
      
         
            
            
            AN ENGLISH EXPOSITOR: TEACHING THE INTERpretation of the hardeſt words vſed in our Language. WITH SVNDRY EXPLICATIONS, Deſcriptions, and Diſcourſes.
            
               By I. B. Doctor of Phyſicke.
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            LONDON Printed by IOHN LEGATT. 1621.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VERTVOVS, HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LADIE, THE LADIE IANE Vicounteſſe Mountague, all honour and happineſſe.
            
               BEing perſwaded (Right Noble Lady) by ſome friends, for publike benefit to make this collection of words common, which at firſt was intended only for priuate vſe, (as written in my youth, at the requeſt of a worthy Gentleman, one whoſe loue preuailed much with me) I could not find in heart to ſend it forth, no better furniſhed than with a bare Title; leaſt like an vnknowne Infant, it ſhould be expoſed to ouer hard vſage, or peraduenture ſcornefully reiected, aduenturing abroad without countenance of any friend or commander. Vpon ſure knowledge therefore

of your moſt honourable diſpoſition, and former experience of your Ladyſhips fauour toward me, I am emboldned to preſent this little Pamphlet vnto your honour, with hope that by your Patronage it ſhall not onely be protected from iniuries, but alſo finde fauourable entertainment, and perhaps gracefully admitted among greateſt Ladies & ſtudious Gentlewomen, to whoſe reading (I am made beleeue) it will not proue altogether vngratefull. And although I may well be taxed of folly or preſumption, that for credit of a ſlender triſlle, craue the asſiſtance of ſo eminent a perſon, yet ſuch (I confeſſe) is my care thereof (ſince I muſt not deny it for my owne) and my duty and deuotion ſo affected to your honour, and all yours; that I haue, (hoping of your Ladiſhips pardon) wilfully repelled all reaſons which might diſſwade me, chooſing herein not ſo much what may ſeeme moſt ſeemely, as what I ſuppoſe moſt behoouefull for me.
            Accept therefore I beſeech your Honour, and receiue vnder your noble tuition this little vocabulary Treatiſe, which hauing beene many years reſtrained of liberty, is now glad of enlargement, eſpecially recommended vnto ſo worthy a Patroneſſe. The glorious Sun

loſeth not the leaſt point of his heighth by liberall lending downe his light, and quickning with his influence the loweſt creatures; neither is any eminency diſgraced, that eaſily condeſcendeth to others deſired good: which is alſo confirmed by the Poet, who ſaieth;

                  Conſpicitur nunquam meliore potentia cauſa,
                  Quàm quoties vanas non ſinit eſſe preces.
               
            
            Not thinking needfull therfore to trouble your Honour with many words of entreaty (vpon aſſured confidence of your wel known Charity and goodneſſe) I conclude, ſincerely wiſhing to your Ladiſhip, the beſt that may be wiſhed, and reſting my ſelfe euer.
            
               Your Honours to be commanded, IO. BVLLOKAR.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Courteous Reader.
            
               HEre haue you (Gentle Reader) that which at firſt was not made for you, though now willingly (for your benefite if you embrace it) offered to your kind acceptance. Commend it my ſelfe I will not, leſt I ſhould giue occaſion to ſome quick heads, to come vpon me with the verſe, Autor opus laudat, &c. Yet this I will ſay (and ſay truely) that in my yonger yeares it hath coſt mee ſome obſeruation, reading, ſtudy, and charge; which you may eaſily beleeue, conſidering the great ſtore of ſtrange words, our ſpeech doth borrow, not only from the Latine, and Greeke, (and ſome from the ancient Hebrew) but alſo from forraine vulgar Languages round about vs: beſide ſundry olde words now growne out of vſe, and diuers termes of art, proper to the learned in Logicke, Philoſophy, Law, Phyſicke, Aſtronomie, &c. yea, and Diuinitie it ſelfe, beſt knowen to the ſeuerall profeſſors thereof. And herein I hope ſuch learned will deeme no wrong offered to themſelues or diſhonour to Learning, in that I open the ſignification of ſuch words, to the capacitie of the ignorant, whereby they may conceiue and vſe them as well as thoſe which haue beſtowed long ſtudy in the languages; for conſidering it is familiar among best writers to vſurpe ſtrange words, (and ſometime neceſſary be reaſon ou
                  •
                ſpeech is not ſufficiently furniſhed with apt termes to expreſſe all

meanings) I ſuppoſe withall their deſire is that they ſhould alſo be vnderstood; which I (knowing that bonum quò communius eo melius) haue endeauoured by this Booke, though not exquiſitely, yet (I truſt) in ſome reaſonable meaſure to performe. It is eaſier (all know) to find faults, then to mende them, and eaſier to mend faults in anothers worke already written, then to write any new worke free from all fault. If therefore any fault finder, or ouer curious Criticke (for from the beſt learned I expect beſt vſage) ſhall to ſhew his skill grow captious, and quarrell at my interpretations, I will deſire him to forbeare bitterneſſe, and temper a while his choler, till hauing laide this worke aſide, hee trauell himſelfe in the ſame or ſome other new argument; and then I doubt not but he will either become more indifferent, or giue others occaſion to bid him Engliſh the olde Prouerbe, Medice cura teipſum. But as for you (iudiciall or courteous Reader) whoſe fauour I deſire, and whoſe counſell or friendly correction I will not refuſe, if to you (I ſay) any thing herein ſhall occurre, which ſeemeth by me omitted, miſtaken, or not fully ſatisfactory to your expectation, (for indeed there are almoſt ſlipt away ſeuen years ſince I had any leaſure as much as to looke on it) I promiſe that vpon warning hereof giuen to me or the Printer, at a ſecond Impreſsion it ſhall be amended or ſupplyed. Meanewhile vſe this as you finde it, and I perſwade my ſelfe your honeſty will ſay it is worth the money you paide for it. So committing my ſelfe and Booke to your fauorable good liking, I commit you to God. From my houſe at Chiceſter in Suſſex, this 17. day of October. 1616.
            
            
               Your hearty well-willer, Io: Bullokar.
               
            
         
         
            
            An Inſtruction to the Reader.
            HAue care to ſearch euery word according to the true Orthography thereof, as for Phoenix in the Letter P. not in F. for Hypoſtaticall in Hy: not in Hi: Remember alſo that euery word marked with this marke * is an olde word, onely vſed of ſome ancient writers, and now growne out of vſe. Lastly, if a word bee of different ſignifications, the one eaſie, the other more difficult, I onely ſpeake of interpretation of the hardeſt; as in the words Tenne, Girle, Garter, may appeare.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        ABandon. To forſake: to caſt off.
                  
                     Abate. To make leſſe: In our common Law it ſignifieth, to enter into any inheritance, before the right heire take poſſeſſion, with intent to keepe the ſaid heire out of it.
                  
                     Abatement. The action or enterpriſe of him which abateth in the common Lawe.
                  
                     Abba. An Hebrewe word ſignifying Father.
                  
                     Abbert. To helpe or aſſiſt one in euill.
                  
                     Abbertour. Hee that counſelleth or comforteth another to doe any euill.
                  
                     Abbot. A ſpirituall Lord ouer a religious houſe of Monkes.
                  
                     Abbreuiate To make ſhort: to abridge.
                  
                     Abbreuiation. A making ſhort, an abridgement.
                  
                     Abdicate. To refuſe or forſake, to renounce.
                  
                     Abeſton. A ſtone found in Arabia, of the colour of yron, which being once ſet on fire, can hardly bee quenched.
                  
                     Abiect. Vile, baſe, of no eſtimation.
                  
                     Abiure. To ſweare or forſweare: a terme ſometime vſed in Lawe, when one hauing committed a capitall offence flyeth to a Church, or Churchyard, and chooſeth rather perpetuall baniſhment: viz. to abiure the Realme, then ſtand to tryall of Lawe. This Law was inſtituted by S. Edward the Confeſſour in fauour of life, but now is not in vſe.
                  
                     Abiuration. A renouncing by oath: ſee Abiure.
                  
                     Ablepſie. Want of ſight, blindneſſe, vnaduiſedneſſe.
                  
                     Ablution. A waſhing.
                  
                     Abolition. A taking away, deſtroying or aboliſhing.
                  
                     Abortion. The birth of a

child before due time; or the deſtroying in the mothers wombe.
                  
                     Abortiue. That which is vntimely borne.
                  
                     Abrahams Baume. A little tree of the kind of Withies growing in Italy, and other hot countreyes, bearing round fruit like Pepper cornes. It is very hot and drie; and hath a ſingular propertie to procure chaſtitie, for which cauſe Phiſitians haue named it Agnus caſtus.
                  
                  
                     Abridge. To ſhorten, to cut off, to gather onely the principall points.
                  
                     Abrogate. To aboliſh: to diſanull, by publike authoritie to alter and make a Law, which was in force, to be of no effect.
                  
                     Abrupt. Broken off.
                  
                     Abruptly. By peecemeale, out of order, without obſeruing of due circumſtance.
                  
                     Abſolue. To pardon, acquite, or diſcharge.
                  
                     Abſolute. Perfect: accompliſhed.
                  
                     Abſolution. Pardon, acquitall, forgiueneſſe.
                  
                     Abſtinence. A forbearing from gluttony, or vnlawfull taking other mens goods.
                  
                     Abſtinent. Sober, temperate, content with his owne.
                  
                     Abſtract. A little booke, or gathering taken out of a greater.
                  
                     Abſtraction. A taking away: or a ſhort draught taken out of a greater thing.
                  
                     Abſtruſe. Hidden: ſecret, not eaſie to vnderſtand.
                  
                     Abſurde. Fooliſh, without any wit or grace.
                  
                     Abſurditie. Fooliſhneſſe.
                  
                     Abuſiue. That which offereth abuſe.
                  
                     Abiſſe. A bottomeleſſe pit, any deepneſſe ſo great that it cannot bee ſounded.
                  
                     Acatia. A little thorne growing in Egypt, out of the leaues and fruit whereof they draw a iuyce or blacke liquor, which being dryed, is called Acatia, and is very aſtrictiue or binding. Our Apothecaties haue not the right Acatia, but inſteed thereof,

they vſe the iuice of ſloes, beeing of the ſame vertue that Acatia is.
                  
                     Academie. A Vniuerſitie or great publike ſchoole: the name hereof firſt came of a place in Athens, called Academia, where Plato taught.
                  
                     Academicall. Belonging to an Vniuerſitie, or Academie.
                  
                  
                     Academicke. A Philoſopher of the ſect of Plato. They acknowledged one God, and beleeued the immortality of ſoules; Plato hauing learned many things of the Hebrewes, then the peculiar people of God.
                  
                     Accelerate. To haſten.
                  
                     Acceleration. A haſtening.
                  
                     Acceſſe. Liberty or power to come to a place.
                  
                     Acceſsible. Which may be gone too.
                  
                     Acceſſory. He that counſelleth or commandeth another to commit any offence: or comforteth, or hideth him, knowing that he hath committed an offence.
                  
                     Accident. That which happeneth by chaunce: ſometime it ſignifieth that which belongeth to a thing, and yet is no part of the ſubſtance, as the quantity, quality, and ſuch like.
                  
                     Accidentall. Happening by chance: or belonging to an Accident.
                  
                     Acclamation. A crying out to one.
                  
                     Accomodate. To make fit: to apply.
                  
                     Accoutrement. Attire, or dreſsing.
                  
                     Accoſte. To drawe neere to one,
                  
                     Accrew. To grow, ariſe, or increaſe.
                  
                     Accumulate. To heape vp.
                  
                     Accumulation. A heaping together.
                  
                     Acerbity. Sowreneſſe.
                  
                     Acheeue. To performe or bring to paſſe.
                  
                     Acolite. A Miniſter ſeruing to bring water, wine and light to the altar.
                  
                     Aconitum. A venemous herbe, hauing a root much like a Scorpion, and ſhining within like alabaſter. Poets faine that Cerberus
                     
the three headed dogge of hell, being dregged vp in a chaine of Adamant by Hercules, did caſt ſome of his fome vpon this herbe, whereby it became ſo venemous.
                  
                     Acquire. To gette, or procure.
                  
                     Acquiſition. A getting or purchaſing.
                  
                     Acquite. To diſcharge, or free one.
                  
                     Acquitall. A freeing of one from being guilty of an offence wherewith hee was charged.
                  
                     Action. A deede done: or the doing of any thing. In our common Lawe it ſignifieth a ſuite commenced againſt any man, and is commonly diuided into three differing kindes, viz.

                        1. Action perſonall. which is for debt, goods, cattell.
                        2. Action popular: which any man may ſue, as vpon the breach of a penall ſtatute, where ſome aduantage is allowed to him that will ſue for it.
                        3. Action reall: when one claimeth title to any lands tenements, rents, or common, in fee ſimple, fee taile, or for terme of life.
                     
                  
                  
                     Actiue. Liuely, ſtrong, nimble.
                  
                     Actiuity. Strong nimbleneſſe.
                  
                     Actor. A doer, ſometime a Player.
                  
                     Actuall. That which is done or committed.
                  
                     Acute. Sharpe, witty.
                  
                     Adage. A prouerbe.
                  
                     Adamant. A precious ſtone commonly called a Diamond, brought out of Arabia and Cyprus. It is the hardeſt of all ſtones, inſomuch that it cutteth glaſſe, and yieldeth neither to ſtroke of hammer nor fire, for which cauſe the Greekes name it Adamas, which in their tongue ſignifieth Inuincible: Notwithſtanding it is ſoftened with goates blood, beeing ſteeped therein new and warme. It is of contrary nature to the loadſtone, in ſo much that beeing laide neere it, the loadſtone can not draw yron, hauing the vertue thereof ouer maſtered

by the Adamant.
                  
                     Addict To apply, or giue ones ſelfe much to any thing.
                  
                     Additament. Any thing added.
                  
                     Addition. An adding or putting to. In our commō law it ſignifieth any title giuen to a man beſide his name which title ſheweth his eſtate, trade, courſe of life, and alſo dwelling place.
                  
                     Adhere. To cleaue to.
                  
                     Adherence. A cleauing to, or belonging to any thing.
                  
                     Adherent. That which cleaueth or ioyneth cloſe to a thing.
                  
                     Adiacent. That which lyeth neere to another thing.
                  
                     Adiourne. To deferre or put off till another time.
                  
                     Adiournement. A terme in lawe when any Court is diſſolued, and appointed to be kept vpon ſome other time, or at any other place.
                  
                     Adiunct. A qualitie ioyned to a thing, as heate to fire, coldneſſe to Snow.
                  
                     Adiure. To binde by oath: to make one to ſweare.
                  
                     Adiuration. A ſwearing, or binding by oath.
                  
                     Adminiſter. To doe ſeruice: ſometime to take charge and diſpoſe of a dead mans goods, by appointment of the Ordinary.
                  
                     Adminiſtration. The doing or handling of a buſineſſe; or the diſpoſing of a dead mans goods, that made no will.
                  
                     Adminiſtrator. Hee to whom the Ordinary committeth in charge the goodes of a man dying without will.
                  
                     Admire. To wonder, to honor or eſteeme highly.
                  
                     Admiration. A wondering.
                  
                     Admiſsion. A receiuing or giuing one leaue to enter.
                  
                     Admit. To let in, to allow of.
                  
                     Admixtion. A mingling of things together.
                  
                     Admoniſh. To warne.
                  
                     
                     Admoniſhment. A warning giuen one.
                  
                     Adopt. To chooſe one to be his ſonne.
                  
                     Adoption. The chooſing and making one to bee as his ſonne to him.
                  
                     Adore. To worſhip, to giue diuine reuerence.
                  
                     Adoration. A worſhipping.
                  
                     Adorne. To decke, to ſet out, to beautifie.
                  
                     Adornation. A decking, or trimming.
                  
                     Aduent. A comming: Certaine weekes before Chriſtmas are ſo called, becauſe then is made in the Church ſolemne preparation for the comming of our Sauiour.
                  
                     Aduentaile. A coate of Armour.
                  
                     Aduerſe. Contrary.
                  
                     Aduert. To marke.
                  
                     Aduertiſe. To giue knowledge of a thing.
                  
                     Adulacion. Flattery.
                  
                     Adulatory. Which flattereth.
                  
                     Adulterate. To corrupt or counterfeit.
                  
                     Aduocate. Hee that pleadeth for another.
                  
                     Aduouſon. The right which a man & his heires haue to preſent a Clerke to the Ordinary, to be admitted to a ſpirituall benefice when it becommeth voide.
                  
                     Aduſt. Burnt, ſcorched.
                  
                     Aduſtion. A burning.
                  
                     Aedile. An officer among the auncient Romanes, who had charge to ſee the Temples, priuate houſes & high waies, were kept in good reparation.
                  
                     Aegypan. A Poeticall word, ſignifying a monſter hauing the body of a man and legs like a Goat.
                  
                     Aerie. A neſt of haukes is ſo called.
                  
                     Aeriall. Ayrie, or of the aire.
                  
                     Affability. Courteſie in ſpeech: gentlenes, kindneſſe.
                  
                     Affable. Courteous or kind in ſpeech.
                  
                     Affect. To loue: ſometime to mooue affection.
                  
                     Affectation. Too much curioſity: an extreme labouring without diſcretion to imitate another, or

doe any thing well.
                  
                     Affiance. Truſt: confidence.
                  
                     Affianced. Betrothed.
                  
                     Affinitie. Kindred by marriage: ſometime likeneſſe or agreement.
                  
                     Affirmatiue. Which affirmeth.
                  
                     Affluence. Plentie: aboundance.
                  
                     Affront. To come boldly before one: to looke boldly in ones face.
                  
                     Africa. One of three parts of the world, lying toward the South; herein is Barbary and all Ethiope contained. The people of theſe countries liued in times paſt very vnciuilly, feeding much vpon ſerpents fleſh: It is called Africa of the Greeke worke Phrice, which ſignifieth Colde: and the particle A. which in that language, being placed before a word, changeth the ſenſe thereof; ſo that Africa ſignifieth a country hotte or without cold.
                  
                     Agarick. A kind of muſhrome or tadſtoole of great account in Phyſicke. It groweth vpon the Larch tree in Italy, and is white, light, brittle, and ſpongeous. It expelleth colde fleame and groſſe raw humours out of the body, opening obſtructions of the Liuer, and by this meanes amendeth an euill colour.
                  
                     Agaſt. Amazed with feare; diſmaide.
                  
                     Agent. A dooer or a medler in a matter.
                  
                     Aggrauate. To make any thing in words more grieuous, heauier or worſe then it is.
                  
                     Agilitie. Nimbleneſſe.
                  
                     Agitation. A ſhaking, iogging or moouing.
                  
                     Agnition. Knowledge: acknowledgement.
                  
                     Agnize. To acknowledg.
                  
                     Agnus caſtus. See Abrahams baume before.
                  
                     Agony. A torment of body and minde: great feare and trembling.
                  
                     Agriculture. Tillage of land: husbandry.
                  
                     Alabaſter. A kinde of marble white and very cleare, which by reaſon of the naturall coldnes therof doth preſerue things

long from corruption; and therefore they vſed to make boxes of it to keepe ſweete ointments, and tombes to bury Princes and great Perſonages in.
                  
                     Alacritie. Cheerefulneſſe; courage, quickeneſſe.
                  
                     Alchymie. The art of melting or diſſoluing the nature of mettals, by ſeparating the pure from the impure parts thereof.
                  
                     Alchymiſt. Hee that is skilfull in Alchymie.
                  
                     Alcion. A ſmall bind that maketh her neſt in the ſea, and then it is a ſigne of faire weather; ſome call it a kings fiſher.
                  
                     Alcoran. A booke wherein Mahomets law and religion is written.
                  
                     * Alderan A ſtarre in the necke of the ſigne Leo.
                  
                  
                     Algate. Notwithſtanding: if ſo be, ſeeing that.
                  
                     Alien. A ſtranger borne, an outlandiſh man.
                  
                     Alienate. To eſtrange and withdraw the minde, ſometime to ſell.
                  
                     Alienation. An eſtranging, a ſelling away.
                  
                     Aliment. Nouriſhment.
                  
                     Alkakengi. Otherwiſe called winter cherries: An herb which beareth round berries and red, that are good againſt the ſtoppings of the Liuer, the ſtone and grauell, and diuers diſeaſes of the kidneyes and bladder.
                  
                     Allay. To qualifie or abate the ſtrength or violence of any thing. It is alſo a terme of hunting, when they ſet hounds in a readineſſe where they thinke a Deere will paſſe, and caſt themoſſ when the reſt of the Kennell comes in.
                  
                     Allegation. A telling of ſome proofe or reaſon of a matter.
                  
                     Allegiance. Obedience of a ſubiect to his Prince.
                  
                     Allegorie. A ſentence conſiſting of diuers tropes which muſt be vnderſtood otherwiſe then the literall interpretation ſheweth; as when Saint Iohn Baptiſt ſpeaking of our Sauiour, Matth. 3. ſaid: Whoſe fanne is in his hand, and hee ſhall

make cleane his floore, and gather the wheate into his barne but the chaffe he ſhall burne with vnquenchable fire: The meaning whereof is, that Chriſt being ſupreme Iudge of all, ſhall ſeparate the good from the euill, rewarding the one in heauen, and puniſhing the other in hell fire.
                  
                     Allegoricall. Of, or belonging to an allegorie: ſpoken by an allegorie.
                  
                     Alleluia. An Hebrew word or rather two Hebrewe words ioyned in one, vſed as a ſigne of exultation, and is interpreted, Prayſe ye our Lord. Paulus Diaconus writeth, that when the Britaines were inuaded by the Saxons and Picts, and on a time ready to fight a battell againſt them, they were admoniſhed by Germanus a French Biſhop, (who was ſent hither with Saint Lupus to confute the Pelagian hereſie) that they ſhould doe as he did; and forthwith he cryed aloude Alleluia: which when the whole armie of Britaines had done, the ſound thereof ſtrooke ſuch a terrour into the enemies, that they preſently fledde away, whereby the Britaines had the victorie. De geſtis Rom. lib. 15.
                  
                     Allie. Of kinne to one by marriage.
                  
                     Alliance. Kindred and affinitie, league or friendſhip.
                  
                     Allot. To appoint, or giue by lotte.
                  
                     Allude. To ſpeake any thing which hath reſemblance, or priuily is directed to touch another matter.
                  
                     Alluſion. A likening or priuie reſembling of one matter to another. See Allude.
                  
                  
                     * Alnath A ſtarre in the hornes of the ſigne Aries.
                  
                  
                     Aloes, or Lignum Aloes. A precious wood vſed in Phiſicke, which comforteth the heart, & openeth obſtructions. It is knottie, browne of colour, and bitter in taſte. Being burned it fometh, and yeeldeth a ſweete perfume. Some affirme it to growe vpon

mountaines in the Eaſt, neere the riſing of the famous Riuer Nilus, from which mountaines falling downe, it is carried by the ſtreame into India, where being taken vp in nets, it is cleanſed, and made apt for phyſicke.
                  
                     Aloeſuccotrina. The iuyce of an herbe brought hither dry out of India; the beſt whereof is cleere, cleane and red, like to the colour of a lyuer. It is very bitter, but an excellent medicine to purge cholericke humours out of the ſtomack; yet not good to bee taken inwardly of ſuch as are troubled with the Hemorrhoides.
                  
                     Alpha. The firſt letter of the Greekes: wherefore it is ſometime taken for the firſt or chiefe in any thing.
                  
                     Alphabet. The croſſerow of letters, the A, B, C.
                  
                     Alphabeticall. Belonging to the Alphabet.
                  
                     Alps. High mountaines between France and Lombardie: the rockes whereof Hannibal (the great Captaine of the Carthaginians) ſoftened in diuers places with fire and vineger, to cut out away for his army to paſſe into Italy.
                  
                     Altercation. An angry reaſoning or wrangling in words.
                  
                     Alternall. Done by turne or courſe, one after another.
                  
                     Altitude. Highth.
                  
                     Amate. To diſmay: to make afraid.
                  
                     Amazon. A woman of the Country Amazonica. Amazones were warlike women of Scythia, which kept a Countrey to themſelues without men, yet to haue children companied with the bordering people. Their Sonnes they either deſtroyed or ſent home to the father, but their daughters they kept, bringing them vp in hunting, riding, ſhooting and feates of armes. They burned the right breaſt of their children, leſt it ſhould hinder their archerie, wherefore they had the name Amazons, which (in Greeke) ſignifieth women wanting a breaſt.
                  
                     
                     Ambage. A long circumſtance of words.
                  
                     Amber. A kinde of hard yellow gumme, wherwith they make beades, Meſue ſaith, the tree whereon it groweth is called Ibex Romana; but what this tree is, I cannot yet learne. Dioſcorides ſaith, that it falleth in maner of a liquor from Poplar trees into the riuer Po in Italy, where it congealeth and becommeth hard, in that forme as wee ſee it.
                  
                     Ambergriſe. Meſue ſaith, it is the ſpawne of the Whale fiſh: Auicen affirmeth it to grow in the ſea. Others write onely, that it is caſt vp on the ſhore, and found cleauing to ſtones there: the fume thereof is good againſt the falling ſickneſſe, and comfortable to the braine.
                  
                     Ambia. A clammy liquor of the colour of hony, brought out of India. It is ſaid to haue great vertue in healing old aches or griefes, proceeding from cold diſeaſes.
                  
                     Ambidexter. He that can vſe both hands alike, a crafty fellow, that can play on both parts.
                  
                     Ambiguity. Doubtfulneſſe.
                  
                     Ambiguous. Doubtfull, vncertaine.
                  
                     Ambition. Vnlawfull, or immoderate deſire of ſoueraignty.
                  
                     Ambroſie. A ſweet ſhrub or little tree, wherewith ſome people were wont to make Garlands. In poetry it vſually ſignifieth the meat of the heathen gods. It is ſometime taken for immortality.
                  
                     Ambulatorie. A place to walke in.
                  
                     Ambuſcado. A company of Souldiours, hid in ſome wood or other couert, to entrappe their enemies vnawares.
                  
                     Amenity. Pleaſantneſſe, delectableneſſe.
                  
                     Amerce. To puniſh one by enioyning him to pay a certaine ſmall ſumme of money, at the diſcretion of him that lawfully commandeth it.
                  
                     Amercement. A puniſhment by the purſe: See Amerce.
                  
                  
                     
                     Amethiſt. A precious ſtone of a purple colour, fit to graue any thing in, becauſe it is not ouerhard. It with ſtandeth drunkennes, as the name in Greek ſignifieth.
                  
                     Amiable. Louely.
                  
                     Amitie. Friendſhippe, loue.
                  
                     Ammowacke. A kinde of gum almoſt like to Frankincenſe, ſo called becauſe it groweth in Lybia, neere the place where the Temple of Ammon was. There is alſo a kind of ſalt ſo called, which is found in Africa, vnder ſand, & is like vnto allume.
                  
                     Amorous. Louing, or giuen to loue.
                  
                     Amphiboly. A ſpeech hauing a doubtfull ſence, or which may be taken diuers manner of wares.
                  
                     Amphibologie. The ſame that Amphibole is.
                  
                     Amphiſcians. Such people as dwell vnder the burning Zone, neere the Equinoctiall line, ſo called becauſe their ſhadowes at noone are ſometimes towards the North, ſometimes toward the South.
                  
                     Amphitheater. A place hauing ſeats and ſcaffolds in it, vſed among the old Romanes to ſhew ſpectacles and ſtrange ſights in, Offenders condemned to dye, and Priſoners taken in warre, were often brought to this place to fight and bee deuoured by wilde beaſtes, the people ſitting in ſafe places aboue, and inhumanely ſporting themſelves thereat: Alſo the Gladiatours or the Sword players did fight here.
                  
                     Ample. Large, great.
                  
                     Amplifie. To enlarge.
                  
                     Amplification. An enlarging.
                  
                     Amplitude. Largeneſſe, greatneſſe.
                  
                     Amulet. Any thing hanged about the neck, to preſerue one from inchauntment.
                  
                     Anagramme. An inuention that by altering the places of the letters of ones 
                        ••
                     me, changeth the word, and turneth it to ſome other ſence, as if for Iohn, one would write, Honi:

there beeing iuſt the ſame letters in them both.
                  
                     Analogie. Proportion, agreement, or likeneſſe of one thing to another.
                  
                     Analyſis. A reſolution or explicating of an intricate matter.
                  
                     Anarchie. Lacke of gouernment: all the time when the people is without Prince or Gouernour.
                  
                     Anathema. Any thing hanged vp in a Church, as an offering to God: ſometime it ſignifiethexcommunication; or a man excommunicated and deliuered to the power of the diuell.
                  
                     Anathematize. To hang vp a thing as conſecrated to God: ſometime to curſe ſweare, or betake to the diuell.
                  
                     Anatomie. An inciſion or cuting. The art of knowing the ſituation, office, and nature all the parts of mans body.
                  
                     Anatomize. To cut and ſearch euery part.
                  
                     Anchouie. A Spaniſh fiſh leſſe then our Spratte, preſerued in pickle, and vſed by Gallants to draw down drinke.
                  
                     Anchoreſſe. A religious woman that liueth ſolit by in ſome cloſe place by her ſelfe.
                  
                     Anchorite. A religious man liuing ſolitary alone in ſome cloſe place.
                  
                     Angelicali. 
                     
                        •
                      Like an Angell.
                  
                     Angle. A corner.
                  
                     Anguiſh. Griefe of mind: vexation.
                  
                     Auguſt. Streight, narrow.
                  
                     Animaduerſion. A marking.
                  
                     Animate. To encourage: to harten on.
                  
                     Anime. A white gumme or roſin brought out of the Weſt Indies: It is verie pleaſant in ſmel, and being caſt into the fire cōſumeth very quickly.
                  
                     Animoſitie. Courage.
                  
                     Annals. Chronicles of things done from yeare to yeare.
                  
                     Annats. Firſt fruits paid of a ſpirituall liuing.
                  
                     Annex. To knit or ioin to.
                  
                     Annihilate. To make

void, or bring to nothing.
                  
                     Aniuerſary. A ſolemnitie kept euery yeare at a ſet time.
                  
                     Annotation. A note, mark, or expoſition made vpon any writing.
                  
                     Annuall. Yearely.
                  
                     Annuitie. A yearly payment of mony 
                        •
                     o one, not in way of rent, but vpon ſome other occaſion.
                  
                     Annull. ſo make voide.
                  
                     Annunciate. To tell or declare.
                  
                     Antagoniſt. An enemie: an aduerſary.
                  
                     Antartike Pole. The ſouth pole of the world.
                  
                     Antecedent. That which goeth before.
                  
                     Antheme. See Antiphone.
                  
                  
                     Antichriſt. An aduerſary to Chriſt: It is compounded of the Greeke prepoſition Anti, and Chriſtus, which ſignifieth contrary or againſt Chriſt.
                  
                     Anticipate. To preuent: to take before another.
                  
                     Anticipation. A preuenting; or taking before.
                  
                     Antidate. The dating of a letter or other writing on ſome day already paſt.
                  
                     Antidote. A medicine againſt poyſon, or which ſerueth to amend any diſtemperature of the body.
                  
                     Antike worke. A work in painting or caruing, of diuers ſhapes of beaſts, birds flowers, &c. vnperfectly mixt and made one out of another.
                  
                     Antimony. A white ſtone found in ſiluer mines.
                  
                     Antipathie. A contrariety or great diſagreement of qualities.
                  
                     Antiperiſtaſis. A terme vſed in Philoſophy, when heat being kept in by cold waxeth the ſtronger in it ſelfe, or cold kept in by heate, groweth more vehement.
                  
                     Antiphone. Any verſe or litle ſentēce, which church men do by courſe ſing one after another.
                  
                     Antipodes. People vnder vs that goe with their feet toward ours.
                  
                     Antique. Old, ancient.
                  
                     Antiquary. One ſtudious in matters of antiquity, or well acquainted in old Hiſtories.
                  
                     Antiquate. To make old,

or of no account.
                  
                     Antitheſis. A contrariety of things placed againſt other; as the ſpokes be in a wheele.
                  
                     Antlier. The lower branch of a Harts horne.
                  
                     Anxietie. Carefulneſſe, ſadneſſe.
                  
                     Anxious. Carefull: ſad.
                  
                     Aphoriſme. A ſhort ſentence, briefely expreſſing the properties of a thing: or which ſerueth as a maxime or principle to guide a man to any knowledge, ſpecially in Philoſophie and Phiſicke.
                  
                     Apocalypſe. A diuine book written by Saint Iohn Euangeliſt, while he was baniſhed in the Ile Pathmos: ſo called becauſe it conteineth many profound myſteries there reuealed vnto him. In Engliſh it ſignifieth a Reuelation.
                  
                     Apocrypha. That which is hidden and not knowne, Doubtfull.
                  
                     Apocynon. A little bone in the left ſide of a Frog, of great vertue as ſome thinke.
                  
                     Apogeon. A terme in Aſtronomy, ſignifying the fartheſt diſtance of Planet from the earth.
                  
                     Apologie. A defence: a ſpeech or written anſwere made in iuſtification of any perſon.
                  
                     Apologicall. That which is ſpoken in defence.
                  
                     Apophthegme. A ſhort quick ſentence worthy the noting.
                  
                     Apoplexie. A very dangerous diſeaſe wherin a man lyeth without ſenſe or motion, as if hee were dead, with his eyes cloſe, and great difficulty in fetching his breath. It commeth for the moſt part of colde and groſſe flegmaticke humors, oppreſſing the brain in ſuch ſort that animall ſpirits, cannot paſſe from thence into the ſinewes, as they were wont.
                  
                     Apoſtaſie. A reuolting or falling away from true religion.
                  
                     Apoſtata. He that reuolteth or falleth from true religion: Iulianus one of the olde Emperours was moſt infamous for this crime.
                  
                     
                     Apoſtaticall. Of or belonging to an Apoſtata.
                  
                     Apoſtle. One ſent in meſſage: an Embaſſadour.
                  
                     Apoſtolicall. Of or belonging to an Apoſtle.
                  
                     Apozeme. A drinke made with water and diuers ſpices and herb, vſed inſteed of ſirupes.
                  
                     Appall. To make afraid.
                  
                     Apparent. Cleare, manifeſt, certaine.
                  
                     Appariter. A ſumner: he that attacheth or ſummoneth one to appeare at a Court.
                  
                     Apparition. An appearing: or viſion.
                  
                     Appeach. To accuſe: diſcloſe, or bewray.
                  
                     Appeale. A terme in law, when a malefactour accuſeth or diſcloſeth thoſe that were his confederates in the ſame offence or any other. Alſo when the defendant refuſeth a Iudge, and deſireth to haue his cauſe tryed by a ſuperiour power, he is ſaid then to appeale: as Saint Paul appealed from Feſtus to Caeſar the Emperour.
                  
                     Appellant. He which appealeth.
                  
                     Appellation. A naming or calling.
                  
                     Appendix. That which dependeth or hangeth vpon another thing.
                  
                     Appertenances. That which appertaineth or belongeth to another thing.
                  
                     Applaude. To ſhew loue or liking to a thing, by clapping the hands, or other ſigne of reioycing.
                  
                     Applauſe. A reioycing or clapping the hands for ioy.
                  
                     Application. An applying of one thing to another.
                  
                     Appoſition. A putting of one thing to another.
                  
                     Approbate. To like, to allowe.
                  
                     Approbation. An allowance, or liking.
                  
                     Appropriate. To challenge to ones ſelfe: to k
                        •
                     epe to himſelfe alone.
                  
                     Appropriation. A terme vſed when any body corporate, or priuate man, hath the right vnto a parſonage in themſelues, and may receiue the profite thereof, by maintaining a Vicar to ſerue in the place.
                  
                     Arbiter. A iudge in a

controuerſie, choſen indifferent for both parties.
                  
                     Arbiterment. An agreement made betweene parties, by an indifferent man to them both.
                  
                     Arbitrary. Belonging to arbiterment.
                  
                     Arbitrate. To iudge, to make an agreement.
                  
                     Arbitratour. See Arbiter.
                  
                     * Arblaſter. A Croſſebow.
                  
                     Architect. A chiefe workman.
                  
                     Architecture. The art or Science of building and comely cōtriuing a houſe. It is written that this Science did beginne in Caine, becauſe hee was the firſt that euerbuilt a city, which hee called by his ſonnes name Enoch, as appeareth, Gen 4.
                  
                     Ardent. Burning hot: Vehement.
                  
                     Ardour. Heat: earneſtnes.
                  
                     Argent. Siluer or ſiluer colour: ſometime white.
                  
                     Argonautes. The Worthies that went into Colthos to fetch the golden Fleece; ſo called of the ſhippe Argo in which they ſailed. The chiefe of them were Iaſon, Typhis, Caſtor, Pollux, Hercules and Theſeus.
                  
                  
                     Ariditie. Drineſſe.
                  
                     Ariopagite. A Lawyer or chiefe Iudge in Capitall matters in the Citie of Athens: ſo called of a certaine ſtreet in that citie dedicated to Mars, in which thoſe Iudges were wont to ſit. They were ſo ſeuere in their iudgements, that they ſate to heare and determine matters in the night time, to the end they would not behold the parties which were to be iudged, but onely heare what could be obiected and anſwered. Saint Dioniſius conuerted to the Chriſtian faith by Saint Paul, was one of thoſe iudges.
                  
                     Ariſtocritie. A kinde of gouernment, where the noble men, or chiefe perſons beare all the ſway.
                  
                     Ariſtocraticall. Of or belonging to Ariſtocritie.
                  
                  
                     Arithmetike. The art of numbring: It is written that Abraham firſt taught

this art to the Egyptians, and that afterward Pythagoras did much increaſe it.
                  
                     Arke. In holy Scripture it ſignifieth two things: Firſt, The Arke made by Noe at the commandement of God, which was 300. cubits long: 50, cubits broad, and 30. high: Gen. 6. Secondly, it ſignifieth a moſt precious and conſecrated cofer or cheſt, called the Arke of teſtament, made of the wood Sethim, and plated within and without all ouer with gold: It had foure corners, and in each corner a golden ring, thorough which were put barres of the ſame wood Sethim, couered likewiſe with gold, which ſerued for the carriage thereof. This Arke was two cubits and a halfe long, one cubit and a halfe broad, and one cubit & a half deepe. Exod. 25. In it was kept part of the Manna in a pot of gold, alſo the two Tables of the Law, and Aarons rod that had budded: Heb. 9.
                  
                     Armadilio. A beaſt in India of the bigneſſe of a yong pigge, couered ouer with ſmall ſhels like vnto armour; for which cauſe he is called Armadilio, to wit, an armed beaſt. This beaſt liueth in the ground like a mole, and the bone of his taile hath vertue to cure diſeaſes and noiſe in the head.
                  
                     Armipotent. Mightie, ſtrong.
                  
                     Aromaticall. Sweete of ſauour: ſmelling like ſpice.
                  
                     Arrerages. Mony or rent behind, not yet paide.
                  
                     Arrian. An heretike of the ſect of Arrius Biſhop of Alexandria, who deuiſed a blaſphemous doctrine againſt the diuinitie of our Sauiour.
                  
                     Arride. To pleaſe well, to content with delight.
                  
                     Arrogancie. Pride, loftines.
                  
                     Arrogant. Proud, boaſting.
                  
                     Arrogate. To chalenge, proudly more honour or praiſe then is due.
                  
                     Arterie. A veine with two coates, or a hollow ſinew in which the ſpirits of life doe paſſe through the body. Theſe kind of veines

proceed all from the heart, where the vitall ſpirits are made, and are thoſe which pant or beate, called commonly the pulſes.
                  
                     Articulate. To ſet downe articles or conditions of agreement.
                  
                     Artificial. Cunning, well contriued, skilfull.
                  
                     Articke pole. The North pole of the world.
                  
                     Artillery. Great ordnance for the warres.
                  
                     Artiſan. A handy crafts man.
                  
                     Artiſt. Hee that is skilfull in any art.
                  
                     Aſafoetida. A dried gum or liquor, brought out of Media and Syria, of a ſtrong loathſome fauour; and is ſometime applyed outwardly to the body.
                  
                     Aſcance. Sidewaies, or looking on one ſide.
                  
                     Aſcribe. To impute, apply, or account.
                  
                     Aſia One of the three parts of the world bounding toward the Eaſt, in which is Pontus, Bithynia, Phrygia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Armenia, Cyprus, Syria, Paleſtine, or the holy land, Arabia, Meſopotamia, (ſo called becauſe it is in the midſt betweene the two great riuers, Tygris and Euphrat
                        •
                     s) Aſſyria, Media, Perſia, and diuers other countries.
                  
                     Aſpe. A venemous ſerpent of a blacke earthie colour and ſometime yellow. The ſuperſtitious Egyptians did honor them, and their Kings vſed to weare the figure of an aſpe in their Diadems. They go alwaies two and two together, and if it happen that one of them be killed, the other will preſently purſue him that ſlue his fellow, in ſuch ſort that he ſhal hardly eſcape, vnleſſe hee make great haſt or paſſe ouer a riuer. If one bee bitten by this ſerpent, the beſt remedy is preſently to cutte off the member ſo bitten, if it be Poſſible; otherwiſe hee ſhall fall into a deadly ſleep, & within few houres goe away as it were in a trance, Cleopatra Queene of Egypt, after the death of Marcus Antonius (whō
                     
ſhe loued as her husband) ſlue her ſelfe wilfully, by applying one of theſe aſps to her body; becauſe ſhe would not bee carryed in triumph to Rome, by Auguſtus Caeſar, who had vanquiſhed her and Antonie.
                  
                  
                     Aſpect. Sight or the beholding of any thing. In Aſtronomy it ſignifieth the diſtance betweene the planets & heauenly ſignes And there are foure ſuch Aſpects. The firſt called a Trine aſpect (becauſe it diuideth the heauens into three euen partes) is the diſtance of foure ſignes from each other; as Aries beholdeth Leo, and Sagittarius with a Trine aſpect, becauſe theſe are diſtant foure ſignes, the one before, the other after Aries. The ſecond called a Quartill, is the diſtance of three ſignes, as Aries beholdeth Cancer and Capricorne, with a Quartill aſpect, becauſe they are diſtant three ſignes from him. The third called a Sextill aſpect, is the diſtance of two ſignes, as Aries beholdeth Gemini and Aquarius with this Sextill aſpect, beeing but two ſignes diſtant from them. The fourth called an Oppoſite aſpect, is the fartheſt diſtance that can be, namely a diſtance of ſixe ſignes aſunder; as Aries beholdeth Libra with this oppoſite aſpect, and Libra beholdeth Aries with the ſame. The like is of all the other ſignes, or Planets placed in them, For example; Taurus beholdeth Cancer and Piſces with a Sextill, Leo and Aquarius with a Quartill. Virgo and Capricorne with a Trine, and Scorpio with an oppoſite aſpect. The diſtance of one or fiue ſignes is not called an Aſpect.
                  
                     Aſperity. Sharpneſſe.
                  
                     Aſperſion. A ſprinkling.
                  
                     Aſpire. To hope to come to a thing: to ſeek aduancement.
                  
                     Aſpiration. A breathing, or pronouncing the letter H. before a vowell.
                  
                     Aſſaſinate. A Tobbing, ſpoiling, or murthering in the high way.
                  
                     Aſſecure. To make one

ſure or certaine, to giue one aſſurance.
                  
                     Aſſentation. Flattery.
                  
                     Aſſertion. An affirming or auouching of any thing
                  
                     Aſſets. A terme in the Common Lawe, when wee would ſignifie that a man hath goods enough come to his hands, to diſcharge a dead mans debts or legacies giuen by him.
                  
                     Aſſeueration. An earneſt affirming.
                  
                     Aſsiduitie. Continuance, or continuall attendance.
                  
                     Aſsigne. To appoint: alſo one that is appointed in anothers behalfe.
                  
                     Aſsignation. An appointment.
                  
                     Aſsignement. An appointing or paſſing of a thing ouer to another.
                  
                     Aſsiſtant. A helper.
                  
                     Aſsociate. To accompany.
                  
                     Aſsociation, A ioyning together in fellowſhip.
                  
                     Aſsoile. To acquite, cleere, or pardon.
                  
                     Aſsume. To take to himſelfe.
                  
                     Aſſumpſit. When one for ſome conſideration giuen him, vndertaketh any thing.
                  
                     Aſsumption. A lifting or taking vp.
                  
                     Aſtipulation. An affirming; an agreement.
                  
                     Aſtriction. A binding.
                  
                     Aſtrictiue. Which hath power to binde.
                  
                     Aſtringent. The ſame that Aſtrictiue is.
                  
                     Astrolabe. An inſtrument of Aſtronomie to gather the motion of the Starres by.
                  
                     Aſtrologie. See Diuination.
                  
                     Aſtrologer. One skilfull in Aſtrologie.
                  
                     Aſtronomie. An art that teacheth the knowledge of the courſe of the planets & Starres. This art ſeemeth to be very ancient, for Ioſephus: lib. prim. Antiq writeth, that the Sons of Seth, Nephewes to Adam (for Seth was Adams ſonne, did firſt find it out: who hearing their grandfather Adā
                      foretell of the vniuerſall flood which ſhould ſhortly drowne the world, they thereupon erected two great pillars, engrauing in

the principles of Aſtronomie; which pillars were the one of bricke, the other of ſtone; becauſe if the water ſhold haply waſh away the brick, yet the ſtone might preſerue the knowledge hereof for poſterity.
                  
                     Aſtronomicall Belonging to Aſtronomy.
                  
                     Atcheuement. A terme of Heraldry, ſignifying the armes of any Gentleman ſet out fully with all that belongeth to it. Alſo the performance of any great matter.
                  
                     Atheiſme. The damnable opinion of the Atheiſt.
                  
                     Atheiſt. He that wickedly beleeueth there is no God or no rule of religion.
                  
                     Atomic. A more flying in the ſunne, Any thing to ſmall, that it cannot bee made leſſe.
                  
                     Atrocitie. Cruelty: outragiouſneſſe.
                  
                     Attache. To take: to lay hands on.
                  
                     Attainder. A conuiction or prouing one guilty of a capitall offence.
                  
                     Attaynt. Conuicted or prooued guilty of ſome great crime.
                  
                     Attentiue. Diligently harkening.
                  
                     Atteſtation. A witneſſing.
                  
                     Attired. A terme vſed among Heralds, when they haue occaſion to ſpeake of the hornes of a Bucke or Stagge.
                  
                     Attract. To draw or pul to.
                  
                     Attraction. A drawing or pulling too.
                  
                     Attractiue. Drawing or which hath vertue to draw.
                  
                     Attrectation. A handling or ſeeling.
                  
                     Attribute. To giue to, or impute. It ſignifieth ſometime a fit title or terme applyed to any thing.
                  
                     Attrition. Sorrow, repentance.
                  
                     Atturny. He that by mutual conſent taketh charge of any other mans buſineſſe.
                  
                     Atturnement. The paying of any ſmall piece of mony by a Tenant, in token that he acknowledgeth the party to whom he payeth it, to bee now his Landlord.
                  
                     Auarice. Couetouſneſſe.
                  
                     
                     Aucupation. Hunting after a thing.
                  
                     Audacious. Bold, hardy.
                  
                     Audacitie. Boldneſſe.
                  
                     Audible. That which is ſo ſpoken that it may bee heard.
                  
                     Auditor. An Officer of accounts: it is often taken for a hearer.
                  
                     Audience. A hearing or hearkening: ſometime it ſignifieth an aſſembly of people harkening to ſome thing ſpoken.
                  
                     Auerre. To iuſtifie, auouch or maintain a thing
                  
                     Auerment. A terme in Law when one offereth to prooue that his plea is good.
                  
                     Auerſion. A turning away, a diſliking.
                  
                     Auert. To turne away.
                  
                     Augment. To increaſe.
                  
                     Augmentation. An increaſing.
                  
                     Augur. See Diuination.
                  
                     Auiditie. Greedineſſe.
                  
                     Auowable. That which one may iuſtifie and maintaine.
                  
                     Auow. To iuſtifie or maintaine.
                  
                     Auowrie. A Law terme, when a Bayliffe or other Officer, auoweth or iuſtifieth the lawfull taking of a diſtreſſe from any man.
                  
                     Auricular. Spoken in ones care.
                  
                     Auripigmentum. Sec Orpment.
                  
                     Aurora. The morning.
                  
                     Auſpicious. Lucky: fortunate.
                  
                     Auſtere. Sharpe, ſeuere, cruell.
                  
                     Auſteritie. Sharpneſſe, hard vſage.
                  
                     Authenticall. That which is vndeniable, and approoued of all men.
                  
                     Authentike. The ſame as Authenticall
                  
                     Autumne. Harueſt time: one of the foure quarters of the yeare; the other three are winter, ſpringtide, and ſommer.
                  
                     Autumnal. Of, or belonging to Autumne.
                  
                     Axiome. A propoſition or ſhort ſentence generally allowed to be true; as in ſaying, the whole is greater than a part. It ſignifieth alſo in Logicke, any perfect ſentence, that affirmeth

or denyeth a thing, as in ſaying, Caeſar is mercifull, or Caeſar is not mercifull.
                  
                     * Aye. For euer.
                  
                     Azymes. A ſolemnity of ſeuen dayes among the Iewes, in which it was not lawfull to eate leauened bread: the Paſche or Eſter of the Iewes.
                  
                     Azure, A fine blew colour.
               
            
            
               B
               
                  
                     BAboone. A beaſt much like an Ape, but greater.
                  
                     Bacchanals. The feaſts of Bacchus.
                  
                  
                     Badger. He that buyeth corne or victuall in one place, to carry into another. It is alſo a beaſt of the bigneſſe of a young Hog, liuing in the woods, commonly called a Brock.
                  
                     * Bale. Sorrow: great miſerie.
                  
                     Balaſe. Grauell or any thing of weight laid in the bottome of ſhips to make them goe vpright.
                  
                     Balefull. Sorrowfull.
                  
                     Balke. A little peece of ground in earable lands which by miſchance the Plough ſlippeth ouer, ſo that it is not ploughed at all
                  
                     Ballon. The round Globe or top of a pillar.
                  
                     Balme. A precious iuyce or liquor, otherwiſe called Balſamum, or Opobalsamum. It droppeth by cutting out of a little lowe plant (about a yard high) hauing leaues like Rue, but whiter, which plant groweth in Egypt, and ſome places of the holy Land. This iuice is ſomewhat like to oyle, but more clammie, and inclining to a certaine redneſſe. It hath a ſtrong ſmell, and is not pleaſant in taſte: Being put into a veſſell of water it will ſinke downe to the bottome like a round pearle, without breaking and may bee taken vp againe with the point of a knife. It is an excellent medicine to take any ſcar out of the body, and for diuers other purpoſes, but very coſtly and rarely gotten.

                     Saladinus writes that there was but one vineyard of theſe in the whole world, and that belonged to the great Turke.
                  
                     Balnco. A bathe.
                  
                     Balſanium. See Balme.
                  
                     Baptiſme. It commonly ſignifieth a dipping or waſhing.
                  
                     Baptiſt. A waſher. S. Iohn the ſonne of Zacharias was ſo called, for that hee firſt began to Baptize or waſh men in the riuer of Iordan to the remiſſion of ſinnes.
                  
                     Barbariſme. Rudeneſſe in ſpeech, or behauiour, outragious crueltie.
                  
                     * Bardes. Poets.
                  
                     * Bargaret. A kinde of dance.
                  
                     Barreſter. He that is allowed to pleade cauſes at the barre.
                  
                     Barretter. A common quarreller: one that is euer ſuing and moleſting others without cauſe.
                  
                     Barricado. A warlike defence, of emptie Barrels, and ſuch like veſſels, laide at the breach of a wall to keepe out the enemies.
                  
                     Barriers, A warlike exerciſe of men fighting together with ſhort ſwords, and within ſome appointed compaſſe.
                  
                     Barter. To bargaine or exchange commodities for commodities.
                  
                     Baſe. In Architecture it ſignifieth the foote of a pillar, or the foundation that ſupporteth any thing.
                  
                     Baſiliske. Otherwiſe called a Cockatriſe: the moſt venemous ſerpent that is. It breaketh ſtones and blaſteth all plants with the breath thereof, burning euery thing that it goeth ouer; neither can any herbe growe neere the place where it lyeth. It is poyſon to poyſon, and driueth away all other ſerpents, with only hiſſing. If a man touch it but with a ſticke, it will kill him, and if it ſee a man a farre off, it deſtroyeth him with his lookes. This ſerpent is not aboue a foote long, of colour between black & yellow, hauing red eye, a very ſharpe head, and a white

ſpot thereon like a crowne wherefore he is called by ſome in Latine Regulus, viz. a little king. It goeth not winding like other ſerpents, but vpright vnto the middle, holding vp the breſt thereof. It breedeth onely in the hot burning ſands of Africa: Of this Baſiliske the Poet Lucane writeth thus, lib. 9.

                        
                           Sibilaque effundens cunctas terrentia peſtes.
                        
                        
                           Ante venena nocens, late ſibi ſubmouet omne
                        
                        
                           Vulgus, & in vacua regnat Baſiliſcus arena.
                        
                        With deadly hiſſe the Baſiliske,
                        all other plagues doth fright.
                        And ſpeedier kils then poiſons can,
                        with his infectious ſight.
                        Heele haue no neighbour dwell neere him,
                        he loues to liue alone.
                        And tyrantlike reignes by himſelfe,
                        in caue of ſandy ſtone.
                     
                  
                  
                     Baſsae. A noble man, or great Commander vnder the great Turke.
                  
                     Baſtinado. A ſtaffe: a cudgell.
                  
                     Baſton. A ſtaffe, or cudgell: ſometime it ſignifieth an officer of the Fleet, attending in the kings Court, with a red ſtaffe, to conuey ſuch to ward as are there committed.
                  
                     Battry. A beating or ſtriking.
                  
                     Baubee. A ſmall coine: a farthing.
                  
                     * Baine. A Bathe.
                  
                     Bdellium. A Gumme brought out of Arabia, and the Holy land, of a ſweete ſmell and bitter taſte. It hath vertue to mollifie and ripen hard ſwellings, and is good againſt the ſtiffeneſſe of ſinewes or other parts, and againſt the biting of venemous beaſts.
                  
                     Beades of Saint Elline. Certaine round roots brought out of Florida, which being drie are very hard, on the outſide blacke, and inwardly white: of a ſweet ſmell and good taſte. They

are of great vertue againſt griefs of the ſtomack, as alſo of the kidnies or reines.
                  
                     Beame. The maine horne of a hart or Stagge.
                  
                     Beatitude Bleſſedneſſe.
                  
                     Beauer. In armour it ſignifieth that part of the helmet which may bee lifted vp, to take breath the more freely. It is alſo a beaſt of very hotte nature, liuing much in the water. His two forefeete are like the feete of the beaſt called Gattus, (as Ioannes de Sancto amando writeth:) but what this Gattus is, I doe not well vnderſtand, onely I ſuppoſe it to be an Otter. Vpon theſe feete hee hath very ſharpe clawes, wherewith hee taketh his prey, and hangeth vpon water bankes. His hinder feet are made like to the foot of a Gooſe, wherewith hee ſwimmeth. Hee hath very ſharpe teeth, and doeth much harme to trees, with knawing the rootes and ryndes of them. It is written that if a Beauer come into a ſtrange place, where hee hath not beene bred, the other Beauers will make him their ſlaue, to prouide them meate, and pull off all the haire from his backe that hee may be knowne. The ſtones of this beaſt are ſold in Apothecaries ſhoppes, by the name of Caſtoreum: they are much vſed in Phyſick, beeing very good againſt palſies and cold diſeaſes of the ſinewes: But the skin is of more valew then the ſtones.
                  
                     Beeglue. That which Bees doe make at the entry of their hiue, to keepe out cold.
                  
                     Beeſtings. The firſt milke that commeth from the Teate, after the birth of any thing.
                  
                     Belial. An Hebrew word ſignifying a wicked naughty perſon. An Apoſtata; one without yoke, and is many times taken for the diuell.
                  
                     * Beliue. By and by, anon.
                  
                     Bellona. Warre, or the goddeſſe of Warre among the heathen.
                  
                     Belt. A girdle.
                  
                     
                     Belzebub. An Hebrew word compounded of Bel, which in that language ſignifieth an Idoll, and Zebub, a Fly: ſo that Belzebub ſignifieth the Idoll of Flies: notwithſtanding commonly it is taken for the diuell.
                  
                     Benediction. A bleſſing.
                  
                     Benefactor. A friend, one that doth good.
                  
                     Benificence. A dooing good.
                  
                     Beneficent. Liberall, louing.
                  
                     Beneuolence. Good will.
                  
                     Beneuolent. Louing, friendly, well wiſhing.
                  
                     Benigne Friendly, gentle, fauourable.
                  
                     Benignity. Friendlineſſe: liberty, courteſie.
                  
                     * Beniſon. A bleſſing.
                  
                     Benz vine. A ſweet ſmelling gumme, good againſt hoarſeneſſe and the cough beeing diſſolued in water and drunken. It hath many other excellent properties to be vſed in Phyſick. The tree vpon which it groweth is not with vs certenly knowne.
                  
                     Berill. A precious ſtone brought out of India, cut moſt commonly with ſixe corners, becauſe otherwiſe it would not ſhew ſo faire, if the ſticking out of the corners did not make the brightneſſe more manifeſt. It is of a greeniſh colour, like the water of the ſea.
                  
                     Beaſtiall. Beaſtly: diſhoneſt.
                  
                     Beſtiality. Beaſtlineſſe.
                  
                     Beuie. A heard of row Buckes: moſt commonly with vs it ſignifieth, a great number of Quails in company.
                  
                     Beuie greace. The fat of a row Deere.
                  
                     Bezar ſtone. A ſtone of excellent vertue againſt poyſon, very coſtly and of great account in Phyſick. It is commonly of the bigneſſe of an A corne or Cheſtnut, being compoū
                     ded of certain thin ſcales, one vpon another, like the ſcales of an Onion. It is eaſie to bee ſcraped or cutte, and if it continue long in water, it melteth. The middle part is ſomething hollow, and full of

powder of the ſame ſubſtance that the ſtone is of. And this is a marke to know whether the ſtone bee fine and true: for the Indians doe counterfeite them ſometimes and deceiue many. This ſtone it taken out of the bowels of a beaſt in India, much like a Hart, ſauing that his hornes are like a goates. The occaſion of the growing of theſe ſtones (as ſome write) is thus. Theſe Harts of wilde Goates (for they reſemble both) going to the dennes of Serpents in thoſe countries, doe with their breathing compell them to come forth, and then eate them: after they goe whereas water is, and plunge themſelues therein vntil they perceiue the furie of the venome be paſt, and till then they will not drinke a droppe: beeing come foorth of the water, they goe into the fields, where feeding vpon many healthfull hearbs (knowne to them by naturall inſtinct to bee of vertue againſt poyſon) they are perfectly freed from all danger; and by the mixture of theſe herbs with the Serpents eaten before, theſe Bezar ſtones are very ſtrangely (as is ſaide) ingendered within them: growing by little and little, as appeareth by the ſcales thereof one folded vpon an other.
                  
                     Bezill. The broad part of a ring, in which the ſtone or ſignet is ſet.
                  
                     Bice. A ſine blew colour vſed by painters.
                  
                     Bigamie. The marriage of two wiues; not both together, but ſeuerally after the death of the firſt.
                  
                     Bigamus. Twice married, hee that hath had two wiues. Such an one the Romiſh Church admitteth not to the Miniſterie.
                  
                     Bipartite. Diuided in two parts.
                  
                     Birgandes. A kinde of wilde gooſe.
                  
                     Biſſextile. Leape yeare, ſo called, becauſe the ſixt Calends of March are in

that yeare twice reckoned: viz. on the 24. and 25. of February, ſo that leape yeare hath one day more then other yeares haue. This leape yeare is obſerued euery fourth yeare, & was firſt deuiſed by Iulius Caeſar to accommodate or make the yeare agree with the courſe of the ſunne.
                  
                     Bitumen. A kind of clay, naturally clāmy like pitch, growing in ſome countries of Aſia. It was of old vſed in Phyſicke: The beſt is heauy, bright, and cleere, of purple colour, and hauing a ſtrong ſmell. The black is accounted naught. This Bitumen was vſed in ſtead of morter, at the building of the tower of Babel, as appeareth in Gen. cap. 11. There is alſo a kind of Bitumen, like vnto a liquor, flowing out of ſome fountaines in the yland Sicilie, which is vſed in ſtead of oyle to burne in lampes.
                  
                     Blankemanger A cuſtard.
                  
                     Blemiſhes. Markes made by hunters, to ſhew where a deere hath gone in.
                  
                     Blend. To mixe or mingle together.
                  
                     Blewmantle. The name of an office of one of the Purſeuants at armes.
                  
                     * Blith. Merry, frolicke, ioyfull.
                  
                     Blomarie. The firſt forge, through which the yron paſſeth, after it is once melted out of the myne.
                  
                     Bloodſtone. A ſtone growing in Ethiopia and Arabia; of nature aſtrictiue, ſtopping any iſſue of bloud, and eating proud fleſh out of wounds. It is of a dark colour, like vnto congealed blood.
                  
                     Bole armoniacke. A reddiſh ſtone like to ruddle, of a very binding nature, and of great vertue againſt the plague.
                  
                     Bonayre. Gentle, milde, curteous.
                  
                     Bone breaker. A kinde of Eagle, hauing ſo ſtrong a beake, that therewith ſhee breaketh bones.
                  
                     Bolus. A medicine which muſt be eaten: a mouthful.
                  
                     Bonnet. A hat or cap.
                  
                     Boone. A requeſt, a ſuite, a demand; ſometime it ſignifieth

good: as a boone companion, a good companion.
                  
                     Boras. A white ſubſtance like vnto ſaltpeter, wherewith goldſmiths vſe to ſolder gold and ſiluer: ſome write it is the gumme of a tree, which is very vnlikely: others affirme it to bee made of old lees of oyle, by art and drying in the Sun brought to be white; notwithſtanding I ſuppoſe it rather to be a minerall.
                  
                     Boreas. The Northeaſt winde.
                  
                     Braces. In building it ſignifieth the peeces of timber, which bend forward on both ſides, and beare vp the rafters.
                  
                     Brachmans. A ſect of philoſophers in India, that liued onely by hearbes, rootes, and fruite.
                  
                     Brachygraphic. A ſhort kinde of writing, as a letter for a word.
                  
                     Braket. A drinke made of water and hony.
                  
                     Brandiſh. To ſhake, properly a ſword or ſuch like weapon.
                  
                     Braynſicke. Mad, fooliſh, furious.
                  
                     * Bretfull. Top full.
                  
                     Breuitie. Shortneſſe.
                  
                     Brigandine. A coate of defence.
                  
                     Brigantine. A kinde of ſmall light ſhip.
                  
                     Brime. A terme vſed among hunters when the wilde Boare goeth to the female.
                  
                     Brocage. Meanes vſed by a ſpokeſman.
                  
                     Broches. The firſt head or hornes of a Hart or Stagge.
                  
                     Brocke. See Badger.
                  
                     Brocket. A red Deere two yeere old.
                  
                     Brothell. A houſe of diſhoneſtie.
                  
                     Brothelrie. Diſhoneſtie, bawderie.
                  
                     Bruite. A report ſpread abroad.
                  
                     Brumall. Of or belonging to winter.
                  
                     Brute. Beaſtly, barbarous.
                  
                     Brutiſh. The ſame.
                  
                     Brutiſhneſſe. Beaſtlineſſe, barbarous behauiour.
                  
                     Budge. A furre of a kinde of Kid in other countries.
                  
                     Buffe. A Beaſt like a Bull, with a very long

mane; This beaſt breedeth in the woods of Germany.
                  
                     Bugle. The ſame that buffe is: ſometime a blacke horne.
                  
                     Bullion. Siluer vnrefined, not yet made in money.
                  
                     Burdon. A deepe baſe.
                  
                     Burganet. A Helmet, a Head-peece.
                  
                     Burglarie. The breaking and entring into a houſe by night, with intent to ſteale or kill.
                  
                     Burnet. A hood or attire for the head.
                  
                     Burniſh. To make a thing to gliſter or looke faire by rubbing it. It is alſo a terme among hunters, when Harts ſpread their hornes, after they be fraied or new rubbed.
                  
                     * Burled. It ſometimes ſignifieth Armed.
                  
                     Burlie. Groſſe, fat, great.
                  
                     Burre. The round rolle of horne, next the head of a Hart.
                  
                     Burſholder. A Headborough, or officer in a borough.
                  
                     Buttreſſes. Staies for to beare vp any building, or make it ſtrong.
                  
                     Buxome. Pliant, amiable, obedient.
                  
                     Buxomnes. Lowlineſſe, humbleneſſe.
               
            
            
               C
               
                  
                     CAbal. The tradition of the Iewes doctrine of religion.
                  
                     Cabaliſt. One skilfull in the doctrine of the Iewes religion.
                  
                     Cachos. An hearbe of red colour, growing in India, which is of vertue againſt the ſtone, and to prouoke vrine.
                  
                     Cadence. The falling of the voice.
                  
                     Calaber. A little gray beaſt of the bigneſſe of a Squirrell, whoſe skinne is vſed for furre.
                  
                     Calamarie. A fiſh which hath his head between his hinder part and his belly, with two bones, one like a knife, the other like a quil, whereof hee is called by ſome a Curle fiſh.
                  
                     Calcinate. To burne.
                  
                     Calcine. To burne.
                  
                     Calcination. A burning,

a turning into aſhes.
                  
                     Calculate. To caſt account, to reckon.
                  
                     Calculation. An account, a reckoning.
                  
                     Calends. It ſignifieth properly, the firſt day of euery moneth, being ſpoken alone by it ſelfe. If Pridie be placed before it, then it ſignifieth the laſt day of the moneth going before, as Pridie Calend. Ianuarij. is the laſt day of December. If any number hee placed with it, it ſignifieth that day in the former moneth, which commeth ſo much before the moneth named; as the tenth Calends of March is the twentieth day of February, becauſe if one beginne at March, and reckon backewards, that twentieth day is the tenth day before March. In March, May, Iuly, and October, the Calends, beginne at the ſixteenth day, in other moneths at the fourteenth which Calends muſt euer beare the name of the moneth following, and be numbred backeward from the firſt day of the ſaide following moneths.
                  
                     Calfe. The Fawne or young one of a Redde Deere.
                  
                     Caliſie. To make warme.
                  
                     Calefaction. A making warme.
                  
                     Callette A lewd woman.
                  
                     Calliditie. Subtilty, craftineſſe.
                  
                     Calthrope. An inſtrument vſed ſometime in Warre. It is a little thing made with foure prickes of yron; of ſuch a faſhion, that which way ſoeuer it be throwen, one point will alwaies ſticke vp like a naile, to ſpoile the enemies horſe feete.
                  
                     Caligraphic. Faire writing.
                  
                     Calumniate. To ſlaunder: to belie one ſhamefully.
                  
                     Columniation. Slaunderous lying.
                  
                     * Camoyſe. Crooked vpward, as commonly, the noſes of blacke Moores bee.
                  
                     Camphire. A kinde of Gumme, as Auicen writeth. But Platearius affirmeth

it to be the iuice of an herbe. It is white of colour, and cold and dry in operation.
                  
                     Cancel. To deface, cut or blot out.
                  
                     * Canceline. Chamlet.
                  
                     Canicular. See dogge-dayes.
                  
                     Canker. A hard ſwelling in the veines, being ouercharged with hot melancholy humours. It is called a Canker, becauſe the veines ſo ſwollen are like vnto the clawes of a Crab. This diſeaſe may happen in any part of the bodie, but moſt commonly in womens breaſts; by reaſon of their ſpongie hollowneſſe, and great number of veines their meeting. If it continue long it is very hard to cure, becauſe gentle medicines will doe no good, and ſtrong doe increaſe the raging malice of it.
                  
                     Canniball. A barbarous ſauage perſon: one that eateth mans fleſh.
                  
                     Canon. A Greeke word, properly ſignifying a rule or line, to make any thing ſtraight, or to trie the ſtraightneſſe of it. Hereof Lawes or decrees for Church gouernement are called Canons. And certaine times of prayer vſed by Churchmen, were called Canonicall houres of prayer.
                  
                     Canonicall. Approoued by common or exact rule.
                  
                     Canonier. He that ſhooteth in great Ordinance.
                  
                     Canonize. To declare and pronounce one for a Saint.
                  
                     Canonization. The ſolemnity of Canonizing or pronouncing one to bee a Saint.
                  
                     Cantharides. Certaine Flies ſhining like golde, breeding in the toppes of Aſhe and Oliue trees beyond Sea. They are ſometime vſed by Phyſitions, to raiſe bliſters in the body; but their heads, wings, and feete muſt be caſt away. The iuice of them is poyſonous.
                  
                     Cape. A corner of land ſhooting out into the Sea.
                  
                     
                     Capabilitie. An aptneſſe to containe, or receiue.
                  
                     Capable. Which can containe or hold a thing.
                  
                     Capacitie. Aptneſſe to receiue and hold.
                  
                     Capers. A prickly plant, almoſt like to brambles, growing in Spaine, Italy, and other hot countries, The roote hereof is much vſed in Phyſicke, againſt obſtructions of the ſpleen or milte. The flowers and leaues are brought hither from Spaine, preſerued in brine, and are commonly eaten with Mutton. They ſtirre vp the appetite, warme the ſtomacke, and open the ſtoppings of the liuer and milt.
                  
                     Capitall. Chiefe, principall; ſometime deadly, abhominable.
                  
                     Capite. A tenure, when a man holdeth lands, immediately of the king, as of his crowne.
                  
                     Capitole. An ancient palace in Rome, ſo called.
                  
                     Capitulate. To draw or bring into Chapters.
                  
                     Capriole. Leaping of a horſe aboue ground, called by horſemen, the Goates leape.
                  
                     Capſtand. An inſtrument to wind vp things of great weight: ſome call it a crane.
                  
                     Captious. Short, quicke, quarrelſome in demands.
                  
                     Captiuate. To take priſoner.
                  
                     Captiuity. Bondage, impriſonment.
                  
                     Caranna. A Gumme brought out of the Weſt Indies, of great vertue againſt aches proceeding of cold cauſes.
                  
                     Carbonado. A raſher vpon the coales.
                  
                     Carbuncle. It hath two ſignifications, namely a precious ſtone, and a dangerous ſore. 1. Carbuncle ſtone, is bright, of the colour of fire. It hath many vertues, but chiefly preuaileth againſt the danger of infectious aire. The beſt of theſe ſtones will ſhine in darkeneſſ, like a burning coale, as Albertus writeth, himſelfe hath ſeene. Others ſhine but a little, and are leſſe eſteemed; but ſuch as ſhine not

at all, are ſcarce of any reckoning: theſe ſtones are found in ſome countreies of Africa. 2. Carbuncle diſeaſe, is a botch or vlcer, (otherwiſe called by a Greeke name Anthrax) cauſed of groſſe hot blood which raiſeth bliſters, and burneth the skinne. This vlcer is euer accompanied with a Feuer.
                  
                     Cardones. An hearbe in India, of vertue to heale ſores.
                  
                     Carlo Sancto. A roote growing in the Weſt Indies, of a pleaſant ſmell and bitter taſte, the rynde whereof beeing chewed, draweth downe fleame and humours from the head, & being drun
                        •
                     en in powder is good againſt diuers inward diſeaſes.
                  
                     Carcanet. A ſmall chaine.
                  
                     Cardinall. Chiefe principall.
                  
                     Carnall. Fleſhly.
                  
                     Carnality. Fleſhlineſſe.
                  
                     Carol. A ſong: ſometime a dance.
                  
                     Carpt. To checke, taunt, or rebuke.
                  
                     Carreere. A ſhort ſwift race with a horſe, as at luſts, Tournaments.
                  
                     Carrike. A great ſhippe of burden.
                  
                     Caſani, India bread.
                  
                     Caſia. It is commonly taken for Cinnamome. Poets vnderſtand often by it, ſome ſweete ſmelling herbe: as Virg. Eclog. 2.

                        Tum Caſia atque alijs intexens ſuanibus herbis
                        Alſo Ovid. Quo ſimul ac Caſias & nardilenis ariſtas.
                        Quaſſaque cum fulua ſubſtrauit Cinnama myrrha.
                        Lictantius alſo: De Phoenice.
                        Cinnama dehint, auramque procul ſpirantis amom
                              •
                           ;
                        Congerit & mixto balſama cum folio.
                        Non Caſia mitis, nec olentis vinuen acanthi,
                        Nec thuris Lachrymae, guttaque pinguis abeſt.
                     
Where wee ſee that Caſia and Cinnamome, ſignifie two things. Some think it to bee Lauender.

For mine owne part, I know not certainely what Engliſh name or interpretation to giue it.
                  
                     Caſsia fiſtula. A fruite growing in Arabia and Syria, which is round, blacke, and long, almoſt as ones arme, of the bigneſſe of a Thumbe. The outſide hereof is hard: within it, is contained the ſeede, and a blacke ſubſtance ſoft and ſweete, which is much vſed in Phyſicke, as a gentle purger, of the inward parts.
                  
                     Caſsia lignea. A ſweete wood much like cinnamome, and of the nature of cinnamome.
                  
                     Caſtigate. To chaſtiſe, to correct.
                  
                     Caſtigation. A chaſticing, a correction.
                  
                     Caſtleward. A payment made by ſome dwelling within a certaine compaſſe of a caſtle, for the maintenance of thoſe that doe watch and ward the caſtle; Alſo the circuite of land, which oweth this ſeruice.
                  
                     Caſtoreum See Beuer.
                  
                     Caſual That which happeneth by chance, doubtfull, vncertaine.
                  
                     Caſualtie. Chance, fortune, hap-hazard.
                  
                     Catadupa. A place in Ethiopia ſo called, where the great riuer Nilus, falleth from high Mountanous rockes with ſuch violence, that the continuall noiſe thereof, maketh the people there dwelling to become deafe.
                  
                     Catalogue. A roll, a bill, a regiſter of name or other things.
                  
                     Cataplaſma. It ſignifieth properly a medicine, which is made of diuers hearbes, eyther bruiſed or boyled in water, and ſo applyed outwardly to the body. If there bee oyle added, it is not then called a Cataplaſme, but an Emplaiſter.
                  
                     Cataract. A diſtillation of humours out of the eyes.
                  
                     Catarrhe. A diſtillation of wateriſh humors out of the head, into the mouth and throate, cauſed by a

colde and ſometime hotte diſtemperance of the braine.
                  
                     Cataſtrophe. The concluſion or end of a Comedy: a ſudden alteration.
                  
                     Catecheumen. A nouice, or one newly inſtructed in matters of faith, by word of mouth.
                  
                     Category. In the Greeke tongue it properly ſignifieth an accuſation. It is alſo a terme vſed in Logike, which ſhall after the explicated in the word Predicament.
                  
                     Categoricall axiome. A ſimple axiome or propoſition, not compounded of any coniunction, as; Peter is a man.
                  
                     Cathedrall. Of or belonging to a Biſhops chaire.
                  
                     Catholike. A Greek word, ſignifying vniuerfal or generall.
                  
                     Catobleya. A ſtrange beaſt that killeth a man onely with the ſight of it: ſome thinke it to bee the Baſiliske, or Cockatriſe.
                  
                     Cauearee. A ſtrange meat like blacke ſope, made, (as is ſaide) of the Roe of a Sturgeon.
                  
                     Caueat. A warning, an admonition to take heede.
                  
                     Cauerne. A hole or caue in the earth.
                  
                     Cauille. To mocke or flour in words, to reaſon ouerthwartly.
                  
                     Cauity. Hollowneſſe.
                  
                     Cauſticke. A medicine that burneth; and is vſed when a diſeaſe cannot otherwiſe be maſtered.
                  
                     Cautele. A taking heed.
                  
                     Cautelous. Wary, circumſpect.
                  
                     Cauterize. To burne: to ſeare.
                  
                     Caution. A warning or watchword giuen to take heede: ſometime a great heedfulneſſe, or wary carriage in a thing.
                  
                     Cedar. A tall great tree, which groweth in Africa, and Syria, ſtraight vpright like the Firre tree. The leaues are ſmall and thick, of a ſweete ſmell: This Tree hath finite on it, all times of the yeere, which fruite is like that of the Pine and Fine Tree, but greater and harder.
                  
                     
                     Celebrate. To ſpeake or write very honourably in praiſe of any thing: alſo to rehearſe often: and ſometime to keepe a feſtiuall day, or other time with great ſolemnity.
                  
                     Celebration. The ſolemnization of a feaſt.
                  
                     Celebritie. Great reſort to a place: famouſneſſe.
                  
                     Celeritie. Swiftnes, ſpeed.
                  
                     Celeſtiall. Heauenly.
                  
                     Celſitude. Highneſſe.
                  
                     Cement. Morter: Lime.
                  
                     Cenſer. A veſſell to burne Frankincenſe in.
                  
                     Cenſor. A graue Officer hauing authoritie to controlle and correct maners.
                  
                     Cenſorean. Belonging to a Cenſor.
                  
                     Cenſure. A iudgement: an opinion.
                  
                     Centaures. People of Theſſalie, which becauſe they firſt rid on horſes, were ſuppoſed to be halfe men & halfe horſes. Poets feine they were begotten by Ixion vpon a cloud, made in the likeneſſe of Iuno. They watted on the Lapithes, and were ouercome by Hercules.
                  
                  
                     Center. The point in the midſt of a round circle, or the inward middle part of a globe. Wherefore the earth is called the Center of the world, becauſe it is in the midſt thereof.
                  
                     Centurion. A Captaine ouer a hundred footmen.
                  
                     Certes. Surely: certainly.
                  
                     Certificate. A writing which teſtifieth the certainty of a thing.
                  
                     Ceruſſe. White Lead, oftentimes vſed by Surgeons in oyntments & playſters. Some women make painting therewith.
                  
                     Ceterach. Otherwiſe called Fingerferne: An herbe which hath neither ſtalke, flower, nor ſeed. It is much vſed in Phiſick againſt the blacke Iaundiſe, quartane agues, and ſtopping of the ſpleene.
                  
                     Chalons. Blankets, Couerings.
                  
                     Chameleon. A little beaſt like a Lizard, hauing a rough ſcaly skin, ſtraight legs, ſharpe clawes, a ſlow pace like a Torteyes, and a long wreathed taile: He

changeth himſelfe quickly into any colour that he ſitteth vpon, except white and red: wherefore men that are inconſtant and ſickle, are ſometimes called Chameleons. This beaſt (as is ſaide) is nouriſhed onely with aire.
                  
                     Chamfering. A ſmall gutter or fu
                        •
                     row made by art vpon ſome pillars of ſtone or timber.
                  
                     Champertie. See Champertours.
                  
                     Champertours. Thoſe that ſtirre others to go to law, and beare the charges there of themſelues, to the end they may haue part of the land, or other thing in variance.
                  
                     Chancellour. A chiefe officer in a ſpirituall court: Alſo the Lord or chiefe Iudge in the chancerie.
                  
                     Chancerie. The court of equity & good conſcience.
                  
                     Chantor. A ſinger.
                  
                     Chaos A great confuſed and diſorderly heape, out of which Poets imagined all things to be made.
                  
                     Chaplet. An attire for the head, made of Gold, Pearle, or other coſtly, or curious ſtuffe, vſed to bee faſtened behinde; in manner of a foulded rolle or garland.
                  
                     Character. The forme of a letter. A marke, ſigne, or ſtamp made in any thing.
                  
                     Characterie. A writing by Characters or by ſtrange markes.
                  
                     Charles Wayne. Certaine Starres winding about the North pole of the world, in faſhion like foure wheeles and horſes drawing it. Poets feine that Caliſto, King Lycanus daughter▪ hauing had a childe by Iupiter, was by Iuno in deſpight turned into a Beare, and that Iupiter changing Caliſto afterward, into this figure of Starres, for that cauſe, in Greek it is called Ar
                           •
                        tos, which ſignifieth a Beare.
                  
                     Charnell houſe. A place to lay ſculles and bones of dead men in.
                  
                     Chart. A writing, a written deed.
                  
                     Charter. A writing wherby the king makes a grant to any perſon or perſons of

any liberty, priuiledge, pardon, or other thing: Alſo writings betweene priuate men, are ſomtime ſo called
                  
                     Chattell. A Law tearme, wherof there be two kinds, namely Chattels reall, and Chattels perſonall. Chattels reall, are leaſes, or wards. Chattels perſonall are all moueable goods, as money, plate, cattell, &c.
                  
                     Chaunter. A ſinger.
                  
                     Cheate. To couſin, to deceiue.
                  
                     Cheating. Couſenage.
                  
                     Cherubin. One of the higheſt Order of Angels: See Hierarchie.
                  
                     Chieftaine. A Captaine.
                  
                     Checke vamiſh. Painting vſed by ſome women.
                  
                     Cheuiſance. Merchandiſe, bargaining.
                  
                     China. A hard knottie roote brought out of the Eaſt Indies, of a reddiſh colour: It is very comfortable to nature, and vſed often in reſtoratiues and dyet drinkes.
                  
                     Chiromancie. See Diuination.
                  
                     Chiualrie. Knighthood: the knowledge of a Knight or Nobleman in feats of armes.
                  
                     Chiuancie. Chiualrie: riding.
                  
                     Chriſme. A Greeke word, ſignifying an Oyntment: Sometime it is taken for a white linnen cloth, wrapped about an infant after it is newly chriſtened.
                  
                     Chriſmatorie. A veſſell to carry oyle in.
                  
                     Chriſt. The ſurname of our Sauiour, ſignifying annointed.
                  
                     Chronologer. One skilfull in Chronicles.
                  
                     Chronologie. The knowledge of old Stories.
                  
                     Chryſocoll. A kinde of minerall found like ſand in the veines of ſome mettalles.
                  
                     Chryſolite. A ſtone of the colour of Gold, which ſhineth brighteſt in the morning, and receiueth harme if it bee held too neere the fire.
                  
                     Chymera. A ſtrange monſter, hauing the head and breaſt like a Lyon, the belly like a Goate, the tayle like a Dragon.
                  
                     
                     Chymicall. Of, or belonging to a Chymiſt.
                  
                     Chymiſt. A Phyſition following the method of Paracelſus.
                  
                  
                     Cymball. An old muſicall inſtrument, made in ſome places of two or moe plates of braſſe, which with beating together made a ringing noyſe.
                  
                     Cimiſſe. A noyſome little worme, flat and red, which raiſeth wheals where it biteth: If it be broken, it yieldeth a ſtinking ſmell.
                  
                     Cinoper. A ſoft red ſtone, found in mines, otherwiſe cald Vermilion. The Paynims did vſe to paint their idols therewith, and themſelues in publike feaſts and ſolemnities, as wee reade that Camillus when he triumphed in Rome was painted with this Vermilion: So Virgill ſpeaking in his tenth Eclog. of the ſhepheards god Pan, ſaith that he was ſeene,

                        
                           Sanguincis ebuli baccis minioque rubentem.
                        
                        With bloody Walwoort berries ſtaynd,
                        and with Vermilion red.
                     
                  
                  
                     Cinque Ports. Fiue hauen townes in our Countrey, which haue many liberties. They are Haſting, Romnie, Hethe, Douer, and Sandwich.
                  
                     Circular. That which is round in compaſſe.
                  
                     Circumciſe. To cut off the foreskin of a mans priuy parts: which was a religious ceremony among all the Hebrewes after Abraham, to whom God firſt commanded it.
                  
                     Circumciſion A cutting off of the foreskinne. See Circumciſe.
                  
                     Circumference. The outer part of any round circle: The ring or round compaſſe of a wheele.
                  
                     Circumlocution A long circumſtance: a ſpeaking of many words, where few may ſuffice.
                  
                     Circumſcribe. To cōpaſſe round, to draw aline about.
                  
                     Circumſcriptible. That which may bee limited or contained within bounds.
                  
                     Circumſpect. Wiſe, warie, heedfull.
                  
                     
                     Circumuent. To compaſſe in; to deceiue one craftily.
                  
                     Cite. To warne one to appeare.
                  
                     Citation. A warning one to appeare.
                  
                     Citrene. Yellow.
                  
                     Citradell. A caſtle with a ſmall garriſon to keepe a towne in awe.
                  
                     Ciuet. A ſweet ſubſtance like muske. It is ſaid to bee the dung of the beaſt Hycan.
                  
                     Ciuilike. To make ciuill.
                  
                     Clamour. A great cry or noiſe.
                  
                     Clamorous. Crying out or exclaiming.
                  
                     Clandeſtine. Priuy, cloſe, ſecret,
                  
                     Clarentius. One of the Kings of armes, whoſe office is to diſpoſe the funerals of Knights & Eſquires of the ſouthſide of Trent.
                  
                     Clariſie. To make cleere.
                  
                     Clarity. Nobleneſſe, cleereneſſe.
                  
                     Clauſe. A ſhort ſentence.
                  
                     * Cleepe. An olde word, ſignifying to name, or to call.
                  
                     Clemency, Mercy, gentleneſſe.
                  
                     Clement. Mercifull, pittifull.
                  
                     Client. One that asketh counſell of a Lawyer.
                  
                     Clime. See Climate.
                  
                     Climactericall. A Greek word ſignifying an accoūt or reckoning, made by certaine degrees or ſteps. Some haue heereby diuided the age of mans life after this manner. The ſeuenth yeare they reckon for dangerous; and by this account the 14.21.28.35. &c. are climactericall yeares. Likewiſe the ninth yeare is eſteemed equally as dangerous, and by this account, the 18.27 36. &c. are called climactericall yeares. But the moſt noted and famous climactericall yeare, is at the age of 63. becauſe both accounts doe meete in this number; namely 7. times 9. and 9. times 7. And this is held the moſt dangerous yeare of all other.
                  
                     Climate. A terme vſed in Coſmography. It ſignifieth a portion of the world, betweene North & South, conteining ſome

notable difference in the ſunne riſing.
                  
                     Cloake. To couer or hide.
                  
                     Cloſhe. An vnlawfull game, called by ſome nine pinnes, cules, or kittles.
                  
                     * Clum. A note of ſilence.
                  
                     Coaction. Conſtraint.
                  
                     Coactiue. Conſtraining.
                  
                     Coadiutor. A fellow hel. per.
                  
                     Coagulate. To turne to curde.
                  
                     Coca. An hearbe in India, the leaues whereof being bruiſhed and mixt with the powder of Cockles or Oyſters in their ſhelles burnt, the Indians vſe in litle balles to carry in their mouthes, to preſerue them from famin or great dryth.
                  
                     Cockatrice. See Baſiliske.
                  
                     Coequal. Equal in degree with another.
                  
                     Coeſſentiall. Of the ſame eſſence or ſubſtance.
                  
                     Coeternal. Equall in eternity with another.
                  
                     Cogitation. A thinking.
                  
                     Cognition Knowledge.
                  
                     Cohere. To cleaue, ſticke, or hang together.
                  
                     Coherence. An agreement or hanging together.
                  
                     Collaterall. Sidewaies, or ioyning to the ſide. Euery degree of kindred is either lineall or collaterall▪ The lineall is that which commeth from the grandfather to the Father, from the Father to the Son, and ſo still right downeward:
                  
                     Collaterall is that which commeth ſidewaies, as firſt betweene brothers and ſiſters, then betweene their children, &c. Alſo Vncles, Aunts, and all Couſins are conceiued vnder this tearme of Collaterall kindred.
                  
                     Collation. A ſhort banquet.
                  
                     Colleague. A companion, or one ioyned in office with another.
                  
                     Collect. To gather together.
                  
                     Collection. A gathering.
                  
                     Collocation. A placing together.
                  
                     Colloquie. A talking or conferring together.
                  
                     
                     Colluſion. Deceite, couſenage. It is a tearme vſed in lawe, when an action is brought againſt one, by his owne agreement.
                  
                     Collyrie. A phyſical terme ſignifying any medicine for the eyes.
                  
                     Colon. A marke of a ſentence not fully ended; which is made with two prickes, thus(:)
                  
                     Colonie. Among the Romans, when their city was too ful of inhabitants, they vſed to withdraw a certain number, to dwell in ſome other place, which number ſo withdrawne, as alſo the place to which they were ſent, was called by the name of Colonie.
                  
                  
                     Coloquintida. A kinde of wilde Ground, which the Perſians name Gall of the earth, becauſe it deſtroyeth all hearbes, neere which it groweth. It is round, hauing a thinne yellow rinde (when it is ripe) and the inner part open, and ſpo
                        •
                     gie full of gray ſeede. If there grow but one vpon a plant, it muſt bee throwne away, becauſe it will bee too violent in operation. This fruite is often vſed in phyſick to purge ſlimie groſſe humours from the ſinnewes and ioynts; but muſt be well prepared, for that otherwiſe it is very dangerous.
                  
                     Coloſſe. An image or ſtatue of exceeding greatneſſe, made ſometime by the olde Emperours of Rome. There was one ſuch image in the yle of Rhodes, dedicated to the ſunne, of one hundred and fiue foot long, the thun be of which image fewe men could fathome.
                  
                     Columbine. Douelike.
                  
                     Columne. A pillar.
                  
                     Coluri. Two imagined circles in the heauens, drawne both through the Poles, whereof one paſſeth through Aries and Libra, the other through Cancer and Capricorne; So that they deuide the Zodiacke, and the whole heauens into foure euen parts.
                  
                     Combat. A fight between two, allowed by the law or

for triall of ſome controuerſie.
                  
                     Combatant. He that ſighteth or is to fight a combat.
                  
                     Combine. To couple or ioyne together.
                  
                     Combination. A coupling or ioyning together.
                  
                     Combuſt. Burnt or ſcorched: a planet is ſaid to be combuſt, when he is vnder the ſunnne beames, or within certaine degrees of them.
                  
                     Combuſtible. That which will ſoon be ſet on fire and conſumed.
                  
                     Combuſtion. A burning.
                  
                     Comelie. A play or Interlude, the beginning whereof is euer full of troubles, and the end ioyfull. Among the Greeks Eupolis, Ariſtophanes and Cratinus, were the chiefe comical Poets, among the Latines Plantus and Terence.
                  
                  
                     Commedian. A Player or writer of comedies.
                  
                     Comet. A blazing ſtarre. It is properly a great quā
                     tity of hot and drye exhalations drawn vp from the earth, by the attractiue vertue of ſtarres, into the higheſt region of the aire, where beeing neere the Element of fire, it is inflamed, and there mooued round, according to the motiō of the ſtarre vnder which it is growen, or the motion of the ayre, in thoſe high pares.
                  
                     Comicall. That which pertaineth to comedies: alſo pleaſant or merry.
                  
                     Comma. A marke often vſed in writing and printing, which is made thus(,
                  
                     Commemorate. To rehearſe or make mention.
                  
                     Commemoration, A rehearſall, remembrance.
                  
                     Commence. To begin, to enter an action againſt one.
                  
                     Commen
                           •
                        atory. Which recommendeth one.
                  
                     Comment. Notes of inſtruction ſet in ſome bookes, to expound ſuch things as cannot eaſily be vnderſtood. Sometime it is taken for a lye or fained tale.
                  
                     Commentary. See Comment.
                  
                     
                     Commendatorie. That which hath commendations onely written in it.
                  
                     Commerce. Conuerſation, entercourſe of merchandiſe.
                  
                     Commination. A threatning.
                  
                     Commiſerate. To take pittie or compaſſion vpon any.
                  
                     Commiſeration. Pittie or compaſſion.
                  
                     Commiſſarie. One that hath ſpirituall iuriſdiction in ſome out places of a Dioceſſe, ſo farre diſtant from the chiefe Citie, that it were too great trouble to ſummon people to it.
                  
                     Commiſſion. A writing teſtifying that one or many haue ſome authoritie in a matter of truſt, committed to their charge.
                  
                     Commiſſioner. He that is in authoritie by vertue of a Commiſſion.
                  
                     Committee. He to whom a matter is committed to be decided or ordered.
                  
                     Commixe. To mingle together.
                  
                     Commixtion. A mingling together.
                  
                     Commodious. Fit, profitable.
                  
                     Commotion. A great ſtir, a hurly burly.
                  
                     Communicable. That which may bee imparted vnto an other.
                  
                     Communion. A partaking together.
                  
                     Communitie. Fellowſhip in partaking together.
                  
                     Commutation. A changing.
                  
                     Compact. Hard knit, cloſe ioyned together, ſomtime a bargaine, agreement.
                  
                     Compaſſionate. Pittifull, which grieueth at others harmes.
                  
                     Compendious. Briefe, ſhort, ſauing.
                  
                     Compendium. A ſhort way, a ſauing courſe.
                  
                     Competencie. Sufficiency, fitneſſe.
                  
                     Competent. Conuenient, fit, neceſſary.
                  
                     Competitor. He that ſueth for the ſame thing with an other.
                  
                     Compile. To make, frame, or ſet together.
                  
                     Complement. Fulneſſe, perfection, fine behauiour.
                  
                     Compleate. Full, perfect.
                  
                     
                     Complexion. The temperature of the humors in mans body, which cauſeth the colour: ſometime it ſignfieth painting vſed by women.
                  
                     Complicies. Fellowes or Confederates in lewde matters
                  
                     Compoſe. To frame, or ſet together.
                  
                     Compoſition. A ioyning or putting together.
                  
                     Compoſitor. He that compoſeth or ſetteth a thing in order.
                  
                     Comprehend. To containe, or conceiue in the minde.
                  
                     Comprehenſible. Which may be contained or conceiued.
                  
                     Comprehenſion. A taking, a conceiuing, or vnderſtanding.
                  
                     Compreſſion. A preſſing together.
                  
                     Compremiſe. An agreement made by indifferent parties choſen on both ſides.
                  
                     Compriſe. To conraine.
                  
                     Compulſe. Conſtraint, enforcement.
                  
                     Compulſion. Conſtraint.
                  
                     Compunction. Griefe, remorſe.
                  
                     Computate. To account, caſt, or reckon.
                  
                     Computation. An account, or reckoning.
                  
                     Comrade. A companion, a good fellow.
                  
                     Concaue. Hollow.
                  
                     Concauitie. Hollownes.
                  
                     Concinnitie. Apt, fitneſſe, a feate contriuing, or hanſome ſetting a thing together.
                  
                     Conciſe. Briefe, ſhort.
                  
                     Conclaue. A priuate roome, a cloſet.
                  
                     Concoct. To digeſt, to boyle.
                  
                     Concoction. Digeſtion of meate in the body.
                  
                     Concourſe. A great aſſembly.
                  
                     Concupiſcence. Luſt, fleſhly deſire.
                  
                     Concurre. To meete together.
                  
                     Condeſcend. To agree, to ioyne together.
                  
                     Condigne. Worthy, due, deſerued.
                  
                     Condole. To lament with an other, to bemone.
                  
                     Conduce. To helpe, or be profitable.
                  
                     
                     Conduct. To guide one in the way.
                  
                     Confection. A mingling together; or that which is mingled.
                  
                     Confederate. One ioyned in friendſhip, or linked with another in any practiſe.
                  
                     Conferre. To compare together: ſometime to talke or reaſon with another.
                  
                     Conference. A reaſoning together, or a comparing of one thing with another.
                  
                     Confidence. Truſt, credite.
                  
                     Confident. Very bold, aſſured; nothing doubtfull.
                  
                     Confine. To appoint bounds, to limit.
                  
                     Confines. The bounds or borders of a Country.
                  
                     Confiſcate. Forfeited: ſeiſed to the Kings vſe▪
                  
                  
                     Confiſcation. Forfeiture of ones goods, or ſeiſing them to the Kings vſe.
                  
                     Conflict. A ſight, a skirmiſh a bickering.
                  
                     Confluence. A flowing together: a great multitude: great ſtore.
                  
                     Conforme. To apply or frame ones ſelfe to any thing which is required of him.
                  
                     Conformitie. Likeneſſe or agreement with another thing.
                  
                     Confront. To come or ſtand boldly before ones face: to face one.
                  
                     Confuſe. Mixt together: mingled, out of order.
                  
                     Confuſion. A diſoderly mingling.
                  
                     Confute. To diſproue, to ouerthrow by argument.
                  
                     Congeale. To freeze, to grow ſtiffe, or cling together with cold.
                  
                     Conglutinate. To glew together: to ioyne.
                  
                     Conglutination. A glewing together.
                  
                     Congratulate. To reioyce in anothers behalfe with him: or to ſignifie that we ſo reioyce.
                  
                     Congratulation. A reioycing together.
                  
                     Congregate. To gather together.
                  
                     Congruent. Agreeable, meet, fit.
                  
                     Congruity. Good agreemēnt.
                  
                     Coniecturall. Vncertaine, which may, & may not be.
                  
                     Conioyne. To ioyne together. Coningall. Belonging to wedlocke.
                  
                     
                     Coniunction. A ioyning or coupling together.
                  
                     Coniure. To ſweare or conſpire together: to bind by oath, or vnder a great penalty.
                  
                     Connex. To knit or tye together.
                  
                     Connexion. A knitting together.
                  
                     Conniuence. A ſuffering, or winking at a matter.
                  
                     Conſanguinitie. Kindred by blood.
                  
                     Conſecrate. To hallow or make holy.
                  
                     Conſervation. A making holy.
                  
                     Conſequence. That which followeth another thing going before.
                  
                     Conſequent. Following or neceſſarily comming after another thing.
                  
                     Conſerue. To preſerue or keepe.
                  
                     Conſerues. The iuyce or ſubſtance of any thing boiled with Sugar and ſo kept.
                  
                     Conſi
                           •
                        erate Diſcreet, wiſe.
                  
                     Conſiſtorie. An aſſembly of Magiſtrates, a iudgement place.
                  
                     Conſolatorie. Comforting, which comforteth.
                  
                     Conſolation. Comfort.
                  
                     Conſolidate. To make firme or ſtrong.
                  
                     Conſonant. Agreeable. Alſo euery letter not being a vowell, is ſo called, as B, C, D.
                  
                     Conſort. A company: or a company of Muſitions together.
                  
                     Conſpicuous. Bright, cleere.
                  
                     Conſpurcation. A defiling or making foule.
                  
                     Conſtellation. A company of ſtarres together: or the influēce which they work.
                  
                     Conſternation. Amazement: a great feare.
                  
                     Conſtitute. To ordaine, to appoint.
                  
                     Conſtitution. A decree, an ordinance.
                  
                     Conſtruction. A ioyning of words and ſentences together.
                  
                     Conſubſtantiall. Of the ſame ſubſtance.
                  
                     Conſubſtantiality. Agreement in ſubſtance: the being of the ſame ſubſtance that another is of.
                  
                     Conſull. A chiefe officer among the Romans: there were two choſen yearly to gouerne the City: Theſe

Magiſtrates firſt began after the Kings were expelled, & were called Conſuls, of the latin word Conſulere, becauſe they were by their office to prouide and take care for the good of the common weale.
                  
                     Conſult. To take aduice together.
                  
                     Conſultation. An aduice or deliberation taken together.
                  
                     Conſummate. To finiſh, to make an end.
                  
                     Conſummation. An end, a finiſhing of a matter.
                  
                     Conſumption. A conſuming: alſo a diſeaſe, wherin the lungs being exulcerated, there followeth a leanneſſe of all the body.
                  
                     Contagion. An infection.
                  
                     Contagious. Infections.
                  
                     Contaminate. To defile.
                  
                     Contamination. A defilng.
                  
                     Contemne. To deſpiſe.
                  
                     Contemplate. To behold in the mind: to muſe vpon.
                  
                     Contemplatiō. A beholding in mind; a thinking vpon.
                  
                     Contemptible. Baſe vile, of no account.
                  
                     Contemptuous. Deſpiteful.
                  
                     Continencie. Chaſtity, temperateneſſe.
                  
                     Continent. Chaſte, ſober, temperate.
                  
                     Continent land. That which is no Iland, maine land.
                  
                     Contingēs. Caſual, doubtfull, vncertaine: which may and may not be.
                  
                     Continuate. To ioyn cloſe together.
                  
                     Contract. A bargaine, an agreement made.
                  
                     Contraction. A ſhrinking together.
                  
                     Contradict. To gainſay or ſpeake againſt.
                  
                     Contradiction. A ſpeaking againſt; a whithſtanding in words.
                  
                     Contribute. To giue with others; to allow as others doe.
                  
                     Contributary. Which alloweth or giueth as others doe.
                  
                     Contribution. A giuing with others, when many giue together.
                  
                     Contriſtate. To make ſad or ſorrowfull.
                  
                     Contrite. Broken: very ſorrowfull: hartily repentant.
                  
                     Contrition. Great inward ſorrow for ſin committed.
                  
                     Controuert. To contend, ſtriue, or be at variance about

a matter.
                  
                     Contumacie. Stubbornnes, diſobedience: ſelfe-will.
                  
                     Contumely. Reproach; ſpite, diſgrace.
                  
                     Contumelious. Reproachfull: ſpitefull, diſgracefull.
                  
                     Contund. To pound or beate in a morter.
                  
                     Contuſion. A beating, bruiſing or pounding.
                  
                     Conuent. To bring one before a Iudge.
                  
                     Conuenticle. A little aſſembly; moſt commonly for an ill purpoſe.
                  
                     Conuention. An appearing before a Iudge.
                  
                     Conuerſe. To vſe ones company, to liue with.
                  
                     Conuerſant. Vſing much in ones company.
                  
                     Conuerſion. A turning from euill to good.
                  
                     Conuict. Prooued guiltie of the crime whereof he is accuſed.
                  
                     Conuiction. A condemnation or proofe of beeing guiltie.
                  
                     Conuince. To ouercome, or confute: To proue one guiltie.
                  
                     Conuocate. To call together.
                  
                     Conuocation. An aſſembling or calling together: ſometime the company aſſembled.
                  
                     Conuulſion. A ſhrinking, or pulling together of the ſinewes; a cramp, a pang.
                  
                     Cooperate. To worke together; to helpe.
                  
                     Cooperation. A working with another, a helping.
                  
                     Cope. A Church veſtment much like a large cloke.
                  
                     Copall. A white Roſin of much brightneſſe brought from the Weſt Indies: the people there were wont to make perfumes thereof in their ſacrifices. It is hot in the ſecond degree, and moyſt in the firſt, and is vſe heere to be burnt againſt cold diſeaſes of the braine.
                  
                     Copie. Great plentie.
                  
                     Copious. Plentiful, aboundant.
                  
                     Copulation. A coupling or ioyning together.
                  
                     Corall. There are two ſorts hereof, the one white, the other red; but the red is beſt. It growth like a tree in the bottome of the ſea, from whence being taken,

it is by the ayre, hardened into the forme of a ſtone, as we ſee it. It is cold and dry in operation, good to be hanged about childrens neckes, as well to rub their gums, as to preſerue them from the falling ſickeneſſe.
                  
                     Corbell. A ſhouldering peece cut out in ſtone, as we may ſee in walles, to beare vp a poſte, ſummer, or other weight.
                  
                     Corbets. Places in walles where Images ſtand.
                  
                     Corbona. A cheſt or cofer in the Temple of Hieruſalem, where the treaſure that ſerued for the Prieſts vſe was kept.
                  
                     Cordiall. Hearty; that which comforteth the heart.
                  
                     Cordwyner. A Shooemaker.
                  
                     Corodie. An ancient term, vſed when the founders of Abbies or other religious houſes, reſerued aright in themſelues and heires, to appoint ſome perſon to haue allowance of meate and drinke, or other maintenance out of the houſe; and this allowance was called a Corodie.
                  
                  
                     Coronell. A Captaine ouer many bands.
                  
                     Coronation. The crowning of a King or Queene.
                  
                     Corporall. Of, or belonging to the bodie.
                  
                     Coporation. A bodie politick, hauing by the kings grant and common ſeale, a chiefe Officer, and inferiour perſons belonging to it.
                  
                     Corpulencie. Groſſeneſſe, fatneſſe.
                  
                     Corpulent. Fat and groſſe.
                  
                     Correlative. A tearme of Logicke applyed to ſuch words as cannot bee ſpoken, but there muſt be ſuppoſed ſome other word, which is neceſſarily a dependant vpon it: as a Father and a Sonne; a Maſter and a Seruant; a Captaine and a Souldiour; a Husband and a Wife.
                  
                     Correſpondence. An agreeableneſſe, or proportion anſwering to ſome other thing.
                  
                     Correſpondent. Agreeable, or anſwerable to another thing.
                  
                     
                     Corrigible. That which may bee corrected or amended.
                  
                     Corriuall He that is ſuiter with another, to a woman for marriage.
                  
                     Corroborate. To ſtrengthen, to confirme.
                  
                     Corrode. To gnaw aſunder.
                  
                     Corroſiue. A fretting plaiſter: any thing which laid to the body, raiſeth bliſters and maketh it ſore.
                  
                     Coſignificatiue. Of the ſame ſignification with another thing.
                  
                     Coſmographie. An art touching the deſcription of the whole world. This art by the diſtance of the circles in heauē, diuideth the earth vnder them into her Zones and climats, and by the eleuation of the Pole, conſidereth the length of the day & night, with the perfect demonſtration of the Sunnes riſing and going downe.
                  
                     Couent. The whole number of religious men together dwelling in one houſe
                  
                     Couerture. A couering. In the common Law it ſignifieth all the time that a man and wife are coupled in marriage.
                  
                     Couchant. Couching or lying on the ground.
                  
                     Couert. Hidden, ſecret.
                  
                     Couertbaron. A marryed wife: a woman ſubiect to a husband.
                  
                     Couerture. In our common Law it is ſometime taken for marriage.
                  
                     Couine. Deceit, couſenage.
                  
                     Countermand. To giue commandement contrary to that which was commanded.
                  
                     Countermine. To mine or dig in the earth againſt another.
                  
                     Countermure. A wal made in defence of another wall.
                  
                     Counterpane. The fellow coppy of a deed indented.
                  
                     Counterpoiſe. Any thing laid in waight againſt another thing.
                  
                     Counteruaile. To bee of equall value to another thing.
                  
                     Coupee. Cutt off.
                  
                     Crampefiſh. A fiſh whoſe nature is to make the hands of ſuch as touch it,

to be benummed or aſtonied, though they touch it with a long pole.
                  
                     Crannie. A little hole or chinke.
                  
                     Crauen. A coward.
                  
                     Crazie. Sickly, weake, of vnperfect health.
                  
                     Credence. Beleefe, truſt.
                  
                     Credible. That which may be beleeued.
                  
                     Creditor. He that lendeth or truſteth another with mony or wares
                  
                     Credulitie. Eaſineſſe of beleefe.
                  
                     Credulous. He which eaſily beleeueth a thing.
                  
                     Creſsant. In Heraldrie it ſignifieth the newe Moone.
                  
                     Crime. An offence, or fault committed.
                  
                     Criminall. Faultie: or that which belongeth to a fault or accuſation.
                  
                     Criſis. A Greeke word, which is interpreted iudgment. In Phiſicke it ſignifieth the conflict between nature and ſickneſſe: that is, the time, when either the patient ſuddenly becommeth well, or ſuddenly dyeth, or waxeth better or worſe, according to the ſtrength of his bodie, and violence of the diſeaſe.
                  
                     Criſpe. Curled.
                  
                     Criſtall. A ſubſtance like cleere glaſſe. There are two kindes hereof. One which groweth vpon extreame cold mountaines, being there congealed like yee, by the minerall vertue of the place, as Albertus writeth. Another kinde groweth in the earth in ſome places of of Germanie.
                  
                     Criſtalline. Made of Criſtall, or ſhining like a Criſtall.
                  
                     Criticall. In Phiſicke the fourth and ſeuenth dayes are called Critical, becauſe in them Phiſitians vſe to iudge of the danger of a diſeaſe: But the ſeuenth is accounted the chiefe Criticall day, & the fourth a token or ſigne what the ſeuenth day will be, if the Patient liue ſo long. This account muſt bee made according to the number of weekes thus. In the firſt weeke the fourth day is the token or Critical of the

ſeuenth day. In the ſecond weeke the eleuenth is the Critical of the fourteenth. In the third the ſeuentieth is the Critticall of the twentieth: for Hippocrates reckoneth the twentieth day for the laſt to the third weeke: In the fourth week 24. is the Criticall of the 27. In the fifty the 31. the Criticall of the 34. In the ſixt weeke the 37. the Criticall of the 40. And ſo foorth to a hundred.
                  
                     Criticke. The ſame that Criticall is. Alſo it ſignifieth ſometime, one that hath authoritie, or taketh vpon him to cenſure other mens acts or workes written.
                  
                     Crocodile. A harmefull beaſt liuing moſt about the Riuer Nilus in Aegypt. It is hatched of an egge, and groweth vnto a wonderfull greatneſſe, ſometime to twentie or thirtie foot long. This beaſt hath no tongue, and in feeding mooueth onely the vpper iawe: He hath eyes like a Hogge, and cruell ſharpe teeth: Hee hath no haire but is made much after the faſhion of an Euet, with a long taile, a long belly, and backe couered all ouer with ſcales cloſe ioyned & of great ſtrength. Vpon his feete hee hath ſtrong ſharpe clawes. In the day time hee can ſee farre, and liueth on land, in the night he is almoſt blind, and keepeth in the water. He is very bold vpon thoſe he ſeeth afraid of him, and fearefull if he be aſſaulted. It is written that he will weepe ouer a mans head, when he hath deuoured the body, and then will eate vp the head two. Wherefore in Latine there is a probere, Crocodili Iachrymae, Crocodiles teares, to ſignifie ſuch teares as are fained, and ſpent onely with intent to deceiue, or doe harme. I ſaw once one of theſe beaſts in London brought thither dead, but in perfect forme, of about three yards long.
                  
                     Croches. The little buds or branches, at the top of a Harts horne.
                  
                     Croſſelet. A melting pot.
                  
                     
                     Crotayes. Dung of a Hare.
                  
                     Crownet. A little crowne, alſo a part of a horſe hooſe is ſo called.
                  
                     Crude. Rawe, not well digeſted.
                  
                     Cruditie. Rawneſſe: ill digeſtion.
                  
                     Cubebs. A certaine fruite ſold by Apothecaries like vnto Pepper. It commeth out of India, and is hotte and drie in operation. It comforteth the braine much, and quickeneth the ſpirits, being held & chewed in the mouth. It is alſo very good to open the ſtoppings of the Liuer.
                  
                     Cubite. Halfe a yard: the meaſure from a mans elbow to the toppe of his middle finger.
                  
                     Cullion. The ſtone of any liuing thing.
                  
                     Culpable. Faultie.
                  
                     Culture. Tillage, dreſſing of land.
                  
                     Culuertaile. A ſtrong kind of building, by faſtening boards or timber, with arteficiall ioynts, ſo firmely together, that they cannot fall aſunder.
                  
                     Cummine. An herbe, the ſeed whereof is much vſed in Phiſicke. It is hot and dry, good to breake or diſſolue windineſſe in any part of the body.
                  
                     Cumulation. A heaping vp, or increaſing.
                  
                     Cunctation. Slackeneſſe, delay, lingering.
                  
                     Capglaſſe. A hollow round Glaſſe, with a hole in the bottome, vſed by Phyſitians ſometimes, to drawe blood or wind out of the body, for it ſucketh with great ſtrength, by reaſon of a little flame of fire made in it.
                  
                     Cupiditie. Deſire, couetouſneſſe.
                  
                     Curfew. A bell which ringing about bedtime, giueth folkes warning, to goe to reſt and couer their fire.
                  
                     Curſorily. Swiftly: as when one readeth a booke ouer with ſpeede.
                  
                     Curtezane. A harlot.
                  
                     Curtilage. Any peece of ground, as a yard, backeſide, or garden plotte, adioyning to a houſe.
                  
                     Cuſtodie. Safe keeping.
                  
                     
                     Cutchoneale. A little flie (as ſome thinke) brought from beyond the Sea, dried, wherewith diers die Stammell and colours in Graine: but indeed it is a fruit.
                  
                     Cynicall. Doggiſh, See Cynike.
                  
                     Cynike. Doggiſh or curriſh. There was in Greece an olde ſect of Philoſophers ſo called, becauſe they did ouerſharply barke at mens vices, and were not ſo reſpectiue in their behauiour as ciuilitie required. The chiefe of this ſect were Antiſthenes and Diogenes.
                  
                  
                     Cypher. A circle in Arithmetike like the letter O; which of it ſelfe is of no value, but increaſeth the value of other figures after which it is ioyned: wherefore wee ſometime ſay of one, that in company of others doth nothing himſelfe, that he ſtandeth for a Cypher.
                  
                     Cypreſſe. A tree which groweth on drie mountaine
                        •
                     , very tall and ſlender: the timber thereof is yellowiſh and of a pleaſant ſmell, eſpecially ſet neere the fire. It carieth no leafe, but greene ſmall twigs.
               
            
            
               D
               
                  
                     * DAffe. A daſtard.
                  
                     * Dagges. Latchets cut of Lether.
                  
                     Daine. To vouchſafe.
                  
                     Dandruffe. Small ſcales that ſticke to the skin of the head, and often hang about the haires. They are cauſed by ſalt ſleame, or ſome other corrupted humours, piercing inſenſibly the pores, and then ſlightly congealed by the ayre, and may be taken away by waſhing the head with ſalt water or vineger warme.
                  
                     Darnell. A naughtie graine almoſt like wheate, but much leſſe, and groweth among wheate often. It may be vſed in Phiſicke, againſt ſome outward diſeaſes, but taken inwardly it is harmefull, as beeing too hot, and making the head giddy.
                  
                     Darreigne. To attempt, or challenge.
                  
                     
                     Deaurate. Guilded. gliſtering like gold.
                  
                     Debilitate. To weaken.
                  
                     Debility. Weakneſſe.
                  
                     Debitor. A debtor.
                  
                     Debonaire. Gentle, mild, curteous.
                  
                     Decad. The number of tenne.
                  
                     Decalog. The tenne commandements.
                  
                     Decent, Comely, hanſome.
                  
                     Decency. Comelineſſe.
                  
                     Decide. To determine, or end a controuerſie or doubt.
                  
                     Decypher. To write after a ſtrange faſhion, that none ſhall reade it, alſo to find out the meaning of a thing ſo written.
                  
                     Deciſion. A determination, or end made of a controuerſie.
                  
                     Declayme. To ſpeake euill: to reproach.
                  
                     Declamation. An oration or ſpeech made of purpoſe in reproach of any perſon or thing.
                  
                     Declaymer. Hee that maketh a declamation.
                  
                     Decline. To bend downward.
                  
                     Declination. A bending downeward.
                  
                     Decliuity. A ſteepe bending downward, as on the ſide of a hill.
                  
                     Decoct. To ſeethe, to boyle.
                  
                     Decoction. A boyling or ſeething. In Phyſick it ſignifieth commonly any liquor in which medicinable rootes, herbes, ſeedes, flowers, or any other thing hath beene boyled.
                  
                     Decollation. A beheading.
                  
                     Decorum. Comely, or comeiineſſe.
                  
                     Decrepit. Weake, or very feeble with age.
                  
                     Decreſſant. The moone in the laſt quarter.
                  
                     Decretals. Ordinances, decrees.
                  
                     Dedicate. To offer, giue or appoint for ſome ſpeciall purpoſe.
                  
                     Dedication. An offering, a giuing vp.
                  
                     Deduce. To take away, to abate.
                  
                     Deduct. To take away.
                  
                     Deduction. A taking away.
                  
                     Defamation A defaming, a ſpeaking ill of one.
                  
                     
                     Defamatorie. Slanderous: which defameth.
                  
                     Defatigation. Wearineſſe.
                  
                     Defeaſance. An ouerthrowing, or vndoing that which was formerly done. A writing teſtifying that ſome other writing ſhall be of no force.
                  
                     Defeate. To deceiue, or beguile: to take craftily from one.
                  
                     Defect. A failing or want in any thing.
                  
                     Defection. A falling away a reuolting.
                  
                     Defectiue. Faultie, which wanteth ſomething.
                  
                     Defendant. He which anſwereth to an accuſation or challenge.
                  
                     Defenſiue. That which defendeth, or is ſpoken or done in defence.
                  
                     Deferre. To put off, to prolong.
                  
                     Define. To declare, ſhew or deſcribe a thing plainelie.
                  
                     Definition. A ſentence which expreſly declareth what a thing is.
                  
                     Definitiue. Which defineth or concludeth a matter.
                  
                     Defloration. A deflouring.
                  
                     Defloure. To corrupt ſpoile or marre.
                  
                     Deforme. To diſfigure, to ſpoyle the forme of any thing.
                  
                     Deformation. A diſfiguring.
                  
                     Deformitie. Ill-fauourdneſſe: vncomelineſſe.
                  
                     Defraude. To deceiue, to beguile.
                  
                     Deft. Little and pretty, feat and handſome.
                  
                     Defunct. Dead.
                  
                     Degenerate. To turne out of kinde.
                  
                     Degrade. To take away the priuiledge of holy orders from one.
                  
                     Degradation A taking away of Eccleſiaſticall authoritie, from a Clerke conuinced of ſome notorious crime.
                  
                     ° Degree. A terme often vſed in Aſtronomie and phiſicke. In Aſtronomie it ſignifieth the thirtieth part of a ſigne: viz. of Aries, Taurus, Gemini, &c. For into ſo many parts or degrees are all the ſignes diuided. In phiſicke it ſignifieth

a proportion of heat, cold, moiſture or drineſſe, in the nature of ſimples; and there are foure ſuch proportions or degrees: The firſt degree is ſo ſmal, that it can ſcarce be perceiued. The ſecond, that which may be manifeſtly perceiued without hurting the ſenſe. The third, that which ſomewhat offendeth the ſenſe. The fourth, which ſo much offendeth, that it may deſtroy the body. For example: Sweet Almonds Rice, Bugloſſe, ripe Grapes are hot in the firſt degree: Parſley, Saffron, Hony, in the ſecond degree; Cummine, Galingall, Pepper in the third degree: and Garlick, Spourge, Euphorbium, in the fourth degree. So Barly is cold in the firſt degree, cucumbers in the ſecond, Sengreene in the third, and Hemlocke in the fourth degree. Where note that in heat, cold, and drineſſe, there may bee foure degrees, and in moiſture but two.
                  
                     Dehort. To diſſwade: to aduiſe one to the contrary.
                  
                     Dehortation. A perſwaſion or admonition to refraine from doing ſome thing.
                  
                     Deiect. To throw downe, to debaſe.
                  
                     Deiection. A throwing downe, a debaſement.
                  
                     Deitie. Godhead, or a God.
                  
                     Delineate. To draw the firſt proportion of a thing.
                  
                     Delinquent. An offender.
                  
                     Delude. To mocke, to ſcorne, to deceiue.
                  
                     Deluge. An vniuerſall ouerflowing of waters, Noes floud.
                  
                     Deluſion. A mocking.
                  
                     Demaynes. The Lords Mannor houſe, and the lands which hee and his aunceſtors haue alwaies vſed.
                  
                     Demeane. To behaue or carry ones ſelfe.
                  
                     Demeanour. Behauiour.
                  
                     Demerit. A deſert.
                  
                     Demiſe. To giue or grant.
                  
                     Democritie. A kind of gouernement wherein the people beare rule without

other ſuperiours, ſauing ſuch as they appoint.
                  
                     Democraticall. Of or belonging to the eſtate of Democratic.
                  
                  
                     Demoliſh. To pull downe.
                  
                     Demolition. A pulling downe.
                  
                     Demoniacke. Poſſeſſed with a diuell.
                  
                     Demonſtrable. Which may bee ſhewed or made manifeſt.
                  
                     Demonſtrate. To ſhew.
                  
                     Demonſtration. A ſhewing plaine of any thing.
                  
                     Demurre. A pauſe or ſtay, a ſtanding ſtill.
                  
                     Demy. Halfe, ſometime little.
                  
                     Deneere. A penny, a ſmall peece of mony.
                  
                     Denizen. A ſtraunger borne, that obtaineth the Kings letters patents, and becommeth his Maieſties ſubiect, enioying thereby al priuiledges, as if he were an Engliſhman.
                  
                     Denominate. To name one.
                  
                     Denomination. A naming.
                  
                     Denotate. To note or marke, to ſignifie.
                  
                     Denotation. A noting or marking.
                  
                     Denounce. To giue warning, to declare, to threaten.
                  
                     * Denwere Double.
                  
                     Deodand. When a man is caſually killed by a catt, Horſe, or Mill, &c. that which mooued and was thereby cauſe of his death, being forfeit to the King, appertaineth to his Maieſties Almoner to beſtow in deedes of charity, and is therefore called a Deodand, as being to be giuen away for Gods ſake.
                  
                     Depend. To hang vpon an other thing.
                  
                     Dependant. That which hangeth vpon an other thing,
                  
                     Deplore. To lament, to bewaile.
                  
                     Deploration. A lamenting.
                  
                     Depopulate. To waſte or ſpoile a countrey.
                  
                     Depopulation. A ſpoiling or waſting of a countrey.
                  
                     Depoſe. To take away ones authority, to thruſt out of his kingdome, ſomtime to ſweate.
                  
                     Depoſitum. A pledge, any thing layd vp with one

to keepe.
                  
                     Depoſition. A depoſing or putting from great authority, alſo a laying down ſometime an oath or teſtimony giuen by oath.
                  
                     Depraue. To corrupt or marre, ſometime to ſpeake euill of one.
                  
                     Depreſſe. To crouch downe, to keepe vnder.
                  
                     Depriue. To take away.
                  
                     Depriuation. A loſſe of any thing.
                  
                     Depute. To appoint.
                  
                     Deride. To mocke, or floute.
                  
                     Deriſion. A mocking.
                  
                     Deriue. To take or draw from another thing.
                  
                     Deriuative. That which is deriued from another thing or word.
                  
                     Deriuation. A deriuing, or drawing from ſome thing.
                  
                     Derogate. To empaire, diminiſh, or take away.
                  
                     Derogation. A taking away from ones honour or eſtimation.
                  
                     Derogatorie. That which empaireth or hindereth the credit of any one.
                  
                     Deſcend. To goe downward.
                  
                     Deſcribe. To expreſſe plainly the outward forme of a thing.
                  
                     Deſcription. A plaine expreſſing of the outward forme of a thing, or the manner how a thing was done.
                  
                     Deſigne. To appoint.
                  
                     Deſignement. An enterpriſe or purpoſe which a man hath.
                  
                     Deſiſt. To leaue off.
                  
                     Deteine. To keep from one.
                  
                     Detect. To diſcouer, to diſcloſe.
                  
                     Detection. A diſcouerie, diſcloſing.
                  
                     Detract. To ſpeake euill of one.
                  
                     Detraction. Slanderous ſpeaking.
                  
                     Detriment. Loſſe, harme, hinderance.
                  
                     Deuaſtation. A waſting of a countrey.
                  
                     Deueſt. To vncloath.
                  
                     Deuiant. Farre out of the way.
                  
                     Deuoire. Endeauour.
                  
                     Deuolue. To rolle down.
                  
                     Deuolution. A rolling along.
                  
                     Dewlap. The hollow part

of the throate, hanging downe in ſome beaſts.
                  
                     Dexter. Belonging to the right hand.
                  
                     Dexteritie. Nimbleneſſe, quickneſſe, skilfulneſſe.
                  
                     Diabolicall. Diuelliſh.
                  
                     Diacatholicon. An electuary much vſed in phiſicke, ſo called becauſe it ſerueth as, a gentle purge for all humours.
                  
                     Diacinnamon. A phyſicall mixture of cinnamom and diuerſe ſpices in powder together, which helpeth digeſtion and is good againſt colde moiſt diſeaſes of the ſtomacke.
                  
                     Diacodion. A cold ſirupe made of the tops of poppies, vſed in phiſicke ſometime againſt hote diſeaſes, and to ſtay the falling downe of humours out of the head.
                  
                     Diacurcuma. A confection made of Saffron and diuers other ſimples, vſed againſt the dropſie and olde diſeaſes of the ſtomacke, ſpleene and liuer.
                  
                     Diadem. A kings crowne, or an attire for Princes to weare on their heads, made of purple ſilke, and pearle
                  
                     Diagalanga. A confection made of Galingale and hotte ſpices, good againſt the wind colicke and cold diſtemperature of the inward parts.
                  
                     Diagridium. There is a plant called Scammonie growing in far hot countries, the iuice of the roote whereof being dryed, is a very ſtrong and violent purgatiue medicine, called alſo Scammonie: which before it can be vſed in phyſicke, muſt bee boyled in Quinces, to abate the malice of it: now the Scammony boyled and prepared in this ſort, is called by Apothecaries Diagridium.
                  
                  
                     Dialacca. A confection made of the gumme Lacca, and diuerſe hotte ſimples, good againſt cold diſeaſes of the ſtomack, ſtoppings, of the liuer, and all cauſes that may draw one to the dropſie.
                  
                     Dialect. A difference of ſome words, or pronunciation in any language: as in England the Dialect or manner of ſpeech in the

North, is different from that in the South, and the Weſtern Dialect differing from them both. The Grecians had fiue eſpeciall Dialects: as 1. The property of ſpeech in Athens: 2. In Ionia: 3. In Doris: 4. In Eolia: and 5. that manner of ſpeech which was generally vſed of them all. So euery countrey hath commonly in diue
                        •
                     s parts thereof ſome differance of language, which is called the Dialect of that place.
                  
                     Dialecticall. Of or belonging to the art of Logicke.
                  
                     Dialog. A talke, reaſoning, or diſputation betweene two parties or moe, or a diſcourſe written where ſuch a conference is ſet downe.
                  
                     Diamber. A comfortable confection made of diuers hot ſpices, good to be giuen in wine or other liquor, to ſtrengthen the ſtomacke, reuiue the ſpirits, and warme the inward parts.
                  
                     Diameter. A ſtreight line which paſſing through the middle of any figure, diuideth it in two equall parts.
                  
                     Diapaſon. A concord of muſicke in of all.
                  
                     Diaphoenicon. An Electuary vſed often by Phiſitions to purge fleame and choler.
                  
                     Diaper. A fine kinde of linnen not wouen after the ordinarie faſhion but in certaine workes, Diamonds, knots, or other deuices.
                  
                     Diapred. Diuerſified: of diuers colours, or garniſhings.
                  
                     Diaprunum. An Electuary made of Damaske Prunes, and diuers other ſimples, good to coole the body in hot burning Feuers. After it is made, Phiſitians vſe often to adde Diagridium to it, and then it becommeth very Purgatory, and is called Diaprunum ſolutiuum; ſoluble, or laxatiue Diaprunum.
                  
                  
                     Diarhodon. A comfortable confection good to refreſh and ſtrengthen all

the inward parts, after long hot diſeaſes.
                  
                     Diaſena. A purging Electuaty good againſt quartane Agues, and all other diſeaſes proceeding from melancholy.
                  
                     Diatragacanthum. A confection made of the Gum Tragacarith, and other ſimples, good againſt hot diſeaſes of the breaſt, the cough, pleuriſie & inflammation of the lungs.
                  
                     Diatrionpiperion. A confection ſo called, becauſe it is principally compounded of the three kindes of Pepper, to wit, long, white and blacke Pepper. It is good to helpe digeſtion when the ſtomacke wanteth heat to concoct that which it hath receiued.
                  
                     Diatrionſantalon. A colde confection made of the wood Sanders, good againſt burning Agues, and to refreſh the inward parts inflamed with too much heate.
                  
                     Diaturbith. An Electuarie which principally opurgeth flegmatick groſſe humours.
                  
                     Dicacitie. Much talke: or prating.
                  
                     Dichotomie. A diuiding into two parts, or a diuiſion made by two and two.
                  
                     Dicker. Tenne hides of Lether.
                  
                     Dictate. To endite; alſo that which one writeth from anothers mouth while he ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Dictator. A chiefe Officer among the Romanes; neuer choſen but vpon great neceſſity in dangerous troubles of the common wealth. This Dictator could continue in office but onely ſixe moneths, and then vnder paine of treaſon was to giue vp his authoritie: He could bee named by none but the Conſull, and that in the night time, with great ſilence and attention. After he was once choſen all other Magiſtrates were out of office, except onely the Tribune of the people; ſo that the Dictator, during his time, had (as it were) a kingly authority aboue all.
                  
                     Difficult. Hard: vneaſie.
                  
                     
                     Difficulty. Hardneſſe, vneaſineſſe.
                  
                     Diffidence. Diſtruſt.
                  
                     Diffident. Miſtruſtfull.
                  
                     Diffuſe. To ſpreade abroad.
                  
                     Digamma. The letter F. ſo called, becauſe hee beareth a forme, like the Greeke letter Gamma, made double.
                  
                     Digeſt. To diſpoſe or ſet in order.
                  
                     Dight. Made ready, apparrelled, dreſſed.
                  
                     Digreſſe. To turne aſide, to leaue the matter time is in hand and ſpeak of another thing.
                  
                     Digreſsion A turning to ſpeake of another thing.
                  
                     Dilaniation. A tearing in pieces.
                  
                     Dilate. To ſpread abroad, to enlarge, to drawe in length.
                  
                     Dilatation. A drawing in length ſpeaking of a thing at large.
                  
                     Dilemma. A kinde of argument, which conuinceth ones aduerſary both waies as in ſaying: If hee bee a good man, why doe you ſpeake euill of him? If hee bee naught, why doe you keepe him company.
                  
                     Dimenſion. The true meaſure of a thing.
                  
                     Diminution. A diminiſhing.
                  
                     Diminutiue. Little, ſmall, or a word which betokeneth a little thing, as lambekinne, a little lambe.
                  
                     Dinumeration. A numbring, a reckoning.
                  
                     Dire. Fierce, cruell, terrible.
                  
                     Directory. That which directeth one.
                  
                     Direption. A violent catching away.
                  
                     Diſanull. To diſalowe.
                  
                     Diſappeare. To vaniſh out of ſight. To be ſeene no more,
                  
                     Diſaſtrous. Vnluckie: vnfortunate.
                  
                     Diſauow. To deny or refuſe by vowe.
                  
                     Diſciple. A Scholler, one that learneth.
                  
                     Diſcipline. Inſtruction.
                  
                     Diſclayme. To deny.
                  
                     Diſconſolate. Vncomfortable.
                  
                     
                     Diſcordant. Diſagreeing.
                  
                     Diſcrepant. Much differing.
                  
                     Diſcuſſe. To examine, debate, or try a matter.
                  
                     Diſcuſsion. An examining, a ſifting or tryall of a matter.
                  
                     Disfranchiſe. To take away freedome.
                  
                     Disfranchiſement. A taking away of ones freedome.
                  
                     Diſguſt. Diſlike.
                  
                     Diſlocation A putting out of the right place.
                  
                     Diſmall. Vnluckie: grieuous
                  
                     Diſmantle. To vnclothe: to vnfurniſh, to leaue vnprouided.
                  
                     Diſmiſſe. To diſcharge, to put away.
                  
                     Diſparage. To diſgrace: to ioyne with vnequall match.
                  
                     Diſparagement. Diſhonour: diſgrace, It properly ſignifieth a ſhame or diſgrace done by a Guardian to his ward, in marying him vnder yeeres, to a woman vnfitte for his calling, or to one paſt childe-bearing, or which hath ſome great deformitie, lameneſſe, or ſome horrible diſeaſe.
                  
                     Diſparates. A terme of Logicke, applyed to ſuch words as onely differing one from another, but not contrary: as heate and cold are contraries, but heate and moyſture are Diſparates: viz. two contrary qualities.
                  
                     Diſparity. Vnlikeneſſe: vnequality.
                  
                     Diſperpelled. A terme in Herauldry, when any thing of ſoft ſubſtance, doth by falling from high ſhoot it ſelfe out into diuers corners or ends.
                  
                     Diſperſe. To ſcatter abroad
                  
                     Diſperſion. A ſcattering abroad.
                  
                     Diſplayed Wide ſpreade, opened.
                  
                     Diſputable. Any thing that a man may diſpute on.
                  
                     Diſrobe. To vnclothe: properly of rich, or garme
                        •
                     ts of ſtate.
                  
                     Diſſent. To diſagree.
                  
                     Disſheuelled. Bare hayred,

without any attyre on the head, the haire hanging at length.
                  
                     Diſsimilitude. Vnlikeneſſe.
                  
                     Diſsipate. To ſcatter, or ſpread abroad.
                  
                     Diſsipation. A ſcattering, a waſting.
                  
                     Diſſolue. To vndoe, weaken, or deſtroy: to plucke downe.
                  
                     Diſſolute. Looſe, wanton, giuen much to vaine pleaſures.
                  
                     Diſſolution A breaking, weakening, or pulling aſunder of any thing.
                  
                     Diſſonant. Of a contrary ſound, not agreeing.
                  
                     Diſſwade. To perſwade one from a thing.
                  
                     Diſſwaſion. A perſwading of one from ſome thing.
                  
                     Diſtich. Two verſes; or a ſentence conteyned in two verſes.
                  
                     Diſtinguiſh. To put a difference between things.
                  
                     Diſtinction. A difference put betweene things.
                  
                     Diſtract. To drawe away: to trouble ones minde.
                  
                     Diſtraction. A pulling aſunder, or drawing away of the mind.
                  
                     Diſtreſſe. Any goods taken and detained for not payment of rent, or to enforce one to anſwere to a ſuite. Sometime it ſignifieth great affliction, or miſery.
                  
                     Diſtribution. A diuiding among many.
                  
                     Diſturbe. To trouble, to vexe.
                  
                     Diſunion. A diſioyning, a ſeuering.
                  
                     Diſunite. To part, to diuide, to ſeuer.
                  
                     Diuert. To turne aſide.
                  
                     Diuident. That which diuideth.
                  
                     Diuine. Heauenly, belonging to God. Sometime to geſſe or foretell a thing to come.
                  
                     Diuination A foretelling of a thing before it happeneth: which may (as I take it) bee diuided into three different kindes; namely, ſupernaturall, natur
                        •
                     ll, and ſuperſtitious Diuination. Supernaturall Diuination

(onely reuealed to man by God,) is not properly called Diuination, but prophecy, with which all the holy Prophets haue in former times beene inſpired. Naturall Diuination may bee diuided into two branches; whereof the firſt is, that which hath in former times been practiſed by wicked ſpirits in oracles and anſwers giuen by them in Idols, and is at this day ſometime ſeene in poſſeſſed perſons, who by ſuggeſtion of the diuell may foretell often things to come: and this is but a naturall Diuination: For although to vs it ſeeme miraculous, becauſe of our ignorance in the cauſes and courſe of things, yet in thoſe ſpirits, it is but naturall, who by their long experience, and great obſeruation, beſides the knowledge of ſecrets in nature, and their quicke intelligence from all places, are able to foreſee much more then wee by nature can. The ſecond branch of naturall Diuination, is that which a wiſe man may foretell by probable coniecture, beeing no way offenſiue, ſo long as it is only guided by reaſon, and ouerruled by ſubmitting it ſelfe to the almightie power of GOD. And to this ſecond kinde of Diuination, may alſo Aſtrologie bee referred (which by the motion and influence of Starres and Planets doth promiſe to foretell many things) ſo long as it keepeth it ſelfe in due limits, and arrogateth not too much to the certainetie thereof: into which exceſſe of vanity if it ſhould breake foorth, it can then bee no longer called naturall Diuination, but ſuperſtitious and wicked: for the Starres may incline but not impoſe a neceſſitie in particular things. The third and laſt manner of Diuination, is that which we called ſuperſtitious, whereof there hath among the Gentiles beene diuers different kinds, namely. Auguration,

Aruſpicie, Necromancie, Gromancie, Hydromancie, Pyromancie, Coſsinomancie, Palmiſtrie or Chiromancie.
                  
                  
                     Augutation, was a diuination made of things to come, by the ſlying, feeding, & chirping of birds: the profeſſors wherof called Augurs, were of great account among the heathē Romans, in ſo much that there was a Colledge of them in the citie; neither would the Romans vndertake any publike matter of importance, without aſking their aſſent. But the vanity hereof was well derided by a wiſe Iew, named Moſſolamus; as Ioſephus writes. For an Augur in the wars once requiring, that the army which was then marching, might ſtand ſtill a while, till he tooke obſeruation of a bird thereby, to foreknow the ſucceſſe of that expedition, this Iew whilſt the Augur was buſie in his art, ſhot at the Bird with an arrow, and by chance killed her: whereat the Augur and others being highly offended: Are you ſo fooliſh (quoth the Iew) to imagine, this poore Bird can tell what will happen to vs, that could not foreſee her owne death ſo neere at hand? Aruſpicie, is a diuination, which by opening and viewing the bowels of beaſts, did vndertake to foretell things to come: the profeſſors whereof were called Aruſpices. Necromancie, the worſt of all others, is that diuination, which is practiſed by coniuration, and calling vp Diuels or dead mens ghoſts. Which manner of diuination we reade practiſed by King Saul (1. Reg. cap. 28.) when he required a Sorcereſſe to call vp the ſpirit of Samuell to him. Geomancie, is a kinde of diuination practiſed by making prickes and lines in the earth; as the name in Greeke ſignifieth. So Hydromancie, is a diuination made by ſome apparition in water, as Varro writeth that a Boy ſaw inwater,

one bearing the forme of Mercurie, who foretold in one hundred and fiftie verſes, the euent of the warre which the Romans had with King Mithridates. Pyromancie is a diuination made by the fire, or ſpirits appearing in the fire. Coſcinomancie is a ridiculous kinde of diuination made with a ſieue; which at this day is vſed by ſome ſimple women, and appeareth to bee of antiquitie, for in the third Idylle of Throcritus there is mention made hereof. Palmiſtrie or Chiromancie, is a diuination practiſed, by looking vpon the lines of the fingers and hands, an art ſtill in vſe, among fortune tellers, Egyptians, and iuglers. Beſides theſe there were alſo other diuinations, as namely Aeromancie, that which is gathered by apparitions in the aire. Capnomancie, by the flying of ſmoake. Catoptromancie by viſions ſhewne in a glaſſe. All which being euen by the Pagans themſelues accounted deceitfull and vain
                        •
                     , it remaineth that of Chriſtians they be vtterly reiected and abhorred.
                  
                     Diuorce. A ſeparation of man and wife, which was (as our Sauiour witneſſeth) firſt permitted by Moſes vnto the Iſraelites, for the hardneſſe of their hearts, that men might rather put their wiues away, whome they grew wearie of, then vſe them with too great extremitie, to ſhorten their liues, as many did. The woman ſo diuorced was to haue of her husband, a writing (as Ioſephus witneſſeth to this effect. I promiſe, that hereafter, I will lay no claime to thee: And this writing was called a bil of diuorce. But with Chriſtians this cuſtome is abrogated, ſauing onely in caſe of adulterie. The auncient Romanes alſo had a cuſtome of diuorce, and amongſt them, it was as lawfull for the wiues to put away their husbands, as for the husband to diſmiſſe

his wife: but amongſt the Iſraelites, this prerogatiue was onely permitted to the husband.
                  
                     Diureticall. That which is of vertue, to cauſe one to make water.
                  
                     Diumall. Of or belonging to a day: Alſo a booke, wherein daily actions or accounts are ſet downe.
                  
                     Diuturmitie. Long continuance.
                  
                     Diuulg
                           •
                        
                      To publiſh, or tell abroad
                  
                     Diuulgation. A telling, or reporting abroad.
                  
                     Docibilitie. See docilitie.
                  
                     Docible. See docill.
                  
                     Docill. Eaſie to bee taught, one that will ſoone learne.
                  
                     Docilitie. Aptneſſe, quickneſſe of vnderſtanding.
                  
                     Document. A leſſon, an inſtruction.
                  
                     Dogdayes. Certaine daies in Iuly and Auguſt, ſo called of the Starre Canis, the Dogge: which then riſing with the Sun, doth greatly increaſe the heat thereof.
                  
                     Dogmaticall. Which is helde or maintained in ſome mens opinion.
                  
                     Dole. Sorrow, heauineſſe, griefe: ſometimes almes giuen to many poore folkes.
                  
                     Dolefull. Heauie, ſorrowfull.
                  
                     Dolorous. Grieuous, painfull.
                  
                     Dolphine. A fiſh friendly to man, and eſpecially to children; the Females of this fiſh, haue breaſts like to women, which are well ſtored with milke. They are very faithfull to one another, and bring foorth yong ones like whelpes, after tenne moneths, and in Sommer time. They ſometime breake foorth of the Sea, but preſently die as ſoone as they touch land.
                  
                     Doome. A ſentence pronounced: a iudgement.
                  
                     Doomeſman. A Iudge.
                  
                     Domeſticall. One of the houſe: or any thing belonging to the houſe.
                  
                     Domeſticke. See Domeſticall.
                  
                     Domincere. To beare rule, or great ſway.
                  
                     
                     Dominicall Belonging to ſunday or our Lords day.
                  
                     Dominion. Lordſhip, rule.
                  
                     Dona
                           •
                        ic. A gift; properly that which is hanged vp in a Church.
                  
                     Donation. A giuing.
                  
                     Donce. Hee to whom a thing is giuen or granted.
                  
                     Donour. A giuer.
                  
                     Dormant. Sleeping.
                  
                     Dormitorie. A place to ſleepe in: or that which hath vertue to make one ſleepe.
                  
                     Dorter. A cell or chamber vſed onely for religious men to ſleepe in.
                  
                     Dowager. A Widdow Princeſſe, hauing dowrie in the countrey which was in ſubiection to her deceaſed husband.
                  
                     Doulcets. The ſto
                        •
                     es of a Hare or Stag.
                  
                     Drachme. See dram.
                  
                     Drammt. A ſmal weight, the eight part of an ounce: It conteineth in it three ſcruples, euery ſcruple beeing of the weight of twentie Wheate cornes: ſo that a dramme is the iuſt weight of 60. cornes of wheate.
                  
                     Drerie. Sorrowfull: lamentable.
                  
                     Dromedarie. A kinde of camel, hauing two bunches on the backe, which is very ſwift, and can trauell two or three daies without drinke.
                  
                     Drone. An idle Bee that will not labour.
                  
                     Druides. Ancient Pagan Prieſts in France, which liued naked in woods, giuing themſelues to the ſtudy of philoſophy, and auoyding all company ſo much as they might. They were of ſuch eſtimation among the people, that all controuerſies were referred to their determination, and a great penaltie laid on ſuch as diſobeied their ſentence. They beleeued the immortalitie of ſoules, but ſuppoſed (with Pythagoras) that they ſtill paſſed by death from one body to another.
                  
                     Dryades. Nymphs of the woods, ſo called of the Greek word Drys: which ſignifieth an Oake.
                  
                     Duall. Of, or belonging to two.
                  
                     
                     Dubious. Doubtfull.
                  
                     Dubitable. Doubtfull.
                  
                     Dulia. Seruire
                        •
                      a worſhip done to Angels and Saints.
                  
                     Duplication. A doubling.
                  
                     Duplicitie. Doubleneſſe.
                  
                     Durabilitie. Long continuance.
                  
                     Dwale. An hearb of cold operation, hauing power to make one ſleepe: ſome call it Nightſhade.
               
            
            
               E
               
                  
                     EAglet. A young Eagle.
                  
                     Ebene. A tree which groweth in Ethiopia, beating neither leaues nor fruite. It is blacke and hath no grain like other wood, and is ſharp byting in taſt: Being burned it yieldeth a pleaſant ſmell, neither is the ſmoake thereof offenſiue: but the greene wood is ſo full of ſap, that it will flame like a candle. It is good againſt many diſeaſes of the eies. That which groweth in India, is ſpotted with white and yellow, being not in ſuch eſtimation as the Ethiopian Ebene is.
                  
                     Ebionits. Certaine old Heretikes, which affirmed that Chriſt was not before his mother, the B. Virgin. Againſt theſe Heretikes, Saint Iohn writte his Goſpel, after he returned from his bainiſhment in the yle Pathmos.
                  
                     Ebonie. See Ebene.
                  
                     Ebrietie. Drunkenneſſe.
                  
                     Eccho. A rebounding or ſounding backe of any noyſe or voyce, in a wood, valley or hollow place. Poets feine that this Eccho was a Nymphe ſo called, which beeing reiected of one, whom ſhee loued, pyned away for ſorrow in the woods, where her voyce ſtill remaineth anſwering the outcryes of all complaints.
                  
                     Eccleſiaſticall. Of, or belonging to the Church.
                  
                     Eccleſiaſticus. Of, or belonging to a Preacher. The name of a Booke in the olde Teſtament is ſo called.
                  
                     Eclipſe. A fayling or want of any thing: Commonly

it ſignifieth a want of light, and there be two ſuch Eclipſes, namely of the Moone and of the Sunne. Eclipſe of the Moone; neuer happeneth but at the full Moone, neither then alwayes, but whē ſhe is in ſuch a point, that the ſhadow of the earth depriueth her of the Sunne beames, from whence ſhe taketh her light, Eclipſe of the Sunne is not ſo vſuall and happeneth only at the change of the Moone, namely when the Moone being betweene the Sunne and vs, doth with her dark body, hide part of her light from vs: which was the cauſe that Dionyſius Areopagita, ſeeing the Sunne ſo admirably eclipſed at our Sauiours paſſion, contrary to all reaſon, when the Moone was not in any neereneſſe to hinder his light, cryed out in amazement: Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut machina mundi diſſoluetur. Either the God of nature ſuffereth, or elſe the frame of the world wil be deſtroyed.
                  
                     Ecliptike line. An imagined line, running thorough the middeſt of the twelue ſignes, in which the ſunne alwayes keepeth his courſe.
                  
                     Eclog. It is commonly taken for a poeme conteining a communication of ſhepherds, but the word in Greeke ſignifieth a collection or choice gathering of things together.
                  
                     Eden. An Hebrew word ſignifying delectation, or a place of pleaſure and delight▪ Paradiſe.
                  
                     Edible. Which may bee eaten.
                  
                     Edict. An ordinance made by any in authority: A proclamation or decree.
                  
                     Edifie. To builde, to frame, ſometime to inſtruct.
                  
                     Edifice. A building, a frame.
                  
                     Edification. A building: but moſt commonly it is taken for an inſtruction, ſo plainely deliuered that the hearer profiteth by it.
                  
                     
                     Edition A ſetting foorth or publiſhing.
                  
                     Educate. To bring vp, to nouriſh.
                  
                     Education. A bringing vp.
                  
                     Effectuate To performe.
                  
                     Effeminate. Womaniſh, nice.
                  
                     Efficacie. Strength, vertue, force.
                  
                     Efficiencie. A bringing to paſſe.
                  
                     Efficient. Which bringeth to paſſe or performeth.
                  
                     Effuſion. A powring out, a large ſpending.
                  
                     Eftſoones. Againe, often.
                  
                     Egregious. Notable, excellent.
                  
                     Egreſſe. A going foorth from any place.
                  
                     Egritude. Griefe of mind, or paine of body.
                  
                     Eiect. To caſt out.
                  
                     Eiection. A caſting out.
                  
                     Eiulation. A howling, a pitifull crying out.
                  
                     Elaborate. 
                     
                        •
                     urious, done with great paines.
                  
                     Elate. Lifted vp, advanced, proud, loftie.
                  
                     Elation A lifting vp, pride, loftineſſe.
                  
                     Elaterium. The iuyce of wilde Cucumbers dryed: Beeing taken inwardly, it purgeth wateriſh humors, and is good againſt the dropſie. But it muſt bee mixed with ſomewhat to reſtraine the malice of it, for otherwiſe 
                        •
                     t will bee painfull in operation.
                  
                     * Eld. Old age.
                  
                     Elect. To chooſe, or one that is choſen.
                  
                     Election. Choice.
                  
                     Electuary. Any medicine taken inwardly, made of diuers powders mixed together, and by tempering with ſome ſyrupes or hony, brought to a ſoft liquid forme.
                  
                     Elegancy. Finenes, neatnes.
                  
                     Elegant. Fine, neate, picked, trim.
                  
                     Elegie. A mournefull ſong vſed in funerals, or other paſsions of ſorrow.
                  
                     Elegiacke. Mournefull.
                  
                     Element. The firſt matter of viſible ſubſtance, from whence all things take their beginning: wherof there be foure, namely,

fire, ayre, water and earth. Sometime it ſignifieth a letter, is A.B.C. ſometime the firſt foundation, principle, o
                        •
                      inſtruction of any thing
                  
                     Elementary. Which conſiſteth of Elements.
                  
                     Eleem
                           •
                        ſynarie. Giuen in almes, or which giueth almes.
                  
                     Elench. A ſubtill argument.
                  
                     Eleuate. To lift vp, to aduance.
                  
                     Eleuation. A lifting vp.
                  
                     Elixir. An Arabian word of the ſame ſignification that Quinteſſence is in latine: See Quinteſſence.
                  
                     Elke. A kind of Yew to make bowes with.
                  
                     Elocution. Vtterance, eloquence
                  
                     Eloine. To put, giue, or ſell away.
                  
                     Elong. To put, or ſet far off.
                  
                     Elude. To mocke or deceiue.
                  
                     Eluſion. A mocking, a deceit.
                  
                     Elyſian. Of or belonging to Elyſium.
                  
                  
                     Elyſium. A ſuppoſed place of pleaſure belowe, where Poets imagined the ſoules of good men did reſt.
                  
                     Embalme. To annoint with baulme.
                  
                     Embaſsie. An embaſſage, a meſſage from one Prince to another.
                  
                     Embelliſh. To make beautifull.
                  
                     Embezill. To ſteale, to conuey away.
                  
                     Embleme. It properly ſignifieth any fine worke, cunningly ſet in wood or other ſubſtance, as wee ſee in cheſſe boardes and tables; not withſtanding it is commonly taken for a picture or other deuice, ſhaddowing ſome matter to be learned by it.
                  
                     Embost. A tearme vſed by hunters, when a Decre is ſo weary that he fometh at the mouth.
                  
                     Embracer. A lawe terme of him, that when a matter is in tryall, commeth for reward to the barre, being no lawyer, nor witnes and ſpeaketh in fauour, of one of the parties: or which laboureth the Iury, or vſeth

any vnlawfull practiſe to make them giue their verdit, as he would haue them.
                  
                     Embrion. A childe vnperfect in the mothers wombe.
                  
                     Emendation. An amending.
                  
                     Emeralde. A precious ſtone, the greeneſt of all other, for which cauſe it is very comfortable to the ſight. The beſt of theſe ſtones are brought out of Scythia. And ſome affirme them to bee taken out of the Griffons neaſts, who doe keepe this ſtone with great crueltie. It is found by experience (as Albertus writeth) that if the Emerald be good, it inclineth the bearer thereof to chaſtitie, and cannot endure the action of luſt. There is alſo a diſeaſe ſounding neere this word, for which ſee Hemorrhode.
                  
                  
                     Eminence. Highnes, dignitie, honour.
                  
                     Eminent. High, lofty, honourable.
                  
                     Emmanuel An Hebrew word expreſſing the dignity of our Sauiour, and is interpreted God with vs.
                  
                  
                     Emolument. Profit, gaine, aduantage.
                  
                     Empannell. To make vp a iurie of twelue, or more men.
                  
                     Emphaſis. An expreſſe or moſt plaine ſignification of ones minde.
                  
                     Emphaticall. That which is vttered with moſt expreſſe ſignification, in ſuch ſort, that it ſetteth forth to the full, the intent of the ſpeaker.
                  
                     Empiricke. A phiſition that getteth-skill by his owne practiſe.
                  
                     Emplaſter. A plaiſter or ſalue made of herbs, powders and oyle boyled together.
                  
                     Empleade. To ſue one.
                  
                     Emprimed. A terme vſed by hunters when a Hart firſt forſaketh the heard.
                  
                     Empyriall heauen. The higheſt heauen aboue the firmament; ſo called (by a Greeke name) becauſe of the bright ſhinning of it
                  
                     Emulate. To enuie, to ſtriue to doe as another doth.
                  
                     
                     Emulation. Enuy: an earneſt deſire to doe as an other doth.
                  
                     Enarration. A telling or declaring.
                  
                     Enchiridion. It is commonly taken for a little booke, which one may ſtil carrie in his hand.
                  
                     Encomium. A praiſe.
                  
                     Encroche. To creepe or preſſe vpon a man vnlawfully, to get more then his due.
                  
                     Encrochment. A law terme when one man vnlawfully preſſeth too farre vpon another, as in ſetting his pale too farre vpon anothers land, the more to enlarge his owne, or in taking more rent then is due.
                  
                     Endorſe. To write on the outſide of a Letter.
                  
                     Endorſed. A terme of Herauldrie, when two breaſts are painted with their backs turned to each other.
                  
                     Energeticall. Very forcible, and ſtrong.
                  
                     Energie. Force, vertue, ſtrength.
                  
                     * Enewed. Made new.
                  
                     Enfranchiſe. To make free, to admit or receiue one into any corporation.
                  
                     Enfranchiſment. A making froe.
                  
                     Enhance. To aduance, or make greater.
                  
                     Enigma. A riddle, a darke ſpeech.
                  
                     Enigmaticall. Obſcure: darke, hard to vnderſtand, ſpoken in a riddle.
                  
                     * Enmoiſed. Comforted.
                  
                     Enormitie. A going out of rule: a great diſorder.
                  
                     Enormous. Wicked: very bad.
                  
                     Enqueſt. A Iury of twelue or moe men.
                  
                     Enſigne. A banner borne in warres: a flagge, or any ornament ſeruing for a marke of ſome dignitie.
                  
                     Entalented. Ingrafted.
                  
                     Enthymeme. A terme of Logick: It ſignifieth an imperfect ſyllogiſme, which wanteth either the Maior or Minor: as for example.

                        Euery ſinne deſerueth correction.
                        Euery theft is a ſinne.
                        Therefore euery theft deſerueth correction.
                     
Now if wee will leaue

the firſt part (called the Maior) and ſay thus: Euery theft is a ſinne: Therefore Euery theft deſerueth correction. Or omit the ſecond part (named the Minor) and ſay: Euery ſinne deſerueth correction, therefore euery theft deſerueth correction: Then it is called an Enthymeme, to wit, a keeping in the minde (for ſo the word properly ſignifieth) becauſe one of theſe parts is vnderſtood in the minde: where note that if the two ends of the Enthymeme are like in ſpeech, then the Minor is wanting, if the two beginnings be like, the Maior is omitted, as may eaſily appeare by the foregoing example.
                  
                     Enueloped. Wrapped.
                  
                     Enuiron. To cōpaſſe about.
                  
                     Enumerate. To reckon vp: to declare.
                  
                     Enumeration. A reckoning: a rehearſall.
                  
                     Enunciatiue. Any thing pronounced or ſpoken. A propoſition or ſpeech, which ſimply affirmeth or denyeth any thing; as Cicero is vertuous: Cicero is not vertuous.
                  
                  
                     Epact. A number which is in vſe euery yeare, to finde the age of the Moone by: This Epact changeth yearly, and is made by the addition of eleuen to the former Epact; both which numbers are the Epact for the following yeare, but alwaies ſo, that both thoſe numbers exceede not the number of 30. For if they amount to aboue 30. then muſt you caſt away the 30 and the remaining number ſhall be the Epact. As for example, in this yeare 1616. the Epact is 22. to which if you adde eleuen for the next yeares Epact, it maketh 33. from which if you take away 30. there will remaine three; which is the Epact for the next yeare 1617. Note alſo: whē in any yeere the Epact is 
                        •
                     9. you muſt adde 12. to find out the next yeares true Epact, that caſting away thirty, the Epact may come to be eleuen In al other nūbers the Epact is ſtil made (as before) by adding

eleuen. And theſe Epacts are euer changed on the firſt day of March.
                  
                     Ephemerides. A booke wherein day-acts are regiſtred. Commonly it is taken for a Booke of Aſtronomy (in vſe among ſuch as erect figures to caſt mens natiuities) by which booke is ſhewen how all the Planets are placed, euery day and houre of the yeare.
                  
                     Ephi. An Hebrew meaſure conteining about fiue peckes of ours.
                  
                     Ephod. A holy garment worne by the high Prieſt of the Hebrewes, when he executed his function. It couered the backe, and was curiouſly wrought with gold and twiſted ſilke of Purple, Scarlet, and Violet colour. On the ſhoulders there were fit two great precious Onix ſtones, and in them grauen the names of the twelue ſonnes of Iacob, called the twelue Patriarches, in the right ſhoulder the ſixe eldeſt, and in the left the fixe youngeſt; that the High Prieſt entering into the Sanstum Sanctorium (which was the holieſt place of the Temple (might beare with him the names of the people, for whom hee was to pray vnto God.
                  
                     Epicycle. A terme vſed in Aſtronomy. It ſignifieth a leſſer circle, whoſe center or middle part is in the circumference of a greater circle. In the vpper part of this Epicycle, the fiue Planets Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercurie, doe goe forward according to the courſe of the ſignes; as Aries to Taurus, &c. in the lower part they are retrograde, that is, goe backward, as from Gemini to Taurus, from Taurus to Aries againe. Betweene theſe two motions, are ſaid to bee two ſtations; namely when a Planet ceaſeth going forward, and beginneth to be retrograde, or comming to the fartheſt point of his retrogradation, goeth forward againe: ſo that in the Epicycle, theſe Planets wheele about ſomtime according,

ſometime contrary to the order of the ſignes.
                  
                     Epicure. It is commonly taken with vs, for a man giuen ouer much to pleaſure, eſpecially in gluttony. In ancient times it ſignified one that followed the ſect of a Philoſopher, named Epicurus, who taught that the greateſt happines was, to bee without paine, and enioy pleaſure of body and minde.
                  
                     Epigramme. It properly ſignifieth a ſuperſcription or writing ſet vpon any thing; now it is cōmonly taken for a ſhort wittie poeme, which vnder a fained name, doth couertly praiſe or taxe ſome particular perſon or thing.
                  
                     Epilepſie. The falling ſickneſſe, whereto moſt commonly children and yong folk are ſubiect. This diſeaſe is cauſed by ſome humor or vapor, ſuddenly ſtopping the paſſage of ſpirits in the braine, which the brain ſtriuing to excel cauſeth the patient to fall downe, and commonly fome at the mouth.
                  
                     Epilog. The concluſion or end of a matter. A ſpeech made, after an enterlude or play is ended.
                  
                     Epiphanie. An appearing or manifeſtatiō. The feaſt of Twelfe day at Chriſtmas is ſo called, becauſe then the appearing of a new ſtar did manifeſt the birth of our Sauiour.
                  
                     Epiſcopall. Of, or belonging to a Biſhop.
                  
                     Epitaph. An inſcription or writing ſet vpon a toombe; moſt commonly in lamentation or praiſe of the party there buried.
                  
                     Epithere. Any word or ſhort ſentence, added to a Noune ſubſtantiue, to expreſſe ſome quality of it: as in ſaying, Barbarous crueltie, vnbridled luſt: anger, the ſhort madnes of the mind: where barbarous, vnbridled, and the ſhort madneſſe of the mind, are Epithetes expreſſing the quality of cruelty, luſt and anger.
                  
                     Epitome. An abridgement or ſhort gathering of any matter in writing.
                  
                     Ephitomize. To make an abridgement or ſhort gathering.
                  
                     
                     Equanimity. Vprightnes of hart, quietnes of mind.
                  
                     Equinoctiall. An imagined line, paſſing iuſt in the midſt betweene the two poles of heauen, to which line, the ſun cōming twice a yeare, (namely about the xi. of March and the xi. of September) maketh the dates and nights of equall length in all the world; for which cauſe it is called Equinoctiall: The ſignes Aries and Libra doe both begin at this line.
                  
                     Equipage. Furniture or prouiſion for horſemanſhip; eſpecially in triumphs or turnaments.
                  
                     Equiualence. The equall value of one thing with another.
                  
                     Equiualent. Of equal value to another thing.
                  
                     Equiuocate. To ſpeak or anſwer with a ſecret meaning reſerued in ones own mind; which peraduenture the hearers do not vnderſtand.
                  
                     Equiuocation. A ſpeech or anſwer made, with a ſecret meaning reſerued in ones mind.
                  
                     Equiuocke. When one word ſignifieth two things
                  
                     Eraſed. A terme of Heraldrie, when any member of a beaſt ſeemeth torne from the body.
                  
                     Erebus. Hel, or a riuer in hell.
                  
                     Erect. To lift vp.
                  
                     Erection. A lifting vp.
                  
                     Eremite. See Hermite.
                  
                  
                     Ereption. A taking away.
                  
                     Ermines. A little beaſt leſſe then a Squirrell, the furre whereof is very coſtly, worne onely by Princes or great Potentates, It hath a taile of a thumbe length, and is browne. Ermine in Heraldry ſomtime ſignifieth white powdred with blacke, and Ermines, blacke powdred white.
                  
                     Errant. Wandring: hauing no certaine abode.
                  
                     Erroneous. Full of error: deceiued.
                  
                     Erſt. Heretofore.
                  
                     Erudition. Learning, inſtruction.
                  
                     Eruption. A violent breaking out.
                  
                     Eſcheate. To bee forfeited to the King, or chiefe Lord.
                  
                     
                     Eſcheater. An officer that obſerueth and certifieth into the Exchequer, ſuch things, as do eſcheate vnto the King.
                  
                     Eſcript. A writing.
                  
                     Eſcuage. A tenure of lands, whereby the tenant is bound at his own charge to follow his Lord into the warres: either in Scotland or Wales: ſometime in this tenure, the Tenant, only payeth a yearely rent.
                  
                     Eſcuerconera. An hearbe in the Weſt Indies, ſo named becauſe it is of great vertue, againſt the deadly ſtingings or bitings of certaine venemous beaſtes, which in that country they call Eſcuercos.
                  
                  
                     Eſperance. Hope.
                  
                     Eſſayes. Tryals.
                  
                     Eſſence. The beeing or naturall ſubſtance of any thing.
                  
                     Eſsenes. Certaine religious men among the Iews, which liued a very ſtrict life, abſtaining from wine, fleſh, and women.
                  
                     Eſſential. That which belongeth to the eſſence of a thing.
                  
                     Eſſoine. A tearme in the common Lawe, when a man cannot well appeare at a day appointed in court and is therfore allowed by the Court to bee abſent without penalty.
                  
                     Eſtreate. A copy which is taken of any writing.
                  
                     Eſtouers. Flots of wood, growing in heathes, commons, and other places, where it is lawfull for tenants to take fewell, and timber to repayre their tenements.
                  
                     Eternall. Which hath no beginning nor end.
                  
                     Eternity. Euerlaſtingnes.
                  
                     Etheriall. Heauenly, or belonging to the celeſtiall ſpheres.
                  
                     Ethikes. Bookes of morall Philoſophy, treating of ciuil behauiour and maners.
                  
                     Ethnike. A gentill: a Heathen: one that is no Chriſtian.
                  
                     Etymologie. The true expoſition or reaſon giuen of any word.
                  
                     Euacuate. To empty.
                  
                     Euacuation. An emptying.
                  
                     
                     Euade. To eſcape: to get away.
                  
                     Euangelicall. Of or belonging to the Goſpell: commanded in the Goſpel.
                  
                     Euangeliſt. A bringer of good tydings: wherefore Saint Mathew, Saint Mark, S Luke, and S Iohn, are called Euangeliſts, becauſe they firſt in writing publiſhed the ioyfull Hiſtory of our Redemption by the Sonne of God.
                  
                     Euaporate. To conſume away in vapour.
                  
                     Euaporation. A vapor or ſmoake paſſing from any thing.
                  
                     Euaſion. An eſcape: a ſtarting hole to get out.
                  
                     Euchariſt. It properly ſignifieth a giuing of thankes. In Ecclſiaſticall writings it is often taken for the B. Sacrament of the body & blood of Chriſt.
                  
                     Euecke. A kinde of wilde beaſt like a Goate.
                  
                     Euent. The end or ſucceſſe of a matter.
                  
                     Euert. To ouerthrow.
                  
                     Euerſion. An ouerthrowing.
                  
                     Euiction. An ouerthrow in Law.
                  
                     Euitable. Which may bee auoided.
                  
                     Eunuche. A gelded man.
                  
                     Euphorbium. A gum or teare of a ſtrange plant, growing on the mount Atlas in Lybia. It is yellowiſh, cleere, and brittle. It may be vſed in oyntments againſt palſies, crampes, and ſhrinking of ſinewes: but to be taken inwardly is very dangerous, vnleſſe the malice thereof be wel corrected; for it ſcaldeth and is exceeding hot, neere the fourth degree.
                  
                     Europe. One of the three parts of the world lying toward the Weſt. In it are cōtained, England, Spain, France▪ Germany, Italie, all Greece, Creete, or Candy, beſide many other kingdoms, great countries and ylands. Some affirme it to bee called Europe of Europa, King Agenors daubter, whom Iupiter (as Poets feine) in likeneſſe of a Bull, carried ouer ſea, into the yland Candy.
                  
                     Exact. To demaund

with great earneſtneſſe, or with conſtraint: alſo it ſignifieth perfect and accompliſhed.
                  
                     Exaction. A pilling or taking vp of money by conſtraint.
                  
                     Exaggerate. To increaſe or amplifie a matter: properly, with words to make a thing more then it is.
                  
                     Exaggeration. An increaſing or amplyfying by words.
                  
                     Examinate. To amaze.
                  
                     Examination. An amazement.
                  
                     Exaſperate. To anger, or prouoke one greatly to anger.
                  
                     Exaſperation. A prouoking or ſtirring one to anger.
                  
                     Exceſſe. Which exceedeth or is too much.
                  
                     Excite. To ſtirre vp.
                  
                     Exclamation. A crying out.
                  
                     Exclude. To ſhut out.
                  
                     Excluſion. A ſhutting out.
                  
                     Excogitate. To deuiſe.
                  
                     Excommunicate. To caſt out of the communion or the Church.
                  
                     Excommunication. A caſting out of the Church.
                  
                     Excrement. Any thing which naturally growing or being in the body, may bee taken away without harme to the body.
                  
                     Excreſſion. A growing out. A ſwelling or bunch.
                  
                     Excruciate. To torment.
                  
                     Excurſion. A running out, a light skirmiſh.
                  
                     Execrable. Wicked, worthy to be deteſted.
                  
                     Execration. A curſing.
                  
                     Exemplarie. Of, or belonging to an example.
                  
                     Exemplifie. To declare a matter at large, to alledge examples.
                  
                     Exempt. Free or priuiledged from any payment or ſeruice.
                  
                     Exemption. A freedome or a priuiledge from any buſineſſe.
                  
                     Exequies. Funerall ſolemnities in honour of the dead.
                  
                     Exhale. To caſt or ſend forth a breath or fume.
                  
                     Exhalation. A fumie ſmoake, hotte and drie, drawne out of the earth by the heate of the Sunne, which being inflamed, is

the materiall cauſe of diuers fierie impreſſions in the ayre.
                  
                     Exhauſt. To conſume, ſpend, or waſte.
                  
                     Exhibite. To preſent, offer, or giue.
                  
                     Exhilarate. To make merry, to comfort.
                  
                     Exhortatorie. Which exhotteth or perſwadeth to doe a thing
                  
                     Exiccate. To dry, to make dry.
                  
                     Exigent. A ſtraight, a hard pinch.
                  
                     Exile. Baniſhment.
                  
                     Exinanite. To make emptie, to ſpoile, weaken, or make of no force.
                  
                     Exodus. A going forth. The ſecond Booke of Moſes, is ſo called, becauſe it treateth of the manner how the children of Iſrael went out of Egypt.
                  
                     Exonerate. To vnburden, to acquite or diſcharge.
                  
                     Exorable. Which may be intreated.
                  
                     Exorbitant. That which goeth out of due proportion, or the right way.
                  
                     Exorcize. To adiure, to binde by oath: to charge one vpon conſcience o
                        •
                      grieuous penaltie, to ſpeak truly, or doe any thing required.
                  
                     Exorciſme. An adiurin
                        •
                      or binding by oath.
                  
                     Exordium. The firſt entrance of a ſermon, oration, or ſuch like ſpeech.
                  
                     Expect. To looke for before it come.
                  
                     Expectation. A looking for, a longing.
                  
                     Expedite. Quicke, readie.
                  
                     Expeditate. To cut off the balles or (as ſome ſay) certaine clawes of great dogs feete, which are kept neere a foreſt, that they may not harme the Kings Deere. The dogs ſo cut, are ſaid to be expeditated.
                  
                     Expedition. Quicke diſpatch, ſpeede, ſometime a ſetting forth vnto warre; a voyage.
                  
                     Expell. To thruſt out, to dr
                        •
                     ue away.
                  
                     Experiment. An experience, proofe or triall.
                  
                     Expert. Cunning, skilfull.
                  
                     Expiable. Which may be purged or ſatisfied for.
                  
                     Expiate. To pacifie, to

appeaſe, to recompence.
                  
                     Expiation. Pacifying, appeaſing by ſacrifice.
                  
                     Expire. To dye, end, periſh, or decay.
                  
                     Expiration. A dying, a breathing out, an end.
                  
                     Explane. To make plain, to declare plainly.
                  
                     Explanation. A making plaine, a declaring.
                  
                     Explicate. To vnfolde, open, or to declare at large.
                  
                     Explication. An vnfolding or opening.
                  
                     Explode. To driue out with clapping the hands.
                  
                     Exploſion. A driuing away.
                  
                     Expoſe. To ſet forth: to ſet to view; to put abroad in hazard.
                  
                     Expoſition. An interpretation or expounding.
                  
                     Expoſitour. An expounder or interpreter.
                  
                     Expoſtulate. To reaſon angerly with one; to childe or complaine, as finding himſelfe grieued.
                  
                     Expoſtulation. An angry reaſoning or complaint.
                  
                     Expreſſion. A wringing or ſqueaſing out.
                  
                     Exprobrate. To vpbraid, to caſt in ones teeth.
                  
                     Exprobration. An vpbraiding.
                  
                     Expugne. To conquer: to winne by aſſault.
                  
                     Expugnation. A conqueſt: a winning by fight.
                  
                     Expulſe. To thruſt out.
                  
                     Expulſion. A thruſting out, a driuing away.
                  
                     Exquiſite. Excellent, curious.
                  
                     Extant. That which ſtandeth abroad or in ſight; which may be found.
                  
                     Extempore. Out of hand; preſently, without ſtudie.
                  
                     Extend. To ſtretch forth, to ſhew at length.
                  
                     Extenſion. A ſtretching out.
                  
                     Extenuate. To diminiſh: to make by words, a thing ſeeme leſſe then it is.
                  
                     Extenuation. A diminiſhing.
                  
                     Exterior. Outward.
                  
                     Exterminate. To baniſh: to driue away.
                  
                     Extermination. A deſtroying, or rooting out.
                  
                     Externe. Forten: outlandiſh, ſtrange, outward.
                  
                     
                     Externall. Outward, ſtrange.
                  
                     Extinguiſh. To quench, to put out.
                  
                     Extinct. Quenched, dead, put out.
                  
                     Extirpe. To deſtroy, to roote out.
                  
                     Extirpate. To roote vp: to deſtroy.
                  
                     Extirpation. A rooting vp.
                  
                     Extort. To wreſt away, to take by force.
                  
                     Extortion. Wrong done by any officer, in taking greater fees or rewards, for executing his office, then the lawes will allow him.
                  
                     Extortioner. He that committeth extortion.
                  
                     Extract. To draw forth.
                  
                     Extraction. A drawing out.
                  
                     Extrauagant. Wandering, diſordered, when there are many needeleſſe matters or wordes brought in beſide the purpoſe.
                  
                     Extrinſecall. Outward, or on the outſide.
                  
                     Exulcerate. To raiſe bliſters or ſores.
                  
                     Exulceration. A riſing of bliſters or ſores in the bodie.
                  
                     Exulte. To reioyce greatly, to triumph ouer one.
                  
                     Exultation. A great reioycing.
               
            
            
               F
               
                  
                     FAbricate. To frame, to build.
                  
                     Fabrike. A frame, a building.
                  
                     Fabulous. Falſe as a fable.
                  
                     Facile. Eaſie,
                  
                     Facilitie. Eaſineſſe.
                  
                     Faction. A ſect or diuiſion into ſundry opinions.
                  
                     Factious. Contentious, troubleſome, vnquiet.
                  
                     Factor. Hee that buyeth and ſelleth for a merchant, or that looketh to his buſineſſe.
                  
                     Facultie. Power, ability, a trade or courſe of life, a priuiledge or power granted, that a man may doe ſomething, which without ſuch priuiledge he could not doe.
                  
                     Facundite. Eloquencie.
                  
                     Fage. A fable.
                  
                     Falding. A kind of courſe cloth.
                  
                     
                     Fallacie. Deceit in words.
                  
                     Falſitie. To counterfeite, or make falſe.
                  
                     Falſification. A counterfeiting, or making falſe.
                  
                     Fa
                           •••
                        ie. Falſehood, deceit.
                  
                     Fanaticall. Diſtracted, mad, franticke, out of his wits.
                  
                     Farcines. A diſeaſe in beaſts: it is a creeping vlcer growing in knottes, and following along ſome veine.
                  
                     Farced. Stuffed, full.
                  
                     Faſcinate. To bewitch.
                  
                     Faſtidious. Diſdainfull, loathing, proud.
                  
                     Fate. Deſtiny, that which muſt of neceſſitie come to paſte, by Gods ſecret appointment.
                  
                     Fatall. That which happeneth or commeth to paſſe by fate.
                  
                     Faunes. Poeticall gods of the woods.
                  
                     Fauorite. One in great fauour.
                  
                     Fealtie. A ceremony done by ſome tenants to the Lord of whome they hold lands: which is in laying their right hand vpon a booke, and promiſing fidelitie to him by oath.
                  
                     Feature. Hanſomneſſe, comelineſſe, beauty.
                  
                     Fecundity. Fruitfulnes.
                  
                     Fleere. A companion, a husband or wife.
                  
                     Felicity. Happineſſe.
                  
                     Fell. A skinne, ſometime it ſignifieth fierce, terrible, or frowning.
                  
                     Feminine. Of or belonging to the female.
                  
                     Fencemonth. A month ſo called, becauſe the it is not lawfull to hunt in any forreſt, for that the does then do fawn. This month beginneth about the ninth of Iune, and continueth till the ninth of Iuly.
                  
                     Fengreeke. A plant or herbe, the ſeede whereof is much vſed in Phyſicke. It is yellow, beeing hot in the ſecond degree and dry in the firſt, and hath power to mollifie and diſſolue.
                  
                     Feodarie. An officer who is to be preſent with the Eſcheater, at the finding of any office, and

to ſuruey wards lands, and to rate them.
                  
                     Feofment. A deede witneſſing the ſale or gift of lands in fee ſimple, with liuery of ſeiſiae, and poſſeſſion thereof. He that maketh the Feofment is called the the Feofer, and the party to whome it is made, the Feofee.
                  
                  
                     Feriae. Any day of the weeke kept holy.
                  
                     Fers. The Queene in cheſſe play.
                  
                     Fertile. Fruitfull, yeelding much.
                  
                     Fertility. Fruitfulneſſe.
                  
                     Feruent. Hot.
                  
                     Feruour. Heate.
                  
                     Ferula. A rod, ſticke, or thinne paulmer, wherewith children are corrected in ſchooles vpon the hand.
                  
                     Feſſepoint. The middle part of a ſcutcheon, whoſe breadth is diuided into three euen parts.
                  
                     Feſtiuall. Merry, ioyfull, belonging to a feaſt.
                  
                     Feſtiuitie. Mirth reioycing, pleaſantnes, merrineſſe.
                  
                     Feud. Hatred, enmitie, ſtrife.
                  
                     Fewmets, or Fewmiſhing. The dung of a Deere.
                  
                     Fiants. The dung of a Fox or Badget.
                  
                     Fiction. A feined deuice, a lye.
                  
                     Fidelity. Faithfulneſſe.
                  
                     Figment. A vaine deuice, a lye, a counterfeit tale.
                  
                     Figuratiue. That which figureth or ſerueth but as a repreſentation of another thing.
                  
                     Filiall. Of or belonging to a ſonne.
                  
                     Filme. A fine thinne skinne within the body, deuiding the fleſh or any neere member one from another.
                  
                     Fine. An end: ſometime money payed when one firſt taketh land for yeares.
                  
                     Finall. Of or belonging to an ende, the laſt.
                  
                     * Finance. An end. Finite. Which hath an end.
                  
                     Fire-drake. A fire ſometime ſeene, flying in the

night like a Dragon. Common people thinke it a ſpirit, that keepeth ſome treaſure hidde: but Philoſophers affirme it to be a great vnequall exhalation; inflamed betweene two Cloudes, the one hot, the other colde (which is the reaſon that it alſo ſmoketh. (the middle part whereof, according to the proportion of the hotte Cloud, being greater than the reſt, maketh it ſeeme like a belly, and both ends like vnto a head and taile.
                  
                     Firme. Strong, ſtable, ſtedfaſt.
                  
                     Firmament. Aſtronomers vnderſtand by this word, the eighth ſpheare, next aboue the ſpheres of the ſeauen Planets, in which all the fixt Starres are placed.
                  
                     Firmity. Strength, ſtedfaſtneſſe.
                  
                     Fiſtike nuts. Outlandiſh nuts, brought out of Syria and other hotte countries, not much vnlike a ſmall haſell nutte. They are very good againſt the ſtoppings of the liuer, being ſteeped all night in ſome ſweete wine, and ſo eaten in the morning. They are good alſo to vnſtop the lungs, and for ſuch as are troubled with ſhortneſſe of breath, and are comfortable for the ſtomacke; yet they nouriſh but little, being taken as meate.
                  
                     Fistula. A daungerous vlcer or ſore ſtill running. It goeth vp into the body with a long narrow hole, like a pipe, and is commonly hard in the outſide.
                  
                     Fitch. The furre of the Polecat.
                  
                     Fixe. To faſten.
                  
                     Fixed Faſtened.
                  
                     Flagitious. Wicked, verie lewd.
                  
                     Flamine. A great Prieſt amongſt the Gentiles. There were three ſuch at Rome. One called Flamen Dialis: The Prieſt of Iupiter: who ware rich veſtments, and had a chaire of Eſtate. If his Wife chanced to dye, he thereupon went preſently out of his office: It was

not lawful for him to abide one night out of the City, nor yet to affirme any thing by oath; for his word was held of ſufficient credite. The other two Flamins, were the Flamine of Mars, and the Flamine of Romulus, called Quirinus.
                  
                  
                     Flankards. Hunters call ſo two knots or nuts, in the flanke of a Deere.
                  
                     Flebotomie. See Phlebotomie.
                  
                  
                     Flegmaticke. Full of fleagme, or inclining to fleagme.
                  
                     Flexibility. Aptneſſe to bend.
                  
                     Flexible. Pliant, eaſie to bend.
                  
                     * Flo. An arrow.
                  
                     Floreine. A coyne, Whereof there be two ſorts: one about the valew of three ſhillings foure pence, the other about two ſhillings ten pence fatthing.
                  
                     Fluent, Which floweth or aboundeth.
                  
                     Flux. A flowing or iſſue of bloud.
                  
                     Fluxibility. Aptneſſe to flow or ſpread abroad.
                  
                     Fluxible. Which is apt to flow or run abroad.
                  
                     Foyling. The print of a Deers foot in graſſe, when it cannot well be ſeene.
                  
                     Foemen. Enemies.
                  
                     Foines. A kinde of furre brought for the moſt part out of France: the top of this furre is black, and the ground whitiſh: the beaſt that beareth it, is about the bigneſſe of a Cat.
                  
                     Foſon. Great plenty, ſtore.
                  
                     Foiterers. Vagabonds.
                  
                     Folio. A ſheete or large leafe of paper.
                  
                     Fomentation. In Phyſick it properly ſignifieth, powders or dry things in bags, or any liquor in a ſponge or bladder, applied warme to the body, to mitigate paine, or for ſome other purpoſe.
                  
                     Footſtall. The lower part of a pillar, wheron it ſtandeth.
                  
                     Foppe. A foole.
                  
                     Foppery. Fooliſhneſſe, a vaine matter.
                  
                     Forage. Prouiſion for horſes and cattell in the warres.
                  
                     Forcer. A cofer, or little cheſt.
                  
                     
                     Foreſter. Hee that hath charge to looke to a forreſt, or ſome part of.
                  
                     Foreloyne. A tearme in hunting, when a hound meeteth a chace, and goeth away with it before the reſt.
                  
                     Forlorne. Vtterly vndone, in a deſperate eſtate.
                  
                     Formalitie. An obſeruing of good forme or order.
                  
                     Formall. That which keepeth due forme.
                  
                     Formoſitie. Beautie, faireneſſe.
                  
                     Foreſtall. To buy victuall or other merchandiſe by the way before it come to the faire or market; to ſell it againe at a dearer price.
                  
                     Foreſtaller. He that doth foreſtall, and buy things in ſuch ſort.
                  
                     Fortifie. To make ſtrong.
                  
                     Fortification A hold, any place made ſtrong.
                  
                     Fortitude. Courage, ſtrength, valour.
                  
                     Forewelked, Dried vp.
                  
                     Foſter. To cheriſh, to bring vp, to keepe.
                  
                     Fother. A waineloade of 2000. weight.
                  
                     Fracture. A breaking.
                  
                     Fragilitie. Weakeneſſe, britleneſſe.
                  
                     Fragment. A broken peece, a cantle.
                  
                     Fragrant. Sweete ſmelling.
                  
                     * Frape. A companie, a rabble.
                  
                     Fraternitie. A brotherhood.
                  
                     Fraud. Deceit, couſenage.
                  
                     Fraudulent. Deceitfull.
                  
                     Fray. Harts or ſtags are ſaid to fray their heads, when they rubbe them, to make the pilles of their new hornes come of.
                  
                     * Frend. Strange.
                  
                     Frequent. Often, common, alſo to haunt or reſort much to a place.
                  
                     Frequentation. A haunting or reſorting to a place.
                  
                     Frication. A rubbing.
                  
                     Friction. A rubbing.
                  
                     Friuolous. Vaine, fooliſh, of no account.
                  
                     Froiſe. A pancake, a tanſie.
                  
                     Front. A forehead, the firſt part of a battell, an entrance or beginning.
                  
                     
                     Frontire. The bounds or limits of a countrey.
                  
                     Frontlet. Any thing worne on the forehead.
                  
                     * Frownce. A wrinckle.
                  
                     Fructiſie. To beare fruite.
                  
                     Frugall. Thriftie, ſparing.
                  
                     Frugalitie. Thriftineſſe, good husbandry.
                  
                     Fruſtrate. To make void, to deceiue, to diſappoint.
                  
                     Fugitiue. One likely to runne away, a vagrant perſon, a run-away.
                  
                     Fumigation. A perfume, any thing which being caſt on hot coales, maketh a ſweet ſmell.
                  
                     Function. An office, a charge which one hath, a courſe of life.
                  
                     Fundamentall. Of or belonging to the foundation, or to the maine, chiefe, and principall point.
                  
                     Funerall. A ſolemne buriall of ſome great perſon.
                  
                     Furies. Three imaginarie hags or ſpirits in hell, hauing ſnakes growing on them in ſtead of haires. Poets feyned them to bee daughters of Acheron (a riuer in hell) and of the night, and to haue the office of tormenting the ſoules of wicked men. Their names were Alecto, Megara, and Tiſiphone.
                  
                  
                     Fuſible. That may bee molten.
                  
                     Future. That which ſhall be hereafter.
               
            
            
               G
               
                  
                     * GAb. To prate or lye.
                  
                     Gabbing. Lying.
                  
                     Gabions. Baskets of earth to keepe off great ſhot.
                  
                     Gable. The fore-front or end of a houſe comming downe right.
                  
                     Gayneſt. Moſt profitable or neereſt.
                  
                     * Gadling. Stragling.
                  
                     Galingale. An herbe ſo called, the roote whereof is hot and drie in the third degree, and much vſed in phyſicke.
                  
                     Galbanum. A gumme or liquor drawne forth of a plant in Syria called Metopion, It is of a ſtrange ſauour, and very pure, cloſe and firme, neither too moiſt, not too drie. It is good againſt an olde

rough, and for ſuch as cannot eaſily fetch breath: and the perfume thereof driueth Serpents from the place where it is burned.
                  
                     * Galiard. Luſtie, frolike.
                  
                     * Galoch. A kinde of ſhooe.
                  
                     * Galpe. To belch.
                  
                     Gangrene. A dangerous diſeaſe when any fleſhie part of the body, after ſome great inflammation or other griefe, loſing the or other colour, beginneth to grow inſenſible, and by degrees to waxe dead.
                  
                     Garbe. A terme in Heraldrie. It ſignifieth ſheafe of Wheate, or any other graine.
                  
                     Garbell. To purifie or cleane ſpice or other things, from the droffe or duſt which is mingled with it.
                  
                     Gargarize. To waſh or ſcowre the mouth with any Phyſicall liquor.
                  
                     Gargariſme. A liquor to waſh the mouth.
                  
                     Gargill. The ſame that Gargarize.
                  
                     * Gargoning. Strange ſpeaking.
                  
                     Garrulitie. Pratling, vaine babling.
                  
                     Garter. It ſometime ſignifieth the principall of our Engliſh Heralds, called the King at armes.
                  
                     Gatherbag. The bagge or skin, incloſing a yong red Deere in the Hyndes belly.
                  
                     Gauelkinde. Cuſtomes annexed vnto certaine lands in Kent, called Gauelkinde lands: whereof one is, that if the Father be hanged for fellony; the Sonne ſhall enioy all his landes and tenements holden in Gauelkinde. Other cuſtomes there are of Gauelkinde, too long to bee rehearſed in this plrce.
                  
                     Gawgeour. An officer hauing authoritie, to giue a marke of allowance, to all Tuns, Hogſheads, Pipes, Barrels, &c. of Wine. Oyle, Hony, and Butter, before they ought to bee ſold.
                  
                     * Gawre. To ſtare.
                  
                     Gahenna. It properly ſignifieth a place in a valley, in the Tribe of

                     Beniamin, where the Iſraelites erected abhominable altars, there ſacrificing their children in fire to the Idoll Moloch: notwithſtanding it is vſually taken for hell.
                  
                     Gemme. A iewell.
                  
                     Geneologie. A pedegree; a declaration of ones linage, ſtocke, or race.
                  
                     Generable. Which may be begotten.
                  
                     Generate. To beget.
                  
                     Generoſitie. Nobleneſſe of minde. Gentlemanlike courage.
                  
                     Generous. Noble, valiant, vertuous.
                  
                     Geneſis. A generation. The firſt Booke of Moſes is ſo called in Greeke and Latine, becauſe it declareth the creation and generation of all things.
                  
                     Genet. A goodly horſe of Spaine.
                  
                     Genets. A beaſt almoſt of the bigneſſe of a Cat breeding in Spaine. There are two colours of them, blacke and gray; but the furre of the blacke is moſt eſteemed.
                  
                     Genius. The ſpirit or ſoule: A good Angell, or a familiar euill ſpirit.
                  
                     Gentill. Among the Iewes, all were Gentiles, that were not of one of the twelue tribes: now we commonly call them Gentiles, that profeſſe not the faith of Chriſt.
                  
                     Gentiliſme. The opinion or beleefe of the Gentiles.
                  
                     Gentilitie. The fame that Gentiliſme is.
                  
                     Geographie. A deſcription of the earth, as we ſee in Maps.
                  
                     Geomancie. See Diuination.
                  
                     Geometrie. An art of due proportion conſiſting in lineaments, formes diſtances, and greatneſſe. There are foure principles hereof: to wit, 1. A prick or point: 2. A line. 3. a ſuperfices or outſide: 4. a bodie. This art was of great eſtimation among the auncient Grecians.
                  
                     Geometrician One skilfull in Geometrie.
                  
                     G
                           •
                        orgikes. Bookes treating of huſbandrie and tillage of land.
                  
                     * Gerifull. Changeable; ſometime cruell.
                  
                     * Geſſeran. A breaſtplate.
                  
                     Geſticulation: A moouing of the fingers, hands or othet parts, eyther idle wantonneſſe, or to expreſſe ſome matter by ſignes, in dauncing, ſinging, or other ſuch like exerciſe.
                  
                     Geſtes. Deeds, noble acts.
                  
                     Geules. A tearme among Heralds: It ſignifieth a vermilion colour.
                  
                     * Gibbon. A doublet: a light cote.
                  
                     * Gipſere. A bagge or pouch.
                  
                     Girle. A Roe Bucke of two yeares.
                  
                     * Giſarnie: A certaine weapon.
                  
                     * Gite. A gowne.
                  
                     Giue, A fetter or chaine.
                  
                     Glaine. A weapon like an halberd.
                  
                     * Glede. Fire: embers; flame, aſhes: ſometime a bird called a Puttoke.
                  
                     * Glee. Mirth or ioyfulneſſe.
                  
                     * Gleere. White.
                  
                     * Glinne. A little village, or part of a village.
                  
                     Gliſter. A liquor made ſometime with ſodden fleſh, ſometime with decoction of hearbes or other things, which by a pipe, is conueyed into the lower parts of the body. It is written that the vſe hereof was firſt learned from a bird in Egypt, called Ibis, much like vnto a Storke, which Bird doth often with her bill, open her hinder parts, when nature of her ſelfe doth not expell what is needfull.
                  
                     Globe. A great round Bowle: or a deſcription of the world made in ſuch a forme.
                  
                     Gloſse. A ſhort expoſition of any darke ſpeech.
                  
                     Glow. To be hot and red, to ſhine, to burne.
                  
                     * Gnarre. A hard knotte in wood: ſometime a ſhort thicke fellowe, a chub.
                  
                     Gnathonicall. Flattering; deceitfull in words: ſoothing ones humour, to get by him.
                  
                     * Gneſſe. A Foole, a Churle.
                  
                     
                     Goldfoile. A thin leafe of gold.
                  
                     Golden number. A number which changeth euery yeare, by adding one to the golden number of the yeare going before, vntill it grow as high as nineteene, and then the golden number returneth to one againe. For example, this yeare 1616. the golden number is two: the next yeare therefore it wil be three, &c. This golden number was deuiſed to finde out the feaſt of Eaſter.
                  
                     Golgotha. A Syrian word, ſignifying a place of dead mens ſculles. It was a place at Ieruſalem on the North ſide of Mount Sion, ſo called becauſe there lay the ſculles of offenders put to death.
                  
                     * Goherdiſe. He that hath a fowle great mouth.
                  
                     Gomor. The name of an Hebrew meaſure, conteyning more than a Gallon. The Iſraelites when they were fedde from heauen with Manna in the deſert, receiued euery one, this meaſure full for a dayes allowance.
                  
                     * Gonfennon. A little flag.
                  
                     Gordian knot. A knotte which cannot be looſed.
                  
                     Gorgon. A terrible fighting Woman. Poets feine, there were foure ſuch, Daughters to King Phorcus: their names were Scylla, Meduſa, Stenio, and Euryale.
                  
                  
                     Goſſomor. Things that flye like Cobwebs in the ayre.
                  
                     Gourmand. A glutton.
                  
                     Gourmandize. Gluttony: ſometime to eate like a Glutton,
                  
                     Graces. A poeticall fiction of three ſiſters, ſuppoſed the Daughters of Iupiter and Venus. They were called Aglaia▪ Thalia, and Euphorſyne. The morality of this inuention was, to expreſſe the mutual loue and cheerefull conuerſation which ought to be amongſt friends: For they were painted naked, to ſignifie that friendſhip ought to be plain without diſſimulation; ſmiling and

merry, to ſhew that men ſhould do good willingly; yong & maidēlike, to teach that friendſhip ſhould conſiſt in honeſt things; and holding hands together in a round ring, to ſhew that a benefite beſtowed, doth againe returne to the giuer.
                  
                     Gradation. A going by ſteps, or a ſpeaking by certaine degrees.
                  
                     Graduall. That which was ſaid or ſung, betweene the Epiſtle and the Goſpell.
                  
                     Graduate. Hee that hath taken degree of learning in a publike Vniuerſitie.
                  
                     Graines of Paradiſe. A litle ſeede, brought out of Armenia, of a ſtrong ſweet ſmell, and ſomewhat ſharp in taſte. It is hot and dry, of a ſubtil ſubſtance, and often vſed in Phyſick. For it warmeth the inward parts, and is good againſt the falling ſickneſſe, the Sciatica, the Strangurie, bytings of venemous beaſtes and diuers other diſeaſes.
                  
                     * Grame. Sorrow, miſhap, anger.
                  
                     Gramaticall. Of, or belonging to Grammer.
                  
                     Granadillia. A fruite like a Pomegranat growing in India.
                  
                     Grand. Great.
                  
                     Grandour. Greatneſſe.
                  
                     * Graythed. Deuiſed.
                  
                     * Gratch. Apparell.
                  
                     Gratefull. Thankfull.
                  
                     Gratifie. To pleaſure one, to offer one a kindneſſe To do a good turne.
                  
                     Gratification. A pleaſuring of one, a good turne.
                  
                     Gratis. Freely, without coſt.
                  
                     Gratitude. Thankfulnes.
                  
                     Gratuity. A benefite or gift giuen onely for good will: ſometime thankefulneſſe, or a reward.
                  
                     Gratulate. To ſignifie that we reioyce at the proſperity of another.
                  
                     Gratulation. A reioycing for anothers good. A thankſgiuing.
                  
                     Grauity: Heauineſſe: alſo ſagenes, great diſcretion.
                  
                     Graund Sergeanty. An olde tenure in the Common Lawe, when a man holds lands or tenements of the king, to go with him

into the wars, or to beare his banner, leade his hoſt, or doe ſome ſuch like ſeruice.
                  
                     Graunge. A village, or lone houſe in the countrey.
                  
                     * Gr
                           •
                        e. Good part.
                  
                     Griffine. A ſtrange bird in India, with foure feete armed with cruell clawes, being from the breaſt vpward faſhioned like an Eagle, but of purple colour, with red fierie eyes, and whitiſh wings, and in the hinder part blacke, made much like a Lyon. This bird neaſteth in the high mountaines, and is exceeding hard to be taken, except very young, for he wil aduenture on any man, and is ſo fierce, that hee often killeth Elephants & Dragons. Hee is moſt enemy to horſes: for which cauſe Virgill in his eight Eclog, bringeth in the ſhepheard Damon, who wondered at a ſtrange marriage, ſpeaking thus: Iungunturiam gryphes equis, &c. The Griffins fierce are ioyned with horſes now.
                  
                     * Grith. Agreement.
                  
                     Gruell. Potage.
                  
                     Guacata
                           •
                        . An herb growing in the Weſt Indies of great vertue againſt the piles, or griefs proceeding from cold or windineſſe.
                  
                     Guaiacum. A wood called by ſome Lignum vita. It is much vſed in Phyſick againſt the French diſeaſe.
                  
                     Guaiauas. A fruit growing in India much like vnto apples.
                  
                     Guerdon. A reward.
                  
                     Guerdonles. Vnrewarded.
                  
                     * Guerring. Brawling.
                  
                     Gumme Arabicke. A kind of gumme, growing on a thorne tree, called Acacia in Egypt,
                  
                     Guzes. The ball of the eye. A terme in heraldry,
                  
                     Gymnoſophiſts. Certaine Philoſophers in India, that went alwayes naked, & liued ſolitary in woods; the firſt beginner of which ſect, was (as S. Ierome writeth cont. Iouinian) named Buddas.
                  
                  
                     * Gyre. A trance.
               
            
            
               H
               
                  
                     HAberdepoiſe. A pound weight which conteineth ſixteene ounces.
                  
                     
                     Habit. The outward attire of the bodie, whereby one perſon may be diſtinguiſhed from another; as the habit of Gentleman, is d
                        ••
                     ferent from the habit of a merchant, and the habit of Handi-crafts man differing from them both. Sometime it ſignifieth a qualitie in the bodie or minde, not naturall, but gotten by long cuſtome, or infuſed by God: as an Orator ſtill exerciſed in making orations, hath gotten a habit of eloquent ſpeaking; and the holy Apoſtles had a habit to vnderſand and ſpeake languages without ſtudie.
                  
                     Habitable. Which may be dwelled in.
                  
                     Habitation. A dwelling place.
                  
                     Habituall. Growne to a habit by long cuſtome.
                  
                     * Hailſe. Charge.
                  
                     * Haine. Hatred.
                  
                     * Haketon. A ſleeueleſſe 
                        •
                     acke
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Halituous. Vaporous, thin, moiſt, which may be voided out by the pores.
                  
                     * Halſe A necke.
                  
                     * Halke. A corner, a valey.
                  
                     * Hamelet. Cut off, abated.
                  
                     Hamkin. A pudding made vpon the bones of a ſhoulder of mutton, all the fleſh being firſt taken off.
                  
                     Hamlet. A village in the countrey.
                  
                     Hague. A hand gunne of about three quarters of a yard long.
                  
                     Haguebut. A gunne or harquebuſe.
                  
                     Harbinger. One that taketh vp lodging for others
                  
                     Hariam. A tearme in Herauldry when a fiſh is painting ſtanding vpright.
                  
                     Harmonie. Delightfull muſicke of many notes.
                  
                     Harmonious. Sweete, pleaſant, delightful to the eare.
                  
                     Harpyes. A Poeticall word. It ſignifieth certaine monſtrous birds, with maiden faces, & crooked ſharp talons, ſo called becauſe of their rapine which they vſed. They liued in Stymphalis a lake of Arcadia, and were ſent by the gods (if we beleeue Poets) to ſnatch away and defile

the meate of Phineus, king of that countrey, becauſe he at the perſwaſion of his ſecond wife, had deſtroyed the children which he had by his firſt; they were at laſt driuen away by Ze
                           •
                        us, and Calais the ſonnes of Boreas. Theſe Harpyes were named, .Aello, O
                           •
                        yp
                           •
                        te, Cel
                           •
                        no, and Thy
                           •
                        lla.
                  
                  
                     Harquebuze.A hand Gunne.
                  
                     Harquebuzier. He that ſhooteth in a hand Gunne.
                  
                     * Harrow. An old word ſignifying, away, fie.
                  
                     Haubergion. A coate of male.
                  
                     Hauoire. Poſſeſſion.
                  
                     * Hauſelins. Breeches.
                  
                     * Hawbacke.. To returne.
                  
                     Hawberke. A gorget.
                  
                     Hearſe. A buriall coffin couered with blacke.
                  
                     Hecatombe. A great ſacrifice wherein were offered a hundred beaſts.
                  
                     Hecticke. A Feuer inflaming the Heart, and ſoundeſt parts of the body.
                  
                     Heiſugge. A bird which hatcheth the Cuckooes egges. 
                  
                     Hemiſphere. Halfe the compaſſe of the heauens: that part of the heauens which is ſtill viſible to vs.
                  
                     Hemiſtich.Halfe a verſe.
                  
                     Hemorrhodes. 
A ſwelling of the veines 
in the fundament like werts: 
whereof ſome doe vſe to bleede often, and ſome bleede not at all. 
They are cauſed by ſuperfluitie of groſſe melancholy blood, ſent to thoſe parts from the liuer, beeing many times healthfull to the patient, by preuenting other diſeaſes; 
and therefore ought not haſtily to be ſtopt, vnleſſe through continuance, the body bee too much weakened by them.
                  
                     Henchman A page of honour, neere attendant to a Prince, or other great perſonage.
                  
                     * Hend. Gentle.
                  
                     * Hent. To catch or lay hold of.
                  
                     Herbage. Paſture, or the feeding of cattel in paſture
                  
                     Herball. A booke of the nature of herbes.
                  
                     Herbinger. See harbinger.
                  
                     Hereticall. Obſtinate in a falſe beleefe, belonging to an Hereticke.
                  
                     
                     Hereti
                           •
                        e. He that maketh 
                        •
                     is owne choice, what 
                        •
                     oints of religion he will 
                        •
                     eleeue, and what he will 
                        •
                     ot bel
                        •
                     eue.
                  
                     Hered
                           •
                        arie. That which 
                        •
                     ommeth to one by inheritance.
                  
                     Herio. The beſt liuing 
                        •
                     eaſt which a Tenant hath 
                        〈◊〉
                      his death, which in ſome 
                        •
                     lanno
                        •
                     s is due to the 
                        •
                     ord of whom the land is holden.
                  
                     Hermaphorodite. Of both natures: which is both man and woman.
                  
                     Hermite. One dwlling ſolitarie in the wilderneſſe attending onely to deuotion.
                  
                     Hermitage. A lone houſe where an hermite dwelleth.
                  
                     Hermodactiles. Little roots white and round, ſolde by Apothecaries. They are hot and dry in the ſecond degree, and are much vſed againſt all gouts, purging ſlimy fleame from fartheſt parts of the body: but they muſt bee taken with Ginger, Anniſeed or Cummin, and a little Maſticke, or elſe by ſtirring windineſſe, they will ouerturne the ſtomacke.
                  
                     Heroes. Great Noble men.
                  
                     Heroycall. Noble, honorable, couragious.
                  
                     Heroike. The ſame, as Heroicall.
                  
                     Heſts. Commandements or decrees.
                  
                     Hi
                           •
                        eroſcians. Any people dwelling vnder a temperate Zone: ſo called becauſe their ſhadowes at noone bend ſtill but one way.
                  
                     Hew. Colour.
                  
                     Hewte. A little copſe or groue.
                  
                     Heyward. A bayliffe, or officer hauing charge to looke to the fields.
                  
                     Hiacinth. See Hyacinth.
                  
                     Hide of land. Some affirme it to be a hundred acres.
                  
                     Hidage. A taxe or payment for euery hide of land.
                  
                     Hidebound. A diſeaſe in cattell when the skin cleaueth to their ſides.
                  
                     Hideous. Terrible, vgly.
                  
                     Hiena. See Hyena.
                  
                     Hierapiera. A bitter confection  made of Aloe ſuccotrina, and other ſimples,
often vſed in Phyſicke to purge Choler out of the ſtomacke.
                  
                     Hierarchie. The holy order of Angels, which conteining nine degrees (as ſome affirme) is a myſtical reſemblance of the B. Trinitie, there being in nine, thrice three, and in euery three thrice one. So that there are three ſuperiour, three inferiour, and three middle degrees. The ſuperiour are Seraphines, Cerubines, and Thrones; the middle, Dominations, principalities, Powers: The inferiour, vertues, Archangels, and Angels.
                  
                     Hieroglyphikes. A darke myſticall kind of writing, vſed chiefely in times paſt among the Pagan prieſts and learned men of Egypt to hide their knowledge from the vulgar ſort. This writing was by making the formes of beaſts and diuers other figures, and could hardly bee vnderſtood without expoſition, or great knowledge in the nature of things. For example: Eternity or Euerl
                        •
                     
                     ſtingneſſe, they expreſſe
                        •
                      by a round circle, which hath no end: A king, by a ſcepter with an eye 
                        〈◊〉
                      the toppe thereof: A m
                        ••
                     
                     ter of haſte, by a Dolphin, the ſwifteſt of all fiſhes. And a matter of deliber
                        •
                     
                     tion or aduice, by an A
                        •
                     chor, which ſtayeth a ſhip in the waues. With a thouſand ſuch deuices, not ſubiect to common capacities to finde out.
                  
                     Hight. Was named.
                  
                     Hillocke A little hill.
                  
                     Hin. An Hebrew me
                        •
                     
                     ſure or moiſt things, containing (by Agricolas account) foure pottles and a quart of ours. Santes Pag
                           ••
                        
                        nus affirmeth it to contain, threeſcore and twelue egges.
                  
                     Hip. The red berry on the bryer.
                  
                     Hipocrite, See Hypocrite.
                  
                     Hiſtorian. A writer or teller of Hiſtory.
                  
                     Hiſtoricall. Of or belonging to a Hiſtory.
                  
                     Hiſtori
                           •
                        grapher. A writer of Hiſtories.
                  
                     Hiſtoriologie. The knowledge,
and telling of old hiſtories.
                  
                     Hoane. A fine kinde of whetſtone.
                  
                     Hogſteere. A wilde bore of three yeares old.
                  
                     Holocauſt. A ſacrifice wherein the whole beaſt is offered, and no part reſerued.
                  
                     Holt. A groue.
                  
                     Homage. In Court Barons, the Iury that are ſworne to enquire of matters, are ſo called. It ſignifieth alſo a ſeruil ceremony, of duty by ſome Tenants to their Lords, after this manner. The Tenant that holdeth Landes by homage, kneeling on both knees before the Lord (who ſitteth and holdeth the Tenants hands between his) ſaith as followeth. 
                        I become your man, from this day forward, of life and member, and of earthly honour, and to you ſhall bee faithfull and true, and ſhall beare to you faith for the Lands I claime to holde of you, ſauing the faith that I owe to our Lord the King.
                      And then the Lord ſitting muſt kiſſe the Tenant.
                  
                     Homager. One that doth of oweth homage.
                  
                     Homicide. A manſlayer: ſometime manſlaughter.
                  
                     Homilie. A talking together: a ſpeech, or a Sermon.
                  
                     Homonymie. A terme in Logicke, when one word ſignifieth diuers things: as hart: ſignifying a beaſt, and a principall member of the body.
                  
                     Honour point: In herauldry the vpper part of a Scutcheon, is ſo called when the breadth thereof, is diuided into three euen parts.
                  
                     * Hopeſteres. Pilots to guide a ſhippe.
                  
                     Horizon. All imaginary line compaſſing the loweſt part of the heauens that we can ſee; ſo called becauſe it limiteth our ſight, diuiding the heauens vnderneath vs, from that which is aboue. The Sun riſing and going downe is euer in this line.
                  
                     Horologe. A Clocke, or Dyall.
                  
                     
                     Horoſcope. The Aſcedent of ones natiuity, to witte, that part of the firmament which aſcendeth from the Eaſt, when a childe is borne. Aſtrologers call it, the firſt houſe.
                  
                     Horride. Terrible: fearefull to looke on.
                  
                     Horrour. Great feare or trembling.
                  
                     * Horrow. Beaſtly; baſe, ſlanderous.
                  
                     Hoſanna. An Hebrew word, which ſignifieth, Saue I beſeech thee.
                  
                     Hoſpitality. Entertainement of ſtrangers, good houſe keeping.
                  
                     Hoſtage. A pledge left in warres for performance of couenants.
                  
                     Hoſtile. Of or belonging to an enemy: malicious, harmefull.
                  
                     Hoſtility. Enmity: hatred, open warre.
                  
                     Hotchpot A terme in our common Lawe, when a daughter which hath had giuen vnto her any lands in Frankemarriage, clayming to bee coheire after her fathers death, to other lands with ſome ſiſters, is conſtrained to ſuffer that part of land, giuen her before her fathers death, to bee put in Hotchpot, that is, to be mingled together with the landes whereof her Father dyed ſeiſed, ſo that an equall diuiſion may be made of the whole.
                  
                     * Howgates. How.
                  
                     Howſell. To miniſter Sacraments to a ſicke man in danger of death.
                  
                     Howten. To hallow.
                  
                     Hulke. To open a hare or cony, to take out the garbage.
                  
                     * Hulſtred. Hidden.
                  
                     Huke: A Dutch attire couering the head, face, and all the body.
                  
                     Humane. That which belongeth or may happen to man.
                  
                     Humanity. Gentleneſſe, courteſie, ciuill behauiour: alſo manhood or the nature of manhood.
                  
                     Humide. Moiſt.
                  
                     Humidity. Moiſture.
                  
                     Humiliate. To make humble.
                  
                     
                     Humiliation. A making low or humble.
                  
                     Humorous. Full of humors.
                  
                     * Hurtelen. To thruſt, to prouoke.
                  
                     Hyacinth. The red, blew, or yellow lilly: alſo a purple flowre called crowcoes.
                  
                     Hydra. A monſtrous ſerpent in the Lake Lerius, which hauing one head cut off, had forthwith two other heads growing vp in the place. Hercules fought with this ſerpent and ſlew him.
                  
                     Hydromancy. See Diuination.
                  
                     Hydromell. A phyſicall ſweete drinke, made of water and hony.
                  
                     Hyemall. Belonging to winter, winterly.
                  
                     Hyena. A beaſt like a Wolfe, hauing a mane and long haires ouer all the body. It is the ſubtilleſt (as ſome ſay) of all beaſtes, and will counterfeite the voyce of a man, to drawe ſheepeheardes out of their houſes in the night, to the ende hee may kill them. It is written that he changeth ſex often, being ſome time male, and ſometime female.
                  
                     Hymen. A poeticall word, it is taken for the god of marriage, ſonne vnto Bacchus and Venus; and ſometime for a ſong at a mariage feaſt.
                  
                     Hymne. A ſong to praiſe God.
                  
                     Hyperbole. A figure when one ſpeaketh a great deale more then is preciſely true.
                  
                     Hyperbolicall. Any thing ſpoken above all beleefe, as in ſaying, higher than heauen ſwifter than lightning, &c. is called an Hyperbolicall ſpeech.
                  
                     Hypocrite. It properly ſignifieth one that doth counterfeite the geſture of another man: but it is commonly taken fot a diſſembler, that with feined holines would ſeeme better then hee is indeed.
                  
                     Hypoquiſtidos. In diuers hote countries there

groweth a plant called Ciſtus, hauing about the root thereof, a certaine Muſhroome, which being bruiſed yeeldeth a liquor called by Apothecaries Hypoquiſtidos. This liquour (brought hither dry) is cold of operation, and of vertue to ſtoppe all bleedings, laskes, and fluxes of the belly.
                  
                     Hypoſtaticall. Belonging to ſubſtance; or that which conſiſteth in the ſubſtance of a thing.
                  
                     Hypotheticall. In Logike, thoſe propoſitions, which haue a coniunction in thē, and ſo conſiſt of two parts are called Hypotheticall propoſitions, as in ſaying; If the Sunne be in our Hemiſphere, it is day.
                  
                  
                     Hyſteron proteron. A Greek terme, ſometime vſed in deriſion of that which is ſpoken or done prepoſterouſly or quite contrary. We call it in Engliſh. The catt before the horſse.
               
            
            
               I
               
                  
                     IAcent. Lying along.
                  
                     Iacynth. A precious ſtone found in Ethiopia, whereof there are two kindes, the one of a pale yellow colour, and the other of a cleer bright yellow, which is accounted the better. It is cold of nature, comfortable to the body, and prouoketh ſleepe.
                  
                     Iacobs ſtaffe. An inſtrument in Geometry.
                  
                     Iaculatory. That which is ſuddenly caſt from one, like a dart.
                  
                     Iambes. Poſtes ſuſteining both ſides of the dore.
                  
                     Iambeux. Armour for the legs.
                  
                     Iaſmine. A limmer weake plant, full of ioynts or knottes, which groweth in manner of a hedge or quickſet, and muſt be ſtaied vp, as roſes and vines are.
                  
                     Iaſper. A precious ſtone of diuers colours; but the beſt is greene, tranſparent with red veines, and ſheweth faireſt being ſet in ſiluer: it is good to ſtoppe any iſſue of blood.
                  
                     Iaſponyx. A precious ſtone, white of colour,

and hauing red ſtrakes.
                  
                     Iazul. A precious ſtone of a blew azure colour.
                  
                     Ibis. A tall ſtrong bird in Egypt, with a long bill, which doth much good there in deſtroying ſerpents.
                  
                     Jeleeped. Named, called.
                  
                     * Icond. Learned.
                  
                     Idea. The forme or figure of any thing conceiued in the minde.
                  
                     Identitie. The ſelfe ſame thing.
                  
                     Idiome. The forme of ſpeech, or propertie of any language.
                  
                     Idiote. It is commonly taken for a foole naturall: notwithſtanding it ſometime ſignifieth a man vnlearned.
                  
                     Ides. Eight daies in euery moneth, ſo called, becauſe they diuide the moneth almoſt in the middle. In March, May, Iuly, and October, theſe eight daies beginne at the eighth day of the moneth, and continue to the fifteenth: in other months they begin at the ſixt day, and continue to the thirteenth. Where note that the laſt day onely is called Ides, and the firſt of theſe dayes, the eighth Ides, the ſecond the ſeuenth Ides: that is, the eighth or ſeuenth day before the Ides, and ſo of the reſt.
                  
                     Idolaſter. An Idolater.
                  
                     Iehonah. The ineſtable name of God, ſignifying his diuine eſſence. The Hebrewes did not vſe to read this word, when they came to it in any writing, ſo much reuerence did they beare vnto it; but in ſtead thereof they pronounced Adonai, which ſignifieth Lord.
                  
                     Ieſus. A Sauiour.
                  
                     * Iewiſe. Reward by reuenge, alſo a gibbet.
                  
                     * Ifere. Together.
                  
                     * Ifietten. Deuoured.
                  
                     Ignoble. Baſe, that is not noble.
                  
                     Ignominie. Shame, reproch, infamie.
                  
                     Ignominious. Shamefull, vile, reprochfull.
                  
                     * Ikend. Knowne.
                  
                     Iliads. A booke written in Greek by Homer, of the deſtruction of Troy.
                  
                     * Ilke. The ſame.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
                     Illation. A bringing in of a matter.
                  
                     Illaudable. Not worthy of praiſe.
                  
                     Illegitimate. Vnlawfull, not lawfully begotten.
                  
                     Illiberall. Not liberall, miſerable, baſe.
                  
                     Illiberalitie. Niggardneſſe: properly in a great man, that ouer ſlightly rewardeth a ſeruice or curteſie done to him by his inferiour.
                  
                     Illiterate. Vnlearned, one that is not acquainted with letters.
                  
                     Illude. To mocke, to deceiue.
                  
                     Illuſion. A mockerie, a cunning ſlight to deceiue one.
                  
                     Illuminate. To enlighten.
                  
                     Illumination. A ſhining or giuing of light.
                  
                     Illuſtrate. To make famous, or noble.
                  
                     Illuſtration. A making famous or noble.
                  
                     Illuſtrious. Famous, noble, very honourable.
                  
                     Imagerie. Painted or carued workes of images.
                  
                     Imaginarie. That which is conceited in the minde.
                  
                     Imbecillitie. Weakeneſſe.
                  
                     * Imeint. Mingled.
                  
                     Imitate. To follow.
                  
                     Imitation. A following.
                  
                     Jmitator. A follower of another.
                  
                     Immaculate. Vndefiled, pure, vnſpotted.
                  
                     Immanitie. Cruelty, outragious, fierceneſſe.
                  
                     Immarceſſible. Vncorruptible.
                  
                     Immature. Vnripe.
                  
                     Immaturity. Vnripeneſſe.
                  
                     Immediate. That which commeth directly from one thing to another, without any thing betweene.
                  
                     Immedicable. Which cannot be healed.
                  
                     Immemorable. Not worthy to be remembred.
                  
                     Jmmenſe. Vnmeaſurable, which cannot be meaſured.
                  
                     Immenſitie. Exceeding greatneſſe, vnmeaſurableneſſe.
                  
                     Immoderate. Vnreaſonable, contrarie to modeſty.
                  
                     Immodeſt. Not ſober, vnmannerly, ſaucy.
                  
                     Immolate. To offer in ſacrifice.
                  
                     
                     Immolation. An offering of ſacrifice.
                  
                     Immortall. Not ſubiect to death: euerlaſting.
                  
                     Immortalitie. Euerlaſtingneſſe.
                  
                     Immunitie. Freedome, or diſcharge from any publike buſineſſe.
                  
                     Immure. To ſhut vp, or incloſe in a wall.
                  
                     Immutable. Vnchangeable.
                  
                     Immutation. A change.
                  
                     Impacted. Thruſt hard together: couched into.
                  
                     Imparitie. Vnequalneſſe, vnlikeneſſe.
                  
                     Imparlance. When a man ſued in the common law, for debt, treſpaſſe, or ſuch like, craueth and obtaineth of the Court, ſome reſpite of time, before hee make his anſwere, this ſtay of making his anſwer is called an Imparlance.
                  
                     Impaſſibilitie. A Freedome from any abilitie of feeling paine.
                  
                     Impaſſible. Which cannot feele any paine, or paſſion.
                  
                     Impeach. To harme, to hinder.
                  
                     Impeachment. A hinderance.
                  
                     Impeachment of waſte. A reſtraint from making waſte in lands, or Tenements.
                  
                     Impediment. A hinderance.
                  
                     Impell. To thruſt on, to conſtraine.
                  
                     Impenetrable. So hard that it cannot bee pierced.
                  
                     Imperious. That commandeth with authoritie: Lordlike, ſtately.
                  
                     Impertinent. Not belonging to the matter.
                  
                     Impetrable. Which may be obtained.
                  
                     Impetrate. To obtaine.
                  
                     Impetuous. Violent: or haſty.
                  
                     Impietie. Wickedneſſe.
                  
                     Impious. Wicked.
                  
                     Implacable. Hard to bee pacified, or that cannot be appeaſed.
                  
                     Implicite. Wrapped vp, hidden.
                  
                     Implore. To beſeech, to entreat with teares.
                  
                     Importance. The weight

or valew of a thing.
                  
                     Important. Of great weight and valew.
                  
                     Importune. To vrge earneſtly.
                  
                     Importunate. Very earneſt: which will not be anſwered.
                  
                     Importunitie. Vnreaſonableneſſe: too much earneſtneſſe in asking.
                  
                     Impoſe. To lay on.
                  
                     Impoſition. A laying on.
                  
                     Impoſt. Cuſtome or tallage paid at hauen townes or elſewhere.
                  
                     Impoſtume. A quantitie of euill humours, gathered into one part of the body. There are two kinds hereof. One when inflamed blood, beeing turned to corrupted matter, filleth ſome place: the other when without any inflammation, nature thruſteth thoſe humours into ſome part apt to receiue them.
                  
                     Impoſture. Deceit, couſenage: properly in ſelling counterfeit wares for currant, or in craftie illuſions done by Sorcerers, Egyptians and Iuglers. The partie ſo deceiuing is called an Impoſtor.
                  
                     Impotency. Weakeneſſe.
                  
                     Impotent. Weake, feeble.
                  
                     Imprecate. To curſe and wiſh euill.
                  
                     Imprecation. A curſing, a wiſhing euill.
                  
                     Impregnable. That which cannot be taken or ouercome.
                  
                     Impreſa. A deuice painted vpon a ſhield.
                  
                     Impreſſe. To import the forme of a thing.
                  
                     Imprimis. Firſt of all.
                  
                     Improbabilitie. Vnlikelihood.
                  
                     Improbable. Vnlikely to be true; that which cannot be prooued true.
                  
                     Improbitie. Naughtineſſe, lewdneſſe, diſhoneſty.
                  
                     Impropriation. A parſonage, or Eccleſiaſticall liuing comming to one by inheritance.
                  
                     Improoue. To raiſe rents higher.
                  
                     Improuidence. Want of foreſight.
                  
                     Improuident. Which forecaſteth not, or taketh no care what ſhall come after.
                  
                     
                     Imprudence. Fooliſhneſſe, want of wit.
                  
                     Imprudent. Vnwiſe, not diſcreet.
                  
                     Impudence. Shameleſneſſe.
                  
                     Impudent. Shameleſſe, paſt ſhame.
                  
                     Impugne. To aſſault, or fight againſt.
                  
                     Impulſe. To conſtraine.
                  
                     Impulſion. A conſtraint.
                  
                     Impunity. Lacke of puniſhment.
                  
                     Impurity. Vncleanneſſe.
                  
                     Impute. To lay to ones charge: to aſcribe.
                  
                     Imputation. An imputing or laying by coniecture to ones charge.
                  
                     Imputatiue. Which is imputed to one.
                  
                     Inacceſsible. Which cannot bee come vnto, vnapprochable.
                  
                     Inanity. Emptineſſe.
                  
                     Inaugurate. To dedicate, or conſecrate.
                  
                     Inauſpicious. Vnluckie, vnfortunate.
                  
                     Incantation. A charme.
                  
                     Incapable. Which cannot conceiue or conteine.
                  
                     Incendiary. He that burneth or ſetteth any thing on fire.
                  
                     Incenſe. To inflame, to ſtirre vp to anger: being a nowne it ſignifieth the beſt frankincenſe.
                  
                     Inceſt. Carnall knowledge betweene neere kindred.
                  
                     Inceſtuous. Wicked, which committeth Inceſt.
                  
                     Inchepinne. The lower gut of a Deere.
                  
                     Incident. That which happeneth or belongeth to a thing.
                  
                     Inciſion. A cutting: A terme vſed in Chirurgery, when they lance a wound, the better to come to the bottome; or any impoſtume, or ſuch like to let out euill humours.
                  
                     Incite. To ſtirre vp.
                  
                     Incitation. A ſtirring vp.
                  
                     Inclemency. Vngentlenes; cruelty.
                  
                     Include. To containe, to ſhut in.
                  
                     Incluſiue. Which containeth,

or is contained.
                  
                     Incoact. Vnconſtrained.
                  
                     Incompact. Slight, not cloſe ioyned.
                  
                     Incompatiable. Diſagreeing: vnrecouerable: alſo miſchieuous: not ſufferable.
                  
                     Incomprehenſible. Which cannot be comprehended or conteined.
                  
                     Inconcinnity. Vnaptneſſe: il agreeing, diſproportion.
                  
                     Incongruity. Diſagreement: falſe ſpeaking, diſproportion.
                  
                     Incongruous. Diſagreeable: abſurd; againſt rule of Grammar.
                  
                     Inconſiderate. Fooliſh, vndiſcreete.
                  
                     Inconſideration. Fooliſhneſſe: vnaduiſedneſſe
                  
                     Inconſolable. Comfortleſſe.
                  
                     Jncontinent. Vnchaſte: alſo forthwith, by and by.
                  
                     Incorporate. To mixe two or moe, ſubſtances together.
                  
                     Incorrigible. That which cannot bee corrected or amended.
                  
                     Jncreate. Which is not created or made.
                  
                     Incredibility. Impoſſibility of beliefe.
                  
                     Incredible. Which cannot be beleeued.
                  
                     Incredulity. Want of beleefe.
                  
                     Incredulous. One that will not beleeue.
                  
                     Increment. An increaſe.
                  
                     Increſſant. A terme of Herauldry, ſignifying the Moone paſt the prime, and not yet come to the full.
                  
                     Incroch. See Encroch.
                  
                     Incubus. The night mare, when a man in his ſleepe ſuppoſeth hee hath a great weight lying on him, and feeleth himſelfe almoſt ſtrangled; in ſuch ſort that he cannot turne himſelfe nor ſit vp, nor call for helpe. The vulgar thinke it ſome ſpirit, but the Phiſitions affirme it to beo a naturall diſeaſe, cauſed by humours vndigeſted in the ſtomacke, which fuming vp to the braiue, doe there trouble the animall ſpirits, ſtopping their paſſage into the ſinewes, ſo that the body cannot mooue.
                  
                     
                     Inculcate. To repeat a thing often, thereby to make one remember it.
                  
                     Inculcation. An often repeating, a repeating into the braines,
                  
                     Jnculpable. Blameleſſe, without fault.
                  
                     Incumbant. Hee that is in poſſeſſion of a benefice, or ſpirituall liuing.
                  
                     Incurſion. A running in.
                  
                     Indecorum. Vncomely.
                  
                     Indifinite. Not preciſely expreſt: vndefined.
                  
                     Indemnity. Eſcaping with out dammage or hurt.
                  
                     Index. A Table in a booke.
                  
                     Indico. A ſtone brought out of Turkie, wherewith dyers vſe to die blew.
                  
                     Indiction. The ſpace of fifteene yeares, by which account Charters & publike writings are dated at Rome: euery yeere ſtill increaſing one, till it come to fifteene, and then returning to one againe.
                  
                     Indigence. Want: pouerty.
                  
                     Indigeſtion. Want of digeſtion: or euill digeſtion.
                  
                     Indignity. Diſgrace, diſhonour.
                  
                     Indiuiduum. That which cannot bee diuided: A terme in Logicke, when we directly expreſſe, and ſeeme to point to that thing which we ſpeake of: as in ſaying. This horſe, That man: For although the words Horſe, or Man, may bee applyed to any horſe or man, yet being ſo expreſly pointed at, they cannot then be drawen to ſignifie other then thoſe two.
                  
                     Indocible. Which cannot bee taught, hard to learne,
                  
                     Induce. To bring in.
                  
                     Inducement. That which bringeth or draweth one in.
                  
                     Induction. A drawing in: or a forme of argument proceeding from particulars to vniuerſals.
                  
                     Indulgence. Gentleneſſe, too much cockering.
                  
                     Jndulgences. Pardons.
                  
                     Induration. A hardening.
                  
                     Induſtry. Diligence:

painefull indeauours.
                  
                     Induſtrious. Diligent: painefull.
                  
                     Ineffable. That which cannot be ſpokē, vnutterable.
                  
                     Incuitable; That which cannot be auoided.
                  
                     Inexorable. Which cannot be intreated.
                  
                     Inexperience. Want of experience,
                  
                     Inexpiable. So grieuous that one cannot make ſatisfaction for it: vnmercifull, deadly.
                  
                     Inexplicable. Which cannot be vnfolded, opened, or declared.
                  
                     Jnextricable. So confuſed or difficult, that a man cannot winde himſelfe out of it.
                  
                     Infallible. Certaine: ſure wherein one cannot bee deceiued.
                  
                     Infamous. Lewd: ill ſpoken of, baſe, vile.
                  
                     Infatigable. Vnwearied
                  
                     Infatuate. To make fooliſh.
                  
                     Infecundity. Vnfruitfulnes.
                  
                     Infelicity. Vnhappineſſe.
                  
                     Inferior Lower, more baſe.
                  
                     Infernall. Helliſh, or belonging to hell.
                  
                     Inferre. To bring in by way of argument, to conclude.
                  
                     Inference. A bringing in, or concluding vpon ſomwhat going before.
                  
                     Infeſtation. A troubling, a moleſting.
                  
                     Infinity. Endleſneſſe: vnmeaſurableneſſe.
                  
                     Infirme, Weake, feeble.
                  
                     Infixe. To faſten, or ſtick in,
                  
                     Inflammation. An inflaming: a hotte angry ſwelling.
                  
                     Inflate. To puffe vp: to make proude.
                  
                     Inflation. A puffing vp: a ſwelling.
                  
                     Inexflexible. Very hard, which will not bend.
                  
                     Jnflict. To lay puniſhment, or ſome penalty vpon one.
                  
                     Influence. A flowing in: moſt commonly it is takē for the powre which Planets and Starres haue in mouing of inferior things.
                  
                     Information. An inſtruction, or giuing one to vnder ſtand.
                  
                     Jnfringe. To breake: to tranſgreſſe.
                  
                     
                     Infuſe. To poure in.
                  
                     Infuſion. A powring in. Alſo a liquor wherein any medicinable thing is layed warme to ſteepe, that the vertue thereof may paſſe into it: Phyſitions vſe theſe infuſions often, when they haue to deale with delicate perſons, that wil not endure ſtrong medicines.
                  
                     Ingenerable. Which cannot be bred or begotten
                  
                     Ingenious. Witty: quicke conceited.
                  
                     Ingenuous. Gentleman-like.
                  
                     Ingot. A ſmall maſſe or little wedge of fined gold.
                  
                     Ingrate. Vnthankfull.
                  
                     Ingratitude. Vnthankfulneſſe.
                  
                     Ingredience. A going in: or that which goeth into the making of a thing.
                  
                     Ingreſse. A going in.
                  
                     Ingroſſe. To buy vp all for himſelfe: ſometime to write a thing faire in a booke.
                  
                     Ingroſſer. One that buyeth corn growing, or dead victuall, to fell againe: except it be by retaile, or victuallers vſe, or buying barly for Malt; Oates for Oatmeale, oyles or ſpices.
                  
                     Ingulfe. To drowne, to ſwallow vp.
                  
                     Ingurgitation. A ſwilling or ſwallowing in.
                  
                     Inhabitable. Which cannot be dwelled in.
                  
                     Inherent. Cleauing too, or abiding in a thing
                  
                     Inhibit. To forbid.
                  
                     Inhibition. A forbidding.
                  
                     Inhoſpitable. Harbourles: not fit to entertaine one.
                  
                     Inhumane. Cruell, vnmanlike, vnciuill.
                  
                     Inhume. To bury.
                  
                     Inhumanitie. Cruelty, vnmanlike behauiour.
                  
                     Iniection. A liquor which Surgeons doe Squirt into a deepe wound.
                  
                     Inimitable. Which cannot be followed.
                  
                     Iniunction. An inioyning or commanding one to doe a thing.
                  
                     Innate. Naturall.
                  
                     Innauigable. That which cannot be fayled vpon.
                  
                     Jnnouate. To make new.
                  
                     Jnnouation. A making new: an alteration.
                  
                     Inobſeruable. Which cannot be obſerued or marked
                  
                     
                     Inoculate. To graſſe a bud, by cutting a round hole in the barke of another tree, and ſetting it on with clay.
                  
                     Inquiſition. A ſearching.
                  
                     Inquiſitiue. Very deſirous to know: ſearching or enquiring after a matter.
                  
                     Inſatiable. Which cannot bee ſatisfied or filled.
                  
                     Inſcription. A title or note written vpon any thing.
                  
                     Inſcrutable. Vnſearchable: which cannot be perfectly found out.
                  
                     Inſculpt. To cut or carue in.
                  
                     Inſenſible. Which cannot bee perceiued: or one ſo fooliſh that he perceiueth nothing.
                  
                     Inſert. To put in; to adde.
                  
                     Inſertion. A putting in.
                  
                     Inſinuate. To put any thing into ones mind cunningly and cloſely: alſo by little and little to creepe into ones fauour.
                  
                     Inſinuation. A cunning ſpeech to creepe into ones fauour.
                  
                     Inſiſt. To continue or abide.
                  
                     Inſition. Graffing.
                  
                     Inſociable. Not apt to keepe company.
                  
                     Inſolencie. Pride.
                  
                     Inſolent. Proud, preſumptuous: alſo ſtrange and vnwonted.
                  
                     Inſoluble. That which cannot be looſed: vnanſwerable.
                  
                     Inſpection. A looking in.
                  
                     Inſperſion. A ſprinkling.
                  
                     Inſpire. To breathe into; to put in ones minde.
                  
                     Inſpiration. An inward inſtruction or motion comming from God.
                  
                     Inſtance. An example or ſimilitude brought of a thing.
                  
                     Inſtant. Very earneſt: alſo quickneſſe, ſpeedineſſe, preſent time.
                  
                     Inſtaure. To repayre or build anew.
                  
                     Inſtigate. To ſtirre vp: to prouoke.
                  
                     Inſtigation. A ſtirring vp: a prouoking.
                  
                     Inſtinct. A naturall inclination.
                  
                     Inſtitute. To ordaine, to appoint: ſomtime to teach and inſtruct.
                  
                     
                     Inſtitution. An appointment, an ordinance: ſometime a teaching or inſtruction.
                  
                     Inſult. To vaunt proudly ouer one.
                  
                     Inſultation. A proude crowing ouer one.
                  
                     Inſuperable. Which cannot be ouercome.
                  
                     Inſurrection. A riſing of many together in armes or diſturbance of the peace.
                  
                     Integritie. Soundneſſe; vpright dealing: honeſty.
                  
                     Intellectuall. Of, or belonging, to the vnderſtanding.
                  
                     Intelligence. Knowledge, vnderſtanding: ſometime an Angell or heauenly ſpirit.
                  
                     Intelligent. One that vnderſtandeth.
                  
                     Intelligible. Which may be vnderſtood.
                  
                     Intentiue. Which liſteneth well, and is earneſtly bent to a thing.
                  
                     Intercede. To ſtep between, to intreare for one.
                  
                     Intercept. To take by the way before it come to him to whom it was ſent.
                  
                     Interception. A taking of a thing by the way, to the let or hinderance therof.
                  
                     Interceſſe. See Interceed.
                  
                     Interceſſion. An intreating in ones behalfe.
                  
                     Interceſſor. He that intreaeth for another.
                  
                     Intercourſe. Paſſing or ſending one to another.
                  
                     Interdict. To forbid: to barre or keepe away.
                  
                     Interdiction. A forbidding.
                  
                     Intereſt. Right, or title: ſometime profite made by vſurie.
                  
                     Interfeere. To knock the legs together in going.
                  
                     Interim. In the meane while.
                  
                     Interior. Inward.
                  
                     Jnterlace. To ioyne withall, to mixe together.
                  
                     Interline. To write betweene two written lines.
                  
                     Interlocution. A ſpeaking betweene.
                  
                     Interlude. A Play, a Comedie.
                  
                     Intermiſsion. A leauing off for a time.
                  
                     Jntermit. To leaue off for a time, to diſcontinue.
                  
                     Intermixe. To mingle with other things.
                  
                     Internall. Inward: very

deerely eſteemed, or familiar. with one.
                  
                     Interpellation. An interrupting or troubling one while he ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Interpoſe. To put between, to ſtep in betweene two: to buſie himſelfe where hee needeth not.
                  
                     Interpoſition A putting betweene.
                  
                     Interre. To bury.
                  
                     Interreigne. The ſpace of time betweene the olde king and the new.
                  
                     Interrogation. An asking a queſtion.
                  
                     Interrogatiue. Which aſketh a queſtion.
                  
                     Interrogatorie. Asking of a queſtion: a demand.
                  
                     Interrupt. To breake betweene, to trouble one as he is ſpeaking.
                  
                     Interruption. A breaking off: a troubling.
                  
                     Internall. A diſtance of time or place.
                  
                     Inteſ
                           •
                        ate. That dyeth without making any teſtament or will.
                  
                     Inteſtine. Bred in the bowels: Inteſtine warre: Ciuill warre.
                  
                     Intimate. To ſignifie, or touch a matter cloſely.
                  
                     Intimation. A cunning or cloſe ſignifying of a matter
                  
                     Intire. Whole, ſound, perfect.
                  
                     Intolerable. Which cannot be endured.
                  
                     Intoxicate. To bewitch, to amaze, or extreamely dull ones ſpirit.
                  
                     Intractable. Stubborne, which cannot be ordered or handled.
                  
                     * Intreſſe. Lyning.
                  
                     Intricate. Wrapped, entangled, hard to be vnderſtood.
                  
                     Intrinſecall. Inward.
                  
                     Introduct. To lead or guide in.
                  
                     Introduction. That which leadeth or directeth one.
                  
                     Intrude. To thruſt boldly in.
                  
                     Intruſion. A thruſting in, properly into a void tenement, whereto one hath no right.
                  
                     Inuade. To ſet vpon: to aſſault.
                  
                     Inualiditie. Weakeneſſe, want of ſtrength.
                  
                     Inuaſion. A ſetting vpon; an aſſault.
                  
                     Inuectiue. A ſharp ſpeech

made in ones diſgrace.
                  
                     Inueigh. To ſpeak bitterly againſt one.
                  
                     Inueigle. To allure, to a entice.
                  
                     Inueloped. Wrapped, couered.
                  
                     Inuentory. A writing of the quality and value of a mans goods.
                  
                     Inuerſion. A turning in, or a turning vpſide down.
                  
                     Inuert. To turne contrary to right forme.
                  
                     Inueſt. To cloth.
                  
                     Inueterate. Olde, auncient.
                  
                     Inuincible. Which cannot be conquered.
                  
                     Inuiolate. Safe, whole, not wronged or broken.
                  
                     Inuiſible. Which cannot be ſeene.
                  
                     Jnuite. To requeſt, to bid to a feaſt.
                  
                     Inundation. An ouerflowing of water.
                  
                     Inuocate. To call vpon.
                  
                     Inuocation A calling vpon.
                  
                     Inuolue. To roule vp in a thing: to couer.
                  
                     Inuulnerable. Which cannot be wounded.
                  
                     Jocund. Merry, pleaſant.
                  
                     Ioynture. Lands or Tenements which a man aſſureth vnto his wife, for terme of her life, or otherwiſe, in reſpect of his marrying her.
                  
                     * Ioleyning. Ioyfull.
                  
                     * Ionglery lugling.
                  
                     Iouiall. Noble, excellent; alſo liuely, pleaſant, and merry,
                  
                     Ioyeux. Ioyfull.
                  
                     Jraſcible. Which hath power to be angry.
                  
                     Iris. The Rainebowe,
                  
                     Ironie. A ſpeaking by contraries, as in calling blacke, white.
                  
                     Ironicall. That which is ſpoken in ieſt or mockingly, contrary to his meaning that ſpeaketh it.
                  
                     Irradiation. A ſhining vpon.
                  
                     Irrationall. Vnmeaſurable.
                  
                     Irrefragable. Vndeniable.
                  
                     Irregular. Contrary to rule: ſomtime it ſignifieth one not capable of holy orders.
                  
                     Irregularity. A going out

of right rule. In the olde Canon Law it is taken for any impediment, which hindereth a man from taking holy Orders. As if he be baſe borne, or notoriouſly defamed of any notable crime, or be maymed or much deformed, or haue conſented to procure anothers death, with diuers other impediments too long to bee rehearſed in this place.
                  
                     Irremediable. Which cannot be remedied.
                  
                     Irreparable. Which cannot be repaired.
                  
                     Irreprehenſible. Which cannot be reprooued.
                  
                     Irreſolute. Not f
                        ••
                     ly reſolued: vncertaine.
                  
                     Irreuocable. Which cannot bee called backe againe.
                  
                     Irriſion. A mocking.
                  
                     Irritate. To prouoke: to mooue to anger.
                  
                     Irritation. A prouoking.
                  
                     Irruption A breaking into.
                  
                     Iſthmos. A narrow part of a country between two ſeas.
                  
                     Iterate. To repeate or do againe.
                  
                     Iteration. A doing again, adoing twice.
                  
                     * Jub. A bottle.
                  
                     Inhilation. A great ſhout for ioy, a great reioycing.
                  
                     Inbilie. A publike reioycing or a great ſhout for ioy. Among the Hebrewes euery fiftit a yeare was called the yeare of ſubile; for then were bond men of their owne country made free, poſſeſſions returned againe to the firſt owners, neither was it lawfull to plant or ſowe any thing that yeare. Among Chriſtians this ſolemnitie of keeping a yeare of Iubilie, was firſt inſtituted by Bonifacius the eight, in the yeare of our Lord. 1300. who ordayned that it ſhould bee obſcrued euery hundreth yeare. After this Clement the ſixt, inſtituted it to be kept euery fiftieth yeare. And laſtly, Sixtus the fourth brought it to bee celebrated euery fiue and twentieth yeare, beginning it firſt in the yeare of our Lord God, 1475.
                  
                     
                     Iucundity. Pleaſantes, mirth.
                  
                     Iudaiſme. The religion or beleefe of the Iewes.
                  
                     Iudiciall. Belonging to iudgement: alſo wiſe, graue of great iudgement.
                  
                     Iudicious. See Iudiciall.
                  
                     Iuiubes. Certaine plumbs of Italy, ſolde here by Apothecaries. This fruite is in colour white or red, in faſhion round or like an oliue, in taft ſweet, hauing a hard long ſtone like an oliue ſtone, but muchleſſe. If theſe plumbes bee kept long, they waxe dry, and full of wrinckles. They are temperate in heate and cold, and are good againſt the cough, roughnes of the throate, and againſt all exulcerations and inflammations of the kidneſs and bladder: but beeing eaten for meate, they are of hard digeſtion.
                  
                     Iulep. A phyſicall cleere drinke made of diſtilled waters, and ſugar, vſed to coole the body, or quench thirſt in hot diſeaſes: ſometime the Iuleps haue ſirups or other mixtures put to them.
                  
                     Iuncture. A ioynt, a ioyning together.
                  
                     Iuory. The Elephants tooth; it is of a binding nature, and the ſcraping thereof is good againſt ſores, growing vnder the rootes of the nayles.
                  
                     Iuridicall. Of or appertaining to iudgement.
                  
                     Iuriſdiction. Lawfull authority in any place.
                  
                     Iuſtification. A iuſtifying or making iuſt.
                  
                     * Iwympled Muffled.
               
            
            
               K
               
                  
                     Kalends. See Calends.
                  
                     Keele. The bottome of a ſhip.
                  
                     Keene. Sharpe edged.
                  
                     Kell. The cauſe about the paunch of a Hart or Stagge.
                  
                     * Kemelling. A brewers veſſell.
                  
                     * Kepe. It is ſometimes taken for a care or regard.
                  
                     * Keynard. A micher, a hedge-creeper.
                  
                     * Kitchell. A kinde of cake.
                  
                     Kimall. A certaine

weight of about an hundred.
                  
                     Kirat. An Arabian word ſignifying the weight of three graines.
                  
                     Kith. Acquaintance.
                  
                     Kitkaies. The fruite of the athen tree: they are little narrow huskes hanging together in cluſters, wherein is contained the ſeede of the aſhe which is bitter. This prouoketh vrine, and is ſought by ſome for other purpoſe.
                  
                     * Knarry. Stubbie.
                  
                     Knight-ſeruice. An auncient tenure of lands, by which a man was bound to beare armes in warre, for the defence of the Realme.
               
            
            
               L
               
                  
                     LAas. A nette or gynne.
                  
                     Laborious. Painefull, full of labour.
                  
                     Labyrinth. An intricate building or place made with ſo many turnings and windings, that whoſoeuer went into it, could neuer get out without a perfect guide, or a thred to direct him, the ende of which thred muſt be tyed at the doore where hee entreth. Some heathen Princes beſtowed infinite charge, to build ſuch deuices in a ſtately forme, There were foure principall labyrinths in the world. The firſt in Egypt, made for a ſepulcher of one of their Kings or (as ſome write) in honour of the ſunne. The ſecond in the yland of Candie, built at the commandement of King Minos, by the ingenious workeman Daedalus, who tooke his pattetne, from that which he had ſeene in Egypt, the third in the yle Lemnos, the fourth in Italy, built by King Porſenna, of great ſquare ſtones, for his own ſepulcher.
                  
                     Lacca. A kinde of redde gumme, brought out of Arabia, and ſolde heere by Apothecaries, good againſt diſeaſes of the breaſt, and comfortable to the lyuer.
                  
                     Laudanum. A yellowiſh gumme, as ſome write;

notwithſtanding others affirme it to be made of a dew, which falleth vpon a certaine herbe in Greece. Auicen ſaith, it is taken hanging on the haire of Goats beards, that haue fed vpon that plant. It is hot and drie, and ſweete of ſmell, if it be pure. It is often vſed in pomanders, and being annointed vpon the had withoyle of myrtles, it doth ſtrengthen the skinne, and keepeth hatre from falling off.
                  
                     Laike. A lay man.
                  
                     Laitie. The eſtate or degree of a lay man, lay men.
                  
                     Lake. A faire red colour vſed by painters.
                  
                     Laire. The place where any Deere harboureth by day.
                  
                     Languiſhment. A feebleneſſe, a fainting.
                  
                     Languor. Feebleneſſe, ſickneſſe, infirmitie.
                  
                     Lapidarie. One that ſelleth or poliſheth precious ſtones: a Ieweller.
                  
                     Lappiſe. A terme vſed among hunters, when hounds opē their mouthes in the ſtring, or a greyhound in his courſe.
                  
                     Larch Turpentine. A kinde of Turpentine or roſen growing vpon the Larch tree in Italie, vſed often in oyntments and emplaiſters, to cleanſe or heale wounds. It may be alſo taken inwardly with honie, and then it cleanſeth the breaſt, looſeth the belly, and expelleth the ſtone and grauell.
                  
                     * Larſon. Robberie.
                  
                     Largeſſe. Liberalitie.
                  
                     Laſciuious. Wanton diſhoneſt.
                  
                     Laſciuiouſneſſe. Wantonneſſe.
                  
                     Laſſitude. Wearineſſe.
                  
                     Laſtage. Any heauy weight or balaſſe, laide in the bottome of ſhips to make them goe vpright. It is alſo a terme in the common law, which ſignifieth to bee quit of a certaine payment in faires and markets, for carrying of things where a man will.
                  
                     Latitude. The breadth of any thing: in Aſtronomy it ſignifieth the diſtance, north, or ſouthward, from the Equinoctiall line:

or the diſtance of the Pole from the Horizon.
                  
                     Latria. Diuine honour.
                  
                     Laude. Praiſe.
                  
                     Laudable. Worthy of praiſe.
                  
                     Laureate. Crowned with Laurell.
                  
                     Laurell. The Bay tree, or a garland of Bayes.
                  
                     * Laye. A ſong.
                  
                     * Layuers. Thongs of lether.
                  
                     Lazer. A Leaper, a poore man full of ſores and ſcabs.
                  
                     Lezule ſtone. A blewiſh greene ſtone of the kinde of marble, vſed ſometime in phyſicke. It is in operation hot and drie, and being rightly prepared (according to an art knowne to Apothecaries) is good againſt melancholy diſeaſes, and by cleanſing the blood to preſerue one from the leaproſie.
                  
                     League. Truce, friendſhip, peace; ſometimes it ſignifieth a ſpace of three male or thereabout.
                  
                     Leaſing Lying.
                  
                     Lector. A reader.
                  
                     * Lectorne. A Deske.
                  
                     Lecture. A reading, a leſſon.
                  
                     * Leede. An olde name of the moneth of March.
                  
                     Leete. A court or law-day holden commonly euery halfe yeare.
                  
                     Legacie. Any thing giuen by ones will or teſtament.
                  
                     Legall. Of or belonging to the law.
                  
                     Legate. An Embaſſadour.
                  
                     Legend, A ſtory of olde matters.
                  
                     Legible, Which may bee read.
                  
                     Legion. An armie of men. The Romane Legion conſiſted of ten bands, whereof the firſt band conteined 1105. footemen, and 123. horſemen; in which band the Standard was alwaies carried. The other nine bands had euery one 555. footemen, and 66. horſemen; ſo that a Legion made vp the number of 6100. footmen, and 726. horſemen.
                  
                     * Legiſters. Lawyers.
                  
                     Legitimate. Lawfull, lawfully begotten.
                  
                     Legitimation. A making

of one legitimate.
                  
                     Lenitie. Gentlenes, mildneſſe, mercie.
                  
                     Lentils. A kinde of ſmall pulſe growing in hot countries, round and flat, of colour ſometime blacke, ſomtimes white, and ſometimes browne. Being boyled but once, hey looſe the belly, but at the ſecond boyling in another water, they are of a binding nature, being then good to ſtop the bloody ſlixe or any looſeneſſe of the bodie.
                  
                     Lentiske. A tree growing in diuers hot Countries, which beareth the notable Gumme called Maſticke. The leaues and barke of this tree ſtop all looſenes, and iſſues of blood whatſoeuer.
                  
                     Leſſee. He that taketh a leaſe.
                  
                     Leſſes. Dung of a rauenous beaſt, as of a Beare, Bore, &c.
                  
                     Leſſour. Hee that letteth lands or tenements to another.
                  
                     Lethargie. A diſeaſe contrarie to phrenſie: for as phrenſie is cauſed by hot humours inflaming the braine, ſo the Lethargie by cold Phlegmaticke humours, oppreſſing the braine in ſuch ſort, that the Patient can doe nothing but ſleepe, whereby he becommeth forgetfull, with loſſe (in a manner) of reaſon and all the ſenſes of his body.
                  
                     Lethe. A Poeticall word, ſignifying a leined Riuer in hell, the water whereof beeing drunken, cauſeth forgetfulneſſe of all that is paſt.
                  
                     Leueoma. A fruite in India ſo called, much like vnto a Cheſtnut.
                  
                     Leueret. A young Hare.
                  
                     * Leueſell. A buſh.
                  
                     Leuitie. Lightneſſe.
                  
                     Lexicon. A Greek Dictionary for words.
                  
                     Liable. Subiect to, belonging to.
                  
                     * Liard. Nimble, wilde.
                  
                     Libard. A ſpotted wilde beaſt, the male of a Panther: See Panther.
                  
                     Libell. A little Booke: ſometime a defamatorie ſcroll, or ſlanderous writing

or inuectiue written againſt one, without any knowne name of the Author.
                  
                     Libertine. One of looſe life, or careleſſe of Religion.
                  
                     Libiainous. Luſtfull, leacherous.
                  
                     Licenciate. One that hath ſtudied the Ciuill Law fiue yeares.
                  
                     Licentious. Looſe, wanton.
                  
                     Licentiouſneſſe. Too much libertie, looſeneſſe, wantonneſſe.
                  
                     Lieu. In ſtead or place of another thing.
                  
                     Lignum Aloes. See Aloes.
                  
                  
                     Lignum vita. See Guaiacum,
                  
                  
                     Limit. A bound or end. Alſo to ſet bounds.
                  
                     Limitation. An appointing of bounds.
                  
                     Lineall. Downeright like a line.
                  
                     Lineament. The forme, draught, or proportion of the body.
                  
                     Linguiſt. One skilfull in languages.
                  
                     Lipothymie. A fainting or ſwounding, when the vital ſpirits being ſuddenly oppreſt, a man ſinketh down, as if he were dead.
                  
                     Liquid. Thin and moiſt.
                  
                     Liquefaction. A melting.
                  
                     Liqueſie. To melt.
                  
                     Liquid Amber. A ſweete Roſin brought from the Weſt Indies, comfortable to me braine, any griefe proceeding from cold cauſes.
                  
                     Lizard. A little beaſt much like our Euer, but without poyſon, breeding in Italy & other hot countries. The dung of this beaſt is good to take away ſpots in the eye, & cleereth the ſight. And the head thereof being bruiſed and laid to, draweth out tho
                        •
                     ns or any thing ſticking within the fleſh.
                  
                     Litanies. Prayers or ſupplications, ſo called of the Greeke verbe Litaneuo, which ſignifieth to beſeech or entreat.
                  
                     Litargie. The ſome that riſeth from lead, when it is tried. It is cold of operation, and often vſed by

Surgeons in Oyntments and Plaiſters, be
                        •
                     ing of a gentle drying, cleanſing, and binding nature. See Lethargie.
                  
                  
                     Literature. Learning: knowledge in bookes.
                  
                     Litherly. Slothfull.
                  
                     Litigious. Contentious, full of ſtrife.
                  
                     Piturgie. Publike ſeruice of the Church.
                  
                     Locall. Of, or belonging to place.
                  
                     Locuſt. A great Flye or Graſhopper with long legges, breeding in India, and other hot Countries. There are two kindes of them: One with winges, not good to bee eaten, and the other without winges, which the inhabitants vſe for food.
                  
                     * Lodemanage. Skill of nauigation.
                  
                     Lodeſtar. A Starre that guideth one.
                  
                     Lodeſtone. A ſtone of the colour of 
                        •
                     uſty iron, which hath an admirable vertue, not onely to draw yron to it ſelfe, but alſo to make any yron, vpon which it is rubbed, to draw yron alſo. It is written notwithſtanding, thru beeing rubbed with the iuyce of Garlicke, it cannot then darw Iron, as likewiſe if a Diamond hee laide cloſe vnto it. This ſtone is found in the Indian Sea, and alſo in the Countrey of Trachonitis: It is of greateſt vſe in Nauigation, for by it Saylers finde out the certaine courſe of their voyage; the needle (in their compaſſe) tempered herewith, ſtill ſtanding directly toward the North and South.
                  
                     Logician. One skilfull in Logicke.
                  
                     Logicke. The art of reaſon.
                  
                     Lohor. A phyſicall word; It is a thicke ſirupe or other ſoft ſubſtance, which muſt not bee ſwallowed, muſt ſuffered to melt of it ſelfe in the mouth, that ſo it may gently ſlide downe, and thereby haue the more vertue againſt diſeaſes of the breaſt, lungs and throate.
                  
                     Lone. Lending. ſometime ſingle or ſolitary.
                  
                     
                     Longanimity. Long ſufferance or forbearance.
                  
                     Longitude. The length of any thing. In Aſtronomy it ſignifieth the diſtance of any Star or Planet from the firſt degree of the ſigne Aries.
                  
                  
                     Loquacity. Much talke, or babling.
                  
                     * Lore. Learning, knowledge.
                  
                     Lorimer. One that maketh bits for bridles, and ſuch like inſtruments.
                  
                     * Lorrell. A deuourer.
                  
                     * Loſell. A lout, ſometime a crafty fellow.
                  
                     Loſengar. A flatterer, a lyar.
                  
                     Lotion. A waſhing.
                  
                     * Louke. A fellow receiuer.
                  
                     Lubricity. Slipperneſſe.
                  
                     Lucerus. A beaſt almoſt as big as a Wolfe breeding in Muſconia, and Ruſcia, of colour betweene redde and browne, mingled with blacke ſpots.
                  
                     Lucre. Gaine, profit.
                  
                     Lunary. A diſeaſe wherin one is diſtracted in his wittes, at certaine times of the Moone.
                  
                     Lunaticke. Sicke of a Lunacy.
                  
                     Lupines. A little flatte Pulſe almoſt like a ſmall beane, but much leſſe and bitter in taſt. They be not very good meate, but are ſometime vſed in Phyſicke againſt worms in children & the decoction of them taketh away ſpots & freekles of the face.
                  
                     * Luſhbrough A baſe coine in the time of king Edward the third.
                  
                     Luſter. A ſhining or great brightneſſe.
                  
                     Lutum. Clay.
                  
                     Luxury. Riotouſneſſe, leachery.
                  
                     Luxurious. Riotous, wanton, leacherous.
                  
                     Lyncuris. A bright ſhining ſtone, and ſometimes of a dark yellow color like ſaffron. This ſtone groweth of the vrine of the beaſt Lynx, being congealed, which vrine the Lynx hideth (as Pliny writeth) becauſe men ſhould not find it. Some ſay it is good againſt the paine of the ſtomack, yellow Iaundiſe, and looſeneſſe of the belly.
                  
                     
                     Lynx. A ſpotted beaſt like vnto a Wolfe, and hauing a very perfect ſight. This beaſt breedeth chiefely in countries of the Eaſt, & is often found in the woods of Almaine & Sclauonia.
                  
                     Tyrike. A poet which maketh verſes to be ſung vnto the harp. The beſt of theſe poets among the Grecians was Pindarus, and among the Latines, Horace.
                  
               
            
            
               M
               
                  
                     MAcerate. To ſteepe or ſoake in water; ſometime to afflict or vexe. To make leane.
                  
                     Machil An Hebrew word; It ſignifieth the rich Robe of the Ephod, worn by the high Prieſt of the old law, hauing about the skirtes therof 72. Pomgarnats of blew ſilk, purple & ſcarlet, and as many bels of golde between thē round about.
                  
                     Machination. A deuiſing or ſubtil contriuing of a matter.
                  
                     Machiuilion. A politicke ſtates mania cunning Polititian, ſuch as Machiuel was.
                  
                     Macrologie. Long and tedious talke.
                  
                     Maculate. To blemiſh or blot.
                  
                     Madrigals. A kind of ſonnet.
                  
                     Magician. A cunning mania Sorcerer, a great learned Clark, a Conturer.
                  
                     Magike. At firſt this word ſignified great learning or knowledge in the nature of things; now it is moſt commonly taken for inchantment and ſorcery.
                  
                     Magiſtra
                           •
                        y. The bearing of office, authority, rule, gouernment.
                  
                     Magnanimity. Great courage.
                  
                     Magnanimous. Noble minded: one of great courage.
                  
                     Magnificence. Sumptuouſneſſe: great port and ſtatelineſſe.
                  
                     Magnificent. Sumptuous: honourable, ſtately.
                  
                     Magnifico. An honorable perſonage.
                  
                     Magnitude. Greatneſſe.
                  
                     Manipernours. Thoſe that are ſureties for a man and vndertake that he ſhall appeare at a certen day, before Iudges in a Court.
                  
                     
                     Mainepriſe. The bayling of a man out of priſon, vpon ſecurity giuen, that hee ſhall bee foorth comming.
                  
                     Maior. The greater or more ancient.
                  
                     Malady. A diſeaſe.
                  
                     Maleco
                           ••
                        ent. Mot contented ill pleaſed.
                  
                     Malediction. A curſing.
                  
                     Malefactor. An euil doer.
                  
                     Maleuol
                           •
                        nt. Ill minded: ſpitefull, enuious.
                  
                     Malignant. Enuious, ſpitefull, miſchieuous.
                  
                     Maligne. Spitefull: or to ſpite and hate.
                  
                     Malignity. Spitefulneſſe: enuy, malice.
                  
                     Mammon. An Aſſyrian word of the ſingular number, and maſculine Gender, as Saint Hierome affirmeth: It is interpreted riches.
                  
                     Manage. To rule, order, or handle a thing well.
                  
                     Mandate. A commandement.
                  
                     Mandragorus. See Mandrake following.
                  
                     Mandrak. A ſtrange hearbe, bearing yellowe round Apples. The roote of this hearbe it great and white like a Radiſh roote, and is diuided into two or moe parts, growing often almoſt like to the legs of a man. This roote, eſpecially the barke thereof, is extremely cold and drie, euen to the fourth degree: It is therefore very dangerous to receiue inwardly, for that the leaſt quantitie too much, will quickly kill one. Surgeons vſe to ſteepe this root in Wine, and giue it to bee drunken of ſuch as they muſt cut, ſawe, or burne in any part, for the colde operation thereof cauſeth ſleepe, and maketh the body inſenſible for a time.
                  
                     Manna. In holy Scripture it ſignifieth a delicate food, which God ſent from heauen to the Iſraelites, in manner of a dew, white and ſomewhat like Coriander ſeede: with which the Iſraelites liued fortie yeares in the Wilderneſſe. till they came to the borde
                        •
                     s of the land of Canaan. At the firſt

ſending hereof, the people were in ſuch admiration, that they ſaid to each other, Manhu? viz. What is this? Which ſeemeth to bee the cauſe, why it was after called Manna In Phyſicke it is taken for a kinde of dew, which falling in hotte countries vpon trees, doth there congeale, almoſt like to crummes of whitebread, and is gathered & choicely kept, as a gentle purger of choler.
                  
                     Manſion. A tarying or abiding: alſo a dwelling houſe.
                  
                     Manſuetude. Gentlenes: mildeneſſe.
                  
                     Manuall. Handy: or that which may bee carried in the hand.
                  
                     Manumiſſion. A making one free from bondage.
                  
                     Manumitte. To make a ſlaue or bondman free, which was in olde time thus. The lord of the ſlaue holding him by the head, arme, or other part, ſaide before witneſſe, I will that this man goe free, and in ſo ſaying , ſhoued him forward out of his hand.
                  
                     Manure. To till, to dreſſe land.
                  
                     Manuſcript. A handwriting: a written booke.
                  
                     Marchaſite. A ſtone participating with the nature of ſome mettall, yet in ſo ſmall quantitie, that the mettall cannot be melted from it, but will vapour away in ſmoake, the ſtone turning to aſhes. Theſe Marchaſites are commonly in colour like to the mettall mixed with them; whether it bee golde, ſiluer, braſſe, or any other. Some affirme a Marchaſite to bee any ſtone out of which, fire may bee ſtricken.
                  
                     Marches. The bounds, or limits lying betweene two countries, commonly betweene Wales and England, or betweene England and Scotland.
                  
                     Marcioneſſe. A great Lady a Wife to a Marqueſſe.
                  
                     Marcioniſts. Olde condemned Heretikes, ſo called of their firſt maſter Marcion, a ſtoicke Philoſopher,

who held a deteſtable opinion that Chriſt was not the Sonne of God.
                  
                     Margarites. Little pearles found in the ſhell fiſh, eſpecially in Oyſters, wherof ſome haue holes in them, and ſome haue none: the beſt are brought out of India, yet they are alſo found in our Engliſh Seas, as alſo in the Flemiſh and Almaine, and the faireſt Margarits grow in yong ſhels. Some write that in Thunder, the Oyſters doe caſt them vp, as it were in way of abortion, which is the cauſe that they are often found in the ſands. They are ſometimes vſed by Phyſitions in cordiall confections, for they comfort the ſpirits, and are therefore good againſt ſwoundings hauing vertue alſo in them to ſtop iſſues of blood, or any looſeneſſe of the bodie.
                  
                     Margent. A brimme, or border.
                  
                     Marginall. Written in the Margent.
                  
                     Marine. Belonging to the Sea.
                  
                     Maritall. Husbandlike.
                  
                     Maritime. Bordring neere the Sea.
                  
                     Marte. A great faire or Market.
                  
                     Martiall. Warlike.
                  
                     Martyr. A witneſſe: one that dyeth for the teſtimony of a good conſcience.
                  
                     Martyrdome. A ſuffering of death or grieuous torment for conſtant perſeuerance in true religion,
                  
                     Martyrologie. A hiſtorie of the death of Martyrs. A booke of the memorie of Martyrs.
                  
                     Maſſacre. A great ſlaughter or murder of many people together.
                  
                     Maſculine. Of the male kinde.
                  
                     Maſticke. A white and cleere Gumee, of a ſweete ſauour. This Gum groweth on the Lentiske tree, eſpecially in the Iland Chios. It is temperate in heat, and of a dry binding nature; wherfore it ſtrengtheneth the ſtomacke, ſtayeth vomiting, and

ſtoppeth any iſſue of blood. Some doe vſe to rub their teeth herewith, as well to whiten them, as to faſten ſuch as bee looſe.
                  
                     Maſluerco. An herbe in India, of great vertue to heale wounds.
                  
                     Materiall. Which hath matter or ſubſtance in it.
                  
                     Maternal. Motherly.
                  
                     Mathematician. One skilfull in the Mathematickes: ſometime it is taken in a worſe ſenſe, for one that ſuperſtitiouſly caſteth mens natiuities, or vndertaketh to find things loſt, or foretell what is to come.
                  
                     Mathematickes. A terme applyed to ſuch arts, as treate onely of quantities imaginarily abſtracted frō bodies. The arts commonly ſo called, are Arithmeticke, Muſicke, Geometry, Geography, Aſtronomie, Coſmography, and Aſtrology.
                  
                     Matrimoniall. Belonging to Matrimony or Wedlocke.
                  
                     Matrixe. The wombe or place of conception.
                  
                     Matrone. A graue motherly woman.
                  
                     Mature. Ripe
                  
                     Maturity. Ripeneſſe.
                  
                     Matutine. Of or belonging to the morning.
                  
                     Maugre. In deſpite of ones heart whether one will or no.
                  
                     Maxime. A principall matter, a maine point, a generall rule.
                  
                     Maze. An aſtoniſhment: ſometime a deuice like a labyrinth made in ſome gardens in manner of a knot, out of which a man cannot get eaſily, if he once enter in.
                  
                     Mazar. A broad flat ſtanding cuppe to drinke in: There is alſo a kinde of ſmall Cherries ſo called.
                  
                     Mecoenas. It was the proper name of a noble Romane, who being in great fauour with Auguſtus the Emperour, was a ſpeciall friend to the Poets Virgill and Horace, and generally a ſupporter of all learned men: wherefore ſometin
                        ••
                     
                     
a great friend or patron is called a Mecoenis.
                  
                  
                     Mechanicall. Of or belonging to handicrafts.
                  
                     Mechoacan. A whitiſh roote brought out of India, called by ſome Indian or white Ruba
                        •
                     be. It is hot in the firſt, and dry in the ſecond degree, and purgeth all humours of what kinde ſoeuer with much eaſe. It cleanſeth and comforteth the liuer and all the inward parts.
                  
                     Mediate. To deale betweene two, to make means of agreement, as an indifferent party to both.
                  
                     Mediation. A meanes of agreement by a friend to both parties.
                  
                     Mediator. Hee that maketh meanes or ſpeaketh for another.
                  
                     Medicable. Which may be healed.
                  
                     Medicament. A medicine. Mediocritie. A meane, a meaſure.
                  
                     Mediterranean Sea. A ſea which diuideth Europe from Africa.
                  
                     Megaſine. A ſtorehouſe for warre.
                  
                     Melancholy. One of the foure humours in the body, the groſſeſt of al other, which if it abound too much, cauſeth heauineſſe and ſadneſſe of minde,
                  
                     Melioritie. A bettering.
                  
                     Melliſtuous. Sweet as hony.
                  
                     Membrane. The vpmoſt thin skin in any part of the body.
                  
                     Memorable. That which is worthy of remembrance.
                  
                     Memorandum. A terme often vſed, when we write of a thing which we would remember.
                  
                     Memorial. That which putteth one in remembrance.
                  
                     Mendicitie. Beggery.
                  
                     Menniges. Thinne skins in which the braine is contained. There are two ſuch skinnes: one called by Phyſitians, Dicta mater, which is the ſtronger of the two, and next vnto the ſcull. The other named Pia mater, is within this firſt, beeing more tender and ſine, and cloſe wrapping the braine it ſelfe. If any of theſe skinnes hee

wounded, it cauſeth ſpeedy death.
                  
                     Menſtruous. Which hath vpon her the monethly courſes, or which belongeth to them.
                  
                     Menſuration. A meaſuring.
                  
                     Mentall. That which is only thought in the mind.
                  
                     Mercenary. A hireling: one that worketh for hire.
                  
                     Mercurian. Eloquent as Mercury was.
                  
                  
                     Meridian. Of or belonging to noone day, or the South part of the world.
                  
                     Merit. Deſert, or to deſerue.
                  
                     Meritorious. Which doth much deſerue.
                  
                     Meſsias. The ſame in Hebrew, that Chriſt is in Greeke: to wit, Annointed. Our Lord and Sauiour is often ſo called.
                  
                     Metamorphiſe. To change the outward ſhape.
                  
                     Metamorphoſis. A change from one ſhape to another
                  
                     Metaphore. The changing of a word, from the naturall ſenſe, into another ſenſe like to it: as in ſaying, Couetouſneſſe is the roote of all euill: Where the word Root, is called a Metaphore, becauſe it ſignifieth, the cauſe and beginning of all euill, euen as a root is the cauſe, from whence a Plante ſpringeth.
                  
                     Metaphoricall. Spoken by a Metaphore.
                  
                     Metaphyſikes. Arts which lifting themſelues aboue the changeable nature of things, doe conſider of ſuch as doe ſubſiſt in their owne eſſence, not ſubiect to any alteration; ſo that the Metaphyſicks dealeth onely with incorporall, and euerlaſting things, and in this ſenſe ſchoole Diuinity is the higheſt part of the Metaphyſickes, being chiefely occupied in contemplatory knowledge of God, angels, and ſoules of men.
                  
                     Meteore. Any imperfect mixt ſubſtance ingendred, in the ayre; as rayne, ſnowe, hayle, thunder, lightning, blazing ſtarres, cloudes, and winde: all which are made of vapors

or exhalations drawn vp from the earth and Sea, by attractiue vertue of the Sunne.
                  
                     Meter. Meaſure, or a verſe made by meaſure.
                  
                     Method. A direct way, to teach or doe any thing.
                  
                     Metonymie. A figure in ſpeaking, when the cauſe is put for the effect, the ſubiect for the adiuact, or contrarily.
                  
                     Metropolitan. The chiefe or mother city: an Arch-Biſhop.
                  
                     Microcoſmus. 
                     It properly ſignifieth a little world.
                     This terme is ſometime applyed to man, who is therefore called a Microcoſmus or little world, becauſe his body being compared to the baſer part of the world, and his ſoule to, the bleſſed Angels, ſeemeth to ſignifie, that man is as it were a little world and that the whole world doeth reſemble a great man.
                  
                  
                     Midriſſe. A ſinewie skin paſſing ouerthwarte in mans body, which diuideth the heart and lungs, from the ſtomacke, guttes, & liuer, leſt the vitall parts ſhould bee oftended with any ill vapour comming from them.
                  
                     Migrant. A diſeaſe coming by ſits, eyther in the right or left ſide of the head; cauſed by diſtemperate humours or vapours, brought thither from the veines or arteries at certaine times,
                  
                     Militant. Warring or which is in warfare,
                  
                     Military, Warlike: or belonging to warre.
                  
                     Mimicall. That which belongeth or ſcoffing behaviour, or wanton geſture.
                  
                     Mimicke. A wanton geſter, a counterfet foole.
                  
                     Minatory. Threatning.
                  
                     Minerall. Mettall or any thing digged out of the earth.
                  
                     Miniature. A ſmall proportion: a little figure.
                  
                     Miniuer. A ſine white Furre made of the bellies of Squirrels: ſome ſay it is the skinne of a little white Vermin, breeding in Muſcouia.
                  
                  
                     
                     Minor. The leſſer, the yonger.
                  
                     Minority. A mans time before he be of full age in the lawe, to diſpoſe of his goods and lands.
                  
                     Minotaure. A poeticall monſter, halfe like man, halfe like a Bull. This monſter was kept in the Labyrinth of Candy, and fedde with mans fleſh, where at laſt he was ſlaine by Theſeus, as Poets report
                  
                     Miſcreant. An infidell, a falſe beleeuer.
                  
                     Miſpriſion. An offence inclinable to fellony or treaſon, but not ſo capital, as fellony or treaſon is, in which the offendour ſhall be puniſhed by fine, loſſe of goods, forfeite of lands, during his life, or perpetuall impriſonment, according to the quality of his offence.
                  
                     Miſsion. A ſending.
                  
                     Miſsive. That which witneſſeth ones being ſent.
                  
                     Miſtledon. A plant which hath ſlender branches, and greene thick leaues, growing neuer vpon the ground but vpon other trees. The beſt is that which groweth vpon an oake, and the leaues and fruit hereof are good to ſoften and ripen any cold hard ſwellings.
                  
                     Miſy: A kinde of yellow copperas, ſhining like gold brought out of Egypt and the Ile of Cyprus: It is of a fretting burning nature, as the common copperas is.
                  
                     Mithridate. A great confection like treacle, inuented by King Mithridates, from whom it taketh the name. It is of ſingular vertue againſt poyſon, and hath ſo many and ſtrong ſimples in it, that it ought not to bee taken inwardly before it bee aboue ſixe moneths old.
                  
                     Mittigate. To aſſwage or pacifie.
                  
                     Mitigation. A pacifying, an aſſwaging.
                  
                     Mittimus. A warrant made to conuey an offender to priſon.
                  
                     Mixture. A mingling.
                  
                     Mobility. Aptnes to mooue.
                  
                     Moderate. Meaſurable, temperate, alſo to gouerne

or temper with diſcretion.
                  
                     Moderation. A due proportion, temperance, good diſcretion.
                  
                     Moderator. A diſcreet gouernour, hee that keepeth both parties from beeing too extreame.
                  
                     Moderne. Liuing now in our age.
                  
                     Modicum. A little, a poore pittance.
                  
                     Modulation. A pleaſant tuning or ſweete ſinging.
                  
                     Modwall. A bird which deſtroyeth bees.
                  
                     Moity. Halfe.
                  
                     Moleboute. A great fiſh which maketh a grunting noyſe when he is taken.
                  
                     Moleſtation. A troubling.
                  
                     Mollifie. To make ſoft.
                  
                     Mollification. A making ſoft.
                  
                     Moloch. The name of an Idol, in the vally of Ennon, in the tribe of Beniamin, to which the Iſraelites did abhominably offer their children, in ſacrifice of fire This Idoll was made in the likeneſſe of a Calfe.
                  
                     Moment. A minute, a very little time, ſometime the valew or weight of a thing.
                  
                     Momentany, Of ſhort continuance, which laſteth a very little while.
                  
                     Monarch. A King or Prince that ruleth alone, without any equall.
                  
                     Monarchie. The rule of one Prince alone, or a countrey ſo gouerned.
                  
                     Monaſterle. A religious houſe of Monkes.
                  
                     Monaſticall. Solitarie, belonging to a Monaſterie.
                  
                     Monition. A warning.
                  
                     Monologie. A ſpeaking ſtill of one thing, a long tale of one matter.
                  
                     Monomachie. A ſingle fight betweene two, hand to hand.
                  
                     Monopolie. When a man doth ingroſſe or get commodities into his hands, in ſuch faſhion that none can ſel them, or gaine by them but himſelfe.
                  
                     Moote. To argue or reaſon a caſe in law.
                  
                     Morall. Of or belonging to good manners: ſome time one of good behauiour: ſometimes the meaning of a fable.
                  
                     Moralitie. Goodneſſe of

manners, ciuilitie.
                  
                     Morgage. To lay houſe or land to pawne, in ſuch ſort that they are forfeit, if the money be not repayed at a certaine time.
                  
                     Moroſitie. Frowardneſſe, way wardneſſe.
                  
                     Morpheus. Sleepe, or the God of ſleepe.
                  
                     Mortifie. To kill: ſometime to tame, to breake the courage, or take away ones delight.
                  
                     Mortification. A killing, a pulling away of ones pleaſure.
                  
                     Mortmaine A terme in the Law, when lands were giuen to a houſe of religion, or to a company corporate by the Kings grant; for then ſuch land is ſaid to come into Mortmaine, that is, a dead hand, and by a ſtatue, the King or Lord of whom it is holden may enter into it.
                  
                     Mortuarie. A payment due in ſome places for the buriall of the dead: which is foure ſhillings and foure pence where the goods of the deceaſed party are aboue the value of twentie nobbles, and vnder thirty poundes: ſixe ſhillings and eight pence, where the goods exceede thirtie pounds; and ten ſhillings where the goods amount aboue the valew of threeſcore pounds.
                  
                     Moſaicall. A cunning kinde of painting, which ſeemeth to bee emboſſed and grauen in ſome places.
                  
                     Mother. A diſeaſe in women, when the wombe riſeth with paine vpward. In this diſeaſe the ſmelling to all ſweet ſauours is harmefull, as contrarily the ſmelling to all ſtrong loathſome ſauours, profitable.
                  
                     Motion. A mouing from place to place, or the moouing of a matter to haue it conſidered of.
                  
                     Motiue. A cauſe mouing one to any thing.
                  
                     Motte. A word, or ſhort ſentence.
                  
                     Mountibancke. A baſe deceitfull merchant (eſpecially of Apothecaries drugs) that with impudent lying doth for the moſt part ſell counterfeite ſtuffe to the common people.
                  
                     
                     Mugwet. See Gatherbagge.
                  
                     Mulet. A fine or penalty layd on one.
                  
                     Mullet. A kinde of deynty fith: it is alſo a tearme in Heraldry, which ſignifieth a ſpot deſcending from high, and deuided into fiue corners or ends out of one drop.
                  
                     Mummia. A thing like pitch, ſolde by Apothecaries. Some affirme it is taken out of olde Tombes, being a corrupted humour that droppeth there from embalmed bodies: others ſay it is made of mans fleſh boyled in a pitch. It is hot in the ſecond degree, and good againſt all bru
                        •
                     ſings, ſpetting of bloud, and diuerſe other diſeaſes.
                  
                     Mundane. Worldly.
                  
                     Mundifie. To make cleane.
                  
                     Mundification. A making cleane.
                  
                     Municipall. Of or belonging to the ſtate of a Free-man or Burgeſſe of a Citty.
                  
                     Munificence. Liberality.
                  
                     Munificent. Liberal, bountifull.
                  
                     Munition. Great Ordinance for the warre, great ſhot.
                  
                     Muſcle. In phyſicke it ſignifieth a knitting together of fleſh with veines, arteries and ſinewes, ſeruing ſpecially for the motion of ſome part of the bodie, by reaſon of ſinewes in it.
                  
                     Muſes. The feined goddeſſes of poetry, and muſicke, which were nine in number and daughter vnto Iupiter and Mnemoſyne: Their names were Cleio, Melpomene, Thaleia, Euterpe, Terpſichore, Erato, Calliope, Vtania and Polymneia.
                  
                  
                     Muske. It is brought out of India and other hotte countries, taken there from a beaſt like a Roe, ſauing that it hath two crooked teeth bending inward like two hornes; within which beaſt the muske groweth, conteined in a little bag or bladder. It is comfortable to the heart and braine, by reaſon of the ſweete ſmell thereof; being hotte and dry in operation; and it

conueyeth the vertues of diuerſe medicines, to thoſe the two principall parts.
                  
                     Mutation. A change.
                  
                     Mute. Dumbe.
                  
                     Mutable. Changeable.
                  
                     Mutabilitie. Changeableneſſe.
                  
                     Mutinie. An vprore: a troubleſome aſſembly of people together.
                  
                     Mutinous. Apt to broed quarrels, or diſcord among the people.
                  
                     Mutuall. That which paſſeth one from another.
                  
                     Mutulate. To maime, cut off, or make lame.
                  
                     Muzrole. A ring or band of yron, to come ouer a horſes noſe.
                  
                     Myrobalanes. A fruite growing in Egypt and Syria, like Plummes, or Damſens. There are fiue kinds hereof, diſtinguiſhed by theſe names, Citrina, Inda, Cepula, Emblica, and Bellirica, They are colde in operation, and comfortable to nature; The firſt of theſe purgeth choler, the ſecond melancholie, and, the three laſt fleame.
                  
                     Myrrhe. A Gumme brought out of Arabia, and Aſſyria, of colour betweene white and red, It is hotte and drie in the ſecond degree, or as ſome write in the third, and is often vſed in Phyſicke, being of an opening, cleanſing, and diſſoluing nature. Poets feine that Myrrhe, firſt came by reaſon of a kings daughter, named Myrrha, who for a grieuous crime committed, was by the gods turned into a little, Tree, out of the branches whereof this Gumme ſtill droppeth in manner of teares, as a token of her repentant ſorrow.
                  
                     Myrtle. A little lowe Tree growing in ſome hotte countries, 
                        •
                     hauing ſmall darke leaues, and bearing berries, which are of a binding nature, good to ſtop any iſſue of blood. This myrtle is a

tender plant, not able to endure cold, and was wont to bee worne of the Romane captaines garland-wiſe in triumph, when they had obtained any victorie, without ſlaughter of men: Poets conſecrated this Tree to Venus.
                  
                  
                     Myſter. Vnknowen: ſtrange.
                  
                     Myſticall. Darke, which hath a myſterie in it.
                  
                     Myſterious. Darke ſpoken in a myſtery, hard to vnderſtand.
               
            
            
               N
               
                  
                     NAdir. That point in the heauens which is direct vnder our feet.
                  
                     Naiades. The water Nimphes.
                  
                     Naperie. Linnen for the Table.
                  
                     Narcoticall. That which hath power to prouoke ſleepe, or to make the bodie inſenſible.
                  
                     * Narre. Neerer.
                  
                     Narration. A declaration of the matter whereof one purpoſeth to ſpeake. A report, a diſcourſe.
                  
                     Natiue. Naturall: The place where one was borne.
                  
                     Naturalize. To make naturall.
                  
                     Naue. The middle part of a wheele.
                  
                     Nauigable. Any water where ſhips may faile.
                  
                     Nauigation. A ſailing by Sea.
                  
                     Nauigator. A Sayler: a Marriner
                  
                     Nazarite. In Hebrew it ſignifieth a man ſeparated or diuided. The Iewes ſo called thoſe that had vowed themſelues for ſometime to God: And theſe Nazarites, while their vow laſted, where to abſtaine from wine and Grapes, either greene or dry, and generally from all whatſoeuer came from the vine tree or might make a man drunke. They alſo cut not their haire, but ſuffered it ſtill to grow, and obſerued diuers other ceremonies. The date of their vowe being expired, they preſented themſelues to

the Prieſt, who offered a ſacrifice for them, and then was the Nazarites haire cut, and burnt with the ſacrifice. After which time it was lawfull, for the Nazarites to drinke wine as before.
                  
                     Necromancy. See Diuination.
                  
                     Nectar. Poets faine it to be a delicate pleaſant liquor, which the gods vſed to drinke.
                  
                     Nefarious. Very wicked.
                  
                     Negation. A denying.
                  
                     Negatiue. A denyall, or that which denyeth.
                  
                     Negotiate. To trafike in merchandiſe: to follow much buſineſſe.
                  
                     Negotiation. A buying and ſelling: a trafike of merchandiſe.
                  
                     Neophyte. Any thing lately planted or ſet: wherefore it is often taken for one, who is newly conuerted to the faith: a nouice, or young learner.
                  
                     Nerue. A ſinew.
                  
                     Neuter. Neither on the one ſide, nor the other. An indifferent party.
                  
                     Neutrality, A retchleſſe beeing on neither ſide.
                  
                     Nicotiane. The hearbe Tobacco, ſo called of a French mans name who firſt brought the knowledge of this herbe into France.
                  
                     Nieſe. In our common Lawe, it ſignifieth a bond woman.
                  
                     Niter. A ſubſtance like Salt, but ſometime of a light red colour. It is hot and dry, of a ſtrong fretting nature: ſome take it to be ſalt Peter.
                  
                     Nobilitate. To make Noble.
                  
                     Nocent. Hurtfull.
                  
                     Nocturne. Pſalmes and Prayers vſed at certaine houres of the night.
                  
                     Nocturnall. Belonging to the night.
                  
                     N
                           •
                        linie tangere. A diſeaſe by ſome ſo called. It is a peece of fleſh growing in the noſtrill, in ſuch ſort that it often ſtoppeth the winde.
                  
                     Nombrill. In Herauldry it ſignifieth the lower part

of a ſcuchion which is diuided by the breadth, into three euen parts.
                  
                     Nominate. To name, to appoint.
                  
                     Nomination. A naming.
                  
                     Nonage. A childes age vnder 21. yeares old.
                  
                     Nonreſidencie. Vnlawfull abſence from the place of of ones charge.
                  
                     Nonreſident. Abſent from his charge, or where hee ought to dwell.
                  
                     Nones. In March, May, Iulie, and October, they art the ſixe dayes, next following the firſt day: In other months, they are the foure dayes next after the firſt; but the laſt of theſe dayes is properly called Nones, and the other reckoned backward according to the number diſtant frō the Nones; as the third, fourth, or fift Nones. They are called Nones, becauſe they are iuſt nine daies before the Ides.
                  
                  
                     Nonplus: No more, a terme ſomtime vſed, when a man can ſpeake no further, or make no anſwer to an obiection.
                  
                     Nonſuite. The letting of a ſuite fall.
                  
                     Norroy. One of the Herauldes, hauing the ſame authority beyond Trent northward; that Clarentius hath from Trent Southward.
                  
                     Notice. Knowledge.
                  
                     Notifie. To make knowne.
                  
                     Nouelty. Newes, a newe matter.
                  
                     Nouice. A young learner, o
                        •
                     e that hath no experience.
                  
                     Nouity. Newneſſe.
                  
                     Nullifidian. Of no honeſtie, of no religion.
                  
                     Nullity. Nothing.
                  
                     Numeration. A numbering.
                  
                     Nuncupation. A naming.
                  
                     Nuptiall. Of or belonging to marriage.
                  
                     Nutriment. Nouriſhment.
                  
                     Nutritiue. Which nouriſheth.
                  
                     Nymph. A Virgine, a faire young Maide.
               
            
            
               
               O
               
                  
                     OBdurate. To harden, alſo hard, or vnrelenting.
                  
                     Obduration. A hardening.
                  
                     Obeliske. A great ſquare ſtone, broad beneath, and riſing of an admirable height, ſmaller and ſmaller, toward the toppe. There were diuers of theſe Obeliskes in Egypt, conſecrated in honour of the Sunne: whereof foure were principall erected by King Sochis, of two hundred and forty yards high: In time of the Romane Emperours, many Obeliskes were likewiſe ſet at Rome.
                  
                     Obiect. That which is placed before ones eyes, or the thing that one laboureth to attaine.
                  
                     Obiection. A laying to ones charge.
                  
                     Obiurgate. To chide, to reprooue ſharpely.
                  
                     Obiurgation. A chiding.
                  
                     Oblation. A ſacrifice, an offering.
                  
                     Oblige. To binde.
                  
                     Oblique. Crooked, ouerthwart.
                  
                     Obliquitie. Crookedneſſe.
                  
                     Obliterate. To blot out.
                  
                     Obliuion Forgetfulneſſe.
                  
                     Obliuious. Forgetfull.
                  
                     Obloquie. Slander: euill report.
                  
                     Obnoxious. Subiect to danger.
                  
                     Obſcene. Filthy, abhominable, diſhoneſt.
                  
                     Obſcenity. Filthy talke.
                  
                     Obſcure. Darke.
                  
                     Obſcurity. Darkneſſe.
                  
                     Obſecrate. To intreate▪ to beſeech.
                  
                     Obſecration. A beſeeching.
                  
                     Obſequie. A Funerall: a ſolemne buriall.
                  
                     Obſequious, Dutifull: diligent, ſeruiceable.
                  
                     Obſeruance, Diligent heede, or attendance.
                  
                     Obſeruant. Dutifully watching diligent.
                  
                     Obſeſſe. To beſiege: or compaſſe about: A man is ſaid to bee obſeſt, when an euill ſpirit followeth him, troubling him diuers

times and ſeeking oportunity to enter into him.
                  
                     Obſolete. Olde, ſtale, growne out of vſe.
                  
                     Obſtacle. A hinderance or lette.
                  
                     Obſtruction. A ſtopping, commonly in the body.
                  
                     Obteſtation. A beſeeching.
                  
                     Obtrectations. A ſlandering behind ones backe.
                  
                     Obtrude. To thruſt forth, to caſt vpon one.
                  
                     Obtuſe. Dull; blunt.
                  
                     Occidentall. Of or belonging to the Weſt.
                  
                     Occurre. To come in the way: to meete with one.
                  
                     Occurrent. That which happeneth or commeth in the way.
                  
                     Ocean. The vniuerſall maine Sea, compaſſing the greater part of the earth.
                  
                     Octances. Eight dayes next after ſome principall feaſts of the yeare.
                  
                     Ode. A ſong.
                  
                     Odious. Hatefull.
                  
                     Odour. A ſweet ſmell.
                  
                     Odoriferous. Sweet ſmelling.
                  
                     Oeconomie. The knowledge of wel ordering matters blonging to houſhold.
                  
                     Oeconomicall. Of or belonging to houſhold.
                  
                     Oecumenicall. Vniuerſall generall.
                  
                     Oedeme. A wateriſh ſwelling, in the body without paine, cauſed by ſome flegmaticke or vaporous humour, and leauing a hollow dent or pit therein, if one preſſe it downe with the finger.
                  
                     Offenſive. Which offendeth.
                  
                     Officious, Seruiceable▪ willing to pleaſe.
                  
                     Officiall. An Officer.
                  
                     Olibanum. The right frankincenſe, which is a Gumme, growing in Arabia; whereof there are two kindes: the femall or ſmaller frankincenſe, and the male, the greater whitet, and ſtronger: of which Virgill ſpeaketh, Eclog. 8. Burne Verucine fatte, and ſtrong male frankincenſe. It is hotte and dry, good for perfumes to correct infectious

ayre, and to be put in plaiſters for greenwounds. The weight of two or three Wheate cornes ſwallowed downe, doth helpe digeſtion, and maketh the breath ſwette. Where note that the right Olibanum or Frankincenſe will burne like a candle, and that which is counterfeit conſume away in ſmoake.
                  
                     Oligarchie. A common wealth where a few principall perſons gouerne all the reſt.
                  
                     Olympicke games. Solemne games of running, riding, wraſtling, and other feates of actiuitie, kept euery fift yeare on a high hill in Greece, called Olympus. The reward to thoſe that ouercame in theſe trials, was nothing but a Garland of Oliue branches, leaſt couetouſneſſe, rather then vertue ſhould make men ſtriue for victorie: which was the cauſe that Tigranes Sonne of Artabanus, ſeruing in the huge armie of King Xerxes, who then inuaded Greece, ſaid to Mardonius, who had perſwaded the King to that enterprize; againſt what a people haue you brought vs to fight, that more eſteeme honour then mony? Thinking it impoſſible to ouercome ſuch Nations as were ſo affected.
                  
                     Omen. A hauſening.
                  
                     Ominous. Hauſening that which ſignifieth ſom good or bad lucke to enſue.
                  
                     Omiſsion. A letting ſlip: a leaning vndone.
                  
                     Omit. To forbeare: to leaue vndone.
                  
                     Omnipotencie. Almightineſſe.
                  
                     Omnipotent. Almightie.
                  
                     Omniregencie. The hauing all authoritie in ones owne hands.
                  
                     Onerate. To burden or ouercharge.
                  
                     Onyx. A precious ſtone found in the Mountaines of Arabia, of the colour of a mans naile. Some write, that it is congealed of a iuyce dropping from a tree called Onytha, which is the cauſe that it ſmelleth ſweet being caſt into the fire, as alſo that it is often found

with diuers pictures in it, being eaſily therein faſhioned, before the ſtone bee throughly hardened.
                  
                     Opall. A precious ſtone of diuers colours, wherein appeareth the fierie ſhining of the Carbuncle, the purple colour of the Amethyſt, and the greene ſhew of the Emerald, very ſtrangely mixed together.
                  
                     Operate. To worke.
                  
                     Operatiue. Which worketh, or hath power to worke.
                  
                     Ophthalmie. An inflammation of the outer skin of the eye, cauſed by hot fretting humours flowing thither.
                  
                     Opinionate. Bent to his own opinion: ſelfe-willed.
                  
                     Opium. The iuice of black Poppie, ſold dry by Apothecaries. It is ſometime vſed in Phyſicke to make one ſleepe, or to aſſwage exceſſiue paine; but then it muſt bee mixed with other things diſcretion; for taken alone it will caſt one into a deadly ſleepe; beeing cold and dry in the fourth degree.
                  
                     Opobalſamum. See Balme.
                  
                     Opopanax. A ſappe or liquor flowing in ſome hot Countries out of a Plant called Panax. It is brought hither dry, being of a yellow colour on the outſide, and white within, if it bee not ouerſtale. It is good againſt cold ſhiuerings of agues, & to be drunke with meade, of ſuch as are ſquat or bruiſed therein.
                  
                     Oportunely. Fitly, in due time.
                  
                     Oppilation. A ſtopping.
                  
                     Opponent. He which appoſeth, or asketh queſtions.
                  
                     Oppoſe. To obiect; to ſet one thing againſt another.
                  
                     Oppoſite. Contrarie, or placed ouer againſt.
                  
                     Oppoſition. A putting, ſetting, or ſtanding againſt.
                  
                     Opprobrious. Reprochful, naughtie, wicked.
                  
                     Oppugne. To reſiſt, to fight againſt.
                  
                     Optike. Belonging to the ſight.
                  
                     Option. A wiſh.
                  
                     Opulencie. Great wealth, riches.
                  
                     
                     Or. Gold, or golden colour.
                  
                     Oracle. An anſwere or counſel giuen by God. Among the Gentiles, theſe Oracles were but illuſions of the diuel, who anſwered for the moſt part doubtfully in Idols, to queſtions or demands made vnto him. There were two ſuch principall places of Oracles: One of Ammon or Iupiter, in Lybia, which was founded vpon this occaſion. When Bacchus after his conqueſts in India, came into the hot burning countrey of Lybia, and wanted there water to releeue his armie, it is ſaid that he praied to his father Iupiter to helpe him in that diſtreſſe: whereupon there appeared a Ramme vnto him, which ſtamping vpon the ground with his foote, cauſed a fountaine forthwith to ſpring in the place. Bacchus obtaining by this meanes his deſire, built a temple there of exceeding huge greatneſſe, in the middle whereof, hee erected an Idoll to Iupiter, in the likeneſſe of a Ram; which Idol afterward gaue Oracles, and was called the Oracle of Ammon; becauſe it was ſituated in a dry ſandy place; for Ammos in Greeke ſignifieth Sand. The other Oracle was at Delphi, a Cittie of Beotia in Greece, where Apollo was ſaid to giue anſwers.
                  
                     Oratorie. A place to pray in.
                  
                     Oratour. One that pleadeth cauſes, an eloquent ſpeaker.
                  
                     Orbe. Any perfect round circle hollow in the midſt.
                  
                     Orbicular, Round like an Orbe.
                  
                     Orchall. A ſtone like Allume, vſed ſomtime by Diers to raiſe a red colour.
                  
                     Ordinarie. A Iudge that hath ordinary iuriſdiction in Eccleſiaſticall cauſes.
                  
                     Ordure. Dung, filth.
                  
                     Orgall. The lees of Wine dried, vſed by Diers to make their cloth to drinke in the colour throughly.
                  
                     Organicall. That which conſiſteth of diuers ſubſtantiall parts & members.
                  
                     
                     Organiſt. A player vpon Organs.
                  
                     Organ Ling. A kinde of Ling brought out of the North Countries.
                  
                     Orgies. Rude ceremonies inſtituted by the Poet Orpheus, to bee kept euery third yeare in the honour of Bacchus.
                  
                  
                     Orient. The Eaſt.
                  
                     Orient Pearles. Gliſtring Pearles of great price.
                  
                     Orientall. Of, or belonging to the Eaſt.
                  
                     Orifice The mouth of any thing, or the outward hole of a wound.
                  
                     Originall. The firſt beginning. The firſt of any thing.
                  
                     Oringos. Certaine rootes growing in ſome places, neere the Sea ſide. The Plant is called Sea hollie, bearing prickly broad leaues, and round ſharpe prickly heads, ſet about with ſmall ſkie coloured floures. Theſe rootes are very long and deepe into the ground, of an aſhie colour in the outſide and full of ioynts. They vſe, ſcraping of the outer rinde of theſe roots, & pulling out the pith, to preſerue them by boyling them with Sugar or Hony, & a little Cinamon and Ginger; which preſerue is very good for aged people, and ſuch as are conſumed in their bodie, to nouriſh them againe.
                  
                     Oriſons. Prayers.
                  
                     Ornament. A garniſhing.
                  
                     Ornature. A garniſhing, a ſetting forth.
                  
                     Ornifie. To garniſh.
                  
                     Orphan. He that wanteth Father and Mother: friendleſſe.
                  
                     Orpment. A ſoft yellow kind of Arſenik, like vnto Brimſtone: It is commonly taken for Rats-bane.
                  
                     Orthodoxall. That which belongeth to a true and right faith, or Religion.
                  
                     Orthographie. The art of writing words truly; as Sonne of man, with an O: Sunne that ſhineth, with the vowell V.
                  
                  
                     Orthographiſt. Hee that profeſſeth or is skilfull in Orthographie.
                  
                     Oſanna. See Hoſanna.
                  
                  
                     Oſprey. A kinde of rauenous Fowle, which houereth

ouer pooles to take Fiſh.
                  
                     Oſtentation. Boaſting; vaine craking or vaunting. A proude ſetting foorth to ſhew.
                  
                     Ostiary. An officer hauing authority to keep vnworthy perſons out of the Church.
                  
                     Oſtraciſme. A baniſhment among the Athenians for ten years, ſo called becauſe they vſed to write the names of the party ſo condemned, in Oyſter ſhelles. This puniſhment was chiefely vſed, to abate the ouergreat power of noble men.
                  
                     Ouall. A long round circle made like an egge, ſuch as pictures are ſometimes drawne in.
                  
                     Ouerture. An ouerturning, a ſudden change.
                  
                     Oxgang. Thirteene acres of land.
                  
                     Oxymel. A ſirupe made of Hony, Vineger and water, good to cut and clenſe groſſe flegmatick humors: ſometime there are boyled certen roots and ſeeds with it; and then it is called Oxymell compoſitum: ſometime it is made with Hony, Vineger, and the Sea Onion, and then it is named Oymel Scilliticum which alſo is of two ſorts, to witte, ſimple and compound.
               
            
            
               P.
               
                  
                     PAcal. A tree in India ſo called.
                  
                     Pacification. An appeaſing or pacifying.
                  
                     Pacificatory. Which appeaſeth or pacifieth.
                  
                     Pact. A bargaine.
                  
                     Page. A written ſide of a leaſe of paper.
                  
                     Pagan. A Heathen: an infidell.
                  
                     Paganiſme. The beleefe of the Pagans.
                  
                     Paico. An hearbe in India, good againſt the griefe of the ſtone in the Kidnies, which commeth of windineſſe or colde cauſes.
                  
                     Palate. The vpper hollow part of the mouth, wherin lieth the ſenſe of taſting, as in the tongue.
                  
                     
                     Paleſtricall. Of, or belonging to wraſtling. Alſo that which is done decently with comely geſture of the body.
                  
                     Palinode. A recantation or denying of an opinion formerly maintained.
                  
                     * Palliard. A Whooremonger.
                  
                     * Palliardiſe. Whooredome.
                  
                     Palliate. To cloke, to couer.
                  
                     Pallizado. Great poſts ſet vp in the entry to a Camp for a defence againſt great ſhot.
                  
                     Palme. The tree which beareth Dates, growing plentifully in the holy land. There are of theſe trees found alſo in ſome parts of Egypt, but they beare no fruite, or if they beare any it is vnpleaſant. The branches of this tree, were wont to be carried as a token of victory, becauſe they are of that nature, that they wil ſtil ſhoot vpward, though oppreſſed with neuer ſo great weight, & the leaues thereof neuer fall. Of this tree there is male and female: the male beareth only bloſſomes & no fruit, but the female beares both. In olde times, ſome people vſed to write with Paper, made of leaues of the Palme tree.
                  
                     Palmer. A poore pilgrime, that viſiteth all holy places.
                  
                     Palmiſter. He that telleth ones fortune by looking in his hand.
                  
                     Palmiſtry. See Diuination.
                  
                     Palpable. That which may be felt with the fingers: manifeſt, notorious.
                  
                     Pamphlet. A little booke.
                  
                     Pandar. A baſe fellow that keepeth or attendeth vpon Harlots.
                  
                     Pandect. A booke treating of all matters: alſo the Volume of the Ciuill Lawe called Digeſts, is ſo called.
                  
                     Panegyricall. That which is ſpoken flatteringly in praiſe of ſome great perſon: Alſo it ſignifieth, ſtately, honorable, magnificent, or a ſpeech made of many great matters together.
                  
                     Panther. A fierce wilde

beaſt, hauing a ſweet ſmel, and a faire ſpotted skinne, wherewith▪ ſhee allureth other beaſtes to looke on her; hiding her head leaſt it ſhould make them afraid, and by this means, getteth her prey more eaſily. The male of this beaſt is the libard. The panthers (as is written) haue on their ſhoulder a ſpotte, which groweth and waineth like the moon. This beaſt is ſo fearfull of the Hyena, that in his preſence ſhee dareth not doe any thing: in ſo much that if one haue but a peece of the skinne of a Hyena, the Panther will not touch him, and it is ſayde, that if both their skins be hanged together, the haire of the Panthers skin will fall of.
                  
                     Panyme. A heathen, a gentile.
                  
                     Parable. A ſimilitude or reſemblance made of a thing.
                  
                     Paracelſian. A phyſition that followeth the method of Paracelſus, and his manner of curing, which was by exceeding ſtrong oyles and waters extracted out of the nature of things.
                  
                     Paraclete. A comforter.
                  
                     Paradiſe. A garden or pleaſant place.
                  
                     Paradox. An opinion maintained cōtrary to the common allowed opinion as if one affirme that the earth doth mooue round, and the heauens ſtand ſtil.
                  
                     Paragon. A beautifull peece, a louely creature.
                  
                     Paragraph. It properly ſignifieth any marke ſet in a margent, to note the different diſcourſes in a booke, or long chapter, wherefore ſuch diuiſions in writing, are commonly called Paragraphs.
                  
                     Paralipomenon. Omitted, or not ſpoken of: There are two bookes in the old teſtamēt ſo called, becauſe many worthy hiſtories omitted in the bookes of Kings, are there related.
                  
                     Parallels. 
                     Lines running of an equall diſtance from each other, which can neuer meete, though they be drawn infinitely in length, thus, 
                           parallel lines
                        .
                     
                        In Aſtronomie there are fiue ſuch imagined lines, running circlewiſe about the round compaſſe of the heavens. The firſt is the Equinoctiall line iuſt in the middle of the world betweene the two Poles. The ſecond northward from the Equinoctiall, is the Tropike of Cancer, to which line the ſunne commeth about the twelfth day of Iune. The third (yet more northward) is the northerne circle, within 23. degrees and 50. minutes of the North pole. The fourth line is the Tropike of Capricorne, declining ſouthward frō the Equinoctiall, as much as the Tropike of Cancer doth northward, and to this line the ſunne commeth about the twelfth of December. The fift and laſt line is the ſoutherne circle, beeing as neere the ſouth pole, as the northerne circle (before ſpoken of) is to the North pole.
                  
                  
                     Paralogiſme. 
                     A deceitfull ſyllogiſme, a manner of arguing which ſeemeth true, when it is not as in ſaying, Hee that affirmeth William to be a lining creature, ſayth true.
                     
                     
                        He that affirmeth William to bee a horſe, affirmeth him to be a living creature.
                     
                     
                        Therefore he that affirmeth William to bee a horſe ſaith true.
                     
                  
                  
                     Paramounte. The chiefe Lord of the fee.
                  
                     Paramour. A Sweete heart, one dearely beloued.
                  
                     Paraphraſe. A free manner of tranſlation or interpretation, wherein a man doth not tye himſelfe to expreſſe euery word as it lyeth in the coppy, but to explicate and adorne the matter more at large, and to abridge ſomethings, yet ſtill keeping the ſenſe of the Author, any ſuch tranſlatiō is called a Paraphraſticall tranſlation.
                  
                     Paraſite. A Flatterer, a trencher friend. One that is ſtill hanging on ſome rich man, and flatteringly feedeth his humor becauſe hee would bee partaker of his good cheere.
                  
                     
                     Parcitie. Sparingneſſe, niggardneſſe.
                  
                     Parentheſis. Any word or ſentence, thruſt into an other ſentence, in ſuch ſort that it may bee left out in ſpeaking, and yet the ſenſe of the matter ſtill remaine whole. Such word or ſentence is commonly marked with two halfe circles (thus)
                  
                     Paricide. One that hath killed his owne Father or Mother. Among the auncient Romans if any committed ſo horrible a crime, hee was ſowed aliue in a leather bag, with a Cocke, an Ape, and an Adder put to him (and as ſome write, a Dog) & ſo were throwne together into the riuer Tyber, where the miſerable Caytife muſt needs die a lingering death, being depriued of the vſe of al elements, ſaue onely a little aire, to draw his wretched life in torment the longer.
                  
                     Paritie. Equalitie, likeneſſe.
                  
                     Parley. A talking together.
                  
                     Paroxyſme. The ſharpe aſſault or fit of an ague.
                  
                     Parſimonie. Thriftineſſe, good husbandrie.
                  
                     Parſimonious. Thriftie, ſparing.
                  
                     Particulariſe. To draw or deuide things in ſpeaking, into certaine particulars or ſmall parcels.
                  
                     Partiſan. A weapon like a Halberd.
                  
                     Paſchall. Of or belonging to the feaſt of Eaſter.
                  
                     Paſche. The feaſt of Eaſter.
                  
                     Paſſant. Walking, paſſing along.
                  
                     Paſſible. Which may ſuffer, or feele paine.
                  
                     Paſſion. A ſuffering.
                  
                     Paſtor. A ſhepheard.
                  
                     Paſtorall. Of or belonging to a ſhepheard.
                  
                     Paternall. Fatherly.
                  
                     Patheticall. Paſſionate, or that which mooueth paſſions in a man.
                  
                     Patriarch. A great aunceſtour, a great Biſhop or father.
                  
                     Patrimonie. Goods or lands left one by his father, or ſome other aunceſtour.
                  
                     Patrone. A defender, a

great friend that ſupporteth one.
                  
                     Patronage. Defence.
                  
                     Patronize To defend.
                  
                     Paucitie. Fewneſſe.
                  
                     Pauice. A great large ſhield that couereth the whole bodie.
                  
                     Pauilion. A tent for war.
                  
                     Paunage. The feeding of ſwine in any forreſt, wood, or other place with maſt.
                  
                     Peccaui. I haue offended.
                  
                     Pectorall. Belonging to the breaſt, or which hangeth before the breaſt.
                  
                     Pecuniarie. Of or belonging to money.
                  
                     Pellican. A bird that wanting foode, feedeth her yong ones (as is ſaid) with her owne blood.
                  
                     Pellmell. Confuſedly, running diſorderly together.
                  
                     Penall. Of or belonging to paine or puniſhment.
                  
                     Pendant. Hanging downward.
                  
                     Penetrable. Which may be pearſed through.
                  
                     Penetrate. To pearſe thorough.
                  
                     Penetentiall. Belonging to penance or repentance.
                  
                     Penitent. He that is heartily ſortie and repenteth.
                  
                     Penon. An enſigne or banner borne in watre.
                  
                     Penſion. A yeerely fee or wages for ſome ſeruice done.
                  
                     Penſiue. Sad, heauy.
                  
                     Pentateuch. The fiue bookes of Moſes, to wit, Geneſis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri, and Denteronomie.
                  
                  
                     Pentecoſt. The feaſt of Whitſontide, ſo called becauſe it is fiftie daies after Eaſter. For Pentecoſt in Greeke ſignifieth the fiftieth.
                  
                     Penurie. Want, pouertie.
                  
                     Penurious. Poore, in want.
                  
                     Perambulation. A walking.
                  
                     Perceptible. Which may be perceiued.
                  
                     Perch. A kinde of fiſh, It ſignifieth alſo a rod or long pole vſed in meaſuring of land, beeing of 16. foote & a halfe in length, and in ſome places more.
                  
                     Percullis. The name of an office of one of the Purſiuants at armes.
                  
                     Percuſſion. A ſtriking.
                  
                     
                     Perdition. Deſtruction.
                  
                     Perdurable. Laſting, of long continuance.
                  
                     Peregrination. A trauelling into a ſtrange land.
                  
                     Peremptorie. Reſolute, ſhort, quicke.
                  
                     Perennitie. Long continuance.
                  
                     Perfidious. Treacherous, not to be truſted.
                  
                     Perfidiouſneſſe. Treacherie, diſloyaltie.
                  
                     Perfunctory. Careleſly don.
                  
                     Perigeon. The neereſt diſtance of the Planets from the earth.
                  
                     Period. The perfect end of a ſentence, marked commonly with a full point thus (.)
                  
                     Peripatetickes. Philoſophers of the ſect of Ariſtotle: ſo called becauſe they walked in their readings and diſputations: for Peripatco, in Greeke, ſignifieth to walke.
                  
                     Periphraſis. A long ſpeaking, a ſpeaking of one word by many.
                  
                     Periſcians. People dwelling ſo neere either of the two Poles, that their ſhadowes goe round about them like a wheele.
                  
                     Periutie. A forſwearing.
                  
                     Permiſſion. A Sufferance, leaue.
                  
                     Permutation. A changing
                  
                     Pernicious. Deadly, dangerous.
                  
                     Peroration. The concluſion of a long ſpeech or Oration.
                  
                     Perpendicular. Directly, downe right.
                  
                     Perpetrate. To commit any vnlawfull thing.
                  
                     Perpetuitie. Euerlaſtingneſſe.
                  
                     Perplexitie. Great doubtfulneſſe, intangledneſſe.
                  
                     Perquiſits. Profits comming to lords of mannors by caſualtie, or vncertainly as eſcheats, heriots, releefes, ſtrayes, forfeitures.
                  
                     Perſiſt. To continue to the end.
                  
                     Perſonate. To repreſent the perſon of another.
                  
                     Perſpicuitie. Cleereneſſe, plainneſſe.
                  
                     Perſpicuous. Cleere, plain, manifeſt.
                  
                     Perſwaſiue. Which doth or may perſwade.
                  
                     Pertinacie. Stubbornnes, wilfulneſſe.
                  
                     Perturbe. To trouble.
                  
                     
                     Penurbation. A trouble, a great diſquietneſſe.
                  
                     Peruerſe. Froward, contrarie.
                  
                     Peruert. To corrupt or marre: to turne one from good to bad.
                  
                     Peſtiferous. Mortal, deadly, poyſonous.
                  
                     Petition. A ſuite, a demand, a requeſt.
                  
                     Petroll. A ſubſtance ſtrained out of the naturall Bitumen ſpoken of before. It is for the moſt part white, and ſomtime black, and being once ſet on fire, can hardly be quenched.
                  
                     Pettie. Being placed before other words, it ſignifieth little.
                  
                     Pettie Sargeantie. A tenure of lands, holden of the King, by yeelding to him, a Buckler, Arrow, Bow, or ſuch like ſeruice.
                  
                     Petulancie. Wanton ſaucineſſe, malepart boldnes.
                  
                     Phantaſme. A viſion or imagined appearance.
                  
                     Phariſee. A ſect of Iewes, profeſſing more holineſſe then the common ſort did. They wore on their foreheads little ſcrols, wherein were written the ten commandements; and were called Phariſes, of the Hebrew word Phares, which ſignifieth to diuide or ſeparate, becauſe by their feined deuotion they ſeemed to ſeparate themſelues from the other people.
                  
                     Pheere. See Feere.
                  
                     Phenix. The rareſt Bird in the world. It is written, that there was neuer any but one of this kind liuing at one time, and that only in Arabia; of the bigneſſe of an Eagle, of a purple colour, hauing a bright colour of golde about his necke, a goodly faire taile, and a tuft of feathers vpon his head. He liueth aboue 600. yeares, and being old, buildeth him a neſt of Cinnamon and the twigs of Frankincence, which he filleth with ſpices, & then with the labouring of his wings in the Sun, ſetting it on fire, is there conſumed in it; out of whoſe Aſhes there groweth a Worme, and of the worme another Phenix.
                  
                     Pheon. A terme in Heraldry:

It ſignifieth the head of a Dart.
                  
                     Philoſopher. A louer of wiſedome. It is commonly vſed for a learned man, of great knowledge in the nature of things.
                  
                     Philoſophy. The ſtudy of wiſedome: a deepe knowledge in the nature of things. There are three different kindes hereof 1, Rationall Philoſophy, including, Grammar, Logik, and Rhetoricke. 2 Naturall Philoſophy teaching the nature of all things, and conteining beſides Arithmetick, Muſick, Geometry and Aſtronomy. 3. Morall Philoſophy, which conſiſteth in the knowledge and practiſe of ciuility and good behauiour.
                  
                     Philtre. An amorous potion: a drinke to procure loue.
                  
                     Phlebotomy. Letting of blood. Phyſitions (as is written) learned this practiſe firſt of a beaſt called Hyppopotamus, liuing, in the riuer Nilus; which beeing of a rauenous nature, and therefore often ouercharged with much eating, is wont to ſeek in the banks, for ſome ſharpe ſtubbe of a Reed; vpon which pricking his leg, he thereby eaſeth his ful body, ſtopping the bleeding afterward with mud.
                  
                     Phlegmon. A hot ſwelling of inflamed blood.
                  
                     Phraſe. A manner of ſpeaking.
                  
                     Phylactery. A ſcroll of parchment which the Phariſes wrote on their foreheads, hauing the ten commandements written in it.
                  
                     Phyſignomie. An arte to iudge of ones nature or conditions by his viſage and forme of his body.
                  
                     Phytoniſſe. A woman poſſeſſed with a ſpirit, & therby foretelling things to come.
                  
                     Pia mater. The inmoſt skin which incloſeth the braine round about.
                  
                     Pickage. Money paide at Faires for breaking the ground to ſet vp boothes.
                  
                     Piety. Godlineſſe.
                  
                     Pigmen. A painting.
                  
                     Pight. Set or placed.
                  
                     Pine tree. A tall ſtrong

tree not ſubiect to wormes or rottenneſſe, and therefore much vſed, where it groweth to make ſhippes. The leaues of this tree are hard pointed, ſharpe and narrow, continuing greene all the yeare, and the ſhaddow thereof will not ſuffer any plant to grow vnder it.
                  
                     Pinipinichi. A milkie iuyce drawne out of certaine trees in India. It is ſomewhat thick and clam, my, and with great vehemency purgeth cholerike humours.
                  
                     Pinnas. A fruite growing in India, good for the ſtomacke and heart.
                  
                     Pioner. A labourer in an army, vſed to caſt trenches or vndermine forces.
                  
                     Pious. Godly, vertuous.
                  
                     Pipe. A meaſure of halfe a Tunne; that is 126. gallons.
                  
                     Piepowders. A court held in faires for redreſſe of diſorders theſe committed.
                  
                     Pirate. A robber by ſea.
                  
                     Piſtacke. See Fiſtik-nuts.
                  
                     Placable. Gentle, milde, that will ſoone bee pacified.
                  
                     Placability. Gentlenes, mildenes.
                  
                     Placard. A licence to maintain vnlawfull games.
                  
                     Plaintife. Hee that complaineth.
                  
                     Plane tree. A tree wide ſpreading, with broade leaues, in times paſt greatly eſteemed in Italy onely for the ſhadow thereof, in ſo much that they often bedewed it with wine to make it grow. The Romans were wont to banquet much vnder theſe trees.
                  
                     Planet. A wandering Starre mooued onely in a ſpheare by himſelf: there are ſeauen ſuch Starres, to wit, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moone, Saturne, Iupiter, and Mars. They are called Planets of a greeke word ſignifying to wander or goe aſtray, becauſe theſe Starres paſſe through the twelue ſignes, and are ſometimes wide diſtant, ſometimes neere to each other.
                  
                     
                     Plaudite. A ſigne of reioycing: a clapping of the hands.
                  
                     Plauſible. That which greatly pleaſeth or reioyceth.
                  
                     Plebeian. One of the common people.
                  
                     Pleget A linnen cloath dipped in any water to waſh, or lay to a ſore place
                  
                     Plenary. Full, whole, intire.
                  
                     Plenitude. Fulneſſe.
                  
                     Pleuriſie. A diſeaſe when the inward skin of the ribs in mans body, is idflamed with to much blood, flowing vnnaturally to it. In this diſeaſe there is a hardneſſe to fetch breath, a cough, a continuall ague, and a pricking paine about the ribs.
                  
                     Plonkets. A kind of wollen cloth.
                  
                     Plume. A feather.
                  
                     Plurall. More than one.
                  
                     Plurality. The being or hauing more than one.
                  
                     Poeme. Any ſhort matter, wittingly contriued in verſe.
                  
                     Poeſie. The writing of a Poet; a Poets worke.
                  
                     Poet. One that writeth well in verſe.
                  
                     Poetaſter. A counterfeite Poet: a bad Poet.
                  
                     Poeticall. Like a Poet: belonging to a Poet,
                  
                     Poetize. To write like a Poet.
                  
                     Poetrie. The ſame that Poeſie is.
                  
                     Poiſe. Weight, heauines.
                  
                     Pole. The end of the axle-tree whereon the heauens do moue; that part or point of the heauens, which neuer moueth. There are two ſuch Poles of the world; one called the north pole, viſible to vs in the North, farre aboue the earth: the other called the ſouth pole, farre out of our ſight, beeing as much vnder the earth in the South, as the North pole is aboue it.
                  
                     Poliſh. To make faire or bright.
                  
                     Polite. Bright, trim, fine,
                  
                     Pollute. To defile.
                  
                     Pollution. A defiling, an vncleanneſſe.
                  
                     Polygamie. The hauing of moe wiues than one: often marriage.
                  
                     Polype. A fiſh hauing many

feete, and changing colour often: wherfore inconſtant perſons are ſometimes ſaid to be Polypes.
                  
                     Polypodium Okeferne: a kind of hearbe like Ferne, growing much about the roots of oakes: The roote of this hearbe is vſed in Phiſicke to purge melancholike, groſſe, and phlegmaticke humors.
                  
                     Pompe. A great ſhew, a ſolemne traine.
                  
                     Pompou
                           •
                        . Stately, very ſolemne.
                  
                     Ponderous. Heauy, of great weight.
                  
                     Pontage. Money paid toward the maintenance and repayring of bridges.
                  
                     Pontificacy. Popedome.
                  
                     Pontificall. Stately, honorable, Biſhoplike.
                  
                     Popular. In great fauour with the common people.
                  
                     Populous. Full of people.
                  
                     Pores. Little holes in the skin; out of which ſweate droppeth, or vapors breath out of the body.
                  
                     Porphyrie. A kinde of red marble.
                  
                     Port. A hauen, or hauen towne, ſometime a ſtately crame or behauiour.
                  
                     Portable Which may eaſily be carried.
                  
                     Portage. Carriage, tranſporting.
                  
                     Portend. To foreſhew, or ſignifie before hand.
                  
                     Portent. A monſtrous thing which foreſheweth ſome great matter.
                  
                     Portculiſe. A falling gate to keepe out enemies from a City, or keepe them in.
                  
                     Portgreue. A chiefe officer in certaine Port townes.
                  
                     Portrature. An image, a picture.
                  
                     Portſale. A ſelling at the hauen.
                  
                     Poſe. A rheume or humor which falleth into the no
                        •
                     e, ſtopping the noſtrills and hindering the voyce.
                  
                     Poſition. A ſetting or placing: ſometimes a ſentence propounded.
                  
                     Poſitiue. Expreſly ſet down and decreed.
                  
                     Poſtſcript. That which is written in the end after an other thing.
                  
                     
                     Poſterior. The later, the hinder part.
                  
                     Poſtilion. A ſpeedy poſte or meſſenger.
                  
                     Poſtulation. A demand, a requeſt.
                  
                     Potent. Mighty, ſtrong, able.
                  
                     Potentate. A prince, a great ruler.
                  
                     Potion. A Phyſicall drinke.
                  
                     Pourcontrell. The ſame that Polype is.
                  
                     Poundage. A Subſidie granted to the kings Maieſtie, of twelue pence in the pound, for all merchandiſe, brought hither, or carried away by euery merchāt denizen, or alien.
                  
                     Practicall. Of or belonging to practiſe.
                  
                     Practique. The ſame that practicall is.
                  
                     Prauity. Leudnes, naughtineſſe.
                  
                     Preamble. A ſpee
                        •
                     h, ſpoken before we enter into a diſcourſe, a flouriſh or entrance into a matter.
                  
                     Prebend. A portion of maintenance, which euery member or Canon of a Cathedrall Church receiueth in the right of his place.
                  
                     Prebendarie. Hee which hath a Prebend, or yeerely maintenance, out of the lands of a Cathedrall Church, ahd is member of the ſame Church.
                  
                     Precede. To goe before.
                  
                     Precedent. Going before.
                  
                     Precept. A commandement.
                  
                     Precinct. The compaſſe, or circuit of a place.
                  
                     Precipitate. To throwe downe headlong. It is alſo the name of a coroſiue pouder, commonly called red Mercury, vſed by Chirurgians, to eate corrupted fleſh.
                  
                     Precontract. A former, bargaine, or contract.
                  
                     Percurſor. A forerunner, a foregoer.
                  
                     Predeſtinate. To appoint before hand, what ſhall follow after.
                  
                     Predeſtination. An appointment before hand what ſhall follow.
                  
                     Predeceſſor. Hee that was in place or office before another.
                  
                     Predicable. That which

may bee reported or ſpoken of. In Logicke it ſignifieth certaine generall words, or vniuerſalities; whereof there are fiue, to wit, Genus, Species, Differentia, Proprium, and Accidens.
                  
                  
                     Predicament. A terme of Logicke: It ſignifieth a different order in the nature of things, or certaine generall heads, to which they may be referred; and there are cōmonly reckoned ten ſuch predicaments The firſt called Subſtance, includeth all ſubſtances whatſoeuer, as the foure Elements, and all other creatures. The ſecond named Quantity, containeth all quantities, as ten, twenty, a yard, a furlong, a mile. The third called Quality, hath vnder it all qualities, as wiſedome, art, fortitude, diligence, ſloth. The fourth named Relation, is properly of ſuch words, as depend mutually one vpon another, as a husband and wife, a maſter and ſeruant, a father and child. The other ſixe are, 5. Action or doing: 6. Paſſion or ſuffering: 7. Where: 8. When: 9. Situation or placing: 10. the Habit or outward couering of a thing.
                  
                     Predicate. To tell abroad, to report. In Logicke, it ſignifieth the later part of a propoſition, as in ſaying, Paul is an Apoſtle: The word Apoſtle is called predicate, becauſe it is ſpoken or affirmed of the ſubiect Paul.
                  
                  
                     Prediction. A foretelling.
                  
                     Predominant. That ruleth or beareth ſway.
                  
                     Preface. That which is ſpoken or written before.
                  
                     Prefect. A chiefe Magiſtrate, a Gouernour.
                  
                     Prefigure. See prefigurate.
                  
                     Prefigurate. To foreſhew any thing by a figure.
                  
                     Prefiguration. A foreſhewing by a figure.
                  
                     Prefixe. To faſten before, or to appoint a time aforehand.
                  
                     Pregnant. Quickewitted, that will ſoone conceiue.
                  
                     Pregnancy. Quickewittedneſſe.
                  
                     Preiudicate. To iudge raſhly, without due tryall.
                  
                     
                     Preiudication. A iudging before hand.
                  
                     Preiudice. A iudgement giuen before due tryall, or a iudgement formerly giuen of the ſame matter: ſometime it ſignifieth harme, or hinderance.
                  
                     Preiudiciall. Which iudgeth before due time, ſometime hurtfull, or euill.
                  
                     Prelate. A Biſhop, a great Clergie man.
                  
                     Premeditate. To thinke before hand.
                  
                     Premeditation. A thinking, or muſing vpon a thing aforehand.
                  
                     Premiſe To ſend before, to ſpeake before.
                  
                     Premoniſh. To warne before.
                  
                     Premunire. A puniſhment wherein the offender loſeth all his goods for euer▪ and libertie during life.
                  
                     Preordaine. To ordaine before hand.
                  
                     Preordinate. Ordained before.
                  
                     Prepoſterous. Diſorderly, vntoward, contrary to due courſe.
                  
                     Prepoſe. To preferre, to ſet before.
                  
                     Prepuce. The foreskinne of a mans yard, which the Hebrewes vſed to cut off in circumciſion.
                  
                     Prerogatiue. Priuiledge or authoritie aboue other.
                  
                     Preſage. A foretelling, or coniecture made of a thing before hand.
                  
                     Preſbytery. Prieſthood, elderſhippe.
                  
                     Preſcience. A knowing beforehand.
                  
                     Preſcript. A commandement or appointment by writing.
                  
                     Preſcription. Poſſeſſion and vſe of a thing, time out of minde.
                  
                     Preſeruatiue. Which preſerueth or defendeth from ſickeneſſe.
                  
                     Preſident. A chiefe Iudge or ruler.
                  
                     Preſsure. An oppreſſion.
                  
                     Preſtigious. Deceitfull: blinding the ſight.
                  
                     Pretermiſſion. A letting paſſe, a leauing out.
                  
                     Pretermit. To ouerpaſſe.
                  
                     
                     Pretext. A colourable excuſe, or pretence.
                  
                     Pretor. A chiefe Iudge, a great officer.
                  
                     Preuarication. Deceit, falſe dealing: when he that ſeemeth to helpe a mans cauſe, doth craftily ſeeke to hinder it.
                  
                     Pricker. A Huntſman on horſebacke.
                  
                     Pricket. A Fallow Deere two yeeres old.
                  
                     Pricking. The print of a Hares foot on the ground.
                  
                     Prigge. To filch, to ſteale.
                  
                     Prigging. Stealing.
                  
                     Prime. The morning: ſometime the ſpring, ſomtime the chiefe.
                  
                     Primacie. Chiefe authority, or iuriſdiction.
                  
                     Primate. An Archbiſhop.
                  
                     Primitiue. The firſt, the moſt ancient.
                  
                     Prioritie. The more excellent ſtate or dignitie.
                  
                     Priſtine. Old, ancient.
                  
                     Priuation. A depriuing, or taking away.
                  
                     Probable. Which may be prooued.
                  
                     Probation. A proofe, a tryall.
                  
                     Probatum. Proued, tryed.
                  
                     Probitie. Honeſty, goodneſſe.
                  
                     Probleme. A darke ſentence, with a queſtion ioyned vnto it.
                  
                     Procline. Inclining, or bent to a thing.
                  
                     Procliuity. An inclination, a bending to.
                  
                     Proconſull. A deputy vnto a Conſull, or one endewed with a Conſuls authoritie.
                  
                     Procraſtination. A delaying, a prolonging.
                  
                     Procreate. To breede, to bring forth.
                  
                     Procreation. A breeding, a bringing foorth.
                  
                     Procurator. A ſteward, he that taketh charge to ouerſee anothers buſineſſe.
                  
                     Pordigie. A rare thing ſeldome ſeene, which ſignifieth that ſome ſtrange matter ſhall after follow.
                  
                     Prodigious. Strange, wonderfull.
                  
                     Prodition. A betraying.
                  
                     Produce. To bring forth, to draw at length.
                  
                     Profane. To put holy things to a common vſe.
                  
                     Profanation. A putting of holy things to common vſes.
                  
                     
                     Proficient. One that hath well profited.
                  
                     Profligate. To ouerthrow, to driue away.
                  
                     Profundity. The depth of a thing.
                  
                     Profuſe. Waſtefull, lauiſh in ſpending.
                  
                     Progenie. A generation, an of-ſpring, a ſtocke, or kindred.
                  
                     Progenitor. An Anceſter, a forefather.
                  
                     Prognoſticate. To knowe or coniecture before hand.
                  
                     Progreſſe. A going forward.
                  
                     Progreſsion. A going forward.
                  
                     Proheme. A beginning of a matter: a preface before a booke.
                  
                     Prohibit. To forbid.
                  
                     Prohibition. A forbidding.
                  
                     Proiect. A plot, or the contriuing of any thing.
                  
                     Prolix. Long, or large tedious.
                  
                     Prolixity. Length, or largeneſſe, tediouſneſſe.
                  
                     Prolocutor. The firſt ſpeaker.
                  
                     Prologue. A preface, a foreſpeech.
                  
                     Promoſcuous. Confuſed, mingled one with another.
                  
                     Promontory. A hill lying out, like an elbow into the Sea.
                  
                     Promote. To aduance, to lift vp.
                  
                     Promote. Hee which accuſeth another, for the breach of ſome lawe, and hath thereby part of the penalty for his paine.
                  
                     Prompe. Ready, or quick: ſometime to tell one priuily, to teach what hee ſhould ſay.
                  
                     Promptitude. Readineſſe.
                  
                     Promulgate. To publiſh, to ſpeake abroad.
                  
                     Promulgation. A publiſhing of a Lawe or Decree.
                  
                     Prone. Stooping, downeward: alſo bending or inclined to a thing.
                  
                     Propagate. To ſpreade abroade, inlarge, or multiply.
                  
                     Propagation. An increaſing, or breeding.
                  
                     Propenſe. Ready, apt, or giuen to a thing.
                  
                     Propheticall. Of or belonging to a Prophet.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
                     Pro
                           •
                        inquity. Neereneſſe, ſometime kindred.
                  
                     Propitiation. An obtaining of pardon, or a ſacrifice to appeaſe Gods diſpleaſure.
                  
                     Propitiatory. A table ſet on the Arke of the Olde Teſtament; on either ſide whereof was a Cherubin of golde, with the wings ſpread ouer the Propitiatorie, and their faces looking one toward another.
                  
                     Propitious. Gentle, fauourable, mercifull.
                  
                     Propoſe. To ſet forth, to offer, to appoint.
                  
                     Propoſition. A ſhort ſentence contayning the ſumme of what wee will ſpeake.
                  
                     Proprietary. Hee that hath the fruites of a Benefice, to him and his heires or ſucceſſors.
                  
                     Propulſe. To beate off, to put away by force.
                  
                     Prorogue. To prolong, to delay, to continue.
                  
                     Prorogation. A prolonging.
                  
                     Proſcription. Baniſhment, or open ſale made of goods beeing forfet.
                  
                     Proſecute. To follow: to purſue.
                  
                     Proſelyte. A ſtranger conuerted to our religion.
                  
                     Proſodie. True pronouncing of words.
                  
                     Proſpect. A large ſight, or a place where one may ſee farre.
                  
                     Proſtitute. To ſet to open ſale: to offer to euery man for money.
                  
                     Prostrate. To fall downe, at ones feet.
                  
                     Proteſt. To affirme earneſtly.
                  
                     Proteſtation. A declaration of ones mind.
                  
                     Protomartyr. The firſt Martyr.
                  
                     Prototypon. The firſt copy or patterne of a thing.
                  
                     Protract. To drawe in length, to prolong.
                  
                     Prouiſo. A prouiſion or condition made in any writing.
                  
                     Proule. To got about in the night: to pilfer or ſteale ſmall things.
                  
                     Prowe. The forepart of a ſhip.
                  
                     
                     Proweſſe. Strength, manhood, courage.
                  
                     Proximity. Neereneſſe.
                  
                     Prudent. Diſcreete, wiſe.
                  
                     Prunellas. A fruite like ſmall Figges, good for reſtoratiue, and to comfort the heart.
                  
                     Pſalmiſt. A maker or ſinger of Pſalmes.
                  
                     Pſalmody. A ſinging of Pſalmes.
                  
                     Pſaltery. A ſweete inſtrument like a Harpe.
                  
                     Pſeudo. Note, that words which begin with Pſeudo, ſignifie counterfet or falſe, as Pſeudomartyr, a falſe Martyr, or witneſſe: Pſeudoprophet, a falſe prophet.
                  
                     Pſiſane. A Phyſicall drinke of Barley, and cold herbes ſod together.
                  
                     Publicant. Hee that hyreth the reuenewes or common profites of the CITIE at a certaine Rent. This was an odious name among the Iewes, becauſe they were commonly men of il conſcience, which exerciſced that office.
                  
                     Publicke. Common, open abroad.
                  
                     Pulcritude. Beauty, faireneſſe.
                  
                     Pulpe. The fleſhie part of any thing.
                  
                     Pulſe. A beating veine: alſo peaſe, beanes, lupines, and ſuch other graine are ſo called.
                  
                     Pulueriſated. Beaten to powder.
                  
                     Punctuall. Not miſſing a haltes breadth: which is ſhort, and direct to the purpoſe.
                  
                     Pupill. A Ward, a yong Scholler, one vnder age.
                  
                     Purgatiue. Which hath vertue to purge.
                  
                     Purgatory. A place of purging.
                  
                     Purlue. A place neere ioining to a Forreſt, where it is lawfull for the owner of the ground to hunt, if hee can diſpend fortie ſhillings by the yeere of free land
                  
                     Purporte. A purpoſe, or meaning.
                  
                     Puſillanimitie. Littlenes

of courage, faintheartedneſſe.
                  
                     Puſtule. A wheale, or bladder riſen in the body.
                  
                     Putrifaction. A rottennes or corruption.
                  
                     Putrifie. To be rotten or corrupted.
                  
                     Pygmies. Little people in India, not aboue a foot and a halfe long: their women bring forth children at fiue yeares and at eight are accounted olde. They haue continual warre with Cranes, who do often put them to the worſt.
                  
                     Pyramides. A ſteeple or pillar, broad and ſquare beneath, and ſharpe aboue.
                  
                     Pyromancy. See Diuination.
                  
                     Python. A ſpirit which poſſeſſeth one; or a man poſſeſſed with a ſpirit.
               
            
            
               Q
               
                  
                     Quadrangle. A figure made with foure corners.
                  
                     Quadraus. Foure ſquare, or the fourth part of a thing.
                  
                     Quadripartite. Diuided, into foure parts.
                  
                     Quadruplication. A foure folde doubling.
                  
                     Quaint. Fine and ſtrange.
                  
                     Quarantine. A terme in the common law, when a woman after the death of her huſband remaineth forty dayes in the chiefe Mannor place, within which time her dower ſhal be aſſigned.
                  
                     Quarrie. A place or pit where ſtones are digged. Among hunters it ſignifieth a reward giuen to Houndes after they haue hunter, or the Veniſon which is taken by hunting.
                  
                     Quauiuer. A ſea Dragon.
                  
                     Quaternion. Foure, or any thing diuided by the number of foure.
                  
                     Queach. A thicke buſhie plot.
                  
                     Querimonious. Full of complaining.
                  
                     Querulous. Complayning.
                  
                     Queſt. A ſearch or enquiry.
                  
                     Quiddity. A ſhort darke ſpeech, an intricate queſtion.
                  
                     Quiddant. A ſweete

mixture thicker then a ſirupe, and not ſo thicke nor ſtiffe as marmalet.
                  
                     Quidproque. A terme amongſt all Apothecaries, when in ſtead of one thing they vſe another of the ſame nature.
                  
                     Quinteſſence. The fiſt ſubſtance. That which remaineth in any thing after the corruptible Elements are taken from it.
                  
                     Quippe. A quicke check, a pretty taunt.
                  
                     Quotidian. Daily.
               
            
            
               R
               
                  
                     RAbbine. A Maſter, a Lord, a great Doctour, a teacher.
                  
                     Racha. An Hebrew word of reproch, neuer ſpoken but in extreame anger.
                  
                     Radiane. Bright ſhining, gliſtering with beames.
                  
                     Radiation. A gliſtering, a caſting of beames.
                  
                     Radicall. Of or belonging to the roote, naturall.
                  
                     Radicall moiſture. The naturall moiſture ſpread like a dew in all parts of the body; wherewith ſuch parts are nouriſhed; which moiſture being once waſted can neuer be reſtored.
                  
                     Raindeere. A beaſt like a Hart, but hauing his head fuller of Antliers.
                  
                     Rampant. A terme in Herauldry, when a beaſt is painted ramping vpright with the forefeete.
                  
                     Rancor, Hatred, malice.
                  
                     Rape. A violent rauiſhing of a woman againſt her will. There is alſo a roote like a Turnep ſo called. Sometime it ſignifieth a diuiſion made in ſome ſhires; as the County of Suffex is diuided into ſixe Rapes, to wit, the Rape of Chicheſter, of A
                        •
                     undel, of Bramber, of Lewis, of Peuenſic, and of Haſtings.
                  
                     Rapacitie. A rauening, a violent catching.
                  
                     Rapiditie. A ſnatching, a catching.
                  
                     Rapine. Robberie, catching, extortion.
                  
                     Rapſodie. A ioying of diuerſe verſes together.
                  
                     Raſaction. A making of that thin, which is thicke or cloſe ioyned together.
                  
                     Rarifie. To make thin,

to pull a thing abroad.
                  
                     Raritie. Fewneſſe, thinneſſe.
                  
                     Raſure. A ſhauing away.
                  
                     Ratifie. To confirme, to allow.
                  
                     Rationall. Reaſonable. It ſignifieth alſo an ornament, which the high Prieſt of the Iewes ware on his breaſt, when he executed his function, being foure ſquare, of the length of a ſpan, made curiouſly of gold and twiſted ſilke of diuers colours, wherein were ſet twelue precious ſtones in foure rankes of gold, and in euery ſtone grauen one of the names of the twelue ſonnes of Iacob.
                  
                  
                     Reall. Which is in every deede.
                  
                     Reaſſume. To take againe.
                  
                     Recant. To deny an opinion formerly by himſelfe maintained.
                  
                     Recapitulate. To rehearſe briefely that which was ſpoken before.
                  
                     Recapitulation. A briefe rehearſall of that which hath beene formerly ſpoken at large.
                  
                     Receptacle. A place of recent, or any veſſel to receiue a thing in.
                  
                     Receſſe. A bye-place, a going backe or aſide.
                  
                     Recidiuation. A backeſliding, or falling backe againe.
                  
                     Reciprocall. That which returneth backe, or hath reſpect to ſome thing going before.
                  
                     Reclaime. To winne, to make gentle.
                  
                     Recluſe. Shut vp.
                  
                     Recogniſance. An acknowledgement. A band wherein a man before a lawfull Iudge, acknowledgeth himſelf to owe a certaine ſumme of money to the King, if he faile in performance of a condition thereto ioyned.
                  
                     Recoile. To flie backe.
                  
                     Recollect. To gather againe, to call his wits together.
                  
                     Rectifie. To direct, to make ſtreight.
                  
                     Recreant. Hee that denieth his owne challenge, he that goeth from what hee hath ſaid, or eateth his word.
                  
                     
                     Rector. A Rule, a Gouernour.
                  
                     Recurre. To run backe.
                  
                     Recurſion. A running backe.
                  
                     Recuſant. He that refuſeth to doe any thing.
                  
                     Redolent. Sweete in ſmell.
                  
                     Redoubted. Greatly reuerenced, moſt noble.
                  
                     Redound. To abound, or ouerflow.
                  
                     Redobbour. He that wittingly buiethſtollen cloth, and turneth it into ſome other faſhion.
                  
                     Reduce. To bring backe, to reſtore.
                  
                     Reduction. A bringing backe.
                  
                     Reedifie. To build again, to repaire.
                  
                     Reenter. To enter againe.
                  
                     Reentrie. An entrance againe.
                  
                     Reeue. An old name of an officer in Lordſhippes, much like to thoſe that we call Bayliffes now.
                  
                     Refection. A refreſhing.
                  
                     Refectorie. A place to refreſh ones ſelf, or to take ones diet in.
                  
                     Refell. To diſprooue, to prooue falſe.
                  
                     Reflect. To turne or caſt backe againe.
                  
                     Reflection. A rebounding backe: or turning backe againe.
                  
                     Reforme. To amend, to correct.
                  
                     Refractorie. Stubborne, which will not bend.
                  
                     Rufuge. A place of ſuccour.
                  
                     Refute. To diſprooue, to confound by ſcene and reaſon.
                  
                     Refutation. A diſproouing, a confuting.
                  
                     Regall. Kingly; belonging to a King.
                  
                     Regalitie. The eſtate or authoritie of a King.
                  
                     Regardant. A terme in Heraldrie, when a beaſt is painted, looking backewards at one.
                  
                     Regenerate. To beare againe in birth, to renew.
                  
                     Regeneration. A new birth.
                  
                     Regent. A Prince, Ruler or Gouernour.
                  
                     
                     Regiment. A gouerment, or the place where one hath authoritie.
                  
                     Regiſter. Writings of record kept for memory. Alſo hee that keepeth ſuch writings in a ſpirituall Court.
                  
                     Regratour. He that in a faire or market, buyeth any dead victuall whatſoeuer, and ſelleth the ſame againe in any faire or market kept there, or within foure miles thereof.
                  
                     Regreſſe. A going backe againe.
                  
                     Regreſſion. The ſame.
                  
                     Regular. Vnder rule, or liuing according to a ſet rule.
                  
                     Reiect. To caſt off, to deſpiſe.
                  
                     Reioynder. A ſecond anſwer made by the defendant, after his firſt anſwer hath beene replyed vnto.
                  
                     Reiterate. To do againe, to do a thing often.
                  
                     Relapſe. A backe ſlyding.
                  
                     Relate. To tell, to declare.
                  
                     Relation. A rehearſall or telling of a matter.
                  
                     Relaxation. A releaſing, a refreſhing or ſetting at libertie.
                  
                     Relay. A terme of hunting, when they ſet hounds in readineſſe, where they thinke a Deere will paſſe, and caſt them off after the other hounds are paſt by.
                  
                     Releefe. A payment which ſome Heires make (after the death of their Aunceſtour) to the Lord of whom their lands are holden.
                  
                     Relent. To waxe ſoft, to yeeld.
                  
                     Relinquiſh. To leaue off, to forſake.
                  
                     Reliques. Things left or remaining. Moſt commonly it is taken for the bodies, or ſome part of the bodies, or ſomwhat which hath toucht the bodies of Saints now in heauen.
                  
                     Remainder. A poſſibility in any, to enioy lands, tenements, or rents, after anothers eſtate is ended.
                  
                     Remiſſe. Slacke, negligent or careleſſe.
                  
                     Remit. To ſend backe;

ſomtime to releaſe or forgiue.
                  
                     Remora. A little Fiſh which cleaning to the bottome of a ſhippe, doth very ſtrangely ſtay the ſhippe that ſhee cannot mooue.
                  
                     Remorſe. Doubtfulneſſe in conſcience, to doe a thing: a ſtaggering in minde: ſometime pittifulnes or repentance of a ball deed done.
                  
                     Remote. Farre diſtant.
                  
                     Remunerate. To reward.
                  
                     Remuneration A reward, a requitall.
                  
                     Renouate. To renew.
                  
                     Renouation. A renewing.
                  
                     Repaſt. Food.
                  
                     Repeale. To call backe aganie, to diſallow.
                  
                     Repell. To thruſt backe.
                  
                     Repercuſsiue. That which ſtriketh backe againe, or reboundeth backe.
                  
                     Repetition. A new rehearſing.
                  
                     Repleuine. A Warrant ſent from the Sheriffe or his Bayliffe, that a man ſhall haue his cattell or a diſtreſſe taken from him, reſtored to him again; vpon ſurety found to anſwer the party grieued, in the Law.
                  
                     Replication. The anſwer made to the defendant after the defendant hath anſwered.
                  
                     Repoſe. To lay vpon ſometime to take reſt.
                  
                     Repoſitory. A ſtorehouſe, a place to lay vp things in.
                  
                     Repoſſede. To poſſeſſe againe.
                  
                     Reprehend. To reprooue.
                  
                     Reprehenſion. A reproouings.
                  
                     Repreſse. To ſtay backe, to keepe downe by force.
                  
                     Repriſes. All payments and charges that iſſue yearely out of a mannor.
                  
                     Reprobate. One paſt grace: a wicked perſon, a caſt away.
                  
                     Republike. A Commonwealth.
                  
                     Repudiate. To refuſe: properly to put away ones Wife.
                  
                     Repugne. To reſiſt.
                  
                     Repugnancy. Diſagreement, contrariety.
                  
                     Repugnant. Contrary or

reſiſting.
                  
                     Repute. To eſteeme, to account.
                  
                     Reputation. Eſtimation or account.
                  
                     Requiem. Reſt. ceaſing from labour.
                  
                     Rereward. The hindmoſt part of a battell.
                  
                     Reſcouſe. A forcible deliuery or ſetting at liberty of one that hath beene arreſted.
                  
                     Reſcrue. To keepe by it ſelfe, to keepe for ſome purpoſe.
                  
                     Reſcruation. A keeping of ſome thing apart.
                  
                     Reſide. To alight, ſinke downe, or to abide in a place.
                  
                     Reſident. Abiding in a place.
                  
                     Reſigne. To giue or yeild vp.
                  
                     Reſignation. A yeelding vp of a thing to another.
                  
                     Reſolue. To open, to weaken, to make looſe: ſometime to expound and declare.
                  
                     Reſolute. Determinately bent to doe any thing.
                  
                     Reſpectiue. Awfull, which beareth great reſpect to one.
                  
                     Reſpiration. A fetching of breath.
                  
                     Reſplendent. Bright, cleere ſhining.
                  
                     Reſpondent. Hee that anſwereth.
                  
                     Reſponſe. An anſwer.
                  
                     Reſtauration. A repayring, a making againe.
                  
                     Reſtie. Dull, heauy.
                  
                     Reſtitution. A reſtoring backe.
                  
                     Restriction. A reſtraining, or holding backe.
                  
                     Reſult. To rebound, to leape backe.
                  
                     Reſume. To take againe.
                  
                     Reſurrection. A riſing againe.
                  
                     Reſuſcitation. A ſtirring vp againe.
                  
                     Retaile. To ſell in ſmall parcels: that which was formerly bought.
                  
                     Retention. A keeping.
                  
                     Retentiue. Hauing power to binde, retaine, or keepe.
                  
                     Retire. To returne backward.
                  
                     Retore. To throwe, or ſhoote backe againe.
                  
                     Retract. To call backe

againe, to reuoke.
                  
                     Retractation. A calling backe, a recanting, a denying of a thing before affirmed.
                  
                     Retrate. A calling backe of Souldiours from ſight: a returning or going backe.
                  
                     Retribution. A reward, a recompence.
                  
                     Retriue. A ſeeeking againe.
                  
                     Retrogade. That which goeth backward. A planet is ſayde to bee retrograde, when he goeth backeward contrary to the courſe of the ſignes, as from Taurus to Aries, &c.
                  
                  
                     Retrogradation. A going backward.
                  
                     Reuels. Players and dancings, with other pleaſant deuices, vſed ſometimes in the Kings Court, and elſewhere in great houſes.
                  
                     Reuenew. Yearely rent receiued for lands or tenements.
                  
                     Reuerberation. A beating backe againe.
                  
                     Reuerſed. A tearme in Heraldry when a mans armes is giuen him, turned the lower part vpward.
                  
                     Reuert. To returne.
                  
                     Reuiſe. To peruſe, to look ouer againe.
                  
                     Reunite. To ioyne together againe.
                  
                     Reuocable. Which may be called backe againe.
                  
                     Reuocation. A calling back againe.
                  
                     Reuoke. To call backe.
                  
                     Reuolt. To forſake ones captaine or company, and goe to another.
                  
                     Reuolue. To toſſe vp and downe in ones minde: to muſe or thinke much of a matter.
                  
                     Reuolution. A turning or winding about: eſpecially in the courſe of time.
                  
                     Rhetoricke. The arte of eloquent ſpeaking.
                  
                     Rheubarbe. See Rubarb.
                  
                     Ridiculous. Worthy to be laughed at: fooliſh; without wit.
                  
                     Rigid. Stiffe, hard ſtubborne.
                  
                     Rigor. Hardneſſe, ſtiffeneſſe, extreme dealing.
                  
                     Rigorous. Hard, cruell, vnmercifull.
                  
                     Rime. A miſt or foggie dew.
                  
                     
                     Ringwalke. A round walk made by Hunters.
                  
                     Rinocere. A great beaſt, hauing a horne in his noſe bending vpward, which he whetteth often againſt rockes, to fight therewith againſt the Elephant.
                  
                     Riot. In the law it ſignifieth when three or moe perſons, beeing aſſembled to commit forcibly an vnlawfull act, do accordingly execute the ſame.
                  
                     Rite. A ceremony, a cuſtome.
                  
                     Riuall. One that ſueth for the ſame thing with another.
                  
                     Robuſtious. Strong.
                  
                     Roode. In land it ſignifieth a quarter of an acre. It is ſometime taken for the picture of our Sauiour vpon the croſſe.
                  
                     Rotundity Roundneſſe.
                  
                     Rougecroſſe. The name of an office of one of the Purſeuants at armes.
                  
                     Rougedragon. The name of an office of one of the Purſeuants at armes.
                  
                     Route. A diſorderly aſſembly of three or moe perſons moouing forward to commit by force an vnlawful act. It ſignifieth alſo a heard or great company of wolues together.
                  
                     Rubarbe. A coſtly root much vſed in phyſicke to purge choler, & is brought hither out of Barbaria. Being toaſted and dryed it is then good againſt the bloody flixe, and all manner of laskes; if it bee ſo drunke with ſome binding liquor, as the iuice of plantaine, redde Wine, and ſuch like,
                  
                     Rubrike. An order or rule written.
                  
                     Rubriacted. Marked with red; or written in red letters.
                  
                     Rudiments. The firſt grounds or principles of an art or any knowledge.
                  
                     Ruine. Vtter ouerthrow, vtter deſtruction.
                  
                     Ruminate. To chew ouer againe as beaſtes doe, that chew the cud: wherfore it is often taken for to ſtudy and thinke much of a matter.
                  
                     Running of the reines. A diſeaſe when by reaſon of weakneſſe, ſeede paſſeth

often from one againſt his will.
                  
                     Ruption. A breaking.
                  
                     Rupture. A breaking.
                  
                     Rurall. Of or belonging to the countrey.
                  
                     Ruſticall. Countrey-like, homely, rude.
                  
                     Ruſticitie. Rudeneſſe: clowniſh behauiour.
               
            
            
               S
               
                  
                     SAbaoth. Hoſtes or armies of men.
                  
                     Sable. In armorie it ſignifieth blacke. It is alſo a rich Furre of a beaſt ſo called, which beaſt is made like a polecat, of colour betweene blacke, and browne, and breedeth in Rusſia, but moſt in Tartaria
                  
                  
                     Sabboth. A day of reſt.
                  
                     Saciety. Fulneſſe.
                  
                     Sacrament. A myſticall ceremony inſtituted by our Sauiour.
                  
                     Sacred. Holy.
                  
                     Sacriledge. The robbing of a Church: the ſtealing of holy things, or abuſing of Sacraments or holy myſteries.
                  
                     Sacrilegious. Very wicked and abhominable.
                  
                     Saduce. An hereticall ſect among the Iewes, which denyed the reſurrection: they called themſelues Saduces of the Hebrew word Tsedek.: Which ſignifieth Iuſtice, becauſe they tooke themſelues to liue more vprightly, and iuſter then other men.
                  
                     Safeconduite. A ſecuritie and protection giuen by a Prince or any other perſon in authoritie, for a mans ſafe comming or going to or from a place.
                  
                     Sagacitie. Quickeneſſe of vnderſtanding; wittineſſe.
                  
                     Sage. Graue, wiſe, diſcreete.
                  
                     Sagapenum. The ſappe or Gum of a plant growing in Media, of a yellowiſh colour without, and white within. It is hot and dry, of a ſtrong ſmell like garlicke, and is vſed in Phyſicke againſt diuers cold diſeaſes.
                  
                     Saint Antonies ſire. A diſeaſe riſing of hotte cholericke blood, which beginning firſt with a bliſter, groweth after to a ſore, or ſcab like tetter.
                  
                     
                     Salamander. A little beaſt like a lizard, with foure feere and a ſhort taile, hauing diuers ſpottes in the body thereof. It is of a byting venemous nature, and (as ſome affirme) will abide in the fire without harme, and at laſt put it cleare out.
                  
                     Salarie. Wages, or hyre.
                  
                     Salgemma. A cleere kind of ſalt like Chryſtall, vſed ſometime in Phyſicke, and is found plentifully in Hungaria.
                  
                     Saliant. A terme in Herauldry, when a beaſt ſeemeth rampand, but lifteth not the fore pawes ſo high, as the rampande doth.
                  
                     Salubritie. Healthfulneſſe.
                  
                     Sanctifie. To make holie.
                  
                     Sanctification. A making holy.
                  
                     Sanctimonie. Holineſſe.
                  
                     Sanctitie. Holineſſe.
                  
                     Sanctuarie. A place whither offenders, or indebted perſons may flie for ſuccour, from being puniſhed or areſted.
                  
                     Sanctum Sanctorum. The holieſt place of the Iewes temple, where the Arke was kept, and whither none entred but the high Prieſt euery yeare.
                  
                     Sandall. An ancient kind of ſhooe.
                  
                     Sanders. A precious wood brought out of India, whereof there are three kinds, to wit, red, yellow, and white Sanders. They are all of a cooling nature, eſpecially the red, which is often vſed in Phyſicke againſt hot diſeaſes.
                  
                     Sanglier. A wilde Bore, fiue yeeres old.
                  
                     Sanguine. In Heraldrie it ſignifieth a murrey colour: but commonly it ſignifieth a complexion moſt inclining towarde blood.
                  
                     Sanguinolent. Bloody.
                  
                     Sanry. Health.
                  
                     Saphire. A precious ſtone brought out of Eaſt India
                        •
                      of a cleare skie colour, and the beſt ſort of them hath as it were cloudes therein, inclining to a certain redneſſe. This ſtone is ſaid to be of a cold nature.
                  
                     
                     Sapience. Wiſdome, knowledge.
                  
                     Sarcaparillia. A plant of India, the roote whereof is often vſed in dyet drinkes, againſt the French, and other diſeaſes.
                  
                     Sarc
                           •
                        colla. A Gumme brought out of Perſia, which is red, and bitter in taſte. It is of a healing nature, and therefore often vſed to cloſe vp woundes, and fill corrupted vlcers with new fleſh. For which cauſe it is named in Greek Sarcocolla, which ſignifieth a glewer or healer vp of the fleſh.
                  
                     Saſſafras. A tree of great vertue, which groweth in the Florida of the Weſt Indies: the rinde hereof hath a ſweete ſmell like Cinnamon. It comforteth the lyuer, and ſtomack, and openeth obſtructions of the inward parts, being hotte and dry in the ſecond degree. The beſt of the Tree is the roote, next the boughes, then the body, but the principall goodneſſe of all reſteth in the ryndes.
                  
                     Satan. An enemie.
                  
                     Satiate. To fill.
                  
                     Satiety. Fulneſſe.
                  
                     Saturitie. Fulneſſe.
                  
                     Satyr. A ſtrange monſter in India, hauing the body of a man all hairie, with legs and feete like a Goat: which monſters the ancient Poets were wont to call gods of the woods. It ſignifieth alſo a ſharpe byting kind of verſe, wherin mens vices were laid open.
                  
                     Satyricall. Sharpe or biting, as Satyrs were commonly written.
                  
                     Sauine. A little low tree, bearing leaues almoſt like Tamariske, and of a hotte ſcowring nature.
                  
                     Saults. Iumpes, leapes.
                  
                     Saunce. Without.
                  
                     Sawe. An olde ſaying.
                  
                     Saxifrage. An herbe bearing ſeed like Parſley ſeed, but more hot and byting, which ſeede or the roote being boiled in wine and drunken, breaketh the ſtone of the kidneyes and bladder.
                  
                     
                     Scalpe. The haire skinne of the head.
                  
                     Scammonie. The iuyce of the roote of an herbe, brought hither drie out of Aſia, and Myſia. It is a violent purger of choler, and dangerous to take inward, vnleſſe it bee well prepared. See Diagridium.
                  
                  
                     Scandall. An offence, or that which cauſeth one to fall, ſtumble, or take offence.
                  
                     Scandalize. To offend by euill example, or giue one occaſion to bee offended.
                  
                     Scarifie. To ſcrape, cut, launce, or open a ſore.
                  
                     Scarification. A ſcraping, or cutting.
                  
                     Scedule. A little rowle, or written bill.
                  
                     Scene. A play, a Comedy, a Tragedy, or the diuiſion of a play into certaine parts. In old time it ſignified a place couered with boughes, or the roome where the players made them ready.
                  
                     Scheme. A figure in ſpeaking.
                  
                     Schiſme. Diuiſion or ſtrife in matters of religion.
                  
                     Schiſmaticall. Diuided in fellowſhip from the other part: erroneous.
                  
                     Schiſmaticke. One diuided from the vnitie of the Church.
                  
                     Scholaſticall. Learned, belonging to Schollers.
                  
                     Scia
                           •
                        ica. A gout in the hippe, cauſed by groſſe and flegmaticke humours, gathered in the hollowneſſe of the ioynt thereof.
                  
                     Science. Knowledge.
                  
                     Scolopendra. A fiſh that feeling himſelfe taken with a hooke, caſteth out his bowels, vntill he hath vnlooſed the hooke, and then ſwalloweth them vp againe.
                  
                     Scope. The end or marke that one aymeth at.
                  
                     Scorpion. A venemous worme with ſeuen feete, bearing his ſting in his taile; with which hee striketh miſchieuouſly. They are of diuers colours, and the femall is the greater, hauing withall a ſharper ſting then the male. They may be killed with faſting

ſpittle of a ſound man. There are alſo great Scorpions with wings, which are carryed in ſome hotte countreyes with the wind from one place to another.
                  
                     Scoute. One ſent out to eſpye and bring tydings of the enemyes purpoſe, or of any danger likely to happen.
                  
                     Scribe. A writer, a clerke, a publike notary.
                  
                     Scruple, Doubt, difficulty: In Phyſicke it ſignifieth a ſmall weight of twenty wheat cornes; the third part or a dramme.
                  
                     Scrupuloſitie. Doubtfulneſſe, difficulty.
                  
                     Scrupulous. Doubtfull, fearefull: one that caſteth many doubts.
                  
                     Scrutinie. Search: enquiry.
                  
                     Scull. A great company of fiſh ſwimming together.
                  
                     Sculpture. A caruing, a grauing.
                  
                     Scurril. Scoffing, beaſtly, diſhoneſt, filthy.
                  
                     Scurrility. Saucy ſcoffing, ribauldry.
                  
                     Scurrillous. The ſame that Scurrill is.
                  
                     Scut. The tale of a hare or cony.
                  
                     Scacalfe. Great fiſhes that bellow like oxen, and haue their bodyes couered with hayre. They breede like beaſtes on the land, and ſleepe there often in the night.
                  
                     Sealamprie. A fiſh called by ſome Remora, which ſtayeth a ſhippe vnder a ſaile.
                  
                     Sebeſtens. Little plums brought out of Italy, of a blewiſh colour and ſweete in taſte. They are cold and moiſt in operation, and are often, vſed by Phyſitians in hotte agues and inward inflammations of the body.
                  
                     Seclude. To ſhut apart, to ſhut out.
                  
                     Secluſion. A ſhutting apart.
                  
                     Sect. A particular opinion of ſome few.
                  
                     Sectary. One that followeth priuate opinions in religion.
                  
                     Section. A diuiſion or cutting off.
                  
                     
                     Secular. Worldly, or belonging to the world.
                  
                     Secundine. The after birth the skinne, wherin a child it wrapped in his mothers wombe.
                  
                     Secure. Careleſſe, void of feare.
                  
                     Security. Aſſurance from feare or danger.
                  
                     Sediment. The dregges of any liquor which ſinketh to the bottome.
                  
                     Seduce. To deceiue, to miſleade.
                  
                     Sedulity. Diligence, carefulneſſe.
                  
                     Segregate. To diuide, to ſeuer.
                  
                     Seiant. A terme in Herauldry, when a beaſt is painted ſitting vpright.
                  
                     Select. To chooſe, to pick out.
                  
                     Semblable. Like.
                  
                     Semblance. A ſhew, a colour.
                  
                     Semblant. Like.
                  
                     Semicircle. Halfe a circle.
                  
                     Seminary. A ſeede plot.
                  
                     Semitary. A crooked ſword: a faucheon.
                  
                     Sempiternall. Euerlaſting.
                  
                     Sena. A little plant growing in Italy, and other hot countryes, but the beſt is brought from Alexandria. It is hot and dry, and the leaues thereof are often boyled in Phyſicke, to purge the body of melancholicke groſſe humours, and to cleanſe the blood: but there muſt beee Anniſeede, Cinamon or Ginger added to it, for that therwiſe it will prouoke windineſſe, and gripings in the belly.
                  
                     Senate. The Counſell houſe, where the Magiſtrates of a city aſſemble themſelues.
                  
                     Senator. An Alderman, or graue Magiſtrate of a city.
                  
                     Senior. The Elder.
                  
                     Senſible. That may bee felt or perceiued: ſometime witty or of good conceite.
                  
                     Senſuall. That pleaſeth the ſenſes, wanton, giuen to pleaſe the fleſh.
                  
                     Senſuality. Bodily pleaſure: wanton delight.
                  
                     
                     Sentinell. A man ſtanding in ſome conuenient place to diſcry what company cometh neere an army or towne of warre.
                  
                     Sententious. Full of ſentences or wiſe ſpeeches.
                  
                     Septentrionall. Of, or belonging to the North.
                  
                     Septuagints. Seuenty learned men which tranſlated the Old Teſtament out of Hebrew into Greeke.
                  
                     Sepulture. Buriall.
                  
                     Sequell, That which followeth the matter following.
                  
                     Sequeſter. To diuide, to withdrawe. To put by it ſelfe.
                  
                     Sequeſtration. A putting apart: a placing in ſeuerall by it ſelfe.
                  
                     Seraine. A foggy miſt or dampiſh vapour falling in Italy about ſunne-ſet, at which time it is vnwholeſome to be abroad eſpecially bareheaded.
                  
                     Seraphicall. Inflamed with diuine loue like Seraphin.
                  
                     Seraphin. The higheſt order of Angels: See Hierarchie.
                  
                     Serenity. Faire and cleere weather.
                  
                     Sergreant. A tearme applyed in Heraldly only to the Griffine which is ſo called.
                  
                     Serious. Earneſt, weighty, of great importance.
                  
                     Serpintene. Of the nature of a Serpent.
                  
                     Seruile. Baſe, ſlauiſh, belonging to a bondman or ſeruant.
                  
                     Seruility. Bondage; baſe eſtate.
                  
                     Seruitude. Bondage.
                  
                     Seſsions. A ſitting of Iudges.
                  
                     Sethim. A kinde of tree like a white Thorne, the timber whereof neuer rotteth Of this tree was made the holy Arke of the Old Teſtament.
                  
                     Seuere. Iuſt, graue, hard.
                  
                     Seuerity. Grauity, great conſtancy in miniſtring iuſtice.
                  
                     Sewell. A Paper, clour, or any thing hanged vp to keep a Deere from entring into a place.
                  
                     Sewer. He that goeth before the meate of a Prince or great perſonage, to

place it on the table: alſo one that hath authority to ouerlooke water courſes,
                  
                     Shamoiſe. A wilde Goat keeping the mountaines.
                  
                     Shankes. Theinue of the ſhanke of a kinde of Kidde.
                  
                     Shingles. A diſeaſe about the breaſt, belly, or backe, wherein the place affected looketh red, increaſing circlewiſe more and more. It is chiefly cured with Cats blood; or if it goe round the body, it killeth.
                  
                     Shrew. A kinde of field Mouſe, which if hee goe ouer a beaſtes backe, will make him lame in the chine; and if hee bite, the beaſt ſwelleth to the heart, and dyeth.
                  
                     Shrine. A Toombe or place where the body of ſome Saint is buried or remaineth.
                  
                     Siatica. See Sciatica before.
                  
                     Sibbe. One of kinne.
                  
                     Sybill. A woman inſpired with a ſpirit of propheſie; ſo called of the greeke words Sios, which ſignifieth God, and Boyle, which ſignifieth counſell, becauſe ſuch women had knowledge (as was ſaide) of the counſell of God. There were tenne Sybils, famous aboue the reſt. The firſt was Sybilla of Perſia, the ſecond of Lybia, the third of the City Delphos in Greece, the fourth of Cunia, a city in Aeolis, the firſt of Erythrae, a city of Aſia, the ſixt of the Ile, Samos, the ſeauenth of Cumae, a city of Campania in Italy. This Sibylla of Cumae, (as it is written) came on a time to Tarquine king of Rome, in the habit of a ſtrange olde woman, offering to ſell him nine hookes, full (as ſhe ſaid) of diuine oracles, for which ſhee demanded three hundred crownes of golde: the King not much regarding, and beſides thinking them too deere at that price, ſhe burned three of them before his face, and then asked if hee would haue the other ſixe, for which ſhe demaunded no leſſe, than ſhe had done at firſt for the nine. Hereat the King deriding

her and thinking her halfe made, ſhe burned three more of them, and tolde him that he ſhould giue her the ſame price for thoſe three that were left. The King much wondering at the womans conſtant earneſtneſſe, and therefore thinking the books contained no common matter, commanded three hundred crownes to bee giuen her for them, which ſhe receiuing, preſently vaniſhed out of ſight. Theſe bookes were after kept by the Romans very carefully, who in great matter of doubt, alwaies had recourſe to them, as to an aſſured Oracle. The eighth Sibyll, was called Sibylla of Heleſpontus in Greece; the ninth was of Phrygia; the tenth and laſt of Tybur, a citie neere Rome in Italy. All theſe Sibylls prophecied of the incarnation of our Sauiour Chriſt.
                  
                     Sicle. In coyne it ſignifieth foure ſterling groates of eight to an ounce: in weight it is halfe an ounce.
                  
                     Sidelayes. Dogs layd in the way to bee let ſlip at a Deere as he paſſeth by.
                  
                     Signet. A ſeale.
                  
                     Significatiue. Which expreſſeth a matter plainly.
                  
                     Signiorie. A Lordſhip.
                  
                     Silence. Holding ones peace.
                  
                     Similitude. A likeneſſe.
                  
                     Simonie. The ſelling of ſpirituall things for mony. This name firſt was deriued from one▪ 
                     Simon a ſorcerer of Samaria, who offered mony to the Apoſtles that he might haue power to giue the holy Ghoſt vnto any that hee ſhould lay his hands on; for which cauſe hee was ſharpely reprooued by Saint Peter.
                  
                  
                     Simulachre. A picture or image.
                  
                     Simulation. Diſſembling.
                  
                     Sincere. Vpright, plaine, without diſſimulation.
                  
                     Sinden. Fine linnen cloth.
                  
                     Single. The taile of a Stagge or other Deere.
                  
                     Singularitie. Priuate opinion, a deſire to bee odde from other men.
                  
                     
                     Siniſter. Vnhappy, naughty, lewde, harmefull.
                  
                     Sinoper. A kinde of red ſtone which ſome call rudle.
                  
                     Syren. A Mer-maide: Poets feine there were three Mer-mayds or Syrens, in the vpper part like maidens, and in the lower part fiſhes: which dwelling in the ſea of Sicilie, would allure Saylers to them, and afterward deſtroy them; beeing firſt brought aſleepe with harkening to their ſweete ſinging. Their names were Parthenope, Lygia, and Leucaſia; wherefore ſometime alluring women are ſaid to be Syrens.
                  
                  
                     Site. The ſetting or ſtanding of a place.
                  
                     Situation. The ſame that Site is.
                  
                     Slot. The view or print of a Stags foote in the ground.
                  
                     Slowth. A heard or company of wild Boares together.
                  
                     Sluſe. A frame or deuice to keepe water in any ground, or let it out.
                  
                     Smaradge. A precious ſtone called an Emerald: See Emerald.
                  
                     Socage. An ancient tenure of land, by doing ſome inferiour ſeruice of husbandry to the Lord of the fee.
                  
                     Sociable. Kinde, louing, one that will keepe company, or is curteous in company.
                  
                     Societie. Fellowſhip.
                  
                     Sole. Alone, onely.
                  
                     Soleciſme. A falſe manner of ſpeaking, contrary to rules of Grammar.
                  
                     Solegroue. An old name of the moneth of February.
                  
                     Solicite. To vrge, to mooue, to prouoke.
                  
                     Solicitude. Carefulneſſe.
                  
                     Solid. Whole, firme, not hollow.
                  
                     Soliditie. Wholeneſſe, maſſiueneſſe, ſoundneſſe.
                  
                     Solitarie. Alone, without company.
                  
                     Solitude. A deſert place, a wilderneſſe.
                  
                     Solſtice. The ſtay of the Sunne when he cannot go higher and lower, which is (with vs) in ſommer about

mid Iune, and in Winter about the middle of December.
                  
                     Soluble. Looſe, not bound
                  
                     Solue. To vntie, to open, to expound.
                  
                     Solution. A paiment or an expounding.
                  
                     Sophiſter. A ſubtill cauiller in words, a craftie diſputer, which will make a falſe matter ſeeme true.
                  
                     Sophiſme. A falſe argument.
                  
                     Sophiſticall. Deceitfull: captious.
                  
                     Sophiſticate. To counterfeit, to deceiue.
                  
                     Sophiſtrie. A falſe kinde of argument ſeeming true when it is not.
                  
                     Sore. To flye vp aloft: alſo it ſignifieth a Fallow Deere fou
                        •
                     e yeeres olde.
                  
                     Sorell. A Fallow Deere three yeeres old.
                  
                     Source. A waue of the ſea.
                  
                     Sownder. A company of wilde Bores together.
                  
                     Spaide. A Red Deere three yeeres old.
                  
                     Spatious. Large and wide.
                  
                     Species. The differing kinde of euery thing.
                  
                     Spectator. A beholder.
                  
                     Speculation. The inward knowledge, or beholding of a thing.
                  
                     Speculatiue. That which belongeth to Speculation.
                  
                     Sperme. Seed.
                  
                     Spermaceti. The ſeed of the Whale fiſh: It is vſed in Phyſicke againſt ſquats and bruiſings of the bodie.
                  
                     Spermaticall. Of or belonging to ſeed: or the veines which conteine the ſeede.
                  
                     Sphere. A round circle; It is commonly taken for the circled round compaſſe of the heauens.
                  
                     Spericall. Round like a ſphere.
                  
                     Spikenard. A kinde of ſweet herbe like Lauender.
                  
                     Splene. The Milte of man or beaſt: which is like a long narrowtongue, lying vnder the ſhort ribbes on the left ſide, and hath this office of nature, to purge the liuer of ſuperfluous melancholicke blood: ſometime it ſignifieth anger or choler.
                  
                     Splendour. Brightneſſe.
                  
                     
                     Splendent. Bright ſhining.
                  
                     Spongeous. Hollow, like a Sponge.
                  
                     Spouſals. A marriage.
                  
                     Spraints. Dung of an Otter.
                  
                     * Sprent. To ſprinkle.
                  
                     Spume. Fome or froth.
                  
                     Squadron. A ſquare forme in a battell.
                  
                     Squinanth. A kinde of round ruſh, which is ſweet, and hath flowers very medicinable.
                  
                     Squincy. A ſwelling diſeaſe in the throat.
                  
                     Stabilitie. Stedfaſtneſſe: conſtancie.
                  
                     Stacte. A ſweete oyle or liquor, which is drawen out of new myrrhe, by bruiſing and ſtrayning it according to art.
                  
                     Staggerd. A red male Deere, foure yeares old.
                  
                     Stanchhound An old hound well experienced.
                  
                     Stannaries. Mines of Tinne.
                  
                     Staple. Any towne or citie appointed for merchants of England to carry their Wooll, Cloth, Lead, Tinne, or ſuch like commodities vnto, for the better ſale of them to other merchants by the great.
                  
                     State. It is ſometime taken for vrine of mans bodie.
                  
                     Station. A ſtanding or reſting place.
                  
                     Statue. A carued, or caſt image, made inproportion like a man.
                  
                     Staueſaker. An herbe bearing a three cornered ſeed of a hotte burning nature, which beeing beaten to powder, and mingled with oyle, deſtroyeth lice, and cureth all itchy mangines.
                  
                     Stechados. A beautifull herbe, bearing faire knops or eares, which being boiled and drunken, doe open the ſtoppings of all inward parts, and are very good againſt the paine of the head, and diſeaſes of the breſt.
                  
                     Sterill. Barren.
                  
                     Sterilitie. Barrenneſſe: vnfruitfulneſſe.
                  
                     Stigmaticall. See Stigmaticke.
                  
                     Stigmaticke. A notorious leude fellow, which hath beene burnt with a hot yron,

or beareth other markes about him, as a token of his puniſhment.
                  
                     Stile. A manner or forme of writing, or ſpeaking.
                  
                     Stillyard A place in London where the Eaſterling merchants of Hawnſe and Almane, were wont to abide.
                  
                     Stipend. Wages, or hire giuen one.
                  
                     Stipendary. Hee that receiueth yearely wages, or is hyred to doe a thing for a certaine price.
                  
                     Stipulation. A ſolemne couenant or bargaine.
                  
                     Stoicall. Of or belonging to the Stoikes.
                  
                     Stoike. A ſeuere ſecte of Philoſophers at Athens which followed the doctrine of Zeno, who taught that a wiſe man ought to be free from all paſſions, and neuer to bee mooued either with ioy or griefe. They were called Stoikes, of the Greeke word Stoa. (which ſignifieth a porch) becauſe Zeno taught his followers in a common porch of the city.
                  
                     Storax. A kinde of ſweete Gumme, good againſt horſeneſſe and the cough.
                  
                     Storke. A birde famous for naturall loue toward his parents, whom he feedeth being olde and impotent, as they fedde him, being young. The Egyptians ſo eſteemed this bird, that there was a great penalty laid vpon any that ſhould kill him.
                  
                     Strangurion. A diſeaſe when one cannot make water, but by drops, and that with great paine.
                  
                     Stratageme. A policy or ſubtill deuice in warre, whereby the enemy is often vanquiſhed.
                  
                     Strict. Hard, ſtreight, ſeuere.
                  
                     Structure, A building.
                  
                     Student. One that ſtudieth.
                  
                     Studious. Giuen to ſtudy.
                  
                     Stupid. Blockiſh, without wit: dull.
                  
                     Stupidity. Blockiſhneſſe, dulneſſe: aſtoniſhment.
                  
                     Stupifaction. A making dull or ſenſleſſe.
                  
                     
                     Stygian. Belonging to the riuer Styx.
                  
                     Styx. A feined Riuer in hell, by which the heathen gods did vſe to ſweare. And if they ſwore falſely, they were depriued of their godhead, for one hundred yeares after.
                  
                     Suauity. Sweetnes.
                  
                     Subalterne. Placed vnder another: or that which ſucceedeth another by courſe.
                  
                     Subalternation. A ſucceeding by courſe.
                  
                     Subiect. That which doth ſupport qualities belonging vnto it: as the body is the ſubiect in which is health, or ſickeneſſe, and the minde the ſubiect that receiueth into it vertues or vices.
                  
                     Sublime. High, lofty, honourable.
                  
                     Sublimatum. A ſtrong coroſiue powder called white Mercury, vſed by Chirurgians to eate and conſume corrupted fleſh.
                  
                     Sublimity. Highneſſe, loftineſſe.
                  
                     Submiſſe. Lowly, humble.
                  
                     Subordinate. Placed in office vnder another.
                  
                     Subordination. An appointing or placing of one thing vnder another.
                  
                     Suborne. To bring one in for a falſe witneſſe: to inſtruct one priuily how to deceiue another.
                  
                     Subpoena. A Writ wherby one is ſummoned to appeare in the Chancery at a certaine time, vpon a great penalty, if he faile in appearance.
                  
                     Subſcribe. To write vnder.
                  
                     Subſcription. A writing vnder.
                  
                     Subſiſt. To abide or continue in his owne beeing.
                  
                     Subſiſtence. The abiding or continuance of a thing in it owne eſtate.
                  
                     Subſtitute. To appoint an inferiour officer: alſo hee that is in authority vnder another, or which ruleth in ſtead of another.
                  
                     Subterfuge. A refuge, a ſauegard; a place to hide or ſaue one in.
                  
                     Subuerſion. An ouerthrow.
                  
                     
                     Subuert. To ouerthrow, to deſtroy.
                  
                     Succinct. Briefe, ſhort.
                  
                     Suffocate. To ſtrangle: to choke.
                  
                     Suffocation. A choaking, a ſtrangling.
                  
                     Suffrage. Fauourable, voices in our behalfe, as at the chooſing of of officers or Magiſtrates
                  
                     Suggeſt. To put cloſely into ones mind.
                  
                     Suggeſtion A prompting or putting of a thing into ones mind.
                  
                     Sulphur. Brimſtone.
                  
                     Summary. A briefe gathering together: an abridgment containing the whole effect of a matter in few words.
                  
                     Summarily. Briefly: touching onely the chiefe points.
                  
                     Summity. The height or top of a thing.
                  
                     Seperabound. To abound very much; to bee in great plenty.
                  
                     Supereminence. Authority, or dignity aboue others.
                  
                     Supererogation. Laying out of more then one hath receiued; or the doing of more then a man is of neceſſity bound to doe.
                  
                     Superficiall. Going no farther then the outſide; ſlight, bearing ſhew onely in the outſide, without any goodneſſe within.
                  
                     Superficies. The outſide of euery thing, which is alwayes in ſight.
                  
                     Superfluity. More then needes to be, ouermuch.
                  
                     Superfluous. That which is too much: alſo vaine or vnprofitable.
                  
                     Superlatiue. The higheſt.
                  
                     Superiour. Higher, aboue another.
                  
                     Supernall. That which commeth from aboue.
                  
                     Superſcription. A writing ſet vpon any thing, as on the outſide of a letter.
                  
                     Superſedeas. In our common Lawe it ſignifieth a commaundement ſent by writing, forbidding an officer from the doing of that, which otherwiſe he might and ought to doe.
                  
                     Superſtition. An exceſſe of ceremonious worſhip, falſe worſhip, or honour giuen to God.
                  
                     
                     Supplant. To trip one, or to ouerthrow one craftily.
                  
                     Supplement. That which ſupplyeth or maketh vp what is wanting.
                  
                     Supply. To fill vp or adde too.
                  
                     Suppliant. He that maketh a ſupplication, or humbly intreateth another.
                  
                     Supplicate. To beſeech humbly.
                  
                     Suppoſitory. Any thing put vp into the Fundament, to make the body ſoluble. It is commonly made of hony boyled till it grow thick, and ſo made into an apt forme for that purpoſe; whereto ſometime is added the yolke of an egge, or ſalt, when wee will haue it to worke the effect more ſpeedily.
                  
                     Suppreſſe. To keepe downe; to beate vnder: ſometime to conceale or keepe cloſe.
                  
                     Suppuration. An account or reckoning.
                  
                     Supreme. Chiefe, higheſt, moſt excellent.
                  
                     Surceaſe. To giue ouer, leaue off or ceaſe.
                  
                     * Surcote. A gowne with a hood of the ſame.
                  
                     Surpluſage. Ouerplus, more then needes.
                  
                     Surpriſe. To come vnwares: to take vpon a ſodaine.
                  
                     Surpriſall. A taking vnawares.
                  
                     * Surquidry. Preſumption.
                  
                     Surrender. To yeeld vp lands or tenements to another.
                  
                     Surreption. A priuy taking away.
                  
                     Surround. To compaſſe round about.
                  
                     Suruey. To ouerlooke, or ouerſee.
                  
                     Surueyer. Hee that hath the ouerſight, of the kings or ſome great perſonages lands or works.
                  
                     Suruiue. To ouerliue, or liue after another.
                  
                     Suruiuer. He that liueth after another.
                  
                     Suſpend. To ſtay one by authority for a time, from executing his office: to delay, to deferre.
                  
                     Suſpence. Doubtfulneſſe, vncertainty.
                  
                      
                     Suſpiration. A breathing or ſighing.
                  
                     Swallowes tayle. In building it ſignifieth, a faſtening of two peeces of timber ſo ſtrongly together, that they cannot fall aſunder.
                  
                     Swaine. A ſeruant.
                  
                     Swainemote. A Court kept thrice a yeare, touching matters belonging to a forreſt.
                  
                     * Sweuen. A dreame.
                  
                     * Swynker. A labourer.
                  
                     Sycomore. A tree like a fig tree, hauing great branches, and large leaues like a Mulberrie. It beares fruit three or foure times in a yeare, much like a wilde Fig, but without any ſeeds within. The fruit groweth vpon the very bodie of the tree, and the great maine boughes, and will neuer be ripe except it bee ſcraped with an iron toole. It is found plentifully in Caria, Egypt, and the Ile of Rhodes; eſpecially in ſuch places, where Wheate will not grow.
                  
                     Sycophant. A Talebearer, a ſlanderer, a falſe accuſer.
                  
                     Syllogiſme. An Argument conſiſting of three parts, whereby ſomething is neceſſarily prooued, as thus: 

                        
                           Euery vertue is honourable: Patience is a vertue.
                        
                        Therefore Patience is honourable.
                        
                     
The firſt part of a ſyllogiſme is called the Propoſition or Maior; the ſecond the Aſſumption or Minor; and the third, the Concluſion.
                  
                     Syluane. Of, or belonging to the woods.
                  
                     Symbole. A ſhort gathering of principall points together.
                  
                     Symmetrie. Due proportion of one part with another.
                  
                     Symmetrian. Hee that conſidereth the due proportion of a thing; & how well the parts agree with the whole.
                  
                     Sympathie. A likeneſſe in quantitie; or a like diſpoſition or affection of one thing to another.
                  
                     Symphonie. Harmony or conſent in Muſicke.
                  
                     
                     Symptome. Any paſſion or griefe following a diſeaſe, or ſenſibly ioyned with it: as headach with an Ague, a pricking in the ſide with Pleuriſie, and ſuch like.
                  
                     Synagogue. A Congregation or aſſembly: commonly it ſignifies a church of the Iewes.
                  
                     Synteriſie. The inward conſcience, or a naturall qualitie ingrafted in the ſoule, which inwardly informeth a man, whether he doe well or ill.
                  
                     Syynod. A generall councell, a generall or vniuerſall aſſembly.
                  
                     Synoper. See Cinoper.
                  
                     Synopſie. A ſight or full view of a thing.
               
            
            
               T
               
                  
                     * TAas. An heape.
                  
                     Tabernacle. A ſhelter or a roome made abroad, with boords and boughes of trees. There was of old among the Iſraelites, a feaſt commanded by God, called the feaſt of Tabernacles; which beganne on the fiftenth day of the ſeuenth moneth, and continued ſeauen daies, during which time the Iſraelites liued abroad in Tabernacles, in re
                        •
                     embrance, that their Fathers a long time ſo liued, after God had deliuered them out of the land of Egypt. 
                  
                     Tacamahaca. A Roſin brought out of the Weſt Indies, of great vertue againſt any cold humours, riſing of the Mother, Toothach, and diuers other griefes.
                  
                     Talent. A certaine value of money Among the Greekes there were two kinds of talents, the greater and the leſſe: The greater conteined about two hundred thirtie three pounds ſterling: the leſſe about a hundred ſeuentie fiue pounds. Among the Hebrewes the greater talent of the Sanctuary conteined 400. pounds, the leſſer Talent halfe ſo much.
                  
                     Tallage. Cuſtome: fraight.
                  
                     
                     Tamarinds. A fruite brought hither out of India like vnto green Damſe
                        •
                     . They are cold in operation, and therefore good againſt burning Feauers, and all inward diſeaſes, proceeding of heate and choler.
                  
                     Tamariske. A little tree bearing leaues not much vnlike to heath; the decoction whereof in Wine and a little Vineger beeing drunken, is of great vertue againſt the hardnes or ſtopping of the ſpleene or Milt. This tree doth by nature ſo waſt the Milt, that Swine which haue beene daily fedde out of a veſſell made thereof, haue beene found to haue no Milt at all.
                  
                     * Tapinage. Secrecie, ſlilineſſe.
                  
                     Tarantula. A little beaſt like a Lizard, hauing ſpots in his necke like ſtarres.
                  
                     Tardie. Slow.
                  
                     Tartar. Leeze of wine.
                  
                     Tautologie. A repeating of one ſpeech or matter often.
                  
                     Taxe. To appoint what one ſhal pay to the Prince: ſometime to reprooue.
                  
                     Tearce. A meaſure of moyſt things beeing the fixt part of a tunne, and the third part of a pipe.
                  
                     * Teene. Sorrow.
                  
                     Temerarius. Raſh, haſty.
                  
                     Temeritie. Raſhneſſe.
                  
                     Templaries. Certaine Chriſtain ſouldiours dwelling about the Temple at Hieruſalem, whoſe office was to entertain Chriſtian ſtrangers that came thither for deuotion, and to guard them in ſafety when they went to viſite the places of the holy Land: They wore by their Order a white Cloake or vpper Garment, with a red Croſſe.
                  
                     Temporall. That which endureth but a time.
                  
                     Temporarie. The ſame that Temporall is.
                  
                     Temporize. To follow the time: To ſeeke or pleaſe the time.
                  
                     Tenacitie. A holding faſt, a niggardneſſe.
                  
                     Tenderlings. The ſoft tops of a Deeres hornes when they are in blood.
                  
                     
                     Tendrels. Little ſprigs of Vines or other Plants, wherewith they take hold to grow or ſtay themſelues vp.
                  
                     Te
                           •••
                        
                      A terme vſed among Heralds, ſignifying an Oreng or tawny colour.
                  
                     Tenon. The part of a poſt which is put into a mortiſe hole, to make it ſtand vpright, or to beare it vp.
                  
                     Ten
                           •
                        itie. Littleneſſe, ſlenderneſſe.
                  
                     Tergiuerſation. Wrangling, ouerth 
                        ••
                     rt dealing. A ſeeming to run away and yet 
                        •
                     ight ſtill.
                  
                     Termination. An ending or laſt part of a word.
                  
                     Terrne. Earthly.
                  
                     Terreſtriall. Earthly.
                  
                     Terrifie. To make afraid.
                  
                     Territorie. Land lying within the bounds of a Citie.
                  
                     Terrour. Feare, dread.
                  
                     Tertian The third, or returning euery third day.
                  
                     Teſtament. A written will.
                  
                     Teſtator. He that worketh a will.
                  
                     Teſtifie. To beare witneſſe.
                  
                     Teſtification. A witneſſing.
                  
                     Tetragrammaton. Hauing foure Letters. The Hebrewes ſ called the great name of God Iehouah, becauſe in their language it was written with foure letters.
                  
                     Tetrarch. A Prince that ruleth the fourth part of a kingdome.
                  
                     Theater. A place made halfe round where people ſate to behold ſolemne playes and games.
                  
                     Theatricall. Of, or belonging to the Theater.
                  
                     Theme. A ſentence or argument whereupon one ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Theologie. Diuinitie: the knowledge of Diuine things.
                  
                     Theologicall vertues. Faith, Hope and Charity are ſo called, becauſe they haue their obiect & end in God
                  
                     Theoreticall. That which belongeth to cotemplation or inward knowledge of a thing.
                  
                     Theorick. The inward knowledge or contemplation of a thing.
                  
                     
                     * Thilke. The ſame.
                  
                     * Thirle. To pearce.
                  
                     Thorpe. A village.
                  
                     Thraſonicall. Vainglorious, full of boaſting as Thraſo was.
                  
                     Threnes. Lamentations: mournings.
                  
                     * Threpe. To affirme.
                  
                     Thummim. An Hebrew word ſignifying perfection See Vrim.
                  
                  
                     Tiara. A rich cap or hat of ſilke vſed by Kings and Prieſts of Perſia: It couered not the whole head before, but was faſtened with ribbins behind, ſo that it could not eaſily fall off.
                  
                     Tiger. A fierce wild beaſt in India & Hyrcania. This beaſt is the ſwifteſt of all other, wherefore they are taken very young in the dams abſence, and carried away by men on horſebacke; who hearing the cry of the old Tiger following ſwiftly after them, doe of purpoſe let fall one of the young whelpes, that while ſhe beareth that back, they in the meane time may eſcape ſafe with the other to the ſhip.
                  
                     Timerous. Fearefull.
                  
                     Timidity. Fearefulneſſe.
                  
                     Tincture. A dipping, colouring, or ſtayning of a thing.
                  
                     Titular. Which beareth onely a Title.
                  
                     Toft. A place where a houſe hath ſtood.
                  
                     Tolerate. To indure or ſuffer.
                  
                     Toleration. An induring; a ſufferance.
                  
                     Tome. A part or diuiſion.
                  
                     Tone. A tune, note, or accent of the voice.
                  
                     Tonnage. A paiment due for merchandiſe carried in tuns, or ſuch like veſſels, after a certaine rate in euery tunne.
                  
                     Tonſure. A clipping or cutting of the haire.
                  
                     Topaſe. A precious ſtone wherof there are two kinds one of the colour of gold, and the other of a Saffron colour, not ſo good as the firſt. It is written that this ſtone beeing put into ſeething water, doth ſo coole it, that one may preſently take it out with his hand.
                  
                     Topikes Places to finde arguments.
                  
                     Topography. A deſcription of a place.
                  
                     
                     Torrent. A little ſtreame, a brooke that runneth ſwiftly.
                  
                     Torride. Burning, exceeding hot.
                  
                     Torteauxes. Cakes of bread: a terme vſed in Heraldry.
                  
                     Totall. The whole.
                  
                     Trace. To follow by the ſteps.
                  
                     Traces. The print of feet in a b
                        •
                     aſtes of rauine, as wilde Boares, Beires, and ſuch like.
                  
                     Tract. A diſcourſe a drawing in length,
                  
                     Tractable. Eaſie 
                        •
                     o be ruled and handled: gentle, eaſie to be perſwaded.
                  
                     Tradition. A deliuerie: that which is deliuered vs from others.
                  
                     Traduce. To ſpeake euill of one, to defame, to reproach.
                  
                     Tragacanth. A kinde of Gum, the beſt whereof is cleere, and ſomwhat ſweet in taſte: It is often vſed againſt coughes, and rough hoarſeneſſe of the throat.
                  
                     Tragedy. A play or Hiſtory ended with great ſorrow and bloodſhed.
                  
                     Tragedian. A Player or Writer of Tragedies.
                  
                     Tragicall. Mournefull, lamentable, deadly, which endeth like a Tragedy.
                  
                     Tranquility. Quietnes of mind, calmeneſſe.
                  
                     Tranſcendent. That which clymeth ouer and ſurmounteth another thing: In Logicke it ſignifieth a word of ſuch nature that it cannot bee included in any of the tenne predicaments.
                  
                     Tranſcript. A writing or a coppying out.
                  
                     Transferre. To carry or conuey from one place to another.
                  
                     Transfiguration. An altering of the form or figure.
                  
                     Transformation. A changing into another forme.
                  
                     Tranſition. A paſſing ouer from one thing to another.
                  
                     Tranſitory. Soone paſſing, of ſhort continuance.
                  
                     Tranſlucent. Cleere, bright, which may be ſeene through.
                  
                     Tranſmigration. A remoouing to dwell, from one place to another.
                  
                     
                     Tranſmitte. To ſend ouer or away.
                  
                     Tranſmutation. A changing.
                  
                     Tranſparent. Cleere, that may be ſeene through.
                  
                     Tranſport. To ſend ouer by ſhippe.
                  
                     Tranſpoſe. To change or alter the order of a thing.
                  
                     Transubſtantiation. A changing of one ſubſtance into another.
                  
                     Traſonings. The croſſings or doublings of a Rowe bucke before the hou
                        ••
                     ds.
                  
                     Traue. A treuiſe to ſhooe a wild horſe in.
                  
                     Trauerſe. To march vp and downe or to moue the feete with proportion, as in dancing. In our commō Lawe it ſignifieth to make contradiction, or to deny the chiefe point of the matter wherewith one is charged.
                  
                     Treble. Threefolde, or to make a thing thrice ſo great as it is: ſometime it ſignifieth the higheſt note in muſicke.
                  
                     Tremour. A trembling.
                  
                     Trepandiron. An inſtrument vſed by ſurgeons to cut out a ſmall bone withall.
                  
                     Treſſes. Haire.
                  
                     Triangled. Three coroered.
                  
                     Tribe. A kindered; or company that dwelleth together in one ward.
                  
                     Tribune. The name of two chiefe officers in Rome. The firſt was Tribune of the people, who was to defend their liberties, and had therefore the gates of his houſe ſtanding alwayes open day and night. The other was called Tribune of the ſouldiours, who had charge to ſee them well armed, and ordered, beeing as the Knight marſhal is with vs.
                  
                     Tribunall. A iudgement ſeate.
                  
                     Tributary. Which payeth tribute.
                  
                     Trine. The number of three.
                  
                     Trinity. Three ioyned in one, or three together.
                  
                     Tripartite. Diuided into three parts.
                  
                     Trippe. A heard or flocke of goates.
                  
                     Triplicity. Threefolde being.
                  
                     
                     Triuiall. Baſe, vile, of no eſtimation, common euery where.
                  
                     Triumuirate. The office of three together.
                  
                     Trociſkes. Little flatte cakes ſolde by Apothecaries, made of diuers ſimple medicines mingled together.
                  
                     Trope. The changing of a word; or a figuratiue manner of ſpeaking.
                  
                     Trophie. Any thing ſet vp in token of victorie. This cuſtome firſt began among the Greeks, who vſed in that place, where the enemies were vanquiſhed, to cut downe the boughes of great trees, & in the ſtockes or bodies of them to hang vp armour, or other ſpoiles taken from the enemies.
                  
                     Tropicall. That which is ſpoken by a trope or figure.
                  
                     Tropikes. Two imagined circles in the ſpheare, of equall diſtance on eyther ſide from the Equinoctiall line. The one is called the Tropike of Cancer, the other the Tropike of Capricorne. To the firſt the Sun commeth in Iune, to the other in December. They are called Tropikes of the Greeke word Trepo, which ſignifieth to tourne, becauſe when the Sun comes to either of them, he turns his courſe another way.
                  
                     Troy weight. A pound weight of twelue ounces, by which gold, ſiluer precious ſtones, iewels and bread are weighed.
                  
                     Trucheman. An interpreter.
                  
                     Truculent. Fierce, cruell and terrible.
                  
                     Trunke. The body of a tree.
                  
                     Tuition. Defence, protection.
                  
                     Tumor. A ſwelling.
                  
                     Tumult. A ſedition or trouble, ſome gathering together of the people.
                  
                     Tumultuous. Seditious, full of buſineſſe, or trouble.
                  
                     Tunne. A meaſure of 252. gallons. In weight it ſignifieth twenty hundred.
                  
                     Turbith. A roote much vſed in Phyſicke, to purge ſlimie fleame out of the

                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     

                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     

                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
body. The beſt is white and hollow, and is commonly taken with a little ginger, for then it will worke the effect with more eaſe.
                  
                     Turbith minerall. A certaine red powder (made according to the Paracelſian practiſe) which is vſed aga
                        •
                     nſt the French diſeaſe.
                  
                     Turbulent. Troubleſome, vnquiet.
                  
                     Turkiſe. A precious ſtone of a ſilke blew colou
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Turpentine. A faire, cleere, and moiſt kinde of roſin, which iſſueth out of the Larx and Turpentine tree. It is good to be put into oyntments and emplaiſters, for it gleweth, cleanſeth and healeth wounds. It may bee alſo licked in with hony, and then it cleanſeth the breſt, and gently looſeth the belly, prouoking vrine and driuing out the ſtone and grauell.
                  
                     Turpitude. Filthines, diſhoneſty.
                  
                     Turtle doue. A bird leſſe then a pigeon, fanſous for contine n
                        •
                     ie in windowes eſtate. If the male or female of this bird die, the other euer remaineth ſingle, as it were in continuall ſorrow. In the ſpring time they are ſcarce ſeene, becauſe they then looſe their fethers: when they drinke, they lift not vp their heads backeward as other birds vſe. They liue commōly eight yeares, and doe breede twice a yeare, not aboue three egges at a time.
                  
                     Tutmouthed. He that hath the chinne and nether iaw ſlicking out farther then the vpper.
                  
                     Tutour. A defender, hee that hath charge to bring vp a childe.
                  
                     Twibill. An inſtrument vſed by Carpenters to make mortiſe holes.
                  
                     Tympanie. A diſeaſe wherein the body waxing leane, the belly ſwelleth vp, hauing great ſtore of wind and windy humours gathered together betweene the inner skinne thereof and the guts.
                  
                     Type. A figure, forme or likeneſſe of any thing.
                  
                     
                     Typicall. Myſtical, or that which ſerueth as a ſhadow and figure of an other thing.
                  
                     Tyrant. A cruell Prince, One that ruleth vniuſtly.
                  
                     Tyrannize. To play the tyrant, to gouerne with crueltie.
               
            
            
               V
               
                  
                     VAcant. Voyde, empty; without buſineſſe.
                  
                     Vacation. A ceaſing from labour.
                  
                     Vacuitie. Emptineſſe.
                  
                     Vacuum. Emptineſſe.
                  
                     Vaile bonet. To put off the hatte, to ſtrike ſaile, to giue ſigne of ſubmiſſion.
                  
                     Valentinians. Certaine heretikes ſo called by the name of their firſt maſter Valentinianus; who held opinion that our Sauiour receiued not his fleſh of the bleſſed Virgin Mary.
                  
                     Validitie. Force, or ſtrength.
                  
                     Variable. Changeable, which altereth often.
                  
                     Variation. An altering, or changing.
                  
                     Vaſte. Huge and great.
                  
                     Vaſtation. A waſting or ſpoyling of a countrey.
                  
                     Vaſtitie. Exceeding greatneſſe: alſo waſte or ſpoile done to a countrey.
                  
                     Vaueſſour. A Lord.
                  
                     Vauntcourers. Forerunners
                  
                     Vauntlay. A terme of hunting, when they ſeue hounds in readines, where they thinke a chace will paſſe, and caſt them off before the reſt of the kennell come in.
                  
                     Vaward. The foremoſt part of a battle.
                  
                     Vbiquitie The preſence of a perſon in all places at once.
                  
                     * Vechons. Hedgehogs.
                  
                     Vegetiue. That which liueth and groweth as plants doe.
                  
                     Vehemencie. Earneſtnes.
                  
                     Veile. To hide or couers alſo any thing which hideth or couereth.
                  
                     Velitations. Skirmiſhes, fightings.
                  
                     Velocitie. Swiftneſſe.
                  
                     Velume. Fine parchmen
                        •
                      of calues skinnes.
                  
                     Vendible. Saleable, which will quickly be ſold.
                  
                     
                     Venerable. Reuerent, graue, worſhipfull.
                  
                     Veneration. A worſhipping.
                  
                     Venery. Hunting: ſometime fleſhly wantonneſſe.
                  
                     Veneriall. See venerious.
                  
                     Venerious. Fleſhly: giuen to lechery.
                  
                     Venie. A touch in the body at playing with weapons.
                  
                     Veniall. Which may eaſily be pardoned.
                  
                     Ventory. A fanne for a woman.
                  
                     Ventoſity. Windineſſe.
                  
                     V
                           •
                        ntricle. The ſtomacke of any liuing thing.
                  
                     Ventroloquie. A hollow inward ſpeaking of a ſpirit in a poſſeſſed body.
                  
                     Ver. The ſpring time.
                  
                     V
                           •
                        rbal. Of or belonging to words.
                  
                     Verbatim. Word by word, that which is preciſely ſpoken, according as ſome thing was ſpoken before.
                  
                     Verboſitie. Much talke, many words.
                  
                     Verdegreaſe. A greene ſubſtance, made of the ruſt of braſſe or copper, which hath beene hanged certaine dayes ouer ſtrong vineger; It is of a fretting nature, and therfore to be vſed with great diſcretion.
                  
                     Verdour. The name of a chiefe officer in a Forreſt: ſometime it ſignifieth greeneneſſe.
                  
                     Verge. A rod or wanne.
                  
                     Verger. Hee that carryeth a white wande before a great officer.
                  
                     Verifie. To prooue, to make true.
                  
                     Verity. Truth.
                  
                     Vermilion See Cinoper.
                  
                     Vernall. Of or belonging to the ſpring.
                  
                     Verſifie. To make verſes.
                  
                     Verte. A terme in herauldry: it ſignifieth a greene colour.
                  
                     Veſper. The Euening.
                  
                     Veſtals. Certaine virgins among the ancient Romanes, conſecrated to the Goddeſſe Vesta. They were alwayes choſen betweene ſixe and tenne yeares of age, and continued thirty yeeres in their office; whereof the

firſt tenne yeares they beſtowed in learning the ceremonies of their order, the ſecond they employed in execution thereof, and the laſt tenne in teaching others, after it was lawfull for them to marry if they would. Their chiefe office was to keepe fire continually burning in a round temple at Rome in honour of Veſta, and if it chanced to goe out, they were to renew it againe with no vſuall fire, but ſuch as they could get by art from the Sunne beames. They were greatly honoured in the City, and had diuers priuiledges: for they were carried in Chariots, and the chiefeſt Magiſtrates would doe reuerence to them. They had officers going before them, as the Conſuls had, and if they met any who was ledde to bee put to death, they had authority to deliuer him, taking an oath that they came not that way of purpoſe, but by chāce. They might alſo make a will, and diſpoſe of their goods as they pleaſed. But if any of them were found to liue vnchaſt ſhee was openly carryed with ſad ſilence to the gate called Collina, where being put into a deepe pitte, ſhee was preſently buryed aliue. Theſe Veſtals were firſt inſtituted by Numa Pompilius, or as ſome write, by Romulus.
                  
                  
                     Veſtment. A garment, or clothing.
                  
                     * Viands. Victuals.
                  
                     Viaticum. Money or any neceſſary prouiſion for a traueller.
                  
                     Viciate. To corrupt, to defile.
                  
                     Vicegerent. A deputy, one that ſupplieth the place of an other man.
                  
                     Vicinity. Neighbourhood.
                  
                     Vicisſitude. An intechangeable courſe of things, now one way, now an other.
                  
                     Victime. A ſacrifice, a beaſt offered in ſacrifice.
                  
                     Victimate. To offer in ſacrifice, to kill and ſacrifice.
                  
                     
                     Victor. A conquerer.
                  
                     Victorious. That hath gotten the victorie.
                  
                     Videlicet. To wit, that is to ſay.
                  
                     View. The print of the foote of a fallow Deere in the ground.
                  
                     Vigilancie. Watchfulnes
                  
                     Vigilant. Watchfull.
                  
                     Vigill. The Eeue or day next before a great feſtiuall day. It ſignifieth alſo a portion of the night diuided into foure equal parts, the firſt Vigill beganne at ſixe of the clocke in the euening, and continued till nine. The ſecond Vigill began at nine, and continued till twelue. The third wa
                        •
                      from twelue till three. And the fourth was from three, till ſixe of the clocke in the morning.
                  
                     Vigour. Strength, liuelineſſe, force.
                  
                     Vigorous. Liuely, ſtrong, luſty.
                  
                     Vilifie. To make baſe.
                  
                     Vilitie. Baſeneſſe.
                  
                     Vindictiue. Reuengefull, or apt to reuenge.
                  
                     Vintage. The time of yeare when wine is made.
                  
                     Violate. To offer violence, to corrupt or defile, to tranſgreſſe or breake a law.
                  
                     Violation. An offering of violence, a breaking.
                  
                     Viper. A venemous ſerpent in ſome hot countries lying much in the earth, hauing a ſhort taile, which grateth and maketh a noiſe as he goeth. They are of a yellow colour, and ſometime red. The male hath but one tooth in euery ſide, but the female hath moe. It is written that when they ingender, the female biteth off the males head, which he putteth into her mouth, and that the yong ones doe gnaw the dams belly, and ſo kill her to get forth the ſooner.
                  
                     Virago. A ſtout woman of manly courage.
                  
                     Virginall. Of or belonging to a Virgin.
                  
                     Virilitie. Mans eſtate.
                  
                     Virulent. Poyſonous, deadly, infectious.
                  
                     Viſible. Which may be ſeene.
                  
                     Viſibilitie. The abilitie or powre of ſeeing.
                  
                     
                     Vitall. Liuing, or appertaining to life.
                  
                     Vitiate. To corrupt or defile.
                  
                     Vitious. Full of vice, lewde, wicked.
                  
                     Vitriol. Copperas: It is of a middle nature betweene ſtone and metall.
                  
                     Vituperate. To reproach, blame, or diſpraiſe.
                  
                     Vituperation. A blaming, a rebuking.
                  
                     Viuacitie. Long life, liuelineſſe.
                  
                     Viuification A quickening, a reuiuing.
                  
                     Vleer. A ſ
                        •
                     re, or botch.
                  
                     Vleerate. To make ſores or bliſters to ariſe.
                  
                     Vmbilike. The Nauell, the middle part
                  
                     Vmbrated. Shadowed.
                  
                     Vnacceſsible. Vnapproachable, which cannot bee come vnto.
                  
                     Vnammitie. One conſent of minde, concord, agreement.
                  
                     Vncoteth. Strange.
                  
                     Vnction. An annointing.
                  
                     * Vneth. Scarce, hardly, with difficulty.
                  
                     Vnguent. An oyntment.
                  
                     Vniforme. Of one forme and faſhion.
                  
                     Vniformitie. One forme and faſhion.
                  
                     Vnintelligible. Which cannot be vnderſtood.
                  
                     Vnion. A ioyning together, concord, agreement: alſo there is a precious pearle ſo called.
                  
                     Vnitie. Concord, agreement.
                  
                     Vniuerſall. The whole, all in generall.
                  
                     Vniuerſalitie. The whole ſtate, all in generall.
                  
                     Vnſatiable. Which cannot be filled or ſatisfied.
                  
                     Vocabularie. Of or belonging to words, which conſiſteth onely of words.
                  
                     Vocall. Of or belonging to the voice.
                  
                     Vocation. A calling, or courſe of life that one is called to.
                  
                     Volant. Flying.
                  
                     Volubilitie. The quicke turning of any thing: inconſtancy, changeablenes.
                  
                     Voluntarie. Willing.
                  
                     * Voluper. A Kercher.
                  
                     Voluptuous. Giuen to pleaſure.
                  
                     
                     Voluptuouſneſſe. Pleaſure o
                        •
                      bodie, wantonneſſe.
                  
                     Vomite. To caſt, to rid the ſtomacke.
                  
                     Voracitie. A deuouring.
                  
                     Votarie. He that maketh a vow, or bindeth himſelfe by vow.
                  
                     Vowell. A letter which maketh a perfect ſound of it ſelfe, as a, e, i, o, u.
                  
                  
                     Vrbanitie. Courteſie in ſpeech or behauiour, ciuilitie, gentleneſſe.
                  
                     Vrgent. Which vrgeth or compelleth a man to go about a matter.
                  
                     Vreters The water pipes or conduits by which the vrine paſſeth from the kidnies to the bladder.
                  
                     Vrim. An Hebrew word, which the high Prieſt of the Iewes wore with the word Thummim, in the plaits of the Rationall vpon his breſt: Saint Hierome interpreteth it, Learning.
                  
                     Vrine. Water of man or beaſt.
                  
                     V
                           •
                        ne. A box, or litle veſſel.
                  
                     Vtas. The eighth day following any terme or feaſt.
                  
                     Vtenſils. Neceſſaries belonging to a houſe or ſhip.
                  
                     Vtility. Profit, commoditie.
                  
                     Vulgar. Common or much vſed of the common people.
                  
                     Vultur: A rauenous fellow, a cruell Cormorant.
                  
                     Vuula. A little peece of fleſh in the inmoſt roofe of the mouth, which ſomtime hangeth looſe downward, and hindereth from ſpeaking and ſwallowing the meat.
               
            
            
               W
               
                  
                     WAife. Goods that a Fellon flying, leaueth for haſt behind him, which commonly are forfet to the lord of the ſoile, if the right owner bee not knowne.
                  
                     Waiue. In our common law it ſignifieth a woman that is outlawed.
                  
                     * Wanger. A male or bouget.
                  
                     * Wariſon. Reward.
                  
                     Wariangles A kinde of rauenous birds.
                  
                     Warpe. The threed that goeth in the length of the cloth.
                  
                     
                     * Waſtell bread. Fine Cimnell.
                  
                     * Waymenting. Lamenting.
                  
                     Weaſand. The throat or paſſage into the ſtomacke.
                  
                     * Weene. To thinke.
                  
                     Welked. Withered.
                  
                     Welkine. The whole compaſſe of the heauens: the Firmament, the heauens.
                  
                     * Wend. To goe.
                  
                     Whilke. Which.
                  
                     * Whilome. Whilſt, ſometime once, or in time paſt.
                  
                     Whirlebone. A round bone vpon the knee, which may be mooued vp and downe.
                  
                     Whorleba
                           •
                        . A weapon hauing plummets of Lead tyed to the end of it.
                  
                     Wile. Deceit, craftineſſe.
                  
                     Wily. Subtile, craftie.
                  
                     Wiſard. A Wiſe man, a Witch, a cunning man.
                  
                     Withername. When hee that hath taken a diſtreſſe carrieth it to ſuch a place, where the Sheriffe may not make diliuerance vpon a Repleuine, then the party diſtrayned may haue a Writ to the Sheriffe, that he takes as many beaſts, or as much goods of the other in his keeping, till that he hath made deliuerance of the firſt diſtreſſe, and this is called a Writ of Whithername.
                  
                  
                     * Wone. Store.
                  
                     * Wonne. To dwell, or abide.
                  
                     * Woodſhaw. Woodſide or ſhadow.
                  
                     Woofe. That threed in weauing which goeth a croſſe.
                  
                     Wooldriuer. He that buyeth wooll in the Country, and carrieth it away on horſebacke to ſell it againe.
                  
                     Wrethe. The tayle of a wilde Boare.
                  
                     Wrecke. The loſſe of a ſhip at Sea by drowning: alſo goods ſo loſt and caſt vpon the ſea ſhore.
                  
                     * Wreme. To compaſſe about.
                  
                     Wright. A Carpenter.
                  
                     * Wimble. A Kercher.
                  
                     Wyner. A ſerpent much like a Dragon.
               
            
            
               X
               
                  
                     XYloaloes. See Lignum Aloes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Xylobalſamum. A ſweete wood out of which balme droppeth. See Balme.
               
            
            
               Y
               
                  
                     YArdland. In ſome places, it is 20. Acres of land: in ſome, 24. and in ſome 30.
                  
                     Yarrow. Fearefull, ſaint-hearted. Alſo there is an her be ſo called, good to ſtop any bleeding.
                  
                     Yate. A Gate.
                  
                     Yeleeped. Called, named.
                  
                     Yearne. To cry and ba
                        •
                     ke as Beaggles doe at their prey.
                  
                     Yede. Went.
                  
                     Yexing. Sobbing.
                  
                     Y
                           ••
                        e. Long agoe, of old.
                  
                     Yuca. An herbe in India, wherewith they vſe to m
                        •
                     ke bread.
               
            
            
               Z
               
                  
                     ZAnie. A fooliſh imitator to a tumbler, or ſuch like.
                  
                     Zenith. That part of the heauens which is direct ouer our heads.
                  
                     Zephyrus. The Weſte w
                        •
                     nde.
                  
                     Zodiake. An imaginary winding circle in the heauens, vnder which the planets are ſtill mooued, and in which the twelve ſignes are placed.
                  
                     Zone. A girdle in Coſmography, it ſignifieth a diuiſion made of the heauens into fiue parts, wherof one is extreme hot, two extreame colde, and two temperate. The hot Zone, otherwiſe called the burning Zone, is all that part of the heauens, which is contained betweene the two Tropickes of Cancer and Capricorn
                           ••
                        
                      in which Zone, contin
                        ••••
                      
                     
                        •••
                     y the Sun keepeth his 
                        •••••
                     e. The two cold Zones are vnder the two poles of the world, or within 23. degrees neere them. The two temperate are the Zones betweene the fartheſt extreme cold and the middle burning zone. And with theſe fiue Zones of the heauens, doeth the earth vnder, agree in heat, cold, temperature.
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   