
      
         
            
            
            
               A
DIALOGVE
BETWIXT COSMOPHILUS
AND THEOPHILUS
ANENT THE
Urging of new ceremonies
upon the Kirke of
SCOTLAND.
            
            1 Ioh. 1. 15.
            Love not the World, neither the things
that are in the World: If any man
love the World, the love of the Father
is not in him.
            MDCXX.
         
         
            
            
            To the Christian Reader.
            
               I Have penned this conference anent
ceremonies; short, that thine eyes
should not be wearied with the reading
of it: plaine, that thy wits should
not be troubled with the understanding
of it: generall, because they are particularly
in sundry treatises already handled.
My purpose onely is, the information
of the simple and unlearned, to
guard their minds, that they bee not
drawn or stollen away from the truth,
by these common and deceaving arguments,
which are much in the mouthes
of those who mind earthly things. The
speechmen in it are, Cosmophilus, that
is, a lover of the World: and Theophilus,
that is, a lover of God. The love
of the one of their two opposite objects,
either to God or to the World, leads the
opposite armies, whether of preachers, or
of professors in these decaying dayes. The
true badge of the lover of God, is, zealously
to plead for God and his cause:
although it should be to his worldly disadvantage.
The true badge of the lover

of the World, is to plead for the World,
and the belly-advantage: howsoever under
a fair (although a fectlesse) profession.
That proverb proves now over
true, The belly is busie, and witty:
and it wants eares.
               venter est ingeniosus▪ venter non habet aures. Yee may perceive
many in this age among us, who draw
their wits from their belly, and their
wealth to it. So that; although a lowd
plain speaking truth do meet these bellywitted-men
in the teeth: yet they heare
not, they are deafe; for they have no
eares where their wits are. But the day
will dawe, when they shall be forced to
heare on the deafest side of their head. O
then, how careful should we be, knowing
the terrour of that day, to perswade men
to the love of the truth: & to persevere
in it our selves, preassing to approve our
selves both unto God, and unto the consciences
of men: that so we may receive
that crowne of glory, that fadeth not away,
when the chief Sheephard shall appeare.
            
               Worlds-love the soule insnares in many woes,
            
               Gods-love the soule repairs with many Ioes.
         
      
      
         
            
            A DIALOGUE BETWIXT
Cosmophilus and Theophilus anent
the Ceremonies.
            
               Cosmoghilus.
               GOOD morrow precise Theophile.
               
            
            
               Theoph.
               As much to you politick Cosmophile.
               
            
            
               Cosm.
               Yee look very pale upon it How?
Hath not your tender stomake as yet digested
the ceremoniall piluls, for the purging of your
Puritan humors?
            
            
               Theoph.
               Well Cosmophile, yee make but a mock
of the matter of my mourning; yet I will answer
you in your own termes: surely they will never digest
with me.
            
            
               Cosm.
               And why so I pray you Theophile?
               
            
            
               Theoph.
               Because they are so full of Antichristian
ingredients, my stomake loathes them, and all
such Romish Drogs and Dregs.
            
            
               Cosm.
               No Theophile, yee must not say so. The
particulars in these articles, the practise whereof is
presently urged (except it be kneeling in the act of
receiving the sacrament) were in use in the primtive

Church, before the Antichrist occupied the
Roman Chaire.
            
            
               Theoph.
               I see Cosmophile, yee except kneeling in
the act, and that iustly: seeing it hath neither father,
nor mother, but the Antichrist in his full
growth: and I am sory it should find so many protestant
patrons. As to the rest, how ancient soever
some of them may seeme to be, yet all were but
humane inventions, beginning and rising with the
Antichrist, whatsoever the intention was. As for
their use, it ended in abuse: their devotion in superstition:
as it ordinarily befalles to all human
devices in matter of divine duties. And the Antichrist
having setled himselfe in his throne, called
them in, and many other also of that quality, to
his coyn-house, and stamped them all with his Idolatrous
image, that henceforth they might bee
known for the proper and peculiar coyn of his
kingdome, where-ever they were fouud current in
the world.
            
            
               Cosm.
               O but they are now purged from all these
abuses, and superstitions.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Indeed Cosmophile, it is no small paines
would purge them. For although they be like wax
in receiving; yet are they like brasse in reteining
the stampe of superstition: they are like the Leopard,
that cannot change his spots. I would think
them then rightly purged, if the kirk were altogether
purged of them. They should be purged as
the fire purgeth the stubble; seeing they defile the

puritie, and deface the beautie of Gods worship.
            
            
               Cosm.
               You must not think Theophile, that it is a
good reason to reiect any thing, because it hath
been, or is in the Roman Church.
            
            
               Theoph.
               The reason is good enough Cosmophile,
and holds well in these things, without the which
Christs Kirk may be, and abide in good case, accomplished
with all her orders and ornaments,
wherewith the Evangell hath adorned her: in
these things, which (being indifferent as yee say)
have been abused and defiled with idolatry: in
these things, which, for the most part, are badges
of the Romish beast, and baits to superstition: if
the brasen serpent, Gods own ordinance being afterward
abused to idolatry, was broken and abolished;
much more their base and bruckle ceremonies,
mans invention, should be.
            
            
               Cosm.
               O but some of these remaines Theophile,
even in reformed Churches, and are not much disallowed
by sundry learned Protestant Theologues.
            
            
               Theoph.
               True, they remain Cosmophile, but as a
black spot in a faire face, which many of of the
godly-wise would be glad were wiped away. As to
mens not disallowance, or silence it makes not
lawfulnesse. I could give as learned Theologues,
two for one, disallowing.
            
            
               Cosm.
               It is your ministers Theophile, who misinforme
and marre you, they might easily close
up all question and controversie about these matters,
if it pleased them.
            
            
               
               Theoph.
               How so Cosmoph. what would you have
them doe?
            
            
               Cosm
               I would have them to propone and prove
to the people, these three notable poynts. 1. the
indifferencie or lawfulnesse of the things urged.
2. The strong and lawfull authority of the urger,
both King, and Kirke. 3. The great hurt will
come to the partie urged, in case of disobedience.
            
            
               Theoph
               Ye presume too high Cosmophile, to prescrive
poynts of preaching to Past
                     •
                  rs, whose place,
and grace is above your reach: and indeed it were
more easie to propone these poynts, then to prove
them. But tell me, I pray you, with what conscience
and countenance they could preasse to prove
the lawfulnesse of these things, wherein sup
                     •
                  rstition
and profanitie have such place, as is clearly
proved in these treatises, wherein they are particularly
handled. I will onely in generall give
you some few strong impediments that prohibite
this proofe.
            
            
               Cosm.
               What are these strong impediments yee
pretend, Theophile?
               
            
            
               Theoph.
               I will give you these three Cosmophile. 1.
The bands of their fideli
                     •
                  y. 2. The credit of their
ministerie. 3. The dutie they ought in reverence
and charity, to their worthy predecessors in this
our Kirk.
            
            
               Cosm.
               What call ye the bands of their fidelity?
            
            
               Theoph.
               Their oath and their subscription to

that confession of faith, which two do bind us also
which are professors.
            
            
               Cosm.
               O but these bonds may be loosed.
            
            
               Theoph.
               I confesse they may be violently broken,
but lawfully loosed they cannot be. For an
oath is the strongest bond that the tongue can
make: and subscription is the strongest bond that
the hand can make. If ye breake these bonds, tell
me, what shall bind a man?
            
            
               Cosm
               I tell you Theoph. our superiours, King
and Church may loose them.
            
            
               Theoph.
               No Cosmophile, that may they not. For
both consented, yea and by their authority presented
this confession, and urged these bonds on all:
binding first themselves, then others, to hold fast
their profession, according to that confession,
during all the dayes of their life. So the bands of
the grave must bind al, before we can be loosed frō
these bonds. Indeed Cosmophile there is harder, and
faster knots in them, then ye consider of; namely
in the band of the oath.
            
            
               Cosm.
               What be these I pray you Theophile?
               
            
            
               Theoph.
               In that band there is a double, and indissoluble
knot. The one, the perswasion of the
truth. The other: the promise for the truth.
In the former, the takers of the oath solemnly
professed their perswasion wrought in their
hearts by Gods spirit, through his word, of the undoubted
truth of that religion, doctrine, and discipline
professed in the Kirke of Scotland at that

time: and after to be continued therein: and by
the contrary, the detestation of all false religion,
Papistry, and all the particular poynts thereof, as
they were then condemned by our kirk. In the
latter, they solemnly promised to maintaine, defend,
prof
                     •
                  sse, and practise that true religion, in all
the poynts thereof: and to abhorre and detest the
contrary.
            
            
               Cosm.
               It is true Theophile, that band and the
knots thereof, holds fast upon the substantialll
poynts of religion, doctrine, and discipline, which
a
                     •
                  e unchangeable; but not so upon the changeable
rites and ceremonies about them.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Surely Cosmophile, the matter of the
oath, and all the particulars thereof, are like a holy
Taber
                     •
                  acle, so joyntly and soundly compacted,
and knit together, that the loosing of one pin,
bring
                     •
                  th perrill to shake all loose. So albeit some
might seem to be indifferent in themselves severally
and apart considered: yet ye must not thinke
it 
                     〈◊〉
                   thing indifferent, to single, and pick out the
small pinnes of it (as yee account them) at your
pleasure, lest all (as is like this day) fall downe about
your eares.
            
            
               Cosm.
               But will you consider Theophile, that your
formes, and ceremonies for the which; and ours against
the which yee stand, have not entred in that
oath, being but things indifferent.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Yes but they have Cosmophile: for in it
ours in generall termes are included, and yours excluded,

and abjured. Farther, this oath is relative,
and hath respect to the former confession, bookes
of discipline, and acts of assemblies. By the which
particularly, and expresly our formes were
received, ratified, and passed under practise, as agreeable
to Christs ordinance: and yours rejected,
and debarred out of our Kirk, as Antichristian
rites.
            
            
               Cosm.
               That oath Theophile, so farre as it concerned
these outward, and alterable formes, or the
like, was but indefinite, and conditionall: that is,
such formes as it should please the Church for the
time to appoynt, continue, or change, according
to that power and libertie she did professe herselfe,
in sundry acts of assemblies, to have over such indifferent
things.
            
            
               Theoph.
               It was both determinate and absolute
Cosmophile, even in these formes, and such was the
mind of our Kirk at that time, which (as I sayd in
the former answer) received ours, and rejected
yours. So that her Profession of her power, in the
change of things indifferent, extends not to their
formes, which are so particularly and by name excepted:
and the great seale of that solemne promise
set upon the continuance in reteining of the
one, and in outholding and withstanding of the
other.
            
            
               Cosm.
               I think Theophile, that was an unadvised
Oath, in respect of these indifferent formes, which
should not be made the subject of an Oath: seeing

they are so subject to changes.
            
            
               Theoph.
               I think Cosmophile, ye are evill advised to
condemne so wise, and worthy a Kirk, consisting
both of preachers and professors of all estates, in
an errand of so great importance, as if they had
not known nor keeped these inseparable conditions
of a lawfull oath, which the Lord himselfe expressed,
Ierem. 4. 2. That an oath should bee in
Truth, and so not false: in Iudgement, or discrerion,
and so not rash: In Justice, and so not unrighteous,
or unequitable. The first and last respect
chiefly the matter of a lawfull oath; and the mid,
the manner. Now that this oath was given in
truth, and to the truth, it is cleare, because they
swore their resolution and perswasion of the
truth of these heades contained therein. That
it was given in judgement, not rashly or unadvisedly
(as yee say) it is cleare by the words of
the confession, where it is sayd, that after long
and due examination of their conscience, being
throughly resolved in the trueth by the word and
Spirit of God, they gave it. That it was given
in justice, it is cleare, because all the particulars
they swore too, were, and are agreeable to
GODS word, serving for the edification of
the Kirke, and overthrow of the kingdome of
Sathan, and of his eldest sonne the Antichrist:
and that their formes, which yee call indifferent,
were not such in the judgement of our Kirke,
when they appoynted the one, and discharged the

other, is evident by the religious and grave reasons
given for their so doing. As that ours were
according to Christs institution, agreeable to the
simplicitie of the Evangell, profitable for the
preservation of the purity of Gods holy worship,
and eschewing of the occasions, and countenance
of superstition, and conformity with Rome: but
yours by the contrary.
            
            
               Cosm.
               I see then Theophile, yee are loath to grant
these formes to be indifferent.
            
            
               Theoph.
               That I am Cosm. and although I should,
yee would be little neerer your purpose. For it is
neither the unadvisednesse of the maner; nor the
the indifferencie of the matter of an oath, will
loose the band thereof once layd on, as long as
the indifferent matter is not turned to a sinfull
use, or abuse. Although such cases might possibly
hinder the making of it: it is onely the unlawfulnesse
looses all. The oath which Iosua and the
Princes of Israel gave to the Gibeonites, Ios. 9. 14.
15. was unadvisedly made: for they consulted not
(sayes the text) with the mouth of the Lord: yet
it was advisedly keeped, for the religious reverence
to the great and glorious name of God. If
yee be able to prove, that our formerly established
formes are turned unlawfull, unprofitable, inequitable,
profane, or superstitious, goe to, try
your wits. Your Bishops and Doctors publickly
professed they would not, they could not.
            
            
               
               Cosm.
               Yea but for all that Theophile, your former
formes must to the doore.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Sure then Cosm. yours must fly in at the
window: For ye have no lawfull warrant to bring
them in, in the roome of so old and kindly possessors,
who have all your lyfrent takes, sworne, and
subscribed to them, to stand sure, under the penaltie
of that dreadful damnation, in the great day
of the Lord. Beside in so doing, shall yee not undergoe
the guiltinesse of double perjurie by the
violent ejection of the one, which were sworn to:
and the fraudulent and forcible intrusion of the other,
which were sworn against.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Ye aggreage the matter strangely Theoph.
in making it both sinfull and hurtfull.
            
            
               Theoph.
               I will add the third also Cosm. shameful.
Consider that worthy example of good Abraham,
and yee shall see that, and more, Gen. 14. 22. 23.
When the king of Sodom offred to him the goods
which he brought back, after battell against the
Kings, he refused to receive them, and why? I have
lift up my hand, sayes Abraham, to the Lord, the most
high God, the possessor of heaven, that I should so doe: and
wherefore that? lest the King of Sodom should say, I
have made Abraham rich? Abraham thought, that
had been to him a great discredit, and shamefull
slander. Now have we not all lift up our hand to
this LORD, the most high GOD, possessor
of heaven and earth, that we shall continue in
the maintenance and obedience of these comely

and customable formes of our Kirk, and not to
borrow, beg, or bring back again these formes abhorred,
and abjured: lest, beside both sinne and
skaith, to our great disgrace and shame, it should
also be sayd: The Antichristian King of spirituall
Sodom, hath enriched, or rather bewitched us.
            
            
               Cosm.
               I will leave now the purpose of the oath
Theoph. and come to the persons whō it concerns.
Howsoever, it would seem that these who have personally
taken it, cannot be freed from the bonds
of it: yet ye know, such as were not come to perfect
yeares at that time: who have never personally
taken it: as also the succeding posterity, are not
bound by it.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Indeed Cosm. (to passe by the professors,
whose case is alike with preachers) there are
few either among our Ministers, or among your
Bishops, who are not personally bound, both when
they passed their course in the Colledges of Philosophy,
and when they entred in the office of the
Ministery, beside the renewing of these bands sundry
times since in particular synods, and Assemblies.
As to these forenamed, who have not personally
taken it, or in time comming shall not, they
are bound really. Because this bond of their parents
and predecessors (who at that time represented
the whole body, and all sorts of the members
of our reformed Kirk) as upon their parts it was
personall: so also it was reall, passing to their
children, being about a matter which concerned

their good and welfare; as well as theirs, who took
the oath. Now to cleare this poynt Cosm If that
oath of Israel to the Gibeonites, bound old, and
yong, parents and posterity, in a matter more private,
and of lesse importance (albeit the oath was
obtained by craft, and ignorance) much more
doth this oath binde, in a matter so publick,
so profitable, and with such knowledge, conscience,
d
                     •
                  liberation, resolution, and perswasion
made unto God.
            
            
               Cosm.
               That oath of Israel Theoph. concerned this
present life: but this oath concernes our religion;
and the life to come: so they are not alike.
            
            
               Theoph.
               It is true Cosm. the two lives are not alike.
But as for the oath, if the band of it hold fast
an
                     •
                  nt the one, and the matters belonging thereto:
tell me, by what reason it should not far more
hold in things concerning the other? If even
common civil bands, or worldly contracts without
an oath, binds parents and predecessors, who
make it: and children and post
                     •
                  rity, who made it
not: much more should this religious contract,
and holy covenant, sealed both with oath and subscription,
binde both to the constant profession,
and practise of that truth, which is according to
godlinesse. Did not that religious vow which Iosua
made, chap. 24. 14. I and my fathers house (sayes
he) will serve the Lord, bind not onely those who
were present, but even his posteritie through their
generations? Did not that stone which Iosua set

up as a witnesse of the covenant, which the people
did make to for sake all strange Gods, and to serve
the Lord, vers. 26. continue a witnesse of the transgression
of children and posterity, who (after Iosua
and all the Elders that out-lived him, were
dead) brake that covenant, and served Baalim,
Iud. 2. 12. Did not likewise that solemne oath and
covenant made by Asa King of Iuda, and his people,
that they would seek and serve God, 2. Chron.
15. bind all, old and yong, parents, and posterity,
among whom, whosoever afterward fell away, were
even guilty of the breach of this particular oath
and covenant, as well, as of the generall covenant
to be Gods people. Here are in the like case, like
examples.
            
            
               Cosm.
               I grant Theoph. your reasons move me almost
to be of your minde.
            
            
               Theoph.
               I would wish Cosm. your almost, were altogether.
And now in end I intreat you, seeing an oath
should be the end of all controversie, Heb. 6. that
ye would once end all cōtroversie about this oath▪
and as ever yee would dwell in the mountaine of
God, learn to make greater conscience in keeping
the great oath of God. Beware of dangerous and
damnable jugglery, to play fast and loose, with this
so holy and religious a band. Remember, and consider
that fearfull example of Ezekiah king of Iudah,
2. Chron. 36. 13. who breaking that oath
which hee made by God to the King of Babel,
but a man, but an Ethnick man, received such an

hard and heavy challenge, and threatning from
the Lord, by his Prophet Ezekiel, cap. 17. 18. 19.
As I live, sayth the Lord, I will surely bring my oath,
that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath brok
                        •
                     n,
upon his own head. O! may not they look for the
like challenge one day, or a heavier, who doe wittingly
and willingly break that covenant, and 
                     •
                  espise
that oath, made by God himself, to God himselfe.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Now come to your second impediment
Theoph. which you call the credit of their ministry:
What? will you have them to stand upon the
poynts of their reputation?
            
            
               Theoph.
               Surely Cosm. as Men I say nothing: but
as Ministers I say they should. For if they lose the
credit of their calling, they lose also the fruit of
their labours in it. If they in publick preaching
shall turn their tongues, and allow those, as lawfull,
and religious rites, which before they condemned
as Romish reliques: may it not be justly sayd, that
their preaching is not yea and Amen: but yea and
nay, 2. Cor. 18. 20. Will not the simple people say,
what shall we beleeve now, when one and the selfe
same tongue speakes contraries from the chaire of
truth? Will not the Papists rejoycing, say? Take up
your Ministers now, yee may see, if their talking be
worthy of trusting, who whiles affirmes, wh
                     •
                  les denies:
whiles disallowes, whiles allowes, the selfe
same things. Surely a pulpit contradiction drawes
with it a selfe conviction, and a just imputation of

levity and inconstancie in preaching, farre worse
then if it were in practise: and that which is worst
of all, a comfortles desertion of the spirit of power
and grace.
            
            
               Cosm.
               But they have been too rash Theophile, in
their Sermons, speaking against these things: So
they must not be ashamed to recant, and confesse
their oversight.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Yee are but rash in so saying. They had
the warrant of Gods word; and the warrant of the
Acts, both of Kirk and kingdom for them, to speak
against such superfluous, and superstitious ceremonies.
So recantation h
                     •
                  re, were but the incantation
of some transporting passion, as feare, favour, avarice,
ambition: and confession of an oversight,
were a great oversight in the not constant professing
of the formerly avowed truth. I have seen the
day Cosm. when even your principall pillars have
spoken zealously against them also. But this late
indifferencie of theirs, with the following commodity,
hath cooled and quenched their former fervencie.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Now to come to your third impediment
Theoph. let me see what undutifulness the receiving
back, and practising of these ceremonies can import
upon your ministers part, to their predecessors
in this Church.
            
            
               Theoph.
               By so doing Cosm. they should (so farre
as in them lyeth) discredit all their former care,
knowledge, and conscience of so many grave, godly

and learned men, who in so many lawfully called,
and well constitute Assemblies, by constitutions
wisely and advisedly enacted, according to God
                     •
                  
word, did establish in our kirk these forms of ours,
so long possessed to the great good, and edification
thereof: and did banish yours back to Rome,
whence they came: yea for-faulted them, never to
be reduced, or restored.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Yet Theoph▪
                   for all yee have sayd, if these
things be in themselves in different, or lawfully, why
may they not be received?
            
            
               Theoph.
               Yee would bee an evil Musitian Cosmophile,
yee sing ever one song, and strike ever upon
one string. But give me licence to question you a
little; Why confound ye indifferencie and lawfulnesse?
Seeing (to speake properly and strictly) indifferencie
is in respect of the nature of a thing: and
lawfulnesse in respect of the use of it. It is true, we
have a liberty in things indifferent, to doe, or not
to doe: but when wee come to the particular and
determinate act or use of them, if they be found
expedient and profitable, then properly are they
counted and called lawful. But this is your custome
Cosmophile, under the generalitie, ambiguitie,
and plausible sound of words (passing by the
proper signification of them) to colour all your
purposes, which you propone: that yee may
steale away a conclusion by appearance, where
there is no logical or lawful consequence.
            
            
               
               Cosmoph.
               I wil answer to your first question
Theophile, I call them things indifferent in themselves,
which are neither commanded nor forbidden
by Gods word: and so neither good nor evil
in themselves.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Then if so be Cosmoph. are ye not forbidden
by Gods word, and told, that it is not good
to plead and persecute so hotly for them, as ye
                     •
                  
doe? And is this a good argument of yours,
Those things are indifferent in themselves, that is,
neither commanded, nor forbidden, neither good
nor ill: Therefore we vvil have them reduced,
and repossessed in our Church. Indeed Cosmophile,
ye have need to learn better Logicke from
your Doctors. For it is not the indifferencie of a
thing, that will vvarrant the admission, farre lesse
the readmission of it againe into a Church.
Yee must come to the use, wherein a thing is neither
evil nor good, lawful nor unlawful, expedient
nor inexpedient. And if yee can prove, that
your formes in their use are expedient and profitable,
and ours not at all, or lesse then yours, I shal
approve.
            
            
               Cosmoph.
               Thinke yee then Theophile, that there
is such such difficultie, or rather impossibilitie in
that probation?
            
            
               Theoph.
               I think it certainly Cosm. that even your
Philosophers stone, that yee so brag and boast of,
shal not be able to turn this lead into gold.
            
            
               Cosm.
               And why so Theophile?
               
            
            
               
               Theoph.
               Will ye Cosm. put them to the triall of
that true touch stone, of these Apostolicall rules,
order, comelinesse, edification, peace, charity,
Rom. 14. 1. Cor, 14. ye shall easily perceive, what
yee and they both prove. Let wofull experience
this day be judge, and give out sentence. The Papist,
and Protestant are so confounded in the use
of your formes, that hardly in outward shew can
they be discerned; answeres that to order? The obscuring
and defiling vaile of Antichristian ceremonies,
drawen upon the comely putitie, and simplicitie
of the Evangell, agreeth that with comelines?
The weak ones offended, & distracted with doubting,
what hand to turne to: the Papists heartned
and hardned in their superstition: the stronger,
and wel resolved grieved to see things go so; makes
this for edification? By dissention and division, the
bowels of a motherly Kirke rented; stands this
with peace and charity? So these rules clearly reveale
how perillous and pernicious your formes
are▪ put case in themselves they were never so indifferent.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Will yee look Theoph. to the example of
our neighbour Kirke, so wise and learned, which
useth and maketh so much of these formes.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Wee will keep us within the boundrod
Cosm. and say nothing, or little, of our neighbours,
among whom many both worthy preachers and
professors, have ever, and yet doe, stand out against
them. Onely this farre for the form and state of

their Kirk: their case and ours is very farre different.
They are free (although not of every conscientious
band) yet of the bands, which, beside
these, bindeth us strictly. As 1. the band of Oath.
2. Subscription. 3. 
                     •
                  o long peaceable possession.
4. publick profession. 5. uniforme practise; all
standing and pleading for our formes: and against
yours. They have continued and kept them still,
which our Kirk did so advisedly cast out, and so
long hath holden out, as pestilential clouts of that
Romish infective superstition. So if ye would leave
your unlike examples, and your jangling in generals,
wherein ye take roome to reele, and 
                     •
                  unne to
many starting holes: and if ye would consider particularly
what is the singular case of our Kirk in
this respect, ye would be forced to confesse, that it
is not a thing lawfull, nor indifferent, to reduce
them. And albeit in the judgement of some Theologues,
where some of them are in a Kirk, and cannot
without the disturbance of the peace thereof,
be removed, they may be tollerate: yet all in one
minde affirme, that being once removed, their reduction
is not tollerable. The consideration of
this poynt Cosm. I hope shall close your minde, if
not your mouth.
            
            
               Cosm.
               What Theoph. is not pest-clou
                     •
                  s, and
cloathes oft-times cleansed, and so applyed to
good use? Will not carefull preaching cleanse all?
            
            
               Theoph.
               Seeing yee urge preaching Cosm. go to
shall not this be a particular poynt of it, that a
                     •
                  
                  
the monuments and remainders of Idolatry, and
all the occasions and entisements to it, be removed.
What wil become then of your ceremonies?
The truth is Cosm. as long as that man of sin hath
place upon the face of the earth, they wil never be
cleansed. And as for preaching, it is appoynted by
God, not to cleanse them, but to consume them,
and him both. 2. Thess. 2. Indeed Cosm. ye may be
the Popes Pensioner, for the paines ye take to vent,
and advance his wares.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Yet seeing other things Theoph. which
have been abused to superstition, are purged,
and retained: as for example, our Temples, and
Churches, wherein the true God is now truely
worshipped: tell me, why may not these things
in like manner be purged and retained?
            
            
               Theoph.
               I desired you before Cosm. to hold off
your unlike examples, but yee doe not: therefore
by answer either to content you, or convict you, I
say 1. Temples, or Kirkes have a needfull use, both
natural and civil, in the commodious, and comely
containing of people, for the publick practise of
Gods worship. So the abuse may be purged, and
they retained. But the best use of your ceremonies
is but abuse▪ which being removed, they fall, as idle,
and fectlesse things, to the ground. 2. Albeit a
Kirk be the place, wherein God is publickly worshipped:
yet it hath no place or state in the exercise
of that worship, as any part, poynt, or ceremony
thereof: as your formes have. 3. Sometimes some

needful circumstances may require, even the Temples
to be removed, and razed: as the Temples of
Idols were in the dayes of Constantine, and Theodosius,
two godly Emperours.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Would your Ministers Theoph. in their doctrine,
tell the people, that these ceremonies should
be, and are used, without any Papistical superstition
and opinion of merit, of inherent holines, and efficacie,
or of necessity, as if they were essential parts
of Gods worship, this would purge all.
            
            
               Theoph.
               If they should so doe Cosmophile, how
would you purge them of the slander of inconstancie,
who before in their doctrine have told the
people so oft, that such ceremonies should not be
used at all, because superstitious. And albeit they
should tell, and tell again, as ye prescrive, what assurance
have ye, that therby the hearts and minds of
simple people should be purged of that naturall inclination
they have to superstition: so long as the
objects & occasions of it stand in their eyes. And
so much the rather, when they see such things so
violently enforced, as if they were matters of greatest
efficacie and necessity in Gods worship. I must
say Cosm. little wit makes meekle travell. Were it not
better to fill up the pit, and so to take away all danger
of falling in it: then to spend time unnecessarily
to warn folks to go by it, who notwithstāding, possibly
through forgetfulnes, carelesnes, or want of
light, might fal into it? Preachers & preaching may
be better imployed, then to be made slaves to your

ceremonies, by giving continuall warning to saif
from their ill, when no sound warrant can be given
for their good.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Now say to the second poynt Theoph. may
not the authority of King, and Kirk, lawfully reduce
and impose these formes?
            
            
               Theoph.
               They may not Cosm. in respect their
hands are already bound by these former bands:
they must come from some new found land, or go
to it, who make this thing.
            
            
               Cosm.
               But answer me Theoph. is there not lawfulnesse,
and strength in their authority to do it?
            
            
               Theoph.
               I have answered that already in effect,
Cosm. But I will adde this further: It is true, God
hath given authority to both, but with this restriction,
and direction, (sayes the Apostle Paul 2. Cor.
13. 10.) not for the destruction, but for the edification of
his Kirk. For the power of authoritie is the power
of equity, and not of injury. Now by urging to
re-edifie that, which was justly destroyed: and to
destroy that, which was lawfully built; what humane
authority can free the doers from transgression,
Gal. 2. or themselves from guiltinesse.
            
            
               Cosm.
               That holds onely Theoph. in matters of
substance, according to the Apostles meaning, and
not in matters of ceremonies.
            
            
               Theoph.
               It holds both in substance and ceremony,
Cosm. where the edification of a Christian soule
may bee hurt, or the course of the Gospell hindered.
            
            
               
               Cosm.
               Ye curbe the power and authority of the
King, and Church strangely Theoph. that denieth it
to them even in things indifferent.
            
            
               Cosm.
               I have told you Cosm. that there is nothing
indifferent, that breakes these Apostolicall rules.
Mans authority is not absolute in things indifferent;
but i
                     •
                   is tied to these former scriptures: from
the which, if it vary, it wants the warrant of divine
authority.
            
            
               Cosm.
               But Theoph. this twofold Christian authority,
takes away all perril of offence, and prejudice
against these rules.
            
            
               Theoph.
               One thing sayd, and another thing
seen, Cosm. We see sensibly, it rather continues and
increases offence. For the hearts of the lovers of
the truth, of King, and Kirk, are exceedingly grieved,
when they see humane authority enforcing,
what divine authority hath forbidden: And the
hearts of the enemies to all, wonderfully comforted,
when they see authority so favour and further
their formes. For then there is no perill of
offence, when the expediencie and utilitie of the
use of things indifferent, is evident: but if that be
not, the injunction of authority is very inexpedient,
unprofitable, and doubleth the danger.
            
            
               Cosm.
               The Papists Theoph. have but smal cause
of comfort hereby. For ye see how farre we differ
from them in poynts of doctrine.
            
            
               Theoph.
               But if ye wil call to mind Cosm. how they
place almost the life of their religion in their ceremonies,

and that by them the very power and purity
of true religion, have been peece and peece
weakned, and worn out; ye shal easily perceive, that
they cannot but conceive a great hope, that we shal
with time, by following and affecting so fervently
their formes, fall in likewise upon their faith.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Ye perceive not Theoph. the wise intent of
authority, to draw the Papists to us, by conforming
in some measure in outward shewes, or ceremonies
to them.
            
            
               Theo.
               Wel Cosm. that intent had never yet a good
event. For it is the express precept of God in scripture,
both of old & new testament, that we should
be in every thing
                     •
                   (so farr as possibly can be) unlike
to Idolaters. We are cōmanded to come out of Babel,
both in conscience and countenance, in inward
affection, & outward fashion: in substance and ceremony.
We are commanded to beware of Idols: to
hate and cast away their garments, coverings, & ornaments:
and to eschew every appearance of their
evil. It proves never well to bee wise above that
which is written. Before yee had yeelded to their
ceremonies, ye should have seen them in some measure,
yeild to your substance. Ye have been over sudden
Cosm. in going awayward to Rome, to meet
them: but who sees, that they have any mind to
meet you mid-way. Ye think to draw them to you:
but ye have chosen the wrong cords, their own ceremonies,
by the which they will draw you neerer
to their Babel: then ye shal do them to your Ierusalem.

And if they seem to draw neere to you by such
means, ye had need to beware of Iudas kiss, that is,
treachery & cruelty under the cloke of hypocrisie.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Ye are too much afraid for so few, honest &
innocent ceremonies; the peaceable receving wherof,
wil make you quit of the cumber of any moe.
            
            
               Theoph.
               It is not your word or vote will cleanse
them, they have been so oft convict & condemned;
and to receive one ceremonie, is to receive all. For
they are not loose, bnt linked, as in a chain, so inseparably,
that draw one, draw all. It is but your policie
to let some few, that look most smoothly, appeare,
& to hide the rest, which wil follow hard on.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Let alone Theoph. trouble not your selfe,
your shallow wit cannot conceive the draught of
so deep wisedome.
            
            
               Theoph.
               It may wel be a deep wit, but it seems to
be no divine wisedom, to trouble the peace of so
vvell a constitute Kirk, by intruding such idle ceremonies;
as if there were worth in them, to countervaile
the meanest point of that peace. Surely even
an approved politick wit, would be loath to make
such an interchange: seeing any one of the least
points of the peace of Christs Kirk, is worth all
your gracelesse and peacelesse ceremonies.
            
            
               Cos.
               Now I desire to have your particular answer
severally: first for the authority of our Kirk. Have
not the conclusions of that late assembly, holden
at Perth, credit to take away all scruples: and to satisfie
your conscience anent the receiving and
practising of these formes.
            
            
               
               Theoph.
               Certainly they have not Cosm. for it is
Scripture, and not Kirk-conclusions, which settles,
and satisfies the conscience. As for that Assembly,
the unlawfull constitution, the violent and posted
proceeding, and the crafty closing of it, wel enough
known to all, declares those conclusions to have
been, rather collusions, and delusions.
            
            
               Cosm.
               What meanes the man? Doth the credit
of that reverend Assembly weigh so light in the
ballance of your braine?
            
            
               Theoph.
               I am not speaking fantasie Cosm. but verity.
I wil put in bellance with that unlawful assembly
which was so divided in judgement, and consent,
all the former worthy, and well constitute Assemblies,
for the space of moe then a Iubile of
yeares, consenting in one minde and mouth. Then
let a constant and conscientious hand hold it, and
ye shal sensibly perceive, how light and little worth
your one is in reducing these superstitious formes,
in respect of the weight and worth of all those, in
removing them.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Wel Theoph. ye should not reason against
the Acts of an Assembly: nor set your selfe as a
Iudge, to censure them, and your superiours.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Ye see Cosm. it is not I, but many godly,
and grave Assemblies reason against one pretended
assembly, and doe justly chalenge it of levity, and
perjurie for restoring those so deservedly forefalted
Romish rites. Farther, ye know, that how sever the
Lords injunctiōs are to be receved without questioning;

yet the ordinances of the Kirk, are presented
to us, not with the necessity of beleeving, but with
the liberty of judging. For albeit the judgment of
jurisdiction, to censure, belongs not to me: yet I
should have the judgement of discretion to satisfie
my conscience, by the warrant of the word, in all
poynts of obedience to my superiours.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Say what you please Theoph. against that
Assembly, it wil stand, and the decrees of it wil
have place, ay and while they be reduced.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Stand as it wil Cosm. to the formalist, it
shal not stand in my conscience: neither shal the decrees
thereof have place in my practise: neither
should it, or the decrees thereof, stand to others,
seeing both it, and they, stand against all good order,
and the wholsome doctrine of the word. The
good people perceive this: and therfore they skar,
and skunner with the iniquity, and vanity of the
conclusions therof. Where before they did ever
willingly subiect themselves to the constitutions of
our ancient Assemblies, because they evidently saw
the equity and the utility of the conclusions, and
lawful manner of their proceedings.
            
            
               Cos,
               It seemes then Theoph. ye mind to play the
schismatike, and make a separation: seeing ye
                     •
                  
mean not to stand to the judgement of our Kirk.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Your kirk Cosm. what doe you call your
selves a kirk? are ye comparing a kirk scarse cropen
out of the cradle, and a cripple halting kirk, with
a kirk so ancient, so honorable, and indued with

such vvisedome and prudence, by long and manifold
experience; which studied carefully to walke
ever uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel?
As for schisme or separation, it seems ye vvot
not vvhat they meane For in the unitie both of
judgement and practise, we yet stand with the kirk
wherein we were baptised, and brought up: and
vvhereunto we gaue our right hand of fellowship,
and band of fidelitie: which being broken by you,
ye may justlie bee called schismatikes, both from
this Kirk, and from your selves also: seeing ye have
broken down the beautiful walles of our Ierusalem,
and have re-edified the cursed walles of Iericho.
Ye have built a Kirk to your self, standing upon
thritten rotten pillars, but painted with ceremonial
colours, all of the workmanship of Rome.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Now let me heare Theoph. what ye can say
particularlie to the kings authoritie: may he not
lawfullie enjoyn these things?
            
            
               Theo.
               Not Cosm. seeing (beside that which hath
been sayd alreadie) they want the warrant of the
word▪ and ye know, that the book of the law of
God, should lye ever open before his eyes, to lead
him in every point and appointment of any thing
(within the bounds of his authoritie) that concerns
the work of God, and his holie vvorship.
            
            
               Coms.
               See ye not Theoph. the credit of his royall
authoritie engaged to the advancement of these
errands?
            
            
               Theoph.
               I see it not Cos. for it was the credit and

commendations of the good and godly Kings of
Iuda, to root out, and remove Idolatry, and all the
monuments thereof, from among Gods people:
and by the contrary, a discredit, and dispraise to
those, who either planted, permitted, or reduced
them.
            
            
               Cosm.
               But is he not a Prince, wise, learned, and religious,
without a peere this day living upon the
face of the earth, who would bee loath to doe any
thing, but that which is lawful.
            
            
               Theoph.
               I acknowledge he is, and so was David,
a most worthy Prince and Prophet too: yet he needed
a Nathan, both to draw him to repentance,
and to direct him in things concerning the house
of God.
            
            
               Cosm.
               There is not a minister Theoph. within his
dominions (yea joyn them all together) that knoweth
so well what belongs to the house of God, as
he doth.
            
            
               Theoph.
               It may be so Cosm. but I know it should
not be so. Every one should bee best skild in his
own craft. And I am sure a spirituall office-bearer
in the house of God, sanctified & set a part by him
to that service, both should and wil know best the
wil of his maister, anent the poynts, and discharge
of his own calling: and likewise, what concernes
the weil, good order, and diet of the family, and
domestickes thereof. Surely it may seeme strange,
and must spring either from a high presumption of
selfe conceit: or from a high contempt of the holy

ministry, that credit shall be given to every one in
their own calling (yea go even down to the basest
mechanicks) but it shal be denied to Ministers in
their calling; they and it both being subject to the
rash censures of every raving spirit, rushing in upon
them.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Is he not our native and gracious King,
Theoph. and should we not in these things pleasure
him, and give to him his own due: else it is a token
vve lack true love and loyaltie to him.
            
            
               Theoph.
               He is Cosm. the Lord preserve and blesse
him. We would most vvillingly (God is our vvitnesse)
pleasure him in all things, vvherein our king
of kings is not displeased, and our conscience damnified.
We vvill most gladly give to our most Christian
Caesar, vvhat belongs to him: and to give
farther, is not fidelitie, but flatterie, and spreading
of a net to his feet: not loyal love to his weil, but
selfe love to the world, and our own privat commoditie.
            
            
               Cosm.
               I see Conscience is a great doer with you
Theoph. in every thing ye pretend conscience, conscience.
            
            
               Theoph.
               And I intend it also Cosm. It shall God
vvilling, bee a doer with me, as long as I dwell in
this tabernacle of clay. If ye count more of a great
conquest then a good conscience, sometime ye will
smart for it.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Wel Theoph. if ye care not for his pleasure,
yet I think ye vvill respect his displeasure, and feare

his Majesties offence, vvhich will draw vvith it so
many fearful evils upon the Church, if these things
be not yeilded to.
            
            
               Theoph.
               We protest Cosm. next unto the displeasure
of the Almightie God, vve most feare, and
would fainest flee his displeasure. As for his Majesties
offence, ye make it to be the offence of anger,
not of ignorance. For of ignorance it cannot be, in
respect of his so great a measure of light and knowledge:
and of anger, it will not be, in respect he is
indued with so peerlesse vvisedom and clemencie.
So neither can he stumble through lack of light;
neither vvil he tumble over his anger, as ye say, upon
his loyal subjects. So I affirme Cosm. ye deserve
neither Bishoprick, nor pension, at his Ma. hand,
for such uncharitable prognostications.
            
            
               Cosm.
               It appeares Theoph. protest as yee please,
that the great reason, why ye wil not yeeld, is, because
the King vvill have it. So it seems, ye delight
to be opposite to the King in every thing.
            
            
               Theoph.
               I say ye delight to calumniate Cos. we reverence
his vvill: but vve must rest upon the vvil &
word, both of his and our king. Yea and your great
Donns, and Doctors professed, that reason, Scripture,
and antiquity are against these things: and ye
have nothing for you, but his Majestis vvill, and the
feare of his offence. But it seems ye favour most
your own cōmodity, seing ye look these light ceremonies
shal bring with them some solid substance
to you: and so ye receive them as typicall.
            
            
               
               Cosm.
               But what needs all this obstinate standing
Theo. against matters of ceremony? I confesse, if any
alteration be urged in matters of faith, wee
should give our lives before we yeelded.
            
            
               Theoph.
               And what needs all this violent urging
of matters of c
                     •
                  remony, as if they were metamorphosed
in matters of faith. For there is not such
danger for commission against Gods ordinance,
as for omission of mans. And make what ye will
of them, it is too neere marching. For they have
made an innovation and alteration of the confession
of faith, sworn and subscrived by us: so that a
new one is thrust into the room therof. Moreover,
whatsoever is a matter of conscience, cannot be denied,
but in so far, it is also a matter of faith. Now
will you, or dare you say, that there is no conscience
to be kept in the using of such things as may
defile Gods holy and pure worship. But I will
come neere you, and try your faith a little Cosm,
He who sweareth, and for his worldly hinderance
changeth, doth he not cast a great impediment in
his own way to the mountain of God? But he,
who sweareth for his spirituall furtherance, and
yet changeth, casteth a farre greater, if mercie
and repentance remove it not. Beleeve ye this Cos.
it is Gods word, Psalm. 15. Beleeve ye that all the
poynts of Gods worship, both inward & outward,
should be directed by his word? Beleeve yee that
there should be no communion betwixt Christ and
Belial. These are matters of faith, founded on Gods

word. Look to your selfe: for if this word rule not
your faith, your fancie will misrule all.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Ye must not say that these things urged,
are matters of faith.
            
            
               Theoph.
               If ye mean of your faith Cosm. it may be
it hold; the wings whereof seem to be so sore clipped,
that ye cannot fly, nor see farther then the fire
side. But I must tell you, take faith in what sense yee
will, whether for the doctrine of faith: or for that
divine holy habit of the soule; they belong to the
one, as a part of the subject: or to the other, as a
part of the object, that is, ye must beleeve, that they
are either with, or against the word.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Now last, will ye consider, how commendable
a thing it were, that the Churches of all his
Majesties kingdoms were uniform & conform: as
in substance, so also in ceremonies of religion.
            
            
               Theoph.
               If so it should be Cos. then it were needful
that your ceremonies, to the which you would
have us to conform, were first freed of superstition,
which shall never be. Therefore ye must turn you,
and consider where the best formes, the reformed
formes are, according to the holy patterne: and let
conformity be there, and so uniformity: else it may
be justly counted but a deformity.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Some things ye have sayd I confesse, to the
first two poynts. Now let us come to the third and
last, which, I hope, will put you to your peremptories,
concerning the inconveniences wil seize upon
the parties urged, in case of disobedience.
            
            
               
               Theoph.
               What are those inconveniences Cosm.
and on whom in that case will they light?
            
            
               Cosm.
               They will be Theoph. according to the
condition and qualitie of the persons. It professors
in private estate, they will be fined: and it may
be also the communion will be denied to them.
If Professors in publick state, they will also loose
his Majesties favour, or their place. If preachers,
then deprivation from their ministerie, and privation,
either of bodily, or country libertie will follow,
by warding confining, or banishment.
            
            
               Theoph.
               O inconvenient ceremonies, which drawe
after them such inconveniences! I see it is a
just complaint, which many worthy divines take
up against them, affirming that these indifferent
ceremonies (as yee call them) have bred greater
difference, and division in the kirk, and yet do, then
the doctrine it selfe. They have ever been (as the
story of the Kirk in all ages reports) that apple of
contention cast in by that old and subtile Serpent,
which hath vexed the Paradise of God. Therefore
would to God (say they) that the Kirk were once
rid, and freed of them.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Tush Theoph. they will be, and will abide
in the Kirk when ye and I both are dead & rotten.
            
            
               Theoph.
               I hope yee shall prove a false Prophet
Cosm. and if so be, what shall I say? offences must
come, but woe unto them by whom they come.
Heresies, schismes, and troubles must be, that they
vvho are approved of God, may be known. 1. cor. 11▪
               
            
            
               
               Cosm.
               But answer to the poynt Theoph. I perceive
yee would fain shift it.
            
            
               Theoph.
               I confesse I vvould faine shift your ill, if
I could: but not an answer to you. I vvould understand,
by vvhat reason yee can enforce obedience
to these things? And if not, by what equitie,
ye can bind their punishments upon their backe
                     •
                  
in case of non-obedience?
            
            
               Cosmoph.
               It is sufficient that king and kirk will
have it so.
            
            
               Theoph.
               It is not will Cosmoph. but reason that I
crave. Gods vvill, I know, must aud should go for
reason: but mans vvill vvants that priviledge. I
have answered before sufficiently to that onely wil-argument,
or violent reason of yours.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Think ye it not very equitable Theop. that
the benefits of the Church be denied to those, who
deny obedience to the Church: and that they may
be justly fined in their purses, vvho will not obey
in their persons, the command of the King and
Kirk; and last, that they are unworthy of his Maj
                     •
                  sties
favour,
or of a place of state in his kingdome,
vvho will not follow his practise, and obey
his precept?
            
            
               Theoph.
               Not surely Cosm. For vvhat equity is it,
to deny the benefits of the Kirk to those, vvho
are both in, and of the Kirk; or to punish either in
purse, of person, for obeying rather God then
man. As to vvorldly favour and places: it is better
to keep Gods favour, then coilye mens: better

keepe peace in conscience, then place in earthly
kingdomes.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Now I will leave the Professors, and come
to the Preachers. It will go very hardly with them,
if they obey not. For the Church will take their
calling from them, and close their mouth: and the
king their living, and their liberty.
            
            
               Theo.
               That is a hard saying, indeed, & drawes
with it a great hinderance to the free course of
Christs Evangell: and a furtherance to the Antichristian
course. Yet if so shal be, the comfort of
faithfull Preachers is, that no creature is able to
take a good conscience, the love of God, and the
liberty of the Spirit from them. But I will aske,
what kirk is this of yours, that will close up the
mouthes of the faithfull servants of Christ. The
good people it cannot be: for they heavily regrate
such iniquity. The faithfull Pastors it cannot bee:
for in none of their meetings, generall, provinciall,
or presbyteriall, have they allowed such work. So
it rests, that your Bishops must bee this crabbed
Kirk, who being once so solemnly banished out of
our Kirk, as belonging to that Antichristian crew,
hath cropen back againe upon us, and minds after
this manner, to revenge the old quarrel. Alas Cosm.
if they proceed after that fort, how shall the rooms
of honest Preachers be supplied?
            
            
               Cosm.
               Ye may be sure Theoph. they wil get anew
to fill their rooms.
            
            
               Theoph.
               There may be anew Cosm. and yet little

worth, who will rather defile their roomes, then fill
them; who will love the fleece better then the
flock: who will study more to be Patrons of Episcopacie,
& ceremonies, to please the Bishops: then
paternes of pietie, charitie, and sobriety, to profite
the people.
            
            
               Cosm.
               But ye must consider more deeply of this
matter, Theoph. ye must not think that your Ministers
should leave their calling, and forsake their
flock, for such things: that wil be an ill and ungodly
doing.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Ye mistake the matter very farr, Cosmop.
for they are not leavers of their calling, but your
Bishops are reavers of their calling from them.
They are not forsakers of their flockes, but your
Bishops are wilfull and violent ruggers of them
from their flock. They are patients & not agents:
sufferers of violence, and not actors in that wickednesse:
who would rather leave, and forsake
their lives, if it lay in their hands. Your Bishops indeed
Cosm. for their worldly ease, profit, and preferment,
in effect willingly have left their former
calling, or pastorall charge, and violently thrust
honest men out of their places: because they will
not allow their evill course.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Nay but they should not suffer themselves
to be deprived of their ministery, and loose the exercise
therof, for matters of this indifferent nature.
            
            
               Theoph.
               Ye must confesse then Cos. that farr lesse
should your Bishops, whose words these are, d
                        •
                     prive
                  
them from their ministery, for matters of that indifferent
nature: and if they doe, they are damned
of them own selves, Tit. 3. 11. They avow and argue
them to be matters indifferent: but they urge
them as matters of necessity, and lay upon their
omission, the pain of deprivation. Therefore our
faithfull Pastors, who count them not indifferent,
may lawfully suffer themselves, rather to be deprived
from their calling, then deprive themselves of a
good conscience, by doing any thing against it.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Let alone Theoph. I tell you over again, it
is better for them to yield to these things, then to
loose their ministery, or the exercise of it.
            
            
               Theoph.
               They loose no ministery Cosm. who keep
a good conscience, and give testimony by suffering
to Christs cause: that is a speciall poynt of their
ministery, when they are called to it. They stand
in the reputation of GOD, faithfull ministers,
let men account of them as they will. As to
the closing up of the exercise thereof, ye may perceive
how the contrary will fall out. For the liberty
taken from them in their own parishes by mens
malice, is given to them in prison, or banishment,
by Gods providence. Albeit they be cast in bands,
or under banishment, yet Gods word is not
bound, nor banished.
            
            
               C.
               Beside the former, wil ye consider Theo. their
inconveniences also▪ they will loose their worldly
moyen and maintenance▪ and this yland will not
keep them.
            
            
               
               Theoph.
               Will yee consider Cosm. that the earth,
and the fulnesse therof, is the Lords, and that this
Iland is but a silly angle of it. If it cast them out,
and close the doore upon them, their provident
and gracious Lord, who hath called them, will
care for them, and open in forrain nations to them
a wide doore for the entry of the Evangel, as experience
declares. They wil never want maintenance,
who have care to maintaine, and entertaine a good
conscience: which is a continual feast. Alas Cosmo.
it is a lamentable thing to see, how some learned
men, sometime well thought of, have turned now
both their tongue, and their penne, to the wrong
hand, for worlds gain: and do direct the darts of
their variable wits, unsetled judgements, and salerife
learning, against the truth, and sincere patrons
and professors thereof, their friends: where before
they wont to throw them against their Romish enemies.
Your golden, or godlesse hammer, breakes
all, and makes much halting, as also writing with
the left hand.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Yet wil ye think Theop. what account your
ministers should make of their precious ministery,
and of that worthy worke.
            
            
               Theoph.
               There is nothing in your mouth, but a
Ministery, a Ministery. But I must tell you, a Ministery,
and take a good conscience from it, is but a
misery. What is the price of it, when the power of
it is gone? and the worth of it, when the vertue is
away? Is not grace, and a good conscience the life

of it? if they be gone, it is but a dead ministery, and
so farre better to burie it, then to beare the dead
burthen of it.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Ye care not Theoph. for making of emptie
pulpits, silent ministers, and so a destitute and desolate
people.
            
            
               Theo.
               The Lord knowes the contrary: albeit
I confesse, that pulpits are then most empty, when
those who occupy them, are empty of holy humility,
heavenly wisedome, and Christian courage for
Christs cause. Silent sufferings of faithfull ministers
for the truth, prove oft-times as profitable to
Gods people, to confirme them in it: as eloquent
Sermons of the truth to informe them of it. That
people is most desolate, whose Pastors are most
dissolute, either in doctrine, or life. God can and
will provide for his people, the means and instruments
of their comfort, as pleases him best.
            
            
               Cos.
               I am of that judgment, that a minister should
not suffer the losse of his calling for any thing, but
for that he should suffer the losse of his life.
            
            
               Theoph.
               And ye will not say, that any Christian
magistrate wil or should for such omission take his
life: and if any would, then the case is altered (although
the practise of such ceremonies were indifferent)
and turnd in the case of confession, & necessity,
for the which one might lawfully suffer.
Your judgement is not sound Cosm. touching this
matter: for there is great difference between doing
& suffering. We may suffer the gratest evill of punishment,

rather then do the least evil of sinn. We
may commit no evill of sin, how small soever, that
good of any sort may come of it. Now, to practise
these superstitious ceremonies, is many wayes scandalous,
and to give a scandal, is sin, or moral transgression
expresly forbidden in the law.
            
            
               C.
               Now I have kept my great Gun last, a Moonce
which will blow up all your answers in the aire.
            
            
               Theo.
               Go to Cos. mount your Moonce: It may be
your Gun mis-give: or your bullet be but a windy
bladder.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Have at you then Theoph. when these two
divine duties, to wit, The preaching of the Gospell: and
The not practising of inconvenient ceremonies (as yee call
them) cannot both the performed together by your
Pastors: but of the necessity, if they stand to the
one, they must fall from the other: then the greatest
and weightiest dutie, which is the preaching of
the Gospel, should prevaile: the liberty wherof in
that case, they should redeem even by the practise
of these ceremonies: and so let fall the lesser dutie,
which is the not practising of them.
            
            
               Theop.
               Your great Gun Cosm. hath raised a great
smoke but hath done no skaith to the cause. For ye
divide between these two divine duties, by supposed
necessity, which is both wrong & weak. Wrong,
because it is no divine dividing necessity, by any
ordinance of Gods word, which (by the contrary)
couples these two duties together: but it is
an humane dividing necessity, by violence of

mans enforcing authority. Weake, because experience,
our school-mistresse, may tell you, that the
Lord oft-times keepes together in the persons
of faithful preachers these two duties in their performance.
Experience proves this in the persons of
sundry, who are violently thrust out from their particular
charges. Thus divine providence stands
out against your humane violence. Againe, for farther
answer, I will let you see the inequality, or different
quality of these these two duties: To preach
the word, is an affirmative dutie and respects the doing
of good: Not to practise inconvenient Ceremonies,
is a negative dutie, and respects the not
doing of evil. Now the affirmative may be without
sin in some cases, and somtimes and places omitted:
as when one can neither keepe, nor redeeme
the liberty of preaching, unlesse he enter his conscience
captive to some one sinne, or other. But the
negative cannot in respect of any circumstance,
bee omitted, without sinne. Because to omit the
dutie negative of The not practising of these ceremonies,
is to practise them, and so to commit a sin: seeing
superstition and scandall are the two inseparable
companions thereof. So albeit the former duty
seeme weightiest in the quality, or kind thereof:
yet in the knot, or band, it is not so strait, and absolute,
as the other.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Well then Theoph. I see there is no remedy,
but your Ministers must goe for Virginia, and
so play the Evangelists.
            
            
               
               Theoph.
               I count that better Cosm. then to play
the Anguillists here, slipping, and sliding to and
fro, by the wimples and windings of their wits, and
wayes, so that, no gripe can be had, or holden of
them. Better to preach the Gospell of Christ in
Virginia, then to practise the ceremonies of Antichrist
in Scotland. Oh how is the sometimes faithfull
nation going on to become an harlot! Go out
of Babel my people, and bide out of Babel: to returne
to Rome, is but to draw on our ruine.
            
            
               Cosm.
               Now Theoph. ye have given an answer to
all my three poynts, but not answerable to my
minde. These former inconveniences, which I
have alledged, I see, must light upon your Ministers.
            
            
               Theoph.
               No wonder Cosm. because your mind is
in the Swines trough, not on the throne of grace.
If these ills of yours light upon our Pastors, they
will be but the light and easie yoke of Christ upon
them. But the impious imposers of them, shall be
one day countable to the Prince of Pastors for it.
               Now to close with you at this time, Cosmophil
                        •
                     .
seeing I am not able to convert you, nor ye able to
pervert me, (I thanke God) you and I must
part company: I know, yee will retire
your selfe to your sworne, and mensworne
companions, Dem
                        ••
                     
                  
and Diotrephes.
               
            
            FINIS. Januar. 1. 1621.
            
         
      
   