
      
         
            
            
               THE SPEACH OF THE KIRK OF SCOTLAND TO HER BELOVED CHILDREN.
            
            
               HEu, heu Domine Deus, quia ipsi sunt in persecutione tuâ primi, qui videntur in Ecclesia tua primatum diligere, gerere principatum; impedire salutem est persequi Saluatorem. 
               Bernard.
            
            
               Alace Alace ô Lord God, for they are cheesest in thy persecution, who love the first and chief places and to bear rule: to stay the course of salvation is to persecute the Saviour. 
               Bernard.
            
            
               SImplicitas amentia, malitia sapientia nomen habet, viri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   boni us
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeo irridentur, ut fere nullus qui irrideri possit, appareat. 
               Petrarch.
            
            
               Simplicitie now carieth the name of madnes, malice the name of wisdome, and good men are so derided, that almost no man can be found to be derided. 
               Petrarch.
            
            Imprinted in the yere 1620.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE KIRK OF CHRIST IN SCOTLAND TO HER DEARLY beloved Children, wisheth purity and peace.
            
            
               AS I your loving mother fearing to be finally deserted of my glorious Spouse the Lord Iesus, and to be childles hereafter, haue weeped sore in the night this time bypast my teares are on my cheekes; Among all my lovers few to comfort mee, my friendes haue dealt treacherously with me, they are become my enemies, Lament. 1. 2. So would ye my dear children dolefully cry out: The joy of our heart is ceased, our daunce is turned into mourning, the crown is fallen from our heads, woe unto us that we haue sinned, Lament. 5. 15. 16. If ye were touched with the sense and feeling of your present estate, and could by the thick shaddowes of this evening be brought

to consider the comfortles desolation of that approaching night of darknes, after so bright a day of visitation. But so much the more dangerous is defection, and the mysterie of iniquitie the more pernicious, that it proceeds from so subtile beginnings as to your simplicitie ar almost insensible.
            It is not time then for me your dolorous mother to keepe silence. But love and feare presse me to put you in minde, that it hath been in all ages the holy disposition & happy practise of all Gods people wayting for the appearing of Iesus their Lord, tēdring the weal of his spouse, and taking to hart the aeternall salvation of their own soules; to setA three fold consideratiō of every Christian, ap plyed to the present purpose and tyme. continually before their eyes. 1. His inaestimable goodnes towardes his Kirk. 2. Her case and condition, while she is militant here on earth. And 3. in consideration of the one and the other, the duetie required and expected at their handes, wherthrough

in the goodnes of God they have beene safe from that dreadfull ruine, that hath overtaken the wicked. And which I wish you my beloved children to escape by calling to minde in like manner at this tyme of your danger and my distresse. First how wonderfull the Lordes mercies have been towards me his Kirk in this nation. Secōdlie my present case crying with the complaints of a mother for help at your hands. And thirdly what is due from your affection, places, and callings to me, in whose wombe ye were conceived, and by whose care ye are brought up to that which ye now are. That whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, it may be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven. For why should he be wroth against the realme of the King and his sonnes, Ezra 7. 23. And that Christ may say to me yet once againe: Thou art beautifull my love as Tirzah,

comelie as Ierusalem, terrible as an army with banners. Cant. 6. 3. Words and motions of this sort as they have been, so they will be but oyle to feede the fire of the furie of such incēdiaries, as make their own earthlie particulars their highest projects; for the wicked shall doe wickedlie and none of them shall understand; yet by the grace of God manie shalbe purified and tryed & the wise shall understand. The greatest wisdome of the greatest of you in other matters; and your gracious countenance towards me, and the meanest of your brethren at other tymes, suffereth me not to doubt of your audience of any message or motiō from heaven; but especiallie be my mouth, which may either dis cover, or prevent anie spirituall or temporall danger. Now the spirit of wisdome and knowledge give unto yow all wise hearts, that in the sight of God ye trying thinges that differ may approve things excellent

(which is above the reach of the naturall man) that ye may be sincere & without offence till that day of Christ your Lord & mine.
            THe riches of the unsearchableFirst of the great goodnes of God to the Kirk of Scotland. favours of my spouse towardes me have beene so greate, he hath made his glorie to dwell so sensiblie in this land, that I may bouldlie say, Mercie and truth righteousnes and peace had never since Christs comming in the flesh a more glorious meeting, & amiable embracing on earth, then ye have seene amongst your selves in the roughe end of this northern Yland: which therfore hath justlie obteined (to my no small comfort) a great name among the cheefe Kirkes and Kingdomes in the World. A people that sat inIn making the Gospel to shine here beyond the light of other nations. darknes hath seene a great light, and to them who sat in the region of death light is sprung up. To what nation under heaven (when now the sunne of righteousnes hath shined

upon the most part of the world) hath the Lord communicated the Gospell for so large a time, with such puritie, fulnes, prosperitie, power, libertie and peace. The hottest persecutions had never greater puritie, and power; the most halcyon hereticall tymes had never more prosperitie and peace; the best reformed Kirks in other places can hardlie parallel your fulnes and libertie. And all these with such continuance, that not onlie hath he made the truth to stay with you, as he did the sunne in the daies of Iosuah; but when the cloud of your iniquities did hasten it to goe downe, in his mercie hath he brought back the glorious sunne by manie degrees as in the tymes of Ezekiah. Oh that ye had known the long pleasant day of your visitation, and in this your day the things belonging unto your peace. Christ hath not onely beene one, & his name one, in respect of his propheticall

office for your information, of his priesthood for the expiation of your sinnes, and intercession for you: but also hath displayed his banners; and hath shewed himself (few can say the like) a soveraigne King in our Land, to governe you with his owne scepter erected in his Worde, to cutt off with his sword all monuments of Idolatry, and superfluitie of pompous ceremonies; & to restore all the meanes of his worship in Word, Sacraments and discipline to the holy simplicitie and integritie of the first paterne shewed in the mount; frō the which, by that wisdome of man which is ever foolishnes with God, they had fearfully and shamefully swerved.
            The sincerer sort of the bordering nations about you, haue been so ravished with that beautie of the Lord upon your Sion, with that crowne of glorie and rich diademeTestified by their confessions' and wishes. by the hand of our God set upon your heades, that they have made

you the meath of ther religious wishes: they haue with vehement desires longed to see the things that ye have seene. And have not spared to profess, that in your case, they would rather suffer themselves to be dissolved, then that one pinne of that holy Tabernacle so divinelie compacted should be loosed.
            Within and amongst your selves that puritie of profession received universallie with so full consent, that Prince and Peeres, Pastors and people were all for Christ, one heart & one soule of these who beleeved, with such evidences of Gods favour that the windowes & gates of heaven seemed to be opened, to raine downe upon this Land spirituall gifts to save you, as sometime they had beene readie to powre downe raine to destroy the world, every hand almost received some gift, and every head crowned with some grace, with such successe that it brought a rare unitie, prosperitie, &

peace upon Kirk & cōmon wealth. With such power and presence of the spirit of God in converting, comforting & confirming his people that Satan was seene fall like lightening from heaven, the infidel and unbeleever casting himselfe downe on his face, and confessing that undoubtedlie God was amōgst yow, and in the middest of your meetings, as the soules of his own secret ones can best beare witnesse, who have beene most submitted to that holie and happie simplicitie, the effectes whereof yet remayning in the harts of many, all worldly power be it never so violent sall not be able to remove it.
            And with such terrour from God and the Kings Lawes, that ye wanted not your Theodosians publikly humbling themselves. The hardest hearted and haughtiest were made to stoup. The Atheist either changed in heart, or in countenance, and forced to play the hypocrite, the

proudest papist, eyther made like you, or made to leave you. Heresie never hatched within your walles, and the Babylonish brood of schisme in the infancie till this tyme was dashed against the stōes. Ye sought not then (my dere children) with Iohn and Iames like great Princes one to sitt on the right hand, another on the left; nor to be busked with earthly glorie and Persian pompe, better beseeming the kings of the world, then the kingdome of Christ. The Carbuncles, the Saphyres, the Emeraulds, the Chrysolites; the gold, the precious stones, wherewith my foundation, walles, windowes, gates were set and adorned, were out of the Lords own thesaurie. Your ambition was then set upon spirituall glorie, the cōquest of syn and Satan by the powerfull puritie of the Word, Sacraments, and discipline. The joy of your soules was to see Christ reigning in the middest of his enemies,

his sword dividing the father from the sonne, and the sonne from the father: yea & a man frō himself, parting the soule and the spirit, the joynts and the marrow, and ending in glorie to God, and peace upon earth. Then were the tabernacles of God amiable; then provoked ye one another with cheerefulnes to go up to the mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iacob: ye were sure there to learne his wayes, and how to walke in his pathes. Then found ye the Lord his glorie filling his Sanctuarie, and one of the largest springs of the blood of Christ from Eden watring the citie of God, and glaiding your soules wearied with sinne. This was my beautie so truelie glorious in the sight of God and his Angels that all the glorie of this lyfe is unworthie to enter in comparison with it. Better to you to have this glorie under a crowne of thornes with our Saviour, in a chaine with

Paul, in the Lyons den with Daniel, then all the splendor of Tiberius, of Nero, of Darius, wherewith the weak eyes of the world are dazled, and pitifullie (to my great griefe) bewitched.
            And surely your forgetfull ingratitudeHis goodnes in the manner of the working of her reformation. were inexpiable, if with the mater ye remembered not the finger of God wonderfully working in the meanes of that glorious reformation. We have to regrate that the Atheisme of these dreggs of tymes and manners is become so gross, that all events now are sacrilegiously ascribed to second causes. If Naaman his cure, or Anna her fruitfulnes, or the Egyptiā or Babylonian libertie had fallen out in these godles tymes, it had beene counted foolishnes and simplicitie of men over religious, upon the ignorance of alterations wroght by nature, or policie, to attribute them to God. Yet God is the Lord; Of him and through him and for him

are all things. Ezrah, Nehemiah, and the godly of that time acknowledge no less the wonderfull working of God in their redemption from the bondage of Babylon, then their fathers did their deliverance out of Egypt, Although the power of God was not so miraculous in the one, as in the other. Consider a little, and mark the constitution of the tyme before this reformation was wrought, the grandeur, pride, & insolencies of my office bearers thē; the averse disposition & induration of the personages both at home & abroade, upon whom in mans eyes it did depend; the heathenish darknes of idolatrie and palpable blindnes of superstition, wherin the multitude was wrapped, and ye shal be forced to say, that he who would have intended a change of religiō, might have received that desparing answer, which a man of great spirit and place, an enemie of Romish pride, and a desirer of reformation

gave concerning Luthers purpose. Frater frater abi in cell
                     •
                  m et dic miserere mei Deus 
               Brother, brother goe to your cloyster and say have mercy on me ô God. All seene second causes were posting on in a contrarie course; or if any possibilitie of alteration could haue beene imagined, what hope could there have beene therof, except it had beene wrought more gladij cruentā
                  di. with the edge of the sword bathed in blood: as Grostead the Malleus Romanorum hammer of Rome said a little before his death. Yet (to the endles praise and wonderfull goodnes and wisdome of our God be it remembred) the great worke was so singularly brought about and perfected, that almost without blood, except the blood of a few martyres, (wherein through the same wisdome and goodnes, for commending and ratifying the truth, the mouth of the sword of persecutors was dipped,) the whole bodie and shadow, substance and ceremonies, roote and branches of Romish Idolatrie were at once cut off.
            
               Thus by reason of the wonderfull manner of Gods working, of my own feeling, and yours of the wonders wrought amongst you, and of the testimonie of others both friends and foes about us, may not ye with one voice say and sing with the Kirk, Psal. 126. When the Lord turned againe the captivitie of Sion, we were like them that dreamed, then was our mouth filled with laughter and our tongue with singing; Then sayd they among the heathen the Lord hath done great things for them, the Lord hath done great things for us wherof we are glad.
            
            And would God as your deliverāce was in many things like that of Israel; so your infidelitie and unthankfulnes were not like theirs; there arose an other generation which knew not the Lord, nor yet the work which he had done for Israel. A generation not onely unthankfull, but contumelious against that glorious work of God & worthie

instruments therof, and therefore ready to bless that which the Lord hath cursed, and to build that which he hath destroyed. For is there not start up of late within my skirts a new sect of shameless mishapen formalists (my indignation cannot bear such monsters) who blush not to joyne with my enemies the papists in breathing out reproachful obloquies against your reverend fathers and brethren, Calvin, Beza, Knox etc. as though their zeale against Romish idolatrie (the deformities whereof by new colours are now beginning to seeme beauties) had been excessive; and by disparaging their credite to bring the truth preached by them in suspition, and that glorious work of reformatiō, wherin they were so worthy instruments into question. He that is the keeper of Israell vindicat his owne cause from the blasphemous mouth, and uncouth stratageme of this generation of vipers.
            
               Finally that the Lord might shew▪
               His strong hand against all her enemies forraine and domestick. that he left nothing undone; haue ye not experienced the blessing of Abraham; hath he not blessed them who blessed you, and cursed them who cursed you; he hath been not onely our sunne, but our shield. What instrument framed against you hath prospered? What tongue arysing against you hath not the Lord cōdemned? that all the world might know, that God was your saviour, and the strong God of Iacob your avenger. Your forraigne enemies haue bene made the objects of your pitie, and so many as haue rent my bowels within, have perished tragically in their own divices. No sooner began they, till now, to reedifie the cursed walls of Iericho, but they have beene buried under the ruines of them. All which hath proceded of his own good pleasure. If ye should say that the cause were any worthynes in your selves above other nations, not onely my spouse

Christ, and his faithfull servant Moses would cry out against you, but all the world that knowes what ye are in other respects would laugh you to scorne. The Lord who shewes mercie on whom he will shew mercie, hath done it. It is wonderfull in my eyes, and should have moved the most obdured, and stonie hearts amongst you to melt, & answerably to spend themselves to his honour in the duties of holines and righteousnes, which alas ye have not done, as now shall appeare by the sequel of your iniquities, casting me your poore mother into so great a doole & desolation, which is the second point of your Christian consideration propounded in the beginning.
            Would God it might pleaseThe present distress and doleful face of the K
                     •
                  rk. him to blesse your senslesse soules with a holy remembrance of that which ye once were, and from whence ye are fallen. Ye would surely finde, that as in manners and

conversatiō from small beginnings by degrees ye are now come to great abominations; so both in the lyfe of your profession, and in the outward worship of God, ye are further fallen from that which of late ye were, then now your case is distant from that which ye feare.
            To let pass the desperate profanessCrying sinns of the godles multitude, and lukewarmnes of the best preachers and professors. of many crying sins even beyond the cry of Sodome (considering all the circumstances of the mercie of God, of the meanes and space graunted to you to repent) by continuall importunitie deaving the eares of divine justice, that had not the Lord had respect to some of his secret ones; who kneele before him day and night to continue his gracious favour with you, misregarded of the world, but my chariots and horsmen: had he not a purpose to prevent the insolencies of my enemies, I have sayd I would scatter them abroad, I would make their remembrance to cease frō amongst men,

save that I feared the furie of the enemie, lest their adversaries should waxe proud. And which is principall, did not the Lord for his own names sake, and the praise of his mercy spare me, we had long since beene consumed and the enemy had entered within my gates. To let passe that lukewarmenes & careles mediocritie in the matters of God, that neutrall adiaphorisme in my affaires, which hath in it a native and proper power to hasten at the hand of God the removall of my candlestick, and to bring in the famine of the word. For how can the Lord without indignatiō suffer men to esteeme basely of the least circumstance, which he willeth to be observed. And not to insist in that fall from your first love, decay of your wonted zeale, secret indevotion even in true christians: where is that wonted power and demonstratiō of the spirit in preaching? that cheerfulnes in holy exercises?

that circumspect walking before God in all your wayes? that preparation to divine dueties? that spirit of deprecations? that spiritual profite of hearing, communicating, meditation, and conference? that consciencious diligence in winning of others, & working upon your acquaintāce to bring them within the bosome of my love? that jealousie over your hearts? that indignation against errours, idols, Apostates? Is not the life of religion condemned under the names of hypocrisie, singularitie, melancholie, simplicitie, puritanisme etc. And the light thereof either smothered under the ashes of this errant tyme
                  •
               , or put in a theefes bowet; so that the godly now born down with a bastard modestie, and spirituall pusillanimitie, dissemble and conceale the grace of God for eschewing the shame & offence of the world, which the wicked not long since, did simulat, and counterfeyt for currying of credite

with me and my follovvers.
            But leaving all these, I come toThe glory of the Kirk turned into shame. complaine of the alteration made upon my outvvard face and goverment. May not I novv, as once the vvorld becomming Arrian, poure out my sighes, and vvonder hovv so suddenly I am changed from that vvhich I vvas, and become that vvhich novv I am. All the rites of Rome are not more odious to many novv, then my present ceremonial cōstitutiō vvas to them of late. The formes and fruites of preaching fearfully changed, the crystalline fountaines of holy Scripture troubled with the mudd of mans putide learning, the ministration of the Sacraments brought in under a new guise of mans shaping, the painfull ministerie turned into a busie Lordship, and these who are set over soules, & should warre unto God are become seculars, intangling themselves with the affaires of

this life; nothing but a pompous shadow for Gods simple service. Demas & Diotrephes are become the paterns of wisdome and praeeminence; Chrysostome is thrust out and Arsatius placed in his rowme, beloved Liberius is set a syde and lightlied, Foelix is set to feede the flock; pratling tymeservers are become preachers, & powerfull pastors put to silence; plaine and frequent preaching reproved, a redd liturgie commended; Alevite for a Preist, and lesse then a levite for mouth and messenger to Gods people; Non residents with their flattering varlots sit in the chaires of dignitic, fed with pluralitie of benefices, and painfull promoovers of the Kingdome of Christ, and subverters of Antichrist with ignorance the mother of devotion, borne down and despised, Labourers vexed with angvish of Spirit, & loyterers live in wealth & ease, In the tyme of confusion, wicked men

attayne to honours, and that seat of dignitie
               In turbis pravus etiam sortitur b
                     •
                  norem et quam dignitatis sedem quieta rep. desperat eam perturbata se consequi posse arbitratur. 
               wherof in a peaceable common wealth they dispared, in the tyme of trouble they hope to procure. Commandes are cancelled. Canons are made commandes. And as Gerson complained in his tyme, a Monke more severely punished for going without his cowle, then for comitting adulierie or sacrilege. Or as Chaucer, the Fryer more bound to his habit then a man to his wife. The duties of Ministers, and edification of Christians tyed to the sens
                  •
               es practise of trifling ceremonies. And hence we see it is, that old hypocrites are become professed Atheists; Philadelphian professors are come to a Laodicean temper, Papists wax insolent and obstinate, the faithfull pastors either put frō the building of the Sanctuarie, or forced to build with the one hand, and with Nehemiah to beare off these corruptions with the other; the people through publick contradictions and present

practises contrary to late preachings, know not what way to incline. But as usually it falleth out in multitudes when they are shaken with contrarie doctrines, and tossed betwixt errour and trueth, from being doubtfull in questions moved about religion, their hearts in end are opened, and themselves made naked to receive everie corruption & vanitie. As the contentions about Eutyches opinion thrust out Christ and brought in Mahomet. Yea except the Lord restreyne and stay, they rush into Atheisme in opiniō, and Epicureisme in conversation, where through the lyfe of religion is utterly extinguished. The case of religion herein not being unlike unto that of the miserable woman in Plutarch, whō her suters divided amongst themselves in members, because that every one could not have her whole. Thus she perished and they were disappointed. What may be the finall event, your synnes

may make you justly to feare, what it shall be, the alpowerfull God, who rules all events, knowes well.
            This ye may see at least, that pulpits and schooles, taverns and alehouses, towne and village, Gath & Askelon, are all busied with these broyles. Which make me the daughter of Sion to complaine and in doole to deplore that in so distressed a case, there is no compassion in my sonnes. That of so many whome I have brought forth and brought up, there be so few to cō
               fort me, almost none to guide me or take me by the hand. Yea after tryall I finde that my own ministers and domestickes, beholding the invention of their own heades, & concupisence of their own hearts, without respect to God or his wordThe causers of her calamitie, the same that have beene in other Kirks heretofore. are the prime authors of my calamitie & actors of this my mischief, according to the bitter complaint of the godly learned of old, searching the causes of all the abuses,

wherwith the glorie of the christian Kirks my sisters in the tyme of their peace hath beene blemished or defaced. I will content me with two witnesses, who speaking of their own tymes, directly point at ours, & taxing the enormities of the Kirks then, paint out in lively colours our present corruptions, that we may see the coincidence of the course of synne and may feare the similitude of judgements.
            The one is learned Gerson aboutSome of thē drawen out of Gerson a
                     •
                   the neglect of Scripture and multiplying of traditions. the yeare 1420. who observed two principall causes of the sicknesses & soares of the Kirk in his tyme. One was the neglecting of the lawes of God and direction of Scriptures, and the multitude of mans inventions. No tongue (sayth he) is able sufficiently to expresse, what evill, what daunger, what confusion, the contempt of holy Scriptures (which doubtlesse is sufficient for the government of the Kirk, for otherwayes Christ had beene an unperfect Lawgiver) and

the following of humane inventions hath brought into the Kirk. For proof hereof he addeth, let us consider the state of the cleargie, to which heavenly wisdome should have beene espoused. But they have committed whordome with that filthie harlot, earthly, carnall, and divelish wisdome; so that the estate of the Kirk is become meerely brutish & monstrous, heaven is below, and earth is above, the spirit obeyeth, and the flesh commaundeth, the principall is esteemed as accessorie, and the accessorie as principall. Yet some shame not to say, that the Kirk is better governed by humane inventiōs, then by the divine law, and the law of the gospell of Christ, which assertiōis most blasphemous. For the Euangelicall doctrine by the professors of it did inlarge the bounds of the Kirk, and lifted her up to heaven, which these sonnes of Hagar seeking out that wisdome which is from the Earth, haue cast down to the dunghill. And that it is not wholly fallen, and utterly overthrowne and extinct, it is the great

mercy of our God and Saviour.
            
            The other cause of the Kirks ruineThe 
                     •
                  vari
                     ••
                   and ambitiō of Bishops▪
                he observed to be, the ambition, pride and covetousnes of Bishops, and their Hierarchy. He 
                  •
               pareth not to say, that in imitation of Lucifer they will be adored and worshiped as God. Neither doe they think themselves subiect to any, but are as sonnes of Belial that have cast off the yoke, not enduring whatsoever they doe, that any should ask them, why they doe so, they neither feare God, nor reverence men. Hence was it, that not onely hee, but innumerable others of the wise men, & holyest of the Kirk, longed and looked for a reformation, a long time before Luther was borne; wishing that all things were brought back to that estate, they were in the tyme of the Apostles. And what wonder, that perceiving among our selues, the same causes and many the like effects, we tremble for feare of a more dangerous 
                  •
               ecidivation.
            
               The other witnes is Nicolas OremCauses out of Nicolas Orem: as the profanity of kirkmen. a man learned & pithic, who in a sermon before Pope Vrban the fyft in the yere 1364, noteth among many moe, these causes of the approaching miserie of the Kirk. The profanitie of the Kirk beyond the synagogue, we know (sayth he) how Christ rebuketh the Pharises, the cleargie of the Iewes for covetousnes 1. for that they suffered doves to be sould in the temple of God 2. for that they honoured God with their lipps and not with their heart, and because they sayd, but did not. 3. for that they were hypocrites. To the first then let us see whether it be worse to sell both Kirk and sacraments, then to suffer doves to be sould in the temple. To the second, there be some who neither honour God with their heart nor with their lipps, who neither doe well, nor say well, neither doe they preach any word at all, but be dumbe doggs not able to barke, impudent doggs that never have ynough. And truely there

be also some, whose intollerable pride & malice is so manifesty and notoriously kindled up like a fyre, that no cloke nor shadow of hypocrisie can cover it. But are so past all shame that it may be well verified of them, which the Prophet speaketh, Thou hast gotten the face of an harlote, thou wouldest not blush. An other cause is the unaequal proportionWant of proportion in the Kirk. seen in the Kirk, where one is hungrie and starved, an other drunk, by reason wherof it cannot be, that the state of the Kirk can long endure. As he cleareth by the comparison of the proportions in Musik in common wealths, and in the bodie of man, wherupon he inferreth. If in the bodie of the wealth Ecclesiasticall some who be the heads be so enormously overgone in riches and dignity that the weak mēbers of the body be scant able to beare them up, there is a great token of dissolution and ruine shortly. A third cause is the pridePride of Prelates. of Prelates declared in their great horses, troupes of horsemen, the

superfluous pomp of their waiting men and great families. To them the Lord speaketh by the Prophet Amos, ch. 4. Hear you fatted kine of Samaria, ye that doe poore men wrong & oppresse the needy, the day shall come upon you &c. Besides these he allegethDivers other causes. the tyranny of Prelates, which as it is a violent thing, so it cannot long indure, the promoting of the unworthie, and neglecting of the worthie, the tribulations of outward policie & cōmotions of people, the refusing of correction in the Princes and Rulers of the Kirk, the backsliding from righteousnes, lack of discreet and learned preachers, promoting of children unto Kirk offices, and such other like. This sermon changing the name & time, might seem to haue bene studied for our present estate. And happy were we, if we were not miscaried with the perillous opinions, which he ascribes to the Prelates of that time. One opinion is of them

who thinke the Prelates to bee the Kirk, which the Lord will alwayes keep, and never forsake. An other who deferred time, thinking that the causes & tokens before rehearsed, have been in the Kirk at other times no lesse then now. The third of such as say, Let come what will come, let us conforme our selves to this world, and take our time with temporizers. And the last is of such as being unfaithful, beleeve not that any such thing shall come. But so long as men are drunken with one or moe of those errors, what hope is there of happinesse of recovery? We might heare Henricus de Hassia in the yeare 1371. speaking that of our times which he said of his own, That the Ecclesiasticall governours in the primitive Kirk were compared to the Sunne shining in the day time, and the politicall to the Moon shining in the night. But the spiritual men which now are, doe neither shine in the day nor in the night. But rather with

the darknesse of impiety, ignorance, and licentious living, doe obscure both the day and the night.
            
            The renowned Bishop of Spalato,Causes brought by the Bishop of Spalato. as holy Bernard before him, complaines more bitterly of that damned couple of crying sins, Avarice and Ambition, two monstrous beasts, and ravenous Harpies, which have seized upon the harts of Kirkmen in the time of peace; then of the crueltie of persecution and craft of heresies, which seeme to you to be the most desperate and onely evils. Then (saith hee) speaking in the person of the Kirk, was I at my highest, and at my best esteeme, whiles I went in a thin coat, such as I was cloathed with, when my spouse Christ Iesus betrothed himselfe to me, &c. And afterward; They have thrust upon the world their owne inventions, and established their own ordinances, not drawn out of that testament, which my spouse left to me and them, namely the holy Scriptures, but craftily hammered out

of their own capricious projects, and tending to the prejudice of your poore soules my deere children. So true it is, that wealth is a viperine brood of devotion.
               Cō
                  
                     •
                  estae passim opes in tanti officij reverentiam, pene causam reverentiae 
                     •
                  x
                     •
                  inxerunt. 
               Riches heaped together for reverence of so great a function, almost have removed the cause of reverence.
            
            And lest my calamity should seeme common, or my present miseries to be lesse, then the greatnesseConclusion from Nazianzen. of my by-past felicities, may not every feeling soule rightly affected towards unity & verity, mournfully deplore this my estate in the words of Nazianzen, describing the case of the Kirk in his time to this meaning. My mind (sayes he) leads me, seeing there is no other remedy, to flee and convoy my selfe unto some corner out of sight, where I may escape frō the cloudy tempest of maliciousnesse, whereby all parts are entred into deadly warre amongst themselves; and that little remnāt of love which was, is now consumed to nothing. The onely godlines we glory in, is to find out somewhat

whereby we may iudge others to be ungodly. One of us observes the faults of another, as matters of upbraiding, and not of mourning. By these meanes we are growne hatefull, even in the eyes of the heathen themselves; and (which woundeth us the more deeply) we cannot deny but we have deserved their hatred; with the better sort of our own our credit and name is quite lost: the lesse wee are to marvell, if they iudge vily of us, who although wee did well, would hardly commend us. On our backes they also build, that are leaud, and what we object one against another, the same they use to the utter scorne and disgrace of us all.
            
            But I come now my belovedIII. The dutie required of us in respect of the two former consideratiōs
                brethren, to the conscience of your duty in this case (which was the third and principal purpose) the religion whereof will bind so many as think seriously of the exceeding bountifulnesse of God to mee his Kirk, and upon my manifold crosses here on earth.
            
               One common dutie of all is, thatAnd first a common duty of humiliation urged upon all. seeing they be all under the guiltines of ingratitude, and are become a sinfull nation, loaden now with iniquities, as ye have been with mercies before, which doe provoke the Lord to remove his kingdome altogether from you, and to give it to others that would bring forth the fruits thereof (according to the constant course of the severity of his Iustice, both with his own people the Iewes, and with many other famous Kirkes in the East and West, given over to beleeve that great lye, because they received not the love of the truth, and rendred not to the great King, the fruits of his kingdome in due season) that now before the fiercenesse of his wrath come on, all of you, from the house of David to the house of Levi, look with melting hearts, and mourning eyes upon him, whom you have pierced with your iniquities. Oh that yee had lights to search your

hearts, and hearts to repent for your sins in the evening of this your day, that ye could turne unto the Lord with one heart before yee bee overwhelmed with darknesse. At least, if in these godlesse and devotionless dayes, wherein all your wonted fasting is turned into feasting, a general humiliation cannot be obtained, ye that are the Lords owne, and delight in his tents, yee that love the beauty of Sion, and have accesse to the face of God, contend with him by the spirit of deprecation, fill your chalmers with strong cries, fill heaven and earth with the grones of his owne spirit, poure out teares day and night, take hold of the king of glory, wrastle with him as becomes Israel, pray againe and againe with Abraham; let him not depart out of your hearts, nor from his owne tabernacles in this land; your God lookes to be intreated, loves to be importuned, he is loth to leave you altogether. No sudden eclipse

comes upon you, but like that of old when the glory of the Lord departed by degrees: first, from the Cherub to the doore of the house, Ezek. 10. 4. then to the entry of the gate of the Lords house, v. 19. then from the midst of the citie to the mountain towards the East side of the citie, chap. 11. 23. Better keepe his presence now, then seeke him through the streetes when hee is gone. Choose rather to mourn in Sion for preuenting comfortles Babel, then sitting desolate by the rivers of Babel, to burst out in bitter teares in remembrance of sweet Sion. The triall begins upon Pastors, but ye know not upon whom it shall stay.
            The large time of so faire occasionTwo things required evē of ordinary professors. First, skill to▪ try the Spirits. in the schoole of Christ, requires two things now at your hands. One is, that yee bee able to try the spirit, and to know with certainty what to follow. The way to establish your selves, is not with

the Romans to rest upon a blinde faith, receiving for truth whatsoever carries my name or authority; nor with the rich man in the Gospell, to wish that one may rise from the dead for your satisfaction. Neither as it was in the time of Eliah, to seek for a miracle from heaven, nor yet to run to any on earth for decision of all questions; for within and amongst your selves all are divided, and without Papists are your enemies; Protestants are strangers to your secrets, and unacquainted with your covenants and oathes: your comfort may be that your father died not intestate. Let his testament bee read with attentiue reverence. Search his latter will which he hath left for a plain and perfect direction to his comming againe. Consider what is most agreeable to his wisedome, what makes most for his honour, for the edification of your owne soules, for the restraint of the liberty of the flesh, and for

the comfort of a distressed conscience, without respect to the appearances of wisedome and humility among men, or to that which seems most to serve to your worldly credit, that wooes your flesh, or courts your carnall senses: for this will bee a meager consolation, when the horrors of God are upon your soules ready to be presented before his Iustice. Continue in the things yee have learned and are perswaded of, knowing of whom yee have learned them. Have yee attained by a conscientious use of prayer, hearing, meditation, conference, unto a perswasion of that which is now in debate; have ye an inward witnes testifying to your soules, that your teachers by their fidelity, & the effectual blessing of God upon their labours, have caried with thē the seale of their ministery? Then cōtinue & bee not caried about with every wind of doctrine to the hellish disturbance of the heavenly peace of

your soules. In the time of tentation ponder with your hearts what better warrants yee have for some practises of religion more substantiall in mens estimation, and whether the motives of the one alteration may not as wel inforce the other. As ye should be able to try your selves, whether ye are in the faith or not, which Paul requireth of the whole Kirk of Corinth, so should ye have skill to try the spirits, whether they be of God or not. For such are perverted, as are ever learning, & never come to the knowledge of the truth. And as in respect of the time yee ought to be teachers, and to be able to edifie every one another in the most holy faith, so are yee charged by the Apostle Peter to be ready to give an account, even to your enemies of that hope which is in you. He that hath faith can try himselfe, can try the spirits, and teach others, and give a reason both of his hope and practise before the adversary.
            
               The other is, that once having gainedSecōdly, readines to suffer for the least poynt of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   truth. a godly resolution of the truth, you suffer nothing earthly to divert you from the profession & maintenance of the same. It is now high time for you who have been hearing of Christ so many yeares, to be put to your trial, how yee have learned Christ, & to give proof of your passive obedience, when the Lord calles you, no lesse then of your active. Offences, schismes, troubles, persecutions, have been in all times, & in every period of the Kirk hath opened a back doore for a worldling to slip forth at. Others before us have had their own trials, & these in the dispensation of God are now made ours. Hee hath never been a Christian in action, that hath not been a martyr in affection. And (let the world still sit in the chaire of the scorners) that professor that will not bee a ceremoniall confessor, would refuse to bee a substantiall martyr. The smallest threed of

the seamlesse coat of thy Saviour, the lowest hem of his garment, the least pin or latchet of that heavenly tabernacle may be a matter of a glorious and comfortable suffering to thee. And the lesse the cause be, it being Christs cause, the more rare & acceptable is thy testimony. The heart may be sound, and voyd of Idolatrie, and yet the outward action of adoration may prove Idolatrous. Knowledge is greater, and Christ now more glorious, by confessions, martyrdomes, prescription of time, and profession of all nations, then in the primitive times. He that now counteth it no religion to renounce a Christian rite, and receive an Antichristian in place therof, would not have spared of old, to set Antichrist himself in the throne of Christs kingdome. We are unthristie bankerupts, wasting that thesaurie unworthily, every penny whereof was painfully and narrowly gathered together. The worthy

martyrs of preceding times, and glorious instruments of reformation, if they were alive in these decaying dayes, how would they bee ashamed of so degenerated children? How ready would they be in your places to suffer for the name of Christ? Or if yee had lived in their troublesome times, spoyled of your goods, hated of the world, pinched in prison, sequestrate from wife, house, and children, looking every houre for death: consider what would have been your thoughts of infidelity, your words of blasphemy, your deeds of defection.
            If it please my glorious head toYour care and your comfort in suffering. call you to suffer for his name, let your care bee (as Peter hath taught you) 1. to sanctifie him in your hearts, and not to feare the feare of men. 2. to bee ready with your mouthes to make apologie to every one that craveth a reason of your hope: and 3. to have a good conversation

in Christ, that they who speak evill of you may be ashamed. And let your comfort be, 1. a good cōscience, arising upō two grounds; One, that ye suffer for wel doing, the other, that the will of God bee so: For howsoever all Christians be called to suffer, yet every one is not called to every suffering. 2. your conformitie with Christ. And 3. the assurance of an happy out-gate by his power, who was put to death in the flesh, but was quickned in the spirit, and now stands on the right hand of the father to maintaine his owne, and to revenge himself upon his enemies. Deceive not your selves with worldly policie, under the name of that heavenly vertue of Christian prudence, which doth nothing, intendeth nothing, admitteth nothing, in deed, in word, or in shew, neither by dissimulation nor simulation against the honour of God, in prejudice of the least truth against the love of your brethren, or

the duties of your own vocation. Prudence never doth the least evill for procuring the greatest good, for avoyding the greatest evill. Shee is carefull of her own duty, and commits the care of the event to God, to whom it pertaines. She is never so perplexed betwixt two evils, but her eye seeth an out-gate without falling into a third evill of sin. She teacheth her followers either with Cyprian in a matter so holy, as is the casting of a little incense into the fire of an idoll not to enter in deliberation; or else after deliberation with that worthy Prince of Conde to make the right choyce, never to choose sin: to remit punishment to the pleasure of superiours, and the successe to the providence of the most high.
            Beside that common necessitieSpeciall du
                     •…
                   of Pastors. layd upon you all in generall, there is a speciall dutie at this time required of my Pastors and leaders. The schooles of divinity, which of late

were a pleasant Lebanon fortimbe
                  •
                to my buildings, are become dennes of ignorance and impiety, sinkes of schisme and sedition for my subversion. The sonnes of the Prophets are made enemies to prophesie; in stead of convictions of heresie, hearing nothing almost, but the censures of sincerity: in place of the harmony of Christs Evangel deaued with dyted contentions about Antichristian geniculation. Among their schoole Doctors sonnes of Ismael descended of Hagar, R
                     •
                  conditae prorsum & occuitae eruditionis viri. 
               Mismah Duma and Massa, our toung-tied teachers Audi, vide, tace. all men of profound and hid learning, the greatest Rabbi (but that hee hath no hebrew at all) whom God hath marked many wayes in his speeches, preachings, and practises, bitterly condemneth them for heretickes, who stand constant against that, which of late he himselfe condemned of superstition & idolatry both by word and by writ, yet extant among

his scollers in his patched and plagiarie collections written by many of their hands. Thus alas my glory is become my shame, my foū
               taine a puddle, my Na
                     •
                  oth, my beauty, is become my loathing, my deformity. Hence forsooth shall bee furnished that plentie of excellent labourers cracked of, to fill the places of my faithfull watchmen, for their fidelity silenced and deprived. Had my worthy Pastors but the favour of papists now, or popish monkes of old, casten forth of their places, but not out of their livings, our young divines fore-runners (if ever any) of religions ruine, would neither, like the lyons whelps, make so great haste by their pricking pawes to get out of the matrix, and in into their roomes, nor yet make their mother so pregnant and parturient. I may hope for some of Luthers spirit forth of these Cloysters; and I beseech my God to give them the spirit of discerning. But for the

most part they were never taught to speak against papists for the truth, to deale with the soules of people, nor to live as Christians, and yet must lay their hands upon the Lords Arke, temerating my sacred mysteries, entring unreverēly with shooes, and all into my Temple, and making that holy ministery a meane of temporall life unto themselves, more then a power of spirituall life to others.
            The discharge of their calling is conforme to their education and entry, and answerable to the wishes of the wicked people, and wiles of the worldly patrones. In conversation they and others before them so lewd, that now it is esteemed puritanisme in a Pastor not to be prophane. Every man and minister carefull to walk before God, studious of Scripture, and given to any abstinence in his diet, as of old hee was set down by Ithacius in his Kalendar of suspected Priscillians: so

now by men of Ithacius spirit, in the roll of Puritanes, who cannot better to their iudgement approve the soundnesse of faith, then by a more licentious and loose behaviour. The authority of many preachers is so farre from procuring credit to their doctrine, that to my great griefe, and discredit of the Gospell, that is thought by many in earnest, which by a learned man was uttered in jesting, of a profane preacher, that hee would not willingly heare him say the Creed, lest hee should take it for a lye, comming foorth of his mouth. This is it which carieth with it a secret cause of the conformity of the most part. For how shal he that makes no conscience of morall duties in his conversation, count it religious to stand against ceremonies in his vocation? Or how can he be a director of thee in rites, who is a neglecter of himselfe in substance. The sonnes of Eli made the people to abhorre the

offering of the Lord, and they were slaine. When Nadab and Abihu were consumed with fire from the Lord for failing in the outward duty of the ministry, in a matter as might seeme of smal moment, Moses told Aaron his brother, that the Lord would bee sanctified of them that came neere unto him.
            Few of the best sort can plead innocent of the matter in hand. If people had been more painfully instructed in times past, they had been better prepared for the present difficulties. Had ye cleared your selves by your Apologetickes to your friends in forraine parts, I had not been despised in the world: neither had your reprochful defection been proclaimed among your adversaries. Had you made your meane to your gracious soveraigne, and layd before his mercifull eyes the pittifull cause of his own deere people, lamentably scandalized, and ready to make shipwrack of their souls

upon these dangerous, sands, and uncouth rockes of novelties 
                  •
               et in their way, his maiesties clemency had not suffered matters to come to this desperate passe. If yee, who are the remembrancers of the Lord, had not kept silence, had ye blowen the silver trumpet in the middest of the congregation in the dayes of the holy assemblies, had ye instantly denounced curses against the reedifiers of Iericho, had ye informed judicious professors in private and publicke of their owne interest and my danger, had ye withdrawn your presence, your countenance & concurrence from the ring-leaders of that course, had every watchman been watchfull in his own watchtower, defection had not gone on so farre: at least your uncessant proclaimes, and continuall protests would both have witnessed to the world, and to the posterity after you, that defection was not universall, and also would have given your

selves some hope to bee repossessed in your former liberty, not betrayed of you by your wilfull silence, but extorted from you by wicked violence. Were this cloud past, and I restored to the sunne-shine of the lightsome countenāce of my God, ye would all be ashamed and blush at your present mis-behaviour. In the time of peace yee would seeme lyons,
               In pace leones, in praelio Cervi. 
               but when battell comes, you prove but Harts. Could ye have looked that at the first so many of Gideons armies would haue fled home. But if the remnant were faithfull and forward, their noyse and light would yet make Madian to flee. They who have yeelded under colour of care for their congregations, but indeed cōstraint for feare of worldly losses, have brought the rest of their brethren in suspition, that either they will follow at last, or else that they deale more obstinately then conscientiously. It were good therfore that yee cleared your selves to the

consciences of others by the evidence of reason, and sine lift up your voyce as a trumpet, that the deafest and deadest may heare: that yee were instant in season and out of season, to shew Israel their transgressions, lest yee bee guiltie of their bloud. Why should yee bee ashamed to cry that in the eares of others openly, which ye think with your hearts, & speak among your selves secretlie? Who shal stand for Christ, & suffer for his crowne, if yee fall away and betray his honor? If ye hold your peace, Christ will tell you, that the stones will cry out, although whole multitudes of you bee silent. Suppose all Ierusalem should be offended at you, yet it becomes you to crie, Thou sonne of David have mercy on us. And, blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord. Let schismatickes load you, according to their malicious custome, with carts full of reproches of schisme & sedition,

yet ye must follow the example of those glorious ministers of God, who before peace upon earth, did sing glory to God in the highest heavens. Ye must first be pure, then peaceable. It is a cursed silence of the mouth, that makes the conscience within to cry. Remember the example of Aphraades; remember the modest virgins behaviour, when shee saw her fathers house on fire; remember the cryes of the dumbe child of Craesus at his fathers danger. The woe is terrible, that belongs to you, in case ye crie not. The Athenian Cynegirus detained the Persian Gallie with his right hand, & when that was cut off, with his left; and being mutilate of both, hee spared not his teeth. No meane should bee left unassayed with God, and with men, to maintain the least parcel of truth for his sake, whose truth it is, and who hath concredit you with the bloud of his own sonne. As the Libellatici wer odious of old,

for redeeming from the Gentiles their peace with money: so may ye be suspected of defection, and deniall of the truth, if yee shall redeeme either your peace or places with promise of silence. Away with halting, with luke-warmnesse, with shaming, to utter the words of Christ in the midst of an adulterous and sinful generation, lest he be ashamed of such, when 
                  •
               ee commeth in the glory of his father▪ with his holy Angels. Promise of silence is a secret collusion, and indirect approbation of the contrary course▪ a hardning of the adversaries in their wickednesse, and a deserting of your brethren in the cause of God. The occasion of the preaching of the Gospell procured by dealing of this sort, is not unlike to Pilates subtilitie, who thought meet to scourge Christ, for saving of his life. Moses Exod. 10. 25. Daniel chap: 6. 11. Iohn Baptist, Mark. 6▪ 18. had no such wisedome. Albeit all thy

speaking were but as the washing of a blackmore, yet bee not mis-led with the cunning and craftie offers of your adversaries. Their intention is to cast you loose of your own order, to draw you on by degrees, to make the number behind the smaller, the common clamor and complaint the lesse, their owne travels in cutting off the rest, the more easie and plausible. And in the end, when ye have satisfied their desires, they shall bee hardened in their course, and ye condemned as unfavorie salt, censured by them as old hypocrites, condemned by your owne consciences as betrayers of the truth, and complained upon by Gods people, who haue heard his truth from your lips.
            But then might I have good hope to be freed from this deluge of defection, and that all my lower vallies would at last appeare, if the tops of my mountaines were once discovered. If these who i
                  •
               
               
the providence of my God are of greatest estate, and have the first places in the kingdome, and high and honorable meetings thereof, would go as farre before others in zeale, as they are above them in preferment. Men will mock me (as the servant of Strato the Syrian was mocked at the election of a king) for looking to the West for the sight of the sunne rising. Yet as it was then first seene by that wise servant upon the tops of the Westerne mountaines: so my hope is in this night of desolation, to see the beames of my wonted light first upon you of greatest place, and then upon the lower ground, by obtaining at your hands a few reasonable petitions, which I will then propone, when I have by your patience a little dis-burthened my heavie minde, by demanding a few things at the Prelates, once my ministers, † Who are ashamed to heare what they have done, but have no shame
               Quibus audendi quae fecerunt pudor est, nullus faciendi quae audire 
                     •
                  rubescunt. Illic ubi opus est, nihil verentur, hic ubi nihil opus est, ibi verentur. 
               In doing of that which they blush to

heare. Where need, i
                     •
                   they are voyd of feare: and where there i
                     •
                   no need, there they feare: Charging and attesting them, as they will answere to the Iudge of all the world▪ to ponder my demands unpartially, and in the presence of God to answere them secretly, in the cabinets of their soules.
            1. First, how they could so farreSome demands proponed to the Prelates. forget themselves in so short time, as to come to this measure of defection▪ of pride and persecution? Would they not have answered, and did they not say in the beginning of this their course, with Hazael, Are we dogges, that we should doe this mischiefe? And consequently what inexpected extremity they may yet fall into, if they wilfullie goe on in this their wickednesse, the end whereof they cannot see?
            2. Vpon what warrant they can receive or urge the five Articles, which may not as well inforce the

whole ceremonies of England, yea the whole Romulean rites of Antichrist, as being of one kinde and qualitie, onely differing in degrees. And thus if they can think it tollerable to change my comely Christian countenance into the painted Antichristian complexion of that Whoore of Babel?
            3. Whether the Episcopacie which they esteeme the principall office in the house of my God, hath any paterne in the mount: and if it hath, whether their forme of ministration bee answerable to that institution, or to the practise of any orthodox Kirk in the world, or to the caveats sworne unto by their owne mouthes?
            4. Whether in the sight of God they thinke the maintainers of the reformed religion, or the late formalists more faithfull in their callings, and cons
                  •
               ientious in their conversation? And therefore if it be not Pharisaisme to pronounce of

the fidelity of my pastors by their conforming to ceremonies: and extreme malice to think that men in all other things studying to approve themselves to God and the King, durst be bold to resist in these without conscience, for respect to any popular opinion.
            5 Whether that meeting of Perth be one of my lawfull Assemblies, justificable in the sight of my Lord and Saviour, and the constitutions thereof concluded for Canons, to bee urged upon pain of deprivation: whereupon Ministers are removed from their charges, and many soules famished, for whom he gave his life, for not conforming to a platforme blank as yet, and scarcely drawen in the Idea of their own imaginations?
            6 What warrant from Christ my King, and me, can be pretended for bringing my ministery, and me, under this new bondage in the persons of intrants forced at their admission

to sweare, and subscribe. 1. That they shall not onely maintaine his Maiesties prerogative in causes ecclesiasticall; which, what it is, or what is the extent thereof, they doe not well understand; but also the present governement of the Kirk, and jurisdiction Episcopall, in all places where they shall have opportunity, either of privat conference, or publick preaching: and that they shall bee carefull by reading to informe themselves, to the end they may be the more able to withstand all adversaries opposite to the same. 2. That they shall bee obedient to their Ordinary, and all other superiours in the Kirk, speak of them reverently, and in all their prayers privat and publick, commend to Gods protection, their estate not allowed by me. 3. That they shal subject thē
               selves to the present orders pretended to bee the ordinances of the Kirk, and to the orders, which shall be established by consent of the sayd

Kirk, meaning assemblies framed and over ruled by Prelates, and to procure due reverence to the same at the hands of others, by all the means, which they cā use. 4. That if they cōtravene any of these poynts, they shall be content without making any contradiction, to bee deprived of their ministery, and to be reputed perjured and infamous persons for ever. And by these oathes and subscriptions, that they would consider, what mischiefes may bee wrought in the after ages, when they are dead and gone.
            7 Whether it were more pertinent to deale with their brethren by reason or authority? Ye are made
               Pastores facti estis, non percussores, nova atque inauditae est ista praedicatio, quae verberibus 
                     •
                  xigit fidem. Aliud est quod agitur typho superbiae, aliud zelo disciplinae: Plus erga corrigendos a
                     •
                  at benevolentia quam severitas, plus cohortatio quam comminatio, plus charitas quam potestas. Sed hi qui, quae sua sunt, quaerunt, non quae Iosa Christs, facile ab hac lege discernuntur & q
                     •
                  um domi
                  
                     •
                  ri magis quam consulere subditis quaerunt. Places honor, inflat superbi
                     •
                   & quod provisum ad concordiam, 
                     •
                  endit ad noxam. 
               shepheards, and not strikers. This is a new and uncouth sort of preaching,

which will inforce faith by strokes. Pride effectuates one thing, and discipline another. Favour should be more used then severitie, exhortations more then threatnings, love more then law. But by such forms it is easie to disoern, who are they that seeke their owne, and who the things of Iesus Christ, sayth the Canon law their owne paterne.
            8 By what conscience, reason or law, they have deserted their flocks and pastorall charges, entred into civil place and pompe, breaking the caveats, and contrary to their alledged commission for keeping of ministers in quietnesse and peace, and vindicating the Kirk from poverty and contempt, have they taken upon them the power of both swords against the whole subjects of the kingdome, and summarily to confine, ward, imprison, discharge, silence, suspend, deprive, autorize and exauctor at my ministers at their pleasure?
            
               If the Lord should cause a terrible finger to come forth, and write these, and a thousand other their presumptuous dittaes upon the wall over against them, where they use to sit Balthazar-like in their sacrilegious pompe, abusing the furniture of his house; their brightnes would change, their thoughts would trouble them; so that the joynts of their loynes would loose, and their knees would smite one aanother. I have borne them, but to my griefe and shame. They have given me cause to pronounce the curses of Iob upon the day of their birth. For they neither care to bee esteemed bastards themselves, nor to brand me with the marke of an harlot. They prove Loammi, and would have me to prove Apostaticall. Had these my forlorne hopes, but one sparkle of true love to my spouse or me, they would resolve with Nazianzen, to undergo Ionas punishment for stilling of this tempest,

and to preferre my peace to their own preferment. What can I doe but mourne, intreat, protest, rebuke, expostulate. I call therefore heaven and earth, their owne soules, the testimonies of al who have been acquaint with them, and their proceedings, to beare witnesse against them. Beseeking & exhorting them by the salvation of their own souls, by the tender mercies of Christ, by the precious drops of his blood, by that excellent price of their redemption: if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any love to his glory, to his blood, to his Gospell: and if there be any pitty in their hearts to the breasts which they have sucked, to this sinfull land, and their owne native kingdome, to returne to God, to repent them of their course, to leave off to allow, to defend, to urge that, yea and persecute for that, which of late they were wont to condemne,

and even now almost could hardly have tollerated. Let them forbeare any longer (as it is to be feared, they have peevishly been doing) to fight against God, to kick against the pricke, to vaunt themselves proudly in the glory of their munition. Their craft is knowen; can they dance naked in a net, and think not to be seen? The seams of their black policies are sewed with white threed. If they shall persist to stop their eares against all admonitions, to harden themselves in rebellion against God, still to proceed in their truculent breathings, Thrasonicall boasts, and tyrannous executions, and shall for their backes and bellies, and the making up of their houses, make havock of the puritie of Gods truth, and the liberty of the kingdom of his sonne: As the Lord lives that sees them, he shal yet harden their hearts more, and at last shall tread them in the wine-presse of his wrath, and there shal be none

to deliver them.Petition in 
                     •
                   humility t
                     •
                   the Nobility and Estate
                     •
                   to deale with his Ma
                     •
                  esty.
            
            Now my petitiō, backed with the authority of a mother, to your honors is, that for the glory of Christs kingdom in this land, the adorning of his majesties crowne, & quietnes of his loyal subjects, the endles praise of your selves, and flourishing of your honorable estate, and the particular comfort of the Ministers and congregations within this realme in this time of distresse felt and feared. I may by your timous intercession at his gracious majesties hands, and uttermost endevours debtfull to God from your place, obtaine how▪ soone occasion may be offered.
            1 A sufficient and ready execution of former actes of Parliament made against the fearful blasphemy of Gods name, profaning of the Lords day, and contempt of his sanctuarie, and service, so universally overflowing this land, not onely in the persons of poore ignorants, in a

manner tyed to these horrible crimes by a cursed custome, & beggerly necessitie: but even in the more honourable sort, whose damnable example encourages their followers to sinne without feare: with such additions as may represse and restraine these crying abhominations in all, without respect of persons.
            2 A safe liberty to enjoy the profession of our religion, as it is reformed in doctrine, sacraments and discipline, and hath been openly professed by Prince, Pastors, and people of all rankes, your predecessors of worthy memory, your selves & us, all yet living, these threescore yeares by gone, and above.
            3 A full deliverance from, and a sufficient defence against all novations and novelties in doctrine, sacraments, and discipline, and specially such, as by constitutions of the Kirk, confessions of faith, louable lawes of the countrey, and long

continued practise hath been condemned, and casten out as idle rites, and Romish formalities, under what soever pretence they plead for reentry.
            4 That no act passe in derogation, or prejudice of the actes already granted in favour of Reformation, liberty of Assemblies, convenient execution of Discipline, &c. or for corroboration of new opinions against the same: concerning whether Episcopacie, or ceremonies the shadow thereof, which for the peace of the Kirk by heavenly wisedome should bee rejected before they be ratified.
            5 That all ministers provided to Prelacies, and admitted to vote in Parliament, be urged to observe the Act granted in their favours to that place; especially the provision expressed therein.
            6 The happinesse to live under his Majesty, and his highnesse ordinary Iudges, and Rulers established

by lawes and custome, and that our cause he lawfully cognoseed, according to order and justice, before any sentence passe against our persons, places, & estates. In the nameTriall to bee made by the word. of Iesus Christ intreating and commanding, all worldly and personall respects set apart: yee look with a single eye upon the matter controverted, not suffering your faith in Iesus Christ to bee blamed with partiality: ye try all with the touchstone of the Temple, and ballance of the Sanctuarie. Consider the example of Moses, when hee saw the Israelite & Egyptian fight. He spent no time in rebuking them for the strife, but drew his sword, and slew the Egyptian; But perceiving a debate betwixt two Israelites, he sayd. Ye are brethren, why strive yee? If the intended novelties be Israelites, then may yee say, Why strive yee; but if they be of that Egypt, from the bondage wherof, the Lord your God miraculously hath set you free,

then may they not be reconciled to the truth: but being slaine by the sword of the Spirit, must also bee proscribed by your authoritie. VseBy true zeale. the triall of Elias against Baals Priests, (albeit without the miracle of Eliah) take my bullockes and theirs, that is, the urged novelties, and the possessed liberties, or alas the liberties that I once possessed, (for now whether I possesse them, or not, it is uncertaine,) lay their peeces on the altars, and on which God sends the holy fire of zeale in the powerfull preaching of the word, and consuming of sinne, let that bee received. When no manBy the fruits, and not by pretext of antiquity, or outward appearance. was able to discerne betwixt Alexander the sonne of Herod before put to death, and a certaine craftsman like unto him, who gave himselfe out for Alexander, as though hee had escaped by favour of the executioner: the noble and wise Augustus by griping his hand, tried him to be an Artificer, and punished

him for his falshood. Would it please your honours, whilst so many learned and wise are deceaved with the counterfeit face of these novelties, but to gripe their hand a little, and to try what hath beene their frootes, where they have been admitted from the beginning: ye shal incontinent finde that they have been voyd of the sap of grace, and that their best workes evidently declare, that they never were begotten, nor blessed by the father of peace. Their own maintainers confesse that the controversie about them, hath brought confusion, breach of the second command of love, rent my body into divers parts, divided my people into divers sects, and the sheep to despise their Pastors, and estranged them from the love of their flockes. It hath confirmed the prophane in their impieties, and given way to the common enemies, distracted the mindes of the multitude, and shaken their faith

who for the most part knew no other difference betwixt Christ and Antichrist, but that which consists in externall shewes and formalities. It hath brought the ruine of Christs kingdome, and increase of Satans, partly in superstition, and partly in impiety. And in a word, generally hath put out the life of true religion, and brought in Atheisme. Bee not satisfied with a fashionable and superficiall triall, but examine them from the very root, and from the ground rip them up. As wise Nehemiah tried who had right to the Priesthood, by searching their lineall descent from Aaron. It was not sufficient for them to cleare their genealogie by writ from Levi, and Coath: for so the childrē of Habaiah and Barzillai had been admitted, & had brought the wrath of God with them. Men may alledge, and perhaps prove by writ, some such customs as they urge, for some hundreth years in my neighbour kirks,

but except it can bee cleared, that they have their pedigree frō Christ, or his holy Apostles, they ought to be esteemed uncleane, and should not be receiued, as belonging to me, or my ministers. All these, and many moe, have vexed me before, and being mans inventions in the matter of Gods worship, waxed old, and weak, (As it fareth with every errour contrary to the course of verity which groweth ever greener and stronger) and at last dying, were cast out of my habitations, as vile and stinking carrion, that now the opening of their grave raiseth a noysome fleur in every spirituall and exercised sense, and if they bee taken up againe, shall make many poore soules of weake constitution to perish through their pestilent contagion. It cannot be denied, but they have been defended by some, and digested by others by way of Interim, till opportunity of further reformation in the Kirks and countries,

where they had place. But beforePerih 
                     •…
                  y wants a paterne. this time, we dare be bold to say, never any kirk, countrey, or cōscientious Christian did so much as enter in deliberation: whether they should have been repossessed, where they have been displaced. Let the two renowmed maisters ofHooker and Saravia 
                     •
                  hē
                  selves against the 
                     •
                  re
                     •
                   entry of R
                     ••
                  es. English ceremonies, profound Hooker, and fordward Saravia, be heard in this poynt. The one sayes, In as much, as they goe about to destroy a thing, which is in force, and to draw in that, which hath not as yet been received, and to impose that which we think not our selves bound unto, and to overthrow things, whereof we are possessed: that therefore they are to take them to the opponents part, which must consist in one of two things: the one that our orders condemned by them, we ought to abolish: the other, that theirs wee are bound to accept in stead thereof. And the other, A mult
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  unt reform
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     ••
                   ecclesiae q
                     •
                  ae 
                     •
                  ineam 
                     •
                   lam veste
                     •
                   non admittunt, & pereorina
                     •
                  ū ecclesiarum ministri & insularum Iersae & Iern
                  
                     •
                  ae, quae An
                     •
                  lcan
                     •
                   ecclesiae annumerentur. Resp 
                     •
                  um, qui in illis ecclesijs usum hujus vestis vellet introducere, a schismste non posse excusa
                     •
                  i, sicut nec a superstitione quicquid contra ad suam excusationent posset allegare. 
               he that would bring in the

use of the surplice into the reformed Kirkes, where i
                     •
                   hath no place, cannot be excused from schisme, and superstition, whatsoever hee alledge for his excuse. As he speakes of one, so hee speakes of all.
            The drierie lamentations, & heavieThe moane of the Kirk of 
                     ••
                  d under the burd
                     •
                   of ceremonies. complaints of the unsupportable burthen of the ceremonial yoke, powred out in all ages by the holy men of God, may provoke the compassion of the hardest hearts. Augustine in his time complained, that the Kirke was pressed contrarie to Christs mercifull institution, with such a servile burthen of ceremonies, that the state of the Iewes under the law, was more tollerable, then the condition of Christians: seeing they were subject onely to Gods ordinances, & not to humane presumptions, as Christians are. How would hee at this time have mourned for the case of other Kirks, and for the perill that I am in! Erasmus, Polidorus Virgilius,

&c. 
                  •
               ing the same ditta. It is a certaine truth, many ceremonies, littleQuanto maegis accedit cumulo rituum in Ecclesia tanto maegis d
                     •
                  trahitur non tantum libertati Christianae, sed & Christo, & eiu
                     •
                   fide
                     •
                  : dum vulgus ea quae
                     ••
                  t in ritibus quae quae eret in solo Dei filio Jesu Christo per fidem. faith. Look how much is added to the midding of rites, as much is withdrawen, not onely from Christian liberty, but from Christ himself, and his faith; while the multitude seeketh for that in rites, which they should seek in the onely sonne of God Iesus Christ. The greater bulk of bodily ceremonies, the lesse spirit of true devotion. The true worshippers under the Gospel shall not say, The Ark of the Lord▪
                they shall forget all those outward ceremonies, and never revive them. Moses his vaile, farre more all other things, that neither were nor are frō God, is removed, and now may we with open face behold the glory of God. Then the sea about the altar was of brasse, and could not be pierced with the sharpest sight: but now our sea about the throne is glasse, clearly convoying the knowledge of God unto our minds. The Amphiscij can tell, that the more

shadow the lesse light. The shadow alwayes accompanies the body, sometimes it followes behinde, but sometimes also it comes before. Ye may be sure the dark body of error is not farre off, when the shadowes of ceremonies are at hand; and iustly may feare, that they are the harbingers sent before by Satan (whatsoever be mans intention) to make place for their owne substance. Oh, if the Lord would open your eyes to see the subtill working of that mystery of iniquity. The web may be divided in mens intentions, who possibly mind no more for time to come, then they urge for the present. But in the iustice of God, punishing the world for the contempt of the truth, and in respect of Satans malice, bringing in his lye, it is all of one threed. And that which is begun by one, may be wrought out by another, entring upon the preceeding labours. Ye see not this weed growing; but it

will be perceived to have growen. The seeds of Popery were secretly sowen in the Primitive Kirke, and by degenerating ages grew up to that monstrous height, which now the world wonders at. But alas all our countrey wit is M
                     •
                  tanoia, after wit. My people are like the Athenians, who (as Demades objected to them) never intreated for peace, but in mourning gowns; that is, after they had suffered great calamitie in battell. When afterward ye are poysoned with errour, and over laden with crosses, ye and your children after you shall be forced to cry out upon your owne madnesse and folly, that would not see and resist the beginnings of so great evils.
            The remanent sparkles of naturesLi
                     •
                  h
                     •
                   of nature, true policie, and cō
                  mon equity against English formalities in our Kirk. light, looking upon the common providence of God, may let your Honours see, that it serves most for the prosperity of Kirkes and Kingdomes, that ilk constitution and

                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
order in a societie should sort with the nature, disposition, and condition of the people. My people have from the liberal hand of their God, externall abundance for the honest sustentation of their bodies, with a substantial, sound, and simple religion for the salvation of their soules. Yet farre from the artificial fulnes, whereby the Tyrian spirits of the world do disquiet their neighbour nations, striving to subject all to their formes, that they may reigne over all, as Queenes; against the protestations made in all the confessions of faith of other Kirkes. A single forme of policie is more fit for a plain people, and mean provisions, then the gorgeous shew of a pompous port, necessarily requiring rents, complements, and carriage, that neither this land may beare, neither wee nor our fathers have learned. Rites must have rents: their service is both cumbersome & costly: they scorne the assignations of

our plotted povertie; they strive with Statesmen, Earles and Lords for place & precedencie; they loath the preaching of the Gospell, and like better the chief places of estate. The restitution of the Kirk to her wonted possessions, & to her worldly dignities, must goe on together with equall speed. Neither can so long experience be denied, but that ordinarily the estate of the common wealth accompanies the constitution of the kirk, as the morning starre goes with the Sunne, which Constantine acknowledged in his grant to the Kirkes of Africa, thus beginning his Epistle, Considering that the due observation of things pertaining to true religion, and the worship of God, brings great happinesse to the whole estate and common wealth of the Empire of Rome: and Charles the 8. of France lamentably experienced. For when he had faire occasions to reforme the Kirke of Rome at his pleasure, and to help the Kirk

of God, he neglected both: wherefore shortly after striken with a sudden sicknesse, he died, according to the forewarning of Savanarola; who told him plainly, that he should have great successe in his voyage to Italy, for reforming the corrupt state of the Kirk, which if hee did not, he should returne with dishonour, and God would reserve the honour of that work unto some other. All the policie of Achitophel, and wisdome of Salomon, cannot establish a kingdome, wherein the kingdome of Christ is misregarded. His true worship is the pillar and wall of policies. If the Lord remove his truth from you, hee will deprive you also of your civill liberties, and give you over into the hands of mercilesse enemies. If he spare not his own strength, and glory, but give over the one to captivity, and the other to the hands of his enemies, he shall respect you no more thē the mire in the street. The

nation and kingdome that will not serve the Lord shal perish, and these nations shall be utterly destroyed.
            My faithfull ministers, and obedient children to the meanest are all Gods people, and his majesties loyal subjects and faithfull servants. The testimonies of his love belong to them all for their comfort in this world, and safe conduct to the world to come. As they feare God, they honour his highnesse, they pray for him and his children, and all that are in authoritie, that they may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godlines and honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God their Saviour, who will have all to be safe, and come to the knowledge of the truth. They wish from the desires that lodge within their breasts, long life unto his Majesty, a secure reigne, a safe house, valiant armies, a faithful counsel, good people, a quiet world, Et quaecunque hominis & Caesaris sunt vota. They

stand by that reformation, that hath been so profitable and comfortable these threescore yeares by past: giving more reasons for it, then hath been, or can be clearly answered. How can it stand then with the grounds, either of good policie, or Christian equity, for removing dissentions, to yeeld respect, countenance, support, and authority to the other party, neither having nor giving evidence of reason for their pretended novations against the received truth. Although the inferior law were inacted, (as God forbid) yet in all Christian Prudence it ought to give place to the royall law of love, and unity, as being of a more noble descent. But since unity forbids, and peace declares her miscontentment in the beginning, how shall this ever contentious and unruly Hagar be heard to contest with Sarah. Were not this a way to bring a further rent and desolation upon the house of Abraham.

Vpon this ground, what great tollerations have been granted by Christian Emperours, and Kings, all men know, who know anyInterdū con
                  
                     ••
                  ve
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  menus est▪ q
                     •
                  am rem
                     •
                  d
                     •
                  j
                     •
                   d
                     •
                  
                  licta incendere. thing in History. It is better somtime to give connivence, then by untimous cures to waken diseases. And as one sayd to Augustus, It is a speciall poynt of wisedome not to suffer new names, or ought else, wherefra discord may arise.
            
            The cause wherein they stand,Judgmēts to be given not according to the b
                     •
                  senesse of the defenders, but according to the truth. and for the constant defence wherof they are traduced under the odious names of Puritanes, precisians, schismatickes, Anabaptists, and the like, is an article of your honours owne worthy profession andR
                     •
                  spuite AEne
                     ••
                   suscipite p
                     •
                  um. confessiō of faith, wherof the adversaries themselves were preachers, and practisers of late, and have never yet made any publicke repentance for their former heresies. Augustine could say. albeit in a different case, Let them exercise crueltie
               Illi in vos saeviant qui nullo 
                     •
                  asi 
                     ••
                  r
                     •
                  re dec
                     •
                  p
                  
                     •
                  i sunt, quali vos deceptos vident, ego 
                     •
                  utem saevire in vot omni
                  
                     ••
                   non possū, quos sicut 
                     •
                  eipsum illo 
                     •
                  empore, ita 
                     •
                  unc▪ debeo sustinere. 
               against you, who never were deceived

with the like error, wherewith they see you deceived: but as for me, I am not the man that can be cruell against you, whom I must beare with now, as I did comport with my selfe then. But they have forgotten what they were, and make my ministers to find the truth of that which is in the French proverb: Quison chien veult tuer, larage luyme
                     •
                   sus. He that is disposed to have his dogge killed, will first have him thought to be madd. As I will have them for their part to resolve with Daniel, to sustaine the wrong of such Assyrian nick-names, and by the grace of the God of Daniel, wil have them both to abstaine from these impurities, and to professe the detestation of the least shew of them: So I would wish your honours upon the other part, not to judge of them according to mens calumnies, but to the truth of God. And consider upon your beds, who they are that yeeld, & what are they that stand, and upon what inducements.
            
               Ye can hardly poynt at any one of my ministers, but hee is in some good measure fitted for the work of the ministery. And howsoever according to the diverse roomes in my habitation, lesse or greater, all have not the same measure of light: some torches for more publick places, and others smaller lights for their own cottages: yet every one makes conscience of residence to shine in his own roome, both in the purity of doctrine, and life, to my great joy and your benefit, by the blessing of God upon their labours▪ hardly any one of the other side, but hee is either, &c. They have large rents, if not great wealth: the others portion is but meane. The one is encouraged with outward assistance, the other enfeebled with cries, crosses, and ensuing dangers; the one richly rewarded for proud practises, the other are boasted for painfull labours to clear and defend a just cause: the one, men of glorious

state, and great pompe in the world, the other trode upon as unworthy of the countenance of the world. The one take leasure from their charge to invent and publish their pleasure: the other have no time frō the charge of their flockes, to cleare the truth. To the one, the presses are open and free: to the other it is neither safe no
                  •
                possible almost to print a few words of this sort; fa
                  •
               r lesse labours of greater moment, and better use. The one gets money for their hungry pamphlets: the other counts charges & hazard gaine. The one are both parties and judges of the cause: the other dare scarcely make provocation in publick to the Lord Iesus. The one finally by their defection rise, and become Princes of the world: the other for their constancy are thrust downe, and tyed fast to the crosse. Wherby ye cānot but see, whether the love of the world, or the zeale of God, be the spirit that blowes in the

sailes of their affections. Know yee not, that howsoever they bee counted few, silly, and of base resolution, yet if they esteemed not more of a good conscience, then they who make a covenant with death and hell, and put the evill day farr from them, they might speed as well as others in worldly projects. Can it bee denied, but they preferre the peace of their soules, and purity of their profession, to the pleasures of the world, wherewith others are pampered? Were it proclaimed by the Emperour, Let us take from them
               auferamus illis nocentes divitias: ho
                     •
                   enim facere est opus charitatis. 
               these hurtfull riches: for that were a work of charity, the zealots of this course would grow key cold.
            Suffer not then poverty, paucity, pusillanimity, prisonings, wardings, difficulties of writing, printing, uttering and countenancing Gods cause, and thousands of such disadvantages, be a prejudice to that truth, whereof ye are convinced in your mindes. Be not deceived with

this new, fond, and false glosse of indifferencie: look to God, to his word, to the parties, to your owne soules, and to that great day of the revelation of Christ Iesus. As the pretext of conformity. the visor of unity, the null-authority of a pseudo-synod, wanting formality, fulnesse, and liberty, should not bee a Gorgons head to terrifie them: so should it neither by serpētine slight deceive you.
            In conformity there is to bee respected,Cōditions of conformity. 1. The substantiall truth of God, wherein all true Conformitants must agree. 2. The sincere ministery, and sorts of ministers appoynted by the sonne of God for our edification in the truth. 3. Christs incommunicable prerogative in appoynting of the Sabboth, and solemne ministration of the word, sacraments, and discipline. 4. The edificative use of these ministrations in the several ages, Kirks, & kingdomes of the world. 
                  •
               . A clear

distinction between divine and ecclesiasticall rites, the indifferencie in nature, the expedience of use, the diversitie in practise of ecclesiastical: according to the saying. It is not possible
               Impossibile fuerit omnes ecclsiarū qu
                     •
                   per civitate
                     •
                   sunt & regiones ritus cō
                  scribere. Nulla religio cosdem ritus custodit, etiamsi eande
                     •
                   de illis doctrinam amplectitur. 
               to take up all the diverse rites of all Kirkes in all countries. No religion observeth the same rites, albeit it embrace the same doctrine of rites. The attempt of the contrary, will still prove, as from the beginning, a malady a thousand fold worse then the moraine of ceremonies. And without these conditions, a conforming with men, is but a contesting with God. As for the conclusions of men, Tout proposition humaine a autant d'authorite quel'autre si la raison n'on fait la difference, Even so are the sentences of all Kirkes equall, except the authority of the word make the difference. Belongs not the judgement of discretion to all Christians? Shall my children with weathercockes, be caried with every uncertaine winde of mens

mouthes, like fooles runne with the cry, & suffer themselves like beasts without reason to follow the dreave. This were to make every constitutution like Nebuehadnezzar his Image, and Roman-like to make the name of the Ki
                  •
               k the rule of all religion. Can that one null-assembly, the nakednesse whereof is now layd open to the eyes of the world, beareQuis ferat co qui a
                     ••
                  ā q
                     •
                  āpiam syn
                     •
                  dum praepo
                     ••
                  nt N
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  inae. At quis non potius oderit eos q
                     •
                  i rejiciunt pa
                     •
                  ū decreta, & praeponunt recē
                  tio
                     •
                  a nuper A
                     ••
                  mini, contentione, & vi expressa. Qu
                     ••
                   cum illis hominibus societatē ini
                     •
                  e velit, qui ne quidē sua ipsi 
                     •
                  u
                  
                     •
                  ntu
                     •
                  . down all the formall, full, and free councels of this nation before, and all the determinations and constitutions of your worthy forefathers of blessed memory. Who can enter in fellowship with them, who defend not their own conclusions? My ministers have clearly testified by their admonitions presented to the Parliament holden at Perth in the yeare 1606. in generall assemblies, and at other occasions before and since, their detestation of all novelties and novations of that sort thrust upon mee. Many a one that hath consented thereto in shew, and for worldly respects,

resting yet unperswaded in their own minds, and unable to perswade others of the contrary judgement, if they saw the day of their liberty, & were free from the stroke of worldly inconveniences, would cry with the Bishops of Asia, Not by
               Nos non nostra voluntate, sed necessita
                     •
                  e adducti subscripsimus: non animo sed verbis duntaxa
                     •
                   consensimus. 
               our owne wils, but by necessity, have we been moved to subscribe: we consented with our words, not with our hearts. And to declare, that that act was unlawfully begotten, the fathers of it would deny that they begat it with that face, & force, that it hath brought with it into the world. Your honours may remember also, your owne religious provision expressed in that act, whereby ministers are permitted to vote in Parliament. The particulars of their place and office are remitted to be treated by his Majesty, and generall assembly; but prejudice alwayes of my jurisdiction, and discipline, established by actes of Parliament made in any time preceeding, and permitted by the sayd acts, to all generall and

provinciall assemblies, and others whatsoever my presbyteries and Sessions.
            Men may muse at the matter, alledging that my children makeThe poynts controverted are material. mountaines of mots, tragedies of trifles, and raise a noyse about things indifferent, circumstantiall, accidental, and that with their brethren. But first it can be no prejudice to them, or the cause they maintaine, that they stand in it against their brethren: seeing they are defenders of themselves; and not persuers of their brethren. The promise, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are they who in the last time suffer against the beast, as well as they who in the first times were persecuted by the heathen, belongeth to them. For if the Lord measured sufferings by the inequality of his enemies, and not by the equity of the cause, there would bee great disparagement betwixt the Martyrs put to death by the Pope, and the persecuting Emperours. Neither is there any suffering here, but for

that which is papall. It is no shame for them to suffer that of their brethren, which Christ suffered: neither is it honour to their enemies to doe that, which Iudas did.
            The Spirit of God Revel. 2. speakes more comfortably to the kirk of Smyrna, a figure of the Christian Kirk under Constantine troubled with intestine enemies: then to Ephesus representing the primitive Kirk invaded by the heathen. I know thy workes, and tribulation, and poverty, but thou art rich: and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Iewes, and are not. Feare none of these things, &c. Let him therefore that is righteous, be yet more righteous, and he shall have a crown in the end.
            Next, let them be considered 1. in the urgers intention. Whatsoever they be in valuation, they are not of so small moment. For albeit they bee concluded by way of counsell, and not of command; albeit that conclusion want a sanction; albeit

no punishment bee determined by law; and albeit that Synod be knowen to be null, yet they lay upon the transgressors, and for their cause, upon their innocent families and congregations, the heaviest of all punishments, except death: and to some equall with death, if not more bitter, and intollerable; heavier then for non-residence, idlenesse, error, wickednesse, scandall. In deliberation they are talked of as indifferent, but in execution they are inforced as most necessary. A necessary conclusion inferred upon indifferent premisses. Anticeremoniall Christians more rigorously used then Antichristian practisers of ceremonies. Papists without prejudice to their lives, livings, and liberties, enjoy the comfort of the countrey. To his Majesties loyall and religious subjects, is denied favour to sigh at home in the cause of publick and privat grievances, and to go with the armies of Israel against the 
                  ••
               ilistims of Rome. Let a man

bee Paules presbyter in every, poynt, yet a more of ceremonies shall marre him. Let him be a Demas, or Demetrius, a formalizing ceremony shall accomplish him. Is not this to neglect the greater things of the law? Is not this to make the precepts of God of no force for mens traditions? To love themselves above God, and to bee wedded more to their owne wits, then to his divine wisdome.
            2 In their bitter effects of changes brought upon the preaching of the word, ministration of the sacraments, discipline, cōfession of faith, and the whole worship of God in so short time.
            3 In respect of the practise of religion so frequently, and ordinarily to be performed of all: that no man can either bee ignorant or carelesse of any poynt, but must bee setled and throughly resolved in all, except he would hold his soule on a perpetuall rack, and make his whole devotion and service doubtsome,

and comfortlesse.
            4 According to the confession of both parties, tending to the honour or dishonor of Christ, serving either to beautifie or deface his spouse, and to the edification or destruction of weak Christians.
            5 In the estimation of some holy martyrs: who, howsoever in their prosperity they cōtended for them: yet neere the time of their martyrdome, when their minds were most unpartiall, condemned them for foolish and abominable. And in the judgement of many worthy men, suffering bitter persecutions for the like: as for officium Ambrosianum, the service of Ambrose against the lame Liturgie of Gregory, and refusing to practise in matters of farre lesse importance. If yee looke to the fountaine, yee sustaine a common cause with all the Saints, who in any age have opponed themselves to the current corruptions of the Kirk & Kirkmen in their time: such as Basil, Ierome, &c. The

Albigenses contemptuously stiled Apostolickes, the Waldenses called Puritans, &c.
            6 In consideration of the change brought upon me, and of the course of my declining from my former perfection, my errors now may bee smaller: and yet my case is worse, then in my growing dayes, when I was wrastling against greater infirmities. My lukewarmnesse then was a way to, and a degree of heate, but now after my zeale, I am become Laodicean, waxing colder frō day to day: And increase (with Vincentius) I love; but defections & changes I loath. Our bodies (sayth he) albeit in processe of time they grow, yet they change not. The same members, the same joynts are in children, which are in men, though in the one stronger and greater, in the other smaller and weaker. But if the shape bee turned into another kinde, or any thing be added to the number of the members, or taken from them, then either the body perisheth, or becometh monstrous, or

at the least becomes weak. It is right so in religion, if we begin to make chā
               ges, wherof the kirk of Christ should be a diligent keeper, changing nothing, diminishing nothing, adding nothing. I admit no alteration for indifferent that tends to Apostasie, and not to accretion.
            7 Considered in themselves, & not in relation to other things more necessary. A leg or an arm is necessary for a mans body, yet not in that degree, that it is necessary for the life, as the soule. I may live, & be the kirk of God, so long as Christ by his spirit breathes faith into my soule. Yet wanting the least thing which God hath ordained, and receiving supply of a leg of wood from mens artifice, I can never bee beautifull in Gods fight, nor cheerfull in performing my own actiōs; but pines & dwines away, til at last nothing be left, but a stinking carkasse, unfit both for the habitation & celebration of the majesty of my God.
            8 Whatsoever they be in thēselves,

and in their own nature, yet falling under our use and practise, they become to us either good or evill, and consequently, either sin or acceptable service, wherin Scandall beares so great sway, that for avoyding of offence
               propter scandalum, quod vel 
                     〈◊〉
                   imbecillita
                     •
                  e vel ex ignorantia nascitur, declinandum, omnes quantum cumque rectae aut utiles actiones quae ad animi salutem non sunt necessariae praetermittendae vel occultandae aut saltem in in aliud tempus differendae sunt. Thom. 2a. 2
                     •
                  q. 43. artic. 
               arising upō weaknes or ignorance, all actions, albeit never so lawfull and profitable, which are not necessary to salvation, are either to bee left off, or kept up, or at least to bee put off till another time. Woe bee to them not onely who give offences, but by whom offences come.
            9 The Fathers in the primitive times, partly preferring the Vernish of the Iewes religion, and the pompe of Paganisme to Christian simplicitie. And partly with greater zeale then knowledge, desirous to enlarge the boundes of Christs kingdome, by drawing both Iewes and Gentiles unto their profession, did change sacraments into sacrififices, Pastors into Priests, Tables into Altars, Prayers into Liturgies,

Saturnals into Christmasse, &c. And pestered the Kirk then, with heapes of their ceremonies. Quod consilium specie prudens, re anceps, eventu infelix, hodieque lugendum & luendum est Ecclesiae sayth Tilenus, whatsoever some talke now of his Palinod in particulars. It was not lawfull for the heathen Poets to borrow matter from traditions of Scripture, and in their allegorizing veine to persue them for their purposes of profanity. Lesse tollerable for the spouse of Christ to begg ornaments from enemies, whether at Ierusalem, or Athens. But farrest from indifferencie, and most intollerable in you, who ought to bee wise by the dolefull experience of others, to walk again upon the same snares, after yee have escaped twice, to make shipwrack, to lick up your own vomit, and to make your sins once of a simple die, now to bee of a scarlet colour.
            10 By reason of the warrant, which they seek without the boūds

of the law and testimony. Yee have no other Ephod, no other Vrim and Thūmim but the light of scripture. Herein as in the breast of your high Priest, may yee see and read the will of God for your direction in all your actions, as they are actions of a Christian, even your naturall and civill actions, farre more your religious duties. So that albeit yee can neither conclude affirmatively, nor negatively frō the words of mē; yet were your knowledge as ample as the Scriptures, and could your faith adequat the largenes of the revelation therof, ye might inferre a conclusion both wayes from them.
            In all these considerations they can bee no indifferent judges, that call them indifferent. When it was objected by Mauritius the Emperour to Gregorie, that he busied the Kirke with a needlesse contention, when the question was about theQuaedam frivola & innoxia, quaedam frivol
                     •
                   & noxia. name of universall Bishop: hee answered, That some things are frivovolous, and not hurtfull, other things

frivolous and hurtfull: albeit indeed there be nothing frivolous in the matters of God. Carnall men have coinzed with their wit, a new Category of indifferent things: and have made the Genus summum their own wil. The prophetical & princely office of Christ is no lesse perfect▪ then his priesthood. And he that either addeth to his word or discipline, or yeeldes not obedience to them in every poynt, can have no comfortable hope of full redemption by his sacrifice. It is a fearfull judgement, and a wide doore to finall excecation & hardnes of heart, first to revolt, and peevishly to rebell against the light once received, and now to be guiltie of affected ignorance, closing your eyes against ingyring knowledge. Albeit Pastors who are to teach others, in respect of their office and place, be bound to know many things, which others of another condition and vocation are not, yet considering the occasions and means offring things

to your particular consideration, even secular persons, and privat men are bound to know & beleeve that, whereof Pastors themselves not observing it, may bee safely ignorant. Refuse not, resist not the least truth of God for pleasing of your selves, or others. Albeit any of my ministers might with Ambrose, speakingHope of h
                     ••
                   Ma. gracious favour. to Theodosius & Valentinian, say, touching his majesty, that it is neither imperial to refuse the liberty of speking,
               Quod neque imperiale si
                     •
                   libertatē dicendi negare, neque sacerdotale quod sentiat non dicere. 
                     •
                  is causa vero Dei quem audies si sacerdotem non audies: cuius maiori peccatur periculo: quis tibi verum audebi
                     •
                   dicere, si sacerdos non audeat. 
               nor pastorall not to speak that which he thinks. In Gods cause whō shal ye heare, if yee heare not Gods minister, by whose greater danger sin is comitted. Who dare be bold to speak the truth unto you, if the minister be not bold? Yet far be in frō them to utter any thing, that may exulcerat his meeknes, or provoke their dread soveraigne to wrath. As Emperours know (saith Tertullian,) who gave them the Empire, they know that it was even the same God who gaue unto them to bee men, and to have humane soules, they will perceive that hee onely is God, in whose onely power

they are so with him. My children acknowledge, that after God, Kings are in order the second: and among all the first. It becommeth them to feare God, and honour the King, who should be as an Angel of God, a defender of the faith, a nurse father of the Kirk, and a comfortable refuge unto the poore, and simple, in time of need. It is no small part of the hope of my happines, that his majesty hath declared, that by the grace of God he is set & disposed, equally to love and honor the learned and grave men of either of these opinions, avowing his sinceritie in that religion, which hee ever constantly professed. And confessing, that if his conscience had not resolved him, that all the religion professed by him and his kingdome, were not grounded upon the plaine word of the scripture (without which, all poynts of religion were superfluous, as any thing contrary to the same is abomination) he had never outwardly avowed it

for awe of any flesh. He calleth it the religion wherin he was brought up, and ever made profession of, wishing his sonne ever to continue in the same, as the onely true forme of Gods worship. He purgeth the good men of the ministery that like better of the single forme of policie in our Kirk, then of the many ceremonies of the Kirk of Englād. That are perswaded that their Bishops smel of a papallsupremacie, and that the surplice, the corner cap, &c. are the outward badges of Popish errors. And praises God, that there is a sufficient number of good men in this kingdome, and yet they are all knowen to be against the forme of the English Kirk. And shall yee think now, that his Majestie will either cease to love, and maintaine his owne loyall subjects for slow pronouncing a sentence in so old a controversie: or will impaire the liberties of the kingdom of Christ, who hath added so largely to his dominions? But rather as hee is the Lords

Lievtenant, bearing the sword to punish transgressors; so as defender of the faith he wil procure and protect the liberty of his subjects, wherwith Christ hath made them free, and save them that they be not intangled again into the yoke of bondage. It is a work worthier of his majesties gift, and place, to begin to reforme, where his worthy predecessors left, then to end where they began. To set my sister of England at libertie, which she hath long desired, then to bring mee, who have been so long free, to servitude, which I never deserved. The speech of Gregory brought by Beda, is very good. It pleaseth mee;
               Sed mihi placet sive in Romana. sive in Galliarū, seu in qualibet ecclesia aliud invenisti quod plus omnipotenti Deo possie place
                  
                     •
                  e, sollicite e
                  
                     ••
                  g as. Et in Anglorum ecclesiā qu
                     •
                   ad fidem n
                     ••
                   v
                     •
                   est, institutione, praecipua quae de multie ecclesijs colligere potui
                     •
                  ti, in
                  
                     •
                  undas. Non enim pro loc
                     ••
                   res, sed pro bonis rebus loca amanda sunt. Ex singulis ergo quibusque ecclesijs quae pia, quae religiosa, quae rect
                     •
                   sunt, elige: & haec quasi in fasciculum collecta apud Anglorum mentes in consuetudinem depon
                     •
                  . sayes he, that whether in the Roman; French, or any other Kirk, yee have found anything, that may more please the Almighty God, that yee carefully make choyce of that. And in the English Kirke, which yet is but new in the faith, whatsoever yee may collect of many Kirkes, by speciall institution, yee establish: for things are

not to be loved for places, but places for things. His highnesse will never in the most indifferent matters upon his meere pleasure enjoyne any thing that may destroy these poore and tender soules for whom Christ died, which were to fall in the greatest breach of the law of Charitie. Prelates would have his Majesty to think, that his royall authority is supported by the shadow of ceremonies, and would have the subjects to think, that there is no support of ceremonies, but royall authoritie▪ Forbearing in practise, onely in love to the salvation of other brethren, without contempt, will bee esteemed of his majesties wise heart, to be better service, and obedience then their lies, and temporizing conformity: who bring the blood of multitudes of soules upon the whole body of the countrey, a sinne in Gods sight worse then rebellion. How could his Majestie trust my ministers in any thing, if hee knew not (as Theodosius

sayd to Ruffinus of Ambrose) that they wil not transgresse the law of God for any respect to imperiall power. Constantius accepted of them as most loyall subjects to him, who were most faithfull and precise servants of God. I wil never doubt, but his highnesse will thinke them honester men, that give him that which is due, then that which hee will not take. Albeit Courtlie parasites alledge through want of better reason, that ceremonies are not so much stood upon as obedience, even as God tried Adam with one apple: yet his Majesty can tel them, that humane lawes do bind the conscience, not because of the meere will of the law-giver, but by reason of the utilitie & equitie of the law. Non ex voluntate legislatoris, sed ex ipsa legum utilitate, & ratione. And that it becommeth Christian subjects to professe disobedience in things evill, and against God, passive obedience in things injurious, and unprofitable, and active obedience

in things lawful, profitable, expedient; wherin by Gods grace, my ministers shall be found most cheerfull and ready. That their scandall in this is not humorous, or Pharisaicall, may be easily tried by their obedience to Caesar in all matters, even of greatest difficulties, being ready, as becomes them, to spend their goods, lands, libertie, and lives, for his preservation, and counting nothing sufficient to redeeme his happinesse. The Lord reprove them who slander his loyall subiects, and let the judge of all the world determine, whether of the parties doth better establish lawfull authoritie. As hee was reputed sacrilegious in the time of Antoninus Pius, who set not up his Statue in his house: so let him be Anathema, who carries not his Majesties name and glorious estate upon his heart to God, and prayes not for his royall person, hopefull progenie, and happy successe to the Lord; with whom is wisedome and strength, who looses

the bands of Kings, and girds their loynes with a girdle; who leadeth Princes away spoyled, and overthrowes the mightie. In his hand is the heart of the King, as the rivers of waters. Albeit in the judgement of men longing for the finall subversion of the truth, and defacing of the Kirk, my most faithfull Pastors bee ready to slip with their feet, and to fall from his Majesties favour, yet will hee, maugre the malice of men, scatter all the clouds of their feare, and in the end, with Ioseph, powre out the bowels of his compassion upon them. Neither wisedome nor authoritie can root out affection. He will ratherNeque Philosophia, neque imperiū, 
                     •
                  olli
                     •
                   affectus with Antoninus Pius save one true subject, then slay many enemies. Kings ought as rarely put in use their supreame prerogative, as God doth his power of working miracles. Remember, O King, that my glorious Spouse is the Prince of the Kings of the earth, and will bee supreme in his owne kirk. Remember when Theodo
                  •
               ius,

otherwayes a religious Emperour, was desired to take order with the tyranny of Flavianus, spirituall tyrants in the Kirk being no lesse unsufferable then the civil in the common wealth. And when hee had answered, that hee had taken upon him the defence of Flavianus, that Flavianus cause was his cause, that the things objected against Flavianus, were objected against him. That it was sayd of him, that he had grieved them, whō he should have made to rejoyce, & had made thē rejoyce, whom he should have grieved.
            Many speeches, as lots, areSupplication to the Nobility and Estates urged for that end. offered to your Princely consideration, but the disposition is of the Lord, whom we pray to grant, that the best cause may have the first lot. And who knowes, but your Honors are advanced at this time to intercede for me, that his highnesse may blesse and reward you for hindering hard courses against his harmlesse ministers, and most dutifull subjects, sincere professors of

the Gospell. Dorotheus and Gorgonius, men of great authoritie and place, and of the Emperours privie chamber, when they beheld the punishment of one Peter with them, spared not to say, Wherfore O Emperour, why doe yee punish in Peter that opinion, which is in us all? Why is that in him counted an offence, which wee all confesse; wee are of that faith and religion which he is off. The truly noble Terentius for all other su
                  •
               es, which the Emperour desired him to make, craved onely liberty for Christians, and beeing refused of that, gathered up the peeces of his riven supplication, and could not be induced to seek any thing else. The Lord requires not onely profession, but confession at your hands in this case. Whe
                  •
                can yee better make your affection knowen, then when the Lord Iesus in the persons of his spouse, and your owne mother, becomes a petitioner unto you. As yee would wish to see his face in mercy in that day of his second

comming: make not by your unkindnesse his countenance to fall down upon you now, send him not away with a repulse. He hath run many times like the Roe, or the yong Hart, over the highest mountaines of difficulties, to succour you in your distresse, when ye have called upon him. Let no pretended impediment be an hinderance unto you to help his cause most instantly suing for support at your hands. If there bee any iniquity in my children, let them suffer for it, spare them not. But if they be innocent, smite them not. Open your mouth for the dumbe. Iudge righteously the afflicted and poore. Deliver the oppressed, that they may offer sacrifice and pray for the life of the king and his sonne. If hard courses be taken against faithfull ministers and people, let not your honours wash your hands of that harme. It is all one to doe them evill, and not to helpe them against wrong done by others. The hoast of Israel spake

in great courage for the life of Ionathan, and Ionathan for David to the danger of his life. Ebedmelech spake a good word for Ieremie, and was saved when his master Zedekias was slaine. But curse yee Meroz, curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the helpe of the Lord against the mightie, although they had no hand against them. God that hath given you grace and credit with his highnesse, requireth that ye bestow it upon his matters; and that yee reserve it not for your own. Remember the example of that worthy Courtier Nehemiah, who esteemed a libertie to build up the walles of the Citie of God, a sufficient reward for all his faithfull service. As your solicitude is great to leave the common wealth, and your own honorable houses in good case: so dilapidat not my libertie. Leave me not, of whom ye have both your first & second birth in worse estate, to your own incredible griefe, and the

desolation of your posterity. Invenistis marmoreane ne relinquit
                     •
                   lateritiam. Vpon the wall that yee have found rather build a palace of silver, Cant. 8. 9. It was that name of Iehovah, and holinesse to the Lord put upon the head of the high Priest, that was the greatest beautie, and crowned all the other inferiour ornaments. The truth of religion, and the purity of your profession, as it hath been, so let it still bee your glory, and the luster of all those inferiour gifts, wherewith the Lord hath inriched you. As this is the first great triall of your hearts, Love to Christ and me: so it may be your last occasion. It is not long, since the places, which ye possesse, were filled with your ancestors of worthy memory, (whose constancy in defending the liberty of Gods worship, is frequently observed in your owne history) who now are passed to their eternity; and ere be long, according to the succession of generations one after another, others

shal have their time of your present dignities, both in degree and continuance. Bend your wits and credit to do good, while ye haue time. Hazard not the happinesse of your eternity. Do not that, which at the least, while yee live, will be a bleeding wound in your soules. Set your eyes upon him, that is invisible, and that recompence of reward: so shall yee esteeme the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of AEgypt. And shall choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. The Lord who searcheth the reignes, sees you, and the secrets of your deliberation, and conclusions, and could make them to found again outwardly in your eares, and to the hearing of others. All your thoughts are legible to that piercing eye, from which nothing is hid. Look not what ye may say for your excuse, or what one partie may say against another, whether in private conference, or publick velltation

by print, or dispute. But in the sight of God cōsider upon your beds, by the light of his spirit, whether of the two courses from the beginning ye find to be of, through and for God. And we have no great feare, but ye shal be moved to break down that wall of ceremonies, hurtfull to all, and profitable to the souls of none: that both the houses may be one, as the Lord himselfe abolished the Iewish ceremonies, and put none in their place.
            I have many children, some aged, some poore, some consumed with godly griefe, not so much for their own trouble, as for the decay of purity, and my desolation. They would doe all things for pleasing all parties, wherin God is not displeased, and their consciences not disquieted. But the honour of God, and peace of their soules, they dare not but regard. And albeit obedience to the word should destroy their own & all other mens worldly estate, yet they must still and uncessantly

urge it. If in times past your honors have been pleased to hearesome of them in pulpit, and in privat, in the matters of religion: and have not despised their speeches, when there was greater probabilitie for suspition: there is greater reason now, when they are in hazard of suffring, to beleeve, and take to heart, that which they say, and require. Wherof as they must be coū
               table to the eternall Iudge of all the world, so shall yee be for your hearing; and shall not escape his hand, if yee harken not, for disobedience to the truth. The world may well dally for a time, and make men so drunke with the wine of wickednes, that through security they may thinke thēselves safe. But be assured, when the Lord shall search Ierusalem with lights, and enter to the fiery 
                  ••
               yall, every abomination shall kythe in the own colours. If ye hold your▪peace, God will provide for his owne children. But behold hee commeth shortly, and his reward is

with him, to give to every man according as his workes shall bee. Albeit my messengers may now cry with the prophet, Who beleeves our report; yet that dreadfull sentence shall make the soule once brought within the sight of death, to tremble and quiver. God wil not be mocked. If the righteous scarcely be saved, and God spares not his Angels, where shall they appeare, who make marchandise of his truth; albeit at the highest rate of honour and wealth? The whole word of God, his law, promises, and threatnings, his practises, and the works of providence cannot prevaile with the sencelesse soules of men. But death (so violent are his perswasions, and his might so unresistable) at his first approch, shall make every heart to beleeve and feele, that all the workes under the Sunne are but vanity. The conscience and happy remembrance of one word uttered or suffered for Christ, his crowne, his truth, or his needy members,

shall at that strait fill the soule with greater joy, then all the crowns and kingdoms under heaven. And what is then left to the godlesse, craftie, and merciles wretch, that laugheth at my death, and daunceth at my funerals: when men afflicted cry unto the Lord, and he heareth them: But thou hast proved in the end victorious,
               Vici
                     ••
                  i tandem Galilae 
               O Iesus of Galilee.
            
            I conclude with that of my beloved Bernard, I owe my selfe unto God for my creation, what shall I give for my restauration, especially being restored after such a manner: neither was 
                     •
                   so easily restored as created. In his first work hee gave me unto my selfe: in his second, he gave himself unto me, & by giving himselfe, he hath restored me unto my selfe. Being therfore given & restored, I ow my selfe for my selfe, and so ow my selfe unto God by a double right. But what shall I render unto God for giving himself unto me. For though I should give my selfe a thousand times for recompence, what am I in comparison of him. And I add, that seeing all

my well-doing can be no recompence unto him. I wish the increase of his glory by a second restitution of me unto my selfe, by giving himselfe now the second time unto me; and am content to be put to a greater perplexity, not knowing what to render, that his mercies yet may be the greater. O that it would please him yet again to pitty me. At least, let all the blessed of the Lord keep themselves from troubling the preachers of peace, and bringers of blessings: let them be stout, stedfast, and play the men, that they may all run out their course with joy, and report that excellent price conquesed by the blood & bitter sufferings of Iesus Christ my spouse, now at the right hand of the father; for whose revelation I am waiting daily, that my marriage may bee perfected, and I with all the Saints may enter into the ioyes conquesed by his bitter suffering. To him with the Father & holy Ghost be all glory, praise and honor for ever.
            FINIS.
         
      
   