
      
         
            
            
            Two little workes defenſiue of our Redemption,
That our Lord went through
the veile of his fleſh into Heaven, to appeare
before God for vs.
            Which iourney a Talmudiſt, as the Goſpell,
would terme, a going vp to Paradiſe: But heathen
Greeke, a going downe to Hades, and Latin,
Deſcendere ad inferos.
            
            Wherein the vnlearned barbarous anger God and
man, ſaying, That Ieſus deſcended to HELL: and
yeelde vnto the blaſphemous Iewes by ſure
conſequence vpon their words, That
he ſhould not be the Holy one
of God.
            
            BY HVGH BROVGHTON.
            If any man love not the Lord IESVS, let him be
Anathema Maran Atha. 1. COR. 16.
            
            
            1604.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            BY knowing that Hades, a terme vſed in the Creede, is the place
generall, where ſoules are before Gods throne, diuided there, fat
enough, by heauen & hell, ſo that in ſpeach of the holy, Hades the
generall, by difference of the Perſon, is Heauen, and in the wicked,
Hell, as we cōmonly terme Hell: which place is on high, out of this
world by Apo. 14. & all Iewes in Cether Malc. fol. 11. by knowing
of this great light cometh to Religion. Firſt their opinion falleth,
who thank God for ſending his ſonne to redeeme the Fathers from
Hades, to Paradiſe: that is, from Paradiſe to Paradiſe. So Limbus
Patrum and Purgatorie fall: when Hades hath onely two partes,
Heauen and Hell. So our madnes falleth, who in the Creede, put
for that Part of Hades, which holdeth the faithfull, and is heauen
or Paradiſe, the part which holdeth the wicked, and put for Heauen,
Hell, to which they that goe, periſh for euer. Here ſtandeth the
Article: Our Lord being in body crucified, dead and buried, had a
ſoule immortall, as all men, which went hence to God: & being in
Hades, holy, had not hell but heauen. This is all. When the Goſpel
began ſcant any held ſoules immortall. Pliny ſheweth that. Therfore
it was needfull the Creed ſhould haue it. When the immortalitie
was graunted, very many Creedes did omit the article: becauſe
in ſpeach of a man, to die & to go to Hades is all one. Of an horſe,
Grekes would ſay, he is dead. Of a man, more: He is dead & gone to
Hades. This matter vnknowen hath vexed the world by ignorāce
of one Greeke worde. And two Biſhops vexed their owne. Againſt
whom two ſmal writings folow: beſides much otherwiſe printed &
written to them. The ſtyle is not of their gall, but it may gall, in
mildnes.
         
         
            The argument of the Admonition following.
            BR. wrote vnto Queene Elizabeth, that King Edward the ſixt and her Maieſt.
ſwearing to the Goſpell, ſware to this, That to goe to Hades in the Creede,
was to goe to Paradiſe, euen by Heathen Greeke: to whom Hades is the
world of ſoules: in which the holy haue Paradiſe, and the godles, Gehenna. Both
be on high before Gods throne. And Br. commended the cauſe to Q. Elizabeths
M. and the King of Scots Maieſtie. Againſt that a libell was allowed to ſcoff the
Scottiſh miſt, penned by ſome Belial Bar Lo: and againſt ſaluation Bilſon raged:
as this ſhort worke telleth.
         
      
      
         
            
            A lye reſumed of D. Bilſon.
            
               
                  DOctor Bilſon in his ſermon booke against Maiſter
Iacob, folio 419. fumeth thus: Firſt then
tell your abettor that all the Realme will
take him not onely for a rayler againſt all
honeſtie, but a lier againſt all duty that
voucheth ſo cōfidentlie: King Edward the
ſixt and his ſubiectes helde that Chriſt his ſoule never went
to Gehenna: and the Realm knoweth the Qu. oath, as alſo the
Q. adventureth her eternall ſtate. Theſe be no ſtates to come
within his vncleane mouth. He may doe well to remember
who they be of whom it is written: They deſpiſe governement:
and ſpeake ill of them that be in authoritie, as raginge
waves of the ſea, foming out their owne ſhame. Thus the D.
writeth. Marke now the Zurich confeſsion, which K. Edw. and
Queene Eliz. allowed. Per inferos intelligimus non locum ſupplicij
deſignatum impijs, ſed defunctos fideles, quemadmodum
per ſuperos adhuc ſuperſtites in vitâ. Proinde anima
Chriſti deſcendit ad inferos, id eſt, delata eſt in ſinum Abrahae:
in quo collecti fuerunt omnes defuncti fideles. Ergo
cum Latroni ſecum crucifixo dixit, hodie mecum eris in Paradiſo,
promiſit ei conſortium vitae, & beatorum ſpirituum.
Licet enim Dominus deſcendiſſe dicatur, fit tamen ex more
loquendi. Confitemur in hoc articulo animas eſſe immortales,
eaſue protinus à morte corporeâ tranſire ad vitam.
This is the Zurick confeſsion, allowed by King Edward and Qu.
Elizabeth: So Deſcending must be graunted to be Aſcending, and

Hell to be Paradiſe. If our Biſhops miſſe in termes,
               
                  
                     ••
                  t 
                     •
                  o ſim
                  
                     •••
                   euer 
                     ••
                  inke that 
                     •
                  ell, as men 
                     ••
                  mmonly 
                     ••
                  ak is hea
                  
                     ••
                  n▪ But if 
                     〈◊〉
                   foole put 
                     ••
                  ll, by his 
                     ••
                  gue where 
                     ••
                  auen is in
                  
                     •
                  eed: a foole 
                     •••
                  not by vn
                  
                     ••
                  rnedſhip 
                     ••
                  rne heaven 
                     〈◊〉
                   Hell The 
                     •
                  arbarous 
                     ••
                  anſlation 
                     •
                  f the Greek 
                     •
                  reede wt 
                  
                     ••
                  ceaved D. 
                     •••
                  on i
                     •
                   bla
                  
                     •
                  ed: not the 
                     ••
                  e Creede. 
               they must blame
them ſelves: and not rage with hereticall Satanean madnes vpon
ſuch as force them to faith. Now what grace the D. hath in his
wordes, all may ſoone iudge: conſidering what him ſelfe graunteth:
and how in his eſcape afterwardes he differeth from all the worlde.
This was the question: Whether our Lords ſoule went hence
to Gehenna: or hence to Paradiſe: Iohn Cant. and all vexed by
him know that, and for one of theſe two opinions the Princes religion
was to be esteemed. And if I. C. had invented a going from Paradiſe
to Gehenna, Geneveans would haue renowned him over the world.
Now marke how rightly the right reverend Father and Doctor taketh
of him ſelfe the lye vnto him ſelfe, fol 219. We haue no warrant
in the word of God ſo to faſten Chriſts ſoule vnto Hell
for the time of his death, that it might not be in Paradiſe before
it deſcended into Hell. Now Iohn Cant. will graunt, that
he damneth them both: and iustifieth the adverſary, as a Greeke Epistle
printed at Hannawe required Sir Iohn Forteſcue once
Queene Elizabeths greek Reader, to determine, whether both Biſhops
were not condemned most certeinly by their owne graunt. The ridiculous
feigning of a new Satanean fable that our Lord went from
Paradiſe to Gehenna: and to Hades, as from Paulls to London, from
Winchester to England, from England to Europe, frō Europe to this
world, from part to the whole: and againe, the fable that he went not
to Hades, that is, in trueth, to the world of ſoules, till his body was buried:
and again his feigning thriſe, at Paules, Hades in S. Matthew,
cap. 5. twiſe, with 10. once, where Gehenna is the text, perverting the
originall with wresting Scriptures and Fathers to an opinion that
neuer came into holy mindes, this excuſeth not his Lye, but
augmenteth his impiety: that befooleth all Scriptures of
God, and all Divines that ever have bene in the
world. Curſed be he that maketh the blinde
wander out of the way, and let all
the people ſay, Amen.
            
         
         
            
            The argument and effect of the Epistle
following.
            I. C. was adviſed in a worke dedicated to Queene Elizabeth and
to the moſt Noble, our King now, That he ſhould not burne for
Gehennaes honour, leaſt he burned in Geheaenaes ſhame for ever and
ever: At the firſt he ſkoffed all trueth of God and the King: but
being taught how he was caught in his owne ſyllogiſme thus: The
place which our Lordes ſoule went to hence, telleth what Hades (his
HELL) meaneth in the Creede: But Paradiſe is the place which our
Lord went to hence: Therefore Paradiſe is the HELL of the Creed,
being taught how he was caught, he ſent his Chaplayne M. Greffrey
King, obteyning the Queenes hand for his leaue, to agree with his
adverſarie: and he vpon agreement, returned preſently, ſaying that
he ſhould be ſent againe: but preſently after he came home, hee
would write. Conditions were not kept. The libell was ſtill ſolde:
and Machmadiſme was in it: and a contumelious mockage of Chriſt
and all Chriſtians & Iewes: when he ſaid Ruben the Iewe his Ebrew
Epiſtle was forged: whereby he hindred the defence of Chriſtianitie,
and deſerved rooting out▪ Beſides that, after the King was ours,
Paules ſold the treaſon of the libel. For not ſtāding to his covenant,
three Greeke Orations plaid vpon him: and one dedicated to the
King and Brettiſh nation in Queene Elizabets dayes: And after all,
this Epiſtle. At the firſt ſight he laid the blame on Bar Lo, that vſurped
his auctoritie, as being guiltles: yet when at the Court a Duke
ſhewed what he had done, he fell as dead, & ſoone died. The party
greeued was much greeued at his death: becauſe he had proteſted
he never ſpake againſt him. Yet as Ely, ſo he by ſoftnes paid for others
blame: while he repreſſed not bad ſoules. And his Gentlemen
wiſhed Bar Lo vnborne: as more griefe to the Archbiſhop then all
that ever were his adverſaries: not only for his libel againſt the
Scottiſh miſt: full of moſt deadly treaſon: and full of blaſpemy and
lying againſt God and man: But alſo for his Satanean declamation
at Paules againſt the beſt Nobilitie, and the beſt bent for the good
of the State: againſt whom the Iſcariot railed and raged: whereby
the Nobilitie iuſtly terme him: The vileſt that is this day vnder the
cope of heaven: as bent againſt God, the King, the Nobilitie, and
all humanitie. So Bar Lo will be his notation.
         
         
            
            To the aged Sir, IOHN of Canterb. Archbiſhop,
grace and truth.
            
               MAISTER Francis Hall told that your G. depriued
M. Pickaerd and him of their benefices,
and gaue both to Bar Lo (whom he deſcribed
after his name, a babe most bad) for defending
your Gehenna: which haereſie of yours was vſed
for a barr, that you were not fit to confirme others,
who ſo erred your ſelfe: againſt all the
Bible, all Greekes and Hebrewes. That the children whiche you
would haue confirmed and you together may be truly firmed herein,
behold your owne graunt in D. Bilſon: to whom in Bar Lo his
booke, your grace & wiſedome referreth the vnlearned for a learned
defence of your minde: which held that the Creed telleth whether
our Lordes ſoule went hence. And this is your Propoſition &
myne too: and you will aduenture your eternall ſtate vpon it, and
I myne. This it is: The Place into which our Lordes ſoule went
hence, is Hades or Hell of the Creede. This poſition is built vpon
a rocke: that no ſtorme, windes, nor waues can ſhake it. And if we
agree to what place our Lord his ſoule went hence, we agree what
Hades or your Hell is in the Creede. Nowe to your Propoſition,
this aſſumption D. Bilſon layeth downe, fol
                  •
               o 219. Paradiſe is the
place to which our Lord went hence. Therefore by your owne graūt
Hades or Hell in the Creede is Paradiſe. Seeing then the whole
tenour of Moſes and the Goſpell, cannot mooue you: ſeeing the
vniverſall iudgement of the Hebrewes for their owne tongue, can
not mooue you: ſeeing 3000. yeares heathen Greeke cannot mooue
you: and Eulogines Patriarcha 1200. yeres old, with all other Chriſtian
Greekes which doe place Abraham in Hades, can not mooue
you, and ſeeing the Zurick confeſſion, which ſayth, per Inferos intelligimus
non locum ſupplicij deſignatum impijs, ſed defunctos fideles,
& ſinum Abrahae can not mooue you, let your owne confeſſion
mooue you: and publiſh it in print, that the ſimple deceaued by
you, may know how you led them to deny that our Lorde went
through the vaile of his fleſh into the moſt holy. Which they that
will denie, may as well denie all religion and trueth of God. You
haue moſt highly iniuried the Maieſtie of God: pretendinge that

               Sheol Pſal. 16. was the Devils lodge, which no Ebrew euer thought,
neither ſuffreth Moſes to thinke: contemning the Goſpell for the
hand of God receaving the holy ſoule of our Lord: pervertinge ſorowes
of death into the ſecond death, Act. 2. to befooll all Chriſtianitie,
turning Saint Paul to Gehennean darknes: where he purpoſelie
ſpeaketh of the Goſpells brightnes: in theſe three iniuries you
ſtaine all the Bible, while you make ſome iarr from all the reſt, and
befoole the moſt holy Writers. This your ſinne is haynous. So
your deſpiſing of Ebrew DD. For their owne tongue, wilbe holden
of the Scottiſh miſt and Brettiſh nation, and all nations a brutiſh
parte. and no leſſe the reiecting of Heathen Greeke, for the Creede
penned for heathen: and your reſtrayning of Greeke only to Poets:
and your teaching as generall that Hades in them is vgly, this your
learning wil be holden babiſh. Alſo where D. Bilſon reiecteth the
world of ſoules, as checking all Iewes in their owne tongue, his
wrangling was ſenſeles: that he knew no place where ſoules were
togeather. Hath he euer ſeene in this world all bodyes togeather;
other ſaw them not, yet the ſpeach, this world is currant with all
men. And for Hades Macedones call it Heaven. Portus Dictionarie
would haue taught you ſo much, though you ſought no deeper
Graetians. And in Clemens Alexandrinus, Hades is Iuppiter.
To your blame for denying the lxx. in Pſal. 110. a warrant for the
New Teſt. Greeke, you ſay nothing, as damned. And D. Bilſon
ſaith: the Greeke Fathers vnderſtood not Joſephs Haden. Such
owles you bring to Athens: and make your Witgifte a ſcoph to all
learned. Alſo you anſwer nothing to your blame for ſaying, that
it were better the trueth of Daniel were hid, then antiquitie ſhould
be diſgraced for miſſing. Others thought it a graceleſſe ſpeach. So
when you condemne Saint Paul for curſing Ananias, which thing
he was bound to doe, by expreſſe lawes, for ſtryking treacherouſlie,
and miſleading the blind, you check Chriſt that promiſed a mouth
that no adverſarie could reſiſt, and befoole Moſes for making a defence
for an open impudent iudge. The blind, the deafe, the officers
may not lightly be curſed: but in open wilfulnes they be curſed, as
Saul of Dauid, and Sedechias of Ezechiel, and the Phariſes. Mat. 23.
Herein you ſtand at the mercy of God. Moreover touching. Abraham
Ruben the Iew, you haue iniuried Chriſt our Lord, & all Chriſtians
moſt wickedly. If he had not bene anſwered, all Chriſtians

had bene worſe thought of. Now he & all the Iewes in the Empire
ſpeak better of Chriſtianity. And ſome by that haue bene baptized:
and one D. told that he would be baptized and come to Englande:
he is the man that prefaced to Aruc. So a rare learned Iew, to whō
at Baſil one gaue Rubens epiſtle, and ſhewed the apoſtles Thalmudicall
rare ſkil, he made requeſt to the Profeſſours, when the party
was gone, to deſire him to returne to inſtruct him more fully: (but
the party could not) and afore requeſted his teacher to tranſlate into
Ebrew, as he ſpake to him, the new Teſtament. This deſerued better
then your language. You ſay the party feigned that whiche is
written of his praiſe: and ſcoph his ſkil in Ebrew and Greeke: and
terme him an aſſe, and offre all diſgrace. For all, Chriſtians & Iewes
ſhould thinke you vnworthy to haue the benefit of Chriſtian policie.
And as you know you haue the Anathema maran Atha giuen
you. It returneth to the giuer if you deſerue it not. If your deſert be
doubtles, you are ſurely miſerable: as in your perpetual vntruthes
and miſvſing of the Realmes authoritie to Satans ſlavery. So when
you ſcophed the hope in the Scottiſh mist, and the Brittiſh nation,
what meant you but to endeuor to ſet millions to kill one another.
Six yeres Beza noiſed a Teſtament bent badly, and Geneua meant
to kill one for leaning on the Scottiſh miſt: as three Scottes there
then tolde the party: and Beza wrote much alike to your old head.
Yet the party boldly printed the Scottiſh miſt then to be his King.
And now with what face can you looke for any good ſubiect, who
knowes the bleſſing of the Scottiſh miſt turned to a ſhyning ſunne
ever to wiſh you well: after your ſo great endevour to overthrow
your owne nation; The Brettiſh nation would, as Davids 37. worthies,
haue layde their life in their hands for their lefull Prince, then
and now moſt deare King. And wiſheth you, after pardon, to be an
harty ſubiect. Great cauſe you haue.
         
         
            To the Reader.
            AS Britanie conteyning England with Scotland, a Scott is not born
in England becauſe he is borne in Britanie: So Hades conteyning
Heauen and HEL, our L. his holy ſoule going to Hades to his holy
ioy, can not be ſayd to goe to HEL, becauſe his went to Hades. But
the barbarous tranſlation ſhould be lothed of al wiſe & ſuch as would
not deſcend to HEL, to their eternall woe.
            
         
      
   