
      
         
            
            
            CERTAINE DEMANDES WITH their grounds, drawne out of holy Writ, and propounded in foro conſcientiae by ſome religious Gen̄tl. vnto the reverend Fathers, Richard Archbiſhop of Canterbury, Richard Biſhop of London, William Biſhop of Lincolne, Garvaſe Biſhop of Worcester, William Biſhop of Exeter, & Thomas Biſhop of Peterbourough, wherevnto the ſaid Gentl. require that it would pleaſe their Lordſhips to make a true, plaine, direct, honeſt and reſolute aunſwere.
            
               Iſai. 66. 5.
               Heare the word of the Lord, all ye that tremble at his word, your brethren that hated you, & cast you out for my Names ſake, ſaid, let the Lord be glorified: but he ſhall appeare to your ioy, and they ſhalbe aſhamed.
            
            
               Ier. 23. 27
               Thinke they to cauſe my people to forget my Name by their dreames, which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their forefathers have forgotten my Name, for Baall?
            
            
               Iſai. 8. 16.
               Bind vp the Testimony: ſeale vp the Law among my diſciples.
            
            
               Iſai. 8. 20.
               To the Law and to the Testimony, if they ſpeake not according to this word: it is becauſe there is no light in them.
            
            1605.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            To the Reverend Fathers, &c.
            
               RIght Reverend Fathers, your Lordſhips having bene a long tyme Divinitie Readers in the ſchole of Chriſt, and ſome of vs alſo, a long tyme ſcholers brought vp in the ſame ſchole at your feete, give vs leave, we pray you, by way of Queſtion, and not of Definition, to propound theſe Demaundes following. And as we brieflie and plainly have oppoſed, ſo let your Lordſhips be wel pleaſed ſimply and honeſtly to make vs anſwere. For we having (as the men of Beraea did) ſearched the ſcriptures, for our ſatisfaction in the doubtes propounded, and out of them, not being able to reſolve our ſelves, our deſire is, to be reſolved, by men of greater skill, and not to reſt our ſelves vpon our owne iudgements. Now then we thus propound, and we thus demaund:
            
               FIRST, whether every ſupreme Christian Magistrate, for
               The like demande wee make concerning the command of the Church. 
               every commaund to be given by vertue of his Christian Magiſtracie, touching the worſhip of God, ought not to have the word of faith, for the ground and warrant of his commaund; that ſo his commaund being of faith, may not be of ſinne?
            
            
               Secondly, whether any ſupreme Christian Magistrate, by Authoritie
               The like demande wee make of the abilitie of the Church. 
               of holy Writ, be inabled to deviſe, ordayne and appropriate a Ministeriall garment for the Ministerie of the Goſpell, without putting on of which garment, he may commaund the Ministers of the Gospell, neither publikely to pray, to preach the Worde, nor administer the Sacramentes?
            
            
               Thirdly, if it be lawfull for a ſoveraigne Christian Magistrate, by

authoritie of holy Writ, to ordayne and appropriate a Ministeriall garment, for the Ministers of the Gospell, then we demaunde, whether by Authoritie of holy Writt, he may ordayne and appropriate ſuch a Ministeriall garment, as in matter and forme, differeth not from that proper and neceſſarie Priestlie garment, which the Prince, & chief Prieſt of Idolatrie hath appropriated to be worne by his Jdolatrous Priestes in their Idoll ſervice?
            
            The reaſon moving vs to make the firſt demaund, reſpecteth ſome others, rather then our ſelves. For we doubt not, but that every ſupreme Chriſtian Magiſtrate, will agnize, that every his mandatorie action concerning the outward worſhip of God, of what nature, or qualitie ſoever it be (if it be not ſinne) muſt be of faith. And that no ſuch action of his, can be of faith, vnles the ſame have the word of faith for the ground and warrant thereof.
            Concerning the ſecond Demaund, For our partes we never yet read of any commaundement, of any word of faith, or of any godly example in holy Writt, whereby the ſupreme Chriſtian Magiſtrate, is either directly, or by conſequence inabled to ordayne and appropriate a Miniſteriall garment, for the Miniſters of the Goſpell.
            For howſoever by imitation of the Prieſtly garmentes, ordayned for the Leviticall Prieſthood, vnder the Law, your Lordſhips may thinke that a miniſteriall garment may lawfully be commaunded for the Miniſters of the Goſpel: nevertheleſſe, there being an expreſſe commaundement given vnto Moſes, vnder the law, for the one, and no generall or particular rule delivered vnto a Chriſtian Magiſtrate, in the Goſpell, for the other, we deſire to be ſatisfied by your Lordſhips, whether ſuch an imitation of Leviticall garments, be lawfull, yea or no? If your Lordſhips anſwere, that the inſtitution of a Miniſteriall garment, vnder the Goſpel, is not by imitatiō from the Leviticall law, then we demaund, from whence the originall and ofſpring of that Miniſteriall garment came?
            If your Lordſhips anſwere, that it ſprange originally from Mans invention, then you directly charge the Chriſtian Magiſtrate, to have no rule of faith for the guidance of his conſcience in the inſtitution of a miniſteriall garment. For your Lordſhips very well know, and according to this your owne knowledge, have a longe tyme taught vs, that no deviſe or invention of man, can be a divine rule, for a Chriſtian Magiſtrates conſcience to be guyded by.
            
               But aſwell for the better clearing of the proper and right vſe of the Prieſtlie garmentes vnder the law, as alſo of the cleare opening of this poynt, namely, that no reaſon can bee yeelded, from the vſe of the prieſtly garmentes vnder the law, for the vſe of miniſteriall garmentes vnder the Goſpell, we demaund:
            
               Whether your Lordſhips did ever read in any parte of holy Writ, that the Priestes were commaunded to eate the Paſſeover in any other garmentes, then in their ordinary garments?
            
            
               Whether your Lordſhips did ever read in any parte of holy Writ, that any holy Ministeriall garment was commaunded to bee worne, by him, that cut of the foreskinne of the fleſhe vpon the eight day?
            
            
               Whether your Lordſhips have read in any place of holy Writt, that the Prophetes had any proper or ſpeciall attire, enioyned vnto them, as a proper and neceſſarie habite, wherein they ſhould exerciſe, and without which they might not exerciſe their propheticall office? For wee finde it1. Ki. 20. 41. written; When the Prophet hasted, and tooke the aſhes away from his face, that the King of Iſrall knew him, that he was of the Prophetes. Whereby it ſeemeth vnto vs, that, that Prophet, rather by his face, then by his proper Propheticall garment, was diſcerned from other men to bee a Prophet, especially in the execution of that his propheticall function:1. Sam. 9. 1
                        •
                     
                   And this agayne is made more manifest, by thoſe wordes which Saule vſed, when meeting with Samuell in the middest of the gate of one of the Cities of Zuph, he queſtioned with him after this maner: Tell me, I pray thee, where the Seers houſe is? For had the Prophets bene known in thoſe dayes by their proper propheticall garmentes, then needed not Saul in the middeſt of the gate, and at ſo ſolemne a feast, to have enquired of Samuell, for the Seers houſe.
            
            
               But it is written, that Saule knew that it was Samuell, when an ouldObiection. 1. Sā. 28. 14 Iſa. 20. 1. man came vp, lapped in a mantell, And Iſayah was commanded to looſe his ſackcloth from his loynes, and to put off his ſhoe from his foote. And againe it is written: And in that day ſhall the Prophetes bee aſhamed everyZech. 13. 4. one of his viſion, when he hath prophecied, neither ſhall they weare a rough garment to deceyve: And lastly, that Iohn the Baptist had hisMath. 3. 4. garment of Camels hayre, and that a girdle of a skinne was about his loynes: By all which places it is apparant, that in ould tyme the Prophetes vſed a ſpeciall attyre, or habite, and were accustomed to put vpon them a distinct kinde of garment from other men.
            
            We confeſſe plainly and ſimply, that your Lordſhips herein ſpeakeAnſwers.
               
the trueth, neither doe we denie, that it is both lawfull and convenient for the Miniſter of the Goſpell, dayly & ordinarily, to weare ſuch a ſpeciall kinde of civile apparell, as whereby he may be knowne from being a Marchant, a Lawier, a Gentleman, or an Huſbandman: But what for that? For to the poynt in queſtion, what reſolution is that? For how followeth is, that the prophet Iſayah, the other old prophets, and Iohn Baptiſt▪ by their every dayes rough and hayrie apparell, wherſoever in the ſtreetes, in the fields, in the Markets, in the ſchooles, in the gates, in the Court, or in the countrey, they were ſeene, how (we ſay) doeth it follwe (they being knowne by their ſpeciall garments to be of the number of the prophetes) that therefore whenſoever in the Temple, in the Synagogue, or in any other place, wherin they propheſied, that they put vpon that their ordinary and vſuall garment, ſome other garment, neceſſarily and properly to be worne in their propheticall office? and without which neceſſary and propheticall garment, it was not lawfull for them to propheſie?
            If your Lordſhips could make good your obiection by the holy ſcriptures, you ſhould then have ſome colour from the example of the old prophets, to affirme that extraordinary prophets, (if there were any in our times) might weare ſome rough and haytie garments; But to alleadge theſe examples, as ſufficient authorities for ordinary Paſtours & Teachers, that they may or ought to weare proper miniſteriall garments, whenſoever they pray, preache the word or adminiſter the Sacraments, is to alleadge quidlibet pro quolibet? inſteed of a kernell, to give a nutſhale, and to imagine as Saul imagined, that he ſaw Samuell when he ſaw Satan, who to blind Sauls eyes, had put vpon him the forme of an old man lapped in a Mantell.
            And yet nevertheles we grant that from the place of Samuell, we may learne thus much: viz. If any perſon in our age were ſo ſottiſh, as to ſeek vnto a Witche, to have the body of an Archbiſhop rayſed vp; that Satan in this caſe, by lapping him ſelfe in an Archbiſhops Pall, Rochet and ſquare Cap, might tranſforme him ſelfe to the ſhape and likenes of Thomas Beckett, though he be long ſince dead.
            As for that which is alleadged out of the propheſie of Iſaiah, it proveth directly that his garment of Sackcloth, was not any proper propheticall garment, but only ſuch an ordinary garment, as whereby in his common and daily attire, his condition of being a Prophet, was diſtinguiſhed from the apparrell of other men, who were no Prophetes.

For if by the commandment of looſing the ſackcloth from his loynes, the Lord had meant a proper propheticall Mantell or garment, which was only vſuall in the execution of his propheticall function, then might the ſame well-inough have bene put of, and yet Jſaiah not have bene naked, and his buttocks vncovered.
            Beſides, if by Iſaiahs garment, a proper propheticall garment in the exerciſe of Propheſie, and not a ſpeciall ordinary garment, common with other Prophets in their daily vſe, had bene noted; then by Iſaiahs ſhoes likewiſe, why ſhould not a proper & propheticall kind of ſhoes be vnderſtood?
            And if ſo, why then by this place might not Miniſters be appointed, (whenſoever they pray, preache or miniſter the Sacramentes) to have proper miniſteriall ſhoes or pantofles vpon their feete, aſwell as proper miniſteriall Surplices or Copes vpon their backes?
            The place out of Zacharie, and that argument from Iohn Baptists apparell, be of like interpretation with that of Eſai. And that out of Zachary, what ells proveth it, but that the falſe Prophets ordinarily did weare ſome ſuch maner of ſpeciall rough garments, as were after the forme of ordinary garments, worne by the true Prophets? and that thoſe falſe Prophets, for deceiving of the people, by colour of their garments, ſhould have thoſe garments, (as it were) plucked over their eares, and no more be ſuffered by their garmentes, to make their doctrine ſeeme more holy: ſeeing they were never ſent from God, to bee Prophets for the good of his people, but might ſtill have continewed huſbandmen or heards men, as not having any true propheticall doctrine, but only making a ſhew their of by their outward rough garments, as if their garments had bene ſufficient to have approved their propheſies? In like maner as at this day a number of idole miniſters, have naught▪ ells to approve them to be miniſters, but only that they weare a large whit Surplice with two wide ſleeves, and a litle blacke Cappe with foure narrowe corners.
            Nay, againe we demand, whether your Lordſhips have read in holy1 Chro. 23. 6 1 Chro. 25. 1. 1 Chro. 26. 20. 1 Chro. 9. 
                     •
                  2. 2 Chro. 19. 25. Writt, that King David deviding Offices to the ſonnes of Levie, & ſeparating ſome to be Singers, ſome to be Porters, and ſome to be over the Treaſures of the Houſe of God, according to the commandement of the Lord, by the hands of the Prophets Samuell, Gad and Nathan, did appoint any other ſongſterlike, porterlike or other miniſterlike garments, to be worne by theſe Officers in the ſervice of the Houſe of

God, then ſuch only as were appointed by the Law.
            And if your Lordſhips can produce no place out of holy Writt for the proofe of theſe queſtions; then from the example of celebrating the Paſſover, miniſtring Circumciſion, Propheſying by the Prophets, and from ſervices done by the Singers, Porters and Treaſures, without other miniſteriall garments then were appointed to be vnder the Lawe:
            We demand what good proofe your Lordſhips can make out of holy Writt, that miniſters of the Goſpell may be commanded, not to pray, not to preach, and not to adminiſter the Sacraments without miniſteriall garments, not appointed by God, but by man in the time of the Goſpell?
            And yet touching certaine holy garments, vſed by the Prieſtes and Levites vnder the Law, your Lordſhips have not read (as we ſuppoſe) that either Moyſes or Aaron, did appoint any other holy garments for the Prieſts or Levits in their prieſtly or Leviticall Offices, then ſuchExo. 28. 12 29. 30. 35. 41. 43. Eze. 42, 13. 14. Eze. 44. 15. 17. 18. 19. only as the Lord him ſelfe commanded to be made and worne; which holy & Prieſtly garments alſo, you reade that they might not be worne by the Prieſts or Levites in the vtter Court, but only in the holy place, when they came to miniſter in the Prieſtes and Levites Office before the Lord.
            And ſo from the proportion of the Miniſtery of the Prieſthood vnder the Law, vnto the miniſterie of faith vnder the Goſpell, we queſtion thus: If God the only author of the Prieſthood vnder the Law, were the only author of the Prieſts holy and miniſteriall garments, vnder the Law, why ſhould not the ſame God, being the holy author of the miniſterie of the Goſpell, be likewiſe the only author of miniſteriall garments vnder the Goſpell? For otherwiſe how ſhould the Miniſters perfectly vnderſtand, that the wearing of miniſteriall garments in the time of the Goſpell, bee aſwell pleaſing to the Lorde, as were the Prieſts holy garments in the time of the Law?
            Beſides, for ſo much as the Prieſts when they came out of the inner Court even to the vtter Court to the people, and approched to thoſeEzek. 42. Eze. 44. 15. 17. 18. 19. things which were for the people, were then commaunded to put of their holy and Lynen garments, and to put on their other garments, namely, their Wollen garments which they had put of when they entered into the inner Court.
            From whence we againe demande, what reaſon your Lordſhips can

yeald out of holy Writt, that the Miniſters of the Goſpell when they approche to pray, to preach the Word & to adminiſter the Sacramēts, which are things for the people vnder the Goſpell, ſhould put vpon them miniſteriall Lynen garments? And not rather from the identitie of reaſon and equitie of that order, which was given to the Prieſtes vnder the Law, challendge a free and liberall vſe of their miniſterie in their ordinarie garmentes? We meane ſuch comly and cleanly wollen garmentes, as by the law, vſe, or cuſtome of the countrie, wherein they live, may lawfully be worne.
            Where it is written that David had on him a lynen garmēt, as all the1 Chro. 15. Levites that bare the Arke, & the ſingers: If your Lordſhips from this place ſhal vrge, that lynen garments were ordinarily worne by the Levites, among the people, when they approched to the ſervices, which were for the people, you ſhall in this caſe but wreſt the holy ſcriptures, to an other ſenſe then rightly can be gathered from the ſame, becauſe the ſame your ſenſe directly repugneth the aforeſaid teſtimonie of the Prophet Ezekiell: neither indeed doeth this place any more prove, the ordinarie wearing of lynen garmentes, by the Levites among the people, in the vtter courte, then it doeth prove the ordinarie wearing of an Ephod by King David, whenſoever he came into the Temple to worſhip.
            The reaſon then of the Levites wearing of lynen garmentes at this tyme, being in the preſence of the Arke of the covenant of the Lord which was now to be remooved from the houſe of Obed Edom, andNum. 4. 15. to be caried vpon the ſhoulders of the ſonnes of Koath, and to bee attended vpon by other of the Levites their brethren, in holy garments, it ſeemeth playne that this wearing of holy garmentes, in this peculiar ſervice thus performed to the Lord, in the preſence of the Arke, excludeth the wearing of the ſame garmentes in common ſervices done among the people.
            Beſides, that the Singers and Levites did not at any time miniſter in their lynen garmentes, among the people, is apparant. For that the proper place of their miniſtration was before the Arke in the inner court; And this is evident by the ſcriptures:
            For it is written, that 1. Chr. 15 17. 19. 
               Heman and Aſaph and Ethan were ſingers, and that the King left 1. Chro. 16 37. before the Arke of the Lords covenant, Aſaph the chiefe and his brethren to miniſter continually before the Arke, that which was to be done every day, to ſinge with 1. Chro. 45. 16. inſtrumentes, and

to lift vp their voyce with ioye, and to 1. Chro. 16. 41. prayſe the Lord, becauſe his mercy endureth for ever: yea and this manner of ſinging and miniſtring before the Arke in the Tabernacle of the congregation did not only continew vntill 1. Chr. 6. 32. 
               Salomon had built the houſe of the Lord in Ieruſalem, but then alſo, the ſingers continewed their office according to their cuſtome for it is written thus. And the 2. Chro 5. 12. Levites the ſingers of all ſortes, as of Aſaph, of Heman, and Ieduthun, and of their ſonns, and of their brethren being clad in fyne Lynen, ſtood with Cymbales and with Vyolles, and Harpes, at the Eaſt end of the Altar, and with them an hundred and twentye prieſtes, blowinge which Trumpettes, vnles then your Lordſhips be able to proue by holy wrytt, that the inner courte, or holy place, wherein the Altar ſtood, was not a place ſeparated for the preiſtes, & Levites alone, but that the people as well, as the Prieſtes and Levites, came into the ſame place, to worſhipp before the Arke, wee may bouldly (as wee thinke) affirme that you ſhall never be able to prove, that the Prieſtes or Levites vnder the law, did at any tyme weare any Miniſterial garments, when they approched into their vtter court, to the people, to doe ſervices for the people. Among the reaſons (why the Prieſtes vnder the law were commanded to put on their lynen garmentes when they miniſtred in the ſanctuarie and at the table) one reaſon among other is rendered to bee this: namely, for that the garmentes were holy garmentes, as having from the God of holynes an holy inſtitution.
            The reaſon alſo why the prieſtes were commaunded to put of their lynen garmentes, and to put on other wollen garmentes, when they approched to thoſe thinges which were for the people, is this: viz. for that they ſhould not ſanctifie the people with their garmentes: From which two reaſons, we queſtion thus:
            Firſt, ſeeing vnder the Miniſterie of the Goſpell, the Miniſters therof, have neither holy place, nor inner court, ſeparated from the people; neither any garmentes, by any holy inſtitution, appointed by the name of holy garmentes to miniſter in; we demaund, what authoritie your Lordſhips can alleadge out of holy Writt, that it ſhould not bee as comely and as decent a thinge, for the Miniſters of the Goſpell, to approche vnto prayer, preaching the worde, and adminiſtring the Sacramentes (which are things for the people vnder the Goſpell) without any Miniſteriall garmentes deviſed, and inſtituted only by man: as

it was for the Prieſtes to approch vnto the like things, which were for the people vnder the Law, without thoſe holy garmentes, which were ordayned by God?
            Secondly, the reaſon of the prohibition of the Prieſtes putting on their holy and prieſtly garmentes, when they approched into the vtter court to thoſe things which were for the people: being this: Namelie, that they ſhould not ſanctifie the people with their garmentes; wee demaunde with what reaſon deduced from holy Writt, you can impugne this poſition, viz.
            
            That our Saviour Chriſt (to preſerve the equitie and integritie of that prohibition, aſwell in the tyme of the Goſpell, as in the tyme of the Law, did not inſtitute any proper miniſteriall garmentes, for the Apoſtles, Evangeliſtes, Prophetes, Doers of Myracles, or Teachers, to exerciſe anie their miniſteriall function in, leaſt the people putting an opinion of holynes in their garmentes, might thinke the doing of myracles, preaching the worde, prophecying, or miniſtring the Sacramentes, to be ſanctified by their garmentes? And therefore from the manner of preaching the worde, adminiſtring Baptiſme, celebrating the Lordes Supper, doing Myracles, and praying by the Apoſtles, Evangeliſtes, Prophetes, &c. without any proper miniſteriall garmentes: we queſtion thus:
            In aſmuch as Iohn Baptiſt did both crye in the wildernes, and baptiſe in Iorden, having vpon him none other proper miniſteriall garmentes, but onely his ordinarie garment, of Camells hayre, with a girdle of a skinne about his loynes: And ſeeing the Apoſtles did neither preache the worde, nor adminiſter the Sacramentes, nor doe myracles, amonge the people, in any other garmentes, then in their vſuall and ordinarie garmentes. And beſides, ſeeing the Apoſtles, did not inſtitute or commaunde any proper miniſteriall garmentes for their ſucceſſors, namely for Biſhoppes, Paſtours and Teachers to miniſter in: ſeeing (we ſay) theſe things can not be prooved out of holy writt to be otherwiſe, our deſire is to be ſatisfied from your Lordſhips, by ſome holy rule of faith, why Biſhops, Paſtors, and Teachers, ſo long after the Apoſtles tymes, ſhould be commaunded, to weare any other forme or manner of garmentes in their holy miniſtrations, then ſuch their ordinarie and vſuall garmentes, (being comelie and cleanly garmentes) as by cuſtome, or law of the Countrey, they vſually weare.
            
               For if all ordinarie garmentes be ſanctified a like, to miniſter, and people, by the worde of God and prayer, as all ordinarie meates and drinkes be, we demand, what reaſon your Lordſhips can alleadge out of holy writt, that the publike ſervice, accompliſhed by the Miniſter, in his ordinarie apparell, ſhould not be as acceptable to the Lord, as is the publique ſervice performed by the people, in their ordinarie garmentes.
            And if your Lordſhips can affoord vs no reaſon out of holy Writt, why offering vp of prayers, preaching the Worde, or adminiſtring the Sacramentes, ſhould be leſſe acceptable to the Lord, when the ſame are performed in an ordinarie garment, and not in a proper miniſteriall garment: we then demaunde, whether your Lordſhips by any rule of holy Writ, can prove vnto vs, that the worde preached, Sacraments adminiſtred, and prayers offered vp in a proper miniſterial, rather then in an ordinary garment, can be of more efficacie, profit or edification vnto men?
            For as the manifeſtation of the ſpirit is given to every man to profit withall, ſo muſt all things which are done in the Church, bee done to the vſe, benefite and profite of the Church: Vnto theſe two latter queſtions, if your Lordſhips ſhall anſwere, that the miniſtration of the Worde and Sacramentes, can not be proved by holy Writ, to bee in it owne nature, either more acceptable to the Lord, or of more efficacie, profite and edification vnto men, when the ſame is accompliſhed by a Miniſter, wearing only his ordinarie garment: And yet notwithſtanding ſhall tell vs, that the not wearinge of a proper miniſteriall garment in the ſervice of prayer, preaching the Worde, and miniſtring the Sacraments, may be both diſpleaſing to God, & hurtful to the people, vpon circumſtance & contempt of the Churches, or Magiſtrates commaund: Then we replie and affirme, that you begge the thing in queſtion, driving vs▪ backe agayne, to ſeeke your reſolution of that doubt, which we moved above, in the ſecond principall demand:
            For vnleſſe the Church and ſovereigne Chriſtian Magiſtrate, be inabled by holy Writt to commaund a proper miniſterial garment vnder the Goſpell, the not wearing of ſuch a proper miniſteriall garment, commaunded by the Magiſtrate, or by the Church, can be neither an offence to God, nor hurtfull to the people.
            Beſides if neither the Church nor Magiſtrate, have any certaine rule out of holy Writt, for the reſolution of faith, in commanding a proper

miniſteriall garment; Then lyeth the ſame Miniſteriall garment vnder a iuſt ſuſpition of abomination, as being a thing invented by man: And then alſo how ſhould a Miniſter beeing bound to take for his marke the only will of God, as it is manifeſted & opened vnto him in the word, be excuſable in foro conſcientiae, if in the execution of his miniſterie, he may faſhion him ſelfe to the invention of man?
            
               But the preaching of the worde of God, is of greater moment and importance,
               Obiection. 
               then that the ſame ſhould be left of for the not vſing of a proper ministeriall garment.
            
            That is true indeed (ſay wee) if a Miniſter by the vſe of ſuch a garmentAnſwere. ſhould not ſinne? But that a Miniſter not fully perſwaded in his minde of the lawfull vſe of a proper miniſteriall garment, may weare it doubtingly, and ſo ſinne, to the end he may preache the Worde: we doubte greatly whether your Lordſhips bee able to prove this out of holy Writt & of this we pray your reſolutions? For how ſhould a man doe evill that good may come thereby, when as the Scripture teacheth vs, that his damnation is iuſt, that ſo doeth?
            The not preaching of the word then, being no ſinne in a Miniſter, when for the keeping of a good cōſcience, in not vſing a proper miniſteriall garment, he is commanded by a ſuperiour power not to preach the word; we demand herevpon, whether your Lordſhips ſinne not rather in preſſing, then the Miniſter in refuſing this kinde of Miniſteriall garment.
            And ſeeing wee are fallen by occaſion vpon this compariſon of preaching the worde, and wearing a proper miniſteriall garment, we pray your Lordſhips patiently to heare, and quietly to anſwere our demandes?
            Our demand then, is whether in your iudgements, the preaching of the word be not in it owne nature more precious, more needfull and more profitable for the people, then can bee the wearing of a proper miniſteriall garment?
            If your Lordſhips ſhould preferre the wearing of ſuch a miniſteriall garment to the preaching of the worde, in this caſe, if we ſhould hould our peace, the very ſtones might cry out ſhame vpon our faces; for we are taught out of holy Writt, that Marie was commended before Martha, for that ſhee ſitting at the feete of Ieſus to heare him preach the word, had choſen the better parte, even one thing that was neceſſary, and which might not be taken from her.
            
               If your Lordſhips anſwere (as the trueth is) that the preaching of the word, is more precious, needfull and profitable for the Church, then is the wearing of a proper miniſteriall garment; Then wee demand why grave, learned and Godly Preachers, whom the King him ſelfe confeſſeth to love and to honor, have bene put to the worſe, commanded to ſilence, ſuſpended & excommunicated for the not wearing of ſuch a Miniſteriall garment, when as notwithſtanding light, laſcivious, and vnlearned Miniſters no-preachers, (if ſo be they have worne a proper miniſteriall garment) have bene ſuffered quietly to enioy their functions, and their benefices?
            
               But all Preachers were never ſilenced, only certaine Preachers not
               Biſhops. 
               ſubmitting them ſelves to the wearing of a ministeriall garment according to the orders and lawes of the Church are displaced.
            
            Well bee it ſo? what other thing doeth this argue, but that the notGentl. wearing of a miniſterall garment, is reputed to bee a ſinne more haynous then is the not preaching of the word?
            
               But there are a multitude of Ministers who be not able to preach
               Biſhops. 
               the worde; whereas there is not one preacher but he is able to put on a ministeriall garment:
            
            What then? did ever any Preacher (we praye you) when hee wasGentl. made a Miniſter, bind him ſelfe by a ſolemne vowe to weare a miniſteriall garment? No. And did not every Miniſter when he was made a Miniſter, binde him ſelfe by a ſolemne vowe to preache the worde? Yea: And how then cometh it to paſſe, (vnleſſe the wearing of a miniſteriall garment, bee reputed more precious then is the preaching of the Worde) that the not wearing of the one by a Preacher, and the not preaching of the other by a Miniſter, ſhould bee offences, in degree of peyne vnmatchable? eſpecially when as the not preaching is a breache of the ordinance of God, and the not wearing of a Miniſteriall garment, but a tranſgreſſion of the lawe of man?
            When any huſbandman ſhall have ſowen cleane and pure wheate in his field, if the envious man ſhall ſowe tares, in this caſe, if the huſbandman plucke vp the wheate, and let the tares growe, would you commend his huſbandrie?
            
               But your Lordſhips will ſow the fieldes with purer Wheate, and provide
               
                  
                     •
                  iſhops. 
               men of ſofter Spirits, leſſe Novelous, better affected to the ſtate,

and of more diſcretion and maturitie of iudgement.
            
            Indeed if it may pleaſe your Lordſhips, this is ſoone ſaide; but byGentl. your leaves, the thing is not ſo ſone done; yea and beſides we demand what good ſecuritie your Lordſhips can give vnto the King and State in this caſe?
            For in a matter of ſo great danger, as is the perill of the ſoules of the Kinges ſubiectes, it were no good ſaftie (in our opinion,) to truſt your bare wordes for the time to come; when as in time paſt vpon pretence of the wante of able & preaching Miniſters, ye have thought it fitt, rather then to have none at all, to reteyne a number of vnpreaching miniſters, knowne to bee no better then idle beaſtes and flow bellies.
            And if your Lordſhips already have ſuch a ſufficient number of learned, ſober, wiſe and ſofte ſpirited Preachers, to bee diſpoſed vpon vacant benefices at your commaunde, as that you bee able to furniſhe the Churches of all thoſe miniſters, whom you intend to deprive, for not conformitie vpon an inſtant: wee praye your Lordſhippes to reſolve the Kinge what charitie you have carryed towarde his people in time paſt, when you have collated (for a great parte) the benifices of your owne giftes, either vpon no Preachers, or at leaſtwiſe vpon ſtrawberie preachers; but if your Lordſhippes intende hereafter to ſende foorth Preachers, that ſhall yeeld beryes, not once in the yeare onely, but at the leaſt ſtrawe once every moneth; then wee demande? what thankes you would con̄ your Stewardes, in caſe they ſhould provide no better Cookes for the dreſſing of your dyners, then ſuch onely, as vnder one whole monethes ſpace, could not diſpatch the roaſting of an egge, or frying of a ſmelt?
            If your Lordſhips thinke that the preaching Miniſters, not yealding to the Chriſtian Magiſtrates authoritie, in the not vſing of this miniſteriall (falſly by you ſo called indifferent) apparell, by ſuch their diſobedience, may bee an example vnto the people, of like diſobedience in other matters: Then wee demande, whether your Lordſhippes carry not a teſtimonie in your owne conſciences, that their abſtayning from the vſe of Miniſteriall apparrell, proceede not rather from an honeſt and good hearte, to the obedience of GOD, then of any evill affection conceyved againſt the

authoritie of the Magiſtrate? for before the Kingdome of England was lawfully inveſted in the Royal perſon of our Soveraine Lord King IAMES, did not ſundry of them abide many ſharpe reproches and bitter tauntes, for their Scotizing, and defending the ſingle forme of church policie, vpheld by the Kings authoritie in the Realme of Scotland? yea and doe not the ſame Miniſters now at this day hartily and devoutly pray, for the life and proſperitie of the King, the Queene, the noble yong Prince, and all other the Kings Royall progenie? yea and excepting this one point of their not conformitie vnto the ceremonies (wherein they alleadge for them ſelves, the conſcience of the vnlawfulnes and inconvenience of the ſaid ceremonies) are they not knowne to be men worthy to be reſpected as the Miniſters of Chriſt? men of good reputation for learning? of honeſt converſation? and peaceable among their neighbours? and men very obedient (this one thing excepted) to all authoritie? by whoſe good doctrine alſo, and example of life, the Magiſtrates in every Countie have found it more eaſie to continew the common people in the dewties of their ſubiection, and loyaltie to the ſupreme power?
            Nay, which is more at this very inſtant, doe not they extraordinarily declare and teſtifie their love, their loyaltie and their fidelitie vnto the King, when by their loanes they ſupply the Kings want, though in the meane time they them ſelves want, and be driven to borrow to ſupply their owne neceſſities? if then in theſe great and waightie things, appertaining to the dignitie of the Kings Crowne, they carefully and holily approve thē ſelves to be both teachers & followers of the Apoſtles doctrine, would they not aſwell (trow you) by the wearing of a miniſteriall garment, ſubiect their neckes to the Kings authoritie, if by a greater band of faith & obedience to the moſt high and mightie God, they were not drawne to the not wearing thereof?
            Touching the reaſon yealded by ſome, that miniſteriall apparell, is to diſtinguiſh the miniſter from other men: it ſeemeth vnto vs to be a reaſon altogether without reaſon: for albeit the outward forme of a Miniſters ordinary apparell may lawfully and expediently differ from the outward faſhion of apparell common to other men, and ſo the Miniſters perſon by his apparell may be knowne vnto all ſuch as know him not by face: Nevertheleſſe it is void of all ſenſe, that his miniſteriall apparell, in the publike ſervice of that Church, whereof he is a Miniſter, ſhould bee an inſeparable note, to diſtinguiſh his perſon,

from the perſons of every of his people: For ſithence by name, by face, by office, by place, by voice, yea by ordinary apparrell alſo, every miniſter is, or ought to be known vnto his people, what a kind of foundneſſe is it, to imagine that a miniſter can better be knowne by wearing of a miniſteriall garment, then by the dewe execution of his miniſteriall function.
            Concerning the reaſon of decencie and comlines vrged by ſome, for the vſe of a white miniſteriall garment, in the miniſterie of the Goſpell, becauſe the ſame cometh more aptly to bee diſcuſſed in the queſtion following, we will not trouble your Lordſhips at this time with any other matter, about the two firſt demandes: And therefore we will proceede to the thirde; which for your Lordſhips better remembrance, we hold it not amiſſe to repeate againe.
            If it bee lawfull for a ſoveraine Magiſtrate, by authoritie of holy writt, to ordeine and appropriate a miniſteriall garment, for the miniſters of the Goſpell, then we demand, whether by authoritie of holy Writt, he may ordayne and appropriate ſuch a miniſteriall garment▪ as in matter, forme and ſpecie differeth not from that miniſteriall garment, which by the high Prieſt & chiefe Prince of idolatry, hath bene, and ſtill is ordeyned and appropriated to be a neceſſary prieſtly garment, for his idolatrous Prieſts, in their idoll ſervice?
            And to the end your Lordſhips may perceave our demands to bee made cōſcionably & not humorouſly, or novelouſly, we have thought neceſſary to lay downe and annex certaine principles or canons out of holy Writ, whervpon our Demands and reaſons are grounded, which grounds and reaſons alſo, we extend againſt croſſing in Baptiſme, and Kneeling in the acte of receving the Communion.
            
               
                  
                     
                        The first ground.
                        
                           The graven images of their Gods, ſhall ye burne with fire, and covet
                           Deut. 7. 25. 
                           not the ſilver and gold that is on them, nor take it to thee, leaſt thou be ſnared therewith, for it is an abhomination.
                        
                        
                           Bring not therefore abhomination into thine houſe, least thou bee accurſed
                           Deut, 7. 26. 
                           like it, but vtterly abhorre it, and counte it most abhominable, for it is accurſed.
                        
                        
                           There ſhall cleave nothing of the damned thing to thine hands; All
                           Deut. 13. 17 Iſa. 44. 9. 
                           they that make any image are vanitie, and their delectable things ſhall nothing profite.
                        
                        
                           
                           And ſhall polute the covering of the images of ſilver, and the riche
                           Eſa. 30. 22. 
                           ornaments of gold, and cast them away, as a menstruous cloth, and thou ſhalt ſay vnto it, get thee hence.
                        
                        Neither be ye idolaters, as ſome of them were.1 Cor. 10. 7 
                                 •
                               Iohn. 5. 2
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        Babes keepe your ſelves from idoles.
                     
                  
               
            
            From theſe grounds of the Law, the Prophets, and the Goſpell, wee demand whether your Lordſhips againſt theſe, can oppoſe any other rules of holy Writt, to prove that any Chriſtian Magiſtrate, Chriſtian Miniſter, or Chriſtian people may be blameleſſe and without fault, in foro conſcientiae, if in the publike and outward worſhip of God, either he ſhall command, or they ſhall vſe, any the relickes, monuments or memorialls, any the delectable, vaine, and vnprofitable things, ſome times, or now apperteyning to the idolatrous ſacrifice of that great and knowne idole, the Popiſh Maſſe.
            For if every commandement of the firſt Table of the Law, be a way, and bee a path out of the which no Chriſtian ought to turne a ſide, either to the right hand, or to the left; but in the which every Chriſtian is bound aſwell in the time of the Goſpell, as every Iſraelite was bound in the time of the Lawe to walke; then not onely that great Idoll of the Popiſh Maſſe it ſelfe, ſett vp and worſhipped in the time of the Goſpell; but then alſo, all relickes, monuments, memorialls and delectable things with their acceſſaries, appendices, and appurtinances, as a menſtrous cloth, ought to be caſt away, and to bee bidden get ye hence; eſpecially we ſay in the publike ſervice and worſhip of the true God.
            For by how much more, the glorie of the Sonne, who ſpake from heaven, doeth farre excell the honour of a ſervant, which ſpake on earth, by ſo much the more ought that Idoll & that Idolatrie, which is ſet vp and committed in the time of the Goſpell, be eſteemed more vile and deteſtable, then was that Idoll and that Idolatrie ſet vp and committed in the time of the law.
            The reaſons of the prohibition of coveting, and of taking any the images, their coverings, their ornaments▪ their golde and their ſilver, vnder the Law were in number foure: Namely:
            
               First they were an abhomination to the Lord.
            
            
               Then: A feare of the peoples being ſnared.
            
            
               Thirdly, a threat of being accurſed:
            
            
               And lastly, for that they were vaine, and could nothing profite.
            
            
               If then that great Idoll of the Popiſh Maſſe, with all the Copes, Veſtiments, Surplices, Croſſes, Kneelings, Candles and other memorialls and delectable things, invented for the adorning and pompe thereof, be abhominable and accurſed in the ſight of God, bee alſo vaine and can nothing profit men: If alſo the Magiſtrate, the Miniſters and people beleeving the Goſpel, may be ſnared, and ſhalbe accurſed after the maner of the Iſraelites, if ſo be without warrant from holy Writt, they ſhall vſe theſe things in the worſhip of God; we demand, whether from the doctrine of the Law, the Prophets, and the Goſpell, we may not conclude thus:
            
               With whatſoever things, either Magistrate, Minister, or people may be ſnared, and for the vſe of whatſoever things they may be accurſed, thoſe things may not lawfully be commanded or vſed in the publike worſhip of God.
            
            
               But aſwell the Magistrate as the Ministers and people may then be ſnared, and ſhalbe accurſed with, and for the command and vſe of Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. when in the publike worſhip of God, they be commanded and vſed without warrant of his word:
            
            
               Therefore Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. may not be commanded nor vſed in the publike worſhip of God, without warrant of his word.
            
            If your Lordſhips denie the aſſumpt; and anſwere, that Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. commanded and vſed for the adorning, and bewtifying of that great Idoll the Maſſe, bee in their owne nature thinges indifferent, and none other otherwiſe can be accurſed or be a ſnare to any Chriſtian Magiſtrate, Miniſter or people, then as they bee imployed to the vſe and ſervice of that Idoll; and in this regarde, their free and liberall vſe is no more now forbidden, then is the eating of meates ſacrificed vnto Idolls, and that therefore all feare of being ſnared and accurſed, doeth ceaſe, becauſe wee have free libertie by the word for the eating of meates ſacrificed vnto Idolls; then herevnto wee replie, that your anſwere is very vnſufficient and vncertaine, and without any ſtrength of reaſon, drawne from holie Writt.
            For though wee grant that nothing is vncleane of it ſelfe, and that we ought not to accompt that polluted, which God hath purified:

nevertheleſſe we pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs by holy Writt, that God hath by his worde aſwell purified Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. for the outward vſe of his publike worſhip, as by his word hee hath purified meates ſacrificed vnto idols, for the private vſe of mans life.
            When Peter had faſtened his eyes vpon the ſheete, let downe fromAct. 11. heaven by the foure corners, he cōſidered and ſaw foure footed beaſts of the earth, and wilde beaſts, and creeping things, and foules of the heaven, which were all the good creatures of God, and which alſo in the beginning were created for the foode of man: only for a time while Iſraell was vnder the Schoolmaiſterſhip of the Lawe, certayne of theſe creatures were forbidden to be eaten, not becauſe they were in their owne nature evill, or vncleane, but only becauſe they were made vncleane for a time, by prohibition: And therefore when the fulneſſe of time was come, and that Chriſt the ende of the Lawe, was ryſen from the dead, the law of not eating meates forbidden ceaſed: And by letting downe the ſheete, and commandement given to Peter, to ſlay and to eate, Peter was aſſured that all thoſe meates were reſtored to their primarie vſe, integritie, and puritie. And therefore theſe creatures being in their owne originall nature good; and in the beginning ſanctified by the Lord, to the vſe of mans life, howſoever the idolaters prophanely & abuſively did ſacrifice them vnto their idoles, yet could thoſe idoles never ſo pullute them by their abuſe, as that they might vtterly take away the good and profitable vſe, for the which they were firſt created.
            But that Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, Candles, and other memorialls and delectable things, authoriſed by that man of ſinne, for the pompous ſervice of his great idoll, the Maſſe, bee of the nature of meates, or of the nature of gold and ſilver, (howſoever ſacrificed vnto idolls) we deny.
            For firſt: meates, gold and ſilver in their owne nature, were by creation (as earſt was ſaide) good, and to the ende wherevnto they were created ever bleſſed of God, and never accurſed; whereas on the other ſide, no reliques, monuments, or memorials of any idolatrie, were ever bleſſed, but ever accurſed.
            Secondly, they were never in their firſt originall good or profitable, no not for that vſe wherevpon they were imployed: for as the Idole it ſelfe, is vayne, vnprofitable, polluted and abhominable, yea nothing in reſpect of that thing which it repreſenteth, even ſo alſo bee all the acceſſories

and appurtenances thereof, damned and execrable.
            Thirdly, theſe reliques, monumentes and memorialls of Idolatrie, being not the workes of God, created in the beginning for the vſe of man, but the workes of mens handes, applied to the ſervice of an Idol, are not by the prohibition of God, vncleane, and polluted only for a tyme, as certeyne meates were, but are evermore by a perpetuall decree, things damned and accurſed for the vſe of any ſervice vnto God: And therefore howſoever (as meates are vſually ſolde in the ſhambles) they may be ſold in a ſpinſters, or in an Embrotherers ſhopp, and may be vſed by man, to ſome benefite of this life: yet that they may be tranſlated from the ſervice of an Idol, to the worſhip of the trew God, without warrant of being ſanctified to that vſe, by the worde of God, or that the Miniſters and people profeſſing the goſpell, may as intyrely & freely vſe and receive them in the outward worſhip of the trewe God, as the popiſh prieſtes and people did in the ſervice of their great Idoll the Maſſe; we deny: And whether you be able to prooue the contrarie out of holy Writ, we demaund your reſolutions?
            And thus much for confirmation of the aſſumption of our former requeſt: it followeth that we demaund, whether your Lordſhips by anie rule out of holy Writ, be able to repugne theſe concluſions following.
            Firſt.
            
               All Idolls with all their ornamentes, and all their appurtenances, by the doctrine of holy Scriptures, as a menstruous cloth, are to be cast away and to be bidden get you hence:
            
            
               But the Popiſh Maſſe is an Idoll, and all the Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, Candles, &c. have bene, and yet be, ornamentes and appurtenances vnto that Idole of the popiſh Maſſe:
            
            
               Therefore the popiſh Maſſe, and all Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, Candles, &c. as a menstruous cloth are to be cast away, and to be bidden gett you hence.
            
            Secōdly.
            
               Whatſoever hath bene first invented by man, and afterward appropried by authoritie of the great whore, to be a note, token, badge or enſigne vnto all her lovers, in the acte of her fornication, the ſame ought not to be any note, token, badge, or enſigne vnto the spouſe of Christ, or any her lovers, in the acte of the outward worſhip of the true God.
            
            
               But all Copes, Surplices, Croſſings have bene firſt invēted by man, & appropried by authoritie of the great whore, to be notes, tokens,

badges, and enſignes vnto all her lovers in the acte of her fornication:
            
            
               Therefore no Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. ought to be any badge, token or enſigne, to the Spouſe of Christ, or any her lovers, in the acte of the worſhip of the true God.
            
            If your Lordſhips deny the truth of the firſt propoſitiō of the firſt argument to be proved by thoſe places before quoted out of the law, the Prophetes and Apoſtles, then we pray your Lordſhips to yeeld vs ſome reaſon, from other places of holy Writt, for the confirmation of ſuch your negation? For vnto vs the letter of the ſcriptures, ſeeme to be very direct & plaine to the purpoſe, for the which we have alleadged them:
            If your Lordſhips deny the conſequence of the firſt propoſition, of the ſecond argument, and affirme that the ſpouſe of Chriſt, and her lovers may lawfully weare in the outward acte of the worſhip of the true God, the notes, tokens, badges and enſignes, commanded by the great whore to be worne in the acte of her fornication; then we demand, by what places of holy Writ your Lordſhips be able to prove this your affirmation? in the meane time give vs leave, according to the meaſure of our skill, to diſcharge the aſſum
                  •
               t: of the firſt argument, from ſuch error, as happily at the firſt view may ſeeme in your opinions, to bee conteyned therein.
            If then your Lordſhips ſhall challenge the aſſumpt: of the firſt argument, either of particularitie, or ambiguitie of the wordes (Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c.) for that all Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. have not bene, 
                  •
               e now be ornamentes, and appurtenances vnto that great Idoll of the Maſſe, becauſe ſome Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. be ornamentes and ſolemnites for the adminiſtration of Baptiſme, celebration of the Lords Supper, and other divine ſervices; then for the adnulling aſwell of your Lordſhips diſtinction, as for the overthrow of all, both new and ould Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. to be vſed by the Spouſe, and her lovers, in the acte of the worſhip of the true God, wee propound vnto your Lordſhips theſe groundes of holy Writt following, wherevnto alſo we demaund your reſolutions?
            
               Beware least thou be taken in a ſnare after them after that they bee
               Deu. 12. 30 31 
               deſtroyed before thee, & leaſt thou aske after their gods, ſaying, how did theſe nations ſerve their gods, that I may do ſo likewiſe, thou ſhalt not do ſo vnto the Lord thy God.
            
            
               
               Ye are the children of the Lord your God, you ſhall not cut your ſelves
               Deu. 14. 
                     •
                  . 2 
               nor make you any baldnes betweene your eyes for the dead: for thou art an holy people, vnto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath choſen thee to be a precious people vnto him ſelfe, above all the people that are vpon the earth.
            
            
               What fellowſhip hath righteouſnes with vnrighteouſnes? what communion
               1. Cor. 6. 14 15. 16 
               hath light with darknes? what concord hath Christ with Beliall, or what parte hath the beleever with the infidell? and what agreement hath the temple of God, with Idolls?
            
            
               Come I will ſhewe thee the damnation of the great whore, that fitteth
               Rev. 17 1. 2 
               vpon many Waters; with whom have committed fornication the Kings of the earth, and the inhabitants of the earth are drunken with the wine of her fornication.
            
            
               And I ſawe ſeates, and I ſawe the ſoules of them that were dead for
               Revel. 20. 4 
               the witnes of Ieſus, and for the word of God, and which did not worſhip the beast, neither his image, neither had taken his marke vpon their forheads, or on their handes.
            
            From theſe grounds of holy Writ, taken out of the law, we demand,Deut. 12. 30. 31. whether the worſhip of every Idoll, and falſe god, or not, rather every ſuperſtitious, and falſe worſhip of the true God bee forbidden? And whether this ſuperſtitious and falſe worſhip of the trew God, bee not intended to be that maner, forme and faſhion of worſhip, both wholy and in parte, which the Gentiles vſed in the worſhip of their Idolles?
            For there being a commaundement given before vnto the children of Iſraell, for the burning of the Images, and of the vtter deſtruction of all the Idolles of the Cananites: it is by theſe Scriptures commaunded (after theſe Idoles were deſtroyed, and the Images burnt) that the children of Iſraell ſhould not ſo much as once hearken after, or inquire; how thoſe nations ſerved their gods, leaſt they ſhould be taken in a ſnare, to doe ſo, and likewiſe vnto the Lord their God, as the nations did vnto their Idoles:
            And thus much alſo doth that argument, drawen from the doctrine of the goſpell enforce, of not having felowſhip, concord, parte, or agreement with beliall; or with an Idoll: of the not taking of the marke of the beaſt in their handes, or in their foreheads; And therefore we again demand, whether the Church (falſly ſo called) of Rome, be not this great whore, with whom the kings of the earth have cōmitted fornication? And whether ſhee alſo be not from the earth, and of this

world? Whether the beautie of this great whore ſtand not in outwarde pompe of apparell, and outward ſhewes, after the manner of a ſtrumpett?
            Whether this outward pompe of apparell and ſhewes of impudency conſiſt not partly in Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, and ſuch like traſhe? And whether theſe Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. be not deſigned by that whore, to be the proper and peculiar cognizances, tokens, badges and enſignes of her lovers, cōmitting fornication with her great Idoll the breaden God?
            If your Lordſhips can iuſtly deny our demaunds, in the affirmative to be true: we then agayne demaund; If the bryde of the lambe, being a pure virgine, ſhall at any tyme be apparelled, in the acte of the ſervice of her beloved, like to the minnions wayting vppon the great Whore, in the acte of her fornications: wee demaunde (wee ſaye) whether the Bryde (in this caſe) can be precious and amiable in the eyes of the Bridegrome? can be ſaid to have no concord with beliall? no parte with an infidell? no agreement with an Idoll? can bee ſaide, not to take vpon her hande, vpon her forehead, or vpon her backe, the marke of the beaſt? Can be ſayd, not to doe ſo, and lykwiſe to the brydgrome, as the mynions of the whore, doe to their Idole? or not to doe ſo, and lykewiſe, to God, as the papiſts doe to the devill?
            Nay, if the Church of England herſelf alone; bee not the bryde, but one of the maydes of the Bride, and if alſo ſhee profeſſe hir ſelf, to be the firſt of the three, rather then the laſt, of the the thirty worthyes and honorable Virgins; we demand what holy reaſon ſhould move this maide of England, ſtill to faſhion her Necklaces, her Bracelets, hir Frontlets, hir Cheynes, hir Iewels, hir lynen Apornes, hir gaudie Kirtles, like to thoſe which the moſt famous ſtrumpett, that ever was, (for pompous oſtentation and braverie) daily vſeth and putteth on, eſpecially ſithence all hir other fellow maides, in other Countries attending vpon the Bride with moſt ſolemne vowes and obteſtations, and with a moſt holy diſdayne and indignation have abandoned and caſt away, as a menſtruous cloth, what attire ſoever hath bene, or yet is proper, to the minions of that great Whore?
            If your Lordſhips anſwere that the Maide of Englande, being perfectly inſtructed from the Bridegroms voice, (that no Cope, Surplice or Croſſe is vncleane of it ſelfe,) may command hir Damſels, to attyre and faſhion their liveries, colours and badges, like to thoſe which the

minions & louers of the great whore, cōmonly deck them ſelves withall: if ſo be hir commandement tend not, that hir Damſells ſhould be defiled or bee druncken with the Wine of the fornication of the great whore, but only that they ſhould be humbled at the feete of the Chriſtian Magiſtrate, whom the Bridgrome hath armed with power, to be a protector and a nurſing father of all the liberties and franchiſes of the Bride, and of hir Maides: if your Lordſhips (we ſay) to diſchardge the Maide of England, in foro conſcientiae, ſhall anſwere thus and thus: then becauſe the Chriſtian Magiſtrate is him ſelfe not the Bridgrome; but one of the children of the Bride chamber, & a friend of the Bridegromes; and for this cauſe, & in this reſpect, can not rightly command the Maide of Englande to be appareled otherwiſe in the ſervice of the Bridegrome, then as the Bridegrome hath lycenſed the Magiſtrate to command; wee then demand, by what rule of holy Writt, your Lordſhips can prove, that the Chriſtian Magiſtrate hath commiſſion from the Bridegrome, to command the Maide of England at all ſeaſons, and in all the courts of his aboade, to waite and to attend, to preſent, and to put vp hir requeſts, hir prayers, and hir ſervices, in ſuch ſuite and change of rayment, as is common with that of the minions of the great whore?
            For vnleſſe the Chriſtian Magiſtrate be armed with power from the Bridegrome, to chardge the maide of England to be thus attired, your Lordſhips can not be ignorant, but that aſwell the nurſing Father in commanding, as the nurſe Child in obeying, ſhall ſinne againſt the Bridgrome.
            For howſoever it may bee lawfull for the Chriſtian Magiſtrate to command or forbidde the vſe, or not vſe of every kinde of creature, which in it owne nature, by vertue of creation, is good, and therefore only called indifferent, becauſe indifferently at the moderate pleaſure of every man, the ſame with prayer and thankſgiving, may be vſed, or refuſed, for the vſe of this life without offence to God; nevertheles we greatly ſtand in doubt, whether the Chriſtian Magiſtrates authoritie reach ſo farr as to command that the worke of mans hands be vſed in the outward worſhip of the true God, which for the pollution and prophanation thereof in the ſervice of an Idoll, is become for the ſervice of the true God, abhominable and damned.
            Nay; if Hezekiah King of Iudah, be commended in holy Writt, for2 Ki. 1
                     •
                  . 3. 4 doing vprightly in the ſight of the Lord, when he brake in pieces the

braſen Serpēt, & called it a piece of braſſe, when the children of Iſraell, by burning incenſe to it, abuſed it to Idolatrie, notwitſtanding the ſame were firſt ſet vp by Moyſes, at the commandement of God: How much more ought Chriſtian Magiſtrates to deſtroy and to breake in pieces all maner workes of mens handes, never commanded in holy writt, either for the ſervice of God, or for the profite of his people?
            
               But Hezekiah might have done well and vprightly alſo, if ſo be he
               Biſhops. 
               had ſtill reſerved the Serpent, as a memoriall of the miracles wrought by the looking vpon it, though for the abuſe of burning incenſe before it, he had not broken the ſame in pieces.
            
            But wee beſeech your Lordſhips to informe vs rightly out of holyGentl. Writt, whether this your anſwere in the ſight of the Lord, be vpright, yea or no?
            Firſt, after the peoples heartes were once turned aſide, by burning incenſe to the Serpent, it was not in the power of Hezekiah to knowe, whether the peoples hearts would have bene againe vpright in the memoriall of the miracles, yea or no? And as for the reſtitution of the Serpent, to that integritie of doing miracles, after the peoples departure out of the wilderneſſe, when they were no more ſtunge by Serpents, that to doe, was much leſſe in the power of Hezekiah: Beſides, becauſe by the doctrine of holy Writt, we be taught, not only that the forbidding of one thing, includeth a commandement of the contrary, and that the commandement of one thing inforceth a forbidding of the contrary; but alſo that aſwell the omiſſion of a dewtie required, as the commiſſion of a thing prohibited, is an offence to God: We pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs out of holy writ; whether the holy Ghoſt, commending the vprightnes of Hezekiah, aſwel for breaking to pieces the2. K
                     •
                  . 18. 4. braſen Serpent, as in taking away the high places, and breaking the Images and cutting down the groves, doe not inſtruct vs that he was to have bene diſcommended, in caſe he had let the Serpent ſtood vnbroken down, though he had cut downe the Groves, broken the Images, and taken away the high places?
            For in our iudgments by the doctrine aforeſaid, founded vpon holy Writt, the breaking of the Serpent, being reckoned as a part of his vprightnes, and for the which he is commended, the not breaking thereof, muſt needes have bene as an vnvpright and as diſcommendable a thing, as the not cutting downe of the Groves, the not breaking the Images, and the not taking away the High places.
            
               
               But ſuch Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c. as heretofore have bene worne,
               Bb. 
               and vſed at, & for Idols ſervice, are not eadem numero with ours: For all the old Popiſh Copes, Surplices, &c. be long ſince out of date, and we will have all ſpicke and ſpan new.
            
            Yea be it ſo, yet if the faſhion and workmanſhip of their old, be theGentl. true paterns of our new, how ſhall not ours be like vnto theirs? King Ahaz though hee ſent not the very ſame Altar which hee ſaw at Damaſcus,
               2. Ki. 10. 10 but the paterne and the faſhion of it, and all the workemanſhippe thereof to Vriah the Prieſt, yet doeth the holy Storie witneſſe, that hee treſpaſſed, and did evill, and commendeth Hezekiah, that2. Ki. 29. 5
                     •
                   15. 16. 17 in the firſt yeare and firſt moneth of his reigne, hee commanded the Levites to cary forth the filthineſſe out of the Temple, and all the vncleanenes that they found in the Temple of the Lorde, brought in by their Fathers.
            In the ſecond booke of the Kings, the holy Ghoſt teſtifying what2. Ki. 17. 15 evill Hoſhea the ſonne of Elah King of Iſraell & his Fathers had done, in the ſight of the Lord, ſheweth vs, that they followed vanitie, and became vaine, and followed the Heathen, that were round about them; concerning whom the Lord hath charged them, that they ſhould not doe like them. And againe that they walked according to the faſhion8. 11. of the Heathen; And againe that they burned incenſe in the High places as did the Heathen.
            And againe, that they would not obey, but hardened their neckes,12. 40. like to the neckes of their Fathers: and againe, that they obeyed not, but did after their old cuſtome? yea and the Lorde by the mouth of Abijah King of Iudah reproved Ieroboam to his face, not for that he had made Prieſts of other countries, but that he had made him Prieſts, like the people of other countries.
            
               But by your patience, Sirs, theſe caſes be not alike, For there was an
               Bb. 
               expreſſe commandement in the Law, that there ſhould be but one Altar, the paterne alſo whereof, was given to Moyſes in the holy Mount, whereas we be not expreſly forbidden in the Gospell to weare Copes, Surplices, or to make Croſſes.
            
            But by your Lordſhips favour (ſay we) the caſes (notwithſtanding thisGentl. your exception) be a like: for the Bride (ſay we) of the Lambe; by the doctrine of the Goſpell, is aſwell expreſly taught and bound as the Iſraelites were, to obſerve and keepe the ſecond commandment of the Law; yea ſhee is commanded not to faſhion hir ſelf like to this world;

not to weare the liverye of the great whore: not to marke hir ſelfe in the hand or in the forehead, with the marke of the Beaſt: not to have any fellowſhip, concord, part or agreement with Beliall, with an infidell, or with an Idoll.
            If then the great whore doe ſtill raigne, though not over vs; if the beaſt doe ſtill rage, though his hornes puſh not at vs; if Beliall be ſtill worſhipped, though not by vs: And if alſo this Beliall, and this Beaſt, vaunt him ſelfe, and this great Whore glory and decke hir ſelfe in, and with this kind of apparelling, and this maner of Croſſing, we humbly pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs out of holy Writ, whether amōg our Prieſts, whoſoever ſhall come to praye, to preach, or to adminiſter the Sacraments, with a Cope, with a Surplice, with a Taper, with a Croſſe, or with a ſhaven Crowne, like to the Copes, Surplices, Tapers, Croſſes and ſhaven Crownes, of thoſe Prieſtes which are Prieſtes to them which are no gods, whether ſuch our Prieſtes (wee ſaye) borrowing this attyre from the great whore, and vſing the ſame in the ſervice of the true God; doe not follow vanitie and become vaine, and follow the Popiſh Idolaters about vs, concerning whom, the Lord hath forbidden we ſhould not doe like them, neither walke according to their faſhion, and after their old cuſtome, niether to have any part, fellowſhip, communion, concord, or agreement with them?
            
               What Sirs? would you then have vs, to have no manner of agreement,
               Biſhops. 
               concord, or communion, with the Papistes with the Beast, or with the great whore? what, no thing at all? why then Sirs, you would belike have vs pull downe our Churches, our Oratories and our Chappells?
            
            Though our deſire be to keepe our ſelves from all the defilementsGentl. and pollutions of that Romiſh ſtrumpett, yet doe wee diſlike the pullinge downe of Churches, &c. For we knowe and are fully perſwaded, by rules of holy Writt, that wee may lawfullie vſe, not onlie Churches, Oratories and Chappells: but alſo that we may have ſeates in Churches; Pulpits in Churches; Fonts in Churches; Tables together with faire lynen table clothes, to cover theſe Tables in Churches; Bells, and Ropes for Bells▪ in Churches; yea and beſides that, Reading, Praying, Preaching, adminiſtring of Sacraments, Singing, yea and Ringing too: are thinges which lawfully may bee performed by vs in Churches, becauſe all theſe and every of theſe thinges being of ſome holy, naturall, neceſſarie, profitable, comely or good, orderly vſe

for the people, in, for, and toward the ſervice of God, by ſome generall rule of holy Writt, be approved, and therefore by the ſame commanded, and ſanctified for our vſe.
            But as for Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, Candles at noone dayes, and ſuch like ſuperſtitious ornaments, rites and ceremonies, becauſe there is neither holynes, neither nature, neither neceſſitie, neither vtilitie, neither decencie, neither any good order that require the ſame; Nay, becauſe what ſoever good order, decencie, vtilitie, neceſſitie, nature, or holines can require, may without thoſe ornaments, rites, and ceremonies, be fully accompliſhed; we affirme that they ought as a menſtruous cloth be caſt away, and to be bidden, get ye hence.
            
               Why, Sirs? do you approve of a white lynen table-cloth to cover the
               Biſhops. 
               communion table, and do you diſallow a white lynen Surplice? What? is it not as comely a thing, and as good an order, we pray you, for the Minister at the communion table, to ſtand in a fyne, large, and cleane lynen Surplice, as it is a thing decent and orderly, for the communion table, to be overspread with a fine and cleane lynen table-cloth?
            
            Vntill your Lordſhips ſhall be able to prove vnto vs, either out ofGentl. holy Writt, or by ſome good reaſon, that it is, as vndecent a thing for your pages, to wayte and to attend vpon your trēchers and vpon your cuppes, without wearing whit lynen Surplices, as it is a ſlovenly manner, for any kinde of perſons to ſit downe, to eate, and to drinke, at the table, without having layd before them a whit lynen table-cloth, or napkin; we are bould to affirme, that there is great oddes, betweene the decent vſe of a white lynen table-cloth, for the communion table, and betweene the vſe of a white Surplice, for the back of a miniſter.
            Indeed, if it were as comely and as orderly a thing, for all ſortes of people, aſwell woemen, as men, to weare Surplices vpon their vpper garmentes, when they come to the Lords table, as it is a decent and orderly manner for all men and woemen, whenſoever they ſit downe to eate, and to drink, to have their tables covered, with fayre lynen table-clothes; we would not then much ſtand with your Lordſhips, that the wearing of a Surplice, by a Miniſter, at the communion table, might be as decent, and as orderly a thing, as is the covering of the communion table, with a fayre lynen table-cloth: but the firſt being a thinge vndecent, we denye the ſecond to be decent: And yet were the latter graunted to be decent, what advantage, we pray your Lordſhips, doth this argument of compariſon (from a white lynen table-cloth, to a

whit lynen Surplice) bring for the vſe of a ſilken, Embrodered, & yellow glittering Cope? Are the heartes of the Prieſtes in Cathedrall and Collegiat churches, ſo golden, as they muſt ſignifie their goldē hearts, by their golden garmentes?
            
               Hic tacuere phriges, auro ſua ſomnia caelant:
            
            
               Well, by your patience (Sirs) though wee have not much to ſaye for
               Bb. 
               maintenance and defence of our Copes, which are to be vſed onely in our Cathedrall and great churches, and not in your Parochiall churches, yet we pray you to carry a better estimation of the wearing of Surplices, by your Ministers, then you doe of the wearing of Surplices, by the popiſh Priests: Becauſe the fountayne from whence ours ſprange, and the end wherevnto ours tende and are applyed, bee much every way different from theirs.
            
            Why then give vs leave▪ by your Lordſhips favour, to demand whatGentl. were the fountaynes from whence, and what are the endes wherevnto both theirs and ours ſprang, and do tend? Your Lordſhips can not denye but as theirs were firſt worne, without any cōmandement of God, ſo be ours, and that therfore, as the wearing of theirs was but by deviſe and authoritie of man, ſo is ours: As theirs were commaunded for order, comelines and decencie, vnto the minions of the great whore, ſo be ours commended to be decent, comely and orderly garments, for the maydes of the bryde. As theirs were for a conformitie amonge the lovers of her that committed fornication, ſo bee ours for an vniformitie among the lovers of a pure and chaſt virgin: As theirs were forTreat: of ceremon: ſect. 3. notes and diſtinctions betweene the people and the prieſtes, ſo be ours held to be markes betweene the ſhepheardes and the ſheepe: As theirs might not be worne but vpon the vpper peltes of their prieſtes, ſo muſt not ours be vſed, but vpon the vpper garmentes of our miniſters: As their Prieſtes might not ſacrifice, nor make holy water without them, even ſo is it not lawfull for our Miniſters without them, to pray or to adminiſter the Sacramentes. As theirs were ſignificant, and yet notwithſtanding, were altogether idle, vayne, fruitleſſe, and without edification: ſo be ours mainteyned to bee neither darke nor dumme ceremonies, to ſerve as a decent order, and diſcipline, and ſuch as be apt to ſtirre vp the dull mynd of man, to the remembrance of his dutie to God, by ſome ſpeciall ſignification, whereby he might bee edified, to have reſpect how to pleaſe God and profit the church. Whereas nevertheleſſe they be in trueth without edificatiō, without profit, nay rather

hurtfull to the church, without pleaſing God, without vſe, idle, vayne, and needles; As theirs might not be vſed at any other time, or in any other place, but only in the place & at the time of their ſervice of their falſe god; ſo may not ours be vſed in any other place, or at any other time, but only at the time, and in the place of the worſhip of the true God.
            And laſtly, whoſoever amonge the Prieſtes, refuſed to weare their Surplices, were adiudged Sciſmatickes and to bee excommunicated; even ſo what ſoever miniſter, among our Miniſters, denieth to receive and to put on one of our Surplices, he is at the pleaſure of his ordinarie, for ſuch refuſall, to be ſuſpended, excommunicated, and deprived. In ſo much as there is not any one leaſt circumſtance to be found, wherein their, and our Surplices, differ in matter, forme, vſe, ende, or application.
            And thus much of our Demaundes, grounded vpon holy Writt, whether the Chriſtian Magiſtrate, may commaunde and appropriate a Miniſteriall garment for the Miniſters of the Goſpell, and eſpecially ſuch a Miniſteriall garment, as hath bene a prieſtly garment, for the Prieſtes of that great Idoll the Maſſe. Now it followeth that wee demaunde, vpon what rules of holy Writt the making of a Croſſe, and ſigning of the child in the forehead in the adminiſtration of Baptiſme is grounded; againſt which we propound theſe grounds of holie Writt.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Grounds out of holy writt againſt the vſe of the Croſſe in Baptiſme.
                        Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any graven Image.Exod. 20
                        
                        All they that make an Image are vanitie, & their delectable thingsIſa. 44. 9. nothing profite.
                        Every man is a beast by his owne knowledge.Ierem. 10▪ 14. 15. 17 Iſa. 29, 13
                        
                        This people have removed their hearte farr from me, and their feare toward me, was taught by the precept of man.
                        In vaine they worſhip mee, teaching for doctrines the precepts ofMath. 15. 8. men.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               From which grounds we demand:
            
            Whether your Lordſhips can prove out of holy Writt, that there can be a ſervice yealded vnto God, where God hath not given a commandement?
            Whether the more a man thinketh to doe any thinge by his owne wiſedome, and not as God inſtructeth him, the more he doe not prove him ſelfe to be a vile beaſt?
            Whether any thing can be acceptable in the ſight of God, which he never required at our handes?
            Whether God wilbe honored, according to mans fantaſie, or rather doth not deteſt, whatſoever is not grounded vpon his worde?
            If your Lordſhips for the avoyding of theſe demandes, ſhall deny the feigned making of a croſſe, and feigned ſigning of the childe in the forehead with a croſſe, in the adminiſtration of Baptiſme, to be any ſervice, or to be any worſhip vnto God, and therefore neither voluntarie ſervice, neither will-worſhip vnto God: then we demaunde for what intent, or to what end, the making of a Croſſe, and ſigninge the forehead of the childe with a croſſe, is commaunded as a neceſſarie ſervice, to be performed by the Miniſter, in that publique acte of Gods worſhip? for if the forme and manner of Gods worſhip (as you ſay) be eſtabliſhed, preſcribed, & conteyned in the booke of commonConſtitut. & ca. publiſhed 1604. com. 4. 10. prayer, if alſo the miniſtration of the Sacrament commaunded in that booke, be (as you ſay) no corrupt, ſuperſtitious, or vnlawfull worſhip, neither conteyning any thing in it that is repugnant to the ſcriptures: how ſhould not the making of a Croſſe, and ſigning of the childe in the forehead with a croſſe, but be a pure, a religious, & a lawfull worſhip vnto God? Beſides, if making a croſſe vpon the childes forehead, and ſigning the forehead of the childe with a croſſe, be no act of gods worſhip in the adminiſtration of Baptiſme; Then we demaund, how the Miniſter in foro cōſcientiae, can be guiltles of taking the holy name of God in vaine, when as in the act of Gods ſervice and worſhip, hee doth neither worſhip, nor ſerve God?
            
               But, Sirs, by your patience, the Minister in obeying the authoritie of
               Biſhops. 
               the Church, when ſhee commaundeth him, to make a Croſſe, herein obeyeth God.
            
            Why then, by your Lordſhips favour, wee demaund, whether theGentl. church doe ſerve God, or doe but pleaſe her ſelfe, in that her cōmandment?

For (ſay we) where no commaundement of God, there no ſervice vnto God: And therefore if the Church, by ſuch her commaundement, doe but pleaſe hir ſelfe; and not ſerve and pleaſe God. Then we demaund, whether the Church in thus pleaſing her ſelfe, and not ſerving 
                  •
               od, doe not offend God, aſmuch, nay rather more, then if ſhee had commaunded a voluntarie ſervice, and a will-worſhip vnto God?
            
               But, Sirs, the acte of making a Croſſe, and ſigning the childe in the
               Biſhops. 
               forehead with a croſſe, is no parte of baptiſme, for we graunt, that baptiſme is perfect and abſolute without it.
            
            But yet by your Lordſhips favour, the queſtion is not, whether makingGentl. of a croſſe, or ſigning with a croſſe, be any parte of baptiſme, but whether making of a croſſe, and ſigning with a croſſe, be any parte of the continued acte of the outward and divine worſhip given vnto God in the publick adminiſtration of baptiſme? For if it be a meere traditionall, and no divine or religious action▪ or if it be partly traditional, and partly divine, we ſtill vrge your Lordſhips to prove vnto vs, by the holy ſcriptures, whether it were ever lawfull in any act of Gods worſhip, to act a thing meerely traditionall, or partly traditionall, and partly divine.
            As for the action of ſitting, ſtanding, kneeling, going, reading, praying, preaching, and if there be any other Divine, naturall, or neceſſarie actions, powers or faculties of the body or minde, without which no outward ſervice can be yealded vnto God.
            We confeſſe, that the Church with the Magiſtrates conſent, may determine of the comely and orderly acting of theſe things: becauſe Aliquo per Deum mandato, omnia ea mandantur, ne quibus illud mandatum commodè & religiosè adimpleri non potest: And therefore thoſe divine, neceſſarie, and naturall actions before remembred, depending vpon, or proceeding from the powers and faculties of the bodie or mind, being ſuch as without which the outward ſervice of God can not▪ commodiouſly, decently, and orderly be accompliſhed, we affirme, that they be confirmed vnto vs from generall rules of holy writ.
            And this alſo may ſerve for an anſwere, for the having of water, & a veſſell to conteyne water; becauſe, as water of neceſſitie is required to the adminiſtration of baptiſme, ſo muſt alſo water (we having no waters running through our churches) of neceſſitie be cōteyned in ſome veſſell▪ but as for making a croſſe, or ſigning the forehead of the child with a croſſe in baptiſme, becauſe the ſame by your confeſſion, is no

part of Baptiſme; And becauſe alſo the ſame is not properly and ſimply any neceſſary, naturall or divine actiō, as without which Baptiſme can not be adminiſtred; Nay, becauſe it is ſuch an action, as without which Baptiſme very decently and orderly may be adminiſtred: wee pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs out of holy Writt, how the Miniſter may acte the ſigne in the outward acte of Gods worſhip: And yet not breake (as earſt hath bene ſaid) either the ſecond commandement, by outwardly ſerving God otherwiſe then hee hath commanded in his worde, or not violate the thirde commandement, by taking his holy Name in vaine?
            
               But by your patience, Sirs, this making a croſſe vpon the childes forehead,
               Biſhops. 
               and this ſigning him with a ſigne of the croſſe, in token, &c. though the ſame be no part of Baptiſme, nor any parte of the outward worſhip of God, nor any naturall, nor neceſſarie action of the body or mind, without which Baptiſme can not be administred, yet is the ſame a ſolemnitie, & an ornament apperteyning vnto Baptiſme, by the order of the church▪ which ought not to be omitted and left vndone.
            
            But by your Lordſhips favour, this your Apologie is of no freſherGentl. hue, nor of any deeper dye, then wherewith the great Papiſtes and fond Canoniſtes have alwayes bepainted and becouloured their ſigning, their ſalting, their ſpitteling, their oyling, their chriſmating, and their other ſuch like ſolemnities, according to theſe verſes:
            
               Sal, oleum, chriſma, cereus, chriſmate, ſaliua,
               Flatus, virtutem Baptiſmatis ista figurant;
               Haec cum patrinis, non mutant eſſe, ſed ornant.
            
            And therefore we pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs by ſome place of holy Writt, whether the Papiſts and you, or either of you, be inabled to invent, or ordeyne ſuch ſolemnities, ornaments, ſignes & figures of croſſes to be vſed in the publique adminiſtration of Baptiſme, as never once came in the mind of God to have deviſed or vſed? And ſo much the rather doe wee deſire your Lordſhips reſolutions herein, becauſe there is no maner of ſolemnitie, ſigne, figure or ornament of a croſſe, required by the book of cōmon prayer, to be vſed in that adminiſtration of Baptiſme, which in the ſame book, is intituled private Baptiſme.
            For if Baptiſme without any reall ſolemnitie, or actuall ornament of a croſſe, or of the ſigne of a croſſe, may bee adminiſtred privately, how much more without theſe humane ſolemnities and ornamentes might baptiſme be adminiſtred publiquelie?
            
               There being then in the Church of England, two formes & maners of the adminiſtration of Baptiſme, the one private, the other publike; the one with a croſſe, the other without a croſſe, and both of theſe concluded by your late Canons, not to be corrupt, ſuperſtitious, or vnlawfull, by meanes alſo whereof there is to be ſeene no cōformitie, or vniformitie betwene having ſolemnities & ornaments of croſſes, & ſignes of croſſes in publike baptiſme, & betwene the not having ſolemnities and ornaments of croſſes, and ſignes of croſſes in private baptiſme: we pray your Ll. to reſolve vs out of holy writ; whether theſe ornaments & ſolemnities of croſſes, & ſignes of croſſes, for the ſtability of publike peace & quiet in the church, & the not enforcing of any mans conſcience with the vſe of the croſſe, might not aſwell be left out in the adminiſtratiō of publike, as it is in the adminiſtratiō of private baptiſme?
            For whether reſpect be had to the brethren offended, or made weake by the vſe therof, or whether we regard the not cōfirming & ſtrenghtening of the ſuperſtitious in their error, there is farr much more danger like to enſue, both to the one ſorte & to the other, by the vſe of it, in publike, then in private Baptiſme, by reaſon that the aſſembly generally is evermore great in the one, and never but ſmall in the other.
            But to let paſſe this deformitie of croſſing & not croſſing, in publik & private baptiſme, we will proſecute ſome few demands, not yet moved, concerning the feigned imaginarie and ayrie croſſing, vſed in publike Baptiſme. And firſt, we pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs out of holy writ, how a Miniſter, in foro conſcientiae, can be cleare & without ſinne, when as in the ſame publike & continewed act of Gods worſhip, imaginarily & feignedly he ſhal affirme the doing of a thing, wch indeed & in trueth he doth not, ne poſſibly can do? if the Miniſter then without ſome inſtrumēt, chalk, rudle or ſuch like, can make no croſſe vpon the childs forehead, and yet ſhall ſay (as the booke preſcribeth) that he ſigneth him with the ſigne of the croſſe, what a groſſe fitten call ye that?
            To affirme that the paſſing of the Miniſters hand, thūme or finger, croſwiſe in the ayre over the childs forehead, is to make a croſſe vpon the childs forehead, & that the ſame paſſing in the ayre, is alſo the ſigne of a croſſe, this (we ſay) to affirme, is as if a man ſhould aſſevere, that the flying of a bird in the ayre, & the ſlyding of a ſerpent vpon a ſtone, leaveth a bird, and the ſigne of a bird in the ayre; a ſerpent, and the ſigne of a ſerpent, vpon a ſtone: And to ſay that there is an inviſible croſſe, or a ſigne of an inviſible ſigne of a croſſe, remaining in the ayre over

the childes forehead, how abſurd, and without all reaſon that ſaying is, we leave to your Lordſhips conſiderations.
            For if it be vnpoſſible to make a croſſe, or the ſigne of a croſſe, vpon the running water, much more vnpoſſible is it to make a croſſe, or the ſigne of a croſſe, in the ſubtile and repleniſhing ayre: wherefore vnleſſe your Lordſhips can prove by ſome rule of holy Writt, that every Miniſter is indowed with power from above, to make croſſes, and ſignes of croſſes, which be inviſible, and that theſe inviſible ſignes and croſſes be alſo inviſible tokens in the childes forehead, of his being not aſhamed of Chriſt crucified, of his manfull fighting, &c. we demand, what good plea in foro conſcientiae, your Lordſhips can frame to diſchardge the Miniſter from being guilty of a thrice feigned, imaginary & lying croſſe? we ſay, thrice faigned at the leaſt.
            Firſt, we receive and doe ſigne thee: ſecondly, with the ſigne; and thirdly, of the Croſſe. And what, if we ſaide fourthly, in token? for what token can the child, or his witneſſe, in his name receive & keepe, when as neither he, nor they, have any croſſe, any ſigne, or any token of a croſſe given or delivered vnto them at all? which maner of croſſing, ſigning and tokening, may well bee compared to our atturnies proceeding by ſignes and profers, ſignes and profers; when indeed by ſuch their pleadings they haſten not, but delay their clyents cauſes, only making ſignes and profers, ſignes and profers, as though by this meanes they haſtened to an end, when as indeed they mind nothing leſſe.
            But to ſpeake no more of the Miniſters feigned ſignes and profers of making croſſes & ſignes of croſſes in the ayre, vpon or over the childs forehead; Wee demand? whether not to be aſhamed to confeſſe the faith of Chriſt crucified; whether not to be aſhamed manfully to fight vnder his banner, againſt ſinne, the world and the divell; whether not to be aſhamed to continewe Chriſtes faithfull ſouldier and ſervant to his lifes end? We demand (we ſay) whether theſe three graces, be not all, & every of them, inward, inviſible and ſpirituall graces, yea or no?
            If your Lordſhips anſwere, (as the trueth is) that theſe graces be all ſpiritual, inviſible & inward graces, then becauſe by the book of common prayer (ſo the Miniſter make a croſſe) it is not materiall of what forme the croſſe be made: we demand, by what rules of holy writ, your Lordſhips can prove, that the ſigne of the croſſe of ſaint Iohns of Ieruſalem, the ſigne of ſaint Andrews croſſe, the ſigne of ſaint Peters croſſe,

the ſigne of the croſſe made after the Greeke T. or like the Hebrew χ. or like the Greeke X. or the ſigne of any other croſſe, (for there be divers other formes of croſſes) can be a token of theſe ſpirituall and inviſible graces, if ſo be they were engraven with a Diamond vpon the childes forehead.
            If your Lordſhips anſwere affirmatively, that the ſigne of ſaint Andrewes croſſe, of ſaint Iohns croſſe, of ſaint Peters croſſe, or the ſigne of any other croſſe, made by the Miniſter vpon the childes forehead, is a token of theſe inward, ſpiritual and inviſible graces; then we demand, whether your Lordſhips aſcribe not like power to every miniſter, for the trāſubſtantiation of every inviſible croſſe, feinedly made in the adminiſtration of Baptiſme, to the forme of a true & viſible croſſe, as the Pope attributeth to every Prieſte, for the tranſubſtantiation of every piece of bread, wherevpon he bloweth at the Altar, into the Body of Chriſt? or if your Lordſhips anſwere (becauſe there is no croſſe ſenſibly to be ſeene, but intelligiblie to be vnderſtood) that the imaginary feigned & ayrie croſſe is a token of theſe inviſible & ſpirituall graces; then againe we pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs out of holy Writt, whether God did ever ordeine any inviſible ſignes, to bee inviſible tokens, of inviſible graces, yea or no?
            And if God did never ordeine ſuch ſignes; then we demand, what authoritie man hath to ordeine ſuch ſignes?
            But if your Lordſhips ſhall anſwere negatively, viz: that the inviſible ſigne of the croſſe, imaginarily pretended to bee made by the Miniſter, is not a token of theſe inward and ſpirituall graces; then wee demande, whether your Lordſhips with your owne mouthes pronounce not that thing to be falſe, which the booke of common prayer commandeth every Miniſter, with his lips to proclaime to be true?
            
               But Sirs, by your leave, the Church hath power from Christ to ordeyne
               Bb. 
               rites and ceremonies, and the Magistrate may command that all things be done decently and according to order, in the time of prayer and administration of Sacraments.
            
            Yea, and ſo ſay we too: Nay wee ſay more, that the Chriſtian MagiſtrateGentl. knowing any thing to be done vndecently and vnorderly, ſhall ſinne againſt God, if by his authority, he take not order, for reformation of ſuch diſorder; but by your Lordſhips favour, the queſtion is not whether the Church may ordeine Rites and Ceremonies, or whether the Chriſtian Magiſtrate may command ſuch things, as by the Apoſtles

doctrine are to be done, that the ſame be done decently and orderly: but the queſtion is, whether all rites and ceremonies indefinitlie, and without limitation approved by the Church and commaunded by the Magiſtrate to bee decent, and to be in order, be in deed and without contradiction abſolutely decent, and abſolutely in order? And for this cauſe and in this regarde only, both by miniſters and people, without any ſearch or inquiſitiō of their agreeablenes with holy writt, abſolutely to be receyved, as if the ſame by ſome holy oracle, were immediatly ſent vnto them from God?
            For be it ſuppoſed, that ſome rites and ceremonies ordeyned by the Church and commaunded by the Chriſtian Magiſtrate, be of the nature of things either vnlawfull, or inexpedient, or that they be vaine, idle, vnneceſſarie and vnprofitable things: in theſe caſes, we pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs out of holy Writt, whether the Apoſtles rule of having all things to be done decently and according to order in the Church ceaſe not? For how ſhould thoſe things be done decently and orderly in the Church for the which the Church hath no warrant, that the ſame ſhould be done at all?
            The Apoſtle then having taught the Corinthians, that the thinges
                  
                     •
                   Cor. 14. 40. which he wrote, were the commaundements of the Lord, and concluding that all things treated of by him in the former partes of that chapter, touching the right vſe of ſpirituall giftes, are to bee done decently and in order, we demaund, whether your Lordſhips from this apoſtolicall rule can religiouſlie conclude any otherwiſe then thus?
            
               All the commaundements and all the ſpirituall giftes of the Lord, are to be done and vſed in the Church decently and orderly.
            
            
               But the wearing of a Surplice, in tyme of prayer and administration of Sacramentes, the making of a Croſſe vpon the childes forehead, &c. And kneeling in the act of receyving bread and wine at the Lordes Table, bee ſpirituall giftes, or at leastwiſe be the commaundements of the Lord:
            
            
               Therefore theſe things are to be done decently and in order.
            
            But now if your Lordſhips beeing not able to ſtrengthen your minor propoſition by any place of holy Writt, ſhall make the ſame anſwere which the Romaniſtes frame in all like caſes, for the Authoritie of their church, namely: that the Miniſters, and people, ought preciſelie

to obſerve and doe theſe thinges, if not propter Authoritatem Apostolicam, yet propter authoritatem Eccleſiae, ſeu Christiani Magiſtratus ſic ſtatuentis: Then doe your Lordſhips but as they doe, even runne from the Rock, and buyld vpon the Sand; yea and beſides, flee from the poynte in queſtion: making the Church, and Chriſtian Magiſtrate not only to be preſervers, but commanders of all Evangelicall decencie and order, And then might not this conſequution, and concluſion infallibly be true?
            
               What ſoever thinges by the Church, with conſent of the Christian Magistrate, be, or ſhalbe appointed, for Evangelicall decencie and order in the Church: the ſame without all exception, and challendge of any vndecencie, or diſorder, muſt and ought to be receyved of every member of the Church, for decent and orderlie thinges:
            
            
               But all ſuch and ſuch things by the Church, with conſent of the Christian Magistrate be appointed, &c.
            
            
               Therefore all ſuch and ſuch things, must & ought, without all exception, be receyved, &c.
            
            
               Yea, Sirs: and is not this a good conſequution, and doeth not this
               Bb. 
               concluſion neceſſarilie followe? For who ſhall be Iudge of Evangelicall decencie and order, if not the Church and Christian Magistrate alone?
            
            Before we anſwere vnto this queſtion, wee denie your propoſition,Gentl. becauſe the ſame ſeemeth vnto vs to be rather an inverſion, then a true converſion of the Apoſtles rule, viz.
            
            
               Let all things be done decently and in order.
            
            1 Cor. 14. 4
                  •
               
            
            The meaning whereof, according to the Analogie of the place, we take to be this, namely: that all thinges, or what ſoever thinges are to be done in the Church, that the ſame thinges ought to bee done decently and in order:
            But what agreement, we pray you, hath this rule with your propoſition? or what coherence hath your propoſition with this rule? for by what arte can you frame this your propoſition vpon the Apoſtles foundation?
            
               This your propoſition (wee ſaye) namely all things, or whatſoever things the Church with conſent of the Christian Magistrate ſhall authorize for decencie and order, the ſame are all decent and orderly things.
            
            
               
Indeed, if this your propoſitiō could be proved true by any doctrine drawne from any other place of holy Writt, we would eaſilie graunt, the church with conſent of the chriſtian Magiſtrate having commanded Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, kneelings, &c. to be vſed in the church, that this the Apoſtles rule did binde all thoſe to kneele, to make croſſes, and to weare Copes, and Surplices, not vngaynely, diſorderly or ſlovenly, but comely, hanſomely, and netely; but ſeeing your propoſition is falſe, and can not by any other place of holy ſcripture be proved true, you have drawne in the Apoſtles rule, as it were by the hayre, and pluckt it in, as it were by the heeles, to a wrong purpoſe, and forced it to a wronge ſenſe.
            Furthermore, becauſe theſe wordes decencie and order, mencioned in your propoſition, carrie a double ſenſe, we pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs, whether by theſe wordes decencie & order, you meane ſimplie ſuch a decencie, and ſuch an order, as for the allowance whereof, playne and evident teſtimonies may be founde in holy Writt, that the ſame decencie and order is pleaſing vnto God? or whether you meane ſuch a decencie and order only, as for the which (we having no other warrant, then tradition or commaundment of man) is only pleaſinge vnto man? touching which latter kinde of decencie and order, the ſame being but humane, we demaund, if either Miniſters or people bee not fully perſwaded in minde, that this humane decencie and order, is by ſome generall rule of holy Writt, aſwell pleaſing vnto God; as the ſame by ſome law of man, is knowne to be well pleaſing vnto man: we demaund (we ſay) in this caſe whether Miniſter or people, in foro conſcientiae, be obliged to vſe this ſo called and commaunded decencie or order, yea or no? For albeit every ſoule be ſubiect to the higher powers; nevertheleſſe, for the avoyding of error, and that the conſcience of every ſoule may be vpright with God, in her ſubiection, to the ordinance of man: the conſcience muſt take direction, not from the onely will and authoritie of man, but from the only Writt and authoritie of God. And therefore as every Magiſtrate, ought to be fully perſwaded in his conſcience of his commaund, before he conſcionably may require, that to be obeyed which he commaundeth: even ſo it be hoveth every ſoule, before he obey, to be perſwaded fully in his minde, that the thing cōmanded, ought for conſcience ſake, to be obeyed, becauſe the ſame is approved by the holy word of God: For otherwiſe howſoever outwardly he may ſerve, and pleaſe the Magiſtrate, yet inwardly &

in the ſpirite, he can never be aſſured that in this caſe, he ſhal ſerve God: becauſe the Magiſtrates commandement ſimply conſidered in it ſelf, is not any true ſpirituall guide, for the conſcience of any ſoule, to be ledd and conducted by.
            Now then to your Lordſhips former queſtion, whether the Church and ſupreme chriſtian Magiſtrate, ought not to ſitt, as ſoveraigne Iudge, vpon the conſcience of every ſoule, about the determination of all decencie and order to be kept by that ſoule, your Lordſhips by this our diſcourſe, eaſily may perceave, that we may well anſwere your demand, if we propound but one queſtion to another.
            And therefore we demaund, who ſhalbe ſovereigne Iudge over that ſoule and cōſcience, that commandeth decencie & order in the church, if not only the holy word of God alone? And if the chriſtian Magiſtrate muſt for the ſafetie of his ſoule, have ſome rule of holy writt, to be his ſoveraigne Iudge, for the thing that he cōmandeth; how ſhould not the chriſtiā ſubiect in like ſorte for the ſafetie of his ſoule, have ſome word of faith, to be his ſovereigne Iudge, for his ſubiectiō in the thing which he obeyeth? for ſo ſhall not the conſcience of him that commandeth, be any more a ſovereigne Iudge over him that obeyeth, then ſhall the conſcience of him that obeyeth, bee ſovereigne Iudge over him that commandeth.
            
               But, Sirs, if this be ſo, what ſoverainitie doe ye yeeld vnto the Christian
               Bb. 
               Magiſtrate, above the ſubiect, or what ſhall his authority avayle, when every ſoule commanded to be ſubiect to his power, ſhall examine the validitie of the lawfulneſſe of his command? ſhall not every rule of holy writ, wherevpon the christian Magiſtrate doeth ground his conſcience, for the thing commanded, be a good and ſufficient ground for the conſcience of every one, in the thing that is obeyed?
            
            Vnto this we anſwer; that the Chriſtian Magiſtrates conſcience canGentl. not be any ſufficient diſcharge for the conſcience of him that obeyeth, vnleſſe your Lordſhips bee able to prove vnto vs by ſome place of holy Writ, that the Magiſtrate touching the lawfulnes of the thing commanded, can not erre. For every ſoule, aſwell of the ſubiect, muſt anſwere & give an accompt for him ſelfe vnto God, for the thing wherein he obeyeth, as the Magiſtrate muſt for the thing which he cōmandeth; for the good and rightfull obedience, and command whereof, he hath appointed his holy word alone, to be the only Iudge aſwell vnto the ſubiect, as vnto the Magiſtrate: or ells what ſoverainitie ſhould the word of God

beare over the cōſcience of a ſubiect, if ſo be the Magiſtrates conſcience & command ſhould be the ſoveraigne Iudge over the ſubiects ſoule, & ſway the ſubiects conſcience? And yet by this meanes doe we not take away the due preeminence and authoritie, which by the holy Worde of God is given to the civill Magiſtrate, over the ſubiect: For in that,
                  
                     •
                  om. 13. that every ſoule is commanded to be ſubiect, for conſcience ſake, to the higher powers, this ſcripture by your Lordſhips patience (as we take it) is to be vnderſtood, not for the conſcience of him that cōmandeth, but for the conſcience of him that obeyeth: becauſe the ſubiect, without the breach of his conſcience, can not contemne the civill governement, which God hath appointed, not to be over the ſoule, but to be over the body. And indeed to eſtabliſh the command or conſcience of the civill Magiſtrate, to be the ſquire & plūmet of every ſubiects conſcience, were to wreſt the holy Scriptures, & to eſtabliſh (as the Antichriſtianites do) a tyranny over the conſciences of ſubiects: Thus much touching that later kind of humane decencie and order before ſpoken of.
            And as concerning that kind of decency & order for the which there may be teſtimonies found in holy Writ, that they be pleaſing vnto God: we affirme that the church and Chriſtian Magiſtrate ought not only to be commanders and preſervers of the ſame, but that both Miniſters and people alſo ought to be followers and embracers thereof.
            Nay, we ſay more, yea we affirme, that every humane decencie & order whatſoever ought to ſtoupe and give place vnto that order and decencie for the which teſtimonies are to be found in holy writ, that the ſame be pleaſing vnto God, And therfore we demand, by what rule of holy writ, your Lordſhips can prove your late convocationall canons, to have allowance from the ſpirit of Chriſt, when as by the ſame ye have cōmanded a decencie & order, meerly humane preciſely to be obſerved in the church, inſteed of that decencie & order which at the beginning was in the church & which being pleaſing vnto God could not be but divine?
            It had bene (in our iudgments) a fact not ſimply cōmendable, if your Lordſhips had but invented and added an humane decencie and order vnto that which hath warrant from holy writt, to be divine: but wholy to diſſeyſe the Church of that decencie and order, which by teſtimony of holy Writt, is witneſſed to bee pleaſing vnto God; and to give your owne deviſes, decencies and orders, liverie and ſeyſin this to doe, we demand, whether, in foro conſcientiae, it be not a double ſinne, and in curiae Christianitatis, deſerve not a double cenſure?
            
               
               But, Sirs, by your patience, what is that Divine order, and what is that
               Biſhops. 
               Divine decencie, whereof we have diſſeyſed the Churches, and what decencie and order, of our owne, have we put in ſeyſin thereof?
            
            By your Lordſhips favour, before we make full anſwer vnto this yourGentl. queſtion; we demand, whether your Lordſhips bee able to prove out of holy Writt, that the outward forme and maner of acting any ſervice vnto God, by our Saviour Chriſt or his Apoſtles in prayer, preaching the word & adminiſtring the Sacraments, was an vnorderly, or an vndecent forme or maner of acting that ſervice before God, yea or no?
            If your Lordſhips anſwere, as the trueth is, that the outward maner of acting every kind of ſervice by our Saviour Chriſt & his Apoſtles, was ſo decently & orderly done, and ſo acceptable vnto God, as nothing in the outward acting thereof could be more, wee then pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs firſt, what warrant you have out of holy writt, to diſſeyſe all the Miniſters of the outward acting of the whole worſhip of God in prayer and adminiſtring the Sacraments, without a Surplice?
            Secondly, what warrant you have from the ſpirit of Chriſt, to diſſeyſe all the Miniſters of the acting of ſome part of Gods worſhip, in the adminiſtration of publike Baptiſme, without making a croſſe vpon the childes forehead, and ſigning him with the ſigne of the croſſe?
            Laſtly, what approbation you have from the ſpirit of Chriſt, wholyConſt. 27 to diſſeyſe all the ſonnes and daughters of God, of the acte of ſitting in the acte of receiving the Sacrament of the Lordes Supper? For in that you have commanded that no Miniſter, when he celebrateth the communiō, ſhall wittingly adminiſter the ſame to any but to ſuch as kneel, you haue, by conſequence, inhibited every one that ſitteth, to receive the ſame. And thus to eſtabliſh your owne humane decencie and order of kneeling, in the acte of receiving the communion, you have diſſeyſed vs of that Euangelicall decencie and order of ſitting, warranted vnto the Miniſters and vnto vs by the example of our Saviour Chriſt and hisMar. 14. 18. Apoſtles, whē as at his laſt Supper, he him ſelf delivered both the Bread and the Wine vnto his Apoſtles, as they ſate, and not as they kneeled at the Table; whereby it appeareth that you looked not vnto the holy one of Iſraell, nor ſought vnto the Lord; and he yet is wiſeſt.Iſa. 21. 1. 2
            
            
               But, Sirs, by your patience, it is not required as a thing of meere neceſſitie,
               Bb. 
               as though without kneeling the Sacrament might not lawfully be ministred and received at all, but for reverence and conformities ſake only, it is commanded that the people ſhould kneele.
            
            
               
Why then, by your Lordſhips favour, we demand, vnto whom this reverenceGentl. is yealded, and vnto what thing this conformitie is proportioned? for that this forme of kneeling is not conformed to the Apoſtles maner of ſitting at the table, is evident, nether can it be denyed, but that this kinde of reverence is faſhioned like to that maner of reverence, which every catholicke fornicatour, by the ordinance of his love the great whore, doeth yealde vnto his Idoll, when he received his breadenLevi. 18. 3. 19. 27. 2. Cor. 6. 14 15. 16. god: wherefore we pray your Lordſhips to reſolve vs out of holy Writt, whether your conformitie, and your reverence of kneeling (in the acte of receiving the Sacrament of the Lordes Supper) may not rightly be condemned, as things not having any due reverence, conformitie or proportion with the written Law of God, or example of our Saviour Chriſt and his Apoſtles before mencioned?
            Beſides, we demand, whether your Lordſhips had not worthely deſerved to have bene much praiſed and commended by all the churches, for that thanks might have bene given by many vnto God, for you, if ſo be for reverence vnto the example of our Saviour Chriſt, who did all things well, and conformitie to his Apoſtles, ye had commanded the people not to have kneeled in the acte of receiving after the faſhion of the catholicke fornicatours, who doe all things ill, but rather to have ſitten after the maner of the Apoſtles? eſpecially ſithence betwene this maner preſcribed of receiving the Sacrament of the Lordes Supper kneeling, & the maner of the receiving the Sacrament of Baptiſme, yea and the word it ſelfe, ſitting or ſtanding, and not kneeling, there can be found no maner of conformitie at all; And yet as we deny not (when we come to the Font, or to the Sermon, both before, & after the Word preached and Baptiſme adminiſtred) but that we ought reverently and vniformely to kneele in prayer & thankeſgiving preſcribed by the booke. Even ſo alſo, we acknowledge, when we come to the Lords Table, that before and after the deliverie and receiving of the Sacrament, we ought to confeſſe our ſinnes, to pray and to give thankes, reverently and vniformely kneeling vpon our knees: But that we ſhould more kneele in the very acte of receiving Bread and Wine, at the Miniſters hand, at the Lords Table, then in the name of our children, in the very acte of our childrens receiving Water vpon their faces, or being dipt in Water, wee ſhould kneele at the Font, in the time of Baptiſme; we for our partes muſt confeſſe, that as yet this myſterie of conformitie and reverence, to kneele in the acte of receiving the communion, is hidden from vs:

becauſe we ſee no more needfulneſſe of reverence and conformitie for kneeling, to be in the acte of receiving the one Sacrament, then to be in the act of receiving the other: nor that there is any greater reverence, or conformitie of kneeling to bee vſed, when the Miniſter breaketh bread for our bodyes, which periſheth at the communion Table, then when he breaketh the bread of life for our ſoules, which periſheth not in the Pulpit.
            Nay, furthermore what conformitie is there preſcribed in the booke of common prayer; when in one & the ſame church, and in one & the ſame act of receiving the Lords Supper, it permitteth the Miniſter to receive ſtanding, and preſcribeth the people to receive kneeling? or what greater reverence is there required by the ſheepe, then is to be performed by the ſheepheard, who ſhould be an example to the flocke?
            The words of the book for the Miniſters ſtanding, when he receiveth the communion, ſeeme vnto vs to bee ſo perſpicuous and without all maner of ambiguitie, as without an abſurditie they can not bee conſtrued to command a Miniſter to kneele▪ for the maner how the Miniſter of the place, or how other Miniſters, if any be preſent to helpe him, ſhould receive, is not preſcribed at all, vnleſſe it be preſcribed, that he and they, ſhould receive ſtanding.
            Nay, howſoever in the ſame book it be ſaid, that the Miniſter ſhall deliver the communion in both kindes to the people in their hands kneeling, nevertheleſſe it followeth not herevpon, (the law being not in the negative, but in the affirmative) that the Miniſter may not deliver the communion to the people ſtanding or ſitting, or that the people be exactly bound not to ſtand or to ſitt, but to kneele.
            Beſides, becauſe by the booke of common prayer of the ſeconde of Edw. 6. wherevnto only (as we take it) touching ornaments▪ rites, and ceremonies our booke hath reference (which booke alſo of Edw. the 6. by the repeale made of the ſtatute of primo of Queene Mary, in the firſt ſeſſion of this laſt Parliament is revived) becauſe (we ſay) by this booke of common prayer of the ſecond of Edw. 6. kneeling, croſſing, holding vp of handes, knocking vpon the breaſte, and other geſtures are to bee vſed, at leaſt, as every mans devotion ſerveth, without blame: We pray your Lordſhips to ſuffer vs without blame, and danger of your late canons, peaceably, and quietly to enioy and poſſeſſe our libertie; That ſo we may receyve the communion, ſitting, ſtanding, or kneeling, as everie mans devotion ſerveth.
            
               And thus much for our full and perfect anſwere vnto your queſtions of diſſeyſing the church of her evangelicall decencie and order, and of reverence and conformitie, in kneeling in the act of receyving the cō
               munion; wherevpon we moſt inſtantly pray your Lordſhips, that you would be well pleaſed vpon your ſecond thoughtes, to heale your former errours; And withall to be content, not only to ſuppreſſe the vſe of your Copes, Surplices, making of Croſſes, ſigning with Croſſes, tokening with Croſſes▪ kneeling, &c.
            But alſo to reſtore our poſſeſſion, and to give vs livery and ſeyſin of all thoſe decencies, conformities, and reverend maner of prayer, preaching the word, receiving and adminiſtring the Sacramentes (without Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, and kneelings) whereof the Churches were ſeyſed in the Apoſtles tymes: And which being moderated by the wiſdome and authoritie of our Saviour Chriſt, we are moſt aſſured, can not be but well-pleaſing vnto God.
            
               But, Sirs, by your patience, our Christian Magistrate impoſeth them,
               Bb. 
               as matters of order, according to that forme, wherein he found the church at his coming, and this his pleaſure must commaund, & may ſatisfie vs; if it ſhould pleaſe the King not to commaund them, wee, for our partes▪ could be well content not to vrge them.
            
            See, ſee, what a dalliance is this in a matter of ſo high a qualitie, andGentl. touching the dignitie, & preheminence of ſo excellent a perſon? what? was your melody yeſterday, and that in the preſence of the King, and aſſemblie of his Nobles; was your melody but yeſterday (we ſay) viz. No ceremonie, no Biſhop: no Biſhop, no King? and can your LordſhipsLord Biſhop of Lincolae to day, ſitting Iudicially in your Conſiſtory (to cenſure the Miniſters for not conformitie) thus ſudenly change your note, and cry openly; No commaundement of ceremonies by the King; no impoſition of ceremonies by the Biſhop? For is it not? as if you ſhould have layde the whole blame vpon the King, and have ſpoken thus: No ceremonious King, no ceremonious Biſhop? And yet for all this, do not all men know, that your Lordſhips were too too ceremonious, and too too great maſters of ceremonies, before ever the King ſaw your faces?
            And how then cometh it to paſſe (ceremonies having hitherto ben vpheld by your Lordlines) that your Lordlines ſhould not now ſtande but by ceremonies? or how cometh it to paſſe (your Lordlines heretofore being propped vp by the crowne and ſcepter of our late Queene) that your Lordlines ſhould now vphold the ſcepter & crowne of our Chriſtian King?
            
               This your Lordſhips gradation therefore, made vpon the firſt day from the not being of a Ceremonie, to the not being of a Biſhop, to the not being of a King: And this your proteſtation made vpon the next day, of the being of a Kinge, to the being of a ceremonie, what ells doeth the one and the other argue and importe, but a feare and a ſuſpition (if the King ſhould once commande downe your lawes of Ceremonies) that the Lawes of your Lordlineſſe likewiſe would of them ſelves, ſone after fall to the ground. And therefore whether the King did conceive, that you might but gloſe and flatter with your gradation, or whether poore, ſimple and playne meaning men might be ſeduced by your proteſtation, we know not, neither is it our purpoſe to enquire.
            Only we can not but much marveile, that each of you profeſſing him ſelfe to be a Gad, and to be a Nathan: to be a Seer, and to be a Prophet vnto our chriſtian Magiſtrate, ſhould thus proteſt, & thus chardge the King, to be the only ſpirit, by whom your ſelves doe ſpeake, and the only prophet from whom your ſelves doe learne.
            Nay, what a thinge is this? your Lordſhips propheſying vnto the King, in the name of the Lord; That your rites and ceremonies, are no way contrariant, or repugnant, but every way agreeable and conſonant to the holy word of God, and meete to be reteyned, aſwell for the manner and forme of Gods worſhip, as for edification of the church, ſhould notwithſtanding openly avow the Kings pleaſure, and the Kings command, to be the fountayne and welſpring of your propheſies?
            Nay, which is more, your ſelves, making for your ſelves Ceremonious hornes of Iron, & aſſuring the king, that with the ſame he ſhould be able to overthrowe and puſh downe al ſuch as by your Lordſhips be falſely called puritanes, What a thing is this, that you ſhould notwithſtanding, proclayme the kings minde, to be, as it were, the only mould wherein your ceremonies were caſt?
            Nay, which is more, What a thing is this? your Lordſhips aſſuring to your ſelves, to bee the chiefeſt of the Lordes Prieſtes and Levites, ſhould notwithſtanding put the holy Cenſores into his Maieſties hand, and laye the holy Arcke of the Covenaunt, vpon the kinges ſhoulders, to burne incenſe, and to beare it, and to carrye it him ſelfe alone?
            Nay, which is more, What a thing is this (your Lordſhips by a definitive ſentence, publickly given, read and divulged in your ſacred (ſo called) Synod, having not only iudicially decreed, the lawfulnes of ornaments,

rites and ceremonies, but alſo humbly and profeſſedly deſired the ſame to be cōfirmed by the Kings royal authoritie vnder the broad Seale of England) that you ſhould notwithſtanding, for the execution of your ſaid Decree, call to witnes the Kings commaund, and the Kings pleaſure? As though the Kings pleaſure and commaund were the only cauſe, and not the effect of your decree; and not rather your decree the only cauſe and not the effect of his Highnes commaund?
            Your ſecond canon, by which the ſame power is iuſtly (as we cōfeſſe) given to our Sovereigne Lord the King in cauſes eccleſiaſticall, that the godly Kings had among the Iewes, will not ſerve to excuſe you, in the making of your canons, if any of them be blame worthie; for the godly Kings of Iudah, never had any authoritie to command what ceremonies ſhould be ordeyned among the lewes: Neither did King David, neither any other of the godly kings of Iudah, doe any thing in building of the Temple, in diſtribution of offices among the Levites, or in any manner ſervices performed to the Lord, but the ſame was ſent vnto them in writing from the hand of the Lord, or by the mouth of the Prophetes, or by caſting of Lott.
            What ſoever authoritie then the godly Kings of Iudah had, to command ceremonies once made, to be obſerved, the ſame authoritie, and none other in matter of ceremonies, doeth your canon yeald vnto the King: And therfore we beſeech your Lordſhips hereafter to carry ſuch a loyall and conſcionable reverence, and eſtimation, to the honor and dignitie of our Chriſtian King, and the noblenes of his kingly charitie declared by his proclamation, as that hereafter in your conſiſtories and publique ſeates of Iudgement, you would vſe conferences, arguments, and perſwaſions, wayes of love, and gentlenes, workings by clemencie, and weight of reaſon, to reclayme all that be in the miniſterie, to the obedience of the church lawes, according as by the Kings proclamation you are required; rather thē by rigour of law, ſhaking the kings ſword, and preſſing the kings commandement, to enforce the trembling conſciences of your weake brethren, contrarie to the Kings moſt noble & chriſtian intention plainly vttered by his proclamation.
            There be ſundrie other poyntes in his Maieſties proclamation, which by your Lordſhips worthily deſerved conſideration, before you had begun thoſe violēt courſes, which ſome of you have purſued in this caſe: The peremptory day aſſigned to the Miniſters for their conformitie by the King, being of more authoritie then 1000. of your canonicall admonitious,
                  
                     •
                  
               
               
would have bene fully expired, before you had troubled the Miniſters about this matter, otherwiſe then by conferences, argumentes, perſwaſions, &c.
            All Miniſters who had incurred no cenſures of the church or penalties2. of the law in the Queenes tyme, or ſince the Kings raigne, before the ſixth of Iuly 1604. be exempted out of the proclamation; though before the day appointed, they have not conformed them ſelves, to the orders of the Church. And yet many ſuch have you diſquieted?
            The Lawes and orders of the Church remayne very vncerteyne, ſo as3. it is not certeyne, to what lawes and orders eſtabliſhed the miniſters ſhould conforme them ſelves, And yet before the day expired, you have vrged ſome Miniſters to cōforme them ſelves to Canons divulged ſince the Proclamation.
            The Canon law, is vtterly voyd within the Realme, and therefore4. your oath of Canonicall obedience is of no force, and all your Canonicall admonitions not worth a ruſh.
            The old provinciall conſtitutions, intreat of no ſuch oath, beſides5. they litle or nothing reſpect any orders, or ceremonies of our Church.
            To which booke of common prayer the Miniſters ſhould ſubſcribe,6. in that maner and forme, as by the Canon is required, is not decided. If they ſubſcribe to the booke publiſhed ſince the Kings raigne, they may then be called into queſtion, at every ſeſſions & aſſiſes, for vſing an other forme, then is preſcribed in the Queenes booke, the ſame remayning ſtill in force & vnrepealed: if ſubſcription be vrged to the Queenes booke, then may not the Miniſters yeeld therevnto, becauſe the Kinge and Biſhops have concluded to reforme ſome things conteyned in the ſame, as being repugnant to the holy word of God.
            Beſides, the booke of common prayer of the ſecond of Edward 6. touching ornamentes, rites and ceremonies, and wherevnto for the ſame reſpect both the Queenes and the Kings booke hath reference, revived this laſt Parliament, by diſannulling the ſtatute of repeale made the firſt of Queene Mary.
            This book, we ſay of the 2. of Edw. 6▪ eſtabliſhing other ornaments, rites and ceremonies, then the former bookes doe, ſome of thoſe ceremonies alſo to be vſed, or at leaſt at every mans devotion, and the ornaments after another maner thē ours, make vs greatly to ſtand in doubt, whether all ceremonies, conteyned in every of theſe bookes, or but ſome, or which of them, are to be vſed, yea or no.
            
               Touching the late Canons, of what authoritie many of them be, may iuſtly be queſtioned: becauſe ſome of them ſeeme vnto vs, to be contrariant or repugnant to the lawes, ſtatutes, & cuſtomes of the realme, ſom to be derogatorie to the Kings prerogative royall, and other ſome to be repugnant to the holy word of God, and therefore in all theſe three reſpects25. H. 8. c. 19. to be voyd canons, by the common law, & ſtatutes of the realme.
            Laſtly, howſoever ſome miniſters might be within the cōpaſſe of the proclamation, not conforming them ſelves, before the laſt of Novēb. to the lawes eſtabliſhed before the 16. of Iuly, nevertheleſſe the Biſhops after the day expired, ought to have attēded the Kings pleaſure, by what wayes and meanes, he had determined to take from among the people; all occaſions of ſectes, diviſions and vnquietnes, much leſſe before the day, ſhould they have attempted any thing, vnleſſe, as the proclamation requireth them, they had provided meete perſons, to bee ſubſtitutes, in the places of thoſe, who wilfully had abandoned their charges.
            Theſe things being thus moſt providently, nobly, and Royally, for the quietnes of the church, ſet forth by the Kings proclamation, it had bene a parte of very great wiſedome and moderation for your Lordſhips (in our opinions) paciently to have expected the Kings further direction, before by your vntimely preſſing the kinges commandement, authoritie and rigour of his lawes, ye had indevoured the inforcing of their conſciences, without perſwaſions by weight of reaſon; And ſo much the rather ſhould your Lordſhips have done this, that hereby ye might have ſatisfied, all civill Magiſtrates, Gentlemen and others of vnderſtandinge, that they ſeeing by your conferences, argumentes, perſwaſions, love, gentlenes, clemencie, and weight of reaſon, that the cauſe which you maintayne, & not that which they impugne, is good, might not in any ſorte have ſupported, favoured, or countenanced any factious miniſters, in their obſtinacie, as by the proclamation they are required.
            And yet by your Lordſhips favour, not to conceale any thing, which hetherto we have (as we thinke) rightly conceaved of the Kinges proclamation, we can not but informe your Lordſhips, that by the ſame the King hath more tēdered the good eſtate of the miniſters, & of their controverſie in hand, then ever was tēdred, by any former Prince, ſince poperie was baniſhed. For when was there in England, before this time, by any kingly proclamation, any conference, argument, perſwaſion, love, gentlenes, clemencie▪ & weight of reaſon, commanded, & rigor of

the law forbidden to be vſed by the Archbiſhops & Biſhops, for the reclayming of the miniſters to the lawes of the church?
            When were any miniſters by publike authoritie, called, as it were, into open field, to ſtand vpon arguments and weight of reaſon?
            Whē was it appointed by publike authoritie, that any miniſters ſhould anſwere, and that Archbiſhops & Biſhops ſhould oppoſe? that the miniſters ſhould be defendants, and the Biſhops plaintifes?
            When was it proclaymed, by any Princes authoritie, that the Archbiſhops and Biſhops, to their vttermoſt indevours, by argumentes, and weight of reaſon, ſhould prove vnto the miniſters, that the book of cō
               mon prayer, bookes of homilies, booke of cōſecrating Biſhops, Prieſts, and Deacons, book of Articles, and other lawes, & orders of the church conteyne nothing, in the whole, or in any parte, diſagreeable either in doctrine, or governement to the word of God?
            All which things by the proclamation, are intended ſhould be done, which things alſo if the Archbiſhops & Biſhops have done, thē indeed we confeſſe, the miniſters (that have not yeelded to conforme thēſelves) to be wilfull, & the King to be righteous, for the abandoning of ſectes, diviſions and vnquietnes, among his people, if he ſhall allow no factious miniſters in their obſtinacie.
            But if the Archbiſhops and Biſhops have not endevoured, much leſſe not indevoured to the vttermoſt of their powers (as by the king they are required) by conferences, arguments, perſwaſions, love, gentlenes, clemencie, and weight of reaſon, to reclayme al miniſters, to the obedience of the church lawes; then wee can not ſee, how any civill Magiſtrates, Gentlemen, or others of vnderſtanding, can be intended by the proclamation to be favourers, ſupporters, or contenancers, of factiouſnes, or obſtinacie in the miniſters, which are not conformable.
            As for thoſe two and twentie thouſande Miniſters, if poſſible thereIudg. 7. 3. could have bene ſo many, who, without any conferences, argumentes, perſwaſions, or weight of reaſon vſed by the Archbiſhops, or Biſhops, have turned their heeles, and as Gedeons tymerous and fearfull ſoldiours, have returned and departed early from mount Gilead, before the appointed tyme came, we leave them to the Lord, vnto whom in this caſe they have ſtood, or fallen. And who is able, to rayſe thē vp though for a tyme they be downe?
            Nay, if of the tenne thouſande (if poſſible there were ſo many) which bee left, there ſhould nine thouſande ſeven-hundered, bowe

downe their knees, to drinke water at the Biſhops poole, and but 300. only ſhould ſtand vp, to lapp water with their tongues, as a dogge lappeth, in that well of water, which ſpringeth to eternal life, yet by theſe 300. only, is the Lord able to ſave Iſraell, and to deliver the Medianites
               Reve. 11. 3. 4. 5. into Gedeons hand.
            Nay, if of theſe 300. but two only ſhall ſtand vp, clothed in ſackcloth, to be witneſſes, yet in the end, ſhall theſe two witneſſes, bee two Olyve trees, and two Candlestickes ſtanding before God, who governeth the earth, out of whoſe mouth, if any will hurt them, ſhall fire proceed and devoure their enemies.
            And thus much have we thought neceſſarie to be ſpoken, touching our vnderſtanding of the Kings pleaſure and commaund, declared by his Highnes proclamation; yea this alſo have we done, not onely in regard of our loyaltie vnto our chriſtian King, but alſo in regard of the clearing of ourſelves from every vniuſt imputation of being favourers, ſupporters, or countenancers of factious miniſters in their obſtinacie, praying your Lordſhips to cary a favourable conſtruction of theſe our Demaundes; Becauſe our deſire is to be fully ſatisfied by holy Writt, and not reſt our iudgementes vpon humane authoritie, eſpecially ſithence both your Lordſhips and our ſelves, by the experience of full fiftie yeares, have both heard and ſeene how vnprofitably, and to no good purpoſe this ſalve of humane power hath bene applied vnto the church ſurfeted with drinkings, and eatings, of that romiſh ſtrumpet: yea and for our parts, we can not but be hartily ſory, that after ſo long a time of triall, your Lordſhips ſhould ſtill remayne ſo vnperſwaſible, as not once to make experiment of the powring in of ſome more ſweete and medicinable oyle, to this ſo deadly and deſperate a wound: Eſpeciallie, the ſore being at this day as deepe, as noyſome, and as full of dead fleſh, as the ſame was the very firſt moment, that your predeceſſors began to ſtoppe the iſſue thereof, with this kinde of humane tente. And ſo wee will proceed to our laſt ground drawne out of holy Writt, for the reſolutenes of our iudgementes wherevpon, and wherein we yet ſtand.
            
               
                  
                     
                        The third ground.
                        
                           If thy brother be grieved for the meate, now walkeſt thou not charitably,Rom. 14. 15. Rom. 14. 20. 21. destroy not him with thy meate, for whom Christ dyed.
                        
                        
                           It is evill for the man, which eateth with offence.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            It is good neither to eate fleſh, nor to drink wine, nor any other thing,

whereby thy brother ſtumbleth, or is offended, or made weake.
            Let vs not therefore iudge one an other any more, but vſe your iudgmentRom. 14. 13. rather in this, that no man put an occaſion to fall, or a ſtumbling block before his brother.
            
               From which grounds we demand.
            
            Firſt, whether your Lordſhips iudge not all godly Miniſters & true beleevers within your iuriſdictions, to be your Chriſtian brethren. And whetherye, and they bee not all ſonnes vnto one Father, and ſervants vnto one Lord?
            Whether your Lordſhips be not of opinion, that the putting, and not putting on of a Surplice, the making & the not making of a croſſe vpō the childs forehead in Baptiſme, the wearing & not wearing of a ſquare Cap; and kneeling and not kneeling, in the acte of receiving bread and wine at the Lords Table, be not things in their owne nature of like indifferencie, as were the eating, and not eating of meates, drinking and not drinking of wine, or any thing in the Apoſtles time?
            Whether your Lordſhips can prove by any place of holy writt, that theſe rules and precepts given by the Apoſtles of not greeving a brother for meate; of not walking charitably by eating meate: of not deſtroying him, for whom Chriſt died with meate; of not doing evill by eating meate, of not eating or drinking, whereby a brother ſtumbleth, is offended, or made weake, and of not putting an occaſion, to fall before a brother by eating meate. We demand, (we ſay) whether theſe the Apoſtles commandements, in the not doing of all things of like indifferencie, with that of not eating meate, and not drinking wine, do not aſwell bind your Lordſhips at this day, as they did the Biſhops, Paſtours, Elders and Brethren of that time? And therefore we demand:
            If any of your Ll. had bene Archbiſhop of Epheſus, or of Creete, had bene Biſhop of Ieruſalem, Rome or Coloſſe, in the Apoſtles time: whether vnder the title of order & vniformitie, or by right of ſuperioritie & power, (you might without breach or cōtradiction of the Apoſtles doctrine) have cōmanded any brethren, within your charge, being weak in faith, to have eaten meats, forbiddē by the law, or ſacrificed vnto Idols?
            Againe, if any of your Lordſhips in the Apoſtles time, had bene an Archbiſhop or a Biſhop, and by your Archiepiſcopall, or Epiſcopall authoritie, had commaunded the Paſtours, Elders and Brethren vnder your chardge, being weake in faith, by example of the ſtrong in faith,

and for conformities ſake, to have eaten meates ſacrificed vnto Idols, or forbidden by the law; we demand, whether ſuch your commandement had bene a charitable commandement, yea or no?
            Yea, and we demand, whether the ſame your commandement (vnder what pretence of canonicall obedience, vnitie or conformitie, ſoever) might have excuſed the weake in faith, from ſinning againſt Chriſt, if at your commandment they being not fully perſwaded in their minds, had eaten of theſe meates doubtingly?
            And if the Apoſtles charitie were ſo great, as that he would never have1. Cor. 8. 13. eaten fleſh, while the world ſtādeth, rather then he would greeve or offend his weak brother, or give him an occaſion to ſinne; we demād how ſmall charitie the men of our age may ſeeme to have, who be ſo far frō not greeving & not offending a weak brother, & of not giving him an occaſion to ſinne, as that not only they content not thē ſelves, by eating fleſh themſelves, to grieve & to offend a weak brother, & to give him an occaſion to ſinne, but alſo cōmand a weake brother to eate that meate, by eating wherof, he can not but fal, but ſtumble, but grieve, but offend, but ſinne, and but deſtroy him ſelfe? This kind of charitie may deſerve vnhappely the name of ſome Synodal or Provincial charitie, but certes it can neverworthely deſerve to be called an Apoſtolicall charitie.
            
               But, Sirs, you miſtake the matter very much, you deceive your ſelves, &
               Biſhops. 
               draw not the caſes rightly: The vſe of Croſſes, Copes, Surplices, Cappes, & kneelings are cōmanded by the chriſtiā Magiſtrates ſoveraigne authority, only as things indifferēt for orders ſake, & not that men ſhould be grieved and offended, or that they ſhould fall, ſtumble, ſinne, & deſtroy them ſelves:
            
            Touching the chriſtian Magiſtrates authoritie about ordering ritesGentl. & ceremonies in the church, we have ſomewhat at large argued before, which we had thought might have fully ſatiſfied your Lordſhips, but becauſe it pleaſeth you ſtill to preſſe vs with the ſame, we muſt once againe plainly ſignifie vnto you; that we beleeve, that your ſelves do not attribute any more ſpirituall authoritie vnto the King, to make, conſtitute and ordeine canons, conſtitutions, rites or ceremonies, then you give vnto him ſpirituall power to preach the word, adminiſter the Sacraments, and excommunicate: For we beleeve, that your ſelves with the reſidue of the clergie, aſſembled by the Kings writt, in your convocation, doe chalendge all ſpirituall power vnto your ſelves, to make, ordeine and decree all maner of canons, conſtitutions, ordinances, ornaments, rites and ceremonies in the Church.
            
               Yea, and this ſpirituall power we beleeve, that you pretend to be derived vnto your ſelves, and the reſt of the clergie in the convocation, not from any ſpirituall power inveſted in the perſon of our ſoveraigne Lord the King, but onely from the ſpirituall power of our Saviour Chriſt alone. And this is manifeſt by your Cxxxix. canon, for ſo are your words: Whoſoever ſhall hereafter affirme that the Sacred Synode of this nation in the name of Christ, and by the Kings authoritie aſſembled, is not the church of England by repreſentation, let him be excommunicated, &c. Theſe wordes (wee ſay) of your canon, viz. Sacred Synod is aſſembled in the name of Christ, and by authoritie of the King, plainely teſtifie, that you hold your Synode not to be aſſembled by authoritie of the King, in the name of the King, or in the name of Chriſt and the King, but only in the name of Chriſt: And therefore by your owne wordes, wee are inforced to beleeve that you attribute vnto the King none other authoritie, then ſuch as you attribute to the godly Kinges of Judah: namely an authoritie to aſſemble and command your perſons, as they aſſembled and commanded the perſons of the Prieſtes. What? to execute the1. Chron. 13. 2. rites and ceremonies of the Kinges of Iudah? No: but to execute the rites and ceremonies of God.
            And ſo we beleeve your perſons being aſſembled by authoritie and commandement of the King, that your ſelves by your owne authoritie, and that in the name and by the power of Chriſt, and not in the name and power of the King, doe ordeine, decree and make canons, conſtitutions, rites and ceremonies, as if they were ſent vnto vs, by your handes, from God. And thus much doe the very firſt words of your firſt canon, and ſome words in your 140. 141. canons clearly prove: For howſoever in the title of your book, you vſe theſe words: Constitutions and Canons treated and agreed vpon, by the Biſhop of London, &c.
            
            Yet both in the proheme & body of your firſt canō, you affirme as followeth. In your proheme or title you ſay thus: the Kings ſupremacy over the church of Englād in cauſes eccleſiaſtical, you ſay not over the church & cauſes, but over the church in cauſes▪
                and in the body of the ſame canō you ſay, we firſt decree & ordeine, that the Archb. of Canterbury, &c. and in the Cxl. canon your words are theſe: Whoſoever ſhall affime, that no maner of perſon, &c. are to be ſubiect to the decrees therof (ſpeaking of the Synod ecclleſiaſticall) made & ratified by the kings Maieſties ſupreame authority, &c. let him be, &c. your words alſo in your laſt canō, are theſe, whoſoever ſhal hereafter affirm, &c. that the ſacred Sinod aſſembled, &c.

was a company of perſons, &c. in making canons & cōſtitutions in cauſes eccleſiasticall, &c. ought to be deſpiſed, &c. the ſame being ratified, confirmed and inioyned by the regall power, ſupremacie and authoritie, lett them be excommunicated; Now by all theſe your owne words and ſentences, we decree & ordeine: decrees of the Synod, making canons by the ſacred Synod; ratified, confirmed, inioyned by the regall power, &c. by all theſe words (we ſay) we can not but beleeve, that you chalendge your eccleſiaſticall power of ordeining, decreeing, & making decrees, canons, conſtitutions, rites and ceremonies, to be inveſted in your owne perſons aſſembled by authoritie of the King, from the authoritie and power of Chriſt; and not from any ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall power, inveſted in the perſon of the King, and derived, and conveighed vnto your perſons aſſembled by his regall writt, For then how ſhould we not beleeve alſo, but that you iudged the Kings writt, to be no civil, but an eccleſiaſticall and ſpirituall writt. But howſoever (as yet) wee beleeve not this latter, yet ſtill we beleeve, that you appropriate vnto your owne perſons aſſembled by the Kings writt, a ſole power, and that from our Saviour Chriſt, to give vnto your decrees, canons, conſtitutions, rites and ceremonies, their firſt being and their firſt birthright: and that you aſſigne vnto the King none other power, but a power of their after birth, & of ratifying and confirming of that life, & being, which your perſons have firſt put into them: So that the King is in this, but as it were an executioner of your canons, and not you the executioners of the Kings decrees. Yea & thus much M. Doctor Bilſon, in his Book intituled, True difference, betweene Christian ſubiection, & vnchristian rebellion, Pag. 243. avoweth & teſtifieth, whoſe words are theſe; We never ſaid that Princes had any ſpirituall power, it is a falſe collection of yours, it is no part of our cōfeſſion, & the ſword which they bear, we never called but external & tēporall.
            
            
               Againe to deviſe new rites and ceremonies for the Church, is not the Princes vocation, but to receive and allow ſuch as the Scriptures and canons commend, and ſuch as the Biſhops & Pastours of the place ſhall adviſe, not infringing the Scriptures or canons, & ſo for all other eccleſiasticall things & cauſes, Princes be neither the deviſors nor directors of them, but the confirmers and establiſhers of that which is good, and displacers, and revengers of that which is evill, which power we ſay they have in all things, be they ſpirituall, eccleſiasticall or temporall. ibid. pag. 252.
            Yea, and moreover we beleeve, if any ſhould impugne or gaine-ſay, this your power of making ſpirituall and eccleſiaſticall decrees, in your

convocatiō, not to belong properly to your miniſteriall power which you have by your divine offices in the church, that you would then fly for the interpretation of the ſtatute: 1. Elizab. to our late Queenes iniunctions;Title, admonition to ſimple men. wherby it is declared that nothing was, is, or ſhalbe meant, or intēded by the oath required, to have any other duety allegeance, or band, then was acknowledged to be due to the moſt noble Kinges, of famous memorie K. H. the eight hir Maieſties Father, or to K. Ed. 6. hir Maieſties brother: And that the Kings and Queenes of this Realme, may not challendge authoririe and power of any miniſtery of divine offices in the Churches.
            But vnder God to have ſoveraintie & rule of all maner of perſons borne within hir Realmes, ſo as no other foreigne power, ſhal or ought to have any ſuperioritie over them; vpon this iniunction (we ſay) we build our former credence, that your Lordſhips iudge your only perſons, and the perſons of the reſt of the Clergie, & not the miniſterie of your divine offices, or any parte thereof, to be vnder the obedience of the Kings power; vnto which miniſterie alſo of divine offices, you attribute right of ordeyning and making canons, rites and ceremonies in the Church, as a right properly incident and appertaining to that miniſtery, not of doctrine, but of divine governement, which you challendge to be due vnto you, as vnto Miniſters and Officers appointed to rule and governe the Church vnder Chriſt, by the holy Scriptures; And therefore we pray your Lordſhips henceforwards to put vs vnto no more paine, to anſwere this your argument, of Kingly and ſupreame authoritie.
            For we beleeve aſſuredly, if Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Deanes, Archdeacons and the reſt of the clergie, aſſembled by the Kings writt, by their deliberate counſaile, voluntary and vnconſtrayned will, had not in their Synod decreed the vſe of Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, ſquare Cappes, Tippets, and ſuch traſh, or if they had not by the preſident of their aſſembly, moſt inſtantly ſupplicated the King to command the vſe of theſe things, thus ordeined by them ſelves: we perſwade our ſelves aſſuredly, that the King by his abſolute, regall and ſupreame power, would never have conſtrayned, Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Deanes, Archdeacons, &c. to have vndergone the yoke of theſe ceremonies; for the King right well knoweth, that in ſo doing, he ſhould not have walked in the wayes of the Godly kings of Iudah, then whoſe holy example to followe, his Highnes hath proteſted, to deſire nothing more.
            Neither for any other purpoſe, as it ſeemeth vnto vs, by your late ſpeaches in the eares of the King (no ceremony, no Biſhop) doe your ſelves

preſſe theſe ceremonies, then that they ſhould be in your owne hands, as croſier ſtaves, to ſtay vp from falling the tottering walles of your Lordly Iuriſdictions. And yet becauſe we never read in holy Writt, that any ceremony was ever planted by our heavenly Father, to bee a leanetoo, for any Biſhops of Gods planting, or that the vnplanting of an humane ceremony, would be the vnplanting of any of Gods Biſhops, what ſhould we gather from hence, but that your Lordſhips bee no Biſhops of Gods planting; for Biſhops planted by the hande of God, in the Vineyard of Chriſt, be ſo faſt ſett, and ſo deeply rooted, that by no blaſt or ſtorme of humane ceremonies, they can be blowne vp.
            And thus much touching your argument of the Kings cōmandement, for orders ſake; As for the indifferencie of the things commanded, the ſame hath already bene handled in an other place; but touching the laſt part of your exception, that the vſe of theſe things is not commanded, to the end, that men ſhould be grieved, offended, fall, ſtumble, ſinne, & deſtroy them ſelves; we reiect this, as an impertinent & inſufficient anſwere to our demand; for our demand tendeth not to inſinuate, that we think, that theſe things be commanded to the end, that every man by the vſe of them, ſhould ſinne, but our demand concerneth the vncharitable commandement, of the vſe of theſe things impoſed vpon a weake brother, which weake brother, by the vſe of theſe things (notwithſtanding the commandement) can not but full, but ſtumble, but give an offence, but ſinne. What? becauſe of the commandement? No: but by reaſon of his weaknes, which the commandement hath not power to ridd, and take from him. And therefore vnles your Lordſhips by ſome learning taught you in holy Writt, can informe your ſelves, & our Chriſtian Magiſtrate, that your Synode in the Apoſtles abſence, is placed in the Apoſtolike chaire, and being ſo placed, hath alſo received by the Apoſtles doctrine, an Apoſtolike authoritie, to commande thoſe thinges in his abſence, which he expreſly forbade in his preſence, wee doubt greatly whether your convocationall aſſembly, can charitably by Gods Law command the weake in faith, to eate meate ſacrificed vnto Idols, and ſo by conſequence to weare a Surplice, a Cope, a ſquare Cap, a ſhaven Crowne, a Fryers Coule, or a Monckes Hood, yea or no?
            Nay, ſithence the Apoſtle hath directly, and in plaine termes forbidden1. Cor. 10 28. the ſtrong in faith, the eating of meate ſacrificed vnto Idolls; becauſe of him that ſhewed it, and for the conſcience, not of thine, but of that other which ſayeth, this is ſacrificed vnto Idols; and if withall, hee

have taught, that it is evill, for a man to eate with offence: we demand, by what rule of holy Writt, your Lordſhips can aſſure the conſcience of our Chriſtian Magiſtrate, and the ſoules of your aſſembly in convocation, that his Highnes and they ſhall doe charitably, vprightly, and not ſinne, in the ſight of the Lord, in caſe by a commandement, ye impoſe a neceſſitie of eating meates, or vſing things of like indifferencie, vpon the weake, which the weake, by the Apoſtles doctrine have free libertie, nay rather which by the Apoſtles doctrine they be taught, ſo longe as they be weake, not to vſe.
            Beſides, if eating, drinking, appareling, croſſing or kneeling, doubtingly & without faith, or with offence, be ſinnes againſt the ſoule & defilements of the ſoule, we then pray your Ll. to deale plainly with vs, & divinely to teach vs, whether it be an Apoſtolike charitie, to cōmand the doing of a thing which can not be done, either by the weak in faith, but doubtingly; or by the ſtrong in faith without offence, giving an occaſion to fall, or putting a ſtumbling block before his brother?
            
               But, Sirs, by your patience, the Christian Magiſtrate doeth not inioyne,
               Biſhops. 
               neither doeth the Clergie in their convocation decree, that the Miniſters or people, ſhould weare a Surplice, make a Croſſe, or kneele doubtingly and without faith, only his commandement is, that they kneele, that they make a croſſe, and that they weare a Surplice.
            
            Yea, by your Lordſhips favour, we demand, whether ſuch their doubting,Gentl. & ſuch their being without faith, can either be purged by any gliſter or be diſpenſed with, by any facultie of humane authoritie?
            Yea, and whether any humane diſpenſation, or purgative receipt, may be of ſuch validitie and operation, in foro conſcientiae, that it may exempt the patient, or the diſpencer in foro conſcientiae from ſinne, in caſe hee iudge his apparell, croſſings and kneelings, to be vncleane?
            For though the Chriſtian Magiſtrate, be perſwaded through the LordRō. 14. 14 Ieſus, that there is nothing vncleane of it ſelfe, yet to him that iudgeth it vncleane, to him it is vncleane. And therefore albeit the chriſtian Magiſtrate may not ſinne in his commandement, yet may neither Miniſter nor people, be without ſinne, in their obedience.
            For the conſcience only of the cōmander (be he never ſo Chriſtian) can not be any warrant for the conſcience of him that obeyeth doubtingly.
            
               But, Sirs, it is their folly, & their wilfull peeviſhnes, that (having bene ſo
               Bb. 
               long a time inſtructed) they have no better profited, in the knowledg of their chriſtian libertie, & of the cleanes of the things: (by my faith) if they continew

weake longe, it were not amiſſe to bring ſome of them to the ſtake. Oh! my Lords, bona verba quaeſumus, ſoft fire maketh ſweet malt, preachGentl. faith we beſeech your Lordſhips, but ſwear not by your faith: For by your Lordſhips favour, if the Apoſtle (having aſwel by doctrine as by example taught the weak brethren, among the Romans and Corinthians, of theirRom. 14. 1. Cor. 8. Chriſtian libertie, did neither reprove them of peeviſhnes, wilfulnes, or folly, neither yet condemne their ignorance of Chriſtian libertie to be a ſinne againſt Chriſt, albeit the ſame their ignorance, conſiſted only about the vſe of meates, created for the benefit of mans life; wee deſire your Lordſhips to reſolve vs out of holy Writt, whether ignorance of Chriſtian libertie, in the weake of our time, which conſiſteth about the vſe of things dedicated to the ſervice of an Idoll, may be a ſinne againſt Chriſt, for not vſing the ſame, in the worſhip of the true God?
            Beſides, we demand, by what rule of holy wtitt your Lordſhips in theſe things may condemne an other mans ſervant, or iudge his errour of chriſtian libertie in this caſe, to bee worthy of puniſhment? For ſeeing ye be not able to make him ſtand, whom God hath left weak, & not inabled to ſtand: And ſeeing the Apoſtle did not preſcribe vnto the weake brethren of his time, any time for the amendement of their errour, of the not vſe of things indifferent, but did rather bind him ſelf & all other, for all ages to come, by his example, never to eate fleſh, while the world ſtandeth, that he might not offend his brother, or cauſe him to fall, or to ſtumble: The Apoſtle, we ſay, having appointed no time, no not while the world ſtādeth in this caſe, & all others of the ſame nature, we demand, by what rule of holy Writt, your Lordſhips may limite a certaine time, as by the eight, tenth or twelfe moneth for the reformation of iudgment, in this but ſuppoſed errour, of not vſing Popiſh apparell, croſſings and kneelings?
            Nay if by the decree & canons of the Apoſtle, both Miniſters & people, be infranchiſed, to vſe, and not to vſe, theſe things freely & frankly without lett; we then demand, by what rule of holy Writ, it may be lawfull for your Synode, by a provinciall ordinance and conſtitution, to change and to turne this their Chriſtian freedome and libertie, into a meere ſlaviſh ſervitude and neceſſitie? And therefore we proteſt from your Synod, and avow, that your Synode in this caſe, was not guided by the ſpirite of Christ, and that therevpon it followeth your decrees, (ſo many of them) as abate the edge of charitie, whetted vpon the brethren, by the Apoſtles rule, or bringing into bondage againe, ſervantsCor. 10. 28. manumiſſed by the authoritie of Chriſt, that the ſame your decrees

are both erroneous in them ſelves, and iniurious to the church of God.
            For vnleſſe the world have bene diſſolved ſince the Apoſtles tyme, and that the ſame world, ſtand not now, which ſtood then; or vnles the ſame be not charitie now, and the ſame freedome now, which the Apoſtle cō
               mended for charitie, and left for freedome: or vnles you would have vs, winke with our eyes, leaſt we ſhould ſee, and ſtoppe our eares, leaſt wee ſhould heare, and harden our heartes leaſt we ſhould vnderſtand, & conſequently have no faith, except it be a Synodall, a Provinciall, or a Canturbury-church faith: we muſt needes ſpeake both what wee have ſeene, what we have heard, and what we have vnderſtood, out of holy ſcriptures; Namely that ſome of your Synodall decrees be oppoſite & repugnant to the Apostles both chriſtian charitie and christian libertie.
            
            For if it be ſinne for one brother, to do any acte, by doing whereof an other brothers conſcience, is wounded and made weak; if alſo whoſoever ſhall wound the weake conſcience, of a brother, and ſinne againſt a brother, doth ſinne againſt Chriſt: then of neceſſitie be your canons of popiſh rites & ceremonies, both vncharitable canons againſt your brethren, & ſinfull canons againſt Chriſt. For though it were free for chriſtians to vſe Copes, Surplices, ſquare Cappes, Croſſes, &c. civilly vpon their backes, heads or foreheads; yet if ſome remayne ignorant of this libertie, and thinking them to be vncleane, as having bene things offered to the ſervice of an Idoll, ſhould by the example of others, with wavering conſciences, enterpriſe to vſe them, when inwardly they thinke the vſe of them to diſpleaſe God: if in this caſe (we ſaye) men ſhall ſinne againſt Chriſt: how much more ſhall they ſinne againſt Chriſt, when they ſhall vſe them in the worſhip of God? againſt which vſe, they have many teſtimonies out of holy Writt, ſeated in their conſciences by the finger of God, that their vſe is altogether vnlawfull in the worſhip of God.
            On the other ſide, if it be no ſinne againſt Chriſt, for weake brethren not to vſe either theſe or any other relickes, monumentes and memorialls of Idolatrie; in the ſervice and worſhip of the true God: If alſo the weake in faith can not vſe thē waveringly, without ſinne againſt Chriſt, If laſtly they have libertie and freedome, by the Apoſtles doctrine, not to vſe them at all; we deſire your Lordſhips to reſolve vs out of holy Writt, how it may be lawfull, in foro conſcientiae, to bring weake brethren, before the ſeates of Magiſtrates, to excommunicate them, to revile them, & to ſpeak all maner of evill againſt them, for vſing their Apoſtolicall freedome, for being charitable, and for not committing ſinne.
            
               
               But, Sirs, by your patience, they be not handled after any ſuch maner, ſimply,
               Bb. 
               and only for not vſing the Surplice, not making a croſſe, not kneeling in the act of receyving the communion, but for contempt of not vſing and making the ſame, and not kneeling at the comandement of the christian Magistrate, whom not to obey in things indifferent, is to ſinne against Christ; and for this ſinne they ought to be excommunicated, &c.
            
            Though this be a Maxime in ſome learning, non ſolent quae ſuperabundant
               Gentl. 
               vitiare ſcripturas; yet by your Lordſhips favour, your &c. ſwelleth to high, and gulleth the paſſages of a ſofte ſpirit overmuch: your argument alſo of chriſtian Magiſtracy; at the leaſt three times already vrged, is in this place more then ſuperabundant, as amounting above the third, vnto a fourth degree of compariſon. But to the poyntes. And firſt, becauſe (as earſt hath bene ſaid) it was the decree, and ſupplication of your Synod that begate this commandement, and not this commandement, that travayled, and brought your Synodall decree and ſupplication to the birth: touching which your Synodall decree, for the vſe of theſe ornaments, rites & ceremonies, by the weak, what els is there to be added, then that we deny againe, what in effect, more then once, & twice, we have in this behalfe denied before: namely granting theſe thinges in their owne nature to be indifferent, and that they may be vſed in the ſervice of God, by them that be ſtrong in faith, & have knowledge of their indifferencie: nevertheleſſe we deny that by any Decree of the Church, they may be appointed to be vſed, by the weake, and them that have no knowledge of their indifferencie: For this we have learned of the nature of things indifferent, if the cōſcience be ſtrong, that the things be good; if the conſcience be weake, that they bee evill: not in regarde of their owne nature, but in regarde of the conſcience of him that iudgeth them to be evill.
            For as it is not meate it ſelfe, but the vſe of meate, wherevnto the Apoſtle would have men ſticke, ſo is it not apparell, a Croſſe, or a Ceremonie, wherevpon the ſervantes of Chriſt are to caſt their eyes, that they may not be reprehended, by their conſciences rightly guyded, for the vſe of that thing which they vſe; And how ſhould a conſcience bee rightly guyded in the thing which he vſeth, vnles he have grounde out of Gods worde for the thinge which he vſeth? But he hath (you will ſay) a commaundement of God, to obey the higher powers, in the vſe of thinges indifferent. This is true in deed (ſaye we) if they (having for the guyde of their conſciences, the holy worde of God) ſhall iudge the

thinges, and the vſe of the things, for the ſervice wherevnto they bee commaunded, to be indifferent; but they being not fully perſwaded in their myndes, both of the indifferencie of the thinges, and of the vſe of the things, in that ſervice wherevnto they bee commaunded, how can your Lordſhips proove, that in this caſe the Church may decree, and the Magiſtrate command them to do an act, in the doing whereof, they ſhall commit ſinne, yea and which they can by no meanes avoyde, if in doing the thing commanded, they ſtand in doubt. For he that doubteth is condemned,Rō. 14. 23 in that he doth, becauſe he doeth it not of faith. And what ſoever is not of faith, is ſinne.
            Wherefore, becauſe no canon, nor decree of the Church, can cleanſe a mans conſcience of the weaknes of faith, or poure ſtrength into the ſame that he ſinne not; we affirme, that every decree, and canon of your Synod, which giveth an occaſion of offence, and emboldeneth the weak in faith to ſinne, by the vſe of theſe rites and ceremonies, in the worſhip of God, is a Canon and is a Decree conteyninge matter in the ſubſtance of it, contrary and repugnant to the doctrine of the Apoſtle: And that therefore it is no ſinne, for any brother weake in fayth, not to obey the ſame, though at the requeſt of your Synod, it hath pleaſed our Chriſtian Magiſtrate to inioyne him therevnto: becauſe the ground-worke of your Decree being ſandy, the buylding of the Magiſtrate, can not ſurely and firmely ſtande: This your Lordſhips argument therefore of the lawfull vſe of indifferent things, by commandement of the chriſtian Magiſtrate, for orders ſake, is but a begging of the point in queſtion: For wee hold, that no church, nor chriſtian Magiſtrate, can decree or impoſe any rites and ceremonies (being relickes, monuments, or memorialls of idolatrie) to be vſed, no not for orders ſake, in the worſhip of the true God; becauſe the vſe of all relickes, monumentes, and memorialles of idolatrie, in divine worſhip, is not a thing, not only not indifferēt, but a thing in all reſpectes, meerely and abſolutely vnlawfull. And therefore it importeth your Lordſhips to proove vnto vs, by ſome holy Writt, the contrary of that which we affirme: namely, that the vſe of all Relickes, Monumentes, and Memorialles of Idolatrie, (as thinges indifferent for orders ſake) may be decreed by the Church, and inioyned by the Chriſtian Magiſtrate, in the worſhip of God; what we have alleadged out of holy Writt, for the proofe of our generall negative, your Lordſhips have ſeene and read, And now we wayte and exſpect that you would produce your ſtronge reaſons, for the proofe of your generall affirmative.
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        Our generall negative is this.
                        
                           No Reliques, Monumentes, or Memorialls of Idolatrie may lawfully be decreed by the Church, or inioyned by the Christian Magistrate to be vſed by the ministers and ſervants of Christ, as indifferent rites and ceremonies, for orders ſake, in the worſhip of God: And if none, Then not your Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, &c.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Your Lordſhips affirmation.
            
            All Reliques, Monumentes, and Memorialls of Idolatrie, may lawfullie be decreed by the Church and inioyned by the Chriſtian Magiſtrate to be vſed by the Miniſters & ſervants of Chriſt, as indifferēt rites & ceremonies, for orders ſake in the worſhip of God: And if all, why not then a Friers coule, for an Archbiſhop: a Monkes hood, for a Biſhop: a ſhaven crowne, for a Deane? and a ſhaven chinne for an Archdeacon? But now alas, alas, to adde and to ſpeake but one worde touching the vſe of theſe rites, &c. appointed by your Synod for orders ſake, may not we, and all the Churches take vp a complaynt, and lamentably cry, ſaying: Alas, alas, what? Was it not poſsible for your ſacred Synod aſſembled (as you ſay) in the name of Christ, but that the ſame must decree popiſh and Idolatrous rites and ceremonies, to be ſtill continued in the church for orders ſake? Or was it not poſsible, for your ſacred Synod, aſſembled (as you ſay) in the name of Christ, but that the ſame must needes deviſe and decree ſuch rites, and ceremonies, for orders ſake, as by the vſe whereof your weake brethren, the ſervantes of Christ, can not be but tempted, and captiouſly inſnared? Or was it not poſsible for your Synod, to have vſed their iudgement, but to the perill of the ſoules of their brethren? but to put occaſions of falling and of ſtumbling, before their brethren?
            
            
               But by your patience, Sirs, we abhorre the popiſh pollutions of the Surplice,
               Bb. 
               of the Croſſe, and of the Idolatrous kneeling to a piece of bread. And as we take not our garmentes, rites, and ceremonies from the papistes, but from their betters, ſo we profeſſe the detestation of their ſuperstitious abuſes, and restore them to their ancient integrity.
            
            But by your Lordſhips favour, all men have not knowledge of the Idoll,Genel. as you have, All mens knowledge among vs doth not edifie, but by their knowledge many men be puffed vp: All men among vs profeſſe not a deteſtation of their pollutions: All men doe not knowe thoſe betters from whom (as you ſay) they were taken. Neither laſtly doe all men vnderſtande, what that ancient integritie is whereof you ſpeake.
            
               The Papiſtes you know, as they daily commit fornication with that great whore, ſo doe they greatly delite, and much ſolace them ſelves, to ſee their minionly Prieſtes attired in the vnchaſt colours of their wanton paramoure.
            Nay, with great inſolencie and oſtentation they vaunt, that Croſſes,In a libell caſt out in London againſt one of the Sherifes and certaine Miniſters. Surplices, &c. are to be received and vſed, not as things indifferent, but as neceſſarie parts of Gods divine worſhip.
            The Atheiſtes, as they neither embrace the doctrine, nor reverence the perſon of the Miniſter of Chriſt, much leſſe doe they regard from whence miniſteriall apparell originally came. Only if they live vnder an ordinary, who glorieth to be a ceremonie maſter, they can then find witt, and opportunitie, and agilitie, and nimblenes ynough, to make vſe of theſe ceremonies, as by them to worke miſchief againſt their Godly Miniſter, if at any time them ſelves be reproved for their drunkennes, whoredome, vſurie, ſwearing, poperie and ſuch like: But if any of themBiſhop Horne. being of the age of 60. 70. or 80. yeares, ſhalbe willed by their honeſt ordinarie, to returne home, and to learne of their Miniſter the Catechiſme, before they proſecute their preſentment, for the not wearing of a Surplice in this caſe, rather then they wilbe religiouſly taught the principles of godlines, at their Miniſters hand, they force not for xxv. yeares ſpace together, to bee wholy ſilent: Liking in the meane while the not wearing of a Surplice well ynough. And as for our partes, and others of the Religion, we doubt very much whether your Lordſhips be able to prove, that the Surplice, the croſſe in Baptiſme, or kneeling in the act of receiving the Communion, were by their firſt originall of any integritie, for an orderly or comely vſe of outward divine ſervice or worſhip, as now they be vſed, yea or no; For though now they bee vrged as decent and comely ſignes and ornaments, to the forme of Gods worſhip; yet if at the beginning they were not for this end and purpoſe, drawne directly or by conſequence, from ſome expreſſe commandement of God, but were meerely the deviſes & inventions of men: then can we not aſſure our ſelves, that they be reſtored, to their ancient integritie. For how ſhould their originall bee of ancient integritie, when they had beginning, not from the will of God, but from the witt of man? not from the Well of life, but from the pitt of death? when theyDeut. 31. 28 were not pure, but corrupt, & therefore without integritie? For which cauſe we are to beware leaſt we be taken in a ſnare by them, provoking the Lord to anger through the workes of our owne hands.
            
               And howſoever theſe ceremonies be taken from men, better affected to the Goſpell, then be the Papiſtes: nevertheleſſe ſeeing ſervants (be they never ſo young) are not to be guided by their fellow ſervants (be they never ſo old) without knowledge of their Lord & Maſters pleaſure, firſt declared vnto them by his Prophets or Apoſtles, we pray your Lordſhips to prove vnto vs, out of holy Writt, that theſe ceremonies hold their originall from God.
            For, if they be not according to the old way, which is the good way,Ierem. 16 and wherein we are bidd to ſtand, and to behold, and to aske after it, namely, the Teſtimonie which is bound vp, and the Law which is ſealedIſai. 8. 16 vp among Gods Diſciples, then ſhall the Paſtours offend for runningIere. 2. 8. 36 about ſo much, to change their wayes, going after things that doe not profit; yea (if they doe not according to this word) they may iuſtlyIſa. 16. 20 be reproved, becauſe their is no light in them.
            The ancienty then of your ceremonies, let the ſame be as ancient as poſſibly ye can deviſe, yet in reſpect of the ancient of dayes, and of him that inhabiteth the eternitie, they ſhalbe but novelties, and the Author of them but a noveliſt. For as this ſaying in the Schoole of reaſon, is true, omne magnum tum est paruum, cum ſit aliquid maius; ſo is this ſaying alſo in the ſame Schoole true, omne vetus tum est novum, cum ſit aliquid vetustius.
            
            Yea and the holy Scriptures teach vs, to call thoſe things new, whatſoever man inventeth, be the errour never ſo old. They have (ſaith the holy Ghoſt) offered vnto Devills, not vnto God, but to gods whom theyDeu. 32. 17 knew not: new gods, that came newly vp, whom their Fathers feared not; And in an other place, they are pronounced to be accurſed whenDeut. 27. 5. they turne after other gods, which they have not known, whereby alſo is reproved the vanitie and fondnes of thoſe men, which leave that which is certeine, to follow that which is vncerteine.
            If the Apoſtle then, the firſt and moſt ancient father of all the children whom he begate with the word of the Goſpell, and the planter of all the Churches among the Gentils, never knew thoſe or any the like rites, ornaments, or ceremonies, much leſſe never knew them to be for any decent and orderly forme of Gods worſhip, in any of the churches which he begate, and which he planted; it muſt needes follow (as wee conceave) that the children of the Church, (who deviſed and appointed theſe rites and ceremonies, for an orderly and decent forme of Gods worſhip, in the ages ſucceeding the Apoſtles) left the ancient integritie

together with the certaine and ſingle forme of Gods worſhip, ſetled in the Apoſtolicall churches, without any miniſteriall apparrell, croſſings or kneelings in the act of receiving the communion: And ſo following their owne hearts, became Noveliſtes vnto the Apoſtles, in theſe vncerteine and new found ceremonies.
            Neither for the poynt in queſtion is it materiall, whether they were children, next and immediatly ſucceeding the Apoſtles, yea or no: For ſo ſoone as they declined from that integritie, & ſimple maner of GodsDeut. 9. 12. worſhip, and from that certeyntie, wherein the Apoſtle left the Churches, even ſo ſoone was their vncerteyne and newly ſtart vp forme of Gods worſhip corrupt and impure: For when the Lord hath once ſpokenDeut. 5. 22. wordes, and doeth add no more, thereby we are taught, by his example, to lay our handes vpon our mouthes, to bee content with his word, and to add nothing of our owne. Yea and we bee warned to beware,Deu. 11. 16 leaſt our heartes deceyve vs, and leaſt we turne aſide by deviſinge fooliſh inventions, according to our owne fantaſies.
            Wherefore your Lordſhips argument, of ſuch ancientie, and of ſuch integritie of theſe ceremonies, as declineth from that ancient, and in al poyntes and qualities certeyne and vpright forme of Gods worſhippe practiſed without Copes, Surplices, Croſſes, and kneelings in the acte of receyving the communion, by the Apoſtle in all the Churches planted by his Miniſterie, argueth rather corruption and noveltie, then eyther any ancientie or integritie.
            And therefore we pray your Lordſhips, that hereafter you would be adviſed by vs, not to licenſe your Scribes and prolocutors, to caſt an imputation of Noveltie vpon the Miniſters of Chriſt: or to vpbrayde them with that odious and reprochfull name of Noveliſtes: leaſt for their ſafegard, and iuſt defence in this behalfe, they be conſtreyned to pray for remedy, protection, & ayde from our Sovereigne Lord King Iames: That by a writ of errour, out of the Recordes of the High Court of Parliament, to be graunted vnto them, they may procure the reverſing, and adnihilating of your worthie orators, their vniuſt and Novelous accuſatiō: For vnleſſe it ſhould ſeeme a ſmall matter, in your Lordſhips ſight, to vpbrayd our Sovereigne Lord the King, his Nobles and Commons of both Realmes, with a blemiſh of being Noveliſtes, and to be complotters of Novelties, for that his Highnes, and they, by al good counſelles, endevour, that the Engliſh, and Scottiſh nations, ſhould bee vnited into one people, and be reſtored to their firſt and ancient name

of Brittans: And that the two Realmes, England and Scotland, as in moſt Ancient time ſhould be called by the name of Great Brittany, vnles (we ſay) it ſhould ſeeme a ſmall matter, in your eyes, to traduce the King, his Nobles and Commons, in this caſe, of being Noveliſtes, wee pray your Lordſhips to beare with vs; if we tell you playne, that for our partes we can not throughly diſcerne, with what honeſtie your Scribes be indowed, when as in their pamphlettes, they blaze the Miniſters of Chriſt to be Noveliſtes. Which Miniſters notwithſtanding hate nothing more then Noveltie, and crave nothing ſo much as that the moſt certeyne and moſt ſingle forme of Gods worſhip, left to the Churches, by the Apoſtle, without your many, and vncerteyne rites and ceremonies, might be reſtored, to her primative, and Apoſtolicall ancientie, and integritie.
            God ſave King IAMES.
         
      
      
         
            
               Faults eſchaped in the Print.
               Pag. 6. lin. 6. is for it.
               Pag 6. li. 10. followe, for followe.
               Pag. 17. li. à fine 8. oovet, for covet.
               Pag. 18. li. à fine 7. prohibition, for prohibition.
               Pag 24. li. 4. outward, for outward.
               Pag. 26. ad marg. li. 2. Numb. 21. 8. 9.
               Pag. 27. marg Kin 10. 10, for 16 10.
               Pag. 42. li. 12. comn: and, for command.
            
            
         
      
   