
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE Second part of the good Huſ-wiues IEWELL.
                  Where is to be found moſt apt and readieſt wayes to diſtill many whol. ſome and ſweet Waters.
                  
                  In which likewiſe is ſhewed the beſt maner in preſeruing of diuers ſorts of Fruits, & making of Sirrops.
                  
                  With diuers conceits in Cookerie with the Booke of Caruing.
                  AT LONDON Printed by E. Allde for Edward White, dwellimg at the little North doore of Paules Church at the ſigne of the Gun, 1597.
               
               
                  
                  The Table.
                  
                     TO boyle mary bones for dinner. fol. 1
                     To boyle a Capon. Ibidem
                     How to boyle a capon with orenges. fol. 2
                     How to boyle Teales, Mallards, pigeons, chynes of porke, or Neates tunges, all after one ſorte, fol. 3
                     Mutton boyled for ſupper. Ibidem
                     To boyle mutton with Nauons. fol. 4
                     To boyle a Lambes head with purtenannances. Ibidem
                     How to ſtew a capon for dinner. Ibid.
                     To boyle a capon in white broth. fol. 5
                     How to boyle chickins. Ibidem
                     To boyle chickins with ſpinage and Lettice. fol. 6
                     To make pears to be boiled in mear. Ibid
                     To farſe a cabbadge for a banquet diſh. fol. 7
                     To boile a breſt of Veale or mutton farced. fol. 8
                     To boile a Mugget of a ſheepe. fol. 2
                     To boile mutton for ſupper. Ibidem
                     To boile a Neats tung for ſupper. fol. 10
                     To boyle mallards, teales, and chines of porke with cabbadge, Ibidem
                     For a gooſe giblots and pigs petitoes. Ibi.
                     
                        For fricaſes of a Lambes head and Purtenance. fol. 11
                     For fricaſes of Neats feet for ſupper. Ibi.
                     A fricaſe of tripes. Ibidem
                     How to roſte a Lambes head. fol. 12
                     How to make a pye in a por. Ibidem
                     To make allowes to roſte or boyle. fol. 13
                     To make red Deere. Ibidem
                     To farſe all thinges, Ibidem
                     A Sop of Onyons. fol. 14
                     To make gallantine for fleſh or fiſh. Ibi
                     How to ſtew Oyſters. fol. 15.
                     To bake aloes of veale or mutton. Ibid.
                     To bake a cunnie, veale, or mutton, Ibi.
                     How to make fine paſte. fol. 16
                     Eor ſmall pyes. Ibidem
                     To make purſes or cremitaries. fol. 17
                     How to make a tart of ſpinage or wheate leaues, or of coleworts. Ibidem
                     For tartes of creame. Ibidem
                     A tart of proines. fol. 18
                     A tart of Egges. fol. 19
                     A white Leache. Ibidem
                     How to keep Lard in ſeaſon. Ibidem
                     To make Iombils a hundred. Ibidem
                     To make butterd Egges. Ibidem
                     How to boyle Neats feete. fol. 20
                     
                        How to boile a carpe. ibidem
                     How to boile a Pike with Orenges, a banquet diſh. fol. 22
                     How to boyle a Pike another way. fol. 23
                     How to boile Roches, perches, and Daſe with other ſmall fiſh. fol. 24
                     How to boile a Pike another way. ibidem
                     How to boile a Tench. ibidem
                     For Turbet and Cunger. fol. 25
                     For freſh Salmon. ibidem
                     For white peaſe pottage. fol. 26
                     To make a caudle of Ote meale. ibidem
                     How to dreſſe a carpe. fol. 27
                     How to farſe Egges. fol. 28
                     Sallets for fiſhe daies. ibidem
                     Another. ibidem
                     Another. ibidem
                     Another. ibidem
                     Another. fol. 29
                     Another. ibidem
                     Another. ibidem
                     Another. ibidem
                     Another. ibidem
                     Howe to make tartes or balde meares for fiſhe daies. ibidem
                     To make Alloes of freſhe Salmon to boyle

or to baka. fol. 31
                     A troute baked and minced. ibidem
                     How to make a ſprede Eagle of a Pullet. fol. 32
                     How to make Martris of a Capon, Hen, or Pullet. fol. 34
                     How to make a Colluce. ibidem
                     A made diſh of the proportion of an Egge for fiſh daies. fol. 35
                     How to ſtill a capon for a ſick perſon. fol. 36
                     How to preſerue Quinces in Sirrop all the yere. fol. 37
                     How to conſerue Wardens all the yeere in Sirrop. fol. 38
                     To conſerue Cherries, Dameſins, or Wheat plummes al the yere in the ſirrop. Ibi.
                     To make a paſte of Suger, whereof a man may make all manner of fruites, and other fine thinges with their forme, as Plates, Diſhes, Cuppes, and ſuch like thynges wherewith you may furniſh a table. fol. 39
                     To confite walnuts. fol. 40
                     To make Mellons and Pompons ſweet. fol. 41
                     To confite Orrenge peeles which may bee doone at all times in the yeare, and cheefly in May, becauſe then the ſaid peeles be greateſt and thickeſt. fol. 42
                     Howe to purifie and prepare Honny and

ſugar for to confite ſitrons and al other fruites, fol. 43
                     How to confite peaches after the Spaniſh faſhion. Ibidem
                     A goodly ſecret for to condite or confite ringes, citrons, and all other fruites in ſirrope, fol. 45
                     How to bray golde. fol. 46
                     How to make a condonack. Ibidem
                     How to make confection of mellons or pompions. fol. 47
                     To ſtill a capon, a great reſtoritie. fol. 48
                     How to make good ſope. fol. 40
                     To make Quinces in ſirrope. fol. 50
                     For to make conſerue of barberies. fol. 51
                     To make a pudding of a calues chaldron. 
                     How to boile calues feet. fol. 52
                     How to ſtew Veale. Ibidem
                     How to boile chickins and mutton after the Dutch maner. ibidem
                     How to make a cawdle. fol. 93
                     How to make a haggaſſe pudding. Ibi.
                     How to make Haggas puddings. fol. 54
                     How to make Iſing puddings. ibid.
                     How to ſeeth muſcles. ibid.
                     How to make a pudding. fol. 55
                     How to ſtew ſteakes. ibid.
                     
                        To boyle the Lightes of a calfe. fol. 56
                     How to make a Lenthen haggeſſe with poched egges. Ibidem
                     How to boile onyons. fol. 59
                     How to boyle citrons. ibidem
                     How to bake Lampernes. fol. 57
                     How to make fried to ſte of ſpinage. ibid.
                     How to bake a citron pye. fol. 49.
                     Another way to bake citrons. ibid.
                     How to bake alloes. ibid.
                     How to bray golde. fol. 60
                     How to make conſerue of Roſes, and of other flowers. ibid.
                     How to make conſerue of cherries, and of other fruites. ibid.
                     How to ſeeth a carpe. fol. 61
                     How to ſeeth a pike. ibid.
                     How to boylecockles, fol. 62
                     How to boile a carpe in green broth with a pudding in his belly. ibid.
                     How to make an almond cuſtatd. fol. 63
                     How to make a blanch marget on the fiſh day. ibid.
                     How to bake chickins. 
                     How to make a pudding in a pot, ibid.
                     How to ſtew ſteakes. ibid.
                     To roſte a Pigge, fol. 65
                     
                        How to roſte an Hare. fol. 66
                     How to make toſtes▪ ibidem
                     How to make conſerue of Mellons or pompons. ibidem
                     How to make Sirrope of Violets. fol. 67
                     How to make Sope. fol. 68
                     How to preſerue Orrenges. ibidem
                     The ſtilling of a capon a great reſtoritie. fol. 69
                     To make▪dry Marmelet of Peaches. fol. 70
                     How to make the ſame of Quinces, or any other thing. fol. 71
                     How to preſerue Orrenges, Lemmons, and Pomecitrons. ibidem
                     Howe to preſerue Quinces all the yeare through, whole and ſoft. fol. 72
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A Booke of Cookerie.
                  
                     To boyle mary bones for for dinner.
                     
                        FIrſt put your mary bones into afaire pot of Water, and let them boyle till they bee halfe enough, then take out al your broath ſauing ſo much as will couer your mary bones, then put therto eight or nine carret rootes, and ſee they be wel ſcraped and waſhed, and cut inch long or litle leſſe and a handfull of Parſelie and Iſop chopped ſmall, and ſeaſon it with Salte, Pepper and Saffron. You may boyle Chynes and racks of Veale in al points as this is.
                  
                  
                     To boyle a Capon.
                     LEt your capon be faire ſcalded and ſhort truſſed, and put into a fair pot of water with a marybone or two, & a racke of 
                           •
                        utton cut together in three or fower peeces, and let them boyle together tyll they be halfe boyled, then take out a ladle full or two of the beſt of the broth, and put it into a faire earthen pot. & put thereto 
                           •
                         pinte of white wine or of claret, and cut a

twelue or fourtéene dates long wayes & a handfull of ſmall rayſons, a handfull of tyme, Roſemary and Iſope bound together, and ſo let theſe perſels boyle by thē
                        ſelues, and when your capon is enough, lay it in a faire platter vpon ſops of white bread, and your mutton by him alſo, then take out the mary from the bones whole, and lay it vpon the capon, then take your made broth & lay it vpō your capon & mutton, and ſo ſerue it forth, your latter broth muſt bee ſeaſoned with cinamon cloues and mace, and ſalt and mace beaten alſo.
                  
                  
                     To boyle a capon with Orenges.
                     TAke your Capon & ſet him on the fire as before with marybones & mutton, and whē you haue ſkimmed the pot wel, put thereto the value of a farthing loafe, and let it boyle till it be halfe boyled, then take two or thrée ladleful of ye ſame broth and put it into an earthen pot, with a pint of the wine aforeſaid, and pill ſix or eight Oringes and ſlice them thin, and put thē into the ſame broth with foure peniworth in ſugar or more, and a handfull of parceley, tyme, and Roſemary together tyed, and ſeaſon it with whole mace, Cloues &

ſticks of cinamon with two Nutmeg, beaten ſmall and ſo ſerue it.
                  
                  
                     To boile teales, Mallards, pigeons chines of porke, or Neates tunges all after one ſort.
                     LEt them be halfe roſted, ſticke afew cloues in their breſtes, then two or three toſtes of bread being burned black, then put them into a litle faire water immediatly take them out again, and ſtrain them with a litle wine and vineger to the quantitie of a pint: put it into an earthen potte, and take eight or ten onions ſlyced ſmall, being fryed in a frying pan with a diſh of butter, and when they be fried, put thē into your broth, then take your meat from the ſpitte and put it into the ſame broth, and ſo let them boyle together for a time, ſeaſoning with ſalt and pepper.
                  
                  
                     Mutton boyled for ſupper.
                     FIrſt ſet your mutton on the fire, & trim it cleane, then take out all the broth ſauing ſo much as will couer it, then take and put thereto ten or twelue onions pilled, cut them in quarters, with a handful of parſeley chopped fine, putting it to the mutton, and ſo let them boile, ſeaſoning it

with pepper, ſalt and ſaffron, with two or or three ſpoonefull of vineger.
                  
                  
                     To boyle Mutton with Nauons.
                     FIrſt pill your Nauons, and waſh them then cut fiue or ſixe of them into peeces to the bignes of an inche, and when your mutton hath boiled a while take out al the licour ſauing ſo much as may couer well the mutton, then put the Nauons into the pot of mutton with a handfull of parſelye, chopped fine, and a branche of Roſemary, ſeaſoning it with ſalt pepper and ſaffron.
                  
                  
                     To boyle a Lambes head with purtenaunces.
                     FIrſt ſkimme it well, then take of the broth, leauing ſo much as wil couer it, then put to it Parſely and Roſemarye, a branch of Iſop and time, and a diſh of butter, with Barberies or Gooſeberies, then let them boile being ſeaſoned with cloues Mace, ſalte, pepper, and ſaffron, and ſo ſerue it foorth vpon ſops.
                  
                  
                     To ſtewe a Capon for Dinner.
                     TAKE a knuckle of Veale and boil it with your capon: putting to it proines Rayſons great and ſmall, whole Mace, and let it boile together, ſeaſoning it with

Salt and ſo ſerue it forth.
                  
                  
                     To boyle a capon in white broth.
                     TAke a wel fleſhed capon and a maribone, and a quart of faire water, put them together in an earthen pot, and let them boyle till the Capon be enough, but you muſt firſt take away the mary from ye bone, and when it hath boiled take the vppermoſt of the broth & put it into an earthen potte, and the mary with it. Put to it ſmall raiſons, proines, whole mace, dates, and halfe a quartern of ſuger, ſixe ſpoonefull of verdiuice, three or fower yolkes of Egges, put theſe all together, and when your Capon is boyled, lay him in a fayre platter: powre your broth vpon him, and ſo ſerue him.
                  
                  
                     To boyle Chickens.
                     BOyle them as the Lambs head & purtenance is boiled, and when you are to ſerue them, ſtrain three or foure yolkes of Egges with vergious, and put it into the pot, and let it boyle no more: after the egs be put in, ſeaſon it with ſalt, pepper, mace and cloues, and ſo ſerue them. Thus may you boyle a connye or Muggets of Veale, as the chickins are boyled.
                  
                  
                     
                     To boile chickens with Spinnage and Lettice.
                     TAke a Platter of Spinnage and Lettice, and waſh them cleane, and when the pot is ſkimmed▪ then put them in with a diſh of butter, and a branch of roſemary with a litle vergious, being ſeaſoned with Salt and ginger beaten.
                  
                  
                     To make Peares to be boiled in meate
                     TAke a peece of a legge of Mutton or Veale raw, being mixed with a little Sheepe ſewet, and halfe a manchet grated fine, taking foure raw egges yolkes and al. Then take a little Time, & parſely chopped ſmal, then take a few gooſeberies or barberies, or greene grapes being whole. Put all theſe together, being ſeaſoned with Salte, ſaffron and cloues, beaten and wrought altogether; then make Rowles or Balles like to a peare, and when you haue ſo done, take the ſtalke of the ſage, and put it into the ends of your peares or balles, then take the freſhe broth of beefe, Mutton or veale, being put into an earthen pot, putting the peares or balles in the ſame broth wyth

Salt, cloues, mace and Saffron, and when you be ready to ſerue him, put two or three yolkes of egs into the broth. Let them boile no more after that but ſerue it forth vpon ſoppes. You may make balles after the ſame ſorte.
                  
                  
                     To farſe a cabbadge for a banquet diſh.
                     TAke litle rounde cabbage cutting off the ſtalkes, and by the cabbadge then make a round hole in your cabbadge, as much as will receiue your farſing meat, take héede you breake not the brimmes, thereof with your knife, for the hole muſt be round and deepe, then take the Kidney of a mutton or more, and chop it not ſmal, Then boile ſixe egges hard, taking the yolkes of them being ſmal chopped & alſo take rawe egges and a manchet grated fine, then take a handfull of proynes, ſo many great rayſons, ſeaſoning al theſe with ſalte, pepper, cloues and Mace, working all theſe together, and ſo ſtuffe your Cabbedge. But if you haue Sawſedge you may put it among your meate at the putting in of your ſtuffe, but you muſt leaue out both the ends of your ſawſage

at the mouth of the cabbadge when you ſhall ſerue it out. In ye boyling it muſt be within the cabbadge, and the cabbadge muſt be ſtopped cloſe with his couer in the time of his boyling, and bound faſt round about for breaking: the cabbadge muſt bée ſodde in a deepe pot with freſh beefe broth or mutton broth, and no more thē will lye vnto the top of the cabbadge, and when it is enough take away the thrid, and ſo ſet it in a platter, opening the heade & laying out the Sawſadge endes, and ſo ſerue it forth.
                  
                  
                     To boyle a breaſt of Veale or Mutton farced.
                     TAke a breaſt of Ueale or Mutton and farce it in like maner as your cabadg is, ſo that you leaue out the proines and great rayſons, boyle your veale or mutton in the foreſaide brothes, putting no more broath then will couer your meat, & when your meate is halfe boyled, then put twoo handfulls of Lettuce or Spinage, cutting it fower times aſunder and no more, and when your meate and hearbes be boyled, then put a little verdiuice in the broth, ſeaſoning it with ſalt and pepper, then ſerue

your meate vpon Soppes, caſting your hearbes vpon it, and ſo ſerue it.
                  
                  
                     To boile a Mugget of a ſheepe.
                     FIrſt waſh and ſconre it clean, then per boyle it a litle, then choppe a péece of a Kidney of Mutton ſmall, and put it into a platter, thē put the quantity of a farthing lofe grated, with prunes and rayſons of eche a handful, Perſely and time chopped ſmal, and thrée or foure hard roſted egges being chopped with bread and Suet, then a litle water put to and ſaffron, and coulour it with thrée or foure rawe egges, both yolkes and whites, Salt, Pepper, Coues and Mace being minced together, putting it into the Mugget, and ſo boile it with a little Mutton broth and Wine, Lettice and ſpinnage whole in the ſame broth, and ſo ſerue it forth.
                  
                  
                     To boile Mutton for Supper.
                     TAke Carret rootes, and cut them an inch long, take a handfull of parſelie and time halfe chopped, and put into the pot the Mutton, and ſo let them boyle, being ſeaſoned with Salte and pepper, and ſo ſerue it foorth.
                  
                  
                     
                     To boile a neates tongue to Supper.
                     TAke a little wine or faire water, putting vnchopped Lettuce faire waſhed into your Neates tongue, with a diſhe of Butter or two, and ſeaſon it with Salte, Pepper, cloues and Mace, and ſo ſerue it.
                  
                  
                     To boile Mallards, Teales, and chines of porke with Cabbadge.
                     FIrſt vnloſe your Cabbadge, & cut them in thrée or foure quarters vnloſing euery leafe for doubt of worms to be in them, then waſh thē and put them into a pot of faire water, and let them boyle a quarter of an houre, then take them vp, and chop them ſomewhat great, then put them into a faire pot with the broath of the Mallard and whole Pepper, and pepper beaten, with Cloues, mace, and ſalte, and ſo let them boile together. &c.
                  
                  
                     For a Gooſe gibluts and pigges petitoſe.
                     LEt them be ſoddē throughly, then cut them in péeces and fry thē with butter, and when they be half fried, then put to a little Uineger with Ginger, Sinamon and pepper and ſo ſerue it forth: thus

maye you vſe Calues feete boyled in all pointes as this is.
                  
                  
                     For fricaſies of a lambes head and purtenance.
                     TAke a Lambs head and cleaue it, and cut his purtenaunces in peeces, and perboyle it till it bee almoſt enough, then take the yolkes of two Egges, and baſte your Lambes head and purtenance with it, and frye it in butter for ſauce, put to the butter, pepper, Uineger and Salt, frying them together a little on the fire and ſo ſerue it.
                  
                  
                     For fricaſies of Neates feete for ſupper.
                     TAke your Neates feete & cleane them and baſte thē with butter and crums of bread, and lay them vpon a Grediorne, till they be throughlie broyled, then take Uineger, pepper, ſalt and butter, and put thē altogeather in a diſh, ſet on a chafingdiſh of coles boyling, and ſo let them boyle there til you muſt ſerue it, you muſt put to ſauce, barberies or grapes, &c.
                  
                  
                     A fricaſe of Tripes.
                     LEt them be faire ſodden, and ſauce thē take the leaneſt and cut it in peeces,

inch broad, frye them with butter or flats, and your ſauce to bee vineger, pepper and muſtard, being put a litle while in the friing panne with butter or flattes.
                  
                  
                     To roſt a lambes head.
                     TAke the head and purtenaunces being cleane waſhed, cut the purtenances in péeces, ſo that it may be broached, and roſt thē baſting it with butter, and when it is enough, take the yolkes of two rawe egs, with a little parſely chopped fine, beating them together, and baſte your Lambes head with it, euen ſo long till your egges be hardened on, then take it vp, and ſerue it with the ſauce of pepper, vineger and butter boyled a little vpon a Chafingdiſh of coles.
                  
                  
                     To make a pie in a pot.
                     TAke the leaneſt of a Legge of Mutton and mince it ſmall, with a peece of the kidney of mutton, then put it into an earthen pet, putting therto a ladlefull or two of mutton broth, and a little wine, of proynes and raiſons of ech a handfull, or barberies. Let them boyle together, putting to it half an orenge, if you haue any, ſeaſoning it with ſalte, pepper, cloues, mace,

and Saffron and ſo ſerue it.
                  
                  
                     To make allowes to roſte or boile.
                     TAke a Leg of mutton and ſlice it thin, then take out the kidneys of the mutton hauing it minced ſmall, with Iſope, time, parſely, & the yolkes of hard egges, then bind it with crumms of white bread and rawe eggs, and put to it proines and great raiſons, and for want of them barberies or Gooſberies, or grapes ſeaſoning it with Cloues, mace, pepper Sinamon, ginger & ſalt. You may make a mugget of a Sheepe as theſe allowes bee, ſauing you muſt put no mutton into it.
                  
                  
                     To make red deere.
                     TAke a legge of béef, and cut out all the ſinewes clean, then take a roling pin and all to beate it, then perboile it, and when you haue ſo doon, lard it very thick, then lay it in wine or Uineger for two or three howers, or a whole night, thē take it out & ſeaſon it with peper, ſalt cloues and mace, thē put it into your paſt, & ſo bake it.
                  
                  
                     To farſe all things.
                     TAKE a good handfull of tyme, Iſope, Parſelye, and three or foure yolkes of Egges hard roſted, and choppe them with

hearbs ſmall, then take white bread grated and raw egs with ſweet butter, a few ſmall Raiſons, or Barberies, ſeaſoning it with Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Sinamon and Ginger, woorking it altogether as paſte, and thē may you ſtuffe with it what you will.
                  
                  
                     A ſop of Onions.
                     TAKE and ſlice your Onions, & put them in a frying panne with a diſh or two of ſweete butter, and frie them together, then take a litle faire water and put into it ſalt and peper, and ſo frie them together a little more, then boile them in a lyttle Earthen pot, putting to it a lyttle water and ſweet butter, &c. You may vſe Spinnage in like maner.
                  
                  
                     To make gallantine for fleſh or fiſh.
                     TAke browne bread and burne it black in the toſting of it, thē take them and lay them in a litle wine and vineger, and when they haue ſoked a while, thē ſtrain them, ſeaſoning it with ſinamon, ginger, Pepper and ſalte, then ſet it on a chaſingdiſh with coales, and let it boyle till it bée thick, and then ſerue it in ſaucers.
                  
                  
                     
                     To ſtewe Oyſters.
                     TAke your oyſters, and put them either in a little ſkellet ouer the fire, or elſe in a platter ouer a chaffingdiſhe of coles, and ſo let thē boile with their licour, ſwéet butter, vergious, vineger, and pepper, and of the tops of Time a little, till they be enough, and then ſerue them vpon ſoppes.
                  
                  
                     To bake aloes of Veale or Mutton.
                     MAke your aloes ready to bake in all points as you boile them, laying vpon them in the paſte barberies, Gooſeberies or grapes gréene, or ſmall Raiſons, and put in your Pie a diſh af butter, and ſo ſet it in the ouen, and when it is baked, then put in a little vergious, and ſo ſeethe it in an Ouen again a while, and ſo ſerue it foorth.
                  
                  
                     To bake a Connie, Veale, or Mutton.
                     TAke a Conny and perboile it almoſte enough, then mince the fleſh of it verie fine, and take with it three yolkes of hard egges, and mince with it, thē lay another Conny in your Pie being perboiled, and your minced meat with it, being ſeaſoned

with Cloues, Mace, Ginger, Saffron Pepper & Salt, with two diſhes of ſwéete butter mixed with it, lay vpon your Connie Barberies Gooſeberies, or grapes, or the ſmal raiſons, and ſo bake it.
                  
                  
                     To make fine paſte.
                     TAke faire flower and wheate, & the yolkes of egges with ſweet Butter, melted, mixing all theſe together with your hands, til it be brought dowe paſte, & then make your coffins whether it be for pyes or tartes, then you may put Saffron and ſuger if you wil haue it a ſwéet paſte, hauing reſpect to the true ſeaſoning ſome vſe to put to their paſte Béefe or Mutton broth, and ſome Creame.
                  
                  
                     For ſmall pies.
                     TAke the Mary out of the marybones hole, and cut it in the bignes of a bean ſeaſon your mary with Ginger, Suger, and Sinamon, then put them in fine paſte and frie them in a frying panne with the ſkimming of freſh béefe broth, or elſe you may bake them in your ouen a litle while take héede they burne not, and when you do ſerue them in a faire diſh, caſt blaunch pouder vpon them.
                  
                  
                     
                     To make purſes or cremitaries.
                     TAke a little Marow, ſmall raiſons, & Dates, let the ſtones be taken away, theſe being beaten together in a Morter, ſeaſon it with Ginger, Sinamon and ſuger, then put it in fine paſte, & bake them or frie them, ſo done in the ſeruing of them caſt blaunch pouder vpon them.
                  
                  
                     To make a tarte of Spinnage or of wheate leaues or of colewortes
                     TAke three handfull of Spinnage, boile it in faire water, when it is boyled, put away the water from it and put the ſpinnage in a ſtone morter, grind it ſmal with two diſhes of butter melted, and foure rawe egges all to beaten, then ſtraine it and ſeaſon it with ſuger, Sinamon and ginger, and lay it in your Coffin, when it is hardened in the ouen, then bake it, and when it is enough, ſerue it vpon a faire diſh, and caſt vpon it Suger and Biſkets
                  
                  
                     For tartes of creame.
                     TAke a pinte of creame with ſixe rawe egges, and boile them together, and ſtirre it well that it burne not, then let it boile till it be thick, then take it out of the

pot, and put to two diſhes of Butter melted, and when it is ſome what colde, then ſtraine it and ſeaſon it with Suger, then put it into your paſte, when your paſte is hardned, and when it is enough, the ſerue it with Suger caſt vpon it. If you will haue a Tart of two colours, then take the halfe of it, when it is in Creame, and colour the other halfe with ſaffron or yolks of egges.
                  
                  
                     A tart of proines.
                     MAke your Coffine two inches déepe round about, thē take ten or twelue good apples, pure them and ſlice them, and put them into the Paſte with two diſhes of butter among the apples, then couer your tarte cloſe with the Paſte, and breake a diſhe of butter in peeces, and lay it vpō the couer becauſe of burning in the Panne. And when the apples be tender, take it forth and cut of the couer, & beate the apples together till they be ſofte, and they be dry put the more butter into them and ſo ſeaſon them with Sinamon, Ginger and Suger, then muſt you cut your couer after the faſhion, leauing it vpon your Tarts, ſerue it with blaunch pouder.
                  
                  
                     
                     a tart of egges.
                     TAke twelue Egges and butter them together, then ſtraine them with roſewater, ſeaſon it with Suger, then put it into your paſte, and ſo bake it and ſerue it with ſuger vppon it.
                  
                  
                     a white leach.
                     TAke a quart of newe milke, and thrée ounces weight of Iſinglaſſe, halfe a pounde of beaten ſuger, and ſtirre them together, and let it boile half a quarter of an hower till it be thicke, ſtirring them al the while: then ſtraine it with thrée ſpoonfull of Roſewater, thē put it into a platter and let it coole, and cut it in ſquares. Lay it faire in diſhes, and lay golde vpon it.
                  
                  
                     To keepe lard in ſeaſon.
                     CUt your lard in faire peeces, and ſalt it well with white ſalte, euery péece with your hand, and lay it in a cloſe veſſel then take faire running water, and much white ſalt in it, to make it brine, thē boile it vntill it beare an Egge, then put it into your Lard and keepe it cloſe.
                  
                  
                     To make Iombils a hundred.
                     TAke twenty Egges and put them into a pot both the yolkes & the white, beat

them wel, then take a pound of beaten ſuger and put to them, and ſtirre them wel together, then put to it a quarter of a peck of flower, and make a hard paſte thereof, and then with Anniſeede moulde it well, and make it in little rowles beeing long, and tye them in knots, and wet the ends in Roſewater, then put them into a pan of ſéething water, but euen in one waum, then take them out with a Skimmer and lay them in a cloth to drie, this being doon lay them in a tart panne, the bottome béeing oyled, then put them into a temperat Ouen for one howre, turning then often in the Ouen.
                  
                  
                     To make buttered Egges.
                     TAke eight yolkes of egges, and put them into a pint of creame, beat them together and ſtraine them into a poſſenet all, ſetting vpon the fire and ſtirring it, & let it ſeeth vntil it quaile, then take it and put it into a clean cloth, and let it hang ſo that the Waye may auoide from it, and when it is gone beate it into a diſhe of roſewater and ſuger, with a ſpoon, and ſo ſhall you haue fine butter. This doon, you may take the white of the ſame eggs putting

it into another pint of Cream, vſing it as the yolkes were vſed, and thus you may haue as fine white butter as you haue yellow butter.
                  
                  
                     To boyle Neates feete.
                     TAke your Neats feete out of the ſauce and waſh thē in faire water, then put them into your mutton broth, and take fiue or ſixe onions chopped not ſmall, then take a quantitie of tyme, Parſely and Iſope chopped fine: boyle altogether, and when it is half boyled and more, thē a d
                           •
                        ſh or two of butter, and put to it, then ſeaſon it with pepper, ſalt and ſaffron, with fiue or ſixe ſpoonefulls of vineger, and ſo ſerue it vpon ſoppes.
                  
                  
                     To boyle a Carpe.
                     TAke out the gall, caſt it away, and ſo ſcalde not your Carpe nor yet waſhe him, & when you doo kill him let his blood fall into a Platter, & ſplet your carpe into the ſame blood, and caſt thereon a ladleful of vineger, then toſte three or fower toſts of browne bread and burne it blacke, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         them into a little faire water, and thē immediatly ſtraine them into the liquour where your carp ſhalbe ſodden with thrée

or fower Onions chopped ſomewhat big, with parſely chopped ſmall, then ſet your broth vpon the fire, and when it begins to boyle, put to your Carpe two or three diſhes of butter, and a branch of roſemarie ſlipped, and ſlippes of time, and if it be too thick, put to it a little Wine, and ſo let it boyle faire and ſoftlye, ſeaſoning it with whole mace, cloues and ſalt, and pepper, cloues and mace beaten, and ſo ſerue it.
                  
                  
                     To boile a pike with orenges a banquet diſh.
                     TAke your pike, ſplit him, and ſéeth him alone with water, butter, & ſalt, then take an earthen pot and put into it a pint of water, and another of Wine, with two Orenges or two Lemmons if you haue them: if not, then take foure or fiue Oringes, the rines being cut away, and ſlyced, and ſo put to the licour, with ſixe Dates cut long wayes, and ſeaſon your broth with Ginger, pepper and ſalte, and two diſhes of ſweete butter, boyling theſe together, and when you will ſerue him, lay your pike vpon ſoppes, caſting your broth vpon it, you muſt remember that you cut of your pikes head hard by the body & thē
                        
his body to be ſpletted, cutting euery ſide in two or three partes, and when he is enough, ſetting the body of the fiſh in order: then take his heade & ſet it at the foremoſt part of the diſh, ſtanding vpright with an Orrenge in his mouth, and ſo ſerue him.
                  
                  
                     To boile a pike another. way.
                     TAke your Pike and pull out all hys guttes, and doo not ſplette your Pyke, but cut of his head whole, and cut his body in three or foure péeces, and ſo let him be boiled in wine, Water, and Salte, to the quantitie of a pottell, then take a pinte of wine, and a ladlefull or two of the Pikes broth and put theſe together into an earthen pot, with two diſhes of butter, and thrée or foure Orenges ſliced, ſmall Raiſons and ſuger, Time and roſemary, ſlipped, and then put in the effect of the Pike in the ſame broth, and ſo let them boile together and when you be ready to ſerue, lay your Pike vpon ſoppes, and put your broth vpon it, ſeaſoning it with whole ſinamon and mace, and a Nutmeg beaten, and ſo ſerue it foorth.
                  
                  
                     
                     To boile Roche, Perche and Daſe, with other ſmall fiſh.
                     TAke faire water & put to it parſely Time & Roſemary ſlipped, and ſo let it boyle a good while together, then take a diſh or two of butter, putting to the ſame broth and your fiſh, and ſo let it boyle together ſeaſoning it with cloues mace pepper and ſalte, and ſo ſerue them vpon ſoppes.
                  
                  
                     To boile a Pike another way.
                     TAke and ſplet your Pike through the back and take out the refect, ſo done, put your Pike into a pan of water with Roſemary, let it ſeeth till it be boiled, thē take your refecte with a litle wine & verdiuice with two diſhes of butter, put theſe in a platter, ſetting it on a chafing diſhe of Coles, and there let it voile, ſeaſoning it with whole mace, this done, take vp your Pike, laying him vpon ſops in a platter, then take your refecte and his broth and caſt vpon it, and ſo ſerue it forth with ſalt.
                  
                  
                     To boile a Tench.
                     SEeth your Tench with a litle water & a good deale of vineger, whē it is ſodden

lay it in a faire diſh, take out all the bones and put a litle Saffron in your broth with a little ſalte, and put the ſame broth vpon your tench, and caſt a little fine pepper vpon it while it is hot, and ſo let your tench ſtand til it be on a gelly, and when you do ſerue it, take an Onion & Perſely chopped fine, and caſt it vpon your Tench, and ſo ſerue it.
                  
                  
                     For Turbot and Cunger.
                     SEeth them in faire water and ſalt, and let them boile till they be enough, then take them from the fire and let them coole then vſe them in the ſeaſoning as the ſalmon héereafter following.
                  
                  
                     For freſh Salmon.
                     TAKE your Salmon and boile him in faire water, roſemary and time, and in the ſéething put a quart of ſtrong Ale to it, and ſo let it boile till it be enough, then take it from the fire, and let it coole, then take your Salmon out of the pan, and put it into an earthen pan or woodden boule, and there put ſo much broth as will couer him, put into the ſame broth a good deale of vineger, ſo that it be tart with it.
                  
                  
                     
                     For White peaſe pottage.
                     TAke a quart of white Peaſe or more & ſeeth them in faire water cloſe, vntill they doe caſt their huſkes, the which caſt away, as long as any wil come vp to the topp, and when they be gon, then put into the peaze two diſhes of butter, and a little vergious, with pepper and ſalt, and a little fine powder of March, and ſo let it ſtand till you will occupy it, and thē ſerue it vpon ſops. You may ſée the Porpoſe and Seale in your Peaſe, ſeruing it forth two péeces in a diſh.
                  
                  
                     To bake porpoſe or Seale.
                     TAke your porpoſe or Seale, and perboile it, ſeaſoning it with Pepper and Salt, and ſo bake it, you muſt take of the Skinne when you doe bake it and then ſerue it forth with Gallentine in ſawcers
                  
                  
                     To make a cawdle of Ote meale.
                     TAke two handful or more of great otemeale, and beat it in a Stone Morter wel, then put it into a quart of ale, and ſet it on the fire, and ſtirre it, ſeaſon it with Cloues, mace, and Suger beaten, and let it boile til it be enough, then ſerue it forth vpon Soppes.
                  
                  
                     
                     To dreſſe a carpe.
                     TAke your carpe and ſcale it, and ſplet it, and cut off his heade, & take out all the bones from him cleane, then take the fiſh and mince it fine, being raw, with the yolkes of foure or fiue hard egges minced with it, ſo doone put it into an earthen pot, with two diſhes of butter & a pint of whit wine, a handfull of proynes, two yolks of hard egges cut in foure quarters, and ſeaſon it with one nutmeg not ſmall beaten, Salt, Sinamon and Ginger, and in the boyling of it you muſt ſtirre it that it burne not to the pot bottome, and when it is enough then take your minced meat, & lay it in the diſh, making the proportion of the body, ſetting his head at the vpper end and his taile at the lower end, which head and taile muſt be ſodden by themſelues in a veſſell with water and ſalt.
                     You may vſe a Pike thus in al points, ſo that you do not take the proines, but for them take Dates and ſmall raiſons, and when you haue ſeaſoned it as your Carpe is, and when you do ſerue it put the refect into the pikes mouth gaping, and ſo ſerue it foorth.
                  
                  
                     
                     To farſe Egges.
                     TAke eight or ten eggs and boyle them hard, pill of the ſhelles, and cutte euery eg in the middle then take out the yolkes and make your farſing ſtuffe as you do for fleſh, ſauing only you muſt put butter into it inſteede of ſuet, and that a little ſo doon fill your Egges where the yolkes were, and then binde them and ſeeth them a little, and ſo ſerue them to the table.
                  
                  
                     Sallets for fiſh daies.
                     FIrſt a ſallet of green fine hearbs, putting Perriwincles among them with oyle and vineger.
                  
                  
                     an other.
                     OLiues and Capers in one diſh, with vineger and oyle.
                  
                  
                     an other.
                     VVHite Endiue in a diſh with periwincles vpon it, and oyle and vineger.
                  
                  
                     an other.
                     CArret rootes being minced, and then made in the diſh, after the proportion of a Flowerdeluce, then picke Shrimps and lay vpon it with oyle and vineger.
                  
                  
                     
                     Another.
                     ONions in flakes laid round about the diſhe, with minced carrets laid in the middle of the diſh, with boyled Hippes in fiue partes like an Oken leafe, made and garniſhed with tawney long cut with oil
                           •
                         and vineger.
                  
                  
                     another.
                     ALexander buds cut long waies, garniſhed with welkes.
                  
                  
                     another.
                     SKirret rootes cut long waies in a diſh with tawney long cutte, vineger and Oyle.
                  
                  
                     another.
                     SAlmon cut long waies, with ſlices of onions laid vpon it, and vpon that to caſt violets, oyle and vineger.
                  
                  
                     another.
                     TAke pickeeld herring cut long waies and lay them in rundles with onions and parſely chopped, and other herringes the bones being taken out to bee chopped together and laide in the roundles with a long péece laide betwixt the rundles like the proportion of a ſnake, garniſhed with Tawney long cut, with vineger and oile,
                  
                  
                     
                     another
                     TAke pickelde Herrings and cut them long waies, and ſo lay them in a diſh, and ſerue them with oyle and vineger.
                  
                  
                     To make tattes or balde meates for fiſh daies.
                     TAke your diſh and annoint the bottom well with butter, thē make a fine paſt to the bredth of the diſh, and lay it on the ſame diſh vpon the butter, then take Béetes, Spinage, and Cabbadges, or white Lettice, cutting them fine in long péeces, then take the yolkes of viii. rawe egges, and ſix yolkes of hard Egges, with ſmall Raiſons and a little Cheeſe fine ſcraped, and grated bread, and thrée or four diſhes of Butter melted and clarified, and when you haue wrought it togeather, ſeaſon it with Sugar, Sinamon, Ginger and ſalt, then lay it vpon your fine paſt ſpreading it abroad, then the couer of fine paſte being cut with prettie work, then ſet it in your ouen, bake it with your diſh vnder it and when it is enough, thē at the ſeruing of it you muſt newe paſte the couer with Butter, and ſo ſcrape ſuger vppon it, and then ſerue it foorth.
                  
                  
                     
                     To make alloes of freſh Salmon to boile or to bake.
                     TAke your Salmon and cut him ſmall in peeces of thée fingers breadth, and when you haue cut ſo many ſlices as you will haue, let them be of the length of a womans hand, then take more of the ſalmon, as much as you thinke good, & mince it rawe with ſixe yolkes of hard Egges very fine, and then two or three diſhes of Butter with ſmall raiſons, and ſo worke them together with cloues, Mace, Pepper, and Salt, then lay your minced meat in your ſliced Aloes, euery one being rolled and pricked with a feather, fall cloſed, then put your aloes, into an Earthen pot, and put to it a pinte of water, and another pint of Claret wine, and ſo let them boile til they be enough, & afterwarde take the yolkes of three rawe egges with a litle vergious, being ſtrained together, and ſo put into the pot, then let your aloes ſeeth no more afterwarde, but ſerue them vpon Soppes of bread.
                  
                  
                     A Troute baked or minced.
                     TAke a Troute and ſeeth him, thē take out all the bones, then mince it verie

fine with thrée or foure dates minced with it, ſeaſoning it with Ginger, and Sinamon, and a quantitie of Suger and Butter, put all theſe together, working them faſt, thē take your fine paſte, and cut it in thrée corner waies in a ſmall bigneſſe, of foure or fiue coffins in a diſh, thē lay your ſtuffe in them, cloſe them, and ſo bake thē and in the ſeruing of thē baſte the couers with a little butter, and then caſt a little blaunch pouder on them, and ſo ſarue it foorth.
                  
                  
                     To make a ſplede Eagle of a pullet.
                     TAke a good pullet and cut his throate hard by the head, and make it but a little hole, then ſcalde him cleane, and take out of the ſmall hole his crop, ſo done, take a quill and blowe into the ſame hole, for to make the ſkinne to riſe from the fleſhe, then break the wing bones, and the bones hard by the knee, then cut the necke hard by the body within the ſkinne, then cut off the romp within the ſkinne, leauing the bones at the legges, and alſo ye head on, ſo drawing the whole body out within the ſkinne of the hole, the bones to be laid beneath

towardes the clawes, and the feets being left alſo on, you muſt cut of his bill: when you haue taken out all theſe bones, and brought it to the purpoſe, then take the fleſhe of the ſame pullet, & perboile it a little, and mince it fine with Shéepes Suet, grated bread, thrée yolkes of harde Egges, then binde it with foure rawe Egges, and a fewe Barberies, working theſe together, ſeaſon it with Cloues, Mace, Ginger, Pepper and ſalt, and ſaffron, then ſtuffe your pullets ſkinne with it, putting it in at the hole at the head, and when you haue ſtuffed him, take him and lay him flat in a platter, and make it after the proportion of an Eagle in euery part, hauing his head to be cleft a ſunder, and laide in two partes like an Eagles head thus done, then muſt you put him into the Ouen, leauing in the platter a diſh of butter vnderneath him, an other vpon him, becauſe of burning, and whē it is enough then ſet it foorth, caſting vpon him in the ſeruice blaunch pouder, Sinamon Ginger, and Suger.
                  
                  
                     
                     To make Mortirs of a Capon, Hen, or pullet,
                     TAke a well fleſhed Capon, Henne, or pullet, ſcalde and dreſſe him, then put him into a pot of faire water, and ther let it ſeeth til it be tender, then take it and pul all the fleſh from his bones, and beat it in a ſtone morter, and when you thinke it halfe beaten, put ſome of the ſame licour into it, and then beate it til it be fine, then take it out and ſtraine it with a litle roſewater out of a ſtrainer into a diſhe, then take it and ſet it on a chafingdiſh of coles, with a little Suger put to it, and ſo ſtirre it with your knife, & lay it in a faire diſhe in three long 
                           •
                        owes, thē take blanch pouder made of Sinamon and Suger, and caſt vpon it and ſo ſerue it forth.
                  
                  
                     To make a colluce.
                     TAke all the bones and legges of the aforeſaid Capon, Henne or pullet, and beat them fine in a ſtone Morter, putting to it halfe a pinte or more of the ſame licour that it was ſodden in, then ſtraine it, and put to it a litle Suger, then put it into a ſtone Crewes, and ſo drinke it warm firſt and laſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     A made diſh of the proportion of an Egge for fleſh daies.
                     MAke in all your things, your farſing ſtuffe as you do for your Cabbadge, euen ſo much as will fill a Bladder. Frſt take a drie bladder & waſh it cleane, that is of a Calfe or of a Stere, and cut a little hole in the toppe, and then put in all your farſeing ſtuffe, and when you haue filled it then cloſe the bladder toppe, binding it with a threede, and then put it into freſhe Beefe broth, or Mutton broth, and there let it ſeeth till it be enough, then take it out, and let it ſtand ſtill til it be ſomewhat ſtiffe, then cut away the bladder from it, and take another drie bladder and waſhe it clean: let it be bigger ſomewhat thē the other was before, and cut it broad at the toppe, wherby your farſing ſtuffe may in the hole goe, and when it is in then ſo many whites of Egges being rawe as may run round about him both aboue and be, neath, within the bladder cleane couered with it, then bind vp your bladder mouth and put into your broth againe the Bladder, and there let it ſeeth till the white be hardened about the farſing, then take it

out and cut away the bladder, then ſet it in a faire diſh, laying the parſelie vpon it, and ſo ſerue it forth.
                     Thus may you make ſmall Egges to the number of ſixe or eight in a diſh in like maner, hauing a bladder for the ſame purpoſe.
                  
                  
                     To ſtill a Capon for a ſicke perſon.
                     TAke a well fleſhed capon faire ſcalded and dreſt, and put him into an earthen pot, put to it Burrage and Buglas, three handfull of mints, one handfull of Hartes tung, and Langdebeefe, a handfull of Iſope, put thereto a pinte of Clarret wine, and a pinte of cleane water, and twelue Proynes, and when you haue ſo doon couer the pot with a diſh or ſaucer, and vpon that all to couer courſe paſte that no aire come out, then take the pot and hang in a Braſſe pot vp to ye brimmes of your paſte, and ſo let it boile for twelue houres at the leaſt, & alwaies as your water that is in the braſſe pot doth cōſume, be ſure to haue in readines another pot of hotte water at the fire to fill it as long as it doth ſeeth for the twelue howers, and when the howers be paſt take it from the fire, and let it coole

for one hower, then vnloſe and ſtrain the licour from the capon into a faire pot, taking euery morning warme foure or fiue ſpoone fuls next to your hart, which ſhall comfort and reſtore nature to you beeyng ſicke, vſing this aforeſaide capon.
                  
                  
                     To Preſerue Quinces in ſirrop all the yeere.
                     TAke three pound of quinces being pared and cored, two pounde of Suger and three quarts of faire running water, put all theſe togeather in an earthen pan, and let them boyle with a ſoft fire, & when they be ſkimmed, couer them cloſe that no ayre maye come out from them, you muſt put cloues and Sinamon to it after it is ſkimmed, of quantitie as you will haue them to taſte, if you wil know when they be boyled enough, hang a linnen cloth between the couer and the pan ſo that a good deale of it may hang in the licour, & when the cloth is very red they be boiled enough let them ſtand till they be colde, then put them in Galley pots ſirroppe, and ſo wil they keepe a yeere.
                  
                  
                     
                     To conſerue wardens all the yeere in ſirrop.
                     TAke your wardens and put them into a great Earthen pot, and couer them cloſe, ſet them in an Ouen when you haue ſet in your white bread, & when you haue drawne your white bread, and your pot, & that they be ſo colde that you may handle them, then pill the thin ſkinne from them ouer a pewter diſh, that you may ſaue all the ſirroppe that falleth from them: put to them a quarte of the ſame ſirroppe, and a pinte of Roſewhter, and boile them together with a fewe Cloues and Sinnamon, and when it is reaſonable thick and cold, put your wardens and Sirroppe into a Galley pot, and ſée alwaies that the Syrrop bee aboue the Wardens, or any other thing that you conſerue.
                  
                  
                     To conſerue cherries, Dameſins or wheat plummes all the yeere in the ſirrop.
                     FIrſt take faire water, ſo much as you ſhall think meete and one pound of ſuger, and put them both into a faire baſon, and ſet the ſame ouer a ſoft fire, till the ſuger be melted, then put the reto one pound

and an halfe of chirries, or Damſins, and let them boile till they breake, then couer them cloſe til they be colde, then put them in your gally pottes, and ſo keep them: this wiſe kéeping proportion in weight of Suger and fruite, you may conſerue as much as you liſt putting therto Sinamon and cloues, as is aforeſaid.
                  
                  
                     To make a paſte of Suger, where of a man may make al manner of fruits, and other fine thinges with their forme, as Plates, Diſhes, Cuppes and ſuch like thinges, where with you may furniſh a Table.
                     TAke Gumme and dragant aſmuch as you wil, and ſteep it in Roſewater til it be mollified, and for foure ounces of ſuger take of it the bignes of a beane, the iuyce of Lemons, a walnut ſhet ful, and a little of the white of an eg. But you muſt firſt take the gumme, and beat it ſo much with a poſtell in a braſen morter, till it be come like water, then put to it the iuyce with the white of an egge, incorporating al theſe wel together, this don take foure ounces of fine white ſuger well beaten to powder, and caſt it into ye morter by a litle

and little, vntil they be turned into ye form of paſte, thē take it out of the ſaid morter, and bray it vpon the powder of ſuger, as it were meale or flower, vntill it be like ſoft paſte, to the end you may turn it, and faſhionit which way you wil. When you haue brought your paſte to this fourme ſpread it abroad vpō great or ſmal leaues as you ſhall thinke it good, and ſo ſhal you form or make what things you wil, as is aforeſaid, with ſuch fine knackes as may ſerue a Table taking heede there ſtand no hotte thing nigh it. At the ende of the Banket they may eat all, and breake the Platters Diſhes, Glaſſes, Cuppes, and all other things, for this paſte is very delicate and ſauerous. If you will make a thing of more fineneſſe then this: make a Tarte of Almondes ſtamped with ſuger and Roſe water of like ſorte that Marchpaines be made of, this ſhall you laye between two paſtes of ſuch veſſels or fruits or ſome other things as you thinke good.
                  
                  
                     To confite walnuts
                     TAke them greene and ſmall in huſke, and make in them foure litle holes, or more, then ſteepe them in water eleuen

daies, make them cleane and boile them as ye Orenges héer after written, but they muſt ſéethe foure times as much. Dreſſe them likewiſe with Spices, ſauing you muſt put in very fewe Cloues, leaſt they taſte bitter. In like ſorte you may dreſſe Goords, cutting them in long péeces, and paring away the inner partes.
                  
                  
                     To make Mellons and Pompons ſweet.
                     TAke fine Suger and diſſolue it in water, then take ſéedes ot Mellons and cleaue thē a litle on the ſide that ſticketh to the Mellon, and put them in the ſugred water, adding to them a little roſewater. Leaue the ſaide ſéedes ſo by the ſpace of thrée or foure houres, then take them out, and you ſhall ſée that as ſoone as the ſaide ſéedes be dry, it wil cloſe vp again. Plant it and there will come of it ſuch Mellons, as the like hath not béen ſéene. If you wil haue them to giue the ſauour of Muſke: put in the ſaid water a little muſke, and fine Sinamon, and thus you may doo the ſeedes of Pompones, and Cowcumbers.
                  
                  
                     
                     To confite Orenge peeles which may be doone at all times in the yeere, and cheefly in May, becauſe then the ſaide peeles be greateſt and thickeſt.
                     TAke thicke Orenge péeles, and them cut in foure or fiue péeces, and ſteepe them in water the ſpace of ten or twelue daies. You may know when they be ſtéeped enough, if you holde them vp in the ſunne and ſée through them, then they be ſteeped enough, & you cannot ſée through them, then let them ſtéepe vntil you may. Then lay them to drye vpon a table, and put them to dry betwéen two linnen clothes, then put them in a Kettell or veſſell leaded, and adde to it as much Honny as will halfe couer the ſaide peeles, more or leſſe as you think good, boyle them a little and ſtirre them alwaies, then take them from the fire, leaſt the Honny ſhould ſéeth ouermuch. For if it ſhould boyle a little more then it ought to boyle, it would be thick. Let it thē ſtand and reſt foure daies in the ſaid Honny, ſtirring and mingling the Orrenge and Honny euery day together. Becauſe there is not honny enough to couer all the ſaide Orrenge péeles, you

muſt ſtir them well and oftentimes, thus doo thrée times, giuing them one bobling at ech time, then let thē ſtand thrée dayes then ſtrain them from the honny, and after you haue let them boile a ſmall ſpace, take them from the fier, and beſtow them in veſſels, putting to them Ginger, cloues and Sinamon, mixe all together, and the reſt of the Sirrope will ſerue to dreſſe others withall.
                  
                  
                     How to purifie and prepare Honnye and Sugar for to confite citrons and all other fruites.
                     TAke euery time ten pound of hony, the white of twelue new laid egges, and take away the froth of them, beate them wel together with a ſtick, and ſix glaſſes of fair freſh water, then put them into the honny, and boyle them in a pot with moderate fire the ſpace of a quarter of an hower or leſſe, then take them from the fire ſkimming them well.
                  
                  
                     To cōnfite Peaches after the Spaniſh faſhion.
                     TAke great and faire Peaches and pill them clean, cut them in péeces and ſo

lay them vpon a table abroad in the Sun the ſpace of two daies, turning them euerye morning and night, & put thē hot into a Inlep of Sugar wel ſodden, and prepared as is aforeſaid, and after you haue taken them out ſet them againe in the Sun turning them often vntill they bee well dried, this doon, put them againe into the Inlep, then ſet them in the ſun vntill they haue gotten a faire bark or cruſt, and thē you may keepe them in boxes for winter.
                  
                  
                     a goodlye ſecret for to condite or confite Orenges, citrons, and all other fruites in ſirrop.
                     TAke Cytrons and cut them in peeces, taking out of them the iuice or ſubſtance, then boyle them in freſhe water halfe an hower vntill they be tender, and when you take them out, caſt thē in colde water, leaue them there a good while, thē ſet them on the fire againe in other freſhe water, doo but heat it a little with a ſmal fire, for it muſt nrt ſeeth, but let it ſimper a litle, continue thus eight daies together heating thē euery day in hot water: ſome heat ye water but one day, to the end that the citrons be not too tender, but change

the freſhe water at night to take out the bitterneſſe of the pilles, the which being taken away, you muſt take ſuger or Hony clarified, wherein you muſt the citrons put, hauing firſt wel dried them from the water, & in wīter you muſt kéep thē from the froſt, & in Sommer you ſhal leaue thē there all night, and a daye and a night in Honie, then boile the Honie or Sugar by it ſelfe without the orenges or Citrons by the ſpace of halfe an hower or leſſe with a little fire, and beeing colde ſet it again to the fire with the Citrons, continuing ſo two morninges: if you wil put Honnie in water and not ſuger, you muſt clarifie it two times, and ſtraine it through a ſtrayner: hauing thus warmed and clarified it you ſhall ſtraine and ſette it againe to the fire, with Citrons onely, making them to boyle with a ſoft fire the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, thē take it from the fire & let it reſt at euery time you do it, a day & a night: the next morning you ſhall boyle it again together the ſpace of half an hower, and doo ſo two morninges, to the end that the Honie or ſuger may be well incorporated with the Citrons. All the cunning

conſiſteth in the boyling of this ſirrope together with the Citrons, and alſo the Sirrope by it ſelfe, and heerein heede muſt be taken that it take not ye ſmoke, ſo that it ſauour not of the fire: In this maner may be dreſt the Peaches, or Lemmons Orrenges, Apples, greene Walnuts, and other liſte being boiled more or leſſe, according to the nature of the fruits.
                  
                  
                     To bray golde.
                     TAke Golde leaues, fower drops of hony mixe it wel together, and put it into a glaſſe, and when you will occupie it, ſtéep and temper it in gumme water and it will be good.
                  
                  
                     To make a condonack.
                     TAke Quinces and pare thē, take out the cores, and ſéeth them in fair water vntil they break, thē ſtrain them through a fine ſtrainer, and for eight pound of the ſaid ſtrained quinces, you muſt put in 3. pound of Suger, and mingle it together in a veſſel, and boile them en the fire alwaies ſtirring it vntil it be ſodden which you may perceiue, for that it will no longer cleaue to the veſſel, but you may ſtāp muſke in powder, you may alſo ad ſpice

to it, as Ginger, Sinamon, Cloues, and Nutmegges, as much as you think méet, boyling the muſke with a litle Uineger, then with a broad ſlice of wood ſpread of this confection vpon a table, which muſt be firſt ſtrewed with Suger, and there make what proportion you wil, and ſet it in the ſunne vntil it be drye, and when it hath ſtood a while turn it vpſidown, making alwaies a bed of Suger, both vnder and aboue, and turne them ſtill, and drye them in the ſunne vntill they haue gotten a cruſt. In like maner you may dreſſe Peares, Peaches, Damſins, and other fruites.
                  
                  
                     To make confections of Mellons or Pompones.
                     TAke what quantity of Mellons you think beſt, and take them before they be ripe, but let thē be good, and make as many cuts in thē as they be marked with quarters on euery ſide, and hauing mundified them and taken out the cores and curnels, and péeled the vtter rinde, ſteepe them in good Uineger, and leauing them ſo the ſpace of ten daies, & when you haue taken them out, take other vineger and

ſtéepe them a new againe other ten daies remouing and ſtirring them euery daye, then when time ſhalbetake them out, and put them in a courſe linnen cloth, drying and wiping them, and ſet thē in the ayre, the ſpace of a day and a night, then boyle them in Hony, and by the ſpace of x. daies giue them euery day a little boyling, leauing them alwaies in the Hony, and they muſt boile at euery boiling but one walm then take the peeces and put thē in a pot with pouder of cloues, Ginger and Nutmegges, and peeces of Sinnamon, thus doone, make one bed of the peeces of Mellons, and another of the ſpices, and then powre white Honnie vpon all in the ſaid pots or veſſels,
                  
                  
                     The ſtilling of a capon a great reſtoritie.
                     TAke a yong Capon that is well fleſhed and not fat, & a knuckle of yong Ueale that is ſucking, and let not fat be vpon it, and all to back it bones and all, and fles the cap on cleane the ſkin from the fleſhe, and quarter it in foure quarters, and all to burſt it bones and al, and put the Ueale and it altogether in an earthen pot, and

put to it a pinte of Red wine, and eight ſpoonfulles of roſe water, and half a pound of ſmall raiſons and Currants, and ſoure Dates quartred, and a handfull of Roſemary flowers, and a handful of Burrage flowers, and twenty or thirtie whole maces, and take and couer the pot cloſe with a couer, and take paſte and put about the pols mouth that no ayre come forth, and ſet it within a braſſe pot full of water on the fire, and let it boile there eight houres and then take the ladle and bruſe it altogether within the pot, and put it in a faire ſtrainer, and ſtraine it through with the Ladle, and let no fat be vpon the broth, but that it may be blowne or els taken with a feather, and euery daye next your hart drinke halfe a dozen ſpoonefulles thereof, with a Cake of Manus chriſti, and againe at foure of the clocke in the afternoone.
                  
                  
                     To make good ſope.
                     FIrſt you muſt take halfe a ſtrike of aſſhen Aſhes, and a quarte of Lime, then you muſt mingle both theſe together, and then you muſt fil a pan full of water and ſeeth them well, ſo done, you muſt t take foure pound of beaſtes tallow, and put it

into the Lye, and ſéeth them together vntill it be hard.
                  
                  
                     To make Quinces in Sirrope.
                     TAke thirty Quinces to the quantity of this ſirrop, take a pottel of water and put it in a pan, and then take the whites of ſix egges and beat them with an other pottle of water, & then put it altogether, and put therto twelue or fouretéen pound of Suger, as you ſhal ſee cauſe, and ſeeth it and ſkim it very cleane, and then put to it two ounces of cloues and bruſe thē a very little, and let them ſeeth vntill the ſome do riſe very black, and then ſkimme of the cloues again & waſh them in faire water and dry them and put them in again and your quinces alſo. Put to them half a pint of roſewater, and then put the Sirrope in a faire earthen pot or panne, and lay a ſhéet foure times double vpon them to kéep in ye heat, and ſo let it ſtand a day or two, and then put them & the ſirop in a veſſell that was neuer occupied, & couer them cloſe, but in the beginning pare your quinces and core them, & ſéeth them in faire water, vntill they be tender, and then take them vp and lay them that the

water may runne from them cleane, and when they be cold, then put thē into your ſirrope as it is aboue ſaid.
                  
                  
                     To make conſerue of Barberies.
                     TAke your Barberies and picke them cleane, and ſet thē ouer a ſoft fire, and put to them Roſewater as much as you thinke good, then when you thinke it be ſodde enough, ſtraine that, and then ſéeth it againe, and to euery pound of Barberies, one pound of ſuger, and meat your conſerue.
                  
                  
                     To make a Pudding of a Calues chaldron.
                     Firſt take ye chaldron & let it be waſhed ſcalded & perboyled, and let it be chopped & ſtamped fine in a morter, and while it is hotte ſtraine it through a cullender, and halfe a dozen of Egges both whites and yolkes, with all maner of hearbs to them a handful or two, let the hearbes be ſhred ſmall, and put them to the chaldron and a good handful of grated bread, then take a handfull of flower, and put it to it all, then take an Drenge pil out of the ſirope and mingle with it, then ſeaſon it with Sinamon and Ginger, and a fewe

Cloues and mace, and a little Roſewater and Marrowe or Suet, Butter a good quantity thereof cloſe it vp, ſo it be not dry baked, then take the thinneſt of ye ſheepes kel and wrapt the meat in, then reaſe the coffin of fine paſte and put it in.
                  
                  
                     To boile calues feete.
                     TAke a pinte of white wine and a ſmal quantity of water, and ſmall raiſons and whole mace, and boile them together in a little Uergious and yolkes of egges, mingled with them, and a peece of ſweete butter, ſo ſerue them vppon bread ſliced.
                  
                  
                     To ſtewe veale.
                     TAke a knockle of Ueale & al to bruſe it, thē ſet it on the fire in a litle freſh water, let it ſeeth a good while, then take good plenty of onions and chop them into your broth, and when it hath well ſodden, put in Uergious, Butter, Salt and Saffron, and when it is enough, put to it a little ſuger, and then it will be good.
                  
                  
                     To boile chickins and mutton after the Dutch faſhion.
                     FIrſt take Chickins and mutton, and boyle them in water a good while, and let a good deale of the water be boyled away,

then take out the Mutton and chickens and the broth, make whit broth, put in thereto Sinnamon and Ginger, Suger and a litle Pepper, and a litle Uergious, and a litle flower to thicken it, and a little Saffron, take Roſemarye, Time, Margerum and penirial, and Hiſope, and halfe a diſh of butter, with a litle ſalt, the liquor muſt be cold before the chickins be put in.
                  
                  
                     To make a caudle.
                     TAKE a pinte of Malmeſie and fiue or ſixe egges, and ſeeth them ſtrained to gether, ſo ſodden, ſtirre it till it be thicke, and lay it in a diſh as you doe pleaſe, and ſo ſerue it.
                  
                  
                     To make a Haggas pudding.
                     TAke a peece of a Calues Chaldron and perboile it, ſhred it ſo ſmall as you can, then take as much Beefe Sewet as your meate, ſhred likewiſe, and a good deale more of grated bread, put this together, and to them ſeuen or eight yolkes of egs, and two or three whites, & a litle creame, three or fower ſpoonefull of roſewater, a little Pepper, Mace and nutmegs, and a good deale of ſuger, fill them and let them

be ſodden with a very ſoft fire, and ſhred alſo with a little Winter Sanery parſely and Time, and a little Peniriall with your meat.
                  
                  
                     To make Hagges Puddings.
                     TAke th liuer of a Hog and perboyle it, then ſtampe in water and ſtrain it with thicke creame, and put therto eight or nine yolks of egges, and thrée or foure whites, and Hogges ſuet, ſmall raiſons, Cloues and Mace, pepper, ſalte, and a litle ſuger, and a good deale of grated bread to make it thick, and let them ſéeth.
                  
                  
                     To make Iſing puddings.
                     TAke great Otemeale and pick it and let it ſoake in thick cream 3. howere, then put therto yolkes of Egs, and ſome whites, pepper, ſalt, cloues and mace, and a litle ſuger, and fil them nod too full, and ſéeth them a good while.
                  
                  
                     To ſeeth Muſcles.
                     TAke butter and vineger a good deale, parſeley chopt ſmall and pepper, then ſet it on the fire, and let it boile a whild, then ſee the Muſcles be cleane waſhee, and put them in the broth ſhelles and all, and when they be boyled a while, ſerue

them ſhelles and all.
                  
                  
                     To make a Pudding.
                     TAke Parſeley and Time, and chop it ſmall, then take the kidney of Veale, and perboile it, and when it is perboyled, take all the fat of it, and lay it that it may coole, and when it is colde ſhred it like as you doo ſewet for puddinges, then take marrow and mince it by it ſelf, then take grated bread and ſmal raiſons the quantity of your ſtuffe, & dates minced ſmall, then take the egges and roſte them hard, and take the yolks of them and chop thē ſmall, and then take your ſtuffe afore 
                           •
                        ehearſed and mingle altogether, and then take pepper, Cloues and Mace, Saffron, and ſalt, and put it together with the ſaid ſtuffe, as much as you thinke by caſting ſhal ſuffire, then take ſix Egs and breake them into a veſſel whites and all, and put your dry ſtuffe into the ſame egges, and temper them all wel together, and ſo fill your haggeſſe or gut, and ſéeth it wel and it will be good.
                  
                  
                     To ſtewe Steakes.
                     TAke a necke of Mutton and cut it in péeces, and then frye them with butter

vntill they be more then halfe enough fry them with a good many of Onions ſliced, then put them in a little pot, & put thereto a little parſely chopt, as muche broath of Mutton or beefe as couer them, with a little Pepper, Salt, and Uergious: then let it ſéeth together very ſoftly the ſpace of an hower, and ſerue them vpon ſoppes.
                  
                  
                     To boile the lightes of a calfe.
                     FIrſt boile the lightes in water, then take Perſely, Time, Onyons, Penyriall, and a litle Roſemacy, and when the Lightes be boiled chop all theſe together Lights and all very ſmal, and then boile them in a litle pot, and put into them vergious, Butter, and ſome of the own broth then ſeaſon it with Pepper, Sinamon, and Ginger: let them boile a little and ſerue them with ſops.
                  
                  
                     To make a lenthen Haggeſſe with poched egges.
                     TAke a Skillet of a pinte, and fill it half with vergious, and halfe with water, and then take Margerome, Winterſauerie, Peniroyall, mince, Time, of eche fixe crops, waſh them, and take foure Egges, hard roſted, and ſhred them as fine as you

can, & put the hearbes thus into the broth, then put a great handfull of currants, and the crummes af a quarter of a Manchet, and ſo let it ſéeth til it be thicke, then ſeaſon it with Suger, Sinamon, Salt, and a good peece of Butter, and three or foure ſpoonefulles of Roſe water, then poch ſeauen Egges and lay them on ſippets, and poure the Haggeſſe on them, with Sinamon and Sugar ſtrewed on them.
                  
                  
                     To boile Onions.
                     TAke a good many onions and cut thē in foure quarters, ſet them on the fire in aſmuch water as you think will boyle them tender, and whē they be clean ſkimmed, put in a good many of ſmall raiſons, halfe a ſpooneful of groſe pepper, a good peece of Suger, and a little Salte, and when the Onions be through boiled, beat the yolke of an Egge with Uergious, and put into your pot and ſo ſerue it vpon ſoppes. If you will poch Egges and lay vpon them.
                  
                  
                     To boile Citrons.
                     WHē your Citrons be boiled, pared and ſliced, ſéeth them with water and wine, and put to them butter, ſmall

Rayſons, and Barberies, ſuger, ſinamon and Ginger, and let them ſeeth till your citrons be tender.
                  
                  
                     To bake Lampernes.
                     FIrſt make your coffin long waies, and ſeaſon your Lampernes with Pepper, Cloues, and Mace, and put them in the Pye, and put thereto a good handfull of ſmall Rayſons, two or thrée onions ſliced a good peece of Butter, a litle ſuger, and a few Barberies, & whē it is enough put in a little Vergious.
                  
                  
                     To make fried toſte of Spinage.
                     TAke Spinnage and ſeeth it in water and ſalt, and when it is tender, wring out the water betwéene two Trenchers, then chop it ſmal and ſet it on a Chafingdiſh of coles, and put thereto butter, ſmall Raiſons, Sinamon, Ginger, and Suger, and a little of the iuyce of an Orenge and two yolks of rawe Egges, and let it boile till it be ſomewhat thicke, then toſte your toſte, ſoake them in a little Butter, and Suger, and ſpread thinne your ſpinnage vpon them, and ſet them on a diſh before the fire a litle while, & ſo ſerue them with a litle ſuger vpon them.
                  
                  
                     
                     To bake a Citron pie.
                     TAke your citron, pare it and ſlice it in peeces, and boile it with groſe pepper and Ginger, and ſo lay it in your Paſte with butter, and when it is almoſt baked put thereto Uineger, Butter, and Suger, and let it ſtande in the Ouen a while and ſoke.
                  
                  
                     An other way to bake Citrons.
                     WHen your Citrons be pared & ſlyced laye it in your Paſte with ſmall Rayſons, and ſeaſon them with Pepper, ginger, and fine ſuger.
                  
                  
                     To bake Aloes.
                     TAke a Legge of mutton or Ueale, and cut it in thinne ſlices: take parſeley, Time, Margerom, Sauerie, & chop them ſmall, with ii. or iii. yolkes of hard Egges and put there to a good many Currants, then put theſe hearbs in the ſlices, with a péece of Butter in each of them and wrap them together and lay them cloſe in your Paſte, ſeaſon them with Cloues, Mace, Sinamon, Suger, and a lyttle whole pepper, Currans and Barberies caſt vpon them and put a diſh of butter to them & whē they be almoſt baked put in a little

Vergious.
                  
                  
                     To bray Golde.
                     TAke Golde leaues, fower drops of hony, mix it wel together, and put it into a Glaſſe, and when you will occupy it, ſtéep and temper it in gumme water and it will be good.
                  
                  
                     To make conſerues of Roſes, and of any other flowers.
                     TAke your Roſes before they be fullye ſprung out, and chop off the white of them, and let the Roſes be dried one daye or two before they be ſtamped, and to one vnce of theſe flowers take one vnce and a halfe of fine beaten Suger, and let your roſes be beatē as you can, and after beat your roſes and Suger together againe, then put the Conſerue into a faire glaſſe: And likewiſe make all Conſerue of Flowers.
                  
                  
                     To make conſerue of cherries, and other fruites.
                     TAke halfe a pound of Cherries, & boile them dry in their own licour, and thē ſtraine them through a Hearne rale, and when you haue ſtrained them, put in two pounde of fine beaten Suger, and boyle

them together a prety while, and then put your Conſerue in a pot.
                  
                  
                     To ſeeth a carpe.
                     FIrſt take a Carpe and boile it in water and ſalt, then take of the broth and put in a litle pot, then put therto as much Wine as there is broth, with Roſemary, Parſelie, Time, and margerum bounde together, and put them into the pot, & put thereto a good manie of ſliced Onyons, ſmall raiſons, whole maces, a diſh of butter, and a little ſuger, ſo that it be not too ſharp nor two ſwéet, and let all theſe ſeeth together: if the wine be not ſharpe enough then put there to a little Vineger, and ſo ſerue it vpon ſoppes with broth.
                  
                  
                     To ſeeth a pike.
                     FIrſt ſeeth the Pike in water and ſalte, with Roſemarie, Parſely and Tyme, then take the beſt of the broth and put into a litle pot, then put therto the ruffilt of the pyke, ſmall Raiſons, whole Mace, whole pepper, twelue or thirtéen Dates: a good peece of Butter, a goblet of white wine, and a litle yeaſt, and whē they haue boyled a good while, put in a little vineger, ſuger and Ginger, ſo ſerue the pyke

with the Ruffilt, and broth vpon ſoppes.
                  
                  
                     To boyle cockles.
                     TAke water, vineger, pepper, and béere, and put the cockles in it, then let them ſéeth a good while, & ſerue thē broth and all. You may ſeeth them in nothing but in water and ſalt if you wil.
                  
                  
                     To boyle a carpe in greene broth, with a pudding in his bellie.
                     TAke the ſpawn of a carpe, and boile and crumble it as fine as you can, thē take grated bread ſmal raiſons dates minced, cinamon, ſuger, cloues, and Mace, and Pepper, and a little ſalte mingled altogeather, and take a good handful of ſage, and boile it tender, and ſtraine it with thrée or foure yolkes of Egges, and one white, and put to the ſpawne, with a little creame and Roſewater, then take the carpe and put the pudding in the bellie, and ſeeth him in water and ſalt, and whē he is almoſt boyled, take ſome of the ſpawne and of the beſt of the broth, and put it into a little pot with a little white wine, and a good péece of butter, and thrée or foure Onyons, whole Mace, whole Pepper, and ſmall Raiſons, and thrée or

ſower Dates, and when it is a good deale ſodden, put in a good deale of ſéeded ſpinnage, & ſtrain it with thrée or fower yolks of Egges, and the Onyons that you put into the Broth with a little Vergious, and put it to your Broth: and if it be too ſharpe put in a little Suger, and ſo laye your Carpe vpon ſoppes, and poure the Broth vpon it.
                  
                  
                     To make an Almond Cuſtard.
                     TAke a good ſort of almonds blanched, and ſtampe them with Water, and ſtraine them with water and a litle roſewater, and twelue Egges, then ſeaſon it with a little ſynamon, ſuger, and a good deale of Ginger, then ſet it vpon a pot of ſeething water, & when it is enough ſtick Dates in it.
                  
                  
                     To make a blanch marger on the fiſh day.
                     TAke whites of egges and creme, and boile them on a chafingdiſh on coles, till they Curd, then will their whay goe from them, then put away the whay, then put to the Curd a little Roſewater, then ſtraine it and ſeaſon it with ſuger.
                  
                  
                     
                     To bake chickins.
                     FIrſt ſeaſon them with cloues & mace, pepper and ſalt, and put to them currans and Barberies, and ſlitte an apple and caſt ſynamon and ſuger vpon the apple, and lay it in the bottome, and to it put a diſh of butter, and when it is almoſt enough baked, put a little ſuger, vergious and orenges.
                  
                  
                     To make a Pudding in a pot.
                     TAke a peece of a Legge of Mutton or Veale and perboyle it well, then ſhred it very fine, with as much ſuet as there is mutton, and ſeaſon it with a little pepperand ſalte. Cloues and Mace, with a good deale of ſynamon and Ginger, then put it in a little pot, and put thereto a good quantity of Currans and Prunes, and two or thrée Dates cut the long wayes, and let it ſéethe ſoftly with a little vergious vpon ſops, and ſo ſerue it with ſuger.
                  
                  
                     To ſtew Steakes.
                     TAke the great Ribbes of an Necke of mutton and choppe them aſunder, and waſh them wel, thē put them in a platter one by another, and ſet them on a chafindiſh of coales, couer them and turne them

now and then, ſo let them ſtew til they be halfe enough, then take Parſeley, Time, Margerome and Onyons, and chop them very ſmall, and caſt vpon the ſteakes, put therto one ſpoonfull of vergious, and two or thrée ſpoonfulles of Wine, a little butter and Marrowe, let them boyle till the mutton be tender, and caſt theron a little pepper, if your broth be too ſharp put in a little ſuger.
                  
                  
                     To roaſt a Pigge.
                     TAke your pig and draw it, and waſh it cleane, and take the liuer, perboile it and ſtraine it with a little creame, and yolkes of Egges, and put thereto grated bread, marrow, ſmall Raiſons, nutmegs in powder, mace, ſuger and ſalte, and ſtirre all theſe together, and put into the Pigges bellye, and ſowe the Pigge, then ſpit it with the haire on, & when it is halfe enough pull of the ſkinne, and take héede you take not of the fatte, then baſte it, and when it is enough, thē crum it with white bread, ſuger, ſinamon and ginger, and let it be ſomewhat browne.
                  
                  
                     
                     To roſte an Hare.
                     TAke the Hare and flay her, then take Parſeley, Time Sauery, Creame, a a good péece of Butter Pepper, ſmall raiſons, and barberies work all theſe together in the Hares bellye: when ſhe is almoſt enough, baſte her with Butter, and one yolke of an Egge, and make veneſon ſauce to her.
                  
                  
                     To make Toſtes.
                     TAke the Kidney of Ueale and chop it ſmall then ſet it on a chafingdiſhe of Coales, and take two yolkes of egges, Currans, Synamon, Ginger, Cloues and mace, and ſuger, let them boyle together a good while, and a little Butter with the Kidnie.
                  
                  
                     To make conſerue of Mellons, or Pompons.
                     TAke what quantity of Mellons you thinke beſt, and take thē before they be ripe, but let them be good, and make as many cuts in thē as they be marked with quarters on euery ſide, & hauing mundified thē and taken out the cores and curnelles, and péeled the vtter rinde, ſtéepe them in good Uineger, and leauing them

ſo the ſpace of ten daies, & when you haue taken them out, take other vineger and ſtéep them ten daies more, remouing and ſtirring them euery day, then when time ſhalbe take thē and put them in a courſe linnen cloth, drying & wiping them, then ſet them in the ayre the ſpace of one daye and a night, then boile them in hony, and by the ſpace of ten daies giue them euery day a little boyling, leauing thē alwaies in the Hony, and they muſt boile at euery boiling but one walm, then take the peeces and put them in a pot, with pouder of Cloues, Ginger and Nutmegges, and a peece of ſynamon, this doone, make one bed of the peeces of Mellons, and another of the ſpice, and then poure white honye vpon all in the ſaid pots or veſſels.
                  
                  
                     To make ſirrope of Violets.
                     FIrſt gather a great quantity of violet flowers, and pick thē cleane from the ſtalkes and ſet thē on the fire, and put to them ſo much Roſewater as you thinke good, then let them boile altogether vntill the colour be forth of them thē take them of the fire and ſtrain them through a fine cloth, then put ſo much ſuger to them as

you thinke good, then ſet it againe to the fire vntil it be ſomewhat thick, and put it into a violl glaſſe.
                  
                  
                     To make ſope.
                     FIrſt you muſt take halfe a ſtrike of Aſſhen aſhes, and a quarte of Lime, then you muſt mingle both theſe together, and then you muſt fil apanne ful of water and ſeeth them well, ſo doone, you muſt take foure pound of beaſtes tallaw, and put it into the lye and ſeeth them togeather vntill it be hard.
                  
                  
                     To preſerue orrenges.
                     TAke your Pills and water them two nights & one day, and drie them clean againe and boile them with a ſoft fire the ſpace of one hower, then take them out to coole, and make your ſirroppe halfe with Roſewater and half with that liconr, and put double Suger to your Orenges, and when your Sirroppe is halfe ſodden, then let your orrenges ſeeth one quarter of an hower more, then take out your orrenges and let the ſirroppe ſéeth vntil it rope, and when all is colde, then put your Orenges into the Sirrop: The white of an Egge and ſuger beaten togeather will make it

to candie.
                  
                  
                     The ſtilling of a capon, a great reſtority.
                     TAke a yong Capon that is wel fleſhed and not fat, & a knuckle of yong Veale that is ſucking and let not fat be vpon it, and all to hack it bones and all, and flea the capon clean the ſkinne from the fleſh, and quarter it in foure quarters, and all to bruſe it bones and al, and put the veale and it altogether in an Earthen pot, and put to it a pinte of Red wine, and eight ſpoonfuls of Roſewater, and half a pound of ſmall Raiſins or Currans, or foure Dates quartered, and a handfull of Roſemary flowers, and a handful of Burrage flowers, and twenty or thirty whole Maces, and take and couer the pot cloſe with a couer, and take paſte and put about the pots mouth that no ayre conie forth, and ſet it within a braſſe pot full of water on the fire, & let it boyle there eight howers, and then take the ladle and bruſe it altogether within the pot, and put it in a faire ſtrainer, and ſtraine it through with the ladle, and let no fat be vpon the broth but that it may be blowne or elſe taken with

a feather, and euery daye next your hart drinke halfe a dozen ſpoonfulles therof, with a cake of Manus Chriſti, and again at foure of the clock in the afternoone.
                  
                  
                     To make drie Marmelet of Peches.
                     TAke your Peaches and pare thē, and cut them from the ſtones, and mince them very ſinely, and ſtéepe them in roſewater, then ſtraine them with roſewater through a courſe cloth or Strainer into your Pan that you will ſéethe it in, you muſt haue to euery pound of peches halfe a pound of ſuger finely beaten, and put it into your pan yt you do boile it in; you muſt reſerue out a good quātity to mould your cakes or prints withall, of that Suger, then ſet your pan on the fire, and ſtir it fil it be thick or ſtriffe that your ſtick wil ſtand vpright in it of it ſelf, thē take it vp and lay it in a platter or charger in prety lumps as big as you wil haue ye mould or printes, and when it is colde print it on a faire boord with ſuger, and print thē on a mould or what knot or faſhion you will, & bake in an earthen pot or pan vpon ye embers or in a feate couer, and kéep thē continually by the fire to kéep them dry.
                  
                  
                     
                     To make the ſame of Quinces, or any other thing.
                     TAke the Quinces and quarter them, and cut out the ccares and pare them cleane, and ſéeth them in faire water till they be very tender, then take them with roſewater, and ſtraine them, and do as is aforeſaid in euery thing.
                  
                  
                     To preſerue Orrenges, Lemmons, and Pomeſitrons.
                     FIrſt ſhaue your Orrenges finely, & put them into water two dayes and two nights, changing your water thrée times a day, then perboyle them in thrée ſeueral waters, then take ſo much water as you think conuenient for the quantity of your Orrenges, then put in for euery pound of Orrenges one pound and a halfe of ſuger into the water, and put in two whites of egges and beat them altogether, then ſet them on the fire in a braſſe veſſel, & when they boyle ſkimme them very clean, and clenſe them through a Jelly bagge, then ſet it on the fire and put in the Orrenges. Vſe walnuts in like maner, and vſe lemmons and Pomecitrons in like ſorte, but they muſt lye in water but one night.
                  
                  
                     
                     To preſerue Quinces al the yere through whole and ſoft.
                     TAke as is aforeſaide one pound of water, and three pound of Suger, & break it into very ſmal péeces, and in all things as you did before, then take twelue Quinces and core them very clean, & pare them and waſhe them, and put into you ſirrup, when the ſkim is taken off let them ſeeth very ſoft vntill they be tender, then take them vp very ſoftly for breaking, and lay them in a faire thing one by another, thē ſtraine your firrupe, and ſet it on the fire again, then put in your Quinces & haue a quick fire, let them ſeeth apace and turne them with your ſticke, and when they be almoſt ready put in ſome Roſewater and let them ſeeth. and when you thinke they be ready take vp ſome of the ſirrope in a ſpoone, and if it be thick like a zelly whē it is colde then take of your Pan, and put your Quinces into pots and your ſirrope to thē, and put into your pots litle ſtickes of Sinamon and a fewe cloues, and when they be colde couer them with paper pricked full of ſmall holes.
                     FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE Booke of Caruing and Sewing.
                  
                  
                     And all the feaſtes in the yeere, for the ſeruice of a Prince or any other eſtate, as yee ſhall finde each Office, the ſeruice according in this booke following.
                  AT LONDON Printed by E. Allde for Edward White, dwelling at the little North doore of S. Paules at the ſigne of the Gunne.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     Tearmes of a Caruer.
                     
                        BReake that Deare, Leach that Brawn, reare that Gooſe, lift that Swan, ſauce that Capon, ſpoyle that Hen, furſh that chickē, vnbrace that Malard, vnlace that connie: diſmember that Heron, diſplay that Crane, diſfigure that Pecock, vnioynt that Bitture, vntach that Cnrlew, alay that Feſaunt, wing that Partrich, wing that Quaile, mince that Plouer, thie that Pigion, broder that paſſtie, thie that Wodcock, thie all manner of ſmall birds.
                     Timber the fire, tire that egge, chine that Salmon, ſtring that Lampry, ſplat that Pike, ſauce that place, Sauce that Tench 
                           ••
                        lay that Breme, ſide that Haddock, tuſk that Barbel, culpon that Troute, finne that Cheuine, tranſen that Eele, traunch that Sturgion, vndertraunch that purpes

tame that crab, barde that Lobſter.
                     Heere endeth the goodly Tearmes.
                  
                  
                     Heere beginneth Butler and Panter.
                     THou ſhalt be butler and panter al the firſt yere, and ye muſt haue thrée pantry kniues, one knife to ſquare trencher loaues, another to be a chipper, the thirde ſhall bee ſharpe for to make ſmooth trenchers, than chip your ſoueraignes breade hot, and all other bread let it be a day old, houſhould bread thrée daies olde, trencher bread foure dayes olde, then look your ſalt be white and dry, the plouer made of Juory two inches brode, and thrée inches long and looke that your ſaltſeller lid touch not the ſalt, than looke your table clothes, towels and napkins, bee faire folden in a cheſt, or hanged vpon a pearch, than look your Table kniues bee faire pulliſhed, and your ſpoones cleane, then looke yee haue two tarriours, a more and a leſſe, and wine cannels of box made according, and a ſharpe gimlet and faucets. And when ye ſet a pipe on broche dooe thus, ſette it toure fingers broade aboue the nether

chine vpwardes aſtaunt, and then ſhall the lies neuer ariſe. Alſo looke yee haue in all ſeaſons, butter, chéeſe, apples, peares, nuts, plumes, grapes, dates, figges, and rayſons compoſt, gréene ginger, and chard Quince. Serue faſting, butter, plums, damſons, cheries, and grapes. After meat, peares, nuts, ſtrawberies, hutelberies, and hard chéeſe. Alſo blaundrels or pipins, with caraway in confects: after ſupper reſt apples and peares, with blanch pouder and hard chéeſe, beware of Cow cream and of Strawberies, hurtelberies, iuncat, for cheeſe wil make your ſoueraigne ſick, but he eate hard chéeſe.
                     Harde chéeſe hath theſe operations, it will keepe the ſtomacke open, butter is wholſome firſt and laſt, for it will doe away all poyſons: Mylke, Creame and Jouncate, they will cloſe the maw, and ſo dooth a poſſet, therefore eate harde chéeſe, and drinke Rumney Modom, beware of gréene Salets and rawe fruites, for they will make your Soueraigne ſicke, therefore ſette not much by ſuch meates as will ſette your teethe on edge, therefore eate an

Almond and hard cheeſe, but eat not much chéeſe without Romney modon. Alſo of diuers drinkes if their fumoſitiues haue diſpleaſed your ſoueraine, let him eate a raw apple, and the fumoſitiues wil ceaſe, meaſure is a mery meane, and if it be well vſed, abſtinence is to be praiſed, when God therewith is pleaſed.
                     Alſo take good héede of your wines, euery night with a candle voth red Wine and ſweete wine, and looke they reboyle nor leeke not and waſh the pype heades euery night with colde water, and looke yée aclenching iron, ads, and linnen clothes if néede be, and if they reboile ye ſhall know by the hiſſing, therefore keepe an emptie pipe with the lies of couloured roſe, and draw the reboiled wine to the lies, and it ſhall helpe it. And if the ſweet wine pale, drawe it into a Ramney veſſell for léeſing.
                     
                        Heere followeth the names of Wines.
                        Red wine, White wine, Claret Wyne, Oſey, Caprick, Campolet, Renniſh wine, Malmeſey, Baſtard, Tyre, Rumney,

Muſcadel, Clary Raſpis, Vernage, Cute▪ piment and Ipocras.
                     
                     
                        For to make Ipocras.
                        Take ginger, pepper, graines, canell, ſinamon, ſugar and forneſole, that looke yee haue fine or ſixe bags of your Ipocras to run in, and a pearch that your renners may ren on, than muſt ye haue ſixe peuter baſins to ſtand vnder your bags, then look your ſpice be ready, and your ginger well pared or it be beaten to pouder, than looke your ſtalkes of ſinamon be well coloured and ſwéete, canell is not ſo gentle in operation, ſinamon, is hotte and dry, graines of paradice be hot and moiſt, ginger grains, long pepper and ſuger ben hot and moiſt ſinamon, Canell and redde wine colouring.
                        Nowe knowe yee the proportions of your Ipocras, than beate your pouders, eache by them ſelfe, and put them in bladders and bange your bagges ſure that no bagge touch other, but let eache baſing touch other, let the firſt baſin bee of a gallon, and each of the other a pottell, that put in your baſin a gallon

of redde Wine, put thereto your pouders, and ſtirre them well, than put them into the firſt bagge, and let it ren, than put them in the ſeconde bagge, than take a peece in your hande and aſſay if it be ſtronge of Ginger, and alay it with ſinamon, and it be ſtrong of ſinamon, alay it with ſuger, and look ye let it ren through ſixe renners, and your Ipocras ſhall bee the ſiner, than put your Ipocras into a cloſe veſſell and keepe the receit, for it wil ſerue for ſewes, then ſerue your ſoueraigne with wafers and Ipocras.
                        Alſo looke your compoſt bee faire and cleane, and your ale fiue daies olde, or men drinke it, than keepe your houſe of office cleane, and bee curteous of aunſwere to each perſon, and looke yee giue no perſon no palde drinke, for it will breede the ſcab.
                        And when yee laye the cloth wipe the boord cleane with a cloth, than lay a cloth (a couch it is called) take your fellowe that one ende, and hold you that other end, than draw the cloth ſtraight, the bought on the vtter edge, take the vtter parte and hange it euen, than take the thirde

cloth and lay the bought on the inner edg, and lay eſtate with the vpper part halfe a foote broad, than couer thy Cubboord and thine ewrie with the towell of Diaper, than take thy Towell about thy necke, and lay the one ſide of the Towell vppon the left arme, and thereon lay your Soueraignes napkin, and lay on thine arme ſeuen loues of breade with thres or fower trencher loues, with the end of the towell in the left hande, as the manner is, than take thy ſalt ſeller in thy left hande, and take the▪ end of the towell in your right hand to beare in ſpoones and kniues, than ſet your ſalt on the right ſide, where your Soueraigne ſhall ſit, and on the left ſide your ſalt, ſet your trenchers, then lay your kniues and ſet your breade one loafe by another, and your ſpoones and your Napkins faire folden beſide your breade, then couer your bread and trenchers, ſpoones, and kniues, and at euery ende of the Table ſette a Saltſeller, with two Trencher Leaues, and if yee wyll wrappe your Soueraignes Breade ſtately, yee muſt ſquare and proportion your breade, and ſee that no Lofe

be more then another, and then ſhall yee make your wrapper mannerly, then take a towel of reines of two yards and a halfe, and take the towell by the endes double, and lay it on the table, then take the ende of the bought a handfull in your hand, and wrap it hard, then lay the end ſo wrapped between two towels, vppon that ende ſo wrapped. This being doon lay your bread bottome to bottome, ſixe or ſeauen loaues, then ſee you ſet your breade mannerlie in good forme, and when your Soueraignes table is thus arayed, couer al other boords with ſalt, trenchers and cups: alſo ſee thine ewry bee arayed with baſins and ewers, and water hot and colde, and ſee yee haue napkins, cups, ſpoons, and ſee your pots for wine and ale be made clean, and to the ſurnabe make the curteſie with a cloth vnder a faire double napry, then take the towels end next you, and the vtter end of the table, and hold theſe three ends at once, & folde them at once that a pleit paſſe not a foote broad, then lay it euen there it ſhould lye. And after meate waſh with that, that is at the right ende of the table, yee muſt guide it out, and the marſhal muſt conuey

it and looke to ech cloth the right ſide bee outward and drawe it ſtraight, then muſt yee raiſe the vpper part of the towell, and lay it without any groning and at euerye ende of the towell yee muſt conuay halfe a yarde that the ſewer may take eſtate reuerently, and let it be: and when your ſoueraine hath waſhed, draw the ſurnape euen, then beare the ſurnap to the midſt of the boord, and take it vp before your ſoueraigne, and beare it into the ewry againe: and when your ſoueraigne is ſet, look your towell bee about your necke, then make your ſouerain curteſie, then vncouer your breade and lay it by the ſalt, and lay your napkin, knife, and ſpoone afore him, than kneele on your knee till the purpain pas eight loues and looke ye ſet at the endes of the table foure loues at a meſſe, and ſee that euerie perſon haue a napkin and a ſpoone, and waite well to the ſewer howe many diſhes be couered, and ſo many cups couer yee, then ſerue yee foorth the Table mannerlie, that euery man may ſpeake of your curteſie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Here endeth the Butler and Panter yeoman of the ſeller and ewry: and heere followeth ſewing of fleſh.
                     THe ſewer muſte ſewe, and from the boord conuay all manner of pottages meats and ſauces, and euery day common with the Cooke, and vnderſtand and wit how many diſhes ſhall be, and ſpeak with the panters and officers of the ſpicerie for fruites that ſhal be eaten faſting. Than go to the boord of ſewing and ſee ye haue officers ready to conuay, and ſeruants for to beare your diſhes. Alſo if the marſhall ſquires, and ſergeants of armes be there, than ſerue foorth your ſoueraigne without blame.
                     
                        Seruice.
                        Firſt ſet yée foorth muſtard and brawn, pottage, beefe, mutton, ſtued feſant, ſwan capon, pig, veniſon, hake, cuſtard, leach and lombard, fruter vaunt, with a ſubtilty two pottages, blaunch manger and gelly. For ſtandard, veniſon, roſt kid, fawne, and conie, buſtard ſtorke, Crane, peacock with his tayle, herenſew, 
                              •
                           itture, woodcocke,

partrich, plouer, rabets, great birdes, larkes, doucets, pampuffe, white leach, amber gelly, creame of almondes, curlew brew, ſnite, quaile, ſparrowe, martinet, pearch in gelly, pety peruis, quince bake, leach dew
                              •
                           ard, fruter fage, blandrels or pippens with caraway in confects, wafers and Ipocras they be agreeable. Now this haſt doon, voye yee that table.
                     
                  
                  
                     Heere endeth the ſewing of fleſh, and here followeth caruing of fleſh.
                     THe Caruer muſt knowe the caruing, and the faire handling of a knife, and how he ſhall fetch all maner of foule, your knife muſt be faire and your handes muſt be cleane, and paſſe not two fingers and a thombe vpon your knife. In the midſt of your hande ſet the haft ſure, vnlaſing the mi
                           •
                        ſing with two fingers and a thombe, caruing of bread, laying and voiding of crums with two fingers▪ & a thombe▪ looke ye haue ye cure ſet neuer on fiſh, fleſh beaſt ne fowl, more than ii. fingers, & a thumb, than take your lofe in your left hande and holde your knife ſurely, enbrewe not the table cloth, but wipe vpon your Napkin,

then take your trencher lofe in your lefte hande and with the edge of your Table knife take vp your Trenchers as nie the point as ye may, then lay foure trenchers to your ſoueraine one by another, and lay theron other foure trenchers, or els twain, than take aloafe in your left hande, and pare the loafe rounde about, than 
                           〈◊〉
                         the ouer cruſt to your ſoueraine, and cut the nether cruſt and voide the paring and touch the loafe no more after it is ſo ſerued; than cleanſe the table that the ſewer may ſerue your ſoueraine.
                     Yee muſt alſo knowe the fumoſities of fish, fleſh, and foules, and all maner of ſauces▪ according to their appetites, heſe ben the fumoſitiues, ſalt, ſoure, reſtie, fat, freid, ſinewes, ſkins, hony, 
                           •
                        roupes, young feathers, heads, pigions bones, and all maner of legges of beaſtes and foules to the otter 
                           〈◊〉
                        , for theſe be fumoſitiues lay them neuer to your ſoueraine.
                     
                        Seruice.
                        Take your knife in your hand, and cut 
                              •••
                           wne in the diſh as it lyeth, and lay on your ſoueraignes trencher, & ſee there bee muſtard.
                        
                           Veniſon with furmitie is good for your Soueraigne, touche not the veniſon with your hand but with your knife, cut it out into the furmintie, doe in the ſame wiſe with peaſon, and bacon, beefe, henne, and mutton, pare the beef, cut the mutton and ſay to your ſoueraigne, beware of fumoſitiues, ſalt, ſinew, fat, reſty and rawe. In ſirrup, pheſant, partrich, ſtockedoue, chickins in the left hand, take them by the pinion and with the fore parte of your knife lift vp your wings, than mince it into the ſirrup, beware of ſkin, rawe and ſinewe, Gooſe, teele mallard and ſwan, raiſe the legs, than the winges, lay the body in the midſt, or in another platter, the wings in the midſt and the legs after, lay the brawn betweene the legges▪ and the wings in the the platter, Capon or hen of Greece, lyft the legs, than the wings, and caſt on wine or ale, then mince the wing and giue your ſoueraigne: Feſand, partrich, plouer or lapwing, raiſe the winges and after the legs woodcock, 
                              •
                           irture, egrit, ſnite, curlew and heronſew vnlace them breake of the pinions, and breake the necke, than raiſe the legs, and let the feete be on ſtill, than

the wings. A crane raiſe the winges firſt, and beware of the trumpe in his breſt, pecock, ſtorke, buſtard, and ſhouillard vnlace them as a crane, and let the feet be on ſtil. Quaile, ſparrow, larke, martinet, pigion, ſwallow and thruſh the legs firſt, than the wings, fawn, kid, and lambe, lay the kidney to your ſoueraigne, than lift vp the ſhoulder and giue to your ſoueraign a rib. Veniſon roſt, cut it in the diſh and lay it to your ſoueraigne: a conny lay him on the back, cut away the vents betwéen ye hinder legs, breake the canel bone, than raiſe the ſides, than lay the cony on the womb, on each ſide the chine the two ſides departed from the chine, than lay the bulke, chyne and ſides in the diſh: alſo yee muſt mince foure leſſes to one morſell of meate, that your ſoueraigne may take it in the ſauce. All bake meate that bee hot, open them aboue the coffin, and and all that be colde open them in the midway Cuſtard, cheeke them inche ſquare, that your ſoueralgne may eate thereof. Doucets pare away the ſides & the bottome, beware of fumoſitiues, Fruter, vaunt, Fruters they ſay bee good, better is Fruter pouch, Apple Fruters bée

good hotte, and all colde touch not. Tanſey is good hot, wortes of gruell, of béefe or of mutton is good. Jelly, mortrus, creame, almonds, blanch, manger, iuſſell and charlet, cabadge and vmbles of a déerr be good and all other potage beware of.
                     
                  
                  
                     Heere endeth the Caruing of fleſh, and beginneth ſauces of all maner of foules.
                     Muſtard is good with brawn, béefe, chine of bacon, and mutton, vergis is good to boiled chickins, and capon, ſwan, wyth chawdrons ribs of béefe with garlike muſſtard, pepper, vergis, ginger, ſauce of lamb pig, and fawne, muſtard and ſuger, to Feſand, partrich and cony ſauce game lin, to herenſew, egript, plouer and craine to brew and curlew, ſalt, ſuger and water of camet, buſtard, ſhouillard & bitture, ſauce gamline, wodcock lapwing, lark, quaile, martinet, veniſon, and ſnite with white ſalt, ſparowes and throſtles, with ſalt and ſinamon, thus with all meates ſauce ſhalt haue the operation.
                     Heere endeth the ſauces for all manner of foules and meates.
                  
                  
                     
                     Heere beginneth the feaſtes and ſeruice from Eaſter vnto Whitſontide
                     On Eaſter day and ſo foorth to Penticoſt after the ſeruing of the table there ſhall bee ſet bread, trenchers and ſpoones after the eſtimation of them that ſhall ſit there, and thus yee ſhall ſerue your Soueraigne, lay trenchers, and if he be of a lower degrée or eſtate, lay fiue trenchers, and if he bee of lower degrée foure trenchers, and of another degrée thrée trenchers, thā cut breade for your ſoueraigne after yee know his conditions whether it bee cut in the midſt or pared, or els to be cut in ſmall péeces: alſo ye muſt vnderſtand howe the meate ſhall bee ſerued before your Soueraigne, and namely on Eaſter day, after the gouernance and ſeruice of that country where yee were borne. Fyrſt on that day yee ſhall ſerue a calfe ſodden and bleſſed, and ſodden egs with greene ſauce, and ſet them before the moſt principall eſtate, and that Lorde becauſe of his high eſtate, ſhal depart them al about him, then ſerue potage as worts, roots or browes, wt béefe, mutton, or veale, & capons that be coloured with ſaffron, and baked meats: and the ſecond

courſe, Juſſel with mamony, & roſted endoured, & pigions with bake meates, as tarts chewets, and flaunes, and other, after the diſpoſition of the cookes: and at ſupper time diuers ſauces of mutton or veale in broth, after the ordinance of the ſteward and than chickins with bakon, veale, roſt pigions or lamb, & kid roſt, with the heade and the purtenance of Lambe and pigges féet, with vineger and parcely theron, and a tanſie fryed, and other bake meates, yée ſhal vnderſtand this maner of ſeruice dureth to pentecoſt, ſaue fiſh daies.
                     Alſo take héede howe yée ſhall araye theſe things before your ſoueraigne. Fyrſt yée ſhall ſée there be gréene ſauce of ſorell or of vines, that is, holde a ſauce for the firſt courſe, and yée ſhall begin to raiſe the capon.
                  
                  
                     Heere endeth the Feaſt of Eaſter till Pentecoſt. And here beginneth Caruing of all maner of Foules.
                     
                        Sauce that Capon.
                        Take vp a capon, and lift vp the right

leg and the right wing, and ſo aray foorth and lay him in the platter as he ſhould fly, and ſerue your ſoueraigne, and know wel that capons or chickens bee araied after one ſauce, the chickins ſhal be ſauced with greene ſauce or vergis.
                     
                     
                        Lift that ſwan.
                        Take and dight him as a gooſe, but let him haue a larger brawne and looke hee haue a chawdron.
                     
                     
                        Aley that Feſant.
                        Take a feſand raiſe his legges, and his wings as it were a hen, and no ſauce but onely ſalt.
                     
                     
                        Wing that partrich.
                        Take a Partrich and raiſe his legges and his wings as a hen, and ye mince him ſauce him with Wine, pouder of Ginger and ſalt, than ſet him vpon a Chafingdiſh of coales to warme and ſerue it.
                     
                     
                        Wing that Quaile.
                        Take a Quaile and raiſe his legges and his wings as a hen, and no ſauce but ſalt.
                     
                     
                        Diſplay that crane.
                        Take a Crane and vnfold his legges, and cut of his wings by the ioyntes, than

take vp his wings and his legs and ſauce him with pouder of ginger, muſtard, vineger and ſalt.
                     
                     
                        Diſmenber that Heron.
                        Take a Heron and raiſe his legs and his wings as a crane, and ſauce him with vineger, muſtard, pouder of ginger & ſalt.
                     
                     
                        Vnioynt that Bitture.
                        Take a Bitture and raiſe his legges, and his winges as a Heron, and no ſauce but ſalt.
                     
                     
                        Breake that Egript.
                        Take an Egript and raiſe his legges and his winges as a Heron, and no ſauce but ſalt.
                     
                     
                        Vntach that Curlew.
                        Take a Curlew, and raiſe his legges and his winges as a Henne, and no ſauce but ſalt.
                     
                     
                        Vntach that brew.
                        Take a Brewe and raiſe his legges, and his winges in the ſame manner, and no ſauce but onely ſalt, and ſerue your Soueraigne.
                     
                     
                        Vnlace that Conny.
                        Take a Cony and lay him on the back and cutte away the vents, than rayſe the

wings and the ſides, and lay bulke, chyne, and ſides together, ſauce, vineger and pouder of ginger.
                     
                     
                        Breake that Sarcell.
                        Take a Sarcellor a téele, and raiſe his wings & his legs, & no ſauce but onely ſalt.
                     
                     
                        Mince that Plouer.
                        Take a Plouer and raiſe his legs & his wings as a Hen, & no ſauce but onely ſalt.
                     
                     
                        A Snite.
                        Take a ſnite and raiſe his winges, his legs, and his ſhoulders as a plouer, and no ſauce but ſalt.
                     
                     
                        Thie that Woodcock.
                        Take a Woodcock and raiſe his legs and his wings as a Hen, this done dight the braine.
                     
                  
                  
                     Heere beginneth the feaſt from Pentecoſt vnto Midſomer.
                     In the ſecond courſe for the meats before ſaid, ye ſhal take for your ſauces, ale, wine, vineger, and pouders after the meate, but ginger and canel, from pentecoſt to the feaſt of S. Iohn Baptiſt.
                     The firſt courſe ſhalbe béefe and mutton ſodden with capons, or roſted, and if capons be ſodden, aray him in the maner aforeſaid

and when he is roſted, thou muſt caſt on ſalt, with wine or with ale, than take the capon by the legges, and caſt on the ſauce and breake him out, and lay him in a diſh as he ſhould flée: firſt ye ſhall cut the right legge, and the right ſhoulder, and betwéen the foure members, lay the brawne of the capon, with the croupe in the end betwéen the legs, as it were poſſible for to be ioined together, and other bake meats after. And in the ſecond courſe, potage ſhall be iuſſell Charlet or Mertrus, with young Gees;e, Veale, Porke, Pigions or chickins roſted, with Pampuffe, fruiters, and other bake meates after the ordinaunce of the Cooke. Alſo the Gooſe ought to be cut member to member, beginning at the right leg, and ſo foorth vnder the right wing, and not vppon the ioynt aboue, and it ought to bee eaten with gréene garlike, or with ſorrel, or tender vines or vergis in ſummer ſeaſon after the pleaſure of your ſoueraigne: alſo ye ſhal vnderſtand that al maner of foules that hath whole féete ſhould be raiſed vnder the wing and not aboue.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hecre endeth the feaſte from Pentecoſt to Midſomer: and heere beginneth from the feaſt of S. Iohn the Baptiſt vnto Michaelmas.
                     IN the firſt courſe potage Worts gruell, and furmentie, with veniſon and Mortrus and peſtles of porke, with gréene ſauce. Roſted capon, ſwan with chaworon In the ſecond courſe, potage after the ordinance of the cookes with roſted mutton, veale, porke, chickins or endoured pigions heronſewes, fruiters or bake meates, and take heede of the feſant, he ſhall be arayed in the manner of a capon, but it ſhall bee done drie without any moiſture, and hee ſhall be eaten with ſalt, and pouder of ginger: and the Herenſew ſhall be araied in the ſame manner without any moiſture, and hee ſhould be eaten with ſalt and pouder: alſo ye ſhall vnderſtand that all maner of foules hauing open clawes as a capon ſhall bee tired and arayed as a capon and ſuch other.
                  
                  
                     From the feaſt of S. Michael vnto the feaſt of Chriſtmas.
                     IN the firſt courſe, potage, béefe, mutton, bacon, peſtles of porke, or with Gooſe,

capon, malard, Swan or Feſant, as it is before ſaid, with tarts or bake meats, or chines of porke. In the ſecond courſe, potage, mortrus or Conies or few, than roſt fleſh, mutton pork, veale, pullets, chickins pigions, teles Wigions, Malards, Partrich, Wodcock, plouer, bitture, curlewe, Heronſew, Veſon roſt, great birdes, ſnite, feldfares, thruſhes, fruiters, chewits, béefe with ſauce, geloper roſt, with ſauce pogill, and other baked meates as is aforeſayds: and if yee carue afore your Lord or your Lady any ſodden fleſhe, carue away the ſkinne aboue, than carue reaſonably of the fleſh for your Lord and Lady, and ſpecially for Ladies, for they will ſoone bee angry, for theyr thoughts be ſoone changed, and ſome Lordes will be ſoone pleaſed, and ſome not, as they be of complexion. The Gooſe and Swan may bee cut as yee doe other foules that haue whole feete, or elſe as your Lord or your Lady wyll haue it.
                     Alſo a Swan with chadron, Capon or Feſand, ought to be arayed, as it is aforeſayde, but the ſkinne muſt bee had away and when they béene carued before

your Lorde or your ladie, for generally the ſkin of all maner whole footed foules that haue their liuing on the water their ſkins be wholſome and cleane, for by cleanes of water, and fiſh is their liuing, and if they eat any ſtinking thing, it is made ſo clean with the water that all the corruption is cleane gon away from it.
                     And the ſkinne of a capon, henne, or chickin be not ſo cleane, for they eate foule thinges in the ſtreete, and therefore the ſkins be not ſo wholſome, for it is not their kinde to enter into the Riuer, to make theyr meate voyde of the filth. Mallarde, Gooſe or Swan, they eate vpon the lande foule meate, but anone after their kinde they go to the riuer, and there they clenſe them of their foule ſtinke. A feſand as it is aforeſaide, but the ſkin is not wholeſome, than take the heades of all fielde birdes, and wood birds, as feſand, Pecocke, Partrich wodcock, curlew, for they eat in theyr degree, foule thinges, as wormes, toades and other ſuch.
                     Thus endeth the feaſts and caruing of fleſh.
                  
                  
                     
                     And heere beginneth the ſewing of fiſh.
                     
                        The firſt courſe.
                        To goe to ſhewing of fiſhe, muſcalade, menews in ſew of porpas or of ſalmon, baken hering with ſuger, greene fiſh, pike Lampry, ſalens, purpos roſted, bake gurnard, and lampry bake.
                     
                     
                        The ſecond courſe.
                        Gelly white and red, dates in confects, congre, ſalmon, dorey, brit, turbut, halibut for ſtandard, baſe trout, mullet, cheuin, ſele, eles and lamprey roſt, tench in gelly.
                     
                     
                        The third courſe.
                        Freſh Sturgion, breme, pearch in gelly, a 
                              •
                           oule of ſalmon, Sturgion, Welks, apples, and peares roſted with ſuger candy. Figs of malike and raiſons, dates capt with minced ginger, wafers and Ipocras they be agreeable, this feaſt is doon, voyde ye the table.
                     
                  
                  
                     Heere endeth the ſewing of Fiſh, and heere followeth caruing of fiſh.
                     The caruer of fiſh, muſt ſée to peaſō and furmenty, the tayle and the liuer, ye muſt

looke if there be a ſalt purpoſe or ſele turrentine, and doe after the form of Venſon, baken Hering, and lay it whole vpon your ſoueraignes trencher▪ white hering in a diſh, open it by the back, pick out the bones and the rowe, and ſee there be muſtarde. Of ſalt fiſh, greene fiſh, ſalt Salmon, and cunger, pare away the ſkin, ſalt fiſh, ſtockfiſh, Marling, Mackrell, and Hake with butter, take away the bones and the ſkinnes: a pike lay the wombe vpon his trencher▪ with pike ſauce enongh, a ſalte lampray gobon is in vii. or eight peeces, and lay it to your ſoueraigne: a place put out the water, then croſſe him with your knife, caſt on ſalt, wine or ale. Gurnard rochet, breame, cheuin, baſe melet, roch, pearch, ſoll, macrell, whiting, haddocke, and codling, raiſe them by the backe, and pick out the bones and clenſe the refet in that belly, Carpe, breame, ſol and troute, back and belly together, Salmon, conger, ſturgion, turbut, thirbol, thornbach, hound fiſh, and halibut, cut them in the diſhes the porpos about, tenche in his ſauce cut two els & lampraies roſt, pull of the ſkin, pyke out the bones, put thereto Vineger and

powder a Crab breake him aſunder in a diſhe, and make that ſhell cleane and in the ſtuffe againe, temper it with vineger and pouder them couer it with bread, and ſend into the kitchin to heate, then ſet it to your ſoueraigne and lay them in a diſh: a creuis dight him thus, depart him aſunder and ſlit the belly and take out the fiſh, pare away the red ſkin, and mince it thin, put vineger in the diſh and ſette it on the table without eating: a ioule of ſturgion, cut it in thinne morſels, and lay it round about the diſh.
                     Freſh lamprey bake open the paſtie, than take white breade, and cutte it thin, and lay it in a diſh, and with a ſpoone take out galentine and lay it vppon the breade, with red wine, and pouder of ſinamon, thā cut gobon of the lamprey, & mince the gobon thin, & lay it in the galentine, than ſet it vpon the fire to heate, freſh hering with ſalt and wine, ſhrimps well picked, flounders, gogines, menews, & muſcles, eles, & lampries, ſports is good in ſew. Muſcnlade in wortes, oiſters in ſew, oiſters in grauy, menews in porpas, ſalmond in ſéele gellie white and red cream of almonds, dates in

confects, Peares and quinces in ſirroppe, with parcely roots, mortrus of houndefiſh raiſe ſtanding.
                  
                  
                     Heere endeth the caruing of fiſh, And here beginneth ſauces for all fiſh.
                     Muſtard is good for ſalt hering, ſalt fiſh ſalt conger, ſalmon, ſparling, ſalt ele, and ling, vineger is good with ſalt Purpos, turrentine, ſalt ſturgion ſalt thrilpole, and ſalt whale, lamprey with gallantine, vergis to roche, dace, breme, molet, bace, floū
                        ders, ſalt crab and ch
                           •
                        uin, with pouder of ſinamon to thorneback, hering, houndfiſh, haddock, whiting and cod, vineger, pouder of ſinamon and ginger, green ſauce is good with gréene fiſh and halibut, cottell and freſh turbut, put not your gréene ſauce away, for it is good with muſtard.
                     Heere endeth all maner of ſauces for fiſh according to their appetite.
                  
                  
                     The chamberlaine
                     The Chamberlaine muſt be diligent & cleanly in his office, with his head kembed, and ſo to his ſoueraigne, that he be not retchles, and ſee that ye haue a clean ſhirt

brech, petticote and doublet, than bruſh his hoſen within and without, & ſee his ſhone and his ſlippers bee cleane, and at morne when your ſoueraine will ariſe, warme his ſhirt by the fire, and ſee yee haue a foote ſheet made in this maner. Firſt ſet a chair by the fire with a cuſhion, another vnder his feet, than ſpread a ſheet ouer the chair, and ſee there bee readie a kerchiefe and a combe, than warme his petticote his dublet and his ſtomacher, and than put on hys dublet and his ſtomacher, and than put on his hoſen and ſhone or ſlippers, than ſtrike vp his hoſen mannerlie, and tie them vp, than lace his doublet hole by hole, and lay a cloth vpon his necke and head, than look ye haue a baſin and an ewer with warme water, & a towell to waſh his hands than knele vpon your knee, & aſk your ſouerain what robe he wil weare, & bring him ſuch as hee commandeth▪ and put it vpon him, and take your leaue manerlye, and goe to the Church or Chappel to your ſoueraines Cloſet, and Carpets, and Cuſhions, and lay downe his booke of prayers, than drawe the Curtaines, and take your leaue goodly, and goe to your ſousraigns

chamber, and caſt all the clothes of the bed, and heate the feather bed, and the bolſter, but looke yee waſhe no feathers, then the blankets, and ſée the ſheetes bee faire and ſweete, or els looke yee haue cléene ſhéets, than lay the head ſhéets and the pillows, than take vp the towell and the baſin, & lay carpets about the bed or in windowes and cupbordes layd with quiſhins: alſo looke there bee a good fire burning bright, and ſée if the houſe of eaſement bee ſweete and cleane, and the priuy boord couered with greene cloth and a Quiſhin, then ſée there bee blanket, doune or cotton for your ſoueraigne, and looke yee haue a Baſin or a ewer with water, and a towel for your ſoueraine, than take off his gown, and bring him a mantell to kéep him from colde, than bring him to the fire, and take off his ſhone and his hoſen, thē take a faire kerchif of reines, and kembe his head, and put on his kercheife and his bonet, than ſpred downe his bed, lay the head ſhéet and the pillowes, and when your ſoueraigne is to hed, draw the curtaines then ſée there be morter or waxe, or perchours ready, than driue out dog or cat, and looke there be baſins

and vrinall ſet néere your ſoueraigne, than take your leaue mannerly, that your ſoueraine may take his reſt merrily.
                     Heere endeth of the Chamberlaine.
                  
                  
                     Heere followeth of the Marſhall and the vſher.
                     The Marſhal and the Uſher muſt know all the eſtates of the land, and the high eſtate of a king, with the blood royall.
                     
                        The eſtate of a King.
                        The eſtate of a Kings ſonne, a prince.
                        The eſtate of a Duke.
                        The eſtate of a Marques.
                        The eſtate of an Earle.
                        The eſtate of a Biſhop.
                        The eſtate of a Vicount.
                        The eſtate of a Baron.
                        The eſtate of the thrée chiefe Judges and the Maior of London.
                        The eſtate of a Knight bacheler.
                        The eſtate of a knight, Deane, Archdeacon.
                        The eſtate of the maſter of the Rols.
                        The eſtate of other Juſtices, and Barons of Cheker.
                        The eſtate of the Maior of Callice.
                        The eſtate of a Doctor Deuine.
                        
                           The eſtate of a Doctor of both the Laws.
                        The eſtate of him that hath bin Maior of London, and ſergeant of the Law.
                     
                     The eſtate of a maiſter of the chancery, & other worſhipfull preachers and clarkes that be granduable, and al other orders of chaſt perſons and prieſts, worſhipful marchants, and gentlemen, all theſemay ſit at the ſquires table.
                     A Duke may not kéep the hal, but each eſtate by them ſelfe in chamber or in pauilion, that neither ſee other, marques, Erles, Biſhops and vicaunts, al theſe may ſit at a meſſe: a baron and the Maior of London, and thrée chéefe Judges, and the ſpeaker of the Parliment, all theſe may ſit two or three at a meſſe: and all other ſtates may ſit thrée or foure at a meſſe: alſo the Marſhall muſt vnderſtand & knowe the bloede royall, for ſome Lorde is of the blood royall, and of ſmall lyuelyhood: and ſome knight is wedded vnto a Lady of roiall blood, ſhe ſhall keep the eſtate of her Lords blood, and therefore the royall blood ſhall haue the reuerence as I haue ſhewed you before: alſo a Marſhall muſte take hee de of the birth, and next of the line of the blood royall: Alſo hee muſt take héede

of the Kings officers of the chanceler, ſte ward, Chamberlaine, Treaſurer, & comptroler.
                     Alſo the Marſhall muſt take heed vnto ſtrangers and putthem to worſhip and reuereuce, for if they haue good cheere it is your Soueraines honor. Alſo a Marſhall muſt take heede if the King ſend your Soueraine any meſſage, & if he ſend a knight receiue him as a Baron, and if he ſende a Yeoman, receiue him as a ſquire, and if he ſend a groome receiue him as a Yoman. Alſo it is no rebuke to a Knight, toſette a groome of the Kings at his table.
                  
                  Heere endeth the book of Caruing.
               
               
                  Heere followeth how to make Marchpaine and Ipocras.
                  
                     How to make good Marchpaine.
                     FIrſt take a poūd of long ſmall almonds and blanch them in cold water, and dry the as poſible as you can, then grinde them ſmall, and put no licour to them but as you muſt néedes, to kéep them from oyling, and that licour that you put in, muſte bee roſe water, in manner as you ſhall think good but wet your peſtell therin, when ye hau beaten them fine, take halfe a pounde

ſuger and more, and ſee that it bee beaten ſmall in pouder, it muſt be fine, then put it to your almonds, and beat them together, when they bee beaten, take your wafers and cut them compuſſe rounde, and of the bignes you will haue your Marchpane, and then aſſoone as yee can after the tempering of your ſtuffe, let it bee put in your paſt, and ſtrike it abroad with a flat ſticke as euen as ye can, and pinch the very ſtuff as it were an edge ſet vpon, and then put a paper vnder it, and ſet it vpon a faire boord and lay a latin baſin ouer it, the bottome vpward, and then lay burning coales vppon▪ the bottome of the baſin: to ſee how it baketh, if it happen to bren too faſt in ſome place folde Papers as broade as the place is, and lay it vpon that place, and thus with atttending ye ſhall bake it a little more then a quarter of an houre, and when it is well baked, put on your golde and biſkets, and ſtickin conficts, and ſo you ſhall make a good Marchpaine. Or euer that you bake it▪ you muſte caſte on it fine ſuger and roſe water, that wil make it look like Ice.
                  
                  
                     
                     To make marchpane.
                     Take halfe a pounde of blanched Almonds, and of white Sugar a quarter of a pound, of Roſe water half an ounce, and of damaſke water as much, beat the almōds with a little of the ſame water, and grind them till they be ſmall, ſet them on a fewe coales of fire, till they wax thicke, then beat them againe with the ſuger fine: then mix the ſwéet waters and them together, and ſo gather thē and faſhion your marchpane: then take Water cakes of the broadeſt making, cut them ſquare, paſte them together with a litle liquor, and when you haue made them as broade as will ſerue your purpoſe, haue ready made a hoope of a green haſel wand of the thicknes of half an inche on the inner ſide ſmooth, and on the outward ſide round and ſmooth without any knags: lay this hoope vpon your water cakes aforeſaid, and then fill your hoop with the geare aboue named, ye thicknes of the hoope: the ſame driuen ſmooth aboue, with the back of a ſiluer ſpoone, as yee doe a tart, & cut away all the parts of the cakes, euen cloſe by the outſide of the hoope with a ſharpe knife, that it may bee round: then hauing white paper vuderneath

it, ſet it vpon a warme harth or vppon an inſtrument of iron and braſſe, made for the ſame purpoſe, or into an ouen after the bread is taken out ſo it be not ſtopped, it may not bake but onely bee harde and through dried: & ye may while it is moiſt, ſtick it full of cumfets of ſundry colours in comely order, yee muſt moiſt it ouer with roſewater and Suger togeather, make it ſmooth, and ſo ſet it in the ouen or other inſtrument, the clearer it is like Lantarne horne, ſo much the more commended▪ If it be through dried and kept in a warm and drie aire, a marchpane will laſt many yeares. It is a comfortable meat for weak folkes, ſuch as haue loſt the taſt of meates by much and long ſicknes: the greateſt ſecret that is in making of this cleare, is with a little fine flower of rice, roſe water and ſuger beaten together, and laid thin ouer the marchpane, ere it go to drying: this will make it ſhine like Ice, and ladies report.
                  
                  
                     To make Ipocras.
                     Take a gallon of wine, and an ounce of ſinamō two ounces of ginger, and a poūd of ſugar, twentie cloues bruſed, and twē
                        ty corns of pepper groſſe beaten, and let al

thoſe ſoke one night, and let it run through a bag.
                  
                  
                     To make Ipocras
                     Take of choſen ſinamon two ounces, of fine ginger, one ounce of graines, halfe an ounce, bruſe them all, and ſteepe them in thrée or foure pints of good odifferous wine with a pound of ſuger, by the ſpace of foure and twenty houres, than put them into an Ipocras bag of woollen, and ſo receiue the liquor. The readieſt and beſt way is, to put the ſpices with the half pound of ſuger, and the wine into a bottell, or a ſtone pot ſtopped cloſe, & after twenty foure houres it will bee readie, than caſt a thin linnen cloth, and a peece of a boulter cloth in the mouth, and let it ſo much runne through as yee will occupye at once, and keepe the veſſell cloſe, for it will ſo well keepe both the ſprite, odour, and vertue of the wine, and alſo ſpices.
                     FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   