
      
         
            
            
            
            
            ¶A Breife Narration of
the poſſeſſion, diſpoſſeſſion, and, repoſſeſſion
of William Sommers: and of ſome proceedings
againſt Mr Iohn Dorrell preacher,
with aunſweres to ſuch obiections as
are made to prove the pretended
counterfeiting of the ſaid
Sommers.
(⸪)
            Together with certaine depoſitions
taken at Nottingham concerning
the ſaid matter.
            Anno M.D.XCVIII.
         
         
            
            
            THou ſhalt here receive (Gentle Reader) a ſhort
narration of a large matter, together with certaine depoſitions
taken at Nottingham, tending to the manifeſtation
of a marvelous work of God, latelie ſhewed among
vs; written (as it ſeemeth) by ſome frend of this cauſe, and of
the witneſſes thereof: to ſtaie if it maie be the malice of ſome,
and raſhnes of others, who will not be reclamed from impugning,
or baſelie eſteeming of this glorious work, a greatter then
which, hath ſkarcelie bene heard of (ſaving performed in like
caſes) eyther in our dayes, or in the dayes of our fore fathers for
manie yeares. Yf it were particularlie ād fullie diſcovered (as
we wiſh it might be) howe ſtrangelie this William Sommers
came to be poſſeſſed by meanes of a witch in Worceſter ſhire,
who ſent a wicked ſpirit into him, witch he called Lucie: howe
he was tormēted during his poſſeſſion: howe the foule ſpirit
raged, and the Lord Ieſus prevailed at his diſpoſſeſſion:
howe he was ſubtillie tempted, ād eſtſoones repoſſeſſed: howe
extraordinarelie he hath caried himſelfe ſince his diſpoſſeſſion:
howe the Devill hath buſied himſelfe againſt the ſervant of
Chriſt Ieſus, who was the chife meanes of the diſpoſſeſſion:
and howe ſome perſons trulie other wiſe fearing God, have
bene incredulous, ſome vppon one fanſie, and ſome vppon an
other: ſpeaking Iere. 23. 16. by viſion out of their owne heart,
ād not from the Lords mouth: or els giving credit to this work,
and the witneſſes thereof have not taken it to heart, much les
vouchſafed to viſit, comfort, and releive them, or to vſe ſome lawefull
meanes, and mediation to our godlie Magiſtrates, (as
they ſhould) in the behalfe of the men of God theyr brethren
whom God hath honoured to ſuffer for the teſtimonie of this
his holie truth: Yf (I ſaie) all theſe things were fullie diſcovered,
and well weighed, doubtles a man muſt needes be aſtoniſhed,
and expect a rarer event of theſe things then can be yet
conceived. By the waie the providēce of our mercifull and heavenlie
father is to be wiſelie obſerved, ād with greate humilitie
to be reuerenced, that he hath ſuffered this matter to becalled in

queſtion, and for ſo long time to be ventilated, and ſifted into
as it hath bene. Doubtles, as we haue experience of our dulnes
in apprehending, and profitablie meditating vppon other
maruelous acts of the Lord dailie ſhewed before our eies, ſo
if this work had not bene mightilie impugned, we ſhould alſo
haue negligentlie ſlipped it ouer, and the reſidue of like nature
of late performed, without yeelding ſuch due honour to God,
and to the powerfull exerciſes of prayer and faſting, as appertaineth.
Albeit God thus turneth the rage of man to his glorie,
yet I would adviſe them who ſlaunder this work, ād perſecute
the ſervāthes of God, without cauſe, to take hede leaſt they
be found evē fighters againſt God. For he that ſitteth in the
heaven ſees their deviſes, and laughes them to ſkorne and
they, and all theyr conſpiracies, plots ſlaunderingh, and revelingh
ſhall conſume like a ſnaile that melteth but this mightie
work, ſeing it is of God, and was without queſtion a deede
done according to the witnes giuen vnto it, cannot be reverſed
or deſtroied but mager the malice, and ſubtiltie of the Devill
though Mr Dorrell ſhould be conſumed to aſhes the truth
thereof ſhall breake forth as the light, and the glorie thereof
as a burning lamp. God hath lighted a candle, not in a corner,
but hath advanced it as it were on a candelſtick in the
heart, or center of our land that the beames thereof might ſhine
forth, and give light to all the Realme. It is not in theyr
power (though it hath bene given out by a greate man among
them, that ſeeing they have taken it in hand they will have the
credit of it) altogether to eclipſe, or whollie to hide it vnder abuſ
hell when they have had theyr ſwinge but a litle, they wilbe
aſhamed of theyr owne follie. Nowe till the time appointed be
expired, let all faithfull hearted men beware, leaſt they take
Gods name in vaine by baſelie eſteeming of this mightie work
or beare falſe witnes againſt theyr neighbours, in crediting
lying rumours againſt thoſe men of God who doe nowe, or
hereafter ſhall ſuffer in this holie cauſe. I praie, conſider with
me a litle theſe circumſtances, and procedings, and indifferentlie

judge wihth whom the right ſtandeth. Mr Dorrell and
Mr Moore who are nowe impriſoned for giving teſtimonie to
this truth, have bene both of them for manie yeares aproved
godlie miniſters, juſt, and ſimple hearted men, fearing God,
of good reputation among the beſt Chriſtians, and painfull
preachers where they lived. God hath marvelouſlie bleſſed
theyr joint labours in diſpoſſeſſing ſeven perſons together in
Lamaſhire: which is ſo notorious, and free from challenge, as
the enimies to this Action of Nottingham dare not once to call
yt into queſtion. The Papiſts take knowledge of the poſſeſſion,
and diſpoſſeſſion in Lamaſhire: but they would fayne
have vs beleyve that theyr ſeminarie Preiſts were the onelie
actors: Yea this phanſie hath takē ſuch impreſſiō in them,
that ſome of them have not doubted to ſaie, if it can be proved
that Mr Moore, and Mr Dorrell did performe that work, they
would diſclayme theyr religion, and imbrace ours. They that
have accuſed, and proſecuted, againſt Mr Dorrell be men
that have blaſphemed the Scriptures, Popiſh perſons, and
knowen enimies to the preaching of the Goſpell. The wrath
of God is allreadie gone forth againſt one of Mr Dorrells greatteſt
enimies, namelie Mr Sale Officiall of Weſſon whoſe
child is latelie vexed whith an evill ſpirit: bycauſe (as his wife
reporteth) he hath bene adverſarie to Mr Dorrell. The procedings
againſt him, and others have bene verie violent. He
was put to ſilence by the Arch-Biſhop of York whithout
fufficient cauſe warranted by lawe: ād as if this had bene too
litle to be deprived of the vſe of his miniſterie, and of his livelihode,
having a wife, and five children: he was called before
the Commiſſioners of Canterburie province: ād without hearing,
or examining his cauſe was ſodainlie cōmitted. Brought
before the ſeate of juſtice: they who at the ſame time gave gentle
audience to Papiſts. Arrians, Atheiſts, and blaſphemers,
would not permit him to ſpeake anie thing almoſt in his owne
defenſe: but (as though he had bene the moſt dānable wretch
in the world) before anie conviction exceedinglie reviled him.

Iudges became parties, pleaders, and accuſers: Some ſtormed
that anie ſhould be preſent as witneſſes to their doings:
They would not ſuffer one of the depoſitions to be read before
them: the Commiſſioners, and deponents, were contemptvouſlie
rejected: charge given that no copies of the depoſitiōs
ſhould be divulged. Committance was threatned to diverſe,
onely bycauſe they tooke acquaintance which Mr Moore.
ſaying none ought to be countenanced, that was diſgraced before
them. Mr Dorrell having but one copie of the depoſitions,
he delivered it vnto them for theyr ſatiſ-faction, and though
they gave him promiſe that it ſhould be returned, when his
wife required it, they menaced her to Bridewell. There hath
bene running to the court to foreſtall the Lords, and Ladies of
honour, and to hinder the preferring of petitions in Mr Dorrels
behalfe to the right honorable Lords of the privie Counſell.
And bycauſe Thomas Darling a boie of Burton vppon
Trent of the age of 15. Yeares, or thereabouts had bene diſpoſſeſſed
by prayer vppon adviſe taken from Mr Dorrell, (as appeareth
by a booke publiſhed ſome yeares agoe): in hatred of
Mr Dorrell the bookes were called in, and the printer impriſoned
as if he had publiſhed a fined matter. Mr Bainbridge,
a Gentleman of good reckoning in Darbie ſhire was required
by the Biſhop of London to ſhewe his opinion touching
the ſayd Darling, he anſwered it was the common voice of
the countrie, which he beleyved to be true, that he was in deede
poſſeſſed, and diſpoſſeſſed: the Biſhop told him in great anger
but that if he had not heard well of him, he would clap him
in priſon for ſo ſaying. Thus having delt whith the printer,
and Mr Bainbridge, then he thought meete to examine the
matter: belike to ſee whether he had done well or not, thus to
determine, and then to heare. So he ſent a Purſivant for the
boye of Barton. The Purſivant having receyved 40.s. of the
boyes frends: the boye was kept in the Biſhop of Londons
houſe: and committed to the tuition of Mr Harſenet who latelie
had bene vomited out of Cambridge for his erroneous

opinions. None of the boies frends might be ſuffered to come
vnto him. He was allured by promiſes: terrified by threatnings:
as that he ſhould be hanged as the Burgonion was
whom they ſhewed vnto him, hāging at Londō, all a daie long
for a murder: Alſo that he ſhould be whipped, and laid in
Newegate. He was cloſe priſoner in a chamber two dayes,
the boie of Nottingham appointed for his keeper, who with
the prophane ſerving men were alwaies ſkorning at him being
a ſtraunger among them: letters were contrived in Mr
Dorrells name vnto him willing him to acknowledge a counterfeyt
poſſeſſion: and letters were returned by him whereyn
he proteſted the truth, and would not in anie ſort be removed
from it. All this was practized to heape ſhame, if it might be
vpon Mr Dorrell: but when they percived that the power of
God in the boie was ſtronger then the malice of Satan, they
let him goe: but I doe not heare that the 40. ſhillings was againe
reſtored. Not finding anie help herein to prove Mr Dorrell
a practitioner in conterfeyting whith this boye of Burton,
a Commiſſion was directed to five perſons in Nottingham,
(Satan could not have wiſhed better): that is to the
verie ſame men who have perſecuted Mr Dorrell at Nottingham,
York, and London ever ſince this matter came in queſtion.
This was to encounter the former depoſitions taken by
vertue of a Commiſſion awarded from York as is ſet forth
in this treatiſe. It fell out that Robert Cooper the Clerk of
St Maries in Nottingham cauſed the 94. Pſalme to be ſong
before theſe Commiſſioners ſate in Commiſſion, which being
done of purpoſe, or vnawares, (I knowe not) but ſure it is,
it ſo galled them, bycauſe it deſcribeth the like practizes of old
as they nowe had in hand, that the poore man was fetch vp
to London for this heinous fact. Theſe proper Commiſſioners
refuſed ſuch as were willing to juſtifie the truth vppon
theyr othes, they picked out whom they liſted, and wrote
what pleaſed them▪ When they were to examine Mr Aldridge,
and his Curate they cauſed them to ſweare that they would

not reveale vnto anie others the things whereof they ſhould
be depoſed. What goodlie ſtuffe they have returned, time and
malice will make knowne vnto vs. Yet all this being not ſufficient
to obſcure, and ſuppreſſe the work of God, if anie man
about Nottingham doe ſaie that Sommers was poſſeſſed,
and diſpoſſeſſed, he is threatned to be bound to the good behaviour.
Behold and wonder at the violence of theſe men. Doe
ye thinck that if they had a good matter in hand▪ they would
be halfe ſo zealous. O Lord, (if it be thy good will) open theyr
eies, and turne theyr hearts that they maie ſee and comprehēd
this great and wonderfull work wich thou haſt done among
vs, that the faith of vs all maie be ſtrengthned, our loue to thee
and thine Embaſſadours increaſed▪ Satan confounded, and
our ſinfull liues amended to the great praiſe of thy holie name
and our everlaſtin comfort in Chriſt Ieſus. Amen.
            
               G. CO.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A BREIFE NARRATION OF THE POSSESSION,
diſpoſſeſſion, & repoſſeſſion of w: Sommers, & of ſome proceedings
againſt Mr IOHN. Dorrel preacher, together with anſweres
to ſuch obiections as are made to iuſtifie, or ſhew the pretended
counterfeiting of the ſaid Sommers.
            
               WIlliam Sommers of Nottingham: of
the age of 19. or. 20 yeares, about the beginning
of October 1597. began to be ſtrangelie tormented
in bodie and ſo continued for diuerſe weekx,
to the great aſtoniſhment of the beholders, and
trouble of his frends: and gaue great tokens that
he was poſſeſſed by a wicked ſpirit, wherevppon
the MAIOR and ſome of the Aldermen of Nott: vnderſtanding that
Mr Dorrell, a miniſter of Gods worde dwellingh in Aſhbie de la
zouche, had by praier and faſting reſtored 8. or 9. perſons that in
like ſort had bene vexed, did inſtātlie ſēd for the ſaid Mr Dorrell to
com to Not. to beſtwe ſome paines about the faid ſommers: wich he
refuſed ſundrie times to yeeld vnto: bycauſe he tooke vppon him nogreatter
power in ſuch caſes, then was incident to anie godlie miniſſter,
or other perſōs; with onelie was to intreat the Lord in the name
of Chriſt Ieſus to diſpoſeſſe the wicked ſpirit out of the poſſeſſed perſon:
yet by theyr importunate letters and meſſengers he condiſcended
to their deſires. And came to Nott. the 5 of Nouember in the
yeare aforeſaid: hauing neuer before that time (to his knowledge)
ſeene the ſaid Sommers. The 7. daie of Nouember, being Mondaie,
was appointed for the exerciſe of praier, and faſting, to the end
the ſaid Sommers might be diſpoſſeſſed: which Allmightie God▪
onelie at the prayers of Mr Dorrell, and others to the nomber of
150. perſons brought to paſſe. Hyereuppon Mr Dorrell was retained
preacher in Nott: that populous towne, hauing had no ſetled
preacher before this time ſince the beginning of her Maieſties reigne.
Sommers being diſpoſſeſſed, he diſcouered certaine witches;
whereof one was called Doll ffreeman, allied to one ffreeman an
Aldermā of Nott: This ffreemā offēded that his kinſwomā ſhould
be called in queſtion, threatned Sommers that he was a which: laiing
to his charge ſome preſumptions tending that waie. Sōmers
was committed to priſon, where the Deuil appeared vnto him in
liknes of a mouſe: threatning that if he would not let himThat the Deuil deſtreth to reenter is proved by mat. 12. 42. and 
                     •…
                  are. 925. and by experience. and ſeem Thy
                     •
                  aus de 
                     〈…〉
                   4. capit. 1. ſect. 6. 7. reenter,
and would not ſaie that all that he had done touching his tormenting
during his poſſeſſiō was but counterfeyt, then he ſhould be
hangd: but if he would yeeld to him, he would ſave him. Thus anew
ſtipulation being made betwene them, the Devill entred: And
afterwards Som: ſtill pretented that all which before he had done
was onelie counterfeyt. Yet this notwithſtanding, vppon his repoſſeſſiō
he was as horriblie (ſpite of his face) tormented as before,
as appeareth by diverſe of the Deponents, if the time when the

things wich they depoſed were done, be well obſerved. To ſearch
into the truth hereof a Commiſſion was awarded from the highe
Commiſſioners for the province of yorke, to certifie the matter, to
12. principall perſone of account there abouth. Mr Dorrell had taken
the names of threeſcore perſons: who were readie to haue bene
depoſed touching the extraordinarie handeling of the ſaid Som. 17.
of them being ſworne, examined, and theyr depoſitions takē Som
was called before the Comiſſioners to be examined himſelf, whether
he had counterfeited, or not. He told them, all that he did, was but
counterfeit. The highe Sheriffe exhorted him in the name of God
to tell the truth: then ſodenlie Som. was violentlie caſt into one
of his fits before them all where he wallowed vp and downe the
chamber where they ſate, in a farefull maner. There were pius
thruſt deepe into his hand, and leg, to trie if he did counterfeyt: but
he was ſenſeles, and no bloud followed. At length being re
                  •••…
               ed
as out of ſleepe: they aſked what he had done. He ſaid, he could not
tell: whether he had not bene pricked with pins, he ſaid, yes: they
aſked where, and he ſhewed the wrong hand: when he was examined,
howe the hole came in his other hand wich had bene pricked
he ſaid it was there before: being demaunded, why he fell downe?
he aunſwered, a qualme came ouer his ſtomack. Then he was conveied
awaie: and being abſent he was worſe tormented them before.
They brought him back againe to knowe if he would confeſſe,
who perſwaded him to ſaie, he had counterfeited. As he ſhould haue
gone vp a paire of ſtaires, through a gallerie, if he had not bene
hindred, he had caſt himſelfe headlong ouer the gallerie, to haue broken
his neck. When he was the ſecond time brought before the
Commiſſioners, he was more terriblie handled them before, in ſo
much that the Commiſſioners, and all that were preſent were fullie
ſatiſfied, that he thē was corporallie poſſeſſed: ād ſurceſſed to examie
ani moe witneſſes Mr Walton Archdeacō of derbie being preſēt, ād
a principall enime to Mr Dorrell acknowledged it was the finger
of God vppon this rare accident. Then was generallie great rejoicing
in Nott: in ſomuch as it had pleaſed God thus to manifeſt
the truth when it came to triall. After, the Commiſſion was returned
to Yorke, and Som. committed to the cuſtodie of certain honeſt
perſons where he was ſtill tormented as before; and in his fits
delivered,One of theſe is a great perſecutor of Mr Dorrel and is ſuſpected to be a wich. how the Devill had appeared vnto him in priſon in likenes
of a mouſe as afore ſayd: and howe the Devill and alſo certayne
perſons had adviſed him to ſaie, that he vvas but a counterfeyt,
and vvhat promiſes they made vnto him. Alſo he told of things that
hapned at that time elſwhere whithout having knowledge from
anie. Which things were taken in writing by ſome that heard him:
and they are readie to be depoſed thereof, if they might be ſuffered.
And being come to himſelfe he did confeſſe his poſſeſſion; and gave
himſelfe bodie, and ſoule to the Devill, if he did counterfeyt. The
Arch-Biſhop of Yorke after the depoſitions came to his hands
was ſatiſfied that in deede Som: was poſſeſſed. Yet having receive
                  •
               
               
letters from ſome great perſonages / he tooke occaſiō to ſilence Mr
Dor: pretending this onelie cauſe, that Mr Dorrell ſhould hold
that the Devil might be diſpoſſeſt by praier, & faſting. Which yet he
told him was his private opinion, and that he would willinglie alter
it, if he might be better informed. But the A. B. neuer endevoured
to informe him better: But after goodwords, as that he was
an honeſt man, ecc ſent him aware ſilenced. The matter thus apprehended
at york, the Commiſſioners of the province of Canterburie
convented Mr Dorrell before them: he appeared a for the daie
and being vſed with hard ſpeeches, was ſent to the Gatehouſe.
Som: was brought vp to London, and committed to a barber of
Eaſt Smithfeild, a man of evill report. And afterward was takē
into the Biſſchop of London his houſe. The matter was ſo well
handled that Som: perſiſted in ſaiing that he had bene a counterfeyt:
and at length ſeing this to be ſo plauſible, grewe to be ſo impudent,
that he ſaid Mr Dorrell had hired him to counterfeyt, and
had bene acquained with him 4. yeares before, and cauſed him to
practiſe his feats in Aſhbie parck: and informed him after his comming
to Nott: howe he ſhould demeane himſelfe in time of his diſpoſſeſſion.
All which Mr Dorrell vppon his othe denied, but Som:
bare word (nowe growone to be a mam of great credit, though he
had confeſſed himſelfe, heretofore to haue bene a counterfeyt) was
better beleiued then Mr Dorrell a godlie, and faithfull man, of honeſt
converſation, long approved by the beſt Chriſtians, and miniſters
where he lived. But Mr Dorrell for a weeke was herevppon
cloſe priſoner. And at length againe he was convented at Lambith.
Where taken vp with hard ſpeeches: as if all that Som: had
ſaid was true, he not being ſuffered to anſwer for himſelfe, and the
depoſitions wich might beſt ſhewe the matter being taken awaie,
and deteined from him, was remanded to the priſon: where he yet
lieth, till it pleaſe God, his cauſe maie be heard. Nowe to the end
that it maie appeare vpon what ground Mr Dorrel hath bene thus
handled, and taken vp with ſpeeches, as, the moſt impudent varlet
that euer came before them: aſſe, heretick, a Deuil, one that had ſeuen
Deuils: that he ſhould be the Devils mrthyr, & either recant, at
Pauls, croſſe, or be burnt in Smithfeild, & ſuch like: for this cauſe,
and for the better clearing of the truth: I will deliuer ſuch obiections,
as haue bene made againſt him, with evident aunſweres (as I
hope) to everie of them.
            There haue bene manie counterfeits:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                therefore Som. did couterfeit
            This followeth not. for we maie with as good reaſon ſaie,Auſ. 1. manie
haue not counterfeyt: therefore Som: did not counterfeyt.
            2. There could neuer anie man counterfeyt ſuch things as ſommers
in truth hath done.
            Sommers himſelfe ſaid he did counterfeyt.2. obiectio
                     •…
                  
               
            
            1. Sommers likewiſe ſaid, he did not counterfeyt: yea gaue himſelf
bodie and ſoule to the Devill:Auſ. 
                     •
                  . if he ded counterfeyt: as wilbe depoſed:

why ſhould he not be beleiued aſwell with an exetration deniing,
as barelie affirming he did counterfeit?
            2. Somm. is not to be beleiued when he affirmeth an impoſſibilitie.
for it appeares by the depoſitions that he did ſuch things, as by humane
power without the Deuill are not poſſible for him to doe
            3. Somm: for feare he ſhould be counted a witch ſaid he did couterfeit,
as appeares in the narration, and nowe perceiuing that this is
well pleaſing to ſome great perſonages, he doth more īpudentlie ſtād
in defence of it.
            4. If Som. did counterfeit, he is to be burnt as a blaſphemer for
ſaiing that he was God, Chriſt, and that he made Baptiſme. And
if he be not puniſhed, we muſt conclude he did not counterfeit. Els
men will imagine that the reuerēd fathers would tollerate blaſphemie;
hetherto he hath bene rather rewarded.
            Sommers owne confeſſion is more to be credited,3. ob. then all the Deponēts:
he beſt knoweth what himſelfe did: the depoſitions are not
worth 2 D. the Commiſſioners ſimple men.
            1 Sōmers being in his fits knewe not what himſelfe did,Anſwer. or, ſaid
or was done vnto him, as hath bene confeſſed by himſelfe, and is depoſed,
and further maie be.
            2 There can no exception be taken againſt the witneſſes: if it were
in caſe of hie treaſō, or in matters concerning anie mans life, or lāds
in England: ſo manie, and ſuch witneſſes are ſufficient in anie other
court of juſtice in England. 6 of the Commiſſioners were in degree
of Eſquires, or better: the reſidue (ſaue the Maior of Nott: a verie
ſimple man) were men of learning: they can not be noted of partialitie
ſaue ſuch of thē, as were enimies to Mr Dorrell. for the others
if there be fault in them, let them be ſent for, and puniſhed. But it is
not like that anie ſhalbe called till more indifferēcie be procured, but
ſuch onelie as will ſeeke rather to obſcure then to reueale the truth
of theſe proceedings
            Sommers can act all thoſe things againe that are depoſed.4. ob.
            
            1 If he can act them all in ſuch maner,Anſ. and forme as is depoſed,
then he is, either ſtill poſſeſſed, or more then a man: for no humane
power can doe the like.
            2 Let him be brought before ſome indifferēt perſons, let the depoſitions
be read, and let him act the ſame in ſuch maner, and forme as
is depoſed, by naturall, or artificiall power, then Mr Dorrell will
peeld that he did conterfeit. If he cannot, (as vndoubtedlie he cannot,)
then pleade no longer for the Deuill: but puniſh that imp. of
Satā as a wicked lier, and blaſphemer of the mightie work of God
            He ſaith he ſeemed to be ſtronger then,
                  
                     •
                  . ob. 4. or 5 men in his fits, bycauſe
he looked rerriblie, & they were ſo afraid they durſt not uſe
their ſtrength uppon him.
            It appeareth,Anſ. by the depoſitions of Robert Aldridge, Ihon wood
Ioane Pie, Ihon Slrellie, Richard Mee, and William Langford,
that they, and others laboured wiht all their might, and ſtrength ſo

as they ſweat againe and could not rule him: he neither ſweating,
panting, nor changing colour.
            It was an eaſie matter for him to trouble 3.6. ob. or 4 perſons, being caried
aloſt uppon their ſhoulders: ſuch ſtrength he can ſhewe againe.
            It is depoſed that being vppon his bed, and on the ground, and ſitting
in a chaire he was ſo ſtrong,Anſ. he could not be maſtered by 3. or 4.
perſons joining together their vnited forces; as appeares by the depoſitions.7. ob.
            
            Where ſome ſaie he had a ſwelling in his bodie, it was nothing but
the windcollick.
            A ſtrange collick that ſhould run in a variable bignes betwene the
fleſh and ſkin vp,Anſ. and downe his bodie, from leg to leg, thē to his toe,
bellie, eare, roote cheeke, throat, tongue, and eie, changing the colour
of the eie; and making the part in wich it was inflexible, and heauie
as yron. Yet if Mr Dorrell ſhould by praer, and faſting cure ſuch a
collick,8. ob. he ought rather to be reuerenced then reuiled.
            But Som: denieth that it ran vp & downe his bodie in that ſort.
            It is depoſed by eleuen witneſſes:Anſ. manie moe alſo wilbe readie to
depoſe.
            But where finde you that in Scripture?9. ob. qd. My L: of London.
            Mr Dorrell affirmed,Anſ. there were twelue things depoſed cōcerning
Som: his poſſeſſion, wich he could not poſſiblie counterfeit: he was
ſuffered to produce the running of this lump up and downe his bodie,
for one of thē wich was directlie proued by manifold witneſſes.
When ſom that had ſeene the depoſitions knwe this to be moſt certenlie
depoſed, thy had nothing to obiect but: Where finde you that in
Scripture. Wherby they ſhwe manifeſtlie, that ſome of thē doe fight
againſt the light of their owne conſcience. for themſelues knowing
that Som: could not counterfeit this, neither could Mr Dorrel poſſiblie
inſtruct him how to practiſe anie ſuch feat, they had nothing in
reaſon to anſwer but leaſt by their ſilence they ſhould ſeeme to be cō
               vinced
and confounded, they obiect a matter nothing to the purpoſe,
namelie that this is not found in Scripture. The weight of wich obiection
is this.
            
               All impoſſibilities are found in Scripture: this is not found in Scipture:
therefore this is not an impoſſibilitie. Who feeleth not the
groſnes of this argumēt. as if a mā mihht not name a 1000 things
vnpoſible to be performed by W Som: wich yet are not to be found
in Scrip: It is not poſſible for Som: to goe to Rome in an houre,
yet this is not found in Scripture. It is not poſſible for Som: to
touch the ſtars, yet this is not found in Scrip: no more ſurelie is it
poſſible for Som: to counterfeit ſuch a variable motion, as was euidentlie
ſeene, and felt vppon his bodie though it be not to be fonnd in
Scrip. This one thing alone (if there were nothing els) is ſufficient
to conuince anie man whoſe heart is not hardned, that Som: did not
conterfeit: much les coold Mr Dorrell be acceſſarie to him in ſuch
iniquitie.
            
               
2. All the ſignes mentioned in Scrip: might more eaſilie be
deluded by this cōceit of counterfeyting▪ then this moveable ſwelling
net the Devill in thoſe dayes was not ſo wittie as to afcribe all
poſſeſſions vnto counterfeyting.Such ſwelling is obſerved in others as aſigne of poſſeſſion, vide Thyr: de demoniaris part. 1. cap. 3 ſect. 3. But ſeeing men in this matter are
growen more incredulous then heretofore, it hath pleaſed God beſide
the ſignes of poſſeſſions mentioned in Scrip: to give other ſignes
alſo, more free from cavill to make his glorious works moſt
apparant, and certen.
            The kitlings that ſeemed to move vnder this coverlet,10. objection. where he
laie, was but the motion of his owne hand: One put his hand vnder
the coverlet, & caught Som: hand moving.
            1. If this be true then he had five hands in bed with him for
there ſeemed to be five kitlings ſome time,Anſ. as is depoſed by Rob.
Aldridge.
            2. It maie be after the time that he pretended to counterfeyt,
ſome confederate of his might catch his hand vnder the coverlet to
delude the former accidents.
            3. This motion was, when Som: hands, and feete were held:
depoſed by Th. Graie.
            
            4. Laſtlie depoſed; that the riſing vp vnder the coverlet being
felt, it yeelded like a bladder full of winde when it is pricked: and
filled againe as with winde: and ſome times it patted, like the foote
of a kitling.
            Thoſe things wich he told in his fits to be ſayd and done in his abſence,11. ob.
he vnderſtoode by the people who were with him, that talked
of ſuch matters, ſuppoſing he heard them not.
            By the depoſitions it is playne,Anſ. he ſpake of things done in his
abſence, at the inſtant when he ſpake them: as that of the examination
of Millecent Horſelere, and of Mr Dorrells, and Mr Abdredges
coming, vnknowen to anie there preſent.
            Where it is ſayd,12. ob. he ſpake, his mouth open, not moving tongue,
chaps, &c. he can doe ſo againe: for gaping he can ſaie, hang▪
hang.
            It is depoſed by Richard Newto,Anſ. he ſpake a continued ſpeach.
his mouth being wide open, his tongue drawne into his throate,
vttering thoſe words among others. Ego ſum rex, ego ſum Deus.
            
            He can foame as he did before by keeping ſoape in his mouth,13. ob. &
working it with his tongue.
            Belike he brought this concert from the barbars ſhop.Anſ. It is depoſed
by Mr Langford, that he continued his foaming the ſpace
of an houre, in ſuch abundant maner, that the foame did hang downe
from his mouth to his breſt, notwithſtanding it was continuallie
wiped with clats, in ſuch abundance, as is not able to be vttered
by anie humane creature, not having receyved anie thing from 6 in
the morning, till 5 at night to augment it.
            
               
When he threwe himſelfe into the fire,14. ob. he knewe there vvere ſome
preſent ſpeedilie to relcue him.
            He was throwen with ſuch violence againſt the chimneie as they
that were preſent thought his neck had bene broken,Anſ. he could not ſodenlie
be takē out of the fier; for it is depoſed, he was of ſuch weight
as is not poſſible to anie naturall bodie▪ ſo as there were 3. or 4. forced
to joine in taking him by: yet he had not his haire ſinged, nor
was himſelfe hurt.
            When he fel dovvne before the Commiſſioners,15. ob. it vvas done by
the adviſe of the Maior, and ſome of the Aldermen at Nott: vvho perſvvaded
him to it; and ſhould have given him a vvatchvvord, vvhen to
riſevp, but it vvas forgotten: vvhereby (alas) the poore boie vvas in
great paines through the maiors forgetfulnes.
            1. Then belike the maior,Anſ. and Aldermen were complotters in
this counterfeyting: me thincks they ſhould aſwell be puniſhed
as Mr Dorrell.
            2. Could they by teaching, or he by practizing ſtaie the iſſuing
of bloud when he was deepelie pricked with a yin, both in his hād,
and leg? howe came it to paſſe that he had forgotten which hand
was pricked? why did he purpoſe to counterfeyt, and yet would tell
them, that he fell downe bycauſe a qualme came over his ſtomack,
howeſoever it is an eaſie matter to delude ſuch as were abſent by
words, yet the Commiſſioners being choiſe men of the countrie,
both for learning, and authoritie could not be deceyved by ſuch a
paltrie companion. For the matter was ſo apparant vnto them,
that they held it ſuperfluous to proceede anie further to examination
of witneſſes: in ſo much as Mr Walton the Archdeacon confeſſed
it to be the finger of God: ād ſhrunck awaie aſhamed, being
convinced with the evidence, and demonſtration of truth.
            He ſaith,16. ob. Mr Dorrell taught him to counterfeyt, & hovve to behave
himſelfe at the diſpoſſeſſion.
            1. This relieth vppon the ariome and infallible principle whervppon
moſt of the objections are founded,Anſ. namelie this whatſoever
Wt. Som: ſaith is true, he ſaith Mr Dorrell inſtructed him to
counterfeyt etc. let them prove the propoſition: ād we will yeeld the
Concluſion. As if a godlie miniſter were not better to be beleyved
vppon his othe, then the bare affirmatiō of a lewd voie whom they
ſaie was a counterfeyt.
            2. If Mr Dorrell ſhould ſaie, or ſweare that Som: by his
teaching can doe theſe things; he were not to be credited: for none
can by reaching, or learning practiſe impoſſibilities. Therefore
it is a mere vanitie to ſeeke to drawe Mr Dorrell into anie confederacie
in this action, vnles they prove theſe witneſſes to be all perjured
perſons.
            3. Mr Dorrell never came to him but with companie finding
alſo companie alwaies with him: he never (to his knowledge) did
ſee him before the 5 of Novemb. 1597. us he hath depoſed.
            
               
4 Why ſhould Mr Dorrell teach him to conterfeit more then
others, whom he hath dealt withall in like caſes of diſpoſſeſſion? eſpeciallie
the 7. in Lancaſhire? whereof 4 were vnder 12 yeares,
troubled 2 yeares before he came to them; and 2 of them children
to a gentleman of good credit; who was at 200 ll charges by occaſion
of their poſſeſſion? and could not expect anie aduantage by giuing
out that 6 in his familie were vexed by Sathan: the procurer of
their trouble was indited and executed for coniuration: yet till this
likewiſe be proued conterfeiting; a poſſeſſion and diſpoſſeſſion muſt
be held for granted.
            It is Poperie to holde there is anie poſſeſſiō ſince Chriſts time:17. Objection. and it is
hereſie to maintaine that the Deuill maie nowe be caſt out by praier, &
faſting. Miracles are nowe ceaſed: theſe are but deuices to maintaine
your hypocritical faſtings.
            To hold there are poſſeſſions,Anſwere. and maie be diſpoſſeſſions by praier
and faſting, is neither Poperie, nor hereſie. If it be, why doe they
not ſend for Mr. Ihon Ireton of Legworth a man knowne to be
learned and ſound in religion, as anie of them: who ſhamefullie confounded
Archd: Walton in this queſtion: and offered to maintaine
the ſame in the Vniuerſitie? there being in deede (as I am verilie
perſuaded) nothing in the Scripture, the Apologie, or articles of rereligion
proffeſſed in England, nor in the armonie of Confeſſions,
nor in anie ſound Proteſtant Diuine to the contrarie. In this, and
in otherVr: Whether a Biſhop, et Elder be all one in ſcrip. whether Chriſt ſuffered in ſoule et
                     •
                  
                queſtiōs it is fit to be knowē, wich mē learnd in the lawe
do tel vs1 Elizabeth. c. 1. 
               that the Eccleſiaſticall Commiſſioners ought not to determine
anie matter to be hereſie, but onelie ſuch as hath heretofore
bene determined to be hereſie by authorite of the Canonical Scripture;
or by the firſt foure General Councels, or anie of them; or by
anie other General Counſel, whereyn the ſame vvas declared to be
hereſie by the expreſſe, & plaine vvords of the Canonical Scripture;
or ſuch as hath heretofore bene judged hereſie by the Parleamēt with
the aſſent of the Clergie in the Convocation; as appeares by the
ſtatute made in the firſt yeare of her M.ties reigne and the firſt
chapter. There have bene poſſeſſions before Chriſts tyme, wich maie
be ſeene by theſe things which are recorded of theIoſeph. de antiq: 
               Exorciſts among
the Iewes,Mat. 12. 27 and of theLevit. 20 27. 1 Sa 28. 7. who had the Devil in thē. in theyr bellie: called alſo Pythoniſts. Ad 16 16. 18. See hereof Orig lib. 7. cont Celſ: Chryſ. hom. 29. Oracles, Engaſtrimuthoj, and others
among the Gentiles. Since Chriſts time there have bene infinite
examples teſtied by theCyprian ad Deniet etc. de Idolor: Vanitate. Orig. hom. 244 in Ioſ. Iact. lib. 4. Ca. 27. Iuſtin. diſp. cont. Fryph. Chryſoſt. hom. 4. Athanaſ: de incarnat. Auguſt. de temp. ſer. 197. Caſſ. Coll. 7. c. 25. 27. Proſper de promiſſ. Gregor. didlog. lib. 1. r. 10. Zāch. de operibus. l. 4. c. 10. Martyr in 1. reg. 8. Melanct. in Epiſt. Gualt. hom. in Luc. 8. Szeged. loc com. f. 400. Cheſ. Geuev. Giffard dialog. of with. monuments of all ages. A thing ſo
vſuall in the times of Antiquitie, ſince Chriſt, and his Apoſtles,
that I marvell anie men who would ſeeme to be learned, and doe
profeſſe great reading, ſhould beware theyr ignorance in ſuch a
triviall matter. Hierome in vita Hilariom ſpeakes of one Hilarion
who dipoſſeſſed verie neare 200. perſons. omitting others I will

onelie alledge tertulliā in his apologie, who made the like offer in
his time, as was made of late vp Mr More a godlie Miniſter, to
the Biſh: of London touching W. Som: for wich he was committed
to the priſon of the Clinck. Let a man (ſayth tertullian) that
is vexed by a Devill be brought before your judgement ſeate: & ad the
commandement of the meaneſt Chriſtian, the ſpirite ſhal ſpeake, &
confeſſe himſelfe to be an vncleane ſpirit. Let one of thoſe folke be
brought whom you thinck to be inſpired of a God, &c. If he dare bie
before a Chriſtian, or if he confeſſe not himſelfe to be a Devill, take
the Chriſtiā to be preſumptuous, & let him die for it out of hand, &c.
Nowe none wil ſpeake his owne ſhame, but rather the which maye
ſound to his honour.Tertul in Apolog. Surelie they wil not tel you that Ieſus is a deceyver,
or of the common ſtamp of men: or that he was ſtolne out of his
grave, as hath bene reported vnto you: but that he is the power the
wiſedome, & the word of God: that he ſitteth in heaven, & that he
ſhal come to judge us. And on the contrarie part that themſelues be
Devils, damned for theyr naughtines, & wayting for theyr dreadfull
dome: and this bycauſe that beyng afrayde of Chriſt in God, & of
God in Chriſt they yeeld to God & Chriſt, & to the ſervants of God,
& Chriſt.
               nd Scap. cap. 3. And againe els where he ſaith, We doe not onelie deſpite
the Devils, but alſo we binde them, & doe dailie traduce them, & expel
them out of men, as it is wel knowen vnto verye manye. Of corporall
poſſeſſions alſo even in theſe dayes.Lirie & others. We doe reade in credible
hiſtories of the weſt Indies.
            But to ſeeke no further, there hath bene evident demonſtration
hereof in our owne land. Where the Symptomes, or ſignes of poſſeſſion
mentioned in Scripture have bene apparant in the parties
poſſeſſed, as namelieLuk. 8. 29. 
               extraordinarie ſtrength
               Luk. 8. 28. 
               knowledge,
               Act. 16. 16. & 19. 15. 
               & tormenting
of the bodies,
               Mar. 9. 20. 
               Foaming, wallowing, beatting of themſelves
gnaſhing whith the teeth.
               Marc. 9. 22 
               caſting into the fire, & ſuch licke.
               Mote this ye Atheiſis:
When the ſignes of poſſeſſion, and diſpoſſeſſion have bene delivered
out of the Scripture, the verie ſame at the naming of them (the
work correſponding with the word, ſufficient to confound all Actheiſts)
have at that inſtāt bene ſhewed in the perſons affected, being
themſelves ſenſeles, not remembring afterward what had hapned
vnto them. When the godliemen have called vppon the Lord to diſpoſſeſſe
the wicked ſpirit out of the tormented creature, he hath anſwered,
as it were from heaven, be it vnto you, as you have deſired.
Laſtlie when Saran hath bene diſpoſſeſſed, he hath (as the Scrip:
ſayte) walked in drye & barren places,
               Mat. 12. 43. 
               ſeeking reſt, but finding none:
& returning back into the houſe frō whēce he came, he hath appeared
in diverſe ſhapes, perſwading the parties by promiſes, and threatnings
to let him 
                  •
               reenter.Marc. 9. 25. Some have yeelded, as Iane Aſhton
in Lancaſhire, this Som: and others: and have bene greivouſlie
tormented as before without giving hope of recoverie: ſeeing ouwr
Saviour ſayth,Mat. 12. 45. that in ſuch caſe, the ſpirit taking 7. worſe dwelleth

there & of ſuch is worſe, then the beginning. Others haue repulſed
him, and would not relent, either by this allurements or threathnings.
Whereof he hath outwardlie in theyr bodie ſo pinched, ād
tormēted them, that they could not goe without halting for a good
time after. Yet he being ſtill reſiſted in faith, hath after manie
aſſaults ſurceaſed to trouble them anie further. The miraculous
curing of fevers, palſae
                  •
               , leproſies, and other diſeaſes
by Chriſt, and his Apoſtels gave credit to the Ghoſpell: Yet the
like diſeaſes remaine at this daye. Seing therefore there maie be
poſſeſſions at this daye, as before (for what hath bene done,
that maie not againe be done, the Devill being as malicious, and
powerfull as in times paſt) What ſhall we doe (ſaith P.in 1 Reg. 8. Martyr)
with them that be taken, and tormented with Devils, Shall
we forſake them. Vndoubtedlie they muſt not be forſaken; yet
we muſt not by adjurations commaund them to goe forth. Wherefore
(ſaith he) we will vſe faithfull prayers for the recoverie of
them.
               in Epiſt. Demonologie. The like is the opinon of Phillip. Melanthon, and the godlie
learned King of Schoth: men more judicious, and better
grounded in religiom, then theſe that ſpeake at randome of Poperie,
and of hereſie. To remove the Devill by prayer and faſting
is no miracle:Mat. 17. 21. 
               this kind is not caſt out but by prayer and faſting.
ſaith our Saviour. If God by prayer ſhould heale the falling,
ſicknes, or phrenſie, or ſhould graunt raine, drought, victorie, or
ſuch like requeſts, where this a miracle? Chriſt, and his Apoſtels
ſpake the word onelie (as the Centuriom ſaith) and it was done:
               Mat. 8. 8. Act. 16. 18. Mat. 10.
               they commaunded, and it came to paſſe. The Diſciples had power
giuen them againſt vncleane ſpirits, and to heale all diſeaſes. This
in deede was miraculous. But Mr Foxe, Mr Greenham, Mr Dorrel,
Mr More nor others in theſe daies, neither challenge, nor have
anie power onelie in an extraordinarie caſe, wherein the Phiſitions
ſaie there is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſomewhat divine, or ſupernaturall,
not curable by anie humane ordinarie ſkill, they vſe in extraordinarie,
and ſupernaturall lawfull meane of cure, that is by long,
and earneſt intreatie to beſeech Almightie God by mediation of
Chriſt Ieſus, to releaſe the partie. This God hath done, and theſe
men for our good are witneſſes hereof: and woe be to them who
haue prevailed againſt Satan, and heard with theyr eares, and
ſeene with theyr eies the great works of Allmightie God, if they
ſhould relinquiſh the truth of God, for the feare of man, Touching
the ceaſing of miracles there is no determination thereof
in holie Scripture: neither is that article in this action to be controverſed.
Sure w
                  •
               are that the Scripture, the deitie, and all religion
is by ſome among vs as much called in queſtion, as euer heretofore.
The Eccleſiaſticall Commiſſioners can witnes, howe
manie Atheiſts and blaſphemers haue bene brought before them,
likewiſe there be ſome who call themſelues Chriſtians, and alſo

Miniſters of the Ghoſpell, who yet in theyr practized liue
Atheiſts, and make a ſcorne at the exerciſes of religion, as namelie
at preaching, praiing, faſting, ſanctifiing the Saboth, reading
the word of God, giving thanks at meate-vſing the phraſes of the
Scriptures and doe revile, and hate others bycauſe they refraine
from ſwearing liing, filthie ſpeaking, gaming, plaies, and ſuch
abhominations of this age where in we liue. It is to be doubted.
that neither the word, nor miracles can prevaile with thoſe men.
when God ſhutteth no man can open: when Lazarus was raiſed
from the dead, manie beleived: but ſome were hardned, & complained
vppon our Saviour.
            Though ſome ſawe Chriſt viſiblie riſē from the dead, yet they ſtil
doubted. Therefore all is to litle to vnbeleivers. The greatter,
and more noble the workes of God be, the more earneſt is the Devill
in obſcuring them. If there were no other proofe hereof but
this matter of Nottingham: it were ſufficient to exemplifie vnto
vs, the exceeding ſubtiltie, and malice of Sathan. For by diſgracing
this wonderfull work of God, the powerfull preaching
of the Goſpell is hindred in Nottingham, where it hath bene a
ſtrannger for manie yeares: a number of people in that towne
whoſe hearth were opened hereby to receive the Ghoſpell are left
to the wolfe: the holie exerciſe of prayer, and faſting are ſhamefullie
ſkorned: wicked and Popiſh perſons are kindelie intertained:
and highlie commended: the witneſſes of Chriſt Ieſus, and
enimes of Satan are evill intreated: the Papiſts opinion who
hold that Satan cannot poſſiblie by the Miniſterie of anie Proteſtant
be diſpoſſeſſed, is mightlie countenanced: the Atheiſts,
and carnall Goſpellers (who not knowing the power of godlines,
and holie exerciſes doe attrebute all things to arte, chance,
or nature) are exceedinglie hardned.
            It cannot be indured that thoſe kinde of men which be accounted
the of ſcouring of the world ſhould be thought to have
ſuch intereſt in CHriſt IEſus, as that theyr (falſelie termed)
verball prayers, and hypocriticall faſtings, he ſhould, as it were
viſiblie deſcend from heaven, and tread downe Satan vnder
theyr feete: where as other men who account themſelues more
learned, excellent, and wiſe then they, doe not with all theyr
Phiſick, Rhethorick, pompe, and primacie accompliſh the like.
But God hath choſen the fooliſh things of the world. to confound
the wiſe, & the weake things of the world to confound the
mightie.
            
            
               
THus much touching the objections which have
bene made to prove the pretended counterfeiting of W. Sommers.
But howe by counterfeyting he could ſpeake a quarter of an
houre together his mouth being ſhut: howe he ſhould ſtaye his
temples, and pulſes from ād beating: howe his eye, hands, ād face
ſhould be vnnaturallie black and turne by and by into theyr naturall
colour: howe there ſhould be extraordinarie ſmells in the place
where he laye: howe he ſhould violentlie be with great force caſt-againſt
the yron bars, ād poſts of the chimneies receyving no hart:
howe he could be taller then the higheſt man in Nott: howe all his
bodie ſhould be as cold as ice, and heavie as yron: howe his face
ſhould be turned quite backward his neck throwen round about
without hurt vnto him: howe he being naturallie weake ſhould ſo
oftentimes belabour ſo manie ſtrong men, himſelfe not panting,
ſweatting, or changing colour: howe he made his tongue to ſwell
to the bignes of a Calves tongue, and his eies as great as beaſts
eies: howe he ſhould forget continuallie what he did, or was done
vnto him in his fits: howe his legs crooked with falls, ſhould be
inflexible as anie yron: howe the collick ſhould run along all his
bodie, in a variable quantitie: Howe ſuch a collick ſhould be cured
by prayer, and faſting: howe in his fits he ſhould vtter ſtrange voices,
which at other tymes he could not doe agayne, as is depoſed:
howe he did counterfeyt all theſe impoſſibilities, when the Sadduces,
Galeniſts, and Naturaliſts of our time have conſidered of the
matter, we will expect ſome newe objections ſutable in diſcretion to
the former. In the meane ſeaſon, Let him that is filthie, be filthie
ſtill: but doe Satan what he can, Wiſedome ſhalbe juſtified of her
children.
            
            Surelie the rage of man ſhall turne to thy prayſe:
            Pſalm. 76. 10.
         
         
            
            Depoſitions taken at Nottingham the 20.
of March. An. 1597. by vertue of a Commiſſion
granted from the right reverend father in God Mathewe
Archbiſſchop of Yorke, and others her Mties high Commiſſioners
before Iohn Therrald Eſquier highe ſheriffe of the
Countie of Nott. sr Iohn Byron Knight, Iohn
Stanhop, Robert Markham, Richard Parkins
Eſquires, Peter Clerk Maior
of the towne of Nottingham.
            Miles Leigh Officiall of the Archdeaconrie of Nott.
Iohn Ireton Parſon of Legworth Iohn Browne parſon of
Loughborrowe, Robert Evington parſon of Normanton vppon
Sore, and Thomas Bolton, Miniſters, and preachers
of Gods Word.
            Commiſſioners appointed for the taking of the ſame.
            1 THomas Hais of Kirkbie in Aſhfeild in the countie of Not.Thomas Hais.
Clerk, and preacher of Gods word ſworne, and examined,
ſaith that being at Nott. vppon All Saints daie to
attend vppon Sr Charles Candiſh, the ſaid daie was intreated
to come to the houſe where William Sommers was, by
the ſaid Som. mother:At the name of Ieſus caſt downe. and there found the ſaid Som. wonderfullie
tormented, and at the name of Ieſus ſuddenlie oftentimes caſt
on the earth, the one leg being bended crooked towards this examinant:
not able to ſtreighten the ſame. In which leg he ſaw ſomething
run,The leg bound. and ſo out of that leg into the other: thence forth with
into his bellie greatlie ſwelling the ſame, in ſo much that the ſame
was much bowned vpwards: and when the ſame departed thence,
he ſawe it plainlie in his throate,a running ſwelling. in his tongue, and in his cheeke neare
vnto his eare roo
                  •
               e, appearing there as at that time he conceived
the quantitie of the yelke of aneg and liing his hand vppon it,
ann taking it betwene his fingers found the ſame in ſoftnes, and
quam trie to the yelke of an eg. And bein doubtfull what to thinck, or
ſaie of ſuch a ſtrange ſight this Examinant went thence to Mr Arkinſon
of the ſame towne of Nott. with whom he had often bene, ād
ſent for ſuch as were troubled with Melancholies, or temptations,
to crie out ſome naturall cauſe, if he might. But after manie aunſweres
of his touching convulſions, falling ſickneſſes, and ſuch
others, he could conceive none that might leade him to the finding
of a naturall cauſe.No deſeaſe, but the Devil. So he procured Mr Ebings, and Mr
Aldredg the ſame daie to come to him, where in theyr prayers,
and preſences, he had diverſe fits as before, giving out words, that
it was no diſeaſe, but the Devill.
            
               
2.2. Robert Aldridg. Robert Aldridge Clerk vicar of Sanct Maries in Nott:
ſworne, and examined ſayth, that firſt he comming to William
Somm: vppon Thurſ daie being the 3 of November (as he thinketh)
he found him lying vppon a bed, no bed clothes lying vppon
him,Running ſwelling. but onelie his owne hoſe: ād ſawe a thing running vp his right
leg to the quantitie of a mouſe, and he calling vnto God by prayer,
immediatelie it removed out of the right leg, into the left, and laying
his hand therevppon immediatelie it removed into his bellie, where
it did ſwell to a verie great quantitie, twiſe ſo big as his bodie as
he thinketh, and from thence into his breſt, and there it was the bignes
of his fiſt, and from thence into his neck, and from thence vnder
his eare, where it remayned in the bignes of a french wallnut, not
changing his former colour, and ſo remayned there for the ſpace
of a quarter of an houre: and the ſayd Sommers liing vppon his
back, his hands were holden by two there ſtanding by the whole
time this examinant was there.
            And this examinant further ſayth,A hollowiſh voyce. that he heard in a ſtrange
hollowiſh voyce, that he was his, and this examinant anſwering
ſayd that he lied, he was Gods: and that he had made a promiſe
vnto God in Baptiſme to be his,Blaſphemie. then the voyce anſwered that he
was God, Chriſt, and a king; & that he made Baptiſme, & that he
made him his by a newe Covenant, for he had given him 3. pen: &
that it was in the boyes ſleiue, which beingh ſearched, there was
noone ſuch to be found, then it ſayd agayne that it was in his
glove.
            
            This Examinant alſo further ſayth, that the ſayd William
Sommers: the xvij. of November laſt, from the houre of 7. off
the clock, vnto 3. off the Clock in the afternoone off the ſame daye
continued ſtraungelie,Extrrordinarie ſtrength. and diverſelie vexed, and tormented: ād had
ſuch ſtrength as five men had much a doe to keepe him downe during
which time he exceded in ſwelling, ſtritching, roaring, and
yelling verie fearefullie gnaſhinſh of his teeth, and foaming at his
mouth. And alſo ſayth that vppon the xviij. th of November betwixt
7, ād 8. of the clock in the morning, he went into the houſe of Robert
Cooper, where William Som: laye to heare howe he had done the
night before,knocking and he ſtanding in the hall heard a great knocking in
the Parlour where the boye laye, and ſuddenlie he ruſhed in, where
he found the boye alone in his bed, lying with his face vpward in
his fit, with his mouth drawne awrie, and his eyes ſtaringh as
though they would have ſtarted out of his head. And this Examinant
kneeling downe to prayer heard the knockingh agayne vnder
his knees as he thought. And in the bed vnder the coverlet, he ſawe
the forme,5 kitlings and ſhape as it were of five kitlings in quantitie to the
veiwe of his eye. And agayne this Examinant ſawe the bed clothes
at the feete to ſhake, move, and leape as the leaves of an Aſpen tres
ſhaken with the winde.
            
               
3. William Hyinde of the towne of Notthingham taylour
ſworne,3. w. Hinde. and examined ſayth that at his comming vnto the ſayd
Sommers he found Mayſter Aldridge there (being vppon Frydaie
the fourth of November as this Examinant thinketh) and did
ſee a ſwelling in his neck to the bignes off a great walnut,The running. ſwciling. and from
thence vnto the bone of the checke, and there was to the bignes of a
great haſſelnut: ād from thence it removed into his eye, ād the ſkin of
his eye waxed black, and bycame this Examinant had heard before
that he the ſayd Sommers did counterfeyt,Eie ſkin-black. he did laye his hād vppō
the ſaid ſwelling vppō the chekebone which ſwelling did tremble
like an Aſpen leaf in a calme winde, and was verie ſoft, but in that
place did not change his naturall colour.
            4. Thomas Weſtfeyld in the countye of Nottingham Clerke,
and preacher of Gods word ſavorne,the running ſwelling. and examined ſayth, that vppon
Sondaye at night, being the 6. of November laſt paſſed (as
he thincketh) being deſirours to ſee the ſtrange things which he had
heard of the ſayd Sommer: came thether with Maiſter Dorrell to
ſee him,The ey
                     •
                   changed colour 8. times. where he found him with a great ſwelling vnder the left
eare, to the bignes of a wallnut, and from thence it removed into
the eye, where it ſeemed not ſo greate, but cauſed a great blacknes in
his eye, and vppon that this Examinant layd his hand where he
felt a certen moving, and his eye changed into his naturall colour
immediatelie: and ſo changed 8. times betwixt 3. and 6. a Clock in
the morning.
            5. William Aldred of Colwick in the countie of Nottingham
Clerk, and preacher of Gods word ſworne, and Examined ſaith,
that vppon the 6. of November laſt being the Saboth, Mr Ihon
Dorrell, and diverſe other Miniſters, whereof this Examinant,
was one, together with the Major of Nottingham and others, being
about 7. of the clock in the Evening came into the houſe where
the ſaid Sommers was. And after prayers made to GOd, the
ſaid Ihon Dorrell exhorted with manie words all ſuch whoſe
hearts GOd ſhould touch with his feare, to prepare, and aſſemble
themſelves the next daie againſt 7 of the clock in the morning, and
to conſecrate that daie wholie vnto the Lord with faſtings and
praper,150. perſons preſent and ſo departed from them at that time. And the Miniſters
withdrawing themſelues, and conferring about the keeping
of the ſaid excerciſe, it was thought good that this ſaid Examinant
ſhould begin the next daye.Mouth diſtorted. There were aſſembled at
the time appoynted about an hundred, and fiftie Perſons: and
this Examinant beginning with prayer preached againſt the ſins
of our time.Tongue doubled into his throte. The boie in the meane time being tormented by fits
in his bodie wonderfullie, as by heaving vp his bodie by hailing his
lips awrire, one towards the one eare, and thother towards
thother eare: opening his mouth wide, as if it where foureſquare,
thruſting out his tongue, and putting it double againe

into his throat: with manie fearefull cries, and ſtrikes and ſometimes
laie ſilent. This examinant having ended his ſermon the above
named Ihon Dorrell began with prayer, at which tyme the
torments in the boye ſeemed to be doubled: and after exhortation to
the people ended, and the ſayd Ihon Dorrell diſcourſing of the ſignes
of poſſeſſion as they bie in order in the 9. of Mark, the verie
ſame ſignes there ſpoken of appeared moſt evidentlie in the ſayd
William Som:The ſignes appeare according to the vvord. in moſt terrible manner, for he ſtriked, and roared
with a lowde voyce, he fomed abundantlie, he gnaſhed with
his teeth his bodie diſtracted ſeverall wayes, and the preacher comming
to theſe words: all things are poſſible to him that beleyveth,
anſwere was made from the boye, thou lieſt, ād with terrible countenance
ſtaring with his eies, gaping with his mouth, ſtretched
out his hands with bended fingers like Eagles poun
                  •
               s towards
the preacher, as menacing him, with leaping vp with his bodie,
and other threatning geſtures, but that he was reſtrayned by his
keepers. And thus he continued the whole diſcourſe of fayth. But
when he began to ſpeake of the ſignes of diſpoſſeſſion, (as it followeth
in the ſame chapter) the ſayde William Sommers was againe
tortured with the former torments mone forceablie. And the ſaid
Ihon Dorrell dilating vppon this ſpeach. He came out out of
him, the ſayd W. Som: made as though he would have vomited.
And the ſayd Iohn Dorrell beſought God to glorifie his worde,
and worke: then the whole congregation breaking theyr hitherto
continued ſilence cried out all at once as it were with one voyce vnto
the Lord, to releyve the diſtreſſed perſon: and with in a quarter of
an houre, or thereabouts it pleaſed God to heare theyr prayers:
for the bodie of the boie was taken, and throwen thwart the bed
groveling, in which manner he laye as if he had bene dead for a ſeaſon.
The preacher then glorifying God, and willing the people to
be thankfull (the which being accordinglie performed) the bote turned
himſelfe over, and vppon his knees rendred thanks vnto God
for his deliverie By which time the ſun being ſeth the exerciſe ended,
and the boie went home with his maſter.
            6. Ioane Pie wiſe of Robert Pie of the towne of Nott: baker
ſworne, and e
                  •
               a
                  •••…
               ed depoſeth, and ſayth that about a weeke before
M. Dorrell was ſent for to come to W. Som: being the Saturdaie
before all Saintsdaie at night this Examināt comming to
the houſe of Thomas Porter where the boie laie,His bodie doubled &c. and after a while
he fell into a fit of laughing, ād then preſentlie he was threwen ſuddenlie
into the beds feete, his bodie doubled, and his head betweene
his legs: ād then ſuddenlie he was plucked round vppon an heape,
as though his bodie had leue like a greate browne loafe, of a ſtrike:
and ſo rolled in the bed, caſt vp from the bed like a ball, 3. or 4. times
together, about halfe a yard in height, the coverlet being ſo faſt
wrapped about him, as all that were preſent had much a doe to pull

the cloathes from him: and this Examinant tame manie times to
the ſaid Sommers, of purpoſe to ſee the accidents that did ſhewe
his poſſeſſion, wherein ſhe deſired to be ſatiſfied. And this Examinant
alſo ſaith, that about Allhallowtide, and manie others times
ſhe hath ſeene the ſaid Sommers handled with ſuch violēce, as whē
his fit had come, he could haue bene ſo ſtrong as ſomtimes there haue
bene 4.extraordinarie ſtrength or 5 women, and could not hold him liing flat vppon the
ground: and that notwithſtanding all their force he could haue beatten
his menbers one after an other, as his legs, armes, and head,
as though he would haue beatten his head in peices, if he had done
it in Gods name and that part, or members with the fit did poſſeſſe
3 or 4 could not hold it,leg maſſie inflexible. or bowe it. This Examinant further ſaith
that on Allhallowe euen at noone, or thereabouts, ſhe with ſundrie
others, being with the ſaid bote, he was ſitting in a chaire about
two yards from the fire ſide, and ſuddenlie was caſt towards the
fire, his head lighting vppon the yron that kept up the fire, ād one
of his hands in the fire:Caſt into the fire. and they being 3 or 4 taking him up to ſaue
him from burning, they could not ſet him in the chaire againe: for
his legs were ſo bowed as they could not not al ſtreight them: and he
ſo heauie,leg bowed as they could ſcarce lift him, and that neither his head
heire, nor anie part of his bodie was hurt, or burned by the fire, ād
ſhe further ſaith,though ſo heave as hardlie by 3. or 4. taken out yet vnhurt. that there was a ſmall line, wich tied up a painted
cloth: wich was hung ouer the bed: to wich the ſaid Somm: ſtretched
his hand, but could not reach it: ād then to theyr imaginatiō
he ſeeming to exceede the ſtature of the talleſt man in the towne ſuddenlie
got his chin ouer the ſaid line:extraordinarie ſtature. and ſo with his hands plucked
the line ſo faſt about his neck, as that they with ſtood by had much
a doe to ſaue him from hanging. She further ſaith that the boie in
one of his fiths (the night before Mr Dorrell came) ſaid that Dorrell
was comming,extraord: knowledge. when neither ſhe nor anie other to her knowledge
had anie certen intelligence that Mr Dorrell would come. for
the meſſengers wich went for him brought anſwere, that he purpoſed
not to come till the next weeke. And ſhe alſo further ſaith, that
the ſaid Saturdaie wich Mr Dorrell came to the towne he was
more extremelie handled then before:Speache without moving tongue, othps. and that he late manie times
with his mouth extraordinarilie voide, and ſtrangelie open, and
that he ſpake theſe words vz I wil uſe W: S his tongue, and mēbers
for 3 daies without mouing, or ſtirring his tongue, or lips in ſpeaking
anie of the ſaid words. And that the ſpeache was in the ordinarie
voice of W: Somm: And this deponent further ſaith, that
an houre and halfe before Mr Dorrells comming to the towne, the
boie fell into an extreme fit in ſuch manner as ſhe,For dead. and thoſe with
were prefent iudged verilie he was dead: for he laie ſenceles, and
ſpeechles, his eies out of his head, like wallnuts: his face black in
a ſtrange manner,No remē
                  brance. and all his members, and the parts of his bodie
inſtanlie cold vppon the ſudain by the ſpace of an houre. And being
aſked when his fits were paſt, whether he remembred the extremlie

or anie part denied, that he remembred anie thing, and that during
the tyme off his extremitie they manie tymes endevoured to recover
him by giving him Aquavitae, and other comfortable things, but it
wrought nothing in him to revive him. And Mr Dorrell being come
into the towne, the boye inſtantlie ſpake of it with theſe words:
I have but a ſmall tyme nowe to ſtaye,
               Extraord. knovvledg. 
               but I will ſhortlie returne: And
that Mr Dorrell comming in at the backſide of the houſe without
knowledge off the boye (as ſhe verilie thincketh) the boye fortolde
off his comming,ſtrange ſmels like brimſtone. ād he alſo had foretold of Mr Aldridg his comming
at ſundrie tymes. This Examinant ſayth likewiſe that at
diverſe tymes when the boye was in his fits ſhe hath felt ſmells like
brimſtone:Running ſvvelling. and alſo ſayth that being in his fits ſhe hath ſeene a
ſwelling in his foote, which removed, from toe to toe, and ſo to his
leg, and from thence in his bodye to the bignes off a 3. penie white
leafe: and ſo to his throate to the bignes off a rat, ād vnder his eare
to the bignes off a wallnut, and in his eye brees like a black clock,
and ſo removed from place to place. which this Examinant, and
others have ſenſiblie ſeene, and felt. And this deponent further ſaith
that after the tyme of his diſpoſſeſſion, the hope diſcovered by ſpeech
certayne which he named to be witches, amongſt the reſt he named
one Milicent Horſelie, who dwelled at Bridgeford: which Maiſter
Dorrel and Mr Aldred caried to Mr Parkins to be examined, and
the boye about one of the clock in the ſame daye in his fits vttered
theſe words.extraord. knovvledge. 
               Nowe they have her, and are examining her: and ſhe
ſayth ſhe doth all by prayer, & nowe ſhe is ſaying her prayer, and this
was not knowne to this Examinant, or anie other then preſent to
her knowledge. And ſhe further depoſeth, and ſayth that at diverſe
tymes ſhe hath heard a clapping in his bed, as though it had bene
the clapping of 3. hands. and that ſhe hath ſeene a motion in the
bed,kitlings. as though it had bene the creeping off 3. kitlings, which ſhe,
and diverſe others have endevoured to take hold of, but never could,
for when they have attempted the ſame:knocking. It hath vaniſhed: and his
hands and feete never ſturring to theyr ſights and that at other tymes,
at his beds feete a knocking as though it were vnder the bed
to theyr vnderſtanding: and in ſome of thoſe extreme fits, he would
crie,Nec troend & mouth dravvne aſide immeaſurablie. 
               Nowe ſhe comes, nowe ſhe comes, nowe ſhe wil breake my neck,
and therevppon his neck was throwen about▪ as though it had
bene broken, with his mouth drawne of the one ſide vnmeaſurablie,
ſome tyme on thone ſide, and ſome tymes on the other.
            7. Richard Newton of the towne of Nottingham glover, ſworne,
and examined ſayth that he heraing off the ſtraungenes off this
extremities of the ſayd Sommer: came vnto him with a full determination
to vnderſtand whether his ſtraunge actions were counterfeyted,
or not: and thought to ſatiſfie himſelfe with a full vnderſtanding
of the truth of the cauſe, and found he the ſayd Som:
in his fit: and heard him ſpeake plainlie with a continued ſpeech

with his mouth wide open,Speache vvith mouth open, his tongue dravvne into his throate, neither lips nor chaps moving. his tongue drawne into his throate, ſo
that there could be ſeene nothing of it but the rootes in his throate,
neither lips, nor chaps moving: ād vttered this ſpeech amōg others
Ego ſum rex, Ego ſum Deus, with ſome other ſpeeches, which he
(this Examinant) could not vnderſtand well for that he is no good
Latineſt: and this was done in the ſight of manie.
            8. Henrie Nuſſie of the towne of Nott: lockſmith, ſworne, and
examined, depoſeth, and ſayth, that he came vnto the ſayd Som:
to wake with him: and about 10. or 11. of the Clock in the night,
he ſawe him with his mouth wide opē: ād he ſpake certayne words
vnto Ihon Wigan in Lattin: which this Examinant vnderſtoode
not,ſpeach. vvithout moving chaps. his chaps nor tongue moving, ād did ſo ſpeake, ād this Examinant
ſawe theſe things evidentlie: for he came verie neare him to behold
him.
            9. William Langford of the towne of Nottingham Chirurgiam
ſworne, and examined depoſeth, and ſayth that it is true, that the
ſame daie of his diſpoſſeſſing being the 7. of November he did gnaſh,
wallowe,Foaming exceding. and foame in ſuch abundant manner, that the foame did
hang downe from his mouth vnto his breſt: notwithſtāding it was
wiped awaye continuallie with clothes: and that he continued for
the ſpace of an houre: and that it was in ſuch abundance, that this
Examinant did not thinck it poſſible to be vttered off anye humane
creature, and ſo much the more he did marvell at it, for that the ſayd
Sommer had not taken anie thing from 6.Skriking hideouſlie. like a bul, & a beare & a ſmall voyce vncounterfeyt able of the Clock in the morning
vntill 5. of the clock in the after noone to augmēt it anie waies:
and that he did ſtrike with 3. ſeverall voyces ſo hideouſlie, and ſo
terriblie as they were not like anie humane creature, but rather thone
of them was like vnto a bull, the other like vnto a beare, and the
third a verie ſmall voyce, and ſuch as this Examinant thinketh cannot
be counterfeyted.extra ordinarie ſtrength. Feb. 17. And this Examinant further ſayth, that the
ſayd Sommer did ſhewe extraordinarie ſtrength: and ſpeciallie vppon
the 17. of Februarie laſt, when he this Examinant, a kiſman of
his,temples. pulſes. not beating. and one other ſervant to Mr Graie could not hold him: ād that
then this Examinant felt his temples, and his pulſes of his armes
which had no motion: but was as he had bene ſenceles, and like a
dead man: and that he was cold of all outward parts of his bodie:
which he purpoſelie then did trie, for the ſtrangenes thereof: neither
did he extraordinarilie pant, or blowe, that this Examinant could
perceyve. And this Examinant ſayth that he hath heard him make
rime of the Scriptures,a ſmal tuneable voyce. and heard him ſing ſo ſmall a tuneable voice,
as that out of his fit he could not ſing the like, as this Examinant
made proofe of, of verie purpoſe: and hearing him ſing manie
times before in his perfect memori, he did never heare him ſing with
ſo ſmal a voice. And this examināt further ſaith that on the ſaid 7. of
Novē. laſt (with daie the ſaid exerciſe for his diſpoſſeſſiō was appointed)
this Examinant came to the houſe of the ſaid Thomas Porter,

where the ſaide W. Som. was, and there finding the ſaid Som:
vppon his knees praiing, and with him ſome companie in prayer,
this deponent tolde ſecretlie ſome in the companie, that it was appoynted
that inſtantlie the ſaid Som:Extraord. knovvledge. was to be cōveied to the place
where the ſayd exerciſe was to be vſed: and therevppon (without
the vnderſtanding of the ſaid Som.5. or 6. vvith much a doe carie him. by audible ſpeech) he was caſt
ſodenlie thwart vppon the bed: and this deponent with 5. or 6. others
had much trouble (though they vſed theyr whole ſtrength) to
carie him to the ſaid place, where the ſaid exerciſe was appointed,
and kept: and that this examinant havivg onelie the guiding of his
head could not continuallie keepe it by his ſtrength: but ſometime
it was taken from him. He alſo ſaith, that vppon the ſaide 7. of November
the ſaid Som. being extremelie tormented, and toiled, and
his buttons therewith opened he ſawe a riſing,the running ſvvelling. or ſwelling in the
bottome of his bellie, wich to his knowledge moved the clothes: ād
his breſt, and ſtomack being hare he ſawe viſiblie the ſame riſing, or
ſwelling in bignes of a gooſe eg, or a halfe penie white loafe, aſcend
vp to his breſt, and ſo to his throte, with wich he would haue offered,
as though he would haue vomited, and therein continued till
the time of his diſpoſſeſſion as was generallie thought by all the
ſtanders by. for in a trice he was ſodenlie throwen over, by what
motion they wich were then preſent could not conceiue by anie humane
experience, or practize.
            10. Thomas Graie of Graies Langlie in the conntie of Leiceſter
Eſquire, ſworne, and examined ſaith that about the 3. daie
of Decemb. laſt, he was in the houſe of one Cooper Clarke of St.
Maries in Nott. wherein he ſawe W. Som: liing vppon a bed, being
hold by ſandrie perſons,Decemb. 3. at his feete, and alſo at his head: ſo
that it ſeemed vnto this deponent thereby that he was in ſome fit
but by the countenāce of his face it ſeemed to this Examinant, that
he the ſaid Somm: did but diſſemble. whereuppō this Examināt
conſidering the ſtrange report wich he had heard by diuerſe credible
perſons concerning matters in fact done by the ſaid W. Sommers
in the time of his poſſeſſion, and diſpoſſeſſion deſired of God in his
heart that ſome manifeſt token might beſhewed unto him this Examinant
for his better vnderſtanding of the truth in that behalfe.
And immediatelie he ſawe a mouing vnder the vppermoſt couering
of the bed (not far diſtāt from the ſmal of the ſaid W Som:the running ſvvelling. leg) wich
laie in a round lump panting: wich this Examināt perceiuing pointed
at, ād ſaid to the ſtāders by, what might this be: whereuppō one
of them ſaid it is his foote: then it was anſwered by thoſe that ſatt
vppon the beds feete, thus: We haue his feete here, and doe hold
them. Then this deponent for the better vnderſtanding thereof laid
his hand vppon the ſaid lump, and felt it moue, and claſping his
hand together, he felt that it yeelded, as aire, or winde, and opening
his hand againe it filled the ſame in verie full manner: And this
Examinant taking awaie his hand, ſawe the clothes ſettle verie

ſoftlie downe, like as a bladder being blowne full of winde falleth
together after it is pricked: and immediatelie the like moving was
on the other ſide of the ſaid W. Som: and this deponent ſeeing it
ſaide (laiing his hand uppon the place, where before it was) here it
was euen nowe:patting like the foote of a kicing. and at that verie inſtant this deponent (without
moving of his hands) ſenſiblie felt ſomething vnder the clothes part
verie faſt in the palme of his hand, like the foote of a kirtling, or ſuch
like thing.
            11. Ihon Wood of Lenton in the countie of Nott: clerk, ſworne,
and examined ſaith, that vppon Fridaie being the 17 of Februa.
laſte, he being crediblie informed that W. Som. was verie miſeſerablie
tormented, and piteouſlie vexed with moſt ſtrange fits, was
deſirous to viſit him: and to that end going with ſome other of his
frends to the houſe of Robert Cooper clerk of St Maries in Nottaforeſaid,
where the ſaid W. Som: then was at this comming
thether.Extraord. ſtrength. and this Examinant found him in a fit, wherein he perceived
that 3. or 4. men had inough to doe to hold him: and this
Examinant thincking with himſelfe that it was impoſſible that a
boie of his age, and ſtrength, ſhould in ſuch wiſe toile 3. or 4. luſtie
fellowes, being deſirous to knowe whether his ſtrength was ſuch
as they pretended, or not: in another of his fits wich laſted from betwene
9, and 10. of the clock, vntill it was paſt twelue, this Examinant
was deſirous to deale with him himſelfe for ſatiſfaction
of his own minde: and to the end he might haue the better advauntage
(as he thought) he ſtepped behinde him as he was ſitting in a
chaire, and got faſt hold of the brawnes of his armes, as though
he would haue pinioned him. But when this Examinant preceived
that he could not hold him, but that he would ſlip from him, whether
he would or not, he was inforced to let goe his holde there, and
with his fingers faſt locked one into another, ſo that he could not anie
waie ſlip frō him as before, by reaſō both his armes ūder his armes
were faſt cloſed about his bodie,ext. ſtrength he ſo held him: but the ſaid S:
ſo laboured this Examināt, that both his hat fell of from his head,
and his cloake from his back with ſtrugling with him. But when
the ſtanders by ſawe that this deponēt was almoſt overcome with
ſtriving with him: two of them laide hold on him with him, the
one, by the one leg, and the other by thother leg, and this Examinant
ſtill at his bodie: who ſo belaboured them all for the ſpace of
an houre, or therabout, as that in the end they were all breathles,
and conſtrained to giue place to others ſtanding by. Wherevppon
this Examinant preſentlie ſtepping before him vppon purpoſe to ſee
whether he either panted, or drewe his breath, ſhort, or not, found
him with his eies ſhat,no panting. and his mouth, ād lips faſt cloſed: and ſo far
from panting, as that this Examinant could not preceive him drawe
his winde: and where as they all were verie hott, and this Examinant
in a verie great ſweet,nor rednes. he for his part neither ſwet, neither
yet had ſo much as anie rednes in his cheekes. Afterwards this

Examinant hearing that it was noiſed abroade, that the ſaid W.
Som. had confeſſed that al that ever he had done was counterfeited
and that he was delivered to Ihon Cooper, and Nicholas Shepheard
as his keepers: for triall of the truth, and learning alſo that the
ſaid W. Som, was with his ſaid keepers. at Lentom: this Examinant
was deſirous to talke with him to the end that he might
make triall whether he counterfeited, or not: for he thought with
himſelfe, that if he did counterfeit he could remēber ſomething that
this Examinant did vnto him, conſidering that he never came at
him but once. And to the end no exceptions might be taken againſt
this Examinants words, he requeſted his neighbour Mr Forſter a
verie honeſt man, and one fearing God, to accompanie him thether
telling him before hand the end of his going: who willinglie went
with him. When this Examinant came vnto him, after they had given
ouer theyr worke, and all the workmen were departed: he aſked
leaue of his ſaide keepers that he might talke with him the ſayd
W. Sommers not ſecretlie, but openlie, which requeſt being
graunted, openlie before the ſaid Mr Forſter, and his ſaid keepers
this Examinant aſked him firſt whether he did remember that
he was ever with him in anie of his fits? he aunſwered, he did:
then this Examinant aſked him if he could remember anie thing
that he did vnto him: he aunſwered, he could: beiing aſked by this
Examinant, what it was he did, he ſayd, that he nipped him by
the finger with his thumb naile,He remembrance. ād with that made a ſigne with his
owne naile, vppon his owne finger, ſaiing you nepped my fingers
thus, but this Examinant aunſwering it was an vntruth that he
ſpake, he willed him in the name of God to ſhame the Devill in
ſpeaking the truth: for ſaid this deponent) everie lie is of the
Devill. Whereto the ſayd Sommers aunſwered, that in deede
he did not nip his finger: but (ſayd he) you did bend my finger
thus: and with that he buckled his finger with his owne
hand: to the end ſayde he you might trie whether I had anie
ſenſe, or feeling, or not. This Examinant likewiſe affirming
that to be an vntruth alſoo: Exhorted him agayne in the feare of
God to ſpeake the truth: then after he had pawſed a pretie ſpace,
this Examinant aſked him the third time what he did, and then
he aunſwered directlie, and ſaid, if you did not ſo vnto me, I cannot
tell anie thing that you did. When this Examinant preceived
he could not remember anie thing that he did, after a ſhort exhortation
vſed vnto him to ſerve, and feare God, he went awaie, with Mr
Forſter: and when they were gone as far as a man maye rove an
arrowe, his ſayd keeper Ihon Cooper called vnto this Examinant
ſaying, Mr Wood, Mr Wood, the lad remembreth, nowe what you
did. And this deponent aſking him what it was, his ſayd keeper
anſwered that the lad ſaid he read of a booke and praied ouer his
ſiſter lying on a trendle bed: but when he this Examinant had aunſwered
that to be an vntruth alſo: for (ſaide he) witnes all that

were in that houſe I touched no booke in that houſe that daye, he
aunſwered againe after a litle ſpace, that allthough he read not ouer
her, yet he prayed ouer her: wherevnto this Examinant aunſwered,
that he but geſſed at that, (as he thought) bycauſe he might
well knowe that no CHRIſtian man ſeeyng them in ſuch eytremities
could forbeare to praie for them, and thus they left them.
            12. Ihon Strellie of the countie of Nottingham Gentleman,
ſworne, and examined, depoſeth, and ſayth that he being deſirous
to ſee William Sommers of whom he had heard ſtrange reports
of being poſſeſſed with a Devill, and diſpoſſeſſed, and as it
was thought repoſſeſſed againe, came to the houſe in Nottingham
where the ſayd Somm: was kept about the 18 of Febrarie, where
finding him in one of his fits in the preſence of Ihon Dorrell,ext: ſtrēgth, and
W:4 vvith holding, abundantlie the ſvveatting, he not breathing. Aldred preachers of the word of God with others, the ſaid Sō.
amongſt manie other ſtrange things, did ſhewe himſelfe of that
great ſtrēgth, that this Examinant with 3 others could ſcarce hold
him: but that he made them all to ſweat in great abundance, the ſaid
Som. neyther ſweatting, nor breathing to theyr perſeverance, and
ſo for that time he left him. And comming vnto him on Mōdaie the
20.Feb. 20. of Februarie in the preſence of the parties aboue named with others
finding him verie well to theyr thinking, ād exhorting him out
of the word of God,Caſt againſt the poſte of the Chimneie. he was on the ſundaine throwē from the place
where he ſate with his head in ſuch violent manner knocked to the
furtheſt poſt of the chimneie, as they thought his nec had bene broken:
being of ſo great weight as they thought was impoſſible for
anie naturall bodie:Exceeding maſſie. and being laid vppon a bed, and liing in his
fit about halfe an houre, manie ſtraunge things were ſeene, as his
neck being doubled vnder him,neck doubled. being (as it ſeemed) tormented in his
inward parts, with one of his legs being of a verie maſſie weight:
a litle thing ſeene to move in divers parts of his bodie, ſwelling the
bodie,one leg verie maſſie. and riſing into ſeverall parts of the face, to the bignes of a
crab or wallnut, and after comming to himſelfe againe, and continuing
well a ſmall time was on a ſodaine caſt into the fyer in the
preſence of them all:the running ſvvelling. and being ſodenlie taken out without anie hurt
to him,Caſt into the fire. by the fyre being of weight as aforeſaid, manie ſtrāge things
appeared in theyr preſence, as foaming, wallowing, gnaſhing his
teeth, ſtriking, roaring, and ſeeming to be ſtrāgelie tormented in his
bodie with the ſame ſwelling through his bodie,ſpeach his mouth vvid open. and face as before
vttering in his trance diuerſe ſtrange ſpeeches, his mouth wide open
his tongue drawne into his throate, (but not ſpeaking in that time)
and other things which be nowe out of memorie.
            13. Richard Mee of Nott. butcher, ſworne, and examined depoſeth
ād ſaith, that on ſondaie at night (being as he thinketh) the 6. of
November, he came to the ſaid Sō. to watch with him about 9. of
the clock at night, and found with him Mr Weſtfeild, and others
and betwene 3. and 6. a clock in the morning heard a voice ſaying

               that he would have his right eye,
               blacknes in his eie. 
               & then he vvould have his left: And
immediatelie a great blacknes was in his left eie, the voice being
(as he thinketh contrarie to his naturall voyce. And this Examinant
further ſayth that a daye or two before, and ſundrie other
tymes this Examinant did ſee a ſwelling in his armes,the running 
                     •
                  vvelling. and
legs, (they being naked) to the bignes off a wallnut, and removing
from place to place into his bodie, and that he felt it in his
bellie to the bignes of a 6.Face turnd directlie, backvvards his bodie not mvoing eies great as beaſts eis. pen: browne lofe, and that it was ſo hard
that he could not preſſe it downe with his hand: which this Examinant
aſſayed to doe by putting his hand vnder the bed clothes.
This deponent alſo ſayth, that he hath ſeene him ſtand, and turn
                  •
               
his face directlie backwards, not moving his bodie: and that his
eyes were as great as beaſts eyes, readie as he thincketh to ſtart out
of his head.
            And further ſayth that he hath ſeene him fallē downe before them,leg crooked vvith fals.
and that one of his legs would be crooked with his fall, and that
this examinant hath aſſaied to pull his leg ſtreygth out,Yet by no meanes to be ſtreigted. mouth ſtrā
                  gelie draune aſide. but could
not by anie wayes move it. And that he hath ſeene him drawne his
mouth verie ſtrangelie to one ſide, ſo as he imagineth could not be
done by anie naturall courſe for that he did never ſee anie doe the like.
And that his tongue would be thruſt out of his mouth to the bignes
of a calves tongue.tongue big as a Calves. This Examinant further ſayth, that he
hath ſeene him laugh verie ſtrangelie, and ſodenlie ſtrich like a ſwine
when he is in ſticking,Laughter ſtrange & thē ſkiking. ād wallowe, gnaſh his teeth, foame at mouth
verie ſtrangelie, and be (as he thought) ſenſeles, and theſe things
were done before Mr Dorrells comming vnto him, ād that the ſayd
Som:Caſt into the fire vn hurt. would be violentlie caſt into the fier, ſtanding from the fire,
a yard, and halfe of: and none of his clothes burnt, or hayre ſinged.
            And further this Examinant ſayth that the ſayd Som: in manie
off his fits,ext: ſtrength 6 or mor ſcarelie able to hold him did ſhewe extraordinarie ſtrength ſo as ſometimes 3.
ſometimes 4. ſometimes 6, ſometimes moe could ſcarcelie hold him,
and keepe him downe, and during his ſayd fits he was not prceived
to pant, or blowe more then if he had not ſtreined his ſtrength, or
ſtrugled at all.not panting and this Examinant further ſayth, that from the
ſayd Sommer there came a big voyce,Blaſphsmie. vttering theſe words, that
there vvas no God, that he vvas God. that he vvas king & prince of
darknes.
               exceeding ſvveete ſmels. And in ſaying of the Lords prayer, he could not be perſwaded
to ſaye lead vs not into temptation, but lead vs into temptation.
And alſo he ſayth that he hath felt ſuch exceeding ſweete ſmells in
the roome where the ſayd Sommer was, that he, this Examinant
could not endure the ſame for the exceeding ſweetnes thereof.
            14.Dead to their ſeeming an houre & halfe. Elizabeth Milward of the towne of Nott: ſpinſter, ſworne,
and Examined, ſayth that the Saturdaye in which Mr Dorrell
came to the towne, the ſayd William Som: was extremelie
tormented,cold as Ice face & hāds blak. in ſuch ſorte as he laye for an houre, and halfe for cleane
dead to theyr Iudgment being ſenſeles, ſpeechles, ād without breath
to theyr ſight, on which tyme preſentlie he was as cold as Ice,

and hands black annaturallie, the reſt of his bodie being coveres
which they could not ſee. And though they gave him Aquavitae, and
other confortable things to revive him, yeth they could not in all
that tyme: and his bodie ſo heavie as that they could not heave it
vp.Maſſie. And the firſt word he vttered was this Dorrell comes, Dorrell
comes, he vvil have me out, but I vvil come agayne for Noottingham
and Lenton are jollie tovvnes for me. And ſhe further ſayth, that
the firſt tyme ſhe called anie of theyr neyghbours in to help him,
ſhe heard a thumping, or knocking in his bed: and ſhe putting her
hand into his bed,a fearefull knocking. felt the ſayd knocking (as ſhe thought) at a hallowe
place aboue the cheſt of his bodie: which knocking ſhe heard
as ſhe went downe the ſtayres being ſo fearefull as ſhe durſt not
ſtaye above with him.
            15.15. Iohn Pare of Plumtree in the countie of Nottingham Clerk,
ſworne, and examined depoſeth, and ſayth that he came to the towne
of Nottingham on the Mondaye which was the daye of the exerciſe
of faſting, and prayer for William Sommers, about 9. off the
Clock the forenoone: and hearing the exerciſe in hand at the houſe
of one Smale, went theither about 10. of the Clock to heare what
was done, and found Mr Dorrell, and Mr Aldredge, and diverſe
other there, where they continued till the houre of 3. of the Clock in
the afternoone in preaching, and prayer: and that the preaſſe was
ſo great that he could not come to the ſight of the boye till about the
ſayd houre of 3. of the Clock, and then he ſawe the boye lie groveling
vppon his face vppon the bed, and a certayne ſwelling or riſing vnder
his clothes to the bignes of a mouſe:the running ſvvelling. which removed from place
to place, to diverſe parts off his bodie. and this Examinant alſo
ſayth that he heard a thumping, or knocking in the boyes bed in
three ſeverall places at once,a knocking in 3. ſeverall places at once. and he putting his hand into the bed
felt it ſenſiblie knock vnder his hand: and that he was perſwaded
it was not the boyes hands: bycauſe they could not reach ſo lowe.
            16.16. Iohn Clerk off the towne off Nottingham Cordwinder,
ſworne, and examined depoſeth, and ſayth, that on Sondaye being
the 6. th off November (as he remembreth) coming to wards the
Church, of Sint Maries in Nottingham, and hearing the boye
(meaning William Sommers) was in ſome torment went into
the houſe off Thomas Porter, and found the ſayd boye in a fit in
which he vttered to one Edward Garland, theſe words, vz. Edvvard
Garland art thou there, hovve doe thy children, I vvill have one
of them, even the youngeſt, to which the ſayd Garland anſwered
I defie the Devill: for he can have no power off me, nor my children.
            And this Examinant ſayth, that after a litle tyme, the boye came
to his ſenſes, and then being aſked whether he would riſe, he anſāſwered,

he would: ād ſo the clothes being taken of this Examinant
ſawe in his breſt being in his ſhurt a ſwelling,the running ſvvelling. or riſing to the bignes
off a rat: which this Examinant tooke hold off: and found it
as ſoft to his feeling as a downe pillowe, and he thincking to hold
it faſt, it preſentlie avoyded, and then the boye ſayd it was gone
downe into his leg. And this Examinant ſayth, that he ſawe him
at ſundrie tymes, when divers of his members, as his legs, armes,
and others were inflexible, and exceeding heavie, above nature, as
yron.Members 
                     •
                   in flexible; and heavie. And this Examinant being aſked to what purpoſe he came
to ſee the boie, he ſaid he came to be perſwaded in his opinion hearing
ſuch ſtraunge things, and accidents.
            17.17. W. Hunt of the towne of Nott: baker, ſworne, and examined,
depoſeth, and ſayth, that he did ſee W. Sommers in his
fit liing for dead to his thincking in which fit he did heare a voice
proceed from the ſayd Sommers and his lips were cloſe ſhutt,Speach, mouth ſhut. and
did neyther move his lips or jawes to his vnderſtanding, and he
continued ſo ſpeaking by the ſpace of a quarter of an houre.the running ſvvelling. And
this deponent further ſayth that in the ſame fit he did ſee a thing to
the bignes of a wallnut running in the fleſh of the ſaid W. Sommers
about his face, forehead, and eies, and ſo run about his face
to his eare.
            
               The ſeverall aunſweres of W. Power,
Ihon Pepper, Ihon Cooper, an Nicholas
Shepheard vppon certaine queſtions propounded
vnto them for the diſcoverie of the
practizes with W. Som. for the cauſing him
the ſaid W. Som. to affirme his diſſembling
of poſſeſſion.
               1 William Powre of the towne of Nottingham Gentleman
ſworne, and examined ſaith, that Ihon Cooper being demaunded
by this Examinant whether the ſayd W. Som: was a counterfeyt,
or no, did ſaie, that when Mr Dorrell did caſt out the Devill, he
had not appoynted him anie place to goe vnto: but we have ſent
him into a heard of zwine at the towneſend: or words to that ef
                     •
                  ect:
which words were ſpoken about amonets paſt.
               
                  
2. Ihon Pepper of the towne of Nott. taflour, ſworne, and examined
ſaith, that he did heare the ſaid Ihon Cooper ſaye, that
when Mr Dorrell had caſt out the Devill, he had not appoynted
him anie place to goe into: but nowe that I have caſt him out. I
have ſent him into an heard of ſwine, and nowe he will com no more:
or words to that effect.
               3. Ihon Cooper of St Ihons in Nottingham and one of the
keepers of the ſayd Sommers ſworne, and examined ſayth that he
did not knowe anie which perſwaded the ſayd Sommers to confeſſe
himſelfe to be a diſſembler ſaving this Examināt himſelfe threatned
to whip him: he alſo confeſſeth that one Wilkinſon, and two
others came to the houſe of St. Ihones about 8. or 9. of the clock
at night: and he thincking it an vnlawfull houre would not ſuffer
them to come to the boye: but ſaide he would indite him, if he came
vppon the ground, for that he was not his frend. This Examinant
alſo ſaith, that he never knewe one Nicholas Aire to have acceſſe
to the boye, to his knowledge. This Examinant further
ſayth, that it is true, there was an ointment brought to the ſaid boie
by Nicholas Shepheard one of his keepers, appoynted therevnto
by William Gregorie the Maiors Clerck: with which the ſayd
Sommers was annoyted: bycauſe he might be the more nimble
to ſhewe his tricks: but words of charme he heard not at the annoynting
of the ſayd boye. He alſo confeſſeth he ſaid that Mr Dorrell
hath caſt out the Devill (as he ſayth) but hath not aſſigned
anie place to goe into: but he had ſent him into Collwick hill.
               This Examinant alſo ſayth that the ſayd boye ſince his comming
to St Ihons had no fits, ſave at 3 times: one immediatelie
after his comming: and the laſt when ſome of the wives came to
the houſe, and then he fell downe: but after this Examinant had
put the ſayd wives out of the houſe, and given him ſome words
of Correction, he preſentlie aroſe.
               4 Nicholas Shepheard of the towne of Nottingham fletcher,
ſworne, and examined ſayth, that he never knewe of anie promiſes
made, or other matter vſed to the ſayd boye to make him to ſaye,
that he counterfeyted: but that in one of the boyes fits: he himſelfe
treatned to have a paire of pincers to pinche him by the toes, if he
vſed thoſe tricks: but remembreth that Mr Iackſon promiſed that
if he would declare the truth, he would be good vnto him, and helpe
him to ſervice in London. This Examinant alſo confeſſeth

that Mr Hurt, Mr Iackſon, and Mr Freeman Aldermen, and
William Gregorie the Maiors Clerck deſiring to have the boye to
vſe ſome of his tricks aunſwered, that his leg was ſo ſore he could
not ſhewe them: and the ſayd Gregorie commaunded that
ſome ointment might be giuen him: which this
Examinant did, and the boie annointed his
knee, and gaue ſome to his ſiſter
to annoint her finger which
was ſtreyned. (⸪)
            
         
         
            
            A BREIFE OF THE FORESAID DEPOSItions,
proving that William Sommers of Nottingham of
the age of 20. yeares was poſſeſſed by Satan, & did not
counterfeit as ſome pretend.
            
               1 THere ſeemed to run along his leg, and thence into his toe. bellie
throate, tongue, cheeke, eie, & other parts a lump ſometimes leſſe,
ſometimes bigger then an eg: being ſoft, depoſed by eleuē. 16. 17.
               2 The lump being in his leg, it was heavie, & inflexible like yron by
4. the 6. 12. 14. 16.
               3 He had ſuch extraordinarie ſtrength that ſometimes 3. 4. 5. 6. or
moe, were ſkarce able to rule him depoſed by 6: the 2. 6. 9. 11. 12. 13th.
               4 When 4. or 5. ſtrugled with him ſo as they were wearied; he did
not ſweat pant, or chaunge colour. depoſed by 3. the 9. 11. 13.
               5 He wallowed, gnaſhed with his teeth, ſtared with his eies, & foamed
at his mouth exceſſivelie: by 5. the 2. 5. 9. 12. 13.
               6 There ſeemed to run vnder the coverlet where he laie as it were
kitlings to the number of 4. or 5 depoſed by 3. the 2. 6. 10.
               7 His face, and mouth fearefullie diſtorted one lip toward one eare
& the other toward thother depoſed by 3. the 5. 6. 13.
               8 His face turned directlie backward not moving his bodie at all, by
2. the 6. 13.
               9 His neck doubled vnder him. by Richard Mee. the 13.
               10 His bodie doubled, his head betwene his legs, ſodenlie plucked
round like a round browne loafe, caſt vp like a ball from the bed 3.
or 4. times together, halfe a yard highe. depoſed by Ioane Pie. 6.
               11 Being caſt into the fyre againſt the wals, & yron bars of the chimneie
with great violence, & there liing ſome time, he received no
apparance of hurt at all, depoſed by 3. the 6. 12. 13.
               12 His boie ſeemed to be extented to the height of the talleſt mā whē
once he ondevoured to hang himſelfe, depoſed by Ioane Pie 6.
               13 He told of diverſe things done in his abſence, without notice given
by anie perſon: depoſed by 2. the 6. & 13.
               14 Strange ſpeeches vttered by him in his fits, in a ſtrange voice, that
he was his, that he was God, Chriſt, & a King, that he made Baptiſme
& I wil vſe W: Som, tongue, & member for 3. daies; EGO SVM

REX, EGO SVM DEVS: that there vvas no God, that he
vvas King & Prin-ce of darknes. Alſo before Mr Dor. had ſeene him
he ſaide Dorrel comes; Dorrel comes he vvil haue me out, but I
vvil com againe; for Nott. & Lenton are jollie tovvnes for me. depoſed
by the 2. 7. 13. 14.
               15 Being recovered out of his fits, he knevve nor vvhat he had ſaid,
or done by the 6. 11.
               16 In his fits, ſtrange ſmels vvere in the place vvhere he laie, by the 6.
& 13.
               17 A ſtrange knocking perceived about his bed in his fits, his both
feete, & hands being field vnmoveable. by 4. the 2. 6. 14. 15.
               18 He cried hideouſlie ſometimes like a bul, beare, ſvvine, & in a ſmal
voice vnpoſſible to be counterfeyt, by 3. the 2. 9. 13.
               19 His leg vvould be crooked vvith his fals, & remaine inflexible.
by 2. the 1. 13.
               20 He ſpake in a continued ſpeeche, his mouth being vvide open, his
tongue dravven into his throat, neyther lips, nor chaps moving, by
4. the 6. 7. 8. 12.
               21 He ſpake a quatter of an houre together his mouth being cloſe
ſhut. by the 17.
               22 In his fits, his temples, & pulſes did not beat, he laie for dead, cold
as Ice. depoſed by the 9. 14.
               23 His eie vvas black, & chaunged colour in his fits, by the 3. 4. 13.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   