
      
         
            
            Vox Graculi, OR Iacke Davves PROGNOSTICATION.
            
            NO leſſe wittily, then wondrouſly rectified, for the Eleuation of all Vanity, Villany, Sinne, and Surquedrie ſublimate, keeping quarter in the Courts, Cities, and Countries, of all Chriſtendome; For this yeere 1623.
            
            Saepe malum hoc vobis praedixit ab aethere Cornix.
            
            Publiſhed by Authority.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE GENTLEmen READERS, J wiſh no worſe, then white Bootes, and wet WEATHER.
            
               GAllants, (and yet I hope no Gulls neither) As on a time I ſate muſing on the very verticke point of Hie-gate-hil, (with as little coyne in my Pocket, and as much cunning in my Craneon, as moſt of our Starre-gazers haue) To make experiment of my skill, if it could reach ſo high, as to take the iuſt Altitude of the Blindmans Bottle-ale at Holloway. I ſpied ſuch a cluſter of Knaues below in the valley, (like ſo many Danske Crowes ſummon'd on Douer ſands againſt a ſtorme) as that by my Aſtrolabe I began to collect; That this Producing more wonders then Plato's Mirabilis Annus.
               
               Yeere would proue intemperate, by reaſon of an extreame heate in Summer; inſomuch that the ſtones in Cheapſide ſhall

be ſo hot, that diuers Steeletto-bearded Scape-thrifts ſhall feare to goe from Paules to the Counter i'th Poultrie: Whereupon I betooke me to my Ephimerides, and erecting a figure, haue found ſuch ſtrange Accidents to fall out this yeere (Mercury being Lord and predominate in the houſe of Fortune) that many fooles ſhall haue full Bellies, and cramm'd Coffers; when wiſe men ſhall walke vp and downe with hungry ſtomackes▪ and emptie pockets: and that many (who haue newly buried their Sires, and leap▪t into their Lands, before they be come to their wits) ſhall this yeere drowne many an Acre of their Ancestors, in the bottome of a wine-ſeller; and burie their Quae malè parta, malè dilabuntur.Demeſnes in the Bellies of Brothell houſes: Moreouer, if Iupiter were not ioyned with Mercurie in a more fauourable aſpect, Butchers wines ſhould haue little or nought to doe all Lent, but ride out of towne with their Iourneymen, and prouide Prickes againſt Eaſter: Seeing therfore the wonders that are like to enſue this ſucceeding yeere, I haue taken vpon me (for the beneficiall content of all my Countrymen) to complie this Prognoſtication, diſcourſing & diſcouering briefly the diſpoſition of the foure Quarters of the yeere 1623. the Ecclipſes both of Sun and Moone, with their dangerous and ſubſequent effects: by which (if Piſces play not the Porter) many poore men, wanting money, are like to faſt on Sundayes for Lacke of food; and ſuch as haue no Shooes, to goe bare-foot; if certaine deuout Coblers proue not the more propicious: Yet Aſtrologie is not ſo certaine, but that it may faile: and therefore diuers Ale-ſtufft-beleeuing

Hoſteſses, may perhaps chalke vp more this yeere, then ſhall by their Cuſtomers be wiped out in two yeeres after; But V. P. for that: Monedula capiet muſcas, and digest them as eaſily, as ſome Church-men doe two liuings, and neuer ſurfet on them neither. Now as touching my Dedication; I was at firſt halfe way ſuggested to haue cull'd out ſome Church-warden or other for my Maecenas, who perhaps would haue bid me once a yeere to dinner, or haue fisted me with Forty-pence out of the poore-mans Boxe: But in the very rumination on this merry-thought, ſteps in a good Starre, and plainely told me, that Cum inſipientibus ludere, inſipidum eſt. Therefore, with the reſt of my weather-beaten brethen, I muſt needs conclude, that Sapiens dominabitur aſtris.
            
            
               Your vnparalleld Practitioner in Aſtrologie,
I. D.
            
         
         
            
            Health to all my friendly Acquaintance.
            
            
               ME thinkes I heare you whiſper (Sirs) that I
               Preſent you with a piece of Beggerie,
               
               Or conceal'd Crauing: And that here I ſhow
               More Wit than's good: what would you haue me do?
               Vſe Citty-faſhion? heard you with braue ſpeaking,
               And make the neareſt ſhow, at neareſt breaking?
               If Pouerty be it, you ſo much hate;
               O pardon that; for tis the Hen quanta Poeta patiunturt
                  Muſes Fate.
               'Tis better begge an almes, then fall to Yet Viro eſurienti, neceſſe eſt furari, ſaith Suidas.ſtealing;
               And worſe to be diſhoneſt, then Appare quod es, aut eſto quod appares. Aug.
                  plaine-dealing.
               The hide-bound Earth, of all reliefe me barres,
               I'm faine to picke a liuing from the Starres:
               And that's the mightie Motiue, which excites me
               To this Attempt. Acceptance, full requites me
               In ampleſt meaſure, and contents me beſt:
               But (faith) I'm poore: You may conceiue the reſt.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the Ecclipſes that ſhall happen in the yeere 1623. to the wonderfull amazement of the beholders.
            
               IF we may credit the authenticall Cenſures of Albumazar and Ptolomey, about the circumuolutions of celeſtiall Bodies, whoſe influence doth excitate and procure perpetuall Mutability in this lower Region: we ſhall finde, that the Moone this yeere ſhall be ecclipſed; which ſhall happen in one of the twelue Moneths, and in ſome one of the foure Quarters of the yeere, whoſe dozen of poynts, as they ſhall be totally darkened, ſo the effects ſhall follow moſt ſtrange and wondrous. For Cancer being the ſole houſe of the Moone, doth preſage, That this yeere, fruits ſhall be rauenouſly deuoured by Caterpillers; as Petifoggers, Brokers, and Flatterers, who feeding on the ſweate of other mens browes, ſhall greatly blemiſh the Beauty of the Spring of Goodneſſe, and diſparage the forward

growth of all wholeſome & hotteſt hearbes, vnleſſe ſome Northerly blaſt of Heauens vengeance, cleare the plants of ſuc
                  •
                Catterpillers, with a ſweeping plague. But Cancer being a liquide ſigne, and cheife Water-Baylife ouer Flouds and Streames, it foreſheweth, that Fiſhmongers (if they bee not narrowly lookt vnto) ſhall goe downe as farre as Graueſend in Wherries to foreſtall the Market, to the great preiudice of the poore, who all Lent long doe partly relie on the benefit of Saltfiſh and red Herring. Moreouer, it ſignifieth, that Brewers ſhall make hauocke of Thames water, and put more liquor then they ought amongſt their Mault; to the vtter vndoing of certaine red-nos'd Ale-Knights, whoſe morning draughts of ſtrong liquor, is a ſufficient Baricado againſt cold weather; a lamentable caſe, if it bee not lookt into, and preuented by ſome ſpeciall Supplication to the ſtrong Coppernation, and worſhipfull Company of Ale-cunners. But in this we haue great hope, that becauſe the Effects cannot ſurpaſſe the Cauſe, that diuers Tapſters ſhall truſt out more in a moment, then they can get in, in a moneth; and although they fill their Iugges with frothy emptineſſe, yet for want of true dealing ſhall they die in the Brewers debt. Thus much for the watry Signe of Cancer: And becauſe this Ecclipſe is like to play vnderboard, and to be little viſible in our Horizon, though it will haue great operation in it, I paſſe it ouer with this prouiſo to all Sea-faring men, that

they carry more ſhirts then one with them a Ship-board, left to their great labour they beſtow many houres in ſearching ſlike-wormes on the hatches.
            
               Of the Ecclipſe of the Sunne.
               THe Ecclipſe of the Sunne, according to A learned Author in the Antipodes.
                  
                  Demogorgons opinion, is like to produce many hote and peſtilent infirmities, eſpecially amongſt Sumners and Petifoggers, whoſe faces being combuſt with many fierie inflammations, ſhall prognoſticate the ſcarcitie (that by their deuout drinking) is like to enſue of Barly, if violent ſurfets ſweepe not away ſpeedily ſuch deuouring Maultwormes.
               There are many alſo who are like to be troubled with ſuch hote rheumes in their heads, by walking the purlewes, that their haire ſhall fall off without the helpe of a The Pockes▪ a ſharpe ſhauer.Barber; and ſuch hote agues ſhall raigne this yeere, with ſtrange feuers and calamities, that if Sol were not placed in a cold Signe, Reniſh wine would mount to tenpence a Quart, before the latter end of Auguſt: But ſome few good and auſpicious Planets being retrograde, foretelleth, that Lemmans this yeere ſhall be plenty, inſomuch that many ſhall vſe them to Bed-ward, for the qualifying of their hote and inflamed ſtomackes.
               By all coniecturall arguments, the influence of Mars this yeere ſhall be ſo violent, that here in

our Clime, great quarrels ſhall be ſtirred vp betweene man and man, eſpecially in caſes of Law: Muli ſe mutuò ſcabunt. Cic.Iuſtice and Gentrie ſhall conniue with each other, and coine ſhall out-countenance the iuſteſt cauſe.
               The diſſentious Corid
                        •
                     n ſhall ſell his Coate to ſtriue for a ſtraw, and Lawyers laugh ſuch fooles out of their Liuings, as cannot keepe their ſeditious ſpirits from wronging their neighbours.
               Further, there will be certaine fond Sects of Religion, who are like to peſter the Commonweale; as ſanctimonious ſelfe-Conceiters, holy White Deuils.Counterfeits, whoſe profeſſion and practiſe dwell as farre a ſunder, as Diues did from Lazarus, when he cryed out for water to coole his toung; theſe, I ſay, ſhall bandy themſelues againſt Eccleſiaſticall Authoritie, and be ready to outſtare ciuill Gouernement, were it not that Saturne with a frowning influence, did menace them with the ſtrangling euill.
               
                  But whereas the Sunne is darkened but by digits, and that vpon the South-points, it preſageth great miſeries to Southerly Countries; for there ſhall Friars and Monkes, ſo heate themſelues this yeere with confeſsing of Harlots, that their crownes ſhall grow bald of their owne accord, to the vtter impoueriſhing of all Barbers.
               Many braue Spirits, this yeere, and men of high merit, ſhall be ſo well reſpected, as that for their magnanimous atchieuements, they ſhall be recompenced with a Date obolum Beliſario, quim in
                        ••
                     dia, non 
                        •
                     utpa caec
                        •
                     uit.
                  Beliſarian almes, and haue

the eyes of their Reputation, popt out by the infectious fingers of Enuie and baſe Neglect, and ſo caſt out of fauour, as vnworthy of humane ſocietie.
               Furthermore, let me not omit this remarkable Obſeruation, that this Ecclipſe affordeth vnto me: For this yeere there ſhall happen ſome ſtrange Births of children, produced in an hideous and formidable ſhape, as thus: Some children ſhall be borne, that when they come to age, ſhall not know their owne fathers: Others ſhall haue their fingers of the nature of Polypus, quicquid tetigit, tenet. Diog.Lime-twigs, to get moſt part of their liuing with fiue and a reach: Some ſhall be borne with feete like Hares, who ſhall runne ſo ſwift, as that they neuer ſhall tary with any Maſter, but trudge from poſt to pillar, till they take vp Beggers-buſh for their lodging: Others ſhall haue noſes like Swine, that there ſhall not be a feaſt within a mile, but they will ſmell it out: But this is ſhroudly to be feared, that ſome women this yeere ſhall be borne with two tongues, to the terrible griefe of thoſe that ſhall marry them, thundering in their furie ſuch Caninam ſacundiam exercent. Saluſt.
                  rough-caſt Eloquence that 
                     No better hopes of a Scold.
                     Aquad Pu
                           •
                        ice non poſtulanda.
                   
                  Knaue and Slaue, ſhall be but Holy-day words to their huſbands; dropping as faſt from their litigious lips, as oathes doe from the chaps of a cholericke Cooke, againſt a long Sermō, (frying in his own greaſe) when his ioynts ſcorch, and are ouer roaſted: of which ranke or range of men I muſt confeſſe, that ſome of them are already profane

enough, if they could but once leaue A bad cuſtome, hardly left.ſwearing. And whereas this fearefull Ecclipſe doth continue but an houre and an halfe, it fore ſignifieth, that this yeere, womens loues to their husbands ſhall be very ſhort, and in ſome ſo Mulier Lun
                        •
                      mutabilior.mutable, that it ſhall ſcarce continue from the Church doore to the wedding houſe: and that Hens, Capons, (Geeſſe eſpecially,) and Chickens, ſhall be baniſht from poore mens houſes; and be faine to flie away with ſpits in their bellies to fat Churles tables, whoſe panches iutte foorth like an Aldermans dining roome, or King Harries Codpiece, in the Tower, with bumbaſting them with delicious Viands.
               Many other effects are to be prognoſticated in the ſubſequent predictions; giue me leaue in the meane ſeaſon, to lay in this Caution between my Countrimen, and this wonderfull Ecclipſe: 
                     No worſe Counſell giuen, then I would be content to take my ſelfe.
                     Fruſtraſapit, qui ſibi non ſapit, Eurip.
                   Let ſuch as haue cloathes enow, keepe themſelues warme, for feare of taking cold; and I would wiſh rich men all this Winter to ſit by a good fire, and ſeldome to goe to bed without a Cup of Sacke, and that ſo thickly qualified with Sugar, as they may not grow rheumaticke. Let them take eaſe enough, and feed daintily, then no doubt, (conſonant to the learned Iudgment of Albumazar) they are like to liue as long as they can, and not die one houre before their time: But in ſpeciall, let them take this premonition along with them; That they be drunke twiſe aweeke, and then (vnder pretence of taking Too common a ſhift in theſe times, to couer the rich mans exceſſe.Phyſicke) lie

yawning two dayes after to euaporate the exceſſe of a Surfet; no matter, though the poore Caitiffe lie ſtaruing in the ſtreets without reſpect or pitie.
               And thus haue I led you through the adumbrageous Ecclipſe of the Sunne.
               
            
         
         
            
            A PREDICTION OF THE GENERALL DISPOSITION OF SVNDRIE CONCEITED QVALIties, incident vnto mens minds and natures throughout the foure quarters of the yeere, 1623. by the merry Influence of the Planets, with ſome other tragicall Obſeruations, compriſed vnder each ſeparated Reuolution.
            
               Of Winter.
               
                  VVInter, the ſworne Enemie to Summer, friend to none but Colliars, Chandelers and Woodmongers: The froſt-bitten Churle, that hangs his dropping noſe ſtill ouer the fire: the Dogge that bites fruits, and the waſte-good, that fels wood; the vnconſcionable binder vp of Vintners fagots, and the onely conſumer of burnt Sacke and Sugar. This kinſman to Death, furtherer to Sickneſſe, and brother to Old-age, ſhall not put foorth his hoarie Bald-pate in this Climate of ours, according to our vſuall computation, vpon the 12. of December, at the firſt entring of the Sunne into the firſt minute of the Signe Capricorne, &c. With much more ſuch fuſtian futilitie, then euer any reaſonable

man could truly vnderſtand; but take this from me, as an infallible rule, that Winter beginnes, when Charitas laudatur, & alget.
                  Charity blowes her nailes, and is ready to ſterne, yet not ſo much as a drowſie Watchman will lend her a flap of his freeze Gowne to keepe her warme:
               When Payd in their owne coine; for Malo herclè▪ veſtro, tam verſutè vi
                           •
                        itis, Plaut.Tradeſmen ſhut vp ſhops, by reaſon that their frozen-hearted Creditours exact more for dayes of truſt, then they are able to raiſe (and play the Knaues too) out of their Commodities ſo taken vp:
               When the price of Sea-coale riſeth, and the rate of poore mens labours is pulled downe:
               When euery Chimney or rather Tobacco Pipe vomits out ſmoake, but ſcarce any doore opens, to hurle out ſo much as a Marrow-bone for a Dogge to breake his faſt on:
               When Beaſts die for want of fodder in the field, and mens Moleſtus interpellat
                        •
                     r venter, Plaut.
                  bellies cry out, who are ready to famiſh for lacke of food in the Citie:
               When the firſt word that a Punke ſpeakes at her Ingles comming into her Chamber in a Morning, I pray thee ſend for ſome Fagots; and the cold comfort a Lawyer heates you withall, is to ſay; What will you giue me?
               
               When Gluttons blow their pottage to coole them; and Prentiſes blow their nailes to heate them: And laſtly,
               When the A hard time for Watermen.
                  Thames is couered ouer with yce, and mens hearts caked ouer, and cruſted with Cruelty; then may any man boldly ſweare it is Winter.
               
               
                  
But let vs wade a little further into the fountaine of Infallibilitie, and then ſhall we find, that Winter this yeere, (being the firſt Aſtronomicall Quarter, according to my coniecturall Computation) whatſoeuer Ptolomee ſayes, beginnes ſooner with poore men, then with rich; and ſo graunted; by the malignant influence of Saturne, whoſe conſtellation maleuolent, portends; That ſuch as haue no money nor credit, ſhall want Coles and Wood, and be faine to beate their iawes one againſt another with cold, while your old peny-fathers ſit and toſte themſelues by the fire.
               And by reaſon that this Winter will beginne, when Sol makes his entrance into the degree of Capricorn, that Hyemall ſolſtitial Signe foreſhewes, that the Bakers basket ſhall giue the wall to the Brewers barrell; and an halfepenny dry, ſhall do homage to an halfepeny wet. The weather likewiſe ſhall be ſo vnſeaſonably cold, that diuers for feare of being froſt-bit, ſhall Aleator, quanto eſt in arte peritior, tanto eſt nequior, Syr.craftily ſit all day at Cardes and Tables, while their poore wiues and families knocke their heeles, and faſt at home for their thriftleſſe follies.
               And for that I find, three of the Planets to be drencht in aquaticke Signes, as Iupiter, Mars, and Luna, it plainely demonſtrates; That diuers pretenders to good fellowſhip ſhall for want of ſtrong Taplaſh, goe ſober to bed againſt their wils.
               That there ſhall be coagulated Froſts, ſo as vpon

ſmall acquaintance men and women ſhall creepe to bed together, and ſome of them lie ſo long, till they be fetcht out with a Beadle, and a Baſen.
               That Sea-faring men (if they be not the better prouided of skilful Pilots) ſhall either ſticke in the ſands, or ſplit their Shippes againſt the ſturdie Rockes, and ſo condemne them to the bottome; * Quicquid ſclet nocers, ide
                        ••
                      ſolet docer
                        •
                     .or elſe looſe their goods by Pyracie and Palliardiſe.
               
                  Saturne falling retrograde in Gemini, ſhewes, That there ſhall fall this Winter ſuch tenebrous fogges, and ſtifling Miſts, that many rich Chuffes ſhall looſe their purſes by the high-wayes ſide; and poore men be ſo weather-beaten by the vnconſcionable craft of Qui infiniti
                        •
                      aucup
                        •
                     js emu
                        •
                     
                     gunt pecuniant.Vſureres, that they ſhall be forc't to beg their bread by the extremity of ſuch Extortion: But Mercury and Venus being congregated in Sagittarius, prognoſticate; That for want of faire weather, ſuch as haue but one ſhirt, ſhall goe wool-ward, till that be a waſhing; and that Watermen who want Fares, ſhall ſit and blow their fingers, or lie in Ale-houſes till they be drunke, and then for want of better employment, baſt one another with their vnmercifull Stretchers.
               And for that Mars, that rugged Planet, hath no predominance in this Brumall Reuolution, Souldiers for the more part, though their fare bee hard, yet ſhall they lie in field beds, and not bee too much moleſted neither with more money then

ſhall be neceſſarie:
               And it is greatly to be feared, that through extreame cold, diuers pooremen ſhall die not dine, at rich mens gates: Pitty ſhall be exiled; Goodworkes thruſt out of dores with Iack-a-lent, and Hoſpitality whipt out of the Country as a relicke of the old Religion; and were it not that ſome moyſt ſhowers of Mercie ſhall mollifie the obduration of the froſt, Charity, ſhould for want of houſe-roome lie and freeze to death in the heart of our higheſt Cities.
               Impetuous ſtormes are this yeare to bee expected, eſpecially in houſes where the wiues weare the breeches; and ſuch loud Winds, that the husbands ſhall be whurld out of dores; and withall there are like to fall huge Haileſtones, as big as ioyn'd-stooles, that ſome ſhall be ſure to haue their crownes crackt, and all through the petulant diſpoſition of Venus. But Mars ſhall come in, and play the tall man, who beeing placed in Gemini, that gouernes the armes and ſhoulders; and he preſageth, that ſundry tall fellowes ſhall take heart of graſſe, who armed with ſoure Cudgels ſhall ſo Lambeake their irregular huſwiues, that the wind ſhall turne into another quarter, and ſo the weather waxe more Poſt nubila, Ph
                        •
                     bu
                        •
                     .calme and temperate.
               Such ſuperfluxe of waters are like to enſue, through this Hyemall diſtemperature, that many bold-braines ſhall be drowned on drie hills; and fiſh, if they could not ſwim, were in great danger

totally to periſh. Eeles are like to bee deare, if there be few or none taken: But plenty of Pouts ſhall be had in al places, eſpecially in thoſe Countries where women haue not their owne wils.
               Now (patient Reader) in reſpect of diuers particular circumſtances drawne from the quotidian motions, progreſſions, ſtations, retrogradations, aſpects, and other appointments of fixed and extrauagant Starres, I am induced to declare, that ſuch as haue no fire, ſhall feele moſt cold; That Wier-drawers and Preſſe-men, if they follow not their worke cloſe, ſhall feele no great heat; and that Compoſitors, let them ply the Boxe neuer ſo faſt, ſhall ſhare a great part of extreame cold; and be Stulti fortunati miſ
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     s co
                        •
                     
                     temn
                        ••
                     t.laught at for their labour.
               The diſtemperance of this Quarter, is like to breed ſundry ſickneſſes as well in yong as in old, proceeding either of vicious blood, or of the ſuperabundance of inordinate guzling; as Catching diſeaſes, that ſpare none who come in their vvalkes.
                  Cephalagies, Quirimobs, or Whimſies in the head, that ſhall make men ſo dizzie, as that ſome ſhall ſtagger and ſtumble vp and down the ſtreets, till they haue ſtollen a nappe to ſettle their diſtempered Coxcombes.
               Aches in the ſhoulders ſhall bee rife amongſt diuers Women that haue Knaues to their husbands; and diuers Drunken Sots ſhall bee peſtered with Surfets.
               
                  
Maydens this Winter ſhall haue ſtrange A malady as vnauoydable, as incurable.ſtitches and gripings about the girding place, which diſeaſes principally will proceed, by their ſituation in Supinity: and many actiue men ſhall bee troubled with ſuch paine in their eies, that they ſhal not Wilfull miſpriſions.know their chamber maydes from their owne wiues.
               Now becauſe I find in the Ephimerides of heauen, certaine vnluckie, criticall, and dangerous dayes pointed out, whoſe foreheads are full of Plagues, and vnder whoſe winges doe lurke other diſmall calamities, that threaten this Region; it ſhall not be impertinent, if I open the foule boſome of Winter before he paſſe further, and ſhew vnto you what contagious maladies do hang vpon him, and harbour within him. I find therfore, that a browne Twelue ſtrange plagues to happen this yeere.dozen of ineuitable plagues, ſhall heauily light on the heads and hearts of this our Engliſh Nation; and thus I bring them out in orderly ranke:
               1. Plague of Pouerty.The firſt, is the plague of Animi generoſi neruos egeſtas execat.
                  Pouerty, When a man ha's neuer a peny in's purſe, credit with his neighbours, nor a hole to hide his head in: Alas! how many will lie languiſhing of this frenſie? how many that haunt Bowling alleyes, and fill vp Play-houſes with their infection; nay, how many that ſtalke in the middle-Ile of Paulcs in indifferent good clothes too, will be ſtrucke with this Plague? It is harder to reckon them, then to ſumme vp the vertues of a wandring woman which are numberleſſe.
               
                  
                  Plague of Diſcontent. 2. The ſecond, is the Plague of Diſcontent; when a husband ſhall find cold cheare, and hote words, from a ſcolding wife: Many Coblers will be ſubiect to this diſeaſe; yet they will not lie long vpon it, but euery houre be of the mending hand; marry it is ſuppoſed, their wiues will proue worſe and worſe.
               
                  Plague of Contention. 3. The third, is the Plague of Contention: when a Trauailer hath a long iourney, a tyred horſe, and a little money: This Plague will meete with many poore Yorke-ſhire Clients; and (vnleſſe they keepe it off with their hookes) with ſome Welch-men too.
               
                  Plague of Deceit. 4. The fourth, is the Plague of Deceit; when a man hath fraudulently congeſted heapes of riches, enioyes it but a while, and leaues a foole behind him to ſpend it: It is to be feared, that ſome wealthy Citizens, and quirking Lawyers cannot eſcape this Plague.
               
                  Plague of Extortion. 5. The fifth, is the Plague of Extortion; when a man is growne old in yeeres, yet a child in goodneſſe; when his wife is a Drunkard, and his daughter a wanton, his ſonne a Lecher, and his ſeruant a pilferer: This Plague is ſure to ſhake hands with exacting Vſurers, and extorting Landlords; but chiefly with Brokers, their bodies being ſubiect to many infections, and their Conſciences to much corruption. So that it is thought, Lord haue mercy vpon vs, will ſticke on moſt of the doores in Houndſ-ditch and Longlane: and that all people who loue themſelues,

for honeſtie ſake, will ſhunne thoſe places, and thoſe perſons, whereof but one of them is ſufficient to poiſon a whole Citie.
               
                  Plague of Luſt. 6. The ſixt, is the hote Plague of Luſt: when a Maide is faire, and hath no portion; of ripe yeeres, yet troubled with the Greene-ſickneſſe; and longs for a husband, yet No-body will haue her. This Plague will tickle poore Chambermaids, and though it fall hard vpon them, yet will it not proue ſo mortall, becauſe they haue a tricke to helpe themſelues: It is to be ſuſpected, that ſome Citizens daughters will be tainted too, vnleſſe they take a priuate receipt againſt it, of their fathers Prentiſes: Yong Gentlewomen likewiſe would hardly eſcape, were it not that the Gentlemen-Vſhers, and ſmooth-faced Pages, muſt ſtand betweene them and infection.
               
                  Plague of Marriage. 7. The ſeuenth, is the Plague of Mariage: when a woman poſſeſſeth a husband that is very poore, yet iealous: young, yet a cholericke foole. Seruingmens wiues (it is thought) will turne vp their heeles of this Diſeaſe; or if not die, yet lie for it a long time.
               
                  Plague of Debt. 8. The eight, is the Plague of Debt: when a man hath much to pay; little to diſcharge, and an vnmercifull Creditour. This Plague (I feare me) will flie as farre as Bohemia, and pitifully peſter our Engliſh Souldiers, who will take more care how to wipe off the Rundles in chalke, then to winne a Towne from the enemie.
               
                  Plague of Hunger. 9. The ninth, is the Plague of Hunger: when

a man ſees or ſmels good cheare, and hath an excellent ſtomacke, but knowes not how to get it: if any complaine of this maladie, it will be thoſe that are the attendants at a ſcamling feaſt, or elſe, ſuch as walke ſnuffing vp and downe in Winter Euenings through Pie-corner, yet haue not one croſſe to repleniſh their paſternes.
               
                  Plague of Prodigality. 10. The tenth, is the Plague of Prodigalitie: when a man marying a Wagtaile, and letting her out to the full length of her owne Luſt, Pride and Pleaſure; muſt thereby be beholden to his enemie, muſt honour him, that hornes him, yet dares not be reuenged: The tokens of this Plague will ſtand thicke on a number of young Bankrupts, who haue had dealing with Courtiers.
               
                  The Horn-Plague. 11. The eleuenth, is the Horne-plague: It will be too common both in Court, Citie, and Countrie: and albeit, it be incurable, yet none can die of it: this aking Plague takes a man firſt in the head, and he muſt needs ſicken of it, that is either a Cuckold, a Wittall, or a Suffragatour. In very many ſtreets (beſides Cheapfide and the Strand) will there be houſes contaminated with this monſtrous diſeaſe.
               
                  Plague of Ingratitude. 12. The twelfth, is the fearefull Plague of Ingratitude: when a man hath much wealth, and no wiſdome; much coine and no conſcience; continuall health, and no grace to returne thankes vnto him that beſtowes it on him: when he talkes of God, yet keepes company

with the diuell. This Plague ſtrikes deepe, euen to the wounding of the Soule, and yet ſtickes by many, euen of the better ſort: Beſides theſe capitall Plagues, there be many Boyles, Carbunkles, and Bliſters of Impieties, that will lie ſucking the bones of common people, which I omit.
               Thus may you diſcouer a farre off, how ſharpe a Winter we are like to haue: let vs now make triall if the Spring will looke vpon our Horizon with a more fauourable aſpect, or accorſt vs with a more chearefull ſalutation.
               Exit Hyems.
            
            
               
               Of the Spring.
               
                  Diſcription of the Spring. NExt enters vpon her Cu, that odoriferous Lady Ver, or the Spring, attended with all her Attributes of Honor: For ſhe is the Bride of the Sunne, the Noſegay-giuer to weddings, the richeſt Hearbe-wife in the world: the rareſt Gardiner, ſweeteſt Perfumer, cunningſt Weauer, pureſt Dyer, and nobleſt Muſitian; for all the Quiriſters of the Groues are her Schollers: This mother of health, Phyſitian to the ſicke, Surgeon to the wounded; this daughter of Plenty, and ſiſter to Sommer, comes not attired in her verdant robes, as by Poets and Printers ſhe is publiſhed, vpon the tenth day of March, after the Sunne (with an Herculean Vigor) hath conquered his twelue Labours, and like a skilfull Charioter) hath hurried his golden Wagon through the twelue Signes, ready againe (as ſome will haue it) to beginne his taske afreſh, by making his entrance vpon the firſt Minute of the Equinoctiall Signe of the Ramme, whoſe hornes ſtand in ſuch an euen proportion a ſunder, as that the Day and Night take them for their meaſure, and are contented to be of an equall length.
               
                  Reformation of bad manners, is the propagation of a good Spring. Shall I tell you then at what Signe the Spring dwelleth at? turne vp your eyes and behold; for by theſe markes ſhall you know her, when ſhe comes: When Philomele ſits ſinging with a briar at her breaſt, and the Adulterer ſtands ſighing

at the thornes which pricke his C
                     ••
                  ſcience: When young teares of Repentance 
                     〈◊…〉
                   Liueries, and Old Whoremongers plucke off the Vizars of their Vices: when the big-bellied Earth beares all kinds of flowers, and the O 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  Conrts of Princes bring forth all ſorts of Vertues: When Gardens beginne to be dreſſed, and abuſes in the Church reformed: When Lords leaue falſifying their promiſes, and Ladies leaue ſophiſticating their faces: When Courtiers pay their debts, and Citizens ſurceaſe to ſell counterfeit Wares: When Players turne Preachers, and Poets cary money in their purſes: When Lawyers plead without Fees, and Taylors cary true Billes to their Cuſtomers: When Vſurers giue all they haue to the poore, and Brokers lend money without pawnes: When Vintners doe not mixe their Wines, nor Tapſters froth vp their lugges: When Oſtlers leaue greaſing of Horſes teeth, and Chamberlaines forbeare to lie with Country Wenches: When Beaſts waxe wanton by nature, without violating her Lawes, onely to multiply their kind for the good of man; and when men abhorre to change themſelues into the nature of Beaſts: Then, and onely then ſhall the vernall gates flie wide open; then may you boldly ſweare, it is the Spring.
               
               But as the S
                        •
                     pè diſsident ab animis gratu
                        •
                     antium vultus.ſlickeſt horſe may haue the ſloweſt pace, and oftentimes the faireſt Atterá 
                        •
                     anu 
                        •
                     ert aquam, ulter
                        •
                     , ignem, Plutare.Brow may haue the fouleſt Body, ſo this beautifull daughter of old Ianus, who is Maſter Porter to the twelue

Moneths, by dealing with ſome few vnſalubrious Planets, is thought not to be free from diſeaſes. A ſpice therefore of one Plague or other, will lie in her tender bones, by which meanes this Spring to ſome people (eſpecially the French, and I feare the Engliſh cannot goe Scot-free) will proue as fatall, and as buſie in priuie Searches, as the fall of the Leafe▪
                  
               
               The Dugges of this delicate young bed fellow to the Sunne, will ſo flow with the milke of Profit and Plenty; that (of all other) Some Players (if Praeſtat fortunatum, qu
                        ••
                      ſapere.
                  Fortune, turned Phoenix, faile not of her promiſe) will lie ſucking at them with their fulſome forcaſtings, for pence and two-pences, like young Auriſacra fames, quid non mortalia pect
                        •
                     
                     ra coget? Virg.Pigges at a Sow newly farrowed, for that they are in danger to meet with a hard Winter, and be forced to trauell ſoftly on the hoofe.
               It is coniectured likewiſe, That in this time of coalition betweene the Planets and the Earth, Lawyers will grow vp ſo thicke, as that they will ſcarce liue But one ſtep lower then Impoſſibility.honeſtly one by another; and moſt of them ſhall proue to their Clients, as tares to a field of Corne: for they ſhall proſper beſt when they choake thoſe by whom they were nouriſhed: yet on the contrary ſide, ſhall Maiden-heads be ſo ſcant, that if Luſt, like death, ſweeps all before it.two hundred be to be had ouer-night, one hundred ninety and nine of them will be ſtrucke off before the next Morning.
               Notwithſtanding all this, I finde, that Winter finiſhing with the laſt grade of the watrie Signe Piſces, at Sols ioyfull Progreſſe into the firſt degree

of Aries, then muſt the Spring needs march vp in the next rancke, and ſhew her face An infallible ſigne of the Springs approach.when graſſe begins to ſprout, and trees to bud. By which I gather, That this Spring will bee very ill for Schollers for they ſhall ſtudy much, and gaine little: They ſhall cary more wit in their pates, then white. 
                     •
                  ney in their purſes. Rebus Immanis, ordine nullo, fortuna regit, ſpargit
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      manu m
                        •
                     nera c aeca pejora fouens, Sen.
                  Dunces ſhall proue more wealthy then Doctors; inſomuch that ſundry vnlettered ſots ſhall ſcrue thē
                  ſelues into the Miniſtery, if the prouident care of reuerend Biſhops doe not iuſtle them aſide. And by the opinion of Proteus, 
                  Plent, rident, ſapiunt, inſaniunt, &c.women are like to grow wilfull, and ſo variable, that they ſhal laugh and weepe, chide and chat, and all with a breath.
               Butchers ſhall ſell their meate as deare as they can, and if they be not carefull, hornes ſhall bee hurtfull vnto them: and ſome ſhall be ſo wedded to ſwines fleſh, that they ſhall neuer be without a Sow in their houſe as long as they liue.
               This vernall Reuolution being naturally hote and moiſt, is like to be very forward for flowrie fields and blooming trees: and becauſe Saturne will reſide in his proper manſion, Old men are like to be very wayward, and crafty Scriueners (or Error ex amore, non ex more.Knaues, all is one) ſhall neede no Brokers: Vſury, ſhall be called, good Husbandrie; and men ſhall be eſteemed honeſt for their wealth, not for their Quarenda pecunia primum eſt, virtus poſt numnos. Horat▪
                     
                  Vertues. And becauſe Aquarius muſt keepe ſome leuell-coile this Quarter, it is to be doubted that many Springs of water will riſe vp

in Vintners Sellars, to the great weakning of their Gaſcoine Wine, and to the vtter diſſolution of the ancient Order of the Red-noſes. March Beere ſhall alſo be more ſet by, then ſmall Ale.
               
                  Multiplicity of Sects, dangerous to a State. Out of the Old Stocke of Hereſie, it is to be expected this Spring, will ſprout foorth new ſchiſmaticall Opinions, and ſtrange Sects, as Separatiſts, Armaniſts, with other exoticke Niceties and Balductum diſeaſes, to the diſturbance of the vnity of the Church, and diſquieting of good mens conſciences: but I could wiſh, that the learned Doctor, Sir T. Tyburne might bee put to that taske, as to confute ſuch vpſtart Statiſts, with his rope-ripe concluſions.
               Becauſe Cancer will bee buſie this Spring-tide, it is therefore likely, that the flouriſhing bloſſomes of young vnſtayed Gentlemen, ſhall bee ſo vnmercifully annoyed with Caterpillars, who ſhall entangle them in ſuch Statutes and Recognizances, that they ſhall cry out againſt Brokers, as Ieremie did againſt the falſe Prophets. Beſides, though this laſt Winter nipt vp many Picke-pockets, yet this Spring is like to affoord twice as many; ſo thāt at euery Read me a Riddle, what's this?Tearme ſhall bee found an Hundred at leaſt in Westminſter-Hall.
               
               Barbers alſo ſhall become poulers of the Common-wealth; and latronicall Leaſe-mongers, pillers of their poore Tenants.
               
                  
                  Mercury combuſt ſhall ſo ſet men together by the eares, that many Lawyers ſhall grow rich, get the Diuell and all, no matter Si L
                        ••
                     nina pelli
                        •
                      non ſuffi
                     
                        •
                     ie, vulpina add
                        •
                     nda, Zenod.
                  how; and weare ſide gownes, and widé Conſciences; ſtill keeping their mouths open to call for a feeling, and their purſes ſhut, when they ſhould beſtow an almes. Oſtlers ſhall ſteale Hay in the night from Gentlemens horſes, and rub their teeth with tallow, that they may eate little prouender while they ſtand at Liuery: but this I prognoſticate againſt them, that being extruded from humane ſocietie, they ſhall die in Hay-lofts, and that ſo poorely too, as all their wealth ſhall ſcarce purchaſe them Chriſtian buriall.
               
                  Wonderfull euents premonſtrated. But let me not hide theſe ſecrets from you (my Country-men) that Iupiter, being in milde aſpect with Venus, diſcouereth; which are; That diuers ſhall drinke more then they bleed; That Taylors ſhall ſteale nothing but what is brought vnto them: That Poulterers ſhall bee ſtinkingly peſtered with rotten Egges; and that Butchers dogs ſhall make Libels againſt Lent, for affording no better diet then Herring-cobs, for their ſlabbring Chappes.
               Other diſeaſes incident to this Quarter, as by Aſtrologicall Coniectures I can gather, are theſe▪ 
                  Diſcouery of diſeaſes.Prentiſes that haue beene ſoundly cudgel'd ſhall be troubled with a ſoreneſſe on their ſhoulders; and it ſhall be very ill for them that haue ſore eies to haue ſand thrown in them, or to looke againſt the Sunne. This plague ſhall raigne mightily amongſt

poore ſtage-keepers, that they ſhall not be able to change a groat for a boxe o'th eare. Beſide, ſicke folkes ſhall haue queaſier ſtomacks, then thoſe that bee ſound: and men that cannot ſleepe, ſhall take very little reſt: with other accidentall infirmities, which for breuity ſake I am content to flurre ouer.
            
            
               A Prediction of Summer, 1623,
               
               
                  Deſcription of Summer. NOW ſteps in the Minion of the yeere, Summer: the Miſtris of the earth, daughter and heire to the Spring, and Empreſſe ouer many Kingdomes; whoſe robes are fields of ſtanding corne; whoſe crowne is a garland playted of all varieties of fruites. Summer, the poore mans Almner, and the rich mans Land-lady: the Ploughmans Goddes to whom he praies, the ſhepheards Queene to whom he does homage: the filler of Barnes, the feeder of Birds, the fatner of men and beaſts, the worlds Magazine, the Nurſe of Plenty, the ſworne-enemy to dearths and ſcarcity. Summer, that's the Saint, to whom Bowyers, and Fletchers kneele; in whoſe praiſe, Archers ſend out ſhouts, and Hay-makers mery Songs.
               This red-lipt, liuely-fac'd, roſie-finger'd Damſell, comes not by turne to her Coronation, on the Eleuenth day of Iune, according to vulgar Aſtronomicall computation, when the Sunne

hath fetcht his cariere vp as high, as the firſt degree of the Eſtiuall Solſtice (Cancer,) which is the vtmoſt declenſion from the North to the Equinoctiall, &c. but I find that ſhe hath forſaken thoſe celeſtiall houſes, wherein ſhe did vſe to lie, in her illuſtrious progreſſe, and hath taken vp her lodging in ſublunarie Manſions, from whence ſhe muſt iſſue: And theſe that follow ſhall be the Harbingers, to make way, or the Heralds to proclaime her comming.
               
                  Entrance of Summer. When our exuberant, though ſuperanuated Grandam (the Earth) ſhall (albeit in her dayes of moroſitie) be great with child of Corne, Flowers, and Fruites, and be ioyfully deliuered of them; yet that Non eſt dig
                     
                        •••
                      dandis, qui non agit grates pro datis, Greg  in Morall.vngratefull creature, enriched with Reaſon onely, ſhall be barren of all goodneſſe:
               When the heate of the Sunne-beames begets Gold in the Veines of the Earth, yet Gold when it is brought foorth, ſhall beget a coldneſſe in the hearts of men:
               When Riuers ſhall ſwell with Spring-tides, and the fountaines of Learning be drawen drie; and ſtopped vp with the rubbiſh of Diſreputation. When ſheepe hurrie to broad trees, to ſhroud their carkeiſes vnder their ſhades from the wrath of Heauen, and when Innocencie is protected vnder the wings of Greatneſſe, from the furie of Oppreſsion:
               
               When Cuckooes ſing merrily; and Cuckolds laugh at their owne hornes:
               
                  
When Courtiers ride the Wild-gooſe chace; and Farmers ſtand by, and neuer curſe their Horſemanſhip.
               When Harueſters come ſinging from the field, becauſe their corne is bound vp in ſheaues; and when Citizens Wiues walke to their Gardens, yet bring from thence to their husbands no Noſegayes beſtucke with Columbines:
               Theſe, and many other like theſe, are the Badges that Summer weares; and neuer comes, but when ſhe puts on theſe and ſuch like Liueries: yet for all this, that Originall curſe which at firſt was layd vpon her, ſhall this yeere 1623. ſo cruſh her beautifull ſtructure, inſomuch that her luſty and neruall limbes ſhall grow weake, and her entrailes be ready to drie and rumple vp to nothing, by reaſon of a ſtrange famine, which ſhall moſt vnmercifully feed vpon her.
               Diuers deare yeeres haue crept out of the Chronicles of precedent ages, to ſhow their viſages to this preſent time, but the face of this ſhall looke more grizly then them all. In the time of 
                     Holinſhed cum multis alijs.
                  Edward the ſecond there was ſuch a famine, that horſe-fleſh then was accounted as dainty, as Hares-fleſh now; and fat O quantum cogit egeſtas!Dogs ſnapt vp as faſt then, as fat Pigs are now with vs at Bartlemewtide; for that Oxen and Sheepe, and other prouiſions, were drawen vp to ſuch an exceſſiue rate, as that people of the meaner ranke could not reach vnto it. But this yeere, 1623. Oxen and Calues ſhall not be ſold ſo deare in Smithfield;

men ſhall be ſold as cheape: nay men ſhall turne Homo homini lupus.
                  Omophagi, and deuoure one another. Country Gentlemen ſhall eate vp the induſtrious Farmers: Citizens, the Country Gentlemen: Courtiers, the Citizens: Leaſe-mongers, their Tenants: the diuell, the Leaſe-mongers. The Shop-keepers, or crafty-handed men, ſhall feed on the handicrafts men: Lawyers ſhall ſwallow their Clients, and many of them be ſuddenly choked, with a bad Cauſe ſticking croſſe their throats: And Vſurers ſhall cramme downe young Heires, as if they were pickled greene Geeſe, or bakt Woodcocks.
               But here Albumazar ſteps in with a croſſepoint to counterbuffe mine opinion, and he will needs affirme: That when the Sunne hath made his voyage through the germinall Signes, Aries, Taurus, and Gemini, and takes vp his Inne at the ſolſticiall eſtiuall Signe Cancer, then ſhall the third part of the yeere, called Summer, beginne his raigne: But I poſitiuely conclude, (and to maintaine the Prouerbe, will haue mine owne ſaying,) That An infallible rule to know when Summer beginnes.
                  Summer beginnes, when the weather waxeth ſo hote, that beggars ſcorne Barnes, and lie in the fields; and the night-Crowes of Saint Pancrace-church, build their neſts vnder the ſhades of Colman-hedge, or the new found vaulting Schoole adiacent.
               
               This Quarter therefore will prooue ſo immoderately hote, that diuers Mechanickes ſhall hurle their cloakes into Hounds-ditch, doffe their Cantabit v
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     us coram 
                        •••
                     rom pota
                     
                        ••
                     r.doublets and damme them in Debt-lane; and

walke in their Waſte-coates and greaſie apernes, for nimbleneſſe-ſake, for that they muſt trudge to prouide a cooling-card for their inflamed Liuers. And by reaſon that the flammigerous, and fire-foming Dog-ſtar ſhall ſnuffe vp the Planets, and with his flaring tong, licke vp the graſſe off the tops of hills, parch the corne-fields, ſeare the low-layd Valleys, and dye the face of Ceres as tawnie as a Gypſies, all Tobacco-ſhops ſhall ſmoke for it; but eſpecially the Katherine-wheele, 
                  An honeſt man, is his owne praiſer.where (by the confluence of Kind-hearts) ſhall be found theſe three Contentus in pace bibere▪
                  
                  Contentments: Great Pipes, Good Tobacco, and gentle Vſage.
               If this yeere, Aquarius piſſe freely after quaffing, then at the Signe of the Cerulean-coloured ſauage Boare, ſhall, (this yeere,) be had for ready money, all ſorts of precious Waters; as your Aquafrigida, refecta, calida, colorata, limpida, luctuoſa, fucoſa, feculenta, potabilis, portabilis, vtilis, futilis, Bumme, Humme, and Hawberna: The which Hawberna, (as it is reported by a famous, and fumous Radulphus Brutus. Iſeldonius.Hiſtorian) the great Duke of Moſco drinkes of, but vpon Feſtiuals: for if he ſhould drinke it daily, the reuenues of his whole Empire could not maintaine it.
               But becauſe that Vrſa-maior ſhall be auſpiciouſly inclined to Homogeneall Congruity, and ſimiliancie of condition, by his appointment ſhall Or; the white Beare.
                  Vrſa-minor be vnmuzzled, and blurt out more Becauſe ſtopt with Corke.light-headed Bottle-beare then halfe Barbican; the which being once let looſe, will furiouſly flie

in any mans face; nay, if hee gape, to gallop downe into his guts too: but being diſcharged, if it happen to bounce or hit againſt a Goodfellowes noſe, it will hiſſe like a Snake bathing in the Sunne vnder the skirts of a Groue, or as Oyle poured downe vpon an ouer-heated Anuile. Bottle-ale likewiſe ſhall be as buſie as a fooliſh Conſtable; and mad-brain'd Malt, ſhall bee ready to doe the offices of a knauiſh Sic figulus figulum, ſic Faber fabrum oditBeadle againſt meale-mouth'd Wheat. Of purpoſe to entertaine the Sunnes glorious returne from the Antipodes, innocent More-fields ſhall this Quarter bee cloathed all in white: For the ſhirts of Maſters, the ſmockes of Maydes; the ſmockes of Miſtriſſes, and the ſhirts of ſeruants, ſhall bee there ſo A fearfull confuſion to happen this Summer in Moore-fields.
                  promiſcuouſly layd together, that it would almoſt make a ſinner of a Saint to behold them: And (three to one) if they dare lie ſo neere together abroad, they will venter to lie cloſer when they are at home; as queſtionleſſe they do, when (being folded vp) they lie one vpon another: ſo that this is the forcible occaſion, that will ſtirre vp ſhirts and ſmockes to Citizens, old ſmel-ſmocks.s;mell after each other; or at leaſt wiſe, ſhirts to ſmell after ſmockes all the yeere after.
               
                  Mercury, moreouer, hath ſo conſtituted, that thoſe who are drunke ouer-night will bee drie in the morning: thoſe that be-piſſe their beds ſhall be Optimum eſt pati, quod cmendare non potes, Sen. Epi. 4. lib. 18.
                  vexed with Fleas; and ſuch as want meat, and haue no Feras non culpes, quod vit
                        •
                     ri non poteſt.money to buy it, ſhall bee very likely to goe ſupperleſſe to bed.
               
                  
Beſides, this Quarter, great hurly-burlyes are to be expected, and horrible Stratagemes like to bee performed: for Butchers ſhall make vnmercifull hauocke amongſt Flies, and Beggers on Sunne-ſhine dayes ſhall commit monſtrous murthers vpon their neuer-ceaſing blood-ſuckers. The Aſſiſtants like wiſe of Coperſmiths-hall ſhall doe mightie deeds of armes vpon Cuppes, Kannes, Pots, Glaſſes, and Blew-anckour Iackes; not giuing ouer the skirmiſh as long as they are able to ſtand, or wagge a finger.
               Further it is to be doubted, that becauſe Venus ſoiournes in the houſe of Mars; That Millars, Weauers, and Taylors, will proue as theeuiſh, as they are knauiſh: and Maids this Quarter will make ſillibubbes for their Louers ſo long, till at the length ſome of them calue with the Cow for company. But Iupiter in his exaltation preſageth, that diuers Semelenbidi, decies pallidi▪ 
                     Suidas.
                  Gallants ſhall creepe further into the Mercers booke in a moneth, then they can get out in a yeere. If there be ſuch exceſſiue plenty of Cherries this Quarter, that Fruterers know not what to doe with them, they perchance may fall to ſixe-ſhillings the pound: and Coſtard-mongers this Summer ſhall bee licenc'd by the Wardens of their Hall, to weare broad baskets on their heads, to keepe them from the heate of the Sunne.
               
               But Libra aduſt, and retrograde, foretelleth, that there is like to be a League betweene diuers Bakers and the Pillorie, for making their bread too light; and the Sunne ſhall be ſo hot, that it ſhall

melt away the Qu
                        •
                      plus ſunt pota, plus ſitiunt
                        •
                     r aqua.dropſie conſciences of couetous men; & that by the amorous aſpects of Venus, reſiding in the lodge of Scorpio, women ſhall fall ſo loue-ſicke, that ciuill Lawyers; Sumners, & Surgeons ſhall feed vpon their ſins, and fare the betby them all their life time after; and beſides diuers of theſe Lying ſpirits ſhall bee ſeene to ſtand in white ſheets like Ghoſts, in Churches, of purpoſe to affright ſuch like offenders.
               But by the way learne this of mee, That Shoomakers will grow ſo proud, that they ſhall refuſe the name of Souters: And the Taylor and the Louſe ſhall ſtand ſo vpon the poynt, in defence of each other; That were it not, the worſhipfull Company of Botchers haue ſet down this Order; That he who lies a bed, till his cloathes bee mended, needs not keepe a man to looke to his Wardrobe. But amongſt all, the Neceſſary Impoſitions on Pot-hunters.
                  Smiths haue exhibited a Supplication to the Ale-cunners, That he who goes drunke to bed, and aſſoone as hee wakes i'th morning, dares not carouſe a hearty draught next his heart, ſhall be adiudged to drink ſmall Ale for his penance, prouided hee can get no ſtrong.
               Conſonant to the variation of this Seaſon, ſhall variable diſeaſes be predominant; as namely, the In omnibus rebu
                        •
                      magis offendit nimium, quàm parùm, Cicero.
                  
                  Pluriſie, which ſhall ſo abound in many, that in ill, they ſhall exceed their patterne, though in goodneſſe they fall ſhort of their ſamplar. Fluxes alſo, and thoſe in poore mens purſes; for they ſhall be ſo laxatiue, that money ſhall runne out

faſter, then they are able to put in. The ſmall Pockes amongſt children, and the great amongſt Cum magnis, magna creſennt.great men: Infirmities alſo in the tongue; for ſome ſhall doe nought but lie, and oftentimes with thoſe they ſhould not.
               But becauſe wee would not ſwelt, and waxe faint, vnder the heate of this vnſeaſonable Summer, let vs make haſte out of it, and deſcend to the next Quarter, to make trial what benefits that will participate vnto vs.
            
         
         
            
            Of Autumne or the Fall of the Leafe.
            
               Deſcription of the fall of the Leafe. 
               AVtumnus, the chiefe Barber to the right Honorable Lord Annus, that mad ſhauer of Buſhes, Hedges, and Trees: the ragged Prodigall that conſumes all, and leaues himſelfe nothing: the arranteſt Raggamuffin amongſt all the foure Quarters, and the moſt diſeaſed, as being alwayes troubled with the Falling-ſickneſſe, and (French-man like) not ſuffering an haire to ſtay on his head. This murderer of the Spring, this theefe to Summer, and bad companion to Winter, ſcornes to come in according to his old wont, when the Sunne ſits Iuſtice with a paire of ſcales in her hand, weighing no more houres to the day, then he does to the night, as he did before in his Vernall progreſſe, when he rode on a Ram: But this 
                  Dominatur vt in grege Taurus, Liu.
                  
                  Quod non poteſt, vult poſſe, qui nimium poteſt.
                Bald pate will be ſeene walking vp and downe Groues, Gardens, Medowes, Fields, Woods, Parkes and Paſtures, 
                  Dominatur vt in grege Taurus, Liu.
                  
                  Quod non poteſt, vult poſſe, qui nimium poteſt.
                blaſting of fruits, beating leaues from their liuings; and trampling the gawdy garments of his Siſter, the Spring, vnder his feete.
            
               Signes of his comming. By theſe tokens alſo ſhall you perceiue his approach, when the World lookes like the old Chaos; and the Ground, like a young Prodigall,

new ſhorne by an Vſurer: when Luſt rides to the Ba
                     •
                  be, and is at great charge with Cornelius to keepe him company: when Luxurie flies amongſt Hen-ſparrowes, and brings not halfe the feathers home he carried out: when Luſt, its owne puniſher.
               Whoredome craules along with a ſtaffe in his hand, ſaddle-ſunke Noſe on his face, and a night-cap, in ſtead of haire, on his naked ſcalpe: when Bawdes cry out of their bones; Punkes, pray for the morning; and Panders put off their Calues with their ſtockings when they goe to bed▪ when many Great Ones cry, Oh, with a poxe to them; and ſome too, who would be entitled, Gentlemen; ſhall not be able to lift their Armes, to ſhew them.
            But all theſe are the fond fancies of Aeſoulapius, whoſe iudgement in theſe kinds I would be lothe to embrace. Therefore mine opinion is, (and that muſt cary it) That this Tatterdemalian Autumne, (whom Phyſicians call, The fall of the Leafe, and the Farmers Harneſt,) beginnes to ſhew his ill-fauoured face, True entrance of Autumne.when co
                  ••
               e is ripe, and calls to be reaped, and when the ſinnes of men are ſhot vp to that height, as that they cry out for the ſickle of Gods vengeance to cut them downe▪
            
            When the iſſue of the Earth are diſroabed of all their Verdures, and the brood o
                  •
                man ſtipt naked of all their Vertues:
            
               
When Greatneſſe ſits pruning her feathers, (and thoſe borrowed too) in the Sunne-ſhine of Reputation, and Goodneſſe be faine to lie ſculking in the ſhadow of Contempt:
            
            When Flattery is euery Lords fellow in the Exeat aula qui vult eſſe piu
                     •
                  .Court, and Honeſty is forced to goe a begging in in the Country, becauſe the Citie will not entertaine her:
            When Couſnage ſhall Foxe-like, be coopt and chained vp in the darke corners of Sale-mens ſhops, and vpon aduantage, be let looſe on the buyer, to gnaw out the bowels of his purſe, and yet he neuer feele it.
            When Churches ſhall be empty of ſoundhearted profeſſors, and Ale-houſes cram'd full of Vbiregnat Ebrieta
                     •
                  
                  ▪ ibi exulat Ratio.beſtiall and pernitious Pot-ſuckers▪
            
            When Murther ſhall be held but manly reuenge, and the maine act of man-ſlaughter, made but the light Scaene of mans-laughter:
            
               When Vſury ſhall be tearmed Thrift, and Lechery, a tolerable tricke of youth: Extorſion, warie husbandrie; Pride, comlineſſe; and Drunkenneſſe, a laudable recreation.
            When Hypocriſie gets on the gabbardine of Quod ſimile Ʋero eſt, peſſ
                     •
                  
                  mum eſt mendacium, Quint. D
                     •
                  cl. 11.
               
               Sanctitie, to goe to Church in on a Sabbath

day, where he will ſit ſighing at a Sermon, and turne vp his eyes, as though he would ſhoote them through the Churches roofe into Heauen; and being returned home, fals to an vndigeſted ſeeming-deuout prayer, and that ſo lowde too, as his Aliud palàm agere, aliud clam, dedecet probos. Plin. lib. 4.
               neighbours round about may heare him: yet neuertheleſſe, all the weeke after will practiſe no worſe, then to lie for aduantage, falſifie his promiſe, filch himſelfe drunke, if he can catch it a free-coſt, traduce his neighbour ſecretly, defraud his friend, and then fliere in his face:
            When children ſhall fling vp oathes and execrations againſt the face of heauen, in the ſtreets, and their Parents ſit laughing at their doores, to heare them ſo forward of their tongues:
            When Qui ſcel
                     ••
                  is parcit, o
                     •
                  nes perditum it bon
                     •
                  s, Saluſt.
               
               Iuſtice is ſo troubled with the palſey in her hand, that when ſhe is to poyze her ballance, ſhe makes a ſolide cauſe ſeeme light, and a light cauſe, he auie and downe-waight; and when ſhe heaues her ſword, and ſtrikes more out of rage then right; mad-man like, wounding thoſe that ſtand neereſt vnto her.
            When the grafs of Grace lie ſtarke deaded in the hearts of men, and Goodneſſe is excluded from humaine ſocietie.
            Theſe, with a ſupernumerarie multitude of

the ſame breed, ſhall bee the vndoubted ſignals of the Fall of the Leafe, or rather of the finall diſſolution and deſolation of this wide, wilde, and wicked Vniuerſe.
            But for the nature of this Autumnall Reuolution, becauſe it begins in Libra, I find, That Grocers, Chandlers, and ſuch like, ſhall vſe little weights in their publike Shoppes, and leſſer meaſures in their priuate Chambers: That Knaues ſhall weare ſmockes, and Women haue Warrens in their hearts, that as faſt as Loue creepes in at one hole, it runnes out at another.
            Yet Leo, being an igniferall Signe, foreſheweth; That diuerſe men ſhall weare their teeth longer then their Monſtrum horrendum, informe, ingens, quo crinis ademptus.Beards, and ſome ſhall be ſo Sunneburnt with ſitting in the Ale-houſe, that their noſes ſhall Match like, light a Candle. Others ſhall for want of money pawne their Cloakes, and ſtalke mannerly in their hoſe and Doublets. Some alſo this Quarter ſhall haue barnes, yet want corne to fill them with.
            
               Rie, this Quarter ſhall bee common and plentifull euery where, and Knaues ſhall haue licence to ſell it by the mouthfull: and hee that will not ſpend a penny with his friend, by the counſell of One of the learned Doctors of the Labour-in-
                        •
                     ains.
               
               Drinkalius, ſhall be thruſt quire out of all good Company for a Hoggrubber.
            
               
It may be doubted, that ſome vncouth maladies will be obuious & obnoxious this quarter: as Hollowneſſe of the heart, ſo as one ſhall hardly know a Knaue from an honeſt man: lingring * Conſumptions alſo of the liuer, that diuers men Plutus claudus eſt, cùm accedit, cùm recedit aliger. Lucian in Timone.
               of good wealth ſhall (by the perſwaſion of their kind hearts) ſpend all, and die bankrupts: Some ſhall bee troubled with ſuffocations in their throates, which cannot be helpt, vnleſſe Brandon the hang man, play the skilfull Chyrurgion. Amongſt the reſt, many that haue wiues with faire faces, and ſoule hearts, ſhall be troubled with an inuiſible ſwelling in their browes; a miſchieuous Malady as incurable, as vnauoydable. Some ſhall be troubled with the Stone, and ſeeke to cunning women to aſſwage the fury of that diſeaſe; an infirmity eaſily cured, were it not, that the Doctors of Bridewell did puniſh ſuch feminine Phiſitians by a Statute. But the moſt grieuous diſeaſe that is to be feared, is the * Cataphaluſie 
               An vncouth Malady neuer knowne before.(that is) when good fellowes (for want of money) ſhall oft times be contented to breake vp company.
            Thus farre haue you heard of imminent Plagues, Famines, and Diſeaſes, that hang in the tumerous clouds, euery minute ſtriuing to burſt out, and fall vpon our criminall Coxcombes; Misfortunes are not borne alone, but like married fooles they come in couples. Now muſt a ciuill War march at the heeles of theſe by-paſt miſeries, and in this variable Quarter will hee

firſt ſtrike vp his Drum at Strange calamities to ceize on Weſtminſter.
               Weſtminſter: who in the beginning thereof, ſhall lie ſicke of a long Vacation, and being enraged with the furious operation of this diſeaſe, ſhee buffets her owne cheekes, teares her haire, and would drinke her owne heart-blood in the anguiſh of her ſoule. Then ſits ſhee like a Proh dolor binc lachryme!Widdow in the midſt of her mourning; then doe her goodly Buildings looke like infected Peſt-houſes, from whence the Inhabitants are fled: then are her Chambers empty, and her common pathes vntroden. Thus ſhall the beginning of the Fall of the leafe trouble her, inſomuch that ſhe feeles the ſtate of her body very weake, and lyable to infirmities: for theſe Canker-wormes, called Vacations, corrode her carkaſſe, and then leaue it in a long and waſting conſumption, more grieuous to her memory, then the comming on of a tedious Winters night to a man tormented with ſickneſſe, or a marriage delayed, to thoſe that lye ſighing for the delights thereof.
            But now note with mee, how ſuddenly the Tem
                     •
                  ora temporibus mutantur triſtia laetis: Succedunt 
                     •
                  ummis, gaudia ſun▪ ma malis.ſtreame of her ſorrow is * turn'd another way: for iuſt in the necke of this, ſhall come in the Meditullium, or middle part of this interchangeable ſeaſon, and bring her Balme to cure her fore-receiued wounds; and that's the Law, (which lies in ateuery Vacation) who is brought a bed foure times a yeere, and deliuered of foure ſonnes, that is, the foure Tearmes; one of which comes to viſite her: At whoſe firſt ſight, her

heart leapes Lanolto's in her boſome; Now ſhall Character of her exceſceſſiue ioy.ye ſee her as * iocund, as a damſell faſt folded in the embracements of her Louer: now ſhall her cheekes looke red, with an high and Iuſty colour, for ſhe will waſh them in Wines: now ſhall her Tenants ſleepe ſecurely, for they will drinke ſoundly: now dares ſhe talke * any thing, for ſhe Quid non?ha's the Law on her ſide: now ſhall her Inhabitants bee contented to take crack't crownes, though at another time, they would goe neere to ſtab him, that ſhould but play with their noſes.
            
               Deſcription of a wellcuſtom'd Tauerne. Now ſhall Vintners be as buſie, as Bees in a Hiue; for as Bees flie from one flower to another to ſucke out Honey, ſo ſhall the Drawers leape from one Hogſhead to another to let out Wines. In euery roome are the Pottle-pots working, to bring in gaines to their Maſter, as the other labour to bring forth Waxe for their Hiues. The ſtings which ſhould be placed in their tayles, are brought in their tongues, to thoſe that at the end of Cup-emptying, are ſummon'd 
                  Qui bibit, ſolua
                        •
                     , is Tauerne law.to the * Barre for a reckoning; for none but men of Reckoning can there be entertained: now the Drones, are ſuch, as guzzle downe that, which would doe others good, yet hurt themſelues.
            Neither ſhall Tauernes alone fall into this profitable and healthfull ſweating * ſickneſſe: but Morbus vtilis, non eget medicamme bono.all other Trades, Occupations, Myſteries, and Profeſſions, ſhal row vp and downe this Springtide

ſtreame of buſines: and ſuch good draughts ſhall they haue, that all ſhall prooue Fiſh that come into their nets.
            Beſides, in the open ſtreets ſhall be ſuch walking, ſuch talking, ſuch running, ſuch riding, ſuch clapping too of windowes, ſuch rapping at Chamber-doores, ſuch ratling of pen and Inkehornes, ſuch ruſtling of Buckram-bags, ſuch balling for Prouant, ſuch calling vpon Shots, and ſuch ruffling of ſtuffe Gownes, that at this time, ſome ſhall verily thinke themſelues in a Towne of Warre, and it ſhall truly fall out ſo to be.
            For in the height and heat of this irregular combuſtion, ſhall a moſt heauie, blacke, and Tanto be
                     ••
                  o, innocens, ac noxius iuxta cadit. Tacit. lib. 1. Anual. cap. 48.
               bitter * conflict happen (if the Starres doe not gull mee) betweene Lawyers, and their Clyents; and Weſtminſter-hall ſhall bee the field where it ſhall be tryed out: what thundring, what thumping, what threatning, what muſtring, what marching, what Baricadoing, what countermuring, what wheelings, what windings, what ſummoning to parlees, what defiances will there be racketed on either ſide? diſmall ſhall this expedition be to ſome, deadly to others, and ioyfull to a third ſort. It is not yet doom'd by the Palma in medio poſita eſt, accipiat qui poteſt, Terent.
               
               Metaphyſicall Moderators, on whoſe ſide the * victory will flie, but by all Metempſichoſicall coniectures, it is thought the Lawyers will carie away the day, be it but with wrangling: For thoſe that goe armed with Buckram-bagges, in

ſtead of Muskets; with Pen and Inkehornes by their ſides, in ſtead of Touch-boxes, and ſhoote nothing but Paper-pellets, ſhall haue thoſe in terrible execution, * who match with blacke Weakeſt goe to the walles.Boxes at their girdles, and white Billes in their hands.
            And albeit, it goe hard on either ſide ouernight, or that the one part be put to the worſe, yet the next morning, ſhall there be ſiding into Factions; * Lawyer, againſt Lawyer; Client againſt Lis lit
                     •
                  m parit, Phocylid.
               Client, and all of them endeauour to reaſſume freſh courage and magnanimity. Then ſhall theſe men of Law march againe into the Hall, as it were to the field: The Councellers ſhall be the Leaders, Atturnyes, & Clerkes, petty Commanders, and Officers of both the Armies: the trained old weather-beaten Soldadoe's, ſhall be thoſe that haue followed the Law a long time, and by brabbles haue made themſelues, and their families Beggars: The freſh-water Souldiers, ſhall be thoſe, as were but the laſt Tearme embarqued in the Action.
            
               En quo diſcordia ciues, perduxit miſer
                     ••
                  ! Virg.
                In which * March of theirs, if you ſhould but fall in amongſt the Ranckes, you will preſently ſuppoſe your ſelues in the Turkiſh Leaguer: for as the Souldiers there, ſo theſe heere, talke of nothing but Stratagems and points of Warre. Some threaten to ouerthrow their Foe-men, vpon Aſſaults and Batteries: Some (as if an enemy were to be blowne vp in a Cittadell) ſweare to driue them out by way of Eiections: Others, as if

they came to the ſacking of Conſtantinople, vpon nothing but Attachments, both of body and goods.
            But becauſe I haue wit enough to keepe my ſelfe out of Gunſhot, and to remember an oldſaid Saw, which long agoe I learn't of my Grandame, That it is wholeſome ſleeping in a whole skin; I will heere leaue them together by the eares Tutiſſimum in portu nauigare.: Fight Dog, fight Beate; and for me the Deuill part them.
            
               A briefe Prediction of the 12. Months of the Yeare. 1623.
               
               BVt for I ſcorne to vndervalue ſo my Skill, as to ſerue vnder the Standard of vulgar Aſtronomy, I ſhould heere lay downe ſome Documents, when to eate hote meates, and when to drinke new Wines: but becauſe euery Widgin (that ha's money in his purſe, and eyes in his head to ſtumble to a Tauerne) can doe this without a Kalendar, I pretermit it, as friuolous and feeulent.
               Moreouer, I ſhould ſhow you how many followers euery Month maintaines, as ſome Thirty, ſome One and thirty, and one onely but Eight and twenty; becauſe hee is fallen to decay, and therefore keepes but a colde houſe: amongſt which ſeruing Creatures, I ſhould giue you the names of the Gentlemen, who are the Dominc all
                  
                  Letters, wearing Red liueries both Winter and Sommer: but becauſe I would not willingly haue a hand in grinding ſuch baſe Colours, giue me leaue to ayre your thoughts on a nimbler wing, where they ſhall flye in a high place; and from whence (as if you ſate in the moſt perſpicuous Twopenny Gallery of a Playhouſe) you ſhall with perſpicacity behold all the partes, which I (your new-come Aſtrologer) ſhall Act among the Starres; and thus I begin:
               The working dayes of euery Month, ſhall not be obſerued this Yeare, as in times of yore; by reaſon of certaine morball infirmities, that are vnauoydably to domineere ouer Tradeſmen, as the Wonderfull Maladies amongſt Tradeſmen.
                  Lazie-euill, the Lethargie, and the Whiripuffe; which is, a forgetfull careleſneſſe of their owne State: Dizzineſſe of the pate, (ariſing from the fumes of Tap-laſh) and the like. For men of occupations ſhall in ſpite of Order; or the rules of Almanacke-makers, tranſpoſe Workidayes into the roomes of Holidayes: yea, by my fea, and women ſhall hold Holy-dayes in ſuch baſe contempt, that though their Husbands doe then ſhut vp Shops, and lay not abroad their Wares; yet ſhall the Wiues fall cloſe to worke in their ſecret Chambers.
               Diuers Grocers this yeare perhaps may breake, for many Reaſons, beſt knowne to themſelues: but (if Agrippa ſoble me not) thoſe Apothecaries muſt haue maine good doings, whoſe Wiues are ſurpaſſing 
                     •
                  aire, and their Doctors ſuperlatiuely

famous for their practick & Chance-medley Science.
               
               This yeare ſhall Religion bee Mockers of Religion, are in the high way to Reprobation.ſcoft at, and a deepe ſcandall ſtruck on the Profeſſors thereof: ſo that Holineſſe ſhall bee faine to hide its head, for feare of being branded with that irreligious Nick-name of Puritan; and many zealous Saints ſhall not dare, outwardly to ſhew the fruits of that Profeſſion, which inwardly hath taken deepe roote in their hearts, leſt they ſhould be ſnapt vp with the thorny teeth of calumnious Reproach. But woe to the world (cry I) becauſe of offences: For my better Genius tels me, that had it not beene for theſe Moſeſes, theſe heauenly ſtop-gaps, who by their powerfull Ejaculations and prayers, haue from time to time, bung'd vp the veſſels of Gods wrath, it long ere this, had been, in no leſſe fearefull manner, then plentifull Meaſure, powred downe vpon this Kingdome, to its vtter demoliſhment and perdition.
               Diuers likewiſe this yeare, ſhall ſurfet in ſinne and ſenſuality, wholly anchoring their hopes on the Spaniſh Prouerbe, A Roma por todo, At Rome there are 
                  Gr
                        •
                     ale a Frier in the fiſt, then liue as you liſt.
                  Ablolutions enow for all manner of Tranſgreſsions: and ſo nuzzeling themſelues in all ſortes of Naughtineſſe, at laſt ſhall dye of the A Diſeaſe, of which many dye laughing.
                  Sardinian Diſeaſe. O may the Sunne of Grace ſo ſhine into them, that at laſt they may ſee (with melting ſoules) the Cimmerian blindneſſe of their caltginous Errors! And that's all the harme I wiſh them.
               
                  
This yeere, ſhall more Newes be coyn'd by the numerous * Multitude, in a minute of an 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     Phocyl.houre, then ſhall fall out to be true, in a Million of yeeres: For diuers, out of an ill-ſeaſon'd, diſcompos'd, and vn-occaſion'd Affection, and fanaticall Fancie, ſhall conclude infinite Infallibilities.
               
               Many Monſter-Muliers alſo of our Age, ſhall lay out large ſummes of Time, about white-liming their cheekes, and blemiſhing the brightneſſe of their Creation; beginning their worke in their beds betimes in the morning, and ending it at Noone a little before the Cloth is layd: So that I may iuſtly take vp this Spaniſh Prouerbe; and (if I dare come neere them, for feare of Infection) hurle it at their impious Impudence; That theſe painted * Puppets, the more Que la Muger, quento mas mirare la cara, tanto mas deſtruye la caſa.curious they are about their faces, the more careleſſe they are about their houſes; the reparation of the one, being the ruination of the other.
               The loſſe of Memorie, or the Lethall Euill, ſhall ceize vpon them that ſhall goe drunke to bed: but to thoſe who recluſe themſelues in Counters or other places of deere reckoning, becauſe they abhorre the vanities of the world; and to thoſe that ſhall be ſwinged with French-Birch, or be ſtrucke with a Gentleman-like diſeaſe; the curtalleſt day in Winter ſhall ſeeme more tedious, Annulus arctus, non geſtandus, Pythag.
                  yea, and indeed ſhall produce more * weariſome houres, then S. Bar
                        •
                     abies day, which Nature

ha's decreed to be the longeſt in the yeere.
               The Sundayes (as if it were Biſſextile, or Leapeyeare) ſhall be by a number leaped ouer, ſo that a filme of Senſuality being drawne ouer their eyes, they ſhall not for foure, fiue, or ſixe moneths together, be able (by the aduice and helpe of thoſe that make the beſt waters, to recouer eye-ſight) to ſee a Church, but ſhall be ſtruck with ſuch Megrimes, and Vagaries of the braine, that in ſtead of going to Church, they will (if my cunning faulter not) ſtumble into a Tanerne.
               
               The Dogge-dayes will all this yeere rage twice a weeke, and that very furiouſly; but their foreſt out-rage will be about the Beare-garden. The riſing alſo and declination of the Sunne, ſhall be ſo miraculous; that albeit, it ſhine neuer ſo brightly in our Horizon, yet there ſhall be certaine perſons (and thoſe cloſe fellowes too) that ſhall not haue power at high-Noone to behold it. The Moone alſo ſhall be ſo various in her influence, that as well men as women ſhall be as mad in all the reſt of the moneths, as in that of Midſommer.
               
               The ſetting vp of a An intollerable liberty in a Chriſtian Commonwealth.
                  Whorehouſe this yeere, ſhall be as common, as the ſetting vp of a Trade, yea, and ſhall paſſe vnder that name. For a ſtock of two beds and foure Wenches, ſhall be ſufficient to put a Madame Pimpernelle into preſent practiſe, and bring them into reaſonable doings. In theſe Shops of the World, the fleſh, and the diuell, many ſoules ſhall be ſet to ſale, and bodies

expoſed to Shipwrack: for men and women there ſhall as Conſuetude vim naturae obtinet propter vetuſtatem, Cicero.
                  familiarly goe into a Chamber to endanger one another on a Flock-bed, as into a Tauerne to make one another merry with Wine.
               But giue me leaue (my little ſweet ſinfull Citizens) to ſeaſon your diſ-relliſht palates with this ſaucie counſell: That when you are mis-led with luſt (that Will-with wiſpe,) to thoſe caues of Cockatriſes, gather your ſelues within this thought, That notwithſtanding you ſeeme to ſuck coole and ſupple blandiſhments from their * moiſt-warme tongues, yet are they but like 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Binis fidibus con
                        •
                     t, Ariſtid. Non omnes qui habent Cytharam, ſunt Cytharaedi, Nar.
                  
                  Sampſons Foxes, and carie fire in their tayles: I meane, when you are hurried with the heat of Concupiſcence to any of thoſe Limbo-patrums, and are at poynt of entrance, then ſtart backe, as from a bed of Snakes, or as you would doe from a houſe, where a Red-croſſe affronts the vpper poſt of the doore, and be ſure to recall this ancient Adage into your memory; Quicquid agis, prudenter agas, & reſpice finem: the which for the leſſe-learneds benefit I conſter thus: On what exploit ſoeuer you venter, be firſt well aduis'd, and remember the end. For this is probatum, whoſoeuer rides long on the belly of Lechery, ſhall be ſure at laſt to be hurl'd at an Hoſpitall gate.
               
               
                  A Paradoxe. On St. Lukes day is there likely to happen ſuch a confuſion of Caterpillars at Cuckoldshaven; as that this yeere there ſhall not die one Scricant; and yet in all the 24. Wards of London,
                  
ſhall there be ſcarce one honeſt man found aliue of that claw-back Faculty.
               
                  Aliud agit, aliud ſimulas, Cic.
                   
                  Drunkenneſſe this yeere, ſhall turne * Machiauell, and play the Polititian; for though ſhee cannot haue lycence to keepe open-houſe on the Sabbath-day, and get her full ſwinge, to out-ſtare the Lam, to reele & ramble out of euery tipling-Schoole; by reaſon of ſome wholeſome Inhibitions conceiued againſt her Irregularity; yet will ſhe in the midſt of diuine Seruice, ſlily filtch her ſelfe into the Tauerne vnder a Church-wardens Gowne; where ſhe ſuddenly will ſacrifice more pence in pintes of Sack to her ſpoungie Lungs, then ſhall be after the Sermon, diſtributed to the poore of the Pariſh; and at her comming ſoorth, ſhall wipe her iudicious chinne with ſuch a compos'd grauity, as if ſhee had beene ſearching thoſe neſts, for ſome birds of the ſame feather.
               The gouernance of Scorpio, this yeere, ſhall be ſo flammigerous; that Court-bloods ſhall ſo boyle in their burning boſomes; as that the moſt monſtrous or manlike Lady of them all, ſhall be glad (not withſtanding her Stilletto) to runne behind the Arras (perhaps you will thinke, of purpoſe to be found there) to hide and preſerue her Chaſtity from their vnreſiſtable fury; but in Luſt, lawl
                        •
                     ſſe,this jumbling * combuſtion, poore Chamberpot Wenches ſhall be ſure (how ere the game goes) to goe to the walles; where, to cry out, will be bootleſſe, for they ſhall bee put in no

ſtronger hopes, then to bee vſed without pitty, vntill the ſtorme be layde and ouerblowne. Abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vata 
                        •
                      auda virtus, manca
                        •
                     
                     ▪ Orbis gloria, Syn. Epiſt, 49.
                  
               
               
                  Poets * who are vertues Crutches, and keepe life in the dying world, this yeare, ſhall bee in a poore caſe: for if they bee but taken napping with Haec rarò aus nunquam.good Cloathes on their backes, and ſtore of money in their pockets; they ſhall preſently be apprehended by the Citties Anniuerſaries, and clapt into the Chronicles: but to preuent this danger, I hope, that Opus and Vſus, their two daily Companions, will continually lye knocking at their Chamber doores, to keepe them waking.
               
                  Proh dolor! hinc lachryma!
               
               Very few Foot-men this yeare ſhall purchaſe Land: for that in the courſe of their liues, they commonly are vnſtayed fellowes, and moſt an end, carry running heads.
               This is likely to be an heauy yeare to poore * Q
                        •
                     iſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      portabit Onus.Porters too: For though ſundry Commutatiue differences fall betweene Marchant and Marchant, Sale-men and Countrey-Chapmen, with other like accidentall occurrences; yet the Porters muſt beare the burthen of it; and by the helpe of * Pattence ſhall carry it away willingly: Patientia aſininum onus, ſaith a Spaniard.And beſides, for that they are generally reputed, men of the beſt vnder-ſtanding, they ſhall this yeare be truſted with the weightieſt matters of the Common-wealth.
               Trumpetters, of all other men, this yeare, had moſt need to carry Aqua-vitae Bottles at their girdles; and the reaſon is; for that they are moſt

ſubiect to ſounding. And as for common Fidlers; they ſhall ſcrape out a poore liuing out of dryed Cats-guts; and many of them ſhall this yeare be troubled with abhominable noyſes and ſingings in their heads, inſomuch as the moſt part of them ſhall dye Beggers; or at the beſt, as bare as their Cloakes, or a baſe Vyoll vncaſed; and thoſe that ſuruiue, ſhall often feed on melody for want of better meate.
               And wheras the Ecclipſes of this yeare ſhall be farre remote from the ſigne Piſces, it ſhewes, that there ſhall bee much ſtinking Fiſh at Belinſgate; and that Queene-borrow Oyſter-boates ſhall carry more Knaues then Honeſt men: but let Fiſhwiues beware, left moſt of them this yeare, proue not inſufferable Scolds: yet becauſe Piſces is a Signe that gouernes the feete, they ſhall weare out more Shooes in Lent, then in any 2. moneths beſides throughout the whole yeare, and get their liuing (liking the wandring * Iew)
                  Read Trundle, in his 1. Tome of the Wandring Jew.
                   by walking and Crying; becauſe they will rayle againſt Pyecorner, and call her, The foule-fac'd fulſome Slut of the Citty.
               I ſhould heere vnlock the Casket of my knowledge, (hauing well nie forgot) and lay open ſome rarities concerning Qui b
                        •
                     na, bon
                        •
                     ; mala malo redduns.
                  Players: but becauſe the Cōmon-wealth affoords them not their due deſert; and for they are men of ſome parts, & liue not like lazy Drones, but are ſtill in Action; I am content ſilently to referre them to three Sublunary Felicities; which are theſe: A Faire Day, a

                  Good Play, and a Gallant Audience, and ſo let them ſhift for their liues.
               But now haue I an horrible Monthes minde, to cut through the Mayne of the 12. Monthes, in a particuler ſucceſſiue Order: but the Glaſſe which Time ha's lent me, being not fill'd with many howers, I will hoyſt Sayle, and onely diſcouer ſixe of them, and then caſt Anchor.
               Behold them therefore at hand, how they come frisking in ſingle file one after another, like ſo many Morice-Dancers, (my ſelfe being the Hobby-horſe) and euery Month wearing in his Cap, in ſtead of a Feather, Foure vnhandſome holeſome Rimes; conformable to the faſhion of our Neo
                        •
                     ericke Prognoſticators. And thus heare the Foreman of the Morice deliuer his ſpeach.
            
            
               IANVARY.
               
                  This Mon'th drink you no Wine commixt with Dregs,
                  Eate Capons, and fat Hens with dumpling Legs:
                  Whether it bluſter, Sleete, hayle, freeze, or Snow,
                  Be ſure, that from the Fire you doe not goe.
               
               
                  Diſpoſition of January.
                   
                  THE Firſt day of Ianuary being raw, colde and comfortleſſe to ſuch as haue loſt their mony at One being asked, what his Opinion was of Gaming, thus replyed: Hee that looſeth, looſeth Heauen, and hee that winnes, winnes Hell.
                  Dice at one of the Temples ouer-night, ſtrange apparitions are like to be ſeene: Marchpanes marching

betwixt Leaden-Hall and the little Conduit in Cheape, in ſuch aboundance, that an hundred good fellowes may ſooner ſtarue, then catch a corner, or a Comfit to ſweeten their mouthes.
               It is alſo to be feared, that through frailty, if a ſlip be made on the Meſſengers default that carries them, for non-deliuery at the place appointed; that vnleſſe the ſaid meſſenger, be not the more inward with his Miſtris, his Maſter will giue him ribroſt for his Newyeares-gift the next morning.
               This day ſhall be giuen many more gifts then ſhall be asked for: and Apples, Egges, and Orenges, ſhall be lifted to a lofty rate; when a Pomewater beſtucke with a few rotten Cloues, ſhall be more worth then the honeſty of an Hypocrite: and halfe a dozen of Egges of more eſtimation, then the Vowes of a Strumpet. Poets this day ſhall get mightily by their Pamphlets: for an hundred of Eleborate Lines ſhall be leſſe eſteemed in London, then an hundred of Walfleet Oyſters at Cambridge.
               
               Be not proude my nimble pated Mercuries: you that ſend forth your Pamphlets flutt'ring about the City to fetch in Crownes: for ere this yeares Semicircles meet, (if I ouerſhoot not my skill in Aſtrologie) 
                  Quo Fata trabunt, retra
                        •
                     untque ſequamur, Virg.
                  
                  Latine ſhal be ſet at a lower rate, then a Lobſter; and Fat
                        •••
                      cuiq, quid fleat, quid 
                        •••
                     dea. Sen. Prou.
                  
                  Greeke ſtand begging in Paules with a Paper on its breſt, as a puniſhment, that it ſhould be ſo preſumptuous, as to begge with an Heathen Tongue, in this our Iewiſh Nation;

and all this, long of a malignant Aſpect of ſome purſie Planet, that had rather heare an Oxe of his owne lowe in his Paſture, then a Scholler declaime of Hoſpitality in his Larder.
               The 2. 3. 4. and 5. of this Month, to begin the New yeare thriftily; He that ha's any buſineſſe of import abroad; the firſt thing he do's, muſt be ſure, firſt to riſe in the morning, before he goe any whether. For though Albumazar and Ptolomee talke of theſe Circumſtances, yet my Bookes * warrant me; That about Soper-Lanes end, (Heauen keepe Printers from thence) theſe dayes early Tant
                        •
                      quiſq
                        •
                      i
                        •
                     
                     tus amplius ſtultior, quanto o
                        •
                     
                     natur exteri
                        ••
                     , ſapiens videri. Greg.
                  in the morning, if you ſet ſixe double ribbes of roſt-Beefe, with Bread and Drinke ſutable; ere a Sergeant can goe to Paules to ſay his prayers with a ſound Conſcience, will be no more reliques ſeene of the Roſt-meate (I trow well) then is at this day of great Illium.
               
               The ſixt of this Month; if your buſineſſe aske not much haſt, it will be better going by Land then by water to Brainford: and being like to be colde and a cloſe Skye, better putting into an * Teſtudo 
                        〈◊〉
                      tegumen tut
                        •
                      eſt. Luc.
                  Alehouſe at Putney, then to wing againſt winde and tide without a tilt-Cloath to Richmond banke.
               About ſixe a clocke in the morning (the tide ſeruing well at Queen-hiue) he that ſups not ouernight, and lands at the Court with Purſe and ſtomacke empty, vnleſſe hee finde ſome friend to comfort him, ſixe to foure, he could finde in his heart to venter the ſtealing of the Guards Chine

of Beefe: which thing to doe, would be an Herculean taske, conſidering the great Fire-forke ſo neare, and ſo many ſharpe ſhauers at hand, Champions for the Beefe and the Bombard.
               This day about the houres of 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and 10. yea in ſome places till midnight well nigh, will be ſuch a Maſſacre of Spice-bread, that ere the next day at noone, a Two-penny browne Loafe will ſet twenty poore Folkes teeth on edge: which hungry humour will hold ſo violent, that a number of good fellowes will not refuſe to giue a ſtatute Marchant of all the Lands and goods they enioy, for halfe a Crowned worth of Two-penny paſties.
               And if on this night there bee neuer ſo much Masking in the Strand, Cheapſide, Holburne, or Fleetſtreet, yet it is to bee thought, (propter Sympathiam) there will be as hote Reuels without Libido nullo loco excluditur.Torch-light, in * White-friers, Turnbull, Fieldlane, &c. at Noone dayes, as you ſhall finde at Antwerpe in Lepwel-Street, or London in Peticote-Lane.
               For the reſidue of the dayes diſpoſitions of this Month, I finde they will be conformable to the former, and farre different from that, which our annuall Prognoſticators ſhall foretell of them: Therefore leſt my Pen ſhould freeze to my fingers ends, I will abandon the Company of this Clumzy-fiſted Gray-bearded Ianuary, and leaue him to blow his Nayles.
            
            
               
               FEBRVARY.
               
                  If thou haſt ſtore of Caſh, drinke Muskadine,
                  And chuſe a young Wench to thy Valentine:
                  For ſhee that's queaſie, ouer-worne and Olde,
                  Can make no muſicke in a Month ſo Colde.
               
               
                  FEBRVARY fill-dike: An olde ſaying and a true; for it is like this yeare to fill Dike, I can tell you, but not fill Dickes belly: For according to the courſe of Aſtrologie, the Charity of men will refrigerate extreamely with the weather; both being as colde as the Harrowes Bottle-Beere was the laſt yeare on Chriſtmas euen, which warm'd me at the heart, like the croking Call of a carrion Conſtable at midnight, abetted by his barbarous Bill-men to encounter me. Twenty ſeauen of theſe 28. dayes, Men, Women, & Children, are like to fill the Ditches in ſome Countries, & make poore Cabbins in high wayes, for want of warmer Stowage, long of a ſwarme of cruell Caterpillars, that * Quis metus aut pudor eſt v
                        •
                     
                     quam proper axtis 
                        ••
                     ari!Cormorant-like ſhall ſwallow the patrimonies of the Widowes and Fatherleſſe, who disburſe no more beneuolence at their doores, then comes from the poore, out of the backe Gate of the Sauoy.
               
               But that I am a Prognoſticator and no Preacher, (my ſmall honeſt friends) I could elſe render you ſome ſauory Sentences out of holy Writ, againſt this hardnes of heart, contempt, and couetouſnes,

that might perhaps moue you neuer a whit to amend: but becauſe you care as little for Sermons as Almanackes, and all one, I will leaue you to your Idolatry, who haue ſeen more Angels on Earth, then euer you ſhall ſee in Heauen; (vnleſſe you repent) hang me elſe (Vſurers) and let me lacke no Rope.
               To the Ninth day of this Month, ſuch will be the ſharpneſſe of the weather for the moſt part; that it will be as good walking in a fur'd Gowne, as in a Doublet cut vpon ſtarke naked: and as good Dining well in a matted Chamber, as Dialoguing with Duke Humphrey in Paules.
               
               This day will be ſuch ſtormy weather in Weſtminſter-Hall, that ſome through the fulneſſe of griefe, and emptineſſe of Purſe, will goe nie to burne his Capcaſe, & be glad to take 13. groates de claro for his gray-Maro.
               
               The 10. 11. and 12. dayes, ſuch a ſlaughter ſhall be cōmitted in Eaſt-Cheape, St. Nicholas Shambles, Southwarke, & Smithfield-Barres, that for 6. weekes and vpward, ſome one or two Carnifices in thoſe corners, are like to doe Penance, & ſtand all day vnder a white Sheet, ſelling that for two Shillings, that they might well affoord for 16. pence; if they did not pay ſome 40. Markes for a Licenſe: which indeed forceth the Fiſhmongers take vp this colde complaint, and ſay truely: Licentiâ ſumus omnes deteriores; and wiſh wiſely beſides, that ſuch Patents did not proue Patent oppreſſions?
               
                  
                  Deſcription of Shroue-Tueſday. But now ſtand off (my friends) giue roome I ſay: for here muſt enter that wadling, ſtradling, burſten-gutted Carnifex of all Chriſtendome; vulgarly enſtiled Shroue-Tueſday, but more pertinently, ſole-monarch of the Mouth, high Steward to the Stomack, chiefe Ganimede to the Guts, prime Peere of the Pullets, firſt fauorite to the Frying-pans, greateſt Baſhaw to the Batterbowles, Protectour of the Pan-cakes, firſt Founder of the Fritters, Baron of Bacon-flitch, Earle of Egge-baskets, and in the leaſt and laſt place, lower Warden of the Stinke-ports. This corpulent Commander of thoſe chollericke things, called Cookes, will ſhew himſelfe to be but of ignoble education; for by his manners, you may finde him better fed then taught where euer hee comes: For he feedes fulſomly on nothing but fleſh, of purpoſe to empty Plenties Pallace, to fill the dirty draught; and deuoures with delight, onely to impoueriſh Heauens Bounty, and quite eraze the race of Roſt-meate.
               By the reuolution of the Starres, this is alſo infallible, the ſigne being in Piſces; That Fiſhmongers ſhall ſell more fiſh in ſixe weekes this yeere, then in ſixteene after Eaſter: by which I diuine, That he that makes his dinner with red Herrings on a Sunday, would be Eſurienti (Lu-po) ne occurras, Thcocrit.
                  glad with all his heart of a loyne of Veale, to cloſe his ſtomack; which becauſe he cannot ſo conueniently cate at noone dayes in new Fiſh-ſtreet, I wiſh him to the Barres in Smithfield, or a little beyond,

where for money he may haue fleſh at all times of the day.
               From the 13. to the 20. of this preſent Moneth, what weather ſoeuer comes, ye ſhall at all times of the day finde ſuch good Cuſtomers in Paules, that for three ſingle yards of Sattin, will ſeale with you to a *Cùm maximè fallit, bonus vir videri vult. Recognizance of an hundred pound howſoeuer: but it is to be feared, Mercury being predominant, that a day or two before the day of payment, one March blaſt will blow them to Virginia; who when once being gone, you ſhall finde a meaſure of Hercules foot, as ſufficient, as their obligation euer after.
               For the reſidue of the dayes of this Moneth, if the ſnow fall but a foote thicke, are like to be ſeene ſuch formidable Monſters, Beares, Lyons, Elephants, and Vnicornes, in Cheapſide, Cornehill, Fleetſtreet, and Paules-Church-yard, that ſome ſhall not dare to put their heads out of doore, or walke the ſtreets for feare of ſnapping: others, ſhall gather vp on credit, as much as they can, and then take Ludgate for Sanctuary: nay, and I feare me too, that the proudeſt Aſtrologer of vs all, ſhall not dare to *Semper plus a
                     
                        ••
                     nus metuit, ignorans 
                        〈◊〉
                     . venter by the Poultry gate; leſt he ſhould be ceaz'd on, and hurried too into a Gulfe, where he ſhall ſee nothing but Miſerie charactred on the naked walls, lowzie lodging, and men walking vp and downe like affrighted Spirits in Purgatory, crying out on Conſcience, and Couſnage, their continuall Companions.
               Dij talem terris auertite peſtem.
            
            
               
               MARCH.
               
                  Walke warme within thy Chamber or thine Hall;
                  March not too faſt, leſt thou doe catch a fall:
                  And better is the duſt (when windes doe riſe,)
                  To lie beneath thy feete, then in thine eyes.
               
               
                  MARCH, my books ſay, is this yeere like to be wet and windie. The 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. day, ſuch weather, that if it rayne a pace, it will be better and dryer going in Thamesſtreete in a payre of liquor'd Neates-leather Bootes, then in a payre of Spaniſh leather Pumpes: and farre worſe marching ouer Hownſlow heath without a Cloake, then with one.
               The 6. 7. 8. and 9. dayes; if it powre downeright in the after noone, it will be as good tarying at an honeſt Alchouſe, and take impoſt, as going to a bowling Alley, and looſe euery bet.
               The 10. 11. and 12. if the Clouds ſwell, and tend to skuds, though it thunder not aloft, yet ſixe to foure, once ere night, it will ſo thunder in Turne-againe-Lane, that the * Fiſh-wiues will Caninam facundiam exercent, Salu
                        ••
                     
                  fight a combat with Belins-gate Playce: whereof this yeere ſhall be ſuch ſtinking ſtore, that a man had better hang them at his backe, then put them in his belly.
               Till the 26. of this Moneth, the weather will

be ſo raw and raynie, that neuer a Merchant, Metcer, Grocer, Draper, Fiſhmonger, Goldſmith, Haberdaſher, Skinner, Salter, Iron-monger, or Vintner, but had as lieue deliuer for ready money, as for dayes, to the beſt Chapman, Courtier, or Cuſtomer he hath: and moreouer, will ariſe ſuch gales of peſtiferous guſts, that not a Phyſitian, or Chirurgeon in the Towne, but had rather haue a rich man to his Patient, then one who hath neither money to giue in earneſt nor in ieaſt.
               The 26. 27. and ſo to the end of this Moneth, you can gueſſe as well as I, what weather will happen: marie this I finde in many moe Authors, then either you or I haue euer ſeene or heard of, That he that hath not his Pecuniae ſunt neceſſariae, ſine quibus n
                        •••
                     l rectè geripoteſt, Demoſt. 3. Olynth.
                  Rent ready ſome one of theſe dayes, being the laſt of March; may perchance hop without his houſe in Aprill, vnleſſe happily his Featherbed reprieue him, and his Land-lord freely and friendly giue him leaue to lie in the ſtraw, till the day of Redime come on.
               A few flawes are like to fall the latter end of this Moneth; which foule weather, if it hold, will keepe ſome ſo faſt in the Counter, as that without an Habeas corpus, or a better comprimiſe, they are not likely to walke abroad in haſt. As for thunder and lightning, you ſhall be ſure to haue more ſtore this Moneth, at the Fortune in Golding-lane, then in Graues-end Barge, or in Weſtminſter-hall, in a long Vacation.
               
            
            
               
               APRILL.
               
                  Aprils ſoftſhowers, as ancient Authors ſay,
                  Bring in and beautifie the flowres of May:
                  Whether thy Doublet be or thicke or thinne,
                  Tis better to be warme, then wet to'th skinne.
               
               
                  APRILL ſhowers bring May flowers. This is as true as February fill-dike: and indeede if ſhowers fall faſt in Aprill, it is like enough that ſome bodies money and gold will bee cleane waſht out of their purſes ere May: For the 1. 2. and 3. day of this Moneth, a ſhoulder of Mutton will then be in as good requeſt, as at any time of the yeere before or after.
               The 4. or 5. and ſixt, ſhall be many more ſuites of apparell worne, then will be payed for: and more money Nullum bonum eſt, quo quis male non vtatur.beſtowed on fat Lambes in Eaſtcheape, then will be giuen to all the poore betweene the Tower and Weſtminſter.
               
               The 7. 8. 9. and 10. young men ſhall waxe ſo couetous, that they ſhall ſeeke to ceize on all the prety Wenches they can come by; and old men ſo luſty and wanton, that a wealthy Widdow ſhall be better welcome vnto them, then a pure poore virgine, that ha's ne're a penny to her marriage. Batchelours wiues, and maydens children in theſe dayes are like to be well taught,

and more ſeeming-friendſhip to be had in an houſe of Tranſgreſsion for a French-crowne, though it be a bald one, then at Belins-gate for a boxe o'th eare.
               The 11. 12. and 13. ſhall be much deluing with Spade and Pick-Axe, amongſt Gardeners: But this I muſt tell you, that not one pot of gold ſo found or taken vp, ſhall euer be drawne in queſtion at the Exchequer, or come into the Cryers mouth at Fortuna faue
                        ••
                     atuis.
                  Alders-gate. And if peraduenture one or other with his Mattocke hit vpon any ſuch miſchance; if hee repaire the ruines of ſome Church with it, preſently hee forfeits his eyeſight, and ten to one, will lacke money, ere hee dies, to buy his dinner.
               From the 13. to the 21. the weather ſhall be ſo variable, that he who lies in Lud-gate, and becomes a cloſe fellow, ſhall not weare out ſo many ſhooes in a day, as a foot-poſt will doe in a whole twelue-moneth; and thoſe that lye encountred, ſhall be ſure to haue a dry houſe ouer their heads, when their Creditours (perhaps) goe dabbling vp and downe in the durt: but for that Venus will be in coniunction with Mars, it preſageth; that many a ſturdy knaue-Oſtler will be buſie with the Sinon caſtè, 
                        ••
                     men cautè.Kitchin-maid in the manger, while their Miſtreſſes ſiluer Whiſtle keepes time to their Trench-more.
               About this time, new Playes will be in more requeſt, then old▪ and if company come currant to the Bull and Curtaine, there will be more money

gathered in one after-noone, then will be giuen to Kings-land Spittle in a whole moneth. Alſo, if at this time, about the houres of foure and fiue, it waxe cloudy, and then raine downeright, they ſhall ſit dryer in the Galleries, then thoſe who are the vnderſtanding men in the yard.
               In the reſt of this Moneth will be ſuch moiſture ſtirring, that if ſome doe not looke warily this Spring to the Engliſh Rheume, it may chance turne the next fall to the French—P.
               
               In the laſt quarter, No more pity to ſee a widow weep, then to ſee a Gooſe go
                        •
                      bare-foot.Widowes that follow their Husbands howling to the Church, will drill ſuch ſhowers of ſorrow from their eyes, as that ere the buriall banquet be fully ended, they will be more then halfe ſped of freſh bed-fellowes.
               For the ſtormes, ſhowers, guſts, flawes, and Changes incident in this Moone, I might ſet downe a more: conciſe Diſcourſe, if I could tell how: but let this ſatisfie, that in this Moneth, many Ca
                        •
                     acliſmes will fall in the bottomes, flats, and low grounds, that will bring foorth ſuch fruit in February, as will goe alone with a little helpe within forty weekes after.
            
            
               
               MAY.
               
                  To Iſlington and Hogſdon, runnes the ſtreame
                  Of giddie people, to eate Cakes and Creame.
                  Which is farre wholeſomer, with Sugar in,
                  Then in the durt, to wade vp to the chin.
               
               
                  MAY is the merry moneth, and may not be put beſide his iocund humour: yet on the firſt day betimes in the morning, ſhall young Fellowes and Mayds be ſo inucloped with a miſt of wandring out of their wayes, that they ſhall fall into ditches one vpon another, and there ſhall the young men lie for a little while, not being able to ſtand, while the Maids after their downe-falls, being aſtonied, ſhall riſe ſooner then they would doe. Yet in the after-noone, if the skie cleare vp, ſhall be a ſtinking ſtirre at Picke-hatch, with the ſolemne reuels of Morice-dancing, and the Hobbiehorſe ſo neately preſented, as if one of the Maſters of the Pariſh had playd it himſelfe. Againſt this high day likewiſe ſhall be ſuch preparations for merry meetings, that diuers durty-Sluts ſhall beſtow more in Cit
                        •
                      ignomi
                     
                        •
                     ia fit ſuperbi gloria, Sy r. Omnium ſuper
                     
                        •
                     ia, procedit ex ſui ignoratione.Stuffe, Lace, and making vp of a Gowne, and a Peticote, then their two yeeres wages comes too, beſides the benefit of Candles ends, and Kitchin-ſtuffe.
               
                  
This day ſhall be erected long wooden Idols called May-poles; whereat many greaſie Churles ſhall murmure, that will not beſtow ſo much as a Faggot-ſticke towards the warming of the Poore: an humour, that while it ſeemes to ſmell of Conſcience, ſauours indeed of nothing but Couetouſneſſe.
               
               From the 1. to the 23. day, he that liues to ſee them, ſhall ſee more broken heads at Cudgels vnder the Zenith of London, then Angels or French Crownes in the poore mens Box at Ludgate. And within the compaſſe of theſe dayes, ſhall there happen ſuch a tenebrous obfuſcation of the Sunne, that in all Great Britaine ſhall you hardly diſcerne a common Horſe-courſer from an arrant Knaue. As for Taylors and Millers, ſuch ſhall be their Conſcience, that worke Mercury neuer ſo mightily, they ſhall ſteale nothing, but that which is brought vnto them.
               The reſidue of this pleaſant Month, will bee Congruous to the ſweet Seaſon, onely it will be ſomewhat bleake in the mornings, which will ſo Difficulter r
                        ••
                     iduntur vitia, quae nobiſcum creuerunt. Seneca.
                  coole the Hoſpitality of many a Country-Gentleman, as being in hope to buy Fowles better cheape in St. Nicholas-Shambles, then kill them with his owne Hawkes, he will leaue his Bayliffe, and his Dairy-Maydes to multiply together at home, and either ſojourne with ſome Cittizen, for the loue of his Wife; or keepe a Garden-Houſe, and a freſh Wench, ſome-where about the Suburbes.
            
            
               
               IVNE.
               
                  Take heede of toſsing Balles vntill you ſweate,
                  And to be ſwelted with vnkindly heate:
                  Yet though the time ſerue, you your Sheepe may ſheare,
                  Tis better haue good Cloaths, then none to weare.
               
               
                  THE 1. 2. and 3. of this Month, the weather is like to be
                     •
                   ſo inconſtant in diſpoſition; as that he who ha's made an ill bargaine at Algate, ſhall Criminis Medidicina princeps ipſa poenitentia, Arrian.
                  repent him twice, ere he come to Charing-Croſſe. And Painters ſhall proue the craftieſt Corporation in the Citty: for whatſoeuer buſineſſe they take in hand, they ſhall finde ſome Colour for it.
               The 4. 5. 6. and 7. if the weather proue faire, many mens eyes ſhall be ſo dazeled with the illuſtrious coruſcation of the Sun-beames; That A tricke of legerdumain, called Deceptio viſus.
                  they ſhall meete a * Taylor in the ſtreet, and take him to be ſome Knight: and preſently after meet a Knight, and thinke him to bee a Gentleman of ſome Noble deſcent.
               About this Month's 8. 9. and 10. ſhall Diſeaſes raigne powerfully in this Realme, and eſpecially the ſwelling-Euill; inſomuch as diuers fat gorrell-gutted Churles, ſhall haue golden Tumors and Tympanies in their purſes.
               But if they be long let alone (an hundred to

one) ſome one or other of them will neuer ſee wel, till he be Sheriffe of his Shire, or haue bought his neighbors Houſe ouer his head for a fauour. Beggers at this time ſhall be no chooſers, vnleſſe it be Robin-Hoods choyſe; Either this or nothing. Brewers alſo ſhall by exchange, take vp money out of the Thames without Bill or Aſſurance, and turne Water into double Beere, without miracle.
               
                  Hackney-men this Month, ſhall be prodigiouſly Planet-ſtrucke: For hee that takes ſixe Shillings for three dayes hyre of a Curtoll; may happen neuer to ſet eye of him, till his tayle ha's attained a ſeauen yeares growth: ſuch kinde * Fallere fallentem non eſt fraus.Cuſtomers ſhall they meete with, this faire weather, that becauſe Hay and Horſe-meate are deare, they will giue them the running of a Nag or Gelding all their life-time for nothing.
               Till the 20. th of this Month of Iune; the Weather is like to ſhew ſo ſerene a browe; That Watermen ſhall rowe in their Shirts vp and downe the Riuer: And he that plyes a man at Paules-wharſe, with his Cap in's hand for a Penny; ſhall be as ready to out-braue him in ſcuruy tearmes, the next day on the Banke-ſide, or the Beare-garden, as if he were a Gentleman of Fiue hundred pounds Land per Annum.
               
               The 21. 22. and 23. of this Month, will be good ſhearing Sheepe, and better owning them. Theſe dayes, it is to be doubted, that Gentlemen and wealthy Countrey-chuffes, will ſo fleece

their poore neighbours, that twenty Tenements ſhall flye at once into one Manner-houſe, and a goodly large Common transformed to a Parke, for cumbring the Pariſh.
               Theſe dayes the Ecclipſes chancing in Cancer, ſole houſe of the Moone: Colliers, Smithes, Blacking-boyes, Armorers, and Chimney-ſweepers, are like to weare the fouleſt Faces in the Citty: and Ladyes, Landreſſes, and curious Sempſters, the faireſt hands. &c About this time of the yeare, will be farre better riſing to Prayers then at St. Andrewes-tide: and St. Antlins Church better filled at ſixe in the morning, then in February or March at hye Noone.
               In this Seaſon the weather being as faire as it will be, an ambling Nag ſhall be as eaſie for an Olde man to ride on, as an hard Trotter: and he that is perplexed with an Ague, ſhall bee more deſirous to keepe his Bed, or the Chimney corner, then to backe a great Horſe in a Scottiſhſaddle. Schollers likewiſe ſhall be kindely entreated, the rather, for it is the latter end of the Quarter; and Tutors as ready to receiue Quarteridge, as reade Logicke Lectures to their Pupils.
               The 24. 25. and ſo onward to the end of this Month, though the weather ſhall be extreamely hote, yet ſhall Satin bee as faire wearing as Sackcloath; and a perfum'd Leather Ierkin, as good as a payre of Sheepe-skin breeches: Veluet, though it weare beſt in the Winter, ſhall bee

farre dearer then Buckram; and Silke-ſtockings not ſo good cheape, as linnen Boot-hoſe.
               About theſe dayes, if the Lyons in the Tower roare, as they were wont; a ſeaming-lac'd Shirt, and an open-ſleeu'd Doublet, ſhall be bought cheaper for ready money, then vpon lackadandies bond; though it bee ſealed with his wooden ſtump at the Wraſtling place.
               
               In this Moneth, let Graues-end Barge looke to her fraight; for lie the windes neuer ſo low; if there be neither Lowſe, nor Flea, Knaue, nor Drab; Thiefe, nor Whore in it, it will ſinke betweene Wapping and Woolwich, a Noble to a Groat.
               For poſting betweene Douer and Graues-end; howſoeuer the Tide fall by day or night; the ſofter you ride, (the ſooner I will not ſay,) the ſafer you come to your iourneys end. And this I can tell you; though the weather towards the latter end of this Moneth be neuer ſo hot; yet hee that lies in the bottome of the Thames two houres together, were as good bee on the Temple-ſtayres ſtarke-naked, with an hundred pound of his owne in a bagge vnder his arme.
               The two laſt dayes of this Moneth, will be as good a time to lay a furr'd Gowne to pawne as in any ſeaſon of the yeere; vnleſſe it be to be vſed for a greater exigent, as to bribe a Sergeant, ſo to euolue out of a more intricate danger: then (all excuſes ſet apart) pawne Gowne, or whatſoeuer, according to the old aduerbe: Better ſuffer a miſchiefe then a conuenience.
               
               
                  
Now at the cloſe ſhould I lead you vp into thoſe ſpangled Pallaces aboue vs, and ſhew you * According to the opinion of all Aſtrologers.two and twenty thouſand Starres, and tell you the names of them all; then bring you into the Planets banquetting-houſe, where you might behold their glorious Magnificence: but becauſe they are (like bad Tenants here below) alwaies remouing, I know not where to find them: The Sphaeres harmonious conglomerations, &c. but ſome wiſer then ſome, therefore for theſe trifles, I referre you to the reading of Doctor Dondolo: Onely take this decurtate concluſiue prediction along with you for a parting blow, as touching obnoxious accidents: That it will be farre better for the bodies and purſes of men to drinke Bottle-Ale moderately, then Claret, or Sacke exceſſiuely: and farre worſe for a woman to receiue a thumpe o'th backe with a ſtone, or a pop i'th eye with a ſticke; then haue a meſſe of whitebroath, or a Iowle of freſh-Cod to dinner.
            
         
         
            
            Lenuoy.
            THVS farre (my capricious Conſtruers) haue I guided you, by the ſlender twiſt of my cackling Skill, through the Labyrinth of this buſie Seaſon of ſixe Monthes: So that by this time, I doubt not, but you are ſubſtantially inſtructed in Iacke Dawes Dialect; which is, (ſuting to the garbe of all vs Aſtrologers) to prattle much, to little purpoſe. Therefore, leſt my too-much chattering ſhould peſter the eares of Patience, I will now take wing, and flye from out this contagious Climate, into ſome Solitary and ſacred place; where (after pruning my infected feathers) I will re-ediſie my towzed Neſt, and there carefully hatch vp the other ſixe Monthes; which ſhall be fledge and ready to flye the next Tearme, or neuer. But heere ſuppoſe me to ſpeake Spaniſh; or promiſe Quouſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                and meane to performe vpon Aduantage. Till when, I hopefully Conclude, to haue left behind me ſuch an euident Demonſtration of my vnparaleld Practiſe in Starre-ſtaring, as ſhall induce the both meaneſt, and moſt iudicious, to ſay; That (well fare his Chaps)—Mouet Cornicula riſum.
            
         
         
            
               OIONISMA: OR A Cox-comicall Prediction of this ſucceeding yeares Production. 1623. (*⁎*)
            
               OVt of high Selfe-conceit, I forth could chatter,
               Such monſtrous Omens, as it makes no matter,
               To winne a windy Reputation from
               
                  Phlebean Breath, as (* wiſely) haue done ſome; Sc
                        •
                     ptic
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  
And ſo tho Turne-Key draw vpon my backe:
               
                  Qui neſcit tacere, loqui neſcit. But I haue Wit enough to keepe my 
                     •
                   clacke,
               And not ore-ſwell my Bankes; as did that Flood,
               
               Who ſoyl'd his purer Current in the Mudde
               of Scandall; whoſe foule ſtigmaticke deepe Shame,
               
               Was ſtrucke ſo home, as 'twill out-laſt his Name.
               I cannot Cogge, though I can talke Non-ſonſe;
               
               Maugre Eaues-dropping ſlye Intelligence:
               
               For who faines Truth vnto a falſe Intent;
               
               May ſome ſharpe Vlcer play on's Fundament
               
               The Spaniſh-Panin; or elſe the Engliſh Horſe
               Of Wood, diſ-mount him, and ſtop's Natures courſe.
            
            
               Heau'ns bleſſe the King: And God good-ſpeed the Plough:
               If Corne be plentifull, wee's haue enough:
               
               If't chance to Raine or Shine; or both, or either,
               We ſhall be ſure t'haue foule, or elſe faire Weather.
               
               If Flatt'ry be ſent packing from the Court,
               
               
                  Falſhood i'th Citty, ſhall in Truthfull ſort
               Then ſtuffe each Shop: when Good-things come, Bad flye;
               If Fiſh want Water, they muſt needs be Dry.
               
               If fruitleſſe Strife, the Countrey doe diſ-eaſe,
               Then Lawyers muſt (its fury to appeaſe)
               Take Fees a both ſides. This I dare preſage,
               That the cleare Sunne ne're look't on ſuch an Age
               
               Of vntam'd Badneſſe, as will take's Carreere
               Quite through the Circle of this ſequent Yeere.
               
               I am not yet excentricke; I know how
               To ſcrue vp Vice, and Vertue to allow.
               But to all Knaues this moſtly will appeare;
               That Fooles had ne're leſſe Wit, than th haue this Yeare.
               
            
            
               Would I had Crownes▪ enow: I, thoſe for mee;
               One thouſand and Sixe hundred Twenty three.
            
            And no more.
            
               Some Faults haue ſcap't: Such Faults Good-men can mend:
               The Printer's faultie: for t'was truly pe'd.
            
         
      
   