
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ THE CASTEL OF HELTH GATHERED AND MADE BY SYR THOmas Elyot knyghte, out of the chiefe Authors of Phyſyke, wherby euery manne may knowe the ſtate of his owne body, the preſeruatiō of helth, and how to inſtructe welle his phyſytion in ſyckenes that he be not deceyued. ❧
            
            1534
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ 
               TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORDE CRVMVVELL LORDE PRIVIE SEALE Thomas Elyot knyghte wyſheth longe lyfe in honour.
            
               
                  HE GIVETH twiſe that gyueth quyckly (ſayth Senek.) Bis dat qui cito dat. The griefe, which I had for your lordſhyps diſeaſe, with the deſyre that ye mought lyue longe with out ſyckenes, cauſed ſuche ſpede in buyldynge the Caſtell of helthe, that therein lacked ſom part of perfectiō, but yet the promptnes in gyuyng that thynge, whyche I thoughte neceſſary, to declare myn affection, I doubt not, was no laſſe eſtemed of your good lordſhyp, thā afore is reherſed. Not withſtandynge, whan I had efteſones pervſed that lyttell fortreſſe, and founde here and there ſome thynge that lacked, I toke my penne in the ſtede of a truelle, and amended the faultes, and added ſomwhat more, where I thoughte it conuenyent: And yet perchance ſome thynges mought happen to eſcape, which were as nedeful to be corrected: myne attendence on the parlyament, I being a member of the lower houſe, withdrawyng from me leyſure conuenyente, to fynde in this warke all the

faultes, whithe moughte be amended. Maye 
                  〈◊〉
                nowe lyke your good lordſhyppe to take in good parte, not efteſones the caſ
                  ••
               lle, whiche I all re
               
                  •
               ye haue gyuen you, but my good wyll and dylygente in amendynge or repayrynge the ſame, whiche is alſo prynted in a moche better letter, conſyderynge that I no laſſe do beholde you cō
               tynually with myne eye of remembrance, than they, whiche at dyner and ſupper do dayly loke on you, the cauſe I wyll not repete for ſuſpition of flattery. Frendeſhyp (as men ſaye) ſhulde be requyted, but yet craue I none other thyng, but onely equall beneuolence, and fayth without any ſuſpition: wherevnto actuall demonſtration is ſo moche requiſite, that without if they both, ſeeme to be drowned, ſens amonge vs that be mortall, thynges are moſte iudged by outwarde tokens. And yet alſo in them men be ſometyme deceyued, Hypocr
                  ••
               y hauynge in this worlde ſoo greate a preemynence: but in amitie is one rule, which ſeldom faileth. He that lyueth moderatly, doth loue alway faithfully: for ouer hym affections and paſſions haue lefte authoritie: and he that ſtandeth iuſte in the myddell, ſtandeth moſt ſurely. Alſo in the worlde there is no more foly, than to theſe frendes of them, whiche do folow Fortune, lyke as ſwyne do folowe the mayden, whiche beareth on her heed a payle ful of mylke. And yf the payle falle, or happen to be emptye, they wyll folowe no lenger. The moderate perſon, where bothe authoritie and vertue be in his frende equell, bycauſe that vertue was the only cauſe of his loue, that remaynyng, his mynde is in ſuche wyſe thervnto ioyned, that although

authorytie happen to ſlyppe, yet that loue and vertue maye neuer be ſeuered. I haue ſpoken of frendeſhyppe perchaunce more than nedeth, but who wylle not wyſſhe, (yf it moughte happen) to haue ſuche a treaſour, as neyther the mountaynes of Ethiope, nor the ryuers of Inde do conteyne in them, to be therto compared. Callimachus an auncient poete ſayth, Puiſſance is dredefull: Rycheſſe is honourable: but loue for ſuretie is moſte incomparable, who perceyueth herein more than your good lordſhyppe, whyche beſydes the aboundaunte knowledge of hyſtoryes and naturall wytte, alſo concernynge this matter in your owne ſondry experiences, I dare ſaye without flatterye, are equalle to any noble man lyuynge. Yet this my longe tale is not ſuperfluous, whyche is tolde not to teache you, but onely to renewe your lordeſhyppes remembraunce, whyche is not alway preſent, ſpecially where the brayne is choked with worldely matters of weyghtye importaunce. In ſuche as I am, hauynge lyttell and lyttell to doo, remembraunce ſtandeth more at lybertie, and therfore we may more often thynke on that, whyche we haue bothe herde and ſene, and in cheſyng frendes, be the more circumſpecte. But leſte I ſhall make the name of frendſhyppe 
                  •
               edyouſe, by often reherſalle, I nowe conclude, that I leaue this lyttelle warke a monumente of the longe contynewed affection by me borne towarde your lordeſhyppe, and a perpetuall wytneſſe, that I haue deſerued ſoo moche of youre fauoure, as in mutuall frendſhyppe is of rayſon requyred; whyche maye be as eaſylye payed, as it

is graunted, yf in place, where it oughte to be ſhewed, ye do not forgette it. In the meane tyme I ſhall pray to God to adde to your good fortune and helth, contynuance with his grace and fauor wherein onely is moſt perfite ſuertye.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE TABLE ▴
            
               
                  IT MVST BE remembred, that the noumber in the Table, dothe ſygnifye the leafe, and the letter A, dothe ſygnifie the fyrſt page or ſyde, the letter B, the ſeconde page or ſyde.
            
               A
               ANexed to thinges naturall. fol. 1. a.
               Ages. fo. 10. b. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 40. b
               Ayre. fol. 12 a
               Appuls. fol. 21. a
               Almondes. fo. 22. b
               Anyſe ſede. fo. 25. b
               Ale. fol. 36. b
               Abſtinence. fo. 55. b
               Affectes of the mynde. folio. 64. a
            
            
               B
               BLoudde. fol. 8. a
               Beetes. fo. 24. b
               Byrdes. 30. a
               Brayne exceedynge in heate. fol. 3. b
               Brayn
                     •
                   exceedynge in colde. ibidem.
               Brayne moyſt. ibid.
               Brayne drye. 4. a
               Brayn hot & moiſt. ibi.
               Brayn hot & dry. ibid.
               Brain cold & moiſt. 4 b
               Brayn cold & dry. ibid.
               Beanes. 25. b
               Breakefaſt. 43. a
               Bloud ſuckers. 63. a
               Bourage. 27. a
               Breadde. 28. b
               Blacke byrde. 30. b
               Buſtarde. 31. a
               Byttour. ibid.
               Brayn of beſtis. 32. a
               Butter. fo. 33. a
               Bie
                     •
                  e. fo. 36. b
            
            
               C
               COnſyderations of thinges belō
                  ging to helth. 1. a
               Complexion of mā. 2. a
               Colerike body. 2. b
               Coler. fo. 8. b
               Coler naturall. fol. 9. a
               
                  
Coler vnnaturall. ibid.
               Colour. fo. 11. a
               Colour of heare. 11. b
               Cuſtome. 17. b
               Cucumbers. 19. b
               Cherics. 21. a
               Chaſtnartes. 22. b
               Capers. 23. a
               Colewortes and cabages. fol. 23. b
               Cyhorye. 24. a
               Cheruyle. 25. a
               Conſiderations in abſtynence. 55. b
               Cloues. 28. b
               C
                     •
                  nyc. 29. b
               Capons, hennes, and chyckens. 30. a
               Crane. 31. a
               Cheſe. 33. a
               Cyder. 36. b
               Confortaryues of the harte. 69. a
               Cruditit. 75. b
            
            
               D
               DAtes. fol. 20. a
               Dueke. 31. a
               Dyuerſytie of meates. 44. a
               Dygeſtiues of choler. folio. 59. b
               Dygeſtiues of fleume. folio. 60. a
               Domynyon of condry complexions. 70. a
               Diete of ſanguine perſones. 72. b
               Dtete of cholerike per ſones. ibid.
               Dyete of fleuinatycks perſones. 73. b
               Dyete of melancolyke perſones. 74. a
               Dyete of them, whiche be redye to falle into ſyckenes. 78. b
               Diete in tyme of peſtilence. 89. a
               Drynke betwene meales. 43. b
               Drink at meales. 46. b
               Dygeſted. 55. a
            
            
               E
               ELementes, fol. 1. b
               Endyue. 24. b
               Egges. 33. a
               Exerciſe. 48. a. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 50. a
               Euacuation. 54. b
               Exetementes. ibidm.
            
            
               F
               FLematih body. 2. b
               Fleume. 8. a
               Fleme natural. ib.
               Fleme vnnaturall. 8. b
               
                  
Fruites. 19. a
               Fygges. 20. a
               Fenell. 25. b
               Fylberdes. 22. a
               Fleſſhe. 29. a
               Feſaunt. 30. b
               Fete of beaſtes. 32. b
               Fylhe. ibidem.
               Frytaſyes or rubbynges. folio, 49. a
            
            
               G
               GEnytours hote. folio 7. a
               Genytors cold. ibidem.
               Genitours moiſt. ibid.
               Genytours drye. ibidē.
               Genytours hotte and moyſte. 7. b
               Genytours hotte and drye. ibidē.
               Genytours colde and moyſt. ibidem.
               Genytoures colde and drye. ibidem.
               Gourdes. 19. a
               Grapes. 20. b
               Garlyke. 26. b
               Gynger. 28. a
               Gooſe. 31. a
               Gyſar of byrdes. 31. b
               Geſtation. 51. b
            
            
               H
               HArte hot diſtempered. 4. b
               Harte colde dyſtempered. 5. a
               Harte moyſte dyſtempered. ibidem
               Harte drye dyſtempered. ibidem.
               Hart hot & moyſt. ibid.
               Hart hote and dry. 5. b
               Hart cold & moiſt. ibid.
               Hart cold and dry. ibi.
               Humours. 8. a
               Herbes vſed in potage or to eate. 23. b
               Hate. 29. b
               Hearon. 31. a
               Hart of beaſtis. 32. a
               Heed of beaſtis. ibid.
               Honye. 37. b
               Hemorroides or pyles. folio. 63. b
               Heatnes or ſorow. 66. a
            
            
               I
               ¶ Icope. 27. a
               Joye. 69. b
            
            
               K
               ¶ kydde. 29. b
            
            
               L
               LJuer in heate diſtempred. 6. a
               Lyuer colde dyſtempered. ibidem.
               
                  
Lyuer moyſte dyſtempered. ibidem.
               Lyuer drye dyſtempered. ibidem.
               Letyſe. 23. b.
               Lekes. 27. a
               Lambe. 29. a
               Larke. 30. b
               Lyuers of byrdes and beaſtes 31. b
               Lunges of beaſtes. ibi.
               Letting of bloud. 61. a
               Leaches or blouds ſuckers. 63. a
               Laſſitude. fo. 77. a and 78. a
            
            
               M
               MElancolike bodye. fol 3. a
               Melācoly. 9. a
               Members inſtrumentall. fol. 9 b
               Meate and drink. 12. b
               Meates makyng good iuyce. ibidem.
               Meates makynge ylle iuyce. 13. a
               Meates makyng choler. fol 13. b
               Meates making fleme ibidem.
               Meates ingendrynge melancoly. 14 a
               Meates makyng thick iuyce. ibid.
               Meates hurtynge the teethe. 14. b
               Meates hurtynge the eyen. ibidem.
               Meates makynge oppilations. 15. a
               Meates wyndy. ibid.
               Melons. 19. b
               Medlars. 22. a
               Malowes. 24. b
               Mutton. 29. b
               Moderacyon in Dyete. 42. a
               Meales. 42 b
               Maces. 28. b
               Members of byrdes. folio. 31. b
               Melt or ſplene. 32. a
               Marowe. ibid.
               Mylke. 35. b
            
            
               N
               ¶ Nutmygges. 28. b.
            
            
               O
               OFfycyall members. 9 b
               Operatiōs. 10. b
               Olyues. 22. a
               
                  
Orenges. ibid.
               Onyons. 26. b
               Order in eatynge and drynkynge. 45. b
               Opilations what they are. fol. 41. a
               Olde men. 41. b
               Ordure. 55. a
            
            
               P
               PRyncypall members. fo. 9. b
               Partes ſimilares. ibid.
               Powers natural. 10. a
               Powers ſpirituall. ibi.
               Powers animall. ibid.
               Peaches. 21. a
               Peares. 22. a
               Pourſelan. 25. a
               Perſely. ibidē.
               Purgers of coler. 59. b
               Pourgers of flewme. folio. 60. a
               Purgers of melancolye. fol. 60. b
               Preceptes of Diocles folio. 75. b
               Pomegranates. 21. b
               Prunes. 22. b
               Peaſon. fo. 25. b
               Parſnepes. 26. a
               Penyryall. 27. b
               Pepper. 28. a
               Partryche. 30. b
               Plouer. ibidem.
               Pygeons. 31. a
               Purgations by ſiege. 57. b. and. 58. a
               Precyſe dyete. 47. a
            
            
               Q
               QVantytie of meate. 16. a
               Qualytie of meate. fo. 17. a and. 18. b
               Quynce. 21. b
               Quayle. 30. b
            
            
               R
               RAyſons. 20. b
               Rapes. 26. b
               Radyſſhe. 26. a
               Rokat. 27. b
               Roſemary. ibid.
               Repletion. 53. b
            
            
               S
               SAnguine body. 2. a
               Stomak hot. 6. b
               Stomake cold. ib.
               Stomak moyſt. ibidē.
               Stomake drye. 7. a
               Spirite naturall. 10. b
               
                  
Spirite 
                     •
                  ttali. ibidem.
               Spirite animall. ibidē.
               Sorell. 25. a
               Sauge. 27. a
               Stomake in the which mete is corrupted. 88. a
               Slepe & watche. 47. a
               Sauerye. 26 b
               Saffron. 28. b
               Swynes fleſhe. 29. a
               Sparowes. 30. b
               Shoueler. 30. a
               Supper. 43. a
               Sugar. 38. b
               Scarifieng. 62. b
               Syckneſſes appropryed to ſondrye ſeaſons and ages. 79 a
               Significations of ſickeneſſes. 80. b
            
            
               T
               THynges Naturall. fo. 1. a
               Thinges not naturall. ibidem.
               Thinges agaynſte nature. ibidē.
               Thinges good for the heed. 15. b
               Thynges good for the harte. ibidem.
               Thynges good for the iyuer. ibidem.
               Thynges good for the lunges. ibid.
               Thynges good for the tyes. 16. a
               Thynges good for the ſtomake. ibid.
               Temperature of meates. 17. b
               Turnippes. 26. a
               Tyme. 27. b
               Townesreſſes. ibid.
               Trypes. 31. b
               Tung of beaſtis. 32. a
               Tyme. 39. a. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 40. a
               Tymes appropryed to 
                     •
                  uery humour. 71. a
            
            
               V
               VV
                     •
                  ildes. 12. a
               walnuttes. 22. a
               Veale. 29. b
               Venyſon. ibid.
               woodcockes. 31. a
               Vdder. 32. a
               water. 33. b
               wyne. fo 34. b
               wuaye. 36. b
               Vociferation. 52. b
               Vomyte. 56. b
               Vrines. 84. a
               Vertu of meates. 88. a
            
            
               ❧ Thus endeth the Table. ❧
            
         
         
            
            
            
            
               
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FYRST BOKE.
            
               TO THE CONSERVAtion of the body of mankynde, within the limitation of helth, which (as Galene ſayth) is the Detuenda ſanitate lib. 1. ſtate of the body, wherin we be neyther greued with peyne, nor lette from doyng our neceſſary buſyneſſe, doth belonge the dylygent conſyderation of thre ſortes of thinges, that is to ſay,
            
               Thynges Naturall,
               Thynges not naturall, and
               Thynges agaynſt nature.
            
            ¶ Thynges Naturall be .vii. in number.
            
               Elementes
               Complexions.
               Humours.
               Membres.
               Powers.
               Operations and
               Spirites.
            
            ¶ Theſe be neceſſary to the beynge of helthe, accordyng to the order of theyr kynde: and be alwaye in the naturall body.
            ¶ Thynges not naturall be ſyxe in number.
            
               Ayre
               Meate and drynke.
               Slepe and watche.
               Meuyng and reſt.
               Emptyneſſe and repletion and
               Affections of the mynde.
            
            ¶ Thynges agaynſt Nature be thre.
            
               Syckeneſſe.
               Cauſe of ſyckeneſſe.
               Iccident, whiche foloweth ſyckenes.
            
            ¶ Annered to thynges naturall.
            
               Age.
               Colour.
               Fygure, and
               Diuerſitie of kyndes.
            
            
               
¶ The elementes be thoſe originall thynges vn myrt and vncompounde, of whoſe temperance and myxture all other thynges, hauynge corporall ſubſtance, be compacte: Of them be four, that is to ſaye,
            
               Erthe.
               Water.
               Ayre and
               Fyre.
            
            ¶ Erthe is the mooſte groſſe and pondercuſe element, and of her proper nature is colde and drye.
            ¶ Water, is more ſubtyll and lyghte thanne erth, but in reſpect of Ayre and Fyre, it is groſſe and heuy, and of hit proper nature is colde and moyſte.
            ¶ Ayre, is more lyght and ſubtylle thanne the other two, and beynge not altered with any exteriour cauſe, is properly hote and moyſte.
            ¶ Fyre, is abſolutely lyghte and clere, and is the clarifier of other elementes, yf they be vyci
               
                  •
               te o
                  •
                out of theyr naturall temperaunce, and is properly hotte and drye.
            ¶ This to be remembred, that none of the ſayd elementes be commonly 
                  •
               ene or felte of mortall men, as they are in theyr originall beynge: but they, whiche by our ſences be perceyued, be corrupted with mutuall mixture, and be rather erthy, watry, ayry, and fyry, than abſolutely erth, water, ayre, and fyre.
            
               
               Of the complexion of Man. Cap. 2.
               COmplexion is a combynation of two dyuers qualities of the foure elementes in one body, as hotte & drye of the Fyre: hote and moyſte of the Ayre, colde and moyſte of the Water, colde and drye of the Erth. But although all theſe complexions be aſſembled in euery body of man and woman, yet the body taketh his denomination of thoſe qualities, which abounde in hym, more thanne in the other, as hereafter inſeweth,
               ¶ The body, where heate and moyſture haue ſoueraintie, is called Sanguine, wherin the aire hath preeminence, and it is perceyued and knowen by theſe ſygnes, whiche do folowe,
               
                  Sanguine
                  
                     
                        Carnoſite or fleſhyneſſe.
                        The vaynes and arteries large.
                        Heare plentie and redde
                        The viſage whyte and ruddy.
                        Sleape moche.
                        Dreames of blouddy thynges or thynges pleaſaunt.
                        Pulſe great and full.
                        Digeſtyon perfecte.
                        Angry ſhortly.
                        Siege, vryne, & ſweate abundant.
                        Fallynge ſhortly into bledynge.
                        The vrine redde and groſſe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
¶ Where colde with moyſture preuayleth, that body is called Fleumatike, wherin water hath preeminence, and is perceyued by theſe ſygnes.
               
                  Fleumatike.
                  
                     
                        Fatnes, quauyng and ſofte.
                        Vaynes narow.
                        Heare moche and playne.
                        Colour whyte.
                        Sleape ſuperfluous.
                        Dremes of thynges watry or of fyſſhe.
                        Slownes.
                        Dulnes in lernynge.
                        Cowardyſe.
                        Buſle ſlowe and lyttell.
                        Dygeſtyon weake.
                        Spyttell whyte, abundaunt, and thycke.
                        Vrine groſſe, white and pale.
                     
                  
               
               ¶ Colerike is hote and drie, in whom the fyre hath preeminence, and is diſcerned by theſe ſygnes folowynge.
               
                  Cholerike
                  
                     
                        Leanes of body.
                        Coſtyfeneſſe.
                        Heare blacke or dark aburn curlyd.
                        Viſage and ſkyn redde as fyre, or ſalowe.
                        Hotte thynges noyfull to hym.
                        Lyttell ſleape.
                        Dremes of fyre, fighting or angre.
                        Wytte ſharpe and quycke.
                        Hardy and fyghtynge.
                        Pulſe ſwyfte and ſtronge.
                        Vrine hygh coloured & clere.
                        Voyce ſharpe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
¶ Melancolyke is colde and drye, ouer whome the erthe hathe dominion, and is perceyued by theſe ſygnes.
               
                  Melancolyke.
                  
                     
                        Leanneſſe with hardnes of ſkynne.
                        Heare playne and thynne.
                        Colour duſkyſhe, or whyte with 
                              〈…〉
                           nneſſe.
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           e watche
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           es fearefull.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            in opinyons.
                        Digeſtion ſlowe and yll.
                        Tymerous and fearefull.
                        Anger longe and frettynge.
                        Pulſe lyttell.
                        Seldome laughynge.
                        Vrine watry and thynne.
                     
                  
               
               BEſides the ſayde complexions of all the hole bodye, there be in the particular membres, complexions, wherin yf there be any diſtemperaunce, it bryngeth ſyckeneſſe or griefe into the member. Wherfore to knowe the diſtemperature, theſe ſignes folowynge wold be conſydered. Foreſene, that it be remembred, that ſome diſtemperatures be ſymple and ſomme be compounde. They whiche be ſymple, be in ſimple qualities, as in heate, colde, moyſte, or drye. They whiche be compounde, are in compound or myxt qualyties: as heate and moyſture, heate and drythe: colde and moyſte, colde and drye. But nowe fyrſte we wyll ſpeake of the ſymple complexions, of euery principal member, begynnynge at the brayne.
               
                  
                  The brayne exceding in heate hath,
                  
                     
                        The hedde and vyſage very redde and hotte.
                        The heare growynge faſte blacke and courlyd.
                        The vaynes in the eyen apparant.
                        Superfluoꝰ matter in the noſethryls, eien, & eares.
                        The heed annoyed with hotte meates, drynkes, and ſauours.
                        Slepe ſhorte & not ſounde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The brayne exceding in colde hath,
                  
                     
                        Moche ſuperfluite runnynge oute of the noſe, mouthe, eares and eyen.
                        Heare ſtrayght & fine growing ſlowly, & flaxen.
                        The headde diſpoſyd by ſmall occaſyon to poſes and murres.
                        It is ſoone annoyed with colde.
                        It is colde in touchynge.
                        Vaynes of the eyen not ſeene.
                        Sleapy ſomwhat.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Moyſt in exceſſe hath,
                  
                     
                        Heares playne.
                        Seldome or neuer balde.
                        Wytte dulle.
                        Moche ſuperfluities.
                        Slepe moche and depe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The brayn drie hath
                  
                     
                        No ſuꝑfluites runnyng.
                        Wyttes good and redy.
                        Watchefull.
                        Heares blacke hard and faſt growynge.
                        Balde ſhortly.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Complexions compouned.
                  
                     Brayne hote & moyſt dyſtempered hath,
                     
                        
                           The heed akyng & heuy.
                           Full of ſuperfluines in the noſe.
                           The ſouthen wynde greuouſe.
                           The Northerne wynde holſome.
                           Slepe depe but vnquiete with oftē wakinges & ſtraunge dreames.
                           The ſenſes and wytte vnperfecte.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Brayne hote and dry dyſtempered hath,
                     
                        
                           None abundaunce of ſuperfluities, whiche may be expelled.
                           Senſes perfecte.
                           Moche watche.
                           Soner balde than other.
                           Moch heare in childhod and blacke or browne, and courlyd.
                           The heed hot and ruddy
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Brayne cold & moyſt Dyſtempered hath,
                     
                        
                           The ſenſes and wyt dul
                           Moche ſleape.
                           The hede ſoone repleniſſhed with ſuperfluous moyſture.
                           Diſtyllations and poſes or m
                                 〈…〉
                              .
                           Not 
                                 〈◊〉
                               
                              
                                 •
                              alde.
                           Sone 
                                 〈◊〉
                               with colde.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Brayn cold and dry dyſſempered hath,
                     
                        
                           The heed colde in feling and without colour.
                           The vaines not apering.
                           Soone hurt with colde.
                           Often diſeraſed.
                           wytte perfecte in chyldehode, but in age dull.
                           Aged ſhortly and balde.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of the harte.
                  
                     The hart hote diſtempered hath
                     
                        
                           Moch blowyng & puffing.
                           Pulſe ſwyfte and buſy.
                           Hardines & māhode moch.
                           Promptnes actiuitie and quyckeneſſe in doynge of thynges.
                           Fury and boldnes.
                           The breaſte heary toward the lefte ſyde.
                           The breſte brode with the heed lyttell.
                           The body hote, except the lyuer do let it.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The hart colde diſtempered hath,
                     
                        
                           The pulſe very lyttell.
                           The breth lytell and ſlow.
                           The breſt narow.
                           The body all colde, excepte the lyuer doth inflame it.
                           Fearfulnes,
                           Scrupuloſite, & moch care
                           Curioſitie.
                           Slowneſſe in actes.
                           The breaſte cleane without heares.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The hart moyſt diſtempered hath.
                     
                        
                           The pulſe ſofte.
                           Sone āgry & ſone pacified
                           The body al moyſt, except the liuer diſpoſith cōtrary.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The hart drye diſtempered hath
                     
                        
                           The pulſe harde.
                           Not lyghtly angry, but beynge angry, not ſoone pacyfied.
                           The body dry, except the li uer doth diſpoſe contrary.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The harte hotte and 
                           •
                        oyſt
                     
                        
                           The breſt & ſtomake heary
                           Promptnes in actes.
                           Soone a
                                 •
                              gry.
                           Fierſnes but not ſo moche as in hote and drye.
                           Pulſe ſofte, ſwift, & buſy.
                           Breth or wind according.
                           Shortely falleth into diſeaſes cauſed of putryfaction.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The harte hotte and drye.
                     
                        
                           The harte poulſe greatte and ſwyfte.
                           The breath or wynde accordynge.
                           The breaſt and ſtomacke all heary.
                           Quicke in his doynges.
                           Boldnes and hardyneſſe.
                           Swift & haſty in mouing
                           Soone ſtyr
                                 •
                              ed to anger & ryrannous in maners.
                           The breaſt brode and all the body hotte & drye.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The harte colde and moyſte
                     
                        
                           The pulſe ſofte.
                           Fearefull and tymerous.
                           Slowe.
                           The breaſt clene without heare.
                           Not haſtily angre nor refaynynge angre.
                           The breſt narowe.
                           All the body cold & moyſt
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The harte colde and drye hath,
                     
                        
                           The pulſe hard & lyttell.
                           The wynde moderate.
                           Seldom angry, but whā it hapneth, it dureth long
                           The breaſt cleane without heare and lyttell.
                           All the body cold & drye.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of the liuer.
                  
                     The lyuer in heate diſtempered hath.
                     
                        
                           The vaynes great.
                           The blood more hote than temperate.
                           The bealy heary.
                           All the body hote exceding temperaunce.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The lyuer cold diſtempered hath
                     
                        
                           The vaynes ſmall.
                           Abundance of fleum
                                 •
                              
                           
                           The blood colde.
                           All the body colde in feelynge.
                           The bealy without heare.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The lyuer moyſte diſtempered hath
                     
                        
                           The vaynes ſofte.
                           Moch bloud and thynne.
                           All the bodye moyſte in felynge, except the harte diſpoſeth it contrary.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The lyuer drye diſtempered hath
                     
                        
                           The vaynes harde.
                           The bloudde lyttell and thycke.
                           All the body drye.
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶ The complexions compounde, maye be decer Galenus in arte parua. lib. 2. ned by the ſayd ſymple qualities. And here is to be noted, that the heate of the harte maye vanquyſhe the colde in the lyuer. For heate is in the harte, as in the fountayne or ſprynge, and in the Lyuer, as in the Ryuer.
               
               
                  
                  Of the ſtomake.
                  
                     The ſtomake hotte diſtempered.
                     
                        
                           He digeſteth well, ſpecyally harde meates, & that wyl not be ſhortly altred.
                           Lyght mentes and ſoone altered, be therein corrupted.
                           The appetite lyttell and ſlowe.
                           He delyteth in Meates and drinkes, whyche be hotte for euery naturall complexiō delyteth in his ſemblable.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The ſtomake colde dyſtempered.
                     
                        
                           He hath good appetite.
                           He digeſteth ylle and ſlowely, ſpecyally groſſe meates and harde.
                           Colde meates doo waxe ſoure, beinge in hym vndygeſted.
                           He delytethe in meates and drynkes, whiche be Colde, and yet of theym he is indamaged.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The ſtomake moyſt dyſtempered
                     
                        
                           He thyrſteth but ſeldom, yet he deſyreth to drynke.
                           with ſuperfluous drink
                                 •
                               he is hurte.
                           He delyteth in moyſte meates.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſtomake drye dyſtempered
                     
                        
                           He is ſoone thyrſty.
                           Contente with a lyttelle drynke.
                           Diſeaſed with moche drynke.
                           He deliteth in dry meates
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶ It is to be noted, that the dyſpoſitions of Galenus in arte parua. the ſtomake naturall, do deſyre that whiche is of lyke qualities. The diſpoſitions vnnaturall, do deſyre thynges of contrary qualities.
                  ¶ Alſo not the ſtomake onely cauſeth a man to thyrſte or not thyrſte, but alſo the lyuer, the lunges, and the harte.
               
               
                  Of the genitories or ſtones of generation.
                  
                     The genytories hote diſtempred
                     
                        
                           Great appetite to the acte of generation.
                           Ingendrynge men chyldren.
                           Heare ſoone growen aboute the membres.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The genytories colde diſtempred
                     
                        
                           Small appetite to the acte of generation.
                           Ingendryng women chyldrē.
                           Slowe growthe of heare about the membres.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The genitories moiſt diſtempred
                     Sede abundant but thynne and watrye.
                  
                  
                     The genitoryes drye diſtempred
                     Sede lyttel but metely thick in ſubſtance.
                  
                  
                     
                     Genytories hot and moyſte
                     
                        
                           Laſſe appetite to lecherie than in them, whiche be hote and drye.
                           More puiſſaunce to do it, and without laſſe damage.
                           Hurt by abſteynyng frō it.
                           Leſſe herines thā in hot & dry.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The genytories hote and drye
                     
                        
                           The ſede thycke.
                           Moche fruitefulneſſe of Generation.
                           Great appetite and redyneſſe to the acte.
                           Heare about the membres ſoone growen.
                           Swyfteneſſe in ſpedynge o
                                 •
                               the acte.
                           Soone therwith ſatiſfyed.
                           Damage by vſyng therof.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The genytories colde and moyſt
                     
                        
                           The ſede watry and thynne.
                           Lyttell deſyre to the acte, but more puiſſance than in them whiche be colde and drye.
                           Lyttell heares or none about the membres.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The genytories colde and drye
                     
                        
                           Heares none or fewe.
                           Litle apetit or none to lecher
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Lyttell puiſſance to do it.
                           Ingendrynge more females than men chyldern.
                           That litle ſede that is, is thikker than in colde and moyſt.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  ☞ Of humours.
                  IN the body of Man be foure pryncipal humours, which continuynge in the proporcion, that nature hath lymitted, the body is free frome all ſyckeneſſe. Contrary wiſe by the increaſe or diminution of any of theym in quantitie or qualitie, ouer or vnder theyr naturall aſſignement, inequall temperature commeth into the bodye, whiche ſickeneſſe foloweth more or laſſe, accordyng to the lapſe or decaye of the temperatures of the ſayd humours, whiche 
                        〈◊〉
                      theſe folowynge.
                  
                     Bloudde,
                     Fleume,
                     Choler,
                     Melancholy
                  
                  ¶ Bloudde hath preeminence ouer all other humours in ſuſteynynge of all lyuynge creatures, for it hath more conformitie with the originalle cauſe of lyuynge, by reaſon of temperatenes i
                        •
                      heate and moyſture, alſo nouryſſheth more the body, and reſtoreth that which is decayed, being the very treaſure of lyfe, by loſſe wherof, dethe immedyately foloweth. The diſtemperature of bloud hapneth by one of the other thre humors, by the inordinate or ſuꝑfluous mixture of them.
               
               
                  Of fleume.
                  ¶ Fleume is of two ſortes,
                  
                     Naturall and
                     Vnnaturall.
                  
                  ¶ Naturall fleume is a humour colde & moyſt, whyte and ſwete, or without taſte ingendred by inſufficient decoction in the ſeconde digeſtion of the watry or rawe partes of the matter decocte

called Chilus, by the laſt digeſtyon made apt to be conuerted into bloud. In this humour, water hath dominion moſt princypall.
                  ¶ Fleume vnnaturall is that, whiche is myxte with other humours, or is altered in his qualitie. And therof is .viii. ſondry kyndes
                  
                     Fleume.
                     
                        
                           watry, which is founden in ſpettil of great drinkers, or of them, whiche dygeſte ylle.
                           Slymy or rawe.
                           Glaſy, lyke to whyte glaſſe, thicke, viſcouſe lyke byrd lyme and heuye.
                           Plaſtry, which is very groſſe, and as it were chalky, ſuch is found in the ioyntes of theyin, whiche haue the gowte.
                           Salt, which is mingled with coler.
                           Sower, myxt with melancoly, whiche cometh of corrupt dygeſtion.
                           Harſhe, thycke and groſſe, whiche is ſeldome founden, whiche taſteth lyke grene crabbes or ſloes. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 o
                                    •
                                 ticum.
                           
                           Stiptik or binding, is not ſo groſſe nor cold, as harſhe, & hath the taſte lyke to greene redde wyne, or other lyke, ſtraynynge the tu
                                 •
                              ge.
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶ Choler doth participate with naturall heate as longe as it is in good temperance. And therof is alſo two kyndes,
                  
                     Naturall and
                     Vnnaturall.
                  
                  
                     
                     Choler naturall.
                     ¶ Naturall choler is the fome of bloudde, the colour wherof is redde and clere, or more lyke to an orenge colour, and is hote and drye, wherin the fyre hath dominion, & is light and ſharpe, and is ingendred of the moſt ſubtyll part of matter decocte, or boyled in the ſtomacke, whoſe be gynnynge is in the lyuer.
                  
                  ¶ Vnnaturall choler is that which is myxte o
                        •
                      corrupted with other humours, wherof be foure kyndes,
                  
                     Citrine or yelowe choler, whiche is of the myxture of natural choler, and watry fleume, and therfore hath leſſe heat then pure choler.
                     Yelky, lyke to yelkes of egges, whiche is of the myxture of fleume congeled, and choler naturall, & is yet laſſe hotte than the other.
                     Grene lyke to lekes, whoſe begynnyng is rather of the ſtomak, thā of the lyuer
                     Grene lyke to grene canker of mettall, and bourneth lyke venym, and is of excedynge aduſtion of choler or fleume, & by theſe two kyndes nature is mortifyed.
                  
                  ¶ Melancoly or blacke coler is deuided into two kyndes.
                  
                     Naturall, which is the dregges of pure bloude, and is knowen by the blaknes, whan it iſſueth eyther downewarde or vpwarde, and is veryly cold and drye.
                     Vnnaturalle, whiche procedeth of the

aduſtion of cholerike myxture, and is ho
                           •
                        ter & lyg
                           •
                        ter, hauynge in it vyolence to kyll, with a dangerous diſpoſytion.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the members.
                  ¶ There be diuerſities of members, that is to ſaye.
                  
                     Principall members.
                     
                        
                           The brayne.
                           Th harte.
                           The lyuer.
                           The ſtones of generatiō
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Officiall members.
                     
                        
                           Syn
                                 •
                              wes whiche doo ſerue to the brayne.
                           Arteries or pulſes, which do ſerue to the harte.
                           Vayn
                                 •
                              s which do ſerue to the lyuc
                                 •
                              .
                           Veſſels ſpermatik, wher in mans ſede lyeth, which do ſerue to the ſ
                                 •
                              on
                                 ••
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Partes called Similares, for being diuided they remayne in them ſelf like as they were.
                     
                        
                           Bones.
                           Griſtell.
                           Calles betwirte the vttermooſte ſkynne and the fleſhe.
                           Muſkles or fylettes.
                           Fatte Fleſ ſhe.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Members inſtrumentall.
                     
                        
                           The ſtomacke.
                           The raynes.
                           The bowelles.
                           All the great ſynewes.
                        
                     
                  
                  Thoſe of their vertue do apetite meat & alter it.
               
               
                  
                  O
                        •
                      powers
                  
                     Animall.
                     Spiri
                           •
                        uall,
                     Naturall.
                  
                  
                     Naturall power
                     
                        
                           whiche do miniſter.
                           To whome is miniſtred.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Which dothe mynyſter.
                     
                        
                           Appetiteth,
                           Retayneth,
                           Digeſteth.
                           Expelleth.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     To whome is mynyſtred,
                     
                        
                           Ingendreth,
                           Nouryſheth,
                           Fedeth,
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Power ſpiritual
                     
                        
                           Warkyng, whiche delateth the harte and art
                                 〈…〉
                              es, and 
                                 •
                              fteſones ſtrayneth them.
                           Wrought, which is ſty
                                 •
                              red by an exterior cauſe to wark wherof commeth anger, indygnation, ſubtilitie, and care.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Power animall.
                     
                        
                           That whiche ordeyneth, diſcerneth, and compoſet
                                 •
                              .
                           That moueth by voluntarye motion.
                           That whiche is called ſenſyble, wherof do procede the fyue wyttes.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Of that which ordeineth do ꝓcede
                     
                        
                           Imagination in the forhed.
                           Reaſon in the brayne.
                           Remembrance in the nodel.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Operations.
                     
                        
                           Apetite by heate and drythe.
                           Digeſtiō by hete & moiſture.
                           Retayning by cold & drythe.
                           Expulſiō by colde & moyſre.
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶ Spirite is an ayry ſubſtance ſubtyll, ſtyryng the powers of the body to perfourme their opera
                        •
                     ions, whiche is dyuyded into
                  
                     Naturalle, whiche taketh his begynnynge of the lyuer, and by the vaynes whiche haue no pulſe, ſpredeth into all the hole body.
                     
                        
                           •••
                        all which procedeth from the hart, and by the arteries or pulſes is ſent into all the body.
                     Animalle, whiche is ingendred in the brayne, and is ſente by the ſenewes throughout the body, & maketh ſence or feelyng
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Annexed to thynges naturall.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            be. 
                              •
                           ii
                              •
                           .
                        
                           
                              Adoleſcencye to .xxv. yeres, hotte and moyſte, in the whiche tyme the body groweth.
                              Juuentute vnto .xl. yeres, hot and drye, wherin the bodye is in perfyte growth.
                              Senectute, vnto .lx. yeres colde & drye, wherin the body begynneth to decreace,
                              
                                 
Age decrepite, vntyll the laſte tyme of lyfe, accidently moyſte, but naturally colde and drye, wherin the pdwers and ſtrength of the body be more and more myniſhed.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  ☞ Colour.
                  
                     Of inwarde cauſes.
                     Of outwarde cauſes.
                  
                  
                     Colour of inward cauſes
                     
                        
                           Of equalitie of humoures, as he that is redde and whyte.
                           Of inequalitie of humoures, wherof doo procede, blacke, ſalowe, paale, or whyte onely.
                           Redde,
                           Blacke,

                                 do betoben dominiō of heate.
                              
                           
                           Salowe,
                           Whyte, colde of fl
                                 〈…〉
                              .
                           Pale, colde of melancholy.
                           Redde abundaunce of bloude.
                           Salow, chole
                                 •
                               citrine.
                           Blarke, melancholye or choler aduſte.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Colour of outwarde cauſes.
                     
                        
                           Of cold or heate, as englyſſhe menne be whyte, Moriens 
                                 〈◊〉
                               blacke.
                           Of thynges accidentalle, as of feare, of anger, of ſorowe, or other lyke mocion
                                 •
                              .
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Colour of heare
                     
                        
                           Blacke, eyther of aboundaunce of choler inflamed, or of moche intendynge or abuſ
                                 •
                              yon of bloudde.
                           Redde heare of moche heate not a
                                 •
                              uſt
                                 •
                              .
                           Gray heares of abundaunce of melanch
                                 〈…〉
                              .
                           
                              
                                 〈…〉
                              te heares of the lacke of naturall heare, & by occaſyon of fleume pu
                                 〈…〉
                              fyed.
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶ All the reſydue concernyng thinges naturall 
                        〈◊〉
                      in the Introduction of Joan
                        •
                     icius, and in the lyttell crafte of Galene, I purpoſely 
                        〈◊〉
                      ouer for this tyme, foraſmoche as it doth requy
                        ••
                      a r
                        •
                     der hauyng ſome knowledge in philo
                        •
                     ophye naturall, or 
                        ••
                     s is 
                        〈◊〉
                      to harde and t
                        •
                     dious to be vnd
                        ••
                     ſtande. Moreouer this, whiche I 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      in this fyrſte tables, ſhall be ſufficient, to the conſeruation of he
                        •
                     the, I meane, with that whiche nowe foloweth in the other Tables.
               
               
                  The ſeconde Table.
                  THynges not naturall be ſo called, bycauſe they be no por
                        •
                     yon of a naturall body, as they be, w
                        •
                     iche be callyd naturall thynges, but yet by the temperance of theym the body beynge in helthe, ſo conſyſteth by the diſ
                        •
                     emp
                        •
                     tance of them, ſyckeneſſe is induced, & the body deſſolued.
                  ¶ The fyrſte of thynges not naturall is ayre, whiche is proprely of it ſelfe, or of ſome materiall

cauſe or occaſion good or yll.
                  ¶ That which is of it ſelfe good, hath pure va 
                        •
                     ours, and is o
                        •
                     oriferous.
                  ¶ Alſo it is of it ſelfe, ſwyft in alteration from hotte to colde, wherin the body is not moch prouoked to ſweate for heate, ne to chylle for vehemency of colde.
                  ¶ Ayre among al thynges not natural is chiefly to be obſerued, foraſmoch as it doth both incloſe vs, & alſo enter into our bodyes, ſpecially the moſt noble member, which is the hart, & we can not be ſeparate one howre frome it, for the neceſſitie of breathyng and fetchyng of wynde,
                  ¶ The cauſes wherby the ayre is corrupted be ſpecyally foure.
                  
                     Influēces of ſondry ſterres.
                     Great ſtandynge waters neuer r
                           •
                        freſhed.
                     
                        
                           •
                        arayne lyenge longe aboue grounde.
                     Moche people in ſmall 
                           •
                        ome lyuynge vnclenly and ſlutty ſhely.
                  
                  
                     wyndes brynging holſom ayre.
                     
                        
                           Northe, whiche prolongeth lyfe by expoulſynge ylle vapours.
                           Eaſt is temperate and luſty.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     wyndes brynging ylle ayre.
                     
                        
                           South corrupteth, and maketh ylle vapours.
                           Weſte, is very mutable, whiche nature doth hate.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Meate and dryn
                        〈…〉
                     e.
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      and drynke we muſt conſyder ſyxt thynges,
                  
                     Subſtaunce.
                     Quantitie.
                     Qualitie.
                     Cuſtome.
                     Tyme.
                     Order.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Subſtaunce, ſome is good, whiche maketh good 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and good bloud, ſome is ylle, and 
                        ••
                     gendi
                        •
                     th ylle iuyce and ylle bloudde.
                  
                     Meates and drynkes makyng good 
                           〈…〉
                        ce.
                     ¶ Bread of pure floure, of good whete ſomewhat leuened, welle baked, not to olde nor to ſtale.
                     Egges of feſauntes, hennes, or patryches newe layd, poched, meane betwene rere and harde.
                     Mylke newe mylked, dronke faſtynge,
                     Wherin is ſugar, or the leues of mintes.
                     Feſauntes.
                     Pairiches or chykens.
                     Capons or hennes.
                     Byrdes of the feldes.
                     Fyſhe of ſtony ryuers.
                     Veale ſuckynge.
                     Porke yonge.
                     Biefe not paſſynge .iii. yeres.
                     Pygeons.
                     Venyſon of redde dere.
                     Peaſe potage with myntes.
                     
                        
Fate of ſwyne or calues.
                     Fygges rype,

                           before meales.
                        
                     
                     Rayſons,
                     Borage.
                     Languedebiefe.
                     Perſely.
                     Myntes.
                     Ryce with almonde myſhe.
                     Letyſe.
                     Cykorye.
                     Grapes rype.
                     Wynes good moderatly takē, wel fined.
                     Ale and biere ſyxe dayes olde, cleane brewed, and not ſtronge.
                     Myrthe and gladneſſe.
                     The lyuer and braynes of hennes and chykens, and yonge geeſe.
                  
                  
                     Meates and drynkes makynge ylle iuyce.
                     Olde biefe.
                     Olde mutton.
                     Geeſe olde.
                     Swanne olde.
                     Duekes of the kanell.
                     Inwarde of beaſtes.
                     Blacke puddynges.
                     The hart lyuer & kydneys of all beſtes.
                     The braynes & mary of the backbone.
                     Wodde cul
                           •
                        ers.
                     Shell fyſhe, excepte creuyſe deaudoulce
                     Cheſe harde.
                     Apples and peares moche vſed.
                     Fygges and grapes not rype.
                     All rawe herbes, excepte letyſe, borage,

and cykorie.
                     Onyons,
                     Garlyke,

                           immoderatelye vſed, ſpecyally in Cholericke ſtomackes.
                        
                     
                     Leekes.
                     Wyne in muſte or ſowre.
                     Feare, ſorowe, and penſyfeneſſt.
                  
                  
                     Meates ingendrynge choler.
                     Garlyke.
                     Onyons.
                     Rokat,
                     Kerſis,
                     Lekes,
                     Muſtarde,
                     Pepper,
                     Houye,
                     Wyne moche Dronken.
                     Swete meates.
                  
                  
                     Meates ingendrynge fleume.
                     All ſlymy and deauynge meates.
                     Cheſe newe.
                     All fyſh, ſpecially in a flematike ſtoma
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Inwardes of beaſtes.
                     Lambes fleſhe.
                     The ſynewe partes of fleſhe.
                     Skynnes.
                     Braynes.
                     Lunges.
                     Rapes.
                     Cucumbers.
                     Replecion,
                     Lacke of exerciſ
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Meates ingendrynge melancholy.
                     Biefe,
                     Gotes fleſhe,
                     Hares fleſhe,
                     Bores fleſhe,
                     Salte fleſhe,
                     Salte fyſſhe,
                     Cole wortes,
                     All pulſe excepte white peaſon.
                     Browne breadde courſe.
                     Thycke wyne,
                     Blacke wyne,
                     Olde cheſe,
                     Olde fleſhe.
                     Greate fyſhes of the ſee.
                  
                  
                     Meates makynge thicke iuyce.
                     Rye breadde,
                     Muſte.
                     Breade without leuen.
                     Cake breadde.
                     See fyſhe greate.
                     Shelle fyſhe.
                     Biefe.
                     The kydneys,
                     The lyuer of a ſwyne,
                     The ſtones of beaſtes.
                     Mylke moche ſoden.
                     Rapes.
                     All rounde rootes,
                     Cukumbers.
                     Swete wyne.
                     Deepe redde wyne.
                     Garlyke,
                     
                        
Muſtarde.
                     Origanum.
                     Hyſope.
                     Baſylle.
                     Fenell.
                     Cheſe.
                     Egges fryed or harde.
                     Cheſte
                           •
                         nuttes.
                     Nau
                           •
                        wes.
                     Fygges grene.
                     Appulles not rype.
                     Pepper.
                     Rokat, moche vſed.
                     Leekes. moche vſed.
                     Oynyons moche vſed.
                  
                  
                     Meates whiche do hurte the teeth.
                     ¶ Very hotte meates.
                     Nuttes.
                     Swete meates and dryntkes.
                     Rodyſſhe rootes.
                     Harde meates.
                     Mylke.
                     Bytter meates.
                     Moche vomyte.
                     Leekes.
                     Fyſhe fatte.
                     Lymons.
                     Colewortes.
                  
                  
                     Meates Whiche do hurte the eyes.
                     ¶ 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     
                        
Lechery.
                     Muſte.
                     All poulſe.
                     Swete wynes and thycke wynes.
                     Hempe ſede.
                     Very ſalte meates.
                     Garlyke.
                     Oynyons.
                     Colewortes.
                     Radyſhe.
                     Readynge after ſupper immediately.
                  
                  
                     Makynge great oppilations.
                     ¶ Thycke mylke.
                     All ſwete thynges.
                     Rye breadde.
                     Sweete wynes.
                  
                  
                     Meates inflatynge or Wyndy.
                     ¶ Beanes.
                     Lupynes.
                     Cicer.
                     Mille.
                     Cucumbers.
                     All iuyce of h
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Fygges drye.
                     Rapes.
                     Nauews rawe.
                     Mylke.
                     Honye not well clarified.
                     Swete wyne.
                     Muſte.
                  
                  
                     
                     Thynges good for the heed
                     ¶ Cububes.
                     Galyngale.
                     Lignum alnes.
                     Maioram.
                     Baulme myntes.
                     Gladen.
                     Nutmygges.
                     M
                           〈…〉
                        e.
                     Roſemarye.
                     Roſes.
                     Pionye.
                     Hiſſope.
                     Spyke.
                     Camomyll,
                     Mellylote.
                     
                        
                           •
                        ewe.
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        a
                           •
                        kyn
                           〈…〉
                        ſe.
                  
                  
                     Thynges good for the harte
                     ¶ Cyramome.
                     Saffron.
                     Corall.
                     Cl
                           •
                        ues.
                     Lignum aloes.
                     Perles.
                     Macis.
                     Baulme myntes.
                     Myrabolanes.
                     Muſke,
                     Nutmigges.
                     Roſemarye.
                     The bone of the harte of a redde dere.
                     Maioram.
                     Bugloſſe.
                     Borage.
                     Setuall.
                  
                  
                     Thynges good for the liuer
                     ¶ worme wode.
                     With wynde.
                     Agrymonye.
                     Saffron.
                     Clones.
                     Endyue.
                     Lyuer worte.
                     Cyhorie.
                     Plantayne.
                     Dragons.
                     Rayſons greate.
                     Saunders.
                     Fen
                           •
                        lle.
                     Violetres.
                     Roſe water.
                     Letyſe.
                  
                  
                     Thynges good for the lunges
                     ¶ Elycampane.
                     Hyſope.
                     Scabioſe.
                     Lyko
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     Rayſons.
                     Maydenheare.
                     
                        
Penidies.
                     Almondes.
                     Dates.
                     Piſtacis.
                  
                  
                     Thynges good for the eies
                     Eyebryght.
                     Fenyll.
                     Veruyn.
                     Roſes.
                     Celandyne.
                     Agrymonye.
                     Cloues.
                     Colde water.
                  
                  
                     Thynges good for the ſtomake
                     ¶ Myrabolanes
                     Nutmygges.
                     Organum.
                     Pyſtaces.
                     Ouynces.
                     Olybanum.
                     Wormewode.
                     Saffron.
                     Corall.
                     Agrymonye.
                     Funitorye.
                     Galyngale.
                     Cloues.
                     Lignum aloes.
                     Maſtix.
                     Mynt.
                     Spodium.
                     The innermooſte ſkyn of a hennes gyſar.
                     Coriander prepared.
                  
               
            
         
         
            THE SECOND BOKE,
            
               Of quantitie. Cap. 1.
               
                  
                     THE QVANTITIE of meate muſt be proporcioned after the ſubſtaunce and qualitie thereof, and accordyng to the complexion of hym that eateth Fyrſt it ought to be remēbred, that meates hotte and moyſte, whiche are qualities of the bloudde, are ſoone tourned into bloudde, and therfore moche nouryſheth the body. Some meates do nouriſh but

lyttell, hauynge lyttell conformitie with bloude in theyr qualities. Of them, whiche do neryſhe, ſome are more groſſe, ſome lyghter in digeſsion. The groſſe meate ingendreth groſſe bloude, but where it is wel concoct in the ſlomake, and well digeſted, it maketh the fleſſhe more firme, and the officiall membres more ſtronge, thanne fyne metes. wherfore of men, which vſe moch labour or exerciſe, alſo of them, which haue very cholerike ſtomakes, hore in England, groſſe meates may be eaten in a great quantitie: and in a cholerike ſtomake biefe is better digeſted than a chykens legge, foraſmoche as in a ho
                     •
                  fe ſtomacke fyne meates be ſhortely aduſte and corrupted. Contrarywyſe in a colde or fleumatike ſtomake groſſe meate abydeth longe vndigeſted, and maketh putrifyed matter, lyght meates therfore be to ſuche a ſtomacke more apte and conuenient. The temperate bodye is beſt nouryſſhed with a lyttell quantitie of groſſe meates: but of tempecate meates in ſubſtance and qualitie, they may ſafely eate a good quantitie. Foreſene alwaye, that they eate without gourmandyſe, or leaue with ſome appetite. And here it wold be remembred, that the cholerike ſtomake, doth not deſyre ſo moch as he may digeſte, the melancholye ſtomake may not digeſte ſo moche as he deſyreth: for colde maketh appetyte, but naturall heate concocteth or boyleth. Not withſtandynge vnnaturall or ſupernaturall heate diſtroyeth appetyte, and corrupteth digeſtion, as it appereth in feuers. Moreouer fruytes and herbes, ſpecially rawe, wolde be eaten in a ſmalle quantitie, all though the perſone be very cholerike, foraſmoch

as they do ingender thynne watry bloudde, apt to receyue putrifaction, whiche althoughe it be not ſhortely perceyued of hym that vſeth it, at length they fele it by ſondry diſeaſes, which are longe in comynge, and ſhortly ſleeth, or be hardly eſcaped. Fynallye exceſſe of meates, is to be abhorred. For as it is ſayde in the booke called Eccleſiaſticus, In moch meate ſhall be ſycknes, Eccleſiaſti co. 37. and inordinate appetite ſhall approche vnto choler. Semblably the quantitie of drynk wold be moderated, that it excede not, nor be equalle vnto the quantitie of meate, ſpecially wine, whiche moderately taken, aydeth nature, and comforteth her, and as the ſayde author of Eccleſiaſticus Eccl. 31. ſayth, wyne is a reioycynge to the ſoule and body. And Theognes ſaythe in Galenes Galen. de tuenda ſa. warke, A large draught of wyne is ylle. A moderate draught is not onely not ylle, but alſo cō
                  modious or profitable.
            
            
               ☞ Of qualitie of meates. Cap. 2.
               QValitie is in the complexion, that is to ſaye, it is the ſtate thereof, as Hotte or cold, moyſte or drye. Alſo ſome meates be in wynter colde in acte, and in vertue hotte. And it wolde be conſydered, that euery cō
                  plexion temperate & vntemperate, is cōſerued in his ſtate, by that which is lyke therto in fourme and degree. But that whiche excedeth moche in dyſtemperaunce, muſt be reduced to his temperaunce, by that whiche is contrarye to hym in fourme or qualitie, but lyke in degre moderatly vſed. By fourme is vnderſtande groſſenes, fyneneſſe,

thyckeneſſe, or thyckeneſſe, by degree, as the fyrſte, the ſeconde, the thyrde, the fourth, in heate c
                     ••
                  de, moyſture, or drythe.
            
            
               ☞ Of Cuſtome. Cap. 3.
               CVſtome in feedynge is not to be contemned, or lyttell regarded: for thoſe meates, to the whiche a ma
                     ••
                  e hath ben of longe tyme accuſtomed, though they be not of ſubſtāce commendable, yet do they ſomtyme laſſe harme 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                   than better metes, whervnto a man is not vſed. Alſo the meates and drynkes, whiche do moche del
                     •
                  te hym that eateth, or to be preferred before that, whiche is better, but more vnſauery. But if the cuſtome be ſoo perniciouſe, that it nedes 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                   muſt be lefte, than wolde it be withdrawen by lyttell and lyttell in tyme of helthe, and not of lyckeneſſe. For yf it ſhoulde be withdrawen in tyme of ſyckeneſſe, Nature ſhulde ſuſteyne treble de
                     •
                  runent, fyrſt by the grefe induced by ſyckneſſe, ſeconde by receyuynge of medicines, thirdly by forbearyng the thyng, wherin ſhe delyteth.
            
            
               ☞ Of the temperature of meates to be receyued. Cap 4.
               TO kere the body in good temper: to them whoſe naturall cōplexion is moyſte, ought to be gyuen meates that be moſte in vertue or power. Contrarywiſe to them, whoſe naturalle complexion is drye? oughte to be gyuen meates drye in vertue or power. To bodyes vntemperate, ſuche meates or drinkes are to be gyuen,

whiche be in power contrary to the diſtemperance, but the degrees are alway to be conſydered, as well of the temperance of the body, as of the meates. For where the meates do moche excede in degree the temperature of the bodye, they anoye the body in cauſyng diſtemperance, As hotte wynes, pepper, garlyke, onyons, & ſalt, be noyfull to them, which be cholerike, bycauſe they be in the hygheſt degre of heate and drieth, aboue the iuſte temperance of mannes bodye in that cōplexion. And yet be they oftentymes holſome to them, whiche be fleumatike. Contrary wyſe, colde water, colde herbes, and cold fruites moderately vſed, be holſom to choleryke bodies, by puttyng awaye the heate, excedyng the naturall temperature: and to theym, whiche be fleumatyke, they be vnholſome, and do brynge into them diſtemperance of colde and moyſte.
            
            
               
                  ❧ What diſtemperance hapneth by the exceſſe of ſondry qualities in meates and drynkes. Cap. 5.
               
                  Meates.
                  
                     
                        Colde, do congele and mortifye.
                        Moyſte, do putrifie and haſten age.
                        Drye, ſucketh vp naturall moyſture.
                        Clāmy, ſtoppeth the iſſue of vapors and vrine, and ingendreth toughe fleume and grauell.
                        Fatte and oyly, ſwymmeth longe in the ſtomake, and bryngeth in lothſomneſſe.
                        Bytter, doth not nouryſhe.
                        Salte, do frette moche the ſtomake.
                        
                           
Harryſ ſhe, lyke the taſte of wylde fruytes, do conſtipa
                              •
                           e, and reſtrayn. Swete, chauffeth the bloudde, and cauſeth opilations or ſtoppynges of the pores and cundytes of the body. Sower cooleth nature, and haſteneth age.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ❧ What commoditie happeneth by the moderate vſe of the ſayd qualities of meates and drynkes. Cap. 6.
               
                  Meates
                  
                     
                        Colde aſſwageth the bournynge of choler.
                        Moyſte, humecteth that whiche is dryed.
                        Drye, conſumeth ſuperfluouſe moyſture
                        Clammye, thycketh that, whiche is ſubtyll and percynge.
                        Bytter clenſeth and wypeth of, alſo mollifieth and expelleth fleume.
                        Salt, relenteth fleume clammy, and dryeth it.
                        Fatte and vnctuouſe, nouryſheth, and maketh ſoluble.
                        Stiptike or roughe on the toungue vyndeth and comforteth appetite.
                        Sweete dothe clenſe, diſſolue, and nouryſhe.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               ☞ Of fruites. Cap. 7.
               FOraſmoche as before that tyllage of corne was inuented, and that deuouryng of fleſh and fyſhe was of mankynde vſed, men vndoubtedly lyued by fruites, & Nature was therwith contented & ſatisfied: but by chaunge of the diete of our progenitours, there is cauſed to be in our bodies ſuch alteration from the nature, whiche was in men at the begynnyng, that nowe all fruites generally are noyfulle to man, and do ingender ylle humours, and be oftetymes the cauſe of putrified feuers, yf they be moche and contynually eaten. Not withſtandynge vnto them, whiche haue aboundaunce of choler, they be ſomtyme cōuenient, to repreſſe the flame whiche procedeth of choler. And ſomme fruytes whiche be ſtyptike, or byndynge in taſte, eaten before meales, do bynde the bealy, but eaten after meales, they be rather laxatiue. Nowe ſhall it not be vnexpedient, to wryte of ſome fruites particularly, declarynge theyr noyefull qualities in appayrynge of Nature, and howe they may be vſed with leſte detriment.
               
                  ☞ Of Gourdes.
                  GOurdes rawe be vnpleaſant in eatynge, Galen. de aliment. 2. yll for the ſtomacke, and almoſt neuer digeſted, therfore he that wylle nedes eate them muſte boyle them, toſte them, or fry them, euery way they be without ſauour or taſt, & of theyr proper nature, they gyue to the bodye colde and moyſte nouryſhement, and that verye

lyttell, but by reaſon of the ſlypperneſſe of their ſubſtaunce, and bycauſe all meates, whiche be moyſte of theyr nature, be not byndynge, they lyghtly paſſe forth by the bealy. And being well ordred, they wyll be metely concocte, yf corruption in the ſtomake do not preuente theym: they be colde and moyſte in the ſeconde degree.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of Melones and Pepones.
                  MElones and Pepones be almoſte of one kinde but that the melone is round like an apple, and the innermoſte parte therof, where the ſeedes are conteyned, is vſed to be eaten. The pepon is muche greatter, and ſomewhat longe, and the inner parte therof is not to 
                        〈◊〉
                      eaten: They bothe are very colde and moyſt, and do make yll 
                        •
                     yce in the body, yf they be not well digeſted, but the pepon moche more thanne the melon. they doo leeſt hurre, yf they be eaten afore meales. All be it yf they do fynde in the ſtomake fleume, they be tourned into fleume, yf they fynde choler, they be tourned into choler. Not withſtandyng there is in theym the vertue to clenſe and to prouoke vrine, they be colde and moyſie in the ſeconde degree.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Cucumbers.
                  CVcumbers do not excede ſo moche in moiſture as melons: and therfore they be not Galen. de alimor. 2. ſo ſoone corrupted in the ſtomake: but in ſome ſtomackes, beynge moderatelye vſed, they doo digeſte well: but yf they be aboundauntly

eaten, or moche vſed, they ingender a colde and thycke humour in the vaynes, whiche neuer or ſeldome is tourned into good bloude, and ſometyme bryngeth in feuers. Alſo they abate carnall luſte. The ſeedes as well thereof, as of melones and gourdes, beyng dryed, and made clene from the huſkes, are very medicinable agaynſte ſyckneſſes procedynge of heate, alſo the difficultie or lette in pyſſynge, they be colde and moyſte in the ſeconde degree.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Dates.
                  ¶ Be harde to dygeſte, therfore beynge moche eaten, and not well dygeſted, they anoy the hed, and cauſe gnawynge in the ſtomacke, and make groſſe iuyce, and ſomtyme cauſe obſtructions or ſtoppinges in the liuer and ſplene. And where there is inflammation or hardneſſe in the body, they are vnholſome, but beyng wel digeſted and temperately vſed, they nouryſſhe and make the fleſhe firme, and alſo bindeth the bealy: olde daies be hotte and drye in the fyrſte degree: newe gathered are hotte and moyſt in the fyrſt degre.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of fygges.
                  FIgges eaten, do ſhortly paſſe out of the ſtomacke, and are ſone diſtrybuted into all the Actius. 1. partes of the bodye, and haue the power to clenſe, ſpecially grauell, beynge in the raynes of the backe, but they make no ſubſtancial nouriſhment, but rather ſomewhat lowſe and wyndye, but by theyr quycke paſſage, the wynde is ſoone diſſolued. Therfore yf they be rype, they do leeſt

harme of any fruytes, or almoſt none. Drye figges and olde, are more hotte and moyſte thanne newe gathered, but being moch eaten they make yll bloudde and iuyce, and as ſome do ſuppoſe, do ingender lyce, and alſo anoyeth the lyuer and the ſplent, if they be inflamed, but hauynge the power to attenuate or make humours currant, they make the bodye ſoluble, and doo clenſe the raynes. Alſo beynge eaten afore dyner with ginger or pepper, or powder of tyme, or penyroyall, they profyte moche to them, whiche haue oppilations or hard congeled matter in the inner partes of the body, or haue diſtillations or reumes fallynge into the breſte and ſtomake. Newe fygges are hote and moyſte, olde fygges are hote in the fyrſte degree, and drye in the ſeconde.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of grapes and rayſons.
                  GRapes do not nouryſhe ſo moche as fygges, but beinge type, they make not moch Galen. de aliment. 2. yll iuyce in the body: all be it newely gathered, they trouble the bely, & fylleth the ſtomake with wynd, therfore yf they be hanged vp a whyle, er they be eaten, they are the laſſe noyfull. Sweete grapes, are hotteſt, and doo lowſe ſomewhat, and make a manne thyrſtye, Sowre grapes are colde, and do alſo lowſe, but Dioſco. 5. they are harde of digeſtyon, and yet they do not nouryſhe. They which are in taſte bytter or harryſhe, be lyke to theym that are ſowre. Rayſons do make the ſtomake firme and ſtronge, and do prouoke appetite, and do cōfort weake bodies, being eatē afore meales, they be hote in the firſt

degre, and moyſt in ſeconde.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of Cheries.
                  CHeries, yf they be ſweete, they do ſoone ſlyp downe into the ſtomake, but yf they be ſowre or ſharpe, they be more holſom, & do louſe, yf they be eatē freſhe, & newly gathered, they be cold & moyſt in the fyrſt degre.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of peaches.
                  PEaches do laſſe harme, and do make better iuyce in the bodye, for they are not ſoo ſoone corrupted beyng eaten. Of the iuyce of them maye be made a ſyrope, very holſome againſt the diſtemperaūce of choler, wherof procedeth a ſtynkynge breathe, they be colde in the fyrſt degree, and moyſte in the ſeconde.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of appulles.
                  AL appulles eaten ſoone after that they be gathered, are colde, hard to digeſt, and do make yll and corrupted bloudde, but beynge well kepte vntyll the next wynter, or the yere folowynge, eaten after meales, they are ryght holſom, and do confyrme the ſtomake, and make good digeſtion, ſpecially yf they be roſted or baken, moſte properly in a cholerike ſtomake, they are beſt p̄ſerued in hony, ſo that one touche not an other. The rough taſted apples are holſome, where the ſtomake is weake by dyſtemperaunce of heate or moche moyſture. The bytter

apples, where that grief is increaced. The ſoure appuls, where the matter in congeled or made thycke with heate. In diſtemperature of heate and dryeth by drynkyng moche wyne, they haue ben founde commodiouſe: being eaten at nyght, goinge to bedde, withoute drinkynge to theym, they be colde and moyſte in the fyrſte degre.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of Quynces.
                  QVynces be colde and drye, eaten afore meale, they bynd & reſtraine the ſtomak, that it may not digeſte welle the meate, except that they be roſted or ſodden, the core taken out and mixte with honye claryfyed, or ſugar, than they cauſe good appetyte, and preſerueth the heed from drunkennes: taken after meate, it cloſeth and draweth the ſtomake to gyther, and helpeth it to dygeſte, and mollifieth the bealy, yf it be aboundantely taken: they be colde in the fyrſte degree, and drye in the begynnynge of the ſeconde.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of Pomegranates.
                  POmegranates be of good iuyce, and profytable to the ſtomake, ſpecially they, whiche are ſweete, but in a hotte feuer, they that are ſowre be more expedient and holſome. for than the ſwete do intende heate, and puffe vp the ſtomake.
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ Of Peares.
                  PEares are moche of the nature of apples, but they are heuyer, but taken after meate roſted or baken, they are not vnholſome, and do reſtrayne and knytte the ſtomake, beyng rype
                        •
                      they be colde and moyſte in the fyrſt degre.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Medlars.
                  MEdlars are colde and drye, and conſtrictiue or ſtraynynge the ſtomake, and therfore they may be eaten after meales, as a medicine, but not vſed as meate, for they ingender melancholye, they be colde and drye in the ſeconde degree.
               
               
                  ☞ Walnuttes
                  VAlnuttes, yf they be blaunched, are ſuppoſed to be good for the ſtomake, & ſomwhat lowſynge the bealy, myxte with ſugar, they do nouryſſhe temperately. Of two drye nuttes, as many fygges, and .xx. leaues of Rewe with a grayne of ſalte, is wade a medycine, wherof yf one do eate faſtynge, nothynge whiche is venemous may that day hurte hym, and it alſo preſerueth againſt the peſtilence, and this is the very ryght Mithridate. they be hotte and drie in the ſeconde degree, after ſome oppinions hotte in the thyrde degre, drye in the ſeconde.
               
               
                  ☞ Fylberdes and haſylnuttes.
                  ¶ They are more ſtrong in ſubſtance than wall

nuttes, wherfore they are not ſo eaſily or ſoone digeſted. Alſo they do inflate the ſtomacke, and cauſe heed ache, but they ingender fatte. And yf they be roſted, they are good to reſtrayne rewmes. Alſo eaten with pepper, they are good agaynſt tourmentes of the bealye, and the ſtoppynge of vryne. They be hotte and drye in the fyrſte degree.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of Almondes
                  THey do extenuate and clenſe without any byndynge, wherfore they purge the breſte and lunges, ſpecially bytter almondes. Alſo they do mollifye the bealy, prouoke ſleape, and cauſeth to pyſſe well, fyue or ſyx of theym eaten afore meate, kepe a manne from beynge drunke, they be hot and moyſt in the fyrſt degre.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of Cheſtyns
                  ¶ They beinge roſted vnder the ymbers or hot aſſhes, doo nouryſſhe the bodye ſtrongely, and eaten with hony faſtynge, do helpe a manne of the cowghe.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Prunes
                  OF the gardeyne and type, doo diſpoſe a man to the ſtoole, but they do brynge noo maner of nouryſhement. To this fruyte lyke as to fygges this propertie romayneth, that being dryed they do profyte. The damaſ
                        •
                     e prune rather byndeth than lowſeth, and

is more commodiouſe vnto the ſtomake they be colde and moyſte in the ſeconde degre.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Olyues
                  COndyte in ſalte lycoure, taken at the begynnynge of a meale doth corroborate the ſtomake, ſtireth appetite, and louſeth the bealy, beynge eaten with vyneger. They whiche be rype, are temperatly hote, they which be grene, are colde and drye.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of Capers
                  THey nouryſhe nothynge after that they be ſalted, but yet they make the bely louſe and purgeth fleume, whiche is therin conteyned. Galen. de alime. 2. Alſo ſtyrreth appetite to meate and openeth the obſtructions or ſtoppynge of the lyuer and ſplene, beynge eaten with oximell, before any other meate: they be hotte and drye in the ſeconde degree.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Orenges
                  ¶ The ryndes taken in a lyttell quantitie, doo comforte the ſtomake, where it digeſteth, ſpecially condite with ſugar, and taken faſtynge in a ſmall quantitie. The iuyce of orenges, hauynge a toſte of bredde put vnto it, with a lyttell powder of myntes, ſugar, and a lyttell cynamome, maketh a very good ſauce to prouoke appetite. The iuyce eaten with ſugar in a hotte feuer, is not to be diſcommended. The rynde is hotte in the fyrſt degree, and drye in the ſecond: the iuyce of them is colde in the ſeconde degree, and drye in the fyrſte.
               
            
            
               
               ☞ Herbes vſed in potage or to eate. Capitulo. 8.
               GEnerally al herbes rawe, and not ſodden, do ingender cold and watry iuyce, yf they be eaten cuſtomably, or in abundance: all be it ſome herbes are more comeſtyble, & doo laſſe harme vnto nature, and moderatelye vſed, maketh inetely good bloudde.
               
                  ☞ Lettyſe.
                  AMonge all herbes, none hath ſoo good iuyce as letiſe: for ſomemen do ſuppoſe, that it maketh aboundance of bloude, al be it not very pure or perfyte. It doth ſet a hote ſtomake in a very good temper, & maketh good appetite, and eaten in the euennynge, it prouoketh ſlepe, albe it, it neither doth lowſe nor bynd the bealye of his owne propertie. It increaſeth mylke in a womans breaſtes, but it abateth carnall appetite, and moche vſynge therof, hurteth the eye ſyghte. It is colde and moyſt temperatly
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Colewortes and Cabages.
                  BEfore that auarice cauſed marchantes to fetche out of the eaſte and ſouth partes of the worlde, the traffyke of ſpyce and ſondry droughes, to contente the vnſaciableneſſe of wanton appetites, Colewortes for the vertues ſuppoſed to be in them, were of ſuch eſtimation, that they were iudged to be a ſufficient medycyne agaynſt all diſeaſes, as it maye appere in the booke of wyſe Cato, wherein he wryteth of

huſbandrye. But now I wyll no more remember, than ſhall be requyred, in that whiche ſhall be vſed as meate and not pure medicyne. The iuyce therof hathe vertue to pourge: the holle leaues beynge halfe ſodden, and the water poured out, and they beynge put eftſones into hotte water, and ſodden vntyll they be tender, ſo eaten they do bynde the bealy. Some do ſuppoſe, yf they be eaten raw with vineger, before meat, it ſhall preſerue the ſtomacke from ſurfettynge, and the heed from drunkenneſſe: all be it moche vſynge of them dulleth the ſyght, except the eies be very moyſt. Fynally the iuyce that it maketh in the body is not ſo commendable, as that whiche is ingendred of lettyſe. It is hote in the firſt degree, and drye in the ſeconde.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of Cikorie or ſuckorie.
                  IT is lyke in operation to lettyſe, & tempereth choler wonderfully, and therfore in all cholerike feuers, the decoctiō of this herbe or the water therof ſtylled, is ryghte expedient. ſemblably the herbe and rote boiled with fleſhe, that is freſhe beyng eaten, kepeth the ſtomacke and hed in verye good temper. I ſuppoſe that Southyſtell and Dentdelyon, be of lyke qualities, but not ſo conuenient to be vſed of theym, whiche are hole, bycauſe they are wylde of nature and more bytter, and therfore cauſeth faſtidiouſneſſe or lothſomneſſe of the ſtomacke. It is colde and drye in the ſeconde degree.
               
               
                  
                  ☞ Endyue and Scariole
                  BE moche lyke in theyr operation to Cykorie, but they are more conuenient to medicine than to meate. All be if Scariole callyd whyte Endyue, hauynge the toppes of the leaues tourned in, and layde in the erthe, at the latter ende of ſommer, and couered, becommeth whyte and criſpe, lyke to the great ſtalkes of ca bage lettyſe, whiche are in wynter taken vp and eaten. And to theym that haue hotte ſtomakes and drye, they be ryght holſome, but beynge to moche vſed, or in very great quantitie they ingender the humour, whiche maketh the cholike▪ they be colde and moyſte in the fyrſte degree.
               
               
                  ☞ Malowes
                  ¶ Are not colde in operacion, but rather ſomewhat warme, and haue in them a ſlypperneſſe: Gale. 2. de alimentis. wherfore beynge boyled and moderatelye eaten with oyle and vyneger, they make metely good concoction in the ſtomake, and cauſeth the ſuperfluous matter therin eaſily to paſſe, and clen ſeth the bealye. It is hotte and moyſte in the fyrſte degree.
               
               
                  ☞ Whyte betis
                  ¶ Are alſo abſterſiue and lowſeth the bealy, but moche eaten, annoveth the ſtomake: but they ar ryght good agaynſte obſtructions or ſtoppynge of the lyuer, yf they be eaten with vyneger or muſtarde, lykewyſe it helpeth the ſplene. It is colde in the fyrſt degre, and moyſt in the ſecond.
               
               
                  
                  ☞ Pourſelan.
                  Doth mitigate the great heate in all the inwarde partes of the body, ſemblably of the hed and eies: alſo it repreſſeth the rage of Venus, but yf it be preſerued in ſalte or bryne, it heateth and pourgeth the ſtomacke. It is colde in the thirde degre, and moyſte in the ſeconde.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Cheruyle.
                  Is very profytable vnto the ſtomacke, but it maye not ſuſteyne very moche boylynge, eaten with vineger, it prouoketh appetyte, and alſo vrine. The decoction therof drunke with wyne, clenſeth the bladder.
               
               
                  ☞ Sorell.
                  Beyng ſodden, it louſeth the bealy. In a tyme of peſtilence, yf one beynge faſtynge, do chewe ſome of the leaues, and ſucke downe the iuyce, it meruaylouſely preſerueth from infections, as a newe practiſer called Guainerius, doth wryte. And I my ſelfe haue proued it in my houſehold. The ſedes therof brayed and drunke with wine and water, is very holſome agaynſte the cholike Dioſcorides li. 2. ca pit. 106. and frettynge of the guttes: it ſtoppeth fluxes, and helpeth the ſtomake anoyed with replecion. It is colde in the thyrde degree, and drye in the ſeconde.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Perſely.
                  Is very conuenient to the ſtomake, and comforteth appetite, and maketh the breath ſweete, the ſedes and roote cauſeth vrine to paſſe well, and breaketh the ſtoone, diſſolueth wyndes: the rootes boiled in water, and therof oxymel being

made, it diſſolueth fleume, and maketh good digeſtion. It is hotte and drye in the thyrd degre.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Fenell,
                  ¶ Beynge eaten the ſede or rote maketh abundance of mylke, lykewyſe drunke with ptyſane or ale. The ſede ſommewhat reſtrayneth fluxe, prouoketh to pyſſe, and mytigateth frettynges of the ſtomacke and guttes, ſpecially the decoction of the rote, yf the matter, cauſynge fretting be colds, but yf it be of a horte cauſe, the vſe 
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                      therof is daungerouſe, for inflammation or exulce
                        •
                     ation of the raynes or bladder. It is hotte in the thyrde degree, and drye in the fyrſte.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Anyſe ſede.
                  Maketh ſwete breathe, prouoketh vrine, and dryueth downe thinges, cleauyng to the raynes, or bladder, ſtyrreth vp courage, and cauſeth abundance of mylke. It is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree.
               
               
                  Beanes.
                  They make wynde, howe ſo euer they be ordered: the ſubſtance, whiche they doo make, is ſpungye, and not firme, all be it they be abſterſyue, or clenſynge the bodye, they tarye longe, or they be digeſted, and make groſſe iuyce in the body, but yf onyons be ſodden with them, they be laſſe noyfull.
               
               
                  ☞ Peaſyn.
                  Are moche of the nature of beanes, but they be laſſe wyndy, and paſſeth faſter out of the body: they be alſo abſterſyue, or clenſyng, ſpecially white peaſon, and they alſo cauſe merely good

nouryſhynge, the huſkes taken awaye. And the brothe wherin they be ſodden, cleuſeth ryghte well the raynes and bladder.
               
            
            
               ☞ Rape rotes and Nauews. Cap. 9.
               THe iuyce made by them, is very groſſe: & therfore beyng moch eaten, if they be not perfytely concocte in the ſtomake, they do make crude or rawe iuyce in the vaynes. Alſo yf they be not well boyled, they cauſe wyndes, and annoye the ſtomake, & make ſomtyme frettynges: If they be well boyled fyrſte in cleane water, and that beinge caſte away, the ſecond tyme with fatte fleſhe, they nouryſ ſhe moche, and do neyther lowſe nor bynde the bely. But Nauews do not nouryſhe ſo moche as rapes, but they be euen as wyndy.
               
                  
                     ❧ Turnepes,
                  Beyng well boyled in water, and after with fatte fleſhe, nouryſheth moche, augmenteth the ſede of man, prouoketh carnall luſt. Eaten raw, they ſtyre vp appetite to eate▪ beynge temperatly vſed, and be conuenient vnto them, whiche haue putrifyed matter in theyr breſtes or lunges, cauſynge theym to ſpytte eaſ
                        •
                     ly, but beynge moche and often eaten, they make raw iuyce and wyndyneſſe.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Parſneps and carettes.
                  They do nouryſhe with better iuyce than the other rootes, ſpecially carettes, whiche are hote & drye, and erpelleth wynde. Not withſtandyng Gal. ſimp. med
                           •
                        . li. 7. moche vſed they ingender yll iuyce: but carettes

laſſe than parſnepes, the done and the other expelleth vrine.
               
               
                  ☞ Radyſſhe rotes.
                  Haue the vertue to extenuate, or make thyn, and alſo to warme. Alſo they cauſe to breake Paulus Ae ginera. Dioſcorides. Li. 7. de aliment. wynde, and to pyſſe: beyng eaten afore meales, they lette the meate, that it may not deſcend, but being eaten laſte, they make good digeſtion, and louſeth the bealy, thoughe Galenus write contrary. For I, amonge dyuers other, by experience haue proued it: Notwithſtandyng they be vnholſome for theym, that haue contynually the goute, or payne in the ioyntes.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Garlyke.
                  It doth extenuate and cutte groſſe humours and ſlymy, diſſolueth groſſe wyndes, and heateth all the body: alſo openeth the places, which are ſtopped, generally where it is well digeſted in the ſ
                        •
                     omake: it is holſom to dyuers purpoſes, ſpecially in the bodye, wherein is groſſe matter, or moche colde incloſed: yf it be ſodden vntyll it toſ
                        •
                     th his 
                        •
                     arteneſſe, it ſomewhat nouryſſheth, and yet looſeth not his propertie, to extenuate groſſe humours: beinge ſodden in mylke, it profyteth moch agaynſt diſtillations from the heed into the ſtomake.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Onyons.
                  Do alſo extenuate, but the longe onions more than the rounde, the redde more than the white, the drye more than they whiche be greene: alſo rawe more than ſodden: they ſtyre appetite to meate, and put awaye lothſomneſſe, and lowſe the bealy, they quycken ſyght: and beynge eaten in great abundance with meate, they cauſe one

to ſleape ſoundely.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Leekes.
                  Be of yll iuyce, and do make troublous dreames, but they do extenuate and clenſe the body. Galen 7. cap. 138. and alſo make it ſoluble, and prouoketh vrine. Moreouer it cauſeth one to ſpette out eaſily the fleume, whiche is in the breaſte.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Sauge
                  It heateth, and ſomwhat byndeth, and therwith prouoketh vrine, the decoction of the leaues and braunches beinge druncke. Alſo it ſtoppeth bleedynge of woundes, beinge layde vnto them. Moreouer it hath ben proued, that women, whiche haue ben longe tyme without childerne, and haue drunke. r. ounces of the iuyce of ſauge, with a grayne of ſalte, a quarter of an houre before, that they haue companyed with theyr huſbandes, haue conceyued at that tyme. It is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree, the vſynge therof is good agaynſt palſeyes.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Iſope.
                  Doth heate and extenuate, wherby it dygeſteth ſlymye fleume: beynge prepared with fygges, it pourged fleume downewarde, with honye and water vpwarde, boyled in vyneger, it helpeth the toth ake, yf the te the be waſhed ther with: it is hotte and drye in the thyrde degre.
               
               
                  ☞ Bourage.
                  Comforteth the harte, and maketh one mery, eaten rawe before meales, or layde in wyne that is drunke: Alſo mollyfieth the bealye, and prepareth to the ſtoole. It is hotte and moyſt in the myddell of the fyrſt degree.
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ Sauery.
                  Purgeth fleume, helpeth dygeſtyon, maketh quycke ſyghte, prouoketh vryne, and ſtyreth carnal apetite: It is hot and dry in the thyrd degre.
               
               
                  ☞ Rokat.
                  Heateth moche, and increaſeth ſeede of man, 
                        •
                     ouoketh courage, helpeth dig
                        •
                     ſtion, and ſomewhat louſeth. It is hotte and moyſte in the ſeconde degree.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Tyme.
                  Diſſolueth wyndes, breaketh the ſtone, expelleth vrine, and ceaſſeth freattynges. It is hote and drye in the thyrde degree.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Penyryall.
                  Dothe ertenuate, heate, and decocte, it reformeth the ſtomake, oppreſſed with fleume, it doth recomforte the faynte ſpirire, it expelleth melancholy by ſiege, and is medicinable agaynſte many diſeaſes, it is hotte & drye in the thyrd degre.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Townecreſſes.
                  ¶ Paulus dyſcommendeth, ſayeng, that it reſiſteth Lib. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . concoction, and hurteth the ſtomacke, and maketh yll iuyce in the body, taken as medicine, it helpeth many diſeaſes. It is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Roſemary.
                  Hath the veriue to heate, and therfore it diſſolueth humour congeled with colde: It helpeth agaynſt palſeys, fallyng ſyckenes, olde diſeaſes of the breaſte▪ tourmentes or frettyng, it prouoketh vrine and ſweat: it helpeth the cough taken with pepper and hony, it putteth away to the ake. the roote beyng chewed, or the iuyce therof put into

the to the: beinge bourned, the fume therof reſyſteth the peſtplence: the rynde therof ſodden or burned, & the fume receyueth at the mouth, ſtop peth the reume, which falleth out of the heed into the chekes or throote: whiche I my ſelfe haue proued, the grene leaues bruyſed, do ſtoppe the hemorroides, yf they be layde vnto them: this herbe is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree.
               
            
            
               ☞ Spices growyng out of this realme vſed in meate or drynke. Cap. 10,
               
                  
                     ❧ Pepper.
                  BLacke pepper is hotteſt, and mooſte drye, whyte pepper is next, longe pepper is moſt temperate. The generall propertye of all kyndes of pepper is to heate the bodye, but as Galene ſayth, it perceth downeward, and dothe not ſpreade into the vaynes, yf it be groſſe beaten. It diſſolueth fleume and wynde, it helpethe digeſtion, expulſeth vrine, and it helpeth agaynſt the diſeaſes of the breaſte, procedynge of colde. It is hot in the fyrſte degre, & dry in the ſecond
               
               
                  ☞ Gynger.
                  Heateth the ſtomake, and helpeth dygeſtyon, but it heateth not ſo ſoone as pepper: but afterwarde the heate remayneth longer, and cauſeth the mouth to be moyſre: Beynge grene, or well confectioned in ſyrope, it comforteth moche the ſtomake and heed, and quyckneth remembrance. if it be taken in the morowe faſtynge. It is hote in the ſeconde degree, and drye in the fyrſte.
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ Saffron.
                  Somwhat byndeth, heateth, and comforteth the ſtomake, and the harte ſpecially, and maketh good digeſtion, being eaten or drunken in a ſmal quantitie. It is hotte in the ſeconde degree, and drye in the fyrſte.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Cloues.
                  Hath vertue to comforte the ſynewes, alſo to conſume and diſſolue ſuperfluouſe humoures, They be hotte and drye in the thyrde degre: ſoddē with mylk, it cōforteth the debilite of nature.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Maſes.
                  Dioſcorides commendeth to be drunke againſt ſpyttynge of bloudde, and blouddy fluxes, and exceſſiue laxes. Paulus Jegineta, addeth to it that it helpeth the cholyke: they be hotte in the ſeconde degree and drye in the thyrde degre. It is to the ſtomake very commodiouſe, taken in a lyttell quantitie.
               
               
                  ☞ Nutmigges
                  With theyr ſwete odour comfote and diſſolue, and ſomtyme comforteth the power of the ſight and alſo the brayn in cold diſcraſies, and is hote and drye in the ſecond degre.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of breade. Cap. 11.
               Breade of fyne floure of wheate, hauynge no 
                     ••
                  uyn, is ſlewe of digeſtion, and maketh 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  nours, but it nouryſſheth moche: yf it be l
                     ••
                  yned, it dygeſteth ſooner: breade 
                     〈…〉
                  ynge moche branne, fylleth the bealye with excrementes, and nouryſſheth lyttell or nothyng, but ſhortely deſcendeth from the ſtomacke: The

meane betwene bothe, ſuffyciently leuyned, well moulded, and moderately baken, is the moſt hol ſome to euery age. The greateſt loues do noriſhe moſte faſte, for as moch as the fyre hath not exhauſted the moyſture of theym. Hotte breadde, moche eaten, maketh fulneſſe and thyrſte, and ſlowely paſſeth. Barley bread clenſeth the body, and doth not nouryſhe ſo moche as wheate, and maketh colde iuyce in the body.
            
            
               ☞ Of fleſſhe. Capi. 12.
               BEfe of Englande to Englyſhemen, whiche are in helthe, bryngeth ſtronge nouryſſhynge, but it maketh groſſe bloudde, and ingendreth melancoly: but being of yonge oxen, not excedynge the age of foure yeares, to them, which haue cholerike ſtomakes, it is more conuenient, thanne chykens, and other lyke fine meates.
               
                  Swynes fleſſhe.
                  ¶ Aboue all kyndes of fleſhe in nouryſhyng the body, Galene moſt cōmendeth porke, not beinge of an olde ſwyne, and that it be well digeſted of hym, that eateth it. For it maketh beſte iuyce, it is moſte conuenient for yong perſons, and them, whiche haue ſuſteyned moche labour, and therwith are fatigate, and become weake. Yong pig ges are not commended before that they be one moneth olde, for they do brede moche ſuperfluous humours.
               
               
                  Lambe.
                  Is very moyſte and fleumatyke, wherfore it is not conueniente for aged men, excepte that it be very drye roſted, nor yet for theym whiche haue in theyr ſtomake moche fleume.
               
               
                  
                  ☞ Mutton.
                  ¶ Galene doth not commende it, not withſtanding De alimē. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                           •
                        . experience proueth here in this realme, that if it be yonge, it is a ryght temperate meate, and maketh good iuyce: and therfore it is vſed more than any other meate, in all diſeaſes. And yet it is not lyke good in all places, nor the ſhepe, whiche beareth fyneſt wolle, is not the ſweteſt in eatynge, nor the moſte tender. But I haue founde in ſome countrays mutton, which in whitenes, tenderneſſe, and ſweteneſſe of the fleſhe, mought be well nygh compared to kydde, and in digeſtion haue proued as holſome.
               
               
                  Kydde and veale.
                  Of Galene is cōmended next vnto porke, but ſome men do ſuppoſe, that in helth and ſickneſſe they be moche better thanne porke, the iuyce of them both beyng more pure. And here it is to be noted, that of all beaſtes, whiche be dry of theyr nature the yongeſt be moſt holſom: of them that are moyſte, the eldeſt are leſt hurtfull.
               
               
                  Hare, Conye.
                  Maketh groſſe bloude, it dryeth and ſtoppeth, but yet it prouoketh a man to pyſſe. Conye maketh Hippo. de 
                           •
                        atione vi 
                           •
                        us lib. 
                           •
                        . capit. 19. Plin. 
                           •
                        3. better and more pure nouryſhement, and is ſoner digeſted than hare. It is well proued, that there is n
                        •
                     o meate more holſome, or that more cleane, firmely, and temperatelye nouryſſhethe than rabettes.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Dere redde and falowe.
                  Hippocrates affyrmeth the fleſhe of hartes and hyndes, to be of yll iuyce, harde of digeſtion, and drye, but yet it moueth vrine. Of falowe dere, he nor any other olde wryter doth ſpeake

of, as I remember. I ſuppoſe, bycauſe there be not in all the worlde ſo men, as be in England, where they conſume a good part of the beſt paſture in the realme, and are in nothynge profytable, ſauynge that of the ſkynnes of theym is made better lether, than is of calues: the huntyng of them beyng not ſo pleaſant, as the huntynge of other venerye or vermyne, the fleſſhe moche more vnholſome and vnpleaſant, than of a redde dere, ingendrynge melancholy, and makynge many fearefulle dreames, and diſpoſeth the bodye to a feuer, yf it be moche eaten: not withſtandynge the fatte therof (as ſome lerned menne haue ſuppoſed) is better to be dygeſted, than the leane.
               
               
                  Of byrdes.
                  The fleſhe of all byrdes, is moche lyghter, thā the fleſhe of beaſtes in compariſon, moſte ſpecyally of thoſe foules, whiche truſte moſte to their wynges, and do brede in hygh countreyes.
               
               
                  Capons, hennes, and chyckens.
                  The Capon is aboue al other foules prayſed, for as moch as it is eaſily digeſted, and maketh lyttell ordure, and moch good nouryſhement. It is commodiouſe to the breſte and ſtomake. Hennes in wynter are almoſt equall vnto the capon: but they do not make ſo ſtronge nouryſhement. Auycen ſayth, yf they be roſted in the bealy of a kydde or lambe, they wyl be the better. Chikens in ſommer, ſpecially yf they be 
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     k
                        •
                     elles, are very conuenyent for a weake ſtomake, and nouryſheth a lyttell. The fleſſhe of a rocke is harde of dy
                        ••••
                     ion, but the broth, wherin it is boyled, louſeth the bealy, and hauyng ſodden in it colewortes,

Polypodium, or Cartamus, it pourgeth yll huinours, and is medicmable agaynſte goutes, ioynt aches, and feuers, which come by courſes.
               
               
                  Feſannt.
                  Excedeth all fowles in ſweteneſſe and holſomneſſe, and is equall to a capon in nouriſhing, but he is ſomwhat dryer, and is of ſome menne put in comparyſon, meane betwene a henne and a patryche.
               
               
                  Partriche.
                  Of all foules is moſte ſooneſt digeſted: and hath in hym moche nutriment, comforteth the brayne, and maketh ſede of generation, and re
                     
                        〈…〉
                     eth luſte, whiche is abated.
               
               
                  Quayles.
                  All though they be of ſome men commended, yet experience proueth theym to increace melancholy, and are of a ſmalle nouryſhynge.
               
               
                  Larkes.
                  Be as well the fleſhe as the brothe, very holſome: eaten roſted, they do moche helpe agaynſte the cholyke, as Dioſcorides ſayth.
               
               
                  A plouer.
                  Is ſlowe of digeſtion, nouryſſheth lyttell, and increaſeth melancolye.
               
               
                  Blacke byrdes or ouſyls.
                  Among wylde foule hath the chiefe prayſe, for lyghtnes of digeſtion, and that they make good nouryſhement, and lyttell ordure.
               
               
                  Sparowes.
                  Be harde to digeſte, and are very hotte, and ſtyreth vp Venus, & ſpecyally the braynes of them.
               
               
                  
                  Woodcoc
                        •
                     es.
                  Are of a good temperaunce, and metely lyghte in dygeſtyon.
               
               
                  Pygeons.
                  Be eaſily dygeſted, and are very holſome to them, whiche are fleumatike, or pure melancoly.
               
               
                  Gooſe,
                  Is harde of digeſtion, but beynge yonge and fatte, the wynges be eaſy to digeſt in a hole ſtomake, and nouryſheth competently.
               
               
                  Ducke,
                  Is hotter than gooſe, and hard to digeſt, and maketh warſe iuyce, ſauyng the branues on the breaſte boone, and the necke is better thanne the remnaunt.
               
               
                  Crane and buſtarde.
                  Crane is harde of digeſtyon, and maketh yll iuyce, but beyng hanged vp longe in the ayre, he is the laſſe vnholſome. Buſtarde beinge fat, and kepte without meate a day or two afore that he be kylled, to expulſe his ordure, and than drawen, and hanged as the crane is, beynge rooſted or baken, is a good meate, and nouryſheth well, yf he be well dygeſted.
               
               
                  Hearon, Byttour, Shou
                        •
                     lar,
                  Beynge yonge and fatte, be lyghtlyer digeſted than crane: and the byttour ſooner than the heron. And the ſhoular ſooner than any of theym, but all theſe fowles muſte be eaten with moche gynger or pepper, and haue good olde wyne drunke after them, and ſo ſhall they be more eaſyly digeſted, and the iuyce commynge of theym be the laſſe noyfull.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ The partes and members of byrdes and beaſtes, Cap. 13.
               THe wynges braunes and necke of geeſe, capons, hennes, feſaunt, partryche, and ſmall byrdes beyng fa
                     •
                  te, are better than the legges in dygeſtyon, & lyghter in nouryſhyng, of wyldfoule and pygeons beyng fatte the legges are better than the wynges: the braunes of ducke, teale, and wygeon excepte, whiche is better to dygeſte than the teſydewe.
               
                  The gyſar or ſtomake.
                  Of a gooſe or henne beyng fatte with branne and mylke, beynge well ſodden or made in pou
                        •
                     
                     der, is good for the ſtomake, in making it ſtrong to digeſte, and nouryſheth competently.
               
               
                  The lyuar.
                  Of a capon, henne, feſaunt, or gooſe, beynge 
                        •
                     ade fatte with mylke myxte with theyr meate, is not only eaſy to digeſt, but alſo maketh good iuyce, and nouryſheth excellently. But the lyuers of beaſtes be yll to dygeſte, paſſeth ſlowely, and maketh groſſe blod, but it is ſtrong in noriſhyng
               
               
                  The inwarde of beaſtes, as trypes and chitterlynges.
                  The fleſhe of them is more harde to dygeſte. And therfore although they be well digeſted, yet make they not iuice naturally ſanguine, or clene, but rawe iuyce and colde: and requyreth a longe tyme, to be conuerted into bloode.
               
               
                  The lunges or lyghtes.
                  Are more eaſy to dygeſte than the lyuer, and laſſe nouryſheth, but the nouryſhement, that it maketh, is fleumatyke: All be it the lunges of a

Foxe, is medicinable for them, which haue ſykneſſe of the lunges.
               
               
                  The ſplene or 
                        〈…〉
                     ylte.
                  Is of yll iuyce, for it is the 
                        ••
                     aber of melancoly.
               
               
                  The harte.
                  Is of harde fleſhe, and therfore is not ſoone dygeſted, nor paſſeth ſhortely, but where he is well dygeſteth, the iuyce that it maketh, is not to be dyſprayſed.
               
               
                  The brayne.
                  Is fleumatike, of groſſe iuyce, ſlowe in digeſtynge, noyouſe to the ſtomacke, but where it is well dygeſteth, it nouryſheth moche.
               
               
                  Marowe.
                  Is more delectable than the brayne, it is yll for the ſtomacke, but where it is well dygeſteth, it nouryſheth moche.
               
               
                  The ſtones and vdders,
                  Beyng well digeſted, do nouryſhe moche, but the ſtones are hotter with theyr moyſtneſſe, the vdders colde and fleumatike, they bothe do increaſe ſede of generation: but the bloudde made of the vdder is better than that, whiche cometh of the ſtones, excepte it be of calues and lambes. Alſo the ſtoones of cockes, maketh commendable nouryſhement.
               
               
                  The heed.
                  The fleſhe therof nouriſheth moch, and augmenteth ſede: but it is ſlowe of dygeſtyon, and noyeth the ſtomacke, but to theym, whiche vſe moche exercyſe, it is not diſcommendable.
               
               
                  The tongue.
                  Is of a ſpoungy and ſanguine ſubſtance, but

the kernelles and griſtell, whiche are in the rootes, yf they be welle dygeſted, they make good nouryſhement, yf they be not well dygeſted, they make fleume.
               
               
                  The feete.
                  Beynge well boyled and tender, in a holle ſtomake, dygeſteth well, and maketh good iuyce, and paſſeth forthe eaſily. Galene commendeth the fete of ſwyne. But I haue proued, that the feete of a yonge bullocke tenderly ſodden, and layde in ſouſe two dayes or thre, and eaten colde in the euenynge, haue broughte a cholerike ſtomake into a good digeſtion and ſlepe, and therwith hath alſo expulſed ſalte fleume and choler, and this haue I founde in my ſelf by often experience: alway foreſene, that it be eaten before any other meate, without drynkynge immediatly after it.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of fyſſhe generally. Cap. 14.
               THe beſt fyſhe after the opinion of Galen, is that, whiche ſwymmeth in the pure ſee, and is toſſed and lyfte vp with windes and ſourges. The more calme that the water is, the warſe is the fyſhe, they which are in muddy waters, do make moche fleume and ordure, taken in fennes and dyches be warſte, beinge in freſhe ryuers and ſwyfte, be ſomtyme commendable: albeit generally, all kyndes of fyſhe maketh more thynner bloudde, than fleſſhe, ſo that it doth not moche nouryſhe, and it doth ſooner paſſe out by vapours: to a hotte cholerike ſtomake, or in feuers, ſomtyme they be holſome,

beynge newe, freſhe, and not very harde in ſubſtance or ſlimy, harde fyſhe is hard of digeſtion, but the nouriſhement therof is more fyrme, than that, whiche is ſofte: thoſe whiche haue muche groſſe humours in them, are beſt powdred.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of butter. Cap. 15.
               BVtter is alſo nouryſſhynge, and profiteth to them, whiche haue humours ſuperfluous, in the breſte or lunge, and lacketh rypyng & clenſynge of them: ſpecyally if it be eaten with ſugar or hony. If it be well ſalted, it heateth and elenſeth the more.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of Cheſe. Cap. 16.
               CHeſe by the hole ſentence of all auncyent wryters, letteth digeſtion, and is enemye vnto the ſtomacke. Alſo it ingendreth yll humours, & bredeth the ſtone. The cheſe whiche dothe leſte harme, is ſofte cheſe, reaſonably ſalted, whiche ſomme men do ſuppoſe, nouryſheth moche.
            
            
               ☞ Of Egges. Cap. 17
               EGges of feſantes, hennes, and partriches, be of all other meates moſt agreable vnto nature, ſpecially yf they be newe layde: yf they be reere, they do clenſe the throte and the breaſte. If they be harde, they be ſlowe in digeſtion: but beynge ones digeſted, they do nouryſhe moche. Mean betwene rere and hard, they dygeſte conueniently, and nouryſhe quyckely. Egges well poched, ar better thā roſted. If they be fryed harde, they be of yll nouryſhement, & do make ſtynkyng fuines in the ſtomake, & do corrupt other meates with whom they be mingled. They be moſte holſome, whan they be poched,

and moſt vnholſome, whan they be fryed. Dioſcorides ſayth, If they be ſouped warme, before any other meate, they do heale the griefes of the bladder, and raynes, made with grauelle: alſoo foreneſſe of the chekes, and throte, and ſpytting of bloudde: and they be good agaynſt eatarres, or ſtyllynge out of the heed, into the ſtomake.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of drinkes, and fyrſte of Water Capit. 18.
               VNdoubtedly water hath preemynence aboue all other lycours, not onely bycauſe it is an element, that is to ſay, a pure matter, wherof all other lycours haue theyr original ſubſtance: but alſo foraſmoch, as it was the very naturall and fyrſt drynke, to all maner of creatures. wherfore the fayeng of Pindarus the poete, was euer welle allowed, which ſayth, water is beſte. And one thyng is to be well conſydered that from the creation of the world, vntyll the vniuerſalle deluge or floudde, durynge whiche tyme, men lyued eyght or nyne hundred yeres, there was none other drink vſed nor knowen, but water. Alſo the true folowers of Pythagoras doctrine, dranke onely water, and yet lyued longe: as Apollonius, and other: and in the ſerchynge out of ſecrete and miſticall thynges, their wyttes excelled. More ouer, we haue ſene men and women of great age, and ſtronge of body, whiche neuer, or very ſeldome, dranke other drynke, than pure water: As by example, in Cornewall, although that the countray be in a very colde quarter, whiche prouethe, that yf menne from their infancye, were accuſtomed to

none other drynke but to water onely, moderately vſed it ſhulde be ſufficient to kepe naturall moyſture, and to cauſe the meate that is eaten to perce and deſcende vnto the places of digeſtion, which are the purpoſes that drynke ſerueth fore. But nowe to the qualities of water, after the ſentence of auncient philoſophers and phiſitions, The rayne water, after the opinion of the moſt men, yf it be receyued pure & cleane, is moſte ſubtyll and penetratyue, of any other waters: the nexte is that, whiche yſſueth out of a ſprynge in the eaſte, and paſſeth ſwyftely, amonge great ſtones or rockes: the thyrde is of a cleane ryuer, which rennethe on great harde ſtones or pebles. There be dyuers meanes to trye out, whiche is the beſte water, for that which is lyghteſt in poyſe or weyght is beſte. Alſoo that, wherof commeth leſte ſkymme or frothe, whan it doth boyle. Alſo that, whiche wyll ſooneſt be hote. More ouer deape lynnen clothes into ſundrye waters, and after laye them to drye, & that whiche is ſooneſt drye, the water wherin it was depid is moſte ſubtylle. After a greate ſurfette, colde water drunken is a generall remedy. Hippocrates affyrmeth, that in ſharpe and feruent diſeaſes, none other remedy is to be requyred, than water. And Galene wylle not, that chylderne ſhulde be lette from drynkynge of water: De ratiōe uictus in mor. acutis li. 3. but that whan they fele them ſelues very hotte, after meales, and do deſyre to drynke water, ſpecially of a cleane fountayn, they ſhuld be ſuffred. Alſo Hippocrates ſayth, In ſuche ſyknes where as thou feareſt, leſt the heed ſhuld be vehemently greued, or the minde peryſhed there muſt

thou gyue eyther water, or whyte wyne alayed with moche water. Not withſtandynge there be in water cauſes of dyuers diſeaſes, as of ſwellynge of the ſplene, and the lyuer, it alſo flytteth and ſwymmeth, and it is long or it perceth, in as moche, as it is colde and ſlowe in decortion, it loſeth not the bealy, nor prouoketh vrine. Alſo in this it is vicyous, that of his proper nature, it maketh none ordure. Fynally, alway reſpecte muſte be hadde to the perſone, that drynketh it, for to yonge men, and them, that be hot of complexion, it doth laſſe harme, and ſomtyme it profyteth: but to them that are feble, olde, fleu matyke, or melancoly, is not conuenient.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of Wyne. Cap. 19.
               PLato, the wyſeſt of all phyloſophers, doth affirme, that wyne moderatly drunke, noryſheth and cōforteth, as well all the body, as the ſpirites of man. And therfore, god dyde ordeyne it for mankynde, as a remedy agaynſte the incommodities of aege: that thereby they ſhulde ſeme to retourne vnto youth, & forgette heuynes. Vndoubtedly wyne heateth and moyſteth the body, which qualities chiefly conſerueth nature. And Galene of all wynes, commendeth that, which is yelowe and clere, ſaing, That it is the hoteſt, and whyte wyne leſt hote. And the colour meane betwene bothe, of ſemblable temperature. The yelowe wyne, whiche is the proper colour of very hotte wynes, to olde men doth brynge theſe cōmodites Fyrſte it heateth al theyr membres, alſo it purgeth by vryne,

the watry ſubſtaunce of the bloudde. Moreouer the wynes, whiche be pale or yelowe, and full of ſubſtance, they do increaſe bloudde, & nouryſhe the body, but for the more parte olde men haue nede of ſuche wynes, whiche do prouoke vrine: for as moch as in them do abounde watrye excrementes, or ſuperfluities. And they whiche do tary longe in the bealy, be not apt for aged men. Blacke or depe redde wynes and thicke, do bind and congele that which they do fynde in the bodye, and although ſome of them do not longe abyde in the bealy, yet they moue not vrine, but rather withdraweth: but yet they do harme to olde men, for as moche as they do ſtoppe the eū
                  dites of the ſplene, the lyuer, & the raynes. Alſoo groſſe wynes be beſt for them, whiche deſyre to be fatte, but it maketh oppilations: olde wyne and clere is better for them, that be fleumatike. Galene alſo prohibiteth chyldern to drynke any Lib. 1. de tuenda ſanitate. wyne, foraſmoch as they be of an hot and moiſt temperature, and ſoo is wyne: and therfore it heateth and moyſteth to moch theyr bodyes, and fylleth theyr heedes with vapours. More ouer, he wolde, that yonge men ſhoulde drynke lyttell wyne, for it ſhall make them prone to fury, and to lechery: and that parte of the ſoule, whych is called rationable, it ſhall make troublous and dull
                     •
                  : not withſtandynge, yet it is ſommetyme profytable to mitigate or expell ordure, made of coler or melancolye. Alſo it profyteth agaynſte drythe, whiche hapneth in the ſubſtance of the bodye, eyther by to moche labour, or by the propre temperature of age: for wyne moyſteth and nouryſheth that, whiche is to drye, alſo mytigateth

and diſſolueth the ſharpenes of cholet, and purgeth it alſo by vrine and ſweate: Finally (as Theognes ſayth Moch drynkynge of wyne is yll, but moderate drynkyng of wyne is not only not yll, but alſo commodious and profitable, whiche ſentence is confyrmed by Jeſus Syrac, in the boke named Eccleſiaſticus, ſayeng, wyne moderatly drunke, reioyſeth bothe the body and Eccle. 3
                        •
                     . ſoule. wherfore to cōclude this chapyter, There is neyther meate nor drynke, in the vſe wherof ought to be a more diſcrete moderation, than in wyne, conſyderynge that beynge good & drunke in due tyme and meſure, it not onely conſerueth naturall and radicall moyſture, wherby lyfe in
                  
                     •
                  ureth, but alſo it helpeth the pryneypall members, whiche belonge to digeſtyon, to do they
                     •
                   office: On the other parte, beynge yll or corrupt or taken out of order and meaſure, it doth contrarye to all the premyſſes, beſydes that it tranſformeth a man or womā, makyng them beaſtly. More of the qualities of wyne, ſhall be touched hereafter in the order of dyete.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of Mylke. Cap. 20.
               MIlke is comparte of three ſubſtaunces, creame, whey, and cruddes. The moſte excellent mylke is of a womā The milke of a cowe is thyekeſt, the mylke of a cantlle is moſte ſubtyll, the mylke of a goote is betwene cowe mylke, and camelle mylke. Ewes mylke is betwene cowe mylke and aſſes mylke. Alſoo the mylke of beaſtes, fedyng in large paſtures, and oute of fennes and marſſhes, is better than of

them, whiche be fedde in lyttell cloſes, or in watry groundes. In ſpringe tyme mylke is mooſte ſubtyll, and milke of yong beaſtes, is holſomer, than of olde. To chylderne, olde menne, and to them, whiche be oppreſſed with melancolye, or haue the fleſhe conſumed with a feuer ethike, mylke is conuenient. And generally to all them, which do not fele the mylke ryſe in theyr ſtomokes, after that they haue eaten it: and in thoſe perſones, it dothe eaſyly pourge that, whiche is in the bealy ſuperfluous. And afterwarde it entreth into the vaynes, and bryngeth good nouryſhement. Who ſo euer hath an appetit to eate or drynke mylke, to the entente that it ſhall not aryſe or abrayde in the ſtomake, lette hym put in to a veſſel, out of the whiche he wyll receyue it, a fewe leaues of myntes, ſugar, or pure honye. And in to that veſſel cauſe the beſt to be milked, and ſo drynke it warme from the vdder: or els lette hym do as Paulus Aegineta teacheth, that is to ſay, boyle fyrſt the mylke with an eaſy fier, and ſethe it after with a hotter fire, and ſkimme it cleane, and with a ſpunge deaped in cold water, take that cleane away, whiche wold be burned to the veſſell, than put to the mylke ſalt and Oribaſius de confectione ciborum. li. 3. ſugar, and ſtere it often. More ouer mylke taken to pōurge melancolye, wolde be drunke in the mornyng abundantly newe mylked, as is before wrytten. And he that drynketh, ſhulde abſteyne from meate, and exerciſe, vntyll the mylke be digeſted, and haue ſomwhat pourged the bealy. For with labour it becommeth ſowre: and therfore it requyreth reſte and watche, or to walke very ſoftely. Finally, where men and women

be vſed from their chyldhode, for the more part, to mylke, and do eate none or lyttell other meat, but mylke and butter, they appere to be of good complexion and facion of body, and not ſo moche vexed with ſickeneſſe, as they whiche drinke wyne or ale: not withſtandynge moche vſe of mylke in men ſanguyne or choleryke, dothe ingender the ſtone.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of ale, biere, cyder, and whay.
               I Can neyther here nor rede, that ale is made and vſed for a commen drynke in any other coūtray than England, Scotland, Ireland and Poyle. The latine worde Cereuitia, is indifferent as well to ale as biere, and the onely difference betwene them is, that biere hath hoppes ſodden in it, ale ought to haue none. If the corne be good, the water holſom and cleane, and the ale or biere well and perfytely brewed and clenſed, and by the ſpace of .vi. dayes or more, ſettled and defecate, it muſte nedes be a neceſſary and conuenient drynke, as well in ſyckeneſſe as in helth: conſyderyng that barley corne, wher of it is made, is commended, and vſed in medicine, in all partes of the worlde: and accompted to be of a ſyngular efficacy, in reducyng the body into good temper, ſpecyally which is in a diſtemperature of heate. For what auncient phiſition is there, that in his workes commendeth not ptyſane, which is none other than pure barley, brayed in a morter, and ſodden in water, the ſame thynge is ſmalle and clene ale or biere, ſauynge that perchaunce, the drienge of the malte

is cauſe of more drythe to be in the ale, than in ptyſane. And the hoppes in biere maketh it colder in operation. But to ſay as I thynke, I ſuppoſe, that neyther ale nor biere is to be cōpared to wyne, conſyderynge, that in theym do lacke the heate and moyſture, whiche is in wyne. For that beynge moderately vſed, is moſt lyke to the naturall heate and moyſture of mannes bodye. And alſo the lykour of ale and biere, beyng more groſſe, do ingender more groſſe vapours, and corrupte humours, thanne wyne dothe, beynge drunke in lyke exceſſe of quantitie.
               ¶ And one thynge is to be noted, whiche was lately wel marked, of a man of excellent lerning, beinge vexed with the ſyknes of the ſtone. That in them, which do alway vſe to drink ale or bere the ſtone & grauel ingendred in them, is white of colour: And in them, whiche do vſe to drynke wyne for the moſte parte, the ſtones and grauell, whiche be ingendreth in them, be redde of colour. Not withſtandyng commonly the colour of the ſtone foloweth the humour, whiche dothe moſte abounde in the pacyent. As coler maketh the grauell more redde, fleume maketh it more whyte. Alſo ſome men do ſuppoſe, that red grauell is ingendred in the raynes: white grauell in the bladder. More ouer, who ſo euer vſeth ingurgitation of ale or bicre, his breathe ſhall be more lotheſome, than the breathes of them, whiche do take the exceſſe of wyne: for the wyne, by the reaſon of his heate, is ſoner digeſteth, and doth leue behynde hym, fewer dregges. As for Cyder, may not be good in any condicion, conſyderynge (as I ſay) that all fruytes do ingenderyll

humours, & do coole to moch naturall heate: but to them, whiche haue abundaunce of reddecholer, moderately vſed, it ſomewhat profiteth in mytigation of exceſſiue heate. But who that wyll dyly gently marke in the countrays, where ſyder is vſed for a comon drynke, the men and women haue the colour of their vyſage palled, & the ſkynne of theyr vyſage ryueled, although that they be yong. Whay yf it be lefte of the butter, brynge well ordred, and not drunke, vntylle it haue a thycke curde of mylke ouer it lyke to a hatte, is a ryght temperate drinke: foraſmoch as by the vn
                     •
                  tuoſitie of the butter, wherof the whay retayneth ſome portion, it is bothe mayſte and nouryſhynge, and clenſeth the breſte: and by the ſubtylneſſe of it ſelfe, it deſcēdeth ſone from the ſtomacke, and is ſhortly digeſted. Alſo by reſon of the affinitie, which it hath with mylke, it is conuertible into bloudde and fleſhe, ſpecially in thoſe perſones, whiche do inhabite the northe partes, in whom natural heate is conglutinate, and therfore is of more puiſſaunce and vertue in the office of concoction. Alſo cuſtome frome chylhoode dothe eleuate the power of meates and drynkes in theyr diſpoſition, not withſtandynge that the foure humours, ſangume, choler, fleume, and melancoly, muſt alſo be conſydered as it ſhall apper
                     •
                   in dyuers places hereafter,
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of Hony. Cap. 22.
               HOnye as well in meate as in drinke 
                     〈◊〉
                   of incomparable efficacy, for it not only clenſeth, altereth, and nouryſheth, but alſo it

longe tyme preſerueth that vncorrupted, whiche is put into it. In ſo moch as Plini
                     •
                   ſayth, Suche is the nature of hony, that it ſuffred not the bodyes to putrifie. And he affirmeth, that he did Pli. li. 22. ſee an Hippocentaure (whiche is a beaſte halfe man, halfe horſe) brought in honye to Claudius the emperour out of Egypte, to Rome. And he telleth alſo of one Pollio Romulus, who was aboue a hundred yeres olde, of whome Auguſtus the emperour demaunded, by what meanes he lyued ſo longe, and retayned ſtyl the vygoure or lyuelyneſſe of body and mynd, Pollio anſwered, that he dyd it inward with meade (whiche is drynke made with hony and water) outward with oyle. Which ſayeng agreeth with the ſentence of Democritus, the greatte philoſopher: who beynge demaunded, howe a man moughte lyue longe in helthe, he aunſwered, If he wette hym within with hony, without with oyle The ſame philoſopher, whan he was a hūdred yeres olde and nyne, prolonged his lyfe certayne daies with the euaporation of hony, as Ariſtoxenus writeth. Of this excellent matter, moſte wonderfully wrought and gathered by the lytel bee, as wel of the pure dewe of heuen, as of the moſt ſubtyl humour of ſwete and vertuous herbes & floures, be made likors cōmodious to mankind, as meade, metheglyn, & oxymel. Meade whiche is made with one parte of hony, and foure tymes ſo moche of pure water, and boyled vntyll no ſkymme do remayne, is moch commended of Galene, drunke in ſommer, for preſeruynge of Galen. de tuend. ſan. lib. 4. 
                  
                     •
                  elthe. The ſame author alwaye commendeth the vſynge of hony, eyther rawe eaten with fine

breade ſomwhat leuened, or ſodden, and receyued as drinke. Alſo meade perfectly made, clenſeth the breſte and lunges, cauſeth a man to ſpyt eaſily, and to pyſſe abundantly, and purgeth the bealy moderately. Metheglyn, whiche is moſte vſed in wales, by reaſon of hotte herbes boyled with hony, is hotter than meade, and more comforteth a colde ſtomake, if it be perfectely made, and not newe or very ſtale. Oximell is, where to one parte of vineger is put double ſo moche of hony, foure tymes as moche of water, and that beynge boyled vnto the thyrde parte, and cleane ſkymmed with a fether, is vſed to be taken, where in the ſtomacke is moche fleume or matter vndygeſted, ſo that it be not redde choler, Loke the vſe therof in Alexandro Tralliano. Many other good qualities of honye, I omytte to wryte of, vntyll ſome other occaſyon ſhal happen, to remember them particularly, where they ſhall ſ
                     •
                  me to be profytable.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Sugar. Cap. 23.
               OF ſugar, I do fynde none ancient author of grekes or latynes, to wryte by name, but onely Paulus Aegineta, who ſaythe in this wyſe, after that he hath treated of hony, Moreouer ſugar, whiche they calle hony, that is brought to vs from Arabia, callid felix, is not ſo ſwete as our hony, but is equalle in vertue, and doth not anoy the ſtomake, nor cauſeth thyrſte. Theſe be the wordes of Paulus. It is nowe in dayely experience, that ſugar is a thynge verye temperate and nouryſhynge, and where there

is choler in the ſtomake, or that the ſtomake abhorreth hony, it may be vſed for hony in al thynges, wherin hony is requyred to be.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of tyme. Cap. 24.
               IN the conſyderation of tyme, for takynge of meates and drynkes, it is to be remembred, that in wynter meates ought to be taken in great abundance, and of a more groſſe ſubſtance than in ſommer, foraſmoch as the exterior aire, whiche compaſſeth the body beynge colde, cauſeth the heate to withdrawe into the inner partes, where being incloſed, and contracte togither in the ſtomake & entrayles, it is of more force to boyle & digeſt that, which is receiued into it. Alſo meates roſted, ar thā better than ſodden, and fleſhe & fiſhe powdred, is thā better than in ſommer. Herbes be not than commendable, ſpecially raw, neither fruites, except quynces roſted or baked, drynk ſhuld be than taken in lyttel quātitie. Moreouer wines ſhall nede no water, or very litell, and that to coleryke perſons: redde wynes, and they, whiche be thicke & ſwete, may be than moſte ſurely taken of theym, whiche haue none oppilations, or the ſtone. Alway remember, that in wynter fleume increaſeth by reaſon of rayne and moyſtneſſe of that ſeaſon, alſo the length of nyghtes and moche reſte. And therfore in that tyme cholerike perſons, are beſt at eaſe, ſemblably Gal. in cō
                     ment. in apho. 2. li. 3. are yonge men, but to olde men wynter is ennemye. It begynneth the .viii. day of Nouember, & endureth vntyll the .viii. day of February.
               The ſpryng tyme doth participate the fyrſte

parte with wynter, the latter parte, with ſommer. Wherfore yf the fyrſte parte be colde, than Hipocrat. 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      humana. ſhall the diete be accordynge to wynter. If the ende be hotte, than ſhall the diete be of ſommer. If 
                     •
                  ot
                     •
                  e partes be temperate, than ſhulde there be alſo a temperannce in diete: alwaye conſyderyng, that fleume yet remayneth, & bloud than 
                     〈…〉
                  r
                     •
                  aſeth meate wold be laſſe in quantitie than 
                     〈…〉
                  ynter, and drynke ſomwhat more. Sprynge tyme begynneth the .viii. daye of February, 
                     〈◊〉
                   cōtinueth vntyll the .viii. day of May.
               In ſemmer the inward heat is but lytel, & the ſtomake doth not digeſt ſo ſtrongely nor quykly Gal. 
                        〈◊〉
                      in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . lib 
                        〈◊〉
                     . as in wynter, wherfore in that ſeaſon, eatyng often, and a lyttell at ones, is moſte conuenient. And Damaſcenus ſaythe, that faſtynge in ſommer drieth the body, maketh the colour ſalowe, ingendreth melancoly, and hurteth the ſyght. alſo boyled meate, breade ſteped in whyte brothe, Hipocrates de 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     moribus. with ſ
                     •
                  dden lettyſe, or cykorie, are than good to be vſed alſo varietie in meates, but not at oone meale, potages made with colde herbes, drynke in more abundance, wyne alayde with water, to hotte complexions moche, to colde natures laſſe. In this ſeaſon bloudde increaſeth, and towarde the ende therof, choler. And therfore they, which Galen in cōment. in aphor. be colde of nature and moyſte, are than beſte at caſe, hotte natures and dry wa
                     •
                  ſte. More ouer, chyldren, and very yonge men in the begynnyng of ſommer, are holeſt, old folke in the latter end and in harueſt
                     •
                   ſomer beginneth the .viii. daye of May, & cōtinueth vntyll the .viii. day of Auguſt.
               Autumne beginneth the .viii. day of Auguſt, & endeth the .viii. day of Nouember, that ſeſon of

the yere is variable, & the aire changeable, by occaſyō wherof, happen ſondry ſikneſſis, & blod decreaſeth, & melancoly abundeth: wherfore al ſū
                  mer frutes wold thā be eſchewed, foraſmoch as they make yll iuyce and windes in the body. In this tyme meate wolde be more abundant than in ſomer, but ſomwhat drier: drink muſt be laſſe in quantitie, but laſſe myxte with water. This tyme is daungerous to all ages, al natures, and all countrays, but the natures hote and moyſte, be leſte indamaged.
               
                  ☞ Diete concerning ſondry tymes of the yere wrytten by the olde phiſition D
                        •
                     ocles to kyng Antigonus.
                  FRom the .xii. daye of December, at the whiche tyme the day is at the ſhorteſt, vntyl the nynthe day of Marche, which do conteyne lxxxx. dayes, reumes and moyſtures do increaſe, than meates and drynkes naturally very hotte, wolde be moderately vſed, alſo to drynke abundantly wyne without alaye or with lyttell water, and to vſe lyberally the companye of a woman, is not vnholſome to the body.
                  ¶ FRom the nynth daye of Marche, at whiche tyme is eaquinoctium vernū, vnto the. xxv day of Aprill, ſwete fleume and bloudde do increaſe, therfore vſe than thynges hauynge moche iuyce and ſharpe, exerciſe the bodye dilygently, than may ye vſe ſafely the company of a woman.
                  ¶ From the xxv. day of Apryll. to the .xiiii. daye of June, Choler increaſeth, than vſe all thynges, that are ſwete, and doo make the bealy ſoluble, forbeare carnall company with women.
                  
                     
¶ From the .xiiii. day of June, at whiche tyme the day is at the lēgeſt, vnto the .xii. day of September, dothe melancoly reigne, forbeare lechery, or vſe it moderately.
                  ¶ From the .xii. daye of September, vnto the xvii. daye of October, doo abounde fleume and thynne humours, than wolde all flures and diſtillations be prohibited, than all ſharpe meates and drynkes and of good iuyce, are to be vſed, and lechery eſchewed.
                  ¶ Frome the .xvii. daye of October, to the .xii. daye of December, increaſeth groſſe fleume, vſe therfore all bytter meates, ſweete wynes, fatte meate, and moche exerciſe.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of ages. Cap. 25.
               CHyldren wold be nouryſheth with meates Gal. de tu. ſan. li. 1. Chyldern. and drynkes, whiche are moderately hote and moyſte, not withſtandynge Galene dothe prohibite them the vſe of wyne, bycauſe it moyſteth and heateth to moche the bodye, and fylleth the heedes of them, whiche are hotte and moyſte, with vapours. Alſo he permitteth them in hotte wether to drynke clere water of the fountayne.
               ¶ A chylde growynge faſte in his members towarde a man, ſoo that he ſemeth well fedde in the bodye, is than to be feared of fulnes of humours, Oribaſins de virtute ſimpli. li. 1. and if it be perceyued, that he is replete, than muſte be withdrawen and miniſhed ſome parte of that nutriment, and accordynge vnto his age, ſome euacuation wold be deuiſed, other while by exercyſe, walkynge vp and downe faſtynge,

and before that they eate any meate, lette them exerciſe them ſelfes with theyr own labors and do theyr own accuſtomed buſynes, and eate the meates wherunto they be moſte vſed, ſo that it be ſuche, that may not hurte theym. And this nede they not to knowe of phiſitions, but by experience and diligent ſerche by theyr ſtoole, theyr norices ſhall perceyue what dygeſteth well, and what doth not.
               ¶ But yf it appere, that by exceſſiue feedynge the bealy of the chyld is fuller and greater than it was wonte to be, and that whiche paſſeth by the bealy, is corrupted, or his ſweate ſtynketh, theſe thynges knowen, if they eate ſtronge meates, gyue them not one kynde of meate, but dyuers, that the noueltie of the meate may helpe, that they may go more eaſily to the ſtole. For if any haue an vnreaſonable appetite, he is ſooner recouered, yf he be pourged by a boyle or impoſtume comen forthe and broken, before that the meate be corrupted: and after that let hym eate fyne meates, and beynge ones hole, retourne by lyttell and lyttell to his olde cuſtome.
               ¶ Yonge men, excedyng the age of .xiiii. yeres, Yong men ſhal eate meates more groſſe of ſubſtance, colder and moyſter: alſo ſalades of colde herbes, and to drynke ſeldome wyne, except it be alayd with water. All be it all theſe thynges muſte be tempred, accordyng to their complexions, & exercyſe and quietneſſe in lyuynge, wherof ye ſhall reede in theyr proper places hereafter.
               ¶ Dide men, in whom natural heate & ſtrength Olde men ſemeth to decay, ſhuld vſe alway meates, which are of qualitie hotte and moyſt, and ther with all

eaſy to be digeſted, and abſteyne vtterly from al meates & drinkes, whiche wyll ingender thicke iuyce and ſlymy, ſemblably from wyne, whiche is thicke, ſwete, and darke redde wynes, and rather vſe them, whiche wyll make thyn humors, and wyll purge well the bloudde by vryne: therfore whyte or yelowe wynes, and perchaunce frenche clarette wynes, are for them very com, Paulus Eg
                        ••
                     eta. li. 1. cap. 23. mendable. Alſo wyne prepared with pure hony clarified, wherin rootes of perſely or fenelle be ſteped, ſpecially yf they ſuſpecte any thynge of the ſtoone, or goute▪ And yf they more deſyre to clenſe theyr raynes and bladder: than is it good to vſe ſmall white wine, as racked reniſhe wine, or other like to it. and ſommetyme to ſtepe ouer nyght therin a perſely roote ſlyt, and ſomwhat bruyſed, and a lyttell lykorice. Fynally, let them beware of all meates, that wyll ſtoppe the poores, and make obſtructions or oppilations, that Opilatiōs what they are. is to ſaye, with clammy matter ſtoppe the places, where the naturall humours are wroughte and digeſted, the whyche meates I haue before ſette in a table. But if it chaunce theym, to eate any ſuche meate in abundance, lette them take ſhortely ſuche thynges, as do reſyſte opilations, or reſolue theym. As white pepper, bruiſed and myxte with theyr meates or drynke: garlyke alſo or onyons, yf they abhorre them not. Alway remembre, that aged men ſhuld eate often, and but lyttell at euery tyme, for it fareth by theym, as it dothe by a lampe, whiche is almooſte extincte, whiche by powrynge in of oyle lyttell and lyttell, is longe kept bournynge: and with moche oyle poured in at ones, it is cleane put out. Alſo

they muſt forbeare all thynges, whiche doo ingender melancolye, wherof ye ſhall rede in the table before: and breadde cleane without leuen, is to theym vnholſome.
            
            
               Moderation in diet, hauyng reſpecte to the ſtrength or weakenes of the perſon. Cap. 26.
               NOwe here it muſt be conſydered, that all though I haue writen a generall diet for euery age, yet netheles it muſt be remembred, that ſome chyldren and yong men, eyther by debilite of nature, or by ſome accydentall cauſe, as ſyckenes, or moch ſtudy, happen to gather humours fleumatike or melancoly in the places of digeſtiō, ſo that cōcoction or digeſtion is as weake in them as in thoſe, which are aged Semblably ſome olde men fynde nature ſo beneficyall vnto them, that theyr ſtomakes and lyuers are more ſtronge to digeſte, than the ſayde yonge men, ſome perchaunce haue moche choler remaynynge in theym. In theſe caſes the ſayde yonge men muſte vſe the diete of olde menne, or nygh vnto it, vntyl the diſcraſy be remoued, hauynge alwaye reſpecte to theyr vniuerſall complexions, as they, whiche are naturally cholerike, to vſe hotte thynges in a more temperance than they, whiche be fleumaticke, or melancolye by nature. The ſame obſeruation ſhall be to Hipocrat. aphor. Galen. in comment. olde menne, ſauynge that age, of his owne propertye is colde and drye, therfore the olde man, that is cholerycke, ſhall haue more regarde to moyſture in meates, than the yonge man beyng

of the ſame complexion. Foreſene alwaye, that where nature is offended or greued, ſhe is curyd by that, whiche is contrarye to that, whiche offendeth or greueth, as colde by heate, heate by colde, drythe by moyſture, moyſture by drythe. In that wherby nature ſhulde be nouriſhed in a hole and temperate bodye, thynges muſte be taken, whiche are lyke to the mans nature in qualitie and degre. As where one hath his body in a good temper, thynges of the ſame temperance dothe nouryſſhe hym. But where he is oute of temper, in heate, cold, moyſture, or dryth, temperate meates or drynkes, nothyng do profyt hym, for beynge out of the meane and perfyte temperature, nature requyreth to be therto reduced by contraries, remembrynge not only, that contraries are remedye vnto theyr contraries, but alſo in euery contrary, conſideration be hadde of the proporcion in quantitie.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Tymes in day concernynge meales. Cap. 27.
               BEſydes the tymes of the yere, and ages, there be alſo other tymes of eatynge and drynkynge to be remembred, as the ſondry tymes in the daye, whiche we call meales, whiche are in noumber and dyſtaunce, accordynge to the temperature of the countrey and perſon: As where the countrey is colde, and the perſone luſty, and of a ſtrong nature, there may 
                     ••
                  o meales be vſed, or the laſſe diſtance of tyme betwene them. Contrarywiſe in contrary countrays and perſonages, the cauſe is afore reherſed, where I

haue ſpoken of the diet of the times of the yere, not withſtādyng here muſt be alſo conſideratiō of exerciſe and reſte, which do augmente or apeireth the naturall diſpoſition of bodyes, as ſhall be more declared herafter in the chapiter of exerciſe. But concernyng the general vſage of coū
                  treys, & admittyng the bodies to be in ꝑfit ſtate of helth. I ſuppoſe that in England yong men, vntyll they come to the age of .xl. yeres, may wel eate thre meales in one daye, as at breakefaſte, dyner, & ſupper, ſo that betwene breakefaſt and dyner, be the ſpace of foure houres at the leaſte, betwene dyner and ſupper .vi. houres, and the breakefaſt laſſe thā the dyner, and the dyner moderate, that is to ſay, laſſe than ſaciete or fulnes of bealy, and the drynke thervnto meaſurable, accordynge to the dryeneſſe or moyſtneſſe of the meate. For moch abundance of drynk at meale, drowned the meate eaten, and not onely letteth conuenient concoction in the ſtomake, but alſo cauſeth it to paſſe faſter than nature requyreth, and therfore ingendreth moche fleume, and conſequently reumes, & crudenes in the vaynes, debilitie and ſlypperneſſe of the ſtomake, contynuall fluxe, and many other inconueniences to the body and membres. But to retourne to meales, I thynke breakefaſtes neceſſary in this realme, as well for the cauſes before reherſed, as Brekefaſt. alſo foraſmoche as choler, beyng feruent in the ſtomake, ſendeth vp fumoſities vnto the brayn, and cauſeth heed ache, and ſomtyme becometh aduſte, and ſmouldreth in the ſtomake, whereby happeneth peryllous ſycknes, and ſommetyme ſodayn deth, yf the heate incloſed in the ſtomake

haue nat other conuenient matter to worke on: this dayly experience proueth, and natural reſon confirmeth. Therfore men and womē not aged, hauing their ſtomakes cleane without putrified matter, ſlepyng moderately and ſondely in the nyght, and felynge them ſelfe lyghte in the mornynge, and ſwete breathed, lette them on goddes name breake theyr faſte: Coleryke men with groſſe meate, men of other complexions with lyghter meate, fore ſene, that they labour ſomewhat before: ſemblably their dyner and ſupper, as I haue before written, ſo that they ſleape not incontinent after theyr meales. And here I wyll not recite the ſentences of authors, whiche had neuer experience of englyſſhe mens natures, or of the iuſte temperature of this realme of Englande, onely this counſell of Hipocrates ſhall Hipocrat. aphor. 13. lib. 1. Galen. de tuend. ſan. be ſufficient. We ought to graunt ſomewhat to tyme, to age, and to cuſtome: not withſtandynge where great weryneſſe or drythe, greued the body, there oughte the dyner to be the leſſe, and the longer diſtance betwene dyner and ſupper. alſoo moche reſte, excepte a lyttell ſofte walkyng, that by an vpryght mouyng, the meate beyng ſtyred, may deſcende. This is alway to be remembred, that where one feleth hym ſelfe full, and greued with his dyner, or the ſauoure of his meate by erurtation aſcēdeth or that his ſtomake is weke by late ſyckeneſſe or moche ſtudy, than is it moſt conuenient, to abſteyne from ſupper, and rather prouoke hym ſelfe to ſleape moche, than to eate or drynke any thynge. Alſo to drynke betweene meales, is not laudable, excepte very great thirſt conſtrayneth, for it interrupteth the office of the

ſtomake in concoction, and cauſeth the meate to paſſe faſter than it ſhulde do, and the drynke beinge colde, it rebuketh naturall hete, that is workyng, and the meate remaynyng rawe, it corrupteth dygeſtyon, and makyth crudeneſſe in the vaynes, wherfore he that is thyrſty, let hym conſyder the occaſyō. If it be of ſalt fleume, let him walke fayre and ſoftely, and onely waſſhe his mouthe, and his throote with barley water, or ſmall ale, or lye downe and ſleape a lyttell, and ſo the thyrſte wyll paſſe away, or at the leaſte be well aſſwaged. If it happen by extreme heate of the ayre, or by pure choler, or eatynge of hot ſpices, lette hym drynke a lyttell iulep made with cleane water and ſugar, or a lyttell ſmall biere or ale, ſo that he drynke not a great glutte, but in a lyttell quantitie, let it ſtyll downe ſoftly into his ſtomake, as he ſytteth, and than let hym not moue ſodeynly. If the thyrſte be in the euenyng, by eatynge to moche, and drynkynge of wyne, than after the opinion of the beſte lerned phiſitions, and as I my ſelfe haue often experienced, the beſt remedy is, yf there be no feuer, to drinke a good draught of colde water, immediatly, or els yf it be not peynefull for hym to vomyte, to prouoke hym therto with a lyttel warme water, and after to waſhe his mouth with vineger and water, and ſo to ſleape longe and ſoundly, yf he can. And yf in the mornyng he fele any fumoſities ryſyng, than to drynke iulep of violettes, or for lacke therof, a good draught of very ſmall ale or biere ſomewhat warmed, without eatyng any thynge after it.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Of dyuerſitie of meates eaten wherby helthe is appaired. Cap. 28.
               NOw let this be a generall rule, that ſondry meates, beynge dyuers in ſubſtance and qualitie, eaten at one meale, is the greateſt ennemy to helth, that may be, and that whiche ingendreth moſt ſikneſſes, for ſome meates beyng groſſe, and harde to dygeſte, ſome fine & eaſy to dygeſt, do requyre diuers operations of nature, and diuers temperatures of the ſtomake, that is to ſay, moch heate and temperate heate, whiche may not be togyther at one tyme. Therfore whan the fyne meate is ſuffycientlye boyled in the ſtomake, the groſſe meate is rawe, ſo both iuyces, thone good and petfite, the other groſſe and crude, at one tyme dygeſted, and ſent into the veynes and body, nedes muſte helth decaye, and ſyckneſſes be ingendred. Lykewyſe in diuers meates being diuers qualities, as where ſome are hotte and moyſt, ſome cold and moyſt, ſome hote and drye, ſome colde and drie, accordynge ther vnto ſhall the iuyce be dyuers, which they make in the body. And lyke as betwene the ſayd qualities is contrarietie, ſo therby ſhall be in the body an vnequall temperature, foraſmoch as it is not poſſible for man to eſteme ſo iuſte a proporcyon of the qualities of that, whiche he receyueth, that the one ſhall not excede the other in quantitie. wherfore of the ſayd vnequall mixture, nedes muſt enſue corruption, & conſequētly ſykneſſe. And theofore to a hole man, it were better, to fede at one meale competently on very

groſſe meate only, ſo that it be ſwete, and his nature do not abhorre it, than on diuers fyne meates, of ſondry ſubſtance and qualities. I haue knowen and ſene olde men, and olde women, whiche eatyng only befe, baken, cheſe, or curdes, haue continued in good helthe, whome I haue prouyd, that whan they haue eaten ſondry fyne meates at one meale, haue ſone after felte them ſelfe greued with frettinges and hed ache, and after that they haue ben hole agayne, there hath ben gyuen to theym one kynde of lyght meate, they haue done as well therwith, as they were wont to do with groſſe meates, whan they eate it alone, whiche proueth to be true that whiche I haue reherſed. And it is good reaſon, for after the generall opinion of philoſophers and phiſitions, the nature of mankynde is beſte contente with thynges moſt ſymple and vnmixte, all thinges tendynge to vnitie, wherin is the onely perfection. Alſo it is a generall rule of phiſyke, that where a ſyckenes may be cured with ſymples, that is to ſay, with one onely thyng, that is medieinable, there ſhulde the phiſition gyue no cō
                  pounde medicyne myxte with many thynges.
               Theſe thynges conſydered, it maye ſeme to all men, that haue reſon, what abuſe is here in this realme in the contynuall gourmandyſe & dayely fedynge on ſondry meates, at one meale, the ſpirite of gluttony, triumphynge amonge vs is his gloryouſe charyot, callyd welfare, dryuynge vs afore hym, as his pryſoners, into his dūgcon of Glutony. ſurfet, where we are tur
                     •
                  edted with catarres, feuers, goutes, pleureſies, freitynge of the guttes, & many other ſyckneſſes, and fynally cruelly

put to death by them, oftentymes in youth, or in the moſte pleaſaunt tyme of our lyfe, when we wold moſt gladly lyue. For the remedy wherof, howe many tymes haue there ben dyuiſed ordynaunces and actes of counſayle, althoughe perchaunce bodyly helthe was not the chyefe occaſyon therof, but rather prouiſion ageynſt vayne and ſumptuous expenſes of the meane people. For the nobilitie was exempted and had libertie to abyde ſtyll in the dongeon, yf they wolde, and to lyue laſſe whyle than other men: But whan, where, and howe longe were the ſayd good denyſes put in due execution, for all that thereof ſhuld ſuccede double profite, that is to ſay, helth of body, and increſe of ſubſtance, by eſchewyng of ſuperfluous expenſes in ſondry dyſhes? Alas how longe wyll men fantaſye lawes and good ordynaunces, and neuer determyne them. Fantaſy procedeth of wytte, dete, mination of wiſedome, wytte is in the deuyſyng and ſpeakynge, but wyſedome is in the performance, whiche reſteth ouely in execution. Here I had almoſt forgotten, that my purpoſe was to wryte of the order of diete, and not of lawes, but the feruente loue that I haue to the publyque weale of my countray, conſtrayned me to digreſſe ſomewhat from my matter: but nowe wyll I procede forth to wryte of order, whiche in takynge of meates and drynkes, is not the leſte parte of diete.
            
            
               Of order in receiuynge of meate and drynke. Cap. 29.
               HErbes as welle ſodden, as vnſodden, alſo fruytes, whiche do mollyfye and louſe the bealy, oughte to be eaten before any

other meate, excepte that ſommetyme for the repreſſynge of fumoſities, ryſynge in the heed by moch drynkyng of wyne, rawe lettyſe, or a colde appull, or the iuyce of orenges or lymons maye be taken after meales in a lyttel quātitie. More ouer all brothes, mylke, rere egges, and meates, whiche are purpoſely taken to make the bealye ſoluble, wolde be fyrſte eaten. All fruites and other meates, that are ſtyptike or byndyng, wold be eaten laſte after all other. Fruites confectionate ſpecially with hony, ar not to be eaten with other meates. But here is it to be dylygentelye noted, that where the ſtomacke is coleryke and ſtrong, groſſe meates wold be fyrſt eaten; where the ſtomacke is colde or weake, there wold fyne meates be fyrſte eaten: for in a hot ſtomake, fine meates are bourned, whyle the groſſe meate is digeſting. Contrary wiſe in a colde ſtomake, the lyttel heate is ſuffocate with groſſe meate, & the fyne meate lefte rawe, for lacke of concoction, where if the fyne meat be fyrſt taken moderatly, it ſtereth vp and comforteth naturall heate, and maketh it more able to concoct groſſe meates, yf they be eatē afterward: ſo that it be but in ſmall quantitie. not withſtandyng, as I late affirmed, one maner of meate is moſte ſure to euery complerion. foreſene that it be alway moſt comonly in conformitie of qualities, with the perſon that eateth. Moreouer take hede, that ſlipper meates be not firſt eaten, leſt it drawe with it to haſtily other meates, or they be digeſted, nor that ſtiptik or reſtraining meatis, be taken at the begynning as quynces, peares, and medlars, leſte they may let other meates, that they deſcende not into the

bottom of the ſtomake, where they ſhulde be digeſted, not withſtāding the cōfection made with the iuyce of quynces, callid Dacitonites, taken two houres afore dyner, or ſupper, is commēded of Galene, and other, for reſtoryng appetite, and making good concoction. Alſo cōcernyng drynke at meales, it wolde not be afore, that ſomwhat were eten. And at the begynnyng the drink wold be ſtrongeſt, & ſo toward the end more ſmal, if it be ale or bere, & if it be wine more & more alaide with water. And after the better opinion of phiſicions, the drink wold rather be mixte with the meate by ſondry lytle draughtes, than with one great draught at thend of the meale, for the mixture tempreth wel the meate without anoyance, a great draught with moch drink, drowneth the meate, rebuketh natural hete, that than worketh in concoction, & with his weight driueth downe the meate to haſtily. Hot wines and ſwete, or cō
                  fectioned with ſpices, or very ſtrong ale or bere, ar not conuenient at meales, for the meate is by them rather corrupted, thā digeſted, & they make hot and ſtinking vapors aſcende vp to the braynes. All be it yf the ſtomake be very wyndy, or ſo colde and feble, that it can not concoct ſuche a quantitie of meat, as is requyred to the ſuffycyent nouriſhement of the body of hym that eateth, or hath eaten raw herbes or frutes, where by he feleth ſom anoyance, than may he drynke laſt incontynent after his meale, a lyttell quantitie of ſecke, or good aqua vite in ſmal ale: but yf he haue moche choler in his ſtomake or a heed full of vapours, it were moch better, that he dyd neyther drynke the one, nor the other, but rather

eate a lyttell colyander ſede prepared, or a pece of a quince roſted, or in marmelade, and after reſte, to amende the lacke of nature with ſlepe, moderate exerciſe, and playſters prouyded for comfortynge of the ſtomake. And here wyll I leaue to wryte any more of the diete in eatyng & drinkyng, ſauynge that I wold, that the reders ſhuld haue in remembraunce theſe two counſayles. Fyrſt, that to an hole man, to preciſe a rule is not conuenient in diete: & that the diſeaſes, whiche do happen by to moche abſtinence, are wars to be cured, than they whiche come by replecion. Cor. Ccl. li. l. cap. 1. And as Cornelius Celſus ſayth, A man that is hole and wel at eaſe, and is at his liberte, ought not to bynde hym ſelfe to rules, or nede a phiſition: but yet where the ſtomake is feble, as is of Idē, ca. 2. the more parte of citeſyns, and wel nigh al they that be ſtudious in lernyng or weighty affayres, there ought to be more circumſpection, that the meate may be ſuch, as that eyther in qualitie or quantitie, nature beynge but feble, but not rebuked, or to moche oppreſſed.
            
            
               ☞ Of ſleape and watche. Cap 30.
               THe commoditie of moderate ſlepe, appereth by this, that naturall heate, whiche is occupied about the matter, wherof procedeth nouryſhement, is comforted in the places of dygeſtion, and ſo digeſtion is made better, or more perfite by ſlepe, the body fatter, the mynde more quiete and clere. the humours temperate: and by moche watche all thynges happen cōtrarye. The moderacyon of ſleape muſte be meaſured

by helthe and ſyckeneſſe, by age, by tyme, by emptyneſſe or fulneſſe of the body, and by naturall complexions. Fyrſte to a hole man, hauynge no devilitie of nature, and digeſtynge perfytely the meate that eateth, a lyttell ſleape is ſufficient: but to them, which haue weake ſtomakes, and do digeſte ſlowely, it requireth, that ſleape be moche lengar. ſemblable temperance is required in youth and age, wynter and ſommer. The body beinge full of yll humours, very lytel ſlepe is ſufficient, except the humors be crude or raw, for than is ſlepe neceſſary, which digeſteth them better, than labour. Semblably, where the body is longe empty, by longe ſyckneſſe or abſtinence, ſlepe comforteth nature, as well in the principal membres, as in all the other. Alſo regarde muſte be hadde to the complexion, for they that ar hot and do eate lyttell, and digeſte quickely, a lyttell ſleape ſerueth, ſpecyally to choleryke perſones, for in them moche ſlepe augmenteth heate, more than is neceſſary, whereby hote fumes and inflamations are often ingendred, and ſomtyme the naturall choler is aduſte or putryfied, as experience teacheth. Fleumatike perſons at naturallly inclyned to ſleape: and bycauſe they ingender moche humours, they requyre more ſleape than ſanguine or cholerike. Perſons hauyng naturall melancoly, not procedynge of choler aduſte, do requyre very moche ſleape, whiche in them comforteth the powers animal, vitall, and naturall, which ye may find writē in the tables preceding Sleape wolde be taken not immediatelye after meales, and before that the meate is dyſcended from the mouthe of the ſtomake. For thereby is

ingendred paynes and noyſe in the bely, and digeſtion corrupted, and the ſlepe by yll vapours, aſcendyng, made vnquiete and troublous. More ouer immoderate ſlepe maketh the body apt vnto palſeys, apoplexis, fallynge ſycknes, reumes, & impoſtumes. Alſo it maketh the wyttes dull, and the body ſlowe and vnapte to honeſte exerciſe. Scmblably immoderate watche drieth to moch the body, and doth debilytate the powers animall, letteth digeſtion, and maketh the bodye apte to conſumptions. Wherfore in theſe two thynges, as well as all other, a diligent temperance is to be vſed the moderation is beſt coniected for it is harde perfytely to knowe it) by the ſenſible lyghtnes of all the body, ſpecially of the brayne, the browes, and the eyes, the paſſage downe of the meate from the ſtomake, the wyll to make vrine, and to go to the ſtoole. Contrary wiſe, heuines in the body and eyes, and ſauor of the mete before eaten, ſignifieth that the ſlepe was not ſufficient. They that ar hole muſt ſlepe firſt on the right ſide, bycauſe the meate may approche to the lyuer, whiche is to the ſtomake, as fyre vnder the potte, and by hym is digeſted. To them, whiche haue feble digeſtion, it is good to ſlepe proſtrate on their bealyes, or to haue theyr bare hand on theyr ſtomakes. Lyeng vpright on the backe, is to be vtterly abhorred.
            
            
               The commoditie of exerciſe, and the tyme whan it ſhulde be vſed. Cap. 31.
               EVery menynge is not an exerciſe, but only that which is vehemēt, the end wherof, is alteration of the breath or wynd of a man

Of exercyſe do procede two cōmodities, euacuation of excremētes, and alſo good habite of the body. for exercyſe beyng a vehemēt motion, ther of nedes muſte enſue hardneſſe of the members, wherby labour ſhal the leſſe greue, and the body be the more ſtronge to labour. alſo therof commeth augmentation of heate, wherby hapneth the more attraction of thynges to be dygeſted, alſo more quycke alteration, and better nouryſſhynge More ouer, that al and ſyngular partes of the body, be therewith ſomwhat humected. wherby it hapneth, that thinges harde be mollifyed moyſt thynges are extenuate, and the pores of the body ar more opened. And by the violence of the breath or wynd, the pores are clenſed, and the fylthe in the body naturally expelled. This thing is ſo neceſſary to the preſeruatiō of helth, that without it, no man may be longe withoute ſyckneſſe, whiche is affyrmed by Lornelius Lelſus, Cor. Cel. lib. 1. ſayeng, that ſluggyſhnes dulleth the bodye, labour doth ſtrength it, the fyrſt bryngeth the in cōmodities of age ſhortly, the laſt maketh a man longe tyme luſty. Not withſtandynge in exercyſe ought to be foure thinges diligently conſidered, that is to ſay, the tyme, the thynges precedyng, the qualitie and the quantitie of exercyſe.
               Fyrſt as concernyng the tyme conuenient for exerciſe, that it be not whan there is in the ſtomake or bowels, great quātitie of meate not ſuffycyently dygeſted, or of humours crude or raw, leſſe therby peryll mought inſue by conueyance of them into all the membres, before thoſe metes Galen. de tuend. ſan. lib. 1. or humours be concocte or boyled ſuffyeyently. Galen ſayth, that the tyme moſte conuenient for

exerciſe is, whan bothe the fyrſt & ſeconde digeſtyon is complete, as well in the ſtomake, as in the vaynes, & that the tyme approcheth to eate 
                     〈◊〉
                  . For yf ye do exercyſe ſooner or later, ye ſhall eyther fyll the body with crude humours, or elles augment yelowe choler. The knowledge of this tyme is perceyued by the colour of the vrine, for that which reſēbleth vnto clere water betokeneth, that the iuyce, whiche cometh from the ſtomake, is crude in the vaynes: that whiche is well colouryd; not to hygh or baſe, betokeneth that the ſecond digeſtion is nowe perfyte: where the colour is very hygh or redde, it ſygh
                     ••
                  fyet
                     〈…〉
                   that the concoction is more thanne ſuffycyent. Wherfore whan the vryne appereth in a temperate colour, not redde nor pale, but as it were gylt, than ſhulde exerciſe haue his begynnyng.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of fricaſies or rubbynges precedynge exerciſe. Cap. 32.
               AS touchynge thynges procedynge exerciſe, for aſmoch as it is to be feared, leſte by vehement exerciſe any of the excremē 
                  Galenus. Paulus. Oribaſius, Actius. tes of the bealy or bladder, ſhulde haſtely be receyued into the habyte of the body, by the vyolence of heate, kendled by exercyſe: alſo leſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   thynge, whiche is hole, be by heuyneſſ
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  tes, or vyolent motion, broken or 
                     〈◊〉
                   out of his place, or that the excrementes, by violence of the breathe, ſhulde ſtoppe the po
                     ••
                  res or 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  dytes of the bodye, it ſhall be neceſſarye lyttell and lyttell, by chafynge the body, fyrſte to mollifye the partes conſolydate, and to ex
                     〈…〉
                  te or

make thynne the humours, and to lowſe and open the poores, and than ſhall enſue to hym that exerciſeth, no peryll of obſtruction or rupture. And to brynge that to paſſe, it ſhall be expedient, after that the body is clenſed, to rubbe the body with a courſe lynnen clothe, fyrſt ſoftely and eaſilye, and after to increaſe more and more, to a harde and ſwyfte rubbynge, vntyll the fleſſhe do ſwelle, and be ſomwhat ruddy, and that not only downe ryght, but alſo ouerthwart & round Some do vſe fricaſies in this forme, in the mornynge, after that they haue ben at the ſtole, with theyr ſhirte ſleues or bare hande, if theyr fleſh be tended, they do fyrſt ſoftely, and afterwarde faſter, rubbe theyr breſte, and ſydes downewarde, and ouerthwarte, not touchyng their ſtomacke or bealy, and after cauſe their ſeruāt ſemblably to rubbe ouerthwart their ſhoulders, and backe, begynnyng at their neckbone, and not touchyng the raynes of their backe, excepte they doo fele there moche colde and wynde, and afterwarde their legges frō the knees to the ancle: laſte their armes from the elbowe to the hand wreſte. And in this forme of fricaſy I my ſelfe haue founded an excellent commoditie. Old men, or they, whiche be very drye in their bodyes, yf they put to ſome ſwete oyles, as Yrinum, Nardiū, Chamemelinum, or other lyke, myxte with a lytel ſwete oyle of rooſes, I ſuppoſe they do wel. I wyl not here ſpeake of oyntementes vſed in ode tyme amonge the Romaynes and Grekes, in frie
                     〈…〉
                   or rubbynges. For I ſuppoſe, that they were neuer here vſed. and in the ſayde places, they be alſo left, oneleſſe it be in palſies, or apoplexies,

or agaynſt the rigour, which hapneth in feuers, onely. I wyll remember the ſayeng of Hipocrates, Fricaſye hathe power to lowſe, to bynde, to increaſe fleſſhe, and to mynyſſhe hit. For harde fryeaſies doo bynde or conſolidate, ſofte rubbynge doth lowſe or mollyfye, moche dothe mynyſhe fleſhe, meane rubbynge dothe augment or increaſe it. He that wyll knowe more aboundantly herof, lette hym rede the boke of Galene of the preſeruation of helth, callyd in latyne Detuenda ſanitate, tranſlated moſt truely and eloquentely, out of Greke into latine, by doctour Linacre, late phiſition of moſte worthy memory to our ſoueraygne lorde kynge Henry the eight. The ſame mattier is written more briefely of Paulus Aegineta, Oribaſius, Aetius and ſome other late wryters, but vnto Galene not to be compared.
            
            
               ¶ The diuerſities of exerciſes. Cap. 33.
               THe qualitie of exerciſe, is the dyuerſytie therof, foraſmoche as therin be many differences in mouynge, and alſo ſome exerciſe moueth more one parte of the body, ſome another. In difference of mouynge, ſome is ſlowe or ſofte, ſome is ſwyfte or faſte: ſome is ſtronge or violent, ſome be myxte with ſtrength & ſwiftneſſe. Stronge or violent exercyſes be theſe, deluyng (ſpecially in tough clay and heuy) bearyng or ſuſteynynge of heuy burdeynes, clymmyng or walkynge agaynſt a ſtiepe vpright hyll: holding a rope, & clymmyng vp therby, hangyng by the handes on any thynge, aboue a mannes reache,

that his fete touche not the grounde: ſtandynge and holdynge vppe, or ſpreadynge the armes, with the handes faſte cloſed, and abydynge ſoo a longe tyme. Alſo to holde the armes ſtedfaſte, cauſynge an other man, to aſſay, to pulle theym out, and not withſtandynge he kepeth his arme ſtedfaſte, inforcynge thervnto the ſynewes and muſcles. wraſtlynge alſo with the armes and legges, yf the perſones be equall in ſtrengthe, it dothe exerciſe the one and the other: yf the one be ſtronger, than is it to the weaker a more vyolent exerciſe. All theſe kyndes of exerciſes, and other lyke them, do augmente ſtrengthe, and therfore they ſerue onely for yonge men, whiche be inclyned, or be apte to the warres. Swyfte exerciſe without violence is, runnynge, playenge with weapons, tenyſe, or throwynge of the balle, trottyng a ſpace of ground forwarde and backewarde, goynge on the toes, and holdynge vppe the handes. Alſo ſtyrrynge vp and downe his armes, without plummettes. Vehement exerciſe is compounde of vyolent exerciſe, and ſwyfte, whan they are ioyned togyther at oone tyme, as daunſynge of galyardes, throwynge of the balle, and rounnynge after it: footeballe playe may be in the number therof, throwynge of the longe darte, and contynuynge it many tymes, ronnynge in harneys, and other lyke.
               The moderate exercyſe is longe walkynge or goyng a iourneye. The partes of the body haue ſondry exerciſes appropryed vnto them, as runnynge and goynge is the mooſte proper for the legges. Mouynge of the armes vp and downe, of ſtretchynge theym oute, and playenge with

weapons, ſerueth moſt for the armes and ſhulders, ſtoupynge and ryſynge oftentyme, or lyftynge great weightes, takynge vp plummettes or other lyke poyſes on the endes of ſtaues, and in lyke wyſe, lyftyng vp in euery hande a ſpeare or mortſpyke by the endes, ſpecyallye croſſynge the handes, and to laye theym downe agayne in theyr places, theſe do exercyſe the backe and loines. Of the bulke and lunges the proper exercyſe is meuynge of the breathe in ſyngynge or cryenge. The entrayles, whiche be vndernethe the myddreffe, be exercyſed by blowynge, eyther by conſtraynte, or playenge on Shaulmes, or Sackbottes, or other lyke inſtrumentes, whyche doo requyre moche wynde. The Muſc
                     •
                  
                  les are beſt exercyſed with holdynge the breath in, a longe tyme, ſoo that he whiche dothe exercyſe, hath welle dygeſted his meate, and is not troubled with moche wynde in his bodye. Fynally lowde redynge, counterfayte battayle, tenyſe, or throwynge the balle, runnynge, walkynge, Celſus. 1. adde to ſhotyng, whiche in myn opinion excede all the other, do exercyſe the body commodiouſely. Alwaye remember, that the ende of violent exercyſe, is difficultye in fetchynge of the brethe. Of moderate exercyſe, alteratiō of breth onely, or the begynnynge of ſweate. More ouer in wynter, runnynge, and wraſtlynge, is conuenient. In ſommer wraſtlynge a lyttell, but not runnynge. In very cold wether, moche walking, in hotte wether, reſte is more expedyent. They whiche ſeme to haue moyſte bodyes, and lyue in ydelneſſe, they haue nede of vyolent exercyſe
                     〈…〉
                   They which at leane and choleryke, muſt walk

ſoftly, and exerciſe them ſelfes very temperatly. The plummettes, callyd of Galen Alteres, whiche are nowe moche vſed with great men, being of equall weight, and accordyng to the ſtrength of hym, that exerciſeth, are very good to be vſed faſtynge, a lyttell before brekefaſte or dyner, holdynge in euery hand one plummet, and lyftynge theym on hyghe, and bryngynge theym downe with moche vyolence, and ſo he maye make the exerciſe vyolent, or moderate, after the poyſe of the plummettes, heuyer or lyghter, and with moche or lyttell labourynge with theym.
            
            
               ☞ Of Geſtation, that is to ſay, where one is caried, and is of an other thynge meued, and not of hym ſelfe. Cap. 34.
               THere is alſo an other kynde of exercyſe, which is called Geſtation, and is myxte with mouynge and reſt. For as moch as Paul. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Actius. the body, ſyttyng or lyeng, ſemeth to reſt, and not withſtandyng it is meued by that, whiche beareth it, as lyenge in a bedde, hauynge by cordes or chaynes, or in a cradell, ſyttinge in a chaire, which is caried on mens ſhulders with ſtaues, as was the vſe of the aūcient Romayns or ſyttynge in a boote or barge, which is rowed, rydynge on a horſe, whiche aumbleth very eaſilye, or goth a very ſofte pace. The bedde, cradel, and chayre caried, ſerueth for theym, that are in longe and continuall ſyckeneſſe, or be lately recouered of a feuer Alſo them, whiche haue the freneſye or letarge, or haue a lyghte terciane feuer,

or a cotidiane. This exerciſe ſwetely aſſwageth troubles of the mynd, and prouoketh ſlepe, as it appereth in chylderne, whiche are rocked. Alſo it is conuenient for them, whiche haue the palſey, the ſtoone, or the goute. Geſtation in a charyotte or wagon hath in it a ſhakynge of the body, but ſome vehement, and ſome more ſofte, the ſofte ſerueth in dyſeaſes of the heade, and where any matter runneth downe into the ſtomake and entrayles. But the vehement ſhaking is to be vſed in the griefes of the breſte and ſtomacke. Alſo in ſwellyng of the body and legges in dropſies, palſeys, mygrimes, and ſcotomies, whiche is an imagination of darkeneſſe, beynge retōutned, at the ende of his iourneye, he muſte ſytte vp, and be eaſily moued. I haue knowen, ſayth Aetius, many perſons in ſuche wyſe cured without any other helpe. Nauigation or rowynge nigh to the lande, in a clame water, is expediēt for them that haue dropſies, lepries, palſepes, called of the vulgar people, takynges, and franſies. To be caried on a rough water, it is a vyolent exerciſe, & induceth ſondry affections of the mynde, ſomtyme feare, ſomtyme hope, nowe coward harte, nowe hardineſſe, one whyle pleaſure, an nother whyle dyſpleaſure. Theſe exerciſes, yf they be well tempered, they maye put out of the body, all longe durynge ſyckeneſſes. For that whiche is myxte with reſte and menynge, yf any thynge elles maye, it moſte excellently cauſeth the body to be well nouryſſhed. Celſus, Celſus. 2. doth prohybite geſtation, where the body feleth peyne, & in the begynnyng of feuers, but whan they ceaſſe, he aloweth it.
               
                  
Rydynge moderately, and without gryefe, it dothe corroborate the ſpyrite and bodye aboue other exercyſes, ſpecyally the ſtomake, it clenſeth the ſences, and maketh theym more quycke: all be it to the breſte it is very noyfull. It oughte to be remembred, that as well this, as all other kyndes of exercyſe, wold be vſed in a hole countreye, and where the ayre is pure and vncorrupted. Foreſene, that he that woll exercyſe, do go fyrſte to the ſtoole, for the cauſes reherſed in the laſte chapiter.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of vociferation. Cap. 35.
               THe chiefe exercyſe of the breſt and inſtrumentes of the voyce, is vociferacion, whiche is ſynging, redyng, or crienge, wherof is the propertie, that it purgeth naturall heate, and maketh it alſo ſubtyll and ſtable, and maketh the membres of the body ſubſtancyall and ſtronge, reſyſtynge diſeaſes. This exercyſe wold be vſed, of perſones ſhorte wynded, and theym, whiche can not fetche theyr brethe, but holdyng their necke ſtreight vpright. Alſo of them, whoſe fleſhe is conſumed, ſpeciallye about the breaſte and ſhoulders. alſo which haue had apoſtume
                     •
                   broken in theyr breaſtes: moreouer of them that are hoorſe by the moche moyſture. and to them, whiche haue quartene feuers, it is conuenient, it louſeth the humour, that ſtycketh in the breſt, and dryeth vp the moyſteneſſe of the ſtomacke, whiche properly the courſe of the quartayne is wont to brynge with hym, it alſo profiteth them whiche haue feble ſtomakes, or do vomyte contynually,

or do breake vp ſowreneſſe out of the ſtomake. It is good alſo for grefes of the heed. He that intendeth to attempt this exerciſe, after that he hath ben at the ſtoole, and ſoftly rubbed the lower partes, and waſhed his handes. Lette hym ſpeake with as baſe a voyce as he can, and walkynge, begynne to ſynge lowder & lowder, but ſtyll in a baſe voyce, and to take no hede of ſweete tunes or armonye. For that nothynge dothe profyte vnto helthe of the body, but to inforce hym ſelfe to ſynge greatte, for therby moche ayre drawen in by fetchyng of breath, thruſtyth forth the breaſt and ſtomacke, and openeth and inlargeth the poores. By hygh crienge and lowde readynge, are expellyd ſuperfluouſe humours. Therfore me
                     ••
                  e and women, hauynge theyr bodyes feeble, and theyr fleſſhe lowſe, and not fyrme, muſte reade oftentymes lowde, and in a baaſe voyce, extendynde oute the wynde pype, and other paſſages of the breathe.
               But notwithſtandyng, this exercyſe is not vſed alway, and of all perſons. For they in whome is abundance of humours corrupted, or be moche diſeaſed with crudite in the ſtomak and vaines, thoſe doo I counſayle, to abſtayne from the exercyſe of the voyce, leſte moche corrupteth iuyce or vapours, may therby be into all the body dyſtrybuted. And here I conclude to ſpeake of exercyſe, whiche of them, that deſyre, to remayne longe in helth, is moſt diligently, & as I mought ſay, moſte ſcrupulouſely to be obſerued.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRDE BOKE.
            
               
                  ❧ Of replecion. Cap. 1.
               
                  
                     REPLECION IS A ſuperfluous abundance of humours in the body: and that is in two maner of wyſe, that is to ſay in quā
                  titie, & in qualitie. In quantitie, as where al the foure humours are more in abū
                  daunce, that be equalle in proporcion to the body, that conteyneth theym, or where one humour moche excedeth the remnaunt in quantitie. In qualytie, as where the bloudde or other humour, is hotter, or colder, thycker or thynner, that is conuenient vnto the body. Fyrſte where all the humours, beynge ſuperfluouſely increaſed, fylleth and extendeth the receptories of the body, as the ſtomake, the vaynes, and bowels, and is moſt properly callid fulneſſe, in greke Plethora, in latine Plenitudo.
               The other is where the body is infarced, eyther with choler, yelowe or blacke, or with fleume, or with watry humours, and is properly callyd in greke, Cacochymia, in latin Vicioſus ſuccus, in englyſh it may be callid corrupt iuyce. I wyl not here write, the ſubtyl and abundant definitions and deſcriptions of Galen in his bokes de Plenitudine, and in his commentaries vppon the

aphorſſmes of hipocrates. For it ſhall here ſuffyſe, to ſhewe the operations of replecion good or yll, rymyttynge them, whiche be curious, and deſyre a more ample declaration, to the moſt excellent warkes of Galene, where he may be ſatisfied, Li. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . aph. yf he be not determyned to repougne agaynſt reaſon. Hipocrates ſaythe, where meate Apho. 15. Vbi cibus praeter na turā plus igeſtus eſt hic morbū facit. Galen. in cōmē. lopraedicto. is receyued moche aboue nature, that makethe ſyckeneſſe. Galene declarynge that place ſayth, More meate than accordeth with natures meaſure, is named replecion. And afterwarde he expoundeth that worde aboue nature, to ſignifie to moch and ſuperfluouſly as who ſayth, where the meate is ſuperfluouſly taken, it maketh ſikneſſe. For meate but a lytell excedynge temperance, may not forthwith make ſyckeneſſe, but maye yet kepe the bodye within the latitude or boundes of helthe, for the meat that ſhall make ſyckenes, muſt not a lyttell excede the exquiſite meaſure. The incommoditie, whiche hapneth therby is, that moyſtneſſe is to moche extended. and naturall heate is debilitate. Alſo naturalle heate reſolueth ſomewhat of the ſuperfluouſe meate and drynke. And of that, whiche is reſolued of meate vndigeſted, procedeth fumoſytie groſſe and vndygeſted, whiche aſcendynge vp into the heed, and touchynge the ryme, wherin the brayne is wrapped, cauſeth heed ache, tremblyng of the membres, duſkyſhnes of the ſyght, and many other ſyckneſſes: alſo by the ſharpnes therof, it prycketh and annoyeth the ſynewes, whiche make ſenſibilitie, the rootes of whome, ar in the brayn, and from thenſe paſſeth through all the body. Fynally, the ſayd fumoſitie, ingendred

of repletion, percynge the innermoſt parte of the ſayd ſynewes, callyd ſenſible, it greuouſly annoyeth the power animall, there conſyſtynge, by the occaſion wherof, vnderſtandynge and reſon, as to the vſe of theym, are let and troubled. And alſo the tongue, whiche is reaſons expoſytour, is depryued of his office, as it appereth in them, which are drunke, and them, whiche haue greuous paynes in their heed, procedyng of replecion. Sygnes of replecion be theſe, loſſe of appetyte, delite in nothynge, ſlouthfulneſſe, dulneſſe of the wytte, and ſences, more ſleape, than Oribaſius Euporiſtō lib. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . was accuſtomed to be, crampes in the body, ſter tynge or ſaltion of the membres, fulneſſe of the vaynes, and thyckenes of the pulſis, horrour or ſhrouelynge of the body myxte with heate. The remedyes are abſtynence, and all euacuations, whereof I wylle make mencyon in the nexte Chapyter.
            
            
               ☞ Of euacuacion. Cap. 2.
               THe meates and drynkes receyued into the bodye, if the ſtomake and lyuer do their naturall office, be altered by concoction and digeſtion, in ſuch wyſe that the beſte parte therof goth to the nouryſhment of the body: the warſte, beinge ſeparate by the membres officiall, from the reſidue, are made excrementes in ſondry fourmes, and ſubſtaunces, whiche ar
                     •
                   lyke in qualitie to the naturall humour, whiche than raygneth moſte in the bodye. Theſe excrementes Excrementes. be none other, but matter ſuperfluous, and vnſauery, whiche by naturall powers may

not be conuerted into fleſhe, but remaynynge in the body corrupt the membres, and therfore nature abhorrynge theym, deſyreth to haue theym expelleth. Theſe excrementes be thre in number, ordure, vrine, humour ſuperfluouſe. More ouer Ordure. there be two ſortes of ordure, that is to ſay, one digeſted, whiche paſſeth by ſiege, the other vndygeſted, Dygeſtyd. whiche is expelled by vomyte. where I ſaye dygeſted, I meane, that it is paſſed the ſtomake, and tourned into an nother fygure. Lyke wyſe I calle that vndigeſted, whiche ſtyll retayneth the fygure of meate. Vrine is the watrye Vrine ſubſtaunce of the bloudde, lyke as whaye is of mylke, whiche out of the meate that is altered and concocte or boyled in the ſtomacke, is ſtrayned in the vaynes called Meſaraice, which procedeth from the holowe parte of the lyuer, and ſente by the raynes into the bladder, paſſethe by the Inſtrumente, the whiche is ordeyned as welle to that purpoſe, as for Generation.
               Humour ſuperfluouſe is in thre ſortes, eyther Humour ſuperfluous. myxte with any of the foure humours, called naturall, or els it is gathered into the brayne, or it is betwene the ſkynne and the fleſhe, or lyeth amonge the ſynewes, Muſcules or ioyntes. Of humours ſome are more groſſe and colde, ſome are ſubtyll and hotte, and are called vapour
                     •
                  . Now for to expelle the ſayd excrementes, are .ix. ſondry kyndes of euacuation, that is to ſaye, abſtynence, vomyte, purgation by ſiege, lettynge of bloudde, ſcarifienge callyd cuppynge, ſweating, prouocation of vrine, ſpyttynge, bledyng at the noſe, or by hemorrodes: And in women, their naturall purgations. Of theſe euacuations I wy
                     ••
                  
                  
briefely declare, with the cōmodities, whiche by the diſcrets vſe of theym do happen vnto the bodye.
            
            
               ☞ Of abſtinence. Cap. 3.
               ABſtinence is a forbearynge to receyue any meate or drynke. For if it be but in part, it is than called rather temperance than abſtinence. It ought to be vſed onely after replecion, as the proper remedye therfore. And than if it be moderate, it conſumeth ſuperfluities, Cel. lib. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Hipocrat. apho. li. 7. and in conſumynge them, it clarifieth the humoures, maketh the body fayre coloured, and not onely kepeth out ſyckeneſſe, but alſo where ſycheneſſe is entred, nothynge more helpeth, yf it be vſed in ſeaſon. To them, whiche haue verye moyſte bodyes, hunger is ryghte expediente, for Conſiderations in abſtinence. it maketh theyin more drye, not withſtandynge there ought to be conſyderations, in the meate before eaten, in the age of the perſone, in the tyme of the yere, and in cuſtome. Fyrſte in the meate before eaten, yf it be moche in exceſſe or very groſſe, or not moche excedynge, or lyghte of digeſtyon, and accordynge therto, wolde abſtynence more or laſſe be proporcioned. Concernyng age, Hipocrates ſaythe, olde men may ſuſteyne Apho. li. 1. faſtynge eaſilye: nexte vnto them, men of myddell age, yonge men maye wars beare it, chylderne warſt of all, ſpecially they that be luſtye, not withandynge, here Galene correcteth Hipocrates, ſayenge, that he ſhuld haue excepted men Galen. in cōment. very olde, who, as experience declareth, muſte eate often and lyttell. As touchynge tyme, it muſt be remembred, that in wynter and ſprynge

tyme, the ſtomakes be naturally veeye hotte, and ſleape is longe, and therfore in that tyme meates wolde be more abundaunt, & all though moch be eaten, it wyll be ſooner digeſted. wherfore abſtinence woide not be than ſo moche as in ſommer, all be it to abſteyne moche in ſommer, excepte it be after replecion. Damaſcene ſayth, it dryeth the body, it maketh the colour Damaſeenus apho. ſalowe, it ingendreth melancoly, and hurteth the ſyghte. More ouer, cuſtome maye not be forgotten, for they, whiche are vſed from chyldhode, to eate ſondry meales in the daye, wolde rather be reduced to fewer meales, and lyttelle meate, than to be compelled to abſtaynevtterly, to the intent, that nature, whiche is made by cuſtome, be not rebuked, and the power digeſtyue therby debilitate. And note well, that by to moche abſtinence, the moyſture of the body is withdrawē and conſequentely the body dryeth, and waxeth leane: naturall heate, by withdrawynge of moiſture, is to moche intended, and not findyng humour to warke in, tourneth his vyolence to the radicall or ſubſtantiall moyſture of the bodye. and exhauſtyng that humour, bryngeth the body into a conſumption. wherfore Hipocrates ſaith, Apho. li. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   that to ſcarſe and exquiſite an order in meate and drynke, is for the more parte more daungerouſe than that, which is more abundant. Contrarywyſe moderation in abſtinence, accordyng to the ſayde conſyderatyons, is to helthe a ſure bulwarke.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Of Vomite. Cap. 4.
               THe meate or drynke ſuperfluous, or corrupted in the ſtomake, is beſt expellyd by vomyte, if it be not very greuous to him whiche is diſeaſed. Alſo the moderate Aetius. li. 1 vſe of it, pourgeth fleume, lighteth the heed, cauſeth that the exceſſe of meates or drynkes, ſhall not anoy or brynge ſyckeneſſe. Moreouer it amē
                  deth the affectis of the raynes, bladder, and the fundement. It alſo helpeth agaynſt lepries, cankers, goutes, dropſies, and alſo diuers ſickneſſes procedyng of the ſtomake. For-yf any grefs hapneth of the heade, vomyte is than vncommodyous. It is better in winter, than in ſommer. Alſo good for them, whiche are replete, or very choleryke, yf tkey haue not well dygeſted. but it is yll for theym, that be leane, or haue weake ſtomakes. And therfore where one feleth bytter vapours ryſynge out of his ſtomacke, with griefe and weyghtyneſſe, in the ouer partes of his bodye, lette hym roome forthwith to this remedye. It is alſo good for him that is hart burned, and harh moche ſpyttell, or his ſtomacke wambleth, and for hym that remeueth into ſondrye places. Yet I coumſaye ſayth Celſus, hym that wyll be Celſ. lib. 1. in helthe, and wold not be to ſoone aged, that he vſe not this dayly. And I my ſelfe haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   men, whiche dayly vſynge it haue brought therby theyr ſtomakes into ſuch cuſtome, that what ſo euer they dyd eete, they coulde not longe retayne it, wherby they ſhorten theyr lyues. wherfore it wolde not be vſed, but onely where great ſurfet, or abundaunce of fleume do requyre it.

He that wyll vomyte after meate, lette hym drynke ſondry drynkes myxte togyther, and laſt of all, warme water: or yf that be to eaſy, lette hym myxt therwith ſalte or hony. If he wyl vomyte faſtynge, lette hym drinke water and hony ſodden togyther, or yſope with it, or eate of a radyſhe roote, and drynke warme water vppon it. alſo water wherin radyſhe is boyled, and afterward prouoke hym ſelfe to it, Them that wil haue more vyolent pourgations, I remytte to phiſitions lerned. But yet I do eftſones warne them, that therin they be circumſpecte, and doo not moch vſe it. More ouer in vomites, the matter brought forthe, wolde be conſydered, accordynge to the rules of Hipocrates, in his ſeconde Hipocrat. praeſag. 2. cap. 7. boke of pronoſtications, that is to ſaye, yf it be myxt with fleume & choler, it is moſt profitable if it be not in very great quantitie, nor thycke, the laſſe myxture it hath, the warſe is it. If it be greene, lyke to leeke blaades, thynne or blacke, it is to be iudged ylle. If it haue all coloures, it is extreme peryllous. If it be leady coloured, and ſauoureth horribly, it ſignifieth a ſhort abolicion, or diſſolution of nature. For as Galene affirmeth there in his comment, ſuche maner of vomite declareth corruption with extinctinge of nature. Alſo euery putrifyed and ſtynckynge ſauour in vomyte is yll. Theſe thynges be ryghte Galen. de locis. affectis. lib. 1. neceſſary, to be loked for, where one dothe vomyte without any difficultie: but to inforce one to vomite, whiche can not, is very odious, and to be abhorred.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
wels, griefe in the raynes of the backe or huckle bone, ventoſities in the bealy, inflamation or exulceration in the guttes or bladder. It is a conuenient and ſure medicine, and lefte hurte dothe enſue of it. The makynge and ordrynge therof, I wyl omytte to wryte in this place, partly that I wolde not, that phiſitions ſhuld to moch note in me preſumption, partely that another place may be more apte to that purpoſe.
            
            
               ☞ The particular commodities of euery purgacion. Cap. 6.
               IN potions, electuaries, and pylles oughte to be moche more obſeruation, than in clyſters or ſuppoſitories, foraſmoch as theſe do enter no further than into the gutte, where the ordure lyeth, and by that place onely, bringeth forth the matter, whiche cauſeth diſeaſe. But the other entrynge in that way, that meates and drynkes do, cometh into the ſtomacke, and there is boyled, and ſente into the places of digeſtyon, and afterwarde is myxte with the iuyce, wherof the ſubſtance of the body is made, and expellynge the aduerſarye humours, ſommewhat thereof doubteleſſe remayneth in the bodye. Wherfore menne haue neede to beware, what medicynes they receyue, that in them be noo venenoſytie, malyce or corruption, leſt for the expellynge of a ſuperfluous humor, which perchance good diet, or ſome brothes made of good herbes, or the ſaid euacuation, with ſuppoſitorie or cliſter, mought brynge forthe at leyſure. by deſyrynge of to haſtye remedye, they receyue in medicine that whiche

ſhal ingender a venemous humour, and vneuitable deſtruction vnto all the body. And therfore happye is he, whiche in ſyckeneſſe fyndeth a dyſcrete and welle lerned phiſition, and ſoo trewe a potycarye, that hath alwaye drowges vncorrupted, and whome the phyſition maye ſurely truſte, to diſpence his thinges trewely. But nowe to retourne to the ſayde fourme of pourgation, I wylle nowe ſette forthe ſomme counſayles, concernynge that mattier, whiche I haue collected out of the chiefe authours of phiſycke. Bodies hotte and moyſte, maye eaſyly ſuſteyne pourgation by the ſtoole. They whiche be leane or thynne, hauynge the members tender, may take harme by purgations. To men that are cholerike, and theym that eate lyttelle, pourgations are greuouſe. In yonge chylderne and olde menne, it is daungerouſe to lowſe moche the bealye. To theym that are not wonte to it, pourgation is noyfulle. He that lyueth in a good order of diete needeth neyther pourgation nor vomyte. After that the pourgation hathe wroughte, thyrſtnes and ſounde ſlepe be ſygnes that the bodye is ſufficiently pourged. By dayly takynge of medicynes, nature is corrupted. whan ye wyll purge any thynge make fyrſte the matter flowynge & ſoluble. Medicyne to pourge Hipocrat aphor. oughe not to be myngled with meate, but to be taken foure houres at the leſte before meales, or thre houres after meales, excepte certayne eaſy pylles made to clenſe and comforte the ſtomake, whiche wolde be taken at the begynnynge of ſupper, or after ſupper a lyttell before that one goeth to bed, makynge a lyghte ſupper or none.

After purgation taken, the pacyent ſhulde reſte, & not walke, vntyll the medicyne hath wrought, nor eate or dryncke in the meane ſpace. Theſe thynges haue I remembred, bycauſe I haue knowen ryght good phiſitions, to haue forgotten, to inſtructe therof their paciētes. Now wyll I ſette forthe the table of ſuche thynges, whiche of theyr propertie do digeſt or pourge ſuperfluous humours particularly, whiche I haue gathered out of the bookes of Dioſcorides, Galene, Paulus Egineta, Oribaſius, and Aetius, and other late wryters, not withſtandynge, I haue not writen all, for as moche as there be diuers thynges, whervnto we haue not yet founden any names in englyſhe.
               
                  ¶ Digeſtiues of choler.
                  ¶ Endyue.
                  Lettyſe.
                  Cykorye.
                  Scabioſe.
                  Maydenheare.
                  Malowes.
                  Mercury.
                  The iuyce of pome
                        •
                      garnades.
                  Pourſelane.
                  Popy.
                  Berberies.
                  Roſes.
                  Violettes the lefe and flowre.
                  Sorell.
                  Lyuerworte.
                  Sorell de boyſe.
                  Whay clarifyed.
                  The great foure colde ſedes, that is to ſay, of gourdes, cucumbers, melones, and citruls.
                  Pſilium,
                  Vyneger.
                  Saunders.
                  Barley water.
                  Prunes.
                  Tamaryndes.
               
               
                  ¶ Purges of choler.
                  Wylde hoppes.
                  
                     
Wormewode
                  Centorie.
                  Fumytorie.
                  Whay of butter.
                  Violettes.
                  Mercury.
                  Juycs of Roſes
                  Prunes.
                  Eupatorye.
                  Tamarindes, halfe an ounce in a decoction.
                  Manna .vi. drammes at the leaſte, and ſo to xxv. in the brothe of a henne or capon.
                  Rebarbarū by it ſelfe frome two drammes, vnto foure, infuſed or ſtiped in lycour, frome iiii. drāmes vnto .viii.
               
               
                  ¶ Digeſtyues of fleume.
                  ¶ Fenell,
                  Perſely, the rootes
                  Smallage.
                  Capers.
                  Lawrell.
                  Synuy.
                  Puly.
                  Maioram.
                  Penyroyall.
                  Wylde parſnyp ſede.
                  Mynt.
                  Pympepnell.
                  Horemynt.
                  Gladen.
                  Agrymonye.
                  Calamynt.
                  Nep.
                  Betayne.
                  Sauge.
                  Radyſhe.
                  Mugworte.
                  Junyper.
                  Hyſope.
                  Pyony.
                  Baulme.
                  Honye.
                  Gynger.
                  Squilla.
                  Ariſtolochia.
                  Cynamome.
                  Pepper.
                  Cumyne.
               
               
                  ¶ Pourges of fleume.
                  ¶ Centorie.
                  Nettyll.
                  Agrimonye.
                  Alder.
                  Polypodiū of the oke.
                  Myrabolani kebuli, infuſed frome halfe an ounce to an ounce,

and two drammes. In ſubſtance, frome twoo drammes to halfe an ounce.
                  Agaricus, frō a drāme to two drammes, infuſed from .ii. drāmes to fyue.
                  Yreos.
                  Maydenheare.
                  Sticados.
               
               
                  ¶ Pourges of melancoly.
                  ¶ The brothe of colewortes, lyght boyled.
                  Baulme mynte.
                  Sticados.
                  Tyme.
                  Seene, boyled in white wine, or in the broth of a henne.
                  Laſed ſauery.
                  Exthimus.
                  Vnwrought ſylke.
                  Organum.
                  Calamynt.
                  Borage.
                  Hartis tunge.
                  Quyckbeme.
                  Maydenheare.
                  Wythwynde.
                  Pulyall mountayne.
                  Hony.
                  Sugar.
               
               ¶ Melancoly for the thynneſſe and ſubtylneſſe of the humour, nedeth no digeſtiue.
               ¶ They whiche wyll take ſharper purgations, or compounde with dyuers thynges, lette theym take the counſayle of an honeſt and perfyte phiſytion, and not aduenture to myxte thynges togyther, without knowynge the temperaunce of them in degrees, and that he canne proporcion theym to the bodye, that ſhall receyue theym in ſymples, as they be wrytten. And ſo he maye vſe theym without peryll, agaynſte the humours, whervnto they ſerue.
            
            
               
               ☞ Lettynge of bloudde. Cap. 6.
               THe parte of Euacuation by lettynge of bloudde, is inciſyon or cuttynge of the vayne, wherby the bloud, whiche is cauſe of ſyckeneſſe or griefe to the hole bodye, or any partycular parte therof, doth moſte aptly paſſe. The commodities wherof, beyng in a moderate Arnold 
                        〈◊〉
                      de uillano
                        •
                      ua. quantitie, and in a due tyme taken, be theſe that folowe, it clarifieth the wyt, and maketh good memorye, it clenſeth the bladder, it dryeth the brayne, it warmeth the marowe, beynge in the bones, it openeth the hearyng, it ſtoppeth teares or droppynges of the eyen, it taketh awaye lothſomneſſe, and confirmeth the ſtomake, it nouriſheth that, whiche is proper to nature, and the contrarye expelleth. It is thought, that therby lyfe is prolonged, and the matter makyng ſyckneſſe ſhortely conſumed. Wherfore lettynge of Oribaſi
                        〈…〉
                      in medicine comp
                        •
                      dio. bloudde is not onely expedient for theym, which are fulle of bloudde, or haue aboundaunce of ſtrengthe, but alſo for theym, in whome, withoute plenitude, callyd fulneſſe, inflammations begynne to be in theyr bodyes, or by ſome outewarde ſtrooke, the bloudde beynge gathered within, by collection therof, doo feele griefe or diſeaſe. Alſo where there is moche peyne felte, or debylitie of ſome member, wherof is ſuppoſed to be ingendred ſome greuous diſeaſe. More ouer they, whiche vſe exceſſe of meates and drynkes, may be cured by lettynge of bloudde. But thoſe, whiche be temperate, kepynge good diete, be holpen without lettynge of blode: as by fricaſies, vſynge of bathes, exerciſe, walkynge,

and rydynge moderately. Alſoo vnctions with oyles and oyntementes, called Diaphoretice, whiche by euaporation, do ſhortly euacuate the fulneſſe. All be it, yf the fulneſſe be of melancoly bloudde, than alway nedes muſte be lettynge of bloudde. Abundaunce of melancoly bloudde is knowen by theſe ſygnes. There is felte in the entrayles, or within the boulke of a man or woman, a weyghtynes with tenſion or thruſtynge outwarde and all that parte, whiche is aboue the nauel, is more heuy, than it was wont to be. Alſo moche vrine and fatty, the reſidence or bo
                  
                     •
                  ome, thycke, troublous, and fatte, ſommetyme blacke pouſhes or boyles, with inflamation and moche peyne. Theſe muſte be ſhortly let bloude, and the melancoly humour alſo purged by ſiege They, whyche haue crude or rawe humoures, muſte be warely lette bloudde, before that ſyckneſſe ingender, but hauyng the feuer, in no wiſe. Concernynge lettynge of blonde, theſe thynges Aetius. li. 3 folowynge, wolde be had in continuall remembrance, and be afore thought on. In abundance of the bloudde, the qualitie and quantitie, the greatneſſe of the ſycknes, and yf it be preſente, or loked for. alſo the diet precedyng, the age and ſtrength of the perſon, the naturall fourme of his body, the tyme of the yere, the region or coū
                  trey, the preſent ſtate of the ayre, the diſvſe of accuſtomed exercyſe, the ceaſſynge of euacuations vſed before. In qualitie conſyder, of what humour the fulnes procedeth. In quantitie the abundance of that, whiche is to be pourged. In ſyckeneſſe, if it be dangerous or tollerable: if the ſyckneſſe be preſent, it requyreth the more dilygence:

if it be loked for, it may be the better proporcioned. Cor. Celſus. lib. 2. In diete, the cuſtome in earynge and drinkyng, muſt be ſpecially noted. In yonge men and women, lettynge of bloudde wolde be more lyberall. In olde menne and yonge chylderne, it wolde be ſcarſer: ſtronge men maye ſuſteyne bledynge, they whiche are feble, may not endure it: Large bodies haue greatter veſſelles, than they, which be litle. leane mē haue more blod, corporat men haue more fleſhe. The time of the yere muſt be ſpecially marked. For in the begynnynge of Oriba. ſ
                        •
                     
                     Arnold. deuilla noua de flobothomia. Io. Damaſcenus in arte medi. ſpringe tyme, it is beſte lettynge of bloudde, as Oribaſius ſaythe, and ſo dothe contynue, after the opinion of Arnolde, vnto the eyght calendes of June. Aetius affirmeth, that in wynter, or in a colde countrey, or where the perſon is of a very colde nature, the vaynes ſhuld not be opened. And Damaſcene ſayth, They whiche in youthe haue vſe to be moche lette bloudde, after they be thre ſcore yeres old, their nature waxeth cold, and naturall heate is in them ſuffocate, ſpecially if they were of a colde complexion. but that is to be vnderſtande, where they that are in helth, are often let bloude. For in the lapſe from helth, and in dyuers diſeaſes, wherein, the bloudde is corrupted, or where it ingendreth impoſtumes, or reſorteth to any place, where it ought not to be, or paſſeth by any other cundyte, than nature hath ordeyned, or where it is furyouſe or inflamed, or by any other meanes bredethe greuouſe diſeaſes, in all theſe caſes it ought to be practyſed, ye ſometyme in aged perſones, women with childe, and yong infantes. For in extreme neceſſitie, it were better experience ſome remedy, than

to do nothynge. All other thynges concernynge this matter, pertayne to the part curatyue, whiche treateth of healynge of ſyckneſſe, whereof I wyll not nowe ſpeake, but remytte the reders to the counſayle of diſcrete phiſitions.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of ſcarifienge called boxinge or cuppynge. Cap. 7.
               FOr as moche as it is not conuenient, to be lette bloude often tymes in the yere, bicauſe moch of the vital ſpirite paſſeth forth with 
                     
                        •
                     alenus the bloudde, whiche beynge exhauſte, the bodye waxeth colde, and naturall operations become 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . li. 3 the more feble, I therfore do counſayle (ſaythe Galene) that the baſe partes of the body, as the legges, be ſcarified, whiche is the moſte ſure remedy, as well in conceruynge heithe as in repairynge therof, beynge decayed. For it cureth the eyen beynge anoyed with longe diſtillations. It profyteth alſo to the heed, and ouer parte of the body, agaynſt ſondry diſeaſes. In what member the bloudde is gathered, the body beynge fyrſte purged by ſcarification, the grefe may be cured. Alſo Oribaſius affirmeth the ſame, and alſo addeth Oribaſius ſin medici
                     
                        〈…〉
                      cōpen. therto, that it helpeth ſquynances, or quinces in the throte, and diſſolueth the conſtipations or ſtoppynges made of all places, if the places be ſcarified: not withſtandynge applicacion of boxes about the ſtomake, in hot feuers, where reaſon is troubled, are to be eſchued, for feare of ſuffocatiō. Likewiſe put to the heed vndiſcretely, Aetius. it hurteth bothe the heed & the eies. The late authors do affirme, that ſcarifieng is in the ſtede

of lettynge bloudde, where for age, debilitie, or tyme of the yere, or other lyke conſyderation, a man maye not ſuſteyne bloudde lettinge, and it bryngeth forth the thynne bloud, whiche is next to the ſkyn.
            
            
               ☞ Of bloude ſuckers or leaches. Cap. 8.
               THere is alſo an other fourme of euacuation by wormes, founde in waters callyd bloude ſuckers or leaches, whiche beinge put vnto the body or member, do draw out blode. And their drawynge is more conuenient for fulneſſe of bloudde than ſcarifyenge is, foraſmoche as they fetche bloud more deper, and is more of the ſubſtance of bloud, yet the opinion of ſome men is, that they do drawe no bloude but that, which is corrupted, and not proporcionable vnto our body. And therfore in griefes, which happen betwene the ſkynne and the fleſſhe of blode corrupted, theſe are more conuenient than ſcarifienge. But before that they be putte vnto any Oribaſius in medicinae cōpen. parte of the body, they muſte be fyrſte kepte all one day before, gyuyng vnto them a lyttel blode in freſhe fleſſhe. And than putte theym in cleane water, ſomwhat warme, and with a ſpounge wype awaye the ſlyme, whiche is about theym, and than laye a lyttell bloudde on the place greued, and putte theym thanne to it, and laye on theym a ſpounge, than whan they be fulle, they may falle away. or yf pe wyll ſooner haue them of, put a horſe heare betweene theyr mouthes, and the place, and drawe them awaye, or putte to theyr mouthes ſalte or aſhes, or vyneger, and 
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
heate them, and diſturbeth reaſon, where the bodyes be hote afore, where natural heate is feble, the heate may not be diſperſed vnto the extreme partes, and than dothe the extreme membres, that is to ſaye, whiche are farre from the harte, remayne colde and tremblynge. Of this affection commeth ſometyme feuers, ſometyme apoplexies, or priuation of ſencis, tremblynge, palſeys, madneſſe, franſies, deformitie of vyſage: and that warſe is, outragious ſwearynge, blaſphemye, deſyre of vengeance, loſſe of charitie, ainitie, credence, alſo forgetfulneſſe of benefytte precedynge, and of obedience, duytie, and reuerence. There alſo do ſuccede contencion, chargeable ſuite, vnquietnes of mynde, lacke of appetite, lacke of ſlepe, feble digeſtion, ſcorne, dyſdayne, and hatred of other, with peryll of loſynge of all good reputation. Theſe incōmodities of Ire, perfitely had in remembraunce, and at the fyrſt motion therof one of them thoughts on, may happen to brynge in his felowes, and therby the flame may be quenched. or lette hym that is angry, euen at the fyrſte conſyder one of theſe thynges, that lyke as he is a man, ſo is alſo the other, with whome he is angry, and therfore it is as lefulle for the other to be angrye, as vnto hym, and if he ſo be, than ſhall that anger be to him diſpleſant, and ſtere him more to be angry wherby it appereth, that Ire is to him lothſome. If the other be pactent, than let hym abhorre that thyng in him ſelfe, the lacke wherof, in the other contenteth hym, and aſſwageth his malice. More ouer, let hym before, that occaſion of Ire dothe happen, accuſtome hym ſelfe to

beholde, and marke well theym that be angry, with the ſucceſſe of that anger, and ruminate is in his mynde, a good ſpace after. And in that tyme, let hym remember, howe Chriſt, the ſome of god and God, who (as he hym ſelfe ſayde) mought haue had of god his father, yf he wolde haue aſked theym, legions of aungels, to haue defended him, ye with laſſe thā a winke moughs haue ſlayne all his aduerſaries, yet he not withſtandyng, rebuked, ſcorned, falſely accuſed, plucked hyther and thyder, ſtryped, bounden with halters, whipped, ſpytte on, buffettes, crowned with ſharpe thorne, laded with a heuye piece of tymber, his owne proper tourmente, halyd, and vryuen forthe lyke a calfe to the ſlaughter hous, efteſoones beaten and ouerthrowen, retched, forthewith ropes, armes and legges layde on the Croſſe, and there vnto with longe yron nayles throughe the handes and feete nayled, with manye ſtrookes of hammers, with many pryckynges, or euer the nayles moughte perce by his tender and moſt bleſſed fleſhe and ſynewes, quyte throughe the harde tymber, vppe to the heedes of the nayles, and all this beynge done for the offence of mankynde, and not his: yet with the men, which dyd it, his moſte vnkynde countreymen, his moſt vnnaturall kynneſmenne whome he fyrſte made of nothynge, preſerued by myracles, delyuered from perylles, and cured of dyſcaſes, in all his vexation and trouble, he was neuer ſeene or perceyued angry. If one wyl ſay, that anger is naturall, let hyn: alſo conſyder that in Chryſtes manhode, were all naturalle pomers. If he wyll ſaye, that Ire is token of

courage, and in Chryſte it lacked not, whome bothe angels and deuyls trembled and feared. The premyſſes often reuolued, and borne in the mynde, I wyll not ſay, ſhall vtterly extincte all motions of wrathe, which is not poſſyble, but it ſhall, whan it kyndleth lightly, repreſſe it, and let that it ſhall not growe into flame. And in ſpeakynge here of wrath, I do not meane that, whiche good men haue agaynſte vyces: or wyſe and diſcrete gouernours and mayſters, agaynſte the defautes or negligences of theyr ſubiectes of ſeruauntes, vſed in rebukyng them, or moderately punyſſhyng them. For that is not properly yre, but rather to be callyd diſpleaſure, and is that wherof god ſpeaketh, by his prophete Dauyd ſayeng. Be you angry & do not ſinne. And that Pſal. 4. Geneſ. 35. Exod. 32. Leuit. 10 Marc. 11. maner of anger, hath ben in dyuers holy menne, prophetes, and other. And it appered in Chryſte whan he draue out them, which made their markette in the holy tēple of god, where there ought to be nothyng but prayer. And in lyke wiſe whā he rebuked the hypocrites But yf none of theſe thinges may come ſo ſhortly to his remēbraūce, that is meued with anger, at the leſt lette hym thynke on the leſſon, that Apollodorus the phyloſopher taught to the Emperoure Octauian, that before he ſpeake or do any thynge in anger he do recite in order, al the letters of the A, B, C, & remoue ſomwhat out of the place, that he is in, and ſeke occaſyon to be otherwyſe occupied. This ſhal for this tyme ſuffyſe, for the remedies of Ire. And he that wyl know more of this matter, let hym reade in my warke, called the Gouernour, where I therof do write more abūdantly.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Of dolour or heuineſſe of mynde. Capitulo. 12.
               THere is no thynge more ennemy to lyfe, then ſorowe, callyd alſo heueneſſe, for it exhauſteth bothe naturall heate and moyſture of the body, and dothe extenuate or make the body leane, dulleth the wit, and darkneth the ſpirites, letteth the vſe and iugement of reaſon, and oppreſſed memorie. And Salomon ſaythe, Pro. 17. 25. Eccleſiaſt
                        〈…〉
                      25. 33. that ſorowe dryeth vp the bones. And alſo lyke as the mothe in the garmente, and the wourme in the tree, ſoo dothe heuyneſſe annoye the harte of a man. Alſo in the boke called Eccleſiaſticus, Sorowe hathe kylled manye, and in it ſelfe is founde no commoditie. Alſo by heuyneſſe dethe is haſtened, it hydeth vertue or ſtrengthe, and heuyneſſe of harte boweth downe the necke.
               This is ſo puiſſaunt an ennemye to nature and bodyly helthe, that to reſyſte the malyce and violence therof, are requyred remedies, as well of the holſome counſayles founde in holy ſcripture & in the bokes of morall doctrine. As alſo of certayne herbes, fruytes, and ſpyces, hauynge the propertye to expelle melancalyke humours, and to comforte and kepe lyuely the ſpirites, whiche haue theyr proper habitation in the hart of mā, and moderate nouryſhyng of the naturall heate and humour, callyd radical, which is the baſe or foundation, whervppon the lyfe of manne ſtandeth, and that faylyng, lyfe falleth in ruyne, and the body is diſſolued. Nowe fyrſte I wylle declare ſome remedyes agaynſte ſorowfulneſſe of harte, concernynge neceſſary counſayle.
               
                  
Somtyme this affecte hapneth of Ingratitude, eyther wherfore benefyte, or ſpecialle loue employed, one receyueth damage, or is abandoned in his neceſſite, or is deceiued of hym, whom he truſted, or fyndeth hym, of whome he hathe great expectation, forgetfull or neglygent in his commoditie, or perceyueth the perſone, whome of longe tyme he hath loued, to be eſtraunged from hym, or to haue one of later acquayntance in more eſtimation. This affection nyppeth the harte, ye of moſte wyſe men, for they loue moſte hartily, not prouoked by carnalle affection, but rather by good opinion, ingendred by ſimilitude of honeſt ſtudies, and vertuous maners of long tyme mutually experienced. And it is not onely vnto man greuous, but alſo vnto god moſt diſpleaſant and odiouſe, as it is aboundantly declared in ſcripture. wherfore the perſone, which feleth hym ſelfe touched with this affecte, before that it growe into a paſſion, and waxeth a ſyckneſſe, lette hym calle to remembraunce theſe artycles folowynge, or at the leſte wayes ſomme of theym, For eueryche of theym maye caſe hym, thoughe perchance they can not forthwith perfitely cure hym.
               ¶ Conſyder, that the corruption of mans nature is not ſo moche declared in any thynge, as Counſailes agaynſt ingratitude. in Ingratytude, whereby a man is made warſe, than dyuers brute beaſtes. The lyttell ante or emote helpeth vp his felowe, whome he ſeeth ouerthrowen with burdeyn, or by other occaſyon. Alſo whan olyphantes do paſſe ouer any greate Appianus in uaria hi ſtoria. water, the greatteſt and moſte puiſſant of them deuyde them ſelues, and ſettynge the weakeſt in

the myddell, parte go before, tryeng the depneſſe and perylles, parte come after, ſuccourynge the weakeſt or leaſte, with theyr longe noſes, whan they ſee them in daūger. The ſame beaſtes haue ben ſeene not onely brynge men out of deſertes, whiche haue loſte theyr wayes, but alſo reuenge the dyſpleaſures doone to them, the which gaue them meate, as one that ſlewe hym, whych had commytted aduoutrye with his mayſters wyfe. The terrible Lyons and Panthers, haue bene ſene in theyr maner, to render thankes to theyr benefactours, ye and to obiecte their owne bodies and lyues for theyr defence. The ſame we maye dayely beholde in oure owne dogges.
               Than in whom thou fyndeſt the deteſtable vice of Ingratytude, reputynge hym amonge the warſte ſorte of creatures, thynke not that thou haſte loſte a frende, but thynke that thou art
                     •
                   delyuered frome a monſter of nature, that deuoured thy loue, and that thou arte nowe at lybertye, and haſte wonne experyence to cheſe the a better. But yf this maye not ſuffyſe, than Seneca de benefi. 7. efteſoones conſyder, that yf thou loke welle on thy ſelfe, perchaunce thou mayſt fynde the faute wherof thou complayneſt, within thyne owne boſomme. Calle to thy remembraunce, yf thou haſte alwaye rendred vnto euery man condygne thankes or benefytte, of whome thou haſt kyndneſſe receyued, or yf thou haſt alway remembred euery one of them, that haue done to the any cō
                  moditie or pleaſure. Thou ſhalt well perceyue, that what thyng thou receyuedſt in chyldehode, thou forgatteſt, or dyddeſt lyttell eſteeme, whan thou cameſt to the ſtate of a man, And what

thou dyddeſt remember in youthe, in age, thou dydded lyttell thynke on: thy nouryces pappe, her rockynges, her watchynges, thou haſt not al waye remembred, or equally recompenſed. Thy ſcoole mayſters ſtudye, his labour, his dilygence in a lyke degree, thou haſte not requyted. what greatter frendes haſte thou had, of whome thou couldeſt receyue any greatter benefites, than thy nouryſſhyng and preſeruynge of thy lyfe, in thy moſte febleneſſe, or thyne erudicion, wherby thy nature was made more excellent. Remembrynge this leaue to be angry or ſorowful, for ſo cōmon a vyce: yet yf it ceſſe not to greue the, comferre the ingratitude that doth vere the, with that ingratitude, which was ſhewed by the Iſraelytes whome god chaſe for his owne people, deliuered from ſeruage, ſhewed for theym wonders, preſerued them fourty yeres in deſert, deſtroied for them kynges, gaue to them the countrey, which flowed mylke and hony, defended them agaynſt all outwarde hoſtylitie, ſent vnto them ſuche abundance of ryches, that ſyluer was in Hieruſalem, as ſtones in the ſtrete, had his tabernacle, and afterwarde his moſte holye temple amonge them, whiche he dyd dayely vyſite with his dyuyne maieſtie, made theyr kynges to reigne gloriouſely, and ſpake with their prephetes familyarly, and corrected their errours moſte gentilly: and yet for all this, they, imbracyng the paynyms ydolatrie, they lefte ſoo gracyous and louynge a lorde, and lyuynge god, and to his great deſpite, gaue diuine honours, to calfes of braſſe, and other monſtruouſe ymages, and at the laſte put to moſte cruell deth, the onely ſonne of god,

that hadde done ſo moche for them.
               And yf we chryſten men, doo loke well on our ſelues, reuoluynge the incomparable benefite, whiche we haue receyued by Chriſtes paſſyon, and conſyder the circumſtance of his mooſte excellent pacience, and moſte feruent loue toward vs, with our forgetfulnes, and they dayly breche of our promyſe, whiche we made at oure baptyſme, conferryng our mutuall vnkyndnes thervnto, there ſhall appere no ingratitude, that ſhulde offende vs. Fynally for a concluſyon, beholde well aboute the, and thou ſhalte all daye fynde the chylderne ingrate to theyr parentes, and wyues to theyr huſbandes. And wylte thou looke that thy benefyte, or vayne expectation, ſhuld make the more fre from ingratitude of thy frende, whome chaunce hath ſente the, than nature may the parentes towarde theyr chyldern, or the coniunction of bodyes by lefull maryage, take vnkyndneſſe from the wyues toward their huſbandes. This vyce therfore of Ingratitude, beinge ſo common a chaunce, make no worldlye frendeſhyp ſo preciouſe, that lyfe or helthe therfore ſhulde be ſpent or conſumed. I haue ben the lenger in this place, bycauſe I haue had in this griefe ſufficient experience.
               ¶ If death of chylderne be cauſe of thy heuyneſſe, Death of chyldren. call to thy remembrance ſome chyldern (of whome there is no lyttell nomber) whoſe lyues eyther for vncorrigyble vyces, or infortunate chaunces, haue bene more greuouſe vnto theyr parentes, thanne the deathe of thy chylderne ought to be vnto the 
                     〈◊〉
                   conſyderynge that death is the diſcharger of all gryefes, and myſeries,

and to theym that dye well, the fyrſte entrie into lyfe euerlaſtynge.
               ¶ The loſſe of goodes or authoritie do greene none but fooles, which do not marke dyligently, Loſſe of goodes. that lyke as neyther the one nor the other dothe alwaye happen to them that are worthye, ſo we haue in dayely experience, that they fall frome hym ſodeynely, who in increaſynge or kepynge them ſemeth moſte buſy.
               ¶ Oftentymes the repulſe frome promotion is Lacke of promotion. cauſe of diſcomforte, but than conſyder, whyther in the opinion of good men, thou art demed worthy to haue ſuche aduan̄cement, or in thyne owne expectatiō & fantaſy. If good men ſo inge the, thanke thou god of that felicitie, and laugh at the blyndneſſe of theym, that ſoo haue refuſed the. If it procede of thyne owne folye, abhorre all arrogance, and inforce thy ſelf to be ad uanced in mennes eſtimation, before thou canſt fynde thy ſelfe worthy in thy proper opinion.
               ¶ All other chaunces of fortune eſteme as noo Chaunces of fortune. thynge, and that longe before they doo happen. The ofte recordynge of myſerye, prepareth the mynde to fele leſſe aduerſitie. And the contempt of fortune is ſure quietneſſe and mooſte perfyte felycitie.
               ¶ This nowe ſhall ſuffyſe concernynge remedies of morall phyloſophie. Nowe wyll I write ſomewhat touchynge the counſayle of phyſyke, as in relieuynge the bodye, whiche eyther by the ſayde occaſyons, or by the humoure of melancolye is brought out of temper.
               ¶ The fyrſte counſayle is, that durynge the tyme of that paſſyon, eſchewe to be angrye, ſtudyouſe,

or ſolitarye, and reioyce the with mei
                     •
                  
                  dye, or els be alwaye in ſuche company, as beſte maye contente the.
               Auoyde all thynges that be noyouſe in ſyght, ſmellynge and herynge, and imbrace all thynge that is delectable.
               Flee darkeneſſe, moche watche, and buſyneſſe of mynde, moche companieng with women, the vſe of thynges very hotte and drye: often purgations, immoderate exercyſe, thyrſt, moche abſtinence, drye wyndes and colde.
               Abſteyn from dayly eatyng of moch old blefe or old mutton, hard cheſe, hare fleſh, bores fleſh, venyſon, ſaltefyſhe, coolewortes, beanes, and peaſon, very courſe breadde, greate fyſſhes of the ſee, as thurlepole, porpyſe, and ſturgeon, and other of lyke natures, wyne redde and thycke, meates beynge very ſalte or ſowre, olde, burned, or fryed, garlyke, onyons, and lekes.
               Vſe meates whiche are temperatelye hotte, and therwith ſomewhat moyſte, boyled rather than roſted, lyght of dygeſtyon, and ingendryng bloudde clere and fyne. As mylke hotte from the vdder, or at the leſte newe mylked, ruen cheſe, ſwete almondes, the yelkes of rere egges, lyttell byrdes of the buſhes, chyckens, and hennes. wyne whyte or clarette, cleere and feagraunte. Swete ſauours in wynter hot, in ſommer colde, in the meane tyme temperate.
               
                  ¶ Confortatiues of the hart hot.
                  ¶ Bourage the floure or leafe.
                  Bugloſſe.
                  Baulmynte.
                  Elycampane.
                  Cloues.
                  Cardamomu
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  Roſemary.
                  
                     
Lignum aloes.
                  Muſke.
                  Ambergryſe.
                  Saffron.
                  The bone of the harte of a redde diere.
                  Myntes.
                  The rynde of Citron.
                  Been.
                  Cububes.
                  Baſyle.
               
               
                  ¶ Cenfortatyues of the harte colde.
                  Violettes.
                  Perles.
                  Corall.
                  The vnicornes horne.
                  Olde appulles whiche be good.
                  Roſes.
                  Saunders.
                  The olyphantes tothe.
                  Water lylies.
                  Coriander prepared.
               
               
                  ¶ Comfortatyues temperate.
                  Jacinet.
                  Saphire.
                  Emerauldes.
                  Myrabolanes, called kebuly.
                  Bugloſſe.
                  Golde, ſyluer.
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Of Ioye.
                  I
                        〈…〉
                      or gladneſſe of harte doth prolonge the lyfe, it fatteth the bodye that is leane with troubles, bytynge the humours to an equall temperance, and drawynge naturall heate outwarde. But yf it be ſodayne & feruent, it oftentymes ſleeth, for as moche as it draweth to ſodeynly and exceſſyuely naturall heate outward. And therfore dyuers men and women haue ben ſene to falle in a ſounde, whā they haue ſodaynlye beholden the perſons, whom they feruently loued. A a woman in Rome, herynge fyrſte, that her ſonne was ſlayne in battayle. After whan he Ti. Liuius. came to her, ſhe ſeynge hym alyue, imbracynge

eche other, ſhe dyed in his armes. This welle conſydered, agaynſt ſuche inordinate gladneſſe, the beſt preſcruatiue is to remember, that the extreme partes of mundayne ioye is ſorow and heuyneſſe: And that nothynge of this worlde, maye ſo moche reioyce vs: but occaſyon maye cauſe it to be diſpleaſaunt vnto vs.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧ The dominion of ſondry complexions. Cap. 13.
               IT ſemeth to me not inconuenient, that I do declare as well the counſayles of ancient & approued authors, as alſo myne owne opinion gathered by dilygent markynge in dayely experience, concernynge as well the neceſſarye diet of euery complexion, aege and declinatiō of helthe, as alſo the meane to reſyſte diſcraſies of the body, before ſyckeneſſe be therin confyrmed, leauynge the reſydue vnto the ſubſtancyall lernynge and circumſpecte practyſe of good phyſitions, whiche ſhall the more eaſilye cure theyr pacientes, yf theyr pacientes do not dyſdayne to beare awaye and folow my counſayle. And firſt it ought to be conſydered, that none of the foure complexions, haue ſooly ſuche dominion in one man or womans body, that no parte of any other complexion is therwith myxte. For whan we call a man ſanguine, choleryke, fleumatyke, or melancoly, we doo not meane, that he hathe bloude onely without any of the other humors, or choler withoute bloudde, or fleume withoute bloudde or melancolye, or melancolye withoute bloudde or coler. And therfore the man, whiche

is ſanguine, the more that he draweth into age, wherby naturall moyſture decayed, the more is he coleryke, by reaſon, that heate, ſurmountynge moyſture, nedes muſte remayne heate and drythe. ſemblably, the colerycke man, the more that he waxeth into age, the more naturall heate in hym is abated, and drythe ſurmountynge naturall moyſture, he becommeth melancolyke: but ſome ſanguine man hathe in the proporcion of temperatures, a greatter myxture with choler, than an other hath. Lykewyſe the cholerycke or fleumatyke man with the humour of ſanguyne or melancolye. And therfore late practyſers of phyſyke are wonte to call men, accordyng to the myxture of theyr complexions, as ſanguyne colerike, fleumatike ſanguine. &c. Moreouer, beſyde the naturalle complexions, whiche man receyueth in his generation, the humours, wherof the ſame complexions do conſyſte, beynge augmēted ſuperfluouſly in the body or members by any of the ſayde thynges called not naturall, euery of them do ſemblably augment the complexion, whiche is proper vnto hym, and bryngeth vnequall temperature vnto the bodye. And for theſe cauſes, the ſanguine or fleumatike man or woman, felynge and diſcraſye by choler hapned to them by the ſayde thynges, callyd not naturall, they ſhall vſe the diete deſcribed hereafter to hym, whiche is naturally coleryke. Semblablye the coleryke or melancolyke manne or woman, hauynge any dyſcreaſye by fleume, to vſe the diete of hym, whiche is naturallye fleumatyke, alwaye remembrynge, that ſanguyne and fleumatyke men haue more reſpecte vnto dryth,

choleryke and melancalyke vnto moyſture, and that alway as the accedentall complexion decay eth, to reſorte by lyttell and lyttell to the dyete, pertaynynge to his naturall complexion.
            
            
               ☞ The tymes appropried to euery naturall humour. Cap. 14.
               BVt fyrſt it muſt be conſydered, that where the foure humours, be alway in man, and in ſome man cōmonly one humour is more abundant than an other naturallye, that is to ſay, from his generation. The ſayde humoures haue alſo peculyar tymes aſſygned to euery one of them, wherin eche of them is in his moſte power and force, as after enſueth, after the deſcription of Soranus. Soranus Epheſius
               
               ¶ Fleume hath moſt puiſſance in wynter, from the .viii. Idus of Nouember, vnto the .viii. Jdus of February, whereby are ingendred Catarres or reumes, the vuula, the cough, and the ſtytche. This humour is parte in the heed, parte in the ſtomacke. It hathe dominion frome the thyrde houre of nyght vutyll the nyneth houre of the ſame nyght.
               ¶ Bloudde increaſeth in ſpryng tyme from the viii. Idus of Februarye, vnto the .viii. Idus of Maye, whereof are ingendred feuers, and ſweete humours, whiche doo ſhortely putrifye, the power of this humour is aboute the harte, and hath dominion from the .ix. houre of nyght vntyll the .iii. houre of the mornynge.
               ¶ Redde choler hathe power in ſommer frome the .viii. Idus of May, vntyll the .viii. Idus of

Auguſte / wherby are ingendred hote and ſharpe feuers / this humour is ſpecially in the lyuer / and hath dominion from the thyrde houre of daye vntyll the .ix. houre of the ſame daye.
               Yelow choler, wherof is ingendreth the fleume of the ſtomake / is nouryſhed in Autumne, which begynneth the .viii. Idus of Auguſte / and dureth vnto the .viii. Idus of Nouember / and maketh ſhakyng feuers and ſharpe, the blacke choler than increaſeth / and than foloweth thycknes of the blode in the vaynes. Blacke choler or melancoly moſte rayneth in the ſplene / and it rayneth from the .ix. houre of daye vntyll the thyrde houre of nyght.
               
                  ☞ Peculyar remedyes agaynſt the diſtem perance of euery humour.
                  IF the diſtēperance be of bloud / helpe it with Soranus 
                           〈…〉
                        arte medendi. thynges colde, ſharpe, and drye: for bloude is moyſte, hote & ſwete. If it be of redde choler gyue thynges cold / moyſte / and ſwete / for redde coler is bytter and fyry. If it be of blacke coler / gyue thinges hot moyſt & ſwete / for blacke coler is ſharpe & cold. If the diſeaſe be of ſalt fleume gyue thinges ſwete hot and drie, thus ſayth Soranus. Notwithſtandynge where there is abū
                     dance of colde fleume not myxt with coler / there thinges very ſharpe and hotte be moſte conuenient / as tarte vyneger with hotte rotes and ſedes or wynes ſtronge and rough / hony being ſodden in the one and the other / or where choler is myxt with fleume / ſyrope acetouſe made with vineger and ſugar boyled / ſomtyme with herbes / rootes

or ſedes / which may diſſoule fleume & digeſt it.
               
            
            
               ☞ Diete of them, whiche are of ſanguine complexion. Cap. 15.
               FOr aſmoche as in ſanguine menne bloudde moſte raygneth / whiche is ſoone corrupted, it ſhall be neceſſary for them whiche are of that complexion / to be circumſpecte in eatynge meate / that ſhortely wyll receyue putrifaction / as the more parte of fruites / ſpecyally not being perfitely rype. alſo meates that be of yl iuyce / as fleſhe of beaſtes to olde / or to yonge / vdders of beaſtes / braynes excepte of capons and chykens marowe of the backebone / moche vſe of onyons lekes / garlyke / moche vſe of olde fygges / moche vſe of rawe herbes / and all thyng wherin is exceſſe of hete / colde / or moyſture / meates that be ſtale / fyſhes of the fennes or muddy waters / and to moche ſlepe / as experyence ſheweth.
            
            
               ¶ Dyete of choleryke perſons. Ca. 16.
               TO them which be cholerike / beyng in theſe naturalle temperature / and hauynge not from theyr youth vſed the contrary / groſſe meates moderately taken / be more conuenient / than the meates that be fyne, and better ſhall they dygeſte a piece of good biefe / than a chyckens legge. Choler of his propertye rather burnynge than well dygeſtynge meates of lyght ſubſtance / not withſtandynge ſome gentylmen whiche be nycely brought vp in theyr infancy / may not ſo well ſuſteyne that diet as poore men beyng the more parte vſed to groſſe meates. wherfore theyr diet muſte be in a temperance / as yonge biefe / olde veale / mutton / and venyſon

powdred, yonge geeſe, and ſuche lyke, cōſeruyng their complexion with meates lyke there vnto in qualitie and degree, accordynge to the counſayle of Hipocrates. And as he perceyueth choler to abounde, ſo to interlace meates, whiche be colde in a moderate quantitie, and to alay theyr wyne more or laſſe with water, eſchewynge hotte ſpices, hotte wynes, and exceſſyue labour, wherby the body maye be moche chaufed. Alſo he maye eate oftener in the day, than any other: foreſene, that there be ſuche diſtance betwene his meales as the meate before eaten be fully dygeſted, whiche in ſome perſone is more, in ſome laſſe, accordynge to the heate and ſtrength of his ſtomake, notynge alwaye, that the colerike perſone digeſteth more meate than his appetite deſyreth, the melancolyke perſone deſyreth by falſe appetite more than his ſtomacke maye dygeſte. And to a cholerike perſone, it is ryght daungerous, to vſe longe abſtynence: for choler, fyndynge nothyng in the ſtomacke to concocte, it fareth than, as where a lyttell potage or mylke, beynge in a veſſell ouer a great fyre, it is burned to the veſſelle, and vnſauery fumes and vapours do iſſue oute therof. Lykewyſe in a cholerike ſtomake, by abſtinence, theſe inconueniences doo happen, humours aduſt, conſumynge of naturall moyſture, fumoſities and ſtynkynge vapours, aſcendynge vp to the heed, wherof is ingendred, duſkynge of the eyes, heed aches, hot and thynne reumes, after euerye lyttell ſurfette, and many other inconueniences. wherfore beſyde the oppinion of beſte lerned men, myne owne peynefull experyence, alſo moueth me, to exhorte them, whche be

of this complexion, to eſchewe moche abſtinēce. And although they be ſtudyous, and vſe lyttell exercyſe, yet in the mornynge to eate ſomewhat in lyttell quantitie, and not to ſtudy immediatly, but fyrſt to ſytte a whyle, and after to ſtande or walke ſoftely, whiche vſynge theſe two yeres, I and alſo other, that haue longe knowen me, haue perceyued in my bodye a great alteration, that is to ſay, frome ylle aſtate to better. Alway remember, that yf any other humour do aboūde in the choleryke perſone, as fleume, or melancolye, than vntyll that humour be expelled, the diete muſt be correctiue of that humour, and therfore more hotte and fyne, than the natural dyete before reherſed: but yet there wolde be alwaye reſpecte hadde to the naturall complexion, ſome tyme ſufferyng the perſon to eate or drinke that, whiche nature workynge, he feruently deſyreth.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Diete of fleumatike perſons Capitulo. 17.
               IT is to be remembred, that pure fleume is properly colde and moyſte, and lacketh taſte. Salte fleume is myxt with choler, and therfore hath not in hym ſo moch colde nor humiditie, as pure fleume hath: and therfore it requyreth a temperance in thynges hote & drye, wherby fleume is digeſted or expulſed To fleumatike perſons all meates are noyfull, whiche are very colde, vyſcous or ſlymy, fatte or ſone putrifyed, eatynge moche and often, ſpecially meates ingendrynge fleume, whiche be remembred in the table precedynge. All thynges be ggod, whiche

are hote and drye, alſo meates and drinkes whiche be ſowre: onyons alſo, and garlyke, moderately vſed, be very commendable, in pure fleme not myxte with choler, moche vſyng of ſalt, ſpecially dryed. Pepper groſſe beaten, and eaten with meate, oughte to be with all fleumatycke perſons familyar, alſo gynger is ryght conuenient, but not to be ſo frequently vſed as pepper, for as moche as the nature of pepper is, that beynge eaten, it paſſeth through the body, heatyng and comfortynge the ſtomake, not entrynge into the vaynes, or anoyeng the lyuer, whiche vertue is not in gynger. Gynger condite, the whiche we do call grene gynger, ſpecyallye candyd with ſugar, yf it may be gotten, and alſo Mirabolanes, called kebuli condyte in India, be moſt excellent remedies agaynſt fleume, alſo the herbes which are remembred afore in the table of digeſtyues of fleume, and the rootes of perſely, fenel, yreos, Elycampane, and carettes be very commendable. Exercyſe twyſe in a day, the ſtomacke beyng almoſte empty, ſo that ſweate begyn to appere, is very expedient, clenſynge of the body from all fylthynes, with rubbynge and wypynge, oftentymes with waſhynge, ſpecyally the heed and partis there about moderate ſweatynge in hote bathes or ſtufes be to this complexion neceſſarie ſpecially whan they haue eaten and drunken exceſſyuely. The heed and fete to be kepte frome colde and to dwell hygh and farre from mores and marſhes, is a rule ryghte neceſſary, alſo to abſtayne from eatynge herbes and rootes not boyled, and generally from all meates, whiche wyll not be eaſyly dygeſted.
            
            
               
               ¶ The dyuyſion of melancoly, and the diete of perſons melancolyke. Cap. 18.
               MElancoly is of two ſortes, the one is callyd naturall, whiche is onely colde and dry, the other is called aduſt or bourned. Naturall melancoly is (as Galene ſaith) the reſidence or dregges of the bloudde: & therefore is colder and thicker than the bloude. Melancoly aduſte is in foure kyndes, eyther it is of naturall melancolye aduſte, or of the more pure parte of the bloude aduſte, or of choler aduſte, or of ſalte fleume aduſte. But of all other that melancoly is warſt, whiche is ingendred of choler: fynally all aduſte melancolye annoyeth the wytte and iugement of man. for whan that humour is hette, it maketh men madde, and whan it is extincte, it maketh men fooles, forgetfulle, and dull. The naturall melancolye kepte in his Ex Marcilio ficino, de uita ſana. temperance, profyteth moche to true iugemente of the wytte, but yet yf it be to thycke, it darkeneth the ſpirites, maketh one timorous, and the wytte dulle. If it be myxte with fleume, it mortifieth the bloudde with to moche colde, wherefore it may not be ſo lyttell, that the bloude and ſpirites in theyr feruentneſſe, but as it were vnbrydelyd, whereof do happen vnſtableneſſe of wytte and ſlypper remembraunce: nor yet ſo moche, that by the weight therof (for it is heuy, approchynge nygh to the erthe) that we ſeme to be alwaye in ſleape, and nede a ſpurre to prycke vs forwarde. Wherefore it is ryghte expedient, to kepe that humour as thynne as nature wyll ſuffer it, and not to haue to moche of it.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
But nowe to the diete perteynynge to theym, whome this humour annoyeth. The knowlege that melancoly reygneth, is oftentymes heuyneſſe of mynde, or feare without cauſe, ſlepineſſe in the membres, many crampes without replecyon or emptyneſſe, ſodayne furye, ſodayne incontynencye of the tongue, moche ſolycytude of lyght thynges, with palyneſſe of the vyſage, and fearefull dreames of terryble viſyons, dreaming of darkeneſſe, depe pyttes, or death of frendes or acquayntaunce, & of all thynge that is black. The meates conuenient are they, which be temperatly in heate, but ſpecially they that be moyſt meates ſone dygeſted, and they rather boyled thanne roſted, temperately myxte with ſpyces, mylke hot from the vdder, or late mylked, is very conuenient for that complexion, ſwete almondes blaunched, and almond mylke, the yelkes of rere egges, and fynallye all thynges, whiche ingender pure bloudde, and all that is wryten in the chapyter of age. All theſe be yll for theym, wyne thycke or troublous, ſpecyally red wyne, meates harde, dry, very ſalte, or ſoure, bourned meate, fryed meate, moche biefe, hares fleſhe, beanes, roket, colewortes, muſtard, radyſhe, garlyke, except there be moche wynde in the body, for than is it very holſome, onyons leekes, fynally all thynges whiche heateth to moche, keleth to moche, or dryeth to moche, alſo wrathe, feare, compaſſyon, ſorowe, moche ſtudye or care, moch ydelneſſe or reſte: all thynge that is greuous to ſee, to ſmelle or to heare, but moſt ſpecyally darkeneſſe. Moreouer moche dryenge of the body, eyther with longe watche, or with moche care

and toſſynge of the mynde, or with moch lecherye, or moche eatynge and drynkyng of thynges that be hote and drye, or immoderate euacation, labour, abſtinence, thyrſt, goyng in the ayre vntemperately hotte, colde or drye, all theſe thynges do anoy them that be greued with any melancoly. It is to be dylygentely conſydered, that where melancolye happeneth of choler adduſte, there meates whiche be hotte in warkyng, wold be wyſely tempred, and drynkynge of hotte wynes wolde be eſchewed: ſemblable cautele wold be in ſauours. Not withſtandynge moderate vſe of ſmall wynes, clere and well verdured, is herein very commendable, the humour thereby beynge clarifyed, and the ſpyrytes clenſed, but the abuſe or exceſſe thereof dothe as moche damage. Alſo it is ryghte expedyente, to put into wyne or ale, a gadde of ſyluer or golde, glowing hotte oute of the fyre, to tempre hotte meates with roſes, vyolettes, ſaunders, roſe water, bourage, bugloſſe, baulme called in latyne Melyſſa, or the water of all thre drunken with good wyne, whyte or clarette, or made in a Julep with ſugar, is wonderfull holſome, chewyng of lykoryſe, or rayſons of coraunce is ryght expedyent, but mooſte of all other thynges, myrthe, good compauye, gladneſſe, moderate exercyſe, with moderate feedynge. And thus I leaue to ſpeake of dyetes, aptely belongyng to the foure complexions.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
            
         
         
            
            Galene and all other, do agree in this caſe, Pepper bruyſed and eaten with meate, is very expedient: And where there is moch wynde in the ſtomake, than to eate all tymes of the daye of the medicyne made of the three kyndes of pepper, tyme, anyſe ſede, and honye clarified, whiche is callyd Diatrion piperion, or that whiche is callyd Diaſpoliticō, or Diapiganon, which is made Galen. de 
                     •
                  enda ſa. 
                     •
                  b. 5. of cumyne ſtieped one day and a nyght, or lenger in tarte vyneger, and after fryed or layde on a bournyng hot ſtone, and made in powlder. Alſo pepper and rewe dried ſomwhat, and made into powder, all in equall porcyons, and myxte with claryfied hony. Galene addeth therto ſalt peter, called in latyn Nitrum. The confection made with the iuyce of quynces, and is callyd Diacyconiten, is very excellent. but it is to be dylygently noted, that where crudytie is in a choleryke perſone, there wold the ſayd medicynes be temperatly vſed, and the ſayd Diacytonitē, to haue lyttell or no ſpices in it. And for my parte, beyng the ſpace of foure yeres contynually in this crudytie, I neuer founde any thynge to be compared to fyne R
                  •
               ubarbe, chewed with rayſons of corens, which I toke by the coūſayle of the worſhypfull & well lerned phyſitiō, mayſter doctour Auguſtyne, who in his maners declarethe the auneyent gentylneſſe of his blode: which medycyne I do not leaue to vſe dayly faſtynge, whan I fele ſuche crudytie to begyn. Alſo ſyrope acetoſe, that is to ſay, ſugar ſodden in pure vyneger, and lyttell water, vntyl it be thycke as a ſyrope, is ſomtyme conuenient, and that as well to choleryke perſones, as vnto fleumatyke, and yf

fleume be abundant, than with rootes & ſeedes of fenell and perſely ſodden with it. Alſo in that caſe Oxymel, that is to ſay, honye & water ſodden togyther, with the ſayd rotes and ſedes, and a quantitie of vyneger put therto in the boyling is very commendable: yf the pacient be very coſtyue, than the medycyne of Galene, callyd Hierapicra, from halfe an ounce to an ounce, taken in water of honye or ale, or taken in pylles the weight of a grote and a halfe, or two grotes, yf the ſtuffe be good, wyll pourge the bodye ſuffycyently, without makyng the body weaker. Alſo that medycine by clenſyng the ſtomake & body, delyuereth a man and woman, from many peryllous ſyckneſſes. If the humours in the ſtomacke be not putryfyed, but that it is greued with abundance of ſalte fleume, I haue founde that mylke newe mylked, wherin is put a quantitie of good honye or ſugar, and thre leaues of good ſpeare myntes, and a lyttell boyled, ſo beynge drunke warme faſtyng, the quantitie of a pynte, and reſtynge on it, without eatynge or drynkynge any other thynge the ſpace of three houres after, haue abundantly pourged and cō
               forted the ſtomak: but where there is no fleume but onely choler, it is not ſo holſome, but rather hurteth, makynge fumoſyties in the heed, wherof commeth heed ache.
            
               ☞ Of laſsitude. Cap. 2.
               LAſſitude is a diſpoſition toward ſycknes, wherin a man feleth a ſooreneſſe, a ſwellynge, or an inflammation. Soreneſſe hapneth of humours ſharpe and gnawyng, as

after great exerciſe and labours which laſſitude hapneth to them, whoſe bodyes are fulle of ylle iuyce, & excrementes. Alſo after cruditie in them which ar not exerciſed, or do abyde longe in the A
                        〈…〉
                     
                   heate of the ſonne. It may alſo be in the bodye, wherin is good wyce, yf he be fatigate with immoderate exerciſe. In them, whiche do feele this laſſitude, the ſkyn appereth thycke and rough, & there is felte a griefe ſomtyme in the ſkyn onely, 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     . 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  tyme alſo in the fleſhe, as it were of a ſoore. The cure therof, is by moch and pleaſaunt rubbynge, with ſweete oyles, whiche haue not the vertue to reſtrayne or cloſe, and that with many handes, and afterwarde to exercyſe moderately, and to be bayned in water ſwete and temperate in heate. alſo thā muſt be gyuen meates of good iuyce, potage but ſeld, wyne is not to be forbodden: for vnto wyne, vneth any thyng may be cō
                  pared, that ſo 
                     •
                  ell dygeſteth crude humours: It alſo prouoketh ſweate & vrine, and maketh one to ſlepe ſundly. But yf this laſſitude do abyde the nyght and day folowyng, or waxeth more & more, than yf the pacyent be of good ſtrengthe and yonge, and hath abundaūce of bloude, lette hym be lette bloude, or prouoke the hemoroides or piles to blede, yf they do appere. But yf it procede of the malyce of any humour, without abū
                  dance of bloude, than reſorte to purgations apte for the humour that greueth. The tokens wherof, ſhall appere as well by the colour of the ſkyn and diete precedyng, as by vrine, ordure, ſweate, thyrſte, and appetyte, as it is reherſed before in the complexions. If the yll bloudde be lyttell in quantitie, and the crude humours aboundant,

than ſhall he not be lette bloude, nor vehemently pourged, neyther, ſhal exercyſe or moue hymſelfe nor be bayned, for all exercyſe caryeth humours throughout all the body, & ſtoppeth the powers. Wherfore theſe maner of perſons ſhuld be kept in reſte, and ſuch meates drynkes and medicyns ſhuld be gyuen to them, which ſhould attenuate or diſſolue the groſſenes of the humours, without notable heate, as oximell, barley water, and mulſe, yf the pacyent abhorre not hony. And for as, moch as in the ſayd perſons, comonly there is abundance of wynde about theyr ſtomakes, therfore pepper ſpecially longe pepper or whyte is very conuenient to be vſed, and the medicine before wrytten, callyd Diaſpoliticum, whan the humours are diſſolued, than it is good to drinke whyte wyne, or ſmall clarette wyne moderately.
            
            
               Laſſitude extenſiue. Ca. 3.
               VVan one thynketh, that he dothe feele a ſwellyng or bollynge of the body, where in dede there doth not appere in ſyght or touchynge any ſwellynge, that is callyd Laſſitude extenſiue, yf it hapneth without exerciſe or vehement mouyng. This doth happen of exceſſiue multitude of humours, which do extend the muſcules or fyllettes. In this no ſoreneſſe is felt but only an heuynes with extenſion or thruſtyng out of the body. And bycauſe that there is abundance of bloude in the body, beſte remedye is to be letten bloude about the elbowe or ancle, after to be pourged, than to vſe ſofte frycaſyes with oyles afore reherſed, afterward moche reſte and temperate bathes, and meates lackynge ſharpenes, and beynge abſterſyue.
            
            
               
               ¶ Laſſytude with the feelynge of infamation. Cap. 4.
               IF without any mouynge, the muſcles and fleſh ryſe vp in the body, as it ſwelled with great paynes & excedynge heate, than ſone after foloweth moſt hoteſt feuers, except it be preuented by lettynge of bloud, and that in abundance, and almoſte to ſownynge, but it were Actius. more ſure to be lette bloud twyſe in one day, the fyrſt tyme without ſownynge, at the nexte tyme ſownynge is not to be feared. If the grefe be in t
                     ••
                   necke or heed, the bloud muſte be lette of the bayne called Cephalea, or the ſhulder vayne. If it be in the bulke or vppermoſt part of the body than muſt the vayne be cut, which is callyd Baſilica, or the innermoſt vayne. If all the body be greued thā cut the veyn, which is named Mediana, or the myddel veyn. If a feuer remayne after bloud lettyng, than order hym, with the dicte of them that haue feuers, whiche ye ſhall fynde wryten hereafter. If no feuer remayne, thanne vſe moderate fricaſies, and lyttell eatynge, and that of meates hauynge good iuce, increaſynge by lyttell and lyttell to the naturall dyet.
            
            
               ¶ Dyete of them that are redy to fall into ſyckeneſſe. Cap. 5.
               NOwe retourne efteſones to ſpeake of diete, it is to be remembred, that they, whiche are redy to fall into diſeaſes, they are prepared thervnto, eyther by replecyon of ſuperfluous humours, or els by eruditie or malyce of humours, which are in them. As touchyng the fyrſt, the generall dyete muſt be ſuch,

as therby the humours maye be attenuate, and by conuenient euacuatiō, brought to a moderate quantitie. As for the ſeconde muſte be corrected with meates and drynkes of contrary qualities, hauyng alway reſpecte to the age of the perſon, tyme of the yere, place of habitation, and moſte ſpecially the vniuerſal complexion, for choler offendyng in an old man, in winter tyme, in a cold countrey, or the perſon beynge of his naturall complexion fleumatike or melancoly, wolde not be ſo habundantly expulſed or ſubdued, as yf it be in one yonge and luſty, in the hote ſommer, in the coūtrais, where the ſonne feruently burneth or the perſone of his proper nature is very coleryke. And in lyke wyſe contrary. wherfore euery man, knowynge his owne naturall complexion, with the qualitie of the humour that offendeth, let hym make temperan̄ce his chiefe coke, and remembrynge that which I haue before declared, ordeyne to hym ſelfe ſuch diete, as may reforme the offence with none or lyttell annoyance, to his vniuerſall complexion. And yf he can ſo do, he ſhal happily eſcape, not only dyuers ſyckeneſſes but alſo the moſt pernitious daūger, procedyng of corrupted drowges or ſpices, wherof ſome couetous poticaries do make medicines, maugre the heedes of good and well lerned phyſicyons.
            
            
               ¶ Syckenes moſte commune to particular tymes of the yere and ages. Ca. 6.
               ALthough I do not intēde to write of the cure of egritudes or ſyckeneſſes confyrmed, as well bycauſe it moughte be reputed in me a great preſumption, as alſo foraſmoche

as it were very peryllous to dinulgate that noble ſcience, to cōmune people, not lerned in lyberall ſciences and philoſophie, whiche be requyred to be ſuffyciently in a phiſition. And more ouer, many bokes of Hipocrates and Galene ought to be radde, before that one do take vpon hym the generall cure of mens bodies: yet not withſtandyng, I truſte I may without any note of arrogance write, what diſeaſes do moſt commonly happen in ſondry tymes of the yere & ages of men and women, with ſome ſignifycations, wherby the diſcraſie or diſtemperature of the body is perceyued, to the intent that the phiſition beinge farre of, maye be truely informed / conſideryng that vrines farre caryed, doo often deceyue them / and lyke wyſe lacke of the ſyghte of the pacyent / and inquiſition of thinges which do precede or folowe the ſyckeneſſe. And with this I truſte none honeſt and charytable phiſition wylle be offended / but rather gyue to me thankes for my dyligence / in the aduaunrynge of theyr eſtimation, which by lacke of perfite inſtruction hath ben appayred.
               
                  ¶ Syckeneſſes of ſprynge tyme.
                  ¶ Diſeaſes procedynge of melancoly / as madneſſe / fallynge ſyckeneſſe / bleedynges / auynſes / poſes / hoorſeneſſe / coughes / lepries / ſcabbes / ache in the ioyntes.
               
               
                  ¶ Syckeneſſes of ſommer.
                  ¶ Many of the ſayd diſeaſes / alſo feuers concynuall / hotte feuers / feuers tertiane / quartaynes / vomites / flyres / watryng of eies / peynes of the eares / blyſters and ſoores of the mouth / and ſweattynges.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Syckeneſſes of Autumne.
                  ¶ Dyuers of ſommer ſyckeneſſes / alſo oppilations of the ſpleene / dropſies / conſumptiōs / ſtrā
                     gulyons / coſtyueneſſe / ache in the huckle boones / ſhortneſſe of wynde / frettynge of the bowelles / fallynge ſyckeneſſe / and melancoly dyſeaſes.
               
               
                  ¶ Syckeneſſe of wynter.
                  ¶ Stitches and griefes in the ſides / inflamatiō of the lunges / reumes / coughes / paynes in the breſle / ſydes / and loynes / heed ache / & palſeyes.
               
               
                  ¶ Syckneſſes happenyng to chyldern.
                  ¶ Whan they be newe borne / there do happen to them ſoores of the mouth called Aphte / vomitynge / coughes / watchyng / fearefulneſſe / inflamations of the nauyll / moyſtures of the eares.
                  Wwhan they breede tethe / ytchynge of the gummes / feuers / crampes / and laſkes.
                  Whan they ware elder / than be they greeued with kernelles / oppenneſſe of the moulde of the heed / ſhortneſſe of wynde / the ſtone of the bladder / wourmes of the bealy / wartes / ſwellynges vnder the chynne / and in Englande commonlye purpyls / meaſels / and ſmalle pockes.
               
               
                  ¶ Syckeneſſe happenyng to yonge men from .xiiii. yeres of age.
                  ¶ Feuers cotydiane / tereyane / quarteyne / hotte feuers / ſpyttynge or vomitynge of bloude / pleureſies / diſeaſes of the ſydes / inflammation of the lunges / lethargies / franſye / hote ſyckeneſſes / cholerik paſſiōs / coſtiuenes or vehement laſkes.
               
               
                  ¶ Syckeneſſe of age.
                  ¶ Difficultie of breathe / reumes with coughes / ſtrangulyon / and dyfficultie in pyſſynge / ache in

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
the ioyntes, diſeaſes of the raynes, 
                        •
                     wymmynges in the heed, palſeyes, ytchynge of all the body, lacke of ſlepe, moyſture in the eyes and eares dulneſſe of ſyght, hardnes of herynge, tiſikneſſe or ſhortneſſe of breth.
                  ¶ Although many of the ſayd ſyckeneſſes doo happen in euery tyme and age, yet bycauſe they be moſte frequent in the ſayde tymes and ages, I haue wryten them, to the intent, that in the ages and tymes moſte inclyned vnto them, ſuche thynges mought be than eſchewed, whiche are apte to ingendre the ſayde diſeaſes.
               
            
            
               ¶ The generall ſygnifications and tokens of ſyckenes. Cap. 7.
               IF the bodye be hotter, colder, moyſter, drier, leaner, fuller, the colour more pale, or ſwarte, the eyes more holowe, than is accuſtomed to be it ſygnifieth that the body is diſpoſed to ſyknes, or alredy ſycke.
               
                  The brayne ſycke.
                  
                     
                        Rauynge.
                        Forgetfulneſſe.
                        Fantaſye.
                        Humours commyng from the roufe of the mouth, the eyes, the noſe, or the eares.
                        Watche.
                        Sleape.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The harte sycke.
                  
                     
                        Difficultie of breathe.
                        Tremblynge of the harte.
                        Beatynge of the pulſe.
                        Feuers. Colde.
                        Diutrſite of colours.
                        Griefe about the harte.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The lyuer ſycke.
                  
                     
                        Lacke or abūdaūce of humours.
                        The fourme of the body alteted.
                        Palenes.
                        Concoction.
                        Digeſtion.
                        Alteration of excrementes accuſtomed.
                        Peyne in the place of the lyuer.
                        Swellynge.
                        Difficultie of breath.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The ſtomacke ſycke.
                  
                     
                        Concoction, ſlowe or quycke.
                        Appetite of moyſte or drye, dull or quycke.
                        Separatiō of excremētes moiſt or harde with theyr colours.
                        Yexynge.
                        Belkynge.
                        Vometynge with peyne and difficultie of brethe.
                        Vryne moche or lyttel with the colour and ſubſtaunce to redde or to pale, to thicke or to thynne
                     
                  
               
               
                  The breaſte.
                  
                     
                        Difficultie of breathe.
                        Cowgh.
                        Spyttynge.
                        Peyne in the breaſte.
                     
                  
               
               ¶ This haue I writen, not to gyue iudgemen
                     •
                   thereby, but onely for the pacyent to haue in a redyneſſe, to the intent, that what ſo euer he feleth or perceyueth in euery of the ſayde thynges thereof to inſtructe his phiſition, whervnto he maye adapt his counſayle and remedyes.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of vrynes. Cap. viii.
               FOraſmoch as nowe a dayes the moſt commune iudgement in ſyckeneſſe is by vrines, whiche being farre caried or moche meued, or ſtandyng longe after that it is made, the fourme thereof is ſo altered, that the phiſytion ſhall not perfytely perceyue the naturall colour, nor contentes, although it be neuer ſo wel chaufed at the fyre, as Actuarius and other greatte lerned men do affirme. I wyll therfore ſomwhat ſpeake of vrines, not ſoo moche as a phyſition knoweth, but as moche as is neceſſarieto euery man for to perceyue the place and cauſe of his griefe, whereby he maye the better inſtructe the Phyſition.
               ¶ Fyrſte in vrine, foure thynges are to be conſydered, that is to ſay, the ſubſtance, the colour, the regions or partes of the vrine, and the contentes or thynges therin conteined.
               Alſo foraſmoch as in the body of man be foure qualities, heate, colde, moyſture, and dryth, two of them heat and cold, are cauſes of the colour, dryth and moyſture are cauſes of the ſubſtance.
               Moreouer in vryne, beinge in a veſſell apt ther vnto be ſene, are thre regiōs. The loweſt region in the bottome of the vrynall, conteynynge the ſpace of two fyngers or lytell more. The myddel region, from whens the loweſt ended vnto the cerkele. The hygheſt region is the cerkle.
               The hyghneſſe of the colour ſygnifyeth heate, the place, blacke, or grene, ſygnifyeth coulde.
               Alſo the groſſenes or thyckeneſſe of the vryne ſygnifieth moyſture, the clerenes or thynnes, ſygnifieth drithe.
               
                  
                  ¶ The colours of vrynes.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              ¶ Colour of bryght goulde.
                              Colour of gylte.
                           
                        
                        Perfyte dygeſtyon.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Red as a red apple or chery.
                              Baſe redde, lyke to bole ar
                                 
                                    •
                                 enake, or ſaffron dry
                              Redde glowynge lyke fyre.
                           
                        
                        Exceſſe of dygeſtion.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Colour of a beaſtes lyuer.
                              Colour of darke red wyne.
                              Grene lyke to colewortes.
                           
                        
                        Aduſtion of humours.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Leaddy colour.
                              Blacke as ynke.
                              Blacke as horne.
                           
                        
                        Feblenes or mortifycation of nature, excepte it be in purginge of melancoly.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Whyte clere as water.
                              Gray as a horne.
                              Whyte as whay.
                              Colour of a camels heare.
                           
                        
                        Lacke of dygeſtyon.
                     
                  
                  
                     Pale lyke to brothe of fleſhe ſodden.
                     The beginnynge of digeſtyon.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Citrine Colour or yelowe.
                              Subcitrine or paler.
                           
                        
                        The myddell of dygeſtyon.
                     
                  
                  
                     Whyte and thinne betokeneth melancolye to haue domynyon.
                     Whyte and thycke, ſygnifieth fleume.
                     Redde and thycke betokeneth ſangnuine.
                     Redde and thinne betokenethe choler to haue the ſouerayntie.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The ſubſtance of the vrine. Cap. ix.
               AT the firſt piſſyng, all vrines well nigh do appere thyn, as longe as they abide warme, for naturall heate, duryng the tyme that it preuaileth, ſuffreth not that the lycour, which is the ſubſtance of the vrine, to con
                  
                     ••
                  le or be thycke for any occaſion: but after that heate is gone, ſome vrines ſhortly, ſome a lōger time after, waxe thyck, lyke wiſe ſomtime, ſome a
                     〈…〉
                  piſſed thicker, & after waxe clere, ſome remain ſtylle as they were made, ſome be metely thycke, as they were troubled, ſome very thick & groſſe. Thoi that waxe clere, ſone do gather that, which is thick into the bottome of the vrinal, ſome remayn troubled, the groſſenes not withſtandynge gathered in the bottome. Sēblably the diuerſitie of thyn or ſubtyl vrines, muſt be perceiued, that is to ſaye, that ſome are very ſubtyll, as water, ſome laſſe ſubtyll, ſome in a meane betwene thycke and thynne.
               ¶ Of thynges conteyned in the vrine, ſome doo diſcende downe to the bottome, & be callyd in a greke worde Hypoſtaſis, in englyſſhe ſome calle it the groūdes, ſome the reſydēce, which yf it be whyte, lyght, riſynge vp frō the bottome of the vrinall, lyke a peare, it ſignifieth helth, if it be of any other fygure or colour, it betokeneth ſome a noyance. If lyke thynges be ſene in the myddell of the vrynall, they be called ſublations, if they approche vnto the hygheſt region of the vrine, they be named cloudes, in latin Nebule. The groūdes or reſidēces not perfite, ſome is lyke lit 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  le redde vetches, & is callyd in latyn Orobea, ſome is like to brāne of wheat gron̄de, & ſeuered

from the meale, and is callyd branny reſidēce, in latin Furfurea, ſome be like vnto plates, hauing bredth and length wythout thycknes, & may be named platy reſidēce, in latine Laminea, ſome is lyke to meale, wheate, or barley, and may be named mealy reſidence, in latyn Sunilacea.
               ¶ There is alſo ſeene in the vrine like to white heares, ſome lengar, ſome ſhorter, ſōtune lyke to ragges ſomwhat red, there is alſo ſene in the vp permoſte parte of the vrine, ſometime a fome or froth ſomtyme belles or bobles. ſometyme there ſwymmeth in the vrine a thing like a copwebbe otherwhile ther is about the cerkle, as it were the rētyng of clothe, ſōtyme there is in the vrine lyke motes of the ſonne, ſōtyme lyke the matter of a ſore, otherwhyle lyke the ſede of a man alſo grauelle or ſande. And in theſe thynges maye be dyuers colours, ſome whyte, ſome red, ſome betwene bothe, ſome yelow, ſome graye, and ſome blacke. All this muſte be diligently marked, and therof ſeparatly to aduertiſe the Phiſitiō, vnto whome I referre the iudgement of the ſyckenes, for the cauſe afore reherſed, and for as moche as the iudgement of them is very ſubtyll.
               Sēblably of ordure, whyther it be very thyn or very thicke: what other matter yſſueth out with it, what colour it is of the ſauour very great, litell or none, yf it were eaſyly expulſed, or peynefully, how oft or how ſeldom. Moreouer of ſweat, what colour it is of, & of what ſauour yf in taſting it be ſalt, ſowre, bitter, or vnſauery.
               Alſo the vomite, yf it be of one colour or many, yf it do ſmell horrybly, of what humour it had moſt habundaunce, yf it were faſtynge, or

after meales, yf it were peynefull or eaſy.
               Likewiſe ſpettil, whether it be thicke or thin or mixt with bloude or matter corrupt, accordingly of the humour iſſuinge out at the noſe, & yf that be bloude, than whyther it be red, watrye or blacke.
               Moreouer, it may not be forgotten, to aduertyſe the Phiſition of the dyet vſed by the pacient, aſwell afore the ſyckeneſſe, as in the tyme of the ſycheneſſe, his age, the ſtrength of his body, his exercyſe, and place, where he lengeſt abode in his youth, whether it were hye or lowe, watry or dry, hotte or colde.
               This I truſt ſhall be ſuffycient, to inſtruct a phyſition, he that deſyreth to knowe more particularly hereof, let hym rede the bokes of Hypocrates, Galene, Cornelyus Celſus, Actuarius, Paulus, and dyuers other late wrytters, for this lytell treatyſe may not receyue it.
            
            
               ¶ The preceptis of the auncient phyſition Dyocles vnto kynge Antigonus. Cap. 10.
               VVe will nowe diuide the bodye of man into foure partes, the heed, boulke, called in latin thorax, which conteyneth the breſt, the ſydes, the ſtomake, and entrayles. The bely, called in latyn venter, conteyneth the panche & the bowels. Alſo the bladder, called in latin veſica, in the whiche name is alſo conteyned the cundites, by the which vryne paſſeth. Whan any diſeaſe approcheth to the heed, theſe tokens do commonly precede, ſwymmyng in the hced, heed ache, heuines of the browes, ſounding in the eares, pryckynges in the temple, the eyes

in the mornynge do water, or waxe dymme, the ſmellynge is dulle, the gummes do ſmelle. Whā thou feleſt ſuche tokens forthwith pourge the heed with ſomwath, not with vehement medecines, but takinge I ſope or Organum, & the croppes of them boyle with whyte or claret wyne half a pynte, & therwith gargariſe your mouth faſtyng, vntil the fleume be purged oute of your heed, this is the eaſyeſt medicine in diſcraſies of the heed. It is alſo very holſome to gargaryſe the mouth and breſt with hony water, wherinto muſtarde is put & myngled, but fyrſte the heed muſt be rubbed with a warme clothe, that the fleum maye eaſyly come out of the heed. And yf theſe tokens be neglected, theſe maner of ſyckeneſſes do folowe ſone after, blared eyes, and humour lettinge the ſight, cleftes in the eares, ſwel lynges in the necke full of matter, called the kinges euyll, corruption of the brayne, poſes, or reumes, heuyneſſe of the heed, and tooth ache.
               Whā the boulke is like to ſuffer any ſickenes it is perceiued by theſe tokens, all the body is in a ſweatte, the bulke moſt ſpecially, the tonge wa xeth thicke, the ſpettyll is eyther ſalt or bitter, or cholerycke, the ſides and ſhoulders do ake without any occaſyon, the pacient gapeth often, alſo there dothe happen moche wakynge, ſuffocations or lacke of breth, thirſt after ſlepe, the mynd is vexed with heuineſſe, alſo the breſt and armes are verye coulde, and the handes do trembele.
               Againſt theſe thyges this remedy may be prouided. After a moderate ſoupper, aſſaye to vomite without any medycine, vomyte is alſo profytable, whiche meate dothe folowe: He that in

ſuch wyſe wyll vomite, let hym eat haſtyly ſmall radyſſhe rootes, townkerſis, rokat, ſynuy, or purſlane, and drynke after it a greate quantitie of warme water, and prouoke hym ſeſfe to vomyte. He that ſetteth lyttell by the ſayde tokēs, let hym feare theſe ſyckneſſes folowing, the pleureſie, the ſyckenes of the lunges, melancolye or madnes, ſharpe feuers, the franſye, the letargie, inflamation with yexinge.
               If any ſyckeneſſe be towarde the bealy, they maye be eſpied by theſe tokens, the bealye is fyrſte wrapped together, and in it ſelfe is troubled, all meates and drinkes do ſeeme bytter in taſt, he feleth heuyneſſe in hys knees, a ſtyffenes in hys loynes, a wearyneſſe in all hys body without any occaſiō, a ſlepyneſſe in his legges, with a lyttell feuer, whan thou feleſte theſe tokens, mollyfie the bealy, not wyth medicyne, but wyth good order of diete, for it is beſt and moſt ſure, to vſe thoſe thynges, wherof lyghtly may enſue none annoyāce, in the number of them are betes boyled in water of hony garlike ſodden, malowes, ſorel, mercury, and all thynges condite in hony. Al theſe do erpel the ordure of the bely: but if any of the ſayd ſignes dothe more and more increaſe, the lyquour, wherein the ſede of Carthamus, callid alſo Cnicus, is boyled, is a pleſāt and ſure medicine, ſmall colewortes boyled in a good quātitie of water, the licour therof in meaſure▪ ii pintes, ſauyng the thirde parte of a pint, wyth hon
                     •
                   and ſalt beyng drunken, ſhall profite moch. Cicer, and the pulſe called in la
                     ••
                  o ernum, in engliſhe I ſuppoſe chittes▪ in water drunk faſting, hath the ſame eſſect. To them, which ſet

littel by the ſaid tokens, theſe diſeaſes do ſodēly happen, Fluxe of the bealy, bluddy fluxe, ſlyppernes of the bowels, peynes in the guttes, ach in huckle bones the feuer terciane, the gowte, the apoplexie or palſey in the lymmes, hemoroides, aking of ioyntes.
               Whan the bladder is towarde any ſickenes, it is perceyued by theſe tokēs, fulneſſe felt after lytel meat, brekyng winde downwarde and vpwarde, paleneſſe of colour in al the body, heuy or troublous ſleapes, the vrine pale, and paſſynge forth peynefully, ſwellynges about the coddes & priuy members. Whā theſe tokens appeare, thā is it expedient to hauy remedy of odoriferous thinges, whyche do expell vrine, whyche ſhall be done without any peryll with the rotes of fenell and perſely ſtieped one or two dayes in good whyte wyne and to drinke therof faſtinge euery mornyng thre ounces and two drāmes, wyth the water of wylde carettes, or clycampane, whyche of theſe is next at hande, euery of thē haue lyke effect. Alſo water, wherin the peaſyn called in latyne Ciceres, are ſtieped, beynge drunke wyth wyne, is lyke cōmodiouſe: he that neglecteth the ſayde tokēs, let him loke for theſe ſyckeneſſes fo lowynge, the dropſy, the greatnes of the ſplene, griefe in the lyuer, the ſtone, ache of the backe, or peynes in the raynes, the difficultie of vrine, fulnes of the bely. In al theſe thinges that we haue ſpokē of, we ſhal gyue to child
                     •
                  ē moſt eaſy medi cines, to mē thoſe, which be ſtrōger in workyng.
               This diete of Diocles, althought at this time it ſemeth not moſte pleaſaunt, nor accordynge to the practiſe nowe vſed, yet beynge tempred with

that, which I haue before remēbred, ſome thyng maye be founde in it, which beinge experienced, maye be as commodious for the helth of mans body, as that diete, which is more curyous or pleaſaunt.
            
            
               ¶ Of them in woſe ſtomakes meat is corrupted. Cap. 11.
               THey in whom cuſtomably meat is corrupted, let them afore that they eat any meat aſſaye to vomite, drynkynge ſwete wine, abſteine from meat, that ingender botches inflāmations, fumous ructuations or vapours, and take ſuche as noryſhe good iuyce, & choſe them out, which do molyfy the bely, & at ſondry tymes take them. It is alſo good to take temperatly that which lowſeth the bely, as the medicyne called picra, and to abſteyne from ſuche thinges, wherby yll iuyre is gathered, & do ingender ſyckeneſſes, harde to be cured or neuer, as goutes, boneache, peynes of the raynes &c.
            
            
               ¶ Of the vertue of meates. Cap. 12.
               HE that is ſtudious about the cōſeruation of healthe, he nedeth to knowe the vertue ribaſius 
                        〈…〉
                      medici 
                        〈…〉
                      fimp. 1. of meates. The meat whiche hath vertue to extenuate, or make humours ſubtylle, it openeth the poores, and bryngeth forthe that whych is faſte in the fleſhe, it maketh that whiche is clammye, ſubtylle, & doeth extenuate, or relent that which is fatte, it bringeth forthe that which abideth long in the bealy, but that which is eaten, is a ſuperfluitie watry & coleryke, and at length maketh melancolike bloud. Wherfore

moche vſinge of them is prohibited, ſpecially to them, that are colerike, & only ſerueth for them that ar replete with fleume, crude or vndigeſted humours, clammi or fatte. The diete of fattinge thinges, dothe nouriſh aboundantly, ſo that the ſtomake & lyuer do digeſt well: meate of good iuice, maketh good bloud, but yet it ſtoppeth the lyuer & ſplene. Theſe do they, whiche make fat humours onely, as the poulſe callid Lenticula, & they that are ſlimy like malowes, ſome do make fat humors, & be alſo ſlimy, as fiſhes with hard ſhelles. Finally the diete, whiche doth extenuate & make leane, is more ſure for kepyng of helth, than that, whiche fatteth moch. Noriſhing meates wold be therfor moderateli vſed, whan a mā perceyueth hym ſelfe to haue nede therof, it may be moſt ſureli vſed of them that be exerciſed temporately, & can ſlepe whan they luſt. They that can not ſlepe by reaſō of exerciſe, lette theim eſchewe fattinge meates, lette none ydelle perſone attempte to vſe theim. In the preſeruation of helth, ſluggardy is the greatteſt miſchiefe. Lyke as the temperate mouing is good, ſo is the meat which betwene thycke & thynne, is to mannes helth moſt cōuenient, which ingendreth bloude, according to the competent cōſtitution of mans body, & therfore is it to be chifly vſed. Meate of yll iuyce is alway noiful, wherfor it ought to be eſchewed. Likewiſe the varietie of meates is to be obſerued diligently, for it is a great thinge to couple wel togither thinges of cōtrarie vertues. for yf they be not well digeſted, that whiche is receyued, may brynge diſpleaſure.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               ¶ A diete preſeruatiue in the tyme of peſtilenee. Capitulo. xiii.
               THe bodies moſt apte to be infected, are ſpecially ſanguine, next colerike than fleumatike laſte melancolyke, for in them the humour beyng colde and drie. is moſte vnapt to receyue putrifaction, hauynge alſo ſtrayte paſſages, by the whyche venim muſt paſſe. The lar
                        •
                     inus cinus. diete cōuenient for that tyme is to abſtein from meres inflaming and opening the pores alſo frō the heat of the ſōne, from to moch heate of fire, or garmenus, from very hot herbes, and moche vſe of tart thinges, except onions and cikory, or radiſhe with vineger for they do reſiſt agaynſte venim, from wine very furniſhe, exerciſe incontinent after meales, frō ſwetting, from all thing is that wyll cauſe oppilations and putrifaction, frō thinges hot and moiſt, where moiſture hath the dominion in degree, ſpecially being not ſufficiently boiled: alſo from milke, except it be in a littel quātite, and that with a litel ſugar. Frutis and herbes cold and dry, and ther wyth ſoure or ſomwhat bitter, are not prohibited. If ye eate figges, grapes, or ſwete cheries, eate after them of an orenge wyth ſalt. If ye eate thinges colde and moyſt, as cucūbers, melones, fyſhe ſoft and freſhe, or damſyns, eate by and by after ſome fenell, and orenge wyth ſalt, drinkinge therwyth a draughte of good wyne. Beware of muſherons, moch purſlane, gourdis, and all other thynges, whych wyll ſone putrifie: not wythſtandynge, I wyll not forbyd eatynge of lettyſe, wyth a fewe myntes, or myxt wyth cynamom. All thynges ſowre ar cōmended, as wel in diete cōſeruatiue,

as in that whyche is curatiue or healeth, excepte where there is ſtraytneſſe of the breſte, or weakenes of the ſtomack, than oughte they to be tem, pred wyth ſugar ſalt, almond milke, cynamom, pepper, fenell, ſaffron, egges / and ſome thynge that is fatte or vnctuous. Capers ar good to be vſed wyth vineger. Cheſe very fatte and ſalt / is not commended / no more is colewortes / or any kynde of pulſe / excepte chittes: greate peaſon / rapes / nor ſpynache is good. Alſo there be forboden rokat and muſtard / moche wyne and egges / excepte they be eaten wyth ſorell ſauce / vyneger / or iuyce of orenges: perſely and alſo parſnepes be good. newe wynes be noyfull / let the meate be ſomewhat more than drinke. but yet ſuſteyn not to moche hunger nor thyrſt. beware of lechery / of a clowdy wether and cloſe / eſchew moche reſorte or thronge of people / wyndes com mynge from fēnes or mores / from ſlepe at none: vſe with your meate this poulder / ſāders redde / halfe an ounce / cynamom thre drammes and a halfe / ſaffron halfe a dramme. After your meate / eate a lyttell of coriander ſede / welle prepared. In the mornynge / at a temperate fyre kembe your herd backwarde / clenſe your body and heed of all ſuperfluities: vſe alſo moderate fricaſies / wyth ſwete perfumes / and odours / waſhe oftentimes your face and handes with pure vyneger mixt with roſewater. In cold wether mixt it with myntes / baulme / rue / or myrtes / and ſome tyme cloues. In hotte ſommer wyth roſes or vio lettes. Aboue all thynges vſe to take white wine good / white vyneger roſette / water of roſes / in equal porciōs / put ther vnto a littell ſeruale / or of

the rynde of a citron, and drynke therof a lyttell and oftentymes waſhe therwith your handes and viſage.
               Medicynes preſeruatyue agaynſte the peſtilence, whiche be alwaye moſt ready, are theſe, a fygge with rue, and a wall nutte eaten faſtyng, alſo triakle, or mithridate, to old men a dramme weyghte, to yonge men halfe a dramme, or a ſcruple diſſolued in vineger and roſe water, or in water of tormentyll, ſeabioſe or balme, yf the plage be in ſommer: yf it be in wynter, put to the waters ſome whyte wyne. Alſo the pylles called comonly. Pillule Raſis, but in dede they were inuented by Rufus are very excellent, ſpecially yf the al
                     ••
                  , whiche i
                     •
                   it, be waſhed, and thervnto added a lyttell Bolus armenus, & terra ſigillata. And yf the perſon be of hotte completion, a quantitie of ſorell ſede, and red corall, this confectioned with ſyrope of citrons, in colde complexions or to old men with wine, vſe them euery thyrde daye one pille at a tyme, thre houres or foure afore dyner or ſupper. If ye take triakle or Mithridate, abſteyne from meate at the leaſte ſyx houres after. A pece of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of ſetuall, borne in the mouth preſerueth, from infection. In lykewyſe doth ſorell chewed faſtyng, and the iuyce ſucked downe. To poore men, Marſilius was wont to grue a toſte of bread ſteped in vineger, with a piece of an onyon or rewe. Al thynges whiche be cordiall, that is to ſaye, which do in any wyſe comforte the barte, do reſyſte peſtilence, vehement anger, or heuineſſe, be very perniciouſe. Other more exquiſite and coſtly preſeruatyues, I purpoſely paſſe ouer, whiche Marſilius,

and othre phiſitions, do wryte of abundantly, for as moche as I deſyre to be in this warke compendiouſe. One thynge I hadde almoſte forgotten, that there is no better preſeruatyue, than to flee frome the place corrupted, betyme and farre of, and to let none approche you, that hath made theyr abode, where the plage is feruent. More ouer receyue not into your houſe any ſtuffe, that commeth out of a houſe, wherin any perſon hath ben infected. For it hath bene ſene, that ſuch ſtuffe lyenge in a cofer ſhutte by the ſpace of two yeres, after that the coffer hath ben opened, they whiche haue ſtande nygh to it, haue ben infected, and ſone after haue died. But there I alwaye excepte the powre of god, which is wonderfull, and alſo mercifull, aboue mans reaſon or coūſell, preſeruyng or ſtrykyng whom, whan, and where it ſhall lyke his maieſtie, to whom be glorye and prayſe euerlaſtynge. Amen.
               ¶ Thus make I an ende of this treatiſe, deſyrynge them that ſhall take profyte therby, to defende it agaynſte enuyous dyſdayn, on whom I haue ſet the aduēture for the loue that I bare to my countrey: requyrynge all honeſt phiſitions to remember, that the intent to my labour was that men and women redynge this warke, and obſeruynge the counſayles therin, ſhulde adapte therby their bodyes, to receyue more ſure remedye by the medicines prepared by good phiſitions in daūgerous ſykeneſſes, they kepyng good dyet, and infourmynge dilygently the ſame phiſitions, of the maner of theyr affectes, paſſyōs, and ſenſyble tokens. And ſo ſhall the noble and moſt neceſſarye ſcience of phiſicke, with the miniſters

therof / eſcape the ſclaunder / whyche they 
                     〈◊〉
                   of longe tyme ſuſteyned / and accordynge to the precepte of the wyſe man / be worthely honoured / for aſmoche as the hygheſt god dyd create the phiſition / for mans neceſſitie. And of the earth created medicine / and the wyſe man ſhall not abhorre it. Thus fare ye well gentyl reders / and forget me not wyth your good reporte / and praye to God that I be neuer wars occupyed.
            
         
      
      
         
            Londini in aedibus Thomae Berthe leti typis impreſſ. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum. ANNO. M. D. XXXIX.
            
         
      
   