
      
         
            
            
            THE SPEECH
OF THE LORD
CHANCELLOR OF
England, in the Eſchequer
Chamber, touching the
Post-nati.
            
            LONDON,
Printed for the Societie of
Stationers. An. 1609.
         
         
            
            The Printer to the curteous
Reader.
            THrough great haſte (the common Spoiler of moſt
ſerious Labours, Hillary Terme being halfe ſpent
ere this Booke could come forth) the word Non, in the
45. page, and 15. line, of all the Bookes of the firſt Impreſsion
was left out, which altered the Sentence to a
cleane contrary Sence: Therefore, in thoſe firſt imprinted
Bookes, for Quod lego, non credo, reade quod non lego,
non credo, according to the correction of that place in
theſe Bookes of the ſecond Impreſsion.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ To the louing
Readers.
            
               BEfore I preſumed
to ſpeake
in the Eſchequer
Chamber
in R. C. Caſe
(which is now
commonly called, the Caſe of
Post-nati,) I conſidered mine
age and infirmities, and how
long I had diſcontinued from

ſuch Legall Exerciſes. I might
hereupon haue iuſtly challenged
the priuiledge of ſilence: But
greater and weightier Reaſons
ouer-ruled mee, and enforced
mee to waiue the benefit of that
priuiledge: For, looking into the
nature of the Queſtion then in
hand, and examining the Circumſtaunces,
I found the Caſe
to bee rare, and the Matter of
great import and conſequence,
as being a ſpeciall and principall
part of the bleſſed and happy Vnion
of great Britaine.
            
            I heard many learned and iudicious
Arguments, made by
the reuerend Iudges: and finding
that they did not all concurre

in Opinion (though the
number was indeede ſo few, of
them that differed, that in Greeke
it woulde not make a plurall
number) and that ſome things
were by them omitted, which
ſeemed to mee to be both pertinent
to the Matter, and neceſſary
to bee knowne, and more
proper and fit to bee ſpoken by
me, reſpecting the place I hould,
than by them, that did wholy
binde themſelues to the forme
and rule of legall Argument and
Diſcourſe: I thought that I
coulde not, in duetie, ſit as a
dumbe and idle Hearer onelie:
The Cauſe being iudicially depending
in the high Court of

               Chancerie, where I was to iudge
of it according to Lawe, following
the rule of mine owne Conſcience,
and the meaſure of mine
owne vnderſtanding, and not
to bee ſwayed vvith the vveight
of other mens opinions.
            I conſidered alſo, that althogh
Silentij tutum proemium is often
true in humane policie, yet
ſometime, there is Crimen Reticentiae;
and therefore the Prophet
ſaid, Vae mihi quia tacui. And
Chryſoſtome obſerueth, that, Tribus
modis in veritatem peccatur: 1.
Ʋeritatem prae timore tacendo: 2.
Ʋeritatem in mendatium Commutando:
3. Ʋeritatem non defendendo.
Remembring this, my Conſcience

tould me, that howſoe
               
                  •••
               
Silence might in this Caſe

                  •••
               e excuſed mee of the ſecond,
but I could not haue eſcaped by

                  •••
               ence, from offending in the
firſt & laſt. And if Feſtus thoght
it not reaſon, to ſend a priſoner,
without ſhewing the Cauſes
which were layed againſt him,
I might haue beene worthily &

                  •
               uſtly cenſured, if vpon other
mens arguments, and as it vvere

                  
                     •…
                  implicita, I ſhould haue pronounced
my iudgement and
ſentence in ſo great a Cauſe,
without declaring the grounds

                  ••
               d reaſons vvhereupon I ſtood.

                  ••
               us, Duetie and Neceſsitie

                  ••
               r, ratio ſapienti neceſsitas) were

the cauſes that induced mee to
ſpeake in this rare and weightie
cauſe, and the force of truth moued
mee to ſpeake that which I
did ſpeake, without reſpect of
pleaſing or diſpleaſing any. And
ſo, hauing the warrant of a ſincere
conſcience, which is truly
ſaid to be, veluti Comes, & Teſtis,
& I
                     •
                  dex actionum, I haue in the
Chancerie iudged and decreed
the Caſe for R. C. And the like
Iudgement is alſo giuen by the
Iudges of the Kings Bench, in
the Aſsiſe depending in that
Court. The decree and iudgement
being thus paſſed, diuerſe
vnperfect Reports, and ſeuerall
patches and pieces of my Speech

haue bin put in writing, & diſperſed
into many hands, and ſome
offred to the Preſſe. The Kings
Mie. hauing knowledge thereof,
miſliked it, & thereupon cō
               manded
me to deliuer to him in
writing, the whole diſcourſe of
that which I ſaid in that Cauſe.
            Thus I was put to an vnexpected
new labour, to reuiew my
ſcribled & brokē papers. Out of
which (according to the charge
impoſed vpon me) I gathered all
which I had before ſpoken, & ſo
ſet it downe faithfully & plainly,
and (as neare as I could) in the
ſame words I vttered it: it pleaſed
his ſacred Mie. to take ſome view
of it, & taking occaſion thereby,

to remember the diligence of the
L. chiefe Iuſtice of the common
place, for the ſummary report he
had publiſhed of the Iudges Arguments,
he gaue mee in charge
to cauſe this to be likevviſe put in
Print, to preuent the Printing of
ſuch miſtaken and vnperfect
reports of it, as vvere alreadie
ſcattered abroad.
            Whatſoeuer it is, it vvas firſt
conceiued & ſpokē out of conſcience
& duty; and is now publiſhed
in humble obedience to
my moſt gracious Soueraigne.
And ſo I offer and commend it
to your good acceptance and fauourable
interpretation.
            
               T. Elleſmere Canc.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ Poſt-nati.
            
               MY Lords, mine age,
mine infirmitie, and indiſpoſition
of health,
my decaie and weakeneſſe
of memorie, and
Deſuetudo, and long diſcontinuance
from this maner of Legall exerciſe
(aboue foureteene yeeres) haue bereaued
mee of the meanes and helpes that
ſhould inhable me to ſpeake in ſo great a
Caſe.
            
               
I feare therefore, that it will be deemed
preſumption (if not worſe) that I aduenture
to ſpeake heerein at all; ſpecially
after ſo many learned and iudicious Arguments
of ſo many graue, learned, and
reuerend Iudges.
            To ſay the ſame that hath beene ſaied,
muſt needes be vnpleaſaunt, weariſome,
and loathſome to the hearers; and not to
ſay the ſame, is to ſpeake little to the purpoſe:
for, what more can bee ſaied than
hath beene?
            Yet, for that the Caſe is depending
in Chancerie, and adiourned hither for difficultie
in Law, & there I muſt giue iudgement
according to the Law, Whether the
Complainant bee inhabled, by Lawe, to
maintaine his ſuit in that Court, or not: I
holde it more fitting to deliuer the reaſons
of my iudgement heere, where others
haue beene heard, than there, before a
few, which haue not heard that which
hath beene ſo learnedly argued, and largely
debated heere.
            
               
And therefore the Caſe ſtanding thus,
I will ſpeake what I thinke: And I muſt
ſay as one of the graue Iudges ſaied, I can
tell no newes; But ſome old things which
I haue read and obſerued, I will remember;
but I can not diuine, or propheſie
de futuris, I leaue that as Iuſtice Yeluerton
did.
            I am free, and at libertie Nullius addictus
iurare in verba Magistri, and therefore I
will ſpeake ingenuouſly and freely.
            In the arguing of this Caſe, ſome things
which are of great weight with mee, haue
(in mine opinion) beene paſſed ouer too
lightly; and ſome other thinges which
ſeeme to me but light, haue beene ouerweighed,
as I thinke.
            Halfe an howers time longer or ſhorter
I meane not to ſtriue for, and therefore I
will preſume on your patience, and aſſume
to my ſelfe ſuch conuenient time as others
haue done: And yet I will husband
time as well as I can.
            I will not be abaſhed to ſtrengthen my

weake memory with helpe of ſome ſcribled
papers, as others haue done: for I accompt
it a point of wiſedome to followe
wiſe mens Examples.
            Other Exordium, Inſinuation, Proteſtation,
or Preface for the Matter it ſelfe, either
to prepare attentiue and beneuolent
auditors, or to ſtirre offence or miſlike againſt
either partie, I meane not to vſe; it
is fit for Oratours, I neuer profeſſed the
Art, I had neuer skill in it: And it is not
Decorum for Iudges, that ought to reſpect
the Matter, and not the humours of the
Hearers.
            The Exordium the Ciuilians vſe in their
Sentences I like well; In Dei nomine Amen,
& Deo primitùs inuocato; other Exordium I
care not for.
            The Caſe now depending in Chauncerie
which is adiourned hither,The Caſe. is thus.
            
               Robert Caluine, ſonne and heire apparant
of Iames L. Caluine of Colcroſſe in the realme

of Scotland, an Infant of three yeares of
age, borne in the ſaied Realme of Scotland,
maketh title by his Bill to a Meſſuage
and Garden with th'appurtenaunces in
the pariſh of Saint Buttolph without Biſhops-gate
in the citie of London: and complaineth
againſt Iohn Bingley, and Richard
Griffin, for detaining the Euidences concerning
the ſame Meſſuage and Lands, and
taking the profits thereof.
            The Defendants pleade, that the Plaintife
is an Alien, and that in the third yeere
of his Maieſties raigne of England, and in
the nine and thirtieth yere of his Maieſties
raigne of Scotland, hee was borne in the
Realme of Scotland, within the ligeance of
his ſaid Maieſtie, of his Realme of Scotland,
and out of the ligeance of our ſoueraigne
Lord the King of his Realme of England.
            
            And the Defendants ſay further, That
at the time of the birth of the Complainant,
and long before, and euer ſithence,
the ſaied Kingdome of Scotland was, and
ſtill is, ruled and gouerned by the proper

Lawes and Statutes of the ſaid Kingdome
of Scotland, and not by the Lawes and Statutes
of this Realme of England: And therfore
the Defendants demaund iudgement,
Whether the Complainant ought to bee
anſwered to his ſaid Bill, or ſhall be receiued
to proſecute the ſaid ſuite againſt the
Defendants, being for, and concerning
the title of Inheritance, and euidence touching
the ſame.
            Heereupon the Complainant hath demurred
in Law.
            This is the ſpeciall Caſe now depending
in the Chancerie; in which, and touching
all like Caſes in generall, mine opinion
is, and ſince the queſtion was firſt
mooued hath beene, That theſe Post-nati
are not Aliens to the King, nor to his Kingdome
of England, but by their Birth-right,
are liege ſubiects to the King; and capable
of eſtates of Inheritance, and freehould of
Landes in England: and may haue and

maintaine as wel Reall as Perſonall actions
for the ſame. And that therefore the now
Complainant Robert Caluine ought to bee
anſwered.
            This opinion I did firſt conceiue vpon
thoſe rules and reaſons in Lawe (as well the
Common Law of England, as the Ciuile law)
which heereafter in the courſe of my
Speech I will remember. And in this opinion
I haue beene ſince confirmed by
many great and weighty reaſons.
            Firſt,The proceeding in the generall Caſe of Post-nati.
                in the Statute made in the firſt
yeare of his Maieſties raigne of England,
authorizing the Treatie betweene the
Commiſsioners for both the Kingdomes,Stat. 1. Iac.
it is ſaid (as Iuſtice Warburton noted well)
That both the famous & ancient Realmes
of England and Scotland,
               19. Mart. 1603 are now vnited
in allegeance and loyall ſubiection in his
royall perſon, to his Maieſtie, and his poſteritie
for euer.
            Heere wee haue the Iudgement of the
Parliament, that there is a Vnitie in allegeance

to one Royall perſon; And therefore
I ſee not how wee may out of imaginarie
conceipts, and by ſubtile diſtinctions
ſtraine our wittes to frame ſeuerall allegeances
to one and the ſame Royall perſon,
contrary to ſo plaine a declaration made
by Parliament.
            Next followeth his Maieſties Proclamation
20. Octobris 1604.
               
                  The Proclamation, 2. Iacobi 20. Octobr. 1604. by which hee
aſſumed to himſelfe the Name and Stile of
King of great Britaine: In which Proclamation,
among many other weighty reaſons,
this is added for one, We haue receiued from
thoſe that be skilful in the Lawes of the Land,
That immediatly vpon our ſucceſsion, diuerſe of
our auncient Lawes of this Realme are ipſo
facto expired; as namely, that of Eſcuage,
and of the naturalization of the Subiects. This
was not done ſodainely, nor lightly; but
vpon graue and ſerious deliberation, and
aduiſe: And therefore ſeemeth to mee to
be a matter of great importaunce, and not
to be lightly regarded.
            
               
The ſame twentieth of October,The Commiſſioners authorized by Parliament, did begin 20. Octob. and did continue vntill 6. Decemb. 2. Iacobi.
                theſe
Commiſſioners beganne their Treatie. Of
the graue and iudicious Courſe which
they held, in debating of the Matter then
propounded, I will forbeare to ſpeake:
But for this point of Naturalization now
in queſtion, their reſolution in the end
was thus:
            That it ſhall bee propounded to both
the Parliaments at the next Seſsions,The reſolution of the Cō
                  miſſioners. that
an Act be made containing a declaration,
as followeth: That all the Subiects of both
the Realmes, borne ſince the deceaſe of Elizabeth
the late Qu. of England of happie
memory, and all that ſhalbe borne hereafter
vnder the obedience of his Maieſtie,
and his royall Progeny, are by the common
Lawes of both the Realmes, and ſhall
be for euer, inhabled to obtaine, ſucceede,
inherite, and poſſeſſe all Lands, Goods, and
Chattels, &c. as fully and amply as the Subiects
of either Realme: reſpectiuely might
haue done, or may doe in any ſort within
the Kingdome where they were borne.

This, after long debating, and graue and
deliberate conſideration, was, in the end,
the reſolution of the greater part of the
Commiſſioners, not one openly gaineſaying
it. And diuerſe of the principall
Iudges of the Realme were preſent at all
times when the point was debated. And
herein I note the wiſe and iudicious forme
of that reſolution, which was not to propound
to the Parliament the making of a
new Lawe, but a declaration of the common
Lawes of both the Realmes in this
queſtion.
            Now, if wee conſider who theſe Commiſſioners
were, what Lords of the higher
Houſe, and what perſons of the common
Houſe, ſelected of all degrees, moſt
eminent for their learning and iudgement,
as well in Ciuile and Common Law,
as in knowledge, and experience other
waies, beeing aſſiſted by the graue Iudges
of the Realme: If this, I ſay, be well
conſidered, then this Reſolution muſt be
accompted and eſteemed as a matter of

great and weighty importance, and much
to be regarded in the deciding of this queſtion.
            According to this Act of the Commiſſioners,The Iudges opinion in Parliament.
the Caſe was propounded in the
next Seſsion of Parliament. In the higher
Houſe, the Iudges were required to deliuer
their opinions. There were then eleauen
Iudges preſent; whereof tenne did
with one vniforme conſent affirme the
Lawe to be, That the Post-nati were not
Aliens, but naturall Subiects (one onely
diſſenting.) After this, the Queſtion was
debated in a ſolemne Conference betweene
both the Houſes of Parliament at
ſeuerall times, and at great length, and
with much libertie: Nothing was omitted
that Wit or Art could inuent to obiect
againſt this opinion; And that was
done by men of great learning, and ſingular
iudgement in the Common Lawe,
and Ciuile Lawe; and by ſome other Gentlemen
of the Common Houſe, of rare

gifts for their learning knowledge, elocution
and experience.
            At this Conference the Iudges were
preſent; who, after they had heard all
that was, or could be ſaid, did confirme
their former opinions, which they had
before deliuered in the higher Houſe:
Three of the chiefe of them declaring
their reaſons, and all the reſt (ſauing one
alone) concurring in the ſame. So, here
was now a generall reſolution by all the
Iudges of the Realme (one excepted)
and that deliuered, not priuately, but in
Parliament; which without more adoe
had beene ſufficient to haue decided and
determined this Queſtion.
            Touching the Proclamation,The force and ſtrength of the Kings proclamations. it was diſcreetely
and modeſtly ſaied by a learned
Gentleman of the lower Houſe. That it
was of great reſpect, and much to bee regarded;
but yet it was not binding, nor
concluding: for, Proclamations can neither
make, nor declare Lawes: And beſides,

that this Proclamation was not
grounded vpon any reſolution of the reuerend
Iudges; but vpon the opinion of
ſome skilfull in the Lawes of this Land.
            Of the ſtrength of Proclamations, being
made by the King, by the aduiſe of
his Counſell and Iudges, I will not diſcourſe;
yet I will admoniſh thoſe that
bee learned and ſtudious in the Lawes,
and by their profeſſion are to giue counſell,
and to direct themſelues, and others,
to take heede that they doe not contemne,
or lightly regard ſuch Proclamations.
            And to induce them thereunto, I deſire
them to looke vpon, and conſider aduiſedly
theſe few Proclamations, Prouiſions,
or Ordinaunces, which I will point
out vnto them; and of what validitie and
force they haue beene houlden to bee in
conſtruction of Lawe, albeit they be neither
Statutes, nor Acts of Parliament.
            M. 4. H. 3. in Dower,Fitzh. Dower. 17
                     •
                  . 
               the defendant pleaded,
Quod petens est de potestate Regis Franciae,
& reſidens in Francia; Et prouiſum est

à Conſilio Regis, quod nullus de potestate Regis
Franciae reſpondeatur in Anglia antequam Angli
reſpondeantur de iure ſuo in Francia. This
the Plaintifes Atturney could not denie;
and thereupon the iudgement was, Ideo
ſine die.
            Anno 20. Hen. 3. certaine Prouiſions and
Ordinaunces were made which were called
Prouiſiones Merton, where the King aſſembled
his Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Earles,
and Barons for the Coronation of the
King, and his wife Queene Elenor; and
the words be, Prouiſum eſt in curia Dom. Regis
apud Merton corā Willihelmo Cantuarienſi
Archiepiſcopo, & Coepiſcopis, Suffraganeis
ſuis; Et coram maiori parte Comitum &
Baronum Angliae ibidem existentium pro Coronatione
ipſius Domini Regis & Helionorae Reginae,
pro qua omnes vocati fuerunt: Cum
tractatum eſſet de communi vtilitate Regni
ſuper articulis ſubſcriptis. Ita prouiſum fuit
& conceſſum, tam a praedictis Archiepiſcopis,
Epiſcopis, Comitibus, & Baronibus, & alijs.
De viduis primò &c.
            
               
Fitzherbert citeth a Prouiſion made Anno
19. H. 3.Fitzherbert Nat. Br. 32. 
               in theſe words, Et prouiſum fuit
coram Domino Rege, Archiepiſcopis, Epiſcopis,
Comitibus, & Baronibus, Quod nulla Aſſiſa
vltimae praeſentationis de caetero capiatur
de Eccleſiis, Praebendatis nec de Praebendis.
This Prouiſion was alowed and continued
for Lawe, vntill W. 2. Anno 13. Edw. 1. ca. 5.
which prouides the contrary by expreſſe
words.
            
            
               Anno 6. Ed. 1.
               Anno 6. Ed. 1. the King and his Iudges
made certaine Explanations of the Statute
of Gloucester,
               Explan. ſtat. which are called, Explanationes
ſtatuti Glocestriae:
               Glouceſtr. And theſe be the
words. Postmodum per Dominum Regem &
Iusticiarios ſuos factae ſunt quaedam Explanationes
quorundam articulorum ſuperius poſitorum.
Which Explanations haue euer
ſince beene receiued as a Law.
            There is a Proclamation by King Ed. 3.
               A Proclamation. 15. Ed. 3.
bearing Teste at Westminster Anno 15. Edw. 3.
And Iudge Thorpes opinion Pa. 39. Ed. 3. 7.
both which I will now forbeare to report,
and wiſh the Students to reade the ſame

in the printed Bookes, where they ſhall
ſee both the effect, and the reaſon, and the
cauſe thereof; They are worth their reading,
and may informe and direct them
what iudgement to make of Proclamations.
            Touching the opinion of the Iudges,How the Iudges opinion deliuered in parliament ought to be regarded.
ſome haue obiected (yet modeſtly, and
I ſuppoſe, according to their conſcience
and vnderſtanding) That there is not
like regarde to be had of Iudges opinions
giuen in Parliament,Obiect. as ought to bee of
their iudgements in their proper Courts
and Seates of Iuſtice: for, in thoſe places
their Oath bindeth them; but not ſo in
the other.
            1. To this I anſwere:Reſponſ. The reuerence,
and woorthineſſe of the men is ſuch, as is
not to bee quarrelled and doubted of, if
there were no Oathe at all: For, if men
of ſo great and eminent places feare not
God and his iudgements, euen out of a

religious conſcience, which is Fraenum ante
peccatum, & flagrum post peccatum, it may
be doubted that the externall ceremonie
of adding a Booke will little auaile.
            2 Their Oath doth bind them as much
in the Court of Parliament, as in their proper
Courts: for, that is the ſupreme Court
of all; and they are called thither by the
Kings Writ, not to ſit as Tell-clockes, or
idle hearers; but, quòd perſonalitèr interſitis
nobiſcum, ac cum caeteris de Conſilio nostro ſuper
dictis negotijs tractaturi, vestrum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Conſilium
impenſuri: And thoſe Negotia be Ardua
& vrgentia negotia Regni &c. And their
Oath, amongeſt other things, is, That
they ſhall counſell the King truely in his
buſineſſe.
            3 This Exception may ſerue againſt
the Iudges, as well in Caſes when they ſit
and giue iudgement, as Iuſtices of Aſſiſes,
Niſi prius, Oyer and Terminer, and Gaole
Deliuerie, as in this Caſe of Parliament:
for, there they haue none other Oath but
their generall Oath.
            
               
4 It becomes vs to eſteeme of Iudges
now, as our forefathers eſteemed them in
times paſt; for, as they ſucceede them in
Time and Place (I thanke God, and the
King, I haue neither cauſe to feare any for
diſpleaſure, nor to flatter any for fauour:
wherefore I will neither be afraid, nor abaſhed
to ſpeake what I thinke:) I ſay
therefore, that as our Iudges now ſucceed
the former Iudges, in Time and Place; ſo
they ſucceede them, and are not inferior to
them in Wiſedome, Learning, Integritie,
and all other iudicious and religious Vertues.
            Then let vs ſee what the wiſedome of
Parliaments in times paſt attributed to
the Iudges opinions declared in Parliament;
Of which there bee many Examples;
but I will trouble you but with two
or three.
            I wil not remember Richard the ſeconds
time (of which ſome of our Chroniclers
doe talke idely, and vnderſtand little)
where power and might of ſome potent

perſons oppreſſed iuſtice, and faithfull
Iudges, for expounding the Law ſoundly,
and truely. The firſt that I will remember,
is this.
            In the Parliament 28. H. 6. 16. Ianuarij,
the Commons made ſuite, That W. de la
Poole Duke of Suffolke ſhould bee committed
to priſon for many treaſons and other
hainous crimes committed by him.
The Lordes in Parliament were in doubt
what anſwer to giue; they demaunded the
opinion of the Iudges: Their opinion
was, That hee ought not to bee committed;
And their reaſon was, for that the
Commons did not charge him with anie
particular offence, but with generall
ſlaunders and reports; And therefore becauſe
the Specialties were not ſhewed, hee
was not to bee committed. This opinion
was allowed; And thereupon 28. Ianuarij,
the Commons exhibited certaine ſpeciall
Articles againſt him, viz. That hee conſpired
with the French King to inuade

the Realme &c. And thereupon hee was
committed to the Tower.
            2 In the Parliament Anno 31. H. 6. in
the vacation (the Parliament being continued
by prorogation) Thomas Thorpe the
Speaker was condemned in a thouſand
pounds dammages in an action of Treſpaſſe,
brought againſt him by the Duke
of Yorke, and was committed to priſon in
Execution for the ſame. After, when the
Parliament was re-aſſembled, the Commons
made ſuite to the King and the
Lords, to haue Thorpe the Speaker deliuered,
for the good exploite of the Parliament;
whereupon the Duke of Yorkes
Counſell declared the whole Caſe at
large. The Lords demaunded the opinion
of the Iudges, whether, in that Caſe,
Thorpe ought to bee deliuered out of priſon
by Priuiledge of Parliament: The
Iudges made this aunſwere, That they
ought not to determine the Priuiledge of
that high Court of Parliament; But for

the declaration of proceeding in lower
Coutts, in caſes where Writtes of Superſedeas
for the priuiledge of the Parliament
be brought vnto them, They aunſwered:
That if any perſon that is a Member of
the Parliament bee arreſted in ſuch caſes
as bee not for treaſon or felonie, or for
ſuretie of Peace, or condemnation had
before the Parliament, it is vſed that ſuch
perſons be releaſed; and may make Atturney,
ſo as they may haue their freedome
and libertie, freely to intend the
Parliament. Hereupon it was concluded,
That Thorpe ſhould ſtill remaine in priſon
according to the Lawe, Notwithſtanding
the priuiledge of Parliament, and
that hee was the 
                  •
               peaker. Which reſolution
was declared to the Commons by
Walter Moyle, one of the Kings Serieants
at Lawe. And then the Commons were
commaunded in the Kings name, by the
Biſhop of Lincolne (in the abſence of the
Archbiſhop of Canterbury then Chauncellor)
to chooſe another Speaker.
            
               
3 In the Parliament An. 7. H. 8. a Queſtion
was moued, Whether ſpirituall perſons
might bee conuented before temporall
Iudges for criminall cauſes; There ſir
Iohn Fineux and the other Iudges deliuered
their opinion, that they might and
ought to bee ſo. And their opinion was
allowed, and maintained by the King and
the Lords: And D. Standiſh, who before
had houlden the ſame opinion, was deliuered
from the Biſhops. And it is worth
the noting, what wordes paſſed in that
Caſe betweene the Archbiſhop of Canterbury,
and that worthy Iudge Fineux.
            
            4 If a Writ of Errour bee brought in
Parliament vpon a Iudgement giuen in
the Kings Bench,Writs of Errour ſued in parliament. the Lords of the higher
Houſe alone (without the Commons)
are to examine the Errours; But that is
by the aduiſe and Counſell of the Iudges,
who are to informe them what the Lawe
is, and ſo to direct them in their iudgement.
And if the iudgement bee reuerſed,

then commaundement is to bee giuen to
the Lord Chancellour to doe Execution
accordingly. And ſo it was in Anno 17. R.
2. in a Writte of Errour brought in Parliament
by the Deane and Chapiter of Lichfield,
againſt the Prior and Couent of New-port-Panell,
as appeareth by the Record.
But if the iudgement bee affirmed, then
the Court of the Kings Bench are to proceede
to execution of the Iudgement, as
it appeareth in Flowerdewes Caſe P. 1. H. 7.
fol. 19. But it is to bee noted, that in all
ſuch Writtes of Errour, the Lords are to
proceede according to the Lawe; and for
their iudgement therein they are informed
and guided by the Iudges, and doe
not follow their owne opinions or diſcretions
otherwiſe.
            This extrauagant Diſcourſe touching
Proclamations, and Iudges opinions deliuered
in Parliament, and how they
ought to bee regarded, I haue thought
materiall and neceſſarie, both in reſpect

of the time wherein wee liue, and the Matter
which we haue in hand: And theſe bee
thinges which I thinke haue beene too
lightly paſſed ouer: But if you condemne
it as impertinent, I muſt then confeſſe I
haue preſumed too much vpon your patience;
I pray you beare with mee, it is but
my labour loſt, and a little time miſ-ſpent,
if it ſeeme ſo vnto you: You are wont to
pardon greater faultes; Call it either a
Paſſe-time, or Waste-time, as pleaſeth
you. Now, to returne to the Caſe we haue
in hand.
            The generall Queſtion hauing had
this paſſage (by Proclamation,The proceſſe and forme of proceeding in the Caſe of R. C. now in queſtion. by Commiſſion,
and by debating in Parliament)
remaineth yet without cōcluſion or iudgement:
And as euerie man abounds in his
owne ſence, ſo euery one is left to his owne
opinion; Specially thoſe that were not
ſatisfied with the graue Reſolution of
the Iudges in Parliament, which (although
ſome may tearme and accompt

as bare opinions) I muſt alwayes valew,
and eſteeme as a reall and abſolute iudgement.
Now, I ſay, this generall Queſtion
is reduced to two particular Caſes, and
is iudicially depending in two the higheſt
Courts of Iuſtice in this Realme; and that
is by one Complainant againſt ſeuerall
Defendants for the freehoulde and inheritance
of ſeuerall parcells of Land: and
(as M. Solicitor ſaid well) is a Caſe, not
fained, nor ſurmiſed, but a true Caſe betweene
true parties: And being Quaestio
iuris, non facti, is by both theſe Courts
adiourned hither to bee decided, and determined
by all the Iudges of England, as
the rareneſſe of the Caſe, and the weight
and importaunce of it, both for the preſent
and the future doth require.
            And the Caſe being of this nature and
qualitie, it is not amiſſe to obſerue the
proceeding in it: for, it is woorth the obſeruing,
and not to bee forgotten. The
Defendants counſell, men of great learning,
and in their profeſsion inferiour to

none of their qualitie and degree, men
conuerſant and well exerciſed in the Queſtion,
and ſuch as in the great conference
in parliament, moſt of them were ſpecially
ſelected & choſē (for ſo they wel deſerued)
as moſt ſufficient, able, and fit, as well for
Learning and Knowledge, as for all other
giftes of Witte and Nature, to handle ſo
great and rare a Queſtion. And although
it hath pleaſed them of their good diſcretion
to vſe the paines but of a few in the
debating and arguing of the Caſe at the
Barre: yet no doubt that was done vpon
mature deliberation and conference with
all the reſidue: And whatſoeuer the Spirites,
the Learning, the Wiſedome, and
Knowledge of all the others, vpon long
ſtudy could affoorde, was put into the
mouth of thoſe few to ſerue as Organs
and Inſtruments to deliuer it vnto vs;
which they haue ſo well and ſufficiently
performed, that they deſerue great praiſe
and commendation: For, in my poore
opinion, the witte of man could not deuiſe

to ſay more touching this Queſtion
in Lawe than they haue ſaied. And whatſoeuer
hath beene ſithence ſpoken for that
part, it is for the Matter but the ſame in
ſubſtance, which the counſell at the Barre
did deliuer; though it hath beene varied
in forme, and amplified with other
wordes and phraſes, and furniſhed with
ſhew of ſome other ſtrained Caſes and authorities.
            The handling of it by the learned and
reuerend Iudges, hath beene ſuch, as it
may appeare to the world, that euerie
one hath ſpoken his owne heart and conſcience;
and hath laboured by long ſtudie
to ſearch out the Lawe and the true reaſon
of the Lawe in this rare Caſe; and ſo
they haue ſpoken, as Coram Deo & Angelis:
None, with deſire to ſeeme popular; for
nothing ought to bee tam populare quam
veritas: None to ſeeme to be Time-ſeruers,
or Men pleaſers; for the King (whome
vnder God they ſerue) being Pater patriae,
and ſoueraigne head of both theſe great

vnited Kingdomes, is to them both, like
as the head of a naturall body is to all the
Members of the ſame, and is not, nor can
not bee partiall more to one than to an other.
Hee deliteth in truth, and deſireth
it; and without truth hee can not bee
pleaſed. Hee ruleth by his Lawe, and
commaundeth his Iudges to miniſter to
all his Subiects Lawe and Iuſtice ſincerely,
and truely; and equally and indifferently,
without any partiall reſpect.
            It was neuer ſeene, but that in all rare
and difficult Caſes, there haue beene diuerſitie
of Opinions; but yet without
breach of Charitie, which is the Bond
of Vnitie. So it hath happened in this
Caſe. The Caſe hath beene argued at
large by foureteene learned Iudges;
twelue of them haue concurred in iudgement,
but vpon ſeuerall reaſons: for, as
many wayes may leade to one end of the
iourney; ſo diuerſe and ſeuerall reaſons
may conduce to one true and certaine
concluſion.
            
               
And here I may not omit the woorthie
memorie of the late graue and reuerend
Iudge, Sir Iohn Popham, chiefe Iuſtice of
the Kings Bench deceaſed (a man of great
wiſedome, and of ſingular learning and
iudgement in the Lawe) who was abſolutely
of the ſame opinion, as he often declared,
as well in open Parliament, as otherwiſe.
            The Apoſtle Thomas doubted of the
Reſurrection of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt,
when all the reſt of the Apoſtles did firmly
beleeue it: But that his doubting confirmed,
in the whole Church, the Faith of
the Reſurrection.
            The two woorthy and learned Iudges
that haue doubted in this Caſe, as they
beare his Name, ſo I doubt not but their
doubting hath giuen occaſion to cleare
the doubt in others; and ſo to confirme
in both the Kingdomes, both for the
Preſent and the Future, the truth of the
iudgement in this Caſe.
            
               
Thus, my Lords, haue you hitherto nothing
from mee but Amen, to that which all
the Iudges (ſauing two) haue ſaied; and
much more you cannot expect from mee:
Yet, ſince I muſt giue iudgement in this
Caſe; and I ſaied in the beginning, that I
would render the reaſons of my iudgement:
(for that is the courſe of argument
I muſt houlde) I will now deliuer vnto
you, what are the ſpeciall and principall
reaſons that firſt haue induced mee, and
ſtill mooue mee to houlde the opinion
that I doe: And as I goe, I will indeuour
to cleere ſome doubts and queſtions, that
partly in the conference in Parliament,
and partly otherwiſe, I haue heard made;
not onely touching this Caſe it ſelfe, but
alſo touching the forme and manner how
it is to be decided and iudged.
            The Caſe is rare,How this Caſe is to be iudged, and by what Law. and new (as it hath
beene often ſaied) it was neuer decided
Terminis terminantibus; It was neuer iudged
by any Statute Lawe, which is a poſitiue

Lawe; nor by iudgement of the Iudges
of the common Lawe.
            Now, the firſt Queſtion is (as ſome
would haue it) How it is to be iudged,
and by what Lawe; and haue wiſhed that
it might haue ſtayed vntill the Parliament,
and ſo bee decided by Parliament.
They that make this doubt, I will let them
demurre, and die in their doubts: For,
the Caſe beeing adiourned hither before
all the Iudges of England, is now to be iudged
by them according to the common
Lawe of England; and not tarrie for a Parliament:
For, it is no tranſcendent Queſtion,
but that the common Lawe can
and ought to rule it, and ouer-rule it, as
Iuſtice Williams ſaid well.
            But then this Queſtion produceth another;What is the common Law of England: & whether it be Ius ſcriptum
                That is, What is the Common
Lawe of England; Whether it be Ius ſcriptum,
or non ſcriptum; and ſuch other like
niceties: For, wee haue in this Age ſo
many Queſtioniſts;Questionists and Quo modo and
Quare, are ſo common in moſt mens

mouthes, that they leaue neither Religion,
nor Lawe, nor King nor Counſell,
nor Policie, nor Gouernment out of queſtion.
            And the end they haue in this Queſtion,
What is the Common Lawe? is to
ſhake and weaken the ground and principles
of all gouernement: And in this particular
Queſtion of the Law of England, to
ouerthrow that Law whereby this Realme
hath many hundred yeares beene gouerned
in all honour and happineſſe: or at
leaſt to caſt an aſperſion vpon it, as
though it were weake and vncertaine. I
will therefore declare mine opinion in
this point plainely and confidently, as I
thinke in my conſcience, and as I finde to
be ſufficiently warranted by ancient Writers,
and good authorities voide of all exception.
            The common Law of England is grounded
vpon the Law of God,The ground of the Common Law. and extendes it
ſelfe to the originall Lawe of Nature, and
the vniuerſall Lawe of Nations.
            
               
               When it reſpects the Church, it is
called Lex Eccleſiae Anglicanae, as Magna
Charta ca. 1. Eccleſia Anglicana habeat omnia
ſua iura integra & illaeſa.
            When it reſpects the Crowne, and the
King, it is ſometimes called Lex Coronae,
as in Stat. 25. Edw. 3. cap. 1. Lex Coronae Angliae
est & ſemper fuit &c. And it is ſometimes
called Lex Regia, as in Registro fo 61.
Ad iura Regia ſpectat: And, Ad conſeruationem
iurium Coronae nostrae, & ad iura Regia
ne depereant &c.
            
            
               When it reſpectes the common ſubiects,
it is called, Lex Terrae; as in Magna
Charta ca. 29. Niſi per legale iudicium parium,
vel per legem Terrae.
            Yet,The common Law is not originally Lex ſcripta.
                in all theſe Caſes, whether it reſpectes
the Church, the Crowne, or the
Subiects, it is comprehended vnder this
generall tearme; The common Lawes of
England: Which although they bee for a
great parte thereof reduced into writing;
yet they are not originally Leges ſcriptae.
            
            This I firſt learned of the late Lord Treaſurer

               Burleigh (whoſe Honourable memorie
England can neuer forget) and hearing
it from him, I indeuored by my priuate
ſtudie to ſatisfie my ſelfe thorowlie
in it. And, whoſoeuer ſhall well conſider
the Lawes of England, which were before
the Conqueſt (whereof wee haue
ſome Remnants and Patches) or ſince
the Conqueſt vntill Magna Charta, Anno 9.
H. 3. will make little doubt of it.
            
               In H. 2. time Glanuile writeth thus; Leges
Anglicanas licèt non ſcriptas, leges appellari
non videtur abſurdum.
            
               And in Hen. 3. time Bracton writeth
thus; Cùm autem ferè in omnibus Regionibus
vtantur legibus & iure ſcripto, ſola Anglia vſa
est in ſuis finibus iure non ſcripto & conſuetudine;
in ea quidem, ex non ſcripto Ius venit
quod vſus comprobauit.
            
               But I may not agree with Bracton, that
Sola Anglia vſa est iure non ſcripto: For I find
that the graueſt, and the greateſt learned
Writers of the Ciuile Lawe, both auncient

and of this our time, doe hould the ſame
opinion, touching the Ciuile Lawe it ſelfe,
for thus they write: Ex non ſcripto Ius venit
quod vſus approbauit. And thus; Ius Ciuile
dictum ex non ſcripto natum est. And; Ius
non ſcriptum dicitur Conſuetudo, non quod
ſcripto perpetuò careat, hoc enim falſum est.
Nam & Conſuetudines in memoriam conſtantiorem
reducuntur in Scripturam, vt caetera
quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                quae ſine ſcriptura perficiuntur: Sed non
ſcriptum ius est: id est, quòd à ſcriptura vis eius
non coepit nec pendeat. So, hereby it may
appeare how in this wee concurre with the
Ciuile Lawe.
            
            But hereupon theſe Queſtioniſts moue
an other Queſtion,How the common Law of England may be knowne. 
               viz. If the common
Lawe be not written,Obiect. how then ſhall it be
knowen?
            To this I aunſwer;Reſponſ. It is the common
cuſtome of the Realme (as Bracton ſaieth,
Ius venit quod vſus comprobauit:) And it

ſtandeth vpon two maine pillers & principall
parts, by which it is to bee learned
and knowen.
            The firſt is,Maximes and Principles. certaine knowne principles
and Maximes, and ancieut Cuſtomes,
againſt which there neuer hath beene, nor
ought to bee any diſpute. As in Caſes of
Subiects; an eſtate in Fee-ſimple, for life,
for yeeres, Dower, Curteſie &c.
            In Caſes of the Crowne, the Female to
inherite: the Eldeſt ſole to bee preferred:
No reſpect of Halfe Blood: No tenant
in Dower, or by the Courteſie of the
Crowne: No diſabilitie of the Kings perſon
by infancie &c.
            The ſecond is,Reſponſa prudentum. where there be no ſuch
Principles, then, former iudgements giuen
in like Caſes: And theſe be but Arbitria
Iudicum, & Reſponſa Prudentum, receiued,
allowed, and put in practiſe and execution
by the Kings authoritie.
            
               
               Of theſe Bracton ſpeaketh; Ego H. de
Bracton animum erexi ad vetera Iudicia iuſtorum
perſcrutanda; facta ipſorum, Conſilia,
& Reſponſa in vnam ſummam redigendo compilaui.
            And before the Conqueſt, King Ethelbert
cauſed a Booke to bee made, which
was called Decreta Iudiciorum: And king
Alured did the like,Lambard in explicatione verbi Hyde. as maſter Lambard a iudicious
and learned obſeruer of Antiquities,
doth remember.
            
               Of theſe alſo the Iudges ſpeake H. 33.
H. 6. Moyle, fo. 8. We rule the Law according
to the auncient courſe. Aſhton, fol. 9. All our
Lawe is guided by Vſe, and by Statute. And
Pryſot ſaieth, fol. 9. There cannot be a poſitiue
Law, but ſuch as was iudged or made by Statute.
Wherein I note alſo that hee equalleth
a Iudgement with a Statute.
            
            
               In 36. H. 6. fol. 25. Forteſcue reaſoneth
thus; The Lawe is as I haue ſaid, and ſo hath
beene alwaies ſince the Lawe beganne.
            
               In 37. H. 6. f. 22. Aſcue reaſons thus; Such
a Charter hath bin allowable in the time of our

Predeceſſours, which were as ſage and learned
as we be.
            
               In H. 4. Edw. 4. fol. 41. Markham reaſoneth
thus; It is good for vs to doe as it hath
bin vſed before this time, and not to keepe one
way one day for one party, and another day the
contrary for the other party: And ſo the former
Precedents be ſufficient for vs to follow: And
iudgement was giuen accordingly.
            
            
               And in the former Caſe 36. H. 6.
               Anno 36. H. 6. Forteſcue
ſaith further; Wee haue many Courſes
and Formes which be houlden for Lawe.
            Alſo euerie one of theſe foure principall
Courts, The Chauncery, Kings Bench,
Common-plees, and Eſchequer, haue in
many things ſeuerall courſes and formes
which are obſerued for Law, and that not
onely in that proper Court, but alſo in all
Courtes through the Realme; whereof
many Examples bee remembred in the
Caſe of the Mines in Plowdens Commentaries.
            
            The third:In nouo caſu nouum remedium. But if there be no ſuch former

Iudgements, nor direct Examples or
Precedents, then this Rule hath a further
extention, which is this.
            
               There is a Rule in the common Lawe,
that in nouo caſu nouum remedium eſt apponē
               dum.
Et concordent Clerici de Breue faciendo,
ita quod nullus recedat à Cancellaria ſine remedio.
For the Chācery is properly Officina Iuſtitiae
& AEquitatis; where all original writs
(which in ancient times were the Grounds
of all Suites) are deuiſed and framed. And
theſe Clerici were graue and auncient men;
skilfull, & long experienced in the courſe
of the Chancerie; and called Clerici de prima
forma: And of late time Magistri Cancellariae;
who in new and ſtrange caſes, beſides
their owne knowledge and experience,
had oftentimes conference with the graue
Iudges for the deuiſing and framing of
new Writtes when neede required. And
this I take to bee the ſame which is in the
Statute W. 2. cap. 24.St. W. 2. ca. 24. Et quotieſcun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                de caetero
euenerit in Cancellaria,Anno 13. Ed. 1. quod in vno caſu

reperitur breue, & in conſimili caſu, cadēte ſub
eodem iure & ſimili indigente remedio, non reperitur,
Concordent Clerici de Cancellaria in
breui faciendo, vel atterminent querentes in
proximum Parliamentum: Et ſcribantur caſus
in quibus concordare non poſſunt, & referant
eos ad proximum parliamentum: Et de conſenſu
Iuriſperitorum fiat Breue, ne contingat
de caetero, quòd Curia Regis deficiat conquerentibus
in Iusticia perquirenda.
            Wherein I note theſe three thinges:
Firſt, The Clerkes are to agree; and if
they agree, that is an end, and ſtandes
for Lawe, and then no referrement to the
Parliament. Second, If the Clerks agree
not, and ſo the Caſe be referred to the Parliament;
Then De Conſenſu Iuriſperitorum
fiat Breue: So Conſenſus Iuriſperitorum is the
Rule, and not the multitude of vulgar opinions.
The third is, That Iuſtice faile not
them which complaine: Which will often
faile, if you ſtay vntill a Parliament:
For Parliaments are not to be called for the
wrong of a few priuate Subiects: but for

the great and vrgent affaires of the King
and the Realme.
            
               I finde alſo a like Rule in the Ciuile
Lawe;
               Vbi non eſt directa Lex &c. Vbi non est directa lex ſtandum est arbitrio
Iudicis, vel producēdum ad ſimilia. And
another ſaith, De ſimilibus ad ſimilia iudicium
& argumentatio recipiuntur.
            4 Beſides theſe,Rex ſolus iudicat, &c. there is an other
generall and certaine Rule in the Ciuile
Lawe, which I reſerue to the laſt parte of
that which I meane to ſpeake in this Matter.
            So, leauing that vnto a more proper
place, I will hereupon conclude, That
if there bee no former Iudgements, nor
Examples, nor Precedents to bee found,
then Concordia Clericorum, & Arbitrium Iudicum
is to ſeeke out the true and ſolide
reaſon; and thereupon to ground their
Iudgements in all new Caſes: For it was
truely ſaide by a learned Gentleman of the
lower Houſe, Deficiente lege recurrendum eſt
ad conſuetudinem: Deficiente conſuetudine recurrendum

ad rationem. And ſo from the
Iudges we ſhall haue Reſponſa prudentum to
decide all ſuch new Caſes and Queſtions.
And according to this Rule, all ſuch new
doubts and queſtions haue beene reſolued
and decided by the graue Iudges in former
times.
            But here,A requeſt to the profeſſors of the Ciuile Lawe. before I proceede further, I
am to make a ſuite, which is this:
            That whatſoeuer I haue ſpoken, or
ſhall happen to ſpeake of the Ciuile Lawe;
or whatſoeuer I ſhall cite out of any Writer
of that Lawe, I pray fauour my Maſters
that profeſſe it. I acknowledge that
Lawe to be auncient and generall in many
parts of the world; and I reuerence the
profeſſors of it, as men of great learning,
wiſedome, and iudgement. I profeſſe it
not; I haue learned little of it; but in that
little I haue found that in the reall and eſſentiall
partes of Iuſtice, the Ciuile and
common Lawe doe in many things concurre,
though they differ much in the

forme and manner of proceeding. And
that which I ſhall haue occaſion to produce
of that Lawe, will bee to ſhew how
the common Law and Ciuile doe agree in
one reaſon and iudgement in thoſe things
which I ſhall ſpeake of.
            Yet I muſt take libertie to ſay, That
neither in Spaine, nor in France (thoſe two
great Monarchies) it is not generally receiued
nor allowed as a concluding and binding
Law.
            They take there the reaſon of it onelie
as a directiō to their proceeding & iudgement:
But to produce or alleadge it as a
concluding or binding Law, was no leſſe
than Capitis poena.
            
            
               This I make not of my ſelfe; for, beſides
common practiſe and experience, I
haue an honeſt and ſubſtantiall witneſſe,
Maſter Adam Blacwood a Scottiſhman,
               Blacwood ca. 10 
               a
man of ſingular learning in the Ciuile
Lawe, who defendeth in like manner the
Lawes of Scotland, as appeareth in his
learned Booke intituled, Pro Regibus Apologia,

               written by him againſt a ſeditious
Dialogue or Libell made by George Buchanan,
De iure regni apud Scotos, where he tells
him, Aliud Sceptrum, aliud Plectrum. But it is
not amiſſe to recite his owne words, which
are thus; Philippus cognomento Pulcher, cùm
Lutetiae ſupremae iuriſdictionis curiam institueret,
eam Romano iure ſolutam esse declarauit
in eam
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſententiam vetus extat eius Curiae decretum,
ne cauſarum patroni Romanarum Legum
auctoritatem patriae legibus opponant. Sed
cùm illae bono & aequo niti videntur & probabilem
vtilitatis publicae cauſam continere, nos
earum vtimur haud imperio, ſed ratione cui
omnes homines naturae praeſcripto ſubijciuntur.
Quin etſi quid aduerſus rationem legum Romanarum
perperàm ac temerè iudicatum eſt, id
earum multis poenis haud aestimatur, ſed vel
Principis, vel ſuperioris magistratus arbitratu.
Nam cùm in publici muneris partem admittimur,
& conceptis verbis inauguramur, ſolemni
ſacramento regiarum & municipialium
legum at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                morum obſeruationem, nulla Romani
iuris mentione, ſpondemus. Apud Hiſpanos

capitis poenam ijs indictam legimus qui Romanarum
legum auctoritatem vel in foro laudarent,
vel in puluere ſcholastico profiter entur.
Sed ſi quid occurreret patrijs legibus ac moribus
indefinitum quod iudicanti religionem adferret,
vnicum erat eximendo ſcrupulo regis
conſulendi remedium. Alaricus Toloſae regnans,
idem Gothis imperauit, vt ſi quis aduerſus ipſius
leges, Ciuile Romanorum ius citaret, temerè
factum morte lueretur.
            Now to returne to that which I haue
touched before,Recurrend▪ ad Rationem &c. I ſay, that when there
is no direct Lawe, nor preciſe Example,
we muſt Recurrere ad rationē,
               Quod non lego non credo. 
               & ad reſponſa
prudentum: For, although Quod non lego, non
credo, may bee a true and certaine rule in
Diuinitie; yet for interpretation of Lawes,
it is not alwaies ſo: For wee muſt diſtinguiſh
betweene fidem moralem, and fidem
diuinam, or elſe wee ſhall conſound many
things in the ciuile and politike gouernement
of Kingdomes and States. For, the
firſt Precedent which wee haue now, had
no precedent when it began; But as Tacitus
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
ſaith, Quae nunc vetustiſsima creduntur
noua fuerunt, & quod hodie exemplis tuemur,
inter exempla futurum est. And to thoſe
that hould, that nothing is to bee done
but by former Examples, Horace ſpeaketh
thus; O imitatores ſeruum pecus: And Cicero
ſaith, Non exempla maiorum quaerenda, ſed
confilium est eorum à quibus exempla nata
ſunt explicandum.
            
            Thus hath Iuſtice beene duely adminiſtred
in England, and thereby the Kings
haue ruled, the people haue beene gouerned,
and the Kingdome hath flouriſhed
for many hundred yeeres; and then no
ſuch buſie Queſtioniſts moued any quarrell
againſt it.
            Thus haue all doubts growing vpon
Magna Charta,
               Expoſition of Statutes. and Charta de Foresta,
made in King Henry the thirds time, and
vpon the Statutes of Westmin. 1. Westm. 2.
Westm. 3. and many other Statutes made
in Ed. 1. time: And vpon Praerogatiua Regis,
and many other Statutes made in Ed.
2. time, beene from time to time expounded;

and ſo of later times, the Statutes
of Fines, of Vſes, of Willes, and many
moe.
            Thus alſo haue all Doubts and Caſes,Expoſition of Lawes.
whereof there was no Statute or Poſitiue
Lawe, beene alwaies expounded: for ſuch
are moſt of the caſes which wee haue in
our Yeere-Bookes, and Bookes of Reports,
which are in effect nothing but Reſponſa prudentum,
as Iuſtice Crooke did truely
ſay.
            Vpon this reaſon it is,Lawes obſolete. that ſome lawes,
as well Statute Lawe, as common Law, are
obſolete and worne out of vſe: for, all humane
lawes are but Leges temporis: And
the wiſedome of the Iudges found them
to bee vnmeete for the time they liued in,
although very good and neceſſarie for the
time wherein they were made. And therefore
it is ſaide, Leges humanae naſcuntur, vigent,
& moriuntur, & habent ortum, ſtatum,
& occaſum.
            
            By this Rule alſo,Lawes changed. and vpon this reaſon
it is, that oftentimes auncient Lawes are

changed by interpretation of the Iudges,
as well in Caſes criminall as ciuile.
            In criminall caſes the Law was Voluntas
reputabitur pro facto; but it is not ſo now,
ſauing in treaſon onely.
            
               In an appeale of Maime Britton fol. 48.
ſaith, Soit le Iudgement, que il perde autiel
member, come il auer tolle a le plaintife; but
it is not ſo now.
            
            In auncient time, one preſent, aiding,
comforting, and aſsiſting to a murder,
was taken to bee no principall, but an acceſſorie,
as it appeareth M. 40. Edw. 3. fol.
42. & 40. li. Aſſ. p. 8. & p. 25. But now in
that caſe hee is iudged a principall. And
ſo it was ruled by all the Iuſtices M. 4. H. 7.
18. and ſo Plowden affirmeth the Lawe to
be, in his Commentaries fol. 99. & 100.
            
            In ciuile cauſes in auncient time, the
Lawe was houlden, That hee in Remainder
in Taile could not haue an action of
Waſte, nor bee receiued vpon default of
tenant for life: But afterwards, the Lawe
was often iudged otherwiſe; and ſo is

the common experience and practiſe at
this day.
            In Anno 40. Ed. 3. 28. Fynchden, chiefe
Iuſtice of the common place, ſaith, that
in ancient time the Vicar could not haue
an Action againſt the Parſon; But hee
ſaieth the contrarie is vſed at this day,
which is the better.
            In ancient time a Diſſeiſee could not
enter vpon the feoffee of the Diſſeiſor, for
ſauing of the warranty; but for many
yeeres the Lawe hath beene houlden otherwiſe,
and ſo the common practiſe
yet remaineth.
            By this Rule it is alſo,Conſtruction of words. that words are
taken and conſtrued, ſometimes by Extenſion;
ſometimes by Reſtriction; ſometimes
by Implication; ſometimes a Diſiunctiue
for a Copulatiue; a Copulatiue for a
Diſiunctiue; the preſent tenſe for the future;
the future for the preſent; ſometimes
by equity out of the reach of the wordes;
ſometime words take in a contrary ſence;
ſometime figuratiuely, as Continens pro contento,
               
and many other like: And of all
theſe, examples be infinite, as well in the
ciuile lawe as common lawe:
            And oftentimes the reuerend Iudges
haue had a graue regarde in their proceeding,Iudges conſulted with the priuie Counſell.
that before they would reſolue, or
giue iudgement in ſuch new Caſes, they
deſired to conſult with the Kings priuie
Counſell; as appeareth in diuerſe Caſes
in King Edward the third his time.
            
               R. VV. aſſaulted Adam Brabſon in preſence
of the Iuſtices of Aſsiſe at VVincheſter,
               39. E. 3 li. Aſ. p. 1.
for which A. B. complained by Bill
before the ſaid Iuſtices, alledging this
offence to bee in deſpite of the King and
his Iuſtices, to his dammage of an hundred
pounds. R. VV. pleaded, Not guiltie;
and was found guiltie, and dammages
taxed to tenne pounds. Thereupon
the Iudges awarded him to priſon in the
Sherifes keeping. And for the Fine, and
that which ſhould be further done for the
King; for the aſſault done in the preſence
of the Iudges, they would haue the aduiſe

of the Kings Counſell:M. 19. Ed. 3. Iudgemēt 174 For in a like
caſe, becauſe R. C. did ſtrike a Iurour at
VVestminster, which paſſed in an Enqueſt
againſt one of his friends; It was adiudged
by all the Counſell, that his right
hand ſhould be cut off; and his lands and
goods forfeited to the King. Theſe be the
words in the Booke.
            In this caſe I note three things.
            
               1. The Iudges conſulted with the
Counſell.
               2. They haue a like caſe before
when the Counſell was alſo conſulted
with, viz. Anno 19. E. 3. and yet they would
not proceede in this caſe before they had
againe conſulted with the Counſell.
               3. That before Anno 19. Edw. 3. there
was no like caſe nor precedent for ſuch a
Iudgement; And therefore the Iudges
would not of themſelues pronounce that
heauy iudgement before they had conferred
with the Counſell touching the
ſame. And after they had the opinion

and aduiſe of the Kings Counſell, they
proceeded to that Iudgement.
            
            
               Thomas Vghtred Knight brought a
Forme-done againſt a poore man and his
wife;M. 39. Ed. 3. 35 They came and yeelded to the Demaundant,
which ſeemed ſuſpitious to
the Court: whereupon they examined
the Matter, and ſtaied Iudgement, becauſe
it was ſuſpitious. And Thorpe ſaide,
that in the like Caſe of Giles Blacket it was
ſpoken of in Parliament: And wee were
commaunded, that when any like Caſe
ſhould come, we ſhould not go to iudgement
without good aduiſe. Wherefore
ſue to the Counſell, and as they will haue
vs to doe, wee will; and otherwiſe not,
in this Caſe.
            
               Greene and Thorpe were ſent by the
Iudges to the Kings Counſel (where there
were 24. Biſhops and Earles) to demand
of them,M. 40. Ed. 3. 34 whether by the Statute 14. Ed. 3.
ca. 6. a word may be amended in a Writ,

aſwel as a letter or a ſillable: for, the ſtatute
ſpeakes but of a letter or a ſillable; & it was
anſwered, That it may well be amended:
For, there cannot be a Word without a
Sillable; and that it was a nice queſtion of
ſo ſage men.
            Thus Arbitria Iudicum, and Reſponſa
prudentum haue beene receiued, allowed,
and reuerenced in all times as Poſitiue
Lawe; and ſo it muſt be ſtill; For, otherwiſe
much miſchiefe and great inconuenience
will enſue: for new Caſes happen
euery day: No lawe euer was, or euer can
be made that can prouide remedie for all
future caſes; or cōprehend all circumſtances
of humane actions which Iudges are
to determine: Therfore, when ſuch happen,
and complaint is made; what ſhall
Iudges doe? Shall they giue no remedie
to the partie grieued? Shall they ſtay for
a Parliament?Iudges to be directed by reaſon and diſcretion. 
               Interim patitur iuſtus. They
muſt therefore follow Dictamen rationis;
and ſo giue ſpeedie iuſtice. And in many

matters of materiall circumſtauces
they muſt guide themſelues by diſcretion.
            As in iudging vpon Preſumptions; To
diſcerne which be Preſumptiones temerariae,
which Probabiles, which violentae.
            
            So for Time; what is a conuenient
Time, and what not.
            So for Waſte; what is Waſte puniſhable,
and what not.
            So for Tenders of money; what is a
conuenient place for tender of mony, and
what not: and what is a lawfull Tender,
and what not.
            So for Diſparagement; what is a diſparagement,
and what not: And ſo of
other the like caſes, which are infinite.
            If it be ſaid (for ſo ſome haue ſaid) That
if this be thus,Obiect. then the common Lawe of
England is vncerten;That the common Lawe is vncerten. and ſo the rule of Iuſtice,
by which the people are gouerned,
is too pliable, and too weake, and vncerten.
            
               
By the ſame reaſon it may be ſaid,Reſponſ. That
all the Lawes of all Nations are vncerten:
For, in the Ciuile Lawe, which is taken to
be the moſt vniuerſall and generall Lawe
in the world, they hould the ſame rule
and order in all caſes which be out of the
direct words of the Lawe; and ſuch caſes
be infinite: For, as I ſaide, new caſes
ſpring euery day as malice and fraude increaſeth.
And ſince the Roman Impire
beganne, moſt of their Lawes bee either
Edicta Principum, or Arbitria Iudicum, or Reſponſa
prudentum. And in their Iudgements
they are guided by Arreſts and former
Iudgements, as may appeare in the Books
of many that haue collected ſuch Arreſts.
And they attribute ſo much to ſuch former
Iudgements, That as Pryſot equalleth
them to a Poſitiue Lawe, ſo they
hould, that Sententia facit Ius, & res iudicata
pro veritate accipitur, & legis interpretatio legis
vim obtinet.
            
            Nay (which is more vncerten) ſometimes
they relie vpon Doctours opinions

deliuered in their Prelections and Treatiſes.
And when they finde them varying,
and differing one from another (as ſometimes
they doe) then they preferre that
which is Communior opinio: And ſo in good
reaſon they may: For, Pluralitas idem ſentientium,
ſemper ſuperat; quia faciliùs inuenitur
quod à pluribus quaeritur.
            
            But to conclude this point, I would
aske of theſe Noueliſts, what they would
haue done in Sibill Belknappes caſe; if they
had liued in Henry the fourths time?
            Sir Robert Belknappe,
               M. 2. H. 4. 7. that reuerend and
learned Iudge, of whome ſundrie noble
and worthy perſons, and ſome now of
great & eminent place in England are deſcended,
was baniſhed out of the Realme,
(Relegatus in vaſconiam,) not for any deſert
or offence of his, but by the might of his
potent enemies, and malice of the time.
The Lady his wife continued in England;
ſhe was wronged; ſhe brought a Writ in
her owne Name alone, not naming her
Husband. Exception was taken againſt

it, becauſe her husband was liuing; and
it was adiudged good, and ſhee recouered:
and the Iudge Markeham ſaid;
            
               Ecce modo mirū quòd foemina fert breue regis,
               Non nominando virum coniunctū robore legis.
            
            Here was a rare and a new caſe, yet it
was not deferred vntill a Parliament: it
was iudged, and her wrong was righted
by the common Law of England, and that
Ex arbitrio Iudicum, & ex reſponſis prudentum;
and yet it was counted Mirum with an
Ecce.
            
            Now to apply this to R. Caluines caſe:
his caſe is rare and new, ſo was that: There
is no direct Law for him in preciſe and expreſſe
tearmes: There was neuer iudgement
before touching any borne in Scotland,
ſince King Iames beganne his happie
raigne in England: Hee is the firſt that is
brought in queſtion: So there was no
direct Lawe for Sibill Belknap to ſue in her
owne name without her husband, who

was then liuing: nay rather there was direct
Lawe againſt it; yet by the Lawe of
England ſhee had iudgement to recouer
with an Ecce modo mirum: So by the lawe
of England iudgement ought to bee giuen
for Robert Caluine, but not with an Ecce modo
mirum; but vpon ſtrong Arguments
deduced à ſimilibus, and ex dictamine rationis.
            
            But before I come to thoſe arguments,
I wil vſe a few words more touching ſome
Rules which I haue read for the interpretation
of lawes.
            There is a graue and learned Writer in
the Ciuile Lawe that ſetteth downe foure
waies & formes of interpretation of lawes:Note foure formes of interpretation of Lawes.
that is, firſt, Interpretatio historica; ſecondly,
Etymologica; thirdly, Analogica; fourthly,
Practica.
            
            In the Argument of this Caſe all theſe
formes haue beene vſed, and largely handled:
and the two firſt be thoſe that ſeeme
but light to me, and therefore in mine opinion

haue beene too much ſtoode vpon,
and ouer-weighed.
            For the Hiſtoricall interpretation,Historica. it
is alwaies darke, obſcure, and vncerten, of
what kingdome, countrey, or place ſoeuer
you ſpeake; I doe alwaies and onely except
the diuine Hiſtories written in the
Bible.
            Liuy ſaith, In tanta rerum vetustate multi
temporis errores implicantur.
            Saint Augustine ſpeaking of the ſuppoſed
Bookes of Henoch ſaieth, Libri isti ob
nimiam antiquitatem reijciuntur.
            
            Wherefore, for this parte let this ſuffice,
whether in the beginning there were
one or ſeuerall Kingdomes in great Britaine;
or one or ſeuerall Monarches and
Kings of theſe two great & famous Kingdomes
in great Britaine. The King our Soueraigne
is lawfully and lineally deſcended
of the firſt great Monarchs and Kings
of both the Kingdomes;Fergus. and that by ſo
long a continued line of lawfull diſcent,Inas. as

therein he exceedeth all the Kings that the
world now knoweth; and therefore to inquire
further of Hiſtoricall knowledge in
this Caſe, I hould it needeleſſe.
            For the Etymologicall interpretation,Etymologica
there hath beene very much ſaied, euen as
much as Wit and Art could deuiſe: There
haue beene alleadged manie Definitions,
Deſcriptions, Diſtinctions, Differences,
Diuiſions, Subdiuiſions, Alluſion of
wordes, Extenſion of wordes, Conſtruction
of words; and nothing left vnſearched
to finde what is Ligeantia, Allegiantia,
Fides, Obedientia, Subiectio, Subditi; And
who bee Aborigines, Indigenae, Alienigenae,
Aduenticij, Denizati, &c. And much of this
hath beene drawne out of ſome Writers
of the Ciuile Lawe; amongſt whome the
Etymologicall interpretation of the
words Ligeus, and Ligeantia, is as vncerten
and doubtfull, as it is with our common
Lawyers; And ſo vpon any of theſe there
cannot be any certen Rule found for Iudges

to iudge by, eſpecially in new and rare
Caſes.
            As for Definition, Vlpian teacheth vs,
Omnis definitio in iure Ciuili eſt periculoſa: and
it is ſaid, that Definitio est duplex: Propria,
quae constat ex genere, & differentia: Impropria,
quae & deſcriptio vocatur, & est quaelibet
rei deſignatio: So Definition and Deſcription
are often confounded, and both
vncerten. Then, ſince both be vncerten and
dangerous, I will leaue both, and ſeeke a
more certen Rule to iudge by.
            As for Etymologie of words, I agree
with him which ſaieth, It is Leuis & fallax,
& plerumque ridicula. It is a Pedant
Grammarians fault. Marcus Varro and
others haue beene noted for it. And
if you examine the Examples which
ſome doe bring, you will perceiue how
ridiculous and vaine it is. So this Rule
will not ſerue to finde out that which
wee ſeeke for: Theſe bee but Tendiculae
verborum, & Aucupationes ſyllabarum as one
calleth them: It may haue ſome vſe, and

ſerue a turne in Schooles, but it is too light
for iudgements in Lawe, and for the ſeates
of Iuſtice.
            
               Aquinas ſetteth downe a more certen
Rule, In vocibus videndum, non tàm à quo,
quàm ad quid ſumantur. And words ſhould
be taken Senſu currenti: for Vſe & Cuſtome
is the beſt Expoſitor both of Lawes and
Wordes, Quem penes arbitrium & ius &
norma loquendi.
            
            Wherefore, of the many and diuerſe
diſtinctions, diuiſions, and ſubdiuiſions,
that haue beene made in this Caſe, I will
ſay no more but, Confuſum est quicquid in
puluerem ſectum est: and will conclude with
Biſhop Iuel; A man may wander and miſſe his
way in Mists of Distinctions.
            
            Then leauing theſe Hiſtoricall and Etymologicall
interpretations,Ligeantia ſenſu currenti eſt vinculum fidei &c. and theſe
curious and ſubtile Diſtinctions and Diuiſions,
I ſay, Ligeantia, or Allegiantia vnderſtood
Senſu currenti, is vinculum fidei & obedientiae,
as Iuſtice Daniel ſaid well. And

hee that is borne in any of the Kings Dominions,
and vnder the Kings obedience,
is the Kings liege ſubiect, and borne Ad
fidem Regis (for that is the proper and ancient
word which the lawe of England hath
vſed; Ad fidem Regis Angliae, Ad fidem Regis
Franciae) and therefore hee cannot bee a
Stranger or Alien to the King, or in any of
his Kingdomes; and by conſequence, is
inhabled to haue lands in England, and to
ſue, and be ſued in any Reall action for the
ſame.
            And Ligeantia hath ſometimes a more
large Extenſion: For, hee that is an Alien
borne out of the kings Dominions, vnder
the obedience of another king, if hee
dwell in England, and be protected by the
king and his Lawes, hee oweth to the
king the duetie of Allegeance; and ſo hee is
Ligatus Regi, and Ligeus Regis: and if hee
commit treaſon, the Indictment ſhall bee
contra ligeantiae ſuae debitum, as it was in Shirley
the French-mans Caſe: yet is hee not
the Kings ſubiect: for, hee was not borne

               Ad fidem Regis; But, this is not that Ligeance
which wee muſt finde: For, in a true
and lawfull ſubiect, there muſt bee Subiectio,
fides, & obedientia; and thoſe cannot
bee ſeuered, no more than true Faith and
Charitie in a true Chriſtian. And hee that
hath theſe three à natiuitate, is Ligeus Regis,
and can not bee a Stranger or Alien to the
King, or in his Kingdomes. And that
it is ſo, may be proued by the Rule of the
other two interpretations of Lawe; That
is,Analogica. 
               Analogica, & Practica.
            
            King Iames hath now the Kingdomes
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Iſles of Gernſey, and Ierſey by diſcent; all
theſe bee his Dominions, and vnder his
ſubiection and obedience.
            King Henry the ſecond had England and
Normandy by diſcent, from his mother
Mawd the Empreſſe; and Aniow, and Maine
by diſcent from his father Geffery Plantagenet;
and Ireland by conqueſt.
            
               Henry the third had England and Ireland
               
by diſcent from his Grand-father Henry
the ſecond: and Aquitany by diſcent from
his Grand-Mother Queene Elenor wife to
King Henry the ſecond, and daughter to
the duke of Aquitany.
            
            
               Edward the firſt had all the ſame by
diſcent; and parte of Scotland by Conqueſt.
            
               Edward the ſecond, and Edward the
third had all the ſame by diſcent alſo:
and beſides, Edward the third claimed all
France by diſcent from his mother Queene
Iſabell, and had the moſt part of it in poſſeſsion;
and ſo had Henry the fift and Henry
the ſixt alſo.
            Now if in theſe kings times, ſubiectes
borne in thoſe Countries, being then vnder
their obedience, vvere no Aliens, but
capable of landes in England: And if at
this time ſubiects borne in Irelād, or Gernſey,
and Ierſey be no Aliens, but capable of
lands in England; then, by an Analogicall
interpretation, why ſhould not ſubiectes
borne in Scotland be at this time in like degree?

For, in proportion, and in likeneſſe,
and conueniencie, there can bee no difference
at all.
            But whether the ſubiects borne in thoſe
Countries in the time of thoſe kings vvere
then capable of lands in England as naturall
ſubiects;Practica: & ſic ad ſimilia. or were deemed Aliens, is the
Queſtion: and therein Interpretatio practica
is to bee conſidered; and ſo the Caſe
is brought to be examined per ſimilia. And
in Diuinitie Praxis ſanctorum est interpres
praeceptorum.
            
            Now then the Queſtion is, Whether
the kings Subiects of England and Scotland,
that be Post-nati, may be reſembled to the
Kings ſubiects of Ireland, and the Iſles of
Gerneſey, &c. as now they bee: and to
the ſubiectes of Normandie, Aniow, and
Gaſcoyne, and parte of Scotland in former
times, when the ſame were the Dominions,
and vnder the obedience of the King
of England: (for I ſpeake alwaies, and
would be vnderſtoode of kingdomes and

dominions in poſſeſsion, and vnder obedience,
and not of thoſe whereunto
the King hath right, but hath no poſſeſſion
or obedience.) I houlde, that in all
points materiall concerning this Queſtion
they are alike, though not in all things:
(for, then it were Idem, and not Simile:)
and this can not bee better vnderſtoode,
than by examining the Obiections to the
contrary: which in ſubſtance may bee reduced
to foure in number.
            Firſt for Ireland,
               Ireland. it was gotten by Conqueſt,Obiect. 1.
and the Conquerour may impoſe
what Lawes hee will vpon them: But it
is otherwiſe of kingdomes comming by
diſcent.
            This is a conceipted difference,Reſponſ. and
lacks the foundation of Reaſon, and hath
not the true parts of a difference: for thoſe
that are borue in Ireland, and thoſe that
are borne in Scotland, are all alike for their
birth within the Kings Dominions, and

are borne vnder the like ſubiection and obedience
to the King, and haue the like
bond; Nay, euen the ſame bond of Allegiance;
That is, they are borne Ad fidem
Regis.
            
            Beſides, where it is ſaid, The Conquerour
may impoſe what Lawes hee will:
Then conſider how it was in the Interim
before King Iohn gaue lawes to Ireland.
            
            Nay, which is more, I aske whether
the Conquerour of Ireland can giue new
lawes to England, and make Iriſh men to
bee as naturall borne ſubiectes in England
(if their birth-right doe not giue it them)
which before the Conqueſt they were
not? for, that is properly the Queſtion:
But if any difference bee, the Caſe of deſcent
is the ſtronger: For, (as Iuſtice Yeluerton
ſaide) that is by an vndoubted Title
made by lawe; the other by a doubtfull
Title wonne by the Sword.
            But leaue Ireland gotten by Conqueſt;France.
vvhat ſay you to the great kingdome of

               France; which Edward the third had firſt
in right by lawfull deſcent, and after in
poſſeſsion by triumphant Conqueſt; and
vvhich Henry the ſixt held after in poſſeſsion
by deſcent? Was euer doubt made,
Whether the ſubiects borne there ſo long
as it vvas in ſubiection and obedience to
the King, vvere capable of landes in England?
            
            I vvill now turne the Caſe, and aske an
other Queſtion; If King Iames our Soueraigne
had firſt beene King of England by
lavvfull deſcent (as novv hee is) and after
Scotland had deſcended vnto him, ſhould
not the Subiects of Scotland (I ſpeake ſtill
of Post-nati) haue beene iudged as Naturall
ſubiects in England, as thoſe of France
were in Edward the thirds time?
            Then, he hauing now both kingdomes
by lineall, true, and lavvfull deſcent, it can
make no difference touching the capacitie
of Subiects, vvhich kingdome deſcended
to him firſt, and vvhich ſecond; but
both are to him alike. And it is cleere,

               Post-nati in England are now capable and
inheritable in Scotland, though ſome haue
made a cauſeleſſe and needeleſſe doubt
of it: and ſo on the other ſide thoſe of
Scotland are in England.
            
            It is ſaid,Normandy and Aquitany. 
               Normandie and Aquitanie were
no monarchies or kingdomes,Obiect. 2. but dukedomes
or ſeigniories in France, and holden
of the Crowne of France, and therefore not
to bee reſembled to Scotland, which is an
ancient and abſolute kingdome.
            This Obiection reacheth not to the
reaſon of our Queſtion:Reſponſ. For, bee they
kingdomes, bee they Seigniories, yet the
ſubiectes borne there, were borne out of
the kingdome of England, and ſo in that reſpect
Aliens: But in that they were borne
within the kings dominions, and vnder
his ſubiection and obedience, they were
no Aliens but liege and naturall borne
ſubiectes to the King; and ſo capable and
inheritable in England.
            
            
               
I ſay beſides, the Dukes of Normandie
and Aquitany were abſolute Princes, and
had ſoueraigne power in thoſe countries,
although they did not beare the name of
kings; as at this time the Duke of Sauoy;
the duke of Florence; the Duke and State
of Venice; and of late, the great Duke of
Ruſsia; the Duke of Burgundy; the Archduke
of Austria, &c.
            So the difference in Stile and Name
makes no difference in Soueraignty: For,
king Henry the eight had as abſolute ſoueraignetie
in Ireland, vvhen his Stile was
Lord of Ireland, as when hee changed his
Stile, and was called, King of Ireland.
            
            And, to ſay, That the tenure of the
Crowne of Fraunce ſhould giue any priuiledge
to them of Normandie and Aquitanie
in England is a ſtrange conceipt; It might
rather bee obiected againſt them. But, as I
ſaied before, they were borne within the
kings Dominions, and vnder his obeiſance,
and therefore as ſubiects borne in
England.
            
            
               
And if men may beleeue ſome auncient
Stories, Aquitany and Normandy had ſometimes
kings, and were kingdoms of themſelues:
and not depending nor ſubiect to
the Crowne of France: and the kingdome
of France was then a ſmall portion of Gallia,
and but a little one, in compariſon of
that which it is at this day. And ſome ſay,
that there were foure and tvventie kings
in Gaule: But as the kings of France increaſed
in povver and ſtrength, they ſubdued
their neighbor-Princes, and ſo that kingdome
grew to that greatneſſe that novv it
is at; euen as the Heptarchie in England was
diſſolued, and made an intire kingdome,
when one of the kings mightier than the
reſt ſubdued his neighbors.
            It is ſaied further,The Crowne and great ſeale of England. that Normandy and Aquitany
vvere ſubiects to the Crovvne of
England;
               Obiect. 3. and to the great Seale of England;
but ſo is not Scotland: Ergo &c.
            
            This ſtandeth not wel with that whichReſponſ.
               
was obiected before; That they were but
Seigniories houlden of the Crowne of
Fraunce. And it is true, that before Edward
the thirds time, thoſe Kings of England
that held thoſe great Seigniories, did
acknowledge, that they held the ſame of
the Crowne of Fraunce.
            
            But theſe Obiections be light, and not
worth the time that hath beene ſpent about
them. The Soueraignetie is in the
perſon of the King; the Crowne is but an
Enſigne of Soueraignety; the Inueſture
and Coronation are but Ceremonies of
honour, and maieſtie: the King is an abſolute
and perfect king before he be crowned,
and without thoſe Ceremonies.
            The Seale is to be altered and changed
at the will and pleaſure of the King: hee
may haue one, hee may haue many, as
pleaſeth him. The King did vſe Queene
Elizabeths Seale, for diuerſe moneths after
his comming into England: Queene
Elizabeth vſed king Philips & queene Maries
Seale for a time; and queene Marie vſed

king Edwards ſeale. And all that vvas
ſo done, was well and lawfully done. Many
things were done by auncient kings of
England before the Conqueſt by their ſignature,
and ſigne manuell without anie
ſeale at all; and ſome ſuch ſince the Conqueſt
alſo: as Graunts made by Maude the
Empreſſe to Albericke de Vere, and others.
            The King may by his great ſeale commaund
all his ſubiectes that bee vnder his
obedience whereſoeuer they bee in the
world: So he did in Normandie; ſo he did
in Aquitany; ſo hee did in that part of Scotland
that he had in poſſeſsion. And in 24.
Edw. 1. his Iudges kept ordinary Courts
of iuſtice there: and I haue ſeene the Records
of Placita. Exercitus Regis apud Edinburgh,
Apud Roxburgh, Apud S. Iohns-towne,
&c. in Scotia. So hee may commaund his
ſubiects, if they be in France, Spaine, Rome,
or Turkie, or the Indies. And for ſeuerall
ſeales, the Earle of Chester had a ſpeciall
ſeale for that his auncient County Palatine.
The Duke of Lancaster had a ſpeciall ſeale

for his new Countie Palatine. And after,
when theſe Counties came to the kinges
poſſeſsion, the Kinges continued ſeuerall
ſeales in them both for the adminiſtration
of iuſtice; but as ſubordinate to the great
Seale of England.
            
            And I make little doubt, but if the King
ſhall now commaund any of his ſubiects
of Scotland vnder his great ſeale of England,
they will (as they ought) duetifully obey
him. As in king Edward the 1. Edward the
2. and Edward the 3. times they commanded
many of the Lordes of that parte of
Scotland which then was vnder their obedience.
            
               I finde, that in 13. Edw. 2. quarto die Iunij,
the King Constituit Adomarū de Valentia comitem
Pēbrochiae Cuſtodem Regni ſui; ac locum
ſuum tenentē quamdiu Rex in partibus tranſmarinis
morā fecerit. And the next day, viz.
Die Iouis quinto die Iunij Rex ordinauit, quod
magnum Sigillum ſuum remaneret clauſum in
liquo loco ſecuro, dum Rex eſſet in partibus

tranſmarinis: Et ordinauit quoddam aliud
paruum Sigillum interim pro regimine Regni,
ad breuia, &c. Conſignanda, ſub Teste Adomari
de Valentia Comitis Pembroch. Nota, heere
was a petty Seale pro regimine Regni, wherein
are compriſed Commiſsions for Iuſtice,
Mandatoria, & ad breuia conſignanda; which
is for Remedialia as they are termed.
            
            It is ſaide,Seueral Laws. that Scotland hath Lawes that
are proper for that kingdome,Obiect. 4. & that they
are not ſubiect to the lawes of England, and
ſo è contra.
            
            And laſtly it was ſaide, that in England
euery perſon was within the iuriſdiction of
ſome Leete, and at the age of twelue yeares
euery one is to bee ſworne in the Leete to
bee Foiall and Loiall to the King of England;
That is, to the Lawes of England,
(for ſo hee vnderſtoode Loiall:) But Post-nati
in Scotland can not be ſo; and that they
haue an other forme of oathe in Scotland:
Ergo, &c.
            
            
               
For this laſt parte,Reſponſ. of the Oathe in the
Leete, the Lord chiefe Baron did cleere it
ſo plainely, as more needes not to be ſaid.
This is Legalis ligeantia, It is not Alta ligeantia
by birth, which is that which we haue
now in queſtion.
            The Hiſtoricall diſcourſe that hath bin
made of Leetes, of Law dayes, of Decenna,
Decennarij, of the Tenne-mens Tale,
and the Oathe of all Male children of
twelue yeeres, &c. taken at the Leete, is
no newes indeede, it is very olde.
            Maſter Lambard hath it all,Lambard in explicatione verbi Centuria. and more
too, at large in Explicatione verborum in the
word Centuria; It vvas before the Conqueſt.
            But it maketh no hing to this naturall
Allegeance and ſubiection of birth; it is
not Alta ligeantia by birth-right; it is but
Legalis ligeantia by Policie: And Fitzherbert
calleth it Swearing to the Lawe.
            
            And if that were the onely Bond and
Marke of Allegeance, many are out of it,
and ſo at libertie. As, children vnder

twelue yeeres; yet ſometimes they may
commit treaſon and felony; where, Malitia
ſupplet aetatem: So women of all ſortes;
yet they may bee ſhrewd and daungerous
traitours; and if they bee women nobly
borne, or widowes that were wiues to noble
men, they ſhall be tried per pares.
            
            Alſo Noble men of all ſortes, who are
neither bound to attend the Leete, nor to
take that Oathe, as appeereth by Britton
cap. 29. treating of the Court called The
Shirifes Turne, out of which the Leete ſeemeth
to be extracted: For, whatſoeuer is
not preſented in the Leete may bee preſented
and puniſhed in the Shirifs Turne. And
M Kitchin citeth Britton in this point for
the Leete; and alleadgeth alſo the ſtatute
of Marlebridge cap. 10. to the ſame purpoſe.
            And at this day the view of Francke-pleges,
and the putting in of Francke-pleges,
and the Decennarij, are but bare names
of things paſt, the vſe and ſubſtance is obſolete
and gone.
            
               
And, as it was ſaide, few in this place
haue put in ſuch Pleges, or taken that
Oath, and yet I truſt wee are good ſubiects,
and beare true faith and allegeance.
            But this hath beene ſo fully anſwered
and cleered by the Lord chiefe Baron, and
the Lord Coke, chiefe Iuſtice of the Common
pleas, as I doe wrong to ſpend time
in it.
            But touching the ſeuerall Lawes; I ſay,
that ſeuerall lawes can make no difference
in matter of Soueraigntie; and in the bond
of Allegeance and obedience to one King:
And ſo it concludeth nothing for the point
in queſtion.
            
               Normandy and Aquitany had ſeuerall
lawes differing from the lawes of England:
ſo had Fraunce in King Edward the 3. and
Henry the 6. his time.
            
               Ireland, before king Iohns time continued
their auncient Lawes, and ſo, for the
moſt part, haue done euer ſince.
            
               Gerneſey and Ierſey haue yet at this day

ſeuerall lawes, which, for the moſt part,
were the auncient Lawes and Cuſtomes of
Normandie.
            
            
               Wales had, & in many things yet haue
ſeuerall Lawes: ſo for the County Palatine
of Chester alſo.
            Yet theſe neuer were, nor muſt not be
cantelled and cut off from their allegeance
and obedience to the King; nor the Kings
ſubiects borne there be incapable of lands
and inheritaunce in England: for vvhere
there is but one Soueraigne, all his ſubiects
borne in all his Dominions bee borne Ad
fidem Regis; and are bound to him by one
bond of Faith and Allegeance: And in that,
one is not greater nor leſſer than an other:
nor one to bee preferred before another:
but all to bee obedient alike; and to be ruled
alike; yet vnder ſeuerall Lavves and
Cuſtomes. And as Saint Gregorie ſayeth
of the Church, In vna fide nihil officit
Eccleſiae ſanctae diuerſa conſuetudo. So I will
conclude for this point, That diuerſitie
of Lavves and Cuſtomes makes no

breach of that vnitie of obedience, faith,
and allegeance which all liege ſubiects
owe to their liege King and Soueraigne
Lord. And as none of them can be Aliens
to the king, ſo none of them can bee Aliens
or Strangers in any of his kingdomes
or dominions; nor Aliens or ſtrangers
one to another, no more than a Kentiſhman,
to a Cheſhire-man; or è contra.
            
            And therefore all that haue bin borne
in any of the kinges dominions ſince hee
was King of England, are capable and inheritable
in all his Dominions without exception.
            And as to the other parte of the Obiection,Defect of Triall.
that there will be defect of triall;
for, things done in Scotland, cannot bee
tried in England; I ſay, that that maketh
little to our preſent Queſtion, whether
Post-nati in Scotland, be Aliens in England,
and not capable of landes in England: but
it trencheth to▪ caſt ſome aſperſion vpon
the common lawe of England; That

it is not ſufficient to giue iuſtice to the
Kinges ſubiectes for lacke of ſufficient
meanes of triall of queſtions of fact: but
to this baron Altham gaue ſo full an aunſweare,
as more cannot bee ſaied: And
ſo hee did both cleare the doubt, and did
vphould the ſufficiencie of the lawe of
England in that behalfe. And it ſeemeth
ſtrange, that this ſhould now bee found
out to bee obiected againſt Scotland, ſince
it vvas neuer heeretofore obiected for
France, Normandie, Aquitany, nor is at this
day for Ireland, Gerneſey, and Ierſey, &c.
whereas all ſtand vpon the ſame reaſon
for the point of triall. But the wiſedome
of the lawe of England hath beene ſuch, as
there neuer failed certen rules for triall of
all queſtions in fact; and thoſe were fitted
and adapted to the Matter which was
to bee tried. And therefore, whoſoeuer
doth diligently obſerue it, hee ſhall finde
in the courſe and practiſe of the lawes of
England aboue twenty ſeuerall formes of
trialls: as by Battell; by Iurie, and that

in diuerſe kindes; by Wager of Lawe; by
Proofes; by Examination; by Inſpection;
by Certificates of diuerſe kindes; and by
manie other wayes: And leſt there ſhould
bee any defect in that behalfe, the Law
hath prouided ſeuerall formes of Ioyning
of iſſues; and in that, hath ſpeciall regard
of things done out of the Realme, as euerie
Student may ſee in the Bookes of Reports.
            Thus I haue paſſed theſe foure Obiections,
and therefore for this part I conclude,
That if Argumentum à ſimili were euer
good and concludent in Lawe, my
Lords the Iudges haue prooued this Caſe
by ſo many plaine and direct Examples,
and like Caſes; and by ſo manie ſtrong
arguments & ſolide reaſons drawne out of
Booke Caſes, out of Statutes, out of the
true rules and forme of pleading, and
out of ancient Records and Precedents,
ſome produced by M. Atturney, and many
moe remembred by the Iudges, as no

one thing can bee more plainely exemplified,
nor appeare more like to an other,
than this Caſe is to thoſe Caſes which
they haue remembred.
            But if examples and arguments à ſimili
doe faile,Recurrend ad Rationem. then it remaineth Recurrere ad
Rationem; and what reaſon that ought to
bee, and how to bee vnderſtoode, is to
be conſidered: for, it is ſaid, that Lex est
ratio ſumma, iubens ea quae facienda ſunt, &
prohibens contraria. So it muſt be the depth
of reaſon, not the light and ſhallow diſtempered
reaſons of common Diſcourſers
walking in Powles, or at Ordinaries,
in their feaſting and drinking, drowned
with drincke, or blowne away with a
whiffe of Tobacco. Lucretius noteth, that
in many there is Rationis egestas: And ſaint
Gregory ſaith, Qui in factis Dei rationem non
videt, infirmitatem ſuam conſiderans cur non
videat, rationem videt: For, although Reaſon
and Knowledge bee infinite, yet no man
can haue more of it than hee is capable of:
Euery man muſt receiue it, and keepe it

in his owne veſſell; he cannot borrow his
neighbours braine-pan to put it in. And
therefore it is not without cauſe,Hopperus de vera Iuris prudentia pag. 118 that one
of the graueſt and beſt learned Lawyers of
our age, and a priuie Counſellor to one
of the greateſt Monarches of Europe, deſcribeth
thoſe that ſhould bee Interpreters
of Lawes by foure ſpeciall qualities,
That is, 1. AEtate graues, 2. Eruditione praeſtantes;
3. Vſu rerum prudentes, 4. Publica
authoritate constituti: So, there muſt be grauitie,
there muſt be learning, there muſt
be experience, and there muſt be authoritie:
and if any one of theſe want, they are
not to be allowed to be Interpreters of the
Lawe.
            How all theſe Qualities concurre in
theſe reuerend Iudges, whom wee haue
heard in this preſent Caſe, I will ſpare to
ſpeake vvhat I thinke: For, Chryſostome
teacheth mee, Qui laudatur infacie, flagellatur
in corde.
            
            
               In ſeeking out this depth of Reaſon,

the ſame Author giueth a caution,Hopperus ibid. pag. 119. which
is this; Vitium quod in hoc genere fugi debet
eſt, ne, ſi Rationē non inuenias, mox legem ſine
ratione eſſe clames. And in 36. H. 6. Forteſcue
ſaieth the ſame in effect, which is thus;
We haue many Courſes and Formes which bee
houlden for Lawe, and haue beene houlden and
vſed becauſe of Reaſon; and notwithstanding
the reaſon be not ready in memory, yet by ſtudy
and labour a man may finde it.
            Now when wee come to examine by
reaſon, whether Post-nati in Scotland ſhall
be diſabled as Aliens, or ſhall be capable
of lands in England, as naturall borne ſubiects
there; wee are firſt to conſider vvhat
is the reaſon whie Aliens in the Dominions,
and vnder the obedience of other
forraine Princes, are nor capable of landes
in England: And ſurely, the true reaſon is,
that which was noted by baron Altham;
and hath ſince beene ofte remembred, viz.
The danger that might thereby come to
the king and the common-weale: Specially

by drawing hither too great multitudes
of them: for ſo the Treaſure of the Realme
might bee tranſported by them into other
forraine Kingdomes and Countries;
whereby it might bee vſed againſt the
King, and to the preiudice of the State.
And beſides, they might vnder-hand
practiſe Sedition and Rebellion in the
kingdome, and cauſe many other daungers
and inconueniences: but that reaſon
cannot ſerue againſt Post-nati in Scotland,
now that there is but one King of
both the kingdomes, no more than it can
ſerue againſt thoſe that are borne in Ireland,
or Gerneſey, or Ierſey: and therefore
in reaſon they are as capable of landes in
England, as the kings ſubiects of Ireland,
and Gerneſey, and Ierſey are.
            Againſt this,Obiections. there haue alſo beene many
Obiections made, and Reaſons deuiſed
that ſeeme witty, and haue ſome ſhew of
probability to proue that Post-nati in Scotland
are Aliens, and ought not in reaſon

to bee capable of landes in England, videlicet▪
               
            
            1. That England and Scotland were two
ancient ſeuerall kingdomes vnder ſeuerall
kings, and ſeuerall crownes.
            2. That they continue yet ſeueral kingdomes.
            3. That they haue yet ſeuerall Lawes,
ſeuerall Seales, ſeuerall Crownes, and ſeuerall
Kings: For, it is ſaid, though king Iames
be king of both, and hath but one naturall
body, yet in iudgement of Law, he is in reſpect
of his two ſeuerall kingdomes, as
two ſeuerall kings, and the ſubiects of ech
ſeuerall kingdome are bound to him by
diſtinct allegeance, according to the ſeuerall
Lawes of the kingdome where they
were borne.
            
               And all this is grounded vpon this rule
or fiction in Lawe: Quando duo iura concurrunt
in vna perſona, aequum est ac ſi eſſent in
diuerſis.
            And vpon this ground is this new form
of pleading deuiſed, which the Defendants

haue vſed in this Caſe, ſuch as cannot
be found in any Record, euer to haue
beene pleaded before; and may as well
ſerue againſt the Kinges ſubiectes of Ireland,
as againſt the Post-nati of Scotland.
And ſithence in former times the like
forme of pleading vvas neuer ſeene againſt
any of the Kings of Englandes ſubiects,
which were borne in any of his dominions
out of England, as in Normandie or
Aquitanie, or in France (I meane ſuch part
of it as was in the Kinges poſſeſsion, and
in ſubiection and obedience to him, and
not in that parte of France which his enemies
helde) it may be probably inferred,
That it was then generally houlden, that
neither ſuch a forme of pleading, nor the
Matter it ſelfe was ſufficient in Lavve to
diſable anie ſuch Plaintife: for, againſt
French-men that vvere not vnder the
Kings obedience wee finde it often pleaded.
And as thoſe that were not ſubiects
to the King, nor borne vnder his obedience,
did then preſume to bring ſuites,

and actions in England. So it can not bee
thought, but that the king hauing then
ſo large and ample Dominions beyond
the Seas, as Normandy and Aquitany, and
many other partes of France, ſome of his
ſubiects borne there, had cauſe to haue,
and did bring the like ſuites in England.
And ſithence no ſuch Plea is found to
haue beene then vſed againſt them, it can
not in Lawe and Reaſon bee now allowed
againſt the Post-nati in Scotland: For, I may
ſay as Aſcue ſaied in 37. H. 6. Our Predeceſſors
were as ſage and learned as we be.
            
            And I ſee not, but that in this Caſe a
good Argument may bee reaſonably deduced
from the Negatiue, as it was in the
Caſe reported by the great learned, and
moſt graue and reuerend Iudge ſir Iames
Dyer chiefe Iuſtice of the Common pleas,P. 23. Elizab. Dyer. 376.
               Anno 23. Elizab. The Queſtion there, was,
Whether an erroneous iudgement giuen
in Rie, which is a member of the Cinqueportes,
might bee reuerſed in the kinges
Bench, or Common place at Weſtminſter;

And it was thus reſolued; Sed pro eo
quod nullū tale breue in Registro, nec in aliquibus
Praecedentibus curiarum praedictarū inueniri
potuerat, dominus Cancellarius Bromley
per opinionem Capitalium Iuſticiariorum vtriuſque
Banci denegauit tale breue concedere.
And ſo Iuſtice Fenners argument houldeth
well, viz. There is in this Caſe no lawe to
exclude the Complainant, Ergo hee is a
liege and a naturall borne ſubiect.
            But the forme of pleading in the time
of king Ed. 1. in Cobledickes caſe, which was
cited out of Hengam, (and the Booke
ſhewed heere by the Lord chiefe Iuſtice
Coke) is ſo direct and plaine for this our
Queſtion, as nothing can be more plaine:
and therefore I thinke it not amiſſe to report
it againe.
            That Caſe was in effect and ſubſtaunce,
thus:
            A woman brought a Writte of Ayel againſt
Roger Cobledicke, and declared of
the ſeiſin of Roger her Grand-father, and
conueied the diſcent to Gilbert her father;

and from him to the Demaundant, as his
daughter and heire. The Tenant pleaded,
that the Demaundant was a French-woman,
and not of the ligeance nor of the fidelitie
of England; and demaunded iudgement
if ſhee ought to haue the action againſt
him. This plea vvas houlden to
bee inſufficient; and thereupon the tenant
amended his plea, and pleaded further,
That the Demaundant was not of
the ligeance of England, nor of the fidelitie
of the King; and demaunded iudgement,
&c. And againſt that plea none exception
was taken, but thereupon the Demaundant
prayed licence to depart from
her Writ. By this it appeareth plainely,
that the firſt plea, alleadging that ſhe was
a French-woman, and not of the ligeance,
nor of the fidelitie of England, was
inſufficient (and ſo declared by Berreford
the chiefe Iuſtice;) For, there can bee no
fidelitie nor allegeance due to England, reſpecting
the land and ſoile without a Soueraigne
and King. But the ſecond Plea

alledging, that ſhee was not of the ligeance
of England, nor of the fidelitie of the
King, was good and ſufficient: For, to
the King fidelitie and allegeance is due;
and therefore, ſince ſhee failed in that, ſhe
was not to be anſwered: and thereupon ſhe
praied licence to departe from her Writte,
and ſo ſhe left her ſuite.
            Now,Stat. 14. Ed. 3. for the reaſons which haue beene
drawne and ſtrained out of the ſtatute An.
14. Edw. 3.
               That the Realme of England ſhall not be ſubiect to France. if they bee well examined, they
ſerue little for this point which we haue in
hand.
            It is to be conſidered, at what time, and
vpon what occaſion that Statute was made:
King Edw. the third being right heire to
the Crowne and Kingdome of Fraunce by
deſcent from his Mother, and hauing
ſpent many yeeres for the recouering of
the ſame, reſolued to take vpon him the
Name and Stile of King of France; being
aduiſed thereunto by them of Flaunders:
Hereupon he did take the Stile of King of

Fraunce; and altered his Seale and his
Armes; and after a while, placed the
Armes of France before the ancient Armes
of England, as they are borne at this day.
This gaue occaſion for the making of
this ſtatute: for ſome people (Aſcun gentes,
ſaith the ſtatute) ſeeing this change,
and conſidering the large and ample extent,
and the magnificence of that great
Kingdome, beganne to doubt that the king
would make his Imperiall ſeate there; and
conceiued thereby, that the kingdome of
England, being the leſſer, ſhould bee in
ſubiection of the king and kingdome of
France, being the greater, and to bee gouerned
and ruled by a Vice-Roy, or Deputy,
as they ſaw Ireland was. And though in
the Kings Stile, England was placed before
France, yet they ſawe the Armes of France
marſhalled before the Armes of England;
though at the firſt bearing thereof ſome
ſay it was not ſo.
            To cleere this doubt, and to take away
this feare from the Subiects of England,
               
was this Statute made, as doth plainely
appeare by the wordes of the ſtatute it
ſelfe.
            Now if you will make an apt and proper
application of that Caſe then betweene
England and Fraunce, to this our
Caſe now, betweene Scotland and England,
it muſt be thus:
            1. Edw. 3. then king of England (being
the leſſer) had afterwardes the kingdome
of France (being the greater) by deſcent,
and tooke the Stile of King of France.
            
            King Iames king of Scotland (beeing the
leſſer) hath afterward the kingdome of
England (being the greater) by deſcent,
and taketh the Stile of King of England.
            
            2. King Ed. 3. altered his Seale, and his
Armes, and placed the Armes of Fraunce
before the Armes of England.
            
            King Iames hath changed his Seale, and
his Armes in England, and hath placed the

Armes of England before the Armes of
Scotland.
            
            3. It was then doubted, that King Edw.
3. would remoue his Court out of England,
the leſſer, and keepe his Imperiall ſeate and
ſtate in France, the greater.
            King Iames hath indeede remooued his
Court out of Scotland, the leſſer, and doth
in his royall perſon (with the Queene and
Prince, and all his Children) keepe his Imperiall
ſeate in England, the greater.
            4. In al theſe the caſes agree; but yet one
difference there is, and that is in the Stile:
For king Ed. 3. in his Stile placed England,
the leſſer, being his ancient kingdome, before
France, the greater, being newly deſcended
vnto him.
            But King Iames in his Stile placeth England,
the greater, though newly deſcended
vnto him, before Scotland, the leſſer, being
his ancient kingdome.
            
               
5. Now, this being thus; perhappes
Scotland might out of this Example haue
conceiued the like doubt againſt England,
as England did then againſt France: But as
there was then no doubt made, whether
the kings ſubiects borne in England ſhould
be capable of lands in France; ſo, out of this
ſtatute, and vpon this example no doubt
can bee inferred, whether the kings ſubiects
now borne in Scotland, ſhall be capable
of lands in England.
            
            But, all theſe Obiections, and the
ground whereupon they are framed, viz.
Quando duo iura &c. haue beene ſo thorowly
and profoundly examined, and
ſo learnedly and fully anſwered and cleered
by the Iudges, as I make no doubt but
all wiſe and indifferent hearers be well ſatisfied
therein.
            And if there bee any ſo poſſeſſed with a
preiudicate opinion againſt Trueth, and
Reaſon, that will ſay in their owne heartes
licèt perſuaſeris non perſuadebis; & ſo, either
Serpent-like ſtop their eares, or elſe wilfully

abſent themſelues, becauſe they
would not heare the weakneſſe and abſurdities
of their owne conceipts laied open
and confuted: If there bee any ſuch I
ſay (as I truſt there bee but few, and yet
I feare there bee ſome) I would they had
learned of Tertullian, That Veritas docendo
ſuadet, non ſuadendo docet. And I wiſh that
they bee not found among the number of
thoſe to whome Saint Paul ſaieth, Si quis
ignorat, ignoret: And Saint Iohn in the Apocalips,
Qui ſordidus est, ſordeſcat adhuc. And
I will exhort with Saint Paul. Qui tenet, teneat,
and not wauer or doubt by ſuch
weake arguments and obiections.
            But in this new learning,A dangerous diſtinction betweene the King and the Crowne. there is one
part of it ſo ſtrange, and of ſo daungerous
conſequent, as I may not let it paſſe, viz.
That the king is as a king diuided in himſelfe;
and ſo as two kings of two ſeuerall
kingdomes; and that there be ſeuerall allegeances,
and ſeuerall ſubiections due vnto
him reſpectiuely in regarde of his ſeuerall

kingdomes, the one not participating
with the other.
            This is a daungerous diſtinction betweene
the King and the Crowne, and betweene
the King and the kingdome: It reacheth
too farre; I wiſh euery good ſubiect
to beware of it. It was neuer taught, but
either by traitours, as in Spencers Bill in Edward
the ſeconds time (which Baron Snig,
and the Lord chiefe Baron, and Lord Coke
remembred) or by treaſonable Papiſts, as
Harding in his Confutation of the Apologie
maintaineth, that Kings haue their authority
by the poſitiue Lawe of Nations,
and haue no more power, than the People
hath, of whome they take their temporall
iuriſdiction; and ſo Ficlerus Simanca, and
others of that crew.
            Or by ſeditious Sectaries and Puritans,
as Buchannon De Iure Regni apud Scotos,
Penry, Knox, and ſuch like.
            For, by theſe, and thoſe that are their
followers, and of their Faction, there is in

their Pamphlets too much ſuch traiterous
ſeede ſowne.
            But leauing this,Abſurdities in this dangerous diſtinctiō
                I will adde a little
more, to prooue, that in reaſon Robert Caluine,
and other like Post-nati in Scotland,
ought by Lawe to be capable of landes in
England: and for that, I wil remember one
rule more which is certen and faileth not,
and ought to bee obſerued in all Interpretation
of Lawes; and that is, Ne quid abſurdum,
ne quid illuſorium admittatur.
            
            But, vpon this ſubtle and dangerous
Diſtinction of Faith and Allegeance due
to the King, and of Faith and Allegeance
due to the Crowne, and to the Kingdome
(which is the onely Baſis and fundamentall
maine reaſon to diſable the Plaintife,
and all Post-nati) there follow too many
groſſe, and fowle abſurdities, whereof I
will touch ſome few, and ſo conclude, that
in Lawe and Reaſon this ſubtile, but abſurd
and dangerous diſtinction, ought not to
be allowed.
            
               
This Bond of Allegeance whereof wee
diſpute, is Vinculum fidei; it bindeth the
ſoule and conſcience of euery ſubiect ſeuerally
and reſpectiuely, to be faithfull and
obedient to the King: and as a Soule or
Conſcience cannot bee framed by Policie;
ſo Faith and Allegeance cannot bee framed
by Policie, nor put into a politike bodie.
An oath muſt be ſworne by a naturall bodie;
homage and fealtie muſt be done by a
naturall bodie, a politike body cannot doe
it.
            Now then, ſince there is but one king,
and ſoueraigne, to whome this faith and
allegeance is due by all his ſubiects of England
and Scotland, can any humane policie
diuide this one King, and make him two
kings? Can cor Regis Angliae be in manu Domini,
and cor Regis Scotiae not ſo? Can there
bee warres betweene the King of England,
and the king of Scotland? or betweene the
kingdome of England, and the kingdome
of Scotland, ſo long as there is but one
king? Can the king of England now ſend

an army roial into Scotland againſt the king
of Scotland? Can there bee any Letters of
Marke or Repriſall now graunted by the
king of England, againſt the ſubiects of the
king of Scotland? Can there bee any Protections
now, Quia profecturus in exercitu Iacobi
Regis Angliae in Scotiam?
            
            Nay ſhortly, Can any man bee a true
ſubiect to King Iames as King of England,
and a traitor or rebell to king Iames as king
of Scotland? Shall a foote breadth, or an
inch breadth of ground make a difference
of birth-right of ſubiects borne vnder one
king? Nay, where there are not any certen
bounds or limites knowne at all, but an
imaginarie partition wall, by a conceipted
fiction in Lawe? It is enough to propound
theſe and ſuch like Queſtions, whereof
many more might be remembred: they
carry a ſufficient and plaine anſweare in
themſelues: Magis docet qui prudentèr interrogat.
            
            As the King nor his heart cannot bee

diuided, for hee is one entire King ouer
all his ſubiectes, in which ſoeuer of his
Kingdomes or Dominions they vvere
borne, ſo hee muſt not bee ſerued nor
obeyed by halues; hee muſt haue intire
and perfect obedience of his ſubiects: for,
Ligentia (as Baron Heron ſaied well) muſt
haue foure qualities; It muſt bee 1. Pura
& ſimplex: 2. Integra & ſolida: 3. Vniuerſalis
non localis: 4. Permanens, continua, &
illaeſa. Diuide a mans heart, and you loſe
both parts of it, and make no heart at all;
ſo hee that is not an intire ſubiect, but
halfe faced, is no ſubiect at all; and hee
that is borne an intire and perfect ſubiect,
ought by Reaſon and Lawe to haue all the
freedomes, priuiledges, and benefites
pertaining to his Birth-right in all the
Kinges Dominions; and ſuch are all the
Post-nati in England and Scotland. And the
inconuenience of this imaginary locall allegeance
hath beene ſo lately, and ſo fully
declared by the Lorde chiefe Iuſtice
Coke, as more needes not bee ſaied in it.
            
               
In ſome ſpeciall Caſes there ſometime
may bee a king of ſubiects without land in
poſſeſsion, as Iuſtice Fenner noted in the
gouernement which Moſes had ouer the
people of Iſrael in the wilderneſſe; and as
in the Caſe which ſir Iohn Popham the late
Lord chiefe Iuſtice did put in the Parliament:
If a King and his ſubiects bee driuen
out of his kingdome by his enemies,
yet notwithſtanding hee continueth ſtill
King ouer thoſe ſubiects, and they are ſtill
bound vnto him by their bond of allegeance,
whereſoeuer hee and they bee: But
there can not bee a King of land without
ſubiects: For, that were but Imperium in
belluas, and, Rex & ſubditi ſunt relatiua.
            
            I ſaied there was an other generall rule
for expounding of Lawes,Rex ſolus iudicat &c. which I reſerued
to bee laſt ſpoken of, I will now but
touch it; for, I will not ſtand to examine
by humane reaſons, whether Kings were
before Lawes, or Lawes before Kinges;
nor how Kings were firſt ordained; nor

whether the kings, or the people did firſt
make Lawes; nor the ſeuerall conſtitutions
and frames of ſtates and commonweales;
nor what Plato or Aristotle haue
written of this argmment.
            They were men of ſinguler learning
and wiſedome, but wee muſt conſider
the time, and the countrie in which they
liued, and in all their great learning they
lacked the true learning of the knowledge
of God. They were borne and liued in
Greece, and in popular States: they were
enemies, or at leaſt miſlikers of all Monarchies;
yet one of them diſdained not to
bee a ſeruant or mercenarie hireling to a
Monarch. They accompted all the world
barbarous, but their owne Countrey of
Greece: their opinions therefore are no
Cannons to giue Lawes to kinges and
kingdomes, no more than ſir Thomas
Moores Vtopia, or ſuch Pamphlets as wee
haue at euerie Marte.
            I beleeue him that ſaieth,Prou. ca. 8. 
               Per me Reges
regnant, & Principes iusta decernunt; And

I make no doubt, but that as God ordained
kings, and hath giuen Lawes to kings
themſelues, ſo hee hath authorized and
giuen power to Kings to giue Lawes to
their ſubiects; and ſo kings did firſt make
lawes, and then ruled by their lawes, and
altered and changed their Lawes from
time to time, as they ſawe occaſion, for
the good of themſelues, and their ſubiects.
            
               And this power they haue from God
almighty; For, as Saint Auguſtine ſaieth, In
hoc Reges Deo ſeruiunt ſicut eis Diuinitùs praecipitur,
in quantum ſunt Reges, ſi in ſuo Regno
bona iubeant, mala prohibeant, non ſolum quae
pertinent ad humanam societatem, verumetiam
quae ad diuinam religionem.
            
               And I hould Thomas Aquinas his opinion
to be good, Rex ſolutus à Legibus quòad
vim coactiuam, ſubditus eſt legibus quòad vim directiuam
propria voluntate. And for this opinion
there is a ſtronger authoritie, euen
from God himſelfe in Eccleſiaſtes, ca. 8. ver.
2. Ego os Regis obſeruo; Et praecepta iuramenti

Dei: & ver. 4. Sermo illius poteſtate plenus eſt:
Nec dicere ei quiſquam poteſt, quare ita facis?
            Now beeing led a little from the Common
Lawe to the Ciuile Lawe, I finde in
the ciuile Lawe a direct Text, warranting
that generall Rule which I reſerued to
this place,Cod. li. 1. Tit. 14 le. 1. which is this; Inter aequitatem iuſque
interpoſitam interpretationem nobis ſolis &
licet & oportet inspicere.
            
            And another like Text in theſe words,Ibidem le. 12.
               Sententia Principis Ius dubium declarans, Ius
facit quòad omnes. And ſome graue and notable
Writers in the ciuile Lawe ſay, Rex
eſt lex animata: Some ſay, Rex eſt lex loquens:
Some others ſay, Interpretantur legem conſuetudo
& Princeps: Another ſaieth, Rex
ſolus iudicat de cauſa à iure non definita.
            
            And as I may not forget Saint Auguſtines
words, which are theſe; Generale pactum
eſt ſocietatis humanae regibus ſuis obtemperare:
So I may not wrong the Iudges of the
common Lawe of England ſo much as to

ſuffer an imputation to bee caſt vpon
them, That they, or the Common lawe
doe not attribute as great power and authoritie
to their Soueraignes the kinges
of England, as the Romane lawes did to
their Emperours: For, Bracton the chiefe
Iuſtice in the time of king Henry the third,
hath theſe direct wordes, De Chartis Regijs
& factis regum non debent nec poſſunt Iusticiarij
nec priuatae perſonae disputare. Nec etiam,
ſi in illa dubitatio oriatur, poſſunt eam interpretari.
Et in dubijs & obſcuris, vel ſi aliqua dictio
duos contineat intellectus, domini Regis erit expectanda
interpretatio & voluntas; Cum eius ſit
interpretari cuius eſt condere. And Britton in
the time of king Ed. 1. writeth as much in
effect.
            So as now if this queſtion ſeem difficult,
that neither direct law, nor Examples &
Precedents, nor application of like caſes,
nor diſcourſe of reaſon, nor the graue opinion
of the learned and reuerend Iudges,
can reſolue it, here is a true and certen
Rule, how both by the Ciuile Lawe,

and the ancient Common lawe of England
it may and ought to be decided: That is,
by ſentence of the moſt religious, learned,
and iudicious king that euer this kingdome
or Iland had.
            But this Caſe is ſo cleare as this needeth
not at all.
            And in this I would not be miſ-vnderſtoode,
as though I ſpake of making of
new Lawes, or of altering the Lawes now
ſtanding; I meane not ſo, but I ſpeake only
of interpretation of the Lawe in new
queſtions and doubts, as now in this preſent
caſe: neither doe I meane hereby to
derogate any thing from the high court of
Parliament; (farre be it from my thought)
It is the great Councell of the kingdome,
wherein euery ſubiect hath intereſt. And
to ſpeake of the conſtitution or forme of
it, or how, or when it was firſt begunne,
is for buſie Queſtioniſts; It ought to bee
obeyed and reuerenced, but not diſputed;
and it is at this time impertinent to
this Queſtion.
            
               
But certen it is, it hath beene the wiſedome
of the Kinges of this Realme to reſerue
in themſelues that ſupreame power
to call their Nobles, Clergie, & commons
together, when they ſawe great and vrgent
Cauſes; and by that great Councell
to make Edicts and Statutes for the weale
of their people, and ſafetie of the Kingdome
and State, as in Anno 10. Edw. 3. the
Aſſembly at Nottingham for the great wars
in France: And in Anno 20. H. 3. Prouiſiones
Merton, which I remembred before.
            There haue beene made ſome Obiections
of inconueniencie,Obiect. of Inconueniencie and frugalitie. as for bearing of
Scot and Lot, and ſuch other charges; and
ſome out of frugalitie, that the king ſhall
loſe his profit of making Denizens, and
ſuch like: Theſe are ſo light as I leaue
them to the winde; They are neither fit
for Parliament, nor Councell, nor Court.
            Another argument and reaſon againſt
the Poſt-nati hath beene lately made outObiect. vpon diffidence.
               
of diffidence and miſtruſt, that they will
come into England ſans number, and ſo as
it were to ſurcharge our Common; and
that this may be in ſecula ſeculorum. I know
not well what this meanes. The Nation
is ancient, noble and famous; they haue
many honourable and woorthie Noble
men and Gentlemen, and many wiſe
and worthie men of all degrees and qualities;
they haue lands and faire poſſeſsions
in Scotland: Is it therefore to bee ſuppoſed,
or can it in reaſon bee imagined,
that ſuch multitude ſans number will
leaue their natiue ſoile, and all tranſport
themſelues hither? Hath the Iriſh done
ſo? Or thoſe of Wales, or of the Iſles of
Man, Gerneſey, and Ierſey? Whie ſhould
we then ſuſpect it now more for Scotland?
            
            Nay, doe you ſuppoſe that the Kinge
of England will euer ſuffer ſo great a parte
of his Dominions, and ſo great and famous
a Kingdome as Scotland is to be diſpeopled?
It is a doubt imagined without
any foundation or ground of reaſon.

But if it were to bee doubted, the twelue
Iudges that haue concurred in opinion,
and that late worthy Iudge Popham had as
great cauſe to feare it as any others: They
are wiſe, they are learned, they haue
faire poſſeſsions and good eſtates, They
haue poſteritie to care for, as others
haue.
            Yet, admit it bee a matter worth the
doubting of, what is that to the yoong
Post-nati that are not like in many yeares
to come hither in ſuch number? Shall we
vpon this cauſleſſe feare depriue them of
their lawfull Birth-right?
            Haue wee ſeene in theſe fiue yeeres
paſt anie moe of them than this one alone
that haue gotten any Lands in England?
And this little that he hath is ſo ſmall
and poore a portion, that his purchaſe is
not great, and therefore no iuſt cauſe of
offence to any.
            Nay,Ante-nati. if you looke vpon the Ante-nati,
you ſhall find no ſuch confluence hither,
but ſome few (and very few in reſpect

of that great and populous kingdome)
that haue done long and worthie ſeruice
to his Maieſtie, haue, and ſtill doe attend
him, which I truſt no man miſlikes: For,
there can bee none ſo ſimple, or childiſh
(if they haue but common ſenſe) as to
thinke that his Maieſty ſhould haue come
hither alone amongſt vs, and haue left behinde
him in Scotland, and as it were caſte
off, all his ould and worthie Seruants.
            And if theſe Noble and worthie Gentlemen
of Scotland, I meane the Ante-nati
be louingly and brotherly entertained amongſt
vs, with mutuall loue & beneuolence,
that ſo we may coaleſcere, & be vnited
together, by marriage, and otherwiſe (as
in ſome particular caſes wee ſee it already
happily begunne) no doubt God will
bleſſe this Vnion of both theſe Nations,
and make them, and the King, and great
Britaine to be famous through the world;
and feared & redoubted of our enemies,
and of all that wiſh vs ill: For, Vis vnita

fortior, & concordia multos facit vnum. But
what may follow vpon ſuch arguments of
diffidence and ſuſpition, which ſeeme
but to hinder Vnion, and to breede diſcord
and diſſention I will not ſpeake; Let
euery wiſe man conſider it well: For, Humana
conſilia castigantur vbi coelestibus ſe praeferunt.
And remember Saint Paules caution,
Si inuicem mordetis, videte ne ab inuicem conſumamini.
            
            And for the reſemblance that hath bin
made of this Caſe of Post-nati (but indeed
for the Vnion of both Kingdomes) with
the houſwifes cutting of her cloth by a
threede, I will ſay but this, That if ſhee
cut her peece of cloth in length aſwell as
in breadth, all the threeds will bee cutte,
and the cloth marred. And this cutting
in this our Caſe, is, to cutte all aſwell
in length as in breadth, euen through
all the Kinges Dominions; and ſo will
rent aſunder the whole frame of the Vnion;

and cut in peeces all the threeds of
Allegeance.
            But now I wil aske this queſtion:A Queſtion, how long this ſuſpition and diſ-vnion ſhall continue? How
long ſhall this ſuſpition and doubt continue?
Shall there bee a diſ-vnion for euer?
If it bee ſaied, No, but vntill the Lawes,
and Cuſtomes of both Kingdomes bee
made one and the ſame: then I aske; how,
and when ſhall that be done? And it may
bee, that the Conſtitutions of the Countries
bee ſuch as there can hardely in all
things bee ſuch an abſolute and perfect
reconciling or vniting of Lawes as is fancied.
Is it yet ſo betweene England and
VVales? or betweene Kent and Cornewall?
or betweene many other parts of this
Kingdome? I ſay no; and I ſpeake it confidently,
and truely it is not ſo, nor well
can be ſo. Therefore let England and Scotland
be in like degree now, as England and
VVales were for many hundred yeeres,
and in many things are yet ſtill; and yet
let Vnion and Loue increaſe amongſt vs,

euen in ſecula ſeculorum. Let vs not be ſuch
as Saint Bernard noteth,Bernard. 
               Amant quod non
decet, timent quod non oportet, dolent vanè,
gaudent vaniùs. And let vs no longer
make queſtion, whether ſeuerall Lawes
and Cuſtomes bee markes of ſeperation
and diſ-vnion, or of ſeuerall Allegeances;
for certainely they are not.
            One other Reaſon remaines againſt
theſe Post-nati,
               Obiection vpon Diuination and that is out of a prouident
foreſight, or as it were a propheſying:
What if a ſeperation of theſe Kingdomes
fall hereafter?
            Of this I can ſay but Abſit omen.
               Reſponſ. It is
Potentia remota (as Iuſtice VVilliams ſaied)
and I truſt in God Remotiſsima: And I will
euer pray to God that it neuer fall ſo, vntill
the King of all Kinges reſume all Scepters
and Kingdomes into his owne hands.
And let vs take heede of ſinnes of Ingratitude
and Diſobedience; and remember,
that Adam and Eue were puniſhed, Non

propter pomum, ſed propter vetitum. And for
ſuch Prophets, let the Prophet Ezechiel ca.
13. anſwer them, Vae Prophaetis inſipientibus
qui ſequuntur ſpiritum ſuum, & nihil vident.
And the Prophet Eſay ſpeaketh to
all ſuch with an other Vae, Vae illis qui diſpergunt.
            
            
               Now then, as M. Solicitor beganne
with ſeeking out the truth; ſo I will conclude
with Eſdras words, Magna est Veritas
& praeualet: And with this further, Eatenus
rationandum donec veritas inueniatur: Cùm inuenta
est veritas, figendum ibi Iudicium: Et in
victoria veritatis, ſoli veritatis inimici pereunt.
            
               The Concluſion.
               THus I haue heere deliuered my concurrence
in opinion with my Lordes
the Iudges, and the reaſons that induce
and ſatisfie my conſcience, That Ro. Caluine,
and all the Poſt-nati in Scotland, are in
Reaſon, and by the Common Lawe of

                  England naturall borne ſubiects within the
allegeance of the King of England; and inhabled
to purchaſe and haue free-hould
and inheritance of lands in England; and
to bring reall actions for the ſame in England.
               
               For, if they haue not this benefit by
this bleſſed and happie Vnion, then are
they in no better caſe in England, than the
king of Spaines ſubiects borne in Spaine, &c.
And ſo by this Vnion they haue gotten
nothing: What they haue loſt Iuſtice Yeluerton
did well note.
               And therefore I muſt giue Iudgement
in the Chancerie, That the Defendants
there ought to make direct anſwer to Ro.
Caluines Bill for the Lands and Euidences
for which he complaines.
               
                  T. Elleſmere Canc.
               
               
            
         
      
   