
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Maister D. his councell, to all that are his: as also a briefe lesson for all estates.
            KEepe counsell. Vse not manye wordes. Tell the truth. Be slow to speake. Brydle thine anger. Appease debate. Hinder no mans good name. Take heede of drinke. Remember thy ende. Be mercifull. Trie before thou trust. Repose no confidence in a reconciled aduersarie. Sorowe not for that which can not be got agayne. Reioyce not in thy neyghbours crosse. Striue not with thy ouer match. Reueale not thy secretes to thy wife, nor to thy children: for women, and children, say all they know. Three things vndid the Romanes reigne: priuie grudge, yong heaves, and priuate gayne. Beare with others, as thou would haue others heare with thee. Be not to rashe, hasty, bolde, nor wyse in thine owne conceyte.
            
               Doe not speake all thou knowest.
               Doe not beleeue all thou hearest.
               Doe not doe all thou canst.
               Doe not say all thou seest.
            
            Beholde the ende ere thou beginne,
            Haue mynde on death, and feare to sinne:
            For death shall reape that lyfe hath sovvne,
            And lyfe shall spring vvhere death hath movvne.
            If thou by God arte set on hie,
            Remember yet that thou shalt die.
            
               Abstinence is good for the health and vvealth of the Soule,
               Abstinence is good for the health and vvealth of the Mynde,
               Abstinence is good for the health and vvealth of the and bodie.
            
            If thou flie ydlenesse, Cupid hath no might,
            His Bowe lyeth broken, his fire hath no light.
            FEARE GOD, And keepe his Commaundements.
         
         
            
            GODLY priuate prayers for housholders to meditate vpon, and to say in their families.
            
               MARK. 11.24.
               ¶ What so euer ye desire when ye praye, beleeue that ye shall haue it, and it shall bee done vnto you.
               ROM. 10.13.
               ¶ Whosoeuer shall call vpon the name of the Lorde, shall bee saued.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  Psal. 55. verse. 16.
                  ¶ I will call vnto God, and the Lorde will saue me: Euening and morning and at noone will I pray and make a noise, and he wil heare my voyce.
               
            
            
            ¶ Godly priuate prayers for housholders to be saide in their Families.
            
               A prayer conteyning the effect of the Housholders Catechisme.
               
                  ALmightie God and most mercifull Father, I see in thy blessed lawes and commaundementes, the greatnesse of my sinnes and wickednesse: yea, I see (O Lord my god) the whole course of my life to be almost nothing els, but a continuall breaking of thy holy lawes and commaūdements. The thoughts of my harte, either in vanitie, or els open wickednesse, are in number infinite, daily in the aboundance of them, causing my mouth to speake, & my body to execute and do contrary to thy holy will. And againe (O Lord) I see thy heauie wrath, vengeāce, and iudgment against sinne to be intollerable, that euen the least wicked thought and most secreat cogitation of my harte, procureth thy heauy wrath, and euerlasting curse, the tormente of hell, and euerlasting fire, euen although I had but once in all my life broke any of thy commaundements, so much as once in thought. And I know (O Lord God) that thou art true and iust, & canst not abide sinne and wickednesse, but wilt iustly punish euerie sinne, euen with the selfe same tormentes of hell whiche thy iustice hath appointed, euen for euery

sinne. This O Lord my God throweth me downe and euen amaseth me, so that I knowe not what to do. I looke into my selfe, vewing mine owne power, whither I am able to ouercome this punishment of my sinne or no: and I see that al euē the most exquisite punishment which I can deuise to my selfe, in whipping of my body as long as I liue, wearing haire cloth, pineing my selfe with fasting, or any other paine, I see, I see (O Lorde) that all this punishmēt is not sufficient for one of my least sinnes because it deserueth euen the euerlasting paines of hell. I looke to Heauen, I see there is no Sainte nor Angel able to abide and ouercome this punishment of sinne: I looke to men in this worlde, euen to the Popes treasure, that wicked man of sinne, and I see yt neither his masse nor purgatory, pilgrimage, pardons, penance, satisfactions, nor any of suche like wicked stuffe, alas I see they are nothing for the satisfying for one of my least wicked thoughts, seeing the punishmente is by thy iuste decree and sentence thine euerlasting cursse. Wherefore I am driuen out from my selfe, and all that I can do, to seeke this punishmente discharged other where, or else to quall vnder the burthen. I see there is no healpe for me in Angels, Saintes, nor mortall men, but onelie in that perfecte man Christe Iesus thy deere sonne, in whome I see the full punishment of my sinne wholy payd, satisfied, discharged, and ouercome: death vanquished, the paines of hel in victorie swalowed vp, the curse satisfied, and the eternitie of the punishmente (through his euerlasting

power) ouerreachead. This I see (O Lord) by the eyes of faith, being through thy holy spirite wholy assured, that all the whole punishment of sinne payd by my Sauiour Christ, is not onely payd for other men, but euen also for me and my sinne. This assurance of my faith, being thine onely woork in me, I beseech thee in mercy to strengthen & increase, for I feele it often ful of wauering & doubting. Graunt that I may daily more and more in my soule and conscience, feele my selfe knit and grafted into the body of thy sonne, whereby I may be assured, that whatsoeuer He hath done, pertaineth to mee, and is fully & wholy mine: that I may through the power of his death, feele daily sinne die in me, and thorough the power of his resurrection feele my selfe risen from sinne, to haue my full ioy and comforte in those things which be agreeable to thy holy wil, vtterly detesting, hating, and abhorring from my hearte althinges which be contrarie to thy will and pleasure: that euen in this life I may still looke for this endlesse ioy and felicitie, vsing the thinges of this worlde, as though I vsed them not, till that good time that it shall please thee to call mee to thine euerlasting Kingdome of Glorie, there to reigne with my Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ for euer and euer. Amen.
            
            
               
               A prayer vppon the Lordes prayer.
               O Moste mighty Lorde and eternall God, who hast by thy deere sonne Christe Iesu our Lord and Sauiour,
                     Our father which art in heauen.
                   reconciled vnto thy selfe all things in heauen and earth, and in him haste made an euerlasting bond and couenaunte with vs thy faithfull children, that thou wilt not onely be our God, but also our moste louing and mercifull Father, whereof as a pledge thou hast giuen vs thy holy Spirite of adoption, whereby wee may with boldenesse and ful trust and cōfidence come to thee by harty praier, as vnto our moste louing and mercifull Father, being assured that thou wilt not deny vs any thing which thou knowest shalbe expediēt for vs: graunt we beseech thee (deare Father) that wee being fully persuaded in our harts of this thy fatherly loue and affection towards vs, may be sturred vp to make our petitions with suche an affection, ardent desire, loue and reuerence to thy maiesty, that our mindes be not carried away with bythoughts creeping in, but without all wandering may be fully bente and attentiue to the thing we aske, and fully staide vppon thy merciful and iuste protection.
               We then beseech thee (deare Father) that thou wilte strengthen our heartes with thy holy Spirite,
                     Holowed be thy name.
                   that considering thou hast made all thinges for the glory of thy Name, so wee may in al our dooings, enterprises, counsels and purposes, chiefly aboue all things seeke thy Glorie: that wee may fully acknowledge thee not onely the Authour of all

thinges, but the ruler, guider and gouernour of all thinges, both in Heauen and earth: that we neuer diminishe thine incomprehensible Glory, by attributing vnto our selues any power, strength, or abilitie to do, wil, or think that which is good: but from our harts we may acknowledge all our goodnesse to come from thee, yelding for the same continually prayse and thankesgiuing to thy glorious Name: that we neuer by distrusting thy mercifull prouidence, dishonour thy Name, but that euen in our greatest distresse we may put our ful confidence in thee, not looking vppon our weaknesse, but staying vpon thy power and promises, by harty prayer fleeing vnto thee our onely refuge: that our whole life may be so framed according to thy holy wil in al points, that thy glorious Name in vs may be sactified, and that we be not an occasion that thy holy Name be blasphemed through our wicked life and conuersation.
               Let thy Kingdome (most mercifull Father) appeare, and manifestly be declared in all the worlde,
                     Thy kindome come.
                   but especially amongst thy Churche, and faithfull flocke: declare thy selfe Lord and King oue
                     •
                   them, ruling them by the scepter of thy holy woorde, and force of thy holy Spirite. Increase the number of faithful Pastors and Preachers amongst the people: blesse their labours to the increase of this Kingdome of thy deere Sonne Iesus Christ, and to the destruction of the kingdome of satan and antichrist. Suppresse the rage of the enimies, that they may knowe that thou, O Lorde, doest reigne

in all ages, to the behoofe of thy Church and terour of thine enimies. Grāt these mercies good lord, not onely to the whole Churche in generall, but especially to euery one of vs thy Children particularly: Graunte that we may effectually feele the force of this thy Kingedome in our heartes. Beate downe in vs our olde corrupt Adam, with all sinfull delightes, thoughtes, motions, and desires: and renew in vs day by day our spiritual and inwarde man, that we may be wholy bente to delight, thinke, desire, and do those thinges whiche be acceptable in thy sighte.
               
                  
                     Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heauen.
                  Frame our heartes (good Lorde) with suche humble obedience to thy holy will, that we may be heartily wel content with whatsoeuer it pleaseth thy goodnes to lay vppon vs: that wee neuer cease in our miseries, but continually call vppon thee by hearty prayers, although wee feele no release at all, yet that still patiently we may abide, and quietly waite for thy good leysure and appointed time of deliueraunce, when thou knowest it shall be moste expedient for vs.
               Graunte vs, deere Father, that al our counsels, studies, labours and endeuours, being by thy holy spirite guided and framed,
                     Giue vs this day our daily bread,
                   wee may euery one in that vocation in whiche thou haste placed him, so faithfully trauaile, to the discharging of our consciences, and edifying of thy Churche, that our accompt may be founde acceptable before thy throne and Iudgement seate. So blesse our labours and trauels, that we may haue sufficient for the preseruing

of this present life, and be content with those benefites whiche thou shalt bestowe vpon vs, whether they be many or fewe, acknowledging them to be receiued of thee: not greedily to care for them or vainely to delight in them, but thākfully esteeme of them, as thy benefites bestowed vppon vs, and as faithful Stewards moderately to vse them to the reliefe of our brethren, and the discharge of our consciences.
               Increase in vs (good Lorde) the gifte of faith, that wee may daily more and more in our soules and consciences bee assured,
                     Forgiue vs our trespasses as we forgiue them that trespasse against vs.
                   that our sinnes be defaced, cleane blotted out, and couered with the full, perfecte, and sufficient sacrifice of thy deare Sonne Christ Iesu our Lorde and Sauiour once made for vs▪ that we are vnited, knit, and made one bodie with him, partakers of his righteousnesse, iustification, and holinesse, and euen fellow heires with him of euerlasting life: that wee may vnfainedly from the bottome of our hearts loue thee for this thine vnspeakeable goodnesse and mercie: forgiueing from our hearts our brethren which doe offend vs, pray for them, loue, cherishe, and comforte them as fellowe members all of one body, with perfecte naturall loue and compassion linked together to our head Christe Iesu.
               Strengthen vs, good Lorde,
                     Lead vs not into temptation.
                   with thy holy spirite, that we be not ouercome with the subtile suggestions and sinneful motions of satan the diuell: holde vs vp with thy mercyfull hand that we sleepe not in sinne, that we be not drawen away with the

wicked worlde, nor the enticementes of the flesh, to delighte in wickednesse: but so arme vs with thy mightie power, that we may strongly abyde all the assaultes and subtile sleightes of our ghostly enimy, and sincerely to walke before thy face, both in prosperitie and aduersitie, to thy honour and glory, the health of our soules, & profit of thy Church, through Iesus Christe our onely Lorde and Sauiour. Amen.
            
            
               
                  Our father which art in Heauen.¶The Lordes prayer more at large.
               O Moste mightie and eternall God, who of thine infinite loue to mankinde, haste giuen vs thine owne eternall sonne Christe Iesu our Lorde, to be made man for vs, in the similitude of sinnefull flesh, to become flesh of our flesh, bone of our bones, in all things like vnto vs, sinne onely excepted:who being thy true and naturall sonne, hath made vs with him, sonnes, children, and heires to thee our moste mercifull Father, giuing vnto vs by grace, that which is his by nature: And by his due, alone, once offered, sufficient sacrifice, hath payd the raunsome of our sinnes before thy diuine Maiestie, to satisfie thy iustice vpon sinnful flesh. Whiche debt being payde for vs, he hath broughte vs in fauour with thee, so that wee may now with boldnesse and truste come to thee as vnto our moste merciful and louing Father, with full assuraunce, that as thy loue is so much greater and more excellent towardes vs, then all loue of earthly Parentes towardes their

children, as thou passest all men in goodnesse and mercy, so thou wilte denie vs nothing which shall be expedient for vs. So that although all the fathers which are in earth, hauing shaken off all feeling of fatherly naturalnesse, woulde forsake their children, yet thou wouldest neuer forsake vs, because thou canste not denie thy selfe: who promisest, that if earthly fathers being euill, can giue good giftes to their children, how much more wilt thou our heauenly Father, beeing altogether goodnesse it selfe, giue good thinges to them that aske in thy Sonnes name? And that although a mother should forsake her children, yet wilt thou not forsake vs thy children, whome thou haste before the bginning of the worlde in thy deere Sonne Iesu Christe, chosen to be thy children and heires with him of thine immortall Kingdome. Whereof that we in our selues mighte be sure and certaine, and out of all doubte that wee are the children and heires of euerlasting life, thou haste giuen into our heartes thy holy Spirite, as a true pledge and earneste of our inheritaunce, whiche Spirite doth assure our spirites that we are thy children, and therefore crieth in our harts Abba Father.
               Wee therefore as thy deere children, raunsomed and boughte by thy deere sonne, flee to thee our moste louing and mercifull Father, who in goodnesse art infinite, in mercy aboundant, in substance incomprehensible, in immortalitie euerlasting: who by thy mightie power and singular prouidence rulest all thinges, according to thy heauenly

wisedome: beseeching thee for thy deere sone Christ Iesus his sake,
                     Holowed be thy name.
                   yt as thou hast sufficiētly sette forth thy glorious Name in making the whole worlde, heauen, earth, and al things therein contained: so we may in beholding and viewing thy creatures the works of thine handes, be lifted vp to thee our Lord God the Creatour and Maker, and in them, glorifie thy holy name, acknowledgeing in them thy singular goodnesse and loue towardes man, for whose vse thou haste created all thinges, both in Heauen and earth: and that we may for the same, euen from the bottom of our harts, yeeld due honour, praise and thankesgiuing to thee (deere Father) all the dayes of our life. Graunte moste mercifull Father, that wee may in hart and minde be fully assured, that thou by thy heauenly prouidence rulest and guidest all things in heauen and earth, so that nothing in the whole world commeth to passe but according to thine appoyntmente: that thou guidest and framest the affaires and doings of men, that thou haste euen their harts and all their powers in thy mercifull hande, to turne them whiche way soeuer it seemeth best to thy godly wisedome: so that whither wee be in prosperitie or aduersitie, we may acknowledge both of them to be thy woorke in vs, and therefore be no lesse thankful for sicknesse then for health: for sorrowe, then for comforte: for a troubled mind, then for a quiet: for imprisonment and banishmente, then for libertie: especially seeing we know that y• turnest them all (seeme they neuer so sharp) to the comforte and cōmodity of thy children

which feare thee: and that in al things whiche shall befal vnto vs, whither they be greuous or ioyous, prosperitie or aduersitie, life or death, thy holy Name may be sanctified in vs by yeelding due and continuall praise and thankesgiuing to thy eternall Maiestie: that wee neuer cease to put our ful truste and confidence in thy mer
                     •
                  y, who haste promised to be our defender, buckler, and shielde, to keepe vs as the apple of thine eye, to deliuer vs when we call vppon thee, to open when we knock, to giue when wee aske: that we knowing our owne weakenesse, that of our selues we haue no power or strength to do, no not so muche as to will that whiche is good, wee may acknowledge all our strength, comforte, ioy, faith, loue, hope, and confidence to be thine only gifte and woorke in vs. And for the same, and the increase of the same, and for all thy benefites in vs, whereof we feele our selues destitute, we may constantly flee vnto thee by harty prayer, requiring the same at thy mercifull hande. And hauing felt thy mercifull dealing towardes vs, we may alway to the end of our life continue thankfull to thy blessed Name: that wee neuer speake or thinke of thee (O Lord God) without high reuerence and an obediēt feare vnto thy Glorious Name.
               And that thy kingdome (O Lorde) may more gloriously shine amongest men,
                     Thy kingdome come.
                   subdue the hearts of the people to be obedient to thy woorde. Lighten all nations with thy glorious Gospell: raise vp faithful ministers of thy woord; aboundantly in euery place, who with pure and perfect zeale in true

knowledge may feede the hungrie soules with the foode of life. Lighten the harts of thy children, whome yet thou haste not called to the feeling of thy mercies in thy sonne reuealed. Beate downe the furie and rage of the kingdome of satan and antichrist with all tyrants, who shewe their vtter malice and furie against thy deare and faithfull flock. Confounde their deuises, suppresse their pride, and so strengthen all thy true and faithfull seruauntes againste their rage, that they may haue true wisedome to confound their enimies, and steadfast constancie to professe the truth of thy glorious gospell, euen to the death. And that euery one of vs may feele the force of this thy kingdome particularly in our selues, wee beseeche thee kill in vs, by thy holy spirite, all wicked delightes of sinne, and vanities of this worlde. Mortifie in vs our earthly and carnall affections, and graunte that wee may haue our full delighte and pleasure in thee our Heauenly Father, and in thy sonne Christe Iesu our Lorde and Sauiour, and reuerently embrace thy holy Woord, that our soules may be comforted therein, and our faith thereby confirmed. Lighten our vnderstanding, that we may in thy holy woord learne, and in heart be fully assured that thou art our most merciful Father: and thy deere Sonne, our Lorde and Sauiour. Beate downe in vs all sinnefull motions of the aduersarie, whiche do rebell againste thy holy spirite, and settle and frame our mindes by thy holy spirite in vs, that all rebellion in our fleshe being killed, wee may quietly with stayed mindes and consciences

sette our full ioy, comforte, and consolation in heauenly thinges, walking before thee in sinceritie of mind: put our ful trust and confidēce in thee, rest, and quiet our selues wholy in thy mighty protection and prouidence.
                     Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heauen.
                  
               
               And forasmuche (O Lord God) as of our selues wee be nothing but stubbernesse and rebellion, wee beseeche thee (deere Father) that as thine Angels in heauen doe willingly obey thy Will without resistance, so wee thy children in earth (all stubbernesse and peruersnesse, by thy holy spirite, in vs being vtterly extinguished and quenched) wee may willingly submit our selues, resigne and yeelde our whole affections to thee O Lord, to be gouerned after thy blessed and heauenly Will. That we may feele in our selues no other motion or desire, then a meete consente to thy holy Will: that whatsoeuer affections in vs fighte against thy holy Will, thou wilt vtterly make them voyde. That wee neuer will any thinge of our selues, but that thy holy Sp
                     •
                  rite in vs may gouerne our heartes, by whome inwardly being taughte, wee may learne to love, embrace, and take comforte in those thinges that please thee, and to hate those thinges that displease thee: That our heartes, mindes, and willes, beeing wholy subdued to thy moste blessed Will, wee may willingly bee contente with that estate of life, which it pleaseth thy goodnesse to excercise vs withal in this world, whither it be in aduersitie or prosperitie, in sicknesse or health, in ignominie or glorie, in quietnesse or trouble, in sorrow or gladnesse. Graūt vs, deere Father,

this willing and patiente minde, that euen in our greatest distresse wee may be content with thy good will, and not to murmur or grudge againste thy Maiestie, knowing that thou wilte lay nothing vppon vs, but that whiche shall turne to our goodnesse or profite. And that wee may patiently abide whatsoeuer it shall please thee to lay vppon vs: that we be assured in our heartes, that thou wilt not lay more vnto vs, then thou wilte giue vs strength to beare, and euen in our greatest afflictions, wilte finde a way for our deliuerance, and that thy power and strength is more fully declared, when wee feele our selues vtterly voyde of all strength, and see no way of deliueraunce: that we may in our most grieuous assaults, conflicts, and anguishe of minde, submitte our selues wholy to thy blessed will, and looke for our deliueraunce at thy hand, when thou knowest it shalbe moste expedient for vs, and most for thy glorie, leauing the time and meane of deliueraunce to thy good Will and pleasure, and that in the meane time wee neuer cease but call vppon thee, by hearty prayers continually as thou haste commanded, vntill suche time as thou shalt heare our petitions. And although after many and sundry callinges vppon thee, thou seeme not to regarde vs, but rather deale more extreamely with vs: yet notwithstāding strengthen vs so with perseuerance in prayer, that we faint not, but stil continue in praier, being assured, yt although we feele our selues nothing released, yet wee may quiet our selues herein, that wee as thy children haue layd our complaints,

griefes and sorrowes in the bosome of thee our heauenly Father, who wilt as a louing Father, whē he seeth it moste conuenient, healpe vs. And that although thou seeme nothing to graunte our requestes, yet wee honour thee in calling vppon thy Name: seeing thou doeste accepte it as a moste chiefe honour, to bee called vppon in the day of trouble.
                     Giue vs this day our daily bread,
                  
               
               And forasmuche (deere Father) as thou doeste by thy mighty power, nourish, feede, sustaine, preserue, and maintaine all liuing creatures, yea, euen the verie yong fowles and beastes, wee beseech thee to sende vnto vs thy children, (ouer whome thou haste a more speciall care) all thinges necessarie for this our present life: that wee hauing sufficient, may walke euery one in our calling, in sinceritie & pure holinesse before thy face, acknowledging all our benefits of richesse, wealth, health, meate, drink, apparell, and all our substance to bee thy mere gifts, bestowed vppon vs, and deliuered vnto vs from thy handes: that wee bee not drawen from thee through setting our mindes to muche vppon them, but so moderately vse them, as thy benefites for a time bestowed vppon vs, knowing that thou wilte at our handes require an accompte howe wee haue vsed them. That wee do not carefully gape or seeke after them, but discretely to thy glorie vse them, acknowledging in them thy goodnesse & liberalitie towardes vs. And seeing (moste mercifull Father) that it is not our trauaile, labour, paines, studie, or endeuour whiche is able to gette vs our liuing, but

onely in so muche as it pleaseth thy goodnesse to blesse and prosper them: wee beseeche thee that if through our greate trauailes and paines, we be yet still in poore and meane estate, that thou wilte giue vs a contented hearte, knowing that thereby thou letteste vs vnderstande, that it is thy good will and pleasure so to keepe vs vnder, that wee more effectually may giue our selues to serue thee. Or if it bee thy wil and pleasure more aboundantly to blesse vs and our trauaile, to sende vs aboundaunce of all thinges, wee beseech thee (deere Father) giue vs a thankefull hearte to acknowledge them to bee thy good gifts: and frame our hearts with such liberalitie that we may be contented to distribute them according to the necessitie of thy children, beeing assured that thou haste to that end made vs Stewards ouer them, that thou mayest at his handes require muche, on whome thou haste bestowed muche: so that wee hauing the due estimation of thy benefites whiche wee oughte to haue, may both reuerence thy goodnesse in thy benefites, and supply the want of our brethren, to the reliefe of their necessitie, and furtheraunce of thy Glory.
               
                  
                     Forgiue vs our trespasses, as we forgiue them that trespasse againste vs.
                  And whereas (moste mercifull Father) thy Sonne, our Lorde and Sauiour Christe Iesus hath in our nature payed the raunsome and debte of all our sinnes, whiche wee haue from the beginning of our life committed, and do daily committe, we beseeche thy gratious goodnesse that thou wilte by thy holy Spirite in our hearts, assure our soules, and consciences with a liuely faith, that by that same

one alone sufficient sacrifice, the punishment of our sinnes is payed, thy wrath appeased, and thy iustice satisfied, whereby our consciences may be quieted and set at peace with thee our mercifull Father and God. Let vs, deere father, feele in our soules and consciences, that wee are vnited and knitte to thy deere Sonne Iesus Christ, and made one body with him, and heires with him of euerlasting glorie, so coupled and ioyned with him, that wee are members of his body, so that what so euer he hath done in his body, we may be assured that it is ours: that his righteousnesse, is our righteousnesse: his sanctification and holinesse is ours: the cursse, condemnation and death which he suffered, is the same cursse, condemnation, and death due for our sinnes: that wee knowing that our sinnes bee done away, and cleane forgotten and forgiuen by thy mercifull loue & goodnesse declared, in offering vp thy sonne to death for vs, wee may be driuen to loue thee vnfaynedly from the bottome of our heartes for this thine vnspeakable loue. And considering that thou haste in mercy pardoned so many our hainous offences, wee may gladly be moued to forgiue one another their offences, and put out of our hart al rancour, malice, and hatred towarde our brethren, knowing that wee are all members of one body Christe our Sauiour: that so surely as wee haue forgiuen al them that offend against vs, wee may be so certainely assured, that thou our mercifull Father, haste forgiuen vs, like as we haue forgiuen our brethren.
               
                  And forasmuche (moste heauenly Father) as wee of our selues be feeble,
                     Leade vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill.
                   fraile, and weake, and haue a strong and subtile aduersarie satan the diuel, who goeth aboute continually like a roaring Lion seeking whome he may deuour: wee beseeche thee strengthen vs by thy holy spirit, that we may withstande his subtile suggestions and motions: holde thou vs by thy mercifull hand, and keepe vs alwaies in thy safegarde and protection, that wee bee not ouercome in the mighty assaultes of our aduersarie. And forasmuche as he often vseth euen our owne fleshe armed againste vs, to conquer vs, wee beseech thee deare Father, mortifie, subdue and kill in our fleshe all subtile suggestions, and sinnefull motions of satan, that we yelde not our selues as slaues thervnto, but continually fight against them, and bring them into subiection of the spirite. Graunt vnto vs, deere Father, that wee bee not drawne through the subtilitie and sliely tormentes of satan, to haue our delight and pleasure in the vanities of this presente world, but by thy Grace, might and power, may so in the prosperitie of this life be vppholden, that our mindes with full ioy and comfort may be lifted vp to our perfecte consolation in our Lorde and Sauiour Christe, and in him, take our full and perfecte ioy & consolation, so that no vaine delight of this worlde put vs from the same, neither any sharp adversitie, as pouertie, miserie, or calamitie, through the malice of the diuell, driue vs to despaire of thy mercifull goodnesse towardes vs: but alwayes beeing through thy grace and assistance defended, wee may be fully and perfectly armed againste all the

subtile intrappings of satan, and reste wholy in thy merciful defence and ayde. For thou haste (O Lord and eternall God) in thy gouernement, all things in heauen and earth, all power and dominion ouer all creatures, Angels and diuels, to rule them according to thy good pleasure and will, to the profite and commoditie of thy churche, and euery faithfull member thereof, and to thine owne incomprehensible glorie: in all thinges, in all ages, for euer and euer thy glorious name may bee exalted, and thy faithfull flocke edified thorough Christ our Lord. Amen.
            
            
               ¶ A confession of sinnes with faith and repentaunce.
               O Mercifull and heauenly Father, wee thy seruauntes do humbly prostrate our selues before thy Maiestie, acknowledging here in thy sighte our haynous offences committed against thy Maiestie, seing & beholding thy heauie wrath against them: wee feele our selues laden (O Lord our God) with a huge companie of horrible sinnes, whereofeuen the very leaste, beeing but conceiued in thoughte, is sufficient in iudgement to throwe vs downe to the euerlasting burning lake. Our owne consciences, O Lorde, do beare witnesse againste vs, of our manifolde transgressions of thy blessed lawe, of our securitie & senselesse blindenesse running headelong to destruction, committing sinne after sinne, although not notorious to the woorlde, yet horrible

before thine eye. The thoughtes of our heartes rise vp in iudgmente against vs: the vanitie of our talke before thy maiestie condemneth vs: the wickednesse of our deedes from thy sight reiecteth vs: all our wicked thoughtes, woordes and deedes, with the inwarde corruption of our nature, do altogether as it were a whole lumpe and lode of sinne, lye heauy vppon vs, and with their intollerable weight do euen presse vs downe to hell. Wee do daily grone vnder the burthen of them, inwardly lamenting our owne folly so greedily rūning into them. In Heauen, earth, or hell, wee see none able to sustaine the weight of them, but euen thy deerely beloued Sonne Iesus Christe, who in mercy infinite, and compassion endlesse, hath sustayned and ouercome that endlesse punishmente due vnto them: in him therefore, in him, moste mercifull Father, and through him wee come to thee, beeing fully assured according to thy promise, that thou wilt accept and take that ful recompence which he thy deere sonne hath made for vs, as a iust raūsome for all the sinnes of all those whoe withe a true faithe take holde on him. In him therefore wee see thine anger towardes vs appeased, thy wrath satisfied, & our debts payde.
               Increase in vs, good Lorde, wee beseeche thee, this liuely and feeling faith, for wee feele it often times in vs very weake, and troubled with many doubtes: increase it in vs (O Lorde) that wee may through thy holy spirit bee assured, that the punishment of our sinnes is fully in thy sonne discharged.

Make vs, O Lorde our God, to feele this same in our soules and consciēces, that Iesus Christ is ours, and all that he hath done: that wee are graffed into his body, & made one with him, and therefore fellowe heires with him of euerlasting life. Lette vs not onely haue these wordes in our mouthes (good Lorde) but through thy holy Spirite lette vs feele the comfort of them in our heartes fully sealed and settled in vs: that wee feeling our selues inwardly before thy iudgemente seate discharged, and our consciences towardes thee appeased, may be swallowed vp with an vnfained loue towarde thy Heauenly Maiestie, and towardes our brethren for thy sake. Make sinne to die in vs daily more and more, that wee may hate, detest, and vtterly abhorre all sinne and wickednesse in all men, but especially in our selues: that wee may strongly through thy holy Spirit set our selues in open warre and defiaunce againste all sinne and wickednesse: that wee please not our selues in our sinnes, but streightly examining sinne by the iuste rule of thy holy Lawes, wee may vtterly from the bottome of our heartes condemne euen the least sinne in our selues, hauing our whole ioy, comforte and consolation vppon those thinges whiche bee agreeable to thy blessed will, alwayes beeing afraid to do any thing contrary to the same: that wee may euen from the bottome of our heartes, examine and trie our thoughtes, before thy presence, that they bee vprighte and vnfained, not hypocriticall in outwarde shewe onely and appearance, but that euen all corners of our heartes being

opened and disclosed beefore thee, wee may euen as though it were openly before the face of the whole worlde bring them in shewe, knowing that a double heart is detestable in thine eyes: and yt we may walke alwayes as before thine eyes, not onely before the eyes of man, being more carefull to walk circumspectly, in this respecte, that wee haue thee to be a viewer of our dooings, a thousād fold more then the eyes of man: that thus wee may walke as becommeth thy children, not onely in outwarde shewe, but also in sinceritie of heart, abhorring euen the leaste sinne in our selues, striuing, resisting and fighting againste sinne, not delighting our selues in sinne, nor nourishing the same in our breste, but earnestly embraceing, and studiously seeking after those thinges whiche bee pleasante in thine eyes: yt neither the feare of man, nor losse of goods, life, lāds possessions, or friends drawe vs away frō thee, to do any leaste thing contrarie to thy will and pleasure: neither the fauour or friendshippe of man, nor yet the flattering enticementes of this worlde, nor the vaine promotions of the same do moue vs any whitte from the true and endlesse ioy, delighte and pleasure whiche wee ought to haue in those things whiche bee agreeable to thy will, and the constante performance of ye same: but that alwayes to the end of our life we may continue in thy pathes, growing and increasing from faith to faith, from strength to strength, til at length wee shall come to thy euerlasting rest. Amen.
            
            
               
               A prayer for the estate of the whole Church.
               O Lorde our God and Heauenly Father, for asmuch as by thy holy word wee are commanded in our prayers not onely to be mindefull of our selues, but also of all others thy children, yea euen of our enimies: wee commend vnto thy Maiestie all thy whole true and catholike Churche, and euery member thereof: that as it hath pleased thy goodnesse by the brighte beames of thy holy woorde, to shine ouer the whole worlde, whereby thou haste expelled, driuen away, and caused to vanishe the darke and mistie cloudes of ignorance and superstition, so thou wouldest vouchsafe by thy holy spirite to touche the heartes of men, that they may ioy fully embrace that thine so high a treasure sente amongest vs, that through our vnthankfulnesse we prouoke not thy Maiestie in anger to take it from vs. Crush, bruse, and destroy with the breath of thy mouth, the mightie power of that man of sinne, whiche so proudly exalteth himselfe aboue all that is called God. Let not thy simple flocke (deere Father) in whose consciences he of long time hath and yet doth sitte as GOD, bee any longer poysoned with his sweete enticeing poysons: but so lighten their heartes, that they may perceiue his iuglynges, and embrace the sweete and comfortable doctrine of life euerlasting, reuealed in thy Glorious Gospell.
               
                  And forasmuch as it hath pleased thee in mercy aboue all nations of the earth, to powre downe the sweete showers of thy Heauenly Graces vppon this our Englishe nation aboundantly, in more plentifull wise watering the same with the giftes of thy holy Spirite, in promoting thy Gospell, and ouerthrowing idolatrie, wee beseech thee continue thy fauour towarde the same, and vtterly roote out all remnantes, reliques and monumentes of idolatrie, that thy Glorious Name may be throughly exalted, in sincere, pure, and holy worshippe. And as thou haste in mercy from amongst vs in this thy Churche, vtterly banished all false, venemous and poysonfull doctrine, wherewith the soules of thy Children heretofore haue bene wounded to death, and in place thereof haste placed the true and comfortable doctrine of life euerlasting, wherewith the soules of thy children bee fedde and nourished to euerlasting ioy: so in like mercy and fauour wee beseeche thee, deere Father, establish in the same thy Church, a true, perfecte, and sincere regiment thereof, according to the prescripte rule of thy blessed woord, all fantasies of mans braine, and dreames of humaine policie vtterly abolished: that thy glorious Maiestie onely may bee exalted in the lighte of thy glorious Gospel: & that thy Church may flourishe and increase, beeing through thy protection ayded, supported, maintained and defended: we beseech the by thy holy spirit, guide & rule euery part & member therof, especially thy seruant ELIZABETH our Queene, whome thy gratious fauour

and mercifull prouidence hath appointed a chiefe member in the same: vnder whose winges next vnto thy protection it hath a chiefe succour and supporte. Graunte vnto her, O Lorde, a pure and perfecte Zeale, aboue all thinges to promote thy Glorie: first and chiefly in labouring and endeuouring of her selfe earnestly in wiping away and purging out of thy Churche all blots and deformities, to reduce the same to a pure and sincere fourme of worshippe, agreeing to thy blessed woorde, vtterly to remoue all stumbling blockes which stay and hinder the course of thy Gospel: giue her in like manner O Lorde, the spirite of wisedome, discretion, and gouernement, that with equitie and iustice shee may see this whole Realme, which thou hast committed to her charge, peaceably and quietly gouerned: that shee may studiously labour, that as wel thorough the whole Realme vertue be exalted, & vice abandoned: as especially in her owne house and court, that all wicked vanities of this worlde, al licentious and inordinate life, all flattering and dissimulation beeing vtterly banished, the feare of thy Glorious Maiestie may so reigne in the heartes of all within her palace and courte, that their liues and conuersation may bee agreeable to thy blessed wil, in sinceritie and true holinesse and integritie of life, that from them, as from the heade, may shine puritie of life and conuersation, as an example and patterne of true Godlinesse to the whole Realme. Preserue her, we beseech thee good Lorde, from all conspiracies and treasons, that if it bee thy good

wil she may haue a long and quiet reigne ouer vs, to the benefite of thy Churche, and the aduauncement of thy glorie. Indue the whole counsel, good Lord, with true and perfect wisedome, that in all their consultations and counsels, hauing thee present before their eyes, they may consulte of those thinges which principally and chiefely may be for the aduancemēt of thy glorie, & the cōmoditie of thy churche, and next for the quiet peace and gracious gouernment of this realme. So lighten al inferiour Magistrates of this Realme, good Lorde, with the brightnesse of thy holy Spirit, that vnderstanding thy wil, they may zealously defend, mainteine and further the course of the Gospel with the sword of iustice, cut off the wicked, and cherish the godly.
               Defende and gouerne, by thy holy Spirite, the Pastours of thy Churche, and labourers in thy vineyard, that they may zealously, earnestly and diligently feede thy flocke committed vnto them, with the foode of life thy blessed word, wherewith their soules may be nourished to Life Euerlasting. Increase the number of them, deere Father, place ouer euery flocke a godly, learned & paineful Pastor, who may painfully and carefully trauail euery one in his charge, to bring thy people (which nowe alas in moste partes do wander and go astray like loste sheepe) to the true knowledge of thee their Lord and God, and of thy deare sonne Christe Iesu their Sauiour. And for thy mercie, we beseeche thee, to take pitie vpon thy poore and simple flocke,

roote out all rauening wolues, which haue craftily crept into thy sheepefolde and do make hauocke of the soules of thy simple flock. Cast out al hirelings, time seruers, & dumb dogs, which to fill their bellies only, haue thrust themselues among thy sheep, & do pitifully suffer the flock of Christ thy sonne, to be deuowred and scattered of the woolfe. Stirre vp, good Lord, and place in their roomes faithfull sheepheardes, which diligently, painefully, carefully and earnestly may labour in thy vineyard, seeke to winne the soules of thy people, out of the tyrannie and power of satan, to the freedome of thy deere sonne Christ Iesu our Lorde.
               And that thy Churche may better be furnished with Godly learned Pastours, we beseeche thee prosper and increase in all Godly knowledge, all Schooles of learning, especially the two Vniuersities Cambridge, and Oxforde: Graunt deere Father, vnto al the students of the same, that the chiefe ende of all their studies may be to the furtheraunce of thy Churche, and maintenance of the common wealthe. Blesse their studies, deere Father, that all vaine studies set aside, they may so fructifie and profite in all profitable & godly sciences, that hereafter they may become profitable members in thy church, & godly vpholders of the cōmon wealth.
               Grant, good Lord, to al the whole Commons of this Realme, that their hartes being touched with a sincere feare and reuerence of thy heauenly Maiestie, acknowledging thy mercie in placeing ouer them a Godly Princesse, they may euery one

in their callings, walke in all true and humble obedience vnto her, in thee and for thee without resistance, tumults, insurrections, conspiracies, or rebellions: knowing that to resist the higher powers, is to rebell against thy Maiestie. Finally we beseeche thy goodnesse so guide & gouerne the hartes of all ye whole Realme of euery degree, yt euery one in his calling, being by thy grace supported, may so occupie his talent, that thy Glorie in all thinges may be aduanced, thy Churche inlarged, and this whole Realme into sincere Godlinesse vertuously reduced.
               Moreouer we beseech thee (O Lord our God) in mercie behold all those which suffer persecution for thy glorious wordes sake, whither it be imprisonmente, deathe, or banishment, or whatsoeuer else: strengthē them good Lord, yt they hauing thee always before their eyes, and the glorie laide vp for thē in ye life to come, may continue constant in defēding thy truth, without feare of man or vaine allurementes of the world, yt whether it come by life or death, they may glorifie thy Holy name in continuing in ye trueth to the end. Preserue in like maner we beseech thee, all others thy children, whom it hath pleased thee with any other kinde of crosse to chasten for their amendement, whither by pestilence, famine, warre, pouertie, imprisonment, sicknesse or banishment, trouble of conscience, vexation of spirit, disquietnesse of minde, want of spirituall comforte, or whatsoeuer kinde of affliction of body or mindes, thou doest trie them with:

that by thy holy spirit being fully assured, that thou by this thy correction mindest to call them backe to a feeling of their sinne, and due consideration of their life and conuersation, that they may patiently abide thy Fatherly trial, looking for aide, help, and comfort from thee, when it seemeth most conuenient to thy godly wisedome: and beeing by thy merciful hande once deliuered, may acknowledge thy singular power & worke, giueing al laude and praise to thy glorious Name: and afterwards, al the dayes of their life, studie to liue before thee in sinceritie and perfect holinesse, euen to their liues ende. Amen.
            
            
               Morning prayer for priuate houses and Families.
               O Gratious God, and louing Father, according to thy commaundement, wee do here presente our selues before thy Maiestie, humbly prostrating ourselues before ye throne of mercy, acknowledging and confessing from the bottome of our hearts that wee be miserable sinners, daily breaking thy commaundements, both in thought, woord, and deede, wherein wee iustly deserue euerlasting damnation, and to bee vtterly throwne from thy presence: yet, O Lorde, wee see thy goodnesse againe towardes vs, who not suffering vs thus to perishe in our sinnes, hast sent thine owne deere Sonne Iesus Christ, to take vpon him whatsoeuer is due, to reconcile & make vs at one with thee againe: In him

therefore, good Lorde, and through him do wee come vnto thee, beseeching thee for his sake, that wee feeling the greeuousnesse of our sinnes, and groneing vnder the burden of them, may feele the release and ease of them, in that we be through thy holie Spirit assured, and stedfastly beleeue, that Christ hath borne the burden of them, euen for vs. Graunte, O Lorde, that we beeing assured hereof in our consciences, may through thy holy Spirite bee renued in the inner man, to hate, deteste and abhorre sinne, and to studie to liue according to thy blessed will during our whole life.
               Wee do not onely pray for our selues, but also for all thy whole Church, especially suche as bee persecuted for thy woorde: graunte vnto them, that whither it be by death or life, they may glorifie thy Name to their liues ende. Bee mercifull to this Churche of Englande and Irelande, wee beséeche thee good Lord, and preserue euery part and member of the same, especially thy Seruaunte Elizabeth our Queene: graunt her all such giftes as bee needeful for so high a calling, to the aduauncement of thy Glory, and benefite of this common wealth, to the establishing of a perfect gouernemēt of thy Church, according to the prescript rule of thy blessed word, to the rooting out of all superstition and reliques of antichriste, to the gouerning of her Subiectes in all peace and tranquillitie. Defende her, O Lord, from all conspiracies, treasons, and rebellions, and so woorke in the hearts of all her Subiects, that knowing her authoritie doth come from thy Heauenly

Maiestie, they may with obedient heartes humbly obey her in thee and for thee. Preserue the whole Counsell and the Magistrates of the Realme, that beeing lightened through thy holy Spirite, they may defende thy trueth, suppresse wickednesse, and maintaine equitie. Beholde all the Pastours and Preachers of the woorde, blesse their laboures, increase ye number of them, place ouer euery Churche a paineful watchman, remoue all idle Lubbers, and confounde the power of antichriste, and turne the heartes of the people that they may bee obedient to thy truth. Blesse the two Vniuersities, Cambridge and Oxforde, and all the Studients of the same, with all Schooles of learning. Beholde al those that bee afflicted with any kinde of crosse, that they may profite by thy correction in newnesse of life. ‡*‡
               Lastly, for our selues here gathered together, we hartily craue at thy hands, that it would please thee to make vs thankfull vnto thy Maiestie, for all thy loueing kindnesse shewed vnto vs euen from our infancie: especially, that thou haste this present nighte deliuered vs from all daungers both of body and soule, whereinto many haue fallen, as wee into like manner should haue done, if wee had not bene stayed with thy mercifull hande: that thou haste also graunted vnto vs so sweete and comfortable reste, and haste nowe presently broughte vs to the beginning of this day. For these thinges, good Lorde, wee yeelde vnto thee most hartie thankes, beseeching thee to make vs more and more daily

thankfull vnto thy Maiestie for them, and pardon our vnthankfulnesse. And as thou hast safely preserued vs vnto this present houre from al the daungers of this life: so we beseeche thee continue thy fauour towards vs this day, and the whole course of our life. Defend vs, O Lord, that we nowe entring into the affaires of this day, be not drawen away with the vaine allurementes of this world, to sinne and wickednesse: that wee walke not in the shadowe of death, that we be not intangled in the snares of sinne, that we stumble not at the blockes of iniquitie, that we finally fall not into the pitte of deathe, and destruction: but being shadowed vnder thy winges, we may cheerefully and constantly go on forward to the end of our course. Graunt vnto vs, O Lord our God, that this good time whiche thou grauntest vnto vs in this life, be not idely, or vainely of vs consumed, but that euery one of vs may be diligently exercised in his calling this day, and all our life long, being assured that thou wilt once call vs to yeelde an account of our stewardshippe: indue vs we beseeche thee, with those gifts and graces which be needeful for vs in our calling, & that with a pure and sincere conscience we may vse them to the benefite of our brethren, and discharge of our owne consciences, beefore thy Maiesty. We beseech thee, O Lord, that in al our consultations, woordes and workes this day, and the whole course of our life, we may always haue thee present before our eyes, knowing that thou seest euen the very deepe thoughtes of our hartes, whiche

alwayes may be as a bridle to pull vs backe, that we neither do, nor yet consent vnto any sinne or wickednesse: but that alwayes we may be so exercised in the affaires of this life, that we looke stil to the end of our course, whē it shal please thee to bring vs through ye pilgrimage of this life to our euerlasting rest with thy deere Sonne Iesus Christe our Sauiour. In whose name for these mercies and whatsoeuer thou knowest to be needful for vs, and for the whole Churche, we pray vnto thee, as he himselfe hath taught vs in his holy word, saying: Our Father whiche art. &c.
               The Lord blesse vs and saue vs, the Lord make his face to shine vpon vs, and be mercifull vnto vs, the Lorde turne his fauourable countenance toward vs, and graunt vs his peace. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christe, the loue of God the Father, & the moste comfortable fellowshippe of the holy Ghost be with vs, preserue and keepe vs this day and euermore. Amen.
            
            
               ¶Euening prayer for priuate houses and Families.
               O Gratious God & louing Father. &c. As in the beginning of the morning prayer, reding so forth, til ye come to this marke. ‡*‡. Then read this folowing for the Euening.
               
               Lastly, for our selues here gathered, we render most hartie thanks to thy maiestie, O Lord, which hast hitherto from our infancie, preserued vs by thy mercie from all perils and daungers bothe of soule

& bodie, wherevnto fraile man is subiect, that thou hast sent vnto vs al things necessarie for this present life, as healthe, foode, apparel, and such like, whiche many of thy deere children doe want, being notwithstanding as preciously bought with the precious bloud of thy deere sonne, as we be, and yet lie in miserie and calamitie, oppressed with pouertie, nakednesse, imprisonement and bannishment, in which case also, deere Father, thou mightest haue brought vs, saue onely that thou dealest herein more fauourably with vs, then with them. For the which thy louing kindenesse wee giue thee hartie thankes, desiring thee, that as thou hast hitherto thus fauourably in mercie preserued vs by thy protection, and euen presently this day hast brought vs past all the daungers thereof: so we beseech thee good Lorde, in like fauour beholde vs this night, that we taking our natural rest and quietnesse may through thy protection be defended, that our bodies resting, our soules may be occupied in beholding thy fauour and mercie towarde thy children, stil looking for the comming of our Lord and Sauiour Iesu Christ for our full redemption. Graunt that our sleepe be not immoderate, according to the lust of our fleshe, but as muche as is sufficient to refreshe our weake nature: that beeing thus refreshed, bothe the bodie and the minde may be more able to doe their seuerall office and function, in that vocation vvherein thou haste placed vs.
               Graunt that wee laying our bodies downe to

reste, may be thereby put in minde of our long rest of deathe: that as we doe nowe lay downe our bodies in bedde, so wee may be thereby admonished, that hereafter they shalbe laide downe in graue, to bee consumed to duste, earthe, and ashes, from whence they were taken: That wee hauing this before our eyes, may be stirred vppe in minde warely to walke in this our pilgrimage, not knowing when the time shalbe of our departure, but alwayes to be founde readie with our lampes of pure faithe clearely burning, that we may be accepted to meete the Bridegrome, when our mortall, earthly, and corruptible bodies shalbe made like to the glorious bodie of our Lord and sauiour Christ Iesu, there to reigne with him in perpetuall ioy & cōsolatiō together with al the elect children of God, continually lauding with all the heauenly multitude the glorious Maiestie of thee our Lorde God and heauenly Father, in our Lord and Sauiour Iesu Christ. For these and whatsoeuer else thou knowest to be needefull for vs and thy whole Churche, we pray vnto thee, as he himselfe hathe taught vs, saying: Our Father. &c.
               The Lorde blesse vs and saue vs, the Lorde make his face to shine vppon vs, and bee mercifull vnto vs: the Lord turne his fauourable countenance vnto vs, and graunte vs his peace. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, the loue of God the Father, and the moste comfortable fellowshippe of the Holy Ghost, be with vs, preserue and keepe vs this night and euermore. Amen.
            
            
               
               A prayer to bee saide before the studying or reading of holy Scripture.
               O Heauenly Father, what soeuer I am, what so euer I haue, whatsoeuer I know, it is only by thy free grace. For by nature I am the childe of wrath, and I am not borne a newe of fleshe and bloude, neither of the seede of man, or of the will of man. Fleshe and bloude cannot reueale the mysteries of thy Heauenly Kingdome vnto mee: but by thy blessed will I am that I am, and by the same knowe I that I knowe. Therefore, O Father, do I commit into thy handes onely, my saluation. If my knowledge bee small, yet I doubte nothing but that I am the childe of thy euerlasting kingdome: and therefore by thy mightie power I shall growe (when it shall bee thy good will and pleasure) to a more full and riper knowledge, as of a more perfecte age, wherein my faith shal bee fully able to comprehend and perceiue the breadth, deapth, heigth and largenesse of thy greate mercies and gratious promises. But seeing, O Father, this power of full knowledge and perfecte reuelation, passeth all power naturall, and remaineth onely in thy power, and the light of thy spirite: O Lord do thou whatsoeuer it shall please thee, to open vnto me and all the rest of thine elect seruaunts and children, depending vppon thee, so muche of the lighte of thy countenaunce as may be moste for thy Glorie and our comforte, yea, and at suche time as shall seeme good to thy wisedome

& fatherly mercie. In the meane while thus resting wholy vpō thee, neither can I despaire, neither wil I be to much careful, althogh I cannot attaine to the knowledge of many of thy works, neither to the vnderstanding of many places of thy scriptures. But I will confesse vnto thee the weakenesse of my faith, waiting alwais for the further reuealing of thy glorious light to be vttered vnto me thy poore seruant, when thou shalt thinke (of thy fatherly beneuolence and goodnesse) meete and conuenient. I knowing moste assuredly that thou wilt pitie my weake imbecillitie and childishe infancie, and cause the same to serue for thy glorie, and my greate commoditie: seeing that I erre as a childe before suche a Father, which canst not put off thy fatherly pitie and compassion, but rather as thou haste bought mee vnto thee, to be an heire of the kingdome by the bloud of thy naturall sonne my Sauiour Iesus Christ: so am I sure that thou wilt lighten me in the end with full fruition of the brighte lighte of thy countenaunce, that I may see thee and know thee as this thy sonn knoweth thee: yea, see thee and knowe thee my Father face to face, and knowe as I am knowen. Thus reste I onely in thy handes (O my God) crauing of thee to increase my knowledge in thy holy woorde, wherby I may know thy good wil and pleasure. And knowing the same, giue me, O Lord thy holie Spirit to conduct & leade me in the same al the dayes of my life, that in sinceritie of faith, and purenesse of liuing and conuersation, thy glorious Maiestie may be magnified in me for euer. Graunt

this, O Father, for thy deerely beeloued Sonne our sauiour Iesus Christe, to whome with thee and the holy Ghost be all honour, glorie and prayse, world without ende. Amen.
            
            
               Prayers and thankesgiuinges to bee saide before and after meate. Prayer before meate.
               O Lorde our God and Heauenlie Father, in thy beeloued Sonne Iesus Christe, woorke in our heartes true repentance, with increase of a true and liuely faith: make vs thankfull vnto thy Maiestie for all thy benefites whiche wee continually receiue at thy mercifull hand: graunte vs the grace, that wee may at this presente with thankfull hearts as from thy hands receiue meate and drink for the sustenance of our bodies, with moderatiō vse them to thy Glorie, and through thy blessing, receiue by them perfect nourishment: and aboue all we craue at thy handes, good Lorde, the heauenly foode of our soules, which neuer perisheth: that through thy gratious goodnes, we may be nourished & strēgthened both in soule and body to eternall life, through Iesus Christ our Sauiour. Amen.
            
            
               Thankesgiuing after meate.
               ETernall God, and mercifull Father, wee yeelde vnto thee moste heartie thankes for al thy benefites so plentifully bestowed vppon vs: especially that thou haste at this presente fedde and nourished our mortall bodies with meate and drinke: wee beseeche

thee in like manner let our soules feele the sweete taste of thy heauenly foode, that wee beeing fedde and nourished at thy hands, both in soule and body, may in this life walke as it becommeth thy children, & in the life to come, be receiued to thine eternall Kingdome of glorie, through Iesus Christ our Lorde and Sauiour. Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer beefore meate.
               O Mercifull and Heauenly Father, who giuest foode to euery liueing creature, and without whome nothing can liue, blesse and sanctifie our meates and drinkes, whiche we are nowe about to receiue, that they may turne to the nourishmente of our bodies, whereunto thou haste appointed them: that we acknowledging thy gratious goodnesse in prouiding so liberally for our bodies, may with cheereful heartes be lifted vp earnestly to long after the foode of our soules, whereby wee may be fedde eternally, through Iesus Christ our sauiour. Amen.
            
            
               A thankesgiuing after meate,
               O Heauenly Father, for these thy benefites wherwith thou haste now sufficiently fedde our bodies, we beseech thee make vs thankfull: And as we feele the sweetnesse of them pleasant to our bodies: so wee beseeche thee, good Lorde, that the foode of our soules may be as pleasante and comfortable vnto our soules, and that we may with as careful harts prouide for the nourishmēt of our soules, as we are careful for our bodies, til it shal please thy Maiestie to bring vs to the place, where we shal neuer hunger nor thirste more, but liue eternally through Christe our Sauiour. Amen.
            
            
               
               A Prayer before meate.
               O Lord our God & heauenly Father, which haste prouided meate and drink for the nourishment of our bodies, giue vs grace to vse them reuerently as from thy handes with thankfull heartes. And as wee do greately hunger and thirste for this foode of our bodies, so wee beseech thee, good Lord, that our soules may earnestly hunger after the like food and nourishment, that with earnest minds we may seeke to haue our soules fedd and refreshed eternally, through our only Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ. So be it.
            
            
               A Thankesgiuing after meate.
               WOonderfull is thy prouidence, O Lorde, in preseruing all liueing creatures. Graunte vs grace wee beseech thee, that with thankfull harts wee may acknowledge thy bountifull goodnesse, so liberally giuing vnto vs al things needeful: especially feeding vs so plentifully at this presente with thy manifolde blessings whereof a greate many of our brethren are destitute, as in like māner we shuld be, if thou diddest not deale more liberally with vs: graunt vs therefore, gratious Lord, that we may be thankful for this thy goodnesse, and to be mindeful of them, whiche haue not suche aboundance to relieue them: that being all members of one body, we may at length reigne with our heade Christe, to whome be al honour and glorie woorlde without ende. Amen.
            
            
               
               A thankesgiuing after the receiuing of our bodily sustenance, & reading of some part of Gods holy word our spiritual foode.
               O Lord our God the onely giuer of al good gifts, who of thy great mercies hast made vs partakers bothe of the Heauenly gyftes of thy holy worde, to feede our mindes, and of thine earthly creatures for the necessarie sustenance of our weake bodies: graunt we beseeche thee that through thy grace, these thy gifts may be madeperfect vnto vs: giue strength vnto our meate, that it may be our healthful nourishment, not to breede in vs any carnall desire of our vaine life, but to enable our bodies to all good workes during the time of this present pilgrimage, that so thy good creatures may be our good reliefe, so long as thou wilt, and so muche as thou knowest to be expediēt for vs thy seruants, to finishe our dayes which thou hast numbred, in the edifying of thy saincts, and glorifying of thy Holy Name. And because (O Lord) we know nothing of our selues, but our ignorant hartes are full of darknesse, therfore we beseech thee that this thy Worde (whiche is thine eternal wisedome) that nowe we haue read, (& wherein wee haue had our conference) may be in our minds a shining light of thine onely trueth, and in our heartes a fruitefull seede of our newe birth, so that thine owne Image may be happily againe restaured in vs, and we may be made before thee a holie and righteous people, by the inward working of thy gratious spirite, daily

strengthening our heartes in earnest loue of thy trueth, and carefull obedience of thy commandementes, through Iesus Christe our only Mediatour, who in the sacrifice of his owne bodie, hathe purchased vnto vs all thy fauour, and hath giuen vs this boldenesse to call vppon thee: vnto whom (O Father) with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honour and glorie world without end. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer for all times.
               O Lorde God Father of mercie and God of all consolation, without whome we haue neither hope nor comfort, we poore wretches and miserable sinners beseeche thee of thy fatherly goodnesse to looke vpon vs, and so make vs partakers of thy gratious goodnesse, that we may stil increase in all goodnesse, so that euermore we may set forth thine honour and glorie: let our conuersation be suche, that a greate many beholding our good woorkes, may glorifie thee our heauenly Father: and so direct our wayes, that we may holde foorth the profession of thy Gospel as a lanthorne to lighten the steps of a great many, that they may turne to thee, and praise thy name in their visitation. Thus (O Lord) we beseeche thee to deale with vs, that in deede we may be vessels of honour vnto thee, now to set forth ye praise of thy name, & after this transitorie life, to behold thy Glorie, who hast immortalitie alone, & dwellest in light yt no man hath approched vnto: remoue farr frō vs our sins & iniquities, that they may not separate betweene vs and thee:

blot out of vs our offences, and make our prayers righteous, that thou maiste fauourably graunt our requestes: looke vpon vs with thy fauourable mercie, that thou mayst haue pittie vpon vs, and behold vs in the righteousnes of thy beloued sonne Christ Iesu, & yt we may be presēted faultlesse in thy sight: and thou accepting vs as holy, wee may finde the grace euermore to set forth thine honour and glorie, and to speake of thy praises in the middes of all thy people. Let vs loue (O Lord) the thinges that are good, and hate the thinges that are euill: let vs delight in all thinges that may please thee, and let vs be grieued with whatsoeuer is displeasant in thy sight. And to the intent wee may haue true vnderstanding & be able to discerne betweene things, what is good or euil, we beseech thee let thy word dwel plentifully in vs, which may guide our vnderstandinges so, yt we may abound in al knowledge, and do according to that which is righteous. And in this estate of true Christianitie, being instructed in minde, & readie in bodie to all holy obedience, we beseech thee make vs to growe & increase from grace to grace, from faith to faith, vntil wee come vnto the fulnesse of age to be perfecte members of the bodie of Christe, wayting for the blessed hope of thine electe, and sighing in spirite vntil the time that thy children shalbe reuealed. In the meane season let vs sighe with al those that haue receiued the firste fruites of thy Spirite, that these dayes of sinne may cease, that satan be troden downe vnder feete,

that antichrist may bee reuealed, yet to manie thou sandes that be in ignoraunce, that the number of thine electe may be full, the bodie of thy Sainctes made perfect, all teares wiped from our eyes, euen than when the Sonne shal appeare again the second time to iudge the quicke and the dead, whiche time (O Lord) send quickly, according to thy good wil, and teache vs to pray with all thy Sainctes, Come Lord Iesu, come quickly: graunt this (O Father) for thy Sonnes sake, in whose name wee pray vnto thee. And although we be but earth and ashes, yet we are bolde to say vnto thee, (the God of all Glorie) euen as he hath taught vs. Our Father which art in Heauen. &c.
               
                  E.D.
               
            
            
               A prayer for all estates.
               O Lord God Father of light, with whome is no change, neither yet shadow of change, but hast established thine apointed coūsels, which shal not be changed for euer: thou (O God) hast made among vs this diuersitie of estates & degrees, according as euery cōmon wealth requireth, keepe vs all, we beseeche thee, that we may walke obediently in our calling, and followe the steppes that thou haste set before vs, euen from the highest to the lowest, let vs accomplishe that duetie vnto whiche thou haste appointed vs, and with a faithfull remembrance of thy promise made of olde to our Father Abraham, that thou art his exceeding great reward, we may

likewise depend on thy prouidēce, & seeke not any shameful ways to get our liuing, wandring from ye righteousnesse of our vocation, into the manifolde errors of sinne & iniquitie: look vpon vs (O Lord) & inrich vs with thy grace, make vs obediēt to our inferiours, meeke towardes our enimies, faithful to our freendes, true and iust towardes all men, that wee may dwell stedfastly rooted in the hope of thine electe, vntil thou shalt make an ende of all our labours: looke vpon our moste excellent Queene, and her Honourable Counsel, and as thou hast called them to the highest roome, so giue vnto them the greatest measures of grace, that they faithfully dispence the talentes committed vnto them: leade them with the good king Dauid into thy Sanctuarie that they may see thy louing kindenesse which is better then life, and say with the Prophet: Al flesh is grasse, and the glorie of man is as the flower of the fielde, and so consecrate themselues to do thy wil, offer vp their bodies to be holy, liuely, and reasonable sacrifices vnto thee, that they may be nurses and noursfathers vnto thy Churche: looke also we beseech thee vppon thy ministers whome thou haste appointed to the preaching of thy Gospell, make them (O God) faithfull dispensers of thy mysteries, without respecte of persons to doe the worke vnto the whiche thou hast appointed them, that they may conuert sinners, and haue their glorie perfecte in the day of Christ: and knit vs together in peace and loue, that we may be full of compassion one towardes an other, to reioyce with thē
                  
that reioyce, and mourne with them that mourne, especially to instruct one another in the wayes of righteousnesse, that by our mutuall healpe we may the better withstande our enimie, and dwell, safe in hope of thine electe, till our dayes shall bee full, and we shall walke the wayes of all the worlde, whiche time wee beseeche thee bring vs happily vnto, euen for thy Sonnes sake wee beseech thee, to whome with thee and the holy Ghost three persons & one God, be all honour and glorie nowe and for euermore. Amen, Amen.
            
            
               
               A fourme of Morning prayer necessarie for this present time for Godly Christians, to vse in their houses and families.
               WE moste humbly thanke thee (O Heauenly Father) for the sweete and quiet rest that we haue had this night, for the louing and fauourable deliuerance out of all daungers bothe of bodie and soule, which we iustly deserue to be throwne into for our manifolde sinnes: for that thou hast raised vs vpp this morning, we pray thee to go before vs: and for as muche as thou seest our sluggishnesse and drowsines, it would please thee (good Lord) to pull vs after thee, and to shewe vs those wayes, whiche thou hast appointed vs to walke in. And as thou renuest this morning, so renue thy mercies: and as thou causest the Sunne comfortably to shine to our bodily eyes, so vouchesafe (we pray thee) to be Sun vnto our bodies and to our soules, by the beames of thy holy Spirit, and Starr of thy blessed Word, shining into the middes of our hartes, to driue away all the night and darkenesse of all prophanenesse: to chace away all want of true feare of thy good Maiestie: and in place thereof, bring in loue towardes thy Glorie, zeale of thy House, loue also towardes our brethren: especially those that thou aboue the rest commendest vnto vs, that we may loue them with that loue, wherewithall thou haste first loued vs: whiche is pure, vncorrupt, vehement, and euerlasting: and therefore wee pray thee

to ridde our hartes of al naughtie and corrupt loue, and whatsoeuer is vnmeete to be in those vessels that are to serue such a mightie Prince as thou art: and in those houses wherein it pleaseth thy Maiestie by thy holy Spirite to dwel: and therefore on the other side (good Lord) chace away from vs all rancor and malice, all pride, enuiousnesse, disdainefulnesse, vncharitablenesse, vnnaturalnesse, vnkindnesse, and whatsoeuer is contrarie to that loue, whereof thou hast giuen vs a liuely example in our sauiour Iesus Christ: vnto ye which example, graūt (good Lorde) that we may alwayes haue our eyes lifted vppe, and therein holden, and caused thereby to profite, vntil suche time as we come to that perfection, whereunto thou haste appointed we shall come. Vouchsafe moreouer by the comming of the selfe same Spirite, to scatter in vs al the night & darkenesse of ignorance, and forgetfulnesse, and of all those thinges whiche perteine to the clearer and fuller knowledge of thy trueth. Take from vs all negligence, all want of iudgement and discretion, and deliuer vs from all those thinges, whiche thou knowest to be hinderaunces to vs, either to walke in that greate calling of Christianitie whereunto thou hast called vs, or in those seuerall and particular callinges wherein thou hast placed euery one of vs: that we may walke so (good Lorde) bothe in the one and in the other, that thy Name may bee glorified in bothe. Amen.
            
            
               
               Euening prayer.
               O Lord prepare our hartes to praye, bow downe thine eares (deere Father) and heare vs, open thine eyes and looke vpon vs for thy deere Sonne Iesus Christes sake, and receiue our humble confession that we make to the against our selues, whiche haue broken al thy lawes, and therefore deserue to haue thy heauie iudgements powred vppon our heades to our vtter destruction, if thou shouldest enter into iudgement with the least of our sinnes, whereof we haue so greate and infinite thousands: notwithstanding, we pray thee to turne away thy face from our sinnes, and for Iesus Christes sake to forgiue vs all that is past, and graunt that we may haue the assurance of the forgiuenesse of our sinns, sealed vp by thy Holy Spirite in our consciences, wherby we knowing that we are at one with thee, may haue our hartes kindled with thy loue so feruently, as it may waste in vs all that is against thy holy Will. And for this cause we beseech thee, Lord, to goe forwarde with the worke of our new byrthe, that thou hast begunne in vs, and neuer take away thy hand, vntill suche time as thou hast made an end of it: and to this ende, we beseeche thee to slay in vs euery day, more and more, the olde man with his concupiscences, nailing them to the crosse of thy deere Sonne Iesus Christ: and causing vs to feele the power of his Passion in our bodies and in our soules, that we beeing partakers thereof, may

come also to the felowshippe of his holy Resurrection: not only in that we shal once appeare before thee, hauing these our base bodies chaunged, and made like vnto his Glorious bodie, but also that we may in the meane time rise from the deathe of sinne to all newnesse of life, and that our good workes may so shine before men, that they seeing them may glorifie thee our Heauenly Father: not onely they that are of the selfe same religion with vs, but those also that are enimies vnto thy trueth, may rather in the time of their calling by the voice of thy Gospel, yeelde themselues to be one sheepefolde with vs. And we most hūbly thanke thee (O Heauenly Father) for all thy louing kindenesses bestowed vppon vs from time to time, and especially for that olde and auncient Loue, wherewithall thou haste loued vs before the beginning of the worlde: for that also that thou calling vs by the voice of thy holy Gospell in that good time that thou appointedst for vs, hast giuen vs faith, hope▪ & loue, and all other graces which thou knowest to be needefull for vs: whiche we beseeche thee to increase in vs with mightie increases, according to that thou seest we haue neede of, hauing regarde to our manifolde enimies, that we haue to wrestle with: and that we haue not to striue with flesh and bloud, but against the diuels themselues. And therfore considering their strength and our weaknesse, their craft and our simplicitie, their watchfulnesse and our sluggishnesse, their long experience & our rawnesse, their preparation and our nakednesse, &

that we haue not only nothing to helpe vs, but also do carrie about vs our own cōcupiscences, readie to betray vs into the handes of our enimies, it may please thee to furnishe vs from aboue, giuing vs the strength of thy holy Spirite, in the inner man, reaching vnto vs the compleate harnesse of thy Grace, wherewith we being armed on bothe sides, may be prepared at all assayes againste all assaultes of our enimies. And for as muche as in this weakenesse we oftentimes giue backe, and sometimes runne away, we pray thee (O Lorde) that with the hande of Faith, we may lay holde on the victorie of our Sauiour Iesus Christ: that albeit wee be not able to ouercome in our owne persons, yet notwithstanding we may ouercome in His, who hathe ouercommed for vs all, and so be partakers of those promises that thou hast knit vnto that glorious victorie. And we moste humbly thanke thee also for those graces both of the bodie & soule which perteine to this present life: desiring thee to increase them vpon vs, and in vs, so farre forth as thou seest we haue neede of to thy Glorie, the commoditie of others, and our owne comfortes: therefore we beseeche thee, Lorde, to teache vs with thy holy Spirite the lawful vse of them: that thou wouldest not suffer our hartes to be rooted in them, but that at all times we may be willing to parte from them. And whensoeuer it shal please thee to cal for vs, we may willingly goe vnto thee, as children to their deere Fathers, straungers vnto their owne Countrie, and members of the bodie vnto their Heade: and so

muche the gladder, by howe muche thou Lorde art better then all the men in the worlde, and the Kingdome that thou haste prepared, better then all the Kingdomes thereof.
            
            
               An addition to the former morning praier, as time and leasure shall serue
               WE pray not onely for our selues (O moste mercifull Father) but for all those that thou haste appointed to eternall life: beseeching thee to gather the number of those that are to be gathered, those that thou haste alredy called, thou wouldst alwayes keepe: and to this end (good Lorde) raise vp faithfull Ministers both of thy Churche and common weale, whose heartes thou wouldest fill with all Graces of thy holy Spirite meete for their callings, meete also for these daungerous times: roote out from among thy Church, all rauening and deuouring Beastes, whiche to fill their owne bellies, destroy thy flocke: ease thy selfe of al hirelings and idle shepheardes, whiche haue no care nor skill to feede thy flocke with the holesome foode of thy blessed woorde, nor to rule them with that equitie wherewithall thou wilte haue thy people to be ruled: those Pastors that thou haste giuen, it woulde please thee to increase the number of them: those that are fallen a sleepe and carried away with the corruptions of these times, that thou wouldest awake, letting them vnderstand the charge that thou haste committed vnto them, the truste that thou

haste put them in, and the accompt that thou wilte take at their handes. Be gratious (O Lorde) vnto this Lande of ours, and enter not into iudgement with the horrible sinnes of it, namely, the contempt and lighte esteeming of thy holy Woorde, so many yeares offered vnto vs, and wee beeing trusted withall, so many Nations better then wee beeing passed by, whiche woulde haue broughte forth the fruite thereof more then wee haue done: and wee not onely haue broughte forth no good fruite, but rotten and vnsauourie, to prouoke thy Maiestie withall: not withstanding all these our sinnes, it woulde please thee in that loue, wherewithall thou haste firste loued vs, when wee hated thee, and in that long patience wherein thou haste hitherto borne with vs, and doest yet beare, and tarriest for our repentance: to graunt vs hearty and earnest repentance, our heartes beeing effectually touched with thy holy Spirite, striking these rocky heartes of ours, that they may be resolued into riuers of teares for our sinnes, making them soft and meeke to receiue the print of thy holy Woord, and seale of thy blessed Spirite, writing with thy finger thine owne lawes in them, so, that thou mayest reade thine owne hande, acknowledge thine owne seale, and so passe by vs, when thou shalt bring thy iudgmente vppon the face of the Earthe, for the iniquities thereof: whereof thou haste giuen, and still giuest, from time to time diuers tokens, which we beseeche thee may be profitable vnto vs, whilest firste of all we acknowledge thy hand striking vs,

and thy counsell calling vs thereby to repentance, that thy heauier iudgementes do not fall vppon vs to our vtter destruction.
               Moreouer, wee thanke thee (O Lord) for that it hath pleased thee to bee the watche man, and as it were the spie of this Churche & cōmon wealth, and haste foreseene all the stormes, and treasons comming against it, and againste thine annoincted our Souereigne whōe thou in mercy hast appointed to rule ouer it, and haste scattered them and broughte them to noughte, and haste pursued certaine of thine enimies and oures vnto death, beseeching thee to continue this watchful and careful eye ouer vs, still to do vs good, and to pursue the rest of thine enimies and oures vnto the graue giuing notwithstanding repentance vnto them, vnto whome thou haste lefte place of repentance. And to this ende, raise vp the heartes of our moste Gratious Queene and her honourable Counsell thy Magistrates, that as they sitte in thy seate, and are called by thy Name, so they may execute thy iustice, which thou so wel approuest of, wherof also thou wilte require a streighte accompte at their handes. Wee desire thee also to shewe these thy Graces to all other Churches of thine, namely thy Churche of Scotlande, that it may enioy that peace that thou haste giuen it: and graunte that the same bee referred to that end wherefore thou haste giuen it: namely, to the full establishmente of the throne of thy deere Sonne our Sauiour Iesus Christe, and to the building of his Kingdome there. Wee beseeche

thee also for the Churches, which thy hand hathe planted long since: especially those, from whome we haue receiued knowledge in time of our ignorance, places of refuge in time of persecution: that it would please thee to continue thy louing kindenesse towardes them, and therfore cause them to continue their faith towardes thee, and obedience towardes thy holy Word. And whensoeuer it shalbe thy pleasure, to trie them with any kinde of affliction, it woulde please the to graunt vnto them, that they may put their trust in thee, hauing regard to the trueth of thy promises, and to the good experience that they haue of thy helpe in times past, and thereby conceiue comforte & hope (O Lord) euen of life in deathe, and of Saluation in destruction. We pray the also (good Lord) that we may haue the feeling of the miseries of our Brethren, as members of the same bodie, and those that liue by the same Spirite. And therefore we pray thee, that according to the manifolde troubles that thou shalt visite them with, it woulde be thy good pleasure, to measure out thy grace in suche plentiful manner, that thy children may patiently beare, & ioyfully attend, for the good houre wherin thou wilt pull them out of al their troubles. And especially wee pray thy Maiestie for our Brethren that are afflicted for thy Gospel sake: namely, those that suffer imprisonment or otherwise in any nation, for the clearer testimonie of it: that it woulde please thee to giue them patience in all their troubles, wisdome and mouthes to defende thy cause,

against all those that rise vppe against it: that thou wouldest blesse their trauels and sufferings for that, for whiche they are taken: which is, to giue a freer course of thy Gospell into all places. And therewithal we beseech thee for the churches of Fraunce and Flaunders, whiche are so miserably racked and torne in sunder, and whiche are almoste consumed with these fiery trials: that it would please thee to looke vpon their sighings and groneings, the teares that fal from their eies continually, the bloud that is shed in al parts of the land, ye bodies that lie vnburied, to be meate to the foules of the ayre, and Fishes of the Sea, the lonenesse of wiues lacking their husbandes, children their Fathers, and euery freend his freende. And for asmuche as those thinges are come vpon them for thy Names sake, let it be thy good pleasure to helpe them, considering that they are forsaken of all their freendes rounde about: and therefore pray thee that thou wouldest not looke vppon our sinnes, nor the sinnes of our forefathers, whereby we deserue not onely this correction, but vtter destruction, as Sodom and Gomorra: but rather to looke vpon thy mercies which were before them: whereby thou hast saide, that although wee doe offend, and thou doest correct vs, yet thou wilt not take away thy mercies from vs, but wilt leaue a remnant which thou wilt multiplie, and make as the Starres of the Heauen, and as the sandes of the Sea. Looke also (O Lord) vpon the outrageousnesse and crueltie, vnfaithfulnesse, and blasphemie of the enimies, wherewithall they blaspheme thee,

and prouoke thee to thy face, and therefore in thine owne cause, and for thine owne sake, take the matter into thine owne handes, and pay into the bosomes of thine enimies double and treble of that they haue giuen to thee. Notwithstanding, those amongst them, that belong to thine holy election, hasten their calling, that afterwards thy iudgement may hasten vpon the earthe, and the inhabitants thereof may learne to know thee by thy iudgements, that would not vnderstand and come to thee, by the louing calling of thy Gospel. Wee pray thee (O Lorde) for our brethren that are vp in armes in both those countries: that thou wouldest goe before them, and come behinde them, and on euery side of them: couer their heades in the day of battel, teache their handes to fight, and their fingers to warre: giue them wisedome and valiantnesse, and good successe in all their enterprises: strike a dizinesse & maaze of spirit into the enimies harts, and take away from them all force, and disappoint al their counsels. And vpon our brethren in Flaunders, we beseeche thee that thou wouldest comfort them ouer all the troubles that they haue receiued, and breaches that haue beene made in vpon them: and where there are newe forces euery day gathered, new sleights inuented to destroy them, it may please thee, to scatter their forces, and bring their sleightes to nothing. Yea, graunt also (O Lorde) that that which they haue deuised against thy children, may come vpon their owne heades. And for our Brethren in Fraunce wee beseeche thee (O Lord) what streights so euer they be in, thou wouldest

deliuer them: and although they be forsaken in the iudgement of all the world, and in their own iudgements, notwithstanding thou that haste the issues of death in thine owne handes, deliuer those that are appointed to deathe. And finally we most humbly thanke thee, for that it hath pleased thee to keepe vs this day, and al the dayes and times of our liues: beseeching thee, that thou wouldest receiue vs this night into thy holy keeping, that we may haue quiet rest, not of bodies alone, but of our soules also, resting from all those thinges that are contrarie to thy moste holy will, attending while thou raisest vs vppe in the morning, to do all those thinges that thou haste appointed vs. These things we desire of thee, and al other things (which thou knowest to be more needefull for vs, and thy whole Church, better then we ourselues do know) for Iesus Christes sake: saying the same prayer, that he himselfe hath taught vs. Our Father. &c.
            
            
               A prayer for the Queene.
               
                  O Gratious Lorde, and moste mercifull father, we acknowledge thee the Lorde of Lordes, and the Kinge of Kings, creating at the beginning, and ruling all thinges euermore in heauen and earthe, accordinge to thy wonderful wisdome and power: and our selues to be thy poore seruantes, the worke of thy handes, & the sheepe of thy pasture, subiected to thy highe

Maiestie, and depending vppon thy fatherly prouidence for al thinges. Neuerthelesse, seing thou in thy wisdome annoyntest Kings and Queenes, appoyntinge them to rule ouer thy people, to sitt as Lieuetenantes in thy seate, to minister iustice, and most of all, as Fathers and Nurses to mainteine & cherish thy Church: commaundinge vs not onely to obey and honour them, but moreouer to pray for thē, as watching ouer vs for our good: we therfore beseech thee for thy greate names sake, & for Iesus Christes sake, to shew thy mercy to all Kings and Princes, that mainteine thy glorious Gospel: but especially we praye thee to blesse our gratious Queene, in all spirituall blessinges in Christ Iesus, and in all temporall blessinges, accordinge to thy good pleasure, that in the greate measures of thy effectual Lawe she may more and more finde great increases of vertue, and wisdome, and strength in Christ Iesus to the faithful and happy discharge of her dutie: that her holines, and ioy, and zeale of thy house may be multiplied and euerlasting.
               And, seeing it hath pleased thee of thy singular mercie, to giue her this especiall honour, firste to suffer for thy Glorious trueth, and afterward miraculously deliuering her out of the handes of her enimies, to set a Crowne vppon her heade, and to make her the instrument to aduaunce thy Glorie and Gospel, for whiche she suffered, and to bring it out of darkenesse into light, out of persecution into this great and long peace: as we giue thee most hartie thankes for this singular benefite, so wee beseeche

thee to make her and vs euermore thankful for it, and in thy good pleasure still to preserue her for the continuance of these blessings towardes vs, with all increase from time to time, to thy Glorie, the benefite of the Churche, and her infinite peace in Christ Iesus, the Prince of Peace. And furthermore we pray thee for her, and the estate, that such as be enimies of the Gospel, and her enimies also, for the defence thereof, may not despise the peace offered them to repentance, but that they may account thy long suffering, and her peaceable and vnblouddie gouernement an occasion of saluation to their soules, and unfeigned loue to the trueth, & their mercifull souereigne. Otherwise if they still remaine disobedient to the trueth, disobedient to her highnesse, and daungerous to the state, then (O GOD of our Saluation) as thou haste discouered them, so discouer them still, as thou haste preuented them, so preuent them still, and let their eyes waxe wearie with looking, and their harts faint with waiting for the comming of that, which yet commeth not, neither let it come (O Lord) we beseeche the, but a blessed, and a long reigne to her, and peace to Sion for euermore.
               Also (deere Father) so blesse, so loue, so in thy Spirite sanctifie and keepe her, that shee may in the Spirite of counsell and fortitude so rule that other sister also, namely this her Common wealth, that they may flourish together, and growe vp together as Palme trees, in beautie, and in strength, giueing ayde and helpe one to another, that in the

Churche the Glorie of God may appeare, as the Sunne in his brightnesse, and that the lande may flowe with milke, and honie, and true peace aboūd therin as in the triumphant reigne of Debora.
               These graces (O Lord) are great, and we miserable sinners, vnworthie of the least of them: therefore looke not to vs but to thy selfe, not to our iniquities but to thy greate mercies, acceptinge the death and passion of thy sonne, as a full raunsome for al our offences: throwing thē into the bothome of the sea, and making his crosse and resurrection effectuall in vs to all obedience and godlines as becommeth thy Saincts, that to all other thy good blessinges towarde our gratious Souereigne, this may be added, that she gouerneth blessedly, ouer a blessed people, a people blessed of the Lorde, and beloued of the Lorde, and that thy graces may abounde as the waues of the sea, in the Prince and in the people, in the Churche and in the common wealth, frō day to day, til the day of our translatiō into ye kingdome, where iustice inhabiteth, where we also shal inhabite and reigne with thee, according to thy promise, for euer. Graunte vs these thinges (O mercifull father) for thy deare sonne our Lord Iesus Christ his sake, in whose name we craue them at thy mercifull hande, prayinge furthermore for them, as he hath taught vs to pray.
               Our father whiche art. &c.
               
               
            
         
      
   