
      
         
            
            
               
A CONFVTATION OF ATHEISME By Iohn Doue Doctor of Diuinitie.
The Contents are to be ſeene in the Page following.
            
               Pſalm. 68. God will ariſe, and his enimies ſhall be ſcattered: they alſo that hate him ſhall flye from him.
            AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde for Henry Rockett, And are to be ſold at the long ſhop vnder S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1605.
         
         
            
            The Contentes of this booke.
            
               WHat Atheiſme is: Chapter, 1.
               The cauſe of Atheiſme. Chap. 2.
               How Atheiſme may be rooted out of all Chriſtian landes. Chap. 3.
               That there is a God. Chap. 4.
               What God is. Chap. 5.
               That there is but one God. Chap. 6.
               The bookes of the Bible, are the worde of God. Chap. 7.
               Of the will and ſufferance of God. Chap. 8.
               The world had a beginning. Chap. 9.
               The ſoule of man, what it is, whence it commeth, how it is infected with ſinne, and the immortalitie of it. Chap. 10.
               Of Noah his Arke, and the Deluge. Chap. 11.
               Of the deſtruction of Sodom. Chap. 12.
               Of Chriſt. Chap. 13.
               The world ſhall haue an end. Chap. 14.
               There is hell fier. C
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST HIGH and Mightie Prince, Iames by the grace of God, King of Great Brittanye, France, and Ireland: Defender of the Faith.
            
               MOST dread Soueraigne, your Maieſties gratious acceptance of my late Treatiſe againſt Recuſancy, cauſeth me to preſent vnto your Highnes this poore Mite, which out of my penury I offer into the treaſurye of the Church: being no way comparable to the Talents which others out of their great plentye, Luc, 21, 2. haue caſt into the offrings of God. Albeit the right worſhipfull Sr. George More knight, hath learnedly and religiouſlie handled the ſame ſubiect, yet may I tread the ſame wine-preſse againe, by the example of Saint Auguſtine, which confuted the Arrians whome Athanaſius had confuted before him, and the learned of our age which dayly write bookes, notwithſtanding others before them haue written bookes of the ſame argument. And as S. Auguſtine in his time, becauſe there were many haeretikes, wiſhed that all men which were able to write, would write againſt haereſie: ſo becauſe now Contrà menda: Chap, 6. Dè Trinitat: Lib. 1. Chap, 3. 
               
                  〈◊〉
                many Atheiſtes, it is to be wiſhed that many would write 
                  〈◊…〉
                Atheiſme.
            The ſtate of religion dependeth vpon the ſtate of the Paſtors and Miniſters. And therefore S. Iohn prophecying of the decay of it, firſt diſcouereth the defects of them, as the cauſe therof: That he of

               Epheſus had lefte his former loue: he of Pergamus had them which Apoc, 2, 4. & 14, 15. & 20. maintayned the doctrine of Balaam and the Nicholaitans: he of Thyatira ſuffered Iezabell to make the people commit fornication, and eat meate ſacrificed to Idols: he of Sardis had onely a name that he liued, but was dead: he of Laodicia was neither hotte nor colde, Apoc, 3, 1. 15, & 16. but ſuch a one as the Lord would ſpewe out of his mouth, that he which tooke vpon him a greater charge then all they, ſhould haue onely hornes like the lambe Chriſt Ieſus: but as for his doctrine, he ſhould ſpeake like the dragon Sathan. And S. Paul prophecying of Apoc, 13. 17 that great Apoſtaſie and reuoliment from true religion through the world, ſhewed the cauſe to be in him which tooke vpon him to be the vniuerſall Paſtor of the world, That he ſhould be an aduerſaerie, exalting 2, Theſ, 2, 39. him-ſelfe aboue all that is called God: that ſitting in the Temple of God, he ſhould not ſhew himſelfe as the miniſter of God, but as God. The holy Ghoſt deriued the corruption of religion, and calamitie of the Church of Iſrael, from the baſe condition of the Prieſtes in the dayes of Ieroboam, ſaying: that he made Prieſtes of 1, King, 12, 31 the loweſt of the people. And it is a curſe denounced againſt them from God by the Prophet Malachye, that their Prieſtes ſhould be Mal, 2. 9. deſpiſed and vyle before the people.
            Your Highnes vnder the Maieſtie of Almightie God, now ſitteth in the ſeate of Dauid, and vpon the throne of Salomen: You haue the ſame authoritie ouer vs, which Ioſias, Ioſaphat, Ezechias. and the other Godlie Kinges had ouer Iuda. The Lord therefore of his infinite mercie toward you his anoynted, and vs your people, continue in your Princely heart this your zeale of his houſe, and great care of the aduancement of the ſtate of the miniſterie for the aduauncement of the Ghoſpell, the increaſe of Godlines, the ſubuerſion of Atheiſme 
               Act, 13, 22. and all Impietie. The Lord make you ſuch a King as Dauid was, a man according to his owne heart, that your Highnes may raigne ouer vs religiouſly, peaceably & happily, to his glorie, our comfort, and the ſaluation of your owne ſoule. The Lord graunt to our noble Queene that ſhe may be an auncient Mother i
                  •
                
               Iſ
                     •••••…
                  
                to Prince Henrie a large heart as he did vnto Salomon. 
                     〈◊…〉
                  
                bleſſe all your posteritie, that they way continue in his▪ 
               
                  〈◊…〉
                the worlds end.
            
               Your MAIESTIES humble and obedient Subiect: IOHN DOVE,
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A CONFVTATION of Atheiſme.
            
            
               Chapter 1.
               
                  What Atheiſme is:
               
               SOmetimes vnder the name of Atheiſts are comprehended Pagans, Infidels and Idolaters, all ſuch as are ignorant of the true God, albeit in their kinde they be very deuout, religious and godly. So ſaith the Apoſtle: Wherefore remember that ye, Ephe, 2. being in times paſt Gentiles in the fleſh, and called vncircumciſion, of them which are called circumciſion in the fleſh made with handes, that ye were I ſay, at that time without Chriſt, aliants from the common wealth of Iſrael, ſtrangers from the couenant of promiſe, and had no hope, & were without God in the world. But what it was to be without God in the world, he expreſieth in an other place, ſaying: Euen then when ye knewe not God, ye Gal, 4. Rom, 1. did ſe
                     ••…
                  ce vnto them which by nature are not Gods. That is, they worſhip the Sunne & Moone, and carued idols, the creature in ſteede of the Creator, which is bleſſed for euermore, Amen. Theſe be not the Atheiſts which we are to treate of.
               Other Atheiſts there be, which haue a knowledge of the true 
                     〈◊〉
                   and how he is to be worſhiped, and are in name Chriſtians: 
                     〈◊〉
                   a continuall habit and cuſtome of ſinne, haue ſo hardned 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  durated them ſelues, that they haue no ſence or feeling of the iudgement of that true God which they knowe and profeſſe, and would be thought outwardly to ſerue. And therefore they are bolde to commit ſinne againſt him, becauſe they preſume vpon

his mercye, or at the leaſt his conniuencye and negligence in puniſhing, as if they were perſwaded God did not ſee them, or he would not puniſh them. Of ſuch ſaith the Prophet: The foole Pſalme, 14. hath ſaid in his heart there is no God. And of ſuch fooles he ſpeaketh elſe-where more plainly, ſaying: Wickednes ſaith to the Pſalme, 36. wicked man, euen in mine heart, that there is no feare of God before his eyes. And what it is to caſt away all feare of God from before his eyes, he ſheweth more plainly, ſaying: He hath ſaid in his heart: God hath forgotten, he hydeth away his face, & will Pſalme, 10. neuer ſee. And this kinde of Atheiſt is in ſtate of damnation aſwell as the other, but is not the ſubiect of my Treatiſe.
               There are other ſortes of men (or rather beaſtes) I meane ſuch beaſts as S. Paul ſtroue with at Epheſus in the ſhape of men, farre 1. Cor. 15, more abhominable then the other two, of which ſo oftē I ſpake: I may iuſtly ſay with Eliphas, Feare cōmeth vpon me & dreade, which maketh all my bones to tremble, and a winde paſſeth before Iob, 4. me, which cauſeth the hayres of my head to ſtand vp, and (that I may vſe the wordes of the Lord to Samuel) ſuch a wickednes as ſhall not be purged by ſacrifice nor offering for euer. 1. Sam. 3. Such a ſlaunder to States & Kingdomes, ſo offenſiue to all chaſt & religious eares, that whoſoeuer ſhall heare of it, his eares ſhall tingle. Theſe beaſtes holde there is no God, and they are of foure ſortes:
               The firſt ſaith in broade tearmes without bluſhing, Non eſt Deus, there is no God: of that brood, were not onely the olde Philoſophers Diagoras, Lucretius, Epicurus and others, but alſo ſince the Goſpell was publiſhed to the worlde, many of them haue been known, of whome Theodoret (an ancient Father) hath written, as alſo Prateolus, and other writers of later times, and eſpecially Lilius Grigorius, Giraldus Ferrarienſis maketh mention Libro dé cuuatione Graecarū affectionū. Eleuch: alphabet: C, 1. Dè 
                        •
                     iſto: pretarum, Dialo: 6. of a whole Iland lately inhabited by ſuch as deny God. And I wiſh all Atheiſts were baniſhed out of Chriſtian States and Kingdomes, and ſent into that Iland, that other places might not be infected by them.
               The ſecond, doth ſcoffe at God and deride him, 
                     〈◊…〉
                   his name, and make open profeſſion of contempt againſt him and all Religion. Such an Atheiſt was Holophernes, which ſaid vnto Achior, Becauſe thou haſt prophefied amongſt vs to day, & haſt Iudith. 6.
                  
ſaide that the people of Iſrael is able to ſight, becauſe their God will defend them: and who is God but Nabuchodonozor? he will ſend his power and deſtroye the face of the earth, and their God ſhall not deliuer them. Such an Atheiſt was Pharao which ſaid: Who is the Lord that I ſhould heare his voyce, and let the people Exod, 5. goe? I know not the Lord neither will I let Iſrael goe. And Senacherib who ſaid by the mouth of Rabſhakah: Let not Ezekias 
                  2 Reg, 18. deceiue you, for he ſhall not be able to deliuer you out of my hand, neither let Ezechias make you to truſt in the Lord, ſaying: The Lord will ſurely deliuer vs, & this Land ſhall not be giuen euer into the hand of the King of Aſhur; Ezechias doth deceiue you, ſaying: The Lord will deliuer vs. Who are they among all the Gods of the nations that haue deliuered their Land out of my hand, that the Lord ſhould deliuer Ieruſalem out of my hand? Such Atheiſts were Lucian, which in his writings, that he might Vide Suide Hiſt: Sozom. l. 6, c 7. et. 10. Tripartit, hiſt. be thought to confeſſe no God, mocked all Gods: Iulian the Apoſtata, which ſcoffed at religion: Olimpius the Arrian, which as he was waſhing himſelfe in his Bath, ſpake blaſphemy againſt the Trinitye. Doletus which called Moſes, Helias, and Chriſt, the three deceiuers of the worlde. And ſuch Atheiſts are the Theodore, l. 5. Hiſt. C. 25. ſwaggerers of our age, which are not aſhamed to call them ſelues The damned crue: Of the ſaluation of ſuch there is no hope, whoſe God is their bellye, whoſe glory is their ſhame, and whoſe end is Phil, 3. damnation, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: Their damnation ſleepeth not, nay they are condemned alreadye, becauſe they ſpeake blaſphemye againſt the Holy Ghoſt. Of ſuch as offend God vpon weakenes, there may be ſome hope that they will come to repentance, becauſe their ſinne is againſt the Father, which is ſtrength. 1 Sam, 17. Concerning them which offend him vpon ignorance, there is alſo hope of their conuerſion, becauſe they ſinne againſt God the Sonne, which is wiſedome. But as for theſe, they mocke God in Prou, 8. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  of him, they ſinne vpon malice, & therefore their blaſ
                  
                     •••••…
                   againſt the Holy Ghoſt, which is loue and charitye, 1 Iohn, 4. 
                  
                     〈◊…〉
                   no hope of their conuerſion, becauſe our Sauiour hath Math, 12. already pronounced ſentence of damnatiō againſt them, ſaying: Their ſinne ſhall neuer be for giuen, neither in this life, nor in the life to come.
               The third, profeſſe the religion which is profeſſed in the place

where they dwell, ſo farre as lawes may not take holde of them, but otherwiſe are of all religions which may bring them profit, and are of no religion farther then to ſerue their turne. For example whereof, I cannot inſtance in any man better, then in William Ruſus King of England, which profeſſed him ſelfe to be a Chriſtian 
                     Hollend ſhed in his Cronicle. for feare of the Pope & the Eccleſiaſticall cenſure, becauſe elſe he could not haue held his Kingdome. Of him it is written, that the Iewes being many in England, one of them was conuerted to be a Chriſtian, and the olde Iewe his Father taking the matter greiuouſly, deſired the King to interpoſe his authoritye, and to commaund him to renounce his Chriſtian faith againe. The King vpon conſideration of 80. Markes of ſiluer (before hand payed vnto him) vndertooke the conuerſion of the young man to the Iewiſh religion againe: Whereupon the partie was conu
                     •
                  nted before the King, hee gaue him charge to renounce Chriſt, but he anſwered: Sir you profeſſe Chriſt yourſelfe, how then can you perſwade me to be a Iewe? If you be a Chriſtian in deed, you will not perſwade me to renounce Chriſt, but if your ſelfe profeſſing Chriſt, will commaund me to denye Chriſt, you are not of any religion, but an Atheiſt; and if you be ſo, it is fit the Popes holynes ſhould vnderſtand ſo much. The King fearing the Popes diſpleaſure, diſmiſſed the man, but ſaide in great furye: Get thee out of my preſence, elſe by S. Lukes face, I will ſcratch out thine eyes. The olde Iewe his Father expoſtulated with the King, becauſe the bargaine was not performed, and required reſtitution of his money: But the King anſwered, holde ye contented Sir, heere is halfe, I will haue the other halfe for my endeauour, I did the beſt I could. Of ſuch Atheiſts we haue many.
               The fourth ſorte, are they which inſinuate them-ſelues into Noble-mens houſes, and Princes Courts, taking vpon them to be the great Polititians of the worlde, and account all men fooles beſides themſelues. They alſo make open profeſſion of religion but for aduantage: I meane them which haue turne 
                     〈◊…〉
                   
                  Machiauel: Their Diuinitie is policye, their zeale is 
                     〈◊…〉
                   and their God is the deuill. Theſe Engliſh Italiana▪
                   and 
                     〈◊〉
                   incarnat, doe holde theſe damnable opinions: That there was no creation of the world, that there ſhall be no day of iudgement, no reſurrection, no immortallitye of the ſoule, no hell: they diſpute

againſt the Bible, reckon vp Genealogyes more auncient then Adam, alleadge arguments, to proue that the ſtory of Noah his Arke and the Deluge were fables: Finally, they holde that the Scriptures were deuiſed by men, onely for policye ſake, to maintaine peace in ſtates and Kingdomes, to keep ſubiects in obedience to lawes, and loyaltie to Magiſtrates, by thus terrifying them from enormities when their conſciences are poſſeſſed with an opinion of hell fire, and alluring them to ſubiection by hope of eternall life, that ſo Princes may enioy outward peace & temporall proſperitie. Examples of this laſt ſorte, we haue Leo the tenth of that name Biſhop of Rome, who when he had heard Bembus alleadge places out of the Scriptures concerning Chriſt, ſaid vnto him: Quid mihi narras illam de Chriſto fabulam? why doſt thou tell me that fable of Chriſt? Againe, in oſtentation of his riches, ſaid: Vide quantum mihi profuit illa de Chriſto fabula. See what treaſure I haue ſcraped together, by publiſhing to the people that ſame fable concerning Chriſt! An example alſo is Machiauel, which holdeth theſe principles & grounds of policy: Machiauell principis. C, 1. 
                  Princeps qui ſapientia eſt praeditus, debet ea promiſſa vitare quae ſuis commodis contraria fore videt. I am vero hominibus nunquam defuturae ſunt cauſae, quibus in violatam fidem colorem inducant. A wiſe Prince muſt not regard his promiſe if he finde it not for his profit, neither ſhall he at any time be deſtitute of ſuch ſhiftes and euaſions whereby he may iuſtify and make good the breach and falſifying of his oath. Qui ſagatior fuerit, vt vulpinum ingenium melius exprimeret, ei faelicius omnia ceciderant. That he muſt learne to play the Fox, which will haue his deſignes and proiects to take effect. He propoſeth vnto Princes the example of Pope Alexander the ſixt to immitate, of whome he ſaith: Is nihil quam mortalium impoſtorem egit, nihil quam ad omnē malitiam & fraudem (quo hominum genus falleret) mentem ſuam exercuit. In aſſeuerando autem quis magis fuerit efficax, aut qui ſpeciotius iurauit iuſiurandum viciſſimque, qui minus praeſtiterit, nemo vnquam fuit. Nihilo ſecius doli nunquam ei non commode ceciderunt. That is, he plotted nothing more, then how he might be the coſoner and deceiuer of men: he ſet his minde vpon nothing but malice and fraude, whereby men might be by him ſupplanted & ouertaken, no man promiſed more largely, nor ſwore more deeply then he,

and no man performed leſſe then he, and yet not-withſtanding, his falſhood & knauery, he neuer fayled of his purpoſe. Proinde, non est quod Princeps omnes eas ſuperius deſcriptas virtutes oſtentet: ſunt enim aduerſus tales diſſimulandae ſaepe numero callidèque tegendae. And yet, for al that, falſhood preuaileth better thē plaine dealing, yet a Prince muſt not make a ſhewe of a large conſcience, but he muſt diſſemble, & carry him ſelfe cunningly before the eyes of the worlde. Quocirca, ad omnem fortunae & ventorum conuerſionem verſatile ingenium Princeps habeat neceſſe eſt, & ab eo quod bonum eſt ne diſcedat: at, ſi neceſſitas vrgeat, edoctus ſit et malum auertere. Wherefore a Prince muſt frame him ſelfe for all times & ſeaſons as occaſions may ſerue: let him imbrace truth and doe iuſtice, vnleſſe he ſee cauſe to the contrary, but if he doe, let him be ſo wiſe that he do not diſaduantage him ſelfe. Princeps acram curam & diligentiam adhibeat, vt pietatom, fidem, integritatem, humanitatem, religionem ſanctè colere videatur, atqui nihil magis eſt quod prae ſe ferat quam illam virtutem: fere enim homines magis ſpecie & colore rerum, quam rebus ipſis, permouentur, & iudicant. Nemo non videt quid prae te feras, at pauciſſimi ſunt, qui quid ſis ſenſu percipiant. Vitam princeps tueatur, curet
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      imperium conſeruare: quibus autem idſiat rationibus, ex modo honeſti ſpaciem prae ſe ferant, nunquam non honore dignae, laudibuſque exiſtimabuntur. Let a Prince eſpecially take heed to him ſelfe, that he ſeeme godly, true, honeſt, curteous, and aboue all religious, becauſe men for the moſt parte are caryed away with the outward ſhewe of religion, and doe iudge all things according to outward appearance. Euery man can take notice of that which you ſeeme to be, but fewe men can ſound the bottome of your heart, and diue into your ſecret thoughts, ſo farre as to diſcouer what in deed you are, to conceiue what your intent & meaning is. Let a Prince looke eſpecially to the defence of his owne life and ſtate, it maketh no matter by what meanes he doe it, be they lawfull or vnlawefull, ſo as they haue an outward ſhewe and colour of honeſtye.
            
            
               
               Chapter 2.
               
                  Of the cauſes of Atheiſme.
               
               THat I may ſpeak ſomwhat of the cauſes of Atheiſme, They are many: Some men are become Atheiſts by building vpō a falſe ground, by miſconſtruing and wreſting that place of Tully 
                  De natura De orum. lib, 1. to their owne perdition: Sunt qui negant Deos habere procurationem rerum humanarum, quorum ſententia falſa eſt, quia ſic omnis religio inanis eſſet, religione autem ſublata tolleretur hominū ſides, & magna ſequeretur vitae perturbatio & confuſio. There are ſaith Tully, ſome men which deny that there is a God which taketh vpon him the care of humane affaires, whoſe opinion is euicted to be falſe, for as much as if it were ſo, all religion were in vayne, and were it not for religion, there would be no fidelitie or honeſtie among men, nothing but diſorder & confuſion through the whole worlde. I cannot deny but religion doth maintaine ciuill gouernment, and kingdomes are beſt gouerned where men haue the greateſt feeling of religion, becauſe the feare of God hauing taken a deepe roote in mens hearts by the often preaching of the worde, doth binde ſubiects to their Princes farre more faſt then humane lawes, & the feare of the Princes diſpleaſure. And I muſt needs confeſſe that the King and the whole ſtate of England are to aſcribe this long peace which we haue had, and yet doe inioy, as alſo this great increaſe of wealth, and loyaltye of the ſubiectes, more to the diligent preaching of the Miniſters then to the ſincere gouernmēt of the Magiſtrates, to Diuines then to Polititians, how little ſoeuer now Diuines be regarded, and how highly ſoeuer Polititians be eſteemed. Subiects are now more obedient to Lawes and loyall to Princes then in times paſt they haue bene, becauſe the Goſpell is more preached among them then it was in former ages. So then, it is not for feare, but for conſcience ſake, not becauſe they feare him that can kill the bodie, but becauſe they feare him that is able to deſtroy both bodie and ſoule in hell Math, 10. fire. And yet the Prouerb in many hath bene fulfilled, Filia deuorauit matrem, that the daughter hath deuoured her owne mother, For religion is the mother of peace, and peace is the daughter

of religion, becauſe the preaching of Chriſtian religion hath brought peace into the worlde. All godly Diuines preach the doctrine of St. Paul: Si fieri poteſt, quantum in vobis eſt, cum omnibus 
                  Rom, 12, 
                  pacem habetote, if it be poſſible and as much as lyeth in you, haue peace with all men. But this long peace which we haue enioyed hath increaſed our riches, & riches haue made vs to forget God, and ſo (like an vnnaturall daughter) peace hath deuoured religion, which bred and maintayned peace in the world. The Prophecie is verifyed: In theſe laſt dayes, ſince the mountaine of Eſay, 2. the houſe of God hath beene prepared in the top of the mountaines, and hath beene exalted aboue the hilles, and all nations haue flowed vnto it, and many people haue gone & ſaid: Come let vs goe vp to the mountaine of the Lord, to the houſe of the God of Iacob, and he will teach vs his wayes, and we will walke in his pathes: our ſwordes haue beene broken into mattocks, & our ſpeares into ſythes, nation hath not lifted vp a ſworde againſt nation, neither haue they learned to fight any more. The Lamb dwelling with the Wolfe hath beene in ſafetie, the Kid with the Leopard, the Cow feeding with the Beare, the Calfe with the Lyon, the ſucking Childe hath plaied vpon the hole of the Aſp, the weaned Childe hath put his hand into the hole of the Cockatrice Eſay, 11, without any hurt, and the reaſon is alleaged by the Prophet: Becauſe the earth was full of the knowledge of the Lord, euen as the waters that couer the ſea. This Prophecye you ſee is fulfilled. But theſe ſayings are by them miſtaken. For Tully doth not argue in this manner: that we muſt holde there is a God, and maintaine religion, that ſo ciuill gouernment may be maintayned, and men may liue orderly in a common wealth. But his meaning is cleane contrary: that we muſt performe all ciuill duties in a common wealth for religion ſake, and we muſt be religious for Gods ſake, becauſe there is a God which hath ingraffed religion in our hearts, whereby ciuill ſtates may be the better maintayned, and which will puniſh all ſuch as are not religious, that is, which haue not a true feeling of religion. And it was not the meaning of the Prophet Eſay, that after the knowledge of true religion had planted peace among vs, and peace had brought proſperitie, then we ſhould ceaſe to be religious, & ſo forget God, but rather increaſe our zeale, and hauing receiued ſuch benefits at his hands whome

we ſerue, continue faithfull in his ſeruice.
               A ſecond cauſe of Atheiſme may be the want of due & right hearing of the worde preached, becauſe faith commeth by hearing, and therefore where there is a want of hearing faith fayleth, Rom, 10. and, by a conſequent, Pagiſme and infidelitie increaſeth. For many of them doe not heare, but abſent them-ſelues, or if they be preſent, they ſtand not for figures but for cyphers, they doe not by the worde preached as the virgin Mary did by the ſayings of Luc, 2. our Sauiour Chriſt, which layed thē vp in her heart: or as Abraham 
                  Gen, 18. did by the Angels, which receiued them into his houſe, or as the Sunamite woman did by Elizeus, or the widowe by Elias, 
                  2 Reg, 4. 1 Reg, 17. which entertayned them with willingnes. The worde to them is not as the raine of heauen falling vpon the earth, or the deawe of Deut, 11. Pſal, 133. Math, 7, & 15 Matb, 13. Math, 10. Hermon vpon mount Sion, but as the Childrens bread caſt before whelpes, or pearls caſt before ſwine, ſeede ſowen by the high way ſide, & the peace of the Apoſtles beſtowed vpon vnworthye houſes, and therefore returneth backe againe. They ſtop their cares with the Adder, or ſleep with Eutichus, or make loue as the Act, 20. Ezech, 23. Egiptians did to Aholah and Aholibah, cloathed with blewe ſilke and diuers ſuites, pleaſant young men, that they may ſet Aholah and Aholibah on fire, bruiſe the breſtes of their virginitye, and powre out their adulterie vpon them, as the Prophet ſpeaketh. Some heare the Preacher with great attention, but as the Phariſies Math, 22. did our Sauiour to intrappe him in his ſpeech, to take exception againſt his wordes, as the Athenians did St. Paul to ſcoffe at Act, 17. his ſimplicitie, they read the Bible but as Porphurye did, to finde (as they prophanely call them) abſurdities and contradictions in the worde of God, not as the Bee which gathereth honye, but as the Spider which ſucketh poyſon out of wholſome flowers.
               A third cauſe of Atheiſme, proceedeth from the long ſuffring of God, which doth not preſently puniſh Atheiſts. For he doth not onely with patience ſuffer them to blaſpheme his holy name, but alſo in his wiſdome which no man can ſound, & in his iudgementes whome no man can ſearch, bleſſeth them with worldly bleſſings, as if he did reward their vngodlines. It is not my complaint alone, but it is the complaint of the Prophet Dauid which Pſalm, 10. cryeth out in this manner: Why ſtandeſt thou ſo farre off ô Lord and hydeſt thee in due time, euen in affliction? the wicked hath

made boaſt of his owne hearts deſire, and the couetous bleſſeth himſelfe, he contemneth the Lord, he is ſo proud that he ſeeketh not for God, he thinketh alwaies there is no God, his wayes alwaies proſper, he ſaith in his heart: I ſhall neuer be moued, nor be in danger. Nay it may very well be ſaid, as it was of Iob: that the Lord hath made an hedge about him & his houſe, and about Iob, 1, all that he hath on euery ſide, he hath bleſſed the worke of his handes, and his ſubſtance is encreaſed in the Land. The Lord ſuffred his owne Arke to be taken by the Philiſtins his enemies, 1, Sam, 4 and his owne people the Iraēlites which fought his battle, to be ouerthrowne in the battell. And this cōmendation is giuen of the godly King Ioſias, that he read the lawe of the Lord before the people, he made a couenant with the Lord that the people ſhould 2, Reg. 23 walke after the Lord, and keep his commandements, his teſtimonies & ſtatutes, with all their hearts, all their ſoules, & all the people ſtood to the couenant, he purged the Temple, and put downe the Idols, he ſlewe the idolatrous Prieſts, he kept ſuch a paſſeouer in honour of God, as neuer the like was holden, from the daies of the Iudges yt iudged Iſrael, nor in al the daies of the Kings of Iſrael & the Kings of Iuda, he tooke away thē which had familier ſpirits and the ſooth-ſayers, and the Images, and the Idols, and all the abhominations that were eſpyed in the Land of Iuda and Ieruſalem, that like vnto him there was no King before him that turned to the Lord with all his heart, all his ſoule, and all his might, according to all the lawe of Moſes, neither after him aroſe there any like him. And yet, ſee how the Lord rewarded him. The very next thing which followeth in the ſame Text, is this: Pharao ſlewe him at Megiddo. Thus you ſee how the Lord rewarded faithfull Ioſias which ſerued him, & truſted in him, with death in this worlde, and ouerthrowe in ſighting of his owne battell, and gaue the victory to Pharao an heathen King, which put no truſt nor conſidence in him. Likewiſe Nabucodonozor burned Gods 2, Reg, 25 houſe, robbed his Temple in contempt of him and his ſeruice, & yet God proſpered him as if he had rewarded him for ſo dooing, 
                     Ʋalerius Maximus citeth out of Tully the example of Dionyſius the Tirant, which did brag and boaſt of his ſacrilege, that when he ſayled to the Temple of Proſerpina which was at Locris to Lib. 1. Cap. de neglect religione. robbe the ſame, the winde and weather did ſo much fauour him,

as if it had beene a pleaſing thing to that Goddeſſe to doe her violence, as if ſhe had the rather proſpered his nauigation, & giuen ſucceſſe vnto his buſines becauſe he did robbe & ſpoyle her Temple. When the Turkes and Hungarians ioyne in battell, the Hungarians armye cryeth out aloud Ieſu, Ieſu, The Turkes name their prophet Mahomet, but Mahomet preuayleth againſt Ieſus. The greateſt parte of the worlde are inſidels, and they encreaſe daily, but the number of Chriſtians doe decreaſe. And this is agreeable to that which Prateolus obſerueth, which all eageth De haereſ. Lib. 1. that among many cauſes of Atheiſme this is not the leaſt, namely, Euentus mirabiles quorum cauſas ignorant, & putant longe aliter fore, ſi Deus exiſteret omnia cernens & curans, vt ſunt faelicitas impiorum, infaelicitas piorum, & eius Dei longanimitas qui atrociſsimos peccatores ſtatim non punit. Strange euents which continually fall out, contrary to the ſence and reaſon of man, the cauſes whereof man vnderſtandeth not, but thinketh that it would be otherwiſe, if there were a God which did ſee and regarde humane affaires, as for example, the happines of the vngodly, the vnhappy eſtate of the godlie, and the long ſuffering of God him ſelfe which ſuffereth grieuous offenders ſo long to eſcape vnpuniſhed: whereas contrarywiſe, if God would be pleaſed to ſhewe preſent examples of his iuſtice vpon ſinners, as he did when he turned Lots wife into a piller of Salt for looking back, deſtroyed Gen, 19 1, Reg, 13, 1, Sam, 4, 
                  Sodom with fire & brimſtone for pride, cauſed Ieroboam his hand to wither for burning Incence, Eli to breake his necke for ſuffering his Children to abuſe the Prieſts office: the earth to ſwallowe vp Core, Dathan & Abiram for their rebellion: the Beares Numb, 16, to deuour the Children for mocking Eliſaeus, the dogges to eate 2 Reg, 2 2 Reg, 9. Leuit, 10 1, Sam, 15 Dan, 5 Luc, 1, Act. 8. Act. 5, 2. Reg: 5 Deut, 32 
                  Ioſabell for oppreſſing Naboth, the fire to burne vp Nadah and Abihu for vſing prophane fier vpon the Altar, which tooke away Saul his Kingdome for diſobeying Samuel, ſtroke Zachary with dumnes for vnbeleefe, Elymas with blindenes for hindering the courſe of the Goſpell, Balthaſar with death for prophaning the holy veſſels, Ananias and Saphira for telling a lye, Gehezi with Leproſie for taking bribes, and ſhut Moſes out of the Land of Canaan for treſpaſſing at the waters of Meriba: I ſay, if God would vouchſafe to dwell with vs as he did with them, and ſhew ſuch examples among vs as he did among them, puniſh whole

landes as he did Egipt for not letting his people goe, no dout but Exod, 8 Atheiſme would ceaſe, and vngodly men would confeſſe that there is a God. It is a ſigne that our ſinnes are great, and God doth not loue vs as he loued them.
               And yet the Atheiſts haue but miſtaken all this while, for theſe be arguments rather to proue vnto them that there is a God. For this is the Lords long ſuffering to bring them to repentance as St. Peter teacheth ſaying: The Lord is not ſlack as ſome men 2 Pet, 3. account ſlacknes, but is pacient towards vs, and would haue no man to periſh, but would haue all men to come to repentance. And as St. Paul ſaith: Thou ô man, deſpiſeſt thou the riches of Rom, 2. his bountifulnes, and patience, and long ſuffering, not knowing that the bountifulnes of God leadeth thee to repentance? but thou after thine hardnes, and heart that cannot repent, heapeſt vp as a treaſure vnto thy ſelfe wrath againſt the day of wrath & of the declaration of the iuſt iudgement of God. But therefore the Prophet Dauid in the Pſalme aboue rehearſed, where he Pſal, 10. ſaith: The wicked hath made boaſt of his hearts deſire, his waies alwayes proſper: he inſerteth theſe wordes in the middle of the ſentence: Thy iudgements ô Lord are farre aboue his ſight. And St. Auguſtine doth fully ſatisfie this point, where he ſaith: Diuina miſerecordia ad impios & ingratos peruenit. Primo quia Deus 
                  Dè Ciui: Dei, Lib, 1. Chap, 8. 
                  facit oriri Solem ſuper bonos pariter & malos, & pluit ſuper iuſtos & iniuſtos. Secundo vt quidam iſta cogitantes ab impietate ſe corrigant. Tertio, vt quidam diuitias longanimitatis eius contemnentes ſibi theſaurrizentiram. Quarto, patientia Dei ad poenitentiam inuitat malos, ſicut flagellum Dei ad patientiā erudit bonos. Quinto, quia placuit diuinae prouidentiae praeparare impoſterū bona iuſtis quibus mali non fruentur, et mala impij quibus boni non cruciabuntur. Againe, Si nunc omne peccatum plecteretur poenis temporalibus, nihil vltimo iudicio reſeruari putaretur, &, ſi nullum peccatum nunc puniretur, nulla Dei prouidentia eſſe crederetur. Gods mercy is extended to the godleſſe and vnthankfull men for theſe cauſes following: Firſt, becauſe he maketh his Sun to ſhine aſwell vpon the vniuſt as the iuſt, and his raine to fall vpon the godleſſe aſwel as the godly. Secondly, that ſome of them conſidering theſe thinges, might repent them of their ſinnes. Thirdly, that otherſome deſpiſing the riches of his longanimitye might heape vp

wrath vnto themſelues. Fourthly, the patience of God doth invite and allure the wicked to repentance, euen as the ſcourge of God doth inſtruct the godly vnto patiēce. Fiftly, becauſe thath ſeemed good to the prouidence of God to prepare in an other worlde ioyes for the righteous, whereof the vnrighteous ſhall not be partakers, and puniſhments for the wicked which the godlye ſhall not feele. And, laſt of all, if all offences were now puniſhed with temporal puniſhmēts, it wold be thought that nothing were reſerued for the day of iudgement, as contrarywiſe, if nothing were puniſhed temporallye in this worlde, men would make a dout of Gods prouidence.
               A fourth cauſe of Atheiſme is the malice of Sathan, as the Apoſtle ſheweth vs: If (ſaith he) our Goſpell be yet hidden, it is 2 COL 4. hidden to them which are loſt, in whome the God of this world hath blinded the mindes, that is, of the infidels that the light of the glorious Goſpel of Chriſt ſhould not ſhine in them. Beholde Sathan his malice and cunning, from time to time. In the firſt two hundred yeares after the Paſſion of our Sauiour Chriſt, he buſied himſelfe about the firſt Article of the Creed to ouerthrow that, and therefore ſtirred vp the Marcioniſts, the Gnoſties, the Maniches to teach that there was not one God the Father almightye maker of heauen and earth, but diuers Gods. But finding not his ſucceſſe therein anſwerable to his malice, ceaſed there and went to an other Article, and ſo ſtirred vp Praxeas, Noetus, Paulus Sanioſatanus to ouerthrowe the diuinitye of our Sauiour Chriſt his Sonne, afterwad haeretickes to diſproue his conception by the holy Ghoſt, his birth of the Virgin Mary, and the other Articles of fayth which are to be beleued concerning him. Being not able to preuaile therein, he deſcended to the Article of the holy Ghoſt, and ſo ſtirred vp Macedonius to deny the Godhead of the holy Ghoſt. Being not able to preuaile therein he went to the Articles concerning the Church, and ſo in ſundrye ages hath gone from one Article to an other, vntill he hath gone ouer all the Articles of the Creed. Now, being diſproued in them all, he doth not ſo reſt, but returneth againe to the firſt at which he began, not to proue a multiplicitie of Gods as he did before endeuour, but to proue a nullitie of any God, by diſprouing the God-head either of the Father, or of the Sonne, or of the holy Ghoſt,

of all three; But he goeth to worke with greater violence, to chop off all fayth, all religion at one blowe, by prouing that there is neuer a God, and to this purpoſe hath he armed his Polititians with arguments againſt the Bible. But to them may be applyed the wordes of Policarpus to Marcian the haereticke, who being asked of him: Agnoſcis me ô Policarpe? Doſt thou acknowledge me ô Policarpus? anſwered him: Agnoſco te eſſe primogenitum Satanae, I knowe thee very well, thou art the ſonne and heire of the Deuill.
               The laſt cauſe of Atheiſme is the lenitye and ouer great mildnes of Princes and Gouernours, which doe ſuffer Atheiſts to eſcape vnpuniſhed. I may iuſtly ſay it is their fault that there are Atheiſts that will ſuffer Atheiſts, For ſo ſaith the holye Ghoſt concerning Azariah the King of Iudah: He did vprightly in the 2, Reg, 15 ſight of the Lord, according to all that his Father Amaziah did: but the high places were not taken away, for the people yet offered, and burned Incenſe in the high places. And the Lord ſmote the King, & he was a leper vnto the day of his death. The King him-ſelfe you ſee is commaunded to be a godly man, not he, but his ſubiects committed idolatrye, yet God puniſheth him for the idolatrye of his ſubiects, But that could not ſtand with the iuſtice of God to puniſh the King for his ſubiects offences vnles it were the Kings faulte that the ſubiects offended. Where the Spaniſh Inquiſition is, it is a very rare thing to heare of an Atheiſt, which I ſpeake not to that end as if I did wiſh that Inquiſition to be brought into any Chriſtian Kingdome, but onely to ſhewe that it is better to liue where there is too much ſeueritie rather then too much looſenes, and where nothing is lawfull, rather then where all things are permitted as if they were lawfull. The Lord of his mercy ſtirre vp the hearts of all his annoynted Princes, & inflame their Zeale, that they may not onely hate Atheiſme, as I hope they doe, with a perfecte hatred, but alſo baniſh ſuch impietye, that heereafter not onely the opinions but alſo the verye name of Atheiſt may be as it were buried in hell, and no more heard of in their Kingdomes.
            
            
               
               Chapter 3.
               
                  How Atheiſme may be rooted out of all Chriſtian landes.
               
               AS proſperitie cauſeth many men to forget God, and others to denye God: ſo aduerſitie, ſicknes, impriſonment & ſuch like chaſtiſements of God for ſinne, will make wicked men not onely to acknowledge & confeſſe God, but alſo to ſtoop downe before him, and to flye for ſuccour vnto him. When Iulian the apoſtata was deadly wounded by a dart from heauē, he could not be ſilent, but that plague extorted out of his mouth a confeſſion of the power of Ieſus Chriſt whome before he had denyed, & he cryed out: Viciſti Galilaee, Ieſus of Galile the conqueſt is thine. Though Pharao in his proſperitie had ſaid: who is the Lord? I Exod, 5. knowe him not, I will not let the people goe: yet when his land was plagued with Frogges, he called for Moſes and Aaron and ſaid: Pray ye for me vnto the Lord, that he may take away the Frogges from me and from my people, and I will let the people Exod, 8. goe, that they may doe ſacrifice to the Lord, But as ſoone as God gaue him a little reſt, that the plague ceaſed, he was hardned againe. When the hand of the Lord was heauye vpon the men of Aſhdod, and he deſtroyed them and ſmote them with Emeroides 1 Sam, 5. they remoued the Arke out of the houſe of Dagon, and ſaid: Let vs ſend the Arke of God vnto his owne place, that he ſlay vs not, and our people. When Nabuchodonozer was depriued of his Dan, 4. Kingdome, and turned into an Aſſe to graze in the field for the ſpace of ſeuen yeares: then he began to be humble, to vnderſtand himſelfe better, to lift vp his eyes to heauen, to giue thankes to the moſt high, to praiſe and honour him that liueth for euer, to confeſſe that his power is an euerlaſting power, that his Kingdome indureth from generation to generatiō, that all the inhabitānts of the earth are reputed as nothing, that according to his will he worketh in the armye of heauen, and in the inhabitants of the earth, that none can ſtay his hand, nor ſay vnto him, what doſt thou? Then he could make both an humble & a large conſeſſion, and ſay: I Nabuchodonozer prayſe, and extoll, and magnifie

the King of heauen, whoſe workes are all truth, and his waies iudgement, and thoſe that walke in pride he is able to abaſe. But for as much as now ſuch miracles doe ceaſe, and it belongeth to Gods annointed Kings to be ielous of his glory, if they wil abanden Atheiſme out of their Kingdomes: firſt of all they muſt withdrawe their countenace from all vngodly liuers. For ſo long as the Prince dooth looke cheerfully vpon them, the eyes of the people will be defixed vpon them alſo, they will admire them, and think their vices to be vertues. You know what Hamon ſaid: Eſther, 6. Thus ſhall he be honoured whome the King doth honour: and againe the argument muſt followe aſwell on the contrary ſide: Thus, and thus, ſhall he be diſhonoured whome the King doth diſhonour, You are not ignorant of the ſaying of Salomon: Indignatio 
                  Pro, 19, & 20 
                  Regis eſt nuncius mortis, The diſpleaſure of the King is but a fore-runner of death. If the King giue countenance to Atheiſts, the people will reſpect them by his example, if he frowne vpon them, the people will trample ouer them. The King is like the maior prepoſition in a Sillogiſme, the people are like the concluſion. But it is a moſt certaine rule in Logicke: Concluſio ſequitur deteriorem partem. If the maior be negatiue or perticuler, the concluſion will bee ſo, if any thing bee worſer then other in the King the people wil be ſure to followe that.
               Secondly, they muſt be aſſiſting vnto their Miniſters. For God in the Primitiue Church gaue them the gift of working miracles to credit their office and calling whereby they did chaſtiſe Gods enemies. So St. Paul ſtroke Elymas the ſorcerer with blindenes Act. 13. for peruerting and ſeducing the Deputye from the fayth. And St. Peter ſtroke Ananias and Saephira with preſent death for telling a Act, 5. lye to the holy Ghoſt. And becauſe miracles after a ſhort time were to ceaſe, our Sauiour Chriſt left the ſworde of excommunication in his Church to be in place of miracles, and to continue vnto the end of the worlde. And ſince the Church hath no other ſword now, but the cēſure of excōmunication, which is ſo greatly diſpiſed: if it would pleaſe God to put it the hearts of Princes to ſtrengthen excommunication with their Princely authoritye, to adde the ſworde of the Kingdome to the keyes of the Church, not to ſuffer any perſon that is noted of impietye to dwell in the lande, none that is tanquam Publicanus & Ethnicus, as an heathen

or infidell to dwell among Chriſtians, but to deliuer them ouer to the hang-man whome the Church hath deliuered ouer to Suthan, vnles they he heartily openitent, and ſpeedily reformed: no dout but then God would be better knowne in Iuda, and his name in Ieruſalem would be greater. I ſay, if any man be an Atheiſt, let him not be honoured among the people, but let him haue Micheas 
                  1 Reg. 21. his entertainment, which was to be fed with the bread of affliction, and water of affliction, or let him be baniſhed out of the lande, not by Ostraciſme, as Ariſt
                        •
                     des was for his vertues, but as Ouid was for his vices, and that I may vſe the phraſe of the holy Ghoſt, let his houſe be made a Takes. As Tully wiſhed, that it Dan, 3. were written in euery mans forhead what he thought of the common-wealth of Rome, that ſo true-hearted ſubiectes might be knowne from Traytours: ſo, I wiſh it were written in all mens forheads, what they think of God and of Chriſtian religion. We can iudge no farther of them then wee heare by their blaſphemy, and prophane wordes which they vtter, & ſee by their looſe liues and conuerſations. But ſo farre we may iudge as we heare and ſee, and we finde there are ſo many, that we haue good cauſe to crye out with the Prophet Dauid, and to ſay: Help Lord help, there Pſal. 12. is not a godly man left, for the faithful are fayled from among the children of men, they ſpeak deceitfully euery one with his neighbour, flattering with their lippes, and ſpeake with a double heart, the Lord cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that ſpeaketh proud thinges. Thus much I am fare: there is no policye to religion, no wiſdome to well doing, and moſt firme is the eſtate of that man, be he high or of lowe degree, which procureth God to be his freind.
            
            
               Chapter 4.
               
                  That there is a God.
               
               THey which call them-ſelues the damned Crue, yet doe think there is no damnation, they ſweare continually by the name of God, and yet they think there is no God. See how they are ouertaken vnawares. As St. Paul might very well diſpute with Act, 17. the Athenians in the defence of that God whome he preached

vnto them; and ſay: There is a God beſides all thoſe Gods which you ſuperſtitiouſlye doe worſhip; and is yet vnknown vnto you, witnes your ſelues and your owne Altar, Doe not think it abſurd that I preach vnto you ſuch a God for if there be not, why do you then erect an Altar vnto him & write this ſuperſcriptiō vpon it? IGNOTO DEO, TO THE VNKNOWNE GOD. So I diſpute againſt them: if they be, as they confeſſe their ſelues, a damned crue, how ſhall they thinke to eſcape damnation? If they ſwearo by the name of God, why doe they deny God? for in ſwearing by him vnawares they doe confeſſe him. They weare by the woundes and bloud of Chriſt & yet deny the merits of the death of Chriſt. The man of God calleth ſuch men fooles, and ſuch Pſalm, 14. fooles may be rebuked euen out of their owne Booke, intituled THE SHIP OF FOOLES.
               
                  
                     Preb ſcelus horrendum, blaſphema tricuſpide telo
                     Gent humana petit genitum Patris Altitonautis,
                     At
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         illi exprobat quod nostros induit artus.
                     Languoreſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tulit noſtros, miſeratus abalto
                     Caſum inſaelicen quo primus corruit Adam. 
                        
                           What haynous ſin, blaſphemous mangainſt Gods beloued Sonne
                           Doeſt thou commit? vp brayding him who did for vs become?
                           Our ſelf-ſame: fleſh: who bore our ſin, & pitved frō his Throne
                           That moſt vhappy ſtate of ours frō whence Adam was throwne.
                        
                     
                  
               
               To them I ſay no more then out of their owne Booke.
               
                  
                     Deſine ſacrilegis iterum crucifigere labris
                     
                        Ʋirgineum partum, poenam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         horreſce propinquane. 
                           With ſuch vncircumciſed lippes forbeare (ô wretch) againe
                           To Crucifye the Virgins ſoune, and feare eternall paine.
                        
                     
                  
               
               They were thought worthy to be put into the Ship of Fooles which are ſwearers, but much more doe they ſhewe them ſelues to be fooles which ſweare by God, and yet ſay there is no God But I will proue to the damned Atheiſt by theſe reaſons, that there is a God.
               
                  
Firſt they read euery day in the booke of nature that there is a God. I meane by the booke of nature, the great frame of heauen & earth. For what is this whole viſible world, but Epiſtola a Deo ſcripta ad humanum genus? A letter or Epiſtle written from God vnto mankind? For, in it we may read of the inuiſible God in his workes, and his name is engrauen there in hierographicall letters. Lactantius proueth it out of Tully (an heathen Philoſopher) by the ſame argument, his wordes are theſe: Nemo eſt tamrudis, tam 
                  De falſae religione. L. 1. C. 2 
                  ſeris moribus, quin oculos ſuos in coelum tollens, tametſi neſciat cuius Dei prouidentia regatur hoc omne quod cernitur, aliquam tamen eſſe intelligat ex ipſa rerum magnitudine, moles, diſpoſitione, conſtantia, vtilitate, pulchritudine, temperatione, nec poſſefieri, quis id quod mirabiliratione conſtat, conſilio maiori aliquo ſit inſtructū. No man is ſuch a ruſticke, ſo brutiſh and voyde of cōmon ſence and reaſon, but as often as he looketh vp to heauen, if he deny this, his owne eyes ſhall witnes againſt him, for although this be not ſufficient to bring him to the perfecte vnderſtanding of that God by whoſe prouidence he ſeeth the worlde is gouerned, yet what his eye hath ſeene, his tongue may tell. The very greatnes of the frame of heauen, the conſtant motion of the ſtarres, the wonderfull temperature of the elements, doth ſhewe there is a God which guideth theſe thinges, and by a conſequent there is a God which made theſe thinges. Mercurius Triſmegiſtus doth Ad filium ſuū 
                     Tatium quod manifeſtus Deus manifeſtiſſimus eſt. proue it. Singula haec aſtra non ſimilem & aqualem curſum faciunt in coelo. Quis eſt qui eui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      modum & magnitudinem curſus terminauit? vrſa haec quae circaſe voluitur, & vniuerſum mundum ſecum circumferens; quis eſt qui ei fabrifecit inſtrumentum? quis eſt qui mariterminum impoſuit? quis eſt qui terram ſtabiliuit? eſt enim aliquis ô Tati, qui herum omnium factor eſt & Dominus. Impoſſibile enim eſt, vellocum, vel numerum, vel menſuram terminari abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      factore. When we ſee the motion of the planets & fixed ſtarres contrary one to an other, the celeſtiall ſpheres in continuall volubilitye, the multiplicitye of their motions, their diurnall or daylye courſe from the Eaſt to the Weſt, their retrograde and vyolent motion from the Weſt to the Eaſt, their trepidat motion from the South to the North. When we ſee the ſea farre higher then the earth, and a fluide or liquid body, yet confined within the bankes that it cannot drowne the earth, the earth ſolid

and firme vnder our feet that we cannot ſinke, we muſt confeſſe ô ſonne Tatius that there is one which is Lord & maker of theſe thinges, for it is impoſſible that euery thing ſhould continue in due place, number and meeaſure, and ſo iuſt a preportion ſhould be obſerued without a maker, and who could make theſe thinges but God? therfore there is a God. To this booke of nature agreeth the booke of the Bible, who ſaith: The heauens Pſalm, 19. declare the power of God, the firmament ſheweth the worke of his handes, one day teacheth another, & one night giueth knowledge to another. Againe, the wrath of God is reuealed from heauen Rom, 1. againſt all vngodlynes and vnrighteouſnes of men, which detaine the truth of God in vnrrighteouſnes, for aſmuch as that which may be knowne of God is manifeſt in them, for God hath ſhewed it vnto them, for the inuiſible thinges of him, that is, his eternall power and Godhead are ſeene by the creation of the worlde, being conſidered in his workes, to the intent that they ſhould be without excuſe. Dauid ſaith: he couereth him ſelfe with light as with a garment, and ſpreadeth the heauens like a curtayne, he Pſal, 104. layeth the beames of his chamber in the waters, maketh the clowdes his chariots, and walketh vpon the winges of the winde. In which wordes, I doe not preſſe them with the authoritye of the Scriptures, becauſe the Scriptures are not of ſufficient credit with them, but with the reaſons which are vſed in the Scriptures, which if they cannot anſwer, they muſt yeild vnto, and confeſſe that there is a God. And therefore I conclude againſt them in this manner: We ſee dayly effects before our eyes in all the elements, continuall motions in the heauens, but there can be no effecte without a cauſe, there can be no motion without a mouer, no action without an agent, no worke without a workeman: theſe be relatiues, and therefore one could not be without the other. Mercurius Triſmegiſtus could ſay: Statuam ſiue imaginem fieri ſine ſtatuario aut pictore nemo dicit. Hoc vero opificium fine opifice 
                  Ad filiū 
                     Tatiū
                     
                   
                  factum eſt? Ô multam cacitatem, ô multam impietatem, ô multam ignorantiam, nunquam ô ſili Tati priuaueris opifice opificia. A picture cannot be made without a Painter; or a grauen image without a Caruer, And can ſuch a piece of worke be made without a worke van? It is blindenes, it is impietye, it is groſſe to entertaine ſuch a conceit. So then we take theſe for vndouted principles in

naturall Phioſophye that they may not be denyed, to witte: Euery effect hath his cauſe, euery action his agent, euery motion his mouer. But, as there be many ſecondary cauſes, agents & mouers, ſo there muſt needes be one principall and aboue the reſt. There is ordo cauſarum, qui in rerum natura non procedit in infinitum, an order of cauſes ſub-ordinate one to an other, and therefore there is no infinite aſcention vp in the ſubordination of cauſes, but at the lēgth by aſcēding we muſt come to the higheſt, & we muſt in ea conſiſtere, ſtay when we come there, becauſe we can goe no higher, and that is God. What naturall body ſoeuer is moued, I ſay it is moued by ſome other which is higher then it ſelfe. For example: The ſphere of the Moone which is the loweſt of the heauens, is moued by the ſpheare of Merc. which is higher thē it, Mer. is moued by Venus which is higher then it, Venus by the Sun, the Sun by Mars, Mars by Iupiter, Iupiter by Saturne, Saturne by the ſphere of the fixed ſtaries, and ſo we aſcend vntill we can goe no higher, that is vnto the heauen which is called Primum mobile, yt firſt & higheſt body wc is ſubiect to motion & volubility. That alſo is moued aſwell as the reſt, not of it ſelfe, becauſe no naturall bodye can moue it ſelfe, therefore it hath motion frō ſome other, not from any other bodye, becauſe there can be no other bodye aboue the higheſt, therefore it muſt of neceſſitye be moued by that which is a Spirit and not a bodye, not naturall but metaphiſicall, Phiſic: l, 2. c, 1 and that can be nothing elſe but God. In like manner, the Sunne and a man doe beget a man, the Sunne & putrifaction doe engender Flyes, and theſe thinges being ſubiect to outward ſenſes are therefore naturall bodyes, and becauſe they are naturall bodyes they haue foure cauſes, two inward which are matter and forme, and two outward efficient and finall, and there is nature which hath his ſecret motion, tell me therefore what is that? You will ſay peraduenture that is nature which Ariſtotle defineth to be principium motus the beginning of motion: you ſay rightly, but that is inward, therefore you muſt beſides this aſſigne an outward cauſe of motion, and what is that? If you ſay the ayre, that is but a middle cauſe, and therefore you muſt aſcend higher, for, if there be cauſa media, there is alſo prima, if there be a midde or ſubordinate cauſe, there is alſo a principall and firſt cauſe. And what is that, but onely God, that is cauſa cauſarum the cauſe of

all other cauſes, and from whence all other thinges haue their being? Againe, all agents doe not worke alike, for one thing worketh of neceſſitye, and that is nature, an other thing worketh (in theſe outward and indifferent thinges) partly of will, and partly of neceſſitye, & that is man, there you ſee medium participationis, a meane which participateth with the extremitye, but there can be no meane without two extreames, and there can be no one extreame without the other, and therefore of neceſſitye there muſt be a third agent which worketh freely as nature worketh of neceſſitye, and man partly of will & partly of neceſsitye. And that can be nothing elſe, but Deus liberrimum agens, euen God which worketh freelye that no power is able to withſtand his worke. Therefore I conclude this point with Iob: Aske the beaſtes and they will teach thee, the foules of the heauen, and they will ſhewe Iob, 12. thee: ſpeake to the earth, and it will tell thee: the fiſhes of the ſea, and they ſhall declare vnto thee: who is ignorant of all theſe, but the hand of the Lord hath made all theſe?
               Secondly, to leaue the work-manſhip of the whole worlde, and to come to man alone which is but one little part of the ſame. If man goe no farther then him ſelfe, he ſhall ſee God moſt liuely in him ſelfe three manner of wayes: Firſt in his conſcience and vnderſtanding, Secondly in his naturall inclination he hath to religion, Thirdly in the excellencye of the work-manſhip both of his bodye and his ſoule. Concerning the firſt: I ſay there is in euery man at ſome time or other an inward feeling of his conſcience, which wil he nill he, maketh him to confeſſe there is a God. For, ſuppoſe a man for his wickednes to be a monſter of men, a very ſlaunder and reproch to mankinde, as Nero was that ſlewe his Mother, his Maſter and him ſelfe: when he hath committed any haynous crime, he doth in his conſcience ſee that God doth behold it, that God doth purſue him, that God wil worke reuenge although there be no witnes to accuſe him, no humane power aboue him to execute iuſtice vpon him. I will not dwell vpon many exāples, neither wil I inſtance in Adam, which as ſoone as euer he had eaten the Apple hid him ſelfe from the preſence of God Gen, 3. in the thicket: in Herod which when he had beheaded Iohn the Baptiſt wrongfully, did think yt he was haunted by Iohn the Baptiſt Math, 14. his ghoſt, ſaying of Chriſt: ſurely this is Iohn riſen from the

dead, nor in Cain which but intending to murther his brother, Gen, 4. watched a time when he was in the field out of the ſight of his parents. I will not alleadge the authoritye of the Prophet which ſaith: Impius fugit, nemine perſequente. The wicked man flyeth Pro, 28. when no man doth purſue him: And of the Apoſtle which ſaith, Rom, 2. The Gentils which haue not the lawe written (meaning the Bible) yet haue by nature the effect of the lawe of God written in their hearts, their conſcience bearing witnes, and their thoughts accuſing or excuſing one an other: becauſe they thinke the Bible to be a partiall iudge, and no way competent betweene them & vs, and therefore I will alleadge one or two examples out of indifferent Authors tending to the ſame purpoſe. Tully pleading for a Oratione pro. S. Roſcio Amorine. man which was accuſed as a Parecide, or one which had murthered his owne father, alleageth this as an eſpeciall proofe of his innocencie, that in the whole courſe of his behauiour after his father was ſlayne, nothing could be obſerued in him which did ſauour of a troubled conſcience. And for the better cleering of Sextus Roſcius whoſe cauſe was then in hand, he alleageth a former example of a father and his ſonne, which in their trauayle tooke vp their lodging, and after ſupper lay together in one bed: the morowe after, the maſter of the houſe comming by chance into the chamber, found the father ſtrangled in his bed and the ſonne ſleping by his ſide: when the matter was examined by the Iudges, the ſonne was acquitted by the equitye of the lawe as a man innocent, becauſe it was then held and by them ſo adiudged to be a matter impoſſible, that he ſhould in ſo ſhort a time haue ſlept if ſo be that he had committed murther. A man ſaith Tully which Pro, 15 hath ſlayne his father, ſhall feele a thouſand vexations and furyes of hell tormenting his conſcience, according to that ſaying of the Eſay, 57. wiſe man: A good conſcience is a continuall feaſte, but non eſt pax impijs, no inward peace, no quietnes of conſcience with ſuch men as are notoriouſlye wicked. A man I ſay, that hath committed any crying ſinne, ſhall betraye him ſelfe by the working of his owne conſcience, it will not ſuffer him to take his bodily reſt, it will alter his very face and countenance, as the Poet ſaith:
               
                  Heu quam difficile eſt crimen non prodere vult
                        •
                     ? 
                        Ouidij metamorpho:
                  
               
               Oh how hard a thing is it for a man to keep his countenance, & not to bluſh which hath committed an offence? The Lord ſaid

to Cain after he had committed murther: Why is thy countenance caſt downe? ſuch a man feareth the wagging of euery leaf, Gen, 4. and the flying of euery bird. An obnox ous man watching, is like to a phrenſie man ſleeping, for the one reſteth not ſleeping, and the other reſteth not waking, he cannot ſit ſtill hee cannot lye ſtil, he cannot ſtand ſtill, nor abide long in any place. Caligula the tyrant was afeard of euery blaſt. Nero when he had maſſacred 
                     Suco
                           ••••
                        
                      Ca
                     
                        •
                     gul: Cap, 15 the chriſtiās, put St. Paul to the ſword, St. Peter to the gibbet, was ſo terryfied by apparitions, as he thought, of St, Paul and St. Peter which appeared at his bedſide in a dreame: and after he had put his mother Agrippina to death, he was ſo terrified in his conſcience, that he knewe not where to beſtowe him ſelfe, at the end for very greife of minde, he ran into a priuye, and there ſtabbed himſelfe. 
                     
                        •
                     is in Nerone
               
               That I may come to religion. Tully ſaith: Sunt qui negant Deos procurationem habere rerum humanarum, quorum ſententia 
                  De natura De
                     
                        •••…
                     , Lib, 1. 
                  falſa eſt, quoniam ſic omnis religio inanis eſſet. Religion ſheweth there is a God, for if there were no God, then could there be no religion. But euery mans ſoule naturally hath ſomtimes a feeling of religion, although he diſpiſe God and religion neuer ſo much. This appeareth by the very heathens them ſelues, which, be they neuer ſo rude and barbarous, and depriued of the knowledge of God, yet doe make vnto themſelues idols euen of their owne accorde, as Mr. Caluin verye well obſerueth: Dei conceptionis apud 
                  Institut: Lib, 1 
                  Ethnicos, ſaith he, idolotria ſatis eſt argumenti, quum lapidem potius quam nullum deum colant, ye mansown conceit doth naturally leade him to knowe there is a God, the verye idolatrie of the heathens is a ſufficient proofe, which choſe rather to worſhip a ſtone, then no God at all. And as Statius ſaith: Primus in orbe Deos fecit timor, as ſoone as men be in danger and extremitye, be they neuer ſo vngodly, yet they erect Altars, carue Images, flye to thē for ſuccour, ſhewing that in their owne naturall iudgement which they haue by the light and inſtinct of nature, there is one higher then them ſelues, one whoſe power is aboue the power of man to whome they ought to flye vnto for help and deliuery out of trouble, and who is that but God? Nay, witnes in this point the Atheiſtes them ſelues that there is a God, for in their extremitye of greife they crye out ô God. It is an olde and true Prouerb: Qui

neſcit orare tranſeat mare, if a man knowe not how to ſerue God, let him ſayle vpon the ſea, and it will make him to ſerue God. When the Lord ſent a great winde that the Ship was like to be Iouae, 1. rent, the Mariners were afeard, & euery one cryed vnto his God, they ſaid vnto Ionas: Thou ſleeper ariſe, and call vpon thy God, if ſo be that God will think vpon vs that we periſh not, and (as the Text ſaith) Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered ſacrifices vnto him, and made vowes. And for this cauſe namely, that men by the inſtinct of nature doe incline to religion, and a man is as much diſtinguiſhed from a beaſt by his feeling of religion as by his reaſonable ſoule; After the floud, Mercurius Triſmegiſtus and Menna preſcribed lawes and rules of religion to the Aegiptians, Meliſſus to the Cratians, Ianus, to the Latines, Numa Pompilius to the Romanes, Orpheus and Cadmus to the Grecians, aſwell as Moſes and Aaron to the Hebrues, the difference onely this, that the Hebrues were in the right way, al the reſt in the wrong. But yet all nations beſides had their Prieſts, their Altars, their Gods, their rules and principles of the religion which they profeſſed, which is an argument, that by nature they knewe there was a GOD.
               And that I may deſcend vnto the work-manſhip of man to ſhewe that there is a God, It is truely ſaid, that hominis fabricatio eſt innumeris Dei teſtimonijs ornata, the verye work-manſhip of man him ſelfe doth aboundantly witnes that there is a God. Let vs therefore firſt of all looke into the ſoule of man, and afterward into the ſtate of his bodye. There is in it not onely an infinite capacitye, in ſo much that the more it knoweth, the more it is able to learne, It is able to conceiue not onely the whole worlde, but alſo two worldes, yea infinite worldes, It is of infinite deſire Pro, 27. Dan, 9. which is neuer ſatisfied. I will not ſpeak of Daniel which was called: vir multorum diſideriorum a man of manye deſires, nor of Moſes which in this tranſitorye life deſired to ſee the very face of Exod, 33. God, but of Alexander the great, which when he thought he had ſubdued the whole worlde, yet was not therewith contented, but affected more worldes: and hearing a Philoſopher ſay there were infinite worldes, wept for greife to thinke how great a labour it ſhould be for him to ſubdue them all, as if he had hoped to conquer all. Mans appetite is neuer ſatisfied: giue him a Citye, he

deſireth a Kingdome: giue him a kingdome, he affecteth an Empire: giue him an Empire, he deſireth a worlde. If he could be made Lord of the whole world, and knew that beſides that there were no more, yet would he not reſt there, but deſire ſomwhat which is greater then the worlde, And what can that be but only God? So then, foraſmuch as man is not ſatisfied with knowledge and contemplation, but laboureth to knowe more (that ſtill Ariſtotles propoſition ſhall be veryfied in him: Omnes homines naturaliter 
                  Metaphy: Lib, 1. Cap, 1. 
                  ſcire deſiderant, all men naturallye are deſirous of knowledge) neither yet with poſſeſſion, but deſireth to haue more: what can that be but Dei maieſtas in mente & voluntate tanquam in ſpeculis reflexa et vnita, euen the Maieſtie of God in mans minde and in his will as it were in two glaſſes ſeene, and reflected backe againe? Againe, foraſmuch as the proper obiect of the minde is truth as Tully writeth, but the minde of man is infinite, Officiorū, ſi, 1. as I haue declared, the obiect muſt be correſpondent vnto the minde, therefore truth muſt be infinite, and there muſt be no end of the knowledge and apprehenſion of truth. And foraſmuch as that truth which is in creatures dependeth vpon vncertaintyes, therefore there is ſome other truth which is immutable and moſt certayne, and that is God. Alſo, the ſubſtance of mans ſoule hath not his originall or beginning from any materiall thing, becauſe it is not of ſeed, as in due courſe I will proue vnto you, neither yet is it mortall, as I will ſhewe when I come to ſpeake of the ſoule, Therfore it is not of any naturall cauſe, but is the effect of ſuch a cauſe as is ſupernaturall, and metaphiſicall, and that is God.
               But to leaue the ſoule of man and come to his bodye. Mercurius Triſmegiſtus writeth of it in this ſorte: Si vis opiſicem etiam per mortalia intueri, cogita ô fili, hominis in vtero fabricam, & opificis 
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Tatiū
                     
                   
                  exacte artificium expende, & diſce quiſuam artifex pulchram hanc & diuinam hominis imaginem cordat, quiſnam ſit qui oculos circumſcribat, nares & aures perforauerit, os aperuerit, nertias extenderit & colligauerit, venas in canales efformauerit, oſſa indurauerit, carni cutam circum diderit, digitos & articulos diſtiuxerit, pedibus baſim dilatauerit, ſplenem extenderit, poros cauauerit, heper latum fecerit, pulmonem perforauerit, ventrem capac
                        ••…
                      fecerit, honorabilia palam figurauerit, turpia abſconderit? vide quot artes in vna materia quis haec omnia fecit? qua mater? quis pates?

niſi ſolus immanifeſtus Deus? If thou (ô man) wilt ſee the inuiſible workeman, doe but thinke vpon man how he is framed in the wombe: who made his eyes round, his eares and noſtrels holowe, his mouth open? who ſtretched out his ſinewes, hardned his bones, skinned his fleſh, parted his fingers? who made the paſſage from his veynes? who widened the bottomes of his feet, dilated his ſplene, who opened his pores & his lunges, dilated his liuer, made his belly of ſuch capacitye, his honeſt partes to be open, and his ſecret partes to be hidden? who did all theſe thinges but onely the inuiſible God?
               A third reaſon to proue there is a God, is the generall conſent, not onelye of the learned men of the worlde, but alſo of the worlde it ſelfe. And why ſhould any fewe wicked men thinke them ſelues wiſer then the worlde? The denyers of the God head haue beene theſe men of name: Diagoras, Theodotus, Cyrenaeus, Euemarus Tegeates, Callimachus, Podicus, Caeus, Plinius, Lucianus, Lucretius, Doletus, Epicurus: ſome of them denying that there was a God, others that he tooke the care of gouerning and guiding the worlde, and beſides theſe, verye fewe. But as for the famous and learned Philoſophers of the worlde, they confeſſed there was a God. Empedooles ſaid: Deus eſt cuius centrum eſt vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , circumferentia autem nuſquam, God his center is euerye where, his circumference no where. Socrates called him magnum Iudicem the great Iudge, as Tully witneſſeth: Plato acknowledged 
                     Cicero in ſom: Stip: Phiſico: Lib, 7. Cap, 2. & 10. Pheſ L, 8 C 6, de coelo. l, 1, 
                        •
                     , 9 Lib, 2, Cap, 3. Metaphy: Lib, 11, Cap, 7. him in all his workes, Ariſtotle the greateſt of all, which in deed was equiualent to all the Philoſophers, I may iuſtlye ſay, there is almoſt no leafe in his workes, but in it he inſerteth the name of God (euen as almoſt no page of the Bible but in it is vnderſtood the name of Chriſt) who is called by him: prima cauſa, cauſa cauſarum, ens entium, primus mortor, author omnium, lux aterna, ſimpliciſſimus actus, conditor mundi, infinitus, immenſus, inaffabilis Deus, The firſt cauſe, the cauſe of cauſes, the eſſence of all thinges of whome all things haue their being, the firſt mouer, the author of all thinges, the eternall light, moſt pure act, maker of the world, infinite, vnmeaſurable, vnſpeakable God. Aristotle 
                  Laērtius dé vita Ariſtot: when he liued, was accuſed by Hiero the Prieſt, becauſe, Contra patrios mores & ritus multitudine deorum vnum ſolum & 
                        •
                     erum Deum agnouit, Contrary to the religion of his countrye

where many Gods were worſhipped, he acknowledged but one onely true God. And when he dyed, the laſt wordes which he ſpake were theſe: Ens entium miſerere mei, God haue mercy vpon me. The like was acknowledged by Mercurius Triſmegiſtus. Quid Deus? immutabile bonum. Mundus factus eſt propter hominem, & homo propter Deum. What is God? an immutable goodnes, the worlde was made for man, and man for God. Ego filt, et humanitatis gratia et erga Deum pictatis haec ſcribo. 
                  De pietate et Philoſophia. Paenander Sermo ſacar I write this tract (my ſonne) in regarde of my loue to vardes man, and my dutye towards God. Illud vero ex mente lucidum verbīs filius Det, that ſame pure worde which is borne of God is the ſonne of God. Natura diuina principium entium, the diuine nature is the beginning of all thinges. Deus et pater, & bonum eandem habent naturam, quid eſt Deus, pater, & bonum, quam omnium eſſe? 
                  Glauis. God the Father, and Goodnes, haue the ſame nature, what is God, the Father, and Goodnes, but the very eſſence, and being of all thinges? Here is a manifeſt acknowledgement of the Trinitye. To leaue particular men, what anſwere the Atheiſts to the iudgement of the worlde? the conſent of nations? Tully draweth his argument in this manner: Deus eſſe non eſt dubitandum, 
                  De natu: deo
                     
                        •••…
                     . L, 1. 
                  quoniam corum notitiam omnium animis ipſa impreſſit natura, that there is a God, it is without queſtion, becauſe all nations doe acknowledge and confeſſe him by the inſtinct of nature. But in an other place ſaith he: Omnium conſenſus vox naturae eſt, the conſent of all men is the voyce of nature it ſelfe. I haue ſhewed how 
                     
                        ••
                     ſeuls queſt: Lab. 1. all nations imbrace ſome religion or other, haue their Altars, their Prieſts, their Gods: as the Hebrues from Moſes, ſo the Egiptians from Mercury, the Cretians from Meliſſus, the Latins frō 
                  Ianus, the Romans from Numa, the Greckes frō 
                  Orpheus and Cadmus, and all nations from one or other. St. Auguſtin ſaith, concerning miracles: Non nunc neceſſaria ſunt, vt olim, miracula, tum facta erant neceſſario priuſquam crederet mundus, ad hoc vt crederet mundus, quiſquis autem adhuc, vt credat prodigia requirit, magnum 
                  Ciuitatis Dei, L. 22, Cap. 8 
                  eſt ipſe prodigium, qui mundo credente, non credit. Now miracles are not ſo neceſſary as in times paſt they were, before they were neceſſary, that ſo the worlde might beleeue, but now he is a miracle his ſelfe that will not beleeue, becauſe the world beleeueth. But ſay I, as he is a wonder that will not beleeue that which

the worlde beleeueth: ſo he is a monſter which will not confeſſe that which the world confeſſeth.
               A fourth argument to proue there is a God, is the great multitude of miracles which haue beene manifeſted to the worlde, euen ſuch things as are farre aboue the ſtrength of nature, & therfore needs muſt proceed from ſome higher & ſupernaturall cauſe, and who is that metaphyſicall cauſe but euen Natura naturans, God him ſelfe. For example, ſlightly to paſſe ouer ſo many earthquakes, which haue ouerthrowne whole Cityes, as Eutropius ſheweth how the yeare after St. Pauls death, the Citye of Coloſſus was ſwallowed vp for deſpiſing St. Pauls doctine. They are Vide Carcaum de meteoris. not vnacquainted with the Hiſtoriographers which ſhewe how by an earthquake the Iland of Sicily was made an Iland being before one maine continent with Italy, how Europe and Africa were parted when Spaine was deuided from Barbary which before were one land? And that I may ſpeak that which mine eyes haue ſeene, 
                     Ʋienna the cheife Citye of Auſtria is now more ſubiecte to earthquakes then other places in the worlde beſides, in ſo much that there is ſcarce one houſe in the Citye which hath not one rent or other in the ſtone wall, which came onely by earthquakes. And becauſe that place hath beene more ſubiecte to earthquakes then other places, one of the Biſhops of that Sea heretofore deuiſed a certaine prayer continually to be ſaid in the 
                     Charion in his Chronicles. Churches of Vienna to this effect, that God would defend that Citye from earthquakes. Let the Atheiſt ſatiſfie me by a natural reaſon concerning this poynt, elſe let him confeſſe that there is a ſupernatural cauſe, which if they doe, that is God. What can they ſaye to ſo manye ſtrange Eclipſes, to ſo manye prodigious raines? as when it rayned bloud, fleſh, ſtones, coles of fire, of which 
                     Plutarch in 
                        •
                     ita Fabii. Luuius. l. 4. Decad. 3. et L. 3. dec 1. they may read at large in Liuy, Plutarch and other authors? what ſay they to ſo many comets appearing in the ayre, after which ſtil doe inſue the death of ſo many Princes, as namely the Comet which appeared in the yeare 1506. after which enſued the death of Philip King of Spayn ſonne and heyre to Maximlian the Emperour, Philip Prince Elector of Rhene, Albert Duke of Bauaria, Pope Iuly the ſecond, Iohn King of Suecia and Noruegia, Lewis king of France, Maximiliā
                   the Emperour, the Biſh. of Spire, the Archbiſhops of Colen & Magdeburg, the venetiā wars, the wars

between the Turke and the Perſian, the King of Denmarke Chriſtian driuen out of his Kingdome, Hungary inuaded and Rhodes taken by the Turke. Lewis King of Hungary ſlayne, who can giue a naturall reaſon of this, and many other like vnto this? But I will ſtand eſpecially vpon two things which haue troubled the wiſe men of the world, let the Atheiſts yeild naturall reaſons how theſe things could be, elſe let thē cōfeſſe there is a God wc is aboue nature. Firſt the Starre which apeared at the birth of our Sauiour being neither a fixed ſtarre, nor yet a Planet, for it was nothing Math. 2. like vnto either of them, if we doe reſpecte the motion of it, the place where, and the time when it apeared, and the vſe whervnto it ſerued, For, it neither moued as the fixed ſtarres from the Eſt to the Weſt, nor as the Planets from the Weſt to the Eſt, but from the Eſt to the South, the like neuer heard of before nor ſince. When the Sunne ſhined it alſo ſhone, when the wiſe men came to Paleſtina it went before them, when they came to Ieruſalem it vaniſhed away, when they went to Bethleem it went before them againe, as if it were a creature indued with reaſon and vnderſtanding, it ſhewed them the verye houſe where the Childe did lye, whereas a naturall ſtarre by reaſon of the great diſtance betweene heauen & earth, could not diſcouer vnto them the place and ſcituation of a great Citye, much leſſe of a ſmall houſe: when they went forward, it went forward, whē they ſtood ſtill, it ſtood ſtill, And as St. Auguſtin ſaith: Quid erat illa ſtellaniſi magnifica lingua coeli, quae nec vnquam antea inter ſidera apparuit, nec poſtea demonſtranda perntanſit? quid erat niſi magnifica lingua coeli, quae gloriam Dei narraret, quae inuſitatum virginis partum inuſitato fulgore clamaret, cui non poſtea apparenti euangelium toto Orbe ſuccederet? What ſtarre was that which was neuer ſeene before nor ſince, but the wonderfull voyce of heauen which ſhould declare the glory of God, and publiſh to the worlde, the vnvſuall Child-bearing of a Virgin, by an vnvſuall brightnes, which ſhould neuer afterward apeare againe, but in ſteed of it ſhould be the glorious Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt? If you aske me what proofe I haue beſides the Goſpell that euer there apeared ſuch a ſtarre: witnes Ignatius which ſawe our Sauiour in the fleſh, Prudentius the Poet, Macrobius a profeſſed enemye to 
                     Ignatius ad Epheſ. Lib. 2. Sa
                        •…
                     turnal. Chriſtiā religion, which teſtifieth the ſame. And it is not vnworthy

of obſeruatiō, that not the Maniches. not Celſus, not Porphu
                        •
                     y, not Iulian in al their cauels againſt the ſtory of the Goſpel, did no way ſo much as in a word take exceptiō againſt this ſtorye of the ſtar
                     •
                   might eleuate or extenuate the truth thereof. And therfore 
                     Ad Ephe. concerning this, I may ſay with Ignatius, Hinc euanuir mundi ſapientia, praeſtigiae factae ſunt nugae, magia riſus, omnes ritus malitiae aboliti, ignorantiae caligo fugata, quum Deus & homo apparuit, & homo vt Deus operabatur. In this the wiſdome of the worlde was preued to be but follye, the wiſe in their wiſdomeme it proued but a toy, their magicke ridiculous, all their ſuperſtitious rites were aboliſhed, the clowdes of ignorance diſperſed, when God apeared to the worlde as a man, and man as if he were God. And ſecondly what naturall cauſe can they alleage of that great Eclipſe Math. 26. of the Sun, which contrarye to nature laſted from the ſixt houre to the ninth, and darkened the face of the whole earth? For firſt of all the Aſtrologers knew wel that al eclipſes of the Sunne which haue beene from the beginning of the worlde (that onely excepted) haue beene according to the rules of Arte and the nature of an eclipſe, which Iohannes de ſacrobuſto deſineth in this manner: Eſt interpoſitio Lunae inter aſpectum noſtrum & ſolare 
                  Libello de Sph
                        •
                     ra. 
                  corpus, An interpoſition of the Moone betweene the body of the Sunne and our ſight, which, as he ſaith, cannot be; but quum Luna fuerit in capite vel cauda Draconis, vel prope, vel infra metas ſupradictas, & in coniunctione cum Sole. When the Moone is in the head or tayle of the Dragon, or there abouts, and in coniunction with the Sunne. And foraſmuch therefore as the Eclipſe of the Sunne which was at the time of the paſſion of our Sauiour Chriſt, was when it was plenilumium, a ful Moone, not coniunctio ſiue nouilunium, not a coniunction of the Sunne with the Moone, or newe Moone, he concludeth that it was no naturall Eclipſe, but cleane contrary to the rules of Aſtronomye and the courſe of nature. Againe, he ſheweth that when the Sunne is Eclipſed, all the earth is not darkened, but onely one Climat, becauſe of the difference of the aſpectes in diuers Chmats, but this Eclipſe darkned the whole earth, therefore it was ſupernaturall, and to the aſtoniſhment of the world, inſomuch yt 
                  Dionyſius the Arcepagi
                     •
                  e at the very time of the Eclipſe, beholding of it, cryed out on a ſuddaine Aut Deus naturae paetitur, aut mundi machina diſſoluitur. Either

the God of nature doth this day ſuffer, or the frame of the worlde ſhall be diſſolued. Againe, darkenes continued for the ſpace of three howers which could not be, if it had bene a naturall Eclipſe, therefore it was ſupernaturall, and of it ſaith St. Chriſoſtom: Non 
                  Sermone de paſions. 
                  poterat ferre creatura iniuriam creatoris, vnde Sol detraxit radios ſuos, ue videret impiorum facinora. The creature could not with pacienceindure the wrong done to the Creator, and therefore the Sunne withdrewe his beames becauſe he would not beholde ſo wicked a fact as that the Lord of glorye ſhould ſo vngraciouſlye be put to death. But the Atheiſts will aske me, how I can make proofe by any ſauing the Euangeliſt, that there was euer ſuch an Eclipſe? I anſwerd foraſmuch as at that time when the Eclipſe was, darkenes was not onely in Iudea but throgh al the whole worlde, and therefore at that time not onely Dionyſius the Arcopagite, but alſo the inhabitants of the whole earth could witnes, as St, Origen anſwered. But leaſt they ſhould thinke we are vtterly voyde Contra Celſum L, 2. of the teſtimoney of heathen writers: Origen diſputing againſt Celſus the Epicure, an enemye to the Chriſtian faith, proueth it vnto him, not by the the teſtimony of the Goſpel, but of Phlegon a famous Chronicler, ſeruantto Adrian the Emperer as Suidas 
                  Vide de ed Fuſins apud Suidam. reciteth Phlegons wordes, Phlegon his ſelfe did giue his owne iudgement of this Eclipſe that it was prodigious. And Tertullian diſputing with the Gentiles, proueth the ſame Eclipſe out of their Apologiâ aduerſus gentes. owne Writers, ſaying: Et eum mundi caſum relatum in archiuis vestris habetis. Ye haue the verye ſame occurrent regiſtred in your owne recordes.
               A fifte reaſon to proue there is a God, is the varietye of puniſhments which haue been inflicted vpon the Atheiſts from time to time which haue denyed God: Holophernes which being ſo great a warriour, beheaded in the middle of his owne Campe by 
                     Iudith. 11 Theodo: bist: L, 3. C. 23. Sabell: anae. 8. L. 2. C, 11 Fulgentius, lib, 7, & 6. a ſillye woman, Lucian deuoured with dogges, Iulian the Apoſtata ſtrookē dead with a darte frō heauen, Arrius who died with his belly breaking & his bowelles guſhing out as he ſate vpō the priuye, Olympius waſhing him ſelfe in a bathe, and blaſpheming the Trinitye, while manye men looked vpon him, was conſumed ſuddenly with three fierye dartes, the poyntes of all three meeting in one. Let the Atheiſts ſhewe how theſe thinges could otherwiſe be done, but by the extraordinary hand of Almighty God,

or elſe if they cannot, let them confeſſe the God which did theſe thinges.
               A ſixt reaſon to proue there is a God, is the confeſſion of the deuils them ſelues. For what one deuill confeſſeth, is the confeſſion of them all, for regnum diuiſum non poteſt ſtare, the kingdome of Sathan being diuided within it ſelfe cannot ſtand. Neither will I for confirmation hereof alleage the authority of St Iames which Mat. lac. 2. ſaith, They beleeue and tremble, of St. Luke which writeth of the deuils confeſſion ſaying: Chriſt I knowe, and Paul I knowe: of Act. 19. Marci. 1. Ex. 7. Ex. 8. 1. Sam St. Marke, where the deuill ſaith to our Sauiour: I knowe thee that thou art euen that holy one of God, neither how Moſes his rodde deuoured the ſerpents which was made by the ſorcerers of Aegipt, how they could not make lyce, becauſe their power was reſtrayned by an higher power, the finger of God, how Dagon fell downe before the Arke of God, & could not ſtand in the Chappel where it ſtood: becauſe they ſnall not ſay I am partiall. But what anſwer can they make to the generall ſilence of all Oracles, Vide Ciceronem Lib. 2. de diuinat. Arnobius aduerſus Gentil Lib. 3. Sueton in Octau. C. 94. C, 70 Chap, 29 Niceph. hiſt. L 1. C, 17. Susdas. that ſo many Oracles ſpeaking before the time of our Sauiour Chriſt, all were by him put to ſilence? What anſwer can they make to that famous ſtorye of the Oracle of Apollo at Delphus, which when Auguſtus the Emperor offered ſacrifice vnto him, to knowe the reaſon of that vnwonted ſilence vnheard of in former times: gaue this for the laſt anſwer, as being neuer to ſpeake againe.
               
                  
                     Me puer Hebraeus, diuos deus ipſe gubernans
                     Cedere ſede iubet, triſtem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         redire ſub orcum.
                     Aris ergo dehinc tacitus abcedito noſtris. 
                           An Hebrus Childe, his ſelſea God, which other Gods doth quell.
                           Bids me be ſilent, leaue my ſeate, and get me downe to hell.
                           From this ſame place departe therefore:
                           This Oracle will ſpeake no more.
                        
                     
                  
               
               Which anſwer being giuen, Auguſtus erected an Altar in the Capitoll of Rome, with this inſcription ingrauen vppon it: ARA PRIMOGENITI DEI. The Altar of the firſt begotten Sonne of God. Seeing therefore the deuils haue confeſſed

God the Father and his Sonne Chriſt, ſuch men as will not confeſſe the ſame, are in that poynt worſſe then deuils.
               Laſt of all, it ſtan leth with good reaſon that it ſhould be the ſafeſt opinion for the Atheiſts to holde that there is a God. For if ſo be that there were no God, there could come no hurt vnto them for thinking ſo, becauſe all men beſides them ſelues holding the ſame, there were none that would puniſh them for their opinion. But if ſo be that there be a God, (as I haue prcued vnto them that there is) ſurelye one day he will torment them in hell fire for their contempt, becauſe they would not belceue in him, and confeſſe his name. Therefore I conclude with the Apoſtle: Corde creditur ad iuſticiam, orefit confeſſio ad ſalutem, Let the heart belecue to righteouſnes, and the tongue conſeſle vnto ſaluation. At the Ro. 10. name of Ieſus let euery knee bow, both of thinges in heauen, and thinges in earth, & thinges vnder the earth, and let euery tongue Phil. 2. confeſſe, that Ieſus Chriſt is the Lord, vnto the glorye of God the Father.
               Amen.
            
            
               Chapter 5.
               
                  What God is?
               
               SAint Chriſoſtom ſaith: Ego omne quod intelligo, ſinc Chriſto, & Spiritu Sancto, & Patre, nolo intelligere, niſienim intellexero in Trinitate quae me ſeruabit, mihi dulceeſſe non poteſt quod intelligo. 
                  In Marcum 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 14. I can vnderſtand no other God, when I heare the name of God mencioned, but the Father, the Sonne and the holy-Ghoſt. For vnleſſe I vnderſtandd it to be ment by the holy and vndiuided Trinitye, whereby I am ſaued, my vnderſtanding ſhall content me nothing. So thē, according to S. Auguſte: God is a diuine Meditat. Cap. 31. nature, conſiſting of three perſons, the Father, the Sonne, the holy Ghoſt, God, the Lord, the Cōforter, He which begetteth, which is begotten, he which regenerateth & newe begetteth, Of one all things, In one al things, By one al things, Frō whence, By whome, & in whom are al things, Life wc liueth, Life of him which liueth, the quickner of al things which are liuing, One of him ſelfe, One of an other, One of thē both. The principles of humane artes and liberall ſciences are by themſelues 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   not to bee proued

by the ſame artes. An Arithmetician cannot proue by Arithmeticke that Omnis numerus eſt par aut impar, euerye number is euen or odde. The Muſitian cannot proue by his owne Arte that two crotchets make a quauer, becauſe theſe be principles of Arithmeticke and Muſicke. All principles, as Ariſtoile teacheth Poſter Lib: 1 C. 3. in his Demonſtrations, if they be demonſtrated, muſt be demonſtrated by the Metaphyſics which are of an higher nature, but that the principles of the Metaphyſics cannot be demonſtrated becauſe there is no higher ſcience. But foraſmuch as Diuinitye is the higheſt, it is enough for vs to belceue the principles thereof without farther ſerching, and happy is the man which ſeeth not the reaſon how they ſhould be ſo, and yet belecueth that they are ſo. No man hath ſeene God at any time, becauſe he is inuiſible. Tully ſaith: Vtioculus, it a anima, ſereliqua videns ſeipſum non videt, 
                  Iohn. 3. The eye ſeeth not it ſelfe, and the ſoule vnderſtandeth other thinges better then it ſelfe, And that this ſaying: Noſce teipſum, 
                  Tuſcul: quaſt. Lib. 1. know thy ſelfe, is meant in regarde of the ſoule of man, becauſe it is ſo hard to conceiue what it is. But if ſo be that an eye cannot ſee it ſelfe, no meruaile though it haue not ſeene God, if a man cannot fullye vnderſtand him ſelfe, how ſhould he ſo perfectly conceiue and define what God is, which is ſo infinitelye aboue himſelfe? That which is finite him which is infinite, the creature the Ro. 9. Creator, the pipkin the pipkin maker, he which is made of vile claye him that hath made all thinges of nothing? But as Moſes when he was a mortall and ſinfull man was not able to beholde Ex, 33. the glorye of God, and therfore ſawe but his backe partes onelye as he paſſed by: So let vs which haue but ſhallowe braynes ſo far demonſtrate faith by reaſon, as faith may be diſcerned by reaſon.
               The Philoſophers, as S. Auguſtin ſaith, ſeeking after the nature Magiſter ſentent. L. 1. diſt. 3. of God, found that he could not be a body, & therefore concluded that he was farre more excellent then all bodyes, and therfore a Spirit: that he could not be ſubiect to change, and therfore that he was aboue all bodyes and ſoules which are ſubiect to alteration: that all mutable thinges haue their beginning from that which is without all ſhadowe of change or mutabilitye, and that hee which is not thus ſubiect is ſimply of him ſelfe depending of nothing but all other thinges haue their dependance on him.
               Againe, they conſidered that al ſubſtances are other bodyes

or Spirits, and that a Spirit is more excellent then a bodie, but that to be moſte excellent which hath made both the bodie and the Spirite. They conſidered likewiſe, that the ſhape of the body is diſcerned by the outward ſences, and the ſpirit is perceaued by the vnderſtanding, but that which is onely vnderſtood is better then that which is ſeene, and that there was ſomething more excellent then both theſe, & by ſo many waies God is known. Therfore, for aſmuch as God is one ſimple eſſence, not compounded of any partes, not conſiſting of any accidents, and yet ſubſiſting, and the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of him in the plurall number ſaying: Ro. 1 the inuiſible things of him are ſeene by the creation of the worlde becauſe the truth of God is knowne and perceaued by many meanes through the thinges which he hath made: by the continuance of his creatures is vnderſtood his eternitie, by the greatnes of them his omnipotencie, by the excellent order wherby he hath diſpoſed them his wiſdome, by his gouernment and preſeruation of them in that comely and decent order, his goodnes, and all theſe thinges doe belong to the vnitie of his ſubſtance.
               Therefore not to ſpeake of the authoritie of the holy Bible, where at the Baptiſme of our Sauiour, the bleſſed Trinitie did ſencibly appeare, the Father in a voice, the Sonne in a man, the holy Mat. 3, Ghoſt in a doue, how in the beginning the Father made, the Son ſpake, and the holy Ghoſt mooued vpon the waters, Bara elohins 
                  Gen, 3, 
                  creauit dij, ſeu Deus Trinus, a verbe of the ſingular number is Ioyned to a nominatiue caſe of the plurall to ſhew that theſe three Gen, 18 are one, how when three Angels came to Abraham his houſe, he proſtrated himſelfe to them as vnto God, which could not bee Eſay, 6. without the crime of idolatrie, vnleſſe they had bin God: howe ſometimes he ſpake to them in the plurall number as vnto three perſōs, & ſometimes in the ſingular as vnto one God: how the Angels crie in heauen, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth, three times holy & once Lord to ſhow that there were three perſons & one God. But if I come onely to ſhewe the backe partes of God, ſo farre as by earthlie compariſons he may be made manifeſt vnto ſinfull man: the Atheiſt doth aske how it can ſtand, with ſence & reaſon that three ſhould be one, and one ſhould be three? Firſt let the Atheiſt take example by Olimpius the Arrian, which waſhing himſelfe in the Bathe contempteouſly asked how this

might be? but was ſuddenly diſtroyed by three fierie dartes ſent Saballius Anoe ad, 8, L. C. 11, from heauen, and the pointes of theſe three ioyning all in one, to teach others by his example, howe it is neceſſarie to beleeue, but no way ſafe to make a doubt of the principles of Diuinitie, and to call into queſtion ſuch deep miſteries of our faith, and yet to ſhew that three might be one, and one three.
               Secondly, the number of three are one number, & yet three vnities in Arithmetic, a triangle is three angles and one figure in Geometrie, three gimballes compacted together are one ring, & yet three as they be diſioyned, and concerning theſe things do doubt is made. So you ſee by familiar examples how one may be three, and theſe three notwitſtanding one.
               Thirdly, in the Sunne which ſhineth in the firmament, there are the bodie of the Sunne, the brightnes which proceedeth from the body, and the heate which procedeth from them both. So in the Trinitie, there is the Father from whome all thinges are, the Sonne which is the brightnes of his Fathers glorie, and ingrauen forme of his perſon, and the holy Ghoſt, which is the heate and Heb, 1 loue of them both.
               Fourthly, in the fire there are light, flame, & heate, the fier cannot be deuided, neither can the Trinitie. 
                     Peter Lomb: diſt: 3:
               
               Fiftly, there are three powers and faculties of the ſoule of man, the memorie, the vnderſtanding, and the will, theſe three are ſeuerall faculties, yet the ſoule is one. All theſe three doe comprehend Aug: de Trinitate, Lib. 4 one another. For man remembreth that he hath memorie, will, and vnderſtanding. The vnderſtanding likewiſe comprehendeth al three, for man vnderſtandeth that he hath vnderſtanding, will and memorie. The will comprehendeth all three, for man is willing that he ſhall will, vnderſtand, and remember. So the Father comprehendeth him ſelfe, the Sonne & the holy Ghoſt, the Sonne comprehendeth himſelfe, the Father and the holy Ghoſt, the holy Ghoſt comprehendeth himſelfe, the Father & the Son.
               Sixtlye, that which vnderſtandeth, & that which is vnderſtood, are all one, when the minde reflected vpon it ſelfe vnderſtandeth it ſelfe. So, God the Father from euerlaſting vnderſtanding himſelfe begat his Sonne coeternall with himſelfe: as a vninitie is not of any other, but of it ſelfe, and yet begetteth a vnitie of it ſelfe: ſo God the Father which is of none, yet vnderſtanding

of himſelfe, alierum ſe, non aliud generat, begetteth of himſelfe an other, not in nature, but in perſon from himſelfe, which yet is all one with himſelfe. Againe that which vnderſtandeth and is vnderſtood is all one with that which is beloued, when the vnderſtanding doth loue it ſelfe, and then it is one and the ſelfe ſame thing which loueth, and is beloued, and there is the holy Ghoſt, all one with the Father and the Sonne. And ſo, as it were in the glaſſe of nature is repreſented a liuely image of that eſſential loue and vnderſtanding by which the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt doe loue and vnderſtand each other from all eternitie.
               Laſt of all, in euery thing which is made and framed by the arte of man, there be neceſſarilie three thinges, and yet theſe three make one, matter, ſhape, and order: by the matter is repreſented the Father, by the ſhape the Sonne which is the Image of his Father, by order the holy Ghoſt, which ordereth and diſpoſeth all thinges.
               I conclude with St. Augustin: Te patrem ingenitum, te filium vnigenitum, te ſpiritum paracletum ab vtriſg, procedētem, colimus & veneramur, we praiſe & worſhip thee ô God the Father vnbegotten, the Sonne onely begotten, the holy Spirit the comforter proceeding from them both.
            
            
               Chapter. 6.
               
                  That there is but one God.
               
               
                  DAuid ſayth that the God of Gods euen the Lorde hath ſpoken, and called the earth euen from the riſing of the Sunne to the going downe therof. In which wordes notwithſtanding, Pſal, 50, he doth not intimate that there be many Gods, but one, for he called the other Gods ſo, by a figure called Ironia, or Sarcaſmus as. God did by Adam when he ſaid: Beholde Adam is like one of vs, when he ment nothing leſſe. Such Gods are but creatures as Gen, 3. I haue ſhewed, & by nature they are not Gods. Such Gods were the Idols of the nations, of which S. Paule ſaith: they turned the Ephe, 2 Ro. 1, truth of God into a lye, and worſhipped the creature for the creatour. Such Gods were Dagon, Remphan, Aſtoroth, the Gods of the Philiſtines, Moabites, Sidonians. But euen as Aarons rodde deuoured Exod, 7,
                  
the Serpents of the ſorcerers, ſo the God of the Philiſtines Dagon fel down before. Arke the of the couenant where the true God was preſent, to ſhewe that ſuch Gods were but counter faite Gods, and vaine like them which put their truſt in them. Of ſuch 1, Sam, 5. Gods ſaith S. Auguſtin. Nec ideo Troiaperijt quia Mineruam perdidit, quid enim ipſa prius Mincrua perdidit vt periret? an forte, 
                  De eiuitate Dei, Lib, 1, C: 2 
                  cuſtodes ſuos? hoc ſane verum eſt, quippe illis, coeſis potuit auferri, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      homines a ſimulachro, at ſimulacrum ab hominibus ſernabatur Quo modo ergo celebratur vt patriam cuſtodiret et ciues, quae ſuos non potuit cuſtodire cuſtodes? Troy was not therfore ouerthrowne, becauſe it loſt the idoll of the Goddeſſe Minerua, but tell I pray you what the Idol did looſe, firſt, that itſelf ſhold be alſo loſt? you will ſay ſhee loſt her keepers, and ye ſay the truth, for when the keepers of her Temple were ſlaine, it was no maſterie to ſteale the Goddeſſe away, for it was not the idoll that kept the man, but the man did keepe the Idoll. How abſurde a thing therefore was it to worſhippe ſuch a Goddeſſe as a defendour and keeper of the Cittie, which was not able to keep her ſelfe, nor the keepers of her Chappell? whereas 
                     Ʋirgill ſayth: Victoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Deos, paruum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nepotem, 
                  Aenaad, Lib, 2 
                  ſuoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tibi commendat Troia penates: Si autem Virgilius tales deos, & victos dicit, et vt vel victi quo quo modo euaderent, homini commendatos, que dementia eſt exiſtimare his tutoribus Roman ſapienter fuiſſe commiſſam, & niſi eos amiſiſſat, non potuiſſe vaſtari? Imo, Deos victos tanquam defenſores colere, quid aliud eſt quam non numina bona, ſed daemonia mala? Non Roma perijſſet ſi illi, perijſſent; ſed illi multo antea perijſſent, niſi eos Roma ſeruaſſet. Hector in Virgill ſayth: his God was conquered, and hee commendeth them to the tuition of Aenaeas. But what madneſſe was it to imagin that Rome was wiſely committed to the protection of ſuch Gods as were conquered, and had neede their ſelues of mans protection, and that Rome could not bee ſacked ſo long as theſe Gods were in ſafetie? Nay to worſhip conquered Gods as patrons of the Citie, is not to ſerue bleſſed Gods but damned deuils. Rome had not bin ſacked ouer the ſooner becauſe they, were taken, but they had bin taken ſooner, had they not bin kept by the Cittie. The Kingdome of the Iewes, ſaith St. Auguſtin, 
                  De ciuitate Dei. L. 4. Cap. 34. was founded by one God, and not by a multitude of Gods, and was maintained by that one God ſo long as they ſerued him. That

one God multiplyed the people in Aegipt, but neither did their women vſe the helpe of Lucina in their childe-birth, neither did the man vſe the helpe of Neptune when they paſſed ouer the Red Sea, neither of the Nimphes when they dranke water out of the Rocke, neither of Mars when they conquered Amalac, but they obtained more at the handes of their owne God, then euer did the Romans at the handes of their multitude of Gods whome they ſerued.
               
                  Lactantius propoſeth this queſtion, whether the world is gouerned Defalſa religione. Lib. 1. C. 3 by one God or manie? Not to ſtand vpon his authoritie becauſe he was a Chriſtian, but to wey his reaſons, becauſe I diſpute againſt neathens and inſidels, which, as I ſhewed in the firſt Chapter are alſo comprehended vnder name of Atheiſtes, although they doe not denie God, becauſe they ſerue, as the Apoſtle ſaith: the thinges which by nature are not Gods. What neede ſaith Lactantius, hath the worlde of many Gods? Vnleſſe they Gal. 4. ſuppoſe that one of himſelfe is not ſufficient to vndergoe ſo great a burden? which needes muſt be graunted, if euerie God of himſelfe be not able without the aſſiſtance and helpe of an other. If any of them of himſelfe be not omnipotent, then he is not a God, if he be omnipotent thēhe needeth not any partner. If God of him ſelfe bomnipotent, there can be but one, for if the diuine power be diuided among many Gods thē no one can be all ſufficiēt of himſelfe, but by how manie more they are in number, by ſo much the weaker they muſt be in power. He concludeth: Quid quod ſumma illa & diuina poteſtas, ne ſemel quidem diuidi poteſt, quicquid enim capit diuiſionem, & interitum neceſſe eſt, ſi autem interitus, procul eſt a Deo. The diuine power which belongeth vnto God cannot be imparted vnto many, for whatſoeuer is capable of diuiſion is alſo ſubiect to corruption, thē the which thing, nothing can be more repugnant to the nature of God. Therefore there is but one God. I ſay therefore with the Apoſtle: Now to the 1. Tim, 1, King euerlaſting, immortall, inuiſible, vnto God onely wiſe, bee honour and glorie for euer and euer. Amen.
            
            
               
               Chapter. 7.
               
                  That the Bookes of the Bible are the word of God.
               
               I Made mention before, of the Booke of nature, which might worthily be called Gods booke, becauſe as I ſaid, it was a letter or Epiſtle wherein God did make himſelfe knowne vnto mankinde, and did inſtruct vs ſo farre as to knowe and confeſſe that there was a God. But becauſe that knowledge was but bare and naked and no way ſufficient to bring vs to ſaluation, onely it ſerued to make vs ſearch and inquire farther, that by inquiring farther we might bee ſaued: there is an other booke which is more eſpecially called Gods booke, I meane his holy Bible, wherin we are taught not onely to knowe God in his viſſible creatures, but alſo, in his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt whereby wee are ſaued. And it ſtood verſe much with his Diuine wiſdome ſo prouiding for euerye thing, as the ſeuerall nature and quallitie of each creature doth require, to write ſuch a booke for mans inſtruction in his feare & true worſhip, becauſe man cōſiſteth of a body as wel a of as ſoule, and conceaueth viſible things eaſier then ſuch things as are onely ſpirituall and are not ſeene, and by ſuch things as are ſubiect to his outward ſences, man is brought to vnderſtand. It pleaſed him therefore of his great mercie to inſtruct vs by theſe viſible Characters, and written Letters which dayly we doe reade. And as S. Auguſtin ſaith: De illa ciuitate vnde peregrinamur, hae literae 
                  
                     In. Pſal. 90. 
                  nobis venerunt, ipſae ſunt Scripturae quae nos hortantur vt bene viuaenius. Theſe letters ſent vnto vs from that Cittie the heauenly Ieruſalem from whence yet wee doe wander, & they are the Scriptures which doe exhorte vs to liue well. And I cannot denie, but the writers themſelues of theſe holy bookes, were ſo immediately inſtructed from God himſelfe which is the fountaine of all heauenly wiſdome, that they needed no writings. But yet with vs it is otherwiſe, they are the foundation, wee are but the walles which are builded vpō that foundation, we (ſaith the Apoſtle) are builded Epheſ, 2, vpon the foundation of the Prophets and the Apoſtles. Becauſe by their writings we are edified, but they by whoſe meanes

we are edified & builded, doe leane their ſelues immediately vppon the chiefe corner ſtone which is Ieſus Chriſt. There are great oddes betweene the high mountaines and the little hillocks, and lowe valleyes, they are lightned immediately vpon the firſt riſing of the Sunne, but light & heate commeth by degrees from them to the lower partes. As alſo God foreſawe in his wiſdome, and we know by experience of the former ages frō the beginning of the worlde vnto Moſes, when there was no written worde, that there could not be veritatis et doctrinae puritatis ſalua cuſtodia ſine ſcripto, ſoundneſſe of doctrine could not be preſerued, but by committing of it to writing. And therefore it pleaſed God that theſe Volumes of the Bible ſhould bee written. And that theſe are the holy Scriptures giuen by inſpiration of God, profitable to teach, to conuince, to correct, and to inſtruct, that the man of God 2. Tim. 3. may be abſolute to all good workes: That the man of God which writte them, ſpake inſpired by the holy Ghoſt, that they were written for the ſaluation of mens ſoules, & not for the maintenāce 2 
                        〈◊〉
                      et. 1 of ciuil gouernment, I proue by theſe arguments following.
               The firſt is the truth of all the prophecyes which haue fayled in nothing, wc ſpake of things long before they came to paſſe, ſo certainely as if they had bin already fulfilled. And yt I may make due proofe therof, certiſſimus & fideliſſimus vaticiniorum interpres eſt euentus: the ſureſt & faithfull eſt interpreter of prophecies is the euent of thinges: Now wee ſee their predictions are alreadie come to paſſe, we are eye witneſſes that they are true, which truth argueth that they were written by the finger of God which is the holy Ghoſt, which onely could not erre in writing, and not by man, for aſmuch as all men are lyers, humanum eſt errare, it is the Ro. 
                        •
                     
                   nature and propertie of a man to e
                     ••
                  e▪ in ſo much that if hee bee without error, hee is not a man. And therfore it is impoſſible but in ſo manie predictions foretolde ſo many yeares before the time & ſo cōnary to humane reaſon, but they ſhold haue bin deceiued if men had bin the authors of theſe bookes. I will inſtance for breuitie ſake in ſome one or two eſpeciall thinges which may beſt ſerue for this purpoſe. The Scriptures foretolde long before the time that the world ſhould be conuerted to Chriſtian Religion, all Nations ſhould beleeue and ſubmit themſelues to the obedience of the Faith, a thing in mans iudgement not to bee expected.

For the Prophet ſaide concerning the Kingdome of Pſal, 2. Chriſt, I meane his Kingdome of the Goſpell or of Grace. The Heathens raged, & the people murmured againſt the Lord and his Chriſt, but in vaine, the Kinges of the earth ſtood vp & banded them ſelues, and the Princes aſſembled themſelues togeather. But he that ſitteth in heauen ſhall laugh them to ſcorne, the Lord ſhall haue them in deriſion. Euen I haue ſet my King vpon Sion mine holie mountaine, I will declare the decree: that is, the Lorde hath ſaide to me, thou art my Sonne, this day haue I begotten thee, aske of me, and I ſhall giue thue the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the endes of the earth for thy poſſeſſion. There could not be a more vnlikely thing foretolde, and yet it was fulfilled long ſince, no Atheiſt can denie it. Tertullian to this purpoſe ſaith: who was able to gouerne the world, but onely Chriſt Aduerſus Indaeos. C. 7. 8 of whome it was foretolde that his Kingdome ſhould be extended ouer the whole world? The Kingdome of Salomon ſaith her was confined within the Land of Iudaea from Dan to Beerſheba, and his territories did reach no farther. Darius raigned ouer the Pabylonians and Perſians, but no farther, Pharao ouer the Aegiptians, and there his dominion ceaſed. Nabuchodonozer was a great Monarche, yet he reigned not ouer the whole worlde, but onely from India vnto Aethiopia: the like may bee ſaide of the Greekes & the Romās, which were called the Lords of the world, and yet the whole world was not knowne vnto them, much leſſe ſubdued by them. But as for the Kingdome of Chriſt, it hath extended it ſelfe farre and wide, the Goſpell hath bin preached in al Act. 2. places, and receaued of all Nations of the Parthians, Medes, Elamites, the inhabitantes of Meſopotamia, Armenia, Phnygia, Cappadocia, Aegipt, Pamphilla, Aſia, Africa, and the vttermoſt Indies. Of this aſſertion there bee ſo many recordes, that it cannot bee denyed. As for ſome few things which are foretolde in the Scriptures & not yet fulfilled, as namely, the conuerſion of the Iewes, and the deſtruction of Antichriſt, the time is not yet come to paſſe that they ſhould be fulfilled, for all thinges muſt be performed in that due time which God in his ſecret wiſdome hath appointed. There are other thinges alſo foretolde which muſt goe immediately before the ende of the world, which are not yet performed becauſe as you ſee the ende is not yet. But it is a ſufficient

argument to induce Infidelles to beleeue that all theſe thinges ſhall come to paſſe, becauſe they ſee all other things alreadie performed in their time and order. For as hee that ſometimes lyeth ſhall not bee beleeued though hee tell the truth ſo hee which alwaies hath tolde the truth, cannot without impietie bee ſuſpected of fallhood, God cannot deceaue or bee deceaued. And which is not to bee omitted: St. Peter did prophecie that at the latter end there ſhould bee ſuch Atheiſtes, which ſhould denie theſe 2, Pet, 3. thinges, and the Prophecie is now verified, otherwiſe this my labour might haue bene ſpared, their impiety maketh it good which the Prophet hath foretolde.
               Againe there is in Daniel an auncient Prophecie concerning the death of our Sauiour Chriſt, euen the verie time and computation Dan, 9. of yeares is defined when hee ſhould be put to death. Seauenty weekes, (ſaith hee,) are determined vpon thy people, and vpon the holy Cittie, to finiſh the wickedneſſe, and ſeale vp the ſinnes, and reconcile the iniquitie, and bring in euerlaſting righteouſneſſe, & to annoynt the moſte holy. From the going foorth of the commaundement to bring againe the people, and build Ieruſalem: to Meſſias the Prince ſhall bee 69. weekes, and after he ſhall bee ſlaine, but ſo, that for one weeke hee ſhall teach, but in the middle of the weeke hee ſhall cauſe the Sacrifice and oblation to ceaſe. But theſe weekes are annuae hebdomadae, euery weeke is ſeauen yeares and ſo reckoning weekes conſiſting of yeares, & not onely of daies, as for euery day in the weeke ſhould be reckoned a yeare, 70. of Daniels weekes make 490. yeares. But the Temple which was the firſt and cheifeſt thing reaedified in Ieruſalem began in the ſecond yeare of Cyrus, the builders were hindred 42. yeares as it appeareth out of the Goſpell, and in the 46. yeare it was finiſhed, becauſe the laſte 4. yeares they had quietnes. Iohn, 2. 
                  Longimanus in the ſecond yeare of his raigne giuing foorth a newe edict that they ſhould builde without moleſtation, and no man vnder payne of death ſhould hinder the workemen, as in times paſt they had done. From the ſecond year therfore of Longimanus the Emperour, to Alexander the great, were 145. yeares, from Alexander to the natiuitye of our Sauiour 310. from his birth to his baptiſme 30. theſe being put together, make yeares 485. ſo the 69. weekes make 482. yeares, but at his baptiſme the

whole 482. yeares that is 69, were fullye complete and ended. In the next weeke or 7. yeares, our Sauiour taught the people, and in the middle thereof, that is in the fourth yeare he was put to death: What Iewe or Atheiſt can except againſt the truth of this Prophecye?
               A ſecond proofe that the bookes of the Bible are the worde of God, is the generall conſent and agreement of ſo many writers, which writ at diuers times, in diuers places remote one from an other, in diuers languages, and vpon diuers occaſions, all writing of one and the ſelfe-ſame ſubiect, all agreeing in Doctrine, none contradicting other, that they might not ſo fitlie bee termed diuers writers as diuers pennes of the ſame writer. The bookes of Moſes were written in the wilderneſſe, of Ioſua, Iudges, and the Kinges in the land of Promiſe: of Daniell in Babylon: the workes of St. Paule ſome at Rome, ſome in other places as Athens, Epheſus, Laodicea, Nicapolis: St. Iohns reuelation in Pathmos, the Booke of Iob no man knoweth by whome, when, nor where. The Bookes of Moſes about 2554. yeares after the creation of the worlde: the Pſalmes, ſome of them 605. yeares after Moſes, the bookes of Ezra after the returne from Captiuitie about 605. yeares after Dauid by whome manie of the Pſalmes were made. Betweene Dauid and the Captiuitie, Eſay and Oſee vnder King Ioathan, Achaz, and Ezechiaz: Ieremie vnder Ioſias, Ioachim, & Zedechias, Ezechiel, Abacuc & Daniel in Captiuitie, and the whole new Teſtament long after the olde, yet all agree as the diuers thunders which haue one voyce, foure Beaſtes which ſing one ſong, 
                     Ʋox tamen vna manet, qualem decet eſſe ſororum. 
                  
                     Apoc, 4. De Fide. lib, 4. 
                  Damaſcen compareth them to a Garden bedecked with varyetie of hearbes of excellent vertue, which are to be gathered one by one, and yet to make one Garland: or diuers precious ſtones in one breſt-plate of Aaron the Prieſt: and as Cyrillus ſpeaketh, The Kings daughter hath a Coate of diuers colours, Pſal, 45, yet one garment Colligitis flores ad ſpirituales texandas coronas ſed ex omni flore ſpiritus ſancti ſpirat fragnantia. Whereas if man had written, not beeing guided by the holye Ghoſt; they would haue differed as much one from the other, as a Mulberrye Tree doth from a Mirtle, as Iohn the Baptiſt did from Ieremye, and Dan, 13. Math. 16, Chriſt from Iohn the Baptiſt, as the Iudges of Suſanna, or the witneſſes

which made reporte of our Sauiour Chriſt.
               A third proofe is the ſtile, and manner of writing, the olde Teſtament being written in Hebrue, becauſe it was written to the Iewes, The newe in Greeke, becauſe it was written to the Gentiles, to whome that language was moſt familiar, and beſt vnderſtood, although they were not Grecians that did write it. And yet the tongues in which the olde and newe Teſtament were written, ſo differing one from the other: the ſame idiotiſme and proprietye of ſpeach in both Teſtaments vſed, continuall Hebraeiſmes aſwell in the newe as in the olde, doe ſhewe that they were written by one and the ſelfe-ſame ſpirit, that ſtill God might ſpeake like vnto him ſelfe. The languages alſo being more fitte for the worde of God to be written in then other tongues, as more ſignificant, more copious, and indeed, no other language being capable enough of that ſacred ſtorye, as Benedictus Arias Montanus verye learnedly hath obſerued. For, firſt, ſayeth hee, Eorum, qui 
                  Prafat in Biblea interlinear. 
                  tranſferunt duplex eſt conſilium, alij enim ſtudent perſpicuitati, alij proprietati, quorum vtrum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vnà opera preſtari non poteſt, quum tamen vtrum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſit in archetypo eodem opera a ſpiritu sancto demandatum, ſuggeſtum, neutrum vllo modo praetermiſſum. Theſe, ſaith he, which tranſlate the Bible, ſome of them endeauour to be perſpicuous, others to keep the proprietye of the tongue, but neither can performe both, that is, to obſerue the propriety of the tongue, and yet be perſpicuous, whereas the holy Ghoſt in the originall hath obſerued both. Secondly, Ea the nata quae carent punctis varie legi poſſunt ſecundum varias Grāmaticae regulas, quae autenpunctis diſtincta ſunt, varias admittunt ſignificationes, quae tamen Spiritue Dei exſua ſapien ianobis ambigua tradidit, vt omnia quae varietas illa complectitur, intimis ſenſibus reponamus. Eadem autem vox quae in archetypo, ambigua eſt, non poteſt alia lingua reddi ambigua, ſi vero ambigua reddi non poſſit vt eſt in archetypo, fit vt illa ſententia non reddatur integra ſed manca, quam Spiritus ſanctus de industria ambiguā tradidit, vt in vtram
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      partem interpretaremur. Thoſe Hebrue rootes which are without prickes, may be read and co
                     •
                  ſtered diuers wayes according to the Gramatticall rules, they which are diſtinguiſhed with prickes, are alſo ambiguous, which notwithſtanding the holy Ghoſte, did vpon ſetpurpoſe deliuer thus ambiguous vnto vs, of his infinite wiſdome,

that wee might vnderſtand and conſter them diuers wayes. But the word which is thus ambiguous in the Hebruew or Greeke, cannot bee fitted by a worde in latine or any other language which ſhall bee anſwerable to it in ambiguity, and becauſe it cannot bee ambiguous in the interpreter as well as in the Originall, it is deliuered vnto vs maymed and as it were defectiue, which the holy Ghoſt would haue to be more full and perfecte, containing this varietie of ſenſes, by reaſon of the ambiguitie. And therefore all tongues ſauing the Greeke and Hebrue, in compariſon of them, are vnworthie of that great maieſtie of the holy Ghoſt. For example, the word Barac in the Hebrue tongue ſignifieth both to bleſſe and to curſe, the worde is vſed in the ſtorie of Iacob which Gen, 49, 28. called his Children before him as he lay in his death-bed, & prophecied to them, in which Prophecie ſome hee bleſſed and ſome hee curſed. Now the tranſlation hath: Benedixit, he bleſſed: thus their Father ſpake vnto them, euery one of them bleſſed he with a ſeuerall bleſſing. Ieroms tranſlation hath it in this manner: Haec loquutus eſt eis pater ſuus, benedixit
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſiagulis benedictionibus proprijs. Now it cannot be a perfect tranſlation, whē it is thus tranſlated: He bleſſed them al. For he curſſed ſome. Neither yet had it beene well tranſlated in this manner: He curſſed them all. For he bleſſed ſome. Becauſe therefore there is no worde anſwerable to Barac which ſignifieth both to bleſſe and to curſſe, no tongue is ſo capable of this ſtorye as the Hebrue. As for Reuben, when he ſaide vnto him: Thou waſt light as water, thou ſhalt not be excellent becauſe thou wenteſt vnto thy Fathers bed, then didſt their defile my bed, thy dignitye is gone; It was no bleſſing. And when he ſaid vnto Simeon and Leui, Bretheren in euill, the inſtruments of crueltye are in their habitations, into their ſecret let not my ſoule come, my glorye bee not thou ioyned with their aſſemblye, for in their wrath they ſlewe a man, and in their ſelfewill they digged downe a wall, curſſed be their wrath, for it was fierce, & their rage, for it was cruell, I will deuide them in Jacob and ſcatter them in Iſrael: Theſe wordes were not ſuch wordes as might importe anye bleſſing, Therefore ſaith he; Ideo viſum eſt Deo ſcripturas hac potiſſimum lingua exaratas voluiſſe, qui ſimplici ſua inimenſa
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſapientia omnia inuenit, vt multa etiam conſilij ſui myſteria vnica voce declararet. It pleaſed God, which by his

ſingle and infinite wiſdome ſound out and deuiſed all thinges, to deliuer the Scriptures in this tongue aboue others, that ſo in one ſimple worde he might declare many myſteryes vnto vs. The Greeke tongue goeth before the Latin, becauſe it is more copious & ſignificāt. For example: this word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is by ſome trāſlated: incredulitye, by others diſobedience, and it ſignifieth both, But the tranſlator could finde no Latin worde which may include both diſobedience and incredulitye. But as for the Hebrue, it goeth farre beyond it, maieſtate, pondere, numero, ſignificatione, in maieſtye, weight, number, ſignification, witnes the Sonne of Syrach in the very prologue before his booke.
               Likewiſe, beſides the two tongues Hebrue & Greeke wherein the Bible is written, and the idiotiſme or propryetye of the Hebrue onelye in both, to ſhewe that the ſame ſpirit writte both, that God, whether hee ſpake Hebrue or Greeke vnto vs, ſtill he might ſpeake after one manner, and ſo be like none but him ſelfe: the verye ſimplicitye of the ſtyle not fauouring of humane eloquence, and the verye diſcretion which is vſed in euerye booke concerning the ſtyle, ſtill applyed to the capacitye of them who eſpeciallye and aboue others were written vnto, doe argue that men could not be the authors of theſe books. If we doe examine the wordes, the ſentences, the arguments, the matter, forme: we ſhall finde many times that there is difficultye in the wordes, grauitye in the ſentences, acutenes in the arguments, rare inuention and great choyce in the matter, a ſcholler-like methode obſerued in the forme of writing, tropes, grammer figures, exornations of rhethoricke, all thinges proued according to the rules of logicke, and yet notwithſtanding all theſe, a vulgar and familiar kinde of ſpeech is vſed. For God him ſelfe, the Angelles, the Prophets ſpeaking vnto men, doe accommodate them ſelues to our capacitye, to the vnderſtanding of plow-men, of ſhepherds, of women, of children, that the conuerſion of the world may not be aſcribed vnto mans wiſdome, or humane eloquence, or any other thing that is in man. The holy Ghoſt doth not write like Demoſthenes, that it may be ſaid: Where is the Scribe, the ſubtil diſputer? &c. he hath made their wiſdome fooliſhnes. But St. Peter was able to perſwade more with one Sermon, then all the nations of the 1 Cor, 1. worlde with their Orations, more in an hower then they in their

life, more by his ſimple kind of ſtyle, thē they by al their eloquēce. Magnus Ciprianus Orator, ſed maior Petrus Piſcator. Ille miſit ſagenam in mare & piſcatus eſt orbem. Non per oratorem Deus lucratus eſt piſcatorem ſed per piſcatorem oratorem, Saith a learned Father, Aug. in Iohn, chryſoſt. hom. 4. in Eſaiae verba vide dominum ſtantem ſuper thronum St. Ciprian was a great Orator, but St. Peter a greater Fiſher, He caſt his nette into the ſea and caught the worlde, God did not conuert the Fiſher-man by the Orator, but he conuerted the Orator by the Fiſher. St. Paul when he writ to the Romans, writ learnedly and profoundly, becauſe he writ to men that bore high mindes, and did expect learning at his handes, he writ to the Corinthians after an other manner, as vnto men not of ſo great capacitye: when he writ to the Galathians he altered his ſtyle, vnto the Hebrues which had a preiudice of his perſon, in ſuch ſort that they might not ſuſpecte the Epiſtle to come from him. St. Iohn writing to a Ladye, writ in a lowely manner, and in ſuch ſort as he might beſt befit a woman. There is the diſcretion and wiſdome of the holy Ghoſt, which in men is neuer ſeene.
               The fourth proofe that the Bible is the worde of God, is euen God his ſelfe, which neuer would ſuffer that book to be prophaned. For Ptolomye marueyling why no Poets nor Hiſtoriographers writ concerning theſe miſteryes of Faith? anſwer was made vnto him by Demetrius Phalerius, that it was the holy Scripture, Ioſephus en Ariſto. anti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Lib. 12, C, 2. Euſeb. Lib. 8. Peup euen. C. 1. & therefore that all prophane writers which went about to write of the ſame, were preſently plagued of God from heauen, and ſo cauſed to deſiſt and relinquiſh their worke which they tooke in hand: that Theopompus becauſe he went about to illuſtrate ſome parte of the Scripture in the Greeke tongue, was ſo troubled in his minde, that he could proceed no farther. And that Theodorus a maker of Tragoedyes, becauſe he endeuoured to inſert ſome parte of the Scriptures into his Tragoedye, was preſently ſtroken blind, like Elymas the Sorcerer, of whome we read in the ſtory of Act. 13. the Goſpell.
               Fiftly, the argument followeth well which Necodemus vſeth to confirme the doctrine of our Sauiour Chriſt. Maſter ſaith he, I knowe thou art a teacher come from God, for no man can doe Iohn. 3. theſe thinges which thou doſt vnleſſe God were with him. And, therefore our Sauiour ſaith in an other place: Operibus credite Beleeue the workes. And therefore againſt Alexander the great,

and Domitian the Tyrant, which would haue beene accounted Gods, St 
                  Ambroſe vſeth this arguement: Doe theſe and theſe thinges, and then I will confeſſe that ye are Gods. When Canutus the King of Danes had conquered England, and ſitting in his Chayre by the ſea ſide, had boaſted the like of him ſelfe that he was a God: It was ſaid vnto him, Sit in this place one houre longer, and I will confeſle you are a God, but if you cannot ſit vntill the full tyde, and commaund the waters that they ſhall not carye you away, you are no God. But the Scriptures haue beene confirmed to be the worde of God, by ſuch miracles as no power of man or deuill could effecte. The birth of our Sauiour Chriſt was confirmed by the appearing of a Starre which troubled all the Star gazers of the worlde, The reſurrection of our Sauiour by an Eclipſe which troubled the great Aſtrologians of the world, the Math. 2. Math 26. Iohn. 9. healing of a blinde man with claye made of duſt and ſpittle troubled Galen the great Phiſition of the worlde: But as our Sauiour confirmed his doctrine by miracles, as Moſes confirmed his ambaſſage to come from God by making Serpents: So the Apoſtles Ex, 4. confirmed their Sermons which they Preached, and doctrine which they left behinde them in writing, to be the worde of God, by caſting out deuils, rayſing vp the dead, healing diſeaſes &c.
               Sixtly, the antquitye of the Bible proueth it ſelfe to be Gods worde, for as God is antiquus dierum, the ancient of dayes, becauſe Dan. 7. he was before all other, ſo the bookes of Moſes are more ancient then all other brokes. Ioſephus maketh mentiō of certaine Pillars: in which ſome thinges were written by the ſonnes of Seth 
                  Antiqu Lib. Vide Polidorū 
                     Virgil de muēt before the Floud, whereof one (he ſaith) remayned to be ſeene in Syria in his owne time. But be it ſo, theſe letters were but Hyeroglyphicall, like to the letters of the Egiptians, not Abedarye letters, but ſhapes and Images of beaſtes, not written in bookes, but engrauen in ſtone. But as for the Abedarye letters, that is Grammaticall letters, whereby we write wordes and ſentences, they were not deuiſed before Moſes deliuered them to the Hebrues, Vide Euſeb: de temporibus et 10. de praepavat: euang et Lib 8. from whence the Phaenicians learned them, and the Greekes receiued them from the Phaenicians, and the Romans did learne to write of the Grecians. And Moſes was more ancient then Cadmus which brought letters into Greece, or any other which broght them into other places, as Euſebius doth plainly proue.
               
                  
Now, foraſmuch as no lawes, no precepts of life, no Chronicles, no rules cōcerning the worſhip of God, no contract betwene man & man, no antiquitye can be kept in memorye but by writing: Therefore it was neceſſary for the true knowledge & worſhip of God, that ſuch a booke ſhould be written wherein God might be knowne, and in what ſorte he would be worſhiped. But there is no booke of that nature beſides the Bible which is of any antiquitye, neither the Alcaron of the Turkes, nor the Talmod of the Iewes: witnes the Talmod and Alcaron them ſelues, nor any other booke of religion, but they were written long ſince the Bible. Religion cannot be newe, as God him ſelfe cannot be newe, therefore that is onely the true religion which is the ancienteſt of all, and it is impoſſible to knowe or iudge of the antiquitye of religion, but by the antiquitie of the bookes and recordes wherein the precepts of Religion are deliuered and ſet downe, and againe it is impoſſible to know what is religion, or how God is to be worſhiped, but by bookes wherein are contained the rules of his worſhip. For as much therefore, as the bookes of Moſes are more auncient then all other bookes, therefore that religion is the trueſt which is contayned in them, and becauſe there can be but one true Religion, the onely truth is in them, therefore they are the word of God. And, as for the other bookes of the Bible which were written long ſince, they handle the ſame ſubiect, they holde the ſame doctrine as the bookes of Moſes, and are but all partes and members which make one body of the Bible, written by the ſame Spirit, and of the ſame nature, and therfore are alſo the word of God, and there is no other written booke of God, but the Bible.
               In the ſeauenth place, I could alleage for witneſſe that the Bible is Gods word, the great multitudes of Martyrs, which haue dyed in the defence of the Bible, and ſealed the ſame with their owne bloud, both before, and in, and after the times of the ten bloudy perſecutions, to whome God gaue the gift of patience to ſuffer death willingly for the teſtimony of the worde. Neither could ſo manye of them haue ſuffered in ſuch manner, vnleſſe God had ſtrengthned them in ſo good a cauſe. But becauſe this argument is not ſo forcible to perſwade Atheiſts, as it is to exhort chriſtians, I paſſe it ouer.
               
                  
Laſt of all, the teſtimonye of the Gentiles proueth the Bible to be the worde of God. For, becauſe God the Father had eternally decreed to ſend his Sonne to take fleſh for the ſaluation both of Iewes and Gentiles, and vnleſſe they beleeued in him, there could be no ſaluation purchaſed by his death, neither for Iewe nor Gentile: That he might be receiued by the conſent of each people, it could not ſeeme good vnto his heauenly wiſdome, vnleſſe he did long before our Sauiour ſhould come publiſh his comming both to the Iewes and Gentiles. And therfore Chriſt was publiſhed to the Iewes many wayes, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, by dreames, viſions, Angels, but eſpecially by their owne Prophets, Dauid, Eſay, 
                  Heb, 1 
                  Ieremye, Moſes, Daniell and the reſt, which were Iewes, & in that reſpecte called their owne Prophets, that they might giue the more credit vnto them. To the Gentiles alſo he was made known by the heathen Prophets and Propheteſſes, Baalam, Mercurius Triſmegiſtus, Hidaſpes, and eſpeciallye the tenne Virgins called Sybils the heatheniſh Propheteſſes, of which we may read at large in the workes not onely of the heathens, but alſo of the Fathers, and Eccleſiaſticall writers of the Primatiue Church. Now foraſmuch as the Gentiles were vnacquainted with Moſes & the Iewiſh Prophets, and not accuſtomed to read the Canonicall writers, Lactant. Lib. 1 c. 6. and deſtitute for the moſt part, of the Bible, and therefore would giue no credit to the teſtimonyes cyted out of theſe bookes, and Hieron cont: Intuian: L, 1, yet were to be conuerted to the Fayth by vertue of the Commiſſion giuen to the Apoſtles Math: 28. where our Sauiour ſaid: Goe, Preach, and baptize all Nations: The Apoſtles and Diſciples in the Primitiue Church at their firſt Preaching to the Gentiles, Theophi: Atio chonus ad Auto. Lib: 2. Clem: A exſtro: Lib 2. Contra Celſum. L. 5 prooued the Bible by the teſtimonye of heathen writers, the Sybils, Hydaſpes, Mercurius, as St. Origin and Lactantius declare at large. In ſuch ſorte did St 
                  Paul deale with the Inhabitants of Creet, alleaging for authoritie the verſe of their owne Poet Epimenides which Cicero and Lacrtius doe reporte to haue beene a kinde of Prophet or Diuiner among them. And therfore St. Paul 
                  De diuinat. Lib. 1. Tit. 1. ſaith: a Prophet of their owne ſaid of them: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . The Cretians are alwayes lyers, foule beaſtes & ſlowe bellyes. Likewiſe, to the Greekes he alleageth the teſtimonye of a Greeke Poet Menander. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Euill wordes 1. Cor. 15. Menander in Thaide. corrupt good manners. And to the Scholers at Athens, the teſtimonye

of the Poet Aratus 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . we are his generation, Act. 17. meaning God. And, for this cauſe, the heathens called the Chriſtians Sybilliſtes, becauſe Chriſtian religiō was moſt of all proued out of the Sybils Oracles, which writ more playnly and plentifully, then all other heathen writers. And, as Clemens Alexandrinus writeth: S. Paul in one of his Sermons ſaide vnto the people: Libros 
                  Strom, Lib. 6 
                  quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Graecos ſumite, agnoſcite Sybillam, quo modo vnum Deum ſignificet, & ea quae ſunt futura, take in hand your Greeke authors, read Sybil, ſee how ſhe teacheth that there is one God, and fore-telleth thinges to come. Hydaſpen ſumite, & legite, & inuenietis De: filium multo clarius & apertius eſſe ſcriptum. Doe but vouchſafe to read Hydaſpes, & ye ſhall finde in him a cleare and euydent teſtimonye of the Sonne of God. And, becauſe the Chriſtians were ſo frequent in alleaging of the Sybils Oracles for confirmation of Chriſtian Fayth vnto the Gentiles, and conuerted ſo manye vnto Chriſt by theſe bookes, as Iuſtin Martyr writeth: In oratione ad Autonium P
                        •
                     
                     um. Proclamation was made, that vpon payn of death no man ſhould read them any longer, nor Hydaſpes his writings, yet the people would not refrayne from reading them. And againe, Gods prouidence did wonderfully appeare in the perſeruation of the Sybills verſes for the behoofe of the Gentiles, as of the Bible for the Iewes, in that they were verie faithfully kept in the Capitoll of Rome and that being once loſte by a miſchance when the Capitol was burned, yet by publik edicte of the Senate, diligent ſearch Vide Dioniſium helicar: hiſt. Rom. L. 4 Lactantius, L. 1, C, 6 Cornelius Tacitus annal. l. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   and inquirie was made for all coppies that could be gotten, that ſo an other booke was newly written and kept in recorde, being duely examined, corrected and purged of all faultes that might elſe haue eſcaped. And to that purpoſe commiſſion was giuen to diuers learned men fitte to bee imployed in ſuch a ſeruice, which was performed with all dilligence, and the booke was layed vp in the capitol againe, euē as the bookes of Moſes, were kept in the Arke of the couenant. So when the Chriſtians labored the conuerſion of the Romans, they were not onely furniſhed with proofes of their Doctrine out of the Sibilles, to cōuince the Romans and their idolatrie, but alſo they were freed from ſuſpition of corrupting thoſe bookes or any clauſe in them contayned, becauſe whatſoeuer was by them alleaged, was conſonant & agreeable to their own: Coppie which they kept in their Tower, or Capitoll,

or treaſure houſe, which was the chiefeſt place of their recordes. Now, for as much as nihil eſt iam dictum quod non fuit dictum prius, there can bee no newe or ſtrange inuention now Eccleſ. 1. which hath not bin thought of before, as the wiſe man ſpeaketh: I cannot finde any way to diſprooue the Atheiſts better then that which the Apoſtles vſed to diſproue the infidels, that is, by the teſtimonie and witneſſe of heathen Authors. For, if they will neither ſtand to arguments drawen from reaſon, neither yet to authoritie, neither Diuine nor Humane, then they reiect all the Topics of Ariſtotle and places whereby they ſhould be confuted, they renounce the lawes of Schooles and order of diſputation & by a conſequent, they ſhew themſelues meerily ignorant, and contra indoctos non eſt diſputandum, diſputations are not to bee held and maintained againſt them which knowe not the lawes of diſputation. Therfore, that I may come to particulars, to ſhew that the ſtorie of the Bible may be prooued by prophane authors:
               The firſt reuealing to the Gentils of the time and place when, and where our Sauiour was borne, was by the conduct of a ſtarre, Math, 2. What mooued the Gentils, I meane the wiſemen which came frō the Eaſt, to come to our Sauiour Chriſt by the leading of that Star, and being with him to adore him as God? but euen the Prophecy of Baalam their own Prophet? The Prophecie of Balaam which liued in the dayes of Moſes is inſerted into Moſes his workes. Numb. 24. 
                  Orietur ſtella ex Iaacob, a ſtarre ſhall ariſe out of the houſe of Iacob. Concerning this Starre ſayth Chalcidius a Philoſopher: Eſt 
                  Chalesdiús commentin Timaum Platon: 
                  alia ſanctior et venerabilior hiſtoria, quae perhibet de ortu ſtellae cuiuſdam, non morbos morteſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      denunciantis, ſed deſe enſum Dei venerabilis, ad humanae conuerſationis, rerumque mortalium gratiam: quam ſtellam, quum nocturno itinere conſpexiſſent Chaldaeorum profecto ſapientes viri, et conſideratione rerum caeleſtium ſatis exercitati, quaeſiſſe dicuntur recentem Dei ortum, reperta
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      illa maieſtate puerili, veneratieſse, et vota tanto Deo conuenicutia nuncupaſſe. There is an other more holy and venerable ſtorie which maketh mention of the riſing of a certaine Starre, which did not portend ſickneſſe & death, but the deſcending of God downe from heauen to conuerſe among men after a humane manner, which ſtarre when the wiſe men of Chalde had obſerued, as they trauayled in the night, being skilfull & excerciſed in the ſtudy of the motions

of the ſtarres, are ſaid to haue enquired out the verye place where God was newlye borne, and when they had found it out, to haue worſhipped him, & offered vowes vnto him. And therfore ſaith S. Origin: Si a Moſe prophetiae Baalam ſacris inſertae ſunt voluminibus, 
                  In numeros hous: 13. 
                  quanto magis ab his deſcriptae ſunt qui inhabitant tunc Meſopotamiam apud quam magnificus habebatur Balaam, quoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      artis eius conſtat fuiſſe diſcipulos? ex illo deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fertur Magorum genus et inſtitutio in partibus orientis vigere, qui deſcripta apud ſe habent omnia quae prophetauit Balaam, etiam hoc habuerunt ſcriptum: Quod orietur ſtella ex Jaacob, & exurget homo ex Iſrael. Haec ſcripta habebant Magi apud ſcipſos, & ideo quando natus eſt Ieſus, agnouerunt ſtellam, & intellexerunt impleri prophetiam, magis ipſi quam populus Iſrael qui prophetarum ſanctorum verba audire contempſit. Illi ergo ex his tantum quae Balaam ſcripta reliquerat, agnoſcentes adeſſe tempus, venerunt, & requirentes eum, ſtatim adorarunt. If Balaams prophecie were by Moſes himſelfe in erted into the holy Scriptures, how much more was it kept of the inhabitants of Meſapotamia among whome Balaam was ſo famous, and which were Balaams Diſciples? The Magitians which floriſh in the Eaſt part of the worlde, had their firſt beginning and inſtitution deriued from this Balaam, and they which had all Balaams prophecyes recorded among them, could not be ignorant of this prophecye, to wit: That a Starre ſhould ariſe out of Iaacob and a man out of Iſrael. The Wiſe men had this prophecye written in their owne books, and therfore when Ieſus was borne, they acknowledged the Starre, they vnderſtood that the prophecye was fulfilled, better then the people of Iſrael which contemned the writings of the holy Prophets & vnderſtood thē not. They therfore, by that which they had learned out of Balaams writings, acknowledging the time to be come, went and worſhipped Ieſus Chriſt.
               Of the ſlaughter of the Infants at Bethleem by Herod, we haue Mat. 2. Saturnal: L, 2. Cap. 4. Math, 26. Iohn, 9. the teſtimonye of Macrobius an heathen man: of the burning of Sodome we haue the teſtimonye of the place it ſelfe which yet remayneth and ſheweth it ſelfe: of the Eclipſe which was at the time of the Paſſion of our Sauiour, wee haue the teſtimonye of Phlegon a prophane writer but an excellent hiſtorian, as I haue alreadye ſhewed: of Noahs floud, we haue the teſtimony of Ouid
                  
a Poet: of the reſurrection of our Sauiour, we haue the teſtimony Metamor: L, 1 Antiquit: L, 8 Cap, 4. of Ioſephus a Iewe and no Chriſtian, where he ſaith: Eodem tempore fuit Ieſus vir ſapiens, ſi tamen virum fas eſt dicere, erat enim mirabilium operum patrator, & Doctor eorum qui libenter vera ſuſcipiunt, plurimoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tum de Iudaeis tum de Gentilibus ſectatores habuit. Chriſtus hic erat, quem accuſatum a noſtrae gentis principibns Pilatus quum addixiſſet Cruci, nihilominus non deſtiterunt illū diligere, qui ab initio caeperunt. Apparuit enim ijs tertio die viuus, ita, vt diuinitus de eo vates hoc & alia multa miranda praedixerunt. At that time was Ieſus a wiſe man, if it may be lawfull to call him a man, for he was a worker of miracles, and a teacher of ſuch as were willing to imbrace the truth, he had many Diſciples both of Iewes and Gentiles. This was Chriſt, whome when Pilat had Crucified vpon the accuſation of our Princes, notwithſtanding, they which loued him before, did loue him ſtill. But after the third day, he appeared vnto them aliue, according as the Prophets (being inſpired from aboue) fore-tolde this & many other wonderfull thinges concerning him. That which the Apoſtle ſaith: that God made all thinges by his worde, is alſo confirmed by Mercurius Triſmegiſtus the wiſe man of Aegipt, which ſaith Gen, 1, Iohn, 1. of him: Sanctus es, qui verbo conſtituiſti entia omnia, Thou art holy which haſt made all thinges by thy worde. Likewiſe the incarnation of the worde. Exilijt ſtatim ex deorſum latis elementis 
                  Paemandus. Ibidem. 
                  Dei verbum, in purum naturae opificium, et vnitum eſt opifici menti. The worde of God came out of the loweſt element, and became the workmanſhip of nature, and is vnyted to the minde. What is the loweſt element but the Virgins wombe which is earth as all other fleſh? he became the workmanſhip of nature, that is, he was made man, he is vnited to the minde, that is, God the father, which throughout his bookes is ſo called. Againe, man made vnto Gods image. Omnium vero Pater, Mens quum eſſet vita & lux, parturijt hominem ſibi ſimilem, quem adamauit vt proprium partum, pulcher enim erat Patris imaginem habens, reuera enim Deus dilexit propriam formam, ei
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tradidit omnia ſua ipificia. But the Minde which is the Father of all thinges, when his ſelfe was life & light, brought forth man like to him ſelfe, loued him as his owne ofſpring, for he was faire and beautifull, becauſe he was after the Fathers image, for God indeed loued his owne likenes, & gaue vnto

his vſe and ſeruice all his creatures. What are the cheife points of religion contayned in the Bible? but the creation of the worlde, of Adam and Eue, their placing in Paradice, their ſeduction by the Serpent, their expulſion, Noah a Preacher of righteouſnes before the Floud, the Deluge, the birth of Chriſt, his miracles, his death and reſurrection, the Virginitye of Mary, the day of iudgement: but all theſe thinges are ſet downe in the firſt booke of Sybils 
                  Centra Faustīs Manichaeum: Lib, 3, Cap, 19. Oracles. I conclude this poynt with S. Auguſtin: Sybilla porro vel Orpheus et neſcio quis Homerus, & ſi qui alij vates, vel theologi vel ſapiētes, vel philoſophi gentiliū de Filio Dei, aut Patre Deo vera praedixiſſe, ſeu dixiſſe perhibentur, valet quidem aliquid ad Paganorum vanitatem reuincendam, non tamē ad iſtorum authoritatem amplectendam, quum illum Deum nos colere oſtendimus, de quo nec illi tacere potuerunt, qui ſuos congentiles populos idola & demonia colentes partim docere auſi ſunt, & partim prohibere auſi non ſunt. If Sybil, or Orpheus, or Homer, or any other Prophets, or Diuines, or Wiſards, or Philoſophers of the Gentiles, are ſaid to haue either tolde or fore-tolde true things concerning God, or the Sonne of God, that is auaylable to refute the vanitye of the Gentiles, although not to get ſufficient credite to their workes, that therefore whatſoeuer they write ſhould be imbraced, when we can ſhewe that we worſhip the ſame God, concerning whome they could not be ſilent their ſelues, when they tooke vpon them to inſtructe their fellowe Pagans, and idolators, and worſhippers of deuils in the true knowledge and worſhip ſo farre as they durſt.
               You haue heard it (I hope) ſufficiently prooued, that the bookes of the Bible are the worde of God, and I am ſure we haue them among vs very true & vncorrupted. If any Iewe or Atheiſt ſhall dare to ſay that they are not now ſo pure and free from errours and corruptions as from the beginning they were: I argue againſt them in this manner: If they had been corrupted before the time of our Sauiour, or in his time, no dout but whē he commaunded Ioh, 5. vs to ſearch the Scriptures, he would haue giuen vs warning to take heed of ſuch corruptions. And, that ſince his time they haue not bene corrupted we may be ſecure, becauſe the teſtimonyes which haue beene alleaged in the newe Teſtament out of the olde, doe all agree with the olde, and the teſtimonyes which are cyted by the Fathers out of the newe Teſtament, doe

alſo agree with the originall out of which they are cyted. To ſay that the Iewes haue corrupted the olde Teſtamēt it were madnes, without proofe or juſt cauſe of ſuſpicion. I would that ſuch men as ſuggeſt theſe thinges, would either certiſie vt eus bono? vnto what end the Iewes ſhould now in the latter end of the worlde corrupt the Hebrue, or elſe how it ſhould bee poſſible for them being ſo ſcattered, and diſperſed in places ſo farre diſtant and remote one from an other, corrupt their owne bookes without notice of the whole worlde? much leſſe then were they able to corrupt the bookes which were in the handes of Chriſtians. But, for as much as our Hebrue Bibles and theirs doe agree, and all newe Teſtaments doe likewiſe agree, it is manifeſt that neither the olde nor the newe Teſtament are corrupted. Wherfore we may conclude, that we haue (prayſed be God) his worde pure and intyre without any corruption or diminution, as it was left vs by the holy Ghoſt, which (as the Apoſtle writeth) is able to make vs wiſe 2 Tim. 3. to ſaluation through the Fayth which is in Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               Chapter, 8.
               
                  Of the will and ſufferance of God.
               
               THe Atheiſts doe obiecte as a reproach to Diuinitye, that we knowe not the difference betweene the will of God and his ſufferance, And becauſe (ſaye they) we cannot aptly diſtinguiſh theſe, therfore we cannot define what God is, & by a conſequent, we are not ſure that there is a God. This is all one as if they ſhold ſay: becauſe the profeſſers of humane artes and liberall ſciences cannot aſſigne to euery ſpecies their eſſentiall differences & proper paſſions, therefore there are no ſuch differences nor proper paſſions belonging vnto them, and by a conſequent there are no ſuch thinges, and by an other conſequent no ſuch ſpecies: and againe, that theſe things be not knowne vnto nature, becauſe they are not knowne vnto vs. So mans ignorance ſhall ouerthrowe the certaintye and vndouted truth of liberall ſciences, & make the ſecrets of nature to be no ſecrets.
               But, it is no meruayle if we cannot ſhewe the difference betweene

the thinges which haue no difference. In man I confeſſe that will is one thing, and ſufferance is an other, becauſe man is not ſo powerfull, but that his will is often with-ſtood, and therefore he ſuffereth againſt his will. So Moſes his will was, the people Numb. 16. ſhould haue beene obedient, but they were rebellious, and he did ſuffer their rebellion which he could not hinder. As alſo men doe ſuffer oftentimes againſt their will, that which is in their power to hinder, but not without a greater miſcheife, and ſo Moſes his will being they ſhould keep their wiues, yet did ſuffer them Dent. 24, Math. 19. by a bil of diuorcement to put them away, but he did ſuffer them for the hardnes of their hartes, becauſe, had he not ſuffered them they would haue ſlayne their wiues. But, God is omnipotent as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: why doth he yet complayne? for who reſiſted his will? he will haue mercye vpon whome he will haue Rom, 9 mercye, and whome he will he hardne
                     •
                  h. And, as our Sauiour Math, 11, Luc, 10, ſaith: Thou haſt hidden theſe thinges from the wiſe men of the worlde, becauſe it was thy will and pleaſure. So God ſuffereth ſo much as he is willing to haue effected, and he willeth no more then he ſuffereth, and, if he had not this omnipotencye, he were not God, and therefore with God to will and to ſuffer, are all one. But, idem reſpectu eiuſdem non poteſt differre a ſeipſo, the ſame thing in the ſame reſpect cannot differ from it ſelfe. Theſe things be lippis & tonſoribus aeque nota, ſo common and obuious to euerye ſimple mans vnderſtanding, that I meruayle how any man ſhould be ignorant of them.
               But as for Gods reuealed will, it is often contrarye to his ſufferance, in as much as it is contrarie to his ſecret will which is all one with his ſufferance. For example, in his reuealed will he ſaith: Thou ſhalt not ſteale, thou ſhalt not commit adulterie, murther, Exod, 20, Idolatrie, and yet, in his ſecret will hee ſuffered the Chaldeans to ſteale, Aaron to commit idolatrie, Dauid to commit murder and Iob, 1, Exod. 33, 2, Sam, 16 adultery, for had it not ſtood wt his wil they could not haue done theſe thinges, becauſe he is omnipotent, and nothing can be done againſt his will. Neither can the Atheiſts ſcoffe at this diſtinction of Gods ſecret will and his reuealed will, becauſe th
                     •
                  y ſee it ſo plainely proued. For they finde his reuealed will reuealed vnto them in his written worde, where he ſaith: Thou ſhalt not commit Exod, 20 adulterie, and againe they finde his ſecret will to be centrarie

to that which he publiſhed and reuealed in his worde, becauſe he ſuffered Daniel to commit adulterie, vnleſſe they will blaſphemouſly, and contrarie to ſence and reaſon, ſay that the power of God was ſo weake, yt he was not able to hinder Dauids adultery, ſo indeed it might follow that there were neuer a God, for vnleſſe he be omnipotent he is no God. Now his reuealed wil is many times contrarie to his ſufferance, becauſe he ſuffereth that which he hath willed and commanded to the contrarie, as I haue ſhewed you in Dauid and the reſte. And this will and his ſufferance do differ in theſe pointes, firſt, in reſpect of our knowledge, ſecōdly in reſpect of the diuers ends wherunto lie willeth and ſuffereth. Concerning our knowledge, wee know his reuealed wil, euer ſince it was written and publiſhed in his worde, but what he will ſuffer contrarie to that his commaundement, is hidden from vs, and vntil it come to paſſe, and wee ſee that hee hath ſuffered it. As for diuerſitie of endes which he purpoſeth in his will and his ſufferance, I will ſhew you by a familiar example. He willeth that no man ſhall ſteale, that ſo no theife may excuſe himſelfe by pleading ignorance, and yet hee ſuffered the Chaldaeans to ſteale Iobs Cattell, that ſo hee might make open triall of Iobs patience. Hee willed that Iudas ſhould not betray him, that if hee did betray him hee ſhould not bee excuſable, yet ſecretly hee willed Math, 26, Act, 1, Math, 7, the contrarie and ſuffered the contrarie, that ſo might he wrought the worke of our redemption. And that this diſtinction of wills may not ſeeme impoſſible in God, we finde it alſo in man, when a earthly Prince many times maketh a publike Proclamation that this or that lawe ſhall bee executed, and yet notwitſtanding hath a ſecret meaning to hinder many particulars, contrarie to that which he hath publiſhed and to diſpenſe with his owne Proclamation although the people take no notice thereof.
               Againe theſe thinges are ſayed to differ in this manner, onelye in regarde of our vnderſtāding, as his will & his ſufferāce are diuerſly apprehended by vs, but as they are in God himſelfe, they cannot differ, becauſe in him, power, wiſdome, will, ſtrength, ſufferance, and all other thinges, are all one with himſelfe. In God, and with God there are no accidents, his will is his ſelfe, his wiſdome is his ſelfe, and his ſufferance is his ſelfe, I proue there can be no accidents with God or in him, becauſe hee is not anie vniuerſall

or perticular thing comprehended in the praedicament of ſubſtance which is ſubiecte vnto accidents. And becauſe he is a tranſcendent, going aboue all the coordinations which are in the praedicamentall lyne, & actually infinite ſo that he cannot be included within the compaſſe of any praedicament, there can be no kinde of differences either accidentall or eſſentiall in him, he cannot generically, or numerically, or ſpecifically differ from himſelfe, or in him ſelfe. And ſo this queſtion is eaſily anſwered, and whatſoeuer the Atheiſt can alleage againſt vs.
            
            
               Chapeer, 9.
               
                  That the Worlde had a beginning.
               
               
                  MOſes writeth, that in the beginning God made heauen and Gen, 1. earth. That is, in the firſt moment of time, or, when time firſt began, then God began his worke of the creation of the worlde. Which time, foraſmuch as it is defined to be Numerus or menſura motus, the meaſure of the motion of all naturall bodyes, and the ſubiect of time is the very body of heauen which is firſt moued, and by which all other naturall bodyes are ſecondarily moued: time was not before nor after the heauens, but they were created both together: and, becauſe after the end of the worlde motion ſhall ceaſe: euen as before the beginning, ſo after the ending there ſhall be no more time. So then, whereas it is ſaide: in the beginning God made heauen and earth, it is all one as if he had ſaide, that once he made them.
               By this making is meant creation, which is to make a thing of nothing, hauing no matter praecedent out of which he ſhould make it, and this muſt neceſſarilye followe, becauſe if there had beene any matter before wherof he ſhould haue made the world, that matter had beene in ſome place, ſo then, if there were place and matter, there was a worlde before the creation of the worlde, and the worlde could not be the firſt thing that was made. Creation is an action of God, not intentionall but reall, not inward but outward, not immanent but tranſient, by the which he giueth to thinges their being. For, although the will of God alone with reference to the thinges which are made, were ſufficient, yet there

is a kinde of influence of Gods power executing his will, which doth afterward followe in his worke. It is an action both neceſſarye and voluntarye: neceſſarye becauſe hee decreed, and yet voluntarye becauſe it was his will to create the worlde. And that it was no hard thing for him to create the world of nothing, neither abſurd to ſay that God did create any thing of nothing, it is apparant, foraſmuch as we ſee creat on in the Angels, which are immateriall, and therefore cannot be of any praecedent matter, as alſo the ſoules of men, which he then did, and now continually doth, create, which are a manifeſt argument to proue creation.
               Out of this doctrine alſo followeth an other concluſion, that God onely is eternall and before time, becauſe he did once create the heauen and the earth, and gaue them their beginning, whereas before they were not, neither was there anye thing beſides him-ſelfe.
               God before the worlde was made, was in him ſelfe, and vnto him ſelfe inſteed of the worlde, and he was alone, becauſe there was nothing but him ſelfe, and yet not ſo alone, but that he had all power, wiſdome, and happines in him ſelfe.
               He had no need of the worlde or any thing contayned in it, for as much as he was eternally without it, and therefore could ſtand without it, and had not his dependance of it. He was infinitely happy in him ſelfe, and therefore the creation of it could adde no happynes vnto him, and if he had needed it, he could haue made it before. Neither did he then make it becauſe he was wearye of being without it, or that it diſpleaſed him that he had not made it before, becauſe he did not make that which he would not, but he would haue that which he made, and that which he would he did make in order, and therefore he made it not raſhly but deliberatly, not caſually but wiſely, and in time he did all thinges, and in time, eſpecially he made thee ô thou Atheiſt, that whilſt thou haſt time to liue, thou ſhouldſt acknowledge and worſhip him.
               The manner how he made it, euen as Kings doe, by his commaundement onely. He ſaid the worde, and it was done. If you aske how God ſhould ſpeake? or who ſhould heare his voyce when there was nothing beſides him ſelfe? he ſpake, that is, he decreed with him ſelfe that it ſhould be ſo. If you aske what moued him to create it, when he could be aſwell without it? being delighted

with the reflection of his owne glorye which he ſawe in him ſelfe, made creatures, becauſe he would haue ſome to be partakers alſo of that his happines, as men and Angels, and for their ſakes he made the worlde, that they might be contayned in it, Angels in heauen, men vpon the ſuperficies of the earth, and all other creatures for the vſe of man, that ſo Angels and men ſeeing his goodnes, whereof they were made partakers, ſhould prayſe him.
               As for the Philoſophers, and Poets, and great wiſe men of the worlde, although they enioyed not the Bible, as were Mercurius Triſmegiſtus, Homer, Heſiodus, Ariſtotle, Tully, Ouid, they all held that the world had a beginning, and that God was the maker of it. How then is it that now our Atheiſts denie the ſame? Surely they thinke themſelues wiſe, and are become fooliſh, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh. For they thinke there may bee an effect Rom. 1. without a cauſe, a motion without a moouer, a worke without a workeman. But becauſe diſputation is not to be held with them which are ignorant, but with the learned, and the learned will not preiudice their knowledge ſo much, as to be thought not able to yeild a reaſon of their aſſertions: let vs examin the reaſons which they alleadge, why they ſhould holde that the world w
                     ••…
                   
                  
                     〈◊…〉
                   out beginning?
               
                  Ariſtotle (ſay they) affirmeth, that there can be no motion without a mouer, and there muſt be a due proportion inter motorem & id quod mouetur, betweene that which is moued and that by whome it is moued: there is one Sphere which is called primum mobile, the firſt bodye which is moued, ſo there muſt be one firſt agent to moue the ſame, but he did moue from eternitie, there was therefore ſome thing which from eternitye was to be moued by him, and that is the higheſt Sphere. For (ſay they) if he did not from all eternitye moue this Sphere, but began the worlde, then non agens factum eſt agens, of no agent he was made an agent, which could not be without alteration, but that could not be becauſe God is not ſubiect to alteration, for then ſhould he alſo be ſubiect to corruption, and ſo ſhould be no God. The argument I ſay, doth not followe, for, although that God is ſaid to be primus motor ab aeterno, the firſt mouer from eternitye, yet he did not actu mouere ab aterno, this motion of his was not in action eternallye,

and therefore it is not rightly inferred that there ſhould befor that cauſe anye change in God. For God what-ſoeuer in his eternall fore-knowledge he intended to doe, is ſaid to doe it in the ſame maner as he intended it, and that motion which was not in rerum natura ſubſistens, ſubſiſting in the nature of things as they terme it, yet in God was alwayes ſubſiſting, with whome all future thinges are preſent, which called the things that were not, by their names, as if they were. He ordayned euery thing that it ſhould be, euen before the foundation of the worlde was layed, the reaſon is, becauſe that eternall and diuine eſſence doth not acknowledge time, he ſeeth thinges paſt, preſent, and future, not ſucceſſiuelye, but all at once. Therefore they haue not yet attayned to the true vnderſtanding of Ariſtotles meaning, which argue in this maner.
               Naturally I confeſſe, motion is without beginning, becauſe one motion cannot begin without an other precaedent motion, ſo likewiſe it cannot end without alteration, becauſe in omni vere continuo phyſico, in euerye true naturall thing whoſe partes haue their coherence together, as this hath, there is a perpetuall ſucceſſion which may be diuided into infinite partes of the ſame proportion. For euen as in time, and euery part thereof, there is one preſent moment or inſtant, which argueth that there is an other paſt, and an other future: ſo in euerye motion which is meaſured by time, there is one preſent mutation, which argueth one motion precedent, and an other ſubſequent, becauſe euery motion is a change, either of ſubſtance, or of quantitye, or of qualitye, or ofplace. And therfore the firſt moment of time cannot be aſſigned, nor the firſt mutation which is in motion. The naturall Philoſophers could not diſcerne by nature, whether was firſt the Hen or the egge, becauſe one cannot be without the other, & therfore they ſuppoſed that eternallye the generation of one was the corruption of an other, and ſo there ſhould be an eternall reuolution of thinges, which indeed naturally muſt be ſo, but metaphiſically it is not ſo, becauſe there is a God aboue nature by whome nature is ouer-ruled. Neither is it meruayle though Philoſophye and Fayth doe not ſpeake alike concerning the beginning of the worlde, whē the Metaphyſics and their principles differ ſo much from the Phyſics & their principles, and Ariſtotle diſſenteth ſo much from Ariſtotle, one and the ſelfe ſame man from himſelfe.
               
                  
It is one thing to affirme that the worlde ſimply had no beginning, and an other thing to ſaye that nature did not make the worlde, and that by the power of nature it ſhall haue no end, for, God and Nature are diuers thinges. Ariſtotle confeſſed that the worlde began, and ſhall haue an end, in reſpect of the diuine and ſupernaturall power, becauſe he ſaid that God as he is the firſt mouer, ſo he is the firſt cauſe of motion, and actuallye infinite, a moſt free agent, not tyed to any ſecondary cauſes, inſtruments, & meanes whereby he worketh. He which is eternall was before all motion, & can be without motion or time, becauſe he made both motion and time. Ariſtotle denyeth that any thing which is eternall can be meaſured by time, he denyeth God to be in time, and by a conſequent he denyeth him to be tyed vnto motion which is meaſured by time.
               God moued eternallye, but his motion was metaphyſicall, which was nothing elſe, but to will, to nill, and to vnderſtand. The worlde therfore is not without beginning in reſpect of the firſt cauſe which is God, but of the ſecond cauſe which is nature, for then nature ſhould be iniurious vnto her ſelfe, if ſhe ſhould doe vyolence vnto her ſelfe, and be a cauſe of her owne deſtruction. And therefore, according to nature there is a reference and due proportion betweene him which mooueth and that which is mooued, and the motion it ſelfe, and ſo the eternitie of the mouer muſt argue the eternitie of the thing which by him is mooued, & of the motion, but God hath, & exerciſeth his metaphyſical power and authoritie ouer all thinges, whereby he counterchecketh, and ouer ruleth theſe thinges.
               The arguments therefore which the Philoſophers produce to proue the eternitie of the worlde, are reduced vnto theſe. Firſt, if there were any firſt motion, the mouer and the mo
                     •
                  ued body from whence this motion proceeded had their beginning, or they were without beginning, if they had a beginning they began by a precedent motion, becauſe nothing can begin but by motion, and ſo that which is called the firſt motion could not be the firſt becauſe another went before it. But if they were without beginning, it is a great abſurditie to ſay that hee which was an eternall mouer, yet did not mooue, and that which was alwayes mooued, notwithſtanding was without motion. Secondly, time is eternall,

for it is in the definition of time, that there is alwaies in it a preſent inſtant or moment, which ioyneth together that which is paſt and that which is future, and therefore the firſt inſtant of time cannot be aſſigned, and therefore motion is alſo eternall becauſe there is a iuſt proportion betweene the meaſure which is time, and the thing meaſured, wt is motion. Thirdly, there muſt be a proportion between the cauſe and the effect, the mouer and that which is mooued, becauſe there can bee no compariſon betweene that which is infinite and that which is finit, that which is eternall and that which is temporall. But this one anſwer is inſtead of Dauid his ſling to kill Golias, of Iudeth hir ſworde to cut of the 1. Sam. 17. Iudith. 11. Exod. 7. Iudic. 16. head of Holophernes, of Sampſons Iawe bone to ſlay all the Philliſtins, and of Moſes his rod to deuoure the Serpents of the Sorcerers of Aegipt, to wit that theſe thinges holde onely in naturall mouers which are tyed vnto inſtrumēts & meanes, but not in God which is a ſupernaturall and free agent, theſe arguments holde in thinges that be finit not infinit, phyſical not metaphiſicall, which worke of neceſſitie and not of wil, but otherwiſe they be no good conſequence, they doe not holde.
               Let this therefore be the ſtate of the queſtion. God had eternally the verie ſhape and Idea of the worlde which he conceaued in his minde, and he eternally decreed when and how it ſhould bee, euen as when a workeman determineth to frame a peece of worke, he firſt frameth it in his minde, but doth not preſently begin the ſame: ſo hee decreed eternally, and before all time, when, and how the worlde ſhould bee in time. Hee which is the eternall fountaine of goodneſſe, which fountaine notwithſtanding did not eternally iſſue foorth into ſtreames, but in time, did not eternally communicate vnto others, this his goodneſſe, but was a Fountaine of water, which for a long ſeaſon lyeth hidden in the earth before it doth guſh out. But hee was not as a Carpenter which maketh an houſe becauſe he hath neede of an houſe. Therfore he did not eternally create, not becauſe he could not but becauſe he would not, and he would not becauſe hee had eternally decreed that the world ſhold be in time, and he ſo decreed, that ſo hee might bring vs to the knowledge of himſelfe, for as much as when wee knowe that the worlde was not alwaies, wee are forced to confeſſe that there is a ſuperiour cauſe from whence it had his

beginning, whereas if it had bin created from eternitie, and had had no beginning, wee could not ſo eaſily haue diſcerned how God ſhould haue bin the creator of it. And therefore it cannot followe in this place, that there was in God any mutation or mutabilitie, becauſe before the worlde was made he was not willing that it ſhould bee made, and afterward when it was made hee was willing. S. Auguſtine ſayeth: Nouit Deus agens quieſcore, & 
                  DeCluit, Doi. Lib. 12. Ca. 17 
                  quieſcens agere, poteſt ad actionem nouam ſempiternum adhibere conſilium, id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſine mutatione ſui, quoniam in infinitum non cadit mutatio. God knoweth how to be an agent doing nothing, and to doe nothing being an agent, to bring his eternall decree to a newe action without any alteration of himſelfe, becauſe that which is infinite is not ſubiect to alteration. You cannot ſay properlie that God made not the worlde ſooner becauſe he wold not, becauſe with God there is nothing ſooner or later, for although God doth worke in time, yet he cannot be apprehended by time, his actions are meaſured by time, not in reſpect of himſelfe, but onely in reſpect of vs, that ſo his actions may be demonſtrated, & made manifeſt vnto vs. Neither ought theſe things to ſeeme ſtrāge vnto vs, becauſe the verie light of naturall reaſon giueth vs thus much to vnderſtand, yt there is an order of cauſes, and that one being ſubordinate vnto an other, we muſt ſtill aſcend vp vntill we come to one which is aboue all the reſt, which is of it ſelfe actually infinit, and that is God. And againe, reaſon doth tell vs that becauſe God is of an infinit nature, his eſſence is ſimple, not tyed to meanes by which hee worketh (for according to the rules of Philoſophie, that agent is moſte noble which needeth the feweſt meanes), and being not tyed to meanes he needeth no matter to worke by. Alſo reaſon doth tell vs that as euerie thing is, ſo it worketh, but God is of himſelfe abſolute and not depending of anye, and therefore worketh in the ſame manner, that he is a free agent and therfore cannot be compelled, that he is omnipotēt & therefore nothing can be held or difficulte vnto him, & becauſe he is infinite, hee is tranſcendent aboue all the boundes of nature. Out of all theſe principles I conclude. The world had a beginning, God which is euerlaſting made it in time, and hee made it of nothing, that is, without anie matter precedent or going before the creation of it.
            
            
               
               Chapter. 10.
               
                  Of the Soule of man, what it is? whence it commeth? and the immortallitie of it.
               
               AN Atheiſt hauing heard a Preacher in his Sermon make mention of the ſoule: the Sermon being ended, asked him what the Soule was? and whether it were any thing or nothing? After diſputation betweene them both, the Atheiſt ſaide: I will ſhewe you what it is. So hee cauſed a candle to bee lighted and brought to the Table, hee blew it out, and ſayd: your ſoule is no more then the flame of that candle, you ſee an ende of that, it is blowen out, and ſo ſhall it be with your ſoule when you die. Paraduenture, ſome cauſe of this vngodly aſſertion might bee the ambiguitie of the worde. For S. Auguſtine in diuers places calleth the Soule by no better name then Flatus which properly ſignifieth no more then a breath, or a blaſt, Deus fecit omnem flatum ſaith hee, God made euerie blaſt, meaning euerie ſoule, and it is Adoptatum epist. 157. Gen 2 written that God breathed into Adam the breath of life. And in the Scriptures it is ſometimes confounded with 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which is a breath, and ſo 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , anima and ſpiritus, a Soule & a breath or a blaſt, in ſignification are all one. Therefore that I may diſtinguiſh the aequiuocation or ambiguitie of the word, that nothing may be miſtaken, it ſignifieth theſe thinges, 1. the life of any thing, anima mea eſt in manibus meis ſaith Dauid, my ſoule is in mine handes, meaning his life. 2 a deſire, ſo the ſoule of Pſal. 18. 
                  Dauid was ioyned to the ſoule of Ionathan. 3. the whole man 1. Sam. 18. Gen, 40, 2. Sam. 1. conſiſting of bodie and ſoule, ſo 76. ſoules deſcended with Jacob into Aegipt. 4. a blaſt, or breath, Saule ſaid to the Amelakite, I pray thee come vpon me and ſlay me, for anguiſh is come vpon me, anxietas apprehendit me, etiamſi anima mea adhuc in me eſt, becauſe my Soule is yet within me. And it was ſaid of Eutychus which fell downe dead for ſleeping at S. Paules Sermon, anima eius eſt in ipſo, his ſoule is yet in him, that is, there is yet breath in his bodie that he may bee reuiued againe. 5. It is alſo taken for nothing, ſo ſaid the Prophet: we haue conceaued, and Act, 20. bin in Trauell, and wee haue brought foorth a ſoule, poperimus 
                  Eſa. 26.
                  
                  ſpiritum, that is nothing, becauſe the ſoule or ſpirit although it bee ſome thing, & a moſt excellent thing, yet becauſe it is not viſible, nor any ſenſible thing, he calleth it nothing. 6. It is taken for that which is regenerate by the ſpirit of God, ſo ſayth the Apoſtle: Gal. 5. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . the ſpirit luſteth againſt the fleſh, that is, the ſpirit as it is guided by God, doth ſtriue and wraſtle with it ſelfe. 7. when the ſoule and the ſpirit doe concur together in the ſame ſentence, the ſoule ſignifieth mans will, and the ſpirit his vnderſtanding, ſo the Apoſtle ſaith: I pray God that your whole ſpirit and ſoule and 1. Theſ. 5 body may be kept blameles, &c. But laſt of all, and in this place it is that which is defined by Ariſtotle: Actus corporis organici in potentia vitam habentis, an acte or perfection of the body which giueth vnto the bodie life, ſenſe, motion, vegetation, &c. And of this ſignification of the ſoule we are to diſpute in this place.
               Concerning the originall of the ſoule, which I propoſed in the ſecond place, it is agreed vpon by the beſt Diuines and Philoſophers, that ſince the firſt Sabaoth, God ceaſed from creating any more viſible things, but yt he doth Quotidie noues animas creare, create new ſoules querie day & houre, & momēt, for aſmuch as euerie moment young Children are quickned in their mothers wombes, and that Anima hominis creando infunditur et infundendo creatur, mans ſoule is in one moment infuſed by creation, and created by infuſion of it into the bodie. But Optatur deſireth to bee reſolued by S. Auguſtin concerning this doubt of the originall Auguſt epiſt. 157 of the ſoule: vtrum animae vt corpora, propagàtione naſcantur, ſint
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ex illa vna anima quae primo homini creata eſt, vel Deus ſine vlla propagatione animas nouas faciat ſingulis proprias? Whether euerie mans ſoule is made out of Adams ſouie, as euery mans bodie is made out of Adams bodie, that ſo, by propagation a ſoule ſhould come out of a ſoule, as a bodie commeth out of a bodie? or whether God doth eſpecially create to euery mans body a newe ſoule proper onely to that bodie? He anſwereth: that in the ſame manner as God made Adams ſoule of nothing, ſo hee made all mens ſoules of nothing, and he proueth it thus. 1. When Adam 
                  Gen, 2, ſaith of Eue: fleſh of my fleſh and bone of my bone, hee dooth not ſay, ſoule of my ſoule. 2. If any man holde that the ſoule of man commeth of man, hee muſt ſhewe that as one light is kindled of an other, and one fier lighted of an other without diminiſhing

of their former light and heate: ſo the ſoule muſt proceede out of an other ſoule, the ſame ſoule out of which it proceedeth being not diminiſhed, which cannot bee expreſſed how it might be by the wit of man. And beſides, ſaith hee, it is dangerous to holde ſo, leaſt ye fal into the error of Tertullian which deemed the ſoule to be a bodie and not a ſpirit, for ſo it muſt be borne 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of ſeede, as the bodie is. If they ſpeake of ſemen incorporeum a ſpirituall ſeede infuſed inuiſibly into the body at the time of mās conception: ſuppoſe that which is often ſeene, that that which is conceaued doth prooue an obortiue and vntimely fruit when it is Embrio, or non homo, not a perfect man, not fully ſhaped in the wombe that ſpirituall ſeede muſt either returne whence it came, which it cannot doe, or periſh with the bodie, and then wil follow this abſurditie, that an immortall ſoule is borne of corruptible & mortall ſeede. Tolet the Ieſuit ſheweth that mans ſoule cannot come ax traduce, by any Propagation, for theſe cauſes. 1. No naturall De anima Lib 3 agent can produce and bring foorth that which is aboue it ſelfe, but the ſoule of man is aboue nature, becauſe it comprehendeth ſupernaturall thinges. The maior is plaine becauſe no naturall agent can worke, but it muſt worke vpon matter, the action muſt bee a materiall action, whereas the ſoule is immateriall. 2. Euerie natural agent, as I haue ſhewed, doth work vpon matter and the matter is capable of diuiſion, but the ſoule of man is indiuiſible. 3. God hath created ſoules in the ſame manner as hee created Angells, but the Angells were created of nothing, therefore mens ſoules were created of nothing.
               And becauſe I haue entred into this diſcourſe concerning the ſoule, that I may leaue the Atheiſt for a little ſeaſon, & handle one point for the inſtruction of the Diuine. The queſtion ariſeth vppon this diſcourſe, how the ſoule commeth to bee infected with ſinne? Pope Gregorie the great diſputeth in this manner: Si anima oriatur cum carne ex ſubſtantia Adae, cur non ſimul moritur 
                  Ad Secun linū epiſt. 53. 
                  eum carne? ſi cum carne non naſcitur, cur peccato obligatur? The ſoule is either borne together with the bodie of the ſubſtance of Adam, or elſe it is onely infuſed from aboue: if it be borne with the bodie of the ſubſtance of Adam, then ſhould it alſo die with the body: if it be infuſed of God, how can it being newly created, and immediately comming from God which is perfectly righteous,

be originally and naturally ſinfull, as is the fleſh which originally deſcendeth from a ſinfull man? Optatus deſireth to be inſtructed how, when, and where, the ſoule which of it ſelfe is pure, beginneth to take infection? S. Auguſtin anſwereth that hee is not able to giue him full ſatisfaction therein. Pelagius obiecteth againſt S. Auguſtin in this manner. If the fleſh onely deſcended from Adam, then is the fleſh onely polluted with ſinne, and not the ſoule, quia iniuſtum eſt vt hodie nata anima non ex Adae maſſa tam antiquum peccatum portet alienum, quia nulla ratione conceditur vt Deus qui propria peccata dimittit vnum imputet alienum, becauſe it cannot ſtand with the iuſtice of God, that the ſoule which is newly borne and not deſcended of Adam, and therefore hauing no ſinne of her own, ſhold beare the ſinne of an other man, namely of Adam, which was committed ſo long before, For it is not to be thought that God which forgiueth vs our owne ſinnes will impute an other mans ſinnes vnto vs. The ſoule ſaith hee, at the firſt creation is eyther pure or corrupted, impure it cannot be, becauſe it commeth immediately from God, and being at the firſt cleane, how commeth it to be vncleane? how can a ſpirit bee infected by a body? that which is immateriall bee polluted by that which is materiall? But Mr. Caluin doth ſatiſfie that doubt ſaying: Iuſtitut Lib. 1 that although corruption be inherent both in the ſoule and the body, yet the cauſe of that hereditarye corruption is not in the ſubſtance eyther of the body or the ſoule, but onely it was ordayned of God that the imperfections of the firſt parents ſhould bee common to all the Children, euen as according to the lawes of earthly Princes ſuch as are deſcended of parents attainted of high treaſon, are alſo ſtayned in their bloud, preiudiced in reſpect of their landes and honors by their fathers offences committed before their time, and wherof they were ignorant, and it is but imitatio diuinae iuſticiae, an imitatiō of that iuſtice wc is with God. So thē we are borne of impure ſeede as the Pſalmiſt teacheth, and not Pſal. 50. onely the bodie, but alſo the ſoule is infected with ſinne, by reaſon of this our birth, although ſinne be more apparent in the body, then in the ſoule, and the onely cauſe why the ſoule is thus infected is this our impure and vncleane birth, and yet the ſoule is not of ſeede, or any materiall thing, but it commeth immediately from God. And it is a weake argument which Pelagius vſeth: that

becauſe beleeuing parents doe ſanctifie their Children, therefore 1. Cor. 7. Children cannot receaue infection from their Parents which are regenerate. For the children doe lineally deſcend from their parents by carnall generation, but not by ſpiritual regeneration, becauſe regeneration is not from beneath, but from aboue, not from men, but from the holy Ghoſt. Sanctification is an eſpecial bleſſing Iohn. 3, giuen in particular: but ſo, that the general courſe of al mankinde may take holde of all men, for as much as they all are the Sonnes of men. Natus eſt homo natura, ſanctificatus ex ſupernaturali gratia, that wee are borne, it is the worke of nature, that we are ſanctified it is ſupernaturall, & of the eſpeciall grace of God. But I returne to the Atheiſt.
               The ſoule I ſay, as it appeareth by theſe premiſes, is of a more excellent and diuine nature thē that it ſhould be ſubiect to mortalitie and corruption. And therfore, that we may not complaine with Theophraſtus, who accuſed Nature becauſe ſhe gaue to Rauens and Harts a long life whome length of life did no way profit, but made mās life of that ſhortnes, vt tum extingueretur qùum incaepiſſet ſapere, that euen then hee was cut off and vtterly extinguiſhed when hee did but begin to be wiſe: I will produce theſe arguments which are alleadged by naturall Philoſophers to prooue the immortallitie of the ſoule, that I may refute Theophraſtus, and ſhew plainely that wee are not vtterly extinguiſhed by death, and that although wee doe but then begin to bee wiſe when we are neare our death, yet wee doe not then ceaſe to bee wiſe, but then we increaſe in wiſdome when the ſoule is ſeparated from the bodie. My reaſons are theſe.
               The firſt is drawne from the vnderſtanding of man, for mans ſoule is of infinit capacitie, the more it vnderſtandeth the more it is able to vnderſtand. It is able to comprehend not onely the whole world, but infinit worldes. In numbring it can adde and multiply ſo farre, that of addition and multiplication there ſhall bee no end. It is able to imagin infinit perfection. But, whatſoeuer is infinit in capacitie, is alſo infinit in continuance, becauſe, as the proprietie of any thing is, ſo is the exiſtence of the ſame. But, for aſmuch as it is infinitlye capable in this life, and cannot bee ſatiſfied in this life, therefore it muſt bee ſatisfied in the life to come.
               
                  
2. The obiect of mans vnderſtanding is truth, as Tully ſpeaketh, not in particular, but in general, which is the way wherby Officiorum lib. 
                        •…
                     
                   all thinges are knowne, And therefore it cannot be ſatisfied vntill it come vnto that in which all truth conſiſteth, and that is God, which is truth it ſelfe according to his eſſence, for no accidents are in him. And for aſmuch as this cannot be attained vnto in this life, therefore it is reſerued vnto a better life.
               3. The obiect of mans vnderſtanding is ENS, euerie thing that is, but becauſe there are ſome thinges material, and ſome ſpirituall, it muſt conceaue them both, and as for the thinges which be immateriall and without bodies, it cannot diſtinctly conceaue them in this fraile body, therfore the conceiuing of them belongeth to the ſoule when it is ſeparated from the bodie.
               4. All men by nature deſire knowledge as the Philoſopher ſpeaketh, but ſcire eſt rem per cauſas cognoſcere, to knowe Metaphiſicorum. L. 1. C. 1. Poſtereorum. Lib. 1. C, 2 a thing is to iudge & diſcerne of the cauſes of it. So then becauſe it is naturall to euery man when hee ſeeth any effect, to ſearch out the cauſes of that effect: and againe, when hee hath found out the cauſe, to ſearch farther, and examine what is the cauſe of that cauſe, and ſo to aſcend higher vntill he come to the higheſt cauſe which is God. And that cannot be in this life, becauſe the eſſence of God is not conceaued by diſcourſing of him, but by perfectly ſeeing of him, and beholding of him face to face euen as he is.
               My ſecond reaſon is drawne from the will of man. That alſo is infinite, for he can loue that which is good, not onely in the firſt degree, but alſo in the ſecond and third, neyther can there be any end of his loue, but ſtill his louing and liking may increaſe, as St. Auguſtin ſaith in his Meditations: En amo te Domine, et ſi hoc non ſufficit, amo teplus, et ſi hoc parum eſt amabo te validius, Behold Lord I loue thee, if this be not enough, I wil loue thee more, and if that be not yet enough, I wil ſtil loue thee more. Man may deſire that which is infinitely good, & this infinite capacitye of the will muſt bee fulfilled, and becauſe not in this life, therefore after death.
               2. The libertie alſo and freedome of mans will (I meane not in Diuine but in ciuill and Domeſticall affayres) is of an infinit power, which is a ſufficient argument to proue the immortality of the ſoule. For if man will not, no creature is able to force his

will to loue this thing or that, voluntas poteſt cogi, who can impoſe a neceſſitie vpon man to bee willing or vnwilling to do this or that? but onely God which hath created both the will and vnderſtanding and is therefore aboue them both.
               3. The obiect of the wil is that whatſoeuer is good, I meane all goodneſſe in generall, and therefore neuer reſteth, but ſtill willeth & deſireth, vntill it come to the perfect fruition of God in whome all goodneſſe is included, who is eſſentially good in himſelfe.
               4. The will of man mooueth it ſelfe to one thing and an other, and is not mooued by any naturall agent, and as the will is, ſo is the eſſence it ſelfe, and therefore not ſubiect to corruption.
               A third reaſon, the verie appetit of man is alſo infinit, it findeth no contentment among al the things which are vnder the Sunne, it is neuer ſatisfied with the deſire of happineſſe, knowledge, honour, glorie, riches, and eternitie, that it may liue after death. But to whatſoeuer nature hath giuen this appetite, it hath alſo appointed how this appetite ſhall bee ſatisfied, and that muſt bee onely after death.
               A fourth, the verie operations of the ſoule it ſelfe without any reference vnto the bodie. As for example, to beleeue, goeth farre aboue ſence, and is an act ſeparated from it. To diſtinguiſh between a body and a ſpirit, to imagin thoſe thinges which are but onely imaginarie, as vacuum, infinitum, in rerum natura, emptines, infinitenes in worldly and naturall thinges, mathematicall lines, to make ſillogiſmes, to define, deuide, demonſtrate. And theſe thinges it doth without the conditions and proprieties of the bodie, & it doth theſe thinges the better, the more it is abſtracted from the body, and therefore doth then, beſt of all when it is altogether out of the bodie, and at full liberty, theſe thinges which do not depend vpon the body neither can bee accompliſhed by the Organs and Inſtruments of the body.
               A fift, nothing can be deſtroyed by that wherein the perfection of it doth conſiſt, but ye very perfection of the ſoule doth cōſiſt it, the abſtraction & ſeperation of it from the body which appeareth by the iudgement of all morall Philoſophers which holde the very higheſt perfection of vertue to be then when man doth not follow the paſſions and perturbations of the body, but doth

ſubdue them wholy to the minde and vnderſtanding.
               The ſixt, There is a kinde of reflection of the minde and al the faculties thereof, aboue it ſelfe the vnderſtanding vnderſtandeth that it doth vnderſtand, the wil willeth that it ſhal be willing, the memorie remembreth that it doth remember, ſo it vnderſtandeth that it willeth and doth remember, which no bodily nor mortall thing can performe, it is therefore ſpirituall and immortall.
               The ſeauenth. Beſides the vſuall manner of attaining to knowledge which is proper to it ſelfe, the ſoule hath alſo a more diuine knowledge by the influence of an higher cauſe, which is by reuelation and infuſion. But when it hath ſuch reuelations it is abſtracted from the body, and therfore it is in a more perfect eſtate when it is not at all in the body.
               The eight. The firſt originall or beginning of the ſoule is not by any naturall agent, becauſe it is more perfect then the bodye, for no effect which is more perfect can proceed frō a cauſe which is of leſſe perfection. Therfore as it proceeded not frō any natural cauſe, ſo it cannot be deſtroyed by any naturall cauſe, and therefore it cannot dye by ſeperation of it from the bodye.
               The nynth. The ſoule ſubſiſteth by it ſelfe, and therefore it cannot die by any accident: The antecedent I proue, becauſe it hath operations proper to it ſelfe, as I haue ſhewed.
               The tenth. Euerie thing which is corrupted hath his bane & deſtruction eyther by that which is contrarie to it ſelfe, as heate by colde, drynes by moiſture, or by the abſence of that whereby it is preſerued and nouriſhed, as the lampe goeth out for want of oyle, or by the corruption of the ſubiect in which it is, as the heate of the fire when the fire is extinguiſhed, but nothing is contrarye to the ſoule becauſe it is a ſubſtance and not an accident, neither doth it depend vpon any material cauſe, but onely on God, neither hath it any ſubiect becauſe it is no accident.
               The eleuenth. That which dyeth with the body muſt alſo languiſh and decay with the bodie, and wax olde when the body is olde, as it appeareth by ſence, motion and vegetation, which in olde men doe faile, but vnderſtanding doth increaſe in age.
               The twelfe is the verie conuenience and agreement which the ſoule hath with God, and the Angells it argueth the immortality thereof, for why are they ſayd to be immortall, but becauſe they

are as the ſoule is, ſpirituall, immateriall, ſimple, no way mixed or depending of the bodye?
               The thirteenth. What is more common in this life, then the proſperitye of the wicked and the aduerſitye of the godlye? But it cannot ſtand with Gods iuſtice nor his prouidence, that there ſhould be no rewarde for wel-doers, and no puniſhment for vngodly men, therefore becauſe it is not in this life, it muſt needes be in an other life wt cannot be vnles the ſoules of men be immortall.
               To conclude, It is incident to good men to hope well, to euill men to feare and be troubled in their mindes becauſe of their offences, there is Conſcience. But there cannot be Conſcience without immortality of the ſoule. Therefore I conclude, that the ſoule of man is immortall.
            
            
               Chapter, 11.
               
                  Of Noah his Arke and the Deluge.
               
               THe Atheiſts diſpute againſt the ſtorye of Noah his Arke, & the maner of the drowning of the worlde with water, ſaying: it was an impoſſibilitye that ſo many creatures ſhould be preſerued in ſo ſmall a veſſel, or that the worlde ſhould be ſo deſtroyed. For the better ſatiſfaction of ſuch vngoldly men, concerning that ſtorye, I obſerue theſe thinges which folowe.
               Concerning the multitude of Beaſtes which were in the Arke, of thoſe which were cleane were 7. of euery ſorte, that is, 3, couples for increaſe, for meat when it ſhould be permitted to eat fleſh, for labour, and other vſes of man, and the odde beaſt for Sacrifice. Of vncleane beaſtes, 2. of euery ſorte for increaſe. As for Fiſhes, they were in the Sea, and not deſtroyed, becauſe they were farther ſeparated frō the ſinnes of men, for they were in an other element, as alſo ſuch other creatures as can liue in the waters, as Otters, ſeawolues, Swannes, water-ſoules &c. Agairie, from the kindes of beaſtes which were in the Arke were excluded ſuch as bred not by generation, as Mules, ſuch Serpents and creeping thinges as are ingendred by the Sun out of putrifaction, ſuch as being wholye periſhed might be reſtored agayne in other creatures which were preſerued, as Mules which are ingendred of an horſe and a

ſhee Aſſe. Therefore theſe beaſtes which were in the Arke, were onely ſuch as liued vpon the drye, and proceeded by generation. The number of beaſtes (according to Plinye and Geſner) are not Naturalihist. Cap. 10. De Animalibus. knowne to be aboue one hundreth and fiftye kindes. And it is verye likely that they which are not known, ſhould be neither great, nor manye. And of them which are great, there are not aboue fortye kindes.
               As for the capacitye of the Arke, it was 300. cubits in length, 50, in bredth, 30. in height: there were 3. chambers or floores in it, therefore there was roome enough to receiue all theſe beaſtes, and many more, and meate for them for a long time, that we need not for the defence of this ſtorye to flye to Geometricall cubits, ſaying: that Moſes being learned in Geometrye and all the artes of the Egiptians, did vnderſtand Geometricall cubits, but playne Act, 7. cubits. Such a cubit is the length of a mans arme from his elboe to the top of his middle finger. Though (no dout) ſuch cubits were longer then now they are, becauſe men were of higher ſtature then now they are. But the length therof being 300. cubits, ſheweth that it was 5. times the length of Salomons Temple which 1 Reg, 6. was but 60. cubits long, the bredth of it being 50. it was twice & an halfe as broad as being but 20. cubits broad. But, the length of it being 300. cubits and the bredth 50. being ioyned together, do make of ſquare meaſure, by the cōmon rules of arte 15. thouſand cubits. Moreouer, it contayned in the height of it 3. ſtoryes as I haue ſhewed, one being aboue the other, in regard whereof, it was 3. times as capable of the creatures, contayning 3. times the meaſure of the loweſt roome, excepting onely the thickneſſe of the boordes which made the partition betweene the floores, that is in the whole 45. thouſand cubits, and euerye ſeuerall floore contayning 10. cubits in height. The food of the beaſtes, whatſoeuer it was before, it might behaye, hearbes and berryes, for what food would not hunger cauſe them to eat?
               The worke-manſhip, though it were aboue the knowledge of man to deuiſe it, and contriue it in ſuch ſorte, and aboue his cunning and ſtrength to guide ſo great a veſſell on the water, and to keepe it frō wrackes: it was an hūdred yeares in building, it needed not to be lanched out into the water as Ships are, becauſe the water of itſelfe did beare it vp whē all the earth was ouerflowen.
               
                  
From whence had God ſuch great quantity of water to drowne the worlde? There were two immediat cauſes, the Sea beneath, becauſe the fountaynes of the deep were opened, and the heauen aboue, for the windowes of the heauen were alſo open. Concerning the waters from beneath: The vaynes and pores of the earth were broken vp to ſend forth more abundance of water, the waters which were before gathered together into certayne places began to ſwell, and being rarified ouer flowered the bankes, that, as before, according to nature the water was to hide and couer the whole earth, yet, ſecundum naturae conſilium, according to the counſell and diſpenſation of nature, for the preſeruation of theſe creatures the water and the earth made but one globe: ſo now againe, for the deſtruction of theſe creatures, the waters did hyde & couer the whole earth, as according to nature they ought to doe. And we ſee by our owne experience, though not in generall, becauſe God hath promiſed otherwiſe, yet in particular, how often Gen 
                        •
                     
                   the water goeth beyond the bankes, & maketh breaches into the land. And it is in mans reaſon impoſſible how it ſhould be otherwiſe, but that the water being a liquid and fluid ſubſtance, ſo farre in quantitye exceeding the earth, and in place higher then the earth, ſhould preſentlye drowne the earth. But onely God doth ſupernaturally gouerne it, & reſtrayne it againſt the nature of the firſt creation. The windowes of heauen were open, that is, as the Text doth expound it, it rayned 40. dayes and 40. nights, all the cloudes were melted and diſſolued into rayne, and wheras before God ſeparated and diuided the waters from the waters that ſome Gen, 1. were beneath in the Sea and riuers, and parte of the earth & ſome in the ayre frozen and congealed into cloudes: now to make a deluge and generall ouer-flowing, he brake the partition, and let them be at libertye as they were before.
               I could for their better contentment ſtand vpon ſuch natural cauſes as are beſides the Text, as ſome Diuines & Philoſophers haue done, which by the windowes of heauen vnderſtand Cancer Piſces, Heiades, Pleiades, and Orion among the ſtarres, Mars, Venus and Luna among the planets. Alſo I could alleadge Mechlinus the ſcholer of Albertus Magnus in his Cōmentaryes, which In magnas Albumaſaris coniunctiones. writeth that before the floud there was a Coniunction of Iupiter & Saturne in the end of Cancer, contrary to the Ship called Argo,
                  
which repreſented the Arke, and that this Coniunction did portend an inundation, although I need not to ſtand vpon theſe thinges, becauſe the naturall cauſes which I haue alleaged out of the Text are ſufficient.
               But they obiect, that the waters couered the mountaynes 15. cubits vpward, as it is in the Text, and they aske how that could be, ſeeing there were but two cauſes, the ſwelling of the waters beneath, and the rayne from aboue. For ſome mountaynes are higher then the middle region of the ayre, and by a conſequent Selius Polihiſt: Cap. 18. Herodian. Herodotise in Melpo
                        •••••…
                     . they are higher then the clowdes, as namely Olympus in Theſſaly, Artas in Barbary, the Alpes &c: My anſwer is, that if any parte of the earth is aboue the cloudes, it is naturall for the water alſo to be aboue that parte of the earth, bee it neuer ſo high, therefore it is not to be wondred at, much leſſe is it impoſſible or abſurd. Againe, though the cloudes are not aboue theſe fewe mountaines, yet the firmament or middle region of the ayre it ſelfe is farre aboue them, and although ſome of theſe mountaynes are found to be by the plum-lyne or perpendiculer 15. ſurlonges aſcending from the playne, and the cloudes are commonly lifted vp but 10. furlonges aboue vs, yet ſometimes they are lifted vp 40. furlonges as Pliny ſheweth. Againe, the very waters of the deep doe ſtand Lib: 2 cap 23. aboue the mountaynes. You aske how that may be? you ſay they are beneath the firmament, & that therfore they cannot be aboue the mountaines, ſeeing theſe aboue the firmament are the clouds which are a great deale lower then the mountaynes, vnleſſe the waters which are beneath the firmament, ſhould be aboue the waters which are aboue the firmament? To this I anſwer, that the miſtes which are in the vallyes are reckoned among the waters which are aboue the firmament, and yet are ſometimes diſſolued into rayne before they are drawne vp ſo high as the mountaynes, for which cauſe they ſeeme to them which be in the vallyes, to be gathered together in the tops of the mountaynes, and doe hyde the mountaynes with darknes: in the tops of which mountaines, yet Springes doe ariſe, which are of the waters beneath the firmament.
               For an other cauell, they obiect, that the floud began the 17. day of the ſecond month, that the rayne continued 40. dayes, that the waters preuayled 150. dayes, where-vpon they aske how it

could be that the Arke reſted vpon the mount of Armenia the 7. day of the 7. month, which by this account was 4. dayes before the falling of the water? to them I anſwer: the waters preuayled on the earth 150. dayes, albeit they began to be diminiſhed before the full end of 150. dayes. albeit they began to be deminiſhed before ye ful end of 150. dayes. For nothing letteth but yt they might well be ſaide to preuayle, that is to be ſtrong and deep vpon the earth, albeit they were in parte diminiſhed, and that the Arke might drawe ſo deep of water, as the mount being high, to reſt vpon it. And where it is ſaid after the Arke reſted vpō the mountayne then the waters were abated, that is, it might then more plainly & ſenſibly be perceiued and apeare to the eyes of Noah.
               
               The heathen hiſtoryes doe mention this Deluge, although after a corrupt maner, which is not ſufficient to ſtrengthen the truth, Giuitat: Dei. Lib. 18. but yet ſerueth to conuince the Atheiſt. And though S. Augustine ſayth: Diluuium gentium nec Latina nec Graeca nouit hiſtoria, no heatheniſh writers doe remember it, meaning, without corruption: yet Ioſephus ſayth: Huius arstem diluuij & arcae meminerunt omnes Barbaricae hiſtoriae ſcriptores, that all Barbarian hiſtoriographers haue mentioned this Deluge and Arke of Noah, 
                  Anti, Li: ca. 4. whereof he reckoneth theſe: namely Beroſus the Chaldaean, Hicronimus the Egiptian, Phoenix Mnaſſeas, Nicholaus Damaſcenus. And Euſebius remembreth Greeke writers, Alexandrum Polihiſtorem, 
                  Lib: 9. de preparat: Euang: Metam: Lib. 1. 
                  Molonem, Empoleneum and others which haue written of it vnder the name of Deucalion, as they haue receiued it from others by reporte. Ouid maketh a liuely diſcription of this Deluge vnder the name of Deucaliō. And Iuſtin Martyr ſayth: we Chriſtians call him Noah whom the heathens call Deucalion. Plutarch ſayth, that the Doue which was ſent out of Deucalion his Arke Apolog: 1, Lib: de industria Animalium, Lib, d: deâ Syria. brought to him a token of the fall of the water. And Lucian an A theiſt yet ſayth: that this generation of man which now is, was not from the beginning, but that it wholye periſhed which then was, and that this progenye which now is, is an other which deſcended from Deucalion. And of the generation which periſhed, that they were cruell, wicked, periured, they harboured not ſtrangers, they were inexorable, for which cauſe they ſuffered great calamitye, for ſuddenlye the earth poured out great ſtore of water, great quantitye of rayne fell from the skye, the riuers ſwelled, the

Sea aroſe to ſuch an height, that the worlde was drowned and all thinges periſhed. Of that multitude only Deucalion was left aliue who was preſerued by theſe meanes: Hee put him ſelfe with his wife and children in a great Arke which he had made, when he had imbarqued him ſelfe, there came vnto him Swine, Horſes, Lyons, and all other Beaſtes which the earth nouriſhed, two of euery ſorte. So God lefte not him ſelfe without witnes among the heathen, that thereby he might ſtirre them vp to ſearch out the truth, which onely remayned in the Church of God.
            
            
               Chapter, 12.
               
                  Of the deſtruction of Sodome.
                  
               
               WHen Lot had entred into Zoar, the Lord rayned vpō 
                  Sodom fire & brimſtone, & burned the Cittie, & the plaine, Gen, 19, Deut. 29. Eſa. 13. and all the inhabitantes, and all that grewe vpon the earth. And Lots wife behinde him looked backe, and ſhe was turned into a Piller of Salte. This is the ſlorie of the Bible, and what ground hath any Atheiſt to deny it? The Chriſtian may eaſily confound the Atheiſt, becauſe the reliques of it doe yet remayne, and the place doth ſhew it ſelfe. Concerning the time when it was done, it is ſet downe in the Text, that it was burned in the dayes of Abraham, which aroſe early in the morning and beheld the ſmoke of it mounting vp as the ſmoke of a Furnace. And by iuſt computation it is well knowne to haue beene about 392. yeares after the ſloud. The place is well knowne to all Coſmographers, and is daylye ſeene by many trauaylers: it is one of the three famous Lakes which are in the Land of Canaan, which are commonly by the figure catachreſis called ſeas. For in that Land there are three ſuch waters, the Sea of Galilie where Peter, Andrew, Iames, 
                  Math. 4. and Iohn, were about their nettes, when our Sauiour did call them to be Apoſtles. The Sea of the Gaderens, into which the heard of Math, 8, ſwine did run hedlong when the Deuils had entred into them by the permiſſion of our Sauiour Chriſt being beyond Jorden towards Arabia, and the waters are at this time venimous, and as it is thought, polluted by thoſe ſwines. The third is this which wee are now to ſpeake of and the ſubiect of our diſcourſe. A greate part of it, which then was land is now all water, and is called Aſphaltites
                  
of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which ſignifieth pitch, becauſe great quantitie Vide Garcaei meteora. of pitch boyleth out of it, and it is alſo called Mare mortuum the dead Sea, or mare mortuorum the ſea of the dead, becauſe no fiſh nor other creatures can liue in it. The nature of it is ſuch that if any bordes be throwne into it, they will preſently ſinke to the bottom, if any veſſell be vpon it which hath men in it, ſo long as the men liue it will bee aboue the water, but as ſoone as the men are dead being poyſoned with the ſtinke of it, the veſſel wil preſently ſinke. In ſo much that when 
                     Ʋeſpaſian the Emperour had cauſed certaine men to haue their handes tyed behinde them that they might not be able to ſhift for themſelues, and ſo to be violently plunged into the botome: they were preſently driuen vp againe with as great a violence vnto the top, and ſo ſloted vppon the ſuperficies of the water vntill they were dead. The quātitie of this ſtinking lake is about 8. high Almaigne miles, with in the compaſſe of it were ſcituated theſe fiue Citties, Sodom, Gomorah, Adama, Seboim, and Segor, which were deſtroyed with fire and brimſtone, of the which the cheife and principal was Sodom. In this water ſtandeth a Rocke, which to them that behold it, repreſenteth the image of a woman, that is Lots wife. In the bankes round about it, & al the ground which is neare it, are ſome reliques of theſe Citties yet remayning, for the earth doth looke like aſhes taken out of a furnace, there are great ſtones and peeces of rockes which looke as if they had bin in the fier, greate heapes of ſalte, a ſmell of fire as if the place were ſtill burning, a filthye ſauour of brimſtone, ſuch ſmokes & vapours continually riſing out of the ground, that they doe annoy the villages and inhabitants which are anye way nere that place. Some Trees doe growe there, and bring fruite, but the fruites thereof neuer come to rypenes: if a man gather one of the Apples and cut it with his knife, they are full of nothing but ſparkles of fire and noyſome ſmoakes. And therfore, for the confirmation of this ſtory, beſides the witnes of the Scriptures, we need no more then the teſtimony of the place it ſelfe, which doth moſt plainly diſcouer it ſelfe. And therefore, the beſt counſaile that I can giue the Atheiſt that readeth this ſtorye is this: that hereafter he doe no more denye the truth of it, or make anye queſtion how it might be, but rather thus: Quotiescun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      legit hiſtoriam timeas ne ipſe flat hiſtoria, ſo

often as he readeth the ſtorye, let him tremble at Gods iudgements, leaſte he become alſo an acter of ſuch a Tragedye, and the ſubiecte of the like ſtorye, that is, leaſte he be turned into a ſtone as Lots wife was, or conſumed with fire and brimſtone as Sodome was.
            
            
               Chapter. 13.
               
                  Of Chriſt.
               
               I Haue (I truſt) ſufficiently proued that there is a God, that the Atheiſts might be conuerted vnto the true God. But, becauſe this knoweledge of God in his creatures, is onely ſufficient to giue them occaſion to ſeeke further, and no way in it ſelfe able to ſaue their ſoules, they muſt alſo knowe him in his Sonne, by whome onely ſaluation commeth. When the fulnes of time was Gal. 4. come ſaith the Apoſtle, God ſent his Sonne made of a womā &c That I may therefore proue vnto them God in his Sonne our Sauiour Chriſt, by humane authorityes and reaſons, becauſe they will not ſtand to the authoritye of the Scriptures: I will not alleage the teſtimony of the deuils out of the Goſpell, which ſayd: Ieſus thou Sonne of God, what haue we to doe with thee? art thou come hither to tormēt vs before ye time? but out of prophane Mat, 8. hiſtoryes, which ſayd in effect the ſame thing. For, being ſilenced at his comming, that their Oracles could giue no more anſwer, and being asked a reaſon of their ſilence, one of them anſwered, as in the 4. Chapter I haue already ſhewed vnto you.
               
                  Me puer Hebraeus diuos Deus ipſe gubernans
                  Cedere ſede iubet, triſtem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      redire ſub orcum.
                  Aris ergo dehinc tacitus abcedito noſtris.
               
               Vpon which anſwer by them giuen, Auguſtus the Emperour erected an Altar in the Capitoll of Rome with this inſcription: ARA PRIMO-GENITI DEI, An Altar dedicated to the firſt begotten Sonne of GOD. I cannot ſee how any thing can be playner then the deuils confeſſion by the Oracle of Apollo, wherein he is called: Puer Hebraeus, an Hebrue Childe, & Deus
                  
a God. A childe there is, his birth and humane nature, like that of the Prophet Eſay: Natus eſt nobis puer, a Childe is borne vnto Eſay. 9. Heb. 2, Symbolum Athanaſis.
                   vs, and an Hebrue as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: Hee deſcended not of Angells, but of the ſeede of Abraham. And God, there is his Diuine nature, God is become a childe, there is Chriſt God and man.
               Our Sauiour ſhewed himſelfe many waies to the Infidels to be God, & yet to be borne, but they vnderſtood him not. Tully citeth De diuina Hone. L. 2. the prophecy of Sybel for proofe yt a King ſhould be borne, and that none ſhold be ſaued vnles they did imbrace him, & yet, neither he nor the reſt of the Romās had the grace to applie it rightly. Tully his ſelfe did onely aleadge it, but not beleeue it, for hee thought it to be ſome inuentiō of man tēding to the alteration of the ſtate of Rome. Lentulus applyed it vnto himſelfe, hoping hee ſhould be that King, & therfore ioyned in conſpiracie with Cataline. Virgill applyed it to Solonius the Sonne of Pollio becauſe he Lucius Florus. L, 4. C. 1. aglog. 4. was his good Patron, & was deſirous to; honour & magnifie him aboue other men. And it is very likely that Virgil had heard ſomething concerning this matter of the Hebrues themſelues, becauſe (as Ioſephus writeth) when ſo euer Herod the King of Iudaea came to Rome he lodged at Pollio his houſe, vnto which houſe 
                     Ʋirgill often reſorted. But afterward Conſtantine the great did expound Antiquit. Lib. 15. C. 13. Oratione ad ſanctum caetum. Belts Indeici. L. 7. C. 12. In octan, Aug. C. 94. that prophecie to bee vnderſtood onely of the incarnation of Chriſt. Ioſephus writeth that there was an auncient prophecie among the Romans, that a King ſhould come out of Iudaea, which ſhould be the great man of the worlde. But they were ſo blinde that they could not apply it vnto Chriſt, of whome it was meant, but they vnderſtood it of Veſpacian the Emperour becauſe hee conquered the Iewes. Swetonius maketh mention of a ſtrange accident which fell out at Rome before the birth of Chriſt, by which it was publikely acknowledged that Nature did beeede a King which ſhould raigne ouer the people of Rome, & what that wonder was, Dio ſheweth: In the Capitoll many images were ouerthrowne Rom. hist. Lib 37 from heauen, writings in grauen in Marble pillers were blotted out. But they had not ſomuch light as to vnderſtand that the Kingdome of Chriſt his Goſpell ſhould ouerthrow idolatrie, and preſcribe new Chriſtian lawes, whereby his Church ſhould be gouerned. Great was the blindenes of Auguſtus which could

erect an altar to the Sonne of God, & yet could not acknowledg the Sonne of God whē he was borne and publiſhed to the world, and being himſelfe a tipe & figure of Chriſt, yet did not ſee chriſt in his ſelfe, of whome hee was a figure. And, that it may not ſeeme to any man abſurde which I haue ſaid, that Auguſtus, was a tipe of Chriſt, wee finde the like in the Prophet Eſay concerning Cyrus the King of Perſia: I haue likened thee to my ſelfe, thogh thou haſt Eſay, 45. not knowne me. Cyrus was a tipe of Chriſt though hee knewe not Chriſt, in that he deliuered Gods people out of Captiuitie, by giuing them leaue to returne to their countrie and to builde the Temple. So was Auguſtus a tipe of Chriſt in his happie & peaceable gouernment of the Empire, in that hee was ſaluted firſt by that name of Auguſtus the ſixt day of Ianuarie, and the ſame day was Chriſt worſhipped as a God & King by the wiſe men which came from the Eaſte: that vnder him were burnt the recordes and Mat, 2. ſpecialties of the debts wt were due to the treaſure houſe or chamber of the Empire; for ſo by our Sauiour was cancelled the handwriting 
                     Col, 2, Oraſius hiſt. L, 6, C, 20. of ordinance which was againſt vs, and it, was nayled on the Croſſe, when our Sauiour was borne: greate quantitie of oyle did miraculouſly iſſue out of the earth, what was that but the birth of the Lords annointed wt was annointed with the oyle of gladnes aboue al his fellowes? vpon that miracle Auguſtus was ſo aſtoniſhed yt he made proclamatiō, yt after that time no mā ſhold Heb. 1. call him Lord, & what was that but a manifeſt acknowledgemēt that a greater Lord was borne then Auguſtus was?
               To this alſo I may adde the teſtimonye of the ſtarces and conſtellations in heauen, to ſhew the Atheiſt the birth of the Son Mat. 2. of God vpon the earth. The wiſemen, as I haue ſhewed before, ſought out our Sauiour Chriſt by the leading of a Starre, which Staire I haue proued to bee miraculous. And yet although the birth of the Sonne of God was not ſubiect to conſtellations, but was farre aboue the capacitie of Aſtrologers and the courſe of the heauens: yet the verie Aſtrologicall predictions, and Aſpects of other naturall Starres were enough to giue occaſion to the Gentiles to ſeeke farther and ſo to come to the knowledge of the birth of Chriſt, for aſmuch as they did yeelde benignos influxus et amica lumina, as the Aſtrologers call them; the beſt influences; and moſte fauourable Aſpects vnto the natiuitie of him, of whome

they receaued their influences, their lights, their Aſpects, and all their heauenly vertues. The wiſe men which came from Perſia to Bethleem, although they could not knowe Chriſt by the heauens, yet the heauens gaue them two manner of wayes to vnderſtand that a man ſhold be borne, which in glorie & honour, vertue and pietie, ſhould farre exceede all other men. For firſt, the ſixt yeare before our Sauiour was borne, there was a coniunction of Iupiter and Saturne in Cancer, which mooued all the Aſtrologers then liuing, to ſay, that ſhortly after there ſhould inſue a verie great change and alteration of Religion. Secondly the conſtitution of the heauen which was at the time of our Sauiour his birth in the 42. yeare of the Empire of Auguſtus the 24. of December a little before midnight did teſtifie the ſame. For in it the Petrus Aliacus Card: quest in Gen. 30. 
                  Horoſcopus was the eight part of Virgo, which ſignifieth change of Religion, Saturne was in the higheſt part of the heauen, Sol in the loweſt, which did ſhewe that ſuch a Childe was borne which might cauſe the world to wonder. And as Albertus Magnus citeth out of Albumaſar the great Aſtrologer: aſcendi in prema 
                  Inſpeculo. 
                  facie illius ſigni virgo pulchra et honeſta habens in manu ſua duas ſpicas et nutrit puerum, et vocat ipſum puerum quaedam gēs Ipſum, et aſcendit cum eaſtella virginis; Non quod ſubiaceret ſtellarum motui qui creauit ipſas ſtellas, ſed quia quum extenderet coelum ſicvt 
                  In maiori introdactorio, tractatis ſexta. 
                  pellem, formans librum vniuerſitatis, noluit literis eiuſdem de eſſe ex his quae ſecundum prudentiam ſuam in libro aeternitatis ſunt ſcriptae etiam elegantiſſimum illud a natura quod de virgine naſceretur, et per hoc innueretur homo carnalis et verus, qui non naturaliter naſcebatur. There aroſe in the firſt aſpect of the ſigne Virgo, a faire and chaſte Virgin, hauing two eares of Corne in her hand, and a Childe in her armes, which Childe ſome nations doe call Ieſus, not as if he that made the ſtarres were any way ſubiect to the motion of the Starres, but that hee which ſtretcheth foorth the heauens as a ſcrole of Parchment, when hee writ the booke of nature, might not want witnes out of the booke of nature, of that which before was contayned in the book of aeternitie, which was his ſecret decree, that a Virgin ſhould bring foorth a Childe, and ſo he ſhould be deſcribed to vs to be a natural man although not borne after a naturall manner.
               Thus, haue I proued the comming of Chriſt by manie witneſſes,

of mē, of deuils, of ſtars & ſenſeles creatures, cyted out of prophane ſtories, becauſe the Atheiſt wil not beleeue the teſtimony of God & Angels in the holy Bible. Yet for their better ſatiſfactiō concerning diuers particulars, I will alleage them reaſon ſo far as faith may bee made manifeſt by reaſon, that if poſſibly it may be, they may be brought to the acknowledgment of the truth.
               They aske vs what neede there was that the Son of God ſhould take our fleſh? and whether God was not able to ſaue vs by other meanes? I anſwer, Man offended God, & therfore it behoued man to make ſatiſfaction, but mā alone was not able to ſatiſfye, therefore God & mā were ioyned together. I proue the minor, that man alone was not able to ſatiſfie, becauſe God would not be ſatiſfyed but by ſacrifice, & no ſacrifice vnleſſe it were infinite, could ſuffice. That an infinite ſacrifice was requiſit, I proue by theſe reaſons: An infinite offence cannot be purged but by a ſacrifice anſwerable to the offence, but mans offence was infinite in two reſpects, firſt, of the infinite God-head wt was offended, ſecondly of man himſelf wt was the offender, which although he be finite, yet voluntate peccandi in infinitum rapitur, hee hath an infinite wil & deſire to cōmit offences. And againe, as man alone was not ſufficiēt, ſo it was not for God alone to worke this worke of our redēption, becauſe there was no ſacrifice ſufficiēt to pacifie God but by death, &, as man without God could not ouer-come death, ſo God without man could not ſuffer death, & therefore it was required that the Sauiour of the worlde ſhould be God incarnate, and ſo God and man to make one Chriſt might be vnited together.
               They aske how it came to paſſe that man offended? For their ſatisfaction I anſwere: God made two eſpeciall creatures to his owne Image, indued with vnderſtanding, Angels and men: hee gaue thē two giftes wherby they might continue their happy eſtate, knowledge to diſtinguiſh betweene good and euill, & freedome of will to chooſe one & leaue the other, ſo that they might chooſe whether they would fall or ſtand. The Angelles firſt fell, the cauſe of their fall was pride, the obiect by which they were puffed vp, the reflection of themſelues vpon their own ſelues beholding their owne glorie and that excellencie whereunto they were created. For they could not be proud without an obiect, & there could be no other obiect to make thē proud but themſelues.

For God was ſo farre aboue them in glorie, that the ſight of him would make them rather to haue a meane conceite of themſelues and as for man he was farre beneath them, that they took no ſuch delight in looking ſo ſtedfaſtlye vpon him, as to compare him with themſelues. And therfore they beheld themſelues in themſelues, and ſo being delighted with their owne glory, manie of them forgot their owne ſelues how they were ſubordinate vnto God, and ſo their ſeruice & duetie towards God was interrupted, which did conſiſt in perfect loue, ſincere adoration, and imitation of him. And for this cauſe they were caſt downe. After their fall they enuied that man ſhould ſtand, and mooued him to diſobedience, the outward obiect which allured him to diſobedience being an Apple, they mooued him to take the Apple by falſe ſuggeſtions; that ſo his eſtate ſhould bee aduanced. Now both Angells & men had fallen, it pleaſed God to reſtore man againe, but not Angells, for theſe two cauſes: Firſt, the Angells being firſt in the praeuarication ſeduced man, and were the cauſe of his fall. Secondly, the Angells being Spirits and not bodies were of greater perfection then man was, & therefore better able to withſtand ſinne and all manner of temptations then man was, and therefore God was more highly diſpleaſed with the ſinne of Angells then he was with the ſinne of men. And therefore hee ſent his Sonne for the redemption of Man, but not of Angells.
               They aske why the Father tooke not fleſh rather then the Sonne? why the Sonne being incarnate had his conception of the holy Ghoſt without begetting how he could be borne of a Virgin, and wherefore he was ſo borne? to which queſtions I anſwer as followeth:
               The incarnation of the Sonne was the worke of the whole Trinitye, yet one perſon was incarnate, as if three ſiſters ſhould make a Coate, and one put it on. Pater & Spiritus imple erunt carnem Chriſti maieſtate, Filius tantum aſſumptione, The Father and the holy Ghoſt filled the fleſh of Chriſt by their maieſty, but the Sonne by aſſumptiō of it vnto him ſelfe Quia congruum fuit, vt qui erat in deitate Filius Dei, eſſet in humanitate filius hominis, It was moſt fit that the Sonne onely ſhould be incarnate, and not the father, nor the holy Ghoſt, that he which in his diuinity was the Sonne of God, might be in his humanitye the Sonne of man.
               
                  
He could not haue beene man, had he not beene conceiued. And foraſmuch as he came into the world to redeeme mankind, which he could not doe vnles he were without ſinne, & he could not haue beene without ſinne, had he not beene conceiued onely and not begotten, For if man had begotten him he had begotten him in ſinne, becauſe omne ſimile generat ſui ſimile, euerye thing which begetteth doth beget that which is like to it ſelfe, and therfore he was not begotten, but onely conceiued without the helpe of man, and he could not haue beene ſo conceiued, but by the holy Ghoſt. He was therefore conceiued by the holy Ghoſt, that he might be conceiued without ſinne.
               As he was conceiued by the holy Ghoſt that he might be conceiued without ſinne, ſo he was borne of a Virgin that he might be borne without ſinne. But they aske how he could be borne of a Virgin? I could aske them how Eue could be borne of Adam without a mother? or Adam of the earth without father or mother? why could not Chriſt aſwell be borne of a mother without a father, as Eue of a man without a woman, or Adam without man or woman? And becauſe this doth not onely concerne the A theiſt, but alſo the Iewe and the Maniche, S. Auguſtin for confutation of them both ſayth: Ego tibi oſtendam incredule Iudaee & deteſtande Manichaee, peperiſſe Ʋirginem, I will proue to the vnbeleeuing Iewe, and the curſſed Maniche, how a Virgin may bring forth a Childe. Againſt the Iewe he alleageth that twelue roddes according to the number of the 12. Tribes were put into the Arke of the couenant, among the reſt, Aarons rodde wanting Numb. 27. moyſture, and all the rightes of nature, contrary to nature brought forth fruite. Quod virga potuit, virgo non potuit? virga potuit contra naturam Nuces producere, nunquid & Ʋirgo non potuit contra naturam Dei filium generare? oſtendas mihi quo modo virga Nuces pratulit, & ego tibi oſtendam quo modo Virgo filium peperit. That which a rodde could doe, could not a Virgin doe? a rodde could contrary to nature bring forth Almonds, and could not a Virgin contrary to nature bring forth the Sonne of God? ſhewe me how the rodde brought forth Almonds, and I will ſhewe thee how a Virgin brought forth a Childe. Rubus ſuſt
                        •…
                     uit ignem, & non amiſit viriditatem, ſic Virgo peperit Chriſtum & non amiſit virginitatem. The Buſh burned and yet continued greene, but as

the Buſh bore the heat of the fire without loſſe of viriditye, ſo the Virgin bore a Childe wtthout loſſe of virginitye. This may ſuffice Exod. 3. to confute the Iewe which doth allow the authoritye of the bookes of Moſes, but it wil not ſerue for the confutatiō of the Atheiſt, for he will aske me how it may ſtand with humane reaſon and with the rules of arte how this may be? and how there may be penetratio corporum, that one body ſhould penetrate an other? I will not therfore cyte the authorityes & exāples of the ſcriptures, how Chriſt aroſe out of his graue, the graue being ſhut vp, & the ſtone not rolled away: how after his reſurrection he went into the houſe where his Diſciples were, the doores being locked: how at his aſcenſion he peirced the heauens: how he is (as before I haue Math, 28, Luc, 24, Marc, 16, Ioh, 20. & 21 ſhewed) liberrimum agens, & medijs non alligatum, a free agent, and not tyed to meanes whereby he worketh: how he hath metaphyſicum imperium in ſingula, a ſupernaturall power whereby he ouer-ruleth all creatures. But I will diſpute by reaſon againſt the Atheiſt, as S. Auguſtin doth againſt the Maniche: Solis radius ſpecular penetrat, & ſoliditatem illius inſenſibili ſoliditate pertranſit, & talis videtur foris qualis intus, nec quum ingreditur violat, nec quum egreditur diſſipat, quoniam ad ingreſſum & egreſſum ſpecular integrum perſeuerat. Specular non rumpit ſolaris radius, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      igitur integritatem Virginis vitiare potuit ingreſſus aut egreſſus Deitatis. The Sun-beame peirceth through the glaſſe, & the glaſſeis not broken, how it paſſeth through ſo ſolid & hard a body, the eye or ſenſe of man cannot perceiue, it looketh alike both within and without: whē it entreth in, the glaſſe is not cracked by the entrance of it, when it goeth out agayne, the glaſſe remaineth without blemiſh as it was before: and ſo it is with our Sauiour Chriſt which paſſed through the Virgins wombe.
               He came in forme of a ſeruant that he might ſuffer, ſi enim cognouiſſent, Dominum gloriae non crucifixiſſent, for if he had beene outwardly glorious, that the Iewes had knowen him to be the Lord of glory, they had neuer put him to ſo vnglorious a death. And ſeeing that he came to dye, it behoued him to dye vpon the Croſſe, & to chooſe that death aboue all other. Placuit Deo hominem reconciliaſſe eodem modo quo nouit cecidiſſe: homo damnatus eſt in ligno, reconciliatus eſt in ligno, vixit in ligno vitae, mortuus eſt in ligno ſcientiae, reuixit in ligno Crucis. Quia primus Adam deceptus

eſt in ligno, ſecūdus Adam paſſus eſt in ligno. It pleaſed God that mā ſhould riſe by the ſame maner as he fel, but mās ſaluatiō came by the wood of ye tree, & therfore his ſaluatiō came throgh the wood of the tree. Becauſe the firſt Adam was deceiued in the tree, the ſecōd Adā ſuffered in the tree. Man liued in the wood of life, man dyed in the wood of knowledge, man reuyued agayne in the wood of the croſſe. The differēce being ſhewed between creating & redeming, & how hard it was for the Son to redeeme, ouer that it was for the Father to create, as namely the Father did his work by ſpeaking, the Son his worke by doing, the Father commaūding, the Son by obeying, the father in 6. dayes, the Son in no leſſe time thē 33. yeares, the father wt eaſe, the Son with groning, the Father as an agēt, the Son as a paciēt, the Father with the letter 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  He, which is but an aſpiration, the Sonne in the letter 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Thau, which repreſenteth the gallowes, or the Croſſe.
               After reproach, by due courſe did follow glorie, after ſuffering death, victorie and triumph ouer death, elſe hee could not haue deliuered vs from death. And becauſe vnderſtanding creatures are in three places, deuils and damned ſoules in hell, men vppon earth, Angelles and bleſſed ſoules in Heauen, due courſe required that he ſhould deſcend into hell to triumph among the Deuils & damned ſoules, ariſe from the dead to triumph before men, and aſcend vp into heauen to Triumph among the Angells, & bleſſed ſoules which are in heauen. It was no ſtrange thing for him to deſcend into hel, becauſe that deſcenſion was onely in ſoule, & therefore an eaſie paſſage. Of his reſurection from the dead we ſee manie reſemblances, for out of the aſhes of the dead Phoenix doth ariſe a liue Phoenix, of the Corne buried and rotted in the earth, foringeth vp Corne againe in greater meaſure then it was ſowed, all theſe thinges being as vnlikely, and as impoſsible as the reſurection from the dead. In Alcumiſtrie they ſee that when golde is brought to powder there is a ſpeedie reduction of that ſame powder into golde againe, & ſo ofal other metalles: the heauens yeelde no moyſture to the earth, but they take it vp againe. And as for his aſcention vp into heauen it was moſt naturall vnto him, for where ſhould a glorified body be, but in a place of glory, and where ſhould God be but in heauen, which is his throne and dwelling place.
            
            
               
               Chapter, 14
               
                  The end of the world.
               
               THe Atheiſt thinketh the worlde ſhall haue no ende, but hee alleadgeth no reaſons to proue his vngodly aſſertion, more then haue bin already anſwered by St. Peter. Our reaſons to proue an end and conſummation of all things are theſe. 1. What-ſoeuer had a beginning muſt alſo haue an end. That the worlde had a beginning, I haue alreadie proued in the 8. Chapter, and the 2, Pet, 3, ſequell followeth in natural Philoſophie, yt it muſt therefore haue and end becauſe it had a beginning. There muſt bee reſolutio in materiam primam, a reſolution into that chaos wherof it was firſt made according to Ariſtotle the great Philoſopher of the world. 2. Man is commonly called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a little world, and for his ſake the great worlde was partly made, for if hee ſtretcht foorth Phiſ. L. 1. his armes at length, from the endes of his two middle fingers, to his head & foote, may be drawne a circle, his head is as the North pole, his feete inſtead of the South, his armes as the expanſion of heauen, his handes as the Eaſt and Weſt, his Nauel as the Center. In him are colde, heate, moyſture, drineſſe as the foure Elemēts, his heart ſtill mouing repreſenteth heauen which is in continuall motion, his ſoule an immortal Spirit guiding & moouing the bodie, reſembleth God the guider of the worlde, But man which is the leſſer worlde declineth, it followeth therefore as a good conſequent, that the greater worlde alſo doth decline, and where there is declination there is alſo corruption, and death. That man declineth, it is manifeſt, for men are of lower ſtature, leſſer bones and ſtrength, and ſhorter life then their fore fathers were, but whatſoeuer is languiſhing, faynting & declining, doth growe to an end, & whence commeth this but from the declining eſtate of the greater world? The earth we ſee, wt is the lower part of it, is not ſo fruitefull as before it was, but beginneth to bee baren, like the wombe of Sara, the fruites which ſhe doth bring foorth yeeld not ſo much nutriment as before they did. And how commeth that to paſſe, but becauſe the heauen alſo fainteth, the Planets wax olde, and cannot affoord ſo great vertue & influence to theſe lower bodies, as in times paſt they did? as I'liny and Aulus Gellius teſtifie. But this is a manifeſt proofe ſeeing leſſe and weaker bodies

are conceiued euerye age in the wombe of nature, that nature Natural hiſt, L, 7, C. 16. N
                        •
                     ct, At: L. 13, C, 1, waxeth olde and wearye of conceiuing, & cuiuſcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſt ſenectus illius eſt mors, whatſoeuer waxeth olde, that alſo dyeth and hath an end. 3. If a man do but behold the face of heauen, the Moone looketh pale and wan, Mars leſſe rubicund, Sol leſſe orient, Iupiter not of ſo amiable and fauourable countenance, 
                     Ʋenus more hipocriticall, all the reſt both of the wandring & fixed ſtars, more weake & ſuſpicious then they did before. That mightye Gyant Pſal. 19. which was wōt to runne his vnwearied race, now waxeth weary, as if he would ſtand ſtill in heauen, as he did in the dayes of ioſue, ſhineth more dimly, apeareth more ſildome then before, what is this but an argument that ſhortly the high Arch of heauen which is erected ouer our heads, will fall & diſſolue it ſelfe? 4. What do ſo many irregular & threatning Eclipſes portend, ſuch vn-vſuall aſpects of the ſtarres, ſuch fearfull Coniunctious of Planets, ſuch Ro. 8, prodigious apparitions of Comets? but, that as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: The feruent deſire of the creature wayteth when the ſonnes of God ſhalbe reuealed, euerie creature groneth with vs, and trauaileth in paine together vnto this preſent, that they may bee deliuered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the ſonnes of God? 5. Empires, and kingdomes, and all eſtates haue their fatall periods. Daniel his expoſition of Nabuchodozer his dreame is now almoſt fulfilled, the head of gold, the ſhoulders of Siluer, the belly of braſſe, are already worne out, nothing of that image is now lefte but the very ſtumps of clay, their dates are ended, their periods determined long ſince, & how is it poſſible that feete of claye ſhould continue for euer, ſeing golde, ſiluer, braſſe, & yron, ſuch ſtrong mettals are conſumed? what now remayneth therefore, but the ſtone cut out of the rocke without hands which bruiſeth this image in peices? The euerlaſting kingdome Dan. 2, of Ieſus Chriſt in an other worlde, vnto which all the temporal kingdomes in this worlde muſt giue place, that all theſe being expired Chriſt in heauenly kingdome may rule for euer? what remaineth now but that we looke dayly & howerly for this kingdome, Gen, 28, that now we begin to climbe Jacob his Ladder, a peccato ad poenitentiam, a poenitentia ad opera, ab operibus ad iudicium, a iudicio ad miſerccordiam, a miſericordia ad gloriam, from ſinne to repentance, from repentāce to good workes, from workes to iudgment,

from iudgement to mercye, from mercy to glorye? there is the glory of God ſtanding vpon the top of the Ladder. Laſt of all that the worlde ſhall haue an end, & be conſumed with fier, witnes not onely St. Peter the Apoſtle, but alſo Ouid the Poet, his 2 Pet. 3, wordes be theſe:
               
                  
                     Eſſe quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         infatis reminiſcitur affore tempus, Metamor: Lib: 1.
                     
                     Quo mare, quo tellus, correpta
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         regia coeli
                     Ardeat, & mundi moles operoſa laboret. 
                           And there he ſhewes how't is ordaynd of olde,
                           that time ſhall come, when both the earth and ſea,
                           With heauens Arche, ſo glorious to beholde,
                           ſhall burne, and all ſhall turne vnto decaye.
                        
                     
                  
               
               That the worlde ſhall haue an end, witnes Lucretius, his words are theſe:
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋna dies dabit exitio, multoſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         per annos Lib: 5.
                     
                     Suſtentata ruet moles, & machina mundi,
                     Accidet exitium Coeli, terrae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         futurum. 
                           The worlde which ſtood ſo many yeares
                           Shall in one day deſtroyed be:
                           Deſtruction likewiſe ſhall appeare
                           for heauen and earth moſt ſodenly.
                        
                     
                  
               
               To this alſo agreeth the Poet Lucan, his wordes be theſe:
               
                  
                     Inuida fatorum ſeries, ſummiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         negatum Belliciuilis Lib: 1.
                     
                     Stare diu, nimio
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         graues ſub pondere lapſus,
                     Nec ſe Roma ferens. Sic cum compage ſoluta
                     Secula tot mundi ſuprema coegerit hora
                     Antiquum repetens iterum Chaos, omnia miſtis
                     Sidera ſideribus concurrent, igneapontum
                     Astrapetent, tellus extendere littora nolet,
                     Excutiet
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         fretum. Fratri contraria Phoebe
                     Ibit, & obliquum bigas agitare per orbem
                     Indignata diem poſcet ſibi, tota
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , diſcors
                     Machina, diuulſi turbabit foedera mundi,
                  
               
               
                  
                  The fates enuye the ſtates of mortall men,
                  The higheſt ſeates doe not continue long:
                  Great is the fall vnder the greater burden,
                  (and greateſt thinges doe to them ſelues great'ſt wrong)
                  
                     Rome was ſo great (whome all the world did feare)
                  that Rome her ſelfe ſhe could no longer beare.
               
               
                  So when this well couch't frame of worlde ſhall burne,
                  And the laſt houre ſo many ages end:
                  To former Chaos all thinges ſhall returne,
                  (the enuyous fates this iſſue doe portend)
                  Then all the Planets ſhall confus'dly meete,
                  And fires Caeleſtiall on the flouds ſhall ſleete.
               
               
                  The earth ſhall grudge to make the ſea a ſhore,
                  And caſt it off, and puſh the fload away:
                  The Moone enrag'd ſhall croſſe her brother ſore,
                  And ſeeke to alter courſe, to ſhine by day:
                  Thus all at oddes, in ſtrife and out of frame,
                  They ſhall diſturbe the worlde, & ſpoyle the ſame.
               
            
            
               Chapter, 15.
               
                  Of Hell fire.
               
               THus you haue heard, how by the courſe of nature the worlde ſhall haue an end. What then foloweth? I ſay to the Atheiſt Rom, 2. with S. Paul; And thinkeſt thou ô man that thou ſhalt eſcape the iudgement of God? ſhall men thinke there is no puniſhment for wicked men after this life? I wiſh that they would beleue S. Ambros: Chriſtus moriens in nouiſſimo Teſtamento ſingula ſingulis,

officia diſtribuebat, Patri ſpiritum, militibus veſtimenta, corpus Iudaeis, pacem Diſcipulis, Crucem. Apoſtolis, latroni paraediſium, peccatoribus infernum. When Chriſt dyed in his laſt wil & Teſtament, he bequeathed diuers Legacyes: To his Father he commended his ſoule, to the Iewes his bodye, to the Soldiers his garments, to his Diſciples peace, to his Apoſtles the Croſſe, Paradice to the good. Theefe which was crucified by him, but hel fire to vngodly men. But to perſwade theſe vnbeleeuers that there is an hell, my reaſons are theſe:
               Firſt, I haue manifeſtly prooued that there is a God, and it cannot ſtand with the nature of God, but that he muſt be iuſt, and there can be no iuſtice in God vnles he puniſh offenders, they for the moſte part do eſcape puniſhment in this worlde, Gods iudgements doe not ouer take them in this life therefore that God may be iuſt, their iudgement is reſerued vnto another world that they may be puniſhed in an other place, and where is that, but in Hell-ſire.
               Secondly whereas Tully a Philoſopher, Claudius Claudianus 
                  Tuſcul: quaeſt: Lib, 1. a Poet, Seneca, and others being ſo many, in their deſcription of Hell, make mention of Minos & Rhadamanthus, the Iudges there ſo cruell and inexorable, the furies, the fier, Tantalus his euerlaſting thirſte, 
                     
                        •
                     xion his wheele alwaies rolling, Titius vpon whoſe bowels the vultures are eternally feding, what is this but the ſame deſcription of hel, which is in the Scriptures, eternal fire prepared for the deuill and his Angells, and as the Prophet Eſay writeth: Mat. 25. fier that ſhall neuer bee quenched, and a worme of conſcience gnawing alwaies and neuer dying? Eſa. 66.
               
               Thirdly, witnes the Atheiſt that there is a hell for wicked men. For many times hauing committed heynous offences, though ſo ſecret that no man can detect them, & he ſo mightie that he feareth no man that ſhould puniſh him, yet he is inwardly troubled & vexed in his Conſcience: what is this his Conſcience but a ſecret feare that God will puniſh him? he ſoeth that God doth not puniſh in this world according to the qualitye of ſuch an offence, therfore he feareth puniſhment in an other world, then witnes the Atheiſt his owne Conſcience there is a hell.
               Fourthly witnes, the Atheiſt that there is an hell, all be it hee denyeth Hell. For hee knoweth, and alſo verye well conſiderreth,

that in the time of his health he is ſubiect to ſicknes, pouertie, impriſonment, a whole ſea of gall and bitternes, nay a worlde of diſcontentments, yet he would not dye Nay whē he is grieuouſly ſicke, his panges intollerable, his diſeaſe vncurable, he would giue a great ſumme of money yet to prolonge his paine vpon earth, to liue heere continually though in continuall ſickenes. And why is all this, but becauſe hee is loath to die? why is that, but becauſe he feareth death? But if hee thought his ſoule were extinguiſhed by death, that after death there ſhould be no iudgement, no hel, no feeling of ſorrowe, then why ſhould hee feare death? Nay why ſhould not an Atheiſt which is ſo worldly wiſe, and which loueth his own eaſe ſo much, deſire to die, and ſo to be at reſt rather then to liue in continuall ſicknes, if he thought that death were an end of ſorrowe? Therefore it followeth as a neceſſarie conſequent, that he feareth death, becauſe he thinketh that a farther reckning is to be made of the thinges which he did in this life, that greater panges and torments ſhall enſue after death then could bee incident vnto him in this life, and that can bee nothing elſe but Hellfier.
               Fiftly, let the Atheiſt for his better ſatisfaction concerning this point, but trauaile into the Land of Canaan, to beholde the lake Aſphaltites, where Sodom ſtood, and he ſhall ſee the verie Image and Idea of Hell before his eyes ouen in this life. When he cōmeth thither theſe thinges ſhall preſent themſelues vnto him: Tetrus odor, aſpectus horrendus, lacus fietidus, fumus venenoſus, poma quae morſu tentata, in fumum et fauillam or to fatiſcente vaneſcunt. An vgly and loathſome ſmel of brimſtone, horrible & dreadful proſpect, a ſtinking lake poyſoning ſmoke, Apples full of filthie vapours and ſparkes of fier, the thinges which hee ſhall ſee with his eyes, ſmell with his Noſtrells, and taſte with his tongue, wil make him to confeſſe there is an hell.
               To them which aske whether hell be a materiall place or no? I anſwer, it muſt of neceſſitie be ſo, becauſe in it are to be tormented not onely ſoules, but alſo bodies. It is no imaginarie thing, becauſe when they come there, it ſhalbe no imaginarie puniſhēt which they ſhall ſuffer. If they aske where hell is? ſurely it is in the loweſt parts of the earth, becauſe they are fartheſt from Heauen. But I wiſh them not to be ſo curious in diſputing, and inquiring|

                     〈1… pages missing〉
                  
               
            
         
      
   