
      
         
            
            
            A
RECORD OF
SOME WORTHY PROCEEDINGS:
IN
THE HONOVRABLE, WISE, AND
FAITHFVLL HOWSE
OF
COMMONS IN THE LATE
Parliament.
            Iuſtitiae eſt ſuum cui
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tribuere.
            1611.
         
         
            
            Contents.
            
               1. A Preface to true Engliſh men.
               2. A memorable ſpeach in Parliament.
               3. A Petition for the Parliaments libertie.
               4. Particulars of the great contract.
               5. Petitions for grace in eccleſiaſticall cauſes.
               6. Grievances in temporall matters.
            
         
         
            
            To all true hearted Engliſh men
dwelling in their native ſoile.
            HOwſoever (my deare country-men) it is mine
hap to abide on this ſide the ſeas; yet I cannot
but hearken after the proſperitie of my gracious
Soveraigne, & naturall countrey, eſpecially in the
Parliament time. I am not (indeed) in any ſuch eminent
place▪ as where I may be ſure to have a
perfect relation of all remarkeable affaires: yet by
my diligent indevour, I obteyne (in time) more
probable intelligence, than many of you doe. Of
which the love of my countrey compelleth to make
ſome preſent vſe, occaſioned by a Publication (for
not one word thereof is in the Kings name) dated
31. December laſt. Wherein the worthieſt houſe of
Commons that ever was, is covertly traduced for
ſpending long time, and great charges, and yet
failing an earneſt expectation of a good concluſion
for the Eaſe, and Freedome of his Maieſties ſubiects.
I could not therefore but indevour to prevent
(as I may) the heart-burning which (I feare)
that publication may occaſion between the King
and his Commons, and 2. to make it appeare that
no houſe of Commons had ever a greater zeale for
the eaſe & freedome of the ſubiects than the late
houſe had. The former, by demonſtrating that the
ſayd covert imputation is not the Kings, but the
pen-mans. For whereas Proclamations (in deed)

ſpeake in the first perſon, as thus, Our ſubjects;
&, We are reſolved, that publication ſpeaketh in
the third perſon thus, His Maieſties ſubiects; &,
His Maieſtie is reſolved. Therefore it was not
penned by his Maieſtie. Againe, How can cloſe
ſuggeſting the ſaid imputation to be cauſe of diſſolving
the Parliament agree with that which is
expreſley ſaid, That his Maieſty, for many good
conſiderations knowne to himſelfe determined to
diſſolve, &c? Doth not this ſhew, that the over
large preamble of that publication is the penmans,
& onely the body thereof was by the Kings
direction? Moreover, In a Proclamation dated
24. September last, his Majeſty findeth fault
with former proclamations, in regard of their
penning. Which ſheweth, that, when his Majeſty
hath ſignified his mind touching the ſubſtance of a
proclamation; he doth not alwayes review the
penning thereof. Therfore it may be ſuppoſed, that
he did not peruſe the penning of the publication.
So that I think it may be well concluded, that
the ſaid imputation is not the Kings, but the
pen-mans.
            As for the Zeale of the commons in parliament
for the eaſe, & freedome of the ſubjects, let that
appeare by that which is here publiſhed. Onely I
ſuppoſe it not amiſse to remember, that in the ſecond
ſeſſion of the late parliament, there paſſed

theſe billes in the houſe of commons. 1. An act
for the better obſerving and keeping holy the Sabbath
day, or Sunday. 2. An act againſt ſuch, as
cōming to church, doe refuſe to receive the ſacrament
of the Lords ſupper. 3. An act for the providing
of a learned, & godly Miniſtery. and 4.
An act to inable ſuſpended, and deprived Miniſters
to ſue, & proſecute their appeales. I remē
               ber
theſe, becauſe that worthy Knight, or burgiſſe
(whoſe speach is here recorded) doth not speak
of them; Intending (belike) to mencion no other
billes, but ſuch as paſſed in the houſe of commons,
in the fourth, that is, the laſt ſeſſion of parliament.
I ſay, The laſt, becauſe the fifth cannot be
accompted a ſeſſion, ſeeing nothing was concluded
therein, the Speaker, ſundry mornings before the
houſe met togither adjourning the ſame from day
to day, til the parliament was prorogued, & there
diſſolved. Well, I pray God; that, whenſoever
we ſhall haue an other parliament, Counties, cities
and burroughes may not be moved by letters
from ſuch common-wealth-men, as the pen-man
of the ſaid publication is feared to be, to chuſe ſuch
Knights and burgiſſes, as will have leſs Zeale for
the eaſe and freedome of the ſubjects, than had the
Knights, and burgiſſes of the late parliament.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A memorable ſpeach in the houſe of Commons.
            MR. Speaker, I perceive we are all much troubled
by the evill ſucceſſe which we have had
in the great contract concerning tenures and
purveiance, after our long travell and much
tyme ſpent therein, and in other cauſes of good importance:
ſo as many have taken occaſiō therby to ſay of us,
that although there was never a more honourable aſſembly,
in the Cōmons howſe of Parliament, of godly, wiſe,
and learned men, then at this time, that yet there did never
leſs fruit appeare of their labour to the world, at any
time before, then now: which fruitleſſe labour if it
might be truly imputed unto us, it might worthily grieve
vs all. but I hope that in ſeeking out meanes of redreſſe,
or reliefe in this caſe, I ſhall make it appeare to all, that
will rightly weigh of the thinges, that if furtherance had
been given by others, whom it concerns, to our labours
and good indevours, many abuſes had been reformed, &
much good done to the common wealth of England.
            But as it is true, which that great wiſe Lord, who hath
the chief charge of the treaſure of the Realme; ſayd unto
vs at our laſt meeting with the honourable Lords of the
vpper howſe of Parliament, in the paynted chamber at
Weſtin: touching the great contract, viz. that he did
well perceiue, that we had a great deſire to haue effected
that great contract, that the Kings maieſly had willingly
given his aſſent to the ſame, & that yet neverrheleſſe
it proceeded not, wherein he could not finde the
impediment, but that God did not bleſſe it: ſo is it likewiſe
true of the reſt of our proceeding in Parliament,
that God hath nor bleſſed the ſame with good ſucceſſe,
which troubled me at the firſt, vntill I did further conſider
of many other parties of the Realme, and many other
callings, and ſocieties of the Realme, to whom God

hath given as little bleſſing, as to the Parliament howſe.
For it did appeare plainely to vs in this howſe, vpon the
treatie and examinations of the grievances of the Church
and common wealth, that the Merchants of England
who were a calling of very great vſe in this Realme, for
the wealth, ſtrength, and credit thereof, and as it were
the leggs of the common wealth, whereon it goeth, had
not received ſuch bleſſing of late, yea in their merchandizing,
as in former times, although they labor aſmuch,
and adventure aſmuch, as in former times they did. And
that likewiſe the clothiers being a trade whereby many
thowſands ſubjects are mainteyned, although they labour
in their calling as much at this time, as ever before
they did; doe of late finde ſo litle fruit of their labour, as
that many of them are decayed, and many of them have
given over that trade to the hinderance of the Realme.
            And alſo the like is fallen to the Marriners, and Shipwrights
of this Realme, which number is greatly decayed,
and with them the ſerviceable ſhipp: and ſhipping
very much weakened, which threatneth a decay of the
walls, and ſtrength of the Realme, which by good ſhipping,
and good Marriners, is well defended.
            And I find alſo, that God hath not bleſſed the treaſure
of the Realme, for it is gone from us, as if God had blown
upon it, to turne it out of the land, ſo as Prince & people
want.
            And I finde alſo in the calling of lawyers that there is
not the like increaſe of their labors, as in times paſt, except
it be ſome fewe favorites; and I think that divers
Knights, Citizens, and Burgeſſes now here preſent about
me, could ſay the like of divers ſorts of men in their coū
               tryes,
cities, and Burroughes, if they liſt to ſpeak: whereupon
I doe aſſuredly think, that for ſome publique ſinns

of the land, God hath a quarrell to the land, whereby he
doth withdrawe his ordinary bleſſings; which publique
ſinnes this great Councell of the Realme ought firſt to
ſeeke out, and as much as in our power to redreſs the
ſame, that God being thereby reconciled vnto the land,
an happy bleſſing might inſue to all the eſtates thereof:
which to effect you ſhall ſee what we for our parts have
done to obteyne Gods loving countenance to the land,
as a ſhield, by removing the publicke ſinnes thereof,
which as a thick cloud doth keepe from vs Gods ſun-ſhining
grace.
            Firſt we did ſee, and conſider, that the precious name
of God, which we ought to regard more then our lives,
is not by the lawes of England, ſo tenderly regarded, &
preſerved, as the name of all ſortes of people in the land:
For if ſome evill wordes be vſed againſt the King it is
high treaſon, for which the offender ſhall dye. And if
ſome evill words be vſed againſt noble men, it is publiſhable
by the ſtatute de Scandalū magnatum. And
that for ſome evill words vſed by any private perſon againſt
another, an actiō of the caſe doth lye, at the common
law, to puniſh the offender, and to recompence the
partie wronged▪ But for abuſing the holy name of God,
and tearing him in peeces by wicked oathes, there is no
puniſhment by the lawes of the Realme, whereby both
men, women, and children increaſe in that ſinne greevouſly,
every day, without puniſhment or checke:
wherefore to prevent that ſinne, we did, at two ſeverall
ſeſsions of Parliament, make two ſeverall bills, which
did paſſe our howſe of Commons, to be made lawes for
puniſhment of ſuch Offenders.
            And to take away that crying ſinne which doth moſt
provoke God, & moſt greeve the ſubjects, viz, the depriving,

priving, diſgracing, ſilencing, diſgrading, and impriſoning,
ſuch of Gods Meſſengers (being learned and godly
preachers) as he hath furniſhed with moſt heavenly graces
to call us to true repentance, for no other cauſe, but
for not conforming themſelves otherwiſe than by ſubſcription
limited in the ſtatutes made in the 14. yere of
the late Queene Elizabeth of famous memory, thereby
making the lawes of the Church, and cōmon wealth to
iarre: which to reforme we made a lawe for ſubſcription
agreeing to the intent of the foreſayd ſtatute, which
every wiſe mā will approue, & willingly ſubſcribe unto,
whereby much peace, & unitie would grow in the chnrch
& cōmon wealth, & be an occaſion that many ſubiects
might be well taught the meanes of their ſalvation, who
now want ſufficient knowledge of the word of God to
ground their faith upon.
            And to take away another groſſe ſin, which is made
lawfull by act of Parliament, whereby the land is made
guiltie thereof, viz. concerning non reſidents, and pluralitie
of benefices, we did paſſe a bill in the laſt Seſſions of
Parliament, & have another bill concerning that offence
ready to paſſe being twice read, and agreed upon at the
Cōmittees, whereby we abrogate ſo much of the ſtatute
of the 21 yere of K. Hē. the 8. as did inable non reſidēts,
or the taking of more benefices then one with cure of
ſoules, for by the proviſoes in that Statute, the Kings
Chapleines may haue as many benefices, as they can
get, without ſtint, & ſome others may have 4. benefices
with cure at one time, in ſeverall counties, & ſome two
benefices, & yet be reſident upon none of them, ſo long
as he attendeth upon his Lord, or Mr. which is a thing
intolerable in a Chriſtian common wealth.
            And for that ſome ſcandalous Miniſters of evill life do

bring a great ſlaunder to all the reſt, being many godly &
learned preachers, we did make a good law to remove
ſuch ſcandalous Miniſters from their place.
            And where by the lawes of God, and the lawes of this
Realme the eccleſiaſticall perſons ſhould, in their goverment,
uſe onely the ſpirituall ſword by exhortation, admonition,
and excōmunication, which are the keyes of
the Church to exclude impenitent ſinners, & to receive
into the Church, the penitent and faithfull perſons,
and to leave the temporall ſword, to the temporall Magiſtrate,
which was alwayes ſo uſed in England untill the
ſecond yeare of King Hen. 4. at which time the popiſh
Prelates, following the example of the man of ſinne at
Rome, obtayned a ſtatute without the free conſent of
the ſubjects (as is ſet forth by Mr. Foxe, and in ſome ſort,
appeareth by the record of the Towre) by which ſtatute
they got the temporall ſword into their handes, which
ſtatute was ſince, by ſeverall acts of Parliament, made
voide with great diſgrace, and yet by colour of that temporall
authoritie once, by a ſhort ſpace by them uſed,
ſome eccleſiaſticall perſons doe uſe both ſwords, to the
great griefe, and trouble of the ſubjects, and with thoſe
two ſwordes, they doe alſo uſe the oath ex officio, which
began firſt in England, by that ſtatute of the 2. yere of K.
Henry the 4. being contrary to the lawes of England, &
(as I verily think) contrary to the lawes of God.
            Wherefore we to reforme thoſe great abuſes, made 2.
good lawes, the one to abridge the force of the eccleſiaſticall
cōmiſſion in many pointes: thother to abrogate,
and take away the power of eccleſiaſticall perſons to miniſter
the oath ex officio being a very hatefull thing, and
unlawfull.
            Andi for that among the Canons, late made by the

clergie of England in their Convocation, it was thought,
that ſome of their canons did extend to charge the bodies,
landes, and goods of the ſubjects of the Realme, further
then was lawfull, and meet, we therefore made a
good lawe to make voide ſuch Canons, as doe charge
the bodies, lands and goods of the ſubjects, unleſſe
that the ſame Canons were confirmed by Parliament.
            And as we had care of the Church, ſo had we care of
the common wealth, touching impoſitions layd upon
the ſubiects goods, and merchandize, and other thinges,
& therefore, after long travel taken by us in ſearching ancient
Records in the Tower of Londō, & in other places,
& after great diſpute made herevpon, in open houſe, by
many learned Lawyers, we found it cleare in our opiniō,
that impoſitions layd upon merchandize, or other goods
of the ſubiects of this Realme, by the Kings Maieſty, with
out the free conſent of the ſubiectes in Parliament was
not lawfull, and therefore we did make and paſſe a bill,
by the generall conſent of the houſe of Commons, intended
by us all to be a lawe, thereby to declare, that
by the lawes of England, no impoſition could be lawfully
layd vpon goods, or merchandize of the ſubiects of
England, without conſent of the ſubiects in Parliament.
            And becauſe that many ſubiects were greatly troubled
by purueyance, and cartaking, notwithſtanding the
good lawes in that behalf made to reſtraine the ſame, a
bill was preferred by ſome member of the houſe, for reformation
of that abuſe, at the beginning of the laſt
Seſſions of Parliament; which bill, by all likelihood, had
long ſince paſſed this howſe of commons, if the matter
of purveyance had not been comprehended in the great
contract, which matter of great contract being nowe ended,
a new bill concerning purveyance, and cartaking is

in my hands, now preſently to be delivered into the houſe
to receive ſuch proceeding therin, as ſhalbe thought meet.
            And touching wardſhip & tenures, becauſe it is thought
a heavie law, and grievous to the ſubjects, after the death
of the father to have the ſonne, & heire within age; taken
from the mother and kindred, to be bought and ſold, &
with the heire alſo to take all the lands and tenements of
the father, that ſhould many times mainteyne both the
heire, & the reſt of the children, for the onely benefit of
the gardian: therefore we made a very large offer to free
the land thereof, which we laboured earneſtly to effect,
but God hath not bleſſed it, nor brought to good effect
any of thoſe good intended lawes above by me mentioned,
although we much deſired the ſame, and had done
therein as much as perteyned to vs to doe, which if they
had been well effected, and paſſed as lawes and ſtatutes,
and that all ſuch grievances, concerning the Church and
cōmon wealth, as wee carefully cōmended unto his Ma:
in writing (whereof the copies doe remain in this houſe)
had procured ſuch amendemēt of things, as we expected,
it had made England ſo honourable and happy in the
government thereof, as ever was kingdome in this
world (as I think). And which when the ſame ſhalbe
well effected, will (as I think) make both King, and
ſubjects more happy, then ever they were. For if
all theſe thinges had ſo concurred togither, as wee
wiſhed, and laboured for, what would wee not give
to ſupply the Kings wants, and to ſupport him in a moſt
Roiall, & princely eſtate. But rebus ſic ſtantibus,
as is before declared, without reformation of thoſe
things, which were by us ſo earneſtly ſought, we cannot
give much to ſupplie the Kings wants, becauſe we know

no certainty of that which ſhould remaine to us after
our gift, ſo as, in mine opinion, the good proceeding
of this Parliament hath not been hindred by us, which
is all I meant to ſay at this time.
         
         
            The particulars to be contracted for, in conſideration
of two hundred thouſand pounds,
per annum to be paid unto his Majeſtie.
            
               1. Wardſhippes, and tenures, with their particular
dependances, ſhalbe vtterly taken away.
               2. The maxime, Nullum tempus occurrit regi,
ſhalbe no longer of any effect.
               3. All the Kings patents ſhalbe expounded for
the good of the patentee, & according to the true
meaning.
               4. No forfeiture ſhalbe taken by the King, or
his patentee, for non payment of rent.
               5. Any ſubject ſhall plead the generall iſſue
(Not guilty) vpon information of intruſion.
               6. All penall lawes, and informations ſhalbe
ordered for the best eaſe of the ſubject.
               7. All maner purveyance taken by prerogative,
cart taking, compoſitiōs, & cōmiſſions therfore, &
Praeemption (except of time) ſhalbe vtterly taken
away, & no clerke of the market ſhall ſet price on
any victuall, nor any other ſhall doe the ſame.
               8. All prefines, and poſt fines to be due vpon alienation
by fine and recovery, ſhalbe taken away.
               9. Debts ſhalbe paid to the ſubjects before any

advantage be taken, by the King, of forfeitures
vpon outlaries, or attainders of felons, or traitors.
               10. That clauſe in the ſtatutes of 34. & 35. of
Hen. 8. touching alteration of lawes in Wales
ſhalbe repealed.
               11. Every ſubject that hath poſſeſſed land by the
ſpace of 60. yeares, where the King, in that time,
hath not had the poſſeſſion, or profit thereof, by the
ſpace of one yeare, ſhalbe free from the Kings
claime. And, if the King, within that ſpace, hath
been ſeiſed of any rent, out of the ſame landes, then
that rent onely ſhall remaine to the King.
               12. Old debtes due to the King before tenne
yeares last paſt ſhalbe forgiven.
               13. The King ſhall expreſs the cauſe of demurrer
in pleading against any of his ſubjects.
               14. Fees of all courtes to be payd by the ſubjects
ſhalbe expreſſed in a booke in print.
               15. All lawes abſolute, that are penall, ſhalbe
repeaied, and all penall lawes of one nature ſhalbe
reduced to one law.
               16. No protection against law ſhalbe graunted
by the King.
               17. Any thing doubtfull in any of theſe articles
ſhalbe explaned by our ſelves.
               18. Any other matter, which at our next meeting,
we ſhall conceive to be for eaſe of the ſubjects,
& ſhall not detract from the King, in point of ſoveraignty,
or profit ſhalbe eſſential in this cōtract.
            
         
         
            
            To the Kinges moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            MOſt gracious ſoveraigne, whereas we your Majeſties
moſt humble ſubjects the cōmons aſſembled
in Parliament, have received firſt by meſſage, &
ſince by ſpeach, from your Majeſtie a commandement
of reſtraint from debating, in Parliament, your Majeſties
right of impoſing vpon your ſubjectes goodes exported,
or imported out of, or into this Realme, yet allowing vs
to examine the grievances of theſe impoſitiōs in regard
of the quantitie, tyme, and other circumſtances of diſproportion
thereto incident: wee your ſaid humble
ſubjectes nothing doubting, but that your Majeſty had
no intent, by that commandement, to infringe the ancient,
and fundamentall right of the libertie of Parliament,
in point of exact diſcuſſing of all matters concerning
them, and their poſſeſſions, goods, and rights whatſoever:
which yet wee cannot but conceive to be done,
in effect, by this commandement, doe with all humble
dutie make this remonſtrance to your Majeſty.
            Firſt we holde it an ancient, generall, and vndoubted
right of Parliamēt to debate freely all matters, which do
properly concerne the ſubject, and his right, or ſtate:
which freedome of debate being once forecloſed, the
eſſence of the libertie of Parliamet is with all diſſolved.
            And whereas, in this caſe, the ſubjects right on the one
ſyde, and your Majeſties prerogative on the other cannot
poſſibly be ſevered in debate of either, we alledge,
that your Majeſties prerogatives of that kynd cōcerning
directly the ſubjects right, and intereſt, wee dayly handled
and diſcuſſed in all courts at Weſtminſter, and have
been ever freely debated, vpon all fit occaſions, but in
this, & all former Parliaments without reſtraint. Which

being forbidden, it is impoſſible for the ſubject either to
know, or mainteine his right, & propertie to his owne
landes, and goods though neuer ſo juſt, and manifeſt.
            It may further pleaſe your Moſt excellent Majeſty to
vnderſtand that wee have no minde to impugne, but a
deſire to informe ourſelves of your highnes prerogative
in that point: which if ever, is now moſt neceſſary to be
knowne. And though it were to no other purpoſe,
yet to ſatisfie the generality of your Majeſties ſubjects,
who finding themſelves much grieved by theſe new Imdoſitions,
do languiſh in much ſorrow, and diſcomfort.
            Theſe reaſons (dreade ſoveraigne) being the proper
reaſons of Parliament) do pleade for the vpholding of
this our ancient right and liberty. Howbeit, ſeing it
hath pleaſed your Majeſtie to inſiſt vpon that judgement
in the Exchequer, as being direction ſufficient for us,
without further examination, upon great deſire of leaving
your Ma, vnſatiſfied in no one point of our intents,
and proceedings, w
                  •
                profeſſe touching that judgement,
That we neither doe nor wil take upon us to reverſe it:
but our deſire is to know the reaſōs whereupon the ſame
was grounded. And the rather, for that a generall cō
               ceipt
is had, that the reaſons of that judgement may be
extēded much further, even to the utter ruine of the ancient
libertie of this kingdome, and of the ſubjects right
of propertie to haue landes, and goods. Therefore
the judgement it ſelf, being the firſt and the laſt that ever
was given in that kind, for ought appearing unto us,
and being onely in one caſe, and againſt one man; it can
binde in law no other then that perſon, and is alſo reverſable
by writ of error graunted heretofore by act of
Parliament. And neither hee, nor any other ſubject is
debarred, by it, from trying his right in the ſame, or like

caſe, in any of your Majeſties Courts of record at Weſtminſter.
            Laſtly wee nothing doubt, but your intended proceeding,
in a full examination of the right, nature, & meaſure
of theſe new impoſitions (if this reſtraint had not
come betweene) ſhould have been ſo orderly, and moderately
caried, & ſo applied to the manifold neceſſitie of
theſe tymes, and given your Majeſty ſo true a view of
the ſtate, and right of your ſubjects, that it would have
been much to your Majeſties content, and ſatiſfaction
(which wee moſt deſire) & remoued all cauſe of feares,
and jealouſies from the loyall hearts of your ſubjects,
which is (as it ought to be) our carefull indeavour.
Whereas contrarywiſe, in that other way directed by
your Majeſty, wee cannot ſafely proceed, without concluding,
for ever, the right of the ſubject: which, without
due examination thereof, wee may not doe.
            We therefore, your highnes loyall and dutifull commons,
not ſwerving from the approved ſteps of our anceſtors,
moſt humbly and inſtantly beſeech your gracious
Majeſty, that without offence to the ſame we may
(according to the vndoubted right, and libertie of Parliament)
proceed in our intended courſe of a full examination
of theſe new impoſitions, that ſo we may cheerefully
paſs on to your Majeſties buſines, from which this
ſt
                  •
               p hath, by diverſion, ſo long with held vs. And wee
your Majeſties moſt humble, faithfull, and loyall ſubiects,
ſhall ever, according to our bounden dutie, pray for
your Majeſties long and happie raigne over vs.
            Delivered by 20. of the lower howſe of
Parliament the 24. of May 1610,
            
         
         
            
            Petitions.
            MOſt gracious and dread ſoveraigne, Sith it hath
pleaſed Almightie God, of his unſpeakable goodnes
& mercie towards us, to call your Majeſtie to
the government of this kingdome, and hath crowned
you with ſupreme power, aſwell in the Church, as in the
cōmon wealth, for the advancement of his glorie, & the
generall benefite of all the ſubjects of this land, Weo
doe with all humilitie preſent, at the feet of your excellent
Ma: our ſelves, and our deſires full of confidence in
the aſſurance, of your religious minde, and princely diſpoſition,
That you wilbe graciouſly pleaſed to give life,
and effect to theſe our petitions greatly tending (as undoubtedly
we conceive) to the glorie of God, the good of
his Church, & ſafetie of your moſt royall perſon, wherein
we acknowledge our greateſt happines to conſiſt.
            1. Whereas good and provident lawes have beene
made for the maintenance of Gods true religion & ſafetie
of your Majeſties moſt royall perſon, iſſue, and eſtate,
againſt Ieſuites, ſeminarie Prieſts, and popiſh recuſants.
And although your Majeſtie by your godly learned, and
judicious writings have declared your princely, & chriſtian
zeale in the defence of the religion eſtabliſhed, &
have very lately (to the comfort of your beſt affected
ſubjects) publiſhed to both howſes of Parliament your
princely will and pleaſure, that recuſants ſhould not be
concealed, but derected and convicted: yet for that the
lawes are not executed againſt the Prieſts, who are the
corrupters of the people in religion, and loyaltie, and
many Recuſants haue already compounded, and (as it
is to be feared) more and more (except your Ma: in your
great wiſdom, prevēt the ſame) will cōpound with thoſe

beg their penalties, which maketh the lawes altogither
fruitleſs, or of litle or none effect, & the offenders to become
bold, obdurate, and unconformable: Your Majeſtie
therefore would be pleaſed, at the humble ſute of
your commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, in
the cauſes ſo highly concerning the glorie of God, the
preſervation of true religion, of your Majeſtie and ſtate,
to ſuffer your highnes naturall clemencie to retire it ſelf
and to giue place unto juſtice, and to lay your royall cō
               mand
upō al your miniſters of juſtice both eccleſiaſtical,
& civil, to ſee the lawes made againſt Ieſuites ſeminarie
Prieſts and Recuſants (of what kind and ſect ſoever) to
be duely, and exactly executed, without dread, or delay.
And that your Majeſtie would be pleaſed likwiſe to take
into your owne hands, the penalties due for recuſancie,
and that the ſame be not converted to the priuate gaine
of ſome, to your infinite loſſe, the imboldning of the Papiſts,
and decay of true religion.
            2. Whereas alſo divers painfull, and learned Paſtors,
that haue long traveiled in the work of the Miniſterie,
with good fruit and bleſſing of their labours, who were
ever ready to perform the legal Subſcription appointed
by the Statute of 13. Elizab: which onely concerneth the
confeſſion of the true Chriſtian faith and doctrine of the
Sacraments, yet for not conforming in ſome points of
ceremonies, and refuſing the ſubſcription directed by
the late Canons, have been removed from their eccleſiaſticall
livings, being their freehold, and debarred from
all meanes of maintenance, to the great griefe of ſundry
your Majeſties well affected ſubjects; ſeing the whol people,
that want inſtruction, are by this meanes puniſhed,
and through ignorance, lye open to the ſeducements of
popiſh, and ill affected perſons; Wee therefore moſt

humbly beſeech, your Majeſty would be gratiouſly pleaſed,
that ſuch depriued, and ſilenced miniſters may by licence,
or permiſſiō of the reverend fathers, in their ſeverall
dioceſſes, inſtruct, and preach vnto their people in
ſuch pariſhes, and places, where they may be imployed:
ſo as they apply themſelves, in their Miniſtery, to wholſome
doctrine, and exhortation, and live quietly, and
peaceably in their callings, and ſhall not by writing, or
preaching, impugne thinges eſtabliſhed by publick authority.
            3. Whereas likewiſe through pluralitie of benifices, &
toleration of non recidencie in many, who poſſeſs not
the meaneſt livinges with cure of ſoules, the people in
diverſe places want inſtruction, and are ignorant, & eaſy
to be ſeduced, whereby the adverſaries of out religiō
gaine great advantage, and although the pluraliſts, and
non-reſidents doe frame excuſe of the ſmalneſſe of ſome
livinges, and pretende the maintenance of learning, yet
we finde by experience that they, coupling many of the
greateſt livings, doe leave the leaſt helpleſs, & the beſt
as ill ſerved, & ſupplied with preachers, as the meaneſt.
And where pluraliſts heaping vp many livings into one
hand, doe by that meanes keep divers learned men frō
maintenance to the diſcouragement of Students, & the
hinderance of learning & the non-reſidents (for ſeeking,
or abſenting themſelves frō their paſtorall charges) doe
leave the people, as a prey, vnto the popiſh Seducers. It
might therefore pleaſe your moſt excellent Majeſtie for
remedy of theſe evils in the Church to provide, that
diſpenſatiōs for plurality of benefices with cure of ſouls
may be prohibited, & that toleration of non-reſidencie
may be reſtrayned. So ſhall true religion be better
vpheld, and the people more inſtructed in divine, and

civill duties:
            4. And for aſmuch as excommunication is the heavieſt
cenſure for the moſt grievous offences which the
Church doth reteine, yet exerciſed and inflicted vpon
an incredible number of the common people by the
ſubordinate officers of the juriſdiction eccleſiaſticall,
moſt cōmonly for very ſmall cauſes grounded vpon the
ſole information of a baſe apparitour, in which caſe the
parties, before they can be diſcharged, are driven to exceſſive
expence for matters of very ſmall moment, ſo
that the richer break thorough more heynous offences,
and eſcape that cenſure, by commutation of penance to
the great ſcandall of the Church government, in the abuſe
of ſo high a cenſure, the contempt of the cenſure it
ſelfe; and grievance of your Majeſties poore ſubjects.
            Wherefore your Majeſties dutifull commons
moſt humbly beſeech your highnes
that ſome due, and fit reformation may
be had in the premiſſes.
         
         
            
            Grievances.
            To the Kinges moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            Moſt gracious Soveraigne, your Majeſties moſt humble
commons aſſembled in Parliament being moved, aſwel
out of their dutie and zeale to your Majeſtie; as out
of the ſenſe of iuſt griefe wherewith your loving ſubiects
are generally through the whole Realme at this
tyme poſſeſſed, becauſe they perceive their cōmon &
ancient right & libertie to be much declined, & infringed
in theſe late yeares, Doe with all dutie & humilitie preſent
theſe our iuſt complaints thereof to your gracious
viewe, moſt inſtantly craving iuſtice therein and due redreſſe.
And although it be true, that many of the particulars,
whereof we now complaine, were in ſome uſe
in the late Queenes time, & then not much impugned,
becauſe the uſage of them, being then more moderate,
gave not ſo great occaſion of offence, and conſequently
not ſo much cauſe to inquire into the right and validitie
of them. Yet the right being now more throughly
ſcanned, by reaſon of the great miſchiefs, and inconvenien
                  •
               es
which the ſubiects have thereby ſuſtained,
wee are very confident, that your Maieſtie wilbe ſo farre
from thinking it a point of honour, or greatnes to continue
any grievance vpon your people, becauſe you
found them begun in ſome of your Predeceſſors times,
as you will rather hold it a work of great glorie to reforme
them, ſince your Maieſtie knoweth well, that neyther
continuance of time, nor errours of men, can
or ought to preiudice truth of iuſtice; and that nothing
can be more worthy of ſo worthy a King, nor

more anſwerable to the great wiſdome, and goodnes
which abound in you, then to underſtand the griefes, &
redreſſe the wrongs of ſo loyall, and well deſerving a
people. In this confidence (dread ſoveraigne) we offer
theſe grievances (the particulars whereof are hereunder
ſet downe) to your gracious conſideration, and we offer
them out of the greateſt loyaltie, and duetie that ſubjects
can beare to their Prince. Moſt humbly and inſtantly
beſeeching your Majeſtie, aſwell for juſtice ſake (more
then which (as we conceiue) in theſe Petitions we doe
not ſeek) as alſo for the better aſſurance of the ſtate, and
generall repoſe of your faithfull & loving ſubjects, and
for teſtimonie of your gracious acceptation of their full
affections, declared aſwell by their joyfull receiuing of
your Majeſty, at your happy entrance into this kingdom,
which you have been often pleaſed, with favour, to remember;
as alſo by their extraordinarie contributions
graunted ſince vnto you, ſuch as haue been never yeelded
to any former Prince, upon the like termes, and occaſions,
that we may receive to theſe our cōplaints your
moſt gracious anſwer: which we cānot doubt but wilbe
ſuch, as may be worthy of your princely ſelfe, and will
give ſatiſfactiō, & great cōfort to all your loyall, and moſt
dutifull loving ſubjects; who doe, and will ever pray for
the happy preſervation of your moſt royall Majeſtie.
            
               New Impoſitions.THe policie and conſtitution of this your
kingdome appropriates unto the Kings of
this Realme, with the aſſent of the Parliament,
as well the ſoveraigne power of making lawes,
as that of taxing, or impoſing upon the ſubjects
goods, or merchandizes. Wherein they haue
juſtly ſuch a proprietie, as may not, without

their conſent, be altered, or changed. This is the cauſe,
that the people of this Kingdome, as they ever ſhewed
themſelues faithfull, and loving to their Kings, and ready
to ayde them in all their juſt occaſions, with voluntarie
contributions, ſo have they been ever carefull to preſerve
their owne liberties and rights, when any thing hath
been done to prejudice or impeach the ſame. And
therefore when their Princes occaſioned eyther by
their warres or their over great bountie, or by any
other neceſſitie, haue, without conſent of Parliament,
ſet impoſitions, eyther within the land, or
upon cōmodities eyther exported, or imported by the
Merchants, they have, in open Parliament, complained
of it, in that it was done without their conſents. And
thereupon never failed to obteyne a ſpeedie, and full redreſſe
without any claime, made by the Kinges of any
power, or prerogative in that point. And though the
lawe of proprietie be originall, and carefully preſerved
by the cōmon lawes of this Realme, which are as ancient
as the kingdome it ſelfe; yet theſe famous Kings? for the
better contentment, and aſſurance of their loving ſubjects,
agreed, that this old fundamentall right ſhould be
further declared, and eſtabliſhed by act of Parliament.
Wherein it is provided, that no ſuch charges ſhould ever
be layd upon the people, without their cōmon cō
               ſent,
as may appeare by ſundry records of former times.
Wee therefore your Majeſties moſt humble cōmons aſſembled
in Parliament following the example of this
worthy care of our anceſtors, and out of a dutie of thoſe
for whome we ſerve, finding that your Majeſtie without
adviſe or conſent of Parliament, hath lately, in time of
peace, ſet both greater impoſitions, and farre more in
number, then any your noble anceſtors did ever, in time

of warre, have with all humilitie preſumed to preſent
this moſt iuſt, and neceſſarie Petition unto your Ma:
That all impoſitions ſet without the aſſent of Parliamēt
may be quite aboliſhed, and taken away, and that your
Maieſtie in imitatiō likewiſe of your noble Progenetors,
wilbe pleaſed, that a law may be made during this ſeſſion
of Parliament, to declare that all Impoſitions ſet, or
to be ſet upō your people their goods or merchandizes,
ſave onely by cōmon conſent in Parliament, are, and
ſhalbe void. Wherein your Ma: ſhal not onely give your
ſubiects good ſatiſfaction in point of their right, but alſo
bring exceeding ioy, and comfort to them which now
ſuffer, partly through the abating of the price of native
cōmodities, & partly through the raiſing of all forraign,
to the overthrow of Merchants and ſhipping, the cauſing
of a generall dearth, & decay of wealth among your
people, who wilbe thereby no leſſe diſcouraged, then
diſabled to ſupply your Ma: whē occaſion ſhal require it.
            
               Cōmiſſion eccleſiaſticall.WHereas by the ſtatute 1. Eliz cap. 1. intituled an Act reſtoring to the crown the
auncient iuriſdictiō over the ſtate eccleſiaſticall,
&c. power was given to the
Queene, and her ſucceſſors to conſtitute,
and make a Commiſſion in cauſe eccleſiaſticall,
the ſaid Act is found to be inconvenient,
of dangerous extent in d
                  •
               vers reſpects.
Firſt, for that it inableth the
making of ſuch a cōmiſſion as wel to any
one ſubiect borne, as to more. Secondly,
for that whereas by the intention, and
wordes of the ſayd ſtatute, eccleſiaſticall
iuriſdiction is reſtored to the crown, and

highnes, by that ſtatute inabled to give only ſuch power
eccleſiaſticall to the ſayd cōmiſſioners, yet under colour
of ſome words in that ſtatute, whereby the Cōmiſſioners
are authoriſed to execute their Commiſſion according
to the tenour, and effect of your highnes letters patents.
And by letters patents grounded thereupon, the ſayd
Commiſſioners doe fine, and impriſon, and exerciſe other
authoritie not belonging to the eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction
reſtored by that ſtatute, which we conceive to
be a great wrong to the ſubiect; And that thoſe Commiſſioners
might as well by colour of thoſe words, if
they were ſo authorized by your highnes letters patēts,
fine without ſtint, and impriſon without limitation of
time, as alſo according to will, and diſcretion, without
any rules of law, ſpirituall or temporall, adiudge and impoſe
utter confiſcation of goods, forfeiture of lands, yea,
and the taking away of limme and of life it ſelfe; & this
for any matter whatſoever perteyning to ſpirituall iuriſdiction.
Which never was, nor could be meant by the
makers of that law. Thirdly for that by the ſaid ſtatute
the King, and his ſucceſſors may (howſoever your
Maieſtie hath been pleaſed out of your gracious diſpoſition
otherwiſe to order) make, and direct ſuch Comiſſion
into all the Counties, and Dioceſes, yea into every
pariſh of England, and thereby all cauſes may be taken
from ordinarie iuriſdiction of Biſhops, Chancellors, and
Arch deacons, and lay men ſolely be inabled to excommunicate,
& exerciſe all other cenſures ſpiritual. Fourthly
for that every petty offence perteyning to ſpirituall
iuriſdiction, is, by colour of the ſayd wordes, and
letters Patents grounded thereupon, made ſubiect to
excommunication and puniſhment by that ſtrange and
exorbitant power, and commiſſion, whereby the leaſt

offenders, not cōmitting any thing of any enormous, or
high nature may be drawne from the moſt remote places
of the kingdome to London; or York, which, is very
grievous, and inconuenient. Fifthly for that limit,
touching cauſes ſubject to this cōmiſſion, being onely
with theſe words, viz. Such as perteine to ſpirituall
or eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction; it is very hard to knowe,
what matters, or offences are included in that number.
And the rather becauſe it is unknown, what ancient canons,
or lawes ſpirituall are in force, & what not: from
whence ariſeth great incertaintie, and occaſion of contention.
            And whereas upon the ſame ſtatute a cōmiſſion eccleſiaſticall
is made; Therein is grievance apprehended
thus. Firſt for that thereby the ſame men have both
ſpirituall and temporall juriſdiction, and may both force
the party by oath to accuſe himſelfe of an offence, & alſo
inquire thereof by a jurie, and laſtly may inflict for the
ſame offence, at the ſame time, and by one and the ſame
ſentence, both a ſpirituall and temporall puniſhment.
Secondly whereas, upon ſentences of deprivation, or other
ſpirituall cenſures given by force of ordinarie juriſdiction,
an appeale lyeth for the partie grieved; that is
here excluded by expreſſe wordes of the cōmiſſion. Alſo
here is to be a tryall by iury, yet no remedy by traverſe,
nor attaint. Neyther can a man haue any writ of
errour, though a Iudgement or ſentence be given againſt
him, amounting to the taking away of all his goodes, &
impriſoning him during life, yea to the adiudging him
in the caſe of Praemunire, whereby his lands are forſeyted,
and he out of the protection of the lawe. Thirdly,
that whereas penal lawes, and offences againſt the ſame
cannot be determined in other courts, or by other perſons,

then by thoſe truſted by Parliament with the execution
thereof, yet the execution of many ſuch ſtatutes
(diverſe whereof were made ſince 1. Eliz.) are cōmended
and cōmitted to theſe Cōmiſſioners eccleſiaſticall,
who are eyther to inflict the puniſhment conteyned in
the ſtatutes being premunire, and of other high nature,
and ſo to inforce a man upon his own oath to accuſe, &
expoſe himſelf to theſe puniſhments, or els to inflict other
temporall puniſhment at their pleaſure. And yet beſides,
and after that done, the partie ſhalbe ſubiect in
the Courtes mentioned in the Acts, to puniſhments by
the ſame actes appointed and inflicted: which we think
very vnreaſonable. Fourthly, that the cōmiſſion giveth
authority to inforce men called into queſtion to enter
into recogniſance not onely for appearance frō time, to
time, but alſo for performance of whatſoever ſhalbe, by
the cōmiſſioners ordered. And alſo that it giveth power
to enioyne parties defendant, or accuſed, to pay ſuch
fees to miniſters of the court, as by the cōmiſſioners ſhal
be thought fit.
            And touching the execution of the cōmiſſion, it is
found greivous theſe wayes among other. Firſt for that
laymen are by the Cōmiſſioners puniſhed for ſpeaking
(otherwiſe then in iudiciall places, and courſes) of the
ſymonie and other miſdemeanours of ſpirituall men,
though the thing ſpoken be true, & the ſpeach tending
to the inducing of ſome condigne puniſhment. Secondly
in that theſe cōmiſſioners uſually appoint and allot
to weomen diſcontented at, and unwilling to live with
their husbands ſuch portions, & allowances for preſent
maintenance, as to them ſhall ſeeme fit: to the great incouragement
of wives to be diſobedient, and contemptuous
againſt their husbands. Thirdly, in that their

purſuivantes, or other miniſters imployed in the apprehenſion
of ſuſpected offenders in any things ſpirituall,
& in the ſearching for any ſuppoſed ſcandalous bookes▪
vſe to breake open mens houſes, cloſets, & deskes, rifeling
all corners, and ſecret cuſtodies, as in caſes of high
treaſon, or ſuſpition thereof. All which premiſſes among
other things conſidered, your Majeſties moſt loyall,
and dutifull commons, in all humblenes, beſeech
you, that for the eaſing of them, aſwel from the preſent
grievance, as from the feare, and poſſibility of greater in
tymes future; your highnes would vouchſafe your royall
aſſent, and allowance to, and for the ratifying of
the ſaide Statute and the reducing thereof, and conſequently
of the ſaide commiſſion to reaſonable, and cō
               venient
limits, by ſome act to be paſſed in this preſent
ſeſſion of Parliament.
            
               Proclamations.Amongſt many other pointes of happines, &
freedome which your Majeſties ſubjects of
this kingdome have inioyed under your
royall Progenitors, Kings and Queenes of
this Realme, there is none which they have accounted
more deere, and precious then this, to be guided,
and governed by the certaine rule of the law (which
giveth both to the head, and members, that which of
right belongeth unto them) and not by any vncertaine
or arbitrary forme of government. Which, as it
hath proceeded from the originall good conſtitution,
and temperature of this eſtate: ſo hath it been the principall
meanes of upholding the ſame in ſuch ſort, as
that their Kings have beene juſt, beloved, happy &
glorious, and the kingdome it ſelfe peaceable, flouriſhing

and durable ſo many ages. And the effect, aſwell
of the contentment that the ſubjects of this kingdome
haue taken in this forme of gouernment, as alſo
of the love, reſpect, and dutie which they have,
by reaſon of the ſame, rendred unto their Princes,
may appeare in this, That they haue, as occaſion
hath required, yeelded more extraordinarie and voluntary
contributions to aſſiſt their Kings, than the
ſubjects of any other knowne kingdome whatſoever.
Out of this roote hath growen the indubitable right
of the people of this kingdome: not to be made
ſubject to any puniſhment, that ſhall extend to their
lives, landes, bodies, or goodes, other then ſuch, as
are ordeyned by the common lawes of this land, or the
ſtatutes made by their common conſent in Parliament.
Nevertheleſſe it is apparant both that
proclamations have beene, of late yeares, much more
frequent, then heretofore, and that they are extended,
not onely to the libertie, but alſo to the goods,
inheritances, and livelihood of men, ſome of them
tending to alter ſome points of the lawe, and make
anewe. Other ſome made, ſhortly after a ſeſſion
of Parliament, for matter directly rejected in the ſame
ſeſſion; other appointing puniſhments to be inflicted
before lawfull triall, and conviction; Some cō
               teyning
penalties in forme of penall ſtatutes: Some
referring the puniſhment of offenders to the courts
of arbitrary diſcretion, which have layd heavie and
grievous cenſures vpon the delinquents: Some,
as the Proclamation for ſtarch, accompanied with
Letters commaunding inquirie to be made againſt
the tranſgreſſors, at the quarter ſeſſions: and ſome

vouching former proclamations to countenance, and
warrant the later, as by a catalogue here vnder written
more particularly appeareth. By reaſon whereof there
is a generall feare conceived, and ſpread amongſt your
Maieſties people, that proclamations will, by degrees,
grow vp, and increaſe to the ſtrength, and nature of
lawes. Whereby, not onely that ancient happynes, freedome
wilbe much blemiſhed (if not quite taken away)
which their anceſtors haue ſo long inioyed: but the ſame
may alſo (in proces of time) bring a new forme of arbytrary
government vpon the Realme. And this their
feare is the more increaſed by occaſion aſwel of certeyn
bookes lately publiſhed, which aſcribe a greater power
to Proclamatiōs then heretofore hath been conceived
to belong unto them; as alſo of the care taken to reduce
all the proclamations, made ſince your Maieſties
reigne, into one volume; and to print them in ſuch
forme as Acts of Parliament formerly have been, & ſtill
are vſed to be: which ſeemeth to imply a purpoſe to
give them more reputation and more eſtabliſhment, thē
heretofore they have had. Wee therefore your Maieſties
humble ſubiects the commons in this Parliamen
                  •
               
aſſembled, taking theſe matters into our conſiderations,
and weighing how much it doth concerne your
Maiſtie, both in honour and ſafetie, that ſuch impreſſions
ſhould not be ſuffered to ſettle in your ſubiects
mindes, have thought it to apperteyne to our duties, as
well towards your Maieſtie; and to thoſe that haue truſted,
and ſent us to this ſervice, to preſent unto your
Maieſties view theſe feares, and griefs of your people &
to become hūble ſuiters unto your Maieſtie, that hence
forth no fine, or forfeyture of goods, or other pecuniary,
or corporall puniſhment may be inflicted upon your

ſubjects (other thā reſtraint of liberty, which
wee alſo humbly beſeech may be, but upon
vrgent neceſſity, and to continue but till other
order may be taken by courſe of law)
vnleſſe they ſhall offend againſt ſome law or
ſtatute of this realme in force, at the tyme
of their offence committed. And for the
greater aſſurance, & comfort of your people,
That it will pleaſe your Majeſty to declare
your royall pleaſure to that purpoſe,
either by ſome law to be made in this ſeſſiō
of Parliamēt: or by ſome ſuch other courſe
(wherof your people may take knowledge)
as to your Princely wiſedome ſhall ſeeme
moſt convenient.
            Proclamations importing alterations of
ſome points of the law, and making
new.
            11. Ian. 1. Iac f. 17. forbiddeth chooſing
of Knights, & burgeſſes bankerupt, or outlawed:
and commandeth choiſe of ſuch, as
are not only taxed to ſubſidies, but alſo have
ordinarily payed, and ſatiſfied the ſame. f.
59. If returnes be made contrary to the proclamation,
they are to be rejected, as vnlawfull,
and inſufficient. f: 60.
            25. Aug. 5. Ia. f. 151. That the proclamation
ſhalbe a warrant to any officer, or
ſubject to ſeiſe ſtarch, and to diſpoſe, or deſtroy
any ſtuffe &c. and reſtreineth all men
not licenced to make ſtarch. f. 154.
            2. A Proclamation made ſhortly after

Parliament for matter directly reiected the
precedent ſeſſion.
            1. Mar. 2. I. f. 102. A proclamation for
building with brick after a bill to that and
rejected▪
            
            3. Proclamations touching the freehold,
and livelihood of men. 16. Septemb. 1. Ia.
f. 41. Raiſing and pulling downe howſes authoriſed,
and prohibition to build them
againe at any tyme. f. 42. 12. Oct. 5. Ia.
f. 160. forbidding building and taking away
the materials; and appointing the owners
land to be let by other men, at what price
they pleaſe. f. 161.
            4. Proclamations referring puniſhmēt
to be done by Iuſtices of peace,
Majors, Bailives, Conſtables, &
other Officers; or ſeiſure by perſons
who have no authoritie to
require, heare, and determine
of thoſe offences. So it is to be inflicted
before lawfull triall & cō
               viction.
            8. Ian. 2. Ia f. 72. A Proclamation for folding
wooles. 23. Aug. 5. Ia. f. 151. ſeiſure of
ſtarch, &c. f. 154.
            5. Proclamations penned with penalties
in forme of penal Statutes.
            4. No. 1. Ia. f. Paine of confiſcation of
goods, f. 56. 18. Ian. 2. Ia. f. 72. Ten
dayes impriſonment & ſtanding in the pillory,
f. 72. Iuſtices of peace to forfeyt

20. pounds if they ſee not the Proclamation
of folding wooles executed, f. 75.
            23. Aug. 5. Ia. f 151. forfeyture of one moitie
of ſtarch &c. ſeiſed &c. 154.
            6 Puniſhment of offenders in courts of
arbitrary diſcretion, as ſtarre chamber.
            1. Mar. 2. Ia. f. 102. Proclamation for
building. f. 103. 12. Oct. 5. In. 159. Proclam.
for building, f. 160. 5. Iul. 6. Ia.
f. 177. Procl. for ſtarch. f. 180. 25. Iul.
6. Ia. f. 180. Procl for building, f. 181.
            7. Proclam former become Preſidents,
and vouched in later Proclam.
            18. Iun. 2. Ia. f. 75. avoucheth 5. E. 6. &
4. Eliz. f. 73. 25. Iul. 6. Ia. f. 180. mentioneth
former Proclam. againſt buildings, &
explaineth, and qualifieth them. f. 180.
            
               Stay of writes of prohibition, &c.Your Majeſties commons in this ſeſſion of
Parliament aſſembled, doe cheerefully acknowledge
the ſpring and fountaine of the
publique juſtice of this ſtate, to be originally
in your Ma: from the benefite therof is conveyed,
and derived into every member of
this politique body by your Highnes writs.
Amongſt which none are more honourable
for the ſupport of the common juſtice of the
realm, then the writes of prohibition,
habe as corpus, & de homine replegiādo:
               
writs have been ever held, and found to
be a chief meanes of reliefe vnto the poore
diſtreſſed, and oppreſſed ſubjects of this
kingdome, and can be no inconvenience at
all. Seing they are no way concluſive againſt
any man, and doo draw no benefit to
the procurers, but rather a fruitleſs charge,
if they be obteined vpon any vnjuſt ground,
or pretence. In the free granting of, & proceccing
vpon ſome of which writes, eſpecially
that of prohibition; there hath of late,
been obſerved to be ſome obſtruction: by
reaſon, that vpon the complaintes and the
importunity of ſome, who deſire the ſupport
of inferiour courts, againſt the principall
courts of the common law (wherewith
your Majeſty hath been greatly troubled)
you have taken into your royall conſideration
the ſeverall extents of the juriſdiction
of the ſayd ſeverall courts. Since which
time the ſaid writes have been more ſparingly,
graunced, and with ſtricter cautiōs
then anciently hath been accuſtomed. It is
therefore moſt humbly deſired, that it may
pleaſe your Majeſtie (whoſe glory is never
more cōſpicuous, then when the pooreſt of
the commonalty are bleſſed with the influence
of the ancient beames of juſtice) to require
your judges, in the courts of Weſtminſter,
to grant the ſaid writes, in caſes
wherein ſuch writes doe lye, and by law
are grantable: And in ſuch ſort, as that
ſuch perſons, whoſe bodies being eyther cō
               mitted

to priſon, or their cauſes like to receive
great prejudice by procedings againſt
them, in times of vacation, may not be debarred
nor deferred from hauing the ſpeedy
reliefe & benefite of thoſe writes, more
then in former times.4. Shires.
            
            For aſmuch as the exerciſe of authoritie
over the counties of Gloceſter Hereford
Wigorne and Salope. by the preſident,
& councell of Wales by way of inſtructions,
vpon pretext of a ſtatute made in the
34. yeare of the reigne of King Henry the
8. is conceived not to be warranted by that
or any other lawe of this Realme of England.
And for that in the 2. ſeſſion of this
preſent parliament, there did a bill paſs the
houſe of the Commons, whereb
                  •
                it was
declared that the true intent, and meaning
of that before mentioned ſtatute, was not
thereby to ſubject theſe countries to that
kind of government by inſtructions. And
yet notwithſtanding the inhabitāts of thoſe
Counties are ſince vtterly diſcouraged, and
in effect, debarred from triall of the right
of that kind of juriſdiction over thoſe countries,
by the ordinarie courſe of the cōmon
lawes of this land; by reaſon of Prohibitions,
which were heretofore frequently
granted (vpon ſuggeſtion, that thoſe countries
are not part of Wales or of the marches
of the ſame (which is the very point
in queſtion) are now become very hard to

be obteyned, except in caſes, where thoſe
of that councell doe exceed the inſtructions
ſet downe to them by your Majeſtie. As
alſo for that, in caſes, where actions have
been brought at the common law, whereby
that queſtion might haue come to diciſion,
the plaintifes haue been ſtopped, ſometimes
by injunctions out of your Majeſties court of
Chancery, from their proceedings ſometime
before, ſometime after judgemēts, and ſome
time alſo by impriſonment. The precedent
of which proceedings doth concern all your
Majeſties loyall and dutifull ſubjects of this
kingdome, aſwell in reſpect of the ſtopping
of the free courſe of Iuſtice: as alſo, by
reaſon that if that kinde of juriſdiction were
at firſt extended over thoſe 4. counties, and
be now ſtill continued without warrant of
law: then conſequence of this example
may, in future times, give countenance to
the erecting of like juriſdictions in other
places of this Realme. And for aſmuch
as your Majeſtie was pleaſed to commaund
all the Iudges to conſider of this queſtion,
and that they thereupon beſtowed very many
dayes in hearing the cauſe argued by
learned counſaile on both ſides. And in
viewing and conſidering of great numbers
of recordes produced before them, concerning
that cauſe: whereby, they have (no
doubt) throughly informed themſelves of
the right. It is therefore the moſt

humble petition of the commons in this
preſent Parliament aſſembled, that your
moſt excellent Majeſtie will alſo be pleaſed
to commaund, that the Iudges may deliver
their opinion upon that ſo exact, and deliberate
hearing, which was had before them,
concerning the right of the foreſayd juriſdiction
over thoſe 4. Counties by force
of that ſtatute. And that the opinion which
they ſhall deliver therein, may be in ſuch
ſort publiſhed, as that all your Majeſties
ſubjects whome it may concerne may have
meanes to take knowledge thereof. And
that your Ma: will vouchſafe to declare
it by your moſt princely pleaſure, that
any of your Maieſties ſubiects who may have
occaſion thereof may trye his, or their
right in that point by due, and ordinarie
courſe of the common lawe, eyther by
ſuing out of prohibitions, or any other
your Maieſties writs without reſtraint. And
that if the ſayd iuriſdiction over thoſe 4.
Counties ſhall appeare to your Maieſtie, by
the opinion of the Iudges, or otherwiſe,
not to be warranted by law, that then your
Maieſty be pleaſed out of your moſt princely
and gracious favour towards all your
loyall, and dutifull ſubiectes, to order
the ceaſing of the ſayde iuriſdiction over
thoſe counties, to the great comfort of
the inhabitants of thoſe counties, and the
reſt of your Maieſties ſubiects of all the
kingdome.
            
               
               New drapery.Complaint was made, in all humble manner,
the ſecond ſeſſion of this preſent Parliament,
of many diſorders, outrages, &
oppreſſions committed vpon occaſion of
letters patents granted to the Duke of Lenox,
for the ſearching, and ſealing of ſtufs,
and manufactures, called by the name of
new draperie: which patent wee held in
all, or the moſt partes of it, to be queſtionable,
and in many apparantly vnlawfull:
and the execution thereof we found ſtretched
by the farmers, and deputies beyond
the extent of the ſayd letters patents, as appeares
in the particulars ſet downe in the
ſaid greivance. To which it pleaſed your
Majeſtie to give this gracious anſwer, that
the validitie of the ſayd patent ſhould be
left to be judged by the law. And whenſoever
any abuſe ariſing in the execution
thereof ſhould appeare, it ſhould be ſeverely
puniſhed. Which was, for that time,
to our good ſatiſfaction yet finding, by
divers complaints made now in Parliament,
that not only the ſaid letters patents are
ſtill in force, and the validity of them undecided
by iudgement: but diſorders in the
execution of them are ſo farre off from being
reformed, that they multiply every day
to the grievance of your Maieſties ſubiects.
And thoſe of the poorer ſort, who exerciſing
theſe manufactures are ſubiect to much
oppreſſiō, to the great hindrāce of ſome, &

utter undoing of many as hath appeared in
the particularities of the complaints preſented
unto us. Our humble deſire is, that your
Ma: wilbe pleaſed, according to your former
reſolutiō, to give order, that this cauſe, which
hath thus long hung in ſuſpence, be ſpeedily
brought to iudgement: and that before all
the Iudges, becauſe it concernes all the ſubiects
of the land. And, in the meane time,
that the execution of the ſaid letters patents,
ſo farre forth as they concerne the ſaid
new draperies, may be ſuſpended till iudgement
be given: whereby your ſubiectes,
who doe in all humilitie preſent this grievance
unto your Maieſtie may be relieved,
& haue no occaſion to reiterate their complaints.
            
               Licenſe of Wines.Whereas by ancient, and late ſtatutes it
hath been enacted, that wines ſhould be
retayled at ſuch lowe rates, and prices,
as for theſe 50 yeares laſt paſt they could
not be affoarded. And for redreſſe thereof
it was ordeyned by a ſtatute, in the
5. yeare of the late Queene Elizabeth, that
(thoſe former lawes notwithſtanding) wines
might be ſolde at ſuch prices, as by Proclamation
from time to time to be made by
conſent of divers great officers, ſhould be
publiſhed, and ſet downe: which proclamatiō
nevertheleſſe, the late Queen, & your
moſt excellent Ma: have been drawn to forbear,
upō the earneſt ſute of certein perſons,

therein onely intended their private gaine▪
By reaſon whereof, both great ſumms of mony
in fines, rentes, and annuall payments
have been gotten, and rayſed vnto the ſaid
perſons, and their aſſignes, and great damage
and preiudice hath likewiſe fallen, and light
vpon your people, not onely by inhancing
the prices of wines, licencing over many Tavernes,
and appointing of vnmeet perſons,
in vnfit places, to keepe the ſame: But alſo
by reaſon that corrupt, mingled, evill, and
vnwholeſome wines have been vttered, and
ſolde to the great hurt of the health of your
Highnes people, One man ſometimes ingroſſing
all the Licences deſigned for that
place: Wherevpon complaint being made
to your Maieſtie, amongſt other grievances
of your people, in the ſecond ſeſſion of this
preſent Parliament, your Highnes was pleaſed
to anſwer, that your grants in that behalfe
were no other, then ſuch as were
warrantable by the law. Whereas the greivance
was the greater, for that all lawes, cō
               cerning
the ſale of wines, being intended,
and conceived to ſtand, & be reptaled, there
were nevertheleſſe, by the overfight of
them which were truſted in that buſienes,
caſually omitted, and left vnrepealed certaine
abſolute lawes impoſſible to be obſerved:
as namely one made in the time of K.
Edward the firſt, commanding wines to be
ſold at 12. pence the ſexterne, and one other

made in the 28. of K. Henry the eight
prohibiting all perſons, vnder penalty, to
ſell any french wines above 8. pence the
gallon, and other wines, as ſecks, and ſweet
wines above 12. pence the gallon: and one
branch of a ſtatute made in the 7. yeare of
K. Edward the 6. prohibiting men to ſell
any wines by retaile in their howſes.
Wherevpon your Maieſty hath been induced
and drawne to ground new patents of
diſpenſation, and to grant the benefit thereof
vnto the Lord Admirall: whereby the
like diſcommodities and inconveniences
have ſithence inſued vnto the commonwealth
as formerly did ariſe and growe vpon
the other repealed lawes, whereof, in
the former petitions of your ſubiects exhibited
vnto your Maieſty in the ſayd ſecond
ſeſſion, your highnes never had any direct,
and cleare information. May it therefore
pleaſe your moſt excellent Maieſty at the
humble requeſt of your commons (who
have taken into conſideration the great
charges, and expences, which the ſayd L.
Admirall hath been at, in your Maieſties
ſervice, and have conſidered likewiſe the
preſent licences, and grants for valuable
conſideration vnto many hundreth of your
Highnes ſubiects, which without great
loſſe to the ſayd grantees, cannot be ſo
ſuddenly made voide) out of your Princely
wiſdome, and goodnes, wherein you have

profeſſed not to extend, & ſtraine your prerogative
royall againſt the publique good of
your people, for the particular gaine of any
private perſons, To vouchſafe, that from
hench forwards, there may no mo grante▪
of that nature, be made vnto any of your
ſubiects whomſoever. But that the ſayd ſtatute
of 5. Elizabeth, for the appriſing of
wines, to be publiſhed by proclamation, a
                  •
               
time, and occaſion ſhall require, may be put
in execution. And that your Maieſty will
likewiſe vouchſafe to grant your royall aſſent
to a bill of repeale of the ſayd obſolete
ſtatutes, and all other, wherevpon any ſuch,
Non obſtantes, & diſpenſations might
be grounded vpon. In which ſtatute of repeale
proviſo ſhalbe made for the indempnitie
of all ſuch, as vnder your Maieſties
great ſeale have alreadie procured licence
for ſuch ſale of wines.
            
               AlehouſesWhereas, by the lawes of this your Maieſties
realme of England no taxes, aides, or
impoſitiōs of any kinde whatſoever, ought
or can be laid, and impoſed vpon your people,
or upon any of their goods, or commodities,
but onely by authority and conſent
of Parliament. Which being vndoubtedly
the ancient, and fundamentall law of th
                  ••
               
land, is yet, for more abundant clearnes expreſly
declared in ſundry acts of Parliamēt
made and inacted in the time of ſundry your
Maieſties Progenitors, the nobleſt, & moſt

prudent Kings of this Realme. Y
                  ••
               r comōs
with iuſt griefe doe complaine vnto your
Maieſty of the late taxe, and impoſition laid,
and impoſed yearely vpon ſuch, as are allowed
to keep victualing houſes, or ſell ale,
and beere bee retaile. Which impoſition
not being taxed by aſſent of parliament, but
commanded, and directed onely by letters,
and inſtructions, your commons are perſwaded
that the ſame proceeded rather vpon
miſinformation, then by the direction, and
judgement of your owne moſt noble & royall
heart. Wherefore your ſaid commons
knowing the griefe of your people in this
behalfe, do (according to their duties) in all
humilitie informe, and ſignify vnto your
Maieſtie: firſt, that the ſaid taxation being
ſingular, and without example, is in it
ſelf a Preſident of dangerous conſequence,
and (as your people feare) may eaſily (in
time) be extended further, as to badgers of
corne, makers of mal
                  •
               , drovers of cattel, and
ſuch like, who, in ſuch ſort, are to be licenced
by Iuſtices of peace, as thoſe perſons
are, upon whom, at this time, this preſent
charg
                  •
                and tax is layd. Secondly ſuch howſes,
being often times at (the beſt) the harbours
of idlenes, drunkennes, whoredome,
& all maner of felonies, the licences are now
(the honeſter ſort, in moſt places, refuſing
to vndergo the new charge) rented, & taken

by the looſer, and baſer ſort of people, who
have no conſcience how they gaine, By
reaſon whereof all manner of vice, and evill
behaviour is likely every day to encreaſe:
neyther can the Iuſtices of peace conveniently
prevent the ſame: for that the perſons
licenced under the late contribution,
affirme, with clamour, that they have a toleration
for a yeare, and that ſuch perſons
are not friends unto the crowne, that ſeeke
to ſuppreſſe them, and thereby to diminiſh
your highnes revenewes. Thirdly many
Iuſtices of peace, (being ſworne to execute
their office) which for this particular
they conceive to be, that alehouſe
keepers formerly licenſed, are not to be
ſuppreſſed without iuſt, and reaſonable
cauſe, cannot be ſatisfied touching their
ſayd oath, but are much diſtracted, and perplexed
what to doe (the late inſtructions
notwithſtanding) againſt ſuch perſons, a
                  •
               
otherwiſe being not knowen to be of evi
                  •
               
behaviour, onely refuſe to pay this late taxed
and impoſed ſome of money. In conſideration
whereof, your humble cōmons
moſt inſtantly beſeech your moſt excellent
Maieſtie that the former letters, and inſtructions
may be countermaunded, or ſtayed,
and all further directions, and proceedings
in that kinde forborne.
            
               Seacole.Among many reſemblances, which are
obſerved to be between naturall and politique
bodies, there is none more apt, and naturall

then this, That the diſeaſes of both
doe not, at one inſtant, cōmonly ſeiſe vpon
all partes: but beginning in ſome one
part, doe, by tract of time, and by degrees,
get poſſeſſion of the whole, unleſſe by applying
of wholeſome and proper remedies,
in due time, they be prevented. Which as
it is in many things very viſible▪ ſo it is in
nothing more apparant, then in this matter
of impoſitions: which beginning at the
firſte eyther with forreigne commodities
brought in, or ſuch of our owne, as were
tranſported, is now extended to thoſe cō
               modities,
which growing in this kingdome,
are not tranſported, but uttered to the ſubjects
of the ſame: for proofe whereof, wee
doe, with all humilitie preſent unto your
Ma: view the late impoſition of 12. pence
the chalder of ſeacole riſing in Blith & Sunderland,
not by vertue of any contract, or
grant (as in the coales of New caſtle) but
under a meer pretext of your Majeſties moſt
royall prerogative: which impoſition is
not onely grievous for the preſent (eſpecially
to thoſe of the poorer ſort, the price of
whoſe onely, and moſt neceſſarie fewell is
thereby, to their great griefe, inhaunced)
but dangerous alſo for the future; conſidering
that the reaſon of this preſident
may be extended to all the commodities of
this kingdome. May it therefore pleaſe
your moſt excellent Maieſtie, who is the

great, and ſoveraigne phyſition of this eſtate,
to apply ſuch a remedie as this diſeaſe may
be preſently cured, and all diſeaſes for tyme
to come, of like nature, prevented.
            Theſe grievances were Preſented
to his Maieſty with a
ſpeach of Sir Fr. Bacon, by
12. of the lower houſe. 7. July
1610. in the 4. ſeſſion of
Parliament; Becauſe the
King commanded 12. and
no moe, &c.
            
         
      
   