
      
         
            
            
            Newes from France: CONTAINING Tvvo DECLARATIONS OF TWO NEW CONVERTS from the Church of ROME to the reformed Churches of FRANCE: the former made by Maſter M. du TERTRE, Lord de la MOTTHE LVYNE, late Preacher amongſt the Order of the CAPVCINS vnder the name of F. FIRMIN, &c. at SAVMVR on the 27. of May laſt: The latter by the Marquiſe BONIVET, Lord of CREVE COEVR, &c. at ROCHELL on the ſeuenth of Auguſt laſt. Both tranſlated out of the ſeuerall French copies into Engliſh by E. M. of CHRIST-CHVRCH in OXFORD. Whereunto is added an Engliſh Letter ſent from PARIS by an Engliſh Gentleman to his friend in England, touching the late ſurpriſall and impriſonment of the Prince of Conde, which happened on the 22. of Auguſt laſt.
            
            LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, dwelling neere S. Auſtins gate at the ſigne of the Pide-Bull. 1616.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE REVEREND, right Worſhipfull, and my worthy friend, Mr. Doctour GOODVVIN, Doctour in Diuinitie, and Deane of Christ-Church in OXFORD, the Tranſlator wiſheth all happineſſe both in body and ſoule.
            
               Reuerend and Right Worſhipfull,
            
            
               HAuing within theſe few daies lighted vpon this booke, by the meanes of a familiar friend of mine, who lately had receiued it out of France, and conſidering the happy ſubiect and methodicall compoſure thereof, I thought it would not be amiſſe (nay rather a very profitable worke for the Church, at leaſt for the bringing home of ſuch, of whom there is yet good hope they may be reclaimed) if I did ſet by ſome few of theſe vacation

houres for the tranſlating thereof. And I was the rather induced thereunto, by reaſon of a more particular charge, which not long ſince it pleaſed you to lay vpon me, to the performing whereof this might (with Gods helpe) not a little auaile. The points perhaps that are handled in this Treatiſe, or at leaſt moſt of them, haue beene formerly and often diſcuſſed to the full by others, but yet very ſeldome (would to God it happened more often) by way of recantation or reclaiming: and if in that manner, as of late we haue had an example thereof, The aduice of a ſonne, &c. printed at Oxford, 1616. and our Preſſe is yet hot with it, (I would our affections were ſo alſo) yet moſt ſeldome by men of my Authors coat, by ſuch I meane who are ſo farre gone, and ſunke ſo deepe into the whirle-poole of their ſuperſtitions, that they haue with a neerer bond, and as it were an apprentiſhip for terme of life, bound themſelues neuer to depart, I will not ſay, from their religion (for that is common to them with others) but from their particular order and quinteſſence as it were of religion; it being from thence that ſuch only (and no others, either of their Clergie or Laitie) are called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and by way of eminencie, religious.

Hauing thus ſhewed the profit which (I truſt) may come from this my ſmall endeuour, or rather from the Authors owne labours & trauels (his indeed being as the very waters of life, the only taſting whereof is ſalvificall, and mine but the channell to conuey them) it remaines now that I recommend this my labour to your patronage, from whom I firſt receiued the occaſion of taking it in hand. I will not now ſtand vpon Apologies (as the manner of moſt is) either for my ſelfe or the booke. The booke (I am ſure) needs none; and for my ſelfe, I truſt, I haue met with a Patron that wil reade me without any Apologie. If any ſhall thinke I haue beene too buſie herein, it being a ſubiect for the which I am ſcarce ripe; let him know thus much, that what I haue done, may be the worke, nay ought of dutie ſo to be, I ſay not, of euery Diuine, (Quanquam ô, would to God euery ſuch would put to their helping hands) but of euery one that is onely brought vp in the bare ſchoole of Chriſtianitie. Thus committing my ſelfe and theſe my labours to your good acceptance, I pray to the Almighty God, that he will continue and confirme in his Church

thoſe that to all appearance are in already, with the ninety and nine of that good Shepheard in the Goſpell, and that it will pleaſe him, with the ſame Shepheard who brought home his one ſheepe, daily to bring home and adde vnto his true Church, ſuch as either by others ſeducing haue ſtraied from, or out of forced ignorance neuer could finde the way to his fold. Amen.
            
               
                  From my Study in Chriſt-Church, Oxford  
                     this 31. of Iuly. 1616.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  The Authors Epiſtle, to my Maſters of the Romiſh Church.
                  
                     SIrs, I haue a long while debated and diſputed with my ſelfe, whether I ſhould ſet to your view the cauſes and reaſons of my retreate from you and your Church, and of my conuerſion and vnion to the Reformed ones of this Kingdome, and their ſocietie and company. On the one ſide, the ſinceritie of my intention in this charge ſeemed wholly to diuert, turne, and hinder me from ſo doing, as caring very little what men thought, ſpake, or eſteemed of it; ſo that my actions were pleaſing and acceptable to the ſupreame and eternall maieſty of my God, conformable to his holy and diuine will, tending and redounding to his honour and glory, and aduantagious and profitable for mine owne good and ſaluation. And beſides contenting my ſelfe with that which I haue ſpoken, treated, and declared thereof in my Profeſsion, made in the Church of this Citie, the 24. of April. But on the other ſide, the duties and obligations which I owe to the truth, ioyned with the moſt affectionate ſuits and opportunities, which almost an infinite number haue vſed towards me, and often reiterated, and the calumnies and ſlaunders, wherewith many amongst you (though vniuſtly and wrongfully) doe charge me, doe force and conſtraine me to ſet downe in this paper, produce to the day and bring to light, that which almoſt I then ſaid of it; this only excepted, that now I will enlarge my ſelfe a little

more, then the ſhortneſſe of the time and diſcourſe could at that time permit me. I haue thought and beleeued that I could not more iuſtly, and with better reaſon and equitie, direct this Treatiſe to any, then to thoſe, from whom I ſeparated my ſelfe, to the end I might take from them the idle and light opinions, and the bad beliefes, farre remoued from piety and honeſty, and remoue the ſcandall which they might haue conceiued therevpon. Receiue it therefore, I pray you▪ with the ſame gentlenes and ſincerity of affection, with the which I offer and preſent it vnto you. And doe mee the fauour to take the paines to read it; but with quietneſſe, if it pleaſe you, and tranquillity of minde, without trouble and paſsion. And I hope, nay I am certaine, and aſſure my ſelfe that you ſhall finde, that there is more reaſon and knowledge in my action, then you thinke, and more obligation to follow me, and to do that which I haue done, then you imagine. To this end I doe open all the ſecrets of my heart, and foulds of my ſoule before the Maieſty of my God: and in your preſence, with a ſolemne oath and proteſtation, that I will ſay nothing but the truth. I beſeech the diuine goodneſſe, to aſſiſt you with his grace and heauenly light, to make you know clearely both the one and the other. I doe pray with all my heart, and with as great affection, as I am verily, and ſhal be all my life, notwithſtanding this change and alteration of religion, and departure from you, and your ſociety & company.
                  
                     Sirs,
                     
                        Your moſt humble, inward, and affectionate, for your good and ſaluation, Dela Motthe Luyne.
                     
                        From Saumur, 
                           this 27. of May, 1616.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     A DECLARATION and manifeſtation of the chiefe cauſes and motiues which haue moued and induced Mr. M. de TERTRE Lord de la MOTTHE LVYNE, to withdraw himſelfe from the Romiſh Church: Directed to thoſe of the Church of ROME.
                  
                  
                     THe moſt cleare actions of men (euen of the moſt famous and illuſtrious in vertues, perfections, and moſt commendable qualities) are ſubiect to ſhadowes, and their workes expoſed to the fooliſh and raſh examination, ſearch, cenſure, and iudgement euen of the common people.
                  When you heard of, knew, and ſaw my departure, God knowes what ſiniſter opinions I ran into in regard of many amongſt you; ſome taking my deſigne to be but a lightneſſe, inconſtancie, and inconſiderateneſſe of minde; others thinking it to haue proceeded from a matter and occaſion of diſquietneſſe and diſcontent receiued from them, from whom I am departed; others from a deſire of greater libertie and more licentious life; and many other the like: but all in generall

eſteeming it a manifeſt diſloyaltie and notorious treacherouſneſſe to your ſocietie and company.
                  I could neuer haue thought (and yet leſſe beleeued) that the actions of a worme of the earth, of one ſo poore and wretched as I am, ſhould haue beene gathered vp with ſuch a throng: but ſithence that by the manifeſt prouidence of God they are fallen into this debate,1 Pet. 3. v. 15. Matth. 10 33. I am moſt willing and content to render and giue an account of them, as S. Peter commands me, or rather Ieſus Chriſt, who would diſclaime me before his heauenly Father, if I did not confeſſe him (in the truth) ingenuouſly before men.
                  I ſweare therefore and proteſt before the moſt holy Trinitie (to whom al things are knowne and manifeſt, which ſoundeth my very reines, which ſeeth and pierceth euen to the inmoſt and moſt ſecret part of my heart and thought of my ſoule) that this my change hath no other aime, and tends purely and ſimply to no other end, then to the glory of my God, and the aſſurance of my ſaluation: for which two things I doe not nor will euer refuſe, in regard of men, either ſhame, or confuſion, or pouertie, or diſhonour, or martyrdome whatſoeuer, though armed with the moſt cruell and ſenſible prickings of all the puniſhments and torments that at any time were felt by any reaſonable creature. And if I haue any other intent, I pray my God that hee will make an exemplary vengeance of my hypocriſie, and puniſh and chaſten me moſt ſeuerely, if he knoweth and can finde out that I ſpeake not the truth, and that my words doe diſagree and differ from the thoughts of my ſoule and feeling of my heart.
                  
                     I am now come to the 32. yeare of mine age, or thereabouts; and though it hath beene with much paines, weariſomneſſe, and trauell, partly in my ſtudies, and partly in my other publike or priuate buſineſſes, yet I doe not thinke (thankes to Gods bountie) that I euer did weare in my countenance and forehead any marke whatſoeuer, which might make mee bluſh for ſhame, or hinder mee from going with my head lifted vp aloft. I haue not loſt with that little experience which I haue gotten in the world, the deſire of going on and ending my life in the ſame bed of honour and ſtate of innocencie, for to proſtitute that ſo lightly, which I haue kept and maintained ſo dearely and with ſo much care. And how weake ſoeuer I am in body and minde, yet the lightneſſe, inconſiderateneſſe, and inconſtancie, which ſome cloſely obiect vnto me and reproach mee withall, hath not as yet (God be thanked) ſo farre poſſeſſed my braines, as that any one ſhould haue ſeene from thence to iſſue the effects of follie; and I hope that his goodneſſe will not derelinquiſh or leaue me to that wretched and lamentable extremitie. As for the matter and occaſion of diſcontent, which ſome others produce and lay abroad, I ſhould be to blame, and ſhould lie, if I ſhould complaine thereof; it being true (and I muſt needs auouch and confeſſe it ingenuouſly) that I haue beene but too much beloued, cheriſhed, and honoured in that ſtate wherein I was, and as much or more aduanced then I could haue deſired, wiſhed, or challenged, hauing beene put to the ſtudie of Philoſophie and Diuinitie euen ſooner then their cuſtomes, ſtatutes and ordinances could well allow of and permit,

hauing alſo beene made Prieſt preciſely at the time permitted and appointed, and eftſoones admitted and preferred to the office of preaching, which I haue begun to exerciſe from my 25. yeare, and alwayes ſince continued at Burges, Bloys, in this City, Tours, Angiers, Chaſteaugontier, Laval, Mayenne, le Mans, Alenſon, Rhedon, and other ſuch like wel knowne townes of France, with all kinde of contentment and ſatisfaction (thanks be to God) being welcome to all, and vnderſtood by euery one. As for the libertie and a more licentious life, which others laſt of all doe obiect vnto me, God knowes and is my record (and experience alſo can witneſſe it, and giue an aſſured proofe thereof) that I haue had nothing leſſe in my minde and thought then that, but rather on the contrary it was the deſire of a more retired, ſolitary, peaceable and quiet life, and for to put an end to thoſe poaſtings and vagaries, which are ordinary and eſſentiall to men of that eſtate and condition, who like Daedalus his images are in a perpetuall ſtirring, motion, and agitation. But if that had beene the cauſe, I neede not to haue come out from thence where I was, ſuch occaſions and opportunities offering and preſenting themſelues daily vnto me (as well as to others, yea a thouſand times more) if I would haue taken and accepted them as well as they. But God by his infinite goodneſſe and mercy hath kept and preſerued mee euen againſt theſe encounters, wherein the ſtrongeſt and perfecteſt in ſhew haue ſhamefully yeelded and foulely fallen.
                  I would not therefore ſo play with my ſelfe, and and out of an humour (as it were) change my Religion, if that I had not ſome ſound cauſe and ground for

it, it being otherwiſe very eaſie for me (if I had willed) to keepe my wonted manner of life, and to keepe my ſelfe (ſo doing) from ſo many blowes of the tongue, from wry lookes, from pricking ſuſpicions, which I haue (in truth) to the quicke felt, and doe yet feele in good earneſt. But there is no remedy: I muſt reſolue with my ſelfe to ſwallow downe by little and little this cup of bitterneſſe for the loue of our Sauiour,Heb. 12.2. who (ſaith S. Paul) when he could, and it was free vnto him, to ſtay aboue in heauen in the ſame glory, felicitie, and happineſſe with his Father, waited on and adored by the higheſt Spirits and Angelicall powers, not only abaſed and emptied himſelfe, humbling himſelfe ſo farre, as to cloath himſelfe with the weakneſſe and infirmitie of our nature, and to take vpon him the forme of a ſeruant and ſlaue, yea enen was reſolued willingly to ſuffer and endure the infamous and painfull death and puniſhment of the Croſſe, and indeede endured it, without hauing any regard, or caring at all for the ſhame, ignominie, confuſion, and reproach which was to enſue thereupon; it being enough to him that it was for our ſakes, to deliuer and enfranchiſe vs from the power of the deuill, ſinne, and hell, and to bring vs againe into fauour with his eternall Father, and into the poſſeſſion of the kingdome of heauen, loſt by the ſinne and offence of our parents. Adde hereunto that which himſelfe ſaith,Matth. 9 10. 
                     The Diſciple is not aboue his maſter, nor the ſeruant aboue his Lord. If they haue called the maſter of the houſe Beelſebub,Io. 24 25. 
                     how much more them of the houſhold? If they haue perſecuted me, how much more will they perſecute you alſo?
                     Verſ. 37.38. 
                     He that loueth father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me.

He that taketh not his Croſſe and followeth me, is not worthy of me. He that loueth his ſoule, ſhall loſe it; and he that hateth it in this life for my ſake, ſhall keepe it in the life euerlaſting. And if it were ſo (as thankes be to God it is not) that I ſhould be vncertaine and ignorant of what I owe to my conſcience in this behalfe, I would then ſtriue to couer againe and hide my ſtraying with excuſes and repentances, which I am ſure would not be denied me, but rather would be receiued willingly, and with all kinde of ioy, contentment, and cheerefulneſſe, with open both armes and hearts, as it hath beene ſufficiently teſtified vnto mee by thoſe inſtant ſearches, affectionate purſuits, and truly charitable offers, and I cannot but acknowledge and confeſſe it ingenuouſly; at the leaſt if their intent were anſwerable to their words, which thoſe of that ſtate and condition haue vſed and often reiterated vnto me, both by themſelues, and by third perſons interpoſed.
                  What doe I then? And by your fauour I doe pray you (you which take the paines and the patience to reade theſe draughts of my penne, or rather of my ſoule) to thinke on mee with as much attention, as I my ſelfe haue thought of it, and to weigh my reaſons with the iuſt balance of reaſon it ſelfe, and then I am certaine and aſſured that you will iudge and finde me as farre from haſtineſſe, precipitation, inconſtancie, inconſiderateneſſe of minde, and other ſuch like things, which many amongſt you, yea it may be your ſelues doe obiect vnto me and reproach me withall, as I am neere to the truth.
                  My change and my departure doe ſeeme ſtrange to you, I deſire it. I can doe nothing in it, much leſſe hinder

and ſtop the readineſſe of your mindes. But if it pleaſe you to ſtay a while with mee, I ſhall it may be make this change more familiar vnto you. For it firſt of all it be ſtrange vnto you, becauſe that euery alteration and change of religion is ſimply ſo of it ſelfe, and that we ought to end in that wherein we haue begun; what then I pray will become of thoſe among the Iewes, Turkes, the men of Iapan, of Margaia, and other barbarous and ſtrange nations, which haue changed and daily doe change their owne religion, and that of their fathers, in the which they had beene nurtured and brought vp, for to make themſelues Chriſtians, to wed themſelues to the law and faith of our Sauiour, and to profeſſe his religion? If it be, becauſe that more particularly and ſpecially it is ill done to depart from your company, you might haue right therein, if you or your Doctors could enlighten or eaſe me in this doubt. But I thinke that you and they would be troubled as much to doe that, as to proue, ſhew, and make it plaine vnto me, that yours is more worth and truer then that which I haue embraced, the which notwithſtanding would be wholly and altogether requiſite and neceſſary to that proofe.
                  From whence then (you will ſay vnto me) commeth this ſo ſudden a change? From the ſpeciall and ſingular grace of God, and from the particular knowledge which it hath pleaſed his goodneſſe to giue me, for to depart from the diſorders, abuſes, and errours of your Church, as well in matter of faith and doctrine, as of manners. It is very long ſince I began to know and take notice of them; finding it very ſtrange, ridiculous, without reaſon, nay againſt all reaſon both diuine

and humane, and not being able to comprehend and conceiue,Bellar. caeterique omnes vna voce & communi conſenſu. 1. How the holy Scriptures (and the Spirit of God ſpeaking in them) were not the certaine and infallible rule of faith, but rather men which are blinde, ignorant, and faultie of their owne nature: 2. That they were obſcure, doubtfull, vnperfect, altogether inſufficient to ſaluation: 3. That of themſelues without traditions they were not ſo neceſſary, and that the traditions of themſelues purely and ſimply (without the ſaid Scriptures) were abſolutely neceſſary: 4. How the ſubſtance of bread and wine were changed and conuerted into the ſubſtance of the body and bloud of Ieſus Chriſt: 5. How the humanitie of our Sauiour in the ſame Sacrament was ſubſtantially preſent almoſt euery where, or at leaſt was really in almoſt infinite, diſtinct, and ſeuered places in one and the ſame inſtant: 6. How the Maſſe was a true, proper, reall, and ſubſtantiall ſacrifice, in the which the body of Chriſt in his owne eſſence, ſubſtance, and nature and proper perſon, was againe offered, immolated and ſacrificed by the hands of the Prieſt to the euerlaſting Father, for the expiation of our faults, ſinnes and offences: 7. How there was a Purgatorie and ſet place wherein the ſoules of the faithfull after this life were detained for the ſatisfaction of their crimes: 8. How the ſaid ſoules could be helped by the ſuffrages of the liuing, as by praiers, cries, almes, and other the like, but eſpecially by applying of Maſſes and Papall Indulgences: 9. How there was in the Church a treaſure compoſed of the ſuperfluous merits of the Virgin, of the Saints, &c. which could bee applied to the liuing and to the dead for a ſatisfaction

and remiſſion of their faults and offences: 10. And that this application belonged and was proper to the Pope alone, who might diſpoſe thereof as ſhould ſeeme good vnto him, and deliuer by the meanes thereof the ſoules detained in this pretended Purgatorie at his will and pleaſure: 11. How Ieſus Chriſt was not alone the only ſufficient Mediator, Interceſſor, and Aduocate for vs to his euerlaſting Father: and that for this purpoſe we ought to reſort and haue our refuge to the Saints and bleſſed ones: and that a thouſand other ſuch like things which you beleeue, and your Doctors teach and preach, ought to be held for Articles of faith, there not being any trace or ground of them in the ſacred Scripture, the true rule of that which ought to be beleeued and done. Not being able (I ſay) to perſwade my ſelfe that that was the true Church, in the which the true faith and the doctrine of the Goſpell was held and taught, wherein the manners, life and actions were ſo contrary and oppoſite vnto them, and the corruption ſo great and vniuerſally diffuſed and extended throughout. But thoſe were but ſmall, light, and vaine Ideaes, which went no farther by reaſon of the negligence (as I beleeue) in the which the watchings which I beſtowed on my ſtudies and other buſineſſes kept me aſleepe: as alſo by reaſon of the age whereof I was, which for that time did not giue me more liuely conceits thereof for want of ſome body that might haue heartened them on farther, as indeed I was bred in the midſt of them who beleeued and did the quite contrary. Thus did my ſimplicitie hatch my ignorance, wherein I liued fiue or ſix whole yeers ſince this firſt glimpſe of light,

which did kindle in my ſoule and heart this deſire and affection of the truth, and to returne to this firſt ſpring and originall of the faith and manners of the Apoſtles and Diſciples of the Sonne of God our Sauiour, yet of that very Sauiour, from whom by proceſſe of time euen your Church hath ſwarued. At the end of which yeeres finally it hath pleaſed that ſupreme goodneſſe and maieſtie (which doth impart and communicate his graces and fauours to whom he thinkes good, yea oftentimes to leaſt worthy and capable ſubiects, and makes the ſplendor of his euerlaſting light to caſt his beames on thoſe ſoules that are deepeſt plunged into the obſcuritie of darkneſſe) to poure out on mine the amplitude and greatneſſe of his heauenly and diuine benedictions, and to make mee to ſee abundantly, purely and to the full, in their owne eſſence and naturall day, both the truth and falſhood, and to harden, ſtrengthen and encourage my minde for to embrace valorouſly the one, and to reiect the other, againſt all the obiects and repreſentations of humane reaſon, the attractiue and alluring perſwaſions of nature, the impetuous aſſaults of fleſh and bloud, and the ſtrong ſuggeſtions and temptations of the deuill, and the furious and bloudy combats of hell. Whereupon I am and ſhall alwayes be obliged vnto him, ouer and aboue all the obligations which I owe vnto him already in number almoſt infinite: and I doe bleſſe, praiſe, & wil praiſe him to al eternitie, yea all the holy Angels of heauen and iuſt men of the earth, which (whereas the enuious, hatefull, and ill willers haue their foreheads wrinkled) will be glad for me and reioyce at my departure and conuenſion. This my

change then hath no other ſcope, and aimeth purely and ſimply (as I haue already ſaid) at nothing but the glory of my God, and the aſſurance of my ſaluation, which I haue truly found out, and ſweare and proteſt that I could not haue attained vnto and wrought out in that ſtate wherein I was: vnderſtand, I pray you, and hearken to the reaſons thereof. The two grounds and foundations of all Chriſtian religion, and conſequently of euerlaſting ſaluation, are faith and charitie, without which neither one nor the other can remaine and continue ſtanding: faith (I ſay) in Chriſt,Faith. 
                     He that beleeues in me (ſaith he) ſhall not come into iudgement; but he that beleeueth not, is already condemned. Not any faith whatſoeuer, but ſuch as God and the holy Scripture doe demand and require of vs, not languiſhing, dead, grounded on humane inuentions and traditions, but purely and ſimply on Gods word, animated and quickned by the ſpirit of grace, accompanied with good workes. Charitie, not fained,Charitie. diſſembled, in ſhew only, but as the Apoſtle ſaith, proceeding from a pure and cleane heart, from a good conſcience, from an vnfained faith, and a loyaltie not counterfeted.
                  The ſame S. Paul ſpeaking of the firſt in the 1. Epiſt. to the Corinthians,
                     Verſ. 10.11.12. chap. 3. ſaith it clearely and in very expreſſe termes: According to the grace of God which is giuen vnto me, as a wiſe maſter-builder, I haue (ſaith he) laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let euery man take heede how he buildeth thereupon: for other foundation can no man lay then that is laid, which is Ieſus Chriſt. Now if any man build vpon this foundation gold, ſiluer, &c. Where you ſee cleerely how vnder

the metaphore and compariſon of a materiall edifice and building (which that it may be firme, ſound, and laſting, hath neceſſarily neede of a good ſtrong foundation of firme and hard ſtones, laid very farre and deepe in the ground) he declareth, ſignifieth, and giueth cleerely to vnderſtand, that the true faith and beleefe in Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour (ſuch as he teacheth and ſheweth vs in his writings) is the true, ſure, and onely foundation, and the ſolid and ſetled groundworke of all Chriſtian religion, and conſequently by a neceſſary ſequele, of euerlaſting ſaluation, according to my propoſition, which for this firſt point remaines enough by this place and ſufficiently proued. As alſo no man doth deny it and call it in queſtion, but all generally doe admit and receiue it for a certaine and aſſured ground.
                  Let vs come to the proofe of the ſecond point thereof, to wit, of Charitie: I had need of more time then the ſhortneſſe of this diſcourſe can affoord mee, for to relate all the places of holy Scripture making for this purpoſe. That namely is manifeſt and cleare by the very words of our Sauiour, when as being aſked of that Doctour of the Law,Matth. 22. or Scribe and Phariſie, which was the firſt, the greateſt and chiefe commandement thereof, and hauing made anſwer that it was to loue God with all his heart, with all his ſoule, &c. and his neighbour as himſelfe, he addeth, that in theſe two points were compriſed and contained, cloſed and ſhut vp the whole Law and the Prophets, and conſequently by a neceſſary ſequele and infallible concluſion, all religion grounded and ſaluation eſtabliſhed, as on two ſolid and firme foundations, without

the which neither one nor the other (as I haue already ſaid) can remaine and continue ſtanding.
                  Now let vs ſee whether thoſe two grounds and baſes of ſaluation be or can be found in your Church, and in the ſtate and condition from whence I am departed, to the end that from thence you may know and iudge, whether I haue had iuſt cauſe and lawfull occaſion to doe this or no; and that the tongues that make themſelues malicious and ſlanderous, may ceaſe from their calumnious aſſaults and purſuits. And to begin with the faith and beleefe in Ieſus Chriſt:How the Papiſts faile in matters of faith. wee haue amongſt many others three things to be conſidered in him; 1. his perſon, 2. his charge and offices, 3. the ſingular graces, fauours and benefits which hee hath conferred on vs, and wee haue receiued from him.
                  As for his perſon,1. About Chriſts perſon. it is a matter of alike faith and beleefe, equally grounded in the holy Scripture, and acknowledged, approued, and confeſſed by all, that he is very God and very man; God, begotten from all eternitie, of the proper ſubſtance, eſſence, and nature of his eternall Father, yea the very ſame perfectly and in all points, equally God as he is: Man, conceiued, in time produced, and begotten within the chaſte entrailes of the proper ſubſtance of the Virgin Mary, by the working of the holy Ghoſt, of the ſeede of Abraham and Dauid according to the fleſh, truly man as we are, ſubiect to the ſame and altogether alike infirmities, except ſinne and ignorance. Now although your Doctours directly and openly doe not beate downe and deſtroy theſe two things in the Sonne of God our Sauiour; yet ſo it is notwithſtanding that by

manner of conſequence and neceſſary ſequele, they take from him, rob him of, and carry away at the leaſt his humanitie, when as they ſay (and it is their common doctrine and vniuerſall beleefe) that in the Sacrament of the Euchariſt, by the meanes which they call (and they haue forged and inuented it for themſelues but of late times) of tranſubſtantiation, the ſubſtance of bread and wine is conuerted and changed (they are the proper words of the Councell of Trent in the firſt and ſecond Canon of the fourth chapter, and of all your Doctours in dependance thereof) into the body and bloud of Ieſus Chriſt; which is properly and to ſpeake truly, to ouerthrow topſie turuie and deſtroy the truth of the incarnation and humanitie of our Sauiour, and to giue him a body not taken and drawne from the ſubſtance of the Virgin, made and begotten by the ſeede of Abraham and Dauid according to the fleſh, following the promiſe which had beene made them thereof by that ſupreme maieſtie long time before; but from the ſubſtance of the bread, and by a neceſſary conſequence and infallible concluſion, no longer any true body or a naturall man, but a morſell of paſte, a peece of the ouen: horrible and accurſed blaſphemie! but yet farre more when as they affirme, auouch, and wilfully maintaine, that the ſame humanitie of Chriſt (in the ſame Sacrament) is ſubſtantially preſent almoſt euery where: or at leaſt is really and corporally in almoſt infinite diſtinct and ſeuered places in one and the ſame inſtant.
                  So Bellarmine in his controuerſies of the Euchariſt, and after him all the others in a row; which is properly to make the body of Chriſt no longer a true body,

but to ſpeake plainly, an immenſe and infinite God, contrary both to the truth of his humane nature, and to the teſtimonie of all the holy Scriptures and reaſon it ſelfe. For what body would that be, which wanteth his naturall greatneſſe and ſtature, which can neither be felt, handled, nor ſeene, &c. which occupieth and filleth almoſt infinite places diſtant and farre aſunder in one and the ſame inſtant, as we haue already ſaid? Thus doe you ſee that your Church doth oppoſe and deſtroy his holy and ſacred perſon, and the humanitie of our Sauiour, and turneth topſie turuie (as much as in her lieth) this ground of our ſaluation, whereas in lieu of the true body of Chriſt, ſhee offereth, preſenteth, and giueth you an idle viſion, and a very apparition. But this is enough on this matter.
                  Let vs now come to his charges and offices:2. About his offices. They are many and in great number, but may notwithſtanding all be reduced to theſe three principall, of Prophet, of King, of high Prieſt: A Prophet,As he is a Prophet. who like another Moſes, yea better then he and more perfectly many thouſand times, and without compare, nay then all the other Prophets, hath both by himſelfe and by his Apoſtles and Diſciples foretold, denounced and declared the will of his eternall Father, the lawes, precepts and ordinances, which he required and willed vs to obſerue. So had the foreſaid Moſes a long time before foretold, when as being neere to his end, and vpon the finiſhing of his dayes, turning himſelfe to the children and people of Iſrael, and comforting them in the behalfe of his departure,Deut. 18.
                           •
                        5. he did warrant them and promiſed that God would raiſe vp vnto them a

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
Prophet from the midſt of them, of their brethren, &c. And the Apoſtle in the firſt to the Hebrewes ſaith expreſly, that God hauing in times paſt at ſundry times and in ſundry and diners manners ſpoken to the Fathers by the Prophets, hath ſpoken to vs in our dayes by his welbeloued Sonne, &c. And a thouſand other the like teſtimonies of Scripture, which I omit of purpoſe not to wearie you.
                        
                           Scriptures inſufficient according to the Papiſts.
                        
                        Beliarm. diſputatione ſeu controuerſia 1. de verbo Dei ſcripto & non ſcripto, totis 4 libris, tom. 1. & praecipue li 3. cap. 1. cap. 2. & cap. 4. lib. 4. ca 2. cap. 4. & 12.
                        
                      Now thoſe of your Church doe denie vnto him this honourable charge and office, when as they ſay, hold and maintaine, that the holy Scripture is obſcure, ambiguous, vnperfect, inſufficient to ſaluation: That there is nothing in it heauenly and diuine, which can binde vs to beleeue that which is contained therein: That that which the Apoſtles and Prophets haue giuen vs and left in writing, they did it not as being driuen thereunto by any particular and ſpeciall commandement, or inſpiration from God, but by contingent occaſions and accidentall cauſes: That its proper principall and laſt end is not to be and to ſtand for a rule of faith, but only for a certaine vſefull and profitable recommendation to the keeping and obſeruing of the doctrine proceeding from the preaching of the Goſpell, &c. And that not contenting themſelues with this heauenly doctrine, by the meanes whereof the Sonne of God our Sauiour hath giuen and left vnto vs both by his liuing voice, and by the Apoſtles and Prophets, as it were by his owne hands, all that is requiſite and needfull to ſaluation, and to the perfection which hee willeth,Deuter. 4. Apocal. vlt. Ad Galat. 1. requireth and demandeth of vs, they adde to this heauenly and diuine written word (contrary to the expreſſe prohibition which is giuen of it in many places therein, where an Anathema is

pronounced, and a curſe thundered out againſt thoſe that ſhall be ſo daring, bold and ſhameleſſe, as to vndertake it) they adde vnto it (I ſay) as being inſufficient, another not written, to wit, an infinite number of humane conſtitutions, traditions, and inuentions. To the which (although for the moſt part vncertaine,Concil. Tridentin. ſeſſ. 4. Decret. 1.
                      obſcure, and contrary among themſelues) they will haue vs to giue the like credit and beleefe, and carry towards them the ſame and altogether equall deuotion with the word of God, nay farre greater, ſeeing they hold and teach, as I haue ſaid heretofore, that of it ſelfe alone, without the ſaid traditions, the Scripture is not ſo neceſſary, and neither can nor ought to ſerue for a rule of faith: and the traditions alone of themſelues purely and ſimply, without the ſaid Scripture, ought to be and abſolutely are ſo. Which while they doe, what is this elſe, but to reiect and impudently refuſe to admit, receiue and acknowledge the Sonne of God Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour (in whom,
                     Coloſſ as the Apoſtle ſaith, are laid vp all the treaſures of the diuine knowledge and wiſdome of the Father) for their true Prophet and Law-giuer? or at the leaſt to thinke him vnfit, inſufficient, who neither knew, nor could (but what ſay I? nay malicious, who would not) declare and giue vs to vnderſtand the will of his Father, and his purpoſe concerning the ſeruice and obedience which hee would haue, and which we ought to render him; yea moſt vniuſt, to tie and binde vs (and that on paine of eternall death and deſtruction) to obſerue a law which he had not made knowne vnto vs. Which are three blaſphemies none of them leſſe damnable then the other, the which notwithſtanding (before you

perceiue or thinke of it) your Doctours and Prelates doe make you lamentably run into, by this falſe, peruerſe, and wicked doctrine which they ſet before you to beleeue, two-fold worſe then you, yea three-fold, and an hundred-fold, who therefore alſo ſhall be puniſhed for it a thouſand times more grieuouſly.
                  
                     As hee is a King.A King and Paſtor ordained of God, and eſtabliſhed ouer his Church, for to feede, order, guide and gouerne it by his diuine ſpirit, as a ſoueraigne Monarke, head and Paſtor thereof; and to keepe, maintaine, conſerue and defend it againſt all his enemies viſible and inuiſible, by his almighty arme and his ſtrong and forcible hand, and to make her finally ariſe and come to the hauen of euerlaſting ſaluation, of felicitie and bliſſe.Pſal. 1. 
                     I haue beene (ſaith he himſelfe through the mouth of his anceſtor and grandfather Dauid) anointed and conſecrated King by him, to wit, his eternall Father, vpon his holy hill of Sion. In Eſay 16. Ierem. 23. in S. Luke 1. He ſhall raigne (ſaith the Archangell to the Virgin) ouer the houſe of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdome there ſhall be none end. And he himſelfe laſt of all in S. Matthew 28. ſpeaking to his Diſciples after his glorious and triumphant reſurrection, did aſcertaine and aſſure them, that all power was giuen him both in heauen and in earth. And in a thouſand more places and paſſages of the Scripture he is called, and himſelfe alſo ſtiles himſelfe by the title of Paſtour. Now thoſe of your Church doe depriue and diſrobe him of theſe honourable charges and glorious offices,The Pope head of the Church according to Papiſts. for to make them ouer to a mortall, fraile and periſhable man, whom they admit and receiue into his place, acknowledging him for their ſoueraigne chiefe Paſtour and

Gouernour, as if this King of infinite glory and maieſtie, and true Shepheard of our ſoules, were not able and ſufficient for to feede, order, guide and gouerne them, attributing and transferring by a horrible and deteſtable blaſphemie to him, the titles, qualities, and conditions, which befit and pertaine to the Sauiour only, as he is the Bridegroome, vniuerſall Head and Paſtour of the Church, &c. which is nothing elſe, to ſpeake properly and truly, but to plucke and driue away Chriſt from his kingly ſeat and throne, and to ſet therein another, to take from his head the crowne and Miter, and out of his hands the Scepter, for to giue them to the Pope. For if he be head of the Church, Chriſt ſhall be ſo no longer, elſe ſhee would be deformed, monſtrous, and two-headed. If all power hath beene giuen vnto him in heauen and in earth, as hee impudently boaſteth, then truly it will altogether be taken away from Chriſt: for as Alexander ſaid very well to Darius (as learned Plutarch reporteth and witneſſeth) euen as the heauen is enlightned but by one Sunne, from whom all the other ſtarres and planets receiue and keepe alike (by meere and ſimple dependance and communication) their light and ſplendour, and there cannot be two of them: in like manner in a kingdome there can be but one King, and there cannot be ſuffered to be two; otherwiſe the Royaltie would be imperfect, and the Empire ſubiect to perpetuall troubles and continuall warres, and would quickly beginne to fall to decay and vtter ruine. To be ſhort, if the Pope be the generall, only, and vniuerſall Paſtour and Biſhop of the Church, to whom the Sonne of God hath giuen and committed all his authoritie,

care and diligence, in ruling, gouerning, ordering, diſpoſing, eſtabliſhing of lawes, and ſetting downe rules to the conſciences, with a bond of yeelding to him all obedience and ſubmiſſion as to himſelfe; what then hath he more to buſie himſelfe withall here below in his Church? Truly hee hath vtterly depriued himſelfe of his kingdome, and diſrobed himſelfe of his paſtorall office and charge, hee is now no longer any thing elſe in their reckoning, but a meere cypher and o in Arithmeticke; which is a blaſphemie, not only to ſay, but euen to thinke: the which notwithſtanding theſe wretches make you to commit and vtter, though you thinke not or neglect to haue regard of it. But to what a pitifull and deplored ſtate would the Church be brought, hauing for her chiefe Paſtours and vniuerſall Gouernours men that of their nature are weake, feeble, wretched and blinde, who ſcarce are fit to rule, guide and gouerne themſelues, their workes and actions? From thence it is that are ſprung and haue had their ſource, ſo many diſorders, irregularities, and Corruptions in your Church, as is to be ſeene at this day. But it is no wonder: for as Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour ſaith very fitly,Matth. 15. Luk. 6. 
                     If the blinde will vndertake to guide and direct other blinde men in their way, what can be hoped and looked for, but that they ſhall ſtumble on their faces to the ground, and finally all of them haue a deadly downefall? No no, there are no others beſides that ſoueraigne King and glorious Monarke, the eternall, almighty, and diuine Gouernour and Shepheard of our ſoules, who can only rule the whole body of the Church, haue an eye ouer all, giue order for all things, as being wholly wiſe, cleereſighted

& prouident, yea Wiſdome and Prouidence it ſelfe, by the meanes whereof the eternal Father doth gouerne, guide, and diſpoſe of all things.1. Pet. 2.25. 
                     It is he who is the true ſhepheard and biſhop of our ſoules; ſaith Saint Peter, The Lieutenant generall, and vice-roy of God his Father, ſaith Saint Matthew,
                     Matt. 26. 
                     Who hath giuen him all power, authority, and might in heauen and in earth; And hauing brought all things vnder his feet, ſaith Saint Paul,
                     Epheſ. 1. 
                     hath ſet him ouer all things, for to be head to his Church.
                  
                  A true and ſoueraigne Prieſt after the order of Melchizedeck,
                     As he is a Prieſt. anointed and conſecrated by the eternall Father before all worlds.Pſal. 110. 
                     The Lord hath ſworne (ſaith the kingly Prophet ſpeaking to this purpoſe) and will not repent him, Thou art a Prieſt for euer after the order of Melchizedeck. (The Apoſtle S. Paul confirmes and repeats this many and diuerſe times in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, 5.7.8.9.10.) For to offer vp to him in time according to the office and duty of the high Prieſt, his precious body and bloud, his ſacred and ſpotleſſe fleſh vpon the altar of the Croſſe, as a pleaſing ſweet ſmelling and acceptable ſacrifice to his diuine Maieſty, iuſtly prouoked againſt vs for our crimes and offences, for to aſſwage and appeaſe him to reconcile vs with him, to deliuer and ſet vs free from the power of the Diuell, and from the writ, whereby wee were bound ouer to euerlaſting paines & torments of hell, and to bring vs againe gloriouſly to the happy fruition of the kingdome of heauen: In the Pſ. 65. Eſa. 33. in the firſt of S. Peter, 23. to the Rom. 3. Heb. 10. and a thouſand the like. Hence it is that he is called and ſtiled by the ſame Apoſtle, our Saluation, Redemption, Sanctification, &c. For to offer vnto him, I ſay,

according to the forenamed duty and office of the High-Prieſts, prayers, ſupplications, and requeſts continually to intercede for vs, and to ſtand vs in ſtead of an Aduocate towards his diuine Maieſty, Ier. 30. Zachar. 1. Rom. 3.5.8. Epheſ. 2. Hebr. 7.8.9.18. Ioh. 4. This he doth effect and accompliſh very faithfully, and will continue ſo to doe vnto the end and conſummation of the world. Now your Church doth take from him,Chriſts paſſion and ſatisfactiō, vnſufficient according to the Papiſts. and carries away the one and the other of his charges and offices, after many waies and manners, but eſpecially in two.
                  Firſt, when as ſhe preſumes to reiterate this Sacramēt, & doth fondly imagine, that ſhe offers vp again euery day at the Maſſe, the body of Ieſus Chriſt for the ſinnes and ſaluation of the liuing & dead: by meanes wherof the anger and wrath of the eternal father is aſſwaged and appeaſed, and men find and obtaine mercy; ſo that with you the Maſſe is a propitiatory, and impetratorie ſacrifice. Whence it followes plainely, that that firſt oblation and ſacrifice of our Sauiour, made on the tree of the Croſſe, by the effuſion of his precious and diuine bloud, was not ſufficient but wholly imperfect? as the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes, 7.10. argueth and gathereth very well from the ancient ſacrifices of the old Law, the which becauſe they had not the force and efficacy fully to wipe away ſinnes, were therefore reiterated many and ſundry times, but the ſacrifice of the Sonne of God hauing had that vertue, power, and efficacy: hence it is that it ought in no waies to be reiterated and offered vp againe, hauing beene more then able and ſufficient, euen the firſt time to blot out and to quit the ſinnes of the whole world,

yea of a thouſand worlds, if ſo many there had beene. This notwithſtanding your Church denies by thoſe pretended imaginary,The ſacrifice of the Maſſe. vnbloudy (as ſhe calls them) oblations and ſacrifices, which ſhe repeateth euery day, ſhewing enough thereby that ſhee doth not beleeue the firſt to haue beene ſufficient, impairing in this manner the authority, credit, and dignity of this only High-Prieſt, according to the order of Melchizedeck. Read I beſeech you, and take paines to conſider heedfully, the 7.9. & 10. of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, and you ſhall ſee more cleerely, how your faith and beliefe in this matter and doctrine of your Church, is farre different and contrary, to that of the Apoſtle Saint Paul, and of the firſt beleeuers of the primitiue Church.
                  Secondly,Mediation and interceſſion of Saints for vs. ſhee taketh from him the office and charge of mediatour, &c. when as to his diſparagement ſhe ſets, and appoints almoſt an infinite number betweene God and men, the Virgin, Saint Peter, &c. the which ſhe commands to be called vpon, and teaches that reciprocally they vnderſtand our prayers, and make interceſſion for vs to his diuine Maieſty, &c. Now if this were true, it would follow thence by a neceſſary conſequence that Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour, were not alone the only and ſufficient Mediatour, Interceſſour, and Aduocate for men towards his Father, which not only is moſt falſe, but altogether blaſphemous, directlie againſt the Scriptures, in the fore-alleaged places to the Hebrewes, 7. and 10. and a thouſand other the like, all which I omit of purpoſe (as alſo a more ample proofe of this truth) becauſe the time vrges me, and the ſhortneſſe of this diſcourſe forces

compels mee to paſſe it by in ſilence, and to come to the third thing, which I haue ſaid is to bee conſidered in Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour, to wit, his ſingular and not to bee equalled benefits, and graces, and fauours, which ſo louingly hee hath communicated vnto vs, and wee haue receiued from him in ſo great abundance, that ſo I may ſhew, and make plaine vnto you, how your Church, and your Prelates and Doctours, and you with them, doe likewiſe erre and faile greatly and fouly therein, and in the humble, hearty, and louing acknowledgement, which we ought to haue towards that bountifull Lord.
                  His offices are many and in a great number, as I haue ſaid (yea almoſt infinite, and hee would neuer haue done, that will recount them and ſtand vpon each of them in particular) but they may all notwithſtanding be reduced to theſe two ſpecials and particulars; which he hath purchaſed vs by his death and paſſion, and merited by the effuſion of his precious bloud, our Iuſtification and Sanctification, which God promiſeth to his people in that new couenant, which he foretelleth by Ieremy, 31. and 32. that hee was to make with them, rehearſed by the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes, 8. and the 10. Behold (ſaith the Lord) I will make with the houſe of Iſrael, and with the houſe of Iuda, a new Couenant; which is this: I will put my Law in their vnderſtanding, and will write it in their hearts; (there is ſanctification) and I will forgiue their vnrighteouſneſſe, and I will remember their iniquities, and ſinnes no more; There is Iuſtification.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        uſtification.The firſt then of theſe benefits is our iuſtification, which is the meerely free remiſſion & pardon which

God giues vs of all our offences and ſinnes: witneſſe S. Paul, Rom. 4. who following Dauid, Pſalm. 32. doth place the iuſtification and happineſſe of man in this remiſſion, as alſo Dauid denounceth the happineſſe and bliſſe of that man to whom God imputeth righteouſneſſe without workes, &c. This pardon is gotten and deſerued for vs by the merit of Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour, in as much as he offering himſelfe for an offering and ſacrifice of good and ſweet ſauour to his Father on the tree of the Croſſe, hee hath thereby fully ſatisfied his diuine iuſtice for all our ſinnes, as S. Paul teacheth vs, Rom. 3.23. and 24. Being iuſtified freely, &c. and S. Iohn in his firſt generall Epiſtle 1.7. The bloud of Ieſus Chriſt cleanſeth vs from all ſinne. And in the ſecond chapter, verſe 2. For he is the propitiation for our ſinnes. This benefit of iuſtification is communicated by God, through the free imputation of the merits of our Sauiour, to the true beleeuers apprehending and receiuing them through a true and liuely faith working by charitie, as the Apoſtle teacheth vs to the Rom. 3.28. Therefore wee conclude that a man is iuſtified by faith without the workes of the Law. And in the fift chapter, verſe 1. Therefore being iuſtified by faith, wee haue peace with God through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. There is iuſtification by faith. And as for the imputation of the merit of Chriſt, hee ſheweth it there alſo in the fourth chapter, when as telling how God had imputed to Abraham his faith for righteouſneſſe, hee addeth, Now in that, that this was imputed to him for righteouſneſſe, &c. This faith is not an idle imagination, or falſe illuſion and perſwaſion, or fantaſticall ſpeculation in the beleeuers braine (as your Doctors doe ſlanderouſly

ſay) but an holy aſſurance and firme confidence in the bounty and mercy of God, by the which we beleeue that according to the truth of his infallible promiſes hee will be gracious and mercifull vnto vs in Ieſus Chriſt his Sonne, freely for his ſake pardoning vs all our faults. Such a beleefe is not idle nor fruitleſſe in thoſe who haue it, but fructifieth vnto all manner of good workes, righteouſneſſe, godlineſſe, holineſſe, loue, &c. Not for to merit and obtaine that pardon, which is already wholly gotten; but for to ſhew towards God that we acknowledge this ſo vneſtimable a benefit. This faith is not from our ſelues, but is a ſpeciall gift of God, who hath giuen vs freely through his Sonne not onely to beleeue in him, but alſo to ſuffer for his ſake, as ſaith S. Paul, Philip. 1.29.
                  
                     Sanctification.God hauing thus iuſtified vs freely through faith in his Son, he ſanctifieth vs alſo through his ſpirit, which is the ſecond benefit that wee haue obſerued to be gotten for vs in Ieſus Chriſt, and which he hath merited and obtained for vs by his death, as we haue ſaid: and doth beſtow it vpon vs by the vertue and efficacie of his Spirit of regeneration and ſanctification, by the which mortifying daily more and more the naturall corruption in which we all are borne, he makes vs by little and little to renounce and to die to all ſinne, for to liue to righteouſneſſe and holineſſe all the dayes of our life, vntill that in the end he doe ſanctifie vs fully, when as after this life hee ſhall receiue vs into that other, in his heauenly glory. This is briefly that which concernes theſe two great benefits of our Lord, accordingly as the Scripture and Gods holy word doe ſhew and teach vs.
                  
                     It is a pitifull thing to ſee after how many ſorts and manners Satan hath lamentably ſpoiled, ſophiſticated, falſified, peruerted, and corrupted in your Church, by your Paſtors and Doctors, this doctrine being ſo wholſome and full of comfort touching theſe two benefits of Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour: firſt,How Papiſts erre about iuſtification. by extenuating as much as they could, and can, the greatneſſe of theſe graces and fauours: ſecondly, by taking from him and robbing him of all what they can, for to attribute it to the merits either of themſelues, or of others, and to their owne ſatisfactions and papall Indulgences. They extenuate the greatneſſe of grace two wayes: firſt, by leſſening and diminiſhing the greatneſſe of our offence and ſinne; ſecondly, by debaſing the excellencie and perfection of Chriſts merit. They doe leſſen and diminiſh the greatneſſe of ſinne; firſt, in denying that originall ſinne deſerues eternall death, contrary to that which the Apoſtle teacheth vs to the Rom. 6.23. that the wages of ſinne is death; and to the threatning of the Law, which ſounds thus, Curſed is he, whoſoeuer doth not continue and perſeuere to obſerue all things written and deliuered in the booke of the Law. Secondly, by their diſtinction of ſinnes, veniall and mortall, teaching that there are ſome pettie ſinnes which doe not deſerue eternall death and damnation, but rather pardon, which is directly againſt that very ſentence of S. Paul, that the wages of ſinne is death; and that menace of the Law, Curſed is hee, &c. They debaſe the excellencie of Chriſts merit, when they teach: firſt, that he hath not ſatisfied for thoſe ſinnes and offences which they call veniall, but onely for thoſe that are mortall, contrary to that which Saint

Iohn hath in his firſt Catholike Epiſtle, chap. 1.7. That the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt cleanſeth vs from all ſinne. Secondly, that as for mortall ſinnes, he hath only changed the eternall into a temporall puniſhment, which is by them affirmed and maintained, not onely without any ground vpon the holy Scripture, but alſo is much repugnant to the goodneſſe and mercy of God, who in ſo doing would pardon but by halfes. Thirdly, that by the death of Ieſus Chriſt wee obtaine only remiſſion of the guilt, and not of the puniſhment, which is as much, as openly to mocke with God, and to diſanull altogether the merit of our Lord: for what is it, I pray you, to remit and pardon the guilt, but not the puniſhment? As if a Maſter ſhould ſay to his ſeruant, a Lord to his ſubiect, a King to his vaſſall, that had grieuouſly wronged and offended him, Goe thy wayes, I pardon and forgiue thee thy fault, but I will puniſh thee howſoeuer when I ſee time for that that thou haſt done, according as thou deſerueſt. What pardon would that be? nay would it not rather be a mocking of him? It is euen ſo with God according to them. They doe take from Ieſus Chriſt, and rob him as much as in them lieth, of the glory of his merit, for to attribute it to the merits of another, when as refuſing the true pardon of God by faith in the bloud of his ſonne, they will themſelues deſerue of God by the power of their workes this pardon, and the fruition of life euerlaſting: wherein they doe iuſt like a wicked malefactor, who being in the hands and power of his Iudge ready to be executed, would refuſe the grace and pardon of his Prince, and would make no vſe of it, but would thinke that hee could merit, yea would ſtifly

maintaine, that hee had iuſtly merited by his good deeds both his freedome and the expiation of the puniſhment which was prepared and made ready for him, and to be one of the chiefe officers and beſt furniſhed houſhold-ſeruants of his Lord: wherein beſides the intolerable arrogance whereof they cannot (nor you) cleare themſelues, they fall into a groſſe, foule, and palpable ignorance; firſt, in that they thinke that they can of themſelues doe any worthy thing, and ſuch as can deſerue at Gods hands that which they thinke they doe deſerue, although notwithſtanding it ſtands ſo, that of our ſelues, as of our ſelues, we are not able to thinke any thing, but all our abilitie is and proceeds from God, as ſpeaketh the Apoſtle in the ſecond to the Corinthians, chap. 3. yea euen all the moſt iuſt actions of man, which God worketh in him through his grace, are ſo marred, infected and tainted with our naturall corruption, that they are all (as ſaith Eſay 64.) as a menſtruous cloth. Secondly, when as (for a refuge) they ſay that thoſe good workes which they doe, are not from themſelues, but from the grace of God working in them: for it is little to the purpoſe for to preſume to merit of him by ſuch workes; it is as if a vaſſall, that had receiued as a free gift from his chiefe Lord al the goods that he poſſeſſeth, would challenge to merit of him yet more then he hath receiued, for hauing giuen him ſome apple, peare, or other fruit, which he had gathered vpon theſe grounds: there being farre leſſe proportion betweene all the good that we doe through the grace of God, and the remiſſion of our ſins or life euerlaſting, which they thinke and pretend to merit by their workes, then there is

betweene an apple and many large poſſeſſions. For to merit, it is required that there be a proportion betweene that which we doe or giue, and that which we challenge thereby to merit: it is alſo required, that that whereby we doe merit, do come from our ſelues, and be not giuen vs by him from whom wee pretend to merit: for to merit by grace, it is to merit without merit, it is not to merit at all, it is to renounce all merit; grace and merit being in ſuch ſort oppoſed amongſt themſelues, that they can by no meanes ſtand together:Rom. 11.6. 
                     for if it be by workes (ſaith the Apoſtle) then is it no longer by grace; if it be by grace, then is it not by workes, elſe grace is no longer grace. This ſpirituall pride is ſeene yet more cleerely herein,Againſt works of ſupererogation. that not being content to merit pardon and Paradiſe through good workes commanded by God, they thinke and pretend to merit yet ſomewhat ouer by their workes not commanded, which they haue forged for themſelues, of ſupererogation, as they call it: a name that witneſſeth throughly their pride, whereby they thinke that they beſtow vpon God ſomewhat ouer and aboue that which he requires and demands at their hands, or then they are bound to giue him: as if God asking and requiring of vs that wee ſhould loue him with all our heart, with all our ſoule, force and ſtrength, and our neighbour as our ſelues, which is the vpſhot of the whole Law, we could doe any thing beyond that. And yet what ar theſe goodly workes of ſupererogation, that are of ſo great a merit? They will come to this, to weare a frocke, an habit, a cord, the ſandals of a Monke, a Capuchin, &c. to goe bare-footed, not to weare a ſhirt, to vſe the diſcipline and chaſten the

body, to vſe an haire-cloth, to weare the cord of S. Francis, Dominicke, &c. to be of the brotherhood of the Roſarie, of the Beades, &c. and other the like workes, in truth not commanded nor appointed by God, but of which alſo one day iuſtly and with good right he will ſay, Who hath required this at your hands?
                     Eſay 1.12. 
                     In vaine doe they honour me with their workes, and their feare towards me is an humane commandement inuented by men. And yet notwithſtanding what is it that they make account of, or commend in your Church, but theſe workes of ſupererogation? Is it not therein that you put all the marrow and iuice of pietie, deuotion, perfection, holineſſe, and ſeruice of God? And what doe you make (for the moſt part) of all the workes commanded and ordained by God, in reſpect of thoſe which men haue inuented, but hay and chaffe, which no man regardeth? 2. They rob Chriſt of the glory of his merit, in that they teach that wee muſt our ſelues ſatisfie for the temporall puniſhment of our ſinnes and offences, our Sauiour hauing (by their ſaying) onely taken away the eternitie thereof.Againſt Purgatorie. Whereupon they haue deuiſed and kindled in their braine the imaginarie fire of Purgatorie, which they ſet in the very next place, and as it were in the ſuburbs of hell, for therein after this life to ſatisfie in our owne perſons the iuſtice of God for our ſinnes, as if the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, which cleanſeth vs from all ſinne, were not a ſoape and lye (as it were) ſtrong enough for to waſh away all this filth, and that we needed another ſcouring more rugged and purgatiue, of fire altogether as hot and violent (ſay they) as hell-fire it ſelfe; for they muſt needs know much certaine and aſſured newes thereof

in particular, by the relation of ſo many ſoules as returne from thence, as they ſay. But to what end, I pray you? Is it for to haue Maſſes ſung, for to haue ſeruices and obits ſaid for the dead for their deliuerie from this ſo boiling a fire? Alas poore fooles, that ſuffer your ſelues to be deceiued and couſened by theſe tales, fables, and gulleries, and to be muffled by theſe weake terrours and humane inuentions! No, no: it is for to fill their purſe and belly, and to make good cheere at your coſt, and vnder the name and pretence of the poore deceaſed. But though it were true, that there were ſuch a fire and place appoinred by diuine iuſtice for the ſatisfaction of ſinnes after this life, (whereof notwithſtanding wee haue not, nor can they produce any true, ſound and cleere ground and teſtimonie in the Scripture) is there any thing amongſt all thoſe which they giue and offer you for to deliuer you, yea alſo for to keepe you quite from the comming therein, ſuch as are anniuerſarie Maſſes and obits, teſtamentarie legacies and foundations, &c? Is there, I ſay, any of theſe things, yea any other that might poſſibly be deuiſed or imagined, which can counterpoiſe the greatneſſe of theſe torments which they faigne to be in this pretended and ſuppoſed Purgatorie? Truly if that which the Deuill maliciouſly ſaid of the holy man Iob, be true, though ſpoken by him to a very bad end, Skinne for skinne, and all that a man hath he will giue for his life; how much more ſhall it be true in this reſpect, and what will not men giue for to free themſelues from ſuch a fire, and to redeeme themſelues from ſuch torments, if poſſibly it could bee done? Truly they wo
                        •••
                      giue all their goods euen to their

very ſhirt, yea euen to their skinne. And thus it is, and vnder this faire cloake and pretence, that they coſen folkes, and deceiue and abuſe poore ſilly people, ſqueeſing out and drawing to themſelues all their goods and ſubſtance, for to make their owne hearts merry withall, and to make their fleſh-pot to boile. An horrible wickedneſſe; beyond all compariſon, and more then deteſtable miſchiefe and impietie! for to make way for their auarice and gluttonie, vnder pretence of pietie, deuotion, and compaſſion towards the deceaſed. No, no: if it were ſo (as I haue ſaid before, which notwithſtanding is not) that this Purgatorie and the fire thereof were true, nothing of this world, nor any humane action would be able and ſufficient to bring deliuerance and freedome, and to counteruaile the paines and torments; and we ought therein (as ſaith our Sauiour, but to another ſenſe then they vrge and alleage him for) to ſatisfie the rigour of Gods iuſtice euen to the vtmoſt farthing, and to the ſmalleſt fault, before we ſhould come out from thence: which notwithſtanding would ſauour rather of a cruell Tyrant, then of a louing, pitifull, bountifull and compaſſionate God, ſuch a one as ours is. But to their account, they doe deliuer themſelues yet more eaſily, and at a cheaper rate then the aforeſaid, by meanes of the Popes Indulgences and Pardons, by wearing a paire of Beades, or an hallowed Medaill, and ſaying three Pater-noſters, or ſome ſuch other the like meere fooleries, bables, and inuentions proceeding out of the forge and ſhop of ſome ſuperſtitious braine, or rather couetous and deſirous of gold and ſiluer, very fit in truth and conuenient for to helpe towards

the charges and expences of the Popes Court, and of other Eccleſiaſticall perſons his deputies. But (as I haue ſaid) an impious wickedneſſe and deteſtable impietie, nay, an horrible and execrable blaſphemie, thus to diſrobe and depriue Ieſus Chriſt of the glory of his merit, and to imagine by ſuch meanes to ſatisfie the rigour of Gods iuſtice, better then by the effectuall and diuine vertue of his precious bloud, ſhed for the ſinnes not only of the whole world, but of an hundred, yea of a thouſand, if ſo many there were. I giue leaue to all truly Chriſtian and religious ſoules, deſirous of their owne ſaluation and zeale to the honour and glory of their Sauiour, to thinke well of it, and to iudge whether this be to giue him the entire glory of our ſaluation, and whether he be well aſſured, leaning and being built vpon ſuch foundations.
                  The time would faile me, if I diſcouer, and my heart would ake and pant at the ſight of all the filth and abominations that are couered and hidden vnder this cloake of merits and ſatisfactions, which are taught and preached in your Church, farre more then the grace, goodneſſe, mercy, and free pardon of God; yea by the which merits and ſatisfactions this grace, goodneſſe, mercy, and free pardon of God, and the merits of Ieſus Chriſt are not onely darkned and disfigured, but quite defaced and altogether aboliſhed, as much at leaſt as in them lieth. Let that which hath beene ſaid be enough, and ſuffice for this time, for to ſhew and make you to ſee how the benefit of our iuſtification by Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour, is ſet as it were at naught by the doctrine of your men. Let vs now come to the benefit of ſanctification, which hee hath likewiſe

(as I haue already ſaid,How Papiſts erre about ſanctification. and repeated twice or thrice) obtained and merited for vs by his death and paſſion, and by the effuſion of his pretious and diuine bloud. This is no leſſe peruerted, corrupted and aboliſhed, then the former. For in ſtead of acknowledging with the Scripture (which teacheth it vs) that of our owne nature, being dead in our ſins, vnable to frame euen a good thought, and bring forth of our ſelues any good thing, by reaſon that the whole imagination of mans heart is ſet vpon nothing but euill at all times euen from his youth; God hereupon doth baptiſe vs not onely with water, but principally with the holy Ghoſt, by the which correcting and mortifying by little and little the corruption of our nature, infected with the ſinne which we bring with vs from the belly of our mother, of vnbeleeuers, impenitent, rebellious, wilfull, and diſobedient to his commandements and precepts, ſuch as wee are of our ſelues and of our owne nature, he makes vs to beleeue his truth, takes from vs the hardneſſe of our hearts, makes vs flexible and pliable vnder the yoake of his lawes, and of his obedience, that ſo renouncing all vnfruitfull workes of ſinne and darkneſſe, we may liue as true children of light in righteouſneſſe and true holineſſe: in ſtead (I ſay) of acknowledging, teaching, and carefully vrging this, they doe the quite contrary, 1. extenuating (as I haue already ſaid) and diminiſhing as farre as they are able, this naturall corruption and originall ſinne which is in vs, ſaying that it is but a light infirmitie, ſpirituall languor, and weakneſſe of nature, which makes vs indeed backward and ſlow in good, but not dead to all good, and quicke and ready to all euill:

2. attributing to the water, ſalt and ſpittle, and other ſuch like things of baptiſme, the mortification of that naturall corruption in vs, and not rather to the merit of Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour, and to the power and efficacie of his death and paſſion: 3. in that, that ſeeming to acknowledge the grace of God to be neceſſary for the healing of this euill, yet in effect they doe quite diſanull this,Free-will. and attribute it to themſelues, and to the force and power of their free-will: 1. in that they imagine that in man, by the force and power of his nature, there are ſome preparatiues and diſpoſitions to receiue this grace, and conſequently that there are in him certaine merits of congruitie; ſo that with them the cauſe why God offereth and preſenteth his grace to one and not to another, is becauſe the one is well prepared, (of himſelfe, you muſt vnderſtand, and not by the grace of God, ſeeing he prepares and diſpoſes himſelfe for to receiue it) and the other is not: as if man being ſo miſerably corrupted as hee is, could of himſelfe doe any thing that might deſerue grace de congruo, as they ſpeake, that is, might binde God by way of honeſtie and conueniencie, to beſtow vpon him his grace: 2. in that they make this grace to bee ſuch, as that all the vertue and efficacie thereof depends wholly vpon the libertie of man, which in effect is to make this grace idle and vnprofitable: for how can any man call that medicine ſufficient, and effectual for the healing of a maladie, which can doe no good without one certaine ingredient? Now do they make the grace of God like to this medicine; it can doe nothing (as they ſay) nor worke in vs without the force and vertue of our free-will, which is the chiefe ingredient,

according to them, which giueth force and efficacie to this ſpiritual medicine. Is this to recommend the grace of God vnto vs, or to exalt it, and is it not rather to exalt man and his abilitie? Is not this to take from God for to giue to man? to rob the Creator for to couer, decke, and enrich the creature? Thus you ſee that thoſe of your Church (eſpecially your Doctours, directours and Prelates) like to children of a peruerſe, neglectfull, and vngratefull nature, with a preſumption that ſhuts to their heart and puffes vp their ſpirit, they hate nothing ſo much, as to acknowledge, auouch and confeſſe their fault, paſſe condemnation vpon it, cry for mercy, aske pardon, and acknowledge that all their good and eternall happineſſe conſiſts in the goodneſſe, mercy, grace, and meerely free pardon of God: but doe extenuate as much as they can their fault and offence, doe plucke downe grace, and aboliſh as much as in them lieth all pardon, that ſo they may not ſeeme to be beholden to God; they do preach and extoll the greatneſſe of their merits, by the which they pretend to make God beholden and indebted to them: whence it is not very hard to conſider, acknowledge and iudge, whether the true humilitie, which is eſſentiall to Chriſtianitie, and ſo beſeeming it, yea the faireſt and richeſt ornament of a true beleeuer, can be in them, who not onely maintaine and wilfully defend ſuch a doctrine, but doe glory therein, and doe oppugne and perſecute euen to the fire and bloud, thoſe which on the contrary, forſaking themſelues, and all that can come from their owne ſtrength and merits, haue no other refuge, prop, foundation and aſſurance for their eternall ſaluation, then in the meere bountie,

grace, mercy, and free pardon of God, in Ieſus Chriſt his Sonne, his merit, and interceſſion.
                  Hee ſhould neuer haue done, that would relate, ſhew, and ſet to view all the abuſes and errours touching the points of faith neceſſary to ſaluation. Gather only and iudge out of that little which the ſhortneſſe of the time & this diſcourſe giues me leaue to ſpeake, whether the firſt ground and foundation of ſaluation premiſed and ſuppoſed, to wit, a true faith and beleefe in Ieſus Chriſt, (ſuch as the Scripture declareth, and requireth of vs) is and can bee found in your Church, in which is taught and preached a doctrine ſo diametrally contrary and oppoſite to it, yea againſt all reaſon; and whether I haue had iuſt cauſe and occaſion to withdraw my ſelfe from thence (and you alſo are bound to doe the like) in caſe that you and I deſire to worke out our ſaluation.
                  But that which is worſe, and more to be lamented, (euen with teares of bloud if it were poſſible) is, that for the moſt part amongſt thoſe of your Church, there is no more any faith, or law, or God, or religion at all: but by a lamentable euent (permitted notwithſtanding by Gods prouidence for the iuſt puniſhment of their deſerts) are fallen into a groſſe ignorance of matters of God, (I will not ſay into Atheiſme) and is fulfilled in them compleatly and in all points, that which the Apoſtle S. Paul hath ſometimes ſpoken of the Gentiles, Pagans, and Idolaters, in the firſt to the Romans,
                     Verſ. 21.22. namely, that hauing knowne God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankfull; but became vaine in their imaginations, and their fooliſh heart was darkened, profeſsing themſelues to be wiſe, they became fooles, and

changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to a corruptible man, &c. And who then would not withdraw himſelfe from men ſo blinded, and giuen ouer to errour, and the darkeneſſe of ignorance?
                  Now if their faith be ſuch (or for to ſpeak aright & more properly) their vnbeliefe ſo great, what can bee hoped and looked for of the other, I meane of the manners of their life; indeede it is very likely, that ſuch as is the doctrine, ſuch will be the life and manners, namely peruerted and corrupted, &c. And this is it which now in order I am to ſhew to you, and ſet to your view. Let vs begin with charity,Charity towards God & our neighbour. the loue and affection towardes God and our neighbour, the true ground of all Chriſtianity, and the ſecond firme and aſſured foundation of eternall ſaluation, as wee haue ſaid and declared before.
                  As for the firſt, the true teſtimony, the certaine and vndoubted proofe thereof amongſt many that might be giuen and alleaged is, an heartie and louing zeale and affection to his honour, worſhip, and ſeruice, and to the true obſeruing of his lawes and ordinances, and the entire and perfect fulfilling of his holy will, as farre as our weakenes and frailtie can ſuffer vs, and the eſtate and condition of our corrupt and infected nature can permit and beare it. If you loue mee, (ſaith our Sauiour, ſpeaking of this loue to his Apoſtles, and Diſciples, and to vs in their perſons, and in the 14. of S. Iohn) keepe my commandements. He that hath my commandements and keepes them, hee it is that loues mee. And this hee repeats many and diuers times, and amongſt others, that well beloued and fauoured Diſciple, in the ſecond Chapter of his firſt Catholike Epiſtle, confirmes

it, He that keepes his word, the loue of God (ſaith he) is truely accompliſhed and perfected in him. As on the contrary, the true and infallible ſigne of the want & the defect of the loue of God is, not to care for to keepe and obſerue his lawes and precepts, as (beſides reaſon it ſelfe which is cleere and plaine for it) our Sauiour in the ſame place before alleaged, of the Euangeliſt Saint Iohn doth ſay, Hee that loueth mee not, ſaith he, doth not keepe my words: and the ſame Saint Iohn, in the fore-cited places: He that ſaith, I haue knowne him, and yet doth not keep his precepts and commandements, he liar, and the truth is not in him.
                  
                  
                     Gods worſhip externall.As for Gods honour, worſhip and ſeruice, it is double, and of two ſorts, externall, outward, and of the body, ſuch as he preſcriheth vnto vs in his word; namely that Liturgy, or outward and publike ſeruice wherewith hee will be honoured, (euen publikely in his Church) conſiſting of the duties of piety, and the externall actions of religion, which doe ſhew and teſtifie ſome humilitie, deiection, ſubmiſſion, affection and acknowledgement of the minde towards his diuine maieſty.Internall. Internall, inward, in the ſoule and inmoſt part of the minde, by a true acknowledging of his immenſe and infinite excellence, perfection and greatneſſe, and of the ſundry and innumerable obligations wee owe him, with an humble ſubmiſſion, a moſt deiected humilitie, and low deiection before his ſupreame maieſty, honouring, adoring, fearing, reſpecting, cheriſhing, and louing him with all the ſtrength and power of our ſoules, the faculties of our mindes, and the affections of our hearts, as our onely bliſſe and chiefe maſter and Lord, from whom

we hold by meere dependance, and free, bountifull and liberall communication all, what wee are, what wee haue, and what wee can at any time challenge, looke, and hope for, both in this life, and in the other, referring in the meane time, and giuing ouer our ſelues, and all what belongs to vs, or concernes vs, our liues, perſons, goods, health, honours, affaires, and other the like wholly to his diuine prouidence, to the end that he may do with them as he ſhall thinke fitting, and according to his pleaſure and ſacred will, as belonging wholly to him, with a true confidence certain & firme hope, and an vndoubted aſſurance of his diuine goodneſſe, infinite mercy, and promiſes of ſaluation, and this is the chiefe honour, worſhip, and ſeruice, that God wiſhes, deſires, and demaunds of vs, as ſheweth very wel the Sonne of God himſelfe Ieſus Chriſt, our Sauiour anſwering to the queſtion of the Samaritan woman; The true worſhippers, ſaith he,Iohn 4. 
                     ſhall worſhip the Father in ſpirit and truth, and ſuch are thoſe he deſires, demands, and ſeekes after: And hee giueth the reaſon thereof, Becauſe God is a ſpirit, therfore his worſhip ought to be ſpirituall, internall, and in the truth of the heart, anſwerable to his nature; by ſo much more noble, excellent, perfect, and compleate, then the externall and corporal, by how much the ſoule ſurpaſſeth and exceedeth the body, in excellent perfection and nobleneſſe: free, vnuiolable, in the libertie and power of euery one, and ſuch as cannot be hindered (as the externall and corporall) by any indeauour or change whatſoeuer. For hee that is lame of his whole body, hee that lies in his bed grieuouſly and mortally ſicke, hee that is clogged with irons

both on hands and feet, and kept priſoner in the bottome of an obſcure and darke dungeon, hindered from making, or ſhewing any ſigne of outward ſeruice and corporall reuerence, may haue his heart and ſoule lifted vp and deuoted vnto God: and may ſerue honour and worſhip him ſpiritually; as did Ionas in the belly of the Whale, and in the deepe of the waters, and bottome of the ſea: Manaſſes in his priſon, the diſeaſed with the palſye, in his bed and couch, and the good theefe hauing all the members and parts of his body faſt bound and tied. This being as the cauſe and the mother which bringeth foorth, and ingendereth the outward and bodily, which is as it were the ſcum, which ariſes and proceeds from the boyling of the fire of the inward and ſpirituall deuotion: to be ſhort, this of it ſelfe alone is good and perfect, retaining and carrying with it, his worth and value, yea and in neceſſitie ſufficient. But the outward and corporall is ſo farre from being alone good and ſufficient, that it is rather a deluſion and Maſcarado; it is that hypocriſie ſo much cryed out vpon, blamed, and condemned by the Sonne of God, our Sauiour, in thoſe, who with their ſtrange behauiour, and countenance, and with ſome geſtures, actions, and ceremonies, doe thinke they can flatter God, and diſcharge their dutie towards him, doing it onely with the tip and end of the tongue, with their mouth and edge of their lips, without any heart, deuotion, affection, or ſpirit: This people,
                     Eſay 29. ſaith he, honoureth me with their lippes, but their heart and ſpirit is farre from mee. This is iuſt ſo as the Iewes did, who at the paſſion of our Sauiour did kneele before him, ſaluted him, King and Prophet; but in

deriſion and mockery:How Papiſts offend in both theſe worſhips. Now who knowes not how far the moſt part thoſe of your Church are remooued (but what do I ſay?) almoſt quite depriued, and diſrobed of that heartie and louing zeale and affection to the obſeruing of Gods lawes and commandements, to the fulfilling of his ſacred will, and to the true worſhippe and ſeruice which hee deſires, demaunds, and ſeekes at our hands? daily experience makes vs ſee it with our eye, and touch it with the finger, and indeede we ſhould bee quite void both of eyes and vnderſtanding, if wee did neither ſee nor perceiue it: it is the leaſt of their thoughts, and the leaſt of their cares, whereof they make no eſteeme, no reckoning, preferring the edicts, commandements, and ordinances of a mortall, fraile, and periſhable man, to thoſe of that ſupreame and diuine maieſtie, of that glorious, eternall, and almighty monarch: yea eſteeming leſſe of theſe, then of their owne irregular paſsions and affections, corrupted appetites, filthy concupiſcences, and inſatiable deſires, and for the moſt part ſtanding vpon, and contenting themſelues with the onely meere externall, and corporall honor, worſhip, and ſeruice, with vſing ſtrange behauiour and ceremonies, making faces, offering of cierges, being preſent at Maſſes, offices, and ſeruices; rightly diuiding their beads, running ouer their houres, ſaying the ſeuen Pſalmes & the prayers for the deceaſed vttering many words and vocall prayers, babbling and muttering them all the day long in an vnknowne language, and words not vnderſtood, without deuotion, without attention, without affection of the heart, the wil, or the minde, ſpeedily, poſtingly, with haſt, and onely

for faſhion ſake, neuer, or very ſeldome, lifting vp their mindes to the conſideration of the excellent greatneſſe, and diuine perfection of that ſupreame maieſty, or of their owne vileneſſe, baſeneſſe, worthleſneſſe, and nullity, in compariſon to him, and to the innumerable obligations they owe him, for to bring foorth the actions of deepe humility and lowe ſubiection, of true and hearty and inward acknowledgement, of the feruent and ardent loue, of the honour, reſpect, and high reuerence they beare to the God of bountie, and King of infinite glory, greatnes, and maieſty, with an intire forſaking of our ſelues, and totally and perfectly ſubmitting vs to his diuine prouidence, diſpoſition and will, which notwithſtanding is the true honour worſhip and ſeruice (as I haue already ſayd) that he wills, demaunds, and ſeekes at our hands, and that alone is pleaſing and acceptable vnto him him; and not onely haue not any true confidence, certaine and firme hope, and in fallible aſſurance in his diuine goodneſſe, and infinite mercies, and promiſes of ſaluation, or any refuge to him in their neceſſities: but euen rather doe blame, reprehend and condemne on the contrary ſuch as doe ſo, (at the leaſt your Doctors) giuing by a blaſphemy no leſſe horrible and deteſtable, then worthy of all manner of puniſhment, to this holy, heartie, and firme confidence and aſſurance in the bounty and mercy of God, the name and title of diuilliſh pride and preſumption. And they goe themſelues miſtruſtfully, and ſend likewiſe others in the troubleſome chances that happen and come vpon them, to others beſides him, for to be guarded, freed, and deliuered

there-from, expreſly againſt the Scripture and the plaine words of our Sauiour, by which hee inuiteth vs ſo louingly to betake our ſelues vnto him, when wee ſhall feele our ſelues wearied and heauy laden with affliction and anguiſh, with a certaine and aſſured promiſe to eaſe vs; imagining the whileſt, and thinking that by the meanes of this meerely externall worſhip, they are not onely quitted and diſcharged, and that they haue well and fully ſatisfied their dutie towards God, but alſo, that for it he is beholden to them, and remaines in their debt. No, no: this is not that which he requires, demands, and ſeekes of them, but rather their ſpirits and the affections of their hearts. God is a ſpirit (ſaith our Sauiour) and hee that will ſerue,
                     Ioh. 4. 
                     honour, and worſhip him, he muſt doe it in ſpirit and truth of heart: and ſuch are thoſe whom he ſeekes, demands, and lookes after. He is ſo farre from being pleaſed and delighted with this outward and meerely corporall honour, ſeruice and worſhip, that on the contrary he deteſts and hates it, and infinitely and extremely abhorres it, as we haue ſaid. But how indeed can he like it, being without heart, affection, deuotion, or attention of the minde, which is that which he loues, cheriſhes, commends, and eſteemes moſt in all of vs? And beſides, it being for the moſt part nothing but a meere humane inuention, not onely without his expreſſe word and commandement, (who notwithſtanding ought not to bee ſerued at the pleaſure and diſcretion of men, but according to his will reuealed and manifeſted in his ſaid word) but alſo expreſly and formally contrary to it, as is the Maſſe, and that which depends thereof, the inuocation of Saints,

praier in a language not common nor vnderſtood, and other the like. And now let them freely goe boaſting that they haue the loue of God: No, no (ſaith our Sauiour) he that keepes not my words, hee loues me not: Hee that keepes not the precepts and commandements of God (ſaith S. Iohn) he is a lier,
                     Ioh 14.24. 
                     and the truth is not in him. And then how can they loue him,Eiuſdem 2.4. when they giue him not the honour, the worſhip, and true ſeruice which they owe him, and which hee wils, requires, and demands of them, but doe almoſt wholly alter, corrupt and deſtroy it, and in ſtead of the truth, offer and preſent vnto him only a meere dead body and apparition?
                  
                     How Papiſts want true charitie toward their neighbour.Now he that hath not in him, and is deuoid of the loue of God, how ſhall he loue and make much of his neighbour? No, no, (ſaith S. Iohn) if a man ſay I loue God,
                     1.4.20. 
                     and hateth his brother, he is a lier: why ſo? For (as he addeth) hee that loueth not his brother whom hee hath ſeene, how can he loue God whom he hath not ſeene? It is impoſſible: and hee thus concludes; This commandement haue we from him, that hee who loueth God, loue his brother alſo. The loue of our neighbour (ſaith the Moraliſt S. Gregorie) is produced and brought foorth by the loue of God, and the loue of God is nouriſhed and maintained by the loue of our neighbour: and truly he that is negligent and careleſſe in louing his neighbour and Chriſtian brother, knowes not how hee ought to loue God, nay loues him not at all. I neede not ſtriue and ſtand much vpon the proofe and teſtimonie of this truth in the moſt part of them of your Church: it is knowne and appeareth well enough of it ſelfe, without labouring to bring it to light; the Sun and the light being not more viſible then this is cleere

and manifeſt, that there is no more any loue, charitie, affection, good-will, vnion, and concord amongſt them: there is nothing but diuiſions, diſſenſions, partialitie, enuie, iealouſie, murmurs, detractions, ſlanders, riots, diſputes, bloudy hatred, and mortall rancour of the one againſt the other; no agreement, no accord, no proportion, no reſpect and relation of pietie or compaſſion towards the afflicted, no charitable aſſiſtance in the behalfe of the poore and needie, in no wiſe at all. And if ſo be that ſome of them (as there are alwayes ſome particular honeſt and charitable men, and we muſt ingenuouſly confeſſe it, and giue them this commendation and teſtimonie for the truth) that giue and impart ſome of their goods and reuenewes, it will be to no good purpoſe, rather for to found and cauſe to be ſaid ſome Maſſes, ſeruices and offices, and ſing leero wayes (that I may ſo ſay) and celebrated in poaſt-haſte and for a faſhion, without any pietie, deuotion, affection, and attention of the heart and minde whatſoeuer, but with a thouſand irreuerent inſolencies, diſtractions, and wanderings of the minde, with bad thoughts, being rather horrible and deteſtable blaſphemies, then praiers and orizons acceptable to God; for to build Chappels, Monaſteries, and Couents to feede and make fat the lazie bellies of Monkes, Religious and other voluntarie poore men, idle droanes, and vnfit to doe any good, but to dine, make good cheere, and ſleepe for their eaſe; then to maintaine and releeue the truly poore, needie, and ſhame faſte members of Ieſus Chriſt, who die of hunger, either at their gates, or within their houſes, without hauing any care, pittie, or compaſſion of them; they thinking, being

perſwaded, and making themſelues beleeue, that they are diſcharged, and haue well done in regard of their dutie and obligation towards God, when they haue filled the wallets and bottles, and with good and daintie meſſes couered and furniſhed the tables of the Capucins, Recollects, and other the like begging Friers, the true theeues of almes, and deuourers of the ſubſtance due to the truly poore and needie, whereof they ſhall giue (both the one and the other) a moſt ſtrict account to God, and ſhall be moſt ſeuerely and grieuouſly puniſhed. And if that ſometimes (which notwithſtanding happens but ſeldome) they doe any good, and beſtow their charitable aſſiſtance vpon the truly poore and needy, vpon the diſeaſed, vpon priſoners, and ſuch like, yet it is alwayes ioyned with this leauen, that marres, makes ſowre, and corrupts the whole lumpe, namely with an opinion and beleefe of meriting, and of making God by the meanes of theſe things indebted to them: whereas wee ought ſimply to exerciſe the workes of charitie, pietie and mercy, out of a pure and ſimple affection and compaſſion towards our neighbour, and for to teſtifie our loue and gratitude towards God for the infinite fauours and benefits that wee haue receiued and doe daily receiue from him.
                  Now all what is before ſaid being thus, wherein I pray you can they teſtifie their loue towards God, their zeale and affection to the obſeruing of his lawes, commandements and precepts, ſeeing that that being the firſt, chiefe, and as it were fundamentall in reſpect of all the reſt, yet they doe not obſerue it? But what doe I ſay? nay they thinke not once of it, nor at all care

for it. By what can we know that they are the Diſciples of our Sauiour?Ioh 13.35. ſeeing that (as himſelfe witneſſeth) this is the firſt marke and chiefe token whereby to know them, yea to put a diſtinction betweene the good and the bad, the elect and reprobate, the children of God and of the Deuill, as ſaith great S. Auſtin: and S. Iohn confirmes it in the third chapter of his firſt Epiſtle; Hereby are manifeſted the children of God, and the children of the Deuill: whoſoeuer doth not righteouſneſſe, and loueth not his neighbour and Chriſtian brother, is not of God, and conſequently of the Deuill. Iudge then what they are, and you alſo conſequently, and whether I haue had iuſt cauſe to withdraw my ſelfe from you, for to vnite and ioyne my ſelfe with the children of God, with the children of light, with the elect and predeſtinated.
                  But theſe two chiefe and fundamentall grounds of religion and ſaluation being caſt on ground, what will become of the reſt of the edifice and building? I meane of thoſe heauenly and diuine virtues that are needfull and requiſite to the perfection of a good Chriſtian. It muſt needs be that they alſo fall downe, and that in their ſtead doe ſucceede and bee erected a body of all vices and ſinnes, whereunto we ſee that the greater part amongſt you doe apply and giue themſelues ouer. The remainder of that which S. Paul had ſaid of the Gentiles in the place before alleaged of the Epiſtle to the Romans, being truly fulfilled in them: For this cauſe God gaue them vp to vile affections,
                     Verſ. 26. 
                     for euen, &c.
                  But wee need not wonder at it, ſeeing that thoſe of whom you ought to receiue the precepts and doctrines

of ſaluation, and who ought to be vnto you as lights and lampes for to guide and leade you thorow the obſcure darkneſſe of this mortall life, into the way of virtue and heauenly felicitie, I meane the Paſtours and Prelates amongſt you, men that are dedicated, deuoted, and conſecrated to Gods worſhip, are they that are your ſtumbling blockes, and ſtones of offence, and thruſt and carry you by their bad examples, peruerſe and corrupt actions, diſordered and irregular life, to the like enormities. It is a thing too well knowne, auouched and confeſſed, ſo that wee neede not ſtay nor ſtand any longer vpon the proofe thereof. As alſo it would be but a wronging of chaſt eares, offending heauen, and infecting the aire by thoſe abominable ſtenches, filths, villanies, and pollutions more then infectious, deſeruing rather to be couered and buried vnder the tombe of eternall obliuion, then to bee vented foorth and brought to light for to ſee the day.
                  But yet I doubt that you will bring me (for an excuſe and honeſt cloake of theſe horrible and deteſtable impieties, and for an argument of my pretended and obiected wickedneſſe and leuitie of minde) the religious pietie, deuotion of minde, perfection of manners, complement of virtues, and holineſſe of life, of thoſe of the company and condition from which I am departed, and haue withdrawne and ſequeſtred my ſelfe; and although that what is ſaid of thoſe before be true, yet theſe being ſuch (as all the world beleeueth, and the outward appearance teſtifieth and beares record of as much) I had no lawfull pretence and occaſion to doe what I haue done, ſeeing I might

with facilitie and eaſe (though elſewhere hardly) worke out my ſaluation in that eſtate and condition, which is ſo perfect and compleat, and ſo farre diſtant and remoued from the enormities and irregularities of all the reſt of your Church.
                  This is that whereunto now I ſhould neede to anſwer in witneſſe of the truth, in defence of my owne innocence, and for the ſimple peoples ſake, who ſuffer themſelues to be deceiued by theſe faire ſhewes, outward appearances, fained and diſſembled perfections and holines, to the end that I might enlighten them, bring them out of errour, and make them to ſee the truth in his owne and natural brightneſſe. But becauſe the ſhortneſſe of this ſmall declaration cannot ſuffer me to ſtand vpon it ſufficiently,Againſt the orders of Friers, and namely Capucins. and ſo long as it would be expedient and needfull, I referre that part to another Treatiſe and particular diſcourſe, which I will ſet out ſhortly (if God permit) wherin I will cauſe plainly to bee ſeene by the eye, and to bee touched with the finger of all the world, that which is the truth of it. In the meane time I ſay in groſſe and generall tearmes, that theſe are things diſguiſed, and full of myſteries, being not the ſame within which they are without, like to Sacraments and Parables. The world ſees only the cruſt, the barke and the skinne, and lookes no further into it; whereupon it is and continues ſtill couſened and deceiued. That ſad and demure countenance, that pale face, that lumpiſh viſage, that ragged behauiour, that hollow and low looke, thoſe frowning browes, are but as a faire out-ſide, a counterfeited ſtone, and a good face ſet vpon a bad pranke; as a Tragicke ſhew, wherein the King oftentimes counterfets

the begger, the wiſe man the foole, the proud the humble, the rich the poore; but within and in truth it goes quite otherwiſe. Vnder that courſe cloth, that browne and gray habit, that rugged and contemptible garment, how much pride, vanitie, ambition, couetouſneſſe, deſire and affection to honour and glory, how much preſumption, good thoughts and opinions of themſelues, contempt and raſh iudging of others, how much enuie, iealouſie, hatred and rancour, and ſuch like, are there couered and hidden? It cannot be conceiued and vnfolded, nay it is incredible, and beyond all imagination to thoſe who haue not the triall and practiſe thereof. They are very like to the tents of Arabia, and the pauilions of Salomon, all blacke without, couered with the furres and dirtie skinnes of dead beaſts, vgly to behold, for raine, duſt and filth: but within all ouer gilded, flouriſhed, ſhining with precious ſtones, full of aromaticall odours; I meane, filled with pride, vanitie, preſumption, arrogancie, and ſuch like. But yet more fitly and more to our purpoſe may they be compared to the Gods of the Egyptians: without were they ingrauen with imboſſements, with inlaying, guilded, carued, enammelled, and inlaide with diuers colours, there could nothing be found ſo faire, pleaſing and acceptable; all the world did worſhip them, did reuerence vnto them, kneeled before them, did offer and ſacrifice to them all the faireſt, richeſt, and moſt precious things they had: but within were nothing but hay, chaffe, and filth, a neaſt for toads, adders, and ſerpents. Euen ſo it is with theſe men without, and to the outward appearance they ſeeme to be milde, courteous, affable, peaceable, modeſt,

treatable, bountifull, humble; euen mildeneſſe and goodneſſe it ſelfe, &c. Clothed with coarſe and baſe cloth, with a contemptible habit, without ſhirts, without hoſen, or ſhooes, with a mortified looke, and an orderly pace, &c. and there is nothing ſo goodlie and perfect in ſhow, they ſeeme to be young Saints, I I will not ſay little gods: All the world reſpects, honours, and worſhips them (if I may ſo ſpeake) does reuerence vnto them, bends the knee before them, yea offereth and ſacrificeth vnto them the faireſt, fatteſt, and beſt of all their goods and ſubſtance; but as for the inward, and that which is within, O! what a ſtore of dirt, filth, and villanie is therein! There is nothing (as I haue ſaid) but pride, vanitie, ambition, proud preſumption, arrogance, enuy, iealouſie, and a thouſand other ſuch like wickedneſſes and miſchiefes, altogether incomparable, vnconceiuable, yea (as I haue ſaide) incredible and beyond all thought, to thoſe that haue not the triall and practiſe hereof. I deſire no other witneſſes thereof, then their owne conſciences, they know how it ſtands with them, and wil acknowledge, I am ſure, and ingenuouſly confeſſe (at leaſt in their ſoules) that what I ſay is true: But what? I doe not ſay the tenth part of it, no not the hundreth of what might be ſaid: and the wiſeſt, the moſt conſcionable, and honeſt men amongſt them (for there are yet ſome ſuch amongſt them, and we muſt giue them this commendation, and confeſſion to the truth) doe not conceale this; but doe ſay with a loud and cleere voyce, and affirme amongſt them, that if men did know and take them to be ſuch as they are, in ſtead of white loaues and wine, wherewith they fill their wallets

and bottles, they would fling ſtones and flints at their heads, and throw them head-long into the water.
                  We will ſpeake and diſcourſe hereof, God willing, another time more particularly and at large, to the end (as I haue ſaid) that I might enlighten thoſe ſimple folkes, that ſuffer themſelues to be deceiued vnder theſe faire ſhewes and appearances, and fained and diſſembled perfection and ſocietie, and to make them to ſee the truth in his naturall brightneſſe.
                  Now all what before hath beene ſaid, being as it is, and that no man as I thinke, of iudgement and reaſon, and that will neuer ſo little open his eyes to the light, can be ignorant heereof, or call it in queſtion, or honeſtly deny it: Iudge, (and that I pray you, without trouble and paſſion, but with a quiet and ſettled minde, and in the ſerenitie of your conſcience;) Iudge, I ſay, whether I haue had any iuſt matter and occaſion, to doe what I haue done, deſiring to worke out my ſaluation. And whether it bee without cauſe that I haue ſeparated and withdrawne my ſelfe from you and your company; for to vnite and ioyne my ſelfe to the ſocietie of the faithfull and true Diſciples of our Sauiour, and to the true Church, without the which there is no hope of ſaluation. And I am certaine and aſſured (as I haue told you in the beginning) that you ſhall finde me as farre remoued from haſtineſſe, precipitation, inconſtancie, and inconſiderateneſſe of minde, and other the like things, which inconſiderately and in ſomewhat too hot a moode you haue obiected to me, as I come neere to the truth.
                  Now may it pleaſe Gods ſupreme Maieſtie to enlighten

lighten your mindes with the m
                        ••
                     de and p
                        ••••
                     ing beame of his diuine light, for to diſpoſe you ſo, that you may know it, and with mee participate of the grace, fauour, and heauenly benediction, wherewith it hath pleaſed his goodneſſe and pure mercy, without any merit of mine, to preuent me, ſatiate, and fill mee ſo ſweetly: this I deſire of him with all mine heart, and as farre as the deſires and affections of my ſoule can attaine vnto; as alſo, that he will ſtrengthen, confirme, and encourage daily more and more my ſpirit, that I may againſt all the endeuours and aſſaults of men, of the deuill and hell, continue, perſeuere, and die holily in this happy vocation. So bee it.
                  Soli Deo Gloria.
               
            
            
               
                  Faults eſcaped thus to be amended.
                  PAg. 1. lin. 4. for de reade du. p. 2. l. 7. r prouidence. p. 4. l. penult. dele and. p 6. l. vlt. for I deſire it, r. But be it ſo. p. 8. l. 11. after wine interpoſe in the Sacrament of the Euchariſt. p. 18. l. 19 r. Archangeli Gabriel. p. 21. r. l. 29. for 23. r. 2.3. p. 22. l. 5. for 18. Ioh. 4. r. 15. Ioh. 2. & 4. p. 34. l. 17. r if I would diſcouer. p. 38. l. 24. in fine, r. in. p. 41. l. 27. r. excellence. p. 43. l 2. r. for. l. 27. r. deceaſed. p. 44. l. 11. for nf r. of. l 18. dele him. l. 19 r. infallible. p. 46. l. 7. in marg. r. 1. Eiuſdem. p. 47. l. 15. dele and. l. 16. r. ſung.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A DECLARATION OF HENRY MARC DE Gouffier Marquiſe of Boniuet, Lord of Creuecoeur, &c. Made in the Conſiſtorie of Rochell, in the preſence of the Paſtors and Elders of the ſaid Towne; as alſo of Monſieur de la VIOLETTE and THEVENOT, Paſtors of the Churches of Marans and Benet, on Wedneſday being the third of Auguſt, 1616. The which very ſame proteſtation likewiſe hath beene made by the ſaid Lord Marquiſe in the preſence of the whole Church of ROCHEL, on Sunday being the ſeuenth of the ſaid moneth, after the morning Sermon in the great Church.
                  At ROCHELL, Printed for H. HAVLTIN, by CORNELIS HERTMAN. 1616.
                  LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, dwelling neere S. Auſtens gate, at the ſigne of the Pide-Bull. 1616.
               
               
                  
                  The French Printer to the Reader.
                  
                     BEcauſe that otherwiſe this page had beene left emptie, I haue thought good to ſet in it the Epitaph of the late Lord of BONIVET, Admirall of France, as I haue found it in Du-Bellay.
                  
                  
                     LA France & le Piémont, & les Cieux, & les arts,
                     Les Soláats, & le Monde out faict comme ſix parts
                     De ce grand Boniuet: Car vne ſi grand choſe
                     Dedans vn ſeul tembeau ne pouuoit eſtre encloſe.
                  
                  
                     La France en a le corps qú elle auoit eſleué,
                     Le Piémont a le coeur qú il auoit eſprouuē,
                     Les Cieux en out l' eſprit, & les Arts la memoire,
                     Les Soldats le regret, & le Monde la Gloire.
                  
                  The Engliſh whereof is the very ſame which wee finde to be the Epitaph made vpon the death of our Country-man the noble and thrice-worthy Knight Sir Philip Sidney: and therefore I haue thought good to leaue it as it was (mutatis mutandis) the names onely altered.
                  
                     
                        FRANCE and PIEMONT, the Heauens, and the Arts,
                     The Souldiers, and the World, haue made ſixe parts
                     Of noble BONIVET, for none will ſuppoſe
                     That a ſmall heape of ſtones can BONIVET incloſe.
                  
                  
                     His body FRANCE hath had, for ſhe it fed;
                     And PIEMONT his bloud in her defence ſhed:
                     The Heauens haue his ſoule, the Arts haue his fame,
                     All Souldiers the griefe, the World his good name.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE TRANSLATOR to the READER.
                  
                     COurteous Reader, I haue made bold after this former Treatiſe yet a while to trouble (or rather to delight) you with this enſuing ſhorter, yet no leſſe zealous, diſcourſe. The neereneſſe of both their arguments may in ſome ſort challenge a neereneſſe of place, and I hope ſhall obtaine at your hands a like acceptation. I will ſay no more: onely giue me leaue to adde this obſeruation of Gods continuall watchfulneſſe ouer his Church. We haue ſeene of late what troubles, what broiles, what feares of a generall deuaſtation haue beene (and it is to be feared are ſcarce yet ended) in that our neighbour Country. Many ſmall Treatiſes and Pamphlets (that were daily througed as it were to the Preſſe) doe giue hereof a ſufficient teſtimonie: ſo that wee might in a manner ſay (as it is in the firſt chapter of Iob often repeated) Whiles hee was yet ſpeaking,
                     Iob 1. 
                     another came, and ſaid, &c. While one booke of bad newes was yet a printing, another came and brought vs worſe newes. Whileſt the matters of their Common-wealth ſtand thus, ſee how God on the other ſide prouides for his Church, and daily addes to it ſuch as ſhall bee ſaued.
                     Act. 2.47. Not many moneths ſince wee haue heard of the happy conuerſion of the Duke de Candale, one of the Peeres of France, and with

him of a many likewiſe that were of his retinue. This newes was ſcarce downe, but behold this other Treatiſe comming forth, declaring the conuerſion of a Gentleman, though not equall to the former in birth, yet (if wee may beleeue the Romaniſts) as farre aboue him in regeneration, as they eſteeme a ſpirituall vocation to exceede the temporall. And whiles he was yet ſpeaking, another came, I meane, whileſt this booke (at leaſt the tranſlation thereof) was yet in the Preſſe, another came, namely this preſent Declaration of Marquiſe Boniuet, &c. So that wee haue cauſe ſtill to bleſſe God for his goodneſſe, who though (with thoſe builders in Nehemiah) hee hath for a while had his ſword girded on his loines,
                     Neh. 4.18. for to ſtrike by way of puniſhment his people, yet at the ſame time hee kept in the other hand the hammer and chizell for to ſquare and fit theſe liuing ſtones to the building of his ſpirituall Temple. But what doe I? I muſt conclude, leſt mine obſeruation ſhould proue to be longer then the text it ſelfe. In the meane time accept of that which is done for you, and bee thankfull to God for that which he hath done for his Church: and in particular ceaſe not to pray continually for the peace of the diſtreſſed Ieruſalem which he hath in France. Farewell. 
                  
                     
                        London, 
                        this laſt of Auguſt, 1616.
                        
                      
                     Yours, E. M.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A DECLARATION OF HENRY MARC DE GOVFFIER, Marquiſe of Boniuet, Lord of Creuecoeur, &c.
                  
                  
                     IF ſo be that pietie and the knowledge of God were things hereditarie, and of that nature that they could deſcend from the parents to the children, as well as doe the goods and poſſeſſions of this world; then ſhould not I need at this time to declare what I am, what is my beleefe, and what God hath put into me: for my baptiſme, mine education and bringing vp would teſtifie it; I hauing beene deſcended from ſuch perſons, whereof ſome haue had the feeling of Gods truth within them, and others the very confidence of profeſſing it openly. But the publike calamities, which for ſo many yeeres haue afflicted this eſtate, haue brought to mee in particular for my part this loſſe,

(more to be lamented then any other) that I could neuer haue a taſte of that good affection which parents are wont to beare toward their children; and that thoſe, from whoſe care I might haue looked for a faithfull inſtruction in matters of ſaluation, hauing beene taken out of the miſeries of this world, as ſoone almoſt as I came vnto it, there was left vnto mee no other light then for the body, and my ſoule ſtill continued in darkneſſe and the ſhadow of death, and that in ſuch manner, that accordingly as I grew in age, ſo I daily proceeded in errour, and ſtraying from Ieſus Chriſt and his Goſpell, I ſtrayed likewiſe from mine owne happineſſe, and had beene likely miſerably to continue in that lamentable and deplorable eſtate euen vnto this day, and ſo forwards, if God, who knoweth who are his, and whoſe names hee hath written in his booke of life, had not had pittie of me: and if the goodneſſe of him, who ſheweth mercy to whom hee ſheweth mercy, had not preuented mee, and formally oppoſed it ſelfe to the miſchiefe which was pleaſing vnto me, and to that curſe, which being to mee the greateſt of all, yet aboue all others was hugged and liked of by my ſoule. And if the kindneſſe of God towards mee hath beene eminent in regard of the thing it ſelfe, in that he hath vouchſafed to deliuer me from the power of darkneſſe, for to tranſlate me to the kingdome of his well-beloued ſonne; the meanes alſo which it hath pleaſed him to vſe for to bring to paſſe this happie effect, are no leſſe worth the conſidering, in that God of the meanes of my totall perdition (at leaſt as they might ſeeme likely to bee) hath made as many meanes of my conuerſion to him, according as hee is

wont to draw ſweetneſſe out of bitter things for his children,Rom. 8. and generally to make all things to turne to the beſt for thoſe who are called according to his determined purpoſe.
                  
                  It is now twelue yeeres agoe when I was at Rome: (I will ſay no more) there mine eyes ſaw wonders, but ſuch as were quite of another nature then thoſe which heretofore the Apoſtles (being directed and animated by the holy Spirit) brought forth for to authorize and confirme the doctrine of grace. And how carefully and induſtriouſly ſoeuer I was nurtured in ignorance, and brought vp in the hatred of the Religion, and the loue of Idolatrie, yet I could neuer bee hindred from perceiuing that there was a great diſproportion betweene the ſtate of thoſe, who at this day doe domineere ouer the Church, and the condition of them, who formerly did feed the flocke of Chriſt that was committed vnto them. Yet that was ſcarce any more, then if I ſhould haue beheld the darkneſſe of the night, without being able to diſcerne the brightneſſe of the day: or if I did beginne to take notice, it was in that manner as men beginne to ſee at the breake of day. That beginning, how ſmall ſoeuer it was then, did not continue vnprofitable: the riſing of the Sunne drew nigh, the light increaſed, and was ſtrengthned in mine vnderſtanding; the abuſes of Poperie appeared vnto me both groſſer and more; God left not in mee his worke vnperfect, hee did put me in minde of inquiring a little further, and to be informed truly by himſelfe in his owne word, whether of the two Religions that are receiued in this Kingdome might haue the vpper hand in regard

of the truth, or had more conformitie vnto this word. This enquirie did make mee to reſolue about ſome three yeeres ſince, to forſake the ſeruice which I finde condemned in the Scripture, and to embrace that which I find therein commanded, and to come forthwith out of Babylon, for feare that partaking longer of her knowne crimes, I ſhould bring my ſelfe into a manifeſt danger of partaking of her vnknowne plagues. Whileſt I had this reſolution, which came to me from God, behold on the contrary many conſiderations, which came from elſewhere: on the one ſide were preſented to mine eyes the luſtre, the pompe, the dignities, the greatneſſe, the hopes of the earth, and with all this oſtentation of the glories of the world, as it were a certaine voice well-neere like to that which ſaid ſometimes to our Lord, I will giue thee all theſe things, if thou fall downe and worſhip mee: on the other ſide, the pouertie, the miſeries, the ruines of houſes, the hatred, the contempt, and all what is moſt able to cauſe a diſtaſte, which ſhould bee mine aſſured lot in caſe of change. Theſe two tentations, the one on the right, and the other on the left hand, did make me ſuſpend the effect of that wil which the ſpirit of God had inſinuated into my ſpirit; I looked behind me a good while,Rom. 1.18. 
                     I withheld the truth in vnrighteouſnes, I made my ſelfe beleeue that by doing much euil I ſhould haue good done vnto me; I fled from the preſence of God, but God did make me at length feele that he deceiues himſelfe, which thinkes to ſcape by ſwiftneſſe from before him: he prepared for me a Whale for to ſwallow me, but yet not for to deſtroy me; I was chaſtened by his hand, and that through the ſame things

in the which I had ſinned: he tooke away out of mine hands both that which I had, and that which I had not. And now my hopes were cut off euen at the root, now many things by me poſſeſſed were loſt for me, now my libertie (more precious then all the reſt) was taken from me: but God be praiſed, who hauing taken from mee ſo many things, yet hath giuen mee ſo many, that if hee hath ſent mee any euill, it was onely for to ſend me ſome good; if he hath made mee poorer, it was for to make mee richer then euer I was before, and that in better riches, in thoſe namely that are the onely true ones: if hee hath made my body to bee caſt into priſon, it was for to make my ſoule to come out of thrall: if hee hath ſuffered mee to fall into the hands of ſuch men as hated me, it was for feare that I ſhould fall into his hands, yea into his hands as he is a rigorous Iudge, and yet to the end that I might fall into his hands, as hee is a kinde and mercifull Father, and that I might learne to my coſt (being I could not doe it by the example of others) to feare him, to reuerence him, to giue him the glory, and to conſecrate to him whatſoeuer belongs to me, without any reſeruation, as I acknowledge my ſelfe truly and after an infinite number of ſorts to be bound to doe, and acknowledge likewiſe, that it was the pure mercy of God that I was not conſumed, becauſe that his compaſſions did not faile me. And ſeeing that God hath done mee that fauour, that his word doth ſerue mee at this day in ſtead of a lampe for my feet, and of a light for my ſteps, to this word and to this Scripture, diuinely inſpired, I purpoſe to keepe mee, without euer any more repairing to the traditions of men,

ſeeing that God hath giuen Ieſus Chriſt for to be the head to his Church (of the which I am a member) for to bee the onely Mediatour betweene him and men, and our Aduocate towards his Father; for to be the onely Prieſt for euer, for to haue an euerlaſting Prieſthood, and for to offer (as hee hath offered) one onely ſacrifice for ſinnes, for to bee the Lambe of God, whoſe bloud doth cleanſe vs from all ſinne, for to ſit for euer at the right hand of God, and to be held in the heauen vntill the time of the re-eſtabliſhing of all things, and vntill that hee ſhall come from thence for to iudge the quicke and the dead: I acknowledge from henceforth no more (to the preiudice of him) any miniſteriall head of the Church on the earth, nor Aduocate, taken from among either men or Angels, nor any Prieſt ſacrificing his body, nor Maſſe ſeruing for a propitiatorie ſacrifice for the ſinnes of the liuing and the dead, nor Purgatorie after this life, nor reall preſence of the body and bloud of Ieſus Chriſt in the Sacrament vnder the kindes of bread and wine. And becauſe that the Spirit of God doth teach mee, that no fleſh is iuſtified by the workes of the Law, but only by faith in Ieſus Chriſt, I will no longer forge vnto my ſelfe any merit of good workes, and much leſſe of ſupererogation; and I will account the good workes of the faithfull to haue beene prepared by God, to the end that wee may walke therein, and will eſteeme them to be the way to the Kingdome of heauen, and not the cauſe of raigning. And it is in this truth, and in the profeſſion thereof, that I deſire, and that I promiſe here before God, his Angels, and his Church, to bee willing to liue and to die, deteſting with all mine heart

all Idolatries, ſuperſtitions and errors, which are contrary to the confeſſion of faith of the Churches of this Kingdome, and proteſting to ſubmit my ſelfe wholly to that which concernes the order and diſcipline of the Church. Thus ſigned, Boniuet.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  
                  THE COPIE OF A LETTER, SENT from PARIS by an Engliſh Gentleman to his friend in England, Wherein are briefely touched thoſe occurrences which lately fel out in Paris, about the Prince of CONDE, on the 22. of Auguſt, this preſent yeere, 1616.
                  Laus Deo, Auguſt, 22. 1616.
                     
                  
                  
                     I Haue with the firſt conueniency ſent ouer vnto you, the neweſt, and (heere) moſt knowne newes, dated, as before; hauing receiued no letters from you ſince the tenth of the ſame. And whereas, not onely in many before, but eſpecially in your laſt, you ſeriouſly importun'd mee (knowing what windes

blew heere) to giue you intelligence of French preſent occurrences, as they ſhall happen; I haue done ſo, rather to ſatisfie your minde, deſirous of nouelties, than to pleaſe my ſelfe in ſetting downe the troubles of others, that haue too many of mine owne. France (as you know) is to mee nothing, in regard I am an Engliſhman and a ſtranger to her factions. Shee is as one of her Vineyards, rob'd by French-men in my ſight, which ſtelth is no loſſe to mee. I ſtand ſafe on the ſhore, and beholde her ſides beating vpon a rocke, the wracke I feele not; yet am I bound, in common humanitie, to compaſſionate my neighbours ſorrow, ſeeing his houſe burning about his eares: And doe therefore proteſt to you, that I ſuffer as much, as if I were a naturall French-man borne, in being preſent within ſo goodly a Citie as Paris is, when ſhee is full (at leaſt looking howrely to bee ſo) of turmoiles, vproares, and ciuill combuſtion: and to ſee ſo many thouſands of the French (I meane the Pariſiens) walke vp and downe with ſuch amazed, wilde, and diſtracted faces; that if tenne be in a troupe together, not three of them can ſafely ſweare, that a fourth man is his friend. In euery ſtreet, yea at euery corner, the people flocke in heapes, muttering and murmuring, and whiſpering one to another; and nothing is more expected, (nay more deſired by ſome) than that a ſword may be drawne, to the end that pell mell they may fall to cutting of throates. The Townes of France are rich, and ſpoiles would now taſte ſweetly, eſpecially to the Peſant, who

wiſheth to build vpon his countries ruines, and to ſet an edge vpon his fury, this occaſion gaue aduantage. For vpon the twentie two of Auguſt, now preſent, (euen this day, in which I write vnto you) the Prince of Conde being in Paris, well accompanyed, came to the Court, where hee had not beene long, but he was ſurprized and carryed priſoner to the Louure, why hee came, and whether of himſelfe or ſent for, is not in my knowledge, and if I ſhould ſet downe all which I heare touching the cauſes of this ſurprizall (of whoſe true notice I deſire not to bee guiltie) you might thinke mee, either very idle, to call euery ſhadow a ſubſtance, or elſe very buſie to bee ſo inquiſitiue in the affaires of a kingdome, when mine owne are altogether priuate. I had rather walke vp and downe the ſtreets of Paris (albeit with ſome feare of danger) than thruſt my head into their Councell chambers, and to meddle with Princes matters, which no whit concerne mee. And therefore doe I ſparingly deliuer you theſe vproares, not ſearching into the ground and reaches of them, as hearing various and inconſtant reports: I giue eare to many, but credit few, and dare not (albeit I might) vtter my owne opinion, becauſe I am as loth to wrong you by this of mine, as that you ſhould doe the like to your friends in England, by a ſecond relation. The Prince of Conde being taken, the Duke of Vandoſme eſcaped. Others likewiſe fearing the ſame danger, met with the ſame happy meanes of ſafetie: For the Duke of Bouillon, with Tremouille, & many other perſonages of note

being at a ſermon, hauing notice giuen, as they came from Church, fled; and to make their ſide the ſtronger, the Duke Du Maine is ioyn'd with them. How theſe Noble-men came to the knowledge of the Prince of Condees ſurprizall, is (euen heere) doubtfull. Some ſay by a French Page, who ſaw him carried away, & that he was demanded to deliuer vp his ſword, which he refuſed to do: others otherwiſe: But howſoeuer it happened, it ſeem'd a good and miraculous deliuerance of the reſt, (who hold with him) if at leaſt they turne not that preſeruation of themſelues, to the confuſion of others. Which the rather is to bee feared, for that hauing (to auoid the blow) turned their backes for ſafety, they now (as it is thought) arme their hands with weapons, aſſembling themſelues, and freinds with all their forces at Soiſſons, to make their party (for defence) as ſtrong as they can. Now, whether in loue to the Prince of Conde, or in hate for any priuate reſpect they beare the Marqueſse d' Ancres; a man famous inough in England and elſe where for exceeding fauours, done him by the Queene mother in France; or whether (as often it ſo happeneth) a deſire of doing ſomething (though neuer ſo ill) ſet the common peoples fingers on itching, I know not: But preſently vpon ſurprizall of the Prince (it being noyſd through Paris, that hee was ſent priſoner to the Louure) they ranne in heapes and height of fury to the Marqueſses houſe, aſſaulted, entred, and rifled it; making ſpoyle of all that was in it, and when no other prey could feede them, they ſpent

their malice on the inſenſible walles (tearing and beating the building downe) which (if hee could haue beene gotten) they ſwore to execute vpon himſelfe. In this wauering eſtate the Kingdome ſtill ſtands. What the euent of theſe troubles will bee, lies in the hands of God onely: the occurrences whereof (as hereafter time ſhall deliuer) I will (as theſe) ſend vnto you, expecting a returne (by way of exchange) from you of ſome newes out of England. And ſo with wiſhes of your health, I bid you farewell, from Paris, 
                     the 22. of Auguſt, 1616.
                  
                  
                     
                        Reſting yours moſt aſſured, R. M.
                  
               
            
         
      
   