
      
         
            
            ¶Here foloweth the .C. Hystoryes of Troye.
            
            ☞ Lepistre de Othea deesse de Prudence / enuoyee a lesperit cheualereux Hector de Troye / auec cent Histoires. Nounessement 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            ¶The Prologue of the transletour.
            
               BOke of thy rudenesse by consyderacion
               Plunged in the walowes of abasshement
               For thy translatoure, make excusacion
               To all to whom thou shalt thy selfe present
               Besechynge them vpon the sentement
               In the composed to set theyr regarde
               And not on the speche cancred and frowarde.
            
            
               ¶Shewe them, y• thy translatour hath ye wrytē
               
               Not to obtayne thankes or remuneracions
               But to the entent, to do the to be wryten
               As well in Englande, as in other nacyons
               And where mysordre, in thy translacion is
               Vnto the perceyuer, with humble obeysaunce
               Excuse thy reducer, blamyng his ygnoraunce.
            
            
               ¶And pray hym where he fīdeth y• mysordred
               To take the payne, therin to amende the
               So y• by hym, thou be not blamed but fordred
               But enuyous tongues, fro thē god defēde the
               Them dred thy trāslatour euer whā he pēned y•
               
               Therfore whā thou shalt, be blamed of enuye
               Set not his rancoure, at a butterflye.
            
            
               ¶Let hym go kepe the dorre with a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Doughter to kynge Cypres of Athenes
               
                  And dylygently hym selfe dyspose
               With her against maner any to make resistēce
               That he neuer entre to here by vyolence
               And lyke to Ethna a
                     •
                  is skyll and ryght
               Let hym bren him self & hurt none other wigh
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               ¶And yf any man make question vnto the
               Howe thy reducer in his translacion
               Without intellygence had audacite
               For to presume vpon this compylacion
               Yf he be of honour make thy suplycacion
               For pardon therof, and yf he loue dyscene
               With lawfull excuse, pray hym to be content.
            
            
               ¶Whiche shalbe this, say that the translatour
               When the to reduce, he set his enterpryse
               was flowring in youth, what time y• īstigatour
               Of hell hath most power, vīce on hī to surmyse
               Fyndynge hym in Idlenes, whiche to dyspyse
               He hath enterprysed, this rude reduction
               For youth may not yelde most eloquēt īstruccion.
            
            
               ¶And yf he woll, as yet, further reply
               Agaynst the translacion, thus or thus
               Alledge the vpon Aucthoryties boldely
               As of seynt Bernarde, the doctor mellystuous
               Howe he sayth agaynst all persons ocious
               
                  what acōpt or resō shalbe by you forth brought
               whā you it shal behoue to tell ech ydle thought.
            
            
               ¶The sayd seynt Bernarde saith that ociosite
               To mother to vyce, and stepdame to vertue
               She ouerthroweth stronge men into iniquyte
               She norysseth pryde, and vertue doth subdue
               And maketh the way redy, hell to pursue
               Do alway (saith Iherome) some good busine
                     •
                  
               
               That the deuyll, fynde the not in ydlenes.
            
            
               ¶Sayth also the holy doctour Augustyne
               No man that is stronge, and able to laboure
               Ought to be Idle, but to some worke enclyne
               And to the same sayth Iohn̄ Cassiodore
               The Idle man thynketh vpon no more
               But lecherous viandes, to make his bely chere
               Therfore pray all that shall the rede or here.
            
            
               ¶To take in gre this symple translacion
               As (without doubte) all vertuoue wyll do
               But suche as ben replete with emulacion
               May not refrayne y• theyr hertes draweth vnto
               Thus (boke) remembre what thou hast to do
               More charge (as nowe) shal not to the be layde
               But do thy best, in this that I haue sayde.
            
            ¶Finis Prologue.
         
      
      
         
            
            The fyrste Hystorie.
            
               
            
            ¶Here begynneth the Epistle, whiche Othea the Goddes sende vnto Hector of Troye, when he was of the age of .xv. yeres.
            
               The fyrste texte.
               
                  
                     OThea goddes of Prudence
                  Whiche doeth adresse good hertes in valyaunce
                  
                     To the noble Hector, prynce of moste excellence
                  Whiche flouryssheth in Armes hast so great puyssaunce
                  That whom thou encountrest thou puttest to vtteraunce
                  Sone to the mighty Mars god of battayle
                  Whiche all the feates of Armes susteyneth or doth to sayle.
               
               
                  ¶And also to Mynerue, the goddesse puyssaunt
                  Maystresse of armes, as poetes gyue sentence
                  Successour of the Troyans tryhumphaunt
                  Prynce of Troye, and of the Citezens
                  
                     Heyre vnto Pryamus, father of sapyence
                  Salutacion sendeth fyrste vnto the
                  With perfyghte true loue, with out duplycyte.
               
            
            
               The fyrste Glose.
               OThea after the gree & entent may be taken for ye sagenes of a womā And as the auncyent before that they had receyued the lyght, and spendour of the Fayth, adoured and worshypped many Goddes, vnder whiche lawe ben passed the moste hyghe Seygnoryes & lordshyppes that haue ben in the worlde. As the realme of Assyrye, of Perse, the Grekes, the Troyans, Alexandrye, the Romaynes, and many other. And specially all the moste great Phylosophers, As that GOD ne had as yet sette open the gate of his mercy. In this present age we Christen men, by the grace of

God enlumyned of the veray & perfyte Fayth, may reduce and bryng vnto Moralytie the opynyons of the auncyentes And therupon many Alegoryes may be made, And as they were accustomed to adoure and worshyp all thynges, which aboue the cōmune course were prerogatyue, or fortherynge the cōmune profyte by any maner of grace, many Ladyes, whiche were in theyr tyme, were called Goddesses.
               ¶And it was of a trueth after the Hystorie, that in y• tyme of Troye the great flowrysshed in his hygh renōme. A moche sage Lady named Othea consyderyng the fayre youth of Hector of Troy than moche flowrysshynge in vertues, whiche myght be a demonstrued of grace to be in hym, in tyme to come. Send vnto hym many fayre and notable gyftes. And especially his fayre destryer, whiche was named Galathee, to whom in goodnesse none in the worlde myghte be compared. And for so moche as all

graces mōdayne, which a good knyght ought to haue were fyxed and comprysed in Hector, we may say morally that he them toke by the admonastemēt and aduertysement of Othea, whiche sende vnto hym this Epistle. Morallye.
               By Othea we shall take and vnderstande the vertue of Prudence and sagenesse, wherof she right well prouyded & aourned. And as the .iiii. vertues Cardynall be necessary to a good gouernaū
                  ce, we shall of them speke here in this present volume hereafter. And to this fyrste, we haue gyuen a name and taken the maner to speke somwhat Poetyquely, and accordynge to the veray Hystory the better to ensue and procede vpon our matter, and to our purpose we shall take some auctoryties of auncyent Phylosophers. We shall say euyn so in this present volume, as by the sayd Lady it was gyuen or sende vnto the good Hector, that semblably it maye be vnto all other desyrynge bountye and sagenesse.

And how the vertue of Prudence is moche to be recōmended, speaketh the prynce of Phylosophers Arystotyle.
               For so moche as Prudence is the moste noble of all other thynges it oughte to be demonstred and shewed by the best reason, and the most couenable maner.
            
            
               The .i. Texte
               
                  ANd as I haue great desyre and talent
                  My selfe to endeuoure, the perfyghte noblenesse
                  Of the to preserue and euer to augment
                  And that thy valyaunce and hygh prowesse
                  In all tymes be obserued with out distresse
                  By myne Epistle thy youth to supporte
                  I wol the ennorter say & exhorte.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Of suche thynges, as bene moste necessary
                  To valiaunce hygh great and preemynent
                  And to the opposite of prowes contrary
                  To the ende that thy good herte set his entent
                  The horse for to gerte by good aduertysement
                  That flyeth by the ayre and pegasus is named
                  To whom al valyaunt hertes ben attamed.
               
               
                  ¶For so moche as I knowe that thy condycyon
                  To feates cheualrous is right able to stande
                  
                     Vpon all sydes by direct inclynacyon
                  More than of other .v. hundred thousande
                  And as a Goddesse, I knowe and vnderstande
                  By scyence, not by perceyue ne coniecture
                  In euery thynge what shalbe thyne aduenture.
               
               
                  ¶Of the well me ought to haue remembraunce
                  For wel I know algates that there shall be
                  Worthyest of worthy, and mos
                        •
                      of valyaunce
                  And aboue all other haue th
                        •
                      renōme
                  
                     But to thentent that I be loued of the
                  Loued, and why not? sythen I am she
                  Loth to come to her whiche al them enhaunse that haue me in chyertie.
               
               
                  ¶Syttynge in my chayre, I rede them a lesson
                  Whiche vnto the heauens doth them to ascende
                  So I the praye that thou be of them oon
                  And that thou me beleue and well my wordes attende
                  Remembrynge well what I the wryte and sende
                  And yf thou me here recounte

proferer or say
                  A thynge that is to come after this day.
               
               
                  ¶And that I to the saye, that thou aswell it ought
                  As yf it were passed, to holde in memorie
                  Know thou for truth, that they ben in my thought
                  Comprysed by the sprite of prophesie
                  Therfore entēde & be not wery
                  For nothynge shall I say, that is or shall befall
                  Than sith yf they be to come, remembre them at all.
               
            
            
               The prologue of the Allegorie.
               ¶For to bring to Allegorie the purpose of oure matter, we shall take vnto oure

sayenges the holy scrypture to the edyfycacion of the soule, beynge in this myserable worlde.
               EVen so as by the soueraygne sapyence and hyghe puyssaunce of God, all thynges ben creat and made, reasonably, they ought to attende and awayte for theyr ende by this mynystracion. And for so moche as our soule of God, creat and made after his propre Image, is of all his creatures most noble after Angelles. It is a thyng conuenable and necessary that it be aorned of vertues, wherby it may be conueyde to the ende wherto it is made. And in so moch as it maye be empesshed and letted by the assaultes and instigacion of the enemye inferyall, whiche is her mortall aduersyte, & ofttymes her destourneth to come to her beatytude, we may call the lyfe of man very cheualrie, as the Scripture in many places doth expresse and as al thynges mondayne ben transytorious

and fallyble we ought to haue in contynuall memorye the tyme to come whiche is without ende. And for so moche as this is the conclusion and the perfayte cheualrie, and all other is of no comparyson, and that therof the victoryous ben crowned in glorye. We shall take the maner to speake of the spryte cheualrous. And be this done v
                     •
                  
                  to the lawde of almyghty God pryncypally, and to the profyte of them which shall take dylectacion in the herynge of this present volume.
            
            
               ¶The fyrste Allegorie.
               IN lyke maner as prudence and sagesse is the Mother and conductres of all vertues without whom they may not be wel gouerned. It is necessary vnto the spryte cheualryous that of Prudence it be aourned, as saith saint Augustyne in his booke of the syngularitie of clerkes that in what place that prudence be abidyng lightly may be esesed and eschewed all thinges contrary,

but there as Prudence is dyspysed, all thynges contrarye haue signourie and dominacion. And to this purpose sayth Salomon in his Prouerbes.
               Si intrauerit sapienti
                     •
                   cor tuum et scientia anime tue platuerit consilium custodiet te / et Prudentia seruabit te. Prouerbiorū secundo capit.
            
         
         
            The .ii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .ii. Texte.
               
                  AND to the ende, that thou vnderstande
                  What the behoueth to do, and

that thou make
                  The vertues more propyce and apte to thyne hande
                  The better to come to, receyue and take
                  The promysses wherof, I here spake
                  As of Puyssaunce / valyaunce / and Cheualrous
                  Albeit so, it is aduenturous.
               
               
                  ¶Yet vnto the, one thyng shal I tell
                  A Syster Germayne, is there one to me
                  Replete with Beaultie, that other doth excell
                  But ouer al thing in espetialite
                  Swete, and coye, she is attempred wyse and fre
                  
                     And neuer with the, she is surprysed
                  For any thynge, without measure promysed.
               
               
                  ¶She is the goddesse of attemperaunce.
                  Vvithouten whom, the name of great grace
                  Thou mayste not obtayne, for but she pease the balaunce
                  All valueth not, when peyse in this case
                  Therfore thou shalt her fauoure purchace
                  For she is the Goddesse in price moste raysed
                  Of all that ben sage, moche loued and praysed.
               
            
            
               
               The .ii. Glose.
               OThea sayth, that Attemperaunce is his systre, whom he ought to loue. The vertue of attemperaunce verytably may be sayd systre and semblable vnto Prudence. For Attemperaunce is the demonstraunce and showyng of prudence. And of prudence foloweth attemperaunce Therfore she saith that he holde attemperaunce for his frende, so as sēblably ought for to do all good knyghtes desyryng the lawde that is gyuē to all good, so as sayth the Phylosopher named Democritus. Attemperaunce amodereth, or measureth the vyces, and maketh perfyte the vertues.
            
            
               The .ii. Allegorie.
               THe vertue of attemperaunce whiche hath the proprete to lymite superfluyties ought to be had of the good spryte. And Saynt Augustyne sayth in his booke of the maners of the church, that the offyce of attemperaunce is to refrayne and appayse the maners of concupiscence, whiche ben vnto vs contrarye

& destourne vs from the lawe of God, and also to dyspyse all carnall delytes and worldely louynges. To this purpose speaketh saynt Peter the Apostle in his fyrste Epistle.
               
                  Obs
                        ••
                     eo vo
                        •
                      tan
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      aduenas et peregriuos abstinere vos a carnalibus desideriis / que militant aduersus animam.
                  Prima petri secundo capit
                        •
                     o.
               
            
         
         
            The .iii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .iii. Texte.
               
                  TO the with vs twayne, is force conuenient
                  
                     Great vertue, yf thou take in reputaunce
                  To Hercules warde, reuert thyne entent
                  Regardynge his prowesse and puyssaunte valyaunce
                  Wherof he had with great habundaunce
                  And notwithstandyng that he was contrarie
                  Vnto the lygnage, and dyd agaynst them varie.
               
               
                  ¶Shall we take not in dysdeyne neuerthelesse
                  His vertues full of force, and so notable
                  Whiche haue vnclosed, the gates of prowesse
                  
                     But yf thou entende, with mynde ferme and stable
                  Invaliaunce to be his sēblable
                  Yet vnto the it is not necessary
                  Vvith folkes infernall, to contende or vary.
               
               
                  ¶What nedeth it to make lytygacion or stryfe
                  Agaynst the god Pluto prynce of darckenesse
                  For Proserpyne, whiche was the herpers wyfe
                  Called Orpheus and doughter to Ceres the Goddesse
                  Whom pluto rauished vpon the see of greesse
                  The nedeth not to cut the chaynes of Cerberous
                  
                     Porter within, that valey tenebrous.
               
               
                  ¶Ne to take attaynte, by them that be in hell
                  Which in dysloyaulte, ben al by lapped
                  As (for his felowes, named as bookes tell
                  Pirotheus, & Theseus,) in Hell to hym lapped
                  Whiche two stode, on an ase to haue ben by trapped
                  Fyghtyng in that place where many soules ben brent
                  By wrapped in paynes and greuous tourment.
               
               
                  ¶For haue thou in warre, neuer so great pleasure
                  
                     To thine intent (trust this that I the tell)
                  Thou mayst in this world fynde good salue and cure
                  Without dyscendynge to seke it downe in hell
                  Ne also it nedeth the not for to mell
                  (In purchasynge of armes the bone courage)
                  Vvith fyerce Sepentes replete with cruell rage.
               
               
                  ¶To Lyons, ne wolfes, the nedeth not make voyage
                  (I know not yf thou this ymagyne or guesse)
                  To Tygre, Oliphant, ne other beestes Sauage
                  
                     For to acquire renōme of great prowesse
                  Excepte that it be, in suche dystresse
                  That case requyre, thy selfe to defende
                  Yf any suche beestes, wolde the offende.
               
               
                  ¶Or the to assayle, wyll them selfe aduaunce
                  In kepyng thy selfe from dommage, the defence
                  Is than honourable, and with out doubtaunce
                  For as the wyse man, gyueth sentence
                  Who so gardeth hym selfe, maketh good prouydence
                  
                     And in suche case, yf thou haue victory
                  It shalbe to the moche honour and glory.
               
            
            
               The .iii. Glose.
               THe vertue of force or strength is to vnderstande not alonely corporall strength, but also constance and stedfastnes, whiche the good knyght ought for 
                     •
                  o haue in all his assayres delibered by good wysdom, and strength to restyst agaynst the contraryties / that to hym may come, as yf it be in fortune in his 
                     •
                  rybulacion, and there agaynst stronge and puyssaūt courage may be profytable to the exaltacion of his valure, and for to gyue materiall example of force, we shall alledge vs vpon Hercules, to the ende that in two maners it be profytable, that is to knowe, in so moch as materyall force is vertue, and specially in feates of knighthode, wherin ye sayd

Hercules was ryght excellent. And fo
                     •
                   the hyghnes of Hector, it was conuen
                     •
                  
                  ble thinge to gyue hym hygh example▪ Hercules was a knight of great meruelous force, & he brought to ende man
                     •
                   knyghtly promyses, he was a great l
                     •
                  
                  bourer, & voyager by the world. And fo
                     •
                   the great and merueylous voyagꝭ tha
                     •
                   he dyd in thynges of great strengthe▪ The Poetes (whiche speke vnder coueture, and in maner of fables,) say tha
                     •
                   he went into hell to fyght with the pri
                     •
                  
                  ces Infernall. And yt he fought agayn
                     ••
                   serpentes & fyerce beestes, wherby is t
                     •
                   be vnderstande the stronge enterpryse that he accomplyshed. And therfore sh
                     •
                   sayth vnto the good knyght yt he ough
                     •
                   to beholde hym selfe, that is to wyt, i
                     •
                   his prowesse and valyaunce after hi
                     •
                   possybilite. And lyke as the cleretie o
                     •
                   the sonne is profytable to all men. S
                     •
                   may be a good example as sayth a ph
                     •
                  
                  losopher. The grayne of wheete whā 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   falleth vpon good lande it is profitabl
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  o all men. Semblably may be a good 
                     •
                  xample avaylable to all them that de
                  
                     •
                  yre valiaunce. And one sage saith thus The vertue of strength maketh a man 
                     •
                  romanable to vanquishe all thynges.
            
            
               The .iii. Allegorie.
               EVen so as without force & vygour, the good knyghte may not deserne 
                     •
                  he pryce of armes. In lyke maner the 
                     •
                  ood espryte maye not haue ne gayne 
                     •
                  he lawde and pryce due to al vitorious 
                     •
                  ithout it. And saynt Ambrose saith in 
                     •
                  is fyrst booke of offyces, that the very 
                     •
                  orce of mans courage is such as is ne
                  
                     •
                  er brysed in aduersite, and that neuer 
                     〈◊〉
                   orguyllous or prowde in his prospe
                  
                     ••
                  te. And that endeuoureth hym selfe to 
                     •
                  epe and defend the adurmentes of ver
                  
                     •
                  ues, to susteyne ryghtwysenes, whiche 
                     •
                  aketh continual warre against vices 
                     •
                  hich is neuer recreant in labours whi
                  
                     •
                  he is hardy in perylles, dyd royde a
                  
                     •
                  aynst the carnall desyres.
               
                  
                     •
                  nd to this purpose speaketh Saynte

Iohn̄ the Euangelyst / in his fyrste Epystle.
               Scrivo vob
                     •
                  s inuenes quousam fortes estes / 
                     •
                   verbum de
                     •
                  manet in vobis / dicistis malignum. Prima Iohann
                     •
                  s secundo capitulo.
            
         
         
            The .iiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .iiii. Texte.
               YEt the behoueth Minos t
                     •
                   resemble
               Yf thou wylt be arenged in oudaunce
               
                  Althoughe he cause many soules to tremble
               As iustyce of hell, hauynge the conueyaunce
               For yf thou entende thy selfe to auaunce
               Make vnto Iustyce, thy cheyfe repayre
               Els any Realme, to haue in gouernaunce
               Thou art Indygne, or any healme to bayre.
            
            
               The .iiii. Glose.
               PRudence sayth vnto ye good knight that yf he wyll be of the rent of the good, it is to hym conuenyent, to haue the vertue of Iustyce or ryghtwysenes as sayth Arystotle, he that shalbe a perfyte Iudge ought fyrst to Iustefy hym selfe for he that is not rightwyse in him

selfe, is not worthy to Iudge any other so it is to be vnderstand, that he correct hym selfe of his defaultes so that they be all extinct and quenched, and after a man so correct may well and ought to be a correctour of many other men. And for to speke morally we shal say a fable to this purpose / after the couerture of Poetes. Minos as saith Poetes is the Iudge of hell. And as the prouoste and soueraygne Baylyfe, and afore hym ben brought al soules, discendyng into that valley. And lyke as they haue deserued penaunce, and after theyr degrees lyke as he woll that they be put in porfoūdyte he turneth his tayle aboute him, and for somoch as hell is the ryghtwyse Iustyce and punysyon of God, take we at this present tyme to speke to that purpose. It was of very truth that a kyng was ī Grete, named Minos of meruaylous fyerstie. And had in hym a great rygor of Iustice. And therfore saye the Poetes, that after his death he was

made as to be Iudge of hell. And Arystotle sayth Iustice or ryghtwysenes is a thyng which God hath established vpon grounde, for to lymyte the thinges.
            
            
               The .iiii. Allegorie.
               ANd in somoche as god is heed of ryghtwysenes and of al the ordre. It is well necessarye to the spryte cheualrous entending to come to glorious victory that he haue that vertue. And saynt Barnarde sayth in one sermon, that Iustice is none other thing, but to yelde to eche man that is his. Than sayd he, yelde to euery maner of people that whiche is theyrs. To thy soueraygne / to thy felowe or egall / and to thy subiecte or seruaunt. To thy soueraygne thou oughtest to giue reuerence and obeysaunce, reuerence of thine hert and obeysaunce of thy body. To thy felowe thou oughtest to yelde counsayle & ayde counsayle in ensygnyng or informyng his ygnoraunce, and ayde in comfortyng hym in that wherto he hath no

puyssaunce or power, to thy subiect thou oughtest to yelde garde and dyscyplyne garde in kepyng hym from doyng euyl. And disciplyne in chastisyng hym whan he hath trespassed. And to this purpose speketh Salomon in his prouerbes.
               
                  Ercogitat iustus de domo impii vt detrahat im
                     
                        •
                     ios a malo, gaudium est iusto facet Iusticiam.
                  Prouerbiorum .xxi. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .v. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .v. Texte.
               
                  AFter beholde / thy selfe in perseus
                  
                     Of whom through al the worlde abrode is layde
                  The glorious fame, whiche rode on Pegasus
                  Flyenge by the ayre, with wynges dysplayed
                  And from the monstre, delyuered he the mayde
                  Whiche named was Andromeda the bryght
                  And by his force the monstre he desmayde
                  Lyke a good and perfyte, gentle arrant knyght.
               
               
                  ¶He rendred her, vnto her Parentes olde
                  This feate oughtest thou to kepe in remembraunce
                  
                     For eche good knight, the same maner shulde holde
                  Yf he woll haue, honoure and valyaunce
                  Whiche valueth more, then all mondayne substaunce
                  So shadowe the vnder his shynynge shelde
                  Fyght with his fashyon, that putteth all to vtteraunce
                  Than shalte thou be stronge, & stable in the felde.
               
            
            
               The .v. Glose.
               ANd for somoche as it is a thyng cōuenient that to the good knight be due honoure and reuerence, we shall showe therof a fygure after the maner of Poetes. Perseus was a moche valyaunt knyght, and many realmes he conquered, & of hym was named the great lande of Perse, and the poetes say that

rode vpon the horse which flewe by the ayre, named Pegasus. And it is to vnderstande, renome whiche flyeth by the ayre into all countrees. He bare in his hande a fauchyon or a sythe whiche is sayd for the great foyson of people whiche by hym were dyscomfyted in many battayles, he delyuered Andromeda, fro the monstre of the see, whiche was a fayre mayde, whom he delyuered from the sayd monstre, whiche by the sentence of God shuld haue deuoured her. Whiche is to vnderstande that all knyghtes ought to succoure women whiche shall haue nede of theyr ayde. So may be noted by Perseus & his flyeng horse, good renome & fame which the good knyght oughte to haue and purchase by his good merytes, and therupon he oughte to ryde, that is that his name ought to be borne in to all landes & regions. And Aristotle saith, good renome & fame maketh a mā relusant & shining to the worlde & agreable in the presence of princes.
            
            
               
               The .v. Allegorie.
               REnome ought to be desyred of the knyghtly soule, or spryte cheualrous amōgest the noble company of the blyssed sayntes of Paradyce purchased by his good merites. The horse Pegasus, which bare it, shalbe his good aungell, whiche shall bere of hym good reporte at the day of Iudgement Andromeda which shalbe delyuered is his soule whom he shall delyuer from the enemy by banquysshyng synne, and that a man ought to flye ouer it, that is to haue good renome in this world to thende to be rewarded of God, and not to haue vaynglory. Saynt Augustyne sayth in his boke of correction, that two thinges ben necessary to a good lyuer, that is to say, good conscience, and good name or renome, conscience for hym selfe, and renome for his neyghboure, and he that assysteth hym in conscience, & dyspyseth renome is cruell: for it is a sygne of noble courage to loue the goodnes of renome, and to this purpose sayth the sage.
               
                  
                  Curam habe de bono nomine / magis 
                        •
                     niet
                        •
                      perman
                        •
                     bit tibi quam mille thesauri preciosi.
                  Ecclesiastici .xli. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .vi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .vi. Texte.
               AMongest all thyne other inclynacions
               Of Iupyter vse / the maners glorious
               Thou shalt obtayne, many collaudacions
               
                  Yf them in ryghte kynde, thou holde and dyscusse.
            
            
               The .vi. Glose.
               AS it is sayd afore the Paynimes whiche worshypped many Gods, helde the planettes of the ayre for theyr especiall gods. And of the .vii. planettes they named the .vij. dayes of the weke, Iupyter or Iouis, they helde for theyr gretest god, for somoch as he is set in y• highest aspect of planettes after Saturne. Of Iouis hath the thursday his name, and especially the Arsmetriscientes haue attribued & compared the vertues of the .vij. metalles to the .vij. planettes and named the termes of theyr sciences by the same planettes as it may be sene in Geber, and Nycholas, and the other Aucthorities of that science. To Iupyter they attrybued the metall of Tyn, or pewter. Iupyter or Iouis is a Planet of swete condicion, amiable, & moch ioyous and is fygured to the sanguyne

complectiō. Therfore sayth Othea that is to say, Prudence, that y• good knight ought to haue the condicions of Iupyter, and that specially ought to haue al noble men haūtyng cheualrie. To this purpose sayth Pytagoras, that a kyng ought gracyously to be conuersaunt wt his people, and to them shewe Ioyous vysage. And in semblable wyse it is to be entended of all valyaunte entendynge to honoure.
            
            
               The .vi. Allegorie.
               ¶Nowe brynge we to oure purpo
                     •
                  e the Allegorie, of the propreties of the seuen Planettes.
               Ouis whiche is a swete Planet, & gentle of whom the good knyght ought to haue the condicions.I To vs may sygnifie mercy and compassion whiche the good knyght ought to haue in hym, for saynt Gregory sayth in his Epistle to Nepotian: I remembre not (saith he) to haue sene or hard yt he may be deed which hath voluntarily accōplyshed

the workes of mercy, for misericorde or mercy hath many intercessours & it is impossyble but that the prayers of many shuld not be exaulted. And to this purpose speketh our lord in the Gospell.
               Beati misericordes quontam iꝑi misericordiam consequantur.
            
         
         
            The .vii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .vii. Texte.
               MAke not thy Goddesse / of blynde Venus
               Ne of her slypper promyse, take

none hede
               Her to pursue, it is moche trauaylous
               Not honourable, but ful of quakynge brede.
            
            
               The .vii. Glose.
               VEnus is a Planet of the Ayre, of whom the fryday hath his name, and the metall whiche we call Coper to her is attrybued. Venus gyueth influence of loue, and of vagant mynde, and there was a Lady so named, whiche was quene of Cypres. And for somoche as she excelled all other in beaultie and Iolitie, and was right Amourouse and not constant in one loue but abandoned to many, they called her the goddesse of loue. And bycause that she gyueth influence of luxurie saith Othea to the good knyght that he make not of her his goddesse: that is to vnderstande, that vnto that vice he ought not to abandone his body nor his entent, and to this purpose

sayth Hermes. The vice of lechery quē
                  cheth all vertues.
            
            
               The .vii. Allegorie.
               VEnus of whom the good knyghte ought not to make his Goddesse, gyueth vs vnderstandyng that y• good soule ought not to haue in her any vanite. And Cassiodore sayth vpō the Psalter. Vanite doth the aungell to become a deuyll: and to the fyrste man she gaue the death and made hym voyde of the felycite that vnto hym was graunted. Vanite is mother of al euyll, founteyne of all vyces, and the vayne of all iniquitie, whiche debouteth and casteth forthe man from the grace of god, and maketh hym odyous and to be had in hatred, and to this purpose saith Dauid in his Psalter, in spekynge vnto God.
               
                  Odisti obserauntes vanitates super
                     
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     ur.
                  Psalmo .xxx.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .viii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .viii. Texte.
               AT any tyme whan thou syttest on Iudgement
               Take hede that thou resemble olde Saturne
               Gyuynge sentence, delyberer thyne intent
               Tyll doubte be passed, let it in mynde so iourne.
            
            
               
               The .viii. Glose.
               OF Saturne is named the Saturday, and the metall which we call Leade, and he is of condicion, slowe, peasaunt and sage. And there was a king of Crete so named, which was moch sage, of whom the Poetes speke vnder the couerture of fables, & say that his sone Iupyter, cut from hym his genytores which is to be vnderstand that he toke from hym his puyssaunce that he had a
                     ••
                   hym dysheryted & chased from his countree, and therfore is he peasaunt & sage: Othea woll therfore say that the good knyght ought moch to pease and wey the matter afore that he gyue his sentence, be it pryce of armes or in other affaires. And this specially ought to be noted by al Iudges which haue offyces apperteynynge to Iudgement. And to this purpose sayth Hermes. Take good delyberacion in all thyne affayres, and in especiall in the iudgemēt of another.
            
            
               The .viii. Allegorie.
               AS the good knyght oughte to be

tardyse in Iudgement that is to say, well to pondre the sentence afore that he gyue it. Semblably ought to do the good sprite of that which to hym apperteyneth: for to god apperteineth Iudgement, which can diserne the causes egally. And saynt Gregory sayth in his Moralles, that whan our fragilite can not compryse the Iudgementes of God, we oughte not them to dyscusse in hardye wordes, but we ought them to honour in quakynge scylence. And what soeuer he do that vnto vs resembleth meruaylous we ought to repute it for Iust and ryghtwyse and to this purpose speketh Dauid in his Psalter.
               
                  Timor domini sauctus permanet / in seculum seculi. Iudicia domini vera iustitic
                        •
                      ea in semetipsa.
                  Psalmo .xviii.
               
               
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The .ix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .ix. Texte.
               MAke cleare thy speche and from vntruth to turne
               Appollo therof, shall gyue vnto the cure
               For any fylthe or ordure, to soiourne
               He maye not suffre, vnder his couerture.
            
            
               
               The .ix. Glose.
               APpollo or Phebus is the Sonne to whom the Sonday is attribued, and also the Metall whiche we call Golde. The Sonne by his clerety sheweth many thynges that ben hyd. And therfore veryte or truth whiche is clere and sheweth secret thȳges to hym may be attribued. Tho which vertue ought to be in the harte and mouth of euery good Knyghte. And to this purpose sayth Hermes.
               
                  ¶Loue thou God and truth,
                  And gyue Loyall counsayle.
               
            
            
               The .ix. Allegorie.
               APpollo, which is to say the sonne by whom we note verite, we may take it that veryte ought to be had in the mouth of the very knight Iesu christe, & he ought to steal falsetie, as saith Chrisostome in his booke of the louynges of saynt Paule. The condycion of falsetie is suche that especyally where she hath none sayenge agaynst her she falleth into her self. But cōtrary therto

the condicion of verite is so establyshed that in somoch as she hath no aduersaries sayeng against her, the more she encreaseth & is more raysed. And to this purpose sayth holy scripture.
               
                  Super omnia vincit veritas.
                  Secundi Esdree. tertio captulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .x. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .x. Texte.
               TO Phebe in any wyse / be not semblable
               For she is mutable, and full of

emulacion
               Agaynst constaunce and courage, stronge and stable
               Full of melancoly, and pensyfe opperacion.
            
            
               The .x. Glose.
               PHebe is called the Moone of whom the monday hath his name, and to her is attrybued the metall whiche we call Syluer. The Moone neuer resteth the space of an houre in one ryght poynte. And she giueth enfluence of mutabylite and foly. And therfore saith Othea that the good Knyghte ought to kepe hym fro such vyces. And to this purpose sayth Hermes. Vse the to sapyence, and be constaunte.
            
            
               The .x. Allegorie.
               PHebe which is the moone by whom we note or marke inconstaunce whiche the good knyght ought not to haue and semblably the good sprite as sayth

saynt Ambrose in the Epistle to Simplician, that the fole is mutable as the Moone. But the sage is euer constaunt in one estate, he is not brysed by drede, he is not chaunged by puyssaunce, he enhaunseth not hym selfe in prosperytie, nor he plungeth not into trystesse or he uynesse for aduersyte. There where as is sapyence is vertue / force / and constaunce the sage is euer of one courage, he is not minyshed nor augmented for the mutacion of thynges, he fleteth not in dyuers opynyons. But abydeth alwayes perfyte in Iesu christ founded in charyte, and rooted in fayth. And to this purpose sayth holy Scrypture.
               
                  Homo sanctus in sapiencia permanet sicut sol. Nam stuitus sicut luna mutatur.
                  Eccle
                        •
                     i xxvii.c.i.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xi. Texte.
               TO Mars thy father, affyxe thyne Imytacion
               Doubte not therof, fayre feates to defyne
               Of hym thy condicion must take his inclynacion
               By dyscent of Troye, from the stately lyne.
            
            
               
               The .xi. Glose.
               OF Mars is named the Tuesdaye, and to hym is attrybued the metall whiche we call Yron. Mars is the planet which giueth influence of warre and battayles, and therfore the knight whiche loueth to ensue armes & feates of cheualrye and therof hath the name of valoure may be called the sonne of Mars. And therfore Othea so named Hector. Notwithstandynge that he was sonne to kynge Priam. And she sayde that he shuld well ensue his Father as a good knight ought to do, and thus sayth the sage. By the workes of man may be knowen his inclinacions.
            
            
               The .xi. Allegorie.
               MArs the God of battayles, maye well be called the sonne of God, whiche victoryouslye dyd battayle in this worlde, and that the good espryte ought by his good example ensue his good father Iesu Christe. And do battayle agaynst vyces sayth Saynt Ambrose in his fyrste booke of offyces.

That he whiche woll be the frende of God, it is conuenable, and it behoueth hym to be enemye to the Deuyll. And he that woll haue peace of Iesu Christe, it behoueth hym to haue warre agaynst the vyces. And euen so as a man maketh warre in vayne in the felde agaynst his straunge, there as the Cytie is full of pryuy espices, so may not they vanquyshe theyr euyll outwarde, which do not make stronge warre agaynst the synnes of theyr soules. And it is the moste gloryous vyctory that is. A man to vanquysshe hym selfe. And to this purpose speaketh S. Paule the Apostle.
               
                  ¶Non est nobis colluctatio aduersus / carnem et sanguines / sed aduersus prin
                        •••
                     es / 
                        •
                     potestates aduersus mundi rectores tenebrarum harū / contra spiritualia nequicie in celestibus.
                  Ad ephesi
                        ••
                     , sexto capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xii. Texte.
               BE thou aourned, of perfyte eloquence
               And of speche clene & pleasaūt
               Hectors brother
               Therof shal Mercury, gyue the influence
               Whiche of well speakynge, ruleth starre and rother.
            
            
               The .xii. Glose.
               OF Mercury is named the wednesdaye, and to hym is atrybued the

metall whiche we call quicke syluer. Mercury is a Planet whiche gyueth influence of pontyfycall meynteyne and of fayre language aorned of rethorike therfore sayth Othea to y• good knyght that he ought to be aorned for honourable maynteyne & fayre eloquence is well sytting to a noble man desyring the hye price of honour, but that in any maner that he garde hym well that he speake not ouer moche. For Diogenes sayth yt of all vertues this is the best, except the moche speche.
            
            
               The .xii. Allegorie.
               MErcurius whiche is sayd the god of language, by hym may we vnderstand that the knyght of Iesu christ ought to be aorned of good predicacion and of the word of doctrine, and also he ought to loue & honour the announcer & shewer of them. And S. Gregory saith in his Omelies yt a man ought to haue in great reuerence the prechers of the holy scripture for they ben ye currours

which go before our lord & our lord thē foloweth, holy predicacion cōmeth before and than our lord cōmeth into the habitacion of our hart, the wordes exortacion ben the fore course & than verite is so receyued into our entendemēt, and to this purpose saith our lord to ye apostles.
               
                  Qui vos odit / me odit: et qui vos spernit / me sperait.
                  Luce decimo capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .xiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xiii. Texte.
               ARmours and weapons, of one sorte and other
               
                  Thy body to prepayre, stronge, sure, and metall harde
               Ynoughe shall delyuer, to the Minerue thy mother
               Whiche (doubtles) is thy frende and not frowarde.
            
            
               The .xiii. Glose.
               MInerue was a lady of right great knowlege, and founde the maner to make Armours, for afore the people vsed none armoure, but Lether tanned. And for the great sagesse that was in this Lady they called her a Goddesse. And for so moch as Hector couth ryght well, put Armours in operacion, and that it was his ryght mestier and deuour. Othea called hym sonne of Minerue. Notwithstanding he was sonne to Quene Heccuba of Troye. And by semblable name may be named all armours of Armes. To this purpose sayth one Auctorite. The knyghtes gyuen

/ ben vnto her Subiectes.
            
            
               The .xiii. Allegorie.
               BY this that is said that to the good knyght his mother shal delyuer ynoughe of armours good and stronge, we may vnderstand the vertue of fayth whiche is a vertue Theologicall, and is mother to the good espryte and that she shall delyuer ynoughe of armours, sayth Cassiodore, in the exposycion of the Credo. That fayth is the lyght of the soule / the gate of Paradyce / the wyndowe of lyfe / and the foundement of healthe perdurablye. For without fayth no man may please God. And to this purpose sayth saynt Paule the Apostle.
               
                  Sine fide impossibile est placere deo.
                  Ad Hebreos .xi. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xiiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xiiii. Texte.
               TAke next vnto the Pallas the Goddesse
               To thy prowesse let her annexed be
               Yf thou her haue, be sure of all goodnesse
               For well with Mynerue, doeth Pallas agre.
            
            
               The .xiiii. Glose.
               AFter sayth Othea, that he shal annexe Pallas wt Minerue, whiche

is well syttyng, & a man ought to know that Pallas and Minerue ben but one proper thyng, but the names dyuers be taken vnto .ij. vnderstandinges. For she that was named Minerue was also surnamed Pallas. Of an Ile which was named Pallance, wherin she was borne, and therfore bycause that she was sage generally in all thynges, & founde of new, many artes and faculties fayre and subtyle they called her the goddesse of scyence or knowlege. So is she named Minerue to that thyng that apperteyneth to cheualrie. And Pallas to al thynges that perteyne to sagesse, therfore wyll Prudence or Othea say that he annexe sages with knighthod which is ryght good instruction, & lyke as armes ought to be the garde and shelde, of the fayth: it may be vnderstande to this purpose that whiche Hermes sayd. Conioyne or annexe the loue of the fayth with Sapyence.
            
            
               
               The .xiiii. Allegorie.
               ANd as Pallas which is noted sages, ought to be annexed with cheualrie, oughte to be the vertue of hope conioyned to good vertues of ye knyghtly soule without the which she may not profite. And Origenes saith in his Omelies vpon Exodie, ye hope of goodnes to come is the solace of thē which trauaile in this lyfe mortal, right so as to labourers, ye hope of their paymēt adulceth or maketh swete the labour of theyr busynes, & to champions which ben in battayle hope of the crowne of victory attē
                  pereth the dolour of their woundes, & to this purpose sayth s. Paule the apostle.
               
                  Hortissimum solatium habemus 
                        •
                      confugimus ad tenēdum prepositam spem: quam sicat. authoram habemus 
                        •
                     ic tutam.
                  Ad Hebr. vi. ca.
               
               
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xv. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xv. Texte.
               HOlde thou in charyte Panthassillee
               Whiche of thy death shall take thought and grame
               Well ought suche a woman loued to be
               Of whom is sowen, so noble voyce and fame.
            
            
               
               The .xv. Glose.
               PAnthassillee was a mayde Quene, of Amasōne & moche fayre she was and of meruaylous prowesse in armes and hardynes, and for the great goodnes which fame and renome by all the world wytnessed of Hector the prowe, or worthy, she loued hym of ryght perfyte loue. And came from her parties vnto Troy, in the tyme of the great syege for to se Hector, but whan she founde hym deed, she was therof dolent aboue m
                     •
                  asure, and with a great hoste of dammoselles ryght cheualrous she venged moche vygorously his death, where she did meruaylous prowesses, & many griefes vnto the Grekes. And for so moch that she was vertuous / Prudence sayth vnto the good knyght that he ought to loue her. That is to vnderstande that euery good knyght ought to loue & prayse all women stronge in the vertue of wysdome, & of constaunce, and the same woman is moch greued for the deth of Hector, that is to vnderstand whan prowesse

and valour is amortiesed or quenched in a knyght. And thus sayth the sage. Bounte ought to be loued, where it may be perceyued.
            
            
               The .xv. Allegorie.
               BY Panthasillee whiche was socourable to the Troyans we may vnderstande the vertue of charite that is the thyrd Theologicall, the good esprite ought perfytly to haue in hym charite. And Cassiodore saith vpon the Psalter the charyte is euen so as the rayne whiche falleth in the pryme tyme which dystylleth the dropes of vertue vnder the whiche doth bourgen good hart & voulented, & good operacion doth fructyfye. She is pacient in aduersite, attēpred in prosperite, puissaunt inhumilite, ioyous in afliction, well wyllyng to all her enemyes, especial frende to al her enemyes and commen of her goodes. And to this purpose speketh S. Paule the apostle.
               
                  Caritas patiens est benigna est. Caritas non emulatur / non agit perperam / non inflatur / non est ambitiose / non querit que sua sunt,
                  primo ad Cor xiii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xvi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xvi. Texte.
               REfuse to ensewe. the fayre Narcisus
               As with great Pryde, to be accloyde
               
                  For the Knyghte prowde, and surquydrous
               Of many graces / is destytute and voyde.
            
            
               The .xvi. Glose.
               NArcisus was a yonge man which for his great beaulte was inhaunsed in so great orguyll or pryde that he had in dispyte all other, and bycause he praysed no man but hym selfe, it is sayde that he was so amorous and assoted vpon him self that he therof dyed, after that he had regarded and behelde hym selfe in the fountayne, there is to be vnderstande oultre cuydance or pryde of hym selfe. Therfore Prudence defended the good knyght to aduyse and beholde hym selfe in his good dedes, wherby he may be prowde therof. And to this purpose sayth Socrates. Sonne kepe wel that thou be not disceyued in the beaulte of thy youth for it is a thyng not durable.
            
            
               
               The .xvi. Allegorie.
               NOwe make we Allegorie, to oure purpose in applyeng it to the .vij. mortall or deedly synnes. By Narcisus vnderstand we the synne of pryde from the which the good knyght ought to kepe hym self. And Origenes sayth in his Omelies. Wherof doth this earth and asshen make prowde hym selfe, or man how hath he audacite to enhaunce him selfe in arrogauncye, whan he remembre wherof he is comen, and wherto he shall returne, and in howe frayle a vessell his lyfe is conteyned, in what ordure and fylth he is plunged, and what vncienlynes he ceaseth not to cast from his flesshe by all the conduyctes of his body? And to this purpose sayth the holy Scrypture.
               
                  Si ascenderit ad celum superbia cius et 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ius nubes tetigerit quasi 
                        〈…〉
                      predetur.
                  Iob .x. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xvii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xvii. Texte.
               AThamas fullye enraged / and royde
               Caused his two chyldren, to be estraunged
               By the Goddesse of furye, that gladly ottroyde
               Therfore with Furye, be not nēwefangyled.
            
            
               
               The .xvii. Glose.
               AThamas was a Kynge and maried to the quene Iuno, which did to be sowen sothen sede, for to dysheryt her children in the lawe, which she with money corrupted ye priestes of the lawe whiche showed & reported the answers of theyr goddes, so sayd she to the kyng and to them of the countre that the sede which they had sowen in the grounde, brought forth no profyte. For somoche as it pleased the Goddes that the two chyldren of the kynge whiche were fayre and gente / shulde be chased and exyled, and bycause the kyng consentyng to the exyle of his two chyldrē dyd it all with grudgyng and great dolour. The fable sayth that the goddes Iuno wolde therof take vengeaunce, & went into hell to say to the Goddes of fury or woodenes that she shuld come agaynst the kyng Athamas. And than the horryble and espouentable Goddes came with her heares Serpentine and set her vpon the floure of the pallayse,

and stratched her armes to the two sydes of the gate, & than such contencion and strife began betwixt the kyng & the quene that lytle it fayled yt eyther slewe not other. And whā they supposed to haue voyded from the palys than that furyous Goddes pulled of .ii. horryble serpentes of her heares and cast them vpon theyr skyrtes. And whan they behelde goddes so espouentable and dredefull, they both twayne became furious and enraged. Athamas slewe the quene by woodenes, and sythen his two chyldren, & hym selfe he cast from the hight of an hygh Rocke into the see. The exposycion of this fable may be yt a quene was so dyuers to her step children, that she caused them to be dysherited, wherfore neuer after was peace betwyxte theyr father and theyr step mother, and it may be that at the last he slewe her. And bycause that Ire is a mortall vyce and so euyll that he which is therwith strongly atteynted hath no cognissaūce

ne knowlege of reason. 
                     •
                  inea Goddens of Prudence sayth to the good knyght that he oughte to kepe hym well from Ire. For it is a ryght great defaulte in a good knyght to be Irous or wrathful and therfore sayth Arystotle. Kepe the from Ire, for it troubleth the vnderstandynge and dysapoynteth reason.
            
            
               The .xvii. Allegorie.
               BY Athamas whiche was so full of Ire we shall vnderstande proprely the synne of wrath, wherof the good soule ought to be voyde. And S. Augustine sayth in an Epistle, that euen so as Venigre corrupteth the vessel wherin it is put yf it abyde therin by longe space. So Ire corrupteth the hart wher in it is fyxed, yf it abyde frō one day to another therfore sayth s. Paule the apostle.
               Sol non occidat super iratūdiam vestram 
                     •
                  deo hesios quarto capitulo.
            
         
         
            
            The .xviii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xviii. Texte.
               OVer all thynges, whylest thou arte man
               From false Enuye, thy mynde retourne
               Whiche made Aglaros, discoloured and wan
               And then into a stone to turne.
            
            
               The .xviii. Glose.
               AGlaros as sayth a fable was systre to Herce which was so fayre

that for her beaultie she was espoused to Mercurius God of language, & they were doughters to Cicrops kynge of Athenes, but Aglaros had so moch enuy vpon her systre Herce that for her beaulte she shuld be so auaunsed as to be maried to a god, that she brenned all of enuy, and became dry and discouloured and as pale as asshen, for the enuy that she bare to her systre. Vpon a day Aglatos set vpon the thresholde of the dore and to Mercurie which wold haue entred into the house to se the entree. For no prayer that he myght make to her, she wold not suffre hym to enter. Than the god toke displeasure, and sayd that for euer myght she abyde as harde as she had the courage. And than became Aglatos hard as a stone, so may be verified the fable by sēblable case to come or befall to any persons. Mercurious may be a puyssaunt man well spekyng which caused his systre in lawe to be imprisoned or dry for any displeasure whiche

she to hym hath done, and therfore sayth the fable, that she was chaunged into a stone, and bycause that it was a ryght vyllaynous tuche & against gentylnes to be enuious. She sayth to the good knyght that he kepe hym therfro ouer all thynges. And Socrates sayth he that beareth the burthen of enuye, hath payne perpetuall.
            
            
               The .xviii. Allegorie.
               RYght so as the Aucthoritie defendeth enuy to the good knyght, the same synne defendeth holy scrypture to the good esprite. And s. Augustine saith enuy is the hayne of the felycite of another. And enuy stretcheth her from the enuious agaynst them whiche be more greatter than he, bycause he is not so great as they, and against them which be lesse thē he of drede that he hath left they shuld become as great as he. And to this purpose sayth the scripture.
               
                  Dequam est oc
                        •
                     lus mundi et auertr
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     ociem suam.
                  Ecclesiasti .xiiii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xix. Texte.
               BE not lachesse, nor longe soiourne
               To garde the frō vlixes malice
               Which whan he dyd, fro Troy retourne
               Byrefte the Geante, his precyous balesse.
            
            
               The .xix. Glose.
               ONe fable sayth that whan Vlixes returned in to Grece, after the dystruction

of Troy, great tempest of w
                     •
                  
                  de transported his Shyp vnto an Ile where was a Geant which had but one eye amyddes his forheed, of horryble greatnes, which Vlixes by his subtelt
                     •
                   byreft hym, that is to vnderstand he bored it forth and quenched the fyght therof, so it is to be constrewed yt the good knyght kepe hȳ that by parest or slouth he suffre not hym self to be surprysed wt the barates & yll inuasion of the malicious, so that therby his eye be not rauyshed from hym, that is to knowe th
                     •
                   eye of his entendement, his honoure o
                     •
                   his laudes, or that thȳg which he hath most dere, as often befall many inconueniences by slouth and lachesnes. And to this purpose sayth Hermes. Ryght happy is he whiche vseth his dayes inconuenable busynes.
            
            
               The .xix. Allegorie.
               THis whiche is sayd that the good knyght be not prolyxe nor slowe / we may vnderstāde the synne of slouth,

whiche the good spryte oughte not to haue, for as sayth Bede vpon the Prouerbes of Salomō. The slouthfull mā is not worthy to reygne with god, whiche woll not labour for the loue of god and he not worthy to receiue the crowne promysed to knyghtes whiche is a cow
                  
                     •
                  rte to enterpryse the champion of battayle, therfore sayth the scripture.
               Cogitationes robusti semper in habundantia omtis autem piger in egestati erit.Prouer. xxi. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .xx. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xx. Texte.
               ENsewe not the vyllaynes / 

whiche became Frogges
               Ne soyle not thy selfe, in theyr Ryuere
               They brayde vpon Lathona / lyke Dogges
               And troubled to her, the water cleare.
            
            
               The .xx. Glose.
               THe fable sayth that the Goddess
                     •
                   Lathona was mother to Phebus and Phebe, whiche is the Sonne and the Moone, and she bare them both at one burthen. Iuno chased them by all the countre, bycause that she had conceiued them by the operacion of her lorde and husband Iupiter. Vpon a day was the Goddes Lathona sore trauayled, & arryued at one lake, and than she enclyned her to the water to stanche & quenche her great thurst. Ther were a great company of villaynes which for ye great heate of the Sonne bathed them in the

water and they began to bray camposue and make bruyte vpon Lathona, and troubled vnto her the water which she supposed and also entended to haue dronken, but for any prayer yt she might make they wolde not suffre her, nor haue pyte vpon her mysease, so she accoursed them and sayde that for euer more forthwarde myght they demoure & abyde in the maresse, & that they shulde be lothsome, fowle, and abhominable, and that neuer shuld they cease to bray and ramposue from thensforth on, than became the vyllaynes, Frogges. And sythen they neuer ceased to bray as it appereth in the season of sōmer vpon the bankes of such smal lakes or maresses. So may it be vnderstand that some pessauntes or cōmen rude people dyd dyspleasure to some great maystres which caused them to be cast into a ryuer and drowned, so became they renouyles or frogges. This is to vnderstande, that the good knyght ought in no wyse to

soyle or defowle hym selfe in the lake or maresse of vyllany, but ought to fle and eschewe all vyllaynous tuches whiche ben contrarious to gentylnes, for lyke as villany may suffre in him no gentylnes, also ought not gentylnes to suffre in hym any vyllany, nor especially contende or take debate with any person vylayne of dede or of speche. And Plato sayth. He that myxeth with his gentylnes the noblenes of good maners, is to be praised. And he that is suffised wt the gentylnes which cōmeth of the parentes without acquyryng and purchasyng, therto good condicions ought not to be holden for noble.
            
            
               The .xx. Allegorie.
               BY the villaynes which became frogges we may vnderstande the synne of auarice or couetyse, which is contrary to the good sprite. And S. Augustine sayth, that the auaricious man is semblable vnto hell. For hell can not engloute & receyue so many soules, that he

woll say he is suffised. And yf al ye treasures of this world were gathered vpō a hepe into the possession of the couetise mā, he shuld not be satisfied ne content, and to this purpose saith the scripture.
               
                  Insatiabilis oculus cupidi / in parte iniquitates non satiabitur,
                  Ecclesiastici .xiiii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .xxi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The. xxi. Texte.
               OF the God Bacus, refuse the manere
               For his cōdicions shuld be extued
               Vertue and he, ben set on stere
               
                  Thoroughe hym men ben / to Swyne transmued.
            
            
               The .xxi. Glose.
               BAcus was a man which fyrst planted vines in Grece And whan they of the countre felt the force of the wyne whiche made them dronken and destytute of reason, they sayd yt Bacus was a god, whiche had gyuen so great force vnto the plante. So by Bacus is to be vnderstand dronkenes, & therfore sayth Othea to the good knyght y• in no wyse he ought to abandon him self to dronkenes, for that is a ryght impacient vyce to all noblenesse and to a man whiche woll vse hym selfe to reason. And to this purpose sayeth Ipocras. Superfluytie of wynes and meates, destroyeth the body, the soule, and the verues.
            
            
               The .xxi. Allegorie.
               BY the God Bacus we maye vnderstand the synne of Glotony, from the which the good sprite ought to kepe

hym self, of Glotony sayth S. Gregory in his moralles that whan the vyce of glotony taketh dominacion vpon a person it appereth thā all the goodnes that he hath done, & when the bely is not restrained by abstinēce al vertues be togyther drowned, therfore sayth s. Paule.
               
                  Norum finis interitus / quorum deus venter est / it glorin inconfusione eorum / qui terrena sapiunt.
                  
                     
                        •
                     d Philipenses tetrio capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .xxii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxii. Texte.
               BE not assoted on the image
               Of Pigmalion yf yu be wyse
               
                  For of suche a fygures vysage
               The beaulte is seldome, worth the pryce.
            
            
               The .xxii. Glose.
               PIgmalion was a moch subtell worker in makynge of Images. And a fable sayth yt for the great vylyte that he sawe in the women of Cidoyne, he dispraised them moch, and sayd that he shuld make an Image yt no man shuld repreue the makyng therof, he graued and made an Image of a woman of souereigne beaulte, whan he had made it, perfyte loue whiche hath the knowlege subtelly to rauysshe the hartes, made him amorous of his Image, and for it he was agrudged with the maladie of loue, complayntes, and clamours, with petious sighes he made vnto it, but the Image of stone vnderstode not his entention. Than went Pigmalion to the temple of Venus & made vnto her so deuoute a clamour, that the goddes ther

of had pytie, & in demonstraunce therof she lyghted and set a fyre the bronde which she helde in her hande. Than for the sygne the louer was moch ioyous & hasted hym towarde his Image, and toke it betwixt his armes, and somoch eschansed it wt his bare flesshe that the Image had lyfe, and began to speake, and so Pigmalion recouered ioye. To this fable may be put many exposycyons, and semblable to all other fables. And therfore the poetes made them to the ende that the entendementes of mē shuld be made more sharpe & subtyll to fynde dyuers purposes. So may be vnderstand that Pigmalion desprysed the viletie of folyshe women and fyxed his loue vpon one mayde of ryght great be aulte, the which wold not or myght not entende his complayntes, petuous no more than yf she had ben of stone. He had made the Image, that is, that by remembraunce and thought vpon her beaulte she was of him loued, but in the

ende he prayed her somoch & helde hym so nere her, that she loued hym at his volent & had hym in maryage. And so hath the Image beyng hard as a stone receyued lyfe by the Goddesse Venus. Therore saith Othea yt the good knight ought not to be assoted of any such made Image in such maner that he leue to ensue the mestier and exercyse of armes to the whiche he is bounden & obliged by the ordre of knyghthod. And to this purpose sayth Aptalym. An Impertinent thynge it is vnto a Prynce to assote hym vpon a thynge, that is to be reprehended.
            
            
               The .xxii. Allegorie.
               THe Image of Pygmalyon, vpon whom the good knyght ought not to be assoted, we shal take it for the synne of Lechery, from the which the good cheualrous spryte ought to garde his body. Of Lechery speketh S. Hierome in an epistle, O fyre of hell, of whom the busshe is Glotony, the flame, is pryde:

the yesylles or sperkes, bē corrupted speche: the smoke, is euyll name: the asshen ben pouertie: and the ende, is the tourment of hell. To this purpose saith S. Peter the Apostle.
               
                  Voluptatem existemantes delscias coinquinationie / & macule delictis affluentes conutuiis suis luxuciantes.
                  Secundo Petri. ii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .xxiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxiii. Texte.
               TO chaste Diane, thy mynde entyce
               For the honestie, of thy bodie
               For she dyspyseth, lyfe fowled with vyce
               
                  Dyshonesty and also luxurie.
            
            
               The .xxiii. Glose.
               DIane is the Moone, and as there is nothing so euil, but that it hath some properte, the Moone gyueth chast condycyon, and they named her by one lady so called, which was ryght chaste and alwaies a virgyn. So wold Othea say: that honestie of the body well appeteyneth vnto a good knyght. To this purpose sayth Hermes. He may not be of perfyte sence or wysdome that hath not in hym chastyte.
            
            
               The .xxiii. Allegorie.
               ANd for to brynge the Articles of the sayth to our purpose, the whiche may profyte the good spryte cheualtous: Take we for Diane god of paradyce whiche is without any tuche. The loue of al clenlynes, & to whom thinges soylyed and defowled may not be agreable. As the creatour of heauen & earth the whiche thyng it is necessary to the good espryte to beleue. As sayeth the

fyrste Artycle of the fayth whiche was sayde by my Lorde saynt Peter.
               ¶Credo in deum patrem omnipotentem trea
                  
                     •
                  or
                     •
                  m c
                     •
                  li et terre.
            
         
         
            The .xxiiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxiiii. Texte.
               REsemble well Ceres, the Goddesse bryght
               Whiche gyueth all men corne, and none doth denie
               So shulde hym selfe abandon, euery good knyght
               
                  That well woll susteyne, the order of cheualrie.
            
            
               The .xxiiii. Glose.
               CEres was a Lady whiche founde the arte to ayre the landes for afore they sewe theyr gaygnage of theyr sede without labouryng. And by the lande bare more abundauntly after that it was ayred and plowed, they sayd that she shuld be the goddes of Corne, & the grounde they named of her name. So woll Othea say, that as the grounde is abandoned & large gyuer of all goodes so ought to be also the good knyght to all persons abandoned and to gyue his ayde and comfort after his power, and Arystotle sayth. Be thou a lyberall gyuer, and thou shalt purchase frendes.
            
            
               The .xxiiii. Allegorie.
               CEres whom ye good knyght oug
                     ••
                   to resemble take we for the blyssed sonne of God, whom the good spryte ought to ensue whiche vnto vs so largely hath gyuen of his hyghe goodnes.

And in hym ought to be our stedfast beleue as sayth the seconde Article whiche saynt Iohn̄ sayde.
               Et in
                     ••
                  sum x
                     •
                  m filium tius vnicum dominum nostrum.
            
         
         
            The .xxv. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxv. Texte.
               PLante thou all vertues / within thy body
               As Ysis the plantes of Trees, both cause and make
               With blosomes to burgen and

fruyte to tructyfy
               So to edefye the maner, shuldest thou take.
            
            
               The .xxv. Glose.
               YSis they say also to be goddes of plantes & of graffyng whiche gyueth vnto them vygour and growynge to multiply. Therfore saith prudence is the good knyght & gyueth compariso
                     •
                   that so ought he to fructyfy in all ve
                     •
                  
                  tues, and all euyll byces to eschewe, an
                     •
                   Hermes saith to this purpose. O mā yf thou knewe the incouenience of vyce. how well shuld thou kepe the therfr
                     ••
                   and yf thou knewe the laude of valiance, O howe well shuldest thou loue it.
            
            
               The .xxv. Allegorie.
               THere where she sayth that to 
                     •
                  ū
                  
                     •
                   ought the good knyght to be resē
                  blaunt, we maye vnderstande the blyssed consepcion of Iesu christ by the holy Ghost in the blyssed virgyn mary mother of all grace, o
                     •
                   whom the great louynges

may not be Imagined ne sayd entierly, the which dygne & worthy concepciō ought ye good sprite to haue planted in him, & to holde fermly the worthy Article as sayth S. Iames the more.
               Qui conseptus est despiritu sancto natus et maria virgine
            
         
         
            The .xxvi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxvi. Texte.
               SVbmytte the not / to the Iudgement
               Ne to the counsayle, of kynge Mydas
               
                  To whom Iudgynge byrnde intendement
               Were gyuen to Huyre, the eares of an Asse.
            
            
               The .xxvi. Glose.
               MYdas was a Kynge, whiche had small vnderstanding, and a fable sayth that Phebus and Pan, God of shepherdes & herdes, stryued togyther. And Phebus sayd that the sowne of a Harpe was more to be praised than the sowne of a Frestell or Pype, and Pe
                     •
                   sustended the contrary. And sayde that more was to be praysed the sowne of the Frestell. Vpon Mydas they put the Iudgement of this dyscorde, and after that they had played a fore Mydas by longe leysure, he Iudged y• better was the sowne of the Frestel, and more to be praised. So saith the fable that phebus which was greatly corrouced and angry in dyspyte of his rude Iudgement, caused hym to haue the eares of an asse

in demonstraunce that he had the ente
                     •
                  
                  dement of an Asse, whiche so rudely had gyuen Iudgement. So may it be that a man Iudge folishely agaynst a prince whiche causeth hym euer after to beare vpon hym a sygne of foly whiche is the vnderstandyng of the eares of the Asse. So this fable is to be vnderstand that the good knyght gyue not hym selfe to holde to folysshe Iudgment, not grounded vpon reason, nor he hym selfe ought not to be Iudge of folyshe sentence, to this purpose saith one Philospher, the fole is as a moll warpe, whiche hereto and vnderstandeth not. And Diogine
                     ••
                   compareth the fole to a stone.
            
            
               The .xxvi. Allegorie.
               THe Iudgement of Midas wherto the good knyght ought not to holde hym, we may take for it Pilate w
                     ••
                  
                  che Iudged the blyssed sonne of God to be taken, bounde, and hanged, vpon the gybet of the crosse, as a these, he beyng without any tuche of offence so it is to

be vnderstand the good spryte ought to kepe hym fro geuyng of Iudgement vpon the Innocent, & he ought to beleue the article whiche sayd S. Andrewe.
               Passus 
                     •
                  ub pontio pilato crucifixus mortu
                     •
                  s et sepultus.
            
         
         
            The .xxvii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxvii. Texte.
               TRewe felowes yf thou haue, mo or las
               Thou oughtest to go succoure, them at nede
               
                  Thoughe it be to Hell, where Hercules was
               Where ben many soules, brennynge in glede.
            
            
               The .xxvii. Glose.
               A Fable sayth that Pirotheus and Thesius, went in to hell to recouer Proserpine vpon Pluto, which had her rauyshed, and euyl had they ben appoynted yf it had not ben for Hercules, whiche was theyr companyon, whiche came them to succour, and dyd there so moche of armes, that he made all the company Infernall affrayde, & cut the cheynes of Cerberus porter of hell. So woll Othea say, that the good knyght ought not to fayle his loyall felowe for doubte of peryll what so euer it be, for loyall companye ought for to be as a mans proper thyng or cause. And Pytagoras sayeth. Thou ought to kept the loue of thy frende dylygently.
            
            
               
               The .xxvii. Allegorie.
               WHere the Aucthorite sayth that he *** ought to succour his loyall felowes of armes, thoughe it be to hell, we may vnderstand y• blyssed soule of Iesu christ which brought forth the good soules of holy Patriarkes & Prophetꝭ which were in limbo & that exāple the good sprite ought to do, & to draw vnto hȳ at vertues, & beleue y• article as saith s. Phillip.
               Discendit ad inferna.
            
         
         
            The .xxviii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxviii. Texte.
               LOue and prayse, Cadmus

so excellente
               And his dyscyples, holde thou in chyerte
               He gaygned the fountayne, of the Serpente
               Vvith ryght great payne, afore that it wolde be.
            
            
               The .xxviii. Glose.
               CAdmus was a moche noble man and founded Thebes whiche cytie was greatly renomed, he set there a study & he hym selfe was moche profoundly lettered and of great science. And therfore sayth the fable that he daunted the serpent at the fountayne that is to vnderstande the science and sages that alwayes springeth, the Serpent is noted for the payne and trauayle which it be houeth the student to daunte afore that he maye purchase scyence. And the fable sayth, that he hym self became a serpent, which is to vnderstande, he was a

corrector and mayster of other. So wol Othea say that the good knight ought to loue and honour the clerkes lettered, which ben grounded in science. To this purpose sayeth Arystotle to Alexandre. Honour thou scyence and fortyfie it by good maysters.
            
            
               The .xxviii. Allegorie.
               CAdmus whiche daunted the Serpent at the fountayne whiche the good knyght ought to loue, we may vnderstande the blyssed humanite of Iesu christ which dompted the serpent & gaigned the fountayne that is to say the lyfe of this world from the which he passed afore with great payne, and with great trauayle. Wherof he had perfyte victory whan he rose agayne the thyrd day, as sayth s. Thomas.
               Vertia die resurrexit a mortuis.
            
         
         
            
            The .xxix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxix. Texte.
               DElyte the moche, the science for to se
               OF Yo, more than in other substaunce
               For therby thou mayste attayne great dygnyte
               And of gooddes foyson / and great abundaunce.
            
            
               The .xxix. Glose.
               YO was a damosell doughter vnto kyng Ynacus, which was of great

scyence, & founde many maners of letters which afore had not ben sene, howbeit that some fables say that Yo was the loue of Iupiter, and that was transmued to a cowe and after was a cōmon woman. But as Poetes haue cloked the trueth vnder couerture of fables it may be vnderstand that Iupiter loued her, wherby is to be vnderstand the vertues of Iupiter whiche was in her, she became a cowe, for as the cowe gyueth mylke whiche is swete and norysshyng so gaue she (by the letters yt she founde) swete noryture and fode to the entendement. That she was a cōmon woman may be vnderstande that her sence and wysdome was cōmon to all: as letters ben cōmon to all people. Therfore saith Othea that the good knyght ought moche to loue Yo, whiche may be taken for letters and scriptures, and also hystoryes of good men, which the good knight ought Ioyously to here recompted and also red, wherof the example may be to

hym profytable. To this purpose saith Hermes. He that enforceth hym to acquyre scyence and good maners, he fyndeth that thyng which pleaseth him in this worlde and in the other.
            
            
               The .xxix. Allegorie.
               YO, by whom is noted letters and Scryptures, we may vnderstande that the good sprite ought to delite him in redyng the holy scriptures, and haue them wrytten in his mynde and entencion, and therby he may lerne to mounte or assende to heuen with Iesu Christe, by good workes and holy contemplacion. And beleue the worthy article whiche sayde saynt Bartylmewe.
               Ascendit ad celos sedet ad dextera
                     •
                   de
                     •
                   patris omnipotentis.
            
         
         
            
            The .xxx. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxx. Texte.
               WHere euer thou be, take hede ententyfly
               That sowne of Pype / to slepe the not adaunte
               Mercurie played, so swete and pleasauntly
               That he with his pype the people he dyd enchaunte.
            
            
               The .xxx. Glose.
               A Fable sayth, that whan Iupyter loued Yo the fayre, that Iuno had

therof great suspection. And she dyscended fro heauen in a clowde, for to take and surprise her husband with the dede but whā Iupiter sawe her come, he chaū
                  ged his loue ī to a Cowe, but not for y• Iuno was dyscharged of Ialousy and demaunded of hym the Cowe in Ieste, and Iupiter maulgre his courage graū
                  ted therto as he that durst not refuse, for doubt of suspection. Than Iuno be toke the cowe to be kepte, to Argus her cowe herde, whiche had an. C. eyen, and euer he watched her, but the god Mercurie by the cōmaundement of Iupiter toke his pype wherwith he played right swetely, & so longe he pyped at the eare of argus, that all his hondred eyen he brought aslepe, one after another: thē he toke from hym the Cowe, & detrenched his heed fro the shulders. The exposicion of this fable may be that some puyssaunt man loued a damosell whom his wyfe wolde haue in watche so that her husband shuld not come to her, & great

watchers and gardes she there set and clere seynge, which may be noted by the eyen of argus, but the louer by some person malycious and well spekyng dyd so to be done, that ye gardes or watchers consented to yelde vnto hym his loue, so were they endormed by the pipe of Mercury, & had the heed detrenched. Therfore saith Othea to the good knight that by suche a pype he suffre not hym selfe endormed nor enchanted so that therby he be robbed & dysapoynted of that thyng which he ought wel to kepe. And to this purpose saith Hermes. Kepe you from them whiche do gouerne them selues by malyce.
            
            
               The .xxx. Allegorie.
               
                  BY the Pype of Mercurius we may vnderstande that by our auncient enemye the good sprite shuld not be dysceiued in any misbeleue vpon the fayth or otherwyse, & he ought to beleue stedfastly the Article whiche sayde Saynt Mathewe the Euangelyst, whiche said

that our Lord shall come to Iudge the quycke and the deed by these wordes.
               Inde venturus est iudicare vsuos et mortuos.
            
         
         
            The .xxxi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxxi. Texte.
               BEleue thou that Pyrrhus / shalbe resemblaunte
               Vnto his Father, and worke great mysease
               Vnto his Enemyes, and be to them greuaunte
               
                  For he shall reuenge, the death of Achylles.
            
            
               The .xxxi. Glose.
               PYrrhus was sonne vnto Achylles, and well he resembled his father of force and hardines, and after the death of his father, he came vpon Troye and moch asprely reuenged the death of his father, & greatly endomaged the Troyens. Therfore sayth Prudence to the good knyght, that yf he haue mysdone the father, that he kepe hym well from the sonne, in his olde age. For yf the father hath ben valiaūt, semblably ought to be ye sonne. To this purpose saith the wyse. The death of the father draweth to hym the vengeaunce of the sonne.
            
            
               The .xxxi. Allegorie.
               THere where it sayth that Pyrrhus shall resemble his father: we may vnderstande the holy ghost which procedeth from the father, in whom the good sprite ought to beleue as saith s. the lesse▪
               
               Credo in spiritu
                     •
                   sanctum.
            
         
         
            
            The .xxxii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxxii. Texte.
               THe Temple frequente, and honour as is due
               The god of heuens, in eche houre and moment
               And of Cassandra, ye vsage thou ensue
               For to be holden sage, yf thou put thyne entent.
            
            
               The .xxxii. Glose.
               CAssandra was doughter to kynge Priam, and she was a ryght good

lady and deuoute in theyr lawe, the goddes she serued, and the temple she haunted, and lytell she spake without necessyte, and whan it behoued her to speke she sayde nothynge, but that it was verytable, and neuer mendacite or lesyng was founde procedynge from her mouth, moche sage was Cassandra: therfore saith Othea to the good knyght that her he ought to resemble? for mendacious speche, or to be a lesyng mongre, is moch to be reproued in the mouth of a knyght. So he ought to serue God and honour the temple, that is to wyt the churche & the mynysters therof. And Pytagoras sayth a ryght lowable thyng it is to serue god, & sanctify or holowe his saȳtes.
            
            
               The .xxxii. Allegorie.
               THe Auctorite sayth that the good knyght ought to frequent the temple, by semblable case ought to do the good spryte and ought to haue a synguler deuocion in the holy Churche catholyke and in the comunion of sayntes as

sayth the article which said s. Symon.
               Sanctam ecclesiam catholicam sanctorum communionem.
            
         
         
            The .xxxiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxxiii. Texte.
               OFte to go by see, yf fortune haue the lente
               Thou oughtest for to reclayme
               Neptune in thy mynde
               And well his feates to halowe his seruyce to augmente
               
                  To thende that he the kepe frō great tempest and wynde.
            
            
               The .xxxiii. Glose.
               NEptune after the lawe of Paynymes was called the God of the see and therfore she wolde say to the good knyght that he ought to serue hym to the ende that he shuld be succourable to hym vpon the see. So it is to be vnderstande that the knyghtes whiche oft go in many voyages vpon the see, or other dyuers perylles haue more necessyte to serue god, & his sayntes, than other people to thende that at theyr nede, they be to them succourable and aydyng, & they oughte to take a synguler deuocion to God by good deuoute Oraysons by the whiche they may reclayme hȳ to theyr ayde in theyr nede, and how it suffyseth not all onely the deuocion of the mouth sayth the sage. I repute not God to be all onely serued by wordes but by good workes and by leadyng good lyfe.
            
            
               
               The .xxxiii. Allegorie.
               NEptune whom the good knygh
                     ••
                   ought to reclaime yf he go ofte by see, we shall take that the good espryte whiche is contynually in the see of the world ought to reclayme deuoutly his creatour, & pray that yf he gyue hym to lyfe yt he may haue remission of his synnes, & he ought to beleue in the Artycle whiche sayde saynt Iude.
               Remissionem pecratorum.
            
         
         
            The .xxxiiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxxiiii. Texte.
               HAue good regarde, in euerye

tyme and houre
               To Attropos, and to his darte or speare
               Whiche stryketh and spareth, for no drede or fauoure
               It shall the exhorte, thy soule in mynde to beare.
            
            
               The .xxxiiii. Glose.
               THe Poetes called the death Attropos. Therfore sayth Othea to the good knyght that he ought to remembre that he shal not alwayes lyue ī this worlde, but shall shortly departe from it, so ought he rather to vse the vertues of the soule, then hym to delyte in the vyces of the bodye. And therof oughte euerye Chrystyan man and woman to thynke to the ende that they haue in memory the promyssyon of the soule, whiche shall endure without ende. And to this purpose speketh Pytagoras, that

euen so as oure begynnynge commeth of GOD / it behoueth that in hym be oure endynge.
            
            
               The .xxxiiii. Allegorie.
               THere where she sayth to the good Knyght that he haue regarde to Attropos whiche is noted the death. Semblably ought to do the good esprite, whiche by the merytes of the passion of our Lorde Iesu Christe, ought to haue stedfaste esperaunce with the payne and dyligence which he shall take vpon hym to haue Paradyce in the ende. And he ought to beleue fermely that he shal ryse agayn at the day of Iudgement, & shal haue lyfe perdurably yf he deserue it, as sayth the last Article, whiche sayde S. Mathie.
               Carnis resurectionam et vita
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ternam, Amen.
            
         
         
            
            The .xxxv. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxxv. Texte.
               OF Bellorophon make thyne examplayre
               In all the Feates / that thou wolte defyne
               Whiche rather chase to death, to repayre
               Than to do desloyaultie, with herte, or mynde inclyne.
            
            
               The .xxxv. Glose.
               BEnorophon was a knyght of right

great beaultie and full of loyaltie, his Lordes wyfe was strongly esprysed wt his loue, but not for that he wolde not consent vnto her volent. She did so moche, that he was condempned to haue ben deuoured with fierce beestes and he loued better to chese the death, than to do desloyaultie. So sayth Othea to the good knyght that for doubte of death, he ought not to do desloyaultie. To this purpose sayth Hermes. Thou oughtest rather to haue the wyll to dye without a cause, than to do Inconuenyence or desloyaultie.
               ¶Nowe come we to declare the cō
                  maundementes of the lawe and therof take we Allegorie to our purpose.
            
            
               The .xxxv. Allegorie.
               BEllorophon, whiche was so full of loyalte may be noted god of paradice and as his worthy mercy hath ben and is to vs full of loyalte we shal take here the first cōmaūdemēt which saith, thou shalt not adoure nor worships straū
                  ge

gods, this is to say as saith s. Augustyne, the honour which is called latria thou shalt not bere it neyther to Idoll nor to Image, ne to his sēblaunce, ne to no maner of creature, for ye is the honoure due alonely vnto god, in this cōmaū
                  dement is defended al Idolatry, of this speketh our Lorde in his Gospell.
               
                  Dominum deum tuum adorabis et miso
                        ••
                      seruies.
                  Mathei quarto capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .xxxvi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxxvi. Texte.
               MEnymon thy loyall Cousen Germayne
               
                  Vvhiche doth the assyst, in eche daungerous place
               And loueth the so well / thou oughtest to loue agayne
               And at his nede, with Armoure the enbrace.
            
            
               The .xxxvi. Glose.
               MEnymon was cousen to Hector & of the lyne of Troyens, and when Hector was in fyerce Estours and battayles where many tymes he was hardly empressed with his enemyes. Menymon, whiche was a ryghte valyaunte knyght folowed hym nygh, so succoured he Hector, and departed the great prease, as wel it appered, for whan Achylles had slaine Hector by treason Menimon wounded greuously Achylles & had him slayne had not bryefely come vnto hym succour. Therfore sayth wysdom to the good knyght yt he ought to loue hym & succour his nede, & that is to vnderstan̄d

that euery prynce & good knyght whiche hath any parentes be they lytell or poore, so that they be good and loyall, he hought to loue them, and ought to bere and supporte them ī their affayres and in speciall when he fyndeth him loyall & true to hym, and it fortuneth somtymes yt a great prynce is more loued & more loyall of his poore parent than of them that be ryght puyssaunte. And to this purpose saith the Philosopher Rabion, multiply thy frendes for they shal be to the succourable.
            
            
               The .xxxvi. Allegorie.
               MEnymon the loyal cousen we may yet take for the god of Paradyce which is well vnto vs a loyal cousen to take our humanite for ye which we may not him guerdon. So here we may take the second cōmaundement that sayth thou shalt not take ye name of god ī vayne, that is as writeth s. Augustine, thou shalt not swere deshonestly, ne without cause to colour falsyte, for there may b
                     •
                  
                  
no greater abusion than to bring in witnes of falsite, Othe soueraygne & most stedfast verite, and in this commaundement is defended all lesynges, all periurie and all blasphemynge. To this purpose sayth the Lawe.
               
                  Non habit dūs insontem eum qui assumserit nomen dūi dei sui frustra.
                  Exodi xx. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .xxxvii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxxvii. Texte.
               ADuyse the well / that wordes of great menace
               Of nycetie or folye, that commeth

to dyshonoure
               Procede not from thy mouthe / and in this case
               Of Leomedon, make to the a myrroure.
            
            
               The .xxxvii. Glose.
               LEomedon was kynge of Troy, and father to Priam. And when Iason, Hercules and theyr companyons, went into Colcos to get the golden flees and were descended at the porte of Troy for to refresshe them, without doynge any dōmage to the countre. Than Leomedon as euyll aduysed, sende to them by his messagers shamefully to go out of his lande, & strongly them menaced yf they auoyded not shortly. Wherof th
                     •
                   Barons of Grece by this cōmaūdemēt of auoydaunce helde them so moch Iniuried, that therof after ensued the fyrst destruction of Troy. Therfore woll Othea say to the good knyght that in so

moch as the word menace is fowle & vylayne: it ought well to be prepensed and delivered afore that it be said, for many euils therof oftimes ensue. To this purpose sayth the Poete Omere, he is sage whiche can refrayne his tonge.
            
            
               The .xxxvii. Allegorie.
               AS the word of menace cōmeth of arrogauncie & pryde, and to breke cōmaundemēt is also oultre euydaunce or orguyl, we may take that man ought to breke the feastes or holy dayes for it is agaynst the cōmaundement whiche sayth. Remembre the to sanctyfye the Sabboth day, by the which is vnto vs cōmaunded as saith S. Augustine that the Sonday we halowe in place of the Sabboth day to the Iues, we ought to solempnyse it in repose rest of the body and in cesynge from all bodely workes of bondage, and in repose of the soule in cesynge fro all synnes. And of this rest speketh Esay the Prophet.
               Quiescite agere prouerse / discite benefacere.
            
         
         
            
            The .xxxviii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxxviii. Texte.
               SVppose not euery thynge to be certayne
               At the fyrst Sygne / but take delyberacyon
               Tyll treuth be knowen, as for a whyle refrayne
               Of this can Pyramus / gyue best informacion.
            
            
               The .xxxviii. Glose.
               PYramus was a yonge Bacheler of the Cytie of Babylon, and when he

had no more but .vij. yeres of age, loue him wounded with his darte, & he was esprised with the loue of Thesbe a fayre damosyl & gent of his parell of age, and for the great frequentaunce of these .ij. louers togyther was apperceyued their great loue, and by a seruaūt was accused to the mother of the damosell whiche toke her doughter and her enclosed fermly in her chambers and sayd that she shuld well kepe her from hauntyng Pyramus, great was the dolour of the two chyldren for this cause, and theyr plaintes & wepinges moch pituous longe endured this pryson, but the more y• theyr age encreased y• more was embrased in them the instygacion whiche for the absence was not destayned nor arrased. But as betwyxt the pallays of ye two louers was but one wall. Thesbe vpon a day aduysed the wall broken by the which she myght perceyue the lyght on the other parte. Than fyxed she her gyrdle in the creuesse of the wall, to the

ende that her loue myght apperceyue it, whiche he dyd shortly ynoughe, & there often they made theyr assemble, the .ij. louers with moche pytuous complayntes: in conclusyon (as by great loue constrayned) made was theyr accorde such that vpon a nyght in tyme of the fyrst stepe, they wolde secretly departe from theyr frendes, & shuld assemble vnder a whyte brere bery tre, without the cytie, at a fountayne where ī theyr childhod they had ben acustomed to dysporte thē whan Thesbe was come to the fountaine alone all paruorous & full of drede, than hard she a Lyon come moch rudely, wherof she al replenished with drede fled thens to hide her in a busshe, y• next she founde, but in the way fell from her her whyte wymple whiche the Lyon defouled, soyled and made blody, whiche vomyted & cast forth vpon it the entrayles of beestes which he had deuoured, aboue mesure, great was the doloure of Piramus which beleued none other but

that his loue was deuoured with fierce beestes, wherfore after many pytuous regretes, he slewe hym self wt his sworde. Thesbe came out of the busshe, but when she vnderstode the syghes of her louer, which was at the poynt of death and sawe the sworde & the blode, than by great dolour she fell vpon her louer which myght nor speke to her, and after many great plaine
                     •
                  s, regretes, swames, and trauntes she slewe her self wt the same sworde. And the fable sayth that for this pytuous case y• beryes of the brere tre, became blacke whiche ere were whyte. And bycause yt for so smal encheason hapned so great mysaduenture. Othea sayth to the good knyght that to a small ensygnement he oughte not to gyue great fayth. To this purpose sayth one sage. Yelde not thy selfe certayne of thynges which ben in doubte afore that thou haue had conuenable informacion.
            
            
               
               The .xxxviii. Allegorie.
               WHere it sayth that he shuld not beleue al to be certayne, we may note the Ignoraunce which we haue in oure chyldhode, whan we be vnder the correction of the father and mother. And for the good dedes which we receyue of them, we maye vnderstande the fourth commaundement which sayth. Honour thou thy father and thy mother, whiche saynt Augustyne exposeth in sayeng, how that we ought to honour our Parentes in two maners. In berynge to them due reuerence. And in admynystrynge them in theyr necessyties. To this purpose saith the sage.
               
                  Honora patrem tuum et gemitus matris tue ne obli
                        •
                     iscaris.
                  Ecclesiasti. vii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xxxix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xxxix. Texte.
               FOR corporall health, take in consyderacion
               Of Esculapyon the wyfe, aduertysemente
               And not of Cyres / the subtell incantacion
               Her trompery / her charmes / ne her inchauntemente.
            
            
               The xxxix. Glose.
               ESculapion was a right sage clerke

which founde the science of medycyne, and therof made bookes. And therfore sayth she to the good knyght, that he beleue his reportes for his health, that is to say, yf he haue nede, that he turne hȳ to the Physycions & medycynes, & not to the sorcery of Ceres, whiche was an enchauntresse. And it may be sayde for them that in theyr maladies vse sorcery charmes, and enchauntementes. And beleue to be gueryshed which is a thing defended & agaynst the cōmaundementes of holy churche, and which no good christian man ought to vse. Platon adnichilled and brenned the bookes of enchauntementes and sorcery made vpon medycyne, which somtyme were vsed & approued & he helde him to thē that were of science reasonable & of experience.
            
            
               The .xxxix. Allegorie.
               FOr Esculapion which was a Physycion and medicyne, we may vnderstande the fyft cōmaundement, whiche

sayth. Thou shalt not sle, that is to say neyther with hart, with tonge, ne with hande. And so is defended all vyolence, percusyon, and corporall hurtes. And it is not here defended to the Prynces, to Iudges, and to Maysters of Iustyce, to put to death the malefactours, but to them all onely, whiche haue none aucthorytie, excepte in case of necessytie where a man maye not otherwyse escape, in whiche case the Lawes suffre well one man to slee his aduersary, in his corps defendaunte, and otherwyse not, to this purpose saith the Gospell.
               
                  Qui gladio ocesderit oportet / enen in gladio 
                        •
                     cetdi.
                  Luce. xiii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xl. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xl. Texte.
               IN hym (whom thou haste, offended with greuaunce
               Whiche knoweth not howe to venge hym, or amende it)
               Affye the not, for therof commeth myschaunce
               Achylles death, can teache the to entende it.
            
            
               
               The .xl. Glose.
               AChylles dyd moche gryefe, to the Troyens, and to kyng Pryam he slewe many of his childrē. Hector, Troylus, & other, wherfore he ought to hate hym. Notwithstandyng this Achylles affyed hym in the quene Heccuba wyfe to Pryam, to whom he had slayne her chyldren by treason, & he went by nyght to speke to her, to treate of the mariage of Polexene her doughter & hym, and there was he slayne by Paris and his felowes, by the cōmaundement of the quene his mother in the temple of Apolyne. Therfore saith Othea to the good knyght that he ought not to affye him in his enemye to whom he hath greatly mysdone without makyng to hym any peace or a mendement. To this purpose sayth one sage. Kepe the from the deceytes of thyne enemye whiche may not reuenge hym selfe.
            
            
               The .xl. Allegorie.
               LYke as thou oughtest not to affye the in him to whom thou haste misdone

we may take it yt lyke as we ought to doubt the vengeaunce of god it is necessary to holde his cōmaūdemēt which sayth, thou shalt not do lechery, yt is to say adultry, ne fornicacion, & so is defē
                  ded, as saith Isodore all or vnlawful to pulacion which is in the bonde of mariage & al disordinat vsage of the mēbres general to this purpose saith the lawe.
               
                  Morte moriantur mechus et adultera.
                  Leui. xx. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The xli. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xli. Texte.
               REsemble not Busyre, whiche

no goodnes pretended
               But dyd hym employe to murther and occysyon
               His crueltie maye well be / reprehended
               Of all suche Feates / exchewe the erudyccion.
            
            
               The .xli. Glose.
               BVsyre was a kyng of meruaylous cruelte, & moch hym delyted in the occision of men. And wt his propre handes he slewe them in the Temples with knyues, & the
                     •
                  of made sacrifyce to his gods, therfore saith Othea to the good knyght yt in no wyse he ought to delyte him ī the occision of any humayne creature, for such cruelte is agayn
                     •
                  t God agaynst nature, & agaynst al bounte, and to this purpose sayth Socrates to the good counsayler, yf thy prynce be cruell thou oughtest hym to appese and amodre by good examples.
            
            
               
               The .xli. Allegorie.
               BY Busyre which was an homicide and agaynst humayne nature, we may note ye defence yt is made to vs by the cōmaūdemēt which saith yu shalt do no thest. And so is defended as sayth s. Augustyne, all vnlawfull vsurpacion of the goods of other, al sacrilege all rapine all thynges taken by force, & seigneury vpon the people without reason. To this purpose sayth s. Paule the apostle.
               
                  Qui furabatur iam non furetur.
                  ad ephesi. iiii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .xlii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xlii. Texte.
               HAue not so moche delyte / 

in thy pleasaunce
               As in doubtefull balaunce / to put thy lyfe to wander
               For thy lyfe with loue / thou ought most to auaunce
               Remembre howe the flod, hath ouerqualmed Lehaunder.
            
            
               The .xlii. Glose.
               LEhaunder was a yonge gentylman whiche greatly and of perfyte loue, loued Hero the fayre, and as there was an arme of the see betwyxt the maners of the two louers, Lehaunder swam ouer it by nyght many tymes to se his lady, which had her castel nere the ryuage to thende that their loue shuld not be apperceyued. But it fortuned that a great orage of tempest arose which dured many dayes vpon the water & disapoynted al the ioy of the louers, so it hapned one nyghte that Lehaunder constrayned of great desyre put hym selfe in to the see,

in the tyme of the tempest, and was borne there so longe by those peryllous wawes yt it behoued him to perysshe moch pytuously. Hero whiche was vpon the other parte in great thought for her louer whan she sawe the body come flotyng to the ryuage, than estrayned of a meruailous dolour cast her self into the see, & in embrasyng the body that was perisshed there was she drowned. Therfore sayth Othea to ye good knyght that somoch he ought not to loue his delyte, as therfore to put his lyfe in ouer great aduenture. So sayth one sage to this purpose I am moch meruayled of this that I se somoch of perylles suffred for the delyte of the body. And so lytell puruayaunce made for the Soule whiche is perpetuall.
            
            
               The .xlii. Allegorie.
               AS the Aucthorytie defended that he haue not so dere his pleasaunce as to put hym in ouer moche Ieoper dye. It maye be vnderstande the commaundement

that sayth. Thou shalte not speake false wytnesse agaynst thy neyghboure. And so it is defended, as sayth saynt Augustyne, all false accusacion, murmuracion, detraccion, all false re
                     •
                  orte, & defamyng of another. And it is to be knowen, (as sayth Isodore,) that the false wytnesser, doeth vylany to thre partes. That is to say, to GOD whom he dispyseth in forsweryng hym. To the Iudge whom he deceiueth in makyng a lesyng, and to his neyghbour whom he endomageth in false disposyng him selfe agaynst hym, and therfore sayeth the scripture.
               
                  V
                        •
                     stis falsus non erit impunitu
                        •
                     , et qui loq
                        •
                     utur mendacia non effuglet.
                  Proue
                        •
                     
                     bior
                        •
                     m .xix. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xliii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xliii. Texte.
               YElde agayne Helayne, yf any man demaunde her
               For great offence well maye be reparable
               Better is consent to peace, than to withstande her
               And when the Stede is stolen, to close fast the stable.
            
            
               The .xliii. Glose.
               HElayne was wyfe to kyng Menelaus and rauysshed by Paris in

Grece, and when the Grekes were come vpon Troy wt a great army for the vengeaunce of the same dede, afore yt they endomaged the land they required that Helayne shuld be to them yelded agayn and amendes made for the offence done or yf not, they wold destroy the countre, and bycause the Troyens wolde do nothyng, thereafter ensued the great mischefe which after to thē befell, therfore woll Prudence say to the good knyght that yf by foly he haue done any inconuenyence, better it is to hym to leue it & make peace, than it to pursue, wherby euyll may to hym come. Therfore sayth the Phylosopher Plato, yf yu haue done iniury, to whom soeuer it be, thou oughtest not to be at ease vnto such tyme as thou be with hym at concorde and haue made peace.
            
            
               The .xliii. Allegorie.
               HElayne which ought to be yelded agayne may be entended the commaundement which sayth. Thou shalt

not desyre the wyfe of thy neyghbour, by the whiche is defended (as sayth S. Augustyn
                     •
                  ) the thought and wyll to do fornicacion, wherof is spoken afore in the .vi. Commaundement, for our Lord sayth in the Gospell.
               
                  Qui viderit maulieram ad concupiscendam eam 
                        •
                     am mechatus est incorde suo.
                  Mathie. vi. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .xliiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xliiii. Texte.
               THe Goddesse Aurora, resemble in no wyse
               
                  Which yeldeth vnto other, ioy and gladnesse
               At commeth of her howre, and doth her selfe dyspyse
               All ioye, and holdeth to wepynge and sadnesse.
            
            
               The .xliiii. Glose.
               AVrora is the poynct or dawnyng of y• daye, & the fables say that is a Goddes, and that she had a sonne of hers slayne in the battayle at Troye, yt was named Cignus, and for she was a goddes, and had the puissaunce so to do she transmued her sonne in to a swan, and so of hym, came the fyrst swannes. this lady was of so great beaulte that she reioysed all them that behelde her, but al her lyfe she bewept her sonne Cignus which was deed, & yet she doth be wepe hym to this day, for the due which falleth at the poynct of the day, they say it is Aurora that wepeth for her sonne

Cignus, therfore sayth Othea that the good knyght by his good vertues reioyseth other, ought not to be heuy & tryste but ioyous, and modre hym selfe graciously. Therfore sayde Arystole to Alexandre the great what soeuer heuines be closed in thy hart, thou oughtest alwayes to shewe a glad and a ioyous vysage afore thy people.
            
            
               The .xliiii. Allegorie.
               BY Aurora whiche wepeth we may vnderstand that no desyre ought to wepe or be madified in vs by coueytyng a thyng not due, & by this we may note the .x. and the last cōmaundement whiche sayth. Thou shalte not coueyte the howse of thy neyghboure / his Oxe / ne his Asse / nor any thynge that he hath. by the which (as saith saint Augustyne) is defended the wyll to do theft, or rapyne wherof the dede is defended afore by the .vij. cōmaundement, and to this purpose sayth Dauid in his Psalter.
               
                  Nolite sperare in iniquitate.
                  
                     
                        •
                     apinas n
                        •
                     lite concupiscere.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xlv. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xlv. Texte.
               THoughe Pasyphe frequented folysshenesse
               Yet vse yu not to rede in thy stole
               All women to be suche, for manye (neuerthelesse)
               Of Ladyes ben good, thoughe she were a foole.
            
            
               The .xlv. Glose.
               PAsyphe was a quene, and some fables sayth that she was a woman

of great dissolucion and especially that she loued a bull, and she was mother to Mynothauris, which was halfe a bull and halfe a man, which is to vnderstande that she acqueinted her with a man of vyle condicion, of whom she conceyued a man whiche was of great crueltie, and of meruaylous strength, and all was bycause he had the forme of a man, and the nature of a bull. And for that he was of so great strength, and asprety and so euyll that all the countre trembled, the Poetes say, by fiction that he was halfe a man, and halfe a bull. And therfore yf this lady were of vyle condicion. Prudence woll saye to the good knyght, that he ought not to say, nor suffre to be sayde that all women ben semblable as the veryte is manyfest to the contrary. Galien lerned the science of medicine of a ryght good woman and sage named Clempare, which taught hym to knowe many good herbes and theyr propreties.
            
            
               
               The .xlv. Allegorie.
               BY Pasyphe which was folysshe we may vnderstande a soule returned vnto God. And saynt Gregory sayth in his Omelies, that moch greater ioy is demeaned in heauen of one soule returned vnto God, than of one which hath alwayes ben returned to hym. Ryght so as the captayne in the battayle loueth better the knyght which was fled thens, and sythen is returned, and after his returnynge hath wounded the enemye, than hym whiche hath done no fayre feate. And as the labourer loueth better the lande whiche after the thornes bereth fruyte haboundauntly, than that whiche neuer had any thornes, and hath not borne fruyte. To this purpose sayth god by the prophet.
               
                  Beuertatur vnusquis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      a via sua pessima & propietous ero iniquitati & peccato ipsorum.
                  Hiere. xxvi. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xlvi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xlvi. Texte.
               YF thou haue doughters, able to be maryed
               And that thou woldest bestow them and auaunce
               To men by whom, thou woldest not be myscaryed
               Of Kynge Adrastus, haue thou remembraunce.
            
            
               The .xlvi. Glose.
               ADrastus was kyng of Arges, and

moche puyssaunt & a wyse man. Two knyghtes arrant that one called Polomites, and that other Thideus faught togyther in an obscure night vnder the portall of his pallays, wherof that one challenged that loges of that other, bycause of the stronge wether and great rayne whiche had turmented them all the nyghte, and therof aduenture they were fyghtyng. At that houre the kyng arose from his rost, whiche had harde the noyse of the swordes vpon the sheldes, & came to departe the two knyghtes. Polomites was sonne to the kyng of Thebes, & Thideus to another kyng of Grece, but from theyr landes they were exyled. Greatly honoured Adrastus the two Barons, syth he gaue thē in mariage, two right fayre doughters which he had. After to put Polomites to the ryght of his land that Ethiocles his brother helde. The kyng Adrastus made a great army, & went vpon Thebes with his great hoste, whiche were

all dyscomfyted, deed, and taken: And the .ij. sonnes in lawe to the kyng slaine And the brethern betwyxt whom was the dyscorde slewe eche other in the battayle, and to Adrastus besyde his owne person, were not left on lyue thre knyghtes. And therfore bicause to set and establysshe people exyled, in to theyr ryght: is a great affayre. Prudence sayth to the good knyght that in suche a case he ought to haue counsayl, and take example by the sayd aduenture, and as Adrastus met vpon a nyghte that he shulde gyue his two doughters by maryage to a Lyon, and a Dragon, whiche shuld fyght togyther, the exposicion of dremes sayth, that sweuyns commen of fantasie which may be demonstraunce of good or euyl aduenture which shal come to creatures.
            
            
               The .xlvi. Allegorie.
               WHere it is said that yf he haue any Doughters to be maryed that he

shall take hede to whom he shall gyue thē, we may vnderstande that the good mynde or spryte cheualrous to GOD, oughte to regarde well with whom he shall holde company yf it so be that he wol go in to company, as dyd the good Thoby. Also he ought to assygne & set all his thoughtes in holy meditacions. And saynt Augustyne sayth in an Epistle, that they whiche haue lerned of our lord to be debondare, humble, and meke, do profyte more in meditacion and prayers, than they haue done in redyng and herynge. Therfore sayd Dauid in his Psalter.
               Meditabar i
                     •
                   mandatis tuis que dilexi.
            
         
         
            
            The .xlvii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xlvii. Texte.
               WHan thou arte yonge, and flouryng in pleasaunce
               Acquaynte the with Cupido / but not frequente
               For so that measure, leede the in her daunce
               The God of battayle / holdeth hym well contente.
            
            
               
               The .xlvii. Glose.
               CVpido is the God of loue, and for somoch, as it is not vnsyttyng vnto a yonge knight, to be amorous vpon a Lady that is good, his condycions may therby become better. But bycause Othea knoweth that the hauntynge therof is withdrawynge a man, and a thynge moche anoyenge to Armes, she sayth to the good knyght, that she is well consentyng that he acqueynt him with Cupido. And a Phylosoper sayth that to loue of good courage procedeth of Noblenes of the harte.
            
            
               The .xlvii. Allegorie.
               THat it pleaseth well to the God of battayle that he acqueynt hym wt Cupido, may be vnderstande penaunce, yf the good sprite repentaunt of his synnes fyghting agaynst vyces be yonge & entre newly in to the ryght way, well it pleaseth to God of battayle, y• is Iesu Christe that he acqueynte hym with penaunce & that Iesu Christ by his worthy battayle was our redēptoure sayth

saynt Barnarde, what worde (sayth he) of more great mercye myghte one saye to the synner whiche was dampned, that where as he was solde, by his synne to the enemye of hell, and had not where with to redeme hym selfe. GOD the Father sayde. Take my sonne, and giue him for the. And the sonne sayd. Take me for thy Raunsome and redeme thy selfe by me. This is brought into remembraunce by saynt Peter the apostle in his fyrst Epistle.
               
                  Non corruptibilibus aned vel argento cede
                        •••
                     
                     ti est is: sed precioso sanguine quasi agni incontaminati et immaculati iesu xvi.
                  prima Pet. i. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xlviii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xlviii. Texte.
               SLee thou not Corinis, the fayre
               For the reporte, of the Rauen vniuste
               For yf thou her Slee, halfe in dyspayre
               Thou shalt repente after, thou mayest me truste.
            
            
               The .xlviii. Glose.
               COrinis was a damosyll as sayth

a fable whom Phebus loued paramoures, the Rauen whiche than was his seruaunte reported to hym, that he had sene Corinis his loue lyenge-with another yonge man, of this nouell was phebus somoch dolent that he slew his loue as soone as he sawe her, but therof meruaylously he after repented hym, & the Rauen which attended for his euerdon which he shuld haue of his lorde for his good dede, was by hym cursed and chased, & the fethers whiche he was wont to haue whyte as snowe, Phebus them chaūged into blacke in sygne of dolour and Phebus from thensforth on ordeyned hym to be a beyrer and announcer of euyll tydynges and nouelles, and the exposicion may be vnderstand, that the seruaūt of some puyssaunt mā brought to his lorde semblable tydynges, wherfore he was chased and dysapoynted of his seruice. Therfore woll Othea say, that the good knyght ought not to auaunce hym to say to his prynce suche

tydinges wherof he may haue the hart corrouced or angry, for in the ende euyll maye come to hym therof, and also he ought not to beleue the reporte whiche is vnto hym made by flatery. To this purpose sayth he Phylosopher Hermes The reporter or contriuer of tydynges eyther he maketh a leasynge to hym to whom he sheweth them: eyther he is false to hym of whom he sayth them.
            
            
               The .xlviii. Allegorie.
               BY Corinis whiche ought not to be slayne we may vnderstand our soule, whom we oughte not for to slee by synne? but therefro well to kepe her. And saynt Augustyne sayth, that the soule oughte to be kepte as the Cofre that is full of treasour, and as the Castell whiche is assyeged with enemyes & as the kyng which reposeth hym in his chambre of retraite, and this chambre shuld be closed with v. gates, which be the .v. wyttes of nature, and it is none

other thynge to close those gates, but onely to retraye or drawe a backe the dilectacions of the .v. wyttes and yf it fortune that the soule shulde Issue, by any of his gates to his outwarde operacions, she ought demurely, aduysedly and in dyscrecion to Issue. And euen so as the Prynces whan they woll Issue fro theyr chambres haue huyssyers afore them holdynge maces, to make way in the prease, so whan the soule shulde Issue to se, here, speke, or fele, she ought to haue afore her, Drede, for her huyssyer, whiche shulde haue for the mace the consideracion of the paynes of hell, and of the Iudgement of GOD. And thus to garde the Soule admonesteth the Sage, sayenge.
               
                  Omni custodia serua tuum / cor quoniam ex i
                        •
                     o vita procedit.
                  Prouer. iiii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xlix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .xlix. Texte.
               TAke vpon Iuno, no cure ne luste
               Yf thou to the name of honour haue more fauoure
               Than to the degree, whiche falleth to duste
               For prowesse is better, than all golde and hauyoure.
            
            
               The .xlix. Glose.
               IVno is the Goddes of ryches, and

substaunce, after the fables of Poetes, and bycause that hauiour and ryches, is behoueful to be goten with great payne, busines, and trauaile, and that such busynes may dystourne a man to seke honour. And as honour and valyaunce is more lowable than ryches, in as moche as the Cornell of the Nutte is better than the shell. Othea sayth to the good knyght that he ought not to set vpon riches so strongly his felicite that he delay the pursuyte of valyaunce. To this purpose sayth Hermes. That better is to haue pouerte in doing good workes, than riches goten shamefully. For valyaunce is perpetuall, and ryches is fallyble.
            
            
               The .xlix. Allegorie.
               Iuno of whom it is sayde, that he ought not to set vpon her ouer moche his cure, is taken for ryches, & that the good spryte oughte to dyspyse them, sayth saynt Barnarde. O Chyldren dyscended of the coueytous lygne

of Adam, to what encheason louē ye so moch these mondayne ryches, which be not veray nor yet youres, & whether ye wol or not, them it behoueth you to lese at the deth. And the Gospell sayth that the Camell shulde more easly passe thoroughe the hole of a nedle, than the ryche man attaine the Realme of heauen For the Camell hath vpon his backe, but one burthen. And the euyll ryche man hath twayne. One of worldly possessions, and another of synnes, it behoueth that he leue the further burthen, at his death. But the other, (woll he or not,) he shall bere with hym, yf that he leaue it not afore that he dye. To this purpose sayth our Lorde, in the Gospell.
               
                  Hac
                        •
                     tius est camelum perforamen acus transire / 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      diuitem in
                        •
                     eare in rignum celorum.
                  Mathei. xix. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .l. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .l. Texte.
               AGaynste the Counsayle, of Amphoras the wyse
               Go not to destroy, (where deth maye the ouer charge)
               Of Thebes / and of Arges / the Cyties moste of pryse
               
                  Ne there assemble / none hoost / sheelde / ne Targe.
            
            
               The .l. Glose.
               AMphoras, was a ryght sage clerke, of the Cytie of Arges, & moch he had of science. And when the Kynge Adrastus wold go vpon Thebes to destroy the Cytie. Amphoras which knew by his scyence that euyll shulde come to hym therof, sayde to the Kynge that he shuld not go thyther in any maner, and that yf they went thyther, they shuld al be slayne, and destroyed. But he gaue to his wordes no credence, and so it be fell as he had to hym sayd. Therfore she woll say to the good knyght. That the counsayl of the sage is lytell profytable to him that woll not vse him therafter.
            
            
               The .l. Allegorie.
               BY the Counsayle of Amphoras, agaynst the whiche he ought not to go in to battaile, we may note, that the good spryte ought to ensue holy predycacions.

This sayth saynt Gregory in his Omelies, that lyke as the lyfe of the body may not be sustayned without often takyng his corporal refection, right so may not the lyfe of the soule be sustented without often heryng the worde of God. Than the wordes of God which ye here with your corporall eates receyue them to the profundite of your hart For whan a worde is hard, and is not retayned within the wombe of the memory. It is lyke the euyll dysposed stomacke, whiche casteth forth or vomyteth the meate, and also as he that nothynge retayneth, but casteth all forth, is in dyspayre of the lyfe. So is he, in the peryll of death perdurablye. Whiche hereth the predicacions, & retayneth them not: nor putteth them to operacion. Therfore saith the scripture.
               
                  Non 
                        〈◊〉
                      solo penensult homo sed in omni verbo 
                        •
                     ood procedit de ore dei.
                  Mathei. iiii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .li. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .li. Texte.
               OF thy tonge, gyue Saturne the charge
               So that vnto euyll / it be not free and ioly
               Vnsemynge it is, of speche to moche and large
               And he that it heareth / perceyueth well the foly.
            
            
               The .li. Glose.
               SAturne as I haue sayde afore is a

planet / slowe / tardiue / and sage. Therfore sayth she to the good knyght, that his tonge ought to resemble hym. For the tonge ought to be tardyue, so that speke not to moch, and sage that he say not amysse ī any thyng, and that he say nothynge, wherby may be perceyued in hym any foly, for a wyse man saith. By his wordes is knowen the sage and the fole by syght and regarde.
            
            
               The .li. Allegorie.
               THe tonge whiche ought to be Saturnyue, that is to vnderstande, slowe in spekyng. To this purpose saith Hugo de sancto victore: that the tonge which hath no garde of discrecion is as a cytie wtout a wall / as a vessell yt hath no couerture, as the horse that hath no brydle, as a shyp whiche is wtout stere, or gouernal. The tonge euyll kept is glasyng & slippy as an Ele, it perceth as an arrowe fast flieng, it leseth frendes and maketh enemyes, it moueth noyse, & soweth dyscorde, at one stroke it stryketh,

and sleeth many persones, he that kepeth his tonge, kepeth his soule. For the death, or the lyfe, ben the puyssaunce of the tonge. To this purpose sayth Dauid in his Psalter.
               Quis est homo qui vuit vitam dies diligit videre bonos prohibe linguam tuam a malo et labia ne loquantur dolum.
            
         
         
            The .lii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lii. Texte.
               GEue credence to the counsayle of the Crowe
               Neuer therby / shalte thou entysed be
               
                  Euyll reportes, and nouelles, for to sowe
               Whiche who so escheweth, is moste at lybertie.
            
            
               The .lii. Glose.
               THe Crowe as sayth a fable encoū
                  tred the Rauen or the Roke whan he brought tydinges to Phebus of his loue Corinis which was euyl done, and somoch enquired of him that he sayd to her the occasyon of his erroure, but she disalowed it in giuyng him example by her self, which for a semblable case was derecte & chased from the house of Pallas where she was whylome wont wel to be auaunced, but he ne wold gyue to her counsayle and credetice, wherfore euyll to hym came therof. Therfore sayth Othea to the good knyght that he ought to beleue the Crowe. And Platon sayth. Be thou no Iangler, ne to a kynge a great reporter of nouelles.
            
            
               
               The .lii. Allegorie.
               WHere the Crowe ought to be beleued. She woll saye that the good spryte oughte to vse the Counsayle, as sayeth Saynte Gregorye in his Moralles. That force or strength valueth nothynge, where Counsayle fayleth. For force is ryght soone abated, yf it be not appuyed or borne vp by the gyfte of Counsayle. And the Soule that hathe loste within hym the syege of Counsayle, is outwardely dispersed to dyuers desyres. And therfor sayeth the Sage.
               
                  Si inteauit it sapiencia cor tuum censilium custodiet te / et prudencia seruabit te.
                  Prouerbiorum secundo capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .liii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .liii. Texte.
               YF thou the efforce, with thy stronger to be
               To make fayre pastymes / of force or puyssaunce
               Beware of domage, that maye tourne vnto the
               And of Ganimedes, haue thou remembraunce.
            
            
               The .liii. Glose.
               GAnimedes was a yongeman of the

lygnage of the Troyens. And a Fable sayeth that Phebus and he were vpon a day togyther to cast the barre of yron and as Ganimedes was not of power agaynst the force of Phebus, he was slayne by the reboundynge of the barre whiche Phebus cast so hyghe that he had lost the syght therof. And therfore sayeth Othea that with his stronger, or moste puyssaunte, it is not good a man for to stryue. For therof may not come but inconuenience. So sayth one Sage. A man for to playe with the men that be vngracyous, is sygne of pryde. And is fyninished most cō
                  menly with wrath.
            
            
               The .liii. Allegorie.
               AND as it is sayde that agaynst his stronger he ought not to enforce hym it is to be vnderstande that the good spryte ought not to enterpryse

ouer stronge penaunce without counsayle. Of this speketh saynt Gregory, in Moralibus. That penytence profyteth not, but yf it be discret, neyther the vertue of abstynence, is nothynge worthy, but yf it be so ordayned, that it not more aspre than the bodye maye susteyne. And therfore he concludeth that no symple person, neyther ought to enterpryse penytence wt
                  oute the counsayle of more dyscrert than hym selfe. Therfore sayth the Sage in his prouerbes.
               
                  Vbi mul
                        •
                     a consilia ivi erit Calus.
                  Prouerbiorum secundo capitulo.
               
               And the common Prouerbe sayth.
               Omnia fat cum consilio et postea non penitebi
                     •
                  .
            
         
         
            
            The .liiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .liiii. Texte.
               IAson to resemble, thy selfe, well thou shulde
               Vvhiche by Media in conquest gaue the glorie
               Of the Golden flees, wherfore he dyd her yelde
               A ryghte euyll Guerdon, after his vyctorie.
            
            
               The .liiii. Glose.
               IAson was a knyght of Grece whiche

went into a straunge countre, that is to wyt, into the Ile of Colcos by the endictement or cōmaūdement of Peleus his vncle, which by enuy desyred his death. There was a shepe which had his flees of golde, & by enchauntement was kept but as the conquest was so stronge that no mā came thyther, but he lost his lyfe. Medea which was doughter to ye kyng of that countre, was greatly surprysed with the loue of Iason that by the enchauntementes that she vnderstode beynge in that facultie a soueraigne maystres, she gaue charmes and taught enchauntementes to Iason, wherby he cō
                  quered the golden flees, and therby had honour aboue al knightes lyuyng, and was restored from death by Medea, to whom he had promysed for euer to be a loyall louer, but after fayth to hym fayled, and he loued another, and her vtterly he refused and forsoke. Notwithstandyng that she was of right soueraigne beaulte. Therfore sayth my Lady prudence

to the good knyght, that he refuse to resemble Iason which to moch was misknowyng & desloyall vnto her which had done to hym great goodnes. As it is a vyllayne thynge to a knyght to be ingrate, vnkynde, or mysknowyng, any bounte, or goodnes that he hath receyued, be it of Lady, Damosyll, or other. But he ought to remēbre it & yelde guerdon therfore to his power. To this purpose sayth Hermes. Attende not to rewarde hym whiche hath shewed to the bounte, (For why.) Thou ougtest to remembre it for euer.
            
            
               The .liiii. Allegorie.
               IAson whiche was vnkynde, ought not the good sprite to resemble, whiche for the benefytes & goodnes inenarrable receyued of his creatour oughte not to be vnkynde, s. Barnard saith vpō the Cantycles, that ingratitude or vnkindnes is enemie to the soule, the impediment of vertues, the dispersion of merytes, & the destruction of perdycion of

good dedes. Ingratytude is as a dryē wynde, yt dryeth vp the fountayne of pyte, the dewe of grace, & the ryuer of mercy. To this purpose sayth the Sage.
               
                  Ingrati enim spe
                        •
                      tan
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      hibernalis glatiis tabescet / et disparie
                        •
                      tan
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      aqua superuacna.
                  Sapientis .xvi. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .lv. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lv. Texte.
               OF the Serpent Gorgon, fle the consystorie
               Her fygure to regarde, beware thy selfe well
               
                  The valyaunte Perseus, haue in memorie
               Vhiche all the Hystorie, therof can the tell.
            
            
               The .lv. Glose.
               GORgon, as sayth the fable, was a damosell of soueraygne beaulte but bycause that Phebus had pastyme with her in the temple of Diane, the goddes toke therin so great displeasure that she transmued her into a serpent of ryght horryble fygure, and such a properte had that serpent, that the mā which behelde her, was sodeynly turned into a stone. For the euyl that of her did procede, Perseus the valiaunt knyght, went to fyght against the fyerce beeste. And in the resplendour or brightnes of his sheelde, whiche was all of golde, he behelde hȳself, to thentent that he shuld not regarde the euyll serpent, & he dyd so moch, that he stroke of her heed. Many exposycions may be made vpon this

sayd fable. And Gorgon may be vnderstande for one Cytte, or Towne, whiche hath ben wonte to be of great bountie. But by the vyces of the inhabitauntes it becometh a serpent & venimous, that is to vnderstande that many domages and euyls it doth to the marches nere adiacent, as of al them to robbe & pylle and the marchauntes, & other passyng by ben taken, and put in strayte pryson, and so be they turned to stones. Perseus behelde hymself in his cheualry & went to fyght agaynst the sayd Cytie and toke it, and bereft it of the power for any more doyng euyll, and also may it be a Lady that is ryght fayre, and of euyll maners and affayres which by her couetyse leueth naked and vnclothed many of theyr hauiour, ryches, & substaunce. And many other entendementes and exposicions may be set vpon it. Therfore wol she say to the good knyght that he be well ware to beholde that thynge that is euyl, & to euyll may him drawe.

And Aristotle sayth, fle from people full of Iniquitie, and folowe the Sages. Study in theyr bokes, and beholde the in theyr Feates.
            
            
               The .lv. Allegorie.
               THat he ought not to regarde Gorgon yt is that the good sprite ought not to beholde or thynke vpon any delyces, but beholde his owne fygure in the sheelde of the estate of perfection. And the delices ben to be refused saith Chrisostome, that as it is impossyble that the fyre bren in water, so is it impssible that compunction of harte be amōgest the delyces of the world. They ben two thynges contrary whiche destroye eche other, for compūction is mother of teares, and the delices engendre laughter. Compūction restrayneth the hart, and delyces putteth it at lybertie. To this purpose sayth the scripture.
               Qui seruia
                     •
                  nt in letrimie: in exultacione me
                     ••
                  t.
            
         
         
            
            The .lvi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lvi. Texte.
               IF loue by nyghte, constrayne the to wake
               Take hede that Phebus, therof be not aduysed
               By whose aduertisement, thou mayste be take
               And with the bondes of Vulcan to be surprysed.
            
            
               
               The .lvi. Glose.
               A Fable sayth that Mars and Venus loued eche other peramours. It befell vpon a nyghte that these two louers, (arme in arme,) were fallen on slepe. Phebus which sawe clerely them surprysed and apperceyued he them accused to vulcan husband to Venus, thā he seyng them in that poynte, forged a chayne, as he that was Smyth to the Goddes, and in heuen forgeth the seate foulders, thondres, and tempestes, and with his chaynes made of coper, he boū
                  de them both twayne togyther so that they might not moue them selfe and so he them surprised and showed to the other goddes. And suche laughed therat that wold well haue ben fallen in a semblable mysdede. This fable may benofed to many entendementes, & especially some poyntes touching the science of Astronomie, and also Arsmetyke. Therfore sayth wysdome to the good knight that he kepe hym in what case soeuer he be, to be surprysed by time forgoten, & a

sage saith, wt payne is a thyng so secret but that it is perceyued by some man.
            
            
               The .lvi. Allegorie.
               WHere the aucthorite saith that yf leue renne vpon hym by nyghte, we shall say that the good spryte ought to kepe him from the baytes and grinnes of his enemye enfernal. Of this speketh S. Leo the Bysshop. That the auncient enemye whiche can transfygure hym in to an aungell of lyght, sesseth not to attende by all the snares of his temptacions & to espye howe he may aduyse the faith of creatures he loked who he may embrace wt the fyre of couetise whom he may enflame wt the ardour or hete of Lechery, howe he may set forth the baytes of glotony, he examineth of al customes, he dyscusseth the hartes, he coniectureth or gessyth the affections. And there seketh be the cause to noye, or hurte, where he fyndeth the creature moste dylygently enclyned and occupyed.

Therfore sayth saynt Peter.
               
                  Sobrii estote et vigilate quia ol necsariu
                        •
                      vester diabolus tan
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      leo / rugiens circuit quereus quam deuoret.
                  Secundo petri vltimora.
               
            
         
         
            The .lvii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lvii. Texte.
               BE not Thamarys, of the desprysed
               Thoughe she a woman, and to Armes set her entent
               
                  Remembre how she made, Cirus agrysed
               And his dysprysynge, dearelye to repente.
            
            
               The .lvii. Glose.
               THamaris was a Quene, a moche valyaunt Lady full of great prowesse and of great hardines and ryght sage in Armes, and gouernaūce. Cirus the great kyng of Perse, which had conquered many regions wt his great hoste esmeued and concluded in his minde to go vpon the sayd Thamaris Quene of Femenie of whom he praysed the prowesse as a thyng of lytell value. But she that was experte & subtyll in the mestier of armes suffred hym to enter in to her realme without mouyng her self agaynst hym, vnto such tyme as he had brought hym self into strayte passages amonge mountaynes, where as was a ryght stronge countre. Than dyd asshementes which Thamaris did to be made,

was Cirus assayled with an hoste of women on all sydes, & it was brought so well to passe, that he was taken, and all his people deade & taken. The quene dyd hym to be brought afore her, and his heed to be strycken of, & to be cast in to a vessell full of the blode of his Barons which she had caused to be headed afore hym. And so she sayd. Cirus thou which haste neuer ben satisfied nor had the full desyre of mans blode, now mayste thou therof take thy full draughte. And so ended Cirus the puissaunt kyng of Perse which might neuer ere than be vanquysshed in any battayle. Therfore sayth my lady Othea to ye good knyght that he neuer be so prowde nor surcuydrous, but that he haue doubte ye euyll may to hym fall by some fortune, & be meine of him self. To this purpose saith Plato. Disprayse no person for his lytel facultie, for his vertues may be great.
            
            
               The .lvii. Allegorie.
               THamaris whiche ought not to be

dyspraysed. Notwithstandyng that the good spryte oughte not to dyspyse nor hate the state of humilite (be it in religion or other state.) And that humylyte is to be praysed sayeth Iohn̄ Cassian. That in no maner maye the edyfye of oure buyldynge of vertues, rease hym, selfe in oure Soule, nor addresse his begynnynge excepte that there be founded in our hart the grounde workes of the very humylytie, whiche maye ryghte stedfastly susteyne the hyghenesse of perfection and of charite. Therfore sayeth the Sage.
               
                  Quanio maior as humilia teipsum in omnibus et coram deo / inuentis 
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     am.
                  Ecclesiastici .iii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lviii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lviii. Texte.
               REfrayne thy mynde when that it is affyred
               From fowle delyte, and not gyue awaye all
               Thy Cheuesaunce, whan that it is desyred
               Medea therof, to Counsayle mayest thou call.
            
            
               
               The .lviii. Glose.
               MEdea was one of the most knowers of Sorseryes, and Scyences, that euer was, after the Hystories. This notwithstandynge she gaue her mynde the Brydle, to ensue his fre wyl, for the accomplysshement of her delyte, whan she suffred folysshe loue to haue ouer her the masterye. So that vpon Iason, she set all her harte / and vnto hym she gaue her honoure / her bodye / and her cheuesaunce. Wherfore he yelded vnto her an euyll Guerdon.
               Therfore sayeth Dame Prudence / that the good Knyghte oughte not to suffre reason for to be vanquysshed in hym / by a folysshe delyte in any case / yf he woll vse the vertue of strength. And Plato sayeth / a man of lyght courage / hurteth hym selfe soone, in that thynge that he loueth.
            
            
               The .lviii. Allegorie.
               THat he suffre not his wytte to be rouersed by folysshe delyte / maye

be vnderstanden / that the good Spryte oughte not to suffre his fre wyll to haue Lordeshyppe ouer hym. For yf the Lordeshyppe of the propre wyll, were not / there shulde be no Hell / nor the fyre of Hell shulde haue no Seygnourye, but vpon the person which suffreth his propre wyll to be his mayster.
               Thy propre wyll, fyghteth agaynst God, and is orguyllous, it is that thinge that dyspoyleth Paradyce and reuesteth hell. It maketh vade the valoure of the precious blode of Iesu Christe, and submytteth the worlde to the seruytude of the enemye. And to this purpose sayeth the Sage.
               
                  Virga at
                        •
                      correctio tribuent sapientiam puer autem qui dimittitur proprie voluntati confun
                        •••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      suam.
                  Prouerbiorum .xxix. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lix. Texte.
               SVbiect to Cupide, yf thou be or shall
               Beware to be surprysed, with enemytiee
               So that the Rocke, vpon thy backe ne fall
               As it did on Achis & Galathee.
            
            
               The .lix. Glose.
               GAlathee was a Nymphe or a goddes whiche loue a yonge man named

Achis. A Gyant of horryble, and fowle stature, was amourous also on Galathee, and somoch he aspyed them that he apperceyued them both twayne at a creuesse of a Rocke, thā was he surprysed with the sodayne rage of Ialousie, and in such wyse he shoke the Rocke that Achis was therwith oppressed and deed, but Galathee which was a Nymphe, put her selfe into the see, and so she escaped. So is it to be vnderstand that the good knyght beware hymself to be surprised in such a case by such as haue the power so to do.
            
            
               The .lix. Allegorie.
               THat he kepe him wel fro the Giant that is subiect to Cupyde, is to be vnderstande that the good sprite ought to kepe hym that he haue no Imagynacion to the world ne to the thynges conteyned therin, but that he haue alwaies remēbraunce that mondayne Iewelles ben lytle whyle enduryng, & s. Hierome sayth vpon Hieremie, that there is nothyng

which ought to be reputed longe in consyderacion of thynges yt take no ende, nor all our tyme in consyderacion of the Trinite of paradice. To this purpose sayth the Sage.
               
                  Veansi
                        •
                     runt omnia velud vmbra et tan
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      nuntius percurrens,
                  Sapientio. ca. v.
               
            
         
         
            The .lx. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lx. Texte.
               FLye from the face, of the goddesse Dyscorde
               Euyll ben her snares, and also her condycion
               
                  She troubled the weddynges, at Peleus borde
               Wherby assembled moche people in conclusion.
            
            
               The .lx. Glose.
               DIscorde is a Goddes of euyll affayre, & a fable sayth that whan Peleus espoused the goddes Thetis of whom after was brought forth Achylles. Iupiter and al the Godes, and goddesses were at the weddynge. But the goddes Dyscorde was not byden or inuented to the feeste. And therfore as enuyous she came wtout sendyng for, but she came not for nought, for wel coulde she the seruice of her maister or properte Than were set to diner at one table the thre goddesses. Pallas / Iuno / and Venus. Than came dame Discorde which cast vpon the table an Apple of Golde vpon which were wrytten these wordes (be it gyuen to the fayrest,) than was y• feeste sore troubled, for echone susteyned

that she ought to haue it, afore Iupiter they went for Iudgement vpon this discorde, he wold not please one, & dysplease another. Therfore he put the debate vpon Paris of Troye, yt was than an herd, for his mother had dremed (whan she bare hym within her wombe,) that he shulde be cause of the destruction of Troy. Therfore was he sende in to the Forest to the herdes of whom he supposed no other but to haue ben the sōne. And there Mercurius whiche was conduictour of the ladies sayd to hȳ whose sonne he was. Than he lefte to kepe the flockes and went to Troye to his great Parentes, as wytnesseth the fable where the trewe Hystorie is cloked vnder couerture. And bycause that oftentymes many great myschyefes doth ensewen by dyscorde and debate. And therfore it is a ryghte fowle custome, for to be dyscordaunte.
               Othea sayeth to the good Knyghte, that he ought to flye discorde. And therfore

sayth the phylosopher Pitagoras. Go thou not in that waye, where groweth haynes, or hatered.
            
            
               The .lx. Allegorie.
               AS it is sayd that he ought to flye dyscorde. So ought the good sprite for to flye all the empeschementes of conscyence. And the contentours and Ryottes ben to be eschewed saith Cassyodore, vpon the Psalter. Souerayntly (sayth he,) flye contencion and Ryotte. For stryfe agaynst peace, is enragerye. Stryfe agaynste his Soueraygne, is woodnes. And to stryue against his Subiecte, is great vyllaynye. Therfore sayeth saint Paule the Apostle.
               Non incontentione: et emulatione. 
                     •
                  d romanos.
            
         
         
            
            The .lxi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxi. Texte.
               THy trangressyon, put thou not in oblyuyon
               After that thou haste vnto any man offended
               For he woll attende, therfore to yelde Guerdon
               
                  Therby Leomedon, hath his lyfe ended.
            
            
               The .lxi. Glose.
               LEomedon as I haue sayde afore, was kyng of Troy, and great vylleny had he done to y• Barons of Grece, in chasyng them from his lande, which they put not in obliuion, but Leomedon had let it slyde wholy from his remembraunce. At suche tyme as the Grekes ranne vpon hym and hym surprised, he vnpuruayed and dysapoynted, so they dystroyed & slewe hym. Therfore sayth the good lady prudence to ye good knight her dysciple, that yf he haue offended to any man, that he haue euer good watche therof. For he maye be certayne that he woll not fogette it, but woll reuenge hym selfe therof, whan he maye haue tyme and place. And to this purpose sayth Hermes. Take hede of thy-Enemyes that they take the not when thou arte vnpuruayed.
            
            
               
               The .lxi. Allegorie.
               THat he oughte not to put in oblyuyon his mysdede, whan he hath to another offended. Maye be vnderstanden that whan the good spryte feleth hym selfe fallen in to synne, by defaulte of resystence / he ought to thynke what punycion it requyreth, as it is of them that be dampned yf they amende not them self. And of this speketh saint Gregory. The Iustice of GOD, commeth nowe all fayrely and slowly. But in tyme to come it shal recompense more greuously. The mercy shal tary for her attent. To this purpose sayth the prophet Ihoell.
               
                  Conuertemini ad dominum deum vestrum quia benignus et miseriscore est patiens et multe misericordie prestabilis super maliciam.
                  Ihoelis tercio ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxii. Texte.
               IF it so be that thou, haue loue frequented
               Beware wel vnto whom, that

thou thy mynde shewe
               So that thy dedes and wordes be not repented
               Remembre Semelle which did drynke, as she dyd brewe.
            
            
               The .lxii. Glose.
               A Fable sayth that Semelle was a damosel whom Iupiter loued paramours. Iuno whiche was therof in Ialousie toke the semblaūce of an olde woman and came to Semelle, and by fayre and pleasaunt wordes she began to reason with her, and she dyd so moch that Semelle knowleged and confessed all the conceyte betwyxt her and her louer, and that she was ryght well loued of him, and therof moch auaunted her selfe. Than the goddes sayd to her (whiche toke hede that she shulde not take her with the dysceyuaunce) that in nothyng she had as yet perceyued the Iustynes ne Iolytie of her louer. But (she sayd) that whē she shuld require of hym

one gyft or demaunde, & when he shuld haue firmely it promysed and therto accorded, that she shuld demaūde of hym that he wold accoll and embrace her in such maner as he dyd his wyfe Iuno, whan it pleased hym to solace hym self with her, & by this maner (sayd Iuno) she myght apperceyue the loue of her paramour. Semelle forgot it not, & whan she had made her request to Iupiter and that he had it promysed, and that as a God, he might not cal it, againe he was ryght dolent, & well he knewe that she had ben perceyued. Than toke Iupiter the semblaunce of fyre and accolled and embraced his loue Semelle whiche wt in a moment was totally brenned to asshen, of which aduenture Iupiter was ryght pensyfe and thoughtfull. Vpon this fable may be set many entendemē
                  tes, and especially vpon the Scyence of Astronomy (as saith the maysters) but it may be that by some way, a damosel was deceyued by the wyfe of her louer,

wherby he hym selfe dyd her to dye thorough ygnoraunce. And therfore sayth Othea to the good knyght yt he take hede whan he speketh of a thyng which he wold haue to be kept secret, afore whom he discloseth it, & to whom he speketh / for by the circumstantes may be vnderstande the matter. Therfore sayth Hermes. Make thou not reuelacion of thy secrete thoughtes, but onely vnto them whom thou haste well proued.
            
            
               The .lxii. Allegorie.
               THat he shulde take hede to whom he speketh, we may vnderstande yt the good spryte (what soeuer his good thoughtes be,) ought to kepe them in euery case where he might fall into euyl suspection of another (as sayeth saynt Augustyne, in his boke of Verbes) that we ought not onely to set our hartes to haue good conscyence, but in asmoche as is in our vnstedfastnes, and in the dilygence of mans fraylte. We ought to haue the harte, that we do not ye thinge

which cōmech of euyl supection against our brethren, or euyn christen. To this purpose sayth saynt Paule.
               
                  In omnibus prebe et exemplum honorum operum.
                  Ad Titum .
                        •
                     . capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxiii. Texte.
               THe deduyctes of Diane not ouer moche ensue
               For she ne hath cōceyt, ne fantasy
               To such as cheualry, do pursue
               But euer to muse ī her chasery.
            
            
               
               The .lxiii. Glose
               DIane is called Goddesse of woddes & of chasery. So woll Othea say to the good knyght pursuynge the high name of armes ought not ouer moche to muse or take his pastaunce is the deduyctes of chase or huntyng, for it is a thyng that appertayneth to occiosyte or Idlenes. And Arystotle sayth, that Idlenesse bryngeth to perfytenesse, all Inconue
                     •
                  yence.
            
            
               The .lxiii. Allegorie.
               THat he oughte not ouer moche to ensue the deduyctes of Diane whiche is sayde for occiosite, may specyally be noted to the good spryte. And that it is to be eschewed sayth saynt Gregory. Do alwayes some operacion in goodnes, to the entent that the enemye may fynde the occupied in some good excitacion. To this purpose is it sayde of the wyse woman.
               
                  Consideranit semitas domus sue et panem oci
                        •
                     
                     sa non comedit.
                  Prouerbiorum .xxxi. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxiiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxiiii. Texte.
               AVaunce not thy selfe, for domage therof may come
               To Iragnes, whiche dyd her selfe auaunte
               Agaynst Pallas, the Goddesse of wysdome
               Vvherfore the Goddesse, dyd her enchaunte.
            
            
               The .lxiiii. Glose.
               YRaygnes as sayth a fable was a

damosell moche subtyll in the arte of weyuyng and spynnyng and tapystery worke, but she was ouer moche surcuydrous and prowde of her scyence, and of her dede she auaūted herself against Pallas, wherfore she ranne in to the indyngnacion of the Goddes, whiche for her auauntyng transmued her in to an Attercoppe, and then sayd that for her auauntyng somoch she shulde for euer Spyn / weyue / and twyst / worke of no value. And so came fyrste the Actercoppes, whiche spynne and weyue vnto this daye. So maye it be that some Handemanne auaunted hym selfe agaynst her maystres, wherby euyll vnto her came by some maner.
               And therfore sayeth she to the good knyght, that he ought not to auaunte ne booste hym selfe. And an vnsyttynge and fowle custome it is a knyghte to be a vaunter, and moche it may abate the losse of his bountie and semblably speaketh Plato. Whan thou doest, a thynge

better at one tyme than another eschewe to auaunte the therof. For therby thy balour shalbe moche lesse.
            
            
               The .lxiiii. Allegorie.
               THat he ought not for to be a pompous, nor auaunter of hym selfe. We maye saye, that the good Spryte oughte to kepe hym from vauntaunce. And there agaynst speaketh (S. Augustyne, in the .xij. Booke of the Cytie of GOD.) That auauntaunce is no vyce of mannes lawdynge But it is a perfyte vyce of the soule, whiche loueth humayne praysynge and dispyseth the very wytnes of his proper conscyence. To this purpose sayeth the Sage.
               
                  Quid prosint nobis superbia aut di
                        •
                     les
                        •
                     rum iartanti a quid contulit nobis.
                  Sapien. v. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxv. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxv. Texte.
               IF to thy mynde, it be moche pleasaunt
               Greatly to loue, the deduyctes of chase
               
                  Of Adonius, (at leaste,) be recordaunt
               From whom the wylde Boore the lyfe he dyd arase.
            
            
               The .lxv. Glose.
               ADonius was a yonge man of moche amourous countenaunce and of great beaultie, whom Venus loued peramours, but for somoche as he delyted hym moche in chaserye and huntyng. Venus which doubted that euyll might to him come therof by some mysaduenture, many tymes prayed hym to kepe hym well from chasynge of great beestes, but to her aduertysement Adonius toke lytell regarde, so in conclusyon he was slayne with a wylde Swyne. Therfore sayth Wysdome to the good knight, that yf he woll al gam
                     •
                  s chase and hunte, that he kepe hym from suche venorye, wherby euyll may to hym come. To this purpose sayth Sed
                     •
                  chias

the Prophet. That a kyng shuld not suffre his sonne to exercyse ouer moche chasery ne ociosyte. But he shulde cause hym to be instruct in good maners, and to flye vanyties.
            
            
               The .lxv. Allegorie.
               WHere he ought to haue remēbraunce of Adonius, it may be vnderstande that yf the good spryte haue erred or transgressed in any maner, he ought to haue remēbraunnce of the peryll of perseueraunce therin, for howe the enemye hath great puyssaunce vpon synners, saith s. Peter in his .i
                     •
                  . Epistle, that synners ben seruauntes of corrupcion, and the enemye hath puyssaunce vpon thē, for he that is surmounted and vanquysshed by another in battaile, is become his seruaunte or bondeman. And sygne of this, it is sayd in the Apocalipse.
               
                  Data est bestie potestas in omnem 
                        〈◊〉
                      s
                        •
                     um et populum.
                  Apoca. xiii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxvi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxvi. Texte.
               IF thyne enemyes vpon the, make assaulte
               Take hede, leaste thyne owne people, the annoye
               With them whiche thy Cytie, wolde brynge to defaulte
               And take a good example, of the fyrste Troye.
            
            
               The .lxvi. Glose.
               WHan Hercules with a great foyson

of Grekes came vpon the fyrste Troye, and the kynge Leomedon had harde of theyr cōmyng. Than he and all his people whiche he myghte haue within the Cytie Issued forth, and went agaynst them at theyr landynge, and there assembled and ioyned a ryght fyerce battayle, and the Cytie was reuersed and voyde of people. Than Thelamon and suche other, as laye in an Enbusshemente nere the walles of the Cytie, put them selfe within. And so was the fyrste Troye taken. Therfore sayth she to the good knyght. That he take hede that by suche a turne or conueyaunce he be not deceyued of his enemyes, and Hermes sayeth / kepe the fro the snare of thyne Enemyes.
            
            
               The .lxvi. Allegorie.
               WHere he shulde kepe hym, yf his enemyes assayle hym / that his Cytie be not lefte voyde. It is to be noted that the good Spryte ought alwayes

to holde hym selfe ceased, and replenysshed of vertue. And of this speaketh saynte Augustyne. That in lyke wyse as in tyme of warre, the men of armes, dyssease not them selfe of theyr armoures, nether despoyle not by daye neyther by nyghte, so durynge the tyme of this lyfe presente, they ought not to be dyspoyled of the vertues. For he whom the enemye fyndeth without vertues, is as he whom the aduersary hath founde with out armours. And therfore sayth the Gospell.
               
                  Hortis armatus custodit atrium suum.
                  Luce. xi. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxvii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxvii. Texte.
               BE not moche assoted, ne set all thy ioye
               In Orpheus Harpe, yf thou wolte Armes frequent
               For no pryncypall mestier, thou haste not to employe
               Thy mynde, to the Sowne, of any Instrument.
            
            
               The .lxvii. Glose.
               ORpheus was a Poete, and a fable

sayth that he coulde so well playe vpon the harpe, that for to harken the sowne the renning waters returned their course, the fowles of the ayre, the beestes sauage, & the fyerce serpentes therby forgot theyr crueltie, and stode styll wtoute mouyng to giue aduertēce to the sowne of his harpe. So it is to be vnderstand that so well he it sowned, that all people of eche condicion delyted them greatly to here the Poete playenge. And for so moche as suche Instrumentes assoten oftentymes the hartes of men, Prudence sayeth to the good knyght, that ouer moche he ought not to delite him therin. In so moche as it is not syttynge to them that pursewe cheualrie, ouer moche to muse in Instrumentes, nor other in ociosyte. To this purpose sayth an Aucthorytie: The sowne of an Instrument is the snare of a Serpent: And Plato sayth. He that hath set wholy his pleasaunce in carnal delytes, is more bonde than an esclaue.
            
            
               
               The .lxvii. Allegorie.
               THe Harpe of Orpheus, wherof he ought not to be assoted. We may take it that the good Espryte cheuaulrous oughte not to be assoted, neyther to muse in any worldlye companye be they his Parentes or other. Saynte Augustyne sayeth in his Booke of the Syngularyte of Clerkes. That the solatary is leest prycked with the temptacion of the flesshe whiche haunteth not the frequentacion of volupties. And lest ben they greued with auaryce, whiche neuer se the ryches of the worlde. Therfore sayth Dauid.
               Vigilaui et factus sum sicut passer solitarius in tecto.
               
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxviii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxviii. Texte.
               VPon lewde Dremes, or of folysshe illusyon
               Edyfie no empryse or affayre
               Be it ryghte or be it wronge, it is but abusyon
               And of thy brother Paris, make thyne examplayre.
            
            
               The .lxviii. Glose.
               FOr somoch as Paris had dremed that he shulde go into Grece, for the accomplysshement therof, was prepayred

a great army & sende fro Troy
                     •
                   into Grece where Paris rauysshed Helayne. Wherfore for the amēdement, of the same misdede came after vpō Troy all the power of Grece, which was than so great a countre, that it extended vnto the countre which we call Poile and Calabre, or Italy. And than was it called litle Grece, & of that countre was Achilles & his myrrondōnes. This great quantite of people confounded & destroyed Troy & al the countre adiacent. Therfore sayth Othea to the good knyght, yt vpō an auision he ought not to enterprise any great feate or affayre, for therby great euyll and myscheyfe may come to great furtheraunce, and that a great enterprise shuld not be done wt out great deliberacion of counsayl sayth Plato: do not that thyng whiche thy sens or wyt hath not afore proued.
            
            
               The .lxviii. Allegorie.
               THat a great enterpryse ought not to be put to perfectiō, for auisiō is

that the good entent cheualrous ought in no wyse to presume of hym selfe, ne of hym selfe to enhaunse in arrogancie for any grace that God hath to hym gyuen and s. Gregory sayth in his Moralles, that there ben .iiij. spies in whom al the production of arrogancie is shewed, the fyrst is whan the goodnes that they haue, they repute it onely of them selfe, the 
                     •
                  econde is whan the goodnes that they haue, yf they thynke that they haue it of god, they thȳke that they haue wel de
                  
                     •
                  erued it, & that they receyue it for their merites or good dedes / the thyrde whā 
                  
                     •
                  hey vaunte them self to haue that thyn
                  
                     •
                  e whiche they haue not. The fourth is whan they dysprayse other, by desyre that people may know what goodnesse is in them. Agaynst this vyce speaketh the sage in his prouerbes.
               
                  Arrogantiam et superbiam et os bilingna 
                        •
                     etestor.
                  Prouerbiorum octauo capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxix. Texte.
               IF thou haue great delyte in hawkes or houndes fayre
               Let Antheon, beynge so gentyll of condycion
               That became an Harte, vnt
                     •
                   thy mynde repayre
               And euer beware of domage in conclusyon.
            
            
               The .lxii. Glose.
               ANtheon was a yonge man mo
                     ••
                   curtoise and of gentyl condicion
                     •
                   and greatly he loued houndes and ha
                     •
                  
                  kes, and a fable sayth that vpon a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
he chased al alone in a thicke forest wherre he had lost al his people, than Diane the goddes of woddes had chased in the forest to the houre of mydday, she was so sore chaufed and hore, for the ardour and hete of the Sonne, that a great talent toke her to bath her in a fountayne fayre and clere which she there auysed, and as she was all naked, enuyr
                     •
                  nned with Nymphes and Goddesses whiche serued her. Antheon which toke no hede therof, came sodeinly & vnauised where she was, and behelde the goddes al mother naked, whose face (bycause of her great chastite of shamefastnes) became all red, & great was she dolente, & than sayde she thus, for somoch as I knowe that yonge men vaunt them and make theyr cōmunicacion of Ladyes and damoselles, to the ende that thou shalte not vaunt the to haue sene me naked, I shall take fro the, the puyssaunce of spekynge, and theirwth she accursed hym. Than Antheon became a wylde Harts,

and nothing remayned to hym of mannes shape, but onely his vnderstādyng: wherfore he full of dolour and of sodayne drede went flyeng by the wodde and so moche was he chased of his proper houndes & his owne people which went by the forest serchyng for hym, but now haue they founde him, but they can take of hym no knowledge, so was Antheon attaynt which afore his people wept, & there distylled frō his eyen many great teares, and voluntarely he wolde haue cryed them mercy yf he might haue spoken, and euer sythen haue the Hartes wept at their deth. There was Antheon slayne and martred with great dolour, by his owne meany which in shorte space had him wholy deuoured. Vpon this fable may be made many dyuers expocisions, but to our purpose, it myght be a yonge man which abandoned hym to tally to ociosite and Idlenes & dyspended al his hauiour and his cheuisaunce for the delyte of the body, & in deductes

of chase, and therto he kept Idle people and meany, by this may it be sayd that he was hated of Diane, whiche sygnyfyeth chastyte, & deuoured by his owne people. Therfore woll Prudence say to the good knyght, that he beware to be surprysed in lyke case. And thus sayth one Sage. Ociosyte engendreth ygnoraunce and erroure.
            
            
               The .lxix. Allegorie.
               BY Antheon which was transmued to an Harte. we may vnderstande the very penytent whiche was wont to be a synner, now hath he mated & vanquysshed his propre flesshe and made it subiect and seruaunte to the soule, and hath taken the estate of penaunce. S. Augustyne saith vpon the Psalter, that penitence is a burthen well easy and a lyght charge, and it ought not to be called the burthen or charge of a man, but the wynges of byrdes flyeng. For so as the byrdes bere the charge of their wynges in earth, and their wynges bere thē
                  
into the ayre. So yf we bere vpon the earth the charge of penitence, it shall bere vs right vp into heauen. To this purpose sayth the Gospell.
               
                  Penitentiam agite appropinquabit cuim regnum celorum.
                  Mathei tercio capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxx. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxx. Texte.
               GO not to the gates of yron leadynge to payne
               
                  Of Hell / for to go seke, Erudicen the gaye
               Orpheus with his Harpe, very lytell dyd gayne
               As I in Bookes haue red, and also harde men saye.
            
            
               The .lxx. Glose.
               ORpheus the Poete, which so well harped. A fable sayth that he maried the fayre Erudice. But the daye of theyr maryage, she went walkyng in a medowe bare fote for the heate of the wether. Than an herde coueyted that fayre, and her to haue enforced, he put hym selfe to renne, and she which fled afore hym for fere, was stonge vpon the hele wt a serpent which was hyd vnder the grasse, wherof the mayde was deed wtin a lytell terme. Greatly dolent was Orpheus of this euyll aduenture, than toke he his harpe and went hym to the gates of yron, in the vale tenebrous

afore the infernall palays, and there began to herpe a ryght pytuous lay, and to synge so swetely that all the turmentes of hell were appesed therby, and all the offyces infernall were ceased for to gyue aduertence to the sowne of his harpe, and especially Proserpine goddes of hell, was moued wt great pytie. Than Pluto, Lucyfer, Cerberus, and Acaron, whiche sawe that for the herper all the offices of infernall paynes were ceased and styll, yelded vnto hym his wyfe, by such condicion so that he shuld go afore and she after, wtout turnyng hym bakwarde or els he shulde lese her without euer to recouer her. But as soone as they were Issued forth of that obscure lake, he which greatly loued her myght not refrayne to returne his face to regarde his loue, and forthwith Erudyce departed and fled agayne from hym into hell, and neuer myght he haue her agayne. This fable may be vnderstande in dyuers maners, and it maye be that

one had his loue taken from hym & after rendred to hym agayne, and sythen he lost her again
                     •
                  e or it may be a Castel, or another thyng. But to our purpose it may be sayd, that wel he seketh Erudice in hell which seketh a thyng impossyble to be had, ne to recouer suche a thyng a man ought not to take melancoly. The same sayth Solin. Great folye it is to seke that thynge, whiche is impossyble for to be had.
            
            
               The .lxx. Allegorie.
               THat he ought not to go to seke Erudice in hell. we may vnderstande that the good spryte ought not to pray or require of God, a thing myraculous which is sayd to tempt God. And s. Augustyne saith vpō the Gospell of s. Ihon̄ that the request which the creature maketh to God, is not exalted nor harde, whan he requireth a thing that he may not do him selfe, or yt ought not to do or a thyng wherin he shuld mysuse him selfe, yf it were to hym graunted. Or a

thyng which might hurt his soule yf it were hard & exalted. And therfore it cō
                  meth of the mercy of god yf he gyue not to the creature ye thing
                     •
                   wherin he knoweth he shulde mysuse. To this purpose saith s. Iames the apostle ī his Epistle.
               
                  Petitis er non accipilis eo ꝙ male petatis.
                  Iacobi. iiii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxi. Texte.
               TO know a perfyte knyght yf thou wolte assaye
               
                  Whan he within a Cloyster / is enclosed
               The proese whiche dyd, Achylles by wraye
               Shall teache the, the maner / yf that thou be dysposed.
            
            
               The .lxxi. Glose.
               AChylles, (so sayth a Fable,) was sonne to the Goddes Thetis, and bycause she knewe as a goddes that yf her sonne haunted armes he shulde be slayne in batayle, she that loued hym of great and perfyte loue, clothed hym in the vesture of a mayde, and dyd hym to be bayled as a Nonne in the Abbay of the Goddes vesta, longe was Achylles there kepte secrete, that he was nere at his full growynge. And the fable sayth that he there engendred Pyrrus which afterwarde was moche cheualrous by the doughter of kyng ystrus. Than began the great warres of Troy, and the

Grekes knewe by theyr sorcery and answers of theyr Godes, that it was necessary for them to haue Achylles, all aboute was he sought, but tydynges of hym myght not be hard. Vlyxes which was replenysshed of great subtelte and malyce, sought in euery place, so came he to the Temple, but whan he myght not haue any perceiuaunce of the verite he aduised hym of a great cautele: than Vlyxes toke small Rynges, wymples, riche girdles, fayre bokes, & precious Iewelles, for Ladyes, & therwith he toke Armours fayre & quaynt for knyghtes, so cast he all in mydward of the place in presence of the Ladyes, & sayd, ye echone shuld take that thing that was most to her pleasaunce, and than (as eche thinge draweth to his nature) the Ladyes ranne to the fayre & pleasaunt Iewelles and Achylles toke the armours, & than ranne Vlixes him to embrace, and sayd that he was the same whom he sought and for so moche that knyghtes ought

to be more enclyded to armes than to other quayntyses, prety Iapes and Iewelles which appertayne to ladyes, the aucthoryte sayth, that by this meane may a man knowe the very knyght. To this purpose saith Legmon, the knyght is not knowen, but by armours, & Hermes saith: proue the men afore thou haue in them ouer great affyaunce.
            
            
               The .lxxi. Allegorie.
               WHere the aucthoryte sayth that yf he woll knowe a perfyte knyght he must assay as dyd Vlyxes. We may say it that the knyght of Iesu chryst ought to be knowen by armours of good operacions and that suche a knyght hath the salayre and wage due to the good, sayth S. Hierome, that the Iustyce of God, as it leueth none euyll dede vnpunyshed, also it leueth no good dede vnrewarded. So vnto the good men ought no labour to seme hard ne no tyme longe whan they attende and awayte for the glorye perdurably, for theyr huyre

and salayre. Therfore sayeth the holye Scrypture.
               
                  Confortamini et non dissoluantur manu
                        •
                      / vestre erit enim merces operi vestro.
                  sedi paralipomenon .xv. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxii. Texte.
               STryue not with Athalenta, her to ouer go
               For she hath more talent, than thou to renne faste
               
                  (For why,) she hath good mestier, so for to do
               And vnto suche a course, thou no mestier haste.
            
            
               The .lxxii. Glose.
               AThalenta was a Nymphe of moche great beaulte, but hard was her destenye, for by her many lost theyr lyfe. This damosyll for her great beaulte was of many coueyted, to be had in mariage, but suche an edycte or proclamacion was made that no man shulde haue her except that he her vanquisshed by rennyng, and yf she him vanquisshed he shuld lese his lyfe, and by this meane many were put to deth, this course may be vnderstande in many maners. And it might be some thyng that moch was coueyted of many men, but wt out great trauayle it myght not be had, the course that she made, may be the defense or resystence of the thyng, & especially this fable may be noted of many that make

great stryfe without necessyte. So woll the aucthorite say, that wt a man hard couragious & a great stryuer, he ought to take no cure as to stryue ouer moch for thynges vnprofytable which be not towchyng his honour, or by the whiche he myght endomage hym selfe, for many great euyls haue many tymes ensued by suche stryfe. And Thesybelle saith Thou oughtest to do that thyng which is most profytable to the body and most conuenable to the Soule, and to refuse the contrarye.
            
            
               The .lxxii. Allegorie.
               BY that, that he shall not striue with Athalenta. We may vnderstande 
                     〈◊〉
                   the good spryte ought not to empesshe hym self of any thyng yt the world doth nor in what gouernaunce it be, & of this sayth S. Augustyne in an Epistle, that the world is more peryllous when it is swete vnto creatures, than whan it is aspre & sharpe, howebeit a man than seeth hym selfe more greued & ought less
                     •
                  
                  
to empesshe hȳ or be abasshed, and lesse whan he draweth men to his loue, than whan he gyueth occasion to be despised To this purpose sayth Ihon̄ the Euangelyst in his fyrst Gospell.
               
                  Si quis diligit mundum non est caritas patris in eo.
                  primo Iohan̄. ii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxiii. Texte.
               IN Iudgement lyke Paris, no sentence out caste
               
                  For therby some men, endure great domage
               By euyll sentence, graunted in haste
               Many men haue receyued, an euyll wage.
            
            
               The .lxxiii. Glose.
               A Fable sayth that thre Goddesses of great puyssaunce yt is to know Pallas the Goddes of knowledge and science: Iuno Goddes of ryches and hauyour: and Venus Goddes of loue and Iolite. Came afore Paris holdynge an apple of golde, that was wrytten with these wordes (be it gyuen to the fayrest Of this apple was great dyscorde, fo
                     •
                   echone of the Goddesses sayde that sh
                     •
                   ought to haue it, so were they put vpon Paris for Iudgement of the dyscorde Paris wold fyrst dilygently enquere o
                     •
                   the force of eche of them by them self
                     •
                   And than sayd Pallas I am goddes o
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  nyghthod and of sages, & by me are departed armes vnto knyghtes, and scyence vnto clerkes, & yf thou wylt gyue me the apple, knowe thou that I shall make the cheualrous and knyghtly aboue all other, and all other to excell in all sciences. After sayd Iuno goddes of ryches, and seygnoury, by me are departed and gyuen the great treasours to ye world, and yf thou wolt gyue me the apple I shall make the ryche & puyssaunt, more then any other. Thyrdly spake Venus by moch amourous wordes & said I am she yt vpholde the scole of amours loue, and Iolite, which haue the puissaū
                  ce to make the fole sage, & the sage folysshe, the ryche I may make paurōnyers and beggers, and make ryche thē that ben exyled and in pouerte, and (shortely to conclude) there is no puissaunce that ought to be compared vnto myne, and yf thou wolt gyue me the apple, the loue of fayre Helayne of Grece shalbe (by my meane) to the giuen which may be vnto

the moch more of valour than al other ryches. And than Paris gaue his sentence & renounced knyghthod wysdom and ryches, for Venus to whom he gaue the apple, for which encheason Troy was after destroyed. So is it to be vnderstād, for somoch as Paris was not cheualrous, and that he toke no cure of great science, but on loue set all his entent, therfore to Venus he gaue the golden apple. And therfore sayth prudence to her owne knight Hector, & to al good knyghtes ye semblably they ought not to do. And Pitagoras sayth. The Iudge whiche gyueth Iudgement vniustly deserued all euyll.
            
            
               The .lxxiii. Allegorie.
               PAris that Iudged folyshly, is that the cheualrous knyght of Iesu christe ought to kepe him fro gyuyng Iudgement vpon another. Of this speketh s. Augustyne agaynst the, that .ij. thynges there be which we ought especiallye to eschewe, Iudgement of another

pryncypally, for we knowe not of what courage ben the dedes that they haue done, which to cōdempne this great presumpcion, so we ought to take and constrewe them to the better partie. Secō
                  darely for we know not, ne be not certeyne what they shall be, whiche nowe ben good or euyll. To this purpose sayeth our Lorde in the Gospell.
               
                  Nolite iudicare et non indicabimini inquo enim iudicio indicaueritis / indicabimini.
                  seprimo. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxiiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxiiii. Texte.
               IF great Fortune lysteth, to take the to her grace
               
                  Vnto her promyses, haue thou none affyaunce
               For in a momente, she chaungeth her face
               And such as syt hyghest, fall lowest somtyme by chaunce.
            
            
               The .lxxiiii. Glose.
               FOrtune after ye maner of ye spekinge of Poetes may well be called ye great Goddes, for by her we se the course of al worldly thynges to be gouerned and bycause she promyseth to many ynoughe of prosperyte, and gyueth it in dede to some creatures, and sythen taketh it fro them agayne in a momente of an houre, at her pleasure. Therfore saith the aucthorite to the good knight that he oughte not to affye hym in her promyses, ne to dyscomforte hym ī her aduersytyes or contraryties, Socrates sayth. The circuytes or wheles, of fortune be as engynes to take fisshes.
            
            
               
               The .lxxiiii. Allegorie.
               BY this that is sayd that he ought not to aff
                     •
                  e him in fortune, we may vnderstande that the good sprite ought to flye, and dyspyse the delyces of the worlde. Of this speketh Boere in his thyrde booke of consolacion. That the felycytie of Epicures, or of them that haue the conueyaunce of all mondayne dylectacion, ought to be called infylycitie. For this is the playne and perfayte felycitie that man may make to hym self, to be suffisaunt / puyssaunt / reuerende / solempne / and ioyous / whiche condicions gyue not these thinges wher in the mondayne or worldly people set all theyr feylycties. And therfore sayeth GOD, by the Prophet Esay.
               Popule meus qui te beatam dicunt ip̄i te decipiunt.
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxv. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxv. Texte.
               WArre yf thou wolte moue / empryse or auaunce
               Make not of Paris, thy pryncipall Capytayne
               (For why,) he knoweth better the conueyaunce
               Helayne to embrace, betwyxte his armes twayne.
            
            
               The .lxxv. Glose.
               PAris was not moch apte in his condicions

to armes, but all wholy to the Troyens and conceytes of Venus, and therfore sayth the aucthorite to y• good knyght yt he shulde not make capitayne of his hoste or of his batayles a knight not condicioned to armes. And therfore sayth Aristotle to Alexandre, thou oughtest to establyshe & make Connestable of thy cheualry, him whom thou felest and perceyuest sage, and experte in armes.
            
            
               The .lxxv. Allegorie.
               THat he ought not to make Paris heed of his warres, is that ye good sprite goyng to the onely cheualry of heuen, ought wholy to be substracte & as deed to the world, and to haue most eleuate the lyfe contemplatiue, and s. Gregory sayth vpon Ezechiell that the lyfe contēplatiue by good right is preferred and set aboue the actiue lyfe, as she that is more dygne & more great, for the actyue lyfe trauaileth her self in y• labour of this lyfe present, but the contemplatyue lyfe begynneth now to taste the sauour

of the repose & rest that is to come. Therfore of Mary magdaleyn (by whō contēplacion is figured) saith y• gospell.
               
                  Optimam partem elegit sibi maria que non auffetetur ab ca ineternum.
                  Luce. x. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxvi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxvi. Texte.
               TO watche or espye, set not thy besy cure
               
                  But euermore holde forth, thy ryghte voyage
               The wyfe of Loth, shall gyue the suche nurture
               And of Cephalus, whiche chased beestes Sauage.
            
            
               The .lxxvi. Glose.
               CEphalus was an auncient knyght And a fable sayth that all his lyfe he toke great dilectacion in the deduyctes of huntyng and venory, and merueylously well he had the experience & feate of castyng a Iau
                     •
                  iot that he had which had such a propertie that neuer was it cast in vayne, & it slewe al that it might attayne and bicause he was acustomed to ryse early vpon the morowe to go to the forest to watche the beestes sauage, his wyfe was in great Ialousy that he had ben amourous vpon another than her, and for to know the verite she went vpon a morow after him to watche and

auyse his dede. Cephalus beyng in the wod, hard the leues of a busshe moue & make noyse wherin his wyfe was hyd, and he supposyng that it had ben a wylde beeste, cast, (therwith,) his Iauelot, whiche attayned his wyfe and so was she slayne, moch dolent was Cephalus of this mysaduenture. But remedye myght none be set. The wyfe of Loth (as wytnesseth holy scripture) returned her face abacke, against the cōmaundement of the Aungell, whan she hard the fyue Cyties foundre behynde her, & therfore incontynent was she turned into a salte stone. And as all thynges ben fygured, here myght be ynoughe of entendementes, but (for to take truth for an example) no good man ought to delyte hym in watchyng an other in a thynge which ought not to pertayne to hym, & how no man wold be watched saith Hermes, do thou to thy companion no more than thou woldest that he shulde do to the ne be not in wyl to lay snares for to

take men, ne to purchase theyr domage nor dishonour by deceite nor cautele, for in conlusyon it may turne on thy selfe.
            
            
               The .lxxvi. Allegorie.
               THat he oughte not to take cure of watching any man, may be vnderstand that the good sprite ought not to take payne to know the dede of another ne to enquire nouelles or tydynges of another. And s. Iohn̄ Chrisostome saith vpō the Gospell of s. Mathe, how (saith he) in the dedes of another seest thou so many of lytell defaultes, and in thy proper dedes suffrest to ouerpasse so many of great defaultes. If thou loue thy self better than thy neyghboure, for what entent dost yu empesshe the of his dedes & takest no regarde nor cure to thyne owne. Be diligēt fyrst to cōsydre thyne owne dedes, and after consydre the dedes of another. To this purpose sayth our Lorde in the Gospell.
               
                  Quid autem vides fes
                        •
                     ucam in oculo feateis tui? trabem autem in oculo suo non vides.
                  Mathei. vii. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxvii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxvii. Texte.
               DEsprayse not the counsayle of Helenus the sage
               But by myne aduyse, gyue vnto hym aduertence
               For often or this tyme, hath hapened great domage
               To ye sage for gyuīg, no credēce.
            
            
               
               The .lxxvii. Glose.
               HElenus was brother to Hector, & sone to Priam, and he was a moche sage clerke & full of scyence, so he discounsayled and withstode in as moche as he myght the voyage of Paris his brother into Grece to rauyshe the fayre Heleyne. Howbeit, yet no credence was to hym gyuen, wherof great domage came after to the Troyens. Therfore sayth Othea to the good knyght, that men ought to giue credence to the sage and to his counsayl, and Hermes saith that he which honoureth the sage and vseth theyr counsayle, is perpetuall.
            
            
               The .lxxvii. Allegorie.
               HElenus that discounsayled ye warre, is 
                     •
                  hat the good spryte ought to eschewe the temptacions, and s. Hierome sayth, that the synner hath no excusacion which suffreth hym selfe to be surmounted by temptacion, for the enemye is there in so foeble that he maye none surmount but onely hym whiche is recreaunt and yeldeth him selfe vnto

hym wylfully. And to this sayth saynt Paule the Apostle.
               
                  Hidelis deus qui non patietur vos temptati supra id quod potestis: sed faciet etiam cum exultatione prouentum vt possitis sustinere.
                  Primo ad Corinthios .x. capitulo.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxviii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The lxxviii. Texte.
               REioyce the not to moch, ne be dysmayde
               By nyght, for fantastyke auisyons
               Of Morpleus whiche massagier is sayde
               
                  Of GOD, and showeth the sleper Illusyons.
            
            
               The .lxxviii. Glose.
               MOrpleus (so sayth a fable) is sōne and messagier to god sleping, & he is god of Sweuyns and caused auisyons, & bicause that dreming is a thing moch troublous and obscure and sometymes sygnifieth nothyng, & somtyme sygnifyeth al the cōtrary to that thing that a man meteth of, ne there is none so sage that can properly speke therof, what soeuer ye expositours say. Othea sayth to the good knight that he not to reioyce nor yet to trouble esmay hȳ selfe for any suche auisyons wherof no man may declare a certaine sygnification ne 
                     •
                  o what ende they shuld turne & specyal
                  
                     •
                  y howe one ought not to trouble ne re
                  
                     •
                  oyce hym self of the Iestes of fortune, which ben transytory sayth Socrates Thou that arte a man oughtest not to 
                     •
                  eioyce nor trouble thy self for any case.
            
            
               
               The .lxxviii. Allegorie.
               WHere it sayth that a mā ought not ouermoch to reioyce ne trouble hȳ selfe for auisions, we shall say that the sprituall knyght ought not ouer moche to reioyce hym ne trouble for any case, that maye to hym come. And that he ought to bere the tribulacion paciently sayth s. Augustyne vpō the Psalter, fayre sonne (sayth he) yf thou wepe for the euyl that thou felest, wepe vnder the correction of thy father, yf thou complaine the of trybulacions whiche come vpon the take hede that thou do it not by in dygnacion and pryde, for the aduersytie which God sendeth vnto the, is to the a medicine and not payne, it is to the chastysment and not dampnacion, redoubt thou not in any wyse the rode or yarde of thy father yf thou be in wyll that he shall not extremely abiect the from his herytage, and thynke thou it no payne that thou haste in suffrynge his scourge, but consydre, what place thou haste in his Testamente.
               
                  To this purpose sayth the Sage.
               
                  Esse quod t
                        •
                     bi applicatum fuerit acci
                        •
                     e et in dolor
                        •
                     m sustine et in humilitate parientiam habe.
                  Ecclesiastici ii. ca
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxix. Texte.
               TO go by See, whan thy cō
                  clusyon is
               Or peryllous voyage to take / arte desposed
               Of Alchione, beleue the admonycions Iwys
               
                  By whom of Ceys, the death maye be exposed.
            
            
               The .lxxix. Glose.
               CEys was a kyng a moch prudent and worthy man and greatly loued of Alchione his quene, deuociō toke this kyng to go by see, vpon a perillous passage. In tyme of tempest, he put him selfe vpon the see, but Alchione his wyfe which perfytly loued hym of great loue put her in great payne to destourne hȳ fro that voyage and in great wepinges and teares she prayed hym moch therof, but for her myght be set no remedye nor to go with hym he wolde not suffre her which she wold haue done to what ende someuer fortune shuld them brynge and she put her within the shyp, to be parte with hym, but the kyng Ceys her recomforted, and by force dyd her to remayne, wherof she was moch anguysshous. & dolent, for she was ī ouer great turment & thought bycause that Colus

God of wynde moued sore the see raysed the walues in hyght wt the wanne water. Ceys the kyng within fewe dayes after perysshed in the see, wherof whan Alchione knewe the aduenture she cast herselfe also into the see, and there was trenched. But the fable sayth that the Goddes had therof pytie, & transmued the bodies of these two louers into two byrdes to thende that of theyr great loue shuld be had in perpetuall memory. So flye they yet vnto this present day vpon the see, the same byrdes ben called Alcionees, & theyr fethers ben all white and when the maryners se them come then they ben in certayne that they shal haue tempest. The right exposiciō may be that two louers loued eche other, in semblable maner ī mariage whom the Poete hath compared to the sayd byrdes. So woll Prudence saye that the good knyght ought not to put him vpō peryllous voyage wtout the counsayl of his good frendes, & Assalon sayth. The

wyse man enforseth hym self to put domage farre from hym, & the fole taketh vpon hym great payne to fynde it.
            
            
               The .lxxix. Allegorie.
               THat he ought to beleue Alchione / is yf the good Spryte be by euyll temptacion empesshed wt any errour or doubte in his thought that he ought to put hym vpon the opinyon of the churche. And s. Ambrose saith in the seconde boke of offyces, that he is enraged and mad, whiche dyspyseth the counsayle of the Churche. For Ioseph ayded moche more profytable the kyng Pharaon by the counsayle of his prudence than yf he had giuen him of money, for money shuld lytell haue prouided for y• famine of the realme of Egipte, as did the counsayle of Ioseph that set remedy against the famine of Egipte by the space of certaine yeres. And therfore conclude thou to beleue counsayle and thou shalt not repent. To this purpose sayth the sage

Salomon in his Prouerbes, in the person of the Churche.
               
                  Custodi legem meam at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      consilium o
                        •
                      erit vita anime cue.
                  Prouerb
                        •
                     orum .lil. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxx. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxx. Texte.
               TO the counsayle of a chylde, gyue no credence
               
                  And Troylus thy brother, into thy mynde retayne
               Beleue the auncient, that haue good experyence
               And that knowe of armes, the charge, pleasure, and payne.
            
            
               The .lxxx. Glose.
               WHan the kyng Priam had redefied Troy, which for the cause of the vylany done to thē which went into Colchos, had ben destroyed, than of his destruction wold Priam take vengeaunce than assembled he his counsayle where were many Barons hygh and wyse to knowe yf it were good that Paris his sone shuld go into grece, to rauisshe He layne in exchaunge of exione his systre that had ben taken by Thelamon aiax and broughte in seruage. But all the wyse barons accorded yt he shuld not go bycause of the Prophecies & scriptures which sayd that by such rauysshement

Troy shuld be destroyed, than Troylus beyng a chylde & yongest of the sonnes of Priam sayd, that a man ought not to beleue in coūsayle of warre the vyllectes & auncient mē which by recreandise coūsayle rest & peace, so counsailed he al cōtrary, than was the counsail of Troylus holden, wherof great euyll ensued. Therfore sayth she to the good knyght that to the counsayle of a childe ye naturally is of lyght & small consyderacion, he ought not to holde nor giue credence. Of this saith an aucthorite, y• realme is not inquiet of whō the prince is a childe.
            
            
               The .lxxx. Allegorie.
               TO the counsayle of a chylde ought not the good sprite to accorde, and that is to vnderstand his counsaylour ought not to be ignoraūt but knowynge & well lerned & instruct, so yt he maye be profytable to his helth, & against the ignorauntes saith s. Augustyne. Ignoraunce is a ryght euyll mother, & hath two as euyl doughters, that is falshod

and doubtaunce, the fyrst is myschant, the secōde is miserable, the first is mor
                     •
                   vycious, but the .ij. is more greuous, & these twayne ben extynct and quenched by sapience. Of this sayth the Sage.
               
                  Sapientiam preter euntes non tantum in hoc lapsi sunt vt ignorent bona: sed in sipientie sue celiquerunt hominibus memoriam.
                  Sapie. v. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxxi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxi. Texte.
               OF Calcas and his complyces haue dysdayen
               Of whom the malyce, and falsenesse infynyte
               
                  Indurable realmes, and Empyres betrayhen
               In all the worlde, nys people more to wyte.
            
            
               The .lxxxi. Glose.
               LAncas was a subtle clerke of the cytie of Troy, & whan the kyng Priam knewe that the Grekes came vpon hym wt a great hoste, he sende Calcas in to ye Ile of Delphos to their god Dampne, Appollo Delphicus, howe it shuld be of the warre, and to what conclusion 
                     •
                  t shuld turne, but after the answer of the god (whiche sayd that after .x. yeres the Grekes shuld haue the victory.) Calcas returned him towardes the Grekes and hym acqueinted wt Achilles which was cōmyng into Delphos for the same cause, and with him he returned towardes the Grekes, whom he helped and ayded with his counsayle, agaynst his proper Cytie, and many tymes after he desturued and letted the peace to be made betwyxte

the Grekes and the Troyens, & bycause he was a traytour, the Aucthorite saith to the good knyght that such subtle & euyll persons he ought to hate, for theyr treasōs made by many sleyghtes, cauteles, & fraudes, may moch endomage realmes and empyres and all people. Therfore sayth Plato, the subtle enemye poore & not puyssaunt, may more greue, thā the riche, the puissaunt, and them that ben without knowlege.
            
            
               The .lxxxi. Allegorie.
               CAlcas whiche oughte to be hated, may be vnderstande that the good spryte, the knyght of Iesu christ ought to hate & eschew all malice and fraudes against his neyghbour, and in no wyse he ne ought therto to consent, and s. Hierome sayth. That the traytour adoulteth ne maketh debond are ne frendfull hym selfe, neyther for famyliarite of cō
                  pany, ne for preuyte of eatyng and drinking, ne for grace of seruices, ne for plentie of benefytes, or good dedes. And of

this vyce sayd saint Paule the Apostle.
               
                  Erunt homines elati cupidi superbi proditores proterni tumidi.
                  ii. Ad thimote. iii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxxii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxii. Texte.
               TO graunt that thynge, be neuer daungerous
               Whiche thou mayest employe, without vytuperacion
               And make the a Myrroure, of Hermophroditus
               Vvhiche domage receyued, for his denegacion.
            
            
               
               The .lxxxii. Glose.
               HErmophroditus was a yonge mā of great beaulte. A Nimphe was greatly surprysed with the loue of hym in no wise he wold loue her againe, and ouer all she hym pursued, to haue purchased his loue, so moch that vpon a tyme the yonge man was moch wery, for the chase wherin he had all the day trauailed, than arriued he at the fountaine of Salenaxis, where was a fayre slagne or standyng water clere & burblyng than he toke talent therin to bath him he dispoyled him of his clothes, and put hym self into the water, whā the Nymphe sawe hym all naked, she despoyled her of al her abillementes and attyres and lept after hym into the water, and begā to embrace the yonge mā by great loue, but he beyng ful of felony debouted and cast her frō him by great rudenes, & for any prayer that she myght make she might not molyfie his hert, than wt great volent prayed the Nymphe vnto the goddes that she shuld neuer depart

but euer remayne with her louer which so debouted her, the Goddes graciously herd her deuoute Oraison, & set the two bodies of thē twayne in one, which had two sexes or kyndes, that is to wyt, of the man and woman. This fable may be vnderstand in many maners, and as the clerkes & subtle Philosophers haue obūbred and shadowed theyr great secretes vnder the couerture of fables, here may be vnderstande a sentence apperteynyng to the science of Astronomie & Arsmetrike as say these maysters, and for somoch as ye matter of loue is more dilectable to here than other, they made comenly theyr fyctions vpon loue for to be more delectable & especyally to rude people whiche take nothyng therof but the skyn or outward partes, and to thē that ben subtle is more greable to taste and suche the lycour therof. But to our purpose we may vnderstande that it is a fowle detestable and vyllayne thynge to refuse or graunte with daunger that

thyng which shuld turne to no vyce, ne by the graunting wherof shuld come no preiudice to ye graūter, & Hermes saith, make thou no taryeng to put in execucion, that thyng whiche yu oughtest to do.
            
            
               The .lxxxii. Allegorie.
               THe good sprite ought not to be harde or daungerous to graunt a thȳ
                  ge where he seeth that there is necessyte but to comforte the nedy to his power (as sayth saynt Gregory in his Moralles) that whan we woll comforte the sorowfull in heuynes we must fyrst sorow with hym, for he may not proprely recomforte the dolent or sorowfull which accordeth not to his dolour. For like as a mā may not ioyne two peces of yron togythers, but yf both twayne be heated, chaufed, and molified with the fyre also we may not redres the heuynes of another, except that our hart be molyfied and made softe by compassion. To this purpose sayth the holy scripture.
               
                  Confortate manus dissolutas er genua debuta 
                        ••
                     bozate.
                  Esais. xxxv. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxiii. Texte.
               Thou mayest esbatre, and take thy delectacion
               At place and at tyme, in Vlyxes playes
               For they be subtell, and of honest recreacion
               In the tyme of trewes, and in the feestfull dayes.
            
            
               
               The .lxxxiii. glose.
               VLyxes was a Baron of Grece, of great subtelte, and in tyme of the longe syege afore Troy, that endured .x. yeres in all the dayes whā trewes was taken he contryued and founde playes, and pastymes moche subtle & fayre, for the knyghtes to esbatre, playe and dysporte the time of theyr soiournyng, and some men say that he founde the play of the Chesse, & other semblable games to passe the tyme, & Solin saith, euery thinge subtle & honest, is alowed to be done.
            
            
               The .lxxxiii. Allegorie.
               THe playes of Vlixes may be vnderstand that whan the sprite cheualrous shalbe wery of prayeng adournynge, and to be in contemplacion he maye well of batre and take his deduyctes in redyng holy scripture: for (as sayth S. Hierome in his moralles) the holy scripture is proposed and set open to the eyen of our hart, as a myrrour, to the ende y• we may se therin the face of our Lorde, there may we se the ardour and vyletie

that is in vs, there may we se in what maner we profet, and howe ferre we be from profytyng. To this purpose sayth our Lorde in the Gospell.
               
                  Scrutatis scripturas in quibu
                        •
                      putatis vttame e
                        •
                     ernam habere.
                  Iohan̄. v. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxxiiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxiiii. Texte.
               IF with Cupydo, thou euer be attaynte
               
                  And gyue to hym thyne harte, stedfast as stone
               Beware with Bryseyde, the for to acquaynte
               For she hathe the harte, nowe here, and nowe gone.
            
            
               The .lxxxiiii. Glose.
               BRyseyde, (whom mayster Chaucer calleth Cressayde, in his Boke of Troylus) was a damosell of great beaulte, and yet was more quaynte mutable & of vagaunt condycions. Troylus the yongest sonne of Pryam (which greatly was replenysshed of knyghtly prowesse, great beaulte & gentylnes) loued her of great and perfyte loue, & she gaue hym her loue and promysed hym for euer so to contynewe, and neuer to faulse ne wtdrawe it. Calcas father to the damosell, which by science knewe y• Troy shuld be destroyed dyd so moche that his doughter was yelded and so

brought forth of the Cytie vnto him in exchaunge of anthenor, and so was she brought to hym, great was the dolour of the two louers at their departyng, neuerthelesse wtin shorte tyme Diomedes which was a great Baron of y• Grekes and a moch valiaunt knyght, acqueynted hym wi
                     •
                  h Briseyde, and did so moch by his purchase that she graunted him her loue and vtterly she put in obliuion her louer Troylus. For somoch as Bryseyde was so lyght of courage. Othea saith to the good knyght, yt (yf he wol gyue his hert) beware to acqueynt hym wt a lady semblable to Briseyde, and Hermes saith, kepe the out of the cōpany of the euyll, that yu be not as one of them.
            
            
               The .lxxxiiii. Allegorie.
               BRiseyde of whō he ought to eschew the acqueyntaunce, is vayneglory wherwt the good knight ought ī no wise to acqueynt him, but to flye it to his no wer, for it is very light & cōmeth sodeynly: S. Augustine sayth vpō the Psalt
                     ••
                  ,

that he which hath wel lerned & essayde by experience to surmount & ouercome the degrees of vyces, is come to knowlege yt vaynglory is a synne that most specially is to be eschewed of perfite men, for it is amōge al syn̄es, it is most stronge to be vanquysshed. Therfore sayth saynt Paule the Apostle.
               
                  Qiu gloriatur in dn̄o glorietur.
                  ii. ad corin.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxxv. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxv. Texte.
               TO Achilles take thou good hede vpon
               
                  After that thou shalt haue, Patroclus slayne
               For (truste me well) them two ben both as one
               And haue theyr goodes cōmune, betwyxt them twayne.
            
            
               The .lxxxv. Glose.
               PAtroclus and Achylles, were fellowes togither and so perfete frendes and louers, that neuer two brethren loued better eche other, and they & theyr good were as one onely & proper thing, and bycause that Hector slewe Patroclus ī battayle, therfore came the great hate of Achylles vpō Hector. But bicause he moch doubted his great puyssaunte and force, he neuer ceased to watche hym to thentent to renne vpon hym beyng dyscouered by treason. So sayeth Othea to Hector as by prophecy of this that was to come that whan he shuld haue slayne Patroclus it was nedeful

to kepe hym from Achylles. And it is to be vnderstande, that what man soeuer hath slayne or mysdone to the loyall felowe of another, that his felowe beyng a lyue, woll take vengeaunce therof, yf he may. Therfore sayth Madarge. In what place soeuer thou be wt thyne enemye, holde hȳ euer for suspect, although that thou be stronger than he.
            
            
               The .lxxxv. Allegorie.
               WHere it is sayd that whan he shuld haue slaine Patroclus, he shuld haue euer a good eye vpō Achilles, we may vnderstand that yf the good spryte suffre him self to encline to synne he ought to doubte the deth euerlastyng, and (as sayth Iob) the lyfe present is but a cheualry and insygne therof, this present lyfe is called melitant to the difference of the lyfe aboue, whiche is called tryumphaunt, for that hath the vyctory of Enemyes. To this purpose sayth saint Paule the Apostle.
               
                  Induite doe armatur a dei vt possitis st
                        •
                     re ad
                        •••
                     
                     sus insidi
                        •
                     s diaboli,
                  Ad ephesi. vi. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxvi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxvi. Texte.
               GLadly to Echo, her requestes at troye
               Be thou not in wyll, her playntes to augmente
               If thou haue power, to set her harte in ioye
               Thou knowest not what Fortune is vnto the lente.
            
            
               
               The .lxxxvi. Glose.
               ECho (so sayth a fable) was a Nymphe, & bycause that she was wo
                     •
                  t to be ouer great a Iāgleres & by her iangling accused Iuno, yt vpō a day she watched her husband by Ialousy, she rān
                     •
                   ī the indignaciō of y• goddes, which sayd that frō thēsforth she shuld neuer spe
                     •
                  e first any word to such tyme as another had spokē it afore Echo was amourous vpō ye fayre Narcisus but for any praier or sygne of amite yt she myght to hȳ, he dayned not to haue vpō her pyte, ī somoche y• the farre Echo dyed for his loue, but in dyeng she praied to the goddes yt she might be venged vpō him, in whom she had sounde so moch of cruelte & that they wold giue hȳ to fele the amourous pancture or pryckyng of loue wherby he myght know the great dolour that the perfite & fyne louers haue, which of loue ben refused, & therof behoueth to take their deth, therwt fynished Echo her lyfe but the voyce of her remained which yet doth endure, and the goddes made her

euerlasting memory of 
                     •
                  his aduenture and yet she giueth answere to the people in valleys, & vpon ryuers after the voice of 
                     〈◊〉
                   her, but she may neuer speke first Echo may sygnify a
                     •
                   son, that by great necess
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  e, requireth a thyng of another: the voyce that did remayne, is y• the people suff
                     •
                  yng payne or desease thynke the time long ynough, how shorte so it be, & they may not speke but after another, yt is the
                     •
                   may not helpe thēself wtout the ayde of another. Therfore well Othea say to the good knyght that he ought to haue pite vpon such as suffre wh
                     •
                  
                  ̄ they 
                     〈…〉
                   any thing of him, 
                     〈…〉
                   y• 
                  
                     •
                  yll wel kepe the 
                     〈…〉
                   to ayd 
                     〈◊〉
                   fren
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   of 
                     〈…〉
                   to 
                     〈◊〉
                   thē suf
                     ••
                  e, to be 
                     〈…〉
                   to 
                     〈◊〉
                   y• ryg
                     •
                  t is to his 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  rom all vyces & 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               The .lxxxvi. Allegorie.
               ECh
                     •
                   whiche oughte not 
                     〈…〉
                   her request denyed, we maye vnderstande mercye, whiche the good sprite

ought to haue in hȳ, and s, Augustyne sayth ī his boke of the sermō of our lord in the mountaine, that blyssed ben they which volūtarely succour in this pefent lyfe them yt ben in mysery, for they deserue well y• the mercy of god delyuer them fro their miseries, & it a iust & rightwise thȳg yt he which wold be ayded by his soueraigne that is more puissaunt thā he, in lyke wise yt he help such as belesse thā 
                  
                     •
                  e in y• thing wherin he is more puissaūt Therfore sayth the sage.
               
                  Qui pronue est ad in am benedictiue.
                  Pro. x
                        •
                     ii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxxvii Hystory.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxvii. Texte.
               OF the Laurier yf that thou

set thyne entente
               To haue a crowne, which vaineth more than golde
               Daphne to pursue, to the is cō
                  gruent
               Thā shalt thou it haue, yf thou her ryght path holde.
            
            
               The .lxxxvii. Glose.
               A Fable sayth that Daphne was a damosel whom Phebus loued by loue, & moch her pursued, but in no wyse she wold to hym accorde. It befel vpon a day that he sawe the fayre mayde goyng by the way, & whan she sawe hym come, she toke her to stye, and the god after, and whan he was so nere y• she sawe well she myght not escape, she made her prayer to Diane goddes of chastite that she wold saue vnto her poore mayde the virginite of her body, & contynent was the body of the Pucell transmued in to a grene Laurier, & whan Phebus was

approched therto, he toke of the brannches of the tree a made him therof a chā
                  plet in sygne of victory. And euer sythen vnto this day; hath a chapiet of Laurier sygnified victory, and specially in the time of the great felicite of the Romaynes they crowned euer with Laurier the victorious. Many entedemētes may be had of this fable, & it may be that a pu
                     ••
                  
                  saunt man pursued wt long trauayle a lady, in somoch that v
                     •
                  de
                     •
                   a Laurier he at fayned her to his pleasure, and for y• cause he loued the Laurier euer after, & bare it in deuyse and speche in sygne of vitory that he had of his loue vnder the Laurier, and the Laurier may be taken for golde, which sygnifieth nobles, & bycause yt the Laurier sygnifieth honour, she sayth to the good knyght that it is conuenient for 
                     •
                  ym to pursue Daphne yf he w
                     •
                  ll ha
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of Laurier, yt is to vnderstand he must pursue payne, and trauayle yf he w
                     •
                  l come to honour. To this purpose saith Omere, by great

dylygence cometh a man to perfection.
            
            
               The .lxxxvii. Allegorie.
               YF he woll haue a Crowne of Laurier, it behoueth hym to pursue Daphne, by this we may vnderstande, that yf the good spryte woll haue glorious victory, hym behoueth good perseueraunce which shall bryng hym to the victory of Paradyce. Wherof the ioyes ben infynite, (as sayth saynt Gregory.) What is (sayth he) the tonge that suffyseth to recompte, and what is the endemente that maye comprehende howe great ben the ioyes of this soueraygne Cytie of Paradyce? to be eche daye present with the ordre of Aungelles, to be assystynge with the blyssed sprytes, in the glory of the maker. To regard & beholde presently the visage of God. To se the lyght īcircūscriptible. To be sure neuer to haue drede of deth, to reioyce him self ī the rest of euerlasting incorrupciō. To this sayth Dauid in the Psalter.
               Gloriosa dicta sunt de te
                     •
                  ciuitas dei.
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxviii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxviii. Texte.
               OF Andrometha thy wyfe / I shall make mencion
               By that vision, to be aduertised
               Refuse not al, ī thine entencion
               Ne of none other women, that well ben apprysed.
            
            
               The .lxxxviii. Glose.
               ANdrometha was wyfe to Hecto
                     •
                   and the nyght afore that he wa
                     •
                   slayne came an auision to the lady tha
                     •
                   yf vpon the day ensuynge, Hector wen
                     •
                  
                  
to batayle, wtout fayle he shuld be slayne wherof Andrometha wt great sighes and wepyngꝭ did her power that he shulde not go into batayle, but he wold not gyue credence vnto her, & so was he slayne. Therfore saith Othea that the good knyght ought not fully to disprayse the auysions of his wyfe, yt is to vnderstād the counsayle and auyse of his wyfe yf she be sage & well condicioned, & Plato sayth, yu shuldest not disprayse the counsayle of a lytel person, which is sage, for though it so be that yu be olde haue thou no shame to take the auyse which a childe sheweth vnto the, for some tyme the ignoraunt may auyse the sage.
            
            
               The .lxxxviii. Allegorie.
               THe auysion of Andrometha which shuld not be dispraysed is that the good sprite ought not to adnichille & set at nought ye good purpose that the holy ghost hath put in his hert, but he ought anone to put it to effect after his power of this sayth s. Gregory, that the good

sprite to haue vs to do wel admonesteth vs, moueth vs, & ensigneth vs, he admonesteth our memory, he moueth our wyl he ensygneth & techeth our entendemēt the spryte doulce and swete, suffreth no spot of maculaciō to remayne wtin the habitaciō of the hart, wherin he hȳ self enspireth, but ī continēt he brēneth it wt the fyre of his subtle circūspectiō. Therfore sayth S. Paule the Apostle.
               
                  Spiritum nolite extinguere.
                  Ad hebreos .xi. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxxix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxix. Texte.
               IF that great warre, vpon

the be surmysed
               In force of Babyloyne, ouer moche the not affye
               For vnto N
                     •
                  nus, the force so well suffysed
               That he it toke no man might hym denye.
            
            
               The .lxxxix. Glose.
               BAbyloyne the great, which was edefied by Nemdrothtite. Gyant was the most strōge cytie that euer was made, but that notwithstanding it was taken by the kyng Ninus. Therfore saith she to y• good knight that he ought not ouer moche to affye hym in the force of his Cytie or cas
                     •
                  ello time of warre, dut that he be we four
                     •
                  ayde of people at many as hym behoueth, for conuenable offence. And Plato sayth, he that affyeth hym all quelye in his force, is oftentymes vanquysshed.
            
            
               
               The .lxxxix. Allegorie.
               IN the force of Babyloyne, no man ought not to affye him selfe ouermoch that is that the good spryte ought not to set his truste, ne to gyue attendaunce for any thing that the world promiseth Of this sayth s. Augustyne, in the bo
                     •
                  e of the syngularite of clerkes, that it is ouer lewde affyāunce, a man to repute his lyfe sure, against the perilles of this worlde, and folysshe hope it is to supose to be safe, amonges the morsures or bytynges of synne, lytel certaynte hath a man of victory, as longe as he is amonges the dartes of his Enemyes, & he yt is enuyrouned all aboute with hydeous flames of fyre is not delyuered lyghtly without brennynge. Beleue in hym that hathe the experyence, yf the worlde laughe vpon the, haue in hym none affyaunce. In GOD set all thyne hope. Therfore sayth Dauid.
               Bonum est confidere in domino, s
                     •
                   confidere in homine.
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxx. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxx. Texte.
               HEctor, me behoueth, with syghes despytuous
               Thy death to expresse, whiche doth my harte to brest
               Whiche shall to the fall, when of kynge Pryamus
               Thou wolte not obey the prayer, ne request.
            
            
               
               The .lxxxx. Glose.
               THe day that Hector was slayne in the batayle. Andrometha his wyfe came to pray kynge Priam wt pytuous and great complayntes and wepynges, that he shuld not suffre Hector to go in to batayle, for without fayle he shuld be slayne yf he thyther went, for it was certeinly shewed vnto her by Mars the god of batayle, whiche in slepyng had appered vnto her. Priam treated in asmoch as he myght, and hym greatly endeuoured to desturne him, so that he shuld not syght that day, but Hector stole himself preuely from his father and went forth of the Cytie, by a way made vnder the grounde, and went in to batayle, where he was slayne. And so bycause that he had neuer dysobeyed his Father, but onely that daye. She myght well saye that the daye wherin he shulde dysobey his Father, he shulde dye, and it is for to be vnderstande, that no man ought to dysobey his good frendes, whan as they ben sage. And therfore sayde Arystotle

to Alexandre. As longe as thou shalt beleue the counsayle of them whiche vseth sapyence, and that loueth the loyally, thou shalt reygne victoryously.
            
            
               The .lxxxx. Allegorie.
               WHere she sayth to Hector that it behoueth her to shewe his death, is that the good spryte ought to haue in contynuall memory, the houre of death (Of this sayeth S. Barnarde.) That nothynge is founde amonges the thynges humayne, more certayne than the death, nor more vncertayne than is the houre of death, for death hath no mercy of pouerte, she bereth none honour to rychesse, she spareth neyther sapyence, maners, nor age. Of the death no man hath other certayntie, but that she standeth at the dore of the auncyent or olde people, and to the yonge, she is in maner of an espye. To this purpose sayth the Sage.
               
                  Memor esto quoniam mors non tardabit.
                  Ecclesiastici .xiiii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxxi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxxi. Texte.
               YET the to make Sage, I shall do my best
               Take hede that in bataile thou vse not this conceyte
               Of Armes to dyscouer, thy bodye, ne thy brest
               Vvhiche vnto death, may well be called a bayte.
            
            
               The .lxxxxi. Glose.
               HEctor in the batayle was founde

dyscouert of his Armes, and so slayne. Therfore saith Othea to ye good knight that of his armes in batayle he ought not to discouer him, and Hermes saith the death is lyke to the stroke of an arowe, and the lyfe is lyke to the arowe that is commynge.
            
            
               The .lxxxxi. Allegorie.
               WHere it is said that he ought to holde hym couerte of his armes, is to be vnderstand that the good knyght of Iesu christ, ought to holde his wyttes close and not vagaunt. Of this saith s. Gregory in his moralles, that the person which disperseth his wittes is semblable to the Iangler, whiche fynde no worse house then his owne, therfore he is euermore forth of his house. So the mā which holdeth not his wyttes close is euer waueryng forth of the house of his conscience, and is as a place open so that a mā may entre at al sydes. Therfore sayth our Lorde in the Gospell.
               
                  Clauso hostio ora patrem tuum in abscondito.
                  Mathei. vi. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxxii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxxii. Texte.
               OF Polybetes, ne coueyte, also, but exchewe
               The armes (for why) myschaū
                  ce is in them roted
               For at the despoylynge / thy death shall ensewe
               By hym that doth folowe, and hath the dede noted.
            
            
               The .lxxxxii. Glose.
               POlybetes was a kyng moche puyssaunt,

whom Hector had slayne in batayle, after many great feates that he had done that day, and because he was armed with moch ryche a precious armours, Hector did coueyt them greatly and enclyned him vpon the necke of his horse, for to despoyle the Corps. Than Achylles whiche folowed behynde his backe, for to take hym at his gre dyscouerte, stroke hym vnder his Armours. And at one stroke, cast hym dead to the grounde. Wherof it was great domage, for a more valyaunte knyght neuer gyrded hym with a sworde: Of whom any Hystories make mencion. And that suche couetyse maye be domageable in suche a place it appereth, by the sayde aduenture. Therfore sayth the Phylosopher. Couetyse dysordinate, bryngeth a man to death.
            
            
               The .lxxxxii. Allegorie.
               THat of Polybetes he shuld not coueyte the Armes. We may note that the good spryte ought not to haue

couetise of any worldly thyng. For how it bryngeth the soule to death (sayth s. Innocent, in the Boke of the vyletie of mans condicion. That couetyse is a fyre, that is neuer saciat nor extyncte, for the couetyse person is neuer content hauyng all the he desyreth, for whan he hath that whiche he fyrst desyred, he desyreth euer more, alwayes he establysshed his conclusyon in that thyng whiche he loketh to haue, and not in that whiche he hath. Auaryce and couetyse ben two horse leches, which neuer sease to say (brynge, brynge.) And the more that the value of the money groweth, the more is augmented the loue therto. Couetyse is the way, of spyrytuall death: and many tymes of the death temporall. Therfore sayth S. Paule the Apostle.
               
                  Radix omnium malorum cupiditas est.
                  Primo. Ad thimotheum .vi. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxxiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxxiii. Texte.
               BE not surprysed, with straū
                  ge loue, ne assoted
               As dyd Achylles, (regarde ententyuelye)
               Vvhiche dyd suppose (as in folye adoced)
               His louer to make, of his greatest Enemye.
            
            
               The .lxxxxiii. Glose.
               AChylles assored him of the loue of Polixene the fayre mayde whiche

was systre to Hector, & as he had sene her in the vnyuersarie of the obsequies of Hector, ī tyme of trewes, whā many Grekes went īto Troy, he was somoch surprysed with her loue, that in no wyse he myght endure. Therfore he sende to quene Heccuba, that she wold cause the mariage to be treated, and he shuld cause the warres to be ceased and the siege to departe, & for euer they shuld be frendes, longe tyme was Achylles without armyng hym agaynst the Troyens bycause of this loue, and great payne he toke to cause the host to departe which he myght not do, therfore was not made the mariage: After this Achylles slewe Troylus whiche was so full of valoure that he was wel sēblable to Hector his brother after his yonge age. Of this was so sorowful ye quene Heccuba, that she sende vnto hym to come into Troye for the mariage to be entreated, & there was he slaine. Therfore saith she to the good knyght, that of straunge loue he

ought not to assote him, for by ferre loue haue many euyls hapned. And therfore sayth one Sage, whan thyne enemyes may not reuenge them, than is mestier to kepe well and watche thy selfe.
            
            
               The .lxxxxiii. Allegorie.
               OF straunge loue the good Sprite ought not to assote him, that is to vnderstande, he ought to loue nothyng except it come wholy of God, & endyng in hym, & euery straunge thyng (that is to say the world) he ought to flye, and yt the world is to be hated, sayth s. Augustyne in exposyng the Epistle of s. Iohn̄, the world passeth with all his concupiscence. Than, O thou man reasonable whether semeth the better, to loue the temporall, and to passe and slyde away with the tyme: or to loue Iesu christ and to lyue perpetually with hym. To this purpose sayth s. Iohn̄ in his fyrst Epistle.
               
                  Nolite diligere mundum nec
                        •
                      ca q̄ in mundo sunt.
                  Primo. Iohan̄. ii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxxiiii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxxiiii. Texte.
               ENterpryse thou neuer, folisshe armes in feelde
               To body, and soule, whiche peryll doeth purchase
               As (one arme bare) to fyght (or without any sheelde)
               Of Aiax, take thou aduertence in this case.
            
            
               The .lxxxxiiii. Glose.
               AIax was a knight of Grece moc
                     •
                  
                  
orguyllous and prowde, but he was neuertheles a good knight of his hande, and by pryde and fyexitie, he enterprised armes, and to fyght wt one arme bare, and discouered of his sheelde, so was he persed, through and, throughe, and cast downe dead. And therfore sayth Othea to the good knyght to do such armes is of no honour, but is reputed for foly, pride, and ouer moch perillous, so saith Aristotle: many erre and transgresse by ignoraunce and defaulte of knowlege and they knowe not what is to be done, ne what is to be refused, and other fayle by pryde and arrogancie.
            
            
               The .lxxxxiiii. Allegorie.
               THat he ought not to enterpryse folisshe armes is that the good sprite ought not to affie him in his proper fragilite, as sayth s. Augustine in a sermon that no mā ought to presume of his speche whan he pronounceth a wondre, ne no mā ought to affie him this strength whan he suffreth temptacion, for yf we

speke sagely our wordes come of God, & yf we endure stedfastly temptacion, the aduersities come of god, & not of our pacience. To this purpose sayth s. Paule.
               
                  H
                        •
                     duciam ta
                        •
                     em habemus per christum ad deum non 
                        •
                      sumus fucientes aliquid cogitare ex nobis / tan
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      
                     
                        •
                     t nobis.
                  Secundi 
                        •
                     d corinthios .iii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            The .lxxxxv. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxxv. Texte.
               THe traytour Anthenor, exyle and chase
               
                  Vvhiche agaynst his, Countre hath purchased treason
               As a desloyall, scarioth Iudas
               So yelde vnto hym his Huyre / due to hym by reason.
            
            
               The .lxxxxv. Glose.
               ANthenor was a Baron of Troy whan it came to ende of the greuous batailes of Troy, the Grekes whiche had long holden the syege afore the cytie, knew not how to come to the meane to take the cytie, for it was of great strength, but by the exhortaciō of Anthenor, for wrath that he bare to kyng Priam he exhorted them & sayd: howe they shuld fayne to make peace wt the kyng, and by that way he hym selfe shuld put them wtin the Cytie & giue to them passage, so was it done, wherby Troy was betrayed, and for somoch that to great was the treason and euylnes of hym, she sayth to ye good knyght that all his semblables where he may them knowe

he ought to chase and exyle, for moche ben such people to be hated. Plato saith Baxate, is the Capytayne and gouernoure of euyll men.
            
            
               The .lxxxxv. Allegorie.
               ANthenor which ought to be chased, we may vnderstande that the good spryte ought to chase fro hym all thyng wherby inconuenience myght to him come. Of this sayth s. Augustine, yt he which is not diligent to eschewe the inconueniences, is semblable to a butterflye, whiche turneth her so longe aboute the fyre of the Lampe, that her wynges ben brent, and thems she drowned in the oyle, and the byrde which flyeth so long about the byrdlyme that at the last it is fastened in her fethers. Example of s. Peter which abode so longe in the courte of the prynce of the lawe, that he fell in suche inconuenience to deny his mayster. And Salomon sayth.
               
                  Huge a via malarum ne transeas pe
                        •
                     
                     cam.
                  Prouerbiorum, iiii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxxvi. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxxvi. Texte.
               SVffre none offeryng to come to the Temple
               Of Myn̄erue / by thyne Enemyes periured
               Of the Horse of tree / take thou good exemple
               If it had not ben / Troye had yet endure.
            
            
               The .lxxxxvi. Glose.
               THe Grekes made a trewes by fayntyse

to the Troyens, by the treason of Anthenor, they sayd they had auowed a gyft to Minerue the goddes which they wold offre, and they caused to be made an horse of tree of merueilous greatnes which was ful of armed knyghtes, and it was so great that it behoued to breke the gate of the Cytie, that they myght enter, & vpon wheles was set this horse which they drewe vnto the temple. And whan the nyght was come, vp stert the knyghtes and put themself forth of the horse into the Cytie, all the people they slewe, brent, & destroyed, the cytie. Therfore sayth Othea to the good knyght, that ī such fayntyse, nor such offryng he ought not to affie him. To this purpose sayth the sage, a man ought to doubte the subtelties & engines of his enemye if he be sage, & yf he be a fole, his euylnes.
            
            
               The .lxxxxvi. Allegorie.
               BY the temple of Mynerue, we may vnderstand the holy churche, where ought not to be offred out orayson, & s.

Augustine saith ī the boke of fayth, that without the company of our mother holy church any goodnes may to no mā ꝓfet, ne the workes of mercy may be of no valure, ne the lyfe perdurable be had, ne without the circuite of the churche may be none helth. Therfore sayth Dauid.
               Apud te laus mea in ecclesia magna.
            
         
         
            The .lxxxxvii. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxxvii. Texte.
               IN strength of thy Castell, be not to moche assured
               
                  For Ylion, the stronge Castell / and Thune
               Ben taken, and brent, thoughe they were strongly mured
               All thyng is betwyxte, the handes of Fortune.
            
            
               The .lxxxxvii. Glose.
               YLion was the mayster dongeon or strōge holde of Troy, the strongest and the fayrest, that euer was made / wherof the Hystories maketh mencion but this notwithstandynge it was taken, brent, and brought to nought, and also was the Cytie of Thune, whiche was somtyme a great thynge, and for so moche as suche cases do happen by the mutabylytie of Fortune. Prudence woll saye, yt the good knyght ought not to 
                     •
                  norguel ne to holde sure hym self for any strength. Therfore sayth Ptholomeus, of asmoche as seigneury or lordshyp is more hygh, of somoch is ye reygne or fall therof more peryllous.
            
            
               
               The .lxxxxvii. Allegorie.
               THat he shall not trust to haue a sure castell, we may vnderstande that the good Spryte ought not to haue regarde to any delyces. For the delyces ben transytoryous, not sure, but leadynge to dampnacion, sayth saynt Hierome. That it is impossyble, that a person shall passe from delyces to delyces, as to go from the delyces of this worlde, vnto the delyces of Paradyce, that heare fulfylleth his belye, and there shulde fyll, and satysfye his soule. For the condicion of the soule, is there to haue her dylectacion. And it is not gyuen to them whiche suppose to haue the worlde perpetuall in delyces. To this purpose is it wrytten in the Apocalipse.
               
                  Quantum glorificanit se et indeliciis fuit ta
                        •
                     
                     tum dare ei tormentum et luctum.
                  Apo. xviii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxxviii. Hystorie
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxxviii. Texte.
               REgarde that the Porte, of Circes be exchewed
               Where, of Vlixes, the knyghtes dyd repayre
               And were to the fygure of swyne. transmued
               Remembre the fauour, that fortune dyd them bayre.
            
            
               The .lxxxxviii. Glose.
               CIrces was a quene which had her

realme vpon the see of Italy, and was a great enchauntres and moch she knewe of sorcery, auauncementes, and incantacions. And whan Vlixes which went by the see after the destruction of Troy, entended to returne in to his Countre, by many great and peryllous turmentes, that he had. He arryued at the porte of her lande, and sende to the quene by his knyghtes to knowe yf he myght surely take hauen vpō her grounde. Circes moche fayrely welcomed and fested the messagiers, and by semblaunt of curteysye she dyd to be brought vnto them drinke that was moch delicious to drinke, but such vertue it had by poyson that sodeinlye the knyghtes were transmued into Hogges. Circes may be vnderstande in many maners and may be entended for a lande or a countre, where the knygtes were put in fowle or vyleyne prison, and she maye be also a Lady full of inconstaunce, mutabilite, and vagaunt. And that by her many knyghtꝭ errant, that
is 

to say pursuyng armes, which specially were of the people of Vlixes, that is to say malicious & auysed were holden at soiourne as hogges or swyne. And therfore sayth she to the good kynght that at suche so
                     •
                  ourne, he ought not to reste hym & Aristotle saith. He that is wholy enclyned to fornicacion, may not in the ende be lawded ne alowed.
            
            
               The .lxxxxviii. Allegorie.
               THe porte of Cires, we may vnderstand for Ipocrisy, which the good spryte ought to exchewe ouer all thyng. And against the Ipocrites sayth s. Gregory in his morales, that the lyfe of Ipocrites is no more but a fantasticke auysyon, and a fantasye Imagynatyfe / whiche showeth outwardlye the semblaunce of an Image, and in very dede is nothyng worth inwardely. To this purpose saith our Lorde in the Gospell.
               
                  Ve vobis ipocrite qui similes estis sepulcris dealbates que a foris apparent hominibus speciosa ītu
                        •
                      vero plena sunt ossibus mortuorum.
                  Mathei. xxiii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .lxxxxix. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .lxxxxix. Texte.
               Thou oughtest not to showe wyse parables and fayre
               To them that lacketh reason / them to vnderstande
               Of this by Yno, take good examplayre
               
                  Vviche the sodden corue, dyd sowe vpon the lande.
            
            
               The .lxxxxix. Glose.
               YNO was a Quene, whiche caused for to sowe Seedes, after that she had sodden it, wh
                     ••
                  he neuer wolde growe agayne neyther deare fruyte. And therfore woll Othea saye, to the good knyght, that fayre reasons well ordayned, and sage aucthorities, ought not to be sayde to people of rude vnderstandynge, whiche knowe not the entent therof. For than they be loste and wasted in vayne. And therfore sayeth Arystotle. Euyn so as the rayne profyteth not to the Seede, that is sowen vpon the stone. In lyke maner good argumentes doth not profyte vnto the Insypyent.
            
            
               The .lxxxxix. Allegorie.
               THat fayre r
                     •
                  asons, oughte not to be sayde vnto them, whiche ben Ignoraunt, whiche can not vnderstande

them. So that it is a thynge lost. But that Ignoraunce is to be blamed sayeth saynt Barnarde in a Booke of the fyftene degrees of humylytie, that they excuse them for noughte of fragylyte or Ignoraunce, whiche to the entent that they may synne, more freelye ben wylfullye frayle or Ignoraunte, and many thynges whiche ought somtyme to be learned / ben oftentymes vnknowen / by neglygence to learne them, (by slouth to demaunde them,) (or by shame to enquyre them.) And al such Ignoraunce hath non excusacion. And therfore sayth saynte Paule the Apostle.
               
                  Si quis ignorat, ignorabitur.
                  Primo, ad corinthios .xiiii. ca.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .C. Hystorie.
            
               
            
            
               The .C. Texte.
               
                  The .C. Aucthoryties, set in

this booke
                  Despyse not the effecte, for the wordes abused
                  For of a woman, August documente tooke
                  That to be adoured, he vtterlye refused.
               
               
                  ¶And where the translatoure, hath not well perused
                  His style, because of ygnoraunt entendemente
                  The vertuous (doubtles) woll holde hym excused
                  But the enuyous tonges, ben euer insolente.
               
            
            
               The .C. Glose.
               CEsar Augustus was Emperour of Rome, and of all the world, and bycause that ī the tyme of his reygne was peace through all the worlde, so that he

reygned and gouerned all peasible. The folysshe people miscreaunt beleued that the same peace was bycause of the goodnes of him but it was not, for it was bycause of Iesu christ, which was borne of the virgyn Mary, and was than vpon earth, and as long as he lyued in earth as man, peace was established by al the world. So wold the blynde people haue worshypped Cesar as a God. But than Sibilla Cumana to hym sayd that he shuld kepe hym fro beynge adoured and shewed him that there was but one onely God, which al hath created, and than she brought him vpō an hye mounteyne forth of the cytie, and wtin the sonne by the wyll of our Lorde, appered a virgyn holding a childe, Sibille shewed it vnto him & sayd, that the same was the very God which ought to be adoured, & than Cesar adoured him, and to hȳ did great reuerence. And bycause that Cesar Augustus which was prince of al the worlde, lerned to knowe God, at the credence

of a woman, may be sayd to purpose the aucthorite sayd by Hermes: be thou not ashamed to here truth & good ensygnement who soeuer sayth them, for veryte ennobleth hym that doth pronounce it.
            
            
               The .C. Allegorie.
               WHere Othea sayth yt she hath wrytten to hym an C. Aucthorites, and that Augustus toke lerning of a womā is to be vnderstand that good wordes, and good ensygnementes are to be alowed of what soeuer person they be sayd. Of this saith (Hugo de sancto victore.) in a boke called Didastalicon. That the wyse man hereth gladly al thinges and lerneth ioyously of euery man, he redeth voluntarely al ensignementes, he dispyseth not ye scripture, he dispiseth not the person, he dispyseth not the doctrine, he enquireth indy
                     •
                  ferently ouer all, of all, where he seeth that he hath defaulte, he cōsydereth not what he is that speketh but what it is that is spoken, he taketh no regarde of howe moche he hym selfe

hath knowledge, but of howe moche he knoweth not. To this purpose sayeth the Sage.
               
                  ¶Auris bona audiet tum omni concupiscentia sapientiam.
                  Ecclesiastici .iii. ca.
               
               ☞Thus endeth the .C. Hystories of Troye, translated out of Frenche in to Englyshe, by me. R. W.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprynted by me Robert Wyer, dwellyng in s. Martyns parysshe, at charyng Crosse. at the sygne of s. Iohn̄ Euangelist besyde the Duke of Suffolkes place.
            ¶Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.
            ROBERT WYER.
            
         
      
   