
      
         
            
            
            A SERMON
preached at Paules
Croſſe, the ſixt of February.
1596.
            In which are diſcuſſed theſe three
concluſions.

                  1 It is not the will of God that all men ſhould be
ſaued.
                  2 The abſolute will of God, and his ſecret decree
from all eternitie, is the cauſe why ſome are
predeſtinated to ſaluation, others to deſtruction,
and not any foreſight of faith, or
good workes in the one, or infidelitie, neglect,
or contempt in the other.
                  3 Chriſt died not effectually for all.
               
            
            By Iohn Doue, Doctor of Diuinitie.
            
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Printed by T. C. for R. Dexter. 1597.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable,
Sir Thomas Egerton Knight,
Lord Keeper of the great Seale
of England.
            
               RIght Honorable (my ſingular
good Lord) Your
integritie in beſtowing
ſpirituall liuings, and
making choyſe of learned
men vpon whom you beſtow
them, hath ſatisfied
the common expectation, and fully anſwered
that great hope which the Cleargie of
Englande hath conceiued of you. It is the
voyce of all them which are religiouſly affected,
that God in his mercy hath rayſed you vp
to bee an eſpeciall instrument of his glorie.
My ſelfe, among many other of both the Vniuerſities,

had ſet my heart at rest, as one
reſolued to die within the precinctes of the
Colledge, like a Monke ſhut vp in his cell,
or an Heremite mured vp within the compaſſe
of a wall, without hope of euer being
called to any Eccleſiaſtial preferment in this
corrupt and ſimoniacall age, (had I not bene
by your Honor preferred). VVherfore in dutie
I could do no leſſe, thē for my poore portiō
of learning, to offer vnto you this my labor
as a ſchollers myte, which here I humbly
preſent vnto your Honour, as vnto my good
L. vnto whom I am eſpecially bound. It may
pleaſe your Lordſhip to weigh it, not accorcording
to my skill, which is but weake, but
according to the ſoundneſſe of the doctrine
therin conteined, which is warranted by the
authoritie of the ſcriptures, the ſame ſcriptures
being rightly vnderſtood: as it appeareth
by the analogie of the ſcriptures: the
conſent both of the Fathers of the primitiue
Church, and the new writers of our times,
which do concurre in iudgement, and agree
vpon the ſame interpretation. The Lorde
continue this your great loue of godlineſſe,

and ſingular zeale in furthering of religion,
that here you may liue long to his glory, and
hereafter liue for euer to your owne euerlaſting
comfort.
            
               Your Honours in all
humble dutie,
Iohn Doue.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Sermon preached
at Paules Croſſe, the ſixt
of Februarie. 1596.
            
            
               Ezech. 33. 11.
               As I liue, ſayth the Lord God, I haue no delight
in the death of a ſinner.
            
            
               A Proteſtation againſt the
houſe of Iſrael. In which
three things offer themſelues
to our conſideration:
The maieſtie of
the perſon which doth
proteſt: the maner how
he maketh his proteſtation, and what hee
proteſteth. The perſon beeing God, the
maner, by ſwearing by himſelfe, he proteſteth
that he hath no delight in the death
of a ſinner.
            Of the perſon,Med. c. 25 I ſay with Auguſtine: Huius
mysterij profunditatem, mens humana non
poteſt concipere, nec oratoria lingua narrare,
nec bibliothecarum volumina explicare, ſi vniuerſum

mundum libri repleant. His maieſtie is
an hidden myſterie, whoſe depth & bottom
the wit of man can not ſound, the tong of
ſinfull man can not vtter, the whole world
beeing ſuppoſed to bee but one librarie of
bookes, would bee a briefe and compendious
epitomie, not large and voluminous enough
to expreſſe it.Gen. 18. To whom Abraham
the nearer hee approached, the more hee
perceyued himſelfe to bee but duſt and aſhes,
Eſay. 6. at whoſe preſence the Cherubins and
Seraphins do hide their faces, as not able to
behold his glorie,Eſay. 24. at whoſe appearance the
Moone ſhall be abaſhed,Exod. 33. and the Sunne aſhamed:
whoſe face Moſes could not ſee
without preſent death,Iob. 9. who is wiſe in heart,
mightie in ſtrength,Iob. 11. remooueth the mountaines
out of their places, cauſeth the pillars
of the earth to ſhake, commaundeth the
Sunne, and it riſeth not, cloſeth vp the ſtars
as vnder a ſignet, ſpreadeth out the heauens,
and walketh on the height of the
ſea, maketh the ſtarres Arctuarus, Orion,
and Pliades, and the climates of the South,
whoſe wonderfull workes are infinite, and
without number, whoſe perfection is
higher then heauen, deeper then hell, longer
then the earth,Eſay. 6. wider then the ſea.
When the Prophet ſawe the Lorde ſitting

on an high Throne, and the Seraphins
ſtoode vppon it, and one cryed to another,
and ſayde, Holie, holie, holie, is the
Lorde God of hoaſts, the whole worlde is
full of his glorie, and the lintils of the doore
cheekes mooued at the voyce of him that
cryed, and the houſe was filled with ſmoke,
hee ſayde: wo is mee for I am vndone, becauſe
I am a man of polluted lips, for mine
eyes haue ſeene the King and the Lorde of
hoaſts. Then flewe one of the Cherubins
to him with an hote cole in his hand, which
he had takē from the aultar with the tongs,
and he touched his mouth, and ſayde: Lo,
this hath touched thy lips. If the Cherubin
had ſanctified my lippes,Eſa. 40. 4. as he did the Prophets
in this place, if he had giuen mee the
tongue of the learned,Iere. 1. 9. as hee did vnto him
in another place: or if he had put his words
into my mouth, as hee did to Ieremie, yet
ſhould I not be able to expreſſe it, for neither
Eſay nor Ieremie could expreſſe it. For
betweene his reach, and the ſhallowneſſe of
mans heart, there is as great a wirlepoole,
or ſwallowing pitte, as that which is
betweene hell mouth, and Abrahams boſome.
If I ſhoulde wade in the channell
thereof, I ſhould ſinke into as deepe a gulfe
as the water of Ezechiel, which the

firſt time came vp to his ankles, the ſecond
time to his knees,Ezec. 4. 7. the third time to his loins,
the fourth time it was a deepe riuer, and
and not to bee paſſed ouer, that hee was
faine to bee brought backe againe to the
brinke therof, ſo that the farther he waded,
the deeper he was plunged. The Philoſophers
compare him to a circle, becauſe he is
infinite, without beginning, and without
ending, but ſuch a circle as is repugnant to
the principles of Geometrie, whoſe centre
is euery where,Mat. 5. 34 35. but his circumference is no
where: his throne is heauen, his footſtoole
earth, his holy citie Ieruſalem. He is al eye,
for he ſeeth all things: all eare, for he heareth
all things: all arme, for he comprehendeth
al things:Iohn 4. 24 and yet he is none of al theſe,
for he is a ſpirit,2. Cor. 3 17. and in ſpirit to be worſhipped.
Medit. 12. 24. He is great without quantitie, good
without qualitie, euerlaſting without time:
in his greatneſſe infinite, in his power omnipotent,
in his wiſdome ineſtimable, in his
counſels terrible, in his iudgements iuſt: his
thoughts ſecret, his wordes true, his workes
holy: inuiſible, yet ſeeing all things: immutable,
yet chaunging all things: immoueable
himſelf, yet in whom all other things haue
their being and mouing.
            
               As I liue, ſaith the Lord God. We reade of

many Gods in the holy ſcriptures: for Satan
is called Deus huius ſeculi,
               2. Cor. 4. the God of
this world. Sometime the name of God is
aſcribed vnto men,Pſal. 82. 
               Ego dixi vos dij eſtis, I
haue ſayd, ye are Gods, meaning kings, rulers,
and magiſtrates, to whom the ſword of
iuſtice is committed, becauſe they repreſent
the perſon of God, but they ſhall die like
men:Exod. 32. ſometimes to Idols: Faciamus Deos
qui praecedant nos, Let vs make Gods to go
before vs. It was the voyce of the people
to Aaron, when Moſes was in the Mount,
of which Paule ſpeaketh:Gal. 4. Euen then when
they knew not God, they did ſeruice vnto
ſuch things as by nature are not gods. And,
When they knewe God,Rom. 1. they glorified him
not as God, but became vaine in their imaginations,
their fooliſh heart was full of
darkneſſe: when they profeſſed themſelues
wiſe, they became fooliſh, for they turned
the glorie of the incorruptible God, into
the image of a corruptible man, & of birds,
and foure footed beaſts, & creeping things.
Such gods are made with hands,Baruch. 6. and cannot
ſaue themſelues,1. Samu. 12. they are vanitie, abhomination,
1. Reg. 16. the doctrine of vanitie, teachers
of lies,Deuter. 7. expreſſely forbidden in Gods book,
They haue eyes and ſee not,Deut. 27. eares & heare
not,Ier. 10. noſes and ſmell not, handes and touch

not:Habac. 2. feete and walke not: they that make
them are like vnto them,Deut. 26. and ſo are all they
that truſt in them.Deut. 18. But the Prophet ſpeaketh
of one God in this place,Eſay. 2. which is
omnipotent,Eſay. 14. which is a ſpirite, which is euery
where preſent,Mich. 5. and ſeeth al things, which
is immortall,Pſal. 115. which is called in a word, the
Lord God,Gen. 17. and the God of gods. Sing vnto
the Lord a new ſong,Gen. 35. ſing to the Lord al the
earth,Iohn. 14. ſing to the Lord and praiſe his name,
declare his ſaluation frō day to day,Ier. 23. for the
Lord is great and much to be prayſed,1. Tim. 1. 6 he is
to be feared of all Gods.Pſal. 96. For all the gods
of the people are Idols,Pſal. 50. but the Lorde hath
made the heauens.1. Tim. 1. And, The God of gods
euen the Lorde hath ſpoken, and called the
earth, euen from the riſing of the Sunne, to
the going downe thereof. I conclude this
firſt part with Saint Paule: Nowe vnto the
King euerlaſting, immortall, inuiſible, vnto
God onely wiſe, bee honour and glorie,
for euer and euer.
            
               As I liue,
               1. Cor. 8. As there is but one God to the
faithfull,Zach. 14. which hath but one name, that he
may haue no fellowſhip with the gods of
the Nations:1. Tim. 1. ſo is he immortall,1. Tim. 6. onely hath
immortalitie, and dwelleth in the light that
none can attaine vnto, whom neuer man
ſawe, nor can ſee, that hee may bee diſtinguiſhed

from princes which alſo are Gods,Pſal. 82.
but they ſhall die like men:Exod. 29. and he is a liuing
God,Leuit. 26. that he may be diſtinguiſhed frō
Idols,2. Cor. 6. which are but dead Gods, and therefore
hee ſayth:Pſal. 115. 
               As I liue, I delight not. &c.
In which wordes I obſerue two things: to
wit, the Lord ſweareth: and he ſweareth by
his life that is,Pſal. 96. by himſelfe. He ſwore in his
wrath,Num. 92. that they ſhoulde not enter into his
reſt. None (ſaith he) of the men which came
out of Egypt, from twentie yeares olde and
vpward, ſhal ſee the land concerning which
I ſwore to Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, becauſe
they haue not wholye followed mee,
excepting Caleb and Ioſua. And as God
ſwore,Ex. 20. 17 ſo ſometime man ſweare, & that lawfully,
Liu. 19. 20 notwithſtanding the general prohibition
wherin oaths are forbiddē.Dent. 5. 11. 
               Thomas Aquinas
alledgeth the authoritie of Saint Auguſt.
               Iam. 5. 12 
               Contra mendacium,
               mat. 5. 33. where hee ſheweth,
that all oathes are not ſimply forbidden,
                  Pars. 2. quaeſt. 89. artic. 2. but
vpō reſpects. Ne iurando ad facilitatē iurandi
veniamns, deinde ad conſuetudinem, demum ad
periurium. Leaſt often ſwearing breed in
vs a delight, and delight growe to an habit,
and at the length,De ſerm. do. in mon. to periurie. And in
another place: Si iurare cogeris, ſcias de
neceſſitate venire infirmitatis illorum,
quibus ſuades, quae infirmitas mala est,

non male facis qui bene vteris iuramento vt alteri
vtiliter perſuadeas, ſed à malo eſt illius cuius
infirmitate iurare cogeris. If thou be conſtrayned
to ſweare, it is long of their weakneſſe,
which will not beleeue thee without
ſwearing, which weakneſſe of theirs is ſin:
thou art not in fault which takeſt a lawfull
oath, to make fayth vnto an other, but hee
is in the fault whoſe incredulitie is ſuch that
he will not beleeue thee without an oath.
So to confirme a trueth,Gen. 21. & 26. 
               Iacob and Laban
made a couenant betweene themſelues, by
ſwearing one to the other.Ruth. 3. By an oath Boaz
promiſed marriage to Ruth. Abdias being a
iuſt mā,1. Reg. 18. and fearing God, ſwore vnto Elias,
Paule to the Romans.
               Rom. 19. God is my witneſſe
whom I ſerue in my ſpirite, in the Goſpel
of his ſonne, that without ceaſing I make
mētion of you in my prayers. And in ſwearing,
diuerſe ceremonies haue beene obſerued,
according to the times and places as in
the time of Abraham, they ſwore, laying
their handes vnder their thighes. Afterward
the Iewes taking the law of Moſes in their
handes, the Chriſtian touching the Goſpel.
But as a learned man ſayth, Ceremonia
iuramenti nihil eſt, modò res iuſta ſit animus
iuraniis bonus, & religioſum iuramentum. It is
not materiall what outward ceremonie is

vſed in ſwering, ſo as it be in a lawfull cauſe,
the cōſcience of him which ſweareth being
good, and the oath religious which hee taketh.
But whoſoeuer ſweareth, hee muſt
ſweare by the Lorde, and when the Lorde
ſweareth, he ſweareth by himſelfe. So the
Angel ſwore by him that liueth for euermore,
Apo. 10. 6. there ſhould be no more time. By my
ſelfe haue I ſworne (ſaith the Lord to Abraham)
becauſe thou haſt done this thing,Gen. 22. 16. and
haſt not ſpared thine onely ſonne, therfore
I will bleſſe thee, and multiply thy ſeede as
the ſtarres of heauen.Nū. 14. 26 As I liue (ſaieth the
Lorde) I will do vnto you, as you haue ſpoken
in mine eares, your carkaſſes ſhall fall in
the wilderneſſe. But the reaſon why men
ſweare by the Lord, and the Lord by himſelfe▪
is alledged by the Apoſtle.Heb. 6. 13. An oath
for confirmation is the ende of all ſtrife: ſo
God, willing more abundantly to ſhew vnto
the heires of promiſe, the ſtableneſſe of
his counſell, bound himſelfe by an oath, that
by two immutable things wherein it is impoſſible
that God ſhould lie, we might haue
ſtrong conſolation, which haue our refuge
to holde faſt the hope that is ſet before vs.
Now men ſweare by him that is greater thē
themſelues: but when God made the promiſe
to Abraham, becauſe he had no greater

to ſweare by, he ſwore by himſelfe. But
I come to the laſt and eſſential point, where
he proteſteth, that he delighteth not in the
death of a ſinner.
            That he delighteth not in the death of a
ſinner, we need no further proof, then this,
that hee ſent his ſonne to die for the ſaluation
of ſinners.Iohn 12. God ſent not his ſonne to
condemne the worlde, but that through
him the worlde might bee ſaued. And
notwithſtanding the enmitie betweene
God and vs continued no longer,Rom. 5. 10 then vntill
wee were reconciled vnto him through
his ſonne:Col. 1. 21. yet vnleſſe hee had of his free
mercie loued vs from the beginning, hee
had neuer ſent his ſonne to reconcile vs. For
ſo writeth Auguſtine:
               Tract. in Iohn. 100 
               Incomprehenſibilis &
immutabilis eſt Dei dilectio, non enim ex quo
ei reconciliati ſumus per ſaenguinem filij eius cepit
nos diligere, ſed ante mundi conſtitutionem
dilexit nos, vt cum eius vnigenito nos filij eius
eſſemus antequàm omnino aliquid eſſemus. Incomprehenſible
and immutable is the loue
of God, for his loue towardes vs did not
then firſt begin, whē we were reconciled to
him by the death of his ſon, but his loue was
frō the beginning, for he ordeined vs when
as yet we wer not ſons, to be heires with his
only ſon.Iohn. 3. 
               Ita deus dilexit mundū, &c. So God
loued the world, that he gaue his onely begotten

ſon for vs, that whoſoeuer beleeued
in him ſhould not periſh, but haue life
euerlaſting. In which wordes of our ſauiour
Chriſt, I note ſix things, which al do ſauour
of the infinit mercy of god ſhewed to ſinful
men. The firſt is, that god is the only author
and efficient cauſe of yt
                ſaluation of ſinners.
The 2. is, what moued God to ſaue ſinners:
his great loue towards them: the 3. how far
this loue of god is extended: euen to all ſinners,
for he ſo loued the world: the 4. the
means how he wrought the ſaluation of ſinners:
by which ſaluation he made his loue
knowē vnto thē: by giuing his ſon, yt
                higheſt
degree of cōpaſſion, hee gaue the innocent
for the nocēt, the righteous for the vnrighteous,
& that not a ſtranger, but a kinſman,
not a kinſman but a ſon, & not a ſon onely,
but an onely ſon. The 5. what ſinners take
hold of this his mercy, not ſimply al ſinners,
but all beleening ſinners: the 6. is, the end of
his compaſſion vpō ſinners, that they ſhould
not periſh in their ſins, but haue life euerlaſting.
Theſe things being ſo, that we haue ſo
many argumēts of his mercy ſhewed to ſinners,
that he is the only author of their ſaluation,
and that it proceedeth from his loue,
and for the working of it, he ſpared not his
onelie ſonne, and that it extended not to
a fewe, but to all: for as much as hee

loued the world. And, which is a more euident
proofe of his mercie, ſeeing he woulde
haue none to periſh, but all to come to repentance,
2. Pet. 3. 9. ſeeing he would haue all men to
be ſaued, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth, for as much as there is one God,
and one Mediator betweene God and man,
the man Ieſus Chriſt, which gaue himſelfe a
raunſome for all men,1. Tim. 2. 4 to be a teſtimonie in
due time, ſeeing euery one which calleth on
the name of the Lord ſhall be ſaued.Ioel. 2. And
our Sauiour Chriſt inuiteth them ſaying.
Come to mee all that bee laden,Matth. 11. and I will
refreſh you,Pſal, 145. if Gods mercie be greater then
all his workes, if he bee more ready to ſaue
then to deſtroy, to abſolue, then to condemne,
as it appeareth in that immediately
vpon the ſinne by Adam committed in Paradice,
he pronounced the ſentence of ſaluation
before the doome of cōdemnation,
promiſing the Meſſias the bleſſed ſeed,Gen. 3. before
he threatned him with miſery & death,
that he might raiſe him vp to a liuely hope,
and not throw him downe into the pitte of
deſperation. And as ſaint Auguſtine ſayeth,
Quando peccauit homo miſerabiliter, condonauit
Deus miſericorditer, When man ſinned
moſt miſerably, God forgaue him moſt
mercifully, Et licet ô Deus in cunctis tuis operibus

mirabilis es, tamen mirabilior eſſe crederis
in operibus pietatis. Though he be wonderfull
in all his workes, yet hee is more to bee
wondered at for his workes of pittie. In ſo
great a clowde of witneſſes of Gods mercie,
which is extended to all, and that hee delighteth
not in the death of any ſinner,
how can it be that many are called,Ma. 20. 16 and few
are choſen? that great is the way that leadeth
to perdition, and many there bee that
finde it,Mat. 7. 13. and narrowe is the gate which leadeth
to ſaluation,Luk. 13. 24 and fewe there bee that
enter therein? That when Eſau and Iacob
had done neither good nor euill, that the
purpoſe of God might remaine according
to election, not by workes, but by him that
calleth: before they were borne God loued
Iacob,
               Rom. 9. and hated Eſau? choſe one, and refuſed
the other?Mat. 1. that he will haue mercie on
whom he will haue mercie,Exod. 33. and ſhew compaſſion
on whom he wil ſhew compaſſion?Eſa. 10. 21, 22.
That it is not in him that willeth, nor in
him that runneth,Rom. 9. 27. but in God that ſheweth
mercie? That he hath mercy on whom hee
will, and whō he will he hardeneth? though
the children of Iſrael were in number as the
ſandes of the ſea, but a remnant ſhall be ſaued?
I haue thought good to handle this
poynt at large: and for the better diſcuſſing

therof to collect and gather out theſe three
concluſions.
            
               The firſt, that it is not the will of God that all
men ſhould be ſaued.
            
               The ſecond, that the abſolute wil of God, &
his ſecret decree from all eternitye, is the cauſe
why ſome are predeſtinated to ſaluation, others
to death and deſtruction, and not any foreſight of
faith or good workes in the one, or of infidelitie,
neglect, or contempt in the other.
            
               The third, that Chriſt died not effectually
for all.
            Of the firſt S. Auguſtine diſputeth in this
maner,Enchirid. ad Laur. cap. 95, & 97. That God will not haue all men to
be ſaued, it is manifeſt, foraſmuch as our Sauiour
wrought many works in the vnthankfull
cities,Mat. 11. 21 
               Corazin, Bethſaida, & Capernaum,
which he knew would not repent, but he refrained
from ſhewing any ſuch examples in
Tire and Sidon, and Gomorrha and Sodom,
which if he had done there, Tire and Sydon
had repented in ſackcloth & aſhes, & Sodom
had remained vntill this day. Moreouer,
ſaith he, I giue thee thanks, ô father, lord of
heauē & earth, becauſe thou haſt hid theſe
things (meaning the miſteries of ſaluation)
frō the wiſe & vnderſtāding, & haſt opened
them to babes, it is ſo, ô father, becauſe thy
good wil was ſuch. But how then, ſaith he,
ſhall we anſwer the obiectiō of S. Paul?
               1. Tim. 2. 
               Quo

modo dicit apoſtolus deus vult omnes homines ſaluari
quum plurimi non fiant ſalui? If God will
haue all men to be ſaued, as the apoſtle writeth,
how is it that the greateſt part are dā
               ned?
Deus multa poteſt quae non vult, ſed nihil
vult quod non poteſt? his power is greater thē
his will, and his will extendeth not it ſelfe ſo
far as his power: his will is not to do all that
he can, but he can do whatſoeuer is his will,
as the prophet ſpeaketh.Pſal. 115. 3. Our god is in heauen,
and he doth what he liſteth. If it be his
will to ſaue all, and his power is omnipotent
to do what he will, why then are but a remnant
ſaued? Some, ſaith Auguſt. do anſwer,
that the cauſe is in thēſelues, as if God will,
but they will not,Mat. 23. 27. as it is in the goſpel, Ieruſalem,
Ieruſalem, which killeſt the prophets,
and ſtoneſt thē which are ſent to thee,Luke. 13. 34. how
often would I haue gathered thy children
togither, as the hen gathereth her chickens,
but thou wouldſt not? Tanquam dei voluntas
ſuperata ſit hominum vnluntate, & infirmiſſimis
nolendo agentibus facere non potuerit potentiſſimus
quod volebat. Vbi tum eſt eius omnipotentia
qua omnia quaecū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   voluit facit ſi colligare voluit
filios Ieruſalē & non facit? As though the wil
of God could be croſſed by the wil of men,
and the almighty could be hindered of his
purpoſe by the weakeſt veſſels. how thē was
he omnipotent, if he were willing to gather

the children of Ieruſalem, but did it not?
That text being not vnderſtood, would at
the firſt ſight ſeeme to import ſo much, as
if the will of God were made fruſtrate, and
of none effect by the will of men, where
then were his omnipotencie? An potius &
ipſa filios ſuos ab illo colligi noluit, ſed ea quoque
nolente filios eius collegit ipſe quos voluit? Nay,
rather Ieruſalem in deed, foraſmuch as lay
in her, would not haue her children gathered
togither, but his will was not fruſtrate,
for as much as hee againſt her will gathered
together as many of them as ſeemed good
to his owne will and pleaſure. And in another
place hee doeth anſwer it more fullye,Enchi. ad Lau. c. 100
where he ſaith. Quantum ad ipſos attinet, quod
Deus noluit fecerunt, quantum verò ad omnipotentiam
Dei, nullo modo id efficere valuerunt.
Hoc quippe ipſo quod contra voluntatem Dei
fecerunt, de ipſis facta eſt voluntas Dei. Miro
& ineffabili modo nō fit praeter eius voluntatem
quod fit contra eius voluntatē quià non fieret ſi
non ſineret: nec vti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nolens ſinit ſed volēs, nec
ſineret bonus fieri male, niſi omnipotens de male
etiam facere poſſet bene. For their parts, & as
much in as them lay, they did that which
God would not haue to be done, but if ye
conſider the omnipotencie of God, they
could not doo otherwaies then was his will.

For, in as much as they did contrary to the
will of God, in them ſo doing was fulfilled
the will of God. And it is a wonderfull myſterie
to ſee, that which is againſt his will, is
not otherwiſe then hee hath willed; for but
by his ſufferance it could not bee, neither
doth he ſuffer it againſt his will, but with his
will: neither would God which is good ſuffer
any thing to be done which is euill, vnleſſe
his omnipotencie were ſuch that hee
could make good of that which is euill. Finally,
to this obiection out of Saint Paule,
(hauing firſt diſputed antagoniſticò) he maketh
his owne anſwer dogmatice,
               
                  Enchir. c. 100. and that
two maner of wayes. The firſt is this: Quod
Deus vult omnes ſaluari, & tamen plurimi non
ſaluantur, ita intelligendus eſt ac ſi diceret,
nullum hominem ſaluum niſi quem ſaluum fieri
ipſe voluerit, non quod nullus ſit quem non ſaluum
fieri valit, ſed quod nullus ſaluus fiat niſi
quam velit, & ideo rogandus ſit vt valit, quia
neceſſe est fieri ſi voluerit, de orando quippe Deo
agebat apoſtolus vt hoc diceret. Where it is
written, that God willeth all men to be ſaued,
and yet the greateſt part of men are
not ſaued, it is ſo to be vnderſtood. God willeth
all men to be ſaued, that is, no man is ſaued
againſt his will, but whoſoeuer is ſaued,
it is by his will, not as though there were

none whom hee would not haue ſaued, but
that none are ſaued, vnleſſe hee will, and
they onely whom hee will, and therefore he
is to be prayed vnto that he would, becauſe
it cannot otherwiſe bee, but they ſhall bee
ſaued if hee will, for the Apoſtle alleageth
this as an argument, that wee ſhould pray
to him for the ſaluation of all men, becauſe
it is by his will that they are ſaued. And
becauſe the ſafeſt and moſt ſound interpretation
of the Scriptures, is by other like
places of the Scriptures, wee reade the
like kinde of ſaying in the firſt of. Iohn, concerning
Chriſt: Illuminat omnem hominem
venientem in mundum, non quia nullus
hominum eſt qui non illuminatur, ſed quia niſi
ab ipſo nullus illuminatur. Hee lighteneth
all men which come into the worlde, and
yet manie ſit in palpable darkeneſſe, as Papiſtes,
Iohn. 1. Iewes, Turkes, Infidels, and in the
ſhadowe of death, therefore it is not ſo to
bee vnderſtoode, as if all men were
lightened by him, but ſo, that that no man
is lightened but by him. His ſeconde anſwere
is this: That whereas hee willeth
all men to bee ſaued, this woorde All,
is bee vnderſtoode, as it is often tymes vſed
in the Scholes, not De ſingulis generum,
ſed de generibus ſingulorum, Not as if

hee woulde haue euerie one in particular,
of all ſortes of people to bee ſaued, but of
all ſortes ſome to bee ſaued. For thus hee
ſayeth: Omnes homines vult ſaluos fieri, non
quòd nullus hominum eſſet quem ſaluum fieri
nollet, qui virtutes miraculorum facere noluit,
apud eos quoi dicit acturos poenitētiam ſi feciſſet:
ſed vt per omnes homines omne hominum genus
intelligamus per quaſcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   differētias diſtributum,
reges, priuatos, pauperes, mares, faeminas,
&c. By all men we muſt vnderſtand all kind
of men. Whereas it is written, hee will
haue all men to be ſaued, it is not to be vnderſtoode,
as though there were no man
whō he would not haue ſaued, for as much
as he would not work wonders among thē,
which (as hee ſaith) had bin conuerted, if he
had wrought them amōg them: but by euerie
man, all ſortes of men, as kings, ſubiects,
rich, and poore, are to be vnderſtood. Nam
Apoſtolus ibi praecepit vt oremus pro ſingulis,
ſpecialiter addit, pro regibus qui poterant ſuperbia
ſeculari ab humilitate Chriſtiana abhorrere.
For the Apoſtle in that place exhorteth,
that ſupplications be made for all men, but
eſpecially for princes, and ſuch as are in authoritie,
becauſe ſuch men may be more eaſily
by the proſperitie of this life, drawen
away from the humilitye of fayth.
            
               
               Hoc dicit eſſe bonū vt pro talibus 
                     •
                  retur, ſtatim
vt deſperationem tolleret, addit: Quia deus vult
omnes ſaluari. Therefore, ſaith the Apoſtle,
it is good & acceptable in the ſight of God,
that ſuch men be prayed for, and that wee
may hope well of all, and deſpaire of none,
he addeth: For God willeth all men to bee
ſaued. Wherefore in a worde, God will not
haue all men in particular, but all men in a
generalitie, that is, all kindes of men to bee
ſaued, as in the wordes going before, he will
haue prayers to be made for all men, that is,
not for all men in particular, but all kinds of
men: for there bee ſome men in particular,
for whom we may not pray.1. Ioh. 5. 16. If any ſee his
brother ſinne a ſinne which is not to death,
let him aske, and life ſhall be giuen him: but
there is a ſinne to death, that is agaynſt the
holy Ghoſt, which cannot be forgiuen, and
for that thou ſhalt not pray. Likewiſe our
Sauiour ſaith:Luk. 11. 24 Wo be to you Phariſies, for
you tithe mint and rewe, and all hearbs, but
paſſe ouer iudgement and the loue of God.
Yet they tithed not all hearbs, but all kinds
of hearbs, not omnia oleta, ſed omne genus olerum.
So God willeth all men to bee ſaued:
not all men, but all kinds of men. To theſe
two anſwers of Saint Auguſtine, which are
both conſonant and agreeable, not only to

the analogie of fayth, but alſo of that
place of Saint Paule, I will adde a thirde
anſwere, for the more fuller ſatisfying of
all ſuch as deſire to attaine vnto the knowledge
of the truth, & that is this: Foraſmuch
as God will haue all men to bee ſaued, wee
muſt diſtinguiſh of his will, which is two
folde, Voluntas reuelata, & voluntas beneplacita,
his hidden or ſecret will, which is onlie
knowen vnto himſelfe, and his written or
reuealed will, which is imparted vnto man
in his holy Scriptures. According to his
written will,Mat. 11. hee willeth all men to bee
ſaued.Matt. 26. 27. For he ſayth: Come vnto mee all:
Drinke of this all: his Goſpell hath beene
preached vnto all nations.Pſal. 19. The ſounde of
them, meaning the voyce of the Apoſtles,Ma. 28 29
hath been heard in all lands,Mar. 16. 20. Go, and teach
all nations, baptizing them in the name of
the father,Act. 2. 5. &c. They went forth and preached
euery where. There were at Ieruſalem
men that feared God, of euery nation
vnder the cope of heauen, and euerie one
heard the Apoſtles preach in his owne language,
that by their meanes the fame of the
Goſpell might be ſpredde abroad in all the
corners of the earth, that no infidell might
hold himſelfe excuſed by pleading ignorance
at the day of iudgement. But according

to his ſecret wil few are ſaued: and that
is it of which the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, ſaying:
The foundation of God remaineth ſure,2. Tim. 2. 19. and
hath this ſeale or priuie ſignet: Solus deus nouit
ſuos: only god knoweth who be his. And
leaſt any ſhould think, that this diſtinction
of the will of God into his ſecret will, and
reuealed will, is but an idle and friuolous diſtinction,
ſauouring of curioſitie more then
of ſubſtance, I will proue it by ſuch euident
places of Scripture, that it cānot be denied.
In one and the ſelf ſame action of the treaſon
of Iudas, when he ſold his Lord and maſter,
appeare two ſundry wils of God, the
one hidden, the other reuealed, and one cō
               trary
to the other. His ſecret will was that
Iudas ſhould betray him: his reuealed will
was, that he ſhould not betray him: and yet
both theſe willes, in reſpect of God, were
good and iuſt. His reuealed will was, that
Iudas ſhould not betray him. For it is not
onelie forbidden in a generalitie, where it
is written:Exod. 20. Thou ſhalt not kill, or conſent
to murther: And among thoſe things which
the Lord hateth,Pro. 6. 17. one is: Manus effundentes
innoxium ſanguinem, Handes that ſhed
innocen blood: But alſo hee is forbidden
by a particular caueat, where our Sauiour
ſayde as hee ſate at meate, verily

I ſay vnto you,Matt. 26. 21. that one of you ſhall betray
mee, euen hee which dippeth his hand with
me into the diſh, hee ſhall betray mee, but
wo be to that man by whom the ſonne of
man is betrayed, it had beene good for that
man if he had neuer beene borne. And at
the verie inſtant when he did betray him,
he rebuked him,Luk. 22. 48 ſaying: Iudas, doſt thou
betray the ſonne of man with a kiſſe?Act. 2. 22 And
yet Peter ſpeaketh plainlie, that God in his
ſecret will had appointed that Iudas ſhould
betray him: for, ſaith he: Ieſus of Nazareth,
a man approoued among you with
great workes and wonders which God did
by him in the middeſt of you, as yee your
ſelues know, him I ſay, haue ye takē by the
hands of the wicked, being deliuered by the
determinate counſell and prouidence of
God,Act. 4. 25. and haue crucified and ſlaine. And it
is the voice and conſent of all the apoſtles.Pſal. 2. 1. 2.
Thou haſt ſaide by the mouth of thy ſeruant
Dauid: Why did the Gentiles rage,
and the people imagine a vaine thing? The
kings of the earth ſtood vp, and tooke coū
               ſell
againſt the Lord, and his Chriſt. For
doubtleſſe, againſt thine holy ſon Ieſus whō
thou hadſt anointed, both Herod, and Pilat,
with the gētiles & people of Iſrael, gathered
themſelues togither to do whatſoeuer thine

hand and thy counſell had determined before
to be done. This concluſion being thus
determined, two doubts or ſcruples may ariſe.
The firſt: Theſe things bee graunted
that God hath two willes, the one contrarie
to the other, whether it may bee ſayde
at any time, that God is contrary to himſelfe?
The ſecond is: If whatſoeuer the
wicked do, bee done according to the will
of God, why are they not blameleſſe for
dooing his will? To this firſt I anſwere:
Voluntas Dei in ſe eſt ſimplex, nobis tamen apparet
multiplex qui quo modo idem diuerſo modo
fieri, & non fieri velit non comprehendimus.
God is not contrarie to himſelfe, albeit his
reuealed will, and his ſecrete will, are not
one: for the will of God in it ſelfe is one,
but it is ſaide to bee diuerſe, as it appeareth
vnto vs, whoſe dulneſſe is ſuch, that we
cannot conceiue how in diuerſe reſpects he
he will, and he will not. Or elſe wee may
ſafely anſwere with Caluin. Contrariae ſunt
Dei voluntates, ſed in diuerſis inſtitutis. His
willes be different, but to diuerſe purpoſes.
But in reſpect of vs his will is alwayes one,
and the ſame, becauſe for our parts hee exacteth
alwayes the ſame dutie at our hands
to be performed, that thereby wee may be
voyd of excuſe, if we performe it not. He

commaundeth vs alwayes to do the ſame, if
in his ſecret will he will put in our hearts to
to do otherwayes then he hath commaunded,
it is either for our puniſhment, or
the ſetting forth of his owne glorie, or the
executing of his ſecret purpoſe. In vnâ voluntate
illius eluceſcit Dei iuſtitia, in altera proditur
crimen hominis. In one of his willes is
made manifeſt the iuſtice of God: in the other
the offence of man. To the ſecond: If
the wicked do but the will of God, are they
therfore to be excuſed? Nothing leſſe. For
firſt: Licet Deus Illud voluerit, tamen aliud ijs
praecepit. Howſoeuer God willed one thing,
he commaunded an other thing by them to
be done. We muſt not inquire after his ſecret
will, but wee muſt follow his written
commandement. Secondly howſoeuer the
wicked do the wil of god, yet they do it not
to that ende, to obey his will, but to ſatisfie
their owne deſire.Hugo de ſancto victore dè ſacra pars 4. cap. 15. As Hugo writeth. Non
ſua voluntate diriguntur ad implendam Dei
voluntatem, ſed occulta illiu. dispoſitione. They
are not moued by their owne will to fulfill
the will of God, (for they meane nothing
leſſe) but by Gods ſecret inclination, wherby
hee moueth them ſo to do, they doe his
wil, not knowing themſelues that God hath
appointed them to do ſo. And as Auguſtine
               
ſayth:Epiſt. 48. ad Vincen. 
               Quum pater tradidit filium, & Dominus
corpus ſuum, & Iudas dominum, cur in hac
traditione Dominus est iustus, & Iudas reus,
niſi quod in vna re quam fecerunt, cauſa non
erat vna ob quam fecerunt? When God the
father gaue his Sonne, and the Sonne gaue
his owne bodie, and Iudas gaue our Lorde,
the action beeing one and the ſame, why
were God the father and the ſonne iuſt, but
Iudas guiltie, vnleſſe, becauſe the thing being
one, which they did, the end and intent
was not one for which they did it. For God
gaue his ſonne for the redemption of mankinde,
the ſonne gaue himſelfe to be our redeemer,
but Iudas gaue him for thirty peeces
of ſiluer, becauſe he was a theefe and loued
the purſe. As in another place ſaint Auguſtine
ſpeaketh moſt fitly to this purpoſe
in this maner.
                  Enchir. c. 100. 
               Quandoque bona voluntate ho
                     •
                  
                  mo
vult quod Deus non vult, quum tamen dei
voluntas ſit bona: vt ſi bonus filius velit patrem
viuere quem Deus bona voluntate vult mori.
Et poteſt fieri vt homo velit id voluntate mala
quod Deus vult bona, vt ſi malus filius velit
mori patrem, velit hoc etiam Deus: Tantum
intereſt quid velle homini, quid Deo congruat,
& ad quem finem ſuam quiſque referat voluntatem,
vt approbetur vel improbetur. Deus
quaſdam voluntates ſuas bonas implet per hominum

voluntates malas, ſicut per Iudaeos maleuolos,
bona voluntate patris Chriſtus occiſus
eſt, quod ita bonum fuit, vt Matt. 16. quando
Petrus id fieri nolebat, Satanas ab eo qui occidi
venerat diceretur. Sometimes the will of
man is contrary to the will of God, and yet
his will is good: ſometimes againe, the will
of man concurreth with the will of God,
and yet the will of God is good, the will of
man euill. As for example: A good ſonne
deſireth that his father may liue, when the
will of God is that hee ſhall die, there the
will of man is pleaſing to God, though the
one be contrarie to the other. Likewiſe, an
euil ſonne is willing that his father ſhal die,
God willeth the ſame, the will of God and
man are the ſame, yet one is iuſt, the other is
ſinne, &c. I come to the ſecond concluſion.
            The abſolute will of God, and his ſecret
decree from all eternitie, is the cauſe
why ſome are ordayned to ſaluation,
others to death and deſtruction, and
not any foreſight of faith or good
works in the one, or of infidelity, neglect,
or contempt, in the other.
            
               
This concluſion is the doctrine of no leſſe
Doctor in diuinitie then Saint Paule himſelf
moſt learnedly and profoundly deliuered,
in the Epiſtle to the Romans, cap. 9. from
the 11. to the 23. verſe, where he writeth
in this maner.
            
               11 For before the children were borne, and
when they had done neither good nor euill,
(that the purpoſe of God might remain
according to election, not by works
but by him that calleth.)
               12 It was ſaid vnto her, the elder ſhall
ſerue the yonger.
               13 As it is written, I haue loued Iacob,
and hated Eſau.
               14 VVhat ſhall we ſay then? Is there vnrighteouſneſſe
with God? God forbid.
               15 For he ſaid to Moſes: I will haue mercie
on him on whom I will haue mercie,
and will haue compaſsion on him on whō
I will haue compaſsion.
               16 So then, it is not in him that willeth,
nor in him that runneth, but in God that
ſheweth mercie.
               17 For the Scripture ſaith to Pharao: for

this purpoſe haue I ſtirred thee vp, that
I might ſhew my power in thee, and that
my name might be declared through all
the earth.
               18 Therefore he hath mercie on whom he
will haue mercie, and whom he will hee
hardeneth.
               19 Thou wilt ſay then vnto me, why doth
he yet complaine? for who hath reſiſted
his will?
               20 But O man, who art thou which pleadeſt
agaynſt God? ſhall the thing formed,
ſay to him that formed it, why haſt
thou made me thus?
               21 Hath not the potter power ouer the
clay to make of the ſame lumpe one veſſel
to honor, and another to diſhonor?
               22 VVhat if God would to ſhew his wrath,
and to make his power knowen, ſuffer
with long patience the veſſels of wrath
prepared to deſtruction?
               23 And that he might declare the riches of
his glorie vppon the veſſels of mercie,
which he hath prepared vnto glorie?
            
            
               
In which words are cōtained three things:
firſt,Ver. 11, 12 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. the concluſion it ſelfe.
            Secondly, That notwithſtanding he loueth
ſome, and hateth others, before they
are borne, when they haue done neyther
good nor euill, yet God in ſo doing is not
cruell, or vniuſt.
            Thirdly, Albeit God hardeneth the harts
of men to do euill, as hee did the heart of
Pharao, and that according to his owne will
and pleaſure, and it is not in the power of
man to auoyd it, for who can reſiſt the will
of God? yet Gods wrath is iuſtly kindeled
agaynſt them whome hee hardeneth.
            The concluſion in theſe wordes: For
before the Children were borne (meaning
the two twinnes of Rebecca, Eſau and
Iacob,) and when they had done neyther
good nor euill, it was ſaide to her, (that is to
Rebecca) Gen. 25. the elder ſhall ſerue the
yonger, (that is, Eſau ſhall ſerue Iacob.) And
becauſe it may bee a queſtion, what is
meant by theſe words, The elder ſhall ſerue
the younger: hee dooth interprete them by
a playner place of Scripture, out of Malachy,
that is: God hath loued Iacob, and
hated Eſau.
            
            The reaſon why God loued the one,
and hated the other, before they were

borne, and when they had done neither
good nor euill, is alleaged in the parentheſis,
that the purpoſe or ſecret decree of god
in chooſing one & refuſing the other, might
remain according to electiō, not by works,
but by him that calleth, which is God alone.
There is plainly ſet downe the eternall
decree of God, in chooſing ſome, and reiecting
others, proceeding meerely from
himſelfe, without any reſpect or regarde of
the perſons, which are elect or reprobate,
or any thing foreſeene in them, where hee
ſayth: Not by workes, but by him that calleth.
And here is preuented the aunſwere
of the Papiſtes, which confeſſe that Iacob
was loued before hee was borne, but ex
praeuiſis operibus, for the good workes which
God foreſawe in him, as alſo of Huberus,
and other Lutherans of our times, the brochers
of ſtraunge opinions, which holde
that ſome are predeſtinated to bee veſſels
of honour, but expreuiſa fide, becauſe
of theyr fayth, which God did foreſee to
bee in them, others of diſhonour, but
ex mero contemptu, aut neglectu, non ex
Dei decreto, not by anie decree of God,
but becauſe hee had in them a foreſight
eyther of neglect, or contempt: as if
the cauſes of theyr predeſtination were

in themſelues and not in God, whereas in
deede theſe wordes: Not by workes, but by
him that calleth, do ende all controuerſie,
ſhewing that the whole cauſes of election
and reprobation, are in himſelfe and not in
vs, and therefore not long of any fayth, or
workes of ours. And as Saint Auguſtine
ſayth: Si futura opera quae Deus vti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   praeſciebat,
               
                  Enchir. c. 98. 
               vellet intelligi, nequaquam diceret, non ex
operibus, ſed ex futuris operibus, eoque modo
iſtam ſolueret quaeſtionem, immo, nullam quam
ſolui opus eſſet faceret quaeſtionem. If the Apoſtle
did vnderſtād any good works foreſeene
in Iacob, to be the cauſe why God did
loue him, he would not ſay as he doth: Not
of workes: but he would rather ſay, God
loued him becauſe of his workes which hee
foreſaw in him, and ſo he would not onely
ende this controuerſie, but make it ſo plaine
that it ſhould be indeed without all controuerſie.
Againe, the Apoſtle doth explaine
his owne meaning, that he loued Iacob, and
hated Eſau, without reſpect of any thing in
them worthy of loue or hatred, by the obiection
following, where he ſayth: What
ſhall wee ſay then? Is there iniquitie with
God? God forbid. Becauſe it ſeemeth to
fleſh and blood not to ſtand with the iuſtice
of God, to condemne men before they are

borne, but to be crueltie in him to hate thē
which neuer did euill: therefore the apoſtle
preuenteth that obiection, and purgeth
God of that ſuſpition which men might cō
               ceiue
againſt him, which he ſhould not need
to do, if God did loue or hate vpon anie
foreſight of faith or good works in the one,
or neglect and contempt in the other; for
that were in the iudgement of men, a ſufficient
cauſe of loue and hatred, without all
ſhewe of iniuſtice. Thirdly, he maketh it
yet more plaine, by the wordes which follow,
verſ. 18. where he ſaith: Hee will haue
mercie on whom he will haue mercie, and
whom he will he hardeneth. He maketh
two cauſes of ſaluation, and damnation, and
both ſubordinate to an higher and more
principall cauſe, the ſubordinate cauſe
of ſaluation beeing mercye, becauſe
none is ſaued but by mercie: of damnation
hardening, or obdurating, for they which be
damned, are hardened in their ſinnes, that
they cannot repent, and both thoſe inferior
cauſes are ſubordinate to his will, as the
higheſt cauſe, and onely in himſelfe, and
theſe inferiour cauſes doe both proceed
from his will. And finally, when he ſayth:
It is not (meaning election) in him that
willeth (that is, in the indeuors of man) nor

in him that runneth, (that is in the workes
of men) but in God onely that ſheweth
mercy: hee teacheth that the onely rule of
predeſtination, and reprobation, whereby
God is directed, and the only law which he
tieth himſelf to obſerue therin, is his will: ſo
that no part of our electiō is aſcribed to our
ſelues, or any thing which may be in vs.
            Secondly, to anſwere this obiection. Is
there iniquitie with God? God forbid. He
cleareth that two maner of waies. Firſt, God
is not vniuſt by being partiall in ſauing, hee
dooth not erre in his choyſe by preferring
Iacob before Eſau, when the caſe of them
both was one, both vnborne, neither of
them had done good, why hee ſhould bee
choſen, or euill, why hee ſhould be refuſed.
For God will haue mercy on whom he will
haue mercy. Non poteſt peccare in dolectu, cuius
voluntas eſt iuſticiae regula. Hee cannot
erre in his choyſe, when that is iuſt, whatſoſoeuer
is his will. When two theeues haue
committed murther, and both deſerued
death, may not the King without ſuſpition
of iniuſtice ſhewe mercie in pardoning
the one, and doe iudgement in executing
the other?
            Iacob and Eſau were both as we all are,
by nature the children of wrath, could not

God iuſtly haue compaſsion on Iacob,Ephe. 2. and
let Eſau die in his ſinnes? That anie are ſaued
it is his mercie, and hee may haue mercie
on whom hee will. It is worthie of obſeruation
that the Apoſtle dooth ſay: when
they had done neither good nor euill. But
hee dooth not ſay: when they were neither
good nor euill. For true it is that they had
done neither good nor euill, becauſe they
were vnborne, and therefore coulde not
commit anie actuall ſinne: but they were
both of them euill, for both were infected
with originall ſinne, in their mothers
wombe, which they drewe by inheritance
from Iſaac theyr father, and Rebecca their
mother,Enchir. cap. 98. and therefore ſayeth Auguſtine:
Ambo gemini natura filijirae naſcebantur, nullis
quidem operibus proprijs, ſed originaliter
in Adam, vinculo damnationis obstricti:
Iacobum igitur dilexit per miſcricordiam
gratuitam, Eſaum odit per iudicium debitum,
quod quum deberetur ambobus, in altero
tantum alter agnouit, non de ſuis meritis
ſibi gloriandum, ſed de diuinae miſericordiae
largitate, quia non eſt volentis, neque currentis,
ſed Dei miſerentis. Cap. 94. Remanentibus
reprobis in aeterna poena, ſancti
ſcient planius quid illis contulerit gratia: tum
vebus ipſis apparebit, quod Pſal. 100. ſcriptum

eſt: miſericordiam & iudicium tibi cantabo domine,
quia niſi per indebitam miſericordiam nemo
ſaluatur, niſi per debitum iudicium nemo dā
                  natur.
Cap. 95. Ex duobus paruulis alter aſſumiter
per dei miſericordiam, alter relinquitur,
per Dei iudicium, in quo is qui aſſumitur, agnoſcit
quid ſibi per iudicium debebatur niſi miſericordia
ſubueniret. Cur iſte aſſumitur magis
quam ille, cum vna cauſa eſſet ambobus? eadē eſt
cauſa cur apud quoſdam nō ſunt factae virtutes
nempe in Tiro & Sidone. Mat. 11. Quae ſi factae
fuiſſent poenitentiam egiſſent, ſed in Corazin &
Bethſaida factae ſunt, qui non erant credituri.
Cap. 99. Quum Dei miſericordiam commendaſſet
dicens, non eſt volentis ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   currentis &c.
deinde iudiciū commendat, quoniam in quo non
fit miſericordia, non fit iniquitas, ſed iudicium.
They were both by nature the children of
wrath, not by reaſon of any offence which
thēſelues had cōmitted, but for y• firſt offēce
of Adam: they were in ſtate of damnation, as
all the reſt of Adams poſteritie: wherefore
that God loued Iacob, it was free mercy and
vndeſerued grace: that hee hated Eſau, it
was no wrong, but iuſtice, a puniſhment
due vnto his ſinnes: which puniſhment being
due vnto them both, was in iuſtice inflicted
vpon one, and in mercie but vpon
the one: that as one was an example of his

iuſtice: ſo the other might bee a veſſell of
mercie, that none may boaſt of his owne
merits, becauſe it is not in him that willeth,
nor in him that runneth, but in God that
ſheweth mercie. When the wicked ſhall be
tormented in hell fire, then ſhal Gods ſaints
clearly perceiue howe much his grace and
mercie did auaile them: then ſhall they find
it true by their owne experience, as a thing
verified in themſelues, which Dauid ſpeaketh
in his hundred Pſalme. My ſong ſhall
be of mercie and iudgement. For that they
are ſaued, it is free mercie: that the other are
damned, it is iuſt iudgement. When of two
infants one is choſen through mercie, the
other refuſed in iuſtice: he which is choſen,
cannot but confeſſe, what in iuſtice was due
vnto himſelfe, had not mercy beene ſhewed
vnto him, So then, where mercye is not
ſhewed, there is not iniquity, but iuſt iudgment
inflicted. I remember, Saint Auguſtine
ſpeaketh very fitly to this purpoſe, in
an other place, though vpon an other occaſion:
for in his 157. Epiſtle to Optatus,
he propoſeth this queſtion, why God hath
ordained ſo few to be ſaued? and foreſeeing
that ſo many millions of men are to bee
damned for their ſinnes, why he doth creaate
them? Why ſo mercifull a God ſhould

be glorified more by the damnation, then
ſaluation of his owne creatures? For if his
glorie did conſiſt in ſauing rather then in
deſtroying, it ſhould ſeeme without doubt,
that the greateſt number ſhoulde bee ſaued,
and that hee would not create thoſe
whom he doth foreknowe to be but reprobate.
            Hee maketh this anſwere: Meritò iniuſtum
videretur, quòd fiunt vaſa ad perditionem,
niſi eſſet vniuerſa ex Adam maſſa damnata.
Indeede it might ſeeme verie iniurious,
that anie ſhoulde be ordayned to bee
veſſels of wrath, if it were not, that the
whole lumpe of which the veſſels of wrath
are framed, had beene damned before in
Adam, but nowe: Quod fiunt naſcendo vaſa
irae, pertinet ad debitam paenam: quod fiunt
renaſcendo vaſa miſericordiae, pertinet ad indebitam
gratiam: That manie are borne
veſſelles of wrath, it is but a iuſt puniſhment
due to theyr originall ſinne: that a
fewe by their regeneration are made veſſels
of mercie, it is vndeſerued fauour.
But if all which are borne of Adam,
ſhoulde bee regenerate, and borne anew,
and none ſhould bee damned, then: Lateret
beneficium quod donatur indignis:
               
Then Gods mercie which is extended to
them that are ſaued (which indeede are all
vnworthy of their ſaluation) would not bee
ſo apparent as nowe it is when but a fewe
are ſaued. Plures Deus fecit damnandos
quam ſaluandos incomparabili multitudine,
vt reiectorum multitudine oſtenderetur, quàm
nulli momenti ſit apud Deum iuſtum quan
                     •
                  
talibet numeroſitas iuſtiſſimè damnatorum,
atque vt hinc quoque intelligant, qui ex ipſa
damnatione redimuntur, hoc fuiſſe maſſae
illi vniuerſae debitum quod tam magnae eius
parti redditum, cernerent. But therefore
GOD hath ordayned, without all compariſon
more to bee damned then to
bee ſaued, for theſe two cauſes. Firſt,
that it myght appeare by the great multitudes
of them which are damned: howe
little GOD, which is moſt iuſt, regardeth
the outcryes of whole multitudes
of ſinners, which are iuſtlye puniſhed:
Secondlye, that they which are redeemed
from that damnation, may by their
owne redemption, confeſſe, when they ſee
the greater part damned, that that damnation
was due to the whole lumpe, (and
therefore to their owne ſelues) which was

adiudged to the greater part. Secondly, he
is not vniuſt by any parciality in puniſhing,
becauſe, firſt hee may, becauſe it is his will
and pleaſure, iuſtly condemne ſome, as it
appeareth by Pharao: ſecondly, as in election,
ſo in reprobation, between his decree,
and the execution of his decree, there bee
ſubordinate cauſes: for although his will be
the firſt & principall cauſe, that he decreeth
who ſhall be ſaued, and who ſhall bee damned:
yet between his decree to ſaue, and ſaluation
it ſelfe, there is mercie, for none is
ſaued but by mercie: and betweene his decree
to condemne, and the damnation, there
is hardening that men can not repent, but
continue in their ſinnes. So that albeit the
cauſe why he decreed that men ſhoulde bee
damned, is only in himſelf becauſe his owne
wil is the cauſe of that decree, there is found
cauſe of damnation inherent in themſelues,
which is infidelitie and hardneſſe of heart:
ſo that none are condemned, but firſt there
is found in them matter enough worthy of
condemnation, as the Prophet ſpeaketh:
Perditio tua ex te,
               Oſe. 14. 13. 
               ſalus ex me Iſrael, Thy
ſaluation, ô Iſrael, commeth onely from me,
but thy damnation from thy ſelfe.2. Pet. 2. 12. And as
the apoſtle ſpeaketh. Theſe which as bruit
beaſts lead with ſenſualities, ſpeake euill

of the things they knowe not, ſhall periſh
through their owne corruption.
            Laſtly,Verſ. 19. where it is written: Thou wilt ſay
vnto me, why doth hee yet complaine? for
who hath reſiſted his will? Hee graunteth
two antecedents, that God hardeneth whō
he will, And that no man hath power to reſiſt
his will, And yet the argument is denied
as a weake conſequent, that therfore Gods
wrath is vniuſtly kindled againſt them whō
he thus hardeneth, and conſtraineth to do
his will, ſhewing that man may not thus
expoſtulate: which hee proueth by two reaſons.
Firſt, an argument, called in Logicke,
à comparatis,
               Verſ. 21. where he ſaith: Nunquid deo
non licebit quod figulo licet: The potter may
of his owne clay make veſſels for the bedde,
as well as for the boord, and may not God
much more, of the ſame lumpe make veſſels
of wrath. The ſecond is, Ab optimo fine diuini
concilij, drawn from the end which God
doth propoſe, where he ſaith: What if God
woulde, to ſhewe his wrath, and to make his
power knowen, ſuffer with long patience
the veſſels of wrath, prepared to deſtruction?
And that he might declare the riches
of his glorie vppon the veſſels of mercie,Verſ. 22. 23.
whom he hath prepared to glorie, who can
accuſe him of vniuſtice? Then he ſheweth

that neither the ſaluation of the elect, nor
the damnation of the wicked, is the laſt
ende of his eternall decree and purpoſe, but
that he propoſeth a further and better end,
which is his owne glorie, that he may ſhewe
his wrath, and make his power knowne, as
alſo he may declare the riches of his glorie.
A poynt of ſo deepe diuinitie, woulde require
both a learned and large diſcourſe,
eſpecially before ſo honourable, frequent,
and iudicious an auditorie; but two houres
are too ſhort a ſcantling, & I am cōſtrained
to be briefer then I woulde. But that you
may bee fully ſatisfied concerning this
poynt, I will with as great breuitie as I can,
aunſwere three obiections, which doe
ſeeme to make agaynſt this doctrine of
predeſtination, which I haue deliuered vnto
you.
            The firſt is of Samuel Huberus a Lutheran,
which affirmeth that this place
of Saint Paule, concerning Eſau and
Iacob, is not meant of any particular
men, but of whole nations, not of heauenly
things, but temporall bleſsings,
and therefore maketh nothing to proue
predeſtination.
            
               
The ſecond, of the Papiſts, which inferre
this abſurditie, that if God hardeneth
men to doo euill, then God is the authour
of ſinne.
            The thirde of the Atheiſtes and carnall
men, which denye the prouidence of GOD
and diſpute with themſelues in this
manner: If GOD haue predeſtinated
mee to Hell, then in vayne is it for
mee to leade a godlye lyfe? If hee haue
predestinated mee to ſaluation, what
neede I to confourme my ſelfe vnto
his VVoorde? For his will and purpoſe
muſt needes take place, I can
not auoyde his ſecrete Decree, it is lyke
the law of the Perſians, it can not be altered.
            Touching the firſt,Sam. Huberus Hel uetius Ber nenſis, paſtor Eccleſiae Derendum genſis in Ducatu Witten
                     •
                   bergenſi. For as much
as it is written: I haue loued Iacob, and hated
Eſau: Samuel Huberus a Lutheran firſt
diſtinguiſheth the ambiguitie of the
names, Eaſu and Iacob, as alſo of loue and
hatred, affirming that Eſau and Iacob are to
bee vnderſtood collectiue, not diſtributiue,
               
not perſonally, but nationally, as by Iacob
is ment all the poſteritie of Iacob, and by
Eſau, all the families and ofsprings of Eſau:
as for example, oft times in the Scripture,
Iſrael, Edom, Iſmael, Amon, Moab, Iuda, Leui,
are vnderſtoode, not of particular men,
but of whole nations: ſo likewiſe the loue
of God to the one, & hatred to the other, is
not to be vnderſtood of ſpiritual graces, but
temporall bleſſings: not in the life to come,
but in this life: not to belong to their owne
perſons, but to appertaine to their poſteritie,
and thereupon he inferreth this concluſion:
that theſe wordes of the Apoſtle doo
make nothing at all, either to proue election,
or reprobation. And becauſe this doctrine
of Saint Paule is quoted out of Malachy,
               Malac. 1. and that of Malachy out of Geneſis,
               Gen. 25. he
examineth theſe three places of ſcripture,
and by the coherence of the text, ſeemeth
to alleage many arguments to that purpoſe.
His arguments out of Paule are theſe. 14.
1. A great prerogatiue is graunted to the
Iewes aboue other people,Ro. 9. 4. 15 but they are the
whole poſteritie of Iacob.
               Ver. 7. vnto 13. 2. That prerogatiue
is drawne from the couenant, which
the Lord did make with Abraham, which
couenant is belonging to many, and not appropriated
to Abraham alone. 3 He deriueth

this prerogatiue from Iſaac to Iacob,
and ſeparateth Eſau frō it, as one which was
no partaker of that bleſſing: but what is this
prerogatiue which is giuen to Iacob aboue
Eſau? namely, that in his poſteritie ſhould
be continued the true worſhip of God, that
in his poſteritie the Meſſias ſhould be born,
that in his poſteritie ſhould be eſtabliſhed a
temporall kingdome, neither was that prerogatiue,
and glorie alwayes to continue in
Iacobs poſteritie, but only for a time, for as
much as at the length, the Iewes which
were Iacobs poſteritie, were reiected, and
and the Gentiles choſen in their place.
            4 Whereas is written:Verſ. 12, 13. The elder ſhall
ſerue the yonger, it was neuer verified of
the perſon of Eſau, nor during the life of
Iacob, becauſe Eſau did neuer ſerue his brother
Iacob, but only his poſteritie did ſerue
his brothers poſteritie, when the Iſraelites
had brought the Edomites into ſubiection.
            5 He ſayth:Verſ. 24. Whom the Lord hath choſen,
not onely of the Iewes, but alſo of the Gentiles:
where hee mentioneth whole nations
and kinreds.Oſe. 2. 6 He vrgeth the authoritie
of Oſe, ſaying: I will call them my people
which are not my people.Eſay 10. 7 The authoritie
of Eſay: Though the number of the children
were as the ſandes of the ſea, but a

remnant ſhall be ſaued. 8 Hee oppoſeth
all the Gentiles to the whole nation of the
Iewes,Verſ. 30. ſaying: The Gentiles which followed
not righteouſnes, haue obtained vnto righteouſnes,
which is of faith: but Iſrael which
followed the law of righteouſneſſe, coulde
not attaine to the lawe of righteouſneſſe.
9 He ſheweth that Iacob hath not the true
knowledge of God:Cap. 10. 2, 3 ver. 9 & 12 which coulde not
without impietie bee vnderſtoode of the
perſon of Iacob. 10 Out of Deut. 32.
and Eſay 63. He commendeth the obedience
of the Gentiles, and reprehendeth the
contumacy of the Iewes.Cap. 11. verſ, 2, 3, 4▪ 5▪ 8, 9, 10, ab 11. ad 29▪ 30, 31 11 he ſaith: Hath
God caſt away his people▪ god forbid. 12 He
ſheweth that of the poſterity of Iacob ſome
are ſaued, but the greateſt part are gone aſtray.
13 He compareth together the zeale
of both nations, as well Iewes as Gentiles.
14 Hee concludeth of both Nations in
in this manner: As you in tymes paſt
haue not beleeued God, yet haue obtayned
mercie through their vnbeleefe: ſo now
haue they not beleeued God, by the mercy
ſhewed vnto you, that they alſo may receyue
mercie.
            As for the Prophet Malachy, where he
ſayth:Mal. 1. I haue loued Iacob, and hated Eſau,
he expoundeth himſelf, and declareth with

what kinde of hatred he hated Eſau. Namely,
he made his mountaines waſte, and his
heritage a wilderneſſe for dragons: which
was neuer brought to paſſe while Eſau liued,
but long after his death. And notwithſtāding
he bloued Iacob, yet he abhorreth
his vnthankfulneſſe: which ingratitude
could not be obiected to his perſō, but to his
poſterity, as in that whole chap. he diſcourſeth,
not of one in particular, but of a whole
nation.Verſ. 23. To come to the examination of the
words contained in the 25. of Gen. The lord
ſaid to Rebecca: Two Nations are in thy
wombe, two maner of people ſhall bee diuided
out of thy bowels, and the one people
ſhalbe mightier then the other, & the elder
ſhall ſerue the yonger. Where it is moſt
manifeſt by the coherence of the wordes,
that hee ſpeaketh not of perſons, but of
peoples: ſo that where hee ſayeth: The elder
ſhall ſerue the younger, he meaneth the
elder people ſhall ſerue the younger people,
or the poſteritie of the elder ſonne, ſhal
ſerue the poſteritie of his younger brother.
In another place, Iſaac ſaith to Iacob:
Let peoples bee thy ſeruants,Gen. 27. 29 and Nations
bowe to thee: bee Lord ouer thy brethren,
and let thy mothers Children honour
thee. But this can not bee verifyed of the

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
perſon of Iacob, becauſe his brethren did
not bow vnto him, neither were people his
ſeruants, neither did his mothers children
honour him, but he ſerued others: himſelfe
was a fugitiue in Meſapotomia, and did obeyſance
to his brother Eſau: but onely the
poſteritie of Eſau ſerued the poſteritie of
Iacob,2. Sam. 8. when they were by Dauid ſubdued
and brought into ſubiection.
            As for the loue of the one, and hatred of
the other, it conſiſted onelie in temporall
things, which he proueth by theſe three
reaſons. 1 One could not be a ſeruant to
the other in the life to come,Gene. 27. becauſe there
is freedome and no ſeruice, euerie one is noua
creatura in Domino, a new creature in the
Lord. 2 When Iſaac bleſſed Iacob, hee
ſaid: Behold, the ſmell of my ſonne is as the
ſmell of a field which the Lorde hath bleſſed,
God giue thee therefore of the dew of
heauen, and fatneſſe of the earth, and plentie
of wheat and wine. But with the ſame
bleſſing he bleſſed Eſau, though not in ſo
great and ample maner,Verſ. 39. ſaying: Behold, the
fatneſſe of the earth ſhall bee thy dwelling
place, and thou ſhalt haue of the dewe of
heauen from aboue. But all theſe things are
temporall reſpects, 3 If theſe things had
been ſpirituall, and to be vnderſtood of the

life to come, then Iacob and Eſau ſtanding
in oppoſition one againſt the other, in ſo
much that one ſhould be choſen, the other
damned, then both of them could not haue
beene bleſſed.
            That I may anſwer with as great breuitie
as I can. The Argument doth not follow,
that becauſe Saint Paule dooth diſcourſe of
whole nations, and not of particular perſons:
therefore theſe words do make againſt predeſtination.
For, if we do well conſider the
drift and ſcope of the Apoſtle in this place,
we ſhall find the contrarie moſt plainely to
appeare. For although the argument which
the Apoſtle handleth in that Chapter, and
the two other Chapters following, is a ſpeciall
diſcourſe of the generall apoſtacie and
reiection of the Iewes, and the vocation of
the Gentiles, yet by a kinde of occupation,
he entreth into a particular tract of predeſtination,
although it be obiter, and by the
way, as a queſtion moſt neceſſary to be touched,
for the right vnderſtanding of a place
of Scripture, which ſeemeth at the firſt
ſight flatly to make agaynſt this doctrine,
which he hath deliuered concerning the generall
reiection of the Iewes, and ſo hee inintreateth
of predeſtination, for the preuenting
of an obiection. For, in the beginning

of the ſame chapter, hauing lamented the
reiecting of his kindred the Iewes, hee maketh
this obiection with himſelfe: If it bee
ſo that God hath reiected the Iewes, and
called the Gentiles in their place, it ſhould
ſeem to be contrarie to the couenant which
he made with Abraham, (for his promiſe
to Abraham was otherwiſe) and that his
worde ſhould be of none effect. To which
obiection he anſwereth, that albeit the generall
reiecting of the Iewes, yet the promiſe
which the Lorde made to Abrahaem
remaineth ſure and ſtedfaſt, for as much as
notwithſtanding their general apoſtacy and
infidelitie, the Lorde in his ſecret counſaile
chooſeth of them ſome in particular
whom hee liſteth, whom hee hath before
predeſtinated to ſaluation. For hee made
the promiſe to Abraham, and his ſeede,
not in a generalitie to all his ſeede, according
to the fleſh, but in particular, to all
thoſe of his ſeede which ſhould be his children
according to the fayth, euen as hee
was the father of the faithfull. And therefore
the ſtate of this queſtion thus ſtandeth:
That this grace is offered to all the
poſteritie of Abraham, without exception,
that hee woulde bee their God, and they
ſhould be his people, but it is ſealed onely

to the faythfull: the vertue and efficacie
thereof appertaineth onely vnto them of
the ſeed of Abraham, which be of the number
of Gods elect, which are predeſtinated,
which hee proueth by two examples, the
one of Abraham, and the other of Iſaac.
Concerning Abraham: hee hadde two
ſonnes, Iſaac, and Iſmael, though Iſmael
were the ſonne of Abraham, as well as
Iſaac, yea, and circumciſed before Iſaac,
had receyued the circumciſion, yet by the
ordinance of God was Iſaac onely reputed
the ſonne of Abraham, and the heire of the
promiſe, and Iſmael reiected: hee yeeldeth
this reaſon, becauſe they which are the
children according to the fleſh, are not as
children: but only the children of the promiſe,
are accounted for the ſeede. Concerning
Iſaac alſo he had two ſonnes, Eſau and
Iacob, both they were twinnes, and nearer
one to the other then Iſaac and Iſmael,
becauſe they had both the ſame father and
mother, yet before either was borne, one
was choſen, the other refuſed, to ſhewe that
notwithſtanding the generall reiection of
the Iewes, yet God kept his promiſe with
Abraham, foraſmuch as it concerneth onelye
thoſe children of Abraham which are
according to faith, and not according to the

fleſh alone, whom he predeſtinated before
they were borne, not for any foreſight of
any good thing in them, but of his owne
good will and pleaſure, becauſe it was his
will and pleaſure, which in deed are in number
but a fewe, beeing compared with the
great multitude of them whom he hath hated,
although they be of the ſtock of Abraham.
And as for that loue and hatred wherwith
hee loued one, and hated the other,
although it be hiſtorically vnderſtoode, as
it is in Moſes, and Malachy, conſiſteth of
temporall and worldly bleſſings: yet in this
Epiſtle of Saint Paule, it cannot otherwiſe
be conſtered, then of the kingdome of heauen,
and of the life to come, as Paule himſelfe
the beſt interpreter of himſelfe, dooth
in the wordes which followe explaine his
meaning. For he ſheweth that the hatred of
Eſau was ſuch, as the hardening of Pharao
a reprobate, not onely in this life, but alſo in
the life to come. Moreouer, hee tearmeth
thē which are ſo hated the veſſels of wrath,
prepared to deſtruction, and them which
were ſo loued, as Iacob was loued, the veſſels
of mercie prepared to glorie, ſaying:
God to ſhewe his wrath, and to make his
power knowen, doth ſuffer with long patience
the veſſels of wrath prepared to deſtruction,

and to declare the riches of his
glorie vpon the veſſels of mercie, which he
hath prepared vnto glorie. Furthermore,
leaſt wee ſhould bee like the Iewes,2. Cor. 3. which
when the vaile was put vppon Moſes his
face, did not looke to the end of that which
ſhould be aboliſhed: and therefore theyr
mindes are hardened, and till this day doth
remaine the ſame couering vntaken away:
in the reading of the olde Teſtament wee
muſt not be ignorant that it receyueth two
interpretations, the one hyſtoricall, the other
myſticall:Biblioth. ſanc. lib. 3. de vtilitate credendi ad Honoratum, c. 3 as Sixtus Senenſis, and Saint
Auguſtine did well obſerue. As for example.
Chriſt ſpeaketh of Iudas in this maner: I
ſpeake not of you all, I know whom I haue
choſen, but it is that the ſcripture might be
fulfilled: he that eateth bread with me hath
lifted vp his heele againſt me.Iohn 13. But if ye conferre
theſe wordes with the wordes of the
prophet from whence they are taken,Pſal. 41. 9. they
do hyſtorically concerne the perſon of Dauid,
and his acquaintance, and cannot bee
vnderſtoode of Chriſt and Iudas, becauſe
Chriſt was without ſinne, but in the fourth
verſe of that Pſalme, he ſayth: Haue mercy
on me, and heale my ſoule, for I haue ſinned
againſt thee. Yet Chriſt in the new Teſtament
dooth myſtically expounde it of himſelfe,

& the treaſon of Iudas againſt his perſon.
Likewiſe Peter interpreteth this ſaying
of Dauid, Let his habitation be void, & no
man dwell therein,Act. 1. 54. of Iudas, where in that
place the prophet ſpeaketh in the plural nū
               ber,
Pſal. 69. 25 not of one, but of many, ſaying, Let
their habition be voide, and none dwell in
their tents, ſpeaking of the whole nation of
the Iewes, that the iuſt puniſhment of God
ſhould be iuſtly inflicted vpon thē for crucifying
of Chriſt, that their city ſhould bee
ſacked, & they diſperſed by the Roman Emperor.
And ſeeing the ſoundeſt interpretatiō
of the ſcriptures, is by other places of ſcripture,
yt
                theſe bleſſings & curſings, loue & hatred,
which in the old teſtament are hiſtoricall,
are in ye
                new teſtamēt miſtical, as in this
promiſe made to Abrahā, Iſaac & Iacob, and
their poſteritie, it is made manifeſt by the
apoſtle,Heb. 11. 8. ſaying: By faith Abraham abode in
the land of promiſe, as in a ſtrange land, as
one that dwelt in tents with Iſaac and Iacob
heires with him of the ſame promiſe, for he
looked for a foundation, whoſe builder and
maker is god. But I come to the 2. obiectiō.
            
               Rom. 9. 17. 18. The Apoſtle writeth in this
maner: For the ſcripture ſaith vnto Pharao,
for this purpoſe I haue ſtirred thee vp, that
I might ſhew my power in thee, and that
my name might be declared throughout all

earth. Therfore he hath mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will he hardneth. What
then, if God hardned the heart of Pharao,
and cauſed him to ſin, is not God the author
of ſin? Nothing leſſe, forasmuch as God is
goodneſſe it ſelfe, his very eſſence is good,
and nothing can proceed from him, but that
which is exceeding good. True it is, as the
Prophet ſayth,Amos. 3. 
               Non eſt malum in vrbe quod
non fecit Dominus, There is no euill in the
citie but the Lord did it. The lord doth not
onely ſuffer the wicked to do euill, but himſelfe
is a doer, and principall agent therein. I
knowe there bee ſome of greater modeſtie
then iudgement in diuinity, which for reuerence
to the perſon of God, do affirme, that
all the actions of ſathan, and the wicked, are
not done by the will, but onely by the permiſſion
& ſufferance of God: by which opinion
of theirs they fall into two abſurdities:
the one is, they deny his prouidence which
doth ſo moderat & diſpoſe of al things, that
nothing can come to paſſe otherwiſe thē he
hath apointed and decreed before. The other
is, they derogate much & detract from
his omnipotencie, as if he ſhould ſuffer any
thing to be don againſt his wil. I know ſome
haue trāſlated the lords praier in this maner:
ſuffer vs not to be led into tentatiō: but the

Greeke text hath 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
which is, Lead vs not into temptation: ſo
that if we be tempted, he is the leader. And
likewiſe whereas it is written,Mat. 6. 13 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
Rom. 1. 24▪ 26. 28. He gaue
them vp to their hearts luſts, vnto vncleanneſſe,
and to a reprobate ſenſe: hee gaue
them vp vnto vile affections: ſome tranſlated
it, Permiſit eos libidinibus, and he ſuffred
them to follow their owne luſts. Theſe
things as they proceed frō God, are good,
but in reſpect of the men which doo them,
they are euill.Enchir. c. 100. Saint Auguſtine ſaith: Deus
bene vtitur malis tanquam ſummè bonus, ad
eorum damnationem quos iuſte praedeſtinauit
ad poenam, & illorum ſalutem quos digne praedeſtinauit
ad gratiam. Vult peccata, nō vt probet,
ſed vt iudicium ſuum exequatur, ſic malis inſtrumentis
bene vtitur. Vſus eſt Iudae proditione
& pontificum crudelitate, ad illorum perniciem,
ſed ad noſtram ſalutem. Pharaonem indurauit
ad ſuam ipſius gloriam, & ad eius poenam:
ſed aliud fuit illius, aliud Dei inſtitutum. God
which is infinitely good, doth vſe the miniſterie
and ſeruice of them which are euill,
to their damnation whome hee hath iuſtly
predeſtinated to death, and to their ſaluation
whom he hath predeſtinated to glory.
He will haue offences to be committed, not

as if hee did allowe and approue them, but
that by them hee might execute his iudgement,
and ſo he doth make vſe of the euill
as his inſtruments, himſelfe being good. He
vſed the treaſon of Iudas, and the crueltie of
the Iewes, to their deſtruction, but to our
ſaluation: he hardened Pharao, to his owne
glorie, but for Pharaos puniſhment. But the
intent and purpoſe of Pharao, was not the
ſame which God intended: though the action
which God and Pharao did were the
ſame, yet in God it was good, in Pharao it
was euill, becauſe the intent of them both
was not the ſame. Sometime God cauſeth
men to ſinne for their puniſhment, becauſe
oftentimes hee puniſheth one ſinne with an
other: when man hath ſinned grieuouſly,
God cauſeth him to commit a more grieuous
ſinne, or a puniſhment of his former
ſinne, and ſo one ſinne is heaped vpon an other,
that at the day of iudgement their
damnatiō may be the greater, if they do not
repent, As Saint Auguſtine obſerueth. As
for example.Contra Iulian. 
               Rom. 1. The Iſraelites did ſerue
the creature for the Creator, which is bleſſed
for euer,Pelag. li. 5. cap. 3. Amen. There is guilt of ſinne,
but the Lord did puniſh this ſinne of theirs
by cauſing them to commit an other ſinne,
for he gaue them ouer into a repobat ſenſe,

to do thoſe abhominations which were not
conuenient, as it is particularly ſpecified in
the text, and ſo they receiued the reward of
their errour.2. Theſ. 2. So likewiſe ſpeaking of them
which were to bee ſeduced by Antichriſt.
They loued not the truth that they might
be ſaued, that was a grieuous ſin, the Lord
puniſhed it with another ſin, therefore God
ſhall ſend them ſtrong deluſions, that they
ſhould beleeue lies.1. Reg. 22. 
               Micheas ſaw the Lord
ſitting vpon a throne, & the hoſt of heauen
ſtood on his right hand, & on his left, & the
Lord ſaid: Who will ſeduce Achab, that he
may go and fall at Ramoth Gilead? Then
there came forth a ſpirit and ſtoode before
the Lord, and ſaid: I will ſeduce him: I will
go out, and be a lying ſpirit in the mouth of
all his prophets: then the Lord ſaide, thou
ſhalt ſeduce him, and thou ſhalt preuaile.
Now therefore behold the Lord hath put a
lying ſpirit in the mouth of al thoſe thy prophets,
and the Lord hath appointed euill againſt
thee. Therfore in a word I anſwer according
as it is a doctrine receiued in the
ſchooles. Deus eſt author mali, ſed mali poenae,
non mali culpa, quatenus eſt in hominibus culpa
eſt, quatenus proficiſcitur à Deo paena eſt, culpa
non eſt, iuſtae vindictae deus author eſt, & Satan
miniſter. God is the authour of euill, but of

what euill, our ſchoole learning teacheth vs
to diſtinguiſh of euils: one is a ſinne, the
other a puniſhment, God is the cauſe wee
do euill, but as wee doo it, it is ſinne, as hee
doth cauſe it, it is no ſin, but a puniſhment
for our ſinnes. And ſo as it is a puniſhment
or reuenge, God is the authour, Sathan is
the executor of the ſame.Part. 1. quaeſt. 1. artic. 6. 
               Thomas Aquinas
ſheweth, that in ſinne two things muſt bee
conſidered, which are, Actio, ac actionis vitium,
res & qualitas rei, actio quatenus res &
opus est, bona eſt, & à Deo proficiſcitur, quatenus
vitioſa eſt, non à Deo ſed ab hominis natura
corrupta: vt eſt peccatum, Deus non iubet,
ſed vl
                     •
                  iſcitur. The action it ſelf, and the fault
or vnlawfulneſſe of the action, the thing it
ſelfe, and the qualitie thereof: as for example:
in the treaſon of Iudas we muſt obſerue,
firſt, the action it ſelfe, of deliuering
Chriſt to the Iewes to be crucified, that in it
ſelf it was good, & proceeded frō god for the
redemption of mankind: the qualitie of that
fact as it was wilfull murther, ſo it was euill,
and did proceed from the corrupt nature of
Iudas, which was a theef, and deſired therby
to inrich himſelfe, ſo that the action commeth
frō God, in whom we haue our being,
and mouing, but the offence cōmeth frō our
ſelues, becauſe god which cauſeth vs to do ye
               
               
action, doth propoſe a good ende and purpoſe
which is ſecret and knowen to himſelf,
but man which doth the action, propoſeth
an other ende and purpoſe, contrary to the
end and purpoſe which God doth propoſe,
and therefore in man it is an offence. In the
ſelf ſame action, both God and the diuel do
worke in the hearts of the wicked, & yet ſo
that hee cannot bee excuſed, becauſe God
concurreth with thē, nor yet God accuſed
for doing that which the diuell and the wicked
do▪ for their doings being the ſame, yet
they are different two maner of wayes, to
wit, in the end which they propoſe, & in the
maner of their working. As for example:
When the cattell of Iob were ſtollen away,Iob. 1.
in the ſame action were three agents, God,
the diuell, and the Chaldeans: but they differed
in the maner of doing, becauſe God
was the authour, the diuell was but a miniſter,
or executor of the will of God, and the
Chaldees were the inſtruments of the diuel
to bring it to paſſe, as alſo they differed in
the end wherunto they did this. For the intent
of God was, onely to trie the patience
of Iob, and his faith: the intent of the diuell
was cleane contrarie, to driue Iob to deſperation:
the intent of the Chaldees was neyther
of theſe, but to inrich themſelues.
            
               
What then? ſhall wee ſay with the wicked:
If it be ſo that God hath predeſtinated
me to die the death, to what end ſhal I conforme
my ſelfe to do his will and commaundements?
His counſell and eternall decree
cannot be altered, if he haue ordained mee
to be ſaued, I cannot be damned: if he haue
ordained mee to bee damned, I cannot bee
ſaued, what courſe of life ſoeuer I take: for
my ſaluation dependeth not on my indeuours,
but on his decree, which muſt needes
ſtand. This is like the diſputation of ſeruant
of Leno the Stoike Philoſopher, which whē
hee was led to the gallowes for his offence,
his maiſter comming thither, ſaid to him: O
perdite quis ad hoc te impulit? to whom he anſwered:
O ſtulte philoſophe, quis me hoc fatum
docuit? O foole what brought thee hither?
O fooliſh Philoſopher, thou haſt taught
mee, that whatſoeuer was my deſtinie it
could not be auoyded. But wee which are
Chriſtians, muſt not bee ignorant, that in
matters of our ſaluation, God worketh by
his meanes: as he ordaineth ſaluation, ſo he
appoynteth meanes to the attainment therof,
and theſe means are not to be neglected.
God decreed that Abraham ſhould bee ſaued,
therefore he gaue Abraham the gift of
faith, without which there is no ſaluation:

and as he could not but be ſaued: ſo he could
not but beleeue. For howſoeuer theſe
things in reſpect of our knowledge are contingent,
yet in reſpect of Gods ordinance
they bee neceſſarie, and can not otherwiſe
bee, becauſe hee hath ſo appoynted.
Hee decreed that Pharao ſhould be damned,
therefore hee hardened his heart that
hee coulde not turne vnto the Lord: for if
hee had turned, hee had beene ſaued. He
decreed that Iudas ſhoulde bee a caſtaway,
therefore hee gaue him not his grace to
repent, whereas true repentaunce is a
meane to ſaluation. And if hee had trulye
repented, without doubt hee had beene
ſaued.2. Reg. 20. If GOD haue decreed to adde
to the dayes of Ezechias, fifteene yeares
longer, he hath alſo appoynted that Ezechias
during thoſe fifteene yeares, ſhoulde
take his refections and bodily ſuſtenaunce
whereby life is preſerued. VVherefore
let vs for our partes followe the meanes
which God hath appoynted to ſaluation,
as prayer, hearing, the woorde, receyuing
the Sacraments, fayth, amendement of
life, godly and Chriſtian conuerſation,
and then we may ſecure our ſelues, that
as God hath vouchſafed vs the meanes
ſo hee hath predeſtinated vs to ſaluation.

But I come to the third and laſt concluſion.
            Chriſt died not effectually for all,
            Though the death of Chriſt were ſufficient
for the redemption of all mankind,
yet hee dyed not effectually for all, for as
much as all men are not ſaued, therefore
to manie, that is, to them which are not
ſaued, the deathe of Chriſt is of no effect.
Mat. 20. VVee reade that many are called,
but fewe are choſen.Iohn 12, The Iewes coulde
not beleeue,Iohn 20. becauſe the Lorde blinded
their eyes.Matt. 11 They do not beleeue, becauſe
they are none of his ſheepe.Matt. 27. God the father
hath hidden the myſteries of ſaluation from
the wiſe men of the worlde.2 Tim. 2. Euerlaſting
fire is prepared for the wicked.Iohn 17. Some are
veſſels of diſhonour. Our Sauiour Chriſt
ſayth: I pray for them whom thou haſt giuen
me out of this world, but I pray not for
the worlde. But to them which are onelye
called, and are not choſen, whoſe eyes
are blinded that they ſhould not beleeue,
which are not Chriſtes ſheepe, which are
veſſels of diſhonour, from whom God hath
hidden the myſteries of ſaluation, for
whome euerlaſting fyre is prepared,

to thoſe for whom Chriſt doth not pray, to
them the death of Chriſt dooth nothing auaile,
to thoſe his death is of no effect.
            
               Huberus a brocher of new and ſtraunge
opinions, whereof this is one, that Chriſt
died effectually for all, alleageth ſo manie
common places, being altogither friuolous,
and nothing pertaining to the purpoſe, as
would be tedious for mee to repeate them,
and I wiſh it woulde not offend your patience
to heare them. Himſelf diuideth them
into three claſſes, as he dooth tearme them.
The firſt tende to this purpoſe: to prooue
that Chriſt died effectually for all, in a generalitie
without exception. The ſecond,
to ſhew that he died as effectually for Cain
and Iudas, as for Peter and Paule, for the
godly, as for the godleſſe. The thirde, to
ſhew that he died for all, or elſe (as he ſayth)
which is dictu horrendum, not to be ſpoken.
Deum grauiſſimorum ſcelerum reum peragi,
That God is guiltie of heinous crimes. A
verie ſtrange and blaſphemous ſpeech.
            His places to proue that Chriſt died effectually
for all in a generalitie,Gen. 3. are theſe
that followe.Iohn 16. The ſeede of the woman
ſhall breake the Serpents head:He
                     •
                  . 2. The prince
of this world is caſt out:1. Cors 15. By death he hath
aboliſhed him which hath the power of

death, that is the diuell. He ſhall aboliſh all
powers, and tread all his enemies vnder his
feet. But theſe things (ſaith he) cannot bee,
that the Serpents head ſhould bee broken,
that the prince of this world ſhould be caſt
out, that the diuell ſhould bee aboliſhed, if
yet the greateſt part of men are vnredeemed.
Moreouer, the reſtoring againe of
man, is in as ample maner as was the fall of
man.Rom. 5. 19. But as by the diſobedience of one (that
is Adam) many were made ſinners: ſo by the
obedience of one (that is Chriſt) many are
made righteous. Where, by many, all are vnderſtood:
ſo then, as in Adam all are damned,
ſo in Chriſt all are redeemed. The
kingdome of Chriſt the conquerour,1. Tim. 2. is larger
then the kingdome of the diuell,2. Pet. 3. which
is conquered.Rom. 8. God willeth all men to be ſaued.
Rom. 16. He will haue none to periſh. He ſpared
not his only begotten ſonne,2. Cor. 5. but gaue him
for all. The Goſpell is preached to all nations.
God hath reconciled the worlde vnto
himſelfe, And many other places, if different
in wordes, yet parallell to theſe, and in
effect one and the ſame. Which places indeede
are verie ſufficient to prooue that
Chriſt died for all, but not that his death
appertained to all, or that he died effectually
for all, but onely for the beleeuers. And

therefore they are but a fallacie in Logicke,
called Petitio principij, they proue onely that
ſaluation is offered vnto all, which we doe
not denie, but they do not proue that ſaluation
is ſealed to any more then to the faithfull,
which is the queſtion in controuerſie
betweene vs.
            Beſides that, ſome of theſe places are by
him miſtaken. For the brooſing of the ſerpents
head, is not to be vnderſtoode of the
nullitie or paucitie of them which ſhall bee
ſubiect to the kingdome of Sathan, as
though the Serpents head beeing broken,
and the diuell vanquiſhed, all mankinde
were ſo deliuered, that all were ſaued, and
none damned: But it is to bee vnderſtood
of the triumph of Chriſt ouer the diuell, ouer
ſinne, and ouer death, that as by the diuell
mankinde was ouerthrowne, ſo by man
the diuell ſhould be ſubdued againe: that as
before all men were bondſlaues to Sathan,
now Satan himſelfe ſhould be brought vnder
ſubiection, that nowe he ſhould haue no
more power but by Chriſts permiſſion, for
as much as he hath the key of the bottomleſſe
pit,Apoc. 20. and the great chaine in his hande,
and he bindeth the great dragon which before
preuailed againſt vs. Saint Paul maketh
compariſon betweene our fall by the firſt

               Adam, and our riſing againe by the ſecond,
and ſheweth that a greater good is deriued
to man by the obedience of the ſecond, thē
was the puniſhment which was inflicted by
the diſobedience of the firſt. But how? Not
as then al which before in Adam were damned,
nowe in Chriſt were ſaued. But as in
Adam all were damned, ſo in Chriſt ſome
are ſaued: for if all were ſaued in Chriſt, thē
were no vſe of hell, of the diuell and his
angels, which are appointed for the tormē
               ting
of wicked men. But in theſe three reſpects
appeareth the largeneſſe of the benefit
deriued vnto vs by the death of Chriſt, aboue
the loſſe which we indured by Adams
fall. Firſt, our redēption is a greater & worthier
worke then our creation: Facilius est
creare quam lapſos reſtituere, ex nihilo bonū
quàm ex malo bonum facere. It is more eaſie
to create vs then to reſtore vs, when we had
declined from our firſt integritie, of nothing
to make vs good, thē being euill to make vs
good: and therfore by our redēption a more
rich treaſure is heaped vpon vs, but ſo that it
is to be vnderſtood of the life to come, not
of this preſent life. Secondly, by the fall of
Adam was loſt a earthly kingdome, by the
death of chriſt was gained an heauēly kingdome,
which is ſo much the greater benefit,

by howe much heauen is higher then the
earth.
            Thirdly, although before the fall of Adam
the righteouſnes of man was pure and perfect,
now it is full of imperfections: it was thē
inherent,Rom. 7. it is now but onely by imputation
(for as Paule ſpeaketh of himſelfe, in mee,
that is my fleſh, dwelleth no good) yet that
righteouſneſſe which was in man before his
fall, had not onely annexed vnto it Poſſibilitatem
peccandi, Poſſibilitie to ſinne, but alſo
Procliuitatem ad peccatum, It was verie
prone and apt to ſinne, and continued in
him but a verie ſhort time, but the righteouſneſſe
which we ſhall bee indued withall
by the death of Chriſt, in the life to come
ſhall farre exceede, becauſe it ſhall alſo be
inherent in vs, and that not for a ſeaſon, but
for euer, and it ſhall haue all poſſibilitie of
falling taken away. So that in a word, where
the Apoſtle ſayth: By the diſobedience of
one man, many are made ſinners, by many
hee meaneth all: but where hee ſayeth,
by the obedience of one manie are made
righteous, by many hee meaneth not all,
but ſome: yet wee gaine more by Chriſts
death, then by Adams fal, I meane we which
are redeemed, but the greatneſſe of this benefite
beſtowed vpon vs by his death, doth

not conſiſt in the multitude of them which
are to be ſaued, but in the great prerogatiue
giuen to the paucitie of them which are ſaued.
Mat. 7. For, if we weigh the number, Straite is
the gate which leadeth to life, and few there
be that finde it, but broad is the way which
leadeth to deſtruction, and many there bee
that enter in.
            In his ſecond order of common places,
he commeth nearer to the purpoſe, to ſhew
that Chriſt died effectually for them which
are damned in as much as they were by him
redeemed, but afterward voluntarily, & by
their owne free will they made an apoſtacie,
and renounced this benefite of their redemption,
whereof they were once made
partakers. His places are theſe, and others
like vnto them:Heb. 6. 4. For it is impoſſible, that
they which were once lightened, and haue
taſted of the heauenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghoſt, if they fall away,
ſhould bee renued againe by repentance,
ſeeing they crucifie againe to themſelues
the ſonne of God, and make a mock
of him. Doe yee not knowe that yee
are the Temple of GOD,1. Cor. 3. and that the
ſpirite of GOD dwelleth in you? If any
man deſtroy the Temple of God, him
will God deſtroy, for the temple of God is

holy which you are.1. Cor. 8. 11. Through they knowledge
ſhall the weake brother periſh,2. Pet. 2. 1. for
whō Chriſt died. Falſe prophets ſhal bring
in damnable hereſies, denying the Lorde
that hath bought them, and bring vppon
themſelues ſwift damnation. He that hath
not theſe things is blinde,2. Pet. 1. 9. and hath forgotten
that hee was purged from his olde
ſinnes.Gal. 5. 4. Ye are aboliſhed from Chriſt who
ſo euer are iuſtifyed by the lawe,Iohn 15. yee are
fallen from grace.Rom. 11. 12. I am the true Vine,
and who ſo abydeth not in mee is caſt
foorth. Beholde the bountifulneſſe of
God towardes thee, if thou continue in
his bountifulneſſe, or elſe thou ſhalt bee
cut off.
            Vpon which commō places he inferreth
this concluſion: They once beleeued, they
were lightned, they receiued y• knowledge
of the truth, they were made partakers of
the holy Ghoſt, taſted of the heauenly gift,
were waſhed, ſanctified, made the temples
of God, the members of Chriſt, the Lord
bought them. Therefore they were redeemed,
and Chriſt dyed effectually for
them, and that they are not ſaued, it is
not any decree of God from euerlaſting,
but the free will which was in themſelues,
that being redeemed, they renounced the

benefite of their redemption, when it was
in their power to haue receiued it. To theſe
places I anſwere: That indeed in outward
appearance they were waſhed, ſanctified,
redeemed, made the members of Chriſt, and
Temples of the holy Ghoſt, but not in
truth and in veritie, for as much as they
which are indeed the children of God, can
neuer reuolt and ſtart backe from the faith,
and their ſtate of ſaluation. Our Sauiour
ſaith:Iohn 10. My ſheepe heare my voyce, and I
know them, and they follow me and I giue
them eternall life and they ſhall neuer periſh,
neyther ſhall any plucke them out of
mine hande, my father which gaue mee
them is greater then all, and none is able to
take them out of my Fathers hande. And
the Apoſtle ſayeth of the falſe prophets:
they went from vs,1. Ioh. 12. 19 but they were not of
vs, for if they had beene of vs, they woulde
haue continued with vs, but this commeth
to paſſe, that it might appeare that they
were not all of vs. And concerning free will
which hee affirmeth to be the cauſe of their
apoſtacie, the time will not permit mee
to ſay much, onely this in a worde: The
will of man is neither as the Eagle which
alwayes with ſtedfaſt eyes beholdeth the
brightneſſe of the Sunne, neither as a ſtone

which alwayes falleth downe from the top
to the bottome, for neyther doth it alwayes
ſoare vp aloft, nor decline to the centre, but
ſometime it is in diuine contēplation, ſome
times againe it meditateth vpon vanity. It is
not dead, & yet it liueth not: it is not blind,
and yet it ſeeth not: as the ſeede ſowne in
the ground is not conſumed, and yet it
ſpringeth not vp without the warmth and
comfort of the Sunne: as the eye in darkeneſſe
is not blinde, and yet it neither liueth
nor ſeeth, without the eſpeciall grace of
God.
            There are three ſorts of agents: the
one is ex Placito, and that is God: the other
is, ex neceſſitate, and that is nature, then
there muſt needes bee a third, which conſiſteth
in a mediocritie betweene them both:
for, Poſitis extremis ponuntur & Media. No
man is good agaynſt his will: ſo no man
hath power to will any thing that is good,
vnleſſe God giue him the will.Ier. 10. For as the
Prophet ſpeaketh. The way of man is not
in himſelfe, neither is it in man to walke and
direct his ſteppes. We are not of our ſelues
ſufficient to thinke a good thought, as of
our ſelues,1. Cor. 3. but all our ſufficiencie is of God.Iohn. 6.
No man commeth to Chriſt vnleſſe his father
drawe him.Rom. 7. What good I woulde do

that do I not: the euill which I would not
do, that do I, (ſayth the Apoſtle.) But there
is a ſchoole diſtinction betweene compulſion
and neceſſitie: For, Qui neceſſariò peccat,
nihilominus voluntariò peccat. Though
man cannot chooſe but offend, yet hee is
willing to offend, but that is no libertie, or
freedome of his will.
            In the third he doth not ſo much diſpute againſt
the queſtiō, as blaſpheme againſt the
maieſtie of God. As, if all mankind be not
redeemed by Chriſt, neither was by his decree
ordained to life, that he may be iuſtly
accuſed of notorious crueltie an iniuſtice,
his wordes are, Immenſae iniuſticiae, doli, crudelitatis,
omnium flagitiorū quae ſaeuiſſimo competunt
tyranno, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that hee is not

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : They be ſuch
reprochfull wordes, that you may bluſh to
heare them, and I, when I do but thinke of
them.Iob. 4. I may ſay with Iob: Feare commeth
vpon me, and dread, which cauſeth all my
bones to tremble. I am aſhamed to repeate
them in Engliſh, becauſe I would not defile
your religious eares. He doth (ſayth hee)
moreouer, condemne men their cauſe being
not heard: or if it be heard, himſelf doth
inforce them to offend, and leadeth them
into ſnares to be intrapped, he doth puniſh

them for the contempt of that benefite of
their redemption, to whom he neuer ment
that it ſhould appertaine: he is like an houſholder
which chaſteneth his familie for refuſing
their dinner, for whome no dinner
was ordayned: like the maiſter of a feaſt,
which inuiteth gueſtes to his Table, but
entertayned a verie fewe of them, and intreateth
the moſt of them hardly when
they come thither: hee did when he wept
ouer Ieruſalem, Fundere lachrymas Crocodili,
that he was not verus, but mendax, and
periurus. To theſe vngodly and irreligious
ſpeaches, derogatorie to the highneſſe and
maieſtie of the Sonne of God, I ſay with
Saint Paule,
               1. Cor. 15. Euill wordes corrupt good
maners,Epiſt. Iud. and with Michael the Archangel,
when hee diſputed with the diuell about
the bodie of Moſes, the Lorde rebuke
thee. But to come to the reaſons which he
alledgeth, ſetting aſide his blaſphemous
wordes, hee argueth in this manner: To
holde with Caluin, that Chriſt dyed not to
ſaue all, but onelie thoſe which in his will
bee had predeſtinated, were plaine Mahometiſme,
Paganiſme, Saraſaniſme. For
firſt, that were to take away all comfort,
which is deriued vnto vs by the paſſion of
Chriſt, to annihilate the vertue of his

death, to ouerthrowe the foundation of
fayth, for fayth cannot ſtand being grounded
vpon particulars, the vniuerſalitie of
the redemption of mankind being denied,
becauſe then euerie man in particular may
doubt of himſelfe, whether Chriſt bee his
Redeemer or no, when it is helde that he
hath redeemed but a fewe. Secondly, it
were to aboliſh the miniſterie of the Goſpel,
for as much as the duetie of the Miniſter
of Gods worde is to preach repentaunce,
and to pronounce remiſſion of
ſinnes through Chriſt vnto all, to miniſter
the Sacraments to all, and not to a few.
To theſe abſurde concluſions, I may ſay
with Ierome:
               Ad C
                     ••
                  
                  ſiph. aduer. 
               Sententias vestras prodidiſſe,
refutaſſe est. The verie recitall is a ſufficient
confutation of theyr abſurdities.Pelag. c. 4 For
what man but meanely inſtructed in the
rudiments of Chriſtian Religion, can bee
ignoraunt that fayth is grounded vppon
the trueth of Gods promiſe in his ſonne
Ieſus Chriſt, but the application thereof
muſt not be made to all in generall,
but to euerye one in particular by his owne
ſelfe? For, a true, liuelye, and iuſtifying
fayth of a Chriſtian man, is thus defined:
To bee a ſure and certaine knowledge
of the loue of God towards himſelfe,

which beeing grounded vpon the truth of
Gods promiſe in Chriſt is reuealed and ſealed
by the holy Ghoſt. And that is it which
the Prophet ſpeaketh,Habak. 2. 
               Iuſtus ſua fide viuet.
The iuſt man ſhall liue by his owne faith:
and the Apoſtles Creede beginneth Credo,
I beleeue, not Credimus, We beleeue. And
Iob ſaith of himſelfe in particular:Iob. 19. I knowe
that my redeemer liueth, that though
wormes deſtroy this bodie, yet I ſhall ſee
God in my fleſh.Rom. 8. The ſpirit of God beareth
witneſſe with our ſpirit that we are the children
of God.Gal. 4. Becauſe (ſayth Paule) yee are
ſonnes, God hath ſent the ſpirit of his ſonne
into your hearts, which crieth Abba, father.
So that euery true Chriſtian may by this
doctrine of predeſtination, that Chriſt died
onely for them whom hee hath predeſtinated
before, comfort himſelfe that hee is one
of them which are predeſtinated, foraſmuch
as he beleeueth, & the ſpirit of God which
is within him, euen that ſpirit of comfort,
doth witneſſe to his ſpirit that he is the ſon
of God, and therefore aſſure himſelfe of his
owne ſaluation, without entring into the
ſecrets of God, to iudge of other men whether
they ſhall bee ſaued or no. As for the
miniſterie of the Goſpell, it continueth the
ſame which it was euer from the firſt inſtitution.

For though fewe are choſen, yet many
are called, and only God knoweth who
are his. Therfore the Miniſter muſt preach
ſaluation to al, Paule muſt plant, Apollo muſt
water, and leaue it to God to giue the increaſe,
Peter muſt caſt his net into the ſea,
and leaue to God the ſucceſſe of his labors.
The Miniſters of Gods word muſt doe as
the ſeruants of the great king, whē he made
a marriage for his ſonne, which went out
into the high way, and inuited all without
exception, euē euerie one whom they could
finde, both good and badde, and bid them
to the wedding. As God ſuffereth the ſunne
to ſhine, and raine to raine vpon the badde,
as well as the good, with all indifferencie.
No man knoweth whom God hath called,
or at what houre hee will call men, or whether
he will call them or not, and therefore
we muſt not refuſe to do our indeuour, wee
muſt not deſpaire of any mans conuerſion
vnto the fayth, or perſeuerance after his
conuerſion in the fayth. And becauſe God
hath two willes, one ſecret, and knowne to
himſelfe alone, the other reuealed in the
ſcriptures, and imparted to vs: in his ſecrete
will hee will haue ſome to bee ſaued: in his
reuealed will hee commaundeth that the
Goſpel ſhould be preached to all, we muſt

not inquire after his ſecrete will, which is
knowne onely to himſelfe, but his reuealed
will which is knowne to our ſelues: for that
ſeruant which knoweth his maſters will, and
dooth it not, ſhall bee beaten with many
ſtripes. Thus counſailing euerie one that
will enter into the conſideration of ſuch
deepe poynts of diuinitie, that they would
ſapere, non altum, but ad ſobrietatem, that they
would be wiſe, but with ſobrietie, and confeſſe
with ſaint Paule:
               Rom. 11. O the deepeneſſe of
the riches, both of the wiſdome and knowledge
of God, howe vnſearchable are his
iudgements, and his waies paſt finding out?
For who hath knowne the mind of God?
or who was his counſayler? (Wee muſt
not demaunde reaſon in matters of fayth,
becauſe fayth goeth beyond reaſon) I conclude
with the godly Meditation of ſaint
Auguſtin: Miſerum me, quo modo ſic induruit
cor meum,
               Chap. 30. 
               vt oculi me
                     •
                   non indeſmenter
fundant flumina lachrymarum dum ſeruus
ſermocinatur cum Domino, homo cum Deo,
creatura cum creatore, qui factus eſt limo ex
cum eo qui omnia fecit ex nihilo? Wretched
man that I am, howe is my heart hardened
like the Adamant, that mine eyes
doe not powre out ſtreames of teares to
cōſider that the ſeruant expoſtulateth with

his maſter, man with God, the creature with
the Creator, he which is made of the molde
of the earth, with him which made al things
of nothing. To him one inuiſible and immortall
God, the father, the ſonne, and
the holy Ghoſt, be all glory, and
honour, for euer and
euer, Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   