
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  ¶ CERTAINE ſelect Prayers gathered out of S. Auguſtines Meditations, which he calleth his ſelfe talke with God.
                  AT LONDON Printed by Iohn Daye, dwellyng ouer Alderſgate. 1574.
                  ¶Cum gratia & Priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  ¶Of the vnſpeakeable ſwéetneſſe of God.
                  
                     O Lorde which art the ſearcher of the hart, and tryer of the raynes, indue me with ye knowledge of thée: O my comforter, and mirth of my mynde, ſhewe the lyght of thy countenaunce vpō me, and be mercifull to me: Appeare vnto me O my ſoueraigne delight, my ſwéete ſolace, my Lord God, my lyfe, and the whole glory of my ſoule. Let me imbrace thée thou heauenly brydegrome: Let me poſſeſſe thée O endleſſe bliſſe, let me lodge thée in the bottome of my hart: thou art the bleſſed lyfe, and the ſoueraigne ſwéeteneſſe of my

ſoule. Graft in me the true loue of thée, O my God, my helper, the tower of my ſtrength, my caſtle & deliuerer in all my troubles. Open the entries of myne eares, thou worde which entereſt ſwifter than any two edged ſworde, that I may heare thy voyce. Thunder downe from aboue (O Lord) with a lowde and mightie voyce. Let the Sea rore and the fulneſſe thereof, let the earth be moued and all that is in it. Lighten myne eye (O incomprehenſible light) that I ſléepe not in death: flaſhe out thy lyghteninges, and turne them aſide, that they may not looke vaynely. O ſauour of lyfe, make my taſte ſound, that it may ſauour, trye, and diſcerne how great the aboundance

of thy ſwéetneſſe is, which thou haſt layd vp for them that put their truſt in thée. Geue mée a mynde that may euer thinke vppon thée, a hart that may loue thée, a ſoule that may honour thée, an vnderſtandyng that may féele thée, and a reaſon that may alwayes ſticke faſt to thée my ſoueraigne delight. O lyfe to whom all thinges lyue, O lyfe which art my lyfe, and without whom I am dead. O lyfe wherby I am rayſed to lyfe, and without which I am forlorne. O lyfe wh
                        ••
                     by I reioyce, and wherwithout I am ſorrowfull. O lyuely, ſweete, and louely life, alwayes worthy to be had in mynde, where art thou I pray thée, where ſhall I finde

thée, that I may geue ouer in my ſelfe and ſtay vppon thée? Be thou neare me in my minde, be neare in my hart, be neare me in my mouth, be neare me in mine eares, be neare me to my helpe: for I pine away for loue of thée, I die for want of thée: As the hart deſireth the water brookes, ſo longeth my ſoule after the O God. The ſent of thée refreſheth me, the remembrance of thée healeth me: but yet ſhall I neuer be ſuffiſed, till thy glorye appeare which is the lyfe of my ſoule. My ſoule fainteth with longing after thée, and with thinking vppon thée: when ſhall I come and ſhew my ſelfe in thy preſence O my ioy. I had rather be a doorekeeper in the houſe of

my God, then to dwell in the tentes of vngodlyneſſe? for one day in thy courtes is better then a thouſand els where. O Lord hide not away thy face from me, in the néedefull time of trouble, but bow downe thine eare to me and heare me, make haſt to deliuer me, make no long tarying O my God. But wherefore hideſt thou thy face away? perchaunce thou wilt ſay, mā cannot ſée me, and liue. Behold O Lord, I can finde in my hart to dye, that I may ſée thée: let me ſée thée, that I may dye here. I deſire not to liue, I had leuer dye: I would fayne be let looſe, that I might be with Chriſt: I couet to dye, that I might ſée Chriſt: I refuſe to liue heare, ſo I may liue with

Chriſt. O Lord Ieſus, receiue my ſpirite. My life, receiue my ſoule. My ioy draw my hart vnto thée. My ſwéete foode, let me féede vpon thée. My head, direct thou me. Thou light of myne eyes, inlighten me. My melodie, delight thou me. My ſwéete ſent, refreſh thou me. Thou word of God, quickē thou me. My prayſe glad thou the ſoule of thy ſeruaunt. Thou euerlaſtyng light, ſhine thou vpon it, that it may perceiue thée, know thée, and loue thée. For the cauſe O Lord why it loueth thée not, is for that it knoweth thée not: & the cauſe why it knoweth thée not, is for that it perceiueth thée not: & the cauſe why it perceiueth thée not, is for that it comprehendeth not

thy light, for thy light ſhineth in darkneſſe, and the darkneſſe cō
                     prehendeth it not. O light of the minde, O lightſome truth, O true brightneſſe, which inlighteneſt euery mā that commeth into the world: I ſay, which commeth into the worlde, but not which is in loue with the world: for he that loueth the world & the thinges of the world, the loue of God is not in him. Driue away the darkneſſe from the vpperſide of the déepe of my mynde, that it may ſée thée by vnderſtandyng, know thée by perceiuyng, & loue thée by knowyng thée. For who ſoeuer knoweth thée muſt néedes loue thée. Yea he forgetteth him ſelfe and loueth thée more then him ſelfe: he forſaketh him ſelfe,

and cōmeth to thée, that he may ioy in thée. The cauſe then wherfore I am not ſo farre in loue with thée as I ought to be, is by reaſon that I do not throughly know thée: and bycauſe I haue but ſmall knowledge of thée, I haue alſo but ſmall loue to thée: and bycauſe I beare but ſmall loue to thée, therfore haue I but little ioy in thée. By meanes of outward ioyes I raunge frō thée the true inward ioy, and ſéeke counterfet comfortes in theſe outward thinges. And ſo like a wretch as I am, looke what loue I ought to haue yelded vnto thée alone with my whole hart, that haue I ſet vpon vanities: & therfore am become vayne by louing vanitie. Hereupon alſo O Lord

it is come to paſſe, that I delight not in thée, nor ſticke not to thee: for my mynde is buſied about outward thinges, thine about inward thinges: my thought is occupied in carnall thinges, thine in ſpirituall thinges: my talke is intāgled about trāſitorie things, but thou dwelleſt in euerlaſtingneſſe, & art the euerlaſtingneſſe it ſelfe, thou in heauen, and I in earth: thou loueſt high thinges, I low thinges: thou heauenly thinges, I earthly thinges. And how then can theſe contraries agrée together?
               
               
                  ¶Of the wretchedneſſe and frailtie of man.
                  WRetch that I am, when ſhall my crookedneſſe be

made euen to thy ſtraightnes? Lord, thou loueſt ſolitarineſſe, and I delight in company: thou ſtilneſſe, and I noyſe: thou truth, I leaſing: thou loueſt clenneſſe, & I filthines. And what more O Lord? Thou art throughly good, and I wholly euill: thou holie, I prophane: thou happie, I miſerable: thou righteous, I vniuſt: thou lightfull, I blind: thou liuing, I dead: thou the ſalue, I the ſore: thou the ioy, I the ſorow: thou the ſouerein truth, I nothing but vanitie, as all men liuing be. Alas therfore my maker, what ſhall I ſay? Heare me O my Creator: I am thy Creature, and without thee am already forlorne: I am thy creature, and am alreadie dead: I am thy

workemanſhip, thy handes O Lord haue made me and faſhioned me: Lorde, deſpiſe not the worke of thy handes.
                  I am by nature the child of wrath, a wild oliue trée, a veſſell of diſhonour, the veſſell of Sathan, an enemie to thée O God, a louer of my ſelfe, a cage of vncleane birdes, all that euer nought is: Lord be mercyfull to my ſinnes, for they are many, graft me into ye true oliue, make me a veſſell to honor, take from me ſelfeloue, pride and cōtempt of others, renue a right ſpirite within me, that I may perfectly loue thée, and worthely magnifie thy holy name for euer and euer.
                  Behold O Lord, thou haſt ſet me downe vpon thy hands: Lord

God read the writyng, and ſaue me. I that am the creature, do grone vnto thée that art my creator: O refreſh me. Behold, I thy workemanſhip do cry vnto thée: thou that art my life quickē me. Behold I thy handiworke looke vp to thée: thou that art my maker recomfort me. Spare me O Lord, for my dayes are nothing. What is man, which is but duſt and aſhes, that he ſhould talke vnto God his maker? Beare with me for my talking to thée. Pardon thy ſeruaunt for preſuming to ſpeake to ſo great a Lord. Neceſſitie hath no law. Paine compelleth me to ſpeake, and the grief that I indure inforceth me to cry out. I am ſicke, & I call to ye Phiſician: I am blind,

and I hye me to ye light: I haue gone aſtray, and thirſt to returne into the way: I am dead, and I labour for life. Thou art ye Phiſiciā, thou art the light, the way, and the life. Ieſus of Nazareth haue mercy vppon me: O thou ſonne of Dauid haue mercy vpō me: O welſpring of mercy harken to the diſeaſed which crieth vnto thée. Thou light which paſſeſt by, tarie for the blind, reach him thy hand that he may come to thée, and let him ſée light in thy light. Thou liuing life, raiſe vp the dead againe.
                  What am I that ſpeaketh with thée? woe is me Lord: O Lord ſpare me. I am but a rotten carcaſſe, wormes meate, a ſtinking coffin, and foode for fire.

What am I that talketh with thée? Wo is me Lord: O Lord ſpare me. I am an vnhappie mā, euen a ſory man borne of womā, ſhortliued, full fraught with many miſeries: euen a man that is like vnto vanitie, matched with witleſſe beaſtes, and already become like vnto them.
                  Againe, what am I? a darke dungeon, wretched earth, a child of wrath, a veſſell méete for diſhonor, begottē with vnclenneſſe, liuing in miſerie, and dying in diſtreſſe. Out vpon me wretch, what am I? Alas what ſhall become of me? I am a ſacke of dūg, a coffin of rottēneſſe, full of lothſomneſſe and ſtinch: blind, poore, naked, ſubiect to exceding many neceſſities: woting neither when

I came into the world nor when I ſhall goe out: mortall, and miſerable: whoſe dayes paſſe away as a ſhadowe, whoſe life glaunceth away as a ſhadow by Moonelight, growing as a floure vpon a trée, and fading out of hād againe, now floriſhing and by and by withering againe. My life (I ſay) is a fraile life, a fléeting life, ſuch a life as the more it lengtheneth the ſhorter it is: the further it goeth, the néerer it draweth vnto death. A deceitfull and ſhadowiſh life, full of ſnares of death. Now I am merie, & anone I am ſorie. Now I am luſtie, & anone I am weake. Now I am aliue, and by and by I am dead. I ſéeme happie for a while, & I am alwayes wretched. One

while I laugh, & another while I wéepe. And all thinges are ſo ſubiect to vnſtableneſſe, that nothing continueth at a ſtay one houres ſpace. Here withall commeth feare, trembling, hunger, thirſt, heate, cold, faintneſſe, and grief. In the necke of theſe foloweth importunat death, which ſnatcheth vp wretched men vnwares a thouſand wayes euery day. He killeth one with diſeaſes, and diſpatches another with ſorrowes. He ſtarueth this man for hunger, and pyneth that man with thirſt. He choketh ſome mē with water, and ſtrangleth other ſome with a halter. He makes a hand of ſome men by fire, and deuoureth otherſome with ye téeth of wild beaſtes. He fleas this mā
                     
with the ſword, deſtroyes that man with poyſon, and cauſeth ſome other man to finiſh his miſerable life with nothyng, but ſome ſodein feare. And yet there is one great miſerie aboue all theſe: namely that whereas nothing is more certeine thē death, yet doth not a man know when he ſhall dye. Yea euen when he thinkes him ſelfe to haue beſt footing, then is he ſhaken down, & his hope periſheth. For a man knoweth not whē, where or how he ſhall dye, & yet is he ſure that he muſt néedes dye. Sée Lord how great mans wretchedneſſe is, wherein I am, & yet miſtruſt it not: how howge the miſerie is which I indure, & yet am not greued, nor make any moue to

thée. Lord I will cry out vnto thée before I paſſe away, if peraduenture I may abyde in thée, and not paſſe away. I will tell thée then, I will tell thée my miſerie: I will not be aſhamed to acknowledge my vyleneſſe before thée. Helpe me my ſtrength by whom I am vnderpropped, ſuccour me my power by whom I am vpheld, come my light by whom I ſée, appeare my glorie through whom I reioyce, ſhewe thy ſelfe O life wherein I may liue, O my Lord God.
               
               
                  ¶Of Gods Wonderfull light.
                  O Light which Tobias ſaw, when with his eyes ſhet, he taught his ſonne the way of

life. O light which Iſaac ſaw inwardly, when his outward eyes were dim, & yet he told his ſonne what was to come. O light inuiſible, which beholdeſt all the dū
                     geons of mans hart. O light which Iob ſaw when he openly foreſhewed his ſonnes things to come, accordyng as thou haddeſt taught him inwardly. Behold how darkneſſe ouerwhelmeth, ye dungeon of my minde: for yu art light. Behold how miſtie dimneſſe lyeth vpō the waters of my hart, for thou art truth. O word by which all things were made, & without whiche nothing was made. O word which art before all things, & before which was nothing. O word which createſt all thinges, & without which all

thinges are nothyng. O worde which ruleſt all thinges, & without which all things are nought worth. O word which in the begynnyng didſt ſay, let light be made, & light was made: ſay alſo vnto me, let light be made, that light may be in déede, and I may ſée ye light, & know what ſoeuer is not light. For without thée I take darknes for light, & light for darkneſſe: & ſo without thy light there is no truth. Al is errour, al is vanity, there is no diſcretiō. Al is cōfuſiō, all is ignoraūce, there is no knowledge. All is blindneſſe, and there is no ſight: all is ſtraying, & there is no way: All is death, and there is no life.
               
               
                  ¶Of the mortalitie of mans nature.
                  
                     O Lord the word, O God the word whereby all thinges are made & without whom there is not any thing made. Wo is me wretch ſo often blinded, for that thou art the light and I am without thée. Wo is me wretch ſo often wounded, for that thou art the ſalue and I am without thée. Wo is me wretch ſo often ouerſéene, for that thou art the truth & I am without thée. Wo is me wretch ſo often ſtraying, for that thou art the way & I am without thée. Wo is me wretch ſo often dead, for that thou art the life and I am without thée. Wo is me wretch ſo oftē brought to nought, for that thou art the word by which all thinges were made, & I am without thée, with

out whom nothing was made. O Lord the worde, O God the word, who art the light by whō light was made, who art ye way, truth, and life in whom there is no darkneſſe, ouerſight, vanitie, nor death. O light wtout whiche all is but darknes: O truth with out which all is but leaſing: O life without whiche all is but death. Lord ſay the word, that light may be made, ſo as I may ſée the light, & eſchew darkneſſe: ſée the way, & eſchew ſtraying: ſée the truth, and eſchew leaſing: ſée life, and eſchew death. Shyne forth O Lord my light, my inlightening, & my welfare, whom I will reuerēce: my Lord whom I will prayſe, my God whom I will honor, my father whom I

wil loue, my bridegrome to whō I will kéepe my ſelfe. Shyne forth O light, ſhine forth (I ſay) to this blind ſoule of mine which ſiſteth in darkneſſe & in the ſhadow of death, and guide my féete into the way of peace, that I may paſſe thereby into the place of thy wonderfull Tabernacle, euē to the houſe of God with the voyce of gladneſſe and confeſſiō. For true confeſſion is the way whereby I may enter vnto thée which art the way, whereby I may returne from bywayes, and whereby I come agayne to thée which art the way, for thou art the very way of life.
               
               
                  ¶Of the fall of the Soule into ſinne.
                  
                     AS long as I was without thée, I was as nothyng. And therfore I was blind, deafe, and ſenſeleſſe. For I did neither diſcerne the good, nor ſhunne the euill, nor féele the grief of my woundes, nor ſée myne owne darkneſſe, bycauſe I was without thée the true light which inlighteneſt euery man that commeth into this world. Wo is me, they haue wounded me and I was not ſorie, they haue haled me and I felt it not. For I was as nothing, bycauſe I was without life which is the word, wherby all things are made. And therfore O Lord my light, mine enemies haue done what they lifted to me: they haue ſtrikē me, they haue berayed me, they haue marred

me, they haue wounded me, and they haue killed me, bycauſe I ſhrunke backe from thee, and am become as a thing of nothing without thée▪ Alas Lord my life which madeſt me, my light which haſt guided me, then defender of my life, haue mercie vppon me. Rayſe me vp againe O Lord my God. My hope, my power, my ſtrength, my comfort, haue an eye to mine enemies in the day of my trouble, and reſcue me. Let them that hate me flée away from my face, and let me liue in thée by thée. For they haue lyen in wayt for me O Lord and whē they ſaw me without thée, they deſpiſed me. They parted amōg them the garmentes of the vertues wherewith thou haddeſt apparelled

me. They made their way through me, they trampled me vnder their féete, they defiled thy holy temple with the filth of their ſinnes, and they left me deſolate & forpyned with ſorrowe. I went after them blind, and naked, and ſhackled with the fetters of ſinnes. They dragged me after them roūd about from vyce to vyce, and from myre to myre: and I went without ſtrength before the face of him that purſued me. I was a bondſlaue, and yet I loued ſlauerie: I was blind, & ſtill I longed for blindneſſe: I was manacled, & yet I miſliked not my manacles: I thought bitter to be ſwéete & ſwéete to be bitter. I was a wretch & wiſt it not. And all this came to paſſe, bycauſe

I was without the word, wherby al things are preſerued, & without which all thinges are worſe then nothing. For like as al things were made by ye word, and nothing was made without it: euen ſo by it are all thinges preſerued and mainteyned what ſoeuer they be, either in heauen, or in earth, or in the Sea, or in any déepes. One péece ſhould not cleaue to another: in a ſtone or in any of the thinges that be created, vnleſſe they were mainteyned by the worde, whereby all thinges were made. Therfore will I ſticke vnto thée O word, that thou mayſt preſerue me, for aſſoone as I ſtep aſide from thée, I am vndone in my ſelfe, ſauyng that thou which madeſt me haſt

alſo renued me agayne. For whē I had ſinned, thou didſt viſit me: when I was falue, thou didſt lift me vp agayne: when I was ignoraūt, thou didſt teach me: and when I could not ſée, thou didſt inlighten me.
               
               
                  ¶ Of Gods manifold benefites.
                  WRetch that I am, my God, ſhew me how much I am bound to loue thée. Make it appeare to me how much I ought to prayſe thée. Make me to know how much I ought to pleaſe thée. Lord thunder thou downe into the inwarde care of my hart. Teach me, and ſaue me, and I will prayſe thée. For thou haſt created me when I had no being:

thou haſt inlightened me when I was in darkneſſe: thou haſt rayſed me whē I was dead: thou haſt fed me with thy benefites euen from my youth vp. This vnprofitable worme which ſtinketh with ſinne, thou nouriſheſt with all thy ſingular good giftes. Open vnto me O thou key of Dauid, which openeſt and no man ſhutteth agaynſt him to whom thou openeſt, and ſhetteſt and no man openeth vnto him whom thou ſhetteſt out. Open me the doore of thy light, that I may enter in, and both know, & acknowledge vnto thée with my whole hart, that thy mercy is great towardes me, & that thou haſt deliuered my ſoule from the bottom of hel. O Lord our God,

how wonderful and prayſe worthy is thy name through all the earth. And what is mā that thou art mindfull of him, or the ſonne of man that thou viſiteſt him? O Lord whiche art the hope of the Saintes, and the tower of their ſtrength. O God the life of my ſoule, wherby I liue, and where without I dye. O light of myne eyes, by which I ſee, and without which I am ſightleſſe. O ioy of my hart and chearer of my ſpirites, let me loue thée with all my hart, with all my mind, with all my ſtrength, and with all intierneſſe: for thou haſt loued me firſt. And why haſt thou done ſo to me O maker of heauen, and of earth, and of the bottomleſſe déepe, who haſt no néede of me?

Wherupō commeth it that thou haſt loued me? O wiſedome which openeſt the mouth of the dumme, whereby all thynges were made, open my mouth, and giue me the voyce of prayſe, that I may tel forth all thy benefites, which thou haſt beſtowed vppon me from the beginning O Lord. For loe, I am, bycauſe thou haſt created me: and the cauſe that thou didſt create me and account me in the nomber of thy creatures, was thy foreordinaunce frō euerlaſting, before thou madeſt any thing, euen from the begynning, before thou didſt ſpread out the heauens, when as yet there were no déepes, neither hadſt thou yet made the earth, nor foū
                     ded the moūtaines, neither were

any waterſpringes yet broken out. Before thou madeſt all theſe thinges, whiche thou madeſt by thy word, thou foreſaweſt be the moſt aſſured prouidence of thy truth, that I ſhould be thy creature, & alſo thou willeddeſt that I ſhould be thy creature. And whence commeth this to me O moſt gētle Lord, moſt high God, moſt mercyfull father, and alwayes moſt méeke? What had I deſerued? what kindneſſe had I ſhewed, that it ſhould like thy royall maieſtie to create me? I was not, and thou diddeſt create me. I was nothing, and of nothing thou madeſt me ſomwhat. And what maner of ſomewhat? not a drop of water, not fire, not a bird or fiſhe, not a Serpent or

ſome of the brute beaſtes, not a ſtone or a blocke, not of thoſe ſort of thinges whiche haue but being onely, or of thoſe thinges that haue but onely being and growing, nor yet of thoſe kynde of things that haue but onely being, growing, and féeling. But aboue all theſe thinges, it was thy will to haue me both of that ſort which haue but being onely: for I am: and of thoſe that haue no more but being and growing: for I am, and grow: and alſo of thoſe kind of thinges which haue both being, growing, and féeling: for I am, and alſo do both grow and féele. Yea and thou haſt made ſmall oddes betwene me and the aungels. For I haue receaued reaſon to know thee, at thy hand

as well as they. But I did well to ſay there was ſome oddes betwene vs. For they haue the happie knowledge of thée already in poſſeſſion, and I haue it but by hope. They ſée face to face, I ſée thée i
                        •
                      a riddle through a glaſſe. They ſée thée fully, and I but partly.
               
               
                  ¶Of mans dignitie in time to come.
                  1▪ BVt whē the thing commeth whiche is perfect, then ſhall the vnperfect be done away, at ſuch time as we ſhall behold thee vncouered face to face. And what ſhould let vs to be counted litle inferior to aungels, ſeing that thou O Lorde haſt crowned vs with the garland of hope, which

is decked with glorie and honor, and ſeing thou haſt inhonored vs excedingly as thy frendes, or rather as felowes and coequals in all thinges with thine aungels? Verely euen ſo ſayth thy truth, they are equall with the angels, and they be the ſonnes of God. And what be they els then the ſonnes of God, if they be made felowes with the angels? They ſhalbe the ſonnes of God in very deede: for the ſonne of man is become the ſonne of God. Truly when I bethinke me of this, I am bold to ſay, that man is not onely litle inferiour to the aungels, yea or haylefelow with the angels, but alſo ſuperiour to thē, bycauſe a man is God, and God is a man, and not an angell. And

in this reſpect I may ſay that man is the worthyeſt creature, bycauſe the word whiche in the beginning was God with God, the word wherby God ſayd: let light be made & light was made, (that is to ſay, the angelicall nature was made) the word wherby God created all thinges in the beginning, euen the ſelfe ſame word became fleſh and dwelt among vs, and we haue ſene the glorie of it. Lo here the glorie, wherin I glory, whē I glory diſcretly. Lo here the ioy wherin I ioy, whē I ioy diſcretly, O Lord my God, the whole life and glorie of my ſoule. Therfore I acknowledge vnto thée my Lord God, that when thou createdſt me indued with reaſon, thou

didſt create me after a ſort equall with the aungels. For by thy word I may be perfect to atteine vnto equalitie with the aungels, ſo as I may haue the adoptiō of thy childrē by thine onely begotten word, O Lord, by thy deare beloued ſonne in whom thou art well pleaſed, by our onely coheyre, which is of the ſame ſubſtaunce & euerlaſtyngneſſe that thou thy ſelfe art, I euen by Ieſus Chriſt our onely Lord and redemer, our inlightener & comforter, our ſpokeſman with thée and the light of our eyes, who is our life, our ſauiour, our onely hope, who hath loued vs more thē him ſelfe, by whom we haue aſſured truſt layd vp in ſtore, & ſtedfaſt faith to theeward, and

entraunce to come vnto thée, bycauſe he hath giuen them power to become the childrē of God, as many as beleue in his name. I will giue prayſe vnto thy name O Lord, who by creating me after thine owne image, haſt made me capable of ſo great glorie, as to become ye ſonne of God. This truly can not trées do, this cā not ſtones do, this (to ſpeake generally) can not any of the thinges do that moue or growe in the ayre, or in the Sea, or on the earth, in aſmuch as he hath not giuen them power by thy worde to become the ſonnes of God, bycauſe they haue not reaſon. For the power whereby we know, conſiſteth in reaſon. But he hath giuē this power vnto men, whō
                     
he created reaſonable after his owne image and likeneſſe. Certeſſe Lord it is by thy grace that I am a man, and by grace I may be thy child, which thing, the other can not be. Whence haue I this O Lord the ſouerein truth, and true ſouerein, and the beginning of all creatures? Whence haue I this O Lord, that I may become the child of God, whiche the other thinges can not? Thou art he that indureſt for euer, and thou haſt made all thinges at once. Thou haſt made man and beaſt, ſtones and gréene thinges of the earth all at once. For there went no deſert of theirs afore, there wēt no good turne of theirs afore. Thou haſt created all thinges onely of thine own goodneſſe:

no creature had deſerued more thē other, for none of them had deſerued ought at all. And why thē did thy goodneſſe ſhew it ſelf more in this creature which yu haſt made reaſonable, then in all other that be without reaſō? Why was not I as all they be, or why are not all they as I am, or I alone as they be? What had I merited? What had I deſerued, that thou ſhouldeſt make me able to become the child of God, and deny the ſame abilitie to all the reſt? God forbid that I ſhould thinke ſo. It was thy onely grace, it was thy onely goodneſſe whiche brought it to paſſe, that I might be partaker of that ſweetneſſe. Of that grace therfore whereby thou haſt created

me of nothing, I beſech thee O Lord to giue me the grace to be thankefull vnto thée.
               
               
                  ¶Of Gods almightineſſe.
                  THy almighty hand kéeping alwayes at one ſtay, created the aungels in heauen & the ſilie wormes vpon earth, and yet was neither higher in the one, nor lower in the other. For like as none other hand could haue created an aungell, ſo could none other hād haue created a worme. Like as none other could haue created heauen: ſo could none other haue created a leaf of a trée. Like as none other could haue made a body: ſo could none other

make a heare white or blacke, but onely thine almyghty hand, whereunto all thinges are poſſible alike. For it is not more poſſible with him to create a worme then an aungell, nor more impoſſible to ſpread out the heauē, than a leafe: nor eaſier to faſhion a heare, then to faſhion a body: nor vneaſier to ſtabliſh the earth vpon the water, then the waters vppon the earth: but all that he liſted to do, that hath he done. According as he liſted he hath made all thinges in heauen, & in earth, and in the Sea, and in all déepe places: & among all other things he hath alſo made me accordyng as hee liſted, could, and knew how to do it. Certeſſe Lord thy hand could haue made me ſome

ſtone, or ſome bird, or ſome Serpent, or ſome beaſt: and it knew how to haue done it: but it would not bycauſe of thy goodnes. Why then am not I ſome ſtone, ſome trée, or ſome beaſt? Bycauſe thy goodneſſe hath ſo ordeined it, and that thou ſhouldeſt ſo ordeine it, there were no merites of myne goyng afore.
               
               
                  ¶Of the incomprehenſible prayſe of God.
                  HOw ſhall I doe Lorde, whence ſhal I haue prayſe to prayſe thée withall? for like as thou madeſt me without myne aduiſe, as it liked thy ſelfe beſt: ſo haſt thou prayſe without me, as it liketh thée. Thou thy ſelfe

Lord art thine own prayſe. Thy workes prayſe thée accordyng to thy maniſolde greatneſſe, thy prayſe O Lord is incomprehenſible. No hart can comprehend it, no toung can meaſure it, no eare can receiue it: for theſe thinges paſſe awaye, but thy prayſe O Lord continueth for euer. Thoughtes haue a begynning, & thoughtes haue an end: voyces make a ſound and forthwith paſſe away: the eare heareth, and the hearing ceaſeth: but thy prayſe ſtandeth faſt for euer. Who is he then that can prayſe thée? What man is able to vtter forth thy prayſe? Thy prayſe is euerlaſting, and not tranſitorie. That man prayſeth thée, whiche beleueth thée to be thyne owne

prayſe. The man prayſeth thée, whiche acknowledgeth him ſelfe vnable to atteine to thy prayſe. O prayſe perpetuall whiche neuer fadeſt: in thée is our prayſe, in thée ſhall my ſoule be prayſed. It is not we that prayſe thée: but it is thou thy ſelfe that doeſt it, both thy ſelfe, and in thy ſelfe: & we alſo haue prayſe in thée. Thē haue we true prayſe, when we haue prayſe of thée, when light alloweth light, for thou beyng the true prayſe yeldeſt vs true prayſe. And looke how often we ſéeke for prayſe at any other badies hand then thine: ſo often do we forgo thy prayſe, bycauſe the other is ſhadowiſh, but thine is euerlaſting. If we hunt after the tranſitorie prayſe, we loſe the eternall

prayſe. O prayſe eternal, O my Lord God of whom is all prayſe, without whō there is no prayſe. I am not able to prayſe thée without thée. Let me haue thée, and I will prayſe thee. For what am I of my ſelf Lord, that I ſhould prayſe thée? I am but duſt and aſhes, I am but a dead and ſtinkyng dogge, I am but wormes and rottēneſſe I. What am I to praiſe thée O moſt mightie Lord God? Howe can the breath of no better then fleſhe, prayſe thee which dwelleſt in euerlaſtingneſſe? Can darkneſſe prayſe light, or death, life? Thou art light, I darkneſſe: thou life, I death. Can lying prayſe truth? Thou art truth, and I am a mā no better thē vanitie it ſelf. How

ſhall I then prayſe thée O Lord? Shall my wretchedneſſe prayſe thée? Shall ſtinch prayſe ſwéete ſentes? Shall mans mortalitie which is here to day and gone to morow, prayſe thée? Shall man, whiche is but rottenneſſe, or the ſonne of man whiche is but wormes, prayſe thée? O Lord, Can hee prayſe thée whiche is breed, borne, and brought vp in ſinfulneſſe? Prayſe is not ſéemely in the mouth of a ſinner? O Lord my God, let thine own incomprehēſible power, let thy vnbounded wiſedome, let thine vnſpeakable goodneſſe, let thine ouer paſſing mercy, let thy ſuperabundant pitie, and let thine euerlaſting vertue and Godhead prayſe thée. Prayſed be thou by

thine owne almightie puiſſance, and alſo by thy ſingular gracious goodneſſe and louingneſſe, wherby thou haſt created vs O Lord God the life of my ſoule.
               
               
                  ¶Of liftyng a mās hope vp vnto God.
                  ANd I thy creature wil put my truſt vnder the ſhadow of thy winges, and in thy goodneſſe where thorough thou haſt created me. Helpe thy creature whō thy gracious goodneſſe hath created. Let not that periſhe through my naughtineſſe, which thy goodneſſe hath wrought. Let not that periſh through my wretchedneſſe, whiche thy ſingular mercy hath made. For what auayleth

it me that yu haſt created me, if I ſhall ſinke downe into myne owne corruption? O God haſt thou made all the ſonnes of men in vayne? Thou haſt created me O Lorde: rule thou the thing that thou haſt created. Deſpiſe not the worke of thine own handes O God. Thou haſt made me of nought O Lord, & if thou gouerne me not, I ſhall returne to nought agayne. For lyke as whē I was not, thou madeſt me of nothing: ſo if thou gouerne me not, I ſhal yet againe be brought to nothing in my ſelfe. Helpe me O Lord my life, leaſt I periſh in mine owne naughtyneſſe. Lord, if thou haddeſt not created me▪ I ſhould not haue bene at all, but bycauſe thou haſt created me, I

am. Now if thou gouerne me not, I am vndone. For it was not mine owne merites, or mine owne deſeruings that made thée to create me, but thine own moſt gracious goodneſſe and mercifulneſſe. That louingneſſe of thine O Lord my God, whiche made thée to create me, I beſech thée let ye ſame make thée to gouerne me. For what booteth it that thy louingneſſe cauſed thée to create me, if I muſt periſh in mine own wretchedneſſe, and that thy right hand gouerne me not? O Lord my God, let this mercyfulneſſe whiche cauſed thée to create the thing that was not created, cauſe thée alſo to ſaue that whiche is created. Let ye louingneſſe which wonne thée to create, winne thée

alſo to ſaue, ſith it is no leſſe now than it was then: for thou art the very loue it ſelfe and thou continueſt alwayes one. Lorde, thy hand is not ſhortened yt it ſhould not be able to ſaue, nor thyne eare deafed that it ſhould not be able to heare: but my ſinnes haue put a partition betwene me and thée, betwene the darkeneſſe and the light, betwene the image of death, and life, betwene vanitie and truth, betwene this wauing life of myne, and that endleſſe life of thine.
               
               
                  ¶Of the ſnares of concupiſcence.
                  SVch are the ſhadowes of the darkneſſe, wherewith I am

couered in the dungeon of this darke priſō, wherin I lye grouelyng till the day may dawne and the ſhadowes vaniſhe, and light appeare in the firmament of thy power. Let ye voyce of ye Lord in his ſtrength, let the voyce of the Lord in his mightfull power, ſay: let there be light & let darkeneſſe be chaſed away, and let the dry ground appeare, and let the earth bring forth gréene herbes & ſuch as beare the ſéede and good frute of the righteouſneſſe of thy kingdome. O Lord my father & God, the life wherby all thinges liue, & where without all things are as good as dead, leaue me not in my naughtie thoughtes, and giue me not vp to the loftineſſe of myne owne eyes. Take away

my luſtes from me, and giue me not ouer to an froward and fātaſticall minde, but hold thou my hart to thée that it may alwayes thinke vpō thée. Inlighten myne eyes yt they may looke at thée, & not be lifted vp before thée which art the euerlaſtyng glorie: but that they may haue a lowly meaning not medlyng with maruels that are aboue them, and which are at thy right hand. Let thyne eyliddes goe before my ſteppes, for thyne eyliddes peruſe the ſonnes of men. Aſſwage my luſt with thy ſwéetneſſe whiche thou haſt layd vp for them that feare thée, that I may luſt after thée with endleſſe lōgyng, ſo as mine inward faſt may not be allured and deceiued by vayne things, to

take bitter for ſwéete, and ſwéete for bitter: darkneſſe for light, and light for darkneſſe: but that I may be deliuered frō the middes of ſo many trappes as are ſet by the enemie in the way of mens hauntes, to catch the ſoules of ſinners where the whole world is full: whiche thing the Apoſtle ſaw, and paſſed it not ouer with ſilence, but ſayd: what ſoeuer is in the world, is either the luſt of the fleſh, or the luſt of the eyes, or the pride of life. Lo my Lord God, the whole world is full of the ſnares of luſt, whiche they haue layd for my féete, and who can eſcape theſe ſnares? Doutleſſe euen he from whom thou takeſt away his loftie lookes, ſo as the luſt of his eyes catch not

hold of him: and from whō thou takeſt away the luſt of the fleſh, that the luſt of his fleſh attache him not: and from whom thou takeſt away his froward & fantaſticall minde, that the pryde of life do not craftely beguile hym. O how happie is he to whom thou doeſt ſo, for he ſhall ſcape vnpuniſhed. Now my redemer, I beſéech thée by thy ſelfe, helpe me, that I fall not in the ſight of mine aduerſaries, nor be caught in the ſnares whiche they haue layd for my féete to bryng my ſoule to the ground. But plucke me out thou ſtrength of my welfare, leaſt thine enemyes which hate thée may laugh at me. Vp Lord my God my ſtrong champion, breake the aray of myne

enemies, and let them that hate thée flée away before thée. Like as waxe melteth awaye at the heate of the fire, ſo let the ſinners periſh at thy preſence: but let me be hidden in the couert of thy face, and reioyce with thy children as inioying my fill of all thy benefites. And thou O Lord God the father of the fatherleſſe, and thou mother of the motherleſſe, heare the ſhréekyng of thy children, and ſtretch out thy wynges, that we may flée vnder them from the ſight of our enemie. For thou art the tower of Iſraels ſtrength, which neither ſléepeſt nor ſlumbereſt in keping Iſraell, bycauſe the enemie that aſſaulteth Iſraell doth neither ſléepe nor ſlumber.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of mans miſerie and Gods benefites.
                  O Light which no other light cā ſée: O brightneſſe which no other brightneſſe beholdeth: O light whiche darkneth all other lightes: O brightnes which blindeth all outward ſight. O light of whom cōmeth all light: O ſight of whom commeth all ſight: O brightneſſe in compariſon wherof all other brightneſſe is but dimneſſe, & all other light is but darkneſſe. O light vnto whom all darkneſſe is light, and all dimneſſe, bright. O ſouerein light which no blindneſſe can ouer ſhadow, whiche no miſt can dim, which no let can forcloſe, & whiche no ſhadow can kéepe of.

O light whiche inlighteneſt all things, whole, together, at once, and euer, ſwalow me vp into the depth of thy brightnes, yt I may ſée thée throughly in thy ſelfe, & my ſelfe in thée, & all thinges vnder thée. Forſake me not, leaſt ye ſhadowes of mine ignoraūce increaſe, and my miſdéedes growe out of nomber. For without thée all thynges are darkeneſſe vnto me, and all thinges are euill, bycauſe nothyng is good without thée the true, onely, and ſouerein goodneſſe. This I know, and this I confeſſe O Lord my God, that whereſoeuer I am without thée, it is ill with me for want of thée, not onely without me, but alſo within me: for all aboundaunce beſides thée my God, is nothyng

els but ſtarke beggerie. But I ſhall thē haue my fill, when thou appeareſt in thy glorie. And thou O Lord my bliſſed life, make me to confeſſe my wretchednes vnto thée, whiche I am falne into by ſlippyng from the vnitie of thy goodneſſe the ſouerein and onely good thing: ſince which tyme, the manifoldneſſe of tēporall things hath caried me awaye through my fleſhly ſenſes, and ſcattered me from one into many thinges: by reaſon whereof plentie is become painfull to me, and pouertie plentifull, while I raughted after this and that, and was ſatiſfied with nothing, bycauſe that in my ſelfe I found not thée the vnchaungeable, ſingular, and vndeuided good: whiche had I once

atteyned, I ſhould no more wāt: which had I once gottē, I ſhould no more be gréeued: which had I once poſſeſſed, my whole lōgyng were ſatiſfied. Alas how miſerie commeth vpō miſerie, when my miſerable ſoule is fled from thée with whom it hath aboūdaunce and ioy: and foloweth the world, with whō it hath euermore ſcarcitie and ſorow. The world calls me to vndo me, thou O Lord calleſt me to reuiue me, and ſuch is my wicked wretchedneſſe, that I rather folow hym that vndoeth me, then hym that reuiueth me. This is vtterly mine infirmitie. O Ghoſtly Phiſician, heale it, that I may giue prayſe vnto thée the health of my ſoule, with all my whole hart, for all thy benefites

wherewith thou féedeſt me from my youth vnto myne olde age, and euen till my laſt gaſp. I beſeech thée by thy ſelfe, forſake me not. Thou madeſt me when I was not: thou redéemeſt me when I was forlorne: yea when I was both forlorne & dead, thou cameſt downe to me, and tookeſt mortalitie vpō thée. Thou beyng my kyng, cameſt downe to thy ſeruaunt: To redéeme thy ſeruaunt, thou gaueſt thy ſelfe: To the intēt that I might liue, thou tookeſt vpō thée to dye, and ouercameſt death: Thou diddeſt ſet me vp agayne, by abaſing thy ſelfe low. I was vndone, I was gone away in my ſinnes, I was ſold to ſinne: thē cameſt thou for me to buy me out agayne, and

thou didſt loue me ſo well, that thou gaueſt thine own bloud for my raunſome. Lord thou haſt loued me more then thy ſelfe: for thou didſt finde in thy hart to dye for me. Vpon this condition haſt yu with ſo deare a price brought me backe from baniſhment, raū
                     ſomed me out of bōdage, reſcued me from puniſhment, called me by thyne owne name, and ſealed me with thy bloud: that the remembraunce of thée ſhould be euermore with me, and that he ſhould neuer departe from my hart, who for my ſake ſhunned not the croſſe. Thou haſt anoynted me with the oyle wherewith thou thy ſelfe wart annoynted, that I might be called a Chriſtiā after thy name Chriſt. Behold

thou haſt regiſtred me vpō thine handes, to the end that the remē
                     braunce of me might be alwayes preſent with thée: yet notwithſtandyng, ſo as if the remembraunce of thée be alwayes preſēt with me. Thus thē haue thy grace & mercy alwayes preuented me. For thou haſt oftētymes deliuered me from many & great perils, O my deliuerer. When I went aſtray, thou broughteſt me backe agayne: whē I was ignoraunt, thou taughteſt me: whē I ſinned thou didſt chaſtiſe me: when I haue bene in heauineſſe, yu haſt cheared me: when I haue bene in diſpayre, yu haſt recōforted me: whē I haue 
                        •
                     ene falne, yu haſt lifted me vp: when I haue ſtode thou haſt vphild me: whē I

haue gone, thou haſt guided me: when I haue come, yu haſt receiued me: whē I haue ſlept, yu haſt watched me: and when I haue cryed vnto thée, yu haſt heard me.
               
               
                  ¶ That God doth continually behold and marke mens doynges & intentes.
                  THeſe and many other good turnes haſt thou done vnto me O Lord my God the lyfe of my ſoule: and it were a pleaſure to me to be alwayes talkyng of them, alwayes thinkyng vppon them, and alwayes giuyng thée thankes for them, ſo as I might euer prayſe thée for all thy good giftes, and loue thée with all my hart, and with all my ſoule, and with all my minde, and with all

my ſtrēgth, yea and with the very bowelles and intrayles of my hart and of all my ſinewes, O Lord my God the bleſſed ſwéeteneſſe of all that delight in thée. But thine eyes haue ſene myne imperfection. Thine eyes I ſay are much clearer then the ſunne, vewyng throughly all the wayes of men, and the bottome of the déepe, and in all places alwayes beholdyng both the good and bad. For in aſmuch as thou ouerruleſt all thynges, fillyng euery thing, and art wholly preſent at all times & in all places, hauyng regard of all thinges which thou haſt created: (for thou hateſt not any of the thinges that thou haſt made) thou takeſt ſuch heede to my ſteppes and my pathes, and

kéepeſt ſuch watch and ward ouer me day and night, diligently markyng all my walkes lyke a continuall ouerſéer: as though thou hadſt forgotten heauen and earth & all the creatures in them, and haddeſt regard of me alone, without caryng for any of the reſt. For the vnchaūgeable light of thine eye ſight increaſeth not to thy ſelfeward though yu looke but vpon one thing: neither is it diminiſhed though thou looke vppon ſundry and innumerable thinges. For like as thou cōſidereſt the whole perfectly at once: ſo thy whole ſight beholdeth euery ſeuerall thynge perfectly at once, and whole together, be they neuer ſo diuers. Neuertheleſſe thou vieweſt all thinges as one,

and ech one thing as all: thy ſelfe beyng whole together without diuiſion, or chaunge, or abatemēt. Thou therfore being whole at all times, beholdeſt me whole, at once, and alwayes, without tyme, as if thou haddeſt nothyng els to thinke vppon. Yea and thou ſtandeſt in ſuch wyſe my gard, as if thou haddeſt forgotten all other thynges, and wouldeſt taſke thy ſelfe to me alone. For thou euer ſheweſt thy ſelfe preſent: thou euer offereſt thy ſelfe ready if thou finde me ready. Whether ſoeuer I go, yu forſakeſt me not, except I forſake thée firſt. Where ſoeuer I be, thou departeſt not from me. For thou art euery where, ſo as whiche way ſoeuer I go, I

may finde thée by whom I may be, that I periſh not without thee, ſith I cannot be without thée. I cōfeſſe in déede, that what ſoeuer I do, and where ſoeuer I do it, I do it before thée, & what ſoeuer I do, thou ſéeſt it better then I that do it. For what ſoeuer I am workyng, thou art euer ſtandyng at myne elbow, a continuall beholder of all my thoughtes, intentes, delightes & doinges. Lord, all my deſire is euer before thée, & al my thoughts are before thée. Lord, yu knoweſt frō whence my ſpirite commeth, where it reſteth, and whether it departeth: for thou art the weyer of all ſpirites. Thou knoweſt right well whether the roote that ſēdeth forth faire leaues abroad,

be ſwéete or bitter: yea thou ſearcheſt narrowly euē the very pith of the rootes within, as a iudge: and by the diſcuſſing light of thy truth thou conſidereſt, numbreſt, veweſt, and peruſeſt not onely the intent, but alſo the very innermoſt pith of ye roote of it, that thou mayſt render vnto euery man, not onely accordyng to hys worke or intent, but alſo euen accordyng to the very inward & hidden pith of the roote of them, out of which the intent of ye worker procéedeth. What ſoeuer I purpoſe when I worke, what ſoeuer I thinke, and wherein ſoeuer I delight, thou ſéeſt it, thyne eares heare it, thyne eyes behold it, and cōſider it, thou markeſt it, thou takeſt heede of it, thou noteſt

it, and thou writeſt it in thy booke, be it good or euill: that afterward thou mayſt render, for the good, reward, & for the euill, puniſhment, at ſuch tyme as thy bookes ſhalbe opened, and men ſhalbe iudged accordyng to the thinges that be written in thy bookes. And peraduenture this is it that thou menteſt, when thou ſaydeſt vnto vs: I will conſider the laſt of them: & which is ment when it is ſayd of thée O Lord: hee conſidereth the ende of all thinges. For in all thinges that we do, thou vndoutedly regardeſt more the end of the intent, then the act of the deede. Now when I conſider this O Lord my God, which art terrible and mightie, I am abaſhed with feare of thine

excéeding ſtrength, bycauſe it ſtā
                     deth vs greatly on hand to lyue iuſtly and vprightly, for aſmuch as we do all thinges in the preſence of the iudge that ſéeth all thynges.
               
               
                  ¶That man can do nothing of him ſelfe without Gods grace.
                  MOſt puiſſant and mighty-workyng God, ye creator of the ſpirites of all fleſh, whoſe eyes are vppon all the wayes of Adams children, from the day of their birth, to the day of their departure, to giue vnto euery of thē accordyng to his workes either good or euil: ſhew me how I may confeſſe myne owne pouertie.

For I ſayd I was rich and wanted nothyng, and I wiſt not that I was poore, blind, naked, wretched, and miſerable. For I beleued I had bene ſomewhat, when as I was nothyng. I ſayd I will become wiſe, and I became a foole. I thought my ſelfe ſkilfull, but I was deceiued, for now I ſée it is thy gift, without whom we can do nothyng, bycauſe that except thou kéepe the Citie, in vayne doth he watch which kéepeth it. So haſt thou taught me to know my ſelfe, for thou haſt forſaken me to trye me: not for thy ſelfe that yu mighteſt know me, but for me yt I might know my ſelfe. For as I ſayd Lord, I beleued I ſhould haue bene ſomwhat of my ſelfe, I thought I

had bene a man able inough of my ſelfe, & I perceiued not how thou diddeſt gouerne me, vntill thou haddeſt withdrawen thée a while from me: and then by and by I fell to myne owne byas: wherby I ſaw and knew, how it was thou that haddeſt ruled me, and that my fallyng was of my ſelfe, and my riſing agayne was of thée. O light, thou haſt opened myne eyes, and waked me, and inlightened me. I ſée that mans life vpon earth is but a temptation, and that no fleſh can glorie before thée, nor any liuing wight be iuſtified, bycauſe that if there be any good in them, be it much or litle, it is thy gift, and we haue nothyng of our owne but euill. Whereof then ſhall any fleſhe

make his boaſt? Of euill? That is no glorie, but miſerie. But what? ſhall he boaſt of goodneſſe? Then ſhal he boaſt of that which is none of his own. For goodneſſe is thyne O Lord, and thyne is the glorie. For he that ſéeketh his owne glorie by thy goodes, and ſéekes not thy glory, he is a théefe and a robber, and he is like the deuill who would haue ſtolne away thy glory. For he that wilbe prayſed for thy gift, & ſéeketh not to glorifie thée in the ſame, but to glorifie himſelfe: although men prayſe him for thy gift, yet doeſt thou diſpraiſe him, bycauſe yt by thy gift he hath not ſought thy glory, but his owne. As for him that is prayſed of men when thou miſlikeſt him, men ſhal not

defend hym when thou iudgeſt hym, neither ſhall they deliuer him when thou cōdemneſt him. Wherfore O Lord which didſt ſhape me in my mothers wōbe, ſuffer me not to fall into that reproch, that it might be caſt in my teeth how I would haue ſtolne away thy glorie. For all glorie be vnto thée, who art the owner of all goodneſſe: but ſhame and miſerie be vnto vs, who are owners of all euill, except it pleaſe thée to ſhew mercy. For thou O Lord haſt pitie, yea thou haſt pitie on all thinges, for thou hateſt not any thyng whiche thou haſt made, but giueſt vs of thy goodes, and inricheſt vs beggers with thy ſingular good giftes O Lord God. Yea thou loueſt the poore,

and inricheſt them with thyne owne riches. Behold now O Lord, we thy childrē and thy litle flocke are poore: opē vs thy gates that the poore may eate and be ſatiſfied, & they that ſéeke thee ſhall prayſe thée. Alſo Lord, I know by thy teachyng, and I confeſſe that none ſhalbe inriched by thée, but ſuch as féele thē ſelues poore, and acknowledge their poorenes vnto thée. For they that take thē ſelues to be rich whereas they be poore, ſhall finde them ſelues ſhet out from thy richeſſe. I therfore confeſſe my pooreneſſe vnto thée my Lord God, and thyne be the whole glorie, bycauſe the good that hath bene done by me is thyne. Lord, I acknowledge accordyng as thou haſt taught me,

that I am nothing els but all together vanitie, a ſhadow of death a dungeon of darkneſſe, & a barrein and waſt ground, whiche without thy bleſſing beareth not any thyng, ne yeldeth any frute but confuſion, ſinne, and death. If euer I haue had any good in me, I haue had it of thée: what ſoeuer I haue, it is thyne, or I haue it of thée. If euer I haue ſtode, I ſtode by thée: but when I haue falne, I haue falne of my ſelfe: and I ſhould haue lyen in the myre for euer, haddeſt not thou drawen me out. I had bene euer blind, haddeſt not thou inlightened me. Whē I was falne I had neuer riſen agayn, haddeſt not thou reached me thy hand. Yea I had continually falne after

thou haddeſt lifted me vp, haddeſt not thou hild me vp ſtill: finally I had oftētimes periſhed, but that thou didſt gouerne me. Thus alwayes Lord, thus alwayes haue thy grace and mercy preuented me, deliuering me frō all euils, ſauyng me from that was paſt, lifting me vp frō that was preſent, and garding me frō that which was to come: and alſo rippyng a ſunder the ſnares afore me, and takyng away all cauſes of annoyance. For vnleſſe thou haddeſt done ſo for me, I ſhould haue committed all the ſinnes of the world. Doutleſſe Lord, I know there is no ſinne which euer any man hath committed, but that an other man may do the ſame, if he want his

creator by whom he was made man. But looke what I my ſelfe could not do, that haſt thou done. That I forbare it was thy commaundement: & that I beleued thée, it was of thy grace whiche thou didſt ſhed into me. For it was thou Lorde that didſt rule me, both to thée and to my ſelfe: and it was thou that gaueſt me grace and light, that I ſhould not commit aduoutrie or any other kinde of ſinne.
               
               
                  ¶Of the deuill and of his manifold temptations.
                  THere wanted a tempter, & thou wart the cauſe that he was wantyng: there wanted tyme and place, and thou wart

the cauſe that they wanted. The tempter was preſent, and there wanted neither place nor tyme: but thou hildeſt me backe that I ſhould not conſent. The tempter came full of darkneſſe as he is: & thou diddeſt harten me that I might deſpiſe him. The tempter came armed and ſtrongly: but to ye intent he ſhould not ouercome me, thou didſt reſtreine him, and ſtrengthen me. The tēpter came tranſformed into an aungell of light: and to the intent he ſhould not deceiue me, thou didſt rebuke him: and to the intent I ſhould know him, thou didſt inlighten me. For he is that great red dragon, and that old ſerpent, called the deuill and Sathan, which hath ſeuen heades and ten

hornes, whō thou haſt created to take his pleaſure in this howge & broad ſea, wherin there créepe liuyng wightes innumerable, & beaſtes greate and ſmall, that is to ſay diuers ſortes of féendes, whiche practiſe nothing els day nor night, but to go about ſéekyng whom they may deuour, except thou reſcue him. For it is that old dragon which was bréed in the paradiſe of pleaſure, which draweth downe the third part of the Starres of heauen with his tayle & caſtes them to the groūd, which with his venim poyſoneth the waters of the earth that as many men as drinke of thē may dye, which trampleth vpon gold as if it were myre and is of opinion that Iordan ſhall runne into

to his mouth, and which is made of ſuch a moold as he feareth no man. And who ſhal ſaue vs from his chappes? Who ſhall plucke vs out of his mouth ſauing thou O Lorde, who haſt broken the heades of the great dragō? Helpe vs Lord. Spread out thy winges ouer vs O Lord, that we may flée vnder them from the face of this dragon that purſueth vs: & fence thou vs from his hornes, with thy ſhield. For his continuall indeuour and onely deſire is to deuour the ſoules which thou haſt created. And therfore we cry vnto thée my God, deliuer vs frō our dayly aduerſarie, who whether we ſléepe or wake, whether we eate or drinke, or whether we be doyng of any thyng els,

preaſeth vpon vs by all kynde of meanes, aſſaulting vs day and night with traynes and policies, and ſhootyng hys venemous arrowes at vs, ſometyme openly and ſometime priuily, to flea our ſoules. And yet are we moſt lewdly ouerſéene O Lord, in yt whereas we ſée the dragon continually in a readynes to deuour vs with open mouth: we neuertheleſſe do ſléepe and ryot in our own ſlothfulneſſe, as though we were out of his daunger, who deſireth nothyng els but to deſtroy vs. Our enemy to the intent to kill vs, watcheth continually & neuer ſléepeth: and yet will not we wake from ſléepe to ſaue our ſelues. Behold he hath pitched infinite ſnares before our féete,

and filled all our wayes with ſū
                     dry trappes, to catch our ſoules. And who can eſcape them? He hath layd ſnares for vs in our riches, he hath layd ſnares in our pouertie, he hath layd ſnares in our meate, in our drinke, in our pleaſures, in our ſléepe, and in our wakyng: he hath ſet ſnares for vs in our wordes, and in our workes, and in all our lyfe. But Lord, deliuer vs thou from the net of the foulers, and from hard wordes, that we may giue prayſe to thée, ſaying: Bleſſed bee the Lord, who hath not giuen vs vp to be torne with their téeth, our ſoule is deliuered as a ſparow out of the net of a fouler, the net is broken and we be eſcaped.
               
               
                  
                  ¶That God is the light of the righteous.
                  ANd thou O Lord my light, inlighten mine eyes that I may ſée the light & walke in thy light, and not ſtumble into hys ſnares. For who can eſcape theſe ſo many ſnares, except he may ſée them? And who can ſée them, except he be inlightened with thy light? For the father of darkneſſe hath hidden hys ſnares in hys owne darkneſſe, to catch all ſuch in them as be in his darkneſſe, whiche are the children of this darkneſſe, and ſée not thy light, wherin who ſo walketh, ſhal not be afrayd. For he that walketh in the day, ſtumbleth not: but he that walketh in the night, ſtumbleth:

bycauſe there is no light in him. Thou art light O Lorde, thou art the light of the children of light, thou art the day whiche hath none euentyde, wherin thy children walke without ſtumblyng, and where out of who ſo walketh is in darkneſſe, bycauſe he hath not thée the light of the world. Lo, we ſée dayly, that the further of that any man wandreth frō thée, ſo much the more is he wrapped in the darkneſſe of ſinne: and the more he is in darkneſſe, ſo much the leſſe doth he ſée the ſnares in his way, and therfore ſo much the leſſe knoweth them, by reaſon wherof he is oftentymes caught and falleth into them, and (which more horrible is) hee knoweth not that he is

falne into them. Now, he that knoweth not his owne fall, careth ſo much the leſſe to ryſe agayne, in as much as he wéeneth that he is ſtil vpon his féete. But thou O Lord my God the light of the mynde inlighten nowe myne eyes, that I may both ſée and know, ſo as I fall not in the ſight of myne aduerſaries. For our enemy laboreth to roote vs vp, but we beſech thée make him to be melted before our face as waxe melteth agaynſt the fire. For truly Lorde, he is the firſt théefe and the laſt, and he tooke counſell to robbe thée of thy glorie. But when he was puft vp & aduaunced, he did burſt a ſunder, and fell vppon his face, and thou threweſt him down from thy holy

hill, and frō the middeſt of the firie ſtones in the middeſt wherof he walked. And now O Lord God my lyfe, he ceaſeth not to purſue thy children: and for hate of thée O mighty king, he couets to deſtroye this thy creature, which thyne almightie goodneſſe hath created after thyne owne image to inherite thy glory which hee hath loſt through his owne pride. But beate thou him down O our ſtrength before he deuour vs thy lambes: and inlightē thou vs that we may eſpye the ſnares which he hath layd for vs, and eſcape vnto thée O ioy of Iſraell. All theſe things doeſt thou right well know O Lord, who art acquainted with his ſtubburnneſſe and exceding ſtiffe necke, neither

ſay I this to informe thée of it, for thou ſéeſt all thinges, & there is not a thought hid frō thée. But I make complaint of myne enemy at the feete of thy maieſtie O eternall kyng, to ye end that thou ſhouldeſt both damne hym, and alſo ſaue vs thy children, whoſe ſtrēgth thou art. For why Lord, this is a turnecoate and a writhyng enemy, and hardly ſhall a man finde out the crinkes of hys wayes, or diſcerne the lookes of his countenaunce, except thou inlighten hym. For he is now here, now there: now a lambe, now a Wolfe: and ſéemes ſometyme darknes & ſometyme light, offeryng ſundry tēptations vpon euery maner of qualitie, place & tyme, accordyng to the ſundry

chaunges of thynges for to deceiue the ſad, he makes him ſelfe ſad: and to beguile them that be merie, he him ſelfe alſo pretēdeth mirth: to diſappoint the ſpiritual ſort, he turneth himſelfe into an angell of light: to pull down the ſtrong, he appeareth as a lambe: and to deuour the méeke ones, he ſheweth him ſelfe a Wolfe. And accordyng to the likeneſſe of hys ſundry temptations, he hath all theſe thinges to worke with all: that is to wit, to ſcare ſome with feare of the night, ſome with the arrow that flyeth by day, ſome with the peſtilence that walketh in the darke, ſome with breaking in, and other ſome with the noone ſpright. And who is of abilitie to know all theſe thinges? or who

hath diſcerned his wyles? who ſhall diſcouer the ſhape of hys rayment, or who will take accoūt of the téeth in his head? Behold hee hideth his arrowes in his quiuer, and ſhrowdeth hys ſnares vnder the couert of lyght. And this is the harder to eſpye, if we get not light at thée O Lord our hope, that we may ſée all thinges. For he hideth daungerous ſnares, not onely in the workes of the fleſh whiche are eaſly knowen, nor onely in vices: but alſo euen in the ſpirituall exerciſes: eggyng men to vyce vnder the colour of vertue, and tranſformyng hym ſelfe into an aungell of light. Theſe and many other thynges doth the ſonne of Beliall, euen Sathā him ſelfe

practiſe agaynſt vs O Lord our God. He lyeth in wayt to ketch our ſoules, one while as a Lyon, and an other while as a draggō, openly and priuely, within and without, day and night. But deliuer vs thou O Lord which ſaueſt them that truſt in thée: that he may be gréeued at vs, & thou mayſt be prayſed in vs O Lord our God.
               
               
                  Of Gods benefites.
                  I The ſonne of thy handmayd who haue cōmended my ſelfe into thy hand by theſe my poore complaintes, will prayſe thée my deliuerer with all my hart, and cal to my minde all the good that thou haſt done me frō my youth

vp. For I know that vnthankfulneſſe doth greatly diſpleaſe thée, which is the roote of all ſpirituall euill, and a wynde that blaſteth and burneth vp all good, damming vp the foūtaine of thy godly mercy for euer. Through it, the workes that be dead already, reuiue not: and the workes that be alyue do dye out of hand and recouer not agayne. But I will giue thākes to thée O Lord, leaſt I be vnthankfull to thée my deliuerer for thy deliueryng of me. How often had that dragon ſwalowed me vp long ago, but that thou O Lord haſt plucked me out of his mouth? How often haue I ſinned and he ſtode ready to ſnatch me vp, but that thou didſt defēd me O Lord my God?

When I delt wickedly, & when I brake thy commaundements, he ſtode wayting to cary me away to hell, but thou withſtodeſt him. I offended thée, and thou didſt defēd me. I feared thée not, & yet thou didſt kéepe me. I ſtarted away frō thée and yelded my ſelfe to myne enemy, and yet thou didſt fray him away that he ſhould not take me. Theſe good turnes haſt thou done for me O Lord my God, & I wretch wiſt it not. For ſo haſt thou oftentymes deliuered me out of the deuils chappes, plucked me out of the Lyons mouth, and many and ſundry wayes brought me backe agayne from hell though I wiſt it not. For I haue gone downe to the very gates of hell:

but thou haſt held me frō goyng in. I drew neare to deathes doore, but thou haſt not ſuffered it to take me in. Alſo thou haſt oftentymes preſerued me from bodily death, O my Sauiour, when I haue bene attached with ſore ſickneſſes: And when I haue bene in many daungers by Sea, and by land, thou haſt alwayes ſtode by me, deliueryng me from fire and from ſword, and from all perill, and mercyfully preſeruyng me. Truly Lord thou knoweſt, that if death had diſpatched me at that time, hell had receiued my ſoule, and I had bene dāned for euer. But thy mercy & thy grace preuented me, reſcuyng me from bodily death, and alſo from the death of my ſoule O my Lord

God. Theſe and many other good turnes haſt thou done for me, & I was blind and wiſt it not, vntill thou inlightenedſt me. Now therfore O light of my ſoule, my Lord God, my life whereby I liue, the ſight of mine eyes wherby I ſée, behold thou haſt inlightned me, and I perceiue how I liue through thée. And I yeld thée thankes, though litle worth and ſlender and farre vnder thy benefites, howbeit yet ſuch as my frayltie hath to giue. For thou onely art my God, and my gracious maker, whiche loueſt our ſoules and hateſt none of the thyngs that thou haſt made. Behold I am the chief among the ſinners whom thou haſt ſaued, that I may be an example vnto

others of thy moſt mercyfull louyng kyndneſſe. I will acknowledge thy great benefites vnto thée: for thou haſt plucked me out of the bottom of hell, once, & twyſe, and thrice, and a hundred tymes, & a thouſand tymes. Yea I alwayes made towardes hell, and thou didſt alwayes bring me backe againe, whē thou mighteſt iuſtly haue damned me if thou hadſt would. But thou wouldeſt not O Lord my God, bycauſe yu loueſt mens ſoules, and beareſt with mens ſinnes, yt they might repent: all thy wayes be full of mercy. Now therfore O Lord my God I ſée theſe thynges and diſcerne them by thy light, & my hart is aſtoniſhed at thy great mercy towardes me, in that thou

haſt deliuered my ſoule from the bottome of hell, and brought me backe agayne to lyfe. For I was ſtarke dead, and thou haſt made me throughly aliue again. Therfore am I altogether beholden to thee for my life, and whole as I am I yeld my ſelfe wholly vnto thée. Let my whole ſpirite, my whole hart, my whole body, and my whole life liue vnto thée my ſwéete lyfe: for thou haſt deliuered me whole, that thou mighteſt poſſeſſe me whole: yu haſt made me whole new agayne, that thou mighteſt haue me whole againe. And therfore let me loue thee O Lord my ſtrength, let me loue thée O my vnſpeakable ioy, and let me liue hence forth, not to my ſelfe, but vnto thée. All my whole

life which was periſhed in myne owne wretchedneſſe, is reuiued agayne in thy mercy: for thou art a pitifull and mercyfull God▪ and many are thy compaſſions toward thouſandes, in them that loue thy name. And therfore O Lord my God, thou my ſanctifier haſt commaūded me in thy law, that I ſhould loue thée with all my hart, with all my might, yea euē frō the bottom of my hart, at all houres & tymes wherin I inioy ye benefites of thy mercy. For I ſhould periſh for euer, but that thou ruleſt me euer. I ſhould euer dye, but yt thou euer quickeneſt me: yea euery moment thou byndeſt me vnto thée, in as much as euery momēt thou beſtoweſt thy great benefites vppon me.

Therefore lyke as there is no houre or inſtāt of time in all my life, that I haue not the vſe of thy benefites: ſo ought there to be no moment wherin I ſhould not haue thée in remembraunce before myne eyes, and loue thée to thée vttermoſt of my power. But this am I not able to do, except thou make me able, of whō cōmeth euery good gift & euery excellent gift: for yu art the father of light, in whō there is no chaūge nor intercourſe of darknes: for to loue thée cōmeth not of our own will, or of our own running, but of thy mercy. Lord it is thy gift, whoſe all good things are. Thou commaūdeſt vs to loue thée, giue vs that which thou cōmaundeſt, & commaunde what thou wilt.
               
               
                  
                  Of the feruentneſſe of loue or Charitie.
                  I Am in loue with thée my God, & I couet to be alwayes in loue with thée more & more. For in déede thou art ſwéeter thē all honye, more nouriſhyng then all milke, and brighter then all light. And therfore I ſet more by thée, then by all the gold, ſiluer, and precious ſtones in ye world. For I miſlyke all that euer I haue to do within this world: in reſpect of thy ſwéetneſſe, and in reſpect of ye beawtie of thy houſe which I haue loued. O fire which euer burneſt & neuer goeſt out: O loue which euer gloweſt & neuer cooleſt, inflame me: I ſay inflame me wholly that I may be

wholly in loue with thée. For he loueth thee the leſſe, which loueth any thyng beſides thée, except he loue it for thy ſake. Let me loue thée O Lord, bycauſe thou haſt firſt loued me. Where ſhall I haue wordes to vtter ye ſignes of thy ſingular great loue towardes me, conſidering thine innumerable benefites wherein thou haſt brought me vp from the begynning? namely euē from the benefite of the creation, when at the firſt beginnyng thou madeſt me of nothyng after thine owne Image, in honoring and aduauncing me among the creatures whiche thou madeſt, and innoblyng me with the light of thy countenaunce, whiche thou imprintedſt vpon the lampe of my

hart, thereby diſſeueryng me as well from ſenſible as from ſenſeleſſe creatures, and abaſing me but litle beneath the aungelles. And yet was all this but a ſmall matter in the ſight of thy Godhead. For without ceaſſing thou haſt dayly nouriſhed me with the ſingular and excéeding great ſtore of thy benefites: and thou haſt as it were ſuckled & ſtrēgthned me thy litle tēder babe with the teates of thy comfort. For to the intent that I ſhould wholly ſerue thée, thou haſt appointed all thy creatures to ſerue me.
               
               
                  That God hath put all thinges vnder the ſeruice of man.
                  
                     THou haſt put all thynges vnder mās féete, to the end that man alone ſhould wholly be ſubiect vnto thée. And to the end that mā ſhould be wholly thine, thou haſt made man Lord of all thy workes. For thou haſt created all outward thynges for his body: his body, for his ſoule: and his ſoule for thée: that he might ſerue thée onely, & loue thée onely, poſſeſſing thee to his comfort, and all inferiour thynges for his ſeruauntes. For what ſoeuer is conteined vnder the cope of heauen, is inferiour vnto mās ſoule, which was made to inherite the ſouerein goodneſſe aboue, and to become happy by poſſeſſyng it. Whereunto if he ſticke faſt, he ſhall ſurmount the néede of all

the inferiour thynges which are chaungeable, and in euerlaſtyng immortalitie quietly behold the ſouerein maieſtie, wherof he repreſenteth ye image. Thē ſhall he enioy thoſe excellent good thinges in the Lordes houſe, in compariſon wherof, all the thynges that we ſée, are accounted as nothing. Thoſe be the thinges whiche no eye hath ſene, nor eare heard, nor hart of man conceiued, whiche God hath prepared for them that loue him. And truly Lord, theſe thinges wilt thou giue vnto my ſoule. With theſe dooſt thou (which loueſt mens ſoules,) dayly glad the harts of thy ſeruants. But why wonder I at theſe things my Lord God? Thou inhonoreſt thine owne image and

thyne owne likeneſſe wherunto they were created. For to the end our body (though it be yet corruptible & bace) might ſée: thou haſt giuē vs the light of the ſkye by the hand of thine vnwéeriable ſeruauntes the noone, who accordyng to thy commaundement do continuall ſeruice day and night to thy children. To the intent it might breath, thou haſt graunted vs the pure ayre. To the intent it might heare, thou haſt giuen vs the diuerſitie of ſoundes. To the end it might ſmell, thou haſt giuen vs the ſwéetneſſe of ſentes. To the end it might taſt, thou haſt giuen vs the qualities of ſauours. To the end it might féele, thou haſt giuen vs the ſubſtaunces of all bodily things. To

helpe him in his neceſſities, thou haſt giuen him bearyng beaſtes. To refreſh him with all, thou haſt beſtowed vpon him the foules of the ayre, and the fiſhes of the ſea, & the frutes of the earth. For euery ſore or diſeaſe of hys, thou haſt created medicine and ſalue out of the earth. And for euery ſeuerall euill, thou haſt prepared a ſeuerall remedy to incounter it, bycauſe thou art mercyfull and full of compaſſion, and thou our potter knoweſt of what metal we be made, and how that all of vs are as clay in thy hand.
               
               
                  That the greatneſſe of the heauenly wiſedome is coniectured by the conſideration of the temporall benefites.
                  
                     O Let thy great mercy be opened vnto me: ſhine vpon me yet more with thy light I beſeech thée, that it may be the more opened vnto me. For by theſe leaſt thyngs, we comprehend thy great thynges: and by theſe viſible thynges, we cōprehend thyne inuiſible thynges O holy Lord God, our good maker. For if thou ſend ſo great and ſo innumerable benefites vnto me for this baſe & corruptible body of myne, from the ſkye and the ayre, from the land and the Sea, from light and darkneſſe, from heate and ſhadow, from dew and rayne, from winde and ſhowres, from foules and fiſhes, frō beaſtes and trées, by diuerſitie of herbes & thinges that grow vpon the earth, and by

the ſeruice of all thy creatures ſeruyng our turnes by courſe in their ſeaſons, to eaſe vs of our weerineſſe: Howe excellent I pray thée, and how great and innumerable ſhal theſe good things be, which thou haſt prepared for them that loue thée, in that heauenly realme, where we ſhall ſée thée face to face? If thou do ſo much for vs in priſon, what wilt thou do in thy palace? Great and innumerable are thy workes O Lord thou kyng of heauen. For ſith that all theſe thynges be excéedyng good and pleaſant, which thou haſt deliuered to good men and bad men together in cōmon: what maner of things ſhal thoſe be, which yu haſt layd vp in ſtore for good men onely? If the giftes

be ſo ſundry and ſo innumerable, which thou dealeſt now as well to thy foes as thy frendes: How great and innumerable, how ſwéete and delightfull ſhall thoſe be, which thou wilt deale onely to thy frendes? If thou giue ſo great ſolace in this time of mournyng: how great ioyes wilt thou giue in the day of weddyng. If our priſon conteyne ſo many delectable thinges: how much more delectable thyngs conteineth our fathers houſe? O God, no eye without thée hath ſéene ye thinges that thou haſt prepared for them that loue thée. For accordyng to the manifoldneſſe of thy mighty workes, ſo alſo is the great aboū
                     daunce of thy ſwéetneſſe, whiche thou kéepeſt in ſtore for thē that

loue thée. For great art thou O Lord my God, yea vnmeaſurable art thou, and there is no end of thy greatneſſe, nor number of thy wiſedome, nor meaſure of thy mercy: neither is there end, number, or meaſure of thy bounteouſneſſe. But lyke as thou thy ſelfe art greate, ſo are thy rewardes great. For thou thy ſelfe art both the price and the reward of all thy lawfull combaters.
               
               
                  That the ſweetneſſe of God taketh away all the preſent bitterneſſe of the world.
                  LOrd God which art the ſanctifier of thy Saintes, theſe are thy great benefites wherewith thou wilt reléeue the want

of thy hungry children. For thou art the hope of the hopeleſſe, the comfort of the comfortleſſe, and the crown of hope bedecked with glory, whiche is prepared for thē that get the vpper hand. Thou art the euerlaſtyng ſuffiſance, whiche ſhalbe giuen to the hungry. Thou art the endleſſe ſolace whiche giueſt thy ſelfe to them onely that deſpiſe the ſolace of this world for thy eternall ſolace ſake. For they that haue their comfort here, are vnworthy of thy comfort. But ſuch as are turmoyled here, are cōforted at thy hand, and ſuch as be partakers of thy ſufferaunces, ſhall alſo be partakers of thy comfortes. For no man can haue ſolace in both the worldes, neither can a man

ioy both here and in the world to come: but he muſt be fayne to for go the one, who ſoeuer will be owner of the other. When I conſider theſe thynges O Lorde my comforter, my hart refuſeth to haue ſolace in this world, to the intēt it may be thought worthy of thy euerlaſting ſolace. For of good right ought he to forgo thée, who ſoeuer hath choſen to ſolace hym ſelfe in any other thyng more then in thée. And I beſéech thée O ſouerein truth, by thy ſelfe I beſéech thée, ſuffer me not to ſolace my ſelfe in any vayne ſolace. But I aſke of thée, yt all things may be bitter to me, and that thou alone mayſt ſéeme ſweete to my ſoule: for thou art the ineſtimable ſwéetnes, wherby

all bitter thynges are made ſweete. For thy ſwéetneſſe made euen the ſtones of the brooke ſwéete vnto Stephē. Thy ſwéetneſſe made the gréedyron ſweete to ſaint Laurence. By reaſon of thy ſwéetnes, the Apoſtles went away reioyſing from the counſell of the Iewes, for that they had bene counted worthy to ſuffer reproche for thy names ſake. Saint Andrew went quietly and ioyfully to the croſſe, bycauſe he haſted to thy ſwéetnes. This thy ſwéetnes did ſo repleniſh the very chief of thyne Apoſtles, that to come vnto it, the one choſe the galowes of the croſſe, and the other was not afrayd to lay down his head to haue it ſtriken of. To buy this withall, Bartlemewe

gaue his owne ſkinne. Alſo that he might taſt this, Iohn drunke vp a cup of poyſon vnfearefully. Aſſoone as Peter had taſted hereof, by and by forgettyng all inferiour thinges, he cryed out like a drunkenman, ſaying: Lord, it is good beyng here, let vs make vs thrée tentes here, and let vs dwel here and behold thée ſtill: for we want nothing els. It ſuffiſeth vs to looke vpon thée Lord, I ſay it ſuffiſeth vs if we may haue our fill of ſo great ſwéetnes. For Peter had taſted but one drop of that ſwéetnes, & yet he lothed all other ſwéetneſſe. What thinkeſt thou he would haue ſayd, if he had taſted the great aboundance of that ſwéetneſſe of thy Godhead, which thou haſt layd vp for

them that feare thée? This vnſpeakeable ſwéetneſſe, was alſo taſted by that virgine of whom we read, that ſhe went to priſon as ioyfull and triumphyng, as if ſhe had bene bidden to a feaſt. Hereof alſo (as I trow) had he taſted whiche ſayd: Lord, how great is the aboundance of thy ſwéetneſſe whiche thou haſt horded vp for them that feare thée? And ſo had he which incouraged men, ſaying: Taſt ye and ſée ye how that the Lord is ſwéete. For this is that bleſſedneſſe O Lord our God, whiche we looke to receiue of thy gift, for whiche we ſerue thée in continuall warfare, and for which we be killed vnto thée all the day lōg, that we may liue vnto thée in thy life.
               
               
                  
                  That all our truſt, and all the longing of our hart ought to be to Godward.
                  LOrd which art the wayting of Iſraell, & the deſire where after our hart doth dayly long, make haſt and forflow thou not. Vp, hye thée apace, & come, that thou mayſt lead vs out of this priſon, to giue prayſe vnto thy name, and to glory in thy light. Open thine eares to the ſhréekes and teares of thy fatherleſſe children which cry vnto thée, ſaying: Our father, giue vs this day our dayly bread, that we may walke in the ſtrength thereof day and night, vntill we come to thy holy hill of Oreb. And I ſilie ſoule among the litle ones of thy houſehold

O God my father and my ſtrength, when ſhall I come and ſtand in thy preſence, that as I now do prayſe thée for a tyme, ſo I may from thence forth prayſe thée for euer? Happy ſhall I be, if I be once admitted to the beholdyng of thy brightneſſe. Who will do ſo much for me, as to get me leaue at thy hand to come to this point? I knowe Lorde, I know and cōfeſſe, that I am vnworthy to enter vnder thy roofe: but yet giue me leaue for thyne owne honours ſake, and confoūd not thy ſeruaunt which truſteth in thée. For who ſhall enter into thy Sanctuarie to conſider thy mightie power, except thou open it vnto him? And who ſhall open it, if thou ſhet it? For if thou pull

downe, there is none that can build vp: and if thou ſhet vp a man, there is none that can let him out. If thou hold the waters at a ſtay, all ſhalbe dryed vp: & if thou let them go, they ſhall ouerturne the earth. If thou bring all thinges which yu haſt made, vnto nothyng, who ſhall gayneſaye thée? But euerlaſtyng is the goodnes of thy mercy, wherby yu haſt made all thyngs that thou lifteſt. Thou O maker of the world haſt created vs, therfore rule vs: thou haſt created vs, & therfore deſpiſe vs not, for we be thy worke. And truly O Lord our God, we ſilie wormes and clay, are not able to enter into thine euerlaſtyngnes, vnleſſe thou which haſt made all of nothyng, do lead vs in.
               
               
                  
                  That our welfare commeth of God.
                  ANd I the worke of thy handes proteſt vnto thée in thy feare, that my truſt is not in myne owne bow, nor that myne owne ſword ſhall ſaue me: but thy right hand, and thyne arme, and the light of thy countenance. Otherwiſe I ſhould deſpayre, but that thou which haſt created me art my hope, bicauſe thou forſakeſt not thē that truſt in thée. For yu our Lord God art ſwéete and long ſufferyng, and ordereſt all things in mercy. If we ſinne, we be none of thyne, bycauſe we be out of thy bookes. But we be all of vs as a leafe, and all men liuyng are but vanitie, and our

life vpon earth is but a blaſt. Be not angrie with vs if we thy fōdlynges fall, for thou O Lord our God dooſt know what metall we be made of. O God which art of ineſtimable power, wilt thou ſhewe thy force agaynſt a leafe that is toſſed with the wynde? or wilt thou folow vpō dry ſtubble? Wilt thou O euerlaſtyng kyng of Iſraell, wilt thou condemne a dogge? wilt thou cōdemne a flea? Lord we haue heard of thy mercyfulneſſe, how that thou makeſt not death, nor delighteſt in the loſſe of them that dye. For this cauſe Lord we pray thée ſuffer not the thing which thou madeſt not, to haue dominion ouer the creature that thou madeſt. For if thou be ſorie for our damnation,

what letteth thée O Lord which art almighty, that thou ſhouldeſt not alwayes reioyce in our ſaluation? Thou canſt ſaue me if thou liſt: but I cannot ſaue my ſelfe, would I neuer ſo fayne. Great is ye multitude of my miſeries within me. For why? to will, is preſent with me: but I finde not how to bring to paſſe. To will the thyng that is good, I am not able, except thou will it: neither cā I do that I would do, except thy power do ſtrengthen me. Agayne, that which I cā do, of tymes I haue no will to do, vnleſſe thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen. And though I both wil and can: yet wote I not how to do, vnleſſe thy wiſedome inlighten me. Yea and although

ſometymes I haue knowledge ioyned both with will and with abilitie: yet doth my wiſedome paſſe away imperfect & emptie, vnleſſe I be helped by thy true wiſedome. All thinges are in thy will, and there is none that can reſiſte thy will O Lorde of all thinges, which haſt the ſouereintie ouer all fleſh, and dooſt what thou liſteſt in heauen, in earth, in the Sea, and in all déepe places. Therfore let thy wil be done in vs, vpon whē thy name is called, ſo as this noble handiworke of thine periſh not, whiche thou haſt created to ſhine own honor. And what man is he (if he were borne of a womā) that liueth and ſhall not ſée death, or can deliuer his owne ſoule from the hand of

hell, except thou onely which art the liuely way of all life, wherby all things liue, do reſcue him?
               
               
                  ¶That mās will is vnable to doe good workes, without the grace of God.
                  I Haue euen now confeſſed vnto thée that thou art the ſtay of my lyfe O Lord my God the ſtrēgth of my welfare. The time hath bene that I haue truſted in myne owne ſtrength, which notwithſtandyng was no ſtrength. And ſo whē I wold haue runne, where I thought my ſelfe to ſtād faſteſt, there did I moſt fall, and was rather caſt behynde then ſet foreward: and the thyng that I thought to catch, was further and

further of frō me. So tryeſt thou my ſtrēgth by many like things. Now know I that thou haſt inlightened me. For looke what I thought my ſelfe beſt able to do, that was I euer leaſt able to do of my ſelfe. For I ſayd, I will do this, and I will go through with that: but whē it came to ye point, I could doe none of them both. When I had a will to doe it, I wanted ableneſſe: and when I was able, I wanted will, bycauſe I truſted to myne own ſtrength. But now I acknowledge vnto thee O Lord my God the father of heauen and earth, that it is not in mans power to ſtrengthē him ſelfe, leaſt the fooliſh preſumptuouſneſſe of any fleſh ſhould boaſt it ſelfe before thée. For man is

not able to be willing to do that he can, nor to can the thyng that he is willing to do, or to know the thing that he both would and could do: but rather thou art he that guideſt mens ſteppes, I ſay the ſteppes of them whiche acknowledge thē ſelues to be guided, not by them ſelues, but by thée. We beſéech thée therfore O Lord by the bowels of thy mercy, that thou wilt ſaue that which thou haſt created, for if thou wilt thou cāſt ſaue vs, and in thy will reſteth ye power of our ſaluation.
               
               
                  ¶Of Gods olde benefites.
                  LOrd remember thyne olde mercyfulneſſe, wherby thou

haſt preuented vs with thy ſwéet bleſſinges euen from the begynning. For before that I ye ſonne of thy hādmayd was borne, thou O Lord my hope while I hāged yet vppon my mothers breſtes, didſt preuent me, making my way for me wherein to walke, that I might come to the glory of thy houſe. Before thou didſt ſhape me in my mothers wōbe, thou kneweſt me, and before I was borne thou didſt foreordeine of me what ſoeuer pleaſed thée. How and what things are written of me in the ſecret booke of thy Conſiſtorie, truly I know not: and therefore I am ſore afrayde. But thou knoweſt it: for what ſoeuer I looke for by ſucceſſion of dayes and tymes a thouſand

yeare hence in this mortall world: that is already done in the ſight of thy euerlaſtingneſſe, and the thing that is to come is already in doyng. Now then for aſmuch as I ſtand in this night of darkneſſe, and know not theſe thinges: feare and trembling are come vpon me, bycauſe I ſée that many daungers preace vpon me on all ſides, and many enemyes hunt after me, and I am beſet round about with an innumerable multitude of miſeries in this life. And if thy helpe were not preſēt with me in theſe ſo great miſeries, I ſhould deſpaire. But I haue a great hope of thée O moſt méeke prince my God: and the conſidering of the multitude of thy compaſſions chéereth my

hart. The former ſignes of thy mercy whiche preuented me before I was borne, and haue now ſpecially ſhyned out vpon me, do aſſure my hope of the better and perfecter rewardes of thy goodneſſe, whiche thou reſerueſt for thy frendes, that I may reioyſe in thée O Lorde my God, with the holy and liuely ioye wherewith thou alwayes chéereſt vp my youth.
               
               
                  Of Gods predeſtination and foreknowledge.
                  TEache me O bottomleſſe déepe, O wiſedome the creator, whiche haſt counterpeyſed the moūtaines & hils by weight, and hāged the maſſe of the earth

by thrée fingers in the balance: hale vp the lumpe of this groſſeneſſe whiche I beare about me, vnto thée by thy thrée vnſene fingers, that I may ſée and know how wonderful thou art ouer all the earth. O moſt auncient light which ſhoneſt before all light in the hill of thy tymeleſſe eternitie, vnto whom all thinges lay bare and open before they were made. O light whiche hateſt all ſpottineſſe, in aſmuch as thou art moſt cleane and ſpotteleſſe, what delight canſt thou haue in man? What agréemēt is there betwen light and darkneſſe? For what is there in man, that may delight thée? Where canſt thou make thée a méete ſanctuarie for thy maieſtie, that thou mayſt enter

into it, and take thy delight and pleaſure in the ſame? A cleane parlour becommeth thée O clenſing vertue, whiche canſt not be ſene, and much leſſe poſſeſſed, but of cleane hartes. But where is there in man ſo cleane a temple, as may receiue thée the ruler of the world? Who can make that cleane, which is conceiued of vncleane ſéede? Truly none but yu, who onely art cleane. For who cā be made cleane by that which is vncleane? For accordyng to the law which thou gaueſt to our fathers vpō the mountaine burning with fire, and in the cloud that couered the darkſome water, what ſoeuer an vncleane perſō toucheth, becōmeth vncleane. But all of vs are as a defileth

cloth, comming of a corrupt and vncleane maſſe, and we beare in our foreheades the ſpottes of our vncleanneſſe, which we be not able to hide, ſpecially from thée who ſéeſt all thinges. Wherfore we cannot be cleane, except thou make vs cleane, who onely art cleane. And of vs ſonnes of men thou makeſt thoſe cleane, whom it pleaſeth thée to dwell in, whō by the vnapprochable and ſecret depth of ye incōprehenſible iudgemētes of thy wiſedome, alwayes rightful though vneſpiable, thou haſt (wtout any deſert of theirs) predeſtinated before the world, called out of the world, iuſtified in the world, and wilt glorifie thē after the world. But thou doeſt not this vnto all men, wherat all

the wiſe mē of the earth 
                        〈◊〉
                      maruell and are abaſhed. Yea and euen I O Lord, when I bethinke me of it, am afrayde and amazed at the depth of the riches of thy wiſedome and knowledge wherunto I cannot reach, and at the incomprehenſible iudgements of thy Iuſtice, for that of one ſelfe ſame péece of clay thou makeſt ſome veſſels vnto euerlaſting honor, and otherſome vnto euerlaſtyng ſhame. Therfore whō thou haſt choſen to thy ſelfe out of the multitude to be thy holy temple, thē dooſt thou make cleane, pouryng out cleane water vpon thē: the names and number of whom thou knoweſt, who onely telleſt the nūber of the ſtarres, and calleſt thē all by their names. Who

alſo are written in the booke of lyfe, who cannot in any wiſe periſh, and vnto whom all thinges worke to the beſt, yea euen their ſinnes. For when they fall, they be not brooſed, bycauſe thou putteſt thy hād vnder them, and kéepeſt all the bones of them, ſo as not one of them is broken. But moſt miſerable is ye death of ſinners, I meane of thoſe ſinners whom thou haſt foreknowē vnto eternall death before yu madeſt heauen and earth accordyng to ye great depth of thy ſecret (howbeit alwayes rightfull) iudgementes: the number of whoſe names and of their lewd deſeruinges is with thée, which reckeneſt the nūber of the ſand of the Sea, and haſt meaſured the bottom

of the bottomles pit: whom thou haſt left vp to their owne vncleaneſſe and vnto whom all thinges worke to the worſt, and euen their prayer is turned into ſinne: ſo yt if they ſhould clymbe vp into the ayre, and aduaunce their head aboue the cloudes, yea and build their neſt among the ſtarres of the ſkye: yet ſhall they bee deſtroyed in the ende as a dunghill.
               
               
                  Of ſuch as firſt are righteous, and afterward become wicked, and contrariwyſe.
                  GReat are theſe thy iudgementes O Lord God, thou righteous & mighty iudge, which

iudgeſt vprightly, & dooſt things yt are déepe & vnſearchable. Which when I conſider, all my bones quake: for of all men liuing vpō ye earth, there is none of vs ſure to ſerue thee deuoutly & purely in feare all the dayes of our lyfe, nor to ioy in the wt reuerence, ſo as our ſeruice may bee without dread, & our ioy wtout trembling. He yt putteth on armour may not glory as he yt putteth it of: for before thee may no fleſh glory, but muſt quake & tremble at thy preſēce. For we haue ſéene O Lord, & we haue heard of our fathers, (which thing I cānot thinke vpō without great dread, nor ſpeake of without great ſhudderyng) yt many haue heretofore clymbed after a ſort vp to ye ſkyes, & built

their neſt among ye ſtarres, & yet haue afterward falne downe euē into hell, and their ſoules haue bene forehardened with euilles. We haue ſene ſtarres fall from heauen by force of the ſtroke of ye dragons tayle: and them that lay in the duſt of the earth, wonderfully mounted vp at the preſent helpe of thy hand O Lord. We haue ſene the liuyng dye, and the dead riſe from death, & them that walked among Gods children in the middes of firie ſtones, waſh away to nothyng like a péece of clay. We haue ſéene darkneſſe quēch light, & light procede out of darkneſſe. For publicanes & harlots go before ye natiue people into the kyngdome of heauen, & the childrē of the kingdome are caſt

out into vtter darknes. And why commeth all this to paſſe, but bycauſe they be mounted vp into that hill, whereinto the firſt of their race went vp an Aungell and came downe a deuill? Now thē looke whom thou haſt predeſtinated, them haſt thou alſo called, & ſanctified and clenſed, that they may bee a méete dwellyng place for thy maieſtie, with whō and in whō is thy holy & cleane delight, in whom thou haſt pleaſure & makeſt their youth chéerefull, dwelling with them in their remembraunce, ſo as they be thy holy tēple, which is a great dignitie and commendation of our manhode.
               
               
                  That the faythfull mās ſoule is Gods ſanctuarie.
                  
                     THe ſoule whiche thou haſt created, not of thyne owne ſubſtaunce but by thy word, nor of the ſubſtaunce of any of the foure elementes, but of nothing: which truly is reaſonable, vnderſtandyng, ſpirituall, euerlyuing, and euer mouyng: & whiche thou haſt ſealed, marked with ye light of thy countenaūce, and halowed by the power of thy waſhyng, is ſo made capable of thy maieſtie, as it may be filled by thée onely and by none other. And when it hath thée, thē hath it the full luſt, & there remaineth not any thyng els that it can deſire outwardly. But as long as it deſireth any thyng outwardly, it is manifeſt that it hath not thée inwardly: for be thou once had, there is not

any thing more to be wiſhed for. For ſith thou art the ſouereine good, yea and all ye good that may be: there is no more for it to deſire, bycauſe he poſſeſſeth thée which art all the good. Now if he deſire not the whole good, it reſteth that he deſireth ſomewhat which is not the whole good, and therfore alſo not ye ſouerein good: & ſo conſequently not God, but rather a creature. But if he long after a creature, he muſt néedes be euer hungry ſtill, bycauſe that although he atteine his deſire of the creatures, yet it abydeth vnſatiſfied ſtill, in aſmuch as there is nothyng that cā fill it, but thou vnto whoſe image it is created. And thou filleſt them that deſire nothyng but thée, & thou makeſt

them worthy of thee, holy, bleſſed, vndefiled, and Gods frendes, who count all thinges as dung, that they may winne thée onely. For this is the bleſſednes which thou haſt beſtowed vppon man, this is the honor wherwith thou haſt innobled him among all thy creatures and aboue them, that thy name might be wonderfull ouer all the earth. Beholde O moſt high ſouereine good, and almighty Lorde my God, I haue foūd the place where thou dwelleſt, euen in the ſoule which thou haſt created after thyne owne image and likeneſſe, whiche ſéeketh and deſireth none but thée alone: and not in the ſoule that ſéeketh and deſireth thée not.
               
               
                  
                  That God cānot be founde neither by the outward ſenſes nor by the inward wittes.
                  I Haue ſtraied like a loſt ſhepe ſéekyng thée outward whiche art inward. And I haue taken much paine to ſéeke thée without me, & thou dwelleſt within me, at leaſtwiſe if I haue a deſire to thée. I haue gone about ye lanes and ſtréetes of the Citie of this world ſéekyng thée and haue not foūd thée, bycauſe I did amiſſe to ſéeke that thing without, whiche is as within. I ſent abroad all myne outward ſenſes as meſſengers to ſéeke thée, and I foūd thée not, bycauſe I ſought thee amiſſe. For I ſée O my light, my God

which haſt inlightened me I ſée, I did amiſſe to ſéeke thee by thē, for thou art within me & yet they wiſt not where thou cameſt in. For myne eyes ſay, if he haue not ſome colour, he came not in by vs. Mine eares ſay, if he made no noyſe, he came not in by vs. My noſe ſayth, if he had no ſent, he came not in by me. My taſt ſayth, if he had no ſauour, he came not in by me. And my feelyng ſayth, if he be not bodily, aſke not me of any ſuch matter. But none of theſe thinges are in thée my God. For it is neither ſhape of body, nor tēporall beawtie, nor ſhéerneſſe of light, nor colour, nor the melodie of ſweete ſonges and pleaſaunt ſoundyng tunes, nor the ſentes of floures,

perfumes, oyntmētes, or ſpyces, nor honny or manna delightfull to the taſt, nor any of the thinges that men loue to touch and imbrace, nor any maner of thyng ſubiect 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſenſes, whiche I ſéeke when I ſéeke my God. Fye of it, that I ſhould take for my God any of theſe thynges whiche are comprehended euen of the ſenſes of brute beaſtes. Truly when I ſéeke my God, I ſéeke a certeine light aboue all lightes, whiche no eye can comprehend: a certeine voyce aboue all voyces, which no eare cā conceiue: a certeine ſent aboue all ſentes, which no noſe can atteine to: a certeine ſwéetneſſe aboue all ſwéetneſſe, whiche no mouth can taſt of: and a certein imbracing

aboue all imbracing, which no bodily féelyng cā take hold of. This lyght ſhyneth where no place is to hold it: this voyce ſoū
                     deth where no ayre is to carie it: this ſent yeldeth 
                        〈◊〉
                      where no blaſt is to ſhed it: this ſauour yeldeth ſauourines where as is no féedyng: & this imbracing is felt where no armes are pluckt a ſū
                     der. It is euē my God, and there ſhall none other be made account of in compariſon of him. This is it that I ſéeke, when I ſéeke my God. This is it that I loue whē I loue my God. To late haue I loued thée O beawtie ſo old and ſo freſh, to late haue I loued thée. Thou wart within and I without, and there I ſought thée, & I ilfauoredly ruſhed agaynſt theſe

goodly thinges whiche thou haſt made. Thou wart with me, and yet I was not with thee. Theſe thynges held me farre from thée, which could not be without thee. For I went all aboutes ſéekyng thee, and forſakyng my ſelfe for all thinges. I aſked the earth if it were my God, and it told me, no: and all thinges in it did verifie the ſame. I aſked the Sea and the great deepes and all the créepyng thinges in them: and they aunſwered, we be not thy God, ſéeke him aboue vs. I aſked the wyndie aire, and the whole ayre with all the dwellers therin ſayd vnto me, Anaximenes is deceiued, for I am not thy God. I aſked the ſkye, the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, neither

are we thy God, ſayd they. Then ſayd I to all the thinges that ſtād about me at ye doores of my fleſh, Tell me what you knowe of my God, tell me ſomewhat of him: and they cryed all with a loude voyce, it is he that hath made vs. Agayne I ſpake to the maſſe of the whole world, ſaying: Tell me if thou bee my God or no? And it aunſwered with a mightie voyce, I am not he, but I am by him: he whom thou ſéekeſt in me, euen he made me: aboue me muſt thou ſéeke for him yt made me and ruleth me. The aſkyng of the creatures is the déepe conſideryng of them, and their aunſweryng is theyr auouchement concerning God: for all thynges cry out, it is God that hath made

vs. And (as the Apoſtle ſayd) Gods inuiſible things are vnderſtode by his viſible thinges which are beheld from the creatiō of the world. Then came I agayne to my ſelfe, & entered into my ſelfe, and ſayd to my ſelfe. What art thou? and I aunſwered, a man reaſonable & mortall. And I begā to boult out what that ſhould be, and I ſayd: from whence is this maner of wight O Lord my God? from whence is it, but of thée? Thou madeſt me, and not I my ſelfe. Who art thou? Thou art he by whom I liue, thou art he by whō all thinges liue. Who art thou? Thou art the Lord my true and onely God, almightie, euerlaſting, incomprehenſible, & infinite, who liueſt euermore &

nothyng dyeth in thée. For thou art immortall, dwelling in euer laſtingneſſe, wonderfull to the eyes of the aungels, vnutterable, vnſearchable, and vnable to be named. The liuyng & true God, terrible, ſtrong, beginnyngleſſe and endleſſe, the beginnyng and end of all thinges, which art before the foūdations of the world, and before the originals of all ages. Thou art my God and the Lord of all thy creatures with thée ſtand the cauſes of all ſtable thinges, with thée do the originals of all chaungeable thynges abyde vnchaungeable, and with thée do the groundes of all reaſonable, vnreaſonable and temporall things continue euerlaſtingly. My God, tell me thy humble

ſeruaunt, mercifull Lord tell me wretch, tell me for thy mercyes ſake I beſeech thée, from whence is this maner of wight but from thée? Is any man ſuch a workemaiſter as to make him ſelfe? Is beyng and life fetched from any where els then from thée? Art not thou the ſouerein beyng, from whence commeth all being? for what ſoeuer is, it is of thee, and without thée is nothyng. Art not thou the fountaine of lyfe from whence all life floweth? for what ſoeuer liueth, it liueth by thee, & without thée doth nothyng lyue. Then is it thou O Lord whiche haſt made all thinges. Shall I demaunde who hath made me? Thou Lorde haſt made me, for without thee is nothyng made.

Thou art my maker, and I thy worke. I thanke thee my Lord God by whom I liue & by whom all thynges lyue, for thou haſt made me. I thanke thée my creator, for thy hādes haue made me and faſhioned me. I thanke thée my light, bycauſe thou haſt inlightened me and I haue found both thée and my ſelfe. Aſſoone as I found my ſelfe, ſtraightwayes I knewe my ſelfe: Aſſoone as I foūd thée, ſtraightwayes I knew thée: and aſſoone as I knew thée, forthwith thou didſt inlightē me. I thanke thée my light, for that thou haſt inlightened me. What ſayd I? that I knewe thée? Art not thou God incomprehenſible and infinite, the kyng of kynges and Lord of Lordes, who onely

haſt immortalitie, and dwelleſt in vnapprochable light, whiche neuer man ſaw, no nor can ſée? Art not thou the hidden God, of vnſearchable maieſtie, the alonly peruſer and wonderful vewer of thy ſelfe? Who then can know that whiche he neuer ſaw? For thou haſt ſayd in thy truth, man ſhall not ſée me & liue. Thy prophet alſo hath ſayd by thy truth, neuer any man ſaw God. Who then hath knowen that which he neuer ſaw? Alſo thy truth hath ſayd, no mā knoweth the ſonne, but the father, neither knoweth any mā the father but the ſonne. Thyne onely Trinitie, whiche ſurmounteth all knowledge, is knowen fully to none but to thy ſelfe alone. What is it then that

I vayne man haue ſayd, that I know thée? for who knowes thée els ſauyng thy ſelfe? For thou onely O God, in thy moſt holy and heauenly worde art termed almightie, paſſing prayſe worthy, paſſing glorious, paſſing exalted, paſſing high, and paſſing ſubſtantiall, bycauſe thou art diſcerned to be aboue all thynges that can be imagined to be, whether they be to be conceiued in vnderſtandyng or to be perceiued by the ſenſes: & aboue all names that are named, not onely in this world, but alſo in the world to come, beyond all that is, or can be deuiſed to be. For truly, aboue the reach of all reaſon, vnderſtā
                     dyng and being, dooſt thou by thy ſubſtantiall and ſecret Godhead

dwel vnapprochably and vnſearchably in thy ſelfe, whereas is light vnapprochable, & brightnes vnſearchable, incomprehēſible, & vnſpeakable, wherūto no brightneſſe may come neare, bycauſe it is certeinly vnable to be beheld, vnable to be ſeene, aboue reaſon, aboue vnderſtandyng, aboue acces, aboue all chaūge, & aboue all partnerſhyp, whiche neuer any wight neither man nor aungell hath throughly ſene, nor can ſée. This is thy heauen O Lord, this is thy heauen ſo faire ingrauen, the light ſo paſſing priuie, ſo paſſing vnderſtāding, ſo paſſing reaſon, & ſo paſſing all that is: wherof it is ſayd, the heauen of heauens is the Lordes. The heauen of heauens, in compariſon wherof

all other heauēs are but earth, bycauſe it is paſſing wonderfully heaued vp aboue all heauens. In compariſon wherof euen the very firie heauen it ſelfe is but earth: for this is the heauen of heauens that is reſerued to the Lorde, bycauſe it is knowen to none but to the Lord. Vnto this heauen came neuer none but he that came downe from heauen: for no mā knowes the father ſauing the ſonne, and the ſpirite of them both. Neither doth any mā know the ſonne, ſauyng the father & the ſpirite that procéedeth from them both. The Trinitie is fully knowē to none, but onely to thy ſelfe O holy Trinitie, O paſſyng wonderfull Trinitie, ſurmountyng all vtterance, beyond

all ſearchyng, aboue all approchyng, ouer incōprehenſible, ouer vnconceiuable, farre aboue all thinges that be, far paſſing all vnderſtāding, all reaſō, all reach and all beyng of the mindes that are aboue heauen: which it is not poſſible either to vtter, or to conceiue, or to vnderſtand or to diſcerne, no not euen to the aungels that behold it. How then come I by the knowledge of thee which art higheſt aboue all the earth & aboue all heauens? whō neither the Cherubins nor ye Seraphins do know perfectly, but are fayne to ſhadow their faces with their wynges, when they looke vppon him that ſittes vpon the high and ſtately throne, crying & ſaying. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of

hoſtes, the whole earth is full of thy glorie. The prophet was abaſhed & ſayd: Alas I am toungtyde, for I am a man of vncleane lippes. My hart was afrayd and ſayd, wo is me that I held not my toung, bycauſe I am a man of vncleane lippes. But I ſayd I knew thée. Neuertheleſſe Lord, wo be to them that are toūgtyde when they ſhould ſpeake of thée, for there be many that be to full of toung without thée. And therfore O Lord my God I will not hold my peace, for yu haſt made me, and inlightened me, wherby I haue found my ſelfe & knowen thée, bycauſe thou ſhyneſt vppon me. But in what wiſe haue I knowen thée? I knew thée in thy ſelfe. I haue knowen thée, not as

thou art to thy ſelfe ward, but as thou art to me ward: and yet not without thy ſelfe, but in thy ſelf: for thou art the light that hath inlightened me. For no man knowes thee as thou art in thy ſelfe: but as thou art to me ward by thy grace, thou art knowen euē vnto me. But what art thou to me ward? mercyfull Lord, tell me thy ſilie ſeruaunt, for thy mercyes ſake tell me what thou art to me warde? Say vnto my ſoule, I am thy welfare: hyde not thy face from me, leaſt I dye. Giue me leaue to ſpeake before thy mercy, ſuffer me that am but earth and duſt, to ſpeake before thy mercy, for great is thy mercy towardes me. For I that am but duſt and aſhes will ſpeake to my

God. Tell me thy ſillie ſeruaūt, tell me thy rufull creature, tell me for thy mercyes ſake what yu art to me ward. Thou haſt thundered from aboue with a great noyſe into the inward eare of my hart, and haſt broken my deafnes, and I haue heard thy voyce, and thou haſt inlightened my blindneſſe, and I haue ſene thy light, and haue knowē that thou art my God. And therfore haue I ſayd, I knew thée, bycauſe I knew that yu art my God. Yea I know thée to be the onely true God, and thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſt whom thou haſt ſent. The tyme hath bene that I haue not knowē thée. Wo worth that tyme that I knew thée not: wo worth that blindneſſe when I ſaw thée not:

wo worth that deafneſſe when I heard thée not. Blind & deafe as I was, I rā ilfauoredly through the goodly thinges that yu madeſt. And thou wart with me: and yet was not I with thée. For the thinges held me farre from thée, whiche ſhould not haue bene at all if they were not in thée. Thou haſt inlightened me O light of ye world, and I haue ſene thée and loued thée. For no man knoweth thée but he that ſées thée: and no man ſées thée but he yt loues thée. It was late ere I loued thée thou beawtie ſo old & ſo freſh, it was late ere I loued thée: wo worth the tyme that I loued thée not.
               
               
                  Of the acknowledging of a mās owne vylenes.
                  
                     LOrd who is like vnto thée, yea euen among the Gods? who is like vnto thée, which art of excéeding great holines, dreadfull, prayſe worthy, and a worker of wonders? Long it was ere I knew thée the true light, long it was ere I knew thée. There was a great darke cloud before my fond eyes, ſo as I could not ſée the ſonne of righteouſneſſe, & the light of truth. I like a child of darkneſſe was wrapped in darkneſſe: and bycauſe I knew not ye light, I was in loue with myne owne darkneſſe. For aſmuch as I was blind, I was in loue with my blindneſſe, and by darkneſſe walked into further darkneſſe ſtill. But who brought me out of it, when I like a blind wretch

ſate in darkneſſe and the ſhadow of death? who tooke me by ye hand to leade me out of it? Who is he yt inlightened me? For I ſought not him, but he ſought me: I called not him, but he called me. And who is he? It is euen thou my Lord God, mercyfull, and pitifull, the father of compaſſion and God of all cōfort. It is euen thou my holy Lord God, whom I acknowledge with my whole hart, yeldyng thankes vnto thy name. I ſought not thée, and yet thou ſoughteſt me. I called not vpon thée, & yet thou calledſt me. Yea thou haſt called me by thine own name: with a loude voyce haſt thou thundred down from aboue into the innermore eare of my hart, ſaying: Let there be light:

and there was light, ſo as ye great cloud went away, and the darke miſt that couered mine eyes melted away, and I ſaw thy light & knew thy voyce, and ſaid. Truth Lord, yu art my Lord God that brought me out of darkneſſe and out of the ſhadow of death, & called me into thy wonderful light, and ſo now I ſée, I thanke thée myne inlightener. Then turned I backe and looked vpō the darkneſſe wherin I had bene, and the déepe gulfe wherin I had lyen, & I trembled and was afrayde and ſayd: wo, wo worth the darkneſſe that I had lien in. Wo wo worth the blindneſſe that letted me to ſée the light of heauen. Wo wo worth my former ignoraunce, which letted me to know thée O

Lorde. I thanke thée myne inlightener and deliuerer, for that thou haſt inlightened me and I haue knowen thée. It was late ere I knew thée O aūciēt truth: it was late ere I knew thée O euerlaſtyng truth. Thou wart in light & I in darkneſſe, & therfore I knew thee not. For I could not be inlightened wtout thée, neither is there any light without thée.
               
               
                  ¶A conſideryng of Gods maieſtie.
                  O Holieſt of all holyes, O God of ineſtimable maieſtie, O God of Gods and Lord of Lordes, wonderous, vnſpeakable, vnconceiuable, whō the aungels in heauen are adrad of, whō
                     
all the dominations and thrones do worſhip, at the ſight of whom all powers do tremble, of whoſe mightineſſe and wiſedome there is no comprehending, which haſt founded the world vpō nothyng, and ſhet vp the ſea in the ayre as in a bottle, O moſt almightie, moſt holy, moſt ſtrong, O God of the breath of all fleſh, at whoſe preſence the heauen and earth ſhrinke away, at whoſe becke all the elementes ſubmit them ſelues. Let all creatures worſhyp and glorifie thée. And I the ſonne of thy handmayd do bow downe the necke of my hart by faith vnder the féete of thy maieſtie, yeldyng thée thankes for that thou haſt of thy mercy vouchſaued to inlighten me. O true light, O

holy light, O pleaſaunt light, O excéedyng commendable light, O wonderfull light which inlighteneſt all men that come into this world yea and euen the eyes of the aungels. Beholde, I ſée, I thanke thée for it. Behold, I ſée the light of heauē, the lightſome beames of thy coūtenaūce ſhyne down vpō the eyes of my minde, and cheere vp my bones. O that thy light were perfected in me. Augment if I beſéech thée O author of light. I beſéech thee augment that whiche ſhyneth into me. Let it be inlarged I beſeech thee, let it be inlarged by thée. What is this that I féele? What fire is it that warmeth my hart? What light is it that ſpreaddeth his beames into my hart? O fire

which euermore burneſt and neuer art quenched, kindle me. O light whiche euermore ſhyneſt & neuer art dimmed inlighten me. O would to God I were ſet on fire by thée. O holy fire, how ſwéetly thou burneſt, how ſecretly thou ſhyneſt, how amiably thou warmeſt. Wo be to them yt burne not through thee, wo be to thē yt are not inlightened by thée. O ſoothfaſt light which inlighteneſt the whole world, and whoſe brightnes filleth ye whole world. Wo be to the blynd eyes that ſee not thee, the ſunne that inlighteneth heauen and earth. Wo be to the dazelyng eyes that cannot away with the ſight of thee. Wo be to them that turne not away their eyes from looking vpon vanitie.

For the eyes that are accuſtomed to darkneſſe, are not able to abyde the beames of the ſouerein truth: neither can they that dwell in darkneſſe ſkill how to make account of the light. They ſee nothyng but darkneſſe, they loue nothyng but darkneſſe, they like of nothyng but darknes, and bycauſe they plod on from darkneſſe to darkneſſe, they wote not where they fall. Wretched are they that forgoe they wote not what, & more wretched certeſſe are they that know what they forgo, ſo as they fall with open eyes & go downe alyue into hell. O moſt bleſſed light which canſt not be ſene but of exceeding well cleared eyes. Bleſſed are ye cleane in hart, for they ſhall ſee God. O

clenſing power clenſe thou me & heale myne eyeſight, that I may beholde thee with ſounde eyes, whom none but ſound eyes may behold. O vnapprochable brightneſſe, take away the ſcales of my forgrowen dimſightedneſſe, with the beames of thy inlightenyng, that I may looke vpon thee without dazeling, and ſee thee the better by thy brightneſſe. I thanke thée my light. Lo I ſée. Lord I beſeech thée let myne eyeſight be inlarged by thee. Shore open myne eyes that I may conſider the wonderfull miſteries of thy law who art wonderfull among thy ſaintes. I thanke thee O my light. For loe I ſée, howbeit but through a glaſſe & as in a riddle. But when ſhall I ſée thee face to

face? When ſhall the day of ioy and mirth come, that I may enter into the place of thy wonderfull Tabernacle, euen the houſe of God, there to behold hym that ſees me, face to face, that I may haue my longing to the full.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the longyng and thirſting of the ſoule after God.
                  LIke as the Hert longeth for the ſprynges of waters: ſo longeth my hart for thée O God. My ſoule thirſteth after thée O God whiche art the liuyng welſpryng, when ſhall I come and preaſe into thy preſence? O foū
                     taine of life, O veyne of liuely waters, when ſhall I come out

of this deſert, wayleſſe, and waterleſſe land, vnto the waters of thy ſweetnes? that I may ſée thy power and thy glory and ſtaūche my thirſt with the waters of thy mercy? O Lord the fountaine of life, I am a thirſt, ſatiſfie me. I thirſt Lord, I thirſt after thée the liuyng God, O whē ſhall I come Lorde and ſhew my ſelfe before thy face? Thinke ye that I ſhall ſée that day, I ſay yt day of mirth and gladneſſe, that day which the Lord hath made for vs to be merie and ioyfull therein? O excellēt and faire day, which knoweſt none euentyde, nor haſt any Sunne goyng downe, wherin I ſhall heare the voyce of prayſe, wherin I ſhall heare the voyce of gladnes & thankeſgiuyng, wherin

I ſhall heare it ſayd vnto me, Enter thou into endleſſe ioy in ye houſe of ye Lord thy God, where be thinges great, vnſearchable, & wōderfull, that cānot be nōbered. Enter thou into ioy voyde of heauines, which conteineth endleſſe mirth: whereas ſhalbe all goodnes & no euil: whereas ſhalbe all that thou wouldeſt, & nothyng yt thou wouldeſt not. There ſhalbe ye liuely life, ye ſweete life, thee amiable life, & the life that would do a mā good to be alwayes thinking of it. There ſhalbe none enemy to aſſault: There ſhall not be reſt at ſome tymes & vnreſt at other tymes: but there ſhalbe ſouerein reſt, aſſured ſafety, vnimpeached quietnes, quiet mirth, ioyfull happineſſe, happy euerlaſtingnes,

euerlaſting bleſſednes, and bleſſed Trinitie, and vnitie of Trinitie and Godhead of vnitie, and bleſſed beholding of the ſame Godhead, which is the ioy of thy Lord God. O ioy ouer ioyful, O ioy ſurmoūting all ioyes, without whiche there is no ioy, when ſhall I enter into thée, that I may ſée my God whiche dwelleth in thée? I ſhal go thether and behold this great ſight. What is it that holdes me backe? Wo is me that my ſoiornyng is prolonged. Wo is me, how long ſhall it be ſayd vnto me, wayt and wayt agayne. And now, to what purpoſe is my wayting? My Lord God, do we not wayt for the Sauiour our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to repaire our baſe bodies vnto the

likenes of his glorious body. We wayt for the Lord whē he ſhould come from the bridhouſe to fetch vs into his wedding. Come Lord and tary not. Come Lord Ieſus Chriſt, come viſite vs in peace. Come leade vs priſoners out of priſon, that we may reioyſe before thée with a perfect hart. Come our Sauiour. Come thou that art longed for of all natiōs, ſhew thy countenaunce vnto vs and we ſhalbe ſafe. Come my light and my redéemer: take my ſoule out of priſon, that it may giue prayſe vnto thy holy name. How long ſhall I be toſſed in the waues of my mortalitie, crying vnto thee Lord, and thou heareſt me not? Lord heare me how I cry vnto thée out of this howge

ſea, and bring me to the hauen of endleſſe bleſſe. Happy are they O God which are conueyed out of this Sea, and haue obteined to arriue at thée the ſafeſt harborough of all hauons. O happie are they in déede, whiche are eſcaped already from ſea to ſhore, from baniſhmēt home into their owne countrey, and from priſon into a palace, enioying their wiſhed reſt. Bleſſed are they that already haue gayned ye garlād of endleſſe glory which they ſought for here by many tribulations, and ioy in happy mirth for euer: O bleſſed are they in déede, O trebble and foure tymes bleſſed are they, whiche being already quite rid of all miſeries, haue obteined to come to the kingdome

of beawtifulneſſe, and are aſſured of their vnapparable glorie. O euerlaſtyng kyngdome, O kingdome of all worldes, wherin is the light that neuer faileth, and the peace of God which paſſeth all vnderſtanding: wherein the ſoules of holy folke doe reſt, where euerlaſtyng ioye is vpon their heades, where they obteine mirth and gladneſſe, and from whence all ſorrow and ſighing is fled. O Lorde how glorious a kingdome is it, wherein all holy folkes reigne with thée, clothed with light as with a garmēt, hauing crownes of precious ſtones vpon their heades. O kingdome of euerlaſting bliſfulneſſe, where thou O Lorde the hope of the Saintes and the garland of their

glory art ſéene of thē face to face, gladding them on all ſides with thy peace, whiche paſſeth all vnderſtanding. There is ioy endleſſe, mirth ſorrowleſſe, health griefleſſe, way without labour, light without darknes, life without death, all good without any euill: where youth neuer waxeth old, where life neuer weareth out, where beawtie neuer decayeth, where loue neuer cooleth, where health neuer appayreth, where mirth neuer abateth, where is neuer felt any payne, where is neuer heard any groning, where is neuer ſéene any ſadnes, where ioy is euer, where is no euill to be feared bycauſe ye ſouerein goodneſſe is had there in poſſeſſion, which is to behold alwayes

the face of the Lord God of hoſtes. Happie therefore are thoſe that already haue eſcaped the ſhypwracke of this preſent life, & obteined the grace to come to ſo great ioyes. We are yet ſtill in the waues of the Sea, longing for thée the hauen of our Sea. O countrey of ours, O quyet countrey, we ken thée a farre of, we hayle thée from this Sea, we ſigh vnto thée out of this vale of miſerie, and labour with teares if we may by any meanes atteine vnto thee O Chriſt God of God, the hope of mankind, our refuge and ſtrength, whoſe brightneſſe inlighteneth our eyes a farre of, as the beames of the Sea ſtarre doth in the miſtie darknes of the ſtormie ſea, to guide vs vnto thée

our hauen. Lord, gouerne our ſhyp with thy right hand by the helme of thy croſſe, that we periſhe not in the waues, that the tempeſt of the water drowne vs not, and that the déepe ſwalow vs not vp: but with the hooke of thy croſſe plucke vs backe out of this vaſt Sea, vnto thée our onely cōfort, whom we ſée wayting for vs a farre of as the morning ſtarre and as the day ſunne of rightuouſneſſe, in maner with wéeping eyes vpon the ſhore of the heauenly countrey. Behold we whom thou haſt raunſomed do cry vnto thee: yea euen we as yet thy baniſhed mē whom thou haſt redemed with thy precious bloud do cry vnto thée. Here vs O God our ſauiour, ye hope of all

the endes of the earth & of all thē that be in the ſea a far of. We be cōuerſant in a troubleſome Sea, & thou ſtanding vpon ye ſhore lookeſt at our perils: ſaue vs for thy names ſake. Lord graūt vs ſo to kéepe our courſe betwene Scilla & Charibdis, and to hold ſo with thée, that we may eſcape ye daunger of both, & come ſafe to land without leſſe of ſhip or fraught.
               
               
                  Of the glorie of the heauenly countrey.
                  THerefore when we ſhalbe come vnto thée ye foūtaine of wiſedome, vnto thée the vnfaylable light, vnto thée the vnappallable brightnes, ſo as we ſhal behold thée, not any more in a riddle or through a glaſſe, but face to face: Then ſhall we haue our fill

of all good things. For there ſhalbe nothing without vs to be deſired but onely yu O Lord the ſouerein goodnes, who ſhalt be the reward of the bleſſed, & the crowne of their glorie, & euerlaſting ioy vpō their heades, quietyng them both inwardly & outwardly with thy peace which paſſeth al vnderſtāding. There we ſhall ſee thee, loue thée, & prayſe thee. By thy light we ſhall ſée thy brightneſſe, for in thée is ye welſpring of life, & thy brightnes ſhall giue vs light. And what maner of light? A light vnmeaſurable, a light bodileſſe, a light vncorruptible, a light incō
                     prehenſible, a light vnfaylable, a light vnquenchable, a ſoothfaſt light, a diuine light, whiche inlightneth the eyes of the aūgels,

which cheareth vp the youth of ye ſaints, which is ye light of lightes & welſpring of life, which is euē yu O Lord my God. For yu art the light in whoſe light we ſhall ſée light, yt is to wit thy ſelfe, in thy ſelfe in ye brightnes of thine own coūtenaūce, whē we ſhall ſée thée face to face. And what is it els to ſee thée face to face, thē (as the Apoſtle ſayth) to know thée as I am knowē, to know thy truth & thy glory? And to know thy face, is to know ye power of ye father, the wiſedome of ye ſonne, ye mercifulnes of ye holy ghoſt, & the one vndeuidable being of ye thrée perſons in one ſouereine Godhead. For ye beholding of the face of the liuing God is the ſouerein good, ye ioy of ye aūgels, & of all holy mē,

the reward of endleſſe life, ye glory of all ſoules, the euerlaſtyng gladnes, ye crown of honor, ye obteinemēt of happines, ye wealthfull reſt, the beawtiful peace, the inward & outward ioyfulneſſe, & the paradiſe of God. Here is the heauēly Ieruſalē, the happy life, the fulneſſe of bleſſednes, the ioy of euerlaſtingneſſe, & the peace of God which paſſeth all vnderſtā
                     dyng. This is the ful bleſſednes, & the whole glorification of mā: namely to ſée God face to face, to ſée him that made heauen and earth, to ſée him that made him, that ſaued him, & that glorified him. He ſhal ſée him by knowing him, be in loue with hym by liking him, & prayſe him by poſſeſſing hym. For he ſhalbe the heritage

of his people, of his people the Saints, of his people whō he hath raunſomed. He ſhalbe their poſſeſſion of happineſſe, he ſhalbe the reward & recompēce of their lōgyng. I wilbe thine excéedyng great reward ſayth he. For great thinges beſéeme great perſonages. Verely my Lord God, yu art excéedyng great aboue all Gods & excéedyng great alſo is thy reward. But thou thy ſelf art ouer great, thou thy ſelfe art an ouer great reward, thou thy ſelfe art both he that crowneth, & alſo the crowne: thou thy ſelfe art both ye promiſer, and the promiſe: thou art the recompēcer, & the recompēce: thou art the rewarder, and the reward of euerlaſtyng happines. Thou thē art both the crowner

& the crowne O my God, & the diademe of my hope which is garniſhed wt glorie, a gladdyng light, a renewyng light, a glorious ornamēt, my chief hope, the deſire of the hartes of all ſaintes, & their deare beloued. The ſeing of thée thē, is the whole hyre, the whole reward and the whole ioy that we looke for. For it is life euerlaſtyng, yea I ſay, it is thy wiſedome. Life euerlaſting is to know thée the onely true God, & Ieſus Chriſt whom yu haſt ſent. Therfore when we ſhall ſée thée the onely God, the true God, the liuyng God almightie, ſingle, inuiſible, vnboundable, vncōprehē
                     ſible & thine onely begottē ſonne, God of thine own ſubſtaūce, & euerlaſtyng as well as thou, euē
                     
our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, whō for our welfare thou haſt ſent into the world in ye power of the holy Ghoſt, thrée in perſons & one in beyng, the onely holy God, beſides whom there is no God: thē ſhal we hold that which we now ſéeke, namely euerlaſting life, & endleſſe glorie, which thou haſt prepared for them that loue thée, whiche thou haſt layd vp in ſtore for thē that feare thée, and which thou wilt giue to them that ſéeke thée, euen to them that ſéeke thy face for euer. And thou O Lord my God which diddeſt ſhape me in my mothers wōbe, who hath giuen me vp into thy hād, ſuffer me not any more to be plucked out of one into many: but gather me out of theſe outward thinges

into my ſelfe, & frō my ſelfe vnto thée, that my hart may alwayes ſay vnto thée, my face hath ſought thée out, Lord I will ſéeke after thy face, euē after the face of the Lord of all power, wherein ſtandeth the whole glorie of the bleſſed ſorte for euer, whiche to behold, is the endleſſe life & euerlaſtyng glorie of the Saintes. Let my hart reioyſe therfore, that it may reuerēce thy name: Let the harts of them that ſéeke God reioyſe, but much more ye hartes of them that finde God. For if there be ioy in ſéekyng, what maner of ioy ſhall there be in findyng? Therefore I will alwayes ſéeke thy face earneſtly, & inceſſantly, if at any tyme the doore and gate of rightuouſneſſe may be opened

vnto me, that I may enter into the ioy of my Lord. This is the Lordes gate, the rightuous ſhall enter in thereat.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer to the holie Trinitie.
                  THou thrée coequall and coeternal perſons & one God ye very father Sonne & holy ghoſt, who dwelleſt alone in euerlaſtingneſſe, and in vnapproachable light, which haſt foūded the earth by thy mighty power, & ruleſt ye whole world by thy wiſedome, Holie, holie, holie Lord God of hoſtes, dreadfull, ſtrong, rightuous, mercyfull, maruelous, prayſe worthie, to be beloued, One God, thrée perſons, one being, power, wiſedome, goodnes, &

one vnſeperable Trinitie. I crye vnto thée, open me the gates of rightuouſnes, & whē I am come in, I will prayſe thée O Lord. Behold I poore begger knocke at thy doore O ſouerein houſholder. Commaund the gates to be opened at my knockyng, accordyng as thou haſt ſayd, knocke ye & it ſhalbe opened. For truly O moſt mercyfull father, the deſires of my groning hart, and the cryes of my wéepyng eyes, doe knocke at thy doore. All my deſire is before thée, and my gronyng is not hyd frō thée. Lord turne not thy face any more away frō me, neither flyng thou away frō thy ſeruaunt in a ſume. O father of mercies, heare the houling out of thy ward, & reach hym thy ſingular

good helpyng hād, that it may drawe me out of the déepe waters, & out of the lake of miſerie, and out of the myre of filthynes, that I periſhe not, thy pitifull eyes ſeyng it, & the bowels of thy mercy beholdyng it: but that I may wade out vnto thée my Lord God, ſo as I may ſee the riches of thy kyngdome, & alwayes behold thy face, & ſing prayſe to thy holy name. O Lord which workeſt wonders, whiche cheareſt my hart with remembryng thée, & which inlighteneſt my youth: deſpiſe not myne olde age, but make my bones to reioyſe, & my hore heares to waxe freſh againe as the Eagle.
                  ¶ FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  SAINT AVſtens Manuell, or litle Booke of the Contemplation of Chriſte, or of Gods worde, whereby the remembraunce of the heauenly deſires which is falne a ſleepe may be quickned vp agayne.
                  AT LONDON Printed by Iohn Daye dwellyng ouer Alderſgate. 1574.
                  ¶Cum gratia & Priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
               
               
                  
                  
                  The Preface.
                  FOr aſmuch as we be ſet in the middes of ſnares, we eaſly become cold in deſire of heauenly thynges. And therfore we haue neede of continuall defence, that when we be ſhronke awaye, we may be wakened to runne backe agayne to our true God the ſouereine goodneſſe. In conſideration wherof, not through raſh preſumption, but for the great loue that I beare to my God, I haue vndertaken this worke to his glorie, to the intent I might alwayes haue with me a ſhort and handſome abridgement of the choſen ſayinges of the holie fathers concernyng my God, by the fire of the readyng whereof, the loue of him might be kindled in me as oft as it is waxed cold in me. Aſſiſte me now I beſeech thee my Lord God, whom I ſeeke, whom I loue, whom I prayſe and worſhip both with mynde and mouth, and with all the power that I am able. My mynde beyng vowed vnto thee, and inflamed with loue of thée, ſighyng for want of thee, gapyng after thee, and longyng onely to ſee thee, hath no pleaſure in any thyng but to ſpeake of thee, to heare of thee, to write of thee, to conferre of thee, and to bethinke it ſelfe oftentymes of thy glorie, ſo as the remembraunce of thee may be ſome refreſhyng to me among the ſtormes of this worlde.

Thee therefore do I call vpon moſt earneſtly, vnto theee do I crye with a loude noyſe euen from the bottome of my hart. And when I call vpon thee, verely I call vpon thee in my ſelfe: for I ſhould not be at all except thou wart in me, and except I were in thee thou wouldeſt not be in me. Thou art in me, bycauſe thou abydeſt in my mynde: thereby doe I know thee, and therin doe I finde thee. When I remember thee, I am alſo delighted in thee and by thee, of whom, by whom, and in whom, all thynges be.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ¶Of Gods Wonderfull being.
                  
                     THou Lord filleſt heauen & earth, bearyng vp all thinges without being burthened, filling all thyngs without being incloſed, alwayes doing and yet alwayes at reſt: alwayes gathering, but not for any néede: alwayes ſéeking, and yet thou miſſeſt nothing: louing, & yet not doting, being ielous and yet ſtill in quyet. It repenteth thée and yet thou art not gréeued: thou art angrie, and yet not out of patience. Thou chaungeſt thy workes, but thou chaungeſt not thy purpoſe. Thou receiueſt that which thou haſt ſought out,

and yet yu haddeſt neuer loſt it. Thou art neuer néedy, & yet thou delighteſt to gaine. Thou art neuer couetous, & yet yu demaūdeſt vſurie. Thou laſheſt out where thou oweſt not, or rather there is alwayes cōming into thée that yu mayſt owe. But who hath aught yt is not thine? Thou payeſt dets, & yet art in no mans dets. Thou forgiueſt dets, & yet forgoeſt nothing. Thou art euery where, & euery where yu art whole: perceiued thou mayſt be, ſéene thou cāſt not be. Thou art no where abſēt, and yet art thou far of from the thoughtes of ye wicked, nay looke where thou art far of, there art yu not away: for where yu art abſent by grace, there art thou preſēt by vēgeance. So art yu preſent in all

places, and yet canſt ſcarſly be found. Thou ſtandeſt ſtill when we folow thée, and yet we cannot ouertake thée. Thou holdeſt all thinges, filleſt all thinges, inuironeſt all things, ſurmoūteſt all things, and ſuſteineſt all things. Thou teacheſt the hartes of the faithfull wtout noyſe of wordes: thou art not diſſeuered by places, nor altered by times, nor ſubiect vnto to and fro. Thou dwelleſt in vnapprochable light, whiche neuer man ſaw, nor can ſée. Abyding quietly in thy ſelfe, thou goeſt euerywhere about the whole: for thou canſt not be cut or deuided, bycauſe thou art but one in very déede, & art not made out into partes or péeces: but being whole thou mainteineſt the

whole, thou filleſt ye whole, thou inlighteneſt the whole, and thou poſſeſſeſt the whole.
               
               
                  ¶Of the vnſpeakable knowledge of God.
                  ALthough the whole world were full of bookes, yet could not thyne vnſpeakable knowledge be vttered. For in aſmuch as yu art vnſpeakable, yu cāſt in no wiſe be put in writing or comprehended. Thou art the fountaine of godly light, and the ſunne of euerlaſting brightneſſe. Thou art great without quantifie, and therfore vnmeaſurable. Thou art good without qualitie, & therfore very good & ſouereinly good, and no man is good but thou

alone. Whoſe will is a worke, for thou cāſt do what thou liſteſt. Thou haſt created all thinges of nothing, and by thine onely will haſt thou made them. Thou poſſeſſeſt all thy creatures without any want of them, thou gouerneſt them without payne, thou ruleſt them without wéerines, & there is nothing that may trouble the order of thy gouernemēt, from the higheſt thinges to the loweſt. Thou art in all places without place, confeynyng all thinges without incloſure, and being preſent euery where without ſetting or remouing. Thou art not the author of any euill, for yu canſt do none euill. Wheras thou canſt do all thinges, thou haſt not done any thing wherof

it can forthinke thée. It is of thy goodneſſe that we be made, of thy iuſtice that we be puniſhed, and of thy mercy that we be deliuered. Whoſe almightineſſe gouerneth, ruleth, & filleth all thinges which it hath made. Yet meane I not by thy filling of all things, that they conteine thée, but rather that thou conteineſt them. Neither filleſt thou all things by parcel meale, neither is it in any wiſe to be thought that ech thing receiueth thée accordyng to the proportion of it owne bigneſſe, that is to wit the greateſt things more, and the ſmalleſt thinges leſſe: but rather that thou thy ſelfe art whole in all things, and all things in thée: whoſe almightineſſe incloſeth all thinges, and

no man cā finde any ſhift to ſcape frō thy power. For he that hath not thy fauour, ſhal neuer eſcape thy diſpleaſure.
               
               
                  ¶Of the longing of the ſoule that féeleth God.
                  THerfore O moſt mercyfull God, I call vpō thée for my ſoule, whiche thou prepareſt to receiue thée through the deſire which thou breatheſt into it. Enter into it I beſéech thée, & make it fit for thée, that thou mayſt poſſeſſe that whiche thou haſt both made and renewed, that I may haue thée as a ſeale vpō my hart. O moſt pitifull Lord, I beſéech thée forſake not him that calleth vpon thee: for ere I could call vppon

thée thou diddeſt both cal me and ſéeke me, to the intent that I thy ſeruaunt ſhould ſéeke thée, & by ſéeking thée finde thée, & when I had found thée loue thée. Lord I haue ſought thée & found thée, and I deſire alſo to loue thée. Increaſe my deſirouſneſſe & graunt the thyng I craue: for if thou ſhouldeſt giue me all that euer thou madeſt, it would not ſuffice thy ſeruaūt, except thou giue him thy ſelfe to. Giue me thy ſelfe therfore O my God, reſtore thy ſelfe vnto me. Behold, I am in loue with thée: and if that be to litle, let me be yet more in loue. I am bound with the loue of thée, I burne in deſire of thée, I am delighted with the ſwéete remembraunce of thée. Behold,

when my mynde ſtyeth vpward vnto thée, & buſieth it ſelfe with thinking vpon thyne vnſpeakable louing kindneſſe: the fardell of my fleſhe is the leſſe burdenſome vnto me, the turmoyling of my thoughtes ceaſſeth, ye weight of my mortalitie & miſeries maketh me not dull as they are wōt to do, all thinges are ſtill, and all things are calme. My hart gloweth, my minde reioyceth, my memorie is freſh, mine vnderſtanding is cleare, and my whole ſpirite being kindled with deſire to ſée thee, findeth it ſelfe rauiſhed with the loue of things inuiſible. Let my ſpirite take the winges of an Eagle & flye without ceaſſing: Let it flye euen till it come to the beawtie of thy houſe, and

to the throne of thy glory, & there let it be fed at the dyning table of thy heauenly Citizens, in the place of fulféedyng by the plentifull runnyng ſtreames. Thou that art our hope, our welfare, & our redemption, be alſo our ioy. Thou yt ſhalt be our reward, be alſo our reioycing. Let my ſoule ſéeke thée alwayes, & graunt yt in ſéeking thée it may neuer faint.
               
               
                  ¶Of the wretchedneſſe of that ſoule whiche loueth not, ne ſéeketh not our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
                  WO is that wretched ſoule whiche loueth not Chriſt, nor ſéeketh him: it abydeth dry & miſerable. He loſeth his life time

whiche loueth not thée O God. He that cares not to liue for thée Lorde, is nothing and goeth for nought. He that refuſeth to liue vnto thée, is already dead. He that is not wiſe to thée ward, is but a foole. Moſt mercifull Lord, I yeld, graunt, & betake my ſelfe vnto thée by whō I haue being, life, and wit. In thée do I put my whole confidēce, truſt, and hope, by whō I ſhal riſe againe, liue agayne, & inioy reſt. Thée do I couet, loue, & worſhip, with whom I ſhall dwel, reigne, & be bleſſed. The ſoule that ſéeketh not ne loueth not thée, ſéeketh & loueth ye world, ſerueth ſinne, is ſubiect to vyce, neuer at reſt, neuer at eaſe. Let my mind ſerue thee alwayes O moſt mercifull. Let my way

faring be alwayes to trauell vnto théeward, let my hart burne in loue of thée. My God, let my ſoule reſt in thée, let it runne out of it ſelfe to behold thée, let it ſing thy prayſes with ioyfulnes, and let this be the cōfort of me in my baniſhment. Let my minde flee vnder the ſhadow of thy winges, from the ragyng heates of the thoughtes of this world. Let my hart calme it ſelfe in thée, I ſay let the great ſea of my hart that ſwelleth with waues, calme it ſelfe in thée. O God whiche art riche of all good deinties, thou moſt bountifull beſtower of heauenly repaſt giue meate to me that am faint, gather me vp that am ſcattered, deliuer me that am in priſon, make me new agayne

that am heawē in péeces. Behold I ſtand at thy doore and knocke. I beſéeche thée by the bowels of thy mercy, where through thou haſt viſited vs in riſing from aloft, bid the doore to be opened for me wretch which do knocke, that my ſoule may haue frée paſſage to come in vnto thée, and to reſt in thée, and to be refreſhed by thée with thy heauenly bread. For thou art the bread and fountaine of life, thou art the light of euerlaſting brightneſſe, thou art all thinges whereby the righteous liue which loue thée.
               
               
                  ¶Of the longing of the ſoule.
                  O God the light of the hartes that ſée thee, and the life of

the ſoules that loue thée, and the ſtrenghthener of the thoughtes that ſéeke thée, graūt that I may ſticke to the holie loue of thee. Come I pray thée into my hart, and make it drunken with the aboundance of thy pleaſantneſſe, ſo as I may forget theſe temporall thinges. It ſhameth and irketh me to abyde ſuch thinges as this world doth. All that I ſée of theſe tranſitorie thinges is but a ſorrow to me: all that I heare of them, is but a grief to me. Helpe me O Lord my God, & put gladneſſe into my hart, come vnto me that I may ſée thée. But to narrow is the houſe of my ſoule for thée, vntill thou come vnto me & make more rowme in it. Repaire it for it is decayed. It hath many

thinges that will miſlike thyne eyes. I know it and confeſſe it: but who ſhall clenſe it, or to whō ſhall I crye elles but vnto thée? Lord clenſe me from my priuie ſinnes, & beare with thy ſeruaūt for other folkes faultes. Swéete Chriſt make me I beſéech thee good Ieſu make me to laye away the burden of fleſhly deſires and earthly luſtes, for loue and liking of thée. Let my ſoule ouerrule my fleſh, let reaſon ouerrule my ſoule, let thy grace ouerrule my reaſon, and ſubdue thou me both inwardly and outwardly to thy will. Giue me the grace that my hart, my toūg and my bones may prayſe thée. Inlarge my minde, and lift vp the eyeſight of my hart: that euē with the ſwift

conceyt of my ſpirite, I may atteine to thée ye euerlaſting wiſedome whiche abydeſt vppon all thinges. I beſéeche thée looſe me from the fetters wherwith I am ſhackled, that I may leaue all theſe thinges and hye me vnto thee, ſticke to thee onely, and attend vpon thee onely.
               
               
                  ¶Of the happines of the ſoule that is let looſe from the priſon of the body.
                  HAppy is the ſoule whiche being let looſe frō the earthly priſō, flyeth vp fréely into heauen, and there beholdeth thée her moſt ſweete Lord face to face, & is no more diſquieted with any feare of death: but reioyſeth in

the euerlaſtingneſſe of incorruptible glory. For it is ſafe and out of perill, and hence forth feareth neither enemy nor death. It poſſeſſeth thée her mercifull Lorde whom ſhe hath long ſought and euer loued. And accōpanying her ſelfe with the quyres of Pſalme ſingers, it ſingeth continually the ſugred ſonges of euerlaſting mirth, to ye glorie of thee O king Chriſt, O gracious Ieſu. For ſhe is made dronken with the boūtifulneſſe of thy houſe, & thou makeſt her to drinke of the ſtreame of thy pleaſures. Happy is the felowſhip of the heauēly Citizens, and glorious is the ſolemnitie of all them that returne frō the ſorowful trauell of this our pilgrimage, to the pleaſauntneſſe of

beawtie, to the beawtie of all brightnes, and to the floure of all excellencie, where thy Citizens behold thée continually O Lord. Nothyng that may trouble the minde is offered there to ye eare. What ſonges, what inſtrumēts, what Carolles, what melodie ſoundeth there wtout end? There ſounde alwayes moſt pleaſaunt tunes of Hymnes, moſt ſwéete melodie of aungels, & moſt wonderfull dities of ſonges, whiche are ſong to thy glorie by the heauenly inhabitantes. No harſhneſſe, no gallye bitterneſſe hath any rowme with in thy realme. For there is neither a naughtie perſō, nor naughtines. There is none aduerſarie nor impugner, neither is there any intycement

of ſinne. There is no nedineſſe, no ſhame, no brawling, no miſuſage, no excuſing, no feare, no vnquietneſſe, no penaltie, no doubtfulnes, no violēce, no diſcord: but there is perfect peace ful of loue, continuall reioyſing & prayſing of God, careleſſe reſt wtout end, and euerlaſting gladneſſe in the holy Ghoſt. O how lucky ſhould I be if I might heare the moſt pleaſaunt Carols of thy Citizēs, and their ſugred ſonges aduauncing the prayſes of the ſouereine Trinitie with due honor. But ouer happie ſhould I be, might I once atteine to ſing a ſong my ſelfe, I ſay to ſing one of ye ſwéete ſonges of Sion to our Lord Ieſu Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Of the ioyes of Paradiſe.
                  O Liuely life, O euerlaſting and aye bleſſed life, where as is ioye without ſorrow, reſt without trauel, dignitie without feare, riches without loſſe, health fulneſſe without impayring, aboundance without want, lyfe without death, continuance with out corruption, bleſſedneſſe with out abatement, all good things in perfect loue, beawtie and beholding face to face, full knowledge of all thinges and in all thinges: where Gods ſouereine goodneſſe is ſéene, & his inlightening light is glorified of the Saints: where the preſent maieſty of God is beheld, and the mindes of the beholders

ſatiſfied therewtall as with the foode of life. The more they ſée it, the more they deſire to ſée it: yet deſire they it without diſquietneſſe, and haue their fill of it without wéerineſſe. There the dayſunne of righteouſneſſe cheareth all mē with the wonderous ſight of his beawtie, and ſo in lighteneth all the Citizens of the heauenly ſoyle, that they them ſelues yeld light, euen the light that God hath behighted them, light more lightſome then all the brightnes of our dayſunne, & thē the cleareneſſe of all the ſtarres. For they cleaue to the immortal Godhead, and thereby are made immortall and incorruptible thē ſelues, according to this promiſe of our Lord and Sauiour: Father,

as for thoſe whō thou haſt giuen me, I wil haue them to be where I am, that they may ſée my glory, and that they may be all one, as thou father art in me, and I in thée, and that they alſo may be one in vs.
               
               
                  ¶Of the kingdome of heauen.
                  O Realme of heauē, O moſt happy Realme, O Realme wtout death, O kingdome without end, where is no ſucceſſion of time by ages, where the day laſting continually without night woteth not what time meaneth, where the ſouldier that getteth the vpper hād is rewarded with vnſpeakable gifts for his labour,

and hath an euerlaſting garland ſet vpon his noble head. Would God that Chriſt of his heauenly pitie hauing releaſed the burthen of my ſinnes would commaunde me the baſeſt of his ſeruaunts to lay aſide the fardell of this fleſh, that I might paſſe into the endleſſe ioyes of his Citie, to repoſe my ſelfe, ſo as I might keepe cō
                     panie with the holy ſort aboue, ſtand before the glorious maieſtie of my creator with the bleſſed ſpirites, behold the preſent countenaunce of God, be touched with no feare of death, reioyſe in ſuretie of the incorruptibleneſſe of the euerlaſtyng immortalitie, and being linked to him that knoweth all thinges, forgoe all blindnes of ignoraunce, nothing

eſteeming all earthly things, and not vouchſauyng to looke vppon this vale of teares or to remēber it any more, whereas our lyfe is a painfull life, a corruptible life, a lyfe full of all bitterneſſe, a lyfe that is miſtreſſe of miſchief and hādmayd of hell: whom humors make to ſwell, whom paynes abate, whom heate parcheth, whō ayres make diſeaſed, whom meates puffe vp, whom faſtings forepyne, whom mirth maketh nyce, whō heauines conſumeth, whom thought pincheth, whom eaſe dwelleth, whō riches pranke vp, whō pouertie pulleth down, whō youth ſetteth aloft, whō age makes to ſtoope, whom ſickneſſe defaceth, whom ſorow thruſteth downe, whom the deuill layeth

wayt for, whom the world flattereth, whom the fleſh delighteth, where ye ſoule is blinded, where the whole man is put out of order. After all which ſo many and ſo great miſchieues ſucceedeth cruel death, and in ſuch wiſe maketh an end of all vayne ioyes, yt whē they be once paſt, they may be thought to haue neuer bene.
               
               
                  In what wiſe God cōforteth the ſorrowfull ſoule after the lōg mornyng therof.
                  BVt what prayſes or what thankeſgiuinges are we able to render vnto thée O Lorde our God, who ceaſſeſt not to cō
                     fort vs with the wonderfull viſitation of thy grace, among the

great miſeries of our mortalitie? Behold, while I feare the end of my lyfe, whyle I conſider my ſinnes, while I ſtand in feare of thy Iuſtice, while I thinke vpon the horror of death, while I ſhudder at the puniſhement of hell, whyle I knowe not with what ſtraitnes thou dooſt boult out and wey my workes, while I am vtterly ignoraunt with what end I ſhall cloſe them vp, and while I bethinke me of theſe and many other thynges to my ſelfe in my hart: thou O Lord God of thine accuſtomed pitie art ready at hād to comfort me wretch repleniſhed with many griefes: and in the middes of theſe monynges, ſore complaints, and déepe ſighes of my hart, thou takeſt vp my

ſad and ſorrowfull minde to the toppes of the high mountaines, euē to ye beddes of ſweete ſpyces, putting me in a place of paſture by the riuers of ſwéete waters, where thou prepareſt a table diuerſly furniſhed againſt I come, to refreſh my appalled ſprights, and to cheare vp my heauy hart: through which deinties I beyng at length refreſhed, do forget my manifold miſeries, & beyng lifted vp aboue the heigth of the earth, do take my reſt in thée which art the true peace.
               
               
                  ¶Of the ſweetneſſe of the loue of God.
                  I Loue thee my God, I loue thee, and more & more would

I fayne loue thée. My Lord God, thou reſt of all the childrē of mē, graunt me to long for thee, & to loue thée as much as I would, and as much as I ſhould. Thou art vnmeaſurable, and muſt be loued without meaſure, ſpecially of vs whom thou haſt ſo loued, whom thou haſt ſo ſaued, and for whom thou haſt made ſo great & ſo goodly thinges. O loue whiche burneſt euer and art neuer quenched, O ſwéete Chriſt, O gracious Ieſu, O my God which art loue it ſelfe, ſet me wholly on fire wt thy fire, with the loue of thée, with thy ſwéetneſſe, with deſirouſneſſe of thée, with likyng of thée, with ioying and reioyſing in thée, with thy pitifulneſſe & pleaſantneſſe, and with the pleaſure

and delight of thée, which is holy and good, chaſte and cleane: that being throughly full of the ſwéetneſſe of thy loue, wholly beſmoked with ye flame of affection towardes thée, I may loue thée my Lord God moſt ſwéete and moſt beawtifull, with all my hart, wt all my ſoule, wt all my ſtrēgth, wt all my power, with much ſorrow of hart & ſheading of teares, with much reuerence and trembling, hauing thée in my hart & in my mouth & before mine eyes alwayes & in all places, ſo as there may be no rowme in me for any counterfet or vncleane loue.
               
               
                  ¶Of ioy.
                  O Swéete loue, O louyng ſwéetnes, let my belly eate

thée, and let my bowels be filled with the pleaſaunt wyne of thy loue, & let my minde vtter forth good wordes. O charity my God, ſwéete honny, ſnowye milke, the foode of Aungelles, make me to growe in thée that I may eate thée with a ſauorie taſt. Thou art my life whereby I liue, the hope that I ſticke vnto, the glory that I deſire. Hold thou my hart, rule my mynde, guide myne vnderſtandyng, cheare vp my loue, lift thou vp my Soule, & drawe the mouth of my ſpirite whiche thirſteth after thée, vp to the water ſtreames that are aboue. I beſéech thée let the troubleo
                        ••
                     neſſe of the fleſh ceaſe. Let the fancies of landes, waters, aire, and ſkye hold their peace. Let dreames &

fantaſticall Reuelations, let all tounges, all ſignes, and what ſoeuer is able to paſſe, be whiſt. Yea let mine owne ſoule be ſtill, and let it ouerpaſſe it ſelfe, not by thinking vpon it ſelfe, but by thinking vpon thée my God, bycauſe thou art in very deede my whole hope and truſt. For in thée O moſt ſwéete, gracious, and mercyfull God O Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, is both the portion & the bloud and the fleſh of euery one of vs. Then looke where the portiō or peece of me reigneth, there beléeue I my ſelfe to reigne alſo. Looke where my bloud beareth rule, there truſt I to beare rule to. Looke where my fleſh is glorified, there know I yt I alſo am glorious, and although I be a ſinner,

yet diſtruſt I not this communion of grace. For although my ſinnes forfend it, yet doth my ſubſtaunce require it. And although myne owne tranſgreſſiōs ſhet me out, yet doth the communion of nature take me in.
               
               
                  ¶That the word is become fleſhe for our hopes ſake.
                  FOr the Lorde is not ſo vnkynde, as not to loue hys owne fleſh, his owne members, his own bowels. Truly I ſhould deſpayre for my ſinnes, vyces, faultes, and negligences without number, which I haue committed and dayly do cōmit without ceaſſing, in hart, word, and

déede, & by all meanes that mans frayltie cā offend in: were it not that thy word O my God is become fleſh & dwelleth in vs. But now I dare not deſpayre, bicauſe that he beyng obedient vnto thée to the death, euen to the death of the croſſe, hath taken away the handwriting of our ſinnes, and nayling ye ſame to his croſſe, hath crucified both ſinne & death. Now then, I looke backe with a careleſſe eye by meanes of him, who ſitteth at thy right hand & ſeweth for vs, & I thinke lōg to come vnto thée vpon truſt of him, in whō we are already riſen againe & reuiued, alredy moūted vp into heauen, & there do ſit among the aū
                     gels. To thée be prayſe, to thée be glorie, to thee be honor, to thee

be thankes. Amen.
               
               
                  ¶That the more a man muſeth vpon God, the ſwéeter it is vnto him.
                  MOſt merciful Lord which haſt ſo loued & ſaued vs, ſo quickened & exalted vs. Moſt merciful Lord, how ſwéete is the remembraūce of thée? The more I thinke vppon thée, the more ſwéete and amiable art thou vnto me, and therfore am I greatly delighted with thy goodes. With cleare eyeſight of mynd, & with a moſt pure affectiō of godly loue, accordyng to my ſmall abilitie, do I inceſſantly couet to ſue for thy loue, and to behold thy wonderfull beawtie, in this place of

my pilgrimage, as long as I abyde in theſe brittle mēbers. For I am woūded with ye dart of thy loue, I am ſore inflamed with deſire of thée, I would fayne come vnto thée, I long to ſée thée. I will therefore ſtand vpon my gard, and with waking eyes will I ſing in my hart: yea I wil ſing with my minde, and with all my ſtrength. I will prayſe thée my maker & renewer: I will pearce the ſkye with my mynde, and be with thée in deſire: ſo as my body onely ſhalbe held here in this preſent miſerie: but in thought, in deſirouſneſſe, and in longyng, I will alwayes be with thée, for looke where thou myne incomparable deſired and deare beloued treaſure art, there alſo is my

hart. But loe my moſt gracious and mercyfull Lord, whereas I would conſider the glory of thine vnmeaſurable goodneſſe & louing kindneſſe, my hart is not ſufficiēt to do it. For thyne honor, thy beawtie, thy power, thy glory, thy royaltie, thy maieſty, and thy loue excéede all vnderſtanding of mans mynde. Like as the brightneſſe of thy glorie is ineſtimable: ſo alſo is the graciouſneſſe of thyne euerlaſtyng loue vnſpeakable, where through thou adopteſt thoſe to be thy ſonnes & knitteſt them vnto thée, whom thou haſt created of nothing.
               
               
                  ¶ That tribulatiōs for Chriſtes ſake are to be deſired in this life.
                  O My ſoule if we ſhould be fayne to ſuffer tormentes

euery day, if we ſhould be fayne to indure euen hell fire for a long tyme, that we might ſée Chriſt in his glory, and be in cōpany with his Saintes: were it not méete we ſhould abyde all the ſorrow that could be, that we might be made partakers of ſo great a benefite, and of ſo great glory? Let the deuils thē do their ſpight, let them tempt while they tempt may, let faſtings forpyne the body, let courſe apparell greue the fleſh, let labour pinch it, let watching dry it vp, let this man call vpon me, let that man or that mā diſquiet me, let cold make me curle together, let my conſcience barke at me, let heate ſcorche me, let my head ake, let my hart burne, let my ſtomacke be wyndie,

let my face looke pale, let me be wholly diſeaſed, let my life cō
                     ſume in ſorrow, let my yeares waſt away in ſighing & ſobbyng, let rottenneſſe lodge within my bones, & let wormes crawle vnder me: ſo I may reſt in the day of trouble, & that we may go vp together to our people that wayt for vs. For, Lorde what glory ſhall the righteous haue? How great ſhall the ioy of the Saintes be, when euery face ſhall ſhyne as the ſunne? Whē the Lord hauyng ſorted his people into degrées, ſhall begin to muſter them in the kingdome of his father, & render the promiſed rewardes to eche of them accordyng to hys workes and deſertes: giuyng to them, for earthly things heauenly

thinges, for temporall thinges euerlaſting thynges, for ſmall thinges great thynges? Verely then ſhall happineſſe be heaped vp full to the top, when the Lord ſhall bryng hys Saintes to the ſight of eternall glory, & make thē ſit down together in heauen, that God may be all in all.
               
               
                  How the kyngdome of heauen may be gotten.
                  O Happy pleaſauntneſſe, O pleaſaunt happyneſſe, to ſée the Saintes, to be with the Saintes, and to be a Saint: to ſée God, and to haue God for euer & euer. Let vs thinke vpon this with diligent mynde, let vs long after this with our whole hart,

that we may ſoone come vnto them. If thou demaunde howe that may be brought to paſſe, or by what deſeruynges, or by what helpes it may be compaſſed: harken, O man: The kyngdome of heauen requireth none other price but thy ſelfe: the full valew of it is thy ſelfe: giue thy ſelfe for it, & thou ſhalt haue it. Why troubleſt thou thy ſelfe about the price of it? Chriſt hath giuen him ſelfe to purchaſe thée a kingdome to God the father. So then giue thou thy ſelfe that thou mayſt be his kingdome, & that ſinne may not reigne in thy mortall body, but that the ſpirite may reigne to the atteinement of life.
               
               
                  ¶What Paradiſe is, and what it hath.
                  
                     O My ſoule, let vs returne to the heauēly Citie wherin we be regiſtred and made frée Citizens. For like as we be felow Citizens of the Saintes and the houſehold meynie of God: & like as we be the heyres of God and coheires of Chriſt: ſo let vs conſider the happy royalty of our Citie ſo farre forth as it is poſſile for vs to conſider it. Let vs ſay with the Prophet, O how glorious thinges are ſpoken of thée thou Citie of God: for thou art the dwellyng place of all them that reioyſe, the ioy of the whole earth is founded vpō thée. There is not in thée any age, nor miſerie of age. There is not in thée any maymed perſon, any lame man, any crooke backe, nor any

miſhapen body. For all be growē vp to perfect men, after the full meaſure of the age of Chriſt. What bleſſeder thyng can there be thē ſuch a life, where there is no feare of pouertie, nor weakeneſſe of diſeaſe? No man is harmed there, no man is diſpleaſed there, no man enuyeth there. There is no burnyng of couetouſneſſe, no deſire of meate, no ambitious ſewing for honor and authoritie, there is no dread of deuill, no ſnares of féendes, no feare of hell fire. There is no death, neither of body nor of ſoule, but pleaſaunt life aſſured of immortalitie. Thē ſhall there be no miſeries, then ſhall there be no debates, but all things ſhal be at agréement, bycauſe all the

Saints ſhall agrée in one. Peace and mirth hold all thinges together, all thinges are calme and quiet. There is continuall light, not ſuch as is now here, but ſo much the brighter as it is much happyer. For (as we read) that Citie ſhall néede no S
                        ••
                     ne, nor Moone, bycauſe the Lord almightie ſhal ſhine in it, and the lambe ſhalbe the light of it. Where the Saintes ſhal ſhine as the ſtarres for euer without end, and ſuch as haue taught many in the way of righteouſneſſe, ſhalbe as the brightneſſe of the ſkye. Wherfore, there ſhalbe no night, no darkneſſe, no méeting of cloudes, no painefulneſſe of heate or cold: but there ſhalbe ſuch a temperatneſſe, as neuer eye hath ſéene,

eare heard, nor hart of any man conceiued, ſauing onely of them that are counted worthy to enioy the ſame, whoſe names are written in the booke of life. But yet it is farre aboue all theſe thinges to be in felowſhip with the companies of Aungels, Archaungels, and all the heauenly powers, to behold the patriarkes and Prophetes, to ſée the Apoſtles, and all the Saints, yea and alſo to ſée our owne parentes. Glorious are theſe thinges, but much more glorious is it, to behold the preſent countenaunce of God, & to ſée his infinite brightneſſe. A paſſing excellent glorie ſhal it be, when we ſhall ſée God in him ſelfe, and when we ſhall both ſée and haue him in our ſelues,

of whō we ſhall neuer haue ſeene inough.
               
               
                  What thing God requireth like vnto him ſelf in vs.
                  GOd the father is Charitie, God the ſonne is louyngneſſe, and God the holy ghoſt is the loue of the father & the ſonne. This loue, this charitie and this louingneſſe requireth ſome like thing in vs, that is to wit charitie, whereby we be aſſociated, & knitte vnto God as it were by ſome alyance of kinred. Loue paſſing not for dignity looketh for no reuerence. He that loueth, cōmeth boldly of him ſelfe vnto God, & ſpeaketh familiarly vnto him, without any feare or without

any ſtickyng. His life is but loſſe, which loueth not. But he yt loueth hath his eyes euermore to Godward, whō he loueth, whō he longeth for, whō he thinketh of, in whō he delighteth, vpon whō he féedeth, in whom he battleth. Such a one as is thus diſpoſed, doth ſo ſing, ſo read, & is ſo forecaſting and circumſpect in all his workes, as though God were preſent before his eyes, & ſo is he preſent in déede. He prayeth in ſuch wiſe as if he were taken vp and preſented before the face of Gods maieſty in his high throne, where thouſandes of thouſandes do him ſeruice, and ten hundred thouſand are ſtādyng about him. Looke what ſoule loue viſiteth, ye ſame doth it awake out of ſléepe.

It moniſheth, ſofteneth, & woū
                     deth his hart. It inlighteneth the darke places, vnlocketh the ſhet places, warmeth the cold places, méekeneth the ſturdie, fumiſh & impacient mynde, chaceth away vyce, bridleth fleſhly affections, amendeth maners, reformeth & reneweth the ſpirite, and reſtreineth the light motions and actions of ſlipperie youth. All theſe thinges doth loue when it is preſent. And aſſoone as loue is gone away, by and by the ſoule beginneth to droope, like as a boylyng cawldron cooleth if a man drawe away the fire from vnder it.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the boldneſſe of the ſoule that loueth God.
                  
                     LOue is a great thing, where through the Soule preaceth boldly of it ſelfe vnto God, and ſticketh ſtedfaſtly vnto God. The Soule that loueth God aſketh queſtions of him familiarly, and taketh coūſell of him in all caſes. It can thinke vpon nothing els, it can ſpeake of nothing els, it deſpiſeth all other thinges, and it lotheth all other thinges, ſauyng God. What ſoeuer it myndeth, what ſoeuer it ſpeaketh, it ſauoureth of loue, and it ſmelleth of loue, ſo wholly hath the loue of God wonne it vnto him. He that will haue knowledge of God, let him loue him. In vayne commeth he to reading, ſtudying preaching, or praying, which loueth not. The loue of God bréedeth

the loue of the ſoule, & maketh it intentife thereunto. God loueth to the intent to be loued againe. When he loueth he meaneth nothing els but to be loued: for he knoweth that they whiche loue hym are bleſſed by theyr loue. The ſoule that loueth God, renounceth all her owne affections, and giueth her ſelfe wholly to nothyng els but loue, to the ende ſhe may aunſwere loue for loue. And when ſhe hath vtterly ſpent her ſelfe in loue, how ſmall a thyng is it in reſpect of that euerlaſtyng ſtreame of the heauenly loue? There is great oddes in the matche betwéene the loue and the louer, betwéene the ſoule and God, betwéene the maker and the creature. And yet if the

ſoule loue thée whole, where the whole is there is no want. Let not the ſoule be afrayde whiche loueth, but let the ſoule be afrayde whiche loueth not. The ſoule that loueth is caried with deſirouſneſſe, drawen with longing, diſclaymeth deſertes, ſhetteth the eyes of maieſtie, openeth the eyes of pleaſure, ſetteth her ſelfe in ſafetie, and dealeth boldly with GOD. Through loue, the ſoule withdraweth and departeth aſide from the bodily ſenſes, ſo as it féeleth not it ſelfe, to the ende it may féele God. And this is done, at ſuch tyme as the mynde beyng allured with the vnſpeakable ſwéeteneſſe of God, doth after a ſorte ſteale awaye from it ſelfe, or rather is rauiſhed

and ſlippeth away from it ſelfe, to the intent to enioy God to her delight. Nothing could be ſo pleaſaunt, if it were not ſo gezon. Loue procureth familiaritie with God, familiaritie procureth boldneſſe, boldneſſe taſt, and taſt continuall hungering. The ſoule that is ſurpriſed with the loue of God, can thinke of nothing els, nor wiſh nothing els: but with often ſighes ſayth: Like as the Hert thirſteth after the water ſpringes, ſo thirſteth my ſoule after thée my God.
               
               
                  ¶ What God hath done for man.
                  FOr loue to manward, God came to man, God came into
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶The remembring of the woundes of our Lorde Ieſu Chriſt.
                  WHen any foule thought aſſaulteth me, I runne to the woundes of Chriſt. When my fleſhe preſſeth me downe, I riſe vp agayne by remembryng the woundes of my Lord. When the deuill layeth wayt for me, I flée to the bowels of the mercy of my Lorde, and he departeth away from me. If the heate of lecherie prouoke my members, it is quē
                     ched with callyng to mynde the woundes of our Lord the ſonne of God. In all aduerſities I finde no remedie ſo effectuall as the woundes of Chriſt. In them I ſléepe without care, and reſt with

out feare. Chriſt hath died for vs: Now is there nothing ſo bitter to the death, which is not ſalued by the death of Chriſt. All my whole hope is in the death of my Lord. His death is my deſert, & my refuge, my welfare, lyfe, and reſurrection, and the mercyfulneſſe of the Lord is my merite, I am not poore of merite, ſo long as he the Lord of compaſſiōs faileth not. As long as he is manifold in mercy, ſo long am I alſo manifold of deſertes. The mightier that he is to ſaue, the more am I without care.
               
               
                  ¶That the remembraunce of Chriſtes woundes is an effectual remedy againſt all aduerſities.
                  
                     EXcéedyng greatly haue I ſinned, and myne owne conſcience findeth me giltie of many offences, and yet doe I not diſpayre, bycauſe that whereas ſinne hath abounded, there hath grace ouerabounded. He that deſpayreth of the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes, denyeth God to be mercyfull. Great wrong doth he to God, whiche diſtruſteth his mercy. For (as much as in him lieth) he denyeth God to be louyng, true, and mightie, which are the thinges wherein my whole hope conſiſteth, that is to witte in the loue of his adoption in the truth of his promiſe, and in the power of his redéemyng. Now let my vnwiſe imagination murmur as much as it liſteth and ſay, Who

art thou? how great is the glory? and by what deſertes hopeſt thou to obteine it? and I will aunſwere boldly, I know whom I haue credited, that he of his excéedyng great loue hath adopted me to be his ſonne, that he is ſoothfaſt of promiſe, that he is mighty in performance, and that he may do what he liſteth. I can not be feared with the multitude of my ſinnes, if I bethinke me of the death of my Lorde, bycauſe my ſinnes are not able to ouermatch him. His nayles and his ſpeare crye vnto me that I am throughly reconcyled to Chriſt, if I loue him. Longiuus hath opened me Chriſtes ſide with his ſpeare, and I am gone into it, and there do I reſt in ſafetie. He

that is afrayd, let him loue: for loue driueth feare out of doores. There is no remedie ſo mightie and effectuall agaynſt the heate of lecherie, as the death of my redemer. He ſtretcheth out his armes vpon the Croſſe, and he holdeth out his handes in a readineſſe to imbrace ſinners. Betwéene the armes of my Sauiour mynde I to lyue and dye. There ſhall I ſing ſafely, there will I exalte thée O Lorde, bycauſe thou haſt taken me vp, and haſt not giuen myne enemyes their pleaſure ouer me. Our Sauiour hath bowed down his head at his death, to receiue the kiſſes of his beloued. And ſo oftē do we kiſſe God, as we be throughly touched with the loue of him.
               
               
                  
                  The muſing of the Soule vpon the loue of God.
                  O My ſoule whiche art innobled with the Image of God, redéemed with Chriſtes bloud, betrothed to him by fayth, indued with the holy Ghoſt, garniſhed with vertues, and regiſtred among the aungels: Loue thou him that hath loued thée ſo much: Serue him that hath ſerued thée: Séeke him that ſéekes thée: Loue him that loues thée, which loued thée firſt, and which is the cauſe of thy loue. He is the deſert, he is the reward, he is the frute, he is the vſe of it, he is the ende of it. Be carefull for hym that is carefull of thée: he at leyſure for him, that is at leyſure

for thée: be cleane with him that is cleane: be holy with him that is holy. Looke after what ſorte thou ſheweſt thy ſelfe towardes God, after the ſame ſort ſhall he ſhew him ſelfe towardes thée. He is ſwéete, méeke, and mercyfull: and therfore he requireth to haue them that be ſwéete, méeke, pleaſaunt, and mercyfull. Loue thou him that hath plucked thée out of the puddle of miſerie, and out of the myre of filthines. Choſe him for thy frend aboue all frendes, whiche alone will kéepe touche with thée when all thinges fayle thée. In the day of thy buryall when all thy frendes ſhrinke frō thée, he will not forſake thée, but will defend thée from the roring Lyons that wayt for their pray,

and will leade thée through an vnknowen countrey, and bryng thée to the ſtréetes of the heauenly Sion, and there ſet thée amōg the Aungels before the face of his owne maieſtie, where thou ſhalt heare this Aungelicall ditie: holie, holie, holie, Lorde God of hoſtes. There is ye ſong of mirth, the voyce of ioy and welfare, the voyce of thankeſgiuing & prayſe, & the voyce of magnifying God for euer. There is the full meaſure of happineſſe, paſſing excellent glory, ſuperabundant ioy, & all good thynges. O my ſoule, ſigh hartely, deſire earneſtly, that thou mayſt come to that Citie aboue, whereof ſo glorious thinges are ſpoken, and wherein is the habitation of all that reioyſe.

By loue thou mayſt get vp thether. Nothing is hard, nothyng is impoſſible to him that loueth. The ſoule that loueth goeth vp often to the heauenly Ieruſalem, and runneth familiarly from ſtréete to ſtréete, viſityng the Patriarkes and Prophetes, ſalutyng the Apoſtles, wondring at the hoſtes of Martyrs and Confeſſors, and gazing at the companies of the Virgins. Heauen and earth and all things that are in them call vppon me without ceaſſyng, to loue my Lord God.
               
               
                  ¶What the knowledge of the truth is.
                  WHat is the knowledge of truth? firſt to knowe thy

ſelfe, and to indeuor to be that which thou oughteſt to be, and to amende that whiche ought to be amended. And ſecondly to know and to loue thy maker, for that is the whole happines of man. Sée then how vnſpeakeable the graciouſnes of Gods loue towardes vs is. He hath created vs of nothing, and giuen vs all that we haue. But foraſmuch as we haue loued the gift more then the giuer, and the creature more then the creator: we are falne into the deuilles ſnare and become hys bondſlaues. Neuertheleſſe God beyng moued with compaſſion, ſent his ſonne to redéeme vs ſlaues, and his holy ſpirite to make vs his ſonnes agayne. He hath giuen his ſonne to be the pryce

of our raunſome, the holie Ghoſt as an aſſuraunce of his loue, and to be ſhort he reſerueth him ſelfe whole for vs to be the heritage of our adoption. And ſo God accordyng to hys excéedyng gracious goodneſſe and mercie, hath for verie loue and good will to manward, beſtowed not onely hys benefites but alſo him ſelfe vpon him, to recouer him agayne, not ſo much to him ſelfe, as to him. To the intent that men might be borne of God, God was firſt borne of them. Who is ſo hard harted that he will not be ſoftened by the loue of God preuenting man with ſo hartie good wil, that he vouchſaued to become man for mans ſake? who can finde in his hart to hate a man,

whoſe nature and lykeneſſe he ſéeth in the manhode of GOD? Doubtleſſe he that hateth a man hateth God, and ſo loſeth all his labour. For God became man for mans ſake, that he might be a redeemer as well as a creator, and that man might be raunſomed with his owne goodes, and that one man might loue an other the more hartely. God appeared in the ſhape of man, to the end that both body and ſoule might be made bleſſed, by renewyng the eye of the mynde in his Godhead, and the eye of the bodie in hys manhoode, ſo that whether man went in or out, he might finde foode in him layde vp in ſtore by hym in hys humane nature.
               
               
                  
                  ¶What the ſending of the holie Ghoſt worketh in vs.
                  FOr our Sauiour was borne for vs, and crucified and put to death for vs, to deſtroye our death by hys owne death. And bycauſe the grape of hys fleſhe was caryed to the wynepreſſe of the Croſſe, and there beyng preſſed yelded forth the ſwéete wyne of his Godhead: The holy ghoſt was ſent to make ready the veſſels of mens harts, that the new wyne might be put into newe veſſels: firſt to ſeaſon their harts for marryng of the wyne that ſhould be put into them, and afterward to hoope them well for leakyng when the wyne was

poured into them: that is to wit, to clenſe them from delightyng in ſinne, and to bynde them from delightyng in vanitie. For that which is good could not come in, till that whiche is ill was firſt rid out. The delighting in wickedneſſe defileth: and the delighting in vanitie ſheadeth out. The delighting in wickedneſſe maketh the veſſell foule, and the delighting in vanitie maketh it full of cranies. To delight in wickedneſſe, is to loue ſinne, and to delight in vanitie, is to be in loue with tranſitorie thinges. Therfore caſt out the thyng that is euill, that thou mayeſt receiue the thyng that is good. Poure out ſowreneſſe that thou mayeſt be filled with ſwéeteneſſe. Caſt out

the ſpirite of the deuill and the ſpirite of this worlde, that thou mayſt take in the ſpirite of God. The ſpirite of the deuil worketh delight in wickedneſſe, and the ſpirite of the world worketh delight in vanitie. And theſe delightes are euill: for the one is a fault of it ſelfe, and the other is the occaſion of faultes. When the euill ſpirites be caſt out, then will the ſpirite of God come and enter into the tabernacle of thy hart, and worke good delightes, and good loue, wherby the loue of the worlde and the loue of ſinne is driuen away. The loue of the worlde intyceth men to deceyue them, and the loue of ſinne defileth and leadeth to death. But the loue of God inlighteneth the

mynde, clenſeth the conſcience, gladdeth the hart, and ſheweth a man God.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the workyng of him that loueth God.
                  HE in whō the loue of God dwelleth, is alwayes deuiſing when he ſhall come vnto God, when he ſhall leaue the world, and when he ſhall ſcape the corruption of his fleſhe. And to the intent he may finde true peace, he hath his hart and deſire alwayes lifted vp aboue. When he ſitteth, when he goeth, when he reſteth, or what ſoeuer he do, his hart is euermore with God. He exhorteth all men to the loue of God, he commendeth the loue

of God vnto all mē, and in hart, word, and worke he ſheweth vnto all men both how ſwéete the loue of God is, and alſo how euil and bitter the loue of this world is. He laugheth at the glorie of this world, & findeth fault with the care of it, ſhewyng how fond a folye it is to put a mans truſt in thinges that be tranſitorie. He marueleth at the blindnes of the men that loue ſuch thinges. And he wondereth that all men forſake not all theſe tranſitorie and flightfull thinges. He thinketh that all men ſhoulde déeme the thinges ſwéete, wherein he him ſelfe findeth ſo good taſt: that all men ſhould loue, that whiche he loueth: and that all men ſhould be priuie to yt which he knoweth.

Oftētimes doth he behold God, and is ſwéetely refreſhed at the contemplation of him: ſo much the more happely, as he doth it more oftēly. For ſwéete alwayes is that thing to be thought vpon, whiche is alwayes ſwéete to be loued and prayſed.
               
               
                  ¶Of the true reſt of the hart.
                  IN déede the true reſt of the hart, is whē the hart is wholly ſettled in deſire, vpon the loue of God, & coueteth nothing els, but hath a certeine happy delight in the thing that he holdes him to, & ioyeth in the ſame delight. And if it be neuer ſo little withdrawen from him by any vayne

thought, or buſineſſe of other matters: he hyeth him as faſt as he cā to returne to him agayne wt all ſpéede: accountyng it but a baniſhment to abyde any where els then there. For like as there is no moment wherin man doth not inioye or vſe the gracious goodneſſe of God: ſo ought there to be no moment wherein he ſhould not haue him preſent in remembraunce. And therfore no ſmall fault doth that man commit, who when he talketh with God in prayer, is ſodenly pluckt awaye from his preſence, as it were from the eyes of one that neither ſaw him nor heard him. And that is done when he foloweth his owne naughtie and vnruly thoughtes, and preferreth

before God, ſome creature that is for his own profite or pleaſure whereunto the contemplation of his mynd is eaſly drawen away, by bethinkyng, reuoluyng, or mynding the ſame oftener th
                        •
                     n God, whom he muſt continually remember as his creator, honor as his redéemer, attend vppon as his Sauiour, and feare as hys iudge.
               
               
                  ¶What ſoeuer withdraweth the ſight of the mind from God, muſt in any wiſe be eſchewed and abhorred.
                  WHo ſoeuer thou art that loueſt the world, looke before thée whither thou goeſt. The way that thou walkeſt is an euil

way and full of ſorrow. Therefore O man leaue of thyne owne buſineſſes for a while, and with draw thy ſelfe from thy trouble ſome thoughtes. Caſt away thy burdenſome cares, lay aſide thy paynefull turmoyles, beſtowe ſome tyme vpon God, and reſt thy ſelfe a while in him. Get thée into the chamber of thy mynde, ſhet out all thinges ſauyng God and ſuch thinges as further the findyng of hym, and ſéeke hym with thy doore faſt ſhet to thée. Let thy whole hart ſaye vnto God, I ſéeke thy countenaunce, it is thy countenaunce that I ſéeke O Lorde. Now then my Lord God, go to, teache thou my hart where and how it may ſéeke thée, and where and how it may

finde thée. Lorde if thou be not here, where ſhall I ſéeke thée when thou art gone? Or if thou be euery where, why ſée I not thée here? Certeſſe thou dwelleſt in vnapprochable light. And how ſhall I come at thée then? or who ſhall leade me and bryng me in thether? that I may ſée thée there? Agayne, what markes or what ſhape ſhall I ſéeke thée by? I neuer ſaw thée my Lord God, I neuer knew thy face. What ſhall this farre baniſhed creature of thyne doe moſt hygh Lorde, what ſhall he doe? what ſhall thy ſeruaunt doe whiche is carefull for loue of thée, and is reiected far from thy preſence? Beholde, he panteth to ſée thée, and thy countenaunce is farre from him. He

longeth to come neare thée, and thy dwellyng place is vnapprochable. He would fayne finde thée, & he knoweth not thy place. He is deſirous to ſéeke thée, and knoweth not thy countenaunce.
               
               
                  ¶That the ſeyng of God is loſt through ſinne, & miſerie founde in ſtede of it.
                  LOrd, thou art my God and my ſouereine, and yet I neuer ſawe thée. Thou haſt made me and made me newe agayne, and beſtowed all thy goodes vpon me, and yet hetherto I haue neither knowen thée nor ſéene thée. To be ſhort, I was made to ſée thée, and I haue not yet done the thyng that I was made for. O

wretched ſtate of man, that he muſt forgo the thyng for whiche he was made. O hard and curſed caſe as it was. Alas what hath he loſt, and what hath he founde? what is forgone, and what remaineth? He hath loſt bleſſedneſſe, to whiche he was made, and founde miſerie, to whiche he was not made. The thyng is gone without whiche nothyng is luckie, and the thyng remayneth whiche of it ſelfe is all together vnluckie. Man did then eate aungels bread, whiche thyng he now hungreth for: and now he eateth the bread of ſorrow, whiche he was not then acquaynted with. O Lord, how long wilt thou forget vs? for euer? how long wilt thou turne awaye thy face from

vs? when wilt thou looke backe and heare vs? when wilt thou inlighten our eyes and ſhew vs thy face? when wilt thou reſtore thy ſelfe vnto vs? Looke backe Lord and heare vs, and inlighten vs, and ſhewe thy ſelfe vnto vs, and reſtore thy ſelfe vnto vs, that it may go well with vs whiche are ſo ill beſtad without thée. I haue a bitterneſſe at my hart bycauſe thou haſt forſaken it: Lorde I beſéeche thée ſwéeten it agayne with thy comfort. I haue begon to ſéeke thée with a hungrie appetite, let me not be ſent away from thée without repaſt. I am come with a ſharpe ſtomacke, let me not go away faſtyng. I come poore to thee that art rich, I come wretched to thée that art pitifull,

let me not goe away emptie and deſpiſed. Lorde I am bowed downe, and I can not looke but downeward. Rayſe me that I may looke vpward. Myne iniquities are gone ouer my head, they haue ouerwhelmed me, and they ouerlode me as a heauie burthen. Wynde me out, and vnlode me, that the pit ſhut not his mouth vpon me. Teache me to ſéeke thée, and ſhewe thy ſelfe to me at my ſéekyng. For I cannot ſéeke thee except thou teache me, nor finde thée except thou ſhewe thy ſelfe vnto me. Let me ſéeke thée by longyng after thée, and let me long after thée by ſéekyng thée. Let me finde thée by louyng thée, and let me loue thée by findyng thée.
               
               
                  
                  Of Gods goodnes.
                  I Confeſſe Lord (I thanke thée for it) that thou haſt created me after thyne owne image, to the end I ſhould be myndefull of thee, thinke vpon thée, and loue thée. But that image is ſo defaced by the corruption of ſinne, that it cannot do the thing for whiche it was created, except thou renew and reforme it agayne. I beſéech thée O Lorde whiche geueſt the vnderſtandyng of fayth, graunt that I may redily vnderſtād how great thou art. For thou art as we beleue, and this is it that we beleue: namely we beleue that thou art ſome one thyng, then the whiche there can nothyng be thought to be either greater or

better? What art thou then O Lord God? Euen that one thing, then the whiche nothyng can be imagined to be greater or better, that is to ſay the ſouereine goodneſſe, whiche hath his beyng of it ſelfe alone, and hath made all other thynges of nothyng. Thou therfore art righteous, ſoothfaſt, bleſſed and whatſoeuer thing els it is better to be then not to be. But howe doeſt thou ſpare the wicked, ſeyng thou art wholly and without compariſon rightuous? Is it bycauſe thy goodneſſe is incomprehenſible? This thing lyeth hid in the vnapprochable light which thou dwelleſt in. Verely, the headſpryng from whēce the ſtreame of thy mercy floweth, lyeth hid in the moſt déepe

and ſecret gulfe of thy goodneſſe. For although thou be wholly & excéedyngly rightuous: yet art thou alſo gentle to the euill, bycauſe thou art wholly and excéedyng good: for thou ſhouldeſt be the leſſe good if thou ſhouldeſt beare with no euill. For better is he that is good both to good and bad, then he that is good but to the good onely. And better is he that is good to the euill both by ſparyng them and alſo by puniſhyng them, thē he that is good to them but in puniſhing them onely. The cauſe therfore why thou art mercifull, is for that thou art wholly and excéedyng good.
               
               
                  ¶Of the delectable fruition of God.
                  
                     O Vnmeaſurable goodneſſe whiche paſſeſt all vnderſtādyng of hart, let that mercy of thine come vpō me, whiche procéedeth frō ſo paſſing aboūdance. Let that flowe into me whiche floweth out of thée. Spare me of thy mercyfulneſſe, and puniſhe me not by thy Iuſtice. Awake now my ſoule, and lift vp thy whole vnderſtandyng, and conſider to the vttermoſt of thy power how great and of what ſorte that goodneſſe is whiche is God. For if euery ſeuerall good thyng be delectable: caſt in thy mynde aduiſedly, howe delectable that good thyng is, whiche conteyneth the pleaſauntneſſe of all good thynges: not in ſuch ſorte as we finde it in thynges created, but

as farre differyng, as there is oddes betwéene the creature and the maker. For if the life that is created be good: how good is the lyfe that created it? If the welfare that is created be pleaſaunt: how pleaſant is the welfare that made all welfare? If the wiſedome that conſiſteth in conceiuyng or knowynge of thynges knowen, be amiable: how amiable is the wiſedome that made all thynges of nothyng? finally, if there be many and great pleaſures in thinges that be delectable: what and how great pleaſure is there in him which made thoſe delectable thinges? O what ſhall he haue, or what is it that he ſhall not haue, which inioyeth this good thyng? Certeſſe he ſhall

haue what ſoeuer he will, and he ſhall not haue any thyng that he would not haue. For there ſhall he haue all good thynges, both of body and ſoule, ſuch as neuer eye of mā hath ſéene, nor eare heard, nor hart imagined.
               
               
                  The ſouereine good is to be ſought.
                  WHy raungeſt thou then through ſo many thynges O ſilie mā, ſéekyng the goodes of thy ſoule and of thy body? Loue ye one good thyng wherein are all good things, and it is inough. Be deſirous of the ſingle good thyng which is all goodneſſe, & it ſufficeth. For what is it yt thou loueſt O my fleſhe? what deſireſt thou

O my ſoule? whatſoeuer thou loueſt, it is there: whatſoeuer thou deſireſt, it is there. If thou haue a mynde to beawtie, there the rightuous ſhine as the ſunne. If thou like of ſwiftnes, ſtrēgth, or libertie of body, where againſt nothyng may reſiſte: there they ſhalbe lyke the aungels of God. For the body is ſowen a naturall body, but it ſhall riſe a ſpirituall body, that is to witte ſpirituall in power but not in ſubſtaunce. If thou deſire a long or healthy life: there ſhalbe healthfull euerlaſtyngneſſe, and euerlaſtyng healthfulneſſe. For the rightuous ſhall liue for euer, and the welfare of the rightuous cō
                     meth of the Lord. If ſuffiſance: They ſhalbe ſuffiſed when the

glorie of the Lord appeares. If dronkenneſſe: They ſhalbe made drūken with the foyzon of Gods houſe. If melodie: There the angels ſhall ſing vnto God without end. If any maner of pleaſure, ſo it be not vncleane: The Lorde will let them drinke their fill of the ſtreame of his pleaſures. If wiſedome: The very wiſedome of God ſhall ſhewe him ſelfe to them. If frendſhyp: They ſhall loue God more thē them ſelues, and one an other as themſelues: and God ſhall loue them more then they loue them ſelues. For they loue him, them ſelues, and one an other by him: and he loueth him ſelfe and them by him ſelfe. If concord: They ſhall all of them delight but in one thyng,

for there ſhalbe but one will among them, and that ſhalbe the will of God their ſouereine. If power: They ſhalbe maiſters of their wils like as God is of his. For like as God can do what he liſteth by him ſelfe: ſo ſhall they be able to doe what they liſt by him. For like as they wil not liſt any other thing then he liſteth: ſo will he liſt whatſoeuer they liſt, and ſo conſequently whatſoeuer he liſteth muſt néedes come to paſſe. If honor & riches: God will make his good and faithfull 
                        •
                     eruaūtes rulers of much goodes, yea they ſhalbe the children of God and Gods, and they ſhalbe the heyres of God and coheyres with Chriſt. Or if thou deſire aſſured ſafetie: they ſhalbe as ſure

that that good ſtate ſhall neuer fayle them, as they are ſure that they would neuer forgoe it by their owne willes, and that God their louer will not take it away from hys louers agaynſt theyr willes, and that there is not any thing mightier then God to ſeparate God and thē a ſunder. Now then what and how great ioy is there, whereas is ſuch & ſo great goodneſſe?
               
               
                  ¶ Of the mutuall loue betwéene the Saintes in heauens.
                  O Hart of man, O poore hart, O hart vnacquainted with miſerie and wretchedneſſe, or rather ouerwhelmed with miſeries:

how glad wouldeſt thou be if thou haddeſt aboundance of all theſe thinges? Aſke thy furtheſt cōpaſſe of thyne inward conceyt, if it were able to receiue the ioy of this ſo great happineſſe? Certeinely if any other man whom thou louedſt as thy ſelfe ſhould haue the ſame happie ſtate, thy ioye would be double, bycauſe thou wouldeſt be as glad for him as for thy ſelfe. But if two or thrée or a nōber mo ſhould haue the ſame thyng, thou wouldſt be as glad for euery one of them as for thy ſelfe, if thou didſt loue thē as thy ſelfe. What ioy then ſhall there be in that perfect loue of the innumerable bleſſed aungels and men, when none ſhall loue any other leſſe then him ſelfe? for

euery of them ſhalbe as glad for others as for him ſelfe. Now if the hart of man be ſcarce able to conceiue the ioye of any one ſo great a benefite, how ſhall it be capable of ſo many and ſo great ioyes? And doubtleſſe, ſeyng that accordyng as euery man loueth another, ſo much doth he reioyſe of his welldoing: therfore like as in that bleſſed happineſſe euery man ſhal without cōpariſon loue God more then him ſelfe & all others ſet all together: ſo alſo ſhal he without eſtimation reioyſe more of Gods happie ſtate, then of his owne & of all other folkes with him. Moreouer if they loue God with all their hart, with all their mynde, and with all their ſoule, and yet all their hart, all

their mynde, and all their ſoule ſuffice not to loue hym as he is worthy: Out of all doubt, they ſhall alſo reioyſe with all theyr hart, with all their mynde, and with all their ſoule: and yet their whole hart, their whole mynde, and their whole ſoule ſhall not ſuffice to reioyſe to the full.
               
               
                  ¶Of the full ioy of the eternall lyfe.
                  MY God and my Lord, my hope and hartes ioy, tell my ſoule whether this be the ioy whereof thou ſayeſt vnto vs by thy ſonne: Aſke, and ye ſhall receiue, yt your ioy may be full, for I haue founde a certeine ioy that is full and more then full. For

when the hart is full, the mynde full, the ſoule full, and the whole mā full of that ioy, yet ſhall there remaine an ouerplus of ioy with out meaſure. All that ioy then, ſhall not enter whole into the inioyers of it, but the inioyers ſhal enter whole into the ioy of their Lord. Lord tell thy ſeruaunt, tell me inwardly in my hart, whether this be the ioye whereinto thoſe ſeruaūtes of thyne ſhall enter, whiche muſt enter into the ioy of their maiſter. Truly the ioye that thyne elect ſhall inioy, was neuer ſéene of mans eye, nor heard of mans eare, nor conceiued of mās hart. Therefore Lord I haue not yet ſayd or imagined howe much thy choſen ſhall reioyce. Vndoubtedly they ſhall ſo

much reioyce, as they dee loue thée: and they ſhall ſo much loue thée, as they know thee. And how much ſhall they loue thée? Verely, no eye hath ſéene, eare heard, nor hart cōceiued in his life, how much they ſhall know thée and loue thée in that life. I beſéeche thée my God let me know thée & loue thee, that I may haue ioy of thée. And although I cannot do it to the full in this life: yet let me profite from day to day vntill it may come to the full. Let the knowledge of thee grow in me here, that it may become full there. Let the loue of thée increaſe in me here, that it may be full there: ſo as my ioy may be great in hope here, and full in deede there. O ſoothfaſt God,

I pray thée let me receiue the thyng that thou promiſeſt, that my ioye may be full. In the meane tyme let my mynde be thinkyng vpon it, let my toung be talkyng of it, let my hart long for it, let my mouth be ſpeakyng of it, let my ſoule hunger after it, let my fleſh thirſt after it, let my whole ſelfe be deſirous of it, vntill ſuch tyme as I may enter into the ioy of my Lorde, there to continue for euer worlde without ende. Amen.
                  All glorie, honor, prayſe, and thankes be giuen to God alone.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶A TABLE OF the Prayers contained in S. Auſtens bookes intitled his ſelfe talke with God, and his Manuell.
            
               OF the vnſpeakable ſweetnes of God.
               Of the wretchednes & frailtie of man.
               Of Gods wonderfull light.
               Of the mortalitie of mans nature.
               Of the fall of the ſoule into ſinne.
               Of Gods manifold benefites.
               Of mans dignitie in tyme to come.
               Of Gods omnipotencie.
               Of the incomprehenſible prayſe of God.
               Of lifting a mans hope vnto God.
               Of the ſnares of concupiſcence.
               Of mans miſerie and Gods benefites.
               How God doth continually behold & marke mens doynges and intentes.
               Of mans imbecillitie without the grace of God.
               Of the deuill and his manifold temptatiōs.
               That God is the light of the righteous.
               Of Gods benefites.
               Of the feruentnes of loue or charitie.
               That God hath put all thynges vnder the ſeruice of man.
               By conſideration of earthly benefites we

coniecture the greatnes of the heauenly wiſedome.
               That the ſweetnes of God taketh away all the preſent bitternes of this world.
               That all our truſt, and longing of our hart ought to be to Godward.
               That our welfare commeth of God.
               That mans will is vnable to doe good workes without the grace of God.
               Of Gods old benefites.
               Of Gods deepe predeſtination and foreknowledge.
               Of ſuch as be righteous and afterward become wicked, and contrariwiſe.
               That the faithfull mans ſoule is the Sanctuary of God.
               That God cannot be found neither by the outward ſenſes, nor by the inward wits.
               Of the acknowledgyng of a mans owne vileneſſe.
               A conſideration of Gods maieſtie.
               Of the longing and thirſting of the ſoule after God.
               Of the glorie of the heauenly countrey.
               A Prayer to the holy Trinitie.
            
         
         
            The table of prayers in his Manuell.
            
               
               OF Gods wonderfull beyng.
               Of ye vnſpeakable knowledge of God.
               Of the longing of the ſoule that feeleth God.
               Of the wretchedneſſe of that ſoule whiche loueth not, neither ſeeketh our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
               Of the longing of the ſoule.
               Of the happines of the ſoule that is let looſe from the priſon of the body.
               Of the ioyes of paradiſe.
               Of the kyngdome of heauen.
               Of the comfort of the ſorrowfull ſoule after the long mournyng therof.
               Of ioye.
               That the word is become fleſh for our ſake.
               That the more a man muſeth vpon God, the ſweeter it is to him.
               That tribulations for Chriſtes ſake, are to be deſired in this life.
               Howe the kyngdome of heauen may be gotten.
               What paradiſe, is and what it hath.
               What thyng God requireth lyke vnto him ſelfe in vs.
               Of the boldneſſe of the ſoule that loueth God.
               What God hath done for man.
               The remembryng of the woundes of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
               That the remēbraūce of Chriſtes woūdes

is an effectuall remedy agaynſt all aduerſities.
               The muſing of the ſoule vpon the loue of God.
               What the knowledge of the truth is.
               What the ſendyng of the holy Ghoſt worketh in vs.
               Of the workyng of him that loueth God.
               Of the true reſt of the hart.
               Whatſoeuer withdraweth the mynde from God, muſt in any wiſe be eſchewed and abhorred.
               That the ſeyng of God is loſt through ſinne, and miſerie found in ſtede of it.
               Of Gods goodnes.
               Of the delectable fruition of God.
               That the ſouerein good is to be ſought.
               Of the mutuall loue betweene the Saintes in heauen.
               Of the full ioy of the eternall life.
            
            ¶The end of the Table.
         
         
            AT LONDON Printed by Iohn Daye, dwellyng ouer Alderſgate.
            ¶ Cum gratia & Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
         
      
   