
      
         
            
            ¶ Theſe be to require and charge you, and euery of you, in the Quenes maieſties name and behalf by vertue and authority of her graces commiſſyon to vs directed, that you be and perſonally appeare before vs, her maieſties commiſſioners at the next comming, bringinge with you, then & there to deliuer vnto vs, to her highneſſe vſe, fayre wrytten in parchment vnder youre ſignes and ſeales, a true and perfect certificat and anſwer, of al and euery article and thing hereafter enſuing, ſo as you wil verify the ſame to be true at your comming by your corporal other, and anſwer the contrary at all times hereafter at your perils.
            1 FIrſt you ſhal enquire of al landes, tenements, medowes, paſtors, woodes, vnderwodes, reuercions and hereditamentes within your parish which heretofore did belong or appertain to anye late monaſtery or priory, and wer reputed and taken as par
                  ••
               l or member of the ſame, whych before this time ought to haue come to the handes and poſſeſſyon, of the late kinges of famous memorye king Henry the viii. or king Edward the vi. Quene Mary, or to the Quenes Maieſty that nowe is, by the diſſolution of the ſame by force of 
                  〈◊〉
               . ſeuerall actes of parliament made at Weſt minſter in the xxvii. and xxxi. yeres of the raign of the ſaid late king Henry the viii. whyche haue bene or be concealed and wrongfully detayned from her Maieſtie, her ſaid father, brother, and ſyſter, of what yerely value the ſame is: and in whoſe tenure and occupation.
            2 Item, of all colledges, chauntries, fre chappels, chappels of eaſe, within your pariſh hauing bring within v. yeres next before the iiii▪ day of Nouember. Anno primo Reg. Cvi. 
                  〈◊〉
                of all manors, lands, tenements, rentes, tithes, pentions, portions, & other hereditaments to them or anye of them then belonging, which ought to come to the hands of the Quenes Maieſtie by force of an act of parliament made for the deſſolution of the ſame in the firſt yere of the raigne of the ſame late king Edward or whiche by any wayes or meanes, were deſolued or extingguiſhed, ſith the .iiii. daye of February in the .xxvii. yere of kinge Henrie the .viii. being yet concealed from her highnes, and ſo haue ben from her graces ſaid brother and ſyſter.
            3. Item what landes, tenementes and hereditamentes, were appoynted to the findinge of a prieſt for euer, and wherwith any prieſte hath bene mayntained or found at any time within the ſaid v. yeres, which were not in the real poſſeſſyon of the late king Edward the vi. nor Quene Mary: nor yet be come to the Quenes Maieſtye that nowe is.
            4. Item what annuall rentes, profets, or emolumentes, at anye time wythin the ſaid v. yeres haue ben employed towardes the finding of any ſtipendary prieſt (en tended by any act or wryting to haue continuance for euer) yet concealed from her highnes, and haue ben cōcealed from her graces ſaid brother and ſiſter.
            5. Item what lands, tenements, hereditaments, profits and other things haue ben by any conueyance appoynted to the finding of a prieſt for yeres, and wherewith any prieſt hath ben found within the ſaid v. yeres, likewiſe concealed from her highnes as afore is ſaid.
            6. Item what lands, tenements, and hereditaments haue ben appoynted wholly to the finding of any Aniuerſary, Obite, light, lamp, or other like entent or purpoſe for euer, which haue ben kept within the ſaid v. yeares, yet concealed from her highnes, and haue bene concealed frō her graces brother and ſyſter.
            7. Item, wheras part of the iſſues of ſuch landes were appoynted to the intents aforeſaid for euer, that then you do enquire what greateſt ſom of mony hath bene employd about thentents aforſaid, in any one yere within v. yeres aboue ſaid, yet cōcealed frō her highnes & haue ben concealed frō her graces ſaid brother & ſiſter.
            8. Item, you ſhal enquire what ſummes of mony and profits by any manner of conueyaunces were appoynted to haue continuaunce for euer, and what was the greateſt ſomme of mony, that in any one yere of the ſaid v. yeres were employed by any corporation, fraternity, company, or felowſhip of miſteries or craftes towardes the finding of any prieſt, anniuerſarye, light, lampe, or other like thing: yet concealed from her highneſſe and haue bene concealed from her graces ſayde brother and ſyſter.
            9. Item, how many brotherheds, guilds, and fratermittes not being felowſhips of miſteries or craftes, be within your ſaid pariſh, & what lands, tenements and be reditamentes are belonging to any of them, yet concealed from her highnes, and haue bene concealed from her graces ſaid brother and ſiſter.
            10 Item, what goods, cattels, plate, iewels, ornaments, or other moueables late belonging to any the ſaid colledges, chauntries, free chapell or ſtipendary prieſt for the furniture of their ſeueral foundations ar yet with holden from her maieſtie, by whom and of what value.
            11 Item of al landes, tenements, & hereditaments, goods and cha
                  •
               tels, which ought to come to the Quenes maieſty, by reaſon of any attaindor or forfeture of any perſon or perſons by treaſon, fellony or murder, or ſuch like offence or offences, whiche are concealed from her maieſty, or haue ben concealed &c.
            12 Item of all landes, tenementes, and hereditaments which ought to come to the Quenes maieſties handes by way of eſcheate, viz. yf any parſon or perſons being borne without the Quenes dominions, inhabiting within the ſame haue purchaſed any manner landes or tenements to them and their heirs for euer, with out the ſpetiall licence of the prince, or if any parſon or parſons holding any landes or tenements of the Quenes maieſty haue died therof ſeaſed, without heire generall or ſpecial, wherby the ſame landes ought to eſcheat to her highnes, or her graces progenitors, and are concealed and wrongfully deteined from her maieſty or her ſaid progenitors.
            13 Item you ſhall enquire generally of al landes, tenementes, and hereditaments geuen by any of the Quenes maieſties moſte noble progenitors to anye parſon or parſons, for terme of life or lyfes, or in taile, whiche ought to reuerte and come to her highnes handes by anye manner of meanes or wayes, in reuerſion or remainder, and haue bene or be concealed and wrongfully detayned from her highnes, or from her graces moſt noble progenitors, and if any ſuch you do find, then to enquire where the ſame do lie, and in whoſe poſſeſſion the ſame is, and to what vſe the ſame was firſt geuen and appointed, together with the clere yerely value therof, and who taketh the profits of the ſame.
            14 Item what ſale and ſpoyle of timber of any Caſtels, houſes, or buldinges haue ben made, by whom and to what value, and what hath ben taken from any of the ſame, wherof the Quene nor her progenitors haueben anſwered any proffet.
            15 Item how many of the ſaid caſtels: maners and other edifices, be ſo decaied that they cannot be repayred agayne with any reaſonable charges.
            16 Item to value what the ſtone, timber, glaſſe, Iron and ſtuffe, of ſuthe ruinouscaſtels, or maner places and other edifices, ar worth to be ſold.
            17 Item what leade and belinettel hath ben taken from any the ſaid caſtles, late monaſteries, colleges and chaunteries, by whom & to what quantie and value.
            18 Item what quantitie of leade and belinettell is remayning in any ſuche place.
            19 Item if any parke be ſo decayde of game, clouſure, and wod, that the ſame is not to be continued. Then to certifie, by whom the ſame was made, and to what value the ſame amounteth.
            20 Item to certifie the quantitie and goodnes of the grounde of euery ſuche parke, and for what yerely rent the ſame may be letten.
            21 Item to certefie the ſtate of the Quenes houſes, in borowes and townes, and what willrepayre the ſame. And whether the rent of any of them be decayed and how the ſame may be reuiued.
            22 Item if any be diſpoſed to take a leaſe of anie the ſayde houſes for the tearm of yeares at the olde rent and with reprations. Let them com to the commiſſioners.
            23 Item where any the ſayd houſes be ſo decayed that the ſame cannot be repeared without ouer muche charge, neyther can be letten or de
                  ••
               ſed: Then tocertefie what the timber, tile, glaſſe, yron, bricke: and other ſtuffe of the ſame is worth to be ſolde.
            24 Item what timber or wodes haue ben ſpoyled by any wodward or other parſon, by coloure of reprations or otherwiſe.
            25 Item what fines, prophetes, or ſomes of money haue ben receyued by any bailife, collector, or any other for any tenement, houſe, land, woddes, heri
                  •
               tz, 
                  •••
               rey or any other caſualtie, for the whiche as yet the Quene is not aunſwered.
            26 Item what fines will be geuen by any man, for any the Quenes maieſties landes, tenementes or fermes, lying within your ſaid pariſh.
         
      
   