
      
         
            
            
            ORDERS,
thought meete by her
Maieſtie, and her priuie Councell, to be
executed throughout the Counties of this Realme,
in ſuch Townes, Villages, and other places, as are, or
may be hereafter infected with the plague, for
the ſtay of further increaſe of the ſame.
            
               ❧Alſo, an aduiſe ſet downe vpon her
Maieſties expreſſe commaundement, by the beſt learned
in Phyſicke within this Realme, contayning ſundry good
rules and eaſie medicines, without charge to the meaner
ſort of people, aſwell for the preſeruation of her good
Subiects from the plague before infection,
as for the curing and ordring of them
after they ſhalbe infected.
            
               ❧Imprinted at London by Chriſtopher
Barker, Printer to the Queenes
most excellent Maieſtie.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧Orders thought
meete by her Maieſtie and her priuie
Councel, to be executed throughout the Counties
of this Realme, in ſuch Townes, Villages, and other
places, as are, or may be hereafter infected
with the plague, for the ſtay of further
increaſe of the ſame.
            
               
                  INprimis, all the Iuſtices in euery 
Countie, aſwell within the liberties
as without, immediatly▪ vpon knowledge
to them giuen, ſhall aſſemble
themſelues together at ſome one generall
place accuſtomed, being cleare from infection
of the plague, to conſult howe theſe orders following
may be duely put in execution, not meaning
that any Iuſtices dwelling in or nere places infected,
ſhall come thither whiles their comming may
be doubtful. And after their firſt generall aſſembly▪
they ſhal make a diſtribution of themſelues to 
                  •••
               
               dry
limits and diuiſions, as in other 
                  〈◊〉
                ſeruices
for the Countie they are accuſtomed to 
                  〈◊〉
                for
the proſecution thereof.
            2 Firſt, they ſhall inquire, 
                  〈…〉
                informe 
               
habitants of the ſame Townes and Pariſhes are,
to be hable to relieue the poore that are or ſhalbe infected,
and to be reſtrained in their houſes.
            
                3 Item, thereupon after conference vſed▪ according
to the neceſſitie of the cauſe, they ſhall deuiſe
and make a generall taxation, eyther by charging
the Towne infected with one ſumme in groſſe, or
by charging the ſpeciall perſons of wealth within
the ſame, to be forth with collected for the rate of one
moneth at the firſt, and ſo if the ſickneſſe ſhall continue,
the collection of the like ſumme, or of more or of
leſſe, as time and cauſe ſhall require, and the ſame
to be euery firſt, ſeconde, third, or fourth weeke emploied
to and for the execution of the ſaide orders.
And in caſe ſome of the ſaid Townes infected ſhall
manifeſtly appeare not to be of ſufficient habilitie
to contribute ſufficient for the charges requiſite,
then the taxation or collection ſhalbe made or further
extended to other partes, or in any other further

                  〈◊〉
               , as by the
                  •
                ſhalbe thought requiſite
where there ſhalbe any ſuch Townes or Villages

                  〈◊〉
               , and vnable to relieue themſelues. And
if the ſaid Townes be ſcituated in the borders and
confines of any other ſhire, then as the Iuſtices

                  〈…〉
                neede for the greatneſſe of the

                  ••
               arge 
                  〈…〉
               , that the pa
                  ••
               es of the 
                  〈◊〉
                ioyning
to the 
                  〈…〉
               
the next Iuſtices of the 
                  〈◊〉
               
Shire 
                  •
               o confir
                  •••
               g, 
                  •
               o procure by 
                  〈◊〉
                ſome
reliefe, as in 
                  〈…〉
                they 
                  〈◊〉
                to relieue them, in
reſpect of 
                  〈…〉
                of the place, and 
                  〈◊〉
               
that the 
                  〈◊〉
                infection 
                  〈◊〉
                the 
                  〈…〉
               
from the ſaid adioyning places, though they be ſeparated

by name of the Countie.
            4 Item, they ſhal cauſe to be appointed in euery 
Pariſh aſwell infected as not infected, certaine
perſons to viewe the bodies of all ſuch as ſhall die,
before they be ſuffered to be buried, and to certifie
the Miniſter of the Church and Churchwarden, or
other principal officers, or their ſubſtitutes, of what
probable diſeaſe the ſaid perſons died: and the ſaide
viewers to haue weekely ſome allowance, and the
more large allowance where the Townes or Pariſhes
be infected, during the infection, towards
their maintenance, to the end they which ſhal be in
places infected, may forbeare to reſort into the companie
of others that are ſounde: and thoſe perſons
to be ſworne to make true report according to their
knowledge, and the choiſe of them to be made by
direction of the Curat of the Church, with three or
foure ſubſtantiall men of the Pariſh. And in caſe
the ſaid viewers either through fauour or corruption,
ſhal giue wrong certificat, or ſhal refuſe to ſerue
being thereto appointed, then to cauſe them to be
puniſhed by impriſonmēt, in ſuch ſort as may ſerue
for a terror to others.
            5▪ Item, the houſes of ſuch perſons out of the 
which there ſhall dye any of the plague, being ſo
certified by the viewers, or otherwiſe knowen, or
where it ſhalbe vnderſtood, that any perſon remaineth
ſicke of the plague, to be cloſed vp on all parts
during the time of reſtraint, vz. ſixe weekes, after
the ſickneſſe 
                  •
               e ceaſed in the ſ
                  ••
               e houſe, in 
                  〈◊〉
                the
ſaid houſes 
                  〈◊〉
                infected ſh
                  •
               lbe within any Towne
ha
                  •
               ing houſes nere adio
                  •
               ning to the ſame. And if

the infection happen in houſes diſperſed in Villages,
and ſeparated from other houſes, and that of
neceſſitie, for the ſeruing of their cattel, and manuring
of their ground, the ſaid perſons cannot continue
in their houſes, then they to be neuertheleſſe reſtrained
from reſorting into companie of others, either
publiquely or priuately during the ſaid time of
reſtraint, and to weare ſome marke in their vppermoſt
garments, or beare white rods in their hands
at ſuch time as they ſhall goe abroade, and if there
be any doubt that the maſters and owners of the
houſes infected, will not duely obſerue the directions
of ſhutting vp their doores, ſpecially in the
night, then ſhall there be appointed two or three
watchmen by turnes, which ſhalbe ſworne to attend
and watch the houſe, and to apprehend any
perſon that ſhall come out of the houſe contrary to
order, and the ſame perſons by order of the Iuſtices,
ſhal be a competent time impriſoned in ye ſtocks
in the highway next to the houſe infected: and furthermore,
ſome ſpeciall marke ſhalbe made and fixed
to the doores of euery of the infected houſes, and
where any ſuch houſes ſhall be Innes or Alehouſes,
the ſignes ſhalbe taken down for the time of the
reſtraint, and ſome croſſe or other marke ſet vp in
the place thereof, to be a token of the ſickneſſe.
            
                6 Item, they ſhall haue good regarde to chuſe
honeſt perſons that either ſhall collect the ſummes
aſſeſſed, or ſhall haue the cuſtodie thereof, & out of
the ſaid collection to allot a weekely proportion for
the finding of victuall, or fire, or medicines for the
poorer ſort, during the tyme of their reſtraynt. And
whereas ſome perſons being well diſpoſed to yeeld

almes and reliefe, wil be more willing to giue ſome
portions of victuall, as corne, bread or other meate,
the ſame ſhall be committed to the charge of ſome
ſpeciall perſons, that will honeſtly and truely preſerue
the ſame, to be diſtributed as they ſhall be appoynted
for the poore that are infected.
            7 Item, to appoynt certaine perſons dwelling 
within the townes infected, to prouide and deliuer
all neceſſaries of victuals, or any matter of watching
or other attendance, to keepe ſuch as are of
good wealth being reſtrained, at their owne proper
charges, and the poore at the common charges: and
the ſaid perſons ſo appoynted to be ordered, not to
reſort to any publique aſſemblie during the tyme of
ſuch their attendance, as alſo to weare ſome marke
on their vpper garment, or to beare a white rod in
their hande, to the ende others may auoyde their
companie.
            8 Item, that in the ſhire towne in euery Countie,
and in other great townes meete for that purpoſe,
there may be prouiſion beſpoken and made, of
ſuch preſeruatiues & other remedies, which otherwiſe
in meaner townes can not be readily had, as
by the Phyſicians ſhall be preſcribed, and is at this
preſent reduced into an Aduiſe made by the Phyſicians,
and nowe printed and ſent with the ſayd orders,
which may be fixed in market places, vpon
places vſual for ſuch publique matters, and in other
townes in the bodies of the pariſhe churches, and
chappells, in which aduiſe only ſuch things are preſcribed,
as vſually are to be had and founde in all
countries without great charge or coſt.
            
               
                9 Item, the Miniſters and Curates, and the
Church wardens in euery Pariſh, ſhall in writing
certifie weekely to ſome of the Iuſtices, reſiding
within ye Hundred or other limit where they ſerue,
the number of ſuch perſons as are infected and doe
not die, and alſo of all ſuch as ſhall die within their
Pariſhes, and their diſeaſes probable wherof they
dyed, and the ſame to be certified to the reſt of the
Iuſtices at their aſſemblies, which during ſome
conuenient time would be euery xxi. dayes, and
thereof a particular booke kept by the Clerke of the
peace, or ſome ſuch like.
            
                10 Item, to appoynt ſome place apart in each
pariſh for the burial of ſuch perſons as ſhal die of the
plague, as alſo to giue order that they be buryed after
ſunne ſetting, and yet neuertheleſſe by daylight,
ſo as the Curate be preſent for the obſeruation of the
rites and ceremonies preſcribed by the lawe, foreſeeing
as much as conueniently he may, to be diſtāt
from the danger of infection of the perſon dead, or
of the companie that ſhall bryng the corſe to the
graue.
            
                11 Item, the Iuſtices of the whole Countie to
aſſemble once in xxi. dayes, to examine whether
thoſe orders be duely executed, and to certifie to the
lordes of the priuie Councell their proceedings in
that behalf, what townes and villages be infected,
as alſo the nombers of the dead, and the diſeaſes
wherof they dyed; and what ſummes of money are
taxed and collected to this purpoſe, and howe the
ſame are diſtributed.
            
                12 Item, the Iuſtices in the hundred, where any

ſuch infection is, or the Iuſtices next adioyning
therunto, to aſſemble once a week, to take accompt
of the execution of the ſaid orders, and as they finde
any lack or diſorder, either to reforme it themſelues,
or to report it at the generall aſſemblie there, to be
by a more common conſent reformed.
            13 Item, for that the contagion of the plague 
groweth and increaſeth no way more, then by the
vſe and handling of ſuch clothes, bedding and other
ſtuffe as hath bene worne and occupyed by the infected
of this diſeaſe, during the time of their
diſeaſe: the ſayde Iuſtices ſhall in the places infected
take ſuch order, that all the ſaide clothes
and other ſtuffe, ſo occupied by the diſeaſed, ſo
ſoone as the parties diſeaſed of the plague are all of
them either well recouered or dead, be either burnt
and cleane conſumed with fire: or els ayred in ſuch
ſort as is preſcribed in an eſpeciall article conteyned
in the Aduiſe ſet downe by the Phyſicians. And for
that peraduenture the loſſe of ſuch apparell, bedding
and other ſtuffe to be burnt, may be greater
then the poore eſtate of the owners of the ſame may
well beare: it is thought very good and expedient,
if it be thought meete it ſhould be burnt, that then
the ſaid Iuſtices, out of ſuch collections as are to be
made within their Counties for the reliefe of the
poorer ſort that be infected, allowe alſo to them ſuch
ſumme or ſummes as to them ſhall be thought reaſonable,
in recompēce of the loſſe of their ſaid ſtuffe.
            14 Item, the ſaid Iuſtices may put in execution 
any other orders that by them at their generall
aſſemblie ſhall be deuiſed and thought meete, tending

to the preſeruation of her Maieſties ſubiectes
from the infection, and to the end their care and diligence
may the better appeare, they ſhall certifie in
writing the ſayde orders newly deuiſed, and if any
ſhall wilfully breake and contemne the ſame or any
the orders herein ſpecified, they ſhal either preſently
puniſhe them by impriſonment, or if the perſons ſo
contemning them, ſhall be of ſuch countenance as
the Iuſtices ſhall thinke meete to haue their faults
knowen to her Maieſtie, or to the Councell, they
ſhall charge and binde them to appeare before vs, &
the contempt duely certified, that there may bee a
more notorious ſharpe example made by puniſhment
of the ſame by order of her Maieſtie.
            
                15 Item, if there be lacke of Iuſtices in ſome
partes of the ſhire, or if they which are Iuſtices
there ſhall be for the tyme abſent, in that caſe the
more nomber of the Iuſtices at their aſſemblie ſhal
make choyſe of ſome conuenient perſons to ſupply
thoſe places for the better execution hereof.
            
                16 Item, if there be any perſon Eccleſiaſtical or
laye, that ſhall holde and publiſhe any opinions (as
in ſome places report is made) that it is a vayne
thing to forbeare to reſort to the infected, or that it
is not charitable to forbid the ſame, pretending that
no perſon ſhall dye but at their tyme prefixed, ſuch
perſons ſhalbe not onely reprehended, but by order
of the Biſhop, if they be eccleſiaſticall, ſhalbe forbidden
to preache, and being laye, ſhalbe alſo enioyned
to forbeare to vtter ſuch dangerous opinions vpon
payne of impriſonment, which ſhall be executed, if
they ſhall perſeuer in that error. And yet it ſhall appeare

manifeſtly by theſe orders, that according to
Chriſtian charitie, no perſons of the meaneſt degree
ſhalbe left without ſuccour and reliefe.
            17 And of theſe things aboue mencioned, the 
Iuſtices ſhall take great care, as of a matter ſpecially
directed & commanded by her Maieſtie vpon
the princely and naturall care ſhee hath conceyued
towards the preſeruation of her ſubiectes, who by
very diſorder, and for lacke of direction do in many
partes wilfully procure the increaſe of this general
contagion.
         
         
            
            
            An aduiſe ſet dovvne
vpon her Maieſties expreſſe commandement,
by the beſt learned in Phyſicke within this
Realme, contayning ſundry good rules and eaſie medicines,
vvithout charge to the meaner ſort of people,
as well for the preſeruation of her good Subiectes
from the plague before infection,
as for the curing and ordring of
them after they ſhal be
infected.
            
               Preſeruatiue by correcting the aire
in Houſes.
               
                  TAke Roſemarie dried,Preſeruatiues. or Iuniper,
Bayleaues, or Frankincenſe,
caſt the ſame on a Chafindiſh,
and receiue the fume or ſmoke
therof▪ Some aduiſe to be added
Lauender, or Sage.
               
               Alſo to make fires rather in
Pannes, to remoue about the
Chamber, then in Chimneis, ſhall better correct
the aire of the Houſes.
               Take a quantitie of Vineger very ſtrong, and
put to it ſome ſmall quantitie of Roſewater, tenne
branches of Roſemarie, put them all into a baſen,
then take fiue or ſixe Flintſtones, heated in the fire
till they be burning hotte, caſt them into the ſame
Vineger, & ſo let the fumes be receiued from place
to place of your houſe.
            
            
               
               Perfuming of Apparel.
               SVch apparel as you ſhal commonly weare, let
it be very cleane, and perfume it often eyther
with ſome red Saūders burned, or with Iuniper.
And if any ſhal happen to be with them that are
viſited, let ſuch perſons as ſoone as they ſhal come
home, ſhift themſelues, & aire their other clothes,
in open aire for a time.
            
            
               Preſeruation by way of defence in open
aire, and common aſſemblies to
be vſed outwardly.
               IT is good in going abroade into the open aire
in the ſtreetes, to hold ſome things of ſweete ſauour
in their hands, or in the corner of a handkerchiefe,
as a ſponge dipped in Vineger & Roſewater
mixed, or in Vineger, wherein Wormewood, or
Rue called alſo Herbegrace, hath bene boyled.
            
            
               Preſeruatiue by way of inward
medicine.
               TAke a quantitie of Rue, or Wormewood, or of
both, and put it into a potte of vſuall drinke,
cloſe ſtopped, let it lie ſo in ſteepe a whole
night, and drinke thereof in the morning faſting.
               In all Sommer plagues, it ſhalbe good to vſe
Sorrel ſauce to be eaten in ye morning with bread,
And in the fall of the leafe to vſe the iuice of Barberies
with bread alſo.
               
                  
Mens bodies
are apt to take
infectiō, either

                     By the conſtitution of the heart,
the vitall ſpirites being weake,
and the naturall heate feeble, in
which caſe thinges Cordiall are
to be vſed.
                     By repletion,
the body being
filled with humors,
either

                           Good, and then
is the party to
be let blood.
                           Euill, and then
is hee to be cured
with medicine
purgatiue.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Preſeruatiues Cordialls.
               Mithridates Medicine.
               TAke of good Figges not wormeaten, cleane
waſſhed, of Walnuts ye kernels cleane picked,
of either of them an hundred, of the leaues of
greene Rue, otherwiſe called Herbgrace, ye weight
of ii. s. of common Salt the weight of iiii. d. cut
the Figges in pieces, and ſtampe them and the
Walnut kernels together in a morter of Marble
or wood a good ſpace, vntil they be very ſmal, and
then put your Rue leaues vnto them, ſtampe and
ſtirre them well together with the reſt, laſt put in
the Salt and ſtampe and ſtirre theſe things together,
vntill they be encorporated and made of one
ſubſtance. Of the which take the quantitie of ii. or
iii. Figges euery morning faſting, to children the
halfe wil ſerue, and he that liſteth to increaſe or diminiſh

the ſubſtance of this Medicine, ſhall eaſely
do it, by taking of a greater or leſſe quantitie of the
ſimples according to a due proportion.
            
            
               A well approued Medicine to
preſerue.
               TAke of the fineſt cleare Aloes you can buy, in
colour like to a Liuer, and therefore called
Hepatica, of Cinamō, of Myrrhe, of ech of theſe
the weight of iii. French crownes, or of xxii. d. of
our money, of Cloues, Maces, Lignum Aloes, of Maſticke,
of Bole Oriental, of ech of theſe half an ounce:
mingle them together and beate them into a very
fine powder. Of the which take euery morning
faſting the weight of a grote of this in white wine
delayed with water, and by the grace of God you
ſhall be ſafe from the plague. No man which is
learned, if he examine the ſimples of this medicine
whereof it conſiſteth, and the nature and power of
them, can denie but that it is a medicine of great
efficacie againſt the plague, and the ſimples wherof
it is made, are eaſily to be had in any good Apothecaries
ſhoppe, except Bole Orientall, which is
vſed in the ſtead of true Bolus Armenus, wherof we
haue ſeene great ſtore in the ſhopps of maſter Rich
the Queenes Maieſties Apothecarie, and maſter
Morgans in Cheapſyde.
               
               Take a drie Figge and open it, and put the kernel
of a Walnut into the ſame being cut very ſmal,
iii. or iiii. leaues of Rue cōmonly called Herbgrace, a
corne of Salt, then roſt the Figge & eate it warme,
faſt iii. or iiii. houres after it, and vſe this twyſe in
the weeke.
               
                  
Take the powder of Turmentill, the weight of
vi. d. with Sorrell or Scabious water in Sommer,
and in Winter with the water of Valerian or common
drinke.
               Or els in one day they may take a litle Wormewood,
and Valerian with a graine of Salt. In another
day they may take vii. or viii. berries of Iuniper,
dried and put in powder, and taking the ſame
with common drinke, or with drinke in which
Wormwood and Rue hath bene ſteeped al ye night.
               Alſo ye triakle called Diareſſeroū, which is made
but of iiii. things of light price eaſie to be had.
               Alſo the roote of Enula Campana, either taken in
powder with drinke, or hanged about the br
                     ••
                  t.
               Likewiſe a piece of Arras roote kept in ye mouth
as men paſſe in the ſtreetes, is very good Cordiall.
               
               Take vi. leaues of Sorrell, waſh them with water
and vineger, let them lye to ſteepe in the ſaid
water and vineger a while, then eat them faſting,
and keepe in your mouth and chewe nowe or then
either Setwall, or the roote of Angelica, or a litle
Cinamon.
               
               Take the roote of Enula Campana being layde
and ſteeped in vineger, & groſſe beaten, put a litle
of it in a handkercheife, and ſmel to it if you reſort
to any that is infected.
            
            
               For women with childe, or ſuch as be delicate
and tender, and cannot away with
taking of medicines.
               MAke a toſt of white or of the ſecond bread, as
you thinke good, and ſprinkle on it being
hotte a litle good wine vineger, made with

Roſe leaues, and for want of it any good common
or vſed vineger, & ſpreade on the toſt a litle butter,
and caſt thereon a litle powder of Cinamon, and
eate it in the morning faſting. The poore which
can not get vineger nor buy Cinamon, maye eate
bread and Butter alone, for Butter is not onely a
preſeruatiue againſt the plague, but againſt all
maner of poyſons.
               When one muſt come into the place where infectious
perſons are, it is good to ſmel to the roote
of Angelica, Gentian or Valerian, and to chewe any
of theſe in his mouth.
            
            
               An other preſeruatiue for
the poore.
               IT ſhalbe good to take an handfull of Rue, and
as much common Wormwood, and bruſe them
a litle: and put them into a potte of Earth or
Tinne, with ſo much Vineger as ſhall couer the
herbes: keepe this pot cloſe couered or ſtopt, and
when you feare any infection, dippe into this Vineger
a piece of aſyonge, and carie it in your hand
and ſmell to it, or els put it into a round ball of
Yuorie or Iuniper made ful of holes of the one ſide,
carying it in your hand vſe to ſmell thereunto, renewing
it once in a day.
            
            
               To be vſed after infection taken.
               FOr as much as the cauſe of the plague ſtandeth
rather in poyſon▪
                  Curati
                        •
                     es. then in any 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of humours as other agues doe, the chiefeſt

way is to moue ſweatings, and to defend the
heart by ſome cordiall thing.
            
            
               Suppoſitary.
               IF the Pacient be coſtiue and bound in his bodie,
let him take a Suppoſitarie made with a litle
boyled Honney, and a litle fine powder of Salt,
and ſo taken in at the Fundament and kept till it
mooue a ſtoole.
            
            
               An excellent Medicine made without
charges.
               TAke of the powder of good Bayberries, the
huſke taken awaye from them, before
they be dried, a ſpooneful: Let the Patient
drincke this, well mingled in a draught of good
ſtale Ale or Beere, which is neither ſowre nor
dead, or with a draught of white Wine, and go to
bedde and caſt himſelfe into a ſweat, and forbeare
ſleepe as is aforeſaid.
            
            
               An other ſoueraigne remedie, that is
a ſtilled water.
               TAke the inwarde barke of the Aſhe tree, a
pound, of Walnuts with the greene outward
ſhelles, to the number of 50. cut theſe ſmall,
of Scabious, of Veruen, of P
                        •
                     timorel, of Howſleeke, of
euery one a handfull, of Saffron halfe an ounce,
powre vpon theſe ye ſtrongeſt Vineger you can get
foure pynts let them a litle boyle together vpon a
very ſoft fire▪ and then ſtand in a very cloſe potte

well ſlepe all a night vpon the embers, afterward
diſtill them with a ſoft fire, and receyue the water
cloſe kept. Giue vnto the Patient layd in bedde &
wel couered with clothes, two ounces of this water
to drink, & let him be prouoked to ſweat, & euery
ſixe houres, during the ſpace of xxiiii. houres,
giue him the ſame quantitie to drinke. This Medicine
for the worthines therof, and becauſe it wil
ſtand the maker thereof in little charge, it ſhall be
very well done to diſtill it in the Sommer when
the Walnutts hang greene on the tree, that it maye
bee ready againſt the time that occaſion ſerueth
to vſe it.
            
            
               1. Bloud letting.
               IF the Pacient be ful of humors which be good,
let him immediatly be let bloud vpon the Lyuer
veine in the right arme, or in the Median
veine of the ſame arme (if no ſore appeare) in the
firſt day.
            
            
               2. Medicine purgatiue.
               FOr the poore take Aloes ye weight of vi. d. put
in the pappe of an Apple: and for the richer
Pilles of Rufus to be had in euery good Apothecaries
ſhoppe.
               After letting of bloud and purging (as ſhall be
needfull) ſome of the forenamed Cordials are to
be vſed.
               Theſe preparations thus vſed ye firſt day that
the Pacient ſhall fall ſicke, as cauſe ſhalbe to vſe
the one or the other (no ſore appearing) in which

caſe if the ſore ſhal appeare, they are both to be forborne▪
the next is to vſe all meanes to expell the
poyſon, and to defend the heart by Cordials.
            
            
               3. Medicament expulſiue.
               THe poyſon is expelled beſt by ſweatings prouoked
by poſſet Ale, made with Fenel & Marigolds
in Winter, and with Sorrell, Bugloſſe
and Borage in Sommer, with the which in both
times they muſt mixe the triacle of Diateſſaroum,
the weight of ix. d. & ſo to lay them ſelues with all
quietnes to ſweat one halfe houre or an houre, if
they be ſtrong. For they that be neither full of humors
nor corrupt in humors, neede neither purging
nor letting of bloud, but at the firſt plunge
maye moue themſelues to ſweat with Cordiall
things mixt with ſuch things as moue ſweat, and
are before declared.
            
            
               What is to be done when there is any
riſing or ſwelling in any part.
               THen if by theſe three meanes the poyſon be
expelled outward by Botches, carbuncles or
markes, called Gods markes, according as
nature doth expell, ſo muſt the further procedings
be, prouiding ſtill, that they continue ſtill in the vſe
of the cordiall and moderate ſweating now and
then, al the time that the ſores be in healing, which
muſt by the Surgion be handled with great diſcretion.
            
            
               
               Medicine to be vſed in ordinarie dyet.
               IT is thought that the powder of harts horne
hath a ſpeciall prerogatiue, to be vſed al the time
of their ſickeneſſe in their broths, and ſupping,
which in Sommer muſt euer haue Sorrell, Borage,
Bugloſſe, and in winter, Betony, and Scabious, or
Morſus▪ Di
                        •
                     bol
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   and if their habilities do not ſerue,
let them vſe it with Aleburies made with a litle
Nutmegge, or one Cloue, or with Cawdelles in like
maner▪ made with Cloues, Maces, Nutmegges, Sanders
or ſuch like.
            
            
               Both to preſerue and cure the
ſickeneſſe.
               TAke an egge & make a hole in the toppe of it,
take out the white & y
                     •
                  lke, fil the ſhel with the
weight of two frēch crownes of Saffron▪
                   roſt
the ſaid egge thus filled with Saffron vnder the
embres, vntill the ſhell begin to waxe yelow, then
take it from the fire, and beate the ſhel and Saffron
in a 
                     〈◊〉
                   together, with halfe a ſpoonefull of
Muſtard ſeede▪ take of this powder a french crown
weight, and aſſoone as you ſuſpect your ſelf infected,
diſſolue it into tenne ſpoonfulles of poſſet ale, &
drinke it luke warme, then go to bed and prouoke
your ſelfe to ſweating.
            
            
               To be vſed in the firſt time of
the Sickeneſſe.
               ANother is to take fiue or ſixe handefull of
Sorrel, that groweth in the field, or a greater
quantitie according as you will diſtill

more or leſſe of the water thereof, and let it lye
infriſed or ſteeped in good Vineger the ſpace of
xxiiii. houres, then take it of & drie it with a linen
cloth put into a Limbecke, and diſtill the water
thereof: And aſſoone as you finde your ſelfe touched
with the ſickeneſſe, drinke foure ſpoonfulles
of the ſayde water with a litle ſugar, and if you be
hable, walke vpō it vntil you do ſweat, if not, keep
your bed, and being well couered, prouoke your
ſelfe to ſweating, and the next day to take aſmuch
againe of it a litle before ſupper.
               Item, to prouoke vomit with two ounces of
rancke oyle, or walnutte oyle, a ſpoonefull of the
iuyce of Celendyne, & halfe a ſpoonfull of the iuyce
of radice roote, ſo that the party infected do walke
and not ſleepe, is better then any letting of blood,
or any purging. For the diſeaſe neither can ſuffer▪
agitatiō of humors, nor when one is infected, hath
no time to bleede or to purge.
            
            
               Outward medicines for to be applyed
to the ſore.
               The firſt.
               TAke of Scabiouſe two handefulls, ſtampe it in
a ſtone morter with a peſtell of ſtone if you
can get any ſuch, then put vnto it of olde
ſwynes greaſe ſalted, two ounces, and the yelke
of an egge, ſtampe them well together, & lay parte
of this warme to the ſore.
            
            
               
               The ſecond.
               TAke of the leaues of Mallowes, of Camomill
flowers, of eyther of them an handfull, of
Lineſeede beaten into pouder two ounces,
boyle the Mallowe leaues firſt cut, and the flowers
of the Camomil in faire water ſtanding aboue a
fingers breadth, boyle all them together vntil all
the water almoſt be ſpent: then put thereunto the
Lineſeede, of Wheate flower halfe an handful, of
ſwines greaſe the ſkins taken away iii. ounces,
of oyle of Roſes two ounces, ſtirre thē ſtill with a
ſticke, and let them all boyle together on a ſoft fire
without ſmoke, vntill the water be vtterly ſpent,
beate them all together in a morter, vntill they
be wel encorporated together, & in feeling ſmooth,
& not rough: then make part thereof hot in a diſh
ſet vpon a chaf
                     •
                  ndiſh of coales, & lay it thicke vpō a
linnen cloth applying it to the ſore.
            
            
               Another excellent medicine to ripen and
bring out the Sore.
               TAke a white Onion cut in pieces, of freſh
butter three ounces, of Leuen the weight of
twelue pence, of Mallowes one handfull, of
Scabious if it may be had one handefull, of Cloues
of garlicke the weight of xx. d. boyle them on the
fyre in ſufficient water, and make a pulteſſe of it,
and lay it warme to the ſore.
            
            
               Another.
               TO the ſore it ſelfe do thus. Take two handfull
of Valerian, three rootes of Danewort, a
handefull of Smalledge, or Louage, yf you can

get it, ſeethe them al in butter and water, & a fewe▪
crommes of bread, and make a pulteſſe thereof, &
lay it warme to the ſore vntill it breake.
            
            
               Another for the ſame.
               IF you can not haue theſe herbes, it is good to
laye a loafe of bread to it, hot as it commeth out
of the ouen, (which afterward ſhal be burnt or
buried in the earth) or the leaues of Scabious or
Sorrell roſted, or two or three Lillie rootes roſted
vnder embers, beaten and applied.
            
            
               A generall medicine for all ſorts of people
taken with the plague, to be had
without coſt.
               TAke of ye roote of butter burre, otherwiſe called
peſtilēt wort, one ounce, of ye root of great
Valerian a quarter of an ounce, of Sorrel an
hādful, boyle al theſe in a quart of water to a pint,
then ſtraine it and put thereto two ſpoonfulles of
Vineger, two ounces of good Sugar, boyle all theſe
together vntill they be wel mingled, let ye infected
drinke of this ſo hotte as he may ſuffer it a good
draught, and if he chaunce to caſt it vp againe, let
him take the ſame quantitie ſtraight way vpon
it, and prouoke himſelfe to ſweat, and he ſhal finde
great helpe.
            
            
               Time of continuance apart from common
aſſemblies.
               SVch as haue bene infected, ſhould keepe their
houſe without being conuerſant with the
whole, vntill the ſores ſhall haue left running

and be perfectly whole and ſound, which in ſanguine
& cholericke perſons will be healed ſooner,
then in melancholike & flegmatike complexions.
               SVch perſons may not wel be conuerſant with
them which are not infected, for the ſpace of
one moneth.
            
            
               Infected clothes.
               THe cōtagion ſuſpected to remaine in clothes,
either wollen or linnen, cannot wel be auoyded
by better meanes, then by fire and water,
by often waſhing & airing the ſame in froſts,
and ſunne ſhine, with good diſcretion, and burning
the clothes of ſmall value.
               
                  ❧Imprinted at London by Chriſtopher
Barker, Printer to the Queenes
moſt excellent Maieſtie.
(⸪)
               
            
         
      
   