
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The Fraternitye of Vacabondes.
            
               As wel of ruflyng Vacabondes, as of beggerly, of women as of men, of Gyrles as of Boyes, with their proper names and qualities. With a deſcription of the crafty company of Couſoners and Shifters.
            
            ¶ Wherunto alſo is adioyned the .xxv. Orders of Knaues, otherwyſe called a Quartern of Knaues. Confirmed for euer by Cocke Lorell.
            
            (*)
            
               ¶ The Vprightman ſpeaketh.
               ¶ Our Brotherhood of Vacabondes,
               If you would know where dwell:
               In graues end Barge which ſyldome ſtandes,
               The talke wyll ſhew ryght well.
            
            
               ¶ Cocke Lorell aunſwereth.
               ¶ Some orders of my knaues alſo
               In that Barge ſhall ye fynde:
               For no where ſhall ye walke I crow,
               But ye ſhall ſee their kynde.
            
            
               ¶ Imprinted at London by Iohn Awdeley, dwellyng in little Britayne ſtreete without Alderſgate. 1575.
         
         
            
            ¶ The Printer to the Reader.
            
               THis brotherhood of Vacabondes,
               To ſhew that there be ſuch in deede:
               Both euſtices and men of Landes,
               Wyll teſtifye it if it neede.
               For at a Seſſions as they ſat,
               By chaunce a Vacabond was got.
            
            
               ¶ Who promyſde if they would him ſpare,
               And keepe his name from knowledge then:
               He would as ſtraunge a thing declare,
               As euer they knew ſynce they were men.
               But if my fellowes do know (ſayd he)
               That thus I dyd, they would kyll me.
            
            
               ¶ They graunting him this his requeſt,
               He dyd declare as here is read,
               Both names and ſtates of moſt and leaſt,
               Of this their Vacabondes brotherhood.
               Which at the requeſt of a worſhipful mā
               
               I haue ſet it forth as well as I can.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ¶ The Fraternitye of Vacabondes both rufling and beggerly, Men and women, Boyes and Gyrles, wyth their proper names and qualities. Whereunto are adioyned the company of Couſoners and Shifters.
            
            
               
                  ¶ An Abraham Man.
                  
                     AN Abraham man is he that walketh bare armed, and bare legged, and fayneth hymſelfe mad, and caryeth a packe of wool, or a ſtycke with baken on it, or ſuch lyke toy, and nameth himſelfe poore Tom.
                  ¶ A Ruffeler.
                  A Ruffeler goeth wyth a weapon to ſeeke ſeruice, ſaying he hath bene a Seruitor in the wars, and beggeth for his reliefe. But his chiefeſt trade is to robbe poore wayfaring men and market women.
                  ¶ A Prygman
                  A Prygman goeth with a ſtycke in hys hand like an idle perſon. His propertye is to ſteale cloathes of the hedge, which they call ſtoring of the Rogeman: or els filtch Poultry, carying them to the Alehouſe, whych they call the Bowſyng In, & ther ſyt playing at cardes and dice, tyl that is ſpent which they haue ſo fylched.
                  ¶ A VVhipiacke
                  A Whypiacke is one, that by coulor of a counterfaite Liſence (which they call a Gybe, and the ſeales they cal earckes) doth vſe to beg lyke a Maryner, But hys chiefeſt trade is to rob Bowthes in a Faire, or to pilfer ware frō ſtaules, which they cal heauing of the Bowth
                  ¶ A Frater.
                  A Frater goeth wyth a like Liſence to beg for ſome Spi
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     e houſe or Hoſpital. Their pray is cōmonly vpō
                     
poore women as they go and come to the Markets.
                  ¶ A Quire bird.
                  A Quire bird is one that came lately out of priſon, & goeth to ſeeke ſeruice. He is cōmonly a ſtealer of Horſes, which they terme a Priggar of Paulfreys.
                  ¶ An Vpright man.
                  An Upright man is one that goeth wyth the trunchion of a ſtaffe, which ſtaffe they cal a Filtchmā. This man is of ſo much authority, that meeting with any of his profeſſion, he may cal them to accompt, & cōmaund a ſhare or ſnap vnto him ſelfe, of al that they haue gained by their trade in one moneth. And if he doo them wrong, they haue noremedy agaynſt hym, no though he beate them, as he vſeth cōmonly to do. He may alſo cōmaund any of their women, which they cal Doxies, to ſerue his turne. He hath ye chiefe place at any market walke & other aſſembles, & is not of any to be cōtroled.
                  ¶ A Curtall.
                  A Curtall is much like to the Upright man, but hys authority is not fully ſo great. He vſeth commonly to go with a ſhort cloke, like to grey Friers, & his woman with him in like liuery, which he calleth his Altham if ſhe be hys wyfe, & if ſhe be his harlot, ſhe is called hys Doxy.
                  ¶ A Palliard.
                  A Palliard is he that goeth in a patched cloke, and hys Doxy goeth in like apparell.
                  ¶ An Iriſhe toyle.
                  An Iriſhe toyle is he that carieth his ware in hys wallet, as laces, pins, poyntes, and ſuch like. He vſeth to ſhew no wares vntill he haue his almes. And if the good man and wyfe be not in the way, be procureth of the childrē or ſeruants a fleece of wool, or the worth of xij. d. of ſome other thing, for a peniworth of his wares
                  
                  ¶ A Iack man.
                  A Iackeman is he that can write and reade, and ſomtime ſpeake latin. He vſeth to make counterfaite licences which they call Gybes, and ſets to Seales, in their language called Iarkes.
                  ¶ A Swygman.
                  A Swygman goeth with a Pedlers pack.
                  ¶ A waſhman.
                  A Waſhman is called a Palliard, but not of the right making. He vſeth to lye in the hye way with lame or ſore legs or armes to beg. Theſe mē ye right Pilliards wil often times ſpoile, but they dare not cōplayn. They be bitten with Spickworts, & ſomtime with rats bane
                  ¶ A Tinkard.
                  A Tinkard leaueth his bag a ſweating at the Alehouſe, which they terme their Bowling In, and in the meane ſeaſon goeth abrode a begging.
                  ¶ A wylde Roge.
                  A wilde Roge is he that hath no abiding place but by his coulour of going abrode to beg, is commonly to ſeeke ſome kinſman of his, and all that be of hys corporation be properly called Roges.
                  ¶ A Kitchen Co.
                  A Kitchin Co is called an ydle run agate Boy.
                  ¶ A Kitchen Mortes.
                  A Kitchin Mortes is a Gyrle, ſhe is brought at her full age to the Upryght man to be broken, and ſo ſhe is called a Doxy, vntil ſhe come to ye honor of an Altham.
                  ¶ Doxies.
                  Note eſpecially all which go abroade working laces and ſhirt ſtringes, they name them Doxies.
                  A Patriarke Co.
                  A Patriarke Co doth make mariages, & that is vntill

death depart the maried folke, which is after this ſort▪ When they fronte to a dead Horſe or any dead Catell, then they ſhake hands and ſo depart euery one of them a ſeuerall way.
               
            
            
               ¶ The company of Couſoners and Shifters.
               
                  ¶ A Curteſy man.
                  A Curteſy man is one that walketh about the back lanes in London in the day time, and ſometime in the broade ſtreetes in the night ſeaſon, and when he meeteth ſome handſome yong man clenly apareled, or ſome other honeſt Citizen, he maketh humble ſalutatiōs and low curteſy, and ſheweth him that he hath a worde or two to ſpeake with his maſterſhip. This child can behaue him ſelfe manerly, for he wyll deſire him that he talketh with all, to take the vpper hand, and ſhew him much reuerence, and at laſt like his familier acquaintaunce will put on his cap, and walke ſyde by ſyde, and talke on this faſhion: Oh ſyr, you ſeeme to be a man, and one that fauoureth men, and therefore I am the more bolder to breake my mind vnto your good maiſterſhip. Thus it is ſyr, ther is a certaine of vs (though I ſay it both ſame and handſome men of theyr hands) which haue come lately from the wars, and as God knoweth haue nothing to take to, being both maiſterles and moniles, & knowing no way wherby to yerne 
                        •
                     n
                        •
                      peny. And further, wher as we haue bene welthely brought vp, and we alſo haue beene had in good eſtimatiō, we are a ſhamed now to declare out miſery, and to fall a crauing as common Beggers, and as for to ſteale and robbe (God is our record) it ſtriketh vs to

the hart, to thinke of ſuch a miſchiefe, that euer any handſome man ſhould fall into ſuch a dannger for thys worldly traſh, Which if we had to ſuffiſe our want and neceſſity, we ſhould neuer ſeeke thus ſhamefaſtly to craue on ſuch good pityfull men as you ſeeme to be, neither yet ſo daungerouſly to haſarde our liues for ſo vyle a thing. Therefore good ſyr, as you ſeeme to be a handſome man your ſelfe, and alſo ſuch a one as pitieth the miſerable caſe of handſome men▪ as now your eyes and countenaunce ſheweth to haue ſome pity vppon this my miſerable complainte: So in Gods cauſe I require your maiſterſhyp, & in the behalfe of my poore afflicted fellowes, which though here in ſight they cry not with me to you, yet whereſoeuer they bee, I am ſure they cry vnto God to moue the heartes of ſome good men to ſhew forth their liberality in this behalfe. All which & I with them craue now the ſame requeſt at your good maſterſhips hand. With theſe or ſuch like words he frameth his talke. Now if the party (which he thus talketh withall) profereth hym a peny or .ii. d. he taketh it, but verye ſcornfully, and at laſt ſpeaketh on this ſorte: Well ſyr, your good will is not to be refuſed. But yet you ſhall vnderſtand (good ſyr) that this is nothing for them, for whom I do thus ſhamefaſtly entreate. Alas ſyr, it is not a greate or .xii. d. I ſpeake for, being ſuch a company of Seruiters as wee haue bene: yet neuertheles God forbid I ſhould not receiue your gētle offer at this time, hoping hereafter through your good motions to ſome ſuch lyke good gentleman as you be, that I, or ſome of my fellowes in my place, ſhall finde the more liberality. Theſe kind of ydle Uacabondes wyll go commonly well appareled, without

any weapon, and in place where they meete together, as at their hoſte tyes or other places they wyll beate the port of ryght good gentlemen, & ſome are the more truſted, but cōmonly thei pay them wt ſtealing a paire of ſheetes, or Couerlet, & ſo take their farewell earely in the morning, before the mayſter or dame be ſturring.
                  ¶ A Cheatour or Fingerer.
                  Theſe commonly be ſuch kinde of idle Vacabondes as ſcarcely a man ſhall 
                        〈◊〉
                     , they go ſo gorgeouſly, ſometime with waiting men, and ſometime without. Their trade is to walke in ſuch places, where as gentlmen & other worſhipfull Citizens do reſorte, as at Poules, o
                        •••
                      Chriſtes Hoſpital, & ſomtime at ye Royal exchaunge. Theſe haue very many acquaintauntes, yea, and for the moſt part will acquaint them ſelues with euery man, and fayne a ſociety, in one place or other. But thiefly they wil ſeeke their acquaintaunce of ſuch (which they haue learned by diligent enquiring where they reſort) as haue receyued ſome porcion of money of their friends, as yong Gentlemen which are ſent to London to ſtudy the lawes, or els ſome yong Marchant man or other kynde of Occupier, whoſe friendes hath geuen them a ſtock of mony to occupy withall. When they haue thus found out ſuch a pray, they will find the meanes by theyr familiarity, as very curteouſly to bid him to breakefaſt at one place or other, where they are beſt acquainted, and cloſely amonge themſelues wil appoint one of their Fraternity, which they call a Fyngerer, an olde beaten childe, not onely in ſuch deceites, but alſo ſuch a one as by his age is painted out with gray heares, wrinkled face, crooked back, and moſt commonly lame, as it might ſeeme with age,

yea and ſuch a one as to ſhew a ſimplicity, ſhal weare a homely cloke and hat ſcarce worth .vi. d. This nimble fingred knight (being appointed to this place) cōmeth in as one not knowen of theſe Cheatours, but as vnwares ſhal ſit down at the end of the bord where they ſyt, & call for his peny pot of wine, or a pinte of Ale, as the place ſerueth. Thus ſifting as it were alone, mumblyng on a cruſt, or ſome ſuch thing, theſe other yonckers wil finde ſome kind of mery talke with him, ſome times queſtioning wher he dwelleth, & ſometimes enquiring what trade he vſeth, which cōmonly he telleth them he vſeth huſbandry: & talking thus merely, at laſt they aſke him, how ſayeſt thou Father, wylt thou play forthy breakfaſt with one of vs, that we may haue ſome paſtime as we ſyt? Thys olde 
                        •
                     arle makyng it ſtraunge at the firſt ſaith: My mayſters ich am an old man, and halfe blinde, and can ſkyl of very few games, yet for that you ſeeme to be ſuch good Gentelmen, as to profer to play for that of which you had no part, but onely I my ſelfe, and therefore of right ich am worthy to pay for it, I ſhal with al my hart fulfyl your requeſt. And ſo falleth to play, ſomtime at Cardes, & ſometime at dice. Which through his coūterfait ſimplicity in the play ſomtimes ouer counteth himſelf, or playeth ſomtimes againſt his wyl, ſo as he would not, & then counterfaiteth to be angry, and falleth to ſwearing, & ſo leeſing that, profereth to play for a ſhillyng or two. The other therat hauing good ſport, ſeming to mocke him, falleth againe to play, and ſo by their 
                        •
                     ergerdemane, & coūterfaiting, winneth ech of them a ſhilling or twain, & atlaſt whiſpereth the yong man in the eare to play with hym alſo, that ech one might haue a fling at him.

This yong mā for company falleth againe to play alſo with the ſayd Fyngerer, and winneth as the other did which when he had loſte a noble or .vi. s. maketh as though he had loſt al his mony, and falleth a intreating for parte thereof againe to bring him home, which the other knowing his mind and intent, ſtoutely denieth and ieſteth & ſcoffeth at him. This Fingerer ſeeming then to be in a rage, deſireth thē as they are true gentlemen, to tarry till he fetcheth more ſtore of money, or els to point ſome place where they may meete. They ſeeming greedy hereof, promiſeth faithfully and clappeth handes ſo to meete. They thus ticklyng the young man in the eare, willeth him to make as much money as he can, and they wil make as much as they can, and cōſent as though they wil play booty againſt him. But in the ende they ſo vſe the matter, that both the young man leeſeth his part and as it ſeemeth to him, they leeſing theirs alſo, and ſo maketh as though they would fal together by the eares with this fingerer, which by one wyle or other at laſt conueyeth him ſelfe away, & they as it were raging lyke mad bedlams, one runneth one way, an other an other way leauing the loſer in deede all alone. Thus theſe Cheatours at their accuſtomed hoſteries meete cloſely together, and there receiue ech one his part of this their vile ſpoyle. Of this fraternity therebe that be called helpers, which commonly haunt tauernes or alehouſes, and cōmeth in as men not acquainted with none in the companye, but ſpying them at any game, wil byd them God ſpede and God be at their game, and will ſo place him ſelfe that he will ſhew his fellow by ſygnes and tokens, without ſpeech commonly, but ſometime with far fetched

wordes, what cardes he hath in his hand, and how he may play againſt him. And thoſe betwene thē both getteth money out of the others purſe.
                  ¶ A Ring faller.
                  A Ryng faller is he that getteth fayre copper rings, ſome made like ſignets, & ſome after other faſhiōs, very faire gylded, & walketh vp and down the ſtreetes, til he ſpieth ſome man of the country or ſome other ſimple body whom he thinketh he may deceaue, and ſo goeth a lyttle before him or them, and letteth fall one of theſe ringes, which when the party that commeth after ſpieth and taketh it vp, he hauing an eye backward, crieth halfe part, the party that taketh it vp, thinking it to be of great value, profereth him ſome money for his part, which he not fully denieth but willeth him to come into ſome alehouſe or tauerne, and there they will common vpon the matter. Which when they come in, and are ſet in ſome ſolitary place (as commonly they call for ſuch a place) there he deſireth the party that found the ring to ſhew it him. When he ſeeth it, he falleth a entreating the party that found it, and deſireth him to take money for his part, and telleth him that if euer he may do him any frendſhip hereafter ſhal commaund him, for he maketh as though he were very deſirous to haue it. The ſymple man ſeeing him ſo importune vpon it, thinketh the ring to bee of great valure, and ſo is the more lother to part from it. At laſt this ring faller aſketh him what he will geue him for his part, for ſaith he, ſeeing you wyl not let me haue the ring, alowe me my part, and take you the ring. The other aſketh what he counteth the ring to be worth, he anſwereth .v. or .vi. pound. No ſaith he it is not ſo much worth

Well (ſaith this Ringfaller) let me haue it, and I wyll alow you .xl. s. for your part. The other party ſtandyng in a doubt, and looking on the ryng, aſketh if he wyll geue the money out of hand. The other anſwereth, he hath not ſo much ready mony about him, but he wil go fetch ſo much for him, if he wil go with him. The other that found the ring, thinking he meaneth truly, beginneth to profer him .xx. s. for his part, ſometymes more, or les, which he verye ſcornfullye refuſeth at the firſt, and ſtyl entreateth that he might haue the ring, which maketh the other more fonder of it, and deſireth him to take the money for his part, & ſo profereth him money. This ring faller ſeing ye mony, maketh it very ſtraūge, and firſt queſtioneth with him wher he dwelleth, and aſketh him what is his name, & telleth him that he ſemeth to be an honeſt man, and therfore he wil do ſomwhat for friendſhips ſake, hoping to haue as friendly a pleaſure at his hand hereafter, and ſo profereth hym for .x. s. more he ſhould haue the ryng. At laſt with entreatye on both partes, he geueth the Ring faller the money, and ſo departeth, thinkyng he hath gotten a very great Iewell. Theſe kynde of deceyuing Uacabondes haue other practiſes with their rings, as ſomtimes to come to buy wares of mens Prenteſies, and ſomtimes of their Maiſters, and when he hath agreed of the price, he ſayth he hath not ſo much money about him, but pulleth of one of theſe rings of from his fyngers, and profereth to leaue it in pawne, tyl hys Maiſter or his friendes hath ſent it▪ impro
                        •••
                     ing to bring the money, the ſeller thinking he meaneth truly▪ letteth him go, and neuer ſeeth him after, tyll perhaps at Tyburne or at ſuch lyke place. Ther is another kinde of

theſe Ring choppers, which cōmonly cary about them a faire gold ring in deede, and theſe haue other counterfait rings made ſo lyke this gold ring, as ye ſhal not perceiue the contrary, tyl it be brought to ye touch ſtone. This child wyl come to borow mony of the right gold ring, the party miſtruſting the Ryng not to be good, goeth to the Goldſmith with the partye that hath the ryng, and tryeth it whether it be good golde, and alſo wayeth it to know how much it is worth. The Goldſmith tryeth it to be good gold, and alſo to haue hys ful weight like gold, and warenteth the party which ſhall lend the money that the ring is worth ſo much money according to the waight, this yoncker comming home with the party which ſhall lend the 
                        ••
                     ones and hauing the gold ring againe, putteth vp the gold ring, and pulleth out a counterfaite ring very like the ſame, & ſo deliuereth it to the party which lendeth the money, they thinking it to be the ſame which they tr
                        ••
                     ed, and ſo deliuereth the money or ſometimes 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and thus vily be deceiued.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ The .xxv. Orders of Knaues, otherwiſe called a quarterne of Knaues, confirmed for euer by Cocke Lorell.
               
               
                  1 Troll and Troll by.
                  TRoll and Trol by, is he that ſetteth naught by no man, nor no man by him. This is he that would 
                        ••••
                     e 
                        〈◊〉
                      a place, and hath 
                        •
                      authority nor thanke, & at laſt is thruſt out of the doore like a knaue.
                  2 Troll with.
                  Troll with, is he yt no man ſhall know the ſeruaunt 
                        〈◊〉
                      ye Maiſter. This knaue with his cap on his head

lyke Capon hardy, wyll ſyt downe by his Maiſter, or els go cheeke by cheeke with him in the ſtreete.
                  3 Troll hazard of trace.
                  Troll hazard of trace is he that goeth behynde his Maiſter as far as he may ſee hym. Such knaues commonly vſe to buy Spicecakes, Apples or other trifles, and doo eate them as they go in the ſtreetes lyke vacabond Boyes.
                  4 Troll hazard of tritrace.
                  Troll hazard of tritrace, is he that goeth gaping after his Maſter, looking to and fro tyl he haue loſt him. This knaue goeth gaſyng about lyke a foole at euery toy, and then ſeeketh in euery houſe lyke a Maiſterles dog, and when his Maiſter nedeth him, he is to ſeeke.
                  5 Chafe Litter.
                  Chafe Litter is he that wyll plucke vp the Fetherbed or Matrice, and pyſſe in the bedſtraw, and wyl neuer ryſe vncalled. This knaue berayeth many tymes in the corners of his Maiſters chamber, or other places inconuenient, and maketh cleane hys ſhooes with the couerlet or curtaines.
                  6 Obloquium.
                  Obloquium is hee that wyll take a tale out of his Maiſters mouth and tell it him ſelfe. He of right may be called a malapart knaue.
                  7 Rince Pytcher.
                  Rince Pytcher is he that will drinke out his thrift at the ale or wine, and he oft times dronke. This is a licoryce knaue that will ſwill his Maiſters drink, and dry be his meate that is kept for him.
                  8 Ieffrey Gods Fo.
                  Ieffery Gods Fo is he, that wil ſweare & maintaine

othes. This is ſuch a lying knaue that none wil beleue him, for the more he ſweateth, ye les he is to be beleued.
                  9 Nichol Hartles.
                  Nichol Hartles is he, that when he ſhould do ought for his Maiſter hys hart faileth him. This is a Trewand knaue that faineth himſelfe ſicke when he ſhould woorke.
                  10 Simon ſoone agon.
                  Simon ſoone agon is he, that when his Mayſter hath any thing to do, he wil hide him out of the way. This is a loytring knaue that wil hide him in a corner and ſleepe or els run away.
                  11 Grene winchard.
                  Greene Winchard is he, that when his hoſe is broken and hange out at his ſhoes, he will put them into his ſhooes againe with a 
                        •••
                     ck, but he wyll not amend them. This is a ſlouthfull knaue, that had leauer go lyke a begger then cleanly.
                  12 Proctour.
                  Proctour is he, that will tary long, and bring a lye, when his Maiſter ſendeth him on his er
                        •
                     and. This is a flibber gibber Knaue, that doth fayne tales.
                  13 Commitour of Tidinges.
                  Commitour of Tidings is he, that is ready to bring his Maiſter Nouels and tidinges, whether they be true or falſe. This is a tale bearer knaue, that wyll report words ſpoken in his Maiſters preſence.
                  14▪ Gyle Hather.
                  Gyle Hather is he, that wyll ſtand by his Maiſter when he is at dinner, and dyd him beware that he eate no raw meate, becauſe he would eate it himſelfe. This is a pick thanke knaue, that would make his Maiſter

beleue that the C
                        ••••
                      is the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  15 Bawde Phiſicke.
                  Bawde Phiſicke, is he that is a Cocke, when his Mayſters meatelis euyll dreſſed, and he thallen ging him therefore, he wyl ſay he wylle ate the raweſt morſel there of himſelfe. This is a ſauſye knaue, that wyl contrary his Mayſter alway.
                  16 Mounch preſent.
                  Mounch preſent is he that is a great gentleman, for when his Mayſter ſendeth him with a preſent, he wil take a taſt thereof by the waye. This is a bold knaue, that ſometyme will eate the beſt and leaue the worſt for his Mayſter.
                  17 Cole Prophet.
                  Cole Prophet is he, that when his Maiſter ſendeth him on his errand, he wyltel his anſwer therof to his Maiſter or he depart from hym. This tittiuell knaue commonly maketh the worſt of the beſt betwene hys Maiſter and his friende.
                  18 Cury fauell.
                  Cory fauell is he, that wyl lye in his bed, and cory the bed bordes in which hee lyeth in ſteede of his horſe. This ſlouthfull knaue wyll buſkill and ſcratch when he is called in the morning, for any haſt.
                  19 Dyng thrift.
                  Dyng thrift is he, that wil make his Maiſters horſe eate pies and rybs of beefe, and drinke ale and wyne. Such falſe knaues oft tymes, willſell their Maiſters meate to their owne profit.
                  20 Eſen Droppers.
                  Eſen Droppers bene they, that ſtand vnder mens wales or windowes, or in any other place, to heare the

ſecretes of a mans houſe. Theſe miſdeming knaues wyl ſtand in corners to heare if they be euill ſpoken of, or waite a ſhrewd turne.
                  21 Coplogyke.
                  Choplogyke, is he that when his mayſter rebuketh him of hys fault he wyll geue hym .xx. wordes for one, els byd the deulls Pater noſter 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſilence. This proude prating knaue wyll maintaine his 
                        ••••
                     gh 
                        ••
                     nes when he is rebuked for them.
                  22 Vnthrifte.
                  Vnthrift, is he that wil not put his wearing clothes to waſhing, nor black his owne ſhoes, nor amend his his own wearing clothes. This rechles knaue wyl alway be louſy: and ſay that hee hath no more ſhift of clothes, and ſlaunder his Maiſter.
                  23 Vngracious.
                  Vngracious, is he yt by his own will, will heare no maner of ſeruice, without he be compelled therunto by his rulers. This Knaue wil ſit at the alehouſe drinking or playing at dice, or at other games at ſeruice tyme.
                  24 Nunquam.
                  Nunquam, is he that when his Maiſter ſendeth him on his errand he wil not come againe of an hour or two where he might haue done it in halfe an houre or leſſe. This knaue will go about his owne errand or paſtime and ſaith he cannot ſpeede at the firſt.
                  25 Ingratus.
                  Ingratus, is he that when one doth all that he can for him, he will ſcant geue him a good report for his labour. This knaue is ſo ingrate or vnkind, yt he conſidreth not his frend frō his fo, & wil requit euil for good & being put moſt in truſt, wil ſoneſt deceiue his maiſter.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London by Iohn Awdely dwelling in little Britaine ſtreete without Alderſgate, (⸫)
         
      
   