
      
         
            
            
            
               HEre begynneth the firſt volum of ſir Johan Froyſſart: of the cronycles of Englande / Fraunce / Spayne / Portyngale / Scotlande / Bretayne / Flaū
               ders: and other places adioynynge. Trāſlated out of frenche into our maternall englyſſhe tonge / by Johan Bourchier knight lorde Berners: At the cōmaundement of oure mooſt highe redouted ſouerayne lorde kyng Henry the .viii. kyng of Englande and of Fraunce / & highe defender if the chriſten faythe. &c.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Hec rosa virtutis de celo missa sereno. Eternum florēs regia sceptra feret
                  royal Tudor blazon
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The preface of Johan Bourchier knyght lorde Berners / tranſlatour of this preſent cronycle.
            
               WHat condygne graces and thankes ought men to gyue to the writers of hiſtoryes? Who with their great labours / haue done ſo moche profyte to the humayne lyfe. They ſhewe / open / manifeſt and declare to the reder / by example of olde antyquite: what we ſhulde enquere / deſyre / and folowe: And alſo / what we ſhulde eſchewe / auoyde / and vtterly flye. For whan we (beynge vnexpert of chaūces) ſe / beholde / and rede the auncyent actes / geſtes / and dedes: Home / and with what labours / daūgers / and paryls they were geſted and done: They right greatly admoneſt / enſigne / and teche vs: howe we maye lede forthe our lyues. And farther / he that hath the perfyte knowledge of others ioye / welthe / and higher proſperite: and alſo trouble / ſorowe and great aduerſyte: hath the xpert doctryne of all parylles. And albeit / that mortall folke are marueylouſly ſeparated / bothe by lande & water / and right wōderouſly ſytuate: yet are they and their actes (done ꝑaduenture by the ſpace of a thouſande yere) cōpact togyder / by thiſtographier: as it were the dedes of one ſelfe cyte / and in one mānes lyfe. Wherfore I ſay that hiſtorie may well be called a diuyne prouydence: For as the celeſtyall bodyes aboue / complecte all and at euery tyme the vniuerſall worlde / the creatures therin cōteyned / and all their dedes: ſemblably ſo dothe hiſtory. Is it nat a right noble thynge for vs / by the fautes and errours of other / to amede and erect our lyfe in to better? We ſhuld nat ſeke and acquyre that other dyd / but what thyng was moſt beſt / moſt laudable / and worthely done / we ſhulde putte before our eyes to folowe. Be nat the ſage counſayles of two or thre olde fathers in a cyte / towne / or coū
               tre: whom long age hath made wyſe / dyſcrete / and prudent: farre more prayſed / lauded / and derely loued: than of the yongemenne? Howe moche more than ought ſtories to be cōmended / prayſed / and loued? In whom is encluded ſo many ſage counſayls / great reaſons / & hygh wiſedoms: of ſo innumerable ꝑſons / of ſondry nacyons and of euery age: and that in ſo long ſpace / as four or fyue hundred yere. The moſt profytable thyng in this worlde / for the inſtytucion of the humayne lyfe / is hyſtorie. Dues the contynuall redyng therof / maketh yonge men equall in prudence to olde men: and to olde fathers ſtryken in age / it mynyſtreth experyence of thynges. More / it yeldeth priuate perſons worthy of dignyte / rule and gouernaunce. It compelleth themperours / hygh rulers and gouernours / to do noble dedꝭ: to thende they may optayne immortall glory. It exciteth / moueth / and ſtereth the ſtrong hardy warriours / for the great laude that they haue after they ben deed / promptly to go in hande with great and harde parels / in defence of their countre. And it prohibyteth reprouable perſons to do miſcheuous dedes / for feare of infamy & ſhame. So thus / through the monumentes of writynge / whiche is the teſtymony vnto vertue / many men haue ben moued: Some to byldecytes / ſome to deuyſe and eſtabliſſhe lawes tight profitable / neceſſarie / and behouefull for the humayne lyfe: Some other to fynde newe artes / craftes / and ſciences / very requiſyte to the vſe of mākynde. But aboue all thynges / wherby mans welthe ryſeth / ſpeciall laude and cauſe ought to be gyuen to hiſtorie. It is the keper of ſuche thinges as haue ben vertuouſly done / and the wytneſſe of yuell dedes. And by the benefite of hyſtorie: all noble / highe / and vertuous actes be immortall. What moued the ſtrong and ferſe Hercules to enterpriſe in his lyfe / ſo many great incō
               perable labours and pyls? Certaynly noughtels / but y• for his merytꝭ immortalyte mought be gyuen to hym of all folke. In ſēblable wyſe dyd his imytator noble duke Theſe us / & many other innumerable worthy prices and famouſe men / whoſe vertues ben redemed ſro oblyuion & ſhyne by hiſtorie. And where as other monumentes in proceſſe of tyme / by varyable chaunces / are confuſed and loſt. The vertue of hiſtory / dyffuſed and ſpredde throughe the vuyuerſall worlde / hathe to her cuſtos & kepat it (that is to ſay tyme) whiche cōſumeth the other writynges. And albeit that thoſe menne are right worthy of great laude and prayſe / who by their writynges ſhewe and lede vs the waye to vertue: yet neuertheleſſe / the poems / lawes / and other artes that they foūde / deuyſed and writ / ben mixed with ſome domage. And ſōtyme for the trueth / they enſigne a man to lye. But onelye

hyſtorie / truely with wordes / repreſentyng the actes / geſtes / and dedes done: complecteth all profyte. It moueth / ſtereth / and compelleth to honeſtie: deteſteth / erketh / & aborteth vices. It extolleth / enhaunceth / and lyfteth vp / ſuche as ben noble and vertuous: depreſſeth / poyſtereth / and thruſteth downe / ſuch as ben wicked / yuell / and reprouable. What knowlege ſhulde we haue of auncyent thynges paſt / and hiſtorie were nat? Whiche is the teſtymony therof / the lyght of trouthe / the mayſtres of the lyfe humayne / the preſydent of remembraūce / and the meſſanger of antiquyte. Why moued and ſtered Phaleryus / the kynge Ptholome / oft and dilygently to rede bokes? Forſothe for none other cauſe / but that thoſe thynges are founde writen in bokes / that the frēdes dare nat ſhewe to the price. Moche more I wolde fayne write of the incomparable profyte of hyſtorie / but I feare me / that I ſhulde to ſore tourment the reder of this my preface. And alſo I doute nat / but that the great vtilyte therof is better knowen / than I coulde declare: wherfore I ſhall breuely come to apoynt. Thus / whan I aduertyſed and remembred the many folde comodyties of hyſtorie / howe benefyciall it is to mortall folke / and eke howe laudable and merytoryous a dede it is / to write hyſtories / fixed my mynde to do ſome thyng therin. And euer whā this ymaginacyon came to me / I volued / tourned / and redde many volumes and bokes / conteyning famouſe hiſtories. And amonge all other / I redde dilygently the four volumes or bokes of ſir Johan Froyſſart of the countrey of Heynaulte / written in the Frenche tonge: whiche I iudged comodyous / neceſſarie / and profytable to be hadde in Englyſſhe / ſithe they treat of the fomous actes done in our parties. That is to ſay: in Englande / Fraūce / Spaygne / Portyngale / Scotlāde / Bretayne / Flaū
               ders / and other places adioyning: and ſpecially / they redounde to the honoure of Englyſſhemen. What pleaſure ſhall it be to the noble gē
               tylmen of Englande / to ſe / beholde / & rede: the highe enterpriſes / famous actes / and glorious dedes / done and atchyued by their valyant aū
               ceytours? Forſothe and god: this hath moued me at the highe cōmaundement of my mooſt redouted ſouerayne lorde kynge Henry the .viii. kyng of Englande and of Fraunce / and highe defender of the chriſten faythe. &c. Under his gracyous ſupportacyon / to do my deuoyre to tranſlate out of frenche in to our maternall englyſſhe tonge / the ſayd volumes of ſir Johan Froyſſart. Whiche cronycle begynneth at the raygne of the mooſt noble and valyant kynge Edwarde the thyrde. The yere of our lorde / a thouſande thre hundred and ſixtene: And contynucth to the begynning of the reigne of king Henry the fourth. The yere of our lorde god a thouſande and foure hundred: The ſpace by / twene / is threſcore and fourtene yeres. Requyrynge all the reders and herers therof / to take this my rude tranſlacion in gre. And in that I haue nat folowed myne authour worde by worde: yet I truſt I haue enſewed the true reporte of the ſentence of the mater. And as for the true namyng of all maner of perſonages / Countreis / cyties / townes / ryuers / or teldes: Where as I coude nat name them properly nor aptely in Englyſſhe / I haue written them acordynge as I founde them in frenche. And thoughe I haue nat gyuen euery lorde / knyght / or ſquyer his true addycion: yet I truſt I haue natſwarued fro the true ſentēce of the mater. And there as I haue named the dyſtaunce bytwene places by myles and leages / they muſt be vnderſtande acordyng to the cuſtome of the coūtreis where as they be named / for in ſome place they be lengar than in ſome other. In Englande a leage or myle is well knowen / in Fraūce a leage is two myles / and in ſome place thre. And in other coūtreis more or leſſe / euery nacion hath ſondrie cuſtomes. And if any faute be in this my rude tranſlacyon / I remyt the correctyon therof to thē that diſcretely ſhall fynde any reaſonable deraute. And in their ſo doynge / I ſhall pray god to ſende thē the blyſſe of heuen.
            Amen.
            Thus endeth the preface of ſir John̄ Bourchier knight lorde berners / trā
               ſlatour of this preſent cronycle. And herafter foloweth the table / with all the chapiters as they ſtande in the boke in order / from one to four hūdred fyftie and one. Whiche be in nombre C C C C. and li. chapiters.
         
         
            
            ¶ Here after foloweth the table of this preſent volume.
            
               
                  FIrſt the auctours ꝓloge. Ca. i.
               ¶ Of them that were mooſt valyant knightes to be made mencion of in this boke. Cap. ii.
               ¶ Of ſome of ye preveceſſours of kyng Edwarde of Englande. Cap. iii.
               ¶ Of ſome of the prrentes of this good kyng Edwarde the thyrbe. Cap. iiii.
               ¶ The firſt occaſyon of ye warre bytwene the the kynges of Englande & of Fraūce. Cap. v.
               ¶ Howe therle Thomas of Lancaſtre & .xxii. other great lordes and knyghtes of Englande werebeheeded. Cap. vi.
               ¶ Howe the quene of Englande went and cō
                  playned her to the kyng of Fraūce her brother / on ſir Hewe Spenſar. Cap. vii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Hewe Spenſar purchaſed that the quene Iſabell of Englande was putte out of Fraunce. Cap. viii.
               ¶ Howe quene Iſabell deꝑted out of Fraunce and entred in to the empyre. Cap. ix.
               ¶ Howe quene Iſabell areyued in Englande with ſir John̄ of Heynalt in her cōpany. Ca. x.
               ¶ Howe the quene of Englande beſieged kynge Edwarde the ſeconde her houſbande in the towne of Briſtowe. Cap. xi.
               ¶ Howe ſir Hewe Spēſar thelder and therle of Arundell were iudged to bethe. Cap. xii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Hewe Spenſar was putte to his iudgement. Cap. xiii.
               ¶ Of the coronacyon of kynge Edwarde the thirde. Cap. xiiii.
               ¶ Howe kyng Robert de Breur of Scotlāde defyed kyng Edwarde of Englande. Cap. xv.
               ¶ Of the diſcēcion that ſell bytwene tharchers of Englande & them of Heynalt. Cap. xvi.
               ¶ Of the maner of the ſcottes and howe they make their warre. Cap. xvii.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande made his firſt iourney agaynſt the ſcottes. Cap. xviii.
               ¶ Howe kynge Edwarde was maryed to the lady Philyppe of Heynalt. Cap. xix.
               ¶ Howe kyng Robert of ſcotlāde dyed. ca. xx.
               ¶ Howe Philyppe of Ualloyes was crowned kynge in Fraunce. Cap. xxi.
               Of the batayle of Caſſell in Flāders. ca. xxii.
               ¶ Howe therle of Kent and therle Mortymer in Englande were put to dethe. Cap. xxiii.
               ¶ Of the homage that kyng Edwarde of Englande made to the frenche kyng for the duchy of Guyen. Cap. xxiiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Roberte of Arthoyſe was chaſed out of the realme of Fraunce. Cap. xxv.
               ¶ Howe kynge Edwarde tooke the towne of Berwyke agaynſt the ſcottes. Cap. xxvi.
               ¶ Howe king Philyp of Fraunce and dyuers other kynges toke on them the croſey to the holy lande. Cap. xxvii.
               ¶ Howe kynge Edwarde of Englande was counſayled to make warre agaynſt the frenche kynge. Cap. xxviii.
               ¶ Howe Jaques Dartuell gouerned ye countie of Flaunders. Cap. xxix.
               ¶ Howe certayne nobles of Flaūders kept the yle of Cagāt agaynſt thēglyſſhmen. Cap. xxx.
               ¶ Of the batayle of Cagant by twene the Englyſſhmen and flemynges. Cap. xxxi.
               ¶ Howe kynge Edwarde of Englande made great alyaunces in thempyre. Cap. xxxii.
               ¶ Howe kyng Dauyd of Scotlande made alyaūce with kyng Philyp of Frāce. Ca. xxxiii.
               ¶ Howe kyng Edwarde was made vycar generall of thēpyre of Almayne. Cap. xxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe kynge Edwarde & all his alyes dede defy the frenche kyng. Cap. xxxv.
               ¶ Howe ſir Gaultier of Manny after the defyaunces declared / made the firſt iourney into Fraunce. Cap. xxxvi.
               ¶ Howe after the defyaunces / the frenchemen entred in to Englande Cap. xxxvii.
               ¶ Howe kyng Edwarde beſieged the cytie of Cambrey. Cap. xxxviii.
               ¶ Howe kynge Edwarde made ſir Henry of Flaunders knight. Cap. xxxix.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande and the frēche kynge toke day to fight. Cap. xl.
               ¶ Howe theſe two kynges ordayned their batayls at Uyronfoſſe. Cap. xli.
               ¶ Howe the ſayd two kynges departed without batayle. Cap. xlii.
               ¶ Howe king Edwarde of Englande toke on him to beare the armes of Fraunce / & the 
                     ••
                  me to be called kyng therof. Cap. xliii.
               ¶ Howe the frenchmen brent in the lanbes of ſir Johan of Heynalt. Cap. xliiii.
               ¶ Howe therle of Heynalt toke and diſtroyed Aubenton and Thyerache. Cap. xlv.
               ¶ Howe they of Tourney made a iourney in to Flaunders. Cap. xlvi.
               ¶ Of the iourney that duke John̄ of Normā
                  dy made in to Heynalt. Cap. xlvii.
               ¶ Howe they of Doway made a iourney in to Oſtrenant / and howe the erle of Heynalt was

in Englande. Cap. xlviii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Normandy layd ſiege to Thyne the byſſhoppe. Cap. xlix.
               ¶ Of the batayle on the ſee before Srluſe in Flaunders / bytwene the kynge of Englande & the frenchmen. Cap. l.
               ¶ Howe kynge Robert of Cycile dyde all that he might / to pacify the kynges of Englande & Fraunce. Cap. li.
               ¶ Of the coūſayle that the kyng of England & his alyes helde at ye towne of Uyllenort. ca. lii.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande layde ſiege to the cytie of Iourney. Cap. liii.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Heynalt diſtroyed the townes of Seclyn and Dorchies. Cap. liiii.
               ¶ Howe the ſcottes wan agayne a great ꝑte of Scotlande / whyle the ſiege was before Tourney. Cap. lv.
               ¶ Of the great aſſemble that the frenche kyng made to reyſe the ſiege before Turney. ca. lvi.
               ¶ Howe they of the garyſon of Bouhayne diſtruſſed certayne ſoudyers of Mortaygne / before the towne of Conde. Cap. lvii.
               ¶ Of the iourney that ſir Wylliam Baylleule and ſir Walflart de la Croyſe made at the bridge of Creſyn. Cap. lviii.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Heynault aſſayled the fortreile of Mortayne in Picardy by dyuers maners. Cap. lix.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Heynalte toke the towne of ſaynt Amande / duryng the ſiege before Tourney. Cap. lr.
               ¶ Of the takyng of sir Charles of Momorency / and of dyuers other frenchmen at the brige of Creſyn. Cap. lxi.
               ¶ Howe the flemynges were before ſaynt Omers / duryng the ſiege of Turney. Cap. lxii.
               ¶ Howe the ſiege before Turney was broken vp / by reaſon of a truſe Cap. lxiii.
               ¶ Of the warres of Bretaygne / and howe the duke ther dyed without heyre / wherby the diſcencyon fell. Cap. lxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Mountfort toke the towne and caſtell of Breſt. Cap. lxv.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Mountfort toke the cyte of Reynes. Cap. lxvi.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Mountfort toke the towne and caſtell of Hanybout. Cap. lxvii.
               ¶ Howe therle Moūtfort dyde homage to the king of Englād for ye duchy of breten. ca. lxviii
               ¶ Howe therle Moūtfort was ſomoned to the ꝑlyament of Parys / at the requeſt of the lorde Charles of Bloyes. Cap. lxix.
               ¶ Howe the duchy of Bretaygne was iudged to ſir Charles of Bloyes. Cap. lxx.
               ¶ Of the lordes of Fraūce yt entred in to Bretayne with ſir Charles of Bloyes. Cap. lxxi.
               ¶ Howe therle Moūtfort was taken at Naū
                  tes and howe he dyed. Cap. lxxii.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englāde the thirde tyme made warre on the ſcottes. Cap. lxxiii.
               ¶ Howe king Dauyd of Scotlande cāe with a great hoſt to Newcaſtell vpōtyne. ca. lxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the ſcottes diſtroyed the cyte of Dyrham. Cap. lxxv.
               ¶ Howe the ſcottes beſieged a caſtell of therle of Salyſburies. Cap. lxxvi.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englāde was in amours of the counteſſe of Saliſbury. Cap. lxxvii.
               ¶ Howe therle of Saliſbury & therle Moret were delyuered out of priſon. cap. lxxviii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Charles of Bloyes with dyuers lordes of Fraunce / toke the cytie of Reynes in Bretayne. Cap. lxxix.
               ¶ Howe ſir Charles of Bloyes beſieged the coūteſſe of Mountfort in Hanybout. ca. lxxx.
               ¶ Howe ſir Gaultier of Manny brought the englyſſhmen in to Bretayne. Cap. lxxxi.
               ¶ Howe the taſtell of Conqueſt was wonne two tymes. Cap. lxxxii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Loyes of Spaygne toke the townes of Dynant and of Gerande. cap. lxxxiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Gaultier of Manny diſcōfyted ſir Loyes of Spayne. Cap. lxxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Gaultier of Manny tooke the caſtell of Gony in the foreſt. Cap. lxxxv.
               ¶ Howe ſir Charles of Bloies toke the towne of Carahes. cap. lxxxvi.
               ¶ Howe ſir John̄ Butler & ſir Hubert of Freſnoy were reſcued fro dethe. Cap. lxxxvii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Charles of Bloys toke the towne of Jugon with the caſtell. Cap. lxxxviii.
               ¶ Of the feeſt and iuſtes that the kyng of Englande made at London for the loue of the coū
                  teſſe of Saliſbury.. Cap. lxxxix.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of England ſent ſir Robert of Artoyſe in to Bretayue. Cap. lxxxx.
               ¶ Of the batayle of Gernſay / by tweneſir Robert of Arthois and ſir Loyes of Spaygne on the ſee. Cap. lxxxxi.
               ¶ Howe ſir Robert of Arthois toke the cite of Uannes in Bretayne. Cap. lxxxxii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Robert of Arthoiſe dyed / & where he was buryed. Cap. lxxxxiii.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande cāe in to Bretayne to make warre there. Cap. lxxxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the lorde Cliſſon & ſir Henry of Leon were taken priſoners before Uānes. ca. lxxxxv
               
                  
¶ Howe the kyng of Englande toke ye towne of Dynant. Cap. lxxxxvi.
               ¶ What lordes of fraūce the duke of Norman by brought into Bretayne againſt the kyng of Englande. Cap. lxxxxvii.
               ¶ Howe the kynge of Englande and the duke of Normandy were hooſt agaynſt hooſt loged before Uannes. Cap. lxxxxviii.
               ¶ Howe the frenche kynge beheeded the lorde Clyſſon and dyuers other lordes of Bretayne and of Normandy. Cap. lxxxxix.
               ¶ Of the order of ſaynt George that king Edwarde ſtablyſſhed in the caſtell of Wyndſore. Cap. c.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande delyuered out of priſon ſir Henry of Leon. Cap. c .i.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande ſent the erle of Derby to make warre in Gaſcoyne. Cap. c .ii.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Derby conquered the fortereſſe of Bergerath. Cap. c .iii.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Derby conquered dyuers townes and fortereſſes in hye Gaſcoyne. Cap. c .iiii.
               ¶ Howe therle of Quenfort was taken in Gaſcoyne / and delyuered agayne by exchaunge. Cap. c .v.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Layle lieutenant to ye frenche kyng in Gaſcoyne layde ſiege before Auberoche. Cap. c .vi.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Derby toke before Auberoche the erle of Layle and dyuers other erles and vycountes to the nombre of .ix. Ca. c .vii.
               ¶ Of the townes that therle of Derby wan in Gaſcoyne goynge towarde the Ryoll. Cap. c .viii.
               ¶ Howe therle of Derby layde ſiege to ye Ryoll / and howe the towne was yelded to hym. Cap. c .ix.
               ¶ Howe ſir Gaultier of Manny founde in the Ryoll his fathers ſepulture. Cap. c .x.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Derby wanne the caſtell of the Ryoll. Cap. c .xi.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Derby tooke the towne of Mauleon / and after the towne of Franche in Gaſcoyne. Cap. c .xii.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Derby wanne the cytie of Angoleſme. Cap. c .xiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Godfrey of Harcourt was banyſſhed out of Fraunce. Cap. c .xiiii.
               ¶ Of the dethe of Jaques Dartuell of Gaunt. Cap. c .xv.
               ¶ Of the dethe of Willm̄ erle of Heynalt / who dyed in Friſe and many with him. Cap. c .xvi.
               ¶ Howe ſir Johan of Heynault became frenche. Cap. c .xvii.
               ¶ Of the great hooſt that the duke of Normā
                  dy brought into Gaſcoyne agaynſt the erle of Derby. Cap. c .xviii.
               ¶ Howe John̄ Norwich ſcaped fro Angolem whan the towne was yelden frēche. Cap. c .xix.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Normandy layd ſiege to Aguyllon with a hundred. M. men. Cap. c .xx.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande went ouer the ſee agayne to reſcue them in Aguyllon. Cap. c .xxi.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englāde rode in thre batayls thorowe Normandy. Cap. c .xxii.
               ¶ Of the great aſſemble that the frenche king made to reſyſt the kynge of Englande. Cap. c .xxiii.
               ¶ Of the batayle of Cane / and howe the Englyſſhmen toke the towne. Cap. c .xxiiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Godfray of Harcort fought with them of Ampens before Parys. Cap. c .xxv.
               ¶ Howe the frenche kyng folowed the kyng of Englande in Beauuonoyſe. Cap. c .xxvi.
               ¶ Howe the bataile of Blanche take was foughten bytwene the kyng of Englande and ſir Godmar du Fay. Cap. c .xxvii.
               ¶ Of the order of the englyſſhmen at Creſſey / and howe they made thre batayls a fote. Cap. c .xxviii.
               ¶ Of thorder of the frēchmen at Creſſey / and howe they regarded the maner of the englyſſhmen. Cap. c .xxix.
               ¶ Of the bataile of Creſſey / bytwene the king of Englande and the frēche kyng. Cap. c .xxx.
               ¶ Howe the next day after the batayle / the Englyſſhmen diſconfyted agayne dyuers frenchmen. Cap. c .xxxi.
               ¶ Howe after the batayle of Creſſey / the deed men were nombred by the Englyſſhmen. Cap. c .xxxii.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande layde ſiege to Calys / and howe all the poore people were put out of the towne. Cap. c .xxxiii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Normandy brake vp his ſiege before Aguyllon. Cap. c .xxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Galtier of Manny rode thorowe Fraunce by ſaue conducte to Calays. Cap. c .xxxv.
               ¶ Howe therle of Derby the ſame ſeaſon toke in Doictou dyuers townes and caſtels / and alſo the cytie of Poicters. Cap. c .xxxvi.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of ſcottes / duryng the ſiege before Calys / cāe in to Englande with a great hooſt. Cap. c .xxxvii.
               
                  
¶Of the batayle of Newe caſtell vpon Tyne / by ſwette the quene of Englande and the kyng of ſcottes. Cap. c .xxxviii.
               ¶ Howe Johan Coplande toke the kynge of ſcottes priſoner / and what profyt he gate therby. Cap. c .xxxix.
               ¶ Howe the younge erle of Flaunders enſured the kynges doughter of Englande. Cap. c .xl.
               ¶ Howe 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   Robert of Namure dyd homage to the kyng of Englāde before Calys. Cap. c. xlt.
               ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen wan the Roche Daryen / & howe ſir Charles of Bloys layde ſiege therto. Cap. c .xlii.
               ¶ Of the batayle of Roche Daryen / and howe ſir Charles of Bloys was there taken by ye englyſſhmen. Cap. c .xliii.
               ¶ Howe the frenche kynge aſſembled a great hooſt to reyſe ye kyng of Englande fro the ſiege before Calys. Cap. c .xliiii.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande made the paſſages a boute Caleys to be well kept / that the frenche kynge ſhulde nat a proche to reyſe his ſiege there. Cap. c .xlv.
               ¶ Howe the towne of Calys was yelded vp to the kyng of Englande. Cap. c .xlvi.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande repeopled the towne of Calys with engliſſhmen. Ca. c .xlvii.
               ¶ Of the dealynge of a brigant of Languedoc called Bacon. Cap. c .xlviii.
               ¶ Of another page called Crocart. cap. c .xlix.
               ¶ Howe ſir Amery of Pauy a lombarde ſolde the towne of Calys wherof he was capitayne / to the lorde Geffrey Charney of Frāce. cap. c .l.
               ¶ Of the batayle at Calys bytwene the kyng of Englande / vnder the baner of ſir Gaultyer of Manny and ſir Geffray of Cherney and the frenchemen. Cap. c .li.
               ¶ Of a chaplet of perles that the kyng of Englande gaue to ſir Euſtace of Rybamont. Cap. c .lii.
               ¶ Of the dethe of kyng Philyp of Fraūce / & of the coronacyon of his ſon Johan. Cap. c .liii.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Nauer made ſir Charles of Spayne conſtable of Fraunce to be ſlayne. Cap. c .liiii.
               ¶ Of the impoſicyon and gabell ordeyned in Fraunce by the thre eſtates for the feates of the warre. Cap. c .lv.
               ¶ Howe the frenche kyng toke ye kyng of Nauer / and beheeded the erle of Harcourt & other at Roan. Cap. c .lvi.
               ¶ Of the aſſemble that the frenche kyng made to fyght with the prince of Wales / who rode a brode in Berry. Cap. c .lvii.
               ¶ Howe the prince of Wales toke the caſtell of Remorentyn. Cap. c .lviii.
               ¶ Of ye great hooſt yt the french kyng brought to the batayle of Poicters. Cap. c .lix.
               ¶ Of the ordre of the frenchmen before the batayle of Poicters. Cap. c .lx.
               ¶ Howe the cardynall of Piergourt treated to haue made a gremen bytwene the french kyng and the prince / before the batayle of Poycters. Cap c .lxi.
               ¶ Of the batayle of Poicters bytwene ye price of Wales and the frenche kyng. Cap. c .lxii.
               ¶ Of two frenchmen that fled fro the batayle of Poicters / and of two englyſſhmen that folowed them. Cap. c .lxiii.
               ¶ Howe kyng Johan of Fraunce was taken priſoner at the batayle of Poiters. cap. c .lxiiii.
               ¶ Of the gyft that the prince gaue to the lorde Audley after the batayle of Poiters. ca. c .lxv.
               ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen wan greatly at the batayle of Poycters. Cap. c .xlvi.
               ¶ Howe the lord James Audeley gaue to his foure ſquiers the fyue. C. marke of reuenewes that the prince had gyuen hym. Ca. c .lxvii.
               ¶ Howe the prince made a ſupper to the french kyng the ſame day of ye batayle. Cap. c .lxviii.
               ¶ Howe the prince returned to Burdeaux after the batayle of Poicters. Cap. c .lxix.
               ¶ Howe the thre eſtates of Fraunce aſſembled to gyder at Parys after the batayle of Poycters. Cap. c .lxx.
               ¶ Howe the thre eſtates ſent men of warre agaynſt the lorde Godfrey of Harcourt. Cap. c .lxxi.
               ¶ Of the batayle of Conſtances bytwene the lorde Godfrey of Hercourt and the lorde Loys of Rauenall. Cap. c .lxxii.
               ¶ Howe the prince conueyed the frenche kyng fro Burdeaux in to Englande. Cap. c .lxxiii.
               ¶ Howe ye kyng of ſcottes was delyuered out of priſon. Cap. c .lxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Lancaſtre leyde ſiege to Reynes. Cap. c .lxxv.
               ¶ Howe a knyght of the coūtie of Eureux called ſir Willyam of Granuyle wan the cyte and caſtell of Eureux / the whiche the frenche kyng had won before fro the kyng of Nauer. Cap. c .lxxvi.
               ¶ Of the companyons wherof the Archepreſt was chiefe / & howe he was honoured in Auignon. Cap. c .lxxvii.
               ¶ Of a nother ſorte of cōpanyons wherof Ruffyn a walſheman was chiefe capitayne. Cap. c .lxxviii.
               
                  
¶ Howe the prouoſt of the marchantes of Parys ſlewe thre knyghtes in the regentes chambre. Cap. c .lxxix.
               ¶ Howe the kynge of Nauer came out of priſone. Cap. c .lxxx.
               ¶ Howe the kynge of Nauer preched solēpnelye at Parys. Cap. c .lxxxi.
               ¶ Of the begynning of the cyſing of the commens / called the Jaquery in Beauoſyn. Cap. c .lxxxii.
               ¶ Howe the prouoſt of the marchantes of Parys cauſed walles to be made about the cyte of Parys. Cap. c .lxxxiii.
               ¶ Of the batayleat Meaulx in Bry / wher the companyons of the Jaquery were diſconfyted by the erle of Foyz and the Captall of Beufz. Cap. c .lxxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe Parys was beſieged by the duke of Normandy regent of Fraunce. Cap. c .lxxxv.
               ¶ Of the pariſyens that were ſlayne at ſaynt Clude / by the Englyſſhmen that had ben ſoudyers in Parys. Cap. c .lxxxvi.
               ¶ Of the dethe of the prouoſt of the marchantes of Parys. Cap. c .lxxxvii.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Nauer beſyed the realme of Fraunce / the frenche kynge beyng priſoner in Englande. Cap. c .lxxxviii.
               ¶ Of the naueroiſe that the picardes beſieged in the caſtell of Moncounſell. Cap. c .lxxxix.
               ¶ How certayne burgeſſes of Amyens wolde haue delyuered the cytie to the naueroyſe / and of the great famyne that was than in y• realme of Fraunce Cap. c .lrxxx.
               ¶ Of the naueroiſe that were beſeged in ſaynt Ualery by the pycardes / and howe the realme of Fraūce was full of naueroyſe. cap. c .lxxxxi.
               ¶ Of the naueroyſe that the Chanone Roberſart diſconfyted in Beauoyſe / nere to the towne of Craule. Cap. c .lxxxxii.
               ¶ Of the naueroyſe that yelded vp ſaynt Ualerys to the frenchmen / after they had ben long beſieged. Cap. c .lxxxxiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Philyp of Nauer reyſed vp a thre thouſande naueroyſe / to haue reyſed the ſiege before ſaynt Ualerys. Cap. c .lxxxxiiii.
               ¶ Of the Naueroyſe that ſir Peter Audeley brought on a night to haue takenne the cytie of Chalons. cap. c .lxxxxv.
               ¶ Howe the Erle of Roucy was taken priſoner the ſeconde tyme. Cap. c .lxxxxvi.
               ¶ Of the thre quenes & the naueryſe that were beſieged by the duke of Normādy in Melune. Cap. c. lxxxx
                     •
                  ii.
               ¶ Howe the lorde Broquart of Feneſtrages & other frenchemen ordayned their bataylles agaynſt the lorde Euſtace Dambreticourt & the englyſſhmen in Chāpayne. Cap. c .lxxxxviii.
               ¶ Of the batayle of Nogent bytwene the lorde Broquart of Feneſtrages / of the nacyon of Lorayne on the frēche partie. and ſir Euſtace Dabretycourt of the nacyon of Heynalt on the Englyſſhe partie. Cap. c .lxxxxix.
               ¶ Howe the robbers and pyllers that kept fortreſſes in Fraunce began to declyne by myracle. Cap. cc.
               ¶ Howe the frenchemen refuſed the peace that the kyng had made in Englande. Cap. cc .i.
               ¶ Howe ſir Euſtace Dābretycourt was delyuered out of priſon by great raunſome. cap. cc .ii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Broquart of Feneſtrages made hymſelfe to be payed of his wages of the duke of Normandy regent of Fraunce. Cap. cc .iii.
               ¶ Of the iourney that ſir Robr̄t Canoll made in Berry and Auuergne / and of the lordes and gentylmen of the countre that purſewed after hym. Cap. cc .iiii.
               ¶ Of the almayns that abode the kyng of Englande at Calys / to ryde with hym in to the realme of Fraunce / kyng Johan beyng ſtyll priſoner in Englande. Cap. cc .v.
               ¶ Of the great hoſt that the kyng of Englāde brought in to Fraūce to make warr there / kynge Johan beyng priſoner in Englande / and of the order of the Englyſſhe hooſt. Cap. cc .viii.
               ¶ Howe the kynge of Englande departed fro Calys / and of the order of his hooſt in ridynge thorowe Picardy / and ſo to the cytie of Reynes. Cap. cc .vii.
               ¶ Howe the kynge of Englande beſieged the cytie of Reynes / and of the caſtell of Charigny taken by the Englyſſhemen. And of the warre that began agayne bytwene the duke of Normandy and the kyng of Nauer. Cap. cc .viii.
               ¶ Howe the lorde of Roy diſconfyted the lorde of Gomegynes / and howe the caſtell of Comercy was taken by the englyſſhmen. Cap. cc. ix
               ¶ Howe the kynge of Englande as he wente / waſted and diſtroyed the countrey / and howe he came to Aguyllon and there taryed. and of the great prouiſyon that came after his hooſt. Cap. cc .x.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande put the realme of Fraunce in to great trybulacion / and of the prophecyes of the frere of Auygnon / and of the

¶ Howe ſir Robert Canoll & ſir Johan Chandos departed fro Dōme without wynnyng of it and w
                     ••
                   and toke Gauaches and Rochemador / and dyuers other townes that were tourned frenche. Cap. cc .lviii.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Cambridge and the erle of Penbroke toke by great aduyſe the gaiyſon of Bourdell. Cap. cc .lix.
               ¶ Howe ſir Robert Canoll ſir Johan Chandos / and ſir Thomas Phelton ordered their people and retourned to the prince. Ca. cc .lx.
               ¶ Howe the englyſſhe companyons tooke the caſtell of Bell perche / & therin the duke of Burbons mother / and alſo they toke the ſtronge caſtell of ſaynt Seuere in Berry. Cap. cc .lxi.
               ¶ Howe the caſtell of Roche ſur yone was yelden vp to the engliſſhmen / and howe the capyteyne therof was beheeded by the commaundement of the duke of Aniou. Cap. cc. lxii
               ¶ Howe the duke of Burgoyne deꝑted fro the cyye of Roen / to thentent to fight with the duke of Lancaſtre. & howe they lodged eche agaynſt other at Tournehen. Cap. cc .lxiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir John̄ Chandos brought the countre of Aniou in great trybulacion / and howe he waſted & diſtroyed the landes of the vycoūt of Roch choart / except the fortreſſes. Ca. cc .lxiiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Loys of Sanxere came on therle of Penbroke and ſlewe dyuers of his men and beſieged the erle in an howſe. Cap. ii. C .lxv.
               ¶ Howe ſir John̄ Chandos cāe to the ſocoure and reſcue of therle of Penbroke. Cap. cc .lxvi.
               ¶ Howe quene Philyppe of Englande paſſed out of this mortall lyfe / and of ye thre requeſtes that ſhe deſyred of the kyng her huſband or ſhe departed. Cap. cc .lxvii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Burgoyne deꝑted fro the duke of Lancaſtre without batayle / & howe the duke of Lācaſtre went to Calys. Ca. cc .lviii.
               ¶ Howe ye countrey of Uermandoyſe and the coūtie of ſaynt Poule were waſted / & ſir Hugh of Chaſtellone taken. Cap. cc .lxix.
               ¶ Howe ſir Johan Chandos was ſlayne in a batayle / and finally the frenchmen diſcomfyted in the ſame batayle. Cap. cc .lxx.
               ¶ Howe the lorde of Coucy & the lorde of Pomyers wolde nat entre in to the warre / nother on the one parte nor on the other / and howe the lorde of Maleuale and the lorde of Marnayle tourned frenche. Cap. cc .lxxi.
               ¶ The copy of the letters ſent fro the kynge of England in to Acquitayne / and howe Chaſtelerant was taken / and Bell perche beſieged by the frenchmen. Cap. cc .lxxii.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Cambridge and the erle of Penbroke ledde a way fro the garyſon of Bell perche / the duke of Burbons mother / & all tho that were within. Cap. cc .lxxiii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Burbon gaue leaue to all his men to departe when he knewe that ye lady his mother was ledde a way. Cap. cc .lxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Aniou came fro Tholouſe to Parys / and howe kynge Charles ſent hym with the duke of Berry his brother in to Aquitayne agaynſt ye engliſſhmen. Cap. cc .lxxv.
               ¶ Howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy deꝑted out of Spayne & wēt to Tholous / where as the duke of Aniou receyued hym ioyouſly. Ca. cc .lxxvi.
               ¶ Howe they of Monſac and of Moūtpellyer yelded them to the duke of Aniowe / and of the duke of Berry who layde ſiege before the cytie of Lymoges. Cap. cc .lxxvii.
               ¶ Howe trewſe was made bytwene England and Scotlande / and howe ſir Robert Canoll brent and eryled the countrey of Picardy and Uermandoyſe. Cap. cc .lxxviii.
               ¶ Howe they of Noyon toke the englyſſhmen that had ſet fyre in the byſſhops bridge / & howe the frenche kyng ſent for ſir Bertram of Cleſquy. Cap. cc .lxxix.
               ¶ Howe they of Lymoges yelded them to the duke of Berrey / and howe he brake vp his army. Cap. cc .lxxx.
               ¶ Howe ſir Robert Canoll entred in to the realme of Fraūce with a great nombre of men of armes and came nere to the cytie of Parys. Cap. cc .lxxxi.
               ¶ Howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy made great warre in the countie of Lymoges / and howe he toke the caſtell of ſaynt yriell. Cap. iiC .lxxxii.
               ¶ Howe the prince of Walles toke the cytie of Lymoges / and howe foure companyons dyd marueyls in armes. Cap. cc .lxxxiii.
               ¶ Howe the cytie of Lymoges was brent and diſtroyed / and the byſſhop deliuered fro dethe / and howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was made conſtable of Fraunce. Cap. cc .lxxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy and the lorde of Clyſſon / diſcōſyted at the bridge of Bolayne certayne of ſir Robert Canols company. Cap. cc .lxxxv.
               ¶ Howe pope Urbane dyed / and howe Gregory was choſen / & howe ſir Raymon of Marnell was taken of thēglyſſhmen. Ca. cc .lxxxvi.
               ¶ Howe the Prince lefte the duchy of Acquitayne in the kepynge of the duke of Lancaſter / and howe four breton knightes toke the caſtell of Mount Paon. Cap. cc .lxxxvii.
               
                  
¶ Howe the ſayd foure knyghtes bretons defended them ſelfe valiauntly agaynſt the duke of Lancaſtre / and howe fynally the duke toke them all four to raūſome. Cap. cc .lxxxviii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Lācaſtre gaue lycence to all his people to deꝑte / and returned hym ſelfe to Burdeux. And howe therle of Pons turned frenche / and howe ye ſeneſhall of Poytou aſſē
                  bled togyder a company. Cap. cc .lxxxix.
               ¶ Howe the ſeneſhall of Poictou toke Moūtcontour / and howe 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   Bertram of Cleſquy toke dyuers townes and caſtels in Rouuergue / and howe he beſieged the cite of Duſes. Cap. cc .xc.
               ¶ Howe they of Duſes yelded them vp to ſir Bertram / and howe ſir Robert Canoll was in the kyng of Englandes diſpleaſure / and howe at the requeſt of the lordes his peace was made agayne. Cap. cc .lxxxxi.
               ¶ Howe therle of Herforde & dyuers englyſſhmen diſcomfyted in Bretayne on ye ſee / dyuers ſlemynges ye aſſayled them. Ca. ii. C .lxxxxii.
               ¶ How the kyng of Englād ſent a great nauy to the ſee agaynſt the ſlemynges / and howe the peace was made bytwene thē. Cap. cc .lxxxxiii.
               ¶ Howe ye kyng of Mayllorgues was in diſpleaſure with kyng Henry of Spayne / and after went and made warre to the kyng of Arragon. Cap. ii. C .lxxxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Lancaſtre wedded the eldeſt doughter of kyng Dampeter of Spayne / And howe the confederacions were made bytwene the french kyng & the kyng of Spayne. Cap. ii. C .lxxxxv.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Lancaſtre ordayned gouernours in Guyen / and ledde his wyfe with hym in to Englāde. and howe the kyng of Englande ordayned the erle of Penbroke to be gouernour of Poictou. Cap. cc .lxxxxvi.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Penbroke departed out of Englande to go in to Poyctou / and howe the ſpaynierdes fought with hym in the hauen of Rochell. Cap. cc .lxxxxvii.
               ¶ Howe they of Rochell towne wolde nat reſcue therle of Penbroke / and howe the ſeneſhall of Rochell and the lorde of Tanyboton & other came to ſocour the erle. Cap. cc .lxxxxviii.
               ¶ Howe therle of Penbroke was taken priſoner by the ſpanierdes / and howe they departed fro ye hauen of Rochell withall their priſoners / and the ſame day the Captall of Beufz came in to Rochell. Cap. cc .lxxxxix.
               ¶ Howe ſir yuan of Wales diſcōfyted the Englyſſhmen in the yle of Geruſay / and howe the frenche kynge ſent in to Spaygne for men of warre / to ley ſiege to Rochell. Cap. ccc.
               ¶ Howe the kynge of Englande was ſore diſpleaſed for the takyng of the erle of Penbroke / and howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy toke the caſtell of Mountmorillan. Cap. ccc .i.
               ¶ Howe the cōſtable of Fraūce beſieged moūt counter / and howe he departed thens to go to the duke of Berrey in to Lymoſyn to beſiege ſaynt Seuere. Cap. ccc .ii.
               ¶ Howe they of ſaynt Seuere endurynge a great aſſaut / yelded theym vp to ſir Bertram / and howe the cyte of Potters tourned frenche. Cap. ccc .iii.
               ¶ Howe the frenche men tooke the Captall of Beufz before Subyſe in batayle / & howe they of Rochell tourned frenche. Cap. ccc .iiii.
               ¶ Howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy conſtable of Fraūce toke dyuers caſtels in Rochell / & howe the kynge of Englande toke the ſee to come to reyſe the ſiege at Thouars. Cap. ccc .v.
               ¶ Howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy leyde ſiege to the caſtell of Syreth / and howe thenglyſſhemen were diſconfyted: and howe the countreis of Poictou / Xaynton / and Rochell / were clene delyuered out of the englyſſhmens handes. Cap. ccc .vi.
               ¶ Of the ſiege of Bercerell / of the dethe of the kyng of Scottes / and of the peace bytwene the frenche kyng and the kynge of Nauer. & howe the duke of Bretayne ſledde in to Englande / & howe the conſtable of Fraunce conquered his duchy. Cap. ccc .vii.
               ¶ Howe ther were a certayne ordayned in englande to kepe the countre / and howe therle of Saliſbury / ſir Wyllm̄ Neuell / and Philyppe Courtney / with dyuers other men of armes entred in to the ſee and landed in Bretaygne / & howe the conſtable of Fraūce went thyder and the duke of Bretaygne wente in to Englande. Cap. ccc .viii.
               ¶ Howe the frenche men lay at ſiege at foure ſondrie places atones / and howe that Rocheſur yone yelded them ſelfe and became frenche / and howe the englyſſhmen came before Breſt. Cap. ccc .ix.
               ¶ Howe dyuers engliſſhmen were ſlayne and diſconfyted by the lorde of Subyſe before Rybamōt / and howe the garyſons of Soiſſonois diſconfyted thenglyſſhmen. Cap. ccc .x.
               ¶ Howe the hoſtages that were layd by them of Dyriuall were beheeded / and howe ſir Robert Canoll beheeded agayne all ſuche priſoners as he had / and alſo of the duke of Lancaſters iourney. Cap. ccc .xi.
               
                  
¶ Howe the lorde of Brime we & his chyldren were taken by the englyſſhmen & all their company / and howe they of the garyſon of Peron were chaſed in to their towne haſtely. Cap. ccc .lxii.
               ¶ Howe the engliſſhmen brint and waſted the countre of Champayne / and of then countrynges that they had in their way / and of the priſoners that they toke. Cap. ccc .lxiii.
               ¶ Howe the engliſſhmen came before Croyes and of the baſtydes that the duke of Burgoyne made without Troyes / to reſyſt the englyſſhe men. Cap. ccc .lxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen to de and pylled the countrey of Gaſtenoyſe & of Beauſe / and howe a frenche ſquier right valyant requyred an englyſſhe ſquier to iuſt with him. Cap. ccc .lxv.
               ¶ Of the Juſtes bytwene Gawen Mychaell fraucoys / and Joachyn Cathore angloys / and of the wordes that kynge Charles of Fraunce ſayd on his dethe bedde. Cap. ccc .lxvi.
               ¶ Of the lorde of Mauuoyſen who was taken priſoner by the engliſſhmen / and of the lorde of Hangeſt who ſcaped / and of the dethe of kyng Charles of Fraunce the fifte of that name. Cap. ccc .lxvii.
               ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen arryued in Breten / and howe ye duke excuſed himſelfe of his longe taryenge fro them. Cap. ccc .lxviii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Bretayne & the englyſſhmen beſieged Nauntes / and of the coronacyon of kyng Charles ye sixt of that name / and of the ſery
                     〈…〉
                  ſt he done before Nauntes. Ca. ccc .lxix.
               ¶ Of the lettes that the duke of Bretayne had / ſo yt he might nat come to the ſege before Nautes / and of the ſcrimyſſhe made there. Cap. ccc .lxx.
               ¶ Of the ſcrumyſſhe that the Barroys of Barres and Almery of Clyſſon made on chriſtmas cuyu / agaynſt thengliſſhmen beyng at Nauntes. Cap. ccc .lxxi.
               ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen departed fro ye ſiege before Nauntes / and of the fayre excuſes that the duke of Bretayne made to the erle of Buckyngham. Cap. ccc .lxxii.
               ¶ Of the dedes of armes done before therle of Buckyngham / bytwene the englyſſhmen and frenchmen / and the auſwere made to the heraudes on their ſaueconductes. Cap. ccc .lxxiii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Bretayne made his peace with the frenche kyng / and howe the englyſſhmen returned to their countreys. and of a dede of armes bytwene a frenche ſquier and an englyſſhe. Cap. ccc .lxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the warre began agayne bytwene the erle of Flaūders and the flemynges / and howe they of Ipre were diſcomfyted by abuſſhemēt. Cap. ccc .lxxv.
               ¶ Howe they of Ipre and Courtrey turned to the erle of Flaūders parte / and howe the towne of Gaunt was beſieged. Cap. ccc. lxxvt.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Flaunders reyſed vp his ſiege fro the towne of Gaūt / and of the batayle bytwene him & the gauntoyſe. Cap. ccc .lxxvii.
               ¶ Howe the gauntoyſe were brent in the churche of Nieule / and howe the white hodes ſlewe dyuers noble men of the erle of Flaūders parte. Cap. ccc .lxxviii.
               ¶ Howe the whyte hodes and their capitayne was ſlayne / and howe Philyp Dartuell was choſen capitayne of Gaunt. Cap. ccc .lxxix.
               ¶ Of the ordynaunce of Gaunt / & of the warre of Spayne and of Portyngale. Cap. ccc .lxxx.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Cambridge departed out of Englande to go into Portyngale / and how the comons of Englande rebelled agaynſt the noble men. Cap. ccc .lxxxi.
               ¶ Of the yuell dedes that theſe comons of Englande dyd to the kynges offycers / and howe they ſent a knyght to ſpeke with the kyng. Cap. ccc .lxxxii.
               ¶ Howe the comons of Englande entred in to London / and of the great yuell that they dyd / and of the dethe of the byſſhop of Caunterbury and dyuers other. Cap. ccc .lxxxiii.
               ¶ Howe the nobles of Englāde were in great parell to haue bene diſtroyed / and howe theſe rebels were punyſſhed and ſent home to their owne houſes. Cap. ccc .lxxxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Lancaſtre kept hymſelfe ſtyll in Scotlande for feare of this rebellyon / and howe ye kyng punyſſhed of theſe treatours the chiefe mayſters. Cap. ccc .lxxxv.
               ¶ The yuell wyll that the duke of Lancaſtre conceyued in his courage / for the refuſe yt was made him at Berwyke / & howe there of Cambridge arryued in Portyngale. Ca. ccc .lxxxvi.
               ¶ Howe two valyāt men of Gaūt were ſlayne by Peter de boyſe and by Philyppe Dartuell / and of the rebellyon at Parys againſt ye french kyng. Cap. ccc .lxxxvii.
               ¶ Howe the lorde of Coucy apeaſed the diſcencyon and rebellyon of thē of Parys / and of the preparacyon that the duke of Aniou made to make him ſelfe kynge of Naples. Cap. ccc .lxxxviii.
               
                  
¶ Howe thenglyſſhmen rode without any cō
                  maundement of the kyng of Porſyngale / and howe ye caſtel of Sigheyre in Portingale was taken. Cap. ccc. lxxxix
               ¶ Howe the chanoyne Roberſarde & his company returned to their garyſon / and of the maryage of the kyng of England to the doughter of the kyng of Bomayns. Cap. ccc .lxxxx.
               ¶ Howe the frenche kyng coulde haue no money of the receyuoure of Paryg / and howe the duke of Aniowe paſſed in to Italy / and of his noble chyualry. Cap. ccc .xci.
               ¶ Howe therle of Sauoy cauſed the enchaunters heed to be ſtryken of / and howe the Chanoyne Roberſarde and his company toke dyuers caſtels in Spayne. Cap. ccc .xcii.
               ¶ Of the great pyllage and proies done by the Chanoyue Roberſart & his company / agaynſt the kyng of Caſtyle / and of the diſcencyon that was amonge them. Cap. ccc .xciii.
               ¶ Howe the kynges of Caſtyle and of Portingale aſſembled their puyſſaun
                     •
                  es / and howe the peace was made bſtwene them agaynſt the wyll of the englyſſhmen. Cap. ccc .xciiii.
               ¶ Howe the kyng of Spaygne was maryed agayne to the kynge of Portyngales doughter. Cap. ccc. xch.
               ¶ Of the great neceſſyte of vitaylles that they of Gaunt endured / and howe they were ſocoured by them of Liege. Cap. ccc .xcvi.
               ¶ The harde anſwere that the erle of Flaunders made to them of Gaunt / and of the nombre of men of armes that were than at Parys in Fraunce. Cap. ccc. xchii.
               ¶ Howe that fyue thouſande gaūtoyſe yſſued out of Gaunt to fyght with the Erle and with them of Bruges / after the anſwere that Phylyppe Dartuell hadde ſhewed them. Cap. ccc .xcviii.
               ¶ Of the order of the Gauntoyſe / and howe they diſconfyted the erle and them of Bruges / and by what meanes. Cap. ccc .xcix.
               ¶ Howe the towne of Bruges was taken by the gauntoyſe / and howe the erle of Flaūders ſaued hym ſelfe in apoore womans howſe in the towne of Bruges. Cap. cccc.
               ¶ Howe they of Gaunt ſpared the marchaunteſtraungers / and howe the erle departed fro Bruges and wente to Lyſſe / and howe he was receyued there ioyouſſy. Cap. cccc .i.
               ¶ Of the great rycheſſe that the Gauntoyſe foūde in Bruges / and howe all the townes in Flaunders yelded them to Gaunt except. Andwarpe. Cap. cccc .ii.
               ¶ Howe the erle of Flaunders was at Lyſte / and howe And warpe was beſieged by y• gauntoyſe and ſlemynges. Cap. cccc .iii.
               ¶ Howe the gauntoyſe aſſayled the towne of Andewarpe dyuers tymes / and howe they ran before Lyſſe / and in the countre aboute on the realme of Fraunce. Cap. cccc .iiii.
               ¶ Of the requeſt that the duke of Burgoyne made to the frenche kynge / and why the kynge toke on hym to beare the fleyng Hart. Cap. cccc .v.
               ¶ Of a Dreme that fortuned to the kynge the ſame ſeaſon whyle he lay at Lyſſe / by occaſyon of whiche dreme he ordayned the deuyſe of the ſtyeng Hart. Cap. cccc .vi.
               ¶ Of the meſſangers that Philyppe Dartuell ſent in to Englande and alſo in to Fraūce / and of the dethe of ſir Perducas Dalbreth. Cap. cccc .vii.
               ¶ Howe the kynge of Englandes counſayle mocked y• ſlemynges / and of the priſoners that were exchaunged. Cap. cccc .viii.
               ¶ Letters ſende to Philyppe Dartuell fro the commyſſaries of the frenche kynge / and howe the meſſāgers that bare the letters were taken and ſet in priſon. Cap. cccc .ix.
               ¶ Of the letters ſent to Iourney fro Philyp Dartuell / and howe the frenche kynge and his counſayle were enformed of the anſwers that the ſlemynges had made to the commyſſaries. Cap. cccc .x.
               ¶ Howe Philyppe Dartuell made the paſſages in Flaunders to be kept / and howe dyuers frenche knyghtes were loſt in Flaunders with out remedy. Cap. cccc. xi
               ¶ Thordynāce that the frenche king made for to entre in to Flaūders / after that the paſſages were ſtopped and broken. Cap. cccc .xii.
               ¶ Howe the frenchmen coude nat paſſe by the bridge of Comynes / & howe they paſſed without knowlege of the ſlemyngꝭ. Cap. cccc .xiii.
               ¶ Howe the frēchmen that were paſſed the ryuer of Lyſe / put them ſelfe in batayle before the flemynges. Cap. cccc .xiiii.
               ¶ Howe the frēchmen that were paſſed the ryuer of Lyſe / diſconfyted the ſlemynges & ſlewe many of them / and wan the paſſage of Comynes. Cap. cccc .xv.
               ¶ Howe the frenche kynge paſſed the ryuer of Lyſe / and howe Philyppe Dartuell made his ordynaunce to reſyſt the kynge and his puyſſaunce. Cap. cccc .xvi.
               
                  
¶ Howe the towne of Ipre and dyuers other put them ſelfe vnder the obeyſaunce of the frenche kyng / and of the order of the kynges hooſt. Cap. cccc .xvii.
               ¶ Howe the Frenche kynge departed fro the mount of Ipre / and howe Philyppe Dartuell and the flemynges apparelled th
                     •
                  ſelfe to fight. Cap. cccc .xviii.
               ¶ Of a marueyle that came to the flemynges in the night / and howe they ordayned their batayle all in one cōpany. Cap. cccc .xix.
               ¶ Howe the conſtable and admyrall of Fraū
                  ce and the baſtarde of Langres wente to ſe the flemynges / and howe they fortifyed themſelfe Cap. cccc .xx.
               ¶ The maner of the batayle of Roſebeque / & howe the flemynges were diſcomfyted of the threfore ſayde knyghtes / who had auewed all their behauyng. Cap. cccc .xxi.
               ¶ Howe the flemynges were diſcōfyted at the batayle of Roſebeque. Cap cccc .xxii.
               ¶ Howe the body of Philyppe Dartuell was brought before the kyng and fo hāged vp / and howe the towne of Courtrey was brent. Cap. cccc .xxiii.
               ¶ Howe they of Bruges yelded themſelfe vnder the obeyſaunce of the frenche kynge / and howe they of Gaunt were recōforted by Peter de Boyſe. Cap. cccc .xxiiii.
               ¶ Howe the treatie of alyaūce bytwene the englyſſh men and y• flemynges was broken / and howe the frenche kyng departed out of Flaunders. Cap. cccc .xxv.
               ¶ Howe the frenche kynge came to Parys / & howe he cauſed to be putte downe the cheneſſe and harneſſe in the towne / and howe the pariſyens were 
                     •
                  aunſomed at his pleaſure. Cap. cccc .xxvi.
               ¶ Howe dyuers notable men of Parys were beheeded with maiſter John̄ Marettes at Parys / and dyuers other townes in Fraūce / and of the warre of the gaūtoyſe that was newe begon agayne. Cap. cccc .xxvii.
               ¶ Of y• alyaunce that was purchaſed bytwene the Englyſſhmen and flemynges / and of the Bulles that pope Urbane ſent in to Englande to diſtroy the clementyns. Cap. cccc .xxviii.
               ¶ Howe the byſſhoppe of Norwiche and the englyſſhmen yſſued out of Englande to ronne and make warre agaynſte all thoſe that helde with pope Element. Cap. cccc .xxix.
               ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen toke the towne and mynſter of Grauelyng / & howe therle of Flaū
                  ders ſent to ſpeke with thē. Cap. cccc .xxx.
               ¶ The anſwere that the byſſhop of Norwiche made to the knightes of Flaunders / and of the aſſemble that they of Caſſell & the coūtre about made agaynſt thēglyſſhmen. Cap. cccc .xxxi.
               ¶ Howe the fleminges of the countre & they of the lande of Caſſell were diſcōfyted by the Englyſſhmen / and Dōkyrke taken / with dyuers other caſtels in the coūtre. Cap. cccc .xxxii.
               ¶ Howe thēglyſſhmen cōquered all the coūtre of Flaūders fro Donkyrke to Scluſe / & howe they beſieged the towne of Iyre. Cap. cccc .xxxiii.
               ¶ Howe thenglyſſhmen ſent for thē of Gaunt / and howe they came to the ſiege of Ipre / and of the lorde ſaynt Leger & his cōpany / who were diſcōfyted by thēglyſſhmen. and howe the byſſhop of Liege came to the ſiege of Ipre. Cap. cccc .xxxiiii.
               ¶ Of the great cōmaundemēt of aſſemble that the frenche kyng made / to thentent to reyſe the ſiege before Ipre. and of thē that were diſcōfyted by thenglyſſhmen. Cap. cccc .xxxv.
               ¶ Howe the Englyſſhmen and they of Gaunt made dyuers aſſautes before Ipre / & howe the frenche kyng depted fro Compayne and went towarde Ipre / to reyſe the ſiege there. Cap. cccc .xxxvi.
               ¶ Howe the duke Frederyke of Bauyere aryued in the frenche kynges hooſt / and howe the e
                     •
                  le of Bloyſe and his men came to Arras / and howe the kynges vowarde toke Caſſell. Cap. cccc .xxxvii.
               ¶ Howe the engliſſhmen after ye ſiege of Ipre were withdrawen in to the towne of Bergues / and howe they departed thens & went to Burboucke / whan they ſawe the kynges puyſſaūce. Cap. cccc .xxxviii.
               ¶ Howe ye french kyng with all his hooſt came to Burbourke / and of the ordre of the engliſſhemen within the towne / and howe Fraunces 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  freman wan 
                     •
                  ndewarpe. Cap. cccc .xxxix.
               ¶ Howe they of Andwarpe were put out of the towne / & none abode there but gauntoyſe. And howe Amergot Marcell toke y• caſtell of Marquell in Auuerne: and how it was gyuen vp by compoſicyon for fyue thouſande frankes / to the erle Dolphyn of Auuergne. Cap. cccc .xl.
               ¶ Howe the frenche kyng aſſayled Burburke and how he ordayned that whoſoeuer brought thyder a fagotte ſhulde haue a blanke. Cap. cccc .xli.
               
                  
¶ Of the myracles that were done in ye towne of Burburke / and howe ſir Thomas Tryuet and ſir wyll
                     •
                   Helman engliſſhmen were put in priſone for the domage of Fraunce. Cap. cccc .xlii.
               ¶ Howe the lordes of Englande and Fraunce aſſembled togyder to make a peace / whiche by thē coude nat be done. And howe Loyes erle of Flaunders dyed and of his obſ
                     •
                  quy. Cap. cccc .xliii.
               ¶ Howe therle of Northūberlande / the erle of Notyngham / and thēglyſſhmen made a iourney in to Scotlāde. and of the ambaſſadours of Fraunce that were ſent in to Scotlande / to notifye the truſe that was taken bytwene Englande and Fraunce. Cap. cccc .xliiii.
               ¶ Howe the barons & knightes of Scotlande and they of Fraūce / made apoyntment to entre in to the realme of Englāde without the knowledge of the kyng of ſcottes / who was at Edenborowe. Cap. cccc .xlv.
               ¶ Howe the trewſe taken bytwene Englande and Fraūce / was publyſſhed in Englande and Scotlande. Cap. cccc .xlvi.
               ¶ Howe the lorde of Deſtoruay made his aſſemble to wynne againe Andwarpe / and howe by his policy he wanne it. Cap. cccc .xlvii.
               ¶ Howe the duke of Aniou dyed in a caſtell beſyde Naples / & howe the quene of Cycile was coūſayled to go to the pope. Cap. cccc .xlviii.
               ¶ Howe the lady of Brabant cauſed to be called a counſayle / wherat there was the duke of Burgoyne / the duke Aubert / & ſhe / in the cytie of Cambray to treate for the maryage of their chyldren. Cap. cccc .xlix.
               ¶ Howe the french kyng & the lordes of Fraū
                  ce and of Heynault made their prouyſion to be at Cambray / and of the meſſage of the duke of Lancaſtre ſent to the erle of Heynalt / and of the maryage of the chyldren of Heynalt and Burgoyne. Cap. cccc .l.
               ¶ Howe ye duke of Berry enſured his doughter to the ſonne of the erle of Bloys / and howe the erle of Marche and the duke of Burbone / made their ſomons to entre in to Lymoſyn. Cap. cccc .li.
            
            ¶ Finis.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶here begymeth the prologe of ſyr John̄ Froiſſart of the cronicles of frā
               ce / Inglande / and other places abioynynge. ¶he firſt chaptre.
            
               TO thentent that the honorable and noble au
                  •
               tures offeatis of armes / done and achyued by y• warres of Frā
               ce and Ingland. 
               ſhuld notably be inregiſterd and put in perpetuall memory. wherby the prewe and hardy / may haue enſample to in courage them in theyr well doyng. I ſyr John̄ Froiſſart / wyll treat and recorde an hyſtory of great louage and preyſe. But or I begyn / I require the ſauyour of all the worlde / who of nothyng / created al thynges. that he wyll gyue me ſuche grace and vnderſtandyng / that I may cō
               tinue and ꝑ euer in ſuche wyſe / that who ſo this proces redeth or hereth / may take paſtaūce pleaſure and enſample. It is ſayd of trouth / that al buyldynges are maſoned and wroughte of dyuerſe ſtones and all great tyuers / are gurged & aſſembled of diuers ſurges and ſprynges of water. In lyke wyſe all ſciences are extraught and cōpiled of diuerſe clerkes / of that one wryteth / another parauenture is ignorant. But by the famous wrytyng of auncient auctours / all thyngis ben knowen in one place or other. Than to attaygne to the mater that I haue entrepriſed / I wyll begyn. Fyrſt by the grace of god and of the bleſſed virgyn ourlady ſaynt Mary: from whom all comfort & conſolation procedeth. and wyll take my foundation out of ye true cronicles ſomtyme cōpyled by the right reuerend diſcrete and ſage maiſter John̄ la Bele ſomtyme Chanon in ſaint Lābartis of Liege / who with good herte / and due diligence dyd his true deuoure / in wrytyng this noble cronicle / and dyd contynue it all his lyf dayes. in folowyng the trouth as nere as he myght / to his great charge & coſte in ſekyng to haue the perfight knowledge therof. He was alſo in his lyf dayes Welbeloued / & of the ſecret counſayle with the lorde sir John̄ of Haynaulte / who is often remembred (as reaſon requyreth) here after in this boke. For of many fayre and noble auentures / he was chief / cauſer. And by whoſe meanes / ye ſayd 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ la Bele myght well knowe and here of many dyuers noble dedes. The whiche here after ſhalbe declared. Trouth it is that I / who haue entrepriſed this boke. to ordeyne for pleaſure and paſtaunce / to the whiche alwayes I haue ben inclyned / and for that intent / I haue folowed and frequented the company of dyuerſe noble / and great lordes. aſ well in Fraunce Juglande and Scotland / as in diuerſe other countries / and haue had knowledge by them. And alwayes to my power iuſtly haue inquired for the trouth of the dedis of warre / and auentures that haue fallen / and ſpecially / ſyth the great batell of Poyters: where as the noble kynge John̄ of France was takyn priſoner as before that tyme I was but of a yonge age or vnderſtandyng. Ho we be it I toke on me / aſſoone as I came from ſcole to wryte and recite the ſayd boke and bare ye ſame compyled into Ingland / and preſented the volume therof to my lady Philypp of Heynaulte / noble quene of Ingland. who right amyably receyued it to my great profite & auaūcemēt. And it may be ſo / that the ſame boke is nat as yet eramyned nor corrected / ſo iuſtely as ſuche a caſe requyreth. For featis of armes derely bought & achyued / the honour therof ought to be gyuen & truly deuided to them that by promes and hard trauayle haue deſerued it. Therfore to acquyte me in that bihalf. and in folowyng the trouth as nere as I can. I / John̄ Froiſſart haue entrepryſed this hyſtory / on ye forſaid ordynaūce and true fundacion / at the inſtaūce and requeſt of a dere lord of myn 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert of Namure knyght lord of Bewfort. To whom entierly I owe loue and obeyſyunce / and god graunt me to do that thyng that may be to his pleaſure.
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶here ſpekethe the auctour of ſuche as were moſt valiant knyghtis to be made mencion of in this boke. ¶ap .ii.
            
               ALl noble hertis to encorage and to ſhewe them enſample and mater of honour. I 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Froiſſart begynne to ſpeke after the true report & relation of my maſter John̄ la Bele ſomtyme Chanon of ſaynt Lambertis of Liege af
                  •
               ermyng thus / howe that many noble ꝑſons haue oft tymes ſpoke of the warres of France and of Ingland. and ꝑauenture knewe nat iuſlely the trouth therof: nor the true occaſions of the fyrſt mouyngis of ſuche warres: nor howe the warre at length contynued. But now I truſt ye ſhall here reported the true foūdation of the cauſe and to thentent that I wyll nat forget myuyſſhe or abrydge ye hyſtory 
                  •
               any thyng for defaute of lāgage / but rather I wyll multiply and encreaſe it / as ner as I can folowynge the trouth. from poynt to poynt. in ſpekyng and

the wyng all the auētures ſith the natiuite of the noble kyng Edward ye .iii. Who reigned kyng of England / and achyued many perilous auentures and dyuers great batelles addreſſed / and other featis of armes of great proWes / ſyth the yere of oure Lorde god .M. CCC .xxvi. that this noble kyng was crowned in Ingland / for generally ſuche as were with hym in his batels and happy fortunate auentures / or with his peple in his abſence. ought ryght well to be takyn and reputed for valiant and worthy of renowne and though there were great plenty of ſondrye parſonages that ought to be prayſed and reputed as ſoueraignes / yet among other and pryncipally ought to be renowmed the noble propre ꝑſone of ye forſaid gentyll kyng. Alſo the prynce of Walys his ſon / the duke of Lancaſtre / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                
               Reignold lorde Cobham / ſyr Gualtier of Manny of Heynaulte knyght / ſyr John̄ Chandos / ſyr Fulque of Harle / and dyuers other of whom is made mencion hereafter in this preſent boke bicauſe of theyr valyant prowes / for in all batels that they were in moſt cōmonly they had euer the renowne. both by land and by ſe / accordyng to the trouth. They in all theyr dedis were ſo valyant / that they ought to be reputed as ſoueraignes in all chyualry. yet for all that ſuche other as were in theyr companye ought nat to be of ye leſſe value / or leſſe ſet by. Alſo in Fraūce in y• tyme / there were foūde many good knyghtis ſtronge and well expert in featis of armes. For the realme of Fraunce was nat ſo diſcomfited / but that alwayes ther were people ſufficient to fyght withall / and the kyng Philyppe of Uaioyes was a ryght hardy and a valiant knyght And alſo kyng John̄ his ſōne / Charles ye kyng of Behaigne / the erle of Alāſon / the erle of Foyz ſyr Sa
                  ••
               tre / ſyr Arnold Dangle / the lordes of Beamon / the father and the ſonne / and dyuerſe other / ye whiche I cā nat theyr names. of whom hereafter ryght well ſhall be made mencion / in tyme and place cōuenient to ſay the trouth / and to maynteigne the ſame. all ſuche as in cruel batels haue ben ſeen abydyng to the diſcomfeture ſufficiently doyng theyr deuour / may wel be reputed for valyant and hardy what ſoeuer was theyr aduenture.
         
         
            ¶ Here the mater ſpeketh of ſome of the predeceſſours of kyng Edwarde of Ingland. Cap. iii.
            
               FIrſt / the better to entre into the mater of this honorable and pleaſaūt hyſtory of the noble Edward kyng of Ingland. who was crowued at Londō the yere of our lorde god .M. CCC .xxvi. on Chriſtmas day / lyuȳg the kyng his father / and the quene his mother. It is certayne / that the opinyon of ingliſſhmen moſt comonly was as than / and often tymes it was ſeen in Ingland after the tyme of kyng At thure / howe that betwene two valyant kynges of Ingland ther was moſt comōly one bitwene them / of leſſe ſufficiauncy / both of wytte and of prowes. and this was ryght well aparant by ye ſame kyng Edward the thyrde. for his graundfather called the good kyng Edward the fyrſte was ryght valyant / ſage / wyſe / and hardy auenturous / and fortunate in al featis of warre. and had moche a do agaynſt the ſcottis and conquered them .iii. or .iiii. tymes. For the ſcottꝭ coude neuer haue victory nor idure agaynſt hym / and after his diſſeaſe his ſōne of his firſt wyfe who was father to the ſayd good kyng Edward the thyrde was crowned kyng and called Edward the .ii. Who reſembled nothyng to his father in wyt nor in prowes. but gouerned and kept his realme ryght wyldly. and ruled hym ſelfe by ſynyſter counſell of certayne parſons / wherby at length he had no profytte norlaude as ye ſhall here after. For anone after he was crowned Robert Bruſe kyng of Scotlande / who had often before gyuen moche a do to the ſayd good kyng Edward the fyrſt / conquered agayne all Scotland / and brent and waſted a great parte of the realme of England / a .iiii. or .v. dayes iourney Within the realme at two tymes / and diſcomfyted the kyng and all the Barons of Ingland at a place in Scotland called Eſtaruelyn by batel arengyd / the day of ſaynt John̄ Baptyſt in the .vii. yere of ye reigne of the ſame kyng Edward In the yere of our lorde .M. CCC .xiiii. The chaſe of this diſcōfeture endured .ii. dayes and two nyghtys. And the kyng of Ingland wēt wt a ſmall company to London. and on Mydlentſonday in the yere of our lorde .M. CCC .xvi. The ſcottis wan agayne the cite of Berwyk by treaſon. but bicauſe this is no part of our mater I wyll leue ſpekyng therof.
         
         
            ¶ Here myn auctour maketh mencion of the parentꝭ of this good kyng Edward the .iii. Cap. iiii.
            
               
THis kyng Edward the .ii. father to the noble kyng Edward the .iii. had .ii. brethern̄ / the one called Marſhall / who was ryght wyld & diuers of condicions. the other called ſir Aymon erle of Cane right wyſe / a miable / gētle and welbeloued with alpeople. This kyng Edward the .ii. was maried to Iſabell y• doughter of Philyp la Beaw kyng of Fraūce / who Was one of the feyreſt ladyes of ye worlde. The kyng had by her .ii. ſōnes & .ii. doughters. The fyrſte ſon was the noble & hardy kyng Edward y• .iii. of whom this hyſtory is begon. The .ii. was named John̄ / & dyed yong. The firſt of ye doughters was called Iſabel maried to the yōg kyng Dauid of ſcotlād / ſon to kyng Robert de Bruſe maried in her tēder yongth by thaccord of both realmes of Ingland & Scotland for to make 
                  〈◊〉
                fight pear. The other doughter was maried to the erle Reynold / who after was called duke of Guerles / & he had by her .ii. ſōnes / Reynold and Edward. who after reygned ī great puiſſaūce.
         
         
            Herafter begynneth the occaſiō wher by the warr moued bitwene the kyngis of Fraūce and Ingland. Cap. v.
            
               NOw ſheweth the hyſtory / that this Philyp la Beaw kyng of Fraūce had .iii. ſōnes and a feyre doughter named Iſabel maried into Ingland to kyng Edward the .ii. & theſe .iii. ſōnes / theldeſt named Lewes who was kyng of Nauerr in his fathers daies & was called kyng Lewys Hotin. The .ii. had to name Philyp the great or the long. and ye .iii. was called Charles. and all .iii. were kyngis of Fraūce after theyr fathers diſceaſe by ryght ſucceſſion eche aff other without hauyng any iſſue male of theyr bodies laufully begoten. So that after the deth of Charlis laſt kyng of the .iii. the xii. piers and all the barōs of Fraūce / wold nat gyue the realme to Iſabell the ſuſter / who was quene of Inglād by cauſe they ſayd & maynteyned & yet do / that the realme of Fraūce is ſo noble that it ought nat to go to a womā / and ſo cō
               ſequētly to Iſabel nor to the kyng of Inglande her eldeſt ſonne / for they determyned the ſonne of the womā to haue no ryght nor ſucceſſion by his mother / ſyn they declared ye mother to haue no ryght / ſo that by theſe reaſons / the .xii. piers and barōs of Fraūce by theyr comon acord dyd gyue the realme of Fraūce to the lord Philyp of Ualois Nephew ſomtyme to Philyp la beawe kyng of Fraūce / and ſo put out the quene of Ingland and her ſonne / who was as the next heire male as ſōne to the ſuſter of Charles laſt kyng of Fraunce. Thus went the realme of Fraunce out of ye ryght lynage as it ſemed to many folkꝭ Wherby great Warres hath moued and fallen. and great diſtructiōs of people / and coūtres in the realme of Fraūce / & other places: as ye may here after. This is the very right foūdation of this hyſtory / to recount the great entrepriſes & great featis of armes / y• haue fortuned & fallen ſyth the tyme of the good Charlemaigne kyng of Fraunce ther neuer fell ſo great aduentures.
         
         
            ¶ Of the erle Thomas of Lancaſtre / and .xxii. other of the great lordis and knyghtis of Inglande / that were beheeddyd. Cap. vi.
            
               THe forſaid kyng Edward the .ii. father to ye noble kyng Edward ye .iii. on whom our mater is foūded. This ſayd kyng gouerned right diuerſly his realme by ye exortaciō of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hewe Spēcer. who had ben noriſſhed with hym ſyth the begynnyng of his yongth. The whiche 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hewe had ſo enticed the kyng / that his father & he were ye greatteſt maiſters in all the realme. and by enuy thought to ſurmoūt all other barons of Ingland. wherby after the great diſcōfeture that the ſcottꝭ had made at Eſtermelyn. great murmoryng ther aroſe in Ingland bitwene
                  •
               the noble barōs and ye kyngꝭ coūſell / & namely ageynſt 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hewe Spē
               cer. They put on hym / that by his counſell they were diſcomfeted / and that he was fauorable to the kyng of ſcottꝭ. And on this poynt the harōs had diuers tymes comunicatiō to gether / to be aduiſed what they myght do. wherof Thomas erle of Lā
               
                  〈…〉
               re / who was vncle to ye kyng was chief. And anon whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hewe Spencer had eſpied this he purueyd for remedy. for he was ſo great with the kyng / and ſo nere hym / y• he was more beloued with the kyng than all the world after. So on a day he came to ye kyng and ſayd ſir certayn lordes of your realme haue made aliaunce to gether agaynſt you. & without ye take hede therto by tymes / they purpoſe to put you out of your realme. And ſo by his malicioꝰ meanes he cauſed that the kyng made all the ſayd lordes to be takyn / and theyr heedis to be ſtrikē of without delay / and without knowlege or anſwere to any cauſe. Fyrſt of all 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas erle of Lancaſtre / who was a noble and a wyſe holy knyght. & hath done ſyth many fayre myracles

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
in Pomfret / wher he was beheedded / for ye whiche dede / the ſayd ſir Hewe Spencer achyued great hate in all the realme: and ſpecially of the quene. and of the erle of Cane brother to ye kyng And whan he parceyued the dyſpleaſure of the quene / by his ſubtile wytte / he ſet great diſcorde bitwene the kyng and the quene / ſo that ye kyng wold nat ſe the quene / nor come in her company the whiche diſcord endured a long ſpace. Than was it ſhewed to the quene ſecretly / & to the erle of Cane / that withoute they toke good hede to them ſelfe they were lykely to be diſtroyed / for ſir Hewe Spēcer was about to purchace moch trouble to theym. Than the quene ſecretly dyd puruey to go in to Fraūce / and toke her way as on pylgrymage / to ſaynt Thomas of Canturbury and ſo to Wynchelſey. And in the nyght went into a ſhyp that was redy for her and her yong ſōne Edward with her & the erle of Cane and ſir Roger Mortymer. And in a nother ſhip they had put all theyr purueyaūce & had wynde at wyll / and the next mornyng they arryued in the hauyn of Bolayn.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the quene of Ingland went and complayned her to the kyng of Fraunce her brother of ſyr Hewe Spencer. Cap. vii.
            
               WHan quene Iſabell was arryued at Bolayn and her ſonne with her & the erle of Cane. The capytayns and abbot of ye towne came agaynſt her / and ioyouſly receued her and her company into the abbey. And ther ſhe aboode .ii. dayes. Than ſhe departed / and to de ſo long by her iourneys that ſhe arryued at Paris. Thā kyng Charles her brother / who was enfourmed of her comyng ſent to mete her dyuers of the greatteſt lordes of his realme / as the lorde ſyr Robert de Artoys / the lorde of Crucy / the lorde of Sully / the lorde of Roy / and dyuers other / who honorably dyd receue her / and brought her in to the Cite of Paris to the kyng her brother. And whan the kyng ſawe his ſuſter whom he had nat ſene long before. As ſhe ſhuld haue entred into his chambre / he mette her / and toke her in his armes / and kyſt her and ſayd ye be welcome feyre ſuſter with my feyre nephewe your ſonne / and toke them by the handis / & led them forth. The quene who had no great ioy at her harte. But that ſhe was ſo nere to the kyng her brother / ſhe wold haue kneled downe .ii. or .iii. tymes at the feet of the kyng. But the kyng wold nat ſuffre her but held her ſtyl by the right hande / demaunding right ſwetely of her aſtate and beſyneſſe. And ſhe anſwered hym ryght ſagely / and lamentably recounted to hym all the felonyes and iniuries done to her by ſyr Hewe Spencer / And requyred hym of his ayde and cōfort. Whan the noble kyng Charles of Fraū
               ce had harde his ſuſters lamentation. Who wepyngly had ſhewed hym all her nede and beſyneſſe / he ſayd to her. Fayre ſuſter appeaſe your ſelfe / for by the faith I owe to god and to ſaynt Denyce / I ſhall right well puruey for you ſome remedy. The quene than kneled downed whether the kyng wold or nat and ſayd. My ryght dere lord and fayre brother. I pray god reward you. The kyng than toke her in his armes and led her into an other chambre / the whiche was apparayled for her / and for the yong Edwarde her ſōne / and ſo departed fro her / and cauſed at his coſtis and chargis all thyng is to be delyuered that was behouefull for her and for her ſōne After it was nat long / but that for this occaſion Charles kyng of Fraunce aſſembled together many great lordes and barons of the realme of Fraunce to haue theyr coūſell and good aduiſe howe they ſhuld ordeyne for the nede & beſynes of his ſuſter quene of Ingland. Than it was coūſailed to the kyng that he ſhuld let the quene his ſuſter to purchas for her ſelfe frendis where as ſhe wold in the realme of Fraunce / or in any other place / and hym ſelfe to fayne & be nat knowen therof. For they ſayd to moue warre with the kyng of Ingland and to bryng his owne realme into hatred / it were nothyng apertenaunt nor profitable to hym / nor to his realme. But they cōcluded / that conueniently he mgiht ayde her with golde and ſyluer / for that is the metall wherby loue is attaygned both of gētylemen & of pore ſouldiours. And to this counſell and aduyce accorded the kynge. And cauſed this to be ſhewed to the quene priuely by ſir Robert Dartoys. who as than was one of the greatteſte lordis of all Fraunce.
         
         
            ¶ Howe that ſyr Hewe Spencer purchaſed / that the quene Iſabell was banyſſhed out of Fraunce. Cap. .viii.
            
               
               NOwe let vs ſpeke ſomewhat of ſir Hewe Spencer. whan he ſawe that he hadde drawen the kyng of Inglād ſo moche to his wyll / that he coud deſire nothyng of hym but it was graunted / he cauſed many noble men and other to be put to deth without iuſtice or lawe / bicauſe he held them ſuſpect to be ageynſt hym. and by his pride he dyd ſo many marueylles / that the barous that were left alyue in the land coude nat beare nor ſu
                  〈…〉
               e it any lenger / but they beſought and requyred eche other among them ſelfe to be of a peaſable accorde. And cauſed it ſecretly to be knowen to the quene theyr lady. Who hadde ben as then at Parys the ſpace of .iii. yere / Certifiyng her by wryttyng / that if ſhe coulde fynd the meanes to haue any companye of men of armes / if it were but to the nombre of a .M. and to bryng her ſon and heyre with her into Inglande. That than they wolde all drawe to her and abeye her and her ſonne Edward / as they were bounde to do of duety. Theſe letters thus ſent ſecretly to her out of Ingland ſhe ſhewed them to kyng Charles her brother / Who anſwered her / and ſayde Fayre ſuſter god be your ayde / your beſyueſſe ſhall auayle moche the better. Take of my men and ſubiectis to the nombre / that your frendes haue wrytten you for / and I conſent wel to this voyage. I ſhall cauſe to be delyuered vnto you golde and ſyluer as moche as ſhall ſuſfyce you. And in this mater the quene had done ſo moche What with her prayer / gyftes / and promyſſes / that many great lordis and yong knyght / were of her accorde / as to bryng her With great ſtrength agayne into Inglande. Than the quene as ſecretly as ſhe coulde / ſhe ordeyned for her voyage / and made her puruey aunce. But ſhe coude nat do it ſo ſecretly / but ſir Hewe Spencer had knowledge therof. Than he thought to wynne and withdrawe the kyng of Fraunce fro her by great gyftes. and ſo ſent ſecret meſſangers into Fraunce with great plentye of golde and ſyluer and ryche Jewelles / and ſpecially to the kyng. and his priue counſell / and dyd ſo moche that in ſhorte ſpace / the kyng of Fraūce and all his pryue counſelle were as colde to helpe the quene in her voyage / as they had before great deſyre / to dohit. And the kynge brake all that voyage / and defended euery parſone in his Realme / on payne of banyſſhyng the ſame / that none ſhuld be ſo hardy to go with the quene to brynge her agayne into Ingland. And yet the ſayd 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hew Spencer aduyſed hym of more malyce and bethought hym howe he myght gette agayne the quene into Inglande / to be vnder the kyngis daunger and his. Than he cauſed the kyng to wrytte to the holy father the pope effectuouſly / deſyryng hym / that he wolde ſende and wrytte to the kyng of Fraunce / that he ſhulde ſende the quene his wyfe agayne into Inglande / For he Wyll acquyte hymſelfe to god and the Worlde / and that it was nat his faute / that ſhe departed fro hym / for he Wolde nothyng to her but all loue and good faith ſuche as he ought to holde in mariage. Alſo ther Were lyke letters wrytten to the cardynals dyuyſed by many ſubtile wayes / the whiche all maye nat be wrytten here.
            Alſo he ſent golde and ſyluer great plenty to dyuerſe cardynalles and prelates / ſuche as Were mooſt nereſte and ſecretteſt with the pope / and ryght ſage and able ambaſſadours were ſente on this meſſage / and they ladde the pope in ſuche wyſe by theyr gyftes / and ſubtyle Wayes / that he wrote to the kynge of Fraunce / that on peyne of curſyng / he ſhulde ſende his ſuſter Iſabell into Ingland to the kyng her houſbande. Theſe letters were brought to the kyng of Frā
               ce by the buſſhopp of 
                  •
               ainctes / whom the pope ſent in that legation. And whan the kyng had redde the letters / he cauſed them to be ſhewed to the quene his ſuſter / Whom he had nat ſeen of long ſpace before commaundyng her haſtely to auoyde his realme / orels he wolde cauſe her to auoyde with ſhame.
         
         
            ¶ Howe that quene Iſabell departed fro Fraunce / and entred in to the Empyre. Cap. ix.
            WHan the quene hard thys tidyngis / ſhe knewe nat What to ſay / nor What aduyce to take. for as than the barons of the realme of Fraūce were withdrawen frō her by the cōmaundement of the kyng of Fraū
               ce and ſo ſhe had no comfort nor ſuccoure / but all onely of her dere coſyn / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert de Artoys for he ſecretly dyd counſaile and comfort her as moche as he myght / for other Wyſe he durſt nat for the kyng hadde defended hym. But he knew well that the quene was chaſed out of Ingland and alſo out of Fraunce for euyll Wyll / and by

enuy whiche greued hym greatly. Thus was ſyr Robert de Artoyes at the quenes commaun dement / but he durſte nat ſpeke nor be knowen therof. For he had hard the kyng ſay and ſwere That Who ſo euer ſpake to hym / for the quene his ſuſter ſhulde leeſe his landis and be banyſſhed the realme. And he knewe ſecretly howe ye kyng was in mynde and will to make his ſuſter to be taken and Edward her ſonne and the erle of Cane / and ſyr Roger Mortymer / and to put theym all in the handis of the kyng / and of ſyr Newe Spencer. Wherfore he came on a nyght and declared all this to the quene and aduyſed her of the parell that ſhe was in. Than ye quene was greatly abaſſhed / and required hym all we pyng of his good counſaile. Than he ſayd madame / I counſaile you that ye depart and go in to the empire / where as ther be many great lordes / who may ryght well ayde you / and ſpecially the erle Guillyam of Heynault / and ſyr John of Heynaulte his brother. Theſe two are great lordes and wiſe men / true / drad / and redoubted of their ennemies. Than the quene cauſed to be made redy all her purueyaunce. and payd for euery thyng as ſecretly as ſhe myght / and ſo ſhe and her ſonne / the erle of Cane / and all her company departed from Paris / and rode to warde Heynaulte / and ſo long ſhe rode that ſhe came to Cambreſys. And whan ſhe knewe ſhe was in the Empyre. She was better aſſured than ſhe was before. and ſo paſſed through Cambreſys and entred into Oſtrenaunt in Heynaulte and lodged at Ambreticourt in a knights houſe who was called ſyr Dambrycourte / Who receyued her ryght ioyously in the beſt maner to his power / In ſo moche that afterwarde the quene of Inglande and her ſonne hadde with them into Ingland for euer / the knyght and his wyfe and all his children / and auaunced them in dyuers maners.
            THe comyng thus of y• quene of Inglāde and of her ſonne and heyre into the coū
               trey of Heynaulte was anon well knowen in the howſe of ye good erle of Heynault / who as than was at Ualenciennes. And ſyr John̄ of Heynault was certified of the tyme whan the quene arryued at the place of ſyr Dambrecourte. The whiche ſyr John̄ was brother to the ſayde Erle Guillam. And as he that was yong & luſty deſiryng all honoure / mounted on his horſe / and departed with a ſmall company fro Ualēciennes and came the ſame nyght to Ambreticourt / and dyd to the quene all honour and reuerence that he coulde deuyſe. The quene / who was ryght ſorowfull / beganne to declare (complaynyng to hym ryght pyteouſly) her dolours / Wherof the ſayd ſyr John̄ had great pitie / ſo that the water daſhte in his yen / and ſayd certaynly fayre lady beholde me here your owne knyght / who ſhall nat fayle you to dye in the quarell / I ſhall do ye beſt of my power to conducte you and my lorde your ſonne. and helpe to brynge you into your aſtatis in Inglande by the grace of god / and With the helpe of your frendis in that parties / and I and ſuche other as I can deſyre ſhall put our lyues and goodes in aduēture for your ſake and ſhall gette men of warre ſufficient if god be pleaſed without the daūger of the kyng of Frā
               ce your brother. Than the quene wold haue kneled downe for great ioye that ſhe had / and for ye good wyll he offred her. But this noble knyght toke her vppe quyckly in his armes and ſayde / By the grace of god the noble quene of Inglād ſhall nat knele to me. But ma dame recomforte yourſelfe and all your company / for I ſhall kepe you faithfull promyſe / and ye ſhall go ſe the erle my brother and the counteſſe his wyfe / and all theyr fayre chyldren / Who ſhall receyue you with great ioye. For ſo I harde theym reporte they wold do. Than the queneſayd. ſyr I fynde in you more loue and comforte / than in all the worlde. And for this that ye ſay and affirme me I thāke you a thouſande tymes. and yf ye wyll do this ye haue promiſed / in all courteſy and honoure / I and my ſonne ſhall be to you for euer bounde / and wyll put all the realme of Inglād in your abandon. For it is right that it ſo ſhuld be. And after theſe wordes. whan they were this accorded. Syr John̄ of Heynaulte toke leue of the quene for that uyght / & went to Douaing / & laye in the abbeye. And in the mornynge after maſſe / he lepte on his horſe and came agayn to the quene / Who receyued hym with great Joye by that tyme ſhe had dynedde / and was redy to mounte on her horſe to departe with hym / and ſo the quene departed from the caſtell of Dambrety courte / and toke leue of the knyght / and of the lady / and thanked them for theyr good there that they hadde made her / and ſayd that ſhe truſted oones to ſe the tyme / that ſhe or her ſonne ſhulde well remembre theyr courteſye.
            Thus departed the quene in the company of ye ſayd ſyr John̄ lorde Beamont. who ryght ioyouſly dyd conducte her to Ualencyenues / and agaynſt her came many of the Burgeſſes of the towne / and receyued her right humbly. Thus was ſhe brought before the Erle Guyllaume of Heynaulte / Who receyued her with great ioye / and in lyke wyſe ſo dyd the coūteſſe his wyfe / & feaſted her ryght nobly. And as than this Erle

hadde foure layre doughters / Margaret Philypp / Jane / and Iſabell. Amonge whome the yong Edwarde ſette mo
                  〈…〉
                hi
                  •
                loue and company on Phylypp. And alſo the yong lady in al honour was more conuerſ
                  ••
               nt with hym than any of her ſuſters. Thus the quene Iſabell abode at Ualencyennes by ye ſpace of .viii. daies with the good Erle / and with the coūteſſe Jane be Ualoys. In the meane tyme the quene aparailed for her needis and beſyneſſe / and the ſaid ſyr John̄ wrote letters ryght effectuouſly vnto knyghtis and ſuche companyans as he truſted beſt in all Heynaulte / in Brabant / and in Behaigne / and prayed them for all amyties / that was bitwene theym / that they wolde god 
                  〈◊〉
                hym in this entrepriſe in to Inglande / and ſo there were great plentye what of one countrey and other that were content to go with hym. for his loue. But this ſayd ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte was greatly reproued and counſailed the contrarye / bothe of the Erle his brother / and of the chief of the counſaile of the countrey / bycauſe it ſemed to theym / that the entrepriſe was ryght hygh and parillouſe / ſeynge the great diſcordis and great hates that as than was bytwene the barones of Inglande amonge them ſelfe. And alſo conſyderyng / that theſe 
                  〈…〉
               hemen moſt commonly haue euer great enuy at ſtraungers. Therfore they doubted / that the ſayd ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte / and his company ſhulde nat retourne agayne with honour. But howeſo euer they blamed or coūſailed hym / the gētle knyght wolde neuer chaunge his purpoſe / but layd he hadde but one dethe to dye / the whiche was in the wyll of god. And alſo ſayd / that all knyghtꝭ ought to ayd to theyr powers all ladyes and da mozels chaſed out of theyr owne countreys beyng without counſaile or comfort.
         
         
            ¶Howe that the quene Iſabell arryued in Inglande with ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte in her company. Cap. x.
            
               THys was ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte moued in his courage & made his aſſembly / & prayed ye 
               
                  〈◊〉
                to he redy at hale
                  •
                & y• 
               
                  〈◊〉
                at Bredas / and the Hollanders to be at 
                  •
               uchryghte / at a daye lymytted. Than the quene of Juglande tooke leue of the erle of Heynault / and of the coūteſſe, and thanked theym greatly of their honour / ſea
                  •
               t / and good chere: that they hadde made her / kyſſynge theym at her departynge. Thus this lady departed and herſonne & all her company with ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte / Who With great peyne gatte leue of his brother. Sayng to hym My lorde and brother I am yong / and thynke that god hath pourueyed for me this entrepryſe for myn aduancemēt. I beleue and thynke verely / that wrōgfully and ſynfully this lady hath been chaſed out of Inglande / and alſo her ſōne. hit is almes and glory to god and to the worlde to comforte and helpe them / that be comfort
                  〈…〉
                and ſpecyally ſo hyghe / and ſo noble a lady as this is. Who is doughter to a kyng and desceudyd of a royall kyng. We be of her bloodde and ſhe of oures. I hadde rather renounce and forſake all that I haue / and go ſerue god ouer the ſee. and neuer to retourne into this countrey rather than this good lady ſhulde haue departed from vs Withowte comforte and helpe. Therfore dere brother / ſuffre me to go with yor good Wyll. wherin ye ſhall do nobly / and I ſhall hū
               bly thanke you therof. and the better therby I ſhall accomplyſſhe all the voyage. And Whan the good Erle of Heynaulte / hadde 
                  〈◊〉
                harde his brother / and parceued the great deſyre that he hadde to his entrepryſe / and ſawe 
                  〈◊〉
                hy
                  •
                myght tourne hym and his heyres to great honoure here after. Sayd to hym. My fayre brother / god forbyd that your good purpoſe ſhulde be broken or lerte. Therfore in the name of god I gyue you leue and kyſte hym / 
                  〈…〉
               ynge hym by the hande / inſygne of great loue.
            Thus he departed / and roode the ſame nyghte to Mounce in Heynnaulte With the Quene of Inglande. What ſhulde I make long proceſſe / They dyd ſo moche by theyre Journeys / that they came to Durdryght in Holande / Wher as theyr ſpecyall aſſembly was made. And there they purueyed for ſhyppys great and ſmall ſuche as they coulde get / and ſhypped their horſes and harneys and purueyaunce / and ſo com
                  〈…〉
                ded them ſelfe into the kepyng of god and toke theyr paſſage by ſee. In that cōpany there were of knyghtis and lordis. Fyrſt ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte lord Beamond / ſyr Henry Da
                  •
               to
                  •
               g / ſyr Michell de Ligne / the lorde of Gōmeg
                  〈…〉
                / ſyr Parceualde Semeries / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert de 
                  〈◊〉
                ſyr Saures de Bouſſoit / the lorde of 
                  〈◊〉
                ye lord of Pocelles / ye lord Uillers ye lord of heyn The lorde of Sars / the lorde of Boy
                  〈…〉
                / the lorde of Dābretycourte / the lorde of 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
and ſyr Oulpharte of Guſtelle and diuers other knyghtis and ſquyers / all in great deſyre to ſerue theyr maiſter / and whan they were all departed fro the hauyn of Durdryght it was a fayre flete as for the quantite and well ordred / the ſeaſon was fayre and clere and ryght temperate and at theyr departynge With the fyrſteflodde they came before the Dignes of Holande and the next day they drewe vppe theyr ſayles / and toke theyr waye in coſtynge zelande / and theyr ententis were to haue taken land at Dongport but they coulde nat / for a tempeſte toke them in the ſee / that put them ſo farre out of theyr courſe that they wiſt nat of two dayes wher they wer of the whiche god dyd them great grace For if they had takyn lande at the porte where as they had thought they had ben all loſte / for they had fallen in the hand is of theyre ennemyes. Who knew well of theyr commyng. and aboode them there to haue putte theym all to dethe. So hit was that about the ende of two dayes / the tempeſt ſeaſed and the maryners parceyued lande in Inglande and drewe to that parte right ioyouſly / and there toke lande on the ſandes Withoute any ryght hauyn orporte at Harwiche as the Inglyſſhe cronicle ſayth / the .xxiiii. daye of Septembre / the yere of our lorde .M. CCC. .xxvi. And ſo aboode on the ſandes thre dayes with lytle puruey aunce of vitaylle and vnſhypped theyr horſes and harneys nor they wiſt nat in what parte of Inglande they were in: other in the power of theyr frendis / or in the power of theyr ennemies. On the .iiii. day they toke forth theyr way in the aduenture of god / and of ſaynt George / as ſuche people as hadde ſuffred great diſeaſe of colde by nyght and hunger and great feare / Whereof they were nat as than clene ryd. And ſo they rode forth by hylles and dales on ye done ſyde and on the other / tyll at the laſte they founde vyllages / and a great abbeye of blacke monkes the whiche is called ſaint Hamō / wher as they .iii. dayes refreſſhed themſelfe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the quene of Inglande beſeged the kyng her huſbande in the towne of Briſto we Cap. xi.
            
               ANd than this tidyng ſpred about ye realme ſo moche that at ye laſt it came to the knowledge of ye lordes. by whom the quene was called agayn into Ingland. and they apparailed them in all haſt to come to Edward herſon / whom they wold haue to theyr ſoueraigne lorde. And the fyrſte that came & gaue them mooſt comforte was Henry Erle of Lancaſtre With the wrye necke / called Torte colle / who was brother to Thomas erle of Lancaſtre beheeddyd / as ye haue harde here before. who was a good knyght / & greatly recōmended / as ye ſhall here after in this hyſtorye. Thys Erle Henry came to the quene with great companye of men of Warre. and after hym came from one parte and other / erles / barones / knyghtys / and ſquiers with ſo moche people that they thought them clene out of parelles. and alwayes encreaſed theyr power as they went forewarde. Than they toke counſell among them that they ſhulde ryde ſtreyght to the towne of Bryſtowe / Where as the kyng was and with hym the Spencers. The whiche was a good towne and a ſtronge / and Well cloſed / ſtandyng on a good port of the ſee and a ſtronge caſtell / the ſee bettyng rounde about it. And therin was the kyng and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hewe Spencer the elder who was about .xC. of age and ſyr Hewe Spencer his ſonne / who was chieffe gouernour of the kyng / and counſayled hym in all his euyll dedis. Alſo there was the Erle of Arundell / who had wedded the doughter of ſyr Hewe Spēcer / and diuerſe other knyghtis and ſquiers repayryng about the kyng is courte. Than the quene and all her companye / lordes of Heynaulte / erles and barons / and all other ingliſſhemen toke the right way to ye ſaid towne of Briſtowe / and in euery towne where as they entred / they were receyued with great feaſt & honour / and alwayes theyr people encreaſed / and ſo longe they rodeby theyr iourneys that they arryued at Bryſtowe. and beſygedde the towne rounde about as nere as they myght and the kyng and ſyr Hewe Spencer the yonger helde theym in the caſtelle / and the olde ſyre Hewe Spencer and the erle of Arundell / helde them in the towne. And whan the people of the towne ſawe the greate power that the Quene was of. For all mooſt all Inglande was of her accorde / and parceued what parell and daunger euydentely they were in. They toke counſell amonge theymſelfe / and determyned / that they wolde yelde vppe the towne to the quene / So that theyre lyues and gooddys myghte be ſauyd. And ſoo they ſende / to treate with the quene and her counſell in this mattyer. But the

quene nor her counſelle Wolde nat agree therto without ſhe myght do wt ſyr Hewe Spencer & with the erle of Arundell what it pleaſed her.
            Whan the people of the towne ſawe they coulde haue no peace otherwiſe / nor ſaue the towne nor theyr gooddes nor theyr lyues / in that diſtreſſe they accorded to the quene / and opened the gates / ſo that the quene and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynaulte and all her barous / knyghtis / and ſquyers entred into the towne / and toke theyr lodgyngys within as many as myght & the reſide we without. Than ſir Hewe Spencer and the Erle of 
                  •
               rundel were taken & brought before the quene to do her pleaſure with them. Than there was brought to the quene her owne chyldren / John̄ herſonne / and her two doughters / the whiche were foūd ther in ye kepyng of ye ſayd ſyr Hewe Spencer / Wherof the quene had great ioye / for ſhe had nat ſeue theym longe before. Than the kyng myght haue great ſorowe / and ſir Hewe Spencer the yonger / who were faſt incloſed in the ſtronge caſtell / and the mooſt part of all the realme turned to the quenes parte / and to Edward her eldeſt ſonne.
         
         
            ¶ Howe yt ſyr Hewe Spēcer and the erle of Arundell were iudged to dethe Cap. xii.
            WHan the quene and her barons and all her company were lodged at theyr eaſe. Than they beſeged the caſtell as nere as they myght. The quene cauſed ſyr Hewe Spē
               cer the elder and therle of Arūdell to be brought forth before Edward her ſonne / and all the barons that were there preſent. And ſayde howe that ſhe and her ſonne ſhulbe take ryght & lawe on them accordyng to theyr deſertis. Than ſyr Hewe Spencer ſayd. Ma dame god be to you a good iudge and gyue you good iudgement / and if we can nat haue it in this world / I praye god we maye haue hit in another. Than ſtepte forth ſyr Thomas Wage a good knyght / and marſhall of the hoſte. and ther openly he recoū
               ted they dedis in wrytynge. And than tourned hym to another auncient knyght / to the entent that he ſhuld bryng hym on that caſe fanty. and to declare what ſhuld be done with ſuche parſones / and what Judgement they ſhulde haue for ſuche cauſes. Than the ſayd knyght counſailed with other barons and knyghtis / and ſo reported theyr opynions / the Whiche was / how they had well deſerued deth / for dyuers horryble dedis / the whiche they haue commyſed. for all the treſpas reherſed before to iuſtifie to be of trouth / Wherfore they haue deſerued for the dyuerſyties of theyr treſpaces to haue iudgement in .iii. dyuers maners. Fyrſt to be drawen / and after to be heedded / and than to be hanged on the Jebet. This in lyke wyſe as they were iubged ſo it was done & executed before the caſtell of Bryſtowe / in the ſyght of the kyng and of ſyr Hewe Spencer the yonger. This iudgement was doone in the yere of our lorde .M. CCC. .xxvi. on ſaynt Denys day in October. And after this execution / the kyng and the yong Spē
               cer ſeyng theym ſelfe thus beſeged in this myſchief / and knewe no comfort that myght come to them / in a mornyng betymes they two with a ſmalle company entred into a lytle veſſell behynde the caſtell / thynkyng to haue fledde to the countrey of Walys. But they were .xi. dayes in the ſhyppe and enforced it to ſaile as moche as they myghte. But what ſo euer they dydde the wynde was euery daye ſo contrary to them by the wyll of god / that euery daye oones or twyſe they were euer brought agayn within a quartter of a myle to the ſame caſtell.
            At the laſt it fortuned ſyr Henry Beamond ſon to the vicount Beamond in Ingland entred in to a Barge and certayne company with hym / and ſpyed this veſſell / and rowed after hym ſo long that the ſhyp wherin the kyng was coulde nat flee faſt before them / but fynally they were ouer takyn / and ſo brought agayn to the towne of Briſtow / and delyuered to the quene and her ſon as priſoners. Thus it befel of this high and hardy entrepryſe of ſyr John̄ of Heynault / and his companye. For whan they departed and entred into theyr ſhyppes at Durdright they were but .iii. C. mē of armes. And thus by theyr help and the lordes in Inglande / the quene Iſabell conquered agayne all her aſtate and dignyte / And put vnto execucion all her ennemyes wher of all the mooſt parte of the realme were right Joyouſe / withoute it were a fewe parſones ſuche as were fauourable to ſyr Hewe Spencer / and of his parte. And whan the kyng & ſir Hew Spencer mere brought to Briſtowe by the ſaid ſir Henry Beamond The kyng was than ſent by the coūſell of all the barons & knyghtis to the ſtrong caſtell of Barkeley / and put vnder good kepyng & honeſt / & ther were ordeined people of aſtate aboute hym / ſuche as knewe ryght Well what they ought to doo / but they were ſtraytly

commaunded that they ſhulde in no wyſe ſuffre hym to paſſe out of ye caſtell. And 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hewe Spē
               cer was deliuerd to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas wage marſhall of 
                  〈◊〉
                hoſt. And after yt the quene departed and al her hoſt to ward London whiche was the chief cite of Ingland. & ſo ryd forth on theyr iourneis and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas Wage cauſed 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hewe Spēcer to be faſt boūd on ye beſt & leuieſt horſ of al ye hoſt and cauſed hym to were on a tabarte / ſuche as traytours and theues Were wont to were. And thus he was led in ſcorue / after the quenes rout through out all the townes as they paſſed with trumpes and canayres / to do hym the greatter diſpyte / tyll at the laſte they came to the Cite of Herford / wher as the quene was honorably receyued with great ſolempnyte / & all her cōpany and ther ſhe kept the feaſt of all ſayntis wt great royalte / for the loue of her ſon and ſtraūgers yt were ther.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſyr Hewe Spencer was put to his iudgement. Cap. xiii.
            WHan this feaſt was done: than ſyr Hewe Spencer who was nothyng beloued was brought forth before the quene and all the lordes and knyghtꝭ / and ther before hym in wrytyng was reherſed all his dedis / ageynſt the whiche he wold gyue no maner of anſwere. And ſo he was than iudged by playn ſentence. Fyrſt to be drawen on an hyrdell with trumpes and trumpettis through all the cite of Herford and after / to be brought into the market place / where as all the people were aſſembled / & there to be tyed on hygh vpon a ladder that euery mā myght ſe hym / and in the ſame place ther to be made a great fier / and ther his pryuy membres cut from hym / bycauſe they reputed hym as an herety
                  〈…〉
                / and ſo demed / and ſo to be brent in the fyre before his face. And than his hart to be drawen out of his body & caſt into the fyre / bycauſe he was a falſe traytour of hart / & yt by hys traytours coūſell & extorciō yt kyng had ſhamed his realme / and brought it to great myſchief. for he had cauſed to be behedded the greatteſt lordes of his realme. by whom y• realme ought to haue ben ſuſteyned and defended. And he had ſo enduced the kyng / that he wolde nat ſe the quene his wyfe nor Edwarde his eldeſt ſon and cauſed hym to chare them out of the realme for fere of theyr lyues. And than his heed to be ſtryken of and ſent to Lōdon. And accordyng to his iudgement / he was executed. Than the quene and all her lordes toke theyr way toward London / and dyd ſo moche by theyr iourneys / that they arryued at the Cite of London / and they of the cite with great company mette them / and dyd to the quene and to her ſonne great reuerence / and to al theyr company as they thought it beſt beſtowed. And whan they had ben thus receyued and feaſted the ſpace of .xv. dayes / the knyghtis ſtraūgers / and namely ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte had great deſyre to retourne agayn into theyr owne countres / for they thought they had well done theyr deuour / and achyued greathonour / and ſo toke theyr leue of the quene / and of the lordes of the realme and the quene and the lordes requyred them to tary longer a lytle ſpace to ſe what ſhuld be done with the kyng / who was in pryſon / but the ſtraungers had ſo great deſyre to retourne into theyr owne countreys / that to praye theym the contrarye auayled nat. And whan the quene and her coūſell ſaw that. They yet deſyred ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte to tary tyll it was paſt Chriſtmas / and to retaygne with hym ſuche of his company as pleaſed hym beſt. The gentle knyght wold nat leue to parfourme his ſeruice / but courteſly graunted the quene to tary as long as it pleaſed her. and cauſed to tary ſuche of his company as he coud get that was but a fewe for the remnaunt wold in no wyſe tary / Wherof he was diſpleaſed. Whan the quene and her counſell ſawe that they wold nat abyde for no prayers / than they made them great chere and feaſtis. And the quene made to be gyuen to them plenty of golde and ſyluer for theyr coſtis and ſeruicis / and dyd gyue great Jewelles to eche of them accordyng to theyr degrees / ſo as they all helde them ſelfe ryght well content. And ouer that they had ſyluer for theyr horſes ſuche as they wolde leue behynde theym at theyre owne eſtymation without any grudgyng. And thus ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte aboode ſtyll with a ſmalle company among the engliſſhemen / who always dydde hym as moche honoure as they coude ymagyn and to all his company. And in lyke wyſe ſo dyd the ladyes and damozelles of the countre. For there were great plentye of counteſſes / and great ladyes gentle pucels who were come thither to acompany the quene. For it ſemed well to them that y• knyght 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynaulte had well deſerued y• chere and feaſt that they made hym.
         
         
            
            ¶ The coronacion of kyng Edwarth the thyrde. Cap. xiiii.
            
               AFter that the moſt part of the company of Heynault were departed / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Heynaulte lorde of Beamond taryed. The quene gaue leue to her people to be parte / ſauynge a certayne noble knyghtis the whiche ſhe kept ſtyl about her and her ſōne. To counſell them / and commaunded all them that departed to be at London the next Chriſtmas / For as than ſhe was determyned to kepe open court / and all they promyſed her ſo to do. And whan Chriſtmas was come / ſhe helde a great court. And thyther came dukes / erles / harous / knyghtis and all the nobles of the realme with prelates and burgeſſes of good townes / and at this aſſemble it was abuysed ye the realme coud nat long endure without a h
                  〈…〉
                and a chief lord Than they put in wrytynge all the dediss of the kyng who was in priſon / and all that he hadde done by euyll counſell / and all his vſagess / and euyll behauyngis / and how euyll he had gouerned his realme / the whiche wass 
                  
                     •
                  edd openly in playn audience to thentent that the noble ſagis of the realme might take therof good aduyce / 
                  〈◊〉
                to fall at acorde how the realme ſhuld be gouerned from thenſforth. and whan all the caſess and dedis that the kyng had done & cōſented to and all his behauyng and vſagis were red / and wel vndeſt and. The harone and knyghtis and al y• coūſels of the realme / drew them aparte to coū
               ſell / and the moſt part of them accorded / and namely the great lordes and nobles with the burgeſſes of y• good townes accordyng as they had hard ſay / and knew them ſelfe the moſt parte of his dedis. Wherfore they cōcluded that ſuche a man was nat worthy to be a kyng nor to bere a crowne roy all / nor to haue the name of a kyng. But they all accorded that Edward his eldeſte ſon who was ther preſent / & was ryghful heyre ſhuld be crowned kyng in ſtede of his father / ſo that he wold take good counſell ſage and true about hym / ſo that the realme from thenſforth myght be better gouerned than it was before / & that the olde kyng his father ſhuld be well and honeſtly kept as long as he lyued accordyng to his aſtate. and thus as it was agreed by all the nobles / ſo it was accomplyſſhed / and than was crowned with a crowne roy all at the palaice of Weſtm̄ beſide London the yong kyng Edward the .iii. who in his bayes after was rightfortunate & happy in armes. This coronacion wass in the yere of our lorde .M. CCC .xxvi. on chriſtymas day / and as than the yong kyng was about the age of xvi. and they held the feſt tyl the cōuercion of ſayut Paule folo wyng / and in the mean tyme greatly was feſted ſir John̄ of Heynaulte and all the princis and nobles of his coū
               tre. and was gyuen to hym and to his company many ryche Jewels. And ſo he and his company in great feaſt and ſolas both with lordis and ladyes taried tyll the .xii. day. And than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynault hard tydyngis / how 
                  〈◊〉
                the kyng of Bayghan / and the erle of Heynault his brother and other great plenty of lordis of Fraūce / had ordeyned to be at Conde at a great feaſt & turney that was there cryed. Than wold ſir John̄ of Heynaulte no longer abyde for no prayer / ſo great deſire he had to be at the ſaid tourney and to ſe the erle his brother and other lordis of hys countrey / and ſpecially the ryght noble kyng in larges the gentyll Charles kyng of Bayghan / whā ye yong kyng Edward & the quene his mother and the barōs ſaw yt he wold no longer tary / and that theyr requeſt coude nat auaile / they gaue hym leue ſore agaynſt theyr wyls / and the kyng by the coūſell of the quene his mother dyd gyue hym .CCCC. markis ſte
                  •
               lyng is of 
                  〈◊〉
                heritable to hold of hym in fee to be payed euery yere in the towne of Bruges. And alſo dyd gyue to Philyp of Chaſtaulre his chief eſquyer & his ſoueraigne counſellour .C. marke of rent yerely to be payed at the ſayd place / and alſo delyuered hym moche money to pay therwith the coſtis of hym and of his company tyl he come 
                  〈◊〉
                to his owne countre. and cauſed hym to be conducted with many noble knyghtis to Douer / & ther delyuered hym all his paſſage free. And to the ladyes that were come into Ingland with the quene and namely to the counteſſe of Garrēnes / who was ſuſter to the erle of hare / and to dyuerſe other ladyes and damozels / ther were gyuen many feyre and ryche iewels at theyr departyng. And whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynaulte was departed fro ye yong kyng Edward and all his company / and wer come to Douer. they entred encontynēt into theyr ſhippes to paſſe the ſee to the entent to come be tymes to the ſayd tourney and ther wēt with hym .xv. yong luſty knyghtꝭ of Ingland to go to this tourney with hym and to acqueynt them with the ſtraunge lordis and knyghtꝭ that ſhuld be ther / and they had great honour of all the company that turneyd at that tyme at Conde.
         
         
            ¶ Howe that kyng Robert de Breux of Scotland defyed kyng Edward. Cap. xv.
            
               
               AFter that ſyr John of Heynault was departed fro kyng Edward / he and y• quene his mother gouerned the realme by the counſelle of the Erle of Kent vncle to the kyng / And by the counſell of ſyr Roger Mortymer who had great lādes in Ingland / to the ſūme of. vu. C .li. of rent yerely: And they both were 
                  •
               aniſſhed and chaſed out of Inglād with 
                  〈◊〉
                quene as ye haue hard before. Alſo they vſed moche after ye coūſell of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas wage and by the aduyſe of other / who were reputed for the moſt ſageſt of the realme. How be it ther were ſome hadd enuy therat / the whiche neuer dyed in Ingland / and alſo it reigneth and wyl reigne in dyuers other countres. Thus paſſed 
                  •
               orth the wynter and the lent ſeaſon tyll Eaſter / and than the kyng and the quene and all the realme was in good peace all this ſeaſon. Than 
                  •
               o it fortuned / that kyng Robert of Scotland / who had ben rygh hardy & had ſuffered moche trauaile agaynſt Ingliſſhmen / and oftē tymes he had ben chaſed and diſcom
                  •
               eted / in the tyme of kyng Edward the fyrſt / graūdfather to this yong kyng Edward the .iii. he was as than become very olde & auncient and ſicke (as it was ſayd) of the great euyll and malady. Whan he knewe thadu
                  •
               tures that was fallen in Ingland howe that the olde kyng Edwarde the .ii. Was taken and depoſed downe fro his regalley and his crowne and certayne of his coūſellours behedded and put to diſtruction / as ye haue hard here before. Than he bethought hy yt he wolde defye the yonge kyng Edward the .iii. bicauſe he was yong / and that the barons of the realme were nat all of one accorde as it was ſaid. therfore he the better to ſpede in his purpoſe to conquere part of Ingland. And ſo about Eaſter in the yere of our lorde .M. CCC .xxvii. he ſent his defyaūce to the yong kyng Edward the .iii. & to all the realme. ſendyng them Worde / howe that he wolde entre into the realme of Ingland and brenne before hym / as he had done before tyme / at ſuche ſeſon as the diſcomfeture was at the caſtell of Eſtermelin: where as the Ingliſſhmen receyued great dāmage. Whan the kyng of Ingland and his counſell perceyued that they were defyed / they cauſed it to be knowē ouer all the realme: and commaūded that all the nobles and all other ſhuld be redy appareled euery mā after his eſtate: and that they ſhulde be by Aſcen 
                  ••
               on day next after at the towne of yorke / ſtandyng northward. The kyng ſent moche people before to kepe the fronters agaynſt Scotland / And ſent a great ambaſſade to ſir John̄ of Heynault praying hym right effectuouſly y• he wold helpe to ſocour and to kepe company with hym in his voiage agaynſt the Scottis / and that he wold he with hym at the Aſcēcion day nexte after / at yorke / with ſuche company as he myght gette of men of warre / in thoſe parties. Whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynaulte lorde of Beamonde hard y• kyngis deſyre / he ſent ſtreyght his letters & his meſſengers in euery place / where as he thought to recouer / or attaigne to haue any company of men of warre. Inflaunders / in Heynaulte / in Brabant / and in other places deſyryng them yt in theyr beſt apparell for the warre: they wolde mete hym at Wyſant for to go ouer the ſee with hym into Ingland. And all ſuche as he ſent vnto / came to hym with a glad chere: and dyuerſe other that hard therof in truſt to attaigne to as moche honour as they had that were with hym in Ingland before at the other voiage. So that by that tyme y• ſayd lorde Beamond was come to Wyſant / ther was redy ſhyppes / for hym and his company brought out of Ingland. And ſo they toke ſhyppyng and paſſed ouer the ſee / and arryued at Douer / & ſo than ſeaſed nat to ryde tyll they came within .iii. dayes of Penthecoſte to the towne of yorke / wher as the kyng and the quene his mother / and all his lordis were with great hoſt taryeng the comynge ofſir John̄ of Heynaulte / and had ſent many before of theyr men of armes / archers and comen people of the good townes and villagꝭ / and as people reſorted / they were cauſed to be loged .ii. or .iii. leges of alabout in the countre. And on a day thyther came ſir John̄ of Heynaulte and his company / who were ryght welcome & well receyued / both of the kyng / of the quene his mother / and of all other barōs / and to them was delyuered the ſub barbes of the cite / to lodge in. And to ſir John̄ of Heynaulte was delyuered an abbey of whyte monkes for hym and his howſold. Ther came with hym out of Heynaulte / ye lorde of Angiew who was called ſyr Gualtier / & ſir Henry lorde Dantoing / and the lord of Saignoles / and ſit Faſtres de Rae / ſir Robert de Batlleul / and ſir Guilliam de Bailleul his brother / and the lorde of Hauereth chaſteleyne of Mons / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                
               Allard de Bryſnell / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Mychell de Ligne / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ de Mē tigni the yonger and his brother / ſir Sawſe de Bouſſat / the lorde of Gōmegines / ſyr Percyual de Seuernes / the lorde of Byaurien / and the lorde of Floien. Alſo of the countre of Flaūders Ther was 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hector of Uilais / ſir de Rodes / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Umſlart de Guiſtell / the lorde of Traces ſir Guyſſuyn de la Muele / and dyuerſe came

thither of the countrey of Brahant / as the lorde of Dufle ſyr Tyrry of Uaucourt / ſyr Raſſe de Gres / ſyr John̄ de Caſſebegne / ſyr John̄ Pyleſtre / ſyr Guyllaum de Courterelless. The .iii. bretherne de Harlebeque / ſyr Gualtier de hault bergue / and dyuers other. And of Behaignons ther was ſyr John̄ de Libeaur / and ſir Henry his brother / ſir Henry de la Chapell / ſyr Hewe de Hay / ſyr John̄ de Limies / ſyr Lambert de Dres / and ſir Guilbert de Hers. And out of Cā
               breſis and Artoys / ther were come certayn knyghtꝭ of theyr owne good wylles to auaūce theyr bodyes / ſo that ſir John̄ of Heynaulte had well in his company .v. C. men of armes well apparailed / and richely mounted. And after the feaſt of Penthecoſt came thyther / ſyr Guyllaume de Juliers / who was after duke of Juliers after y• diſſeaſe of his father / and ſir Henry Tyrry of Branberque / who was after erle of Los / and with them a ryghtfayre row
                  ••
                / and all to kepe companye with the gentle knyght ſir John̄ of Heynaulte lorde Beamont.
         
         
            ¶ The diſcencion that was bitwene the archers of Inglande and themof Heynaulte. Cap. xvi.
            
               THe gentle kyng of Inglād the better to feſt theſe ſtraūge lordes and all their company helde a great courte on Trynite ſonday in ye friers / wher as he & the queue his mother were lodged / kepynge theyr houſe eche of them apart. All this feaſt the kyng hadde well .v. C. knyghtis / and .xv. were newe made. And the quene had well in her courte .lx. ladyes and damozelles / who were there redy to make feaſt and chere to ſir John̄ of Heynaulte and to his companye. There myght haue been ſeen great nobles / plēty of all maner of ſtraūge vitaile. There were ladyes and damozelless fre ſhly apparayled redy to haue daunced / if they myght haue leue. But incontynent after dyuer there began a great fraye bitwene ſome of the gromes and pages of the ſtraūgers / and of the archers of Inglande / who were lodged among them in the ſaid ſubbarbis / and anon all the archers aſſēbled them to gether with their bowes & droue the ſtraungers home to theyr lodgyngꝭ and the moſt part of the knyghtis and maiſters of them were as then in the kyng is courte / but as ſoone as they harde tydyngꝭ of the fray eche of them drewe to theyr owne lodgyng in great haſt ſuche as myght entre / and ſuche as coulde nat get in / were in great parell. For the archers who were to the nombre of .iii. M. ſhotte faſte theyr arowes / nat ſparyng maiſters nor varlettis. And it was thought and ſuppoſed that this ſraye was begonne / by ſome of the frendis of y• Spencers / & of the erle of Arundels / who were put to deth before / by the a
                  •
               de and counſell of ſir John̄ of Heynaulte as ye haue harde before / as than parauenture thought to be ſom what reueged / and to ſet diſcorde in the hooſt. And ſo the Inglyſſhemen / that were hoſtes to theſe ſtraū
               gers ſhoot faſt their doores / and wyndowes / & wolde nat ſuffre theym to entre in to theyr lodgyngis. howbeit ſome gate in on the backe ſyde and quickly armed them / but they durſt nat iſſue out into the ſtrete for feare of the arowes. Than the ſtraūgers brake out on the backe ſide and brake downe pales and hedges of gardens and drewe them into a certeyne playne place / & aboode their company / tyll at the laſt they were a .C. and aboue of men of armes / and as many vnharneſt / ſuche as coulde nat get to theyr lodgyugꝭ. And whan they were aſſēbled to gether they haſted them to go and ſuccoure theyr compaignyons / who defended theyr lodgyngis in y• great ſtrete. And as they went forth they paſſed by ye lodgyng of the lorde Denghyen / wher as there were great gatis both before & behynd openyng into the great ſtrete / and the archers of Ingland ſhot ferſly at the howſe / & ther were many of the Henaus hurte / & the good knyght of Auſtre de Rue / and ſyr John̄ Parceuall de Meries / and ſyr Sanſe de Bouſſac / theſe .iii. coulde nat entre in to theyr lodgyngis to arme them. but they dyd as valiantly as though they had ben armed. They had great leuers in their handis / the whiche they founde in a carpenters yarde. With the whiche they gaue ſuche ſtrokis that men burſt nat aproche to them. They .iii. bette downe that day / with ſuche few company as they had mo than .lx. For they were great & myghty knyghtꝭ. Fynally the archers that were at the fraye were diſcomfetted and put to chaſe and there was deed in the place well to the nombre of .CCC. And it was ſaid they were all of y• buſſhopprike of Lyncoln̄. Itrowe god dyd neuer gyue more grace and fortune to any people. than he dyd as than / to this gentle knyght / ſyr John̄ of Heynaulte and to his companye. For theſe Inghſſhe archers intended to none other thyng / but to murder and to robbe them / for all that they were come to ſerue the kyng in his beſyneſſe. Theſe ſtraūgers were neuer in ſo great parell / all the ſeaſon that they lay / northey were 
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
euery man had takyn his place to lodge ther al nyght. Than the lordes drewe them aparte / to take counſaile howe they myght fyght with the ſcottis. conſideryng the countrey that they were in / for as farre as they coulde vnderſtande. the ſcottis went euer foreward all about burnyng / and waſtyng the countrey and parceyued well howe they coulde nat in any wyſe / feyght with them among theſe mountaignes without great parell or daunger / and they ſawe well alſo they coulde nat ouertake them. But it was thought that the ſcottis muſt n
                  •
               dis paſſe agayne y• riuer of Tyne home warde. Therfore it was determined by great aduyce and counſaile / that all the oſte ſhulde remoue at mydnyght / and to make haſte in the mornyng to the entent to ſtoppe the paſſage of the ryuer from the Scottis / wherby they ſhulde be aduyſed by force / eyther to fyght with them / orels to abyde ſtyll in Inglande to theyr great daunger and loſſe. And to this concluſion / all the oſte was accorded and ſo ſupped and lodged as well as they myght that nyght / & euery man was warned to be redy at the fyrſt ſoundyng of the trumpette. And at the ſecunde blaſte euery man to arme hym without delaye / and at the .iii. euery man quyckely to moūte on theyr horſes / and to drawe vnder their owne ſtā
               dard & baner / and euery man to take with hym but one loſte of breede / and to truſte it behynde hym on his horſe. It was alſo determined / that they ſhulde leaue behynde theym all theyr looſe harneys and all maner of cariagis and purueyaunces / for they thought ſurely to feyght with the ſcottis the next daye / what ſo euer daunger they were in thynkyng to ieo
                  •
               de eyther to wyn or to leeſe all. And thus it was ordeyned and ſo it was accōplyſſhed / for about mydnyght euery man was redy apparailed / fewe had ſlepte but lytle / and yet they had ſore traualed the daye before. Is great haſte as they made or they were well raunged in batell / the day began to appere Than they auaūced forward in al haſt through moūtaignes valeys / and rokkes / and through many euyll paſſages / without any playn countrey. And on the hyeſt of theſe hylles / and on the playn of theſe valeys / there were meruaylouſe great marſhes and daungerous paſſages / that it was great meruaile that moche people hadde nat ben loſt / for they roode euer ſtyll forward / & neuer taried one for another / for who ſo euer fel 
                  〈◊〉
                any of theſe marſhes with moche peyne could gette any ayde to helpe theym out agayne. So that in dyuerſe places there were many loſt and ſpecially horſe and cariagꝭ and often tymes in the day there was cryed alarum / for it was ſaid euer that the formoſt company of their oſte wer fyghtyng with their ennemies. ſo that the hynder moſt went it had ben true / wherfore they haſted theym ouer rokkis and ſtones and mountaygnes with helme and ſheld redy apparailed to fyght / with ſpere and ſwerde redy in hand wt out tariyng for father / brother / or companyon. And whan they had thus ron forth often tymes in the day the ſpace of halfe a myle to gyther towarde the crye wenyng it had been theyr ennemyes. They were deceyued / for the crye euer aroſe by the reyſyng of hartis hyndis / and other ſauage beaſtis that were ſeen by them in y• forewarde / after the whiche beaſtis they made ſuche ſhowtyng and criyng / that they that came after went they had ben a fyghtyng with theyr ennemies. Thus rode forth all that daye / the yonge kyng of Inglande by moūtaignes and destis / without fyndyng any hygh way / towne / or village. And whā it was ageynſt nyght they came to the ryuer of Tyne / to the ſame place / Where as the ſcottis hadde paſſed ouer in to Inglande Wenyng to them / that they muſte nedis repaſſe agayne the ſame waye. Than the kyng of Inglande / and his oſte paſſed ouer the ſame riuer with ſuche gydis as he had▪ with moche peyne & trauaile / for y• paſſage was full of great ſtones And whan they Were ouer / they lodged theym that nyght by the ryuer ſyde / and by that tyme the Son was goon to reſte / and there was but fewe among them that had other axe or hoke / or any inſtrument to cutte downe any woodde to make their lodgyng is withall / and there Were many that had loſte there owne company / and wiſt nat where they were. Some of the footemē were farre behynde / & wyſt nat well what way to take / but ſuche as knewe beſte the countrey ſayd playnly they hadde rydden the ſame daye .xxiiii. englyſſhe myles / for they roode as faſte as they might without any reſt / but at ſuche paſſages / as they coulde nat cheſe / all this nyght they laye by this ryuer ſyde / ſtyll in theyr harneys / holdynge theyr horſes by theyr raynes in theyr handts / for they wyſt nat wherunto to tye them. Thus theyr horſes dyd eate no meate of all that nyght nor day before. They had nother ootes nor forage for them. Nor the people of the oſte had no ſuſtenaūce of all that day nor nyght but euery man his loffe that he hadde caryed be hynde hym / the whiche was ſore wette with the ſwette of the horſes / nor they dranke none other drynke but the water of the ryuer / Withowte it were ſome of the lordis / that had caryed botels wt them / nor they had no fyer nor lyght / for they had nothyng to make lyght withall without it

were ſome of y• lordes that had torches brought with them. In this great trouble & daūger they paſſed all that nyght / their armour ſtill on their backis / their horſes redy ſadled. And whan the day began to appere▪ the whiche was greatly de sired of all y• hole oſte / they truſted than to ſynd ſome redreſſe for them ſelfe / and for their horſes orels to fyght with theyr ennemies / the whiche they greatly deſyred / to thentene to be deliuered out of y• great trauaile and peyne that they had endured / and all that day it rayned so faſte that the ryuer and paſſage was waxen great / and ryſen ſo high y• or it were noone ther myght none paſſe the paſſages agayn. Wherfore they could nat ſēde to know where as they were / nor where to haue any forage or lytter for theyr horſes / nor brede nor drynke for their owne ſuſtinaūcis but ſo all y• nyght they were fayne to faſt / nor theyr horſes had nothyng but leues of trees & herbes
                  •
                they cut downe bowes of trees wt theyr ſwerdꝭ to tye withall their horſes / & to make themſelfe lodges. And about noone ſome poore folkꝭ of y• countrey were founde / and they ſaid howe they were as than .xiiii. myle from Newcaſtell vpon Tyne / and .xi. myle frō Carlyle. and that there was no towne nerer to them / wheri they might fynde any thyng to do theym eaſe withall. And whan this was ſhewed to y• kyng / & to the lordꝭ of his coūſell / incontinent were ſent thither horſes and ſompters to fetche thens ſome p
                  •
               ueyāce and there was a crye in the kyngis name made in y• towne of Newcaſtell / y• who ſo euer wolde bryng brede or wyne or any other vitaile ſhulde be payd therfore incontinent at a good price / & that they ſhulde be conducted to the oſte in ſaue garde / for it was publiſſhed openly that y• kyng nor his oſte wolde nat departe from the place y• they were in / tyll they had ſome tydyng
                  •
                where their ennemies were become. And the next day by noone ſuche as had benſent for vitaile returned agayne to the oſte with ſuche purueyaūcis as they coulde gette / & that was nat ouer moche and with them came other folkis of the coūtrey with lytle nagges charged with brede euyll bakyn in panyers / and ſmalle pere wyne in barels and other vitaile to ſel in the oſte / wherby great part of the oſte were well refreſſhed & eaſed. and thus they cōtinued day by day the ſpace of .viii. dayes abidyng eueryday y• retournyng agayn of y• ſcott
                  •
                / who knew no more where y• engliſſh oſtelay. thā they knewe where they wer / ſo eche of them were ignorāt of other. Thus .iii. dayes and .iii. nyghtis / they were in maner withowte brede / wyne / candel or lyght / 
                  •
               oder / or forage / or any maner of purueyaūce / othe
                  •
                for horſe or m
                  •
                and after the ſpace of .iiii. dayes a lotte of brede was ſolde for .vi. d. the whiche was worthe but 
                  •
               i. d. And a gallon of wyne for .vi. grootis that was worth but .vi. d. And yet for all that / there was ſuche rage of famin / that eche toke vitailes out of others handis. wherby there roſe diuers batels and ſtryffes bitwene ſondry companyōs and yet beſide all theſe miſchieffis it neuer ſeaſed to rayne all the hoole weeke. Wherby theyre ſaddels / pannels / and countreſyngles were all rottyn and brokē / and moſt part at their horſes hurt on their backꝭ / nor they had nat wherwith to ſhoo them / that were vnſhodde / nor they had nothyng to couer them ſelfe withall fro y• rayne and colde / but grene buſſhes / and their armour Nor they had no thyng to make fyre withal but grene bowes / y• whiche wolde nat burne bicauof the rayne. In this great miſchief / they were all the weeke / without heryng of any worde of the ſcottis. vpon truſt they ſhuld repaſſe agayn into theyr owne countreis the ſame way or uere ther about / Wherby great noyſe and murmour began to ryſe in the oſte / for ſome ſaid and layd it to others charge / that by theyr counſaile the kyng and all they were brought in to that daū
               ger / and that they had done it to betraye y• kyng and all his ooſte. Wherfore it was ordeyned by the kyng & by his counſaile / that the nexte mornyng they ſhulde remoue the ooſte / and repaſſe agayne the ryuer / about .vii. myle thens / wher as they myght paſſe more at their eaſe. Than was it cried through out the oſte / that euery mā ſhulde be redy apparailed to remoue / the nexte day by tymes. Alſo there was a crye made / that who ſo euer coulde bryng to the kyng certayne knowledge where the ſcottꝭ were / he y• brought fyrſt tydyng is therof ſhuld haue for his labour a .C .li. lande to hym / and to his heires for euer / and to be made a knyght of the kyngis hande. Whan this crye was made in the oſte diuers engliſſhe knyghtis and ſquiers to the nombre of 
                  •
               xv. or .xvi. for couetyſe of wynnyng of this promyſe. they paſſed the ryuer in great parell / and rode forth throughe the mountaignes / and departed eche one from other takyng their aduē
               ture. The next mornyng the oſte diſlodged and rode fayre and eaſely all the daye for they were but euyll apparailed / and dyd ſo moche yt they repaſſed agayn the ryuer with moche payn and trauaile / for the water was depe / bicauſe of the rayn that had fallen / wherfore many dyd ſwym and ſome were drowned. And whan they were alouer / than they lodged the oſte / and ther they founde ſome forage / medowes & feldis about a lytle village / the whiche the ſcott
                  •
                had brēt wh
                  •
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
they paſt that way / and the nerte daye they departed frothens and paſte ouer hyls and dales all day tyll it was noone / and than they founde ſome villages brent by the ſcottis / and there about was ſome champyon countrey with corne and medowes / and ſo that nyght the oſt lodged ther. Agayn the .iii. day they rode forth ſo that the moſt parte of the oſte wiſt nat whiche way / for they knewe nat the countrey / nor they coulde here no tydyng is of the ſcottis. And agayn the 
                  〈◊〉
               . day they rode forth ilyke maner / tyl it was about the houre of. iii and there came a ſquyer faſt tydyng toward the kyng / & ſaid. And it like your grace I haue brought you parfit tydyngꝭ of the ſcottꝭ your ennemies. ſurely they be within .iii. myle of you / lodged on a great moūtaine abidyng ther for you / & ther they haue ben all this .viii. dayes / nor they knewe no more tidyngis of you / than ye dyd of them 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                this y• I ſhew you is of trouth for I aproched ſo nere to them that I was takyn priſoner & brought before y• lordes of their oſte / and there I ſhewed them tydyngis of you / and how that ye ſeke for them to then
                  •
               ent to haue batell. & the lordis dyd quyt me my raūſom & priſon / whan I had ſhewed them howe your grace had promiſed a .C .li. ſterlyng of rent to hym y• brought fyrſt tydyng is of them to you and they made me to promiſe yt I ſhuld nat reſt / tyll I had ſhewed you thys tydyngys for they ſayde they had as great deſyre to fyght with you as ye had with theym / and ther ſhall ye fynde them without faulte / and as ſoone as the kyng had harde this tidynges he aſſembled all his ooſte in. fayre medowe to paſture theyr horſes / & beſidis ther was lytle abbey y• whiche was all brent called in y• dayes of kyng Arthur le Blanche land. Ther the kyng confeſſed hym and euery man made hym redy. The kyng cauſed many maſſes to be ſong / to howſell all ſuche as had deuotion therto. And incontyuent he aſſigned a .C .li. ſterlyng of rent to the ſquier that had brought hym tidyng is of the ſcottis / accordyng to his pmyſe / and made hym knyght his owne handis before all the oſte. And whan they had well reſted them / and takyn repaſte. Than the 
                  •
               compet ſounded to horſe / & euery man moū
               ted / and the baners and ſtanders folowed thys new made knyght / euery batell by itſelfe ī good order through moūtaignes and dales raynged as well as they myght euer redy apparailed to fyght / and they roode / and made ſuche haſt that about noone they were ſo nere the ſcottys / that eche of theym myghte clerely ſe other. And as ſoone as the Scottis ſawe theym / they Iſſued owte of theyre lodges a foote / and ordeyned .iii. great batelles / in the auaylynge of the hyll. and at the foote of thys mountaygne / there ranne a great ryuer full of great rockes and ſtones / ſo that none myght paſſe ouer / withowte greate daunger or ieopardye / and though the engliſſhmen hadde paſſed ouer the ryuer. yet was there no place nor rowme / bytwene the hylle and the ryuer / to ſette the batayle in good order. The Scottis hadde, ſtablyſſhed their two fyrſte batelles / at the two corners of the mountaigne ioynyng to the rockes / So that none myght well mounte vpon the hyll to aſſayle theym / But the ſcottis were euer redy to beate with ſtones the aſſaylantis if they paſſed the ryuer. And whan the lordes of Inglande ſawe the behauyng and the maner of the ſcottis. they made all their people to a lyght a foote. and to put of theyr ſpurris and araynged .iii. great batelles / as they hadde done before / and there were made many newe knyghtis. And whan theyr batelles were ſette in good order. Than ſome of the lordes of Inglande brought theyr yong kyng a horſe backe before all the batelles of the oſte to the entent to gyue therby the more courage to all his people The whiche kyng in full goodly maner prayed and requyred theym ryght graciouſly that euery man wolde peyne theym to do theyr beſte to ſaue his honour and common weale of his realme. And it was cōmaūded vpō peyne of deth / that none ſhulde go before the marſha's baners nor breke theyr arraye / without they were commaunded. And than the kyng cōmaunded / that they ſhulde aduaunce towarde their ennemyes fayre and eaſely / and ſo they dyd / and euery batell went forth in good array and order a great ſpace of groūde to the diſcendyng of the mountaygne / where as the ſcottis were. And this the engliſſhe oſte dyd to thentent to ſe if their ennemies wolde breke their felde or nat. & to ſe what they wolde do / but they could nat parceyue that they were about to remoue ī any wiſe / they wer ſo nere to guyther that they myght knowe eche others armes. Than the oſte ſtode ſtyll to take other counſell. And ſome of the oſte mounted on good horſes and rode forth to ſkrymyſſhe with theym / and to beholde the paſſage of the ryuer / and to ſe the countynaunce of theyre ennemyes more nerer. And there were harauldis of armes ſent to the Scottis. gyuyng them knowledge if that they wolde come and paſſe y• ryuer to fight with them in the playn felde / they wolde drawe backe fro the ryuer / and gyue theym ſufficient place to araynge theyr batelles / eyther the ſame day orels the next / as they wold choſe them ſelfe orels to lette them do lyke wyſe / and they wolde

come ouer to them. And whan the ſcottis is harde this they toke counſell among theymſelfe. and anon they anſwerd the harauldꝭ how they mold do nother the ouenor the other / and ſayd ſyrs / yor kyng and his lordisſe well how we be here in this realme / and haue br
                  •
               nt & waſted y• countrey as we haue paſſed through / and if they he diſpleaſed ther with lette them amend it whan they wyll / for here we wyll abyde / as long as it ſhall pleaſe vs. And as ſoone as the kyng of Ingland hard that anſwere / hit was incontynent cryed / that all the oſte ſhuld lodge there y• nyght without reculyug backe / And ſo the oſte lodged there that nyght with moche peyne on the hard ground and ſtones / alwayes ſtyll armed. They had no ſtakꝭ nor roddis to tye withall their horſes / nor forage / nor huſſhe to make withall any tyre / And whan they were thus lodged. Than the ſcottis cauſed ſome of theyre people to kepe ſtyll the felde / where as they had ordeyned their batelles / and y• remnant went to their lodgyngꝭ and they made ſuche fyers that it was merueile to beholde. And bitwene the day and the nyght they made amerueilus great brute / wt blowyng of hornes all at ones / that it ſemed proprely that all the deuelles of hell had ben there. Thus theſe two oſtis were lodged that nyght. The whiche was ſaynte Peters nyght / in the begynnyng of Auguſte. The yere of oure lorde .M. CCC .xxvii. And the nexte mornynge / the lordes of Inglande harde Maſſe / and rayngen agayne theyre batelles / as they hadde done the daye before. And the Scottis in lyke myſe ordred ther
                  •
                batelles. Thus both the ottis ſtoode ſtyll in batell / tyll it was noone. The Scottis made neuer ſemblaunt to come to the Englyſſhe oſte to fyght with theym / nor in lyke wyſe the engliſſhe men to them / For they coulde nat aproche to g
                  •
               
               ther withowte great dammage. There were dyuerſe compaignyons a horſe backe / that paſſed the Ryuer / and ſome a foote / to ſkrymyſſ
                  •
               e with the Scottis. And in like wyſe ſome of the Scottꝭ brake oute / and ſkrymyſſhed with them So that there were dyuerſe on bothe partyes ſlayne / wounded / and takyn pryſoners. And after that noone was paſte / The lordes of Juglande commaunded euery man / to drawe to theyr lodgyng. For they ſawe well the Scottis wolde nat fyght with theym / and in like maner thus they dyd .iii. dayes to gyther / and the ſcottis in lyke caſe kepte ſtyll theyr mountaygnes / Howe be it there was ſkrymyſſhynge on bothe partyes / and dyuerſe ſlayne / and pryſoners takyn. And euery nyght the Scottis made great fyres & great brute with ſhowttyng & blowyng of hornes. The entencion of the englylſhe men was / to holde the ſcottis there / in mauer as beſeged. For they coulde nat fyghte with theym / there as they were / Thynkyng to haue famyſſhed theym. And the englyſſhe men knewe well by ſuche pryſoners as they hadde takyn / that y• Scottis hadde nother bredde / wyne / norſalte / nor other purueyaunce / ſaue of beaſtis they had great plentye / the whyche they hadde takyn in the countrey / and myght eate at their pleaſure without bredde / whiche was an euyll dyette / for they lacked oten meale to make cakes withall / as is ſayde before / the whyche dyet ſome of the engliſſhe men vſed whan they haddenede / ſpecially borderers / whan they make rodes into Scotlande. And in y• mornyng the .iiii. day the englyſſh men loked on the moūtaigne wher as the Scottis were and they coulde ſe no creature / for the ſcottis were depted at mydnyght. Than was there ſent men a horſe backe and afoote ouer the ryuer to knowe where they were become. And about noone they founde theym lodged on another mountaigne more ſtronger than the other was / by the ſame ryuer ſyde / and where there was a great wodde on the one ſyde to goo and come ſecretly whan they lyſt. Than incontynent the englyſſhe oſte diſlodged / and brewe to that parte in batelled in good order & lo
                  ••
               ed theym on another hyll ageynſt the ſcottis / and raynged theyr batelles / and made ſemblant to haue come to them. Than the Scottis iſſued out of their lodges and ſet theyr batels along y• ryuerſyde ageynſt them / but they wold neuer come toward the engliſſhe oſte / and y• engliſſhmen could nat go to them wout they wold
haue ben ſlayn or take at auaūtage. Thus they lodged eche 
                  ••
               cuſt other y• ſpace of .xviii. daies and often tymes y• kyng of Inglād ſent to them his harauldis of armes offeryng them / that yt they wolde ſome and fyght with hym he wolde gyue them place ſufficient on the playn groūde to pytche theyr felde / Or elles lette theym gyue hym rowme and place / and he aſſured theym / that he wolde come ouer the ryuer and fyght wt theym but the ſcottis wolde neuer agree them to. Thus both the ooſtis ſuffered moche payne and trauayle / the ſpace that they laye ſo nere to gyther / and the fyrſt nyght that the engliſſhe o
                  ••
                was thus lodged on the ſecund moūtaigne / the lorde willyam Duglas toke with hym aboute CC. men of armes / & paſt the ryuer farre of fro the oſte / ſo that he was nat parceyued / and ſodē
               ly he brake into the englyſſhe ooſte about mydnyght criyng Duglas Duglas ye ſhall all dpe theues of Juglande / And he ſlewe or he seaſſ
                  ••
               
               
CCC. men / ſome in their beddis / & ſome ſkant redy / and he ſtrake his horſe with the ſpurres / & came to the kyngis owne tent / alwayes criyng Duglas / and ſtrake a ſundre .ii. or .iii. cordis of the kyngꝭ tent & ſo departed / & in y• retret he loſt ſome of his men. Than he returned agayn to y• ſcottꝭ / ſo that they was no more done / but euery nyght the engliſſhe oſte made good & ſure watche / for they doubted makyng of ſkryes / & euer the moſt part of the oſte laye in their harneys. & euery day ther were ſkrymyſſhes made / & men ſlayne on both parties / and in concluſion y• laſt daye of .xxiiii. ther was a ſcottiſſhe knyght taky
                  •
                / who ageynſt his wyll ſhewed to the lordes of Ingland / what ſtate and condition the ſcottꝭ were in / he was ſo ſore examyned / that for feare of his lyfe he ſhewed howe y• lordes of Scotlād were accorded among them ſelfe / that the ſame nyght euery man ſhuld be redy armed. and to folowe the baners of the lorde Wyllyam Duglas and euery mā to kepe hym ſecrete / but y• knyght could nat ſhewe them what they entended to do Than the lordis of Ingland drewe them to coū
               ſaile and ther it was thought amōg them / that the ſcottis myght in the nyght tyme come & aſſaile their oſte on both ſydes to aduenture themſelfe other to lyue or dye / for they coulde endure no longer the famyne that was among theym. Than the englyſſhe lordes ordeyned .iii. 
                  〈…〉
               at batels / and ſo ſtode in .iii. parties without their lodgyngis / and made great fyers / therby to ſe the better / & cauſed all their pages to kepe theyr lodgyngis and horſes. Thus they ſtode ſtyll all yt nyght armed euery man vnder his owne ſtā
               dard and baner and in the brekyng of the daye 
                  •
               ii. trompettis of Scotland mette with the engliſſhe ſcout watche / who toke the trompettis & brought them before the kyng of Ingland & his conſaile / and than they ſaid openly. Sirs what do ye watche here / ye leſe but your tyme / for on the ieopardye of our heedis. the ſcottis are gone and departed before mydnyght / and they are at y• leſt by this tyme .iii. or .iiii. myle on theyr way and they left vs .ii. behynd to thentent that We ſhulde ſhewe this to you. Than the engliſſhe lordes ſaid / that it were but a foly to folowe the ſcottis. For they ſawe Well they coulde nat ouer take theym / yet for doubte of diſceyuyng / they kept ſtyll the two trompettis pryuely / and cauſed their batailes to ſtande ſtyll araynged / tyll it Was nere prime. ¶ And whan they ſawe for trouth that the ſcottis were departed. Than euery man had leaue to retraye to their lodgyng and the lordes toke counſaile to determyn what ſhulde be beſt to do. And in the meane tyme dyuerſe of the ingliſſhe oſte mounted on their horſes / and paſſed ouer the ryuer / and came to the mountaigne / where as the ſcottis had ben / and ther they founde mo than .v. C. great beſtis redy ſlayne / bicauſe the ſcottis coulde nat dryue them before theyr ooſte / and bicauſe that the engliſſhe men ſhulde haue but ſmall profit of them Alſo ther they found. CCC. caudrons made of beſtꝭ ſkynnes / with the heare ſtyll on them ſtrayned on ſtakes ouer the fyre full of water and full offleſſhe to be ſodden and mo than a .M. ſpyttꝭ full of fleſſhe to be roſted. And mo than .x. M. olde ſhoos made of rawe lether / with the heare ſtyll on them / the whiche the ſcottis had left behynd them. Also there they founde .v. poore englyſſhemen priſoners bounde faſte to certayne trees / and ſome of their legges broken / thā they were loſed & let go. & than they returned agayn and by that tyme al the oſte was diſlodged / and it was ordeyned by the kyng and by the aduyce of his counſaile that the hole oſte ſhulde folowe the marſhals baners / and drawe homeward in to Ingland / and ſo they dyd / and at y• laſt came into a fayre medow / where as they foūd forage ſufficient for their horſes and cariagis. wherof they had great nede / for they were nigh ſo feble that it ſhulde haue ben great peyne for them / to haue goon any forther. The engliſſhe cronicle ſayth / that the ſcottis had ben fought with all / and ſyr Roger Mortymer a lorde of Inglande had nat betraied the kyng / for he toke mede and money of the ſcottis / to thentent they myght departe pryuely by nyght vnfoughte with all / as hit maye be ſeen more playnely in the engliſſhe Cronycle / and diuers other maters / the whiche I paſſe ouer at this tyme / and folowe myn auctour. And ſo than the nexte day the oſte diſlodged agayne and went forth / and abowte noone they came to a great abbey / two myle fro the cite of Durham / and there the kyng lodged / and the oſte there about in the feldis / Where as they founde forage ſufficient / for theym ſelfe and for theyr horſes / and the nexte day the oſte lay there ſtyll / and the kyng went to the cite of Durham to ſe the churche / and there he offered. And ī this cite euery man founde their owne cariagis the Whyche they hadde lefte .xxxii. dayes before in a wodde at mydnyght / whan they folowed the ſcottis ſyrſt / as it hath benſhewed before / for the burgeſſes and people of Durham / had founde and broughte theym into theyr towne at theyre owne coſtis and chargis. And all theſe cariagꝭ were ſette in voyde granges and barnes in ſaue garde / & on euery mannes cariage his owne cogniſaūce or armes. Wherby euery mā myght

knowe his owne. And the lordes and genty lmē were gladde / Whan they had thus founde their cariages. Thus they abonde two dayes in the cite of Durham and the oſte rounde about. for they coulde nat all lodge within the cite. & there theyr horſes Were newe ſhoode. And than they toke theyr Way to the cite of yorke / and ſo with in .iii. dayes they came thither / and ther y• kyng foūde the quene his mother. who receyued hym with great ioye. And ſo dyd all other ladyes damozelles / burgeſſes / and c
                  ••
               mons of the Citie. The kyng gaue lycence to all maner of people / euery man to drawe home 
                  •
               arde to theyr owne countreys. And the kyng thanked greatly the Erles / barones and knyghtꝭ of theyr good coū
               ſaile and and that they had done to hym in hys io
                  •
               ney. And he retayned ſtyll with hym 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynaulte and all his company / Who Were greatly feaſted by y• quene and all other ladyes Than the knyghtis and other ſtraūgers of hys company made a byll of their horſes / and ſuche other ſtuffe as they had loſt in that iourney / and delyuered it to the kyngis counſaile euery man by itſelfe / and in truſte of the kyngis promyſe. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynaulte lorde Beamont boūde hymſelfe to all his company / that they ſhulde be content for euery thyng cōprised in theyr owne bils within a ſhortſpace. For the kyng nor his counſaile coulde nar ſo ſoone recouer golde or ſyluer to content their deſyres / but he delyuered them ſufficient by reaſon to pay all their ſmall charges / and to bryng them home withal into theyr owne countreis. And anon after within y• ſame yere they were payd for euery thyng they could deſyre. Than they of Heynnaulte bought lytle 
                  •
               agges to ryde at theyr caſe / theyr lackettꝭ and pagis / and all their harneys and baggages by water in .ii. ſhippes that was deliuered to them the whiche ſhyppes with theyr 
                  〈◊〉
                arryued at Sluce in Flaundders / and ſyr John̄ of Heynnaulte and his companye toke theyr leue of the kyng / of the olde quene / of the erle of Kent / of y• erle of Lancaſtre / and of all the other barones / who greatly dyd honour theym. And the kyng cauſed .xii. knightis / and. C▪C. men of armes to cōpany them for doubt of the archers of Inglād of Whome they were nat well aſſured / for they muſte needis paſſe through the buſſhopryke of Lincoln̄. Thus departed ſi
                  •
                John̄ of heynaulte and his rowte / in the conduct of theſe knyghtis and rode ſo long ī theyr iourney. that they came to Douer / and ther entred into the ſee iſhippis and veſſels that they founde redy ther apparayled for them. Than the 
                  •
               adliſt he knyghtis veparted fro thens / and retourned to their owne houſes / and the henous arriued at Wyſant and ther they ſoiourned .ii. bayes / in makyng redy theyr horſes and harneys. And in y• mean tyme 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynault / and ſome of his company rode a pylgrimage to our lady of Bollayn / and after they returned into Heynaulte and depted eche fro other to their owne howſes / & countres 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynaulte rode to therle his brother who was at Ualenciennes / who receyued hym ioyouſly / for greatly he loued hym. To Whom he recounted all his tydyng is that ye haue hard here before.
         
         
            ¶ Howe kyng Edward was maryed to my lady Philyp of Heynaulte. Cap. xix.
            
               HIt was nat long after / but that the kyng / and y• quene his mother / therle of Kent his vncle / therle of Lancaſtre / ſir Roger Mortymer / and all the barones of Inglande / and by the aduyce of the kyngis counſaile / they ſent a buſſhop / and .ii. knyghtis banerettis / with .ii. notable clerkꝭ / to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynault pray enghym to be a mean that theyr lord y• yong kyng of Ingland myght haue in mariage one of the eric
                  •
               
               ▪ boughts of Heynault his brother named Phylyp. For the kyng & all the nobles of the realme had rather haue her than any other lady for the loue of hym. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of heynault lord Beamont feaſted & honored greatly theſe ambaſſadours / & brough them to Ualenciēnes to therle his brother. who honorably receued them. & made them ſuche chere / yt it were ouer long here to reherse. And whan they had ſhewed the content of theyr meſſage. Therle ſaid. Sirs I thāke greatly y• kyng your prince / & the quene his mother / & all other lordes of Ingland / ſyth they haue ſent ſuche ſufficient ꝑſonages as ye be / to do me ſuche honor as to treat for the mariage. to the whiche requeſt / I am well agreed. if our holy father the pope wyll cōſent therto. With y• whiche answer theſe ambaſſadours were right well cōtēt. Thā they ſent .ii. knyghtꝭ & .ii. clerkꝭ incōtinent to the pope to Auygnon / to purchaſe a diſpēſation for this mariage to be had / for without y• popes licere they might nat marie / for ye linage of Frāce they were ſo nere of kyn / as at y• .iii. degree: for the .ii. mothers were coſyn Jermayns iſſued of ii. brethern̄. & whan theſe ambaſadors were cōe to the pope / & their requeſtꝭ & conſideratiōs well hard / our holy father the pope / with all the hole

colledge conſentyd to this mariage / and ſo feaſted them. And than they departed and came agayne to Ualenciennes with their buls. Than this mariage was concluded and affirmed on bothe parties. Than was there deuyſed / and purueied for theyr apparaile / and for all thyngꝭ honorable / that belonged to ſuche a lady / who ſhuld be quene of Inglande / and there this princeſſe was maryed / by a ſufficient procuration brought fro the kyng of Inglande / and after al feaſt is and triumphes done. Than thys yonge quene entred into the ſee at Wyſant and arryued with all her cōpany at Douer. And & John̄ of Heynaulte lorde Beamont her vncle dyd cō
               duct her to the cite of London / where there was made great feaſt and many nobles of Ingland and the quene was crowned. And there was alſo great iuſtes / tourneys daunſyng / carolyng / and great feaſtis euery day. The whiche enduced the ſpace of .iii. weekis. The engliſſhe cronicle ſaith / this mariage / and coronation of the quene was done at Yorke / with moche honour. the ſunday in the euyn of the cōuerſion of ſaynt Paule / in ye yere of our lorde .M. CCC .xxvii. In the whiche cronicle is ſhewyd / many other thynges of the rulynge of the realme / and of the deth of kyng Edwarde of Carnaruan / and dyuerſe other debates that were within y• realme as in the ſame Cronicle more playnly hit appereth / the whiche the auctor of this boke ſpeketh no worde of / b
                  •
               cauſe 
                  •
               auenture he knew it nat. for it was hard for a ſtrāger to knowe all thyngis / but accordyng to his wrytyng / This yong quene Philyp aboode ſtyll in Inglande with a 
                  •••
               all company of any 
                  •
               ſones of her owne coū
               tre
                  •
                / ſauyng one who was named wandelet of Manny / who aboode ſtyll with the quene and was her karuer / & after dyd ſo many great proweſſes in dyuerſe places / that it were harde to make mencion of them all.
         
         
            ¶ Howe kyng Robert of Scotland dyed. Cap. xx.
            
               ANd whan that the ſcottis were departed by nyght from the mountaigne where as the kyng of Ingland hadde beſeged theym / as ye haue harde here before.
            They went .xxii. Myle throughe that ſauage countrey without reſtyng / and paſſed the riuer of 
                  •
               yne / right nere to Carlyle. And ye next day they went into theyr owne lande / and ſo departed euery man to his owne manſion▪ and within a space af
                  •
                there was a peace purchaſed bitwene the kyngis of Ingland and Scotland / and as the englyſſhe cronicle ſayth / it was done by the ſpeciall counſell of the olde quene / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Roger Mortymer for by theyr meanes / there was a plyament holden at North hampton at ye whiche the kyng being within age / graūted to the ſcottis to releaſe all the feaulties and homages that they ought to haue done to the Crowne of Inglande by his Charter enſ
                  •
               aled. And alſo there was delyuered to the ſcottis an endenture / the whiche was called the Ragmon / wherin was co
                  •
               teyned all the homages and feaulties that y• kyng of ſcottis / and all the prelatis erles and barones of Scotlande ought to haue done to the crowne of Inglande / ſealed with all their ſealis with all other rightis / that ſondry barones and knyghtis ought to haue hadde in the realme of Scotlan
                  •
               . And alſo they delyuered to them agayn the blacke croſſe of Scotland▪ the whiche the good kyng Edwarde conquered / & brought it out of the abbey of Scoue / the whiche was a precious relique / and all rightis and entereſſes that euery baron had in Scotlande / was than clene forgyuen / and many other thyngis were done at that parlyament / to the great hurt / and preiudice of the realme of Ingland / and in maner ageynſt the wyls of all the nobles of the realme ſaue onely of Iſabell the olde quene & the buſſhop of Ely / and the lord mortymer. They ruled the realme in ſuche wyſe / that euery man was myſcontent. So yt the erle Henry of Lancaſtre / and ſyr Thomas Brotherton erle marſhall / and ſyr Edmund of Wodſtocke the kyngꝭ vncles / and dyuerſe other lordes and cōmons / were agreed to gether to amende theſe faultes / if they myght. And in that meane tyme y• quene Iſabell & ſyr Roger Mortym̄ / cauſed a nother parliament to be holden at Salyſbury / at the whiche parliament / & Roger Mortymer was made erle of Marche / ageynſt all ye barōs wyls of Inglād / in preiudice of ye kyng & his realme and ſir John̄ of Eltham ye kyngis brother was made erle of Cornewal. To the whiche 
                  •
               liamēt there Henry of Lācaſtre wold 
                  •
               at come. wherfore the kynge was broughte in beleue / that he wold haue diſtroyed his parſon / for the whiche they aſſembled a great hoſte / and went to ward Bedforde / Where as the Erle Henry was with his companye. Than the Erle Marſhall / and therle of Kent the kyngis brother made a peace bitwene the kyng & ye erle of Lācaſtre on whoſe part was & Henry lorde Beamont / ſyr Fowke Fitzwayn / & Thomas Rocellin. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Williā Truſſell / Syr Thomas Wyther / and abowte a .C. knyghtis who were all exyled out of Inglande by the counſaile of quene Iſabell / and the Erle

Mortym̄ / for he was ſo couetous yt he thought to haue the moſt part of all their landis into his owne handis / as it is more playnly ſhewen in ye ingliſſhe cronicle▪ the whiche I paſſe ouer and folowe myn auctour. The forsaid peace whiche was purchaſed bitwene Ingland and Scotlād was to endure .iii. yere. And in the meane tyme it fortuned that kyng Robert of Scotland was right ſore aged / & feble▪ for he was greatly charged with the great ſickenes / ſo that ther was no way with hym but deth. And whan he felte that his ende drew nere / he ſent for ſuche barones & lordis of his realme as he truſted best. & ſhewed them / how there was no remedy with hym / but he muſt nedis leue this transetory lyfe. Cōmaū
               dyng them on the faith and trouth yt they owed hym / truly to kepe the realme / and ayde ye yong prince Dauid his ſonne / and that whan he wer of age / they ſhulde obey hym and crowne hym kyng / and to mary hym ī ſuche a place as was cōuenient for his aſtate. Than he called to hym the gentle knyght ſir William Duglas / & ſayde before all the lordes. Sir William my dere frēd ye knowe well that I haue had moche a do my dayes to vphold and susteyne the ryght of this realme and whā I had moſt a do / I made a ſolemne vow / the whiche as yet I haue nat accomplyſſhed / wherof I am right sory. The whiche was / if I myght acheue and make an ende of al my warres / ſo that I myght ones haue brought this realme in reſt and peace / than I promyſed in my mynd to haue gone / and warred on Chriſtis ennemies / aduerſaries to our holy chriſten faith. To this purpoſe myn hart hath euer eatē ded / but our lorde wolde nat co
                  •
               ſent therto / for I haue had ſo muche a do in my dayes / & nowe in my laſt entrepriſe I haue takyn ſuche a malady that I can nat eſcape. And ſyth it is ſo yt my body can nat go nor acheue / yt my hart desireth I Wyll ſende the hart inſtede of the body to accomplyhſſmyn auowe / and bycauſe I knowe nat in all my realme no knyght more valyaunt than ye be / nor of body ſo Well furnyſſhed to accōplyſſhemyn avowe in ſtede of my ſelfe. Therfore I re
                  
                     
                  
                  qui
               re you myn owne dere aſpeciall frēde that ye wyll take on you this voiage for the loue of me / and to acquite my ſoule agaynſt my lord god. For I truſt ſo moche in your noblenes and trouth / that and ye wyll take on you / I doubte nat / but that ye ſhall achyue it / and than ſhall I dye in more eaſe and quiete. ſo that it be done in ſuche maner as I ſhall declare vnto you. I woll yt as ſoone as I am trepaſſed out of this worlde that ye take my harte owte of my body / and enbawme it / and take of my treaſoure / as ye ſhall thynke ſufficient for that entrepriſe / both for yor ſelfe / and ſuche company as ye wyll take With you / and preſent my hart to the holy S
                  •
               pulchre Where as our lorde laye. Seyng my body can nat come there / And take with you ſuche company and purueyaunce. as ſhalbe aparteyuyng to your aſtate. And where ſo euer ye come let it be knowen / howe ye cary with you the harte of kyng Robert of Scotland / at his inſtaūce and deſire / to be p̄ſented to the holy ſepulchre. Thā all the lordes that harde theſe wordes / wept for pitie. And whan this knyght ſyr William Duglas myght ſpeke for wepyng / he ſayd. I gentle & noble kyng / a .C. tymes I thanke your grace of the great honour that ye do to me. Sith of ſo noble and great treaſure / ye gyue me in charge And ſyr I ſhall do with a glad harte / all that ye haue cōmaūded me / to the beſt of my true power howe be it I am nat worthy nor ſufficient to achyue ſuche a noble entrepriſe. Than the kyng ſayd a gētle knyght / I thāke you ſo that ye wyl promyſe to do it. Syr ſayd the knyght / I ſhall do it vndoubtedly / by the faythe that I owe to god and to the ordre of knyghthodde. Than I thanke you ſayd the kyng / for nowe ſhall I dy
                  •
                in more eaſe of my mynde / ſith that I knowe / yt the moſt worthy and ſufficient knyght of my realme ſhall achyue for me / the whiche I coulde neuer atteyne vnto. And thus ſoone after thys noble Robert de Bruſe kyng of Scotland / t
                  ••
               
               paſſed out of this vncertayne worlde / and hys hart taken out of his body / and enbaumed / and honorably he was entred in the abbey of Donfremlyn / in the yere of our lord god .M. CCC .xxvii. the .vii. day of the moneth of Nouembre And whan the ſpryngyng tyme began. Than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                William Duglas purueied hym of that whiche aparteyned for his entrepriſe / and toke his ſhip at the port of Morais in Scotlande / and ſailed into Flanders to Shluce / to here tydyngꝭ / and to knowe if there were any noble man / in that coūtrey / that wolde go to Jeruſalem to thētent to haue more cōpany / and he lay ſtyll at Sluce / ye ſpace of .xii. daies or he departed / but he wold neuer come alande / but kept ſtyll his ſhyp / and kept alwaies his port and behauour with great Tryumphe / with trumpettis and clarions / as though he had ben kyng of ſcottꝭ hym ſelfe / and in his companye there was a knyght baneret / & .vii. other knyghtis of the realme of Scotland and .xxvi. yong ſquiers & gentylmē to s
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               ue hym▪ and all his veſſell was of golde and ſiluer / pottꝭ baſons / ewers / Dyſſhes / flagons / barels cuppes / and all other thyngis. And all ſuche as wolde come and ſe hym / they were Well ſerued▪
               
with two maner of wynes / and dyuerſe maner of ſpices / all maner of people accordyng to their degres. And whan he had thus taryed there the ſpace of .xii. dayes. he hard reported yt Alphons kyng of Spaigne made warre ageynſt a ſarazyn kyng of Granade. Thā he thought to draw to that partie / thynkyng ſuerely he could nat beſtowe his tyme more nobly / thā to warre ayenſt goddis ennemies / and that entrepriſe done. thā he thought to go forth to Jeruſalē / & to acheue that he was charged with. And ſo he departed. & toke the ſe to ward Spaigne / and arryued at ye port of Ualen
                  •
                the great. Than he 
                  〈◊〉
                ſtreight to the kyng of Spaigne / who helde his hoſte ageynſt the kyng of Granade ſarazyn / and they were nere to gether on the fronters of his lande and within a while after that this knyght ſyr Williā Duglas was come to ye kyng of Spaigne On a day the kyng iſſued out into the felde to aproche nere to his ennemies. And ye kyng of Granade iſſued out in like wyſe on his part / ſo that eche kyng myght ſe other wt al their baners diſplayed. Than they arenged their batels eche ageynſt other. Than 
                  〈◊〉
                William Duglas drewe out on the one ſyde with all his company / to the entent to ſhewe his prowes the better.
            And whan he ſaw theſe batels thus ranged on both parties / and ſawe that ye bataile of ye kyng of Spaigne began ſomewhat to aduaunce towarde their ennemies / he thought than verelye that they ſhulde ſoone aſſēble to gether to fyght at hande ſtrokes / and than he thought rather to be with the formeſt / than with the hyndemooſt / and ſtrake his horſe with the ſpurres / and al his company alſo / and daſhte into the batelle of the kyng of Granade / criynge Duglas Duglas. Wenyng to hym / the kyng of Spaigne and his hoſt had folowed but they dyd nat / Wherfore he was diſceyued / for the Spaignyſſ he hoſt ſtode ſtyll. And ſo this gentle knyght was encloſed / & all his company with the ſarazyns / where as he dyd meruelles in armes / but fynally he coulde nat endure / ſo that he and all his company were ſlayne. The whiche was great dāmage that ye ſpaynyardis wolde nat reſcue them.
            ¶ Alſo in this ſeaſon there were certayn lordes that treated for peace bitwene Inglād & Scotlande. So that at the laſt there was a mariage made / and ſolempniſed bitwene the yong kyng of Scotland / and dame Johan of the towre ſuſter to kyng Edward of Ingland / at Berwyke as the ingliſſhe cronicle ſaith on Mary Maud ly
                  •
               day. The yere of our lord .M .iii. C .xxviii. agaynſt the aſſente of many of the nobles of the realme. But quene Iſabell the kyng is mother and the erle Mortymer made that mariage. at ye whiche (as myn auctor ſaith) there was great feaſt made on bothe parties.
         
         
            ¶ Howe Phylypp̄ of Ualoys was crowned kyng of Fraunce. Cap. xxi.
            
               Kyng Charles of Fraunce ſōne to the fayre kyng Phylyp was .iii. tymes maried / and yet dyed without iſſue male. The firſt of his wyues was one of the moſt fayreſt ladyes in all the world / & ſhe was doughter to the erle of Artoys. Howe be it ſhe kept but euyll the ſacramēt of matrimony / but brake her wedloke Wherfore ſhe was kept a long ſpace in pryſon / in the caſtell Gaylarde / before that her huſband was made kyng. And whan the realme of Frā
               ce was fallen to hym / he was crowned by the aſſent of the .xii. dowſepiers of Fraunce / and thā bicauſe they wold nat that the realme of Frāce ſhulde belong without an heyre male / they aduyſed by their counſell / that the kyng ſhulde be remaryed agayne and ſo he was to the doughter of the Emperour Henry of Lucenbourg ſuſter to the gentle kyng of Bayhaigne / Wherby the firſt mariage of the kyng was fordoone bytwene hym and his wyfe that was in priſon by the licēce and declaracyon of ye pope / that was than / and by his .ii. wyfe / who was ryght humble / and a noble wyſe lady. the kyng had a ſōne / who dyed in his yong age / and the quene alſo / at Iſſodnii in Berrey. And they both dyed ſuſpeciouſly. Wherfore dyuers parſones were put to blame after priuely. And after this the ſame kyng Charles was maried agayn the .iii. tyme to the doughter of his vncle / ye lorde Loyes erle of Dewreux / and ſhe was ſuſter to the kyng of Nauerre / and was named quene Johan. And ſo in tyme and ſpace this lady was with childe / and in the meane tyme / the kyng Charles her huſband fell ſycke / and lay downe on his dethe bedde. And whan he ſawe there Was no waye with hym but deth / he deuiſed that if it fortuned the quene to be delyuered of a ſonne. Than he wolde that the lorde Phylyp of Ualoys ſhulde be his gouernour / and regent of all hys realme tyll his ſonne come to ſuche age as he myght be crowned kyng. and if it fortune ye quene to haue a doughter / than he wold that all the .xii. piers of Fraunce ſhulde take aduyſe and counſell for the forther ordering of the realme / and that they ſhuld gyue the realme / and regally to hym that

had mooſt ryght therto. And ſo within a whyle after ye kynge Charles dyed about Eſter / in the yere of our lorde .M. CCC .xxviii. And within a ſhort ſpace after the quene was delyuerd of a doughter. Than all the peres of Fraunce aſſē
               bled a counſell togyder at Parys as ſhortly as they might conueniently / and there they gaue ye realme by cōmen acorde to ſir Phylippe of Ualoys: and put clene out the quene Iſabell of Englande / and kynge Edwarde her ſonne / for ſhe was ſuſter germayne to king Charles laſt deed but the opynion of the nobles of Fraunce was / and ſayed and maynteyned: that the realme of Fraunce was of ſo great nobles / that it ought nat by ſucceſſyon to fall into a womans hande. And ſo thus they crowned kyng of France Philypp̄ Ualoys at Raygnes / on Trinyte ſonday next after. And anone after he ſomoned all his barownes and men of war
                  •
               . And went withall his power to the towne of Caſſell and layd 
                  ••
               eg therto / in makyng war
                  •
                agaynſt the 
                  ••
               emmynges / who rebelledde agaynſt their owne lorde. And namely they of Bruges / of Ippre / and of Franke: for they wolde nat obey therle of Flaū
               ders. But they had chaſed hym out of his owne countrey / ſo that he might nat abyde in no partie therof / but onely in Gaunt / and ſcantly ther. Theſe flēmynges were a .xvi. thouſande / and had a capytayne called Colen 
                  •
               ānequyn a hardy man and a couragious. And they had made their grayſon at Caſſell / at y• wages of dyuerſe townes in Flaunders. To thentent to kepe the fronters there about / but ye ſhall here howe the flemmynges were dyſconfeted / and all by their owne outrage.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batell of Caſſell in Flaū
               ders. Cap. xxii.
            
               ANd on a day / they of the garyſon of Caſſell departed out. To thentent to haue dyſconfyted ye kyng and all his hooſt. And they came priuely without any noyſe in thre batels well ordred. Wherof the firſt batayle toke the way to the kynges tentes / and it was a fayre grace that the kynge had natben taken / for he was at ſouper and all his company / and thought nothyng of them. And the other batayle toke the ſtreyght way to the tentes of the kynge of Behaygne / and in maner they founde hym in lyke caſe. And the thirde batayle went to the tentes of therle of Heynault / and in likrwyſe had nere take hym. Theſe hooſtes cāe ſo peaſably to the tentes / that with moch payne they of thooſt coude arme them. Wherby all the lordes and their people had ben ſlayne / and the more grace of god had nat ben / but in maner by myracle of god / theſe lordes dyſconfyted all .iii. batayls / eche batayle by it ſelfe all in one hour. In ſuch wyſe that of. 
                  •
               vi. thouſande flemmynges ther aſcaped neuer a perſon / captayns and all were ſlayne. And the kyng & lordes of Frāce knewe nat one of an other / nor what they hadde done tyll all was finyſſ / edd and atchyued. For they lay in thre ſondrie parties one fro an other but as for the flēmynges there was nat one left a lyue / but all lay deed on hepes one vpon an other in the ſayed thre ſondrie places. And this was done on ſaynt Bartylmewes day / the yere of our lorde .M. CCC .xxviii. Than the french men entred into the towne of Caſſell and ſet vp the baners of Fraūce / and the towne yelded thē to the kyng. And alſo the towne Pyepigne / and of Ipre / & all they of the Caſtlayne of Bergues / and than the receyued therle Loys their lorde / and ſware to hym faythe and loyaltie foreuer. Than after the kynge and his people departed and went to Parys / and he was moche honoured and prayſed for this enterpriſe and ayd that he had done to his coſyn Lois erle of Flaūders. And thus the kyng was in great proſperite and euery day encreſed his ryall eſtat / for as it was ſayd ther was neuer kyng in Fraūce that helde like eſtat / as dyd this kyng Philyp of Ualoys.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the erle of kent and the erle Mortymer in Englande were put to deth. Cap. xxiii.
            THis yong kyng Edwarde of Englande was gouerned a great ſpace as ye haue harde before / by the coūſell of the quene his mother / and of Edmonde of Wodſtoke erle of Kēt his vncle / and by ſir Roger Mortymer erle of March. And at ye laſt enuy began to growe bytwene therle of Kent and therle Mortym̄. In ſo moch yt this erle Mortim̄ enformed ſo the yong kyng / by the cōſentyng of tholde quene Iſabell his mother / beryng ye kyng in hande that therle of Kent wolde haue enpoyſoned hym. To thentent to be kynge hymſelfe / as he that was nexte heyre apparaunt to the crowne / for the kynges yonger brother who was called John̄ a Gaunt was newly deed. And than the kyng who gaue lyght credence to theym / cauſedde his vncle the erle of Kent to be taken and openly to be beheeded without any maner of excuſe to be harde,

Wherwith many of y• nobles of the realme wer ſore troubled / and bare a gruge in their hertes towarde the erle Mortymer / and accordyng to thenglyſſhe cronycle. Therle ſuffred dethe atte Wyncheſter / the tenth day of Octobre: y• thirde yere of the kynges raygne / and lyeth buryed at the friers in Wincheſtre. But as myne auctour ſayeth: within a whyle after as it was reported quene Isabell the kyng
                  •
                mother was wt chylde / and that by therle Mortymer. Wherof ye kyng was enfourmed: & how the ſayd Mortym̄ had cauſed him to put to deth therle of Kent his vncle / without good reaſon or cauſe: for all the realme reputed hym for a noble man. Thanne by the kynges commaundement / this erle Mortymer was taken̄e and brought to London. And there byfore the great lordes and nobles of the realme was recyted by open declaratyon: all ye dedes of the ſayd Mortymer. Than the kynge demaunded of his counſell what ſhuld be done with hym / and all the lordes by commen aſſent gaue iudgement. And ſayed ſyr: he hath deſerued to dye the ſa
                  〈…〉
               ethe that ſir Hewe Spenſer dyed. And after this iudgement: there was no delacyon of ſufferaunce nor mercy. But incōtynent he was drawen throughout London / and than ſet on a ſcaffolde and his membres cut from hym / and caſt into a fyre and his hert alſo: bycauſe he had ymagined treaſon. And thanne quartered: and his quarters ſent to foure of the beſt cyties of the realme / and his heed remayned ſtyll in London. And within a lytle ſpace after the kyng commaunded by thaduyce of his counſell / yt the quene his mother ſhulde be kept cloſe in a caſtell. And ſo it was dōe: and ſhe had with her ladyes and damoſels / knyghtes and ſquiers / to ſerue her acordyng to her eſtat. And certayne lādes aſſigned to her / to mētayne ther with her noble eſtat all dayes of her lyfe. But in no wyſe ſhe ſhulde nat deꝑt out of the caſtell wt
               out it were toſe ſuche ſportes as was ſomtyme ſhewed byfore the caſtell gate / for her recreatyon. Thus this lady ledde forth her lyfe ther mekely / and ones or twyſe a yere the kyng her ſon / wolde cōe and ſe her. Thenglyſſhe cronycle ſheweth dyuerſe other conſyderations / why therle Mortym̄ ſuffred deth the which was on ſaynt Andrewes euyn. In the yere of our lorde a thouſande thre hundred .xxix. The whiche I paſſe ouer and folowe myne authoure.
         
         
            ¶ Of thomage that kyng Edwarde of Englande / dydde to the kynge of Fraunce for the duchye of Guyen. Cap. xxiiii.
            
               ANd after that the king had dōe theſe two execucyōs: he toke newe counſelours of the mooſt nobleſt & ſageſt ꝑſons of his realme. And ſo it was about a yere after: yt Phylip of Ualoys was crowned kyng of France / & that all the barones and nobles of the realme had made their homage and fealty to him / except the yong king of England / who had nat done his homage for the duchy of Guyen: nor alſo he was nat ſomoned therto. Than ye king of France by thaduiſe of all his counſell: ſent ouer into Englande / the lorde Auycenis the lorde Beauſalt / and two no table clerkes maiſters of the parlyament of Parys: named maiſter Peter of Orlyaunce / and maiſter Peter of Maſieres. Theſe .iiii. deꝑted fro Paris / and dyd ſomoch by their iourneis yt they cāe to Wyſant / and ther they toke ſee & aryued at Douer. And ther taryed a day to abyde the vnſhypping of their horſes and bagages: & thā they rode forth ſo long that they cāe to Wynſore. Where as the kyng and the yong quene of England lay. And than theſe foure cauſed to be knowen to the kynge the occaſyon of their commyng. The kyng of Englande for the honoure of the french kyng his coſyn: cauſed them to cōe to his preſence / and receyued them houourably and than they publyſſhed their meſſage. And ye kyng anſwered them how that the nobles of his realme / nor his counſell was nat as than about hym: but deſyred them to drawe to Lōdon / and ther they ſhulde be anſwered: in ſuch wyſe that of reaſon they ſhulde be content. And ſo they dyned in the kynges chambre and after departed / and lay the ſame nyght at Colbroke / and yt next day at London. It was nat long after: but that the kynge came to his palace of Weſtmynſter. And all his counſell was cōmaunded to be ther at a certayne day lymited / and whan they were all aſſembled. Than the frenche embaſſadours were ſent for: and there they declared thoccaſyon of their cōmynge / and delyuered letters fro their maiſter. Thanne the kynge went a parte with his counſell to take aduyſe what was beſt for hym to do. Thanne was it aduyſed by his counſell / that they ſhulde be anſwered by thordynaunce and ſtyle of his predeceſſours / by the byſſhopp̄ of London. And ſo the frēchmen wer called into the counſell chambre: than the byſſhop of London ſayd. Lordes that be here aſſē
               bled for the kyng of Fraunce / the kyng is grace

my ſoueraygne lorde hath harde your wordes / and redde the tenour of your letters. Syrs we ſay vnto you that we woll counſell the kyng our ſoueraygne lorde here preſent: that he go into Fraunce / to ſe the kynge your maiſter his dere coſyn. Who right amyably hath ſent for hym / and as touchyng his faith anohomage / he ſhall do his deuour in euery thynge that he ought to do of ryght. And ſyrs ye may ſhewe ye kyng yor maiſter / that within ſhort ſpace the kyng of Englande our maiſter ſhall arryue in France: and do all that reaſon ſhall requyre. Thā theſe meſſangers were feaſted / and the kynge rewarded them with many great gyftes and iuelles / and they toke their leaue and dyd ſomoche / that at laſt they came to Parys / wher they found kyng Phylyppe / to whome they recounted all their newes. Wherof the king was right ioyouſe and ſpecially to ſe the kyng of Englande his coſyn / for he hadde neuer ſene hym before. And whan theſe tidynges were ſpredde abrode in y• realm of Fraunce. Than dukes / erles / and other lordes aparelled them in their beſt maner: and the kyng of Fraūce wrot his letters to kyng Charles of Behaygne his coſyn: and to the kynge of Nauarre. Certifyeng theym the day and tyme whan the kyng of England ſhuld be with hym / deſyringe them to be with hym at the ſame day / and ſo they came thyder with gret array. Than was it counſelled the kynge of Fraunce / that he ſhulde receyue the kyng of Englande at the cyte of Amyas / and there to make prouyſion for his commyng. There was chambers halles hoſte ries / and lodgynges made redy and apparelled to receyue them all and their company. And alſo for the duke of Burgoyne / the duke of Burbon / the duke of Lurren: and ſyr John̄ of Artoyes. There was purueyaunce for a thouſande horſe / and for ſixe hundred horſe that ſhulde come with the kyng of Englande. The yonge kyng of Englande forgate nat the voyage that he had to do into Fraunce. And ſo he aparelled for hym and his company well and ſufficiently / and there departed out of Englande / in his cō
               pany two byſſhoppes / beſyde the byſſhoppe of London / and foure erles. The lorde Henry erle of Derby his coſyngermayne / ſonne to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas erle of Lancaſtre with the wrie necke / the erle of Saliſ bury therle of Warwyke / and the erle of Hereforde / and. vt. barownes. The lorde Raynolde Cobham / the lorde Thomas Wage marſhall of Englande / the lorde Perſy / y• lorde Māny / and the lorde Mowbray. And mo than .xl. other knyghtes / ſo that the kyng and his cō
               pany were about a thouſand horſe / and y• kyng was two dayes in paſſing bytwene Douer and Wyſant. Than the kyng and his company rod to Bullayne / and there taryed one day. This was about the myddes of Auguſt / the yere of our lorde god a thouſande thre hundred .xxix. And a none the tidynges came to kyng Phylip of Fraunce / howe the kynge of Englande was at Bullayne. Than the kynge of Fraunce ſent his conſtable with great plentie of knyghtes to the kynge of Englande / who as thanne was at Monſternell by the ſeeſyde / and ther was gret tokens of loue and good chere / made on bothe parties. Than̄e the kynge of Englande rodde forth withall his rowt / and in his company the conſtable of Fraunce. And he rodde ſo long that they came to the cytie of Amyas / wher as kyng Phylippe / and the kynge of Behaygne. The kynge of Mayllorgues / and the kynge of Nauarre were redy aparelled to receyue the kynge of Englande / with many other dukes / erles / and great barownes. For there was all the .xii. peres of Fraunce / redy to feaſt and make chere to the kynge of Englande, and to be there peaſably to bere wytneſſe of the kynge of Englandes homage. Ther was the kyng of Englande nobly receyued. and thus theſe kynges and other princes taryed at Amyas the ſpace of .xv. dayes / and in the meane tyme there were many wordes and ordynaunces deuyſed / but as farr as I coude knowe / kyng Edwarde of Englād made his homage to the kynge of Fraunce all onely by worde / and nat puttyng his hādes bytwene the kynge of Fraunce handes / nor none other prince nor prelate lymitted for hym. Nor the kynge of Englande wolde nat procede any farther in doyng any more / concernyng his homage. But rather he was detmyned to returne agayne into Englande / and there was redde openly the priuyleges of auncyent tyme graunted / the which was declared in what maner the kynge ſhulde do his homage and howe and in what wyſe he ſhulde do ſeruyce to the kynge of Fraunce. Than the kynge of Fraunce ſayd coſyn / we woll nat diſceyue you / this that ye haue done pleaſeth vs rightwell / as for this preſent tyme. Tyll ſuch tyme as ye be returned agayne into your realme / and that ye haue ſene vnder the ſeales of your predeceſſoures / howe and in what wyſe ye ſhulde do. And ſo thus the kynge of Englande tooke his leaue and departed fro the kynge of Fraunce ryght amyably. And of all other princes that was there / and retourned agayne into Englande / and laboured ſo longe that he came to Wyndeſor. Where his quene receyued d hym right ioyouſly. And demaunded

tidynges of kynge Phylippe her vncle / and of her linage of Fraūce. The kyng ſhewed her all that he knewe and of the gret chere and honour that he had there / and ſayd in his mynde there was no realme coude be compared to ye realme of Fraunce. And than within a ſpace after the kyng of Fraunce ſent into Englande of his ſpecyall counſell: the byſſhoppe of Chartres / and the byſſhoppe of Beannays / the lorde Loys of Cleremont / the duke of Burbon / therle of Harcourt / and therle of Tankermylle: with dyuers other knyghtes and clerkes to ye counſell of Englande / the which was than holden at London for the parfourmaunce of the kyng of Englandes homage: as ye haue harde before. And alſo the kyng of England and his counſell had well ouerſene the maner and fourme / how his auncyent predeceſſours had done their homage for the duchy of Acquitayne. There were many as than in Englande y• murmured and ſayd: how the kyng their lorde was nerer by true ſucceſſion of herytage to the crowne of Fraunce / than Phylippe of Ualoys: who was as than kyng of Fraunce. Now be it the kyng and his coūſell wolde nat knowe it / nor ſpeke therof as at that tyme: thus was ther great aſſemble and moch a do how this homage ſhulde be parfourmed. Theſe embaſſadours taryed ſtyll in England all that wynter / tyll it was the moneth of May folowyng / or they had aunſwere dyffinatyue: how be it finally the kynge of Englande by the aduyce of his counſell / and on the ſyght of his priuyleges where vnto they gaue great fayth: was determyned to write letters in the maner of patentes ſealed with his great ſeale / knowle gyng therin the homage that he ought to do to the kyng of Fraunce. The tenour and report of the which letters patentes foloweth.
            EDward by the grace of god: kyng of England / lorde of Ireland / and duke of Acquitayne. To them y• theſe preſent letters ſhall ſe or here / ſend gretyng. We wold it be knowen that as we made homage at Amyas / to ye right excellent prince our right dere coſyn Phylyppe kyng of Fraunce: and there it was requyred by hym that we ſhuld knowledge the ſayd homage and to make it to hym expreſly / promyſinge to bere hym fayth and trouth y• which we dyd nat as than / by cauſe we were nat enfourmed of the trouth. We made hym homage by generall wordes: in ſayeng how we entred into his homage in lyke maner as our predeceſſours. Dukes of Guyen in tymes paſt had entred into thomage of the kyng of Fraūce for that tyme beyng. And ſyth that tyme we haue ben well enfourmed of the trouth. Therfore we knowlege by theſe preſentes: that ſuch homage as we haue made in y• cyte of Amyas to the kyng of Fraunce in generall wordes / was and ought to be vnderſtande this worde lyege man: and that to hym we owe to bere faith and trouth / as duke of Acquitayne and pere of Fraunce / erle of Poyters & of Mutterell. And to thentent in tyme cōmynge yt there ſhulde neuer be dyſcorde. For this cauſe we promyſe for vs and our ſucceſſours duk
                  •
                of Acquitayne / that this homage be made in this maner folowyng. The kyng of Englande duke of Acquitayne / holdeth his handes bytwene the handes of the kyng of Fraūce. And he that ſhall addreſſe theſe wordes to the kynge of Englande duke of Acquitayne / ſhall ſpeke for the kyng of Fraunce in this maner. yeſhall become lyege man to the kynge my lorde here preſent as duke of Guyen and pere of Fraunce. And to hym promyſe to bere faythe and trouthe ſay ye: and the kyng of Englande duke of Guyen and his ſucceſſours ſayth ye. And than the kyng of Fraūce receyueth the kyng of Englande duke of Guyen / to this ſayd homage as lyege man wt faythe and trouth ſpoken by mouth: ſauyng his ryght and all other. And furthermore whan the ſayd kyng entreth in homage to the kyng of Fraūce for therldome of Poyters and of Muttrell / he ſhall put his handes bytwene the handes of the kyng of Fraunce for the ſayd erldome. And he that ſhall ſpeke for the kynge of Fraunce / ſhall addreſſe his wordes to the kynge and erle: and ſay thus. ye ſhall become liege man to the kyng of Fraūce my lorde here preſent / as erle of Poyters and Muttrell. And to hym ꝓmyſe to bere fayth & trouth / ſay ye. And the kyng erle of Poyters / ſayth ye. Than the kyng of Fraūce receyueth the kyng and erle to this ſayd homage by his fayth / and by his mouth ſauyng his ryght and all other. And after this maner it ſhalbe done / and renewed as often as homage ſhulde be done. And of that we ſhall delyuer and our ſucceſſours dukes of Guyen: after theſe ſayd homages / made letters patentes ſealed with our great ſeale. If the kynge of Fraūce requyre it / and beſyde that we promyſe in good faythe to holde and to kepe effectuouſly the peace / and cō
               corde made bytwene the kynges of Fraūce and the kynges of Englande dukes of Guyen. &c. Theſe letters the lordes of Fraunce brought to the kyng their lorde / and the kyng cauſed them to be kept in his chauncery.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the lorde syr 
                  •
               ubert of Artoyſe was chaſed out of the realme of Fraunce. Cap. xxv.
            
               THe man in the world that moſt ayded kyng Philyppe to attayne to the Crowne of Fraunce. was syr Robert erle of Artoyſe. Who was done of the moſt ſagelt / and great teſte lordes in Fraunce / and of hygh lynage extraughte / fro the blodde royall and hadde to his wyfe ſuller iermayn to the ſayd kyng Phylyp / & allwayes was his chief / and ſpeciall compaignyon / and louer in all hys aſtatis. And the ſpace of .iii. yere / all that was done in the realme of Fraunce / was done by his aduyce / and withoute hym nothyng was done. And after it fortuned / that this kyng Philyppe tooke a meruailouſe great hiſ pleaſure and hatred ageynſt this noble man ſyr Robert of Artoyſe / for a plee / that was m
                  ••
               ed before hym / Wherof the Erle of Artoyſe was cauſe / For he wolde haue wonne his entent by the vertue of a letter that he layd forth / the whiche was nat true as it was ſayde. Wherfore the kyng was in ſuche diſpleaſure / that yf hadde takyn hym in his ire ſurely it hadde coſte hym his lyfe Without remedye. So this ſyr Robert was fayne to boyde the realme of Fraunce / and went to Namure to the Erle John̄ 
               his Nephewe. Than the kyng toke the Erles wyfe / and her two ſonnes / who were his owne nephewes John̄e and Charles / and dyd put them in priſon and were kept ſtraytly / and ye kyng ſware that they ſhuld neuer come out of priſon / as long as they lyued The kyng is mynde wolde nat be turned by no maner of meanes. Than the kyng in his furye ſente haſtely to the buſſhopp Laoul of Liege
                  〈…〉
                deſired hym at his inſtaūce that he wolde befye and make warre / agaynſt the erle of Namure. without he wolde put out of his countrey 
                  〈◊〉
                Roberte erle of Artoyſe. ¶ And this buſſhoppe / Who greatly loued the kynge of Fraunce / and but lytle loued his neyghbours dyda
                  〈…〉
                y• kyng deſired hym. Than the erle of Namure ſore ageynſt his wyll / cauſed the erle of Artoyſe to auoyde his lande. Than this erle 
                  〈◊〉
                Robert went to the duke of Brabant his coſyn / who right ioyouſly receyued hym and dyd hym great cōforte And as ſoone as the kyng of Fraūce knew that he ſent worde to ye duke / that if he wold ſuſteyue maynteyn or ſuſ
                  •
               re the erle of Artoyſe in his co
                  •
               
               trey / he ſhulde haue no greatter ennemy than he wold be to hym / and that he wolde make warre ageynſt hym / and al his to the beſt of his power with all the realme of Fraunce. Than the duke ſent the erle of Artoyſe pryuely to Arge
                  •
               tuel to then tent to ſe what the kyng wold do forther in the caſe. And anon the kyng knew it / for he had ſpyes / in euery corner. The kyng had great diſpyte / that the duke ſhuld ſo dele with hym / and within a brief ſpace after / the kyng pourchaſed ſo by reaſon of his golde & ſyluer / that the kyng of Behaigne / who was coſin iermayn to y• duke of Brabant / and the buſſhop of Liege / the arche byſſhop of Coleyn / the duke of Guerles / ye matques of Julyers / the erle of Bare / ye lord of Los the lorde Fawkmount / and diuers other lordes were alied to guyther al ayenſt the duke of Brabant / and defyed hym / and entred with a great oſte in to his countrey by Eſbayng and ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                to Hanut / & brent twyſe ouer the coūtrey where as it pleaſed them. And the kyng of Fraūce ſent with them therle of Ewe his Conſtable / with a great oſte of men of armes. Than the 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
               liā of Heynaulte ſent his wy
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                kyng and his brother 
                  〈◊〉
                John̄ 
               
                  〈◊◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               de Beamont / into Fraunce / to t
                  〈…〉
                peace / & ſufferaūce of warr bitwene the kyng and the duke of Brabant. And at laſt the kyng of Frāce wiſ
                  •
               y moche warke conſented therto / vpon condition that the duke ſhulde put hym ſelfe vtterly to abyde the ordynaunce of the kyng of Fraūce and of his counſaile / in euery mater that the kyng 
                  〈◊〉
                all ſuche as had befyed hym had ageynſt hym / And alſo wt in a certayn day lymitted to auoyde out of his coūtrey the erle of Artoyſe / & to make ſhorte / al this the duke dyd ſore ayenſt his wyll.
         
         
            ¶ Howe kyng Edwarde of Ingland toke the towne of Berwyke ageynſt the Scottis. Cap. xxvi.
            
               YE haue harde here before recited of the truce bitwene Inglande and Scotland / for the ſpace of .iii. yere / and ſo the ſpace of 
                  ••
               ue yere / they kept well the peace / ſo that in CCC. yere before there was nat ſo good peace kept. Now beit kyng Edward of Ingland was enformed / that the yong kyng Dauid of Scotland / who had wedded his ſuſter was sea
                  •
               ed of the towne of Berwyke / the whtche ought to apperteyn to the realme of Ingland. for kyng Edward the firſt his graunfather had it in his poſſeſſion peaſably. Alſo ye kyng was e
                  〈…〉
                / 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
the realme of Scotlande ſhulde holde in chief of the Crowne of Inglande / and how the yong kyng of ſcottis had nat done as thā his homage Wherfore the kyng of Ingland ſent his ambaſſad to the kyng of ſcottis / deſyryng hym to leue his handis of the towne of Berwyke / for it parteyned to his heritage / for kyngis of Inglande his predeceſſours haue ben in poſſeſſion therof And alſo they ſomoned the kyng of Scottis to come to the kyng of Ingland to do his homage for the realme of Scotland. Than the kyng of Scottis toke counſaile / howe to anſwere thys mater. And finally the kyng anſwerde the Engli
                  ••
                he ambaſſadours / and ſayd. Syrs both I and all the nobles of my realme meruaile greatly of that ye haue requyred vs to do / for we fynd nat auncientely / that the realme of Scotlande ſhulde any thyng be bounde or be ſubgiet to the realme of Ingland / nother by homage / or any other wayes. Nor the kyng of noble memorye our father wolde neuer do homage to the kyngꝭ of Ingland / for any warre that was made vnto hym / by any of 
                  〈◊〉
               . No more in like wyſe I am in wyll to do. And alſo kyng Robert our father conquered the towne of Berwyke / by force of armes / agaynſt kyng Edwarde father to the kyng your maiſter that nowe is. And ſo my father helde it all the dayes of his lyfe as his good heritage. And ſo in lyke maner we thynke to do to the beſt of our power. Howe be it lordes We require you to be meanes to the kyng your maſter whoſe ſuſter we haue maryed / that he wyll ſuffre vs peaſeably to enioye our fraūches and ryghtis / as his auncetours haue done here before. And to lette vs enioye that our father hath woune / and kept it peaſeably all his lyfe dayes and deſyre the kyng your maiſter / that he wold nat beleue any euyll counſaile / gyuen hym to y• contrary. For if ther were any other prince that wolde do vs wrong / he ſhuld aide / ſuccour / and defende vs / for the loue of his ſuſter Whom We haue maryed. Than theſe ambaſſadours anſwerd and ſaid. Syr we haue well vnderſtand your anſwere / we ſhall ſhewe it to the kyng our lorde / in lyke maner as ye haue ſaid. and ſo toke theyr leaue / and returned into Inglande to the kyng. With the whiche anſwere the kyng of Ingland was nothyng content. Than he ſomoned a parliament to be holden at Weſtm̄. where as all the nobles & wyſe men of the realme were aſſembled to determine what ſhuld be beſt to be done in this mater. And in this meane tyme 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert erle of of Artoys came into Inglande / dyſguyſed lyke a marchaunt / and the kyng rereyued hym right ioyouſly / and reteyned hym / as one of his counſaile. and to hym aſſigned the Erledom of Rychemount. And whan the daye of the parliament aproched / and that all the nobles of the lande were aſſembled about Londō. Thā the kyng cauſed to be ſhewed the meſſage and howe he had wrytten to the kyng of ſcottis. and of the anſwere of the ſame kyng. Wherfore the kyng deſyred all the nobles of his realme / yt they wolde gyue hym ſuche counſaile as ſhulde aꝑteyne to the ſauyng of his honour and ryght. And whan they were all aſſembled in counſaile they thought yt the kyng myght no lenger bear by his honour the iniuryes and wronges / that the kyng of Scottꝭ dyd hym dayly / and ſo they reported their aduiſe to the kyng exortyng hym to prouyde for his force and ſtrength of men of warre / to atteyne therby the towne of Berwike And to entre into the realme of Scotland in ſuche wyſe / that he ſhulde conſtrayne the kyng of Scottis to be ioyfull / to come & do his homage to hym. And ſo all the nobles and cōmons of the realme of Ingland ſayd they wold gladly and willyngly go with hym in that iourney. And of theyr good wyls the kyng thāked them greatly & deſired them to be redy aꝑailed at a daye aſſigned & to aſſēble to gyther at New caſtell vpon Tyne. And than euery man went home and p̄
               pared for that iourney. Than the kyng ſent agayn other ambaſſadours to the kyng of ſcottꝭ his brother in lawe / ſufficiently to ſōmon hym / and if he wolde nat be other wyſe aduyſed / than the kyng gaue them full auctorite to defie hym. And ſo the day of the aſſembly of the kyngꝭ oſte aproched / at y• whiche day the kyng of Inglāde and all his oſt aryued at New caſtell vpō Tyne and there taried .iii. dayes for the reſidue of his oſte that was comyng after. And on the fourth day / he departed with al his oſte toward Scotland / and paſſed through the landes of the lord Perſy / and of the lorde Neuell / Who were two great lordes in Northumberland. and marched on the ſcottis. And in like wyſe ſo dyd the lorde Roſſe / and the lorde Ligy / and the lorde Mombray. Than the kynge and all his oſte drew toward the cite of Berwyke. For y• kyng of Scotland made no other anſwere to theſe .ii. meſſengers / but as he dyd to the fyrſt. wherfore he was opēly defied / and ſomoned. And ſo the kyng of Ingland and his oſte entred into Scotlād / for he was coūſailed / that he ſhuld nat tary at ſiege at Berwike / but to ryde forth / and to burne the Countrey as his graund father dyd / and ſo he dyd. In whiche iourney he waſted & diſtroyed all the playn countrey of Scotland / and exiled diuerſe townes that were cloſed with dykꝭ and

with pales / & toke the ſtrong cattell of Enyagburth and ſette therin a g
                  〈…〉
                paſſed the ſecund 
                  〈◊〉
                in Scotlād 
               
                  〈…〉
                lyn / and ran ouer all the countrey there abowte to Scone / & diſtroyed the good towne of Douf fremlyn but they dyd no euyll to the abbey / for the kyng of Ingland cōmaunded that no hurte ſhuld be done therto / and ſo the kyng cōquered all the countrey to Dondieu and to 
                  •
               oubreten a ſtrong caſtell ſtādyng on the marches ayenſt the wylde ſcottis / where as the kyng of Scottꝭ and the quene his wyfe were withdrawen vnto for ſuretie. For there were no ſcottis y• wolde appere afore the engliſſhe men for they were all drawen into the forelf of Ged worth / the whiche wer inhabitable / and ſpecially for them y• knew nat the countrey / wherin all the ſcottis wer and all theyr gooddis. And ſo they ſet but a lytle by all the rēuant. And it was no maruaile thoughe they were thus dryuen / for the kyng their lorde was but .xv. yere of age / and the erle of Morrey was but yong / and the nephew of Willyam Duglas that was ſlayne in Spayn was alſo of the ſame age. So as at y• tyme / the realme of Scotland was diſpurueyed of good capiteyns. And whan the kyng of Ingland had ronouer all the playne countrey of Scotlande / and taried ther the ſpace of .vi. monethes / and ſawe that none wold come agaynſt hym. Than he garnyſſhed diuers caſtels that he had wonne / and thought by them to make warre to all the other. Than he withdrew fayre and eaſely toward Berwike And in his returnyng he wan the caſtell of Alueſt parteynyng to the heritage of the erle Duglas / it was a .v. leagis fro Edēburge / and ther in the kyng ſet good capitayus / and than rode ſmall iourneis tyll he came to Berwike the whiche is at the entre of Scotlande / and there the kyng layd rounde about his ſiege / and ſayd he wolde neuer depart thens / tyll he had wonne it orels the kyng of Scottis to come / and to reyſe his ſiege parforee. And within the towne there were good men of warre ſet there by the kyng of Scottis. Before this cite ther were many aſſaultis and ſore ſkrymyſſhes 
                  •
               ygh euery daye / for they of the cite wolde nat yelde them vp ſymply / for alwaies they thought to be reſeued / how be it there was no ſuccour appered. The ſcottꝭ on mornyng is and nyghtis made many ſ
                  •
               ryes to trouble the oſte / but lytle hurte they dyd / for the englyſſhe oſte was ſo well kept / that the ſcottis coulde nat entre / but to theyr dammage / and often tymes loſte of theyr men. ¶ And whan they of Berwike ſawe that no comfort nor ayde came to them fro any part / & that theyr vitayles began to fayle / & howe they were encloſed both by water and by lande. Than they began to fall in a treate with the kyng of Ingland / and deſired a truee to indure a moneth. and if within the moneth / kyng Dauid theyr lorde / or ſome other for hym come nat by force to reyſe the ſiege / thā they to rendre vp the cite / their lyues and gooddis ſaued / and that the ſoudiers within myght ſafly go into theyr countrey without any dammage. This treaty was nat lightly graūted for the kyng of Ingland wolde haue had them yelded ſymply / to haue had his pleaſure of ſome of them / bicauſe they had hold ſo lōg ayenſt hym. But finally he was content by the counſaile of his lordꝭ. And alſo 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert of Artoys dyd put therto his payne who had ben all that iourneye with y• kyng / & had ſhewed hym alwayes / home he was uert enheriter to the crowne of Fraun
                  ••
                he wolde gladly that the kyng ſhuld haue made warre into Fraūce / & a left the warres of Scotland. So his wordes & others inclined greatly the kyng to cōdiſcend to the treaty of Berwike. So this truee and treaty
                  〈…〉
               s graūted. Than they within the cite ſent worde to their kyng / in what caſe they ſtode / but for all that they coulde fynde no remedy to reyſe the ſiege. So the cite was delyuered vp at thende of the moneth / and alſo the caſtell / and the Marſhals of the oſ
                  •
                toke poſſeſſion for the kyng of Ingland / and the burgeſſes of the cite came and dyd theyr feaute and homage to the kyng / and ſware to hold of hym. Than after the kyng entred with great ſolempuite / and taryed there .xii. dayes / and made a capitayn ther / called ſyr Edward Bailleul / and whan the kyng departed he lefte with the ſayde knyght certayne yong knyghtis and ſquiers to helpe to kepe the landis / that he had conquered of the ſcottis / and the fronters therof. Than the kyng and his people returned to London / and euery man in to theyre owne countres / and the kyng went to Wyndeſore / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert of Artoys wt hym / who neuer ceaſſed daye nor nyght in ſhewyng the kyng what ryght he had to the crowne of Fraunce / & the kyng harkened gladly to his wordis. Thus in this ſeaſon the kyng of Ingland wanne the moſt parte of the realme of Scotland / who had many expert knyghtꝭ about hym / among other was ſir Wylliam Mō
               tague / and ſyr walter of Manny. They were hardy knyghtis / and dyd many dedis of armes ageynſt the ſcottis. And the better to haue their entre into Scotland / they fortified the baſfyde of Roſebourge / and made it a ſtrong caſtel / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wylliam Montague dyd ſo well in all his entrepriſes / that the kyng made hymerle erle of Sa 
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
Surely ſayd therle I cannat deuyſe a more puiſſant prince to ayde hym / than the duke of Brabant who is his coſyn germayne. And alſo the byſſ hoppe of Liege / the duke of Guerles / who hath his ſuſter to his wyfe. The archbyſſhop of Colayne / the marques of Jullers / ſyr Arnolde de Baquehen / and the lorde of Faulquemount. Theſe lordes be thei that may make mooſt men of warr inſhort ſpace of any that I knowe / they arre good men of warre / they may well make 
                  •
               X. thouſande men of war
                  •
                ſo they haue wages therafter. They arre people that wolde gladly wynne aduauntage / yf it were ſo that the kyng my ſonne your maiſter might gette theſe lordes to be on his part. And ſo to come into theſe parties / he might well go ouer the water of Dyſſe / and ſeke out kyng Phylippe to fyght with hym with this anſwere theſe embaſſadours retourned into England to the kyng / and reported all that they had done. Wherof the kyng had great ioy and was well cōforted. Theſe tidyngꝭ came into Fraunce and multiplyed lytle and lytle / ſo that kyng Phylippes enterpriſe of ye ſayd croyſey beganne to aſſwage and ware colde / and he coūtermaūded his offycers to ſeaſe of / makyng of any farther puiſion tyll he knewe more what kyng Edward wolde do. Than kyng Edward ordayned .x. banerettes / and .xl. other knyghtes and ſent them ouer the ſee to Ualencēnes. And the byſſhoppe of Lyncolne with theym / to thentent to treat with the lordes of thempyre / ſuche as therle of Heynalt had named. Whanne they were come to Ualencennes eche of them kept a great eſtate and port / and ſpared nothynge / no more than yf the kynge of Englande had bene there in proper perſone / wherby they dyd gette great reuo wine and prayſe. They had with thē yonge bachelars / who had eche of them one of their eyen cloſed
                  •
                with a peace of ſylke / it was ſayd how they had made a vowe among the ladyes of their contrey that they wolde natſe but wt one eye tyll they had done ſome dedes of armes in Fraūce. How beit they woldnat be knowen therof. And whan thei had ben well feeſted at Ualencēnes / than the byſſhoppe of Lyncolne and part of his cōpany went to the duke of Brabant who feaſted them greatly / and agreed and promyſed to ſuſayne ye kyng of Englande and all his cōpany in his contrey. So that he might go and come armed and vnarmed at his pleaſure / and to gyue him the beſt counſell he coude. And alſo yf the kynge of Englande wolde defy the frenche kyng that he wolde do the ſame / and entre into the countrey of Fraunce with men of warre / ſo that their wages might be borne / to the nombre of a thouſande mē of armes. Thus than the lordes retourned agayne to Ualencennes / and dyd ſomoch by meſſangers and by ꝓmyſe of golde and ſyluer: that the duke of Guerles who was the kynges brother in lawe / and ye marques of Jullers / the archebyſſhoppe of Colayne / and Waleran his brother. And the lorde of Faulquemount came to Ualencēnes to ſpeke with theſe lordes of Englande byfore the erle of Haynalt / and the lorde John his brother. And by the meanes of a great ſomme of Florēs that eche of them ſhulde haue for themſelfe and for their men. They made pmyſe to defy yt frenche kyng / and to go with the kyng of England whā it pleaſed hym / with a certayne men of warre. Promyſing alſo: to gette other lordes to take their part for wages / ſuch as be beyonde the ryuer of Ryne: and be able to bringe good nombres of men of warre. Than the lordes of Almayne toke their leaue and retourned into ther owne contreis: and thenglyſſhmen taryed ſtyll with therle of Heynalt / and ſent certayne meſſangers to the byſſhoppe of Lyege / and wolde gladly haue hadde hym on their partie. But he wolde neuer be agaynſt the french kyng / for he was become his man and entred into his feaultie. Kyng Charles of Behaygne was nat deſyred: for they knewe well he was ſo fermely ioyned with the frenche kyng / by reaſon of the maryage of John̄ duke of Normandy / who had to wyfe the kyngꝭ doughter. Wherby they knewe well he wold do nothyng agaynſt y• frēch kyng.
         
         
            ¶How that Jaques Dartuell gouerned all Flaunders. Cap. xxix.
            
               IN this ſeaſon there was great dyſcorde bytwene the erle of Flaūders and the flē
               mynges: for they wolde nat obey him / nor he durſt nat a byde in Flaunders: but in gret parell. And in y• towne of Gaunt there was a man a maker of hony / called Jaques Dartuell. He was entred into ſuch fortune and grace of the people / that all thynge was done that he dydde: he might commaunde what he wolde through all Flaunders / for ther was non though he were neuer ſo great yt durſt diſobey his commaundement. He had alwayes

goyng with hym vp and downe in Gaunt .lx. or 
                  •
               ourſ kore varlettes armed / and amonge them there were thre or foure that knewe ye ſecretues of his mynde. So that if he mette a ꝑſone that he hated or had hym in ſuſpectyon incontynent he was ſlayne. For he had commaunded his ſecret varlettes that whanne ſoeuer he mette any perſone and made ſuche aſygae to theym / that incōtynent they ſhulde ſlee hym whatſoeuer he were: without any wordes or reſouynge. And by yt meanes he made many to be ſlayne / wherby he was ſo doughted that none durſt ſpeke agaynſt any thynge that he wolde haue done: ſo that euery man was gladde to make hym good chere. And theſe varletꝭ whan thei had brought hym home to his houſe / than they ſhulde go to dyner where they lyſt: and after dyner returne agayne into the ſtrete before his lodgyng / and there abyde tyll he come out / 
                  〈◊〉
                wayt on hym tyll ſouper tyme. Theſe ſouldyours had eche of them foure grotes flemmyſſhe by the day / and were truely payd wekely. Thus he had in euery towne ſouldyers and ſeruauntess at his wages redy to do his commaundement / and to eſpy if ther were any perſon that wolde rebell agaynſt his mynde / and to enfourme hym therof. And aſſone as he knewe any ſuche: he wolde neuer ceaſe tyll they were banyſſhed or ſlayne / without reſpyte. All ſuch great men: as knyghtes / ſquires / or burgeſes of good townes: as he thought fauourable to therle in any maner / he banyſſhed them out of Flaunders. And wolde leuey the moyte of their landes to his owne vſe / and thother halfe to their wyuess and chyldren / ſuch as were banyſſhed: of whome there were a great nōbre abode atſaynt Diners. To ſpeke properly: there was neuer in Flaunders nor in none other contrey prince / duke / nor other: that ruled a countrey ſo peſably / ſo long as this Jaques Dartuell dyd rule Flaunderss. He leuyed the rentes / wynages / and rightes: that pertayned to therle through out all Flanderss / and spē
               ded all at his pleaſure without any acompt makyng. And whāhe wold ſay ye he lacked money they byleued hym / and ſo it behoued them to do for none durſt ſay agaynſt hym. Whan he wold borowe any thynge of any burgeſſe: there was none durſt ſay hym nay. Theſe englyſſh embaſſadours kept an honourable eſtate at the towne of Ualencennes. They thought it ſhulde be agreat comforte to the kynge their lorde yf they might gette the flymmynges to take their part. Than they toke counſell of therle in that mater and he anſwered / that truely it ſhulde be one of the gretteſt aydes that they coude haue. But he ſayd he thought their labour in yt behalfe coude nat preuayle: without they gette firſt the goodwyll of Jaques Dartuell. Than they ſaid they wolde aſſay what they coude do: & ſo thervpon they departed fro Ualenceunes and went into Flaunders / and departed into thre or foure cō
               panies. Some went to Bruges / ſome to Ipre and ſome to Gaūt. And they all kept ſuch port & made ſo large dyſpēce: that it ſemed that ſyluer and golde fell out of their hādes and made many great promyſes and offers to them that they ſpake to for that mater. And the byſſhopp̄ with a certayne with hym wēt to Gaunt / and he dyd ſomuch / what with fayre wordꝭ and otherwyſe that he gate thacorde of Jaques Dartuell. And dyd gette great grace in the towne and ſpecially of an olde knyght that dwelt in Gauut / who was ther right well beloued: called the lorde of Courciſyen a knight baneret / and was reputed for a hardy knight / & had alwayes ſerued truely his lordes. This knyght dyd moche honour to thenglyſſhemen: as a valyant knyght ought to do to all ſtrāgers. Of this he was accuſed to the french kyng: who incontynent ſent a ſtrayt commaundement to therle of Flaunders / that he ſhulde ſend for this ſayd knyght: and aſſone as he had hym to ſtrike of his hed. Therle who durſt nat breke the kynges cōmanndemēt dyd ſomoch that this knyght came to hym at his ſendyng as he that thought non yuell: and incontynēt he was taken & his heed ſtryken of. Wherof many folkes were ſorie and were ſore dyſpleſed with therle: for he was welbeloued with the lordes of the contrey. Theſe englyſſhe lordes dyd ſomoche that Jaques Dartuell dyuerſe tymes had togyder the counſelles of the good townes to ſpeke of the beſynes that theſe lordes of Englande deſyred: and of the fraūchyſes and amyties that they offred them in the kyng of Englā
               des byhalfe. So often they ſpake of this mater that fynally they agreed / that the kynge of Englande myght come and go into Flaunders at his pleaſure. Howe beit they ſayd they were ſo ſore bouude to the french kyng that they myght nat entre into the realme of Fraunce to make any warre / without they ſhulde forfayt a great ſomme of florens: and ſo they deſyred that they wold be cōtent with this anſwere as at yt tyme. Thenglyſſhe lordes retourned agayne to Ualencennes with great ioy: often tymes they ſent worde to ye kyng of Englande how they ſpedde and euer he ſent theym golde and ſyluer to ber
                  •
                their charges / and to gyue to the lordes of Almaygne

who deſyred nothyng els. In this ſeaſon the noble erle of Heynalt dyed the .vi. day of June / the yere of our lorde .M. CCC .xxxvii. and was buryed at the friers in Ualencennes. The byſſhoppe of Cābrayſang the maſſe / ther were many dukes / erles / and barownes / for he was welbeloued / and honoured of all people in his lyfe dayes. After his dyſceaſe: ye lorde Wyllyam his ſonne entred into the counteis of Heynalt / Hollande / and zelande. Who had to wyfe the dougther of duke John̄ of Brabāt / and had to name Jahane. She was endowed with the lande of Bynche / the which was a right fayre heritage and a profitable. And the lady Jahan her mother went to Fontnels on Leſcault / and ther vſed the reſydue of her lyfe in great deuotion in thabbey ther / and dyd many good dedes.
         
         
            ¶ How certayne nobles of Flaūders kept the yle of Cagaunt agaynſt thenglyſſhemen. Cap. xxx.
            
               OF all theſe ordynaunces and confortes that the kyng of England had get on that ſyde the ſee Kyng Phylipp̄ of Fraunce was well enformed of all the mater / & wolde gladly haue had the flemmyngꝭ on his part. But Jaques Dartuell had ſo ſurmounted all maner of people in Flaūders that none durſt ſay agaynſt his opynion / nor ye erle hym ſelfe durſt nat well abyde in the countrey. For he had ſent the counteſſe his wyfe and Loys his ſonne into Fraunce for dout of the flē
               mynges. In this ſeaſon / ther were in the yle of Cagant / certayne knyghtes and ſquyers of Flā
               ders in garyſon. As ſir Dutres de Haluyn / ſyr John̄ de Radays / and the ſonnes of Leſtriefe. They kept that paſſage agaynſt thēglyſſhmen and made couert warre / wherof thenglyſſhe lordes beyng in Heynalt were well enformed / and how that if they went that way homewarde into England / they ſhulde be met withall to their dyſpleaſure. Wherfore they were nat well aſſured / howbeit they rode and went about ye countrey at their pleaſure. All was by the confort of Jaques Dartuell / for he ſupported and honoured them as moche as he might. And after theſe lordes went to Doudrech in Holande / and ther they toke ſhypping to eſchue the paſſage of Cagaunt. Wher as the gariſon was layd for them by the commaundement of the frenche kyng / ſo theſe engliſſhe lordes cāe agayne into England as priuely as they coude. And came to the kyng who was right ioyouſe of their commyng / and whan he harde of the garyſon of Cagaunt. He ſayd he wolde prouyde for them ſhortly / and anone after he ordayned therie of Derby / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Water Manny / and dyuerſe other knyghtes & ſquiers with fyue hundred men of armes / and two thouſande archers / and they toke ſhippyng at London in the ryuer of Tames. The firſt tyde they went to Graueſende: the next day to Margate / and at the thyrde tyde they toke the ſee / & ſayled into Flaūders. So they aparelled them ſelfe / and came nere to Cagaunt.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batell of Cagaūt bytwene thenglyſſhmen and the frenchmen. Cap. xxxi.
            
               WHan thenglyſſhmen ſawe the towne of Cagaunt before thē / they made thē redy and had wynd and tyde to ſerue them. And ſo in the name of god and ſaint George they approched and blewe vp their trumpettes and ſet their archers before them / and ſayled to warde the towne. They of Cagaunt ſawe well this great ſhypp̄ aproche / they knewe well they were englyſſhmen. And araynged them on the dykes and on the ſandes / with their baners before them / and they made .xvi. newe knyghtes. They were a fyue thouſande mē of warr good knyghtes and ſquiers / ther was ſir Guy of Flā
               ders a good and a ſure knyght / but he was a baſtarde and he deſyred all his cōpany to do well their deuoyre. And alſo ther was ſir Dutres de Hauyn / ſyr John̄ de Roodes / ſir Gyles de Leſtriefe / ſir Symon and ſyr John̄ of Bonquedēt who were there made knyghtes / and Peter of Anglemonſter with many other knyghtes and ſquiers expert men of armes. Thenglyſſhmen were deſyrous to aſſayle / and the flēmynges to defende. Thenglyſſhe atchers began to ſhout / 

and cryed their cryes / ſo that ſuche as kepte the paſſage were fayne perforce to recule backe. At this firſt aſſaute there were dyuerſe ſore hurte / and the englyſſhmen toke lande and came and fought hande to hande. The flēmynges fought valyantly to defende the paſſage / and thēglyſſhmen aſſauted chyualrouſly. The erle of Derby was that day a good knyght: and at the firſt aſſaut he was ſo forwarde that he was ſtryken to the erth / and than the lorde of Manny dyd hym great confort / for by pur feat of armes he releued hym vp agayne and brought hym out of pyll / and cryed Lancaſtre for the erle of Derby. Than they approched on euery part and many were hurt: but mo of ye flemmynges than of the englyſſhmen / for the archers ſhot ſo holly togyder that they dyd to the flemmynges moche damage. Thus in the hauyn of Cagant ther was a ſore batell / for the flēmynges were good men of warre choſen out by the erle of Flaunders / to defende that paſſage agaynſt thenglyſſhemen. And of Englande there was the erle of Derby ſonne to the erle Henry of Lancaſtre with ye wry necke / therle of Suffolke: ſyr Robert Cobham ſir Lewes Byauchampe / ſir Wyllyam ſonne to therle of Warwyke: the lorde Bourcher / ſyr Water Māny / and dyuers other. There was a ſore batayle and well foughten hande to hande: but finally the flēmynges were put to the chaſe and were ſlayne mo than thre thouſande / what in y• hauyn / ſtretes / and houſes. Syr Guy the baſtarde of Flaūders was taken / and ſir Dutres de Haluyn and ſir John̄ de Rodes wer ſlayne / and the two bretherne of Bonquedent / and ſyr Gyles de Leſtrief: and mo than .xxvi. knyghtes and ſquyers & the towne taken and pylled and all the goodꝭ and priſoners put into the ſhippes and the towne brent. And ſo thus the englyſſhemen retourned into Englande without any damage: the kyng cauſed ſir Guy baſtarde of Flā
               ders to ſwere and to bynde hymſelfe priſoner. And in the ſame yere he became englyſſhe and dyd fayth & homage to the kyng of Englande.
         
         
            ¶ How kyng Edwarde of England made great alyaunces in the empyre. Cap. xxxii.
            
               AFter this dyſconfeture at Cagaunt: tidynges therof ſpredde abrode in the coū
               trey. And they of Flaunders ſayd: yt without reaſon and agaynſt their wylles therle of flāders had layd there yt garyſon. And Jaques Dartuell wolde nat at had ben otherwyſe and in contynent he ſent meſſangers to kynge Edwarde: recommendyng hym to his grace withall his hert. Counſellyng hym to come thyder and to paſſe the ſee / certyfyenge hym how the flemmynges greatly deſyred to ſe hym. Thus the kyng of Englande made great purueyancꝭ: and whan the wynter was paſſed / he toke the ſee well acompanyed with dukes / erles / and barownes and dyuers other knyghtes: and aryued at the towne of Andewarpe / as thā pertayninge to the duke of Brabant. Thyther came people from all partes to ſe hym / and the great eſtate that he kept. Than he ſent to his coſyn the duke of Brabant / & to the duke of Guerles: to y• marques of Jullers / to the lorde John̄ of Heynalt and to all ſuch as he truſted to haue any conforte of. Sayeng howe he wolde gladly ſpeke with theym: they came all to Andewarpe bytwene Whytſontyde / and the feeſt of ſaynte John̄ And whan the kyng had well feaſted th
                  •
                he deſyred to knowe their myndes whaūe they wolde b
                  •
               gynne that they had promyſed: requirynge them to dyſpatche the mater breuely / for that intēt he ſayd he was come thyder / and had all his men redy: and howe it ſhulde be a great damage to hym to defarre ye mater long. Theſe lordes had longe counſell among them / and fynally they ſayd. Syr our commynge hyther as nowe: was more to ſe you than for any thynge els: we be nat as nowe purueyed to gyue you a full anſwere. By your lycence we ſhall retourne to our people / and come agayne to you at your pleaſure: and thaūe gyue you ſo playne an anſwere that the mater ſhall nat reſt in vs. Than they toke day to come agayn a thre wekes after the feeſt of ſaynt John̄. The kynge ſhewed thē what charges he was at with ſo longe abyding thynkinge whan he came thyther that they had ben full purueyd to haue made hym a playne anſwere: ſayng howe that he wolde nat returne in to England tyll he had a full anſwere. So thus theſe lordes departed / and the kynge taryed in the abbay of ſaynt Bernarde / and ſome of the englyſſhe lordes taryed ſtyll at Andewarpe: to kepe the kynge company / and ſome of the other rode about the countrey in great dyſpence. The

duke of Brabant went to Louane and there taryed a long tyme / and often tymes he ſent to the frenche kyng / deſyring hym to haue no ſuſpecyous to hym & nat to byleue any yuell informacion made of hym: for by his wyll he ſayd he wold make none alyance nor couenant agaynſt hym. Sayrng alſo that the kynge of Englande was his coſyn germayne / wherfore he might nat deny hym to come into his countrey. The day cāe that the kyng of Englande loked to haue an anſwere of theſe lordꝭ / and they excuſed them and ſayd howe they were redy and their men. So that the duke of Brabant wolde be redy for his part / ſayeng yt he was nere than they. And that aſſone as they might knowe that he were redy / they wolde nat be behynde but be at the begynnyng of the mater aſſone as he. Than the kyng dyd ſo moche that he ſpake agayne with ye duke and ſhewed him the anſwere of the other lordes deſyring him by amyte and lynage that no faut were founde in hym / ſayeng how he parceyued well that he was but cold in the mater / and that without he wer quicker and dyd otherwyſe / he douted he ſhulde leſe therby the ayde of all the other lordes of Amayne / through his defaulte. Than the duke ſayd he wolde take counſayle in the matter / and whan he had longe debated the mater he ſayd howe he ſhulde be as redy as any other / but firſte he ſayd he wolde ſpeke agayne with the other lordes: and he dyde ſende for thē deſyring them to come to hym wher as they pleaſed beſt. Than yt day was apoynted about the myddes of Auguſt / & this counſell to be at Hale bycauſe of the yong erle of Heynalt who ſhulde alſo be ther / and with hym ſir John̄ of Heynalt his vncle. Whan̄e theſe lordes were all come to this parlyament at Hale / they had longe counſayle togyder / finally they ſayd to the kyng of Englande. Syr weſe no cauſe why we ſhulde make defyance to the frenche kyng all thynges conſydred / without ye can gette thagrement of themperour: and that he wolde commaunde vs to do ſo in his name. The emperour may well thus do / for of long tyme paſt there was a couenant ſworne and ſealed that no kyng of Fraūce ought to take any thyng parteyning to thēpyre and this kynge Philyppe hath taken the caſtell of Creuecure in Cambreyſis / and the caſtell of Alues in Pailleull: and the cytie of Cambray. wherfore themperour hath good cauſe to defye hym by vs. Therfore ſir: if ye can get his acord our honour ſhalbe the more / & the kyng ſayd he wolde folo we their counſayle. Than it was ordayned / that the Marques of Jullers ſhulde go to themperour: and certayne knyghtes and clerkes of the kynges / and ſome of the counſell of the duke of Gwerles. But the duke of Brabant wold ſende none fro hym / but he lende the caſtell of Louayne to the kynge of Englande to lye in. And the Marques and his cōpany foūde the emperour at Florebetche / and ſhewed hym the cauſe of their commyng. And the lady Margarete of Heynault dydde all her payne to further forthe the matter / whom ſir Lewes of Banyer than emperour had wedded. And ther the Marques of Jullers was made an erle / and ye duke of Guelders who byfore was an erle was than made a duke. And themperour gaue commyſſion to foure knyghtꝭ and to two doctours of his counſell / to make kyng Edwarde of Englande his bycarre generall throughout all the empyre. And therof theſe ſayd lordes hadde inſtrumentes publyke: confyrmed and ſealed ſuffyciently by the emperour.
         
         
            ¶Howe kyng Dauyd of Scotlande made alyaunce with kyng Phylypp̄ of Fraūce. Ca. xxxiii.
            
               IN this ſeaſon the yonge kyng Dauyd of Scotlande who had loſt the beſt part of his lande / and coulde natte recouer it out of the holde of thēglyſſhmend / eparted priuely with a ſmall company / and the quene his wyfe with hym and toke ſhippyng and arryued at Bolayne / and ſo rodde to Pares to kyng Philyppe who gretly dyd feaſt hym. And offred hym of his caſtels to abyde in / and of his goodes to dyſpende: on the condycion that he ſhulde make no peace with the kynge of Englande without his counſell and agremēt for kyng Philyppe knewe well howe the kynge of Englande apparelled greatly to make hym warre. So thus the kyng / ther retayned kyng Dauyd & the quene a long ſeaſon / and they had all that they neded at his coſte & charge: for out of Scotlande came but lytell ſubſtāce to mayntayne withall their eſtates. And the french king ſent certayne meſſangers into Scotlāde to the lordes ther ſuch as kept warr agaynſt thēgliſſh men / offryng them great ayde and confort: ſo y•
               
they wolde take no peace nor tru
                  •
               e with ye kyng of Englande / without it were by his agrement or by thaccorde of their owne kyng: who had in likewyſe promyſed and ſworne. Than the lordꝭ of Scotlande coūſelled togyder / and ioyouſly they accorded to his requeſt / and ſo ſealed and ſware with the kyng their lorde. Thus this alyance was made bytwene Scotlande and France / the which endured a long ſeaſon after / and ye frenche kyng ſent men of warre into Scotland to kepe warr agaynſt thenglyſſhmen. As 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Arnolde Dandregien who was alter marſchall of Fraunce / and the lorde of Garencieres: and dyuerſe other knyghtes and ſquyers. The frenche kyng thought yt the ſcottes ſhulue gyue ſomoch a do to the realme of England / yt thēglyſſhmen ſhulde nat come ouer the ſee to anoy hym.
         
         
            ¶How kyng Edwarde of England was made bycare generall of thēpyre of Almaygne. Cap. xxxiiii.
            
               WHan the kyng of England and the other lordes to hym alyed wer departed fro the parlyament of Hale. The kyng wēt to Louan and made redy the caſtell for his a byding / and ſent for the quene to come thyder if it pleaſed her: for he ſent her worde he wolde nat come thens of an hole yere. And ſent home certayne of his knyghtes to kepe his lande fro the ſcottes. And the other lordꝭ and knyghtes that were there ſtyll with the kynge / rode aboute the realme of Flanders and Henalt / makyng grete dyſpence gyueng great rewardes and iuels to the lordes / ladyes / and damoſelles of the countrey to get their good wylles. They dyd ſomoche that they were greatly prayſed and ſpecially of the common people / bycauſe of the port and ſtate that they kept. And than about the feeſt of all ſayntes / the marques of Jullers and his cō
               pany ſent worde to the kyng how they had ſped: And the kyng ſent to hym that he ſhulde be with hym about the feeſt of ſaynt Martyne / and alſo heſent to the duke of Brabāt to knowe his mynde / wher he wolde the plyament ſhulde beholde and he anſwered at Arques in y• countie of Loz nere to his countrey. And than the kyng ſent to all other of his alyes / that they ſhulde be there: and ſo the hall of the towne was apparelled and hanged / as though it had ben the kynges chamber. And there the kyng ſatte crowned wt golde / 
                  〈◊〉
               . fote hygher than any other: and there op
                  •
               nly was redde the letters of thēperour / by the which the kyng was made bycare generall and liefrenaunt for the emperour / and had power gyue
                  •
                hym to make lawes and to myniſtre Juſtyce to euery perſon in thempours name: and to make money of golde and ſyluer. The emperour alſo there commaunded by his letters / that all perſons of his empyre: and all other his ſubgiettes ſhulde obey to the kyng of England his vycare as to hymſelfe / and to do hym homage. And in contynent ther was clayme and anſwere made bytwene parties as before the emperour / and right and iudgement gyuen. Alſo there was renued a iudgement and a ſtatute affermed / that had been made before in the emperours courte / and that was this. That who ſoeuer wolde any hurt to other / ſhuld make his defyance thredayes byfore his dede: and he that dyde otherwyſe ſhulde be reputed as an euyll doet / and for a by lans dede. And whan all this was done the lordes departed / and toke day that they ſhulde all appere before Cambray thre wekes after ye feeſt of ſaynte John̄ / the whiche towne was become frenche: thus they all departed / and euery man went to his owne. And kynge Edwarde as bycare of thempyre / went than to Louayne to the quene: who was newely come thyder out of Englande with great nobleneſſe / and well accōpanyed with ladyes and damoſels of Englande. So there the kynge and the quene kepte their houſe ryght honorably all that wynter: and caused money / golde / and ſyluer: to be made at Andewarpe great plentie. yet for all this the duke of Brabant lefte nat / but with great dyligence ſent often meſſangers to kyng Philyppe / as the lorde Loys of 
                  •
               rauehen his chefe counſellour / with dyuers other euer to excuſe hym: for ye whiche cauſe this knight was often tymes ſent / and at the laſte abode ſtyll in the frenche court with the kyng: to thentent alwayes to excuſe hym agaynſt all informacions that myght be made of hym. The which knyght dyd all his detroyre in that behalfe.
         
         
            ¶Howe kynge Edwarde and all his alyes dyd defye the frenche kyng. Cap. xxxv.
            
               
               THus the wynter paſſed and ſomer came / and ye feeſt of ſaynt John̄ of Baptyſt aproched. And the lordꝭ of englande and of Almayne apa relled themſelfe to acōplyſſh their enterpriſe: and the frenche kyng wrought aſmoch as he coude to the cō
               trary / for he knewe moch of their intentꝭ. Kyng Edwarde made all his prouiſyon in Englande and all his men of warr to be redy to paſſe ye ſee incōtynent after the feeſt of ſaynt John̄ / and ſo they dyde. Than the kynge went to Uyllenort / and there made his cōpany to be lodged as many as myght in the towne / and the other without a long on the ryuerſyde / in tentes and pauylyons. And ther he taryed fro Maudelyn tyde / tyll our lady day in Septembre / abyding wekely for the lordꝭ of thempyre. And ſpecially for the duke of Brabant / on whoſe cōmynge all the other abode. And whan the kyng of Englande ſawe howe they came nat / he ſent great meſſangers to eche of them: ſommonyng them to come as they had promyſed / and to mete with hym at Machlyn on ſaynt Gyles day / & than to ſhewe hym why they had taryed ſo long. Thus kynge Edwarde lay at Uyllenort / and kepte dayly at his coſt and charge well to the nombre of .xvi. hundred men of armes / all 
                  ••
               e fro thother ſyde of the ſee: and .x. M. archers beſyde all other ꝓ uyſious. The which was a matueylous great charge / beſyde the great rewardes that he had gyuen to the lordes / and beſyde the great armyes that he had on the ſee. The frenche kynge on his part / had ſet Genowayes / normayns / Bretons / Pycardes / and ſpanyardes to be redy on the ſee: to entre into England aſſone as ye 
               warr were opened. Theſe lordes of Almayne / at the kyng of Englande ſomons came to Machlyn / and with moche beſyneſſe: finally they acorded that the kyng of Englande might well ſette forwarde within .xv. dayes after: and to thentent that their warr ſhuld be ye more laudable. Thei agreed to ſend their defyancꝭ to the french kyng firſt the kyng of England / the duke of Guerles the marques of Jullers / ſir Robert Dartoyſe / ſir John̄ of Heynalt / the marques of Muſſe / ye marques of Blanquebourc: the lorde of Faulquemont / ſir Arnold of Baquchen / the archbyſ ſhop of Colayne / ſir Galeas his brother: and al other lordes of thempyre. Theſe defyancꝭ were written and ſealed by all the lordes / except the duke of Brabāt / who ſayd he wold do his dede by hymſelfe / at tyme conuenyent. To bere theſe defyances into Fraunce: was charged the byſſhop of Lyncolne / who bare thē to Parys. And dyd his meſſage in ſuche maner yt he coude nat be reproched nor blamed: and ſo he had a ſafe cō
               duct to retourne agayne to his kyng / who was as than at Machlyne.
         
         
            ¶How ſir water of Manny after the defyances declared / made the firſt iourney into Frāce. Ca. xxxvi.
            
               IN the firſte weke that the frenche kyng was thus defyed: ſir water Manny aſſone as he knewe it / he gate to hym a .xl. ſperes and rode through Brabant nyght and day tyll he came into Heynalt / and entred into the wode of Blaton. As than nat knowig what he ſhulde do: but he had ſhewed to ſome of them that were mooſt priuyeſt aboute hym. Howe he had promyſed before ladyes and damoſelles or he came out of Englande / that he wolde be the firſt that ſhulde entre into Fraunce / and to gete other towne or caſtell / and to do ſome dedes of armes. And than his entēt was to ryde to Mortaigne and to gete it if he might: the which partayned than̄e to the realme of Fraunce. And ſoo rode and paſſed the wode of Blaton / and came in a mornynge before the ſonne riſyng to Mortaygne and by aduenture he founde the wycket of the gate opynne. Than he alyghtedde with his company and entred in / and dyd ſette certayne of his company to kepe the gate. And ſo went into the hygh ſtrete with his penon before hym / and came to the great towre: but the gate and wycket was faſt cloſed. And whan ye watch of the caſtell harde the brunt / and ſawe them he blewe his horne & cryed treaſon treaſon. Than euery man a woke and made them redy / & kept them ſelfe ſtyll within the caſtell: than ſir water of Manny went backe agayne and dyd ſet fyre in the ſtrete ioyninge to the caſtell / ſo that there were a threſcore houſes brent / and ye people ſore a frayed: for they wende all to haue been taken. Than ſir water and his company rode backe / ſtreight to Conde: and ther paſſed the ryuer of Hayne. Than they rode the way to Ualencennes / and cooſted on the ryght hande and came to Deuayne and ſo went to the abbay: and ſoo paſſed forth towarde Bouhaigne. And dyd ſomoche

that the captayne dyd let them paſſe thorough by the ryuer. Than thei came to aſtrong caſtell parteyning to the byſſhopp̄ of Cambray called the caſtell of Thyne / ye which ſodēly they toke / and the captayne and his wyfe win. And the lorde Manny made a good garyſon: and ſet therm a brother of his called ſir Gyles Mā
               ny / who afterwarde dyd moche trouble to the cytie of Cābray: for the caſtell was within a leage of the towne. Than ſir Water Manny retourned into Brabant / to the kynge his ſoueraygne lorde: whom he founde at Machlyne / and ther ſhewed hym all that he had done.
         
         
            ¶How that after the ſay
                  •
                defyances made / the frenchmen entred in to England. Cap. xxxvii.
            
               AS ſone as kynge Phylyppe knewe that he was vefyed of the kyng of England and of his alyes: he reteyned men of warre on euery ſyde. And ſent the lord Galoys de 
                  •
               a Bauſyne a good knyght of Sauoy into the cyte of Cambray / and made hym captayne ther: and with hym ſir Thybalt de Marneyle / and the lorde of Roy. So that they were / what of Sauoy and of Fraūce a .ii. hundred ſperes. And kynge Philyppe ſent and ſeaſed into his handes the countie of Pontyeu / the which the kyng of Englande had before by reaſon of his mother. And alſo he ſēt to dyuers lordes of thempyre: as to therle of Heynalt his neue we / to the duke of Lorrayne / therle of Bar the byſſhop of Metz / the byſſhop of Liege: deſy ryng them that they wolde make no yuell purchaſe agaynſt hym or his realme. The mooſt part of theſe lordes anſwered / howe they wolde do nothyng that ſhuld be agaynſt hym / and the erle of Heynalt wrote vnto hym right courteſſy how that he wolde be redy alwayes to ayd hym and his realme agaynſt all men. But ſeyng the kyng of England maketh his warre / as bycare and lyeutenaunt of thempyre. Wherfore he ſaid he might nat refuſe to hym his coūtrey nor his confort: bycauſe he helde part of his countrey of thempour and aſſone as ſir Her
                  •
               e Nuyriell / ſir Peter Bahuchet / and Barbe Noyre: who lay and kept the ſtreightes bytwene England and Fraunce with a great nauy / knewe ye the warre was opyn. They came on a ſonday in the fore noone to the hauyu of Hampton / whyle the people were at maſſe: and the Normayns / Pycardes / and ſpanyerdes entred into the towne / and robbed and pylled the towne / and ſlewe dyuers and defowled maydens / and enforced wyues: and charged their veſſels with ye pyllage. And ſo entred agayne into their ſhyppes / and whan the tyde came they dyſancred & ſayled to Normandy and came to Depe. And there departed and deuyded their boty and pyllages.
         
         
            ¶How kyng Edwarde beſieged the cyte of Cambray. Cap. xxxviii.
            
               THe kyng of England departed fro Machelyne & went to Bruſſels / and all his people paſt on by ye towne. Than came to the kynge a .xx. M. Almaynes / and the kynge ſent and demaūded of the duke of Brabāt what was his entenſy on to go to Cambray / or els to leaue it. The duke anſwered and ſayed: that as ſone as he knewe that he had beſieged Cābray / he wolde come thyder with .xii. hundred ſperes of good men of warre. Than the kyng went to Nyuell and there lay one nyght / and the nexte day to Mons in Heynalt. And there he founde the yong erle of Heynalt / who receyued him ioyouſly / and euer ſir Robert of Dartoyſe was about the kyng as one of his priue counſell / and a .xvi. or .xx. other great lordes and knightes of Englande the which were euer about the kyng for his honoure and eſtate / and to counſell hym in all his dedes. Alſo with hym was ye byſſhop of Lyncolne / who was greatly renomed in this iourney / both in wyſdome and ī prowes. Thus thenglyſſhmen paſſed forth and lodged abrode in the countrey / and founde prouyſion ynough before them for their money / howbeit ſome 
                  •
               ayed truly and ſome nat. And whan the kyng had taryed two dayes at Mons in Heynalt: than̄e he went to Ualencennes & he and .xii. with hym entred into the towne / and no mo perſons. And thyder was come therle of Heynalt and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ his vncle / and the lorde of Faguyuelles / ye lorde of Uerchyn / the lorde of Haureth: and dyuers other / who were about therle their lorde. And ye kyng and therle went hand in hande to ye great hall which was redy aparelled to receyue them.

And as they went vp the ſteares of the hall / the byſſhoppe of Lyncolne / who was there preſent ſpake out a loude and ſayd: Wyllyam byſſhopp̄ of Cambray / I admonyſſhe you as procurer to the kyng of England vycare of thēpyre of Rōe / that ye opyn the gates of the cyte of Cambray / & if ye do nat ye ſhall forfayt your landes: and we woll entre byforce. Ther was none that anſwered to that mater: for the byſſhop was nat there preſent. Than the byſſhop of Lyncolne ſayd agayne: erle of Heynault we admonyſſhe you in the name of thempour / that ye come and ſerue ye kyng of England his vycare: before the cyte of Cambray with ſuche nombre as ye ought to do. Therle who was ther preſēt: ſayd with a right good wyll I am redy. So thus they entred into the hall / & therle ledde ye kyng into his chābre and anon the ſupꝑ was redy. And ye next day the king deꝑted and went to Aſpre and ther taryed .ii. dayes / and ſuffred all his men to paſſe forth And ſo than went to Cābray and loged at Wys and beſieged the cyte of Cambray roūde about and dayly his power encreaſed. Thyder came the yong erle of Heynalt in great atray / and ſyr John his vncle / and they lodged nere to ye kyng and the duke of Guerles and his company / the marques of Muſſe / therle of Mons / the erle of Sauynes: the lorde of Falquemōt / ſir Arnolde of Bouquehen: withall thother lordes of thempyre / ſuche as were alyed with the kyng of Englande. And the ſixt day after the ſiege layd / thyder cāe the duke of Brabant with a .ix. hundred ſperes beſyde other / & he lodged toward Oſtrenan on the ryuer of Leſcaut / and made a bridge ouer the water / to thentent to go fro ye one hooſt to the other. And aſſone as he was come / he ſent to defye the frenche kyng: who was at Compyengne. Wherof Loys of Traneheu who had alwayes before excuſed / the duke was ſo confuſed that he wold no more returne agayne into Brabant / but dyed for ſorowe in Fraūce. This ſege durynge / ther were many ſkirmyſſhes: and ſir John of Heynalt and the lorde of Falquemont rod euer lightly togyder / and brent and waſted ſore the countrey of Cambreſys. And on a day theſe lordes with the nombre of .v. C. ſperes / & a M. of other men of warr / came to the caſtell of Doiſy in Cambreſys / pertayning to the lord of Coucy / and made ther a great aſſaut. But they within dyd defende them ſo valyantly / that thei had no damage / and ſo the ſayd lordes retourned to their lodgynges. Therle of Heynalt and his company on a ſaturday came to the gate towarde ſaynt Quyntines / and made ther a gret aſſaut ther was John̄ Chandos: who was thā but a ſquier / of whoſe prowes this boke ſpeketh moch / he caſt hymſelfe bytwene the barrers and the gate and fought valyantly with a ſquyer of Uermandoys called Johanne of ſaynt Dager / ther was goodly featꝭ of armes done bytwene them. And ſo the heynows cōquered by force the baylles: and ther was entred therle of Heynalt and his marſhals / ſir Gararde of Uerchyne / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Henry Dantoyng and other: who aduentured them valyantly to aduaunce their honour & at an other gate called ye gate Robert / was y• lord Beamonde / and the lorde of Falquemont / the lorde Danghyen / ſir Wyllyam of Manny / and their companys / made ther aſore and a harde aſſaut. But they of Cambray / and y• ſoudyers ſet there by the french kyng / defended themſelfe and the cyte ſo valyantly / that thaſſauters wan nothyng: but ſo retourned right wery and well beaten to their logynges. The yong erle of Namure cāe thyder to ſerue ye yong erle of Heynalt by deſyre / and he ſayd he wolde be on their part as long as they were in thēpyre. But aſſone as they entred into the realme of Fraunce / he ſayd he wolde forſake them & go and ſerue the french kyng / who had retayned hym. And in likewyſe ſo was thentent of therle of Heynalt / for he had cōmaunded all his men on payne of dethe / that none of them ſhulde do any thyng within the realme of Fraūce. In this ſeaſon whyle ye kyng of England lay at ſiege byfore Cambray with .xl. M. men of armes / and greatly conſtrayned thē by aſſautes. Kyng Philyp made his ſomons at Peron in Uarmādoys / & the kyng of England counſelled with ſir Robert Dartoys in whome he had great affyance / demaūdyng of hym whyther it were better for hym to entre into ye realm of Fraunce / and to encounter his aduerſary: or els to abyde ſtyll byfore Cābray tyll he had won it biforce. The lordꝭ of England and ſuch other of his coūſell / ſawe well how the cyte was ſtrōg and well furnyſſhed of men a warr and vytels and artylary / and that it ſhuld be long to abyde ther tyll they had wonne the cytie. Wherof they were in no certētie / and alſo they ſawe well how that wynter aproched nere & as yet had done no maner of entpriſe / but lay at gret erpēce. Than they counſelled the kynge to ſet forwarde into y• realme / wher as they might fynde more plentie of forage. This counſell was taken and all the lordes ordayned to dyſlodge / and truſſed tentꝭ and pauylions and all maner of harnes / & ſo departed and rode towarde mnūt ſaynt Martyn the which was at thentre of Fraūce. Thus they

rode in good oroce / euery lorde amōg his owne men: marſhals of thenglyſſhe hooſt were therle of Northāpton & Glocetter and therle of Suffolke: and conſtable of Englande was therle of Warwyke / and ſo they paſſed ther the ryuer of Leſcault / at their eaſe. And whan therle of Heynalt had acōpanyed the kyng vnto the deptyng out of thēpyre / and that he ſhuld paſſe the ryuer and entre into the realme of Fraunce. Than he toke leaue of the kyng / and ſayd howe he wolde ryde no farther with hym at that tyme / for kyng Philypp̄ his vncle had ſent for hym / & he wolde nat haue his yuell wyll but that he wold go and ſerue hym in Fraunce / as he had ſerued y• kyng of England in thempyre. So thus therle of Henalt and therle of Namure and their cōpanyes rode backe to Queſnoy. And therle of Heynalt gaue the mooſt part of his company leaue to be part / deſyringe them to be redy whan he ſende for them / for he ſayd that ſhortly after he wolde go to kyng Philyppe his vncle.
         
         
            ¶How kyng Edward made ſir Henry of Flaunders knyght. Cap. xxxix.
            
               ASſone as kyng Edward had paſſed the ryuer of Leſcaute / and was entred into ye realme of Fraunce / he called to hym ſir Henry of Flāders who was as thā a yong ſquier / and there he made hym knyght. And gaue hym yerely. CC. 
                  〈◊〉
               . ſterlyng ſufficiently aſſigned hym in England. Than ye kyng went and lodged in thabbey of moūt ſaint Martyn / and ther taryed two dayes & his people abrode in the contrey / & the duke of Brabāt was lodged in thabbey of Uancellez. Whan the french kyng beyng at Cōpiengne harde theſe tydynges / than he enformed his ſomones & ſent ye erle of Ewe and of Gynes his cōſtable / to ſaynt Quyntines to kepe the towne and frōters ther agaynſt his ennemies / and ſent ye lorde of Coucy into his owne contrey / and the lorde of Hen i to his: and ſent many men of armes to Guyſe & to Rybemont to Behayne / & the fortreſſes ioynyng to thentre of the realme. And ſo went hymſelfe to wards Peron / in ye meane ſeaſon yt kyng Edward lay at thabbey of moūt ſaynt Martyn his men ran abrode in the contrey to Bapau
                  •
               me and nere to Peron & to ſaynt Quyntines / they founde the contrey piētyfull / for ther had ben no warr of a long ſeaſon / and ſo it fortuned that 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Henry of Flauders to auance his body / & to eucreaſe his honour on a day with other knyghts. Wherof ſir John̄ of Heynalt was chefe: & with hym the lorde of Faulquemōt / the lorde of Bergues the lorde of Uaudreſen / the lorde of Lens and dyuers other to the nōbre of .v. C. And they auyſed a towne therby called Hōnecourt / wher in moch peple wer gadered on truſt of ye fortreſſes. And therin they had cōueyed all their goodꝭ and ther had ben 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Arnolde of Baquehen & ſyr Wyllm̄ of Dunor and their cōpany: but they at tayned nothyng ther. 
               Ther was at this Hōnycourt / an abbot of great wyſdome & hardynes / and he cauſed to be made without the towne a barrers ouerthwart the ſtrete lyke a grate / nat paſt half a fote wyde euery grate. And he made great puiſyons of ſtones & quicke lyme / & men redy to defende the place. And theſe lordꝭ whan they came thyder they lighted a fote / & entred to the barrers with their gleuys in their handes / & ther began a ſore aſſaut: & they within valyātly defended thēſelfe. Ther was thabbot hymſelfe who receyued & gaue many great ſtrokes / there was a ferſe aſſaut: they win caſt downe ſtones / peces of tymbre / potts full of chalke / & dyd moche hurt to thaſſaylers. and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Henry of Flāders who helde his glayue in his handes & gaue ther with great ſtrokes / at the laſt thabbot toke the gleue in his handꝭ & drewe it ſo to hym / y• at laſt he ſet hands on 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Henres arme: & drewe it ſo ſore that he pulled out his arme at the barrers to the ſhulder / & heldehym at a great auauntage: for & y• barrers had ben wyd ynough he had drawen hym through: but 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Henry wolde nat let his wepen go for ſauyng of his honour. Than thother knyghts ſtrake at thabbot to reſcue their felowe ſo this wraſtlyng endured a longe ſpace: but fynally the knyght was reſcued / but his gleaue abode with thabbot. And on a day whan I wrot this boke as I paſt by / I was ſhewed the gleue by the monkes ther / yt kept it for a treaſur. So this ſayd day: Hōnycourt was ſore aſſaylled ye which indured tyll it was nyght / & dyuerſe wer ſlayne and ſore hurt. Syr Johān of Heynault loſt there a kynght of Hollande / called ſir Herment. Whan the flemyngꝭ / heynowes / englyſſh men / and almaygnes: ſame the fierſe wylles of them within / and ſawe howe they coulde gette nothynge there: withdrewe them ſelfe agaynſt nyght. And ye next day on the mornyng y• kyng

depted fro mount ſaynt Martyn / cōmaūdynge that no perſon ſhulde do any hurt to the abbey / the which cōmaundemēt was kept. And ſo than they entred into Hermandoys and toke y• day their lodgyng be tymes on y• mount ſaynt 
                  •
               ui tyne in good order of batayle. And they of ſaynt 
                  •
               uyntines myght well ſe them / how be it they had no deſyre to yſſue out of their towne. The fore ryders came rynnynge to the barrers ſkyrmyſſhyng / and the hooſt taryed ſtyll on y• moūt iyll the next day. Than the lordes toke counſell what way they ſhulde drawe / and by thaduyce of the duke of Brabant they toke y• way to Thyeraſſe / for that way their prouiſyon came dayly to thē. And were determyned that if kyng 
                  •
               hy lyppe dyd folowe thē as they ſuppoſed he wolde do / that than they wolde abyde hym in y• playne felde / and gyue hym batayle. Thus they went forthe in thre great batayls: the marſhalles and the Almaygnes had the firſt / the kynge of Englande in the myddle warde / & the duke of Brabant in the rerewarde. Thus they rodde forthe brennynge and pyllynge the countrey a thre or foure leages a day / and euer toke their logynge be tymes. And a company of englyſſhmen and Almaygnes paſſed the ryuer of Somme by the abbey of 
                  •
               ermans / and waſted the countrey al about. An other company wherof ſit Johān of Heynalt / the lorde Faulquemōt and ſir Arnold of Barquehen were chefe / rode to Drigny ſaynt Benoyſte a good towne. But it was but eaſely cloſed / incontynent it was taken by aſſaut and robbed / and an abbey of ladyes vyolated / and the towne brent. Than they departed and rode towarde Guys and Rybemont / and the kynge of Englande lodged at 
                  •
               ehories / and ther taryed a day / and his men ranne abrode and dyſtroyed the countrey. Than the kynge toke the way to the Flammengerie to come to Leſche in Thyeraſſe / and the marſhals and the byſſhopp̄ of Lpncolne with a fyue hunderd ſperes paſſed the ryuer of Tryſague and entred into Laonnoys / towarde the lande of the lorde of Cou
                  •
               y / and bret ſaynt Gouuen and the towne of Matle. And on a nyght lodgedde in the valey beſyde Laon / and the nerte day they drewe agayne to their hooſt: for they knewe by ſome of their priſoners / that the frenche kyng was come to ſaynt 
                  •
               uyntines with a. C. thouſand men / and there to paſſe the ryuer of Somme. So theſe lordes in their retournynge brent a good towne called Crecy: and dyuerſe other townes and hamelettes ther about. ¶ Now let vs ſpeke of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynalt and his company / who were a fyue hundred ſperes he came to Guys and brent all the towne and bete downe the mylles. And wt in the fortreſſes was the lady Jane his owne doughter wyfe to therle of Bloys called Lewes / ſhe deſyred her father to ſpare therytage of the erle his ſon in lawe. But for all that ſit John̄ of Henalt wolde nat ſpare his enterpriſe: and ſo than he retourned agayne to the kyng / who was lodged in thabbey of Sarnaques / and euer his peple r
                  〈…〉
                ouer the countrey. And the lorde of Falquemont with a. C. ſperes came to Lonnion in Thyeraſſe a great towne / and the men of the towne were fled into a great wood / and had all their goodes with them. And had fortifyed the wood with fellyng of tymbre about thē / the Almayns rode thyder and there mette with them. Sir arnolde of Baquehen and his company / & ſo ther they aſſayled them in the wood / who defēdyd thē aſwell as they might: but finally they were cōquered and put to flight. And ther wer ſlayne and ſore hurt mo than .xl. and loſt all that they had: thus the contrey was ouer ryden / for they dyd what they lyſt.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande / & the french kyng toke day of iourney to fight togyder. Cap. x
                  •
               .
            
               THe kyng of Englande depted fro Sarnaques and went to Muttrell. And ther loged a nyght / & the next day he went to the Flamēgery / & made all his mē to loge nere about hym. Wherof he had mo than .xl. thouſande / and there he was coūſelled to avyde kyng 
                  〈…〉
               lyp / and to fyght wt hym The french kyng depted fro ſaynt Duyntines / and dayly men came to hym fro all partes / & ſo cāe to Uyrōfoſſe. There the kyng taryed & ſayd howe he wold nat go thens tyll he had fought wt the kynge of Englande & with his alyes / ſeyng they were within two leages toguyther. And whā therle of Heynalt who was at Du
                  •
               lnoy redy purueyed of men a warr / knewe that y• frenche kyng was at Uyronfoſſe / thynkyng there to gyue batayle to thenglyſſhmen. He rode forthe tyll he cāe to the french hooſt with .v. C. ſperes. and preſēted hymſelf to the kyng his vncle / who made hym but ſmall cher / vycauſe he had ven wt his aduerſary before Cambray. Howe ve it the erle excuſed hymſelfe ſo ſagely / that the kynge and his counſayle were well cōtent. And it was

ordayned by the marſhals / that is to ſay by the marſhall Bertrame / and by y• marſhall of Try that the erle ſhulde be lodged next the englyſſhe hooſt. Thus theſe two kynges were lodged bytwene 
                  •
               yrōfoſſe and Flamēgery / in the playne feldes without any aduauntage. I thynke ther was neuer ſene before ſo goodly an aſſemble of noble men togyder / as was there. Whanne the kynge of England beyng in the chapell of Thyeraſſe / knewe how that king Ph
                  ••
               ypp̄ was wt in two leages / than he called the lordes of his host togyder / and demaūded of them what he ſhuld 
               
                  •
               o: his honour ſaued / for he ſayd that his enten cyon was to gyue batayle. Than the lordes behelde eche other / and they deſyr
                  •
               dde the duke of Brabāt to ſhewe firſt his entent. The duke ſaid that he was of the accorde that they ſhulde gyue batayle / for otherwyſe he ſayd they coude nat depart / ſauyng their honours. Wherfore he counſayled y• they ſhulde ſende harauloes to the frenche kyng / to demaunde a day of batayle. Than an haraulde of the duke of Guerles / who coude well the langage offrenche was enformed what he ſhulde ſay: and ſo herode tyll he came into y• frenche hooſt. And than he drewe hym to kynge Philyppe and to his counſayle: and ſayd 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                the kynge of Englande is in the felde / and deſyreth to haue batell / power agaynſt power. The whiche thyng kyng Philyppe graunted / and toke the day / the friday nextafter: and as thā it was weduiſday. And ſo the haraude re
                  •
               ourned well rewarded wt good 
                  •
               urred gownes gyuen hym by the french kyng and other lordes / bycauſe of the tidynges that he brought. So thus the iourney was agreed / & knowledge was made therof: to all the lordes of bothe the hooſtes / and ſo euery man made hym redy to the matter. The thurſday in the mornyng there were two knyghtes of ther
                  •
               e of Heynaultes / the lorde Sanguinelles / and the lorde of Tupeney. They mounted on their horſes / and they two all onely depted fro the frenche hooſt / and rode to a viewe y• englyſſh hooſt. So they ro
                  •
               e co
                  ••
               yng the hooſt and it fortuned that the lorde of Sanguynelles horſe toke the bridell in the tethe in ſuche wyſe: that his ma
                  ••
               ter coud nat rule hym. And ſo why ther he wolde or nat / the horſe brought hym into thenglyſſhe hooſt: and there he fell in the handes of the 
                  〈…〉
               maynes / who perceyued well that he was none of their company: and ſet on hym and toke hym and his horſe. And ſo he was priſoner to a fyue orſixe gentylmen of 
                  〈…〉
               mayne: & a none they ſet hym to his raunſome. And whan they vnderſtode that he was a 
                  •
               aynome / the
                  •
                demaunded of hym if he knewe 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Joh
                  •
                of Hepnalt / and he anſwered yes: and deſyred them for the loue of god to bring hym to his preſens / for he knewe well that he wolde quyte hym his raū
               ſome. Therof were the Almaygns ioyous / and ſo brought hym to the lorde Beaumounde / who incontynent dyde pledge hym out fro his maiſters handes. And the lorde of Sanguynelles retourned agayne to therle of Heyualt / and he had his horſe agayne delyuered hym at the requeſt of the lorde Beamond. Thus paſſed that day / and 
                  •
               one other thynge done that ought to be remembred.
         
         
            ¶ how theſe kynges ordayned their batayls at 
                  •
               yronfoſſe. Cap. x
                  ••
               .
            
               WHan the friday came in the mornyng / both hooſtes aparelled thē ſelfe redy / and euery lorde harde maſſe among their owne cōpa
                  •
               yes / and dyuers wer ſhr
                  •
               uen. Firſt we woll ſpeke of thorder of thenglyſſhmen who drewe thē forwarde into the feld
                  •
                and made. iii▪ batels a fote / and dyd put all their horſes and bagages into a lytell wood behynde them / and for tefyed it. The firſt batell ledde the duke of Guerles / the marques of Nuſſe / the marques of Blaquebour
                  •
               : ſir John̄ of Heynalt / therle of 
                  •
               ōs / therle of Sauynes / the lorde of Faulquemont / ſit Guyllam du Fort / ſir Arnolde of Baquche
                  •
                and the almayns: and amonge them▪ was▪ xxii▪ banners / and .lx. penons in the hale / and .viii. M
                  •
               men. The ſeconde batayle had the duke of Brabant / and the lordes and knyghtes of his countrey. Firſt the lorde of 
                  •
               u
                  •
               ſe / the lorde Bergues / the lorde of Bredangh / the lorde of 
                  〈◊〉
                the lorde of 
                  •
               aucelare / the lorde of Borguynall the lorde of Stōneuort / the lorde of wyten / the lorde of Elka / the lorde of Caſſebegne / y• lorde of Duffle: 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thyrre of 
                  •
               alcourt / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Raſſe of the Grez / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Caſſebegne / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Filyfe / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Gyles of Coterebe / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                water of 
                  •
               otebergue / the thre bretherne of Harlebecque / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Henry of Flaiū
               ders: and dyuerſe other barownes & knyghtꝭ of flanders who were all vnder y• duke of 
                  〈◊〉
                baner: as y• lorde of Hallayne / y• lorde of 
                  〈◊〉
                ſir Hector 
                  •
               yllains / ſit John̄ of Rodes / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                ſtart of Gupſtell / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                wyllin̄ of Strat
                  •
                / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                de la mule: & many other. The duke of Brabāt had a .xxiiii. baners / and .lxxx. penons / & in all a vii. M. men. The .iii. bataile & the gretteſt ha
                  •
               
               
the kyng of Englande / and with hym his coſyn therle of Derby: the byſſhopp̄ of Lyncolne / the byſſhopp̄ of Durame / therle of Salyſbury / the erle of Northamton and of Glocetter: therle of Suffolke / ſir Robert Dartoyſe as than called erle of Rychmont: the lorde Raynolde Cobhm̄ / the lorde Perſy / the lorde Rooſe / the lord Montbray: ſir Lewes and ſir John̄ Beauchampe / ye lorde Dalawarr / the lorde of Laucome / ye lorde Baſſet the lorde fitz water / ſir Water Manny ſir Newe Haſtyngs / ſir John̄ Lyle: and dyuers other that I can nat name / among other was 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos / of whom moche honour is ſpoken in this boke. The kyng had wt hym .xxviii. baners / and .lxxxx. penons / and in his batayle a vi. M. men of armes and .vi. M. archers. And he had ſet an other batell as in a wyng: wherof therle of Warwyke / therle of Penbroke / ye lorde Barkley / the lorde Multon: and dyuerſe other were as cheyfe / & they wer on horſbacke. Thus whan̄e euery lorde was vnder his banner / as it was cōmaunded by the marſhals: the kynge of England mounted on a palfray / acōpanyed all onely with ſir Robert Dartoyſe / ſir Raynolde Cobham / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Water of Manny: and rode a long before all his batels / and right ſwetely deſyred all his lordes and other. That they wolde that day ayde to defende his honoure / & they all ꝓmyſed hym ſo to do. Than he returned to his owne batell & ſet euery thing in good order / and cōmaūded that non ſhuld go before ye marſhals banerꝭ. ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of the lordes of Fraunce what they dyd. They were .xi. ſcore baners .iiii. kynges .vi. dukes .xxvi. erles / and mo than .iiii. M. knyghtes: and of the cōmons of Fraunce mo than .lx. M. The kyngs that were ther with kyng Philyppe of Ualoys / was the kyng of Behayne / the kyng of Nauerr / & king Dauyd of Scotland: the duke of Normandy / the duke of Bretayne / the duke of Burbon / the duke of Lorrayne / and the duke of Athenes. Of erles: therle of Alanſon brother to the kyng / the erle of Flaunders / therle of Heynalt / the erle of Bloys / therle of Bare / therle of Foreſtes / therle of Foyz / therle of Armynacke / the erle Dophyn of Auuergne / therle of Lōguyle / therle of Stā
               pes / therle of Uandoſme / therle of Harrecourt / therle of ſaynt Pol / therle of Guynes / therle of Bowlougne / therle of Rouſſy / therle of Dampmartyn / therle of Ualentynois / therle of Aucer therle of Sancerre / therle of Genue / the erle of Dreux and of Gaſcongne / and of Languedoc. So many erles and vycuntes that it were long to reherſe: it was a great beauty to beholde the baners and ſtanderdes wauyng in the wynde / and horſes barded: and knyghtes and ſquyers richely armed. The frechemen ordayned thre great batayls / in eche of them fyftene thouſand men of armes. and .xx. M. men a fote.
         
         
            ¶ Howe theſe two kynges departed fro Uironfoſſe / without batayle. Cap. xlii.
            
               IT might well be marueyledde: howe ſo goodly a ſight of men of warr ſo nere togyder ſhulde depart without batayle. But the french men were nat all of one acorde / they were of dyuers opynyons. Some ſayed it were a great ſhame and they fought nat ſeyng their ennemys ſo nere thē in their owne countre / raynged in the felde. and alſo had promyſed to fyght with thē: and ſome other ſayd it ſhulde be a great folly to fyght / for it was harde to knowe euery mannes mynde / & ieoꝑdy of treaſon. For they ſayd if fortune were cōtrary to their kyng as to leſe the ſelde / he than ſhuld put all his hole realme in a ieopardy to be loſt. And though he dyd dyſconfet his ennemes yet for all that he ſhuld be neuer the nerer of the realme of Englande: nor of ſuch landes parteynyng to any of thoſe lordes that be with hym alyed. Thus in ſtriuyng of dyuers opynions / ye day paſt tyll it was paſt noone: and than ſodenly ther ſtarted an Hare among the frenchmen / and ſuche as ſawe her cryed and made gret brūt wherby ſuche as were behynde thought they before had ben fightynge. And ſo put on their helmes / and toke their ſperes in their handes / and ſo ther were made dyuers newe knyghtes / and ſpecially therle of Heynalt made .xiiii. who wer euer after called knyghts of the hare. Thus that batell ſtode ſtyll all that friday / and beſyde this ſtryfe bytwene the counſellours of France / ther was brought in letters to the hooſt of recōmendacion to the frenche kyng and to his counſell. Fro kyng Robert of Cicyle / the which kyng as it was ſayd was a great aſtronomyer: and full of great ſcience. He had often tymes ſought his bokꝭ on theſtate of the kyngs of England and of frāce: & he founde by his aſtrology / & by thēfluens of ye heuēs / yt if the french kyng euer fought with kyng Edwarde of england / he ſhuld be diſcōfited. wherfore he lyke a king of gret wyſdōe

and as he that douted the peryll of the frenche kyng his coſyn ſent often tymes letters to king Philyppe and to his counſayle: that in no wyſe he ſhulde make any batayle agaynſt thenglyſſ men / where as kyng Edwarde was perſonally preſent. So that what for dout and for ſuch writyng fro the kyng of Cecyle dyuers of the great lordes of Fraunce were ſore a baſſhed: and alſo kynge Philyppe was enfourmed therof. He we beit yet he had great wyll to gyue batayle: but he was ſo counſelled to the cōtrary / that the day paſſed without batell and euery man withdrue to their lodgynges. And whan the erle of Heynalt ſame that they ſhulde nat fight he departed withall his hole company / and went backe the ſame nyght to Queſnoy. And the kyng of Englande / the duke of Brabant: and all the other lordes retourned and truſſed all their bagagis / and went the ſame nyght to Daueſnes in Heynalt. And the next day they toke leaue eche of other: and the Almayns / and brabances departed / and the kynge went into Brabant with the duke his coſyn. The ſame friday that the batell ſhulde haue ben the french kynge whan he came to his lodgyng he was ſore dyſpleaſed / bycauſe he departed without batayle. But they of his counſayle: ſayd howe right nobly he had borne hymſelfe / for he had halyantly purſued his ennemies / and had done ſomoche that he had put thē out of his realme: and how that the kyng of Englande ſhuld make many ſuch vyages or he conquered the realme of Fraūce. The next day kyng Philypp̄ gaue lycēce to all maner of men to dept / and he thanked right courteſly the gret lordes of their ayde & ſocour. Thus ended this great iourney and euery mā went to their owne The frenche kynge went to ſaynt Omers / and ſent men of warre to his garyſons: and ſpecially to Tourney / to Lyſſe / and to Doway: and to the other townes marchyng on thēpyre. He ſent to Tourney: ſyr Godmart Dufay / and made hym captayne there / and regent of that coūtrey ther about. And he ſent ſyr Edwarde of Beaugewe to Mortayne: and whan he had ordred ꝑt of his beſynes / than he drewe towarde Parys.
         
         
            ¶ How kyng Edwarde toke on hym to bere the armes of Fraunce / and the name to be called kyng therof. Ca. xliii.
            
               WHan that kynge Edwards was departed fro the flamengery and came into Brabāt / and went ſtreight to Bruſſels. The duke of Guerles / the duke of Jullers / the marques of Blanqueboure / the erle of Mons / ſyr John̄ of Haynalt / the lorde of Faulquemōt / and all the lordes of thempyre ſuche as had ben at that iournay: brought hym thyder to take aduyce & counſell what ſhulde be done more in the mater that they had be gone. And to haue expedycion in the cauſe: they ordayned a parlyamēt to beholden at ye towne of Bruſſels / and thyder to come was deſyred Jaques Dartuell of Gaūt who came thyder with a great company / and al the counſels of the good townes of Flaunders. Ther the king of England was ſore deſyred of all his alyes of thempyre / that he ſhulde requyre thē of Flanders to ayde & to mentayne his warr and to defy the french kyng: and to go with him wher as he wolde haue them. And in their ſo doyng: he to promyſe thē to recouer the Iſle Doway / & Bethayne. This requeſt was well hard of the ſlemynges / and therupon they deſyred to take counſell among themſelfe: and ſo they toke coūſell at good leaſer / and than they ſayd to the kyng. Syr or this tyme ye haue made to vs requeſt in this behalfe: ſyr if we myght well doo this ſauyng your honour / and to ſaue ourſelfe / we wolde gladly do this. But ſyr we be bounde by faith and othe: and on the ſomme of two my: lyons of floreyns in the Popes chaumbre / that we may make nor moue no warre agaynſt the kynge of Fraunce. Who ſoeuer it be: on payne to leſe the ſayd ſomme / and beſyde that to ryn in the ſentēce of curſyng. But ſyr if ye wyll take on you the armes of Fraūce / & quarter them with the armes of Englande & call yourſelfe kyng of Fraunce / as ye ought to be of ryght. Than we woll take you for rightfull kyng of Fraūce / & de maūde of you quytāce of out bondes: & ſo ye to gyue vs ꝑdon therof as king of Frāce. By this meanes we ſhalbe aſſured & dyſpēſed wt all / & ſo thā we wyll go with you whyder ſoeuer ye wyll haue vs. Than the kyng toke coūſell for he thought it was a ſore mat to take on hym ye armes of France & the name / and as thā had cōquered nothing therof / nor coud nat tell what ſhuld fall therof / nor whyder he ſhuld cōquere it or nat: & on thother ſyde loth he was to refuſe the confort and ayde of the ſtemynges / who myght do hym more ayde thā any other. So ye kyng toke counſell of the lords of thēpyre / & of the lorde Robert Dartoyſe / & with other of his ſpecyall frendes / 

ſo that finally the good and the yuell wayed. He anſwered to the flemmynges / that if they wolde ſwere & ſeale to this accorde / and to promyſe to mentayne his warre: howe he wolde do all this with a good wyll / and promyſed to gette them agayne Lyle / Do way / & Bethayn: and all they anſwered howe they were content. Than there was a day aſſigned to mete at Gaunt / at which day the kynge was there / and the mooſt part of the ſayd lordes and all the counſayls generally in Flaūders. And ſo than: all this ſayd maters were reherſed / ſworne / and ſealed: and the king quartred the armes of Fraūce with Englande / And from thenſ forthe toke on hym the name of the kynge of Fraunce / and ſo contynued tyll he lefte it agayne by compoſicyo
                  •
                / as ye ſhall here after in this boke. And ſo at this counſayle they determyned that the next ſomer after / they wold make great warre into Fraunce: promyſing to beſiege the cytie of Tourney. Wherof the flemmyngꝭ were ioyfull / for thei thought to be ſtrōg ynough to gete it / and that ones goten / they be leued ſhortly after to wynne agayne Lyſſe / Do way / and Bethayne: with thappurtenaūces 
                  〈◊〉
               
               tayning or holden of therle of Flaūders. Thus euery man departed and went home: the kynge of Englande went to And warpe / and the quene abode ſtyll at Gaunt / and was often tymes vyſited by Jaques Dartuell: and by other lordes ladyes / and damoſels of Gaunt. The kyng left in Flaunders / therle of Salyſbury / and therle of Suffolke. They went to Ipre and ther kept a great garyſon / and made ſore warre agaynſt them of Lyſſe / and there about. And whan the kynges ſhyppes were redy he toke the ſee / and ſo ſayled into Englande / and came to London about the feeſt of ſaynt Andrewe / where he was honourably receyued. And ther he had cōplayn tes made hym of the dyſtruction of Hampton / and he ſayd that he truſted / or a yere lenger that it ſhulde be well reuenged.
         
         
            ¶ How the frenchmen brent in the lā
               des of ſyr John̄ of Heynault. Cap. xliiii.
            
               NOwe lette vs ſpeke of kyng Philyppe / who greatly fortifyed his nauy that he hadde on the ſee. Wherof ſyr Kiry Bahuchet and Barbe Noyre were captayns. And thei had vnder them a great retynu
                  •
                of Genowayes / normayns / bretons / & pycardes: they dyd that wynter great damage to the realme of Englande: ſomtyme they came to Douer / ſandwyche / Wynchelſe / Haſtynges / and Rye: and dyd moche ſorowe to thenglyſſhe men / for they were a great nombre as a .xl. M. men. Ther was none that coude yſſue out of en glande: but they were robbed / taken / or ſlayne / ſo they wan great pyllage / & ſpecially they wan a great ſhyppe called the Chriſtofer / laden with wolles as ſhe was goyng into Flaunders. The which ſhyppe had cooſt the kynge of Englande moch money / and all they that were taken with in the ſhyppe were ſlayne and drowned. Of the which conqueſt the frenchmen were ryght ioyeouſe. The frenche kyng than ſent and wrote to the lorde of Beamont / y• lorde of Breme / to the Uidame of Chalon / the lorde John̄ de la Boue the lorde John̄ and Gararde of Loyre / that they ſhulde make an army and to ryde into the land of ſyr John̄ of Heynalt / & to burne and dyſtroy there aſmoche as they might. They obeyd and gathered togyder to the nombre of .v. C. ſperes and ſo in a mornynge they came before the towne of Simay / & gathered to gyder there a gret pray / for they of the countrey thought that the frenchmen wolde nat a cōe ſo farre / nor to haue paſſed the wode of Thyrach. So the frēchmen burnt the ſubarbes of Simay / and dyuerſe other vyllages there about nygh all the lande of Simay except the fortreſſes / than they went to Aubēton in Thyerach / and ther deuyded their boty. In the ſame ſeaſon the ſoudyours of Cā
               bray came to a lytell ſtrong houſe without Cā
               bray called Relenques / pertayning to ſyr John̄ of Haynalt. And a baſtarde ſonne of his kept y• houſe with a .xv. ſoudyours with hym / ſo they were aſſayled a hole day togyder / and ye dykes wer ſo froſen that a man might well come to the walles. And ſo they within truſſed all that they had / and about mydnight departed and ſet fyre themſelfe on the houſe: the next day whan they of Cambray came thyder agayne / & ſawehowe it was brent they dyd bete downe all that ſtode / And the capitayne of the houſe and his company went to Ualencennes. ye haue well harde by

fore / howe ſir Gualter of Manny toke y• caſtell of Thyne: and ſet therm a brother of his called Gyles of Manny / he made many skirmyſſhes with them of Cābray / and dyd them moch trouble. And ſo it hapened on a day that he went fro his garyſon with a ſixſcore men of armes / and came to the barrers of Cambray / and the brunt was ſo great that many armed them within the cyte / and came to ye gate wher as the skirmyſſh was. Wher as ſir Gyles had put backe them of Cambray / than they yſſued out: and among the cambreſes ther was a yong ſquyer a gaſcoyne / called Wyllyam Marchant: who went out into the felde well horſed / his ſhelde about his necke and his ſpere in his hande. And whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Gyles of Māny ſawe hym he rode f
                  •
               er
                  •
               ly to hym: and ther 
               
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Gyles was ſtrykē through all his harnes to ye hert / ſo that y• ſpere went clene through his body & ſo he fell to the erth. Than ther was a 
                  •
               yers ſkirmyſſhe & many ſtryken downe on bothe partes / but finally they of Cambray obtayned the place and drewe a way their ennemies / and toke with them ſir Gyles of Manny hurt as he was / and ſo brought hym to Cambray wt great toye. Than incontynent they dyſarmed hym / 
                  〈◊〉
                dyd gette ſurgions to dreſſe his wound: for they wold gladly that he might eſcaped: but he dyed the next day after. Than thei d
                  ••
               myned to ſend his body to his two bretherne John̄ and Tyrrey / who were in the garyſon at Bouhayne in Oſtrenant: for though that the countrey of Heinalt at that tyme was in no warr / yet all the frō ters to warde Fraūce were euer in good awayt So than they ordayned a horſe lytter right honorably and put his body therin / and cauſed .ii. freres to conuey it to his bretherne / who receyued hym with great ſorowe. And they bare hym to the freres at Ualencennes / and there he was buryed: and after that the two bretherne of Mā
               ny came to the caſtell of Thynel and made ſore warre agaynſt them of Cambray incounteruengyng the dethe of their brother.
            ¶ In this ſeaſon: captayne of Turney & Turneyſes / was ſir Godmarde Fay & of the fortreſſes there about / and the lorde of Beauye
                  •
                was within Mortayn on the ryuer of Leſcaute / and the ſtuarde of Carcaſſonne was in the towne of ſaynt Amande: 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Amery of Poyters in 
                  •
               ouay the lorde Galoisde la Baulme / and the lorde of Uyllars / the marſhall of My
                  〈…〉
               s / and the lorde of Marneyl in the cyte of Cambray. And theſe knyghtes / ſquyers / and ſoudyers of France deſyred none other thyng: but ye they myght entre into Heynault / and to robbe and 
                  •
               yll the countrey. Alſo the byſſhoppe of Cambray who was at Parys with the kyng / cōplayned howe the heynowes had done hym domage / brēt and ouer ron his contrey more than any other men. And than the kyng gaue lycence to the ſoudiers of Cābreſys to make a rode into Heynalt: th
                  ••
                they of the garyſous made a iourney / and were to the nombre of .vi. C. men of armes. And on a ſaturday in the mornyng they departed fro Cā
               bray: and alſo they of la Male Mayſon / rode forth the ſame day and mette togyder and went to the towne of Aſpre / ye which was a good towne and a great without the walles. The peo
                  〈…〉
                
               ther were in no dout for they knewe of no warr towardes thē: ſo the frenchmen entred & founde men and women in their houſes / and toke them and robbed the towne at there pleaſur. And tha ſette fyre in the towne: and brent it ſo clene that nothynge remayned but the walles: within the towne ther was a priory of blacke monkꝭ with great byldinges beſyde the church / which helde of ſaynt Waſt of Arras. The frenchmen alſo robbed the place / and brent it to the yerth / and with all their pyllage they retourned to Cābray Theſe tidynges anone came to the knowledge of therle of Heynault / who was a bedde and a 
                  ••
               epe in his lodgyng: called the ſale / and ſodenly he roſe and armed hym and called vp all ſuch knyghtes as were about hym / but they were loged ſo abrode / that they were nat ſo ſonne redy as therle was / who without taryeng for any ꝑſon came into the market place of Ualencēnes / and cauſed the belles to be ſouned alaram / than euery man a roſe and armed them and folowed therle their lord / who was ryden out of ye towne in great haſt and toke the way towarde Aſpre: and by that tyme he had ryden aleage / tidyng
                  •
                came to hym howe the frenchmen were depted. Than he rode to thabbey of Fountnels / where as the lady his mother was: and ſhe had moche a do to repayſe hym of his dyſpleaſure: for he ſayd playnly that the dyſtruction of Aſpre shuld derely be reuenged in the realme of Fraunce. The good lady his mother: dyd aſmoche as ſhe coude to ſwage his yre / and to excuſe the kynge of that dede. So whā therle had ben ther a certayne ſpace / he toke leaue of her and retourned to Ualencēnes: and incōtynent wrote letters to the prelates and knyghtꝭ of his contrey to haue their aduyce and counſayle in that behalfe. And whan ſir John̄ of Heynalt knewe her of / he toke his horſe and came to therle his nephue: and as ſone as the erle ſawe hym / he ſayd a fayre vncle your abſence hath ſette the frenchmen in a pride

A ſir ꝙ he with your trouble and anoyance / I am ſore dyſpleaſed: howe beit in a maner I am glad therof. Nowe ye be well rewarded for the ſeruyce and loue that ye haue borne to y• frenchmen Nowe it behoueth you to make a iourney into Fraunce agaynſt the frenchmen a vncle ꝙ therle / loke into what quart ye thynke beſt and it ſhalbe ſhortly done. So thus the day of parlyamēt aſſigned at Mons came and thyder reſoried all the counſayle of the countrey: and alſo of Nolande and zelande / ther were di
                  •
               iers opynyons. Some wolde that certayne ſufficyent ꝑ ſons ſhulde be ſent to the french kyng / to knowe if he were cōſentyng to the hurt done in Henalt / or by what tytle he ſhulde make warre into the erles lande without any defiaunce. And ſome other wold that therle ſhulde be reuenged in lyke maner as the frenchmen had begon / how beit finally all reaſons debated: it was thought that therle coude do no otherwyſe but to make warr into Fraunce. And it was ordayned that therle ſhulde make his defyaunce to the frenche kyng / and than to entre byforce into the realme of Frā
               ce: & to bere theſe defyāces was ordayned / thabbot Thybalt of ſaynt Criſpyne. So thā the letters of defyance were written & ſealed by therle / & by all ye nobles of the cōtrey. Than therle thā
               ked all his lordes / and other of their good confort / and of their promyſe to ayde to reuēge him agaynſt the frenchmen. Thabbot of ſaynt Criſpyne came into Fraunce / and brought theſe de fyances to kyng Philypp̄ / who made light therof: and ſayd how his nephue was but an outraous folc / & howe that he was a marchāt to haue his cōtrey brēt. Thabbot returned to therle & to his counſayle / & ſhewed howe he had ſped. And than therle prepared for men of warre in his cō
               trey / and in Brabant / and in Flanders: ſo that he had 
                  〈◊〉
                great nombre togyder. And ſo ſet forwarde / towarde the lande of Symay: for therlles intent was to go and brenne the landes of y• lorde of Bremus / and alſo Aubenton / and Thyerache.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Heynault toke and diſtroyed Aubenton / and Thyerach. Ca. xlv.
            
               THey of Aubenton douted greatly therle of Heynalt & ſir John̄ his vncle. And ſo they ſent for ſome ayde to the great bayly of Uermādoys / and he ſent to thē the vydam of Chalons / the lorde Beaumont / the lorde de la Bone / the lorde of Lore: & dyuers other to the nombre of. CCC. men of armes. And ſo they repayred ye towne in certayne places / and determyned to abyde the heynowes and to defende the towne: the which was a gret towne and full of drapery. The heynowes cam on a friday and lodged nere to Aubenton / & aduyſed the towne / to ſe on what quarter it were mooſt beſt to be taken: and in the mornyng they aproched in thre wardes their baners before thē right ordynatly: and alſo their croſbowes. The erle of Heynalt ledde the firſt batayle and with hym great nombre of the knyghtes and ſquiers of his countrey. His vncle ſir John of Heynalt had the ſeconde batayle / wher as he had plenty of men a warr. The thyrde had the lorde Faulquemont with a good nōbre of almaynes. And ſo thus euery lorde was vnder his owne baner / and there began̄e a ſore aſſaut: and the bowes began to ſhote both within and without / wherby dyuers were ſore hurt. Therle and his company came to the gate / ther was a great aſſaut and a ſore ſkirmyſſhe: ther the Uydame of Calons dyd marueyles / & he made at the gate thre of his ſonnes knyghtes. But finally therle and his company cōquered the baylies / and byforce made their ennemies to withdrawe into yt gate And alſo at the gate towarde Symay was ſir John̄ de la Bone / and ſir John̄ Beamōt / ther was alſo a cruell aſſaut: they within wer fayne to withdrawe in at their gates and to leaue the barrers / and the heynowes wan it / and y• brige alſo. Ther was a ſore aſſaut: for ſuche as were fledde and entred within / went vp on the gate and caſt downe barres of yron / ſtones / pottꝭ full of quycke lyme: wherby many were ſore hurt / a ſquyer of Henalt receyued ſuche a ſtroke with a ſtone on his targe that it was clouyn clene a ſonder with the ſtroke / and his arme broken ſo that it was long after or he was hole. The ſaturday in the mornyng ther was a great aſſaut / & they within dyd their deuer to defende themſelfe: but finally the towne was wonne byforce / and their pales and defences broken. And firſt entred into the towne: ſir John̄ of Heynalt with his baner / with great cryeng and ſhowtyng. Than yu Uydame of Chalons withdrewe hym and his

company into the place before the mynſter / and there made ſemblant to defende hymſelfe as lōg as he myght endure. But the lorde of Bremus departed without order for he knewe well that ſir John̄ of Heynalt was lore dyſpleaſed with him ſo that he thought if he had ben taken / yt no raūſome ſhulde haue ſaued his lyfe. And whan ſir John̄ of Heynalt knewe that he was departed: that had done ſomoche dyſpleaſure in his lande of Symay / he purſued after hym. But the lorde of Bremus ſledde falt / and founde the gate of his towne opyn / and ſo entred in: and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Johanne of Heynault purſued hym iuſte to the gate with his ſwerde in his hande. But whan̄e he ſawe that he was eſcaped / he retourned agayne to Aubenton: and his men mette certayne of y• lorde Bremus men as they folowed their maiſter / and ther they were ſtayne without mercy. The erle and his company ſought ſore with thē that were by the mynſter / and ther the Uydam of Chalons dyd marueyls in armes / and ſo dyd two of his ſonnes: but finally they wer all ſtayn there ſcaped none / but ſuche as fledde with the lorde of Bremus / but all were ſlayne or taken: and a .ii. M. men of the towne and all the town robbed / and pylled: and all the goodes ſent to Symay / and the towne brent. And after y• butnyng of Aubenton / the heynowes wēt to Mauber Fountaynes: and incontynent they wan it / and robbed and brent the towne. And alſo the towne of Daube
                  •
               ueyll / and Segny the great & Segny the lytell / and all the hamelettes ther about the which were mo than .xl. Than the erle went to Mouns / and gaue leaue to his men of warr to depart / and thanked them in ſuch wyſe that they were all well content. Than anone after therle went to make aſure alyance with the kyng of England / to be the more ſtrōger in his warre agaynſt the frēchmen. But firſt he made his vncle ſir John̄ of Heynalt chefe maiſter and gouernour of Holande & zelande: and ſir John̄ lay ſtyll at Mons and prouyded for the contrey and ſent to Ualencēnes to confort and ayde thē: the lorde Autoyng / the lorde of Uerguy / y• lord of Gomegynes / and ſir Henry of Huſpharyce: and the ſtewarde of Heynault / with a hundred ſpeares / to the towne of Landrechyes. And to Bouhayne thre brethern almayns / called Courtars: and to 
                  •
               ſcaudyme
                  •
                / ſir Gararde Saſſes gynes / and into the towne of Daueſnes / ye lord of Faulquemount. And thus he dyde into euery fortreſſe on the fronters of Fraunce.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they of Tourney made a Courney into Flaunders. Cap. xlvi.
            
               WHan the frenche kyng knewe howe the heynowes had brent the contrey of Thyerache / taken and ſtayne his knyghtes / and diſtroyed the good towne of Aubenton. Than he commaunded the duke of Normandy his ſonne / yt he ſhulde make a iourney into Heynalt / and bring the countrey into that caſe that it ſhuld neuer bere couerd agayne. Alſo ye kyng ordayned therle of Layll Gaſtone / who was as than with the kyng at Parys / yt he ſhulde make a voyage into Gaſcoyne as his lyeutenant / and to make warre to Burdeux / and to Bordeloys: and to all the fortreſſes that helde of the kyng of Englande. And alſo the frenche kynge enforced his great nauy that he had on the ſee / and commaunded them to kepe the bondes of Flanders and nat to ſuffre the kyng of Englande to paſſe ouer the ſee into Flanders on payne of their lyues. And whan ye frenche kyng vnderſtode that the flemynges had made homage to the kynge of Englande / he ſent vnto them a prelate vnder the colour of the pope. Shewyng them that yſ they wolde retourne and knowledge themſelfe to holde of hym / and of the crowne of Fraunce: and to forſake the kyng of Englande / who had enchaunted them. Than he ſayd he wolde ꝑdon them of all their treſpaces / and wolde quyte thē of the gret sōme of money / that they wer bound vnto hym by oblygacion of olde tyme: and alſo to gyue thē many fayre franchyſes. And ye ſlemmynges anſwered / howe they thought thēſelfe right well aſſoyled and quyted in any thynge yt they were boūde to the kyng of Fraunce. Than the frenche kyng complayned to pope Clement the .vi. whervpon the pope dyd caſt ſuche a ſentence of curſyng / that no preeſt durſt ſyng or ſay ther any diuyne ſeruyce. Wherof the ſlemmynges ſent a great cōplaynt vnto the kyng of Englande: who to apeaſe them / ſent them worde yt whan he came ouer the ſee / he wolde bring preeſtes out of his contrey to ſyng maſſes / whyther the pope wolde or nat: for he ſayd he had priuylege ſo to do. And ſo by that meanes the flēmynges were ſomwhat apeaſed. And whan the frenche kyng ſawe that he coude nat tourne the slē
               mynges fro their opynion / than he cōmaunded them of the garyſons of Tourney / Lyſle / and

               
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ and other to make warre on the flem
               
                  〈…〉
                and to ouer ronne the contrey. And ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               ohn̄ du Roy / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Mathue de Trye marſhall of Fraunce: and ſir Godmar du Fay / and dyuers other lordes made an army of. M. men of armes and. CCC. croſbowes: what of Turney / Lylle / and Doway. And ſo in an euenyng ther departed fro Turney / and by y• it was day in the mornyng ▪ they were before Courtray / by 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               yme the ſon was vp they had gathered togyther all the catall ther about: and ſome of thē ran to the gatꝭ / and ſlewe and hurt dyuers that they founde without. And than̄e they retourned without any domage and droue before them al their prayes ſo that whā they came to Turney / they had mo thā .x. M. ſhepe / & as many ſwyne beates / and kyen: wherof the flemynges were ſore troubled. Than Jaques Dartuell ſware y• it ſhulde be derely reuenged / and incōtynent he cōmaunded the good townes of Flanders that their men a warr ſhulde be wt hym before Turney at a day aſſigned / and he wrote to therle of Salyſbury and to therle of Suffolke who wer at Ipre / that they ſhulde be ther at y• ſame. And ſo agaynſt the day lymitted / he wēt out of Gaūt and came to a place bytwene And warpe & Turney called le Pount de Sere: and there he lodged and taryed for therles of England and for them of Franke & of Bruges. The ſayd two erles thought for their honour that the enterpriſe ſhulde nat be delayed by them: and ſo ſent to Jaques Dartuell / promyſing hym nat to fayle / to be at the day apoynted. And ſo on a day they departed from Ipre with a .l. ſpeares / and a fortie croſbowes▪ and went towarde the place where as Jaques Dartuell abode for thē and as they paſſed by the towne of Lyle they were ꝑceyued. And they of the towne yſſued out with a .xv. C. men a fote and a horſbacke / and went in .iii. partes / to thentent that therles ſhuld nat ſcape thē. So theſe two erles rode forth by the gyding of ſir U
                  〈…〉
               art de la Crox ▪ who had kept lōg warr̄ agaynſt them of Lyle / and he knewe all y• wayes of the contrey: & as than was at Ipre. And ſo he came forthe with theſe erles to be their gyde / and he had well gyded them: & they of Lyle had nuely made a great dyke wher as there was neuer none before / and whan ſir Uauflart hadde brought them thyder & ſawe howe the way was nuely ſtopped: he ſayd to therles of Englande / ſirs I ſe well we can nat paſſe without the danger of them of Lyſle: wherfore I counſell let vs turne agayne and take ſome other way. Than the lordes ſayde nay ſir Uauflart: it ſhall neuer be ſayd that we woll go out of our way for feare of them of Lyſle. Therfore ryde on byfore / we haue promyſed Jaques Dartuell to be wt hym this day: and ſo thenglyſſhmen rode forth with out feare. Than ſir Uauflart ſayd ſirs ye haue taken me in this vyage to be your gyde / and I haue ben with you all this wynter ī Ipre / wherof I am moch boūde to you. But if they of Lyle yſſue out vpon vs / haue no truſt that I wyll abyde them / for I wyll ſaue my ſelfe aſſone as I can / for if I wer taken it ſhulde coſt me my lyfe the which I loue better thā your cōpany. Than the lordes dyd laugh at hym and ſayd well / and yf it be ſo we holde you well excuſed: and as he ymagined ſo it be fell ▪ for or they wer ware they were in danger of the frenche buſſhement / who cryed ſtoppe ſirs / for ye ſhall nat paſſe this way without our lycence: and ſo began to ſhote and to ronne on the englyſſhmen. And aſſone as ſyr Uauflart ſawe the maner he had no lyſt to ryde any farther: but retourned aſſone as he myght and gate hymſelfe out of the preace. And the. i
                  •
               . erles fell in the handes of their ennemies / lyke fyſſhes in a nette for they were cloſed rounde about in a narowe ſtrayet paſſage among hedgꝭ buſſhes / and dykes: ſo that they coude ſcape no maner of way / forwarde nor backewarde. So whan they ſawe that they wer ſo hardly beſtad they a lyghted a fote and defended themſelfe as well as they might / and dyd hurt dyuers of thē of Lyſle. But finally their defence coude nat auayle them / for euer newe freſſhe men of warre came on them. So ther they wer taken byforce and with them a yong ſquyer of Lymoſyne / nephue to pope Clement called Remon / who after that he was yelded priſoner / was ſlayne for couetyſe of his fayre harnes: and freſſhe apareyle. Theſe two erles were set in priſon in the hall of Lyſle / and after ſent to the frenche kynge: who promyſed to them of Lyſle a great rewarde for the good ſeruyce that they had done hym. And whan̄e Jaques Dartuell / who was at Pont de Ferre knewe thoſe tidyngꝭ he was ſore dyſpleaſed / and ſo ſeaſed his enterpriſe for that tyme / and retourned agayne to Gaunt.
         
         
            ¶ Of the iourney that duke John̄ of Normandy made into Heynault. Cap. .xlvii.
            
               
               DUke John̄ of Normā
               dy eldyſt ſonne to the french kyng / made his aſſemble to be at ſaynt Quyntines. And with hym was the duke of Athenes therle of Flaunders / the erle of Aucerr / the erle of Ewe / and conſtable of Fraunce therle of Porcyen / therle of Rouſſy / therle of Breſne / therle of de graūt Pre / the lorde Couey / the lorde Craon and dyuers other nobles of Normandy / and of the lowe marches. And whan they were all aſſembled anone after Eaſter / the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .xl. The conſtables and the two marſhals: nombred their company to be a .vi. thouſand men of armes / and .viii. M. of other folowynge the hooſt. And ſo they went forthe in to the feldes / and went towarde y• caſtell of Cā
               bre 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                and paſſed by Bohayn / and rode tyll they paſſed the ſayd caſtell in Cambre s. And lodged in the towne of Montays on the ryuer of Sels and ſir Rycharde of Uerchyne ſtewarde of Henalt / knewe by his ſpyes: how the duke of Normandy was at Moutays. Than he deſyred certayne knightes and ſquyers / ſuche as wer nere about hym: to go with hym thyder as he wolde bringe them / and they graunted hym ſo to do. And ſo departed fro his houſe at Uerchyn / and with hym a. l
                  •
               . ſpeares / and rode forthe fro the ſonne ſettyng / tyll he came to a foreſt in the yſſuyng out of Heynalt a lytell leage fro Montays / and by y• tyme it was night: than he reſted hym in a felde / and ſayde to his company. Howe he wolde go & a wake the duke at Montays / wherof they were right ioyouſe. And ſayd howe they wolde aduenture with hym to lyue and dye: he thanked them & with hym there was 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Jaques de Sart ſir Hēry of Phalyſe / ſir Olpharte du Guyſtelles / ſir John̄ du Chaſtellet / and ſir Bertrande. And of ſquyers there 
                  〈…〉
               s: Gyles and Thyerty of Sommayne / Baudwyn of Beaufort / Colebrier of Brule Moreau of Leſcuyer / Sawdart de Stramen / Johān of Roberſat / Bridoull de Thyaulx and dyuerſe other: they rode priuely and came to Mōtays / and entred into y• towne. The frēchmen had made no watche / and ſo the ſtewarde and all his company alyghted before a fayre great lodgyng / wenyng to theym that the duke had lodged ther / but he was in an other houſe. But they were loged .ii. great lordes of Normandy: the lorde of Baylleull / and the lorde of Beaulte / and they were quickely aſſayled and the gate broken 
                  •
               pynne. Whan they hard the cry of Heynalt they were a baſſhed / & defēded thēſelfe aſ well as they might and ther the lorde of Baylleull was ſlayne / and the lorde of Beautie taken: & was fayne to promyſe the ſeneſhall on his fayth & trouth to yelde hymſelfe priſoner / wt in thre dayes after at Ualē
               cens. Than the frenchmen began to ſtirr in the towne / and came out of their logynges & 
                  〈◊〉
                fiers & lighted vp torches and candels / & eche of thē rayſed vp other: and a woke the duke who roſe and armed hym in haſt / & diſplayed his baner before his logyng / & euery man drue thyder Than the heynoues withdrue a backe ſagely to their horſes / & mounted: & whan they wer all to gyder they had a x. or .xii. good priſoners / and ſo returned without any damage / for they wer nat purſued it was ſo darke. And ſo they came by that it was day to Queſnoy / & there they reſted them / and than rode to Ualencens. In the mornyng the duke cōmaunded to dyſloge / and to entre into Heynalt and to bren the contrey wt out mercy. So the fore ryders went forthe a .ii. C. ſpeares / and captayns of thē were: ſir Thybalt of Marncyle / the Galoys of y• Baume / the lorde of Myrpois / the lorde of Rayuenall / the lorde of Sempy / y• lorde John̄ of Landas / the lorde of Hangeſt / & the lorde of Tramels: and after them rode the two marſhals with fyue. C. ſperes. And than the duke with other lordꝭ and knyghtes / & ſo the fore ryders burnt Foreſt bertran / Bertynguinell / Eſcarmayne / Uēdegres 
                  〈◊〉
                y• wod / Uēdegres on y• ſandes / vpon y• ryuer of Cynell. And the next day they went forwarde / & brent Oſmelnall / Uyllers / Gōmegynes / Marchepoys Peſtell
                  •
                Aufroy / Pyepreux / Freſnoy Obeys the good towne of Bānoy: & all the cō
               trey to the ryuer of Hōmell. And y• ſame ſecond day / the marſhals company made a gret aſſaut and ſkirmyſſhe at the caſtell of Uerchy
                  •
               e▪ but they wan nothyng ther it was ſo well defended Than they went & lodged by the ryuer of Selz bytwene Auſey and Sanſoy / and ſir Ualeron lorde of Falquemont was captayne of y• towne of Maubenge / and with hym a. C. ſpeares of almayns and heynowes. And whan̄e he knewe that the frenchmen rode and brent the contrey / and ſawe howe the poore peple wept: he armed hym and his company / and left the towne in the kepyng of the lorde of Beau Reuoyr / & the lord Montigny: and he ſayd he wolde gladly fynde the frenchmen. And ſo he rode all that day cooſtyng y• foreſt of Moriuall / and agaynſt nyght he harde howe the duke of Normandy was loged by y• ryuer of Sels / than he ſayd he wolde go and a wake them. And ſo he rode forthe / and

about mydnight he paſſed the ryuer by a gyde / and whan he was ouer he made hym & his company redy / and ſo rode fayre and eaſely tyll he came to the dukes logyng: and whan they were nere they ſpurred their horſes and daſſhed into thooſt / and cryed Falquemont: and cut downe tentes & pauilyons / and ſlewe dyuers men and dyd great hurt. Than the hooſt began to ſterre and armed them / and drewe to that part where as the noyſe was: and the lorde of Falquemont whan he ſawe it was tyme he drue a backe / & of the frēchmen ther were ſlayne / the lorde of Pyquegny / & taken priſoners: the vycont of Queſnes and the Borgne of Rouuory / and ſore hurt ſir Antony of Condune. And whan ye lorde Falquemont thought beſt / he departed and all his cōpany / and paſſed the ryuer of Sels without damage for they wer nat folowed: and ſo by the ſonne riſyng they came to Queſnoy / where as ſir Thyerrie of Uallecourt opyned to them the gate. The next day after this dede the duke of Normādy cauſed his trumpettes to be blowen and ſo paſſed the tyuer of Sels / and entred into Heynalt. And ſuche as rode before / as ye marſhall of Mitpoys / the lord of Noyſiers / the Galoys of the Baulme / and ſir Thybalt of Marneyle / and iiii. C. ſpeares beſyde the brigantes came before Queſnoy to the bariers / and made ſemblant to gyue aſſaut. But they within were ſo well prouyded with good men of warre and artyllery / that they ſhulde haue loſt their payne how beit they made a lytell ſkirmyſſh before the bayles. But at laſt they were fayne to wtdrawe for they of Queſnoy dyſcharged certayne peces of artyllery and ſhotte out great quarels / wherof the frēchmen were a frayd for ſleyng of their horſes. And ſo withdrue backe / and in their goyng they brent Uergyn the great / and Uergyn the lytell / Frelanes / Sa
                  ••
               uers / Artes / Semeries / Artuell / Saryten / Turgies / Eſtynen / Aulnoy: and dyuers other / ſo yt the ſmoke came to Ualencēnes. And than the frenchmen ordayned their batels on the moūt of Caſters nere to Ualencēnes: and certayne of them / as the lorde of Craon the lorde of Mauluryer / the lorde of Mathelon / the lorde of Dauoyr / and a two. C. ſpeares with them rode towarde Mayng / and came and aſſayled a great to wre / parteyninge to John Uernyer of Ualēcens / and afterwarde it was ꝑteyning to John̄ Neuell. Ther was a great and a fierſe aſſaut / endurynge nygh all day: ſo that of the frenchmen or they departed were ſlayne a .v. or .vi. but they within defēded themſelfe ſo well yt they toke no damage. Than ſome of the frenchmen went to Try / wenyng at their firſt cōmynge to haue paſt the water: but they of the to wne had broken the bridge / and defended the paſſage: ſo that the frenchmen coude neuer haue won it that way. Than̄e ther were ſome among them that knewe the paſſages and the contrey / and ſo they brought a two. C. men a fote and paſſed the plankes at Ponny: and as ſone as they were ouer they came on thē of Try who were but a ſmall nombre / and coude nat endure agaynſt them: and ſo they fledde and dyuers were ſlayne and hurt. The ſame day the ſe neſhall of Heynalt was departed out of Ualencens / with a. C. men of armes to ſocour them of Trye: and a lytell fro ſaynt waſt they met with a .rrv. currours of the frenchmen / and the lorde Boucyqualt / who was after marſhall of Frāce and the lorde of Surgeres / and ſir Wyllyam Blādeau was their captayns / and they had paſſed the bridge by Ualencēnes / called the bridge de la Tourell. And whan the ſeneſhall of Heynalt ſawe them / he ranne out at them and bare downe with his ſpeare the lorde Boucyquault / and toke hym priſoner and ſent hym to Ualencens: the lorde of Surgeres ſcaped / but 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllyam Blandeau was taken by ſir Henry Duſphalyſe: and all the other wer taken and ſlayne but a fewe that ſcaped. And ſo than the ſeneſhal went towarde Try: but he came to late / for the frenchemen had wonne it or he came / and were beatyng downe of the mylles / and of a lytell caſtell that was ther / but whan the ſeneſhall came they had no leaſer for they wer put a backe / ſlay ne and put to flight / and chaſed ſo nere that many lept into the ryuer of Leſcalt: & ſome drowned. So thus the towne of Try was delyuerd and than the ſeneſhall went and paſſed ye ryuer of Leſcalt at Deuayng: and than he and all his cōpany rode to his caſtell of Uerchyn & entred into it / to kepe & defēde it yf nede were. All this ſeaſon the duke of Normandy was on the moūt of Caſters nygh all day / thinkynge euer yt they of Ualencennes wolde haue yſſued out to haue fought with hym / and ſo they wolde fayne haue done / and ſir Henry Dantoynge who had rule of the towne had nat ben: for he wolde ſuffre no man to yſſue out. And he was at the gate Cambreſen / and had moch a do to kepe the peple wt in and ye prouoſt of the towne with him / who with fayre wordes and great reaſons a peaſed the peple. And whan ye duke ſawe that they wolde nat yſſue out to gyue hym batayle: than he ſent to ye duke of Athenes: and the marſhals of Faunce / therle of Aucerre / & the lorde of Chaſtelon with

a thre hundred ſpeares: to rynne to Ualencens. And ſo they rode in good order / and came to the bayls on ye ſyde of Tourell / but they taryed nat there long they feared ſo the ſhot / for ſleynge of their horſes: howbeit ye lorde of Chaſtelon rode ſo forwarde / that his horſe fell vnder hym: ſo yt he was fayne to leape on another / than they retourned by the marches / & brent and bete downe the mylles on ye tyuer of Uyncell: and ſo cāe by Chartreux / and than to their hooſt agayne. Ther were ſome of the frenchmen that taryed behynde at Marlyto gette forage more at their caſe: and ſuch as kept a tow
                  ••
                therby ꝑteyning to the heyres of Heynault / and ſomtyme it was belongyng to ſir Robert de Namur: by yt right of the lady Iſabell his wyfe. Whan they parceyued theſe frēchemen yt were behynde their hooſt and howe that thooſt was farre of fro thē / they yſſued out & ſet on them / & ſlewe many and toke all their pyllage / & entred agayn to their toure. All this ſeaſon: yet the great batayle was ſtyll on the mount of Caſtres and whan the currers came in on euery ſyde / than they toke counſayle what they ſhulde do. The lordes ſayd how they were no nombre ſuffycient to aſſaut ſuch a towne as Ualencennes / and finally they determyned to go to Cambray: and ſo that nyght they went and lodged at Monyg / and at Fountnelles: and made good watche / the next mornyng they departed / and ar they went brent Monyg and Fountnelles / and the abbay parteyning to the lady of Ualoys / ſuſter germayne to the frē
               che kyng. Wherof the duke was ſore dyſpleaſed and cauſed them to be hanged that beganne the fyre: and than at their departyng they brent the towne of Try and the caſtell / and beate downe the mylles / and brent Prony / Romminy / Thyaur / Mouceaulr: and all the playne contrey by twene Cambray and Ualencennes. And than̄e the duke came to Eſcandure / to a caſtell parteynynge to the erle of Heynault: ſtandyng ſtrongly on the ryuer of Leſcault / the whiche garyſon hadde greuyd ſore the towne of Cambray / and capytayne therof was ſir Gararde of Saſſegynes. And whan the duke had ben before that caſtell a ſix dayes it was gyuen vp / wherof all the countrey hadde great marueyle / and had great ſuſpect of treaſon to the captayne ſir Gararde / and to a ſquyer of his called Robert Marmeaulr: and after they bothe dyed ſhamefully at Mons in Heynalt. And they of Cambray bete downe the caſtell / and bare all the ſtones into their towne to make reparacyons withall.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they of Doway made a iournay into Oſtrenan / and howe therle of Heynalt was in England. Ca. xlviii.
            
               AFter the dyſtruction of Eſcandure: the duke of Normādy went to Cambray and gaue leaue to ſome of his cō
               pany to depart / and ſome he ſent to the garyſons of Doway and other. And the firſt weke that they came to Doway they yſſued out and they of Lyſte with theym: ſo that they were a thre hundred ſpeares / and their capytaynes were: ſir Loyes of Sauoy / therle of Geneue / therle of Uyllars / the Galoys of the Baulme / the lorde of waurayne / the lorde of Uaſyers: and ſo they went and brent the fayre contrey of Oſtrenan in Heynault: and leſt nothynge with out the fortereſſes / wherwith they of Bouhay
                  •
                were ſore dyſpleſed: for they ſawe the fyers and ſmokes / and coude nat remedy it. And ſoo they ſent to them to Ualencennes / that if they wolde yſſue out a ſixe hundred ſperes in the night thei ſhuld do moche damage to the frenchmen / who were ſpredde abrode in the playne countrey / howe be it they of Ualencennes wolde natte go out of the towne. So the frenchmen had great pray / and brent the towne of Nyche / Deſcoux / Escaudan / Here / Monteny / Senayne Uerlayne / Uargny / Ambretycourt / Lourg / Salr / Ruette / Newfuylle / Lyeu ſaynt Amande: and all the vyllages in that contrey / and wan great pyllage. And whan they of Doway were gone home than the ſoudyers of Bohayne yſſued out and brent the halfe of Deſcon whiche was frenche / and all the vyllages parteyning to France iuſte to the gates of Doway: and the towne of Deſquerchyne. Thus as I haue deuyſed / the garyſons in thoſe countreis were prouyded for and dyuerſe ſkirmyſſhes and feates of warre vſed amonge theym: the ſame tyme there was certayne ſoudyours of Almaygne ſette by the byſſhoppe of Cambray in the fortreſſe of Male Mayſon / a two leages fro the caſtell Cambreſien: and marchynge on the other parte nere to Lādreches / wherof the lorde of Poytrell was captayne / for therle of Bloys though he wer lorde therof / yet he had rendred it to therle of Heynalt bycauſe he was as than frenche. So on a day y• Almayns of Male Mayſon / cāe to ye bayles of

Landreches / and draue away a gret pray. And whan they of Landreches knewe therof / y• lord of Poytrels armed him & all his company / and yſſued out to reſcue the pray: the lorde of Poytrels was formaſt hymſelfe / and layd his ſpere in the reſt and cryed to the frenchmen / and ſayd ſirs it is ſhame to flye away. And there was a ſquyer called Albert of Colayne / he turned and couched the ſpere in the reſt / and came rennyng agaynſt the lorde of Poytrell / and gaue hym ſuche a ſtroke on the targe that the ſpere flewe all to peaces: yet the ſayd ſquyer ſtrake hym agayne ſuche a ſtroke that the ſpere entred through his harnes / & into his body iuſt to y• hert: ſo that he fell f
                  •
               o his horſe deed. Than his cōpanyons h
                  〈…〉
               ous / as the lorde of Banſiers / Garard de Maſtyne and John̄ of Maſtyn / and other purſued the frēchmen / in ſuche wyſe that they were taken and ſ
                  •
               ayne the mooſt part / but fewe y• ſcaped / and their pray reſcued and ſuche priſoners as they had of Landreches. And ſo retourned agayne with the lorde of Poytrels deed: after whoſe dethe the lorde of Floron was long tyme captayne of Landreches / and of the caſtell ther. Thus ſome day rode forthe the frenchmen / and ſome day the heynous / and dyuers encountrynges was bytwene them. Thus the countrey of Heynault was in great trybulacion / for parte therof was brent: and the duke of Normandy was ſtyll on the fronters & no man knewe what he wolde do / and they coulde here no tidynges of therle of Heynalt. True it was he was in Englande / wher as the kyng and the lordes made hym great there / and made great alyance with the kyng there. And ſo departed out of Englande / and went to themperour Loys of Banyer: and ſo theſe were the cauſes why ye he taryed ſo long out of his owne countrey. And alſo ſir Johanne of Heynalt was gone into Brabant / and into Flaunders: and ſhewed to the erle of Brabant / and to Jaques Dartuell the deſolacyon of the countrey of Heynalt: prayeng them in the name of all the heynowes / that they wold gyue th
                  ••
                ſome counſell and ayde. And they anſwered / that they were ſure that therle wolde ſhortly returne: at which tyme they ſayd / they wolde be redy to go with hym whyther as he wolde.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Normandy layed ſiege to Thyne Leueſque. Cap. xlix.
            
               IN the mean ſeaſon that the duke of Normandy was at Cambray: the byſſhoppe and the burgeſſes of the towne / ſhewed the duke how the heynowes had get by ſtelth / the ſtrong caſtell of Thyne: deſyring hym for the cōmon profet of the countrey that he wolde fynde ſome remedy for ye garyſon ther dyd moche hurt to their cōtrey / than the duke called agayne toguyder men of warre out of Artoyſe / and Uermandoys. And ſo deꝑted from Cambray / and came before Thyne on the ryuer of Leſcalt / in the fayre playne medowes towarde Oſtrenan. The duke caryed with hym out of Cambray / and Doway: dyuerſe great engyns and ſpecially .vi. and made them to be reared agayne the fortres: ſo theſe engyns dyd caſt night and day great ſtones / the which bete downe the roffes of the chambers / halles / and towres: ſo that they within / were fayne to kepe vautes / and ſellars. Thus they within ſuffred great payne / and captayns within wer ſir Rycharde Lymoſyn englyſſhe / and two ſquyers of Heynault bretherne to therle of Namur / Johāne and Thyerry. Theſe thre that had the charge / ſayd often tyme to their company: ſirs ſurely one of theſe dayes / therle of Heynalt wyl come agaynſt theſe frenchmen and delyuer vs with honour / and ryd vs out of this paryll / and ſhal can vs great thanke that we haue kept this fortres ſo longe. The ingens without dyd caſt in deed horſes and beeſtes ſtynkīg: wherby they within had great dyſtres thaūe with any other thynge / for the ayre was hote as in the myddes of ſomer: the ſtynke and ayre was ſo abomynable / that they conſydred howe that finally they coude nat long endure. Than they toke aduyſe to deſyre a truſe for .xv. dayes / and in that ſpace to ſende and aduertyſe 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynalt / who was ruler of the contrey in therles abſence / and without that he dyde ſocour them in that ſpace / to yelde vp the fortres to the duke. This treaty was put forth & agreed vnto / than they wt in ſent a ſquyer called Eſtrelart de Sommayne / to ſir John̄ of Heynalt: and at Mons in Heynalt the ſquyer foūde hym / who had nuely harde fro his nephue therle: howe that he was cōmyng home warde into his countrey / and hadde been with

themperour and made great alyance with hym and with the kyng of England: and with the other lordes of thempyre. All this ſir John̄ of Henault ſhewed to this ſquyer / ſendyng worde to them of Thyne that ſhortly they ſhulde be conforted at the returne of his nephue therle. This 
                  ••
               uſe duryng / the
                  •
               le of Heynalt returned home wherof all his peple wer gretly reioyſed. Than the lorde Beamonde his vncle / ſhewed hym all maters that was done ſyth his departyng / and howe that y• duke of Normādy had fayne on the fronters / and brent and dyſtroyed a great part of his contrey. Therle anſwered howe it ſhulde be well amended: ſayng howe the realme of Frā
               ce was great ynough to make ſatiſfaction of all forfeturs by them done / and determyned brefelye to go and ayde his men at Thyne / who had ſo honorably defended their fortreſſes. Than ye erle ſent for men into Almayne / into Flanders / and in his owne contrey: and ſo came to Ualen cennes / and daylie his nombre encreaſed. And departed thens in great aray: with caryag
                  •
                / tentes and pauilyons: & went and lodged at Nās on ye playne a long by ye ryuer of Leſcalt. Ther were lordes of Heynalt: ſir John̄ of Heynalt / y• lorde of D
                  •
               ghyn / the lord of Uerchyn / the ſeneſhall of Heynalt / the lorde Dantoyng / the lorde of Barb
                  •
               ſon / the lorde of Lens / ſir Wyllyam of Baylleull / the lorde of Hauereth / chatelayne of Mons / the lorde of Montegny / the lord of Barbays / ſir Thyrrie of Ualecourt marſhall of Henalt / the lorde of Dalmed and of Gomegynes / the lorde of Briſuell / the lorde of Royſine / the lorde of Traſegmes / the lorde de Lalayne / the lorde of Maſtyne / the lorde of Sars / the lorde Uargny / the lorde of Beaury
                  •
               u: and dyuerſe other who were all ther to ſerue therle their lorde. Alſo thyder came therle of Namur with .ii. hundred ſpeares: and after cāe the duke of Brabant with .vi. hūdred ſperes / the duke of Guerles / therle of Mons / the lorde of Falquemont / ſir Arnolde Baquechen: and dyuerſe other lordes and men a warre of Almaygne / and Whytphall. And ſo all theſe loged along by the ryuer of Leſcault / agaynſt the frenche hooſt / and plentie of vytails came to them out of Heynalt. And whafie theſe lordes were thus lodged bytwene Nauns / and Illoys. The duke of Normandy who was on the other part with a goodly nombre of men a warr / he ſende worde to his father howe that therls hooſt dayly encreaſed. Than the frenche kynge bevnge at Peron / rayſed vp mo men of warre / and ſende to his ſonne a .xii. hundred ſpeares. And ſo hymſelfe came to his ſonnes hooſt lyke a ſoudyour / for he myght 
                  〈…〉
                come with an army vpon themperour / without heſhulde breke his othe as he dyde. So y• duke of Normandy was named to be cheife of that army: but he dyd nothyng but by the counſayle of the kyng his father. Whan they wtin Thyne ſawe therle of Heynalt of ſuche puyſſance / they were right ioyeous: and the fourth day after yt the erle was come thyder / they of Ualence
                  〈…〉
                came thyder in great a
                  •
               ay: and John̄ 
               
                  •
               e Boy
                  •
               
               ſey prouoſt of the towne was their capytayne. Than ther was a ſkirmyſſh made agaynſt the frenchemen / and dyuers hurt on bothe 
                  〈…〉
                and in the meane ſeaſon / they within the fortres had bottes and barges redy / and ſo paſ
                  •
               e 
                  〈◊〉
                the ryuer of Leſ
                  •
               ault / and were brought to the erle of Heyualt: who ioyouſly and honourably receyued them. In this tyme that theſe two hoſtes were lodged on the ryuer of Leſcault / the 
                  〈…〉
               chmen towarde Fraunce: and the heynowes towarde their owne contreis. Their forages rode forthe but they met nat / bycauſe the ryuer was euer bytwene them: but the frēchmen went and brent the cōtrey of Oſtrenan / that was nat brent before: and the heynowes in likewyſe the contrey of Cambreſes. Alſo to the ayde of therle of Heynault / at the deſyre of Jaques 
                  〈◊〉
                came thyther a. l
                  •
               . thouſande 
                  〈…〉
               mmynges wel
                  •
                armed. Than therle of Heynalt ſent to the duke of Normandy by his haraltes▪ that ther might be batell bytwene them: and howe that it ſhulde be a great ſhame ſo many men of warre aſſembled togyder / and no batayle. The duke anſwered howe he wolde take aduyſe and counſell in that mater / the which counſell was ſo long / that the haraldes departed without anſwere. Than the third day after: therle ſent agayne to knowe the dukes intencyon / & the duke anſwered how he was nat yet fully counſelled to fight nor to aſſigne a day of batayle. Sayng moreouer howe that therle was very haſty: whan the erle harde that he thought that it was but a delay / than he ſent for all the gret lordes of his hooſt / ſhewyng them what he had done / and what anſwere the duke had made hym: deſyring th
                  •
                to haue their counſell. Than euery man loked on other / & no man wold ſpeke firſt: at laſt the duke of Brabāt ſpake for all (and ſayd) as to make a bridge and go ouer to ſight with the frēchmen is nat myne opynion: for I knowe certaynly that ſhortly the kyng of Englande wyll come ouer theſee / & lay ſege to Turney / and we all haue ſworne to ayd and confort hym in all that we canne. Wherfore if we ſhulde nowe fyght with the frēchmen / and

fortune to be agayne vs / that we happe to leſe y• felde / he ſhulde loſe his vyage / and all the helpe that he ſhulde haue of vs. And if we had the vyctorie he ſhulde can vs no thanke / wherfore my intencyon is that without hym: who is chefe of this warre / that we fyght nat with the power of Fraunce. But whan we ſhalbe before Turney with hym and the frenche kynge agaynſt vs / I thynke it wyll be harde to depart without batell wherfore I wolde coūſell let vs depart / for here we lye at great cooſt and charge / for I am ſure within theſe .x. dayes we ſhall here fro the kyng of Englande. To this aduyce the mooſt part of the lordes agreed / but therle of Heynalt deſyred them all in generall nat to depart ſo ſone: and ſo they agreed to tary ſō what lengar they of Bruſſels wolde fayne haue ben gone / and they of Louane. On a day therle called to hym ſir John̄ of Heynalt his vncle / and ſayd fayre vncle I pray you ryde downe a long by the ryuer ſyde / & call ou
                  •
               r the ryuer to ſpeke with ſome perſone of the trenche hooſt / and deſyre hym to ſhewe the frenche kyng fro me / that I wyll make a brydge ouer the water: ſo that I may haue thre dayes reſpyte / and than I woll cōe ouer and gyue hym batell. Than the lorde Beamond rode downe a long by the ryuer of Leſcalt and a .xiii. knyghtes with hym / and his penon before hym: and at laſt he parceyued on the other ſyde a knyght of Normandy / he knewe hym by his armes. Than he called to hym and ſayd / ſir Maubouſſon I pray you ſpeke with me. Than the knight ſayd ſir what wold you with me / I deſyre you quod the lorde Beamonde that ye wyll go to the frenche kyng and to his counſayle / and ſay how the erle of Heynault hath ſende me hyther to take a truſe all onely whyles yt he might make a brige ouer this ryuer: wherby he & his / myght paſſe ouer. I pray you bring me agayne an anſwere and I ſhall tary here tyll ye retourne. Than the lord of Maubuſſō ſtrake his horſe with ye ſpurres and rode to the kyngꝭ tent / where as ye duke of Normandy and many other lordꝭ were / ther he ſhewed his meſſage & he had a ſhort anſwere for he was cōmaunded to tell hym that ſent him thyder / that in ye ſame caſe as they had helde the erle / in likewyſe ſo they wold cōtynue. Sayng how they wold make hym to ſell his lande / and that he ſhuld haue warr on euery ſyde / & whan we lyſt we woll entre into Heynalt / ſo farr yt we woll bren all his eōtrey. This anſwer the lorde of Maubuſſon / reported to the lorde Beamōd: who thanked hym of his labour & ſo retourned to therle / whom he found playng at cheſſe with therle of Namur. and aſſone as therle ſawe his vncle / he a roſe and harde the anſwere that the frenche kynge had ſent hym / wherwith the erle was dyſpleſed and ſayd well / I truſt it ſhall nat be as he purpoſeth.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batell on the ſee before Sluſe in Flaūders / bytwene the kynge of England and the frenchmen. Ca. l.
            
               NO we let vs leaue ſomwhat to ſpeke of therle of Henalt and of the duke of Normandy: and ſpeke of ye kyng of England. Who was on ye ſee to the intent to arryue in Flaunders / and ſo into Heynalt to make warr agaynſt the frēchmen. This was on mydſomer euyn / in the yer of our lorde M. C C C .xl. all thenglyſſh flete was departed out of the ryuer of Tames / and toke the way to Sluſe. And the ſame tyme bytwene Blanqueberque and Sluſe on the ſee: was ſir Newe Kyryell ſir Peter Bahuchet / and Barbnoyr: and mo than ſirſcore great veſſels beſyde other / and they wer of normayns / bydaulr / genowes / and pycardes: about the nōbre of .xl. M. Ther they were layd by the french kyng / to defend ye kyng of Englandes paſſage. The kyng of England and his / came ſaylyng tyll he cāe before Sluſe: and whan he ſawe ſo great a nombre of ſhippes yt their maſtes ſemed to be lyke a gret wood / he demaūded of the maiſter of his ſhyp what peple he thought they were: he anſwered and ſayd / ſir I thynke they be normayns layd here by ye frenche kyng / and hath done gret dyſpleaſur in Englande / brent your towne of Hampton / and taken your great ſhyppe the Chriſtofer: a ꝙ the kyng I haue long deſyred to fyght with the frē
               chmen: and nowe ſhall I fyght with ſome of thē by the grace of god and ſaynt George / for truly they haue done me ſo many dyſpleſurs yt I ſhall be reuenged & I may. Than the king ſet all his ſhyppes in order / the gretteſt befor well furnyſſhed with archers / & euer bytwene two ſhyppes of archers he had one ſhypp̄ wt men of armes / & than he made an other batell to ly a lofe with archers to confort euer thē that were mooſt wery / yf nede were. And ther were a great nombre of counteſſes / ladyes / knyghtꝭ wyues: & other damoſels yt were goyng to ſe the quene at Gaunt: theſe ladyes ye kyng cauſed to be well kept with thre hundred men of armes / and .v. C. archers.

¶ Whan the kyng and his marſhals had ordered his batayls / he brewe vp the ſeales and can
                  •
                with a quarter wynde / to haue the vauntage of the ſonne. And ſo at laſt they tourned a lytell to get the wynde at wyll: and whan the normayns ſawe them recule backe / they had maruell why they dyde ſo. And ſome ſayd / they thynke them ſelfe nat mete to medyll with vs: wherfore they woll go backe / they ſawe well howe the kyng of England was ther perſonally / by reaſon of his baners. Than they dyd appareyle their flete in order / for they wer ſage and good men of warr on the ſee: and dyd ſet the Chriſtofer / the which they had won the yer before / to be formaſt with many trumpettes and inſtrumentes: and ſo ſet on their ennemies. Ther began a ſore batell on bothe partes: archers and croſbowes began to ſhore / and men of armes aproched and fought bande to hande / and the better to come togyder / they had great hokes / & graperss of prou to caſt out of one ſhyppe into an other. And ſo tyed thē faſt togyder / ther were many dedess of armes done takyng and reſcuyng agayne. And at laſt the great Chriſtofer was firſt won by thēglyſſhmen / and all that were within it taken or ſlayne Than ther was great noyſe and cry / and thenglyſſhmen aproched and fortifyed the Chriſtofer with archers / and made hym to paſſe on byfore to fyght with the genoweyss. This batayle was right fierſe and terryble: for the batayls on the ſee at more dangerous and fierſer / than the batayls by lande. For on the ſee ther iss no reculyng nor ſſeyng / ther is no remedy but to fight / and to abyde fortune: and euery man to ſhewe his prowes. Of a trouthe ſir Newe Kyriell / and ſir Bahuchet / and Bathe Noyer / were ryght good and expert men of warre. This batayle endured fro the mornyng tyll it was noone / & thē
               glyſſhmen endured moche payne / for their ennemies were foure agaynſt one / and all good men o
                  •
                the ſee. ther the king of England was a noble knight of his ownehandꝭ he was in the ſtouer of his yongh. In like wyſe ſo was the erle of Derby / Pēbroke / Herforde / Hūtyngdon / Northampton / and Glocetter: ſir Raynolde Cobham / ſir Rycharde Stafforde / the lorde Percy ſir water of Manny / ſir Henry of Flaunders / ſir John̄ Beauchamp: the lorde Felton / ye lorde Braſſeton / ſir Chandos / the lorde Dalawarre / the lorde of Multon / ſir Robert Dartoys / called erle of Rychmont: and dyuerſe other lordes and knyghtess / who bare themſelfe ſo valy antly with ſome ſocours that they had of Brugꝭ / and of the countrey there about / that they obtayned the vyctorie. So that the frēchmen / normaynss / and other were dyſconſetted / ſlayne / and drowned / there was nat one that ſcaped: but all were ſlayne. Whan̄e this vyctorie was atchyued / the kyng all that nyght abode in his ſhyppe before Sluſe / with great noyſe of trūpettes and other inſtrumentes. Thyder came to ſe the kynge dyuers of Flaunders / ſuche as had herde of ye kynges cōmyng: and than the kyng demaunded of the burgeſſes of Bruges / howe Jaques Dartuell dyd. They anſwered / that he was gone to y• erle of Heynalt / agaynſt the duke of Normādy with .lx. M. ſſemynges. And on the next day / y• which was mydſomer day / the kyng and all his toke lande / and the kyng on fote went a pylgrimage to our lady of Ardēbourge and ther herd maſſe and dyned and than̄e toke his horſe and rode to Gaunt / where the quene receyued hym with great ioye: and all his caryage ca
                  •
               e after lytell and lytell. Than the kyng wrote to therle of Heynault / and to theym within the caſtell of Thyne / certyfieng them of his arryuall. And whan therle knewe therof / & that he had dyſconfyted the army on the ſee: he dylloged and gaue leaue to all the ſouldyours to depart. And toke with hym to Ualencennes / all the great lordes and ther feaſted them honourably: and ſpecially the duke of Brabant / and Jaques Dartuell. And ther Jaques Dartuell: openly in the market place in the preſence of all the lordes / and of all ſuch as wold here hym: declared what right the kyng of Englande had to the crowne of Frā
               ce: and alſo what puyſſaunce the thre countreis were of / Flaunders / Heynault / and Brabant: ſurely ioyned in one alyance. And he dyde ſo by his great wyſdome / and pleſaunt wordes that all people that harde hym prayſed hym moche: and ſayd howe he had nobly ſpoken / & by great experyēee. And thus he was greatly prayſed / & it was ſayd yt he was well worthy to gouerne y• countie of Flaunders. Than the lordes departed / and promyſed to mete agayne within .viii. dayes at Gaunt to ſe the kyng of England / and ſo they dyd. And the kyng feaſted them honorably / and ſo dyd the quene / who was as than nuly purifyed of a ſonne called John̄ / who was after duke of Lancaſtre by his wyfe / doughter to duke Henry of Lācaſtre. Than ther was a coū
               ſell ſet to be at Uyllenort / and a day lymitted.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe kynge Robert of Cicyll dyd all that he might to pacyfie the kyngꝭ of Fraunce / and Englande. Cap. 
                  •
               i.
            
               WHan the french king harde howe his army on the ſee was dyſcoufyted: he dylloged and drewe to Arras / & gaue leaue to his men to depart tyll he harde other tidynges. And ſent ſir Godmar du Fay to Tourney to ſe that there lacked nothyng: he feared more the itemynges than any other. And ſent the lord of Beautewe / to Mortayn to kepe the fronters agaynſt Heynalt and he ſent many mē of warr to ſaynt Omers / to Ayre / and to ſaynt 
                  •
               enaunt and purueyed ſuffyciently for all the fortereſſes frontyng on Flanders. In this ſeaſon ther raygned a kyng in Cicyll called Robert / who was reputed to be a great aſtronomyer and alwayes he warned the frenche kyng and his counſell that in no wyſe he ſhulde fight agaynſt the king of Englande: for he ſayd it was gyuen the king of Englande to be right fortunate in all his dedes. This kyng Robert wold gladly haue ſene theſe two kynges at a good acorde: for he loued ſomoch the crowne of Fraunce / y• he was right ſorte to ſe the deſolacyon cherof. This kynge of Cicyll was at Auygnone with pope Clement / & with the colledge ther and declared to them the peryls y• were likely to fall in the realme of Frā
               ce: by the warr byt wene the ſayd two kyngꝭ / de ſyring them that they wold helpe to fynde ſome meanes to apeaſe them. Wher vnto y• pope and the cardynals anſwered: howe they wolde gladly intende therto / ſo that the two kynges wolde he
                  •
               e them.
         
         
            ¶ Of the counſayle that the kynge of Englande / and his alyes helde at Uyllenort. Cap. lii.
            
               AT this counſayle holden at Uyllenort / were theſe lordes as foloweth. The kyng of England / y• duke of Brabant / therle of Henalt 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John his vncle / y• duke of Guerles / therle of Jullers / the marques of Faulquehoure / the marques of Muſſe / therle of Mons / ſir Robert Dartoys / the lorde of Falquemont / ſir Wyllyam of Dunort / therle of Namur / Jaques Dartuell and many other great lordes & of euery good towne of Flanders a thre or .iiii. perſonages in maner of a counſayle. Ther was a grement made bytwene the thre contreis: Flā
               ders / Brabāt / and Heynalt: that fro thenſ forth eche of them ſhulde ayde and confort other in all caſes. And ther they made aſſurāce ech to other that if any of them had to do with any countrey thother two ſhulde gyue ayde. And her after if any of them ſhulde be at dyſcorde one with an other / the thyrde ſhulde ſet agremēt bytwene thē. And if he were nat able ſo to do / than the mater ſhulde be put vnto the kynge of Englande / in whoſe handes this mater was ſworne and promyſed / and he to agre them. And inconfyrmacion of loue and amyte: they ordayned a lawe to ryn throughout thoſe .iii. contres / ye which was called the lawe of the companyons or alyes: and ther it was determyned yt the kyng of Englāde ſhulde remoue about Maudelentyde after / and ley ſiege to Turney: and ther to mete all y• ſayd lordes and thers / with the powers of all y• good to wnes. And than euery man departed to their owne houſes / to aparell them in that behalfe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of England heſieged the cyte of Tourney with great puyſance. Cap. liii.
            
               THe frenche kyng after the departure of theſe lordes fro the counſell of Uyllenort he knewe y• moſt part of their determynacion. Than he ſēt to Tourney the chefe men of warr of all Fraūce / as therle of Ewe / the yong erle of Guynes his ſonne conſtable of Fraunce / therle of Foytz / and his bretherne / therle Amery of Narbon / ſir Aymer of Poyters / ſir Geffray of Charney / ſir Gararde of Mountfaucon the two marſhals / ſir Robert Bertrand / and ſir Mathue de Troy / the lorde of Caieur / the ſeneſſhall of Poyctou / the lord of Chaſtelayn / and ſir John̄ of Landas: and theſe had with them valyant knyghtes and ſquyers. They came to Tourney: and founde there ſir Godmar du Fay / who was ther before. Than they toke regarde to the prouiſyon of the towne aſ well to the vytels / as to thartyllerie: and forti

ficatyon / and they cauſen to be brought out of the contrey there about: where / otes / and other prouyſion. ¶ Nowe let vs retourne to y• kyng of Englande: whan the tyme aproched that he and his alyes ſhuld mete before Tourney and that the corne beganne to rype: he departed fro Gaunt with .vii. erles of his contrey .viii. prelates xxviii. baronettes ii. C. knyghtesꝭ foure thouſande men of armes / and. 
                  〈◊〉
               . M. archers beſyde fotemen. All his hooſt paſſed through y• towne of Andwarpe / and ſo paſſed the 
                  ••
               uer of 
                  •
               eſcalt and lodged before Tourney / at the gate called ſaynt Martyne / the way to 
                  •
               arde Lyſle and Doway. Than anone after came the duke of Brabant with mo than. x
                  •
               . M. men / knyghtes / ſquyers / and cōmons: and he lodged at the brige of Aryes by the ryuer of Leſcalt: bytwene thabbey of ſaynt Nycholas / and the gate Ualē tenoys. Next to hym came therle of Heynaultꝭ with a gooly company of his contrey / with many of Holande / and zelande: and he was loged bytwene the kyuge and the duke of Brabaunt. Than came Jaques Dartuell with mo thā. l
                  •
               . thouſande ſlemmynges / beſyde them of 
                  •
               pre / Dropingne / Caſſell / Bergues: and they were ſent on the other ſyde / as ye ſhall here after. Jaques Dartuell lodged at the gate ſaynt Fountayne / y• duke of Guerles / therſe of Jullers / the marques of Blāqueboure / y• marques of muſſe therle of Mons / therle of Sauynes / the lord of Falquemount / ſir Arnolde of Baquechew and all the Almayns were lodged on the other ſyde towarde Heynalt. Thus the cytie of Tourney was cnuyroned rounbe about / and euery hooſt myght reſort eche to other: ſo that none coulde yſſue out without ſpyeug.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Heynalt 
                  〈…〉
               yed the townes of S
                  〈…〉
               ne / and Dorchyes. Cap. liiii.
            
               THe ſige enduring they without wer well prouyded of vytels and at a metely pri ce for it came to them fro all partes. On a mornynge the erle of Heynalt with .v. hundred ſperes / departed fro the hooſt and paſſed by Lyſle / and brent the good towne of Seclyne and many vyllages there about: and their currours ranne to the ſubarbes of Lens in Artoyſe. And after that the erle toke an other way / and rode to the towne of Durchies: the whiche was taken & brent / for it was nar cloſed: and alſo they burnt Landas / Ly
                  〈…〉
                and dyuers other good townes there about / and ouer ranne the countrey and gate great 
                  •
               yllage. And than retourned agayne to the hooſt 
                  〈◊〉
                Turney: alſo the flemynges often tymes aſſay led them of Tourney / and had made ſhyppes / belſroys / and inſtrumentes of aſſaut: ſo that euery day lightly there was ſkirmyſſhyng & dyuerſe hurt / of one and other. The ſtemmynges toke moche payne to trouble them of Tourney▪ among other aſſautes ther was one endured at a day ther was many feates of armes done for all the lordes and knyghtes that were in Tournay were therat: for thaſſaut was made in ſhyppes and veſſels wrought for the ſame intent / to haue broken the baryers and the poſterne of the arche. But it was ſo well defended / that the ſlē
               mynges wanne nothyng: ther they loſt a ſhypp̄ with a ſixſcore men the which were drowned / & at night they withdrue right ſore traueyled. 
                  〈◊〉
                ſo this ſiege enduryng / the ſoudyours of ſayut Amandeyſſued out and came to Hanon in Heynalt / and burnt the towne and vyolated the abbey / and dyſtroyed the mynſter / & caryed away all that they might to ſaynt Amande / and an other tyme y• ſame frenche ſoudyours paſſed the wood of ſaynt Amande / and came to the abbey of Uycongue and made a great fyre at the gate to haue burnt it. Whan thabbot ſawe what parell his houſe was in / haſtely he toke his horſe & rode out priuely through the wood and came to Ualencennes / deſyring the prouoſt ther to lend hym a certayne croſbowes. And whan̄e he had his deſyre / he brought thē behynde Rames and ſet them in the wood towarde the hyghe way to procelet. And ther they ſhotte agaynſt the genowayes and frenchmen / beyng before the gate of Uycongne: and whan they ſawe and felt y• quarels lyght among them commyng fro the wood they were a frayed / & retourned as faſt as they myght: and ſo the abbey was ſaued.
         
         
            ¶ How the ſcottes wan agayne gret part of Scotlande / whyle the ſiege was before Tourney. Cap. lv.
            
               
               HOwe it is to be remē
               bred how ſir Wyllyam Duglas ſonne of Wyllm̄ Duglas brother: who dyed in Spayne. And therle of Patris / therle of Surlant / ſir Robert of Herſſey / ſir Symonde Freſyell / and Alyſander Ramſey: they were captayns in ſuche parte of Scotlande as was left vnwonne by thenglyſſhmen. And they had cōtynued in the foreſt of Gode0urs ye ſpace of .vii. yere wynter & ſomer / and as they might they made warr agaynſt thenglyſſhmen beyng ther in garyſon. Somtyme they had good aduēture / and ſomtyme yuell: & whyle the kyng of Englande was at ſiege before Tourney. The french kyng ſent men of warr into Scotlande and they arryued at ſaynt Johāns towne / and they deſyred the ſcottes in the french kyngꝭ name / that they wolde ſet on and make ſuch warr in the realme of England: that the kyng might be fayne to retourne home to reſcue his owne realme / and to leaue vp the ſige at Tourney / and the frenche kyng promyſed thē men and money to ayde them ſo to do. And ſo the ſcottes departed out of the foreſt of Gedeours and paſſed thorough Scotlande / and wanne agayne dyuerſe fortreſſes: and ſo paſt the towne of Berwyke & the ryuer of Tyne / and entred into the contrey of Northumberlande / the which ſomtyme was a realme. Ther they founde gret plentie of beeſtes / and waſted and brent all the contrey to Durame: than they retourned by an other way dyſtroyeng the countrey. In this voyage they diſtroyed more than thre dayes iourney into the realme of Englande / and than̄e retourned into Scotlande: and conquered agayne all the fortreſſes that were holden by the englyſſhmen except the cyte of Berwyke and thre other caſtels / the which dyd them great trouble. They were ſo ſtronge that it wolde haue ben harde to haue founde any ſuche in any countrey: the one was Strumelyn / an other Roſbourg / and the third the chyefe of all Scotlande Edenborowe. The whiche caſtell ſtandeth on a hygh rocke / that a man muſt reſt ones or twyſe or he ſōe to the hyeſt of the hyll: and captayne ther was ſir Water Lymoſen / who before had ſo valiantly kept the caſtell of Thyne agaynſt the frenchmen. So it was that ſir Wyllyam Duglas deuyſed a feate and dyſcouerd his intencyon to his cōpanyons to therle Patris / to ſir Robert Freſyell / and to Alyſander Ramſay: and all they agreed togyder. Thā they toke a .ii. C. of the wylde ſcottes and entred into the ſee: and made prouiſyon of otes mele / coles / and wood: and ſo peſably thei arryued at a port / nere to the caſtelll of Edenbo rowe. And in the night they armed theym / and toke a .x. or .xii. of their company ſuche as they dyd truſt beſt: and dyde diſgyſe theym in poore torne cotes / and hattes lyke poore men of the cō
               trey. And charged a .xii. ſmall horſes with ſackꝭ ſome with otes / ſome with where mele / & ſome with coles: and they dyde ſet all their company in a buſſhment / in an olde diſtroyed abbey ther by / nere to the fote of the hyll. And whan ye day began to apere / couertly armed as they were: they went vp the hyll with their marchandyſe. And whan they were in the mydde way: 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllyam Duglas and ſir Symode Freſyll diſgyſed as they were / went a lytell before and came to the porter (and ſayd) ſir in gret fere we haue brought hyther otes / and whetemele: and if ye haue any nede therof / we woll ſell it to you gode chepe. Mary ſayd the porter and we haue nede therof: but it is ſo erly that I darre nat a wake the captayne / nor his ſtuarde: but let them ſōe in and I ſhall opyn the vtter gate. And ſo they all entred into the gate of the bayles: ſir Wyllm̄ Duglas ſawe well how the porter had the keys in his handes of the great gate of the caſtell.
            Than whan the firſte gate was opynned / as ye haue harde: their horſes with caryages entred in: and the two that came laſt laden with coles / they made them to fall downe on the grounſyll of the gate / to thentent that the gate ſhulde nat be cloſed agayne. And than they toke the porter and ſlewe hym ſo peſably: that he neuerr ſpake worde / than they toke the great keys and opynned the caſtell gate / than ſir Wyllyam Duglas blewe a horne and dyd caſt away their torne cotes / and layed all the other ſackes ouerthwarte the gate / to thyntent that it ſhulde nat be ſhytte agayne. And whan they of the buſſhment harde the horne: in all haſt they myght they mounted the hyll. Than the watchmen of the caſtell with noyſe of the horne a woke / and ſawe how the peple wer cōmyng all armed to the caſtell warde. Than he blewe his horne and cryed treaſon treſon: ſirs a ryſe and arme you ſhortly for yonder be men of armes aprochynge to your fortreſſe: than euery man aroſe and armed them and cāe to the gate: but ſir Wyllyam Duglas and his .xii. companyons defended ſo the gate that they coude nat cloſe it. And ſo by great valyantneſſe they kept thentre opyn / tyll their buſſhment cāe they within defended the caſtell / aſ well as they might and hurt dyuers of them without: but 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
               
               
Wyllyam and the ſcottes dyd ſomoch that they conquered the fortreſſe / and all the englyſſmen within ſlayne: excepte the captayne and ſire other ſquyers. So the ſcottꝭ taryed ther all that day / and made a knyght of the contrey captayn ther called Symōde Ueſſey / and with hym dyuers other of the contrey: theſe tidynges came to the kyng of Englande before Tourney.
         
         
            ¶ Of the great hooſt that the frenche kyng aſſembled to rayſe the ſiege before Tourney. Cap. lvi.
            
               VE haue harde before howe the kynge of Englande had beſieged the cyte of Tourney / with mo than ſixſcore thouſande men of armes with the flemmynge. And bycauſe the vytayles within the cytie beganne to myniſſhe: the frenche lordes within cauſed to a uoyde out of the towne / all maner of poore people ſuch as were nat furnyſſhed to abyue the aduenture of the ſiege. They were put out in the opynne day: and they paſſed through the duke of Brabātes hooſt / who ſhewed their grefe / for he cauſed them to beſafely brought to the frēche hooſt at Aras / where as the kyng lay. And ther he made a gret aſſemble of men of his owne cō
               trey / and part out of the empyre. Thyder came to hym the kyng of Behaygne / the duke of Loraygne / therle of Bare / the byſſhoppe of Mets and of Coerdune / therle of Mountbelieu / ſir John̄ of Chalon / the erle of Geuyne / the erle of Sauoy / & the lorde Lewes of Sauoy his brother. All theſe lordes came to ſerue the frenche kynge with all their powers. Alſo thyder came the duke of Bretaygne / the duke of Burgoyne / the duke of Borbone / therle of Alanſon / therle of Flanders / therle Foreſtes / therle Arminacke therle of Bloyes / ſir Charles of Bloyes / therle of Harcourt / therle Dāmartyn / the lorde Coucy: and dyuers other lordes and knightes. And after came the kyng of Nauarr / with a goodly nōbre of men a warre out of the contrey in Frā
               ce / that he helde of the frenche kyng / and therby he cāe to ſerue hym. Alſo there was the kynge of ſcottꝭ / with a certayne nōbre apoynted to hym.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the ſoudyers of the garyſon of Bohayne / dyſtruſſed certayne ſoudyers of Mortayne before the towne of Conde. Ca. lvii.
            
               WHan all theſe ſayde lordes were come to Aras to the frenche kyng / than he remeuyd and came to a lytell ryuerr a thre leages fro Turney the water was depe / and rounde about full of maryſſhes / ſo that no man coude paſſe but by a lytell way / ſo narowe that two horſes coude nat paſſe a fronte. There the kyng lay and paſſed nat the ryuer: for he durſt nat. The next day the hooſtes lay ſtyll / ſome of the lordes counſayled to make bridges to paſſe ouer the water at their eaſe: than ther wey men ſent to aduyſe the paſſage. And whan they had well aduyſed euery thyng / they thought it was but a loſt labour and ſo they ſhewed the kynge / howe that ther was no paſſage but at the brige of Creſſyn. Thus the mater abode in the ſame caſe: the tidynges anone ſpred abrode howe the french kyng was lodged bytwene the bridge of Creſſyn and the bridge of Bonnes / to thentent to fight with his ennemies. So that all maner of people ſuche as deſyred honoure / d
                  •
               ue to the one part and to the other / as they owed their ſeruyce or fauoure Ther were thre Almayns bretherne in Bouhaygne: whan they harde howe theſe two kynges aproched nere togyder be like lyhode to fight / than two of thē deſyred the. 
                  〈◊〉
               . to abyde ſtyll and kepe ye fortres / and they ſayd they wolde go and ſe what chere there was before Tourney. So theſe two knyght
                  ••
                de
                  •
               te
                  •
                one of thē was called ſir Courrat Daſtra / and the other ſir Courrat Lancenuch / and they rode tyll they came to Eſcampons beſyde Ualenc
                  •
               s thinkyng to paſſe the ryuer of Leſcalt at Conde And bytwene Freſnes / and Eſcampons / they harde a gret brunt of men and ſawe howe ſome came fleyng to themwarde. The two bretherne had with thē to the nombre of .xxv. ſpeares and they encountred the firſt / and demaūded what they ayled / ſo to fle away. In the name of god ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                they / the ſoudyers of Mortayne aryſſued out and they haue get a great pray / and are goynge therwith towarde their fortreſſe / and alſo haue taken dyuers priſoners of this countrey. Thā the two bretherne ſayd / ſirs can ye lede vs ther as they be: and they ſayde yes. And ſo they went after the frenchmen by the gyding of thoſe poore men / and the frēchmen were as than nere

to our lady in the wood / and wer a ſixſcore ſoudyers / and draue before them. C. great beeſtes / and certayne priſoners of the men of the cōtrey. And their captayne was a knyght of Burgone called John̄ de Frelays / ꝑteyninge to the lorde of Beauieuu: aſſone as the almayns ſawe them they aſcryed them and ran in fierſly among thē 
               ther was a ſore fight: the Burgonyon knyght dyd put hymſelfe to defence / and ſome of his cō
               pany but nat all / for ther were dyuers that ſted But they were ſo nere chaſed / what with the almayns ▪ and with the men of the countrey / that ther ſcaped but a fewe other ſlayne or taken: ſir John̄ de Frelays was taken / and all y• pray reſcued and rendred agayne to the men of the contrey. And after that aduenture / the almayns cāe before Tourney wher they were welcome.
         
         
            ¶ Of the iourney that ſir wyllm̄ Baylleull and ſir Ualflart de la Croyſe made at the bridge of Creſſyn. Cap. lviii.
            
               A None after the frenche kyng was lodged thus at the bridge of Bouues / a company of heynous by the ſettyng on of ſir Wyllm̄ Bayllule and y• lorde Uauflart de la croyſe who ſayd howe they knewe all the contrey / and that they wolde bring them into ſuch a place on the frenche hooſt / y• they ſhulde haue ſome wynnynge. And ſo on a mornyng they departed fro thooſt about ſirſcore cōpanyons knyghtes and ſquyers: and they rode towarde Dont de Creſſyn / and made the lorde Bayllule to be as chefe / and that to his baner euery man ſhulde drawe. Nowe the ſame mornyng rode forthe certayne nōbre of y• legoys of the french party / wherof 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert de Baylleull brother to the foreſayd ſir Wyllm̄ Baylleull was chefe captayn. So ther were two bretherne on dyuers parties: the lyegois had paſſed the bride of Creſſyn / and were a foragyng for their horſes / & to ſe if they coude fynde any aduenture profitable for them. The heynowes rode all that mornyng without fyndyng of any aduēture / and they alſo paſſed the bridge: ther was ſuch a myſt that a man coude nat ſe y• length of a ſpere before hym. And whan the heynous were all ouer: than they ordayned that ſir Wyllm̄ Baylluell with his baner ſhuld abyde on the bridge / and ſir Uauflart / ſir Raflet de Monceaur / and ſir John̄ de Uerchyne ſhulde aduenture on farther. And ſo they went ſo farr that they daſſhed in to thooſt of y• kynge of Behayne and the byſſhopp̄ of Liege / for they were lodged nere to the bridge / and the lorde of Rademache had made watche the ſame nyght / and it was at the poynt of his deꝑtyng. So bytwene them ther was a ſore conflict / how beit fynally the heynous drue backe towarde y• brige: and the liegoys / and lucēbourzins folowed thē and ſir Wyllm̄ Baylluell was counſelled to repaſſe agayne the bridge with his baner / for thei had dyuers of their cōpany to repaſſe. So the heynous repaſſed agayne aſwell as they might and in their paſſynge ther were many dedes of armes done / in takynge and reſcuyng agayne. So it fortuned▪ that ſir Uauflart coude nat repaſſe the brige / & ſo was fayne to ſaue hymſelfe aſwell as he might: he yſſued out of the preace & toke away that he knewe well / and ſo entred in to the marſhes among buſſhes and rockes / and ther taryed. The other fought ſtyll at the brige and ther the liegoys ouercame 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllm̄ Baylleuls company. And therwith / ſir Robert Baylleull whan he harde that noyſe in that parte / he cāe rynning thyder with his baner before hym / and whan the heynowes ſawe the baner of moraynes / they byleued it had ben the baner of ſir Wyllm̄ Bayllule and drue thyder / for ther was but a ſmall dyfferēce bytwene their baners / for the armes of morians be barres counterbarres two cheurons gowles: and in the cheuron of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert Baylleull ther was a lytell croſſe golde which y• heynous toke no hede of. Wherby they were diſconfyted: and ſlayne John̄ de Uergny ſir water du Pont de large ſir Wyllm̄ of Pypē poix / and dyuers other: and taken ſir John̄ de Soyre / ſir Danyell de Bleze: ſir Race de Mō
               ceaur / ſir Loys Dampelen / and dyuers other: and ſir Wyllm̄ de Baylleul ſcaped aſwell as he might / but he loſt moche of his cōpany ▪ 
               
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Uauflart de la Croyſe / who was in the maryſſhe truſtyng to haue ben ther tyll it had ben night / and ſo to haue ſcaped / was ſpyed by ſome that rode a longe by the mareſe. And they made ſuche an out cry on hym / that he cāe out and yelded hym ſelfe priſoner / they toke and brought hym to the hooſt and delyuered hym to their maiſter / who wolde gladly haue ſaued hī: for he knewe well he was in ieopardy of his lyfe. Anone tidynges of hym was brought to the french kyng / who in cōtynent dyd ſend for hym: and the kyng immediatly ſent hym to Lyle / bycauſe he had done to thē moche damage. And ſo win the towne they dyd put him to deth / they wold in no wyſe haue pyte of hym nor put hym to any ranſome.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe therle of Heynault aſſayled the fortreſſe of Mortayne in Picardy by dyuers maners. Cap. lix.
            
               OF this dede that ſir Robert Bayllieull had done: y• frenche kyng was ryght ioyouſe. And within a ſeaſon after / the erle of Heynault / ſir John̄ his vncle / and the ſene ſhall of Heynalt: with a .vi. hundred ſpeares / heynowes / and almayns / departed fro the ſiege of Turney. And therle ſent to them of Ualencēs ▪ that they ſhulde come and mete with hym before Mortayne: and to come bytwene Leſcharpe / & Leſcault to aſſayle Mortayne: and they came thyder in great array and brought with them great engyus. The lorde of Beauieu who was captayne within Mortayn greatly douted aſſautyng / bycauſe the fortreſſe ſtode nere to the ryuer / and nere to Heynault as on all parties: therfore he cauſed .xii. C. pyles to be driuen in the ryuer / to thyntent that no paſſage ſhulde be that way. Howbeit for all that y• erle of Heynault / and the heynous came thyder on the one ſyde / and they of Ualencens on the other part And incōtynent they made an aſſaut and aproched the barrers / but ther were ſuche depe trenches that they coude nat cōe nere / than ſome aduyſed to paſſe the ryuer of Leſcharpe / and ſo to cōe on the ſyde towarde ſaynt Amand & to make an aſſaut at the gate toward maulde And as they deuyſed: a foure hundred paſſed y• ryuer / ſo than Mortayne was cloſed in thre ꝑtes / the wekyſt ſyde was towarde Mauld / howbeit ther was ſtrength ynough. To that parte came the lorde Beauieu hymſelfe to defende it / for he feared none of the other ſydes / he had in his hande a great glaue / ſharpe and well 
                  ••
               elyd and aboue the blade ther was a ſharpe hoke of ſtele / y• whan he gaue his ſtroke the hoke ſhulde take holde. And loke on whome that it faſtened he came to hym / or els fell in the water: by that meanes the ſame day he caſt into the water mo than .xii. At that gate the aſſant was fereſyſt / y• erle of Heynalt who was on y• otherſyde knewe nothyng of that aſſaut / he was araynged alōge the ryuer ſyde of Leſcault / and deuyſed howe they might get out of the riuer the pyles byforce or by ſubtyltie / for than they might come iuſt to the walles. They ordayned to make a ſhypp / & a gret engyn to drawe out the pyles eche one after other / their carpenters were ſet a warke and the engyn made in a ſhyppe / and the ſame day they of Ualencens rayſed on their ſyde a great engyn and dyd caſt in ſtones ſo that it fore troubled them within. Thus y• firſt day paſſed and the night in aſſayling and deuyſing howe they might greue them in the fortreſſe / the nexte day they went to aſſaut on all partes / and the thirde day the ſhypp̄ was redy / and thengyn to drawe out y• pyles. And than dyd ſet awarke to drawe them out / but ther were ſo many and ſuche labour in the doyng or they coude drawe out one / that they were wery of that craft: and the lordes wolde they had neuer begon it / and ſo cōmaunded to ceaſe their warke. On y• other part within Mortayne / there was a connyng maiſter in makyng of engyns / who ſawe well howe thengyn of Ualencens dyd greatly greue them / he rayſed an engyn in y• caſtell / the which was nat very great but he trymmed it to a poynt. And he caſt therwith but thre tymes / the firſte ſtone fell a .xii. fote fro thengyn without / the ſeconde fell nerer / and the thirde ſtone hit ſo euyn that it brake clene a ſonder the ſhaft of thengyn without. Than the ſo
                  •
               dyers of Mortaygne made a great ſhout: ſo thus the heynous coude get nothyng ther / than therle ſayd howe he wolde wt
               drawe and go agayne to the ſiege of Tourney. And ſo they dyd / and they of Ualencens retourned to their towne.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Heynault toke the towne of ſaynt Amande / duryng the ſiege before Tourney. Cap. lx.
            
               A Thre dayes after that therle of Heynault was retourned fro Mortaygne / he deſyred certayne companyons to go to ſaynt Amande / for he had dyuers complayntes how y• ſoudyers of ſaynt Amand had burnt thabbey of Hanon ▪ and had nere brent Uycoigne / & had done many diſpytꝭ to the fronters of Heynalt. So therle departed fro the ſige with a .iii. M. men and came before ſaynt Amand / on the ſyde towarde Mortayne. The towne was nat cloſed but with pales / and captayne ther was a knyght of Lāguedoke the ſeneſhall of Cracaſſone / who had ſayd to y• mō
               kes of thabbey ther and to them of the towne / y• it was nat able to holde agaynſt an hooſt: how be it he ſayd rather than he wolde deꝑt he wold kepe it to the beſt of his power / but that he ſayd

was in the maner of counſell howbeit his wordes was nat byleued. But long before the iuels of the abbey were caryed to Mortaygne for the more ſuretie / and thyder went the abbot and all his mōkes / for they were no men of warr. And they of Ualencēnes came at therles cōmaundement with a .xii. thouſande men / and all y• croſbo wes kept the gate to warde the bridge of Leſharpe / they began a ferſe aſſaut and many ſore hurt on bothe parties. This aſſaut endured all the day: they of Ualencens coude get nothynge ther / they within ſcorned and mocked thē: and ſayd ſirs go your way and drink your good ale And agaynſt night they of Ualencennes withbre we right wery / and had gret marueyle that they coude here no tidynges of therle their lord and therfore they dyſloged and drewe towarde their towne: the next mornyng be tymes / therle departed fro Turney / & came to ſaynt Amand on the ſyde towarde Mortayne: and incōtynēt they made aſſaute feers and cruell / and wan at the firſt the bayles / and came to the gate to war de Mortaygne. And ther therle and his vncle made a great aſſaut and eche of them had ſuch a ſtroke on the heed with ſtones / that their baſenettes were clouen / and their heedes ſore aſtonyed. At laſt one ſayd to therle: ſir this way we ſhall neuer entre / the way is ſtrayet and ſtrongly kept. But ſir make great rāmes of wood like pyles / and let vs ronne with them agaynſt the abbey walles / and we ſhall peerſe it through in dyuers places / and if we get thabbey the towne is ours. Than therle cōmaunded ſo to be done: and anone gret peaces of tymber wer gote and made ſharpe before: and to euery pece twentie or .xxx. perſons / ronnyng ther with agaynſt the wall: ſo that they brake the wall in dyuers places / and valyantly entred ther and paſſed a lytell ryuer that ranne within. And ther was redy the ſeneſhall of Carcaſſone his baner before hym: the which was goules a ſheffe ſyluerthre cheuorns in the ſheffe bordred ſyluer indented. And he and his cōpany defended valyantly the heynowes as long as they might: but their defence coude nat auayle for the heynowes wer ſomany. And in their entryng into thabbey: ther was a monke called danne Froſſart who dyde maruels / for he kylled and hurt at the hole ther as he ſtode an. x
                  •
               iii. ſo that none durſt entre in at that place: but finally he was fayne to depart for he ſawe howe the henous entred into the abbey in dyuers places. And ſoo the monke ſaued hymſelfe aſwell as he might / and went to Mortayne. Whan therle and his cōpany wer entred into thabbey / he cōmaunded yt all ſhulde be put to the ſwerde they had ſo ſore dyſpleaſed hym / and done ſuche hurt in his contrey. The towne anone was full of men of armes / and they with in chaſed and ſought for / fro ſtrete to ſtrete & in euery houſe: ſo yt fewe ſcaped but all wer ſlayne The ſeneſhall was ſlayne vnder his ſtandarde and a .ii. C. men rounde about hym / & agaynſt night therle retourned to Turney / the next day they of Ualencens cāe a gayne to ſaynt Amand and brent clene the towne / and thabbey minſter and all / and brake all the belles the which were goodly. Another day therle agayne deꝑted fro the ſiege with vi. C. men of armes / and went and brent Orchies / Lādas / and the Chell: and than paſſed by Hanon the ryuer of Leſharpe / & went into France to a great abbey and aryche called Marchienes / wherof ſir Amye of Uernaulx was captayne / & with hym certayne croſbowes of Doway: ther therle made aſſaut for y• captayne had well fortifyed the firſte gate with great depe dykes / and the frenchmen & monkes ther defended thēſelfe right nobly / the heynous at laſt gate them botes and barges / and therby entred into thabbey: but there was a knyght of Almayne drowned a cōpanyon of the lorde Falquemont called ſir Bacho de la Wyer. Therle & his vncle and the ſeneſhall dyd at the gate ſo valyantly / that the gate was wone: and ſir Amye and his cōpany ſlayne or taken. And ther were taken dyuers monkes and thabbey robbed and brent and the towne alſo: than therle retourned to the ſiege before Tourney.
         
         
            ¶ Of the takyng of Charles Mōmorency / and dyuers other frenchemen at the bridge of Creſſyn. Cap. lxi.
            
               THis ſiege before Tourney was long and great: and the kyng of England ſuppoſed euer to wyn it / for he knewe well ther were moche people within and but ſcant of vytayle. Wherefore he thought to famyſſh them and ſome ſayde they founde fomme courteſy in theym of Brabaunt / in ſufferynge vytayles to paſſe through their hooſt into the cyte: and they of Bruſſels and Louane wer ſore wery with taryeng ther ſo long / & they deſyred the marſhall of thoſt that they might haue leaue to retourne into Brabāt. The marſhall ſayd he was well cō
               tent: but than they muſt leue all their harnes be hynde them / with the which anſwere they were

ſo a ſhamed that they neuer ſpake therof more. ¶ Nowe I ſhall ſhewe you of a iourney that ye almayns made at the ſame bridge of Creſſyne: wher as ſir Robert Bayllule dyſconfited ye heynowes / as the lorde of Rauderōdēce & ſir John̄ his ſon / John̄ Raudebourg eſquyer 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                
               Arnold of Baquehen / ſir Raynolde Deſcouuenort / ſir Rorrant / Daſto / ſir Baſtyen de Baſtes / & Can drelyer his brother / ſir Strauren de Leurne: & dyuerſe other of the duchy of Jullers & of guerles. All theſe rode forthe on a day / and alſo they had with them certayne bachellers of Heynalt: as ſir Floren of Beauryon / ſir Latas de la Hey marſhall of thooſt / ſir John̄ of Heynalt / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Oulphart of Guyſtels / ſir Robert Gleuues of therldome of Loz / and dyuers other: they wer a thre C. they came to the bridge of Creſſyn / & paſſed without danger. Than they toke counſell what they ſhulde do / & it was thought moſte for their honour to go and a wake the french hoſt. Ther it was ordayned that the lorde Rauderondence and his ſon / ſir Henry of Keukren / ſir Tylman of Sauſey 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Olphart of Guyſtels 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Lalemāt baſtarde of Heynalt Robert of Gleuues / & Jaquelat of Tyaulx / ſhulde ryde & ſodenly daſſhe into the frenche hoſt. And the other knyghtes & ſquyers / to the nombre of thre. C. ſhulde abyde ſtyll at the brige to kepe ye paſſage. Thus theſe currours rode forthe to the nōbre of a .xl. ſperes tyll they came to thooſt: and ſo daſſht in and ouerthrue tentes & pauilyons / and ſkirmyſſhed with the frenchmen. The ſame night two great barons of France had kept the wache that is to ſay the lorde of Mōmorency / & the lorde of Salieu: and whan they harde the noyſe / they came with their baners to yt part. Than the almaynz retourned towarde the brige / and the frēchmen after them feerſly: and in the chaſe ſir Olphart of Guyſtels was taken / for he was purblynde: and alſo two bretherne Mondrope and Jaquelet Tyaulx they wer ſo nere togyder that ech of them vnderſtode others language. And the frenmen ſayd to the almayns: ſirs ye ſhall nat ſcape thus / than one ſayd to the lorde of Rauderōdēce ſir take good hede for me thynke the frenchmen wyll be at the bridge or we / well ſayd he though they knowe one way / I knowe an other. Thā he tourned on the right hande: & toke a way nat moche vſed / the which brought hym and his cō
               pany to ye foreſayd ryuer / the which was ſo depe and enuyroned with mareſſhes / that they coud nat paſſe ther / ſo that they were fayne to repaſſe by the bridge / and the frenchemen euer rode a great galoppe towarde the bridge / and whaūe they came nere to the brige / and ſawe that great buſſhment ther / they ſayd among themſelfe / I trowe we chaſe folyſſhly / we might lightly leſe rather than wyn. Than dyuers of them retourned: and ſpecially the lorde of ſaynt Saulie
                  ••
                with his baner and his company / and the lorde Charles of Mōmorency with his baner rode euer forwarde and wold nat recule. And ſo with great courage ſette on the almayns / at the firſt brunt ther was a feerſe encounter / and dyuerſe ouer throwen on bothe parties. Than cāe in on thother ſyde / thother almayns / and ſo encloſed in the frenchmen: the lorde Renolde of Dyſcouuenort knewe well the baner of the lorde Mommorency / who was vnder his banner with his ſwerde in his hand fightyng on euery ſyde / and ſo came ſodenly on his right hande / & with his lyfthande he toke the bridell of the lorde Mommorencies horſe / and ſpurred forthe his owne horſe / and ſo drewe hym out of the batayle. And euer the lorde Mommorency ſtrake and gaue hym many great ſtrokes / which ſome he receyued / and ſome he defended. But finally ther he was taken priſoner: ſo the almayns dyde ſomoche that they obtayned the place / and toke a fourſcore priſoners of gentylmen: than they re paſſed the bridge without any danger. And ſo came agayne to the ſiege before Tourney.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the flēmynges were before ſaynt Omers duryng the ſiege. Cap. lxii.
            
               NOw let vs ſhe we of au aduenture that tell to the flēmynges: of the whiche company ther were captayns ſir Robert Dartoyſe / & ſir Henry of Flāders / they wer in nombre a xl. M. what of the townes of Ippre / Propyngne / Meſſynes / Caſſell and of the Catelayne of Bergus. All theſe flēmynges lay in the vale of Caſſell in tentes & pauylions to coū
               tergaryſon the french garyſons / that the french kynge had layed at ſaynt Omers at 
                  〈◊〉
                / at ſaynt Uenaunt / and in other townes and fortereſſes there aboute. And in ſaynt Omers there was therle dolphyne of Auuergne / the lorde of kalengen / the lorde of 
                  〈…〉
                Rocheforte / the 
                  〈…〉
               
               nerſe other knyghtes of 
                  〈…〉
               
               ſyn. And 
                  〈…〉
                alſo many 
                  〈…〉
                out 
                  〈…〉
                
               
and brake downe dyuers houſes / & robbed thē. The fray anon was knowen in the towne / and the lordes within armed them and their cōpany and yſſued out at a nother gate / they were a vi. baners and a .ii. C. men of armes and a .vi. .C. fotemen / and they came by a ſecrete way on the flemmynges / who were beſy to robbe & pyll the towne of Arkes nere to ſaynt Omers / there they were ſpredde abrode without captayne or good order. Than the frēchmen came on them in good order of batell their bauers diſplayed cryeng Cleremont / the dolphyne of Auuergne / wherwith the flemmynges were a baſſhed and beatyn downe by hepes. And the chaſe of them endured .ii. leages / and ther were ſlayne a .iiii. M. and .viii. C. and a .iiii. C. taken priſoners and ledde to ſaynt Omers / and ſuche as fledde and ſcaped retourned to the hooſt / and ſhewed their companyons their aduenture. And at laſt tidynges therof came to their captayns ſir Robert Dartoyſe / and ſir Henry of Flāders / who ſayd it was well enployed / for they went forthe without cōmaundement or capitayne: and the ſame nyght or it was mydnight the flemynges lyeng in their tentes a ſlepe ſodenly generally among thē all ther fell ſuche a feare in their her tes that they roſe in great haſte and with ſuche payne yt they thought nat to be dyſloged tyme ynough. They bete downe their owne tentes & pauilyons and truſſed all their caryages / and ſo fledde away nat abyding one for an other Wt
               out kepyng of any right way. Whā theſe tidynges came to their two captayns / they roſe haſtely and made gret fiers / and toke torches & moū
               ted on their horſes and ſo came to theſe flēmynges / and ſayd ſirs what ayleth you / do you wāt any thyng / why do you thus flye away / be you nat well aſſured / retourne in the name of god / ye be to blame thus to flye and no mā chaſe you But for all their wordes / euery man fledde the ne
                  •
               t way to their owne houſes / and whan theſe lordes ſawe none other remedy / they truſſed all their harnes in waganes / and retourned to the hooſt before Tourney / and the
                  •
                ſhewed the aduenture of the flemmynges: wherof euery man had marueyle / ſome ſayd they were ouercome with fantyſes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the ſiege before Tourney was broken vp by reaſon of a truſe. Cap. lxiii.
            
               THis ſiege endured a long ſeaſon: the ſpace of a .xi. wekes thre dayes leſſe / and all that ſeaſon the lady Jane of Ualoys ſuſter to the frenche king / and mother to therle of Heynalt traueyled gretly what on the one ꝑt and on thother to haue a reſpyte and a peace by twene the parties / ſo that they might depart wt
               out batayle. And dyuers tymes ſhe kneled at ye 
               
                  •
               ete of the frenche kyng in that behalfe: and alſo made great labour to the lordes of thempyre / & ſpecially to the duke of Brabant and to ye duke of Jullers / who had her dought in maryage / & alſo to ſir John̄ of Heynalt. Somoch the good lady procured with the ayde & counſell of Loys Daugymont / who was welbeloued with both ꝑties: that it was graunted yt eche partie ſhuld ſende foure ſufficyent perſons to treat on ſome good way to acorde the parties / and a truſe for thre dayes. Theſe apoynters ſhuld mete in a ly tell chapell ſtandyng in the feldes called Eſplotyn / at the day apoynted theſe perſons mette: & the good lady with them. Of the frenche partie ther was Charles kyng of Behayne
                  •
                Charles erle Dalanſon brother to the frenche kyng / and the byſſhopp̄ of Liege / therle of Flanders / and therle of Armynack. Of thēglyſſhe partie there was the duke of Brabāt / the byſſhop of Licolne the duke of Guerles / the duke of Jullers / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Heynalt. And whan they were all met: they made ech to other gret ſalutacyons & good ther / and than entred into their treaty & all that day they comuned on dyuers ways of acorde / & alwayes ye good lady of Ualoys was amōg thē deſyringe effectuouſly all the parties / that they wolde do their labour to make a peace / howbeit the firſt day paſſed wtout any thing doyng. and ſo they retourned & promyſed to mete agayne ye next day: the whiche day they came togyther agayne in the ſame place / and ſo fell agayne into their treaty. And ſo fell vnto certayne poyntes agreable: but it was as thanne ſo late that they coude nat put it in writynge as that day / and to make an ende: and to make perfyght the mater if they might. The thirde day they met agayne and ſo finally acorded on a truſe to endure for a yere bytwene all parties / and all ther men. And alſo bytwene thē that were in Scotlande / and all ſuche as made warr in Gaſcoyne / Poycton / and in Sāton. And this treuſe to begyn the .xl. day next enſuyng / and within that ſpace euery partie to gyue knowlege to his men wtout mall engyn / and if ſuche cōpanyes woll nat kepe the peace let thē be at their choſe. But as for Frāce / 

Pycardy / Burgoyne / Bretayne / and Normā
               dy to be bounde to this peace without any excepcyon: and this peace to begyn incontynent by twene the hoſtes of the two kynges. Alſo it was determyned / that bothe parties in eche of their names ſhulde ſende foure or fyue perſonages / as their embaſſodours and to mete at Arras / & the pope in likwyſe to ſende thyder foure: and ther to make a full confirmacyon without any meane. Alſo by this truſe euery partie to enioy and poſſede all and euery thyng / that they were as than in poſſeſſyon of. This truſe incōtynent was cryed in bothe hooſtes / wherof the brabances were right gladde / for they were ſore wery with ſo long lyeng at the ſiege. So that ye nexte day aſſone as it was day lyght: ye ſhulde haue ſene tentes taken downe / charyotes charged / & people remoue ſo thycke / that a man wold haue thought to haue ſene a newe worlde. Thus the good towne of Tourney was ſafe without any great damage: howe beit they within endured gret payne / their vytaylsbegan to fayle (for as it was ſayd) they had as than ſcant to ſerue thē a thre or foure dayes at the mooſt. The brabances departed quickely / for they had grete deſyre therto: the kyng of Englande departed ſore agaynſt his mynde / if he might haue done other wyſe / but in manerhe was fayne to folowe the wylles of the other lordes / and to byleue their counſayls. And the frenche kynge coude abyde no lengar there as he lay for the yuell ayre / and the wether hote. So the frenchmen had the honour of that iourney / bycauſe they had reſcued Tourney / and cauſed their ennemies to deꝑte. The kyng of Englande and the lordes on his ꝑtie ſayd how they had ye honour / by reaſon that they had taryed ſo long within the realme / and beſieged one of the good townes therof / and alſo had waſted and burnt in the frenche contrey / and that the frenche kynge had nat reſcued it in tyme and hour as he ought to haue done by gyuyng of batayle / and finally agreed to a truſe / their ennemies beyng ſtyll at the ſiege and brennyng his contrey. Thus theſe lordes departed fro the ſiege of Tourney / and euery man drewe to his owne. The kynge of Englande came to Gaunt to the quene his wyfe / and ſhortly after paſſed the ſee and all his / except ſuche as ſhulde be at the parlyament at Arras. Cherle of Heynalt retourned to his contrey / and helde a noble feeſt at Mons in Heynault / and a great iuſtes. In the which Gararde of Uerchyn ſeneſhall of Heynault dyd iuſt and was ſo ſore hurt / that he dyed of the ſtroke / he had a ſonne called Johān who was after a good knyght and a hardy / but he was but a whyle in good helthe. The french kyng gaue leaue to euery man to departe / and went hymſelfe to Lyle / and thyder came they of Tourney. And the kyng receyued them ioyouſly and dyd ſhewe them gret grace / he gaue thē frely their franches ye which they had loſt longe before / wherwt they were ioyouſe / forſir Godmer du Fay and dyuers other knyghtꝭ had ben long gouernours ther: than they made newe ꝓ uoſt / and iurates acordynge to their auncyent vſages / than the kyng departed fro Lyſle to go to Parys. Nowe than came the ſeaſon that the counſayle ſhulde be at Arras / and for pope Clement thyder came in legacyon / the cardynall of Napuls / and the cardynall of Cleremont: who came to Parys wher as the kyng made theym mochehonour / and ſo came to Arras: for the frē
               che kyng ther was therle of Alanſon / the duke of Burbon / therle of Flaunders / therle of Bloys / the archebyſſhoppe of Senes / the byſſhop of Beawayes / and the byſſhoppe of Aucerre / & for the kyng of England / ther was the byſſhop of Lyncolne / the byſſhoppe of Durame / therle of Warwyke / ſir Robert Dartoyſe / ſir John̄ of Heynalt / and ſir Henry of Flanders / at the whiche treaty ther were many maters put forthe / & ſo contynued a .xv. dayes & agreed of no poynt of effect / for thenglyſſhmen demaunded / and ye frenchmen wolde nothyng gyue: but all onely to rendre the coūtie of Poycton / the which was gyuen with quene Iſabell in maryage with the kyng of Englande. So this parlyament brake vp and nothyng done / but the truſe to be relonged two yeres lengar / that was all that the cardynals coude get. Than euery man departed / and the two cardynals went through Heynault at the deſyre of therle / who feeſted thē nobly.
         
         
            ¶ Nowe ſpeketh the hyſtorie of the warres of Bretayne / and howe the duke dyed without heyre / wherby the dyſcencion fell. Cap. lxiiii.
            
               WHan that this ſayde trewſe was agreed and ſayled before the cyte of Turney / euery lord and all maner of people dyſloged & euery man drue into his owne contrey. The duke of Bretayne / who had ben ther with y• french kyng / aſ well furnyſſhed

as any other prince that was ther / deꝑted hom warde: and in his way a ſickenes toke hym / ſo that he dyed. At whiche tyme he had no chylde nor had neuer noue by the duchies / nor had no truſt to haue / he had a brother by the father ſide called erle of Moūtfort / who was as than lyueyng: & he had to his wyfe ſuſter to therle Loyes of Flaūders. This ſayd duke had an other brother bothe by father & mother who was as than deed: and he had a doughter a lyue / and ye duke her vncle had maryed her to the lord Charles of Bloyes / eldyſt ſonne of therle Guy of Bloyes: that the ſame erle had by the ſuſter of kyng Philypp̄ of France. Who as than raygned and had promyſed with her in maryage ye duchy of Bretayne after his dyſceaſe / for he douted that the erle Mountfort wolde clayme the inherytance as next of blode / and yet he was nat his proper brother germayne. And the duke thought that the doughter of his brother germayne oughte by reaſon to be more nere to the Inherytaunce after his dyceaſe / than therle Moūtfort his brother. And bycauſe he fered that after his dyceaſe therle of Mountfort wolde take away ye ryght fro his yongneſe: therfore he maryed her with the ſayd ſir Charles of Bloys / to thyntent that kyng Philyp vncle to her houſbande ſhuld ayd to kepe her right agaynſt therle Mountfort / yf he medyll any thynge in ye mater. Aſſone as the erle Moūtfort knewe that the duke his brother was deed / he went incōtynent to Nauntes: the ſouerayne cytie of all Bretayne. And he dyd ſomoche to the burgeſſes / and to the people of the contrey ther about / yt he was receyued as their chefe lord: as mooſt next of blode to his brother dyſceaſed / and ſo dyd to hym homage and fealtie. Than he & his wyfe / who had both the hertꝭ of a lyon: determyned with their counſell to call a court / and to kepe a ſolempne feeſt at Nauntes at a day lymitted / agaynſt ye which day thei ſent for all the nobles and counſails of the good to wnes of Bretayne / to be there to do their homage and fealte to hym / as to their ſoueraygne lorde. In the meane ſeaſon or this feeſt began: therle Mounfort with a great nombre of men a warr deꝑted fro Nauntes / and went to Lymogines: for he was enformed that the treſur that his father had gadered many a day before was ther kept ſecrete. Whan he came ther he entred into the cyte with gret tryumphe / and dyd hym moche honour: and was nobly receyued of the burgeſſes / of the clergie / & of the cōmons: and they all dyd hym fealtie / as to their ſoueraygne lorde. And by ſuch meanes as he founde: y• gret treaſur was delyuerd to him / and whan he had taryed there at his pleaſure / he deꝑted with all his treaſur and came to Nauntes to the coūtes his wyfe. And ſo their they taryed in grete ioye tyll the day came of the feeſt / and made gret prouyſiōs againſt the ſame. And whan the day cāe and no man apered for no cōmaundement / except one knyght called ſir Henry du Leon / a noble and a puyſaunt man. So they kept the feeſt a thre dayes aſ well as they might / with ſuch as were ther. Than it was determyned to retayne ſoudyers a horſbacke and a fote / and ſo to dyſpende his gret treſure to attayne to his purpoſe of the duchy / and to conſtrayne all rebels to cōe to mercy. So ſoudyers wer retayned on all ſydes and largely payed / ſo that they had a great nōbre a fote and a horſbacke: nobles and other of dyuerſe countreis.
         
         
            ¶Howe therle of Mountfort toke the towne and caſtell of Breſt. Cap. lxv.
            WHan therle of Mountfort / ſawe howe he had peple ynough: than he was coū
               ſayled to go and conquere all the cōtre outher by loue or by force / and to subdue all his rebels. Than he yſſued out of the cytie of Naū
               tes with a great hooſt / and went to a ſtrong caſtell ſtandynge on the ſee ſyde called Breſt: and captayne therin was ſir Garnyer of Clyſſon / a noble knyght and one of the gretteſt barownes in Bretayne. Therle Mountfort or he came to Breſt / he conſtrayned ſo all the countrey except the fortreſſes / yt euery man folowed hym a horſbacke or a fote / none durſte do none otherwyſe, whan therle cāe to the caſtell of Breſt he cauſed 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hēry de Leon to ſende to the captayn to ſpeke with hym / mouyng hym to obey to therle / as to the duke of Bretayne. The knight anſwered he wold do nothyng after that mocyon tyll he had otherwyſe in cōmaundement / fro hym yt ought to be lorde ther by right: and the next day therle dyd aſſaut the caſtell. Within the caſtell were a .iii. C. men of armes. and euery man was ſet to his part of defence: and than the captayn toke a xl. good men of armes & came to the barryers: & ſo ther was a ſore aſſaut / and dyuers ſore hurt. But finally ther came ſo many aſſaylātes / that the bayles were wonne byfore / and the defēdantes fayne to retourne into the caſtell / at a harde

aduenture for ther were dyuers ſlayne / but the captayne dyd ſo valyantly that he brought his company into the chyefe gate. They that kepte the warde of the gate / whan they ſawe that myſchyefe / feared leſyng of the caſtell: and ſodenly they lette downe the portcolyſe / and cloſed their owne capteyne and certayne with him without who right nobly defēded themſelfe. They were ſore hurt and in great daunger of deth / and the captayne wold neuer yelde hymſelfe: they with in caſt out ſtones / tymber / yron / and pottꝭ with quycke lyme: ſo that the aſſaylantes were fayne to drawe backe / than they drue vp a lytell of the portcolyſe: and the captayne entred and his cō
               pany ſuch as wer left a lyue with him ſore woū
               ded. The next day therle cauſed certayne ingēs to be rayſed: and ſayde howe that he wolde nat depart thens / tyll he had the caſtell at his pleaſure. The thyrde day he vnderſtode: howe the captayne within was deed of ſuch hurtes as he receyued before at entrynge into the caſtell / and trewe it was. Than the duke Mountfort cauſed a great aſſaut to be made: and had certayne inſtrumentes made of tymber / to caſte ouer the dykes to come to the harde walles / they within defended themſelfe aſwell as they myght tyll it was noone. Than the duke deſyred thē to yelde and to take hym for their duke / and he wold frely pardon them. Whervpon they toke counſell: and the duke cauſed the aſſaut to ceaſe / and fynally they yelded them / their lyues and goodes ſaued: than therle of Mountfort entred into the caſtell with certayne nombre / and receyued the feaultie of all the men of that Chatelayne. And ther he ſette to be captayne: a knyght whom he truſted moche / and than he retourned to his felde right ioyouſe.
         
         
            ¶Howe therle of Mountfort toke the cytie of Renes. Cap. lxvi.
            
               WHan the erle of Mountfort was retourned to his felde / & had ſtably ſ
                  •
               hed his captayns in the caſtell of Breſt. Than̄e he drewe towarde the cite of Renes the which was nat farr thens: & euery where as he wēt he made euery man to do him homage and feaulte as to their ryght lorde / and dayly encreaſed his hooſt. So he came before Renes and pyght vp his tentes / and lodged his peple rounde aboute the cyte / and in the ſubbarbes. They wtin made great ſemblant of defence: capytaine ther was ſir Henry Pennefort / who was well beloued for his treweth and valyantneſſe / on a mornyng he yſſned out with a two hūdred men / and daſſhed into the hooſt / and bete downe tentes and ſlewe dyuers ſuche of the hoſt as had kept watche the ſame night drue to the noyſe. Than they of the fortreſſe withdrewe and fledde agayne to their caſtell: but they taryed ſo longe / that dyuers of theym were taken and ſlayne. And ſir H
                  〈…〉
               y of Pēfort was taken and brought to the erle / than the erle cauſed hym to be brought before the cytie / and to be ſhewed to the burgeſſes / yt if they wolde ſaue his lyfe to yelde vp the towne / or els he ſhuld be hanged before the gates. Than they of Renes toke counſayle the whiche enduredde longe / for the commons had great pyte of their captayne / and he was welbelored among them Alſo they conſydred howe they hadde but ſmall ſtore of vytayle / long to defende the ſiege: wherfore they ſayde they wolde haue peace. But the great burgeſſes
                  •
                who hadde ynough for theymſelfe / wolde nat agre to yelde vp the towne. So that their dyſcorde multiplyed ſo farre / that the great burgeſſes / who were all of one lynnage drewe a parte and ſayde: ſirs all that woll take our parte drawe to vs. So that there drewe togyther of one affinyte and lynnage to the nombre of a two thouſande. And whan the other cō
               mons ſawe that / they began to ſterre and ſayde to the burgeſſes many euyll and vylanous wordes / and finally ran togyder and ſlewe dyuers of them. Than whan the burgeſſes ſawe what myſchefe they were in they agreed to them / and ſayd they wolde do as they deſyred. Thā ceaſed the fray: and all the cōmons ranne and opyned the gates / and yelded the cytie to therle Mounfort and dyde homage and feaultie to hym / and toke hym as their lorde: & ſo dyd ſir Henry Pē
               fort who was made of therles counſayle.
         
         
            ¶Howe the erle Mountfort toke the towne and caſtell of Hanybout. Cap. lxvii.
            
               
               THus therle of Moūtfort entred ito Renes with great feeſt: and lodged his hoſt ſtyll in the feldes / and made the peace agayne by twene the burgeſſes & the commons. Than he made ther baylyffes / pronoſt / aldermen / ſergyantes / and other officers: and taryed ther thre dayes. Than he dyſlodged: and drue towarde y• ſtron geſt caſtell in all Bretayn called Hanybout ſtā
               dynge on a port of the ſee / and the ſee rennynge rounde about in gret dykes. Whan ſir Hēry of 
                  •
               ēfort ſawe how therle wolde go thyder: he feared his brother who was captayn ther / than he cāe to therle in coūſell & ſayd: ſir it hath pleaſed you to admyt me as one of your counſaylours / and ſir I haue gyuen you my fayth and allegiance. I vnderſtande ye purpoſe to go to Hanybout: ſir knowe for trouth the towne and the caſtell a
                  •
                of ſuche ſtrength / that they be nat eaſy to wynne: I thynke ſurely ye may well leſe your tyme there a hole yere / or ye wynne it perforce. But ſir if it wyll pleaſe you to byleue me / I ſhal ſhewe you the wayes howe to wynne it / whaūe force can nat helpe ſubtylte & craft muſt auayle If ye wyll delyuer me. 
                  〈◊〉
               . hūdred men of armes to be rueled as I woll haue thē: I ſhall go with them halfe a leage before your hooſt with ye baner of Bretayn before me. And my brother who is gouernour of the caſtell and of the towne / as ſone as he ſhall ſe the banner of Bretayne / and knowe that it is I / he woll opyn the gates and let me entre and all my company. And aſſone as I am within I ſhall take hym as priſoner / and take poſſeſſyon of the towne and gates: and I ſhall rendre my brother into your handes to do pour pleaſure with hym / without he woll obey as I woll haue him. So that ye promyſe me by the fayth of your body that ye ſhall do his ꝑſon no bodely hurt: the which requeſt therle promyſed & ſayd. If ye bringe this about / I ſhall loue you the better euer after. Than ſir Henry Penfort departed with his company apoynted / and agaynſt euenynge he came to Hanybout / and whan his brother Olyuer Pēfort knewe of his cōmyng / he opyned the gates and let hym entre wenynge he had ben come to haue ayded hym: and ſo came and mette his brother in the ſtrete. Aſſone as ſir Henry ſawe hym / he aproched to hym and toke hym by the arme / and ſayd Olyuer ye army priſoner / howe ſo ꝙ he. I haue put my truſt in you / thynkyng that ye were come hytherto ayde me to kepe this towne and caſtell. Brother ꝙ ſir Henry the mater gothe nat ſo / I take poſſeſſion of this towne for therle Mountfort / who is nowe duke of Bretayne: to whome I haue made fealtie and homage / and the moſt part of the contrey hath obeyed vnto hym. And ſo ſhall you do in likewyſe / and it wer better ye dyd it by loue than byforce: ye ſhall deſerue the more thanke. Somoche Olyuer was ſtyred by his brother that he agreed to hym: and ſo therle entred and toke poſſeſſion of the towne and caſtell / and ſet ther a gret gariſon. Than he went withall his hoſt to 
                  •
               ennes and made ſuch treatie with them / that they yelded vp and dyd fealtie and homage to hym / as to their ſoueraygne lorde. And there he ſtablyſſhed all maner of officers / and taryed ther thre dayes: and frothens he went and layd ſiege to a ſtrong caſtell called Roche Peron: captayne therin was 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Olyuer of Clyſſon coſyn germayne to y• lorde Clyſſon / and therle lay ther at ſiege .x. dayes / and coude fynde no wayes howe to gette the caſtell it was ſo ſtrong / and the captayne wolde in no wyſe agre to obey / nother for fayre wordes nor foule. So the erle left that ſiege and departed for that tyme / and went & layd ſiege to an other caſtell a .x. leages thens called Aultoy: and therin was captayne ſir Geffray Maleſtroyt / and in his cō
               pany ſir Juon of Triguyde: therle aſſayled the caſtell two tymes / but he ſawe well he might rather loſe ther / than wynne. Than he agreed to a truſe for a day / at the inſtance of ſir Henry de Leon / who was euer ſtyll about hym. Soo the treaty toke ſuch effect that they were all frendꝭ: and the two knyghtꝭ dyd homage to therle / and ſo departed and left ſtyll the ſame two knightes to be captayns ther / and of the contrey there about. Thanne he went to an other caſtell called Goy la Foreſt: and he that was captayne there ſawe howe therle had a great hooſt / and howe the contrey was ſore yelded to hym / and ſo by y• counſell of ſir Henry de L
                  •
               on with whome the captayne had ben in cōpany in Pruce / in Granade: and in dyuers other ſtrange contreis / he acorded with therle and dyd hym homage: and therle left hym ſtyll captayne ther. Than therle went to Caraches / a good towne and a ſtronge caſtell: and therin ther was a byſſhoppe / who was lorde therof. This prelate was vncle to ſir Henry de Leon / ſo that by ſir Henris meanes / the byſſhoppe agreed with therle and toke hym as his lorde: vnto ſuche ſeaſon as ſomme other ſhulde come and ſhewe more ryght to the duchy of Bretaygne
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the eele Mountfort dyd homage to the kyng of England for the duchy of Bretayne. Cap. lxviii.
            
               THus therle Moūtfort conquered the countrey and made hymſelfe to be called duke of Bretayne. Than he went to a port on the ſee ſyde called G
                  •
               e
                  •
               o: thaſie he ſent his people abrode to kepe y• townes and fortreſſes that he had won. Than he toke the ſee with a certayne with him: and ſo arryued in Cornwall in Englande at a port called Chepſe: than he enquered where the kynge was / and it was ſhewed hym howe ye he was at wyndſore. Than he rode thyderwarde & came to Wyndſore / wher he was receyued with gret ioye and feeſt / bothe of the kyng & of the quene and of all the lordes: than he ſhewed the kynge and his counſayle howe he was in poſſeſſion of the duchy of Bretayne / fallen to hym by ſucceſſion by y• deth of his brother laſt duke of Breten. But he feared leſt that ſir Charles of Bloyes & the frenche kynge wolde put hym out therof by puyſſance / wherfore he ſayd he was come thyder to relyue and to holde the duchy of the kyng of Englande by fealtie and homage for euer: ſo that he wolde defende hym agaynſt the frenche kynge and all other that ſhul
                  •
               e put hym to any trouble for the mater. The kynge of Englande ymagined that his warre agaynſte the frenche kyng ſhulde be well fortifyed by that meanes / & howe that he coude nat haue no more profitable way for hym to entre into France than by Bretayne: remembring howe the almayns and brabances had done lytell or nothyng for hym / but cauſed hym to ſpende moche money. Wherfore 
                  ••
               youſly he condyſcending to therle Mountfortes deſyre: and there toke homage by the handꝭ of therle callyng hym ſelfe duke of Bretaygne. And ther the kyng of Englande in the preſence of ſuche lordes as were ther / bothe of Bretayne and of Englande: promyſed that he wold ayde / defende / and kepe hym as his liege man: agaynſt euery man / frenche kyng and other. This homage and promyſes were writen and ſealed / and euery 
                  •
               tie had his part belyuerd: beſyde y• the kynge and y• quene gaue to therle and to his company many great gyftes: in ſuch wyſe that they reputed hym for a noble kyng / and worthy to raygne in gret proſperyte. Than therle toke his leaue and departed and toke agayne theſee and arryued at y• forſayd port of Gredo in baſe Bretayne / and ſo came to Nauntes to his wyfe who ſayde howe he had wrought by good and byſcrete counſayle.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle Moūtfort was ſomoned to be at the plyament of Parys at the requeſt of the lorde Charles of Bloyes. Cap. lxix.
            
               WHan ſir Charles of Bloys who helde hymſelfe rightfull inherytour to Bretaygne by reaſon of his wyfe: harde howe the erle of Mountfort conquered beforce the countrey / the whiche by reaſon ought to be his. Than he came to Parys to complayne to kyng Philyppe his vncle: whervpon the kyng counſelled wt the nobles of the realme what he might do in that matter / and it was counſaylled hym y• therle Moūtfort ſhuld be by ſufficyent meſſā
               gers ſomoned to apere at Parys / & ther to here what anſwere he wolde make. So theſe meſſā
               gers were ſent forthe: and they founde therle at Nauntes makyng good chere / and he made to them great feeſt / and finally he anſwered howe he wolde obey the kynges cōmaundement. And than made hym redy and departed fro Nantes and ſo came to Paris with a .iiii. C. horſe with hym: and the next day he and all his / mounted on their horſes and rode to the kynges palayſe. Ther the kynge and his .xii. peres with other great lordes of Fraunce taryed his commyng / and the lorde Charles of Blois with th
                  •
               . Than therle entred into the kynges chambre: he was well regarded and ſaluted of euery perſon / thā he enclyned hymſelfe to the kyng (and ſayd) ſir I am come hyther at your cōmaundement and pleaſure. Than the kyng ſayd / erle of Mountfort for your ſo doyng I can you good thanke / howbeit I haue marueyle: howe that ye durſte vndertake on you the duchy of Bretayne wherin ye haue no right / for there is another ne
                  •
               e
                  •
                than ye be / and ye wolde dyſinheryt hym: and to mentayne your quarell / ye haue ben wt myne

aduerſary the kynge of Englande / and as it is ſhewed me ye haue done hym homage for the ſaine. Than ther
                  •
               e ſayd ſir byleue it nat: for ſurely ye at but yuell enformed in that behalf / but 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                as for the right that ye ſpeke of ſauyng your dyſpleaſur ye do me ther
                  〈…〉
                wrong / for 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                I knowe none ſo nere to my brother / that is departed as I▪ if it were iuged or playnly declared by right that the
                  •
                were a nother nerer than I / I wolde 
                  •
               at be rebell nor a ſhamed to leaue it. Well ſir ꝙ the kyng ye ſay well: but I cōmaund you in all that ye holde of me / that ye deꝑt nat out of this cytie of Parys this .xv. dayes / by the which tyme the .xii. peres and lordes of my realme ſhall iudge this mater / and thāye ſhall knowe what right ye haue: and if ye do otherwyſe ye ſhall diſpleaſe me. Than therle ſayd: 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                all ſhalbe at yo
                  •
                pleaſure / than̄e he went fro the court to his lodgyng to dyner / whan he came to his lodgynge he entred into his chambre / and the
                  •
                ſatte and ymagined many doutes: & finally with a ſmall company he mounted on his horſe and retourned agayne into Bretayne / or the kynge or any other wyſt wher he was becōe. Some thought he had ben but a lytell ſicke in his lodgyng: and whan he came to Nauntes he ſhewed the counteſſe what he had done / and than by her counſel herode to all the townes and fortereſſes that he had wonne: and ſtablyſſhed in them good captayns and ſoudyers a horſbacke and a fote / and dyd gyue them good wages.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duchy of Bretayne was iuged to ſir Charles of Bloyes. Can. lxx.
            
               IT is to be thought that the frenche kynge was ſore dyſpleaſed: whan he knewe that the erle of Mountforte was ſo departed. How beit he taryed tyll ye .xv. day that the lordes ſhulde gyue their iudgemēt on the duchy of Bretayne / whan the day came they iudged it clerely to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Charles of Bloys wyfe: who was doughter to the brother germayne of the duke laſt deed by y• father ſyde whom they iudged to haue more right than the erle Mountforte who came by another father / who was neuer duke of Bretayne. In other reaſon the
                  •
                was: they ſayde though that therle of Moūtfort had any right / he had forfeted it two wayes. The one bycauſe he had relyued the duchy of a nother lorde than of the frenche kynge / of whom he ought to holde it. The other reaſon was bycauſe he had broken the kynges cōmaundement: and diſobeyed his a reſt and priſon / as in goyng away without leaue. Whan this iudgement was gyuen in playne audyence by all y• lordes: thanne the kyng called to hym the lorde Charles of Bloys his nephue / and ſayde fayre nephue ye haue iudged to you a fayre herytage and a great. Therfore haſt you and go and conquere it agaynſt hym that kepyth it wrongfully / and deſyre all your frendes to ayde you: and I ſhall nat fayle you for my part / I ſhall lende you golde and ſyluer ynough: and ſhall commaunde my ſonne the duke of Normandy to go with you. Than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Charles of Bloys inclyned hym to his vncle / thankyng hym right humbly: than he deſyred y• duke of Normādy his coſyn / the erle of Alanſon his vncle / the duke of Burgoyne / therle of Bloys his brother / the duke of Butbone / the lorde Loys of Spayne / y• lorde Jaques of Burbon / therle of Ewe conſtable of Fraunce / and therle of Guynes his ſonne: the vycont of Rohayne / and all the other lordꝭ that were ther. And all they ſayde howe they wolde gladly go with hym / & with their lorde the duke of Normandy. Than theſe lordes departed to make them redy / and to make ꝓuyſion agaynſt that iourney.
         
         
            ¶ The lordes of Fraunce that entred into Bretayne with ſir Charles of Bloys. Cap. lxxi.
            
               WHan all theſe lordes of Normandy: the duke of Alanſon / the duke of Burgoyne / and all other ſuche as ſhulde go with ſir Chardu Bloys / to ayde hym to cōquere the duchy of Bretayne were redy. They departed ſome fro Pares and ſome fro other places / and they aſſembled togyder at the cytie of Angers: and fro thens they went to Ancennys / the which is thende of the realme on that ſyde / and ther taryed a thre dayes: than they went forthe into the countrey of Bretayne / and whan they were in the feldes / they nombred their company

to a fyne thouſande men of armes beſyde the ge no wayes / the which were a thre thouſande / and thre knyghtes of Gennes oyd lede thē. The one called ſir Othes de Rue / and thother ſir Charles Germaulx: and beſyde that they had many eroſbowes / of whome ſir Galoys be la Baulme was captayne. Than all theſe went to a ſtrong caſtell ſtandynge on a hyghe mountayne called Chaſtōceaulx ther was thentre of Bretayne / it was furnyſſhed with men of warr: & captayns ther were two knyghtes of Lorayne called ſyr Gyles / and ſir Ualeryan. The lordes of Frāce toke counſell to beſiege this caſtell: for they thought if they ſhulde leaue ſuch a fortres behynde them / it ſhuld do them great damage. So they beſeged it rounde about / and made many aſſautes / ſpecially the genowayes dydde what they might to attayne prayſe at the begynning: but they loſt often tymes of their company / for they within defended themſelfe ſo ſagely that it was longe or they toke any damage. But finally the aſſaylantꝭ brought thyder ſomoch tymbre / wod and fagottes / that they fylled therwith the dykes: ſo that they might go 
                  •
               uſt to y• walles / they within caſt out ſtones / chalke / and brennynge fyre: howbeit they without came to y• fote of the walles / & had inſtrumetes wherby they myght vnder couert myne the walles. Than they with in yelded vp the caſtell / their lyues and goodes ſaued: thafie the duke of Normanvy who was chiefe ther / delyuered the caſtell to ſir Charles of Bloys as his owne / who incōtynent ſet ther a good garyſon to kepe thentre: and to conduct ſuche as came after theym. Than they went towarde Nantes: wher as they harde how therle of Mountfort their ennemy was / the marſhals and currours of their hooſt / founde by the way as they went a good towne cloſed with 
                  •
               ykes / the which they feerſly aſſayled: and in the town ther were but fewe peple / and yuell armed. So that anone the towne was wo
                  •
                / robbed / and the one half brent: and all the peple put to y• ſwerde / this towne was called Carqueſy: within a .iiii. or fyue leages to Nantes. The lordes lay ther about all that night / y• next mornyng they drue towarde Nantes and layed ſiege rounde about it / and pygh
                  ••
               p their tentes and pauilyons. Than the men of warre within the towne and the burgeſſes armed thē / and went to their defences as they were apoynted: ſome of the hoſt went to y• barrers to ſkirmyſſh / and ſome of the ſoudyers within & yong buegeſſes y
                  ••
               ue
                  •
                out agaynſt them / ſo that ther were byuees slayne & hurt on bothe parties / ther were 
                  •
               yuerſe ſuche ſkirmyſſhes. On a mornyng ſome of the ſoudyers within the cytie yſſued out at aduēture / and they founde a .xv. cartes with vytell cōmyng to thooſt warde / and a .lx. perſons to cōuey it: and they of the cytie were a .ii. C. They ſet on them and anone dyſconfyted them and ſlewe dyuers and ſome fled away and ſcaped / and ſhewed in thooſt howe it was. Than ſome went to reſcue the pray: and ouer toke them nere to the barryers / ther began a great ſkirmyſſhe / ther came ſo many fro thooſt that they within had moch a do: howbeit they toke the horſes out of the cartꝭ and dyd driue them in at the gate / to thentent 
                  〈◊〉
                they without ſhulde nat driue lightly away the caryages. Than other ſoudyers of the cytie yſſued out to helpe their companyons: and alſo of the burgeſſes to ayde their parētes / ſo the fray multiplyed and dyuers were ſlayne & ſore hurt on bothe parties: for alwayes people encreaſed fro thooſt / and ſome newe euer yſſued out of the cytie. Than at laſt ſir Henry the captayne ſawe that it was tyme to retreyt: for by his abydinge he ſawe he might rather leſe than wyn / than he cauſed them of the cytie to drawe a backe aſwell as he myght / yet they were purſued ſo 
                  •
               ere that many were ſlayne and taken / mo than .ii. C. of the burgeſſes of y• towne. wherof therle of Mōtfort blamed ſore ſir Henry de Leon / that he cauſed the retrayt ſo ſone: wherwith ſir Hēry was ſore dyſpleaſed in his mynde. And after that he 
                  •
               old no more cōe to therls coūſell ſo aften as he dyd before: many had maruell why he dyd ſo.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the erle Mountfort was taken at Nauntes and howe he dyed. Cap. lxxii.
            
               AS I hard reported ther were certayne burgeſſes of y• cite ſawe howe their goodes went to waſt both without & 
                  •
               in / & had of their chyldren and frendes in priſon & douted that wors ſhulde come to them after: than they aduyſed and ſpake togyder ſecretly / ſo that finally they cōcluded to treat with the lordes of France. So y• they myght come to haue peace & to haue their chyldren and frēdes clerely delyuerd out of priſon. They made this treatie ſo ſecretly: that at laſte it was agreed that they ſhulde haue all the proſouers delyuerd

/ and they to ſet opyn one of ye gates that the frenche lordes myght entre / to take the erle Moūtfort in the caſtell / without doyng of any maner of hurt to the cyte / or to thynhaby tantes or goodes therin. Some ſayed this was purchaſed by the means and agrement of ſir Henry de Leon / who had ben before one of the erles chiefe counſaylours. Thus as it was deuyſed / ſo it was done in a mornyng: the frenche lordes entred and went ſtreyght to y• caſtell and brake opyn the gates / and ther toke therle Moūtfort priſoner and ledde hym clene out of the cytie into their felde / without doyng of any more hurt in the cyte. This was the yere of our lorde god M. C C C .xli. about the feeſt of all ſaynt
                  •
               . Thā the lordes of Fraunce entred into the cytie with great ioye: and all the burgeſſes and other dyd fealtie and homage to the lorde Charles of Bloys as to their ryght ſouerayne lorde / and there they taryed a thre dayes in gret feeſt. Than ſir Charles of Bloys was coūſelled to abyde ther about the cytie of Nauntes tyll the next ſomer / and ſo he dyd: and ſet captayns in ſuche garyſons as he had won / than the other lordes went to Parys to the kyng / and delyuerd hym therle of Mountfort as priſoner. The kynge ſet hym in the caſtell of Loure wher as he was longe / I at laſt as I harde reported ther he dyed.
            ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of the counteſſe his wyfe / who had the courage of a man / and the hert of a lyon. She was in the cytie of Renes whanne her lorde was taken: and howe beit that ſhe had great ſorowe at her hert / yet ſhe valyantly recōforted her frendes and ſoudyers / and ſhewed them a lytell ſon that ſhe had called John̄ / and ſayd a ſirs be nat to ſore a baſſhed of the erle my lorde whom we haue loſt (he was but a man) ſe here my lytell chylde who ſhalbe by the grace of god his reſtorer / and he ſhall do for you all & I haue riches ynough ye ſhall nat lacke: & I truſt I ſhall purchaſe for ſuche a capitayne / that ye ſhalbe all reconforted. Whan ſhe had thus conforted her frendes and ſoudyers in Renes / than ſhe wēt to all her other fortreſſes and good townes / and ledde euer with her John̄ her yonge ſonne: and dyd to thē as ſhe dyde at Renes and fortifyed all her gariſons of euery thyng y• they wanted: and payed largely & gaue frely where as ſhe thought it well enployed. Than ſhe wēt to Hanybout / and ther ſhe and her ſonne taryed all that wynter / often tymes ſhe ſent to byſet her garyſons / and payed euery man full well and truely their wages.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande / the thyrde tyme made warre on the ſcotes. Cap. lxxiii.
            
               YE haue harde here before yt the ſiege beynge before Tourney / howe the lordes of Scotland had taken agayne dyuers townes and fortreſſes fro thenglyſſhmen / ſuch as they helde in Scotlande. Ther were no mo remayning in thēglyſſhmens handes but onely the caſtell of Eſturmelyne / the cytie of Berwyke / and Rouſburge. And the ſcottes lay ſtyll at ſiege with certayne frenchmen with them ſuche as kyng Philyppe had ſent thyder to helpe thē before Eſturmelyne: and they within were ſo ſore conſtrayned y• they ſawe well they coude nat long endure. And whan the kynge of Englande was retourned fro the ſiege of Tourney and came into his owne realme / he was coūſelled to ryde towarde ſcotlande and ſo he dyd / he rode thyderwarde bytwene mighelmas and al ſayntes / cōmaundyng euery mā to folowe hym to Berwyke / than euery man began to ſtyrre: and to drawe thyder as they were cōmaunded. The kyng at laſt came to yorke / and ther taryed for his people: the lordes of Scotlande wer enfourmed of the cōmyng of the kyng of Englande / wherfore they made ſorer aſſautes to the caſtell of Eſturmelyne / and cōſtrayned ſo them within / with engyns and canons that they wer fayne to yelde vp the caſtell / ſauyng their lyues and membres: but nothyng they ſhulde cary away. Theſe tidynges came to the kyng of Englande where as he was / than̄e he departed and drewe toward Eſturmelyne and came to Newcaſtell vpon Tyne: and ther lodged and taryed more than a moneth abydinge prouyſion for his hoſt / the which was put on the ſee bytwene ſaynt Andrewes tyde and All ſayntes: but dyuerſe of their ſhyppes were peryſſhed / for they had ſuche tempeſt on the ſee / that ſmall prouyſion came thyder. Some were driuen into Hollande and into Fryſe / wherby thēglyſſhe hooſt had great defaute of vytayls and euery thynge was dere / and wynter at hande. So that they wyſt nat wher to haue forage: and in ſcotlande the ſcottes had put all their goodes into fortreſſes / and the kyng of England had ther mo thā vi. M. horſmen / and .xl. M. fotemen. The lordes of Scotland after their wynning of Eſtur

melyne they 
                  •
               rue into the foreſtes of Gedeours and they vnderſtode well howe the kyng of Englande lay at Newecaſtell with a great nombre / to brenne and to exyle the realme of Scotlande. Than they toke counſell what they ſhulde do: they thought themſelfe to ſmall a company to mentayne the warr / ſeyng howe they had cōtynued the warres more than .vii. yere / without heed or captayne. And yet as thā they coude parceyue no ſocoure fro their owne kyng: than they determyned to ſende to the kyng of Englande a byſſhop and an abbot to deſyre a truſe / the which meſſangers departed fro Scotland / and came to Newecaſtell wher they founde the kynge. Theſe meſſangers ſhewed to the kynge and to his counſayle the cauſe of their cōmyng: ſo than it was agreed a trewſe to endure foure monethes / on the condycion that they of Scotlande ſhulde ſende ſufficyent embaſſadours into France to kyng Dauyd: yt without he wolde come within the moneth of May next folowing ſo puyſſantly as to reſyſt and defēde his realme els they clerely to yelde themſelfe englyſſhe and neuer to take hym more for their kyng. So thꝰ theſe two prelates retourned agayne into Scotlande / and incontynent they ordayned to ſende into Fraunce / ſir Robert 
                  •
               erſay / and ſir Symon Freſyll / and two other knyghtes to ſhewe to their kynge their apoyntment. The kynge of Englande agreed the ſone
                  •
                to this truſe / bycauſe his hooſt lacked vytayll: ſo he came backe agayne & ſent euery man home. The ſcottyſſhe meſſangers went towarde Fraunce / and toke ſhypping at Douer.
            ¶ Nowe kynge Dauyd who had ben a ſeuyne yere in France / and knewe well that his realme was ſore diſtroyed. Thaūe he toke leaue of the frenche kyng: to go home into his owne contre to confort his people / ſo he toke ſhypping with his wyfe and ſuche cōpany as he had at a port / and dyde put hymſelfe vnder the guyding of a maryner Rychard Flamont: and ſo he aryued at a port of Moroyſe / or euer that any in Scotlande knewe therof. Nor he knewe nothyng of the meſſangers that were gone into France to ſpeke with hym / nor they knewe nat of his retournyng home.
         
         
            ¶ Howe kyng Dauyd of Scotlande came with a great hooſt to Newcaſtell vpon Tyne. Ca. lxxiiii.
            
               WHan that yong kyng Dauyd of Scotlande / was come into his countrey: his men came about hym with great ioye and ſolem puyte / and brought hym to the towne of ſaynt John̄s: thyder cāe peple fro all ꝓties to ſehym. And than euery man ſhewed hym the damages / & the dyſtrueti on that kyng Edward and thenglyſſhmen had done in Scotlande: than he ſayd well I ſhalbe well reuenged / orels loſe all my realme and my lyfe in the payne. Than̄e he ſent meſſangers to all partes ferr and nere / deſyring euery man to helpe hym in his buſyneſſe: at his ſendyng thyder came therle of Orkeney a great prince and a puyſſaunt / he had maryed the kynges ſuſter: he brought a great nombre of men a warr with hym / and dyuers other lordes and knyghtes of Souegne / of Melbegne / and of Denmarche: ſome for loue and ſome for wages / ſo that whan they were all togyder / they were a .lx. M. men a fote / and on hackenayes a .iii. M. armed after their maner. Whan̄e they were all redy they remoued to go into England / to do ther aſmoche hurt as they might: for y• truſe was as than expyred / or els to fight with the kynge of Englande / who had cauſed them to ſuffre moch dyſeaſe. The ſcottes departed fro ſaynt Johannes towne and went to Donfremelyn: and the next day ther they paſſed a lytell arme of y• ſee / than they went with great dyligence and paſſed by Edenborowe / and after by Rouſburge the whiche was as than englyſſhe: but they made none aſſaut ther / bycauſe they wolde haue none of their cōpany hurt / nor to waſt none of their artillary. They thought to do a greatter dede or they retourned into Scotlande: & ſo after they paſſed nat ferre of fro Berwyke / and went by without any aſſaut gyueng. And ſo entred into the contrey of Northumberlande: and came to the ryuer of Tyne brennyng all the cōtrey roū
               de about them / and at laſt came to Newecaſtell vpon Tyne: and ther he lay and all his people about the towne that night. And in the mornig a certayne nombre of gētylmen that were in the towne yſſued out / to the nombre of. C C. ſperes to make a ſkry in the ſcottyſſhe hooſt: they daſſhed into y• ſcottyſſh hoſt right on therle of Morets tentes / who bare in his armour ſyluer thre oreylles goules / ther they toke hym in his bed: and ſlewe many or thooſt was moued and wan great pyllage. Than they returned into y• towne boldely with great ioye / and delyuerd therle Moret as priſoner to the captayne of the caſtell

the lorde John̄ Neuell. Whan the ſcottes were vp / they armed them and ranlyke madde men to the barryers of the towne and made a great aſſaut / the whiche endured longe but lytell it awayled them / and they loſt ther many men: for ther were many good men of war within / who defended thēself ſo wyſely / that the ſcottes were fayne at laſt to withdrawe a backe to their loſſe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe kynge Dauyd of Scotlande diſtroyed the cytie of Dyrrame. Cap. lxxv.
            
               WHan that king Dauyd and his counſayle: ſawe that his taryeng about Newcaſtell was daungerous / and that he coude wynne therby nother profet nor honour: than he departed and entred into the contrey of the byſſhoprike of Dyrram / and ther brent and waſted all byfore them. And ſo came to the cyte of Dyrram / & layed ſiege rounde about it / and made many great aſſautes lyke madde men / by cause they had loſt therle of Morette: and they knewe well that ther was moche richeſſe in the cytie / for all the contrey ther about was fledde thyder. The ſcottꝭ made ingens and inſtrumē
               tes to come to the walles to make the feercer aſſant: and whan the ſcottes were gone fro New caſtell / than̄e ſir John̄ Neuyll captayne there / mounted on a good horſe and toke away farre of fro the ſcottes: and dyd ſomoche that within fyue dayes he came to Chyrtſay / wher as kyng Edwarde lay as than: ther he ſhewed the king tidynges of the ſcottes. Than the kynge ſende forth meſſangers into euery part: cōmaūdyng euery man bytwene the age of .lx. and .xv. all excuſes layd a part to drawe Northwarde and to mete hym in that contrey / to ayde and defende his contrey / that the ſcottes diſtroyed: than lordes / knyghtes / ſquyers: and all other drewe towarde the northe. The kyng deꝑted hymſelf haſtely & taryed for no man / and euery man folowed aſwell as they might: in the meane ſeaſon the ſcottes aſſauted the cytie of Dyrrame / with ingens and other inſtrumentes: ſo feerſly yt they within coude nat defende themſelf / but that the cytie was wonne byforce / and robbed and clene brent: and all maner of people put to deth without mercy / men women / and chyldren / monkes / preeſtes / and chanons: ſo that ther abode a lyue no maner a perſon houſe nor church / but it was diſtroyed / the whiche was great pytie ſo to dyſtroy chriſten blode. And the churches of godde wherin that god was honoured and ſerued.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the ſcottes beſieged a caſtell of therle of Salyſburies. Cap. lxxvi.
            
               THan king Dauyd was coū
               ſelled to drawe a backe a long by ye ryuer of Tyne & to drawe toward Carlyle & as he went thyderward he loged that nyght beſyde a caſtel of therle of Salyſburies / the whiche was well kept with men a warr: captayne therof was ſir Wyllm̄ Montagu / ſon to therle of Salyſburis ſuſter. The next day the ſcottes dyſloged to go towarde Carlyle: they had moch cary age with them of ſuch pyllage as they had won at Dyrā. Whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllm̄ Montagu ſawe how the ſcottꝭ paſſed by without reſtyng / thā he with .xl. with him yſſued out a horſbacke / and folowed couertly the hynder trayne of the ſcottes / who had horſes ſo charged with baggage / yt they might ſcāt go any gret pace. And he ouertoke them at thêtryng into a wood & ſet on them / and ther ſlewe and hurt of the ſcottz mo than. CC. and toke mo than ſixſcore horſes charged with pyllage / and ſoled thē toward the caſtell. The cry and brunt of the flight came to the heryng of ſir Wyllyam Duglas / who had the charge of the reregarde / and as than he was paſt ye wood: whan he ſawe the ſcottes came fleyng ouer the dales and moū
               tayns he had great maruell / and than he and all his cōpany ran forth and reſted nat tyll they cāe to the fote of the caſtell / and mounted the hyll in haſt. But or he came to the bayls thēgly ſſhmen were entred / and had cloſed the barryers & put their pray in ſaftie: than the ſcottes began to aſſayle feerſly / and they within defēded thē: ther theſe two Wyllm̄s dyd what they might eche to greue other. This aſſaut endured ſo long / that all thooſt came thyder kyng & all: whan ye kyng and his counſell ſawe how his men were ſlayne lyeng in the felde / and the aſſaylantes ſore hurt without wynning of any thyng / than he cōmaū
               ded to ceaſe thaſſaut and to lodge. Than euery man began to ſeke for his logyng and to gader togyder the deed men / and to dreſſe theym that were hurt. The next day the kyng of ſcottes cō
               maunded that euery man ſhulde be redy to aſſayle / & they within were redy to defende: ther
               
was a ſore aſſautand a perylous / ther might a ben ſene many noble dedes on both ꝑtes. Ther was within preſent / the noble counteſſe of Salyſbury / who was as than reputed for the moſt ſageſt and fayreſtlady of all England / y• caſtell parteyned to her huſbande therle of Saliſbury who was taken priſoner with the erle of Suttolke before Lyle in Flanders / as ye haue harde before / and was in priſon as than 
                  〈◊〉
                the chatelot of Parys. The kyng of Englande gaue ye ſame caſtell to the ſayd erle whan he maryed firſt the ſayd lady / for the prowes and gode ſeruyce that he had done before whan he was called but ſir Wyllm̄ Montagu. This noble lady conforted them greatly within / for by the regarde of ſuch a lady and by her ſwere cōforting / a man ought to be worthe two men at nede. This aſſaut dured long and the ſcottes loſt many of their men / for they aduentured thēſelfe hardely / and caryed wood and tymbre to haue ſylled the dykes to thyntent to bring their engyns to ye walles / but they within defēded themſelfe ſo valyantly that the aſſaylantes were fayne to drawe a backe. Than the kyng cōmaunded y• ingens to be wel kept that nyght / and the next day to enforce the aſſaut / than euery man drue to their lodging except thoſe that kept thyngens. Some wept the deth of their frendes / other conforted them that were hurt they of the caſtellſa we well if kynge Dauyd cōtynued his ſege / how they ſhuld haue moche a do to defende them & their caſtell wher fore they toke counſell amonge them to ſende to kyng Edward / who lay at yorke as it was ſhewed them / by ſuche priſoners as they had taken of the ſcottes. Than they loked among thē who ſhulde do y• meſſage: but they coude fynde none that wolde leaue the caſtell / and the preſence of the fayre lady to do yt dede / ſo ther was among them great ſtryfe. Than whan the captayne ſir Wyllm̄ Montague ſawe that / he ſayd ſirs I ſe well the trueth and good wyll that ye bere to my lady of this houſe / ſo that for the loue of her and for you all / I ſhall put my body in aduentur to do this meſſage / for I haue ſuche truſt in you yt ye ſhall right well defende this caſtell tyll I retourne agayne. And on thother ſyde I haue ſuche truſt in the king our ſouerayne lorde / that I ſhall ſhortly bring you ſuche ſocours / that ſhall cauſe you to be ioyfull / and than I truſt ye kyng ſhall ſo rewarde you / that ye ſhalbe content. Of theſe wordes the counteſſe & all other wer right ioyefull / and whan the night came / the ſayd ſir Wyllm̄ made hym redy as priuely as he might / and it happed ſo well for hym / that it rayned all nyght / ſo that the ſcottes kept ſtyll within theſe lodgingꝭ. Thus at mydnight ſir Wyllm̄ Montagu paſſed through thooſt & was nat ſene / and ſo rode forth tyll it was day / than he met .ii. ſcottes halfe a leage fro thoſt / briuyng before them two oxen and a cowe towarde thooſt 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllm̄ knewe well they wer ſcottes and ſet on thē / and wounded them bothe & ſlewe the catell / to thy
                  ••
                tent yt they of thoſt ſhuld haue none eaſe by thē / than he ſayd to the two hurt ſcottꝭ: go yor wayes and ſay to your kyng that Wyllm̄ of Montague hath thus paſſed through his hooſt / and is goyng to fetche ayde of the kyng of Englande / and ſo departed. Than the ſame mornynge the kyng of ſcottꝭ made a fecrſe aſſaut but nothing coude he wyn / and euery day lightly they made aſſaut. Than his counſell ſame how he dyd but leſe his men / and yt the kyng of England might well come thyder or the caſtell were wo
                  〈…〉
                they by one acorde counſelled their kyng to depart / ſayeng how the abyding ther was nor for his profet / nor yet for his honour. And ſayd ſir ye haue honourably achyued your enterpriſe / & haue done great diſpyre to the englyſſſhmen: 
                  〈◊〉
                that ye haue ben in this contre a .xii. dayes / and taken & diſtroyed the cytie of Dyrrame. Wherfore ſir all thynges cōſydred it were good name that ye retourned / and take with you your pyllage that ye haue wonne: and an other tyme ye may returne agayne whan it pleaſeth you. The kyng who wolde nat do agaynſt the opynyons of all his counſell / agreed to them ſore agaynſt his mynde: howbeit the next mornyng h
                  •
                byss
                  •
               
               ged and all his hoſt / and toke the way ſtreyght to the great foreſt of Gedeours / there to tary at their caſe / and to knowe what the kyng of Englande wolde do farther / other to god backe agayne: or els to entre into Scotlande.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande was in amours with the counteſſe of Saliſbury. Ca. lxxvii.
            
               THe ſame day yt the ſcottes departed fro the ſayd caſtell kyng Edward came thyder with all his hoſt about noon and came to the ſame place wher as the ſcottꝭ had ſaged and was ſore diſpleaſed that he founde nat the ſcottes ther / for he cāe thyder in ſuch haſt yt his horſe & men wer ſore traueled.

Than he cōmaunded to lodge ther that nyght / and ſayd howe he wolde go ſe y• caſtell and the noble lady therin / for he had nat ſeue her ſythe ſhe was maryed before: than euery mā toke his logyng as he lyſt. And aſſone as the kyng was vnarmed / he toke a .x. or .xii. knyghtes wt hym / and went to the caſtell to ſalute the counteſſe of Saliſbury: and to ſe the maner of the aſſautes of the ſcottes / and the defence that was made agaynſt them. Aſſone as the lady knewe of y• kynges cōmyng ſhe ſet opyn the gates and cāe out ſo richely be ſene / that euery man marueyled of her beauty: and coude nat ceaſe to regarde her noblenes with her great beauty / and the gracyous wordes and countenaunce that ſhe made. Whan ſhe came to the kyng: ſhe knelyd downe to the yerth thankyng hym of his ſocours: and ſo ledde hym into the caſtell to make hym chere and honour / as ſhe that coude ryght well do it / euery man regarded her marueluſly. The king hym ſelfe coude nat witholde his regardyng of her: for he thought that he neuer ſawe before ſo noble nor ſo fayre a lady / he was ſtryken therewith to the hert with a ſparcle of fyne loue / that endured longe after: he thought no lady in the worlde ſo worthy to be / beloued as ſhe. Thus they entred into the caſtell hande in hande: the lady ledde hym firſt into the hall / and after into the chābre nobly aparelled / the kyng regarded ſo the lady that he was a baſſhed. At laſt he wēt to a wyndo to reſt hym / and ſo ſell in a gret ſtudy: the lady went about to make chere to the lordes and knyghtes that were ther / and cōmaun ded to dreſſe the hall for dyner. Whan ſhe had al deuyſed and cōmaunded: than̄e ſhe cameto the kyng with a mery chere / who was in a gret ſtu dy (and ſhe ſayd) dere & why do ye ſtudy ſo ſor yo• grace nat dyſpleaſed / it aparteyneth nat to you ſo to do / rather ye ſhulde make good chere and be ioyfull: ſeyng ye haue chaſed away your enmies who durſt nat abyde you / let other men ſtudy for the remynant. Than the kyng ſayd: a dere lady knowe for trouthe / that ſyth I entred into the caſtell: ther is a ſtudy cōe to my mynde ſo y• I can nat chuſe but to muſe / nor I cannat tell what ſhall fall therof: put it out of my herte I cannat. A ſir ꝙ the lady ye ought alwayes to make good chere to confort ther with yo• peple / god hath ayded you ſo in yo• beſynes and hath gyuen you ſo great graces / that ye be the moſte douted and honoured priuce in all chriſtēdome and if the kyng of ſcottes haue done you any dy ſpyre or damage / ye may well amende it whan it ſhall pleaſe you: as ye haue done dyuerſe tymes or this. Sir leaue your muſyng and come into y• hall if it pleaſe you yo• dyner is all redy / a fayre lady ꝙ the kyng: other thynges lyeth at my hert that ye knowe nat of / but ſurely y• ſwete be hauyng / the perfyt wyſedom / the good grace noblenes / and exellēnt beauty that I ſe in you: hath ſo ſore ſurpriſed my hert / y• I can nat but loue you: and without your loue I am but déed Than the lady ſayde: a ryght noble prince / for goddeſſake mocke nor tempt me nat / I can nat byleue that it is true that ye ſay / nor that ſo noble a prince as ye be wold thynke to dyſhonour me / and my lorde my huſbande: who is ſo valyant a knight / and hath done your grace ſo gode ſeruyce / and as yet lyethe in priſon for your quarell. Certēly ſir ye ſhulde in this caſe haue but a ſmall prayſe: & nothyng the better therby I had neuer as yet ſuch a thoght in my hert nor I truſt in god neuer ſhall haue / for no man lyueng. If I had any ſuche intencyon / your grace ought nat all onely to blame me: but alſo to punyſſhe my body / ye and by true iuſtice to be diſmēbred Therwith the lady deꝑted fro the kyng & went into the hall to haſt the dyner: than ſhe returned agayne to the kyng and broght ſome of his knyghtes with her / and ſayd ſir: yf it pleaſe you to come into the hall your knightꝭ abideth for you to waſſhe ye haue ben to long faſtyng. Than y• kyng went into the hall & waſſht / and ſat down amonge his lordes & the lady alſo: the kyng ete but lytell he ſat ſtyll muſyng / and as he durſt he caſt his eyen vpon the lady. Of his ſadneſſe his knyghtꝭ had maruell for he was nat acuſtomed ſo to be: ſome thought it was bycauſe the ſcottꝭ were ſcaped fro hym / all y• day the kyng taryed ther & wyſt nat what to do. Sōtyme he ymagined yt honour and trouth defēded him to ſet his hert in ſuch a caſe to dyſhonour ſuch a lady: & ſo true a knyght as her huſband was / who had alwayes well & truely ſerued hym. On thother ꝑ
                  •
                loue ſo conſtrayned hym / that the power therof ſurmounted honour and trouth. Thus y• kyng debated in hymſelf all that day & all that night: In the mornyng he a roſe and dyſloged all his hooſt / and drewe after the ſcottes to chaſe them out of his realme. Than he toke leaue of the lady / ſayeng my dere lady to god I cōmende you tyll I returne agayne: requiryng you to aduyſe you otherwyſe than ye haue ſayd to me. Noble prince ꝙ the lady: god y• father glorious be yo• cōduct / and put you out of all bylayne thoughtꝭ ſir I am & euer ſhalbe redy to do your grace ſer uyce to your honour and to myne / therwith the kyng deꝑted all abaſſhed. And ſoo folowed the

ſcottes tyll he came to the cyte of Berwyke / and went & lodged within. iiii leages of the forelt of Gedeors / wher askyng Dauyd and all his cō
               pany were entred: in truſt of the great wylderneſſe. The kyng of England taryed ther a .iii. dayes to ſe if the ſcottes wold yſſue out to fight with hym / in theſe thre dayes ther were dyuers ſkirmyſſhes on bothe ꝑties: and dyuers ſlayne taken / and ſore hurte amonge the ſcottes. Sir Wyllyam Duglas was he that dyd mooſt trouble to thenglyſſhemen / he bare azure / a comble ſyluer / thre ſtarres goules.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Salyſbury and therle Moret / were delyuerd out of priſon by exchaunge. Cap. lxxviii.
            
               IN theſe ſayd thre dayes ther were noble men on bothe parties / that treatid for a peace to be had bytwene theſe two kynges: and their treatie toke ſuche eſſect / that a trewſe was agreed to endure two yere / ſo that the frenche kynge wolde therto agree. For the kyng of ſcottes was ſo ſore alyed to the frenche kyng / y• he might take no peace without his cōſent: and it ſo be the frenche kyng wolde nat agree to the peace / than the truſe to endure to the firſt day of May folowyng. And it was agreed that therle of Morette ſhulde be quyte for his priſonment if the kyng of ſcottes coude do ſomoche to purchaſe with the frenche kyng / that therle of Saliſbury might in lyke maner be quyte out of priſon / the whiche thyng ſhulde be done before the feeſt of ſaynt John̄ of Baptyſt next after. The kyng of Englande agreed y• ſoner to this truſe / bycauſe he had warre in France / in Gaſcoyne / in Poycton / in Xaynton / in Bretaygne / and in euery place he had men of warre at his wages: than the kyng of ſcottes ſent great meſſangers to the french kyng to agre to this truſe. The frē
               che kyng was cōtent: ſeyng it was the deſyre of the kyng of ſcottꝭ / thā therle of Saliſbuey was ſent into Englande / and the kyng of England ſent incōtynent therle Moret into Scotland.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Charles du Bloys with dyuers lordes of Fraunce toke the cytie of Kenes in Bretayne. Cap. lxxix.
            IT is to be knowen that whan the duke of Normādy the duke of Burgoyne / y• duke of Alāſon / the duke of Burbon / therle of Bloys / the conſtable of Fraunce / therle of Guynes his ſonne / ſir James de Burbone ſir Loyes of Spaygne / with other lordes and knyghtes of Fraunce. Whan they were departed out of Bretayne: and had conquered the ſtronge caſtell of Chaſtoneaux / & the cyte of Nantes: and taken therle of Moūtfort and delyuerd hym to y• frenche kyng / who had put hym in priſon in the caſtell of Loure in Parys: and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Charles of Bloys beyng in Nantes and the contrey obeyed to hym rounde about / abydinge the ſomer ſeaſon to make better warr than in wynter. Whan the ſwete ſeaſon of ſomer approched: the lordes of Fraunce and dyuers other drue towarde Bretayne with a great hooſt to ayde ſir Charles de Blois / to recouer y• reſydue of the duchy of Bretayne. They foūde & Charles of Bloys in Nā
               tes than they determyned to lay ſege to Kenes The counteſſe of Mountfort had well preuēted the mater: and had ſet ther for captayne 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllyam of Cadudall breton / the lordes of France came thyder and dyd moche trouble with aſſautes / howbeit they within defended themſelfe ſo valiantly / that their ennemyes loſte more than they wanne. Whan the counteſſe of Mountfort knewe that the lordes of Fraunce were come in to Bretaygne with ſuche a puyſſance / ſhe ſende ſir Amery of Clyſſon into Englande / deſyring ſocourſe of the kyng: on the cōdycion that therle of Mountfortꝭ ſon and heyre / ſhuld take to wyf one of the kynges doughters / and ſhulde be called duches of Bretayne. The king of England was as than at London makyng chere to therle of Saliſbury / who was newe come out of priſon: whan this ſir Amery of Clyſſon was come to the kyng / and had made relacyon of his meſſage. The kyng graunted his requeſt: and cō
               maunded ſir Water of Manny to take wt hym as many men of warr as ſir Amery deſyred / & ſhortly to make them redy to go into Bretayne to ayde the counteſſe of Mountfort / and to take with him a .iii. M. archers of the beſt. Thus 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Water / and ſir Amery toke the ſee: and with thē went the two bretherne of Lyned all / ſir Loys & ſir John̄ the Haz of Brabant / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hubert of Freſnoy / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Aleyn Syrefound and dyuers other: & a .vi. M. archers. But a great tempeſt toke thē on the ſee and a contrary wynde / wherfore they abode on the ſee .xl. dayes: all this ſeaſon the lordes of France with ſir Charles de Bloys kepte ſtyll the ſege before Renes / and ſore cōſtrayned them within: ſo that the burgeſſes of the towne wold gladly haue takē apoyntmēt / but their captayne ſir Wyllm̄ of Cadudall wold in no wyſe

agree therto. Whan the burgeſſes and the commons of the towne had endured moche payne & ſawe no ſocours cōmyng fro no ꝑtie / they wold haue yelded vp the towne but ye captayne wold nat: whan they ſawe that finally they toke hym and put hym in priſon. And made couenaunt wt ſir Charles du Bloys to yelde vp the towne the next day on the condycion that all ſuch as were of the countes part myght go their wayes whyther they lyſt without danger or trouble / ye lord Charles de Bloys dyd graūt their deſyre. Thꝰ the cytie of Renes was gyuen vp: ye yere of our lord. M .iii. C .xlii. in the begynning of May. Sir Wyllm̄ of Nuadudall wolde nat tary ther but went ſtreyght to Hanybout to the counteſſe of Moūtfort / who as than had hard no tidyngs of ſir Amery of Clyſſon nor of his company.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Charles du Bloys beſieged the counteſſe of Mountfort in Hanybout. Cap. lxxx.
            
               WHan the cytie of Renes was gyuen vp: ye burgeſſes made their homage & fealtie to the lord Charles of Bloys. Than he was counſelled to go and lay ſiege to Hany boute wher as the counteſſe was: ſayeng that therle beyng in priſon / yf they myght gette the counteſſe and her ſonne / it ſhulde make an ende of all their warre. Than they went all to Hany bout: and layed ſiege therto and to the caſtell alſo / as ferr as they might by lande: with ye coū
               teſſe in Hanybout / ther was the byſſhop of Leon in Bretayne / alſo ther was ſir yues of Tribiquedy / the lorde of Landreman / ſir Wyllm̄ of Nuadudall / and ye Chatelayne of Guyngnape the two bretherne of Nuyreth / ſir Henry and 
                  〈◊〉
                Olyuer of Pēnefort: and dyuers other. Whan the counteſſe and her company vnderſtode that the frenchmen were commyng to lay ſiege to ye towne of Hanybout: than it was commaūded to ſounde the watche bell a la
                  •
                / and euery man to be armed and drawe to their defence. Whan ſir Charles and the frenchmen came nere to the towne: they commaunded to lodge ther that nyght / ſome of the yong luſty companyons cāe ſkirmyſſhyng to the barrers / and ſome of them within yſſued out to theym: ſo that ther was a great affray / but the genowayes and frēchmen loſte more than they wanne. Whan night came on / euery man drewe to their lodgynge: y• next day the lordes toke counſayle to aſſayle the batrers to ſe the maner of them within: and ſo the thyrde day they made a great aſſaute to the batrers / fro mornyng tyll it was noone. Than the aſſaylantes drewe a backe ſore beaten / and dyuerſe ſlayne: whan the lordes of Fraunce ſawe their men drawe a backe they were ſore dyſpleaſed / and cauſed the aſſaut to begynne agayne more ferſer than it was before / and they within defended thēſelfe valyantly. The counteſſe her ſelfe ware harneſſe on her body: and rode on a great courſer fro ſtrete to ſtrete / deſyringe her peple to make good defence: and ſhe cauſed damoſelles and other women to cutte ſhorte their kyrtels / and to cary ſtones & pottes full of chalk to the walles / to be caſt downe to their ennemyes. This lady dyd ther an hardy enterpriſe / ſhe moūted vp to ye heyght of a towre / to ſe how the frenchmen were ordred Wtout. She ſawe howe that all the lordes and all other people of thooſt were all gone out of ther felde to thaſſaut: than ſhe toke agayne her courſer armed as ſhe was / and cauſed thre hundred men a horſbacke to be redy / and ſhe went with theym to another gate wher as there was non aſſaut. She yſſued out and her company / and daſſhed into the frenche lodgynges / and cutte downe tentes and ſet fyre in their lodgynges / ſhe founde no defence ther but a certayne of varlettes and boyes / who ran away. Whan ye lordes of France loked behynde them & ſawe their lodgynges a fyre / and harde the cry and noyſe ther: they retourned to ye felde cryeng treaſon treaſon / ſo that all thaſſaut was left. Whan the counteſſe ſawe that / ſhe drewe to gyder her cōpany: and whan ſhe ſawe ſhe coud nat entre agayne into the towne without great damage / ſhe toke an other way and went to the caſtell of Breſt / the whiche was nat ferr thens. Whan ſir Loys of Spayne / who was marſhal of the hoſt was come to the felde / and ſawe their lodgynges brennyng: and ſawe the counteſſe & her cōpany goynge away / he folowed after her with a great nombre: he chaſed her ſo nere / that he ſlewe and hurte dyuerſe of theym that were behynde yuell horſed. But the counteſſe and the mooſt parte of her company rode ſo well / that they came to Breſte / and there they were receyued with great ioye. The next day the lordes of Fraunce / who hadde loſt their tentes and their prouiſyons: thanne tooke counſayle to lodge in bowers of trees more nerer to the towne / and

they had great marueyle whan they knewe that the counteſſe herſelfe had done that enterpriſe. They of the towne wyſt nat wher the counteſſe was become / wherof they were in great trouble for it was fyue dayes or they harde any tidynges. The counteſſe dyd ſomoche at Breſt: that ſhe gate togyder a .v. hundred ſperes / and than about mydnight ſhe departed fro Breſt / and by the ſonne ryſing ſhe came along by the one ſyde of the hooſt / and came to one of the gates of Hanybout the which was opyned for her: and ther in ſhe entred and allher cōpany with gret noyſe of trumpettes and canayrs / wherof the frenche hooſt had great marueyle: and armed thē and ran to the towne to aſſaut it / and they within redy to defende: ther began a feerſe aſſaut & endured tyll noone / but the frenchmen loſt more than they within. At noone thaſſaut ceaſed: than they toke counſell that ſir Charles du Bloys ſhulde go fro that ſege and gyue aſſaut to the caſtell of Alroy the which kyng Arthure made / and with hym ſhulde go the duke of Burbone / therle of Bloys / the marſhall of France / ſir Robert Bertrande: and that ſir Henry de Leon and part of the geneuoys and the lorde Loys of Spayne / and the vycont of Rohayne withall the ſpanyer des / ſhulde abyde ſtyll before Hanybout: for they ſawe well they coulde haue no profet to aſſayle Hanybout any more. But they ſent for. xii great engyns to Renes / to thyntent to caſt into the towne and caſtell day & night. So they deuyded their hoſt: the one ſtyll before Hanybout the other with ſir Charles of Bloys before Aulroy: they within Alroy were well fortifyed and were a two. C. companyons / able for to mayntayne the warre. And ſir Henry of Penfort and ſir Olyuer his brother were chyefe capitaynes ther / a foure leages fro that caſtell was ye good towne of Uannes parteyning to the counteſſe / and capitayne ther was ſir Gelfray of Malatrayt / nat farre thens alſo was the good towne of Guyngnape / the cathelayne of Dyuant was captayne ther: he was at Hanybout with ye coū
               teſſe / and had lefte in the towne of Dynant his wyfe and his chyldren / and had lefte ther capytayne in his ſtede Raynolde his ſon. Bytwene theſe two townes ſtode a ſtronge caſtell parteynyng to ſir Charles du Bloys 
                  〈◊〉
                was well kept with ſoudyours burgonyons. Captayne there was ſir Gerarde of Maulayne / and with hym an other knyght called Pyer Portbeufe: they waſted all the contrey about them / and cōſtrayned ſore the ſayd two townes / for ther coude no ther marchandyſe nor prouiſyon entre into any of thē but in great danger. On a day they wold ryde towarde Uānes / and an other day towarde Guyngnape: and on a day ſir Raynolde of Dynant layed a buſſhment / and the ſame day 
                  〈◊〉
                Gerarde of Maulayne rode forthe and had taken a .xv. marchantes and all their goodes / and was driuyng of them towardes their caſtell called Rochprion and ſo fell in the buſſhment: and ther ſir Raynolde of Dynant toke ſir Gerarde priſoner and a .xxv. of his company / and reſcued the marchantes and ledde forthe their priſoners to Dynant / wherof ſir Raynolde was moche prayſed and well worthy.
            ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of the counteſſe of Moūt fort / who was beſieged in Hanybout by ſir Loys of Spayne / who kept the ſiege ther: and he had ſo broken and bruſed the walles of ye towne with his engins. So that they within began to be a baſſhed / and on a day the byſſhop of Leon ſpake wt ſir Henry of Leon his nephue / by whō as it was ſayd that therle Moūtfort was taken So longe they ſpake togyder that they agreed y• the byſſhop ſhulde do what he coude to cauſe the cōpany within to agre to yelde vp the town and caſtell to ſir Charles de Bloys: and 
                  〈◊〉
                Henry de Leon on thother ſyde ſhuld purchaſe pece forthē all / of ſir Charles de Bloyes: and to leſe nothyng of their goodes. Thus the byſſhop entred agayne into the towne: the countes incōtynent douted of ſome yuell purchaſe / than ſhe desyred the lordes and knightes yt were ther / that for the loue of god they ſhulde be in no dout / for ſhe ſayd ſhe was in ſuretie that they ſhuld haue ſocours within thre dayes: howbeit ye byſſhope ſpake ſomoch and ſhewed ſo many reaſons to ye lordes / that they were in a great trouble all that night. The next mornyng they brewe to coūſell agayne: ſo that they wer nere of acorde to haue gyuen vp the towne / & ſir Hēry was cōe nere to the towne to haue taken poſſeſſion therof: than the counteſſe loked downe along the ſee out at a wyndo in the caſtell / & began to ſmyle for great ioy that ſhe had to ſe the ſocours commyng / 
                  〈◊〉
                which ſhe had ſo long deſyred. Than ſhe 
                  〈◊〉
                out a loude and ſayd twyſe: I ſe the ſocurs of Englande cōmyng / than they of the towne 
                  •
               an to the walles and ſawe a great nom
                  ••
                of 
                  〈◊〉
               
               pes great and ſmall freſſhly decked cōmyng towarde Hanybout / they thought well it was the ſocours of England / who had ben on the ſee .lx. dayes by reaſon of contrary wyndes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Water of Manny brought thenglyſſhmen into Bretayne. Cap. lxxxi.
            
               
               WHan the ſeneſhall of Guyngnape / & Perſe of Tribyquedy ſir Galeran of Landreman and the other knyghtꝭ ſawe theſe ſocours cōmyng: thā they ſayd to the byſſhoppe / ſir ye may well leaue your treaty for they ſayd they were nat cō tent as than to folowe his counſayle. Than the byſſhoppe ſayd ſirs: than our company ſhall de part for I wyll go to hym that hath mooſt right as me ſemeth. Than he departed fro Hanibout and defyed the coūteſſe and all her ayders and ſo went to ſir Henry de Leon and ſhewed hym howe the mater went: than ſir Henry was ſore dyſpleaſed / and cauſed incontynent to rere vp the gretteſt ingens that they had nere to the cattell and cōmaunded that they ſhuld nat ſeaſe to laſt day and nyght. Than he deꝑted thens and brought the byſſhoppe to ſir Loys of Spayne / who receyued hym with great ioye / and ſo dyd ſir Charles of Bloys: than the counteſſe dreſſed vp halles and chambers to lodge the lordes of Englande that were cōmyng / and dyd ſende agaynſt them right nobly. And whan they wer a lande: ſhe came to them with great reuerence and feeſted them the beeſt ſhe might / and thanked thē right humbly: and cauſed all the knyghtes and other to lodge at their eaſe in the caſtell and in the towne. And the nexte day ſhe made them a great feeſt at dyner: all night & the nexte day alſo the ingens neuer ceaſed to caſt / and after dyner ſir Gaultier of Māny who was chefe of that company / demaunded of the ſtate of the towne & of the hooſt without. And ſayd I haue a great deſyre to yſſue out and to breke downe this great ingen that ſtandeth ſo nere vs / if any 
                  •
               oll folowe me. Than & Perſe of Tribyquidy ſayde howe he wolde nat fayle hym / at this his firſt begynning: and ſo ſayd the lorde of Lādre man / than they armed them and ſo they yſſued out priuely at a certayne gate / & with thē a .iii. hundred archers / who ſhotte ſo holly togyder y• they that kept the ingen fledde awaye / and the men of armes came after the archers and ſlewe dyuerſe of them that fledde and bete downe the great engyn / and brake it all to peaces. Than̄e they ranne in amonge the tentes and logynges and ſet fyre in dyuerſe places / and ſlewe & hurt dyuers tyll the hooſt began to ſtyrre: than they withdrue fayre and eaſely / and they of the hooſt ranne after thē lyke madde men. Than & Gaultier ſayd: let me neuer be beloued with my lady without I haue a courſe with one of theſe folowers / and therwith tourned his ſpere in the reſt: and in likewyſe ſo dyd the two bretherne of L▪
               dall and the haz of Brabant / ſir yues of Tribyquedy / ſir Galeran of Landreman and dyuerſe other companyons: they ran at the firſt comers ther myght well a ben legges ſene tourned vpwarde: ther began a ſore medlynge / for they of the hooſt alwayes encreaſed. Wherfore in behoued thenglyſſhmen to withdrawe towarde ther fortreſſe: ther might well a ben ſene on bothe ꝑties many noble dedes takyng and reſcuyng / y• englyſſhmen drewe ſagely to y• dykes / and ther made a ſtall tyll all their men wer in ſauegard: and all the reſydue of the towne yſſued out to reſcue their cōpany / and cauſed them of the hooſt to recule backe. So whan they of the hoſt ſawe how they coude do no good they drewe to their lodgynges: and they of the fortreſſe in likewyſe to their lodgynges: than the counteſſe diſcēdyd downe fro the caſtell with a gladde chere / and came and kyſt ſir Gaultier of Manny / and his companyons one after an other two or thre tymes lyke a valyant lady.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the caſtell of Conqueſt was wonne two tymes. Cap. lxxxii.
            
               THe next day ſir Loys of Spayne called to counſell the vycont of Rohayne the byſſhoppe of Leon / the lorde Henry of Leon / and the maſter of the geneuoys to know ther aduyſe what was beſt to do / they ſawe well the towne of Hanybout was marueylouſly ſtrong / and greatly ſocoured by meanes of tharchers of England: they thought their tyme but loſt to abyde there / for they coude nat ſe howe to wynne any thyng ther. Than they all agreed to dyſlodge y• nexte day and to go to the caſtell of Alroy: where ſir Charles of Bloys lay at ſiege / the next day betymes they pulled downe their lodgynges and drewe thyder as they were purpoſed. And they of the towne made great cryeng and ſhowtyng after thē: and ſome yſſued out to aduenture thē ſelfe / but they were ſone put a backe agayne and loſt ſome of their company or they coude entre a gayne into y• towne. Whan ſir Loys of Spayne cāe to ſir Charles of Bloys / he ſhewed hym

the reaſon why he left theſege before Hanybout than it was ordayned that ſir Loys of Spayne and his cōpany ſhulde go and ley ſiege to Dynant / the which was nat cloſed but with pales / water / and mareſſe: and as ſir Loyes went towarde Dynant he came by a caſtell called Conqueſt. And captayne ther for the counteſſe was a knyght of Normādy called ſir Mencon / and with hym dyuers ſoudyers: ſir Loys came thyder and gaue a great aſſaut / and they within defended them ſo well / that thaſſaut endured tyll mydaight and in the morning it began agayn: thaſſaylantes perſed ſo nere that they came to y• wall and made a great hole through / for the dykes were of no depneſſe. And ſo byforce they entred and ſlewe all them within the caſtell / except the knyght whome they toke priſoner: and ſtablyſſhed ther a newe Chatelayne and a .lx. ſoudyers with hym / thā ſir Loys departed & went and layed ſeige to Dynaunt. The counteſſe of Mountfort had knowledge howe ſir Loyes of Spayne was aſſautyng of the caſtell of Conqueſt / than ſhe ſayd to ſir Water of Manny and his company that if they might reſcue that caſtell / they ſhuld achyue great honour. They all agreed therto / and deꝑted the next morning fro Hanybout ſo y• 
               ther abode but fewe behynde in the towne / they rode ſo falt y• about noone they came to the caſtell of Conqueſt wherin was as than y• frenche garyſon: for they had won it the day before. Whan ſir Water of Manny ſawe y• / and howe that ſir Loyes of Spayne was gone he was ſory bycauſe he might nat fight wt hym: and ſayd to his company / ſirs I wyll nat deꝑte hens tyll Iſe what company is yander within the caſtell / and to knowe howe it was wonne. Than he and all his made them redy to the aſſaut / and the frenchmen and ſpanyardes ſame that / they defended theym ſelfe aſwell as they might: the archers helde them ſo ſhort that then glyſſhmen aproched to the walles & they found the hole in the wall / wherby the cattell was won before: and by the ſame place they entred & ſlew all within / excepte .x. that were taken to mercy, than thenglyſſhmen and bret
                  •
               ns drue agayne to Hanybout / they wolde ſet no garyſon in Cō
               queſt for they ſawe well it was nat to he holden.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Loyes of Spayne toke the towne of Dynant and of Gerande. Cap. lxxxiii.
            
               NOwe let vs retourne to & Loys of Spayne / who belieged the towne of Dynant in Bretayne / and than he cauſed to be made lytell veſſels to make aſſautꝭ bothe by water and by lande. And whan y• burgeſſes of the towne ſawe howe they were in dāger to leſe their lyues & goodes / they yelded thēſelf agayne the wyll of their capten ſir Raynalt Guyngnap / whō they ſlewe in the myddes of the market place: by cauſe he wolde nat conſent to them. And whan ſir Loyes of Spayne had ben ther two dayes and taken fealtie of the burgeſſes / and ſet ther a newe capyten a ſquyer called Gerard of Maulyne whom they founde ther as priſoner / and the lorde Pyers Portbeufe with hym. Than they went to a great towne on the ſee ſyde called Gerand / they layd ſiege therto: and founde therby many veſſels and ſhyppes laded with wyne that marchā
               tes had brought thyder fro Poycton & 
                  •
               ochell to ſell the marchantes anon had ſolde their my nes but they were but yuell payed. Than & Loys cauſed ſome of the ſpanyardes and geneunys to entre into theſe ſhyppes: and the next day they aſſayled the towne bothe by lande and by water / ſo that they within coude nat defend thē ſelfe but that they were lightly wonne byforce / and the towne robbed and all the people put to the ſwerde without mercy: men / women / and chyldren: and fyue churches brent and vyolated Wherof ſir Loys was ſore dyſpleaſed and cauſed .xxiiii. of them that dyd y• d
                  •
               de to be hanged for their labours. Ther was moche treaſoure won / ſo that euery man had more than he coude bere away: for it was a riche towne of marchan dyſe. Whan this towne was won they wyſt nat whyder to go farther / than ſir Loys of Spayn and with hym ſir Othes 
                  •
               orne / and certayne genowayes and ſpanyardes entred into y• ſhyppes / to aduenture along by the ſee ſyde to ſe
                  •
                they might wynne any thyng ther: and the vycont of Rohayne / the hyſſhoppe of 
                  〈◊◊〉
                
               
                  •
               en ry of Leon his nephue: and all the other retourned to chooſt to ſir Charles of 
                  •
               loys / who lay ſlyll before the caſtell of A
                  •
               lroy. And ther they founde many knyghtes and lordes of Fraunce who were newely come thyder: as ſir Loyes of Poycters / therle of Ualence / therle of Aucerre therle of Porcyen / therle of Joigny / the erle of Bolayne: and dyuerſe other that kyng 
                  〈◊〉
                had ſent thyder / and ſome y• canme of there owne good wylles to ſerue ſir Charles of Bloys. 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
than the ſtrong caſtell of Alroy was nat wonne but ther was ſuche famyn within / that .vii. dayes before they had eten all their horſes: and the lorde Charles de Bloys wolde nat take them to mercy / without he might haue them ſimpley to do his pleaſur. And whan they within ſawe no other remedy: ſecretely in the night they yſſued but and by the wyll of god went through thooſt on the one ſyde / yet ſome were ꝑceyued & ſlayne but ſir Henry of Pennefort and ſir Olyuer his brother ſcaped by a lytle wood that was therby and went ſtreyght to Hanybout to the coūteſſe. So thus wanſir Charles of Bloyes the caſtell of Alroy / whan he had layne at ſiege .x. wekes: than he newly fortifyed the place and ſet therin newe captayns and men of warr. Than he departed and went & layed ſiege to Uānes / wherin ſir Geffray of Maletrayt was captayne / the next day certayne ſoudyers of the counteſſes of Mountfort beyng in the towne of Ployremell / yſſued out on the hope ſomwhat to wynne: and came ſodenly in the mornyng into the hoſt of ſir Charles de Bloys / but they aduentured themſelfe ſo farr that they were cloſed in and loſt many of their folkes / and thother fledde away and were chaſed to the gates of Ployremell / the whiche was nat ferr of fro Uānes. And whan they of the hooſt were retourned fro the chaſe / incontynent they made aſſaut to Uānes / and byforce wanne they bayles / harde to the gate of the cyte ther was a ſore ſkirmyſſhe and many hurt and ſlayne on bothe parties / the aſſaut endured tyll it was night: than ther was a truſe taken to endure all the next day. The burgeſſes y• next day yelded vp the towne whyther y• captayne wold ornat who whan he ſawe it wold be none other wyſe / departed out of the towne as ſecretly as he coude and went to Hanybout. Soſir Charles of Bloys and the frenchmen entred into Uā
               nes and taryed ther fyue dayes / than they went and layd ſiege to an other cytie called Traiz.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir water of Manny dyſconfited ſir Loyes of Spayne in the felde of Camperle. Cap. lxxxiiii.
            
               NOw let vs returne to ſir Loyes of Spayne who whan he was at the porte of Guerand by the ſeeſyde / he and his cōpany ſayled forth tyll they came into Bretayn bretonaunt / to a port called Camperle right nene to Quypercorentyn and to ſaynt Mathue of Fyne Portern. Than they yſſued out of the ſhyppes and landed / and brent all the countrey about and gate moche rycheſſe: the whiche they conueyed into their ſhyyppes / Whan ſir Gaultyer of Manny / and ſir Arnold of Clyſſon vnderſtode thoſe tidynges / they determyned to go thyder: and ſhewed their myndes to ſir Gyles of Tribyquedy / and to the Cathelayne of Guyngnape. The lorde of Landreman / ſir Wyllm̄ of Caducall / the two brethern of Penneforde / and to the other knyghtes that were ther in Hanybout / and all they agreed to go with good wylles: than they toke their ſhyppes / and toke with theym a thre thouſande archers / and ſo ſayled forthe tyll they came to the port wher as the ſhyppes of ſir Loys of Spaynes lay. Incōtynent they toke theym and ſlewe all that were within theym / and they founde in them ſuche rycheſſe that they had maruell therof: than they toke lande and went forthe & brent dyuers townes and houſes before them / and departed themſelfe into thre batayls / to the intent the ſoner to fynde their ennemys / and left a thre hundred archers to kepe their ſhippes and that they had wonne. Than they ſette on their way in thre partes: theſe tidynges anone came to ſir Loyes of Spayne / than he drewe togyder all his company and withdrue backe towarde his ſhyppes in great haſt / and encountred one of y• thre batayls / than̄e he ſawe well he muſt nedes fyght: he ſette his men in order and made newe knyghtꝭ / as his nephue called Alphons. Than ſir Loys ſette on fierſly / and at the firſt rencoū
               ter many were ouerthrowen / and likely to haue ben dyſconfyted / and the other two batels had nat come on: for by the cry and noyſe of the people of the contrey they drewe thyder. Than the batayle was more ſeerſer / thenglyſſhe archers ſhotte ſo holly togyder that the geneuoyes and ſpanyardes wer dyſconfited / and all ſlayne: for they of the cōtrey fell in with ſtaues and ſtones / ſo that 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys had moche a do to ſcape and dyd flee to the ſhyppes / and of .vi. M. there ſcaped with hym but thre hūdred / and his nephue was ſlayne. And whan he cāe to the ſhyppes he roud nat entre for the archers of England kept hym of: ſo he was fayne with gret ieopardy to take a lytell ſhypp̄ called Lyque / & ſuche of his cōpany as he coūde get to him / and ſayled away as faſt as he might. Whan ſir Gaulter and his cōpany cāe to the ſhyppes / they entred into the beſt ſhip they had / and folowed in the chaſe of ſir Loyes of Spayne: who euer fledde ſo faſt before them

that they coude nat ouertake hym. Sir 
                  •
               oyes at laſt toke port at Redon / and he and all his entred into the towne but he taryed nat there: for incontynent▪ thengly ſſhmen landed at the ſame place / ſo that ſir Loyes and his company were fayne to get ſuch horſes as they might and rode thens to Renes / the which was nat ferre thens: and ſuch as were yuell horſed were fayne to fall in the handes of their ennemyes / ſo that ſir Loys entred into Renes: and thenglyſſhmen and bretons retourned to Redone / and there lay all nyght. The nexte day they toke agayne the ſee: to ſayle to Hanybout to the counteſſe of Moūtfort but they had a contrary wynde / ſo that they were fayne to take lande a thre leages fro Dynant. Than they toke their way by lande / and waſted the countrey about Dynant / and tooke horſes ſuche as they coude get ſome without ſadyls and ſo cāe to Rochprion. Than ſir Gaultier of Manny ſaydſirs: yf our company were nat ſo ſoretraueled I wolde gyue aſſaut to this caſtell / the other knyghtes anſwered hym and ſayd / ſir ſet on at your pleaſure for we ſhall nat for ſake you to dye in the quarell / and ſo they al went to the aſſaut. Than Gerarde of Maulyn who was captayne ther made good defence / ſo that there was a perylouſe aſſaut. Sir Johan Butler / and ſir Mathewe of Freſnoy were ſore burte with many other.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Gaultier of Manny toke the caſtell of Gonyin the foreſt. Cap. lxxxv.
            
               THis Gerarv of Maulyn hadde a brother called Rengne of Maulyn who was captayne of a lytel for treſſe therby called Fauet. And whaſie he knewe that thēglyſſhmen and bretons were aſſayling of his brother at Rochprion: to thentent to ayde his brother he yſſued out & toke with hym a .xl. cōpanyons. And as he came thyderwarde through afayre medowe by a wood ſyde / he foūde certayne englyſſhmen and other lyeng there hurt / he ſette on them and toke them priſoners and ledde them to Fauet hurt as they were: and ſome ſledde to ſir Water of Manny and ſhewed hym the caſe / than he ceaſed the aſſaut. And he and all his company in great haſſe folowed them that ledde the priſoners to Fauet but he coude nat ouertake them: ſo that Regny and his priſoners were entred into the caſtell. Than thenglyſſhmen as ſore trayueled as they were made ther a gret aſſaut but nothyng coude they wynne / they were ſo well defended: and alſo it was late. They lay ther all night / to the entent to aſſyle y• caſtell agayne in the mornig Gerarde of Maulyn knewe all this he toke his horſe in the night and rode all alone to Dynant and was ther a lytell before day. Than he ſhewed all the caſe to the lorde Pyers Portbeuſe capitayne of Dynaunt / and aſſone as it was day he aſſembled all the burgeſſes of the towne in y• common hall: and ther Gerarde of Maulyne ſhe wed theym the mater in ſuche wyſe that they were all content to go forth / and ſo armed them and went towardes Fauet with a ſixe thouſand men of one and other. Sir Gaultier of Manny knewe therof by a ſpye / than̄e they couuſayled togyder and cōſydred that it were great dā
               ger for them if they of Dynant ſhulde come on thē on the oneſyde / & ſir Charles of Blois & his cōpany on thother ſyde: ſo they might be encloſed. Thā they agreed to leaue their cōpanyons in priſone tyll another tyme that they might amende it / and as they retourned towarde Hanybout / they came to a caſtell called Gony lafo reſt: the which was yelded vp to ſir Charles of Bloyes a fyftene dayes before. Than ſir Gaultier ſayde howe he wolde go no farther as ſore trayueled as he was / tyll he had made aſſaute to that caſtell / to ſe the demeanynge of thē with in. Ther they made a fierſe aſſaut & they within quickely defended theym ſelfe / ſir Gaultier encouraged his company and was euer one of theformaſt in ſomoche that the archersſhotte ſo quyckely and ſo cloſe togyder / that ther was none durſt appere at their defence. Sir Gaultier dyd ſomoche that parte of the dyke was fylled with buſſhes and wood / ſo that they came to the walles with pyckaxes and other inſtrumentes / and anone made a great hole through the wall. And ther they entred perforce / and ſlewe all they founde within and lodged ther y• night and they next day they went to Hanybout.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe ſir Charles of Bloyes toke the towne of Carahes. Cap. lxxxvi.
            
               WHan the coūteſſe knewe of their cōmynge ſhe came and mette them / and kyſſed & made them great chere: and cauſed al the noble men to dyne with her in the caſtell. Nowe in this ſeaſon ſir Charles of Bloys had wonne Uannes / and lay at ſege at Carahes: the coūtes of Mōtfort and ſir Gaultier of Manny / ſent certayne meſſangers to the kyng of Englande / ſignyfieng hym howe ſir Charles of Bloys and the lordes of France had conquered Uannes / Renes / and dyuers other good townes and caſtelles in Bretaygne / and was lickely to wynne all with out he were ſhortly reſyſted. Theſe meſſangers arryued in Cornewall and rode to Wyndeſore to the kyng.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of ſir Charles of Bloys / who had ſo ſore conſtrayned with aſſautes and ingens the towne of Carahes / that they yelded theym ſelfe vp to ſir Charles / and he receyued them to mercy: and they ſware to hym homage and fealtie & toke hym for their lorde. And ther he made newe officers / & taryed ther a fyftene dayes: thā they determyned to go and lry ſiege to Hanybout / yet they knewe well the towne was well fortifyed with ſufficyent prouiſyon. And ſo thyder they went and layed there ſiege / and the fourth day after thyder came ſir Loys of Spayne / who had layen in the towne of Renes a ſixe wekes / in helyng of ſuche hurtes as he had. He was well receyued there / for he was a knyght moche honoured and welbeloued among them. The frenche company dayly encreaſed / for ther were dyuers lordes & knyghtes of France were goyng into Spayne warde for ſuche warres as was bytwene the kynge of Spayne / and the kyng of Granado ſaraſyne. And as theſe knyghts paſſed through Poyctou and harde of theſe warres in Bretayne / drewe that way: ſir Charles of Bloyes had rayred vp agaynſt Hanybout a fyftene or ſixtene great engyns / the whiche caſte into the towne many a great ſtone. But they within ſet nat moch therby / for they were well defended there agaynſte them: and ſomtyme they wolde come to the walles and wype them in deryſion / ſayeng go and ſeke vp your company whiche reſteth in the feldes of Camperle: wherof ſir Loys of Spayne and the genowayes had great dyſpite.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir John̄ Butler and ſir Hubert of Freſnoy were reſcued fro deth before Hanybout. Cap. lxxxvii.
            
               ON a day ſir Loyes of Spayne came to the tent of ſir Charles du Bloyes / and deſyred of hym a gyft for all the ſeruyce that euer he had done / in the preſence of dyuerſe lordes of France. And ſir Charles graunted hym: bycauſe he knewe hymſelfe ſomoche bounde to hym / ſir ꝙ he I requyre you cauſe the two knyghtes that be in priſon in Fauet to be brought hyther / that is to ſay ſir John̄ Butler and ſir Hubert Freſnoy / and to gyue them to me to do with them at my pleaſure. Sir this is the gyft that I deſyre of you: they haue chaſed / dyſconfetted / and hurt me: & ſlayne my nephue Alphons / I can nat tell how otherwyſe to be reuenged of them / but I ſhall ſtryke of their heedes before the towne / in the ſyght of their companyons. Of theſe wordes 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Charles was a baſſhed: and ſayd certenly with right a goodwyll I woll gyue you ye priſoners / ſyth ye haue deſyred them. But ſurely it ſhulde be a ſhamefull dede to put ſo to dethe ſuche two valyant knyghts as they be: and it ſhalbe an occaſyon to our ennemyes to deale in likewyſe wt any of ours if they fall in lyke caſe / & we knowe nat what ſhall daylie fall: the chances of warre be dyuers. Wherfore dere coſyn I requyre you to be better aduyſed: than ſir Loyes ſayd / ſir if ye kepe nat promyſe wt me / knowe ye for trouth that I ſhall depart out of your company / & ſhall neuer ſerue nor loue you agayne whyle I lyue. Whan ſir Charles ſawe none other bote: he ſent to Fauet for the two knyghts / and in a morning they were brought to ſir Charles of Bloys tent but for all yt he coulde deſyre / he coude nat turne ſir Loyes of Spayne fro his purpoſe: but ſayd playnly that they ſhulde be beheeded anone after dyner / he was ſo ſore dyſpleaſed with them. All theſe wordes that was bytwene ſir Charles and ſir Loyes for thoccaſion of theſe two knightes / anone was come to the knowlege of ſir Water of Manny by certayne ſpyes that ſhewed ye
               
myſchefe that theſe two knyghtes were in / than he called his company and toke counſaile what was beſt to do / ſome thought one thynge / ſome thought an other: but they wyſt nat what remedy to ſynde. Than ſir Gaultier of Māny ſayd / ſirs it ſhuld be great honour for vs if we might delyuer out of daunger yonther two knyghtes and yf we put it in aduenture though we fayle therof / yet kynge Edwarde our mayſter woll canne vs moche thanke therfore / and ſo woll all other noble men: that herafter ſhall here of the caſe. At leeſt it ſhalbe ſayd howe we dyd our deuoyre ſirs this is myne aduyſe if ye woll folow it / for me thynketh a man ſhulde well aduēture his body to ſaue the lyues of two ſuche valyant knyghtes. Myne aduyſe is that we deuyde our ſelfe into two partes / the one part incontynent to yſſue out at this gate and to a range themſelf on the dykes to ſtyrre thooſt and to ſkirmyſſhe / I thynke that all the hole hooſt woll come rennyng thyder. And ſir Aymery ye ſhall be capytayne of that company / and take with you a .vi. thouſand good archers / and ſhre hundred men of armes: and I ſhall take with me a hundred men of armes / and fyue hundred archers. And I wyll yſſue out at the poſterne couertly / & ſhal daſſhe into the hooſt a monge the lodgynges be hynde / the whiche I thynke we ſhall ſynde as good as voyde. I ſhall haue ſuche with me as ſhall well bring me to the tent of ſir Charles du Bloyes / where as I thynke we ſhall fynde the two knyghtes priſoners: and I enſure you / we ſhall do our deuoyreto delyuer them. This deuyſe pleaſed them all / and incontynent they armed them and about the houre of dyner ſir Aymery of Clyſſon yſſued out with his company and ſet opyn the chiefe gate towardes the hooſt and ſome of them daſſhed ſodaynly into thooſt and cut downe tentes / and ſlewe and hurte dyuerſe: thooſt was in a ſodayne fray and in haſt armed theym / and drewe towardes thenglyſſh men and bretons. Who fayre and eaſely reculed backe / there was a ſore ſkirmyſſhe and many a manne ouerthrowen on bothe parties / than ſir Aymery drewe his people a longe on the bykes within the barryers / and the archers redy on bothe ſydes the way to receyue their ennemys. The noyſe and crye was ſo great that all ye hole hooſt drewe thyder / and left their tentes voyde ſauynge a certayne varlettes. In the meane ſeaſon ſir Gaultier of Manny and his cōpany yſſued out at a poſterne priuely / and cāe behynde the hooſt and entred into the lodgynges of the frenche lordes / for there were none to reſyſt thē all were at the ſkirmyſſhe. Than̄e ſir Gaultier went ſtreyght to ſir Charles of Bloys tent / and founde there the two knyghtes priſoners / 
                  〈◊〉
                Hubert of Freſnoy / and ſir John̄ Butteler: and made them incōtynent to leape vpon two good horſes that they brought thyder for the ſame intent / and retourned incontynent and entred agayne into Hanybout the ſame way thei yſſued out / the counteſſe receyued them with gret ioy. All this ſeaſon they fought ſtyll at ye gate / than tidynges came to the lordes of Fraunce howe the two knyghts priſoners were reſcued: whan ſir Loyes of Spayne knewe therof he thought hym ſelfe dyſceyued / and he demaunded which way they were gone that made that reſcue / and it was ſhewed hym howe they were entred into Hanybout. Than̄e ſir Loyes departed fro the aſſaut and went to his lodgynge right ſore dyſpleaſed / than all other lefte the aſſant: in there trayet there were two knyghtes that aduentured them ſelfe ſo forwarde that they were taken by the frenchmen the lorde Landreman and the Chathelayne of Guyngnape / wherof ſir Charles of Bloyes hadde great ioye / and they were brought to his tent and there they were ſo preched to that they tourned to ſir Charles parte / and dyd homage and feaultie to hym. The .iii. day after all the lordes aſſembledde in the lorde Charles tent to take counſayle / for they ſawe well that Hanybout was ſo ſtrong and ſo well fortifyed with men of warre
                  •
                that they thought they ſhulde wynne but lytell there. And alſo the countrey was ſo waſted that they wyſt nat why ther to go to forage & alſo wynter was at hande wherfore they all agreed to depart. Than they counſayled ſir Charles of Bloyes that he ſhuld ſende newe prouiſyons to all cyties / townes / & fortreſſes / ſuche as he had wonne: and noble capitayns with good ſoudyours to defende their places fro their ennemyes. And alſo if any man wolde treat for a trewſe to Whytſontyde / that it ſhulde nat be refuſed.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Charles of Bloyes toke the towne of Jugon and the caſtell. Cap. lxxxviii.
            
               TO this counſell euery man agreed / for it was thaūe bytwene ſaynt Reymy and All ſayntes / the yere of ourelorde god. M. CCC .xlii. Than euery man departed / 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
Charles of Bloys went to Carahes withall the lordes of his partie: and he retayned certayne of the lordes ſtyll with hym / to counſayle hym in all his beſyneſſe. And whyle he lay there on a day / a burges and a riche marchant of Jugon was taken by the marſhall ſir Robert of Beannoys / and he was brought to the lorde Charles This burgeſſe had all the rule in the towne of Jugon vnder the counteſſe / & alſo he was welbeloued in the towne. This burges was put in feare of his lyfe / he deſyred to be let paſſe for his ranſome: how be it he was ſo handled one wayes and other / that he fell in a bargayn to betray the towne of Jugone and to leaue opyn a certayne gate / for he was ſo well be truſted in the tawne that he kept the kayes whan he was ther This to acomplyſſhe / he layed his ſonne in hoſtage: and ſir Charles promyſed to gyue hym fyue hundred pounde of yerely rent / the day of poyntment came and the gate was lefte opyn at n
                  •
               ght and ſir Charles and his company entred into the towne with great puyſſaunce / the watche of the caſtell dyd perceyue them: and he began to cry a larum treaſon treaſon. They of the towne began to ſtyre and whan they ſawe that the towne was loſte / they fledde to the caſtell by heapes / and the burgeſſe that had done the treaſon fled with thē for a countenāce. And whan it was day ſir Charles & his company entred into the houſes to lodge and toke what they wolde / and whan̄e he ſawe the caſtell ſo ſtronge and ſo full of men / he ſayd he wold nat go thens tyll he had it at his pleaſure. Sir Gerard of Rochfort captayne of the caſtell perceyued the burgeſſe y• had betrayed them / he toke and hanged hym ouer the walles: and whan they conſydred howe ſir Charles had made a vowe nat to deꝑt thens tyll he had the caſtell / and that their prouyſion wolde nat ſerue them .x. dayes / they agreed to yelde them: their goodes that was left and their lyues ſaued / the which was graūted them. And ſo they made fealtie and homage to ſir Charles of Bloyes / and he ſtablyſſhed captayne there ye ſayd ſir Gerard of Rochfort and newely refreſſhed the towne and caſtell with mē of warr and 
                  •
               uiſyon. In this meane ſeaſon certayne noble men of Bretayne ſpake for a truſe for a certayn ſpace / bytwene ſir Charles of Bloyes and the counteſſe of Mountfort / the which was agreed by all their ayders and aſſiſters: alſo the kynge of Englande ſent for the counteſſe to come into Englande / and aſſone as this trewſe was confirmed the coūteſſe toke ſee and paſſed into Englande.
         
         
            ¶ Of the feeſt and iuſtynge made at London by the kyng of England for the loue of the counteſſe of Saliſbury. Cap. lxxxix.
            
               LE haue well harde here before: howe the kynge of Englande had great warres in dyuers countreis / and had men of warre in garyſons to his gret coſt and charge: as in Picardy / Normādy / Gaſcoyne / Xaynton Poycton / Bretayne / and Scotlande. ye haue harde alſo before / how the kyng was ſtryken in loue with the counteſſe of Saliſbury / loue quickened hym day and night: her freſſhe beautie & godely demeanour was euer in his remēbrance though therle of Saliſbury was one of the priuyeſt of his counſell / and one of them that had done hym beſt ſeruyce. So it fell that for ye loue of this lady / and for the great deſyre that ye king had to ſe her: he cauſed a great feeſt to be cryed and a iuſtyng to be holden in the cyti of Lōdon in the myddes of Auguſt / the which cry was alſo made in Flaunders / in Heynault / in Brabāt and in Fraunce: gyueng all cōmers out of euery contrey ſafe cōduct to come and go / and had gyuen in cōmaundement through his owne realme that all lordes / knyghtes / ſquyers / ladyes and domoſels ſhuld be ther without any excuſe and cōmaunded expreſly the erle of Saliſbury that the lady his wyfe ſhulde be ther / & to bring with her all ladyes and damoſels of that countrey. Therle graunted the kyng as he that thought none yuell the gode lady durſt nat ſay nay howbeit ſhe came ſore agaynſt her wyll / for ſhe thought well ynough wherfore it was: but ſhe durſt nat dyſcouer the mater to her huſband ſhe thought ſhe wolde deale ſo to bringe the kynge fro his opynion. This was a noble feeſt: there was the erle Wyllyam of Heynalt and 
                  〈◊〉
                John̄ of Heynalt his vncle / and a great nombre of lordes and knyghtes of hyghe lynage / there was great daunſynge and iuſtynge the ſpace of .xv. dayes / the lorde John̄ eldyſt ſon to the vycount Beaumonde in England was ſlayne in the iuſtes. All ladyes and damoſelles were freſſhely beſene accordyng to their degrees / except Alys counteſſe of Saliſbury / for ſhe went as ſimply as ſhe myght: to the intent that the kyng ſhulde nat ſette his regarde on her for ſhe was fully determyned to do no maner of thynge that ſhulde tourne to her dyſhonour nor to her huſbandes. At this feeſt was ſir Henry with the wrye necke

erle of Lancaltre / and ſir Henry his ſonne erle of Derby / ſir Robert Dartoyes erle of Rychmount / the erle of Northampton and of Glocetter / the erle of Warwyke / the erle of Saliſbury the erle of Penneforde / the erle of Hereford / the erle of Arundell / the erle of Cornewall / the erle of 
                  •
               uenforde / the erle of Suffolke / the baron of Stafforde: and dyuers other lordes & knightes of Englande. And at all theſe nobles departed / the kyng receyued letters fro dyuers lordes of ſundrie contreis: as out of Goſcoyne / Bayon / Flaunders fro Jaques Dartuell / and out of Scotlande fro the lorde Roſe and the lorde Perſy / and fro ſir Edward Baylleull captayne of Berwyke / who ſygnifyed the kynge that the ſcottes helde but ſimply the trewſe concludedd the yere before / for they newely aſſembled togyder moch people for what entent they coude nattell. Alſo the captayne in Poycton / Xanton / Rochell / and Burdeloyes: wrote to the kyng howe the frenchmen made great preparacions for the warre for the peace made at Arras was nere expyred wherfore it was tyme for the kyng to take counſayle and aduyſe: and ſo he aunſwered the meſſangers fro poynt to poynt.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kynge of Englande ſent ſir Robert Dartoys into Bretayne. Cap. lxxxx.
            
               AMong all other thynges the kynge of Englande wolde ſocoure the counteſſe of Moūtfort / who was with the quene. Thanne the kyng deſyred his coſyn ſir Robert Dartoyes to take a certayne nombre of men of warre and archers and to go with the coūteſſe into Bretayne. And ſo he dyde and they departed and toke ſhypping at Hampton / and were on the ſee a great ſeaſon bycauſe of cōtrary wyndes. They departed about Eſter at this great counſell at London the kyng was aduyſed to ſende to Scotlande for the parfour maunce of a trewſe to endure for two or thre yeres. Conſydring that the kyng had ſomoche beſyneſſe in other places / the kynge of Englande was lothe therto / for he wolde haue made ſuche warr into Scotland that they ſhulde haue ben fayne to haue deſyred peace / howbeit his counſayle ſhewed hym ſuche reaſons that he agreed therto. Among other thynges his counſell ſayd that it was great wyſdome whan a prince hath warre in dyuers plac
                  •
                / at one tyme to agre with one by truſe / another to pacify with fayre wordes / and on the thyrde to make warre. Thanne was there a byſſhoppe ſende on that legacyon / and ſo he went forthe and in proceſſe retourned agayne and brought relacyon / howe ye the king of ſcottes wolde agre to no treweſe without the agrement of the frenche kynge. Than the kyng of Englande ſayde openly / that he wolde neuer reſt tyll he had ſo arayed the realme of Scotlande that it ſhulde neuer be recouered: than he 
                  〈◊〉
               
               maunded that euery man ſhulde be with hym at Berwyke by Eeſter / except ſuche as were apoynted to go into Bretayn. The feeſt of Eſter came / and the kynge helde a great court at Berwyke / for the chiefe of the lordes and knyghts of England were ther / and there taryed the ſpace of thre wyckes. In the meane ſeaſon certayne good men laboured bytwene ye parties to haue a trewſe: and ſo there a truſe was agreed to endure for two yere / and confyrmed by the french kyng. Than euery man departed and the kyng went to Wyndſore: than he ſende the lorde Thomas Hollande / and the lorde John̄ 
               
                  〈…〉
                Bayon with two hundred men of armes / andfour hundred archers to kepe the fronters ther.
            
            ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of ſir Robert Dartoyes / that yere fell ſo hye that it was nere to then
                  〈…〉
               g of May / in the myddes of the whiche moneth the trewſe bytwene the lorde Charles of Bloys and the counteſſe of Mountfort ſhulde expyre. Sir Charles of Bloyes was well 
                  〈…〉
               fyed of the purchaſe that the counteſſe of Mou
                  〈…〉
                had made in Englande / and of the confort that the kynge had promyſed her / for the whiche intent the lorde Loyes of Spayne / ſir Charles Germaux / and ſir Othes Dornes were layd on the ſee about Gernzay with a thre thouſande genowayes / and a thouſande men of armmes / and .xxxii. great ſhyppes.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batell of Gernzay bytwene ſir Robert Dartoys and ſir Loys of Spayne on the ſee. Cap. lxxxxi.
            
               
               SIr Robert Dartoyes erle of Rychmont / and with hym therle of Pennefort / ye erle of Saliſbury / therle of Suffolke / therle of Quenfort / the baron of Stafford the lorde Spenſer / the lord Bourchier: and dyuers other knyghtes of Englande and their cōpanyes / were with the counteſſe of Mountfort on the ſee. And at laſt came before the yle of Gernzay: than they ꝑ
                  •
               eyued ye great flete of the genowayes / wherof ſir Loys of Spaygne was chiefe captayne. Than their marynars ſayd ſirs arme you quickely / for yonder be genowayes and ſpaniardes that woll ſet on you: than thenglyſſhmen ſowned their trumpettes and reared vp their baners and ſtanderdes with their armes and deuyſes / with the baner of ſaynt George. And ſette their ſhippes in order with their archers before / and as ye wynd ſerued them they ſayled forth / they were a xlvi veſſels great and ſmall: but ſir Loys of Spaygne had .ix. greatter than any of the other / and thre galyes. And in the thre galyes were ye thre chiefe captaynes: as ſir Loyes of Spayne ſir Charles / and ſir Othes / and whan they aproched nere togyder / the genowayes beganne to ſhote with their croſbowes / and the archers of Englande agaynſt theym: there was ſore ſhotynge bytwene them and many hurte on bothe parties. And whan̄e the lordes / knyghtes / and ſquyers came nere togyder there was a ſore batayle: the counteſſe that day was worth a man / ſhe had the harte of a lyon and had in her hande a ſharpe glayue / wherwith ſhe fought feerſly. The ſpanyardes and genowayes that were in the great veſſels / they caſt downe great barres of yron and peaces of tymbre yt which troubled ſore thenglyſſhe archers: this batayle beganne about the tyme of euynſonge and the nyght departed them for it was very darke / ſo that one coude ſcant knowe an other. Than they withdrewe eche fro other and caſt ankers and abode ſtyll in their harnes for they thought to fight agayne in the mornynge / but about mydnight ther roſe ſuche a tempeſt ſo horryble as though all the worlde ſhulde haue endedd. There was none ſo hardy but wold gladly haue ben a land the ſhyppes daſſhed ſo togyder / that they went all wolde haue ryuen in peaces. The lordes of Englande demaunded counſayle of their maryners what was beſt to do / they aunſwered to take lande aſſone as they might / for the tempeſt was ſo great that if they toke the ſee / they were in daunger of drownyng. Than they drewe vp their ankers / and bare but a quarter ſayle / and drewe fro that place: the genowayes on the other ſyde drewe vpp̄ their ankers and toke the depe of the ſee for their veſſelles were greatter than thenglyſſhe ſhyppes / they might better abyde the brunt of the ſee / for if the great veſſels had cōe nere the lande they were lickely to haue ben broken. And as they deꝑted they toke foure englyſſhe ſhyppes laded with vytell and tayled them to their ſhyppes / the ſtorme was ſo hedeouſe that in laſſe than a day they were driuen a hundred leages fro the place wher they were be fore / and the englyſſhe ſhyppes toke a lytell hauen nat ferre fro the cytie of Uannes / wherof they were ryght gladde.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Robert Dartoys toke the cytie of Uannes in Bretayne. Cap. lxxxxii.
            
               THus by this tourment of ye ſee brake and departed the batell on the ſee / bytwne ſir Robert Dartoyes / and ſir Loyes of Spayne. No man coude tell to whome to gyue the honour / for they departed agaynſt bothe their wylles: thenglyſſhmen toke lande nat farre of fro Uannes / and brought all their horſe and harnes a lande / thā they deuyſed to ſende their nany to Hanybout / and to go theymſelfe and ley ſiege to Uannes / therin were captayns ſir Henry of Leon & Olyuer of Clyſſon / and with them the lorde of Turmyne / and the lord of Loheac. Whan they ſawe thenglyſſhmen come to beſiege them / they toke good hede to their defences bothe to the caſtell / and to the walles and gates: and at euery gate they ſet a knyght with .x. men of armes and .xx. croſbowes.
            ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of ſir Loyes of Spayns and his company: they were ſore tourmented on theſee and in great daunger all that nyght / and the nexte day tyll noone: and loſte two of their ſhyppes menne and all. Than̄e the thirde day about prime the ſee apeaſed: than they demaunded of the maryners what parte of lande was nexte / they aunſwered the realme of Nauarre: and that the wynde hadde driuen theym

out of Bretayne more than ſirſcore leages / thā there they caſt anker and above the fludde: and whan the tyde came they had good wynde to retourne to Rochell. So they coſted Bayon / but they wolde nat come nere it / and they met foure ſhippes of Bayon cōmyng fro Flaunders / they ſette on them and toke theym ſhortly / and flewe all that were in them: than they ſayled towardes Rochell / and in a fewe dayes they arryued at Gue
                  •
               rande. Ther they toke lande / and hard ther howe ſir Robert Dartoyes lay at ſiege be fore Uannes. Than they ſent to the lorde Charles of Bloyes to knowe his pleaſure what they ſhuld do / ſir Robert Dartoys lay at ſiege with a thouſande men of armes / and thre thouſande archers and waſted all the countrey about / and brent to Dynant and to Gony la Foreſt / ſo that none durſt abyde in the playne countrey: there were many aſſautes and ſkirmyſſhes at the barryers of Uannes. The counteſſe of Mountfort was ſtyll with ſir Robert Dartoys at the ſiege alſo ſir Gaultier of Manny who was in Hanybout delyuered the kepynge of the towne to ſir Wyllyam Caducall and to ſir Gerard of Rochfort: and toke with hym ſir yues of Tribyquedy / and a. C. men of armes / and. CC. archers: and deꝑted fro Hanybout and went to the ſiege before Uannes. Than incon
                  •
               ynent there was made a great aſſaut in thre places all at ones: ye archers ſhotte ſo thycke that they within ſcante durſt apere at ther defence / this aſſaut endured a hole day and many hurt on bothe parties / agaynſt night thenglyſſhmen withdrue to their lodgyngꝭ. And they within in likewyſe ſore wery of trayuell: and they vnarmed thē / but they of the hooſt without dyd nat ſo for they kept on ſtyll their harnes except their heed peces / and ſo dranke and refreſſhed them. And than by the aduyſe of ſir Robert Dartoyes / they ordayned agayne thre batayls: and two of them to aſſaute at the gates / and thethirde batayle to kepe thē
               ſelfe priue tyll the other two batayls had aſſayled long. So that all the ſtrength of the towne ſhulde be ther by all lickelyho
                  •
               e to defend / thā it was ordayned that this thyrde batayle ſhuld ſette on the mooſt febleſt place of all the towne with ladders / ropes / and hokes of yron to caſte on the walles. And as they de
                  •
               yſedde ſo it was done / ſir Robert Dartoys with the firſt batell came and made aſſaut in the night at one of the gates / and therle of Saliſbury with ye ſeconde batell at an other gate / & bycauſe it was darke to thyntent to make them within the more abaſſhed / they made great fiers: ſo that the brightneſſe therof gaue lyght into the cytie. Wherby they within had wende yt their houſes had ben a fyre and cryed treaſon / many were a bedde to reſt them of their trayuell the day before and ſo roſe ſodenly and ran towardes the lyght without order or gode aray / and without counſell of their captayns: euery man within armed them Thus whyle they were in this trouble therle of Quenefort / and ſir Water of Manny with the thyrde batell came to the walles wher as there was no defence made / and with their ladders mounted vp and entred into ye towne / the frēchmen toke no hede of them they were ſo ocupyed in other places / tyll they ſawe their ennemis in the ſtretes. Than euery mā fledde away to ſaue themſelfe: the captayns had no leaſer to go into the caſtell but were fayne to take their horſes & yſſued out at a poſtern / happy was he yt might get out to ſaue hymſelfe: all that euer were ſene by thenglyſſhmen were taken or ſlayne / and the towne ouer ron and robbed: and the counteſſe and ſir Robert Dartoyes entred into yt towne with great ioy.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Robert Dartoys dyed / and where he was buryed. Cap. lxxxxiii.
            
               THus as I haue ſhewed you the cyte of Uannes was taken / and a fyue dayes after the counteſſe of Mountfort ſir Gualtier of Manny ſir yues of Tribiquedy: and dyuerſe other knyghtꝭ of englande and of Bretayne returned to Hanybout and therle of Salyſbury / therle of Pennefort / therle of Suffolke / therle of Cornwall / departed fro Uannes: fro ſir Robert Dartoyes with thre thouſandemen of armes / and thre. M. archers / and went and layed ſiege to the cytie of Renes. And ſir Charles de Bloyes was departed thens but foure dayes before / and was gone to Nantes: but he had left in the cytie many lordes / knyghtes / and ſquyers. And ſtyll ſir Loys of Spayne was on the ſee / and kept ſo the fronters agaynſt Englande / that none coude go bytwene Englande and Bretayne / without great danger. They had done that yere to Englande great damage / for the takyng thus of Uannes by thenglyſſhmen the countrey was ſore abaſſhedde / for they thought that there hadde been ſuche capitaynes that had ben able to haue detended

de it agaynſt all the worlde / they knewe well the towne was ſtronge and well prouyded or men of warre and artyllary / for this myſadnenture ſir Henry of Leon / and the lorde Clyſſon were ſore a baſſhedde / for their ennemyes ſpake ſhame agaynſt theym. Theſe two knyghtes were ſo ſore dyſpleaſed with the mater / that they gette togyder a company of knyghtes and ſoudyours: ſo that at a day apoynted they met before the cytie of Uannes / mothan .xii. thouſande of one and other: thyder came the lorde Robert of Beaumanoyre marſhall of Bretayn they layd ſege to ye cite on all ſydes / and than aſſayled it ferſly. Whan 
                  〈◊〉
                Robert Dartoys ſawe howe he was beſieged in the cytie / he was nat neglygent to kepe his defence / and they without were fierſe by cauſe they wolde nat that they that laye at ſiege at Renes / ſhulde nat trouble theym. They made ſo feerſe aſſaute and gaue theym within ſo moche a do / that they wan the barryers and after the gates / and ſo cutted into the cytie by force. The englyſſhmen were put to the chaſe / and dyuerſe hurte and ſlayne: and ſpecially ſir Robert Dartoyes was ſore hurte / and ſcapedde hardely vntaken / he departed at a poſterne / and the lorde Stafforde with hym / the lorde Spencer was taken by ſir Henry of Leon / but he was ſo ſore hurte that he dyed the thyrde day after. Thus the frenchemen wanne agayne the cytie of Uannes / & ſir Robert Darteyes taryed a ſeaſon in Hanybout ſore hurte / and at laſte he was counſayled to go into Englande to ſeke helpe for his hurtes: but he was ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                handled on the ſee that his ſoores rankeled and at laſte landed and was brought to London and within a ſhorte ſpace after he dyed of the ſame hurtes / and was buryed in London in the church of ſaynt Poule: the kynge dyd as nobly his obſequy as though it had ben for his owne proper coſyne germayne therle of Derby his dethe was greatly be moned in Englande / and the kyng of Englande ſware that he wolde neuer reſt tyll he had reuenged his dethe. And ſayde howe he wolde go hym ſelfe into Bretayne / and bringe the countrey in ſuche caſe that it ſhulde nat be recouered agayne in fortie yere after. Incontynent he ſent out letters throughout his realme: that euery noble man and other ſhulde come to hym within a moneth after. And prepared a great nauy of ſhyppes / and at the ende of the moneth he toke the ſee / and toke landyng in Bretayne nat farre fro Uannes / there as ſir Robert Dartoyes ariyued / he was thre dayes a landyng of all his prouiſyon: the .iiii. day he went towarde Uannes. And all this ſeaſon therle of Saliſbury and therle of Pēbroke were lyeng at ſiege before Renes.
         
         
            ¶Howe the kyng of Englande came into Bretayne to make warre there. Cap. lxxxxiiii.
            
               AFter the kyng of Englande had ben a lande a certayne ſpace / he went and layed ſiege to Uānes. And with in the towne ther was ſir O lyuer of Clyſſon / and ſir Hē
               ry of Leon / the lorde of Turmyne / ſir Geffray of Maleſtrayet and ſir Guy of Lohearc: they ſuppoſed well before that the kyng of Englande wolde come into Bretayne wherfore they had prouyded the towne and caſtell with all thyngs neceſſary. The kyng made a great aſſaut that endured halfe a day but lytell good they dyd the cyte was ſo well defēded. Whan̄e the counteſſe of Mountfort knewe that the kyng of Englande was come / ſhe departed fro Hanybout accompanyed with ſir Gaultier of Manny: and dyuers other knyghtes & ſquyers / and came before Uānes to ſe the kyng and the lordes of thooſt / and a foure dayes after ſhe retourned agayne to Hanyboute with all her owne company.
            ¶Nowe let vs ſpeke of ſir Charles of Bloyes who was in Nauntes / and aſſone as he knewe that the kyng of England was aryued in Bretayne / he ſent worde therof to the frenche kyng his vncle deſyring him of ſocour. Whan ye king of England ſawe this cyte ſo ſtrong: and hard reported howe the countrey ther about was ſo poore and ſo ſore waſted / y• they wyſt nat wher to get any forage / nother for mā nor beeſt. Thā he ordayned to deuyde his nombre: firſt therle of Arundell / the lorde Stafforde / ſir water of Manny / ſir yues of Tribyquedy: and ſir Rychard of Rochfort with .vi. C. men of armes / & vi. M. archers to kepe ſtyll the ſiege before Uā
               nes / & to ryde and diſtroy the contrey all about And the kyng went to Renes / wher he was ioy fully receyued with them that lay at ſiege there before / and had done a long ſeaſon. And whan the kyng had ben ther a fyue dayes / he vnderſtode that ſir Charles du Bloyes was at Nantes / and made there a great aſſemble of men of warre. Than̄e the kynge departed fro Renes / 

and left them 
                  ••
               yll ther that were ther before to contynue their ſiege. Than the kyng cāe before Nauntes and beſieged it as farre as he might / but he coude nat lay rounde about / the cite was ſo great: the marſhall of the hooſt rode abrode and diſtroyed great part of the countrey. The kyng ordayned his batellon a lytell moūtayne without the towne / and there
                  ••
               ryed fro ye mornyng tyll is was noone / wenyng that ſir Charles of Bloys wolde haue yſſued out to haue gyuen hym batayle: and whan they ſawe it wolde nat be they brewe to their lodgyngs / the fore ryders ranne to the baryers and ſkirmyſſhed and brent the ſubbarbes. Thus the kyng lay before Nauntes / and ſir Charles within: who wrote to the frenche kyng the ſtate of thenglyſſhmen. The frenche kyng had commaunded his ſonne the duke of Normandy / to gyue ayde to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Charles of Bloyes: the which duke was as than cōe to Angyers / and there made his aſſēble of men of warr. The kyng of Englande made dyuers aſſautes to Nantes / but euer he loſt of his men and wanne nothyng: and whan he ſawe that by aſſautes he coude do nothyng / and that 
                  〈◊〉
                Charles wolde nat yſſue out into the felde to fyght wt hym: than he ordayned therle of 
                  •
               uenforte / ſir Henry vycont of Beaumōt / the lorde 
                  •
               er
                  •
               y / ye lorde Roſe / the lorde Mombray / the lorde Dalawarre / the lorde Raynolde Cobham: and the lorde ſir John̄ Lyſſe / with ſixe hundred men of armes / and two hundred archers to kepe ſtyll ye ſiege ther: and to ryde and diſtroy the countrey all about. And than the kynge went and layed ſege to the towne of Dynant / wherof ſir Peter Portbeu
                  •
               e was captayne: the kyng made there fierſe aſſautes / and they within defended themſelfe valyantly. Thus the kyng of England all at one ſeaſon had ſieges lyeng to thre cites / and a good towne in Bretaygne.
         
         
            ¶Howe ſir Henry of Leon the lorde Clyſſon / were taken priſoners before Uannes. Cap. lxxxxv.
            
               WHyle the kyng of England was thus in Bretayne / waſtynge and diſtroyeng the contrey: ſuche as he hadlyeng at ſege before Uā
               nes gaue dyuers 
                  〈◊〉
                / and ſpecially at one of the gats. And on a day ther was a great aſſaut: and many feates of armes done on bothe parties / they within ſet opyn the gate and came to the baryers / bycauſe they ſawe the erle of Warwykes baner / and therle of Arn̄dels the lorde Staffordes / and ſir Water of Mannes / aduenturyng themſelf teopdouſly as they thought. Wherfore the lorde Clyſſon / ſir Henry of Leon: and other aduentured themſelfe couragyouſly ther was a ſore ſkirmyſſhe / finally the englyſſhmen were put backe / than the knyghts of Bretayne openyd the barryes and aduentured themſelfe / and left ſir knyghtes with a gode nombre to kepe the towne / and they yſſued out after thenglyſſhmen: and thenglyſſhmen reculed wyſely and euer fought as they ſawe their auantage. Thenglyſſhmen multiplyed in ſuche wyſe / that at laſt the frēchmen and bretons wer fayne to recule backe agayne to their towne / nat in ſo good order as they came forthe: than thenglyſſhmen folowed thē agayne and many were ſlayne and hurt. They of the towne ſawe their men recule agayne and chaſed / than they cloſed their barryers in ſo yuell a tyme / that the lorde Clyſſon and ſir Hēry of Leon were cloſed with out: and ther they were bothe taken priſoners. And on the other ſyde the lorde Stafforde was gone in ſo farre / that he was cloſed in bytwene the gate and the baryes / and ther he was taken priſoner / and dyuerſe that were with hym taken and ſlayne. Thus thenglyſſhmen drewe to their lodgynges / and the bretons into the cytie of Uannes.
         
         
            ¶Howe the kyng of Englande toke the towne of Dynant. Cap. lxxxxvi.
            
               THus as ye haue harde theſe knyghtes were taken on bothe parties / there was no mo ſuche aſſautes after. Nowe let vs ſpeke of ye king of Englande: who lay at ſege before Dynant / whan he had layne ther a four dayes: he gate a great nō
               bre of bottes and barges / and made his archers to entre into theym / and to rowe to the pales: wherewith the towne was cloſedde it had none

other walles. The archers ſhot ſo feerſly yt non durſt ſhewe at their defence / than was ther certayne other with ares ſo that whyle the archers dyd ſhote they hewed downe the pales: and ſo entred byforce. Thā they of the towne fledde to the market place but they kept but a ſmall order for they that entred by the pales came to yt gate and dyd opyn it: than euery man entred and ye capitayne ſir Pyers Portbeufe taken / and the towne ouer ron and robbed: thēglyſſhmen wan moche richeſſe in that towne / for it was a great towne of marchandyſe. Whan the kyng had taken his pleaſure ther / as long as it had pleaſed hym: he left the towne voyde and went to Uannes and lodged there.
            ¶ Nowe let vs retourne to ſir Loys of Spayne / and to ſir Charles Germaur and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Othes Dornes / who was as than admyrall on the ſee: with .viii. galeys / xiii. barkes / and .xxx. other ſhyppes with genowayes & ſpanyardes. They kept the cooſt bytwene England and Bretayne and dyd moche damage to them that came to refreſſhe the hooſt before Uannes: and at a tyme they ſet on the kynge of Englandes nauy lyeng at Aucerre / in a lytell hauyn beſyde Uannes: ſo that they ſlewe a great part of them that kepte the ſhyppes / and had done moch more damage yf thenglyſſhmen lyeng at the ſiege had nat ron thyder in all haſt: and yet aſmoche haſt as they made / ſir Loys of Spayne toke away iiii. ſhippes laded with prouiſyon / & drowned thre and all that was in them. Than the kyng was counselled to drawe part of his nauy to Breſt hauen and the other part to Hanybout the which was done / and ſtyll endured the ſiege before Uannes / and Renes.
         
         
            ¶ what lordes of France the duke of Normandy brought into Bretayne / agaynſt the kyng of Englande. Cap. .lxxxxvii.
            
               HOwe let vs retourne to the iourney that the duke of Normandy made the ſame ſeaſon in Bretayne / to ayde and confort his coſyn ſyt Charles de Bloyes. The duke knewe well: howe the kyng of Englande had ſore damaged the contrey of Bretayn / and had beſieged thre cytes / and taken the towne of Dynant. Than the duke departed fro the cytie of Angyers: with mo than .iiii. M. men of armes / and. rxx M. of other: he toke they heygh way to Nauntes by the gyding of the two marſhals of Fraunce / the lorde of Momorency and the lorde of ſaynt Uenant. And after them rode the duke and therle of Alanſon his vncle / therle of Bloys his coſyn / the duke of Burbone was ther therle of Ponthyeu / therle of Bolayne / ye erle of Uandome / therle of Dāmartyne / ye lorde of Craon / the lorde of Coucy / the lorde of Suly the lorde of Frenes / the lorde of Roy: & ſo many lordes knightes & ſquyers of Normādy / Dauuergne / Berry / Lymoſen / Dumayn / Poicton / and Xaynton / that it were to long to reherſe thē all: and dayly they encreaſed. Tidynges came to the lordes that lay at ſiege before Nantes: yt the duke of Normandy was commynge thyder with .xl. M. men of warr. Incōtynent thei ſent worde therof to the kyng of England / than the kyng ſtudyed a lytell and thought to breke vp his ſiege before Uannes / and alſo his ſiege before Renes: and all togyder to drawe to Nauntes. But than his counſell ſayd to hym ſir ye be here in a good ſure ground and nere to your nauy: and ſende for them that lyeth at ſiege before Nantes to come to you and let the ſiege ly ſtyll before Renes: for they be nat ſo ferr of but they ſhalbe euer redy to come to you yf nede be: the kynge agreed to this counſell and ſo ſent for thē before Nauntes and they came to hym to Uā
               nes. The duke of Normandy came to Nantes wher ſir Charles de Bloys was / the lordes loged in the cytie / and their men abrode in the cō
               trey: for they coude nat all lodge in the cytie nor in the ſubbarbes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kynge of Englande and the duke of Normandy were hooſt agaynſt hooſt lodged before Uannes. Cap. lxxxxviii.
            
               WHyle y• duke of Normādy was at Nauntes / the lordes of Englande that lay at ſiege before Renes. On a day made a great and a feerſe aſſaut / for they had made many inſtrumentes to aſ ſaut with all: this aſſaut enduredde a hole day / 

but they wan nothynge but loſt byuers of their men: within the cytie was the lorde Dancenysi the lorde of Pont 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Malatrayt yuan Charnell / & Bertram Graſquyne ſquyer: they defended thē ſelfe ſo well with the byſſhoppe of the cytie that they toke no damage / howe be it thenglyſſhmen lay ther ſtyll / and ouer ran and waſted the contrey all about. Than the duke of Normandy departed with all his hoſt and drue towarde Uannes the ſoner to fynde his ennemies / for he was enformed howe they of Uannes were in mooſt ieopardy and in peryll of leſyng: than the two marſhals went forthe and ſir Geffray of Charney / and therle of Guynes conſtable of Fraunce made the areregarde. So thus the frenchmen came to Uannes on thother ſyde agaynſt ther as the kyng of Englande ſay / they lay a longe by a fayre medowe ſyde and made a great dyke about their hoſt. The marſhals and fore ryders often tymes ſkirmyſſhed toguyder on bothe parties / than the kynge of Englande ſende for therle of Saliſbury / and therle of Pē broke / and the other that lay ar ſiege at Renes to come to hym / and ſo they dyd. Thenglyſſhemen and the bretous of that partie were well to the nombre of .ii. M. and .v. C. men of armes / & vi. M. archers / and .iiii. M. of other mē a fote: the frenchmen were foure tymes as many well a ꝑelled. The kyng of England had ſo fortifyed his hooſt / that the frenchmen coude take no aduauntage of hym / and he made no mo aſſautes to the towne / bycauſe of ſparyng of his mē and artyllary: thus theſe two hooſtes lay one agaynſt an other a longe ſeaſon / tyll it was well on warde in wynter. Than pope Clement the ſixt ſende the cardynall of Peneſter / and the cardynall of Cleremount to entreat for a peace: and they rode often tymes bytwene the parties but they coude bring them to no peace. In the mean ſeaſon ther were many ſkirmyſſhes: and men taken / ſlayne / and ouerthrowen on bothe pties thenglyſſhmen durſt nat go a foragyng / but in great cōpanyes / for they were euer in great danger by reaſon of buſſhmentes that were layd for them. Alſo ſir Loyes of Spayne kept ſo the ſee cooſt / that with moche danger any thyng came to thenglyſſhe hooſt / the frenchmen thought to kepe the kynge ther inmaner as be ſieged. Alſo the frenchmen endured moche payne with wete and colde for day and night it rayned on them / wherby they loſt many of their horſes and were fayne to dyſlodge and lye in the playne feldes they had ſomoche water in their lodgynges. At laſt theſe cardynals dyd ſomoch that there was a truſe agreed for thre yere / the kyng of Englande / and the duke of Normandy ſware to vpholde the ſame without brekyng / as the cuſtome is in ſuche lyke caſes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the french kynge cauſed the heedes to be ſtryken of / of the lorde Clyſſon / and dyuerſe other lordes of Bretayne and of Normandy. Cap. lxxxxix.
            
               THus this great aſſembly brake vpp̄ / and the ſiege rayſed at Uannes: the duke of Normandy went to Nantes and had with hym ye two cardynals. And the kyng of Englāde went to Hanybout to the counteſſe of Mountfort: ther was an exchaunge made bytwene the baron of Stafford and the lorde Clyſſon. Whan the kyng had tary ed at Hanybout as long as it pleaſed him / than he left ther therle of Penbroke / ſir Wyllyam of Caducall and other: and than̄e retourned into Englande aboute Chriſtmas. And the duke of Normandy retourned into Fraunce and gaue leaue to euery man to depart / and anone after y• lord Clyſſon was taken vpon ſuſpecyous of treason and was putte into the chatelet of Parys / wherof many had great marueyle: lordes and knyghtes ſpake eche to other therof / and ſayde what mater is yt is layd agaynſt the lorde Clyſſon / ther was none coude tell: but ſome ymagined that it was falſe enuy / bycauſe the kynge of England bare more fauour to delyuer hym 
                  〈◊〉
                exchang rather than ſir Henry of Leon who was ſtyll in priſon / bycauſe the kyng ſhewed hym y• auantage his enemyes ſuſpected in hym ꝑauen ture that was nat true: vpon the which ſuſpect he was be heeded at Paris without mercy or excuſe / he was gretly be moned. Anone after ther were dyuers knyghtes were accuſed in ſemblable caſe: as the lorde of Maletrayt and his ſon / the lorde of Uangor / ſir Thybault of Morilon and dyuers other lordes of Bretayne to the nō
               bre of .x. knyghtes and ſquyers / and they loſt all their heedes at Parys. And anone after as it was ſayd ther was put to dethe by famyne .iiii. knyghtes of Normandy / ſir Wyllyam Baron / ſir Henry of Maletrayt / ye lorde of Rochteſſon

and ſir Rycharde of Perſy / wherby after there fell moche trouble in Bretayne / and in Normā
               dy. The lorde of Clyſſon had a ſonne called as his father was Olyuer he went to the counteſſe of Mountfort and to her ſonne who was of his age: and alſo without father / for he dyed as ye haue hard before in ye caſtell of Lour in Paris.
         
         
            ¶ Of the order of ſaynt George that kyng Edwarde ſtablyſſhed in the caſtell of wyndſore. Cap. C.
            
               IN this ſeaſon the king of England toke pleaſure to newe reedefy the Caſtell of wyndſore / the whiche was begonne by kynge Arthure. And ther firſte beganne the table rounde / wherby ſprange the fame of ſo many noble knightes through out all the worlde. Than kyng Edwarde deter myned to make an order and a brotherhode of a certayne nombre of knyghtes / and to be called knyghtes of the blewe garter: and a feeſt to be kept yerely at wynſore on ſaynt Georges day. And to begynne this order the kynge aſſembled togyder erles / lordes / and knyghtes of his realme: and ſhewed them his intēcyon. And they all 
                  •
               oyouſly agreed to his pleaſur / bycauſe thei ſawe it was a thyng moche honourable & wher by great amyte and loue ſhulde growe and encreaſe than was ther choſen out a certayne nō
               bre of the mooſt valyanteſt men of the realme. And they ſware and ſayled to mentayne the ordr naunces ſuche as were deuyſed: and ye kyng made a chapell in the caſtell of wynſore of ſaynt George and ſtablyſſhed certayne chanous ther to ſerue god and enduyd them with fayre rent. Than the kyng ſende to publyſſhe this feeſt by his heraldes into Fraunce Scotlande▪ Burgone Heynault Flaunders / Brabant and into thēpyre of Almayne: gyueng to euery knight and ſquyer that wolde come to the ſayd feeſt xv. dayes of ſaule conduct before the feeſt. And after the whiche feeſt to begynne at wyndſore on ſaynt George day nexte after / in the yere of our lorde. M. CCC. 
                  〈◊〉
               . and the quene to be ther ac
                  •
               panyed with. 
                  〈◊〉
               . C. ladyes and damoſels all of noble lynage▪ and aparelled acordingly.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande delyuerd out of priſon ſir Henry of Leon. Cap. C. 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            
               WHyle the kynge made this preparacion at wyndſore for this ſayd feeſt / tidynges came to hym howe ye lorde Clyſſon and dyuers other lordes had loſt their heedes in Fraūce / wher with the kyng was ſore dyſpleased. In ſo moch that he was in purpoſe to haue ſerued ſir Henry of Leon in lyke caſe whom he had in priſonne but his coſyn the erle of Derby ſhewed to hym before his counſayle ſuche reaſons to aſſwage his yre and to refrayne his cou rage. Sayeng ſir though that kyng Philyppe in his haſt hath done ſo foule a dede as to put to dethe ſuch valyant knyghtes▪ yet ſir for all that blemyſſhe nat your nobleneſſe / and ſir to ſay the trouth your priſoner ought to bere no blame for his dede / but ſir put hym to a reſouable raunsōe Than the kynge ſent for the knyght priſoner to come to his preſence / and than ſayd to hym a ſir Henry: ſir Henry / myne aduerſary Philyppe of Ualoyes hath ſhewed his feleny right cruell / to put to dethe ſuche knyghtes / wherwith I am ſore dyſpleaſed / and it is thought to vs that he hath done it in dyſpite of vs. And if I wolde regarde his malyce I ſhulde ſerue you in lyke maner / for ye haue done me more dyſpleaſure / and to myne in Bretayne than any other perſon: but I woll ſuffre it and let hym do his worſt / for to my power I woll kepe myne honour / and I am content ye ſhall come to a lyght ranſome for the loue of my coſyn of Derby / who hathe deſyred me for you / ſo that ye woll do that I ſhall ſhewe you. The knyght anſwered and ſayd / ſir I ſhal do all that ye ſhall cōmaunde me: than ſayd the kyng I knowe well ye be one of the richeſt knyghtes in Bretaygne / and yf I wolde ſore ceaſe you ye ſhulde pay me .xxx. or .xl. M. 
                  ••
               utes / but ye ſhall go to myne aduerſary Philypp̄ of Ualoyes: and ſhewe hym on my behalfe / that ſyth he hath ſo ſhamefully putte to dethe ſo valyant knyghtes in the diſpyte of me / I ſay and woll make it good he hath broken the truſe / taken by twene me and hym: wherfore alſo I renownce it on my parte and defye hym fro this day forewarde. And ſo that ye woll do this meſſage yo
                  •
                raunſome ſhalbe but .x. M. ſcutes / the which ye ſhall pay and ſende to Bruges within .xv. dayes

after ye he paſt the ſee / and moreouer ye ſhall ſay to all knyghtes and ſquyers of thoſe partes that for all this they leaue nat to cōe to our feeſt at wyndſore / for we wolde gladly ſe theym and they ſhall haue ſure and ſaue cōduct to retourne 
                  •
               v. dayes after the feeſt. Sir ſayd the knyght to the beſte of my power I ſhall accomplyſſhe your meſſage / and god rewarde your grace for the courteſſy ye ſhewe me / and alſo I humbly thanke my lorde of Derby of his goodwyll. And ſo ſir Henry of Leon departed fro ye kyng and went to Hampton / and ther toke the ſee / to thyntent to arryue at Har
                  ••
               ewe: but a ſtorme toke hym on the ſee which endured ſystene dayes / and loſt his horſe whiche were caſte into the ſee: and ſir Henry of Leon was ſo ſore troubled that he had neuer helth after / howe be it at laſte he toke lande at Crotoy. And ſo he and all his cōpany went a fote to Abuyle and ther they get horſes / but ſir Henry was ſo ſicke that he was fayne to go in a lytter: and ſo came to Parys to kynge Philypp̄ and dyd his meſſage fro poynt to poynt / and he lyued nat long after / but dyed as he went into his countrey: in the cytie of Angyers god aſſoyle his ſoule.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kynge of Englande ſent therle of Derby to make warre into Gaſcoyne. Cap. C .ii.
            
               THe day of ſaynt George approched that this gret feeſt ſhuld be at Wynſore / ther was a noble company of erles / barownes / ladyes / and damoſelles / knyghtes / and ſquyers: & great tryumphe / iuſtynge / and tournayes / the which endured fyftene dayes: and thyder came many knyghtꝭ of dyuerſe contreis / as of Flanders / Heynalt / and Brabant / but out of France ther came none. This feeſt duryng / dyuerſe newſe came to the kynge out of dyuers contreis thyder came knyghtes of Gaſcoyne: as ye lorde of Leſ
                  •
               are / the lorde of Chaumount / the lorde of Muſydent▪ ſende fro the other lordes of the countrey ſuche as were englyſſhe: as the lorde de / Labreth / the lorde of Punye
                  •
               s / the lorde of Mountferant / the lorde of Du
                  •
               as / the lorde of Carton / the lorde of Grayly and dyuerſe other: and alſo ther were ſent meſſangers fro the cytte of Bayon / and fro Bourdeaux. Theſe meſſangers were well feeſted with the kynge and with his counſayle / and they ſhewed hym howe that his countrey of Gaſcoyne / and his good cytie of Bourdeaux were but febly conforted / wherfore they deſyred hym to ſende thyder ſuche a captayne and ſuche men of warr / that they might reſyſte agaynſt the frenchemen / who were in a great army and kept the feldes. Than the kyng ordayned his coſyn the erle of Derby to go thyder & he to be as chiefe captayne / and with hym to go therle of Penbroke / therle of Quenforde / the baron of Stafforde / ſir Gaultier of Manny / the lorde Franque de la Hall / the lyeure de Brabant / ſir Hewe Haſtynges / ſir Stephyn de Tombey / the lorde of Manny / ſir Rychard Haydon / the lorde Normant of Fynefroyde / 
                  〈◊〉
                Robert of Lerny / ſir John̄ Norwyche / ſir Rycharde Rocklefe / ſir Robert of Quenton / and dyuers other / they were a fyue hundred knyghtes and ſquyers / and two thouſande archers: the king ſayd to his coſyn therle of Derby / take with you golde and ſyluer ynough / ye ſhall 
                  •
               at lacke: and depart largely therof with your men of warr / wherby ye ſhall gette their loue and fauoure. Than the kynge ordayned ſir Thomas Daugorne into Bretaygne / to the counteſſe of Mountfort to helpe to kepe her countrey for all the peace that was taken / for he douted that the frenche kyng wolde make warre bycauſe of the meſſage that he ſent hym by ſir Henry of Leon. And with hym he ſent a hundred men of armes / and two hundred archers: also the kyng ordayned therle of Saliſbury / and therle Dulneſtre into the northe 
                  •
               ties with a hundred men of armes / and ſixe hundred archers for the ſcottꝭ had rebelled agayne to hym / and had brent in Corn wall / and ronne to Briſtowe / and beſieged the towne of Dulneſtre. Thus the kynge ſent his men of warr into dyuers places / and delyuerd the captayns golde and ſyluer ſufficyent to pay their wages & to retayne ſoudyers / and ſo euery company departed as they were ordayned.
            ¶ Nowe firſt lette vs ſpeke of therle of Derby for he had the gretteſt charge / he toke ſhypping at Hampton / and ſayled tyll he aryued at Bayon a good towne and a ſtronge cytie / the which had long been englyſſhe. They landed ther the ſixt day of June / in ye yere of our lorde. M .iii. C .xliiii. ther they were well receyued and taryed ther a ſeuyn dayes / and the eyght day departed and went to Burdeaux / wher they were receyued with ſolempne proceſſyon. And the erle

of Derby was lodged in thabbay of ſaynt Andrewe and whan the erle of Laylle the frenche kynges lyeutenant in thoſe parties vnderſtode of the commyng of thenglyſſhmen: he ſende for therle of Comyges / the erle of Pyergourt / the erle of Carman / the vycount of Uyllemure / the erle of Ualentenoyes / therle of Myrande / the erle of Duras / the lorde of Maryde / the lorde Delabard / the lorde of Pycornet / the vycont of Chaſtellone / the lorde of Newcaſtell / the lorde of Leſtyne / the abbot of ſaynt Syluer: and all other lordes ſuche as helde of the french partie. And whan they were all togyder / than̄e he demaunded counſayle on the commyng of therle of Derby / they anſwered howe they thought themſelfe ſtrong ynough to kepe the paſſage at Bergerate ouer the ryuer of Garon: the which ſayeng pleaſed well therle of Layll who as than was in Gaſcoyne as kyng vnder ye french kyng and had kept that contrey as long as the warre had endured / and had taken dyuers townes & caſtels fro thenglyſſhmen / than theſe lordes ſent for men of warr fro all parties & went and kept the ſubbarbes of Bergerate / the whiche were great and incloſed with the ryuer of Garon.
         
         
            ¶Howe the erle of Derby conquered Bergerathe. Cap. C .iii.
            
               WHan therle of Derby had ben at Burdeuxa .xv. dayes / he vnderſtode howe theſe lordes & knyghtes of Gaſcoyne were at Bergerath. In a mornynge he drewe thyderward / and he cauſed ſir Gaultier of Manny and ſir Franque de Hall to go before / who were marſhalles of his hooſt: that mornynge they rode thre leages to a caſtell that was englyſſhe called Mounterolyer but a lytell leage fro Bergerath / ther they taryed all that day and that night. The next mornynge their currours ranne to the varryers of Bergerath / and at their retourne they reported to ſir Gaultier of Manny howe they had ſene parte of the demeanour of the frenchemen / the which they thoght to be but ſymple. That mornynge thenglyſſhmen dyned be tymes: and as they ſatte at dyner ſir Gaultier of Manny behelde therle of Derby and ſayde / ſir yf we were good men of armes we ſhulde drinke this euenynge with the frenche lordes beyng in Bergerath ꝙ therle and for me it ſhall nat be let: whā euery man harde that they ſayde let vs go arme vs / for we ſhall ryde incontynent to Bergerath 
                  ther was no more to do / but ſhortly euery man was armed and a horſebacke. Whan the erle of Derby ſawe his cōpany ſo well wylled he was right ioyeouſe / and ſayde lette vs ryde to our ennemies in the name of god and ſaynt George ſo they rode forthe with their baners diſplayed in all the heate of they day / tyll they came to the vaylles of Bergerath / the whiche were nat eaſy to wynne: for part of the ryuer of Garon went about it. Whan the frenchmen ſawe thenglyſſhmen come to aſſayle them / they ſayde amonge thēſelfe howe they ſhulde ſone be driuen backe / they yſſued out in good order. They had many of the villayns of the contrey yll armed / the englyſſhmen approched and the archers began to ſhote fierſ
                  •
               y: and whanne thoſe fotemen felt the arowes lyght among theym / and ſawe the baners and ſtanderdes waue with the wynde the which they had nat bene acuſtomed to ſe before. Than thei reculed backe among their owne mē of armes / than thenglyſſhmen of armes aproched and daſſhed in amōg their enmys & 
                  •
               lewe and bete downe on euery part for the frenchmen of armes coulde nother aproche forwarde nor backewarde for their owne fotemen / who reculed without order and dyd ſtoppe thē their way 
                  ther were many ſlayne and ſore hurt thēglyſſhe archers were on bothe ſydes the way and ſhotte ſo holly togyder / that none durſte approche nor yſſue through theym. So the frenchmen were put a backe into the ſubarbes of Bergerath / but it was to ſuche a myſchefe for them that the firſt bridge and baylles were wonne by clene force: for thenglyſſhmen entred with them / and there on the pauement many knyghtes were ſlayne and ſore hurte / and dyuers priſoners taken of them that aduentuted theymſelfe to defende the paſſage: and the lorde of Mirpoyſe was ſlayne vnder ſir Gaultier of Mannes baner who was the firſt that entred. Whan therle of Layll ſawe that the englyſſhmen had wonne the ſubbarbes and ſlayne his men without mercy / he than reculed backe into the towne and paſſed the brige with great trouble and danger / before yt bridge 
                  ther was a ſoreſkirmyſſhe / the lordes & knyghtes fought hande to hande: the lorde of Manny auaunced hymſelfe ſo ferre among his ennemyes / that he was in great daunger. Thenglyſſhmen toke ther the vycount of Bouſquetyne / the

lorde of Newcaſtell / the lorde of Chaſtellon / the lorde de Leſcu / all other of the frenchmen entred into the towne / and cloſed theirgates and lette downe their portcolyſe. And than wente to the walles to their defences / this aſſaut & ſkirmyſſh endured tyll the euenyng: than thenglyſſhmen withdrue right ſore wery and entred into ye ſubbarbes / the which they had wonne: where they founde wyne and v
                  •
               tayle ſufficyēt for their hole hooſt for two monethes. The next mornyng the erle of Derby cauſed his trumpettes to be ſowned / and ſet his people in order of batayle and aproched the towne and made a ſore aſſaut / the which endured tyll noone: lytell dyd thenglyſſh men at that aſſaut for they within defended thē
               ſelfe valyantly / at noone the englyſſhmen with drewe / for they ſawe well they dyd but leſe their payne. Than the lordes went to counſayle and determyned to aſſaut the towne by water / for it was cloſed but with pales / than therle of Derby ſende to the nauy at Burdeaux for ſhyppes / and ther was brought fro Burdeaux to Bergerath .lx. ſhyppes and barkes. The next day in ye euenynge they ordred their batayls and in the next mornyng by the ſon ryſinge the nauy was redy to aſſaut by water / the baron of Stafford was captayne: thenglyſſhmen and archers aduentured theym ſelfe valyantly / and came to a great barryer before the pales / the which anone was caſt downe to the yerth: thanne they of the towne came to therle de Laylle / and to the other lordes and knyghtes that were ther / and ſayde ſirs take hede what ye woll do: we be in a great iedpardy to be all loſt. If this towne be loſt 
                  •
               oe leſe all that we haue and our lyues alſo: yet hit were better that we yelded ourſelfe to the erle of Derby than to haue more damage. The erle of Laylle ſayd / go we to the place wher as nedeth mooſt defence / for we wyll nat as yet yelde vpp̄ the towne: ſo they wente to defende the pales. The archers that were in the barkes ſhot ſo holly togyder / that none burſt apere at their defence without they were ſlayne or ſore hurte: there were within a two hundred genowayes croſbowes / and nere were pauyſſhed agaynſte the ſhotte / they helde the englyſſhe archers well awarke all the day / and many hurt on bothe parties: finally the englyſſhmen dyd ſomoche that they brake downe a great pane of ye pales / than they within reculed backe / and deſyred a treaty and a t
                  •
               ew
                  •
               e the which was graunted to endur all that day & the nextnyght / ſo that they ſhulde nat fortify in the meane ſeaſon. So eyther partie drewe to their lodgynges: this nyght the lordes within the towne were in great counſayle / and finally about mydnight they truſſed bagge and baggage / and departed out of the towne of Bergerath / and toke the waye to the towne of Ryoll / the which was nat ferre fro thens. The next mornynge the englyſſhmen agayne entred into their barkes and came to the ſame place where they had broken the pales / and ther they founde certayne of the towne who deſyred thē that they wolde pray the erle of Derby to take them to mercy / ſauyng their lyues and goodes and fro thenſforthe they wolde be obeyſaunt to the kynge of Englande. The erle of Quenefort and therle of Penbroke ſayde they wolde ſpeke gladly for theym: and ſo they came to the erle of Derby and ſhewed hym thyntent of them of the towne. The erle of Derby ſayde / he that mercy deſyreth mercy ought to haue / bydde theym opyn their gates / and ſhe we them they ſhalbe aſſured of me and all myne. Theſe two lordꝭ went agayne to them of the towne / and ſhewed them the erle of Derbyes intent: than they aſſembled all the people toguyder and ſowned their belles and opyned their gates / and yſſued out menne and women in proceſſyon: and humbly mette the erle of Derby / and ſo brought hym into the chiefe churche / and there ſware faythe and homage to the erle / in the name of the kyng of Englande / by vertue of a procutacyon that the erle hadde.
         
         
            ¶Howe the erle of Derby conquered dyuerſe townes and fortreſſes in hyghe Gaſcoyne. Cap. C .iiii.
            
               THe ſame day that therle of Laylle was come to Ryoll fro Bergerate / he and his company deuyſed to depart themſelfe / ſome into one fortreſſe and ſōe into an other: and to kepe fronter warre. And the ſeneſhall of Tholouz / the erle of Uyllemure were ſent to Auberoche / ſir Bertrame de Preſſe to Pellagrewe / the lorde Phylippe of Dyone to Mount agret / the lorde of Mountbrandone / to Mauldurane / Arnolde of Dyone to Mountgyſe / Robert of Malmore to Beaumount

in Laylloes ſir Charles of Poyters to P
                  •
               nnes in Agynoes. Thus theſe knyghtꝭ wer deuyded fro garyſon to garyſon / and the erle of Laylletaryed in the Ryoll / and newe repayred the fortreſſe. And whaūe the erle of Derby had ta
                  •
               yed in Bergerath two dayes / he demaūded of the ſeneſhal of Burdeaur what way was beſt for hym to take / for he ſayde he wolde natte lye ſtyll: the ſeneſhall aunſwered howe he thought it beſt to drawe to Pyergourt / and into hyghe Almaygne. Than the erle of Derby prepayred to departe / and left captayne in Bergerathe ſir John̄ dela Sante. And as thēglyſſhmen went forwarde they came to a caſtell called Lango: wherof the veigneur of Tholouz was captayn there thenglyſſhmen taryed and gaue aſſaut to the caſtell / bycauſe they ſayde they wolde narte leaue ſuche a caſtell behynde theym / but at that aſſaut the englyſſhmen wanne but lytell. The nexte day the aſſauters brought fagottes / tymber / and other thynges: and fylled ſo the d
                  •
               kes that they might go to the walles. Than ſir Frā
               que de Hall counſayled them within to yelde: for he ſayd they might abyde ſo long yt it ſhulde be to late. They within deſyred reſpyte to gyue an anſwere / the which was agreed: and whan they had counſayled the parties greed / ſo they deꝑted with their lyues / but they bare a way no thynge & went to Mouſacke. Therle of Derby made capitayne at Lango a ſquyer called Aymone Lyone / and with hym .xxx. archers: than therle rode to a towne called le Lacke / and they of the towne met hym on the way and brought hym the kayes / and dyd homage to the kyng of Englande. Than therle went forthe / and came to Mandurant / the whiche he wanne with aſſaut: whan he had ſette rulers there / he went to the caſtell of Mountgyſe and toke it alſo by aſſaut / and the captayne he ſende as priſonere to Burdeaux / than he rode to Punache the which alſo he wanne / and alſo the caſtell de la Lewe: and there he taryed thre dayes / the fourth daye he went to Forſathe and wanne it lightly / and alſo the towre of Pondayre: than̄e he came to a great to wne called Beaumount in Laylloyes / parceyninge to the inherytaunce of the erle of Laylle: thre dayes the erle of Derby lay there and made great aſſautes / the place was well for tifyed with men of warre and artillery: how be it finally it was wonne / and many of them with in ſlayne. Than therle of Derby ſet there newe captayns and men of warre / and fro thenſe he went to the chiefe to wne parteyninge to the erle of Laylle: wherof the lorde Philyppe of Dyone / and Arnolde of Dyone were capitayns. The englyſſhmen approched to the barryers / and the archers ſhotte ſo quickely: ſo that they of the towne durſte nat appere at their defence. So the firſte day they baylles harde to the gate of the towne was wonne / and in the euenynge the aſſaut ſeaced and euery man drewe to their lodgynges. The next mornynge the aſſaut began agayne in dyuers places / ſo that they with in wyſt nat well what to do: than̄e they deſyred to haue a peace / than an haraulde was ſende to them and a day reſpyte to treat in the meane ſeaſon: than̄e the erle of Derby hym ſelfe went to the barryers to ſpeke with theym of the towne / and with hym was the baron of Stafforde and the lorde of Manny. Therle wolde they ſhulde haue yelded themſelfe ſimply / but they ſo agreed that the towne ſhuld be vnder the obeyſance of the kyng of Englande: and that they ſhulde ſende twelfe of their burgeſſes into the cytie of Burdeaur for hoſtage. And the lordes and knightes of Fraunce departed vnder ſaue conduct and went to the Ryoll.
         
         
            ¶Howe therle of Quenfort was taken in Gaſcoyne / and delyuerd agayne by exchaung. Cap. C .v.
            
               AFter this conqueſt the erle of Derby went to Bonu all / and there made a great aſſaute and many hurte on bothe parties: finally it was taken̄e and newe refreſſhed with captaynes and men of warre. Than therle paſſed farther into the coū
               tie of Pyergourt / and paſſed by Bordall without any aſſaute: and laboured ſo longe that at laſte he came before Pyergourt. Therle of that countrey was in the towne / and the lorde Roger of Quenfort his vncle / and the lorde of Duras with a ſixſcore knyghtes and ſquyers of the countrey. The erle of Derby aduyſed howe he myght beſt aſſayle the towne to his aduauntage / for he ſame well it was ſtronge: ſoo that all thynges conſydred it was thought nat beſte to enploy his people there in that ieopardy. And

ſo went and lodged a two leages thenſe by a lytell ryuer / to the intent to aſſayle the caſtelle of Pelagrue / about mydnight yſſued out of Pyergourt a two hundred ſpeares / and are it was day they came into the lodgynges of thenglyſſh men and ſlewe and hurte many: and came into the erle of Quenfortes tent and founde hym armynge / and he was ſo ſharpely aſſayled that he was taken priſoner and thre other of his houſe. Than the gaſcoyns went backe or the hoſt were more ſtyred / and drewe agayne to their towne as it was nedefull for theym: they founde their gates opyn / for they were hotely purſued and driuen home into their barryers. Than the gaſcons a lyghted / and defended their barryers and fought hande to hande: ſo that they loſt nothyng. Than thenglyſſhmen retourned to their hooſt: and the erle of Derby went to Pelagrue and ther was ſixe dayes and made many great aſſautes / ther was the delyuerance made of the erle of Quenfort and his company by exchang / for the vycount of Bonquentyne / the vycount of Chaſtellone / the lorde of Leſcue / and of the lorde of Newcaſtell: on the condycion that the landes of Pyergourt ſhulde abyde thre yeres in reſt and peace / but the lordes and knyghtes of the countrey might well arme themſelfe with out any forfette / but nothyng to be robbed and brent within the countrey durynge that ſpace. Thus thenglyſſhmen departed fro before Pelagrue / for that pertayned to the countie of Pyergourt / than the erle of Derby went to Auberoche a fayre caſtell and a ſtronge / pertayninge to the byſſhoppe of Tholouz. Thenglyſſhmen lodged theymſelfe there about / as thoughe they were mynded to abyde there a longe ſpace: and dyde ſende them worde within to yelde thēſelfe for if they were taken byforce / they were all but deed without mercy: they within hadde great dout of their lyues and they ſawe no ſocour cō
               mynge fro no partie: than they yelded themſelfe and became ſubgettes to the kyng of England. Than the erle of Derby drewe towarde Burdeaux / and left in garyſon in Aube coche ſir Frā
               que de la Halle / and ſir Alayne of Fynefroyde and ſir John̄ of Lynedall. Than̄e in his way he came to a good towne called Lyburne / twelfe leages fro Burdeaux and layde ſiege about it / and ſayde howe he wolde nat depart thenſe tyll he had it. They within tooke counſayle / ſo that all thynges conſydred: the good and yuell they yelded them to therle of Derby and dyd homage / and ther therle taryed a thre dayes: and left the erle of Penbroke / the lorde Stafforde / ſir Stephyn of Courey / and ſir Alyſander Hauſayle ſtyll in Lyborne: than therle of Derby▪the erle of Quenfort / ſir Gaultier of Manny / and other rode ſtreyght to Bourdeaux.
         
         
            ¶Howe therle of Layle layde ſiege before Auberoche. Cap. C .vi.
            
               AT the retournynge of therle of Derby to Bourdeaux: he was ioyefully receyued and mette with proceſſyon / and offeredde hym euery thyng in the towne at his pleaſure: there he taryed & ſported hym with the burgeſſes / ladyes / and damoſels of the towne. ¶Nowe lette vs ſpeke of the erle of Laylle who was at the Ryoll: whan̄e he vnderſtode that the erle of Derby was at Burdeaux and lay ſtyll / and no lickelyhode that he wolde ſtyrre any farther that ſeaſon. Than he wrote to the erle of Pyergourt / of Carmaynye / of Couynes / and of Breuniquele: and to all the other lordes of Gaſcoyne of the frenche partie / that they ſhulde aſſemble their men / and come and mete hym before Auberoche / for his mynde was to ley ſiege therto: they all obeyed hym for he was as kynge in thoſe parties of Gaſcoyne. The lordes and knyghtes within Auberoche was nat ware of any ſiege tyll it was layd rounde about them / ſo that none coude yſſue out nor entre without parceyuinge. The frenchemen brought with them four great engyns fro Tholouz / the whiche dyd caſte day and night / they made no other aſſaut: ſo within ſixe dayes they had broken the roffes of the towres and chambers / that they within durſte nat abyde but in lowe vautes: the intent of them of the hoſt was to ſlee them all within / or els to haue them yelde ſimply. Therle of Derby had knowledge howe the ſiege lay before Auberoch / but he knewe nat that his company wer ſo ſore oppreſſed as they were. Whan ſir Franque de Hall / ſir Aleyne de Fyneforde / and ſir John̄ of Lyndall / who were thus beſieged within Auberoche / ſawe thēſelfe thus hardly beſtadde: they demaunded among their varlets if their were any for a good rewar de wolde bere a letter to therle of Derby to Bur deux / one varlet ſtepped forth and ſayd he wold

gladly bere it nat for the aduantage of his rewarde / but rather to helpe to delyuer them out of daunger. In the nyght the varlette toke the letter ſealed with their ſeales / and thanne went downe the dykes and ſo paſt through the hooſt / there was none other remedy: he was met with the firſte watche and paſt by them for he ſpake good gaſcoyne and named a lorde of the hooſt and ſayd he parteyned to hym / but than agayn he was taken among the tentes / and ſo brought into the herte of the hooſt / he was ſherched and the letter founde on hym: and ſoo he was kepte ſaue tyll the mornynge that the lordes were aſſembled togyder. Than the letter was brought to therle of Layle: they had great ioye whanne they perceyued that they within were ſo ſore cō
               ſtrayned that they coude nat long endure than they toke the varlet and hanged the letter about his necke and dyd put hym into an engyn / and dyde caſt hym into the towne. The varlette fell downe deed / wherwith they within were ſore troubled / the ſame ſeaſon therle of Pyergourt / and his vncle ſir Charles of Poyters and the vycount of Carmany / and the lorde of Duras were a horſbacke / and paſſed by the walles of the towne as nere as they might: and cryed to them within and ſayd in mockery: ſirs demaū
               de of your meſſanger where he founde therle of Derby ſyth he went out but this nyght / and is retourned agayne ſo ſhortly. Than ſir Frāque de Hall ſayde ſirs though we be here in cloſed / we ſhall yſſue out whan it ſhall pleaſe god and the erle of Derby: as wolde to god he knewe in what caſe we be in / for and he knewe it there is none of you that durſte kepe the felde / and if ye wolde ſende hym worde therof / one of vs ſhall yelde hymſelfe priſoner to you to be raunſomed as a gentylman ought to be / the frenchmen anſwered nay nay ſirs / the mater ſhall nat go ſo. The erle of Derby ſhall knowe it well ynough / whan with our engyns we haue beaten downe the caſtell to the yerthe / and that ye haue yelded vp ſimply for ſauyng of your lyues. Certaynly quod ſir Franque we ſhall nat yelde our felfe ſo we woll rather dye here within: ſo the frēchmen retourned agayne to their hooſt and the thre englyſſhe knyghtes were ſore abaſſhed / for y• ſtones y• fell in the towne gaue ſo ſore ſtrokes that it ſemed lyke thondre falled fro heuyn.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Derby toke before Auberoch therle of Layle and dyuers other erles and vycountes / to the nō
               bre of .ix. Cap. C .vii.
            
               ALl the mater of taking of this meſſāger with the letter and neceſſytie of thē with in Auberoch was ſhewed to the erle of Derby / by a ſpye that had been in the frenche hooſt. Than therle of Derby ſent to the erle of Penbroke beyng at Bergerath to mete with hym at a certayne place / alſo he ſende for the lorde Stafforde and to ſir Stephyn Tombey beyng at Lyborne / and the erle hymſelfe with ſir Gaultier of Manny / and his company rode towardes Auberoche: and rode ſo ſecretely with ſuche guydes as knewe the cō
               trey / that therle came to Lyborne and there taryed a day abydinge the erle of Penbroke: and whan he ſawe that he came nat he went forth for the great deſyre that he had to ayde them in Auberoch. Thus therle of Derby / therle of Quenforde▪ ſir Gaultier of Manny / ſir Rychard Haſtynges / ſir Stephyn Tombey / the lorde Feryers and the other yſſued out of Lyborne: and rode all the night and in the mornyng they wer within two lytell leages of Auberoche. They entred into a woode / and lyghted fro their horſes and tyed their horſes to paſture / abydinge for the erle of Penbroke: and there taryed tyll it was noone. They wyſte nat well than what to do / bycauſe they were but thre hundred ſperes / and ſixe hundred archers: and the frenchmen before Auberoch were a .x. or .xii. thouſande men: yet they thought it a great ſhame to leſe their cō
               panyons in Auberoche / finally ſir Gaultier of Manny ſayde: ſirs lette vs leape on our horſes and let vs cooſt vnder the couert of this woode tyll we be on the ſame ſyde that ioyneth to their hooſt / and whan we be nere put y• ſpurres to the horſes and crye our cryes / we ſhall entre whyle they be at ſupper: and vnware of vs ye ſhallſe them be ſo dyſconfited that they ſhall kepe none aray. All the lordes and knightes agreed to his ſayeng: than euery man toke his horſe and ordayned all their pages and baggage to abyde ſtyll ther as they were: ſo they rode ſtyll a long by the wode / and came to a lytell ryuer in a vale nere to y• french hoſt. Than they diſplayed their baners and prnons / and daſſhed their ſpurrꝭ to their horſes and cāe in a fronte into the frenche hooſt among the gaſcoyns / who were nothyng

ware of that buſſhment. They were goynge to ſupper and ſome redy ſette at their meate: thenglyſſhmen cryed a Derby a Derby / and ouerthrewe tentes and pauylions and ſlewe & hurte many: the frenchmen wyſt nat what to do they were ſo haſted / whan they cāe into the felde and aſſembled togyder. They founde the englyſſhe archers ther redy to receyue theym / who ſhotte ſo feerſly that they ſlewe man & horſe / and hurt many: therle of Layll was taken priſoner in his owne tent and ſore hurte / and the erle of Pyergourt and ſir Roger his vncle in their tentes / & ther was ſlayne the lorde of Duras / ſir Aymer of Poyeters / and therle of Ualentenoys his brother was taken / euery man ſledde that myght beſt: but therle of Conynes / the vycount of Car mayne & of Uillemny / and of Brūquell / and y• lorde de la Borde & of Taryde
                  •
                and other that were loged on the otherſyde of the caſtell dreme backe / and wente into the feldes with their baners. Thenglyſſhmen who had ouercome all y• other baſſhed in feerſly among them ther was many a proper feat of armes done / many taken and reſcued agayne: whan they within the caſtell harde that noyſe without / and ſawe thenglyſſe baners and penons. In contynent they armed them and yſſued out / and ruſſhed into y• thyckeſt of the preace / they gretly refreſſhed the englyſſhmen that had fought ther before: wher to ſhulde I make long proceſſe / and tho of therle of Laylles partie were nygh all taken or ſlayne yf the night had nat come on / ther had but fewe ſcapedde: ther were taken that day what erles and vycountes to the nombre of .ix. and of lordes / knyghtes / and ſquyers taken / ſo that ther was no englyſſhman of armes / but that had .ii. or .iii. priſoners. Thisbatell was on ſaynt Larans nyght / the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .xl. and foure: thenglyſſhmen delt lyke good cōpanyons with their priſoners / and ſuffred many to depart on their othe and promyſe to retourne agayne at a certayne day to Bergerath / or to Burdeaux. Than the englyſſhmen entred into Auberoche / and ther the erle of Derby gaue a ſupper to the mooſt part of the erles and vycoū
               tes priſoners / and to many of the knyghtes and ſquyers: thēglyſſhmen gaue lande to god / in y• that a thouſande of them had ouercome .x. M. of their ennemyes / and had reſcued the towne of Auberoche / and ſaued their cōpanyons that were within: who by all lickely hod ſhulde haue ben taken within .ii. dayes after. The next day anone vpon ſonne ryſing / thyder came therle of Penbroke with his company a thre hundren spe res / and a foure thouſande archers. Thatie he ſayd to therle of Derby certaynly coſyn ye haue done me great vncourteſy to fight with our ennemyes without me: ſeyng that ye ſent for me / ye might haue ben ſure I wolde nat fayle to cōe fayr coſyn ꝙ therle of Derby / we deſyred gretly to haue had you with vs / we taryed all day tyll it was ferr paſt no one. And whan we ſawe that ye came nat we durſt nat abyde no lenger / for if our ennemyes had knowen of our cōmyng they had ben in a great aduantage ouer vs / & nowe we haue the aduantage of them I pray you be content and helpe to gyde vs to Burdeaux. So they taryed all that day and the nexte nyght in Auberoche: and the next day be tymes they departed and left captayne in Auberoche a knight of Gaſcoyne called Alyſander of Chamont / this they rode to Burdeaux and ledde▪ with them the mooſt part of their priſoners.
         
         
            ¶ Of the townes that therle of Derby wanne in Gaſcoyne goyng towarde the Ryoll. Cap. Cviii.
            
               THey of Burdeux wyſt nat what ioye to make: nor how to receyue therle of Derby and ſir Gaultier of Man ny / for the takyng of the erle of Laylle and mo than two hundred knyghtꝭ with hym. So thus paſſed that wynter without any more doynge in Gaſcoyne that ought to be remēbred and whan it was paſt Eeſter / in the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .xlv. In the myddes of May▪ therle of Derby who had layne all that wynter at Burdeaux / made a great aſſemble of men of armes and archers / to the entent to go and lay ſiege to the Ryoll / the firſt day fro Burdeux he rode to Bergerath wher he founde therle of Pē
               broke / who had in like wyſe made his aſſembly: ther they taryed thre dayes / and than departed and nombred their company and founde howe they were. M. men of armes / and two. M. archers: than they rode ſo longe tyll they came to ſaynt Baſyll and layd ſiege therto. They within conſydred howe the greatteſt men and mooſt part of Gaſcoyne were priſoners / & ſawe howe they ſhulde haue no ſocoure fro no parte: ſo all thynges conſydred they yelded themſelfe / & dyd

homage to the kyng of England. Than therle paſſed forthe and toke they way to Aguyllone: and in his way he founde the caſtell of Rochemyllone / the whiche was well furnyſſhed with ſoudyers and artyllary / howbeit therle of Derby cōmaunded to gyue aſſaut and ſo the
                  •
                was a ferſe aſſaut. They within caſt out great barres of yron and pottꝭ with lyme / wherwith they hurt dyuers englyſſhmen ſuche as aduentured themſelfe to farr: whan therle ſawe his m
                  •
               hurt and coude do nothyng
                  •
                he withdrue the aſſaut. The next day he made the vyllayns of the countrey to bring thyder fagottes / buſſhes / donge / ſ
                  •
               rawe / and erth / and fylled part of the dykes: ſo that they might go to the walles: and ſo they made. CCC. archers redy / and. CC. men of the countrey to go before them with pauyſſhes / and hauyng great pycares of yron: and whyle they dyd vndermyne the wall the archers ſhuld ſhote / and ſo they dyde that none within durſte apere at their defence. This aſſaut endured the moſte part of the day / ſo that finally the myners made a great hole through the wall: ſo that ten men myght entre a front. Thanne they within were ſore a baſſhed / ſome fledde into the church and ſomme ſtale away by a priue gate: ſo this towne and caſtell was taken / robbed / and the mooſt parte ſlayne / except ſuche as were fledde into the church ▪ the which therle of Derby cauſed to be ſaued / for they yelded themſelf ſimply. Thau therle ſette there newe captayns two en
               
                  〈…〉
                ſquyers / Rycharde Wylle and Robert 
                  〈◊〉
               : than therle went to Mountſegure and lay
                  •
                ſiege therto / and taryed ther a fyftene day 
                  •
               s / captayne within was ſir Hewe Baſtefoll / & euery day there was aſſaut and great engyns were brought thyder 
                  •
               ro Burdeaux / & fro Bergerath: ſo that the ſtones 
                  〈◊〉
                they caſt brake downe walles / roffes / and houſes. Therle of Derby ſende to them of the towne / ſhewyng them that if they were taken byforce they ſhulde all dye: & if they wolde come vnder they obeyſance of the kynge of Englande he wolde pardon them all / and take them for his frendes. They of the towne wolde gladly haue yelded theym / and went and ſpake with their captayne in maner of coū
               
               
                  ••
               yle to ſe what he wolde ſay: and he anſwered theym and ſayd ſirs kepe your defence / we ar able to kepe this towne this halfe yere if nede be. They departed fro hym in ſemyng well cōtent but at nyght they toke and putte hym in priſon ſayeng howe he ſhuld neuer go out therof without ſo be he wold agre to make their peace with therle of Derby / and whan that he had ſworne that he wolde do his deuoyre: they let hym out of priſon / and ſo he went to the barryers of the towne and made token to ſpeke with the erle of Derby / ſir Gaultier of Manny was ther preſent and he went & ſpake with him. The knight ſayd ſir Gaultier of Manny / ye ought natte to haue marueyle though we cloſe our gates agaynſt you ▪ for we haue ſworne feaultie to the frenche kyng: and I ſe well that ther is no perſone in his behalfe that wyll ſtoppe you of your way / but me thynke ye are lyke to go farther. But ſir for my ſelfe and for the menne of the towne I deſyre you that we may abyde in cōpoſicyon / that ye make vs no warr nor we to you the ſpace of a moneth: and duryng that terme if the frenche kyng or the duke of Normandy come into this contrey ſo ſtrong as to fyght with you / than we to be quyte of our couenaunt: and if they come nat or one of them / than we ſhall put vs vnder 
                  〈◊〉
                obe
                  •
                ſance of the kyng of England. Sir Gaultier of Manny went to therle of Derby to knowe his pleaſure in that behalfe / therle was content ſo that they within ſhuld make no fortifycation in that ſeaſon: and alſo y• if any of thēglyſſhmen ther lacked any vitayls / that they might haue it of them for their money. To this they were cō
               tent / and ſent▪ xii. burgeſſes of the towne to Burdeaux in hoſtage: than thenglyſſhmen were refreſſhed with prouiſyon of the towne / but none of them entred. Than they paſſed forth and waſted and exyled the contrey / the which was pleſant and frutefull / and came to a caſtell called & guyllon / and the captayne therof came to therle and yelded vp the caſtell / their lyues and good
                  •
                ſaued. Wherof they of the contrey had gret marueyle / for it was named one of the ſtrongeſt caſtels of the worlde / & whā the captayne that had yelded vp the caſtell ſo ſoone came to Tholoum / the which was .xvii. leages thenſe / they of that towne toke hym and layd treaſon to his charge and hanged hym vp. The ſayd caſtell ſtode bytwene two great ryuers able to bere ſhyppes / y• erle of Derby newe repeyred y• caſtell and made captayne ther ſir Joh
                  •
                of Gombray: tha
                  •
               e the erle went to an other caſtell called Segart / the whiche he toke by aſſaut / and all the ſoudyours within ſlayne / and fro thenſe he went to the towne of le Ryoll.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Derby layd ſiege to the Ryoll / and howe that the towne was yelded to hym. Cap. C .ix.
            
               
               THus the erle of Derby 
                  〈◊〉
                before the Ryoll and layed ſiege therto on all ſydes / & made baſ
                  •
               y
                  •
               es in the feldes and on the waye
                  ••
                / ſo that no prouiſyon coulde entre into the towne / a
                  〈…〉
               he euery day ther was aſſaut: the ſiege 
                  •••
               ured a longe ſpace. And whan the moneth was e
                  ••
               yred that they of Segur ſhulde gyue vp their towne / the erle ſent thyder and they of the 
                  •
               owne gaue vp and became vnder the obeyſaunce of the kynge of Englande / the captayne ſir Hewe Baſtefoll became ſeruant to the erle / with other that were within / vpon certayne wages that they hadde. Thenglyſſhmen that had lye
                  •
                longe before the Ryoll more than nyne wekes / had made in the meane ſpace two belf
                  •
               oys of great tymbre with .iii. ſtages / euery belfroy o
                  •
                fou
                  •
                great whelys and the ſydes towardes the towne were couered with cure boly to defende them fro fyre and fro ſhotte. And into euery ſtage ther were 
                  •
               oynted. C. archers / by ſtrength of men theſe two belfroyes were brought to the walles of the towne / for they had ſo fylled the dykes that they myght well be brought iuſt to the walles. The archers in theſe ſtages ſhotte ſo holly tog
                  •
               der that none durſt apere at their defence without they were well pauyſſhed / and bytwene theſe two belfroys ther were a. CC. men with pycaxes to myne the walles / and ſo they brake through the walles. Thaūe the burgeſſes of the towne came to one of the gates to ſpeke with ſome lorde of the hooſt / whan the erle of Derby knewe therof he ſent to them ſir Gaultier of Manny and the baron of Stafforde: and whan they cāe ther they founde that they of the towne wolde yel
                  •
               e them their lyues and goodes ſaued. Sir Ago
                  •
               s de Bans who was captayne within knewe that ye people of the towne wolde yelde vp / he went into the caſtell with his cōpany of ſoudyers / and whyle they of the towne were entrety
                  •
               g / he conueyed out of the 
                  •
               owne gret quantyte of wyne & other prouiſyon / and than cloſed the caſtell gates: & ſayd howe he wolde nat yelde vp ſo ſo
                  •
               e. The foreſayd two lordes retourned to therle of Derby / ſhewyng hym howe they of the towne wolde yelde themſelf and the towne their lyues and goodes ſaued: thaūe therle ſende to knowe howe the captayne wolde do with ye caſtell / a
                  ••
                it was brought worde agayne to hym howe he wolde nat yelde. Than therle 
                  ••
               udye
                  •
                a lytell▪ ſayde well go take them of the towne to mercy / for by the towne we ſhall haue the caſtell / thaūe theſe lordes went agayne to them of the towne and receyued them to mercy / ſo that they ſhulde go out into the felde and delyuer therle of Derby the kayes of the towne / ſayenge ſir fro heuſforth we knowlege our ſelfe ſubgettes and obey ſaunt to the king of Englande. And ſo they dyd and ſware that they ſhulde gyue no comforte to them of the caſtell / but to greue them to the beſt of their powers: than therle cōmaunded that no man ſhulde do any hurt to the towne of Ryoll / nor to none of them within. Than therle entred into the towne and laydſiege rounde about the caſtell as nere as he might / and rered vp all his engyns the which caſte nyght and day agaynſt the walles / but they dyde lytell hurt the walles were ſo ſtronge of harde ſtone: it was ſayd that of olde tyme it had ben wrought by the handes of the ſaraſyns who made ther warkes ſo ſtrongely that ther is none ſuch nowe a bayes. Whā the erle ſawe that he coulde do no good with his engyns he cauſed theym to ceaſe / than he called to hym his myners: to thyntent that they ſhuld make a myne vnder all the walles / the whiche was nat ſone made.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir water of Manny founde in the towne of the Ryoll the ſepulcre of his father. Ca. C .x.
            
               WHyle this ſiege endured / and that ye myners were a worke: the lorde Gaultier of Manny remembred how 
                  〈◊〉
                his fader was ſtayne goynge a pylgrimage to ſait James. And howe he harde in his youth / howe he ſhulde be buryed in the Ryoll or there about: thaūe he made it to be enquered in the towne yſ there were any manne coude ſhewe hym his fathers tombe / he ſhulde haue a hundred crownes for his labour. And there was an aged man came to ſir Gaultier and ſayd / ſir I thynke I ca
                  ••
               e brynge you nere to the place wher your father was buryed: thanne the lorde of Manny ſayde if your wordes be trewe I ſhall kepe couenaunt and more. ¶ Nowe ye ſhall here the maner howe the lorde Gaultiers father was ſlayne: it was trewe that ſomtyme ther was a byſſhoppe in Cambreſis / a Goſcoyne borne / of the houſe of Myrpoyſe. And ſo it fortuned that in his dayes / ther was at a tyme a great tournayeng before Cambrey:

               wher as there were .v. C. knyghtꝭ on both parties: and ther was a knyght gaſcoyne 
                  •
               ourneyed with the lorde of Manny father to ſir Gaultier / & this knyght of Gaſcoyne was ſo ſore hurt and beaten that he had neuer helth after but dyed: this knyght was of kynne to the ſayde by ſtho
                  ••
               e. Wherfore the lorde of Manny was in his 
                  〈◊〉
                and of all his lynage / a two or thre yere after certayne good men laboured to make peace bytwene thē / and ſo they dyd. And for a mendes the lorde of Manny was bounde to go a pylgrimage to ſaynt James and ſo he went thyder warde: and as he came foreby the towne of Ryoll / the ſame ſeaſon therle Charles of Ualoyes brother to kynge Philyppe / lay at ſiege before the Ryoll / the whiche as than was englyſſhe: and dyuers other townes and cyties than pertayning to the kynge of Englande father to the kynge that layed ſiege to Tourney. So that the lorde of Manny after the retournyng of his pylgrimage: he came to ſe therle of Ua
                  •
               oys who was ther as kyng and as ye lorde of Many went at night to his lodgyng / he was watched by the way by certayne of thē of the lynage of hym yt the lorde of Māny had made his pylgrimage for. And ſo wtout therles lodgyng he was ſlayne and murdred and no man knewe who dyd it / howe be it they of that lynage were helde ſuſpect in ye mater but they were ſo ſtronge and made ſuche excuſes that the mater paſt / for ther was none that wold purſue the lorde of Mannes quarell. Than therle of Ualoyes cauſed hym to be buryed in a lytell chapell in the felde / the which as than was without the towne of Ryoll: and whan therle of Ualoyes had wonne the towne / than the walles were made more larger / ſo that the chapell was within the towne. Thus was ſir Gaulter of Mānes fader ſlayne and this olde man remēbred all this mater / for he was preſent whan he was buryed. Than̄e ſir Gaultier of Manny went with this gode aged man to the place wher as his father was buryed and ther they founde a lytell tombe of marble ouer hym / the which his ſeruauntes layd on hym after he was buryed. Than̄e the olde man ſayd: ſir ſurely vnder this tombe lyeth your father than the lorde of Manny redde the ſcripture on the tombe the whiche was in latyn / and ther he founde yt the olde man had ſayd trouth: and gaue hym his rewarde. And wtin two dayes after he made the tombe to be rayſed and the bones of his father to be taken vp and put in a 
                  •
               ofer: and after dyd ſende them to Ualencēnes in the county of Heynalt. And in the freres ther made theym to be buryed agayne honourably / and dyde there his obſequy 
                  •
               yght goodly / the which is yet kept yerely.
         
         
            ¶Howe the erle of Derby wanne the caſtell of the Ryoll. Cap. C .xi.
            
               NOwe let vs retourne to the ſiege about the caſtell of the Ryoll / the which had endured .xi. wekes / ſo long wrought the mynours that at laſt they came vnder the baſe court / but vnder the dō
               geon they coude nat gette for it ſtode on a harde rocke. Than ſir Ag
                  •
               us des Bans their capten / ſayd to his company: ſirs we be vndermy
                  ••
               d ſo that we ar in great daunger / than they were all ſore a ſrayed / and ſayd ſir ye ar in a great danger and we alſo / without ye fynde ſome remedy year our chefe and we wyll obey you trucly / we haue kept this houſe right honourably alonge ſeaſon. And though we nowe make a compoſycion we can nat be blamed / aſſay if ye canne get graunt of therle of Derby to let vs depart / our lyues and goodes ſaued: and we to delyuer to hym this caſtell. Than ſir Agous dyſcendedde downe fro the hygh to wre / and dyd put out his heed at a lytell wyndo ▪ & made a token to ſpeke with ſome of the hoſt: than he was demaunded what he wolde haue / he ſayd he wolde fayne ſpeke with therle of Derby or with ye lorde of Mā
               ny. Whan therle knewe therof he ſayd to ye lorde of Manny and the lorde Stafforde / lette vs go to the fortreſſe and knowe what the capten woll ſay. Than they rode togyder / and whan ſir Agous ſawe theym he toke of his cappe and ſaluted them eche after other / and ſayde lordes it is of trouth that the frenche kyng ſende me to this towne / to defende and to kepe it and the caſtell to my power. And ye knowe right well howe I haue aquyt my ſelfe in that behalfe / & yet wolde if I might: but alwayes a man may nat abyde in one place / ſir yf it woll pleaſe you I and all my company wolde depart our lyues and goodes ſaued / and we ſhall yelde vnto you the fortreſſe. Than therle of Derby ſayde / ſir Agous ye ſhall nat go ſo away: we knowe ryght well we haue ſo ſore oppreſſed you that we may haue you whan we lyſt / for your fortreſſe ſtādeth but

vpon ſtayes: yelde you ſimply and we wyll receyue you / ſir Agons ſayde: ſir yf we dyde ſo I thynke in you ſomoch honour and gentylnes 
                  〈◊〉
                ye wold deale but courtelly with vs / as ye wold the frenche kynge ſhulde deale with any of your knyghtes / for goddeſſake ſir blemyſſh nat your nobleneſſe for a poore ſort of ſoudyours that be here within / who hath won with moche payne and paryll their poore lyueng: whome I haue brought hyther out of the prouynce of Sauoy / and out of Daulphyne / ſir knowe for trouthe yt yf the leſt of vs ſhulde nat come to mercy aſ well as the beſt / we woll rather ſell our lyues in ſuche wyſe that all the worlde ſhulde ſpeke of vs / ſir we deſyre you to bere vs ſome cōpany of armes and we ſhall pray for you. Than therle and the other two lordes went a parte and ſpake togyder / they ſpake long togyder of dyuers thynges finally they regarded the trouthe of ſir Agons / and conſydred howe he was a ſtranger: and alſo they ſawe that they coude nat vndermyne the dongeon / they agreed to receyue them to mercy Than the erle ſayde to ſir Agons: ſir we wolde gladly to all ſtraungers bere good company of armes: I am content that ye and all your company depart with your lyues ſaued / ſo that you bere away nothynge but your armoure. So be it quod ſir Agons / than he went to his company and ſhewed them how he had ſpedde. Than they dyd on their harneſſe and toke their horſes wherof they hadde no mo but ſixe / ſome bought horſes of thenglyſſhmen / the whiche they payed for truely. Thus ſir Agons de Bans departed fro the Ryoll and yelded vp the caſtell to the englyſſhemen / and ſir Agons and his company wente to Tholous.
         
         
            ¶How therle of Derby toke the towne of Mauleon / and after the towne of Franch in Gaſcoyne. Cap. C .xii.
            
               WHan the erle of Derby had taken his pleaſure at Ryoll: than he went forth and leſt an englyſſh knyght at Ryoll to repayre and a mende that was broken / & he rode to Mountpeſance and made aſſaut there / and within there were but men of the countrey that were gone thyder with their goodes / in truſt of the ſtrength of the place: and ſo they defended theymſelfe as longe as they might / but finally the caſtell was wone with aſſaut and by ſcalynge / but there were many of thenglyſſhe archers ſlayne / and au englyſſhe gentylman ſlayne called Rycharde of Pennenort / he bare the lorde Staffordes baner. Therle of Derby gaue the ſame caſtell to a ſquyer of his called Thomas of Lancaſtre: and left with hym in garyſon .xx. archers / than therle went to the towne of Mauleon and made aſſaut / but he wanne it nat ſo / at nyght there about they lodged: the nexte day a knyght of Gaſcone called ſir Alyſander of Chamont ſayd to therle / ſir make as though ye wolde dyſlodge and go to ſome other part / and leue a ſmall ſort of your people ſtyll before the towne and they within woll yſſue out I knowe theym ſo well and let them chaſe your men that be behynde: and let vs lye vnder the olyues in a buſſhement / and whan they be paſt vs lette part of vs folowe them and ſome retourne towardꝭ the towne. Therle of Derby was cōtent with that counſayle / and he cauſed to abyde behynde the erle of Quenforde with a hundred with hym all onely / well enformed what they ſhulde do: than all the other truſſed bagge and baggage / and departed and went halfe a leage / and ther layd ſir Gaultier of Manny with a great buſſhmēt in a vale amonge olyues and vynes: and therle rode on forth / whan they of Mauleon ſawe the erle departe and ſome ſtyll abydinge behynde / they ſayde among themſelfe let vs go yſſue out and go and fyght with our ennemyes that ar abydinge behynde their maiſter / we ſhall ſoone dyſconfet them / the whiche ſhall be a great honoure and profette to vs / they all agreed to that opynion and armed them quickely and yſſued out who myght firſt / they were a four hundred: Whan therle of Quenfort and his cōpany ſawe them yſſue they reculed backe / and the frenchemen folowed after in gret haſt / and ſo ferr they purſued them that they paſt the buſſhmēt / than ſir Gaultier of Mannyes company yſſued out of their buſſhmēt and cryed Manny / and part of them daſſhed in after the frenchmen / and another part toke the way ſtreyght to ye towne / they founde the baylles and gates opyn / and it was nyght: wherfore they within wende it had ben their owne cōpany that yſſued out before. Thā thenglyſſhmen toke the gate and the brige and incontynent were lordes of the towne: for ſuche of the towne as were yſſued out / were incloſed bothe before and behynde / ſo that they were all taken and ſlayne: and ſuche as were in ye towne dyde yelde them to therle of Derby / who receyued

them to mercy / and of his gentylnes reſpyted the towne fro brennyng and robbynge. And dyde gyue that hole ſeignorie to ſir Alyſaunder of Chamount / by whoſe aduyce the towne was wont and ſir Alyſaunder made a brother of his captayne ther called Antony of Chamont / and therle left with hym certayne archers and other with pauyſſhes: than therle departed and came to Wyelfrāche in Agenoys / the which was won by aſſaut and the caſtell alſo: and he lefte there for captayne a ſquyer of his called Thom̄s Coq̄ Thus therle rode all about the contrey and no man reſyſted hym / and conquered townes and ca
                  〈…〉
                / and his men wanne ryches meruayle to eſteme.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Derby wanne the cytie of Angoleſme. Cap. C .xiii.
            
               WHan the erle of Derby had this towne at his pleaſure / thaſie herode to Myremōt drawyng towardes Burdeux: for all this iourney his currours neuer aproched to port ſaynt Mary. Therle was thre dayes before Myremont and on the fourth day they yelded / therle gaue it to a ſquier of his called John̄ Briſtowe / and after his men wan a lytell towne cloſed / ſtandyng on the ryuer of Gerone called Thomynes / and after the ſtronge caſtell of Damaſſene / the whiche they well garnyſſhed with men of armes and archers. Than they came before the cytie of Angoleſme and layd ſiege therto / and therle ſayde he wolde nat depart thenſe tyll he had it at his pleaſure: than̄e they within made apoyntment with the erle to ſende .xxiiii. of their chiefe burgeſſes to Burdeur in hoſtage for the reſpyte of a peace for a moneth / and if wt in that ſpace the frenche kynge do ſende a ſuffyciēnt perſone to kepe the felde agaynſt therle of Derby: than they to haue agayne their hoſtagꝭ and to be quyte of their bonde / and yf nat than they to put theym vnder the obeyſaunce of the kynge of Englande. This done: thaſie the erle rode to Blames and layed ſiege therto / within were two captayns of Poycton / ſir Guyſſhart Dangle and ſir Wyllyam̄ de Rochchouart: and they ſayde they wolde yelde to no manne. And whyle this ſiege endured ſome of the englyſſhemen rode to Mortayne in Poycton / where as ſir Boucyquant was captayne / and made there a great aſſaut but it auayled nat: but dyuers of them were hurt & ſlayne / and ſo departed thens and went to Myrebell and to Alney. And after came agayne to the ſiege of Blames: euery day there was ſome feate of armes done / the terme of the moneth erpyred that they of Angoleſme ſhulde yelde. The erle of Derby ſent thyder his two marſhals / to whome they of the cyte ſware homage and fealtie in the behalfe of the kyng of Englande: and ſo they were in peace and had a gayne reſtored their hoſtages. And the erle ſent thyder at their deſyers John̄ of Norwyche to be their captayne / ſtyll the ſiege endured before Blaſmes / ſo that thenglyſſhmen were halfe wery / for wynter approched and there they coulde wynne nothynge: than they determyned to go to Bourdeaux tyll another ſeaſon / and ſo they dyllodged & went ouer Gerande and ſo to Burdeaux / and than deꝑted his people into dyuers garyſons to kepe fronter warre.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Godfray Harecourt was banyſſhed out of Fraunce. Cap. C .xiiii.
            
               IN this ſeaſon ſir Godfray of Harecourt fell in the indygnation of the frenche kynge / who was a great baron in Normandy and brother to therle of Harecourt / lorde of ſaynt Sauyour the vycount / and dyuers other townes in Normā
               dy. And it was ſayde all was but for enuy: for a lytell before he was as great with the kyng and with the duke of Normādy as he wolde deſyre but he was as than openly banyſſhed the realm of Fraunce / and yf the kynge coulde haue gette hym in his yre / he wolde haue ſerued hym as he dyd ſir Olyuer of Clyſſone / who was beheeded the yere before at Parys. This 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Godfray had ſome frendes who gaue hym warnyng ſecretly howe the kyng was dyſpleaſed with hym: than he auoyded the realme aſſone as he myght and went into Brabant to the duke there who was his coſyn / who receyued him ioyfully. And ther he taryed alonge ſpace and lyued of ſuche reuenewes

as he had in Brabant for 
                  •
               ut of Fraunce he coude gette nothynge. The kyng had ſeaced all his landes there of Conſtantyne / and tooke the profet therof hymſelfe: the duke of Brabant coude in no wyſe gette agayne this knyght into the kynges fauoure / for nothynge that he coude do. This dyſpleaſure coſt greatly the realme of Fraunce after: and ſpecially the contrey of Normandy / for the tokens therof remayned a hyndred yere after / as ye ſhall here in this hyſtorie.
         
         
            ¶ Of the dethe of Jaques Dartuell of Gaunt. Cap. C .xv.
            
               IN this ſeaſon raygned in Flaunders in great proſperyte and puyſaunce Jaques Dartuell of gaūt / who was as great with the kyng of Englande as he wolde deſyre: and he had promyſed ye kyng to make hym lorde and herytour of Flaū
               ders / and to endewe his ſonne the prince of Wales therwith. And to make the count
                  •
               e of Flaū
               ders a duke dome: for the which cauſe 
                  〈◊〉
                feeſt ſaynt John̄ Babtyſt / they yere of our lorde god. M. CCC .xlvi. the kynge of Englande was come to Sluſe with many lordes & knyghtes / and had brought thyder with hym ye yonge prince his ſonne / on the truſt of the promyſe of Jaques Dartuell. The kyng withall his nauy lay in the hauyn of Sluſe and there he kept his houſe / and thyder came to vyſette hym his frendes of Flaunders: ther were great counſaylles bytwene the kyng and Jaques Dartuell on the one ꝑtie / and the counſayls of the good townes of Flaunders on the other partie. So that they of the countrey were nat of the agrement with the kyng / nor with Jaques Dartuell: who preched to theym that they ſhulde diſheryte the erle Loyes their owne naturall lorde / and alſo his yong ſonne Loyes / and to enheryte the ſonne of the kynge of Englande / the which thynge they ſayd ſuerly they wolde neuer agre vnto. And ſo the laſte day of their counſayll / the whiche was kept in the hauyn of Sluſe in the kynges great ſhyppe called the Katheryne / there they gaue a fynall anſwere by common acorde: and ſayde ſir / ye haue deſyred vs to a thynge that is great and weyghtie / the which herafter may ſore touche the countrey of Flaunders and our heyres: trewely we knowe nat at this day no perſone in the worlde that we loue the preferment of ſo moche as we do yours: but ſir this thynge we cannat do alone / without that all the cōmynaltie of Flaunders acorde to the ſame ſir we ſhall goo home and euery man ſpeke with his cōpany generally in euery towne / and as the mooſt parte agre we ſhalbe cōtent: and within a moneth we ſhall be here with you agayne / and than̄e gyue you a full anſwere / ſo that ye ſhalbe cōtent. The kyng nor Jaques Dartuell coude as than haue none other anſwere / they wolde fayne haue had a ſhort day but it wolde nat be. So thus deꝑted that counſayle & euery man went home to their owne townes / Jaques Dartuell taryed a lytell ſeaſon with the kyng / and ſtyll he promyſed the kyng to bring them to his entent: but he was diſceyued / for aſſone as he came to Gaūt he went no more out agayne: for ſuche of Gaunt as had ben at Sluſe at the counſayle there / whan they were retourned to Gaunt or Jaques Dartuell was come into the towne / great and ſmall they aſſembled in the market place: and ther it was openly ſhewed what requeſt the kynge of Englande had made to them by the ſettyng on of Jaques Dartuell: than euery man began to murmure agaynſt Jaques / for that requeſt pleaſed them nothynge / and ſayde that by the grace of god there ſhulde no ſuche vntrouthe be founde in them / as willingly to diſheryte their naturall lorde and his yſſue / to enheryte a ſtranger. And ſo they all departed fro the market place nat cō
               tent with Jaques Dartuell. ¶ Nowe beholde and ſe what fortune fell / if he had ben as welcōe to Gaunt as he was to Bruges and Ipre / they wolde agreed to his opinyon as they dyde: but he truſted ſomoche in his proſperyte and greatneſſe / that he thought ſoone to reduce thē to his pleaſure. Whan he retourned he cāe into Gaunt about noone: they of the towne knewe of his cō
               myng / and many were aſſembled toguyder in the ſtrete where as he ſhulde paſſe / and whaſie they ſawe hym they began to murmure and began to ron togyder thre heedes in one hood and ſayde / beholde yonder great maiſter who woll order all Flaunders after his pleaſure / the whiche is nat to be ſuffred. Alſo their were wordes ſowen through all ye towne howe Jaques Dartuell had .ix. yere aſſembled all the reuenewes of Flaunders without any count gyuen: and therby hath kept his eſtate. And alſo ſend great rycheſſe out of the countrey into Englande ſecretly:

theſe wordes ſet them of Gaunt on fyre / and as he rode through the ſtrete he parceyued that ther was ſome newe mater agaynſt hym / for he ſawe ſuche as were wonte to make reuerence to hym: as he came by he ſawe theym tourne their backes towarde hym / and entre into their houſes. Than he began to doute: and aſſone as he was a lyghted in his lodgyng he cloſed faſt his gates / doores / and wyndoſe. This was ſkante done▪ but all the ſtrete was full of men / and ſpecially of them of the ſmall craftes: ther they aſſayled his houſe bothe behynde and before / and the houſe broken vp: he and his within y• houſe defended themſelfe a longe ſpace and ſlewe and hurt many without / but finally he coude nat endure▪ for thre partꝭ of the men of the towne were at that aſſaut. Whan Jaques ſawe that he was ſo ſore oppreſſed: he came to a wyndowe with gret humylite barcheeded / and ſayd with fayre langage: good people what ayleth you / why be you ſo ſore troubled agaynſt me. In what maner haue I dyſpleaſed you / ſhewe me & I ſhall make you amendes at your pleaſures: than ſuche as harde hym anſwered all with one voyce / we woll haue acompt made of the great treſure of Flaunders / that ye haue ſende out of the way without any tytell of reaſon: than Jaques anſwered mekely and ſayde / certaynely ſirs of the treſoure of Flaunders I neuer toke nothynge / withdrawe your ſelfys paciētly into your houſes / and come agayne to morowe in the mornynge / and I ſhall make you ſo good acompt that of reaſon ye ſhalbe content. Than̄e all they anſwered & ſayd: nay we woll haue acompt made incontynent / ye ſhall nat ſcape vs ſo: we knowe for trouthe that ye haue ſende great rycheſſe into Englande without our knowlege. Wherfore ye ſhall dye: whan̄e he harde that worde he ioyned his handes togyder and ſore wepyng ſayd / ſirs ſuche as I am ye haue made me: & ye haue ſworne to me or this / to defende me agaynſt all perſons / and nowe ye wolde ſlee me without reaſon
                  •
                ye may do it and ye woll / for I am but one man among you all / for goddeſſake take better aduyce. And remembre the tyme paſt: and conſyder the great gracꝭ and curteſyes that I haue done to you ye wold nowe rendre to me a ſmall rewarde for the great goodneſſe y• I haue done to you / and to yo• towne in tyme paſt: ye knowe ryght well marchanutdyſe was nighe loſt in all this countrey / and by my meanes it is recouered: alſo I haue gouerned you in great peace & reſt for in y• tyme of my gouernyng ye haue had all thynges as ye wolde wyſſhe / corne / rycheſſe and all other marchaundyſe. Than they all cryed with one voyce: come downe to vs and prech nat ſo hyghe / and gyue vs acompt of the great treaſoure of Flaunders / that ye haue gouerned ſo long without any acompt makynge / the whiche parteyneth nat to an offycerto do: as to receyue the goodꝭ of his lorde or of a contrey with out acompt. Whan Jaques ſawe that he coude nat apeaſe theym: he drewe in his heed and cloſed his wyndowe / and ſo thought to ſteale oute on the backeſyde / into a churche that ioyned to his houſe: but his houſe was ſo broken that .iiii. hundred ꝑſons were entred into his houſe: and finally there he was taken and ſlayne without mercy / and one Thom̄s Denyce gaue hym his dethe ſtroke. Thus Jaques Dartuell endedde his dayes: who had ben a great maiſter in Flā
               ders / poore men firſt mounteth vp / and vnhappy men ſleeth them at the ende. Theſe tidynges anone ſpredde abrode the countrey: ſome were ſorie therof / and ſome were gladde.
            IN this ſeaſon therle Loyes of Flaunders was at Teremounde: and he was ryght ioyouſe whan he harde of the dethe of Jaques Dartuell his olde ennemy▪ howbeit yet he durſt nat truſt them of Flaunders / nor go to Gaunt. Whan the kyng of Englande who lay all this ſeaſon at Sluſe: abyding the anſwere of the flē
               mynges / harde howe they of Gaunt had ſlaynr Jaques Dartuell his great frende he was ſore dyſpleaſed. Incōtynent he departed fro Sluſe and entred into the ſee: ſore thretnyng the flemmynges and the countrey of Flaunders / & ſayd howe his dethe ſhulde be well reuenged. Than the counſayls of the gode townes of Flaunders ymagined well howe the kyng of England wolde be ſoore dyſpleaſed with this dede: thau they determyned to go and excuſe themſelfe ſpecially they of Bruges / Ipre / Courtra / Andewarpe / & of Francke: they ſent into Englande to y• kyng for a ſalue cōduct / that they might come to their excuſe: the kynge who was as than ſomwhat aſwaged of his dyſpleaſure graūted their deſyre than there cāe into Englande men of eſtate out of the gode townes of Flanders except of Gaūt this was aboute the feeſt of ſaynt Mychaell / & the king beyng at Weſtmynſter beſyde Lōdon. There they ſo mekely excuſed them of the dethe of Jaques Dartuell / and ſware ſolemly y• they knewe nothynge therof tyll it was done: if they had he was the man that they wolde haue defē
               ded to the beſt of their powers / and ſayde howe they were right ſorie of his dethe / for he had gouerned

the contrey right wyſely. And alſo they ſayde: that though they of Gaunt hadde done that dede / they ſhulde make a ſufficyent amendes / alſo ſayenge to the kynge and his counſell / that thoughe he be deed: yet the kynge was neuer the farther of fro the loue and fauoure of thē of Flaunders / in all thynges except the inherytaunce of Flaunders / the which in no wyſe they of Flaunders woll put a way fro the ryght heyres. Sayeng alſo to the kynge: ſir ye haue fayre yſſue bothe ſonnes and doughters / as for the prince of Wales your eldeſt ſonne / he canne nat fayle but to be a great prince without the inherytaunce of Flaunders. Sir ye haue a yonge doughter: and we haue a yonge lorde / who is herytoure of Flaunders / we haue hym in oure kepynge: may it pleaſe you to make a maryage bytwene them two. So euer after the county of Flaunders ſhall be in the yſſue of your chylde: theſe wordes and ſuche other apeaſed the kyng / and finally was content with the 
                  ••
               emmynges / and they with hym: and ſoo lytell and lytell the dethe of Jaques Dartuell was forgoten.
         
         
            ¶ Of the dethe of wyllm̄ erle of Heynault / who dyed in Freeſe and many with hym. Cap. C .xvi.
            
               IN the ſame ſeaſon the erle Wyllyam of Heynalt beynge at ſiege before the towne of Dautryche / and there hadde lyen a long ſeaſon: he conſtrayned theym ſo ſoore / what by aſſautes and otherwyſe / that finally he hadde his pleaſure of thē: and anone after in the ſame ſeaſon about y• feeſt of ſaynt Remy. The ſame erle made a great aſſemble of men of armes / knyghtes and ſquyers of Heynault / Flaunders / Brabant / Hollande / Guerles / and Jullyers: the erle and his company departed fro Dordreche in Hollande / with a great nauy of ſhyppes. And ſo ſayled to wardes Freeſe: for the erle of Heynault claymed to be lorde there / and yf the freſons had been men to haue brought to reaſon: therle in dede hadde there great ryght / but there he was ſlayne and a great nombre of knyghtes and ſquyers with hym. Sir John̄ of Heynault aryued nat there with his nephue / for he aryued at another place: and whan he harde of the deth of his nephue lyke a manne out of his mynde he wolde haue tought with the freſons: but his ſeruantes and ſpecially ſir Robert of Gluues / who as thanne was his ſquyer / dyd putte hym into his ſhyppe agayne / agaynſt his wyll. And ſo he retourned agayne with a ſmall cōpany / and came to 
                  ••
               oūt ſay
                  •
               it Gertrude in Hollande / wher the lady his nece was / wyfe to the ſayd erle named Iahane eldeſt doughter to the duke of Brabant: & than ſhe went to the lande of Buyche / the which wass her endowrie. Thus y• countie of Heynall was voyde a certayne ſpace: and ſir John̄ of Heynalt dyd gouerne it vnto the tyme that Margaret of Heynault doughter to therle Aubertcame thyder and toke poſſeſſyon of that herytage: & all lordes and other dyde to her feaultie and homage. This lady Margaret was maryed to y• lorde Loyes of Bauyer emperour of Almayne and kynge of Romayns.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir John̄ Heynalt became frenche. Cap. C .xvii.
            
               ANone after the french kyng entreated & cauſed the erle of Bloys to entreat this lorde John̄ of Heynalt to become frenche / promyſing to gyue hym more reuenues in Fraunce than he had in Englande / to he aſſigned wher he wolde hymſelfe deuyce. To this requeſt he dyd nat lightly agre for he had ſpent all the floure of his youth in the ſcruyce of the kyng of Englande: and was euer welbeloued with the kyng. Whan therle Loyes of Bloyes / who had maryed his doughter and had by her thre ſonnes: Loyes / John̄ / and Guy / ſawe that he coude nat wynne hym by that meanes / he thought he wold aſſay an other way / as to wyn the lorde of Saguynels / who was chefe cōpany on and gretteſt of counſell with the lorde John̄ of Heynault. And ſo they bytwene thē deuyſed to make hym byleue that they of Englande wolde nat pay hym his pencyon / wherwith ſir John̄ of Heynault was ſore dyſpleaſed / ſo y• he renounced his ſeruyce / and good wyll that he bare to the kynge of Englande. And whan the frenche kyng knowe therof incontynent he ſent ſufficyent meſſangers to hym / and ſo retayned

hym of his counſayle with certayne wages / and recompenſed hym in Fraunce / with aſmoche or more than he had in Englande.
         
         
            ¶ Of the great hooſt that the duke of Normandy brought into Gaſcone agaynſt therle of Derby. Cap. C .xviii.
            
               THe frenche kyng was well infourmed of the cōqueſtes that the erle of Derby had made in the countrey of Gaſcone / thanne he made a great ſommons: that all noble and nat noble able for the feare of warre ſhulde be at Orlyaunce / and at Bourges and there about / at a certayne day lymytted by reaſon of this cōmaundement came to Parys duke Odes of Burgoyne his ſonne: and therle of Arthoys and of Colayne: they cāe to the kynge with a thouſande ſpeares. Than̄e came the duke of Burbone / and therle of Ponthyeu his brother / with a great nombre of men of armes / thyder alſo came the erle of Ewe and of Guynes cōſtable of Fraunce with a great cō
               pany: alſo therle of Tankernyll / the dolphyne of Auuerne / therle of Foreſtes / therle of Dampmartyne / therle of Uandone / the lorde of Coucy / the lorde of Craon / the lorde of Sully / the byſſhoppe of Bewuayes / the lorde of Frennes / the lorde of Beauiewe▪ the lorde John̄ of Chaalon / the lorde of Roy and dyuerſe other: they all aſſembled in the cytie of Orlyaunce / they of that part of Loyre: and they of Poycton / of Xaynton / of Rochell of Caourſyn / and Lymoſyn they met in y• marches of Tholouz. So all thes paſſed forthe towarde Roueryng: and they foū
               de moche more company aſſembled in the cytie of Rodes / and in the marches of Auuerne / and Prouence. So at laſt they all came to the cite of Tholouz / and there about: for they coude nat be all lodged in the cytie / for they were in nombre mo than a hundred thouſand. This was in the yere of our lorde god. M. CCC .xlv. anone after the feeſt of Chriſtmas the duke of Normandy / who was chefe of that hooſt / rode forth with his two marſhals before hym / the lorde of Momorēcy / and the lorde ſaynt Uenant. Firſt they went to the caſtell of Myremont / the which the englyſſhmen had wonne before: and captayne wtin was one John̄ Briſtowe / there they made aſſaut within were a hundred englyſſhmē. And with the frenchmen was ſir Loyes of Spayne with genowayes croſbowes / who ſparedde no ſhotte: ſo that they within the caſtell coulde nat defende them ſelfe / but that the caſtell was won and they all take and ſlayne with the captayne: than the marſhals ſet ther newe men / than they paſſed forthe and came to vyle Franche in Agenoyes. There all the hooſt layd ſiege and aſſay led the towne / at y• ſeaſon the captayne ſir Thomas Corque was nat there / he was at Burdeaux with therle of Derby who had ſent for hym Howbeit they within defended themſelfe valyantly: but finally they were taken perforce / and the towne robbed and brent / and ſlayne y• moſte part of the ſoudyers: than the hooſt drewe to the cytie of Angoleſme and layd ſiege there / capytayne within was a ſquyer called John̄ Normell. Whan therle of Derby harde of this gret hooſt / and howe they had wonne agayne Myr mount / and Uyle Franche: and brent y• towne and left the caſtell voyde / than he ſent four knyghtes with threſcore men of armes / and thre hū
               dred archers to Uyle Franche to entre into the caſtell / and to cloſe the gates agayne of the towne / and promyſed theym that if the frenchmen came thyder agayne to aſſayle theym / he wolde ſocoure thē what ſoeuer fell therof. And ſo theſe four knyghtes: that is to ſay ſir Stephyn Cō
               bey / ſir Rycharde Heldone / ſir Raffe Haſtynges / and ſir Normant of Fynfroyde / went thyder and newely fortifyed the towne and caſtell: Than therle of Derby deſyred the erle of Penbroke / ſir Gaultier of Manny / ſir Franque de Hall / ſir Thomas Coque / ſir John̄ de la Touche / ſir Rycharde of Beauayes / ſir Philyp Reckeleue / ſir Robert Neuyll / ſir Thomas Briſet / and dyuerſe other knyghtes and ſquyers to go all to Aguyllon / and to kepe that fortres / for he wolde beſore dyſpleaſed if that ſhulde be loſt they departed and were a .xl. knyghtꝭ and ſquyers / & thre hundred men of armes with archers. And ſo they entred into the ſtronge caſtell of Aguyllon: and there they founde a ſixſcore ſoudy ours all redy / that therle of Derby had left ther before: than they made prouiſyon for all thynges neceſſarie. And as theſe foreſayd four knyghtes came towarde Uyle Frāche: they founde in their way great plentie of beafes / mottons / & corne: the which they toke with them into their towne / and they repayred agayn the caſtell and mended the walles and gates of the towne: ſo that they were at laſt a fyftene hūdred men able

to make defence / and had vytayle ſufficyent for ſixe monethes. The duke of Normādy who had long lyen at ſieg before Angoleſme: ſawe howe he coude nat wynne the towne by aſſaut / for euery day he loſt of his men: than he cōmaunded to make no more aſſautes / but to remeue nerer to the towne. On a day the ſeneſhall of Beaucayre came to the duke and ſayd: ſir I knowe well all the marcheſſe of this countrey / if it wyll pleaſe yout to lette me haue a ſixe hundred men of armes / and I ſhall go abrode into the contre and gette vytayle for your hooſt / for within a whyle we ſhall lacke. The duke was content: the next day the ſeneſhall toke with hym certayne knightes / ſquyers / and lordes / that were cōtent to go vnder hym. Firſt the duke of Burbou / therle of Ponthieu his brother / the erle of Tankernyll / therle of Foreſtes / the dolphyn of Auuerne / the lorde of Pons / the lorde of Partuey / the lorde of Coucy / the lorde Daubigny / the lorde Dauſemont / the lorde of Beauiewe / ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / ſir Sayntre / and dyuerſe other to a .ix. C. ſpeares. They toke their horſe in the euenyng and rode all nyghttyll the brekyng of the day in the mornyng: and ſo came to a gret towne that was but newly wonne by thēglyſſhmen called Athenys / and there aſpy came to the ſene ſhall and ſayd: ſir ther is in the towne a ſixſcore men of armes / gaſcons / and englyſſhe / and .iii. hundred archers: who woll defende the towne if ye gyue aſſaut / but I ſawe this mornyng a ii. C. great beeſtes putte out of the towne into the medowes / ioyninge to the towne. Than the ſeneſhall ſayd: ſirs I thynke it beſt let all our cō
               pany abyde ſtyll here in this valey / and I woll go with .lx. with me and fecthe y• catayle hythee and I thynke thenglyſſhmen woll yſſue incontynēt to reſcue the pray / than ſhall ye mete with them. So this was done: y• ſeneſhall with threſcore well horſed rode by wayes couert about y• towne by gidyng of the ſpye / tyll at laſt they cāe into the fayre medowes / wher the catayle paſtured. Thā they draue all the beeſtꝭ togyder a longe by the towne by another way / than they cāe thyder. They of the caſtell & on the walles ſawe them: and began to blowe and to ſtyrre in the towne / and a waked ſome out of their beddes / for it was erely in the mornynge: and than they drewe togyder & mounted on their horſes / and yſſued out he that myght firſte / ſo that there abode in the towne none but a certayne vylayns / thenglyſſhmen haſted them ſore after the frēchmen / and cryed ſirs ye ſhall nat go thus away. Than the frēchmen came on them: ſo that with in a lytell ſpace they were ouercome / and the captayne ſir Stephyn Leſey was taken priſoner and ſome other with hym / and all the other ſlayne. And than the frenchemen rode haſtely to the towne / the which they wanne with aſſaut / for it was without kepynge: the firſt batayle that entred was the duke of Burbons / than they ſette there newe captayns. And ſo depted with their pray and priſoners: and ſo came the next day to the hooſt before Angoleſme / the ſeneſhall of Be aucayre achyued great honoure by that dede / howbeit ther were gretter lordes with hym thā hymſelfe / but he was captayne as at that tyme.
         
         
            ¶ Howe John̄ Nor wyche ſcaped fro Angoleſme whā the towne was yelded to the frenchmen. Cap. C .xix.
            
               THus theſe lordes of Frā
               ce helde a great ſeaſon ſege before Angoleme / and they ranne ouer all the countrey that thenglyſſhmen hadde wonne before / and dyd moche trouble / and toke many priſoners and great prayes / the which they brought to their hooſt / the two bretherne of Burbon achyued great laude and prayſe / for alwayes they went forth with y• formaſt. Whan John̄ Norwiche ſawe that the duke wolde nat depart thens tyll he had the towne at his pleaſure: and parceyued howe their vitayls began to waſt / & that the erle of Derby made no maner to reſcue theym. And alſo he ſawe well howe they of the towne enelyued greatly to the frenche party for they wolde haue tourned frenche or that tyme if they had durſt: therfore he doubted of treaſon. 
                  •
               herfore he thought to ſaue hymſelf and his cō
               pany: on the euyn of the Purifycation of our lady / all alone he went to the walles of the cyte Wt
               out ſhe wyng to any man what he wolde do / he made a token with his hatte to them of the hoſt. they that ſawe the ſigne came thyder & demaunded what he wolde ▪ he ſayde he wolde gladly ſpeke with the duke of Normandy / or with one of his marſhals. Incōtynent this was ſhewed to the duke: who went thyder & certayne knyghtes with hym: aſſone as the captayne ſawe the duke / he toke of his cap & ſaluted the duke / and the duke ſaluted hym and ſayde / John̄ howe is it with you: woll you yelde your ſelfe / ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                he

I am nat ſo yet determyned / but ſir I wold deſyre you in the honoure of our lady / whoſe day ſhalbe to morowe / that ye wolde graunt a truſe to endure all onely but to morowe: ſo that you nor we none to greue other / but to be in peace y• day. The duke ſayde I am content and ſo they departed / the nere day which was Candelmas day▪ John̄ Norwiche and his company armed them and truſſed all that they had to bere away Than they opyned their gate and yſſued oute: than they of the hooſt began to ſtyrre / than the captayne rode on before to them and ſayd: ſirs / beware do no hurt to none of vs▪ for we woll do none: we haue truſ
                  •
                for this day all onely agreed by the duke your caiptayne. If ye knowe it nat go and demaunde of hym: for by reaſon of this trewſe we may ryde this day whyther we woll. The duke was demanded what was his pleaſure in that mater: the duke anſwered and ſayde let them depart whyder they woll a goddeſname / for we can nat let them for I woll kepe that I haue promyſed. Thus John̄ Norwych departed and all his company / and paſſed the french hooſt without any damage and went to Aguyllon. And whan the knightes ther knewe howe he had ſaued hymſelfe and his company / they ſayde he had begyled his ennemyes▪ by a good ſubtyltie. The next day after they of the cytie of Angoleſme went to counſayle / and determyned to yelde vp the towne to the duke / they ſent to hym into the hooſt certayne meſſangers who at laſt ſpedde ſo well that the duke toke thē to mercy / and pardoned them all his yuell wyll and ſo entred into the cytie and into the caſtell / and toke homage of the cytizens: and made captayne ther Antony Uyllers and ſet a hundred ſoudyers with hym / than the duke went to the caſtell of Damaſſ
                  •
               ne where he helde ſiege .xv. dayes and euery day aſſaut: finally it was won and all that were within ſlayn. The duke gaue that caſtell and the landes therto▪ to a ſquyer of Beauſſe called the Bourge of Mulle / than the duke came to Thomyus on the ryuer of Garon and there lay at ſiege a certayne ſpace / at laſte they within yelded vp / their goodes and lyues ſaued: and to be ſauely conducted to Burdeaur So the ſtrangers departed / but they of y• towne came vnder the obeyſaunce of the duke: the duke taryed aboute the ryuer of Garon / tyll it was paſt Eſter. And than he went to port ſaynt Mary on the ſame ryuer / and there were a two hundred englyſſhmen / that kept the towne and the paſſage and was well fortiſyed: but it was taken with aſſaut and all they within / than ther were ſet newe captayns and men of warr / and newe repayred the towne / and thanne the duke went to Aguyllone.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Normandy layd ſiege to Aguyllon with a hundred thouſande men. Cap. C .xx.
            
               THe duke of Normādy and theſe lordes of Fraunce / dyd ſomoche that they came to the caſtell of Aguyllone: there they layde their ſiege aboute the fayre medowes / along by y• ryuer able to bere ſhyppes euery lorde amonge his owne company▪ and euery conſtable by hym ſelfe as it was ordayned by the marſhals. This ſege endured tyll the feeſt of ſaynt Remy: ther were well. C. thouſande men of warr a horſe backe and a fote / they made lightly euery day two or thre aſſautꝭ / and mooſt cōmenly fro the mornyng tyll it was nere nyght without ceaſynge: for euer there cāe newe aſſauters that wolde nat ſuffre them with in to reſt / the lordes of Fraunce ſawe well they coude nat well come to the frōters without they paſſed the ryuer / the which was large and depe Than the duke cōmaunded that a bridge ſhuld be made whatſoeuer it coſte: to paſſe the ryuer there were ſette a warke / mo than thre hundred workemen / who dyde worke day and nyght. Whan the knyghtꝭ within ſawe this brige more than halfe made ouer the ryuer they decked thre ſhyppes and entred into theym a certayne. And ſo cāe on the workemen / and chaſed them away with their defenders: and ther they brake all to peaces that had ben longe a makynge. Whan̄e the frenche lordes ſawe that: than they apayrelled other ſhyppes to reſyſt agaynſt their ſhyppes: and than the workemen beganne agayne to worke on the bridge / on truſt of their defenders. And whan they had worked halfe a day & more: ſir Gaultier of Manny and his company entred into a ſhyppe and came on the workemen / and made them to leaue warke & to recule backe: and brake agayn all that they had made. This beſyneſſe was nygh euery day / but at laſt the frenchmen kept ſo well their workemen that the bridge was made perforce. And thanne the lordes and all their army paſſed ouer in maner of bataylle: and they aſſawtedde the caſtell a

hole day togyder without ceaſyng / but nothynge they wanne. And at nyght they retourned to their lodgynges: and they within amended all that was broken / for they had with them worke men ynoughe. The next day the frenchmen deuyded their aſſauters into foure partes: y• firſt to begynne in the mornyng and to contynue tyll nyne / the ſeconde tyll noon / they thyrde to euyn ſong tyme: and the fourth tyll night. After that maner they aſſayled the caſtell ſire dayes togyder / howe be it they within were nat ſo ſore traueyled / but alwayes they defended themſelfe ſo valyantly that they without wanne nothynge / but onely the bridge without the caſtell. Than̄e the frenchmen toke other counſayle / they ſende to Tholouz for eyght great engyns / and they made there foure gretter: and they made all. xii to caſt day and nyght agaynſt y• caſtell / but they within were ſo well ꝑauyſſhed that neuer a ſton of their engyns dyde they many hurt. It brake ſomwhat the coueryng of ſome houſes / they wt
               in had alſo great engyns / the which brake downe all the engyns without / for in a ſhorte ſpace they brake all to pecys ſixe of the greatteſt of thē without. Duryng this ſiege often tymes 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Water of Manny yſſued out with a hundred or ſire ſcore cōpanyons: and went on that ſyde the ryuer a foragynge / and retourned agayne with great prayes / in the ſyght of them without. On a day the lorde Charles of Momorēcy marſhall of the hoſt rode forthe with a fyue hundred with hym / and whan̄e he retourned he draue before hym a great nombre of beeſtes / that he had get togyder in the countrey to refreſſhe thooſt with vytayle. And by aduenture he encountred with ſir Gaultier of Manny: there was bytwene thē a great fight / and many ouerthrowen / hurte / & ſlayne: the frenchemen were fyue agaynſt one / tidynges therof came vnto Aguyllon / than euery man that myght yſſued out. Therle of Penbroke firſt of all and his company: and whan he came he founde ſir Gaultier of Māny a fote encloſed with his ennemyes / and dyde meruayls in armes. In contynent he was reſcued and remounted agayne / and in the meane ſeaſon ſome of the frenchemen chaſed their beeſtes quyckely into the hooſt / or els they had loſt them / for they that yſſued out of Aguyllon ſet ſo feerſly on the frenchmen / that they putte theym to the ſlyght: and delyuerd their company that were takenne and tooke many frenchemen priſoners. And ſir Charles of Momorēcy had moche warke to ſcape: than thenglyſſhmen retourned into Aguyllon. Thus euery day almooſt there were ſuche rencounters beſyde y• aſſautes: on a day all the hole hooſt armed them / and the duke commaunded that they of Tholouz / of Carcaſſone / of Beaucayre / ſhulde make aſſaut fro the mornynge tyll noone: and they of Remergue / Caours / & Agenoys / fro noone tyll night. And y• duke promyſed who ſoeuer coude wynne the brige of the gate / ſhulde haue in rewarde a hundred crownꝭ alſo the duke the better to mentayne this aſſaut he cauſed to come on the ryuer dyuerſe ſhyppes and ba
                  •
               ges / ſome entred into them to paſſe the ryuer: and ſome went by the bridge. At the laſt ſome of theym toke a lytell veſſell and went vnder the brige: and dyde caſt great hokes of yron to the drawe bridge / and than drewe it to them ſo ſore that they brake the chenes of yron y• helde the bridge / and ſo pulled downe the bridge parforce. Than the frenchmen lept on the bridge ſo haſtely that one ouerthrewe an other: for euery man deſyred to wyn the hundred crownes: they within caſt downe barres of yron / peces of tymbre / pottes of lyme / and hote water: ſo that many were ouerthrowen fro the bridge into the water / and into the dykes / and many ſlayne & ſore hurt. Howbeit the bridge was wonne perforce: but it coſt more than it was worthe / for they coude nat for all that wyn the gate: than they drewe a backe to their lodgynges for it was late / than̄e they within yſſued out ▪ and newe made agayne their drawe bridge: ſtronger than̄e euer it was before. The next day ther came to the duke two connyng men maiſters in carpentre / and ſayde ſir if ye woll let vs haue tymbre and workemen / we ſhall make foure ſcaffoldes as hygh or hyer than̄e the walles. The duke cōmaunded that it ſhulde be done: and to get carpenters in the cō
               trey and to gyue them good wagꝭ / ſo theſe four ſcafoldes wer made in four ſhyppes but it was long firſt / and coſt moch or they were finyſſhed than ſuch a ſhulde aſſayle the caſtell in thē were apoynted and entred. And whan they were paſſed halfe the ryuer / they within the caſtell let go four martynetes that they had newely made to reſyſt agaynſt theſe ſcafoldes: theſe four martynettes dyd caſt out ſo great ſtones / and ſo often fell on the ſcafoldes / y• in a ſhort ſpace they were all to broken ſo that they that were within them coulde nat be pauyſſhed by theym: ſo that they were fayne to drawe backe agayne / and or they were agayne at lande / one of the ſcafoldꝭ drowned in y• water / & the mooſt part of thē that were Win it / the which was great damage: for therin were good knyghtes / deſyringe their bodyes to auaūce. Whan the duke ſawe that he coude nat

come to his entent by that meanes he cauſed the other thre ſcafoldes to reſt. Than he coudeſe no way howe he might gette the caſtell / and he had promyſed nat to departe thenſe tyll he had it at his wyll without the kyng his father dyd ſende for hym. Than he ſende the conſtable of France and the erle of Tankernyll to Parys to ye kyng and there they ſhewed hym the ſtate of the ſiege of Aguyllone the kynges mynde was that the duke ſhulde lye there ſtyll tyll he had won them by famyn: ſyth he coude nat haue thē by aſſaut.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande came ouer the ſee agayne to reſcue them in Aguyllone. Cap. C .xxi.
            
               THe kyng of Englande who had harde howe his mē 
               
                  〈◊〉
                conſtrayned in the caſtell of Aguyllon: than he thought to go ouer the ſee 
                  〈◊〉
                to Gaſcoyne with a great
                  〈…〉
                my / ther he made his 
                  〈◊〉
                ſyon and ſent for men all about his real
                  〈…〉
                in other places wher he thought to ſpe
                  〈…〉
                money. In the ſame ſeaſon the lord
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                of Harecourt came into Englande / who was banyſſhed out of Fraūce: he was well receyued with the kynge and retayned to be about hym / and had fayre landꝭ aſſigned hym in Englande to mentayne his degree. Than the kynge cauſed a great nauy of ſhyppes to be redy in the hauyn of Hampton / and cauſed all maner of men of warr to drawe thyder / about ye feeſt of ſaynt John Baptyſt / the yere of our lorde god. M. C C C .xiv. the kynge deꝑted fro the quene / and lefte her in the gydinge of therle of Cane his coſyn. And he ſtablyſſhed the lorde Perſy and the lorde Neuyll to be wardyns of his realme with the archebyſſhoppe of yorke / the byſſhoppe of Lyncolne / and the byſſhopp̄ of Durham: for he neuer voyded his realme / but that he lefte euer ynough at home to kepe and defende the realme yf nede were. Than the kyng rode to Hampton and there taryed for wynde: than he entred into his ſhyppe and the prince of wales with hym / and the lorde Godfray of Harecourt: and all other lordes erles barownes / and knyghtꝭ with all their cōpanyes: they were in nombre a foure thouſande men of armes / and ten thouſande archers / beſyde Iryſſhmen and walſſhmen that folowed the hoſt a fote. ¶ Nowe I ſhall name you certayne of the lordes that went ouer with kyng Edwarde in that iourney. Firſt Edward his eldeſt ſonne prince of wales / who as than̄e was of the age of .xiii. yeres or there about: the erles of Herforde / Northamptone / Arundell / Cornewall / warwyke / Hūtyngdon / Suffolke and Oxenforth. And of barons: the lorde Mortymer / who was after erle of Marche: the lordes: John̄ / Loyes / and Roger of Beauchāpe / and the lorde Reynold Cobham. Of lordes: the lorde of Mombray / Roſe / Lucy / Felton / Braſtone / Myllon / Labey / Maule / Baſſet / Barlett / and wylloughby: with dyuers other lordꝭ. And of bachelars: there was John̄ Chandoys Fytzwaren / Peter and James Audelay / Roger of Uertuall / Bartylmewe of Bries / & Rycharde of Penbruges / with dyuers other that I can nat name: fewe ther were of ſtāgers / ther was the erle Hauyou / ſir Olphas of Guyſtels / and .v. or .vi. other knyghtes of Almayne: and many other that I can nat name. Thꝰ they ſay
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               rth that day in the name of god: they were 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               warde on their way towarde Gaſcone / 
                  〈◊〉
                on the thirde day ther roſe a cōtrary wynde 
                  〈…〉
                them on the marches of Cornewall / & 
                  〈…〉
                lay at ancre .vi. dayes. In that ſpace 
                  〈…〉
                had other counſell by the meanes of 
                  〈◊〉
                Godfray Harcourt / he counſelled the kyng nat to go into Gaſcoyne / but rather to ſet a lande in Normandy: and ſayde to the kyng / ſir the coū
               tre of Normandy is one of the plentyous countreis of the worlde. Sir on ieoꝑdy 
                  〈◊〉
                my heed if ye woll lande ther / ther is none tha
                  •
                ſhall reſyſt you / the people of Normandy haue nat ben vſed to the warr / and all the knyghtes and ſquyers of the contrey ar nowe at the siege before Aguyllon with the duke. And ſir ther ye ſhall fynde great townes that be nat walled / wherby yo
                  •
                men ſhall haue ſuche wynning that they ſhalbe the better therby .xx. yere after: and ſir ye may folowe with your army tyll ye come to Cane in Normandy. Sir I requyre you byleue me in this voyage: the kyng who was as than but
                  •
               in the floure of his youth / deſyring nothyng ſomoche as to haut dedes of armes / inclyned greatly to the ſayeng of the lorde Harecourt / whom he called coſyn: than he cōmaunded the maryners to ſet their courſe to Normādy. And he toke into his ſhyp ye token of thadmyrall therle of warwyke: and ſayd howe he wolde be admyrall for that vyage / & ſo ſayled on before as gouernor of y• nauy / & they had wynde at wyll: than y• kyng

in the yſſe of Cōſtantyne at a port called Hogue ſaynt waſt. Tydinges anone ſpredde 
                  ••
               rode howe thenglyſſhmen were a lande: the to 
                  〈◊〉
                of Conſtantyne ſent worde therof to Maryst
                  •
                kynge Philypp̄ / he had well harde before howe the kynge of Englande was on the ſee with a great army but he wyſt nat what way he wolde drawe other into Normandy / Bretayne / or Gaſcoyne. Aſſone as he knewe that the kyng of Englande was a lande in Normandy / he ſende his conſtable therle of Guyues and the erle of Tankernell / who were but newely come to hym 
                  〈◊〉
                his ſonne / fro the ſiege at Aguyllon to y• towne of Cane, cōmaundyng them to kepe that towne agaynſt the englyſſhmen / they ſayd they wolde do their beſt: they departed fro Parys with a good nombre of men of warre / and dayly there came mo to them by the way. And ſo came to the towne of Cane / where they were receyued with great ioye of men of the towne and of the countrey there about / that were drawen thyder for ſuretie: theſe lordes toke hede for the prouiſyon of the towne the which as than was nat walled The kyng thus was aryued at the port Hogue ſaynt waſt / nere to ſaynt Sauyour the vycoūt the right herytage to the lorde Godfray of Harcourt / who as than was ther with the kynge of Englande.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande rode in thre batayls through Normandy. Cap. C .xxii.
            
               WHan̄e the kynge of Englande arryued in the 
                  •
               ogu
                  •
               ſaynt waſt / the kynge yſſued out of his ſhyppe and the 
                  〈◊〉
                fo
                  ••
                that he ſette on the grounde / he fell ſo rudely that ye blode braſt but of his noſe: the knyghtes that were aboute hym toke hym vp and ſayde / ſir for goddeſſake entre agayne into your ſhyppe and come nat a lande this day: for this is but an y
                  •
               ell ſigne for vs / than the kyng anſwered quickely and ſayd wherfore / this is a good token for me for y• land deſyreth to haue me. Of the whiche auſwere all his men were right ioyfull: ſo that day & nyght the kyng lodged on the ſandes / and in y• meane tyme dyſcharged y• ſhyppes of their horſess and other bagages / there the kyng made two marſhals of his hooſt / the one the lorde Godfray of Harecourt: and the other therle of warwyke / & the erle of Arundell conſtable. And he ordayned that therle of Huntyngdon ſhulde kepe the 
                  ••
               e
                  •
               e of ſhyppes with. C. men of armes / and .iiii. C. archers. And alſo he ordayned thre batayls, one to go on his right hande cloſyng to the ſee ſyde / and the other on his lyfte hande: and the kynge hymſelfe in the myddes / and euery night to lodge all in one felde. Thus they ſette forth as they were ordayned and they yt went by the ſee toke all the ſhyppes that they founde in their wayes and ſo long they went forthe what by ſee & what by lande / that they came to a good port / and to a good towne called Har
                  ••
               ewe / the which incontynent was wonne / for they within gaue by for feare of 
                  •
               ethe: howebeit for all that the towne was robbed / and moche golde and ſyluer there founde and ryche iewels / there was founde ſomoche rycheſſe that the boyes and vyllayns of the hooſt ſette nothyng by good furred gownes they made all the men of the towne to yſſue out and to go into the ſhyppes / bycauſe they wolde nat ſuſtre them to be behynde them / for feare of rebellyng agayne. After the towne of Har
                  ••
               ewe was thus taken and robbed without brennyng / than they ſpredde a brode in the countrey / & dyd what they lyſt: for there was nat to reſyſt them / at laſte they came to a great and a ryche towne called Cherbourgue / the towne they wan and robbed it and brent parte therof: but into the caſtell they coude nat come it was ſo ſtronge and well furnyſſhed with men of warre: than̄e they paſſed forthe and came to Mountbourgue and toke it & robbed and brent it clene. In this maner they brent many other townes in that countrey & 
                  •
               an ſo moch rycheſſe that it was maruell to rekyn it: thanne they came to a great towne well cloſed called Quar
                  •
               tyne / where ther was alſo a ſtrong caſtell and many ſoudyours within to kepe it / than̄e the lordes came out of their ſhyppes and feerſly made aſſaut: the burgeſſes of the towne were in great feare of their lyues / wyues and chyldren: they ſuffred thenglyſſhemen to entre into the towne agaynſt the wyll of all the ſoud yours that were ther: they putte all their goodes to thenglyſſhmens pleaſures they thought that mooſt aduauntage. Whan the ſon dyours within ſawe that they went into the caſtell / the englyſſhmen went into the towne and two dayes to guyder they made ſore aſſautes: ſo that whan they within ſe no ſocoure / they yelded vp their lyues and goodes ſauyed: and ſo

departed / thenglyſſhmen had their pleaſure of that good towne & caſtell. And whan they ſawe they might nat mentayne to kepe it / they ſet fyre therin and brent it: and made the burgeſſes of y• towne to entre into their ſhyppes as they had done with thē of Harflewe Chyerburgue / and Mountbourge / and of other to wnes that they had wonne on the ſee ſyde: all this was done by the batayle that went by the ſee ſyde / and by thē on the ſee togyder. Nowe let vs ſpeke of the kinges batayle: whan he had ſent his firſt batayle a longe by the ſee ſyde as ye haue harde, wherof one of his marſhals therle of Warwyke was captayne and the lorde Cobham with hym: than he made his other marſhall to lede his hooſt on his lyft hande / for he knewe the yſſues and entrees of Normandy better than any other dyd ther the lorde Godfray as marſhall rode forthe with fyue hundred men of armes / and rode of fro the kynges batayle as ſire or ſeuyne leages: in brennynge and exilyng the countrey / the which was plentyfull of euery thynge: the granges full of corne / the houſes full of all ryches / riche burgeſſes / cartes and charyottes / horſe / ſwyne / mottous / and other beeſtes: they toke what thē lyſt and brought into the kynges hooſt / but the ſoudyours made no count to the kynge nor to none of his offycers / of the golde and ſyluer that they dyd gette / they kept that to themſelfe. Thusſir Godfray of Harecourt rode euery day of fro y• kynges hooſt / and for mooſt parte euery nyght reſorted to the kynges felde. The kyng toke his way to ſaynt Lowe in Conſtantyne / but or he came ther he lodged by a ryuer abyding for his men that rode a long by the ſee ſyde / and whan they were come they ſette for the their caryage / and therle of Warwyke / therle of Suffolke / ſir Thomas Hollande / and ſir Raynolde Cobhm̄ and their cōpany rode out on the one ſyde / and waſted and eriled the contrey as the lorde Hare court hadde done: and the kynge euer rode bytwene theſe bataylles / and euery nyght they logedde togyder.
         
         
            ¶Of the great aſſemble that the frenche kynge made to reſyſt the kyng of Englande. Cap. C .xxiii.
            
               THus by thēglyſſhmen was brent / exyled / robbed / waſted and pylled / the good plentyfull countrey of Normandy. Thanne the frenche kyng ſent for the lorde John̄ of Heynalt / who cāe to hym with a great nombre: alſo the kyng ſende for other men of armes / dukes / erles / barownes / knyghtes / and ſquyers: and aſſembled togyder the gretteſt nombre of people that had benſene in France a hundred yere before he ſent for men into ſo ferr countreys that it was longe or they came togyder: wherof the kynge of Englande dyde what hym lyſte in the meane ſeaſon. The french kyng harde well what he dyd: and ſware and ſayd howe they ſhuld neuerretourne agayne vnfought withall: and that ſuche hurtes and damages as they had done ſhulde be derely reuenged / wherfore he had ſent letters to his frendes in thempyre to ſuche as wer fartheſt of: and alſo to the gentyll kyng of Behayne / and to the lorde Charles his ſon / who fro thenſ for the was called kynge of Almaygne he was made kynge by the ayde of his father / and the frenche kyng: and had taken on hym the armes of thempyre. The frenche kyng deſyred them to come to hym withall their powers / to thyntent to fyght with the kynge of Englande / who brent and waſted his countrey. Theſe princes and lordes made them redy with great nombre of men of armes / of almaynes / behaynoes / and luxambroſes / and ſo came to the frenche kyng: alſo kyng Philypp̄ ſend to the duke of Lorayne / who came to ſerue hym with. CCC. ſpeares: alſo ther came therle ſamynes in Samynoes / therle of Salebrug
                  •
                / the erle of Flaunders / the erle Wyllyam of Namure / euery man with a fayre cōpany▪ ye haue harde here before of the order of thenglyſſhmen howe they went in thre batayls: the marſhalles on the right hande and on the lyft / the kyng and the prince of Wales his ſonne in the myddes. They rode but ſmall iourneys: and euery day toke their lodgynges bytwene noone and thre of the clocke / and founde the countrey ſo frutefull that they neded nat to make no ꝓuiſy on for their hooſt but all onely for wyne: and yet they founde reaſonably ſufficyent therof. It was no marueyle though they of the countrey were afrayed: for before that tyme they had neuer ſene men of warre / nor they wyſt nat what warre or batayle ment: they fledde away as ferr as they might here ſpekyng of thenglyſſhmen / and left their houſes well ſtuffed / and graunges full of

corne / they wyſt nat howe to ſaue and kepe it: y• kynge of Englande and the prince had in their batayle a thre thouſand men of armes / and ſixe thouſande archers / and a ten thouſande men 
                  〈◊〉
                fote / beſyde them that rode with the marſhals. Thus as ye haue harde the kyng rodeforth waſtynge and brennyng the countrey without brekyng of his order: he left the cytie of Conſtance and went to a great towne called ſaynt Lowe / a rych towne of drapery / and many riche burgeſſes in that towne / ther were dwellyng an .viii. or nyneſcore burgeſſes crafty men▪ Whanne the kynge came ther he toke his lodgyng without: for he wolde neuer lodge in the towne for feare of fyre / but he ſende his men before and anone y• towne was taken and clene robbed. It was harde to thynke ye great ryches that there was won in clothes ſpecially: clothe wolde ther haue ben ſolde good chepe yf ther had ben any byers / thā the kynge went towarde Cane / the which was a greatter towne and fall of drapery / and other marchauntdyſe: and riche burgeſſes / noble ladyes and damoſels / and fayre churches / and ſpecially two great & riche abbeys / one of the Crynyte / another of ſaynt Stephyn. And on ye one ſyde of the towne one of the fayreſt caſtels of all Normandy / and capitayne therin was Robert of Blargny with thre hundred genowayes / and in the towne was therle of Ewe and of Guynes conſtable of Fraunce / and therle of Tankernyll with a good nombre of men of warr. The king of England rode that day in good order and logedde all his batayls togyder that night / a two leages fro Cane / in a towne with a lytell hauyn called Nauſtreham: and thyder cāe alſo all his nauy of ſhyppes / with therle of Huntyngdone / who was gouernour of them. The cōſtable and other lordes of France that nyght watched well the towne of Cane / and in the mornyng armed them with all them of the towne. Than the conſtable ordayned that none ſhulde yſſue out / but kepe their defences on the walles / gate / bridge / and ryuer / and left the ſubbarbes voyde: bycause they were nat cloſedde / for they thought they ſhulde haue ynough to do to defende the towne bycauſe it was nat cloſedde but with the ryuer / they of the towne ſaybe howe they wolde yſſue out / for they were ſtrong ynough to fyght with the kyng of Englande. Whan the cōllable ſawe their good wyls: he ſayd in the name of god he it / ye ſhall nat fyght without me. Than they yſſued out in good order: and made good face to fyght and to defende theym / and to putte their lyues in aduenture.
         
         
            ¶Of the batayle of Cane / and howe thenglyſſhmen toke to towne Cap. C .xxiiii.
            
               THe ſame day thenglyſſh men roſe erly and apayrelled them redy to go to Cane: the kyng harde noyſe before the ſonne ryſing. And than toke his horſe / and the prince his ſon / with ſir Godfray of Harcourt marſhall and leader of the hooſt / whoſe counſayle the kyng moche folowed. Than they drewe towarde Cane with their batels in good aray / and ſo aproched the good towne of Cane. Whaūe they of the towne / who were redy in the felde ſawe theſe thre batayls commyng in good order / with their baners and ſtāde
                  •
               des wauynge in the wynde: and the archers the which they had nat ben accuſtomed to ſe / they were ſore afrayd / and fledde away toward the towne without any order or good aray / for all that the conſtable coulde do: than the englyſſhmen purſued them egerly. Whan the conſtable and the erle of of Tākernyll ſawe that / they toke a gate at the entry and ſaued thēſelfe and certayne with thē: for the englyſſhmen were entred into the towne ſome of the knyghtes and ſquyers of Fraunce / ſuche as knewe the way to the caſtell went thyder / and the captayne ther receyued them all for the caſtell was large. Thēglyſſhmen in y• chaſelle we many for they toke non to mercy: than the conſtable and the erle of Tankernyll beynge in the lytell towre at the bridge fote / loked a longe the ſtrete & ſawe their men 
                  ••
               ayne without mercy / they douted to fall in their hand. At laſt they ſawe an englyſſhe knyght with one eye called 
                  〈◊〉
                Thom̄s Holand and afyue or ſixe other knyghtes with hym / they knewe thē / for they had ſene them before in Pruce / in Grenade / and in other vyages: than they called to ſir Thomas & sayd howe they wold yelde thēſelfe priſoners. Than ſir Thomas came thyder with his cōpany and mounted vp into the gate / and there founde the ſayd lordes with .xxv. knyghts with them / who yelded theym to ſir Thomas and he toke thēfor his priſoners and left company to kepe theym / and than moūted agayne on his horſe and rode into the ſtreates / and ſaued many lyues / of lavyes / damoſels / and cloyſterers fro defoylyng / for the ſoudyers were without mercy. It fell ſo well the ſame ſeaſon for thenglyſſhmen: that the

               
                  •••
               er whiche was able to bere ſhyppes at that 
                  〈…〉
               e was ſo lowe that men went in and out beſyde the bridge they of the towne were entred into their houſes: and caſt downe into the ſtrete ſtones tymbre and 
                  •
               ron: and ſlewe and hurte mo than fyue hundred englyſſhmen / wherwith the ky
                  •
               ge was ſore dyſpleaſed. At night whan he hard therof / he cōmaunded that the next day all ſhulde be putte to the ſwerde and the towne brent but than ſir Godfray of Harecourt ſayd: dere ſir for goddeſſake aſſ wage ſomwhat your courage / and let it ſu
                  •
               fice you that ye haue done ye haue yet a great voyage to do orye come before Calys / whyderye purpoſe to go: and ſir in this towne there is moche people who wyll defende their houſes / and it woll coſt many of yor men their lyues or ye haue all at yor wyll wherby parauēture ye ſhall nat kepe your purpoſe to Calys / the which ſhulde redowne to your rech. Sir ſaue your people for ye ſhall haue nede of them or this moneth paſſe: for I thynke verely your aduerſary kyng Philypp̄ woll mete with you to fight / and ye ſhall fynde many ſtrayt paſſages and rencoūters. Wherfore your men and ye had mo ſhall ſtande you in gode ſtede: and ſir without any further ſleynge ye ſhall be lorde of this towne / men and women woll putte all that they haue to your pleaſur. Than the kyng ſayd ſir Godfray you ar our marſhall▪ ordayne euery thyng as ye woll: than ſir Godfray with his baner rode fro ſtrete to ſtrete and cōmaūded in the kynges name / non to be ſo hardy to put fyre in any houſe / to ſlee any perſone / nor to vyolate any woman. Whan they of the towne hard that crye / they receyued the englyſſhmen into their houſes and made theym good chere: and ſome opyned their coffers and badde them take what them lyſt / ſo they might be aſſured of ther lyues howe be it ther were done in the towne many yuell dedes murdrers and roberyes. Thus the englyſſhmen were lordes of the towne thre dayes ano wanne great richeſſe / the which they ſent by ba
                  •
               keſſe and barges to ſaynt Sauyoure / by the ryuer of Auſtr
                  •
               hen a two leagꝭ theus: wher as all their nauy lay / than the kyng ſende therle of 
                  •
               unty
                  •
               gdon with two hundred men of armes / and foure hundred archers with his nauy and priſoners: and richeſſe that they had gotte / backe agayne into Englande. And the kynge bought of ſir Thomas Hallande▪ the conſtable of Fraunce / and therle of Tankernyll: and payed for them twentie thouſande nobles.
         
         
            ¶Howe ſir Godfray of Harecourte fought with thē of Amyens before Parys. Cap. C .xxv.
            
               THus the kyng of England ordred his beſyneſſe beynge in the towne of Cane / and ſende into England his nauy of ſhyppes charged 
                  〈◊〉
                clothes / iewelles / veſſels of golde & ſyluer / and of other rycheſſe: and of priſoners mo than .lx. knightes and thre hundred burgeſſes. Than he departed fro the towne of Cane / and rode in the ſame order as he dyde before: brennynge and exilynge the countrey / and toke the way to Ewreus and ſo paſt by it. And fro thens they rode to a great towne called Louyets / it was the chiefe towne of all Normandy of drapery / riches and full of marchandyſe: thēglyſſhmen ſoone entred therin for as than it was nat cloſed / it was ouer ron ſpoyled / and robbed without mercy / there was won great richeſſe. Thaūe they entred into the countrey of Ewreus / and brent and pylled all ye countrey / except the good townes cloſed and caſtels▪ to the which the kynge made none aſſaut / bycauſe of the ſparyng of his people and his artillery. On the ryuer of Sane nere to Rone: there was the exle of Harecourt / brother to ſir Godfray of Harecourt / but he was on the frenche partie / and therle of Dr
                  •
               ux with hym: with a good nombre of men of warre: but thenglyſſhmen left Roon and went to Gyſors / where was a ſtrong caſtell / they brent the towne / and than they brent Uernon / and all the countrey about Roon / and Pont de Lache / and came to Naū
               tes / and to Meulence / and waſted all the countrey about: and paſſed by the ſtronge caſtell of Robeboyes / and in euery place a long the ryuer of Sane / they founde the briges broken. At laſt they came to Poyſſey and founde the brige broken but the arches and 
                  •
               oyſtes lay in the ryuer / the kyng lay there a .v. dayes. In the mean ſeaſon the brige was made to paſſe the hooſt Wtout paryll: thenglyſſhe marſhals ranne a brode iuſt to Parys / and brent ſaynt Germayne in Lay / and Mountioy / and ſaynt Clowde / and pety Bolayne by Parys / and the quenes Bourge: they of Parys were nat well aſſured of theym ſelfe / for it was nat as than cloſed. Than kyng Philyppe remoued to ſaynt Denyſe / and or he went cauſed all y• penteſſys in Parys to be pulled

downe / and at ſaynt Deuyſe were redy c
                  ••
                / the kynge of Behayne / the lorde John̄ of Heynalt▪ the duke of Lorayne / therle of Flaunder
                  ••
                / therle of Bloyes / and many other great lordes and knyghtes: redy to ſerue the frenche kynge. Whan the people of Parys ſawe their kyng 
                  •
               epart / they came to hym and kn
                  •
               lyd downe and ſayd: a ſir and noble kyng what woll ye do leue thus this noble cytie of Parys / the kynge ſay
                  •
                my good people doute ye nat / the englyſſhmen woll aproche you no nerer than they be / why ſo ſir ꝙ they / they be within theſe two leages: and aſſone as they knowe of your departynge / they woll come and aſſayle vs / and we b
                  ••
               at able to defende them: ſir tary here ſtyll and helpe to defende your gode cite of Parys. Speke no more ꝙ the kynge: for I woll go to ſaynt Denyſe to my men of warre / for I woll encountre the englyſſhmen / and fight againſt them what ſoeuer fall therof / they kyng of Englande was at 
                  •
               uiſſoy / and lay in the no
                  •
               ery there / and kept ther the feeſt of our lady in Auguſt / and ſatte in h
                  ••
                robes of ſcarlet furred with army
                  •
               s: and after that feeſt he went forth in order as they were he fore. The lorde Godfray of Harecourt rode out on the one ſyde with fyue hūdred men of arme
                  •
                and .xiii. hundred archers: and by aduēture he encoūtred a great nombre of burgeſſes of Amyenſe a horſebacke / who were ryding by the kyuges cōmaundement to Parys / they were quyckely aſſayled / and they defended themſelfe valyantly: for they were a great nombre and well armed / there were foure knyghtes of Amyenſe their captayns. This ſkirmyſſhe dur
                  ••
                longe: at the firſt metyng many were ouerthrowen on bothe partes / but finally the burge
                  ••
               es were taken and nye all ſlayne / and thenglyſſhmen to 
                  〈◊〉
                all their caryages and harnes. They were well ſtuffed: for they were goyng to the french kyng well apoynted / bycauſe they had nat ſ
                  •
               ne hym a great ſeaſon before: ther were ſlayne in y• felde a. 
                  •
               ii. hundred / than the kynge of Englande entred into the contrey of Beauuoſy
                  •
                / 
                  •
               rennynge and 
                  ••
               yling the playne countrey: and lodged at a fayre abbey and a ryche called ſayu
                  •
                Meſſene nere to Beaways / ther the king taryed a night and in the mornyng depted. And whan he was on his way he loked behynde him: and ſa
                  •
               e the abbey a fyre / he cauſed incontynent .xx. of them to be hanged that ſet the fyre ther / for he had cō
               maunded before on payne of dethe / none to v
                  •
               
               late any church / nor to bren any abbey: than the kyng paſt by the cite of Beaways / without any aſſaut gyueng: for bycauſe he wolde nat trouble his peple / nor walt his artillery. And ſo t
                  •••
                day he toke his logyng bety
                  〈…〉
                a lytell 
                  〈◊〉
                called Nully: the two marſ
                  〈…〉
                came ſo nere to Beaways / that they made aſſaut and ſkirmyſh at the barryers in thre places▪ the whiche aſſaut e
                  ••
               ured a long ſpace: but y• towne within was ſo well defended by the meanes of the byſſhopp̄ / who was ther within / that finally thenglyſſhemen departed and brent clene harde to the gatꝭ / all the ſubbarbes. And than at night they came into the kynges felde / the next day the kyng depted brennyng and waſtyng all before hym & at night lodged in a good vyllage called Gran
                  •
               uiller the next day the kyng paſt by Argies / ther was none to defende the caſtell / wherfore it was ſone taken and brent. Than they went forth dyſtroyeng the countrey all about and ſo came to the caſtell of Poys where ther was a good towne & two caſtels: ther was no body in them but two fayre damoſels doughters to ye lorde of Poys they were ſoue taken / and had ben vyolated and two englyſſhe knyghtꝭ had nat ben / ſir Johan ¶ hādos and ſir Baſſet: they defended thē and brought them to the kyng / who for his honour made them gode chere and demaunded 
                  〈◊〉
                them whyther they wolde fayneſt go / 
                  〈◊◊〉
                to Corbe: and the kynge cauſed them 
                  〈◊〉
                ught thyder without paryll / that nyght y• kyng lodged in the towne of Poys: they of the towne and of the caſtels ſpake that nyght with y• marſhals of thooſt / to ſaue them and their towne 
                  〈◊〉
                brennyng / and they to pay a certayne ſomme of 
                  ••
               orey
                  •
               s / the nexte day aſſoue as the hooſt was departed. This was graunted them▪ and in the mornyng the kyng departed with all his hooſt / except a certayne that were left there to receyue the money that they of the towne had promyſed to pay. Whan they of the towne ſawe thooſt 
                  •
               epart and but a fewe left behynd / than they ſay
                  •
                they wolde pay neuer a peny / and ſo 
                  •
               a
                  ••
               e out and ſet on thenglyſſhmen / who defended themſelfe aſwell as they might: and ſende after thoſt for ſocoure. Whan ſir Reynolde Coh
                  •
               am / and ſir Thomas Hollande / who had the rule of the reregarde harde therof / they retourned and cryed treaſon treaſon: and ſo came agayne to Poys warde / and founde their companyons ſtyll fightyng with them of the towne. Than anoue they of the towne were nigh
                  •
                all ſlayne and the towne brent / and the two caſtels beaten downe. Than they retourned to the kynges hooſt / who was as than at Araynes and there 
                  •
               odged / and had commaūded all maner of men on payne of dethe / to do no hurte to no towne of Arſyn / 
                  •
               o
                  •
               
               
there the kyng was mynded to lye a day or two to take aduy
                  •
               e howe he myght paſſe the ryuer of Some for it was neceſſarie for hym to paſſe the ry
                  •
               er / as yeſhall here after.
         
         
            ¶ How the french kyng folowed the kyng of Englande in Beauuoyſ
                  •
               oys. Cap. C .xxvi.
            
               NOwe lette vs ſpeke of kyng Philyppe who was at ſaynt Denyſe / and his people aboute hym / and day
                  •
               y encreaſed. 
                  •
               haſie on a day he departed and rode ſo longe that he came to Copp
                  •
               gny du 
                  •
               uyſe / a thre leages fro Amyenſe▪ & there he taryed. The kyng of Englande beyng at Araynes wyſt nat where for to paſſe the ryuer of Some / the which was large and depe / and all briges were broken and the paſſages well kept: than at the kynges cōmaūdement his two marſhals with. M. men of armes / and two. M. arthers went a long y• ryuer to fynde ſome paſſag / and paſſed by Long pre / & came to the bridge of Atheny / the which was well kept with a gret nō bre of knyghtes & ſquyers / and men of the countrey: the englyſſhmen a lyghted a fote / and aſſayled the frenchmen from the mornynge tyll it was noone: but the bridge was ſo well fortifyed and defended / that the englyſſhmen departed without wynning of any thynge: than they went to a great to wne called Fountayns on the 
                  ••
               uer of Somme / the which was clene robbe
                  •
                and brent for it was nat cloſed. Thā they went to another towne called Longe in Ponthieu / they coulde nat wynne the bridge it was ſo well kept and defended / than they deꝑted and went to 
                  •
               yqueny / and founde the towne / the bridge / and the caſtell ſo well fortifyed▪ that it was na
                  •
                lykely to paſſe there / the frenche kyng hadde ſo well defended the paſſages: to thentent that the kyng of Englande ſhulde nat paſſe the ryuer of Somme to fight with hym at his aduauntage or els to famyſſhe hym there. Whan̄e theſe two marſhals had aſſayed in all places to fynde paſſage / and coude fynde none: they retourned agayne to the king and ſhewed howe they coude fynde no paſſage in no place / the ſame night the frenche kynge came to Amyenſe / with mo than a hundred. M. men. The kynge of Englande was right penſyfe / and the next morning harde maſſe before the ſonne ryſinge / and than dy
                  ••
               oged: and euery man folowed the marſhals baners / and ſo rode in the countrey of Uimewe / aprochynge to the good towne of Abuyle / and foūde a towne therby whervnto was come moche people of the countrey / in truſt of a lytell defence that was there / but thenglyſſhmen anone wanne it / and all they that were within ſlayne and many taken / of the towne and of the countrey. The kynge toke his lodgynge in a great hoſpytall that was there / the ſame day the frenche kynge departed fro Amyenſe / and came to Araynes about noone / and thēglyſſhmen were departed thenſe in the mornyng / the frenchmen founde there great prouiſyon that the englyſſhmen had left behynde them / bycauſe they departed in haſt: there they founde fleſſhe redy on the broches / brede and paſtyes in the ouyns / wyne in tonnes and barelles / and the tabuls redy layed. There the frenche kyng lodged and taryed for his lordes / that nyght the kyng of England was lodged at Oyſement: at nyght whan̄e the two marſhalles were retourned / who had that day ouer ronne the countrey to the gates of Abuyle / and to ſaynt Ualery / & made a greatſkirmyſſhe there. Than the kynge aſſembled togyder his counſayle / and made to be brought before hym certayne priſoners / of the countrey of Ponthieu / and of Uymen: the kyng right curteſly demaunded of theym / if ther were any among them that knewe any paſſage byneth Abuyle / that he and his hooſt might paſſe ouer the ryuer of Somme: yf he woldeſhewe hym therof he ſhulde be quyte of his raunſome / and .xx. 
                  ••
               his company for his loue: ther was a varle
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
               ed Gobyn a Grace / who ſtept forthe & ſayde to the kyng: ſir I promyſe you on the ieopardy of my heed I ſhall bringe you to ſuche a place / where as ye and all your hooſt ſhall paſſe the ryuer of Some without paryll / there be certayne places in the paſſage that ye ſhall paſſe .xii. men a front two tymes bytwene day and nyght / ye ſhall nat go in the water to the knees / but whan the fludde cometh the ryuer than waxeth ſo gret 
                  〈◊〉
                no man can paſſe / but whan the 
                  ••
               udde is gon the whiche is two tymes bytwene day & nyght / than the ryuer is ſo lowe that it may be paſſed without danger / bothe a horſebacke and a fote. The paſſage is harde in the botom with whyte ſtones / ſo that all your caryage may go ſurely: therfore ye paſſage is called Blanch taque / and ye make redy to deꝑte be tymes / ye may be ther
               
by the ſonne ryſinge / the kynge ſay
                  ••
                if this be trewe that ye ſay I quytethe thy raunſome and all thy company / and moreouer ſhall g
                  •
               ue the a hundred nobles / than the kynge commaunded euery man to be re
                  •
               y at the ſounde of the trumpette to departe.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batayle of Blanch 
                  ••
               que by twene the kyng of Englande and ſi
                  •
                Godmar du Fay. Cap. C .xxvii.
            
               THe kyng of Englande ſlepte nat moche that nyght / for atte mydnight he a roſe & ſo wne
                  •
                his trumpette: tha
                  •
                incontynent they made redy caryages and all thynges. And atte the brekynge of the day they departed fro the towne of Oyſement / and rode after the guydinge of Go
                  •
               yn a Grace ſo that they came by the ſonne ryſing to Blanch Taque / but as than the flu
                  •
               de was vpp̄ ſo that they might nat paſſe: ſo the kynge taryed there tyll it was prime / than the ebbe came. The frenche kyng had his currours in the countrey who brought hym worde of the 
                  •
               emeanoure of the englyſſhmen / than he thought to cloſe the kyng of Englande bytwene Abuyle and the ryuer of Some / & ſo to fyght with hym at his pleaſure. And whan he was at Amyēſe: he had ordayned a great barowne of Normandy / called ſir God mardu Fay to go and kepe the paſſage of Blā
               che Taque / where the englyſſhmen muſt pa
                  〈…〉
                or els in none other place: he had with hym. M. men of armes / and ſixe thouſand a 
                  •
               ote with the genowayes / ſoo they went by ſaynt Rey
                  •
               g
                  •
               yer in Ponthieu / and fro thens to Crotay / wher as the paſſage lay. And alſo he had with hym a great nombre of men of the countrey / and alſo a great nombre of theym of Mutterell / ſo that they were a twelfe thouſand men / one and other whan the englyſſhe hooſt was come thyder / ſir Godmardu Fay araunged all his company to defende the paſſage / the kyng of England lette nat for all that / but whan̄e the 
                  •
               ludde was gone he cōmaunded his marſhals to entre into ye water in the name of god and ſaynt George: than they that were hardy and coragyous entre
                  •
                on bothe parties / and many a man reuerſed / ther were ſome of the frēchmen of Arthoyes and Pycardy / that were as gladde to iuſte in the water / as on the drie lande. The frenchemen defended ſo well the paſſage at the yſſuing out of the water / that they had moche to do: the genowayes dyde them great trouble with their c
                  •
               oſ
                  •
               owes / on thother ſyde the archers of Englande ſhotte ſo holly togyder / that he frenchmen were fayne to gyue place to the englyſſhmen. There was a ſore batayle and many a noble feate of armes done on both ſydes / finally thenglyſſhmen paſſed ouer / and aſſembled togyder in the felde: the kynge and the prince paſſed and all the lordes / than the frenchmen kept none array but departed he that myght beſt. Whan ſir Godmar ſawe that dyſcon
                  •
               itu
                  •
               e: he fledde and ſaued hymſelfe ſome 
                  ••
               edde to Abuyle / and ſome to ſaynt Raygnyer / they that were there a fote coude nat 
                  ••
               ce ſo that ther were ſlayne a great nombre of them of Abuyle / Muttrell / Arras / and of ſaynt Raygnier / the chaſe endured more than a great leag And as yet all the englyſſhmen were nat paſſed the ryuer / and certayne currours of the kyng of Behayne / & of ſir John̄ of Heynaultꝭ / came on thē that were behynd / and toke certayn horſes & caryages / and ſlewe dyuers or they coude take the paſſage. The french kyng the ſame mornynge was departed fro Araynes / truſtyng to haue founde thenglyſſhmen bytwene hym and the ryuer of Some / but whan he harde howe that ſir Godmar du Fay and his company were 
                  •
               yscō
               fyted / he taryed in the felde and demaunded of his marſhals what was beſt to do / they ſayd ſir ye can nat paſſe the ryuer but at the brige of Abuyll / for the ſludde is come in at Blanche taque than he retourned and lodged at Abuyle. The kyng of Englande whan he was paſt the ryuer he thanked god: and ſo rode forthe in lyke maner as he dyde before: than he called Gobyn a Grace and dyd quyte hym his ranſome and all his company and gaue hym a hundred nobles and a good horſe. And ſo the kynge rode forthe fayre and eaſely / and thought to haue lodged in a great town called Norell / but whan he knewe that the towne 
                  •
               ertayned to the coūteſſe of Dā
               merle / ſuſter to ye lorde Robert of Arthoys: the kyng aſſured the towne and countrey aſmoche as pertayned to her and ſo went forthe: and his marſhalles rode to Crotay on the ſeeſyde / and brent the towne and founde in the hauyn many ſhippes and barkꝭ charged with wynes of Pō
               thieu pertayning to the marchauntes of 
                  •
               aynton / and of Rochell: they brought the beſt therof to ye kynges hoſt. Than one of the marſhals 
                  •
               o
                  •
               e to the gates of Abuyle / & fro thens to ſaynt

Reygnier / and after to the towne of Rueſaynt Eſperyte. This was on a friday: and bothe batayls of the marſhals retourned to the kynges hooſt about noone / and ſo lodged all toguyder nere to Creſſy in Pouthieu: the kynge of Englande was well enfourmed / howe the frenche kyng folowed after hym to fight. Than he ſaid to his cōpany: lette vs take here ſome plotte of groūde for we wyll go no farther tylle we haue ſene our ennemyes / I haue good cauſe here to abyde them / for I am on the ryght herytage of the quene my mother / the which lande was gyuen a
                  •
               her maryage. I woll chalenge it of myne aduerſary Philyppe of Ualoys: and bycauſe that he had nat the eyght part in nombre of men as the frenche kyng had / therfore he commaunded his marſhals to choſe a plotte of grounde ſom what for his aduauntage: and ſo they dyde and thyder the kynge and his hooſt went / than he ſende his currours to Abuyle to ſe if the frenche kyng drewe that day into the felde or natte. They went forthe and retourned agayne: and ſayde howe they coude ſe none aparence of his commyng / than euery man toke their lodgyng for that day / and to be redy in the mornynge at the ſound of the trūpet in the ſame place. Thus friday the frenche kynge taryed ſtyll in Abuyle abyding for his cōpany / and ſende his two marſhals to ryde out to ſe the dealyng of thenglyſſhmen / and at nyght they retourned & ſayde howe the englyſſhmen were lodged in the feldes ▪ that nyght the frenche kyng made a ſupper to all the chefe lordes that were ther with hym / and after ſupper / the kyng deſyred them to be frendes 
                  ••
               h to other: the kyng loked for the erle of Sauoy / who ſhulde come to hym with a thouſande ſpeares / for he had receyued wages for a thre monethes of them at Troy in Campaigne.
         
         
            ¶Of the order of the englyſſhmen at Creſſy / and howe they made thre batayls a fote. Cap. C .xxviii.
            
               ON the friday as I ſayd before: the kyng of Englande lay in ye feldes / for the contrey was plētyfull of wynes and other vytayle / & if nede had ben they had prouiſyon folowyng in cartꝭ and other caryages. That night the kyng made a ſupper to all his chefe lordes of his hooſt / & made them gode chere / and whan they were all departed to take their reſt. Than the kynge entred into his oratorie: and kneled downe before ye auter prayeng god deuoutly / that if he fought the next day that he might achyue the iourney to his honour than aboute mydnight he layde hym downe to reſt / and in the mornynge he roſe be tymes and harde maſſe ▪ and the prince his ſonne with hym and the moſte part of his compa
                  ••
                were confeſſed and houſeled. And after the 
                  〈…〉
               aſſe ſayde: he commaūded euery man to be armed & to drawe to the felde / to the ſame place before apoynted: than the kyng cauſed a parke to be made by the wodeſyde / behynde his hooſt: and ther was ſet all cartes and caryages / and within the parke were all their horſes for euery man was a fote: And into this parke there was but one entre / than he ordayned thre batayls. In the firſt was the yonge prince of Wales / with hym the erle of Warwyke and Canforde / the lorde Godfray of Harecourt / ſir Reynolde Cobham / ſir Thom̄s Holande / ye lorde Stafforde / the lorde of Ma
                  •
               
               uy / the lorde Dalaware / ſir John̄ Chandos / ſir Bartylmewe de Bomes / ſir Robert Neuyll / ye lorde Thomas Clyfforde / the lorde Bourchier / the lorde de la Tumyer / & dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers that I can nat name: they wer an .viii. hundred men of armes / and two thouſande archers / and a thouſande of other with ye walſſhmen: euery lorde drue to the felde apoynted / vnder his owne baner and penone. In the ſecond batayle was therle of Northampton / the erle of A
                  ••
               dell / the lorde Roſſe / the lorde Lygo / the lorde Wylough by / the lord Baſſet / the lorde of ſaynt Aubyne / ſir Loyes Tueton / the lorde of Myleton / the lorde de la Sell / and dyuers other about an eight hundred men of armes / and twelfhundred archers. The thirde batayle had the kyng: he had ſeuyn hundred men of armes / and two thouſande archers: than the kyng lept on a hobby with a whyte rodde in his hand / one of his marſhals on the one hande / and the other on the other hand: he rode fro reuke to reuke deſyringe euery man to take hede that day to his right and honour. He ſpake it ſo ſwetely & with ſo good coūtenance and mery chere / that all ſuche as were dyſconfited toke courage in the ſayeng and heryng of him. And whan he had thus viſyted all his batayls / it was than nyne of the day: than he cauſed euery man to eate & drinke a lytell / and ſo they dyde at their leaſer. And afterwarde they ordred agayne their bataylles / than euery man lay downe on the yerth and by

hym his ſalet and bowe / to be the more 
                  〈◊〉
                he
                  •
                whan their ennemyes ſhulde come.
         
         
            ¶Thorder of the frenchmen at Creſſy / and howe they behelde the demeanour of thenglyſſhmen. Cap. C .xxix.
            
               THis ſaturday the frenche kynge roſe 
                  ••
               tymes and hard maſſe in Abuyle / in his lodgyng in the abbey of ſaynt Peter: and he departed after the ſome ryſing. whan he was out of the towne two leages aproc
                  •
               yng towarde his ennemys / ſome of his lordes ſayd to hym: Sir it were good yt ye ordred yor batayls / and let all your fote men paſſe ſom what on before / that they be nat troubled with the horſemen. Than ye kyng ſent .iiii. knyghtꝭ / the Moyne Baſtell the lorde of Noyers / the lorde of Beauie we / and the lorde 
                  •
               am begny to ryde to a viewe thenglyſſhe hoſte: and ſo they rode ſo nere that they might well ſe part of their dealyng. Thenglyſſhmen sawe the well and knewe well howe they were come thyder to a vieu them / they let them alone: and made no countena
                  〈…〉
               warde thē and let them retourne as they came. And whan the frenche kyng ſawe 
                  〈…〉
               oure knyghtes retourne agayne / he tary
               
                  ••••
               ll they came to hym: and ſayd ſirs what tidynges / theſe four knyghtes eche of them loked on other / for ther was none wolde ſpeke before his cōpanyon: finally the kyng ſayd to Moyne who pertayned to the kyng of Behaygne / and had done in his dayes ſomoch that he was reputed for one of the valyanteſt knightꝭ of the worlde / ſir ſpeke you. Than he ſayd: ſir I ſhall ſpekeſyth it pleaſeth you vnder ye correction of my felawes / ſir we haue ryden & ſene the behauyng of your ennemyes / knowe ye for trouth they are reſted in thre batayls / abidyng for you: Sir I woll counſell you as for my part ſauynge your dyſpleaſure / that you and all your cōpany reſt here and lodg for this nyght / for or they that be behynde of your 
                  •
               ōpany become hyther / and or your batayls beſet in gode order it wyll be very late / and your people be wery and out of array: and ye ſhall fynde your ennemis freſſhe and redy to receyue you / erly in the mornynge ye may order your bataylles at more leaſer and aduyſe your ennemis at more delyberacyon / and to regarde well what way ye woll aſſayle theym: for ſir ſurely they woll abyde you. Than the kynge cōmaunded that it ſhuld be ſo done / than his .ii. marſhals one rode before another behynde / ſayeng to euery baner / tary and abyde here in the name of god and ſaynt Denys / they that were formaſt taryed / but they that were behynde wolde nat tary but rode forthe / and ſayd howe they wold in no wyſe abyde tyll they were as ferr forward as y• formaſt. And whan they before ſawe them come on behynde / than they rode forward agayne ſo that the kyng nor his marſhals coude nat rule thē / ſo they rode without order or good aray tyll they came in ſight of their ennemyes. And aſſone as the formaſt ſawe them / they reculed than abacke 
                  •
               out good aray: wherof they behynde had maruell and were a baſſhed / and thought that the formaſt company had ben fightynge / than they might haue had leaſer & rome to haue gone forwarde if they had lyſt. Some went forthe and ſome abode ſtyll: the cōmons of whom all the wayes bytwene Abuyle and Creſſy were full. Whā they ſawe that they were 
                  •
               ere to their ennemies / they toke their ſwerdes and cryed downe with them let vs 
                  ••
               e them all / ther was no man though he were preſent at the iourney that coude ymagen or ſhewe ye trouth of the yuell order that was among the frenche partie / and yet they were a meruelous great nombre. That I write in this boke I lerned it ſpecially of the engyſſhmen / who well behelde their dealyng: and alſo certayne knyghtes of ſir Johan of Heynaultes / who was alwayes about kyng Philyppe ſhewed me as they knewe.
         
         
            ¶Of the batayle of Creſſy bytwene the kyng of England and the frenche kyng. Cap. C .xxx.
            
               THēglyſſhmen who were in thre batayls lyeng on the grounde to reſt them / aſſone as they ſaw the frenchmen aproche: they roſe vpon their fete fayre and eaſely without and haſt / and aranged their batayls. The firſt which was the princes batell: the archers there ſtode in maner of a herſe / and the men of armes in the botome of the batayle. Therle of Northā
               pton & therle of Arundell with the ſecond batell were on a wyng in good order / redy to confort the princes batayle if nede were. The lordꝭ and knyghtꝭ of France cāenat to the aſſemble togyder

in good order / for ſome cāe before and ſome came after in ſuch haſt and yuell order / yt one of thē dyd trouble another. Whan the french kyng ſawe the englyſſhmen his blode chaunged and ſayde to his marſhals make the genowayes go on before and begynne the batayle in the name of god and ſaynt Denyſe: ther were of the genowayes troſbowes about a fiftene thouſand but they were ſo wery of goyng a fote that day a ſix leages armed with their croſbowes / that they ſayde to their conſtables we be nat well ordred to fyght this day for we be nat in the caſe to do any great dede of armes / we haue more nede of reſt. Theſe wordes came to the erle of Alanſon who ſayd a man is well at eaſe to be charged wt ſuche a ſorte of raſcalles / to be faynt and fayle nowe at mooſt nede. Alſo the ſame ſeaſon there fell a great rayne and a clyps with a terryble thonder / and before the rayne ther came fleyng ouer bothe batayls a great nombre of crowes / for feare of the tempeſt cōmynge. Than anone the eyre beganne to waxe clere / and the ſonne to ſhyne fayre and bright: the which was right in the frenchmens eyen / and on the englyſſhmens backes. Whan the genowayes were aſſembled toguyder and beganne to aproche / they made a great leape and crye to abaſſhe thenglyſſhmen / but they ſtode ſtyll and ſtyredde nat for all that / than̄e the genowayes agayne the ſeconde tyme made a nother leape and a fell crye / and ſtepped forwarde a lytell / and thenglyſſhmen remeued nat one fote
                  •
                thirdly agayne they leapt and cryed and went forthe tyll they came within ſhotte: than̄e they ſhotte feerſly with their croſbowes. Than thenglyſſhe archers ſtept forthe one paſe and lett fly their arowes ſo holly and ſo thycke that 
                  〈…〉
               ſemed ſnowe / whan the genowayes felte the arowes perſynge through heedes / armes / and breſtes: many of them caſt downe their cros
                  •
               ow
                  •
               s and dyde cutte their ſtrynges / and retourned dyſconfited. Whan the frenche kynge ſawe them flye away: he ſayd ſlee theſe raſcals for they ſhall lette and trouble vs without reaſon than ye ſhulde haue ſene the men of armes daſſhe in among them / and kylled a great nombre of them. And euer ſtyll the englyſſhmen ſhot where as they ſawe thyckeſt preace: the ſharpe arowes ranne into the men of armes / and into their horſes: and many fell horſe and men amō
               ge the genowayes: and whan they were downe they coude nat relyue agayne the preace was ſo thycke / that one ouerthrewe a nother. And alſo amonge the englyſſhemen there were certayne 
                  •
               aſcalles that went a fote / with great knyues: and they went in among the men of armes / and ſlewe and murdredde many as they lay on the grounde: bothe erles / barownes / knyghtꝭ / and ſquyers: wherof the kyng of Englande was after dyſpleaſed / for he had rather they had bene taken priſoners. The valyant kyng of Behaygne called Charles of Luzenbourge / ſonne to the noble emperour Henry of Luzenbourge / for all that he was nyghe blynde. Whan he vnderſtode the order of the batayle / he ſayde to them about hym / where is the lorde Charles my ſon: his men ſayde ſir we can nat tell / we thynke he be fightynge / than he ſayde ſirs ye are my men / my companyons / and frendes in this iourney. I requyre you bring me ſo farre forwarde / that I may ſtryke one ſtroke with my ſwerde / they ſayde they wolde do his commaundement: and to the intent that they ſhulde nat leſe hym in the preaſe / they tyed all their raynes of their bridelles eche to other and ſette the kynge before to acomplyſſhe his deſyre / and ſo thei went on their ennemyes: the lorde Charles of Behaygne his ſonne / who wrote hymſelfe kyng of Behaygne and bare the armes. He came in good order to the batayle: but whaſie he ſawe that the matter wente a wrie on their partie / he departed I can nat tell you whiche waye: the kynge his father was ſo farre forewarde / that he ſtrake a ſtroke with his ſwerde / ye and mo than foure: and fought valyantly. And ſo dyde his company / and they aduētured themſelfe ſo forwarde / that they were ther all ſlayne / and the next day they were founde in the place about the kyng / and all their horſes tyed eche to other. The erle of Alanſone came to the batayle right ordynatly and fought with thenglyſſhmen / and the erle of Flaunders alſo on his parte / theſe two lordes with their cō
               panyes cooſted the englyſſhe archers and came to the princes batayle and there fought valyantly longe. The frenche kynge wolde fayne haue come thyder whanne he ſawe their baners / but there was a great hedge of archers before hym. The ſame day the frenche kynge hadde gyuen a great blacke courſer to ſir Johan of Heynault and he made the lorde Johan of Fuſſels to ryde on hym and to bere his banerre / the ſame horſe tooke the bridell in the tethe / and brought hym through all the currours of thēglyſſhmen / and as he wolde haue retourned agayne he fell in a great dyke and was ſore hurt / and had ben ther deed & his page had nat ben / who folowed hym through all the batayls / and ſawe wher his maiſter lay in the dyke / and had none other lette but for his horſe / for thenglyſſhmen wolde nat yſſue

out of their batayle for takyng of any priſoner / than̄e the page a lyghted and relyued his maiſter / than he went nat backe agayn ye ſame way that they came: there was to many in his way. This batayle bytwene Broy / and Crelly this ſaturday was ryght cruell and fell / and many a feat of armes done that came nat to my knowlege: in the night dyuerſe knyghtes and ſquyers loſt their maiſters / and ſomtyme came on thenglyſſhmen / who receyued theym in ſuche wyſe / that they were euer nighe ſlayne / for there was none taken to mercy nor to raunſome▪ for ſo the englyſſhmen were determyned in the mornyng the day of the batayle certayne frenchemen and almaygnes / perforce opyned the archers of the princes batayle / and came and fought with the men of armeshande to hande. Than the ſeconde batayle of thenglyſſhmen came to ſocour the princes batayle the whiche was tyme / for they had as than moche a do / and they with ye prince ſent a meſſanger to the kynge who was on a lytell wyndmyll hyll: than the knyght ſayd to the kyng / sir therle of Warwyke / and therle of Cā
               fort / ſir Reynolde Cobham / and other ſuche as be about the prince your ſonne ar feerlly fought with all and areſore handled: wherfore they de ſyre you that you and your batayle wolle come and ayde them / for if the frenchmen encreaſe as they dout they woll / your ſonne and they ſhall haue moche a do. Than the kynge ſayde is my ſonne deed or hurt / or on the yerthe felled: no ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                the knyght but he is hardely matched / wherfore he hathe nede of your ayde. Well ſayde the kyng retourne to hym and to them that ſent you hyther / and ſay to them that they ſende no more to me for any aduenture that falleth / as long as my ſonne is a lyue: and alſo ſay to thē that they ſuffre hym this day to wynne his ſpurres / for if god be pleaſed I woll this iourney be his / and the honoure therof: and to them that be aboute hym. Than the knyght retourned agayn to thē and ſhewed the kynges wordes / the which gretly encouraged them: and repoyned in that they had ſende to the kynge as they dyd. Sir Godfray of Harecourt wolde gladly that the erle of Harecourt his brother myght haue bene ſaued / for he hard ſay by thē that ſawe his baner howe that he was ther in the felde on the frenche partie / but ſir Godfray coude nat come to hym betymes / for he was ſlayne or he coude cōe at hym and ſo was alſo the erle of Almare his nephue. In another place the erle of Alenſon and therle of Flaunders fought valyantly / euery lorde vnder his owne baner / but finally they coude nat reſyſt agaynſt the puyſſaunce of the englyſſhemen: and ſo ther they were alſo ſlayne & dyuers other knyghtꝭ and ſquyers. Alſo therle Lewes of Bloyes nephue to the frenche kyng / and the duke of Lorayne fought vnder their baners / but at laſt they were cloſed in among a cōpany of englyſſhmen and walſſhemen / & there were ſlayne for all their prowes. Alſo there was ſlayne the erle of Auſſer / therle of ſaynt Poule and many other / in the euenynge the frenche kynge who had lefte about hym no mo than a threſcore ꝑso
                  •
               s one and other / wherof ſir John̄ of Heynalt was one / who had remounted ones the Kynge for his horſe was ſlayne with an arowe / thā he ſayde to the kynge ſir departe henſe for it is tyme / leſe nat your ſelfe wylfully: if ye haue loſſe at this tyme ye ſhall recouer it agayne a nother ſeaſon. And ſoo he toke the kynges horſe by the bridell and ledde hym away in a maner perſorce / than the kyng rode tyll he came to the caſtell of Broy / the gate was cloſed bycauſe it was by that tyme darke. Than the kynge called the captayne / who came to the walles and ſayd: who is that calleth there this tyme of nyght / than the kynge ſayde opyn your gate quickely / for this is the fortune of Fraunce. The captayne knewe than it was the kyng / and opyned the gate and let downe the bridge: than the kyng entred and he had with hym but fyue barownes / ſir Johan of Heynault / ſir Charles of Momorency / the lorde of Beauiewe / the lorde Dabegny / and the lorde of Mountfort: the kynge wolde nat tary there but drāke and departed thenſe about myd nyght / and ſo rode by ſuche guydes as knewe the countrey tyll he came in the mornynge to Amyenſe and there he reſted. This ſaturday the englyſſhemen neuer departed fro their batayls for chaſynge of any man / but kept ſtyll their felde and euer defended themſelfe agaynſt all ſuch as came to aſſayle them: this batayle ended aboute euynſonge tyme.
         
         
            ¶Howe the next day after the batell the englyſſhmen diſconfyted dyuerſe frenchemen. Cap. C .xxxi.
            
               
               ON this ſaturday whan the nyght was cōe: and that thēglyſſhmen hard no more noyſe of the frēchemen / than they reputed thēſelfe to haue the vyctorie / and the frenchmen to be dyſconfited / ſlayne / and fledde away. Than they made great fyers and lyghted vp torcheſſe and candelles / bycauſe it was very darke / than the kyng auayled downe fro the lytell hyll where as he ſtode / and of all that day tyll than his helme came neuer of on his heed. Than he went withall his batayle to his ſonne the prince: and enbraſed hym in his armes and kyſt hym and ſayde fayre ſonne god gyue you good ꝑſeuerance / year my good ſon thus ye haue aquyted you nobly: ye ar worthy to kepe a realme / the prince inclyned himſelfe to the yerthe honouryng the kyng his father / this night they thanked god for their good aduenture / and made no booſt therof / for the kynge wolde that no manne ſhulde be proude or make booſt / but euery man humbly to thanke god. On the ſonday in the mornyng there was ſuche a myſt / that a man myght nat ſe the bredethe of an acre of lande fro hym / than there departed fro the hooſt by the commaūdement of the kyng and marſhalles fyue hundred ſpeares / and two thouſand archers: to ſe if they might ſe any frenchemen gathered agayne togyder in any place / the ſame mornyng out of Abuyle & ſaynt Reyngnyer in Ponthieu / the commons of Rone and of Beauioys yſſued out of their townes natte knowyng of the dyſcōfiture the day before they met with thēglyſſhmen / wenyng they had bene frēchmen. And whan thēglyſſhmen ſawe them they ſette on them freſſhly / and there was a ſore batayle / but at laſt the frenchemen fledde and kept none array / their were ſlayne in the wayes and in hedges and buſſhes: mo than̄e ſeuyn thouſande. And if the day had ben clere: there had neuer a oneſcaped / anone after a nother cō
               pany of frenchmen were mette by the englyſſhmen. The archebyſſhopp̄ of Rone / and ye great priour of Fraunce: who alſo knewe nothynge of the dyſconfiture the day before for they harde that the frenche kynge ſhulde a fought the ſame ſonday: and they were goynge thyderwarde. Whan̄e they mette with the englyſſhmen there was a great batayle / for they were a great nombre / but they coude nat endure agaynſt the englyſſhmen / for they were nyghe all ſlayne / fewe ſcaped / the two lordes were ſlayne. This mornyng thenglyſſhmen mette with dyuerſe french men / that had loſte their way on the ſaturday / and had layen all nyght in the feldes / and wyſt nat where the kyng was nor the captayns / they were all ſlayne as many as were met with / and it was ſhewed me: that of the cōmons and men a fote / of the cyties and good townes of France ther was ſlayne foure tymes as many as were ſlayne the ſaturday in the great batayle.
         
         
            ¶ How the next day after the batayle of Creſſey / they that were deed were nōbred by thēglyſſhmen. Ca. Cxxxii.
            
               THe ſame ſonday as the kyng of Englande came fro maſſe ſuche as had ben ſente forthe retourned and ſhewed the kyng what they had ſene and done: and ſayde ſir we thinke ſurely ther is now no more aparence of any of our ennemyes / than ye kyng ſende to ſerche howe many were ſlayne / & what they were. Sir Reynolde Cobham / & ſir Richard Stafforde with thre haraldes went to ſerche the felde and contrey: they viſyted all thē that were ſlayne and rode all day in the feldes / and retourned agayne to the hooſt as the kyng was goynge to ſupper. They made iuſt report of that they had ſene / and ſayde howe ther were xi. great princes deed / fourſcore baners .xii. C. knyghtes / and mo than .xxx. thouſande other. Thēglyſſhmen kept ſtyll their felde all yt nyght on the monday in the mornyng the kyng prepared to depart / the kyng cauſed the deed bodyes of the great lordes to be taken vp and conueyed to Mutterell / and there buryed in holy groūde and made a crye in the countrey to graunt truſe for thre dayes / to thyntent that they of the countrey might ſerche the felde of Creſſy / to bury the deed bodyes. Than the kynge went forthe and came before the towne of Muttrell by the ſee / & his marſhals ranne to warde Hedyn: and brent Uābam and Seram / but they dyd nothyng to the caſtell it was ſo ſtrong and ſo well kept / they lodged that night on the ryuer of Hedyn towardes Blangy. The next day they rode towarde Bolayne / and came to the towne of Unyſame: there the kyng and the prince lodged / and 

taryed there a day to refreſſhe his men / and on the Wednyſday the kyng came before the ſtronge towne of Calys.
         
         
            £ Howe the kyng of Englande layd ſiege to Calys and howe all the poore people were put out of the towne. Cap. C .xxxiii.
            
               IN the towne of Calys ther was captayne a knyght of Burgone called ſir John̄ de Uieu / and with hym was ſir Andrewe Dandrehen / ſir John̄ de Sury / ſir Barbon de Belborne / ſir Godfray de lament / ſir Pepyn de Urmue and dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers. Whan the kyng of England was come before Calys / he layd his ſiege and ordayned baſtides bytwene the towne and the ryuer / he made carpenters to make houſes and lodgynges of great tymbre / and ſet the houſes lyke ſtretes / and couerd them with rede and brome. So that it was lyke a lytell towne: and there was euery thynge toſell / and a markette place to be kept euery tueſday and ſaturday ▪ for fleſſhe and fyſſh / mercery ware / houſes for cloth for bredde / wyne and all other thyngꝭ neceſſarie ſuch as cāe out of England ▪ or out of Flanders / ther they might bye what they lyſt. Thēglyſſhmen ran often tymes into the countrey of Guynes / and into Triuynois / & to the gates of ſaynt Omers / and ſomtyme to Boleyn: they brought into their hooſt great prayes. The kyng wolde nat aſſayle the towne of Calys: for he thought it but a loſt labour / he ſpared his peple & his artillery / and ſayd howe he wolde famyſſh thē in the towne with long ſiege / without the french kyng cōe and reyſe his ſiege ꝑforce. Whan the capten of Calys ſawe the maner & thorder of thēglyſſhmen: than he conſtrayned all poore & meane peple to yſſue out of the towne. And on a wednyſday ther yſſued out of men women / & chyldren / mo than .xvii. C. and as they paſſed through y• hooſt they were demaunded why they deꝑted / & they anſwered and ſayde bycauſe they had nothyng to lyue on. Than the kyng dyd them that grace that he ſuffred them to paſſe through his hoſt without danger / and gaue them mete and drinke to dyner and euery pſon .ii. 
                  〈◊〉
                ſlerlyng in almes / for the which dyners many of them prayed for the kynges proſperyte.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Normādy brake vp his ſiege before Aguyllou. Cap. C .xxxiiii.
            
               THe duke of Normandy beyng at ſege before the ſtrong caſtell of Aguyllou: ſo it was that about ye myddes of Auguſte he made a great aſſaut to the caſtell ſo that ye moſt part of his hoſt were at the aſſaut / thyder was come newely the lorde Philyp of Burgone erle of Arthoys / and of Bolone / & coſyn germayn to the duke of Normādy / he was as than a yōg luſty knyght. And aſſone as the ſkirmyſſh was begon / he toke his horſe with the ſpurres & came on the ſkirmyſſhe warde / & the horſe toke the bytte in his teth / and bare away his maiſter and ſtumbled in a dyke / and fell horſe & man: the knyght was ſo broſed with the fall that he had neuer helthe after / but dyed of the ſame hurt. Than anone after ye frenche kyng ſent for his ſonne the duke of Normā
               dy cōmaundynge hym in any wyſe to breke vp his ſiege before Aguyllou / and to retourne into Fraunce / to defende his herytage fro thēglyſſhmen. And thervpon the duke toke counſayle of the lordes that were there with hym / what was beſt to do: for he hadde promyſed nat to depart thens tyll he had wone the caſtell / but the lordes counſayled hym ſythe the kynge his father had ſende for hym / to depart. Than the next day be tymes: the frenchemen truſſed bagge and baggage in great haſt and departed towarde France: than they that were within the fortreſſe yſſued out with the penon of the lorde Gaultiers of Manny before them: they daſſhed in amonge the hynder company of the frenchemen / and flewe and toke dyuerſe of theym to the nombre of threſcore and brought them into their fortres and by thoſe priſoners they knewe of the iourney that the kynge of Englande had made that ſeaſon into Fraunce / and howe that he lay at ſiege before Calys. Or the french kyng departed fro Amyenſe to Parys warde / after the batayle of Creſſy / he was ſo ſore dyſpleaſedde with ſir Godmar du fay / bycauſe the kynge ſayd he dyd nat his deuer truely in kepyng of the paſſage of Blāch taque / wher as thēglyſſhmē paſſed ouer the ryuer of Some. ſo yt if the french king coud a gette hym in ye hete / it wold haue coſt hym his heed / & dyuers of the kyngꝭ counſell wolde yt he ſhuld a dyed & ſayd he was a treto
                  •
                & cauſer of ye
               
great loſſe that the kynge had at Creſſy / but ſir John̄ of Heynault excuſed hym / and refrayned the kynges yuell wyll: for he ſayd / howe coulde it lye in his power to reſyſt the hole puyſance of thengly ſſhmen / whan all y• floure of the realme of Fraunce togyder coude nat reſyſt them. Thā anone after came to the kynge and to the quene the duke of Normandy who was well receyued with them.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Gaultier of Manny rode through all Fraunce by ſaue conduct to Calys. Cap. C .xxxv.
            
               IT was natlong after but that ſir Gaultier of Mā
               ny fell in cōmunycation with a knyght of Normandy who was his priſoner / & demaū
               ded of hym what money he wolde pay for his raunſome / the knyght anſwered and ſayd he wolde gladly pay thre. M. crownes / well ꝙ the lorde Gaultyer: I knowe well ye be kynne to the duke of Normandy and welbeloued with hym that I am ſure. And if I wolde ſore oppreſſe you I am ſure ye wolde gladly pay .x. thouſand crownes / but I ſhall deale otherwyſe with you / I woll truſt you on your faythe and promyſe. ye ſhall go to the duke your lorde / and by your meanes gette a ſaue conduct for me and .xx. other of my cōpany to ryde through Fraunce to Calys / payeng curteſly for all your expenſes. And if ye can get this of the duke or of the kyng / I ſhall clerely quyte you your ranſome with moche thanke: for I greatly deſyre to ſe the kynge my maiſter / nor I wyll lye but one nyght in a place tyll I cōe there. And if ye can nat do this / retourne agayn hyder within a moneth / and yelde your ſelf ſtyll as my priſoner: the knyght was content and ſo went to Parys to the duke his lorde / and he obtayned this paſport for ſir Gaultier of Manny and. 
                  •
               r. horſe with hym all onely this knyght returned to Aguyllon and brought it to 
                  〈◊〉
                Gaultier / and ther he quyted the knyght Norman of his raunſome. Than anone after ſir Gaultier toke his way and .xx. horſe with hym: & ſo rode through Auuergne / and whan he taryed in any place he ſhewed his letter and ſo was lette paſſe but whan he came to Orleaunce for all his letter he was a reſted and brought to Parys / & there put in priſon in the Chatelet. Whan the duke of Normandy knewe therof / he went to the kynge his father and ſhewed him howe ſir Gaultier of Manny had his ſaue conduct / wherfore he requyred the kynge aſmoche as he might to delyuer hym / or els it ſhulde be ſayd howe he had be trayed hym: the kyng anſwered and ſayd howe he ſhulde be put to dethe / for he reputed hym for his great ennemy. Than ſayd the duke: ſir if ye do ſo ſurely I ſhall neuer bere armour agaynſt the kynge of Englande / nor all ſuche as I may let: and at his departyng he ſayd that he wolde neuer entre agayn into the kynges hoſt. Thus the mater ſtode a certayne tyme: there was a knyght of Heynalt called ſir Manſart de Sue / he purchaſed all that he myght to helpe ſir Water of Manny / and went often in and out to the duke of Normādy / finally the kyng was ſo coū
               ſelled that he was delyuerd out of priſon and all his coſtes payed. And the kynge ſende for hym to his lodgyng of Neſle in Parys and there he dyned with the kynge / and the kynge preſented hym great gyftes and iewels / to the value of a thouſande floreyns: ſir Gaultier of Manny receyued them on a condycion / that whan he cam to Cales that if the kyng of Englande his maiſter were pleaſed that he ſhulde take them / than he was content to kepe them / or els to ſende thē agayne to the frenche kyng / who ſayd he ſpake lyke a noble man. Than̄e he toke his leaue and departed and rode ſo long by his iourneys that he came into Heynalt / and taryed at Ualencennes thre dayes: and ſo fro thens he went to Cales and was welcome to the kynge / but whan ye kyng harde that ſir Gaultier of Manny had receyued gyftes of the frenche kynge: he ſayde to hym ſir Gaultier / ye haue hytherto truely ſerued vs and ſhall do as we truſt. Sende agayn to kyng Philyppe the gyftes that he gaue you / ye haue no cauſe to kepe theym / we thanke god we haue ynough for vs & for you: we be in good purpoſe to do moche good for you acordyng to the good ſeruyce that ye haue done. Thanne ſir Gaultier toke all thoſe iewels and delyuerd thē to a coſyn of his called Manſac / and ſayd ryde into Fraunce to the kynge there / and recōmend me vnto hym / and ſay howe I thanke hym. M. tymes for the gyft that he gaue me / but ſhewe hym howe it is nat the pleaſure of the kyng my maiſter that I ſhulde kepe thē / therfore I ſende them agayne to hym. This knyght rode to Parys and ſhewed all this to the kyng who wolde nat receyue agayne the iewelles / but dyde gyue

them to the ſame knyght ſir Manſac / who thaked the kyng and was nat in wyll to ſay nay.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Derby the ſame ſeſon toke in Poycton dyuers townes and caſtels / and alſo the cyte of Poycters. Cap. C .xxxvi.
            
               LE haue harde here before / howe the erle of Derby was in the cytie of Burduex / duryng the ſeaſon of the ſiege before Aguyllone. And aſſone as he knewe that ye duke of Normandy had broken vp his ſiege / than he ſende into Gaſcoyne for all his knightes and ſquyers that helde of the englyſſhe partie: than came to Burdeaux the lorde Dalbret / the lorde de Lanſpere / ye lorde of Roſam / the lorde of Muſydent / the lorde of Punyers / the lorde of Torton / the lorde of Bouq̄ton / ſir Amery of Traſt / and dyuers other: ſo that therle had a .xii. hundred men of armes / two thouſand archers / and thre thouſande fotemen. They paſſed theryuer of Garon bytwene Burdeaux and Blay: than they toke the way to zaynton and came to Myrabell / and wan the towne with aſſaut and the caſtell alſo: and ſette therin newe captayne and ſoudyours. Than they rode to Alnoy and wan the caſtell and the towne / and after they wanne Surgeres / and Benon: but the caſtell of Marant a thre leages fro Rochell they coulde nat gette / than they went to Mortayn on ye ſee ſyde in Poyctou and toke it perforce / and made ther a garyſon for thē. Than thei rode to Luſignen / they brent the towne but the caſtell wolde nat be wonne / than they went to Taylbourge / & wan the brige / towne / and caſtell: and ſtewe all that were within / bycauſe a knyght of theyrs was ſlayne in thaſſautyng. The countrey was ſo afrayed that euery man fledde into ſtronge holdes and townes and forſoke their owne houſes they made none other aparance of defence: but all knyghtꝭ and ſquyers kept them ſtyll in their fortreſſes / and made no ſemblant to fyght with thenglyſſhmen. Than at laſt the erle of Derby came and layd ſiege to ſaynt John̄ Dangle and made there a gret aſſaut / within the towne ther were no men of warre tyll agaynſt night whan thaſſaut ſeaſed. Sir Wyllyam Ryonmayre of the towne / and the mooſt part of the burgeſſes ſende to therle of Derby to haue a ſaue conduct for ſixe of their burgeſſes to come into the hooſt to treat with therle the ſame night / or els ye next day / the which was graunted: and the next mornynge theſe burgeſſes came to therles tent / and there concluded to become good englyſſhmen / as long as the kyng of Englande or ſome other for hym wolde kepe and defende them fro ye frenchmen. Ther therle refreſſhed hym in that towne thre dayes and toke homage of the burgeſſes there: than the erle went to the ſtronge towne of Nyort / wherin was captayne the lorde Guyſſharde Dangle / ther therle made thre aſſautes but nothyng coude he wynne / than he departed thens and went to to Burge ſaynt Maxymen / the which was wonne perforce and all that were within ſlayne. After they went to Mōſtrell boy 
                  〈◊〉
                / wherin ther were a two hūdred money makers that forged there money for the frēchkyng they ſayde they wolde nat yelde vp but defende the towne / but there was made ſuche a feerſe aſſaut that it was won / and all they within ſlayne Therle newe fortifyed ye caſtell and made there a garyſon / than the erle came before the cytie of Poycters / the whiche was great and large: the erle beſieged it on the one ſyde for he had nat nō
               bre ſufficyent to lay rounde about. Incontynēt they made aſſaut & they of they cytie / who were a great nombre of meane people nat very mete for the warre / they defended themſelfe ſo well at that tyme that they toke but lytell damage / the aſſaut ceaſed and euery man went to his logynge. The next day certayne knyghtes of the hoſt toke their horſes and rode about the towne / and returned and made report to therle of that they had ſene / than they determyned the nexte day to aſſaut the cytie in thre places: and the greatteſt nombre to aſſaut wher as was the wekeſt place of the cytie / and thus it was done. And as than in the towne ther was no knight yt knewe what ment any feate of warr / nor the people were nat erpert in dedes of armes to knowe howe to defende aſſautes / ſo in the wekyſt place thenglyſſhmen entred. Whan they within ſawe the towne wonne they fledde away out at other gates but ther were ſlayne a .vii. hundred for all were put to ye ſwerde men / women / and chyldren / and the cytie ouerron and robbed: the whiche was full of great richeſſe / aſwell of thynhabytauntes as of them of the countrey that were come thyder for ſurety / dyuers churches were there diſtroyed and many yuelldedes done and mo had ben doue and therle had nat ben / for he cōmaunded

on payne of dethe no man to breune no churche / nor houſe / for he ſayde he wolde tary there a ten or 
                  〈…〉
               dayes / ſo that therby part of the yuell dedes wereſeaſed / but for all that there was roberyes ynough. Therle lay ther a .xii. dayes and lengar myght haue done if it had pleaſed hym / for ther was none to reſyſt hym: all the contrey trymbled for feare of hym. Than therle departed fro Poycters and left it voyde / for it was to great to be kept / at their departyng they had ſo moche rycheſſe that they wyſt natte what to do therwith / they ſette by nothynge but golde and ſyluer / and fethers for men of warre. Thanne they retourned by ſmall iourneys to ſaynt Johan Dangle / there therle reſted hym a certayne ſpace / and thenglyſſhmen gaue many good iuels to the ladyes and damoſels of ye towne / and ſo dyd therle hymſelf and made euery day gret dyners / ſuppers / and bankettes / & made great reuell and ſport among them: he achyued ſuche grace among them there / that they ſayd he was the mooſt noble prince that euer rode on horſebacke. Than he toke his leaue of thē / and made the mayre and ye burgeſſes to renewe their othe and to kepe the towne as the ryght herytage of the kyng of Englande / than the erle retourned by ſuche fortreſſes as he had wonne / tyll he cāe to therytie of Bourdeaux: than he gaue leaue euery man to depart / and thanked them of their good ſeruyce.
         
         
            ¶ How the kyng of Scottes duryng the ſiege before Calys came into England with a gret hoſt. Ca. C .xxxvii.
            
               IT is longe nowe ſyth we ſpake of kyng Dauyd of Scotlande / howe be it tyll nowe there was none occaſion why / for the trewſe that was takenue was well and trewly kept. So that whan the kynge of Englande had be ſieged Calays and lay there / than the Scottes determyned to make warre into Englande / and to be reuenged of ſuch hurtes as they had taken before / for they ſayde than / howe that the realme of Englande was voyde of men of warr / for they were as they ſayd with the kyng of Englande before Calys / and ſome in Bretaygne / Poyctou / and Gaſcoyne: the frenche kyng dyd what he coude to ſtyrre the ſcottes to that warre / to the entent that the kynge of Englande ſhulde breke vp his ſiege / and retourne to defende his owne realme The kynge of Scottes made his ſommons to be at ſaynt John̄s towne / on the ryuer of Tay in Scotlande: thyder came erles / barownes / and prelates of Scotlande: and there agreed that in all haſte poſſyble / they ſhulde entre into Englande / to come in that iourney was deſyred Johan of the out Iles / who gouerned the wylde ſcottes: for to hym they obeyed and to no man els. He came with a thre thouſande of the mooſt outragyouſt people in all that countrey. Whan all the ſcottes were aſſembled / they were of one and other / a fyftie thouſande fightynge menne: they coude nat make their aſſemble ſoo ſecrete / but that the quene of Englande / who was as thanne in the marcheſſe of the Northe about yorke / knewe all their dealynge. Than̄e ſhe ſent all about for menne / and lay herſelfe at yorke: than all men of warre and archers came to Newcaſtell with the quene. In the meane ſeaſon the kyng of ſcottes departed fro ſaynt Johannes towne / and wente to Done Fremelyne the firſte day / the nexte day they paſſed a lytell arme of the ſee and ſo came to Eſdērmelyne / and than to Edēbrough. Than they nombred their company / and they were a thre thouſande men of armes knyghtes and ſquyers / and a thretie thouſande of other on hackenayes: thanne they came to Rouſbourg the firſt fortreſſe englyſſhe on that parte / captayne there was ſir Wyllyam Montague / the ſcottes paſſed by without any aſſaut makynge / and ſo went forthe brennynge and diſtroyenge the countrey of Northumberlande / and their currours ranne to yorke and brent as moche as was without the walles and retourned agayne to their hoſt / within a dayes iourney of Newcaſtell vpon Tyne.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batayle of New caſtell vpon Tyne / bytwene the quene of England and the kyng of ſcottes. Cap. C .xxxviii.
            
               
               THe quene of England who deſyred to defende her contrey came to Newcaſtell vpon Tyne / and there taryed for her mē who came dayly fro all 
                  •
               tes. Whan the ſcottes knewe that the englyſſhe men aſſembled at Newcaſtell they drue thyderwarde / and their currours came rennynge before the towne: and at their retournynge they brent certayne ſmall hamelettes there about / ſo that the ſmoke therof cāe into the towne of Newcaſtell: ſome of the englyſſhmen wolde a yſſued out to haue fought with them that made the fyers / but the captayns wolde nat ſulfre theym to yſſue out. The next day y• kyng of ſcottes with a .xl. thouſande men one and other / came and lodged within thre lytell englyſſhe myle of Newcaſtell in the lande of the lorde Neuyll / and the kyng ſent to them within the towne that if they wolde yſſue out into the felde / he wolde fyght with theym gladly. The lordes and prelates of England / ſayd they were content to aduenture their lyues with the ryghtand herytage of the kynge of Englande their maiſter: than they all yſſued out of the towne / and were in nombre a twelfe hundred men of armes / thre thouſand archers / and ſeuyne thouſande of other with the walſſhmen. Than the ſcottes came and lodged agaynſt theym / nere togyder: than euery man was ſette in order of batayle / than the quene cāe among her men: and there was ordayned four batayls / one to ayde another. The firſte had in gouernaunce the byſſhoppe of Dyrham / and the lorde Percy: the ſeconde the archbyſſhoppe of yorke / and the lorde Neuyll: the thyrde the byſſhoppe of Lyncolne / and the lorde Mōbray The fourth the lorde Edwarde de Baylleule captayne of Berwyke / the archbyſſhopp of Canterbury / and the lorde Roſe / euery batayle had lyke nōbre after their quantyte: the quene went fro batayle to batayle deſyring them to do their deuoyre to defende the honoure of her lorde the kyng of Englande / and in the name of god euery man to be of good hert and courage promyſyng them that to her power ſhe wolde remēbre theym aſwell or better / as thoughe her lorde the kyng were ther perſonally. Than the quene departed fro them recōmendyng them to god and to ſaynt George / than anone after the bataylles of the ſcottes began to ſet forwarde / and in lyke wyſe ſo dyd thēglyſſhmen / than the archers began to ſhote on bothe parties: but the ſhot of the ſcottes endured but a ſhortſpace: but ye archers of Englande ſhot ſo feerſly / ſo that whan the batayls aproched there was a harde batell. They began at nyne and endured tyll noone / the ſcottes had great ares ſharpe and harde / and gaue with them many great ſtrokes / howbeit finally thenglyſſhmen obtayned the place and vyctorie but they loſt many of their me. There were ſlayne of the ſcottes / therle of Sys / therle of Oſtre / the erle Patrys / therle of Surlant / therle Daſtredare / therle of Mare / therle John̄ Duglas and the lorde Alyſaunder Ramſey who bare the kynges baner: and dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers. And there the kynge was taken / who fought valiantly and was ſore hurt: a ſquyer of Northumberland toke hym called John̄ Coplande / and aſſone as he had taken the kynge he went with hym out of the felde with .viii. of his ſeruaunces with hym and ſoo rode all that day tyll he was a fyftene leages fro the place of ye batayle / and at nyght he cāe to a caſtell called Oryulus. And than he ſayde he wolde nat delyuer the kyng of ſcottes to no man nor woman lyueyng / but all onely to the kynge of Englande his lorde: the ſame day there was alſo taken in the felde the erle Morette / the erle of Marche / the lorde Wyllyam Duglas / ye lorde Robert Ueſy / the byſſhoppe of Dadudame / the byſſhoppe of ſaynt Andrewes / and dyuers other knyghtes & barownes. And ther were ſlayne of one and other a .xv. thouſande / and the other ſaued themſelf aſ well as they might: this batell was beſyde Newcaſtell / the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .xlvi. the ſaturday next after ſayur Mychaell.
         
         
            ¶ How John̄ Copland had the kyng of Scottes priſoner / and what profet he gatte therby. Cap. C .xxxix.
            
               WHan the quene of Englande beyng at Newcaſtell / vnderſtode howe the iourney was for her and her men: ſhe than rode to the place where the batayle hade ben / than̄e it was ſhewed her howe the kyng of ſcottꝭ was taken by a ſquyer called John̄ Coplande / and he hadde caryed away the kyng no man knewe whyder. Than the quene wrote to the ſquyer cō
               maundyng hym to bring his priſoner the kyng of ſcottes / and howe he had nat well done to depart with hym without leaue: all that day thenglyſſhmen

taryed ſtyll in ye ſame place / and the quene with them: and the next day they retourned to New caſtell. Whan the quenes letter was brought to Johan Coplande: he anſwered and ſayd that as for the kyng of ſcottes his priſoner he wolde nat delyuer hym to no mā nor woman lyueng but all onely to the kynge of Englande his ſouer ayne lorde. As for the kynge of ſcottes he ſayd he ſhuld be ſauely kept / ſo that he wolde gyue acompte for hym / thanne the quene ſende letters to the kyng to Calays wherby the kyng was enfourmed of the ſtate of his realme / than the kyng ſende incōtynent to Johan Coplande / that he ſhulde come ouer the ſee to hym to the ſiege before Calays. Than the ſame Johan dyd putte his priſoner in ſaue kepynge in a ſtronge caſtell / and ſo rode through England tyll he cāe to Douer / and there toke the ſee and arryued before Calays. Whan the kyng of Englande ſawe the ſquyer he toke hym by the hande and ſayd / a welcome my ſquyer / that by your valyantneſſe hath taken myne aduerſary the kyng of Scottes / the ſquyer kneled downe and ſayde: ſir yf god by his grace haue ſuffred me to take ye king of ſcottes by true conqueſt of armes / ſir I thynke no man ought to haue any enuy there at / for aſwell god may ſende by his grace ſuche a fortune to fall to a poore ſquyer / as to a great lorde and 
                  〈◊〉
                I requyre your grace be nat myſcontent with me / though I dyde nat delyuer the kynge of Scottes at the cōmaundement of the quene / Sir I holde of you as myne othe is to you / and nat to her but in all good maner: the kyng ſayd Johan the good ſeruyce that ye haue done and your valyantneſſe is ſomoche worthe / that hit muſt counteruayle your treſpaſſe / and be taken for your excuſe / and ſhame haue they that bere you any yuell wyll therfore. ye ſhall retourne agayne home to your houſe / and tha
                  ••
               e my pleaſure is that ye delyuer your priſoner to ye quene my wyfe: and in a rewarde I aſſigne you nere to your houſe where as ye thynke beſt yourſelfe tyue hundred pounde ſterlyng of yerely rent / to you & to your heyres for euer: and here I make you ſquyer for my body. Than̄e the thyrde day he departed and retourned agayne into Englande & whan he came home to his owne houſe he aſſembled to guyder his frendes and kynne / and ſo they toke the kyng of Scottes and rode with hym to the cytie of yorke / and there fro the kyng his lorde / he preſented the kyng of Scottes to ye quene and excuſed hym ſo largely / that the quene and her counſell were content. Than the quene made good prouiſyon for the cytie of yorke the caſtell of Roſbourg / the cyte of Dyrham / the towne of Newcaſtell vpon Tyne / and in all other garyſons on the marcheſſe of Scotlande / and left in thoſe marcheſſe the lorde Percy / and the lorde Neuyll / as gouernoure there: thanne the quene departed fro yorke towardes London. Than ſhe ſette the kynge of Scottes in the ſtrong towre of London / and therle Morette / and all other priſoners: and ſette good kepyng ouer them. Than ſhe went to Douer and there tooke the ſee / and had ſo good wynde that in a ſhorte ſpace ſhe arryued before Calays thre dayes before the feeſt of Alſayntes / for whoſe cō
               myng the kyng made a great feeſt and dyner to all the lordes & ladyes that were ther / the quene brought many ladyes and damoſelles with her aſwell to acompany her / as to ſe their huſbandes / fathers / bretherne / and other frendes that lay at ſiege there before Calays / and had done a longe ſpace.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the yonge erle of Flaunders enſured the kynges doughter of Englande. Cap. C .xl.
            
               THe ſiege before Calais enduredde longe / and many thynges fell in the meane ſeaſon / the whiche I canne nat write the fourthe parte. The frenche kynge had ſette men of warre in euery fortreſſe in thoſe marcheſſe in the countie of Guynes / of At thoyes / of Boloyne / and aboute Calays / and had a great nombre of genowayes / normayns / and other on the ſee: ſo that whan any of th
                  〈…〉
                glyſſhmen wolde goo a forragynge other a 
                  〈◊〉
                or horſebacke / they founde many tymes harde aduentures / and often there was ſkirmyſſhing about the gates and dykes of the towne / and often tymes ſome ſlayne and hurte on bothe parties / ſome day y• one part loſt and ſome day the other. The kynge of Englande cauſed engyns to be made to oppreſſe theym within the towne / but they within made other agayne to reſiſt the ſo that they toke lytell hurt by them / but nothynge coude come into the towne but by ſtelth / and that was by the meanes of two maryners / one called Maraunt / and the other Meſtryell / and

they dwelt in Abuyle / by theym two they of Calays were often tymes reconforted and freſſhed by ſtelth and often tymes they were in great 
                  •
               
               yll / chaſed and nere taken: but alwayes they ſcaped and made many englyſſhemen to be drowned. All that wynter the kyng lay 
                  ••
               yll at the ſiege / and thought and ymagined euer to kepe y• commentie of Flaunders in frendſhyppe / for he thought by their meanes the ſoner to c
                  •
               e to his entent / he ſende often tymes to them with fayre promyſes: ſayeng that if he myght gette Calys he wolde helpe them to recouer 
                  〈◊〉
                / and Doway with all their appurtenaunces. So by occaſyon of ſache promyſes / whyle the kyng was in Normandy towardes Creſſey and Calays / they went and layd ſiege to Bethwyn / and ther captayne was ſir Dedeart de 
                  •
               onty who was banyſſhed out of Fraunce. They helde a great ſiege before that towne / and 
                  •
               ore conſtrayned them by aſſaut / but within were 
                  •
               our knyghtes captayns ſet there by ye frenche kyng to kepe the towne / that is to ſay ſir G
                  •
               ſſray of Charney ſir Ewſtace of Rybamount / ſir Ba
                  •
               dwy
                  •
                of Nekyn / and ſir John̄ of Landas: they defended y• towne in ſuche wyſe / that the flemmynges wa
                  •
                nothyng ther / but ſo departed and retourned agayne into Flaunders / but whyle the kynge of Englande lay at ſiege before Calys he ſent ſtyll meſſāgers to them of Flanders and made them great promyſes to kepe their amyte with hym / and to oppreſſe the drift of the french kyng who dyde all that he coulde to drawe them to his opynyon. The kyng of Englande wolde gladly y• the erle Loyes of Flaunders / who was as than 
                  ••
               t f
                  •
               fte
                  •
               e yere of age / ſhulde haue in mar
                  •
               age his doughter Iſabell: ſomoche dyd the kyng y• the flēmynges agreed therto wherof the kynge was gladde / for he thought by that mariage the flēmynges wolde the gladlyer helpe hym / and the flēmynges thought by hauyng of the kynge of Englande on their partie they might well r
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               yſt the frenchmen: they thought it more neceſſary and profytable for them / the loue of the kyng of Englande rather than the frenche kynge / but the yong erle who had ben euer noryſſhed amō
               ge the noble men of France wolde nat agre and ſayd playnly he wolde nat haue to his wyfe the doughter of hym that ſle
                  •
               e his father. Alſo duke Johan of Brabant purchaſed greatly that y• erle of Flaunders ſhulde haue his doughter in maryage / promyſing hym that if he wolde take her to his wyfe / that he wolde cauſe hym to enioy the hole erldome of Flanders / other by 
                  •
               ayre meanes or otherwyſe. Alſo the duke ſayde to the frenche kyng / ſir if the erle of Flanders woll take my doughter I ſhall fynde the meanes that all the flemmynges ſhall take your part and for ſake the kyng of Englande / by the whiche promyſe the frenche kyng agreed to that maryage. Whan the duke of Brabant had the kyngꝭ gode wyll: than he ſent certayne meſſāgers into Flā
               ders to the burgeſſes of the good townes / and ſhewed them ſo fayre reaſons / that the counſayles of the good townes ſent to the erle their naturall lorde / certifyeng hym that if he wolde come into Flanders & vſe their counſayle they wolde be to hym trewe and good frendes / and delyuer to hym all the rightes and iuryſdictyons of Flā
               ders / aſmoche as euer any erle hadde. The erle toke counſayle and went into Flaunders: wher he was receyued with great 
                  •
               oye / and gyuen to hym many great preſentes. Aſſ one as the kyng of Englande harde of this he ſende into Flaunders the erle of Northampton / therle of Arundell / and the lorde Cob
                  •
               am / they dyde ſomoche with the offycers and commons of Flaunders / that they had rather that their lorde therle ſhulde take to his wyfe the kyng of Englandes doughter / than the doughter of the duke of Brab
                  •
               t / And ſo to do they affectuouſly deſyred their lorde & ſhewed hym many fayre reaſons / to drawe hym to that way: ſo that the burgeſſes that wer on the duke of Brabantes partie durſte nat ſay the contrary / but than the erle in nowyſe wolde concent therto / but euer he ſayde he wolde natte wedde her whoſe father had ſlayne his / though he myght haue halfe of the hole realme of Englande. Whan̄e the flemmynges ſawe that: they ſayd howe their lorde was to moche french and yuell counſayled / and alſo ſayd howe they wolde do no good to hym / ſyth he wolde nat belyue their counſayls: than they toke and putte hym in Cortoyſe priſon and ſayd howe he ſhulde neuer depart without he wolde folowe and byleue their counſayls. Alſo they ſayd that the erle his father belyued and loued to moche the frenchemen / for if he wolde a byleued thē he ſhuld haue ben the greatteſt lorde in all chriſtendome / and recouered agayne Lyſle / Doway / and Bethwyn / & yet alyue. Thus the mater abode a certayne ſpace: the kynge of Englande lay ſtyll at the ſiege before Calays / and kept a great court that Chriſtmas. And about the begynnynge of lent after: came thyder out of Gaſcoyne the erle of Derby / the erle of Penbroke / the erle of Can forte / and dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers / that had paſſed the ſee with the erle. Thus the erle of Flaunders was long in danger amonge

the ſtemynges in Cortoyſe priſon / and it greatly anoyed hym. Than at laſt he ſayde he wolde byleue their coūſayle: for he knewe well he ſayd that he ſhulde haue more profet there / than in any other contrey. Theſe wordes reioyſed greatly the flemynges: than they toke hym out of priſon / & ſuffred hym to go a haukyng to the ryuer the which ſport the erle loued well ▪ but euer ther was good watche layde on hym / that he ſhulde nat ſteale away fro theym: and they were charged on their lyues to take good hede to hym. And alſo they were ſuche as were fauourable to the kyng of Englād: they watched hym ſo nere that he coude nat pyſſe without their knowledge This endured ſo longe that at laſt the erle ſayd that he wolde gladly haue to his wyfe the kyng of Englandes doughter than the flemmynges ſende worde therof to the kynge and to y• quene and poynted a day that they ſhuld come to Bergus in the abbey / and to bringe their doughter with theym / and they wolde bring thyder their lorde the erle of Flanders: and there to cōclude vp the maryage. The kyng and the quene were gladde therof: and ſayde that the flemmynges were good men / ſo to Bergus bytwene Newport and Grauelynge / came the mooſt ſaddeſt men of the gode townes in Flaunders / and brought with thē the erle their lorde in great eſtate. The kyng of Englande and y• quene were ther redy: the erle curteſly inclyned to the kyng and to the quene / the kyng toke the erle by the ryght hande right ſwetely and ledde hym forthe: ſayeng as for the dethe of the erle your father / as god helpe me: the day of the batayle of Creſſey nor the nexte day after I neuer herde worde of hym that heſhulde be there / the yong erle by ſē
               blant made as thoughe he had ben content with the kynges excuſe / than they fyll in communycacyon of the maryage / there were certayne artycles agreed vnto by the kyng of Englande / and the erle Loyes of Flaunders: and great amyties ther was ſwor
                  •
               e bytwene them to be holden. And there the erle fyaunced Iſabell the kyng of Englandes doughter: and promyſed to wedde her ▪ ſo that iourney brake of and a newe day to be apoynted at more leaſer / the flemmynges retourned into Flaunders with their lorde / and the kynge of Englande with the quene went agayne to the ſiege of Calays. Thus the mater ſtode a certayne tyme: and the kynge and the quene prepayred greatly agayne the maryage for iewelles and other thynges to gyue away / acordyng to their behauyours. The erle of Flanders dayly paſt the tyme at the ryuer and made ſemblant that this maryage pleaſed him greatly: ſo the flemmynges thought that they were than ſure ynough of hym / ſo that there was nat ſo great watch made on hym as was before / but they knewe nat well the cōdycion of their lorde / for what ſoeuer coūtenance he made out warde / his inwarde courage was all frenche. So on a day he went forthe with his hawkes / the ſame weke y• the maryage ſhulde haue ben finyſſhed / his fauconer caſt of a faukon to an hearon / and therle caſt of a nother: ſo theſe two faukons chaſed the hearon / and the erle rode after as to folowe his faucon. And whan he was a gode way of and had the aduantage of the feldes: he daſſhed his ſpurres to his horſe / and galoped forth in ſuche wyſe that his kepars loſt hym / ſtyll he galoped forthright / tyll he came into Arthoyes and ther he was in ſuretie. And ſo than he rode into Fraunce to kyng Philyp and ſhewed hym all his aduenture: the kynge and the frenchmen ſayd howe he had dalt wyſely / the englyſſhmen on the otherſyde ſaid howe he had betrayed and diſceyued them ▪ but for all that the kyng left nat to kepe the flemmynges in amyte: for he knewe well the erle had done this dede nat by their coū
               ſell / for they wer ſore dyſpleaſed therwith. And the excuſe that they made: the kyng ſoone byleued it in that behalfe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Robert of Namure dyde ho
                  •
               age to the kyng of England before Calays. Cap. C .xli.
            
               WHyle the kynge lay at ſiege before Calays / ther came to ſe the kynge and the quene dyuers lordꝭ and knightes of Flanders ▪ of Brabant / of Heynault / and of Almaygne: and there departed none agayne / but that had great gyftes gyuen them. The ſame ſeaſon there was newely come into the countie of Namure and of Liege dut of the holy lande ſir Robert of Namure: and the lorde of Leſpentyne hadde made hym knyght at the holy ſepulcre. This ſir Robert was as than a yong luſty knight: and was nat deſyred of any of bothe kynges / than he came of his owne good mynde well acōpanyed and richely / to the ſiege before Calayes: and there preſented hymſelfe to the kyng

of Englande / who ioyfully receyued hym / and ſo dyde the quene and all the other lordes: he entred greatly into the kynges fauour ▪ bycauſe he bare the name of ſir Robert de Arthoys his vucle. Thus ſir Robert became the kynges liege man / the kynge gaue hym thre hundred pounde ſterlynge by yere out of his cofers / to be payde at Bruges: there he taryed with the kynge before Calays tyll the towne was wonne / as ye ſhall here after.
         
         
            ¶ Howe thenglyſſhmen wanne the Rochdaren / and howe ſir Charles de Bloyes layed ſiege therto. Ca. C .xlii.
            
               IT is longe nowe ſyth we ſpake of ſir Charles de Bloyes / as than the duke of Bretaygne / and of the counteſſe of Mountforde: but it was bycauſe of the truſe that was takenne at Uannes / the whiche was well kept. For durynge the trewſe eyther partie kept peaſably that they had in poſſeſſyon: and aſſone as the trewſe was expyred / they made agayne feerſe warr. There was cōe into Bretaygne fro the kynge of Englande ſir Thomas Dangorne / and ſir Johan Harewell / they came thyder fro the ſiege of Calays with a hundred men of armes / and foure hundred archers. They taryed with the countes of Moūt forde at Hanybout / and with them ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                of the caſtell bretone bretonant: thenglyſſhmen and bretons of y• part made often tymes iourneys agaynſt ſir Charles de Bloyes men ſomtyme they wanne and ſomtyme they loſt the cū
               tre was expled and diſtroyed by reaſon of theſe men of warre. On a day theſe englyſſhmen wēt and layde ſiege to a good towne called Rochedaren and often tymes they made a
                  ••
               autes / but the towne was ſo well defended that thenglyſſhmen wanne nothyng / captayne within the towne was Taſſartde Guynes / they within y• towne were thre partes / ratherenglyſſhe than frenche. And ſo they tooke the capytayne and ſayde they wolde ſtee hym: without he wolde yelos hymſelfe englyſſhe to them / thanne heſayde he wolde do as they wolde haue hym / and ſo thervpon they let hym go: and than he t
                  •
               ryed with the englyſſhmen and tourned to the countes of Mountfordes parte. And ſo he was ſtyll capytayne of the towne: and left certayne ſoudyers to kepe the towne and caſtell / whan ſir Charles du Bloyes herde therof / he ſware that the mater ſhulde natte longe beſo. Thatic he ſende for menne all aboute Bretaygne / and Normandy▪ and aſſembled in the cytie of Nauntes ſixtene hundred menne of armes / and twelfe thouſande a fote: ther were with hym a four hundred knyghtes and .xxiiii. baners. So he cāe and layde ſiege to Rochdaren: lately before wonne by the englyſſhmen / and had great engyns that caſte day and nyght / the which ſore cōſtrayned them within. Than they of the towne ſende meſſangers to the counteſſe of Mountforde / that acordynge to her promyſe to ſende theym ſome ayde and conforte / than the counteſſe ſende all about to aſſemble men toguyder ▪ and ſhortely ſhe had a thouſande menne of armes / and eyght thouſande a fote ▪ and ſhe made capytayns of theym the forſayd thre knyghtes / who ſayd they wolde neuer retourne tyll they had reyſed the ſeige before Rochdaren / or els to dye in y• quarell. And ſo they ſette forthe and came nere to the hooſt of ſir Charles of Bloyes / and lodged by a ryuer ſyde that night / to thyntent to fight the next day and whan euery man was at reſt: ſir Thomas Dangorne / and ſir Johan Artwell cauſed halfe their cōpany to be armed / and depted fro them hooſt about mydnight / and ſodenly entred into the lorde Charles hooſt on y• one ſyde ▪ and beate downe and ſlewe moche people / and they taryed ſo longe that all the hooſt was moued and euery man redy / ſo that they coulde nat retourne agayne without batayle. There they were encloſed and fought withall ſharpely / ſo that they might nat bere the frenchmens dedes / but ther they were taken / and ſir Thomas Dangorne ſore hurt / but ſir Johan Artwell ſaued hymſelfe aſwell as he might by the ryuer / and retourned to his company and ſhewed them his aduēture thanne they were determyned to haue retourned agayne to Hanybout.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batayle of Rochedaren and howe ſir Charles de Bloys was there taken by thenglyſſhmen. Cap. C .xliii.
            
               
               THe ſame ſeſon that the englyſſhemen were thus in counſayle / and had determyned to haue departed: there came to them a knyght from the counteſſe of Mountforte called Garnyer lorde of Cadudall with a hūdred men of armes. And aſſone as he was come and knewe all their demenour: h
                  •
                ſayde nay ſirs lette vs nat thus tourne agayne / leape on your horſes and ſuche as haue non lette them come a fote. Lette vs nowe go loke on our ennemyes: for nowe they thynke them ſelfe ſure I warant we ſhall dyſconfet thē. Than the horſemen rode forthe and the fotemen folowed / and aboute the ſonne ryſinge they daſſhed into the lorde Charles ho
                  •
               ſt / and euery manne ther was a ſlepe and a
                  •
                reſt / for they thought to haue no more a do at that tyme. Thenglyſſhmen and bretous bete downe tentes and pauilyons / and ſlewe people downe right / for they were ſodenly taken / ther was moch people ſlayne: and ſir Charles of Bloyes / and all the lordes of Bretayne and Normādy that were there with hym were taken priſoners. Thus the ſiege of Rochdaren was reyſed / and the lorde Charles was brought to Hanyboute ▪ but ſuche fortreſſes as were of his partie helde ſtyll / for his wyfe who called her ſelfe ducheſſe of Bretaygne / toke the warre in hande.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frenche kyng aſſembled a great hooſt to rayſe the kyng of England fro the ſiege be fore Calys. Ca. C .xliiii.
            
               KInge Philyppe who knewe well howe his men were ſore conſtrayned in Calays ▪ commaunded euery manne to be with hym at the feeſt of Pentecoſt / in the cyte of Amyenſe or ther about: ther was non durſt ſay nay. The kyng kept there a great feeſt thyder came duke Odes of Burgoyne / and the duke of Normandy his eldyſt ſonne / & the duke of Orlya
                  •
               ſe his yongeſt ſonne: the duke of Burbon / therle of Fo
                  •
               tz / the lorde Loyes of Sau
                  •
               y ſir John̄ of Heynalt / the erle of Armynake / the erle of Foreſtes / therle of Ualentenoys / and dyuers other erles / barons / and knyghtes. Whan they were all at Amyenſe they toke counſayle / y• frenche kyng wolde gladly that the paſſages of Flaunders myght haue ben opyned to hym: for than he thought he might ſende part of his men to Grauelyng / and by that way to refreſſhe the towne of Calys / and on that ſyde to fyght eaſely with thenglyſſhmen. He ſende great meſſangers into Flanders to treat for that mater / but the kynge of Englande had there ſuche frendes that they wolde neuer acorde to yt curteſy / than the frenche kyng ſaid howe he wolde go thyder on the ſyde towarde Burgoyne. The kynge of Englande ſawe well howe he coude nat g
                  •
               t Calays b
                  •
               t by famyne / than he made a ſtronge caſtell and a hygh to cloſe vp the paſſage by the ſee and this caſtell was ſet bytwene the towne and the ſee / and was well fortyfied with ſpringalles bombardes / bowes / and other artillary. And in this caſtell were threſcore men of armes / and two hundred archers they kept the hauyn in ſuche wyſe that nothyng coude come in nor out / it was thought that therby they within ſhulde the ſoner be famyſſhed. In that ſeaſon the kynge of Englande ſo exhorted them of Flaunders that there yſſued out of Flaunders a hundred thouſande / and went and layde 
                  •
               iege to the towne of Ayre ▪ and brent the con
                  •
               rey all about / as M
                  •
               nyuell la gorge / Eſtelles le Uentre / and a marche called la Loe: and to the gates of ſaynt Omer / and Turwyne. Than the kyng went to the towne of Arras / and ſette many men of warr to the garyſons of Arthoys / and ſpecially he ſent his conſtable ſir Charles of S
                  •
               aygne to ſaynt Omers / for the erle of Ewe and of Guynes / who was conſtable of Fraunce was priſoner in Englande as it hath ben ſhewed before. The flemmynges dyd the frēchmen great trouble or they departed: and whan the flēmynges were returned than the french kyng and his company deꝑted fro Arras and went to Hedyn / his hoſt with ye caryage held well in length a thre l
                  •
               agꝭ of that contrey and ther he taryed a day / & the next day to Blangy. Ther he reſted to take aduyſe what way to go forthe: than he was counſayled to go through the contrey called la Belme / and yt way he toke and with hym a. CC. M. one and other and ſo paſſed by the countie of Franqueberg / & ſo came ſtreyght to the hyll of Sangattes / bytwene Calys and Wyſſant. They came thyder in goodly order with baners diſplayed / that 
                  •
               it was great beautie to beholde their puyſſaut array / they of Calys whan they ſawe them lodge it ſemed to them a newe ſiege.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the kyng of England ma
                  •
               e the paſſages about Calay
                  •
                to be well kept / that the frenche kyng ſhulde nat aproche to 
                  •
               eyſe his ſiege. Cap. C. xl
                  •
               .
            
               VE ſhall here what the kynge of Englande dyd & cauſed to be done whan̄e he ſawe and knewe that the french kyng came with ſo great an hooſt to rayſe the ſiege / the whiche had coſte hym ſomoche good and payne of his body / and loſt many of his mē: and knewe well howe he had ſo conſtrayned the towne / that hit coulde nat longe endure for defaute of vitayls / it greued hym ſore than to depart. Than he aduyſed well howe the frenchmen coud
                  •
                nat aproche nother to his hooſt nor to the towne / but in two places / other by the downes by the ſee ſyde / or elles aboue by the hygheway / and there was many dykes / rockes / and mareſſhes / and but one way to paſſe ouer a bridge called Newlande bridge. Than̄e the kynge made all his na
                  •
               y to drawe a long by the coſt of the downes euery ſhyp well garnyſſhed with 
                  •
               ōbardes / croſ 
                  •
               owes / archers / ſpringalles / and other artyllary: wherby the frenche hooſt myght 
                  •
               at paſſe that way. And the kynge cauſed the erle of D
                  •••
               y to go and kepe Newlande bridge with a great nō
               bre of men of armes and archers / ſo that the frē
               chemen coude natte paſſe no way without they wolde haue gone through the marſhes / the whiche was vnpoſſyble. On the otherſyde towarde Calys / ther was a hyghe towre kept with. 
                  〈◊〉
               . archers / and they kept the paſſage of y• downes fro the frēchmen / the which was well fortifyed with great and double 
                  •
               ykes. Whan the french men were thus lodged on the mount of Sangate: the commons of Turney who were a fyftene hundred came to that towre / and they within ſhotte at them / but they paſſed the dykes and came to the fote of the wall with pykes and hokes / there was a fore aſſaute and many of them of Tourney ſore hurte / but at laſte they wanne the towre / and all tha
                  •
                were within ſlayne / and the towre beaten downe. The french kyng ſent his marſhals to aduyſe what way he myght aproche to fyght with the englyſſhem
                  ••
                / ſo they went forthe and whan they had aduyſed the paſſages and ſtraytes / they retourned to the kyng and ſayd / howe in nowyſe he coude come to the englyſſhmen / without he wolde leſe his people. So the mater reſted all that day and nyght after / the nexte day after maſſe the frenche kynge ſende to the kynge of Englande / the lorde Goffray of Charney / the lorde Ewſtace of Rybamount / Guy of Nele / and the lorde of Bea
                  •
               ewe and as they rodde that ſtronge way / they ſawe well it was harde to paſſe that way. They praysed moche the order that the erle of Derby kepte there at the bridge of Newlande / by the which
                  •
                they paſſed / than they rode tyll they came to the kynge / who was well acompanyed with nobl
                  •
                men aboute hym than̄e they fou
                  •
               e lyghted and came to the kynge / and dyde their reuerence to hym / than the lorde Ewſtace of Rybamont 
                  〈◊〉
                ſir the kynge my maiſter ſendeth you worde by vs that he is come to the mount of Sangate to vs batayle with you but he canne fynde no way to come to you. Therfore ſir he wol
                  •
               e that y
                  •
                ſhulde apoynt certayne of your counſayle / and in lykewiſe of his / and they bytwene theym to aduyſe a place for the batayle. The kyng of Englande was redy aduyſed to anſwere and ſayd ſirs I haue well vnderſtande that ye deſ
                  •
               re m
                  •
                on the behalfe of myne aduerſary / who kepe
                  ••
                wrongfully fro me myne herytage: wher
                  •
               ore I am ſor
                  •
               e. Say vnto hym fro me if ye lyſt 
                  〈◊〉
                I am here and ſo haue bene nyghe an ho
                  〈…〉
                and all this he knewe right well / he might 
                  〈◊〉
                come hyther ſoner if he had wolde / but he hath ſuffred me to abyde 
                  •
               ere ſo long the which 
                  〈◊〉
                ben gretly to my coſte and charge / I 
                  ••
               we co
                  •
               
               de do ſomoche if I wolde to be ſone lorde of 
                  •
               alays / wherfore I am natte determynedd
                  •
                to folowe his deuyſe and 
                  •
               aſe / nor to depart 
                  〈…〉
                whiche I am at the poynt to wynne / and that I haue ſo 
                  •
               ore deſyred and derely bought ▪ wherfore if he nor his men canne paſſe this way / lett
                  •
                theym ſeke ſome other paſſage if they thynk
                  •
                to come hyther. Than̄e theſe lordes departe
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                were conueyed tyll they were paſte Newlande bridge ▪ than they ſhewed the frenche kynge the kynge of Englan
                  •
               es aunſwere. In the 
                  〈◊〉
                ſeaſon whyle the frenche kynge ſtudyed ho
                  ••
                to 
                  •
               ight with the kyng of Englande / the
                  •
                ca
                  〈…〉
                into his hooſt two cardynalles from pope Cl
                  •
               
               ment in legacion / who toke great pay
                  •
               e to 
                  〈◊〉
                bytwene theſe hooſtes / and they procuredde ſo moche that the
                  •
                was graunted a certayne tre
                  •
               
               tie of acorde / and a reſpyte bytwene the two kynges / and their men beynge there at ſiege and in the felde all onely. And ſo the
                  •
                were four lord
                  ••
               
               
apoynted on eyther partie to counſell togyder / and to treat for a peace for the frēche kyng ther was the duke of Burgoyne / & the duke of Burbone / ſir Loyes of Sauoy / and ſir John̄ Heynalt. And for thenglyſſhe partie: therle of Derby the erle of Northamton the lorde Reynolde Cobham / and the lorde Gaultyer of Manny. and the two cardynalles were meanes bytwene the parties. Theſe lordes mette thre dayes and many deuyſes put forthe / but none toke effect: and in the meane ſeaſon the kyng of Englande alwayes fortifyed his hoſt and felde and made dykes on the downes / that the frenchmen ſhuld nat ſodenly come on thē. Theſe thre dayes paſſed without any agrement than the two cardynalles returned to ſaynt Dmers / and whan the frenche kynge ſawe that he coude do nothynge / the next day he dyſloged be tymes and toke his waye to Amyens / and gaue euery man leaue to depart. Whan̄e they within Calays ſawe their kynge depart they made great ſorowe: ſome of the englyſſhmen folowed the tayle of the french men: and wanne ſomers cartes / and caryages / horſe / wyne and other thynges: and toke priſoners / whom they brought into the hooſt before Calays.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the towne of Calys was gyuen vp to the kyng of England. Cap. C .xlvi.
            
               AFter that the frenche kyng was thus departed fro Sangate they within Calays ſawe well howe their ſo coure fayled thē / for the whiche they were in gret ſorowe Than they deſyred ſomoche their captayn ſir John̄ of Uyen / that he went to the walles of the towne / and made a ſygne to ſpeke with ſome perſon of the hooſt. Whan the kyng harde therof / he ſende thyder ſir Gaultier of Many / and ſir Baſſet: than ſir John̄ of Uyen ſayd to them: ſirs ye be right valy ant knyghtes in dedes of armes / and ye knowe well howe the kynge my maiſter hath ſende me and other to this towne / and commaunded vs to kepe it to his behofe: in ſuche wyſe that we take no blame nor to hym no dammage / and we haue done all that lyeth in oure power. Nowe our ſocours hath fayled vs / and we be ſo ſore ſtrayned that we haue nat to lyue withall / but that we muſte all dye / or els e
                  •
               rage for famyn: without the noble and gentyll kyng of yours woll take mercy on vs / the which to do we requyre you to deſyre hym to haue pyte on vs / and to let vs go and depart as we be / and lette hym take the towne and caſtell and all the goodes that be therin / y• whiche is great habundaunce. Than ſir Gaultyer of Manny ſayde / 
                  〈◊〉
                we knowe ſomwhat of the entencyon of the kynge our maiſter for he hath ſhewed it vnto vs / ſurely knowe for trouth it is nat his mynde that ye nor they within the towne ſhulde departe ſo / for it is his wyll that ye all ſhulde put your ſelfes into his pure wyll to ranſome all ſuche as pleaſeth hym / and to putte to dethe ſuche as he lyſte / for they of Calays hath done hym ſuche cōtraryes and diſpyghtes / and hathe cauſed hym to dyſpende ſoo moche good / and loſte many of his menne: that he is ſore greued agaynſt them / than the captayneſayde / ſir this is to harde a mater to vs / we arhere within a ſmall ſorte of knyghtes and ſquyers / who hath trewely ſerued the kynge our maiſter / as well as ye ſerue yors. In lyk
                  •
                caſe and we haue endured moche payne and vneaſe / but we ſhall yet endure aſmoche payne as euer knyght
                  •
                dyd rather thaune to conſent that the worſt ladde in the towne ſhulde haue any more yuell / than the gretteſt of vs all. Therfore ſir we pray you that of your humylite / yet that ye woll go and ſpeke to the kynge of Englande: and deſyre hym to haue pytie of vs / for we truſte in hym ſomoche gentylneſſe / that by the gace of god his purpoſe ſhall chaung. Sir Gaultier of Manny and ſir Baſſet retourned to the kynge / and declared to hym all that hadde ben ſayde: the kynge ſayde he wolde none otherwyſe / but that they ſhulde yelde theym vp ſymply to his pleaſure / than ſir Gaultyerſayde ſir ſauyng your dyſpleaſure in this: ye may be in the wronge / for ye ſhall gyue by this an yuell enſample / if ye ſende any of vs your ſeruauntes into any fortreſſe we woll nat be very gladde to go / if ye putte any of theym in the towne to dethe after they be yelded / for in lyke wiſe they woll deale with vs / if the caſe fell lyke: the whiche wordes dyuerſe other lordes that were there preſent ſuſtayned and maynteyned. Than the kynge ſayde / ſirs I woll nat be alone agaynſt you all / therfore ſir Gaultyer of Manny ye ſhall goo and ſay to the capytayne / that all the grace that he ſhall fynde nowe in me is / that they lette ſixe of the chiefe burgeſſes of

the towne come out bare he
                  ••
               ed / bare foted and bare legged / and in their ſhertess with haulters about their neckess / with the 
                  〈◊〉
                of the towne and caſtell in their handes / an
                  •
                lette they in ſi
                  •
               e yelde themſelfe purely to my wyll / and the reſydewe I wyll take to mercy. Than ſir Gaultyer retourned and founde ſir John̄ of Uyen 
                  ••
               yll on the wall / abydinge for an anſwere: 
                  •
               hanne ſir Gaultier ſhewed hym all the grace that he coulde gette of the kynge / well 
                  〈◊〉
                ſir Johan: ſir I requyre you tary here a certayne ſpacetyll I go in to the towne and ſhewe this to the commons of the towne / who ſent me hyder. Than ſir John̄ went vnto the market place and ſo wned the cō
               mon bell / than incontynent men and women aſſembled there / than the captayne mane reporte of all that he had done / and ſayde ſirs it wyll be none otherwyſe therfore nowe take aduyſe and make a ſhorte aunſwere. Thanne all the people beganne to wepe and to make ſuch ſorowe that there was nat ſo hard a hert if they had ſene thē / but that wolde haue had great pytie of theym: the captayne hym ſelfe wepte pyt
                  •
               on
                  ••
               y. At laſt the mooſt riche burgeſſe of all the towne called Ewſtace of ſaynt Peters / roſe vp and ſayde openly. Sirs great and ſmall / great myſchiefe it ſhulde be to ſuffre to dye ſuche people as be in this towne / other by famyn or otherwyſe: whan there is a meane to ſaue theym / I thynke he or they ſhulde haue great merytte of our lorde god that myght kepe theym fro ſuche myſchie
                  •
               e: as for my parte I haue ſo good truſte in our lorde god that if I dye in the quarell to ſaue the reſtdewe that god wolde pardone me. Wherfore to ſaue them I wyll be the firſt to putte my lyfe in teopardy: Whan he had thus ſayde euery man worſhypped hym / and dyuers kneled downe at his fete with ſore wepyng and ſore ſighes. Thā another honeſt burgeſſe roſe and ſay
                  •
               e I wyll kepe company with my goſſyppe Ewſface / he was called John̄ Dayre / than roſe vp Jaques of Wyſſant / who was riche in goodes and herytage: he ſayd alſo that he wolde holde company with his two coſyns in likwyſe / ſo 
                  •
               yd Peter of Wyſſant his brother / and than̄e roſe two other they ſayde they wolde do the ſame: thanne they went and aparelled them as the kyng
                  •
                beſyred. Than the captayne went with them to the gate / ther was great lameutacyon made of men / women / and chyldren at their departyng: than the gate was opyned and he yſſued out with the. vt burgeſſes and cloſed the gate agayne / ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                they were bytwene the gate and the barriers. Than he ſayd to ſir Gaultier of Māny: ſir I 
                  〈◊〉
                here to you as captayne of Calays / by the hole conſent of all the peple of the towne theſe ſix bu
                  •
                geſſes / and I ſwere to you truely that they be & were to day mooſt honourable / riche / and moſt notable burgeſſes of all y• towne of Calys wherfore gētyll knyght I requyre you / pray the kyng to haue mercy on theym that they dye nat / ꝙ ſir Gaultier I can nat ſay what the kyng wyll do / but I ſhall do for them the beſt I can: than̄e the barryers were opyned the ſixe burgeſſes went towardes the kyng and the captayne entred agayne into the towne. Whan ſir Gaultier preſē
               ted theſe burgeſſes to the kyng they kneled downe and helde vp their handes and ſayd: gentyll kyng beholde here we ſixe who were burgeſſes of Calays and great marchantes / we haue brought to you the kayes of the towne and of the caſtell / and we ſubmyt oure ſelfe clerely into your wyll and pleaſure / to ſaue the reſydue of the people of Calays / who haue ſuffred great payne. Sir we beſcche your grace to haue mercy and pytie on vs through your hygh nobles: than all the erles & barownes / and other that were ther
                  •
                wept for pytie. The kyng loked felly on theym / for greatly he hated the people of Calys: for the gre
                  •
                damages and dyſpleaſures they had done hym on the ſee before. Than he cōmaūded their heedes to be ſtryken of / than euery man requyred the kyng for mercy / but he wolde here no mā
               in that behalfe: than ſir Gaultier of Māny ſaid a noble kyng for goddeſſake refrayne your courage / ye haue the name of ſouerayn nobles therfore nowe do nat a thyng that ſhulde blemyſſhe your renome / nor to gyue cauſe to ſome to ſpeke of you villany / euery man woll ſay it is a great cruelty to put to deth ſuche honeſt perſons / who by their owne wylles putte themſelfe into your grace to ſaue their cōpany. Than the kyng wryed away fro hym and cōmaunded to ſende for y• hangman / and ſayd they of Calys hath cauſed many of my mē to be slayne / wherfore theſe ſhalt dye in likewyſe. Than the quene beynge great with chylde / kneled downe & ſore wepyng ſayd: a gētyll ſir ſyth I paſſed the ſee in great parell I haue deſpred nothyng of you / therfore nowe I hūbly requyre you in y• honour of the ſon of the virgyn Mary and for the loue of me / yt ye woll take mercy of theſe ſixe burgeſſes. The kyng be helde y• quene & ſtode ſtyll in a ſtudy a ſpace and thā ſayd / a dame I wold ye had ben as nowe in ſōe other place / ye make ſuche requeſt to me y• I can nat 
                  •
               eny you: wherfore I gyue them to you to do your pleaſure with theym / than the quene cauſed thē to be brought into her chambre / and

made ye halters to be taken fro their neckes and cauſed them to be newe clothed and gaue them their dyner at their leſer. And than ſhe gaue ech of them ſire nobles and made thē to be brought out of thooſt in ſauegard / & ſet at their lyberte.
         
         
            ¶Howe the kyng of England repeopled the towne of Calys with englyſſhmen. Cap. C .xlvii.
            
               THus the ſtrong towne of Calays was gyuen vp to kyng Edwarde of England the yere of our lorde god. M CCC .xlvi. in the moneth of auguſt / the kyng of Englād called to hym ſir Gaultier of Manny and his two marſhals / therle of Warwyke and therle of Stafforde and ſayd to thē. Sirs take here the kayes of the towne and caſtell of Calys / go and take poſſeſſyon there and putte in priſon all the knyghtes that be there / & all other ſoudyours that came thyder ſymply to wynne their lyueng / cauſe theym to auoyde the towne. And alſo all other men / women and chyldren / for I wolde repeople agayne the towne wt pure englyſſhmen. So theſe thre lordes with a hundred with them went and toke poſſeſſyon of Calys / and dyd put in priſon ſir John̄ de Uien ſir John̄ of Surrey / ſir John̄ of Belborne and other: than they made all the ſoudyers to bring all their harneſſe into a place apoynted / & layed it all on a hepe in the hall of Calys / thanne they made all maner of people to voyde & kept there no mo perſons but a preeſt / and two other auncyent perſonages / ſuche as knewe the cuſtomes lawes / and ordynaunces of the towne / and to ſigne out the herytagꝭ howe they were deuyded than they prepared the caſtell to lodge the kyng and quene / and prepared other houſes for ye kynges company. Than the kyng mounted on his horſe and entred into the towne with trumpets tabours / nakquayres / and hormyes / and there the kyng lay tyll the quene was brought a bedd of a fayre lady named Margarete. The kynge gaue to ſir Gaultier of Māny dyuers fayre houſes within the towne / and to therle Stafforde / to the lorde of Bethene / to ſit Bartylmewe of Bomes / and to other lordes to repeople agayn the towne / the kynges mynde was whan he cāe into Englande to ſende out of London a .xxxvi. good burgeſſes to Calys to dwell there / and to do ſomoche that the towne myght be peopled wt pure englyſſhmen / the which entent the kynge fulfylled. Than ye newe towne and baſtyd that was made without the towne was pulled downe / and the caſtell that ſtode on the hauyn raſſhed downe / and the great tymbre and ſtones brought into the towne / than the kynge ordayned men to kepe ye gates / walles / and barryers / and amēded all thynges within the towne / and ſir John̄ de Uien and his cōpany were ſent into Englande / and were halfe a yere at London than they were putte to raunſome: me thynke it was great pyte of the burgeſſes and other men of the towne of Calys / & women / and chyldren / whasie they were fayne to forſake their houſes / herytages / and goodes / and to bere away nothyng: and they had no reſtorement of the frenche kyng for whoſe ſake they loſt all: the mooſt part of them went to ſaynt Omers. The cardynall Guy de Boloyne / who was come into Frā
               ce in legacyon and was with the frenche kynge his coſyn in the cytie of Amyenſe / he purchaſed ſomoche that a truſe was taken bytwene ye kynges of Englande and of Fraunce / their contres & herytages to endure two yeres. To this truſe all ꝑties were agreed / but Bretayne was clerely excepte / for the two ladyes made ſtyll warre one agaynſt the other. Than the kyng of Englande and the quene retourned into Englande / and the kyng made captayne of Calys ſir Amery of Pauy a lumbarde borne / whom the kyng had greatly auaunced / than the kynge ſende fro Lōdon .xxxvi. burgeſſes to Calays / who were ryche and ſage / and their wyues and chyldren. and dayly encreaſed the nombre / for the kynge graunted there ſuche lyberties and franchyſſes that men were gladde to go and dwell there / the ſame tyme was brought to Lōdon ſir Charles de Bloyes who called hymſelfe duke of Breten / he was putte in Cortoyſe priſon in the towre of London with the kyng of Scottes and the erle Morette / but he had nat ben there longe but at the requeſt of the quene of Englande / ſir Charles her coſyn germayne was receyuedde on his fayth and trouth / and rode all about London at his pleaſure / but he might natly paſt one night out of London without it were with the kynge or with the quene. Alſo the ſame tyme ther was priſoner in Englande therle of Ewe and Guynes / a right gentyll knyght: and his dealynge was ſuche that he was welcome wher ſoeuer he came / and with the kyng and quene / lordes ladyes / and damoſels.
         
         
            
            ¶Of the dealynge of a br
                  •
               gant of Languedocke / called Bacon. Cap. C .xlviii.
            
               ALl this yere theſe two kynges helde well the trewſe taken bytwene them: but ſir Wyllm̄ Duglas and the ſcottes beyng in the foreſt of Gedeours / made warre dayly on the englyſſhmen. Alſo ſuche as were in Gaſcoyne / Poyctou / and Xayntone: aſwell frenche as englyſſhe kept nothyng the trewſe taken bytwene the two kynges / but conquered often tymes townes and caſtels one vpon the other byforce / by purchaſe / or by ſtelth nyght & day: and often tymes ther fell bytwene thē many fayre auētures / ſomtyme to the frenchmen / and ſomtyme to thenglyſſhmen / & alwayes the poore brigantes wanne in robyng of townes and caſtels. And ſome therby came riche: ſo that they were made capitayns of other brigantes / there were ſome well worthe .xl. thouſande crownes / often tymes they wold ſpy wher was a good towne a dayes iourney or two fro them / than they wolde aſſemble .xx. or .xxx. of them togyder: and go by couert wayes day and nyght / and ſo entre into the towne vnknowen in ye mornynge / and ſette fyre on ſome houſe. Than they of the towne wolde thynke that it was done by ſome men of warre / and ſo flye away out of the towne: and thanne theſe brigantes wolde breke vp cofers and houſes / and robbe and take what they lyſte: and ſlye away whan they had done. Among other there was a brigant in Languedocke: he ſpyed the ſtronge caſtell of Couborne in Lymoſyn / he rode in the nyght with .xxx. cō
               panyons and toke the caſtell by ſtell he / and the lorde of the ſame caſtell priſoner: who was called Coubourne / and putte hym in priſon in his owne caſtell. And there kept hym ſo longe: that at laſt they raunſomed hym at .xxiiii. thouſande crownes / and they kept ſtyll ye caſtell and made ſore warr in the contrey. And after by fayre promyſes the frenche kyng bought hym and his caſtell: and gaue hym. x
                  •
               . thouſand crownes / and made hym vſſher of armes about him: and this Brigant Bacon was euer well horſed / ap
                  〈…〉
               
               led / and armed lyke an erle. And ſo he contynued as longe as he lyued.
         
         
            ¶ Of another page called Croquart. Cap. C .xlix.
            
               IN lyke caſe there were brigantes in Bretayne / who made warre and wanne townes and caſtelles / and lyued by robery & helde of no man: for that they wanne thei kept to thēſelfe / and ſolde to them of the countrey townes and caſtels derely. And among other there was one as a mayſter called Croquart / who was before but a poore page attendyng on the lorde Dercle in Holland. Whan this Croquart began to waxe a man: his lorde gaue hym leaue to depart and go to the warres into Bretayne / and there he fyll in ſeruyce with a man of armes and bare hymſelfe well / and at aſkirmyſſhe his maiſter was taken and ſlayne / thanne bycauſe of his prowes his felowes dyde chuſe hym capitayne in ſtede of their mayſter. And than he dyd gette ſomoche by wynnyng of townes and caſtelles / that he was eſtemed to be worthe .xl. thouſand crownes beſyde his horſe: wherof he had a .xx. or .xxx. good courſers / and double horſe: and he had the brute to be one of the mooſt expert men of armes in all that countre. And he was choſen in a batayle to be one of the .xxx. of the englyſſhe partie: and he wan ther the price of all other / the frēche kyng made hym offers and promyſe that if he wolde becōe frenche to make hym a knyght / and to mary him rychely / and to gyue hym two thouſande pounde of reuenewes yerely: but he wolde in nowyſe cō
               ſēt therto. And it fortuned hym on a day to ryde a yonge horſe / the which he had bought for thre hundred crownes: and he spu
                  •
               red hym ſoo ſore that the horſe ranne away with hym / and in romnyng fell in a dyke & brake his mayſters necke / thus ended Croquart.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Amery of Pauy lumbar
                  •
                ſolde the towne of Calys / wherof he was captayne / to the lorde Geffray Charney of Fraunce. Cap. C .l.
            
               
               ALl this ſeaſon in the towne of ſaynt Omers / was the lorde Geffray of Charney: & kept the fronters ther / vſing euery thynge touchynge the warre / as kyng. Than he be thought him howe that lumbardes naturally be couetonſe: wherfore he thought to aſſay to gette the towne of Calys / wher of Amery of Pauy lumbarde was capitayne / & by reaſone of the trewſe they of ſaynte Omers myght go to Calys / and they of Calys to ſaynt Omers: ſo that dayly that reſorted toguyder to do their marchādyſes. Than ſir Geffray ſecretly fyll in treaty with ſir Amery of Pauy: ſo that he promyſed to delyuer into the frēchmens handes the towne and caſtell of Calys for .xx. thouſande crownes. This was nat done ſo ſecretely but that the kyng of Englande had knowledge therof: than the kyng ſend for Amery de Pauy to come into England to Weſtmynſter to ſpeke with hym / and ſo he came ouer: for he thought that the kyng had nat had knowledge of that mater / he thought he had done it ſo ſecretly. Whan the kyng ſawe hym he toke hym apart (& ſayd) thou knoweſt well I haue gyuen the in kepyng the thynge in this worlde yt I loue beſt next my wyfe & chyldren / that is to ſay the towne and caſtell of Calys / and thou haſt ſolde it to the frēchmen / wherfore thou haſte well deſerued to dye. Than the lumbard kneled downe (and ſayd) a noble kyng I cry you mercy / it is trewe that ye ſay / but ſir the bargayne may well be broken for as yet I haue receyued neuer a peny: the kyrge had loued well the lumbard (and ſayd) Amery / I woll that thou go forwarde on thy bargayne and the day that thou apoynteſt to delyuer the towne let me haue knowledge therof before / and on this condycion I forgyue the thy treſpas / ſo thervpon the lumbard retourned agayne to Calays and kept this mater ſecrete. Than ſir Geffray of Charney thought well to haue Calays: and aſſembled a certayne nombre ſecretly / a .v. hundred ſpeares: ther were but a fewe y• knewe what he purpoſed. I thynke he neuer made the frenche kyng of knowledge therof: for if he had I trowe the kyng wolde nat a conſented therto / bycauſe of the truſe. This lumbard had apoynted to delyuer ye caſtell the firſt nyght of ye newe yere: the lumbarde ſende worde therof by a brother of his to the kyng of Englande.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batayle at Calays bytwene the kyng of Englande / vnder the baner of ſir Gaultyer of Manny / and ſir Geffray of Charney and the frenchemen. Cap. C .li.
            
               WHan the kyng of England knewe the certayne day apoynted he departed out of England with thre. C. men of armes / and .vi. C. archers: & toke ſhyppyng at Douer / and in the euenynge arryued at Calays / ſo ſecretely that no man knewe therof / and went and layde his men in buſſhmentes in the chambers and towres within the caſtell. Than̄e the kyng ſayde to ſir Gaultyer of Manny: I woll that ye be chiefe of this enterprice / for I and my ſonne the prince woll fyght vnder your baner. The lorde Geffray of Charney: the laſt day of Decembre at nyght departed fro Arras and all his company / and came nere to Calis about the hour of mydnight / and than taryed there abydynge for his company / and ſende two ſquyers to the poſterne gate of the caſtell of Calys. And there they founde ſir Amery redy: than they demaunded of hym if it were tyme that the lorde Geffray ſhulde come: and the lumbarde ſayde yes. Than they retourned to their maiſter and ſhewed hym as the lumbard ſayd / than he made his men paſſe Newlande bridge in good order of batayle: than he ſende .xii. knyghtes with a hundred men of armes / to go and take poſſeſſion of the caſtell of Calays / for he thought well if he myght haue the caſtell / he ſhulde ſoone gette the towne: ſeyng he had ſo gode a nōbre of men with hym / and dayly might haue mo whan̄e he lyſt. And he delyuered to the lorde Edwarde of Ren
                  •
               y .xx. thouſande crownes to pay the lumbarde / and ſir Geffray houed ſtyll in the feldes priuely with his baner before hym. His entent was to entre into the towne by ye gate orels nat / the lumbarde had lette downe the bridge of the poſterne and ſuffred the hundred men of armes to entre peaſably: and ſir Edwarde delyuered at the poſtern .xx. thouſand crownes in a bagge to the lumbarde / who ſayde I truſt here be all: for I haue no leaſer now to tell them / for it wyll be anone day. Than he caſt ye bagge with crownes into a coter: and ſayde to the frenchemen / cōe on ſirs ye ſhall entre into the dongyon / than ſhall you be ſure to be lordes of the caſtell / they went thyder and he drewe apart the barre: and

the gate opyned. Within this towre was ye king of England with two hundred ſpeares: who yſſued out with their ſwerdes & ares in their handes / cryeng Manny Māny to the reſcue / what weneth the frenchmen with ſo fewe men to wyn the caſtell of Calays: than the frenchmen ſawe well that defence coude nat auayle theym / than they yelded thēſelfe priſoners / ſo that ther were but a fewe hurt: than they were put into y• ſame towre in priſon. And thengly ſſhmen yſſued out of the caſtell into the towne & mounted on their horſes / for they had all the frenche priſoners horſes / than tharchers rode to Bolayne gate wher ſir Geffray was with his banner before hym / of goules / thre ſkuchens of ſyluer / he had great deſyre to be the firſt ſhulde entre into the towne / he ſayd to the knyghtes that were about him / with out this lumbarde opyn the gate ſhortely we ar lyke to dye here for colde. In the name of god 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                ſayd Pepy de Werre: lumbardes ar malycious people and ſubtyll / he is nowe lokynge on your crownes to ſe if they be all good or nat / and to reken if he haue his hole ſomme or no. There / with the kynge of Englande and the prince his ſonne was redy at the gate vnder the bauer of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Gaultier of Manny: with dyuers other baners as the erle Stafforde / the erle of Suffolke / the lorde John̄ Montagu brother to therle of Salyſbury / the lorde Beachame / the lorde Be
                  ••
               le / and the lorde Dalawarre: all theſe were lordes and had baners / there were no mo in that iourney. Than the great gate was ſet open and they all yſſued out: whan̄e the frenchmen ſawe them yſſue and herde them cry Manny to the reſcue / they knewe well they were betrayed / than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Geffray ſayd to his company (ſirs if we ſlye) we are clene loſt / yet wer we better to fight with a gode hert in truſte the iourney ſhall be ours. The englyſſhmen herd theſe wordes (& ſayd) by ſaynt George ye ſay trewely: ſhame haue he that ſlyeth / the frenchmen a lighted a fote and put their horſes fro them / and ordred themſelf in batayle. Whan the kyng ſawe that he ſtode ſtyll (& ſayd) let vs order our ſelfe to fight: for our ennemyes woll abyde vs / the kyng ſende part of his company to Newland bridge / for he herde ſay ther were a great nombre of frenchmen. Than thyder went a ſixe baners / & thre hundred archers: and there they founde the lorde Monau of Frenes / and the lorde of Creques kepyng ye bridge and bytwene the bridge and Calays ther were many croſbowes of ſaynt Omers and Ayre: ſo there was a ſore fray / and ſlayne and drowned mo than ſixe hundred frenchmen / for they were ſoone diſcomfytted and chaſed into the water. This was erly in the mornyng but in cōtynent it was day: the frenchmen kept their grounde a whyle and many feates of armes there done on bothe partes / but the englyſſhmen euer encreaſed by commyng out of Calays / and the frenchmen abated. Than the frēchmen ſawe well they coulde nat longe kepe the bridge: than ſuche as had their horſes by them mounted and ſhewed their horſes heles / and thenglyſſhmen after thē in chaſe: there was many a man ouerthrowen / they that were well horſed ſaued themſelfe / as ye lorde Frenes / ye lorde Creques / the lorde of Sē
               py / the lorde of Louchinleych / and the lorde of Namure / many were taken by their owne outrage that might haue benſaued if they had lyſt / Whan̄e it was fayre day that euery man myght knowe other: than ſome of the french knyghtes and ſquyers aſſēbled togyder agayne / and turned and fought feerſly with the englyſſhmen / ſo that ther were ſome of the frenchmen that toke good priſoners / wherby they had bothe honour and profet. ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of the kyng / who was ther vnknowen of his ennemyes / vnder the banner of ſir Gaultyer of Manny / and was a fote among his men to ſeke his enemyes / who ſtode cloſe togyder with their ſpeares a .v. fore long. At the firſt meatyng there was a ſore rencountre: and the kyng light on the lorde Euſtace of Rybemount / who was a ſtronge and a hardy knight: there was a long fyght bytwene hym and the king that it was ioy to beholde thē at laſt they were put a ſondre / for a great company of bothe parties came the ſame way & fought there feerſly togyder. The frenchmen dyd ther right valyantly / but ſpecially the lorde Euſtace of Ribamont who ſtrake the kyng the ſame day two tymes on his knees / but finally the kynge hymſelf toke him priſoner / and ſo he yelded his ſwerde to ye kyng (and ſayd) ſir knyght I yelde me as your priſoner: he knewe nat as than that it was the kyng. And ſo the iourney was for the kyng of England: and all that were ther with 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Geffray ſlayne or taken / ther was ſlayne 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hē
               ry of Boys / and ſir Pepyn de la warre / and ſir Geffray taken. Thꝰ this iourney was achyued by Calis / ye yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lviii. ye laſt day of Decēbre towarde the next mornyng.
         
         
            Of a chapelet of perles that the kyng of Englande gaue to ſir Euſtace of Rybemont. Cap. C .lii.
            
               
               WHan this batayle was done the kyng returned agayne to the caſtell of Calays & cauſed all the priſoners to be brought thyder. Than ye frē
               chmen knewe well yt the kynge had ben there perſonally hy
                  〈…〉
                vnder the baner of ſir Gaultier of Mā
               ny: the kynge ſayd he wolde gyue them all that 
                  ••
               ght a ſupper in the caſtell of Calys / the hour of ſupper cāe and tables couerd. And the kyng and his knyghtes were ther redy euery man in newe a
                  •
               arell / and the frenchmen alſo were ther and made good chere thoughe they were priſoners. The kyng ſatte downe and the lordes and knygh
                  ••
               s about hym right honorably / y• prince lordes and knyghtes / of Englande ſerued the kynge at the firſt meſſe: and at the ſeconde they ſatte downe at an other table they were all well ſerued and at great leaſer. Than̄e whan ſupper was done and the tables take away: the kynge taryed ſtyll in the hall with his knyghtes & with the frenchmen and he was bare heeded ſauyng a chapelet of fyne perles y• he ware on his 
                  •
               eed. Than the kynge went fro one to another of the frenchmen: and whan he came to ſir Geffray of Charney / a lytell he changed his countenance & loked on hym (and ſayd) ſir Geffray by reaſon I ſhulde loue you butte a lytell / wha
                  •
                ye wolde ſteale by night fro me that thynge which I haue ſo der
                  •
               ly bought and hath coſt me ſomoch gode I am right 
                  •
               oyouſe and gladde that I haue taken you with the proffe. ye wolde haue a better markette than I haue had: whan ye thought to haue Calys for .xx. thouſande crownes but god hath holpen me / and ye haue fayled of your purpoſe: and therwith the kyng went fro hym and he gaue neuer a worde to anſwere. Than y• kynge cāe to ſir Euſtace of Rybamont and ioyouſly to hym he ſayd: ſir Euſtace ye are the knyght in the worlde that I haue ſene mooſt valyant aſſayle his ennemyes and defende hymſelf / nor I neuer founde knyght y• euer gaue me ſomoche a do body to body as ye haue done this day wherfore I gyue you the price aboue all the knightes of my court by right ſentēce: than the kyng toke the chapelet yt was vpon his heed / beyng bothe fayre goodly / and tyche (and ſayd) ſir Euſtace I gyue you this chapelet for the beſt doar in at
               
                  •
               es in this journey paſt of eyther party: and I deſyre you to bere it this yere for the loue of me. I knowe well ye be freſſhe and amorouſe: and often tymes be among ladyes and damoſelles / ſay wher ſoeuer ye come that I dyd gyue it you and I quyte you your priſon and ranſome / and ye ſhall depart tomorowe if it pleaſe you. The ſame yere a thouſande thre hundred .xlix. kynge Philyppe of Fraunce wedded his ſeconde 
                  ••
               yfe the wedniſday / the .xxix. day of January: dame Blanche doughter to kynge Philyppe of Nauerre (who dyed in Spayne) ſhe was of ye age of eyghtene yere or there about. Alſo the nynetene day of February next after in y• begynning of lent: the duke of Normandy the kyngꝭ eldeſt ſonne wedded his ſeconde wyfe at ſaynt Geneueſe / nere to ſaynt Germayne in Lay Jane coū
               teſſe of Bolayne / ſomtyme wyfe to ye lorde Phylyppe ſonne to the duke Eudos of Burgoyne: y• which lorde Philyppe dyed before Aguyllone a thre yere before that. She was doughter of the erle Wyllyam of Bolayne / and of the doughter of L
                  •
               yes erle of Eureur: this lady helde in her handes the duchy of Burgoyne / and the counteſſe of Arthoyes / Bolayne / Auuergne / and dyuerſe other landes.
         
         
            ¶ Of the dethe of kynge Philyppe of France / and of the coronacyon of his ſonne John̄. Cap. C .liii.
            
               IN the yere of our lorde god. M. CCC .l. at the beginyng of Auguſt / ſir Raoll of Caours & dyuerſe other knyghtꝭ and ſquyers to the nombre of ſixſcore men of armes / fought before a caſtell called Auleon: within a capitayne of the kynge of Englandes in Bretayne called ſir Thomas Dāgorne. And the ſame ſir Thom̄s ther 
               
                  ••
               ayn and to the nombre of a. C. men of armes with hym: the ſame yere the .xxii. day of Auguſt king Philypp̄ dyed at Nogeunt / and was caryed to our ladyes church in Parys. And the thurſday after he was buryed at ſaynt Denyſe on the lyft hande of the hygh auter / and his bowelles were buryed at the Jacopyns in Parys / and his hert at Bourfontayne in Ualoys. The .xxvi. day of Septembre next enſuynge on a ſonday was ſacred and crowned at Reyns kynge John̄ eldeſt ſon to kyng Philyp: and the ſame day the quene alſo was crowned: and ther the king made certayne knyghtes his eldeſt ſon dolphyn of Uyen & Loys his ſeconde ſon erle of Alanſon / the erle of Stāpes / the lorde Joh
                  •
                of Arthoys / y• duke

Philypp̄ of Orlyaunce brother to the kyng / the duke of Burgoyne ſon to the quene by her 
                  〈◊〉
                huſbande / the lorde Philyp of Burgoyn / therle Dāmartyn / and dyuers other. And the 
                  •
               ōday after the kyng departed and went to Parys by Laon / Soyſſons / and Se
                  •
               lys / and the kynge and quene entred into Parys in great tryūphe the .xvii. day of Octobre / and there kept a great feeſt the hole weke / and the kyng 
                  •
               aryed thet at Neele and at his palys / tyll it was ſaynt Martyns tyde: and there made ordynaunce for his ꝑlyament. The tueſday the .xvi. day of Nouēbre Raffe erle of Ewe and of Guynes conſtable of France / who was newly come out of priſon in England was taken in y• kyngꝭ houſe at Neele in Parys / wher the kyng was / by the prouoſt of Parys at the kynges cōmaundemēt / and in the ſāe houſe he was put in priſon tyll the thurſday after / & about the hour of matyns the ſame day he was beheeded in priſon / in the preſence of the duke of Burbon / the erle Armynake / the erle of Monford / the lorde John̄ of Bolayne / therle of Renell / and dyuers other knyghtes who were there preſent by the cōmaundement of the kyng who was at his palays. This cōſtable was beheeded for high treaſons: the which he cōfeſſed to the duke of Athenes / and to dyuers other: he was buryed in ye auguſty
                  •
               s in Parys without the walles of the church by the apoyntment of y• kyng / for honour of the frendes of the ſayd conſtable. In the moneth of January 
                  •
               olowynge Charles of Spayne to whom the kyng had gyuen the countie of Angolen / was than made cō
               ſtable of France. The firſt day of Aprill next after / the lorde Guy of Neell marſhall of Fraunce fought in 
                  •
               ayntou with dyuers englyſſhmen 
                  〈◊〉
                gaſcoyns / and the ſayde marſhall and his men were there dyſconfited & the marſhall taken priſoner / and the lorde Wy
                  〈…〉
                his brother / y• lorde Arnolde Dandrehen & dyuers other. On good friday the .x. day of Aprill / the yere of our lorde M. CCC .li. was preſented a reed hatte to Gyles Rygalt of Rouſſy / who was abbot of ſaynt Denyce / and was made cardynall in the palais of Parys / in the preſence of the kyng by the byſſhoppe of Laon & Parys / by authorite of a bull fro the pope / the which hadde na
                  •
                be acuſtomed ther before. In ſeprēbre after the frenchmen recouered the towne of ſaynt John̄ Dangle / the which thēglyſſhmen had kept 
                  •
               yue yere / it was delyuerd vp by thēglyſſhmen / bycauſe they had nothyng to lyue by / wout any ma
                  •
               e
                  •
                of batayle in the moneth of Octobre was publy
                  ••
               hed y• fraternyte of the noble houſe of ſaynt Ouen
                  •
               e
                  •
                to Paris / & all ſuche as were bretherne ther bare a ſtarre on his bonet and on his mantell before. This yere was the gretteſt darth that any man than lyueng coude remēbre throughout all france / for a ceptyer of whete was worthe at Parys viii .li. pariſie
                  •
               
               ▪ and a ſeptier of otes at .lx. s. of parys / for a buſſhell of pees .viii. s. & other grenes there after. In the ſame moneth of Octobre the ſame day that the fraternyte of ſaynt Owen was celebrate / thenglyſſhmen toke the towne of Guynes for all the truſe: the ſame yer 
               ther was a maryage made bytwene the conſtable of france▪ and the doughter of ſir Charles 
                  •
               e Bloys.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Nauer made ſir Charles of Spaygne conſtable of France to be ſlayne. Ca. C .liiii.
            
               IN the yere of our lorde M. CCC .lii. in the vygill of our lady in the myddes of auguſt / the lord Guy of Neell lorde of O
                  •
               femōt as than marſhall of France / in Bretayne was ſlayne in bataile the lorde of Briquebeke / the Cathelayne of Beau wayes / & dyuers other nobles / aſwell of Bretayne as of other marches of France. The .iiii. day of Septēbre ſhulde a fought in Parys the duke of Bo
                  •
               ſme / agayne the duke of Lancaſtre for certayne wordes that he ſhulde ſay of ye duke of Boeſme / the which duke apealed hym in the court of Frāce. Theſe two dukes came into the felde all armed in a lyſtes made for y• ſayd duke of Almayne chalenger / and for the duke of Englande defender. And though thēglyſſhmen wer enemys to the french kyng / and that thenglyſſh duke came thyder vnder ſaue cōduct to fight 
                  〈◊〉
                the defence of his honour / yet the frenche kynge wold nat ſuffre them to fight: for aſſone as they had made their othes in ſuch caſe requyſite and were on their horſes redy with their ſpeares in their handes. Than the kyng toke on hym y• mater / and dyd ſet them in acorde and gremēt: the vi. day of Decēbre folowyng pope Clement the vi. dyed at Auygnon / the .xi. yere of his pōti
                  •
               ic
                  •
               
               te / and the .xi. day of the ſame moneth about the hour of thre was choſen pope / a cardynall of Lymoſyn / called by his tytle y• cardynall of Oſtre / but bycauſe he was byſſhoppe of Cleremont he was called moſt cōmonly y• cardynall of Cleremont / and whan he was choſen pope he was n
                  •
               
               
med Innocēt / his owne proper name was Stephyn 
                  •
               ubert / y• yere of our lorde. M .iii. C .liii. the .viii. day of January / anone after y• brekynge of the day in the mornyng / the kyng Charles of Nauer erle of Eureur cauſed to be ſlayne in the towne of the Egle in Normādy in an hoſtre / the lorde Charles of Spayne conſtable of Frā
               ce in his bedde / by certayne men of armes that he ſent to do that dede and hymſelfe abode with out the towne tyll they had done and retourned agayne to hym. And as it was ſayde with hym was the lorde Philypp̄ of Nauer his brother / & the lorde Lovs of Harcourt / the lorde Godfray of Hat court his vncle and dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers aſwell of Normandy as of Nauer. Than the kynge of Nauer and his cōpany went to the cyte of Deureur wherof he was erle and fortifyed the towne / and with hym alſo ther was the lorde of Maule / John̄ Maler lorde of Grauyll / the lorde of 
                  ••
               morie / of Mulent / and dyuers other nobles of Normandy. And than̄e the kyng of Nauer went to the towne of Mant and he had ſent dyuers letters into diuers gode townes of France: howe that he had put to deth the conſtable for dyuers great treſpaces by him cōmytted / and he ſent the erle of Namure to the french kyng to Parys to excuſe hym. Than the kynge ſende to Mant the cardynall of Bolayne the byſſhoppe of Laon / the duke of Burbon / the erle of Uaudone & other / to treat with the kyng of Nauerr / for though he had cauſed to dye the cōſtable of France / yet he thought he ſhulde nat clene leſe the fauour of the frenche kyng / whoſe doughter he had maryed: therfore he made requeſt of pardon to the kyng. It was thought in the realme of Fraunce that great warre ſhulde enſe we bytwene theſe two kynges / for the kyng of Nauer had made great aſſembles of men of warre in dyuers regions / and fortifyed his townes & caſtles: finally there was agrement made bytwene theſe two kynges vpon certayne cōdycions wherof part ſolo weth herafter. That is to ſay: the french kyng ſhall delyuer to the kyng of Nauer .xxxviii. M. 
                  •
               i. tornois of lande / aſwell for certeyn rent that the kyng of Nauer had out yerely of the treſur in Pares as vpon other lā
               des that the frenche kyng ought to aſſigne hym by certeyne treat
                  •
                graūted long before bytwene their predeceſſo's / bycauſe of the countie of Chā
               payne. And alſo for the maryage of the kynge of Nauer: for maryeng of the kyng
                  •
                doughter / at which maryage he was promyſed great landes / that is to ſay .xii. M. 
                  •
               i. of land: alſo the kyng of Nauer wolde haue the coūtie of Beamōt le Roger / the land of Bretuell in Normādy / Conches and Dorbec / the vycoūt of Pōtheu by the ſee / & the bayllage of Cōſtantyne: the which thynges were agreed vnto by the french kyng. Howbeit the coūtie of Beamont / & the landes of Conches Bertuell / & Dorbec: parteyned to the lorde Philyp duke of Orleāce brother to the french kyng / who gaue hym other lādes in recōpence therof. Alſo it was agreed that the lordes of Harcourt and all his other alyes ſhuld holde of him for all their landes wherſoeuer they were in France if they lyſt orels nat: alſo it was agreed y• he ſhuld holde ſtyll all the ſayd landes beſyde thē that he helde before in parie / and if he lyſt to kepe his eſ cheker two tymes in the yere / as nobly as euer dyd any duke of Normādy: alſo the french kynge to ꝑdon the deth of the cōſtable / and all ſuche as were cōſentyng therto: and to ꝓmyſe by his oth neuer to do any hurt or dāmage to any ꝑſon for that occaſion. And alſo the kyng of Nauerr to haue a great ſom̄e of money of y• french kyng and ar the kyng of Nauer wolde cōe to Parys: he wolde haue in hoſtage the erle of Aniowe / ſeconde ſon to the kyng. Than he came to Pares with a great nōbre of men of armes: and the. iiii day of march / he came into the ꝑlyament chābre wher the kyng ſatte & dyuers of the peres of the realme with him and his counſell: ther was the cardynall of Bolayne / ther the kyng of Nauer deſyred the french kyng to ꝑdon hym the deth of the cōſtable of France / ſayeng how he had gode cauſe ſo to do / the which he offred ther to proue or els to be at the kynges pleaſure. And alſo he ſayd and ſware that he dyd it nat for no grudge to the kyng / nor in diſpyte of his offyce: ſayeng alſo howe ther was nothyng ſo greuous to him as to be in the dyſpleaſur with the kyng. Than the lorde Jaques of Burbone as than conſtable by the kynges cōmaundement / ſette his handes on the kynge of Nauer / and cauſed hym to go a backe out of the kyng
                  •
                preſ
                  •
               ns: thā quene Jane and quene Blanche / ſuſter to the kynge of Nauer / the which Jane had ben wyfe to kyng Philyppe laſt deed: came to the frenche kyng & kneled downe / and the lorde Reynold Detrey with them (and he ſayd) my right redouted ſoueraygne lorde: beholde here theſe two ladyes & quenes Jane and Blanche. Sir they vnderſtande howe the kyng of Nauer is in your dyſpleaſur / whereof they be ſorie: and requyre you to forgyue hym your yuell wyll / and by the grace of god he ſhall ſo bere hymſelfe frohens forwarde / that you and all the people of France ſhalbe pleaſed with hym / than the conſtable and the marſhalles

went agayne for the king of Nauer / and ſo brought hym into the kynges preſence / and ther he ſtode bytwene the two quenes. Than ye cardynall ſayd ſir kyng of Nauer: the kyng my maiſter is nat well cōtent with you for the dede that ye haue done / it nede nat to be reherſed / for ye haue publyſſhed it yourſelfe by youre owne writyng / ſo that euery man doth knowe it ye ar ſo bounde to the kyng that ye ought nat thus to haue done. ye be of his blode ſo nere as euery man knoweth that ye ought to holde of hym / & alſo ye haue wedded his doughter / where fore your treſpaſſe is the greatter: Howe beit at the inſtaunce and loue of theſe ladyes the quenes / who hath effectuouſly requyred for you: and alſo the kyng thynketh that ye dyde it wtout great aduyſement / and by ſmall counſayle / therfore ye kyng pardoneth you with good hert and wyll. Than the two quenes and the kynge of Nauer kneled downe and thanked the kynge / than the cardynall ſayd agayne: let euery man fro henſforthe beware though he be of the kynges lynage to do any ſuche lyke dede / for ſurely though he be the kynges ſonne / if he do any ſuche to the leeſt offycer parteyning to the kyng / he ſhall abyde the iuſtyce of the realme in that caſe: than the court brake vp / and ſo euery man departed. The .xxi. day of Marche / a knyght baneret of the lowe marcheſſe called ſir Reynolde of Preſigny lorde of Maraunt beſyde Rochell / was drawen and hanged on the gybette / by iudgement of the parlyament / and by the kynges coū
               ſayle / the yere of our lorde god. M. CCC .liiii. in the moneth of Auguſt. The erle of Harcourt and ſir Loyes his brother / counſayled with the frenche kyng▪ and as it was ſayde / they ſhewed the kyng all the mater of the dethe of the conſtable / and in Septēbre the cardynall of Bolayne went to Auygnon / ſome ſayd the kyng was dyſpleaſed with hym. Howe be it the ſpace of a yere that he had ben in France he was as preuy with the kynge as any other. The ſame ſeaſon there went out of the realme of France / the lorde Robert de Lorris chāberlayne with the kyng / and if the kyng had takyn hym in his yre / ſome thought it ſhulde haue coſt hym his lyfe: bycauſe it was noyſed that he had ſhewed to the kynge of Nauerre certayne ſecretes of the frenche kyng: in like wyſe as the lordes of Harecourt had ſhewed the kyng of Nauers ſecretes to the frenche kyng. In the moneth of Nouembre the kyng of Nauer went out of Normandy without knowledge of the french kyng / and ſported hym in dyuers places tyll he came to Auygnon ▪ and in the ſame moneth the archebyſſhop of Rowan chanceler of Fraunce / the duke of Burbone / and dyuers other englyſſhe lordes wente to Auygnon to the pope to treat for a peace bytwene the kynges of England and of France. And alſo ye ſame moneth the frenche kyng went into Normandy to Cane / and toke in his handes all the landes of the kynge of Nauers / and ſet in his offycers in euery towne and caſtell / except ſixe: that is to ſay Eareur / Pontheu / Chirburge / Gaurey / Auranges / and Mortaygne / theſe wolde nat yelde vp / for ther were naueroys within theym (that anſwered and ſayd) they wolde nat delyuer vp their townes & caſtels: but all onely to the kyng of Nauer their lorde: who had ſette them there. In the moneth of January by ſaue conduct cāe the lorde Robert de Lorris to the frenche kyng: and was a .xv. dayes at Parys or he coude ſpeke with the kyng / and whan he had ſpoken with hym yet he was nat reconſyled at the full / but returned agayne into Auygnon by the ordynance of the kynges counſell / to be as one of them that were ther for the treaty bytwene Englande and France. In the ende of February tidynges cāe howe trewſe was taken bytwene the ſayde two kynges to endure to the feeſt▪ of ſaynt John̄ Baptyſt: and in the mean tyme the pope to do what he myght to make a further peace. And therfore he ſende meſſangers to bothe kynges / that they ſhulde ſende further authorite by their embaſſadours / to conclude on an other maner of peace. The ſame moneth the frenche kyng made newe money of fyne golde: called florence of ye lambe / for in the pyell there was grauyn a lambe .lii. of theym went to a marke weyght / and after they were made the kynge made .xlviii. to goo for a marke weyght and the courſe of all other florēs was prohibyted. The ſame moneth ſir Grāchet be Lore came to Parys to ſpeke with the kynge as meſſanger fro the kyng of Nauer: and he retourned agayne in February / & bare with hym a letter of ſaue cōduct to the kyng of Nauer / the ſame yere about lent came dyuers englyſſhmen nere to ye towne of Nauntꝭ in Bretayne / and entred into the caſtell by ſcalyng a .lii. but ſir Guy of Rochfort who was captayn & was as than in the towne / he dyd ſomoche with aſſaut that the ſame nyght he wanne the caſtell agayne / and all thenglyſſhmen taken and ſlayne. At Eaſter the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lv. kyng Johan of France ſent into Normādy his eldeſt ſon Charles dolphyn of Uienoys to be his lieutenāt ther and there he taryed all that ſomer / and the men of the contre graūted hym .iii. M. mē of armes

tor thre mouethes. Alſo in the moneth of auguſt the kyng of Nauer / came out of Nauer to the caſtell of Chierburge in Conſtantyne / and with hym a .x. M. men of warr one and other. Ther were dyuers treates cōmuned of / bytwene the kyng of Nauer and the frenche kyng / but ſuche as were in the caſtell of Eurur and Pontheau / robbed & pylled the countre all about. And ſome of them came to the caſtell of Couches / the whiche was as than in the french handes / and wan it and newe fortifyed it / many thynges dyde the nauereys agaynſt the frenchmen / finally the .ii. kynges were agreed. Than the kyng of Nauer went to the caſtell of Uernell to the dolphyne / & he brought the kyng of Nauer to Parys / and y• xxiiii. day of Septēbre the kyng of Nauer and the dolphyn came to the frenche kyng to the caſtell of Lour. Than the kyng of Nauerr made his reuerence and excuſed hymſelfe honorably / in that he departed out of the realme of France / and alſo he ſayd it was ſhewed hym how y• kynge ſhulde nat be well content with hym. Than y• frenche kynge deſyred hym to ſhewe what they were that had made that report / than he anſwered that ſyth the deth of the cōſtable / he had don nothyng agaynſt the french kyng / but as a true man ought to haue done. Howe beit he deſyred the french kyng to pardon euery thyng / promyſynge to be true as he ought to be to his father & chiefe lorde / than̄e the duke of Athenes ſayde in kynges behalfe the kynge doth pardon hym all thynges with a good hert.
         
         
            ¶ Of an inpoſycion and gabell ordayned in Fraunce by the thre eſtates for the feates of the warres. Cap. C .lv.
            
               ALſo in the yere of oure lorde. M. CCC .lv. in y• moneth of Octobre: the prince of Wales eldeſt ſon to the kyng of England went into Gaſcoyne and went nere to Tholouz and ſo paſte the ryuer of Garon & went into Cracaſſone and brent the borowe but the cytie was well defended. And fro thens he went to Narbon brēnyng and exilynge the contrey / and in the moneth of Nouembre he retourned to Burdeur with great pyllage and many priſoners / for no man reſyſted hym. And yet in the contrey was therle of Armynake lieutenant to the french kyng in Langnedocke / and alſo the lorde of Foitz / the lorde Janques of Burbon / the lorde of Pontheu / the cōſtable of France / and the lorde John̄ of Cleremont marſhall of Fraunce / and a farre gretter company than the prince had: the ſame yere in the ende of Octobre the kyng of England cāe to Calys / and he rode with a great hooſt to Hedyn / & brake the parke ther and brent the houſe within & about the ꝑke / but he entred nat into the town nor caſtell. And the frenche kyng who had made his aſſemble at the cytie of Amyens / heryng of the kyng of Englande rode towarde hym / but the kyng of England was returnyng to Calys / and the french kyng folowed hym tyll he came to ſaynt Omers And than he ſend his marſhall Dauthayne & dyuers other to the kyng of England / offeryng to fight body to body or power to pouer / what day ſoeuer he wold apoynt: but y• kyng of England refuſed that batayle / & ſo retourned agayn into England / and the frenche kyng to Parys. The ſame yere about the feeſt of ſaynt Andrue: there was aſſembled at Pares by the kynges cōmaū
               ment / the prelates of France / the barownes and the counſayls of the good townes. And ther the chanceler of France in the ꝑlyament chambre reſyted the ſtate of the warres of France / deſyring them thervpon to take aduyce what ayd might be gyuen to the kyng to mentayne & defende the ſayd warres: and alſo he ſayde it is come to the kynges knowledge / howe that his ſubgettes ar ſore greued by reaſon of the mutacyon of y• moneys. Therfore the kyng offereth to make gode money & durable: ſo y• they wolde graunt hym ſufficient ayde to mētayne his warres / they anſwered that is to ſay: the clergy by the mouth of the archbyſſhop of Reyns / the nobles by y• duke of Athenes / and the good townes by the mouth of Stephyn Martell prouoſt of the marchantꝭ of Parys. All they ſayde they were redy to lyue and dye with the kynge: & put their bodyes and goodes into his ſeruyce / requyring to haue deliberacyon to ſpeke togyder / the which was graū
               ted thē. The ſame yere the vigyll of the cōcepcion of our lady: the kyng gaue the duchy of Normandy to Charles dolphyn of Uienoys his eldeſt ſon / and the next day he made his homage. After the delyberacyon taken by the thre eſtates they anſwered to the kyng in the ꝑlyament chā
               bre by the mouthes of the ſayde thre ꝑſons howe they wolde fynde hym for one yer. xxx. M. men at their coſtꝭ & charge / the fināce to pay the wagꝭ of ſo many men of warre was eſtemed to .l. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . pariſien̄ / & the thre eſtatꝭ ordenid this ſom̄e to be leuyed of euery ꝑſon & of euery eſtate mē of y•
               
nobles / and other euery man .viii. 
                  〈◊〉
               . 
                  〈◊〉
                of euery pounde: and that the gabell of ſalt ſhulde ron through the realme / but bycauſe they were nat in certayne of this inpoſicyon ▪ 
               
                  •
               abell ſhuld ſuffyce. Therfore it was ordayned that the thre ſtates ſhulde retourne agayne to Parys to ſe & knowe if this inpoſicyon w
                  •
               lde ſerue or no (the firſt day of March) at the which day thyder agayne they came all: except certayne of y• great townes of Picardy and Normandy / and ſome nobles of the ſame ſuch as were at the inpoſicion makyng came thyder / & they founde that the firſt graunt wolde nat ſuffyce to reyſ
                  •
                the ſayde ſome. Wherfore they ordayned a newe ſubſe
                  •
               y: that is to ſay / that euery perſon of the blode royall or otherwyſe: clerke / lay / relygious / or relygions / except and nat except / houſeholders / curates of churches / hauyng rentes or reuenewes offices / or admnyſtracyon / women / wydowes / chyldren maryed or natte maryed hauyng any thynge of their owne / or in any others kepynge none age or admyniſtracion. And all other of euery eſtate authorite / or priuylege: that they a
                  ••
                thā vſed or haue vſed in tyme paſt / if it be. C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . of reuenues or vnder / if it befor terme of lyſe in herytage / in plege / or by meanes of office / or pē
               cion duryng lyfe or at wyll ſhall pay to hiss ayde & ſubſidy of euery .iiii. 
                  〈◊〉
                .xl. ſouces. And of .x. 
                  〈◊〉
               . of reuenues or aboue .xx. ſouces / labourers and workemen lyueng by their labour / ſhall pay .x. ſouces: ſeruantes prentyſes lyueng by their ſeruyces takyng. C. s. by yere or more ſhall in likewyſe pay .x. s. taking theſe moneys after y• rate of Parys money in that countre / and at Courney for the money currant in that partes. And if ſeruantes haue nat by yere / but. C. ss. 
                  〈◊〉
               : they ſhall pay nothing wourthey haue goodꝭ after the rate / than ſhall they pay as other do. and alſo beggers / monkes / and cloyſtereus without offyce or admyniſtracyon / nor chyldren beynge in warde / vnder the age of .xv. yere hauyng nothyng in their handes / nor noones hauynge no reuenewes aboue .x. 
                  〈◊〉
               . ſhall pay nothynge: nor alſo women maryed / becauſe their huſbandes payeth: for the value of their huſbandess ſhalbe rekened aſwell for that they haue by their wifes as of their owne. And as for clerkess and men of the church / prelat
                  •
                / abbottes / pr
                  •
               ours / chanons / curates / and other as is beforeſayde: if they be worthe aboue. C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . in reuenewes by yere in benefic
                  •
                of the church or patrimony / or y• one with the other / to the ſom̄e of .v. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . they ſhall pay iiii. 
                  〈◊〉
               . for the firſt. C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . and for euery, C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . after tyll ye come to the ſom̄e of .v. M. 
                  〈◊〉
                .xl. ss. nor they ſhall pay nothyng for that they may spe
                  ••
               e aboue .v. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . nor for their moua
                  •
               l
                  ••
               : 
                  〈◊◊〉
                value of their benefyces ſhalbe eſtemed after the rate of their dymes / whan that is pay
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                out any excepcion or priuyledge. And as for noble men & men of y• good townes that may sp
                  ••
               
               de aboue the ſom̄e of. C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . in reuenewes 
                  〈…〉
                pay tyll they come to the ſom̄e of .v. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . for euery. C .xl. s. beſyde .iiii. 
                  〈◊〉
               . of y• firſt. C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . A
                  •
               d the men of the gode townes inſemblable maner tyll they come to. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . of reuenues: and as for the mouables of the noble men that haue na
                  •
                C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . of reuenewes / their mouables ſhalbe eſtemed and rekenyd to the value of. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . & no farther. And other men that haue nat .iiii. C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . of reuenewes: their good
                  •
                ſhalbe rekenyd tyll they 
                  〈◊〉
                to .iiii. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . yt is to ſay. C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . of mouables 
                  〈◊〉
                x. 
                  〈◊〉
               . of reuenues / and after that rate to nay. And if a noble man haue nat in reuenues but all onely. C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . and in mouables nat paſt. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . or that a noble man hath nat in reuenues nat paſt. 
                  〈◊〉
               . C. 
                  〈◊〉
               . nor in mouables paſt .iiii. M. and it 
                  〈◊〉
                part in mouables and part in reuenewes / they muſt be eſtemyd togyder to the ſom̄e of. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . for the noble men: & to .iiii. M. 
                  〈◊〉
               . to other and nat aboue. The ſaturday the fyft day of marche the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lvi. there roſe a diſcēyon / bytwene the cōmons of the towne of Arras and the great men of the ſame / and the cō
               mons ſlewe y• ſame day mo than .xvii. of y• chefe ꝑſonages of the towne / and on the monday after they ſlewe other four / and baniſſhed dyuers that were nat as than in towne / and ſo the cō
               mons was as than chefe maiſters in y• towne.
         
         
            ¶ How the french kyng toke the kynge of Nauer / and beheeded the erle of Harcourt & other at Roan. Ca. C .lvi.
            
               ALſo the iueſday the .v. day of Aprill / about the myddes of lent / the frenche kyng deꝑted before day fro Meneuell in harnes accōpanyed wt a. CC. ſpeares: amonge the which was therle of Aniowe his ſonne / and the duke of Orleance his brother the lorde John de Arthoyserle of Ewe / y• lorde Charles his brother / coſyn germayn to y• kyng the erle of Tankernyll / ſir Arnolde Dādrehen than marſhall of Fraunce: and dyuers other to the nombre aboueſayd. The kyng and they cāe

ſtreyght to the caſtell of Rowan by the poſterne and came nat in the towne. And there he founde in the hall at dyner with his ſonne the dolphyne Charles the kyng of Nauerr / and John̄ erle of Harcourt / and the lordes of Preaux / Grauyll / Clere / and dyuers other. Ther the french kyng cauſed the kyng of Nauer to be taken / therle of Harcourt the lordes of Preaux / of Clere / ſir Loys and ſir Wylliam of Harcourt / bretherne to y• erle: the lorde Frequent of Fryquant / the lorde of Tournbeu / the lorde Maubeu of Mameſners and two ſquyers Olyuer Doubles / & Johan Uaubatou / and dyuers other. The kynge put them in priſon in dyuerſe chambers within the ſame caſtell: bycauſe that ſyth the newe recō
               ſy
                  ••
               acion made for the deth of the lorde Charles late conſtable of Fraunce / the kyng of Nauerre had ymagined and treated dyuers thynges / to the damage and dyſhonour of the frenche kyng and of his realme. And therle of Harcourt had ſpoken iniuryous wordes agaynſt the kyng in the caſtell of Ruell / where the aſſemble was to conclude for the ayde to be gyuen to the kynge: in lettyng to his power the ſame ayd to be graū
               ted. Than the frenche kyng dyned there: and after toke his horſe and rodde out into a telde behynde the caſtell called the felde of pardon / and thyder in two cartꝭ was brought therle of Harcourt / the lorde Grauylle / the lorde Maubeu / and Olyuer Doubles: and there all their heedꝭ were ſtryken of / and after all foure drawen to ye gybette of Rowan and there hanged / and their heedes ſette on the gybette. The ſame day and the next day the frenche kynge delyuered all the other out of priſon: except thre / yt is to ſay Charles kyng of Nauer / who was caryed to Parys and put in priſon in the caſtell of Loure / and after into the chatelette. And certayne of the frenche kynges counſell were apoynted to kepe him alſo Fryquet and Uaubatou were put into the ſame priſon / and therfore the lorde Philypp̄ of Nauer helde in his handes dyuers caſtels pertayning to his brother the kyng of Nauerre in Normandy. And for all that the frenche kynge ſende to hym to delyuer the ſame caſtels / yet the refuſed ſo to do: and he and the lorde Godfray of Harcourt aſſembled togyder dyuers enemys of the french kynges / and brought them into ye contrey of Conſtantyne / the which countre they helde and kept fro the frenche kyng. The wednyſday after Eſter: theyere of our lorde god a. M. CCC .lvi. ſir Arnold Dādrehen than marſhall of France went to the towne of Arras / and ther wyſely wtout any beſyneſſe of men of warr he toke mo than a hundred priſoners of them of the towne ſuche as had made the rebellyon ther and ſlayne dyuers of the chiefe burgeſſes of the towne. And the next day he made .xx. of them to be beheeded: and ye other he kept ſtyll in priſon to knowe the kynges pleaſure in that behalfe / & ſo by that meanes the towne was brought into trewe obeyſance to the kyng. In the moneth of June the duke of Lancaſtre came into Cōſtantyne and fyll in company with the lorde Philyp of Nauerr / and the lorde Godfray of Harcourt they were in all about a foure thouſande fyghtyng mē: they rode to Lyſeur / to Orbec / to Pō
               theau and refreſſhed the caſtell there / the which had ben beſieged more than two monethes: but the lorde Robert of Hotetot maiſter of the croſbowes in Fraunce / who had layne there at ſieg with dyuers nobles and other / departed fro the ſiege whan the knewe of the commynge of the duke of Lancaſtre / and left behynde theym for haſt their engyns and artillary: and they of the caſtell toke all. Than the duke of Lācaſtre and his company rode for the robbyng and pyllyng the townes and contrey: as they paſſed toward Bretuell the which they newely refreſſhed / and bycauſe that they knewe and founde ye cyte and caſtell of Eureux to be newely yelded to ye frenche kynge / who had longe kept a ſiege there at. And alſo they ſawe howe the cytie was brēt and the cathedrall churche robbed: aſ well by the naueroyſe / who yelded vp the caſtell by compoſycyon / as by the frenchemen that lay there at the ſiege. They left it: and than the duke of Lancaſtre and the lorde Philyppe of Nauerr went to Uernueyll in Perche / and toke the towne and caſtell / and robbed the towne and brent a great parte therof. The frenche kyng who had made redy his aſſemble aſſoone as he herde tidynges of the duke of Lancaſtre / he wente after hym with a great nombre of men of armes and fotemenne / and folowed them to Conde in goynge ſtreyght to the towne of Uernueyll: thanne the duke and his company went towardes the towne of the Egle / and the kynge folowed them tyll he came to Tuebufe / a two leages fro the towne of the Egle. And thā there it was ſhewed to the kyng howe he coulde folowe no farther / for ther were ſuche foreſtes that his ennemyes myght take hym whan they lyſte / ſoo that the ſhulde do but leſe his labour to go any farther after them / than the kyng retourned with all his hooſt / and went to the caſtell of Thilyers / the whiche was in the hādes of nauaroes. The kyng toke it and ſette men of warr therin: than the kyng went to

the caſtell of Bretuell / wherin were men of the kyng of Nauers. There ye kyng lay at ſiege the ſpace of two monethes: and than ye caſtell was gyuen vp / and they within went wher they lyſt with their goodes and lyues ſaued.
         
         
            ¶ Of the aſſemble that the frenche kyng made to fight with the prince of wales / who rode in Berry. Cap. C .lvii.
            
               WHan the frenche kynge had made his iourney: and reconquered townes 
                  〈◊〉
                caſtelles in baſe Normandy / pertaynyug as than to the kyng of Nauerre whome he helde in priſonne / and was gone backe to the cytie of Parys. It was nat long after but that he herde howe the prince of Wales with a good nombre of men of warre / was ferre entred into the countrey aprochyng the gode 
                  •
               otrey of Berry. Than the kyng ſayd and ſware that he wolde ryde and fyght with hym whereſoeuer he founde hym: than the kyng made agayne a ſpecyall aſſemble of all nobles and ſuch as helde of hym his commaundement was that all maner of excuſes layde a parte his letters ones ſene that euery man on payne of his dyſpleaſur ſhulde drawe and mete with hym in y• marches of Bloyes and Torayne / for the entent to ſyght with thenglyſſhmen. And the kyng to make the more haſt: deꝑted fro Parys and rode to Chartres to here the better of ſuretie what thenglyſſh men dyd. There he re
                  •
               ted & dayly men of warre reſorted thyder fro all partes: as of Aunergne / Berrey / Burgoyne / Lorayne Heynault / Uermandoyſe Picardy / Bretayne / and Normandy: and euer as they came they were ſet forwarde and made their muſters. And lodged in the countrey by the aſſ
                  •
               gnement of the marſhalles / the lorde Johan of Cleremont and the lorde Arnolde Dādrehen: the kyng ſende alſo great prouiſyon to all his fortreſſes and garyſon
                  ••
                in Antowe / Poyctou / Dumayne / & Torayne: and in to all the fortreſſes wher he thought thenglyſſh men ſhulde paſſe / to the entent to cloſe the paſſages from them / and to kepe thē fro vitayl
                  ••
                that they ſhulde fynde no foragefor thē nor their horses. Howe beit for all that the prince and his cō
               pany / who were to the nombre of two. M. men of armes and ſir. M. archers rode at their eaſe and had bitayls ynough / for they founde the cō
               tre of Auuerne right plentyfull / but they wolde nat tary ther but went for the to make warre 
                  〈◊〉
                their enemyes: they brent and exyled the cōtrey aſmoch as they might. For whan they were entred into a towne and founde it well replenyſſhed of all thyngꝭ: they taryed ther a two or thre dayes to refreſſhe them / whan they depted they wolde diſtroy all the reſydue ſtrike out the heedes of the veſſels of wyne / and bren where / barly and otes / and all other thyngꝭ: to thyntent 
                  〈◊〉
                their enemyes ſhulde haue no ayde therof. 
                  〈◊〉
                than they rode forthe & euer founde good cōtres and plētyfull: for in Berry / Torayne A
                  ••
               owe / Poyctou / and Mayne is a very plentyfull contre for men of warr: thenglyſſhmen rode for the in this maner tyll they came to the good cytie 
                  〈◊〉
                Burges. And ther they made a gret ſkirmyſſh at one of the gates: capitayns within were / the lorde of Conſant / & the lorde Hutyn of 
                  〈◊〉
                who kept the cyte: ther was many feates of 
                  〈…〉
               
               mes done / thenglyſſhmen deꝑted without any more doyng / & went to Iſſoldon a ſtrong caſtell the which was feerſly aſſayled and thyder ca
                  ••
                all the hole hooſt howbeit they coud nat wy
                  •
               it. The gētylmen defended it valiantly: than they paſſed farther and toke their way to U
                  〈…〉
               on / 
                  〈◊〉
                great towne and a good caſtell but it was yuell cloſed and the peple ther nat ſufficyent to make defence / therfore it was won perforce. And ther they founde wyne and other vitayls gret plenty and taryed there thre dayes co refreſſhe all there hoſt / and thyder cāe tidynges to the prince how the french kyng was at Charters with a gret aſſemble of men of warr and howe y• all the tor
                  •
               
               nes and paſſagꝭ aboue the ryuer of Loyre were cloſed and kept / that none coude paſſe the ryue
                  •
                Than the prince was counſelled to returne and to paſſe by Torayne and Poycton / and ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                way to Bourdeaux. Than the prince toke that way and retourned: whan they had done with the towne that they were in their pleaſure / and 
                  〈…〉
               ken the caſtell and ſlayne the mo
                  •
               ſt part that were within / than they rode towarde Remoren tyne. The french kyng had ſend into y• countrey thre great barownes to kepe the fronters there
                  •
                the lorde of Craon / the lorde Boucequant / and the hermyte of Chamont / who with thre. C. ſperes rode into that contrey in coſtyng thēglyſſhmen / and had folowed thē a ſixe dayes togyder
                  •
                and coude neuer fynde auantage to ſet on them:

for thēglyſſhmen rode euerſo wyſely / that they coude nat entre on them on any ſyde / to their aduauntage. On a day the frenchmen putte themſelfe in a buſſhement nere to Remorentyne / at a marueylous ſtrayte paſſage / by the whiche the englyſſhmen muſt nedes paſſe: ye ſame day ther was departed fro the princes bataile by leaue of the marſhals: ye lorde Bartylmewe of Breches / the lorde of Muſydent gaſcoyne / the lorde Petyton Courton the lorde Dalawarre / the lorde Baſſet the lorde Danyell paſeler the lorde Rycharde of Pontchardon / the lorde Nowell Lorynch the yong lorde Spencer Edwarde / and the lorde Dambretycourte: with two hundred menne of armes to ronne before Remorentyne. They paſſed foreby the frenchmens buſſhment and was nat ware of them: aſſone as they were paſſed / the frenchmen brake out and came after them feerſly / thenglyſſhmen who were well forwarde herde the noyſe of the horſes commynge after them / and parceyued how they were their ennemyes: they tourned and ſtode ſtyll and abode the frēchmen: who came on thē with great randon their ſpeares in their reſtes. And ſo cāe ronnyng to thenglyſſhmen: who ſtode ſtyll and ſuffre them to paſſe / and there was nat of them paſt a fyue or ſir ouerthrowen at y• firſt metyng than thenglyſſhmen daſſhed forthe their horſes after the frenchemen. There was a feerſe ſkyrmyſſhe and en
                  〈…〉
               red long: and many knightes and ſquyers beaten downe on both partes / and dyuers taken and reſcued agayn / ſo that a long ſeaſon no man coulde tell who had the better / ſo long they fought that the batayle of thenglyſſhe marthalles aproched. And whan the frenchmen ſawe theym commyng a long by a woode ſyde: they 
                  •
               ledde he that might beſt / & toke their wayes to Remorentyne / and the englyſſhmen in the chaſe natte ſparyng their horſes. There was a harde batayle and many a man ouerthrowen: howe beit the one halfe of the frenchmen entred into the caſtell / the thre lordes ſaued theymſelfe and dyuerſe other knyghtes and ſquyers that were well horſed. Howe beit the towne was taken at their fyrſt commynge: for the frenchmen all entred into the caſtell.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the prince of wales toke the caſtell of Remorentyne. Cap. C .lviii.
            
               THe prince of wales herde how his fore ryders were a fightyng: than he toke that way and came into the towne of Remorentyne / wherin was moche of his people 
                  〈◊〉
                dyeng howe they myght get the caſtell. Than the prince cōmaunded the lord ſir John̄ Chandos to go and ſpeke with theym of the caſtell / than ſir Johan went to the caſtell gate / and made ſigne to ſpeke with ſome perſon within. They that kept the watche ther demaū
               ded what was his name / & who dyd ſende hym thyder / he ſhewed them: than ſir Boucyquant / and the hermyte of Chamount came to the barryers. Whan ſir Johan ſawe theym: he ſaluted them curtelly and ſayde / ſirs I am ſende hyder to you fro my lorde ye prince / who wyll be ryght courteſſe vnto his ennemyes as me thynketh / he ſayeth that if ye wyll yelde vpp̄ this fortreſſe to hym and yelde your ſelfe priſoners / he wyll receyue you to mercy / and kepe you good company of armes. The lorde Boucyquant ſayde: we arnat in purpoſe to putte ourſelfe in that caſe / it were great folly ſyth we haue no nede ſo to do we thynke to defende our ſelfe. So they departed and the prince lodged there: and his men in the towne without at their eaſe / the next day euery man was armed and vnder his baner / and beganne to aſſayle the caſtell right feerſly / the archers were on the dykes and ſhotte ſo holly togyder / that none durſte ſcant apere at their defences. Some ſwame ouer ye dykes on bordes / and other thyngꝭ with hokes and pikes in their handes / and myned at ye walles: and they within caſt downe great ſtones and pottꝭ with lyme / there was ſlayne on ye englyſſhe partie a ſquyer called Remond Derge du Lache / he was of the cōpany of the Captall of Beoffes. This aſſaut dured all the day without reſt: at nyght the englyſſhmen drewe to their logynges and ſo paſt the nyght / in the mornyng whan the ſonne was ryſen / the marſhals of the hooſt ſowned the trū
               pettes. Than all ſuch as were ordayned to gyue the aſſaut were redy appayrelled: at the whiche aſſaut the prince was perſonally / and by reaſon of his preſence greatly encouraged the englyſſhmen / and nat ferre fro hym there was a ſquyer called Bernarde ſlayne with a ſtonne / than the prince ſware that he wolde nat depart then styll he had the caſtell and all them within at his pleaſure. Than the aſſaut enforced on euery part: finally they ſawe that by aſſautes they coulde nat wyn the caſtell / wherfore they ordayned engins

to caſte in wylde fyre into the baſe court / and ſo they dyde yt all the baſe court was a fyre / ſo that the fyre multiplyed in ſuche wyſe that it toke into the couerynge of a great towre couered with rede. And whā they within ſawe that they muſt other yelde to ye wyll of the prince / orels peryſhe by fyre. Than all thre lordes cāe downe and yelded them to the prince: and ſo the prince toke thē with hym as his priſoners / and the caſtell was left voyde.
         
         
            ¶ Of the great hooſt that the frenche kyng brought to the batayle of Poycters. Cap. C .lix.
            
               AFter the takyng of the caſtell of Remorentyne / and of them that were therin: the prince than and his company rode as they dyde before / diſtroyeng the countre aprochyng to Antowe / & to Tourayne. The frenche kyng who was at Charterz departed and came to Bloyes / and ther taryed two dayes: and than to Amboyſe / and the ne
                  •
               t day to Loches: and than he herde howe that the prince was at Towrayne / and how that he was retournyng by Poyctou / euer the englyſſhmen were coſted by certayne expert knyghtꝭ of Frā
               ce / who alway made report to ye kyng what the englyſſhmen dyd. Than the kynge came to the hay in Towrayne: and his men had paſſed the ryuer of Loyre / ſome at the bridge of Orleance / and ſome at Mchun / at Saulmure Bloyes and at Towrs / and wher as they might. They were in nombre a .xx. thouſande men of armes beſyde other / ther were a .xxvi. dukes and erles and mo than ſixſcore baners / and the foure ſonnes of the kyng who were but yonge: the duke Charles of Normandy / the lorde Loyes ye was fro thenſ forthe duke of Aniewe / and the lorde Johan duke of Berry / and the lorde Philyppe who / was after duke of Burgoyne. The ſame ſeaſon pope Innocēt the ſixt ſend the lorde Bertrand cardynall of Pyergourt / & the lorde Nycholas cardynall of the Egle into France / to treat for a peace bytwene the frenche kyng / and all his enemyes. Firſt bytwene hym and the kyng of Nauerr who was in priſon: and theſe cardynalles often tymes ſpake to the kyng for his delyuerance duryng the ſege at Bretuell / but they coude do nothyng in that behalfe. Than the cardynall of Pyergourt went to Tours / and ther he herde howe the frenche kynge haſted ſore to fynde the englyſſhmen: th
                  〈…〉
                rodde to Poycters for he herde howe bothe 
                  〈◊〉
                hooſtes drewe thyderward. The frenche kyng herde howe the prince haſted greatly to retourne / and the kyng feared that he ſhulde ſcape hym / and ſo deꝑted fro Hay in Tourayn and all his company / and rode to Chauuygny / wher he taryed that thurſday in the towne / and without along by the ryuer of Creuſe: and the next day the kyng paſſed the ryuer at the bridge ther weuyng that the englyſſhemen had ben before hym / but they were nat. Howe beit they purſued after and paſſed ye bridge that day mo th
                  〈…〉
               hreſcore thouſand horſes / and dyuers other paſſed at Chaſteleraunt / and euer as they paſſed they tooke they way to Poieters. On the otherſyde the prince wyſt nat truely where the frenchmen were / but they ſuppoſed that they were nat farre of / for they coude nat fynde no more forage wherby they had gret faut in their hooſt of vitayle: and ſome of them repēted that they had diſtroyed ſomoch as they had done before whan they were in Berry / Aniowe / and Torayne: and in that they had made no better prouiſion. The ſame friday thre great lordes of France / the lorde of Craon / the lorde Raoull of Coucy / and therle of Joigny taryed all day in the towne of Chamygny / and part of their companyes: the ſaturday they paſſed the bridge and folowed the kyng / who was than a thre leages before / and tooke the waye amonge buſſhes without a wode ſyde to go to Poicters The ſame ſaturdaye the prince and his cōpany dyſloged fro a lytell vyllage therby / and ſent before hym certayne currours to ſe if they myght fynde any aduēture / and to here where the frēchmen were: they were in nombre a threſcore men of armes well horſed & with them was the lorde Euſtace Dambreticourt / and the lorde John̄ of Guyſtelles: and by aduenture the englyſſhmen and frenchemen mette togyder / by the forſayde wode ſyde. The frenchmen knewe anone howe they were their ennemyes / than in haſt they dyd on their helmyttes / and diſplayed their baners / and came a great paſe towardes thēglyſſhmen: they were in nombre a two hundred men of armes. Whan the englyſſhmen ſawe them / & that they were ſo great a nombre: than they determined to ſlye and let the frenchmen chaſe them / for they knewe well the prince with his hooſt was nat farre behynde / than they tourned their hor
               
                  •
               es

and toke y• corner of the wood: and the frēchmen after theym cryenge their cryes and made great noyſe. And as they chaſed they came on ye princes batayle or they were ware therof themſelfe ▪ the prince taryed ther to haue worde agayne 
                  〈◊〉
                them that he ſend forthe the lorde Raoll of Coucy with his baner went ſo farre forward that he was vnder the princes baner / ther was a 
                  〈◊〉
                batayle and the knyght fought valiantly. Howe beit he was there takenne: and the erle of Wyng
                  •
               y the vycoūt of Bruce / the lorde of Cha
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               ▪ and all the other taken̄e or ſlayne / but a fewe that ſcaped. And by y• priſoners the prince knewe howe the frenche kynge folowed hym in ſuche wyſe that he coude nat eſchue the batayle: than he aſſembled togyder all his men and commaunded that no man ſhulde go before the marſhals baners. Thus the prince rode that ſaturday fro the mornyng tyll it was agaynſt night: ſo that he came within two lytell leages of Poicters than the Captall de Buz / ſir Aymenon of Punyers / the lorde Bartylmewe of Brunes / & the lorde Euſtace Dambretycourt: all theſe the prince ſende forthe to ſeyf they myght knowe what the frenchmen dyd. Theſe knyghtes deꝑted with two hūdred men of armes well horſed / they rodde ſo farre that they ſawe the great batayle of the kynges they ſawe all the feldes couered with men of armes / theſe englyſſhmen coud nat forbers / but ſette on the tayle of the frenche hooſt and caſt downe many to the yerth: & toke dyuers priſoners / ſo that the hooſt beganne to ſtyrre and 
                  •
               idynges therof came to the frenche kyng as he was entryng into the cytie of Poycters. Than he retourned agayne and made all his he oſt do the ſame: ſo that ſaturday it was very late or he was lodged in the felde ▪ thēgliſſh currours retourned agayne to the prince & ſhewed hym all that they ſawe and knewe and ſaid howe the frenche hooſt was a great nombre of people: well ſayde the prince in the name of god lette vs now ſtudy howe we ſhall fyght with thē at our aduauntage / that night the englyſſhmen lodged in a ſtrong place among hedges / vynes and buſſhes: and their hooſt well watched / and ſo was the frenche hooſt.
         
         
            ¶ Of the order of the frenchemen before the batayle of Poycters. Cap. C .lx.
            
               ON the ſonday in y• mornynge the frenche kynge / who hadde great deſyre to fight with the englyſſhmen herd his maſſe in his pauilyon / and was houſeled and his foure ſōnes with hym after maſſe ther came to hym the duke of Orleaunce / the duke of Burbon / therle of Pontheu / the lorde Jaques of Burbone / the duke of Athenes conſtable of France the erle of Tankernyll the erle of Salebruce / the erle of Dāmartyne / the erle of Uantador / and dyuers other great barownes of France / and of other neyghbours holdynge of Fraunce: as the lorde Cleremont / the lorde Arnolde Dandrehen marſhall of France / the lorde of ſaynt Uenont / the lorde John̄ of Landas / the lorde Euſtace Ribamont / the lorde Fyennes / the lorde Geffray of Chargny / y• lord Chatellon / the lorde of Suly / the lorde of Neell ſir Robert Duras / & dyuers other: all theſe with the kyng went to counſell. Than finally hit was ordayned that all maner of men ſhulde drawe into the felde / & euery lorde to diſplay his baner and to ſet forth in the name of god and ſaynt Denice / than trumpets blewe vp through the hooſt / and euery man mounted on horſebacke and wēt into the felde / wher they ſawe the kynges baner waue with the wynde. There myght a been ſene great nobles of fayre harneſſe and riche armory of baners and penōs for there was all the floure of France / ther was none durſt abyde at home without he wolde be ſhamed for euer / than it was ordayned by y• aduyce of the conſtable and marſhals to be made thre batayls: and in ech warde .xvi. M. men of armes / all muſtred and paſt for men of armes. The firſt batayle the duke of Orleaunce to gouern with .xxxvi. baners / and twyſe as many penons. The ſeconde the duke of Normandy and his two bretherne / the lorde Loys and the lorde John̄. The thirde y• kyng hymſelfe: and whyle that theſe batayls were ſettyng in aray / y• kyng called to hym the lorde Euſtace Rybamont / the lorde John̄ of Landas / and the lorde Richarde of Beawyeu and ſayd to them: ſirs ryde on before to ſe the dealyng of thenglyſſhmen / and aduyſe well what nombre they be / and by what meanes we may fight with theym / other a fote or a horſebacke. Theſe thre knyghtes rode forth and the kynge was on a wyght courſer / and ſayde a high to his men: ſirs among you whan ye be at Parys / at Chartres / at Roan / or at Orleaunce: than ye do thret thenglyſſhmen ▪ and deſyre to be

in armes out agaynſt theym. Nowe ye become therto / I ſhall nowe ſhewe you thē: nowe ſhewe forthe your yuell wyll that ye bere them / and reueng your dyſpleaſurs and damages that they haue done you / for without dout we ſhall fyght with them. Suche as herde him: ſayd ſir a god deſname ſo be it / that wolde we ſe gladly. Ther with the thre knightes retourned agayne to the kyng / who demaunded of them tidynges / than ſir Euſtace of Rybamont anſwered for all (and ſayde) ſir we haue ſene the englyſſhmen by eſtymacion they be two thouſande men of armes / & four thouſand archers / and a fyftene hūdred of other / howebeit they be in a ſtronge place. And as farre as we can Imagyne they ar in one batayle: howbeit they be wyſely ordred and a longe the way they haue fortifyed ſtrongly the hedges and buſſhes: one part of their archers are a long by the hedge / ſo that none can go nor ryde that way / but muſt paſt by them. And that way muſt ye go and ye purpoſe to fyght with them / in this hedge there is but one entre and one yſſue by likelyhode that four horſemen may ryde a front / at thende of this hedge where as no mā can go nor ryde / there be men of armes a fote & archers afore them in maner of a herſe / ſo that they woll nat be lightely diſconfyted. Well ſayd the kyng what woll ye than counſayle vs to do: ſir Euſtace ſayde / ſir lette vs all be a lote except thre hundred men of armes well horſed of y• beſt in your hooſt and mooſt hardyeſt / to the entent they ſomwhat to breke and to opyn the archers. and thane your batayls to folowe on quickely a fote / & ſo to fight with their men of armes hand to hande. This is the beſt aduyce that I canne gyue you: if any other thynke any other waye better let hym ſpeke. The kyng ſayd thus ſhall it be done: than the two marſhalles rode fro batayle to batayle and choſe out a thre. C. knyghtes and ſquyers of the mooſt expert men of armes of all the hooſt / euery man well armed and horſed. Alſo it was ordayned that the bataylles of alwayns ſhulde abyde ſtyll on horſebacke to confort the marſhalles if nede were: wherof the erle of Saleſbruce / the erle of Neydo and the erle of Noſco were capitayns: kynge Johan of France was there armed and .xx. other in his apayrell / and he dyd put the gyding of his eldeſt ſonne to the lorde of ſaynt Uenant / the lorde of Landas / and the lorde Thybault of Bodenay: and the lorde Reynolde of Quenoll called the archepreeſt was armed in the armoure of the yongerle of Alanſon.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the cardynall of Dyergourt treated to make agremēt bytwene the frenche kyng and the prince / before the batell of Poycters. Cap. C .lxi.
            
               WHan the frenche kyngꝭ batayls was ordred and euery lorde vnder his banner among their owne men: than it was cōmaunded that euery man ſhulde cutte their ſperes to a fyue fote long / and euery man to put of their ſpurres. Thus as they were redy to aproche: the cardinall of Piergort came in great haſt to the king / he came the ſame mornynge from Poycters: he kneled downe to the kyng and helde vp his handes / and deſyred hym for goddeſſake a lytell to abſteyne ſettynge forwarde tyll he had ſpoken with hym (than he ſayde) ſir ye haue here all the floure of your realme agaynſt a handfull of englyſſhmen / as to regarde your company: and ſir if ye may haue them acorded to you without batayle / it ſhalbe more profitable and honourable to haue theym by that maner / rather than to aduēture ſo noble chiualry as ye haue here preſent: ſir I requyre you in the name of god and humylyte / y• I may ryde to the prince and ſhewe hym what danger ye haue hym in. The kynge ſayd it pleaſeth me well: but retourne agayne ſhortely / the cardynall deꝑted and dilygently he rode to the prince who was among his men a fote: than the cardynall a lyghted and came to the prince who receyued hym curteſſy. Than the cardynall after his ſalutacyon made (he ſayde) certaynly fayre ſon if you and your counſayle aduyſe iuſtely the puyſſaunce of the frenche kynge / ye woll ſuffre me to treat to make a peace bytwene you & I may: the prince who was yong and luſty ſayd / ſir the honour of me and of my people ſaued / I wolde gladly fall to any reaſonable way: than the cardynall ſayd (ſir ye ſay well) and I ſhall acorde you and I can: for it ſhulde be great pytie yf ſo many noble men and other as be here on bothe parties ſhulde come togyder by batayle. Than the cardynall rode agayne to the kyng (& ſayd) ſir ye nede nat to make any great haſte to fyght with your ennemyes: for they canne nat ſlye fro you though they wolde they be in ſuche a groūd

wherfore ſir I requyre you forbere for this day tyll to morowe the ſon ryſinge. The kynge was lothe to agree therto forſome of his counſayle wolde nat cōſent to it / but finally the cardynall the wed ſuch reaſons that the kyng acorded that reſpyt: and in the ſame place there was pyght vp a 
                  〈…〉
               yon of reed ſylke freſſhe and rych and gaue leaue for that day euery man to drawe to their lodgynges / except the conſtables and marſhalle
                  •
                batayls. That ſonday all the day the car
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               yled in ridynge fro the one hooſt to the other gladly to agree them: but the frenche kynge wolde nat agree without he myght haue foure of the princy 
                  ••
               lleſt of the englyſſhmen at his pleaſure / and the prince and all the other to yelde themſelfe ſimply howe beit ther were many great offers made. The prince offred to rendre into the kynges handes all that euer he had wonne in that voyage townes and caſtels: and to quyte all priſoners that he or any of his men had taken in that ſeaſon. And alſo to ſwere nat to be armed agaynſt the frenche kyng in ſeuyn yere after / but the kyng and his counſayle wold none therof / the vttermaſt that he wold do was that the prince and a. C. of his knyghtes ſhulde yelde theym ſelfe into the kynges priſon / otherwyſe he wolde nat: the whiche the prince wolde 
                  〈◊〉
                wyſe agre vnto. In the meane ſeaſon that the cardynall rode thus bytwene the hooſtes: in truſt to do ſome good certayne knightꝭ of Frā
               ce and of Englande bothe / rode forthe the ſame ſonday bycauſe it was truſe for that day / to coſt the hooſtes and to beholde the dealyng of their enemyes: ſo it fortuned that the lorde John̄ Cā
               dos rode the ſame day cooſtyng the french hoſt / and in like maner the lorde of Cleremont one of the trenche marſhalles had ryden for the and auiewed the ſtate of the englyſſhe hooſt / and as theſe two knyghtes retourned towardes their hooſtes they mette togyder, eche of theym bare ou
                  •
                maner of deuyee: a blewe lady enbraudred 
                  〈◊〉
                a 
                  〈◊〉
                beame aboue on their apayrell. Than the lorde Cleremont ſayd: Chandos howe long haue ye taken on you to bere my deuyce / nay ye bere my
                  ••
                ſayd Chandos / for it is aſwell myne as pours: I deny that ſayd Cleremont but and 
                  〈◊〉
                were nat for the truſe this day bytwene vs / I ſhulde make it good on you incontynent that ye haue no right to bere my deuyce. I ſir ſayd Cā
               dos ye ſhall fynde me to morowe redy to defend you: and to proue by feate of armes that it is as well myne as yours / than Cleremont ſayd Cā
               dos theſe be well the wordꝭ of you englyſſhmen / forye can deuyce nothyng of newe / but all that yeſe is good and fayre. So they departed with out any more doyng and eche of them returned to their hooſt: the cardynall of Pyergort coude in no wyſe that ſonday make any agrement bytwene the parties / and whan it was nere nyght he returned to Poicters. That night the frenchmen toke their eaſe they had prouiſion ynough / and the englyſſhmen had great defaut: they coude get no forage nor they coude nat depart theſe without danger of their ennemyes. That ſonday thenglyſſhmen made great dykes and hedges about their archers to be the more ſtronger / and on the monday in the mornynge the prince and his company were redy apayrelled as they were before: and about the ſonne ryſing in lyke maner were the frenchmen. The ſame morning be tymes the cardynall came agayne to the frenche hooſt / and thought by his preachyng to pacify the parties / but than the frenchmen ſayd to hym retourne whyderye woll / bringe hyder no mo wordes of treaty nor peace (and ye loue yor ſelfe depart ſhortely) Whan the cardynall ſawe that he traueyled in vayne: he toke leaue of the kyng and than he went to the prince (and ſayd) ſir do what ye canne their is no remedy but to a byde the batayle / for I can fynde none acorde in the frenche kyng. Than the prince ſayd: ye ſame is our entent and all our people (god helpe the right) ſo the cardynall retourned to Poycters. In his company there were certayne knyghtes and ſquyers men of armes: who were more fauourable to the frenche kyng than to the prince / and whan they ſawe that ye parties ſhulde fight they ſtale fro their maiſters and went to the frē
               che hooſt and they made their captayne the Catelayne of Impaſtre / who was as thā 
               ther with the cardynall who knewe nothynge therof tyll he was come to Poycters. The certentie of the order of the englyſſhmen was ſhewed to the frē
               che kyng / except they had ordayned threhūdred men a horſebacke and as many archers a horſebacke: to cooſt vnder couert of the mountayne / and to ſtrike into the batayle of the duke of Normandy / who was vnder the mountayne a fote. This ordynaunce they had made of newe that the frēchmen knewe nat of: the prince was with his batayle downe amonge the vynes / and had cloſed in the wekyſt parte with their caryages. No we wyll I name ſome of the princypall lordes and knyghtes that were ther with the prince: the erle of Warwyke / therle of Suffolke / the erle of Saliſbury / therle of Stafford / the lorde John̄ Chandos the lorde Richarde Stafford / the lorde Reynold Cobham / the lorde Spencer

the lorde James Audeley / ye lorde Peter his brother / the lorde Bercley / the lorde Baſſer / the lord waren / the lorde Dalawar / the lorde Maulyne the lorde Wylly / the lorde Bartylme we be Brunes / the lord of Felton / the lorde Rychard of Pē
               bruge / the lorde Stephyne of Conſtracyon / the lorde Braſfeton and other englyſſhmen. And of gaſcon ther was ye lorde of Prunes / the lorde of Buger / the Captall of Buz / the lorde Johan of Chamont / the lorde Delaſpare / the lorde of Roſen / the lorde of Conſeu the lorde of Montferāt the lorde of Landuras / the lorde Soulech of Leſtrade / and other that I can nat name. And of Heynowers: the lorde Euſtace Dābretycourt / the lorde John̄ of Guyſtels / and two other ſtrā
               gers / the lorde Dauyell Phaſell / & the lorde Denyce of Moerbertre. All the princes company paſt nat an .viii. M. men one and other / and ye frenchmen were a .lx. M. fightyng men / wherof ther were mo than thre thouſande knightes.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batell of Poycters bytwene the prince of wales and the frē
               che kyng. Cap. C .lxii.
            
               WHan̄e the prince ſame that he ſhuld haue batell and that the cardynall was gone without any peace or trewſe makynge / and ſawe that the frenche kyng dyd ſette but lytell ſtore by him: he ſaid than to his men. Now ſirs though we be but a ſmall company / as in regarde to the puyſſance of our ennemyes: let vs nat be a baſſhed therfore, for ye vyctorie lyeth nat in the multitude of people but wher as god wyll ſende it / yf it fortune that the iourney be ours / we ſhalbe the mooſt honoured people of all the worlde: & if we dye in our right quarell / I haue the kyng my father & bretherne / and alſo ye haue good frendes & kynſmen / theſe ſhall reuenge vs. Therfore ſirs for goddeſſake I requyre you do your deuoyers thin day: for if god be pleaſed & ſaynt George / this day ye ſhall ſe me a good knyght. Theſe wordes and ſuche other that the prince ſpake conforted all his people / the lorde ſir John̄ Chandos that day neuer went fro ye prince / nor alſo the lorde James Audeley of a great ſeaſon / 
                  〈◊〉
                whan̄e he ſawe that they ſhulde nedes fight (he ſayd to the prince) 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                I haue ſerued alwayes truely my lorde your father & you alſo / and ſhall do as long as I lyue / I ſay this bicauſe I made ones a vowe that the firſt batayle that other the kynge your father or any of his chyldren ſhulde be at: howe that I wolde be one of the firſt ſetters on / or els to dye in the payne. Therfore I requyre yor grace as in rewarde for any ſeruyce that euer I dyde to the king yor father or to you that you woll gyue me ſycence to depart fro you / and to ſette my ſelfe there as I may acomplyſſhe my vowe. The prince acorded to his deſyre (and ſayde) ſir James god gyue you this day that grace to be the beſt knyght of all other / and ſo toke hym by the hande. Than the knyght departed fro the prince and went to the formaſt front of all the batayles all onely acompanyed with foure ſquyers / who promyſed nat to fayle hym: this lorde James was a right ſage and a valyāt knight / and by hym was moche of the hooſt ordayned and gouerned the day before. Thus ſir James was in the front of the batayle / redy to fight with the batayle of the marſhalles of Fraunce: In lykewyſe the lorde Euſtace Dambreticourt dyd his payne to be one of the formaſt to ſette on. Whan ſir James Audeley began t
                  〈…〉
               tte forwarde to his ennemyes: it fortuned to ſir Euſtace Dambretycourt as ye ſhall here after. ye haue herde before howe the almayns in the french hoſt were apoynted to be ſtyll a horſebacke: ſir Euſtace beyng a horſebacke layed his ſpear in the reſt and ran into the frenche batayle / and than a knyght of almaygne called the lorde Loyes of Coucoabras / who bare a ſhelde ſyluer / fyue roſſes goules: and ſir Euſtace bare ermyns two hamedes of goules. Whan this almaygne ſawe the lorde Euſtace come fro his company he rode agaynſt hym: and they mette ſo rudely that bothe knightes fell to the yerth / the almayne was hurt in the ſhulder / therfore he roſe nat ſo quickely as dyde ſir Euſtace / who whā he was vp and had taken his breth / he came to the other knyght as he lay on the grounde / but than̄e fyue other knyghtes of almayne came on hym all at ones & bare hym to the yerth. And ſo perforce there he was taken priſoner and brought to the erle of Noſco / who as than toke no hede of hym / and I can nat ſay whyther they ſware him priſoner or no but they tyed hym to a chare and there lette hym ſtande. Than the batayle began on all partes and ye batayls of the marſhals of Fraunce aproched / and they ſet forthe that were apoynted to breke ye ray of the archers: they entred a horſebacke into the

way / where the great hedges were on bothe ſydes ſette full of archers / aſſone as the men of armes entred the archers began to ſhote on bothe ſydes and dyd ſlee and hurt horſes and knyghtes. So that the horſes whan they felt ye ſharpe arowes they wolde in no wyſe go forward but brewe a backe and ſtang and toke on ſo feerſly / that many of them fell on their maiſters: ſo that for p
                  ••
               ace they coude nat ryſe agayne. In ſo moche that the marſhals batayle coude neuer come at the prince: certayne knyghtes & ſquyers that were well horſed paſſed through tharchers / and thought to a 
                  ••
               he to ye prince but they coude nat The lorde James Judeley with his four ſquyers was in the front of that batell and there dyd maruels marmes / and by great prowes he cāe and fought with ſir Arnolde Dandrehen vnder his owne baner / and ther they fought longe togyder / and ſir Arnolde was there ſore handled. The batayle of the marſhals began to dyſorder by reaſon of the ſhot of the archers / wt the ayde of the men of armes: who came in among them and ſlewe of them / and dyd what they lyſt. And ther was the lorde Arnold Dādrchen taken priſoner by other men than by ſir James Audeley / or by his four ſquters for that day he neuer toke priſoner / but alwayes fought and went on his enemyes. Alſo on the french partie the lorde Johan Cleremōt fought vnder his owne baner as long as he coude endure / but ther he was beten 
                  •
               owne and coude nat be relyued nor ranſomed / but was ſlayne wtout mercy: ſome ſayde it was bicauſe of the wordes that he had the day before to ſit John̄ Chandos. So within a ſhort ſpace the marſhals batayls were diſconfyted / for they fell our vpon another and coude nat go forth: & the frenchmen that were behynde and coude nat get forwarde reculed backe / and came on the batayle of the duke of Normandy / the which was great and thicke and were a fote / but anon they began to opyn behynde. For whan they knewe that the marſhals batayle was dyſconfited they toke their horſes and deꝑted he that might beſt / alſo they ſawe a rowt of englyſſhmen cōmynge downe a lytell mountayne a horſebacke and many archers with them / who brake in on the ſyde of the dukes batayle. Trewe to ſay the archers dyd their company that day great aduauntage / for they ſhotte ſo thicke that the frenchmen wyſt nat on what ſyde to take hede / and lytell and lytell the englyſſhmen wanne grounde on theym: and whan the men of armes of Englande ſawe that the marſhals batayle was dyſconfited / and that the dukes batayle began̄e to dyſorder and opyn / they lept than on their horſes the whiche they had redy by them. Than they aſſembled to gyder & cryed ſaynt George gyen: and the lorde Chandos ſayd to the prince / ſir take your horſe and ryde forth this iourney is yors: god is this day in your handes / gette vs to the french kynges batayle / for ther lyeth all the ſore of the mater. I thynke verily by his valyantneſſe he woll nat flye: I truſt we ſhall haue hym by the grace of god and ſaynt George / ſo he be well fought withall and ſir I herde you ſay that this day I ſhulde ſe you a good knyght. The prince ſayde lette vs go forthe / ye ſhall nat ſe me this day retourne backe / & ſayd auaūce baner in the name of god and of ſaynt George: the knyght y• bare it dyde his commaundement / there was than a ſore batayle and a perylous and many a man ouerthrowen / and he that was ones downe coud nat be relyued agayne wtout great ſocoure and ayde. As the prince rode and entred in amonge his ennemyes: he ſawe on his ryght hande in a lylell buſſhe lyeng deed / the lorde Robert of Duras and his baner by hym / and a ten or twelfe of his men about hym: than the prince ſayd to two of his ſquyers & to thre archers / ſirs take the body of this knyght on a targe & bere hym to Poycters / and preſent him fro me to the cardynall of Pyergourt / and ſay howe I ſalute hym by ye token / and this was done. The prince was enformed that the cardynalles men were on the felde agaynſt hym / the which was nat pertayning to the right order of armes: for men of the churche that cometh and goeth for treaty of peace / ought nat by reaſon to ber harnes nor to fyght for neyther of the parties. They ought to be indyfferent / and bycauſe theſe men had done ſo / the price was dyſpleaſed with the cardynall / and therfore he ſende vnto hym his nephue the lorde Robert of Duras deed. And the Cathelayn of Ampoſtre was takenne: and the printe wolde haue had his heed ſtryken of / bycauſe he was pertaynynge to the cardynall / but than the lorde Candos ſayd / ſir ſuſfre for a ſeaſon entende to a gretter mater / and paraduenture the cardynall wyll make ſuche excuſe that ye ſhalbe content. Than the prince and his company dreſſed them on the batayle of the duke of Athenes cōſtable of France: there was many a manne ſlayne and caſt to the yerth / as the frenchmen fought in companyes they cryed (mountioy ſaynt Denyce) and ye englyſſhmen ſaynt George gyen. Anoue the price with his company met with the batayle of almaygnes / wherof the erle of Saleſbruce / the erle Noſco / and therle Neydo were capitayns:

but in a ſhort ſpace they were put to 
                  •
               lyght. The archers ſhotte ſo holly togyder that none durſt come in their dangers: they ſlewe many a man that coulde nat come to no raunſome / theſe thre erles was ther ſlayne / and dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers of their cōpany. And ther was the lorde Dambretycourt reſcued by his owne men and ſette on horſebacke: and after he dyde that day many feates of armes & toke gode priſoners. Whan the duke of No
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               yle ſawe the prince aproche they thought to 
                  〈◊〉
                thē ſelfe: and ſo the duke and the kynges chrldren / the erle of Poycters / and the erle of Tourayne who were ryght yong by leued their gouernors and ſo departed fro the felde: and with them mo than eyght hundred ſpeares / y• ſtake no ſtroke that day. Howe beit the lorde Guyſſhard Dangle / and the lorde John̄ of Sayntre / who were with the erle of Poicters wolde nat ſlye: but entred into the thyckeſt preaſe of the batayle. The kynges thre ſonnes toke the way to Chamigny and the lorde John̄ of Landas / & the lorde Thy bault of Woodney / who were ſette to a wayt on the duke of Normādy: whan they had brought the duke a long leage fro the batayle / than they tooke leaue of the duke and deſyred the lorde of ſaynt Uenant / that he ſhulde nat leaue the duke but to bring hym in ſauegarde / wherby he ſhulde wyn more thanke of the kynge than to abyde ſtyll in the felde. Than they met alſo the duke of Orleaunce and a great cōpany with hym / who were alſo departed fro the felde with clere handes / ther were many good knyghtes and ſquyers though that their maiſters departed fro the felde / yet they hadde rather a dyed than to haue had any reproche. Than the kyngꝭ batayle cā
               
                  •
                on the englyſſhmen / there was a ſore fyght and many a great ſtroke gyuen and receyued: the kyng and his yongeſt ſonne mette with the batayle of thenglyſſhe marſhalles / therle of Warwyke / and therle of Suffolke: and with theym of gaſcons the Captall of Buz / the lorde of Pomyers / the lorde Amery of Charre / the lorde of Mucydent / the lorde of Lāguran / and the lorde de la Strade. To the frenche partie there came tyme ynough the lorde Johan of Landas / and the lorde of Woodney / they a lyghted a fote and wente into the kynges batayle. And a lytell beſyde fought the duke of Athenes cōſtable of frā
               ce / and a lytell aboue hym the duke of Burbone and many good knyghtes of Burbonoyſe and of Picardy with hym. And a lytell on the one ſyde ther were the poyteuyns / the lorde de 
                  〈◊〉
                the lorde of Partney / the lorde of 
                  〈◊〉
                / the lorde of Montahoton / the lorde of Suggeres / the lorde Johan Sayntre / the lorde Guyſſhar / de Dangle / the lorde Argenton / the lorde of Lymyers / the lorde of Mountandre / and dyuerſe other. Alſo the Uycount of Rocheuatt / and the erle of Daunoy. And of Burgone the lorde James of Beauye
                  •
                / the lorde de la Caſtell Uilayn and other. In another parte there was the erle of Uantadowre: and of Mounpenſer / the lorde James of Burbone / the lorde Johan Darthoyes / and alſo the lorde James his brother / the lorde Arnolde of Cernolle called the Archepreeſt armed for the yonge erle of Alanſonne. And of Auuergne there was / the lorde of Mar
               
                  ••
               ell / the lorde de la Towre / the lorde of Chalenton / the lorde of Montague / the lorde of Rochfort / the lorde de la Chayre / the lorde Dachone / And of Lymoſyn: there was the lorde Delmall the lorde of Norwell / the lorde of Pers Buff
                  •
               er And of Pycardie: there was the lorde Wyllyam of Nerle / the lorde Arnolde of Renewall / the lorde Geffray of ſaynt Dygier / the lorde of Chamy / the lorde of Heley / the lorde of Mounsaunt / the lorde of Hangyes / and dyuers other. And alſo in the kynges batayle ther was therle Duglas of Scotlād / who fought a ſeaſon right valyantly: but whan he ſawe the dyſconfyture / he departed and ſaued hymſelfe / for in no wyſe he wolde be takenne of the englyſſhmen / he had rather ben there ſlayne. On the englyſſhe parte the lorde James Awdeley / with the ayde of his foure ſquyers / fought alwayes in the chyefe of the batayle: he was ſoore hurte in the body and in the vyſage / as longe as his breth ſerued hym he fought. At laſte at the ende of the batayle his foure ſquyers tooke and brought hym oute of the felde and layed hym vnder a hedge ſyde for to refreſſhe hym. And they vnarmed hym and bounde vp his woundes aſwell as they coulde. On the frenche partie kynge Johan was that day a full right good knyght: if the fourth part of his menne hadde done their deuoyers aſwell as he dydde / the iourney hadde bene his / by all lykelyhode. Howe be it they were all ſlayne and takenne that were there: excepte a fewe that ſaued themſelfe that were with the kynge. There was ſlayne: the duke Peter of Burbon / the lorde Guyſſharde of Beauieu the lorde of Lādas / and the duke of Athenes conſtable of Fraunce / the byſſhoppe of Chalons in Champayne / the lorde Wyllm̄ of Neell / the lorde Guſtace of Rybamont / the lorde de la Towre / the lorde Wyllyam of Montagu / ſir Guyuenton of Chābley / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Ba
                  〈…〉
                de la houſe / and many other as they

fought by companyes: and ther were taken priſoners: the lorde of Wodney / the lorde of Pompador: and the archpreeſt ſore hurte / the erle of Uandos the erle of Mons / the erle of Genuyll the erle of Uandone / ſir Loyes of Melwall / the lorde Pyers Buffyer / and the lorde of Senerachet ther were at that brunt ſlayne and taken mo than two hundred knyghtes.
         
         
            ¶ Of two frenchmen that fledde fro the batayle of Poicters / and two englyſſhmen that folowed them. Cap. C .lxiii.
            
               AMong the batayls / recounterynges / chaſes / and purſuetes y• were made that day in the felde: It fortuned ſo to ſir Edwarde of Roucy / that whan he departed fro y• felde: bycauſe he ſawe y• feld was loſt without recouery / he thought nat to abyde the danger of the englyſſhmen. Wherfore he fledd all alone and was gone out of the felde a leage / and an englyſſhe knyght purſued hym and euer cryed to hym (and ſayde) retourne agayne ſir knyght: it is a ſhāe to flye away thus. Than the knight tourned & thenglyſſhe knight thought to haue ſtriken hym with his ſpeare in the targe but he fayled / for ſir Edwarde ſwarued a ſyde fro the ſtroke / but he fayled nat the englyſſhe knyght / for he ſtrake hym ſuche a ſtroke on the helme with his ſwerde that he was aſtonyed / and fell fro his horſe to the yerth and lay ſtyll. Than ſir Edward a lighted & came to him or he coude ryſe (& ſayd) yeld you reſcue or no reſeue: or els I ſhall ſlee you / the englyſſhman yelded and went with hym & afterwarde was raū
               ſomed. Alſo it fortuned that an other ſquyer of Picardy called Johan de Helenes was fledde fro the batayle and mette with his page / who delyuerd hym a newe freſſhe horſe wheron he rode away alone: The ſame ſeaſon there was in the felde the lorde Bercle of Englande a yong luſty knyght / who the ſame day had reryd his baner: and he all aloue purſued the ſayd Johan of Helenes / and whan̄e he had folowed the ſpace of a leage / the ſayde John̄ tourned agayne and layed his ſwerde in the reſt in ſtede of aſpeare / and ſo came rōnyng to warde the lorde Bercle / who lyft vs his ſwerde to haue ſtryken y• ſquyer / but whan he ſame the ſtroke come he tourned fro it / ſo that the englyſſhman loſt his ſtroke: and Johan ſtrake hym as he paſt on the arme / that the lorde Berclees ſwerde fell into the felde. Whan he ſawe his ſwerde downe / he lyghted ſo daynly of his horſe / & came to the place wher his ſwerd lay: & as he ſtouped downe to take vp his ſwerd the frenche ſquyer dyd pycke his ſwerde at hym and by happe ſtrake hym through both the thy▪ es / ſo that the knyght fell to the yerth and coude nat helpe hymſelfe / and Johan a lyghted of his horſe and toke the knyghtes ſwerde that lay on the grounde / and came to hym and demaunded if he wolde yelde hym or nat. The knyght than demaunded his name: ſir ſayde he I hyght Johan of Helenes / but what is your name: certenly ſayde the knyght my name is Thomas and am lorde of Bercle / a fayre caſtell on the ryuer of Seuern in the marches of Wales. Well ſir ꝙ the ſquyer than ye ſhall be my priſonere: and I ſhall bring you in ſauegarde / and I ſhall ſe that you ſhall be healed of your hurt. Well ſayde the knyght I am content to be your priſoner / for ye haue by lawe of armes wonne me: ther he ſwar to be his priſoner / reſcue or no reſcue. Than the ſquyer drewe forthe the ſwerde out of the knightes thyes: and the wounde was opyn / thafie he wrapped and bounde the wounde and ſet hym on his horſe / and ſo brought hym fayre and eaſely to Chaterlerant and there taryed more than fyftene dayes for his ſake / and dyde gette hym remedy for his hurt. And whā he was ſomwhat amended: than he gate hym a lytter and ſo brought hym at his eaſe to his houſe in Picardy: there he was more than a yere tyll he was perfetly hole: and whan he departed he payed for his raunſome ſire thouſande nobuls / & ſo this ſquyer was made a knyght by reaſon of the profette that he had of the lorde Bercley.
         
         
            ¶ Howe kyng John̄ was taken priſoner at the batayle of Poycters. Cap. C .lxiiii.
            
               
               OFten tymes the aduentures of amours and of ear are more fortunate and ma
                  •
                uelous / than any man canne thynke or wyſſhe: truly this batayle the which was nere to Poycters / in the feldes of Beaumont and Malpertnes: was right great and peryllous / and many dedes of armes there was done / the which all came nat to knowlege. The fyghters on bothe parties endured moche payne: kyng John̄ with his owne handes hyd that day maruels in armes / he had an axe in his hādes wherwith he defended hymſelfe & fought in the brekynge of the preaſe / nere to the kynge ther was taken the erle of Tankernyll / ſir Jaques of Burbon erle of Ponthieu / and the lorde Johan of Arthoyes erle of Ewe. And a lytell aboue that vnder the baner of the Captall of bu
                  •
                was taken ſir Charles of Arthoys / and dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers: the chaſe endured to the gates of Poiters / ther were many ſlayne and beaten downe horſe & man / for they of Poyters cloſed their gates and wolde ſuſſre noue to entre. wherfore in the ſtretebefore the gate was horrible murdre / men hurt & beaten downe / the frenchemen yelded themſelfe as farre of as they might know an englyſſhmā: ther were byuers 
                  •
               glyſſhe archers y• had .iiii. v. or. vi priſoners / y• lorde of Pous a gret baron of Poiton was ther ſlayne / and many other knyghtes and ſquyers. And ther was taken therle of Rochuart / y• lorde of Dānauemēt / the lorde of Pertney: & of Xaynton the lorde of Montendre & the lorde John̄ of Sayntre / but he was ſo ſore hurt that he had neuer helth after: he was repured for one of y• beſt knightꝭ in France. And ther was left for deed among other deed men: the lorde Rychard Dangle / who fought yt day by the kyng right valyāt ly / & ſo dyd the lorde of Charny on whom was great preaſe bycauſe he bare y• ſouerayne baner of the kyngꝭ / his owne bauer was alſo in y• felde the which was of goules / thre ſcochyns ſyluer. So many englyſſhmen & gaſcons came to that part y• perforce they opyned the kynges batell: ſo that the frenchmen were ſo mengled amonge their ennemyes / that ſomtyme there was fyue men vpon one gētylman: ther was taken y• lord of Pōpadour / & the lorde Bartylmewe de Brunes: and ther was ſlayne ſir Geſtray of Charny with the kynges baner in his handes. Alſo y• lorde Reynold Cobhm̄ ſlewe therle of Dāmartyn: than ther was a great preaſe to take y• kynge & ſuch as knewe hym cryed 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                yelde you or els ye ar but deed. Ther was a knyght of ſaynt Omers retayned in wages with the kyng of England called 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Denyce Morbecke / who had ſerued the englyſſhmen .v. yere before / bycauſe in his youth he had forfayted the realme of France for a murdre yt he dyd at ſaynt Omers. It happenyd ſo well for hym: y• he was next to the kynge whan they were about to take hym / he ſtepte forthe into the preaſe / and by ſtrength of his body and armes / he came to the frenche kyng and ſayd in gode frenche (ſir yelde you) the kyng be helde the knyght & ſayde to whom ſhall I yelde me. Where is my coſyn the prince of Wales: yf I myght ſe hym I wolde ſpeke with hym / Denyce auſwered (and ſayd) ſir he is nat here / but yelde you to me and I ſhall bringe you to hym: who be you ꝙ the kynge: ſir ꝙhe I am Denyce of Morbecke a knyght of Arthops / but I ſerue the kyng of Englande bycauſe I am banyſſhed the realme of Fraunce / and I haue forfaytedde all that I had there. Than the kynge gaue hym his ryght gauntlet (ſayeng I yelde me to you) there was a great preaſe about the kynge: foreuery man entorſed hym to ſay I haue taken him ſo that the kyng coude nat go forward with his yonge ſonne the lorde Philyppe with hym / bycauſe of y• preaſe. The price of Wales who was coragious & cruell as a lyon toke that day great pleaſure to fight and to chaſe his ennemyes / the lorde John̄ Chandos who was with hym / of all that day neuer left hym nor neuer toke hede of takynge of any priſoner. Than at the ende of the batayle (he ſayde to the prince) ſir it were good that you reſted her and ſette your baner a high in this buſſhe that your people may drawe hyder / for they be ſore ſpredde a brode / nor I canſe no mo baners nor penons of the frenche partie: wherfore ſir reſt and refreſſhe you / for ye be ſore chafed. Than the princes baner was ſette vpp̄ a hygh ou a buſſhe: and trumpettes and clarions began to ſowne / than the prince dyd of his baſenet: and the knyghtes for his body / and they of his chambre were redy aboute hym and a reed pauilyou pyght vpp̄: and than drinke was brought forthe to the prince / and for ſuche lordes as were aboute hym / the which ſtyll encreaſed as they came fro the chaſe ther they taryed / & their priſoners with theym. And whan the two marſhalles were come to the prince: he demaunded of them if they knewe any tidynges of the frenche kyng (they anſwered and ſayde) ſir we here none of certenty / but we thike verily he is other deed or taken / for he is nat gone out of y• batels. Than the prince ſayd to therle of warwyke / & to

ſir Reynolde Cobham: ſirs I requyre you god forthe and ſe what ye can knowe / that at your retourne ye may ſhewe me the trauth. Theſe two lordes toke their horſes and departed fro y• prince: and rode vp a lytell hyll to loke about them / than they parceyued a flocke of men of armes cōmynge togyder right werely. There was the frenche kyng a fote in great parell for englyſſhmen and gaſcoyns were his maiſters / they had taken hym fro 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Denyce Morbecke ꝑfore / and ſuche as were mooſt of force ſayd I haue taken hym: nay ꝙ another I haue taken hym / ſo they ſtraue which ſhulde haue him. Than the french kyng to eſchue that peryll ſayd: ſirs ſtryue nat lede me courteſly / and my ſonne to my coſyn the prince and ſtryue nat for my takynge / for I am ſo great a lorde to make you all riche: the kyngꝭ wordes ſomwhat a peaſed them / howe beit euer as they went they made ryot and brauled for the takyng of the kyng. Whan the two foreſayd lordes ſawe and herde that noyſe and ſtryfe amōg them: they came to them and ſayd / ſirs what is the mater that ye ſtryue for / ſirs ſayd one of thē it is for the frenche kyng who is here taken priſoner: and there be mo than .x. knyghtes & ſquyers that chalengeth the takynge of hym and of his ſonne: than̄e the two lordes entred into the preaſe and cauſed euery man to drawe a backe / and commaunded them in the princes name on peyne of their heedes to make no more noiſe nor to aproche the kyng no nerer without they were cōmaunded. Than̄e euery man gaue rowme to the lordes: and they a lyghted and dyd their reuerēte to the kyng / and ſo brought hym and his ſon in peace and reſt to the prince of Wales.
         
         
            ¶ Of the gyft that the prince gaue to the lorde Audeley after the batell of Poycters. Ca. C .lxv.
            
               ASſone as therle of War wyke / and the lorde Cogham were departed fro the prince / as ye haue herde before: than the prince demaunded of the knyghtes that were aboute hym for the lorde Audeley yf any knewe any thyng of hym. Some knyghtes that were ther anſwere (and ſayd) ſir he is ſore hurt and lyeth in a lytter her beſyde: by my faith ſayde the prince of his hurtes I am rightſorie / go and knowe yf he may be brought hyder / or els I woll go and ſe hym there as he is. Than̄e two knyghtes came to the lorde Awdeley (and ſayde) ſir the prince deſyreth greatly to ſe you: outher ye muſt go to hym or els he woll come to you / a ſir ſayde the knyght. I thanke the prince / whan he thynketh on ſo poore a knyght as I am than he called eyght of his ſeruantes / and cauſed theym to bere hym in his lytter to the place were as the prince was. Than the prince tooke hym in his armes and kyſt hym and made hym great chere (and ſayd) ſir James I ought gretly to honour you: for by your valyaunce ye haue this day achyued ye grace and renome of vs all / and ye ar reputed for the mooſt valyant of all other. A ſir ſayde the knyght ye ſay as it pleaſeth yeu: I wolde it were ſo / and if I haue this day any thynge auaunced my ſelfe to ſerue you / and to acomplyſſhe the vowe that I made / it ought nat to be reputed to me any prowes: ſir James ſayde the prince I and all ours take you in this iourney for the beſt doar in armes / and to thyntent to furnyſſhe you the better to purſue y• warres I retayne you for euer to be my knight with fyue hundred markes of yerely reuenewes / the which I ſhall aſſigne you on myne herytage in Englande. Sir ſayde the knynght god graunt me to deſerue the great goodneſſe that ye ſhewe me: and ſo he toke his leaue of the prince for he was right feble / and ſo his ſeruauntes brought hym to his lodging / and aſſone as he was gone the erle of Warwyke / and the lorde Combham retourned to ye prince and preſented to hym the frenche kyng. The prince made lowly reuerence to the kynge: and cauſed wyne and ſpyces to be brought forthe / and hymſelfe ſerued the kynge in ſigne of great loue.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen wan gretly at the batayle of Poycters. Cap. C .lxvi.
            
               THus this batayle was dyſconfyted as ye haue herd the which was in the feldꝭ of Malpertneſſe a two leages fro Poyters / the .xxii. day of ſeptēbre the yere of our lorde ▪ M. CCC .lvii. it began in the mornyng and endyd at noon / but as than all

the englyſſhmen wer nat retourned fro y• chaſe therfore the princes banner ſtode on a buſſhe to drawe all his men togyder / but it was by night or all came fro the chaſe. And as it was reported there was ſlayne all the floure of Fraunce / and there was taken with the kyng & the lorde Philyppe his ſonne a ſeuyntene erles / beſyde baroner / knyghtes / and ſquyers: and ſlayne a fyue or ſixe thouſande of one and other. Whan euery man was come fro the chaſe / they had twyſe as many priſoners as they were in nombre in all: than it was counſayled among them bycauſe of the great charge and dout to kepe ſo many that they ſhulde put many of them to raunſome incō
               tynent in the felde / and ſo they dyd. And the priſoners founde the englyſſhemen and gaſcoyns right courteſſe: ther were many that day putte to raunſome and lette go / all onely on their promyſe of faythe and trauth / to retourne agayne bytwene that and Chriſtmas to Burbeux with their raunſomes. Than that nyght they lay in the felde beſyde where as the batayle had been: ſome vnarmed theym but nat all and vnarmed all their priſoners / and euery man made good there to his priſoner / for yt day who ſoeuer toke any priſoner he was clere his / and myght quyte or raunſome hym at his pleaſure. All ſuche as were there with the prince were all made ryche with honour and goodes / aſ well by ranſomyng of priſoners as by wynnynge of golde / ſyluer / plate / tewelles / that was there founde. There was no man that dyd ſet any thyng by riche harneſſe wherof there was great plentie / for the frē
               chmen came thyder richely beſene / wenynge to haue had the iourney for them.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the lorde James Audley gaue to his foure ſquyers the .v. C. markes of reuenewes that the prince had gyuen hym. Cap. C .lxvii.
            
               WHan ſir James Awdeley was brought to his logynge / than he ſend for ſir Peter Audeley his brother / and for the lorde Bartylmewe of brunes / the lorde Stephane of Gouſenton / the lorde of Wylly / and the lorde Ralfe Ferres. All theſe were of his lynage: and than he called before them his foure ſquiers that had ſerued hym that day well and trewly: than he ſayd to the ſayd lordes / ſirs it hath pleaſed my lorde the prince to gyue me fyue hundred markes of reuenewes by yere in herytage / for the whiche gyft I haue done hym but ſmall ſeruyce with my body. Sirs beholde here theſe foure ſquyers / who hath alwayes ſerued me truely (and ſpecially this day) that honour that I haue is by their valyantneſſe / wherfore I woll rewarde them: I gyue and reſigne into their handes the gyft that my lorde ye prince hath gyuen me of fyue hūdred markes of yerly reuenewes to them and to their heyres foreuer / in lyke maner as it was gyuen me: I clerely diſheryte me therof and inheryte them without any rebell or condycion. The lordes and other that were ther euery man beheld other and ſayde among them ſelfe / it commeth of a great noblenes to gyue this gyft. they anſwered hym with one voyce ſir be it as godde wyll / we ſhall bere wytneſſe in this behalfe wher ſoeuer we become. Than̄e they departed fro hym and ſome of them went to the prince who the ſame nyght wolde make a ſupper to the frenche kynge / and to the other priſoners: for they had than ynough to do it withall of that the frenchemen brought with them for the englyſſhmen wanted vitayle before: for ſome in thre dayes hadde no bredde before.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the prince made a ſupper to the french kyng the ſame day of the batayle. Cap. C .lxviii.
            
               THe ſame day of the batayle at night the prince made a ſupper in his lodgynge to the frenche kyng and to ye mooſt parte of the great lordes that were priſoners: the prince made the kynge and his ſon / the lorde James of Burbone / the lorde John̄ Darthoys / the erle of Tankernyll / therle of Stampes / therle Dampmartyne / the erle of Grauyll / and the lorde of Pertenay to ſyt all at one borde: and other lordes / knyghtes / and ſquiers at other tables. And alwayes the prince ſerued before the king as humbly as he coude / and wolde nat ſyt at the kyngꝭ borde / for any deſyre that the kynge coulde make: but he ſayd he was nat ſuffycient to ſyt at the table with ſo great a

prince as the kyng was / but than he ſayd to the kyng: ſir for goddeſſake make non yuell nor heuy there, though god this day dyde nat conſent to folowe your wyll / for ſir ſurely the kynge my father ſhall bere you aſmoche honour and amyte as he may do / and ſhall acorde with you ſo reaſonably that ye ſhall euer be frendes to guyder after. And ſir me thynke ye ought to reioyſe though the iourney be nat as ye wolde haue had it / for this day ye haue wonne the hygh renome of prowes / and haue paſt this day in valyantneſſe all other of your partie. Sir I ſay natte this to mocke you: for all that be on our partte ye ſawe euery mannes dedes ar playnly acorded by true ſe
                  〈…〉
                to gyue you the price and chapelette.
            Therwith the frenchemen began to murmure and ſayde among thēſelfe: howe the prince had 
                  〈◊〉
                nobly / and that by all eſtimacion he ſhulde proue a noble man if god ſende hym lyfe / and to perceyuer in ſuche good fortune.
         
         
            ¶howe the prince retourned to Burdeux after the batayle of Poycters. Cap. C .lxix.
            
               Whan ſupper was done euery man wente to his lodgyng with their priſoners: ye ſame nyght they putte many to raunſome and belyued thē on their faythes & trauthes & raunſomed them but eaſely / for they ſayd ther wolde ſette no knyghtes raunſome ſo hygh / but that he myght pay at his eaſe and maynteyne ſtyll his degree. The nerte day whan they had herde maſſe and taken ſome repaſt / and that euery thyng was truſſed and redy: than they toke their horſes and rode to wardes Poycters. The ſame nyght ther was come to Poycters the lorde of Roy with a hūdred ſperes he was nat at the batayle / but he mette the duke of Normādy nere to Chauuigny / and the duke ſende hym to Poycters to kepe the towne / tyll they herde other tidynges. Whan the lorde of Roy knewe that thenglyſſhmen were ſo nere commynge to the cytie: he cauſed euery man to be armed and euery man to go to his defence / to the walles / towres / and gates: and thēglyſſhmen paſſe by without any aprochynge / for they were ſo laded with golde / ſyluer / and priſoners, that in their retournynge they aſſauted no fortres. They thought it a gret dede if they might bringe the frenche kynge with their other priſoners and ryches that they had won in ſauegard to Burdeaux: they rode but ſmall iourneys bycauſe of their priſoners and great caryagꝭ that they had they rode in a day no more but four or fyue leages / and loged euer betymes: and rode cloſe togyder in good aray ſauyng the marſhalles batayls / who rode euer before with fyne. C. men of armes to opyn the paſſages as ye prince ſhulde paſſe / but they founde no encounterers / for all the countre was ſo frayed that euery man drue to the fortreſſes. As the prince rode it was ſhewed hym howe the lorde Audeley had gyuen to his four ſquyers the gyft of the fyue hundred markes / that he hadde gyuen vnto hym. Than the prince ſend for hym: and he was brought in his lytter to the prince / who receyued hym curteſly (and ſayde) ſir James we haue knoledge that the reuenewes that we gaue you / aſſone as ye came to your lodgyng / you gaue the ſame to foure ſquyers: we wolde knowe why ye dyd ſo / and whyder ye gyft was agreable to you or nat. Sir ſayd the knyght it is of trauth I haue gyuen it to thē: and I ſhall ſhe we you why I dyde ſo / theſe foure ſquyers that be here preſent haue alonge ſeaſon ſerued me well and truely in many great beſyneſſes / and ſir at this laſt batayle they ſerued me in ſuche wyſe / that and they had neuer done nothynge els / I was bounde to rewarde theym: and before the ſame day they had neuer nothing of me in rewarde. Sir I am but a man alone: but by the ayde and confort of thē I toke on me to acomplyſſhe my vowe long be / fore made: I had ben deed in the batayle & they had nat ben. wherfore ſir whan I conſydred the loue that they bare vnto me / I had nat ben curteſſe if I wolde nat a rewarded them: I thanke god I haue had and ſhall haue ynough as long as I lyue / I wyll neuer be a baſſhed for lacke of good. Sir if I haue done this without yor pleaſure I requyre you to pardon me: for ſir both I and my ſquyers ſhall ſerue you as well as euer we dyd. Than the prince ſayd: ſir James for a nything that ye haue done I can nat blame you but can you gode thanke therfore / and for the valyantnes of theſe ſquyers whom ye preyſe ſo moche / I acorde to them your gyft: and I woll render agayne to you .vi. C. markes in lyke maner as ye had the other. Thus the prince & hsi company: dyd ſomoche that they paſt through Poyctou / and Xaynton without damage / and came

to Blay / and there paſſed the ryuer of Geron / & aryued in the good cytie of Burdeux. It canne nat be recorded the gret feeſt and cherr that they of the cytie / with the clergy made to the prince / and howe honourably they were ther receyued. The prince brought the french kyng into the abbey of ſaynt Andrewes / and there they lodged bothe / the kyng in one part / and the princeliu ye other. The prince bought of the lordes / knygh / tes / and ſquyers of Gaſcone / the mooſt parte of the erles of the realme of Fraunce ſuche as wer priſoners and payed redy money for the. Ther was dyuers queſtyons and chalenges made by twene the knyghtes and ſquyers of Gaſcoyne / for takyng of the frenche kyng / Howe beit Denyce Morbecke by ryght of armes and by true tokens that he ſhewed / chalenged hym for his priſoner. Another ſquper of Gaſcon called Bernarde of Troutes / ſayde howe he had ryght to hym: there was moche a do and many wordes before the prince / and other lordꝭ that were there and by cauſe theſe two chalenged eche other to fight in that quarell. The prince cauſed the mater to reſt tyll they came in Englande / and that no declaracyon ſhulde be made but afore y• kynge of Englande his father: but bycauſe the frenche kyng hymſelfe ayded to ſuſtayne the chalēg of Denyce Morbecke / for he enclyned more to hym than to any other. The prince therfore priuely cauſed to be delyuerd to the ſayd 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Denyce .ii. M. nobuls / to mayntene withall his eſtate. Anone after the prince came to Burdeux / ye cardynall of Piergort came thyder / who was ſend fro the pope in legacyon as it was ſayd / he was there more than̄e .xv. dayes or the prince wolde ſpeke with hym / bycauſe of the Chatclayne of Campoſt and his men / who were agaynſt hym in the batayle of Poicters. The prince belyued that the cardynall ſend them thyder: but the cardynall dyd ſomoch by the meanes of the lorde of Chamont / the lorde of Monferant / and the Captall of Buz / who were his coſyus. They ſhewed ſo good reaſons to the prince / that he was cō
               tent to here him ſpeke. And whan he was before the prince he excuſed hymſelfe ſo ſagely / that the prince and his counſayle helde him excuſed / and ſo he fell agayne into the princes loue / and redemed out his men by reſonable raunſoms. and ye Cathelayne was ſette to his ranſome of .x. M. frankes / the which he payed after. Than the cardynall began to treat on the delyuerance of the frenche kyng / but I paſſe it brefely bycauſe nothyng was done. Thus the prince / the gaſcons and englyſſhmen taryed ſtyllat Burdeux 
                  •
               yll it was lent in great myrth and reuell / and ſpende folyſſhely the golde and ſyluer y• they had won. In Englande alſo there was great ioye whan̄e they harde tidynges of the batayle of Poycters of the dyſconfityng of the frēchmen / and takyng of the kyng: great ſolemnytes were made in a
                  •
                churches / and great fyers / and wakes throughout all Englande. The knyghtes and ſquyers ſuche as were come home fro that iourney were moche made of and prayſed more than other.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the thre eſtates of France aſſembled togyder at Parys / after the batayle of Poycters. Cap. C .lxx.
            
               THe ſame ſeſon that the batayle of Poicters was / the duke of Lancaſtre was in ye coūtie of Eureux / and on the marches of Cōſtantyne and with hym the lorde Philyp
                  •
                of Nauer / & the lorde God▪ ſray of Harcort. They made warr in Normandy: & had done all that ſeaſon in the tytell of the kyng of Nauer / whom the french kyng helde in priſon. Theſe lordes dyd all that they might to haue ben at the iourney of Poyters with ye prince but they coude nat: for all the paſſages on the ryuer of Loyre were ſo well kept / y• they myght nat paſſe. But whan they herd howe the prince had taken the french kyng at the batayle of Po
                  •
               
               ters they were gladde / and brake vp their iourney: bycauſe the duke of Lancaſtre / & ſir Phylyppe of Nauer wolde go into Englande / and ſo they dyd and they ſende ſir Godfray of Harcort to ſaynt Sauyoursle vycont / to kepe ther fronter warre. Nowe let vs ſpeke of the frenche kynges threſonnes: Charles / Loys / and John̄ who were returned fro the beſynes at Poyters they were right yong of age and of counſell. In thē was but ſmall recouery: nor ther was none of thē that wolde take on hym the gouernāce of the realme of France. Alſo the lordes knyghtes & ſquyers ſuch as fledde fro the batayle / were ſo hated & blamed of the cōmons of ye realme 
                  〈…〉
                ſcant they durſt abyde in any good towne. Th
                  •
                all the prelates of holy church beyng in France / byſſhoppes / abbottes / and all other noble lordꝭ and knyghtꝭ: and the ꝓuoſt of the marchātes ye burgeſſes of Paris / & the coūſels of other gode townes. They all aſſembled at Parys: & there

they wolde ordayne howe the realme ſhulde be gouerned tyll the kynge were delyuered out of priſon. Alſo they wold knowe fardet more what was become of the great treaſure / that had ben leuyed in the realme: by deames / maltotes / ſubſidyes forgyng of moneys / and in all other extorcyons / wherby the people hath ben ouerlayd and troubled: and the ſoudyours yuell payed / and the realme yuell kept and defendedde. But of all this there were none that coulde gyue accompt: than they agreed that the prelates ſhuld choſe out twelfe perſones amonge theym / who ſhulde haue power by theym and by all the clergy: to ordayne and to aduyſe all thynges couenable to be done. And the lordes and knyghtes to chuſe other twelfe among them / of their moſt ſageſt and dyſcrete perſones / to determyne all cauſes: And the burgeſſes to choſe other twelfe for the commons. The whiche ſire and thyrtie perſons ſhulde often tymes mete at Parys / and they to common and to ordayne for all cauſes of the realme: and euery matter to be brought to theym: and to theſe thre eſtates all other prelates / lordes / and cōmons ſhulde obey. So theſe perſones were choſen out: but in the begynninge there were dyuerſe in this clectyon / that the duke of Normādy was nat content withall / nor his counſayle. ¶ Firſte theſe thre eſtates defended euermore forgynge of money / alſo they requyred the duke of Normandy / that he wolde a reſt the chaunceler of the kynge his father / the lorde Robert of Lorreys / and the lorde Robert of Bucy / and dyuers other maiſters of the coū
               tes / and other counſaylours of the kynges: to the entent that they might make a trewe acount of that they had taken and leuyed in the realme and by their counſaylles. Whan theſe maiſters and counſaylours herde of this mater / they departed out of the realme into other countreis / to abyde there tyll they herde other tidynges.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the thre eſtates ſende men of warre agaynſt the lorde Godfray of Harecourt. Cap. C .lxxi.
            
               THeſe thre eſtatꝭ ordayned and ſtablyſſhed in their names receyuers of all male totes / deames / ſubſidyes / & other rightes pertayning to the kyng / and to the realme. And they made newe money to be forged of fyne golde called moutons: alſo they wolde gladly that the kynge of Nauer had ben delyuerd out of priſon / where as he was at the caſtell of Creuecure in Cambreſis. It was thought by dyuers of the thre eſtates: that the realme of Fraunce ſhulde be the more ſtronger and the better defēded / if he wolde be true to the realme for they ſawe well there were than̄e but fewe nobles to maynteyne the realme: for they were nyghe all taken̄e and ſlayne at the batayle of Poycters. Than̄e they requyred the duke of Normandy to delyuer hym out of priſonne / for they ſayd howe they thought he had great wronge to be kepte in priſone / for they wyſt nat why. The duke anſwered (and ſayde) howe he durſt nat take on hym his delyueraunce: for the kyng his father putte hym in priſone he coude nat tell for what cauſe. The ſame ſeaſon there came tidynges to the duke / and to the thre eſtates / that the lorde Godfray of Harecout made fore warr in Normandy / and ouer ranne the countre two or thre tymes in a weke / ſomtyme to the ſubbarbes of Cane / of ſaynt Lowe / Eureux / and Conſtances. Than the duke and the thre eſtates: ordayned a company of men of armes of thre hundred ſpeares / and fyue hundredde of other: and made four capitayns / the lorde of Rauenall / the lorde of Kenny / the lorde of Ryuell / and y• lorde of Friamyll. Theſe men of warre departed fro Parys and went to Rowan: and there they aſſembled on all partes / there were dyuers knyghtes of Arthoys and of Uermandoys / as y• lorde of Kenckey / the lorde Loyes of Hanefkell / the lorde Edward of Rouſy / the lorde John̄ Fenes the lorde Ingram of Hedyn: and dyuers other. And alſo of Normandy ther were many expert men of armes: and theſe lordes rode to Cōſtances / and there made their garyſon.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batayle of Conſtances bytwene the lorde Godfray of Harcourt / and the lorde Loyes of Rauenall. Cap. C .lxxii.
            
               
               WHan the lord Godfray of Harco•t / who was a right harby knyght a
                  〈…〉
                a couragious: knewe that the frenche men were come to the cyte of Conſtāces. He assembled togyder as many men of 
                  〈◊〉
                as he coude gette / archers and other (and sayd) howe he wolde ryde and loke o
                  •
                the frenchmen. And ſo departed 
                  〈◊〉
                saynt Sauyour le 
                  〈◊〉
                he had about a ſeuyn hūdred men on
                  •
                and other the ſame day the frenchmen 
                  〈◊〉
                forth, and 
                  〈◊〉
                before them their curr
                  〈…〉
                / who brought them worde agayne that they had sene the naueroyſe. Alſo ſir Godfray had sende 
                  〈◊◊〉
                who had alſo well a viewed the frenchmen / and ſawe their baners and penons and what nombre they were. And 
                  〈◊〉
                and ſhe 
                  〈◊〉
                it to ſir Godfray (who ſayd) ſyth we ſ
                  •
                ou
                  〈…〉
                we woll fight with theym. Than he ſette his archers before / and ſette his company in good order. And whan ſir Loys of Rauenalt
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                th
                  〈…〉
                demeanour: he cauſed his company in a lyght a fote / and to 
                  •
               aues them with their targes agaynſt the archers: and commaunded that none ſhulde go forwarde without he commaunded. The archers began to aproch and thoſe feerſly the frēchmen who were well armed and pauyſſhed ſuffred their ſhotte / it dyd theym no great hurt. So the frenchemen ſtode ſtyll / tyll the archers had ſpent all their arowes: than they 
                  〈◊〉
                away their bowes / and reſorted backe to their men of armes / who were a ranged a longe by a hedg
                  •
               : and ſir Godfray with his ba
                  •
               er before them. Than the frenche archers began to 
                  〈◊〉
                and gathered vp the arrowes that had ben ſho
                  •
                at them before: and alſo their men of armes began feerſly to aproche / there was a fo
                  •
               e fyght. Whan they mette hande to hande: and ſir Godfrayes fotemen kept none aray / but were ſoone diſcōfyteo. Than ſir Godfray ſagely with
                  •
               rue hymſelfe downe into a wyng cloſed with 
                  〈◊〉
                whan the frēchmen ſawe that: they all a lyghted a fote / and deuyſed which way they might 
                  〈◊〉
                they went all about to fynde away: and ſir Godfray was redy euer to defende. They were many hurt and ſlayne of the frenchmen or they 
                  〈◊〉
                de entre at their pleaſure: finally they entred / & than there was a ſore fyght and many a man ouerthrowen. And ſir Godfrayes men kepte 
                  〈◊〉
                good aray / nor dyd nat as they had promyſed: mooſt part of theym 
                  ••
               e
                  •
               de: whan ſir Godfray ſawe that he ſayd to himſelf howe he had rathe
                  •
                there 
                  〈…〉
               than to he 
                  •
               aken by the frēchmen than he toke his are in his handes and ſet 
                  〈◊〉
                y• one legge before thother to ſtande the more ſurely / for his one legge was a lytell croked: but he was ſtrong in the armes. Ther he fought valyantly and long: non burſt well abyde his ſtro
                  〈…〉
                than two frenchmen mounted on their horſes 
                  〈◊〉
                ranne bothe with their ſpeares a tones at hym / and ſo bare hym to the yerth: than other y• were a fote 
                  •
               ame with their ſw
                  •
               rdes and ſtrake hym into the body vnder his harneys. So that ther 
               
                  •
               e was ſlayne: and all ſuche as were with hya
                  •
                were nygh all ſlayne and taken / and ſuch as 
                  〈◊〉
                ped retourned to ſaynt Sauyour the Uycount. This was about the feeſt of ſaynt Martyne 
                  〈◊〉
                wynter: the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lvi.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the prince conucyed the frenche kyng fro Burdeux into Englande. Cap. C .lxxiii.
            
               AFter the beth of this knight ſir Godfray of Harcourt: the frēchmen retourned to Cōſtances with their priſoners and pyliage. And anone after they went into France to the duke of Normandy / who as than was called regent of France / and to the thre eſtates wh
                  •
                receyued them right honourably. So fro thenſ forth ſaynt Sauyour le vycont was englyſth
                  〈…〉
                and all the lordes pertayning to ſir Godfray of Harcourt / for he had ſolde it to the kyng of England after his dyſceaſe / and diſhery
                  •
               ed y• lorde Loys of Harcort his nephue: by cauſe he wolde nat take his par
                  •
               . Iſſone as the kyng of Englā
               de herde tidynges of the dethe of the lorde Godfray of Harcort he was ſorie therof. Thā he ſent incōtynent men of armes knyghtes / ſ
                  •
               uyers / & archers mo than. CCC. by ſee: to go and take poſſeſſyon for hym of ſaynt Sauyour le Uycōt the which was worth .xxc. M. frankes by yere: and made captayne of thoſe landꝭ the lorde Johan Lyle. The thre eſtates all that ſeaſon ſtudyed ou the ordinance of the realme of France and it was all gouerned by them: the ſame wynter y• prince of Wales and ſuche of Englande as were with hym at Burdeux / ordayned for ſhyppes to conuey the frenche kyng and his ſonne: and all other priſoners into Englande. And whan the tyme of his departed aproched: than he cōmaū
               ded the lorde 
                  •
               albert the lorde of Muſydent / the lorde de 
                  〈◊〉
                aſpare the lorde of Punyers / and the lorde of Roſen to kepe y• contre there tyll his

retourne agayne. Than he toke the ſee and certayne lordes of Gaſcoyne with hym: the frenche kyng was in a veſſell by hym ſelf to be the more at his eaſe / acompanyed with two hūdred men of armes and two thouſand archers for it was ſhewed the prince that the thre eſtates by whom the realme of France was gouerned / had layed in Normandy and Crotoy two great armyes: to the entent to mete with hym / and to gette the frenche kynge out of his handes if they myght: but ther were no ſuche that apered. And yet thei were on the ſee .xi. dayes & on the .xii. day they aryued at Sandwych: than they yſſued out of their ſhyppe and lay there all that night and taryed there two dayes to refreſſhe them: and on the thirde day they rode to Canterbury. Whan the kyng of Englande knewe of their cōmynge / he comaunded thē of London to prepare theym and their cyte to receyue ſuche a man as the frē / che kyng was. Than they of London arrayed themſelfe by cōpanyes: and the chiefe maiſters clothyng dyfferent fro the other at ſaynt Thomas of Caunterbury the frenche kyng and the prince made their offerynges / and there taryed a day and than rode to Rocheſter / and taryed there that day and the nexte day to Dartforde: and the fourth day to London / wher they were honourably receyued and ſo they were in euery good towne as they paſſed. The frenche kynge rode through London on a whyte courſer well aparelled: and the prince on a lytell blacke hobbey by hym. Thus he was conueyed a long the cyte tyll he came to the Sauoy the which houſe pertayned to the herytage of the duke of Lancaſtre: there the french kyng kept his houſe a long ſeaſon / and thyder came to ſe hym the kyng and the quene often tymes / and made hym gret feeſt and chere. Anone after by the commaundement of pope Innocent the ſirt there came into Englande the lorde Taylleran cardynall of Pyergort / and the lorde Nycholas cardynall of Dargell. They treated for a peace bytwene the two kynges but they coude bring nothyng to effect: but at laſt by good meanes they ꝓcured a truſe bytwene the two kynges and all their aſſyſters to endure tyll the feeſt of ſaynt Johan the Baptyſt / in the yere of our lorde god. M. CCC .lix. And out of this truſe was excepted ye lorde Philyppe of Nauerr and his alyes the counteſſe of Mountfort / and the duchy of Bretayne. Anone after the french kyng was remoued fro the Sauoy to the caſtell of wyndſore and all his houſe holde: and went a huntyng and a haukyng ther about it his pleaſur and the lorde Philypp his ſon with hym: and all the other priſoners abode ſtyll at London / and went to ſe the kyng at their pleaſure / and were receyued all onely on their faythes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Scottes was delyuered out of priſon. Cap. C .lxxiiii.
            
               YE haue herde here before howe kyng Dauyd of Scotlande was taken & was priſoner in Englande more than .ix. yere. And anone after the truſe was concluded bytwene Englande and Fraunce: the two foreſayd cardynals with the byſſhoppe of ſaynt Andrewes in Scotlande / fell in treaty for the delyuerance of the kyng of Scottꝭ. The treaty was in ſuche maner / that the kyng of Scotes ſhulde neuer after arme hymſelfe agaynſt the kyng of Englande in his realme / nor counſayle nor conſent to any of his ſubgetes to arme them / nor to greue nor make warre agaynſt England. And alſo the kyng of Scottes after his retourne into his realme / ſhulde put to all his payne and dilygence that his men ſhulde agre / that ye realme of Scotland ſhuld holde in fee / and do homage to the kyng of England. And if the realme wolde nat agree thereto: yet the kynge of Scottes to ſwere ſolemply to kepe good peace with the kyng of Englande: and to bynde hymſelfe and his realme to pay within .x. yere after fyue hundred thouſande nobuls: and at the ſomonyng of the kyng of England / to ſende gode pleges and hoſtages: as the erle of Duglas / therle of Morette / the erle of Mare / the erle of Surlant / the erle of Fye the baron of Uerſey / and ſir Wyllyam of Caumoyſe. And all theſe to abyde in Englande as priſoners and hoſtagers for the kyng their lorde: vnto the tyme that the ſayd paymēt of money be full content and payed. Of this ordynaunce and bondes / there were made inſtrumentes / publykes / and letters patentes ſayled by bothe kynges. And than the kyng of Scottꝭ deꝑted and went into his realme / and his wyfe quene Iſabell ſuſter to the kynge of Englande with hym: and he was honourably receyued in his realme and he went and lay at ſaynt Johſis towne on the ryuer of Try / tyll his caſtell of Edenborough was newe prepared.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the duke of Lancaſter layed ſiege to Reynes. Cap. C .lxxv.
            
               ABoute the myddes of May / in the yere of our lorde god. M. CCC .lvii. the duke of Lacaſtre made in Breten a great army of englyſſhmen & of bretons / in the ayde of the counteſſe of Moutfort and or ner yonge ſonne: they were in nombre a thouſande men of armes well aparelled / and .v. hundred of other with archers. And they departed on a day fro Hanybout: and went forthe brē
               nyng and exilyng the contrey of Bretayne / and ſo came before the good cyte of Reynes / and layed ſiege therto and made many aſſautes and lytell good dyde: for within was the Uycount of Rowan / the lorde dela wall / ſir Charles of Dignen and dyuers other. And alſo there was a yong bachelar called Bertraude of 
                  •
               leſquyne / who duryng the ſiege fought with an englyſſh / man / called ſir Nycholas Dagorne: and that batayle was taken̄e thre courſes with a speare / thre ſtrokes with an are / and thre with a dagger. And eche of theſe knyghtes bare themſelfe ſo valyantly / that they departed fro the felde wt
               out any damage / and they were well regarded bothe of theym within / and they without. The ſame ſeaſon the lorde Charles de Bloyes was in the countrey and purſewed ſore the regent of Fraunce deſyring hym to ſende men of warr to reyſe the ſiege at Reynes / but the regent had ſuche buſynes with the maters of the realme / that he dydde nothynge in that cauſe. So the ſiege lay ſtyll before Reynes.
         
         
            ¶ How a knyght of the county of Eureuſe called ſir wyllyam of Granuyll wan the cytie and caſtell of Eureux / the which as than was french: for the frenche kyng had won it fro the Naaeroys / as ye haue herde before. Capitulo. C. lxxvi
            
               A knight named the lorde of Granuyll / ꝑtayning to the kyng of Nauer bothe by fayth and othe: gretly it diſpleaſed hym the preſētmēt of the kyng of Nauerre / and alſo it was right dyſpleſant to ſome of the burgeſſes of Eureur / but they coude nat amende it: bycauſe the caſtell was their enemy. This lorde dwelt a two leages fro the cyte: and oſten tymes he reſorted to the cite to a burges houſe / that in tyme before euer loued well the kyng of Nauer. Whā this lorde came to this burgeſſe houſe he wolde eate & drinke with hym: and ſpeke and cōmen of many maters / & ſpecially of the kyng of Nauer and of his takyng / wherwith they wer nothing cōtent. And on a tyme this lorde ſayd to the burges if ye woll agre with me Iſhal on a day wyn agayne this cyte / bourge / & caſtell / to the behofe of the kyng of Nauer / howe may that be ſayd y• burges / for the captayn of the caſtell is ſo gode a frēchman that he woll neuer agre therto / & with out the caſtell ye can do nothynge / for the caſtell ouer maiſtreth the cytie. Well ꝙ the lorde Wyllyam Iſhall ſhe we you: firſt it behoueth that ye gette of your acorde thre or foure other burgeſſes / and prouyde redy in your houſes certayne men well armed / and Iſhall warrāt you on my peryll that ye ſhall entre into the caſtell without 
                  •
               anger by aſubtyltie that I wyll cōpaſe. This burgeſſe dyde ſomoche in a briefe tyme: that he dyd gette a hundred burgeſſes of his opinyon: This lorde of Granuyll came in and out into y• cyte at his pleaſure without any ſuſpectyon / for he was neuer in harnes with ſir Philyp of Nauerre in no iourney that he made: bycauſe his lande lay nere to the cytie of Eureur. And alſo the frenche kyng whan he wan the cytie he cauſed all the landes there aboute to be bounde to hym / els he wolde haue taken them to his owne vſe. So the freuche kyng had the countrey / but the hertes of the people were ſtyll naueroyſe: alſo if kyng John̄ had ben in Fraunce as he was in Englande he durſt nat haue done as he dyd / but he thought y• maters of France were inſore trouble: and alſo ꝑceyued howe the thre eſtates wer well mynded to the delyuerāce of the kyng of Nauer. And whan he ſaw all his mater redy 
                  〈◊〉
                well forward / & that the burgeſſes of his opynyon were well aduyſed what they ſhulde do / he armed hymſelfe with ſecrete armour & dyd on a 
                  ••
               opp aboue & a cloke aboue that and vnder his arme he bare a ſhort batell axe & with hym went a varlet who was 
                  •
               riuy to his mynd. And ſo he came walkyng before the caſtell gate as he had often tymes done before: he walked vp & downe ſo often / that at laſt the capitayne came downe and opyned the wycket as he was wont to do and ſtode and loked about hym. And whan ſir Wyllyamſame hym: he went by lytell and lytell

to hym and ſaluted hym courteſly / the captayne ſtode ſtyll and ſaluted hym agayne. And whan they came nere togyder / they began to ſpeke of dyuerſe maters: and ſir Wyllyam demaunded of hym if he had herde any newe tidynges oute of Fraunce. The capitayne who was deſyrous to here newes ſayd: ſir I here none I pray you if ye haue herde any lette me here ſome parte of them / with a right good wyll ꝙ the lorde Wyllyam. Sir it is ſayd in Fraunce that the kynge of Denmarke / and the kyng of Irelande ar alyed togyder: and hath ſworne to go forthe togyder / and nat to retourne agayne into their countreys tyll they haue diſtroyed all England / and haue brought agayne the frenche kynge to Parys / for they ar on the ſee mo than a. C. M. men And the englyſſhmen be in ſuche dout of them / that they wot nat what to do / for ther is an olde ſayeng among theym that the danes ſhulde dyſtroy theym. The capitayne demaunded howe he knewe thoſe tidynges: ſir ſayde he / a knyght of Flaunders dyd write this to me for certayne / and he ſent me with ye letter the goodlyeſt cheſſemen that euer I ſawe. He found out that mocke bycauſe he knewe well that the capitayne loued well the game of the cheſſe: than the capitayne ſayde / ſir I pray you lette me ſe theym / I ſhall ſende for them ſayd ſir Wyllyam / on the condycion that you woll play a game with me for the wyne. And than he ſayde to his varlette: go thy way and fetche me the cheſſemen / and bring thē hyther to the gate: the varlet departed / and the capitayne and ſir Wyllyam entred into the firſt gate / than the capitayne cloſed the wycket after them with a bolt and locked it nat. Thanne ſir Wyllyam ſayde opyn the ſeconde gate / ye may well ynough without any danger / the captayne opyned the wycket and dyd ſuffre ſir Wyllyam to entre to ſe the caſtell and he entred with hym. The varlet than went ſtreyght to the burgeſſes who had men redy in harnes ī their houſes: and he cauſed them to come harde to the caſtell gate and than he ſowned a lytell horne as it was deuyſed before that he ſhulde do. Whan̄e the lorde Wyllyam herde the horne he ſayde to the capytayne lette vs go out of the ſeconde gate for my varlet is commynge: than ſir Wyllyam paſſed the wycket and ſtode ſtyll without / and the capitayne that wolde a paſſed out after hym / ſette out his fore and ſtouped downe and put out his heed. Than the lorde Wylliam toke the are that he had vnder his arme: and ſtrake the captayne ſin he a ſtroke that he claue his heed / and ſo fyll downe deed on the groundſyll: than̄e the lorde Wyllyam went to the firſt gate and opyned hit. Whan̄e the watche man of the caſtell herde the horne he had great marueyle: for ther was a cō
               maūdement gyuen in the towne / that on payne of dethe none ſhulde ſowne any horne / than he loked and ſawe men in harnes come ronnynge towardes the caſtell gate / than he cryed treaſon treaſon. Than they within ye caſtell came to the gate and were ſore a baſſhed whan they ſawe it opyn / & the capitayne deed ouerth wart the gate and the lorde Willyam with his axe in his handes to defende the entre: Than incōtynent ther came ſuche as were apoynted to ayde the lorde Wyllyam and entred in at the firſt gate / and ſo after to the ſeconde gate and droue backe ye ſoudyers / and dyuers were taken and ſlayne: and ſo entred into the caſtell. Thus by this manere was the ſtronge caſtell of Eureux won agayne: and than incontynent the cytie yelded vp / & put out all the frenchmen / and than they ſend for the lorde Philyp of Nauer / who was as than newely come out of Englande / & thyder he came and made ther his ſauerayne garyſon to make war agaynſt the good countrey of Normandy / and with hym was ſir Robert Canoll / ſir James Phyſen / ſir Fryquet of Friquant / the Baſcle of Marnell / the lorde Jouell / ſir Fondrigas and other / who dyd after moche myſchiefe in France as ye ſhall here herafter.
         
         
            ¶ Of the cōpanions wherof the archpreeſt was chiefe / and howe he was honoured in Auygnon. Ca. C .lxxvii.
            
               IN the ſame ſeaſon ther was a knyght called ſir Arnolde Canoll / & moſt comōly named archpreeſt / he aſſembled togyder a great company of men of warr of dyuers contrees / ſuche as lacked wages in other places. After the takyng of the frē
               che kynge they wyſte nat where than to wynne any thyng in Fraunce: ſo firſt they went towardes Prouence / and toke byforce many ſtronge townes and caſtelles / and robbed all the countrey to Auygnone. And they had none other capitayne but this knight the archpreeſt: the pope Innocent the ſixt / and the cardynalles beyng at

Auygnon had of that company great dout / and kept there men day and nyght in harneſſe: and made good watche. Whan this archepreeſt and his cōpany had robbed all the countre: the pope and the clergy fell in treaty with thē / and ſo on a ſure apoyntment they came to Auygnone / and they were as honourably receyued / as thoughe there had ben a kynges ſonne. And often tymes this knyght dyned with the pope and with the cardynals / and they had pardon of all their ſynnes / and at their departyng they had in rewarde .xl. thouſande crownes for hym and his company. So ſome of his company departed: but ſtyll the archpreeſt kept his company togyder.
         
         
            Of an other ſort of cōpanyons wherof Ruſſyn a walſſhman was capitayne. Cap. C .lxxviii.
            
               ALſo in the ſame ſeaſon there roſe an other company of men of warr of all contreys gathered togyder: & they kept bytwene ye ryuer of Loyr and the ryuer of Sayne. Wherfore none durſte go nor ryde bytwene Parys and Orleaunce / nor bytwene Parys and Moutargꝭ euery man ſledde to Parys: and the poore men of the countre fled to Orleance. Theſe companyons made among them a captayne called Ruffyn / they made hym knight: and by meanes of robbery and pyſſage he was marueylous riche / ſome day they wolde ryde nere to Parys / another day to Orlyaunce: another tyme to Chartres. There was no towne nor fortreſſe: ſauynge ſuche as were ſtronge and well kept / but was by thē robbed and ouerron: as ſaynt Arnolde / Gallardon / Broumalx / Aloes / Eſtampes / Chaſtres / Montleher / Plounyers / Ingaſtynoes / Mylly / Larchant / Chaſtellon / Montarges / Iſy
                  ••
               es and dyuers other great townes / that it were marueyll to reherſe them. They rode in and out about in the contre by .xx. by .xxx. and by .xl. and they founde no let: Alſo in Normandy by the ſee ſyde there was a gretter company of robbers englyſſhe and Naueroys: and ſir Robert Canoll was chefe of thē and by ſuche meanes he wanne townes caſtels and fortreſſes: without any reſyſtence. This 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert Canoll had longe vſed lyke maner / he was well worthe a hundred thouſand cr
                  •
               wnes / and kepte euer with hym many ſoudyers at his wages: they pylled and robbed ſo well / that many were gladde to folowe hym.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the prouoſt of the marchantes of Parys ſlewe thre knyghtes in the regentes chambre. Cap. C .lxxix.
            
               IN this ſeaſon that the thre eſtates thus ruled: there roſe in dyuers countrees certayne manere of people callyng themſelfe companyons and they made warr to euery man. The noble men of y• realme of France and the prelates of holy churche began to waxe wery of the rule and ordynā
               ce of the thre eſtates: and ſo gaue vp their rule / and ſuffred the prouoſt of the marchantes to me dyll with ſome of the burgeſſes of Parys / bycauſe they medled farther than̄e they were pleaſed withall. So on a day the regent of Fraunce was in the palays of Parys / with many noblemen and prelates with hym. The prouoſt than aſſembled a great nombre of commons of Parys / ſuche as were of his opynion / and all they ware hattes of one colour: to thnetent to be knowen. The prouoſt came to the palays with his men about hym / and entred into the dukes chā
               bre: and ther egerly he deſyred hym that he wolde take on hym the medlyng of the buſyneſſe of the realme of France: that the realme the which pertayned to hym by enherytance might be better kept / and that ſuche companyons as goeth about the realme waſtyng / robbyng / and pyllinge the ſame: myght be ſubdued. The duke anſwered howe he wolde gladly entende therto yf he had wherwith: and ſaid they that receyue the profet and the rightes pertayning to the realme ought to do it yf it be done or nat I report me. So they multiplyed ſuche wordes bytwene thē that thre of the greatteſt of the dukes counſayle were ther ſlayne ſo nere hym / that his clothes were all blody with their blode / and he himſelfe in great peryll: but there was ſette one of their hattes on his heed / and he was fayne there to ꝑdon

the deth of his thre knyghtes two of armes and the thyrd of the lawe: the one called y• lorde Robert of Cleremont a ryght noble man / another the lorde of Cōflans / and the knyght of the lawe / the lorde Symonde of Bucy.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Nauer came out of priſon. Cap. C .lxxx.
            
               AFter this forſayd auen ture certayne knyghtes as y• lorde John̄ of Pequigny / & other vnder the comfort of y• prouoſt of Parys / and of other counſaylours of y• good townes cāe to the ſtronge caſtell of Alleres in Paylleull in Picardy / where the kyng of Nauer was in priſon / vnder the kepynge of the lorde Tryſtram du Boyſe. They brought to theym that kept the caſtell ſuche tokens / that they had the king of Nauer delyuerd into their hādes: for the captayn was nat as thā there. And they brought hym with great ioye into the cytie of Amyenſe where he was well receyued / and lyghted at a chanons houſe who loued hym entierly / called Guy Kyrrecke. And y• kyng taryed there a fyftene dayes: tyll he had ſo prouyded for hymſelfe / y• he was aſſured of the duke of Normandy than regent of France / for the prouoſt of the marchantes of Parys hadde gette hym his peace of the duke / and of them of Parys. And than the kyng of Nauer was brought to Parys by the lorde John̄ of Pequigny and by other burgeſſes of Amyenſe / wher as euery man was gladde to ſe hym: and the duke made hym great feeſt and chere / for it behaued hym ſo to do. For the prouoſt and his ſect exhorted hym therto: therfore the duke diſſembled for the pleaſur of the prouoſt / and other of Parys / 
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Nauerre preched ſolemply in Parys. Cap. C .lxxxi.
            
               WHan the kynge of Nauer had bene a certayne tyme in Parys: on a day he aſſembled togyder prelates / knightes / and clerkes of the vnyuerſite. And ther he ſhewed openly among them in latyn / in y• preſence of the duke of Normādy: his cōplaynt and greffes / and vyolence done to hym wrongfully / without right or reaſon. And ſayde howe there was none that ought to dout in hym: but that he wolde lyue and dye in the defence of the realme of Fraunce and the crowne therof / as he was bounde to do: for he was extraught of father and mother of the right lygne of Fraunce. And ſayde if he wolde chalenge the realme and crowne of Fraunce: he coulde ſhewe by ryght / howe he was more nerer therto than the kynge of Englande. His ſermon and langage was ſo pleaſant that he was greatly prayſed: and ſo lytell and lytell he entred into the fauour of them of Parys ſo yt he was better beloued there than the regent / the duke of Normādy: and alſo with dyuers other cites in the realme of France. But what ſoeuer ſemblant the prouoſt & they of Parys made to the kyng of Nauer / for all that the lorde Philyppe of Nauer wolde neuer truſt thē nor wolde nat come to Parys: for he alwayes ſayd that in a comynalte ther was neuer no certentie / but finally ſhame / rebuke / & dyſhonour.
         
         
            ¶ Of the beginnyng of the ryſing of the commons / called Jaquere in Beauuoſyn. Cap. C .lxxxii.
            
               ANone after the delyueraunce of the kyng of Nauer 
               ther began a meruelouſe trybulacion in the realme of Frā
               ce / as in Beauuoſyn / in Bry / on the ryuer of Marne / in Leamoys / and about Seoſſons: for certayne people of the common vyllages without any heed or ruler / aſſembled togyder in Beauuoſyn. In the beginnyng they paſt nat a hundred in nombre: they ſayd howe the noble men of the realme of Fraunce / knyghtes and ſquyers ſhamed the realme / and that it ſhulde be a great welth to dyſtroy them all / and eche of them ſayd it was true

and ſaid all with one voyce / ſhame haue he that dothe nat his power to diſtroy all the gētylmen of the realme. Thus they gathered togyder wt
               out any other counſayle & without any armure
                  •
                ſauyng with ſtaues and knyues / and ſo went to the houſe of a knyght dwellyng therby / & brake vp his houſe and ſlewe the knyght and the lady and all his chyldren great and ſmall / and brent his houſe. And than they went to another caſtel and toke the knight therof and bounde hym fall to a ſtake: and than vyolated his wyfe and his doughter before his face / and than ſlewe the 
                  〈…〉
               
               dy and his doughter / and all his other chyldren And than ſlewe the knyght by great tourment / and brent & beate downe the caſtell: and ſo they dyd to dyuers other caſtelles and good houſes: and they multiplyed ſo that they were a ſix thouſand / and euer as they went forwarde they encreaſed / for ſuche lyke as they were / fell euer to thē. So that euery gentylman fledde fro them and tooke their wyues and chyldren with them / and fledde .x. or .xx. leages of to be in ſuretie / and left their houſes voyde and their goodes therin. Theſe myſcheuous peple thus aſſembled without capitayne or armoure: robbed / brent / and ſlewe all gentylmen that they coude lay handes on: and forced and rauyſſhed ladyes and damoſels / and dyd ſuche ſhamefull dedes that no humayne creature ought to thynke on any ſuche. And he that dyd mooſt myſchiefe was moſt preaſed with theym and greatteſt maiſter: I dare nat write the horryble dedes that they dyd to ladyes and damoſelles. Amonge other they ſlewe a knight and after dyd put hym on a broche and roſted hym at the fyre: in y• ſyght of the lady his wyfe and his chyldren / and after yt the lady had ben enforced and rauiſſhed with a .x. or .xii. thei made her perforce to eate of her huſband / and after made her to dy an yuell deth and all her chyldren. They made among them a kynge / one of Cleremont in Beauuoſyn: they choſe hym that was mooſt vngracyouſt of all other / and they called hym kyng Jaques Goodman: & ſo therby they were called companyons of the Jaquery. They diſtroyed and brent in the countrey of Beauuoſyn / about Corby / Amyenſe / and Mōt dydier / mo than threſcore good houſes & ſtrong caſtelles. In lyke maner theſe vnhappy people were in Bry and Arthoyes: ſo that all the ladyes / knyghtes / and ſquyers of that contrey were fayne to flye away: to Meaulx in Bry / aſwell the duches of Normandy and the duches of Orlyaunce: as dyuers other ladyes and damoſels / orels they had ben vyolated and after murdred. Alſo ther were a certayne of the ſame vngracyous peple bytwene Parys and Noyon / and bytwene Parys and Soyſſons: and all about in the lande of Coucy / in the countie of Ualoys / bytwene Brieche and Loan: Noyon and Soyſſons. There were brent and diſtroyed mo than a hundred caſtelles and good houſes / of knyghtes and ſquyers in that countrey.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the prouoſt of the marchantes of Parys / cauſed walles to be made about the cytie of Parys. Cap. C .lxxxiii.
            
               WHan the gentylmen of Beauuoſyn / of Corboys / of Uermādoys / and of other lā
               des where as theſe / myſcheuous peple were conuerſant: ſawe the woodneſſe amonge them / they ſent for ſocours to their trēdes into Flanders / to Brabant / to Heynault / and to Behayne: ſo ther came fro all parties. And ſo all theſe gentylmen ſtrangers with them of the countrey aſſembled togyder: & dyde ſette on theſe people wher they might fynde thē and ſlewe and hanged them vpon trees by heapes. The kynge of Nauer on a day ſlewe of thē mo than thre thouſande: beſyde Cleremount in Beauuoſyn. It was tyme to take them vp: for and they hadde ben all togyder aſſembled / they were mo than a hundred thouſande: and whan they were demaunded why they dyd ſo yuell dedes / they wolde anſwere and ſay they coude nat tell: but y• they dyd as they ſawe other do / thynkyng therby to haue diſtroyed all y• nobles and gētylmen of the worlde. In the ſame ſeaſon the duke of Normandy departed fro Parys / and was in dout of the kynge of Nauer: and of the prouoſt of the marchauntes and of his ſect: for they were all of one acorde. He rode to the brige of Charenton on the ryuer of Marne / and ther he made a great ſommons of gentylmen & than defyed the prouoſt of the marchātes and all his ayders. Than the prouoſt was in dout of hym that he wolde in the nyght tyme come and ouerron the cytie of Parys / the which as than was nat cloſed. Than he ſette workemen a worke as many as he coude gette: and made great dykes

all about Parys / and began walles and gates: he had the ſpace of one hole yere / a thre hundred workmen contynually workyng. It was a gret dede to furnvſſhe an arme / and to cloſe with defence ſuche a cytie as Parys: ſurely it was the beſt dede that euer any prouoſt dyd ther / for els it had ben after dyuers tymes ouer ron and rob had by by dyners occaſyons.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batayle at Meaulx in Bry / where the companyons of the Jaquery were diſconfyted by therle of Fo
                  ••
                and the captall of B
                  •
               z. Ca. Clxxxiiii.
            
               IN the ſeaſon whyle theſe vngracious people raygned there came out of Pruce / the erle of Foyz and the Captall of B
                  •
               z his coſyn. And ī 
               ther way they herde as they ſhulde haue entred into Fraunce of the great myſchefe that fell among the noble men by theſe vnhappy people. And in the cytie of Meaulx was the duches of Normandy / and the duches of Orleaunce / and a thre hundred other ladyes and damoſels: and the duke of Orleance alſo. Than the two ſayd knyghtes agreed to go and ſe theſe ladyes and to confort them to their powers: howe be it the Captall was englyſſhe but as than it was truſe bytwene ye two kynges: they had in their company a threſcore ſpeares. And whan they were come to Meaulx in Bry they were welcome to the ladyes and damoſels ther: and whan thoſe of the Jaquery vnderſtode that ther was at Meaulx ſuche a nombre of ladyes / yong damoſelles and noble chyldren. Than they aſſembled togyder: and with them they of Ualoys and ſo came to Meaulx: and alſo certayne of Parys yt herd therof went to them / ſo that they were in all a nyne thouſand and dayly mo reſorted to them. So they came to the gates of the towne of Meaulx / and the peple of the towne opyned the gates / and ſuffred them to entre / ſo that all the ſtreates were full of theym to the market place / where as theſe noble ladyes were lodged in a ſtronge place / cloſed about with the ryuer of Marne: there came ſuch a nombre agaynſt them that ye ladyes were ſore afrayed. Than theſe two knightes and their cō
               pany came to the gate of the markette place and yſſued out and ſette on thoſe bilayns: who were but yuell armed. Therle of Foyz baner and the duke of Orleance / and the Captals penon: and whan theſe bilayns ſaw theſe men of warr well aparelled yſſued out to defende the place the for maſt of them began to recule backe / and the gentylmen purſued them with their ſpeares & ſwerdes. And whan thei felde the great ſtrokes they reculed all a tones / and fell for haſt ech on other than all the noble men yſſued out of the baryers and anone wan the place / and entred in among their ennemyes and beate them downe by heapes / and ſlewe them lyke beeſtes / and chaſed thē all out of the towne / and ſlewe ſo many that thei were wery / and made many of them by heapes to flye into the ryuer. Briefely: yt day they ſlewe of them mo than ſeuyn thouſand and none had ſcaped if they wolde a folowed the chaſe any farther. And whan theſe men of armes retourned a gayne to the towne: they ſette fyre there on / and brende it clene / and all the bilayns of the towne that they coude cloſe therin: bycauſe they tooke part with the Jaquery. After this diſconſyture thus done at Meaulx: they neuer aſſembled a / gayne togyder after / for the yong Ingram lord of Coucy had about hym certayne men of warr̄ and they euer ſlewe theym as they myght mete with theym without any mercy.
         
         
            ¶ Howe Parys was beſieged by the duke of Normandy regent of Fraunce. Cap. C .lxxxv.
            
               A None after this aduenture / the duke of Normandy aſſembled all the noble men togyder that he coude gette / aſ well of the realme as of the empyre for his wages. So that he had a thre thouſande ſpeares / and ſo went and layed ſiege to Parys / towarde ſaynt Antoyne / a long by the ryuer of Sayne / & was lodged hymſelfe at ſaynt More and his men ther about / and euery day they ran ſkirmyſſhing to the walles of Parys. And ſom tyme the duke lay at Charēton / and another ſeaſon at ſaynt More / ſo that nothyng cāe to Parys:

on that ſyde nother by lande nor by water / for the duke cauſed bothe the ryuers of Sayne / and Marne to be ſurely kept: and brende all the villages about Parys ſuche as were nat cloſed the better therby to chaſtyce theym of Parys. And if Parys had nat than ben fortifyed with walles and dykes: it had bene diſtroyed / none durſt go into Parys nor go out for feare of the dukes men / who rode on bothe ſybe
                  ••
                the ryuer of Sayne at his pleaſure / ther were none to reſyſt them. The prouoſt kept ſtyll in loue ye kyng of Nauerr and toke of hym counſayle: and the commons day and nyght dyd worke on the defence of the cytie / and kept a great nōbre of men of warre / naueroyſe and englyſſhe archers: and other companyons. There was in the cytie certayne well dyſpoſed perſons: as John̄ Mayllart / and Symonde his brother / and dyuerſe of their lynage that were ſore dyſpleaſed of the duke of Normādyes yuell wyll: but the prouoſt had ſo drawen to his opynion all maner of men that none durſt ſay contrary to hym / without he were ſlayne without mercy. The kyng of Nauer ſeyng the varyaunce bytwene them of Parys / and the duke of Normandy: thought and ſuppoſed that the maner coude nat long endure in that ſtate. And he had no great truſt to the cō
               montie of Parys: and ſo he departed thenſe as curteſly as he myght and went to ſaynt Denyce and there he kepte with hym a good nombre of ſoudyers / at the wages of them of Parys. The duke thus lay a ſixe wekes at Charenton / and ye kyng of Nauerre at ſaynt Denyce / they pylled and eate vp the countre on euery ſyde: bytwene theſe parties entreated for a peace / the archbyſſhoppe of Senus / the byſſhoppe of Auſſer / the byſſhoppe of Beaumoys / the lorde of Momorency / the lorde of Fyenes / and the lorde of ſaynt Uenant. And ſo often they went bytwene the ꝑties / and ſo ſagely demeaned their buſyneſſe: yt the kyng of Nauerre with his owne good wyll without conſtreynt / went to Charenton to the duke of Normādy and excuſed hymſelfe of that he was had in ſuſpecte. Firſt of the dethe of the two knightes / and of maiſter Symonde Bucy and of the diſpyte that the prouoſt had 
                  •
               one to hym in the paleys of Parys. And they he ſware that it was vnknowen to him: and there promyſed the duke to ſtycke with hym in good & yuell / and there peace was made bytwene them. And the kynge of Nauerſayde howe he wolde cauſe them of Parys / to make amendes for that they had done. The duke was content that the commons of Parys ſhulde haue peace / ſoo that he myght haue the prouoſt and .xii. other burgeſſes / ſuche as he wolde choſe within Parys / to correct theym at his pleaſure. All theſe thynges agreed: the kynge of Nauer retourned to ſaynt Denyce / and the duke went to Meaulx in Bry / and gaue leaue to all his men of warre to dept. Certayne burgeſſes of Parys: ſuche as hadde holpen to make the ſayd treaty / deſyred ye duke to come to Parys / ſayeng howe they ſhulde do hym all the honoure they myght. The duke anſwered (and ſayd) he wolde kepe ye peace made and that he had ſworne vnto / without any brekyng of his part: but to entre into Parys ſurely (he ſayd) he wolde neuer / tyll he had ſatyſfacryon of theym that had dyſpleaſed hym. The prouoſt of the marchantes and his ſect: often tymes viſyted the kyng of Nauerre at ſaynt Denyce / and ſhewed hym howe they were in the in dygnacion of ye duke of Normandy for his ſake bycauſe they delyuered hym out of priſon / and brought hym to Parys. Therfore they ſayd to hym: 
                  •
               ir for goddeſſake haue no great truſte in the duke nor in his counſayle. The kynge ſayd certaynly frendes ye ſhall haue none yuell: but my part ſhalbe therin / & ſeyng ye haue as nowe the gouernaunce of Parys / I wolde counſayle you to prouyde your ſelfe of golde and ſyluer / ſo that if ye haue nede / by that ye may euer helpe your ſelfe. And hardely ſende it hyder to ſaynt Denyce on the truſt of me / and I ſhall kepe hit well / and ſhall alwayes entertayne men of warr̄ ſecretly / that if ye haue nede ſhall make warre a gaynſt your ennemyes. So thus after this the prouoſt two tymes a weke ſende euer to ſaynte Denyce two ſomers charged with floreyns to the kynge of Nauerr / who receyned the money with gladde chere.
         
         
            ¶Of the pariſyens that were ſlayne at ſaynt Clude by thēglyſſhmen that had beſodyers in Paris. Ca. Clxxxvi.
            
               ALl this ſeaſon there were in Parys a great nombre of men of warre englyſſhe and naueroyſe retayned in wagꝭ by the prouoſt / and by the cō
               mons of the cytie to ayde thē agaynſt the duke of Normā
               dy / who bare themſelfe right well the warr du
               
                  •
               yng

but whan y• peace was made bytwene the pariſyens and the duke. Certayne of theſe ſoudyours departed fro Parys: and ſome abode there ſtyll / ſuche as departed went to the kynge of Nauer / who receyued them into wages / ther abode ſtyll in Parys a thre hundred / they ſported them and ſpende merely their money. On a day a ſtryfe fell bytwene theym and they of Parys: and ther were ſlayne of theym a threſcore / wherof the prouoſt blamed greatly them of the cytie. Howe beit to apeaſe the cōmons: he toke mo than a hundred and fyftie / and put theym in priſon in thre gates: and ſayd to the commons / howe they ſhulde all be ſlayne / and corrected acordyng to their treſpaces: wherby the cōmons were apeaſed. But whan nyght came / the prouoſt cauſed them to be delyuered out of priſon: and put them out of the towne at their lybertie. And ſo they went to ſaynt Denyce to the kynge of Nauer: and he receyued and retayned theym all. In the next mornynge whan they of Parys knewe the delyueraunce of the englyſſhmen out of priſon / they were greatly dyſpleaſed with the prouoſt: but he lyke a wyſe man dyſſembled the mater▪ tyll it was forgoten. Theſe englyſſhe & naueroyſe ſoudyers: whan they were toguyder at ſaynt Denyce / they were mo than thre hūdred they determyned to be reuenged of them of Parys / for the diſpyte done to them. Than they defyed theym of Parys: and made eger warre agaynſt theym / and to ſlee all maner of people of Parys that yſſued out / ſo that they durſt nat go out of their gates. Than they of the cytie deſyred the prouoſt that he wolde cauſe parte of the commons to be armed / and to yſſue out into the feldes to fyght with the englyſſhmen. The prouoſt agreed therto (and ſayd) howe he wolde go with them hymſelfe: ſo on a day he cauſed to be armed a .xii. hundred / and ſo yſſued out / & than they herde howe the englyſſhmen that made thē warre were about ſaynt Clude. Than they departed them into two companyes: to the entent that their ennemyes ſhulde nat ſcape them / and poynted to mete togyder at a certayne place / beſyde ſaynt Clude. So they went by two wayes the one partie went all day about Mount Marter / and coude nat fynde their enemyes / and the prouoſt who had the leſſe part / about noone returned and entred into Parys at the gate ſaynt Martyne / and had done nothynge. The other company who knewe nat of the prouoſtes returnyng taryed ſtyll in the feldes tyll it was to wardes night. Than̄e they retourned homewarde without array or good order: for they thought than to haue no trouble / and ſo they went weryly by heapes / ſome bare his ſalette in his hande / ſome on his backe / ſome drewe their ſwerdes after them naked / and ſome in the ſhethes. They toke their way to entre into Parys by the gate ſaynt Honoure / and ſodenly as they went / they founde thenglyſſhmen in a lowe way / they were a foure hundred well apoynted. Whan they ſaw the frenchmen they ſette on them / and at the firſt metyng they beate downe mo than two hūdred than the frēchmen fledde and were beate downe lyke beeſtes. Ther were ſlayne in that chaſe mo than ſixe hundred / and they were purſued to the barryers of Parys: of this aduenture the prouoſt was greatly blamed of the commons / they ſayd howe he had betrayed them. The next day in the mornynge: the frendes of them that were ſlayne yſſued out of Parys to ſeke the deed bodyes to bury them / and the englyſſhmen hadde made abuſſhment / and there agayne they ſlewe & hurt mo than ſixſcore. Thus in this myſchiefe and trouble were they of Parys / they wyſt nat of whom to beware / they were night and day in great feare: alſo the kyng of Nauerre began to waxe colde in aydinge of thē / bycauſe of y• peace that he had ſworne to the duke of Normandy. And alſo for the outrage that they of Paris had done to thenglyſſhe ſoudyers / wherfore he well conſented that they ſhulde be chaſtyſed: alſo the duke of Normandy dyd ſuffre it / bycauſe the ꝓ uoſt of the marchantes had y• gouernyng of the cytie. The prouoſt and his ſect were natte all in ſuretie: for the cōmons ſpake ſhamefully of thē as they were enfourmed.
         
         
            ¶ Of the dethe of the prouoſt of the marchauntes of Parys. Cap. C .lxxxvii.
            
               THe prouoſt and his ſect had among themſelf dyuers counſaylles ſecretly to know howe they ſhulde mayntene thēſelfe / for they coude fynde by no meanes any mercy in the duke of Normandy / for he ſende worde generally to all the commens of Parys / that he wolde kepe with them no lenger peace / without he had delyuerd into his handes

twelfe of Parys / ſuche as he wolde choſe / to do with them his pleaſure. The which thyng gretly abaſſhed the prouoſt and his company: finally they ſawe well that it were better for them to ſaue their lyues / goodes / and frendes: ratherr than to be diſtroyed. And that it were better for theym to ſlee / than̄e to be ſlayne: than ſecreatly they treated with thenglyſſhmen / ſuch as made warre agaynſt Parys. And they agreed bytwene theym: that the prouoſt and his ſect ſhulde be at the gate ſaynt Honoure / and at the gate ſaynt Anthoyne at the houre of mydnight: and to lette in the englyſſhmen and naueroyſe / prouyded redy to ouerr ronne the cytie: and to dyſtroy and robbe it clene. Ercept ſuche houſes as hadde certayne ſignes lymyted among theym / and in all other houſes without ſuche tokens to ſlee menne / womenne / and chyldren. The ſame nyght that this ſhulde haue been done: god enſpyred certayne burgeſſes of the cytie / ſuche as alwayes were of the dukes partie: as Johanne Mayllart / and Symonde his brother / and dyuers other. Who by dyuyne inſpyracion: as hit ought to be ſuppoſedde / were enfourmed that Parys ſhulde be that nyght diſtroyed. They incontynent armed theym and ſhewed the mater in other places / to haue more ayde: and a lytell before mydnight they came to the gate ſaint Anthoyne / and there they founde the prouoſt of the marchauntes with the kayes of the gates in his handes. Thanne John̄ Mayllart ſayde to the prouoſte / callynge hym by his name Stephyne what do you here at this houre: the prouoſt anſwered (and ſayd) Johāne what wolde ye / I am here to take hede to the towne: wherof I haue the gouernynge / by god ſayde John̄ ye ſhall natte go ſo. ye are nat here at this houre for any good: and that may be ſene by the kayes of the gates that ye haue in your handes / I thynke it be to betray the towne. Quod the prouoſt Johanne ye lye falſely. Nay ſayd Johān / Stephyn thou lyeſt falſely lyke a treatour / and therwith ſtrake at hym / and ſayd to his company ſlee the treatours. Than̄e euery man ſtrake at theym: the prouoſt wolde a fledde / but John̄ Mayllart gaue him with an are on y• heed that he fyll downe to the yerthe / and yet he was his goſſyppe / and lefte nat tyll he was ſlayne / and ſixe of theym that were there with hym: and the other taken and putte in priſon. Than̄e people began to ſtyre in the ſtretes: and John̄ Mayllart and they of his acorde went to y• gate ſaynt Honoure / and there they founde certayne of the prouoſtes ſecte / and there they layde treaſon to thē: but their excuſes auayled nothyng. There were dyuers taken and ſend into dyuers places to priſon / and ſuche as wolde nat be taken were ſlayn without mercy. The ſame night they wēt and toke dyuers in their beddes / ſuche as were culpable of the treaſon: by the confeſſyon of ſuche as were taken. The next day John̄ Mayllart aſſembled the mooſt parte of the commons in the markette hall and there he mounted on a ſtage: and ſhewedd generally the cauſe why he hadde ſlayne the prouoſte of the marchauntes. And ther: by the coūſayle of all the wyſmen / all ſuche as were of the ſect of the prouoſt were 
                  ••
               
               ged to the dethe / and ſo they were executed by dyuers tourmentes of dethe. Thus done John̄ Mayllart / who was than̄e greatly in the grace of the commons of Parys and other of his adherentes / ſende Symonde Mayllart / and two maiſters of the parlyament ſir Johān Alphons and maiſter John̄ Paſtorell to the duke of Normandy / beyng at Charenton. They ſhewed the duke all the mater: and deſyred hym to come to Parys to ayde and to counſayle them of the cytie / fro thenſ forthe: ſayeng that all his aduerſaryes were deed. The duke ſayde with ryght 
                  〈◊〉
                good wyll: and ſo he came to Parys / and with hym ſir Arnolde Dandrehen / the lorde of Roy / and other knyghtes / and he lodged at Lour.
         
         
            ¶ How the kyng of Nauer defied the realme of France / the kyng beyng priſoner in England. Cap. C .lxxxviii.
            
               WHan the kynge of Nauerr knewe the trauth of the dethe of the prouoſt his great frēde / and of other of his ſect he was ſore diſpleaſed: bicauſe the prouoſt had ben euer to hym right fauorable. And by cauſe the brunt went y• he was chiefe heed of the ꝓuoſtes treaſon: ſo all thynges conſydred / & by the coūſell of the lorde Philyp of Nauer his brother / who was ther Wt hym at ſaint Denice / they detmyned to make warr to the realm of Frāce. Than incontynent he ſende his defyance to the duke of Normādy / to the pariſyence / and to the hole body of the realme of Fraunce. And than he deꝑted fro ſaynt Denyce / and his men ouerranne

the towne at his departynge and robbed it / and alſo Melynne on the ryuer of Sayne / where as quene Blanche his ſuſtre was / ſomtyme wyfe to kyng Philyppe. The which lady receyued hym ioyfully: and dyde putte all that the had to his pleaſure / and the kyng of Nauer made of that towne and caſtell his principall garyſon / and retayned men of warr: almaygnes / brabanſes / Heynowers / behaignenoyes / and fro euery place where he might gette thē. Men were gladde to ſerue hym / for he payed largely: he hadde ynough wherwith of ſuche money as he had gette by the ayde of the prouoſt of ye marchantes of them of Parys / and of other townes there about. The lorde Philyyppe of Nauerre went to Maunt / and to Meulēce on the ryuer of Sayne / and there he made his garyſons / euery day the kyng of Nauers company encreaſed. Thus the kyng of Nauerre and his men beganne to make warre to the realme of Fraunce / and ſpecially to the noble cytie of Parys. They were maiſters of the ryuers of Sayne / Marne and Doyſſe: theſe naueroyſe multiplyed in ſuche wyſe / that they toke perforce the ſtrong towne of Craell / wherby they were maiſters of the ryuer of Doyſſe: and alſo they wanne the ſtronge caſtell of Hereell / a thre leages fro Amyenſe / and after the wanne Maucounſell. Theſe thre fortreſſes dyde after great dyſturbaunce to the realme of France: there were a fyftene hundred that ouer ranne all the countre without any reſyſtence. And anone after they wanne the caſtell of ſaynt Ualery / where they made a ſtrong garyſon: and ther they made ſir Wyllyam of Bō
               nemare and John̄ of Segures capitayns with fyue hundred men / and they ouer ran the countrey to Depe to Abbeuyle / and to the portes of Crotoy of Roy / and of Mutterell. Whan̄e the naueroyſe harde of a caſtell or towne / though it were right ſtronge / they made no doutes to get it. Often tymes they wold ryde in a night thyrtie leages / and come into a countrey wher they had no doute. Thus they ſtale and wan caſtels and fortreſſes in the realme of Fraunce: & ſomtyme toke knyghtes and ladyes in their beddes and ſome raunſomed / and fro ſome toke all that they had: and than putte them out of their owne houſes. They made capitayne of the towne of Craell the lorde Fondregas of Nauer / he gaue and graunted ſauecōductes to them that wolde paſſe to Parys / to Noyon / or fro Noyon to Cō
               paygne / or fro thens to Soyſſons: or to Laon / and to other places. Theſe ſaueconductes were well worthe to hym whyle he lay at Craell / a hū
               dred thouſande frankes / and at the caſtell of Hereell lay the lorde John̄ of Piquegny pycarde / who was a good naueroyſe: his men conſtrayned ſore them of Moūtdedyer / of Arras / of Peronne / and of Amyenſe: and all the countrey of Picardy a long the ryuer of Some. In the caſtell of Mauconſell ther were thre hundred men of warre / and rabenoyes of Durychars / Franquelyn and Hannekyn were chiefe capitayns. They ouer ranne the countrey aboute Noyon: all the great townes of the countrey that were nat cloſed about Noyon / wer raūſomed to pay euery weke a certayne ſomme of floreyns: and alſo the abbeyes were fayne to do ye ſame / or els they had been brende and diſtroyed: they were ſo cruell on their ennemys. So by theſe maner of people the landes were voyde and nat laboured / wherby a great darthe roſe in the realme of Fraunce.
         
         
            ¶ Of the naueroyſe that the Pycardꝭ beſieged in the caſtell of Maucounſell. Cap. C .lxxxix.
            
               WHan the duke of Normādy beyng at Parys knew howe theſe men of warr exyled the countre in the tytell of the kynge of Nauerr / and yt dayly they encreaſed. He ſent than̄e to all the good townes in Picardy & of Uermādoyſe: deſyring euery man acordyng as they might beare / to ſend certayne nombre of men a warre a fote and a horſe backe to reſyſt the naueroiſe / who waſted the realme of France: wherof he had the chiefe gouernaunce. The cytes and good townes were glad ſo to do: and taxed themſelfe as they might bere the wages of certayne men of armes / a fote and a horſebacke / with archers and croſbowes. And firſt they went towarde the cyte of Noyon / and went ſtreyght before the garyſon of Maucōſell / for they toke it for the weakeſt garyſon naueroſe / and that mooſt dyd hurt to them of Noyon / and of the good countre of Uermādoyſe. Of all theſe frenchmen was captayne the byſſhopp̄ of Noyon / & with hym the lorde Raoll of Couſy / & the lord of Rauenall / the lord of Chaney / ye lorde of Roy / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Mathue of Roy his brother / & diuers

other knyghtes and ſquyers of Picar
                  •
               y and of Uermandoyſe / and ſo they beſieged Maucō
               ſell and made dyuers aſſautes / and ſore cōſtrayned them within. Who ſawe well how they coude nat long defende their fortres without ſome ayde: wherfore they ſend worde of their danger to the lorde John̄ of Piquegny / who was at Hereell: to whom all other of their fortreſſes obeyed. Who whan he knewe therof: made gret haſt to go and conforte his frendes at Mauconſell / heſend ſecretly to them of Craell / that they ſhulde be redy in the ſeldes at an houre and place apoynted for the ſame: euery man drewe to that place. And whan they were togyder: they were in nombre a thouſande ſpeares / and than̄e they rode by night as they were gyded / and came in a mornynge to Maucounſell. The ſame mornyng there was ſuche a myſt: that a man coude nat ſe the bredyth of an acre fro hym / and than̄e ſodenly they daſſhed into the frenche hooſt who was natte warre of theym / but ſlept and hadde but a ſmall watche: for they thought they mſelfe well aſſured. The naueroyſe beganne to make their cryes: and began̄e to ſlee and beat downe tentes and pauylious / and made a great ſkirmyſſhe: ſo that the frenchmen hadde no leaſure to arme theym / but ſo fledde towardes Noyon / the whiche was next to them: and the naueroyſe folowed in the chaſe. There were many ſlayne and ouerthrowen / bytwene Noyon and Orcans abbey / and bytwene Noyon and the byſſhoppes bridge and there about. The deed men lay on the grounde by heapes / and in the wayes / and amonge hedges and buſſbes: the chaſe endured to the gates af Noyon. And the cytie was in great daunger to haue been loſt: for ſuche as were there of bothe parties / ſayde that if the naueroyſe had lyſt / they might haue entred into the towne: for they within were ſo a frayed / that they forgate to cloſe their gates towardes Comptegne. And the byſſhoppe of Noyon was takenne at the barryers: and there ſware to be trewe priſoner / or els he hadde ben ſlayne. And the ſame day there was takenne the lorde Raoull of Couſey / the lorde Raoll of Rauenall / the lorde of Chaunny and his two ſonnes / the Bourge of Rowmorey / the lorde of Turte / the lorde of Uendyenll / the lorde Anthony of Coudune / and a hundred knyghtꝭ and ſquyers: and ſlayne mo thanne fyftene hundred. And ſpecially of them of the cytie of Tourney: for ther was of theym a great nombre there / ſome ſayd of ſeuyn hundred that came thenſe / there retourned but a fewe: but outher they were 
                  ••
               ayne or taken. For they within Maucounſell alſo yſſued out / who ayeded well to that diſconfyture / the which was the yere of our lorde god a thouſand thre hundred fyftie and eyght: the wednyſday nexte after the feeſt of our lady in the myddes of the moneth of Auguſt. The naueroiſe ledde the mooſt parte of their priſoners to Craell / bycauſe it was a gode towne and a ſtronge: they wan at that iourney great rycheſſe and good priſoners / whom they raūſomed. And alſo they raunſomed the burgeſſes of Tourney / and of other good townes: ſome for money / ſome for ſtuffe ſuche as they neded: as ſpeare heedes / glaynes / axes / ſwerdes / cotes / doublettes / hoſes / and all ſuche other thynges. And the knyghtꝭ and ſquyers were raunſomed for golde and ſyluer / or for good horſes: and of a poore gētylman that had nothynge to pay / they tooke their ſeruyce for a quarter of a yere or a halfe / or thre quarters / as they coulde agree: as for wynes and vitaylles they hadde ynough. The playne countrey delyuered theyn ſufficyent: there came nothynge to the good townes but by ſtelth / or els by ſauee cō
               ducte / the which they ſolde dere. And in all there ſaue conductes they euer excepted thre thynges / hattes of Bieuer / euſtrydge fethers / and ſpere heedes. They of Mauconſell vyolated ye moſte parte of the good abbey of Orcans / wherwith the capitayne of Maucounſell was ſore diſpleaſedde: the naueroyſe ſpredde abrode in dyuerſe places / on bothe ſydes of the ryuers of O
                  •
               ſ / & Some. There were two men of armes: Raby goyſe of Dury / and Robyn le Scote: they toke by ſcalynge the good towne of Barley / where they made a garyſon well fortifyed: they hadde in wages vnder theym foure hundred ſoudyers and were payed monethly. Thus they of Berley / of Maucounſell / of Craell / and of Heree
                  〈…〉
                ranne ouer the countre where they lyſt: for ther were none that withſtode theym. The knyghtes of the countrey hadde ynough to do / to k
                  ••
               e their fortreſſes and houſes. So theſe nauer
                  ••
               
               ſe and englyſſhmen went and dydde what they lyſt: ſomtyme they rode in harneys / and ſomtyme vnarmed and ſported theym fro fortreſſe to fortreſſe / as though all the countrey had ben in gode reſt and peace. The yong lorde of Coucy / cauſed his caſtels to be well kept / he was as ſouerayne of all that countrey. The Chanoyne of Roberſart dyd more trouble to the naueroyſe than any any other / for often tymes he dyſtruſſed ſomme of theym.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe certayne burgeſſes of Amyens wolde a delyuerd the cytie to the naueroyſe / and of the great famyne that was than in Fraunce. Cap. C .lxxxx.
            
               SO it was that the lorde Johanne of Piquegny / who was on the kynge of Nauers parte / and chiefe of his counſayle: and by whoſe ayde he was delyuered out of priſone. This knyght lay and kept the garyſon of Hereell thre leages fro Amyenſe / he dyde ſomoche by his ſubtyltie / wytte / and fayre language: with certayne burgeſſes of Amyens of the greatteſt of the cyte / that they ſhulde haue ſufferedde the naueroyſe to entre into the cytie. And theſe burgeſſes traytours to the cytie: had ſecretely in their chambers and loftes / certayne naueroyſe that ſhulde haue ayeded to haue dyſtroyed the cytie. And in an euenynge the lorde Johanne of Piquegny / the lorde Wyllyam of Granuyll / the lorde Fryquette of Fryquaunt / the lorde Lynne of Belaſtoy / and the lorde Fondegray: and with theym a ſeuyn hundred fyghtynge men came to the gate of Amyenſe to wardes Hereell / on truſt of their frendes within the cytie / and they founde the gate opynne as hit was promyſed. Thanne ſuche as were hydde within the cyte / in chambers and cellers yſſued oute and cryed Nauerr: than̄e they of the cytie awooke and roſe and cryed treaſon / and drewe to the gate where the buſyneſſe was / bytwene the boro we and the cytie. And ſuche as cāe firſt kepte the gate: ſo that ther were dyuers ſlayne and ſore hurte on bothe parties / and yf the naueroyſe hadde made great haſte to haue entred aſſoone as they came / they had wonne the cytie: but they taryed at the borowe and dyd ther feat cowardely. The ſame night god enſpyredd the lorde Morell Fyennes conſtable of Fraunce / and the erle of ſaynt Poule / who were at Corby with a great nombre of menne of warr: they yſſued out and rode in ſo great haſte / that they came to the cyte by that tyme the naueroyſe had wonne the borowe and dyd their payne to wyn the cytie: whiche they hadde done / and the commynge of theſe two ſayde lordes had nat been. Who aſſoone as they were entred into the cytie by another gate: drue ſtreyght to the gate wher as the medlyng was / & diſplayed their baners: and ordred theymſelfe in the ſtrete / and yſſued natte out of the gate / for they ſawe well the borowe was but loſte without recouery. Theſe ſocoures encouraged greatly theym of the cytie / and lyghted vppe many torcheſſe and other fyers. Whan the lorde of Piquegny and his company vnderſtode that theſe other lordes were come to the ſocour of the cytie: thanne they thought they might leſe more thanne wynne: therfore he recreated all his menne as ſoberly as he might. And ſo all the naueroyſe reculed backe and ſo wnedde the retreat / but they ouer ranne all the borowe and brende it: wherin their were well thre thouſande houſes and good lodgynges / and paryſſhe churches and other: and all were brende nothynge ſauyd. Thus the naueroyſe retourned with great rycheſſe / that they gatte in the borowe of Amyenſe and many gode priſoners / and ſo went to their garyſōs. Whan they were all gone: the conſtable of France and the erle of ſaynt Poule / ſende their companyes to all the gates of the cytie / commaundynge the kepars on payne of dethe / to ſuffre no manne to yſſue out of the towne: and ſo they dydde. In the mornyng be tymes theſe ſayd to lordes with certayne of the burgeſſes / who knewe well all the maner of the cytie / went to certayne burgeſſes houſes / ſuche as they hadde in ſuſpect of treaſonne. And ſo tooke a ſeuyntene: who were incontynent beheeded openly in the market place / and ſpecially the abbotte of Gars / who had conſented to this treaſon: and hadde lodgedde the mooſt parte of the naueroyſe within his houſe. In lyke caſe anone after there was putte to deth in the good cytie of Laone / ſixe of the greatteſt burgeſſes of that cytie: and if the byſſhopp̄ ther hadde bene taken he hadde dyed / for he was accuſed of treaſonne. And he coude neuer after excuſe hymſelfe: and ſo ſecretely departed / for he had frendes that hadde ſhewedd hym all the mater. And ſtreyght he wente to the kynge of Nauerre to Melyne on they ryuer of Sayne / who receyued hym ioyfully. Suche fortuneſſe fyll in thoſe dayes within the realme of France / wherfore euery lorde / and knyght / and kepars of townes and caſtelles kept euer good watche. And in dede the kynge of Nauerre hadde many frendes abrode in the realme: and yf that he hadde nat bene parceyued be tymes / he hadde done many yuell and myſcheuous dedes in the realme: and yet he dyd ynough. All this ſeaſon

the ou
                  •
               e of Normandy and his bretherne lay at Parys. There were no marchantes that durſte yſſue oute to ryde on their buſyneſſe / yf there dyd / anone they were ouerthorwen which way ſoeuer they toke / for the realme was ſo full of naueroyſe / that they were maiſters of the playne countrey and of the ryuers: and of dyuers cyties and good townes / wherby their fyll ſo dere a ſeaſon in Fraunce / that a barell of heryng was ſolde for .xxx. crownes of golde: & all other thynges after the rate. The poore peple dyed for hū
               ger: and this ſeaſon dured more than four yere ▪ and ſpecially in y• good townes of France: there was no ſalte to get but at the handes of the duke of Normandyes offycers: and they ſolde it atte their pleaſure / to gather therby money to pay y• ſoudyours wages.
         
         
            ¶ Of the naueroyſe that were beſieged in ſaynt Ualery by pycardes / and howe the realme was full of naueroyſe. Cap. C .lxxxxi.
            
               THe conſtable of France and the yonge erle of ſaynte Poule dyd gette them moche thanke and prayſe in the contrey of Picardy / for ſocoring of the good cytie of Amyenſe / and all the knyghtꝭ and ſquyers of Picardy fyll into their company: & there they all toguyder agreed to goo and ley ſiege to ſaynt Ualery. The cōſtable ſende for men to all the good townes & cyties of Picardy: as Tourney / Arras / Lyſle / Doway / Bethyne / ſaynt Omers / ſaynt Quyntyne / Peron / Amyens / Corby / and Abuyle: eche of theym ſende a certayne nombre of men to the cōſtable. And many other knyghtes and ſquyers drewe thyder / and ſpecially out of Heynalt: bycauſe of ſuche herytages as they helde in Fraunce / the lorde Dandrehen ſend thyder the yong ſeneſhall of Heynault / the lorde John of Uerthyne / and ſir Hewe Dātoygne his coſynne / and dyuers other. And ſo they came and layde ſiege before ſaynt Ualery / they were a two thouſande knyghtes and ſquyers / and there were a twelfe thouſande of commons ſende thyder from the gode townes / at their coſt and charge: ſpecially they of Abuyle were ſore charged / for they hadde the mooſt part of their prouyſion fro thenſe. This ſiege endured a longe ſeaſon / and there were many great aſſautes and ſkirmyſſhes: dayly there was euer ſōwhat done of newe. The yonge knyghtes and ſquyers of the hooſt often went forthe to aduenture theymſelfe / and often tymes they founde wherwith / for ſir Wyllyam Bonnemare and Johan Segure and their company / who were within the towne / wolde come to the barryers of their fortereſſe and ſkirmyſſhe with theym without. So that they were hurt and ſlayne of bothe parties / they within were a thre hundred companyons ▪ beſyde them of the towne: whom they cauſed to ayde theym whyder they wolde oriat / for feare of their lyues. They of the hooſt cauſed to be brought thyder dyuers engyns for Abbeuyll and Amyenſe / and cauſed theym to caſte great ſtones / the whiche greatly troubled them within. And they within hadde great plentie of artyllary: as Canons / Springalles / and other / wherwith they troubled greatly them without. In the ſame ſeaſon whyle the ſiege lay thus atte ſaynt Uallery / and that the kynge of Nauerre warred on all parties of the realme of Fraunce. There arryued at Cherbourge the Captall of Bu
                  •
                coſyn to the kyng of Nauerre / who hadde retayned hym with two hundred ſpeares in wages. Aſſone as he was come into Normandy / he rode to Maunt: and there he founde the lord Philyppe of Nauer / and there taryed certayne dayes. Than ſecretely he departed withall his company and rode in a nyght by the countrey of Uulgeſyne and Beauuoyſyne / and ſo came to Cleremount / a great towne nat cloſed / and a ſtronge caſtell / and in the mornyng the Captall ſcaledde the fortereſſe. Howebeit to regarde hit the fortreſſe was inpregnable / yet he wanne hit by ſcalynge with helpe of the archers. And firſt there entred raumpynge vpp̄ lyke a catte Bernarde de la Salle / who in his tyme hadde ſcaled dyuers fortereſſes. Than the Capytall and his company kept that for their garyſon a long tyme after: who traueyled greatly after the contrey of Uulgeſyn and Beauuoſyn / by the ayde of the naueroyſe in other fortreſſes there about as Craell / Hereell / and Mauconſell: all the contrey abrode was theirs / none durſte mete with theym. Thus in euery parte was the realme of Fraunce warredde in the tytell of the kynge of

Nauer and there were taken many ſtronge caſtelles in Bry / in Behaygne / in Ualoyes / in the byſſhopriche of Noyon / of ſaynt Lyz / of Soyſſons of Laon / wherof dyuers knyghtes & ſquyers of dyuers countreis were capitayns / aboute Pouns on the ryuer of Sayne. And about Prouyns / Troy / Auſſer / and Tonnerre: there was ſuche warre / yt none durſt yſſue out of any gode towne or fortreſſe bytwene Chalous and Troy in the caſtell of Beaufort: the whiche was of the enherytance of the duke of Lancaſtre. Capteyn there was ſir Peter Audeley / who ouer ran all the contrey ther about: alſo at Pons on the ryuer of Sayne / and ſomtyme at Nogēt was the lorde Euſtace Dambretycourt hanuer ▪ with .v. hundred with hym / who pylled all the countrey there about: and in Campaygne was Albreſt a ſquyer of Almaygne. Theſe thre captayns kept in Champayne and on the ryuer of Marne / mo than .lx. caſtelles and ſtrong houſes: and whan̄ they lyſt to yſſue into y• felde they were mo than two thouſande fightyng men. They had all the contre vnder their ſubiectyon / and robbed and raunſomed all they contre: they had robbed and brende the gode towne of Amery / of Sparney / the good towne of Uertuz / and all the gode townes a longe the ryuer of Marne / to the caſtell of Thyerie / and all about the cyte of Reynes / and had takenne the good towne of Ronay / and the ſtrong caſtell of Hans in Champaigne: and all aboute to ſaynt Antonys in Partoys. And farthermore in the countre of Burgoyne & of Partoys / ther lay Thebault of Chāfore / and John̄ Chanfore / who alſo in the tytell of the kynge of Nauer had taken in the byſſhopriche of Laungers a ſtrong caſtell called Mountſangon / and therin lay in garyſon foure hundred ſoudyers. And they ouer ran the countre / to the byſſhoppe ryche of Uerdone: and towarde the countre of Soyſſons / and bytwene Laon & Raynes there were another ſort / and their ſouerayne garyſon was at Uelly: wher there were a ſixe hundred. And capitayne of them was Rabygoys of Dury englyſſhe▪ who retayned with hym all maner of people ſuch as wolde ſerue hym / he payed thē ſo truely fro terme to terme / that they were glad to ſerue hym. He had with hym another companyon at his wages called Robynle Stotte: he went and wan in the feeſt of chriſtmas the ſtronge caſtell of Roucy / and all the prouiſyon therin and robbed the towne: and made of the towne & caſtell a garyſon / the which afterward dyd moche hurt to the countre there about. And he raū
               ſomed the erle / his wyfe / and his chyldren ther: at .xii. thouſande floreyns of golde / of the print of the mutton / and he kept the towne and caſtell all the wynter. And the ſomer after: which was the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lix. And whatie therle of Roucy had payed his ranſome he went to Laone / and where hym lyſte. In this ſeaſon there was no labourynge of the yerth / wherby great darth was after in the realme.
         
         
            ¶ Of the naueroyſe that the chanoyn of Roberſart diſconfyted in Lannoys nere to the towne of Craull. Cap. C .lxxxxii.
            
               IN the ſame ſeaſon as I was enfourmed: ther fyll to the lorde Chanoyn of Roberſart a fayre aduēture. It ſo fortuned on a day: y• lorde of Pynon a baneret of Uermandoyes rode with a threſcore with hym / fro one frenche fortreſſe to a nother. And the ſame day it hapenyd: that certayn of the garyſon of Uylly / and of the garyſon of Roucy rode forth at aduēture ſomwhat to wyn / but their capitayns were nat with them. They were a thre hundred companyons togyder / and nere to the towne of Craull / they ſawe where y• lorde of Pynon rode vnder his ſtāderd in good order / and was in the way towardes Craull. Anone they perceyued that they were frenchmen: and y• lorde of Pynon ſawe well howe they wer naueroyſe / and ſawe howe he coude natteſcape without batayle. Than they cooſted towardes Craull: but the naueroyſe had cutte their way / and whan they ſawe that they fledde to ſaue thē
               ſelfe aſ well as they might. The naueroyſe folowed faſt after cryeng ſaint George Nauer: they were better horſed than the frenchemen / ſo that they ouertoke them within halfe a leage ridynge. Than the lorde of Pynon perceyued a great pytte large and depe / cloſed about with a ſtronge hedge: and but one lytell ſtreyt place to entre into it. Whan he ſawe the aduauntage therof: & that he coude flye no farther / he ſayd to his company / ſirs a fote quickely: it is better for vs to abyde here the aduenture that god w
                  •
               ll ſende vs and to defende ourſelfe / rather than to be ſlayne or taken fleyng: than he alyghted and all his.

whan the naueroyſe ſaw that: they in likewyſe a lyghted a fote / ther was a ſquyer with the lorde of Pynon that ſayd to his varlet / leape vpon my courſer and ſpare hym nat: and ryde to the gariſon of Pyer pount / and deſyre the Chanon of Roberſart to come in all haſt to reſcue vs (the varlet ſayde) though I fynde hym there: howe is it poſſyble that he ſhulde come hyder in tyme for he is henſe fyue leages / well ſayde the ſquyet yet do thy deuoyre. Than the verlet rode forthe and lefte his maiſter feerſly aſſayled with theſe pyllers of Uelly / and Roucy: the lorde of Pynon and his cōpany defended themſelf by great vertue / and kept them in the aduauntage of the pytte / fro the mornyng tyll it was non / without any dyſconfeture. ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of the varlet / who rode in greathaſt to Pyer pount in Lānoyes: and there dyd his meſſage to the Canoyne of Roberſart / who anſwered y• he wolde do his deuoyre to ryde to the ſame place / where the lorde of Pynon was fightyng: for he ſayde he knewe the place well. Than̄e he ſowned his trumpet: and he and his company mounted on their horſes to the nombre of ſixſcore / and alſo he ſende a varlet of his to Laon / the which was nat farre thenſe to the captayne ther / to enforme hym of the mater. Howebeithe wolde nat tary for them of Laon / but rode forthe a gret galopp tyll he founde the lorde of Pynon and his cōpany ſore traueyled with the naueroyſe: ſo that he coude nat long haue endured without reſcewe. Incontynent the Chanoyne of Robarſert layd his ſpeare in the reſt and daſſhed in among the naueroyſe / and he ouerthrewe thre at the firſt cō
               myng: and his men who were freſſhe and luſty / anone put abacke the naueroyſe / who were wery fightyng all the day. The Chanoyne of Roberſart gaue ſuche ſtrokes with his axe / y• none durſt abyde hym: So there were 
                  〈…〉
               ayne in that place of theſe pyllers mothan a hundred and .l. and ſuche as ſcaped fro thenſe were mette withall by them of Laon / who were commynge thyder to the ſame reſcue. And there a great part of the naueroyſe were ſ
                  •
               ayne: ſo that of thre hundred / there ſcaped but fyftene perſons: for they were other ſlayne or taken.
         
         
            ¶ Of the naueroyſe that yelded vp ſaynt Uallery to the frenchmen / after they had ben longe besieged. Cap. C .lxxxxiii.
            
               THis as I haue ſhewed here before: the lordes of Pycardy / Arthoyes / Ponthieu / and Bolonoyes: lay a great ſeaſon at ſiege before ſaynte Ualery / and made many aſſautes with engyns & other inſtrumentes of warre. And amonge other aduentures it fell ſo / that the lorde of Bauceen pycarde went vpon theſe aprochyng the caſtell the better to aduyſe it / and ther he was ſtriken with a ſpring all and ſlayne. They within had great plenty of artyllary: ſo that they without coulde make none aſſaut without great damage. The ſiege endured fro the begynning of Auguſt / tyll it was lent: the lordes wtout thought to famyſſh them within / ſeyng they coulde nat get them by aſſaut. All the ſtraytes and paſſages were well watched / ſo that nothyng coude come to theym within: nother by water nor by lande. The prouyſion within began ſore to myniſſhe / and they durſt nat yſſue out to go a foragynge: and alſo they coude nother ſe nor here of any ſocour / than they counſayled togyder and detmyned to treat with the conſtable / and the erle of ſaynt Poule: that they might depart and yelde vp the fortres / their lyues and good ſaued / and to go whyder they lyſt. This treaty was agreed: ſauyng they ſhulde depart without any harneys / the whiche the erle of ſaynt Powle was lothe vnto / for he wolde haue had them ſymply. The ſame ſeaſon was cōmyng to ſaynt Ualerys warde the lorde Philyppe of Nauer to haue reyſed the ſiege: at the leeſt he wolde haue done his power therto. And they of ſaynt Uallery hadde nat gyuen vp their fortreſſe ſo ſoone / wherwith the lorde Philyppe was ſore dyſpleaſed / but he coudenatte a mende it as than.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the lorde Philypp̄ of Nauer reyſed vp a thre thouſande naueroyſe to haue reyſed the ſiege before ſaynte Uallery. Cap. C .lxxxxiiii.
            
               THe french lordes were ſtyll in the felde araynged on the poynt of their departyng / truſſyng vp tē
               tes and pauylions / and dyſtoging And than ſodenly they herde tidynges howe the lorde Philypp̄ of Nauer / who go

uerned all the landes vnder the kyng of Nauer his brother: and ſpecially the landes of the coū
               tie of Eureur / and to hym obeyed all maner of men of warre / ſuche as made warre into the realme of France. The lorde John̄ of Piquegny had enfourmed hym howe they of ſaynt Ualely were lykely to gyue vp their fortreſſe. Than the lorde Philypp̄ toke courage to go and reyſe the liege there: and ſecretly he gathered togyder about Maunt and Meulence / a thre thouſande men one and other and with hym was the yong erle of Harecourt / the lorde of Granuyll / ſir Robert Canoll ſir John̄ Piquegny / and dyuerſe other knyghtes and ſquiers. And all theſe were come within thre leages of ſaynt Uallery / the ſame tyme that it was gyuen vp: they knewe ye trauth therof by ſir Wylliam Bōnemare & Johan Segure: whom they met in the way. And whan the frenchmen that had taken the poſſeſſion of ſaynt Ualery vnderſtodé the commynge of the lorde Philyppe of Nauer: than they drue into the felde and toke counſayle to gyder / the cō
               ſtable of Fraunce / the erle of ſaynt Poule / the lorde of Chaſtellon / the lorde of Poyx / the lorde of Beauſault / the lorde of Helley / the lorde of Creſtkes / the lorde Edwarde of Rency / the lorde Baudwyn Denekyn / and dyuers other lordꝭ and knyghtes that were there. Ther they agreed to go and to fight with their ennemyes / than was it commaūded by the conſtable that euery man in array / ſhulde marche towarde their ennemyes: than euery man rode in gode order thiderwarde / but whan the naueroyſe vnderſtode that the frenchmen were commyng on thē / with mo than .xxx. thouſand. They were nat than in purpoſe to abyde them: but ſo paſſed the ryuer of Some aſſone as they might / and entred in / to the caſtell of Long in Ponthieu / horſe & harneys / and all that they had. They were ſcant entred / but that the frenchmen came thyder / who folowed them: this was about the hour of euyn ſong / and ſtyll their nombre encreaſed. The cō
               mons came after of the good to wnes of Picardy: they coulde nat come thyder ſo ſoone as the men of armes dyd: than the frenche lordes determyned to lodge there all that nyght / and to a byde for their mē that came after / & the next day to make aſſaute: and ſo lodged there. The naueroyſe who were within with a ſmall prouyſion / aboute the houre of mydnight they yſſued out at a backe poſterne without any noyſe / and toke the way to Uermandoyſe / and were gone a two leages or the frēchmen knewe therof / than they armed them and folowed the naueroyſe by the trake of their horſes. Thus the naueroyſe rode before and the frenchmen after / at laſte the naueroyſe cāe to Thorigny alytell vyllage ſtā
               dyng on a hyll / where they might ſe all the countrey aboute: and it ſtode a ſyde / halfe bytwene ſaynt 
                  •
               uyntyns / and Peron in Uermandoyſe there the naueroiſe reſted to refreſſhe them and their horſes. And if they ſhuld nedes fight / ther they had a great aduantage to abyde their enemyes: they had nat long reſted there / but all the countre by neth was couered with the frēchmen they were mo than .xxx. thouſand. Whan the naueroyſe ſa we them / they made thē redy to fight with theym: and yſſued out of their lodgynges and made thre batayls. The lorde Robert Canoll had the firſt / the ſeconde the lorde Philypp̄ of Nauer / the thirde therle of Harecort. And in euery batayle a ſeuyn hundred: and euery man dyd cutte their ſpeares to a fyue fote longe / and in the hangyng of the hyll they cauſed their varlettes to ſette all their ſpurres in the erth ye rowels vp warde: to the entent that their ennemyes ſhulde nat eaſely aproche nere theym / and there the lorde Philyppe of Nauerr made the yonge erle of Harcourt knyght / and the yong lorde of Granuyll. The frenchmen reſted before the naueroyſe and lyghted a fote / ſome wolde incontynent haue gone and fought with thē / and ſome ſayd our men beſore traueyled and many be behynde. It were good that we taryed for theym / and lette vs lodge here this night / anone it woll be late: to morowe we may fight with thē more ordinately. Thus the frenchemen lodged there that night and ſet their caryage rounde aboute theym: and whan the naueroyſe ſa we that they ſhulde natte be fought withall that night / in the euenyng they went into the vyllage of Thoringny / and made great fyers & ſmokes / to make their ennemyes byleue yt they wolde lodge ther all that night: but aſſone as it was darke night they had their horſes redy / and were detmyned what they wolde do / and whan it was darke priuely they departed & went to ye ryuer of Some: and paſſed by a gyde at a lytell vyllage nere to Bethencourt. And than they rode towarde the woode of Bohaygne and cooſted the ſame / and rode that night more than̄e ſeuyn leages: ſome that were yuell horſed were farre behynde / and they of the garyſon of Bouhayne toke them priſoners. Alſo the vyllayns of the countrey ſlewe ſome of thē / ſuch as coude nat folowe their maiſters & had loſt their way: the frenchmen knewe nat of their departing tyll it was nere day light and ſo in haſt they paſſed the ryuer of Some at

the bridge of ſaynt 
                  •
               uintyne / and went towardes Lyceuce to aproche to the naueroyſe. Soeche of them made haſte to warde ſaynt 
                  •
               uyntyus / and came thyder by that it was day light: for it was thenſe but two leages. Formaſt was the conſtable / and the erle of ſaynt Poule: the watchmen on the gates of ſaynt 
                  •
               uityne / whā they herde that noyſe without / and knewe that their ennemyes were natre farre lodged thenſe. Than they were nat well aſſured of themſelfe: but their bridge was vp / than they demaunded ſirs what be ye that aproch ſo nere vs this tyme of nyght. The conſtable anſwered (and ſayde) we be ſuche and ſuche: that wolde paſſe by this towne to gette afore the naueroyſe / who arſtollen out of Thorigny and arre fledde before vs / wherfore opyn your gates we commaunde you in the name of the kyng. The watchmen ſayde ſirs: the kayes be within the towne with the iurates / and ſo than two of the watchmen went into the towne to them that kept the kayes & ſhewed them the mater. And they anſwered that ther ſhuld no gate be opyned without the conſent of the hole towne / and or the myndes of them were knowen the ſonne was vp. Than there came to the gate ſuche as ſhulde gyue anſwere for all the hole towne: they went vppe to the walles of the gate and put out their heedes and ſayd to the cō
               ſtable / and to the erle of ſaynt Poule. Sirs we deſyre you haue vs excuſed for this tyme: it is the mynde of all the cōmons of this towne / that fyue or ſixe of you ſhall entre yf it pleaſe you / to do you honour and pleaſure: but the reſydue to go wher they lyſt. Than theſe lordes were dyſpleaſed: and gaue great and diſpytfull wordes / but for all that they of ſaynt Nuyatyns wolde nat opyn their gates. Than theſe french lordes thought it auayled nat to purſue the naueroyſe any farther: than they all departed by lycence of the conſtable. And the erle of ſaynt Poule went to his caſtell of Bohaygne: ſooſore dyſpleaſed that none durſt ſpeke to hym.
         
         
            ¶ Of the naueroyſe that ſir Peter Audeley brought on a nyght to haue taken the cytie of Chalons. Cap. C .lxxxxv.
            
               THus departed this iurney bytwene the frenchemen and the naueroyſe: the lorde Philyppe of Nauer and his company / rode the ſame day to Wylly & paſſed by a guy / de the ryuer of Oyſe: than̄e they refreſſhed them. Whan they ſawe they wer out of all ꝑels / and at their pleaſure: they rode into Normādy and rode fro fortreſſe to fortreg for they were maiſters of the ryuers / and playn countrey. And ſo entred agayne into Conſtantyne / and made warr as they did before in Normandy: alſo the kyng of Nauer was at Melyn on the ryuer of Sayne with a great nombre of men of warr. So it fyll that ſir Peter Audeley capitayne of Beaufort / bytwene Troy and Calons caſt his aduyce / that if he myght paſſe the ryuer of Marue a lytell aboue ye towne of Chalons / and ſo come to thabbey of ſaynt Peter / he ſhulde lightly entre into the towne. So he taryed on that purpoſe tyll the ryuer of Marne was Iowe: than he aſſembled toguyder ſecretly certayne companyons / for their were of his part a fyue or ſire fortreſſe aboute hym. So he was a foure hundred ſightyng men: and departed fro Beaufort at mydnight and brought them to the paſſage ouer the ryuer of Marne / he had men of the countrey that brought hym thyder / there they lighted a fote and delyuerd their horſes to their varlettes and ſo went ouer the water: whiche was as than but Iowe. And whan they wer all ouer / they went fayre & eaſely toward the abbey of ſaynt Pet: ye watchmen ther were abrode in the towne ſuch as were next to the abbey / the which was without the towne: herde clerely the redoundyng of the naueroyſe / for as they went their harneys clateredd and made ſome noyſe. So that ſuche as herde that noyſe had maruell what it ment: for ſomtyme ye noyſe ſeaced / that was whan the naueroyſe ſtode ſtyll and reſted. And whan they went forth agayne the noyſe began / the wynde was on that ſyde: than ſome of the watchmenſayd / by likelyhode ther beſome theuys englyſſhe and naueroſe ar commyng to ſteale this towne. Let vs aſcry them and wake the men of the cytie be tymes / and ſome went towardes the abbey to ſe what it was / they coude nat ſo ſone do it / but that ſir Peter Audeley and his cōpany were in the abbey court: for the walles therof paſt nat foure fote of hyght. Incontynent they went out at the abbey gate and entred into a great ſtrete: they of the cytie were ſore a frayed / for they cryed in euery part treaſon trea

ſon alarum. Than the men of the cytie armed them and aſſembled togyder and came toward then enemyes and dyuers of them were ſlayne at the firſt commyng. It fell ſo yuell for the towne of Chalons / that Peter of Chalons who had ben capitayne there the ſpace of a hole yere and a hundred ſpeares with hym was newly departed thenſe bycauſe he was nat payed of his wages at his pleaſure. They of the cytie, who wer a great nombre of commons roſe on euery ſyde and feerſly putte themſelfe in defence / the which was nedefull for them to do. Nowbeit they loſte many men / for the naueroyſe wan the firſt to w
               
                  •
               e to the bridge ouer Marne: and beyonde the bridge they of the cytie aſſembled togyder / and defended the firſt bridge / there was a ſore fray. Certayne englyſſhe archers paſſed ouer the gy
               
                  ••
               es of the bridge / and ſhotte ſo feerſly that none durſt come within their ſhotte: this ſkirmyſſhe endured tyll it was noone / and ſome ſayde that the cytie had ben woune / and ſir Does of Graucy had nat been / who had knoledge the day before of the ryding for the of the naueroyſe of Beaufort: And ſo he fearedd the cytie of Chalous / wherefore he deſyred dyuers knyghtes and ſquiers to go with hym for he knewe well in the cytie of Chalons / ther was no gētylman of name So he rode day and nyght / and with hym ſir Philypp̄ of Jancourt / the lorde Au
                  •
               eau of Beaupre / the lorde John Guermyllon / and diuers other / to the nombre of threſcore ſperes. Aſſone as they came to Chalons / they drue ſtreyght to the bridge / which they of the towne defended a / gayuſt the naueroyſe: who dyd all their payne to wynne the towne. Than the lorde of Grancy diſplayed his banner and with great deſyre aproched to the naueroyſe.
         
         
            ¶ How the erle of Roucy was taken agayne the ſeconde tyme. Cap. C .lxxxxvi.
            
               OF the commyng of the lorde of Grancy they of Chalons were gretly reioyſed / & good cauſe why: for and his confort and ayd had nat ben they had ben harde beſtade. Whā ſir Peter Audeley and his men ſawe theſe burgonyons they withdrue them the ſame way they came / and they founde at the ryuer ſyde their barlettes with their horſes. Than̄e they mounted and paſſed the ryuer of Marne without any lette / and ſo retoured wt a ſmall conqueſt to Beaufort: of their deptyng they of Chalons were right gladde / and than / ked god therof / and the lorde of Grancy of the courteſly that he had ſhewed them / and gaue to hym and his company fyue hundred frankes / & deſyred ſir John̄ Sars who was there preſent and their neyghbour to abyde there with them / to counſayle and defend them. He agreed therto with certayne wages that he ſhulde haue for hymſelfe and his company / and ſo he newly for tifyed the cytic wher it neded / at the charges of theym of the towne. In the ſame ſeaſon they of the garyſons of Uelly and Roucy mette by apoyntment togyder / and went and tooke by aſſaut the towne of Syſſome / & there they made a garyſon of all maner of people / and made capitayne there Hanekyn Francoys / alewdefelowe of Colayne on the ryuer of Ryne. He was cruell in all his dedes / for he had no mercy of thē that he he ouer came. He brent the countre there about: and ſlewe men / women / and chyldren / if they were nat raunſomed at his pleaſure. So it fyll that therle of Roucy / who bare ſore at his hert the loſſe of his towne and caſtell of Roucy / the which the naueroiſe had taken fro hym. On a ſeaſon he ſo deſyred the knyghtes and ſquiers about hym / that he had a hundred ſpeares with fortie men a horſebacke out of the cyte of Laon: with hym was the erle of Porcien / the lorde Robert of Canency / the lorde of Montegny in Oſtrenant and other. They rode towarde Syſſome: and in their way they founde the naueroiſe of the ſame garyſon / brennyng of a byllage. Incontynent they ſette on theym: whan Hanekyn and his company ſawe that / they lighted a foote / and ſette their archers before them / there was a ſore and a harde batayle: but they of Laon returned to their cytie and dyd no good / and the other frenchmen abode and fought longe. Howe beit the iourney was nat for them: there the erle of Roucy was ſore hurt and takyn priſoner / alſo ther was taken the lorde Gerarde of Canency / and the lorde of Mōtegny / & dyuers other menne of armes. Thus the erle of Roucy was twyſe takefie in laſſe ſpace than a yere: the lorde Euſtace Dambretycourt in the ſame ſeaſon helde in Champayne a ſeuyn hundred fightyng men: he wanne great rycheſſe ther in raū
               ſomyng of men in Uendages / in to w
                  〈…〉
                / 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
les / and ſaucco
                  ••
               cles. He helde vnder hym 
                  〈◊〉
                twelfe fortreſſes: he was as than a lully louer 
                  •
               abper;amours / and after he maryed the lady Iſabell of Jullyers / ſomtyme boughter to therle of Jullyers. This lady alſo loued the lorde 
                  〈…〉
               ace / for the gret noblenes of armes y• ſhe had herd reported of hym: and ſhe ſend often tymes to hym courſers & hackeneys with letters of loue / wherby the ſayde ſir Euſtace was the more har
                  •
               y in all his dedes of armes / ſo that euery man 
                  •
               an greatly that was vnder hym.
         
         
            ¶ Of the thre quenes / & the naueroiſe that were beſiged by the duke of Normandy in Melune. Cap. C .lxxxxvii.
            
               AFter the yeldyng vp of ſaint 
                  •
               alery as ye haue herde before: the duke of Normandy aſſembled togyder a thre thouſande ſpeares / and departed fro Parys & wente and layed ſiege before Melune on the ryuer of Sayne / y• which was kept by the naueroyſe. Within the ſame towne there were thre quenes: the firſt quene Jane aunt to the kyng of Nauer / ſōtyme wyfe to kyng Charles of France. The ſeconde quene Blanch / ſomtyme wyfe to kynge Philyppe of Fraunce / and ſuſter to the kynge of Nauerr. The th
                  •
               r
                  •
               e the quene of Nauer / ſuſter to the duke of Norman / dy: the which duke was nat at the ſiege hymſelf but he ſende thyder the lorde Morell of Fyēnes conſtable of Fraunce / the erle of ſaynt Poule / the lorde Arnold Dādrehen marſhall of France the lorde Arnold of Coucy / the byſthop of Troy the lorde Broquart of Fenaſtrages / Peter du Bare / Philyppe of Armoyes and other / to the nombre of thre thouſande ſpeares: who beſ
                  〈…〉
                Melune rounde aboute. And they brought fro Parys many engyns and ſpringalles / the whiche night and day dyd caſt into the ſortres: and alſo they made dyuers ſore aſſautes. The naueroyſe within were ſore abaſſhed / and ſpecially the thre quenes: who wolde glably that y• ſiege had been reyſed / they cared nat ho
                  ••
               e. But the captayns: the lorde John̄ Pypes / and y• lorde Johān Carbenauxe ſayd to them / ſayre ladyes biſmay you nat / for one of theſe dayesye
                  •
               hall ſe the ſiegereyſed. For the kyng of Nauerre hath ſende vs worde who is at Uernon / and alſo ſir Philyp of Nauer his brother: howe they haue reyſed a certayne company of men of warre at Maunt and at Meleux to reyſe this ſiege. And alſo all the men of warre of all the garyſons naueroyſe woll come with them / ou the other part the duke of Normandy who knewe that the naueroyſe were about to reyſe the ſiege: rerayned ſoudyours on all parties / and euer dyd ſend thē to the ſiege of Melune. Than ther were certen good people y• beſyed them ſelfe to haue a peace bytwene the kynge of Nauerr / and the duke of Normandy: and as than was ſtyll in Fraunce the cardynall of Piergourt and the cardynall of Angell / and they with other dyd ſomoche that a day was taken of trewſe / to be holden at Uernon. And thyder came the duke of Normandy and his counſayle: and the kyng of Nauer and the lorde Philyppe his brother and their counſaylles / & there a peace was made / and the king of Nauer ſware to be good frenche / and in the ſame peace were cōpriſed a thre hundred knightes and ſquyers / to whom the duke ꝑ doned his yuell wyll: yet the duke excepted certayne other to whom he wold gyue no ꝑ don. To this peace the lorde Philyppe of Nauer wolde in nowyſe agre: but ſayd to the kyng his brother ho we he was enchaūted / & dyd ſore agaynſt the kyng of Englande / to whom he was a lyed. The which kyng had alwayes ayded and conforted hym / & ſo the lorde Philyppe departed fro his brother / all onely with four perſons / and rode in haſt to ſaynt Sauyour le Uycont / the which was a garyſon englyſſhe. And capitayne there vnder the kyng of Englande was ſir Thomas Agorne of Englande / who receyued the lorde Philyp ioyfully / and ſayde howe he had aquyted hymſelfe trewely to the kyng of Englande.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the broquart of Feneſtrages and other frenchmen ordayned their bataylles / agaynſt the lorde Euſtace Dambretycourt englyſſhe in Champaigne. Cap. C .lxxxxviii.
            
               
               BI the treaty of this peace the kynge of Nauer had certaine townes and caſtels in Normandy in peace / the which before were in debate and ſpecially Mant & Meulencke. Alſo ther was a peace made bytwene the duke of Normādy and the yong erle of Harcourt / a great part by the meanes of the lorde Loyes of Harecourt / who was of the dukes coūſayle and of his houſe. And the duke gaue to the ſame erle in mary age y• doughter of the duke of Burbone / ſuſter to the duches of Normandy. Thus the ſiege brake vp before Melune and the towne abode frēche: yet for all this peace / the realme of France was inuaded / a great warre made therin / aſmoche as was before or more: for as than the truſe bytwene Englande and Fraunce was expyred. So ſuche men of warre / as before had made warre in the iytell of the kyng of Nauer in Fraunce in Normandy / in Burgone / in Picardy / in Champaigne / in Brey / and in Beaufe. Than they made agayne as great warre in the tytell of the kyng of Englande: for all the peace / ther was no fortreſſe that wolde tourne frenche / for the companyons and men of warr hadde lerned ſo well to robbe and pyll the countrey / and to raunſome the people that they coude nat leaue: for of two thouſand that had a ten or twelfe horſes of their owne / if they wolde haue made no more warre / in a ſhorte tyme ſhulde haue been fayne to haue gone a fote. After the breakynge vp of the ſiege at Melune: the duke of Normandy deſyred the lorde Broquart of Feneſtrages who was of the nacyon of Lorayne / and had with hym in wagꝭ a fyue hundred cōpanyons / that he wolde helpe to driue out of Champaygne the englyſſhmen / ſuche as made dayly warre in that countre. He agreed therto with a certayne ſomme of florens that he ſhuld▪ haue for hym and his men. Than there aſſembled togyder men of warr: of Chā
               paigne / of Burgoyne / the byſſhoppe of Troy / therle of Uadumont / the erle of Jouy / the lorde Johān Chalon / and the lorde Broquart of Feneſtrages / they were a two thouſande ſpeares / and .xv. C. of other. And ſo they cāe to the ſtrōg caſtell of Hans in Champaigne / the whiche the englyſſhmen had kepte a yere and a halfe / they toke it at the third aſſaut / and there were ſlayne a .lxxx. englyſſhemen / none were take to mercy. Than the frenchmen went to the cytie of Troy and whan they were well refreſſhed / there yſſued out a twelfe hundred ſpeares / and nyne hundred of other / and tode towarde Nogent on the ryuer of Sayne. The lorde Dambrety courte / who vnderſtode of their ryding abrode / aſſembled of the garyſons vnder his rule a four hundred ſpeares / and a two hundred archers: and with them departed fro Pons. He rode clene armed except his heed peace / and rode on a hackeney / and a great courſer was ledde by hym: he had nat ryden farre / but that he herde tidynges of the frenchmen / and in likewyſe the frēchmen herde of them. But if the lorde Euſtace had knowen / that the frenchmen had ben ſo great a nombre: he wolde a deſyred the lorde Peter Audeley and Albreth to haue ayded him / they might well a made a four hūdred men. Than the lorde Euſtace gathered togyder his men without y• towne of Nogent / and toke the hight of a lytell hyll amonge the vynes: and ſette his archers before hym. And whan the frenchemen came nere and ſawe theym: they ordayned thre bataylles. The firſt gouerned the byſſhoppe of Troy / and the lorde Broquart of Feneſtrages: and the ſecond the lorde John̄ of Chalon / and the erle of Jouy: and the thirde the erle of Januyll. Than ſir Euſtace amonge his men ſayde: ſits lette vs fyght with a good courage / this iourney ſhalbe ours than ſhall we be lordes of all Champaigne / the which ſomtyme was an erldome. I may do the kyng of England ſuche ſeruyce whom I repute to be kyng of France / that he woll gyue me this erldome. Than he called to hym certayne yong ſquyers: as the couragyous Manny his coſyn / Johān of Parys / Martyne of Spaygne / and other / and there he made theym knyghtes / and made all his men to lyght a fote and to cut their ſpeares a fyue fote long: and ſette his penon before hym / the whiche was of ermyns / two hameddes goules.
         
         
            ¶ Of the batayle of Nogent bytwen the lorde Broquart of Feneſtrages of the nacyon of Lorayne / of the frenche partie. And ſir Euſtace Dambreti▪ court of the nacyon of Heynalt / of the englyſſhe partie. Cap. C. lxxx xix.
            
               
               WHan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Broquart of Feneſtrages (who was hardy & couragiouſe) ſaw yt 
               ſyr Euſtace wolde nat remoue his batel he ſayd lette vs ſette on them what ſoeuer fall / and ſo aduaunced his bataile / and ſyr Euſtace receyued ſo the firſt bataile / that he ouerthrew of his ennemies mo than .lx. and had nere hande clene diſcomfitted the ſame bataile / but than the .ii. freſſhe bataile aproched whiche greatly ayded & cōforted the fyrſt. Thā ye third bataile came on a wynge / and comforted the other .ii. batailes. The frenche men were .iii. agaynſt one. Sir Euſtace with his glayue ouer threwe a .iiii. of the herdieſt of his ennemyes. Whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Broquart ſawe his prowes / he ſtrake at hym ouer other mennes heedes / and ſtrake / hym in the viſer / and ſtrake out with the ſtroke thre of his tethe / but for all that he letted nat to fight. The engliſſhemen had the vauntage of the hyll / and helde them ſelfe ſo clooſe together that none coude entre into them / the frenchemē were a horſbacke / and the engliſſhemen a fote / and a littel beſyde were the englyſſhe archers a part by themſelfe / and ſhot quyckely at ye frē
               chemen. The frenchemen turned about the engliſſhemē / and as they turned / they dyd ye ſame Than the frenche fortemen came into the felde a ix. C. of them / who had paueſſes / a therby they brake ye array of the archers / for their ſhot coud nat hurt them / they were ſo ſure pa
                  •
               eſſed. Thā the archers were ſore beten / and the ſeconde bataile of ye frenchemē came on them a horſe backe and ſlewe many of them / and than they went on them that kept the englyſſhe horſes / and ſlewe and wanne them all / but fewe that ſcaped. In the meane ſeaſon the other two batailes fought with the engliſſhemen on the one ſyde / and the fotemen on the other ſide / So that finally they brake theyr array / and ſyr Euſtace ſtandderde was beaten downe / and all to torne / and many men ſlayne and taken. Syr Euſtace fell in the hādes of a knyght / called ſyr Henry Quenelart and he had great payne to ſaue his lyſe / for the comons of Troye wolde haue ſlayne hym / for the great dedes of armes / that he had done in the countrey of Champaygne. There was alſo taken ſyr Johan of Parys / the lorde Martine of Spaygne / and diuerſe other knyghtes and ſquyers. And ſuche as ſaued them ſelfe / entred into the fortreſſe of Nogent / The whiche were but a fewe / for they were nere all ſlayne or taken / and the coragious Manny was left for deed in the felde amonge the deed men. But after this diſcomfytture / and that all the frenchemen were departed / he beynge ſore hurte and nere deed lyfte vp a litel his heed and ſawe nothynge aboute hym / but deed men lyeng on the grounde rounde aboute hym: than he roſe as welle as he myght and ſatte downe / and ſawe well howe he was nat farre from the fortreſſe of Nogent / the whiche was engliſſhe / than he dyd ſo moche ſometyme crepyng / and ſomtyme reſtynge / that he came to the foote of the towre of Nogent. Than he made token to them within ſhewynge howe he was one of theyr companyons / than certayn came downe ye towre to hym and bare hym into the Fortereſſe / and dreſſed his woundes. And therehe gouerned hym ſelfe ſo well / that he was heeled. This bataile was in the yere of our lorde a. M. CCC .lix. In the vigill of ſaynt John̄ Baptiſt.
         
         
            ¶ Howe theſe robbors & pyllers that kept theſe fortreſſes in Fraunce began to declyne by myracle. Cap. CC.
            
               AFter this dyſcomfetture of Nogent on ye riuer of Seyn the lordes and men of armes of Fraunce went to Troye with their boty and cōqueſt / but they brought theder non̄ of theyr priſoners. They ſēt them to other frenche garyſons: for the comōs of Troye wolde haue ſlayne them. Whan ſuche as Were ſtyll in the garyſon of Pouns vnderſtode howe that theyr capitayne the lorde Euſtace was taken / and all his company ſlayne & taken / they truſſed all that they had as ſhortly as they myght and departed / bicauſe they wer but a fewe. In lyke wyſe ſo dyd they of Torey of Eſponay / of Arcy / of Mary / of Pleuſy / and of all other fortreſſes that were vnder the obeyſaunce of the lorde Euſtace Dambreticourt. And they left them voyde / for doubte they had of the biſſhop of Troye / And of the lorde Broquarte of Feneſtrages. but ſyr Peter Aubeley lefte nat his garyſon of Beauforte. Nor John̄ of Segure Nogente. Nor Albret the garyſon of Gey / on the ryuer of Seyne. In the ſame

ſeaſon dyed ſtrangely in the caſtell of Herreell a .iii. leages from Amienſe the lorde Johan of Piquygny (as it was ſaid) he was ſtrāgled by his chamberlayn. And in lyke maner dyed ſyr Lucz of Bekuſey / who was of his counſaile.
            In the ſame ſeaſon on a day / certayne of the cō
               pany of ſyr Peter Audeleys rode forth / and entred into a towne called Ronay / and robbed it clene: and as the curate was at maſſe there entred into the churche an engliſſhe ſquier and toke the Chalays fro the aulter / wherin the preſt ſhulde haue conſecrated / and dyd caſte out the wyne / and bycauſe the preeſt ſpake to hym / he ſtrake hym with his gauntlet / that the bludde felle vpon the aulter. Than they departed and went into the feldes: and this ſquier had with hym the patent and corporal / and ſodaynly his horſe beganne to tourne and ſo to take on that none durſte approche nere hym / and horſe and man fell to the erthe / and eche of them ſtrangled other / and ſodaynly were tourned into pouder Than the other companions made a vowe neuer aft
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                to violate any churche. In the ſame ſeaſon they of the gariſon of Mauconſell wanted prouyſion / and ſo ſolde theyr fortreſſe to them of Noyon / and to them of the countrey there about / for .xii. M. motons of golde / and ſo to departe with all theyr goodes. And ſo they went into other fortreſſes / as to Craell / Cleremount Hereell / Uelly / Pierpount / Rouſſey / and to Siſſome. The whiche fortreſſes had ben long in the handes of Naueroys / and after the peace bitwene the duke of Normandy / and the kyng of Nauer / they were englyſſe. And whan they of Noyon had Maucōſel / they raſſhed it to the erthe. Alſo John̄ Segure ſolde the fortreſſe of Nogent to the byſſhop of Troyes for a certayne ſome of florens / wherof he had wrytynge vnder the byſſhops ſeale / and ſo he came into ye cite of Troye / and alyghted at the byſſhop lodgynge who ſayd to hym / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ ye ſhall abyde here with me a thre or foure dayes / and than ye ſhall haue your money. and he / who was come thether vnder the aſſuraunce of the byſſhop / agreed therto. Than the comons of the cite beganne to ſaye / Howe dothe our byſſhop tryfle and mocke vs / ſythe he kepeth aboute hym the greatteſt brybour and robber in all Fraunce / and wolde that we ſhulde gyue hym oure money. Than there roſe a great nōbre of the ſame opynyon / and ſente to kepe theyr gates / that he ſhulde nat ſkape theym / and there came in harneys a ſyxe thouſande of one ſorte to ſlee hym in the byſſhops lodgynge. Whan the byſſhop ſawe that / he ſayde to them / Fayre frendes he is come hyther vnder my ſaue conducte and ye knowe the treatye and bargayne betwene hym and me by your accorde / hit were great ſhame and vntrueth (vnder this aſſurance) to do hym any villanye. But what ſo euer he ſayd they entred into his halle by force / and ſo into his chā
               bre / and ſought ſo naro welye that at laſte they founde hym / and there ſlewe hym / and hewed hym all to peces.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frenchemen refuſed the peace that theyr kyng made in Englande, Cap. CC .i.
            
               IT is longe ſythe I ſpake of the kynge of Englande / but I had non̄ occaſion to ſpeke of hym tyll nowe. for as long as the treuce endured / there was no war
                  •
                made bitwene them / but aſſoone as y• truce was exſpired / the fyrſte day of May / the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lix. after that daye all the garyſons engliſſhe and naueroyſe made warr in the title of the kynge of Englande. Anone after the peace made betwene the kyng of Nauer and the duke of Normandy. The lorde Arnolde Dandrehen retourned into Englande / for he was nat quytte priſoner of his takyng at the batayle of Poieters. In the ſame ſeaſon the kyng of Englande and the prince his ſonne The Frenche 
                  •
               ynge / and the lorde Jaques of Bourbon / mette at London / and ſo they foure allonely to guether in counſayle agreed vpon a peace vpon certayne articles wrytten in a lettre to be ſent into Fraunce to the duke of Normandy. The Erle and ſyr Arnolde paſſed the ſee and arryued at Boloyn / and ſo went to Parys / And there they founde the Duke / and the kynge of Nauer / and ther ſhewed them the letters. Than the duke demaunded counſaile of the kynge of Nauer / who dyd counſayle hym that the prelattes and nobles of Fraunce / and counſayles of the good townes ſhulde be aſſembled / the whiche thynge was done. And than it ſemed to the kyng of Nauer / and to the Duke / and to his bretherne / and to all the counſayle of the Realme / that the ſayde treatye was to greuous to be borne. Wherfore they anſwered all

with one voyce to the ſayde two fordes / that the letter that they had brought and the
                  ••
               ect therin / was ſo preiudyciall to them am▪ to the realme / that they yet wolde endure greatter myſchiefe than they had done: rather than to myniſſhe in ſuch wyſe the realme of France. They wolde alſo rather ſuffre their kyng to lye ſtyll in Englā
               de. And whan the french kyng vnderstode how the realme of Fraunce wolde nat agre to his apoyntmēt (he ſayd) a ſonne Charles: ye be coū
               ſayled by the kyng of Nauerre / who deceyueth you / & woll deceyue ſuche .xl. as ye be. And whā the kyng of Englād knewe their report he ſayd well: or wynter be paſt I ſhall entre into the realme of France ſo puyſantly 
                  〈◊〉
                ſhall abyde there ſo long tyll I haue an ende of this warre / or els peace at my pleaſure / and to myne honour: and than he made the gretteſt aparayle that euer he made. The ſame ſeaſon aboute the myddes of Auguſt the lorde Johān of Craon archbyſſhop of Reynes: and they of the cytie of Parys / and of the coūtre ther about: with a certayne knightes and ſquiers of the countie of 
                  •
               ethell and Laon / went and layed ſiege to the caſtell of 
                  •
               oucy and ther lay a fyue wekes. And than they with in yelded vp their lyues and goodes ſaued: and to go whyder they lyſt. And of this they had letters patentes ſealed by the archebyſſhop / by the erle Porcyen / and the erle of Brayne: but for all that whan they departed the cōmons that were there roſe agaynſt them and ſlewe the moſt part for all the lordes / who had moche payne to ſaue the captayne Hanekyn Francoyſe. Thus therle of Roucy had agayne his towne and caſtell.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Euſtace Danbretycour
                  •
                was delyuerd out of priſon by great raunſome. Cap. CC .ii.
            
               THus after the wynninge of the caſtell of Roucy / ſir Peter Awdeley dyed in his bedde within y• caſtell of Beauforde: wherof ſuche companyons as wer vnder him were right ſorowfull. Than the englyſſhmen and almaygnes there / thought they coude do no better ſyth they made warr for the kyng of Englande / as to make to their capitayne ſir Euſtace Dambreticourt / who was as than̄e hole of his hurtes: but ſtyll as priſonere. Than they ſende Faucon the haraulde to therle of Uandumant / and to ſir Henry 
                  •
               ue
                  •
               ellart / for to putte to raunſome the lorde ſir Euſtace / ſo than he was put to his fynanſe to pay .xxii. thouſande frankes of France. And the companyons of the englyſſhe garyſons in Champaigne payed the ſayd raunſome: and ſo he was delyuered and had agayne his courſer and his hackeney / that he loſt at the batayle of Nogent / the which horſes the lady Iſabell of Jullyers counteſſe of Kent in Englande had ſende hym. Whan theſe cōpanyons had the lorde Euſtace among them / they made hym their ſouerayne / and euery man drewe to him. And than they entred into the coū
               tie of Rethell where they had neuer been before / and there by ſtelth they wanne the good towne of Athyen on the ryuer of Eſue: and there they founde mo than a hundred peces of wyne. Ther they made their ſoueraygne garyſon / and ouer ranne all the countrey about Reynes / and ſpoyled Eſpernoy / Damp
                  •
               ary / Trayone / and the good towne of Uertus: wher the englyſſhmen had great profette. And ther they made another garyſon / the which ouer ranne all the countrey about the ryuer of Marne to the Fertyll Myllon. And they of Athyen ranne dayly to Meſerees on the ryuer of Meuſe / to Douchery / and to Chenpoulux.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Broquart of Feneſtrages made hymſelfe to be payed by force of his wages / of the duke of Normādy regent of France. Ca. C C iii.
            
               IN the ſame ſeaſon the lorde Broquart of Feneſtrages / who had been in the dukes ayde agaynſt thēglyſſhemē and naueroyſe: and had holpen to put them out of y• fortreſſes in Champaygne / but he was but yuell payed of his wages. Ther was owynge to hym and to his a thyrtie thouſande frankes. He ſende certayne meſſangers to Parys to the duke / who gaue none anſwere to his pleaſure / for they retourned
                  •
                without any money or promyſe. Than this knyght ſende

his defyance to the duke and to all the realme of Fraunce: and entred into a good towne called Bare on the ryuer of Sayne / wherin ther 
               wer a nyne hundred houſes / his men robbed y• towne: but they coude nat gette the caſtell it was ſo well kept. They toke with thyem their pyllage and priſoners / and brende ſo the towne that all was diſtroyed: than they went to Cōſtans and there made their cheife garyſon / and they dyde after to the countre of Champaigne / more yuell and vylayne dedes / than euer dyd the englyſſhemen or naueroyſe. And whanne he and his men had thus ouer ronne the countre / the duke agreed with hym and he had all that he deſyred and more. And than he departed and went into Lorayne fro whens as he came: and ſo lefte the realme of Fraunce and the countrey of Champaine in peace whan he had done yuels ynowe. In the ſame ſeaſon the yere of our lorde god a. M. CCC. li
                  •
               . Sir Robert Canoll made a iourney with thre thouſande one and other: and wente out of the marcheſſe of Bretaygne / and rode along the ryuer of Loyre and entred into Berry brennyng and exylyng the countre. And it was ſayd he had taken on hym to paſſe through Auuergne / to go ſe the pope and cardynalles at Auygnone / and to haue ſome of their floring aſwell as the archpreeſt had done.
         
         
            ¶ Of the iourney that ſir Robert Canoll made in Berry and Auuergne / and of the lordes and gentylmen of the countrey that purſued hym. Cap. CC .iiii.
            
               SUche lordes and knightes of Auuergne with their cō
               panyes / as were in purpoſe to encountre ſir Robert Canoell came within a dayes iourney of hym with a thre thouſande ſpeares. Sir Robert had ryden in Berry brenning and exilyng the countre and as than he was entred into Auuergne / and to reſyſt hym / the lordes and knyghtes were aſſembled. They of Auuerne and Lymoſen: and with them therle of Foreſtes / who had with him a .iiii. C. ſpeares. Thus they rode after ſir Robert Canoll and his men / ſuch as he had broght with hym out of Loritaygne / callyng themſelfe englyſſhmen. Whan theſe lord
                  •
                were thus within a dayes iourney of their ennemyes / and ther lodged that nyght. And the next day they came and lodged on a mountayne nere to thenglyſſhmen / & they were lodged on a nother lytell hyll / ſo that eche of theym might ſe others fyers that they made. Than the next mornyng the french / men auaunced farther / & about noone they cāe to a mountayne right agaynſt the englyſſhmen ſo that there was no more bytwene them / but a lytell medowe of a .xii. acres of lande. Incontynent the englyſſhemen made redy their batayle to fight: and ſette their archers in the hangyng of the hyll before them / than the frenchmen ordayned two batayles / in euery batayle a .v. M. men. The firſt ledde the dolphyne of Auuergne erle of Cleremont / called Berault and there he was made knyght / and rearyd his baner quartered with Auuergne & Merquell. And with him was the lorde Robert Daulphyn his vncle / the lorde Montagu / the lorde of Talencon / y• lorde of Cochfort / the lorde of Serygnacke / the lorde Godfray of Boloyne and dyuers other knightꝭ and ſquyers: of Lymoſyn / of Quercy / of Auuergne / and of Rouergue. In the ſeconde batayle was the erle of Foreſtes / the lorde John̄ of Boloyn erle of Auuergne / the lorde Darchyer and his ſonnes / the lorde Dachon / the lorde Du
                  •
               es / ſir Renalt of Foreſt
                  •
                brother to therle / and many other knyghtes and ſquyers: hauyng great deſyre to fyght with their enemyes / by ſemyng. On the other ſyde ſir Robert Canoll and his cō
               pany ſhewed howe he hadd alſo great deſyre to haue batayle. Thus bothe hoſtes ſtode ſtyll tyll it was nere night eche before other / without goynge out of their ſtraytes: ſaue certayne yonge knyghtes and ſquyers to get priſe in armes / diſcended downe on both parties by the lycence of their marſhals / & came downe into the medowe and there iuſted one with another: and he that wanne his felowe had hym priſonerr. Thus at night eche partie drewe to their lodgynges and made good watche: than the french lordes went to counſayle / & they ordayned that at the hour of mydnight they ſhulde dyſcend downe fro their moūtayne / on the ſyde fro their enemyes ward. And to go a two leages / and ſo to come to the otherſyde of the mountayne / where ther enemys were: on the which ſyde y• hyll was eaſy inough to mount / and thought to cōe ſo erly thyder that thēgliſhmen ſhuld nat be redy armed. this was nat ſo ſecretly ſpoken / but y• thenglyſſhmen had knoledge therof by an engliſſhe priſoner y• ſtale

away fro the frenche hooſt / and came to ſir Robert Canoll and ſhewed him all the mater. Thā ſir Robert wente to counſayle with ſuche as he truſted beſt: ſo that they thought all thynges cō
               ſydred that it was nat beſt to abyde the puyſance of the frenchmen / than they truſſed and deꝑted by guydes of men of the countrey / ſuche as they had there for priſoners. At the hour of mydnight the frenchmen putte themin array of batayle and rode for the as they before had ordayned: and by that tyme it was day they came to the moūtayne wher they thoght to haue founde the englyſſhmen. And whan they knewe y• they were departed / they cauſed certayne of their mē to mount vp to the moūtayne to ſe if they coude knowe any thynge of theym / they retourned agayne and reported howe they had ſene theym paſſe by ſuche away as they named / and howe that they were goynge to Lymoges in Lymoſyn. Whan the lordes of France herde that / they brake vpp̄ their iourney and deꝑted euery man to his owne. And anone after was the mariage made of the lorde Berault Daulphyne of Auuergne / and the doughter of the erle of Foreſtes that he had by the duke of Burbons ſuſter.
         
         
            ¶ Of the almaygnes that abode the kyng of Englande at Calays to ryde with hym into the realme of France / kynge Johān beynge ſtyll priſoner in Englande. Cap. CC .v.
            
               ALl this ſeaſon the kynge of Englande made great prouiſyon to come into Frā
               ce: ſuche as had nat been ſene the lyke before. Certayne lordes and knyghtes of the empyre / ſuche as had ſerued the kyng before / prouyded the ſame yer greatly for horſe and harneys / and other thynges neceſſary for their degrees. And aſſoone as they might they came by Flaunders to Calays / and ther a bode for the kynges cōmyng: ſo it was that the kyng of Englande came nat ſo ſoone to Calays as it was ſayde he ſhulde haue done / wherfore moche people reſorted thyder / ſo that they wyſt nat wher to lodge nor to haue ſtablyng for their horſes. Alſo bredde / wyne / hay / and otes: and other ꝓuiſyons were very dere and ſcant / ſo that ther was none to gette for golde nor ſyluer: and euer it was ſaid the kyng cōmeth the next weke. Thus taryed there the lordes of Almaygne / of Behayne / of Brabant / of Flanders / and of Heynault: fro the begynnyng of Auguſt / to the feeſt of ſaynt Luke / ſo that ther were many that wer fayne to ſell the beſte part of their iewelles. And if the kyng had been there than / lodgyng wolde haue ben ſtrayter: the towne was ſo full. And alſo it was dout of theſe lordes / who had ſpende all that they had / that they wolde nat depart fro Calays / tyll they were contented agayne of all their expēſes. The kyng ſende nat for the fourth part of them / many of them were come of their owne good wylles / truſtynge to haue ſome aduauntage: and ſome thought to robbe and pyll in the realme of France. Than the kyng of Englande ſende ouer before the duke of Lancaſtre with foure hundred ſpeares / and two thouſand archers. And whan̄e the duke came to Calays: theſe lordes ſtraungers made great ioye of hym and demaūded tidynges of the kyng and of his commynge. The duke excuſed the kynge of his taryeng ſo longe (and ſayde) howe that all his prouiſyon was natte fully redy: and ſayd fayre lord
                  •
                / the taryeng here is no profyte. I woll go ryde for the into Fraunce / and to ſe what I can fynde ther: wherfore ſirs I requyre you to ryde for the with me / and Iſhall delyuer you a certayne ſomme of money to pay withall your coſtes in your lodgynges / that ye haue ſpent here in this towne of Calays / and ye ſhall haue prouiſion of vitayle to cary on your ſomers. Theſe lordes thought great ſhame to refuſe the dukes offre / & ſo graunted hym: than euery man newe ſhodde their horſes and truſſed and deꝑted nobly fro Calays with the duke and went to ſaynt Omers / they were a two thouſande ſpeares he / ſyde the archers / and other fotemen. They paſſed for by ſaynt Omers without any aſſaut and ſo rode to Bethwyne and paſſed by / and came to Mount ſaynt Eloy a good abbey and a riche a two leages fro Arras: and ther taryed a four dayes to refreſſhe theym and their horſes / for they founde in that abbey well wherwith. And whan they had robbed and waſted the countrey there about / they rode to Cambrey & ther made a great aſſaut. And there was ſlayne a baneret of Englande and dyuers other / for they within defended themſelfe valyantly / by the ayde & conforte of the erle of ſaynt Poule / and the lorde of

Lamenall and other / who with a two hundred ſpeares / came into the towne at a backe gate. And whan thenglyſſhmen ſawe that they coude gette nothyng there: they departed and folowed the ryuer of Sōe with great ſcarſnes of bred and wyne. And ſo came to a towne called Chereſy where they founde plentie of bredde and wyne: and there they paſſed the ryuer for that bridge was nat broken and ther they taryed Alhalowen day and all nyght. The ſame day tydynges came to the duke howe the kyng was aryued at Calays: commaundynge hym incontynent to drawe towardes hym and all his company. Than he retourned towarde Calays / wt hym was alſo ſir Henry of Flaunders with two hundred ſpeares: and of Brabant there was ſir Henry of Beautreſen lorde of Bergues / and the lorde Gerarde de la Herde / the lorde Frāque de Halle. O
                  •
                Heynault / the lorde Gaultyer of Mā
               ny / and the lorde John̄ of Gomegynes. And of Behayne / ſir Gaultyer de la Haultpon / ſir Reynolde de Boulaunt / the lorde Godfray of Hardnamont / and the lord John̄ his ſonne / the lorde of Duras / Thyrey of Ferram / the lorde Ruſe of Junepe / the lorde Gyles Sorles / the lorde John̄ of Bermont / the lorde Reynolde of Berg
                  •
               hes and dyuers other. The Almaygnes and mercenaryes of ſtrange countreis / I canne nat name at this preſent tyme.
         
         
            ¶ Of the great hoſt that the kynge of England brought into France to make warre there / kyng John̄ beyng priſoner in England: and of the order of the englyſſhe hooſt. Cap. CC .vi.
            
               AS the duke of Lācaſtre and theſe lordes retourned towardes Calys / they mette in their way a foure leages fro Calays ſo gret multytude of people / that all the countrey was couered therwith / ſo rychely armed and beſene / that it was great ioye to beholde the freſſhe ſhinyng armours: baners w
                  ••
               ynge in the wynde / their cōpanyes in good order ridyng a ſoft paſe. Whan the duke & theſe lordes mette the kyng: he feeſted them and thanked them of their ſeruyce / than theſe almayns / mercenaryes / brabances / behannoyes / all togyder ſhewed vnto the kyng: howe they had ſpent all their goodes / horſes / and harnes ſolde. So that lytell or nothyng was left theym to do hym ſeruyce: for the which entent they were cōe / nor how they had nat wherwith to go home agayn vnto their countreis if they ſhuld depart: wherfore they deſyred his noblenes to take ſome regarde to them. The kyng anſwered (and ſayd) howe he was nat as than redy to gyue theym a playne aunſwere: but ſayde ſirs I thynke ye before traueyled / wherfore go your wayes and refreſſhe you a two or thre dayes in Calays / and this nyght and to morowe I ſhall take counſell and ſende vnto you ſuche an anſwere: that of reaſon ye ſhalbe content. Than theſe ſtrangers departed fro the kynge and fro the duke and rode towarde Calays: and they had nat ryden halfe a leage farther / but they met a great multytude of caryages. And after that the prince of Wales nobly and richely beſene and all his company / wherof ther was ſuche a nombre that all the coū
               trey was couered with them / and he rode a ſoft paſe redy raynged in batayle / as though they ſhulde incontynent haue fought. Thus he rode euer a leage or two after the kynges hooſt: and all the caryages bytwene both hooſtes / the whiche order theſe ſtrāgers lyked marueluſly well.
            ¶ Whan theſe ſtrāgers had well regarded this company: and had reuerently ſaluted the prince and ſuch lordes as were with hym / and the prince louyngly receyued thē as he that coude ryght well do it. Than they toke leaue of hym & ſhewed hym their nede / deſyringe that he wolde regarde their neceſſytie: and he gladly promyſed thē ſo to do. So they rode on tyll they came to Calays / and the ſeconde day after the kyng ſent them their anſwere by thre ſufficient knyghtes / and they ſhewed theym playnly that the kynge had nat brought with hym treaſur ſufficient to pay all that they deſyred / and to performe the enterprice that he hath taken in hande: but if they wolde go forthe with hym / and to take ſuche fortune as falleth other good or yuell. If good fortune and wynnyng fall: they to haue their part / ſo that they demaunde no wages: nor for loſſe of horſe nor ſpence / nor damage that they maye happ̄ to haue / for they ſaid the kyng had broght men ynough out of his relame to furnyſſhe his enterprice. This anſwere pleaſedd nat greatly theſe lordes nor their cōpany / who had ſore traueyled

and ſpended their goodes / and had layed their horſes and harnes to pledge / and ſolbe for neceſſytie. Howbeit they coude haue nothynge els / but that the kyng delyuerd thē a certayn ſomme of money to bring them home into their countrey. Howe beit ſome of thoſe lordes went agayne to the kyng to ſerue hym at aduenture: they thought it ſhame to retourne agayne without any thyng doyng. I ſhall deuyſe to you ſō
               what the order that the kyng of Englande toke or he departed out of England / the which is nat a thyng ſhortly to paſſe ouer: for ther neuer departed out of Englande before ſuche an army / nor ſo well ordred.
            ¶ Or the kyng departed out of his realme: he made all the lordes of France ſuche as were priſoners to be put into dyuers pla
                  •
               es and ſtronge caſtelles in the realme to be the more ſurer of thē and the frenche kyng was ſet in the towre of Lō
               don and his yonge ſonne with hym / and moche of his pleaſure and ſport reſtrayned: for he was than ſtraytlyer kept than he was before. Than euery man was commaunded to go to Douer / where as ſhyppes were redy to paſſe ouer / ſo euery man drewe thyder none abode at home / bytwene the age of twentie and threſcore. So that nere hande all lordes / knyghtes / and ſquyers went to Douer: except ſuche as the kyng had apoynted to kepe the realme / caſtels / marches / & hauyns of the ſame: whan all were aſſembled at Douer. Than the kynge toke his muſters: and there ſayde playnly that his entencyon was to paſſe ouer into the realme of France / and nat to retourne agayn tyll he had made an ende of his warre / or els a ſufficyent peace to his great honour and profet / or els to dye in the payne. And therfore he ſayd if there were any that were nat well wylling to go ouer to returne agayn backe euery man ſayd they were gladde to ſerue hym. And ſo they all entred into their ſhyppes in the name of god and ſaynt George: and they arryued at Calays two dayes before the feeſt of Alſayntes / the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lix.
         
         
            ¶ How the kyng of England departed fro Calais / and of the order of his hoſt / in ridyng through Picardy / & ſo to the cytie of Reynes. Cap. CC .vii.
            
               WHan the kyng and the prince his ſon were arryued at Calys / and alſo thre other of his ſonnes / that is to ſay lorde Lyonell erle of Ulſter / the lorde John̄ erle of Rychmont and ye lorde Edmonde yongeſt of the foure and all their people / & that they hadde dyſcharged out of their ſhyppes all their horſes and other prouyſion / and had taryed ther foure dayes. Than euery man was cō
               maunded to make redy to depart: ſayeng howe he wolde ryde after his coſyn the duke of Lancaſtre. Than the kyng in a mornyng departed fro Calays with all his company and caryages / in the beſt order that euer any army yſſued oute of any towne. It was ſayd he had a ſixe thouſand charyettes and cartes brought out of England well furnyſſhed: than he ordred his bataylles ſo richely beſene that it was ioye to beholde them / and than his cōſtable the erle de la Marche had fyue hundred knyghtes armed / and a thouſand archers before his batayle. Than the kyngꝭ batayle with thre thouſande men of armes / and .v. thouſande archers in good order: ridyng after the conſtables batayle / and next after the kyngꝭ batayle came all the caryage / the which contayned two leagꝭ in length / mo than fyue thouſand charyettes and cartes / caryeng prouiſyon for y• hooſt withall thynges of houſeholde / which had nat beſene before caryed with men of warre / as handmylles / ouyns to bake in / and ſuche other thynges neceſſary. Than next after them came the princes batayle / and of his bretherne / wherin were a two thouſande ſpeares nobly horſed & richely beſene in order redy to fyght: they rode nat paſt a four leages a day. And in this maner they were encountred with the duke of Lancaſtre and the ſtrange lordes / bytwene Calys and the abbey of Lykes in a fayre playn. In the kynges hooſt ther were a fyue hundred varlettes wt matockes and axes to make euyn the wayes for the caryage to paſſe. ¶ Nowe ſhall I name vnto you certayne of the lordes and knyghtes of Englande that paſſed the ſee with their kynge: and before in the company of the duke of Lancaſtre / the kynges coſyn germayn. Firſt his. iiii ſonnes: the prince Edward / ſir Lyonell / ſir Johāne / and ſir Edmonde. Than ſir Henry duke of Lancaſtre / ſir John̄ erle de la Marche cōſtable of Englande / the erle of warwyke / the erle of Suffolke marſhall of Englande / the erle of Herforde and Northampton / the erle of Salyſbury / therle of Stafforde / the erle of Oxenford / 

the byſſhop of Lyncolne / the byſſhoppe of Dyrham the lorde Percy / the lorde Neuell / the lorde Spenſer / the lorde Roſe / the lorde Manny / the lorde Renolde Cobham ye lorde Monbray / the lorde Dalawar
                  •
                the lorde John̄ Chandos / ſir Rycharde Penbruge / the lorde of Manne / the lorde Wylloughby / the lorde Feltone / the lorde Baſſet the lorde Crabalton / the lorde Syluā
               
               
                  •
               yer / ſir James Awdeley / ſir Bartylmewe de Brunes 
                  〈◊〉
                lorde of Salyche ſir Stephyn Gonſanton / ſir Hewe Haſtynges / ſir Johān Lyſle / ſir Nowell Lormych and dyuers other / whom I can nat name. They rode through Arthoyes and paſſed by the cytie of Arras / and toke the ſame way that the duke of Lancaſtre had paſte before / they coude fynde nothynge to lyue by in the playne countrey: for all that there was lefte was put into the fortreſſes. And alſo the coūtre had ben long poore and ſore waſted: and it was a dere ſeaſon in the realme of France / and great famyne ranne generally through all the contre / for the yerth had nat ben laboured of thre yer before: for if otes and whete had nat come to them out of Heynault and Cambreſis: the people in Arthoyes / Uermādoys / and in the byſſhoprike of Laone and Reynes had dyed for hūger. And the kyng of Englande or he departed out of his owne realme / herde of the great famyne in that countre. He and all his lordes brought prouyſion with them: except otes and ſtrawe / wherfore they made as good ſhyft for their horſes as they might. Alſo the ſeaſon was ſore reyning & weyt the which dyd them great trouble and their horſes alſo: for mooſt part day and night it reyned without ceaſe / ſo that wyne that yere was lytell worth.
            THe kyng of England rode by ſmall iourneys tyll he aproched Balpauſmes / and I ſhall ſhewe you of an aduēture that fyll to ſir Galahault of Rybamont / a right hardy and an expert knyght of Picardy. ye ſhall knowe that all the townes / cyties / caſtelles / and paſſages / which way the kyng went were ſurely kept: for euery towne in Picardy tooke in ſoudyours at their wages for their ſuretie. The erle of ſaynt Poule with two hundred ſpeares was in the cytie of Arras / the conſtable of Fraunce was at Amyenſe the lorde of Monſalt at Corby / ſir Edwarde of Rancy / and ſir Ingram of Hedyn at Balpauſmes / ſir Baudwyn Dannekyns maiſter of the croſbowes at ſaynt Nuyntines. And thus in euery towne and cytie: for they knewe playnly that the kyng of Englande wolde come and ley ſiege to Reynes / ſo it was that they of Peron in Uermandoys / the whiche was in the kyng of Englandes way / had no capitayne nor ruler of their towne: and the englyſſhmen aproched dayly / wherfore they were nat well at their eaſe. This towne ſtandeth on the ryuer of Sōe and thenglyſſhmen lightly euer folowed the ryuers: at laſt they of Peron remembred them of ſir Galahaut of Rybamont / who was nat receyued as capitayne into any towne / and as they were enfourmed he was as than at Tourney. Than they ſende courteſſe letters to hym: deſyryng that he wolde helpe to kepe their towne of Perone with ſuche company as he coude gette / and promyſed to gyue him for his owne perſon euery day twentie frākes / and for euery knight vnder hym ten / & for euery ſpeare with thre horſes one franke a day. Sir Galahaut who deſyred to exercyſe the feat of armes / and ſawe howe he was deſyred of thē of Peron his neyghburs / he lightly agreed to them. And ſende thē worde howe he wolde be with them the ſeconde day after: he prepared hym and gette ſuche company as he coude / and ſo departed fro Tourney with a thyrtie with hym / and alwayes his nombre encreaſed. And he ſende to ſir Roger of Coloyne to mete with hym at a certayne place apoynted: and this ſir Roger came thyder with a twentie with hym. So that at laſt this 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Galahaut had a fyftie ſpeares / and lodged one night a ꝓchynge to Peron warde within two leages of thenglyſſhe hooſt / in a lytell vyllage in the feldes the whiche was all boyde: for all the people of the countrey were fledde into the fortereſſes. The next mornyng they defmyned to entre into Peron / for they were nat farre thens: and whan it was after ſupper about the hour of mydnight / and that they had ſette their watche and iangeled one to another of dyuers maters / than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Galahault ſayde we ſhalbe to morowe betymes at Peron / but yet or we entre I ſhall counſell that we ryde to the frōter of our enemyes / for I thinke there be ſome among theym that to auaunce themſelfe / or to ſeke for ſome forage woll come abrode in the mornyng / we may fortune to mete with ſuche that ſhall pay for our ſcotte. To this agreed all his company and kept it ſecrete: and at the brekyng of the day they were redy & their horſes ſadled / and ſo rode forthe in good order / and went out of the way to Peron / and cooſted the wodes to ſe if they coude fynde any aduētur And ſo came to a vyllage where the people had fortyfied the church: there ſir Galahaut a lighted for he knewe well there was bredde / wyne / &

other vitaylles / and they within offered hym to take what he wolde. And whyle they were ther ſir Galahalt called to him two ſquyers / wherof Bridoll of Tallone was one: and he ſayd to thē ſirs go and ryde forth into the foldes and dyſcouer the countre euery way / and loke if ye ſe any thynge / and come hyder agayne we woll abyde you here. Theſe two ſquyers well horſed rode forthe into the feldes / and went to a wood halfe a leage thenſe: the ſame mornynge was ryden forthe ſir Renault of Boulant an almaygne / of the company of the duke of Lācaſters and was returnyng agayne. And ſo he came to the ſame place where the two ſquyers were / they wende they had ben ſome men of armes of the countre that had been ther in a buſſhement: at laſt they ſpyed well howe they were almaygnes. Than̄e the two ſquyers ſpake toguyder (and ſayd) we muſt fayne vs to be of their partie: than ſir Renault of Boulant ſpake to them / and demaūded what they were in the language of Almaygne / Bridoll anſwered who coude well ſpeke that lā
               gage (and ſayd) ſir we be ꝑtayning to ſir Bartylmewe de Bonnes. Why wher is ſir Bartylmewe ſayd ſir Renolde / ſir ſayd they he is in yā
               der vyllage: and why dothe he tary there ſayde the knyght / ſir ſayde they for vs. Heſende vs abrode to ſe if we coude fynde any forage abrode in the countre / by my fayth ſayd the knyght her is none: for I haue ryden all this mornyng and canne fynde nothyng / wherfore go ryde to hym and bydde hym come away / and let vs ryde togyder toward ſaynt Quyntines / to ſe if we can fynde ther any better market or any good aduē
               ture. Sir ſayd the ſquyer who be you that wolde haue hym in your cōpany: they call me ꝙ the knyght Renolde of Boulande ſay ſo to ſir Bartylmewe. Than the two ſquiers returned to the vyllage: aſſone as ſir Galahault ſawe them / he demaunded what tidynges (haue ye any thing ſone) yes ſir ꝙ they we haue ſene ynough. Sir in yander wood is ſir Renold of Boulant with xxx. wt hym: and he hath ryden all this morning he deſyreth ſore to haue you in his company to ryde togyder towardeſaynt Quyntines / what ꝙ ſir Galahaut what ſay you. Sir Renolde of Boulant is a knight of Almayne / and reteyned with the kyng of Englande: all y• ſir we knowe well ſayde the ſquyers / and howe departed you than fro hym ſayde ſir Galahaut / I ſhall ſhewe you ſayd ſir Bridoll: than he ſhewed hym all ye wordes that had ben bytwene them. And whan ſir Galahaut herde that he ſtudyed a lytell: and than demaunded counſayle of ſir Ronger of Colayne and of ſuche other knightes as were ther what was beſt than to do. They anſwered and ſayde: ſir ye deſyre euer to fynde aduentur / and ſyth they fall in your handes take theym / for alwayes by right of armes a man ought to greue his ennemy. To this counſayle lightly agreed ſir Galahault / who was deſyrous to fynde his enemyes: he lept on his courſer and dyd on his baſenet with a vyſer / bycauſe he wolde natte be knowen / and ſo dyd all his cōpany. Than they yſſued out of the vyllage and toke the feldes / determyned what they wolde do / and ſo rode on ye right hande to warde the wode / wher ſir Reynold taryed for them: and they were a. lx
                  •
               . men of armes / and ſir Renolde had nat paſt a. x
                  ••
               . & whan ſir Renolde ſawe theym he diſplayed his bauer before hym / and came ſoftely ridynge towarde them wenyng to hym that they had been englyſſhmen. Whan̄e he aproched he lyft vp his vyſer and ſaluted ſir Galahaut in the name of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
               
Bartylmewe de Bonnes. Sir Galahaut helde hymſelfe ſtyll ſecrete and anſwered but fayntly / and ſayd lette vs ryde forth: and ſo rode on and his men on the one ſyde / and the almaygnes on the other. Whan ſir Reynolde of Boulant ſawe their maner / and howe ſir Galahaut rode ſomtyme by hym and ſpake no worde: thā he began to ſuſpecte. And he had nat ryden ſo the ſpace of a quart of an houre / but he ſtode ſtyll vnder his baner among his men (& ſayd) ſir I haue dout what knyght ye be / I thynke ye be nat ſir Bartylmewe de Bonnes for I knowe hym well and I ſe well that it is nat you. I woll ye tell me yo
                  •
                name or I ryde any farther in your company. Therwith ſir Galahaut lyft vp his vyſer & rode towardes the knyght to haue taken hym by the raygne of his bridell / and cryed our lady of Rybamont: than ſir Roger of Coloyne ſayde Coloyne to the reſcue. Whan ſir Renold of Boulāt ſawe what caſe he was in / he was nat greatly afrayed: but drewe out his ſwerde: and as 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Galahaut wolde haue taken hym by the bridell / ſir Reynolde put his ſwerde clene throught hym / & drue agayne his ſwerd out of hym and toke his horſe with ye ſpurres / and left ſir Galahaut ſore hurt. And whan ſir Galahaltes men ſawe their maiſter in that caſe they were ſore dyſpleaſed / & ſette on ſir Renaldes men: ther were many caſt to the yerth / but aſſoone as ſir Renolde had gyuen ſir Galahaut that ſtroke / he ſtrake his horſe with the ſpurres and toke the feldes. Than certayne of Galahaultes ſquyers chaſed hym / and whan he ſawe that they folowed him ſo ner that he muſt other tourne agayne or els beſhamed.

Lyke a hardy knight he tourned and abode the tormaſt: and gaue hym ſuche a ſtroke / y• he had no more lyſt to folowe him. And thus as he rode on he ſerued thre of them that folowed hym / and woūded them ſore: if a good are had ben in his handes at euery ſtroke he had ſtayne a man. He dyd ſo moche that he was out of the daunger of the frenchmen and ſaued hymſelfe without any hurt: the which his enemyes reputed for a gret prowes / and ſo dyd all other y• herde therof / but his men were ner ſlayne or taken / but fewe that were ſaued. And ſir Galahault was caryed fro thenſe ſore hurt to Perone: of that hurte he was neuer after perfetly hole / for he was a knyght of ſuche courage that for all his hurt he wolde nat ſpare hymſelfe / wherfore he lyued nat longe after. Nowe lette vs retourne to the kyng of Englande and ſhe we howe he layed his ſiege to the 
                  〈◊〉
                of Reynes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande beſieged the cite of Reynes / and of the caſtell of Chargny taken by thenglyſſhmen. And of the warre that began agayne bytwene the duke of Normā
               dy and the kyng of Nauer. Cap. C C .viii.
            
               THe englyſſhmen dyde ſomoche that they paſſed Atthoyes / where they founde a poore contrey: and ſo entred into Cambreſis where they founde a better market / for there was nothyng put into the fortreſſes bycauſe they thought thēſelfe well aſſured of the kyng of Englande and his cōpany / bycauſe they helde of thempyre: but y• kyng of Englande thought nat ſo. The kyng went & lodged at Beauuoyes in Cambreſis: and ther he abode a foure dayes to refreſſhe them & their horſes and ouer ranne the mooſt part of Cābreſis the byſſhopp̄ Pyer of Cambray and the coū
               ſaylles of the lordes of the countrey & good townes by ſaue conduct: ſend certayne meſſangers so the kyng of Englande to knowe by what tytell he made warre to them. They were anſwered it was bycauſe in tyme paſte they had made alyance and conforted the frenchmen / and mayntened them in their townes and fortereſſes: and in maner made warre as their enemyes. Wherfore the englyſſhmen ſayd they might well by y• reaſon make warre agayne to them. Other anſwere coude they haue non: wherfore they of Cā
               breſys were fayne to bere their damages aſwell as they might. Thus the kyng of England paſſed through Cambreſis and ſo went into Thierache / his men ranne ouer the countrey on both ſydes / and toke forage wher they might gette it On a day ſir Bartylme we de Bonnes ranne before ſaynt Quintyne / and by aduēture he mette with the capitayne therof called ſir Baudewyn Danekyn. Ther was a great fray bytwene thē and many ouerthrowen on bothe partes: finally the englyſſhmen obtayned the vyctorie / and ſir Baudwyn taken priſoner by y• Bartylmew of Bonnes. Than thenglyſſhmen retourned to the kyng / who was lodged at the abbey of Fenney / where they had vitaylles ynought for them and for their horſes. And than rode forthe without any lette tyll they came into the marches of Reynes: the kynge tooke his lodgynge at ſaynt Wall beyonde Reynes / and the prynce of Wales at ſaynt Thierry. Than the duke of Lancaſtre and other erles / barownes / and knyghtes / were lodged in other vyllages aboute Reynes: they had nat all their caſe / for they were there in the hert of wynter: about ſaynt Andrewes tyde with great wyndes and rayne / and their horſes yuell lodged and entreated / for all the countrey a two or thre yere before the yerth had nat benla boured. Wherfore there was no forage to gette abrode / vnder .x. or .xii. leages of / wherby there were many frayes / ſomtyme thēgliſſhmen wan and ſomtyme loſt. In the good cytie of Reynes at that tyme was capitayne ſir John̄ of Craon archbyſſhoppe of the ſame place / and the erle of Porcyen / and ſir He we of Porcyen his brother / the lorde de la Bonne / the lorde of Canency / the lorde of Annore / the lorde of Lore / and dyuerſe other lordes / knyghtes / and ſquyers of the marches of Reyns. They defended the cytie ſo well that it tooke no damage the ſiege duryng: they cytie was ſtronge and well kept. The kynge of England alſo wolde nat ſuffre any aſſaut to be made: bycauſe he wolde nat traueyle nor hurte his people. The kynge abode there at this ſiege fro the feeſt of ſaynt Andre we to the beginnyng of lent: they of the hoſt rode often tymes abrode to fynde ſome aduēture / ſome into the coūtie of Rethell / to Warke / to Mayſey / to Douchery / & Moyſon: and wolde lodge out of the hoſt a thre

or foure dayes and robhe and pylle the couſrey without any reſiſtence / & than agayne repaire to the ooſt. In the ſame ſeaſon 
                  •
               yr 
                  •
               uſtace 
                  〈◊〉
                breticourt toke the good towne of Acherey / on the ryuer of Eſne / and therin founde great plē
               tye of victailles / and ſpecially of wyne he foūde ther a. in. M. veſſels / wherof he ſend great part to the kynge and to the prince / who gaue hym great thauke therfore. And duryng this ſiege as the knyghtes ſought for aduentures / it fortuned that ſyr John̄ Chanoos ſyr James Audeley / and the lorde of Mucident / ſir Richarde of Pountchardon / and their companyes / rode ſo nere to Chalons in Champaigne / that they came to Chargny en Dormoy
                  ••
                / a ryght faire caſtell / they well auewed it / they made there aſſaute / for they couetted greatly to haue it. In the caſtell were two good knightes one named ſyr John̄ Chapel / who bare in his armes gold an ancre Sable. There was a ſore aſſaute. At this aſſaute the lord of Mucident aduentured hym ſelfe ſo forewarde / that he was ſtryken on the heed with a ſtone in ſuche wyſe / that there he dyed amonge his men / of whoſe dethe the other knightes were ſo ſore viſpleaſed / that they ſware nat to departe thenſe / tyll they had that Caſtell at theyr pleaſure / Wherby the aſſawte encreaſſed. There were many ſeaſes of armes done / for the gaſcoyns were ſore diſpleaſed for the dethe of theyr Maiſter and Capitayne the lorde of Mucident. They entred into the dykes Without feare and came to the walles / and moūted vp with theyr targes ouer theyr hedes and in the mean tyme the archars ſhotte ſo holy to guyther / that none appered without he was in great parell. The Caſtell was ſo ſore aſſayled / that at laſte it was taken and 
                  〈◊〉
                With loſſe and hurte of many 
                  〈◊〉
               . Than the two Capytaynes Were taken / and certayne other ſquyers / and all the reſide 
                  〈◊〉
                ſlayne with oute mercy / and raſed downe & brent as muche as they myght of the caſtell / bycauſe they wolde nat kepe it. And than retourned to theyr 
                  〈◊〉
                / and ſhewed the kynge what they had be done. Duryng the ſiege before Reinnes / there began agayne a great grudge and euyll wyll betwene the kynge of Nauer / and the duke of Normandye: the reaſon or cauſe why I can nat tell / but ſo it was that the kynge of Nauer departed ſodaynly from Parys / and went to Maunte on the Ryuer of Seyne / and than de
                  •
               ied the duke of Normandy and his bretherne. And they had great meruayle by what tytle he than renewed agayne his Warre. And ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                or ſhadowe of that warre / a ſquyer of Bruceis called 
                  〈◊〉
                Oſtraſte toke the ſtronge callell of Robeboyls on the ryuer of Seyne / a leage from Maunte / and made there a garyſō / the whiche after dy
                  •
                moche hurte to them of Parys and therabout. Alſo in the ſame ſeaſon the lorde of Gommegines / who was gone into Englāde to the quene / Whan the kyng ſent the ſtraūgers to Calayes / repaſſed the ſee agayn / and came into Heynalt and in hys companye certayne knyghtes and ſquyers of Gaſcoyn and of England / theyr ententes were to go to the Kynge of Englande ſo the ſiege before Reines. Than the yonge lorde of Gommegines deſyrynge to haue auauncement aſſembled certayne men of Warre to guether a .iii. C. oone and other. And ſo departed from Maubuge and ſo came to Ueſnes in haynaulte / and paſſed forthe to Atrelon.
            The ſame tyme the lorde of Ray laye in grayſon at Ray in Thieraſe with a good nombre of knyghtes and ſquiers with hym / and he knewe by ſuche ſpyeng as he had made / that the lorde of Gommegines had aſſembled certayne me
                  •
                of warre to guether to go to y• ſiege at Reinnes to the ayde of the kynge of Englande / And he knewe well that he muſt paſſe through Thierraſſe. And as ſoone as he knewe the certaynte of his ſettynge forewarde he ſente worde therof to certayne companyons thereaboute of the Frenche partye / and ſpecyally to the lorde Robert Chanoyne of Roberſart / who as than gouerned the yong erle of Coucis landes and lay at the caſtell of Merle. Whan the Chanoyne knewe therof he was nat colde to ſette forward but incontinent went to the lorde of Roy With a ſourty ſpeares. So ther the lorde of Roy was made chie
                  •
                Capytayne of that iourney / as hit was good reaſon / for he Was a great lorde of Pycardye / and a Well renowmed man of armes / and Well knowen in many places. So they went forthe to the nombre of thre hundred men of armes / and laye in a buſſhement where as they knewe the lorde of Gommegines ſhuld paſſe / who entred into Thieraſſe / and toke the way to Reinnes nat doubtyng of any encountryng. And ſo in a mornynge he came to a vyllage called Haberguy / there he thought to reſt a littell to refreſſ he hym and his company / and ſo alyghted and entred into y• village and were about to ſtable theyr horſes. And in the meane ſeaſon the lorde of Gommegynes / Who Was yong and luſty / and ryght deſirous of dedes of armes / ſayde howe he wolde tyde out of the village to ſe yf he coulde fyne any better forage▪
               
Than he toke with hym a certayne / and Criſto 
                  〈◊〉
                More a 
                  •
               quyer bare his penon / and ſo departed from 
                  •
               abergey. The frenchemen that ſay in the buſſhement were but a lyttell out of this village / thynkyng to haue entred into the towne in the nyght / to haue ſette on theyr ennemyes / for they knew well where they were / but y• lorde of G
                  •
               meg
                  •
               es fel in their ha
                  ••
               s. Whan the frenchemen ſawe hym comynge with ſo pre
               
                  •
               y a company / they had meruayle at the fyrſte what he was / and they ſent out afore them two currers / and they brought worde agayne / they were theyr 
                  •
               nnemyes. Whan they harde that they brake out of theyr buſſhement / and cryed Roy in the name of the lorde of Roy. The lord of Roy came on before / with his bane
                  •
                before hym diſpla
                  •
               ed / and with hym the lorde Flamōt of Roy his coſyn / and ſyr Loys of Roberſart / and the 
                  •
               hanoyn of Roberſart his brother / ſyr 
               
                  •••
               ſtram of Bo
                  •
               ne roy / and other. Whan the lorde of Gömegines ſawe what caſe he was in like an hardy knyght abode his ennemies and wolde nat flee. At the fyrſt brount the lorde of Gömegines was ouerthrowen / and coude nat ce
                  •
               ouer vp agayne / and ſo there finally he was taken / and two ſquyers of Gaſcoyne with hym who had fought right val
                  •
               auntly. Alſo Criſtoferde Mur was taken / who bare his penon.
            So all that were there were ſlayne or taken / excepte theyr varlettes / that ſcaped by ronnynge awaye / they were well horſed / & alſo they were nat chaſed.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the lorde of Roy dyſcomfetted the lord of Gōmegines: and how the caſtell of Commercy was taken by the engliſſhemen. Cap. CC .ix.
            
               WWhan the knyghtes and ſquyers that had taken the lorde of Gōmegines / and ſuche as had iſſued out of the village with hym. Than they toke theyr horses with y• ſpo
               
                  ••
               s / and 
                  •
               anne into the village c
                  •
               yenge Roy in the name of the lorde of Roy / wherof they with 
                  〈◊〉
                the towne wer ſore abaſſhed / whan they ſaw theyr ennemyes ſo nere them. The moſt parte 
                  〈◊〉
                them were vnarmed and ſpred abrode in the village / ſo that they 
                  •
               oude nat drawe together But there the frenchemen toke theym in theyr 
                  〈◊〉
               . The cha
                  •
               o
                  •
               ne Roberſart had ma
               
                  〈…〉
                priſonners bycause he was knowen by his baner. Some there were that fledde into a littell ſtronge howſe enuyroned with water ſtandynge at the townes ende. And ſome of theym ſayd / howe it was beſt for them to kepe it / affirmynge howe the houſe was ſtrenge ynough to kepe tyl they might ſend worde what caſe they wer in to the kynge of Englande / beyng at the ſiege of Reinnes / nat doubtynge / but that he woll than incontinent ſende them ſome ayde.
            Than ſome other ſayd / that ſo doynge was no ſuerte for theym / ſeynge howe theyr ennemyes were rounde about them. Thus they were in ſtryfe among them ſelfe what they myght do.
            In the mean ſpace theder came the lorde of roy and ſayd to them / ſ
                  •
               rs yelde vp your ſelfe / for and we aſſaile you / ye are all but deed / for incō
               
               
                  •
               ynent we ſhall take you per force. So that by thoſe workes and other / the mooſt hardyeſt of them were abaſſhed: and ſo they yelded theymſelfe pryſoners / theyr lyues ſaued allouly / they were all ſent as priſoners to the caſtell of Coucy and to other frenche garyſons. This aduenture fell in the yere of our lorde. M. CCC: lix. Wherof the kyng of Englande (whan he knew it) was ſore diſpleaſed / but he coude nat amend it as at that tyme. Nowe let vs returne to the ſiege of Re
                  •
               nnes / and ſpeke of an aduenture y• fell to ſyr Bertilmewe of Brennes / who had beſieged the towne and caſtell of Comercy & within was Capitayne a knyght of Champaygne called ſyr Henry Denoyr.
            THe ſiege durynge before Reyns the lordes of the oſt were lodged abrode in the coūtrey to lie the more at theyr eaſe / and to kepe the wayes that no prouyſion ſhulde entre into the citie. And amonge other ſyr Bertilmewe de Bonnes with his Company of ſpeares and archers were lodged nere to Comercy a ſtrong caſtell / parteynynge to the ar
                  •
               hebyſſhoppe of Reynes. The whiche byſſhop had made there a ſtronge garyſon / ſo that this caſtell doubted none aſſaute / for ther
                  •
                was a ſquare tou
                  •
               e thick walled / and fenſably fourniſſhed for the warre Syr Bartilmewe de Bonnes layde ſiege therto / and ſawe well howe he coulde nat wynne it by aſſaute / he ſet a warke a certayne numbre of miners & gaue them good wages / they begā to werk night & day / & dyd ſo moche that they myned farre vnder the great towre / and as they went they ſette vp proppes / ſo that they within knewe nothyng therof. And whan the myners had made an ende / ſo that the towre was 
                  〈◊〉
                to fall whā they 
                  •
               yſt ▪ they came to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bar
                  〈…〉
               
               
and ſayd. Syr we haue ſo 
                  〈◊◊◊〉
                that the great towte ſhall fall / whan it pleaſeth you. Well quo
                  •
                the knyght ye haue well done / 
                  •
               o no more tyll I commaun
                  •
               e you. Than he toke Johsi de Guyltell with hym / and went to caſtell / and madeſigne that he wold ſpeke with ſome of them within. Than syr Henry Denoyr capitayne there cameto the bat
                  ••
               mentes of the y• walles / & demaunded what he wolde haue. I woll (ſayd ſyr Bartilmewe) that ye ye
                  ••
                york and all yours / orels ye are all deed without remedy. Howe ſo quod ſyr Henry / and began to ſmyle / we are prouyded of all thynges / and ye wolde haue vs to yelde ſymply / the whiche We woll nat do. Well quod for Bartilmewe / and ye knewe what caſe ye ſtande in / ye wolde 
                  ••
               continent yelde vp withoute any 
                  〈◊〉
                wordes. Why quod ſyr Henry / what caſe be we in? 
                  〈◊〉
                out quod the englyſſhe knyght / and I ſhall ſhewe you / and ye ſhall haue aſſurance to entre agayn if ye lyſte. Than ſyr Henry and .iiii. with hy
                  ••
                iſſued out and came to ſyr Bar
                  〈…〉
                / and to Johsi 
                  •
               e Guyltelles / and they brought hym to the myne / and there shewed hym how the great toure ſtode but on ſtages of tymbre. Whan the knyght ſawe the parell that he was in and hys company / he ſayd. Syr it is 
                  〈◊〉
                / and this that ye haue done to me is of your great 
                  〈◊〉
                We yelde vs to your pleaſure. There ſyr Bartilme we toke them as his priſoners / and made euery mā to come out of the castell / and al theyr goodes / and than he ſet 
                  •
               yer into the myne and brent the ſtages / and than the toure claue a ſouder and fell to the erthe. Lo
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                ſyr 
                  〈…〉
               
               mewe to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Henry / beholde nowe yf I 
                  〈◊〉
                truth or nat. Syr it is trueſayd 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hery / we are your priſoners at your pleaſure / and thanke you of your courteſye / for 
                  〈◊〉
                other than vs in this caſe we ſhulde nat haue been ſo delte with all. Thus they of the garison of 
                  〈◊◊〉
                taken priſoners / and the ca
                  •
               tell 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            THe kynge of Englande la
                  •
               e at the ſiege of Reinnes more than .vii. weekes / but he made none aſſaute. for he knew well he ſhuld but haue loſt his payne. And whan he ha
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                there ſo longe that he was wer
                  •
                / and that hys men coulde fynde no more forage abrode / and loſt their horſes / and beganne to la
                  •
               ke 
                  〈◊〉
                They on a bay departed in good 
                  〈◊〉
                / and t
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               e the waye to Chalo
                  •
               s in Champaygne / and 
                  〈◊〉
                by Chalons 
                  〈◊〉
                ſo went to 
                  〈◊◊◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               nged at Mery on the 
                  〈◊〉
                of 
                  〈◊◊〉
                all his 
                  〈…〉
                the whiche is called .viii. leages. And while the kynge laye at Mery his Counſtable / with the 
                  •
               awarde went to ſaynt Florentyne / Where ſy
                  •
                Edwarde of Rency was capitayne. Ther was a great aſſaute / but no good they dyd. Than the kynge came thither / and lodged ther about the 
                  •
               yuer of Mouson. And than they departed and came to Tonnerre / and toke the towne by aſſaute / but nat y• caſtell. In the whiche towne the englyſſhemen founde beyonde. in. M. 
                  〈◊〉
                of myne / the whiche was neceſſary for the 
                  〈◊〉
               . And within the Caſtell was the lorde Fyennes Conſtable of Fraunce / with a great nombre of men of warre.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande as he went waſted and diſtroyed the countrey: and howe he came to Aguillo
                  •
               : and there taried. And of the great prouysyon that came after his 
                  •
               oſt. The CC. 
                  〈◊〉
               . Chapitre.
            
               THe kynge of Englande and his ooſt 
                  •
               eſted at 
                  〈◊〉
                the ſpace of .v. dayes 
                  〈◊〉
                of yt good wynes they foūde there / and oftē tymes aſſayled ye caſtell / but therin were goode men of armes / as ſyr Baudwyn 
                  ••
               neken maiſte
                  •
                of the croſbowes whan the kynge had well refreſſhed his ooſt in Tonuer / he departed / & paſſed the ryuer of Armencon / and lefte the waye to Auſſetre on the ryght hande / and toke the waye to Noyers / to the entent to entre into Borgoyn / and to be the
                  •
                all the lente tyme. So they paſſed by Noyers without any aſſaute / for he had the lorde therof priſone
                  •
                euer ſyth the bata
                  •
               le of Poicters. And ſo the kynge went to a towne called Mo
                  •
               t royall / and ſo from thenſe to Aguillon on the riuer of Selettes / for a ſquier of his called / John A
               
                  •
               enſon / who bare in his armes azute / aſko
                  •
               hy
                  •
                ſyluer: had wonne the towne of Flauigny nat farre theuſe / and had founde therin great prouyſion of all maner of victaylles to ſerue y• oo
                  ••
                the ſpace of a moneth the whiche came Welle to paſſe / for the kynge laye at Aguillon fro All he Wednysday tyll after mydlēt: and alwayes his ma
                  ••
               hals and currou
                  •
               s ouer
                  •
               anne the coūtrey waſtynge and e
                  •
               ilynge it / and often tymes refreſſhed the ooſt with newe prouiſion.
            The kynge of Englande and the great men of

his 
                  〈◊〉
                had euer with theym in their cariages 
                  •
               emes / pa
                  ••
               lions / mylles / ouyns / and forges / to syeth and to bake and to forge ſhoos for horſes and for other thynges neceſſary / they had with them a. 
                  〈◊〉
               . 
                  〈◊〉
               . cartes / euery carte at leſt with. 
                  〈◊〉
               . good horſes brought out of Englande. Alſo they brought in theſe Cartes certayne botes made of lether ſubtilly wrought and ſufficiently 
                  •
               uery one of them to receyue .iii. men to row in water or riuers: and to fyſſhe in them at their pleaſure in the whiche dyd the great lorde moche pleaſure in the lent ſeaſon. Alſo the kynge had 
                  〈…〉
               
               ▪ 
               
                  •
               a
                  •
               koners a horſbacke with haukes / and 
                  〈…〉
               ple of houndes / and as many greyhoū
               
               
                  〈…〉
               . So that 
                  •
               ere euery daye eyther he hunted or hauked at the ryuer / as it pleaſed hym. And 
                  〈…〉
               rs other of the great lordes had hundes & 
                  〈◊〉
                as well as the kyng: and euer as the oſt 
                  〈◊〉
                / they went in thre datailes / and euery 
                  •••
               ayle had his vawarde / and euery ooſt lodged by themſelfe / eche a leage from other. And th
                  •
                kynge kept the thirde bataile / whiche Was moſt greatteſt. That maner they kepte fro the tyme they remoued from Calais tyll they came before the good towne of Charters.
            THe kynge of Englande who laye at Aguillon / had great 
                  •
               uiſion for his ooſt / by the meanes of John̄ Alenſon who he found at F
                  •
               auig
                  •
               y. Whyle the kynge lay at Aguillon / th
                  •
                yonge duke of Burgoyne (by the counſayle and requeſt of al the countrey) ſent to the kyng of Englande certayne meſſangers / lordes / and knyghtes / to treate for a reſpite: nat to burne 
                  •
               he countrey / nor ouer ronne it. Theſe were the lordes that went to treate for this mater / Fyrſt the lorde 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                A
                  •
               ceaulme of Sallins great chaū
               
               
                  〈…〉
                of Burgoyn / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Jaques of Uiēne / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ 
               
                  •
               e 
                  •
               ye 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hugh of Uiēne / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                William of Tho
               
                  •••
               ſe / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Mo
                  •
               tmartin. Theſe lordes foūde the kyng of Englande ſo treatable / y• ther was a compoſicion made betwene ye kyng of Englande / and the countrey of Bourgoyn / the kynge made them aſſuraunce for hym and all his / nat to ouer ren that countrey / the ſpace o
                  •
               
               ▪ iii. yeres / and he 
                  •
               o haue redy the ſomme of ii. M. frankes. Whan this treaty was agreed & ſealed the kynge diſlodged and al his ooſt / and t
                  •
               ke the right waye to Paris / and lodged on ye 
               
                  •••
               er of Dyonne at Leon / beſyde Uoſelay / and his peple laye alonge the ryuer ſyde welnere to 
                  〈…〉
                at thentre of the coūtie of Neuers / & the engliſſhemen entred into Gaſtenoys. The kyng ſped hym ſo by his iourneis y• he came be 
                  〈◊〉
                Paris & lay .ii. leagꝭ thēs at Burg
                  •
               le royne.
            THus the kynge rode about the countrey diſtroyeng all before hym: and alſo the garyſons made warre for hym in Beauuoiſy
                  •
                in Pycardy / in France / in Brye / in Chāpaigne & deſtroyed nere all the countrey. Alſo the kyng of Nauer / who was in the marches of Normā
               dy made alſo ſore warre. Thus ye noble realme of France was ſore greued on all ſides. And ſpecially ſyr Euſtace Dambreticourt / who laye at Chemy on y• riuer of Eſne who had a great gariſon of ſoudiers / waſted raunſommed & pilled the countrey / and ouer ranne the countie of Rethel to Douchery / to Meſieres / to Chene Pou
                  •
               lleux to S
                  •
               tenay in the countie of Bay / they rode and lay in the countrey where they lyſt .ii. or .iii. nyghtꝭ together without any let or trouble / & whan they lyſt retourned agayne to their fortreſſe of Chemy. True it was that the lordes and knyghtes of the countrey thereabout were ſore diſpleaſed with that fortreſſe / and aſſigned many dayes amonge them ſelfe to mete / and to go and lay ſiege to Chemy: howe be it they neuer dyd nothyng. Theſe companyons whoymagined nyght and day howe they might geat and ſteale townes & fortreſſes ▪ on a nyght they 
                  •
               ame to a ſtrong towne & a good caſtell in Laonnoyſe nere to Montague / this fortreſſe was called Pierpont ſtandyng in a mareſſe / ye ſame ſeaſon there were within the towne great nōbre of men of the coūtrey / that had brought thither theyr goodes on truſt of the ſtrēgth of the place Whan they of Chemy came thither / the watche within was a 
                  〈◊〉
                / they ſpared nat the dangeroꝰ mareſſes / but went through them and came to the walles / and ſo entred into the towne and wāne it without defence / and 
                  •
               obded it at their pleaſure. They found ther more riches than euer they founde before in any towne. And wh
                  •
                it was day they brent y• towne / and returned to Che
                  ••
               y / well furnyſſhed with great pyllage.
         
         
            ¶ How the kyng of England put the realme of Frāce into great tribulaciō: and the ꝓphicies of the frere of Auygnon: and of thengliſſhe buſſhement layd for them of Paris. Cap. C C .xi.
            
               IN this ſeaſon a frere minor full of great clergie was in the cite of Auignō / called frere John̄ of Roche tayllade / the whiche frere pope Innocent the .vi. held in priſon in the caſtell of Baignoux for ſhewyng of many meruailes

after to come / principally he ſhewen many thynges to fall on the prelates of the churche for the great ſuper
                  ••
               uitie and pryde / that Was as than vſed amonge theym. And alſo he ſpake many thynges to fall of the realme of Fraunce and of the great lordes of Chri
                  〈…〉
               ome for the oppreſſions that they dyd to the pore comō people. This frere ſayd he wolde proue all his ſayynges by the auctorite of the Ap
                  •••
               lippis / and by other bokes of holy ſayntes / and prophettes y• whiche wer opened to hym by the grace of y• holy gooſte he ſhewed many thynges harde to beleue: and many thynges fell after as he ſay
                  •
               . He ſayd them nat as a prophette / but he ſhewed them by auctorite of aunciēt ſcriptures / and by the grace of the holy gooſt / who gaue hym v
                  •
               
               derſtādynge to declare the auncient proph
                  •
               cie
                  •
                and to ſhewe to all criſten people the yeres and tyme Whan ſuche thynges ſhulde 
                  •
               all / he made dyuerſe bookes founded on great 
                  •
               ciences and clergie / wherof one was made the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .xlvi. Wherin were written ſuche meruailes / that it were hard 
                  •
               o beleue them howe be it many thynges accordyng therto 
                  •
               ell after. And whan he was demaūded of the warres of France / he ſayd that all that had ben ſeen was nat lyke that ſhulde be ſeen after. For he ſayde that the warres in Fraunce ſhulde nat be ended tyll the realme were vtterly waſted and exyled in euery parte. The whiche ſayeng was well ſeen after / for the noble realme of Fraunce was ſore waſted and exyled: and ſpecially in y• terme that the ſayd frere ha
                  •
                ſette: The whiche was in the yeres of our lorde. M. CCC. 
                  〈◊〉
                .lvii. lviii. and .lix. He ſayde in thoſe yeres the pryncis and gentylmen of the realme 
                  〈◊◊〉
                for feare ſhewe them ſelfe agaynſt the people 
                  〈◊〉
                lowe eſtate / aſſembled of all cou
                  〈…〉
                without heed or Capitayne / and they ſhulde 
                  〈◊〉
                as they lyſte in the realme of Fraunce / the whiche 
                  〈◊〉
                after as ye haue herde / howe the companyons aſſembled theym to guether / and 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               son of theyr robbery and pyllage wa
                  ••
               d riche and became great capitaynes.
            NOWe lette vs retourne to the kynge of Englande / Who laye at Bourge the Royne a two lyttell leages 
                  •
               ro Parys / and all his ooſte towardes Mou
                  〈…〉
               hery / the kynge ſente his herauldes to Paris to the duke of Normandy / who laye there with great companye of men of warre / to demaunde batayle / but the duke wolde nat agree therto. The meſſangers returned without any thynge 
                  〈◊〉
               . And whan the kynge ſawe / that he ſhulde hau
                  •
                no batayle / he was ſore 
                  •
               iſpleaſe
                  •
               . Than 
                  〈◊〉
                Gaulter of Manny deſyred the kynge that he myght make a ſ
                  •
               rymyſhe at the Bayles of Parys: the kynge agreed therto / and named ſuche as ſhulde go with hym / and the kyng made certayne newe knyghtes: as the lorde Fitz Wa
                  •
               er / the lorde of Siluacier / ſyr Balaſtre / y• William Torceaux / ſyr Thomas Spencer / ſyr Johan Neuell / ſyr Richarde Doſtenay / and other. Alſo the kynge wolde haue made knyght Colla
                  ••
                Dambreticourte ſonne to ſyr Nicholas / Who was ſquier for the kynges body: but the ſqu
                  •
               e
                  •
                excuſed hym ſelfe / he ſayde he coulde nat fynde his Baſſenette. The lorde of Manny dyd his enterpriſe ▪ and brought theſe new knyghtes to ſkrymyſhe at the Barriers of Parys. There was a ſore ſkrymyſhe: for within the cite there were mane good knyghtes and ſquiers / Who wolde gladly haue iſſued out / if ye duke of Normandy wold agreed therto / howe be it they defended theyr gate and barryers in ſuche Wyſe
                  •
                that they toke litell 
                  •
               ammage. This ſkrymy
                  ••
                endured from the mornynge tyll noone / diuers were hurte on both partyes. Than the lorde of Manny withdrewe to his lodgynge / and there taryed all that daye and the nexte nyght folowynge. And the next daye after the kyng 
                  〈…〉
               
               ged and toke the waye towarde Moutlehe
                  •
               y▪ Certayne knyghtes of Englande and of Ga
                  •
               
               coyne at theyr diſlodgyng determined to ly
                  •
                in a buſſhment: for they thought ther were ſo many gentylmē in Parys / that ſome of them wold aduenture to iſſue oute. And ſo a two hundred of choſen men of armes gaſcoyns and engliſſhe layed them ſelfe in a buſſhemēt in a voyd houſe a .iii. leages fro Parys. There was the captall of Buz ▪ ſer Edmonde of Pomiers / and y• lorde of Courton gaſcoyns. And ther were engliſſhe the lorde Neuell / the lorde Mombray / and ſyr Richarde of Pounchardon: theſe .vi. knyghtes were chie
                  •
                capitaynes of this imbu
                  •
               ſhement. Whan the frenchemen in Parys ſawe the dyſlodgynge of the englyſſhe ooſt / certayne yonge knyghtes drewe to guether and ſayd: It Were good that we iſſued out of this cite ſecretly and folowe the engliſſhe ooſt / perauenture we may happe ſomwhat to wynne. Anone there agreed to y• purpoſe / ſyr Ra
                  ••
                of Coucy / ſir Rau
                  •
                of Remenall / the lorde of Montſault / the lorde of Helay / the chatelayne of Beauuoys the Begue of Uillaines / the lorde of Beauſiers / the lorde of Ulbari
                  •
                
               ▪ 
               ſir Gauwen of Ualouell / ſir Fla
               
                  •
               ant of Roy / ſyr 
                  •
               elles of Cauilly / ſyr Peter

of 
                  •
               armoiſes / & Peter of Sauoiſe / and about 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               peares in theyr cōpany. They iſſued out well horſed / and well wylled to do ſome dede of armes / they rode the way to Bourge le Royne and paſſed by and rode ſo forwarde / that they paſſed by y• engliſſe buſſhemēt. And whan they were paſſed / the englyſſhe men and gaſcoynes brake out and ſette on them / cryeng theyr cryes The trenchemen returned / and had great meruaile what it was and incontinent they knewe howe it was theyr ennemies. Than they ſtode ſtyll / and ſet them ſelfe in ordre of batayle / and couched their ſpeares agaynſt the engliſſhmen and gaſcoyns / at the firſt metynge there was a ſore iuſtꝭ / and diuerſe caſt to the erthe on bothe parties / for they wer all well horſed. Thā they drew out theyr ſwerdes / and entred eche amōg other / gyuyng great ſtrokes. There was done many a propre feat of armes. This fight endured a great ſpace / ſo that none coulde tell Who ſhulde haue the victory. Ther y• captall of Buz proued hym ſelfe a good knyght / and dyd with his handes noble dedes of armes. Finally the engliſſhemen and gaſcoyns bare them ſelfe ſo well that the victorie abode on theyr part they were as many and half as many agayne as the frenche men were. On the frenche ꝑtie the lord of Cāpremy was a good knyght / for he fought valiauntly vnder his baner / and he that bare it was ſlayne / and the lorde taken priſoner. The other frēche knyghtes and ſquiers (ſeing theyr euyll aduenture) retourned towarde Parys / and fought euer as they fled / for they were ſore pourſewed. The chace endured tyll they paſte Bourg le Royne / & there were taken a .ix. knyghtes and ſquiers. And if the englyſſhemē and gaſcoyns (who purſewed them / had nat doubted the iſſuynge out of them of Paris / all the other had ben takē or ſlayne: but whan they had done theyr feat they retourned to Moūtlehery where the kyng of England was and brought thither with them theyr priſoners / and raunſomed them courteſly the ſame nyght / and ſuffred them to go whither they lyſte / and truſted them on theyr faithes.
            THe entencion of the kynge of Englande was to entre into the good countrey of B
                  •
               au
                  •
               ſe and ſo to drawe alonge the Ryuere of Loyre / and ſo all yt ſomer to abyde in Britayne tyll after Auguſt. And than at the vyntage to retourne agayne into France / and to lay ſiege to Parys for he wolde nat retourne agayne into Englande bicauſe he ſayd or he departed out of Englande that he wolde nat retourne agayne / tyll he had Fraunce at his pleaſure / and he lefte his men in gariſons to make warre in France. in Champayn / in poicton / in Ponthieu / in Uimeu / in Uulgeſyn and in Normandy / and in al the realme of Fraunce / and in the good townes & cites ſuche as toke his parte with theyr owne good wylles. All this ſeaſon the duke of Normandye was at Parys and his two bretherne / and the duke of orle aunſe theyr vncle / and their counſailes. They ymagined well the courage of the kyng of Englande / and howe that he and his mēbrought the realme of Frāce into great pouerte: and ſawe well howe the realme coulde nat longe endure in that caſe / for the rentes of y• lordes and of the churches were nygh loſt in euery parte. As than there was a ſage and a diſcrete perſone Chauncellour of Fraunce / called ſyr William of Montague byſſhop of Tyrwin by whoſe coūſaile moche of Frāce was ruled / & good cauſe why: For
                  •
               euer his counſayle was good and true / and with hym there were .ii. other clerkes of great prudence / the Abbotte of Clugny / and the maiſter of the friers prechers / called ſyr Symon of Langres a maiſter in diuinite. Theſe two clerkes at the deſyre of the duke of Normandy / and of the hole counſaile of Fraunce departed from Paris with certayn articles of peace / and ſyr Hewe of Geneue lorde of Autun in their company. And they went to the kynge of Englande / Who rode in Beauſſe towarde Galardon. Theſe two clerkes and .ii. knyghtes ſpake with y• kyng / and began to fall in treatye for a peace to be had of hym and hys alies. To the whiche treatye the prince of Wales / the duke of Lācaſtre / and the erle of Marche were called. This treatie was nat as than concluded / for it was longe a dryuynge / and allwayes the kyng went forward. Theſe embaſſadours wold nat ſo leaue the kyng: but ſtylſued and folowed on theyr pourpoſe: For they ſawe howe the frenche kynge was in ſo poure eſtate / that the realme was lykely to be in a great ieopardye if the warre contynued a ſomer longer And on the other ſyde the kynge of Englande requyred ſo great thynges and ſo preiudiciall to the realme of Fraunce / that the lordes wolde nat agree therto for theyr honours / So that al theyr treatie (the whiche endured a .xvii. dayes ſtyll folowynge the kynge) they ſent euer theyr proces dayely to the duke of Normandy to the citie of Parys / euer deſyrynge to haue agayne anſwere what they ſhulde do farther / the whyche ꝓceſſe were ſecretly and ſufficiently examyned in the regentes chambre at Parys / and anſwere

was ſent agayne by wryttynge to them / what they ſhulde do / and what they ſhulde offre. And ſo theſe ambaſſadours were often tymes with the kynge / as he went forewarde towarde the cite of Charters / as in other placess. and great offers they made to come to a concluſion of the warre / and to haue a peace / To the whiche offers the kynge of England was hard harted to agree vnto: for his entenſion was to be kynge of Fraunce / and to dye in that eſtate. For if the duke of Lancaſtre his coſyn had nat counſayled hym to haue peace / he wolde nat agreed thervnto: but he ſayd to the kynge: Syr this Warre that ye make in the realme of Frāce is ryght maruaylous / and ryght fauourable for you / your men wynne great ryches / and ye leſe your tyme / all thyngess conſyderedde / or ye come to your entente / ye maye happe to make Warre all the dayes of your lyfe. Syr I wold counſayle you (ſyth ye may leaue the Warre to your honoure and profytte) accepte the offers that ben made vnto you: for ſyr you myght leſe more in a daye / than we haue wonne in twenty yere. Suche fayre and ſubtyle wordes that the duke of Lancaſtre ſayde in good entencion and for welthe of the kynge and all his ſubiectes cō
               uerted the kynge by the grace of the holy gooſt / Who was chief warker in that caſe: For on a daye as the kynge Was before Charterss there fell a caſe that greatly hu
                  ••
               led the kyngess courage / for whyle theſe ambaſſadours were treatynge for this peace / and had none agreable anſwere / there fell ſodaynly ſuche a tempeſt of thō
               der / lyghtnyng / rayne / and hayle / in the kyngess ooſt / that i
                  •
                ſemed / that the worlde ſhulde haue ended / there fell from heuyn ſuche great ſtoness that it ſlewe men and horſes: ſo that the mooſte hardyeſt were abaſſhed. Than the kyng of Englande behelde the churche of our lady of Charters / and auowed deuoutly to our lady to agre to the peace / and as it was ſayd / he was as than confeſſed / and lodged in avillage nere to Charters called Bretigny: and there were made certayne compoſicions of peace vpon certayne articles after ordeyned
                  •
                and the more ſyrmely to be concluded by theſe ambaſſadours / and by the kynge of Englande and his counſayle / ther was ordeyned by good delyberacion and aduyce a letter called the charter of the peace / Wherof the effecte foweth.
         
         
            ¶The fourme and tenor of the letter on the peas made before Charters bitwene the kynges of Englande and Fraunce. Cap. CC .xii.
            
               EDward by the grace of god kynge of Englande / lord of Irelande / and of Aquitaine To all / to Whom theſe preſent letters ſhall come / We ſende gretyng / howe by the diſcenciōs / debates / ſtriffess moued or hereafter to be moued bytwene vs & our ryght dere brother the Frenche kynge certayne commyſſyoners and procurers of ours / and of our dere ſonne prince of Wales / hauyng ſufficient power and auctorite for vs / & for hym and for our hole realme on the one parte: And certayne other commyſſyoners and procurers of our dere brother the frenche kyng / and of our right dere nephewe Charles duke of Normandy / and dolphyn of Uienne / eldeſt ſonne to our ſayd brother of Fraunce / hauynge power and auctorite for his father for his part / and alſo for hym ſelfe / that they be aſſembled at Bretigny / nere to Charters: at whiche place it is agreed & accorded by the ſayd commyſſyoners and procurers of eyther party / vpon all diſcencions / debates / warres / and diſcordes: The whiche treates by our procurers and our ſonnes for vs and for hym / and alſo the procurers of our ſayd brother / and of our ſayd nephew / for his father and for hym ſwereth by the holy euangelyſtꝭ to hold kepe / and accomplyſſhe this treatie / by the whithe accorde amonge other thynges our brother of Fraunce and his ſayd ſonne are bounde and promyſeth to delyuer / & to leaue to vs / our heires and ſucceſſours for euer: the counties / cites townes / caſtels / fortreſſes / landes / Iles / rentes reuennues / and other thynges as foloweth beſyde that we haue and holde all redy in Guyen and in Saſcoyne / to poſſede perpetually by vs and by our heires and ſucceſſours all that is in demayne / and all that is in fee / by the tyme and maner hereafter declared / that is to ſay / the caſtell and countie of Poicters / and al the landes and countrey of Poictow / with the fee of Thowars / and the landes of Bellville / the cite and caſtell of xayntis / and all the landes and counte of xaynton on both ſydes the ryuer of Charente with the towne and fortereſſe of Rochelle / and theyr appurtenaunces / the citie and Caſtell of Agene / and the countrey of Agenoyſe / the citie

towne and Caſtell of Pierregourte / and all the countrey therto belongynge / the cite and caſtell of Lymoges / and the landes and coūtrey of Lymoſyn / the cite and caſtell of Caours / the caſtell and countrey of Tarbe / the la
                  •
               des coūtrey and countie of Bigore / The countie countrey and la
                  •
               de of Gowre the citie and caſtell of Angoleſme / and all the countrey therto perteynynge / the citie towne and caſtell of Rodaix ▪ the coūtie and coūtrey of Rouergne. And if there be in the duchye of Guyne any lordes / as the erle of Foiz the erle of Armmake / the Erle of Liſle / the Uicount of Carmaine the erle of Pierregourt ▪ the Uicount of Lymoges / or other / holdynge any la
                  •
               des within the foreſayde bondes / they ſhall do homage to vs and all other ſeruicis due and accuſtomed for their landes and places in maner and fourme as they haue done in tyme paſt as we or any other kynges of Englande aunciently haue had: and alſo the Uicount of Muttrel on the ſee as he dyd in tyme paſt / and as we or other kynges of Englande haue had: and in the landes of Muttrell if there haue ben any debate for partage of landes / our brother of Frā
               ce / promyſeth to make a declaracion thero
                  •
                to vs as ſhortly as he canne after his comynge into Fraunce: And alſo the countie of Poictow 
                  •
               nterly ſaue and excepted / if any thynge be aliened awaye by the kynges of Englāde in tyme paſt wherby the ſayde countie and purtenaunces haue ben holden by other perſones than by the frenche kynges / our ſaid brother nor his ſucceſſours ſhall nat be boūde to rendre them to vs But if the ſayde alienacions haue ben done by the frenche kynges / for the tyme beynge without any meane ▪ and our ſayd brother nowe hauynge them agayne i
                  •
                his poſſeſſion / he ſhall leaue them entierly to vs / excepte that if y• Frē
               che kynges had theym by exchaunge for other landes: But if the kynges of Englande for the tyme beynge haue alyened or tranſported any thynge to any other perſonnes than to the frenche kynges / and perauenture yet nowe become to the handes of our ſayde brother / he ſhall nat be bounde to rend
                  ••
                them to vs. And alſo to rendre to vs all ſuche thynges as ought to do any homage to vs & to our ſucceſſours / and if they ought to do none to vs nor our ſucceſſours ▪ thā he ſhall delyuer to vs a tenour of that he ought to do within a yere after y• he ſhall be departed from Calais. Alſo the caſtell and towne of Calais: the caſtell towne and ſeignorie of Merle / The townes caſtelles and ſeignories of Sangates / Coulougne / Baynes / Wales / and Oye / With the landes / Woddes / mareſthes / ryuers / rentes / reuēnues / ſeignories / auouſons of churches / and all other appurtenaunces and places lyenge bitwene the boundes and bournes folowynge: that is to ſay / from Calais to the ryuer before grauelyng / & alſo fro y• riuer that falleth into the great lake of Guiens vnto Fretin: and fro thenſe alonge the valey about the moūtayn of Karlenly encloſynge the mountayne / and ſo to the ſee / with Sangatis / and all the apurtenauncis / the caſtell and the towne / with y• hole countie of Guynes: With all the townes ▪ caſtels fortreſſes / lādes / places / homages / men / ſeignories / woddes / foreſtes / and all right
                  •
                to them belongynge / as entierly as the towne of Calais / or Merle / and of other places before named / as well to vs as they haue obeyed to our ſayd brother or to the erle of Guynes for the tyme beyng and all other thynges cōpriſed in this preſent article of Merle and of Calais we to hold them in demayn / excepte the Heritages perteynynge to the churches / the whiche ſhall ſtyll remayne hooly to the ſame churches / Whereſo euer they be / and alſo excepte the heritages of other people of Merle / and of Calais / vnder the value of C .li. of lande by yere of the money there currāt And vnder that heritage to haue it ſtyll / but the habitaciōs / and heritages beynge in the towne of Calais / and their apurtenaunces ſhal abide ſtyll to the inhabitantes: In the lādes / townes or countie of Guynes all theyr demaynes ſhall ſtyll remayne to them / except that hath ben ſaid before of the foreſayd boundes and bormes In the article of Calais: and all Iles addreſſynge to the la
                  •
               des / coūties / and places before named with all other Iles the whiche We helde in the tyme of the ſayd treatye. And it hath bē agreed that ourſayd brother and his eldeſt ſon ſhulde renounce all maner of ſoueraynte / reſorte / and rightes ▪ that he ſhulde haue of any of theym / or for them / and that we ſhall holde them as hys neyghbour / without any reſorte or ſoueraynte to our ſayd brother / or to the realme of France / and all the right / that oure ſayde brother hath in the foreſayde thynges / he yeldeth and tranſporteth them to vs perpetually. And alſo hit is agreed that ſemblably we and our ſayde ſon expreſſely renounce all thynges / that oughte nat to be delyuered to vs by this ſayde treatye / and ſpecially of the name & right to the crowne of Fraunce / and to the realme / and homage and ſeueraynte and demayne of the duchye of Normandy / of the countie of Thouraine / and of th
                  •
                coūties of Aniou / and of Mayn / the ſouer
                  〈…〉
               
               
and homage of the duchie of Britaigne / except the right of the erle of Moūtfort that he ought or myght haue in the duchye and countrey of Britaygne / the whiche we reſerue / and by expreſſe wordes putte clene out of this our treaty Sauynge that we and our ſayd brother whan we come to Calais ſhal ordre that mater by the aduyſe of our counſaylles there to be deputed that we ſhal ſette a peace and concorde bitwene the erle Mountforte / and our Couſyn the lorde Charles of Bloys / who challengeth & demaundeth the right of the heritage of Britaigne / and we renounce all other demaūdes that we make or may make what ſo euer they be / except ſuche forſayd thynges as ought to abyde to vs / and ought to be delyuered to vs and to our heires by this treatie. And that we tranſport and ſeſe all the right that we myght haue in any of theſe thynges that oughte nat to be delyuered to vs by this treatie. On the whiche thynges after viuerſe altercacions had on the ſame / and ſpecially bicauſe that the ſayde renounciacion trā
               ſportes / ſeſſynge / and leauynge of all the ſayde thynges ſhulde be accomplyſſhed as ſoone as our ſaid brother hath delyuered to vs or to our deputies the cite and caſtell of Poicters / and al the lande and countrey of Poictou / with the fee of Thouars / and the fayre towne citie & caſtell of Agene / and all the lande and countrey of Agenoyſe / the citie and caſtell of Piergourt / and all the lande and countrey of Pierrigins / The cite and caſtell of Caours / and all the lande of Courſin / the citie & caſtell of Rodais / and all y• lande and countrey of Rouergne / the citie and caſtell of xaintes / and all the lande therto belōgynge / the citie and caſtell of Lymoges / and that we or any other kynges of England aunciently helde in the towne of Monterell vpon the ſee with thappurtenaūces. Alſo the coūtie of Pontheu hole entierly / ſaue and excepte the tenoure of the article cōteyned in the ſayd treatie / where it maketh mencion of the ſayde countie. Item the caſtell and towne of Calais / and the caſtell towne and ſeignorie of Sangates / Colougue / Baines / Wales / and Oye / With the landes / ryuers / mareſſhes Woddes / rentes / ſeignories / and other thynges conteyned in the article ther of makyng mencion. Alſo the caſtell and towne and hole entierly the countie of Guynes / With all the landes / Caſtelles / townes / fortereſſes / places / menne / homages / ſeignories / woddes / foreſtes / and other ryghtes / accordynge to the tenour of the article thero
                  •
                makynge mencyon more playnly in the ſayde treatye / and with the Iles that We holde all redy / that is to ſaye in the tyme of thys ſayd treatye and peace / we and our brother the frenche kynge haue promyſed by faythe and oothe eche to other / the ſame treatye and peace to holde / kepe / and accompliſſhe / and nat to do the contrarye / and are bound both we and our ſayde brother and our eldeſte ſonnes by obligacion / and promyſe by faythe and othe / the one parte to the other / except certayne renounciacyons the one to the other accordynge to the tenour and fourme of the ſayd article and peace / Whero
                  •
                the tenour and forme foloweth.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ALso hit is agreed that the frenche kynge and his eldeſt ſonne the regent for them and for theyr heires for euer / and as ſoone as they may without any male engin or at the leeſt by the feſt of ſaynt Michaell next comyng ſhall rendre and delyuer to the ſayde kynge of Englande / his heyres / and ſucceſſours / and to tranſport to them the honours / regalities / obeiſaunce / homages / liegeaunces / men / fees / ſeruices / reconiſaūces / othes / rightes / feaulties / and imperiall iuriſdictions / hyghe or lowe / reſortes / ſaue gardes / ſeignories / and ſouerainties / that apperteyneth / or maye apperteyne in any maner of wiſe to the kynges and to the crowne of Fraunce / or to any other perſone bicauſe of y• kynge or of the crowne of Fraunce / Where ſo euer it be in cities / townes / caſtels / landes / Iles countreys / and places before named / or in any of them / or theyr appurtenaunces / and appendaunces what ſo euer they be / other duke / erle / vicount archebyſſhop / or other prelates of holy churche / baronnes / nobles and other / or kynges or ſucceſſours to the crowne of Fraunce nothynge to them reſerued / ſo that they nor none of theyr heyres nor ſucceſſours / or any frenche kynges or other by reaſon of the kynge or of the crowne of Fraunce make any challenge or demaūde in tyme to come of the kyng of Englāde his heires or ſucceſſours / or of any of his men / or ſubiectes before ſayd / bicauſe of the ſayd contreys or places ſo that all the forenamed ꝑſons theyr heires and ſucceſſours / and all other perſones / cities counties / landes / countreys / Iles caſtelles / and places before named / and altheyr appurtenaunces / and appendaūces ſhall holde of the kynge of England perpetually / peaſably and frely / and to haue ouer them ſeignorie / ſouerainte / obeyſaunce / liegeaunce / and ſubiects as the predeceſſours of the frenche kynge haue had in tyme paſte / and that the kynges of E
                              •
                           
                           gl
                              •••
                           
                           
& theyr heires and ſucceſſours ſhall haue and holde peaſably all the fore named coūtreys in theyr frauncheſe and lyberties perpetuall as lorde and ſoueraygne liege and as neighbour to the frenche kyng and to the realme of Frāce / Without any knowledgynge of any ſouerayn
                           
                              •••
                            
                           
                              •
                           b
                              •
                           y
                              •
                           aunce / homage reſorte / or ſubiection. and without doynge in tyme to come any maner of ſeruice or reconiſaunce to the kynge / or to the Crowne of Fraunce / for any of theſe cities counties / caſtelles / countres landes / Iles / places and perſonnes before named / or for any of them. Alſo it is accorded that the frenche kyng and his eldeſte ſonne ſhall renounce expreſſely the ſayd reſortes and ſoueraynties / and all the 
                              •
                           yght that they haue or myght haue in all theſe 
                              •
                           hynges ſuche as by this preſent treatye ought to apperteyne and be delyuered to the kynge of Englande. And ſemblably the kynge of Englande and his eldeſt ſonne renoūſeth all thynges / ſuche as by this preſent treatie ought nat to be delyuered to hym / and renounſeth al other demaundes of the realme of Fraunce / and ſpecially to the name / right and armes / and challenge to the crowne and realme of France / and 
                              〈◊〉
                            the homage / ſouerainte / and demayne of the duchie of Normandy & of the duchie of Thourayne and of the counties of Aniou ▪ and Mayn and of the ſoueraynte and homage of the coūtie and countrey of Flanders / and of all other demaundes that the kynge of Englande made at the tyme of the ſayde chalenge / or may make in tyme to come to the ſayd realme of Fraunce by any maner of cauſe what ſoeuer it be / except all that by thys treatye ſhulde be delyuered to the kynge of Englande and to his heires / and they to tranſport ceſſe and leaue eche kyng to other perpetually al the right that they ought to haue in all theſe ſayd thynges / the whiche by this pre 
                              〈◊〉
                            treatie ought to be deliuered to eche of them & the tyme / place and whan the ſaid renouncia
                           
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           s ſhulde be done: and bicauſe that our ſayd brother of France / and his eldeſt ſon / to holde & to accomplyſſhe the articles of the ſayde peace / haue expreſſely renounſed the reſortes and ſo
                           
                              •••
                            
                           
                              •••
                           ties compriſed in the ſayd articles / and all the right that they ought to haue / or myght haue in all the ſayd thynges that our ſayd brother hath delyuered and left to vs / and all other thynges that from henſforth ſhall abyde and ꝑ
                           
                              •
                           eyne to vs by reaſon of the ſayde treatye and peace. Alſo we in lyke wyſe expreſſely renoūce all ſuche thynges as ought nat to be delyuered 
                              •
                           o vs by the ſayde treatye / or to our heires. And alſo all demaundes that we make or may make of our ſayde brother of Fraunce / and ſpecially to the name and ryght of the crowne of Fraūce and of the realme / and to the homage / ſoueraintie / and demayne of the duchie of Normandy / and to the coūties of Aniou and Main / and of Thourayn / and of the homage and ſouerainte of the countie of Flanders / and all other demaū
                           des that we make or may make of our ſayd brother for what ſo euer cauſe it be / alwayes except all that by this preſent treatie ought to abyde to vs and to our heyres. And we ſhall tranſporte / ſeſſe and leaue to hym and he to vs / and ſo eche to other in the beſt maner and as ſhortly as We canne all ſuche ryght that eche of vs oughte / or maye haue in euery thynge / the whiche by thys treatie and peace ought to abyde and remayne and to be delyuered to eche of vs. Reſerued to the churches and to the menne of the churche all that to them perteyneth or may apperteine / and all that is occupied and witholde from them by the occaſion of the Warres / ſhall be agayne to them recompenſed / reſtored / rendred / and delyuered. And alſo all the townes fortereſſes / and all habitacions with the dwellers in them ſhall remayne and abyde in theyr liberties and francheſes as they dyd before or they came into our handes and ſeignory / and that to be confermed to them by our ſayde brother of Fraunce / yf he be required ſo to do: and that we do nat the cō
                           trarye in any of the foreſayde thynges or ſubiections. And as to vs and to all thynges to vs and to our heyres and ſucceſſours to be at the Juryſdiction and coh
                              •
                           rcyon of the Churche of Rome. And We wyll and conſent / that our holy father the pope ſhall conferme all theſe ſayde thynges in gyuynge monycions and generall commaundementes on the accomplyſſhement of theym / agaynſte vs / our heyres / and ſucceſſours: And agaynſte our ſubiectes / comons / colleges / vniuerſities / or ſyngular perſonnes / What ſomeuer they be: And to gyue generall ſentences of curſynge / and ſuſpencion of enterdytynge to renne vpon vs or vpon theym that doth the contrarye. And that it ren
                              •
                           e vpon vs / and on them as ſoone as we or any of theym do or attempte (in occupyenge / towne / caſtell / citie / or fortereſſe / or any thynge doynge ratyfienge or conſentynge: In gyuynge counſayle / comfort / fauour / or aide / priuely or openly) agaynſt the ſayde peace. And of the Whiche ſentences of curſe nat to be aſſoyledde / vnto the tyme full ſatiſfaction be made to all them that haue had or ſuſteyne any dammage in that behalf▪
                           
                        
                        
                           
And more ouer we woll and cōſent that our holy father the pope / to the entent that thys ſayde peace ſhulde be the fyrmelier kepte and holde
                              ••
                            perpetually / that if any paction
                              •
                            / con
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           eracyons / aliaunces / and couenauntes / howe ſo euer they be named if they be any thyng preiu
                              •
                           icyall agaynſt the ſaid peace by any maner of way at this preſent tyme / or here after to be made / ſuppoſed that they be ferme and delyuered of certayne peynes or by othes confyrmed by our holy father the pope / or by any other / that they be cancelled & ſtande for nought / or any thynge contrary to the comon weale / or vnprofitable to the peace / and to all Chriſtente / and 
                              •
                           iſpleaſāt to god / and all promeſſes and othes in ſuche caſes ſhalbe ſhewed and diſcuſſed by our holy father the pope. ſo that none be b
                              •••
                           de to holde or kepe any ſuche promyſes / or othes / aliaūces or couenaūtes: to thentent that in tyme to come ſuche ſemblable caſes ſhulde nat be done. And if any attempt to do the cōtrary / that it be voy
                              •
                            and of none effecte. And as for vs we ſhall punyſſ he all ſuche / as violaters and brekers of the peace by theyr bodyes and gooddes / as the cas ſhall requyre / accordynge to reaſon. And if we procure or ſuffre to be done the cōtrary / as god forbyd: than we wol that we be reputed for fals and vntrewe: and that we ren in ſuche eſtate of blame and defame / as a kynge ſacred 
                              ••
                           ght to ren in ſuche a caſe: and we ſwere on the body of our lorde Jeſu Chriſt all the ſayde thynges to holde and kepe / and accomplyſſhe / and nat to do the contrary nother by vs nor by 
                              •
                           one other in no maner of caſe: and to the entent that theſe ſayd bondes ſhulde be fulfylled / We 
                              •
                           ynde vs / our heires / and all the goodes of vs and of our heires to our ſayd brother of France / and to his heires. And alſo we ſwere on the holy euangeliſt by vs corporally touched / that we ſhall perfourme / holde / and accompliſſhe in the forſayd caſes all the ſayd thynges by vs promyſed and accorded. And we woll that in like caſe our brother or his deputies in place / 
                              〈◊〉
                            terme / and in maner (as before is made mencion) preſent to vs his letters cōpr
                              •
                           ſed therin to the
                              •••
                           rt 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſtrength of our ſayd letters / that we haue pro
                              •
                           yſed and delyuered / as is ſayd before. Alwayes ſaued & reſerued by vs / our heires and ſucceſſours that the ſayd letters before e
                              •
                           corpored be of none effecte / nor be to vs any maner of preiudice or damage vntyll the ſeaſon that our ſayde brother and nephewe haue made / fente / and 
                              •
                           elyuered the foreſayde renoncia
                              •
                           ions accordynge to the maner before 
                              •
                           euiſed / and tyll that be 
                              •
                           one our letters nat to be agaynſte vs / our heires / or ſucceſſours in any maner of wyſe / but in the foreſayd caſe. In witneſſe of whiche / we haue 
                              ••
                           tt
                              •
                            our ſcale to the preſent letters.
                        
                           yeuyn at Calais the .xxiiii. day of Octobre / the yere of our lorde M. CCC .lx.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            ANd whan this letter chartre called the letter of renunciacion / aſ well of the one kynge as of the other was engroſed / wrytten / & ſealed: than it was red openly in the counſayle chambre / beyng preſent both kynges and theyr counſayles / the whiche ſemed to eche of them to be ryght good and well ordeyned. and there agayne both kynges ſware and their eldeſt ſonnes on the euangeliſt is corporally by them touched / and on the body of Jeſu Chriſt conſecrated / to kepe and to accōpliſſhe / and nat to broke any of the forſayd thynges. And yet farther by the aduiſe and regarde of the frenche kyng and of his counſa
                  ••
               e / and at the ende of their parliamēt / the kyng of Englande was requyred that he wolde gyue and ſende a generall commiſſ
                  ••
                to all them that for the tyme held vnderſhadow of the warre / townes / caſtels / and fortreſſes in the realme of Fraunce / werby they myght haue ſuche commaundement to auoyde and departe And the kyng of Englande (wo as than wolde nothyng but welth and good peace to be noryſſhed bitwene hym and the frenche kyng his brother / as he had ſworne and promyſed) lyghtly agreed to this▪ requeſte / for it ſemed but reaſon▪ And than the kyng of Englande commaunded his counſaile / that ſuche a commiſſion ſhuld be made after the beſt maner that myght be accordynge to the entent of the frenche kynge and of his counſayle. And than they of the ſpeciall co
                  •
               
               ſayle of bothe kynges dr
                  •
               we theym to guether / and there was wrytten and engroſed by the aduyſe of bothe counſayles a certayn commiſſion wherof the tenor ▪ foloweth.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           EDwarde by the grace of god kyng of Englande / lorde of Ireland and of Aquitayne / To all oure Capytaynes / kepers of townes / and of caſtelles adherauntes / and alies ▪ beynge in the parties of Fraunce aſwell in 
                              ••
                           
                           cardy / Borgoyn / Aniou / Berrey / Normandy / Britaigū Auuerne / Chāpaigū / Mayn / Thourayne / as in all the bondes and lymitacion
                              •
                            of the demayne and tenure of Fraunce / We 
                              〈◊〉
                            gretynge / as peace and accorde hath ben made bytwene vs and our brother of Fraunce / our
                           
alies and adherentes / compriſynge all the debates and diſcordes / that hath ben bitwene vs in tyme paſt or may be / and haue ſworne on the body of Jeſu Chriſt: and alſo our eldeſt ſonne and our other children / and other of our blodd with outers prelates / barons / and knyghtes / & the mooſt notable of the realme of Englande. And in like wyſe hath ſworne our ſayd brother and our ſayd nephewe the duke of Normandy and our other nephewes his ſaid children / and dyuers barones knyghtes / and prelates of the ſayd realme of Fraunce to kepe the peace. And though hit ſo fortune or fall hereafter / that any men of warre of our realme / or of our ſubiectes enforce them to do or to take on them any thyng contrary to the ſayd peace / in takynge or withholdynge / fortreſſes / townes / cites / or caſtelles / or takynge of pyllage or priſoners or reſtynge of any perſone / their goodes / or marchandyſes / or any other thynge doyng agaynſt the peace / the whiche to vs ſhulde be right diſpleaſaunt / and we may nat / nor wyll ſuffre it to paſſe vnder the ſhadow of diſſimulacion / in any maner of wyſe / we woll with all our power (in all theſe ſaid thynges) fynde remedy. Therfore we woll deſire and ordeyne / by the deliberacion of▪ 
                           our counſaile that none of our ſubiectes (whatſomeuer eſtate or cōdicion they be of) do or enforce them to do any thynge contrary to the ſayd peace / Indoynge of any pillage / takyng or withholdynge any fortreſſes / priſoners / or gooddes (what ſo euer they be) perteynynge to the realme of Fraunce: or to our ſayd brother his ſubiectes / alies / and adherentes / or any other what ſo euer they be doynge agaynſt the ſayd peace▪ and nat leaue or ceace ſo to do / and wyll nat rendre agayne the damages by them done within a moneth after / that they be requyred ſo to do / by any of our officers / ſergeauntes / or publike perſones: that than by that dede allonlye without any other proceſſe or condempnacion / that they be all reputed for banyſſhed mē out of our realme and our power: and alſo oute of the realme and landes of oure ſayde brother / and all theyr gooddes forfaited to vs / and into our demayn if they may be founde within our realme we woll and cōmaund expreſſely / that on them We be made as of traytours and rebels agaynſt vs / accordynge to the cuſtome done in cryme of high treaſon withoute gyuynge in yt case any grace or remyſſion ſufferance or pardon. And in like wyſe to be done of our ſubiectꝭ in whatſoeuer eſtate they be / that in our realme 
                              〈…〉
                            ſyde the lee / or on the other ſide / take occupye or holde fortreſſe whatſoeuer it be ayenſt the wyll of them / that they ſhuld perteyne vnto or brenneth or raunſometh townes or perſones or do any pyllage or robbery in mouyng warr̄ within our power / or on our ſubiectes. Than we commaunde / and expreſſely enioyne all our ſeneſchals / bailiffes / prouoſtes / chatelaynes / or other our officers (in eſchewynge of our hygh diſpleaſure / and on peyne of loſynge of their offices) that they publyſſhe or cauſe to be publiſſhed theſe preſentes in certayne notable places within theyr rules / and that this commaundement ones ſen & harde / none after to be ſo hardy to abyde in any fortreſſe ꝑteynyng to the realm of France / & beyng out of the ordinance of treatie of the ſayd peace / on peyne to be taken as an ennemie to vs / & to our ſayd brother the Frēche kynge / and that they ſee all theſe ſayd thynges to be kept / and to do entierly fro poynt to poynt we woll that euery man knowe / that if they be negligent / and fayle thus to do / beſide the foreſayde payne / we ſhall cauſe them to rendre the damages to all them that by theyr defautes / or negligence ſhalbe greued or damaged. and beſide that we ſhal punyſſhe them in ſuche maner that it ſhalbe enſamble to all other. In wytnes of the whiche thynges we haue made theſe our letters patētes.
                        
                           yeuyn at Calais the .xxiiii. day of Octobre / the yere of our lorde. M .iii. C .lx.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            ¶How after the peas made the king of England & the frenche kyng called eche other bretherne. And of the warres of Britayne. And of the hoſtages that were delyuered to the englyſſhemen or the frenche kyng was deliuered out of theyr handes. Ca. CC .xiii.
            
               AFter all theſe letters and cō
               myſſyons were made / deuyſed / deliuered / and well ordeined / by the aduyce of the coū
               ſayle of both parties / ſo that bothe kynges were content. Than they fell in communycacion of the lord Charles of Bloys / and of the lord John̄ of Mountford / for the claymes that they made for the duchie of Britayn / for eche of them clamed great right to haue in yt heritage. but for all theyr coīcaciō how they might bring them to peace & cōcorde / yet finally ther was nothyng done ī yt mat
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                / for as I was infurmed aff

the kyng of England nor his 
                  〈◊〉
                had no great affectyon to make that peace: For they ſuppoſed ye in tyme to come the men of warr ye were on theyr parte / and ſhulde auoyde out of ſuche fortreſſess and gariſons as they hewe at ye tyme & had helde in the realme of France muſte depart into ſome other place: therfore the kyng of England and his counſaile thaught it more erpedient & profitable / that theſe men of warre that thus had lyued by pillage / ſhuld drawe into ye duchie of Britayn the whiche was a good plentifull countrey / rather than they ſhulde retourne agayne into Englande / and robbe and pille there. So this imaginacion made ſhortly the englyſſhemen to breke of fro the cōmunicacion of the article of Britayne / the whiche was euill done and a great ſynne / that they dyd nomore in that mater than they dyd. For if both kynges had ben well wyllyng therto by the aduice of both their counſailles peace might haue ben made bitwene the parties / and eche of them to haue ben content with that hadde ben gyuen them by reaſon of that treatye / and therby the lord Charles of Bloys myght haue had agayn his children / who lay as priſoners in England And alſo (perauenture) had lyued longer than he dyd. And bycauſe ye nothyng was done than in that mater / the warres were neuer ſo great in the duchie of Normādy before ye peace made bitwene both kyngꝭ / as it was after: as ye ſhall here recorded in this hiſtorye / by ſuche barous and knyghtes of the coūtrey of Britayne / who vphelde and ſuſteyned / ſome the our parte / and ſome the other. And than duke Henry of Lancaſtre / who was a right valiant & a ſage ymagined knyght / & greatly loued ye erle of Moū
               
                  •
               
               ford and his aduaūcement / ſayd to kyng John̄ of France / in the preſens of the kyng of Englād and before the mooſt parte of both theyr counſailes: Syr as yet the truce that was taken before Raines / bitwene ye lord Charles of Bloys and the Erle Mountforde is nat expired / But hath day to endure vnto the firſt day of Maye next comyng / by the whiche ſeaſon the kyng of England here preſent (by the aduice of his coū
               ſaile / and conſent of the prince his ſonne) ſhall ſende the yonge duke the lorde John̄ of Moūtforde / with other certayne of his counſayle into Fraunce to you: and they ſhall haue full aurtorite and power to comyn / and to determyne all ſuche ryght / as the ſayde lorde John̄ ought to haue by the ſucceſſiō of his father / in the duchie of Britayne. So thus by you and your counſaile & by ours to guether ſome good way ſhal be taken bytwene them: and for the more 
                  〈◊〉
                I thynke it were good / that the trew
                  •
               e were relonged vnto the feſt of ſaynt John̄ Baptiſt nere folowynge. And as the duke of Lancaſtre had deuyſed / ſo was it done and concludedde. And than the lordes ſpake of other maters.
            Rynge John̄ of France (who had great deſyre to retourne into Fraunce / as it was reaſon) ſhewed to the kynge of Englande with good corage all the ſignes of loue that he might do. and alſo to his nephewe the prince of wales And in lyke wyſe ſo dyd the kynge of England to hym / for the confirmacion of more loue.
            Theſe two kynges / who by the ordinaunce of the peace called eche other brother / gaue to .iiii. knyghtes of eche of theyr partes the ſomme of .viii. M. frankes of yerely reuenues: that is to ſay eche of them to haue .ii. M. frankes. And alſo bicauſe that the lande of ſaynt Sauiour ye Uicoūt in Conſtantyne / the profite of the whiche came yerely into Englande by the gyft and ſale of the lorde Godfrey of Harcourt made to the kynge of Englande: as it hath ben ſhewed here before. The whiche lande was nat compriſed in the ordinaunce of the ſayd treatye and peace: Therfore who ſo euer ſhulde holde that lande / ſhulde become ſubiecte and do homage therfore to the frēche kyng. Therfore the kyng of Englande gaue that lande to ſyr John̄ Chā
               dos: who had done often tymes acceptable ſeruyce to hym and to his children: and at the requeſt of the kyng of Englāde / the frenche kyng by good delyberacion with good courage and loue cōfyrmed and ſealed to the gyfte of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos / he to poſſede and to haue the ſame landes / as his true heritage for euer / the whiche was a fayre lande and a profytable / for ones a yere it was well worthe .xvi. hundred frankes. And beſyde all this yet were there diuerſe other letters of alyaunces made / of the whiche I cannat make mencion of all: for the ſpace of fyftene dayes orthere aboute / whyle theſe two kynges theyr ſonnes / and counſailours were at Calais there was dayly commonynge / and newe ordinaunces deuyſed and confermed to ratifye the peace nat hyndrynge nor brekynge the fyrſt letters / for they were euer made berynge one date to be of ye more ſurete / of the whiche I haue ſen the copy of the regeſtres in the Chaunceryes of both kynges.
            ¶And whan theſe thynges were ſo well made deuiſed and ordeyned / that they coude nat be amended nor corrected / ſo that it was thought

by reaſon of the great alyaunces and boundes wherin the ſaid kynges and theyr childrē were bode / and had ſo ſworne to kepe the peace / that it was nat likely to haue ben broken: howe be it the peace helde nat longe / as ye ſhall here after in this boke. So that whan the hoſtages for ye redemption of the frenche kynge / were comen to Calys / and that the kynge of Englande had 
                  •
               worn̄ to kepe them peaſably in his realme and that the .vi. M. frankes were payd to the kyng of Englandes deputies. Than the kyng of Englande made a ſupper to the frenche kynge in the caſtell of Calais right wel ordered and the kynges children and the duke of Lancaſtre in the mooſt greatteſt lordes and barons of Englande ſerued the kynges bare heeded / and after ſupper fynally theſe two kynges toke leaue eche of other ryght gracyouſly and amyably / & 
                  •
               o the frenche kynge returned to his lodgyng And y• next mornyng / ye whiche was in the vigill of ſaynt Symonde and Jude the Frenche kynge departed out of Calais and all ſuche as thulde departe with hym. And the kynge went 
                  〈◊〉
                fote a pilgrimage to our lady of Boloyn / and the prince of Walys / and his two bretherne in his company / the lorde Lyonelle and the lorde Aymō. And ſo they went a fote to dyner to Boloyn / where they were reſceyued with great ioy And there was the duke of Normandy redy taryenge for them / and ſo all theſe lordes went on fote into the churche of our lady / and dyd their offerynges right deuoutly / and than returned into the abbay there / the whiche was apparelled for the kynge / and to receyue the lordes of Englande. And ſo there they were all that day and the nexte nyght after retourned agayne to Calats to the kynge theyr father / and ſo fynally they all to guether paſſed theſee / and the hoſtages of Fraunce with them / the whiche was in the vigill of all Sayntes. In the yere of our lorde. M. C C C .lx.
            IT is reaſon that I name to you the noblemen of the realme of Fraūce / that entred into Englande in hoſtage for the frenche kyng First the lorde Philip duke of Orliaunce ſometyme ſonne to kynge Philip of France / and alſo his two nephewes / the duke of Aniou and ye duke of Berry / alſo the duke of Bourbon / the Erle of Alanſon / the lorde John̄ of Stampes Guy of Bloys for that countie / Loys of Bloys his brother / the erle of ſaynt Poule / the erle of Harecourt / the erle Daulphyn of Auuergne / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Ingram lorde of Coucy / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Ligny erle of Porccen the erle of Breſme / the lord of Mō
               morency / the lorde of Roy / the lorde of Preault the lorde of Stouteuill / the lorde of Clerettes / the lorde of ſaynt Wenant / the lorde of the toure of Aunergne and diuers other / ye whiche I cannat name. Alſo of the good cite of Parys / of Roen / of Reinnes / of Burges in Berry / and of Towrs in Tourayn / of Lyons on the riuer of Roan / of Seins in Bourgoyn / of Orleance / of Troye in Champaigne / of Amiens / of Beauuoys of Arras / of Tournay / of Caen in Normandy / of ſaint Omers / of Lyſle / of Dowaye / & of euery cite .ii. or the burgeſſes / and ſo thus fynally they paſſed all the ſee / and came to the good cite of London. And the kyng of Englāde commaunded and enioyned all his officers on great paynes / that they ſhuld be to theſe lordes and to theyr company curtoyſe and fauorable / and to kepe and defende theym and theyr company from all euill rule: the whiche commaundement was well kept and vpholde in al poyntes. And ſo theſe lordes and other hoſtagers ſported them withoute perill or daunger all about in the cite at their pleaſure / and the great lordes went a huntynge and haukyng at theyr pleaſure / and rode about the countrey / and dyſited the ladies and damuſels without any cō
               trollynge / they founde the kyng of England ſo curtoyſe and amiable. Nowe let vs ſomwhat ſpeke of the Frenche kynge / Who was come to to Boloyn and departed fro Calais / as ye haue harde here before.
         
         
            ¶ Of the commyſſyoners that were ordeyned on bothe parties to auoyde the gariſōs in the realme of France: & of the companions that aſſembled together in the realme: and of the great euils that they dyd. Cap. C C .xiiii.
            
               THe frenche kynge taried nat longe at Boloyn / but departed after the feeſt of all saintꝭ and went to Montrell / and to Hedyn / and ſo to the good cite of Amiens / and there taryed tyll it was nere Chriſtmas: than he departed and went to Parys and there he was ſolemnly and reuerently receyued of all the clergye of Parys / and ſo conueyed to his palys / and there he alyghted and his ſo
                  〈…〉
                Philip / and al other lordes that were ther with hym / and there was for them a noble dyner apparelled.

I can neuer ſhewe or deuiſe howe 
                  〈◊〉
                the frenche kynge wass receyued at his retourne into his realme of all maner of people For his preſence was greatly deſyred amonge them: and they gaue hym many fayre and riche gyftes / and to viſite hym thither came prelates and baroness of all his realme / and they felted / and made great chere to hym / asshit wass theyr duite to do / and the kynge receyued them right ſwetely.
            ANone ofter that kyng John̄ wass returned into Fraunce / ther paſſed the ſee ſuche perſones as were commytted by the kynge of Englande to take poſſeſſyon of the landes countreys / counties / ba
                  ••
               wykes / cites to 
                  〈◊〉
                ca
                  •
               telles and fortereſſess / that ſhulde be delyuered by reaſon of the teeatie & peace before made howe be it ye was nat ſo ſoone done / for diuerſe lordes in Languedor wolde nat at the 
                  •
               yr
                  ••
               e obeye to yelde them ſelfe to holde of the kynge of Englande / for all that the frenche kynge hadde quyted them of theyr faith & homage that they ſhulde haue done to hym / for it ſemed right cōn trarte to them to obey to the engl
                  ••
               hemen / and ſpecially they of farre macches / as 
                  •
               he 
                  〈◊〉
                of Marche / the erle of Piergourt / the erle of Gomegines the vicount of Chaltellon / the 
                  〈…〉
               ount of Carmaing / the lorde of Pyncorne
                  •
                / and dyuerſe other / and they maruailed greatly of the reſort and alligeance that the frenche kyng had quyted them of / & wold haue them to do it to the engliſſhemen: And ſo
                  ••
               e of them ſayd that the kyng ought nat ſo to acquite them / nor by right myght ſo do: for they ſayd ther were ī Gaſcoy
                  •
                olde auncient charters and priuileges graunted by great Charlemayne / who was kynge of Fraunce / that he myght nat put their reſort & aliegeaunce into any other court / but allonely in his. And therfore theſe lordes at the firſt 
                  ••
               lde nat obey to that pointmēt / but the frenche kyng who wolde hold and accomply 
                  ••
               he that he had ſworne and ſealed vnto / ſent thither to them the lorde James of Bourbon his dere 
                  •
               oſyn / Who apeaſed the mooſt parte of the ſayd lordes and ſo they became liege menne to the kynge of England / as the erle of Arminacke the lorde Dalbret / and many other / Who at the deſyre of the frenche kynge / and of the lorde of Bourbon hiss coſyn obeyed to the Englyſſhemen full ſore agaynſte theyr Wylless. And alſo on the ſee ſyde in Poictou and Rochelss / and in 
                  •
               aynton / thyss compoſicion was right diſplea
                  〈…〉
                to the lordes and knyghtꝭ / and good towness of that con̄
               trey / Whan they ſawe that it 
                  〈◊〉
                theym to become engliſſhe / and ſpecially they of y• towne of Rochell / wolde nat agree therto / and ſo excuſed them ſelfe often tymes / and ſo contynued a hole yere / that they wolde nat ſuffre the engliſſhemen to entre into the towne. And it is meruaile to reherſe the amiable and ſwete word
                  ••
                that they wrote to the frenche kynge / In deſyrynge hym for goddess ſake / that he wolde nat acquyte them of the faith that they owe to hym / nor to put them out of his demayne into the hades of ſtraungers / ſayeng how they had rather to be taxed yerely to the halfe of theyr subſtanc
                  •
                than to be vnder the handes of the engliſſhmen The frenche kynge / Who ſawe well their good wyls and trouth that they bare to hym by theyr often excuſacionss / had of them great p
                  •
               e / 
                  •
               ow
                  •
                be it he ſent and wrote affectuouſly to theym to the entent that they ſhulde fulfyll his deſire ſhewynge them / that elles the peace ſhulde be broken ī their defaute: the whiche ſhulde be a great preiudice to the realme of France. ſo that wha
                  •
                they of Rochell ſawe no other remedye / and 
                  〈◊〉
                ſydered the diſtreſſe that they were in and 
                  〈◊〉
                theyr 
                  〈…〉
               uſacionss nor deſire coude nat be accepted. Than they obeyed full ſore againſ
                  ••
                theyr wylles. And the honeſt men of the towne ſayde We ſhall obeye the Englyſſhemen from henſe forth but our hartes ſhall nat remoue from the frenche parte. Thus the kyng of England had the poſſeſſion and ſeſ
                  •
               nynge of the duchie of Aquitayne / & of the countie of Ponthieu / of Guynes / and of all the landes that he ought to hau
                  •
                on that ſyde of the ſee / that is to ſay in the realme of Fraunce / gyuen hym by the ordinance of the ſayd treatye. And ſo the ſame yere 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos paſſed the ſee as reget and lieutenāt to the kynge of Englande / and toke poſſeſſion of all the ſayd lades with ye faithess & homagess of all the Erles / vicountess / baroness / knyghtess / and ſquyers towness and fortereſſes / and 
                  •
               et 
                  〈◊〉
                euery place conſtabless / capitayness / 
                  〈◊〉
                and officers by hiss ordinaunce / and laye hym ſelfe at Nyort / and there he helde a great eſtate and noble for he had well wherwith / for ye kyng of Englande / Who entierly loued hym Wolde that he ſhulde ſo do for he was well worthy for he was a good knyght curteſſe and benynge amyable / liberall / preu
                  •
                / ſage / and trewe in all cauſes / and valiauntly had mayntayned hym ſelfe among all lordes / ladies / and dammuſelless / Nor there was neuer knyght in his tyme better beloued nor prayſed of euery creature.
            ANd in the meane ſeaſon that the 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                of the kynge of Englande were takynge of the poſſeſſions of the forſaid landes accordyng to the treatye and peace. There were certayne other deputies ſtablyſſhed by the kynge of Englande in the bondes and limitations of Frāce With certayne perſones commytted by the frē
               che kynge to cauſe all maner of men of warre to auoyde and departe oute of the holdes and 
                  〈…〉
               ſo
                  •
               s that they helde by the cōmaundement o
                  •
                the kyng of Englande / and they were ſtraitly 
                  〈◊〉
                on peyne of theyr lyues and gooddes and to be reputed as ennemies to the kyng of Englande that they ſhulde leaue and delyuer vp all ſuche fortereſſes as they helde / that ſhulde perteyue to the frenche kynge. So there were ſome knyghtes and ſqu
                  •
               ers / ſuche as owed a
                  〈…〉
               geaunce to the kynge of Englande / ob
                  ••
               ed the kynges commaundement / and rend
                  •
               ed 
                  •
               rcauſed to be rendred) the fortreſſes that they helde. But there were ſome that wolde nat obeye / ſayeng howe they made warre in the title of the kynge of Nauarre. Alſo there were many ſtrangers / that were great capitaynes / and great pyllers / that Wolde nat departe / as Almayns / Brabances / Flemmynges / 
                  •
               aynows / 
                  〈◊〉
                / manſo
                  •
               s / frāco
                  •
               s / who were but pore by reaſon of the warres / wherfore they thought to recouer them ſelfe / with makynge of Warre in the realme of Fraunce. The whiche people perſeuered ſtyll in theyr euyll doynge: and ſo they dyd after moche euyll in the Realme / agaynſte all them that they were in diſpleaſure with. And Whan the capitaynes were thus departed in courteſſe maner out of theſe fortreſſes that they helde / and that they were in the felde / than they gaue leaue to theyr men of warre to departe / Who had lerned ſo to pylle and robbe / that they thought to retourne into theyr owne countreys was nat to them profitable: and perauenture they durſte nat / bicauſe of ſuche vyllayne dedes / that they were accuſed of there. So that they gathered them ſelfe to guyther / and made amonge them ſel
                  •
               e newe capitaynes and toke by election the worſte and mooſt vnhappy perſonne of theym all: and ſo rode forthe one fro an other / and mette to guether agayne fyrſte in Champaygne / and in Bourgoyn / and there aſſembled by great companyes the Whiche were called the late commers / bicauſe they hadde as than but lyttell pylled in the Realme of France. And ſodainly they went and toke by ſtrengthe the fortereſſe of Genuille / and great gooddes therin the whiche were brought thyther by theym of the countrey / on truſte of the ſtronge place. And whan theſe cōpanions had thus found in this place ſuche great riches / the whiche was eſtymed to be to the value of a hū
               dred thouſande frankes. They deuyded hit amonge them as longe as it wolde laſte: and ſo kepte ſtyll the caſtell a certayne ſpace of tyme / & ouer ranne and waſted the countrey of Champaigne / and the buſſhopryches of Uerdun / and of Langers. And whan they had well pylled that countrey than they paſſed further / but firſt they ſolde the caſtell of Genuill to theym of the countrey for .xx. M. frankes. And than they entred into Bourgoyne / and there reſted and refreſſhed them / and taried for mo of theyr company: and there dyd moche euill / and many villayne dedes: for they had of theyr accorde certayne knyghtes and ſquyers of the ſame countrey / who ladde and guyded them to theyr euyl doynges. And there they taryed a longe ſpace aboute Beſancon / Digon / and Beaulne / and robbed all that countrey / For there were none that reencoūtred them. And they toke the good towne of Guiercy in Beauuoys / and robbed and pylled it. And they taried a ſeaſon aboute Uuergi / bicauſe the coūtrey was plentyfull / and alwayes theyr nombre encreaſed / for all ſuche as departed oute of the fortereſſes / and had lycence of theyr capitaynes to go whither they 
                  〈◊〉
                they drewe all to that parte: ſo they were that lent to guether a .xvi. thouſand fyghtyngmen. And whan they ſawe them ſelfe to be of ſo great a nombre: than they ſtablyſſhed amonge them certayne capitaynes / to whom they ſhuld obey in all thynges. I ſhall ſhewe you the names of ſome of the greatteſt maiſters amonge theym. Fyrſte a knyght of Gaſcoyne called 
                  〈◊〉
                Segu
                  •
               n of Battefoill he had in his company two thouſande fyghtyng men: alſo there was Callebert Callabaton / Guy of Pineſpiote / the litel Mechin / Batailler / Hānequin francois / y• Bourge of Eſpace / Nandon de Baquerant / the Bourg of Bourc / the Bretuel / the Nucharge / y• Scot / Arbretoury / the almayne Bourdonnell / Bernarde of the Salle / Robert Briquet / Carnelle Aymemon of Drtige / Garſiotte of the Caſtell / Gironnet of Paux / Lortingo of the Salle and dyuerſe other. And ſo aboute the myddes of lente theſe companyons aduyſed them ſelfe to drawe to warde Auignon / and to go ſe the pope and the cardynals. and ſo they paſſed through the countrey of Maſcon / and addreſſed theymſelfe to go into the countie of Foreſtes that plē
               tyfulle countrey / and towarde Lyon on the riuer of Roſne.
            
            
               ANd Whan the frenche kyng herd of theſe tidynges / howe theſe companions daily multiplied / waſted & exyled his realme: he was therwith ryght ſore diſpleaſed: for it was ſhewed hym by aduyſe of counſayle / that theſe companions myght ſo ſore encreaſe and multiply that they myght do more euyll and vilayn dedes in the realme of Fraunce / than euer was done (while the warre endured) by the engliſſhemen. Therfore the kynge was counſayled / that he ſhuld ſend an army of men of warr to fyght with them. Than the kyng wrote ſpecially to his coſyn the lorde James of Bourb
                  •
                who as than was in the towne of Montpellier and had put newely ſir John̄ Chādos in poſſeſſion for the kynge of Englande / of dyuerſe landes cities / townes / caſtels / and 
                  ••
               rtreſſeslyteynynge to the duchie of Acquita
                  〈…〉
                is before ſayde. So the kynge by his ſayd wrytyng deſired his coſyn of Bourbon to be chief
                  •
                capttayne to encountre / and to fyght with theſe companions / and to take men of warre with hym / in ſuche nōbre that he myght be ſtrōge ynough to fyght with them. And as ſoone as the lorde of Bourbon herde theſe tidynges / incontinent he went to the citie of Agenoiſe without any reſtynge by the way / and ſent out letrers and meſſangers into euery parte / deſirynge and commaūdyng in the frenche kynges name all knyghtes and ſquiers to come to hym / apparelled for the warre and euery man obeyed his commaundement. And whan they were aſſembled they drewe toward Lyōs on the riuer of Roſne willynge to fyght with theſe euill people. This lorde James of Bourbon / was well beloued through all the realme of Fraunce / and euery man gladly obeyed hym ſo that knyghtes and ſquiers of all parties / as of Auuergne / of 
                  •
               ymoſyn / of Prouēce / of Sauoy / and of the Dolphynne of Uien / and of other parties folowed hym: and alſo diuers knyghtes and ſquiers of the duchie of Bourgoyn. The whiche the yong duke of Bourgoyn ſent thither: and ſo al theſe men of armes drewe on forwarde / and paſſed Lyons / and the countie of Maſcon / and came into the coūtie of Foreſtes / where the lord James of Bourbons ſyſter was lady by the right of her children: for the erle of Foreſtes (her huſbande) was newely deed. Therfore ſhe gouerned the countrey / and ſo ſir Reynalt of Foreſtꝭ / brother to the ſayd erle / receyued the lorde James of Bourbon and his company ryght ioyouſly / and fealted them as well as he myghty▪ alſo there were his two nephewes who preſented them ſelfe to ryde with 
                  〈◊〉
                in armes / to beſende their countrey / for the companions were drawyng to that parte: they were as thā about Chaſlon / and about Thourain. And whā they vnderſtode that the frēche men gadered to gether to fyght with them: Than the capitaynes drewe to guether to take counſayle / howe they ſhulde maynteyne themſelfe. Than they nombred theyr company / and found how they were a .xvi. M. fyghtyng men of one and other / and ſayd amonge them ſelfe / let vs go agaynſt theſe frenche men / who deſyre to fynde vs / and let vs fyght with them at our aduauntage if we may orels nat / & if that fortune be with vs we ſhall be all riche for a great ſeaſon / as well by the reaſon of good priſoners as other goodes, and also we ſhalbe ſo redoubted whereſo euer we go / that none ſhalbe ſo hardy to encountre vs / and if we leſe / we ſhall leſe but our Wages. And to this pourpoſe they agreed all. Than they diſlodged and went vp the mountaynes / to entre into the countie of Foreſtes / and to come to the riuer of Loyre / and ſo they founde in their way a good towne called Charlien / in the 
                  〈◊〉
                of Maſcon: and they made a f
                  •
               erſe aſſa
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                to / the wiche endured a hole day / but they coude wynne no thynge there / it was ſo well defended by gentylmen of the countrey ſuche as were 
                  〈◊〉
                in / orels it had ben taken. And than they departed thenſe and ſpred abrode in the countrey perteynyng to the lorde of Beauteu / and ther 
               
                  〈◊〉
                great dammage: and than they entred into the byſſhopriche of Lyons. And as they went euer they toke ſmall holdꝭ by y• way & lodged 
                  〈◊〉
                them & euer they dyd moche trouble whe
                  •
                they came and on a daye they toke a caſtell & the lo
                  ••
               e and y• lady within it / the whiche caſtell was called Brunay a thre leages from Lyons / and ther
                  •
                they lodged and reſted them / and there had perfect knowlege howe the frenche men were drawen into the feldes / & apparelled them to fyght with them.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the lorde James of 
                  〈◊〉
                and his company were diſcom
                  〈…〉
                by the companyōs: and howe the 
                  〈◊〉
               
               pe made to be cried a croſſe after theſe companyons had taken the Brydge ſaynt Eſperyte: and of the anſwere that they made. Cap. CC .xv.
            
               
               THe men of warr thus aſſembled with the lorde of Bourbon beyng at Ly
                  •
               s / vnderſtode that the route of the cō
               panyous aproched faſte toward them / and had wōne the towne & caſtell of Brunay and dyuerſe other holdes: and howe they ſore waſted and eriled the countrey. Theſe tydynges greatly diſpleaſed the lorde of Bour
               
                  〈◊〉
                bicauſe he had the gouernynge of the erle of 
                  〈…〉
               ſtes landes & of his ſōnes his nephewes Than they went into the felde / and ſawe well howe they were a great nombre of men of armes knyghtes and ſquiers: and ſo they ſent out theyr courrours to know what theyr ennemies dyd / and where they were / & where they ſhulde be founde. Nowe ſhall I ſhewe you the great malice of theſe companyons / who were lodged on a moūtayne / and there they had ſuche a pla
               
                  〈◊〉
                that they coude nat be diſeryed nor auewed and ſpecially the chief of them / who were beſte harneyſed: for the reſidewe (who were worſte harneyſed) arenged alonge on the hylle ſyde / 
                  〈…〉
               red the frenche currours to aproche nere to them and to retourne agayne withoute / any 
                  ••
               mage to the lorde James of Bourbon / the erle Duzes / 
                  〈◊〉
                Raynalt of Foreſtes / and to the other frenche company / to whom they reported as they had ſeen / and ſayd: Syrs we haue ſeen yonder company your ennemies / and to our powers wel aduyſed them. and all thynges ſen and cōſydered to our eſtimacion they paſſe nat a. 
                  〈…〉
                M. perſones / and meruailouſly euil harneyſed. And whan the lorde of Bourbon herd that report he ſayd to the archepreſt: Sir ye haue tolde me or this / that they were to the nombre of. 
                  〈◊〉
               . M. fyghtyng men / and now ye here 
                  〈◊〉
                contrary. Sir quod he I thought them neuer vnder ye ſayd ſome and if they be nat god be thanked / it is the better for vs / therfore nowe take hede what ye wyl do. In the name of god quod the lorde of Bourbon / we wyll go & fight with them / and there he ordered his batayles / and ſet them in good araye redy to fyght for he myght ſe his ennemies before hym / and there he made certayn newe knyghtes firſt his owne 
                  ••
               deſt ſonne Peter / and he rayſed his Baner / and alſo his nephewe the yonge erle of Foreſtꝭ the lorde of Tournon / the lorde of Mo
                  〈…〉
               er & the lorde Groſlee of Daulph
                  ••
               e / and there were alſo the lorde Loys ſir Robert of Beau
               
                  〈◊◊〉
                
               
                  •
               ewes of Chaalon / ſyr Hewe of Uien / the erle 
                  〈◊〉
                / and dyuerſe other good knyghtes and ſquiers / all deſyrynge to auaunce their honours and to ouerthrowe theſe companyōs that thus pylled the countrey without any title of reaſon / and there it was ordeyned that the archepreſt / and ſir Reynolde of Carnoll ſhuld gouerne the firſt bataile / for he was a good and an expert knyght and he had in that bataile .xvi. hundred fyghtynge men. Theſe routes of companyons that were on the moūtayne ſaw right well the orderynge of the frenche men / but they coude nat ſo well ſe them nor theyr gydyng / nor aproche well to them / but to theyr great daunger or damage / for theſe companyons hadde in this mountayne a thouſande cart lode of great ſtones / whiche was greatly to their aduaūtage and profitte / theſe frenche men that ſo ſore deſired to fyght with their ennemies / howe ſo euer they dyd they coude nat come to them the nexte waye / therfore they were dreuen of neceſſite to coſt aboute the mountayne / where there ennemies were. And whan they came on that ſyde / than they who had great prouiſion of ſtones began to caſte ſo ſore downe the hyll on them that dyd aproche that they bette downe / hurte and maymed a great nōbre in ſuche wyſe that they myght nor durſte nat paſſe nor aproche any nerer to theym. And ſo that fyrſt bataylle was ſo ſore beaten and defoyled / that of all daye after they dyd but litell ayde. Than to theyr ſuccour approched the other bataylles / with ſir James of Bourbon his ſonne / and his nephewes with theyr baners / & a great nombre of good men of warre / and all went to be loſte / the whiche was great damage & pite / y• they hadnat wrought by better aduice and counſayle than they dyd. The archepreſte and dyuerſe other knyghtes / that were there had ſayde before / that it hadde been beſte to haue ſuffered theyr ennemyes to haue diſlodged oute of the holde that they were in and than to haue fought with them at more caſe / but they coulde nat be herde. ¶ Thus as the lorde James of Bourbon / and the other lordes with theyr Baners and Penons before them approched and coſtedde the ſayde mountayne. The worſte armed of the companyous caſte ſtyll contynewally ſtones at theym / In ſuche wyſe that the hardyeſt of them was dryuen abacke. And thus as they helde them in that eſtate a great ſpace / The great freſſhe bataylle of theſe companyons founde awaye / and came aboute the mountayne well raynged and hadde cutre theyr ſpeares of ſyxe foote of lengthe and ſo came 
                  •
               ryenge with one voyce / and brake in amonge the frenche men. So at

the firſte metyng they ouerthrewe many to the erthe / there were ſore ſtrokes on bothe partess: and theſe companyons fought ſo ardētly that it was marueyle / and cauſed the frenchemen to recule backe. And there the archpreeſt lyke a good knight fought valyantly / but he was taken priſoner by force of armes and ſore hurte / and dyuers other knightes and 
                  ••
               uyers of his company. Wherto ſhulde I make lengar reherſall of this mater: in effecte the frenchmen had the worſe. And the lorde James of Bourbone was ſoore hurte and ſir Peter his ſonne / and ther was ſlayne the yong erle of Foreſtes / and taken ſir Reynolde of Foreſtes his vncle / therle Duzes / ſir Robert of Beauieu / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys of Chalon / and mo than a hundred knyghtess: and with moche payne the lorde of Bourbone and his ſonne Peter / were borne in to the cytie of Lyons. This batayle was about the yere of our lorde god: a thouſande / thre hundred threſcore and one / the friday after Eaſter day.
            ¶ Greatly were they of the countre aba
                  ••
               hed / whan they herde that their people were dyſconfyted / and ther was none ſo hardy nor ſo ſtronge a caſtell but trymbled for feare. For the wiſe and diſcrete men ſuppoſed and ymagined that great myſchefe ſhulde multiply therby / without god put to ſom remedy. and they of Lyons were gretly abaſſhed / whā they knewe that the companyons had the vyctorie / howe beit they receyued ſwetely all them that retourned & ſcaped fro the batayle / and were ſore dyſpleſed for the hurtes of the lorde of Bourbon / and of ſir Peter his ſonne. And they of the towne ladyes and damoſelles right goodly dyde viſyte hym / but this lorde James of Bourbon dyed a thre dayes after the felde / and ſir Peter his ſonne lyued nat longe after: and they were ſore be way led of euery creature. And for the dethe of thiss lorde of Bourbon the frenche kyng was ryght ſore diſpleaſed but he coude nat amende it / ſo it behoued hym to paſſe ouer his ſorowe as well as he might.
            NOw lette vs ſpeke of theſe companyons who parſeuered ſtyll in their yuell deds / as people reioyſed and cōforted of their dedes as well for wynnynge of that iourney / as for the raunſomyng of many good priſoners. So thus theſe cōpanyons ledde their tyme at the
                  ••
                pleaſure in that countrey / for there were none that came agaynſt theym / for incontynent after the diſcōfyture of Brunay / they entred and ſpredde abrode in the countie of Foreſtes / and pylled and waſted all the countre
                  •
                except ye foreſſess. and bycauſe they were ſo great a company almooſt nothynge helde agaynſt theym. And ſo they deuyded thē into two partes / and ſir Seguyn of Batefoyle had the leſſe parte
                  •
                howe beit he had in his company a thre thouſā
               de fightyng men / and he went and lay at 
                  〈◊〉
                a myle fro Lyons / and fortefyed the place maruelouſly. and ſo his company were ther about in the marcheſſe / the whiche was one of ye plentyfull countrees of the worlde the whiche they ouer ranne / and raunſomed the people at their pleaſure: that is to ſay all the countres on this ſyde / and beyond the ryuer of Some / the coū
               tie of Maſcon / the archebyſſhoprike of Lyons and the lande of the lorde of Beauieu / & all the countrey to Marcylly to Nonnes / and to the countie of Neuers. The other parte of the ſame company: as Nandos of Beaugeraunt / Eſpyot Carnell / Robert Briquet / Ortyngo / Bernarde of the Salle / Lamyt / the Bourge Camas / the Bourge of Bretuell / the Bourge of Leſpare / and dyuers other of one ſorte and affinyte: drewe them towarde Auygnone and ſayd howe they wolde ſe the pope and cardynalles and to haue ſome of their money / orels to hare and to pyll the countre. And ſo they taryed here and there abydynge for the raūſome of ſuche priſoners as they had taken / and alſo to ſe if the truce helde bytwene Fraūce and Englande. And as they went towarde Auygnon / they toke by the way townes and fortreſſes / ſo that none helde agaynſt them / for all the countre was afrayed. And alſo in that countre they had vſed no warre: ſo y• ſuche as were in theſe ſmall holdes wyſt nat howe to defende thēſelfe fro ſuche men of warr. and theſe companyons herde howe there was at the bridge ſaynt Eſperyte a ſeuyn leages fro Auygnon great treaſure and richeſſe of the countre aſſembled ther togyder / on truſt of the ſtronge fortreſſe: and ſo the companyons aduyſed among them that if they might wynne that holde it ſhuld be gretly to their aduauntage and profyte / for thanne they thought to be mayſters of Roane / and of theym in Auygnon. And on this purpoſe they ſtubyed tyll at laſt they had caſte their aduyce as I haue herd reported in this maner. G
                  •
               yot d
                  •
                Pyn / and ye lytell Methyn rode with their company in one nyght a fyftene leages / and in the mornynge at the brekynge of the day / they came to the towne of the bridge ſaynt Spyryt and ſodenly toke it and all that were within / ye whiche was great pyte: for ther they ſlewe many an honeſt perſon / and defoyled many a da
               
                  〈…〉
               
               
and wan ſuche tycheſſe that it coude 
                  〈…〉
                / and great puruyaunces to lyue 
                  〈…〉
                And ſo by that meanes they might r
                  •
               nne at their 
                  •
               aſe without daūger / one 
                  •••
               ſon in to the realme of Fraūce / and another tyme into the empyre. So there aſſembled togyder all the companyons and euery day ran to the 
                  •
               a
                  •
               es of Auygnon wher of the pope and 
                  〈…〉
                were in great affray and drede. & to theſe companyons made there a ſoueraygne 
                  〈◊〉
                amonge them who was euer mooſt 
                  •
               omonly enemy to god and to the worlde.
            BEſyde these there were in Fraūce great nombre of  pyliers and robbers / what of englyſſhmen gaſcoyns and almaygnes / who ſayd they muſt nedes lyue. And they helde ſtyll certayne garyſons and fortreſſes / for all that the kyng of Englandes deputies had cōmaū
               ded them to auoyde and to departe. How be it they wolde nat all obey wherwith the frenche kynge was ſore diſpleaſed and all his counſell but whan theſe companyons in dyuers places herde howe theſe other companyons had ouer throwen the lorde of Bourbon and a two thouſande knyghtes and ſquyers and taken many a good priſoner. And alſo had taken in ye towne ſaynt E
                  •
               pyrite ſo great rycheſſe that it was a thyuge mcomparable: and thynkynge howe they were lykely to wynne Auygnon / or els to putte to mercy the pope and cardynalles and all the coutre of Prouynce. Thā they thought all to departe and to go thyder / for couetyſe to 
                  〈◊〉
                more / and to do more yuell dedes. So that was the cauſe that dyuers of them left vp their fortreſſes and wente to their cōpanyous / in hope to gette more 
                  •
               yllage. And whan that p
                  •
               pe 
                  〈…〉
                and the colledge of Ro
               
                  〈…〉
                were 
                  •
               ered by theſe curſed p
                  •
               opl
                  •
                the
                  •
                were greatly abaſſhed. And than 
                  〈…〉
                agaynſt theſe 
                  〈◊〉
                chriſten people who dyde their payne to diſtroy chr
                  •
               
               ſ
                  ••
               ndom
                  •
                as other bandes had done before wt
               out tytell of any reaſon / for they waſ
                  •
               ed all the countrey without any cauſe / and robbed without spa
                  •
               yng all that euer they coude gette and 
                  〈◊〉
                and de
                  •
               oyled women olde and yong without pytie and ſlewe men women & chyldren without mercy doyng to them no trespace. And ſuche as dyde mooſt ſhamefullyſt dedꝭ were reputed with them mooſt valyaunt. So than the pope and the cardynalles preached openly 
                  〈◊◊〉
                and aſſoyled (a pena 
                  •
               t cul 
                  〈◊〉
                all thoſe that wolde take on them this croy 
                  〈◊〉
               . And that wolde abandon their bodyes wil lyngly to diſtroy theſe yuell peple and their cō
               panyons / and ther was choſen among the cardynals ſir Peter of Monſtier cardynall of Arras called Dſte to be chefe capitayne of y• croyſey. And mcontynent he departed out of Auygnon and wente and taryed at Carpentraſe a ſ
                  •
               uyn myle fro Auygnon and ther he retayned all maner of ſoudyers ſuche as wold ſaue their ſoules matteynyng to theſe ſayd perdous / but they ſhulde haue none other wages / wherfore that tourney brake for euery man deꝑted▪ ſome into Lombardy / ſome to their owne coūtrees / and ſome went to the ſayd yuell company: ſo y• dayly they encreaſed. So thus they haryed the pope / the cardynals / & the marchauntes about Auygnon and dyd moche yuell tyll it was ferr into the ſomer ſeaſon. In the yere of our lorde god a thouſande thre hudred threſcore and one.
            THan the pope and the cardynals aduyſed them of a noble gentyll knyght and a good warryoure the marques of Mounferrant who kept warr and had done a long ſpace agaynſt the lordes of Myllayne / y• pope ſent forhym. And ſo he came to Auygnon and was honorably receyued of the pope and cardynals and ſo atreaty was made with hym by reaſon of a ſomme of money that he ſhuld haue / to the entent that he ſhulde get out of that ceuntre the ſayd yuell cōpanyons / and to retayne thē with him in his warres of Lombardy. So than the marques treated with the captayns of the companyons / and by reaſon of threſcore thouſand florens that they ſhulde haue among them / and great wages that ye marques ſhulde gyue thē / they agreed to depart & go with hym into Lobardy / ſo they might be aſſoyled (a pena ct culpa) all this was agreed / acomblyſſhed / and the florēs payed. And than they rendred vp ye towne ſaynt Eſpyrite and lefte the marche of Auygnon & paſſed forthe with the marques / wherof kyng John̄ of France & all the realme were right toyouſe / whan they ſawe howe they were delyuered of theſe yuell people / howbeit there were many that retorned to Burgoyn. And ſir Seguyne of Batefoyle departed nat out of ye garyl on of Ence / for he wold nat leaue it for no maner of 
                  〈◊〉
                nor promyſe, but the realme of France was in ferr better reſt & peace than it was before. So whan the mooſt parte of the companyous were thus paſſed forthe with the marques into the lande of Pyemōt. Ther the marques dyde well his deuoyre agaynſt ye lordes of Myllayne: & conquered dyuers townes caſtes / fortreſſes and countrees agaynſt them

and had dyuers encountrynges & skyrmiſſhes with them to his honour & profyte. So that 
                  〈◊〉
                in a yere by y• helpe of theſe 
                  〈◊〉
                he had the better hande / and in part had all his entent agaynſt the two lords of Myllayne of ſir Galeas. & ſir Bernabe / who after raygned in gre
                  •
                proſperite.
            SO it fortuned that ſir Seguyn of Batefoyle / who was all that ſeaſon in the garyſon of Ence on they ryuer of So
                  ••
               ie / toke by ſcalyng a good cyte in Auuergne called B
                  •
               od and therin he taryed more than a yere and fortifyed it in ſuche wyſe that he douted nothyng / and ouer ran the coūtre to Cler
                  〈…〉
                to Ty
                  •
               
               lacke / to Puy / to Caſe dieu / to Moūtferant 
                  〈◊〉
                Ryon / to Nonnet / to Uſſoyre and to 
                  •
               udalle / and the lande of the countie Dalphyn the lorde wherof was the ſame tyme in hoſtage in Englande: and in theſe countrees he and his company dyde moche yuell. And whan he had ſore enpoueryſſhed the countre ther about than by treaty he deꝑted and toke with hym great pyllage and treaſure / and ſo went to Gaſcoyne fro whēs he came firſt. Of this ſir Seguyn I can write no more / but that as Iherde recoūted he dyed marueluſly / god forgyue hym all his treſpaces. AMEN.
         
         
            ¶ Of the dethe of the duke of Lancaſtre / and of the occaſyon of the warre bytwene the frenche kyng
                  •
                and the kyng of Nauer: and howe the prince of wales came into Acquitayne / and of the ordre that was taken in Englande. Cap. CC. xv
                  •
               .
            
               IN this ſeaſon de
                  •
               ted out of the worlde in Englade the gentyll duke of Lancaſtre called Henry wher
                  ••
                the kynge and all the 
                  〈◊〉
               
               nes / knightes / and squyers were ryght ſorowfull: but they coude nat remedy it. And behynde him he left two doughters / the lady Maha
                  •
               lt and the lady Blanche: and therle of Heynault 
                  〈◊〉
                wylliam ſonne to the lorde Loyes of Banyer 
                  〈◊〉
                to the lady Margarete of Heynalt maryed the yonger ſuſter / and the lorde John̄ erle of Richmont ſonne to the kynge of Englande had maryed the other ſuſter / and was duke of Lancaſtre by right of his wyfe. The lorde James of Burbone abode ſtyll purſuynge the treaty bytwene the lorde John̄ of Mountfor
                  〈…〉
                lorde Charles of Bloys for the right 
                  〈…〉
                chy of Bretayne / acordyng to the treaty 
                  〈◊〉
                at Calais as ye haue herd before. And for 
                  〈◊〉
                of concludyng therof: great warres and 
                  〈◊〉
                felt after in the countre of Bretayne / as ye ſhall here in this hyſtorie.
            THe ſame ſeaſon the frenche kyng
                  •
                was in purpoſe to go to Auygnone to 
                  〈◊〉
                the pope and cardynals / and to go through the 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               hy of Burgoyn the whiche was newly fallen to hym. So the kyng made redy for that iourney: and departed fro Parys about the ſe
                  〈…〉
                ſaynt John̄ the Baptyſt in the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lxii. And left Charles his eldeſt ſonne duke of Normandy regent & gouernour of his realme: and the kyng had with hym his welbeloued coſyn the lorde John̄ of Artoyſe / & the erle of Tankernyll. / therle Dampmartyn / Boucequant marſhall of Fraunce and dyuers other. And ſo long rode by his ſmall iourneys and with great dyſpence taryeng in euery 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ne and cytie as he rode through Bourgoyn / ſo that about the feeſt of ſaynt Michaell he came to the newe towne 
                  •
               out Auyguon. And there his lodgyng was prepared for him and for his cōpany and there he was gretly 
                  •••
               lled by the pope & by all the hole coledge / and viſyted eche other often tymes. So thus the kynge taryed ther all the ſeaſon of wynter and about chriſtmas pope Innocent departed out of this lyfe. And than there was a great dyſcorde bytwene the cardynals for choſynge of a newe pope / for 
                  〈◊〉
                of them wolde haue had the dignyte / ſpe
               
                  〈…〉
               ly the cardynall of Boulay
                  ••
                and the cardynall of 
                  〈…〉
               ourt who were two of y• grettell of the colledge: and ſo by their diſcencyon they were longe in dyſcorde. And all the other 
                  〈…〉
               nalles finally dyde putte all the 
                  〈◊〉
                of the mater vnto the two foreſayd cardynalles / who whan they ſawe that they coude nat haue theymſelfe the papal
                  〈…〉
               . Thaūe they concluded bytwene them that none of the other ſhulde haue it. And than they dyde cho
                  ••
                and electe the abbot of ſaynt Uyctor of Mar
               
                  •
               ell to be pope / who was a good deuout and a holy man and of vertuous lyueng: and a gret clerke / and had greatly traueyled for the churche of Lombardy and other places. And ano
                  •
                after his creacion / y• frenche kyng vnderſtode that the lorde Pi
                  •
               r of Luzenon kyng of Cypre and of Hyeruſalem / ſhulde come to 
                  〈◊〉
                toſ
                  •
                the pope / and howe y• he was paſt the ſ
                  〈…〉
               
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                the frēche kyng ſayd he wolde tary ther tyll his comynge / for he had great deſyre to ſe hym for the great goodneſſe that he had herde reported of hym: and of the warre that he had made agaynſt the ſarazyns. For the kynge of Cypre had newly taken the ſtrong cyte of Salate agaynſt the enemyes of god / and ſlayne all that euer were within none except.
            IN the ſame ſeaſon and wynter ther was a great counſell in Englande on the orderyng of the realme and ſpecially on the kinges chyldren / for it was cōſydred howe yt the prince of wales held a great and a noble eſtate as he might well do: for he was▪ a valyant man puiſſant and riche / and had great herytage in Acq
                  ••
               tayne wher was habundaunce of all welth and proſperite. Than the king was counſelled that he ſhulde ſend the prince his ſon into thoſe pattes / for he had lande ſufficyēt in that duchy to maynteyne withall his dignyte and eſtate. And alſo all the barones and knightꝭ of acquitayne wolde gladly haue hym among them / of the whiche they had made requeſt to the kynge for all that ſir John Chādos was to thē ryght courtelſe and amyable. yet they had rather haue had their owne naturall ſoueraygne lorde. The prince lightly agreed to that ordynaūce & prepared for hym ſelfe & for the good lady his wyfe acordyng to their eſtates / and whan euery thyng was redy they toke leaue of the kyng and of the quene and of their bretherne / and departed out of England and aryued at Rochell In the ſame ſeaſon departed out of this world the kyng of Englandes mother Isabell of fraū
               re / doughter to kynge Philyp le Beau / ſōtyme frenche kyng. And ſhe was buryed at the fre
                  •
               r mynors in London right nobly and reuerētly ther beyng all the prelates and barones of Englande & the lordes of Fraunce / ſuche as were their in hoſtage: and this was or ye prince and princes deꝑted out of England. And after this obſequy done they departed and aryued at Rochell wher they were receyued with great ioy / and there tayed the ſpace of four dayes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kynges of Fraunce and of Cypre: toke on them the croyſey agaynſt the mfydeles: and of the gret purchace for that entent that the kynge of Cypre made with many kyngꝭ and princes in dyuers places of chriſtendome. Cap. CC .xvii.
            
               AS ſoone as ſir Johan Chandos / who had alonge ſeaſon gouerned the duchye of Acquitayne: herde howe the prince was comyng thyder. Than he departed fro Nyort & came with a goodly company of knyghtes and ſquyers to y• towne of Rochell / wher he was well receyued with the prince and princes. And ſo the prince with great honoure and ioye was brought into the cytie of Poycters: and thyder came to ſe hym with great ioye / the barownes and knyghtes of Poy
                  •
               tou & of Xaynton. and there they dyde to hym feaultie and homage / as they ought to do. And than he wente to Burdeaux and there taryed a long ſeaſon and the princes with him / and thyder came to ſe hym the erles / vycoūtes / barownes / and knyghtes of Gaſcoyne: & there they were receyued right ioyouſly. And ye prince acquyted hym ſelfe ſo nobly amonge theym / that euery man was well content. And the erle of Foyz came thyder to ſe the prince / who had great chere and feaſt: And there was a peace made bytwene hym and the erle of Armynake / the whiche a long ſpace before made werr eche on other. And than anone after ſir John̄ Chandos was made conſtable of all the countrey of Guyene / and ſir Guychart Dangle was made marſhall. So thus the prince made ſuche knightes of his houſe as he loued beſt great offycers throughout the duchy of Acquitayne▪ and tylled all conſtableſhyppes & bayl
                  •
               wykes with englyſſhe knyghtes / who kept after great and puyſſaunt aſtates: parauenture greatter than they of the countrey wolde they had done / but the matters wente nat at their ordynaunces.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of the prince of wales and Acquitayne and of the princes / and ſpeke of kynge Johan of Fraunce / who was as than at the newe towne without Auygnon.
            ABout the tyme of candelmaſſe the yere of our lorde / a thouſande thre hundred 
                  〈◊〉
               . Kyng Peter of Cypre came to Auygnon / of whoſe comynge the hole courte was greatly reioyſed and dyuers cardynalles went to mete hym / and brought hym to the paleys to ye pope Urbayne / who ryght ioyouſly receyued hym. And alſo ſo dyde the frenche kynge / who was

there preſent. And whan they ha
                  ••
               e 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               o g
                  •
               
               ther a certayne tyme / and taken wyne and spices / the two kynges departed fro the pope / and eche of them went to theyr owne lodgyng. And ye ſame ſeaſon there was a wage of 
                  •
               atell before the frenche kyng / bitwene two noble and expert knyghtes / ſyr Aymon of Pommters / and ſyr Fouques of Archiac. and whā they had fought ſufficiently / than the frenche kynge treated for a peace / and accorded them to gether. And ſo all the lente ſeaſon / theſe two kynges 
                  •
               aryed there about Auignon / and often tymes they viſited the pope / who receyued them right 
                  ••
               y
                  •
               uſly.
            ANd often tymes whan the kynge of Ciper was with the pope (the freche kyng beyng preſent and the cardinalles) he declared to them / howe that for all Chriſtedome it ſhuld be a noble and a worthy thyng to open the paſſage ouer the ſee / and to go agaynſt y• enemyes of the Chriſten fayth. The whiche wordes the frenche kynge gladly herde / and pourpoſed in hym ſelfe (if he myght lyue .iii. yere) to go thither for two cauſes that moued hym therto / the fyrſte bicauſe his father kynge Philyp had auowed ſo to do: and ſecondly to the entent therby to drawe out of his realme all maner of men of warre / called companyous / who 
                  •
               ylled and robbed his countrey withoute any title / and to ſaue theyr ſoules. This pourpoſe and entente the frenche kyng reſerued to hym ſelfe without any worde ſpekyng therof / vntyll good fryday that pope Urban hym ſelfe preched in his chapell at Auignon / beynge preſent both kynges / and the hole College of cardinalles. After that holy predicacion / the whiche was right humble and moche deuoute. The frēche kynge by great deuocion toke on hym the Croyſey and ſwet
                  •
               h
                  •
                requyred of the pope to accord and to conſyrme his voyage: and the pope lygh
                  •
               ly agreed therto: and ſo the kynge toke it / and 
                  •
               oith hym ſyr Calleran cardinall of Pierregourt / the erle of Artoiſe / the erle of Ewe / the erle Dampmartyn the erle of Tankeruille / ſyr Arnolde Dandrehen / the great priour of France / ſyr Boucequāt & dyuerſe other knyghtes there preſent. And of this enterpriſe the kynge o
                  •
                
               Cyper was ryght ioyouſe: and thanked ryght hartely our lorde therof / and reputed hit for a great ſyngular meryte.
            THus as ye maye ſe and here the frenche kynge and the ſayd / lordes toke on them 
                  •
               o weare aboue all theyr garmentes the 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               roſſe: and our holy father the pope 
                  〈…〉
                this voyage / and cauſed it to be preched in dyuerſe places. I ſhall ſhe we you howe the kyng of Cyper / who was come thither to 
                  〈◊〉
                and moue this voyage / had great 
                  〈◊〉
                to go and ſe the Emperour and all the hyghe baroues of the Empyre / & ſo into Englande to ſe the kyng there / and ſo to all the other great lordes of 
                  •••
               
               
               
                  ••
               en
                  •
               ome. And thus as he purpoſed ſo he dyd / as ye ſhall here after in this hiſtory. Our holifather the pope / and the frenche kynge offered and promyſed hym theyr bodyes goodes / and ſubſtances / to furnyſſhe this voyage and gaue hym full power to publyſſhe the grace and pardon of this holy voyage / therby to cauſe all lordes and prynces the rather to enclyne to thys holy voyage. And ſo this kynge was ſo well beloued for the reaſons that he ſhewed / and for the fayre language that he vttered to the lordes of this voyage / that they had rather haue herd hym than any other predicacion. and ſo on this poynt they re
                  ••
               ed. Anone after eaſter / the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lxiii. the kynge of Cyper departed fro Auignon / and ſayd he wolde go and ſe the emperour / and lordes of the Empyre / and promyſed to returne agayne by Brabant / Flaunders / and Haynault / and ſo he toke leaue of the pope / and of the frenche kynge who in all caſes acquyted them ryght well to ward hym / and gaue hym many fayre gy
                  •
               tꝭ and 
                  •••
                wels / and pardons that ye pope gaue to hym / & to all his men. And anone after the departyn
                  •
                of the kynge of Cyper / the frenche kynge toke leaue of the pope / & went to the towne of Mo
                  ••
                pell
                  ••
               er / to viſite Languedor / where he had 
                  〈◊〉
                been of a longe ſpace before.
            
               NO we let vs ſpeke of the kynge of Cy
                  •
                and of the voiage 
                  〈◊〉
                he made He rode ſo longe by his 
                  •
               ourne
                  ••
                / that he came into almayn into the cite of Pragne / and there he foūde the / emperour of Almayne ſyr Charles of Behaigne / who receyued hym graciouſly and all the lordes of the Empyre that were there preſent. And the kynge of Cyper taryed there a thre wykes / and exhorted greatly theym of the Empyre to this holy voyage: and in euery place where he paſſed through Almayne the Emperour payde for hys Coſtes. Than the kynge of Cyper wente into the duchye of Jullyers / where the Duke made hym ryght great feaſt and 
                  •
               here: and tha
                  •
                from thenſe he went in to 
                  〈…〉
               ante: where alſo the Duke and ducheſſ
                  •
               
               
receyued hym with great honour in the towne of Bruzels with diuers ſuppers / Juſtis / tournays / & other paſtymes of honor / as they coude ryght well do hit: and at his departynge they gaue hym great gyftes and ieowels. And than he went into Flanders to ſe the erle Loys. who in like wyſe dyd greatly feaſt and honour hym and ſpecially at Brugꝭ: and dyd ſo moche that the kynge Was Well contente with hym: And there he taryed that ſomer / alwayes exhortyng euery man to this holy voyage: Wherof dyuerſe lordes had great ioy and deſire to do it.
         
         
            ¶ Of the frenche hoſtages that were in Englande: and of the purchas that the kynge of Ciper made for this croiſey. Cap. CC .xviii.
            
               IN this ſeaſon the kynge of Englande dyd grace to the iiii. frenche dukes that were there ihoſtage: that is to ſay the Duke of Orleaunce / the duke of Aniou / the duke of Berrey / & the duke of Bourbon. Theſe lordes were at Calais / and yt kyng was content that they ſhulde ryde aboute Calais by the ſpace of .iiii. dayes where they lyſte So that euer at y• .iiii. dayes ende they to come agayne to Calais by ſonne ſettynge. And thys the kynge of Englande dyd for a good entente bicauſe they ſhulde the rather (in France) purchaſe for theyr delyueraunce. Theſe .iiii. lordes thus beyng in Calais / ſent meſſangers dyuers tymes to the frenche kynge / and to the duke of Normandy his eldeſt ſonne / deſyrynge them to entende to theyr delyueraunce / accordynge as they had promyſed and ſworne / whan they entred into Englande / ſayeng / els they wold take hede therto them ſelfe / for they thought theymſelf as no priſoners: & though that theſe lordes were right nere of lignage to the kynge / yet for all that theyr meſſangers were nat herde / nor delyuered to theyr pleaſure / Wherwith theſe lordes were right ſore diſpleaſed / and ſpecially the duke of Aniou who ſayd he wold right wel prouyde for a remedy. The frenche kynge and his counſaile / and the duke of Normandy wer ſore beſied / what for the voyage of the Croyſey that he had taken vpon hym: and for the warres that the kynge of Nauarre made in the realme / who had ſent into Lombardy for certayn of the companyons to helpe hym in his warre. Theſe were y• cauſes / that they toke no regard to the lordes that laye in hoſtage / that is to ſay to the foreſayde .iiii. dukes / nor to delyuer their meſſangers / Whan they came into Fraunce. And whan the kyng of Ciper had viſited theſe lordes / and theſe ſayd countreys / he rode ſo by his iourneys / that he came to Calais / where he founde .iii. of theſe ſayd dukes / the duke of Orleaunce / the duke of Berrey / & the duke of Bourbon: the duke of Aniou was gone into Fraūce / I can nat tell in what eſtate. Theſe .iii. dukes as priſoners receyued the kynge of Ciper into Calais right ioyouſly / and the kynge acquyted hym to them right ſwetely: and ſo they wer there to guether .ii. dayes. Than the kynge of Cyper paſſed the ſee / and arryued at Douer / & there taried two dayes / and refreſſhed hym tyll all his cariage was vnſhypped. Than he rode by ſmalle iourneys at his eaſe / tyll he came to London / and there he was honorably receyued and feaſted / of the lordes of Fraunce that were there / and alſo by them of England / who were ſent to mete with hym by the kynge of Englād as the erle of Herforde / ſyr Gaulter of Manny / the lorde Spenſer / ſyr Rawoll Feryes / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guyſhart of Pēnebruges / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Richard of Stury who accompanied and brought hym to his lodgyng in the cite of London. I can nat recoūt to you in a hole day the noble diners and ſuppers chere and feaſtes that was made to hym by the kynge of Englande / and the preſentes / gyftes / and ieowels that was gyuen hym / and to ſay
                  •
                trouthe / he was well worthy to hauehit / for he was come thither fro farre with great expenſe to exhorte the kynge to take on hym the redde croſſe / and to helpe to open the paſſage againſt goddes ennemies / but the kynge of Englande excuſed hym ſelfe graciouſly / and right ſagely.
            SO than agayne the kynge of Cyper repaſſed the ſee / and arryued at Boloyn & herde in his waye howe that the frenche kynge and the duke of Normandy / the lorde Philyp his yongeſt ſonne / and great parte of his counſayle ſhulde be at the good towne of Amyenſe / thither rode the kynge of Cyper / and there he founde the kynge / who was newly come thider and part of his counſaile / and there he was nobly receyued / and there recounted to them how he had ſpedde in all his voiage / the whiche they were glad to here. And whan the kynge of Cyper had ben there a certayn ſpace of tyme: than he ſayde / he tought he hadde nat yet no thynge done tyll he hadde ſeen the Prynce of Wales / 

ſay enge that by the grace of god he Wolde go and ſehym / and the lordes of Poictom and of Acquitayne. The frenche kynge accorded wel that he ſhulde ſo do / but he deſired hym at his retourne / that he wolde come through Fraūce. And the kyng of Ciper promyſed ſo 
                  •
               o to. And thus he departed from Amience / and went towarde Beaunoyſe / & paſſed the riuer of Seyn and at laſt came to Poicters. At that tyme the prince was at Angoleſme / where as he ſhulde kepe a great feaſt / Juſtis / and tournay / of .xl. knyghtes / and as many ſquiers for the loue of the princeſſe / Who was brought to bedde of a faire ſonne called Edwarde. And as ſoone as the prince knewe of the cōmynge of the kyng of Ciper / he ſent to mete with hym / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chaudos / and a great nombre of other knyghtes & ſquiers of his houſe / Who brought hym With great ioye and reuerence to the prince / who receyued hym right honorably in all 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            NOwe let vs leaue a while to 
                  〈◊〉
                of the kynge of Ciper / and returne to the frē
               che kynge / and recount to what entencion he & his counſatle were come to amience. I was as than enfourmed / and true hit was that kynge Johſt of Fraunce was inpourpoſ
                  •
                to go into Englande / to ſe kynge Edwarde his brother / & ye quene his ſyſter. And for that cauſe he had aſſembled there his counſaile / as at that tyme. & all they of his counſaile coude nat make hym to vary fro that pourpoſe: and yet they counſa
                  ••
               ed hym ſore to the contrarie. Diuers prelates and barones of Fraunce ſayd howe he toke on hym a great foly / as to put hym ſelfe in the daunger of the Kynge of Englande: the kyng anſwered them and ſayd: Syrs I haue foūde in the kynge of England my brother / and in y• quene / and their children / ſo moche trouth and honour / that I can nat prayſe them to moche. Wherfore I doubte me nothynge of them / but that they wyll be to me ryght courteſſe and true frende in all caſes. Alſo I wyll excuſe my ſonne the duke of Aniou of his returnyng into Frāce To his wordes there were none that durſt ſay the contrarie / ſyth he was ſo determined ihym ſelf. Than the kyng ordeyned agayne his ſon the duke of Norman dye to be regent and gouernour of the realme of Fraunce vntyll his retourne agayne. And there he promyſed to the lorde Philyp his yong ſon / that at his returne agayne / he wolde make hym duke of Borgoyn and heriter of that duchie. And whā all his purueyaunce was redy / accordynge to his entent and prouiſion at Bolloyn before hym / than he departed from Amience / and rode tyll he came to Hedyn / and there kept his Chriſtmas daye / and thither came to ſe hym Loys erle of Flaunders / & there the kyng taried a .ii. or .iii. dayes And on Innocētis day he departed fro Hedin.
         
         
            ¶ Howe kynge John̄ of Fraunce returned into England where he dyed And how the duke of Normandy defended hym agaynſt the naueroyſe: and how Mante and Meulent were taken. And howe ſyr Bremont de la 
                  •
               all was diſcomfetted. Ca. CC .xix.
            
               KIng John̄ dyd ſo moche by his iourneis / that he came to Boloyn / and lodged in the abbay / and taried there tyll he had wynde at wyll / and with hym was ſir John̄ Artoyſe Erle of Ewe / the Erle Dampmartyn / the great priour of Fraunce 
                  〈◊〉
                Boucequant Marſhall of Fraunce / ſir Triſtram of Maguelles / ſir Peter and ſyr John̄ Uillers / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Anuil / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Nicholas Braque and diuers other knyghtes and ſquiers. And whan theyr ſhips were all charged & yt ye mar
                  •
               
               ners ſaw they had good wind they gaue knowlege therof to the kyng / & ſo thā ye kyng entred into his ſhip aboute mydnyght and his people into other ſhippes: and ſo longe they ſayled / y• they arriued in Englande at Douer / and that was the day before the vigill of the Epiphany Anoue tidynges came to the kyng of England and to the quene / who were as than at Eltham a .vii. leages fro London / that the frenche kyng was come a lande at Douer. Than he ſente thither diuers knyghtes of his houſe / as 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bartilmewe of Brunes / ſir Alayne of Bouqueſels / ſir Richarde of Pennebruge and dyuers other They departed fro the kynge and rode toward Douer / and founde there the frenche kynge / and there they made great honoure and chere to hym: and amonge other thynges they ſayd howe the kynge theyrlorde was right ioyous of his comynge / and the frenche kynge lyghtly beleued theym. And the nexte day the kyng and all hys companie lepte on theyr horſes and rode to Caunturburye and came thither to dyner / and in entrynge in to the churche of ſaynt Thomas / the kyng dyd ryght great reuerence

               
                  〈◊〉
                offred to the Sh
                  •
               y
                  ••
                a ryche 
                  〈◊◊〉
               
               ▪ And 
                  〈…〉
               e the kynge tar
                  •
               ed t
                  〈…〉
                And on the 
                  〈…〉
               de dare he departed and 
                  •
               ood
                  •
                towarde 
                  〈…〉
               dou and at laſt
                  •
                came to 
                  〈…〉
               ame Where 
                  〈…〉
               kynge o
                  •
                England
                  •
                was with a great nom
               
                  〈…〉
                hym / Who recey
               
                  〈…〉
               . His comynge thy
               
                  〈…〉
                after dyner and bitwene 
                  〈…〉
                
               ther was great daūſyng 
                  〈…〉
               . There was the yonge lorde of 
                  〈…〉
               ed hym ſelfe to daunce and 
                  〈…〉
               t bothe frenche and englyſſhe 
                  〈…〉
               olde hym▪ 
               
                  •
               t became hym ſo 
                  〈…〉
                all that 
                  〈◊〉
                he dyd. I canne nat ſhe we all 
                  〈…〉
                honorably the kynge of En
               
                  ••
               ande and the quene receyued the frēche kyng 
                  〈…〉
                day they departed from Elthame / 
                  〈…〉
                to London. So all maner of people 
                  〈…〉
                of the 
                  •
               itie mette and receyued hym 
                  〈◊〉
                great re
                  •
               er
                  •
               ce / and he was brought with 
                  •
               reat 
                  〈…〉
                through London to his lodgyng to Sa
                  ••
               y the whiche was ordeined for 
                  〈◊〉
               . And in the ſame caſtell were lodged ſuche 
                  〈◊〉
                his blodde as laye there in hoſtage. Firſt the 
                  〈◊〉
                of Orleaunce his brother / and his ſonne 
                  〈◊〉
                duke of Berrey / his 
                  •
               oſy
                  •
                the duke of Bout 
                  〈◊〉
                the 
                  〈◊〉
                of Alenſon / Guy of Bloys / the erle 
                  〈…〉
                Powle and dyuers other. So thus y• 
               
                  〈…〉
                kynge taried there parte of that wynter 
                  •
               mong the lordes of his owne blodde right ioy 
                  〈◊〉
                / and often tymes the kynge of Englande 
                  〈◊〉
                his children viſited hym / and the duke of 
                  •
               larence / the duke of Lancaſtre / and the lorde 
                  ••
               mon one of the kynges ſōnes / and ſo diuers 
                  ••
               mes they made great feaſtes to guether in dy
               
                  •
               ers 
                  •
               uppers / and in diuers other paſtymes at his lodgynge of Sauoy. And whan it pleaſed 
                  •
               he frenche kyng he went to the kynges palaice of Weſtm̄ ſecret
                  •
               y by the ryuer of Temes / and often tymes theſe two k
                  •
               nges (whan they met) 
                  ••
               wayled the lorde James of Bourbon ſayeng that it was great damage of hym / and a great myſſe of hym out of theyr cōpany for it became hym right well to be among great lordes.
            NOwe let vs leaue to ſpeke of the frenche kyng / and returne to the kyng of Ciper Who came to Aguillon to the prince of Wales his co
                  •
               ſyn / who receyued hym right ioyouſly / and in like wyſe ſo dyd all y• barones / knyghtes and 
                  〈…〉
               ers of Poictou / and of 
                  •
               ainton / ſuche 
                  〈◊〉
                were about the prince / as the vicoūt of Tho
               
                  •••
                the yong lorde of Pouns / the lorde of Per
               
                  •••
               ey / ſyr Loys of 
                  •
               arcourt / 
                  〈◊〉
                Guyſſharde 
                  •••
               ngle: and of Englande ſ
                  •
               r John̄ 
               
                  •
               handos 
                  〈◊〉
                Thomas Felton / ſir Nowell Lorwiche / ſyr Richarde of Pountchardon / ſir Symon Baſſell / ſir Ba
                  •
               d wyn of Franuill / ſir Daugoriſes and diuers other / aſwell of the ſame coūt
                  •
               ey as of Englande. The kyng of Ciper was well honored and feaſted of the prince / and of the prin
               
                  •
               eſſe / and of the ſayde barones and knyghtes. And there he taried more than a monethe / and than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos ledde hym a ſportynge aboute in xainton and Poictow / and went and ſawe the good towne of Rochell / where he had 
                  •
               eaſt and there. And whan he hadde viſited the countrey / than he retourned agayne to Angoleſme / and was at the great feaſt that the prince helde at that tyme / where there were great plen tye of knyghtes and ſquiets: and anone after y• feaſt / the kyng of Ciper toke leaue of the prince and of the knyghtes of the countrey: but fyrſt he ſhewed all theym principally wherfore he was come thither / and why he had taken on hym the 
                  •
               edde croſſe that he ba
                  •
               e / and how the pope had confermed it / and what dignite and priuilege perteyned to that voyage. and howe the frenche kyng by deuocion / and diuers other great lordes had enterpriſed / and ſworne the ſame. Thā the prince and his knyghtes anſwered curteſly and ſayd that truly it was a voiage for all maner of men of honour to take hede of. And by y• pleaſure of god (if the paſſage be ones open) he ſhulde nat be alone / but he ſhulde fynde them y• wolde be gladde to deſyre to auaunce their honors. Of theſe wordes the kynge of Ciper was well content / and than departed: but ſir John̄ Chandos helde hym company / tyll he was out of the principalite / and as I vnderſtode he retourned agayne into Fraunce to Parys / Wenynge to haue founde there the kynge / but he dyd nat / for the kynge was nat retourned oute of Englāde / for he lay ſore ſicke at his lodgyng at the Sauoy in London / and euery daye he enpayred worſe and worſe / the whiche greatly diſpleaſed the kynge of Englande / and y• quene for all his phiſi
                  •
               iens ſayde he was in great pa
               
                  •
               ell. And all this knewe right well the duke of Normandy / Who was at Parys / and had the gouernynge of all the Realme of Fraunce / for ſyr Boucequant Was come oute of Englande and hadde enfourmed the Duke howe it ſtode with the kynge hys father. The kynge of Nauarre alſo knewe the certaynte therof / and was no thynge ſorye: For he hoped (that if the frenche 
                  •
               yng dyed) that the Warre / the Whiche he made ſhulde be the better for hym. And he wrote to the Captall of Beuſm / Who Was as than

with the erle of Foyes / deſyringe hym to come into Normādy to hym / ſayeng howe he wolde make hym ſouerayne capt
                  •
               ayne of all his retynewe. And the captall departed fro the erle of Foyes and toke his way to the kyng of Nauer and as he went he deſyred certayne knightes & ſquyers to go with hym / howbeir that was but a fewe. So thus in the meane ſeaſon while the captall was thus comyng to war
                  •
               e the kyng of Nauerre / kynge John̄ of Fraunce dyed in his bedde in Englande at the Sauoy in the cytie of London. Wherof the kyng of Englande the quene and all their chyldren / & many 
                  ••
               o in Englande were right ſory and heuy for y• great honour and loue that the kynge had to hym / euer ſythe the peace was made bytwe
                  •
               e them. Thā the duke of Orleaūce his brother / and the duke of Berry his ſonne / who were ryght ſorowfull for his dethe. ſent incōtynent in great haſt worde therof ouer the ſee to the duke of Normādy wherof the duke was right ſory a
                  ••
                good reaſon why. Howbeit he knowynge hym ſelfe ſucceſſour of the herytage of Fraunce / and ſeynge howe the kyng of Nauerr dayly fortifyed garyſons agaynſt hym / he thought it was tyme to prouyde for good counſell and for remody 
                  〈◊〉
                that behalfe. All the ſame ſeaſonne there was a knyght in Bretayne that toke euer the frenche partie / called ſyr Bertram 
                  •
               e Gueſcly
                  •
                the renowme of hym was nat greatly knowen as 
                  〈◊〉
                that tyme ſauyng among the knyghtes of Bretayne that were about hym / he was abydinge ſtyll in Brerayne alwayes makynge warre for the lorde Charles of Bloys. And ſo in that con̄
               tre this ſyr Bertram was reputed for a valyāt knyght / and welbeloued with all men of warr & was as than greatly in y• duke of Normādes grace / for the grea
                  •
                vertues y• h
                  •
                herd reported of hym. So that whanthe duke had herde of the dethe of his father & dout
                  •
               d greatly of the kynge of Nauerre: than he ſayd to ſir Boucequant. Sir with ſuche men as ye haue I wyll that ye ryde in to Normandy and ther ye ſhall fynde ſir Bertram of Gueſc
                  •
               yue. and loke that you and he togyder make an army agaynſt the kynge of Nauerr and kepe ſurely the ryuer of Seyne / ſir Boucequant ſayd it ſhulde be done And ſo he departed and toke with hym a good nombre of knyghtes and ſquyers and toke his way to Normandy by ſaynt Germayns / and ſhewed them that were with him that he wolde go to the caſtell of Roleboſſe / wherin were certayne of the companyons that dyde ſo m
                  •
               che 
                  ••
               yll throughout the worlde.
            ROleboſſe was a ſtronge caſtell on the 
                  •
               yuer of S
                  •
               yne a leage fro Ma
                  〈…〉
                / and as at that tyme it was full of the companyons who made warr aſ well on the kyng of Nauer as on the frenche kyng / and they had a capy
                  •••
                whome they obeyed / and he retayned them by certayne wages that he gaue them / he was called Uātayre Auſtarde an expert man of arm
                  •
               s and a bolde / and borne in the towne of Bruſels And he and his cōpany had robbed all the countre about hym / ther was none that durſt go fr
                  •
                Parys and Maunt to Roane or to Ponthoiſ
                  •
                and aſ well they bete downe y• naueroyſe as the frenchmen and ſpecially they conſtrayned 
                  •
               ore them of Maūt. Whan ſir Bo
                  ••
               equant parted fro Parys / he fayned to take the way to Role
               
                  •
               oſſe. howbeit he taryed at a certayne place for ſir Bertram of Gu
                  •
               ſcly
                  •
               e & his company / who was ryden before to the caſtell of Deur
                  •
               u
                  •
                an
                  •
                had ſpoken with them within / but they wold
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                no wyſe open their gates to lette hym in / but fierſly dyde caſt ſtones at hym. Whan he ſawe that he departed and wente to the marſhall ſyr Boucequant / where he taryed for hym a lytel
                  •
                fro Roleboſſe. And whan they were met togyder they were a fyue hūdred men of armes and ſo theſe two capitayns had great counſell togyder to ſ
                  •
                howe they ſhulde mayntene themſelfe / and ſpecially to gette yf they myght the towne of Maūt. Than they determyned that s; Boucequaunt and a hundred with hym ſhulde ryde to Maunt in haſt / as though they were ſore afrayed. and ſay howe that they of the garyſone of Roleboſſe dyde chaſe them / deſyringe them to open their gate and let them in for ſaue garde of their lyues. And if they were lette in than to take ſeaſon of the gates / & than ſir Bertram with all his hole company ſhulde come and entre in to the towne and do what they lyſt / and ſo they thought without they coude get it by this maner they wyſt nat howe elles to gette it. S
                  •
                this counſell was determyned to be good and the lordes kept it ſecrete among them ſelfe▪ and ſo thus ſir Boucequant d
                  •••
               ed with this ſayd company and rode towarde Maunte ▪ and ſyr Bertram rode thyderwarde by another way and put thēſelfe in a buſſhment nere to Maūt / And whan ſir Bouceq
                  •
               uant aproched nere to Maunt ▪ than they ſpar
                  •
               led a brode lyke men 
                  〈◊〉
                were diſcōfyted and chaſed. And ſo the knyght ſir Boucequant came to Maunt & but. 
                  〈◊〉
               . with him the reſydue came one after another. Than he called at y• 
               
                  •
               arryers and ſayd / a ye good people of Maunt open your gate and let vs entre / 

               
                  〈…〉
               r fold weth the yuell murdr
                  •
               rs & the
               
                  〈…〉
                Ro
                  •
               eboyſe who chaſeth vs & hath vtterly diſc
                  •
               t
                  •
               ted vs. They within ſayd ſir what be you / 
                  〈◊◊〉
                he I am 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Boucequāt marſhall to the duke of Normady ſent by hym to haue fought with thē of Rol
                  •
               boyſe / but the theues wt
               in haue 
                  〈◊〉
                me ſo that it behoued me to 
                  〈◊〉
                whyder I wolde or nat: and here they wyll 
                  •
               ake me & all myne without ye wyll open your gate and let vs come in forſocour. And they wt in anſwered wenynge to them that his wordes 
                  •
               ad ben true & ſayd ſir we knowe well yt they 
                  〈◊〉
                Roleboyſe be our enemyes & yours alſo / for they care nat with whem they haue warr: but alſo on thother part the duke of Normādy ha
               
                  〈…〉
                of the kyng of Nauer our lor
               
                  〈…〉
                therfore we be in great dout leſt we ſhulde 
                  〈…〉
               d by you who is marſhall of Frāce. S
                  •
               s 
                  〈◊〉
                he by my ſaytheye ſhall haue no hurt 
                  •
               y me / 
                  〈◊〉
                am nat come into this countre but to 
                  〈◊〉
                them of Roleboys. And ſo by theſe wor
               
                  •••
                they opened the gate & ſuffred ſir Boucequant to 
                  〈◊〉
                & alwayes lytell and lytell his 
                  〈…〉
               wed: ſo that bytwene the hyndermaſt 
                  〈…〉
               quantꝭ men and the formaſt of ſir 
                  〈…〉
               mes men they of Maunt had no leaſer 
                  〈…〉
               ne their gates. for ſir Boucequant 
                  〈…〉
               n to a logyng and vnarmed him / ther 
                  〈◊〉
                to apeaſe thē of the towne / & that they ſhuld na
                  •
                myſtruſt: but than ſir Bertram and his cō
               pany came galoppyng and entred in to ye tow
               
                  〈…〉
               d ſaynt Jues Cleſquy / to the dethe 
                  〈…〉
               eroyſe. And ſo enterd into the logyn
               
                  •••
                and pylled & robbed all that euer they foun 
                  〈◊〉
                and coke priſoners & ſlewe whom they lyſt. 
                  ••
               d the ſame ſeaſon that they thus entred into 
                  〈…〉
                / another company of bretons came to 
                  〈…〉
               ke but a leage thens and entred therm 
                  〈…〉
               lly: for they ſayd they were men of 
                  〈…〉
               nt thyder by ſir Wyllyam of Grāuyll 
                  〈◊〉
                was at Maunt with as many mo as they 
                  〈◊〉
               . They of Meul
                  ••
                thought their wordes 
                  〈◊〉
                bycauſe they came the way fro Maunt & 
                  〈…〉
               we well they coulde come none other way / 
                  〈…〉
               ſe the ryuer of Seyn but at the brige of 
                  〈…〉
                therfore they beleued them and opened 
                  〈…〉
               ryers. And than theſe bretons entred 
                  〈…〉
                the gate and cryed ſaynt yues Eleſ
               
                  〈…〉
                people downe right who fledde 
                  〈…〉
                themſelfe aſwell as they myght / 
                  〈…〉
                ſawe them ſelfe ſo diſceyued and be 
                  〈…〉
                hus was Maunt and Meulecke ta
               
                  〈…〉
               t the duke of Normandy was right 
                  〈…〉
                and the kyng of Nauer right ſore diſpleaſed whan he knewe therof. Thā the kyng of Nauerr ſet good capitayns in all his townes and caſtels / and toke it for a great domage the loſſe of Maūt and Meulec for by them he had a fayre entre into Fraunce. and ye ſame weke the captall of Beuſz arryued at Chyerbourge with a foure hundred men of armes / and the kyng of Nauerr made hym great feſt and there / and ſhewed hym in maner of a cō
               playnt howe the duke of Normandy had cauſed the townes of Maunt and Meuleck to be ſtollen fro hym. Than the Captall anſwered and ſayd / ſir and it pleaſe god we ſhall go forwarde / and I truſt ſhall ſpede ſo well that we ſhall haue theym agayne and many mo. It is ſayd howe the duke of Normandy is goynge to Reynes to be crowned / we ſhall go and do hym ſome noyaunce and domage. Thus of y• comynge of the Captall of Beuſz was yt kynge of Nauer ryght ioyouſe and ſayd yt incōtynent he wolde make a iourney in to Fraunce / than he ſende for men of warre in to all partes wher he coudymagen to haue any. The ſame ſeaſon there was in Normandy the Marne a knyght of Englāde who or that tyme had ben with the kynge of Nauerr in his warres. He was a ryght well expertman of armes & was called ſir John̄ Jonell / he had in his cōpany a thre hūdred men of armes. The kyng of Nauer ſent to hym / deſyringe that he wolde come and ſerue hym with ſuche nombre as he had. This knyght condyſcended to the kynges deſyre and came to him and put hym into his ſeruyce. The duke of Normandy knewe ryght well howe the kyng of Nauerr aſſembled an army / and howe the Captall ſhulde be chiefe capitayne. Than he wrote to ſir Bertram of Cleſquy deſyring hym and his bretōs to kepe fronter warr with the kyng of Nauer / promyſyng to ſend hym people ynowe to fight agaynſt the power of the kyng of Nauer. And he ordayned that ſir Boucequāt ſhulde tary and kepe Maūt and Meulec. And ſo ſir Bertran: & his company of bretons went towarde Uernon. In a ſhorte ſpace after the duke of Normandy ſend to hym a great nombre of men of warre: as therle of Aucer / the vycount Beaumount the lorde Beauiewe / and dyuers other knyghtes & ſquyers. In the ſame ſeaſon there was come in to Fraūce to ſerue y• duke of Normandy out of Gaſcone the lorde Dalbret & ſir Aymon of Punyers / ſir Peteton of Corton / y• Soldyche of Leſtrad & dyuers other. wherof the duke of Normādy coude thē great thank
                  •
               
               
deſyring thē to ryde into Normandy agaynſt his ennemyes. Theſe lordes obeyed the duke and rode all into Normandy / excepte the lorde Dalbret / who taryed ſtyll with the duke: but his men rode forthe in that iourney. Alſo in the ſame ſeaſon on the fronters of Bretayne there was a breton knyght of the frenche partie called Beamont of the Uale / and had in his company a .xl. ſperes all bretons / and they came before Eureur / and within the towne ther was a knyght called ſir Guy of Granuyll. Alſone as he herde the fray he armed him and all his ſoudyers and mounted ontheir horſes & rode out into the felde / and by that tyme ſir Beamont had done his enterprice and was departynge: than ſir Guy of Grauyll aſctyed him and ſayd Beaumount ye ſhall nat thus departe. Firſte ye muſt ſpeke with them of Eureux / they ſhall teche you to knowe them. Whan ſir Beamont herd that / he tourned his horſe and layed his ſpeare in the reſt and came agaynſt ſir Guye. the two knyghtes mette rudely toguyder / ſon that their ſpeares ſheuered all to peaces / but they ſatte ſo ſurely that none of them fell. And ſo they paſſed forthe in their courſe / & at theyr retournynge they drewe out their ſwerdꝭ and therwith their cōpanyes mette / at which tyme there were many borne to the yerthe on bothe partyes. There the br
                  •
               tons acquyted theym ſelfe valiantly / howbe it finally they coude nat obtayne the place: but were fayne ther to abyde for people came ſtyll out of the towne on thē ſo that they were all ſlayne and taken none ſcaped. And there was taken ſir Beaumont dela Uale / by ſir Guy of Granuyll who ledde hym as his priſoner into the caſtell of Eureur / 
                  〈◊〉
                ſo were all the reſydewe ſuche as were taken. Thus it happed of this aduenture wherof ſir Guy was greatly prayſed and beloued of the kyng of Nauer and of them of Eureux.
         
         
            ¶Here begynneth the featꝭ of warre done 
                  〈◊〉
                the tyme of kyng Charles the 
                  〈◊〉
                wherof the beginnyng ſpeketh of the obſequy of kyng John̄. and how the yong kyng Charles was honorably crowned at Reynes / & of the gret expēſes that was done there. & of the beginyng of the batell of Cocherell.
            
               THus asye haue herde before / the kyng of Cypre retorned into Frā
               ce & came to Parys to the duke of Normādy / & ther was the dukes bretherne / the duke of Ani
                  •
               ou / & the lorde Philyp who was after duke of Burgone. And all they taryed for the body of ye 
               
                  〈◊〉
                ge their father the whiche was comyng out of Englande & the kyng of Cypreholpe them to cōplayne the dethe of the kyng / & was maruey louſly diſpleaſed therwith / bycauſe of the hyndringe of his vyage of the croyſe. and ſo he cl
                  •
               
               thed hym ſelfe with the veſture of doloure. So the day came thar the body of the frenche kyng aproched to Parys / the which body was broght thyder by therle of Artoyſe / therle Dā
               marten / & the great priour of Fraūce / the duke of Normādy & his bretherne. The kyng of Cypre & the mooſt part of all the clergy of Parys went a fote & met with the body beyonde ſaynt Denyce in Fraūce / and ther he was ſolemply buryed / and tharchbyſſhop of Senceſang the maſſe. And after the ſeruyce done & the dyner the whiche was right noble: the lordes & prelates returned to Parys / & there they helde a parlyament & generall counſell to determyne how the realme ſhuld be ordred / for ye realme might nat longe be without a kyng. And than it was counſelled by thaduyce of the prelatis & nobles of the realme that they ſhulde drawe to the cite of Reyns & ther to crowne the duke of Normā
               dy / who as yet was called none other wiſe. alſo he wrote to his vncle Uyncelant duke of Brabant & of Luzēburge / and alſo to therle of Flā
               ders deſyring them to be at his coronacyon on Trinyte ſonday next comyng. In the ſame ſca ſon whyle the lordes made theyr puruey aunce for the kynges coronacyon. The frenchemen and naueroyſe aproched nere togyder in Normādy / for into the cite of Eureux was come the Captall of Beuz who made ther his aſſemble of men of warr / & of companyons ſuche as he coude get. ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of hym and of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / & of a iourney of batayle bytwene them. The tueſday before T
                  ••
               
               nyte ſonday that the duke of Normāndy ſhulde be crowned kynge / as he was in the cathedrall churche of Reyns. Whan the captall of Beuſz had made his aſſemble in the cite of Eureux of archers & brigans. and left in the cytie a capyten called ſir Mychell Dorgery / & ſent to Couches the lorde Guy of Grauyll to kepe fronter warr. Than he departed fro Eureur with all his men of armes & archers / for he herde ſay

               
                  •
               ow the frēchmen wer abrode / but he wyſt nat where they were▪ than he toke the feldes & had great deſyre to 
                  
                     •
                  ynd th
                  •
                & 
                  〈…〉
               red his cōpany / & 
                  •••
               de yt he was to the ſome of. v
                  ••
               . C. ſpetes. iii C. archers 
                  〈◊〉
               . 
                  〈◊〉
               . C. of other men of warr. And with h
                  ••
                were dyuers good knightꝭ & ſquiers and ſpecially a baneret of the realme of Nauer called y• lorde of Sal
                  •
                / an expert mā of armes. but he y• helde y• gr
                  ••
               t
                  •
               ſt ſome of men of armes 
                  〈…〉
               ers in all the cōpany was a knight of England called ſir John̄ Jo
                  •
               ell / ther was alſo ye lorde Peter of Sauyle / 
                  〈◊〉
                Will
                  •
                of Grauyll / ye lorde Bertrā of Frāke / y• Blaſſoll of marenell / 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               uers other all in wyll to encoūter 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertrā of Cleſquy & to fight with h
                  ••
               . Thā they drue to Paſſy & to ye b
                  ••
               ge of tharch / for they thoght 
                  〈◊〉
                the frēchmen ſhulde paſſe ye ryuer of Seyne ther if they ware nat paſſed all redy. ¶ So it happed y• the friday in the whytſon w
                  •
               ke y• captall & his cōpany rode out of a wode / & by auē
               ture they met a haraude of armes called kynge Faucon: & the ſame mornynge he was deꝑted fro y• frēche hooſt. aſſone as the captall ſe hym he knewe hym well & made him great 
                  
                     •
                  her / for he was 
                  ••
               e
                  ••
               yng to y• kyng of England. Thā he 
                  ••
               maūded of hym fro whens he 
                  •
               ame & if he k
                  ••
               we any tidyngꝭ of the frēchmen▪ ſir ꝙ he in the name of god I knowe well wher they be. I depted fro them to day / they ſeke you aſwell as ye do them where be they ꝙ the captall beyond the b
                  ••
               ge of tharche or a this ſyde. Sir ꝙ Fau
               
                  •
               on they be paſſed y• bridge at Uernon / & as I beleue they a
                  •
                nowe about Paſſy. What nōbre 
                  •
               e they ꝙ the captall & what cap
                  •
               tens haue the
                  •
                I pray you ſhewe me: 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                ꝙ Fau
                  •
               on they ar well a. 
                  〈◊〉
               . C. fightyng men. & there is ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy who hath y• gretteſt cōpany of bretōs / alſo ther is therle of Aucer / y• vycount of Beamont y• lorde Loys of Chalon / y• lorde of Bea
               
                  〈…〉
                / y• maiſter of the croſ bowes / tharchpreeſt the lorde Edward of Remy. & of Gaſ
                  •
               one ther is the cōpany of the lorde Dalbret & the lorde A
                  •
               mon of Punyers / y• lorde of Suldyche & of L
                  •
               ſtrad: & whan y• captall herd thoſe gaſcons named / he marueyled gretly & bluſſed for dyſpleaſure & ſayd / Faucon is this true ye ſay / yt theſe lordes of Gaſcone ar ther / & the lorde dal br
                  •
               t
                  •
               s c
                  •
               pany. ſir ꝙ the harald ye 
                  •
               out fayle / & wher is y• lorde Dalbret hiſelfe ꝙ the captall / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                ꝙ Faucon he is at Parys with y• regēt duke of N
                  •
               rm
                  •
               dy who aparelleth hiſelfe to go to Reynes for it is ſayd y• on ſonday next comyng he ſhulde be crowned kyng. Than y• captall layd his hand on his own
                  •
                heed & ſayd in great diſpleaſur by ſaynt Antones cap / gaſcon agaynſt gaſcone. ſir ꝙ Faucon here by taryeth for me a harald of tha
                  •
               chpreſt ſent to ſpeke with you fro hym / and as I vnderſtand by y• harald tharch preeſt wolde ſpeke with you. Than the captall ſayd a Faucon ſay to y• frenche haralde he nede nat to go any farther / let hym ſhewe to tharchpreſt y• I wyll nat ſpeke with hym. Than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Johan Jonell ſtept forthe & ſayd / ſir why wyllye nat ſpeke with him ꝑauentur it is for our pro
               
                  •
               yte / than y• captall ſayd nay I warrant you it is nat for our ꝓfyte / for tharchpreſt is ſo great a brauler y• if he come to vs he wyll but 
                  •
               angle. and in ye meane tyme ymagen our ſtrengthe & auewe our nōbre / the whiche parauēture ſhall torne more to our pre
                  ••
               dyce than aduauntage / therfore I haue no haſt to ſpeke with him: thā Faucon y• harau
                  •
                wēt to thother haraud wher as he taryed vnder a hedge / & excuſed y• captall ſo wyſely that he was well content / and than he went to tharchpreſt & ſhewed hym all as Faucon had ſayd. ¶ Thus the frēchmen and naue royſe had knolege eche of other by y• report of the two haraldꝭ & aparelled thēſelf echeto mete other. and whan 
                  〈◊〉
                captall had herd by Faucon what nōbre the frēchmen were than incōtynēt he ſent certayne meſſāgers to y• cyte of Eu
                  •
               eu
                  •
                to ye capten ther / deſyringe hym to ſende out of the cite all maner of cōpanyons & other yt were able for the warr / and yt they ſhulde mete with hym about Cocherell / for there he thought to fynde the frenchmen: for ſurely he ſayd wherſo euer they met he wolde fyght with thē. And whan theſe tidynges came to y• capten of Eu
               
                  •
               eu
                  •
                named 
                  〈◊〉
                Leger Dorgery / than he cōmaū
               ded euery man y• was able to ryde a horſe / ſhulde go out of the cyte & drawe to y• Captall: & ſo ther deꝑted out of the towne 
                  ••
               o than ſixſcore / all yong men of the na
                  •
               yon of y• towne. So y• wednyſday the Captall lodged by noone on a moūtayne & his cōpany about him: & the frenchmen 
                  〈…〉
               de forwarde to fynde thē tyll they cāe to a ryuer called in yt countre Iton / the which ran towarde Eureux: and it ſpringeth nere to Couches & there they lodged y• wedn
                  •
               ſday in a fayre medowe a longe by yt ryuerſyde. & ſo the next mor
                  •
               yug bothe partyes ſent out their c
                  ••
                rous to ſe if they coude here any tidynges eche of other / & ſo eche of thē made report that they were within two leages togyder. Than y• naueroyſe rode as Faucon led thē the ſame way he came fro thē / and ſo about noone they came into the way to Cocherell: & there they ſawe y• frenchmen before thē in orde
                  •
               yng of theyr 
                  •
               a
               
                  •
               els

/ & ther was great nōbre of baner
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               enōs ſo y• they ſemed to be double the 
                  •
               ombre y• they were in dede. Than the naueroyſe reſted them without a lytell wode that was there: than the capitayns drue togyder & ordred their batayls Firſt they made thre batayls well and proply all a fote & ſent all their caryages and pages in to y• lytell wode: and they ſet ſir John̄ Jonell inthe firſt batayle withall the men of armes & archers of Englande. The ſeconde batayle ledde the captall of Beuſm / and in his batayle were 
                  〈◊〉
                iiii. C. fightynge men one & other. and 
                  〈◊〉
                hym was the lorde of Saulx of Nauer a yong luſty knight / the lorde Wyll
                  ••
                of Grauyll and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Peter of Sankeuyll. The third batell was ledde by thre knyghtes / yt is to ſay the lorde of Baſcles of Ma
                  •
               nell / the lorde Bertram of Franke and the lorde Sanſ
                  •
               lo
                  •
               yns / they were a .iiii. hūdred. And whan they had ordeyned their batayls / than they toke the vaūtage of a lytle hyll ther beſyde on their right hand bytwene them and the wode. And ſo on the fronte of that hyll they aranged them ſelfe before their enemyes / and they ſette the captals baner on a buſſhe of thornes and ſet a .lx. men of armes about it to defende it fro their enemyes. And y• they dyde to thentent that yf they were ſparkeled abrode they ſhulde drawe to the ſtandarde: and ſo determyned nat to dyſcende downe fro the moū
               tayne for no maner of cauſe / but to let their enemyes come to thē / if they wolde fight with thē.
         
         
            ¶ Howe by the poleſy and counſell of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy the nau
                  ••
               oiſe dyſcēded downe fro the moūtayne to fight with the frēchmen and how the captall was taken. Cap. CC .xxi.
            
               THus as ye haue herbe the naueroyſe & englyſſhmen were arenged on y• moūtayne whyle the frē
               chmen ordred their batayls / wher of they made thre and a rere garde. The firſt had ſir Bertram of Cleſquy with all his bretons / and he was ordeyned to re
                  •
               co
                  •
                the captals batayle. The ſeconde had therle of Aucerr / and with hym there was the vycount Beamond / and the lorde Baudwy
                  •
                
               
                  •
               enekyn maiſter of the croſ bowes / & with thē were frē
               chmen / pycardꝭ / and normayns. as ſir Edwarde of Rency / ſir Ingram of He
                  •
               yn / ſir Loys of 
                  •
               enekerques / and dyuers other good kynght
                  •
                and ſquyers. The thirde batayle had the archpreeſt and the burgonyons / and with hym the lorde of Chalons / the lorde Beau
                  •
               e
                  •
                the lorde John̄ of Uyen and dyuers other: and this batayle was aſſigned to aſſemble agaynſt the b
                  •
               
               ſcle of Marnell and his rout. And the batayl
                  •
                whiche was the reregarde were all gaſcoyns / wherof ſir Aymon of Pomyers / the lorde Sul dyche of
                  •
               e ſtrade / the lorde perducas Dalbreth and the lorde Peteton of Curton were ſoueray g
                  •
               e capitayns. Than theſe gaſcoyne knightes aduyſed well the behauynge of the captall and howe his ſtandarde was ſet on a buſſhe & kept with a certayne nombre: than they ſayd yt it behoued them whā their batayls were aſſembled togyder / that they ſhulde endeuoure thēſelfe to cōquere the captals ſtanderde. ſayeng howe it they might get it their enemyes ſhulde be ſone diſcōfyted. alſo theſe gaſcons auyſed thē on another ordynaunce / the which was to thē that day right ꝓfitable. The lordes of Fraūce wer along ſpace togyder in coūſell howe they ſhulde mayn
                  •
               tene themſelfe / for they ſawe well that their enemyes had a great auauntage. Than the gaſcons ſpake a worde the which was well herde: they ſaid ſirs we knowe well that the captall is as worthy a knight as can be founde in any lande / for as long as he is able to fight / he ſhall do vs great domage. let vs ordayne .xxx. a horſbacke of the beſt men of armes that be in our company / and let the .xxx. take hede to nothyng but to addreſſe themſelfe to the captall / whyle we e
                  •
               tend to cōquere his ſtanderd: & by y• might of their horſes let them breke y• prea
                  •
                ſo that they may come to the captall / and than take hym & cary hym out of the felde / for with / out that be done we ſhal haue no ende of our batayle / for if he may be taken by this meanes the iourney ſhalbe ours / his people wyll be ſo ſore abaſſhed of his takyng. Than the knightes of Fraunce and of Bretayne acorded lyghtly to y• 
               
                  •
               euyce and ſayd it was good counſell & ſo they wolde do. Than among thē they choſe out. xxx of the beſt men of armes among them / & mounted on .xxx. of the beſt horſes in all the cōpany / and they drewe them a ſyde in the felde well determyned of that they ſhulde do: and all the reſydue taryed in the felde a fote in good array. ¶ Whan they of Fraūce had well ordred their batayls & that euery man knewe what he ſhuld do: than ther was a comonyng amōg thē what ſhulde be their crye y• day / and to what ban
                  ••
                they ſhulde drawe to. And ſo they were determyned to cry our lady of Aucerr / and to mak
                  •
               
               
their capitayne yt day cherle of Aucerr / but the erle wolde in no wyſe agree therto to take that charge on hym: but excuſed himſelfe right graciouſly ſaying lordꝭ I thanke you of ye honour that ye wolde put me to. but ſurely as for me I wyll nat therof for I am ouer yong to haue ſuche a charge or honor: for this is ye firſt iorney yt euer I was at therfore ye ſhall take another. here be many good knightꝭ / as ſir Bertram of Cleſquy tharchpreſt / the maiſter of ye croſboſe the lorde Loys of Chalon / the lorde Aymon of pomyers & ſir Edwarde of Rēcy. Theſe haue ben in many great iorneys & they knowe howe to order ſuche a mater better than I can / therfore I pray you holde me excuſed. Than ye knyghtes regarded eche other & ſayd to hym / a noble erle of Aucer ye ar ye greteſt among vs both of lande & lynage / therfore of right ye ought to be our heed. Certenly ſirs ꝙ he ye ſay as it pleſeth you / but this day I ſhalbe as one of your copanyons & ſhall lyue & dye & byde myne auē
               ture with you / but as for ye ſoueraynte ſurely I wyll none therof. than they beheld eche other & aduyſed whom they might make chefe capiten Than they were auyſed yt the beſt knight in all their cōpany & he that had ben beſt proued was ſit Bertrā of Cleſquy: thā it was ordeyned by their comon acorde yt their cry ſhulde be yt day our lady Cleſquy / & that they ſhulde all obey y• day to ſir Bertrā: all thingꝭ ordeyned & ſtablyſſhed & euery lorde & knight vnder his owne ſtā
               derd or penon. Than they regarded their enemyes / who were a hye on ye hyll & wolde nat departe fro ther ſtrength / for they thought it nat / the which gretly anoyed the frēchmen bycauſe it was yuell moūtyng of yt hyll / & alſo the ſon̄e was very hote / the biggeſt of thē were faynt for they were faſtyng / & they had nother wyne nor vitayle with thē that dyde thē any good / wtout it were certayne lordes yt had lytell flagons of wyne the which were anon empty / nor they made ye mornyng no prouiſion for vitayle / for they had thought to haue fought with their enemys the ſame mornynge but they dyde nat / but they eſcryed as nere as they myght the naueroyſe & englyſſhmen: & ſo ye day was ferr gone or they coude be aſſembled togyder. And whan the lordes of Fraūce ſawe the behauyng of the naueroyſe than they drue thē toguyder in maner of counſell to de
                  •
               myne whyder they ſhuld go and fight with their enemyes or nat / ſo they were of dyuers opinyons. ſome wold go fight wt them ſayng it ſhulde be gret blame to thē to do otherwyse. Some yt were ſadde & well a
                  •
               yſed argued ye cōtrary / and ſayd if we go & fyght with thē 
               wher as they be in the auaūtage it ſhalbe to our gret ꝑell / for of .v. of vs they wyll haue .iii. ſo finally they wolde nat agre to go to them for dangers yt myght fall. And ye naueroyſe aduyſed well their maner & ſayd among thēſelfe / beholde yonder our enemyes they wyll cōe anon to fight with vs / beſemyng they make thē redy therto. Ther were certayne knightꝭ & ſquyers normayns priſoners with ye naueroyſe / & they were let go on their faythes: & they went priuely into the frēche hoſt & ſayd to the lordes ther. ſirs auyſe you well for & ye let this day paſſe wt out batell yor enemyes wyll be to morowe gretly recōforted / for it is ſayd among thē yt the lorde Loys of Nauer ſhulde cōe to thē with a .iiii. C. ſperes. ſo theſe wordꝭ enclyned thē gretly to fight with their enemyes how ſoeuer they dyd / and ſo made thē redy to haue ſet forwarde & at that poynt they were a thre or four tymes / but euer ye wyſemen helde thē backe & ſayd / ſirs let vs abyde a lytell ſpace & ſe what they wyll do / for their hertꝭ arſo great & preſūptuous yt they wolde as gladly fight with vs as we with thē. ther were many ouercome with hete of ye ſon̄e / for it was thā about noon & they had faſted all the day & were armed & ſore chafed / and ſayd among thē if we go vp this hyll to fight with thē we ar all lykely to be loſt / therfore let vs drawe as for this day to our logyng / & to morowe let vs take other coūſell: thus they were in dyuers opinyons. whan the lordes & knight of fraūce ſawe ye gouernyng of thēglyſſhmen & of the naueroyſe / & howe yt they wolde nat deꝑte out of the holde yt they were in & that it was hye noon of the day / & alſo had herde ye wordes yt the priſoners y• came fro thē had ſayd. and alſo ſaw ye moſt ꝑte of their peple ſore traueyled with the hete of ye ſonne the which was to thē right diſpleſant. Than by thaduyce of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy they toke other coūſell / for he ſaid ſirs we ſe well yt our enemyes deſyreth ſore to fight with vs / howbeit they wyll nat diſcende out of their holde wtout it be by the meanes yt I ſhall ſhewe you. Let vs make ſemblant to wtorawe backe & nat to fight as this day / & alſo our people ar ſore traueyled with hete / and let vs ſende our varlettes / our caryage / and our ſpare horſes ouer the bridge and water: and let vs withdrawe backe to our lodgyng. & in our goynge backe lette vs be redy to tourne agayne if nede be / & let vs ſe what they wyll do if they be wyllyng to fight with vs they wyll dyſcend downe the hyll to chaſe vs: and if we ſe that they do ſo / 

than let vs be redy to tourne agayne on theym / and than we ſhall deale with them the more eaſely. This counſell was accepted of all the company / than euery lorde drewe hym vnder his owne ſtanderd / and than they cauſed their trū
               pettes to ſowne the retrayt. and commaunded all knightes / ſquyers / and varlets to paſſe the bridge & to cary ouer all their caryages. So thus they paſſed ouer / and ſome men of armes paſſed after fayntly. whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Jonell who was an expert knyght / and had great deſyre to fyght with the frēchmen ſawe the maner of thē howe they drue backe: than he ſayd to the captall ſir let vs go quickely after them / ſe you nat howe they do flye away / a ſaid the captall truſt nat therto / they do it but for an yuell entēt and to begyle vs. Than ſir John̄ Jonell auaūced hymſelfe for he had great deſyre to fight wt his enemyes ſayng to his company ſaynt George / who ſoeuer loueth me let thē folowe for I wyll go & fight with our enemyes. And ſo toke his ſpeare in his hande and wente forthe before all the batayls and dyſcended downe the hyll and ſome of his company / or the captall knewe therof. But whan he ſawe yt ſir John̄ Jonell was gone to fyght without hym he toke it of great preſūpcyon and ſayd to thē about hym / ſirs let vs go downe the hyll quickely for ſir John̄ Jonell ſhall nat fight without me. Than the Captall and his cōpany auaunced them downe the hyll / and whan the frenchmen ſawe thē diſcend fro ye hyll and came into the playne feldes / they were ryght ioyouſe & ſayd: lo nowe we may ſe that we haue deſyred all this day. And ſo ſodē
               ly torned and cryed our lady Cleſquy and dreſſed their baners agaynſt ye naueroyſe / & ſo aſſē
               bled togyder all a fote. and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Jonell who coragiouſly aſſēbled his baners agaynſt ye batayle of the bretons of whome 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertram was chefe capitayne dyde many a feat of armes / for he was a hardy knight. Thus the knightꝭ and ſquiers ſparcled abrode in the playne & fought togyder with ſuche wepyns as they had / and eche of them entred into others batayle and ſo fought with great corage & wyll: the englyſſhmen & naueroyſe cryed ſaynt George / & the frē
               chemen our lady Cleſquy. There were many good knightꝭ on the frenche parte / as ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / ye yong erle of Aucer / the vycoūt Beamont / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Baudwen Denekyn / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys of Chalon / ye yong lorde of Beauieu / & ſir Antony who yt day rered his baner / ſir Antony of Daneſkerly / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Edward of Rēcy / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Ingram of Hedyn. & alſo of gaſcoyns / firſt 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Aymon of pomyers / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Perducas dalbreth / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Suldych de le ſtrade / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Peteton of Corton and dyuers other of that ſorte. And the gaſcoyns dreſſed them agaynſt the captall and his company and they 
                  〈◊〉
                agaynſt thē / they had great deſyre to mete eche with other / there was a ſore batayle and many a noble feate of armes done and acheued / a mā ought nat to ly willyngly. It might be deman̄
               ded wher was tharchpreeſt all this ſeaſon who was a great capitayne / and had a great company vnder his rule / bycauſe I make no mencyon of hym. I ſhall ſhewe you the trouthe / as ſoone as the archpreeſt ſawe the batayle begyn he gette hym ſelfe out of the preaſe / but he ſayd to his company / and to hym that bare his ſtanderd. I charge you all as ye loue me or fere my diſpleaſur / that ye abyde thende of the batayle and do your deuours aſwell as ye can̄e. but as for me I wyll departe and nat retorne agayne / for I may nat as this day fight nor be armed agaynſt ſome knight that is in the felde agaynſt vs: and if any demaunde for me anſwere them as I haue ſhewed you before. So thus he departed and but one ſquyre all onely with hym / and ſo he repaſſed the ryuer and lette the remnant deale. and ſo the reſydue of the felde myſt him nat / for they ſawe his baner and company to thende of the batayle / wherfore they beleued ſurely yt he had ben there ꝑſonally. Nowe ſhall I ſhewe you of ye bataile & howe it was ended
            AT the begynnyng of the batayle whan ſir Johan Jonell was come downe the hyll and his company with hym / and the Captall alſo and his company truſting to haue had the vyctorie. Howe beit the caſe tourned otherwyſe / and ſawe that the frēchmen torned them in good array and ordre / than they perceyued well howe they had ben to haſty to cōe fro their aduauntage. Howbeit lyke valyant knyghtes they baſſhed nothynge / but thought to wynne the victory with their handes in playne felde. And ſo a lytell they reculed backe and aſſēbled togyder all their people / & than they made way for their archers to come forthe on before who as than were behynde them. And whan the archers were forwarde than they ſhotte fierſly togyder / but the frenchmen were ſo well armed & ſo ſtrongely pauyſſed / that they toke but lytell hurt / nor letted nat for all that to fyght. And ſo entred in among thenglyſſhmen & naueroyſe / and they in lykewiſe among them: ſo that ther was bytwene them a cruell batayle / they toke by ſtrentgh of armes & wreſtlyng: ſperes / ares and other wepyns eche fro other / & toke priſoners

on bothe partes. Thus they fought hand to hand ſo valiātly y• it was marueyle to be holde 
                  •
               o ye may well beleue y• in this great preas and parell there were many ouerthrowen and ſtay
                  •
               e for ther were none y• ſpared other I ſay to you playnly y• frēchmen had no nede as thā to ſlepe for they had in hande people hardy & full of corage. Wherfore it behoued euery man to aquyte thēſelfe valyantly / & to defende their bodyes & kepe their countre & to take their aduantage whan it came at the poynt / or els they had ben all diſconfyted. Surely the bretons & gaſcons dyd acquyte thēſelfe right well y• day & dyd many a noble feate of armes. Now ſhall I ſhew you of y• .xxx. y• were apoynted to ſet on the captall who were right well horſed, they toke hede to nothyng els but to the executyng of the
                  ••
                enterprice y• they had in charge: ſo all togyder cāe on the captall wher as he was fyghtyng with a great axe in his hande & gaue therwith ſo great ſtrokes y• none durſt aproch nere hym / but theſe .xxx. by force of their horſes brake the peaſe & came on the captall & by clene for
               
                  •
               e they toke him. Than began the batayls ſore in euery place for the captals men cryed to y• reſcue / how be it all their payne au
                  •
               yled them nothing / for y• captal was caryed out of y• felde at which tyme it was herd to tell who had y• bett.
         
         
            ¶Howe thenglyſſhmen & naueroyſe were diſcōfyted at the batayle of Cocherell / and howe y• yong kyng of Fraūce made his broder duke of Burgoyne / and of the caſtels & fortreſſes that were after wonne. Cap. CC .xxii.
            
               IN this great batayle where that thenglyſſhmen and naueroyſe entended to folowe to reſcue the captall whom they ſaw caryed away before them: and of the frenche ꝑte ſir Aymon of Pomyers / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Petyton of Corton / ſir Souldyche de la ſtrade / and the lorde Dalbretes company: they entended with a coragyous wyll to dreſſe thē towarde the captals ſtanderd that ſtode on a buſſhe. There was than a ſore batayle / for the ſtanderd was well defēded with good men of warr / and ſpecially with ſir Baſcle of marnell / & ſir Geffray of Rouſelone▪ 
               ther was many reſcues & many one hurt & caſt to the erthe. Nowe beit the naueroyſe y• were about the ſtanderd were ouerthrowen & the Baſcle of Marnell ſlayne / & ſir Geffray of Rouſelone taken priſoner: & ſir Aymon of Pomyers no man coude tell what became of him whider he were ſlayne or taken. And whan the captals ſtāderd was taken & torne all to peaces / in the meane ſeaſon the bretons / frēchmen / pycardes / normayns / & the burgonyons fought valiātly the which ſtode thē well in hand to do / for y• naueroyſe had cauſed thē ſomwhat to recule▪ and ther was deed of the frēche ꝑtie / y• vy coūt Beamont y• which was great domage / for he was a luſty yong knyght / & was lykely to haue pued a noble man: & his cōpany with great payne caryed him out of the felde / as I herde recounted of thē of bothe ꝑties. It had nat benſene aforei ſuche a batell with ſuche a nombre to be ſo well fought as this batayle was / for they were all a fote hand to hand: & were medled togyder eche ꝑtie with other / & fought with ſuch wepyns as they had & ther was many a gret ſtroke gyuen with ares of ſteell. and ther was ſore hurt 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Petyton of corton & ſir Suldich de la ſtrade / in ſuche wyſe y• they coude do no more good y• day. Sir John̄ Jonell by whome the batell began / dyd y• day many a feate of armes & was hurt in dyuers placꝭ of his body: & finally he was takē priſoner by a ſquyer of Briten of the cōpany of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertrā of Cleſquy & was caryed out of y• preaſe. but ther was ſlayne of y• frēche ꝑtie y• maiſter of y• croſbowes & ſir Loys of Hennebreq̄ & dyuers other. & of y• naueroyſe y• lorde of ſaul
                  •
                & many of his men: & the ſame day dyed priſoner 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Jonell / & ther was taken 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllm̄ of grauyll / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Peter of Sankuyll / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Geffray of rouſelon / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertram of Frāke & dyuers other but a fewe of y• naueroyſe ſaued / they wer nere all takē or ſlayne in y• place. This batayle was in normādy nere to Cocherell on a tueſday / the xxiiii. day of May / y• yere of our lorde. M .iii. C .lxiiii. ¶After this diſcōfytur and y• all the deed were diſpoyled & euery man takyng hede to his priſoners / & dreſſyng of thē y• were hurt / and y• the moſt part of the frēchmen were repaſſed y• bridge & drawyng to their lodgyng right ſore traueyled & wery. The ſame ſeaſon 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guy of Grauyll ſon to ſir Wyllm̄ of grauyll was departed y• ſame mornyng fro y• garyſon of Couches with a .l. ſperes / to thentent to haue come to the captall or y• batayle began / wherfore they made great haſte & came to the place where as the batayle had ben. Than the frenchmen that wer behynd cryed to their cōpany ſayng to to
                  •
               ne agayne ſirs / behold here cometh mo of our enemyes. And ſir Aymon and his company were ther redy / & whan he ſawe the naueroyſe he ſet his ſtāderd a high on a buſſhe / to cauſe the frenchmen to drawe thyder. and whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guy herd

them cry our lady Cleſquy / & ſa
                  •
               e nat the captall nor none of his cōpany but ſawe moche peple lye deed on the groūde / than he parceyued well that the naueroyſe had ben diſconfyted / & than he retorned the ſame way he came. And y• euenyng the frenchmen toke hede to their priſoners. Than ther was moche ſpekyng & enquiring for the archpreeſt / whan it was knowen y• he was nat at the batayle▪ and his men excuſed hym aſ well as they coude: and the .xxx. y• toke the captall neuer ſeaſſed tyll they had brought hym to the caſtell of Uernon. And the next day the frēchmen dyſloged and went to 
                  〈…〉
               one / and there lefte parte of their priſoners.
         
         
            ¶Df the coronacyon of kynge Charles the fyfte. Cap CC .xxiii.
            
               ON trinyte ſonday the yere of our lorde a. M. CCC .lxiiii. kyng Charles ſo
                  •
               e & heyre to kyng John was crowned & ſacted kynge in the great churche of our lady in Reyns / & alſo the quene his wyfe / dought to duke Peter of Burbone by tharchebyſſhop of the ſame place. And ther was preſent kyng Peter of Cypre / the duke of Anion / the duke of Burgone / ſir Uyncelāt of Behayne duke of Luzenburge & of Brabant / the erles of Ewe & of Dāpmactyn / of Takernyll / & of Uādemont: with many prelates and other lordꝭ / and in the cite was great feeltꝭ and ſolemnytees .v. dayes. Than the kyng departed and wente to Parys. It can nat be recounted in a hole day the solēnyties & great f
                  •
               
               ſtes that they of Parys made them. The lordes retourned into their owne countrees ſuche as had ben there at the kynges coronacyon.
            AT the kynges comynge to Parys / his yongeſt brother was put in poſſeſſyon of the duchy of Burgone / & ſo departed fro Parys with a great nōbre of men: 
                  〈◊〉
                went and toke lyuery / ſeaſon / & homage / of the barons knyghtes / cytes / caſtels / & good townes of the duchy of Burgone. And whan he had viſited his coutre he retorned to Parys: & the ſame ſeaſon tharchpreeſt apeſed the kyngꝭ diſpleaſur by ſuche excuſacions as he layd for hymſelfe / in y• he was nat at the iourney of Cocherell / ſhewynge how he might nat be armed agaynſt y• captall / the which captall at y• requeſt of the lorde Dalbret was let out of priſon on his faithe & trouth the which captal ayded gretly to excuſe arch preeſt to the kyng & to other knightꝭ of Fraūce ſuche as ſpake yuell of hym. Alſo he had as th
                  •
                newly ouerthrowen in Burgone beſyde Dyuyn a .iiii. C. cōpanyons & pyllers of the coutre wher of Gyllot du Pyn / Talbert / tacylbordon / & John̄ the Chafour were capitayns. The ſame ſeaſon the kyng cauſed to be beheded 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Peter Sanguyll in the cytie of Rone / bycauſe he was become naueroyſe / & ſit Grauyll had ben in y• ſame caſe & ſir Guy his ſon had nat be who ſent worde to y• kyng y• if he put to dethe his father he wolde in lyke wiſe ſerue ſir Beamon de la Uale a great lorde of Bretayne / who he had as priſoner. wherfore his lynage & kynred dyd ſomoch by their ſute to y• kyng / y• there was an exchange made bytwene ſir Beamon & ſir grauyll / and eche delyuerd for other. In this ſeaſon 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertrā of Cleſquy gate agayne y• caſtell of Roleboyſe for .vi. M. frākes y• he payd to y• capten therof named Uaſter / who retorned agayne to Brabāt fro whens he came. yet there were dyuers cōpanyons y• helde ſtyll ſudry for treſſes in Calr normādy / perch becauſe / & in o
                  •
               
               her placs y• which dyd moch hurt & trouble in y• realme of Fraūce: ſome in the tytle of y• king of Nauer / & ſome in their owne quarell to robbe the coūtre without reaſon or true tytle. The frē
               che kyng ſent his brother y• duke of Burgone agaynſt theſe pyllers / & ſo the duke made his ſomons in y• cyte or Charters. Thā he drue into the felde & with hym 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertram of Cleſquy ſir Boucequāt / therle of Aucer / ſir Loys of Chalon / y• lorde of Beauieu / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Aymon of Punyers ſir Rauenall / y• begue of vyllayns / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Nicholl of Lyne maiſter of the croſbowes / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Edmarde of Rācy / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Ingrā of Hedyn: & to the nōbre of .v. M. fightynge men. And whan they ſawe they wer ſo great a nōbre they deuyded in thre ptes wherof ſir Bertram of Cleſquy with. M. wet toward Cōſtātyne throwe y• marches of Cherburge to kepe the frōters there y• the naueroyſe ſhuld do no hurt nor domage to y• coūtre of nor mandy: & with hym was y• lorde of Auter / the erle of Joney / ſir Arnold Dandrehen / & many knightes & ſquiers of Briten & of Normandy. The ſeconde bataile had the lorde de la Ryuer and in his cōpany dyuers knyghtes & ſquyers of Fraūce & of Pycardy. And they were ſent 
                  〈◊〉
                to the erldome of Eureux: & the duke hymſelfe with the gretteſt company went and layd ſege to Marchranuyll / a ſtronge caſtell naueroyſe. and brought thyder many engyns fro the cyte of Charters / the whiche dyde caſt day & night and dyde them within moche trouble.
         
         
            
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                Of the iourney that the duke of Burgone made agaynſt the garyſons naueroyſe / and of the ſocour that the frēche kynge ſent to ſir Charles of Bloys. Ca. CC .xxiiii.
            
               IN the meane ſeaſon that theſe mē of warr were thus in Beauſe and in Normandy makyng warre agaynſt the naueroyſe enemyes to the realme. Ther was ſir Loyes of Nauer who had the charge of the warr vnder his brother y• kyng: and he had defyed the frēche kyng bycauſe the warr touched the chalenge of his enherytance. And after the batell of Cocherell he had aſſembled togyder men of warr where as he coude get them & he dyde ſo moche that by his meanes he gat certayne capitayns of the cōpanyons / ſo that he was to y• nombre of .xii. hundred ſperes. And with hym was ſir Robert Canoll / ſir Robert Ceney / ſir Robert Briquet of Carſnell & dayly he encreaſed / & was loged bytwene the ryuer of Loyre & the ryuer of Dallet. and ſo ouerran a great ꝑte of the coūtre of Burbonoyſe about Mo
                  •
               lyns in Auuergne / ſaynt Peter the mynſter / & ſaynt Purſayn. and of ſir Loyes cōpany on a day a CCC. of whome ſir Bertram de la Sale / and Ortyngo were capitaynes: departed & paſſed Loyre beſyde Marcilly the nonnes. And they rode ſo long what night and day that they aryued at Charytie on the ryuer of Loyre a great towne and well cloſed / and incōtynent they ſealed & entred in to it / and taryed ſtyll in a place where as they entred: for they feared leſt they of they towne had ſet a buſſhmen for thē. Therfore they durſt entre no farther tyll it was fayre day. And in the meane ſeaſon they of y• towne caryed all their goodes into botes the whiche were on the ryuer of Loyre / and themſelfe their wyues and their chyldren. And ſorowed away towarde the cytie of Neuers the whiche was a fyue leages thens. And whā it was day the naueroyſe / englyſſhmen and gaſcoyns: ſuche as had ſcaled the towne went forward into the towne & founde all the houſes voyde Thā they determyned to kepe the towne and to fortify it / for they thought it ſtode metely to ouer ron the countre on bothe ſydes of the ryuer of Loyre. Thā they ſent worde therof to ſi
                  •
                Lois of Nauer / who was than in the marche of Auuergne and he incōtynent ſent to them ſir Robert Briquet with a thre hundred ſpeares / and he paſſed through the countre without any reſyſtence: and ſo they entred by the bridge ouer Loyre into Charite. And whan they were met togyder they thought them ſelfe ſtrong ynowe Than they began to make ſore warre into the realme of Fraunce.
            NOwe lette vs ſpeke of the duke of Burgoyn who lay at ſiege before Marcherāuyll / and he oppreſſed them within ſo ſore y• they yelded vp the towne ſauyng their lyues & goodes / and ſo departed. Than the duke ſent ſir Boucequant and ſir Johan of Uyen marſhall of Burgoyn to take poſſeſſyon of y• towne: and made capitayne therof a ſquyer of his called Guyllyam of Charters / and with hym a fourtie ſoudyers. Than the duke went with his company before Canerolles and layd ſege ther to / for it ſtode in a playne countre.
            NOwe let vs ſpeke of ſir John̄ de la Ryuer / who lay at ſyege before Acqueney nere to Paſſy in the coūtie of Eureux & he had in his cōpany a .ii. M. for he was ſo gret with the kyng y• he might ſpende what him lyſt. wtin the caſtell of Aqueney were englyſſhmen / normans / frenchmen / & naueroyſe: who had bene ther euer ſythe the batayle of Cocherell & defē
               ded it right valyantly / for they were well fortifyed with artyllary & vytels. Howbeit finally they were fayne to yelde vp the caſtell their lyues & goodes ſaued. And ſo they departed & caryed their goodes to Cherbourge & there they taryed. Thā ſir John̄ de la Ryuer garniſſhed the caſtell with frenchmen / and than he wente towarde the cytie of Deureux / and with hym was ſir Hewe of the caſtell / the lorde of Sāny ſir Mathewe of Roy / ſir Monfange / the lorde of Ely the lorde of Creſques / the lorde of Cāpy ſir Edwarde of Roucy / ſir Ingram of Hedyn and dyuers other knightes & ſquyers of Fraū
               ce. And in y• meane ſeaſon the duke of Burgon dyde ſo moche to them of Canerolles / that they were fayne to yelde thē to his pleaſure. And ſo all the ſoudyers ſtraūgers were taken to mercy / but certayne pyllers of the nacyon of Fraū
               ce that were ther taken were put to dethe. than there came to the Duke certayne burgeſſes of Charters / and deſyred of the duke that he wolde gyue them for their wages and rewarde for their engens the caſtell of Canerolles / the whiche had done thē great hurt in tyme paſt / & the duke gaue it them to do what they wolde therwith. Than they of Charters ſette men a warke and beate it clene downe to the erthe. Than the duke wente vnto a caſtell called Drewe / in the playne countre of Beaus: and therin were

certayne pyllers and the duke 
                  〈◊〉
                by 
                  〈◊〉
                / and all that were within slayne. Than the duke went to a caſtell named Pru
                  ••
                beſiged it all about / and made many aſſaut or he wanne 
                  〈◊〉
                but finally they yelded them vp their lyues onely ſaued / but as for goodes they bare away nothyng: and all the frenchmen that were within were kept ſtyll as priſoners. Than y• duke toke poſſeſſion of the caſtell & gaue it to a knight of Beauſſe called ſir Peter du Boyes / to thentent that he ſhulde fortify it & kepe it ſufficyently. Than the duke went and refreſſhed him in the cytie of Charters and a part of his hooſt / and whan he had ben there a fyue dayes / than he went and beſeged the caſtell of Conuay the whiche had done moche trouble to the countre there about: and the duke cauſed sixe great engens to be reyſed agaynſt it. In the meane ſeaſon whyle y• duke made theſe aſſantes in Normādy / ſir Loys of Nauer ouerran y• lowe coū
               tre of Auuerne & kept ſtyll the feldes and ſore enpoueryſſhed the countre and none duell encountre with hym. And alſo they of the garyſon of Char
                  •
               te dyd about them what they lyſt alſo therle of Mounthelyert with his alyes of Almayne were entred into the duchy of Burgoyn by Beſancon and waſted all the countre whrefore y• frēche kyng ſent to the duke of but gone y• he ſhulde breke vp his ſege before Cō
               uay & drawe to Parys and ſo to go into Burgone. And whan the duke herd that he was 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ry / for he had promyſed nat to depart fro Conuay tyll he had won it: but they of his coūſell ſayd / that ſythe the kynge had ſent for hym he myght well depart and breke no promyſe but they made therof no semblaunt to thē of Conuay. but the marſhall enquired of them if they wolde yelde them vp ſimply to the dukes pleaſure / and they anſwered nay. Howebeit they ſayde they were content to yelde vp the caſtell theyr lyues and goodes ſaued / the whiche of / fre was accepted and they departed: and y• duke delyuered the caſtell to a knyght of Beaus named Philyppe 
                  •
               arciers / and he newly fortifyed it. Than the duke wēt to Charters and gaue charge of the mooſt parte of his company to the erle of Auſerre / to ſir Boucequant 
                  〈◊〉
                to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys of 
                  •
               ancer. and the duke went to Parys / and with hym ſir Loys of Alenſon / y• forde Beauiewe the lorde of Uyen 
                  〈◊〉
                all the burgonyons / and ſo came to the kyng his brother to Uaur in the countie of Bry and there 
                  ••
               taryed but one day. And than rode ſo longe that 
                  〈◊〉
                to Champaig
                  •
                / and than he toke the way to Langers / and as he wente he gadered men of warre togyder. Thus y• burgonyons made frōter warr agaynſt their enemyes / and there was the archpreeſt / the lorde of the caſtell Uylayne / the lorde of Uergy / y• lorde of Grancy / the lorde of Sobournon / the lorde of Rougemont / and a ryche man named John̄ of Boloyn / the lorde of Priſes / ſir He
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                Uyen / the lorde of the caſtell / the byſſhoppe of Langers and other who were right ioyous of the comynge of the duke their lorde. Than they rode towarde their enemyes / who were a xv. hundred ſpeares / and they were drawen beyond the ryne: and the burgonyons were entred beyond the countie of Moūtbelyart / and brent as they went.
            IN the meane tyme the frenche kyng ſent ſir Morean of Fennes his cōſtable & his two marſhals ſir Boucequant and ſir Mōto
                  •
                of Brāuyll and a great nombre of knyghtes & ſquiers to go & ley ſiege before Charite on the ryuer of Loyre and ſo they dyde / & nigh euery day they ſkirmyſſhed with thē within. After y• the duke of Burgon & the mooſt part of his cō
               pany y• had ben with him in y• county of moūtbelyart were come to Parys. The kynge ſe
                  〈…〉
                the duke with mo than. M. ſperes to the ſiege before Charite. and than ther were at the ſege a thre. M. knyghtꝭ and ſquyers who ſkirmyſſhed often tymes with thē of the garyſon / ſo yt 
               ther were hurt on bothe ꝑties. & ther were made newe knightꝭ and reyſed baners at an yſſu
                  •
                that they of Charite made. Firſt ſir Robert of Alenſon / ſon to the erle of Alēſon who dyed at Creſſy / & ſir Loys of Aucer ſon to therle of au
               
                  ••
               r deed & brother to therle ther preſent. Thus they of Charytie were ſore oppreſſed & gladly wolde haue rēdred vp the fortreſſes by cōposicion / but the duke of Burgon wolde haue had thē at his pleaſure. he had taken fro thē the ryuer / ſo that no purueyaūce coude come at thē.
            IN the ſame ſeaſon ſir Loys of Nauer exyled all before hym in the marches of auuergne for he aſſembled people on euery ſyde / to the entent to reyſe the ſiege before Charytie and he had a two thouſande fightynge men / & had ſente in to Bretayne to ſir Robert Canoll and to ſir Gaultier Hewet / ſir Mathewe Gornay: and other knightꝭ and ſquyers there that they ſhulde come to ſerue hym in that iourney 
                  〈◊〉
                whervnto they were ſore deſyrous: but they were all redy at y• ſege before Alroy with therl
                  •
                Mountfort. & whan ſir Loys ſawe y• he coud
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               at get them / than he drewe to Chorbourge by the ordynaunce of y• kyng his brother. And the ſame ſeaſon to thentent y• ſir Charles of Blo
                  •
               s ſhulde haue mo men of warr with hym / y• frenche kyng ſent to the duke of But goyn yt he ſhul
               
                  •
               e re
                  •
               eyue thē of Charytie their lyues ſaued / cō
               dy
                  ••
               onally that they ſhulde ſwere yt in thre yeres after they ſhulde nat be armed on the kyng of Nauers parte. So thus they of Charytie yelded themſelfe vp their lyues ſaued / but they 
                  •
               aryed away no goodeſſe. And ſo they departed all a foote ▪ and paſſed throughe the realme of Fraunce on the dukes ſaue conducte. And ſo they y• were wont of olde tyme to dwell in Chary
                  •
               e came thyder agayne to abyde there / and the duke retourned to Parys.
            THe frenche kynge acorded to his coſyn ſir Charles of Bloys that he ſhulde haue out of his realme to the nombre of a thouſande ſpeares / & wrote to ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / who was in Normandy that he ſhulde go into Bretayne to ayd his coſyn 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Charles of Blois agaynſt ſir John̄ Mountfort. And of that tydynges ſir Bertram was right 
                  •
               oyouſe / for alwayes he toke the lorde Charles for his naturall lorde. and ſo he departed out of Normādy with ſuche people as he coude gette to go in to Bretayne / & ſir Boucequant kept ſtyll y• ſiege in Normandy in his ſtede. and ſo long rode ſir Bertram and his cōpany that he came to Naū
               tes in Bretayne and there he founde the lorde Charles of Bloys and the good lady his wyfe who receyued hym ryght ſwetely & conde hym great thanke in that he was come thyder to ſocour and ayde hym. And than they counſelled togyder howe they ſhulde maynteyn forthe the warr / for alſo there was the mooſt parte of all Bretayne / in entenſyon to ayde ſir Charles of Bloyes whome they all reputed for the duke of Bretayne / thinkynge to reyſe the ſyege before Alroy / and to fight with the lorde Mountfort. Thyder came great baroney and knyghtes of Fraunce and of Normandy: as the erle of Au
               
                  •
               erre / the erle of Joye the lorde of Frāuyll / the lorde of Prie / y• begue of Uyllers / and dyuers good knyghtes ſquyers / and good men of armes. T
                  •
               dynges came to the lorde Mountforte who lay at ſiege before Aulroy / howe the lorde Charles of Bloys made a great aſſ
                  •
               ble of men of warr and howe that dyuers lordes of Fraū
               ce were come to hym and dayly came newe beſyde the conforte that he had of the lordes knyghtes and ſquyers of Bretayne. Aſſone as the lorde Mountfort knewe theſe tidynges he ſent worde therof in to the duchy of Acquitayne / to the knyghtꝭ and ſquyers that were ther of Englande and ſpecially to ſir John̄ Chandos / deſyring them hertely that in his great nede they wolde confort hym. In truſt that in Bretayne they ſhulde do many a dede of armes / to y• whiche all knyghtes and ſquyers to auaunce theyr honours ſhulde entende. And whan ſir Johan Chandos ſawe that the erle Mountforte deſyred hym ſo effectuouſly: than he aſked lycence of the prince of Wales his lorde & maiſter / who anſwered and ſayd he was content that he ſhulde go. Sayeng it was no breche of ye peace bytwene Englande and Fraunce / for the frenchemen in lykewiſe toke parte with ſir Charles of Bloys agaynſt the erle of Mountforte / and ſo to do they had good leaue of the frenche kyng. Than ſir Johan Chandos was ryght ioyouſe and made his prouiſyon / and deſyred dyuers knyghtes and ſquyers of Acquitayne to haue gone with hym / howbeit ther were but a fewe that wold go with hym ſauyng ſuche englyſſhemen as were there. yet he had with hym a. CC. ſpeares and as many archers / and rode ſo longe through Poyctou and Xaynton that he entred in to Bretayne / and came to the ſyege before Alroy / and ther he founde the erle of Moū
               forte / who receyued hym right ioyouſly & was gladde of his comynge / and ſo was ſir Olyuer of Clyſſon / ſir Robert Canoll & other. And thā it ſemed generally to them that none yuell coude than come to them ſythe they had ſir Johan Chandos in theyr company / and alſo dyuers knyghtes and ſquyers of Englande paſſed the ſee / deſyringe to auaunce their bodyes and to fyght with the frēchmen / and came to the ſiege before Alroy in the ayde of the erle of Mountforte who receyued them with great ioye. And ſo they were what englyſſhe and bretons to the nombre of ſixtene hundred fightyng men / and about eyght or nyne hundred archers.
            NOwe let vs retourne to ſir Charles of Bloys who was in the 
                  •
               ytie of Na
                  •
               tes and made ther his ſomons / and gadered togyder mē of warre in euery part wher he thought to get any / for he was well enformed howe the erle Mountfort was greatly reconforted with the englyſſhmen. Than he deſyred the barownes / knyghtes / and ſquyers of Bretayne of ſache as had done homage to him / that they 
                  〈◊〉
                o
                  •
               
               de helpe or ayde hym to defende his herytage agaynſt his enemyes: there came of the barons

of Bretayne to ſerue 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ the vy
                  〈…〉
                of 
                  〈◊〉
                the lorde of 
                  •
               yon / ſir Charles of 
                  〈…〉
                / the lorde of 
                  •
               eur the lorde of Tor
                  •
               myne / the lord Dancennes / the lorde of Maleſ
                  ••
               yt / the lor
                  ••
                of 
                  〈◊〉
                / the lorde of Dangore / the lord of Lohea
                  •
                
               ▪ the lorde of Pont 
                  •
               nd dyuers other y• I cannat name. Theſe lordꝭ & their men were loged in the cyte of Nauntes and 
                  〈◊〉
                y• 
               
                  •
               ylages ther about / and whan they were aſſembled all togyder they were to the nombre of. 
                  〈◊〉
               . hundred ſpeares with them of Fraunce. So theſ
                  •
                lordes counſciled the lorde Charles nat to 
                  •
               ary longe there / but to ryde towarde his enemyes. And at his departynge the good lady his wyfe ſayd to him in the preſens of ſir Be
                  〈…〉
                of Cle
                  •
               
               quy / and other lordꝭ and knightes of Bretey
                  •
               . Sir ye are goynge to defende myne herytage and yours / for y• is myne is yours▪ the whiche the lorde Mountfort taketh fro vs wrongfully and without cauſe / as god knowe
                  ••
               . And all y• lordes of Bretayne here preſent / knowe ryght well y• I am right enheryter. Therfore ſir I requyre you hartely that ye make 
                  •
               o 
                  ••
               ner of ordynaunce nor compoſycion of agrement or peace with therle Mountfort / but that the hole body of the duchy may remayne with 
                  〈…〉
                he
                  •
                haſband graūted her ſo to do. And than he departed with all his company and toke 
                  〈…〉
                their lady / whome they reputed as 
                  •
               ucheſſe. And ſo they ro
                  •
               e towarde 
                  ••
               ynes and 
                  〈◊〉
                thyder and there lodged / and there ta
                  〈…〉
               d and refreſſhed them to here what their enemyes 
                  〈◊〉
                / and to aduyſe ſome ſu
                  •
               fi
                  •
               yent place to 
                  •
               yght 
                  〈◊〉
                them / in caſe that they might fyade / 
                  〈◊◊〉
                aduauntage. And ther was great 
                  〈…〉
               cacion amonge the knightes and ſquyers of 
                  〈…〉
               aunce and of Bretayn / ſuche as were 
                  〈◊〉
                thyder to ayde ſir Charles of Bloys / who was full ſwere and courteſſe / and parauentur
                  •
                w
                  •
               lde gladly haue cōdyſcended to a peace / and haue 
                  •
               en 
                  〈…〉
               
               tent with a parte of the duchy of Bretayne / but in the name of god he was 
                  〈…〉
                on by his wife and by the knightes about hym / that he might nat fall to no treaty of peace.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Charles of Bl
                  •
               ys came agaynſt the erle Mountford mordynaunce of ba
                  •
               ayle: and howe ſir Johan Chādos came agaynſt hym: and howe many were in eche 
                  ••
               tayle. Cap. CC. xx
                  •
               .
            
               BItwene 
                  〈◊〉
                and Alroy wher therle Mountfortlay at ſige was 
                  〈◊◊〉
                
               
                  •
               eages of that coutre. Tha
               
                  ••
               oyngꝭ came to therle moū
               fort howe the lorde Charles of Bloyes aproched nere to hym / and how that he had the goodlyeſt men 
                  〈◊〉
                armes and beſt a
                  ••
               ed and apoynted that euer was ſene come out of Fraunce. 
                  〈◊〉
                the which 
                  〈◊〉
                dynges thenglyſſhmen were right 
                  〈…〉
               ouſe / 
                  〈◊〉
                they had great deſyre to fight with them / eueryman dreſſed their harneſſe to a poynt 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
               ſhed their ſpeares / daggers / and ares: ha
                  〈…〉
               
               gens / helmes / baſſene
                  •
               tes / vyſers / and 
                  〈◊〉
                and all maner of harnes / for they thoughe 
                  〈◊〉
                that ſhortely it ſhulde ſtande they
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                ha
                  〈…〉
               . Than they capitayns drewe to
                  〈…〉
               er. F
                  •
               rſ
                  ••
                ſir Johan Chandos / by whoſe counſayle ſpecially they wolde be all ruled / and ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               ambreticourt / ſir Robert Can
                  •
               lle / ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               e Caurell / ſir Mathewe Gourney and other. Than theſe knightes counſayled therle Mo
                  ••
               
               ſorde that the nexte day they ſhulde take the 
                  〈…〉
               
               de / and thanne to take further aduyſe. 
                  •
               it was ſhewed to all the hooſt that they ſhulde the next day be redy apparelled and ſette in order of batayle / as thought they ſhulde fight 
                  〈…〉
               tynent. The nyght paſſed and the day came the which was on a ſaturday / than the englyſſhemen and bretons yſſued oute of their holdes / and came properly in good ordynaunce behyude the caſtell of Aulroy / and there toke a place of grounde / and ſayde howe they wolde there abyde for their enemyes. And ſo about the hour of prime ſir Charles of Bloyes and all his hooſt came thyder / who were deꝑted the friday before fro Uannes. and than the ſame night lodged within thre lytell leages of Alroy. And ſir Charles of Bloys and his company were ordred in the beſt maner that coude be deuyſed / and rode ſo cloſe toguyder that yf one had caſt any thynge among them / it wolde haue reſted on their ſpere poyntes / to ſe them thēglyſſhmen toke great pleaſure. Thus the frenchemen reſted in good array before their enemyes / and toke their fel
               
                  •
               e amonge the 
                  •
               uſſhes / and it was commaunded by their marſhalles that none ſhulde go forward without cōmaundement. So they ſtode ſtyll in good aray euer redy to batayle / the whiche was all their deſyre and wyll.
            THan the lorde Charles of Bloys by the coūſell of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / who

was a great capitayne & gretly beloued with ye barons of Breteyn: by his aduyſe ther was ordayned thre batels & a reregard. And as I vnderſtande ſir Bertrā had the leadyng of ye firſt with a great nōbre of knightes & ſquiers of bretayne. The ſeconde led therle of Aucer & therle Jony with plenty of knightes & ſquiers of frā
               ce. The. 
                  〈◊〉
               . had the lorde Charles of Bloyes & in his cōpany great barons of Breteyn ▪ as the vycont of Rohan / the lorde of Leon the lorde of Nagor / ſir Charles of Dynan / the lorde Dācenes / ye lorde of Maleſtroyt & dyuers other. and in the a
                  •
               eregard was the lorde of Raix / the lorde of Rieux / the lorde Tornemyne / the lorde of Pont. & dyuers other barons knightꝭ and ſqu
                  •
               
               ers. & in euery batayle was. M. of good fightyng men / and ye lorde Charles of Bloys was 
                  •
               eſy in deſyringe euery batell to do yt day their true deuoyre / and tooke it on his ſoule & on his part of paradyſe yt they ſhulde fight in a rightfull quarell / promyſing euery man acordynge to their deſertes to be well rewarded.
            ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of the englyſſhmen & bretons how they ordred their batayls. ſir Johan C handos who was princypall capitayue ouer them though therle of Mountfort were chiefe / for the kyng of Englande had writen ſo to hym that he ſhulde ſpecially entend to the buſyneſſe o
                  •
                his ſonne therle of Mountfort who ſhuld haue his doughter in maryage. And ſo aboue all other knightes he was mooſt nereſt to therle of Mountfort / & he had well ymagined and cōſydred the demeanour of the frenchmen / & in his mynde prayſed gretly their good ordre & ſayd / 
                  〈…〉
               pereth ſurely that the flour of honour & cheual
                  •
               y is among yonder company beſyde great wyt and good ordre. And than ſaid openly ſirs it is tyme yt we order out batayls / for our enemyes hath gyuen vs enſample. & ſuche as herd him ſayd ſir ye ſay trouthe: and ye be our mayſter and chefe counſellour therfore order it acordyng to your pleaſure / for there is none yt ſhall coutrole you. And alſo ye knowe better how to order ſuche a mater than all we do / and than he made thre batayls and a reregarde. The firſte had ſir Robert Canoll / ſir Gaultier Huet / and ſir Richard Burlke. The ſeconde had ſir Olyuer of Clyſſon / ſir Euſtace Dābreticourt / & ſi
                  •
                Mathue Gorney. The thirde therle Moūtfort and he hym ſelfe to wayt on hym / & in euery batayle .v. C. men of armes / and .iiii. C. archers. And whan it cāe to the ordring of the reregard than he called to hym ſir Hewe Caurell & ſayd / ſir Hewe ye ſhall kepe y• areregard with .v. C. with you / & ye ſhall kepe you on a wyng & ſtyre nat fro your place for no maner of cauſe / wtout yeſe n
                  •
               de. So that if any of our batayls breke ordiſaray by any aduenture: than if ye ſe any ſuche nede drawe thyder and confort them / and whan ye haue done kepe agayne your ſtall and ye can / for this day ye can nat do better ſeruyce And whan ſir Hewe Caurell had well herd ſir John̄ Chandes he was greatly a ſhamed & diſpleaſed and ſayd / ſir delyuer this areregard to ſome other than to me for I purpoſe nat to medell ther with / & ſir I haue marueyle what ye ſe in me that I ſhulde nat be one of ye firſt to fight with our enemyes. Than ſir John̄ Chandos right well auyſed ſayd: ſir Hewe I ſet you nat in this areregarde bycauſe ye be nat ſo good a knyght as other of our cōpany that was neuer in my mynde / for I knowe truly that ye wolde gladly be one of y• formaſt and right able ye are ſo to be / but I ordeyn you therto bycauſe ye be a ſage knight & well aduyſed / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                it muſt behoue that one of vs two muſt do it / wherfore I hertely requyre you to do it. and ſir I promyſe you faithfully that and ye wyll do it / it ſhalbe a great aduaūtage for vs all / & ye therby ſhall at tayne great honour. And moreouer I promyſe you the firſt requeſt after that euer ye deſyreme of I ſhall graūt it you / howbeit for all the wordes y• ſir John̄ Chandos coude ſpeke ſir Hewe Caurell wolde nat agre therto / for he reputed it a grete ſhame to him ſo to do / and deſyred for goddeſſake holdyng vp his hādes to put ſome other therto / for ī effect his mynde was to fight with the formaſt. And with thoſe wordꝭ ſir Johan Chandos almoſt wept / & ſayd right ſwetely. Sir Hewe it muſt behoue other you to do it or els my ſelfe / therfore conſyder whiche were better. Than ſir Hewe aduyſed hym ſelfe / and was with tho wordes halfe cōfounded & ſayd. Certeſſe 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                I knowe well ye wyll nat deſyre me to any thyng that ſhulde be to my diſhonoure / and ſy the it wyll be none otherwyſe I am content to do it. And ſo ſir Hewe Caurell toke on hym the charge of the reregard and drue out a part on a wyng and ſet hym in good order.
            Thus ye ſaturday the .viii. day of Octobre the yer of our lorde. M .iii. C .lxiiii. were theſe batayls ordred eche before other in a fayre playne nere to A
                  •
               lroy in Bretayne / the whiche was a goodly ſight to beholde. For there might haue ben ſene baners and penons wauyng with the wynde & harneſſe richely aparelled / and ſpecially the frēchmen were ſo properly dreſſed that it was ioye to beholde thē. and thus as th
                  〈…〉
               
               
               
                  •
               red their batayls on bothe 
                  •
               ties. The lorde of Beamanoyre a great baron and a ryche of bretayne went bytwene the parties entretyng for a peace for he was glad to beſy hym ſelfe therin / in exchewyng of the parels that was lykely to fall. He was ſuffred to go and come bytwen the parties / bycauſe he was ſworne priſoner to thenglyſſhmen / and might nat be armed. And that ſaturday he went in and out often tymes tyll it was noone / and ſo by his meanes he gat bytwene the parties a certayne reſpyte for that day and night / vntyll the next day ſonne riſynge. And than euery man brewe to his logynge and toke their eaſe and refreſſhing of ſuche as they had: and the ſame euenyng the capitayne of Alroy yſſued out of his garyſon / bycauſe ye truſe alſo ſtretched to them. and went peaſably into the hooſt of the lorde Charles of Bloyes / who receyued hym right ioyouſly. The capitayne was called Henry of Hanternell a ſquyer and a good man of armes / and he had in his company a fortie ſperes of good companyons well armed and horſed / ſuche as had holpe him to kepe the fortreſſe. And whan the lorde Charles ſawe the capitayne / all ſmy lyng he enquyred of hym the ſtate of the caſtell: and the ſquyer anſwered and ſayd. Sir thāked be god we haue yet prouiſyon ſufficyent to kepe it two or thre monethes if nede were. Well Henry 
                  〈◊〉
                the lorde Charles to morowenexte ye ſhall be well delyuerd other by agrement of peace / or els by playne batayle: ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                the ſquyer god gyue grace. By my faythe 
                  〈◊〉
                the lorde Charles I haue here in my cōpany a .xxv. C. men of armes wel aparelled / and as likely to acquyte them nobly as euer dyde any cōpany that came out of fraū
               ce. Sir 
                  〈◊〉
                the ſquyer and that is a great aua
                  •
                tage / ye ought gretly to thanke god therfore / & ſir Bertram of Cleſquy and theſe other barōs knightes and ſquyers of Fraunce and of Bretayne / that thus courteſly are cōe to ſerue you. Thus the lorde Charles paſſed forthe yt nyght with comunynge wt one and other / and y• ſame nyght ſir John̄ Chandos was ſore 
                  •
               eſyred by certayne engliſſhmen / that he ſhulde nat cōſent to any peace to be had bytwene therle Mountfort and the lorde of Bloyes / for they ſayd they had ſpende all that they had / and were poore. Therfore they wolde other recouer ſomwhat a gayne by batayle or els to loſe all togyder / & ſir John̄ Chandos promyſed them to agree to no peace. ¶ And whan̄e the ſonday came / in the mornyng euery man in the hooſt apar
                  •
               le
                  •
                himſelfe. And in the hooſt of ſir Charle
                  •
                of Bloys ther were many ma
                  ••
               es ſayd / & houſeled ſuche as wolde / and in lykewiſe ſo they dyd in therl
                  •
                Moūtfortes hoſt. And a lytell before the ſonne ryſing / euery man drewe vnder their owne batayls in good ordre as they dyd the day before. and than anone after the lorde of Beamanoyre came to entreat for the peace / for gladly he wolde haue had the parties agreed: and ſo he cam firſt to warde ſir Johan Chandos / who yſſued out of the batayle as ſoone as he ſawe hym comynge and met with hym. And whan the lorde of Beamanoyr ſawe him he ſaluted hym right humbly and ſayd. Sir Johan Chandos I requyre you for goddes ſake ſet in acorde theſe. 
                  〈◊〉
                parties / for it ſhuld be great pyte yt ſo many noble men as be here ſhulde fight to guyder in ſuſteyning of their quarels. Than ſir John̄ Chā
               
               
                  •
               os ſaid: ſir of Beamanoyre it wyll nat be / therfore I aduyſe you yt ye ryde no farther for oure people are determyned that yf they can encloſe you among them / they wyll ſlee you. Therfore ye may ſay to the lorde Charles of Bloys / that howe ſoeuer it be ſir John̄ of Mountfort wyll haue batayle and forſaketh all treaty of peace
                  •
                for he ſaith he wyll this day other be duke of bretayne or els dye in the place. And whan the lorde of Beamanoyre vnderſtode ſir John̄ Chandos he was angry in his mynde & ſayd / a Chā
               dos Chandos that is nat thentent of my lorde ſir Charles of Bloys / and yet hath he as great wyll to fyght as your lorde hath: and ſo hath all his people. And ther with he departed without any mo wordes / and retourned to the lorde Charles of Bloys & to the other lordes of Bretayne who taryed for hym. Than ſir John̄ chā
               dos retourned to the erle of Mountforte / who enquyred of hym howe the mater went & what his aduerſary ſayd. Sir he ſendeth you worde by the lorde of Beaumanoyre fro whome I no we departed / that howe ſoeuer it be he wyll fyght with you: and other this day be duke of Breteyn or els dye in the payne. This anſwer ſir Johan Chandos made / to thentent to gyue his lorde the better corage: and thus finally he ſayd. ſir take hede nowe what ye wyll do whyder wyll ye fight or nat. ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                the erle in ye name of god and ſaynt George let vs than go to it / & god helpe the right: cauſe our baners to auaū
               ce & ſo they dyde. Than the lorde of Beaumanoyre whan he was retorned to the lorde Charles he ſayd / ſir ſir / by my lorde ſaynt yues I haue herde the proudeſt worde of ſir John̄ Chandos yt euer I herde. for he ſayd therle moūtfort ſhulde this day be duke of bretayne / & ſheweth

playnly how ye haue no ryght therto / with the whiche worde ſir Charles chaūged colour and ſayd: as for the right god knoweth it is myne / and ſo affermed the other barons of Bretayne Than he cauſed his baners to be auaunced in the name of god.
            ANd ſo a lytell before the hour of prime / the batayls aproched nere togyder / the whiche was a goodly ſight to beholde / as I haue herde recorded of them that were there: and had ſene it. the frēchmen were ſo cloſe togyder that a man coude nat caſt an appell among thē but it ſhuld a fallen on a baſſenet or on a helme euery man of armes bare his ſpere right befor hym cut of fyue fote of length / and a ſhorte axe hangyng by his ſyde. And ſo they cāe on fayre and eaſely euery man in good array his baner before him and right well aduyſed of that they had to do: and alſo the engliſſhmen were right properly apoynted / and ſo aſſembled and met togyder. Firſt the bretons and ſir Bertram of Cleſquy encountred with the batayle of ſir Robert Canolle and ſir Gaultier Hewet and ſo the lordes of Bretayne on bothe ſydes ſette the baners of their lordes that claymed to be duke eche agaynſt other. And ſo at the firſt encountre there was a ſore batayle: and truely the archers ſhot at the beginnyng right fierſly. howbeit their ſhotte dyde lytell hurt to the frenchemen / they were ſo well armed and pauyſſhed. Than tharchers who were bygge men & lyght caſt away their bowes and entred in amonge the frenchmen that bare the axes / and at y• firſt metyng they pulled out of ſome of the frenchemennes handes their axes / wherwt they fought after ryght hardely. There was done many a 
                  •
               eat of armes / many a one taken and reſcued a gayne: & he that was ones downe it was herde for hym to releue agayne without great helpe. The batayle wherin the lorde Charles was / dreſſed theym ſelfe ſtreyght agaynſt the lorde Mountfortes batayle: and with hym was the erle of Rohane▪ the lorde of Lyon / ſir Charles of Dynan / y• lorde of Quyntyne / the lorde Dā
               cenes / and the lorde of Rochforde / euery lordes baner before hym. So there was a ſore foughten batayle / and the Mountfordes parte at the beginnynge was ſore oppreſſed. but than̄e ſir Hugh Caurell who was in the wynge and had a great batayle of good men of warr / ſawe his cōpany out of ordre / than he drewe thyder and ſette them agayne in ordre / the whiche dealynge gretly aueyled them that day.
         
         
            ¶Howe ſir John̄ Chandos diſconfyted the bataile of therle of Aucer / and howe ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy was diſconfyted and taken. & the lorde Charles of Bloys ſlayne in the batell: and of the pytefull complaynt that therle Mountfort made for his dethe. Cap. C C .xxvi.
            
               ALſo ſir Olyuer Clyſſon / ſir Euſtace Danbreticourt / ſir Richard Brulle / ſir Johan Bourchier / ſir Mathewe Gourney / and dyuers other knyghtes & ſquyers fought with the batayle of the erle of Aucerr / and the erle of Joignye: the whiche was a great batayle and well furnyſſhed with good menne of warr. 
               Ther was many a noble dede done / many taken and reſcued agayne: the frenchmen & bretons on the one parte fought ryght valyantly with the axes that they helde in their handes and the lorde Charles of Bloyes proued hymſelfe a merueylous good knyght. And alſo his aduerſary therle of Mountfort was a valyant knight. and ſir John̄ Chādos dyd y• day many a noble feat / for he was in his dayes a right valyant knight hardy & redouted of his enemyes ſage in batayle / well aduyſed / & full of experyens. He counſelled euer therle of Mountfort / & alwayes toke hede to cōfort him & his men / and ſayd ſir do thus & thus: drawe to y• ſyde or to y• ſyde / and therle ruled hymſelfe alwayes by his counſell. And on the other part ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / the lorde of Tornmyne / the lorde Dauāgour / the lorde of Raix / y• lorde of Loheat / y• lorde of Bornay / y• lorde of Maleſtroyt / y• lord of Pont / the lord of Prier: & many other good knightes & ſquyers of Bretayne & of Normandy y• were ther with the lord Charles of Blois fought valiantly. And ſo long they fought that all the batels aſſēbled eche with other / except y• reregard of thēglyſſmen. wherof 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hewe Caurell was chefe & ſoueraygne. He kept alwayes his batell in a wyng / & toke hede to nothig but to redreſſe agayne his ꝑte if any thyng were a myſſe among any of thē. Among other knightꝭ ſir Olyuer of Cliſſon was well aduiſed / he did maruels with his body & had a grete axe in his hādes wherwt he brake & opened the preſe / ſo y• none durſt aproche nere to hym. He aduētured himſelfe often tymes ſo ferr y• he was in great danger / he had moche to do in y• batell of therle

of Iucerr / and of the erle of Joigny. Where he was ſore encoūtred / ſo that with a ſtroke of an are he was ſtryken on the vyſer of his baſſenet ſo that the poynt of the axe entred into his eyes wherby h
                  •
                loſt euer after y• ſyght with that eye / but for all that ſtroke yet he delt ſtyll lyke a noble knyght. There was recouerynge of batayles and baners that ſomtyme were downe: by well fightynge were releued agayne on bothe partes. Amonge all other knyghtes ſir Johan Chandos was a good knyght / and valyantly fought with an are that he helde in his handes ſo that he gaue ſuche ſtrokes that none durſt aproche to hym: for he was a great and a myghty knight / and well formed of all his membres. So he came & fought agaynſt the batayle of y• erle of Aucers and of the frenchmen / and there was done many a noble dede / and by force of well fightyng y• batayle was broken & brought to ſuche myſchefe that brefely after it was diſcō
               fyted: and all the baners and penons of that batayle ouerthrowen to the erthe / & the lordes put to flight in great danger and miſchefe / for they were nat ayded nor cōforted fro no part: for euery man had ynough to do to defende hymſelfe. To ſay the trouthe whan a diſcōſyture falleth / they that ar ouercome be diſcōfyted for a lytell / for if one fall ther falleth thre / and on .iii. x. and on .x. xxx. and if .x. ſlye ther foloweth. C. Thus it fortuned in this batayle of Alroy: the lordes cryed their cryes wherby ſome y• herde it were recōforted by their men that drue to them / and ſome were nat herde / they were ſo in the preaſe and ſo ferr fro their men. Ho wheit finally the erle of Aucer by force of armes was ſore wounded / and taken vnder the ſtanderd of ſir John̄ Chandos and yelden priſoner / and the erle of Joigny alſo / and the lorde of Prier a great baneret of Normandy.
            ¶yet all this ſeaſon y• other batels fought ſtyll valyantly / and the bretons helde a longe ſpace in good ordre. howbeit to ſpeke truly in armes they kept nat their ordre ſo well as thenglyſſhemen & bretons that were with therle Moūtfort dyde / and gretly aueyled to them y• day the batayle on the wyng that ſir Hewe Caurell ledde And ſo whan thēglyſſhmen ſawe y• frenchmen begyn to breke and opyn their batell they were greatly reconforted: and than ſome of the frenchmen ſuche as had their horſes redy aperelled mounted on them & ſtedd away as faſt as they myght. Than ſir John̄ Chandos and a cōpany with hym / dreſſed thēſelfe agaynſt the batell of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / the whiche batayle had done marueyls in armes: but than it was opyned and many good knightes and ſquters brought to great myſchefe. There was gyuen many a great ſtroke with their heuy ares / and many a baſſenet clouen a ſōdre / & many a man wounded to dethe: and to ſay the trouth 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertram of Cleſquy nor his cōpany coude no lēger endure their enemyes. So ther was taken ſir Bertam of Cleſquy by a ſquyer of Englande / vnder the ſtanderd of ſir John̄ Chandos: and the ſame ſeaſon ſir Johan Chandos toke priſoner a lorde of Bretayne called the lorde of Raix a right hardy knyght. And whan this batayle of bretons began thus to breke / all the other batayls were clene diſcōfyted and loſt their aray: & euery man fledde away as faſt as they might to ſaue them ſelfe. Except a certayne good knyghtes and ſquyers of Bretayne / who wold nat leaue their lorde Charles of Bloys / but had rather dye than to departe with reproche. And ſo they drue about hym and fought right valtan
                  •
               
               ly / and ther was done many a noble dede of armes. And ſo the lorde Charles of Blois and ſ
                  •
               
               che as were about him helde themſelfe togyder a certayne ſpace / defēdyng themſelfe right valyantly / howe beit finally they coude nat defende them ſelfe ſo / but that they were diſconfyted and brought out of ordre by force of armes / for the mooſt parte of the englyſſhmen drewe to y• parte. There was the baner of the lorde Charles of Bloyes diſconfyted and caſt to the erthe and he ſlayne that bare it: and the lorde Charles was there ſlayne his face towarde his enemyes / and a baſtarde ſonne of his called ſir Johan of Bloys / and dyuers other knightes and ſquyers of Bretayne. And as I vnderſtode / it was ſo ordayned in the englyſſhe hooſt / that if they had the better in the bataile / and that if ſir Charles of Bloyes were founde in the place y• none ſhulde take hym to raunſome / but to ſlee hym. And in ſemblable wyſe the frēchmen had ordayned for ſir John̄ Mountfort / if they had atteyned the vyctorie: for as that day they were determyned to haue an ende of the warre. So whan it cāe to the flight ther was great ſlaughter / and many a good knyght taken & brought to myſchefe. There was the floure of cheualry at y• tyme other taken̄e or ſlayne / but a fewe of men of honour that ſcaped / & ſpecially of the banerettꝭ of bretayne. Ther were ſlayne 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Charles of Dynan / the lorde of Lyon y• lorde of Dā
               cenes / y• lorde Dauāgour / the lorde of Loheat / the lorde of Gargoll / the lorde of Maleſtroyt / the lorde of Pout: and dyuers other knyghtes

and ſquyers / the whiche I canne nat all name. And ther were taken the erle of Rohan / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guy of Lyon▪ y• lorde of Rochfort / the lorde of Raix the lorde of Ry
                  ••
               x / therle of Tōnoyre / ſir Henry of Maleſtroyt / ſir Olyuer of Manny / the lorde of Ruyll / the lorde of Franuyll / the lorde of Raneuall and dyuers other of Normandy: and dyuers other good knyghtes and ſquyers of Fraunce / with therle of Aucer and Joigny. Br
                  •
               uely to ſpeke this diſconfyture was great and mighty / & moche good peple therin ſlayne as well in the f
                  •
               ldes as in the chaſe / the whiche endured eyght great leages cuyn to Raynes. Ther were many aduentures the which came 
                  •
               acall to knowledge / & many a one ſlayne and taken as it fortuned them to fall in the handes of them that were cruell or courteſſe. This ba
               
                  〈…〉
               e was nere to Alroy in Bretayne / the yere of our lorde a thouſande. CCC .lx. and foure.
            AFter this great diſconfytur as ye haue herde: the lordes of Englande and Bretayne retourned and lefte the chaſe to their people. Than ther drewe to the erle of Mountfort ſir John Chandos / ſir Robert Canoll / ſir Euſtace Dambretycourt / ſir Mathewe Gourney ſir Johan Bourchier / ſir Gaultier Hewet / ſir Hughe Caurelle / ſir Richarde Brulle / ſir Rycharde Tancon and dyuers other / and ſo came to a hedge ſyde. And ther they vnarmed them for they ſawe well the iourney was theyrs: and certayne of them ſet their baners and ſtanderdes on the hedge / and the baner with y• armes of Bretayne on a buſſhe to drawe their people thyder. Than ſir Johan Chandos / ſir Robert Canoll / ſir Hugh Caurell / and other knightes drewe them to therle Mountfort / and ſmylyng ſayde to hym. Sir laude god and make good chere / for ye haue this day conquered the herytage of Bretayne. Than the erle enclyned hymſelfe ryght courteſly and ſayd openly that euery man myght here: a ſir John̄ Chandos this good aduenture that is thus fallen to me / is by the great wytte and prowes that is in you / the whiche I knowe well: and ſo do all thoſe that be here. Sir I pray you drinke with me: and toke hym a flagon with wyne / wherof he had dronke and refreſſhed hym before: and moreouer ſayd / ſir beſyde god I ought to canne you the mooſt thanke of any creature lyuyng: and therwith ther came to them ſir Olyuer of Clyſſon forchaſed & enſtamed / for he had long purſued his enemyes: ſo he had moche payne to retourne agayne with his people / and brought with hym many a priſonere. Than he came to therle of Mountfort and a lyghted fro his horſe and refreſſhed hym: and in the ſame meane ſeaſon there came to thē two knightes and two haraldes / who had ſerched among the deed bodyes / to ſe if 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Charles of Bloys were deed or nat. Than they ſayd all openly▪ ſir make good chere for we haue ſene your aduerſary 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Charles deed: therwith the erle of Mountfort aroſe and ſayde that he wolde go and ſe hym / for he had as good wyll to ſe hym deed as a lyue: and thyder he went and the knyghtes that were about hym. And whan he was come to the place where as he lay a ſyde couered vnder a ſhelde / he cauſed hym to be vncouered and than regarded hym ryght piteouſly / & ſtudyed a certayne ſpace and ſayd: a ſir Charles fayre coſyn howe that by your opinyon / many a great myſchiefe hath fallen in Bretayn / as god helpe me it ſore dyſpleaſeth me to fynde you thus / howe beit it can be none otherwyſe / and therwith he began to wepe. Than ſir John̄ Chandos drewe hym a backe and ſayd: ſir departe hens and thanke god of the fayre aduentur that is fallen to you / for without the dethe of this man ye coude nat come to the herytage of Bretayne. Thā therle ordayned that ſir Charles of Bloys ſhulde be borne to Guyngant / and ſo he was incōtynent with great reuerence: and there buryed honorably as it apertayned / for he was a good true and a valyant knight: and his body after ſanctifyed by the grace of god & called ſaynt Charles / and canoniſed by pope Urban the .v. for he dyde & yet dothe many fayre myracles dayly.
         
         
            ¶ Of the truce that was gyuen to bury the deed after the hatayle of Alroy and how dyuers caſtels yelded vp to therle Moūtfort: and howe he be ſeged Cāpantorētyne. Cap. CC .xxvii.
            
               AFter that all the deed bodyes were diſpoyled / and that thenglyſſhmen were retourned fro the chaſe. Thā they drewe them to their lodgynges / and vnarmed thē and toke their eaſe and toke hede to their priſoners / and cauſed theym that were wounded to be well ſerued and ſerched. And on the Monday in the mornynge the erle Moūtfort made it to be knowen to them of the

cytie of Reynes and to the townes ther about that he wolde gyue truce for thre dayes / to the cutēt that they might gather togyder the deed bodyes and bury them in holy places / the whiche ordynaunce was well taken and accepted. And ſo the erle Mountfort lay ſtyll at ſiege before Alroy / and ſayd he wold nat depart thens tyll he had wonne it. So the tidynges ſpredde abrode into dyuers countrees / howe ſir John̄ Mountfort by the counſell and ayde of the englyſſhmen had won the felde agaynſt ſir Charles of Bloys / and diſconfyted and put to dethe and taken all the cheualry of Bretayne / ſuch as were agaynſt hym. Sir Johan Chandos had great renome / for all maner of people: lordes / knightes / and ſquyers ſuche as had ben in the felde ſayd: that by his wytte and high prowes thenglyſſhmen and bretons had won the felde. and of theſe tidynges were all the frendes and ayders of ſir Charles of Bloyes right ſorowfull and ſore dyſpleaſed / the whiche was good reaſon. And ſpecially the frenche kyng for this diſconfyture touched hym gretly / bycauſe that dyuers knightꝭ of his realme were ther ſlayne and taken / as ſir Bertram of Cleſquy whome he greatly loued / and the erle of Aucer / the erle of Joigny / & all the barones of Bretayne none except. Than the frenche kyng ſent Loyes the duke of Aniou to the marches of Bretayne for to recōfort the countre / y• which was deſolate & diſconforted for the loue of their lorde Charles of Bloyes / whome they had loſt. And alſo to reconforte the counteſſe of Bretayne wyfe to the ſayd lorde Charles / who was ſo ſore diſconforted for y• dethe of her huſbande / that it was pyte to beholde her / the whiche the duke of Aniou was boūde to do: for he had maried her doughter. So he promyſed with faythfull entent / to gyue vnto all the good cyties & caſtels in Bretayne / and to all the remnant of the countre of Bretayne: his good counſell / confort / and ayde in all caſes. Wherby the good lady whome he called mother / and all the countrey had a certayne ſpace gret truſt / vnto ſuche ſeaſon as the frenche kyng to ereche we all parels / put other prouiſyon as ye ſhall herafter. Alſo theſe tidynges came to the kyng of Englande / for the erle of Moūtfort had writen to hym therof / the. v▪ day after the batayle was ended before Alroy▪ The letters were brought to the kynge of Enlande to Douer by a parſeuant of armes / who had ben in the batayle. And the kyng inconſynent made hym an haralde & called him Wynd ſore▪ as I was enformed by the ſame haraulde and dyuers other. And the cauſe why the kynge of Englande was as than at Douer / I ſhal ſhewe you here after.
            IT was of trouthe that ther was a treaty thre yere before / bytwene the lord Edmō
               de erle of Cambrige one of the kynges ſonnes / and the doughter of therle Loys of Flaūders: to the which maryage therle of Flaūders was as than newly agreed vnto / ſo that pope Urban the fyft wolde diſpence with them / for they were nere of lynage. And the duke of Lācaſtre and the lorde Edmonde his brother / with many knightes and ſquyers had ben in Flaūders with the erle: and were receyued right honorably in ſigne of great peace and loue. And ſo the erle of Flaunders was come to Calais and paſſed the ſee and came to Douer / where the kyng and parte of his counſell were redy to receyue hym / and ſo they were ther. Whan the forſayd purſeuant came to the kyng and brought hym tidynges of the batayle of Alroy / of the whiche the kyng and all that were ther were right ioyouſe: and in lykewiſe ſo was the erle of Flaunders / for the loue and honour and auauncemēt of his coſyn germayne / the erle of Mountfort. Thus the kyng of England and therle of flaū
               ders were at Douer the ſpace of thre dayes in feeſtes and great ſportes / and whan they had well ſported thē and done that they aſſembled for. Than the erle of Flaunders toke leaue of the kyng and departed / and as I vnderſtande the duke of Lancaſtre and the lorde Edmonde paſſed the ſee agayne with hym and helde him company tyll he came to Bruges.
         
         
            ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of therle Moūtfort how he dyd in Bretayne. Cap. CC .xxviii.
            
               THe erle of Mountfort as ye haue herde before / lay ſtyll at y• ſege before Alroy: and ſaid howe he wolde nat departe thens tyll he had it at his pleaſure. And they wt in y• caſtell were nat at their caſe / for they had loſt their capitayne Henry of Fētenycle / for he was abydden in the felde and the chefe of their company / wherfore they were but a fewe within and ſocour came none to thē fro no parte: therfore they toke counſell amonge them and determyned to yelde vp the caſtell

their lyues and good ſaued. Than they entreted with therle and with his counſell: and the erle who had many thynges to take hede of / bycauſe he knewe nat howe all the countre wolde de demeaned. Therfore he toke them to mercy and ſuffred them peaſably to departe / and toke the poſſeſſyon of the fortereſſe / and ſette men 
                  〈◊〉
                of his. And than rode farther and all his 
                  〈◊〉
                the whiche dayly encreaſed / for menne of warr and archers reſorted dayly to hym: and alſo dyuers knightes and ſquyers of bretayne torned to his part. and ſpecially the breton bre
               
                  〈…〉
               tes. Than he taryed thre dayes before the towne of Jougowe / and made two great aſſautes wherin dyuers were ſore hurt / bothe of theym within and without. And whan they of Jougowe ſawe howe they were aſſayled / & that no ſocoure was comynge to them warde. 
                  〈…〉
               han they detmyned nat to be haryed nor vndone but toke therle Mountfort for their lord and opened the gates and ſware to become his men foreuer. Than the erle remoued all the offuers in the towne and ſette in newe / and than rode before the towne of Dynan / and there he layed ſiege the whiche endured long into wynter for the towne was well garnyſſhed with vitayls / and with good men of warre. And alſo the duke of Amou erhorted them to kepe it like good men of warre / and promyſed to conforte them the whiche cauſed them to abyde and ſuffre many a great aſſaut / but whan they ſawe y• there purueyaunces began to myniſſhe / & that no ſocoure apered to them. Than they entreated for a peaſe with the erle Mountforte / who gladly entended therto / for he deſyred nothingels / but that they ſhulde knolege hym for their lorde / and ſo they dyde. And ſo he entred in to the towne of Dynan with great ſolempnyte / & they all dyde to hym homage and fealtie. Thā he rode forthe with all his army tyll he came before the cytie of Campecorentyne and beſieged it rounde about and brought thyder great engens fro Uānes & fro Dynan: and ſayd he wolde nat deꝑte thens tyll he had it at his pleaſur Thenglyſſhmen & bretons as ſir John̄ Chandos & other who had taken at the batayle of Alroy dyuers priſoners / wolde put none to raunſome / bycauſe they ſhulde nat aſſēble to gyder a gayne to make a newe felde agaynſt thē. Therfore they ſent thē into Po
                  •
               to
                  •
                / Xaynton / Burdeaur / & Rochell to be kept there as priſoners. And ſo 
                  ••
               the the meane ſeaſon the bretons and englyſſhmen in one part and other conquered all the countre of Bretayne.
         
         
            ¶ How the peace was made that the erle of Mountfort ſhulde abyde duke of Bretayne / and howe the frenche kynge rendred to Clyſſon his lande / & of the maryage of the duke of Normādy. and howe the captall of Beu
                  •
                became liege man to the frenche kynge / and afterwarde renounced hym agayne. Cap. CC .xxix.
            
               IN the meane ſeaſone that the erle of Mountforte lay at ſiege before Campecorentyne / and that it was ſore beten and oppreſſed by his engyns and aſſautes. His men ran ouer the countre and left nothyng vntaken: without it were to hote / to colde / or to heuy. Of theſe aduentures the frenche kynge was well enformed / and had theron dyuers counſayls / purpoſes / & ymagynacions: howe he myght do with the beſyneſſe of Bretayne / for they were in a harde ꝑte and coude nat well remedy it without ſtyrringe of all his realme / and to make warr agayne with thenglyſſhmen for Bretayne. Wherin he had counſell in no wyſe ſo to do / for by great delyberacion of counſell it was ſayd to him. Sir ye haue helde the opinyon of the lord Charles of Bloyes your coſyn / and in lykewiſe ſo dyde the kyng your father / and kynge Philyp your graundfather: who gaue hym in maryage the duchy of Bretayne / wherby many great yuels and inconuenyentes hath fallen ſythe in Bretayne / and in the countreis about. And ſir ſo it is that the lorde Charles of Bloys your coſyn / in kepynge and defendynge his ryght in Bretayne is now deed and ſlayne. and ther is non on his ſyde that the right of the warre / or of his chalenge can releue: for his two ſonnes John̄ and Guy who be next heyres / ar in Englande in priſone. And ſirye here dayly howe the erle Mountfort cōquereth and taketh townes and caſtels / and reputeth them as his owne true herytage. Sir thus ye may leſe your ryght and homage that ye ought to haue of Bretayne / the whiche is a ryght noble thyng to your realme. Wherfore ye ought greatly to doute the loſſe of the ſame / for if therle Mountfort become liege man and holde the duchy of Bretayne of your brother the kynge of Englande as his father

dyde of olde tyme / ye canne nat haue it agayne without great warre & great hatred / bytwene you and the kyng of Englande wher as good peace is no we / the whiche we wyll nat counſell you to breke. Therfore ſir we thynke all thynges cōſydred and ymagined / that it were good for you to ſend certayne meſſangers to haue a treaty bytwene you and therle Mountforte to knowe howe he wyll maynteyne and agree to any peace bytwene hym and the countre / & the lady who calleth herſelfe ducheſſe. And ſir as your meſſangers feleth hym dyſpoſed in this mater / than acordyng therto ye may take further aduyſe: at ye vttermoſt it were better that he abode ſtyll duke of Bretayne ſo that he wyll holde of you / and do to you all rightꝭ that a ſubget ought to do to his lorde / rather than the mater ſhulde be in great parell of leſyng of all: to the whiche wordes the kynge gladly enclyned vnto. Than it was ordayned that the lorde Johan of Craon archbyſſhop / the lorde of Craon his coſyn / and ſir Boucequant ſhulde go on yt voyage to Campacorentyne / to treat with the erle Mountfort & with his counſell / on ye ſtate of peace as ye haue herde. So thus theſe thre lordes deꝑted well inſtructed of that they ſhulde do / and ſo longe they rode tyll they came to the ſege of the englyſſhmen and bretons before Campacorentyne / and ſo they named them to be meſſangers fro the frenche kyng. Therle of Mountfort / ſir Johan Chandos / and they of his coūſell receyued them right ioyouſly. than theſe lordes of Fraūce ſhewed right ſagely the occaſyon of their comyng thider / and why they wereſent. And at the firſt entreaty therle moūtfort anſwered howe he wolde take counſell and aduyce in the mater / and gaue them day of anſwere. And in the meane ſeaſon theſe thre lordꝭ went and lay at the cytie of Reyns. Than the erle Mountforte ſent into Englande the lorde Latymer to ſhewe to the kyng of England the treaty of the frenchmen / deſyringe hym to haue his coūſell in that behalfe. And the kyng of Englande whan he was enfourmed of the mater / ſayd howe that he wolde counſell therle Moūtfort to haue peace / ſo that alwayes he might be duke of Bretayne: and ſomwhat to recōpence the lady callynge her ſelfe ducheſſe / with ſome honeſt thynge. aſſignynge her ſome certayne rent yerely to be payd out of ſome place wher ſhe myght be ſure to haue it without daunger. Than the lorde Latimer brought worde agayne to therle of the kynges anſwere / and ſo after his letters reed and his anſwere herde / the erle of Mountfort and his counſell ſent for the frenche meſſangers to come to his hooſt / and theyr anſwere was made them right courteſly. And it was ſayd to theym howe the erle Mountfort wolde in no wyſe departe nor forſake his chalenge of the duchy of Bretayne / but that he wolde abyde duke of Bretayne: and ſo to be called. But wher as the frēche kyng wolde haue hym to opyn peaſably his cyties / townes / & caſtels / and to make faithe and homage to him and all other ryghtes: as the dukes of Bretayne haue done in tyme paſte. He is content ſo to do / and gladly to knowlege the frenche kyng for his naturall lorde / and to do to hym homage and seruyce in the preſens of the peres of Fraūce. And alſo to gyue ayde and helpe / and to reconforte his coſyn the wyfe of therle Charles trepaſſed / and to helpe to delyuer his coſyns her ſonnes out of priſon in Englande. This anſwere pleaſed right well theſe lordes of Fraūce / than they toke day and tyme this mater to cōclude or nat Than incontynent they ſent to the duke of Aniou / who was as than at Angiers: to whome ye frenche kyng had gyuen full power and auctoryte to conclude this treaty / or els to leaue it at his pleaſur. And whan the duke of Aniouſaw the effect of this mater he toke counſell a longe ſpace / but finally he was counſayled to accepte the treaty. and the two knightes that were ſent to him retorued agayne with his anſwere writen and ſealed. And than theſe lordes of Fraunce departed fro Reyns and went to the ſiege before Campacorentyne: and ther finally ye peace was made / agreed / and ſealed by therle Moūtfort / and he abode as duke of Bretayne condycionally that if he had no chyldren of his body laufully begoten / than the duchy to retourne to the chyldren of the lorde Charles of Blois. and the lady wyfe to the lorde Charles of Bloys diſceaſſed / ſhulde be counteſſe of Poynteure / the whiche lande was of yerely rent about .xx. M. frankes. And alſo the lorde Mountfort ſhulde come in to Fraunce whan ſoeuer the kyng ſent for hym to do his homage / and to holde the duchy of Bretayne of hym. And for the confyrmacion herof: there were charters and inſtrumentes publyke made and ſealed on bothe parties. Thus therle of Mountfort entred into the duchy of Bretayne / and abode as duke therof a certayne ſpace of tyme / tyll other tidynges of warr came: as ye ſhall herafter in this hiſtory.
            ANd alſo by the ordynaunce of the ſame peace / the frenche kyng reſtored agayn

               
                  〈◊〉
                the lorde of Chſſon his lande / y• whiche was taken fro hym by kyng Philyp ſomtyme kyng So thus the lorde of Clyſſon aquaynted hym ſo with the frenche kynge that he dyde what he wolde / and wtout him nothyng was done. So thus the coūtte of Bretayne was right ioyous whan they ſawe that they were in reſt & peace: and the duke toke faythe and homage of the cy▪
               ties / good to wnes / and caſtels / and of all prelates and other gentylmen. And within a ſpace after the duke maryed the doughter of the princes of Wales▪ the whiche ſhe had before by the lorde Thomas Hollande and this maryage was made in the good rytie of Nauntes right nobly. Alſo it fortuned y• ſame wynter y• queue Jane aunt to the kyng of Nauer / & quene Blā
               che her ſuſtre, dyd ſomoch y• a peace was made bytwene y• french kyng & the king of Nauer by y• ayde & wyſoome of the lorde captall of Beufz who dyde all that he might to conclude y• peace and therby he was aquyted out of priſon. And the frenche kyng ſhewed hym in dede great ſygne of loue / and gaue hym y• fayre caſtell of De nemoux with all the appurtenaunces / the whiche was well worthe of yerely reuenewes thre thouſande frankes / and ſo the Captall became liegeman to the frenche kyng / of whoſe homage y• kyng was right toyouſe. for he loued well the ſeruyce of ſuche a knyght as y• captall was in his tyme. But y• ſeruyce endured no longe ſeaſon / for whan he came into the principalyte to the prince / who was enformed of the caſe as it ſtode. Greatly he blamed hym and ſayd how that he coude nat acquyte hym ſelfe trewely to ſerue two lordes / and that he was to couetous to take lande in Fraunce / wher he was nother be loued nor honoured. And whan the Captall ſawe hymſelfe in that caſe / and home he was taken and reputed by the prince his naturall lorde he was ſore a ſhamed and excuſed hymſelfe / ſayeng ſir I am nat ſo ſore bounde to the frenche kyng / but that I may ſoone for do agayne all that I haue done or ꝓmyſed. And ſo he ſent a ſeruaunt of his to the kyng and renounced al that the kynge had gyuen hym and he taryed ſtyll hym ſelfe with the prince / for he was aquyted of his priſon by the compoſycion of y• peace taken bytwene the frenche kyng and the kyng of Nauer. And the frenche kyng had by cōpoſicyon the townes of Maunt / and Meulecke: & the kyng rendred hym therfore other caſtels in Normandy. In this ſeaſon deꝑted out of fraū
               ce the lorde Loys of Nauer and went into Lō
               bar dy to mary the quene of Naples / but at his departyng he had of the frenche kynge for certayne caſtels that he delyuered vp in Normandy / the ſomme of threſcore thouſande frankes. And the ſame lorde Loys after he had wedded the quene of Naples lyued no longe tyme / god forgyue hym all his fautes / for he was a right good knight and a courteſſe.
            IN this ſeaſon yet was ther ſtyll in Fraū
               ce great nombre of the companyons / the whiche as than wyſt nat what to do / ſeyng the warres of Bretayne were ended. Theſe cōpanyons purſued euer after dedes of armes and takynge of pyllages at their aduauntages / fro the whiche they coude nat nor wolde abſteyne / and all their chefe recours was in Fraunce / for they called the realme of Fraunce their chambre. They durſt do no hurte in Acquitayne for the lande wold nat ſuffre them: and alſo to ſay trouthe mooſt parte of the capitayns were gaſcons and englyſſhmen / vnder the obeyſaunce of the kyng of Englande and of y• prince. ſome ther were of Bretayne but nat many / wherfore dyuers of the realme of Fraunce murmured agaynſt the kynge of Englande and the prince / and ſayd couertly / howe that they aquyted nat themſelfe well agaynſt the frenche kyng. ſeyng they do nat their good wylles to put out of the realme thoſe yuell diſpoſed people. So y• wyſe and ſage men of Fraunce conſydred / that without they dyde put ſome remedy to driue theym out of the realme / eyther by batayle or by meanes of ſome money. Els at length they were lykely to diſtroy the noble realme of Fraūce and holy chriſtendome. ¶ The ſame ſeaſon there was in Hongry a kyng that wolde gladly haue had them with hym / for he had great warre agaynſt the turke / who dyde hym great domage. Than he wrote to pope Urbane the .v. who was as than at Auignon / certifyeng hym how he wolde gladly y• the realme of Fraunce were delyuered of the nombre of companyons and y• they were all with hym in his warres agaynſt the turke. And in lyke wiſe he wrote letters to y• frenche kynge and to the prince of Wales. and ſo they entreated the ſayd companyons and offred them golde / and ſyluer / and paſſage: but they anſwered that they wolde nat that waye / ſayeng they wold nat go ſo ferr to make warr for it was ſhewed among themſelfe by ſome of their owne company that had ben before in Hō
               gry / howe that ther were ſuche ſtraytes that yf they were fought with there they coulde neuer eſcape but to dye ſhamefully / the whiche ſo affrayed

them that they had no luſt to go thyder. And whan the pope and the frenche kyng ſawe that they wolde nat agre acordyng to their deſyers / and alſo that they wolde nat auoyde out of the realme of Fraūce / but dayly multiplyed. Than they be thought theym of another waye and meanes to cauſe them to auoyde.
            THe ſame ſeaſon ther was a kyng in Caſtell called Dame Peter / who was full of marueylous opinyōs / and he was rude and rebell agaynſt the cōmaūdementꝭ of holy churche. And in mynde to ſubdue all his criſten neyghbours kinges and princes / and ſpecially the king of Aragon called Peter / who was a gode true criſten prince / & had as than taken fro him parte of his realme / thynking to haue all the remenant. Alſo this kynge Dampeter of Caſtell had thre baſterd bretherne / the whiche kyng Allphons his fader had by a lady called the Ryche Drue. Theldeſt was called Henry / the ſeconde Dancylle / and the thyrde Sauſes. This king Dampeter hated them ſo that he wolde nat ſuffre them to come in his ſyght / and often tymes if he might haue gotten thē he wolde haue ſtryken of their heedes. Ho wbeit they were welbeloued with the kynge their father / & in his lyfe he gaue to Henry theldeſt the countie Deſconges. But this kyng Dampeter his brother had taken it fro hym / and therfore they kepte dayly warre toguyder. This baſtarde Henry was a right hardy and a valyant knight / and had ben long in Fraunce and purſued the warre there / and ſerued the frenche kynge who loued hym right entierly. Kyng Dampeter as the comon brute ranne / had put to dethe the mother of the chyldren: wherwith they were right ſore diſpleſed and good cauſe why. Alſo beſyde y• he had put to dethe and exyled dyuers great lordes of the realme of Caſtell / he was ſo cruell & ſo without ſhame / that all his menfeared / douted / and hated hym as ferr as they durſt▪ alſo he cauſed to dye a right good and a holy lady / the which he had to wyfe called the lady Blanche / doughter to duke Peter of Burbone / ſuſter germayn to the frenche quene and to the counteſſe of Sauoy / whoſe dethe was ryght diſpleſaunt to all her lynage / the whiche was one of the nobleſt lynages of the worlde. And beſyde all this ther ran a brute of hym among his owne men howe that he was amyably alyed with the kynge of Granade / and with the kyng of Treſbell Maryne / and the kyng of Treſmeſaries / who wer all goddes ennemyes and infydeles. Wherefore ſome of his owne men feared that he wolde do ſome hurt to his owne countre as in violatyng of goddes churches / for he began all redy to take fro theym their rentes and reuenewes / and helde ſome of the prelates in priſon and cōſtreyned them by tyranny wherof great complayntes came dayly to our holy father the pope / requyring him to fynde ſome remedy. To whoſe complayntes the pope condyſcended and ſende incontynent meſſangers into Caſtell to y• kynge Dampeter / cōmaundyng hym that incontynent without any delay ꝑſonally to come to the court of Rome: to waſſ he / clens / & purge hym of ſuche vyllayne dedes as he was gyltye in. Ho wbeit this kyng Dāpeter full of pride and preſumtuouſneſſe wolde nat obey nor cōe ther but delt ſhamefully with the popes meſſāgers / wherby he ran greatly in the indignacyon of y• churche / and ſpecially of the heed of the church as of our holy father the pope. Thus this yuell kyng Dampeter perſeuered ſtyll in his obſtynateſynne. Than aduyſe and counſell was taken by the pope and by the coledge what waye they might correct hym: and ther it was determyned that he was nat worthy to bere y• name of a kynge / nor to holde any realme. And therein playne conſiſtory in Auygnon / in the chābre of excōmunycacion he was openly declared to be reputed as in infidell. Thā it was thought that he ſhulde be conſtrayned and corrected by helpe of the companyons / that were as than in the realme of Fraunce. Than the kyng of Aragon who hated the king of Caſtell was ſent for and alſo Henry the baſtarde of Spayne / to cōe to Auygnon to the pope. And whan they were come / the pope made Henry the baſtarde legytyue and laufull to obtayne the realme of Caſtell / and Dampeter curſed and condemned by ſentence of the pope. And ther the kyng of Aragon ſayd howe he wolde open the paſſage thorough his countre / and prouyde vitayls & purueyaunces for all maner of people and men of warre / that wolde purſue to go into Caſtell to cōfounde kyng Dampeter / and to put him out of his realme. Of this ordynaunce was y• frenche kynge right ioyous / and dyde his payne to helpe to get out of priſon ſir Bettram of Cleſquy / who was priſoner with ſir Johan Chandos / and payed for his raūſome a hūdred. M. frankes: parte therof payed the frenche kynge and the pope / and Henry the baſtard payed the reſydu. And after his delyueraunce they fell in treaty with the cōpanyons / and promyſed thē great profyte yf they wolde go into the realme

o
                  •
                Caſtell. Wherto they lightly agreed for a certayne ſomme of money that they had to depart among them. And ſo this iourney was ſhewed to the prince of Wales and to the knightes and ſquyers about hym: and ſpecially to ſir Johan Chandos / who was deſyredde to be one of the theſe capitayns with ſir Bertram of Cleſquy. Howbeit he excuſed hym / & ſayd he myght nat go thyder: yet the iourney was nat lette for all that. And dyuers knightes of the princis went thyder: as ſir Euſtace Dābreticourt / ſir Hewe Caurell / ſir Gaultier Hewet ſir Mathue Gorney / ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                Dalbret / and dyuers other. And the chefe capitayne of this enterprice was made the lorde John̄ of Burbon erle of Marche to counter wyne the dethe of his coſyne the quene of Spayne / and was in all thynges ruled and counſayled by the aduyſe of ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy: for therle of Marche was as than a 
                  •
               oly yong luſty knight. And alſo the lorde Antony of Beauieu went for the in that vyage and dyuers other good knyghtes: as ſir Arnolde Dandrehen marſhall of Fraūce / the Begue of Uyllayns / the lorde Dantoyng in Heynalt / the lorde of Bruſnell / ſir Johan Neuyll / ſir Guynyars of Baylheull / ſir Johan of Berguetes / the almayne of ſaynt Uenant / & dyuers other the whiche I can nat name. And ſo all theſe lordes and other auaūced for the in the vyage and made their aſſemble in Languedocke / and at Mountpellyer / and therabout. And ſo paſſed all to Narbone to go towarde Parpygnen / & ſo to entre on that ſyde in to the realme of Aragone. Theſe men of warre were to the nombre of .xxx. thouſande and ther were the chefe capitayns of the companyons: as ſir Robert Briquet / ſir Johan Caruell / Nandon of Bergerace / Lanny / the lytell Meclyne / the Bourge Camus / the Bourge de Leſpare Batyller Eſpyot / Aymemon Dortyng / Perote of Sauoy / and dyuers other all of accorde and of one alyaunce / hauyng great deſyre to put kyng Dāpeter out of the realme of Caſtell: & to make king they therle of Deſcōges his brother Henry the baſtarde. And whan theſe men of armes ſhuld entre into the realme of Aragon / to do their enterprice ye more priuely: they ſent to kyng Dā / Peter to blynde hym by their meſſage / but he was all redy well enfourmed of their ententes / and howe they were comyng on hym into ye realme of Caſtell but he ſet nothyng therby: but aſſembled his people to reſyſt agaynſt thē / and to light with thē at thentre of his realm. Their meſſage was deſyring hym to open the ſtraytꝭ of his countre / and to gyue free paſſage to the pylgrimes of god / who had enterpriſed by gret deuocyon to go into the realme of Grenade / to reueng the dethe and paſſyon of our lorde Jeſu Chriſt / and to diſtroy the infydeles / and to exalte the chriſten faythe. The kynge Dampeter at theſe tidynges dyde nothyng but laugh and ſayd he wolde do nothynge at their deſyre / nor obey in any poynt to ſuche a raſcall company. And whan theſe knightes and other men of armes knewe the wyll and anſwere of kyng Dā
               peter / wherby they reputed hym right orgulus and preſumptuous / and made all the haſt they myght to auaunce to do hym all the hurte they coulde. So they all paſſed through the realme of Aragon where they founde the paſſages redy open for them and vitayle / and euery thyng redy apparelled and at a metely price. For the kyng of Aragon had great ioye of their comynge / truſtyng than by their meanes to conquers agayne fro the kyng of Caſtell all his landes / that kyng Dampeter had before taken fro him byforce. And than theſe men of warr paſſed the gret ryuer that departeth Caſtell and Aragon and ſo they entred into the realme of Spayne. And whan they had conquered townes / cyties / and caſtels / ſtreytes / portes / and paſſages / the whiche the kynge Dampeter had taken fro the kynge of Aragon. Than ſir Bertram and his company delyuered thē to the kyng of Aragon on the cōdycion that alwayes fro thenſ forth he ſhulde ayde and conforte Henry the baſtarde agaynſt Dampeter. Tidynges came to ye kyng of Caſtell: how that the frēchmen / bretons / englyſſhmen / normayns / pycardes / and burgonyons were entred in to his realme: and were as than paſſed the great ryuer / departyng Caſtell and Aragon. And howe they had wonne agayne all on that ſyde the ryuer the whiche coſt 
                  〈◊〉
                moche payne and trouble or he wan it firſt Than he was right ſore dyſpleſed & ſayd / well all ſhall nat go ſo as they wene it ſhall: than he made a ſpecyall commaundement throughout all his realme / in gyueng knowledge to thē that his letters and meſſāgers were ſent vnto / that they ſhulde without delay come to hym / to the entent to fight with the men of warr that were entred into his realm of Caſtell / ther were but a fewe that obeyed his commaundement. And whan he had thought to haue had a great aſſē
               ble of men of warr he was diſceyued / for fewe or none came to hym: for his lordes & knightes of Spayne forſoke and refuſed him / and tourned to his brother y• baſtard. Wherfore he was

fayne to ſ
                  •
               ye / or els he had ben taken he was ſo ſore behated with his enemyes: and alſo / with his owne men / ſo that none abode aboute hym / excepte one true knyght called Ferrant of Caſtres, he wolde neuer forſake hym for none aduenture. And ſo than Dampeter went to Syuyle the beſt cytie of Spaygne / and whan̄e he was come thyder he was in no great ſewerty / wherfore he truſſed and put into cofers his treaſure / and toke a ſhyppe with his wyfe and chyldren. And ſo departed fro Cyuyle / and Ferrāt of Caſters his knight with hym: and he arryued lyke a knight diſconfyted in Galyce called the Colōgne where ther was a ſtronge caſtell / and therin he his wyfe and his chyldren entred that is to ſay two yonge doughters: Conſtance and Iſabell. And of all his men and coūſayle he had none but Ferrant of Caſtres.
         
         
            ¶ Now lette vs ſhewe of Henry the baſtarde / howe he he perceyuered in his enterprice. Cap. C C .xxx.
            
               THus as I haue ſhewed before / this kynge Dāpeter was ſoore behated with his owne men / throughout all the realme of Caſtell: bycauſe of the marueylous cruell iuſtyce that he had done / & by the occaſyon of the diſtruccyon of the noblemen of his realme / y• whiche he had put to deth and ſlayne with his handes. Wherfore aſſoone as they ſawe his baſtard brother entre into the realme with ſo great puyſſaūce / than they drue all to hym and receyued him to their lorde: and ſo rode forthe with him. and they cauſed cyte
                  •
               s townes / borowes / and caſtels to be opyned to hym / and euery man to do hym homage. And ſo the ſpanyardꝭ all with one voyce cryed / lyue Henry / and dye Dampeter: who hath been to vs ſo cruell and ſo yuell. This the lordes ledde forthe Henry throughout all the realme of Caſtell / as the lorde Gommegaulx / the great mayſter of Galleſtrane / and the maiſter of ſaynt James. So thus all maner of peple obeyd to him and crowned hym kyng in the cytie of Eſtyrages / and all prelates / erles / barownes / & knightes made hym reuerence / as to their kyng. and ſware alwayes to maynteyne him as their kynge / or els if nede requyred to dye in the quarell. So thus this kyng rode fro cytie to cytie / and fro to wne to to wne: and alwayes and in euery place he had reuerence done to hym lyke a kynge. And than̄e he gaue to the knightes ſtraungers / ſuche as came with hym into the realme of Caſtell great gyftes and riche iewels / ſo largely that euery man reputed him for a lyberall and an honourable lorde. And comonly the normayns / frenchmen / and bretons ſayde that in hym was all lyberalite / and howe he was well worthy to lyue / and to reygne ouer a great realme: and ſo he dyde a ſeaſon right puyſſantly and in great proſperyte. Thus the baſtarde of Spayne came to the ſeignory of the realme of Caſtell / & he made his two bretherne Dancyle / and Sances / eche of theym an erle with great reuenewes and profyte. Thus this Hēry was kyng of Caſtell / of Galyce / of Cyuyll / of Tollette / and of Lyſſebone / vnto ſuche ſeaſon as y• puyſſaunce of Wales and Acquitayne put him out therof. and ſet agayne kynge Dampeter into the poſſeſſyon and ſignory of the forſayd realmes / as ye ſhall here after in this hyſtorie.
            
               WHan that this kynge Henry ſawe hymſelfe in this eſtate / and that euery man obeyed hym and reputed hym for their kyng and lorde / and ſawe nothynge lykely to the cōtrary of his deſyre. Than he ymagined and caſte his aduyce to exalte his name / and to enploy the nombre of ſuche companyōs / as were come to ſerue hym out of the realme of Fraunce / to make a voyage on the kyng of Granade. wherof he ſpake to dyuers knightes / who were well agreed therto. And alwayes this king Hē
               ry helde ſtyll about hym the princes knightes: as ſir Euſtace Dābretycourt / ſir Hugh Caurell and other. And ſhewed theym great token and ſigne of loue / in truſt that they ſhulde ayde and ſerue hym in his voyage to Grenade / whyder he hoped to go. And anone after his coronacyon / there departed fro hym the mooſt parte of the knightes of Fraunce / and he gaue them great gyftes at their departynge. And ſo than retourned the erle of Marche / ſir Arnolde Dā
               drehen / the lorde Beauieou and dyuers other / but ſir Bertram of Clyſquy taryed ſtyll in Caſtell with the kynge / and ſir Olyuer of Manny / and the Bretons with certayne nombre of the companyons. And ſo than ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was made cōſtable of all the realme of

caſtell by the acorde of kyng Henry and all the lordes of the coūtre. Nowe let vs ſpeke of kyng Dampeter howe he maynteyned hymſelfe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe kynge Dampeter requyred the prince of wales to ayde hym agaynſt his brother. Cap. CC .xxxi.
            
               VE haue Well herde how kyng Dampeter was driuen into the caſteil of Colōgne on the ſee / & with him his wyfe / his two doughters / and Domferrant of Caſtres with hym all onely. So that in ye meane ſeaſon that his brother the baſtarde by puyſſance of the me of warre that he had gote out of Fraunce conquered Caſtell: and that all the countre yelded thē to him as ye haue herd before. He was right 
                  •
               ore afrayed / and nat well aſſured in the caſtell of Colongne / for he douted greatly his brother the baſtarde / for he knewe well that yf he had knowledge of his beyng there / he wolde come with puyſſaunce and beſege hym: wherfore he thought he wolde nat abyde that parell. Therfore he departed in a nyght and toke a ſhyppe / and his wyfe / his two doughters / and Domferrāt of Caſtres: and all the golde / ſyluer / and ſowelles that they had. but the wynde was to him ſo contrary that he coude nat drawe fro the coſt: and ſo was fayne to entre agayne into the fortreſſe of Colongne. Than the king Dampeter demaunded of Dōferrant his knight howe he ſhulde maynteyne hym ſelfe / complayninge of fortune that was to hym ſo contrary. Sir ꝙ the knight or ye deꝑte fro hens / it were good ye ye dyde ſend to your coſyn the prince of Wales / to knowe yf he wolde receyue you or nat / and for pytic: ſomwhat to tendre your nede and neceſſyte / for dyuers wayes he is bounde therto. by reaſon of the great alyaunces that the kyng his father / and yours had toguyder. The prince of Wales is ſo noble / and ſo gentyll of bloode and of courage / that whan he knoweth your trybulacion / I thynke verely he wyll take therof great compaſſyon. And if he wyll ayde to ſet you agayne in your realme / there is none that can do it ſo well in all the worlde: he is ſo fered / redouted ▪ and beloned with all men of warre. And ſir ye are here in a good ſtronge fortereſſe to kepe a ſeaſon tyll ye here other tidynges out of Acquitayne. To this coūſayle acorded lightly ye kyng Dāpeter. Thā he wrote letters right pyteous and amyable / and a knyght with two ſquyers were deſyred to do this meſſage: and ſo they toke on them that iourney and entred into the ſee / and ſayled ſo long that they arryued at Bayon / the whiche cytie helde of the kyng of Englande. Than they demaunded tidynges of the prince / and it was ſhewed them howe he was at Burdeaur. Than they toke their horſes and rode ſo longe that they came to Burde aux / and ther toke their lodgynge: and anone after they wēt to the abbey of ſaynt Andrewes where the prince was. And there theſe meſſangers ſhewed howe they were come out of Caſtell / and were ſpanyardes and meſſangers fro kyng Dāpeter of Caſtell. And whan the prince knewe therof / he ſayde he wolde ſe theym: and knowe what they wolde haue. And ſo they cam and kneled downe and ſaluted hym acordynge to their vſage / and recommaunded the kynge their mayſter to hym / and delyuered their letters. The prince toke vp the meſſāgers and receyued their letters / and opyned and reed them at good leyſer: wherin he founde howe pyteouſly kynge Dampeter wrote / ſignifyeng to hym all his pouertie and myſchiefe. and howe that his brother the baſtarde by puiſſaunce / and by the great amyties that he had purchaſed. Firſt of the pope / of the frenche kyng / and of ye kyng of Aragon: and by the helpe of the cōpanyons / had put hym out fro the herytage of the realme of Caſtell. Wherfore he deſyred the prince for goddeſſake / and by the waye of pytie: that he wolde entend to prouyde for him ſome counſell and remedy / wherin he ſhulde achyue grace of god and of all the worlde. For it is nat ye ryght way of a true cryſten kyng to di
                  ••
               herpt a right full heyre / and to enheryte by puyſſaunce of tyranny a baſtard. And the prince who was a valyant knight and a ſage cloſed the letters in his handes / and ſayd to the meſſangers. Sirs ye be right welcome to me / fro my coſyn the kyng of Caſtell: ye ſhall tary a ſpace here with vs / and are ye departe ye ſhall haue an aunſwere. Than the princes knightes who knewe ryghtwell what they had to do / ledde to their logynges the ſpayniſſhe knight and the two ſquyers and the prince who taryed ſtyll in his chambre muſed greatly on thoſe tidynges. And thanne ſent for ſir John̄ Chandos / and for ſir Thom̄s Phelton / two of the chefe of his counſayle: for the one was the ſeneſhall of Aquitayne / and the other conſtable. And whan they were come to hym / than he ſayde to theym all ſmylynge, ſirs ye ſhall here newe tidynges out of Spaygne. The kyng Dampeter our coſyn complayneth

him greatly of the baſtarde Henry his brother / who hath taken fro him his enheritaūce / & hath put hym out of his realme: as ye haue herde reported by theym that hath come fro thens / and he requyreth vs inſtantly of our confort & ayde as it apereth here by his letters. And ſo than ye prince reed the letters worde by worde a two tymes / and theſe two knightes herde well all the mater. and whan he had reed ye letters / than he ſayd to them: ſirs ye two / ſir John̄ and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas ye are the moſt ſpeciall of my counſell / and in whome I haue moſt truſt & aſſyaunce. wherfore I deſyre you counſayle me what ye thynke were beſt to do. Than theſe two knightꝭ behelde eche other without any worde ſpekyng / thā the prince agayn ſayd. ſirs ſpeke hardely what ye thinke in this mater / and ther the price was coūſelled by thoſe two knightꝭ as I was enformed / that he ſhulde ſende to the kyng Dāpeter men of warr to Colōgne wher he was / acordinge to the tenor of the letters: and alſo by the report of the meſſangers. and ye the men of warr ſhulde bring him to the cyte of Burdeur / & ther more playnly to knowe what he wolde ſay / and than acordyng as they ſhuld here his wordꝭ / to take aduyce: and to gyue hym ſuche coūſell as of reaſon ſhuld ſuffyce him. This anſwer pleaſed right well the prince: thā he deſyred to go to Colōgne in that viage to bring in ſauegard to hym the kyng Dāpeter. Firſt ſir Thom̄s Felton as ſouerayne and chefe of that army / ſir Richarde of Pōtchardon / ſir Neez Lornyche / ſir Symonde Burle / ſir Wyllm̄ 
               
                  •
               rouſealx / and in that army ther ſhulde be .xii. ſhyppes furniſſhed with archers and men of warr. So theſe knightꝭ made their ꝓuiſyon to go into Galice / and than the meſſangers depted fro Burdeux and rode with them to Bayon / and ther taried a thre or four dayes abyding for wynde and weder. and the .v. day as they were de
                  •
               tynge / the kyng Dāpeter of caſtell aryued at Bayon himſelfe / for he was deꝑted fro Colongue in great haſt & dout / for he durſt nat abyde ther any le
                  •
               
               ger / and brought but a fewe of his men Wt him / and ſuche treaſur as he had. So the tidynges of his comyng was great ioye to thëglyſſhmen than ſir Thomas Phelton and his cōpany cāe to hym and receyued hym right ſwetely / & ſhewed him how they were ther redy by ye cōmaū
               demēt of ye prince their lorde to haue cōe to him to Colōgne & to any other place to haue broght him to ye prince. Of the whiche tidyngꝭ ye kyng Dāpeter was ryght ioyouſe / & thanked gretly the prince and the knightes that were there.
            ¶ The comyng of the king Dampeter thus to Bayon / ſir Thom̄s Phelton and the other knightes certifyed the price therof / of the which he was right ioyouſe. & within a ſhort ſpace after / theſe knightes brought the kyng Dāpeter to ye cyte of Burdeux. And the prince who gretly deſyred to ſe his coſyn the kynge Dāpeter / and to do hym the more honoure & feeſt / yſſued out of Burdeux acōpanyed with dyuers knightꝭ and ſquiers / and went & mette the kyng and dyd to hym great reuerēce bothe in worde & dede / the whiche he coude do right well / for ther was no prince in his tyme ye coulde ſhewe more honour than he. And whan the prince had well feaſted him / than they rode to Burdeux / & the prince toke the kyng aboue him / in no wyſe he wolde do otherwiſe. And as they rode togyder the kyng Dāpeter ſhewed to the prince how his baſtard brother had chaſed him out of his realme of caſtell / and alſo he pituouſly cōplayned hym of ye vntrouthe of his men / ſhewyng howe they had all forſaken him / except one knyght the whiche was ther with hym called Damferrant of Caſtres. The price right curteſly & ſagely recōforted him / deſyring him nat to be abaſſhed nor diſconforted / for though he had as than loſt all / he truſted it ſhulde be in the puyſſance of god to reſtore hym agayne all his loſſe / and moreouer to take vengeaunce of all his eneymes. Thus as they talked togyder / they rode ſo longe ye they came to Burdeux / and a lyghted at they abbey of ſaynt Andrues / wher as the prince & princes kept their houſe / & than the kyng was brought to a fayre chambre redy aparelled for hym. and whan he was chāged he went to the princeſſe & to the ladyes / who receyued him right curteſly as they coude right well do. I might ouer longe make reporte to you of this mater / what of their chere / feeſtes / & ſportes: wherfore I paſſe it ouer brefely. And ſhall ſhewe you how kyng Dāpeterſped with the prince his coſyn / whom he founde right amyable and curteſſe and well cōdyſcended to his deſyers: howbeit ther were ſome of his counſell ſayd vnto hym / as ye ſhall here after. ¶ Or that Dampeter came to Burdeaux / ſome wyſe and ſage y maginatyue lordes / aſwell of Gaſcoyn as of England / who were of t
                  ••
                princes coūſell / and had euer truly ſerued hym & gyuen hym good counſayle / and ſo thought euer to do. They ſayd to the prince: Sir ye haue herde ſay dyuers tymes / he that to moche enbraſeth / holdeth the wekelyer. Hit is for a trouthe that ye are one of the princeſſe of the worlde: mooſt prayſed / honoured / and

redouted / and holdeth on this ſyde the ſee great landes and ſeignories thanked be god in good reſt and peace. Ther is no kyng nere nor farr of / as at this preſent tyme yt dare diſpleaſe you ye are ſo renomed of good chiualry / grace / and good fortune. ye ought therfore by reaſon to be cōtent wt that ye haue / and ſeke nat to get you any enemyes. Sir we ſay nat this for non yuell we knowell the kynge Dāpeter of Caſtell who is now driuen out of his realme / is a mā of hye mynde / right cruell & full of yuell condycions: for by hym hath ben done many yuell dedes in the realme of Caſtell / and hath cauſed many a valyant man to loſe his heed: and brought cruelly to an ende without any maner of reaſon. & ſo by his vilayne dedes and cōſent he is now diſceyued & put out of his realm / and alſo beſyde all this he is enemy to the churche / & curſed by our holy father ye pope: he is reputed and hath ben a great ſeaſon like a tyrant / and without tytell of reaſon hath alwayes greued and made warr with his neybours / the kyng of Aragon and the king of Nauer / and wolde haue diſhetyted thē by puiſſance. And alſo as the brute rō
               neth throughout his realme / & by his owne mē howe he cauſed to dye his wyfe your coſyn doughter to the duke of Burbone. Wherfore ſir ye ought to thynke and conſydre that all this yt he nowe ſuffereth / ar roddes & ſtrokes of god ſent to chaſtyce him: and to gyue enſample to all other chriſten kingꝭ and princes to beware that they do nat as he hath done. With ſuche wordꝭ or ſēblable the prince was coūſelled or kyng dā
               peter arryued at Bayon: but to theſe wordꝭ the prince anſwered thus. Sayeng lordꝭ I thynke and byleue certēly that ye counſell me truely to the beſt of your powers I knowe well and am well enfourmed of the lyfe & ſtate of this kyng Dāpeter / and knowe well yt without nōbre he hath done many yuell dedes: wherby nowe he is diſceyued. But the cauſe preſent yt moueth & gyueth vs corage to be willyng to ayde him is as I ſhall ſhewe you. It is nat couenable that a baſtard ſhulde hold a realme in herytage and put out of his owne realme his brother ryghtfull enheryter to the lande / the whiche thyng all kynges & kingꝭ ſonnes ſhulde in no wyſe ſuffre nor cōſent to / for it is a great preiudice agaynſt the ſtate royall. & alſo beſyde that the kyng my father and this kyng Dāpeter hath a gret ſeaſon ben alyed togyder by great cōfederacions / wherfore we are boūde to ayde him / in cauſe yt he requyre & deſyre vs ſo to do. Thus ye prince was moued in his corage to ayde & cōfort this kyng Dāpeter in his trouble & beſynes. Thus he anſwered to his counſell and they coude nat remoue him cut of that purpoſe / for his mynde was euer more & more fermely ſet on yt mater. And whan king Dāpeter of Caſtell was come to ye prince to the cyte of Burdeux / he humyled hym ſelfe right ſwetely to the prince & offred to him great giftes and profyte / in ſayeng that he wolde make Edwarde his eldeſt ſon̄e kynge of Galyce / and yt he wolde deꝑte to hym & to his men great good & richeſſe / the which he had left behynde hym in the realme of Caſtell / bycauſe he durſt nat bring it with hym: but this ryches was in ſo ſure kepynge yt none knewe where it was but himſelfe to the which wordes ye knightes gaue good entēt / for englyſſhmen & gaſcōs naturally are couetouſe. Than the prince was counſelled to aſſēble all the barons of the duchy of ac
                  
                     
                  
                  qui
               tayne & his ſpecyall counſell / and ſo ther was at Burdeux a great counſayle. And there the kyng Dāpeter ſhewed openly how he wold meyntayne hym ſelfe / & howe he wolde ſatiſfy euery man / yf the prince wolde take on hym to bring hym agayne into his countre. Thā 
               ther were letters writen & meſſangers ſent forthe / & lordes and knyghtꝭ ſent for all about / as therle of Armynake / therle of Comygines / the lorde Dalbret / the erle of Carmayne / the Captall of Beufz / the lorde of Cande / the vycount of Chaſtyllon / the lorde of Leſcute / the lorde of Roſem the lorde of Leſpare / the lorde of Chamont / the lorde of Muſydent / the lorde of Turtoni ye lorde of Pyncornet / and all the other barons and knightes of Gaſcoyne / and of Uerne. And alſo therle of Foix was deſyred to come thyder / but he wolde nat: but excuſed hym ſelfe by cauſe he had a dyſeaſe in his legge and might nat ryde / but he ſent thyder his counſayle.
            TO this parlyament thus holden in ye cyte of Burdeux came all the erles / vycoū
               tes / barons / & wyſe men of Aquitayne / of Xaynton / Poictou / Duercy / Lymoſyn / and of Gaſcoyn. And whan they were all come / they went to coūſell thre dayes / on the ſtate and ordynaū
               ce for this kyng Dāpeter of Spayne who was alwayes ther preſent in the counſayle with the prince his coſyn / reaſonyng alwayes to fortify his quarell & beſyneſſe. Finally the prince was coūſelled yt he ſhulde ſend ſuffyciēt meſſangers to the kyng his father into England to knowe his coūſell what he ſhulde do in yt caſe. And his pleaſure and anſwere ones knowen / than all ye lordꝭ ſayd they wolde take coūſell togyder / & ſo make the price ſuche an anſwere that of reaſon

he ſhulde be well content. Than ther were choſen and named four knightes of y• princes that ſhulde go into Englande to the kyng / that is to ſay: ſir Dalawar / ſir Noell Lorniſſhe / ſir Johan and ſir Hely of Pomyers. Thus than deꝑted and brake vp this counſell / and euery man went home to their owne houſes: & kyng Dam peter taryed ſtyll at Burdeux with the prince & princeſſe who dyd him moche honour / & made him great feeſt and chere. And than the forſaid four knyghtꝭ depted who were apoynted to go into Englande / and they toke ſhippyng & ſped ſo well in their iourney by the helpe of god and the wynde that they arryued at Hampton / and ther reſted one day to refreſſhe th
                  •
                / and to vnſhip their horſes and caryages. and the ſecond day toke their horſes and rode ſo longe y• they came to the cyte of London. & ther they demaū
               ded wher the king was / and it was ſhewed thē howe he was at Wynſore. And thyder they mēt and were right welcome & well receyued bothe with the kyng and with y• quene / aſwell bycauſe they were pteyning to the prince their ſonne / as alſo bycauſe they were lordes and knightes of great recōmendacion. Than they delyuered their letters to the king / and the kyng opened & reed them / & whan he had a lytell ſtudyed than he ſayd. Sirs ye ſhall go to your logynges / & I ſhall ſende to you certayne lordes & wyſe m
                  •
                of my counſelle / and they ſhall anſwere you wt ſhorte expedicyon. This anſwere pleaſed well theſe knightes / and the next day they retorned to London. and within a ſhorte ſpace after the kyng came to Weſtm̄ and with hym the mooſt gretteſt of his counſell: as his ſon̄e the duke of Lācaſtre / therle of Arūdell / therle of Salyſbury / therle of Māny / ſit Reynold Cobham / the erle Percy / the lorde Neuyll and dyuers other and prelates ther were the byſſhop of Wynche ſtre / of Lyncolne / and of London. And ſo they kept a great coūſell and a long vpon the Princꝭ letters / and on his requeſt that he had made to y• kyng his father: finally it ſemed to the kyng and his counſell athyng due & reſonable for the prince to take on him to bring agayne the king of Spaygne into his owne herytage: & to this they all opēly agreed. And thervpon they wrot notable letters / dyrected fro the kyng and fro y• coūſell of England to the prince / & to all the barons of aqtayn. and ſo with theſe letters y• ſaid meſſangers depted agayne to the cyte of Burdeux / wher as they founde the prince & the kynge Dāpeter / to whome they delyuered letts fro the kyng of England. Than was ther a newe day of counſell ſet to be had in the cyte of Burdeux / and thyder cāe all ſuche as were ſent for. Than ther was reed openly in the counſell the kyng of Englandes letters / the which deuyſed playnly: howe he wolde that the prince his ſon in the name of god and ſaynt George / ſhuld take on hym to ſet agayn kyng Dāpeter into his herytage / the which his baſtarde brother wrōgfully had taken fro hym without reaſon / & falſely as it apereth / hath put him out therof. Alſo y• kynges letters made mēcyon howe he was moche bounde therto / bycauſe of certayne alyaunces of olde tyme made / bytwene him & the king of Caſtell his coſyn / as to ayde hym if case reqred / if he were therto deſyred. Wherfore he deſired by his letters all his frendes and ſubgettes that the prince his ſon myght be ayded & counſelled by them / aſwell as though he were there preſent him ſelfe. And whan the barones of Acquitayne herde reed theſe letters and cōmaundementes of the kyng / and pceyued the kyngꝭ pleaſure and the princes their lorde. Thā they toyouſly anſwered and ſayd: ſir weſhall gladly obey the kyng our ſouerayne lordes cōmaū
               dement / it is reaſon that we obey you and hym and ſo we wyll do / and ſerue you in this vyage and kyng Dāpeter in lykewiſe / but ſir we wolde knowe who ſhulde pay vs our wages: for it wyll be hard to get out men of warr into a ſtrā
               ge countre. Than the prince behelde kyng Dā
               peter & ſayd: ſir kyng ye here what our people ſay anſwere you thē / for it behoueth you to anſwere / ſeyng the maters be yours. Than y• kinge Dāpeter anſwered y• prince and ſayd / right dere coſyn as ferr as the golde ſyluer & treaſur that I haue brought hyder which is nat y• .xxx. part ſomoch as I haue left behynd me / as long as that wyll endure I ſhall gyue and part ther with to your people. Than the prince ſayd: ſir ye ſay well / and as for the remnant I ſhal becōe dettour to thē / and pay thē as the caſe requireth the whiche I ſhall lend you / & all that we nede tyll we come in to caſtell. Sir ꝙ the kyng Dā
               peter ye do me great curteſy and grace / and in this counſayle there were dyuers ſage men: as therle of Armynake / the lorde of Pomyers / ſir John̄ Chandos / the Captall of Beufz and dyuers other / who cōſydred that the prince coudenat well make this vyage without the acorde & cōſent of the kyng of Nauer / for they coude nat entre into ſpayne but through his coūtre / & thorowe the ſtraytꝭ of Rayncenalt / the which paſſage they were nat in ſurety to haue / bycauſe y• king of Nauer & Henry the baſtard had newly

made alyaūce togyder. So thus ther was moche comunynge howe they might do to achyue their purpoſe: than was it determyned yt there ſhulde be another day aſſigned of a counſell to be kept at the cytie of Bayon / and that ye prince ſhulde ſende ſuffycient embaſſadours to ye kynge of Nauer / deſyring hym to be at that counſayle in Bayon. And ſo on this determynacion euery man deꝑted fully cōcluded to be at Bayon the day lymyted and prefixed. In ye meane ſeaſon the prince ſent ſir Johan Chandos and ſir Thomas Phelton to the kyng of Nauerre / who was as than̄e in the cytie of Panpylone. Theſe two ſage and well languaged knightes dyde ſo moche that they came to the kynge of Nauer / who made faythfull couenaunt by worde and by writyng ſealed to be at the ſayd parlyament at Bayon / and theron the meſſangers retorned agayne to the prince and ſhewed him theſe tidynges.
            THe day aſſigned of this ꝑlyament ther came to the cyte of Bayon: the kyng of Spayne Dampeter / the prince / the erle of Armynacke / the lorde Dalbreth / and all the barones of Gaſcoyne / Poictou / Guercy / Rouerne / Xayntonge / and Lymoſyne. And thyder came perſonally the kyng of Nauer: and the prince and kyng Dampeter dyde hym great honour / bycauſe they thought the better to ſpede with hym. So thus in the cytie of Bayon ther was a great counſell / the whiche endured .v. dayes and the prince and his counſayle had moche to do / or they coude bringe the kynge of Nauerr to their deſyre / for he was a man nat eaſy to be woune if he ſawe that mē had any nede of hym How be it the great 
                  〈◊〉
                ower of ye prince brought him into that caſe: that finally he ſware / promysed / and ſealed to kyng Dampeter: peace / loue and ferme alyaunce and confederacion. And in lyke maner kyng Dāpeter dyde to hym / vpon certayne cōpoſicyons that were ther ordeyned Of the whiche the prince of Wales was a mean bytwene them / and chefe deuyſour therof. The whiche was that the kyng Dampeter as kyng of all Caſtell: gaue / ſealed / and acorded to the kyng of Nauer / and to his heyres for euer: all the lande of Groyng / as it lyeth on bothe ſydes the ryuer. And alſo all the lande and countre of Sauanter: with the towne / caſtell / and all the appurtenaūces. Alſo the towne of ſaynt John̄ de Prede port / and the marcheſſe there about / the whiche lādes / townes / caſtels & ſeignories he had taken fro him byforce. And alſo that the kyng of Nauer ſhulde haue .xx. thouſande frā
               kes for the opening of his countre / and to ſuffre paſſe peaſably all maner of men of warre / and to myniſtre to them vitayls and purueyaūces for their money. Of the whiche ſom̄e of florens the kyng Dampeter became dettour to ye kyng of Nauer. And whan the barownes of Acquytayne knewe that this treaty was made and cō
               fermed / than they deſyred to knowe who ſhuld pay them their wages. And the price who had great affection to warde this vyage / becāe dettour to them for their wages. and the king Dā
               peter becāe dettour to the prince. And whan all theſe thynges were ordayned and fully confermed / and that euery mā knewe what he ought to do and what he ſhulde haue: and y• they had ſoiourned ther the ſpace of .xii. dayes. Than ye kynge of Nauer departed home into his owne coūtre / and all other lordes departed euery mā to his owne / and the prince went to Burdeaux and the kyng Dāpeter taryed ſtyll at Bayone. Than the prince ſent his haraldes into Spayne / to certayne knightes & capitayns englyſſhemen and gaſcoyns / fauourable and obeyſaunt to hym / ſignifyenge them howe that it was his pleaſure y• they ſhulde take their leaues of Henry the baſtarde and come to hym / ſayeng howe he had nede of them / and was of thentent to employ and ocupy thē otherwiſe. And whan theſe haraldes had brought theſe letters into Caſtell to theſe knightes fro the prince / and that they ꝑ ceyued the princes pleaſure: thā they toke their leaue of kynge Henry aſſoone as they coude in curteſſe maner / without diſcoueryng of the prices entencyon. Than this baſtarde kyng Henry who was right lyberall / curteſſe / and honorable gaue them lycence with many great gyftes / and thanked them greatly of their ſeruyce. So than deꝑted fro Spayne ſir Euſtace Dā
               bretycourt / ſir Hewe Caurell / ſir Water Huet / ſir Mathue Gorney / ſir Johan Deureux and their company / and dyuers other knightꝭ and ſquiers the whiche I can nat all name of ye princes houſe: and they departed as ſhortly as they might. The ſame ſeaſon the companyons wer ſpedde abrode in the coūtre and knewe nothynge what theſe ſayd knightꝭ dyde / howbeit whā they knewe it they gadered to gyder / as ſir Robert Briquet / Johan Treuyll / ſir Rebours / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Perducas Dalbreth / ſir Garſes du chaſt / Nā
               don of Bergerant / the Bourge of Leſpare / the bourg Camus / & the bourg Bartuell. and this baſtarde kynge Henry knewe nat yt the prince was in mynde to bring agayne his brother dā
               peter

into Caſtell ſo ſoone as theſe knightꝭ dyd for if he had knowen it / they ſhulde nat haue departed ſo ſoone as they dyde: for he might well haue letted them if he had knowen it. So theſe knightes departed / and aſſoone as kyng Henry knewe therof he made no great ſemblant of it / but ſayd to ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy who was ſtyll about hym. Sir Bertram beholde ye prince of Wales / it is ſhe wed vs that he wyll make vs warr and bring agayne that iewe who calleth hym ſelfe kynge of Spaygne byforce into this our realme / ſir what ſay you therto. Sir Bertram anſwered and ſayd: ſir he is ſo valyant a knight that if he take on hym y• enterprice he wyll do his power to acheue it yf he may. Therfore ſir I ſay to you / cauſe your paſſages and ſtraytꝭ on all ſydes to be well kept: ſo that none may paſſe nor entre into your realme but by your lycēce. And ſir kepe yor people in loue / I knowe certaynly ye ſhall haue in Fraūce many knightes and great ayde / the whiche gladly wyll ſerue you. Sirby your lycence I wyll retorne thyder / and in the meane tyme kepe yor people in loue / and I knowe well I ſhall fynde in Fraunce many frendes. And ſir I ſhall get you as many as I can. By my faythe ꝙ kynge Henry ye ſay well / and I ſhall order all the remenant acordyng to your wyll. and ſo within a lytell ſpace after ſir Bertram departed & wēt into Aragon wher the kyng receyued hym ioyouſly / and ther he taryed a .xv. dayes / and thā departed and went to Mountpellyer and ther founde the duke of An
                  ••
               ou / who alſo receyued hym ioyouſly / as he whome he loued right entierly. And whā he had ben ther a ſeaſon he departed and went into Fraūce to the kyng / who receyued hym with great ioye.
         
         
            ¶Howe that kyng Henry alyed him to the kyng of Aragon / and of the mē that the prince ſent for / and howe the prince was counſayled to purſue his warre / & of the lorde Dalbreth who diſcōfyted the ſeneſhall of Tholous. Cap. CC .xxxii.
            
               WHā the tydyngꝭ was ſpred abrode in Spayne / in Aragon / & in Fraunce that the prince of Wales wolde bring agayne kyng dā peter in to the realme of Caſtell. Ther were many had therof great marueyle / and moche comunyng was therof. Some ſaid that ye prince toke on hym ye enterprice for pride and preſūpcyon / and was in a maner angry of the honour ye ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy had gotten him / in conqueryng of the realme of Caſtell / in the name of kyng Henry who was by him made kyng. Some other ſayd ye pyte and reaſon moued the prince to be in wyll to ayde the king Dampeter. and to bring hym agayne into his herytage: for it is nat a thyng due nor reſonable for a baſtarde to kepe a realme / nor to haue the name of a king. Thus in dyuers placꝭ ther were dyuers knightes and ſquyers of ſondrie opynions / howbeit incontynent kynge Henry wrote letters to the kyng of Aragon and ſende to hym great meſſangers / deſyringe hym that he ſhulde in no wyſe acorde nor make no cōpoſicion with the price / nor with none of his alyes: promyſing him euer to be his good neighbour and frende. Than the kyng of Aragon who loued hym entierly / and alſo often tymes he had founde kynge Dampeter ryght fell and cruell / ſaid and made a full aſſuraunce that for to leſe a great parte of his realme / he wolde make no maner of agremēt with the prince / nor accorde with kyng Dāpeter. Promyſinge alſo to open his countrey / and to ſuffre to paſſe through all maner of men of warr ſuche as wolde go in to Spayne / or into any other place to his confort and ayde / and to lette theym to his power that wolde greue or trouble hym. This kyng of Aragon kept well & truely his ꝓmyſe yt he made to this kyng Henry / for aſſone as he knewe the trouthe that kyng Dampeter was ayded by ye prince / and that the cōpanyons were drawyng to that partie. Incōtynent he cloſed all the paſſages in Aragon and ſtraitly kept them / he ſet men of warre on the mountayns to watche the paſſages and ſtraytes of Catholon / ſo y• none coude paſſe but in great parell. Howbeit the cō
               panyons founde another way / but they ſuffred moche yuell and great traueyle or they coulde paſſe and eſcape the dangers of Aragon / howbeit they came to the marcheſſe of the countie of Foyz / and founde the coūtre cloſed agaynſt them: for therle wolde in no wyſe that ſuche peple ſhulde entre into his countre. Theſe tidynges came to the prince to Burdeux who thoght and ymagined nyght and day howe with his honour he might furnyſſhe that vyage / and to fynde the meanes howe the ſayd companyons might come into Acquitayne / for he herde how the paſſages of Aragon were cloſed / and howe they were at the entre of the countie of Foyz / in

great payne and dyſeaſe. So the prince dowted that this kyng Henry and the kyng of Aragon wolde ſo deale with theſe cōpanyons / who were in nombre a .xii. thouſande / that other for feare or for gyftes cauſe thē to take their part a gaynſt hym. Thaſie the prince determyned to ſende to them ſir John̄ Chandos to treat with them and to retayne them and do hym ſeruyce / and alſo to the erle of Foyz / deſyringe hym for loue and amyte to do no diſpleaſure to theſe cō
               panyons / promyſing hym y• what ſoeuer yuell or domage they do to hym or to any part of his countrey / that he wolde make amendes therof to the double. This meſſage to do for his lorde ſir Johan Chandos toke on him / and ſo departed fro the cyte of Burdeux and rode to the cyte of Aſte in Gaſcoyne. and rode ſo longe that he came to therle of Foyz / and dyd ſomoche with him that he was of his acorde and ſuffred him to paſſe throughout his countre peaſably. and he founde the companyons in a countre called Baſell and ther he treated with them and ſped ſo well that they made all couenaunt with hym to ſerue and ayde the prince in his viage / vpon a certayne ſom̄e of money that they ſhulde haue in preſt / the which ſir John̄ Chandos ſware and promyſed them that they ſhud haue. And than he came agayne to therle of Foyz / deſyringe hym right ſwetely y• theſe people who were reteyned wt the prince might be ſuffred to paſſe by one of the ſydes of his countre. and the erle of Foyz who was right agreable to the prince / and in a maner was his ſubgette to pleaſe hym was agreed / ſo that they ſhulde do no hurte to hym nor to his countre. Sir Johan Chandos made couenaunt with hym that they ſhulde do no maner of domage / and than ſent a ſquyer & a haralde to theſe companyons with the treaty that was made bit wene him and therle of Foiz and than he retorned to the prince and recounted to him howe he had ſpedde. The price who byleued and loued hym right well was well cō
               tent with y• he had done in his voyage. In this ſeaſon the prince was in the luſty floure of his youthe / and he was neuer wety nor full ſatyſfyed of warr / ſythe the firſt begynning that he bare armes: but euer entended to achyue hygh dedes of armes. And as to this enterprice and 
                  ••
               age into Spayne / and to ſet agayne y• kyng that was chaſed out therof byforce of armes into his owne realme / honoure and pytie moued hym therto. and often tymes he ſpake to ſir Johan Chandos & to ſir Thomas Phelton / who were mooſt ſpeciall of his counſayle / demaundyng of thē what they thought. Theſe knightꝭ anſwered that they thought nothyng but well / and ſayd. Sir certaynly this, is a gretter enter price without comparyſon / than it was to put out of his realme this kyng Dampeter / for he was hated of all his men. and euery man for / ſoke hym whan he had thought they wolde haue ayded him. Nowe is poſſeſſed at this preſēt tyme of all the realme the baſtarde kynge / and entierly he hath the loue of all the nobles / prelates ▪ and all other in the realme / and they haue made hym kyng / and haue promyſed to maynteyne hym in y• eſtate what ſoeuer befall. Therfor ſir it wyll be behouable for you / to haue in your company great foyſſon of men of armes and archers: for ye ſhall fynde well with whōe to fight if ye come into Spayne. Sir I counſayle you to breke the greatteſt parte of plate & treaſure wherof ye haue great plenty / & make therof money to deꝑte therof largely to the cō
               panyons / ſuche as wyll ſerue you this voyage for the loue of you they are contente to go / but as for the loue of kynge Dampeter they wolde nat ſerue him. and alſo ſirſend into Englande to the kyng your father / deſyring hym to ayde you with a hundred thouſande frankes / y• whiche the frenche kynge ought to ſende into Englande in ſhort ſpace. Sir gather aſmoche money as ye can / for it ſhall greatly ſtande you in hande ſo to do / without taxyng or talagyng any of your ſubgettes or countre: ye ſhall y• better be ſerued and be loued. To this counſayle and to dyuers other good and true counſayles gyuen to the prince by theſe knightꝭ he was content ther with / and cauſed two ꝑtes of his plate to be broken̄e and to make money therof / to gyue therof largely to the ſayde companyons. and alſo he ſent into Englande to the kyng his father / for the forſayd hundred thouſande frankes. The kynge of Englande who parceyued well the buſyneſſe and nede of y• prince his ſon acorded lightly to his requeſt. And ſent letters to the frenche kyng to pay the ſayd ſom̄e to the bringer therof. and ſend him aquytaūce for the ſame ſomme. So theſe hundred thouſande frā
               kes were delyuered and brought to the prince / who departed it amonge all his men of warre.
            ON a day the prince was in his chambre a ſportynge in the cyte of Angoleſme / and with hym dyuers other knightes of Gaſcoyne / Poyctou / and of Englande. And ther he bourded with them and they with hym: and talked of this vyage into Spayne / in the meane ſeaſon

that ſir Johan Chandos was for the cōpanyons. The prince tourned his heed to warde the lorde Dalbreth and ſayde to hym: ſir Dalbreth with what nombre of men of warre may ye well ſerue me in this viage / ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                he yf I deſyre my frēdes I may well make you a thouſād ſpeares and my lande kept. A 
                  〈◊〉
                the prince that is a fayre thyng / and tourned hym to ſir Thomas Phelton and towarde other knyghtes of Englande / and ſayd to theym in englyſſhe: by my faythe one ought well to loue y• lande wher ther is ſuche a baron that canne ſerue his lorde with a thouſand ſpeares. Than he torned hym agayne to the lorde Dalbreth and ſayd / ſir I retayne them all to do me ſeruyce this vyage / ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                he in the name of god I am content. Of this retayning fell after great myſchiefe / as ye ſhall here in this hyſtorie.
            NOwe lette vs retourne to the companyons that were alyed and retayned with the prince. They ſuffred moche yuell and trouble or they entred into y• principalyte of Catholon and Aragon / and were fayne to departe into thre companyes. The gretteſt part went coſtyng Foiz and Borne: the ſeconde Cathelone and Armynake: and the thyrde went by Aragon / by the acorde of therle Dalbreth / therle of Armynake / and therle of Foyz / and in that cō
               pany were mooſt parte gaſcoyns. And that cō
               pany who were about a thre thouſand went deuyded into dyuers companyes / a thre hundred or four hūdred togyder / and drewe toward the byſſhopriche of Tholouſe and Mountanbon. Than ther was a knight of Fraunce ſeneſhall of Tholous called Guy Dazay / who whan he knewe that the companyōs aproched and rode a ſondre in companyes / and that all they togyder paſſed nat the nōbre of thre thouſande / and herde howe they were ſore wery with traueyle / and but yuell armed and horſed / and worſe arayed. Than he ſayde that he wolde nat ſuffre that any ſuche people ſhulde aproche Tholous nor the realme of Fraunce / wherfore he ſayd by the pleaſure of god he wolde go and fight with them. Than he ſent his mynde and purpoſe to the lorde Amorry erle of Narbon / the ſeneſhall of Carcaſſon / and to him of Beaucayre / and to all knightes / ſquyers / and officers therabout: ſendyng and requiryng them of ayde / to kepe and defende the fronters agaynſt theſe yuell cō
               panyons. And all ſuche as he ſent vnto obeyed and haſted to cōe to him aſſoone as they might into the cyte of Tholous. And whan they were come togyder they were in nombre a fyue hundred ſpeares / knightes and ſquyers / and a four thouſande of other men of the coūtre. And they all toke the feldes towarde Montaubon a .vii. leages fro Tholous / they that came firſt paſſed forthe abyding for their company.
            ¶ Whan the erle of Narbone and ſir Guy Dazay / who were ſouerayne leaders of the frenche army / were departed fro the cyte of Tholous / they went and lodged nere to Montanbon / the whiche as than was vnder the obeyſaunce of y• prince / and therin was a captayne a knight named ſir Johan Comes. Than theſe lordes of Fraunce ſent their currours before Montaubon to thentent to drawe out of the fortreſſe the companyons that were ther within. And whā the capitayne knewe that the frenchemen were come thyder with an army he had great marueyle ▪ bycauſe the lande parteyned to the price. Than he ſpake with his company / and dyde ſo moche that by aſſuraunce he ſpake with y• frenche currours / and demaūded who had ſent thē thyder / and why they auaunced theym to ouerron the princes lande / the which was their neybour / and ſeyng that the prince was frende to y• kynge and realme of Fraunce. Sir 
                  〈◊〉
                they we are nat commaūded of our lordes to make you any anſwere. But to content your mynde if ye wyll go or ſend to them they wyll make you an anſwere. Well ſir ſayd the capitayne / and than I deſyre you to go to them / and deſyre them to ſende me a ſaue cōduct / wherby I may go and come to them / or els to ſende me worde playnly by what tytell they wyll make warre agaynſte me / for if I knewe the certayntie I wolde ſend worde therof to my lorde the prince / who wyll ſhortly prouyde for remedy. Sirſayd they we ſhall go and ſhewe 
                  •
               our deſyre. And ſo they retourned and ſhewed their lordes all thoſe wordes / and than ther was a ſaue conduct gette in the name of ſir Johan Comes and brought to Montabon. Than he departed and fyue with hym / and went to the frenche lodgynges / and there founde the frenche lordes who were redy to receyue hym / and were redy aduyſed how to anſwere hym. He ſaluted them / and they him agayn. Than he demaūded for what cauſe they had ſent their currours with an army of men a warr before the fortreſſe of Mountaubon / the whiche parteyned to y• prince. They anſwered hym and ſayd: ſir we wyll inuade no ꝑſone nor make warre / but we wyll chaſe our ennemyes where ſoeuer we knowe that they be. Sir ſaid

the knight who be they that be your enemyes / and wher be they. In the name of god ſayd the erle of Narbon: they are within Montaubon / and are robbers and pyllers of the countrey / & ſuche as hath ſore ouerron the realme of Fraū
               ce. And to you ſir Johan if you were curteſſe to your neyghbours / ye wolde nat ſuffre them to pyll and robbe the poore people without cauſe as they do for by ſuche tytell and meanes ther moueth often tymes great hatred and diſcorde bytwene lordes and princes. Therfore put thē out of your fortereſſe / or els ye be no frende to the frenche kyng / nor to his realme. Lordes 
                  〈◊〉
                the capitayne: it is of a trouthe ther be men of warre within my garyſon ſente thyder fro my lorde ye prince / and retayned to ſerue hym / therfore I am nat in mynde to cauſe them to depart ſo ſodenly. If they haue done you any diſpleaſure / yet I can nat ſe that ye do them right / for they are men of warre / they muſt lyue as they haue ben acuſtomed on the realme of Fraunce and on the princes lande. Than therle of Narbone and ſir Guy Dazay ſayd: yea they be men of warr ſuche as can nat lyue / but by pyllage & robbery: and haue vncurteſly ouer ryden oure countrees / the whiche they ſhall derely abye / if we may gette them in the felde / for they haue taken / brent / pylled and done many an yuell dede 
                  •
               n the bandes of Tholous. Wher of ye greuous complayntes ar come to our heryng / and if we ſhulde ſuffre them thus to contynue / we ſhulde he falſe traytours to the kyng our ſoueraygne lorde / who hath ſet vs here to kepe and defende this his countre. Alſo ſhewe them fro vs / ſythe we knowe where they be we ſhall fynde thē: for they ſhall make vs amendes / or els it ſhall coſt vs more. Other anſwere the capitayne of Mō
               taubon coude nat haue of them / but ſo departed right yuell content with them in his mynde: & ſayd for all their threttes he wold nat breke his entencyon. And ſo retourned to his fortereſſe / and ſhewed all theſe wordes to his company.
            ¶Whan theſe companyons herde theſe tidynges / they were than nat well aſſured: for they were nat able to make party agaynſt the frēchemen. So they helde themſelfe euer redy & toke good wache: and ſo it fortuned that a .v. dayes after theſe wordes / ſir Perducas Dalbreth wt a great route of companyons ſhulde paſſe by Moutaubon / forther was their paſſage to entre into the principalyte. Than he gaue knowlege therof to them of the towne: and whan ſir Robert Cem / and the other companyons who were ther in the towne cloſed and be ſieged by the frenchmen / knewe of y• tidynges they were right gladde. Than they ſent worde ſecretly to ſir Perducas and to his company howe ye frenchemen had be ſieged them / and thretned them greatly: and alſo ſent them worde what capytayns they were and what nombre. And whan ſir Perducas herd that / he was nothing abaſſhed: but drewe togyder his company and cāe and entred into Montaubon / wher they were receyued with great ioye. Than they all togyder deuyſed howe they ſhulde maynteyn themſelfe / and agreed: that the next mornynge they ſhulde be armed and yſſue out of the towne / & drawe them towarde the frenchmen, and to deſyre them that they might paſſe by them peaſably / and if they wolde nat ſuffre them to paſſe: than to fight with them / and aduenture theymſelfe to the beſt of their power. And as they had determyned ſo they dyde / for in the mornynge they armed theym and ſowned their trumpettꝭ and mounted on their horſes: and than yſſued out of Montaubon. The frēchmen were redy raunged in the felde whan they harde the brute and noyſe before Montaubon / ſo that theſe cō
               panyons coude nat paſſe but through thē. Thā ſir Perducas Dalbreth / and ſir Robert Cem rode out afore / and by aſſuraūce went & ſpake with the frenche lordes / deſyring them to ſuffre that they might paſſe by them peaſably / but y• frēchmen ſayd howe they had no luſt to comen with thē. Sayeng howe they ſhulde nat paſſe that way / without it were with the poyntes of their ſpeares and ſwerdes. and than the frenchmen cryed their cryes / and ſayde auaunce baners toward yonder pyllers and robbers / who robbeth all the worlde / and lyueth on euery mā without cauſe or reaſon. And whan the companyons ſawe ſurely howe it behoued theym to fight / or els to dye ther with ſhame. Than they alyghted of their horſes and raūged them ſelfe a fore to abyde for their enemyes / who were fyerſly comynge towarde them: and in lykewiſe they a lyghted and came a fote. Ther they began to ſhote & to chaſe eche other / and to gyue great ſtrokes / ſo that there were many beaten downe on bothe parties. Ther was a ſore and fierſe batayle / well fought and many a feate of armes done and achyued / many a knight and ſquyers layed a long on the erthe / how beit the frenchemen were two agaynſt one. Wherfore at the beginnynge they dyde driue the companyons backe into the barrers of the towne: at whiche entryng ther was many a man ſlayne.

And the companyons had ben in a harde caſe & the capitayne of the towne had nat ben: for he cauſed to be armed all maner of people / and cō
               maūded ſtraytly that euery man to his power ſhulde ayde and helpe the companyons / who were retayned with the prince. Than they of y• towne armed them and put them in array / and entred into ye ſkirmyſſhe: the women of ye towne entred into the houſes / and went vp into the batylmentes and ſolers / and caſt downe on the frēchmen ſtones and hote chalke / ſo thycke that they had nioche a do to couer theym with their targes. And dyuers of them were ſo ſore hurte that they were fayne to recule backe / wherby y• companyons toke courage / who were a fore in great parell. Than they inuaded the frēchmen freſſhly agayne / at wiche tyme ther were ſuche feates of armes done / priſoners taken and reſcued agayn / that lyke caſe had nat benſene longe tyme before. The companyons were but a fewe in regarde to the frenchmen / howbeit euery man dyde his payne to do the beſt he coude: and ſo biforce of armes they droue out of ye towne the frenchmen. And it fortuned that in ye ſame ſeaſon whyle this batayle was thus foughten / y• another rout of the cōpanyons who were ledde by the bourge of Bertuell / and Nandon of Bergerant / to the nombre of foure. C. they entred on the backeſyde into the towne of Mō
               taubon. They had ryden all night in gret haſt to come to that batayle / for they had knowlege howe the frenchmen had beſieged their companyons of Montaubon. Than they entred into the fray / ſo that the frenchmen were ſore aſſayled / by reaſon of ye comyng of thoſe newe freſſh people. This batayle endured fro .ix. of ye bell tyll it was paſt hye none / but finally the frenchmen were diſcoufyted and put to the chaſe / for he was happy that coude get a horſe and deꝑte out of that iourney. Ther was takenen therle of Narbon / and ſir Guy Dayzay / therle Duſes / the lorde of Montmorelon / the ſeneſhall of Carcaſſon / the Seneſhall of Beaucayre / and mo than a hundred knyghtes of Fraunce / and of Prouynce / & of the marches ther about. and many a ſquier and riche man of Tholous and of Mountpellyer. And ther had ben mo taken if they had ben chaſed / howbeit the companyous were but a fewe and yuell horſed / therfore they durſt nat aduenture ouerfarr / and ſo held thē content with that they had done. This ſkyz myſſhe was at Mōtaubon the vigyll of our lady in Auguſt. the yere of our lorde god / a thouſande thre hundred threſcore and ſixe.
         
         
            ¶Howe theſe companyons let theyr priſoners depart on their faithes / but the pope defended thē to pay any raū ſome: and of the wordꝭ that the king of Mallorques had to the prince / and of the departynge of the prince to go into Spayne. Cap. CC .xxxiii.
            
               AFter the dyſconfyture and takyng of the ſayd priſoners / the ſaid Perducas balbreth / ſir Robert Cem / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Rohan Comes / the Bourge of Bertuell / Nandon of Bergerant and their company parted their boty and all their wynning / wher of they had great plenty. And all ſuche as had any priſoners kept them ſtyll to their owne profyte other to raunſome or to quyt them at their pleaſure. And they raunſomed their priſoners right curteſly euery man after his degre. The more courteſly bycauſe this aduenture came to themſo fortunatly by valyantneſſe of dedes of armes. and ſucheas were let go on their faythe and promyſe had dayes lymitted to thē to bringe their raunſoms to Burdeur / or to other places where as they were apoynted. So the priſoners deꝑted and went home in to their owne countrees / and theſe companyons went to the prince / who receyued them right ioyouſly / and ſent them to loge and to abyde in the marcheſſe of Baſell among the mountayns.
            ¶ I ſhall ſhewe you what befell of this mater / and of the erle of Narbon / the ſeneſhall of Tholous and other / who were put to raūſome / and had promyſed on their faythes to pay it. In the ſame ſeaſon ther / was at Rome pope Urban ye fyfte / who entierly hated theſe maner of people of companyous and had long tyme before curſed them / bycauſe of ye vilayne dedes that they had done: ſo that whan̄e he was enfourmed of this ſayd iourney. And howe yt therle of Narbone and other were ouerthrowen he was ſore diſpleaſed therwith / and ſuffred tyll he herde howe they were put to their raunſome / and cōe home into their owne countrees / & out of their enemyes handes. Than he ſent to eche of them and by expreſſe wordes defended theym in any wyſe to pay any raunſome / and aſſoyled them of their promyſe. Thus theſe lordes and knightes were quyted of their raūſome / ſuche as had ben taken at Mountaubon / for they durſt nat

trepaſe the popes cōmaūdemēt / the which happed well for theſe lordes / knightes / & ſquyers: but it fortuned yuell for the companyons / who abode and loked euer for their money / truſting to haue had it to arayed and aparelled thē lyke men of warr. And ſo they made great prepara
               
                  •
               yon on truſt therof / wherof they were diſceyued. So this ordynaūce of the pope was right coutagyous to them and they complayned often tymes therof to ſir Johan Chandos / who was cōſtable of Acquitayne: and had the ouer ſight by right of armes in ſuche maters. Howbeit he diſſymuled with thē aſwell as he might bycauſe he knewe well the pope had curſed thē / and howe yt all their dedes tourned to pyllyng and robbery. And as farr as euer I coude here they had neuer other remedy in that mater.
            NOwe let vs ſpeke of the prince of Wales and aproche to his viage / & ſhewe howe be perſeuered. Firſt as it hath benſhewed here before / he dyde ſo moche that he had all the companyons of his acorde / who were to ye nombre of. 
                  •
               ii. thouſande fightyng men: and greatly it was to his coſt to retayne theym. And after he had them / he ſuſteyned and bare their charges or they deꝑted out of the principalyte / fro the be 
                  〈…〉
               nyng of Auguſt to the beginyng of February and beſyde y• the prince receyued & retayned all maner of men of warr where ſoeuer he coude get them. And alſo the forſayd kyng Henry retayned men of warr in euery parte out of the 
                  •
               ealme of Fraunce and other places / and they came to ſerue hym / bycauſe of the alyaunces y• were bytwene the frenche kyng and hym. And alſo he had with him retayned ſome of the companyons bretons / ſuche as were fauourable to ſir Bertram of Cleſquy: as ſir Bertramme of Budes / Alayne of ſaynt Poule / Wyllyam of Bruex / and Alayne of Connet: all theſe were capitayns of thoſe companyons. And the prince might haue had alſo with hym many ſtrāgersmen of warr / as flemynges / almayns / and brabances: of he had lyſt. But he ſent home agayn many of thē / for he had rather haue had of his owne ſubgettes of the principalyte than ſtrangers. Alſo there came to hym a great ayde out of Englande / for whan the kyng of Englande his father knewe that this viage went forward than he gaue lycens to one of his ſonnes / duke Johan of Lancaſtre to go to the prince of Wales his brother / with a great nombre of men of warr: as four hūdred men of armes / and four hundred archers. And whan the prince knewe of his brothers comynge / he was therof ryght ioyouſe. In the ſame ſeaſon came to the prince to Burdeaur James kyng of Mallorques / ſo he called hymſelfe / but he had in poſſeſſyon nothynge of the realme. For the kyng of Aragon kept it fro hym byforce / and had ſtayne in priſone the kynge of Mallorques in a cytie called Barſelone. Therfore this yonge kyng James to reuenge the dethe of his father / and to recouer his herytage was fledde out of his owne realme to the prince: and he had maryed y• quene of Naples. The prince made hym great there and greatly conforted him / and whan the kyng had ſhewed the prince all the reaſons and occaſyons of his comyng / and parceyued y• wronge that the kynge of Aragon had done to hym / as in kepyng fro hym his enherytaunce: and alſo ſlayne his father. Than the prince ſayd 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                king I promyſe you faithfully / that after my return out of Spaygne I ſhall entende to ſette you agayne into your herytage / outher by treaty or by force. This promyſe pleaſed greatly y• king and ſo he taryed ſtyll with the prince in Burdeaux / abydinge his departynge as other dyde. And the prince to do hym more honour / cauſed to de delyuered to hym all that was for hym neceſſary / bycauſe he was a ſtrāger and of a farr countre: and had nat ther of his owne after his appetyte. And dayly ther came great cōplayntes to the prince of the companyons / howe they dyde moche hurt to men and women of the coū
               tre wher they lay / ſo that the people of that marcheſſe wolde gladly that ye prince ſhuld auaūce forthe in his viage / to ye whiche the prince was right deſyrous. Howe be it he was counſayled that he ſhulde ſuſtre the feeſt of Chriſtmas firſt to paſſe / to thentent that they might haue wynter at their backes. To the whiche counſayle y• prince inclyned / and ſō what bycauſe ye princes his wyfe was great with chylde / who toke moche thought for his departyng. wherfore ye prince wolde gladly ſeher delyuered or he departed and ſhe on her part was gladder to haue him a byde. All this meane ſeaſon ther was gret prouyſion made for this viage / bycauſe they ſhuld entre into a realme wher they ſhulde fynde but ſmall prouiſyon. and whyle they thus ſo
                  •
               orned at Burdeaur / and that all the countre was full of men of warr: The prince kepte often tymes great counſayle / and among other thynges as I was enformed / the lorde Dalbreth was coū
               termaunded with his thouſande ſpeares / and a letter was ſcut to hym fro the prince / conteynyng thus. Sir Dalbreth ſythe it is ſo that we

haue taken on vs by our volūtary wyll this vyage / the whiche we entend ſhortely to procede. Conſydring our great buſyneſſe / charges and diſeaſes that we haue / aſ well by ſtraungers ſuche as entred into our ſeruyce as by great nombre of the companyons / the whiche nombre is ſo great that we wyll nat leaue theym behynde vs for parels yt may enſue: and alſo to ſe howe the lande may be kepte in myne abſence / for all may nat go / nor yet all abyde behynde. Therfore it is ordayned by vs and by our counſayle / that in this viage ye ſhall ſerue vs but with. it. hundred ſpeares / and diſcharge you of the reſydue and let them do what them lyſte. And thus god kepe you / fro Burdeux the .vii. day of Decembre. Theſe letters ſealed with the princes gretſeale were ſent to the lorde Dalbreth / who was in his owne countre right beſy to prepare him towarde this viage / for it was ſayd that y• prince ſhulde departe ſhortely. Whan he ſawe the princes letters he opened thē and reed them two tymes ouer / the better to vnderſtande thē / for he had great marueyle of that he had foūde written in thē: and was in his mynde marueyluſly diſpleaſed (and ſayd) Howe is it that mylorde the prince iapeth and mocketh thus with me / ſythe he wolde that I ſhulde gyue leaue to departe .viii. hundred ſpeares knightes & ſquiers / whome by his cōmaundement I haue retayned / and haue let them of their profyte dyuers other wayes. And incontynent in that diſpleaſur he called for his clerke / and cauſed him to write a letter to y• prince in this maner. Dere ſir I am greatly marueyled of the letters ye haue ſent me / and ſir I can nat well fynd nor take counſayle howe I oughtor can anſwere you in that behalfe / for it tourneth to my great preiudyce and blame and to all my company / whom I haue by your owne ordynaunce and cōmaū
               dement retayned. And they are all redy aparelled to do you ſeruyce. And I haue letted them of takynge their profyte in other places / where as they might haue had it. For ſome of theym were determyned to haue gone ouer theſee into Spruce / to Cōſtantyne / and to Jeruſalem / as all knyghtes and ſquyers dothe to auaunce them ſelfe. Sir they haue great marueyle and are ſore diſpleaſed that they ſhulde thus be put out. and in lykewiſe I haue gret marueyle therof / and 
                  〈◊〉
                what maner I haue deſerued it. Dere ſir pleaſe it you to knowe / I can nat aſſure you of any of them deuyded fro their cōpany / I am the leſt and worſt of them all / if any departe I am in ſurety they wyll alldepte. God kepe you in his ſauegarde. Written. &c. Whan the prince herde this anſwere he toke it of great preſumpcyon / and ſo dyd dyuers knightes of England that were ther of his counſayle. Than the prince ſhoke his heed and ſayde in englyſſhe / as I was enfourmed / for I was than in Burdeux. Aſayd the prince / the lorde Dalbreth is a great maiſter in my countre: whan he wyll breke the ordyuaunce that is deuyſed by my counſayle. By god it ſhall nat go as he weneth lette him a byde and he wyll / for without his thouſand ſperes I truſt to god I ſhall furnyſſhe my viage. Than certayne knightes of Englande yt were ther ſaid / ſir ye knowe full lytell the myndes of theſe gaſcoyns / nor howe proude they be / nor they loue vs but lytell / nor neuer dyde. Sir remembre ye nat howe highly and greatly they bare thēſelfe agaynſt you in ye cyte of Burdeux whan that kynge Johan of Fraunce was fyrſt brought thyder. They ſaid than / and maynteyned playnly / that by them all onely ye atteyned to achyue that viage in takyng of ye kyng. and that right well apered / for ye were in great treaty with them the ſpace of four monethes or they wolde conſent that the frenche kynge ſhulde be caryed into Englande. Firſt it behoued you to ſatiſfy their myndes to kepe them in loue. And at thoſe wordes the prince helde his peace / howbeit his thought was neuertheleſſe. This was the firſt occaſyon of the hatered that was after bytwene the prince & the lorde Dalbreth. Thus the lorde Dalbreth was in great parell / for the prince was high and of great courage / and cruell in his herte: for he wolde other by ryght or wronge / that euery lorde vnder his cōmaundement ſhulde holde of hym. But therle of Armynake vncle to the ſayd lorde Dalbreth / whan he herde of this diſpleaſure / bytwene the prince & the lorde Dalbreth his nephue. Than he came to Burdeux to the prince / and ſir Johan Chandos and ſir Thomas Phelton with hym / by whoſe counſayle the prince was moche ordred. And ſo by their good meanes / the princes diſpleaſure was apeaſed: ſo y• the lorde Dalbreth ſhulde bringe no mo but two hundred ſpeares / with the whiche he was nothynge ioyouſe / nor yet his people / nor neuer after he loued ſo entierly the prince as he dyd before. Howbeit ther was no remedy but to bere and paſſe ouer his trouble aſwell as he might.
            UHus whyle the prince was makynge of his prouyſion / and abyding the comynge of his brother the duke of Lancaſtre. The

princeſſe trancyſed / and through the grace of god ſhe was delyuered of a fayre ſonne on the day of the thre kynges of Colayne / the whiche was as that yere wente on a wedinſday: at the hour of thre or ther about. Wher of y• prince and all his people were ryght ioyouſe / and the friday after he was chriſtned at noone / in the chur the of ſaynt Andrewe in the cyte of Burdeaux / The archbyſſhoppe of the ſame place chriſtned him / and the byſſhop of Dagen in Dagenoys has the kyng of Mallorques were his godfathers: and this chylde had to name Rycharde / who was afterwarde kyng of Englande / as ye ſhall here in this hyſtorie.
            THe ſonday after the hour of prime deꝑted fro Burdeux the prince / with great 
                  ••
               yumphe and all other men of warr. Howbeit the mooſt part of his hooſt were paſſed on be 
                  〈◊〉
                / and lay about the cyte of Aſt in Gaſcoyn. And the prince the ſame ſonday at night / came 
                  •
               o the ſame cytie and ther taryed a thre dayes: for than it was ſhewed him that the duke of Lā
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                his brother was comynge / and had paſſed the ſee a fyue dayes before / and was arryued in Bretayne at ſaynt Mathewes of Fyne 
                  〈◊〉
               : and ſo was come to Nauntes where the duke of Bretayne gretly feeſted him. Than the duke of Lancaſtre paſſed through Poiccou and 
                  •
               aynton and came to Blay / and ther paſſed the ryuer of Gyronde and ſo came to Burdeux / and went to the abbey of ſaynt Andrewe wher the princeſſe lay / who ioyouſly receyued hym: and ſo dyde all other ladyes and damozeks that were ther. Than the duke thought to 
                  •
               ary there no lenger / but toke his leaue of his ſuſtre the princeſſe and departed withall his cō
               pany / and rode ſo long that he came to the cyte of Daſt wher he founde the prince his brother. They made great ioye eche of other for they loued togyder entierly: ther was great tokens of loue ſhewed bytwene them and their company. And anon after the duke of Lācaſtres comyng thyder came the erle of Foyz and made great re
               
                  •
               erence and chere to the prince and to his brother and offred him ſelfe in all poyntes to be at their commaundemēt. The prince who coulde well honour all lordes acordyng to their eſtatꝭ / honoured hym greatly and thanked him of his comyng thyder: and after the prince gaue hym y• charge of his coūtre in his abſence / deſyringe him to kepe it well tyll his retorne. Therle ioyfully acorded to his deſyre: & than toke leaue & deꝑted home into his countre / & the prince and the duke of Lancaſtre his brother ſported them in the cite of Aſt / and all their people ſpredde abrode in the countre about the entre of the paſſages of Nauerr / for as than they were nat in certayne yf they ſhulde paſſe that waye or nat. yet the kyng of Nauerr had promyſed to open his paſſages / for wordes ran through the hooſt that newly he was agreed with the kyng Henry / wherof the prince and his counſayle hadde great marueyle / and the kyng Dampeter was right ſore diſpleaſed. And in this meane ſeaſon whyle theſe wordes thus ranne / ſir Hugh Caurell and his people aproched to Nauer and toke the cyte of Myrande and the towne of y• quenes bridge: wherof all the countrey was ſore a frayed / the whiche tidynges came to the kynge of Nauerr. And whan he parceyued that theſe companyons wolde entre into his land byforce he was ſore diſpleaſed and wrote worde therof to the prince / and the prince let the mater paſſe brefely: bycauſe y• kyng of Nauer as he thoght kept nat trewe promyſe with kyng Dampeter. Than the prince wrote to him that he ſhulde excuſe hym ſelfe of the wordes that was layed on hym / for it was ther openly ſayde that he was clene tourned to kyng Henry. And whan y• kinge of Nauer vnderſtode (y• trayſon was layed on hym) than he was more angry than he was before. Than he ſent a knight to the prince called 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Marten Kar / he came to the cyte of Aſt to excuſe the kynge of Nauer: and he demeaned hym ſelfe ſo wiſely that the prince was apeaſed of his diſpleaſure: ſo that y• ſame knight ſhuld retourne into Nauer to the kyng his mayſter / cauſyng him to come to ſaynt John̄s de pie du port / and the prince to take counſayle if he ſhulde go and ſpeke with him / or els to ſendſuffyci cut meſſangers to him. Thus this ſir Marten Karr departed fro the prince and retourned into Nauar to the kynge / and ſhewed him howe he had ſpedde / and in what condicyon he had founde the prince and his coūſayle: and alſo on what cōdycion he was departed fro thē. This knight dyde ſomoche that he brought the kyng of Nauar to ſaynt John̄s / and than he went to the cyte of Aſt to the prince. And whan y• prince knewe that the kynge of Nauar was at ſaynt Johans de pie du port: than he determyned to ſende to him the duke of Lancaſtre his brother and ſir Johan Chandos / and ſo theſe two lordes with a ſmall company rode to the towne of ſaynt John̄s with this ſayd knight. And there the king of Nauar receyued thē right ioyoully and ther had longe counſayle togyder / finally

it was acorded that the kyng of Nauer ſhulde aproche nerer to the prince / to a certayne place called Pyerferade / and thyder the prince and kyng Dampeter ſhuld come to ſpeke with him and ther to renewe all their couenauntes. And ther eche of them to knowe what they ſhulde haue. all that the kyng of Nauer dyd before was to thentent to be the better aſſured of their promyſes than he thought him ſelfe he was / for he douted that if the cōpanyons were entred into his coūtre: and this treaty and acorde bytwene them nat ſealed. Than he feared he ſhulde nat haue that he deſyred whan he wolde.
            ON this treaty retourned the duke of Lā
               caſtre and ſir John̄ Chandos and recoū
               ted to the prince / and to kynge Dampeter how they had ſpedde / the whiche pleaſed them right well and ſo kepte their day / and came to the place aſſigned: and alſo the kyng of Nauar and y• mooſt ſpeciall of his counſayle. And ther were theſe thre lordes / the kyng Dampeter / the prince of Wales / and the duke of Lancaſtre on the one party / and the kyng of Nauer on the other partie long comunyng toguyder. And there it was deuyſed & acorded what euery man ſhulde haue / and ther was renewed the treaty among them. And ther the kyng of Nauer knewe the certayntie what he ſhulde haue of the realme of Caſtell: and kyng Dāpeter and he ſware good loue / peace / and confederacyon bytwene them: and deꝑted amyably a ſondre. And than their hooſt might paſſe whanit pleaſed them / for the paſſages and ſtraytes were openyd / and vitels aparelled through all the realme of Nauer for their money. Than the kynge of Nauer went to the cytie of Panpylone: and the prince & his brother / and kyng Dampeter went to the cytie of Aſt. And as than ther were dyuers knyghtꝭ and lordes of Poictou / of Bretayne / and of Gaſcoyne nat come to the princes hooſt but taryed behynde. For as it hath ben ſayd before / it was nat fully knowen whyder the prince ſhulde haue paſſage or nat / tyll thende of this treaty was concluded. And ſpecially in Fraunce it was ſuppoſed that he ſhulde nat paſſe that way / but rather that y• kyng of Nauer ſhulde haue broken his viage / the whiche fell contrary. And whan theſe knightes and ſquiers knewe the certayntie therof / and parceyued that the paſſagꝭ were opened. Than they auaunced them ſelfe as faſt as they might / for they knewe well y• the prince wolde paſſe ſhortely and nat retourne agayne without batayle. Thyder came the lorde Clyſſon with a fayre cōpany of men of armes: and at laſt cāe with an yuell wyll the lorde Dalbreth with two hundred ſpeares / and all that vyage he kept cōpany with the Captall of Beufz / and all this mater and confederacions / knowledge therof was had in Fraunce / for alwayes there were meſſangers comyng and goynge / reportyng alway that they knewe or herd. And whā ſir Bertram of Cleſquy who was with y• duke of Aniou knewe howe yt the prince was paſſed and howe the paſſages of Nauer were opened to thē. Than he enforſed his ſomons / & thoght ſurely the mater ſhuld nat be ended without batayle. Than he toke his way towarde Aragon to come to king Henry as faſt as he might / and all maner of people folowed him ſuche as were commaunded: and dyuers other of the realme of Fraunce and other places / ſuche as thought to auaunce them ſelfe to gette honour.
         
         
            ¶ Of the paſſage of the price / & howe he paſſed and all his compauy. Cap. CC .xxxiiii.
            
               BItwene ſaynt John̄s de Pie du port and the cytie of Panpylone vnder y• moū
               tayns / ther are ſtraytes and perylous paſſages: for ther is a hūdred places on the ſame paſſages / that a hūdred men may kepe a paſſage agaynſt all y• worlde. Alſo it was at the ſame ſeaſon very colde / for it was about the moneth of February whan they paſſed / but or they paſſed they toke wyſe counſayle howe & by what meanes they ſhulde paſſe for it was ſhewed them playnly that they coudenat paſſe all atones. and therfor they ordeyned that they ſhulde paſſe in thre batayls thre ſōdry dayes: as y• monday / tueſday / and wedniſday / the mōday the vowarde. wherof was captayne the duke of Lancaſtre / and in his company the conſtable of Acquitayne ſir Johan Chandos / who had .xii. hundred penons of his armes / the felde ſyluer a ſharpe pyll goules / and with him was the two marſhals of Acquitayne: as 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Rycharde Dangle and ſir Stephyne Conſenton / and with thē was the penone of ſaynt George. Ther was alſo ſir Wyllyam Beachaump son̄e to the erle of Warwyke / ſir Hewe Haſtynges / and the lorde Neuyll who ſerued ſir John̄ Chā
               dos

with .xxx. ſpeares in that vyage at his own charge / bycauſe of the takyng of the batayle of Aulroy. And alſo ther was the lorde Dalbreth ſir Garſes of the Caſtell / ſir Richarde of Canton / ſir Robert Cem / ſir Robert Briques / Johan Treuelle / Aymery of the Roche Chouart / Gayllart of the Moytre / Wylliam of Cleceton Uylleboyes the Butteler and panter. All theſe were ther with their penons / vnder ſir Johan Chandos rule. They were to the nombre of .x. thouſande horſes / and all theſe paſſed the monday as is before ſayd.
            THe tueſday paſſed the prince of Wales and kyng Dampeter and alſo the kynge of Nauer / who was come agayne to ye prince to bere hym company / and to enſygne him ye redy paſſage. And with the prince ther was ſir Loys of Harcourt / the vycont of Chatelerat ye vycont of Roche choart / the lorde of Parteney / the lorde of Pynau / the lorde of Tāneyboton & all the poictenyns. Sir Thom̄s Phelton gret leneſhall of Acquitayne / ſir Wyllyam his brother / ſir Euſtace Dambretycourt / the ſeneſhall of Xaynton / the ſeneſhall of Rochell / the ſeneſhall of Quercy / the ſeneſhall of Lymoſyn / the ſeneſhall of Agenoyſe / the ſeneſhall of Bygor / ſir Richarde of Pontchardon / ſir Nowell Lornyche / ſir Dangoſes / ſir Thomas Balyſter / ſir Lowes of Mernall / ſir Edmonde of Marnell / the lorde Peter of Suffyer: and to the nō
               bre of four thouſande men of armes / and they were a ten thouſand horſes. The ſame tueſday they had yuell paſſage bycauſe of wynde and ſnowe / howbeit they paſſed forthe and lodged in the countie of Panpylone. And the kyng of Nauer brought the prince and the kynge Dā
               peter into the cytie of Pāpylone to ſupper / and made them great chere.
            THe wedniſday paſſed the kyng James of Mallorques / and the erle of Armynake / therle Dalbreth his nephue / ſir Bernard Dalbreth lorde of Gyronde / therle of Pyergort the Uycont of Carman / therle of Gomygues / the Captall of Beufz / the lorde of Clyſſon / the thre bretherne of Pomyars / ſir Johan / ſir Hely / and ſir Edmonde / the lorde of Chamont / the lorde of Muſedent / ſir Robert Canoll / the lorde Leſpare / the lorde of Condon / the lorde of Roſen / ſir Petyte of Courbon / ſir Aymery of Tarſe / the lorde de la Barde / ſir Bertram of Caude / the lorde of Pyncornet / ſir Thomas of Wyſtuſuble / ſir Perducas Dalbreth / ye bourge of Beriuell / Nandon of Bergerant / Bernarde de la Salle / Hortygo Launt / and all the other of the companyons: and they were a ten thouſande horſe / they had more eaſy paſſage than̄e thoſe that paſſed the day before. And ſo all the hole hooſt lodged in the countie of Panpylone abyding eche other / refreſſhynge them & their horſes. They lay ſtyll thus about Panpylone the ſpace of thre dayes / bycauſe they founde the coūtre plentyfull: bothe in fleſſhe / breed / wyne / and all other purueyaūces / for them & for their horſes. Howbeit theſe companyons payed nat for euery thynge as was demaunded of thē nor they coude nat abſteyne fro robbynge and pyllyng that they coude get. So that about Panpylone and in the waye they dyde moche trouble and hurte / wherwith the kynge of Nauerr was right ſore diſpleaſed / but he coulde nat as than amende it: but he repented hym often tymes that he had opened his paſſages to ye prince and to his company. For he parceyued well howe he hadde therby more hurt than profyte / howbeit the ſeaſon was nat than for him to ſay all that he thought / for he ſawe well and conſydered that he was nat as than̄e mayſter of his owne countre. So he had dayly great cōplayn tes made to hym of one and other of his countre / wherwith his hert was ſore cōſtrayned for diſpleaſure: but he coude nat remedy it. Howbeit he cauſed ſome of his counſayle / ſuche as knewe well theſe companyons: and had ben in their company in Fraunce / in Normandy / and in dyuers other places / to deſyre thē to abſteyn them ſelfe fro robbyng and pillynge the coūtre as they dyde / to whome they promyſed ſo to do.
         
         
            ¶ Of the great ſomons that king Hē
               ry made / and howe he ſent to the price to ſomon him to fight and how ſir Olyuer of Manny toke the kynge of Nauer priſoner. Cap. CC .xxxv.
            
               KIng Henry of Spayn was well enformed of ye princes paſſage / for he had his meſſangers and ſpyes dayly comyng and goyng / therfore he prouyded for men of armes and comons of ye realme of Caſtell / to the entent to reſyſt the prince

and his brother Dampeter. And daylye he taryed for the comynge of ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy with great ſocours out of Fraūce. And he had ſent a ſpecyall cōmaundement through out all his realme / to all his ſubgettꝭ on payne of their lyues / goodꝭ / and landes: that euery man acordynge to his eſtate outher a fote or a horſ backe to come to hym to ayde and defende his realme And this kyng Henry was welbeloued / and also all they of Caſtell had before moche payne & trouble to ayde to make hym kynge: therfore they obeyed to hym ye rather. And ſo dayly they reſorted to hym to ſaynt Domynyke / to the nō
               bre of threſcore thouſande men a ſote and a horſ backe all redy to do his cōmaundement & pleaſure / and to lyue and dye with hym if nede requyre. And whan this kynge Henry herde certayne worde howe the prince withall his hooſt was in the realme of Nauer / and had paſſed ye ſtraytes of Rouſenaulx. Than̄e he knewe well ther was no remedy but to fight with the prince / of the whiche he made ſemblant to be ryght ioyouſe: and ſayd openly on high. A the prince of Wales is a valyant knyght / and bycauſe he ſhall knowe that this is my right / and that Jabyde and loke to fight with hym / I wyll write to him parte of myne entent. Than he ſent for a clerke and he wrote a letter thus.
            TO the right puyſſanut and honourable lorde prince of Wales and Acquitayne. It is gyuen vs to knowlege that you and your people are paſſed the portes and are drawynge hyderwarde. And howe that ye haue made accorde and alyaunce with our enemy / and that your entent is to make warre agaynſt vs. We haue therof great marueyle for we neuer forfeyted to you / nor wolde nat do. Wherfore than ar ye come with ſuche a great army thus on vs / to take fro vs ſoo lytell an herytage as god hath gyuen vs. ye haue the grace and fortune in armes more than any prince nowe lyueng / wherfore we thynke ye glorify yourſelfe in your puyſſaunce. And bycauſe we knewe the certaynte that ye ſeke to gyue vs batayle / we wyll that ye knowe that wher ſo euer ye entre into Caſtell / ye ſhall fynde vs before you to kepe and defend this our ſeignery. Written. &c. And whan this letter was ſealed he called to hym an haraulde / and ſayd. Go thy way as faſt as thou mayſt to the prince of wales / and bere him this lettre fro me. So the haraude departed and toke ye way through Nauer tyll he founde the prince / than he kneled downe and delyuered hym the letter fro kynge Henry. The prince reed the letter a two tymes the better to vnderſtande it. & than he ſent for certayne of his counſayle and made the haraud to departe a lytell a ſyde. Than the prince reed the letter to his counſayle / demaundynge theym abuyce in that mater / and in the meane ſeaſon the prince ſayd to his counſayle. A I ſe well this baſtarde is a ſtout knyght and full of great prowes / and ſheweth great hardyneſſe this to write to vs. Thus the prince & his counſayle were longe togyder / howbeit finally they agreed nat to write agayne by the haraud Thā it was ſhewed to him how he muſt abyde a ſeaſon / for ye prince at his pleaſure wold write agayne by hym and by none other / therfore he was commaunded to tary tyll he hadde his anſwere. Thus the haraude taryed there ſtyll at his eaſe and pleaſure.
            THe ſame day that the haraude brought theſe letters / ſir Robert Phelton auaū
               ced hymſelfe forthe / and demaunded of ye prince a gyft / than ye prince enquyred of him what it was that he wolde deſyre. Sir ꝙ he I requyre you to gyue me lycence to departe out of your hooſt and to ryde on before: ther be dyuers knightes and ſquyers of my company / deſyring to auaunce themſelfe. And ſir I promyſe you we ſhall ryde ſo forwarde / that we ſhall knowe the behauyng of our enemyes / and what way they drawe and wher they lodge. The prince graū
               ted hym with ryght a good wyll his requeaſt / wherof he thanked the prince. And ſo departed out of the hooſt as chefe capitayne of that enter price / and in his company was ſir Wyllm̄ Felton his brother / ſir Thomas Duforte / ſir Robert Canoll / ſir Gayllarde Uiguyer / ſir Rafe Haſtynges / ſir Dangouſes / and dyuers other knightes and ſquyers. And they were a ſeuyn ſcore / and thre hūdred archers all well horſed & good men of armes. And alſo ther was 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hew Stafforde / ſir Richarde Cauton / and ſir Symō Burle / who ought nat to be forgotē. Theſe men of armes rode through Nauer by ſuche gydes as they had / & came to the ryuer of Marke the whiche is rude and depe / and ſo they paſſed and loged in a vyllage called Nauaret. There they helde them ſelfe / the better to knowe & here wher kynge Henry was. In the meane ſeaſon whyle theſe knightes thus lodged at Nauaret / and the prince in the marcheſſe of Panpylone. The ſame tyme the kyng of Naner was taken priſoner as he rode fro one towne to a nother / by the frenche partie by ſir Olyuer of Manny / wherof the prince & all his part had great marueyle. And ſome in the princis hoſt ſuppoſed it

was done by a 
                  〈…〉
               ll by his owne meanes / bycauſe he wolde cōuey the prince no further / nor go in his cōpany bycauſe he knewe nat howe ye mater ſhulde go bytwene kyng Henry & kynge Dampeter / howe be it the quene his wyfe was therof ſore diſmayed & diſconforted / and came and kneled on her knees before the prince / and 
                  •
               ayd. Dere ſir for goddeſſake haue mercy & 
                  •
               n
               
                  ••
               d on the delyueraūce of the kyng my huſbā
               
               
                  ••
                / who is takē fraudelētly / & as yet can nat be 
                  ••
               owen how. Therfore 
                  •
               ir we deſyre you for ye loue of god that we may haue him agayn. Thā the prince anſwered certaynly 
                  •
               ayre lady & co
               
                  •••
                his takynge to vs is right diſpleſant: & we truſt to prouyde remedy for him ſhortely. wherfore we deſyre you to confort your ſelfe / for this our 
                  ••
               age ones achyued we ſhall entende to no 
                  ••
               ther thing / but for his delyueraūce. Than ye quene of Nauer retourned: and ther was a no
               
                  •
               le knight ſir Marten 
                  
                     •
                  ar / who vndertoke to guyde the prince through the realme of Nauer and dyd get him gydes for his people / for otherwyſe they coude nat haue kepte the right way / thorowe the ſtraytes and perylous paſſage. ſo thus the prince deꝑted fro thens ther as he was loged / and he and his cōpany paſſed through a place named Sarris / the whiche was right perylous to paſſe for it was narowe and an yu
                  •
               li way. Ther were many ſore troubled for lacke of vitayle: for they founde but lytell in that paſſage tyll they came to Saueter.
            
            
               SAueter is a good town / and is in a gode countre & a plentyfull / as to the marches ther about. This towne is at the vtter bandes of Nauer / and on the entrynge into Spayne. This towne helde with king Henry. So than the princis hoſt ſpred abrode that countre ▪ & the companyons auaunced themſelſe to aſſayle the towne of Saueter / and to take it byforce / and to robbe and pyll it. Wher vnto they had great o
                  •
               ſyre▪ by cauſe of the great riches yt they knew was within the towne / the whiche they of y• coū
               
               
                  •
               re had brought th
                  〈…〉
               der / on truſt of the ſtrength of the towne / but they of the towne thought nat 
                  •
               o abyde y• parell / for they knewe well they cou
               
                  •
               e nat long endure / nor reſyſt agaynſt ſo great an hooſt. Therfore they came oute and rendred them ſelfe to kynge Dampeter and cryed hym mercy / and preſented to hym the keys of ye towne. The kynge Dampeter by counſayle of the 
                  〈…〉
               ce toke thē to mercy / or els he wolde nat haue done i
                  •
                / for by his wyll he wold haue diſtroyed them all howe beit they were all receyued to 
                  〈…〉
               . And the prince kynge Dampeter / and the kyng of Mallorques / with the duke of Lā
               caſtre entred in to the towne: and therle of Armynake and all other lodged therabout in vyllages. ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue the prince there / and ſomwhat ſpeke of his men that were at the towne of Nauaret.
            THe forſayd knightes yt were ther greatly deſyred to auaunce their bodyes / for they were a fyue dayes 
                  •
               ourney fro their owne hooſt / wher as they departed fro thē firſt. And often tymes they yſſued out of Nauaret & rode to y• marcheſſe of their enemyes / to lerne what their enemyes entented. And this kyng Henry was lodged in the felde and all his hooſt / deſyryng greatly to here 
                  •
               idynges of ye prince / marueylyng gretly that his haraud retourned nat. And often tymes his men rodenere to Nauaret / to lerne and to here ſome tidynges of thenglyſſhmen / and the erle 
                  •
               ancell brother to the kyng Dame Henry was certaynly enfourmed that ther were men of warr in garryſon in the towne of Nauaret / wherfore he thought to go and ſe them more nerer. But firſt on a day the knightes of Englande rode out of Nauaretet in an e
                  •
               en
                  •
               ynge / ſo farforthe that they came to kyng Hēryes lodgynge and made ther a great 
                  〈…〉
               myſſhe and marueylouſ
                  •
               y awoke the hoſt / and ſlewe and tooke dyuers: and ſpecially the knight that kept the wache was taken without recouery / and ſo retourned agayne to Nauar
               
                  •
               et without any domage. And ye nexte day they ſent to the prince a
                  •
                haraude who was as than at Saueter / ſignifyeng hym what they hadde done and ſene / and what puyſſaunce his ennemyes were of / and wher they were lodged. For they knewe all this well by the informacyon of ſuche priſoners as they had taken. Of theſe tidynges ye prince was right ioyouſe / in that his knightes had ſo well borne them ſelfe on ye fronter of his enemyes. 
                  •
               yng H
                  •
               ty who was right ſore diſpleaſed / that thēglyſſhmen yt lay at Nauaret had thus eſcryed his hooſt / ſayd howehe wolde aproche nerer to his enemies: & ſo auaū
               ced forwarde. And whan ſir Thomas Phelto
                  •
                and his company at Naueret knewe that kynge Henry was paſſed the water / and drewe for warde to fynde the prince. Than they determyned to departe fro Nauaret and to take the feldes / to knowe more certayntie of the ſpanyardꝭ and ſo they dyde / and ſente worde to the prince howe that kynge Henry aproched faſt / and be ſemyng deſyring greatly to fynde hym and his men. And the prince who was as than at Saueter / wher he vnderſtode y• kyng Henry was

passed the water / and tooke his way to come to fight with him he was right ioyouſe / and ſayd a highe y• euery man herde hym. By my 
                  •
               aythe this baſtarde Henry is a valyant knight and a 
                  •
               ardy / for it is ſigne of great prome
                  •
                that he 
                  •
               eketh thus for vs: and ſythe he dothe ſo / and we 
                  〈◊〉
                lykewiſe him by all reaſon we ought to mete and fight togyder. Therfore it were good that we departed fro hens and go forwarde / and to get Uyctoria or our enemyes come there. 
                  〈◊〉
                ſo the next mornynge they departed 
                  •
               ro S
                     •••
                  
                  ter. First the prince and all his 
                  •
               atayle / and he dyde ſo moche that he came before 
                  〈…〉
                / & ther he founde ſir Thomas Phelton and y• for ſayd knyghtes to whome he made great chere / and demaunded them of dyuers thynges. And as they were deuyſing togyder / their currours came and reported yt they had ſ
                  •
               ue the currors of their enemyes / wherfore they knewe for certayne that kynge Henry and his ho
                  •••
                was nat farr of by reaſon of the demeany age / that they had ſene among the ſpanyardes. Whan y• prince vnderſtode theſe ti
                  •
               ynges / he cauſes his trū
               pettes to ſowne / and cryed alarum through out all the hooſt. And whan euery man herde that / than they drewe to their order and array / and ranged them in batayleredy to fight / for euery man knewe or he departed fro Sauete
                     •
                  r what he ſhulde do and what order to take / the which they dyde incontynent. Ther might haue been ſene great nobleneſſe / and baners and penons beaten with armes wa
                  •
               y
                  •
               g in y• wynde. What ſhulde I ſay more? it was great nobleneſſe to beholde: the vawarde was ſo well ranged that it was marueyle to behold. Wherof the duke of Lancaſtre was chiefe / and with hym ſir Johan Chandos conſtable of Acquitayne with a gret cōpany / and in thoſe batayls there were made dyuers newe knightes. The duke of Lácaltre in the vaward made newe knightꝭ / as ſir Rafe Camoys / ſir Water Lomyche / ſir Thom̄s Damery / ſir John̄ Grandon and other to the nombre of .xii. And ſir John̄ Chādos made dyuers englyſſhe ſquyers knightꝭ: as Corton Clyſſon prior▪ Wyllm̄ of F
                  •
               rmeton / Amery of Roch ch
                  •
               
               art / Gyrad de la Motte / and Robert Briquet. The prince made firſt knight Dampeter king of Spayne / ſir Thomas Holand ſonne to his wyfe the princeſſe / ſir Hugh / ſir Philyppe / and ſir Denyſe Courtnay / ſir John̄ 
               
                  •
               onnet / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Nicholas Bonde / and dyuers other. And in lykewiſe ſo dyd dyuers other lordes in their batels / ther were made that day. CCC. newe knight▪ or 
                  〈◊〉
               . and all that day they were 
                  ••
               yll redy 
                  〈…〉
               
               ged in the batell to abyde for their enemies / but they came no fa
                  ••
               er forward that day / but ther as the currours had ſene them. For kyng Hēry taryed for ſocours that ſhulde cōe to him out of Aragon / and ſpecially for ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / who was comig to hi with a .iiii. M. fightyng men / for without thē he thought he wolde nat fight / wherof the prince was right ioyouſe for his areregard wherin wer. vi. M. mē was behynd him a .vii. leages of y• countre / wherof the prince was ſore diſpleaſed in his hert yt they taryed ſo longe. Howe be
                  •
               t if his enemyes had come on forward the ſame day / he was ſully 
                  •
               e termyned to haue receyued & ſought 
                  〈…〉
               
               ▪
            
            ANd in the ſame euer
                  〈…〉
               g 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               o marſha
                  •
               s ſir Dangle and ſir Steuyn Goſſenton cōmaunded euery man to dra
                  •
               e to their logy
                  •
               ge / and in the next mornyng to be redy at ſo 
                  ••
               yng of the trūpettes euery man in ye ſame order as they had ben all that day. and ſo euery man obeyed ſauyng ſir Thomas Ph
                  •
               l
                  •
               on and ſuche cōpany as he had before. The ſame euen 
                  •
               yng they d
                  ••
               ted fro the prince & rode 
                  •
               orwar
                  •
                a two leages nerer to their enemyes / to knowe what they dyd. And that euenyng therle of 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               ll / brother to kynge Henry was with hym in his logyng / and talked togyder of dyuers 
                  〈◊〉
                of armes and aduētures: and at 
                  •
               a
                  ••
                he ſayd to his brother. Sir ye knowe well our 
                  〈…〉
                ar loged nat farr fro vs / and yet ther is no
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                hath auewed thē. Sir I requyre you gyue m
                  •
                leaue that in the mornyng I may ryde toward them with a certayne nōbre ſuche as hath grea
                  •
                
               
                  •
               eſyre ſo to do. And ſir I promyſe you I ſhall 
                  •
               yde ſo nere them / that we wyll bringe you certayne knowlege what they do. And this kynge Henry whan he ſawe the deſyre of his brother 
                  〈◊〉
                greed therto lightly. The ſame proper hour 
                  〈◊〉
                Bertram of Cleſquy came to their hooſt with a iii. M. fightyng men of Fraunce & of Aragon. wherof the kyng and all his cōpany were right 
                  •
               oyouſe / and honorably receyued him & his c
                  •
               
               pany. Therſe of Anxell forgat nat his purpoſe but deſyred ſuche to go as pleaſed hym / & wold 
                  ••
               adly haue deſyred ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / & ſir Arnold Dādr
                  •
               hen / the Begue of U
                  •
               llayns / and the vycont of Roche breten of Aragon 
                  〈◊〉
                bycauſe they were ſo lately come to the hooſt he let thē alone. and alſo the kyng Henry charged hym in no wyſe to ſpeke therof. So therle A
                  •
               
               ſell let it paſſe / and toke with hym other of Frā
               ce and of Aragon / ſo that he was to the nombr
                  •
                of 
                  •
               ire thouſande horſes well appayrelled / and with hym his brother Xanſes in his cōpa
                  ••
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe certayne of the company of the duke of Lācaſtres were diſconfyted / and of the counſayle that kynge Henry wolde nat byleue. And of the letters that the prince wrote to kyng Henry / & of the counſell that ſir Bertram of Cleſquy gaue to the anſwer of the ſame letters. Cap. C C .xxxvi.
            
               ANd whan it was day in ye next mornyng they moū
               ted on their horſes / and deꝑted fro the kynges hooſt in good array and rode to war de thēglyſſhe logynges / and about the ſonne ryſynge in a valley they met with part of ſir Hugh Caurelles company with his harneſſe / for he had lodged that nyght a leage fro the englyſſhe hooſt. And aſſoone as the frenchmen and ſpanyardes ſawe them they ran at them / and ſhortely diſcō
               tyted them / ſo that the mooſt parte were ſlayne and the harneſſe won. But ſir Hugh hym ſelfe who came ſō what behynde / whan he ſawe that he toke another way. Howbeit he was parceyned and chaſed / ſo that he was fayne to flye wt his company in to the duke of Lancaſtres hoſt And the ſpanyardes who were a ſixe thouſand rode at the ſame brunt by one of the corners of the vawarde of the duke of Lancaſtres hooſt. and cryed Caſtell / and bete downe logynges & 
                  ••
               ewe & hurt moch people. Thā the hoſt began to ſtyre and to arme them / and drewe to ye dukes lodgyng who was redy armed and his baner before hym. And the englyſſhmen and gaſcoyns drue theym vnder their baners and penons redy to fight. Than the duke went vp to a lytell mountayne / and to hym came ſir John̄ Chandos and the two marſhals / and dyuers other knightes and ſquiers / puttyng themſelfe in order and array beſyde the duke. And anone after came the prince and king Dampeter / and euer as they cāe they ſet thē ſelfe in order of batayle. Therle of Anxell and his brother hadde thought to haue had the ſame mountayne firſt to auaūtage: but as I herde ſay they fayled of their purpoſe / but whan they ſawe they coulde nat haue it / and that thenglyſſhe hooſt was redy apparelled. Than they departed and aſſembled their company togyder / and ſo rode forthe truſtyng to fynde ſome other good aduenture / but or they departed they dyd dyuers feates of armes / for certayne englyſſhe knyghtes & gaſcoyns departed fro their array / and ſtrake in amonge the ſpanyardes and bare dyuers to the erthe / but alwayes ye great batell ſtode ſtyll on the moūtayne lokyng euer whan they ſhuld haue be fought with all. So thus in the returnynge of the ſpanyardes & aprochynge their owne hoſt they encoūtred ſir Thomas Phelton & his brother / ſir Richarde Tancon. ſir Dāgoſes / ſir Hugh Haſtyngꝭ / ſir Gaylerd Uigor & other to the nōbre of. C C. knighttes & ſquiers englyſſh and gaſcons / & in a valey they met: & the ſpanyardes cryed Caſtell in ye name of kyng Henry. Than thēglyſſhe cōpany ſeyng that great cōpany of ſpanyardꝭ and how they coude nat eſcape fro thē: they conforted them ſelfe aſwell as they might & kept thē togyder in the felde / & toke the aduaūtage of a lytell hyll. Than the ſpanyardꝭ came and reſted thēſelfe before thē / ymaginynge by what meanes they might beſt fyght with thē. Than ſir Wyllm̄ Phelton dyd a great feat of armes & great outrage / for he diſcēded downe the hyll with his ſpeare in the reſt prouynge his courſer & ran in among the ſpanyardꝭ: and ſtrake a knight ſo rudely with his ſpeare that ye ſpere ran clene through his body / & the knyght fell downe deed. Than this ſir Wyllm̄ was encloſed rounde about with his enemyes / & there he fought as valiantly as any knight might do and dyd his enemyes great domage or he was ſtriken to ye erthe: his brother ſir Thom̄s Felton & the other knyghtꝭ that were with hym on the moūtayne ſawe how he fought & dyde marueyls in armes / and ſawe well what parell he was in / but they coude nat cōfort hym without leſyng of themſelfe. So they ſtode ſtyll in their array on the mountayne. And the ſayd knyght fought ſtyll as long as he coude endure / but finally ther was ſlayne. Than the ſpanyardꝭ and frenchmen ymagined howe they might inuade thēglyſſhmen on the moūtayne. So that day ther were dyuers feates of armes done & a chyued / for ſōtyme parte of thē wolde diſcende downe ye mountayne and fyght with their enemyes & recule wiſely backe agayne to it. Thus in this eſtate they were tyll it was hye noon / the prince wolde gladly haue cōforted thē if he had knowen therof and delyuered them out of y• parell but he was nat ware therof / therfore it behoued them to abyde their aduentur. Whan they had thus endured ſcrymiſſ hyng a gret ſeaſon: thā therle of Anxell / who was ſore diſpleaſed y• they endured ſo long / ſayd a hye to his cōpany. Lordes for ſhame what do we here thus all day

we ought or this tyme to haue deuoured them. Auaunce forwarde and let vs fyght with them with a fierſe wyll / ther is nothyng wyll be gote without it be derely bought: with tho wordes the frēchmen and ſpanyardes auaunced them forthe with a hardy courage / and came to them ſo cloſe togyder that they coulde nat be broken. So than on the mountayne was done many a feat of armes. And thēglyſſhmen and gaſcons defended themſelfe to their powers right valyantly / but after the ſpanyardes were entred in among thē they coude nat endure / finally they were all taken and cōquered byforce of armes. So that non eſcaped but a certayne varlettes and pages that ſaued themſelfe by their horſes and at night they came to the princes hoſt / who that day was redy ranged on the hyll to ſyght.
            AFter the takyng of theſe ſayd knyghtes and ſquyers / the erle of Auxell and Sā
               xes his brother and their company retorned to the hooſt ryght ioyouſe: and at nyght came to the kynge Henry their brother. And there they made a preſent to the kynge of ſuche priſoners as they had taken / and recounted to the kynge ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / and ſir Arnolde Dan drchen and other howe they met / and how they dyde. And alſo how they had ouerthrowen ꝑte of ſir Hugh Caurels cōpany / and chaſed hym into the duke of Lancaſtres hoſt / and ther dyd great domage or the hooſt were aſſembled / and howe that in their retournyng they mette with theſe knightes whome they had taken. Kynge Henry who hard well theſe wordes with great ioy and glory anſwered therle his brother / and ſayd. Fayre brother ye haue marueyluſly well ſpedde / wherof ye ſhalbe gretly rewarded: & I truſt ſurely y• all thother ſhall paſſe ye ſame way Than ſir Arnolde Dādrehen ſayd: ſir ſauyng your grace I wyll nat ſay agaynſt you / but rather amende it: but one thyng ſir I ſay yt whan ſoeuer ye ſhall aſſemble with ye prince in batell / ye ſhall fynde the men of warr ſuche as to dedꝭ of armes requyreth / for ther is the floure of all the chiualry of the worlde. Ther ſhall ye fynde ſage and hardy coragious fightyng men / for to dye in the place they wyll nat flye one fote Sir it is neceſſary that ye take good hede and counſell in this mater. But ſir and ye wyll do by my counſayle ye ſhall diſconfyte them without any ſtroke ſtrikyng. As thus / if ye wyll kepe ye ſtraites and paſſages / ſo that no prouiſyon may cōe at them / ye ſhall famyſſhe them and ſo diſcōfite them. For than they ſhalbe fayne to retourne in to their owne countre warde / without good order or array / and thā may you haue yor deſyre acomplyſſhed. Than this kyng Henry anſwered and ſayd: marſhall by the ſoule of my dere father I deſyre ſo moche to ſe the prince and to proue his puyſſaūce and myne / that I wyll neuer depart hens without batayle. For I thāke god we haue men ynowe. Firſt we haue ſeuyn thouſande men of armes well horſed and barded / ſo that they feare no ſhote of archers. And alſo we haue .xx. thouſande of other moūted on genettes cap a pee / and of other we haue threſcore thouſande men of comons / with ſpeares / dartes / and paueſſes / the which may do a great feate. And they all haue ſworne nat to fayle me to dye in the payne / wherfore ſir Arnolde Iſe no cauſe to be abaſſhed / but let vs greatly be re conforted in the puyſſaunce of god and in oure mē. And ſo with this talkyng ther were knightes that brought to the kyng wyne and ſpyces. So the kynge toke therof and gaue the lordes part about hym / and than euery man retorned into their logynges. Than thēglyſſhmen and gaſcoyns priſoners made their aſſuraūce / and were deuyded one fro another. No we lette vs retorne to the prince and ſpeke ſom what of his ordynaunce.
            ¶ The prince of Wales and the duke of Lācaſtre were all the ſayd day on the moūtayn / and at night they were enfourmed of their men that were thus taken & ſlayne / wherwith they were ſore diſpleaſed / but they coulde nat amende it. Than they drue to their logynge: and the next mornyng the prince toke counſell and determyned to deꝑt fro thens and ſo he dyd / and went & loged before Uictoria / & there ſtode in batayle redy to fight / for it was enformed ye prince how that kyng Hēry and his brother & their cōpany were nat farr thens / but they cāe nat forward. The prince & his cōpany had great lacke of vitayls and prouiſyon for thē ſelfe & for their horſes / for they were loged but in an yuell countre and a harde. And kyng Henry and his company lay in a good frutefull countre / in the princꝭ hooſt a lofe of breed was ſolde for a floreyn / euery man gladde ſo to gyue & more and they coude haue gote it. Alſo the tyme was foule & troublous: of wynde / rayne / and ſnowe. and in this daunger and diſeaſe they were ſixe dayes. And whan the prince ſawe that the ſpanyardes cam nat forwarde to fight / and that they were there in gret diſtreſſe. Than they determyned to go and ſeke for paſſage at ſome other place / than̄e they diſloged & toke the way to Nauaret & paſſed through a coūtre called ye coūtre of ye Gard / 

and whan they were paſſed than they came to a towne called Uienne. Ther the prince and the duke of Lancaſtre refreſſhed them: and therle of Armynacke and the other lordes / a two dayes. Than they went and paſſed the ryuer that departeth Caſtell and Nauer at the bridge of Groynge / amonge the gardeyns vnder the olyues / and ther they founde a better coūtre than they were in before: howe beit they had great defaute of vitayle. And whan that kyng Henry knewe that the prince and his people were paſſed the ryuer at Groynge. Than he departed fro ſaynt Muchaulte wher he hadde longe layen / and went and lodged before Nauerette on the ſame ryuer. Whan the prince harde that kynge Henry was aproched / he was right ioyouſe and ſayd openly: by ſaynt George this baſtarde ſemeth to be a valyaunt knight / ſythe he deſyreth ſo ſore to fynde vs I truſt we ſhall fynde eche other ſhortely. Than̄e the prince called to hym the duke of Lancaſtre his brother / and dyuers other of his counſayle: & than he wrote an anſwere to kyng Henry of the letter that he had ſent him before / ye tenor wherof foloweth.
            EDward by the grace of god prince of wales and Acquitayne: to the right honourable and renomed Henry erle of Chriſtemar / who at this preſent tyme calleth him ſelfe kyng of Caſtell. Syth it is ſo that ye haue ſent to vs your letters by your haraud / wherin were conteyned dyuers artycles / makyng mēcyon how ye wolde gladly knowe why we take to our frē
               de and louer your enemy our coſyn / the kynge Dāpeter: & by what tytell we make you warr / and are entred with an army royall into Caſtell. We anſwere therto. Knowe ye for trouthe it is to ſuſteyne the right / and to maynteyn reaſon / as it aparteyneth to all kynges and princꝭ ſo to do. And alſo to entertayne the great alyaū
               ces / that the kyng of England my dere father / & kyng Dampeter haue had longe togyder / and bycauſe ye are renomed a ryght valyāt knyght we wolde gladly and we coude acorde you and hym roguyder / and we ſhall do ſomoche to our ceſyn Dampeter / that ye ſhall haue a great ꝑte of the realme of Caſtell / but as for the crowne and herytage ye muſt renounce. Sir take coū
               ſayle in this caſe: and as for our enteryng into Caſtell we wyll entre ther as we thynke beſt at dure owne pleaſure. Written at Groynge the .xxx. day of Marche.
            ¶ Whan this letter was written it was cloſed and ſealed / and delyuered to the ſame haraude that brought ye other / and had taryed for an anſwere more than thre wekes. Thāhe departed fro the preſence of the prince / and rode ſo longe that he came to Naueret amonge the buſſhes / wher kyng Henry was lodged and drue to the kynges logyng. And the mooſt part of ye great lordes of the hooſt came thyder to here what tidynges their heraude had brought. Than the haraud kneled downe and delyuered the kyng the lettre fro the prince. The kyng toke and opened it / and called to him ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / and dyuers other knightes of his coūſell. There the letter was reed and well conſydred: than ſir Bettram ſayd to ye kyng. Sir knowe for trouthe ye ſhall haue batell ſhortly I knowe ſo well the prince / therfore ſir loke well on the mater. It is neceſſary that ye take good hede to all your beſyneſſe and order your people and your batayls. Sir Bertrā ꝙ the kynge be it in the name of god / the puyſſaunce of the prince I dout nothynge: for I haue thre thouſande barded horſes / the whiche ſhall be two wynges to our batayle / and I haue alſo ſeuyn. M. genetours / and well .xx. thouſande men of armes of the beſt that can be foūde in all Caſtell / Galyce Portyngale / Cordowen / and Cyuyle / and .x. thouſande good croſbowes / and threſcore. M. of other men a fote: with dartes / ſpeares / launces / and other abilymentes for the warre. And all theſe hath ſworne nat to fayle me to dye in ye payne: therfore ſir Bertram I truſt to haue vyctory by the grace of god on whome is my truſt and my right that I haue in the quarell. Therfore lordꝭ I deſyre you all to be of good corage.
         
         
            ¶ How the prince cōmaūded his people to be redy to fight. and how kyng Henry ordayned his batayls / & howe they fought fierſly togyder: & of the confort that kyng Henry dyde to his people. Cap. CC .xxxvii.
            
               THus as ye haue harde kyng Henry and ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy deuiſed togyder of dyuers maters / and lefte talkyng of the princes letter for it was kyng Hēries entē
               cion to haue batayle / & ſo entended to ordre his felde and people. Therle of Anxell and his brother ſir Sanxes / were gretly renomed in their hooſt / for the iourney that

they had made before / as ye haue herde. The prince the friday / the ſeconde day of Aprell
                  •
               dil loged fro Groyng / and auaunced forwarde araynged in batayle redy to fight / for he knewe well that kyng Henry was nat farr thens. And ſo that day he auaūced two leages / and at thre of the day he cāe before Nauaret and ther toke his logyng. Than the prince ſent forthe his currours to auiewe his ennemyes / and to knowe wher they were lodged: and than they departed fro the hooſt and rode ſo forward that they ſawe all their enemyes hooſt / who were alſo loged before Nauaret. So they brought report therof to the prīce / and in the euenyng the prince cauſed ſecretely to be ſhewed through all the hooſt / that at the firſt ſo wnyng of the trumpettes euery man to aparell hymſelfe / and at the ſeconde to be armed / & at the thirde to lepe a horſ backe and to folowe ye marſhals baners / with the penon of ſaynt George. And that none on payne of dethe auaunce before them / without he be commaunded ſo to do.
            IN lyke maner as the prince had done the ſame friday inſendyng out his currours So dyde kynge Henry on his parte to knowe wher the prince was lodged / and whan he had true report therof / than the kyng called 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertram of Cleſquy / and toke counſayle and aduyce howe to perſeuer. Than they cauſed their peple to ſuppe / and after to go to reſt to be ye more freſſher / and at the hour of mydnight to be redy apparelled and to drawe to the felde / and to ordayne their bataylles: for he knewe well the next day he ſhuld haue batayle. So that night the ſpanyardes toke their eaſe and reſt / for they had well wherwith ſo to do / as plenty of vytels and other thynges. And the englyſſhmen had great defaut / therfore they had great deſyre to fight / outher to wynne or to leſe all. After mydnight the trumpettes ſounded in kyng Hēryes hooſt than euery man made hym redy: at the ſeconde blaſt they drewe out of their lodgynges / and ordred thre batayls. The firſt had ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / lorde Robert of Roſebertyne and therle Dune erle of Aragon / and ther 
               wer all the ſtrangers aſwell of Fraunce as of other coūtrees / & ther were two barones of Heynalt the lorde Dautoyng / and ſir Alars lord of Briſuell. Ther was alſo the Begue of Uillayns / the begue of Uylliers / ſir John̄ of Bergutes / ſir Gawen of Baylleull / the almayne of ſaynt Uenant / who was ther made knight & dyuers other / of Fraūce / Aragron / and Prouens / and of the marcheſſe ther about. Ther was well in that batayle four thouſande knightes and ſquiers well armed and dreſſed after the vſage of Fraūce. The ſeconde batayle had therle of Auxell / and his brother therle of Saures: and in that batayle with the genetours ther were .xv. thouſand a fote and a horſ backe / and they drue them a lytell a backe on the lyft hande of ye firſt batayle. The third batayle and the gretteſt of all / gouerned kyng Henry himſelfe: and in his company ther were a ſeuyn thouſand horſmen and threſcore thouſande a fote with the croſbowes. So in all thre batayls he was a fourſcore and ſixe. M. a horſebacke and a fote. Thā kynge Henry lepte on a ſtronge mule after ye vſage of the countrey / and rode fro batayle to batayle ryght ſwetely / prayeng euery man that day to employ themſelfe to defende and kepe their honour / and ſo he ſhewed himſelfe ſo cherefully y• euery man was ioyfull to beholde hym. Than he went agayne to his owne batayle / and by yt tyme it was day light. And than about ye ſon̄eriſyng / he auaunced forthe towarde Nauaret to fynde his enemyes in good order of batayle redy to fight.
            THe prince of Wales at the brekyng of ye day was redy in ye felde a ranged in batayle / and auaūced forwarde in good order / for he knewe well he ſhulde encountre his enemys So there were none y• went before ye marſhals batayls / but ſuche currours as were apoynted ſo thus the lordes of bothe hoſtes knewe by the report of their currours yt they ſhulde ſhortely mete. So they went forward an hoſtyng paſe eche toward other / & whan the ſon was riſyng vp / it was a great beauty to beholde ye batayls and the armurs ſhinynge agaynſt the ſon. So thus they went forward tyll they aproched nere togyder / than the prince and his cōpany went ouer a lytell hyll / & in the diſcēdyng therof they ꝑceyued clerely their enemyes comyng towarde thē. And whan they were all diſcēded down this moūtayne than euery man drue to their batayls & kept thē ſtyll and ſo reſted thē / and euery man dreſſed and aparelled hymſelfe redy to fight. Than ſir John̄ Chādos brought his baner rolled vp togyder to the prince & ſayd. Sir beholde here is my baner / I requyre you dyſplay it abrode / and gyue me leaue this day to rayſe it / for ſir I thanke god and you / I haue lande and herytage ſuffycient to maynteyne it withall. Than the prince and kynge Dampeter tooke the baner bytwene their handes and ſpred it abrode / ye which was of ſyluer a ſharpe pyle goules / and delyuered it to him and ſayd

ſir Johan beholde here your baner / god ſende you ioye and honoure therof. Than ſir Johan Chandos bare his baner to his owne cōpany / and ſayd. Sirs behold here my baner & yours kepe it as your owne. And they toke it & were right toyfull therof / and ſayd that by the pleaſure of god and ſaynt George they wolde kepe and defende it to the beſt of their powers. And ſo the baner abode in the handes of a good englyſſhe ſquyer / called Wyllm̄ Alery: who bare it that day and aquaynted himſelf right nobly. Than anon after thenglyſſhmen and gaſcoins a lighted of their horſes / and euery man drewe vnder their owne baner and ſtanderd in array of barayle redy to fight / it was great ioye to ſe and conſyder the baners and penons: and ye noble armery that was ther. Than the bataylles began a lytell to auaunce / and than the prince of Wales opened his eyen and regarded towarde heuen / and ioyned his handes togyder and ſayd. Uary god Jeſu Chriſt who hath formed and created me / cōſent by your benygne grace that I may haue this day victory of myne enemyes / as that I do is in a ryghtfull quarell / to ſuſtayne and to ayde this kynge chaſed out of his owne herytage the whiche gyueth me courage to auaunce my ſelfe to reſtablyſſhe hym a gayne into his realme. And than he layed his right hande on kyng Dampeter / who was by hym and ſayd. Sir kynge ye ſhall knowe this day if euer ye ſhall haue any part of the realme of Caſtell or nat. Therfore auaunce baners in the name of god and ſaynt George / with thoſe wordes the duke of Lancaſtre and ſir Johan Chandos aproched / and the duke ſayde to ſir Wylliam Beauchamp. Sir Wylliam beholde yonder our enemyes / this day ye ſhall ſe me a good knyght: or els to dye in the quarell. And therwith they aproched their enemyes / & firſt the duke of Lancaſtre and ſir Johan Chandos batayle aſſembled with the batayle of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / and of ye marſhall ſir Arnold Dandrehen / who were a foure thouſande men of armes. So at the firſt brunt ther was a ſore encountre with ſpeares and ſheldes / and they were a certayne ſpace or any of them coude get within other. ther was many a dede of armes done / and many a man reuerſed and caſt to the erthe / that neuer after was relyued. And whan theſe two firſt barayls were thus aſſembled / ye other batayls wolde nat longe tary behynde / but aproched and aſſembled togyder quickely. And ſo the prince and his batayle / came on the erle of Anxes batayle: and with the prince was kyng Dampeter of Caſtell and ſir Marten dela Care / who repreſented the kynge of Nauer. And at the firſt metynge that the prince mette with the erle of Anxes batayle: therle and his brother fledde away without order or good array and wyſt nat why / and a two thouſand ſperes with hym. So this ſeconde batayle was opened and anone diſconfyted / for the captall of Beufz and the lorde Clyſſon and their company came on them a fote / and ſlewe and hurt many of thē. Than the princes batayle with kyng Dampeter came and ioyned with the batayle of kynge Henry / wher as there were threſcore thouſande men a fote and a horſebacke. There the batayle began to be fierſe and cruell on all partes / for the ſpanyardes and caſtillyans had ſlynges wher with they caſt ſtones in ſuch wiſe that ther with they claue and brake many a baſſenet and helme / and hurt many a man and ouerthrue them to the erthe: and the archers of Englande ſhotte fierſly and hurteſpanyardes greuouſly / and brought them to great miſchefe The one parte cryed Caſtell for kynge Henry / and the other parte ſaynt George guyen. And the firſt batayle / as the duke of Lancaſtre and ſir Johan Chandos / and the two marſhals ſir Guyſſ harde Dangle and ſir Stephyne Conſenton / fought with ſir Bertram of Cleſquy & with the other knightes of Fraūce and of Aragon: ther was done many a dede of armes. ſo it was harde for any of them to open others batayle / dyuers of thē helde their ſpeares in both their handes foyning and preſing eche at other and ſome fought with ſhorte ſwerdes and daggers. Thus at the beginnynge the frenchmen and they of Aragon fought valiantly: ſo that the good knightꝭ of Englande endured moche payne. That daye ſir Johan Chandos was a good knight / and dyde vnder his baner many a noble feate of armes: he aduentured himſelfe ſo farre that he was cloſed in amonge his enemyes / and ſo ſore ouerpreſſed that he was felled downe to the erthe: and on hym there fell a great and a bygge man of Caſtell called Martyne Ferrant / who was gretly renomed of hardyneſſe amonge the ſpanyardes / and hedyde his entent to haue ſlayne ſir Johan Chandos / who lay vnder hym in great danger. Than ſir Johan Chandos remembred of a knyfe that he had in his boſome / and drewe it out and ſtrake this Martyne ſo in the backe and in the ſydes / that he wounded him to dethe as he lay on him Than ſir Johan Chandos tourned hym ouer and roſe quickely on his fete and his men were

there aboute hym / who had with moche payne broken the preaſe to come to hym wher as they ſawe hym felled.
            THe ſaturday in the mornynge bytwene Nauer and Nauaret was the batayle right fell and cruell / and many a man brought to great myſchefe. Ther was done many a noble dede of armes by ye prince / and by the duke of Lācaſtre his brother / and by ſir John̄ Chā
               dos / ſir Guyſſhard Dāgle / the captall of Befz / the lorde of Cliſſon / the lorde of Raix / ſir Hugh Caurell / ſir Mathue Gourney / ſir Loys Harcourt / the lorde of Pons / the lorde of Partney. And of gaſcoyns fought valyantly: the erle of Armynake / the lorde Dalbret / the lorde of Pomyers and his brethern / the lorde of Muſedēt / the lorde of Roſen / therle of Pyergourt / therle of Gomegynes / therle of Carmayne / the lorde of Condons / the lorde Parr / the lorde of Chamont / ſir Bertylmewe of Cande / the lorde of Pyncornet / ſir Bertram Dalbreth / the lorde of Garonde / ſir Aymery of Taſt / the Souldiche of Strade / ſir Peteton of Corton / and dyuers other knightes and ſquyers aquyted themſelfe right nobly in armes to their powers. And vnder the penon of ſaynt George and the baner of ſir Johan Chandos were all the companyons to the nombre of .xii. hundred penſels / and they were right hardy and valyant knightes: as ſir Robert Ceney / ſir Perducas Dalbreth / Robr̄t Briquet / ſir Garſes of the Caſtell / ſir Gaillard Uiger / Johan Creſnell / Nandon of Bergerāt Aymon Dortyng / Perrot of Sauoy / ye bourg Camus / the bourge Leſpyne / the bourge Bertuell / Eſperry and dyuers other. On the frēche partie ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / ſir Arnold Dā
               drehen / Xances / ſir Gomes Garybz / and other knightes of Fraunce and of Arragone fought right nobly to their powers / howbeit they had none aduauntage: for theſe companyons were hardy and ſtrong knightes / and well vſed and expert in armes. And alſo ther were great plenty of knightes and ſquiers of Englande vnder the baner of the duke of Lācaſtre and of ſir Johan Chandos. Ther was the lorde Wyllyam Beauchamp ſonne to the erle of Warwyke / ſir Rafe Camoys / ſir Water Urſewyke / ſir Thomas Emery ſir John̄ Grandon / ſir John̄ Dyper / ſir Johan du Pre / ſir Amery of Rochechoart / ſir Gayllarde de la Motte and mo than .ii. hundred knightes / the whiche I can nat name. And to ſpeke truely the ſayd ſir Bertram Cleſquy / and the marſhall Dandrechen / the Begue of Uillaynes / the lorde Dantuell / the lorde of Briſuell / ſir Gawen of Baylleull / ſir Johan of bergeretes / the begue of Uillers / ye almayne of ſaynt Uenant / and the good knightes and ſquiers of Fraunce that were ther / acquyted themſelfe nobly. For of trouthe if the ſpanyardꝭ had done their parte aſ well as the frenchmen dyde / thenglyſſhmen and gaſcoyns ſhulde haue had moche more to do: and haue ſuffred more payn than they dyde. The faute was nat in kyng Hē
               ry that they dyde no better: for he had well admonyſſhed and deſyred thē to haue done their deuoyre valiantly / and ſo they had promyſed him to haue done. The kynge bare hym ſelfe ryght valiantly and dyde marueyls in armes: and with good courage cōforted his people / as whan they were flyenge and openyng / he came in among theym and ſayd. Lordes I am your kyng: ye haue made me kyng of Caſtell & haue ſworne and promyſed / that to dye ye wyll nat fayle me. For goddeſſake kepe your promyſe yt ye haue ſworne & acquyte you agaynſt me / and I ſhall acquyte me agaynſt you: for I ſhall nat flye one fote as longe as I may ſe you do your deuoyre. By theſe wordes and ſuche other full of confort: kyng Henry brought his men togyder agayne thre tymes the ſame day / and with his owne hādes he fought valiantly: ſo that he ought greatly to be honoured and renowmed. This was a marueylous dangerous batayle / and many a man ſlayne and ſore hurte: the comons of Spayne acordyng to ye vſage of their countre with their ſlynges they dyd caſt ſtones with great vyolence and dyde moche hurt / the whiche at the beginnynge troubled greatly the englyſſhmen. But whan their caſt was paſt: & that they felt the ſharpe arrowes lyght amonge thē / they coude no lengar kepe their aray. with kynge Henry in his batayle / were many noble mē of armes: aſ well of Spayne as of Lyſbone of Aragon / and of Portyngale: who acquyted them right nobly. And gaue it nat vp ſo lyghtly for valiantly they fought / with ſpeares / iauelyns / archegayes / and ſwerdes. And on the wyng of kynge Henries batayle ther were certayne well moūted / who always kept the batell in good order / for if the bataile opened or brake array in any ſyde / than they were euer redy to helpe to bringe them agayne in to good order. So theſe engliſſhmen and gaſcons or they had the aduauntage they bought it derely / & wan it by noble chiualry / and great prowes of armes. And for to ſay trouthe the prince hym ſelfe was the chefe flour of chiualry of all the worlde and

had with him as than right noble and valyant k
                  ••
               ghtes and ſquyers. And a lytell beſyde the princes batayle was the kynge of Mallorques and his company / fightynge and acquitynge them ſelfe right valiantly. And alſo there was the lorde Martyn de la karr repreſentyng the kynge of Nauer / who dyde right well his de
               
                  •
               oyre / I can nat ſpeke of all them that dyd that day right nobly. But aboute the prince in his 
                  ••
               tayle there were dyuers good knyghtes / as well of Englande as of Gaſcoyne: as ſir Rycharde Pount Chardon ſir Thomas Spenſer / ſir Thomas Hollande ſir Nowell Lornyche / ſir Hugh and ſir Philyppe Courtnay / ſir Johan Comette / ſir Nycholas Bonde / ſir Thomas Comette and dyuers other: as the ſe
               
                  ••
               ſhall of 
                  •
               ayntonge / ſir Baudwyn of Fran
               
                  •
               yil / the ſeneſhall of Burdeaux / of Rochell / of Poictou / of Angoleme / of Rouerne / of Lym
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               y
                  •
                / and of Pyergourt: and ſir Loyes Marnell ſir Raymon Danduell / and dyuers other. Ther was none that fayned to fight valiantly and alſo they hadde good cauſe why: for there were of ſpaygniardes and of Caſtyle mo than a hundred thouſande men in harneſſe / ſo that by reaſon of their great nombre / it was longe or they coude be ouercom. Kyng Dāpeter was greatly chafed and moche deſyred to mete with the baſtarde his brother / and ſayd: where is yt horeſon that calleth hymſelfe kynge of Caſtell. And the ſame kynge Henry fought ryght valyantly where as he was / & helde his people togyder right marueylouſly / and ſayde. Aye good people ye haue crowned me kyng / therfore helpe and ayde me / to kepe the herytage that you haue gyue me. So that by theſe wordes & ſuche other as he ſpake that day / he cauſed many to be right hardy and valyaunt / wherby they abode on the felde: ſo that bycauſe of their honor they wolde nat flye fro the place.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy was diſconfyted: he taken / and kyng Henry ſaued hym ſelfe / and of the ſpanyardes that fledde / and of the nombre of the deed. And of the cyties that yelded them vp to kyng Dampeter: and of the aunſwere that he made to the prince. Cap. CC .xxxviii.
            
               THe batayle that was beſt fought and lengeſt helde togyder was the company of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / for there were many noble mē of armes who fought and helde toguyder to their powers: and ther was done many a noble feat of armes. And on the englyſſhe parte ſpecially there was ſir Johan Chandos / who that day dyde lyke a noble knight / and gouerned & coū
               ſayled that day the duke of Lancaſtre / in lyke maner as he dyde before the prince at the batell of Poycters / wherin he was greatly renomed and prayſed / the whiche was good reaſon: for a valyant man and a good knyght acquitynge hym ſelfe nobly among lordes & princes ought greatly to be recommended / for that day he toke no hede for takyng of any priſoner with his owne hādes / but alwayes fought and went forwarde: but there was taken by his cōpany vnder his baner dyuers good knightes and ſquyers of Aragon and of Fraūce. And ſpecially ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / ſir Arnolde Dandrehen / ſir Begue of Uillaynes / and mo than threſcore priſoners. So thus finally the batayle of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was diſconfyted / and all that were therin taken and ſlayne
                  •
               : aſ well they of Fraūce as of Aragon. Ther was ſlayne the Begue of Uillyers / and taken the lorde Antoy
                  •
               ge of Heynault / the lorde Breſuell / ſir Gawen of Bayllieull / ſir Johan of Bergenettes / ſir Alemant of ſaynt Uenāt / and dyuers other. Than drewe toguyder theſe baners: the baner of the duke of Lancaſtre / of ſir Johan Chandos / and of the two marſhalles / and the penon of ſaynt George. And went all toguyder on the batayle of kyng Henry / and cryed with a hygh voyce ſaynt George guyen. Than the ſpanyardes and their cōpany were ſore puta backe / ye Captall of Beufz and the lorde Clyſſon fought valyantly: and alſo ſir Euſtace Dambreticort / ſir Hughe Caurell / ſir Souldyche / ſir Johan Dureux / and other acquyted thē ſelfe that day right nobly. The prince ſhewed hymſelfe lyke a noble knight / and fought valyantly with his enemyes. On the otherſyde kyng Henry acquited hymſelfe right valiātly / and recouered and tourned agayn his people that day thre tymes / for after that the erle of Anxell and a thre thouſande horſmen with hym were departed fro the felde: the other began than greatly to be diſcō
               fyted / and were euer redy to flye after their cō
               pany / but than euer kynge Henry was before

theym / and ſayde. Fayre lordes what do you
                  •
                wherfore wyll ye thus forſake and betraye me / ſythe ye haue made me kynge and ſet the crowne on my heed: and putte the herytage of Caſtell into my handes. Retourne & helpe to kepe and defende me / and abyde with me: for by the grace of god or it be night all ſhalbe ours. So that theſe wordes or ſuche lyke / encoraged his people in ſuche wyſe / that it made theym to abyde lengar in the felde / for they durſt nat flye for ſhame: whan they ſawe their kynge & their lorde ſo valiantly fight / and ſpeke ſo amyably. So that there dyed mo than a thouſande and fyue hundred perſons / that might well haue ſaued themſelfe / and haue taken the tyme to their aduantage: and the loue that they had to their lorde and kynge hadde nat been.
            
               WHan the batayle of the marſhalles were paſſed throughe their ennemyes / and had diſconfyted ye gretteſt nombre of thē: ſo that the ſpanyardes coude nat ſuſteyn nor defende them any lengar / but began to flye away in great feare / without any good array or order toward the cyte of Nauaret / and ſo paſſe
                  •
                by the great ryuer. So that for any wordes y• kyng Henry coude ſay they wolde nat retorne / and whan the kyng ſawe the myſchefe and diſconfyture of his people / and that he ſawe no recouery. Than he called for his horſe and mounted theron / and put hymſelfe among them that fledde: but he toke nat the way to Nauaret for feare of encloſynge / but than toke another way 
                  •
               ſchewyng all paryls: for he knewe well that if he were taken he ſhulde dye wtout mercy. Thā the englyſſhmen and gaſcons lept a horſebake and began to chaſe the ſpanyardes / who ſledde away ſore diſconfyted to the great ryuer. And at the entre of the bridge of Nauaret / ther was a hydeous ſhedynge of blode and many a man ſlayne and drowned: for dyuers lepte into the water the whiche was depe and hydeous: they thought they had as lyue to be drowned as ſlayne. And in this chaſe amonge other / ther were two valyant knightes of Spayne / beryng on them the abyte of relygion. The one called the great priour of ſaynt James / and the other the great maiſter of Calatrane. They and their cō
               pany to ſaue themſelfe entred in to Nauaret / and they were ſo nere chaſed at their backe / by englyſſhmen and gaſcoyns / that they wan the bridge / ſo that ther was a great ſlaughter. And thenglyſſhmen entred into the cytie after their enemyes / who were entred into a ſtrong houſe of ſtone. Howbeit incontynent it was won byforce: and the knightꝭ taken and many of their men ſlayne / and all the cyte ouerron and pylled the whiche was greatly to thenglyſſhmens profyte. Alſo they wanne kyng Henries lodgynge wherin they founde gret richeſſe of veſſell and iowelles of golde and ſyluer / for the kyng was come thyder with great nobleneſſe: ſo y• whan they were diſconfyted / they had no layſer for to retourne thyder agayne / to ſaue that they had left there. So this was a hydeous and a terryble diſcōfyture / and ſpecially on the ryuer ſyde ther was many a man ſlayne. And it was ſayd as I herde after reported of ſome of them that were ther preſent / that one might haue ſene the water that ran by Nauaret to be of the coloure of reed / with the blode of men and horſe yt were ther ſlayne. This batayle was bytwene Nauer and Nauaret in Spayne. The yere of the incarnacyon of our lorde Jeſu Chriſt / a thouſande thre hundred threſcore and ſixe / the thirde day of Aprill / the whiche was on a ſaturday.
            
               AFter the diſconfyture of the batell of Nauaret / whiche was done by noone. The prince cauſed his baner to be reyſed vp a highe vpon a buſſhe on a lytell hyll / to the entent to drawe his people thyder: and ſo thyder drue all thoſe that came fro the chaſe. Thyder came the duke of Lācaſtre / ſir Johan Chandos / the lorde Clyſſon / the Captall of Beufz / the erle of Armynacke / the lorde Dalbret / and dyuers other barones. And had reyſed vp on high their baners to drawe their people thyder: and euer as they came they raynged them in the felde. Alſo ther was Loyes kynge of Mallorques / his baner before hym whervnto his company drue and a lytell there beſyde was ſir Marten de la Karr / with the baner of his lorde the kynge of Nauer. With dyuers other erles and barons / the whiche was a goodly thinge to regard and beholde. Than came thyder kynge Dampeter right ſore chafed / comynge from the chaſe on a great blacke courſer / his baner beten with the armes of Caſtell before hym. And aſſoone as he ſawe the princes baner / he alyghted & wente thyder. And whan the prince ſawe hym comynge / he went and mette hym and dyde him great honour. There the kyng Dampeter wolde haue kneled downe to haue thāked the prince / but the prince made great haſte to take hym by the hande / and wolde nat ſuffre him to knele. Thā
               
the kynge ſayd. Dere and fayre coſyn / I ought to gyue you many thākes and prayſes / for this 
                  〈◊〉
                iourney that I haue attayned this day / by your meanes. Than the prince ſayde: Sir yelde thankes to god and gyue him all ye prays for the vyctorie hath come by him all onely and nat by me. Than the lordes of the princes counſayle drewe toguyder and comuned of dyuers 
                  〈…〉
               ters. And ſo long the prince was ſtyll ther / 
                  〈◊〉
                all his people were retourned fro the chaſe 
                  •
               han he ordayned four knyghtes and four harauldes to go ſerche the feldes / to knowe what people were taken / and the nombre of thē that were ſlayne: And alſo to knowe the trouthe of kyng Henry / whome they called baſtarde whether he were a lyue or deed. And than the prince and his lordes went to the lodgynge of kyng Henry and of the ſpanyardes / where they were well and eaſely lodged: for it was great & large / and well replenyſſhed of all thynges neceſſary. So than they ſouped that nyght in great ioye: and after ſouper the knightes and haraudes that went to viſyte the felde retourned / and there they reported y• 
               ther were ſlayne of their enemyes of men of armes / a fyue hundred and threſcore and of comons aboute a ſeuyn thouſande and fyue hundred / beſyde theym y• were drowned: wherof the nombre was vnknowen. And of their owne company ther was no more ſlayne but four knightes / wherof two were gaſcoyns / the thirde an almayne / and the fourthe an englyſſhman: and of other comons nat paſt a .xl. but they ſhewed howe they coude nat ſynde kyng Henry / wherof kyng Dampeter was right ſory. So this ſaturday at nyght they reſted them ſelfe & made good chere / for they had well wherwith / for there they founde plenty of wyne and other vitayls: and ſo refreſſhed thē 
               ther all ye ſonday / the which was palme ſōday.
            
               THe ſonday in the monynge whan the prince was vp and redy apparelled. Than he yſſued out of his pauyllion / and than came to hym the duke of Lancaſtre his brother the erle of Armynacke / the lorde Dalbret / ſir Johan Chandos / the Captall of Beufz the lorde of Pomyers / ſir Gyrarde Dangle the kyng of Mallorques / and a great nombre of other knyghtes and ſquyers. And than̄e anone after came to the prince the kyng Dāpeter / to whōe the prince made great honoure and reuerence. Than the kynge Dampeter ſayde. Dere and fayre coſyn 
                  〈◊〉
                pray and requyre you y• ye wyll delyuer to me the falſe traytours of this coūtre as my baſtarde brother / Sanxes and ſuche other: and I ſhall cauſe them to leſe their heedes for they haue well deſerued it.
            THan the prince aduyſed hym well / and ſayd. Sir kynge: I requyre you in the name of loue and lygnage / that ye wyll graūt me a gyfte and a requeſt / ſayde. Good coſyn all that I haue is yours: therfore I am content what ſoeuer ye deſyre to graunt it. Than the prince ſayd: Sir I requyre you to gyue ꝑdon to all your people in your realme / ſuche as hath rebelled agaynſt you / by the whiche courteſſy / ye ſhall abyde in the better reſt and peace in your realme. Except Wyllyam Garilz / for of hym I am content ye take your pleaſure. The kyng Dampeter acorded to his deſyre / though it were agaynſt his wyll: but he durſt nat deny the prince / he was ſoo moche bounden to hym / and ſayde. Fayre coſyn I graunt your requeſt with a good hert. Thā the priſoners were ſent for: and the prince acorded them with the kynge their lord / and cauſed him to forgyue all his yuell wyll to his brother the erle of Sanxes / & to all other: ſo that they ſhulde make couenant and ſwere fealtie / homage / and ſeruice to hold of him truely for euer / and to become his men: and to knowledge him for their lorde and kynge for euer. This courteſy with dyuers other dyde the prince to the kynge / the whiche after was but ſmally rewarded / as ye ſhall here after in this hyſtorie.
            
               ANd alſo the prince ſhewed great curteſy to the barons of Spayne ſuche as were priſoners / for if kinge Dampeter had taken them in his diſpleaſure / they had all dyed without mercy. And than ſir Wyllyam Garylz was delyuered to the kyng / whome he hated ſo ſore / that he wolde take no taunſome for hym: but made his heed to be ſtriken of before his logynge. Than kyng Dampeter moūted on his horſe and the erle Sanxes his brother / and all thoſe that were become his men / and his marſhalles ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / and ſir Stephyn Goſenton and a fyue hundred men of armes: and they departed fro the princes hooſt / and rode to Burgus. And ſo came thyder the monday in the mornyng: and they of Burgus who were well infourmed how the iourney of Nauaret was atchyued / and howe that kynge

Henry was diſcōfyted / they thought nat to kepe the towne agaynſt Dampeter / but dyuerſe of the richeſt of the towne / and of the mooſt notableſt yſſued out of the towne and preſented ye kayes of the cyte to him / and receyued hym to their lorde. And ſo brought him and all his mē into ye cyte of Burgus with great ioye and ſolemnyte / & all the ſonday the prince abode ſtyll in the logynges that they had won. And on the monday after euynſong / he diſloged and went and lodged at Berguet / and ther taryed tyll it was wedniſday: and than they went all to the cytie of Burgus. And ther the prince entred in to the towne with great reuerēce and with him the duke of Lancaſtre / therle of Armynacke / & dyuers other great lordꝭ and their people made their logynges without the towne: for they coude nat all haue been lodged within at their eaſe. And whan the prince was a his lodgyng ther he gaue and rēdred iugementes of armes / and of all thynges therto aperteyninge & there kept felde & wage of batayle / wherfore it might well be ſayd that all Spayne was come y• day in his handes / and vnder his obeyſaunce.
            THe prince of Wales and kyng Dampeter helde their Eſter in y• towne of Burgus / and there taryed a thre wekes and more. And on Eſter day they of Sturges / of Tollet / of Lyſbone / of Cordowane / of Galyce / of Cyuyle / and of all the other marches and lymitacions of the realme of Caſtell came thyder and made homage to kynge Dampeter: and were gladde to ſe the prince and Damferant of Caſtres. & ſo ther was great chere made bytwene them / and whan kynge Dampeter had taryed there the terme that I haue ſhewed you & more and ſawe that ther were no mo that rebelled agaynſt him / but euery man to hym obeyſaunt. Than the prince ſayd to him: Sir kyng ye are nowe thāked be god peaſably kyng of this yor owne realme without any rebellyon or let / and ſir I and my cōpany tary here at a great charge and expence. Therfore we requyre you to ꝑuyde for money / to pay the wages to them that hath holpen to bring you agayne into your realme / and in fulfylling of your promyſe / wher vnto ye haue ſworne & ſealed. And ſir the ſhortlyer yt ye do it / the gretter thanke weſhall gyue you & the more ſhalbe yor profyte / for ye knowe well mē of warr muſt be payed to lyue with all or els they wyll take it wher as they may get it Than the kynge anſwered and ſayd: coſyn we wyll holde / kepe / and accomplyſſhe to our power / that we haue ſworne and ſealed vnto. But ſir as for this preſent tyme we haue no money / wherfore we wyll drawe vs to the marcheſſe of Ciuyle: and ther we wyll ſo procure for money that we wyll ſatiſfy euery party and ſir ye ſhall abyde ſtyll here in the vale of Olyfes / the whiche is a plentyfull countre: and ſir we ſhall returne agayne to you in as ſhort tyme as we cō
               uenyētly can or may / and at ye fartheſt by whitſontyd. This anſwere was right pleaſant to ye prince and to his coūſayle / and ſhortly after the kynge Dampeter departed fro the prince / and rode towarde Ciuyle / to thentent to get money to pay his men of warr as he had promyſed. & the prince went and loged in the vale of Olyfe / and all his lordes and people ſpred abrode in ye countre / to get vitayls more plentyfull / for thē and for their horſes. Ther thus they ſoiourned to a ſmall profyte to the countre / for the companyons coude nat abſteyne them ſelfe / fro robbyng and pillynge of the countre.
         
         
            ¶ Of the honour that was gyuen to the prince for the vyctorie of Spayne and howe kyng Henry came into frā
               ce to make warre on the princes land and of the anſwere that kyng Dāpeter ſent to the prince / & howe the prince departed out of Spayne and came into Fraunce. Cap. CC .xxxix.
            
               TIdinges ſpred abrode through France / Englande Almayne / & other countre is howe y• prince of Wales and his puyſſance had in batell diſconfyted kynge Henry / & taken ſlayne / and drowned of his men the day of the batayle / mo than. C. thouſande men: wherby the prince was gretly renomed. And his chiualry and highe entprice moche prayſed in all places that herde therof / & ſpecially in thempyre of Almayne / and in the realme of Englande. For the almayns / flemynges / and englyſſhmen ſayde: that the prince of Wales was chefe floure of all chiualry. & howe that ſuche a prince was well worthy to gouern all the worlde / ſythe by his prowes he had achyued ſuche thre highe entprices as he had done. Firſt the batayle of Creſſy in Poictou: the ſetonde

/ ten yere after at Poycters: and the .iii. nowe in Spayne before Nauaret. So in Englande in the cytie of London / the bourgeſſes there made great ſolemnyte and tryumphe for that vyctorie / as they aunciently were wont to do for kynges / whan they had ouercome their enemyes. And in the realme of Fraunce there were made lamentable ſorowes / for the loſſe of the good knightes of ye realme of Fraunce / the whiche were ſlayne at that iourney. And ſpecially there was made ſorowe for ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / and for ſir Arnolde Dandrehenne / who were taken priſoners: And dyuers other who were kept right courteſly / and ſome of thē put to fynance and raunſome / but nat ſir Bertram of Cleſquy ſo ſoone. For ſir Johan Chā
               dos who hadde the rule of hym / wolde nat delyuer him: And alſo ſir Bertrā made no great ſute therfore.
            
               ¶ Nowe let vs ſomwhat ſpeke of kyng Henry / what he dyde whan he departed fro the batayle. And than let vs retourne agayne to the prince and to kyng Dampeter of Caſtell.
               
                  KInge Henry as it is ſayd here after / ſaued hym ſelfe as well as he myght / and withdrewe fro his ennemyes. And ledde his wyfe and his chyldren as ſoone as he might in to the cytie of Ualence in Aragon / where as the kyng of Aragon was / who was his godfather and frende: and to hym recounted all his aduenture. And anone after the ſayd kyng Hē
                  ry was counſayled to paſſe further / and to god to ye duke of Aniou / who as than was at Mōtpellyer / and to ſhewe vnto hym all his aduenture. This aduyce was pleaſaunt to the kynge of Arragon / and conſented well that he ſhulde go thyder / bycauſe he was ennemy to the prince / who was his nere neighbour. So thus kinge Henry departed fro the kynge of Arragon / and lefte in the cytie of Ualence his wyfe & his chyldren / and rode ſo longe that he paſte Narbone / the whiche was the firſte cytie of the realme of Fraunce on that ſyde / and after that Beſeers and all that countrey. And ſo came to Mountpellyer / and there founde the duke of Aniowe who loued hym entierly / and greatly hated the englyſſhmen: though he made them as than no warre. And the duke whan he was well enfourmed of kynge Henryes buſyneſſe receyued hym ryght ioyouſly / and recounforted hym as well as he might: and ſo the kynge taryed there with hym a certayne ſpace. And than went to Auygnone to ſe pope Urbayne / who was as than departynge to go to Rome. And than̄e kynge Henry retourned agayne to Mountpellyer to the duke of Aniou / and had longe treaty toguyder. And it was ſhewed me by them that thought thē ſelfe to knowe many thynges / & after it was right well ſene apparēt Howe that this kynge Henry dyde gette of the duke of Aniowe a caſtell nere to Tholous / on the marcheſſe of the principalyte / called Rockemor. And there he aſſembled toguyder companyons and men of warr / as bretons: and ſuch other as were nat paſſed ouer into Spaygne with the prince: ſo that in the begynnyng there was a thre hūdred men of warre. Theſe tidynges were anone brought to my lady princeſſe / who as than was at Burdeux. Howe that kynge Henry purchaſed hym ayde and ſocoure on all ſydes / to thentent to make warr to the principalyte and to the duchy of Guyen / wher with ſhe was greatly abaſſhed. And bycauſe that he helde hymſelfe in the realme of Fraunce. She wrote letters and ſent meſſangers to the frenche kynge / deſyringe hym nat to conſente that the baſtarde of Spaygne ſhulde make her any maner of warre: ſeyng that her reſorte was to the court of Fraunce. Certifyeng him that moche yuell might enſue / and many inconuenyentes fall therby. Than the kynge condyſcended lightly to the princeſſe requeſt / and haſtely ſent meſſangers to the baſtard Henry / who was in the caſtell of Rockemore on ye fronters of Moū
                  taubon / and was begynnynge to make warre to the countre of Acquitayne / and to the princes lande. Commaundynge hym incontynent to auoyde oute of his realme / and to make no warre in the lande of his dere nephue the prince of Wales and of Acquitayne. And bycauſe to gyue enſample to his ſubgettꝭ / that they ſhulde nat be ſo hardy to take any part with the baſtarde Henry / he cauſed the yonge erle of Auſer to be putte in priſon / in the caſtell of Loure in Parys: bycauſe he was ſoo great and conuerſaunt with this kynge Henry the baſtarde. And as it was ſayd / he hadde promyſed him to ayde him with a great nombre of men of armes but thus the frenche kynge cauſed him to breke his voyage and purpoſe. So thus at the commaundement of the frenche kynge / kyng Henry obeyed / the whiche was good reaſone: but for all that yet he lefte nat his enterprice / but ſo he departed fro Rockemore / with a foure hundred bretons / and to hym was alyed ſuche breton

knightes and ſquyers as foloweth. Firſte ſir Arnolde of Lymoſyn / ſir Geſfray Rycons / ſir Pouns of Lakonette / Sylue
                     ••
                  re Buddes / Alyot de Calays / Alayne de ſaynt Poule: and theſemen of armes and bretons rode ouer the mountaynes / and entred into Bygoure in the principalyte / and there toke by ſcalynge a towne called Bannyers. And than̄e they fortifyed and repayred it well and ſtrongly / and than ouer rode the princes lande / and dyd great hurt and domage therin. Than̄e the princeſſe dyde ſend for ſir James Audeley / who was abydinge behynde the prince in Acquitayne: as chiefe ſoueraygne gouernoure to kepe the countrey. Howe be it this ſayd kynge Henry the baſtard and the bretons dyde great hurte and domage in the countrey / for dayly their power entreaſed more and more.
            
            
               ¶ Nowe lette vs retourne to the prince of Wales and to his company who was in the vale of Olyfes and there aboute / abydnge the comynge of kyng Dampeter of Caſtell.
               
                  THus whan the prince hadde ſoiourned in the vale of the Olyffes / vntyll the feaſt of ſaynt Johan the Baptyſt in ſomer / abydinge for the cō
                  myng of kynge Dampeter / who came nat nor coude nat here no certayne tidynges of hym / where with the prince was right ſoore troubled: and called all his counſayle togyder / to knowe what was beſt to do in that behalfe. Than the prince was counſayled to ſende two or thre knyghtes to the kynge / to demaunde of hym why he kepte nat his day as he hadde aſſigned. And on this meſſage was ſende / ſir Nowell Lornyche / ſir Rycharde of Pontchardon / and ſir Thomas Balaſter. And they rode ſo long by their iourneis that they came to the cytie of Cyuyle / where as they founde kyng Dampeter / and by ſemblant he right ioyouſly receyued them. Theſe knightes dyd their meſſage as they hadde in charge by their lorde the prince. Than the kynge anſwered them in excuſyng of himſelfe and ſayd. Sirs: certaynly it greatly diſpleaſeth vs / that we cannat kepe the promyſe that we haue made with oure coſyne the prince / the whiche we haue often tymes ſhewed vnto our people here in theſe parties. But our people excuſeth themſelfe / and ſay the how they canne make no ſom̄e of money / as longe as the companyons be in the countrey / for they haue thre or foure tymes robbed oure treaſourers / who were commynge to oure coſyne the prince / with oure money. Therfore we requyre you to ſhewe our coſyne fro vs / that we requyre hym that he wyll withdrawe and putte out of this oure realme theſe yuell people of the companyons / and that he do leaue ther ſome of his owne knyghtes / to whōe in the name of hym we wyll paye and delyuer ſuch ſomes of money as he deſyreth of vs / and as we are bounde to paye hym. This was all the aunſwere that theſe knyghtes coulde haue of hym at that tyme. And ſo they departed and wente agayne to the price their lorde: and than recounted to hym and to his counſayle all that they hadde herde and ſene / with the whiche anſwere the prince was moche more dyſpleaſed / than he was before. For he ſawe well how that kynge Dampeter fayled of his promyſe / and varyed fro reaſon. The ſame ſeaſon y• the prince thus abode in the vale of Olyffes / where as he hadde bene more than the ſpace of four monethes / nighe all the ſomer. The kyng of Mallorques fell ſicke ſore diſeaſed / and lay ſycke in his bedde. Than there was putte to raunſome ſir Arnolde Dandrenhen / the Begue of Uyllaynes / and dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers of Fraunce and of Bretaygne / who were taken at Nauaret. And exchanged for ſir Thomas Pheltone / and for ſir Rycharde Centon / and for ſir Hughe Haſtynges / and dyuers other. But ſir Bertram of Cleſquy abode ſtyll as priſonere with the prince / for the englyſſhemen counſayled the prince / and ſayde: that yf he delyuered ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / he wolde make hym greatter warre than euer he had done before: with the helpynge of the baſtarde Henry / who as than was in Bygour / and had taken̄e the towne of Bānyers / and made great warr in that quarter. Therfore ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was nat delyuered at that tyme.
               
                  WHan that the prince of Wales herde the excuſacyons of kynge Dā
                  peter / than he was moche more diſpleaſed than̄e he was before / and demaunded counſayle in that behalfe of his people / who deſyredde to retourne home / for they bare with full great trouble the heate / and the infectyue ayre of the countrey of Spaygne. And alſo the prince hymſelfe was nat verry well at caſe / and therfore his people counſayled hym to retourne agayne. Sayeng

howe kynge Damepeter hath greatly faylled hym to his blame and great diſhonour. Than it was ſhewed openly that euery man ſhulde retourne. And whan the prince ſhulde remoue / he ſent to ye kyng of Mallorques / ſir Hugh Cortnay and ſir Johan Chandos: ſhewynge hym howe the prince wolde depart out of Spayne. deſiryng hym to take aduyce if he wolde deꝑte or nat / for the prince wolde be lothe to leue hym behynde. Than the kyng of Mallorques ſaid / ſirs I thanke greatly the prince / but as at this preſent tyme I can nat ryde nor remoue tyll it pleaſe god. Than the knightes ſayde: ſir wyll you that my lorde the prince ſhall leue with you a certayne nombre of men to wayte and cōduct you / whan ye be able to ryde. Nay ſurely ſir ꝙ the kyng it ſhall nat nede / for I knowe nat how long it wyll be or I be able to ryde. And ſo they departed and retourned to the prince / ſhe wyng him what they had done. Well ſayd the prince / as it pleaſe god and hym ſo be it. Than the price departed and all his company / and went to a cytie called Madigray / and ther he reſted in y• vale called Foyrie / bytwene Aragon & Spayne. And ther he taryed a moneth: for ther were certayne paſſages cloſed agaynſt him in ye marcheſſe of Aragon. And it was ſayd in the hooſt that the kynge of Nauarr / who was newly retourned out of priſon / was agreed with the baſtarde of Spayne / and with the kynge of Aragon to let the princes paſſage: but yet he dyde nothyng as it apered after. Howe be it the prince was in doute of hym / bycauſe he was in his owne countrey / and came nat to hym. In this meane ſeaſon ther were ſent to a certayn place / bytwene Aragon and Spayne / certayne perſons of bothe parties / and ſo had great comunyng togyder dyuers dayes. Finally they ſo agreed that the kyng of Aragon ſhuld opyn his countre / and ſuffre the princes people to returne and paſſe peaſably without any lette of any of the coūtre / payeng courteſly for yt they toke.
               
                  THan came to the prince ye kyng of Nauer and ſir Martyn de la Kar whan they ſaw the mater go in ſuche wyſe bytwene the kynge of Aragon and the prince / and they made to the prince all the honoure that they coude deuyſe / and offred paſſage for hym and for his dere brother the duke of Lancaſtre / and for dyuers other knyghtes of Englande and of Gaſcoyne / but in any wyſe he wolde that the companyons ſhulde take their way by ſome other paſſage / and nat through Naurr. Than the prince and his lordes / whan they ſawe that the way through Nauarr was more mete and neceſſary for thē than through Aragon / thought nat to refuſe the kynge of Nauars offre / but ſo thanked hym greatly. Thus the prince paſſed through the realme of Naurr / and the kynge and ſir Martyn de la Karr conueyed him / tyll they came to the paſſage of Rounſeualx / and ſo from thens they paſſed by their iourneyes tyll they came to the cytie of Bayone / wher he was receyued with great ioye. And there the prince refreſſhed hym four dayes / and than departed and rode to Burdeaulx. Where he was alſo receyued with great ſolemnyte: and my lady the princeſſe mette hym with her yonge ſonne Edward / who as than was of the age of thre yerꝭ. Than deꝑted the lordes and men of warre one from another / and the lordes of Gaſcoyne went home to their owne houſes / and the companyons came alſo into the pricipalyte: abyding for their wages. The prince was moche boūde to them / and promyſed to pay them to his power / as ſoone as he had money / though kyng Dampeter kepte nat his promyſe with hym. yet he ſaid they ſhulde nat beare the loſſe therof / ſythe they had ſo well ſerued hym. And kynge Henry the baſtarde who was in the garyſon of Bā
                  nyers in Bygoure. Than he departed thens with ſuche men of warre as he had / and wente into Aragon to the kynge ther who loued hym entierly / and ioyouſly receyued him. And ther taryed all the wynter / and there made a newe alyaunce bytwene hym and the kynge of Aragon / and promyſed to make warr agaynſt kynge Dāpeter / and the bretons that were in their company. As ſir Arnolde Lymoſyne / ſir Geffray Rycouns / and ſir yons de Lankane
                     •
                   / rode to the paſſages of Spaygne / and made warr for kynge Henry.
            
            
               ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of the delyueraunce of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy.
               AFter that the prince of wales was returned into Acquitayne / and his brother ye duke of Lancaſtre into Englande / & euery lorde into his owne. Sir Bertrā of Cleſquy was ſtyll priſoner with the prince / and with ſir Johan Chandos / and coude nat come to his raun ſome nor fynaunce / the whiche was ſore diſpleſaunt to kyng Henry / if he might haue mended it. And ſo it fortuned after as I was enformed / that on a day the prince called to hym ſir Bertram

of Cleſquy and demaunded of hym how he dyde / he anſwered and ſayd. Sir it was neuer better with me. It is reaſon that it ſhulde ſo be / for I am in priſon with the mooſt renowmed knight of the worlde▪ With whome is that ſayd the prince / Sir ꝙ he that is with ſir Johan Chandos. And ſir it is ſayd in the realme of Fraūce and in other places / that ye feare me ſo moche / that ye dare nat let me out of priſon / the whiche to me is full great honour. The price who vnderſtode well the wordes of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / and parceyued well howe his owne counſayle wolde in no wyſe that he ſhuld delyuer him / vnto the tyme that kyng Dampeter had payed hym all ſuche ſōmes / as he was bounde to do. Than he ſaid to ſir Bertram / ſir than ye thinke that we kepe you for feare of yo
                     •
                   chiualry. Nay thynke it nat / for I ſwere by ſait George it is nat ſo / therfore pay for your raunſome / a hundred thouſande frākes / and ye ſhall be delyuered. Sir Bertram who deſyred gretly to be delyuered / and herde on what poynt he might depart / toke the prince with that worde / and ſayd. Sir in ye name of god ſo be it I wyll pay no laſſe. And whā the prince herde him ſay ſo / he wolde than gladly haue repēted hym ſelfe: and alſo ſome of his counſayle / came to him and ſayd. Sir ye haue nat done well ſo lightly to put him to his raunſome. And ſo they wolde gladly haue cauſed the prince to haue reuoked that couenaunt / but the prince who was a true and a noble knight ſayd. Sythe that we haue agreed therto / we wyll nat breke our promyſe. It ſhulde be to vs a great rebuke / ſhame and reproche / if we ſhulde nat put hym to raunſome / ſeyng y• he is content to pay ſuche a great ſom̄e as a hundred thouſande frākes. So after this acorde / ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was right beſy and ſtudyed dayly howe to get this ſom̄e for his raūſome. And dyde ſo moche with the ayde of the frenche kynge and of his frendes / and of the duke of Aniou / who loued him entierly / yt he payed in leſſe than a moneth a hundred thouſande frankes. And ſo he departed and went to ſerue the duke of Aniou / with two thouſande fightyng men in Prouens / where as the duke lay at ſiege before the towne of Tarraſton / the whiche helde of the kyng of Naples.
               IN the ſame ſeaſon there was a maryage concluded by twene the lorde Lyon duke of Clarence and erle of Ulſeter / ſon̄e to the kynge of Englande. And the doughter to the lorde Galyanche lorde of Myllan / the whiche yonge lady was nere to therle of Sauoy: and doughter to the lady Blanch his ſuſter. And thus the duke of Clarēce acōpanyed with noble knightꝭ & ſquyers of England cāe into Frāce: wher as the king / the duke of Burgon / the duke of Burbone / & the lorde of Coucy / receyued hym with great ioye in Parys. And ſo he paſſed through ye realme of France & came into Sauoy / wher as the gentyll erle receyued him right honorably at Chambrey / and there he was thre dayes greatly feeſted with ladyes and damoſels / and than he deꝑted / and therle of Sauoy brought him to Myllan. and ther the duke wedded his nece / doughter to the lorde of Myllan / ye monday next after the feeſt of the holy Trinyte: the yere of our lorde / a thouſande. CCC .lxviii.
            
         
         
            ¶ Nowe let vs retourne to the buſyneſſe of Fraunce. Cap. CC .xl.
            
               YE haue well herde here before recounted / the maner of ye vyage that the prince of Wales had made into Spayne / and howe he deꝑted thens nat well cōtent with the kyng Dampeter / and howe he returned into Acquitayne. So that whan he was thus returned all maner of men of warr folowed him bycauſe they thought nat to abyde behynde in Spayne / bycauſe kyng Dampeter payed nat thē their wages as he had promyſed. And thus whan they were all returned / the price had nat paymēt for them / ſo redy as he wolde haue had for his vyage into Spayne had ſo ſore myniſſhed and waſted his richeſſe / that it was marueyle to thynke theron. And ſo ſoiourned theſe companyons vpon the countre of Acquitayne who coude nat abſteyn thēſelfe fro robbyng of the coūtre / for they were well .vi. M. fightyng men. And at the laſt the prince deſyred thē to departe his realme / for the countre was nat able to ſuſteyn thē no lēger. The capitayns of theſe cōpanyons were all englyſſhmen and gaſcōs. As ſir Robert Briquet / Johan Treuell / Robert Ceny / ſir Gaylarde Uyger / the Bourge of Bertuell / the Bourge Camus / the Bourge of Leſpare / Nandon of Bergerant / Bernard de la Sale: and many other whiche wolde nat diſpleaſe the prince. But yſſued out of the principalyte as ſhortely as they might / and entred into the realme of Fraūce / the whiche they called their chambre and paſſed ye ryuer of Loyre / 

and ſo came in to Champayne and in to the byſſhopriche of Raynes: and alwayes their nombre encreaſed. And to aduēture them ſelfe / they ſerched all aboute the realme of Fraunce / and dyde many yuell trybulacions and vilayne dedes: wherof the complayntes came dayly to the frenche kynge and to his counſayle. Howe beit they coude fynde no remedy / for they durſt nat fight with them: and the people all about marueyled greatly that the prince of Wales wolde ſende theym thyder to make warre. Than the frenche kynge ſente for the lorde Clyſſon / and made him great capitayne agaynſt thoſe yuell companyons / bycauſe he was a good knyght and a hardy: and the kynge had hym in great loue and fauoure. And in the ſame ſeaſon there was a maryage made bytwene the lorde Dalbret / and the lady Iſabell of Bourbone / of the whiche the prince was nothynge gladde: for he had rather that the lorde Dalbret had ben maryed in ſome other place. For the whiche cauſe the price ſpake great wordes agaynſt hym / but the greatteſt of his counſayle / aſwell knightes as ſquyers / excuſed hym all that they might. Sayeng to ye prince howe that euery man wyll be gladde to auaūce himſelfe as nere as he can. and that a gode knight ought nat to be blamed though he purchaſe his owne honour and profyte / ſo that he leaue nat therby to ſerue his price or maiſter / in that he is bounde to do. So by theſe wordes or ſuche ſemblable / the price was ſomwhat apeaſed: howe be it what ſo euer ſemblant he made he was nat very well content / for he thought verily that the ſame maryage ſhulde be cauſe of with drawynge of loue fro hym / and fro theym that toke his parte / the whiche was of trouthe / as ye ſhall here afterwarde in this hyſtorie.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the barons of gaſcone complayned to the frēche kyng of the price of wales / and how kyng Henry retourned into Spayne / and of the alyaunces that kynge Dampeter made: and of the coūſayle that ſir Bertram of Cleſquy gaue to kyng Henry / and howe kynge Dampeter was diſconfyted. Cap. CC .xli.
            
               IN the ſame ſeaſon that theſe companyons turmented thus the realme of Fraū
               ce / the prince was counſayled by ſome of his couuſayle to reyaſe a fowage through out all Acquitayne and ſpecially the byſſhoppe of Bades / for the ſtate of the price and princeſſe was ſo great / that in all chriſtendome was none lyke. So to this counſayle for reyſinge of this fowage / were called all the noble barownes of Gaſcoyne / of Poyctou / of Xayntō / and of dyuers other cyties and good townes in Acquitayne. And at Nyorte where this parlyament was holden: there it was ſhewed ſpecially and generally by the byſſhoppe of Bades chauncellour of Acquitayne / in the preſens of the prince: howe and in what maner this fowage ſhulde be reyſed. Declarin ge howe the prince was nat in mynde yt it ſhulde endure any lengar than fyue yeres / to ronne throughout his countrey. And that the reyſing therof / was for thyntent to pay ſuche money as he ought by reaſon of his iourney into Spayne. To the whiche ordynaunce were well agreed the poyctous: and they of Xaynton / Lymoſyn / Rouergne / and of Rochell. On the condycion that the prince wolde kepe the cours of his coyne ſtable .vii. yere / but dyuers of other marcheſſe of Gaſcoyne refuſed this purpoſe. As ye erle of Armynacke / the lorde Dalbret his neuewe / the erle of Gomynges / the Uycount of Carmayne / the lorde de la Barde / the lorde of Cande / the lorde of Pyncornet / and dyuers other great barownes. Sayenge howe that in tyme paſt whan they obeyed to the frenche kynge / they were nat than greued nor oppreſſed wt any ſubſydes or inpoſicyons / and no more they ſayde they wolde as than / as long as they coude defende it. Sayeng howe their landes and ſegnyories were fre and excepte fro all dettes / and that the prince haddeſworne ſo to kepe and maynteyne them. Howe be it to departe peaſably fro this parlyament / they aunſwered that they wolde take better aduyſe / and ſo retourne agayne bothe prelates / byſſhoppes / abbottes / barownes / and knyghtes. And the prince nor his coūſayle coude haue as than none other anſwere. Thus they departed from the towne of Nyort / but it was commaunded theym by the prince / that they ſhulde returne agayne thyder at a day aſſigned.
            
               
THus the barownes and lordes of Gaſcoyne retourned into their countrees / & agreed fermely toguyder / that they wolde nat retourne agayne to ye prince / nor ſuffre the fowage to rynne in the landes: thaūe they made warre agaynſt the prince therfore. Thus the countrey beganne to rebell agaynſt the prince / and the lorde of Armynacke the lorde Dalbret / the lorde of Gomegynes / the erle of Pyncornet and dyuers other prelates / barownes / knyghtes / and ſquyers of Gaſcoyne went into Fraū
               ce and made great complayntes in the frenche kynges chambre (The kyng and his peres beynge preſent) of the greffes that the prince of Wales wolde do to them ſayeng howe their 
                  •
               e ſorte ought to be to the frenche kynge / and to drawe to him / as to their ſouerayne lorde. And the kynge who wolde nat breke the peace / bytwene hym and the kynge of Englande began to dyſſemble and ſayd. Sirs ſurely the inryſdictyon of our herytage / and of the crowne of Fraunce we wyll alwayes kepe and augment / but we haue ſworne to dyuerſe artycles in the peace / of the whiche I remembre nat all. Therfore we ſhall viſyte and beholde the tenoure of the letters / and in as moche as we may do we ſhall ayde you / and ſhall be gladde to agre you with the prince our dere nephue / for parauenture he is nat well counſayled to put you or yo
                  •
                ſubgettes fro their fredoms / and frauncheſſes. So with the anſwere that the kynge made thē at that tyme they were content / and ſoo abode ſtyll at Parys with the kyng / in purpoſe nat to retourne agayne into their owne countrees / wt the whiche the prince was nothynge well content: but alwayes he ſtyll perſeuered in ye purpoſe of reyſinge of this fowage. Sir Johan Chandos who was one of the greatteſt of his counſayle / was contrary to this opinyon / and wolde gladly that the prince wolde haue left it: but whan he ſawe that ye prince wolde nat leue his purpoſe / to thyntent that he wolde bere no blame nor reproche in the mater. He tooke his leaue of the price and made his excuſe to go in to Normandy to viſyte the lande of ſaynt Sauyoure the Uycount / wherof he was lorde / for he had nat been there in thre yeres before. The prince gaue hym leaue: and ſo he departed out of Poyctou and went to Conſtantyne / and taryed in the towne of ſaynt Sauyour more thā halfe a yere. And alwayes the prince proceded on the reyſynge of this fowage / the whiche yf he hadde brought about / ſhulde haue been well worthe euery yere a .xii. hundred thouſand frā
               kes. Euery fyre to haue payed yerely a franke / the riche to haue borne out the poore.
            
               ¶ Nowe let vs retourne to kyng Henry / who was all this ſeaſon in the realme of Arragon / and lette vs ſhewe howe he perſeuered after.
               
                  THe mooſt parte of the ſtate of the prince & of his beſyneſſe / was well knowen with the kynges there about. As with kyng Peter of Aragon / & with kyng Henry: for they layed great / wayte to knowe it. They vnderſtode well howe the barownes of Gaſcon were gone to Parys to the frenche kynge / and in a maner began to rebell agaynſt the prince / with the whiche they were nothyng diſpleaſed. And ſpecially kynge Henry: for than he thought to attayne agayne to conquere the realme of Caſtell / the whiche he hadde loſt by the meanes of the prince. And ſo than kyng Henry toke leaue of the kynge of Arragon / and departed fro the towne of Ualence the great: and out of Arragon with hym ther went the Uycount of Roquebertyn / and the Uycount of Roodes / and they were thre thouſande horſemen / and ſixe thouſande a fote / with a certayne genowayes that the hadde in wages. And ſo they rode towarde Spaygne tyll they came to the Cytie of Burgus / the whiche incontynent was opyned and rendered vp to kynge Henry. And they receyued him as their lorde / and fro thens he wēt to the Uale Olyfe: for kynge Henry vnderſtode that the kyng of Mallorques was ſtyll ther And whan they of the towne of Uale Olyfe vnderſtoode that they of Burgus had yelded vp their towne to kyng Henry / than they thought natte to kepe their towne agaynſt hym / and ſo yelded them to him / and receyued him as their lorde. Aſſone as the kyng was entred into the towne / he demaunded where the kyng of Mallorques was / ye whiche was ſhewed hym. Thā the kynge entred into the chambre wher he lay nat fully hole of his dyſeaſe: than̄e the kynge went to hym / and ſayde. Sir kyng of Mallorques ye haue ben our enemy / and with a great army ye haue enuaded this our realme of Caſtell. Wherfore we ſet our handes on you / therfore yelde your ſelfe as our priſoner or els ye ar but deed. And whan the kynge of Mallorques ſawe hym ſelfe in that caſe / and that no defence wolde helpe hym / he ſayde. Sir kynge truely I am but deed yf that it pleaſe you / and ſir gladly I yelde me vnto you but to none other.

Therfore ſir if your mynde be to put me into any other mannes handes ſhewe it me / for I had rather dye than to be put in to the handes of my v
                     •
                  ter enemy the kyng of Aragon. Sir ſaid the kyng feare you nat I wyll do you but right: yf I dyde otherwyſe I were to blame. ye ſhall be my priſoner: outher to acquyte you / or to raun ſome you at my pleaſure. Thus was the kyng o
                     •
                   Mallorques taken by ky
                     •
                  g Henry and cauſed hym to be well kept ther and than he rode further to ye cyte of Lyon in Spayne / the whi
                  
                     •
                  he incontynent was opened agaynſt hym.
               ¶ Whan the towne and cite of Lyon in Spaygne was thus rendred to kynge Henry / all the countre and marcheſſe of Galyce / tourned and yelded them to kynge Henry / and to hym came many great lordes and barownes / who before had done homage to kynge Dāpeter / for what so euer ſemblant they had made to hym before the prince / yet they loued hym nat. Bycauſe of olde tyme he had ben to them ſo cruell / and they were euer in feare / that he wolde tourne to his 
                     ••
                  ueltie agayne. And kyng Henry was euer amyable and meke to them promiſyng to do mo the for them: therfore they all drue to him. Sir Bertram of Cleſquy was nat as than in his cō
                  pany but he was comyng with a two thouſand fightyng men / and was deꝑted fro the duke of Amou who had achyued his war in Prouēs / & broken vp his ſege before Taraſton by cōpoſicion I can nat ſhewe how. and with ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy ther were dyuers knightes & ſquye
                     •
                  s of Fraunce deſyring to exercyſe the feate of a
                     •
                  mes. And ſo they came towardes kyng Hen
                  
                     •
                  y / who as than had layd ſi
                     •
                  ge before Tollet.
               
                  
                     ••
                  dynges came to kyng Dāpeter howe the countre tourned to his baſtarde brother ther as he lay in the marcheſſe of Cyuyll & Portyngale / wher he was but ſmally beloued. And whan he herde therof he was ſore diſpleaſed agaynſt his brother / and agaynſt thē of Caſtell ▪ bycauſe they forſoke him and ſware a gret othe▪ that he wolde take on them ſo cruell a vengeaunce / that it ſhulde be enſample to all other Than he ſent out his commaundement / to ſuche as he truſted wolde ayd and ſerue him / but he ſent to ſome ſuche as 
                     •
                  āe nat to him / but turned to kyng Henry / and ſent their homages to hym. And whan this kyng Dāpeter ſawe that his men began to fayle him. Than he began to dout and toke counſayle of Domferant of Ca
                  
                     •
                  tces who neuer fayled hym / and he gaue hym counſayle that he ſhulde get aſmoche people to gyder as he might / aſwell out of Granade / as out of other places. And ſo in all haſt to ryde agaynſt his brother the baſtarde / or he dyde conquere any further in the countre. Than kynge Dampeter ſent incōtynent to the kyng of Portyngale / who was his coſyn germayne: alſo he ſent to the kyng of Granade and of Bell Maryn / and to the kyng of Trameſames / & made alyaunces with thē thre: and they ſent hym mo than .xx. thouſande ſarazy
                     •
                  s to helpe hym in his warr. So thus kynge Dampeter dyde ſomoche that what of Chriſtenmen and of ſarazyus / he had to the nombre of .xl. thouſand men in the marcheſſe of Cyuyll. And in the meane ſeaſon whyle that kynge Henry lay atſiege / ſir Bertram of Cleſquy came to him with .ii. M. fighting men / and he was receyued with great ioye / for all the hoſt was gretly reioyſed of his comyng.
               BIng Dampeter who had made his aſſē
                  ble in the marcheſſe of Cyuyll / and there about: deſyrynge greatly to fight with the baſtarde his brother. Departed fro Ciuyll & toke his tourney towardes Tollet to reyſe the ſiege ther / the whiche was fro him a .vii. dayes iourney. Tidynges came to kyng Henry how that his brother Dampeter aproched / and in his cō
                  pany mo than .xl. thouſande men of one and other. And thervpon he toke counſell / to the whiche counſayle was called the knyghtes of Fraū
                  ce and of Aragone. And ſpecially ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / by whome the kyng was mooſt ruled / and his counſayle was that kynge Henry ſhulde auaunce forthe to encountre his brother Dāpeter: and in what cōdycion ſo euer that he foūde hym in / incōtynent to ſet on & fyght with hym. Sayeng to the kyng. Sir I here ſay he cometh with a great puyſſaunce / and ſir yf he haue great layſer in his comyng it may tourne you and vs all to great dyſpleaſure: and therfore ſir if we go haſtely on him or he beware / parauenture we ſhall fynde hym and his company in that caſe and ſo diſpur
                     •
                  eyed / that we ſhal haue hym at aduauntage and ſo we ſhall diſcō
                  fyte hym / I dout nat. The counſayle of 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   Bertram of Cleſquy was well herd and taken / and ſo kyng Henry in an euenyng departed fro the hooſt with a certayne of the beſt knyghtes and fightyng men that he coude choſe out in all his hooſt. And left the reſydue of his company in ye kepyng and gouernyng of his brother therle of Anxell. And ſo rode forthe & he had ſeuynſpyes

euer comynge and goynge / who euer brought hym worde what his brother Dampeter dyde / and all his hooſt. And kyng Dampeter knewe nothynge howe his brother came ſo haſtely towarde hym / wherfore he and his cōpany rode the more at large wtout any good order. And ſo in a mornyng kyng Henry and his people met and encountred his brother kyng Dampeter / who had lyen that night in a caſtell therby called Nantueyle / and was there well receyued & had good 
                     •
                  here. And was departed thens the ſame mornyng / wenyng full lytell to haue ben fought with all as that day: and ſo ſodenly on hym with baners diſplayed there came his brother kyng Hēry / and his brother Sanxes and ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / by whome the kynge and all his hoſt was greatly ruled. And alſo wt them ther was the begue of Uillaynes / the lorde of Roquebertyn / the vycoūt of Rodaix / and their cōpanyes: they were a ſixe thouſand fightyng men / and they rode all cloſe togyder / and ſo ran and encountred their enemyes: cryenge Caſtell for kynge Henry and our lady of Cleſquy / and ſo they diſcōfyted and put a backe the firſt brunt. Ther were many ſlayne and caſt to the erthe / ther were none taken to raunſome / y• whiche was apoynted ſo to be / by ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / bycauſe of the great nōbre of ſarazyns that was ther. And whan kyng Dāpeter who was in the myddes of y• preaſe among his owne people / herde howe his men were aſſayled & put abacke by his brother the baſtard Hē
                  ry and by the frenchmen / he had great maruell therof / & ſawe well howe he was betrayed & viſceyued / and in aduentur to leſe all / for his men were ſoreſparcled abrode Howbeit like a gode hardy knight and of good cōforte reſted on the felde / and cauſed his banerr to be vnrolled / to drawe togyder his people. And ſente worde to them that were behy
                     •
                  de to haſt them forwarde bycauſe he was fightynge with his enemyes / wherby euery man auaūced forward to the baner. So ther was a maueylous great & a ferſe batayle / and many a man ſlayne of kyng Dā
                  peters parte / for kyng Henry and ſir Bertram of Cleſquy ſought their enemyes with ſo coragyous and ferſe wyll / that none coulde endure agaynſt them. Howe beit that was nat lightly done / for kyng Dampeterand his cōpany wer ſixe agaynſt one / but they were taken ſo ſodenly that they were diſcōfyted / in ſuche wyſe that it was marueyle to beholde.
               TThis batayle of the ſpanyardes one agaynſt another / and of theſe two kynges and their alyes was nere to Nantueyle / the whiche was that day right ferſe & cruell. Ther were many good knightes of kynge Henryes parte: as ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / ſir Geffray Rycons / ſir Arnolde Lymoſyn / ſir Gawen of Baylleule / the begue of Uillaynes / Alayne of ſaynt Poule / Alyot of Calays / and dyuers other. And alſo of ye realme of Aragon ther was the vycount of Roquebertyn / the vycoūt of Rodaix / and dyuers other good knightꝭ and ſquiers whome I can nat all name. And there they dyde many noble dedes of armes / the whiche was nedefull to theym ſo to do: for they founde ferſe and ſtronge people agaynſt them. As ſarazyus / iewes / & portyngales: the iewes fledde and turned their backes and fought no ſtroke / but they of Granade and of Belmaryn fought ferſely with their bowes and archegayes / and dyd that day many a noble dede of armes. And kyng Dampeter was a hardy knight & fought valyantly with a great axe / and gaue therwith many a great ſtroke / ſo that none durſt aproch nere to hym. And the baner of kyng Henry his brother mette and recoūtred agaynſt his / eche of them cryenge their cryes. Than the batayle of kyng Dampeter began to opyn: than Domferant of Caſtres / who was chefe counſay lour about kynge Dampeter: ſawe and perceyued well howe his people began to leſe and to be diſconfyted: ſayd to the kyng. Sir / ſaue yor ſelfe and withdrawe you in to the caſtell of Nauntueyle / ſir if ye be ther ye be in ſauegarde ▪ for if ye be taken with your enemyes ye are but deed without mercy. The kyng Dampeter beleued his counſayle and deꝑted aſſoone as he might and went to warde Nantueyle / and ſo came thider in ſuche tyme that he founde the gatꝭ opyn / and ſo he entred all onely with .xii. ꝑſons. And in the meane ſeaſon the other of his company fought ſtyll in the feldes / as they were ſparcled abrode here and ther. The ſarazyns defended them ſelfe aſ well as they might / for they knewe nat the countrey: therfore to flye they thought was for them none auayle. Than tidyngꝭ cam to kyng Henry and to ſir Bertram of Cleſquy howe that kyng Dampeter was fledde & withdrawen into the caſtell of Nantueyle / and how that the begue of Uillaynes had purſued hym thyder / and in to his caſtell there was but one paſſage / before the whiche paſſage the Begue of Uiyllaynes had pyght his ſtanderd. Of the whiche tidynges king Henry and ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was right ioyouſe: and ſo drewe to that parte / in ſleyng and beatyng downe their

ennemyes lyke beeſtes / ſo that they were wery of kyllyng. This chaſe endured more than .iii. houres: ſo that day ther was moo than .xiiii. thouſand ſlayne and ſore hurt. Ther were but fewe that were ſaued / except ſuche as knewe y• palſages of the countre. This batayle was beſyde Nantueyle in Spayne / the .xiii. day of y• moneth of Auguſt. The yere of our lorde god / a thouſande thre hundred / threſcore and eight.
            
         
         
            ¶ Howe kyng Dampeter was taken and put to dethe / and ſo kyng Henry was agayne kyng of Caſtell / and of the tenour of certayne letters touchī
               ge the frenche kyng and the kynge of Englande / and of the counſayle that was gyuen to kyng Charles of Frā
               ce / to make warre to the kyng of Englande. Cap. CC .xlii.
            
               AFter this diſconfyture / and yt kynge Henry had obteyned the victory / than they layed ſege rounde about the caſtell of Nātueyle / wher in was kyng Dāpeter. Than kynge Hēry ſent for the reſydue of his company to Tollet / wher as they lay at ſiege. Of the which tidynges therle of Auxell and therle of Sāres were right ioyfull. This caſtell of Nantueyle was right ſtronge & able to haue hold agaynſt them all a long ſpace / if it had ben purueyed of vitayle / and other thynges neceſſary: but ther was nat in the caſtell ſcant to ſerue four dayes / wherof kyng Dāpeter and his company were ſore abaſſhed / for they were ſo ſtraitly watched day and night / that a byrde coud nat come out of the caſtell without ſpyeng. Than kyng Dā
               peter ſeyng hymſelfe thus be ſet rounde about with his enemyes / and knewe no way of peace or concorde / was in great ymaginacyon. So all peryls conſydred / and for defaut of vitayle: he was counſayled to depart priuely at ye hour of mydnight / and .xii. perſons with hym: and ſo to aduentur on the grace of god / and gydes were apoynted to bring hym in ſauegard. And ſo aboute the tyme of mydnight next after / the kynge Dampeter and Domferant of Caſters / and .xii. other perſons with them departed out of the caſtell. The night was very darke / & the begue of Uillayns kept watch without y• ſame night / and a. CCC. with hym. And as kynge Dāpeter and his company yſſued out of the caſtell / and went downe a hye way as priuely as they coude deuyce. the begue of Uillayns who was euer in dout leſt they ſhulde ſcape / the whiche cauſed hym to make the ſurerr watche. He thought he herd men paſſe downe the hye way and ſayd to them that were about hym. Sirs: kepe you ſtyll all preuy / for me thinke I here folkes come in the way / we wyll go knowe what they be / and what they ſeke here at this tyme of night ꝑauenture ther be ſome that are comynge to reuitayle y• caſtell. Than the Begue ſtept forthe with his dagger in his hande / and came to a man that was nere to kynge Dāpeter / and ſayd: What art thou? and he ruſſhed forth with his horſe fro hym / and paſſed by them. The begue ſtept to kyng Dampeter who was next / & ſayde: What art y•? ſhewe me thy name or thou art but deed / and toke hym by the bridell / for he thought he ſhulde nat paſſe fro hym as y• other dyde. And whan kyng Dampeter ſawe ſuche a route of men of warre before hym / and that he coude nat ſcape / ſayd. Sir begue of Uillayns I am kynge Dampeter of Caſtell / I yelde me to you as a priſoner / and put me & my company the whiche ar but .xii. perſons into your handꝭ and pleaſure. And ſir I requyre you by y• waye of gentylneſſe to bring me into ſome ſauegard / and I ſhall pay to you ſuch raūſome as ye wyll deſyre / for I thanke god I haue ynough wher / with / ſo that I may ſcape fro the handes of the barſtarde my brother. Than the Begue as I was enformed anſwered / and ſaid. Sir I ſhall bring you and your company in to ſauegarde / and your brother ſhall knowe nothynge of you by me. So thus king Dampeter was brought to the Begues lodgyng / into the proper loging of ſir yone of Kaonet. And he had nat ben ther the ſpace of an hour / whan that kynge Henry & therle of Roquebertyn and a certayne with thē came to the ſame logyng. And aſſoone as king Henry was entred in to the chambre / he ſayde. wher is that horeſon and iewe / that calleth himſelfe kyng of Caſtell. Than kynge Dampeter who was alryght hardy and a cruell knyght auaunced himſelfe / and ſayd. Nay thou art a hores ſonne / and I am ſonne to kyng Alphons / & ther with he toke kyng Hēry his brother in his armes / and wreſtled ſo with hym / that he ouer thrue hym on a benche / and ſet his hand on his knyfe / & had ſlayne hym without remedy / and the vycount of Roquebertyn had nat bene. He toke kyng Dampeter by the legge and turned hym vp ſedowne / ſo that kyng Hēry was than aboue / who drue out a longe knyfe / and ſtrake

kyng Dampeter into the body. Ther with his men came in to helpe hym. and ther was ſlayn alſo by him a knight of England called 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Rafe Helme / who was ſomtyme called ye grene ſquier / and an other ſquyer called James Roulant bycauſe they made defence. But as for Domfe rant of Caſters and the other had none yuell / but remayned priſoners to the Begue of Uyllayns / and to ſir Lyon of Kaonet.
            THus ended kyng Dampeter of Caſtell who ſomtyme reigned in great proſperyte. And after he was ſlayne he was lefte thre dayes aboue y• erthe / the which me thynke was great pyte. Than the next day the lorde of Nātueyle yelded hym to kynge Henry / and he toke hym to mercy / and all tho that wolde tourne to him. Than tidynges ran ouer all Caſtell how kyng Dāpeter was ſlayne / wherof his frēdes were ſory / and his enemyes ioyfull. But whan the kynge of Portyngale herde howe his coſyn kyng Dāpeter was deed / he was right ſorowfull: and ſware & ſayde that his dethe ſhulde be reuenged. And ſo he ſentincōtynent his defyā
               ce to kyng Henry & made hym warr / and kept the marcheſſe of Ciuyll agaynſt him a certayn ſeaſon / but for all that kyng Henry left nat his purpoſe in purſuyng of his enterpriſe / but returned to Tollet / the which yelded vp ſtreight to hym / and all the countre ther about. And at laſt the kyng of Portīgale thought nat to kepe any lengar warr agaynſt kyng Henry: ſo ther was a peace made bytwene thē / by the meanes of the prelates & lordes of Spayne. Thus kinge Henry abode in peace kyng of Caſtell and with hym ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / ſir Olyuer of Māny / and other knightes & ſquyers of frā
               ce and of Bretayne. And kyng Henry dyd moche for thē as he was bounde to do for without their helpe he had nat obtayned his purpoſe / & ſo he made ſir Bertram conſtable of Spayne / and gaue hym the lande of Soyrie / the whiche was yerely worthe .xx. M. trankes / and to ſir Olyuer his nephue he gaue the lande of Crete the which was yerely worth .x. M. frākes: and alſo he gaue fayre landꝭ to dyuers other knightes and ſquiers. Than the kynge went and lay at Burgus with his wife and children. Of his proſperyte and good aduēture / gretly reioyſed the frenche kyng / the duke of Aniou / & alſo the kyng of Aragon. About the ſame tyme dyed / ſir Lyon of Englande duke of Clarence / who had paſt the ſee as ye haue herde before / & had / maried the doughter of Galays lorde of Myllayne / but bycauſe he dyed ſtrāgely / the lorde Edwarde Spens his company on kept warr agaynſt hym a certayne ſpace but finally he was enformed of the trouthe. ¶ Nowe let vs retourne to the aduentures of the duchy of Acquitayne.
            
               YE haue herd here before howe the prince was determyned to reyſe a fowage in his lande / the which his people thought ſhulde be to theyr gret charge / & ſpecially they of gaſcone / for they of the lowe marches / as of Poytou / Xayton / & Rochell acorded lightly therto / bycauſe they were nere to the princes abidyng / and alſo they wer euer / more obeyſant / ferme & ſtable to the prince / than tho of the further coū
               trees. And to bring this mater to paſſe / ye prince and his counſell had dyuers ꝑlyamentes / at Nyort / Angoleme / Poyters / at Burdeux / & at Bergerat: but alwayes they of Angoleme mē
               teyned ſtyll / and ſayd they wolde pay nothyng / and they ſayd they wolde nat ſuffre this fowage to ryn in their coūtre. Sayeng howe theyr reſort hath ben alwayes in the chābre of the frē
               che kyng. Of the whiche reſorte the prince was ſore diſpleaſed & argued agaynſt it / and ſayd: they ought to haue no reſorte ther / affirmynge howe the french kyng had quyted all reſortes & iuriſdyctions / whan he rēdred the landꝭ of the kyng of England his as it is well aparēt in the tenour of the charters of ye peace. Wherin it maketh playne mēcion / ſo that ther is no article reſerued for the frēch kyng in the peace. To y• anſwered agayne y• gaſcons / ſayeng howe it was nat in the power of the frenche kyng to aquyte thē fro their reſort: for the prelates & barons of cyties & good townes of Gaſcone wolde neuer haue ſuffred it / nor neuer wyll if it were to do agayn: though the realme of Fraūce ſhuld euer abyde in warr. Thus y• princes & lordes of gaſcoyne ſuſteyned ſtyll their opinyon & abode at Parys with the frenche kyng: as therle of Armynake / the lorde Dalbret / therle of Pyergort the erle of Comygines / and dyuers other. And they dayly enformed the kyng / howe the prince by his great pride & preſumpcion / wolde trede them vnder: and reyſe vp newe thyngꝭ in their countreis / the whiche they ſayd they wolde neuer ſuffre to be done / conſydering that their reſorte was to hym. Therfore they deſyred y• the prince ſhulde be apelled in to the chambre of ꝑlyament before the peres of Fraūce: to anſwer 
               ther to the grefes & troubles that he wold do to them. The french kyng who wolde entertayne theſe lordes of Gaſcone y• this requyred him of ayde & confort / as their ſouerayne lorde. And y•
               
they ſhulde drawe to none other court / for leſynge of that ſeignory cōdiſcended to their requeſt agaynſt his wyll / by cauſe he ſawe well it ſhuld turne to haue opyn warr / the which without a good tytell of reaſon he wolde be lothe to moue Alſo he ſawe his realme ſore troubled with cō
               panyons & enemyes / and alſo his brother ye duke of Berry was in hoſtage in England / therfore he toke great leyſer in this caſe. In ye ſame ſeaſon came into Fraūce the lorde Guy of Ligny erle of ſ. Poule without taking of any leaue of thenglyſſhmen by great ſubtylte: the maner howe / were to longe here to reherſe / therfore I wyll paſſe it ouer brefely. This erle hated ſo the englyſſhmen yt he coude ſay no good of them / & he dyd aſmoche as he might that the frēch kynge ſhulde cōdiſcend to the requeſt of ye gaſcons / for he knewe well if the prince were apeled to ye court of ꝑlyament / it ſhulde be a great occaſion of mouyng of warr. And to the opynion of the erle of ſ. Poule was agreed dyuers prelates / erles barons / & knightes of the realme of Frāce: and they ſayd to the kyng / howe that the kyng of England had nat well kept the peace / whervnto he was ſworne and had ſealed to / acordinge to the tenor of the treaty made at Bertiguin beſyde de Charters / & after cōfermed at Calays. For they ſayd thenglyſſhmen hath hated the realme of Fraūce more / ſyth the peace was made than they dyde before. And ſir this that we ſay ye ſhall fynde of trouth / if ye cauſe the charters of the peace to be reed / to the which the kyng of England & his ſon are bounde by their faithe & othe. Than the kynge to be better enformed of the trouthe and to kepe ye rightes of his realme cauſed to be brought into the chābre of counſell all the charters of the peace / & made them to be reed ouer often tymes / the better to examyne ye poyntes & artycles cōpriſed in thē. And amonge other ther was one ſubmyſſion / wheron the kyng and his counſayle areſted mooſt / bycauſe it ſpake clerely and playnly of that they loked for / the tenour wherof here after foloweth.
            EDward by the grace of god: kyng of england / lorde of Irlande & of Acquitayn. To all them that this preſent letters ſeyth: We ſend gretyng / knowe you all that in the finall & laſt acorde and peace made / bytwene vs & oure right dere brother the french kyng / are conteyned two artycles / cōpriſyng ye forme folowing. The firſt is / wher it is ſayde that the foreſayd kynges are bounde to cauſe to be cōfermed all the ſayd artycles cōpriſed in the peace by the ho la father the pope / and ſo to be delyuerd by ſentence fro the court of Rome / touchyng the ꝑfection & accōplyſſhment of this preſent treaty: & ſo to be delyuerd to the ꝑties / at leſt within thre wekes / after the french kyng ſhulde be aryued at Calys. Alſo to thentent that theſe artycles & treaties paſſed / ſhulde be the more ferme & ſtable / ther ſhulde be made certayne bondes & delyuered as foloweth. That is to ſay: letters ſealed with ſeales of bothe kynges and their eldeſt ſonnes / ſuche as ſhulde be deuyſed by the counſayles of bothe kynges. And alſo the ſayd kynges & their children ſhulde ſwere & other of gret lynage to the nōbre of .xx. that they ſhulde kepe and ayde to be kept / aſmoche as in thē lyeth / all the ſayd artycles acorded & agreed: and to acō
               plyſſhe the ſame / without fraude or male engin And alſo that bothe kynges ſhuld do the beſt of their powers / & all their frēdes to bring all the rebels into obeyſance / acordyng to the forme of the truce. and alſo that bothe kyngꝭ ſhulde ſubmyt thēſelfe & their realmes / to the correction of the pope / to thētent that he ſhulde cōſtreyne by cenſuries of the churche / who ſo euer ſhulde rebell to fall to concorde & peace. And beſyde that bothe kynges & their heyres / by othe and aſſurance: ſhulde renoūce all graces & proſſes of any dede done by thē / and though by diſobeyſance / rebellyon / or puyſſance of any of the ſubgettꝭ of the french kyng / wherby the kyng ſhulde be let to accomplyſſhe all the ſayd artycles. yet the kyng of England nor his heyres for all yt 
               ſhuld make no warr to the realme of Frāce / but both kynges togyder ſhulde enforce thēſelfe to reduce the rebels to peace & concorde. & alſo though the ſubgettꝭ of the kyng of England wolde nat rendre the townes / caſtels / or fortreſſes / which they helde in the realme of Fraunce / the whiche ought to be delyuerd by reaſon of the peace / or by any other iuſt cauſe / wherby the kyng of englande ſhulde be let to acōplyſſhe that he ought to do by reaſon of this treaty. Than both kynges togyder ſhuld make warr agaynſt ſuch rebels / to bring thē to good obeyſance / & to recouer ſuche townes / caſtels / & fortreſſes / & to delyuer thē 
               ther as they ought to be. And of this ſhulde ther be made as ꝑfyte & as ſure bandes as coude be deuyſed / aſwell by the holy father the pope and the coledge of cardynalles / as by other. Alſo ther was another artycle in ye ſame treaty / ſayeng thus: In token & perfyte knowlege that we deſyre to haue & to noriſſhe ꝑpetuall peace & loue / bytwene vs and our brother of France. We renounce & by theſe preſentes do renounce

all graces & other proceſſe of dede agaynſt our ſayd brother / his heyres & ſucceſſours of the realme of France / & ſubgettꝭ therof. And promyſe & ſwere / & haue ſworne by the body of Jeſu cryſt / for vs & our ſucceſſours ye we ſhulde nat do nor ſuffre to be done by dede or worde any thyng ayenſt this renūciaciō / nor agaynſt any thyng cōteyned in the forſayd artycles. And if we do or ſuffre to be done to the cōtrary by any maner of way / the whiche god for beve. We wyll than yt we be reputed for falſe & forſworne and to ryn into ſuche blame & diſfainy as a kinge ſacred ought to do in ſuche caſe. And clerely we renoūce all diſpēſacions & abſolucions of ye pope / & if any be obteyned we wyll they ſtande for nought / & to be of no valure / and yt they ayd vs nat in no maner of caſe. And the more fermlyer to vpholde all the ſayd artycles: we put vs our heyres & ſucceſſours / to the iuriſdyction & correction of ye church of Rome. and wyll & conſent yt our holy father the pope conferme all the ſayd treaty & to ordayne monycions & generall cōmaūdemētes agaynſt vs our heyres & ſucceſſours / & agaynſt our ſubgettꝭ / comōs / vniuerſiteis / collegꝭ / or any other ſinguler ꝑſons / what ſoeuer they be in gyueng of ſentēce generall / of curſyng / ſuſpēdyng / & interdityng to ryn on vs or on any of thē: aſſon as we or they do or atēpt to the cōtrary of ye ſaid trety / or ocupyēg to waꝭ caſtels / or fortreſſes: or any other thing doyng ratifyeng / or gyueng coūſell / cōfort / fauour / or ayde priuely or openly / agaynſt any of the ſayd artycles. And alſo we haue cauſed our dere eldeſt ſonne Edwarde prince of Wales / to ſwere the ſame. And alſo our yonger ſōnes: Lyonell erle of Ulſter / John̄ erle of Richmont / and Edmond of Langley: & our right dere coſyn Phylyp of Nauar / and the dukes of Lācaſtre and of Bretayne: and therles of Stafford & Saliſbury. And ye lorde of Māny / the caprall of befz the lorde Mōtford / James Audley / Roger Beauchampt / John̄ Chandos / Rafe Ferres / Edward Spens / Thom̄s & Wyllm̄ Phelton / Eu ſtate Dābretycourt / Frāke de Hall / John̄ Mō
               bray / Bartylmewe Bromes / Henry Percy / & dyuers other. And alſo we ſhall cauſe to ſwere / aſſone as we can cōueniently all our other chyldren / and the mooſt ꝑte of the great prelatꝭ / erles / barons / & other nobles of our realme of England. In witneſſe herof we haue put our ſeale to theſe preſentꝭ / gyuen at our towne of Calais the yere of our lorde. M. CCC. and threſcore. The .xxiiii. day of Octobre.
            ¶ Among other writynges that had ben graū
               ted / aſwell at Bertigny beſyde Charters as at Calays: whan kynge Johan was ther. This ſayd charter was one of thē / and was well reed and examyned by kyng Charles / in the preſēce of the chefe of his coūſell. Than ye prelates and barons of France ſayd to the kyng. Sir ye kynge of England & the prince his ſon / haue nat fulfylled the ſayd peace / but haue taken townes & caſtels and do kepe thē: to the great domage of this your realme / and raūſometh & pylleth the people ſo that the paymēt of the redēcion is yet in ꝑtie vnpayed. Therfore ſir / you & your ſubgettes haue good ryght & iuſt cauſe to brek the peace / & to make warr agaynſt thēglyſhmen / & to take fro thē Bretayn / the which they haue on this ſyde the water. Alſo ſome of his counſayle ſhewed him ſecretly by great delyberacion ſayeng ſir: hardely take on you this warre / forye haue cauſe ſo to do. For ſir aſſone as ye ones begyn the warr / ye ſhall ſe & fynde yt they of ye duchy of Acq
                  
                     
                  
                  qui
               tayn ſhall turne to you: aſwell prelates / barons / erles / knightꝭ & ſquiers: as the burgeſſes of good townes. ye may ſe ſir / howe the prince wolde ꝓcede in reyſing of this fowage / but he can nat bring it to his purpoſe: & ſo ther by he is in hatred withall ꝑſons / for they of Poictou / Xaynton / Querry / Lymoſyn / Rouerne / and of Rochell / are of ſuche nature / yt they can in no wyſe loue thēglyſhmen / nor thēglyſhmen thē / they are ſo proude & preſūtuous: nor neuer dyd. And alſo beſyde that / ye officers of the price dothe ſuche extorciōs on the people of Xaintō Poitou / & Rochell: for they take all in abādon / and reyſeth ſomoch of thē in the tytell of ye price ſo that ther is none yt is ſure to haue any thing of his owne. And alſo the gētylmen of the countre can attayne to no offyce nor prefermēt / for ye englyſhmen and ſeruantꝭ to the prince hath all. Thus the french kyng was moued & coūſayled to moue warr / and nāely by the duke of Aniou who lay at Tholous / deſyred gretly the warr / as he that leued nothing thēgliſhmen / bycauſe of ſuche diſpleaſures as they had done hym in tyme paſt. And alſo the gaſcons ſayd often tymes to the kyng. Dere ſir we are bounde to haue our reſorte to your court / therfore we hūbly requyre you / yt ye wyll do right & lawe. And as ye are the moſt rightfull price of the worlde / do vs right: on the great grefes & extorcions yt the price of Wales & his people doth / & wolde do to vs. & ſir if ye refuce to do vs ryght / we ſhall thā purchace for our ſelfe ſome remedy / in ſome other place: and ſhall yelde & put our ſelfe vnder the iuriſdyction of ſuche a lorde as ſhall cauſe

vs to haue reaſon: and ſo therby than ſhall you leſe your ſeignory ouer vs. And the french kynge who was 
                  •
               othe to leſe thē
               ▪ thinkyng it might be a great hurt and preiudice to him & to his realme / anſwered thē right curteſly & ſayd. Sirs for faute of lawe nor of good counſayle▪ ye ſhall nat nede to reſorte to any court / but all onely to mynde. Howbeit in all ſuche beſyneſſe / it behoueth to worke and folowe good coūſell & aduyce. Thus the kyng draue them of / nigh ye ſpace of a yere / and kept them ſtyll with hym at Parys / and payed for all their e
                  •
               pences / and gaue them great gyftes and iowelles. And alwayes rauſed to beſecretly enquered amonge them / if the peace were broken bytwene hym & Englande / whyder they wolde maynteyne his quarell or nat / and they anſwered that if the warr were ones open / the frenche kyng ſhulde nat nede to care for that part for they ſayd they were ſtronge ynough to kepe warr with the price and all his puyſſance. Alſo the kynge ſent to thē of Abuyle / to knowe yf they wolde tourne & take his parte and become frenche. And they anſwered that they deſyred nothynge in all the worlde ſo moche / as to be french: they hated ſo deedly the 
                  ••
               glyſſhmen. Thus the french kyng gate hym 
                  •
               r
                  •
               des on all ꝑtes / or els he durſt nat haue done y• he dyde. In the ſame ſeaſon was borne Charies the kynges eldeſt ſon / in the yere of our lord 
                  〈◊〉
               . CCC. l
                  •
               viii. wherof the realme of France was ioyfull / & a lytell before was borne Charles Dalbret. Of the byrthe of theſe two / who were coſyn germayns / was all the realme ioyefull and ſpecially the frenche kyng.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the french kynge ſent to ſo
               
                  ••
               n the prince of wales by apell to a yere perſonally in the chambre of the 
                  •
               eres of France at Parys / to anſwere there agaynſt the barons of Gaſcone Cap. CC .xliii.
            
               SO moche the french kyng was exhorted by them of his coū
               ſayle / and ſo ofte requyred by thē of Gaſcoyne / that ther was apell made and formed / to be ſent in to 
                  〈…〉
               quitayne to apele the prince of wales to the 
                  •
               lyament of Paris. And it was deuyſed by the 
                  •
               rle of Armynake the lorde Dalbret / the erle of 
                  ••
               ergo
                  •
               rt therle of Comynges / the vycont of 
                  ••
               rmayne▪ the lorde de la Barde / the lorde of 
                  ••
               ncornet and dyuers other / who were chiefe cauſers of this mater. And this apele cōteyned howe for the great grefes / that theſe gaſcons cō
               pleyned that the prince of wales & Acquitayne wolde do to thē and to their people. Therfore they made their reſort to the frenche kyng / reqryng that the prince might be apelled / ſyth they had made the frēch kyng their iuge. And whan this apell was made and duely corrected by all the wyſe coūſell of France / than it was concluded by the ſayd counſell / that it ſhulde be ſignifyed to the prince / and that he ſhulde be apelled to apere in proper perſon at Parys / in the chā
               bre of the peres of France / to anſwere to the cō
               playntes made ther agaynſt hym. And to bere this apell was cōmaunded a clerke well langaged to do ſuche a beſyneſſe / & a knyght wt hym called Cāponell of Cāponall. And ſo they and their cōpany deꝑted fro Parys / and toke theyr way towarde Poictou / and ſo paſſed through Berry / Tourayne / Poyctou / and Xaynton / & came to Blay / and ther paſſed the ryuer. And ſo came to Burdeux wher as the prince & princeſſe was / and alwayes in euery place they ſaid how they were meſſangers fro the french kyng wherfore they were ye better welcome in to euery place. Than they toke vp their logynge and taryed ther all that night / and in the next mornyng at a cōuenyent hour / they went to the abbey of ſaynt Andrewes wher the prince was loged / & ther they were well receyued. And whan the prince knewe of their comyng / he cauſed thē to cōe before him / and whan they came into his preſens they kneled downe / and made their reuerence / and delyuered the prince letters of credence. The prince toke & reed thē and ſayd / ſirs ye be welcome / declare your meſſage yt ye haue in charge to ſhewe vs. Thā y• clerke ſaid: right dere ſir / here is a let
                  •
                that was delyuered to vs at Paris / by our lorde the french kyng / y• whiche letter we ꝓmyſed by our faithes to publyſh openly in your preſens: for ſir they touche you. The prince than began to change colour / & had great marueyle what it might be / and ſo had other knightes that were about him / howbeit he refrayned hymſelfe / & ſayd. Say on ſirs what ye wyll / good tidyngꝭ we wyll be glad to here. Than the clerke toke ye writyng & reed it word by word / y• tenor of y• which herafter foloweth.
            CHarles by the grace of god french kyng / to our nephue the prince of wales & Ac
                  •
               
               tayne / ſend gretyng. So it is that dyuers prelates / barons / knightꝭ / vnyuerſites / comynaltes / and colleges / of the marches & lymitacyōs of the coūtre of Gaſcone. And the dwellers and

habitantes in the bondes of our realme / beſyde dyuers other of the duchy of Acquitayne / are drawen and are cōe to our court / to haue ryght of certayne grefes & troubles vnlaufull / y• you by feble counſell & ſymple informacion / haue bē in purpoſe to do to them / of the whiche we haue marueyle. Therfore to withſtande & to remedy the ſame maters / we are ſo cōioyned to thē that by our ryall mageſty & ſegnory. We cōmaunde you to come into our cyte of Paris in proper 
                  〈◊〉
                ſon / and ther you to ſhew & preſent before vs in our chambre of our peres / and ther to do right on the forſayd complayntes & grefes moued by you to do on your people / who claymeth to haue their reſorte in to our court▪ and that this be nat fayled / in as haſty wyſe as ye can / after the ſight or herynge of theſe letters. In wytnelſe wherof to theſe preſentes we haue ſet our ſeale / gyuen at Parys / the .xxv. day of January.
            ¶ Whan the prince of Wales had reed this letter he had great marueyle / and ſhoke his heed & behelde ferſely ye frenchmen. And whan he had a lytell ſtudyed / he anſwered in this maner. ss we wyll gladly go to Parys to our vncle / ſythe he hath ſent thus for vs / but I aſſure you y• ſhall be with baſſenet on our heed / and. l
                  •
               . M. men in our company. Than the two frenchmen kneled downe / and ſayde. Dere ſir for goddeſſake take pacy
                  •
               ce / and take nat this apell in ſo great diſpyte / nor be nat diſpleaſed with vs. Sir we be meſſangers ſent by our lorde the french kynge / to whome we muſt nedes obey / as your ſubgettes ought to obey you. Wherfore ſir it behoueth vs to do his cōmaundement / and ſir what ſoeuerye wyll gyue vs
                  •
                charge to ſay / we ſhall ſhe we it to the kyng our prince & lorde. Nay 
                  〈◊〉
                the price / ſirs I am nat diſpleaſed with you / but with thē that ſent you hyder. And the kyngyomaiſter is nat well counſelled / to cōpoy
                  •
               e hym ſelfe with oure ſubgettes / or to make hym ſelfe iudge / wher he hath nothyng to do / nor no maner of ryght. For it ſhalbe well ſhewed / that at the rendring & puttyng in poſſeſſyon of ye kyng my father into the duchy of Acquitayne / he quited all maner of reſortes. For all they that hath cauſed this appele to be had agaynll me / hath none other reſort of right / but into the court of England / before the kyng my dere father. And or it ſhalbe otherwyſe I enſure you / it ſhall coſt a hundred thouſande mennes lyues. And therwith the prince departed and went to an other chambre / and lefte thē ſtyll ther. Than knightes of Englande came to them and ſayd. Sirs 
                  •
               e may depart whan yelyſt to your logyng / ye haue right well acōplyſſhed your meſſage / but loke for none other anſwere than ye haue had. Than the knight and the clerke departed / and went to their lodgyng and ſo dyned. And after dy
                  •
               er they truſſed & mounted a horſbacke & departed fro Burdeur / and toke the way to Tholous warde / to thy
                  •
               t
                  ••
                to ſhewe the duke of An iou how they had ſpedde. The prince was ſore dyſpleaſed with this apele / and ſo were all the knightes about hym: and they counſayled the prince yt the two french meſſāgers ſhulde haue be ſ
                  •
               ayne for their laboure / but the prince charged them the cōtrary: howbeit he had agaynſt them many a ſore ymaginacyon. And whan it was ſhewed hym howe they were deꝑted without any other lycence / & yt they were rydden towarde Tholous. Thā he called to hym 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas Phelton / and the ſeneſhall of Rouergne / ſir Thomas of Pountchardone / ſir Thomas Percy / and his chauncellour the byſſhoppe of Bale. Than the prince demaunded of them / yf the frenche meſſangers had any ſaue conducte of hym or nat / and they anſwered they knewe of none that they had. No hath ſayd the prince and ſhoke his heed and ſayd. It is nat cōuenyent yt they ſhulde thus lightly deꝑte out of our coūtre & to make their tāgelingꝭ to ye duke of an 
                  •
               ou / who loueth vs but a lytell
                  •
                / he wyll be glad yt they haue thus ſomoned vs ī our owne hous. I trowe all thingꝭ cōſydred they be rather meſſāgers of myne owne ſubgettꝭ: as therle of Armynake / the lorde Dalbret / therle of Pyergort & therles of Comynges & Carmayne / than of y• frēch kyngꝭ. Therfore bycauſe of the great diſpite yt they haue done to vs / we wold they were ouer taken & put in priſon. Of the which all the princes coūſell was right ioyouſe & ſayd / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                we fereye haue taryed to long fro this purpoſe. in cōtynēt the ſeneſhall of Dagenois was cōmaū
               ded to take with him 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                wyllm̄ the mōke a right good knight of England / & yt they ſhulde ryde after to ſtoppe ye meſſāgers / & ſo they deꝑted & folowed ſo long after thē yt at laſt they ouertok thē in the lande of Dagenois. & they areſted thē and made an other occaſyon than the prices cō
               maūdemēt / for in their areſtyng they ſpake no worde of the prince: but ſayd howe their hoſt / wher as they lay laſt compleyned on thē / for a horſe yt he ſayd they had changed. The knight and ye clerke had great marueyle of that tidynges and excuſed thēſelfe / but their excuſe coude nat auayle. But ſo they were brought in to the cytie of Dagen / and putte in priſon. And they let ſome of their pages departe / and they went

by the cytie of Tholous / and recorded to y• duke of Aniou all the hole mater / wherof he was nothyng diſpleaſed / for he thought well y• therby ſhuld begyn warr & hatred / and ſo he prepared couertly therfore. These tidyngꝭ came to y• french king ▪ for the pagꝭ went & recoūted all the hole mater to hym / as they had herde & ſene. Of the whiche the kyng was ſore diſpleaſed & toke it in great diſpyte▪ and toke coūſayle & aduyſe theron. And ſpecially of the wordes y• was ſhewed him that the price ſhulde ſay ▪ whan he ſaid that he wolde come ꝑſonally to his vncle to anſwere to the apell made agaynſt him / with his baſſenet on his heed / & .lx. M. men of warre in his cōpany ▪ agaynſt the which the french kyng made prouyſion ryght ſubtelly & wiſely / for he thought well it was a weighty mater / to make warr agaynſt the kyng of England & his puyſſance. Seyng howe they had put his predeceſſours in tyme paſt to ſomoche labour & trauell Whefore he thought it a harde mater to begyn warr / but he was ſo ſore requyred of the great lordes of Gaſcon & Guyen: and alſo it was ſhewed him what great extorcions & domagꝭ thenglyſſhmen dyde dayly / and were likely to do in tyme to come. He graūted to the warr with an yuell wyll / cōsydring the diſtruction of y• poore people / that he thought ſhulde enſue therby.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Berry & dyuers other that were in hoſtage in Englā
               de returned into Frāce. Ca. C Cxliiii.
            
               SO agaynſt this ferſe āſwere of the prince / the frēch kynge and his counſell ꝓuyded therfore priuely. And in y• ſame ſeaſon returned into France out of England duke John̄ of Berry. The kyng of Englande gaue him leaue for a hole yere ▪ but he bare himſelfe ſo wiſely that he neuer retourned agayne / for he made ſuche excuſacious & other meanes / that the warr was opyn / as ye ſhall herafter▪ alſo lorde John̄ Harcort was retourned into his owne coūtre. The kyng of England gaue him leaue to deꝑte / at the inſtance of ſir Loys Harcort his vncle / who was of Poyctou: & as than ꝑteyning to the price / who fell ſicke / the whiche was happy for hym. For his ſickenes endured tyll the warr was newly begon: & ſo therby he neuer returned agayne into Englande. & Guy of Bloys / who was as than but a yong ſquyer and brother to therle of Bloys / was frāke and fre delyuerd out of England / for whan he ꝑceyued that the french kyng / for whōe he lay in hoſtage dyd nothyng for his delyuerance. Than he fell in a treaty with the lorde of Coucy / who had wedded the doughter of the king of Englā
               de / & he had yerely a great reuenewe out of the kyng of Englandꝭ cofers / bycauſe of his wyfe. And ſo ther was ſuch a treaty bytwene y• kyng of Englande & his ſon̄e in lawe / and ſit Guy of Bloys: y• by the coūſell of bothe bretherne / lord John̄ of Blois & ſir Guy. & by the agrement of the frenche kyng: they clerely reſigned into the kyng of Englandꝭ handes / therldome of Soyſſons / the which land the kyng of Englād gaue to his ſon in lawe the lord Coucy / for the which he dyd quyte hym of .iiii. M. 
                  •
               i. of yerely reuenewes. Thus this couenāt was made & engroſed / & ſir Guy of Bloys delyuered. Alſo therle Peter of Alanſon had leue of the kyng of Eng. to returne into Frāce for a ſpace / wher he abod ſo long & founde ſo many excuſacions yt he neuer returned after i hoſtage / howbeit I beleue that finally he payed .xxx. M. frākes for his aquytall. Alſo duke Loys of Burbone was happy / who lay alſo in hoſtage in England / for by ſuche grace as the kynge of Engl. ſhewed him / he was returned into France / & whyle he was at Parys with the french kyng / the byſſhop of Wyncheſtre diſceſſed / who was as than chaū
               cellour of England. Than ther was a preeſt about y• kyng of England called ſir Wyllm̄ Wycan / who was ſo great with the kynge ▪ that all thyng was done by him / & without him nothinge done, and ſo whan the byſſhoprike of Wyncheſtre was voyd: Than the kyng of Englāde by the deſyre of the ſayd preeſt / wrote to y• duke of Burbone / that he wolde for his ſake make ſuche ſute to the holy father pope Urbane / y• his chapelayne might haue y• byſſhoprike of Wyncheſtre: promyſing the duke in his ſo doyng / to entreat hym right curteſly for his priſoumēt of hoſtage. Whan the duke of Burbone ſawe the kyng of Englandꝭ meſſāgers and his letter ▪ he was therof right ioyouſe: & ſhewed all the mater to the french kyng. Than the kyng coūſayled him to go to the pope for the ſame / and ſo he dyde. And departed & went to Auygnon to the pope / who was nat as than gone to Rome. & ſo the duke made his requeſt to y• pope / & he graū
               ted him / and gaue him the byſſhoprike of Wyncheſtre at his pleaſure / & was content: ſo that y• kyng of Englād wold be fauorable to him in y• cōpoſycion for his delyuerance / that y• foreſayd Wy can ſhulde haue the ſayd byſſhoprike. And

than the duke of Burbone returned into Frāce and ſo into Englande / & there treated with the kyng & his coūſell for his delyuerāce / or he wolde ſhewe his bulles fro the pope. The kyng loued ſo well this preeſt that y• duke of Burbone was delyuered quyte / & payed .xx. M. frankes. And ſo ſir Wyllm̄ Wy can was biſſhop of Wyn cheſter / & chancellour of Englande. Thus the lordes were delvuered that were hoſtagꝭ in England. ¶ Now let vs returne to the warres of Gaſcoyne / the whiche began bycauſe of the appell that ye haue herde before.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Piergourt & vycōt of Carmane / and the other barons of Gaſcoyne diſcōfyted the ſeneſhall of Rouergne. Cap. C C .xlv.
            
               VE haue herde how the price of Wales toke in great diſpyte his ſomonyng that was made to him to appere at Parys / & was in full intē
               ſyon acordyng as he had ſayd to y• meſſangers / to apere ꝑſonally in France with a great army the next ſomer. And ſent incontynent to thēglyſſhe capitayns & gaſcons y• were of his acorde / ſuche as were about the ryuer of Loyre / deſyring thē nat to deꝑte farr thens / for he ſayd he truſted ſhortly to ſet thē a warke. Of the which tidyngꝭ the mooſt part of the cōpanyons were right ioyouſe: but ſo it was the prince dayly impered of a ſickeneſſe y• he had taken in Spayne / wherof his men were greatly dismayd / for he was in that caſe he might nat ryde Of the which the frenche kyng was well enformed / & had perfyte knowlege of all his diſeaſe / ſo that the phicyſions & ſurgions of France iuged his malady to be a dropſy ▪ & vncurable. ſo after that ſir Cāponell of Cāponall & the clerke was taken & a reſted by ſir Wyllm̄ the monke & put in priſon in y• caſtell of Dagen / as ye haue herde before. The erle of Comynges / therle of Piergort / the vycont of Carman ſir Bertrm of Taude / the lorde de la Barde / & the lorde of Pyncornet / who were in ther owne countreis: toke in great diſpyte the takyng of the ſaid meſſangers / for in the name of thē & for their cauſe / they went on this meſſage / wherfore they thought to counterueng it / & to opyn the warre / & ſayd ſo great diſpyte is nat to be ſuffred. Than they vnderſtode that ſir Thom̄s Wake was ridyng to Roddes to fortefy his fortreſſe / & ſhuld departe fro Dagenois with a .lx. ſpeares. And whan theſe ſayd lordes knewe therof they were right ioyouſe / & layd in a buſſhment a. C C C. ſpeares / to encoūtre ſir Thom̄s Wake and his cōpany. Thus the ſayd ſeneſhall rode with his lx. ſpeares / &. C C. archers: and ſodenly on thē brake out this great enbuſſhment of gaſcoyns / wherof thenglyſſhmen were ſore abaſſhed / for they thought lytell of this buſhment. How be it they defēded thēſelfe aſ well as they might / but the frēchmen ferſely aſſayled thē. And ſo at the firſt metyng there were many caſt to the erthe / but finally thēglyſhmen coude endure no leger but were diſcōfyted & ſtedde / and than were many taken & ſlayne / and ſir Thom̄s ſtedde or els he had ben taken. And ſo ſaued hymſelfe by the ayde of his horſe / and entred into the caſtell of Mōtaubon: and the gaſcons & other returned into their coūtreis & ledde with thē their priſoners & cōqueſtes. Tidyngꝭ anone was brought to the prince / who was at y• tyme in Angoleme howe y• his ſeneſhall of Rouerne was diſconfyted by therle of Pyergort / & ſuche other as had apeled hym to y• court of Parys / of y• which he was right ſore diſpleaſed / & ſayd that it ſhulde be derely reuēged on thē & on their landes / that had done him this outrage. Than incontynent the prince wrote to ſir John̄ Chādos who was in Cōſtantyne at ſ. Sauyour le vycont / cōmaū
               dyng hym incōtynent after the ſight of his letters to cōe to hym wtout any delay. And ſir Johan Chādos who wolde nat diſobey the prince haſted aſ moch as he might to come to him / & ſo came to Angoleme to the prince / who receyued him with great ioye. Than the prince ſent hym with certayne men of armes & archers to y• garyſon of Mōtabon / to make warr agaynſt the gaſcons & frēchmen / who dayly encreaſed and ouer ran the princes lande. Than ſir Thomas Wake aſſone as he myght went to Roddes & refreſſhed and fortifyed newly the cytie. And alſo the towne and caſtell of Myllan / in the marcheſſe of ▪ Mountpellyer / and in euery place he ſet archers and men of warr. Sir John̄ Chā
               dos beyng at Mōtaubon to kepe the marches & frōters ther agaynſt the frēchmen wt ſuch other barons & knyghtꝭ as y• price had ſent thyder wt hym: as the lorde captall of Beutz the two bretherne of Pomyers / ſir John̄ and ſir Hely / the Soldyche of Leſtrade / the lorde of Partney / the lorde of Pons / ſir Loys of Harcourt ▪ y• lord of Pyname / the lorde of Tanyboton / ſir Rich. of Pountchardon. Theſe lordes and knightes made often yſſues on therle of Armynakes cō
               pany / and on the lorde Dalbretꝭ men / who kept

the fronter ther agaynſt them with the ayde of therle of Pyergourt / therle Comynges / the vycoūt of Carmane / the vycont of Tharyde / the lorde de la Barde and dyuers other / all of alyance & one affinyte. Thus ſomtyme the one ꝑte wanne and ſomtyme thother / as aduentur falleth in feates of armes. All this ſeaſon the duke of Anioy lay ſtyll and ſtyred nat for any thinge that he herde / for his brother the frenche kynge cōmaunded hym in no wyſe to make any warr agaynſt the prince / tyll he were commaunded otherwyſe by hym.
         
         
            ¶ How in this ſeaſon the frēch kyng drewe to hym certayne capitayns of the cōpanyons / and howe he ſent his defyance to the kynde of Englande. Cap. CC .xlvi.
            
               THe frenche kyng all this ſeaſon ſecretly and ſubtelly had get to hym dyuers capitayns of the companyons and other / and he ſent thē into the marches of Berry & Auergne. The kyng cōſented that they ſhulde lyue there vpon that coūtre / cōmaundyng thē to make no warr tyll they were otherwyſe cōmaunded / for the frenche kynge wolde nat be knowen of the warr / for therby he thought he ſhulde leſe ye enterprice that he truſted to haue in therldome of Poictou. For if the kyng of Englande had perfetly knowen / that the french kyng wolde haue made hym warr / he wolde right well haue wt
               ſtande the domage that he had after in Poitou for he wolde ſo well a prouyded for ye good towne of Abuyle with englyſſhmen: and ſo well haue furnyſſhed all other garyſons in ye ſaid coū
               tre / that he wolde haue ben ſtyll ſouerayne ouer thē. And the ſeneſhall of the ſame countie was an englyſſhman / called ſir Nycolas Louayng / who was in good fauour with the kyng of Englande / as he was worthy. For he was ſo true: that to be drawen with wylde horſes / he wolde neuer cōſent to any ſhame / cowardneſſe / or villany. In the ſame ſeaſon was ſent into Englā
               de / therle of Salebruee / and ſir Wyllm̄ of Dorman fro the frenche kyng / to ſpeke with ye kyng of England & his counſayle / ſhe wyng to them howe on their partie ye peace dayly was but yuell kept / aſwell by reaſon of the warr that the cōpanyons had made all this ſixe yere cōtynually in the realm of France / as by dyuers other accydentes / wherof the frenche kyng was enformed: and nat well cōtent therwith. The kyng of Englande cauſed theſe ambaſſadours to tary ſtyll in England the ſpace of two monethes / and in the ſame ſpace they declared dyuers artycles often tymes to the kyng / wherof ye kyng was ſore diſpleaſed / howbeit they ſet lytell ther by / for they were charged by the french kyng & his counſayle to ſhewe it. And whan the french kyng had ſecrete and certayne knowlege howe they within Abuyle wolde become french / and that the warres were opyn in Gaſcone / & howe all his people were redy aparelled / and in gode wyll to make warr agaynſt the prince / & to entre in to the principalyte. Howbeit he thought as than to haue no reproche / nor in tyme to cōe to be ſayd of hym / that he ſhuld ſend his people into the kyng of Englande or princes lande / or to take townes / cyties / caſtels / or fortreſſes wt
               out defyāce: wherfore he was coūſelled to ſend to defy the kyng of England. And ſo he dyd by his letters cloſed / and a breton varlet bare thē. And whan he came to Douer / ther he founde ye erle of Salebruce / & ſir Wyllm̄ of Dorman / returnyng into Frāce / and had acōplyſſhed their meſſage / to whome this varlet declared ꝑte of his meſſage / & ſo he was cōmaūded to do. And whan they herde yt / they deꝑted out of Englande as faſt as they might & paſſed the ſee / & were right ioyfull whan they were aryued at Bolen In the ſame ſeaſon the prince had ſent to Rome to pope Urbane / ſir Guyſſhard Dāgle for dyuers maters touchyng A
                  
                     
                  
                  qui
               tayne. And he foūde the pope right fauorable in all his ſutes / & ſo returned agayne: and by the way he herde howe the gaſcoyns & frenchmen made warr agaynſt the prince / & howe they ouerran the pricipalyte wherof he was ſore abaſſhed & in feare how he might returne without dāger. Howbeit he cāe to the gētyll erle of Sauoy whom he founde in Pyemōt in the towne of Pyneroll / for he made warr agaynſt the marques of Saluces. The erle of Sauoy receyued him ioyouſly & all his company / & kept him two dayes & gaue to them great gyftes / & ſpecially to ſir Guyſſhard Dangle / for therle greatly honoured him bycauſe of his noble chinalry. And ſo whā he was deꝑted & aproched nerer to the bondes of Fraunce & of Bolone / he herde euer tidyngꝭ worſe & worſe to his purpoſe. So that he ſaw well in yt caſe that he was in / he coude nat returne into Guyen / he was to well knowen. Therfore he gaue the gouernāce of his cōpany to a knight called 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                iohn̄ I ſore / who had wedded his dought / he was a good frēchman: borne in ye marches of breten.

So he toke on him the charge to conduct home his father in lawes company / and he went into the lande of the lorde of Beauieu / & ther he paſſed the ryuer of Some. And there he acquyted hym ſelfe ſo with the lorde of Beauieu / that he brought hym and all his company to Ryon in Auuerne to the duke of Berry / and ther he offerd to be good frēche as it was ſayd / ſo that he myght be brought peaſably to his owne houſe into Bretayne. And his father in lawe 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guyſ ſhard Dangle / diſgyſed hym ſelfe lyke a poore preeſt / yuell horſed and arrayed: and ſo paſſed by Fraunce / the marcheſſe of Burgoyne and of Auuerne. And dyde ſomoche with great payne that he entred into the pricipalyte / and came to Angoleme to the price / wher he was right welcome: and another knight that went with him to Rome / called ſir Wyllm̄ of Cens / for feare. As he came homwarde he came to the abbey of Cluny in Burgone / and ther taryed more than fyue yeres after / and durſt neuer go oute of the houſe. And yet at laſt he yelded hymſefe french. Nowe let vs retourne to the breton y• brought the frēche kyngꝭ defyāce to ye kyng of Englād.
         
         
            ¶ How the defyance was delyuered to the kyng of Englande / and howe the erle of ſaynt Poule and the lorde of Chaſtellon / conquered therldome of Poictou. Cap. CC .xlvii.
            
               THis foreſayd varlet dyde ſo moche that he came to London / and vnderſtode how ye kyng and his coūſayle was at Weſtm̄ / holdynge there a great counſayle for the princes warres / bytwene hym & the barons and knightes of Gaſcone / to ſe how it ſhulde be maynteyned: and what men ſhulde be ſent out of England to ayde hym. And than ther came to them other newe tidynges / ye whiche made thē to haue other buſyneſſe than they had before. For this frenche varlet dyd ſomoch that he entred into the chambre wher the kyng and his counſayle was / and ſayd howe he was a varlet ſent by the french kyng / & had brought letters to the kyng of Englande. And ſo kneled downe to the kyng / and offred hym the letters. And the kynge who greatly deſyred to knowe what they ment: cauſed them to be receyued opyned / and reed. ¶ Than the kyng and all his con̄ſayle had great maruell therof / whan they vnderſtode the defyance / and behelde well the ſeale and ſigue: and ſawe clerely howe it was of authorite. Than they cauſed the varlet to departe / ſayeng to hym howe he hadde right well done his meſſage. Wherfore he might departe whan he wolde / he ſhulde haue no let / and ſo he returned aſſone as he might. The ſame ſeaſon ther were ſtyll in England hoſtagers / the erle Dolphyn of Auuergne / therle of Porſeen / the lorde of Mallurer and dyuers other who wer in great heuynes of hert whan they herde thoſe tidynges / for they knewe nat what ye kyng wolde do with them. The kyng and his counſayle had great diſpyte that a varlet ſhulde thus bringe his defyāce / and ſayd howe it was nothyng aꝑtenant that the warr bytwene two ſuch gret princes / as the kyng of Englande and the frenche king / ſhulde be publyſſhed by a varlet. they thought it had ben more metely y• it ſhulde haue ben done by a prelat / or by ſome valyāt man baron or knyght: how beit they ſawe there was no remedy. Than they coūſayled the kyng that incontynent he ſhulde ſende a great army in to Poyctou / to kepe the fronters ther / and ſpecially to ye towne of Abuyle / ye whiche was in great danger of leſyng. The kyng was content ſo to do / and ſo ther was apoynted to go thyder / the lorde Percy / the lorde Neuyll / the lorde of Carbeſton / and ſir Wyllm̄ of Wynſore with. CCC men / and. M. archers. And in the mean ſeaſon whyle theſe lordes made them redy / and were cōe to Douer to paſſe the ſee / ther came other tidynges out of Poictou / ye which were nothyng ioyfull. For aſſone as therle Guy of ſ. Poule / and ſir Guy of Chaſtellon / who were as than maiſters of the croſbowes of France / thought by all likelyhod / y• the kyng of Englande was defyed. Than they drue toward Poictou / and had ſent ſecretly their cōmaūdemēt to ye knightes & ſquiers of Artoyſe / Heynalt / Cambreſis / Uermādoſe / Uyen / and Picardy yt they ſhuldꝭ incōtynent come to thē / and ſo they dyde / to the nombre of ſixſcore ſpeares: & came to Abuyle. And they ſet vpon the gates / for it was ſo determyned before / and ſo the men of warre entred without doyng of any hurt / to any of thē of the towne. Thā ſir Hewe of Chaſtelon / who was chefe leder of theſe men of warr / went ſtreyght wher as he thought to fynde ye ſeneſhall of Poictou 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Nicolas Louayng / & dyd ſomoche y• he foūde him / & toke him priſoner. Alſo they toke a riche clerke & a valyāt man treſourer of Poitou. So yt day the frēchmen toke many a riche priſoner / & thengliſſhmen loſt all that they had

in the towne of Abuyle. And ye ſame day the frē
               chemen ran to ſaynt Ualery / and entred therin and toke it and Crotay: and alſo the towne of Derne on the ſee ſyde. And anone after came ye erle of ſaynt Poule to the bridge of ſaynt Remey / on the ryuer of Somme / whervnto ther were certayne englyſſhmen withdrawen. The erle aſſayled them / and there was a great ſcrymyſſhe / and many noble dedes of armes done and atcheued. And therle made knight ther Galetan his eldeſt ſonne / who dyde that day right nobly / but thenglyſſhmen were ther ſo ſore aſſayled / that finally they were diſcōfyted / ſlayne and takefie: and the bridge and fortereſſe alſo. And brefely to ſpeke / all the countre and coūtie of Poictou was clene delyuered fro thenglyſſhmen / ſo that none abode ther to do any hurte to the countre. The tidynges came to the kyng of Englande to London howe they of Poyctou had forſaken hym / and were become frenche: Wherwith he was ryght ſore diſpleaſed / & had many a harde ymaginacyon agaynſt the hoſtagers of France / that were ſtyll with him at Lō
               don. Howe beit he thought it ſhulde be a great crueltie / if he ſhulde bewreke his diſpleaſur on them. yet he ſent the burgeſſes of cyties & good townes of Fraunce / whome he had in hoſtage: into dyuers townes and fortreſſes in Englande / and kept thē more ſtrayter and harder than they were kepte before. And therle dolphyne of Auuergne / was raunſomed at .xxx. thouſande frankes / and therle Porſeen at .x. thouſand frā
               kes / and the lorde of Roy was kept ſtyll in priſon in great daunger / for he was nat well beloued with the kyng of Englande / nor with none of his courte. Wherfore it behoued hym to endure moche ſorowe & trouble / vntyll ſuche ſeaſon as he was delyuered by great fortune & aduenture: as ye ſhall here after in this hyſtorie.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande ſent great nombre of men of armes in to the fronters of Scotlande / and how the duke of Berry & the duke of Aniou made their ſomōs / to go agaynſt the prince of wales. Cap. CC .xlviii.
            
               WHan the kyng of Englande ſawe that he was thus defyed by the frenche kyng / and the coū
               tie of Poictou loſt / the which had coſt hym ſo moche the repayring of townes / caſtels / and houſes / for he had ſpent theron / a hundred thouſande frankes ouer and aboue the reuenewes therof: & ſawe well howe he was lykely to haue warr on all parties. Alſo it was ſhewed hym / yt the ſcottes were newly alyed with the frēche kyng / and were in purpoſe to make hym warre. Wherof he was ſore diſpleaſed / for he douted more the warr of the ſcottes than of the frēchmen / for he knewe well the ſcottes loued hym nat / bycauſe of the domages that he had done to thē in tyme paſt. Than the kynge ſentemen of warr to the fronters of Scotlande: as to Berwyke / Rokeſborowe / to Newcaſtell / and into other places about ye frō
               ters. Alſo he ſent a great nauy to the ſee aboute Hampton / Gernſey / and the yle of Wyght / for it was ſhewed hym howe the frenche kyng had apparelled a great nauy to go to the ſee / and to come and lande in Englande: ſo yt he wyſt nat on whiche part to take hede.. Thus thenglyſſhmen were than ſore abaſſhed / bycauſe of this ſodayne warre.
            ANd aſſoone as the duke of Aniou / and the duke of Berry knewe that the defyance was made & the warr opyn / they thought nat than to ſlepe / but made their ſpeciall ſomōs the one into Auuerne / and the other into Tholous / to aſſemble and to make warr into ye principalyte. The duke of Berry had redy at his cōmaundement all the barownes of Auuergne of the byſſhoprike of Lyon / and of the byſſhop ryke of Maſcon. Alſo he had the lorde of Beauteu / the lorde of Uyllers / the lorde of Tornon / ſir Godfray of Boloyne / ſir Johan of Armynacke / ſir Johan of Uyllemure / the lorde Mō
               tague / the lorde of Talenſon / ſir Hugh Dolphyn / the lorde of Rochfort / and dyuers other. And incōtynent all theſe drewe into Towrayn and into the marcheſſe of Berry: and began to make ſore warr in the good countrey of Poyctou / but they founde it well garnyſſhed with men of warre / bothe knightes and ſquyers: ſo that they had ther no great aduauntage. And in the marcheſſe of Towrayne in the french garyſons and fortereſſes / there was ſir Loyes of ſaynt Julyan / ſir Wyllyam of Bordes / & Carnet breton. Theſe thre were companyons / and great capitayns of men of warr / and they dyd feates of armes agaynſt thenglyſſhmen: as ye ſhall here after.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the kynge of Englande ſent the erle of Cambridge and the erle of Penbroke to the prince his ſōne / and howe they paſſed by Bretayne. Capitulo. CC .xlix.
            
               THe duke of Lancaſtre had by his enheritaūce in Champayn a caſtel betwene Troy and Chalons called Beauforte / Wherof an englyſſhe ſquyer (called Purceuaunt Damors) was capitayne. And whan this ſquier ſawe that the warr was open / bitwene the frenche kynge and the kyng of Englande: Than he tourned hymſelfe and became frenche / & ſware from thens forth fayth and alligeance to the frenche kyng / who greatly rewarded hym / and left hym ſtyll capitayne of the ſame caſtell / accompanyed with another ſquier of Champayne called yuan. So they .ii. were great companyons to gether and dyd after many feates to gether agaynſt the engliſſhemen. And alſo the chanoyn of Roberſart / who had always ben before a good frencheman / al the renewyng of this warr he became engliſſh and dyd fayth and homage to the kyng of Englande / who was ryght gladde of his ſeruice. Thus the knyghtes and ſquiers turned theyr copies on both partes. And the duke of Anion had ſo procured the companyōs of Gaſcoyn / 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Perducas Dalbreth / the lyttell Mechin / the Bourg of Bertueil / Aymon Dortingue / Peter of Sauoy / Raff Bray / and Nandon of Pans that they became all frēche / wherof the engliſſhmen were ſore diſpleaſed / for theyr ſtrēgth dayly laſſed. And Nādon of Bagerant / the Bourg of Leſpare / the Burg Camus / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert Briquet / Robert Thin / John̄ Trenelle / Gailard dela mote / and Aymery of Rochecho art abode ſtyll good Englyſſhe. And theſe companyons engliſſhe and gaſcoyns / and other of theyr accorde and affinite / abode in the byſſhopryke of Mans / and in baſe Normandy / and had taken a towne called Uire / and diſtroyed all the coū
               trey there about. Thus the companyons turned ſome to the one parte and ſome to the other ſo that they were all eyther engliſſhe or frenche. Than the kynge of Englande was counſayled to ſende his ſonne the erle of Cambrydge / and the erle of Penbroke into the duchie of Acquitayne to the prince / with a certayne nombre of men of warre / & ſo were named they that ſhuld go with them in that voyage / as the lorde of Tarbeſton / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Brian Stapleton / sir Thomas Baleſtre / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Truues / and dyuers other. They entred aſſoone as they myght into y• ſee / and were in all .iiii. C. men of armes / & .iiii. C. archers. And ſo they ſayled towarde Britayne and had wynde at wyll and arryued in the hauen of ſaynt Malo in the Iſle. And whan the duke of Bretayne (
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Mountford) knew that they were arryued in his countrey / he was right ioyous / and ſent incontinent knyghtes to receyue them / as 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Laigingay / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Auguſtin. Of the comynge of them / the erle of Cambridge & the erle of Penbroke were right ioyous: For they knewe nat whether the lordes / knyghtes / & good townes of Bretayne wold ſuffre them to paſſe through the coūtrey or nat. Than theſe ſayd lordes of England deſyred the duke that they myght paſſe. And the duke / who was fauorable to engliſſhemen and was loth to diſpleaſe them / acorded to theyr requeſt / that they ſhulde paſſe through the countrey payeng for that they ſhulde take without riot or grudge. Than the erle of Cambridge / & the erle of Penbroke / and theyr company drew to the companyons / that were at the caſtell of Gontierland at the towne of Uire / and ſo toke them forth with them / and paſſed the ryuer of 
                  •
               oire at the Bridge of Nātes without doyng of any hurt to ye coūtrey. In the ſame ſeaſon sit Hugh Caurell with a great nombre of companyons in the marches of Arragon / was newly come out of Spaigne / & as ſoone as he knewe that the frenchemen made warre to the prince / he with his company paſſed through Fo
                  ••
                and Arragon / and entred into Bigore / and ſo came to the prince to the cite of Angoleſme to whom the prince made great chere / and was gladde of hym / and kept hym ſtyll there tyll the companions were come out of Normandy / who hadde ſolde theyr fortreſſes to come to hym. And as / ſoone as they wer come to Angoleſme ye prince ordeyned 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hugh Caurel to be theyr capitayn And ſo he was than to the nombre of .ii. thouſande fightyngemen. Than the prince ſende them to the landes of the erle of Armynack and of the lorde Dalbreth to burne & exile the countrey. And ſo there they made great warre / and dyd moche great domage to the countrey.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the erle of Cambridge / and the erle of Penbroke arryued at Angoleſine / & howe the prince ſent the
                  •
               
               
to ouerrenne the countye of Piergourt. Cap. CC .l.
            
               THe erle of Cambridge and the erle of Penbroke / who were arryued at ſaynt Malo (as ye haue harde before) and taried there tyll all theyr company were paſt by the agrement of the duke of Bretayne. And whan they were well refreſſhed there / they had leaue to departe / and ſo went to Nantes: & there the duke receyued them right honorably / & they taried with hym .iii. dayes / and refreſſhed them & their people. The fourth day they paſſed ouer the great ryuer of Loyre at the bridge of Nantes / and rode ſo longe by their iorneis yt they came to Angoleſme / where they foūd the prince & the princeſſe. The prince was right ioyous of the comyng of his brother the erle of Cambridge / and of the erle of Penbroke / and demaunded of them how the kynge his father / and the quene his mother / and his other bretherne dyd. And whan they had taryed there a .iii. dayes / than the prince ſente them to make a iourney into the countie of Piergourt And ſo theſe .ii. lordꝭ and theyr company made them redy ſo to do and toke leaue of the prince and went forth in goodly array / they wer a .iii. M. fyghtyng men / by the helpe of dyuers knyghtes and ſquters of Poictou Xainton Lymo ſyn Quercy and Rouergue. And ſo than theſe lordes entred into the coūtie of Piergourt / and there they dyd many great domagꝭ. And whan they had burned and ouerran the moſt parte of the coūtrey / they went & layd ſiege to a fortreſſe called Bourdeill / & there were .ii. ſquiers bretherne capitaynes within called Erualdon and Bernardyn of Batefoll / and beſide them in the countie there were diuers good capitaynes the whiche the erle of Piergourt had ſende thether to kepe the gariſons and fortreſſes / the whiche were right well prouyded fore both with artillarie / vitailes and other thynges neceſſarie to maynteyne and kepe their places a long ſpace. And alſo they that were within were of good wyll ſo to do. Thus durynge the ſiege before Bourdeill there were many featꝭ of armes don and many a ſaute / many a reculyng / and many a ſkrymyſſhe nere hande dayly / for the .ii. ſquiers within were right hardy and prowde / and loued but lytell the engliſſhe men. and came oft tymes to the barriers and ſkrymyſſhedde with them without: and ſome day wanne and ſome day loſte / as the aduentures of warre often tymes falleth / nowe vp nowe downe. And on the other ſyde in the marches of Aniou / and Towrayne there were a. M. fyghtynge men as well frenchemen as bretons / bourgonyons / pycardes / normans / and angeuyns / and dyd aften tymes great domage in the princis lande / ouer whome were capitaynes ſyr John̄ de Belle / ſir Wylliam of Bourdes / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys of ſaynt Julian
                  •
                and Carnet the Breton. And agaynſte them there were men of warr in the fronters of Poictou and Xainton / as dyuers knyghtes of the princis / and ſpecially ſir Symon Burle and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Dangouſe: how be it they had nat the .iiii. part of the men that the frenchemen had. for the frenchemen were a thouſand fightyng men or mo / and the engliſſhemen paſt nat a two or thre hū
               dred at the moſt: for the prince had ſent a great nombre of his mē into .iiii. armies / as to Mō
               taban a .v. hundred with 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chādos / and other cōpanions in the landes of the erle of Armynacke / and the lorde Dalbreth: And alſo a great company with 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hugh Caurell: and the greatteſt company of all with his brother therle of Cābridge to the ſiege of Bourdeil. Wherfore there were but fewe agaynſt the frēchemen in Poictou. Howe be it they acquited themſelfe right nobly / and dyd theyr deuour to kepe the fronters and gariſons there / and neuer refuſed to fight and to ſkrymyſſhe with the frēchemen / thoughe they were nothynge lyke in nombre. And ſo it was / on a day the frenchemen had certayne knowlege / that the englyſſhemen were a brode in the feldes / Wherof they were right ioy full. and ſo layde them ſelfe in a buſſhement as the engliſſhemen ſhulde returne / who were cō
               myng fro an enterpriſe that they had done bytwene Mirebel and Luſignen. And ſo at a broken way the frenchemen came out on them / and were to the nōbre of .v. C. and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ de Bueil and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllyam de Bourdes / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys of ſaynt Julian / and Carnet the Bretō were capitayns of that company: there was a ſore fight and many a man reuerſed to the erth / for the engliſſhemen right hardely fought / and valiantly defē
               ded them ſelfe as long as they myght endure / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Symon Burle and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Angouſe proued y• day noble knyghtes: Howe be it finally it auayled them nothyng / for they were but a hādful of mē as to regard the frenche partye. So they were diſcomfitted / and per force cauſed to flee / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Angouſe ſaued hym ſelfe aſ well as he myght / & entred into ye caſtell of Luſignen. and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Symō
               
Burle was ſo ſore purſewed / that he was taken priſoner / and all his companye eyther taken or ſlayne / but a fewe that ſkaped. And than the frē
               chemen returned into theyr gariſons right ioyous of theyr aduenture / and in lyke wyſe was the frenche kynge whan he herd therof. and the prince rightſore diſpleaſed / and ſorowefull for the takynge of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Symon Burle / whom he loued entierly / and had good reaſon and cauſe ſo to do / for he had euer ben a right noble and a coragious knyght / and had alwayes right valyantly borne hym ſelfe / in the ſuſteynynge of the kynge of Englandes parte: & ſo had bē al the other companyons / that were ſlayne and taken at that ſkrymyſſhe / wherof ye prince and al they of his parte were right ſorowfull / The whiche was no meruayle / for it is comonly ſayde that one is worthe a. C. and a. C. is nat worthe one / And truely ſometyme it fortuneth / that by one man a hole countrey is ſaued by his wytte and prowes / and by a nother a hole countrey lo
                  ••
               . Thus the fortune & chaunces of the world oftē tymes falleth.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir John̄ Chādos toke Tarriers / and howe the erle of Piergourt and dyuers othe knyghtes beſieged Riamulle in Quercy. Ca. CC .li.
            
               AFter thys aduenture that thus fell bitwene Mirebel and Luſignē (as ye haue herd before) the engliſſhemē and theyr companyons rode more wiſelier together. And nowe letvs ſpeke of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guyſſhard Dangle / and their cōpanies / who were at Mōtaban a .vii. leages from Tholouſe / and made many horrible enterpryſes / and whan they ſawe they had layne there a longe ſpace / and thought they had nat enployed well their ſeaſon / except in kepyng of the frōters. therfore they determined to go and lay ſiege to Tarriers in Tholouſayn / & ſo they prepared all thyng redy and departed fro Mō
               taban / and went to Tarriers and beſieged it rounde about. And they perceyued well howe they coude nat geat it by noaſſaute / nor none other wayes at their eaſe / without it were by mynynge / than they ſette theyr mynours a warke / who atcheued theyr warke ſo well / that on the 
                  〈◊〉
                day after they toke and entred into ye towne and all they within ſlayne / and the towne robbed and ſpoyled. And in the ſame iourney they had thought to haue taken another towne a. iii leages from Tholouſe called Lauall: and had layde a buſſhement there by in a Wodde. And than a .xl. of them couertly armed vnder the ha bytes of villaynes of the countrey were goyng to the towne / but they were diſceyued by a villayne boye that was a foote in theyr company / he diſcouered theyr enterpriſe / and ſo they fayled of their entēt / and returned agayne to Mō
               taban. In the ſame ſeaſon there was abrode in the feldes the erle of Piergourt / therle of Comynges / the erle of Liſle / the Uicount of Carmayn / the Uicount of Brunikel / the Uicount of Lautre / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertram of Tharide / the lorde de la Barde / the lorde of Pincornet / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Perducas Dalbreth / the Bourge of Leſpare the Bourge of Bertueill / Ayemon Dortingue / Jaquet de Bray / Perrot of Sauoy / & Arnolde of Pans / and they were to the nombre of .x. M. and they entred into Quercy / by the cōmaundement of the duke of Aniou / who was as than in the cite of Tholouſe / and they brought that lande into great tribulacion / and brent and exyled the coū
               trey: and than they came to Riamulle in Quercy / and beſieged the towne / but the ſeneſchall of Quercy had well prouyded for the towne in all maner of thynges / and had therin many good engliſſhe men / the whiche wold nat yelde vp ye towne to dye therfor / how be it they of ye towne wolde gladly haue gyuen it vp. Than the lordes and knyghtes of France ſent for .iiii. great engins to the cite of Tholouſe / and whan they were come they were dreſſed and reiſed vp / and they caſte nyght and day ſtones & great peces of tymber into ye fortreſſe / and beſyde that they ſet mynours a warke / who made theyr boſte to wynne the towne breuely. And alwayes the englyſſhemen within lyke noble and valiant men comforted eche other and ſet but lytell by theyr mynynge.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the archebyſſhopp̄ of Tholouſe conuerted to the frenche kynge by his prayer and requeſt the citie of Caoure and dyuerſe other townes / and howe the duke of Guerles / and the duke of Julliers defied the french kynge. Cap. CC .lii.
            
               
               IN the meane ſeaſon whyle theſe frenche knyghtes were thus in Quercy / in the marches of Lymoſyn / & Auuergne the duke of Betrey was in Auuergne with a great nombre of menne of warre as ſyr John̄ of Armynac hys vncle / the lorde John̄ of Uillemur / Roger of Beaufort / the lorde of Beauiew / the lorde of Uillers / the lorde of Sergnac / the lorde of Calēcon / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Griffith of Mōtague / and ſir Hugh Dolphin / with a great nombre of other good knyghtes & ſquiers / and ſo they ouerran the marches of Rouergue / of Quercy / and of Lymoſyn / & dyd great domage and enpoueryſſhed greately the countrey for nothynge helde agaynſte them / and ſo by the meanes of the duke of Berrey the archebyſſhop departed out of Tholouſe / who Was a right good clerke and went to Caours / wher of his brother was byſſhopp̄. and there he preched and publyſſhed in ſuche wiſe the frenche kyngis quarell / that by his meanes the citie of Caours turned frenche / and ſware faythe & homage from thence forthe to the frenche kynge. Than the ſayd archebiſſhop rode forth further and preched and declared the Frenche kynges right / title / and quarell in / ſuche wiſe that al the countrey became frenche / he cauſed to turne mo than .lx. townes / cities / caſtelles / and fortreſſes / by the helpe and ayde of the duke of Berreys company of men of warr / as ſyr John̄ of Armi nake and other / who rode abrode in the coūtrey they cauſed to turne frenche Sigac / Gaignac / capedonac / and diuers other good townes and ſtrong caſtelles. For he preched that the frenche kynge had ſo great ryght and iuſte cauſe in his quarell / that the people that harde hym beleued hym. And alſo naturally ye people were in their myndes rather frenche than engliſſhe ye whiche helped moche to the matter. In lyke maner as this archebyſſhop went aboute prechynge and ſhewyng the right & quarel of the frenche kyng in the bondes and lymitacions of Languedoc / there were in Pycardy dyuerſe other prelates and clerkes who well and ſufficiētly dyd their deuours to ſhewe and to preche the ſayd quarel of the frenche kynge to the comon people of cyties and good townes: and ſpecially ſir Wylliā of 
                  •
               ormans preched the ſayd quarel fro cite to citie / and fro towne to towne / ſo wyſely and ſo notably that all that harde hym lent them ſelfe to his opinion / ſo that the buſyneſſe of the realme was by hym and by his wordes ſo coloured that it was marnayle to ſpeke therof. And beſyde that the frenche kyng hym ſelfe was ſo moued with deuocion / that he cauſed to be made contynual proceſſions by the clergie / and hym ſelfe and the quene wolde go bare foote requyrynge and beſechynge god deuoutely to aſſiſt and mainteyne ye right of the realme of France the whiche hath ben a ſeaſon in great tribulacion. And alſo the kynge cauſed all his ſubiectes by the conſtreynte of the prelates to do the ſame. In lyke maner dyd the kynge of Englād in his realme. There was a byſſhop that tyme at London / who made many prechynges and declaracions / ſhewyng the people that the frē
               che kynge by great wronge hadde renewed the warre: And that he dyd was agayngſte ryght and good reaſon / and that he proued by diuers artycles and poyntes openely ſhewed. to ſaye trouth it was of neceſſite / that both kyngꝭ / ſyth they were determyned to make warre / to ſhewe to their people the ordre and cauſe of their quarelles / ſo that they myght with the better wyls helpe and ayde theyr lordes / of the whiche they were all awakened both in the one realme and other. The kynge of Englande ſent into Brabant and Haynault to knowe if he myght geat any ayde there / and deſired duke Aulbert / who had in rule and gouernance the countie of Heynault at that tyme / that he wolde open his coū
               trey to ſuffre hym to go and come / and to abide there if nede were / and that waye to paſſe into the realme of France with his army. The duke Aulbert at the requeſte of the kynge of Englād his vncle / and at the deſyre of ye quene his aūte lyghtly condyſcended to theyr deſyres / by the ayde and good mocyon of Edwarde Duke of Guerles / who was of the kynge of Englandes parte. For he wedded the dukes doughter / and by the duke of Julyers his couſyn germayne. Theſe two at that tyme were in faythe and homage boūde to the kyng of Englāde / by whom they were deſyred that they ſhulde retaygne eche of them the nombre of a thouſande ſpeares at his coſte and charge / Wherfore theſe .ii. lordes aduyſed well that it ſhulde be good for the kynge of Englande / to geatte alied to hym the duke Aulbert: Who was ſore tempted therto by them / and by great gyftes that the kynge of Englande promyſed hym by ſuche knyghtes as he hadde ſente vnto hym. But Whan the lorde of Comynges (who was about the frēche kynge) herde therof / he returned into Heynaulte / and by the counſayle of the lorde John̄ Werthyn ſ
                  •
                neſchall of Heynaulte / by whom all the countrey

was moſte gouerned / and was a wyſe and a valiant knyght / and was good frēche in hart he was ſo well beloued with ye duke & ducheſſe that he brake the purpoſe of the engliſſhe meſſā
               gers / for by the helpe of therle of Bloys / and of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ of Bloys his brother / the lorde Ligny / and of the lorde Barbāſon the duke and all his countrey abode as neuter / and held with none of both partes. And this anſwere made Jane ducheſſe of Brabant. Kynge Charles of Frāce who was ſage / wyſe / and ſubtyle / had wrought about this treatie .iii. yere before / & knewe well he had good frendes in Heynault & Brabant / & ſpecially the moſt parte of the coūſailours of ye great lordes / and to colour / & to make his warr ſeme ye fayrer / he copied out diuers letters touchyng the peace confirmed at Calays / and ther in he cloſed the ſubſtan̄ce of his dede / and what thynge the kynge of Englande and his childrē were ſworne to kepe. & in what articles by their letters ſealed they were ſubmytted to make renūciacions / reſityng ſuche cōmyſſions as they ought to haue delyuered to theyr people / and al other articles and poyntꝭ that made any thyng for hym and his quarell condempnynge the engliſſhemens deades. Theſe letters the kynge cauſed to be publyſſhed in the courtes of great lordes / to the entent they ſhulde be better enformed of his quarel. Inlyke wyſe oppoſit to this dede the kynge of England ſhewed his quarel in Almaygne / and in other places / where as he thought to haue any ayde. The duke of Guerles nephewe to the kynge of Englande / ſonne to his ſuſter / and the duke of Juliers coſyn germayne to his children / who were at that tyme good and true englyſſhe / had great diſpight of the defiaunce that the frenche kynge had made to ye kyng of Englāde done by a varlet / in their myndes greately blamynge the frenche kynge and his counſaile in his ſo doyng. for they ſayd that warre bitwene ſo great princis (as the frē
               che kynge and the kynge of Englande) ought to be publyſſhed and defied by notable ꝑſones / as prelates byſſhops or abbottes / ſayeng howe the frenche men dyd it by great preſumpcyon & pryde. Wherfore they ſayd they wolde ſend and defye the frēche kyng notably / and ſo they dyd / and dyuerſe other knyghtes of Almayne with them. and their entētꝭ was ſhortly to entre into Fraunce / and there to do ſuche dedes of armes / that the remembraūce therof ſhulde be ſeen and knowen .xx. yere after. Howe be it they dyd nothynge / for their purpoſe was broken by another way than they thought of / as ye ſhall here after in this hiſtorie.
         
         
            ¶ How the duke of Bourgoyn was maryed to the doughter of the erle of Flaunders. Cap. CC .liii.
            
               VE haue harde before howe ye ſpace of .v. yere to gether ye kyng of Eng
                  •
               . made moche purchaſe to haue the doughter of therle of Flā
               ders to haue ben maried to his ſon Edmond erle of Cambridge. The deuiſes and ordenances were to longe to reherſe. Wherfore I wyll paſſe it ouer breuely. The kynge of England coude by no maner geat pope Urban to conſent to gyue them a diſpenſacion to mary / and the erle of Fraunders was ſued vnto fro other partes / and ſpecially by the frenche kyng / for his brother the duke of Bourgoyn. Whā he ſawe that the maryage Wolde nat take in England / and howe it was tyme for his doughter to be maryed / and that he had no mo children / and thought that the yōge duke of Bourgoyn was a mete mariage for her: Than he ſent certayne meſſangers into England / to treate with the kyng for acquitaunce / and the meſſangers dyd ſo well their deuour / that the kynge of Englande (who thought none euyl) quited the erle of Flaunders of all his couenauntes / as touchynge ye mariage of his doughter. and ſo theſe meſſangers returned to Bruges / and ſhewed the erle their lorde howe they had ſpedde / Wher of he was ryght ioyfull. And it was nat longe after but that the mariage of the duke of Bourgoyn & their erles doughter was driuē through and agreed. And it was ſhewed me that for this mariage the erle of Flaunders had more than fyfty thouſande frankes / and the towne of Doway and Liſle delyuered in gage for money / yt the frenche kynge gaue with thys maryage to the erle of Flaunders / Who toke poſſeſſyon of them / and therin dyd putte his people. And ſo theſe two townes were attributed to Flaūders by reaſon of gage / as it was ſhewed me / I can ſay no further. And anone after this compoſicion they proceded to the mariage / the whiche was done and confirmed in the towne of Gaūt and there was great feaſte and ſolempnyte the day of ye maryage and after. Ther were many lordes / barones / and knyghtes / and ſpecially ye gentyl lorde of Coucy / who was ſent thither by the frenche kynge / euery man was greatly feaſted with great iuſtes and tryumphes. And after

euery man wenſe Whom to his owne. And whan the kynge of Englāde ſawe that the erle of Flaunders / bycauſe of this ſayde maryage was alyed into Fraunce / he wyſte 
                  •
               at What to ſuppoſe / Whether that the Erle of Flaunders wolde take parte agaynſt hym with the duke of Bourgoyne his ſonne in lawe / who by ſucceſſion ſhulde be his heyre after his diſceace ornat. Nor alſo he myſte nat what rou
                  •
               nauntes were 
                  〈◊〉
                b
                  •
               twene the frenche kynge and the erle of Flaunders. Wherfore the kynge of Englande was more harder to the Flemmynges than he was before / bothe by lande and by ſee / as they came in marchandiſe. Wherof the frēche kynge was nothynge diſpleaſed. for he wolde gladly that the Warre hadde ben open bitwene the engliſſhemen and flēmynges. Howe be it the wiſe men of Flaunders and bourgeſſes of good tow 
                  •
               es had no wyl to ye warre: for the comynalte of Flaunders / ſuſteyned rather the opinion and quarell of the kynge of Englande to be better / than the frenche kynges. The kynge of Englande / who ſought for frendes in all parties / as 
                  •
               ede was for hym ſo to do / ſeynge the great warres and rebellions that dayly roſe agaynſt hym. than he vnderſtode well that kyng Charles of Nauarr his coſyn / who was in baſe Nor mandy / wolde ſoone agree to his accord / for he was behated with the frenche kynge / bicauſe of certayn landes that he kept / and claymed them as his enheritance / the whiche the frenche kyng d
                  •
               n
                  •
               ed: for the whiche theyr counſayles had ben often tymes to guether: But they coulde neuer make agrement bitwene them / and ſo the mat
               
                  •
               er hanged ſtyll / eche of them takyng good hede of other. And the kynge of Nauarre fortifyed greatly his townes and caſtels in Conſtantine and in the countie of Deureur / and in the good townes of Normandye / and helde hymſelfe at Ch
                  •
               erburge and had men of warr in euery gariſon. And with hym there was 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Euſtace Dā
               
               
                  ••
               er
                  •
               court who was gouernour of a towne be
                  
                     •
                  oud the paſſage of ſaynt Clement / in the cloſe of Conſtantyne / the whyche perteyned to the kynge of Nauarre / for it was parcell of his he
               
                  ••
               age / called the towne of Carentyn. And this ſyr 
                  •
               uſtace was chief of the kynges counſaile and the kynge of Englande ſent vnto hym (for he was alſo hisman and knyght) to the entent that he ſhulde knowe the kynge of Nauarres mv
                  •
               de. And this knyght dyd ſo moche that the kynge of Nauarre with a pr
                  •
               uy company entred into a ſhyppe called Ly
                  •
                / and came to the kynge of England / who made hym great there and feaſt / and ſo they were longe to gether / and fynally concluded / that as ſoone as the kynge of Nauarre were returned to Chierbourge / he ſhulde ſende and defye the frenche kynge / and to put in al his caſtelles and fortreſſes engliſſhe men. And whan all this was confyrmed / the kynge of Nauarre departed / and returned agayne into Normandy / to the towne of Chierbourge / and was brought thyther by certayne knyghtes of Englande / who had but euyllfortune at theyr returnynge home ward / for on the ſee they mette normans and pyrates / Who fierſely aſſayled them / and were farre ſtronger than the engliſſhmen. So the normans conquered them and ſlewe them all / they wolde nat take one to mercy / of the whiche aduenture the kynge of Englande was right ſore diſpleaſed. howe be it he coude nat remedy it. And anone after y• the kynge of Nauarre was returned to Chierbourge / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Euſtace Dambreticourt (who was ſent for by the prince) toke leaue of ye kyng of Nauarr to go and ſerue the prince. the whiche kynge gaue hym leaue / ſore agaynſte hysmyll. Howe be it 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Euſtace ſhewed hym ſo many reaſonable cauſes / that at laſte he departed and toke the ſee / and arryued with all his company at ſaynt Malo / and rode to Nauntes / to paſſe there the ryuer of Loyre by the agrement of the duke of Bretayne / Who as than ſtered nat on no partye. And ſo ſyr Euſtace trauayled ſo longe / that he came in to Poictou / and came to the towne of Angoleſme to the prynce / who receyued hym with great ioy / & thā anone ſente hym to ſyr John̄ Chandos / & to the Captal of Beu
                     •
                  
                / who were at Montaban makyng there thyr fronter agaynſte the frenche men / And thyther ſyr Euſtace was ryght well come to all the company.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the conſtable of France / and the conſtable of Heynaulte reyſed all army of men of warre to aſſaile Arde and howe the fortreſſe of Reainuille was taken and the englyſſhemenne ſlayne. Cap. C C .liiii.
            
               IN the ſame ſeaſon the knyghtes of Pycardye aſſembled together to go and aſſaute Arde / and ſir Mores Fyennes Conſtable of France / and ſir John̄ Uertyn conſtable of Heynau
                  ••
               
               
were capitaynes of that companye by the commaundement of the Frenche kynge / and they aſſembled to guether in the towne of ſaynt 
                  
                     •
                  
                  mer / and they were a thouſand ſpear
                  •
               s of knyghtes and ſquyers. And ſo they went and moſtred before the baſtid of Arde / the whiche was well furnyſſhed with englyſſhe men / and ſo the frenche men ſayde they Wolde laye ſ
                  •
               ege therto. And the englyſſhe men were no thyng abaſſhed / but made them redy to defende theyr fortreſſe / if nede were. And on a daye / all the frenchemen and heynowes aſſembled together in y• felde / in good array and freſſhe mauer. it was a goodly ſyght to beholde the baners and ſtandardes wauynge with the wynde / and ſo they gaue aſſaute to the towne / nat greatly to theyr profyt / for there were diuerſe of them ſore hurt and wounded / and conquered nothynge. And as it was ſhewed me / on the ſyft daye they beparted fro Arde Without doynge of any great hurte / and ſo returned euery man home to his owne howſe. Thus brake vp that i
                  •
               urney.
            ¶ Howe lette vs ſpeke of farther countreys / as of the ſiege / that was before 
                  •
               iamuille in Quercy / layde by the frenchemen / who were a .xii. thouſande fyghtyngemen / with the companyons that were in theyr felaweſ
                  ••
               ppe / and within two dayes iourney of them lay the duke of Berreys companye / as ſyr John̄ of Armynake ſyr John̄ Uillemure / the lorde of Beau
               
                  •
               ew / and other of Auuergne and Bourgoyne / and they were well a .iii. thouſand whiche were redy to come to the ſiege if nede were to aſſy
                  •
               te the frenchemen. And ſyr John̄ Chandos / the Captall of Beufz / ſyr Guyſſhard Dangle / and other englyſſhemen that kept the fronter about Montaban / knewe well howe the frenchemen hadde layde ſiege before Reainuille / and what nombre they Were of / So that they ſawe Well they were nat able to fyght with themnor reyſe the ſiege. For the erle of Cambridge and the Erle of Penbroke / Who laye at ſiege before Bourd
                  ••
               lf / wolde 
                  ••
               no wyſe breke vppe their ſiege. And ſo the frenchemen before Reainuille ſet they
                  •
                myners awarke / and alſo they hadde engyns / that dyd caſte daye and nyght. The myners cauſed a great payne of the Walle 
                  •
               o ſalle / Wherby the towne Was taken / and all the englyſſhemen Within ſlayne without mercy / the Whiche Was great pitye: Forthere in was many a good ſquyer. They of the nacion of the towne were taken tomercy / o
                  •
                the coudicio
                  •
                that fro thence forth they ſhulde 
                  •
               e good 
                  〈◊〉
                frenchemen. Than they ma
                  ••
                there newe capitaynes and officers to kepe the towne if nede were. Than theſe men of warre departed and went abrode into the con̄trey of 
                  •
               uercy and Rouergue / to refreſſhe them / and to lye more at theyr caſe. And the companyons went to the citie of Caours / and there about / and capitaynes of them were Aymon of 
                  •
               rtingo Pecotte of Sauoye / the lyttell Mechin / Jaques Braye / Arnolde of Pans. And they ouerranne and diſtroyed all the countrey. And the erle of Pierregourt / the erle of Liſle / the erle of Comynges / the U
                  •
               count of Carmayn / and the other lordes returned into theyrowne coūtreys / For ſyr Hugh Caurell / ſyr Robert Brequet / Joh
                  •
               i Treſnelle / Lanut Nandon of Bergerat the Bourge Camus / the Bourge of Bretueil / the Bourge of Leſpare / and the nombre of companyons made great Warre / and burned and diſtroyed the landes of the erle of Armynacke / and of the lorde Dalbreth. ¶ In the ſame ſeaſon there was a ſeneſchall in Rouergue a right valyaunt man and a good englyſſhe knyght / called ſyr Thomas Witeualle / Who kepte the towne and Caſtelle of Millan a dayes iou
                  •
               ney fro Montpellier / howe be it the countrey all aboute hym was turned frenche / yet he kept his fortreſſe a yere and a halfe after. And alſo an other fortreſſe in Bretayne called Wanclere / In the Whiche ſpace he made many noble Iſſues / vnto the tyme that ſyr Bertram of Cleſquy put hym oute / as ye ſhall here after in thys hiſtory / And all Wayes ſtyll / the ſiege endured before Bourdeilf.
         
         
            ¶ How the ſeneſchal of Poictou bu
                  •
               
               ned and exyled the lande of the lorde of Chauuigny / and toke with aſaute the towne of Breuſe the which was newely before turned frenche. Capitulo. C C .lv.
            
               IN the marches of po
                  •
               
               tou was ſir John̄ of Bue
                  •
               
               ſyr Wyllyam of Bourdes 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys of ſaynt Julyan Carnet Bretō / and 
                  •
               o than. 
                  •
               ii. hundred fightyng men / they imagined and ſtudied night and day howe they myght geat by aſſaute / ſkaynge / or other wyſe townes and fortreſſes in Poictou. And on a day they gatte by ſlelth and

by ſkalynge the caſtell called the Roche of Poſay at the entre of Poictou on ye riuer of Creuſe a two leages fro Haye in Tourayn / and nere to Chatellerault on the ſame riuer / all the coū
               trey of Poictou was in great feare for the frenchemen layde there a great gariſon and repayred the caſtell / and fortyfyed and furnyſſhed it with artillarie & victayles. And whan theſe tydynges came to the prince he was ſore diſpleaſed but he coude nat amend it. Than he ſent to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guyſſharde Dangle / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys of Harecourte / the lorde of Parteney / the lorde of Pinane / and for diuerſe other beynge at Montaban with 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos / that they ſhulde come to hym / for he was in purpoſe to ſende them into other places. And accordynge to the princis cōmaūdment they departed fro Montaban / and came to Angoleſme to the prince / and incontinent he ſent them into Poicters to kepe the citie / and to make fronter there agaynſt the frēchemen / and about the ſame tyme a great baron of Poictou the lorde of Chauuigny vicount of Breuſe forſoke the englyſſhe parte and became frenche / & the towne alſo / and furnyſſhed the towne With bretons and men of warre / and went hymſelfe in to Fraunce to the kynge. Of this aduenture the prince and all the barones of Poictou Were ſore diſpleaſed / and the vicount of Rochecoart was had inſuſpecte: for it was enfourmed the prince howe he wolde turne frenche. Wherfore the prince ſent for hym and ſhewed hym his entent / and the vicount excuſed hym ſelfe as well as he myght: Howe be it he was commytted to priſon / and ſo abode a longe ſpace in that daunger. The ſame ſeaſon the great ſeneſchall of Poictou (vnder the prince) was 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                James Audeley a right ſage and a valiant knyght and he aſſembled to gether a great armye of barons & knyghtes of Poictou / and with hym was ſyr 
               Guyſſhard Dangle / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys of Harecourt / the lorde of Pons / the lorde of Parteney / the lorde of Pinane / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Geffey Dargenton / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Maubrun of L
                  〈…〉
               ers the lorde of Tannaybouton / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                William of Moutaudire and diuers other knightes and ſquiers of Poictou / they were a .xii. C. ſpeares. And alſo there was with hym 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Band wynſeneſch all of Xainton. Theſe lordes made theyr aſſembly at Poicters / and ſo departed in good arraye / and rode tyll they came into Berrey / than they began to burne and exile the coū
               trey / and dyd many great domages. and than they went ito Tourayn: but where ſoeuer they went the coūtrey was ſore turmēted & brought into great tribulacion: they were ſo ſtrong that they kepte ſtyll the felde. and at laſt they entred into the lorde of Chauuignys countrey / Who was as than newly turned to the frenche parte. and ſo they burned and diſtroyed all that was before them / except the fortreſſes. And on a day they came before the towne of Breuſe and gaue therto aſſaute / the whiche endured a hole daye / but that day they wonne but lyttell. Than they withdrewe / and lodged them / and ſayde howe they wolde nat departſo. for they thought well the towne was preignable. Than they roſe at the ſprynge of the day / and ſowned their trompettꝭ to the aſſaute / and ſo approched the towne euery lorde in good arraye vnder his owne baner / the whiche was on a ſaturday. This was a fiers aſſaute / for they within the towne defēded them ſelfe as wel as they myght / they knew wel it ſtode them in ieoꝑdy of their lyues. So ther was done that day many a noble feat of armes the englyſſhe archers ſhotte ſo holly to gether / that none durſt loke out at any loope to defēde the towne / and ſo finally by pure force ye towne was wōne / and the gates caſt downe / and euer
                  •
                man entred that wolde / and a .xvi. of the beſte yt were within / Were taken and hanged in theyr harneis in diſpight of the vicoūt their maiſter / who was ſo falſely become frēche / and ye towne burned / and all the inhabitauntes within loſte all that euer they had / and many ſlayne & drowned. Than the englyſſhemen returned to Poicters to refreſſhe them ſelfe there.
         
         
            ¶ How ſyr Robert Canol was made maiſter gouernour of the princis cō
               panye / and howe ſyr Perducas Dalbreth turned engliſſhe. Cap. CC .lvi.
            
               SIr Robert Canol
                  •
                / who was as than in Bretayne / and had there a fayre heritage / and alwayes he had ben good engliſſhe and loued and ſerued the kynge of England and his ſone / and had ben with them in dyuers iourneis. And whan he vnderſtode that the frē
               chemen made the Prince ſo great warre / and Wolde dyſheryte hym of hys enherytaunce of Acquytayne / At the conquerynge wherof he hadde been before / was ſore dyſpleaſed therwith in his mynde / and pourpoſed to aſſemble to guether ſuche people as he myght / and to go and ſerue the prince at his owne coſte & charge. As he ymagyned / ſo he dyd / he gatte to gether of his frendes and other the nombre of .lx. men

of armes / and as many archers / And than he prepared a foure ſhyppes in an hauen of Bretayne called Kaouke. And whan all his prouyſion was redy / he departed from Deruall and drew to the porte and toke the ſee with his company / and ſayled ſo longe that they arryued at the Kaye of Rochell / and the bourgeſſes of Rochel
                  •
                made hym good chere agaynſt theyr hartes: Howe be it they durſtedo none otherwyſe. And there he founde ſyr John̄ Deureux capitayne of Rochel
                  •
                vnder the prince / for the Seneſchall was with ſyr John̄ Chandos and ſir Thomas Percy. There ſyr Roberte Canol
                  •
                was wel receyued / and the capitayne kept hym good companye. And there he taryed .ii. dayes and than rode forthe tyll he came to Angoleſme and the prince and princeſſe were right gladde of his comyng / and made hym ſuche chere that the prince made hym mayſter and chyef ſoueraygne of all the knyghtes and ſquyers of hys courte / bycauſe of his valoure and noble chyualrie / commaundynge all his courte to obbey hym as theyr ſoueraygne / and they all anſwerd that they were well content ſo to do. And whan he hadde ben there the ſpace of fyue dayes and euery man redy that ſhulde go with hym. than he toke leaue of the prince / and departed fro An goleſme acompanyed with the princes knyghtes / as ſyr Richarde of Pontchardon / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Stephyn Goſenton / ſyr Dagloiret / ſyr Noel Lorniche / ſir Wyllyam Torciel ſir Hugh Haſtinges / ſir John̄ Triuet / ſir Thomas Spenſer 
               ſir Tancon / ſir Thomas Balaſter / ſir Nicolas Bonde / ſir wyllyam the Monke / the ſeneſchall of Agenoys / ſir Baudwyn of Franuille and mo than thre ſcore knyghtꝭ. So they were a .lx. men of armes / and fyue hundred archers / and as many brigantes / all hauyng good myudes to fynde out the frenchemen / and to fyghte with them. Thus ſir Robert Canol
                  •
                and his companye rode forthe towarde Agen to come into Quercy / where the companyōs were / and they rode ſo longe that they came to the citie of Agen: and there they taryed a lytell ſpace to refreſſhe them ſelf and to abyde theyr eunemies. And in the ſame ſeaſon ſir Robert Canoll had knowledge howe ſir Perducas Dalbreth who was capitayne of a certayne nombre of companyons / as a .iii. C. or there aboute / and that he was the ſame ſeaſon in the countrey / and that by the purchaſe of the duke of Aniou he was turned frenche. Than ſir Robert Canoll ſent certayne herauldes and meſſangers to hym / and gaue hym ſalue conducte to come & ſpeke with hym in the feldes / at a certayne place lymytted / and ſo he came to hym / and ſir Roberte made hym great chere / and ſo lyttell and lyttell fell together in talkynge / than ſir Robert Canol ſhewed hym / howe it was greatly to his blame to turne hym ſelfe frenche / and to forſake to ſerue the prince / who ſo well hath honored and loued hym in tyme paſte. Wherto ſhuld I make lōge proceſſe / ſir Robert Canol
                  •
                preched ſo moche to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Perducas Dalbreth that he turned agayn and became engliſſhe / he and all his company / and with hym there turned of the companyons gaſcoynes mo than .v. C. Wherof the duke of Aniou was ſore diſpleaſed / and thought than the laſſe ſurete in the ſayd ſir Perducas. Theſe tydynges came to the citie of Caours to the cō
               paniōs there. as Aymon Ortigo / the lytel Mechin / Jaques Bray / Perot of Sauoy / Arnolde of Pans / who were ther to kepe the garyſon of the whiche tidynges they were ſore troubled in their myndes / and conſidered and thought wel that there gariſon was to great and feble to be kepte agaynſte the puyſſaunce of the engliſſhe men. And ſo departed thence and gaue vp the towne to the byſſhop and bourgeſſes of ye ſame and they went to a priory there by called Durmel / the whiche they had fortified before and determ
                  ••
               ed to kepe it agaynſt theyr ennemyes. And as ſoone as the englyſſhe men knewe that they were ther: they came thither and beſieged the place / and made many aſſaute but they within were ſo well fortified with artillary and other ablementes of warre / that they toke but litell hurt. And whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas Phelton / the captall of Beufz / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Pō
               mers / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas Percy / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Euſtace Dambreticourt / & the other knyghtꝭ of the princis / who were at Montaban vnderſtode how 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert Canol
                  •
                had beſieged the fortreſſe of Durmell / thā they determined to go thether / for ther they thought to enploy well their ſeaſon: and ſo they departed fro Montaban mo than .iii. C. ſpearꝭ and lefte .ii. C. behynde to kepe the gariſon / of whom were capitayns 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Aymery of Charters / the Souldiche of Leſtrade / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bernarde Dalbreth / and the lorde of Geronde. So the aboue ſayd lordes rode ſpedely to come to the ſiege of Durmell. and as they rode they founde by the way a ſtronge frenche towne called Monſac / ye which was kept alonly by them of ye towne / but y• knewe nat they. and ſo to aduiſe ye towne they ſente forthe theyr courrours / and they brought worde agayne y• the towne was very ſtrōge / ſo that without ſiege or ſaute it wold nat be wōne

Than they toke counſayle to gether to ſe what was beſt for them to do and ſo determined that it was nat beſte for them to let theyr enterpriſe. of guyng to Durmell / wherfore they paſſed by yerly in the mornynge. and they were nat gone a leage thence but they mette certayn men with foure ſomers laden with vitayle / whom anone they toke and reſted / and demaūded fro whens they came / and whyther they wolde: they ſayd they were departed from Tholouſe to the entent to go to Monſac / And to brynge thyther theyr victayle. Than they were ſtraytlyer examyned of the ſtate of the towne / and what people were within. And they who were afrayed to 
                  〈◊〉
                for feare of theyr lyues) ſhewed howe the towne lacked victayle / for they had nat vitayle 
                  •
               nough 
                  〈◊〉
                the twone to abyde a ſiege the ſpace 
                  ••
               fo
                  ••
               e dayes and howe there was neuer a gē
               cylman of name nor man of Warre within the towne ſaue all onely the dwellers within. Thā they drewe to counſayle agayne / and vtterlye determyned that they wolde go no farther tyll they hadde aſſayed to geat the ſayde towne of Monſac. And ſo returned agayne / and toke the 
                  •
               ictayle for themſelfe / and deliuered the horſes agayn to the vitailers and badde them go and ſeke for newe prouiſyon. And than wente and layde ſiege about Monſac and harbored themſelfe / as though they wolde nat go thence in a moneth / and made ſemblant to aſſaute ye towne the next day / and layde ſuche artyllarie as they had agaynſt the Walles. And whan they with
               
                  〈…〉
                towne ſawe that / they were afrayed / and knewe well they coude nat longe endure / bycauſe of lacke of victayle. Than they beganne to treate with the englyſſhe knyghtes / and fynally they knoweledged the prince of Wales to be theyr lorde / and to kepe and holde the towne of 
                  •
               ym for euer fro thence forth / without fraude or 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               gyn / ſo that they myght ſytte ſtyll in reſt and nothynge of theyrs taken from them. Than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos and his companye at the requeſte of them of the towne ordeyned for them a capitayne a knyght called ſyr Roberte Mytton and twenty men of armes with hym and fourty archers at the coſtes and wages of them of the towne. Than they rode forthe tyll they came to Durmell where as 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert Ca
               
                  〈◊〉
                and his companye laye at ſiege / and there eche made to other great chere and feaſte and tokens of loue / and ſo than they laye all at the ſiege in good ordre.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Robert Canol & ſir John̄ Chandos departed fro Durmell without wynnyng of it / and wente and layde ſiege to the garyſon of Dōme Cap. CC .lvii.
            WHile this ſiege thus endured before Durmelle / there were many ſkrymyſſhes and dedes of armes done / for there Were many good knyghtes and men of armes without / and within were good men of warre / well expierte and vſed therin / orels they coude nat haue endured halfe ſo long as they dyd. They that lay at ſiege without had no great aduantage / For they were in worſe caſe than they within / for .ii. cauſes. The one / it rayned day and nyght / the whiche was euyl both for men and horſes. The other was defaute of vitayles / ſo that they wiſt nat what to eate / a loffe of breade was worthe .iii. olde grotes. and yet worſe than that / ſometyme they coude geat none for money. Howe be it often tymes they hadde plentye of Wynes the Whyche dyd them great comforte. So in this caſe they Were a fyue wekes. and finally whan they ſawe they coude Wynne nothynge there / bycauſe the garyſon Was ſo ſtronge / and that they laye there in ſo great Jeopardye and diſeaſe: they determyned to departe thence / and ſo they dydde / and drewe them to the Caſtell and towne of Dōme / the Whyche ſtode in a more plentyfull countrey / and ſo beſieged the garyſon. And Within was Capitayne / lorde / and gouernour ſyr Robert of Dōme / and with hym a coſyn of his called ſyr Peter Sanglette / and they had geat in to the fortreſſe all the victayle that was abrode in the countrey aboute them. And Whan the Englyſſhemen and Gaſcoynes Who Were to the noumbre of fyftene houndred men of armes: and two thouſande archers and brygauntes hadde thus layde ſiege to the fortreſſe / aſſauted the place couragiouſly / and reiſed vp dyuerſe great engyns / ſo that dayly ther Were ſautes and ſkrymyſſhes / and many feates of armes acheued. And Whan they hadde layen thus at ſiege the ſpace of fyftene dayes / and ſawe they gatte nor conquered nothynge there. And that they laye there in great payne and trauayle. Than they toke aduiſe and coū
               ſaile & concluded to ſende worde to Angoleſme to the prince certifieng hym of theyr eſtate / and Chandos the heraulde was cōmaunded to go on that meſſage / and ſo he dyd ſo moche that he

come to the prince / who had thā about hym but a ſmall company / for all his knyghtes & ſquyers were out one way or other in warre. Whan the heraulde came before the prince / he kneled downe / and recōmended to hym all ye knyghtes & ſquiers that he had left at ſiege before Dōme and ther ſagely and diſcretly he declared to the prince the ſtate and ordynaūce of them at ſiege / and alſo delyuered to the prince letters of credence. And whan the prince had wel vnderſtād all the matter / he ſayd he wolde take aduyſe in the matter / and cauſed ye herauld to abyde ther v. dayes / and on ye .vi. day he delyuered to hym letters ſealed vnder his owne ſeale / and ſayd at his departyng / Chandos recōmaunde vs to al the company there. And ſo departed and toke his way towarde Quercy. Nowe let vs ſpeke of them of the 
                  •
               oſte / howe they dyd in the mean ſeaſon / that thys heraulde wente and came on theyr meſſage.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Robert Canol & ſir John̄ Chandos departed fro Dōme without any hurt doyng there / and went and toke Gauaches / Rochemandor / & diuers other townes / the which wet newly turned frenche. Ca. CC .lviii.
            
               ANone after that Chā
               dos the heraulde was departed on his meſſage fro ye oſte 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Roberte Canoll / ſyr Thomas Pheltō / ye Captall of Beufz 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                James Audeley / and the other knyghtes and ſquiers went to counſayle and concluded to breke vp their ſiege / for they perceyued well howe they coude geat nothyng there / and determined to go further into ye coū
               trey / and to wynne townes and gariſons ſuche as were newly turned frēche / by the exhortyng of the duke of Berrey. So thus theſe knyghtes diſlodged / and departed fro Dōme / & went to Gauaches / the whiche incontinent yelded vp to them / and became engliſſhe / and there they reſted them a .iii. dayes / and toke coūſayle / what they ſhuld do further. And whan they departed they went to a fortreſſe / the whiche the frenche companyons had newely taken / called Foins / but as ſoone as they within the fortreſſe ſawe the engliſſhemē come to them with ſuche a puiſaunce / and that Gauaches was gyuen vp to them / they alſo yelded vp theyr fortreſſe / and became engliſſhe / and ſo ſware alwayes to continue: but yet they wer forſworne / as ye ſhal here after. Than the engliſſhemen paſſed forth / and came before Rochmador. the gariſon was but eaſely fortified / and yet they with i thought nat to yeld vp the fortreſſe. So whan the engliſſhemen came to the towne / and wel aduiſed the maner of them within / than they ſet forth theyr artyllarie / and gaue aſſaute in good ordre / & many wer hurt with ſhotte / both within and without / the whiche aſſaute endured a hole day / and at nyght the engliſſhemen withdrewe to theyr lodgynges / and were in mynde to aſſayle it agayne the next day: but the ſame night they within toke coūſaile together / and perceyued wel howe they were ſorely aſſauted / and the mooſte wyſeſt of them ſayd / howe at length they coude nat endure / and if they were taken by force they ſhulde all dye / and the towne brent and ſpoyled without mercy. So all thynges conſidered the good and the euyll: they fell in treatie to yelde them vp to the engliſſhemen. So they agreed that fro that daye forth they ſhulde become engliſſhe / and that to fulfyll they made ſolempne othes / and beſide that at theyr 
                  〈…〉
                charge to ſende out of theyr town 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               oſte .xv. dayes to gether. 
                  〈◊〉
                ſomets 
                  〈◊〉
                with vitayles / and they to paye for the vitayle at a certayn price ſet amonge them. And thus Rochmador abode ſtyll in reſt. And than the engliſſhemen paſſed forth towarde Uille Franche in Tholoſain / waſtynge and diſtroyenge the countrey / puttyng the pore people into great miſerie / conquerynge townes and caſtels / that were newely turned frēche / ſome by force and ſome by treatye / and at laſt they came to Uille Franche / the whiche was well purueyed of all maner of vitayle & artyllarie / for al the playne coūtrey was drawē thither. and there they beſieged ye towne So that within foure dayes they gaue many a great aſſaute / werby dyuers were hurte bothe within & without. All thynges conſidered they within perceyued well they coude nat long endure / nor they knewe of no maner apparant reskewe comyng to them warde. So than by cō
               poſicion they became engliſſhe / ſo y• they ſhuld haue no domage. So thus Uile frāche became engliſſhe. wherof y• duke of Aniou (who lay at Tholouſe) was ſore diſpleaſed / whā he knewe therof / but he coude nat amende it as at y• tyme. Sir John̄ Chandos left there to be capitayne

an engliſſhe knyght called ſir Robert Roux & ſo paſſed forther diſtroyeng the countrey.
            Nowe let vs returne to the ſiege of Bourdeill / and how the erle of Cambridge and the erle of Penbroke perceiuered in theyr warre.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the erle of Cambrydge and the erle of Pēbroke toke by great aduyſe the garyſon of Bourdeill. Cap. C C .lix.
            
               IN the meane ſeaſon while yt the barones and knightes of Englande made their iourneys aſwell in Rouergue & Quercy / as in Agenoyſe. the ſiege al that ſeaſon endured ſtyll before the garyſon of Bourdeill / the whiche was the ſpace of a .xi. wekes. In the whiche ſeaſon there were many 
                  •
               autes / ſkrymyſſhes / and feates of armes done and acheued nygh euery day. For moſt comōly daily they wtin wold come with al theyr power to the barriers of theyr to wne without the gate and valiauntly ſkrymyſſhe there with all commers. And bare them ſelfe ſo proprely that they were prayſed of all the ooſte without. Thus in this eſtate they endured a great ſeaſon / and by likelyhod longer had done if pryde and preſumpcion hadde nat been. For they were men 
                  ••
               owe / and ryght hardy and well fournyſſhed with vitailes and artillary: and they of the oſte without beganne to ware werie / and ſawe wel howe they laye there at theyr great cooſte and charge / and wanne but lytell. And ſo on a day they toke theyr counſayle howe to maynteyne theyr ſiege / and to aproche the towne. And ther they cōcluded / that the next day in the mornyng they ſhulde be all armed / and ſo kepe them ſelfe in their lodgynges ſecretly / and to ſende a certayne nombre to ſkrymyſſhe with them within for they thought welle / that they within wolde iſſue out on them as they Were accuſtomed to do. And ſo whan they had fought a while than to returne agayne / and to make ſemblaunt as though they fledde / to the entent to drawe their ennemyes out of the fortreſſe. And than they ordeyned to haue a nombre of horſemen redye to come in bitwene them and the towne to ſtop them whan they wolde returne. And ſo on this appoyntment they concluded / ſayenge / that yf they had it nat by that meanes / they ſhulde nat geat the towne eaſely none other wayes. And ſo in the nexte mornynge yerly / they cauſed all theyr people to be armed / and ſente a. CC. to the towne to ſkrymyſſhe. And whan the capitaynes within / as Erualdon and Bernardya / ſawe them come / they were ryght ioyous / and armed them and al theyr company. They were a .vii. ſcore yonge and luſty companyons / and ſo opened theyr gate and came to their barriers and there encountred theyr ennemies right fyerſly. And ſo at laſte the englyſſhemen reculed back for the nones. And whan they within ſaw that / they iſſued out with theyr ſtandardꝭ / and ſaid. Let vs auaunce after them / for ſurely they are all oures. And ſo they folowed after ſo fierſly / and the fleers fledde ſo fayntely / that ſome were ouerthrowen and taken priſoners. and bicauſe they wolde haue all / they had but lytel. for it is an olde ſayenge / He that all coueteth / al leſeth. So theſe companyōs folowed ſo farre fro theyr fortreſſe / that whan they Wolde haue returned / they coude nat. For than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Mō
               tague (who kept the buſſhment with a .v. hundred fyghtyng men / and was made knight the ſame tyme by the erle of Cambridge) Ther he encoūtred his enemies. And whā they of Bour deill ſawe that: than they knewe well that they had foolyſſhely aduentured them ſelfe. How be it they drewe to gether lyke valiaunt men / and fought / and dyd ther feates of armes meruaile to record. and ſo helde them ſelfe vndiſcomfitted the ſpace of .ii. houres ſtyll fyghtynge with theyr enemies / doynge ſuche dedes of armes yt the englyſſhemen toke great pleaſaūce at theyr valiant dedes. And ſyr John̄ Montague was that day a good knyght and a valiant. Finally they of Bourdeill were all diſcomfited ſlayn or taken / ſo that none ſkaped / and the engliſſhe priſoners reſkewed agayn / and Erualdon and Bernardyn of Batefoll Capitaynes were taken. And in the meane ſeaſon while this ſkrymyſſhe was / the erle of Cambridge and therle of Penbroke were auaūced to the barriers and conquered them / and the gate alſo. And ſo the erle of Cābridge baner entred into the forttes. Thus ye engliſſemen had the gariſon of Bourdeill / & cauſed all the men of the towne to ſwere fayth and trouth to kepe the towne for ye prince. And ther they made a newe capitayne the lord of Mucydent & his companye / and .lx. archers within. And than they brake vp theyr armye / & concluded to go to Angoleſme to the prince / to knowe his pleaſure what he wolde commaund them. Thus the ſiege brake vp at Bourdeill and euery mā returned. Nowe let vs returne

to the knyghtes of England and of Gaſcoyne / that rode in Quercy / and let vs ſpeke of Chandos the herauld / & of the newes that he brought fro the prince of Wales.
         
         
            ¶Howe ſir Robert Canoll / ſir John̄ Chandos / and ſir Thomas Phelton ordred their people and retourned to the prince. Cap. CC .lx.
            
               THus as theſe forſayd men of warr and their companyes rode in the marches of Rouergue & Quercy / and turned to theyr parte townes and caſtels / and brought the countrey into great tribulacion. Chandos the herauld came to them where as they were before a fortres in Quercy / and as ſoone as they ſawe ye 
               herauld come to them / they made hym great there / and demaunded of hym tydynges. And he anſwered & ſaid how the prince ſaluted them al / and deſired moche to ſe them / & ſo velyucred to them the princis letters / and they toke & red them / wherin they founde howe that the prince wold that 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas Phelton / & the captal of Beufz ſhuld returne to hym to ye cyte of Angoleſme / and that 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert Canoll and his men / with all the cōpanyons ſhuld abide ſtyll & make warr as they dyd. And whā theſe lordes / who were chief of al the company vnderſtode theſe tidynges they beholde eche other / and demaūded ech of other what was beſt to do. Than they ſayd all with one voyce to sir Robert Canoll. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                ye ſe & vnderſtand howe our 
               lord the prince hath ſent for vs / and hath ordeyned that ye ſhuld abide ſtyl here in this countre as chief gouernor of al his men of warr. Sirs ſayd he my lorde the prince putteth me to more honor than I wold: but ss knowe for trouth wt out you I wyll nat abide / for if you veyt I wyl departe. So they determined all to returne to the prince / to knowe his pleaſure & entent more playnly. Thus brake vp this great vyage and iorney. And at ther departyng they ſent 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Perducas Dalbret to the towne of Rochemador to kepe the fronter there agaynſt the frenchemen. And than they ſayd to all the other companiōs / ſirs ye haue herde howe the prince hath ſent for vs / & as yet we knowe nat ye cauſ why. Ther / fore we ſhall ſhew you what ye ſhall do / ye ſhall aſſemble you toguyder with your companyes and entre into the marcheſſe of Lymoſyn & Auuergne / and make ther warre: for wtout warr ye can nat lyue. And ſirs we promyſe you faithfully: that if ye wynne towne / fortereſſe / orcaſtell wher ſoeuer it be: and yf it fortune that ye or any of you be ther beſieged / we wyll ſo confort you / that we wyll reyſe the ſiege. And whā they herde that promyſe / they ſayde. Sirs we ſhall do the beſt that we can / on the truſt of yor promyſe / for paraduenture we ſhall haue nede therof. Thus they departed eche fto other / and ſo brake vp that iourney: and theſe lordes wēt ſtreight to Angoleſme to the prince / who made to thē great chere. And a lytell before ther was come to the prince oute of the countie of Pyergourt: the erle of Cambridge / the erle of Penbroke / ſir Johan Mountagu and other.
            ¶Nowe let vs ſpeke of the englyſſhe companyons / who were departed fro ſir John̄ Chā
               dos / and howe they perceyuered.
         
         
            ¶Howe the englyſſhe companyons toke the caſtell of Bell perche / & therin the duke of Burbons mother / and alſo they toke the ſtrōge caſtell of ſaīt Seuere in Berry. Cap. CC .lxi.
            
               AMong theſe ſayd companyōs ther were thre ſquiers / who were great capitanes / hardy and well experte mē of warr / ſpecially in ſautyng and ſcalyng of townes and fortereſſes. The one named Ortygo / the ſeconde Bernarde de Wyſke / and the thirde de la Sale. Theſe thre thought nat to ſyt ydell / but to do ſome dede wherby to be ſpoken of. Than they with their cōpany wēt into Lymoſyn / and ſeneſhall and gouernoure ther vnder the prince was ſir Johan Deureux Theſe thre forſayd ſquyers / toke their aduyſe to aſſay to get ſome fortereſſe in Fraunce / and than they knewe well that Bell perche in Burbonoyſe was a ſtronge caſtell / and that therin dwelled the duke of Burbons mother / and mother to the frenche quene. And they vnderſtode by their ſpyes that the good lady was in the caſtell alone / without company or good watche: for they harde reported howe ye conſtable of the caſtell wolde often tymes ryde out / and take ly tell hede to the ſaue kepynge of the place. So

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
theſe cōpanyons / a certayne of thē ſuch as they dyde choſe out ſlept nat their purpoſe but rode in a day and a night / & in the mornyng came to Bell perche / and ſcaled the caſtell and toke it / & the good lady within it. And than̄e they ſawe well howe the fortereſſe was good and ſtrong / and in a good plentyfull coūtre: and ſayd how they truſted to kepe it agaynſt all men. And alſo the ſame night they toke another / caſtell called ſaynt Seuere / on the marcheſſe of Lymoſyn: and gaue it to ſir Johan Deureux. Theſe tidynges was anone knowen in France / howe Bell perche was taken by thenglyſſhmen / and the quenes mother within it. Wherof the frēche kyng was ſore diſpleaſed / and ſo was ye quene and the duke of Burbone: but they coulde nat amende it as at that tyme. In the ſame ſeaſon ſir Loyes of Sanxere / a right valyant knight and a hardy: was choſen and admytted to be one of ye marſhals of the warr in France / howbeit as than lyued ſir Arnolde Dandrehen but he was ſo aged and bruſed in armes / and trauayle of tyme paſſed: yt he coude nat well helpe him ſelfe / nor coulde no lengar attende on that office. Howbeit he wolde 
                  •
               ere harneſſe at tyme of nede. ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke ſomwhat of the buſyneſſe of Picardy / & of aſſembly that was made at Tornehen.
            THe frenche kyng all the ſeaſon of ſomer had made a great appayrell of ſhyppes and veſſels / in the porte of Hareluce to the entent to haue ſent an army into Englande / well furnyſſhed with good men of armes / knightes and ſquiers. Wherof ſir Philyppe his brother duke of Burbon was admytted as chefe gouernour / to thentent to haue diſtroyed Englande. And the frenche kyng lay at the cyite of Roane the better to bring about his purpoſe. And euery weke a two or thre tymes / he wolde go and ſe his ſhyppes: he had ſo great mynde and affection on them. And beſyde that his cōmaundement was ſo ſpredde ouer all the realme / that about Rone / Ueulgueſſyn / and Beaumoſyne / ther came dayly men of warr: in ſo great nombre / that it was marueyle to regard them. And dayly great pruiſyon came to them / as yf they had ben in Caſtyle or Portyngale. Howebeit the lorde Clyſſon / who was one of the chiefeſt of the kynges counſayle / acorded nat to this by age / but diſcounſayled the kyng and all the nobles of the realme / fro this iourney into Englā
               de. Sayeng / howe they were nat ſo well accuſtomed to make warr / as thenglyſſhmen were. And alleged therto dyuers reaſons / as he that knewe more the cōdicyons and nature of the englyſſhmen / and the ſtate of Englande: than other dyd. Natwithſtādyng he coude nat breke ye kyngꝭ purpoſe / nor ſome of his coūſell: but y• this viage ſhulde go forward. The king of England and his ſon the duke of Lācaſtre / and dyuers of his counſell were well enformed of this army and viage / how the frenchmen wolde cōe and make warr on them in their owne coūtre / wherof they were right ioyouſe. And had furniſſhed the portes and paſſages on the ſee agaynſt Poictou & Normandy / to receyue them if they came. And all ye realme of Englande was fully determyned to fight with thē / if they wolde come into the realme. Than the kyng of England was counſayled to ſend his ſon the duke of Lancaſtre with a certayne nombre of men of warr to Calais. And the kyng himſelfe named them that ſhulde go with his ſon thyder: as the erle of Saliſbury / therle of Warwyke / ſir Water of Manny / the lorde Roſe / ſir Henry Percy the lorde Baſſet / the lorde Wyllouby / the lorde Dalawar / the lorde de la Poule / ſir Thom̄s of Graūtſome / ſir Aleyn Bourchier / ſir Richard Story and dyuers other: they were .v. C. men of armes / and .v. C. archers. And ſo they cāe to Douer / & whan their ſhyppes were redy / they paſſed the ſee / & arryued at the ſtrong towne of Calays: and ther toke landyng & were lodged in the towne. In the ſame ſeaſon the kyng of england had writen ſpecially / deſyring ſir Robr̄t of Framur to ſerue hym in his warres / with a certayne nōbre of men of warr. And ſir Robert who had ben alwayes good englyſſhe / anſwered & ſaid: that he wolde be redy whan ſoeuer it pleaſed the kyng of England to cōmaund hym or aſſone as he knewe ye the kyng or any of his children ſhulde aryue at Calys / or in ye felde to make warr into Frāce. So aſſone as he herde that ye duke of Lācaſtre was aryued at Calys / than he ſomoned all his company / & all ſuch as he thought wolde ſerue and ayde hym: and apparelled for his voyage as haſtely as he coude. Now let vs retorne to ye buſyneſſe of Poictou.
         
         
            ¶ How the caſtell of Roche ſur yone was rendred to thenglyſſhmen / and how the capitayn therof was put to dethe / by the cōmaundement of the duke of Aniou. Cap. CC .lxii.
            
               
               LE ſhall knowe that after the deytyng of the barons & knyghtes / of Guyen / and that Chandos the heraud had brought them tidynges fro the prince / they went all by one accorde to the towne of Angoleme / where they founde the prince / who receyued them ioyounlly And a lytell before that / was retourned the erle of Cambridge and therle of Penbroke / after ye conqueſt of Burdeyll: as ye haue herde before. Thus theſe lordes made great feaſt and chere togyder / whan they mette: and than toke coū
               ſayle and aduyſe toguyder / what was beſt for them to do / to enploy forthe their ſeaſon. Than they remembred / howe in the parties of Aniou there was a fayre caſtell and a ſtronge / parteynyng to ye duke of Aniou / called Roche ſur yon And ſo they all determyned to go and ley ſiege therto / and to wynne it if they might. They prepared for that iourney / and ther came to them all the barons and knightes of Po
                  ••
               tou: 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                James Audeley / the lorde of Pouns / the lorde of Partney / ſir Loys of Harcourt ſir Guyſſhard Dangle / the lorde of Pynan / the lorde of Ta
                  ••
                boton / ſir Mabrion of Lymyers / the ſeneſhall of Rochell / ſir Thom̄s Percy: and whan they were all aſſembled togyder / they were mo than thre thouſand ſpeares. And they departed / and rode ſo long y• they came to the caſtell of Roche ſur yone / the whiche was ſtrong and well kept and well prouyded for defence / wt men of warr / purueyance / and artyllary. And the capitayne ther ſet by the duke of Aniou / was called ſir Johan Blōdeau: who had vnder him many good companions / at the coſt and charge of the duke of Aniou. Than the ſayd lordꝭ / layd ſege roūde about the caſtell in good order / and they made to be brought thyder fro the towne of Thoars / and fro the cytie of Poycters dyuers great eugins / and cauſed them to be reared vp agaynſt the caſtell / beſyde other gonnes and ſpringals / that they had in their hooſt. And they had vytayle ynough / for ther came plentie to them fro Poyctou / and fro the marcheſſe adioynynge. And whan ſir Johan Bloudeau ſawe howe he was beſiged / with ſo many good men of warr for ther were nighe all the barons and knyghtes of Acquitayne. And perceyued well howe there was no conforte nor ayde comyng towarde hym fro no ꝑte: he began than to be afrayed / for he ſawe well the lordes that were ther wold nat departe / tyll they had won the caſtell / other byforce or otherwyſe. And in the erle of Cambridge company / and in ſir Johan Chandos / there were byuers knyghtes that were well acquaynted with the capitayne / & had ben in his company in tyme paſſed. And they came to the barryers / and dyde ſo moche on their promyſe and aſſurance / that they ſpake with hym: and handeled him in ſuche wyſe (for he was nat ſubtell / howbeit he was a good knight) that he rē
               dred vp the caſtell: if he were nat reſcued with in the ſpace of a moneth / and thā he to haue .vi. thouſande frankes / for the purueyaunces with in ye caſtell. And ſo by this treaty they without to abyde ſtyll in ſuertie / without makyng of any warr of bothe parties / duryng the terme of the ſayd cōpoſicyon: & if they were nat reſcued within the ſame terme as aforeſayd / than they to rendre vp the caſtell. This treaty thus concluded / the capitayne within ſignifyed the mater to the duke of Aniou / and to the french kynge / to the duke of Berry / and to all other lordes by whome he thought to be ayded / to thentent that he might the better be excuſed fro blame: if any reproch after were layd to his charge / But for all his ſendyng / & that the caſtell was fayre and ſtronge / and right neceſſary to be frenche / for the countrey of Aniou / and Tourayne. yet for all that: they had nother reſcue nor confort. So that aſſone as the moneth was paſſed and expyred / the englyſſhe lordes deſyred the capytayne to kepe his promyſe: and alſo he had delyuered good pledges ſo to do. Than the ſayd capitayne ſayd to his company. Sirsſyth the frenche kyng and the duke of Aniou / woll wylfully leſe this fortreſſe / we can nat kepe it alone without we be ayded. And ſo ther he yelded vp the caſtell: and thenglyſſhmen toke poſſeſſyon therof / and were right gladde therof / and they delyuered to the capitayne .vi. thouſande frankes / for ſuche prouiſyons as were within the caſtell. And he and all his cōpany were ſurely cō
               neyed to the towne of Angyers. And aſſone as he was come thyder / he was areſted by the gouernour of the towne / and put in to the caſtell in priſon. And as I herd ſay / in a night he was put into a ſacke / and caſt into the ryuer & drowned: by the ſtrayte cōmaūdement of the duke of Aniou / bycauſe he toke golde and ſyluer / for ye delyerance of the caſtell / the whiche was able of it ſelfe / to haue be kept ye ſpace of a yere / if nede had ſo reqred. Thus thēglyſſhmen had in poſſeſſyon / the caſtell of Roche ſur yone in Aniou / and ther they ſet a great gariſon / and repeyred the caſtell ſufficiently. And than they returned agayne to Angoleme to the prince / and ſome of thē toke leaue & departed to their owne houſes / 

and ſir James Audeley that valyant knight / & ſeneſhall as than of Poictou / went & lay at Fōt neythe countie. And there he fell ſicke of a ſore malady / ſo yt therby at length he dyed / wherof the prince & princeſſe were right ſoroufull / and in lykewiſe all the barons and knightes of Poictou. And his obſequy was ſolemply done in the cytie of Poicters / the prince beyng ther perſonally. And anone after at the requeſt of y• barons and knightes of Poicton ſir John̄ Chandos / who was as than conſtable of Aquitayne was made ſeneſhall of Poictou. And ſo he wēt and ſay in the cyte of Poiters / and he made of / ten yſſues and iourneys agaynſt the frēchmen and helde thē ſo ſhorte that they durſt nat ryde but in great routes and cōpanies. In the ſame ſeaſon was delyuered out of priſon / the vycont of Rochchoart / whome the prince had kepte in priſone / bycauſe he was had in ſuſpect to haue tourned frenche. So that at the requeſt of his frendes in Poictou / ſuche as were than aboute the prince: the prince delyuered him / and gaue him agayne all his landes. And aſſoone as the ſame vycount was delyuered out of priſone / he went priuely to Parys to the frenche kynge / & tourned and became frenche / and than retourned into his owne lande / without any knolege that he had been at Parys. Than he ſet Thybault du pont a breton in his fortereſſe: and in contynent ſent and defyed the prince of Wales / and made him great warre. ¶ Nowe lette vs ſomwhat ſpeke of the duke of Lācaſtre.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Burgoyne deꝑted fro the cyte of Roane / to thentent to fight with the duke of Lancaſtre / and howe they lodged eche agaynſt other at Tornehen. Cap. CC .lxiii.
            
               WHan the duke of Lancaſtre was come to Calays / as ye haue herde before: and had well refreſſhed him & his people ther. Than he thought nat to lye ther in ydelneſſe / but rather to do ſome dedes of armes in France. And for that intent he departed fro Calays on a day with thre hūdred ſpeares / and as many archers: & ſo paſſed beſyde Guynes / and rode ſo long tyll he paſſed the ryuer of Oſtre / & ther ſpred abrode in the countre / and toke their way towarde the abbey of Lynques and ther toke a great pray and ledde it to Calys. And another day they toke another way and went towardes Boloyne / & dyde great domage to the playne countre. and the ſame tyme therle Guy of ſaynt Poule and ſir Galeran his ſofie / with a certayne nōbre of men of warr lay in the cytie of Turwyn / but they yſſued nat out for all they herde that thēgliſſhmen rode abrode in the coū
               tre / for they thought them ſelfe nat able to fight with them / nor to kepe the felde agaynſt thē. A none tidynges came to the frenche kyng where as he lay at Roane / and had made a great aſſē
               ble / as ye haue herde before. Howe the duke of Lancaſtre was come to Calais / and howe dayly / he and his men made rodes and yſſues in to France. Whan the frenche kyng herde yt / bothe he and his counſayle had newe ymaginacions / and the ſame weke it was determyned that the duke of Burgoyne ſhulde haue taken the ſee to haue gone into England. Than the kyng and his coūſayle debated / what was beſt to do in yt caſe: other to go and fight with thenglyſſhmen that were on yt ſyde the ſee / or els to kepe forthe their iorney into England. And ſo ther it was fermely cōcluded: yt euery man ſhulde dyſloge and to make them redy to go towarde Calays with the duke of Burgoyne. And ſo their firſt purpoſe was broken / for they were determyned to go and fight with thenglyſſhemen on yt ſyde the ſee / wherof euery man was glad and aparelled thēſelfe. And the duke of Burgone deꝑted and all his cōpany / and toke his way to paſſe y• ryuer of Some at Abuyle: & dyde ſo moche by his iourneys that he came to Muttrell / at Hedyn / and at ſaynt Poule / & ther about the frēch men abode eche other. Than it was ſhewed the duke of Lancaſtre / how the frēchmen aproched nere to him to fight / wherof he was glad & was yſſued out of Calais for that intent / & toke his felde in the valey of Tornehen. And he had nat ben ther long / but that the gentyll knight 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert of Namur came thyder to ſerue him with a hundred ſpeares well furnyſſhed / of whoſe comyng the duke of Lancaſtre was right ioyfull and ſayd to him. A my fayre and dere vncle: ye be right hartely welcome. Sir it is ſhewed vs howe the duke of Burgoyne aprocheth ſore to fight with vs. Sir ꝙ he in goddes name ſo be it we wolde gladly ſe him. Thus thēglyſſhmē were loged in the vale of Tornehen / and fortefyed their campe with ſtrong hedges / and dayly ther came prouiſyon to thē from Calais / and their currors ran ouer the countie of Guyens

for forage and other vitayls / but lytell they gat there: for all the playne countre was diſtroyed and loſt before / and euery thynge had in to fortreſſes. Than came the duke of Burgoyne and his company / and lodged on the hyll of Tornehen / agaynſt the englyſſhmen. The frenchmen lodged them in good order & toke a great ſpace of grounde / for as I herde ſay: the duke of burgoyne had ther with him / mo than foure thouſande knightes. Conſydre than / if the reſydue were nat a great nombre. Thus they were ech agaynſt other a long ſpace without any thyng doynge / for though the duke of Burgoyne had that great nōbre / and ſawe that ther was with hym of good men of warr / ſeuyn agaynſt one of the engliſſhmen: yet for all that he wolde nat fight without leaue of ye kyng his brother / who was nat in mynde that he shuld fight. And yet of trouthe / yf the frenchmen had ſet forwarde to haue fought / the englyſſhmen wolde nat haue refuſed them: for they were redy euery daye to receyue them in good order. Euery man fully determyned what they ſhulde do / if they dyd yſſue out: but bycauſe they were ſo fewe in nō
               bre / and that they were in ſo ſtrōg a place / they thought nat to departe nyſely oute of their aduantage. And ſundrie tymes dyuers on bothe parties wolde yſſue and ſcrimyſſhe / and ſomtyme wanne and ſomtyme loſt / as chaunce often falleth in ſuche aduentures. In the ſame tyme Loyes the erle of Flaunders / was greatly inclyned to the honoure and profyte / of his ſonne the duke of Burgoyne / who lay the ſame ſeaſon in a fayre houſe / that he had newly buylded beſyde Gaunt. And often harde tidynges from the duke and he from hym / by meſſāgers comynge and goynge: and alwayes he counſayled the duke / that he ſhulde in no wyſe breke nor paſſe the ordynaunce of the kynge his brother / nor of his counſayle. ¶ Nowe let vs leue them thus and retourne to the buſyneſſe of farther coūtreis / where as knightes and ſquyers hadde ynough to do / bycauſe the warres were more habundant there / than in other places.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Johan Chādos brought the countre of Aniou in great trybulacion / and howe he waſted and dyſtroyed the landes of the bycount of Rochchoart / excepte the fortereſſes. Cap. CC .lxiiii.
            
               IN the meane ſeaſone while this iorney was thus made about Tornehē / ther fell dyuers aduētures in poictou / the whiche ought nat to be forgotten. For ſir Johan Chandos who was ſeneſhall ther: lyke a hardy and a valyāt knight euer deſyringe to fynde the frenchmen to fyght with them. He aſſembled togyder at Poicters a certayne nombre of men of armes: ſayenge howe he wolde ryde in to Aniou / and retourne agayne by Towrayne / and ſe the frenchemen in the marcheſſe and fronters there. The whiche purpoſe he ſignifyed to therle of Penbroke who lay at Mortaygne in garyſon / with two hundred ſpeares. Of the whiche tidynges the erle was ioyfull / and was well content to haue rydden forthe / but ſome of the knightes of his counſayle brake his purpoſe / and ſayde. Sir: ye be as yet but yong / your nobleneſſe is yet to come: and ſir / if you put your ſelfe in to the cō
               pany of ſir John̄ Chandos / whatſoeuer ye do he ſhall haue the brute and voyce therof / for ye ſhall be reputed but as his companyon. Therfore ſir / it is better for you ſythe ye be ſo great a lorde as ye be / that ye do your enterpriſes by your ſelfe a parte. And let ſir Johan Chandos do his by him ſelfe / ſythe he is but a bacheler as to the regarde of your eſtate. So theſe wordes and other abated the erles desyre / ſo that therby he had no more wyll to go forthe with 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Johan Chandos / and ſo made an excuſe to hym. Howebeit ſir John̄ Chandos wolde nat breke his purpoſe in goyng forth to do his enterprice but made his aſſemble at Poicters / and ſo deꝑted with thre hundred ſpeares of knyghtes and ſquyers / and two hundred archers. With hym was ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Stephyn Goſenton / ſir Richarde Pountchardon / ſir Euſtace Dābretycourt / ſir Richard Tēcon / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thom̄s Spens / ſir Nowell Lornyſſhe / ſir Dangoſes ſir Thomas Balaſtre / ſir Johan Tryuell / ſir Wyllm̄ Mountendre / ſir Wyllm̄ Manbrius of Lymers / ſir Geffray Dargēton and dyuers other. Theſe men of armes and archers / rode forthe in good ordynaunce / and paſſed Poitou and entred into Aniou. Than they ſent forthe their currours before them / to bren and exyle ye playne countrey. So they dyde many yuels in that good plentyfull countrey of Aniowe / and none came to fight with them / and taryed ther the ſpace of .xv. dayes / and ſpecially in the plentyfull

 co
                  ••
               re called Londonoys. And than they cetourned agayne bytwene Aniou & Tourayn a long by the ryuer of Creuſe. And ſo entred in to the lande of the vycont of Roche choart / and brent and waſted the countre all about / for they left nothyng abrode without the fortreſſe. And ſo came to the towne of Roch choart and aſſay 
                  •
               ed it right valyantly: howbeit they wanne nothyng ther / for the towne was well fortifyed 
                  〈◊〉
                good men of warr. Thybault of pont / and He lyons of Talay were capitayns within ye towne ſo than thēnglyſſhmen paſſed forthe. Than ſir Johan Chandos had knowledge howe the marſhall of Frāce / ſir Loyes of Sanxere with a great nombre of men of warr was at Hay in Tourayne. Thā he had great deſyre to go thy 
                  〈◊〉
                & ſent worde therof to therle of Pēbroke de ſyringe him to go with hym to y• Hay in Tourayne / and to mete with hym at Caſteleraulte. And Chandos the heraude wente on this meſſage / and he founde therle at Mortayne / who had redy aſſembled a certayne nombre / to then tent to make a iourney on his enemyes. And y• erle made his excuſe by counſayle of his knightes / ſayeng he might nat cōe to ſir John̄ Chandos as at that tyme. Than the heraude retourned and foūde his maiſter at Caſteleraut / and there ſhewed hym his anſwere fro therle of Pē
               broke. And whan ſir John̄ Chādos herde that he was nat well content in his mynde / for he ꝑceyued well howe therle left that enterprice / by preſumpcion and pride. Than he ſayde / well a goddes name ſo be it. And ſo than gaue leaue to the mooſt parte of his company to departe / and he went agayne to the cytie of Poicters.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Loyes of Sanxere cāe on therle of Penbroke and ſlewe diuers of his people / and beſieged the erle in a houſe. Cap. CC .lxv.
            
               NOwe let vs ſhewe ſō what of therle John̄ of Pē
               broke / what he dyde aſſone as he knewe that ſir Johan Chandos was gone backe agayne to Poycters / & had gyuen leue to his men to departe. Than the erle prepared to ryde forthe / & with hym a thre hūdred ſpeares englyſſhe / and po
                  •
               ctenyns / and ſo departed fro Mortaygne. Ther were certayne knightes and ſquyers of Poictou / & of Xaynton / and ſome of England / who had ben with ſir Johan Chandos. Than they came to the erle of Penbroke & went forth in his company. So they rode forthe and paſſed through Poyctou / and toke the ſame waye that ſir Johan Chandos had taken before / and ſo entred into Aniou / and brent and exyled the countre / and toke all that was lefte / and ſo they taryed a certayne ſpace in the countre of Lōdo noyſe. And than tooke their way into the lande of the vycont of Roche choart / wher they dyde great domage and hurt. Than whan y• frenchmen / who were in the garyſons in the marches of Tourayne / Aniou / and Poyctou / herde of theſe two iourneys / thus made in the countrey of Aniou. And herde howe that for pride therle of Pēbroke / who was but a yonge man / diſdayned to go forthe in the cōpany of ſir John̄ chandos. Than they determyned to encountre him if they might / thinkyng more eaſely to diſconfyte him than ſir Johan Chandos. Than they aſſembled togyder ſecretely a certayne nombre out of euery garyſon ther aboute / & they made their capitayne / ſir Loys of Sanxer marſhall of France. And ſo ſecretely in a night they went forthe by Roche Poizay in Poictou / the which was frenche / and in that company was ſir Robert of Sanxere / coſyn to the marſhall: 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Johan of Uyen / ſir Johan of Bulle / ſir Wyllyam of Bordes / ſir Loys of ſaynt Julyan / and Carnet the breton: they were to the nombre of .vii. hundred. Than the erle of Penbroke had done his iourney / and was retournynge and entred agayne in to Poyctou / and had made an ende of the brennyng of the vycont of Roch
                  •
               hoartes landes. And in his company was ſir Bauden of Fanuyll ſeneſhall of Xaynton / ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Thomas Spenſer / ſir Dangoſes / ſir Johan Ornych / ſir John̄ Herpedan / ſir James Surgeres / ſir Johan Couſon ſir Thomas of ſaynt Albyn / ſir Robert Twyforde / ſir Symon Auſagre / ſir John̄ of Mortayne / ſir John̄ Couchet / and dyuers other. Thus theſe englyſſhmen and poyctenyns rode forthe with out diſmay / and herde no maner of tidynges of any men of warr / and ſo with great pyllage & praye entred agayne in to Poyctou. And on a day they came about hye noone to a village called Puiernon / & toke their lodgynge / wenyng to them to be in ſurety: and there varlettꝭ we
                  ••
                ſettyng vp of their horſes and dreſſing of their ſupper. Than ſodenly the frēchmen who were

well aduyſed of that they ſhulde do / came in to the towne their ſpeares in the reeſt / and cryed their cryes / our lady of Sanxere for the marſhall of Fraunce. And ſo they beate downe on euery ſyde the englyſſhmen in the ſt
                  •
               etes / and in the houſes / and ſo the noyſe was ſo gret that it reyſed men vp in great affray / for they were ſodenly taken. The noyſe came to therle of Pē
               broke / to ſir Thom̄s Percy / ſir Thomas Frā
               uyll / and to the other knightes: howe y• frenchmen wer come and aſſayled them. Than theſe lordes went out of their lodgynges and aſſembled their companyes togyder / but they coulde nat drawe all togyder / for the frenchmen were ſo ſtronge / that the englyſſhmen coulde nat endure them. So at the firſt brunt / ther were taken and ſlayne mo than ſixſcore: ſo that the erle hadde no remedy but to withdrawe him aſſone as he might / in to a place of the templers cloſed with ſtone walles. And ſo there the erle and ſuche as were with him entred into the place / and the reſydue were taken and ſlayne / and mooſt parte of their harneſſe and horſes were loſte. And ther the erle of Penbroke loſt all his baggage and richeſſe. And whan̄e the frenchemen knewe that they were in that place / they were therof right ioyouſe. Sayeng amonge theym ſelfe ▪ they can nat ſcape vs / they are all oures. They ſhall nowe derely abye the domagꝭ / that they haue done in Aniou and Towrayne. So the frenchmen drewe to the place in good order redy to aſſayle it / for they ſawe well that y• place was p̄ignable. Than they aſſayled the place right fierſly / and there was ſhewed many 
                  〈◊〉
                noble feate of armes. The frenchmen were good men of warr / and aſſayled the place rounde about right valyantly. The erle and thenglyſſhmen payned themſelf as moche as they might to defende theymſelfe / as it ſtode them well in hande. The frenchmen hadde certayne ſcalynge ladders / and ſome of theym aduentured thē
               selfe to mount vpon the walles / with paueſſes before theym / for feare of ſhotte and caſtyng of ſtones / but whan they were vp they were fierſe lye receyued / with knightes and ſquyers / with ſpeares and ſwerdes in their handes. And ſoo fought with the frenchmen hand to hande / and cauſed them to diſcende downe faſter than they came vp: & ſuche archers as were within ſhotte ſo fierſly / that the frenchmen drue abacke. So this aſſaut endured tyll it was night / than the frenchmen right wery and ſore traueyled 
                  〈◊〉
                retrayt and reculed backe / ſayeng that 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               hat day / tyll y• nexte mornyng that they purpoſed to come agayn to thaſſaut. But all thynges cōſydred / the frenchmen ſayde ſurely they be all ours / they can nat long endure ayenſt vs / we ſhall rather famyſhe them. And ſo they lodged them that night / and kept good watch before ye place. ye may knowe for trouhe / therle of Penbroke and his cōpany were natte well at their eaſe / for they ſawe well they were in great ieopardy. For they parceyned well howe the 
                  〈…〉
                was nat ſtronge ynough to endure 
                  〈…〉
                ſo many good knightes / as were there 
                  〈◊〉
                thē. Alſo they 
                  〈…〉
                and artyllary / 
                  〈…〉
                the place lon
                  〈…〉
                they made no ſembl
                  〈…〉
                thought to 
                  〈…〉
                and a night yf nede were. And whan it wa
                  〈…〉
                night / than they de
                  ••
               
               red a ſquyer on who
                  〈…〉
               ey had great truſt / to depart out at a backe p
                  ••
               terne and ſo to ryde to Poicters / and to ſpeke with ſir John̄ Chādos / and to ſhewe him what caſe they were in. She wynge him alſo / howe that yf he lyſt / he might come tyme ynough to reſcue them: for they truſted to defende the place / tyll the nexte day paſt noone. The ſquyer who ſawe the great dāger that they were in / ſaid he wolde gladly do their meſſage. And alſo he ſayde / he knewe well 
                  〈◊〉
                way thider. And ſo about mydnight 
                  〈…〉
                by a backe poſterne & toke the way to 
                  〈◊〉
                whiche as he thought ſhulde haue ben the 
                  ••
               xt way. Howbeit for all his knowledge / he went all night out of the way / ſo yt it was faire day or he coude get in to the right waye. And in the mornynge the frenchmen armed thē and ſowned to thaſſaut / ſayeng how they wolde aſſaut y• place in y• cole of the mornyng / rather than in y• heate of the day. And the erle of Penbroke / who had ſlept but lytell / for all the night he & his cōpany were fortifyenge of the walles with ſtones & other thynges / for they ſawe well howe the frenchemen ordeyned to aſſayle them agayne. So within a while the frenchemen drewe to y• place & in good ordre made aſſaute & had ſkalyng ladders & ſome moūted vp y• walles with paueſſes to defend their heedes. they thought a great honour / who ſoeuer coude mount fyrſt howe be it thēngliſſhmen were nat idle / but redy to defēd thēſelfe / or els they had ben taken / & ſo they defē
               ded thē ſelfe merueylouſly and caſt downe ſtones on the paueſſes & baſſenettꝭ / and ouerthrue ſlewe & hurt dyuers / & dyde ſuche dedes of armes yt ye neuer herde of ſo feble a place / ſo well defēded with ſo fewe people / agaynſt ſo many good knightes & ſquyers as were ther▪
                ſo this aſſaut endured fro mornyng tyll it was noone.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe ſir Johan Chandos came to the ſocour of the erle of Penbroke. Ca. CC .lxvi.
            
               BItwene the mornyng & ix. of ye day whan thaſſaut was moſte fereſeſt / and that the frenchmen were ſore dyſpleaſed / that thēglyſſhmen endured ſo longe. Wherfore they ſent to the vyllagꝭ ther about / for pikes and matockes to breke downe and vndermyne the wall / whiche thyng the englyſſhmen douted mooſt. Than the erle of Pē broke called a ſquyer to hym and ſayd. Frende take my courſer and yſſue out at the backe poſterne / and we ſhall make you waye / and ryde ſtreight to Poicters and ſhewe ſir John̄ Chā
               Dos the ſtate and dangere that we be in / and recomaunde me to him by this token and toke a Ryng fro his fynger and delyuered to him: and ſayd take ſir Johan Chandos this rynge / he knoweth it right well. The ſquyer who tooke that enterprice / thought it ſhulde be a great honour to him / if he might acheue to ſcape & ſpeke with hym. Toke the rynge and mounted incō
               tynent on his courſer / and departed by a preuy way while the ſaute endured and toke the way to Poycters. In the meane ſeaſon the aſſaute was terryble and feyrſe by the frenchmen / and the englyſſhmen defended them ſelfe right valyantly with good courage / as it ſtode theym well in hande ſo to do.
            
               NOwe let vs ſpeke of the firſt ſquyer that departed fro Puirenon at the hour of mydnight / and all the night he rode out of his way. and whan it was mornyng and fayre day / thā he knewe his way and ſo rode toward Potters: and by that tyme his horſe was wery Howheit he came thyder by nyne of the clocke / and ther alyghted / before ſir Johan Chandos lodging / and entred and founde him at maſſe. 
                  •
               nd ſo came and kneled downe before him and dyde his meſſage / as he was cōmaunded. And ſir Johan Chandos who was nat content / for the other day before / in that therle of Pēbroke wolde nat ryde with hym as ye haue herde before. Wherfore he was nat lightly enclyned to make any great haſt but ſayde it wyll be harde for vs to com thyder tyme ynough and to here out this maſſe. And anone after maſſe y• tables were couered redy to dyner / and the ſeruauntꝭ demaūded of him if he wolde go to dyuer. And he ſayde yes ſythe it is redy. Than he wente in to his hall / and knightes and ſquyers brought hym water. And as he was a waſſhynge / there came in to the hall the ſeconde ſquyer / fro the erle of Penbroke: and kneled downe and toke the rynge out of his purſe / and ſayde. Ryght dere ſir: the erle of Penbroke recommaundeth him to you by this token / and deſyreth you her tely to come and conforte hym / and bring hym out of the daunger that he and his be in at Puyrenon. Than ſir Johan Chandos tooke the rynge and knewe it well / and ſayd: to cōethyder be tymes it were harde / if they be in yt caſe as ye ſhewe me. Lette vs go to dyner / and ſo ſat downe and all his cōpany / and eate the firſt courſe. And as he was ſeruedde of the ſeconde courſe and was eatynge therof / ſodenly ſir Johan Chandos / who greatly had ymagined of that mater. And at laſt caſt vp his heed / & ſayd to his company. Sirs / the erle of Penbroke is a noble man / and of great lynage. He is ſonne to my naturall lorde the kynge of Englande / for he hath wedded his doughter: and in euery thyng he is companyon to therle of Cābridge. He hath requyred me to come to hym in his beſyneſſe / and Jought to conſente to his deſyre / and to ſocour and confort him / if we may come be tymes. Ther with he put the table fro him / & ſayde. Sirs / I wyll ryde towarde Puyrenon wherof his people hadde great ioye / and incō
               tynent apparelled theym / and the trumpettes ſowned. And euery man mounted on their horſes they that beſt might / as ſoone as they herde that ſir Johan Chandos wolde rydeto Puyre non / to conforte the erle of Penbroke and his company / who were beſiege there. Than euery knight / ſquyer / and man of armes / went out in to the felde. So they were mo than two hundred ſpeares and alway they encreaſed. Thus as they rode forthe toguyder / tidynges came to the frenchemen / who hadde contynually aſſawted the fortereſſe / from the mornynge tyll it was highe noone (by their ſpyes) who ſayd to theym. Sirs / aduyſe you well: for ſir Johan Chandos is deꝑted fro Poicters / with mo thā CC. ſpeares / and is comynge hyderwarde in great haſt / & hath gret deſyre to fynde you here. And whan ſir Loyes of Sāxere / and ſir John̄ of Uyen / ſir John̄ of Bulle / and the other capitayns herd thoſe tidyngꝭ / the wiſeſt among thē ſaid. Sirs our people 
                  〈◊〉
                ſore wery and traueyled with aſſautyng of thenglyſſhmen bothe y
                  •
               
               ſter day & this day. Therfore I thynke it were

better that fayre and eaſely we returned in ſaue garde / with ſuch wynninges and priſoners as we haue gote / rather than to abyde the aduenture of the comyng of ſir Johan Chandos and his company / who are all freſſhe and luſty / for I feare we may loſe more than we ſhall wyn / ye whiche counſayle was well beleued / for it behoued nat them long to tary. Than their trūpettes ſo wned the retrayt / than all their company drewe fro the aſſaut / & aſſembled togyder and truſſed vp their harneſſe and cariage / and ſo retourned and toke the way to Poizay. The erle of Penbroke and his company / knewe anone therby / howe the frenchmen had knowledge of the comyng of ſir Johan Chandos. Than the erle ſayde. Sirs lette vs all yſſue out and ryde toward Poicters / to mete with my dere frende ſir Johan Chandos. Than they lepte a horſebacke ſuche as had any horſes / and ſome a fote and two and two on a horſe / and ſo they yſſued out of the caſtell and rode towarde Poycters. And they had nat rydden aleage / but that they encountred ſir Johan Chandos and his company / and there was a ioyfull metynge: and ſir John̄ Chandos ſayde that he was ſore diſpleased / that he came nat or the frenchmen were departed. And ſo they rode togyder talkynge the ſpace of thre leages / and than̄e they toke leaue eche of other. Sir Johan Chandos retourned to Poitters / and the erle of Penbroke to mortaygne: fro whens he firſte departed. And the marſhalles of Fraunce and their company returned to Potzay / and there departed their 
                  •
               otie. And than euery mā went to their owne gariſon and ledde with them their priſonerss / and raunſomed theym courteſly / in lyke maner as was acuſtomed bytwene the englyſſhmen and frenchmen. ¶ Nowe lette vs retourne to the aſſemble before Tornehen / and ſpeke of ye deth of the mooſt gentyll quene / mooſtly detail / and mooſt courteſſe yt euer was quene in her vdayes the whiche was the fayre lady Philyp of Heynault / quene of Englande and Irelande.
         
         
            ¶ Howe quene Philyp of Englande trepaſſed out of this mortall lyfe / and of the thre gyftes that ſhe deſyred of the kynge her huſbande or ſhe dyed. Cap. CC .lxvii.
            
               IN the meane ſeaſone whyle the noble men of Frā
               ce were thus aſſembled before Tornehen / of whome y• duke of Burgon was chefe and ſouerayne / and y• duke of Lancaſtre with thēgliſſhmen on the other parte. There fell in England a heuy caſe and a comon / howbeit it was right pyteouſe / for the kyng / his chyldren / & all his realme. For the good quene of Englande / that ſo many good dedes had done in her tyme / and ſo many knightꝭ ſocoured / and ladyes and damoſels cōforted: and had ſo largely depted of her goodes to her people / and naturally loued alwayes the nacyon of Heynaulte / the countrey wher as ſhe was borne. She fell ſicke in the caſtell of Wyndſore / the whiche ſickeneſſe contynewed on her ſo longe / that there was no remedye but dethe. And the good lady whanne ſhe knewe and parceyued that there was with her no remedy but dethe / ſhe deſyred to ſpeke with the kynge her huſbande. And whan he was before her: ſhe put out of her bedde her right han
               
                  •
               e / and toke the kynge by his right hande / who was right ſorowfull at his hert. Than ſhe ſaid Sir we haue in peace / ioye / and great proſperyte / vſed all oure tyme toguyer. Sir nowe I pray you at our departyng / that ye wyll graūt me thre deſyres. The kynge tyght ſorowfully wepyng / ſayd. Madame: deſyre what ye wyll I graunt it.
            SIr ſayde ſhe / I requyre you firſte of all: that all maner of people / ſuche as I haue dault with all in their marchaundyſe / on this ſyde theſee or beyond / that it may pleaſe you to pay euery thynge that I owe to theym / or to any other. And ſecondly ſir / all ſuche ordynaūce and promyſes as I haue made to the churches / as well of this countrey as beyonde the ſee / wher as I haue hadde my deuocyon: that it maye pleaſe you to accomplyſſhe and to full fyll the ſame. Thirdely ſir / I requyre you that it may pleaſe you to take none other ſepulture / whan ſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe god to call you out of this tranſytorie lyfe / but beſyde me in Weſtmynſter The kynge all wepynge / ſayde. Madame: I graunt all your deſyre. Than the good lady and quene made on her the ſigne of the croſſe / and cōmaunded the kyng her huſbande to god and her yongeſt ſofie Thomas / who was there beſyde her. And anone after ſhe yelded vp the

ſpiryte / the whiche I beleue ſurely the holy angels receyued with great ioy vp to heuen / for in all her lyfe ſhe dyd neyther in thought nor dede thyng / wherby to leſe her ſoule: as ferr as any creature coulde knowe. Thus the good quene of Englande dyed: in the yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lxix. in the vigyll of our lady in the myddes of Auguſt / Of whoſe dethe tidynges came to Tornehen / into the englyſſhe hooſt: wherof euery creature was ſore diſpleaſed / and ryght ſo roufull: and ſpecially her ſon the duke of Lā
               caſtre. Howbeit ther is no ſorowe / but it behoueth at length to be borne and forgoten. Therfore thenglyſſhmen left nat their order / but remayned a long ſpace before the frēchmen. So it was / that certayne knightes and ſquyers of France that were ther / and dayly ſawe their enemyes before them. Concluded toguyder / the nexte mornynge to go and ſerimyſſhe with the englyſſhmen. And of the ſame acorde were mo than thre hūdred knightes and ſquyers of Uer mandois / Artois / and Corbois: ſo eche of thē gaue warnyng to other / without knowledge of any of their marſhals. And ſo ye next mornyng by yt it was day lyght / they were on horſbacke redy armed / and toguyder aſſembled. And ſo they rode forthe without any noyſe makyng / & rode about the hyll of Tornchen to take their aduantage / to come in at one of the corners of thenglyſſhe hooſt. It whiche corner was loged ſir Robert of Namure and his company / & the ſame nyght he had kepte the watche / and in the mornynge he was drawen to his tent / and was ſet at the table to eate ſome meate / armed ſaue his baſſenet: and ye lorde of Poicten with him. And therwith came the frenchmen on the ſame ſyde / but as happe was: ſuche as had kepte the watche were nat vnarmed / the which fortuned well for them. For anone they were redy to defende their ennemyes / and ſo encountred with them and brake their way. Anone tidynges cāe to ſir Robert of Namure / howe his men were fightyng with the frenchmen: therwith he put the table fro hym / and ſayd: let vs go and helpe our men. And incontynent he put his baſſenet on his heed / and cauſed one to take his baner / and diſplayed it. Than one ſayd to him. Sir: me thynke it were beſt that ye ſent to the duke of Lancaſtre / and fight nat without hym. He anſwered ſhortly and ſayd. Send who ſo wyll I wyll go the nexte way that I can to my men / and they that loue me / lette them folowe after. Therwith he went forth his glayue in his hande / aprochyng his ennemyes: and the lorde of Poicten and ſir Henry of Sanxels with hym / and dyuers other knightes. And ſo founde his men fightyng with the frenchmen / who were a great nombre: and lykely to haue done a great enterprice. But aſſoone as they ſawe ſir Robr̄t of Namures baner come / they drewe abacke to gyder: for they feared that all the hooſt had be ſtyrred / and ſo in dyuers places it was. Under ſir Robertes baner / there was ſlayne a knyght of Uermandoiſe / called ſir Robert of Coloyne / the which was great domage: for he was right ſwete and courteſſe / and a ryght good knight. The frēchmen retourned agayne without any more doyng / for they feared rather to leſe than wyn. And ſir Robert thought nat to folowe after foliſſhely / but aſſembled his men togyder / and ſo went to his lodgyng / whan he ſawe that the frenchmen were gone.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Burgoyne depted fro the duke of Lācaſtre without batayle / and howe the duke of Lācaſtre went to Calays. Ca. CC .lxviii.
            
               AFter thys aduenture: 
                  ther was nothing done that ought to be remembred. It diſpleaſed mochſom of both parties / yt they were ſo long ſo nere togyder and fought nat / for it was ſayde euery day among them / we ſhall fight to more we / y• whiche day cāe neuer. For as it is ſayd before: the duke of Burgoyne wolde nat breke the ordynaunce of the kynge his brother / who hadde ſtraytely commaunded him / that he ſhulde gyue no batayle to thenglyſſhmen: and euery day there was meſſangers bytwene them / comyng and goynge. The duke of Burgoyne / as I was than̄e enfourmed / ymagyned and conſydered / howe that he lay there at great coſt and charge / and howe he coude lye no lengar there to his honour. For he hadde there a four thouſande knyghtes or mo / and ſawe well that his enemyes were but a handfull of men / as to the nombre of his / and had nother fought with thē nor ſhulde nat. Wherfore heſent of his knightꝭ to ye kyng his brother / ſhewyng him his mynde that other he wolde haue leue to fight / or els
                  〈…〉
               
               
departe. The kyng knewe well the duke deſyred but reaſon / commaundyng him that on the ſight of his letters he ſhulde dillodge and gyue leaue to all his men of warr to departe / and to come hymſelfe to Parys. Sayenge / howe he wolde go himſelfe in his owne propre ꝑſone to fight with the englyſſhmen. Whan the duke of Burgoyne herde thoſe tidynges / he gaue knoledge therof ſecretly to the greatteſt of his hoſt / ſayeng to thē. Sirs we muſt diſloge / the kyng heth cōmaunded it / and ſo by the hour of mydnight all thyng was truſſed / & euery man moū
               ted on their horſes / and ſet fyre on their logynges. At whiche tyme ſir Henry of Sāxels kept the watche / with 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert of Namures cōpany (who ſpyed a fyre) and than two or thre and ſo mo. Than he ſayd to hymſelfe: a / I fere me the frenchmen wyll a wake vs this night / it ſemeth ſo by their dealyng & ſaid to thē that were there about hym. Let vs go and awake the lorde Robert Namure / to the entent that y• frenchmen fynde vs nat a ſlepe. Than this ſir Henry came to the lodgynge of the lorde Namur / and called his chāberlayns and ſayd. Sirs / it is be houefull that ye a wake your lorde. And they went to his bedde ſyde and awoke hym / & ſhewed hym all the mater (who anſwered) Well: I ſe we ſhall ſhortely here other tidynges. Call vp your folkes / and let euery man be quickely armed: And ſo they dyde / and alſo he was ſhortly armed. And whan his men were aſſembled togyder / he cauſed one to take his baner & went ſtreight to the duke of Lancaſtres tent / who as than was nere armed / for he had warnynge before of the mater. And ſo he was anon redy and his lordes lytell and lytell drewe anone aboute him / and euer as they came they raynged in batayle fayre & ſoftely / without any noyſe or light And cauſed all the archers to be redy raynged before theym / in ſuche a place: where as they thought the frenchmen ſhulde cōe / if they were in purpoſe to come and fight with theym. And whan they had ſtand thus the ſpace of two houses / and ſawe that none came to them / they had great marueyle. Than the duke demaunded of the lordes about him / what was beſt for hym to do? Some ſayd one thyng / ſome ſayd another euery man after his opinyon. Than the duke ſayd to ſir Water of Manny: ſir howe ſay you? Sir ſayd he / I can nat tell what I ſhulde ſay. But ſir and ye ſhulde do after myne opinyon / ye ſhulde ordayne your men of armes and archers in maner of batayle / and euer lytell and lytell to auaūce forwarde. For ſir / anon it wyll be day lyght: than ſhall you ſe perfitely before you. The duke agreed to this counſayle / howe be it ſome other counſayled to the contrary: for in no wyſe they wolde haue the duke to remoue fro his felde. So in this ſtrife they were togyder a certayne ſpace / at laſt it was ordayned / y• certayne of ſir Robert of Namures company / and certayne of ſir Ualeran de Bromes company ſhulde mount a horſ backe / bycauſe they were mete and able for ſuch an enterprice. And ſo a .xxx. of the beſt horſemen deꝑted and rode towarde the frenche hoſt. Than agayne 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Galtyer of Manny ſayd to the duke: ſir / neuer beleue me without the frenchmen be fledde. Therfore mount on your horſe and all your company / and folowe them quickely: and ye ſhall haue this day on them a fayre iourney. Than the duke ſayde: Sir / I haue hytherto alwayes folowed the aduyſe of my counſayle / & euer wyll 
                  •
               o: but I can neuer beleue that ſo many valyant men of armes / and noble knightes that be here of the frenche partie / wolde thus ſhamfully depart. For parauenture / the fyers that they haue made / is to drawe vs to warde them: and ſo to begyle vs. Anon our currours wyll come in / and they wyll bringe vs the perfyte knowledge of euery thynge.
            
               ANd as they were thus talkynge / their currours came in / and ſayd to the purpoſe of ſir Gaultyer of Māny: and ſhewed all that they had ſene and founde. They ſayde howe they founde no body / but certayne poore vitaylers / ſuche as folowed the hoſt. Than ſir Gaultier of Manny had great honoure of his opinyon before. Than the duke of Lancaſtre drewe to his lodgyng / and vnarmed him: and thought to haue gone and dyned in the frenche mens lodgynges (ſauynge for the fyre & ſmoke that they had made / wolde nat ſuffre him) but at nyght he went thyder to ſupper and lodged there all night / and toke their eaſe with ſuch as they had. The next mornynge they diſlodged and retourned to Calays / and whan the duke of Burgoyne dyſloged / he went the ſame day to ſaynt Omers / and there lay and all his hoſt. And than deꝑted euery man whyder they wolde / whiche was a great payne after to bringe togyder agayne. ¶ The ſame weke the erle of Penbroke beynge in Poyctou / and had great diſpleaſure that ſir Loys of Sanxere / ſir Johan of Uyen / ſir John̄ of Bulle & other had ſo delt with him before at Puyernon as it hath b
                  •
               
               
the wed before / than he thought to be reuenged if he might. And departed fro Mortayne with his company / with a two hundred ſpeares and ſo came to Angoleſme to the prince / who made him great there. The erle deſyred him / to lette him haue a certayne nōbre of men / and to haue leaue to make a iourney. Sayeng how he had great deſyre to reuenge him of the diſpites that the frēchmen had done to him of late. The price who loued hym entierly graūted his deſyre. the ſame ſeaſon ther was newly come to the price fro the countie of Armynake ſir Hugh Caurell / and had brought with hym moo than fyue hūdred men of warr of the companyons. The prince commaunded hym to go with the erle of Penbroke in that iourney: and alſo the erle deſyred ſir Loys Harcourt / ſir Guyſſharde Dangle ſir Percyuale of Coloyne the lorde of Pōs the lorde of Parteney / the lorde of Pynan / ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Thomas Pontchardon / and dyuers other knightes of the princꝭ houſe. who gladly graūted to go with hym. So whā they were all togyder / they were a fyue. C. ſperes / thre hundred archers / and fyftene hundred of other men in maner of brigantes / with launces and paueſſes / folowynge the hooſt a fote. Thus therle of Penbroke deꝑted with his cō
               pany / and rodeſo long that he rāe into Aniou: than he began to brenne / waſt / and diſtroy the countre. And ſo paſſed through on the one ſyde brennynge and winnynge of townes and ſmall holdes / and raunſomed the playne countrey to Sauyour on Loyre. And lodged in the ſubbarbes / and aſſayled the towne / but they coude nat get it / for within was ſir Robert of Sanxere / who kepte and defended the towne / but all the coūtre aboute was brent and diſtroyed. Than 
                  〈◊〉
                Hughe Caurell and his company came to a bridge on the ryuer of Loyre / called the bridge of See / and anone they that kept it were diſcō
               fyted and the bridge wonne. And than they for 
                  ••
               yed it in ſuche wyſe / that they kept it long after. And alſo in the ſame iourney the englyſſhmen toke and wanne an abbey on the ryuer of Loyre / called ſaynt More. the whith they newly fortifyed in ſuche wyſe / that they made therof a great garyſon / the whiche greatly domaged the countre / all the wynter & ſomer after.
            THe ſame tyme ther was in Poyctou an abbey / and is yet called ſaynt Saluyn / a
                  〈…〉
               euyn leages fro Poycters / in the whiche abbey there was a monke that gretly hated his ſuper your the abbot / & that he ſhewed well / for bycauſe of the hatred yt he had to him / he betrayed the abbot and all his couēt. For by his meanes he delyuered the abbey and the towne to ſir Loys of ſaynt Julyan / and to Carnet the breton / who toke it in the frenche kynges name / and repeyred it / and made ther a good garyſone. Of the takyng of ſaynt Saluyn / ſir Johan Chandos was ſore diſpleaſed / bycauſe he was ſene / ſhall of Poictou. And he thought to hymſelfe / that if he lyued long to get it agayne / howeſoeuer he dyde: and that they that hadde taken it ſhulde repent it. ¶ Nowe let vs a lytell ſeaſon leaue ſpekyng of the buſyneſſe of Poictou / and ſpeke of the duke of Lancaſtre.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the countre of Uermādoiſe and the countie of ſaynt Poule were waſted / and ſir Hugh of Chaſtellone taken. Cap. CC .lxix.
            
               WHan the duke of Lācaſtre was come agayne to Calays after the departyng fro Tornehen / and that he & his company had refreſſhed thē there a thre dayes / thanne he thought agayn to ryde forth and make ſome iourney into France. Than y• two marſhals / therle of Warwyke / and the lorde Roger Beauchampt / commaunded euery man to drawe into the felde / wherof euery man was gladde / deſyringe to ryde in to Fraunce. Than they departed fro Calays in good ordre for euery man knewe what he ſhulde do. So y• firſt day they went fyue leages / & the nexte day they came before ſaynt Omers / and ther had a great ſcrimyſſhe at the gate / but thēglyſſhmen reſted nat ther greatly / but paſſed by and went and lodged on the morres of Herſault. And on the thirde day they came to Turwyn / & within the towne was therle Guy of ſaynt Poule with a great nōbre of men of warr. And thengliſſhmen paſſed by & toke the way to Hedyn / and yt day they loged on a lytell ryuer. And whan the erle of ſaynt Poule ſawe yt thenglyſſhmen wēt towarde his countre / he knewe well they went nat thyder for his profyte / for they hated hym moche. Than he departed in the night / and delyuered the cyte to the lorde of ſaynt Pye / and to ſir Johan of Ray / and ſo he rode tyll he cam to the towne of ſaynt Poule. And in the nexte

mornynge the engliſſhe men came thyther / and made there a great ſkrymyſſhe / ſo that the commynge thyther of the erle of ſaynt Poule was happy for them of y• towne / for by hym and his company the towne was kept and ſaued / or els it had ben in a great aduēture of leſyng. Thus the duke of Lancaſtre and his companye toke theyr pleaſure in the coūtie of ſaynt Poule / and burned and exiled all the playne countrey / and dyd there great domage / and he was before the caſtell of Perides / where as the lady of Dowaire was / and as the duke aduyſed the caſtel / he gauged ye depneſſe of the dyche with a ſpeare / howe be it he aſſyed it nat / but made a good face ſo to do / and ſo paſſed by / & came to a fayre caſtell called Lucheu / the whiche perteyned to the erle of ſaynt Poule / and ſo they burned the towne / and dyd nothynge to the caſtell. Than they paſſed further / and came to ſaynt Require The engliſſhemen rode on a day nat paſt a .iii. or foure leages / but euer they burned the countrey as they went / and ſo they paſſed the ryuer of Somme at the plancheſſe vnder Abbeuille. And than they entred into the countrey of Uimeu / in purpoſe to go to Harfle we on the ryuer of Seyne to burne the frenche Nauy. The erle of ſaynt Poule / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Moreau of Fiennes conſtable of France with a great nombre folowed & purſued in coſtynge the englyſſhe huſt / wherfore ye engliſſhemen durſt nat ryde farre abrode out of the high waye / but euer kepte themſelfe cloſe to gether redy to fight with theyr enemies if nede were. And ſo thus they rode through Uimeu and the countie of Ewe / and entred into y• archeby ſſhopryke of Roan / & paſſed by Depe / and rode ſo longe that they came to Harflewe / and there lodged. The erle of ſaynt Poule was gotē before them / and was entred into y• towne with .ii. C. ſpeares. So thus the engliſſhmen laye before Harflewe / but they aſſayled it nat. The .iiii. daye after they diſlodged / and made theyr retourne through the lande of the lorde of Stouteuille / and ſo burned vp the mooſt parte of all his countrey. and than they came through Francqueſin / and drewe toward. Oyſemont to repaſſe the riuer of Somme at Blanchetache. The ſame ſeaſon there was in the towne of Abuille (as capitayne there) Hugh of Chaſtellon maiſter of the croſbowes in France / and whan he perceyued that the duke of Lancaſtre wolde repaſſe the riuer of ſomme / he armed hym / and cauſed a .x. or .xii. of his company in lyke wyſe to arme them / & no mo. And ſo moūted on their horſes / ſayeng / howe he wolde go and ſe the kepyng of the gate of Rowray / to thentent that if thengliſſhmen paſſed by / they ſhulde nat ſe but that it were well kepte. This was early in the mornyng / & it was a great myſt. And the ſame tyme / Sir Nicholas Louuaing / who in tyme paſte before had ben ſeneſchall of Poictou / and the ſame yere before 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hugh of Chaſtellon had taken hym pryſoner / and raunſomed hym at .x. M. frākes / the which ſtacke ſore in his mynde / and had great deſyre in his entent to be reuenged / and to geat agayne that he had loſte. The ſame mornynge he and .xx. with hym were departed fro the duke of Lācaſtres hoſt / he knewe right wel all the paſſages and ſtraytes there aboute / for he had well vſed them the ſpace of .ii. or .iii. yeres to gether. And ſo thought to putte hym ſelfe at auenture in a buſſhement bitwene Abbeuille and the caſtell of Rouuray / & ſo paſſed by a lyttell ſtreyght way through a maryſe / and reſted hym in certayne olde waſt & broken howſes / a man wolde neuer haue thought that any company of engliſſhemen wolde haue lyen in a buſſhement ſo nere to the towne. So thus there / this 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Nicholas and his company kepte them ſelfe preuy. And ſo at laſt through ye ſame waye came 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hugh of Chaſtellon with x. with hym / all armed except his baſſenet / the whiche his page bare after hym on a great courſer / and ſo paſſed ouer the lyttell ryuer that was there / and thought to haue gone to haue ſpoken with the croſbowes that kepte the gate / to knowe yf they had harde any thyng of the engliſſhemen. And whanne ſir Nicholas of Louuayng ſawe hym / he knewe hym wel / he coude nat haue ben more ioyous if one had gyuen hym .xx. thouſād frankes. Than he came out of his buſſhement and ſayd to his company / come on ſyrs luſtely / beholde yonder is he that I deſire to haue / it is the maiſter of the croſbowes / I deſyre to haue hym aboue all creatures lyuynge. Than he ſet the ſpores to his horſe ſydes / and cowched hys ſpeare in the reſte and came towarde ſir Hugh of Chaſtellon and ſayd yelde the Chaſtellon or thou arte but deed. Syr Hugh had great meruayle from whens thoſe men of warre came ſo ſodaynly vpon hym: for he had no leaſer to put on his baſſenet / nor to mount on his courſer. & whā he ſawe he was in ſo hard a caſe / he ſayd / to whom shuld. I yelde me / Sir Nicholas anſwered / to Lauuainge. Than ſyr Hugh (to eſchewe ye perel of deth / for he ſawe wel he coude nat flee) ſayde / I yelde me. Than he was takē and ſir Nicholas ſayde come on and ryde with vs / behold yonder cometh the duke of Lācaſtre

and his company / who wyll paſſe here foreby. at the ſame brunt ther was ſlayne a valyāt burgreſſe of Abuyle called Laurence Dancons / the which was great domage. Thus by great fortune was ſir Hugh of Chaſtellon maiſter at y• tyme of the croſbowes in france and capitayn of Abuyle / taken by ſir Nicholas of Louuayne of whoſe takynge the duke of Lancaſtre was right ioyfull and ſo were all the englyſſhmen. Sir Hugh of Chaſtellons frendes / and y• men in the towne of Abuyle were right ſorie for his takyng but they coude nat amend it as at that tyme. Than the englyſſhmen paſſed the ryuer of Some at blanchtache / and than drue towardes the towne of Rue on the ſee ſyde / and ſo to Monſtrell: and dyde ſomoche by their iorneys that they retourned agayne and cāe to the towne of Calays. And than the duke of Lancaſtre gaue all the ſtrangers leaue to deꝑte / and ſo deꝑted fro hym ſir Robert of Namure / ſir Ualeran of Borme / and the almayns. Than y• duke of Lancaſtre retourned agayne in to England thynkyng to make no more warr tyll the nexte ſomer / for it was as thā about ſaynt Martyns day in wynter / but or he deꝑted he ſayde to the ſtrangers / howe that whan he came agayne he wolde come moche more ſtronger / than he dyd at that tyme. Deſyring his coſyns / the duke of Guerles and the duke of Jullyers / to cōe and mere with him to go into France. ¶ Nowe let vs leue to ſpeke of the beſyneſſe of Picardy / for ther was nothyng done in thoſe ꝑties of a gret ſeaſon after. And let vs now ſpeke of the mater in Poitou / wher as mooſt dedes of armes fell.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir John Chādos was ſlayne in a batayle / and howe finally the frēchmen were diſōfyted & taken in the ſame batayle. Cap. CC .lxx.
            
               GReatly it greued ſir John̄ Chandos the takyng of ſaynt Saluyn / bycauſe it was vnder his rule / for he was ſeneſhall of Poyctou. He ſet all his mynde how he might recouer it agayne / other byforce or by ſtelthe / he cared nat ſo he might haue it. and for that entēr dyuers nightꝭ he made ſūdrie buſſhmētes / but it aueyled nat. For ſir Loyes who kept it / toke euer ſo good hede therto / that he defēded it fro all dāgers. For he knewe well the takyng therof greued ſore ſir Johan Chandos at the hert. So it fell / that the night before the firſt day of January / ſir Johan Chandos beyng in Poycters / ſent to aſſemble togyder dyuers barons / knightes & ſquiers of Poitou. Deſyring thē to cōe to hym as priuely as they coude: for he certeyned thē how he wolde ryde forthe / and they refuſed nat his deſyre / for they loued him entyerly / but ſhortely aſſembled togyder in the cyte of Poicters. Thyder came ſir Guyſſhard Dā
               gle / ſir Loyes Harcourt / the lorde of Pons / the lorde of Partney / y• lorde of Pynan / y• lorde tanyboton / ſir Geffray Dargenton / ſir Maubruny of Lyniers / ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Baudwyn of Feſuyll / ſir Richarde of Pontchardon and dyuers other. And whan they were all togyder aſſembled / they were thre hundred ſpeates / and departed by night fro Poicters none knewe whyder they ſhulde go: except certayne of the lordes / and they had redy with them ſcalyng ladders / & ſo came to ſaynt Saluyn. And ther a lighted / & delyuered their horſes to their varlettes whiche was about mydnight / and ſo entred in to the dyke. yet they hadde nat their entente ſo ſhortely / for ſodaynly they herde the watche horne blowe. I ſhall tell you wherfor it blewe. The ſame nyght Carlonet was departed fro the Roche of Poiſay / with a .xl. ſpeares with hym. And was cōe the ſame tyme to ſaynt Saluyn / to ſpeke with the capitayne ſir Loys of ſaynt Julyan / to thentent to haue ryden togyder to Poictou / to ſe if they coude gette any pray. And ſo he called vp the watchman / y• whiche made hym to ſounde his horne. And ſo the englyſſhmen / who were on the otherſyde of the fortreſſe / herynge the watche blowe / and great noyſe in the place. Feared leſt they had ben ſpyed by ſome ſpyes / for they knewe nothyng that the ſayd frenchemen were on the other ſyde / to haue entred in to the place. Therfore they with drue backe agayne out of the dykes / and ſayd: let vs go hens for this night for we haue fayled of our purpoſe. And ſo they remoūted on their horſes / and retourned hole togyder to Chauuigny on the tyuer of Cruſe / a two leages thens. Than the poictenyns demaunded of ſir John̄ Chandos / if he wolde cōmaunde them any farther ſeruyce / he anſwered and ſayd. Sirs / retourne home agayne whan it pleaſe you / in the name of god: and as for this day / I wyll abyde ſtyll here in this towne. So ther departed the knightes of Poictou and ſome of England to the nombre of. CC. ſpeares. Than ſir Johan Chādos went into a houſe / & cauſed to be made a good fyre / and there was ſtyll with hym: ſir Thomas Percy and his company ſcneſhall of

Rochell / who ſayd to ſir John̄ Chandos. Sir is it your entent to tary here all this day. ye truly ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                he / why demaūde you. Sir / y• cauſe I deſyre you is / ſyth ye wyll nat ſtyre this day to gyue me leue / & I wyll ryde ſome way wt my cō
               pany / to ſe if I can fynde any aduēture. Go yoway ſir in the name of god 
                  〈◊〉
                ſir Johan Chandos. And ſo departed ſir Thomas Percy with a .xxx. ſpeares in his cōpany / and ſo paſſed the bridge at Chauuigny / and toke the longe way that ledde to Poicters. And ſir John̄ Chādos abode ſtyll behynde full of diſpleaſure / in that he had fayled of his purpoſe / and ſo ſtode in a kechyn warmyng him by the fyre. And his ſeruantes tangeled with hym / to thētent to bring him out of his melancoly. His ſeruantꝭ had prepared for hym a place to reſt hym / than he demaunded if it were nere day. And ther wt there cāe a man in to the houſe / and came before hym and ſayd. Sir / I haue brought you tidynges. What be they tell me? Sir ſurely the frēchmen be ryding abrode. Howe knoweſt thou that? 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                ſayd he / I deꝑted fro ſaynt Saluyn with them what waye be they ryden? Sir I can nat tell you the certentie: but ſurely they toke the high way to Poiters. What frēchmen be they? canſt thou tell me. Sir it is ſir Loys of ſaynt Julyan / and Carlonet the breton. Well 
                  〈◊〉
                ſir Johan Chandos I care nat / I haue no lyſt this night to ryde for the: they may happe to be encoūtred thoughe I be nat ther. And ſo he taryed there ſtyll a certayne ſpace in a gret ſtudy / and at laſt whan he had well aduyſed hymſelfe / he ſayde. Whatſoeuer I haue ſayd here before / I trowe it be good that I ryde for the / I muſt retourne to Poicters and anone it wyll be day. That is true 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                / 
                  〈◊〉
                the knightꝭ about hym. Than he ſaid make redy for I wyll ryde forthe / & ſo they dyd and moūted on their horſes / and deꝑted & toke the right way to Poicters coſtyng the ryuer / & the frēchmen y• ſame tyme were nat paſt a leag before hym in the ſame way / thinkyng to paſſe the ryuer at the bridge of Luſar. Ther the englyſſhmen had knowlege how they were in the trake of the frēchmen / for the frēchmens horſes cryed & brayed / bycauſe of thēglyſſhe horſes / y• were before thē with ſir Thomas Percy. And anone it was fayre light day / for in the begynnyng of January the mornyngꝭ be ſoone light And whan the frēchmen & bretons were within a leage of the bridge / they ꝑreyued on the otherſyde of the bridge ſir Thom̄s Percy & his cōpany: and he lykewiſe ꝑreyued the frēchmen and rode as faſt as he might / to get the aduantage of the bride. And ſayd / beholde yonder frē
               chmen be a great nombre agaynſt vs / therfore let vs take the auātage of the bridge. And whā ſir Loys & Carlonet / ſawe thēglyſſhmen make ſuche haſt to gette the bridge / they dyde in lykewyſe. Howbeit thēglyſſhmen gate it firſt / and lighted all a fote / & ſo raynged thēſelfe in good order to defende the bridge. The frēchmen likewyſe lighted a fote / and delyuered their horſes to their pages / cōmaundynge them to drawe a backe. And ſo dyde put thē ſelfe in good order to go & aſſayle thēglyſſhmen / who kept thēſelfe cloſe togider / & were nothyng afrayed: though they were but a handfull of men / as to y• regard of the frēchmen. and thus as the frēchmen & bretous ſtuyed & ymagined / howe & by what meanes to their aduantage / they might aſſayle the engliſſhmen. Therwith ther came behynd thē ſir Johan Chandos / his baner diſplayed / berynge therin ſyluer a ſharpe pyle goules. & Jakes of Lery / a valyant man of armes dyd bere it / and he had with hym a .xl. ſpeares: he aproched fierſly the frēchmen. And whan he was a thre forlonges fro the bridge / the frenche pages who ſawe them comynge were afrayed / and ſo ran away with the horſes / and left their maiſts ther a fote. And whan ſir John̄ Chandos was come nere to them / he ſayd: harke ye frēchmen ye are but yuell men of warr. ye ryde at youre pleaſur and eaſe day and night / ye take & wyn townes & fotereſſes in Poyctou / wherof I am ſeneſhall. ye raunſome poore folke without my leaue / ye ryde all about clene armed: it ſhulde ſeme the coūtre is all yours. But I enſure you it is nat ſo. ye ſir Loyes and Carlonet / year to great maiſters. It is more than a yere & a half that I haue ſette all myne entent to fynde or encountre with you / and nowe I thanke god I ſe you and ſpeke to you / no we ſhall it be ſene who is ſtronger other you or I. It hath ben ſhewed me often tymes / that ye haue greatly deſyred to fynde me / nowe ye may ſe me here. I am John̄ Chandos aduyſe me well. your great feates of armes wherwith ye be renowmed / by goddes leaue no we ſhall we proue it. Whyle ſuche langage was ſpoken / ſir John̄ Chandos cōpany drewe toguyder / and ſir Loyes and Carloner kept them ſelfe cloſe togyder / makyng ſemblāt to be glad to be fought withall. And of all this mater ſir Thomas Percy / who was on the otherſyde of the bridge knewe nothynge / for the bridge was hyghe in the myddes / ſo that none coude ſe other. ¶ Whyle ſir Johan Chandos reaſoned thus with the frenchmen / ther was a

breton toke his glayue and coude for bere no lē
               ger / but cāe to an englyſſhe ſquyer / called Sunekyn Dodall / & ſtrake him ſo in the breſt yt he caſt hym downe fro his horſe. Sir John̄ Chā
               dos whan he herde ye noyſe beſyde him / he tourned that way / & ſawe his ſquyer lye on the erth and the frēchmen layeng on him. Thā he was more chafed thā he was before / and ſayd to his company. Sirs / howe ſuffre you this ſquyer thus to be ſlayne: a fote / a fote. And ſo he lepte a fote and all his company / and ſo Sunekyn was reſcued and the batayle begone. Sir Johan Chādos / who was a right hardy and a coragyous knight / with his baner before him / & his company about him with his cote of armes on hym / great and large beten with his armes of whyte ſarcenet / with two pylies goules / one before and an other behynde / ſo that he ſemed to be a ſufficyent knyght / to do a great feate of armes / & as one of the formaſt with his glayue in his hande / marched to his ennemyes. The ſame mornyng ther had fallen a great dewe / ſo that the grounde was ſom what moyſt / and ſo in his goyng forwarde he ſtode and fell downe at ye ioyning with his enemyes. and as he was aryſing / ther light a ſtroke on him / gyuen by a ſquier called Jakes of ſaynt Martyn with his glayue / the whiche ſtroke entred in to ye fleſſhe vnder his eye / bytwene ye noſe and the forheed. Sir John̄ Chandos ſawe nat the ſtroke commyng on that ſyde / for he was blynde on ye one eye. He loſt ye ſight therof a fyue yere before as he hunted after an hart / in the laundes of Burdeaur. And alſo he had on no vyſer / the ſtroke was rude and entred into his brayne / the whiche ſtroke greued him ſo ſore / that he ouerthrue to the erthe / and tourned for payne two tymes vp ſo downe / as he that was woūded to dethe. for after the ſtroke he neuer ſpake worde. And whan his men ſaw that myſfortune / they were right dolorouſe. Thā his vncle Edward Clifforde ſtepte and beſtrode him / for the frēchmen wolde fayne haue had him: and defended him ſo valyantly / and gaue rounde about him ſuch ſtokes that none durſt aproche nere to him. Also 
                  〈◊〉
                John̄ Chambo / and ſir Bertram of Caſe ſemed lyke men out of their myndꝭ / whan they ſaw their maiſter lye on ye erth. The bretons & frēchmen were gretly cōforted whan they ſawe the capitayne of their enemyes on ye erthe / thynking verily yt he had his dethes woūde. Than they auaunced them ſelfe / and ſayd: ye englyſhmen yelde you / for ye are all ours. ye canne nat ſcape vs. Ther the englyſhmen dyd marueyls in armers / aſwell to defende themſelfe / as to reueng their maiſter ſir John̄ Chandos / whome they ſawe lye in a harde caſe: and a ſquyer of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Chandos ſpyed Jaques of ſaynt Martyn / who hadde gyuen his maiſter his mortall ſtroke / and ran to hym fierſly and ſtroke hym with ſuche voylence / that his glayue pearſed through bothe his thyes / howe be it for all that ſtroke he lefte nat ſtyll to fight. If ſir Thomas Percy and his cōpany had knowen of this aduenture / who were on the otherſyde of ye brige / they ſhulde well haue ſocoured hi: but bycauſe they knewe nothyng therof / nor herde no more of the frenchmen / wenyng to them they had ben gone backe. Therfore he and his company departed and toke the waye to Poycters / as they that knewe nothynge of that buſyneſſe. Thus the englyſſhmen fought ſtyll before the bridge of Luſac / and there was done many a feat of armes: breuely the englyſſhmen coude endure no lenger agaynſt the frēchmen / ſo that the mooſt parte of them were diſconfyted and taken / but alwayes Edwarde Clyfforde wolde nat depte fro his nephue there as he lay. So thus yf the frenchmen hadde ben ſo happy / as to haue had their horſes ther redy as they had nat / for their pages were ronne away fro them before / orels they might haue departed with moche honour and profite with many a gode priſoner / and for lacke of them they loſt all / wherfore they were ſore diſpleaſed / and ſayd among them ſelfe. A / this is an yuell order for the iourney is ours / & yet through faute of our pages we can nat departe. Seyng we be heuy armed and ſore traueyled / ſo that we cānat go a fote through this countre / the whiche is full of our enemyes / and contrary to vs. And we are a ſixe leages fro the next fortereſſe that we haue / and alſo dyuers of our cōpany be ſore hurt / and we may nat leaue theym behynde vs. Thus as they were in this caſe and wyſt nat what to do / and had ſent two bretons vnarmed in to the feldes / to ſe yf they might fynde any of their pages with their horſes. Ther came on them ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / ſir Loyes Harcourt / the lorde Parteney / the lorde Tanyboton / ye lorde Dargenton / the lorde of Pynan / ſir Jaques of Surgyers and dyuers other englyſſhmen / to the nōbre of two hūdred ſpeares / who rode about to ſeke for the frenchmen / for it was ſhewed them howe they were abrode. And ſo they fell in the trake of the horſes / and cāe in great haſt with baners and penons wauyng in the wynde. And aſſoone as the bretons and frenchmen ſawe them comyng

they knewe well they were their enemies. Thā they ſayd to the englyſſhmen / whome they had taken as priſoners before. Sirs / beholde yonder cometh a bande of your company to ſocour you / and we perceyue well that we can nat endure agaynſt thē / and yebe out priſoners. We wyll quyte you / ſo that ye wyll kepe vs & wyll become your priſoners / for we had rather yeld vs to you / thā to them that cometh yonder / and they aunſwered as ye wyll / ſo are 
                  〈…〉
               e content. Thus the englyſſhmen were loſed out of their priſons. Than the poictenyns / gaſcoyns / & englyſſhmen came on them their ſpeares in their reſtes / cryeng their cryes. Than the frēchmen and bretons drewe a ſyde / and ſayde to thē. ſirs leaue do vs no hurt / we be all priſoners a redy. The englyſſhmen affirmed the ſame / and ſaid: they be our priſoners. Carlonet was priſoner with ſir Bertram of Caſe / & ſir Loyes of ſaynt Julyan with ſir Johan Cambo / ſo that there was none but that he had a maiſter.
            UHe barowns and knightes of Poicto
                  ••
                were ſore diſconforted / whan they ſawe their ſeneſchall ſir Johan Chandos lye on the erthe / and coude nat ſpeke: than they lamentably complayned / and ſayd. A / ſir Johan Chandos: the floure of all chiualry / vnhappely was that glayue forged that thus hath woūded you and brought you in parell of dethe. They wept piteouſly that were about hym / & he herde and vnderſtode theym well / but he coulde ſpeke no worde. They wronge their handes & tare their heeres / and made many a pytefull complaynt / and ſpecially ſuche as were of his owne houſe. Than his ſeruauntes vnarmed him and layde him on paueſſes / & ſo bare him ſoftely to Mortymer the next fortereſſe to them. And the other barons and knyghtes retourned to Poycters / and ledde with them their priſoners. And as I vnderſtode / the ſame Jaques Martyn yt thus hurte ſir Johan Chandos / was ſo lytell taken hede to of his hurtes / that he dyed at Poiters. And this noble knight ſir Johan Chandos / lyued nat after his hurte / paſt a day and a nyght / but ſo dyed: god haue mercy on his ſoule / for in a hundred yere after / ther was nat a more curteſſe nor more fuller of noble vertues / & good condycions amonge the englyſſhmen / than he was. And whan the prince and priceſſe / the erle of Cambridge / the erle of Pēbroke / and other barowns and knightes of Englande / ſuche as were in Guyen herd of his dethe / they were all 
                  〈…〉
               orted / and ſayd: they had loſt all on that ſyde of the ſee. For his dethe his frendes / and alſo ſome of his enemyes / were right ſoroufull The englyſſhmen loued him / bycauſe all noble neſſe was founde in hym. The frenchmen hated him / bycauſe they douted hym. yet I herde his dethe greatly complayned among right noble and valyant knightes of France. Sayeng that it was a great dommage of his dethe / for they ſayd better it had ben / that he had ben taken a lyue. For if he had ben taken a lyue / they ſayd he was ſo ſage and ſo ymaginatyue / that he wolde haue foūde ſome maner of good meanes / wherby the peace might haue enſued / bytwene the realmes of Englande and Fraunce / for he was ſo welbeloued with the kyng of Englande / that the kyng wolde beleue him / rather than any other in the worlde. Thus bothefrenche and englyſſhe ſpake of his dethe / and ſpecially the englyſſhmen: for by hym Guyen was kept and recouered.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the lorde of Coucy / and the lorde of Pomyers wolde nat entre in to the warre / nother on the one part nor on the other. And howe the lorde of Maleuall & the lorde of Marneyle tourned frenche. Cap. CC .lxxi.
            
               AFter the dethe of ſir Johan Chandos / ſir Thomas Percy was made ſeneſchall of Poictou. and ſo it fell that the lande of ſaynt Sauiour the vycount / fell in the kynge of Englandes 
                  •
               andes to gyue wher it ſhuld pleaſe him. Than he g
                  ••
               e it to a knyght of his / called ſir Alayne Bourchier / an experte man of armes. Of all that sit Johan Chandos had / whiche was in yerely to uenewes / to the ſomme of four hundred thouſande frankes. The prince was his ſucceſſeſſour and heyre / for he was neuer maryed nor had none heyres. And within a certayne ſpace after ſuche as hadde ben taken at the bridge of Luſac were put to their fynance and raūsome / and payed it: by the ayde and helpe of the frenche kynge. And ſo retourned agayne into their garyſons / ſir Loyes of ſaynt Julyan / Carlonet the breton / and ſir Wyllyam of Bourdes. The ſame ſeaſon ther were ſome knyghtes of France / that were fore troubled in their mynd / bycauſe they ſawe thus nightly and dayly / the

warre multiply bytwene theſe two kynges / of France and Englande. And ſpecially the lorde of Concy / for it touched him gretly: for he had fayre enherytance in Englande / aſwell by hym ſelfe as by his wyfe / who was doughter to the kynge of Englande. Whiche lande he muſt renounce / if he wolde ſerue the frenche kynge (of whoſe blode he was) and of the ſame nacyon. So he determyned him ſelfe to diſſemble with bothe kyngꝭ / & ſo to forget the tyme / he thought to departe out of the realme of France for a ſeaſon and go and ſporte him in ſome otherplace. And ſo ordered his departure ſagely / and toke leaue of the frenche kyng / and with a ſmall cō
               pany departed and rode in to Sauoy / where he was honorably receyued / of the erle / barons and knightes of the countre. And whan he had 
                  〈◊〉
                
               ther as long as it pleaſed hym / than he departed and paſſed forthe in to Lombardy / and came to the lordes of Myllayne: the lorde Galeas and the lorde Barnabo / where he was at the begynning to them right welcome. In lyke maner departed out of the duchy of Acàtayne / ſir Aymon of Pomyers / a knight of the prices: ſayeng howe that as long as the warr dyde endure he wolde nat beare armes / nother on the one parte nor on the other. And ſo this knyght went in to Cypre / and to the holy ſepulcre and dyuers other pylgrimages. And alſo the ſame ſeaſon / there was newly come to Parys ſir Johan of Burbone / who helde parte of his lande of the prince. The frenche kynge wolde gladly haue had hym to renounce his homage to the prince / and to become frenche: but the erle in no wyſe wolde ſo do. In lyke maner no more wolde the lorde of Pyerbuffier / another baneret of Lymoſyn / who alſo was at Parys. But there were other two great barons of Lymoſyn / ſir Loyes of Maleuall / and ſir Raymon of Marneyle his nephue / who alſo ye ſame ſeaſon were at Parys they forſoke the prince and became frēche. And after by their garyſons made gret warre to the prince / wherof the kynge of Englande and his counſayle were ſore diſpleaſed And alſo in that dyuers barones of Guyen became frenche without any conſtraynt / but by their owne wylles. Than the kyng of Englande was counſayled / that he ſhulde write couert letters ſealed with his ſeale / and to be borne by two or thre of his knightes in to Poictou / and in to Acquitayne: and ther to publyſſhe theym In cyties / caſtels / and good townes. The ſame ſeaſon was delyuered out of prison in Dagen / ſir Camponell of Camponall in excha
                  •
               ge / for another knight of the princes / who had ben taken at a ſcrimyſſhe before Pyergourt / called 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas Balaſter / but the clerke yt was with the ſaid knight / remayned ſtyll in priſon in Dagen: and ſir Camponell returned in to Frāce. ¶Nowe lette vs ſpeke of the letters ſent in to Acquitayne / by the kyng of Englande: the tenour wherof herafter foloweth.
         
         
            ¶The copy of the letters / ſent by the kyng of Englande into Acquitayne. And howe Chaſteleraut was taken / and Bell perche beſieged by the frenchemen. Cap. CC .lxxii.
            
               EDwarde by the grace of god / kynge of England and lorde of Irelande and Acquitayne. To all thē that this preſent writynge ſhall ſe or here reed / knowe you that we conſyderyng and regardyng the buſyneſſes of our ſayd marches / and lymitacions of our ſeignorie of Acquitayne / ſtretchynge fro heed to heed. We haue ben enformed y• for certayn troubles / greffes / & vexacyons / done or thought to bedone: by our right dere ſon the prince of Wales / in the ſay de countreis. The whiche we are bounde to withſtande and remedy in all thynges / touchynge the hates and yuell wylles / bytwene vs and our true frendes and ſubgettes. Therfore by theſe preſentes: here we anoūce / & pronoūce / certify & ratify: that we by our good wyll / and by great delyberacyon of counſayle therto called. Woll that our dere ſonne ye prince of Wales / forbere and leaue all maner of accyons / done or to bedone. And to reſtore agayne to all ſuche as hath ben greued or oppreſſed by hym / or by any of his ſubgettes / or offycers in Acqtayne. All their coſtes / ſpences domagꝭ / leuyed or to be leuyed / in ye name of ye ſayd aydes or fo wages. And if any of our true ſubgettes & frendes: aſwell prelates as men of holy church vnyuerſiteis / collages / byſſhops / erles / vycontes / barons / knightes / comynalties / and men of cyties and good townes. Be tourned to kepe & holde by falſe informacion and ſymple aduyſe / the opinyon of our aduerſary the french kyng. We pardon them their treſpas / ſo that after the ſight of theſe our letters / they retourne agayne to vs / or within a moneth after. And we deſyre all our true frendes / to kepe thē ſelfe ſtyll in the ſtate that they be nowe in / to ſaue their faythes and homagꝭ: ſo that they be nat reproched. the

whiche thyng ſhulde greatly diſpleaſe vs / and lothe we wolde be to ſe it. And if vpon our dere ſon̄e the prince or of any of his men / they make any laufull cōplaynt / that they be in any thyng greued or oppreſſed / or haue ben in tyme paſt. We ſhall cauſe them to haue amendes / in ſuche wyſe that by reaſon ſhall ſuffice. And to the entent to noriſſhe peace / loue / concorde / and vnite bytwene vs and all thoſe of the marches and ly mytacions aforeſayd. And bycauſe that euery man ſhulde repute this our mynde and wyll to be of trouthe / we wyll that euery man take and haue the copy of theſe preſentes / the whiche we haue ſolemply ſworne to kepe and maynteyne / and nat to breke them: on the precyous body of Jeſu Chriſt. Preſent our right dere ſonne / Johan duke of Lancaſtre / Wyllm̄ erle of Salyſbury / the erle of Warwyke / therle of Hertforde Gaultier of Manny / the lorde Percy / the lorde Neuyll / the lorde Bourchier / the lorde Stafforde / Richard of Pēbroke / Roger Beauchāp Guy Brian / the lorde of Me
                  ••
               e / the lorde Dalawar / Alayne Boncqueſell / & Richard Stry knightꝭ. Gyuen at our palys at Weſtm̄ / ye yere of our reigne .xliiii. the .v. day of Nouembre.
            THeſe letters were brought fro the kyng of Englande into the principalyte & duchy of Acqtayne / and notifyed and publyſſhed all about. And the copyes ſent ſecretly into Parys / to the vycont of Rochchoart / the lorde Ma leuall the lorde of Marneyle / & to other ſuche as were turned frenche. Nowbeit for all y• theſe letters were thus ſent and publyſſhed / in all the countrey of Acqtayne / I herde nat that any for all that left to do as they lyſt. So that nat with ſtandyng / dayly they turned to the frenche ꝑte. And ſo it was / that aſſone as ſir Loys of ſaynt Julyan was retourned in to the Roche of Poy ſay and ſir Wyllm̄ of Bordes in to the gariſon of the Hay in Tourayn / and Carlon et to ſaynt Saluyn. Than ſecretly they made forthe a iorney of mē of armes and hardy cōpanyons well mounted / and in a mornyng they came to Chaſteleraut & ſcaled the towne / and had nerehand taken ſir Loys of Harcourt / who lay in his bed a ſlepe in his logyng in the towne. And ſo with the ſ
                  •
               ry / he was fayne to flye in his ſherte barefote and barelegged / fro houſe to houſe / fro garden to garden / in great dout & feare of takyng by the frenchmen / who had ſcaled and won the fortreſſe. And ſo ferr he ſledde / that he cāe and put him ſelfe vnder the bridge of Chaſteleraut the whiche his men had fortifyed before. and ſo ther he ſaued him ſelfe / and kept him ſelfe there a long ſpace. But thus the bretons and frenchmen were maiſters of ye towne / and ther made a good gariſon / and made Carlonet capitayn. And dayly the bretons and frenchmen went to the bridge / and fought and ſcrimyſſhed with them that kepte it.
            DUke Loyes of Burbon / who ſawe well that the englyſſhmen and companyons were in his countre of Burbonoiſe. And howe that Drtygo / Bernard de Wyſt / and Bernard de la Sale / helde his caſtell at Bell perche / and the good lady his mother wtin: wherof he had great diſpleaſur. Than he aduyſed hi to make a iourney and to go and lay ſiege to Bell percly and nat to deꝑte thens / tyll he had wonne it. Of the whiche enterprice / he deſyred the frēche kynge to gyue him leaue / whiche the kynge lightly agreed vnto: ſayeng howe he wolde helpe him to maynteyne his ſiege. Thus he departed fro Parys / and made his aſſemble at Molyns in Auuerne / and at ſaynt Porcyns: ſo that he had a great nombre of men of warre. The lorde of Beauieu came to ſerue hym with thre hundred ſpeares / and ye lorde Uyllers & Roſellon with a hundred ſpeares / and dyuers other barowns and knightes of Auuergne and Foreſtes / wher of he was lorde by right of his wyfe / doughter to the gentyll lorde Berault erle Dolphyn. So thus the duke went & layd ſiege to Bell perche / and made before it a great baſtyd / for his m
                  •
               n dayly to drawe in to vnder couert: and ſo dayly ſcrimyſſhed with thē that were within. Alſo the duke had ther four great engins / the which caſt night and day great ſtones / ſo that the toopes of the towres & houſes were beaten downe and a great parte of the towres. Wherof the dukes mother who was priſoner within had gret feare. And ſent out meſſangers to the duke her ſonne / deſyringe hym to ceaſe his aſſantes / for thengins ſore feared and troubled her. But the duke of Burbone / who knewe well that her requeſt and deſyre was done / by the meanes of his ennemyes. Aunſwered / that in no wyſe he wolde ceaſe nor forbere what ſoeuer fell. And whan they within ſawe / howe they were ſo ſore oppreſſed / and howe that the ſtrength of ye frenchemen daylye multiplyed. For to theym was newly come ſir Loyes of Sanrer / marſhall of Fraunce / with great plenty of men of warre. Than they determyned to gyue knowledge of their poore eſtate to ſir Johan Deureux / ſeneſhall of Lymoſyn / who lay at Soubterayne a

two lytell tourneys fro thē / and to certifye him howe the lordes of Poictou and of Gaſcoyne / whan they departed fro them at the iourney of Quercy promyſed them on their faythes / that if they toke any fortreſſe in France / and after to be beſieged: howe they ſhulde be comforted. Thus incōtynent they wrote letters / and ſecretly by night they ſent a varlet out of ye fortereſſe to ſir John̄ Deureur / and whan the meſſāger came to him / he remembred well the mater / by ſuche tokens as he ſhewed hym. And whan he had reed the letters / he ſayd: he wolde gladly ayde and helpe them / and the rather to ſped
                  •
               : ſayd he wolde go him ſelfe to Angoleſme to the prince and to the lordes that be ther: truſtyng ſo to enduſe thē that they of Bell perche ſhulde be conforted / and delyuered out of parell. And ſo he departed fro his fortreſſe / and rode ſo longe that he came to Angoleſme / wher he founde the prince / the erle of Cambridge / therle of Pē
               broke / ſir John̄ Montagu / ſir Robert Canoll ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Thomas Phelton / ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / the Captal of Beufz and dyuers other. Ther to them he ſagely ſhewed / howe the companyons were beſieged in the caſtell of Bell perche / by the duke of Burbon / the erle of ſaynt Poule / and other frenchmen. To the whiche wordes ye lordes gaue good heryng and ſayd: howe gladly they wolde cōfort them / acordyng as they had promyſed. Of this enter price were chefe the erle of Cambridge and the erle of Penbroke. And incontynent the prince ſent out his cōmaundement / that all his ſubgettes after the ſight of his letts / ſhulde in all haſt drawe to the towne of Lymoges. So than thyderwarde auaunſed / knightes and ſquyers / cō
               panyons / and other men of armes / and ſo cam thyder as they were commaunded. And whan they were aſſembled / they were mo than. xv C. ſpeares / & thre thouſande of other men of warr And ſo quickely they paſſed for the that they cāe to Bell perche / and lay on the otherſyde of the towne agaynſt the frenchmen / who lay & kepte ſtyll their baſtyde / the whiche was as ſtronge / and aſwell fortified and aſwell enuyroned as a towne. So that thengliſſhe foragers wyſt nat whyder to reſorte for any forage / howbeit they had ſome vitayls brought fro Poyctou / whan they might conuey it. Than ſir Loys of Sanxere marſhall of France / ſignifyed the ſtate of thenglyſſhmen to Parys to ye kyng / and to the knightes that were ther / and made writynges and ſeadules to be ſet vp on the pales / and in other places ſayeng thus. Among you knightes and ſquyers / deſyring to fynde dedes of armes we certifye you for trouthe / that the erle of Cā
               bridge and therle of Penbroke & their cōpany / ar come before Bell perche / to thentent to reyſe the ſiege ther layd by our men / who ther ſo longe hath endured payne. and we haue ſo cōſtreyned them within the fortereſſe / that of pure neceſſyte they muſt other yelde it vp / or els fyght with vs byforce of armes. Therfore come thyder haſtely / for ther ſhall ye fynde noble dedes of armes. And certaynly thēglyſſhmen lye but in ſmall order / and ar in ſuche a place that they might ſoone haue great domage. Thus by exortacion of the marſhall / dyuers good knyghtes of the realme of Fraunce / auaunſed them to that part. Howe beit I knewe well that the gouernour of Bloyes / Allart of Touſtayne with a .l. ſpeares came thyder / & ſo dyd therle of Porcyen / and ſir Hugh of Porcien his brother.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Cābridge and the erle of Penbroke / ledde a way fro the garyſon of Bell Perche / the duke of Burbons mother / and all thoſe that were within. Cap. CC .lxxiii.
            WHan the erle of Cābridge and the erle of Penbroke had ben thus before ye frē
               chmen the ſpace of .xv. dayes / and ſaw howe they wolde nat yſſue out of their baſtyde to fight with thē. Than they toke coūſayle and aduyſe to ſende to them an heraulde / to knowe what they wolde do: and ſo they ſent Chandos the heraude with the meſſage that he ſhuld ſay to them / and ſo he went to them and ſaid. Sirs my lordes and mayſters hath ſent me to you / & they wolde ye knowe by me / yt they are all gretly marueyled: ſythe that ye haue perfyte know lede how they haue ben here the ſpace of fyftene dayes before you / & yet ye wolde nat yſſue out of your ſtrayte to fight with thē. Therfore they ſend you worde by me / that if ye wyll cōe out towarde thē / they wyll ſuffre you to take a plot of groūde to fight on with them. And than let thē haue the vyctorie that god wyll ſende it vnto. Than the duke of Burbon ſayd: Chādos you ſhall ſay to your maiſters / yt we wyll nat fight with thē at their wylles / nor apoyntment. And I knowe well that they be yonder / but I wyll nat departe hens / nor breke vp my ſiege. tyll I haue wonne the caſtell of Bell Perche. Sir ꝙ the heraude / I ſhall ſhewe them your pleaſure. Than departed the heraud / & retourned to his

maiſters / and ſhewed them the anſwere / y• whiche was nothyng pleaſant to them. Than they went to counſayle / and after they ſayd agayne to Chandos / go agayne to yonder lordes and ſhewe them this wyſe / and ſo declared to hym his meſſage. And than he went for the / & whan he came to them / he ſayd. Lordes: my maiſters and lordes ſendeth you worde by me / that ſithe ye wyll nat fight. Surely they purpoſe the .iii. day hens / at the houre of .ix. or at noone to ſette a horſebacke the lady of Burbone / and to conuey her awaye in the ſyght of you / my lorde of Burbone her ſonne. And ſir / than they bydde you reſcue her and if ye can. Well ꝙ the duke / to ſe my lady my mother ledde away / ſhalbe to me right diſpleaſant. how beit we truſt to haue her agayne whan we may. And ſir heraud ſyth ye haue ſayde this mocheto vs / ſay agayne to your maiſters / that if they wyll put into ye felde afyftie of their company / we ſhall put to them as many: and than take the vyctorie who may get it. Sir ꝙ the heraude / I ſhall ſhewe them all that ye haue ſayd. And therwith Chādos departed & came agayne to therle of Cambridge and to the other lordes / ſhewyng them the duke of Burbons anſwere / and alſo his demaunde. Howe beit they thought nat ſoo to do / but ordayned to departe thens and to lede with them the lady of Burbon / and all they within the for tereſſe / who had ben ſore traueyled with the engens of the hooſt.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Burbone gaue leaue to all his men / whan he knewe that the good lady his mother was ledde away. Cap. CC .lxxiiii.
            
               WHan the day cāe / that they had ſet / in the mornyng they ſowned all their trūpettes. Than they armed them and all their company / and drewe in to the felde in good aray of batayle / a fote and a horſebacke redy to fight / their baners and ſtā
               dardes before thē. And at the houre of .ix. their mynſtrels blewe vp on highe. Than they voyded out of the caſtell of Bell preche all maner of men and the lady of Burbone they moūted on a 
                  〈…〉
               rey well dreſſed for her / and her ladyes & damoſelss with her. Than the englyſſhmen departed aboute noone / and on the lady awayted ſir Euſtace Dābreticourt / and ſir John̄ Deureux. And ſo drewe them in to the principalyte and the lady was priſoner a certayne ſpace after: among the companyons in the Roche Uā
               cloyre in Limoſyn / but with her takyng the prī
               ce was neuer well content / for whan ſoeuer the caſe was ſpoken of / he ſayd yt if any other men had taken her beſyde the cōpanyons / he wolde incontynent haue cauſed her to haue ben delyuered without delay. And whan the companyons that had her / were ſpoken vnto for her delyuerance / they ſayd that what ſoeuer bargayne they made / they wold haue for her their knight agayne ſir Symon Burle / who was priſoner among the frenchmen.
            IT is nat to be douted / but that the duke of Burbone was ſore dyſpleaſed that the englyſſhmen ledde away his mother / but anon after ſhe was departed / he ſent to take poſſeſſion in the caſtell of Bell perche as his owne / the whiche the englyſſhmen had lefte as than clene voyde. The duke repayred and newe fortefied the caſtell / and made it ſtrōger than it was before. Thus brake vp this great iourney and euery man went to his owne / the frēchmen that had ben ther with the duke of Burbone / went agayne to their owne garyſons. And the duke retourned with his knightes and ſquyers into France to the kyng / who made him great chere and was gladde of his comyng. And therle of Pēbroke and his company went to the towne of Mortaygne in Poictou / and the men of armes and companyons retourned into Poytou and Xaynton / and ſerched all about the coūtre to get their lyuengꝭ / and dyd many villayne dedes / they coulde nat abſteyne them ſelfe fro doyng of yuell. And anone after departed fro the prince ſir Robert Canoll / and went in to Bretayne to his caſtell of Doruall / and he had nat ben ther paſt a moneth / but that the king of Englande ſent to hym / that incontynent without delay all excuſacions layd a ꝑte / he ſhuld paſſe the ſee and came in to Englande to ſpeke with him / whiche cōmaūdement he wolde nat breke but aparelled him ſelfe and toke the ſee / and arryued in Cornwall at ſaynt Myghels mount. And than rode ſo longe that he came to wyndſore / where he founde the kyng / who had great ioye of his comyng / and ſo had all the other barons of the realme / by cauſe they thought they ſhulde haue nede of hym / & that he was a good capitayne and leader of men.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the duke of Aniou came fro Tholous to Parys / and howe kyng Charles ſent him to the duke of Berry his brother into Acqtayne agaynſt the englyſſhmen. Cap. CC .lxxv.
            
               IN this ſeaſon the duke of Aniou deꝑted fro Tholous / and rode in great array through the realm of France / and cāe to the cyte of Parys and there he founde the kyng his brother / the duke of Berry and the duke of Burgoyne his other bretherne / who receyued him ioyoully. And ſo bytwene theſe foure bretherne whyle they laye at Parys / they had dyuers counſayls togyder / on the ſtate and buſyneſſe of the realme of France / to ſe what warre they ſhulde make / and howe to maynteyne the ſame the ſomer folowynge. Than it was fully purpoſed and ordayned / that they ſhulde make two great armyes and iorneys into Acqtayne / wherof the duke of Aniou and his cōpany ſhulde gouerne the one / & entre in to Guyen / by Ryall & Bergerath. And the duke of Berry ſhulde gouerne the other army / and entre in by Lymoges and Quercy / and ſo bothe armyes to mete before the towne of Angoleſme: and to beſiege the prince within it. Alſo it was concluded by great delyberacion of coūsell / to ſend for 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertram of Cleſquy that valy āt knight / who ſo oft and valy antly hath fought / for the ſauegard of the crowne of Frāce / & to deſyre him to take on him to be cōſtable of France. And whan ye king & his bretherne had fully determyned their coū
               ſell / & had ſported thē a ſpace / tyll the begynnig of the moneth of May. Than the duke of Aniou toke leue of thē all / thinking firſt to returne into his owne countre / bycauſe he had the longeſt iorney / he deꝑted firſt. He was cōueyed by the barons & knightꝭ of Frāce / bycauſe he was welbeloued. So long the duke rode yt he came to Moūtpellyer / & ther taryed more than a moneth / & than he went to Tholous / and there aſſembled togyder men of warr all about / wher as he might get thē. and ther were many yt kept the feldes / & kept fronter agaynſt thēglyſhmen 
                  •
               n Rouergne & Quercy / for the lytell Mechyn and Nandon of Pauns / Perot of Sauoy / the bourge Camus / Antony lenegre / Lamyt / James of Bray. All theſe with a great nōbre were all this ſeaſon in Caours / and had done moche hurt in the coūtre. The duke of Berry alſo cāe to Burges in berry & made ther a great aſſemble of knightes & ſquyers of France & of Burgoyne. Alſo the duke of Burbon went in to his coūtre / & aſſembled a great nōbre of knightes & ſquiers of the countie of Forest & burbonoiſe. alſo ſir Peter of Alenſon his brother / prouyded him ſelfe gretly for that warr. And in the ſame ſeaſon ſir Guy of Bloys was newly retourned out of Spruce / wher as he had bē made knight and reyſed his baner at a ſcrimyſhe made agaynſt the enemies of god. So that aſſone as the gentyll knight was returned into Heynault / & herde tidynges of this great iourney y• was towarde / by his coſyns into the duchy of Acquitayne. He purueyed him ſelfe greatly to go to yt viage / & ſo dented out of Heynalt and wente to Parys / & preſented hym ſelfe to the kyng / who was glad to ſe him / & apoynted him to go with the duke of Berry / with a certayne nōbre of mē of armes / knightes & ſquiers. And ſo 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guy of Bloys deꝑted fro Paris / & rode to ward Orlyance / to go into Berry. In lyke maner as ye frē
               che kyng ordayned his armies / the king of England alſo ſet forth two great armyes. The duke of Lācaſtre was ordeyned with .iiii. C. men of armes & as many archers / to go into the duchy of Acqtayne / to cōfort & ayde his bretherne for it was thought ſurely / yt in thoſe ꝑties gretteſt warr ſhulde be made by the frēche king. Also the kyng of England by thaduyſe of his coū
               ſell / made another army to go into Picardy / of the which 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robr̄t Canollſhuld be chefe gouernour: for it was thought he was a knight metely to be ye leder of men of armes / for he had long tyme vſed the warr / & ſene great experiēce ther in. Therfore he was deſyred thus to do / by the kynge of Englande: who ioyouſly condiſcended therto. And ſo toke on him that voyage / to go to Calays / and ſo into France to fight with the frenchmen / if he might mete with thē in the felde: of the whiche he thought to be ſure. And ſo he prouided for his iourney / and all ſuche as went with him. In the ſame ſeaſon was delyuered out of priſon / the duke of Burbons mother in exchaunge for ſir Symon Burle: and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Euſtace Dambreticourt dyde helpe moche in that treaty: wher of the duke of Burbone & the frenche quene thanked him greatly. All this ſeaſon ther had ben great treatyes: bytwene the frenche kynge / and the kynge of Nauarr / who lay at Chierbourge. And ſo moche dyde they / that were treaters of the peace bytwene them / that they ſhewed the frenche kyng / that it was than no tyme for hym to kepe warre with the kynge of Nauarre / for they ſayd he had ynough to do

to kepe warre agaynſte the engliſſhemen / ſayenge howe he were better to let ſome what go of his owne / rather than any greatter euyls ſhuld ryſe. For if the kynge of Nauarre ſhulde ſuffre the englyſſhemen to arryue and paſſe through his fortreſſes of Cloux & of Conſtantyne / they ſhuld therby greatly greue the countre of Normandy: whiche thynges they ſayd ought greatly to be redoubted and conſydered. So moche they enduced the kynge / that he agreed to the peace / and went to the towne of Roan / and ther the peace was confyrmed / And to the kynge of Nauarr ther went the archebyſſhop of Roan / the erle of Alenſon / the erle of Salebruche / ſyr Wylliam of Dormās / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert of Lorrys / they foūd the kyng of Nauar at Uernon / ther was made great feaſtꝭ / and thā they brought ye kyng of Nauarr to Roan to the frenche kyng / and ther agayne was confyrmed all the aliaū
               ces & confederacions / ſworne & put in writyng and vnder ſeale / & as I vnderſtode the kyng of Nauar in makyng of this peace ſhuld renoūce all ꝓmyſſes of loue that had ben / bytwene hym and the kyng of England / and that after his returne agayne into Nauarr / he ſhulde defye the kyng of Englād. and for the more ſurete of loue to be holden and kept bitwene hym & the frēche kyng / the kyng of Nauarr went with
                  •
                yt frēche kyng fro Roan to Paris / & there were agayne new feaſtꝭ and ſolēpnities. And whan they had inough ſported them / thā leaue was taken / and the kynge of Nauer departed amyably fro the frēche kyng: and left behynde him his two ſonnes with the kyng their vncle. And than he wēt to Moūtpellyer / & ſo in to the countie of Foi / & after into his owne countre of Nauer. Nowe let vs retourne to the buſyneſſe of Acqtayne.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy deꝑted out of Spayne & went to Tholous / where as the duke of Aniou receyued him ioyouſly. Ca. CC .lxxvi.
            
               VE ſhall knowe as it hath ben ſayd before / how the duke of Aniou had ben in France / and was agreed / yt aſſone as he was returned in to lā
               guedoc / he ſhulde entre byforce in to Guyen / for he coude in no wyſe loue y• prince nor thenglyſſmen / nor neuer dyde. And before his departyng / the frenche kyng ſent letters wt great meſſangers in to Caſtell to kyng Henry. Deſyring hym to ſende in to Fraunce ſir Bertram of Cleſquy: alſo the kyng and the duke of Aniou wrote to ſir Bertrā / that he ſhulde fynd the meanes to come ſhortely into Fraunce. So theſe meſſangers dyd their meſſage / and ye kynge of Spayne / thought nat to kepe him ayenſt the frenche kynges deſyre / and ſo wolde make non excuſe. And ſo ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy made him redy as ſhortely as he coude / and toke leue of kyng Henry / and dyd ſomoche that he came to Tholou / wher the duke of Aniou was / and had ther aſſembled a great nombre of knight / ſquyers / and men of warr / and taryed for nothynge: but the comynge of ſir Bertram. So that by his comyng the duke and all his / were greatly reioyſed / and than they ordayned to de parte fro Tholous / and to entre into the prices lande. The ſame ſeaſon was come to Hāpton in England the duke of Lācaſtre / with .iiii. C. men of armes / and as many archers / their ſhippes & veſſels redy withall their purueyance: & were in mynde to ſayle to Bourdeaux / ſo they myght haue wynde. And with the duke / there was the lorde Roſe / ſir Michell de la poule ſir Robert Rouxe / ſir Johan of ſaynt Lowe / and ſir Wyllyam Beauchampe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they of Monſac & of Moūtpellyer yelded thē to the duke of Aniou. And of the duke of Berry / who lay at ſiege before the cytie of Lymoges. Cap. CC .lxxvii.
            
               THan the duke of Aniou deꝑted fro the cyte of Tholou / in great aray & in good order: and with hi there was therle of Armynake the lorde Dalbret / therle of Piergourt / the erle of Comynges / the vycont of Carmayne / y• erle of Lyle / the vycont of Brune Kyell / the vycont of Narbon / the vycont of Talar / the lorde de la barde / the lorde of Pyncornet / ſir Bertrā Tande / the ſeneſhalles of Tholous / Carcaſſone / & of Beauchair and dyuers other. They were a .ii. M. ſpeares knightes and ſquyers / & vi. M. a fote with laūces and paueſſes. And ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was chefe capitayne of all that company / and ſo tooke the way to Dagenoiſe. And by the way they founde in the feldes mo than a. M. of the cōpanyons / who all that ſeaſon had ben in Quercy / and as than were rydinge to warde Agen. The firſt fortereſſe that they came to was Monſacke / and the countre was in ſuche feare / by reaſon of the commynge

of the duke of Iniou with ſuche a great nōbre / that dyuers townes and fortereſſes trymbled for feare / and were nat in wyll to holde warre agaynſt him. And ſo aſſoone as they were come before Moyſac / they yelded them and became frenche: and than they wente to Thounyns on the ryuer of Garon. And ſo the frenchmen rode at their eaſe folowynge the ryuer / and ſo came to the porte ſaynt Mary / the which incōtynent tourned frenche. And in euery place the frenchmen put in people and made gariſons / & bothe the towne and caſtell of Thounyns yelded thē vp and became french and ther they ſet a newe capitayne / and .xx. ſpeares with hym. Than after they toke they way to Moūtpellyer / and to Iguyllon / brennyng and diſtroyeng the countre. And whan they were come to the good towne of Mountpellyer / they within were ſore afrayed of the duke of Aniou / and ſo yelded thē ſelfe vp to the frenche kyng. Than they went to the ſtronge caſtell of Aguyllon / and there they were four dayes / for within was ſir Gaultyer of Manny and his cōpany: and ſo yelded hym ſelfe and the caſtell to the duke of Aniou / wherof they of Bergerath had great marueyle / that they yelded thē ſelfe ſo ſoone. Capitayne within Bergerath was the captall of Beufz / and ſir Thomas Phelton / with a hundred ſpeares englyſſhe and gaſcoyns. And in lyke maner as y• duke of Aniowe and his company were entred in to the princes lande / in the countre of Agen and Tholouſen. Lyke wiſe the duke of Berry / the ſame tyme and his company rode in Lymoſyn / with a .xii. hundred ſpeares a horſebacke / and a thre thouſande a fote: conquerynge townes and caſtels / brennyng and exilyng the coū
               trey. And with hym was the duke of Burbon / the erle of Alenſon / sir Guy of Bloyes / ſir Robert of Alenſon erle of Perche / ſir John̄ Darmynake ſir Hugh Dolphyn ſir John̄ of Uyllemore, the lorde of Beauieu the lorde of Uyllers / the lorde of Senar / ſir Geffray Mōtagu / ſir Loyes of Malleuall / ſir Rayman of Marnell / ſir John̄ of Boloyne / ſir Godfray his vncle / the vycont Duzes / the lorde of Sully / the lorde of Talenton / the lorde of Cōfant / y• lorde Dappecher / the lorde Dacon ſir John̄ Damenue / ymbault of Peſchyn & dyuers other good barons / knightes and ſquyers. Theſe men of armes entred in to Lymoſyn / & dyd ther great 
                  〈…〉
               uries / and ſo came and layed ſiege to Lymoges. Within y• towne ther were a fewe englyſhmenꝭ the whiche ſir Hugh Caurell had left therin gariſon / for he was ſeneſhalll in the countre.
            THe prince of Wales who was in y• towne of Angoleme / was well enformed of thoſe two great armyes / aſwell of the duke of Aniou / as of the duke of Berry: and howe they were entred with great ſtrength into his countre / in two ꝑties. And alſo it was ſhewed hym how by all likelyhod / they wolde drawe towarde Angoleme / and to beſiege him and the princeſſe within the towne. The prince who was a valyant man and ymaginatyfe / anſwered and ſayd: howe his enemyes ſhulde nat fynde hym cloſed / nother within towne nor yet caſtell / but ſaid howe he wolde mete thē in the playne felde Than he cauſed letters to be written / and ſente forthe to all his true frendes and ſubgettes: in Poictou in Xaynton / in Rochell / in Rouergue in Quercy / in Gore / in Bygore / & in Agenoiſe. Deſyring and commaundyng them to come to hym in all haſt / with as moche power of men of warre as they coude make: & to mete with hym at the towne of Cougnac / for ther he hadde ſtablyſſhed his aſſemble. And ſo anone after he departed fro the good lady priceſſe his wyfe / and had with hym Richarde his yonge ſonne. And in the meane ſeaſon that the prince made thus his aſſemble / the frenchmen rode on forthe / waſtyng and diſtroyeng the coūtre before them / & ſo came to Lynde a good towne / ſtandyng on the Ryuer of Dordone / a leage fro Bergerath. And capitayne therof was ſir Thomas of Batefoyle a knight of Gaſcoyne / who was within the towne / ſet ther to defende it. And ſo the duke of Aniowe / the erle of Armynake / the lorde Dalbret / the erle of Pyergourt / the vy count of Carmayn / and all the other barons and knyghtes came thyder: and ſo layed ſiege to the forte reſſe. Sayeng howe they wolde neuer depart thens / tyll they had the fortereſſe at their commaundement. The towne was good & ſtrong and well furnyſſhed with artillary / for the captall of Beufz and ſir Thom̄s Phelton had ben ther nat paſt a .xv. dayes before / and had ſo refreſſhed y• garyſon / that they thought well that they within might kepe well y• fortreſſe yf they lyſt. Conſydering the ayde and helpe that they might haue ſhortely fro Bergerath / if nede requyred. Howbe it the people of the towne were ſore enclyned to become frenche / and had great deſyre to harken on the promyſſes that the duke of Aniou made vnto thē. So that finally the capitayn ſir Thom̄s of Batefoyle / was fayne to agre to them. And alſo by a certayne ſomme of money that he ſhulde haue: and great ꝓfyte yerely of the duke of Aniowe / and ther vpon to

become good frenche / and ſo it was ordayned that in a mornynge he ſhulde let the frenchmen entre into the towne. This treaty and couenāt was nat ſo cloſe kepte / but that it was knowen in Bergerath / the nyght before that the towne ſhulde be delyuered in the mornynge. And the ſame tyme in to the towne of Bergerath there was come / the erle of Cābridge with two hundred ſpeares / and he was preſent whan reporte was made of thoſe tidynges. The Captall of Beufz / and ſir Thomas Phelton hadde great marueyle therof / and ſayd: how he wolde be at the delyuere of the towne. And ſo after mydnight they departed fro Bergerath / and rode towarde Lynde / and at the brekyng of the day they came thyder / and cauſed the gate to be op▪
               ned & ſo rode through the towne / tyll they came to the other gate / where as the frēchmen ſhulde entre. At whiche tyme they were a entrynge / & ſir Thomas Batefole redy to make them way to entre. Than the Captall of Befz ſtept forthe his ſwerde in his hande and lighted a fote nere to the gate / and ſayd. A / ſir Thomas Batefole falſe traytour: thou ſhalt dye firſt / thou ſhalte neuer do trayſon more / and therwith ſtroke at hym with his ſwerde in ſuche wyſe / that he fell downe deed to the erthe. Whan the frenchmen parceyued the Captall and his baner / and ſir Thom̄s Phelton / they knewe well they fayled of their entent / wherfore they reculed togyder and turned their backes and fledde away. So the towne abode ſtyll englyſſhe / & was in gret parell to haue ben robbed and brent by the englyſſhmen / and all the men within ſlayne: bycauſe they conſented to the trayſon. Howe be it they excuſed them ſelfe & ſayd: howe they dyde nothyng / nor conſented to do nothynge but for very feare / and prīcipally for feare of their capitayne. So this paſſed ouer / and theſe two lordes abode ſtyll ther a long ſeaſon / tyll the duke of Aniou and his cōpany departed thens / and toke another way. ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of the ſtate and ordynaunce of Englande / and of the army that ſir Robert Canoll made in the realme of Fraunce.
         
         
            ¶ How trewſe was made bytwene Englande and Scotlande / and how ſir Robert Canoll brent & exyled the countre of Picardy and of Uermandoiſe. Cap. CC .lxxviii.
            
               BEfore that ſir Robert Canoll and his cōpany parted out of Englande / there was a great treaty bytwene Englande and Scotlande / whiche treaty was ſo wyſely handled by ſadde and diſcrete counſayle of bothe parties / ſo y• a peace was graūted bytwene bothe kynges / their coū
               treis and liege people / to endure .ix. yere. So that the ſcottꝭ myght at their pleaſure arme thē and ſerue and take wages other of englyſſhe or frenche at their pleaſur / without brekyng of any peace / wherby ſir Robert Canoll had in his cōpany a hundred ſpeares of the realme of ſcot lande. Whan ſir Robert Canoll was redy and his cōpany he went to Douer and ſo paſt forth to Calays / and ther arryued and toke lande / & was well receyued of the capitayne ſir Nicholas Stamborne. And whan he had ben well refreſſhed ther / the ſpace of ſeayn dayes / and taken there counſayle / to what parte they ſhulde drawe. And ſo in a mornynge they deꝑted and toke the felde / and were to the nōbre of .xv. hundred ſpeares / & foure thouſande archers. And he had with hym out of Englande / ſir Thom̄s of Grantſon / ſir Alayne of Bourequeſelles / ſir Gylbert Gyfford, the lorde of Saluatier / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Johan Bourchier / ſir Wylliam Meſucyle / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Geffray Orſell and dyuers other knightes & valyant men of armes. and ſo the firſt day they wēt nere to Fiennes. Sir Moreau of Fiēnes / who was conſtable of France was the ſame tyme in his owne caſtell of Fiennes / with a great nombre of knightꝭ and ſquyers / well purueyed and aduyſed to receyue y• englyſſhmen. And in the mornyng the englyſſhmen came thyder / thynkyng to aſſayle the caſtell / but anone they ſawe howe they coude take none aduauntage there. And ſo paſſed forthe through the coūtie of guyens / and entred into the countie of Faucōbrige and brent all before them / and ſo came to the cite of Turwyn. But they dyde nat aſſayle it / for it was ſo well prouyded for / that they thought they ſhulde but loſe their payne. And ſo thanne they toke their way throught the coūtre of Terrenoyſe / to entre into Artoiſe / & dayly they rod a four leages & paſt nat / bycauſe of their caryage & men a fote / and toke their lodgynge euer about noone / and lay about great vyllagꝭ. And ſo at laſt they came to the cytie of Arras / & they lodged in the towne of Mount ſaynt Eloy 
                  〈◊〉
                to Arras. And ſo they brente and waſted all the

countre as ferr as they durſt ſtretche abrode. The frenche kyng had the ſame ſeaſon ſet gret garyſons in all cyties / townes / caſtels / fortreſſes / bridges / and paſſages: to defende them agaynſt all aſſautes. And whan ſir Robert Canoll and his company had refreſſhed them two dayes in the mount ſaynt Eloy / than they deꝑted and went and paſſed by the cytie of Arras. Sir wyllm̄ Meſuell and ſir Geffray Durſell marſhals of the englyſſhe hooſt / thought to go and ſe them of Arras more nerer / and toke with them a two hundred ſpeares / and a foure hundred archers and departed out of the great batayle / and auaūsed thē ſelfe to the ſubbarbes of the towne and ſo came to the barryers / the whiche they foūde well furniſſhed with croſ bowes and men of armes. And within the towne was ſir Charles of Poicters with the lady of Artoiſe / but he made no ſemblant to yſſue out nor to fight with thenglyſſhmen. And whan the engliſſhmen had taryed before the barryers a certayne ſpace / and ſawe that non yſſued agaynſt them. Than they drue agayne to their batayle but at their departyng they thought to make a knowledge that they had ben there / for they ſet the ſubbarbes a fyre / to thentēt to haue drawen out of the towne the men of war / but they were in no mynde ſo to do. And ſo the fyre dyd moch hurt & domage / for ther they brent a great monaſtery of freers prechers / cloyſter and all. and ſo thenglyſſhmen paſſed forthe and toke ye way to Bapalmes / brennyng and waſtyng the coū
               tre. And ſo at laſt they came into Uermandoiſe and cāe to Roy and brent the towne / and than paſſed forthe and went to Hem in Uermādois wherinto all the people were withdrawen / and all their goodes: and ſo they dyde in lyke wiſe at ſaynt Quintyns and at Peron. ſo that thengliſſhmen founde nothyng abrode / ſaue ye grā
               ges full of corne: for it was after Auguſt. So they rode forth fayre & eaſely a two or thre leagꝭ a day. And whan they came wher as any plentie of vitayle was than they taryed ther a two or thre dayes / to refreſſhe thē and their horſes. And ſo on a day they came before a towne / the whiche was chefe of all that countre ther about and the marſhals ſpake with the capitayne by aſſurance / & ſayd to him. Howe ſay you? what wyll ye gyue and we ſhall reſpyte this countre / and ſaue it fro brennyng and robbyng. ſo they fell at a cōpoſicyon that they of the playne coū
               tre ſhulde gyue and pay to thē a certayne ſōme of florens: and ſo the countre was ſaued. This ſir Robert Canoll gate in the ſame voyage / by the ſayde meanes at dyuers tymes / aboue the ſomme of a hundred thouſande frankes / wherof afterwarde he was ſhente / for he was accuſed to the kyng of Englande / yt he had nat well done his deuoyre in yt iourney / as ye ſhall here after in this hyſtorie.
            THe lande of the lorde of Couey abode in peace / for ther was nother man nor woman that had any hurt / the value of a penny / yf they ſayd they belonged to the lorde of Couey. And ſo at laſt the englyſſhmen came before the cyte of Noyon / the whiche was well furnyſhed with men of warre. Ther the englyſſhmen taryed and aproched as nere as they might / and aduyſed to ſe if any maner of aſſaut might preuayle them or nat / and there they ſawe that the towne was well aparelled for defence. And ſir Robert Canoll was loged in the abbey of Dolkans / and his people about him. And on a day he came before the cyte raynged in maner of batayle / to ſe yf they of the garyſon and comontie of the towne wold yſſue out to fight or nat / but they had no wyll ſo to do. Ther was a ſcottyſh knyght dyde there a goodly feate of armes / for he departed fro his company his ſpeare in his hande / mounted on a good horſe his page behynde him / and ſoo came before the barryers. This knyght was called ſir Johan Aſſucton / a hardy man and a couragious. whan he was before the barryers of Noyon / he lighted a fote and ſayd to his page / holde kepe my horſe and departe nat hens / and ſo went to the barryers. And within ye barryers ther were good knightes / as ſir Johan of Roy / ſir Launcelat of Lourys / and a .x. or .xii. other / who had great marueyle what this ſayde knight wolde do. Than he ſayd to them. Sirs / I am come hyder to ſe you: I ſe well ye wyll nat yſſue out of your barryers / therfore I wyll entre and I can / & wyll proue my knyghthode agaynſt yours / wyn me and ye can. And therwith he layed on rounde about hym / and they at hym. And thus he alone fought agaynſt them more than an hour / & dyd hurt two or thre of thē: ſo that they of the towne on the walles and garettes / ſtode ſtyll and behelde them / and had great pleaſure to regarde his valyātneſſe and dyde him no hurt / the whiche they might haue done / if they hadde lyſt to haue ſhotte or caſt ſtones at hym. And alſo the frenche knightes charged them to let hym and them alone togyder. So long they fought that

at laſt his page came nere to the barryers / and ſpake in his langage / and ſayd. Sir cōe away / it is tyme for you to depart / for your company is departyng hens. The knight he cd him well and than gaue a two or thre ſtrokes about him and ſo armed as he was / he lept out of the barryers / and lepte vpon his horſe without any hurt behynde his page: and ſayd to the frenchmen. Adue ſirs I thanke you / & ſorode forthe to his owne company. The whiche dede was moche prayſed of many folkes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they of Noyon toke the engliſſhmen that had ſet fyre in the byſſhops bridge / and howe the frenche kyng ſent for ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy. Cap. CC .lxxix.
            
               SIr Robert Canoll or he depted fro y• ſiege of Noyon / his people brent the towne of byſſhoppes bridge / on the ryuer of Dyſe / wheri ther were many fayre houſes. The knightes and ſquyers that were wt in the towne of Noyon / had great dyſpleaſure of the fyre. And ſo they vuderſtove that ſir Robert and his cōpany were departed: and a .lx. ſperes of thē went out of Noyon and cāe to the fyre / and founde ther ſtyllparte of thē that had ſet the fyre in the towne / and dyuers other that were ther to pylle and robbe / and ſo the mooſt parte of them were ſlayne. And ther the frenchmen wonne mo than .xl. good horſes / & reſcued dyuers priſoners / and ſaued fro brennyng many fayre houſes. And ſo they returned agayne to Noyon / with mo than .xv. priſoners / and ſo ſtrake of all their heedes. ¶ And the englyſſhmen rode forthe in good order to come to Larroyſe / & to paſſe at their eaſe the ryuer of Dyſe and the ryuer of Ewe / and they dyde no hurte in the countie of Soyſſons / bycauſe it parteyned to the lorde of Coucy. And trewe it was: they were cooſted euer with certayne lordes of France: as the vycont of Meaulx / the lorde of Chauny / y• lorde Raoll of Coucy / the lorde wyllyam of Mehung / ſonne to the erle of Tankernell and by their folkes. Wherby the englyſſhmen durſt nat breke their order / but euer kepte them ſelfe cloſe togyder. And alſo the frēchmen wolde nat medyll with thē / but euery night lodged within ſtronge holdes and good townes: and the englyſſhmen abrode in the playne coū
               tre / wher as they founde plentie of vitayls and newe wynes / wherof they made great larges. And ſo thus they rode through the countre / brē
               nyng and waſtynge all before them / and at laſt paſſed the ryuer of Marne / and ſo entred in to Champayne / and paſſed the ryuer of Aube / & tourned to the marches of Prouynce / and paſſed dyuers tymes the ryuer of Saync / & drewe towarde the cyte of Parys. For it had benſhewed thē howe the frēche kyng had made ther a great aſſemble of men of warr: of whome the erle of ſaynt Poule / and the lorde of Clyſſone ſhuld be chefe gouernours / wherfore they thought to drawe thider / wylling to fight with thē for by ſemyng thēngliſſhmen deſyred nothyng els but batayle. And therfore the frenche kynge wrotte to ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / who as than was in Acquytayne with the duke of Aniou. Commaundyng and deſyring him on the ſight of his letters / that he ſhulde drawe incontynent in to France / ſhewyng him how he wolde ſet him a warke in other places. In the ſame ſeaſon pope Urbane the fyft / came in to the cyte of Amou: he had ben before a foure yere togyder at Rome / and there about. He came thyder in truſt to make a peace bitwene the two kyngꝭ for the warr was renewed agayne / the whiche was ſore diſpleſant to the pope. Of whoſe comyng to Aniou / y• cardynals in thoſe marches were greatly reioyſed / for they thought to fare the better by him.
            NOwe let vs ſpeke of the prince of Wales howe he parceyuered in his warres. ye haue herde here before recorded / howe the price of Wales had made his aſſemble at Congnac / to thentent to ryde agaynſt the duke of Aniou / who brent and waſted his coūtre. and ſo at his cōmaūdement thyder auaūſed barons / knightes and ſquyers of Poictou of Xaynton / and of other landes that helde of the prince. The erle of Penbroke departed fro his garyſon and cāe to the prince. The ſame ſeaſon the duke of Lā
               caſtre arryued at Burdeux / wherof the prince was right ioyouſe. And ſo he taryed nat longe ther but deꝑted / for he vnderſtode that the price wold encoūtre his enemyes. And ſo a dayes iourney fro Congnac / he encountred the erle of Penbroke / who was in lyke wiſe goyng to the prince. And ſo they made great chere eche to other whan they met / and ſo rode to gyder to Cō
               gnac. Wher they foūde the prince / the princeſſe

and the erle of Cābridge / who were right glad of their comyng. And dayly there came men of warr to thê out of Poictou / Xaynton Rochell / Bygore Goute / Gaſcoyne / and the marcheſſe nert adioynyng vnder the obeyſance of the price. And on the frenche partie the duke of Aniou the erle of Armynake the lorde Dalbret the erles / vycontes / knightes / and ſquyers / who had conquered: cyties / caſtels / townes / and fortreſſes in their comynge / mo than .xl. And were aproched within fyue leages to Burdeux & had waſted all the countrey. And about Bergerath and Lynde they vnderſtode well howe the price had made his aſſemble at Congnac. And alſo howe the duke of Lancaſtre was arryued wt a great nōbre of men of warr / ſpeares and archers. Than they drue to counſayle / to take aduyſe howe they ſhuld perceyuer in their warr. And ſo newly to them was ſent ſer Bertram of Cleſquy by the frenche kyng / who came fro the duke of Berry / kepyng ſiege before the cytie of Lymoges / and had in ſuche wyſe conſtrayned them within / that they were at a poynt to yelde them / on certayne meanes and cōdicyons. And ſo to this counſayle of the duke of Aniou and of the lordes about hym / ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was called as it was reaſon. Ther were many reaſōs alleged and layd / but finally all thingꝭ cōſydred / they counſayled the duke of Aniou to breke vp his iourney for that tyme / and to ſend all his people in to garyſons / and to warr garyable: ſayeng howe they had done ſufficyētly for that tyme. Alſo it was nedefull to the lordes or Gaſcone / as the erle of Armynake / therle of Piergourt / the lorde Dalbret & dyuers other / to drawe into their owne coūtreis to kepe & defende them / and to make fronter warr for they knewe nat what was the prices entent: ſayeng that he had aſſembled toguyder ſo great an army. So by a comon acorde they departed eche fro other / and the duke of Aniou went to the cytie of Caours / and ſpredde abrode his people in the coūtre / & put in to garyſons. The erle of Armynake / and the lorde Dalbre / and y• other retourned in to their countreis / and prouyded to furniſſhe their townes and caſtels / thynking ſurely to haue warre / and made their people to be on a redyneſſe to kepe and defende their coū
               treis if nede were. ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / who departed fro the duke of Aniou / and dyde ſomoche that he came with his cōpany to the cyte of Lymoges / wher the duke of Berrey / and the duke of Burbone / and other lordes of Fraunce were at ſiege.
         
         
            ¶Howe they of Limoges yelded thē to the duke of Berrey / and howe the ſame duke brake vp his army. Cap. C C .lxxx.
            
               WHan ſyr Bertram was come agayne to the ſege / the frenchmen were greatly reioyſed of his comyng Than anone they purſued the treaty / that was begon bytwene the byſſhoppe of Lymoges and them of the cytie / and the duke of Aniowe. And ſo finally the byſſhoppe and they of the cytie tourned them and became frenche. And the duke of Berrey & the duke of Burbone / entred in to the cytie: and ſir Guy of Bloys and other lordes of France with great ioye / & toke faythe and homage of them of the cytie / and ſo refreſſhed and reſted them there a thre dayes. And ſo determyned ther in counſayle to breke vp their army for that tyme / as the duke of Aniou had done / and to retourne in to their owne coūtreis to kepe and defende their townes and fortereſſes / bicauſe of ſir Robr̄t Canoll / who was ſtyll abrode in the felde in Fraunce. Alſo they ſayd: howe they had right well ſped / in wynnyng of ſuche a cytie as Lymoges. So this counſayle and aduyſe was nat broken: but thus theſe lordes departed eche fro other / and ſir Bertram ab
                  •
               de ſtyll in the parties of Lymoſyn with two hundred ſpeares / and kept the caſtels of y• lorde of Maleuall / the whiche were tourned frenche Whan the duke of Berrey departed fro Lymoges / he ordayned and ſet in y• ſame cytie / at the requeſt of the byſſhop ſir Johan of Wyllemur ſir Hugh de la Roche / and Roger Beauforde / with a hūdred men of armes. and than he went in to Berrey / and the duke of Burbon into but bonoyſe. And other lordes of farther marches / went home into their owne countreis. Nowe lette vs ſpeke of the prince howe he ſpedde.
            ¶Whan tidynges was come to the prince that the cytie of Lymoges was tourned frēche / and howe that the byſſhop who was his goſſyp / & in whome he had before great truſt and confydence / was chefe ayder to yelde vp the cyte and to become frenche. With the whiche the prince was ſore diſpleaſed / and ſet leſſe force in y• men of the churche: in whom before he hadde great truſt. Thā he ſware by his fathers ſoule / wherby he was neuer forſworne: that he wolde gette

it agayne / and that he wolde make y• traytours derely abye their falſneſſe. Whan the mooſt ꝑte of his people were come / they were nombred to xit. hundred ſpeares / knightes and ſquyers: a thouſande archers and a thouſand men a fote. And ſo he departed fro the towne of Cōgnac / & with hym his two bretherne / the duke of Lancaſtre and the erle of Cambridge: ſir Thomas Phelton and the captall of Befz / abode ſtyll at Bergerath to kepe y• fronter agaynſt the frēchmen and companyons that were in the coūtre. And with the prince alſo: was ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / ſir Loyes Harcourt / the lorde of Pōs the lorde of Parteney / the lorde of Pynau / the lorde of Tanyboton / ſir Percyuall of Coloyne ſir Godfray Dargēton. Potenyns & gaſcons: the lorde of Mountferant the lorde of Camont the lorde Lōgueren / ſir Aymere of Tharſe / the lorde of Pomyers / the lorde of Muſydent / the lorde of Leſpare / the ſouldyche of 
                  •
               eſtrabe / the lorde of Gerond and dyuets other engliſſ hmē
               ▪ as ſir Thomas Percy / the lorde Roſe / the lord Wyllm̄ Beauchāpe / ſir Mychell dela Poule / the lorde Stephan Goſenton / ſir Richarde of Pontchardon / ſir Baudwyn of Franuyll / ſir Symon Burle / ſir Dangouſe / ſir John̄ Deureur / ſir Wyllm̄ of Meſuyll and dyuers other / the which I can nat all name. And of heynouſe ther was ſir Euſtace Dābrety court: and of the companyons / ſir Perducas Dalbret / Nandon of Bergerath. And thyder came le Bourge de Laſpare / le Bourge de Bretuell / Eſpyot / Bernarde de Wyſt / and dyuers other. So all theſe men of warre went for the in good ordynaunce and toke the feldes / and all the coūtte trymbled before them. The prince was ſo dyſeaſed that he coude nat ryde: but ſo was caryed in a horſe lytter / and he toke the way to Lymoſyn / to the entent to come to Lymoges. And at laſt thyder they came / and ſo lodged rounde about the cytie: and there the prince ſware that he wolde neuer departe thens / tyll he hadde the cytie at his pleaſure. The byſſhoppe within and the burgeſſes conſydered well: howe they had greatly treſpaſſed the prince / wherof than they repented them. But than they coulde nat remedy it: for they were nat as than lordes nor mayſters of their owne cytie. Sir Johan Wyllemur ſir Hugh de la Roche / and Roger Beaufort / who were capitayns within the cytie / cōforted greatly their people / and ſayd. Sirs: be nat afrayed we are ſtrong ynough to reſyſt agaynſt the prices power / for by aſſaute he canne nat hurt nor greue vs / we are all well furnyſſhed with artyllary. Whan the prince and his marſhalles had well ymagined and conſydered / the puyſſance and ſtrength of the cytie / and had knowledge of the nombre of men of warre within. Than they ſayd how by aſſaut they coulde neuer wyn it. Than the prince thought to aſſaye an other way. He had alwayes in his company a great nombre of myners / and ſo he ſette them awarke to vndermyne. The knyghtes within parceyued well / howe they were vndermyned / and began to make dykes and to countermyne / to the entent to breke their myne.
         
         
            ¶Howe ſir Robert Canoll entred in to the realme of France / with a great nombre of men of armes / and came nere to Parys. Cap. C C .lxxxi.
            
               SIr Robert Canoll (as it hath ben ſayd before) with a great nombre of men of armes / entred into the realme of France: & rode for the in ſmall iourneys with great expence thorowe the realme. But y• 
               poor people of the playne countre payed derely therfore / for the englyſſhmen as they went and cāe / they dyde great hurt: & ſhewed in maner howe they deſyred nothynge but batayle. And whan they had paſſed the coūtres of Artoiſe / Uermā doyſe / the byſſhopriche of Laon / the archebyſſhopriche of Raynes / and Champayne. Than they tourned to Bry / and ſo came before the cytie of Parys / and there lodged a day and two nightes / the whiche tyme the frēche kyng was there / and might well ſe out of his lodgynge of ſaynt Poule / the fyres and ſmokes that were made about gaſtenoyes. ¶ The ſame day / the conſtable of France / ſir Moreau Fyēnes was within Parys. The erle of ſaynt Poule therle of Tankeruyll / the erle of Salebruch / the vycount of Meaulx / ſir Raoll of Coucy / the feneſhall of Heynault / ſir Edwarde of Rauncy / ſir Anguerrant Douden / the lorde of Caſtell Julyan / ſir Johan of Uyan / the lorde de la Ryuer and dyuers other knightes / ſquyers / and valyant men of Fraunce. But none of theym dyde yſſue out that day / for the kynge wolde nat ſuffre thē. For the lorde of Clyſſon / who was one of the mooſt prīcypall of his counſayle / & beſt b
                  •
               leued and herde / dyde put great doutes: and

ſayd to y• kyng. Sir ▪ ye haue no nede to enploy your people agaynſt yonder ſort of madde mē. Let thē go / they can nat take from you your herytage / nor put you out of your realme by their ſmokes. And at the gate ſaynt James / and at the barryers / was the erle of ſaynt Poule / the vycount of Roan / ſir Rafe Coucy / the lorde of Canyne / the lorde of Creques / ſir Edwarde of Rauncy▪ ſir Anguerant Doudyn. And ſo on a tueſday in the mornyng / the engliſſhmen diſſoged and had ſette fyre in the vyllages wher as they had lodged / ſo that the fyre might playnly be ſene to Parys. Ther was a knyght in their company had made a vowe the day before / that he wolde ryde to the walles or gates of Parys / and ſtryke at the barriers with his ſpeare. and for y• furnyſſhyng of his vowe / he departed fro his company his ſpeare in his fyſt / his ſhelde about his necke armed at all peceſſe / on a good horſe / his ſquyer on another behynde him with his baſſenet. And whā he aproched nere to Parys / he toke and dyde on his helme / and left his ſquyer behynde hym: and daſſhed his ſpurres to his horſe / and came galopynge to the barryers / the whiche as than were opyn. And the lordes that were there / had wende he wolde haue entred into the towne / but y• was nat his mynde. For whan he hadde ſtryken at the barryers (as he had before auowed) he turned his reyne and drue backe agayne / and departed. Than the knightes of Fraunce that ſawe hym depte / ſayd to him. Go your way / ye haue rightwell a quyted your ſelfe. I can nat tell you what was this knyghtes name / nor of what countre: but the blaſure of his armes / was goules / two fuſſes / ſable aborder ſable. Howbeit in the ſubbar bes / he had aſore encountre: for as he paſſed on the pauement / he founde before him a bocher / a bygge mā / who had well ſene this knight paſſe by. And he helde in his handes a ſharpe heuy axe with a long poynt; and as the knight returned agayne / & toke no heed. This bocher came on his ſyde / and gaue the knight ſuche a ſtroke bytwene the necke and the ſhulders / that he reuerſed forwarde heedlynge to the necke of his horſe / and yet he recouered agayne. And than the bocher ſtrake him agayne / ſo that the axe entred in to his body. So y• for payne / the knight fell to the erthe: and his horſe ranne away and came to the ſquyer / who abode for his mayſter at the ſtretes ende. And ſo the ſquyer toke the horſe / and had great marueyle what was becōe of his maiſter / for he had well ſene him ryde to the barriers and ſtryke therat with his glayue and retourne agayne. Thanne he rode a lytell forthe thyderwarde / and anone he ſawe where his mayſter lay vpon the erthe bytwene foure men / layeng on him ſtrokes: as they wolde haue ſtryken on a ſtethy. And thā the ſquyer was ſo affrayed / that he durſt go no farther / for he ſaw well he coude nat helpe his maiſter. Ther fore he retourned as faſt as he might. So ther the ſayd knight was ſlayne. And the knightes that were at y• gate / cauſed him to be buryed in holy grounde. And the ſquyer retourned to the hooſt / and ſhewed all the aduēture of his mayſter / wherof they were all ſorie and diſpleaſed. And the ſame night they loged / bytwene moūtle Hery and Parys / by a lytell ryuer / and lodged be tymes.
         
         
            How ſir Bertram of Cleſquy made great warre in the countie of Lymoges / and howe they toke the caſtell of ſaynt yriell. Cap. CC .lxxxii.
            
               THe ſame ſeaſon that ſir Robert Canoll made thus his vyage: and that the price of Wales and his two bretherne lay before the cyte of Lymoges. Sir Bertram of Cleſquy and his cōpany / the whiche were to the nombre of two hundred ſpeares. He rode by the one ſyde of the countre of Lymoges / but he lay nat in the felde neuer a night for feare of the englyſſhmen. But euery night lay in a fortereſſe / ſuche as were tourned frenche: parteyning to ſir Loyes of Maleuall and to ſir Raymon of Marneyle / and to other. Howebeit euery day they rode forthe and dyde great payne / to conquere townes and fortereſſes. The prince was well aduertyſed of this toney that ſir Bertram made / and dayly cōplayntes came to him: howe beit in no wyſe he wolde breke vp his ſiege. Than ſir Bertram of Cleſnuy entred into the vicoūte of Lymoges / a coū
               tre that was yelded / and dyde holde of the duke of Bretayne (the lorde Johan of Mountford) And ther ſir Bertram beganne to make great warre in the name of the lady / wyfe to the lorde Charles of Bloyes / to whome the ſame enherytaunce ſomtyme belonged. There he made

great warre for none came agaynſt him / for the duke of Bretayne thought full lytell y• ſir▪ Bertrā wolde haue made any warr agaynſt hym. And ſo ſir Bertram came before the towne of ſaynt yriell / wherin there was neuer a gentylman to defende the towne. Wherfore they were ſo afrayed / that they yelded them vp to y• obeyſaunce of the lady of Bretayne / in whoſe name ſir Bertram made warr. And ſo of ſaynt yriell the bretons made a great gariſon / wherby they wan dyuers other townes in Limoſyn. Nowe let vs retourne to the prince of Wales.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the price toke the cyte of Lymoges / and howe four companyons dyd marueyls in armes. Ca. CC .lxxxiii.
            
               ABout the ſpace of a moneth or more / was the prince of Wales before the cytie of Lymoges / and ther was no ther aſſaute nor ſcrimyſſhe: but dayly they myned. And they within knewe wel how they were myned / & made a countermyne there agaynſt / to haue diſtroyed thēglyſſhe myners / but they fayled of their myne. & whan y• princis myners ſawe how the coūtermyne againſt thē fayled / they ſayde to the prince. Sir / whan ſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe you: we ſhall cauſe a part of the wall to fall in to the dykes / wherby ye ſhall entre in to the cytie at your eaſe / without any daunger. Whiche wordes pleaſed greatly the prince / and ſayd. I woll that to morowe be tymes / yeſhewe forthe and execute your warke. Than the myners ſet fyre in to their myne. and ſo the next mornyng as the prince habbe ordayned / there fell downe a great pane of the wall & fylled the dykes / wherof the englyſſhmen were gladde / and were redy armed in the ſelde to entre into the towne. The fote men myght well entre at their caſe / and ſo they dyde: and ranne to the gate / and beate / downe the fortifyeng and barryers. For their was no defēce agaynſt thē it was downe ſo ſodaynly / that they of the towne were nat ware therof. Than the prince / the duke of Lancaſtre / the erle of Cambridge / the erle of Penbroke / ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / and all the other with their companyes / entred into the cyte and all other fote mē redy apelled to do yuell / and to pyll and robbe the cytie: and to ſle men / women / and chyldren: for ſo it was commaunded them to do. It was great pytie to ſe the men / women / and chyldren: y• kneled downe on their knees before the price for mercy / but he was ſo enflamed with yre y• he toke no hede to theym / ſo that none was herde / but all putte to dethe as they were mette withall / and ſuche as were nothyng culpable. There was no pyte taken of the poore people / who wrought neuer no maner of treaſon. yet they bought it dererr than the great perſonages / ſuche as had done the yuell and treſpace. There was nat ſo harde a hert within the cytie of Lymoges / and yf he had any remembraunce of god / but that wepte pyteouſly for the great miſchefe that they ſawe before their eyen. For mo than thre thouſande men / women / and chyldren were ſlayne and be heeded that day / god haue mercy on their ſoules / for I trowe they were martyrs. And thus entrynge in to the cytie / a certayne company of englyſſhmen entred into the byſſhoppes palys and there they founde the byſſhop. And ſo they brought him to the princꝭ preſens / who beheld hym right ferſly and felly. And the beſt worde that he coude haue of hym / was how he wolde haue his heed ſtryken of / and ſo he was hadde out of his ſyght.
            
               NOwe lette vs ſpeke of the knyghtes that were within the cytie: as ſir John̄ of Wyllemure / ſir Hugh de la Roche / Roger Beaufort / ſon to the erle of Baufort / capitayns of the cytie. Whan they ſawe the trybulacion & peſtylence that ranne ouer them and their company / they ſayd one to another / we are all deed without we defende our ſelfe. Therfore lettevs ſell our lyues derely / as good knightes ought to do. Than ſir Johan of Wyllemure ſayde to Roger Beauforte. Roger / it behoueth y• ye be made a knight. Than Roger aunſwered / and ſayd. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                / I am nat as yet worthy to be a knyght I thāke you ſir of your good wyll / ſo ther was no more ſayd. They had nat the leaſer to ſpeke long togyder / howbeit they aſſembled thē togyder in a place agaynſt an olde wall / & there dyſplayed their baners / ſo they were to the nōbre of .lxxx. perſons. thyder came y• duke of Lanca ſtre ▪ therle of Cambridge & their companyes / & ſo lighted a fote / ſo that the frēchmen coude nat long endure agaynſt thenglyſſhmen / for anone they were ſlayne and taken. Howbeit the duke

of Lancaſtre hymſelfe fought longe / hande to hande / agaynſt ſir John̄ Wyllemure / who was a ſtrong knight and a hardy. And therle of Cā
               bridge fought agaynſt ſir Hughe de la Roche: and the erle of Pēbroke agaynſt Roger Beaufort / who was as than but a ſquyer. Theſe thre frēchmen dyde many feates of armes / their mē were ocuped otherwyſe. The prince in his charyote came by them and behelde them gladly & apeaſed himſelfe in beholdyng of them. So lō
               ge they fought togyder / that the thre frēchmen by one accorde beholdyng their ſwerdes / ſayd. Sirs: we be yours / ye haue cōquered vs. Do with vs accordynge to right of armes. Sir ꝙ the duke of Lancaſtre: we loke for nothyng els therfore we receyue you as our priſoners. And thus the forſayd thre frenchmen were taken / as it was enfourmed me.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the cytie of Lymoges was brent and diſtroyed / and the byſſhop delyuered fro dethe / & howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was choſen conſtable. Cap. CC .lxxxiiii.
            
               THus the cytie of Lymoges was pylled / robbed / & clene brent: and brought to diſtructyon. Than thēglyſſhmen departed with their cōqueſt and priſoners & drue to Cō
               gnac / wher my lady the prī
               ceſſe was. Than the prīce gaue leaue to all his men of warr to deꝑte / and dyde no more y• ſeaſon: for he felt hym ſelfe nat well at eaſe. For alwayes his ſickeneſſe encreaſed / wherof his bretherne and people were ſore diſmayed. Nowe ſhall I ſhewe you of the byſſhop of Lymoges / who was in great paryll of leſyng of his heed. The duke of Lancaſtre deſyred of the prince to gyue him the byſſhop / to do wt him at his pleaſure. The prince was content / and cauſed him to be delyuered to the duke. The byſſhope had frēdes / and they had newly enformed the pope / who was as than at Auygnon (of the byſſhoppes takyng) the whiche fortuned well for y• byſſhoppe: for els he had ben deed. Than the pope by ſwete wordes / entreated the duke of Lancaſtre to delyuer to him the ſayd byſſhoppe. The duke wold nat deny the pope but graūted him and ſent him to Auignon / wherof y• pope was right gladde. ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of the aduentures of Fraunce.
            THe frenche kynge was enformed of the diſtructyon and conqueſt of the cytie of Lymoges. And how it was left clene boyde / as a towne of deſert / wherwith he was ſore diſpleſed and toke it in great paſſyon / the domage & anoy of thenhabytantes of the ſame. Thā was it aduyſed in Fraunce: by coūſell of the nobles prelates & comons of all the realme / yt it was of neceſſyte / that the frēchmen ſhulde haue a chefe and a gouernour / called y• cōſtable. For 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Mo reau of Fyennes wolde leaue and gyue vp his office / who was a right valyant man of his hā
               des / and a great enterpriſer of dedes of armes. So that all thyng cōſydred and ymagined / by a comon acorde they choſe ſir Bertram of Cleſ quy / ſo yt he wolde take it on him: as the mooſt valyant knight / mooſt vertuous / and mooſt able to execute that offyce / and mooſt fortunate / that they knewe as thā / that bare armes for the crowne of Fraunce. Than the kyng wrote and ſent certayne meſſangers to him / that he ſhulde come and ſpeke with him at Parys. The meſſangers foūde him in the countie of Lymoges / where as he toke fortreſſes and caſtels / & made them to yelde to the lady of Bretayne / wyfe to ſir Charles of Bloys. And as than he had newly taken a towne called Brandon / and was rydyng towardes another. And whan the kyngꝭ meſſangers were come to him / he receyued thē ioyouſly and right ſagely / as he that coulde do it right well. Than the meſſanger delyuered to him the kyngꝭ letter and dyd his meſſage. And whan ſir Bertram ſawe the cōmaundement of the kyng / he wolde make none excuſe: but cōcluded to go and knowe the kynges pleaſur. And ſo deꝑted aſſone as he myght / and ſent y• mooſt parte of his men in to garyſons ſuche as he had cōquered / and he made ſouerayne and kepar of thē ſir Olyuer of Māny his nephue. Than he rode forthe ſo long by his iourneys / that he cāe to Parys / wher he founde the kyng & great nō
               bre of lordes of his coūſayle / who receyued him right ioyouſly / and dyde him great reuerence. And ther the kynge ſhewed him / howe he & his coūſayle had choſen him to be conſtable of Frā
               ce. Than he excuſed him ſelfe right ſagely / and ſayd. Sir I am nat worthy: I am but a poore knight / as in regarde of your other great lord & valyant men in Fraunce / though it be ſo that fortune hath a lytell auaunſed me. Thanne the kynge ſayde. Sir it is for nothynge that ye excuſe

you. It behoueth you to take it / for it is ſo ordayned & determyned by all the counſayle of Fraunce / the whiche in no wyſe I wyll breke. Than ſir Bertram excuſed him ſelf agayne by another way / and ſayd. Right dere ſir and noble kynge / I may nat nor dare nat withſay yo
                  •
                noble pleaſure. Howe be it ſir / it is of trouthe y• I am but a poore man / and to lowe of blode to come to the offyce of conſtable of Fraunce / the whiche is ſo great and ſo noble an offyce. For it is conuenyent that he that wyll exercyſe and acquyte him ſelfe well in that offyce / muſt commaūde as well / and rather the great men than the ſmall perſonages. And ſir beholde here my lordes your bretherne / your nephues / and your coſyns / who hath charge of many men of warr in your hooſt and iourneys. Sir / howe durſt I than be ſo bolde as to commaunde them: certaynly ſir / enuy is ſo great that I ought to fere it. Therfore ſir / I requyre your grace pardon me / and gyue this office to ſome other y• wolde gladlyer haue it thā I / and that may better execute the office. Than the kynge anſwered / and ſayde. Sir Bertram / excuſe you nat by that way: for I haue nother brother / coſyn / nor nephue / erle nor barowne in my realme / but that ſhall obey you. And yf any do the contrary / I ſhall ſo angre hym / that he ſhall parceyue well my diſpleaſur. Therfore ſir / take ioyouſly the office I requyre you. Sir Bertram ſawe well that any excuſacyons that he coude make / ſhulde nat auayle. Than finally he accorded to the opinyon of the kynge / ryght ſore agaynſt his wyll. So than with great ioye ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was made conſtable of Fraunce / and farther to his aduauncement / the kyng cauſed hym to ſytte at his table / and ſhewed all the tokens of loue that he coulde deuyſe. And gaue hym with the offyce / dyuers gyftes and great landes and herytage: to him and to his heyres for euer. To this promocyon dyde helpe greatly the duke of Aniou.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy / and the lorde of Clyſſon / diſconfyted at the bridge of Bolayne / certayne of ſir Robert Canols company. Cap. CC .lxxxv.
            
               ANone after that ſir Bertram was ſtablyſſhed cōſtable of France / he ſayd to the kyng. Sir / and it lyke your grace I wyll go and ryde agaynſt ſir Robert Canolle / who is in the marches of Aniou and Mayne. Thoſe wordes pleaſed well the kyng / who ſaid. Sir / take with you whom it ſhall pleaſe you / as ye thynke beſt / all ſhall obey you. Than the conſtable purueyed for that iourney / and gathered togyder men of armes / bretons and other. And ſo deꝑted fro the kyng and rode towardes Mayne / and had with him in his cōpany the lorde Clyſſon / and ſo he cam to the cytie of Mans / and ther made his garyſon / and the lorde of Clyſſon in another towne nere therto: and they were aboute the nombre of fyue hundred ſpeares. And ſir Robert Canoll and his company was ſtyll in the countre / howe be it they were nat all of one opinyon / for there was an englyſſhe knyght amonge them / called ſir Johan Mayſtrude / who agreed nat to their myndes / for alwayes he counſayled agaynſt that iourney. Sayeng: howe they loſt their tyme / and traueyled theym ſelfe without conqueryng of any thyng. This knight hadde a great company with hym. Sir Robert Canoll and ſir Alayne Boucqueſell / were lodged nere to Mans. Sir Thomas of Grantſon / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Gylbert Gifforde / ſir Geffray Ourſell / and ſir Wyllyam Meſuyll: all theſe with a great company were behynde the other. And whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert Canoll and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Alayne Boucqueſell / knewe that the conſtable of Fraunce / and the lorde of Clyſſon were come in to the countre / they were therof right ioyfull. And 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert Canoll ſaid theſe tidynges be good for vs / let vs drawe togyder and take our aduantage. Surely 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertram of Cleſquy / for the noueltie of his newe offyce / is come to loke on vs. We haue rydden ouer a great part of the realme of France / and as yet we haue founde no maner of aduentur. Lette vs ſende our myndes and ententes to ſir Hugh Caurell / who is at ſaynt Mors on Loir to ſir Robert Briquet / & to ſir Bertram Ceyn and to other capitayns of the companyons / ſuche as are nere aboute vs: and deſyre theym to come to vs incontynent. I thynke they wyll be gladde to cōe. And yf that we may ouerthrowe this newe conſtable / and the lorde of Clyſſon / who is ſo great an enemy vnto vs. It ſhall be to vs great honoure and profyte. Bytwene ſir

Robert Canoll and ſir Alayne Boucq̄ſell / ther was no maner of diſcorde / but alwayes they folowed one counſayle. Than incontynent they ſente letters and meſſangers ſecretely vnto ſir Hugh Caurell / to ſir Robert Briquet and to other / deſyring them to come forthe / to thentent to fight with the frenchmen. In lyke wiſe they ſent to ſir Thom̄s Grantſon / to ſir Gylbert gyf forde / and to ſir Geffray Durſell / and to other / to mete with them at a certayne place / in truſt to fight with the frenchmen as they ryde.
            ALl theſe knightes and capitayns apparelled themſelfe to kepe this apoyntmēt and ſo toke forth their iourney to come to their company / and they were to the nombre of two hundred ſpeares. Sir Robert Canoll ſent nat ſo ſecretly to his companyons / but that ſir Bertram of Cleſquy had knowledge therof. And whan they were well enformed of their ententꝭ they armed them in the nyght ſeaſon / and deꝑted with their company out of their garyſon. The ſame proper night / ſir Thomas Grantſon was departed out of his lodgynge with ſir Geffray Durſell / ſir Gylbert Gyfforde / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllyam de Meſuyll and other. And ſo they came toward ſir Robtt Canoll / wher as they thoght to fynde him. Howbeit their way was ſhorted / for at a place called the palſe of the Pount Uolant the frenchmen & they met togyder ſodenly. The frēchmen were four hundred ſpeares / and thēglyſſhmen two hūdred ſpeares. Ther was a ferſe batayle and well fought / and it long endured: for aſſoone as they met they lighted all a fote / and came rudely eche againſt other / and ſo fought with ſpeares and ſwerdes right valyantly. Howbeit the place abode with the frēchmen / and they obteyned vyctorie agaynſt the englyſſhmen: ſo that they were all ſlayne and taken / none eſcaped▪ except pages and boyes / and ſuche as lept on their mayſters horſes and ſaued them ſelfe. Ther was taken ſir Thomas Grātſon / ſir Gylbert Gyfford ſir Geffray Drſell ſir Wyllin̄ Meſuyll / ſir Philyp Courtney ſir Hugh Spens and dyuers other knightes: and they were all ledde as priſoners to the cyte of Mans. Theſe tidynges were anon brought to ſir Robert Canoll / to ſir Hugh Caurell▪ and to ſir Robert Briquet / and their companyons: wherof they were ſore difpleaſed / and ſo brake their enterprice bycauſe of that aduentur. And they of ſaynt Mors on Loyre came nat forthe / but kept ſtyll their logyng. And ſir Robert Canoll / and ſir Alayne Boucqueſell withdrue thē backe / and brake vp that iourney and entred in to Bretayne. And ſir Robert went to his owne caſtell of Doruall / & gaue leaue to all his men of armes and archers to depart / and take their aduātage wher as they thought beſt. So they departed / and ſome went ouer agayne into England. And ſir Alayne Boucq̄ſell went to wynter in the towne of ſaynt Sauy our the vycont / whiche the kyng of Englande had gyuen him.
         
         
            ¶ Howe pope Urbane dyed / & howe Gregory was choſen. And howe ſir Raymon of Marneyll was taken by the englyſſhmen. Cap. CC .lxxxvi.
            
               AFter this diſconfyture thus at Pont Uolant / wher as parte of the englyſſhmen were ouerthrowen / wherby their iourney was broken. Than ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / who in the noueltie of his offyce / as cōſtable of France had done this dede / wherby he gate great renome and laude / and ſo came agayne in to France / and the lord of Clyſſon with him. And led with him a great parte of the englyſſhe priſoners / and brought them to the cytie of Parys without daunger / & there courteſly raunſomed theym without conſtraynt / and dyde let them go on their faythes. They putte them nat in ſtockes noryrons / nor yet in priſon / as theſe almaygnes do their priſoners / to gette of them the greater raunſome. Curſed be they / they are people without pytie or honour: therfore there is none that ought to take any mercy of them. The frenchmen kepte good company with their priſoners / and raunſomed them courteſly / without any greuaunce to them.
            ¶ Of this diſcōfytur the prince of Wales was right ſore diſpleaſed / and the duke of Lācaſtre and all their cōpany beyng at Congnac. After the recōqueryng of Lymoges / about the tyme of Chriſtmas / pope Urbane the fyft dyed at Auygnon / who had ben a valyaunt clerke and a wyſe: and a good frenchman. Than the cardy nals entred into the Cōclaue / and dyde choſe amonge them a newe pope / who was cardynall of Beauforde / and was called Gregory the .xi. of whoſe creacyon & deuyne prudēce / the frēche

kynge was ryght ioyoule / bycauſe he ſemed to be a good frenchman / at whoſe creacyon there was with hym at Auygnon the duke of Aniou / who dyde great payne to cauſe him to be pope. ¶ The ſame ſeaſon ther fell to ſir Euſtace Dā bretycourt an harde aduenture / he rode in Lymoſyn / and in an euenynge he came to y• caſtell of the lorde Pyer Buffyer / whome he reputed to haue ben his ſpeciall frende and louer / & for a good englyſſhman. But he dyde put ſir Thy balt du pont / a man of armes a breton into his caſtell / and cauſed hym to take ſir Euſtace priſoner / as he that tooke no hede of hym. And ſo heledde him away with him as his priſoner / & afterwarde raunſomed hym at .xii. thouſande frankes / wherof he payed four thouſande: and his ſonne Frances abode in hoſtage for the reſydue with the duke of Burbone / who repledged hym / and dyde moche payne for his delyuerance / bycauſe that ſir Euſtace before dyde his payne to delyuer the lady his mother / whome the cōpanyons had taken at Bell perche. And ſo after ſir Euſtace delyuerance / he went & lay at Carenten / beyonde the waches of ſaynt Clement in baſe normandy / in a good towne / the whiche the kynge of Naucr had gyuen him / & ther he dyed: god haue his ſoule / for as longe as he lyued he was a right valyant knight.
            THe ſame ſeaſon 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Raymon of Maruell depted fro Parys / to go in to his owne countre / the which newly was retourned frenche: and by the way he met an harde aduentur for him. For he founde a great rout of englyſſhmen of ſir Hugh Caurelles / which were ledde by a knight of Poytou. Heſell ſo in this knightes handes that he coude nat ſcape / & ſo he was taken priſoner / and brought in to Poyctou to the ſayde knightes caſtell: The takynge of ſir Raymon was anone knowen in Englande: ſo that the kynge was enformed therof. Than the kyng wrote to the knight that had him / cōmaū
               dyng him incōtynent to ſende hym his enemy / and falſe traytour ſir Raymon Marnell▪ ſayeng howe he wolde take ſuche vengeance on hī that all other ſhulde take enſample by him / promyſing the knight to gyue hym for the takyng of him .vi. M. frankes. The knyghꝭ was called ſir Geffray Dargenton / who wolde nat diſobey the kyng his maiſters commauadement / but ſaid he wolde fulfyll his pleaſur. Sir Raymon of Marnell was enformed howe the king of Englande wolde haue him / and had ſent for hym: and howe his mayſter was determyned to ſende hym ouer in to Englande. And whan he knewe that / he was more abaſſhed than before / and good cauſe why. Than in his priſon he began to make the mooſt lamētable cōplayntes that coulde be deuyſed: in ſo moche that he that kept hym / who was an englyſſhman / had great pyte on hym / and right ſwetely reconforted hym. Sir Raymon / who ſawe no conforte in the danger that he was in: ſeyng that be ſhulde be ledde into Englande to the kynge. Than he diſcouered his ſorowe to his kepar / and on a day ſayd to hym. My dere frēde: if ye wolde delyuer me out of the daunger that I am in. I promyſe you on my faythe and trouthe / to departe with you the halfe of all my landes / and make you enheryter therto / and neuer to fayle you. The englyſſhman who was but a poore man / conſydered howe ſir Raymon was in parell of his lyfe / and howe he had promyſed him great curteſſy. He had of hym great pytie and cōpaſſyon / and ſayd. Sir I ſhall do my payne to ſaue you. Than 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Raymon / who was right ioyfull of that anſwere: ſware to him his faytl
                  •
                to kepe his promyſe / and farthermore if he wolde deſyre it. And than they deuyſed howe they might accomplyſſhe their entences. And whan it was nyght (the englyſſhman) who bare the kayes of the caſtell and of the towre / wherin ſir Raymon was priſoner / and hadde they kay of the poſterne. He dyde ſo moche that he let hym out in to the feldes. And ſo toguyder they went in to a great woode / to the entente they ſhulde nat be folowed. That night they ſuffred as moche payne as coude be thought / for they went a ſeuyn leages a fote the ſame nyght / and it was harde froſt / wherby they cutte their fete. And in the mornyng they came to a frenche fortreſſe where they were receyued ioyfully with theym of the fortereſſe / to whome ſir Raymon recounted all his aduenture / wherof they all thanked god.
            IT was of trouthe / that the next mornyng whā it was knowen how they were gone men a horſebacke folowed after: but it was to late. Thus ſir Raymon ſcaped and retourned into Lymoſyn / and ſhewed to all his frendes / howe the englyſſhe ſquyer had ſhewed to hym great curteſy. And ſoeuer after thenglyſſhman was greatly honoured and cheryſſhed among them. And ſir Raymon wolde haue delyuered to hym the one halfe of his herytage / accordynge as he had promyſed to him before / but the engliſſhe ſquyer wolde in no wyſe take ſo moche.

And ſo he toke all onely but. C C. 
                  •
               t. of yerely reuenewes / ſayenge it was ſufficyent for hym / to maynteyne ther with his aſtate.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the prince of wales lefte the duchy of Acquitayne / in the kepyng of the duke of Lancaſtre / and howe four breton knightes / toke the caſtell of Mount Paon. Cap. C C .lxxxvii.
            
               THe ſame ſeaſon in the cyte of Burdeaux / dyed the eldeſt ſon̄e of the prince and princeſſe / wherof they were right ſorie as reaſone was. Than the prince was counſayled / y• he ſhulde retourne in to Englande into his owne countre / to thentent the rather therby to recouer his helth: this counſayle was gyuen hym by his phiſycions & ſurgyons / that knewe his diſeaſe. The prince agreed well therto / and ſayd: he was well content ſo to do / and thervpon made his prouiſion And as I vnderſtode / the erle of Cābridge his brother / and the erle Johan of Penbroke: were ordayned to retourne with him to kepe him cō
               pany. And whan the prince ſhulde departe out of Acquitayne / and that his ſhippes were redy in the tyuer of Garon / and in the hauen of Burdeaur. The prince and priceſſe / and their yong ſonne Richarde beyng ther: Than he made a ſpeciall ſomons at Burdeaux / of all barownes and knightes / of Gaſcoyne and Poictou: and in all other places where as he was lorde. And they vnder his obeyſaunce / whan they were all come toguyder / in a chambre before the prince. Than he ſhewed to them / how he had ben their lorde / and had kepte them in peace as moche as lay in his power / and had maynteyned them in great proſperyte & puyſance / agaynſt all their enemyes. Shewyng them / that to recouer his helthe / wherof he had gret nede: he was in purpoſe to retourne in to Englande. Deſyring thē to beleue / ſerue / and obey his brother / the duke of Lancaſtre: in lyke maner as they had done hymſelfe. Truſtynge they ſhulde fynde hym a good lorde & curteſſe / requyringe thē to coūſell & aſſyſt hym in all his buſyneſſe. The barones of Acqtayne / Gaſcoyne / Poictou / and of Xainton / promyſed and ſware on their faythes / that there ſhulde neuer defaute be founde in any of thē. And ſo there they dyde fealtie & homage to the duke / and promyſed him their loues ſeruyce / and obeyſance & that they ſware to vpholde and kepe / in the preſence of the prince / and ſo kyſt his mouthe. And after this order taken / y• prince taryed nat long in the cytie of Burdeux / but entred into his ſhyppe / and the priceſſe and their chyldren / & the erle of Cambridge and the erle of Penbroke with thē. And with him there was a fyue hundred fightynge men / beſyde archers. So long they ſayled without danger or domage / that they aryued at Nampton. Ther they toke lande and refreſſhed them two dayes than they tooke their horſes and the prince in a lytter / and ſo came to wyndſore wher the kynge was / who receyued ſwetely his chyldrē
               ▪ and ſo ther he was enformed by thē / of al the ſtate of Guyen. And whan the prince had ben with the king as long as it pleaſed them / than the prince tooke his leaue and went to his owne houſe of Cameſtades. ¶ Nowe let vs leaue to ſpeke of the prince / and ſhewe ſomwhat of the beſyneſſe of Acquitayne.
            ANone after that the prince was departed fro Burdeux / the duke of Lancaſtre made the obſequy of his coſyn Edwarde / ſofie to the prince his brother / the whiche was nobly done in the cytie of Burdeux. And therat were all the barons of Gaſcoyne / and Poictou / ſuch as had ſworne obeyſance to him. In the meane ſeaſon of this obſequy / and that all theſe lordes were at Burdeux / ther yſſued out of the forteteſſe of Pyergourt a two hundred ſpeares bretons / the whiche were ſente thyder by the duke of Aniowe. Of the whiche company ther were four knightes capitayns / right hardy and valyant knightes / called ſir Wyllyam of Lōuall / ſir Alayne of Auſſay / ſir Loyes of Mally / and the lorde Darcy. Theſe lordes rode with their companyes to a ſtronge caſtell / called Mount paon / perteyning to a knight. And whan theſe bretons were cōethyder / and had ronne to the barryers / they made ſemblant to aſſayle the caſtell. Than the capitayn within called ſir Wyllyam of Mount paon / who ſhewed himſelfe to haue rather a frēche hert than an englyſſhe. He tourned and yelded vp the place / and receyued the bretons in to his caſtell / who ſayd they wolde kepe that place agaynſt all the worlde / than they newe repayred and fortifyed it. Theſe tydynges anone was knowen at Burdeux: than the duke of Lancaſtre ſayd to the lordes about

hym. ſirs / we do nat our beuoyre as we ſhulve do / for the bretons are a brode / and haue taken the fortreſſe of Mountpaon marchyng nere to them. Of the whiche takynge / the duke and all the lordes about hym had great ſhame / 
                  〈◊〉
                than they ordayned all to go thyder. And ſo departed fro Burdeaur on a wedntſday / and with y• duke of Lancaſtre was the lorde of Pons / the lorde of Parteney / ſir Loys Harcourt ſir guyſ ſharde Dangle / ſir Percyuall of Culoyue / ſir Godfray Dargēton / ſir Jaques of Surgeres ſir Maubrune of Linyers / ſir Wyllm̄ of Montendre / ſir Hugh of Uinoy / the lorde of Crupenacke / and dyuers other barons and knightes of Poictou / and Xaynton. And of gaſcon there was the captall of Befz / the lorde of Pomyers the lorde of Chamount / the lorde of Mountſerant / the lorde of Langueron / the ſouldyche of Leſtrade / ſir Bernard Dalbret / the lorde of getonde / ſir Amery of Charſe and dyuers other And of Englande / ther was ſir Thom̄s Phelton ſir Thom̄s Percy / the lorde Roſe / ſir Mychell de la Poule / the lorde Wyloughhy / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllyam Beauchāpe / ſir Richarde Pontchardon ſir Bandras of Franuyll / ſir Dāgoſes and dyuers other. They were aſeuyn hundred ſpeares / and fyue hūdred archers. And ſo they rode right ordinatly towarde Mountpaon / and ſo came thyder. And whan ſir Wylliam of Moūt paon knewe of the comyng thyder of the duke of Lancaſtre and of his cōpany / and ſawe how he was by them beſieged. He thought him ſelfe than in no ſurety / for he knewe well that yf he were takenne by force / heſhulde nat eſcape fro dethe / thinkynge ſurely he ſhulde nat be taken to mercy / bycauſe of the forfet that he had done in gyueng vp the place before to the bretons. Than he dyſcouered his entent to the forſayde four knightes / and ſayd to them. Sirs / I wyll leaue this caſtell to you / and I wyll depart and go to Pyergourt / and kepe that. And ſo he departed and wente to Pyergourt / and lefte his owne caſtell / in the kepyng of the foreſayd four knyghtes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe theſe four knightes bretons defended thē ſelfe valiantly / agaynſt the duke of Lancaſtre / and howe fynally the duke toke them all foure to raūſome. Ca. C C .lxxxviii.
            
               WHan the duke of Lācaſtre and the barons & knyghtes were come to the caſtell of Mountpaon / they layed ſiege therto / & made as gret proyiſyon for their lodgynges and other neceſſaryes / as thoughe they ſhulde haue taryed there the ſpace of ſeuyn yere. And they lay nat ydell / for incontyuent they apꝑelled themſelfe to aſſayle the caſtell / and cauſed the villayns of the countre to cutte downe great quantyte of wode and tymbre to caſt into the dykes. And thus fyftene vayes togyder they dyd nothyng / but alwayes caſt ſtuffe in to the dykes / and on the wode and tymbre they layed ouer ſtrawe and erthe. And ſo within that ſpace they had fylled a great ꝑte of the dykes / ſo that they might well cōe to the walles / to ſcrimy ſhe with them within / as they vyde nigh euery day / fyue or ſixe aſſautꝭ / wher as there was many noble dedes done. For the foure breton knyghtes that were within / were right valyaut men of armes / and defended thē ſelfe right nobly / wherfore they ought greatly to be commended. For though the engliſſhmen and gaſcoyns came ſo nere them / yet they were nat afrayed / nor loſt no great thyng. And nere to this garyſon ther were other bretons in an other garyſon / called ſaynt Maquayre / of whō Johan of Maleſtroyt and Sylueſter Budes were capitayns / who euery day herde ſpekyng of the feates of armes / that were done before Mountpaon. And they had great deſyre to be there / and ſayd often tymes one to another. We knowe well our companyons are here by / who are right valyaunt / as we may here dayly by their dedꝭ / and euery day they haue fyue or. vivatayls / and yet we lye here ſtyll & do nothyng▪ Certayuly we acquyte vs nat well. So thus they were in great deſyre to go and reſcue thē if they might. And whan they had all ſpoken / & conſydred the peryll to leaue their owne forte / reſſe voyde / they wyſt nat well what to do. thā on a tyme / Sylueſter Budes / ſayde to his felow. John̄ / ye ſhall other go or els wyll I / choſe you whyder. Than Johan anſwered and ſayd Sylueſter / ye ſhall abyde here and I wyll go. And ther they were at a longe ſtryfe / whiche of them ſhulde go. And ſo at laſt they acorded and ſware / and made promyſe before all the company / that they ſhulde drawe cuttes: and he that ſhulde haue the longeſt ſtrawe ſhuld go forthe and the other abyde. So than they drewe / and

the longeſt cutte fell to Sylueſter Budes / than there was great laughyng among all the company. This Sylueſter toke it for no fable / but apparelled him ſelfe and mounted on his horſe and departed with .xii. men of armes with him and rode ſo long / that at the euenyng he entred in to the towne and caſtell of Moūtpaon / wher of the knyghtes and companyons within had great ioye / and gaue great prayſe to Silueſter Budꝭ. As I haue ſhewed you here before / ther was euery day aſſautes at Moūtpaon / & right well the knightꝭ within aquyted themſelfe / and deſerued great honour. For vntyll ye tyme that a great parte of their wall was ouerthrowen / they were neuer afrayed nor a baſſhed. The englyſſhmen ordayned mantels and other inſtrumentes of warr / wherby to aproche nere to the walles / ouer the dykes that they had fylled. & ther the brigantꝭ well paueſſed / who had great pykes of yron / wherwith they vndermyned the walles / in ſuche wyſe that a great pane of the wall fell downe / more than .xl. fote long. Than the lordes of the hooſt / ordayned their batayls with their archers / who ſhotte ſo holy togyder / that non of thē within durſt ones apere abrode And whan ſir Wylliam of Lonuall / ſir Alayne of Houſſay / ſir Loyes of Maylley / and ye lorde Darcy: ſawe howe they were in the caſe / nat able to endure nor kepe the holde. Thā they ſent a heraulde out a horſe backe to the duke of Lancaſtre to haue a treaty if it myght be. The heraulde came to the duke / and ſhewed hym the entent of his comyng. Than the duke by thaduyſe of his coūſayle / gaue reſpyte to them with in / to ſpeke with hym and his counſayle. The heraulde retourned / and ſhewed his mayſters howe he hadde ſpedde. Than all four knightes went for the / and the duke ſent to them ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / and ſo on the dykes they ſpake togyder. Than they demaunded vnder what maner the duke wolde receyue them. Than ſir Guyſſharde / who hadde the charge / anſwered and ſaid. Sirs: ye haue greatly diſpleaſed my lorde the duke / for ye haue kept here this caſtell agaynſt him / more than .xi. wekes: wherby he hath loſt dyuers of his men. Wherfore he wyll nat receyue you to grace nor mercy / without ye wyll yelde your ſelf ſimply. And alſo delyuer to him firſt / ſir Wylliam of Moūtpaon / yt he may put him to deth as he hath deſerued / lyke a treatour. Thā ſir Loyes of Mailly: anſwered and ſayd. Sir Guyſſharde / as for ſir Wyllyam of Mountpaon / whome ye deſyre to haue deluered / we ſwere vnto you truely / that we knowe nat as no we wher he is: for he was nat in this caſtell ſythe ye layed ſiege therto. And ſir / it is a harde thyng for vs to yelde our ſelfe vp ſymply / as ye wolde haue vs to do / ſythe we be ſent hyder but as ſoudiers / to gette our ſelfe wages to lyue by. In lyke maner as ye ſende yours / & ſomtyme your ſelfe gladde to take wagꝭ. Therfore ſir / or we make y• marchādyſe: we ſhall ſell our ſelfe ſo derely / that it ſhall be ſpoken of a hū
               dred yeres after our dethes. But ſir / we deſyre you to returne to the duke / and ſhewe him that we deſyre hym to receyue vs courteſly / on certayne compoſycion of raunſome. In lyke maner as he wolde that his mē ſhulde 
                  •
               e dalt with all / yf they were fallen in ſuche lyke daunger. Than aunſwered ſir Guyſſharde / and ſayde. Sirs / I ſhall do the beſt of my power. And ſo retourned to the duke / and tooke with hym the Captall of Beufz / the lorde of Rouſayne / the lorde of Muſyden / to the entent the rather to ſpede. And whan they were all come before the duke / they ſhewed hym ſo many fayre wordes / that he condyſcended to their requeſt. And ſoo toke the four breton knightes / and Sylueſter Budes and all their company to mercy / as priſoners. And ſo he hadde agayne full poſſeſſion of the fortereſſe of Mountpaon / and toke fealtie of them of the towne: and ſette ther two gaſcone knightes to kepe it / and fourtie men of armes / and as many archers. And newe repayred and fortifyed the place / & refreſſhed it with vitayle and artyllary.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Lancaſtre gaue lycence to all his people to departe / & retourned himſelfe to Burdeux. and howe the lorde of Pons tourned frē
               che / and howe the ſeneſchall of Poyctou aſſembled togyder a company. Cap. CC .lxxxix.
            
               AFter the Conqueſt of Mountpaon / and that the duke hadde ſette there capitayns / and well fortifyed the fortreſſe. Than he dyſloged and gaue lycence to euerye man to departe wheder they

wolde: and ſo they departed eche fro other and retourned into their owne countrees. And the duke went to the cytie of Burdeur / and the poictenyns in to their coūtre / and they of Gaſcone wente home to their owne townes and caſtels. And the companyons ſpredde abrode all about the coūtre / who dyde moche hurt and yuell / as well in the lande of their frendes / as on their ennemyes. The whiche the duke ſuffred / bycauſe he thought he ſhulde haue nede of them agayn ſhortely / for the warres as at that tyme / were more ſorer without comparyſon in Poyctou / than in any other countre. And there was kept a great garyſon in the caſtell of Mountcontor a foure leages fro Thouars / and ſeuyn leages fro Poicters. And ſir Peter of Guerfyll & Jordayne of Colloyne were capitayns there / and ſo they ranne dayly / outher before Thouars or els before Poicters / and dyde great hurt to thē of the countre / that helde of the englyſſhe part. Alſo in the caſtell of Leraunt was capiten Carlonet a breton / and with hym a ſeuyn hundred bretons / who dyde great domage to the countre. And alſo they of the garyſon of the Roche of Pouſay / and they of ſaynt Saluyn / ranne dayly abrode in the countre / ſo that the barons and knightes of Poictou / ſuche as helde of the englyſſhe parte / durſt nat ſtyrre abrode / without they rode by great companyes: for feare of the frēchmen that were thus cloſed in their coū
               trey.
            ANone after the wynning of Moūtpaon and that the lordes of Poictou were wt / drawen in to their owne countrees ke
                  •
               yng frō
               ter agaynſt the frenchmen. There was ye ſame tyme ſecrete treaty: bytwene the lorde Loys of ſaynt Julyan / the vycount of Rochchoart / and other frenchmen / by great gyftes comynge fro the frenche kynge. Who night and day traueyled / to drawe them of Poictou to his acorde / & ſo moche they dyde / that the lorde of Pons turned frenche / agaynſt the wyll of the good lady his wyfe: or the men of the towne of Pouns in Poictou. And ſo the lady abode ſtyll englyſſhe and her huſbande frenche. Of the which tidynges the barons and knightes of Poictou / ſuch as were englyſſhe were ſore diſpleaſed / for the lorde of Pouns was a great lorde. Whan the duke of Lancaſtre knewe therof / he was right ſore diſpleaſed with the lorde of Pons: & prayſed gretly his wyfe and the men of Pons / that wolde abyde ſtyll englyſſhe. and to ayde and to counſell the lady: the duke ordayned a knyght to go thyder right valyant and hardy / called 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Aymemōs of Bours. Thus they ranne daylye before the towne / and ſomtyme dyde nothynge and ſomtyme were chaſed awaye: and retourned with domage. So the englyſſhmen were troubled / and the lordes and knightes of Poictou one agaynſt another / the ſtronger ouercāe the wekar. So there was nother ryght / lawe / nor reaſon minyſtred on any parte. And the fortreſſes and caſtels were intermedled one within an other / ſome englyſſhe and ſome frenche / eche of them ronnynge on other / and pyllynge eche other without ſparyng. Than certayne of the barons and knightes of Poyctou / ſuche as were englyſſhe: aduyſed well howe they of the fortereſſe of Mountcontour traueyled theym more / than any other garyſon: wherfore they determyned to go thyder and beſiege thē. And ſo they made a ſomons of men of warr to aſſē
               ble in the towne of Poyters / in the name of the ſeneſchall of Poytou / ſir Thomas Percy. To whiche cōmaundement all knightes and ſquyers obeyed / and ſo they were a fyue hūdred ſperes / and two thouſande brigantes paueſſed / wt the archers / ſuche as were ther. So that there were of Poictou: ſir / Guyſſharde Dangle / ſir Loyes of Harcourt / the lorde of Parteney / the lorde of Pynan / the lorde of Tannyboton / the lorde of Cupenac / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Percyuall of Coloyne / ſir Godfray Dangenton / ſir Hugh of Wynay / the lorde of Coyes / the lorde of Puyſſances / ſir Jaques of Surgeres / ſir Maubrune of Linyers and dyuers other. And of englyſſhmen yt were in Poictou: ther were the lorde Baudwyn of Franuyll / ſir Dangoſes / ſir Water Hewet / ſir Richarde Pontchardon and other. And whan they were all aſſembled at Poycters / and redy apparelled: they departed and toke the way to Mountcontour / well furnyſſhed to lay there a ſiege.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the ſeneſhall of Poictou toke Moūtcontour / and howe ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy tooke dyuers townes and caſtels in Rouuergne. and howe he beſieged the cytie of Duſes. Cap. CC .lxxxx.
            
               THe caſtell of Moūtcontour ſtandeth on the marcheſſe of Aniou and Poyctou / & was marueylous ſtrong and fayre: but four lea

               
                  〈◊◊〉
                Thouars. And ſo moche dyde theſe englyſſhmen and poite
                  •
               yns who were to ye nombre of thre thouſande fightynge men / that they came to the fortereſſe: and hadde brought with theym great engyns fro Thouars / and fro the cytie of Poicters. And anone they were reyſed vp agaynſt the caſtell / whiche dyde caſt nyght and day in to the caſtell. And beſyde that / daylye there were aſſautes gyuen to theym within and ſcrimyſſhes. Ther was done many noble feates of armes for with theſe poicteuyns ther were certayne of the companyons / who wolde nat lye ſtyll: as John̄ Creuell / and Dauyd Hollegraue. Theſe two / with ſir Gaultyer Hewet were capitayns. Sir Peter Creſſell and Jordayne of Coloyne / who were within / bare thē
               ſelfe ryght valiantly: and dayly came to ye bar
               
                  •
               ye
                  •
               s / and fought with the englyſſhmen. And among the aſſautes that were there made / whiche were many: the tenthe day that they were come thyder / they made ſuche aſſaute / & with ſo good order / that by clene force the pearſed ye walles / and entred in and conquered the frenchemen. And ſo all were ſlayne that were within except Peter / and Jordayne / and a fyue or ſire men of armes / who were taken to mercy. After this aduenture and enterpriſe / ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Loyes Harcourt / and ſir Guyſ ſharde Dangle / by the acorde and counſayle of all the barons and knightes / gaue the ſame caſtell to ſir Gaultyer Hewet / and to John̄ Creſwell / and to Dauyd Hollegraue / and the companyons / who were a fyue hundred fightynge men / to thentent to kepe fronter warr agaynſt them of Aniou and Mayne. Than theſe lordes departed / & euery man went home to his owne Thus the fortereſſe of Mountcontour and the fronter / abode in the kepynge of theſe foreſayd knightes / who made there a ſtronge garyſon & well fortifyed it. And ſo kept it a long ſeaſon after / and dyde moche trouble to the countre ther about / for dayly they ranne outher to Anioweor to Mayne.
            
               NOwe lette vs retourne to ſpeke of ſir Bertram of Cleſquy conſtable of Fraunce / who was with ye kynge at Paris euerſyth his comyng fro the bridge Uallant. Where he and the lorde Clyſſon had ouerthrowen the englyſſhmen (as ye haue herd before) and he had well herde howe the englyſſhmen in Poictou & in Guyen kept the feldes. So that as ſoone as candelmaſſe was paſt and that the ſpringyng tyme began. Sir Bertram thought to reyſe & gather an army / and to aſſeble lordes & knightes and to ryde to ſome other parte / in lyke maner as thēglyſſhmen ryd in Poytou / in Quercy / and Rouuergue. For in theſe coūtrees ther were englyſſhmen that dyde ryght honorably / and had ſo maynteyned them ſelfe euerſyth the rene wyng of the warre. And alſo the company of ſir Johan Deureur / were newly come in to the countre of Limoſyn: and had taken in Auuergne a caſtell / cytie / and towne all toguyder / named Duſes / the whiche ſir Bertram of Cleſquy thought / ought nat to be ſuffred. Than he ſayd he wolde drawe to that part / and ſo by the kynges lycence / he aſſembled to guider a great nombre of men of armes / and ſo departed fro Parys and alwayes his nōbre encreaſed. And ſo long this conſtable rode that he cāe into Auuergne / and ther was with him ye duke of Berrey / the duke of Burbone / the erle of Alenſon / the erle of Perche his brother / the erle of ſaynt Poule / the Dolphyn of Auuergne / the erle of Uandon / the erle of Porceen / the lorde of Sully / the lorde Montague / ſir Hughe Dolphyne / the lorde Beauieu / the lorde Rochforte / the lorde of Talenſon / and a great nombre of barownes / knightes / and ſquyers of the marcheſſe of Fraunce. So long they rode that they came to the cytie of Duſes / and there they lodged and beſieged the cytie / & lay there a .xv. dayes. ther were gyuen many great and ferſe aſſautꝭ / how be it they coude nat gette the fortereſſe / for win ther were englyſſhmen that valyantly defēded their holde. So than the frenchmen departed and rode farther with the conſtable / in to the pties of Rouuergue / and ſome of the chefe lordꝭ went to Auygnon to ſe pope Gregory / and the duke of Aniou who was with him. And anone after this viſytacion / and that theſe lordes had ſpoken with the duke of Aniou: they departed fro Auygnon and drewe agayne to the conſtable who was in Rouergue / and conquered townes and caſtels on thenglyſſhmen. And ſo they came before the towne of Lamulae / and layed ſiege therto: the whiche ſir Thomas of Ueulq̄ fare helde / and hadde kept it long / and alſo the Roche Uauclere. But ye ſayd englyſſhe knightes by compoſycion yelded thē to ſir Bertram / and ſo dyd dyuers other caſtels / on the fronter of Limoſyn. And whan ſir Bertram hadde refreſſhed hym / he toke his way and his retourne towarde the cytie of Duſes in Auuergne / and ſo came thyder and layd ſiege therto. And thyder they brought great engyns fro Ryon and

Cleremont / and dreſſed them vp before the fortreſſe / and alſo apparelled all maner of inſtrumentes for aſſautes.
         
         
            ¶Howe they of Duſes yelded them vp to ſir Bertram / and howe ſir Robert Canoll was in the diſpleaſure of the kyng of Englande / and howe at the requeſt of the lordꝭ his peace was made agayne. Cap. CC .lxxxxi.
            
               WHan the englyſſhmen that were within the cytie of Duſes / ſawe the order & maner of the conſtable of France / and alſo had perfyte knoledge howe that ſir Thom̄s of Ueulquefare was departed and hadde forſaken the fortereſſe in Rouergue. And alſo ſawe well howe there was no cō
               forte comyng to them fro no parte. Than they drewe to counſayle / and determyned to yelde them vp by treaty and none otherwyſe. And ſo they made with the cōſtable ſo wyſe poyntmentes / that they deꝑted without danger or blame and hadde with them all that they wolde cary and alſo were conueyed in ſauegarde to ſaynte Symere in Lymoſyn. Thus ſir Bertrā wan in this voyage dyuers places and countrees / that the englyſſhmen helde before / and than he retourned in to Fraunce.
            yE haue herde here before / of the iourney yt ſir Robert Canoll made in Frā
               ce / and howe he retourned to his owne caſtell of Deruall in Bretayne. And it was of trouthe / that certayne englyſſhmen at their retournyng in to Englande / enformed ſo the kynge agaynſt hym / that the kynge and his counſayle was nat well cōtent with him. But whan ſir Robert Canoll knewe therof / he ſende to excuſe hym / two of his eſquyers. And they dyde ſo well their deuoyre / that the kyng and his coū
               ſayle parceyued well / how they were yuell and falſely enformed of hym. And ſo were well content agayne with hym / through the helpe of ſir Alayne of Bouqueſell / and of other knightes about the kyng / who helped to excuſe hym. Sir Johan Ourde bought it derely: for he was taken and putte to execuſyon openly at London. The execuſyon of hym / was the excuſe of all yuell wordes. And ſo ſir Robert Canoll abode ſtyll in the kynges grace and in the princes.
         
         
            ¶Howe the erle of Herford & dyuers englyſſhmen diſcōfyted in Bretayne on the lee / dyuers flemynges that aſſayled them. Cap. CC .lxxxxii.
            
               THe kyng of Englande ſeyng howe the frenchemen made him warr / he gat him frendes wher he coude. and ſo hadde to his accorde: the duke of Guerles his nephue and the duke of Jullyers / & were agreed to aſſemble toguyder certayne nō
               bre of men of warr / and ſo to entre into Frāce. And the ſame ſeaſon the kynge of Englande / ſent the erle of Herford and the knightes of his houſholde in to Bretayne to ſpeke with ye duke for certayne maters bytwene them / and ye ſame ſeaſon the flemyngꝭ and englyſſhmen were no frendes. And ſo they mette togyder on the ſee but ther the flemyngꝭ loſt / ſo that they were nothynge content / for by aduenture they met eche other before a hauyn in Breten / called la Bay. And of the 
                  ••
               emyſſhe nauy was patron / Johan Peterſon / and of the englyſſhemen ſir Guy of Brian. And aſſoone as they mette they ſet eche vpon other / ſo that ther was a great batayle & a ſore. And with the erle of Herforde / ther was ſir Richard Stury / ſir Thomas Wyſque and other. And ſo they fought togyder right valyantly / & how be it that the flemynges were more in nōbre and better purueyed for the mater (for they had taryed there a long ſpace for the ſame purpoſe) yet for all that / they had but lytell aduantage. This batayle thus on the ſee / endured the ſpace of thre houres / and ther was done many a noble feate of armes / and many a man wounded and hurt with ſhotte / for they hadde graped their ſhyppes to guyder with hokes of yron / ſo y• one coude nat flye fro another. How be it finally the vyctorie abode with thenglyſſhmen / & the flemynges diſconfyted: and ſir Johan Peterſon their patron taken / and all the other taken or ſlayne / ſo that none eſcaped. And the englyſſhmen turned backe agayne into Englande with their conqueſt and priſoners / and ſo brake vp their vyage for that tyme: and than ſhewed theſe tidynges to the kyng of England who was right ioyouſe of that adueture / whan he knewe that the flemynges gaue the aſſaute &

occaſyon and were diſconfyted. Than Johan Pete
                  •
               ſon was ſent to priſone / and al
                  •
                the other into 
                  •
               yuers places of the realme.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande ſent a great nauy to the lee agaynſt the flemynges / & how the peace was made bytwene them. Cap. CC .lxxxxiii.
            
               AFter this diſconfyture thus on the flemyngꝭ before the Bay in Bretayne. The kyng of Englande ſent men of warr to ye ſee agaynſt the flemynges / commaundyng them to make ſharpe warre agaynſt all the flemynges and to kepe all paſſages: ſo that nothyng ſhulde cōe thyder without danger. And whan they of Brugꝭ / of Ipre / and of Gaunt herde therof / than they drewe to counſayle: and all thynges conſydred and ymagined. They thought it nat profitable for them to haue the yuell wyll of Englande / there nere neyghboure / for the ſuſteynynge or aydinge of the erle their lorde. Therfore the good townes ſent ſuffycient men into Englande to treat for a peace with the kyng and his counſayle. Who ſpedde ſo well or their retourne / that they dyde bring peace to the countre of Flanders / and to the flemynges: on certayne artycles ſealed of bothe ꝑties. So they abode than in good ſtate reſt and peace. ¶ Nowe lette vs a lytell ſpeke of the realme of Mayllorques.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kynge of Mayllorques was in diſpleaſure with kyng Hēry of Spayne / and than wēt and made warre to the kynge of Arragon. Cap. CC .lxxxxiiii.
            
               YE haue herd reherſed here before: howe that kyng James of Mayllorques was takenne in the vale of Olyffes in Caſtell / whan kynge Henry conquered agayne Spa
                  •
               gne / and ſo he was as priſoner with the ſayd kyng Henry. Whan the quene of Naples his wyfe / and the Marques his ſuſter had knoledge of his takyng / they were ſore diſpleaſed therwith: and ſo prouyded for remedy therfore. I ſhall ſhewe you by what maner. They ſente certayne valyant men to entreat with kyng Hē
               ry for his rauſome / and they dyde ſo moch that he was ſet to his raunſome / for the ſomme of a hundred thouſande frankes / the which theſe .ii. ladyes payed ſo curteſly: that kyng Hēry was well content. And aſſone as the kyng of Mayllorques was departed he retourned into Naples / and taryed nat there: but dyde ſo moche that he had golde and ſyluer / and many frēdes in dyuers partes. and than toke his way to the entent to make warre on the kyng of Arragon his aduerſary / whome he coude nat loue / for he had ſlayne his father / and kept away his herytage. And ſo the kyng cāe to Auygnon to pope Gregory the .xi. & ther he taryed a moneth / and there made his complayntes in ſuche wyſe that the pope agreed to his deſyre y• he ſhulde make warre agaynſt the kyng of Arragon / to the entent to recouer his herytage. Than the kynge prouyded for men of warre all about where he coude get them / and bought them derely: bothe englyſſhe / gaſcoyns / almaygnes / bretons and certayne of the cōpanyons / wherof ſir Gaſyen of the caſtell / ſir John̄ Maleſtroyt / Sylueſter Budes / and Jaques of Bray were capitayns. They were about .xii. hundred fightyng men / and ſo went forthe and entred into Nauer / and there taryed a ſeaſon by the conſent of the kyng of Nauer. And ſo than entred into Aragon / & began warre agaynſt the kyng of Aragon / and ouer ran the countre / and toke lytell fortreſſes / and ſore traueyled the playne countre / and raū
               ſomed men and toke priſoners. So that ye kynge of Aragon / who douted greatly that warre ſent men of warr to the fronters / of whome the erle of Roq̄bertyn / and therle of Roddes were capitayns. And whyle this warre thus began cruell and fell / kynge James of Mayllorques fell ſicke agayne in y• vale of Sorey / of the whiche ſickeneſſe he dyed. And ſo therby the arago 
                  •
               eſes had peace and reſt for a great ſeaſon after and the companyons that had made warre / departed and retourned into Fraunce / thyder as they thought to haue ſome aduantage and profyte. Now let vs ſpeke of the duke of Lācaſtre.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Lancaſtre wedded theldeſt doughter of kyng Dampeter of Spayne / and howe the confederacions

were made bitwene the frenche kyng and the kyng of Spaygne. Cap. CC .lxxxxv.
            
               THe duke Johan of Lā
               caſtre / who was in the cytie of Burdeux on Garon / and with hym dyuers barones / knightes and ſquyers of Acqitayne: for as than fortune ſtode metely well on the englyſſhe parte. Howe beit dyuers barons of P
                  •
               
               
               
                  ••
               tou and of Limoſyn / were tourned to the frē
               che partie / and they made often yſſues and ſ
                  •
               ry myſſhes agaynſt their enemyes. This duke of Lancaſtre was a wydower without a wife / for the good lady Blanche of Lancaſtre and Derby / was diſceaſſed. Than the barones of Gaſcoyne / conſydred that kynge Dampeter of Caſtell had two doughters by his firſt wyfe / who was ſuſter to ye kyng of Portyngale / who were as than in the cytie of Gaſcoyne. Thyder they were brought by the ſee / to be kept by certayne knightes fro the parties of Cyuell / for doute of kyng Henry. Aſſone as they knewe the dethe of their father / the two ladyes were dyſconſolate and in great trouble / that it was great pite: for they were trewe herytoursto Caſtell / by ryght ſucceſſyon of kyng Dāpeter their father. The whiche mater ſir Guyſſharde Dangle ſhewed to the duke / ſayng thus. Sir / and it like you ye are to mary: and we knewe wher is a great maryage for you / wherby you and your heyre ſhal be kyng of Caſtell. And alſo it is great almeſſe to confort maydens in their biſtreſſe / and ſpecially doughters to a kyng / beyng in y• caſe that they be in. ſir: we your faythfull ſeruantes / wolde coūſayle you to take theldeſt to your wyfe / for we can nat tell wher ye ſhulde be ſo well maryed agayne / nor where that ſo moche proſyte ſhulde come to you therby.
            UHeſe wordꝭ and other entred ſo into the dukes hert / and ſo well pleaſed hym: y• he was well content to ſend for the two ladyes / theldeſt called Cōſtance / and the other Iſabell And ſo he ſent four knightes for them / and ther ſpedde ſo
                  •
                in their iourney / that they brought with them the ſayd ladies. And whan the duke knewe of their comyng he rode out of Burdeaur to mete with them. And a lytell fro Burdeaur / in a vyllage called Rochſort / he maryed y• eldeſt called Conſtance. At the whiche daye of maryage ther was a great feeſt and great nō
               bre of lordes and ladyes: and thanne the duke brought his wyfe to Burdeux. And than there was agayne great feeſt and ioy made / and the good lady and her ſuſter were greatly feeſted ther / by the ladyes and damoſels of Burdeux / and gyuen to them great gyftes and fayre preſentes / for the loue of the duke.
            UHe tidynges came in to caſtell to kynge Henry / and to the barons of that realm who were alyed by fay the and homage to him / howe that his neſe had maryed with the duke of Lancaſtre. And alſo it was enformed them / that the yonger ſhulde be wedded to the erle of Cambridge / whan the duke were retourned in to Englande / wherof kyng Henry was ryght ſore diſpleaſed / and called all his counſayle toguyder. Than was it counſayled hym / that he ſhulde ſende great meſſangers to the frenche kynge to treate with hym / to whiche counſayle the kynge agreed. And ſente wyſe and ſufficyent perſonages into Fraunce. And ſo they departed and dyde ſo moche by their iourneys / that they came to the cytie of Parys wher they foūde the kyng who receyued them with great ioye and feeſt. And ſo bytwene the kyng & theſe counſaylours of kyng Henry / who hadde procuracyons ſealed / to treate and to procede in all cauſes in the name of their lorde: in any plyament / treaty / counſayle / ſecrete or otherwiſe to take effect. Finally the ſame ſeaſon ther were a corded / ordayned / and confyrmed: alyaunces / and confederacions right great and large / and ſworne ſo
                  •
               ēply on bothe parties / to holde fermly & nat to breke / nor to do agaynſt it by no maner of way: but that thoſe two kyngꝭ to abyde fermly in an vnyte of peace / loue / & alyāce. and there the frenche kyng ſware by the worde of a kyng / that he wolde ayde and helpe the kyngs of Caſtell in all his buſyneſſe: and to make no maner of peace nor acorde with the kyng of Englande / but that he ſhulde be compriſed in the ſame. To this treaty ſir Bertram of Cleſquy helped greatly / for he loued enterely the kynge Henry. After theſe thynges confyrmed and agreed: the embaſſadours departed and retourned into Spaygne / and founde their lorde at Lyon in Spaygne / who was right ioyouſe of their comynge home / and that they had ſo well ſped. And by reaſon of this alyaunce / kyng Hē
               ry thought hymſelfe better aſſured and conforted / than he was before.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the duke of Lācaſtre ordayned gouernours in Guyen and ledde his wyfe with hym in to Englande / and howe the kyng of Englande ordayned the erle of Penbroke to be gouernour in Poitou. Ca. C C .lxxxxvi.
            
               NOwe let vs retourne to ye duke of Lancaſtre who was in the cyte of Burdeux & ſo about the feeſt of ſaynt Mychaell / he thought to re tourne in to Englande / the better to enforme the kynge his father of the beſyneſſe of Acquitayne. And ſo a lytell before his depture / he ordayned therfore and aſſembled in the cytie of Burdeux / all the barownes and knightes of Guyen / ſuch as were englyſſhe. And than he ſhewed them how he was purpoſed to retourne in to Englande / for certayne maters for the profyte of theym all and of the countre of Acquitayne / and that the next ſomer after he wolde come thyder agayne yf the kynge his father were ſo pleaſed. Theſe wordes pleaſed them all. Than the duke ordayned the lorde Captall of Beufez / and the lorde of Muſydent / with the lorde Leſpare: to be gouernours of all the countre of Gaſcoyne / that was englyſſhe. And in Poytou he ordayned to be gouernours: ſir Loyes Harcourt / the lorde of Parteney. and in Xaynton / ſir Loyes Dargentou and ſir Wyllyam of Moūtendre / & left all 
                  •
               is ſeneſchals and offycers as they were before. And it was ordayned that there ſhulde go with the duke into Englande certayne perſons of Gaſcoyne / Xaynton / and Poictou: to ſhewe to the kyng of England the ſtate and beſyneſſe of Aquitayne. As ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / the lorde of Pynan and ſir Aymery of Tarſe: and to abyue for theym / the duke taryed a certayne ſpace and whan they were all redy apparelled they entred in to their ſhyppes in the hauyn of Burdeux. So the duke departed with a great company of men of armes and archers / he had a threſcore veſſels with his company and purueyaūce and ledde with hym his wyfe and her ſuſter. And they ſpedde ſo well on the ſee & had ſo good wynde / that they arryued at Hampton in England and there yſſued out of their ſhyppes and entred into the towne. And ther reſted them the ſpace of two dayes and than departed and rode to wyndſore / where the kynge receyued the duke his ſonne / and the ladyes damoſels / and knyghtes ſtrangers with great feeſt: and ſpecially he was gladde to ſe 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guyſſhard Dangle. ¶The ſame ſeaſon dyed the gentyll knyght ſir Gaultier of Manny in the cytie of London / wherof all the barones of Englande were right ſorie / for the trouthe and good coū
               ſayle that they had alwayes ſene and herde in him. He was buryed with great ſolempnyte in the monaſtery of the charterhouſe beſyde London / and at ye day of his obſequy / there was the kyng and all his chyldren: and the prelates banrons and knightes of Englande. And ſo all his landes bothe in Englande and beyonde the ſee fell to the erle Johan of Penbroke / who hadde to wyfe the lady Anne his doughter and heyre. So the erle of Penbroke ſent to entre in to the lande that was fallen to him in Heynault by. ii of his knightes / who dyde ſo well their deuor
                  •
                with the duke Aubert / who as than helde the erldome of Heynalt in rule / that they atteyned their purpoſe.
            ALl that wynter ther were dyuers counſayls in Englande among the lordꝭ / for the ſtate of the realme / and howe they ſhulde mē
               tayne the warr the next ſomer folowynge. And ſo were of entēt to make two viages / the one in to Guyen / and the other into France by Calys way / and the kyng ſought for frendes in all parties / aſwell in Almayne as in ye marches of the empyre / wher as he gate dyuers knightes and ſquyers of his acorde: alſo he made a marueylous great apparell for his hooſt / that the lyke had nat ben often ſene before. The frēche kyng had knowlege of their ſecretes / and what they were in purpoſe to do / whervpon he toke counſayle and made prouiſyon: and fortifyed his cyties / townes / and caſtels in Pycardy / and ſette in euery place great garyſons of men of warre to thentent to defende the countre fro all myſaduenture. Whan that ſomer was come / and that kyng Edwarde of England hadde holden his feeſt and ſolemnyte of ſaynt George at wyndſore / as was his vſage yerely to do. And that 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guyſſharde Dangle was entred into the ſame fraternyte with the kyng and his chyldren / and other barons of Englande / the whiche were called in the fraternyte / knightꝭ of the blue garter.
            THan the kyng went to Lōdon to his palays of weſtmynſter / and there he had a great coūſayle for the orderyng of the realme. And bycauſe that the duke of Lancaſtre ſhulde that ſeaſon paſſe in to Fraunce / by the playnes

of Pycardy / & the erle of Cambridge with him The kyng at the deſyre of ſir Guyſſharde Dā
               gle and of them of Poyton. Ordayned that the erle of Penbroke ſhulde go in to Poictou to vyſyte that countre / and to make warre agaynſt the frenchmen on that ſyde. For the gaſcoyns & poicteuyns had requyred the kyng by their letters / and by the mouthe of ſir Guyſſharde Dā
               gle / that if he wolde nat ſend any of his ſonnes that he wolde ſende the erle of Penbroke / whōe they greatly loued and deſyred to haue / for they knewe him for a good knight and a hardy. and ſo the kyng of Englande ſayd to the erle of Pē
               broke before all his barons and knyghtes / that were ther aſſembled in counſayle. John̄ fayre ſofie: I ordayne you to go in to Poictou / in the company of ſir Guyſſharde Dangle. And ther ye ſhall be ſouerayne and gouernour of all the men of warre that ye fynde there wherof there be great plētie (as I am ſurely enformed) and alſo of all theym that gothe with you. The erle kneled downe before the kyng / and ſayd. Sir / I thanke your grace of the highe honoure that ye putte me to: ſir I ſhall gladly be there to do you ſeruice / as one of your leeſt marſhals. So thus brake vp the counſayle and the kynge retourned to wyndſore / and had ſir Guyſſharde Dangle with hym / and ſpake to hym often tymes of the beſyneſſe of Poicton and of Guyen and ſir Guyſſharde ſayd to him. Sir aſſoone as my lorde the erle of Penbroke be ones arryued there / we ſhall make good warre: for we ſhall be to the nombre of foure or fyue hundred ſpeares / all obeyng to you. ſo they may be well payed their wages. Than the kyng anſwered. Sir Guyſſhard / care you nothyng for hanyng of golde or ſyluer whan ye come there / to make warr, withall / for I haue ynoughe. And I am well content to enploy it on that marchandyſe / ſythe it toucheth me and my realme.
         
         
            ¶Howe the erle of Penbroke departed out of Englande to go into Poyctou / and howe the ſpanyerdes fought with him in the hauyn of Rochell. Cap. C C .lxxxxvii.
            
               THus with ſuche wordes the kynge paſt the tyme often wt ſir Guyſſhard Dāgle / whō he loued and truſted as reaſon was. So the ſeaſon cāe that therle of Pēbroke ſhulde departe / and ſo tooke his leaue of the kyng / and all his company. And 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Others of Grauntſon was ordayned to go with hym / he had no great company with hym / but certayne knyghtes / by the enformacyon of ſir Guiſſharde Dangle. But he had with him ſuche certayne ſomme of money / to pay the wagꝭ of thre thouſande men of warre. And ſoo they made ſpede tyll they came to Hampton / & there taryed .xv. dayes abydinge wynde / & than had they wynde at wyll. and ſo entred ito their ſhippes and deꝑted fxo the hauyn in ye name of god and ſaynt George / & toke their courſe towarde Poitou. Kyng Charles of Frauce / who knewe the moſt ꝑte of all the coūſell in England / I cā nat tell howe nor by whōe. But he knewe well how ſir Guyſſhard Dāgle was gone into England / to thētent to get of the kyng a good capitayne for the coūtre of Poytou: & alſo he knew howe therle of Penbroke ſhulde go thyder and all his charge. The frenche kyng was well aduyſed therof / and ſecretly ſent an army of men of warre by the ſee / of ſpanyerdes at his deſyre bycauſe his owne men were gone to kyng Hē
               ry of Caſtell / bycauſe of the confederacyon and alyaunce / that was bytwene them. The ſpanyerves were fourtie gret ſhyppes / and .xiii. barkes well purueyed and decked / as theſe ſpaynyſſhe ſhyppes be. And ſoueraynes and patrones of that flete / were four valyaut capitayns: Ambroſe de Boucquenegre / Cabeſſe de Uacadent / Ferrant de Pyon and Radygo de la Rochell. Theſe ſpanyerdes had lyen a great ſpace at ancre in theſce / abydinge the retournyng of the poicteuyns / and comyng of therle of Pē
               broke. For they knewe well howe their entētes were to come to Poitou / therfore they lay at ancre before the towne of Rochell. And ſo it happed / that the day before the vigyll of ſaynt Johan Baptyſt / the yere of our lorde god. M .iii. hundred .lxxii. The erle of Penbroke and his cōpany ſhulde arryue in the hauyn of Rochell / but there they founde the foreſayde ſpaignyerdes / to lette them of their arryuyng / who were gladde of theyr comynge. And whanne the englyſſhemen and poicteuyns ſawe the ſpaignyerdes ther / and parceyued howe they muſt nedes fight with them / they conforted themſelfe:

howbeit they were nat agally matched / nother of men nor of ſhyppes. Howe be it they armed them / and putte them ſelfe in good order / their archers before them redy to fight. And thā the ſpayniſſhe ſhyppes / who were well prouyded with a great nombre of men of warre and brigantes / with arbalaſters and gōnes / and with great barres of yron / and plomettes of leed to caſt downe. Anone they began to aproche / makyng great noyſe: the great ſhyppes of Spaygne toke the wynd to fetche their tourne on the englyſſhe ſhyppes. Whome they but lytell feaced: and ſo came with a full ſayle on them. So thus at the beginnyng ther was great cry and noyſe of the one and other and the engliſſhmen bare them ſelfe right well. And there the erle of Pebroke made certayne of his ſquyers knightes to: honour. Ther was a great batayle and a harve the englyſſhmen hadde ynough to do / for the ſpanyerdes that were in the great ſhyppes hadde great barres of yron and great ſtones / and dyde caſt them downe to perſe the englyſſhe ſhyppes / & hurte therwith many a man right yuell. And amonge the knyghtes of Englande & Poictou / great nobleneſſe of knight / hode and prowes was ſhewed. The erle of Pē
               broke fought and receyued his enemyes ryght ferſly / & dyde that day many a noble feat of armes with his owne handes / and in lyke maner ſo dyde ſir Othes Graūtſon / ſir Guiſſharde dā
               gle / the lorde of Pynan / and all other knightꝭ.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they of Rochell towne wolde nat ſocour the erle of Penbroke / & howe the ſeueſchall of Rochell / & the lorde of Tanyboton and other / came to ſocour hym. Cap. CC .lxxxxviii.
            
               ANd as I haue herde reported by theym that were there at ye ſame batayle / that the englyſſhmen and poyctenyns that were there / deſyred greatly to cōquer laude & prayſe in armes. For there were neuer men that dyde more valyantly / for they 
                  〈◊〉
                but a fewe people in regarde to the 
                  〈…〉
               des and alſo farr laſſe nombre of ſhyppes: and leſſe of quantyte. Therfore it myght well be marueyled howe they endured ſo long / but the noble knightode that was in them / reconforted them / and helde thē in their ſtrength. For if they hadde ben lyke in ſhyppes / the ſpanyerdes hadde taken but lytell aduauntage of them. They helde them ſelfe ſo cloſe toguyder / that none durſt abyde their ſtrokes / withoute they were well armed and paueſſed / but the caſtyng downe of plommes of leed / great ſtones / and barres of yron / hurte and troubled theym marueylouſly ſore. And hurt and wounded dyuers knightes and ſquyers. The people of the towne of Rochell ſawe well this batayle / but they neuer auaunſed them to come to helpe the erle of Penbroke and his company / who ſo valyantly there fought with their ennemyes / but dyde lette thē alone. Thus in this batayle and ſtryfe they endured tyll it was night / and than they departed eche fro other and caſt their ancres but this firſt day the englyſſhmen loſt .ii. barges / laded with their ꝓuiſyon / and all that were within putte to dethe. The ſame night ſir Johan of Hardan: who as than was ſeneſhall of Rochell made gret deſyres to thē of the towne. As to the mayre Johan Chaudron / and to other: that they ſhulde arme them / and cauſe to be armed all the cominalte of the towne / & to entre in to barges and ſhyppes. And to go ayde and cōfort their company / who all the day had ſo valiantly fought with their ennemyes. But they of the towne / who hadde no wyll to the mater: excuſed them ſelfe / and ſayd: that they had ynough to do to kepe the towne. And how they were no menne for the see / nor wyſt nat howe to fight with the ſpanyerdes on the ſee / but yf the batayle were on the lande / they ſayd they wold than gladly go forthe. So the ſeneſchall coude nat get them forthe / for nothynge that he coude do. The ſame tyme within ye towne: ther was the lorde of Tanyboton / ſir Jaques of Surge res / ſir Maubrune of Linyers: who alſo deſyred theym of the towne to go forthe. But whan they ſawe that their requeſt coude nat auayle: they foure knightes went and armed them and all their cōpany / ſuche as wolde go forthe with them / the whiche was but a ſmall nombre. and ſo they entred in to four barkes / and at the brekynge of the daye whan the fludde came / they wente to their company / who gaue them great thanke for their commynge. And ſo there they ſhe wed vnto the erle of Penbroke / and vnto ſir Guyſſharde Dangle. Howe they of the towne of Rochell / wolde nat come forthe to helpe to ayde and ſocour hym and his company. Than

the erle anſwered / and ſayd. Well / than it muſt behoue vs to abyde the grace of god / and ye aduēture of fortune. Truſtyng ones to fynde the ſeaſon to cauſe them of Rochell / to repent their vnkynde dealyng.
         
         
            ¶ How the erle of Penbroke was taken priſoner / and diſconfyted by the ſpanierdes: and howe they departed fro the hauyn of Rochell with theyr priſoners. And the ſame day the Captall of Beutz came in to Rochell. Cap. CC .lxxxxix.
            
               WHan the day was come and that ye fludde began / the ſpanyerdes wayed vp their ancres / makyng great noiſe with trumpettes / and ſette them ſelfe in good order / as they dyde ye day before. And furnyſſhed their great ſhyppes fulle of men of warre / and toke the aduauntage of the mynde to cloſe in the englyſſhe ſhyppes / who were nothynge to the nombre of the ſpanyerdes. And ſo the foreſayd foure patrones of the ſpanyerdꝭ came before in good order. The englyſſhemen and poyctenyns / ſawe well their order: and ſo drewe all togyder / and ſet their archers before them. Therwith came on the ſpanyerdes with full ſayle / and ſo began a feirſe and a cruell batayle. Than the ſpanyerdes caſt great hookes of yron / and graped their ſhyppes toguyder to the englyſſhe ſhyppes / ſo that they coude nat be parte. With the erle of Penbroke and ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / ther were .xxii. knightes / who right valiantly fought with ſuche weapens as they hadde. Thus fightyng they contynued a longe ſpace / howe beit the ſpanyerdes hadde to great aduauntage of the englyſſhmen / for they were in great ſhyppes / and caſte downe great barres of yron and ſtones / the whiche ſore traueyled the englyſſhmen. Thus cryeng / ſhowtynge / and fightynge eche with other: they endured tyll thre of the clocke. Ther were neuer men that endured more traueyle on the ſee / thā the englyſſhemen dyde there that day / for the mooſt parte of their men were ſore hurte / with the caſtynge of barres of yron / ſtones / and plomettes of leed. So that ſir Aymery of Tharſe ye valyant knight of Gaſcoyne was ther ſtayne and alſo ſir John̄ Lantonne / who was knight for the body with the erle of Penbroke. To the erles ſhyp / ther were faſtened four great ſhyppes. Wherof Cabeſſe of Wakadent / and Dom ferant de Pyon were gouernours / and in them were many good fightyng men. And they dyd ſo moche / that they entred into the erles ſhyppe where was done many a feate of armes: & ther therle was taken and all that were in his ſhyp / taken or ſlayne. Firſt ther were takenne of his knightes / ſir Robert Bufforce / ſir Johan Curſone / and ſir Johan of Grimyers. And ſlayne there was: ſir Saymon Houſſagre / ſir John̄ Mortayne / and ſir Johan Couchette. & there fought ſtyll the poictenyns: as ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / the lorde of Pynan / the lorde of Canyboton / and dyuers other knyghtes of their cōpany. And in another ſhyppe was ſir Othes of Graūtſon / Ambroſe of Boucquenegre / and Radygo of Rochell / and they were all takenne by the ſpanyerdes / ſo that none ſcaped: but outher they were taken or ſlayne. But whan they had taken the chefe mayſters / they left ſlayeng of ſeruauntes / for their mayſters deſyred that they wolde forbere theym. Sayeng howe they wolde pay for them all.
            ALl ſuche as were in lyke danger / as the erle of Penbroke / and ſir Guyſſharde Dangle were in: ſhulde be fayne to take the aduenture that god wolde ſende thē. And beſyde the loſſe of ſo many good knyghtes and ſquyers / as were takenne and ſlayne the ſame day. The kyng of Englande loſt the greatteſt loſſe for by the ſame diſconfyture / he loſt after all the hole coūtre: as ye ſhall herafter in this hiſtory. ¶ And as it was ſhewed me / thenglyſſhe ſhyp wherin was all the treyſure and richeſſe / wher with ſir Guyſſharde Dāgle shuld haue payed all ſoudyers wages in Guyen / was peryſſhed and drowned: and all that was therin / ſo that nothyng therof came to profyte. All that day the whiche was the vigyll of ſaynt Johan the Baptyſt and that night / and the next daye tyll it was noone / the ſpanyerdes lay ſtyll at ancre before Rochell / makyng great ioye. And it for tuned well to a knight of Poictou / called 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Jaques of Surgeres: for he ſpake ſo ſwetely & ſo fayre to his mayſter / that he was quyt: with ye payeng of thre. C. frākes. And ſo he cāe on ſalt John̄s day to dyner in to the towne of Rochell by him ther it was knowen / how ye iorney was ſpedde / & who were ſlayne & who were taken. &

dyuers burgeſſes of the towne / ſhewed by ſemblant howe they were ſorie & diſpleaſed. Howbeit they were in dede right ioyouſe / for they neuer naturally loued the englyſſhemen. And ſo whan
                  •
               oone was paſt on ſaynt Johans day / & that the tyde came on. Theſpanyerdes wayed vp ancres and ſpred their ſeales / and ſo departed makyng great noyſe of trumpettes and other mynſtrelſies. And they had long ſtremers wauynge in the wynde beaten with the armes of Caſtell / with other penous and ſtanderdes: ſo that it was great pleaſure to beholde them. Thus in this caſe they departed and toke ther courſe towardes Galyce / and the ſame daye of ſaynt Johan / ther came to Rochell a great nō
               bre of men of armes gaſcoyns and englyſſhe / who had nat as than herde of that aduenture: but they knewe well that the ſpanyerdes lay / & had lyen a longe ſpace before the hauyn of Rochell / and therfore they came thyder to conforte and a yd the towne. Of the which men of warr of gaſcoyns / ther was the Captall of Beufz / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Beras de la Launde / ſir Peter of Landuras / ſir Soudyc / and ſir Bertram de Franke. And of englyſſhmen / ther was ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Richarde of Pontchardon / ſir Wyllm̄ Ferryton / ſir Dangoſes / ſir Baudwyn of Frāuyll ſir Water Hewet / & ſir Johan Deureur. Whan theſe lordes and their cōpany / who were to the nombre of ſire hundred men of armes were cōe to Rochell / they of the towne made them good chere outwarde / bycauſe they durſt do none otherwyſe. Than they were enformed by ſir Jaques Surgeres / of the batayle of the ſpanyerdes on the ſee / and ſhewed theym howe he was him ſelfe at the ſame batayle / taken and raunſomed. Of theſe tidynges were the barones and knightes ryght ſorie and diſpleaſed / and reputed theym ſelfe right vnfortunat / that they had nat ben ther: and complayned greatly the loſſe of the erle of Pēbroke / and of ſir Richard Dā
               gle. So thus they taryed at Rochell / I can nat ſay howe longe: to take counſayle and aduyſe / howe they ſhulde do and maynteyne forthe the warr. ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue a lytell whyle to ſpeke of them / and lette vs ſpeke of ſir yuan of Wales / howe he dyde the ſame ſeaſon.
         
         
            ¶ Howe 
                  •
               ir yuan of wales diſcōfited thengliſſhmen in the yle of Gernſay / and howe the frenche kyng ſent into Spayne for men of warr̄ / to lay ſege to Rochell. Cap. CCC.
            
               THis yuā of Wales / was ſon to a prince of Wales / whom kynge Edwarde had put to dethe: I cā nat ſay for what cauſe. And ſo gaue the principalyte to his ſon̄e / & made hym prince of Wales. So this yuan came into Fraunce & complayned to kyng Charles of Fraunce / of the iniuryes that the kynge of Englande had done to hym / as in ſlayeng of his father: & takyng away of his he rytage. So the frenche kyng retayned him / & aduaunſed him greatly / and made him gouernour of certayn men of warr. And ſo the ſame ſomer / the kyng delyuered him four thouſande fightyng men / and ſent him to the ſee / and toke ſhippyng at Harflewe / and ſo ſayled forthe towarde Englande / & ſo came to theyle of Gern▪ ſay agaynſt Normādy: wherof Aymon Roſſe a ſquyer of honour with the kyng of England was capitayne. And whan he knewe y• the frenchmen were aryued in the yle / and yuan of Wales with them: he was nothynge content. And ſo made his ſomons through the yle / the which is nat great in quantyte / and ſo he aſſembled / what of his owne and of them of the yle / to the nombre of .viii. hundred. And ſo came to a certayne place / and ther fought with ye ſayd yuan where there was a ſore batayle / and endured along ſpace. Howe beit finally the englyſſhmen were diſconfyted and flayne in the ſame place / mo than four hūdred. And ſo this Aymon fled away or els he had ben deed or taken: ſo he ſaued him ſelfe with moche payne / and entred into a lytell caſtell a two leages thens / called Cornette: the whiche the ſame Aymon had well fortifyed before. Than after this diſconfytur / the ſayd yuan drewe togyder his men / and hadde knowledge howe that Aymon was entred into the caſtell of Cornette. Than he drewe thyder and layd ſiege therto / and made dyuers aſſautes: but the caſtell was ſtrong & well purueyed with good artyllary: ſo that it was nat eaſy to be wonne. Duryng this ſiege before Cornette / the aduentur fell on the ſee of the takyng of the erle of Penbroke and ſir Guyſſharde Dangle / and their company before Rochell (as ye haue herde before) Of the whiche tidynges / whan the french kyng herde therof he was right ioy ouſe / and entended thereby the rather to purſue the warre in Poictou. For than he thought that yf the englyſſhmen began ones a lytell to declyne / that lightly the cyties & townes wolde gyue vp / and rendre thēſelfe to him. Than the

frenche kynge deſermyned that in to Poyctou / Xaynton / and Rochelloyſe: he wolde ſende for that ſeaſon his conſtable thyder / with certayne men of armes / and to make hote warr in thoſe countrees / bothe by lande and by ſee: ſayenge that the englyſſhmen ther as than had no capttayne nor chefe ruler. Than the frenche kynge ſent his letters to the ſayd yuā / who lay at ſege before the caſtell of Cornet / in the yle of Gernſay. Of the whiche ſiege the kyng was well enformed / and howe the caſtellby lykelyhod was in preignable. Therfore the kyng commaūded hym after the ſight of his letters / to deꝑte and breke vp his ſiege. And to entre into a ſhyppe / the whiche the kyng ſent hym for the ſame purpoſe / and ſo to ſayle into Spayne to kyng Henry / to gette of hym barkes and galeys / and his admyrall and men of warre / to come and to lay ſiege by the ſee / to the towne of Rochell. Whan the ſayd yuan ſawe the kynges meſſage and cō
               maūdement / he obeyed therto / and ſo brake vp the ſiege and gaue leaue to his company to departe / and delyuered them ſhyppes to bring thē to Harflewe. And himſelfe entred into a great ſhyppe and toke his courſe towarde Spayne. Thus befell of the ſiege before Cornette / in the yle of Gernſay.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englande was ſore diſpleaſed of the takyng of therle of Penbroke / and how ſir Bertram of Cleſquy toke the caſtell of Mount morillon. Cap. CCC .i.
            
               THe kyng of England was ſore diſpleaſed whā he herde how the army that he had ſent in to Poictou was ouerthrowen by the ſpanyerdes on the ſee / and ſo wer all ſuche as loued hym / how be it they coude nat am
                  •
               de it for that tyme. thā the ſages of therealme thought ſurely that the countre of Poictou and of Xaynton was likely to be loſt / by reaſon of the ſayd myſſe happe: & this they ſhewed to the kyng and to the duke of Lancaſtre. So they were long in counſayle on the mater / and ſo determyned as than: that the erle of Salyſbury with fyue hundred men of armes ſhulde go thyder. But what ſ
                  ••
               uer 
                  〈◊〉
                ſ
                  •
               yle or aduyſe was taken / ther was nothyng done / for there came other buſyneſſes in hande out of Bretayne / that letted that iourney / wher of the kyng repented him after / whan he coude nat remedy it. So it was / that the ſpanyerdes who had taken the erle of Penbroke (as ye haue herd before) they taryed a certayne ſpace on the ſee / bycauſe the wynde was contrary to thē Howbeit at laſt they arryued at the porte ſaynt Andrewe in Galyce / and ſo entred into the towne about noone. And ſo brought all their priſoners in to the Caſtell / all bounde in cheanes of yron acordyng to their cuſtome / for other courteſy they can nat ſhewe. They are like vnto the almaynes.
            THe ſame day / yuan of Wales was arryued with his ſhyppe in the ſame porte / & ſo toke lande and entred in to the ſame houſe / wher as Domferant of Pyon / and Cabeſſe of Wakadent had brought the erle of Penbroke and his knightes. And ſo it was ſhewed yuan as he was in his chambre / howe the englyſſhemen were in the ſame houſe as priſoners. And this yuan had great deſyre to ſe them / to knowe what they were. and ſo he went forthe in to the hall / and as he went thyder he encountred with the erle of Penbroke / whome he knewe ryght well / yet he had nat often ſene him before. Thā he ſayd to him as in reproch / a erle of Pēbroke / are ye come in to this countre to do homage to me / for ſuche landes as ye holde in the principalyte of Wales / wherof I am rightfull heyre / the whiche your kynge hath taken fro me / by yuell counſayle and aduyſe. The erle of Penbroke was abaſſhed / whan he ſawe that he was a priſoner and in a ſtrange land / and knowyng nat the man that ſo ſpake to hym in his language. And ſo anſwered ſhortely / and ſayd. What are you that gyue me this langage? I am ꝙ he / yuan / ſonne to prince Aymon of Wales / whome your kyng of Englande put to dethe wrongfully / and hath diſheryted me. But whan I may by the helpe of my right dere lorde the frenche kyng / I ſhall ſhape therfore a remedy. And I wyll ye knowe: that if I may fynde you in any place conuenyent / that I may fyght with you / I ſhall do it. and ſhe we you the right y• ye haue done to me: and alſo to the erle of Herforde / & to Edward Spēſer. For by your fathers with other counſaylours / my lorde my father was be trayed / wherof I ought to be diſpleaſed / and to amende it whan I maye. Than ſtepte forthe a knight of the erles / called ſir Thomas of ſait

               
                  〈…〉
                to speke and ſayd. yuan / 
                  〈…〉
                and maynteyne that there is any 
                  〈…〉
                or hath ben in my lorde / or that he oweth or ſhulde owe any homage to you / or any 
                  〈◊〉
                his 
                  〈◊〉
               . caſt downe your gage in that quarell and ye ſhall fynde hun that ſhall take it vp. Thanyuan anſwered and ſayd. ye are a priſoner. I can haue none honour to apele you for ye haue nat the rule of yourſelfe: for ye are vnder the rule of them that haue taken you. but whan ye be quyte / than I ſhall ſpeke with you more of the mater for it ſhall nat reſt thus. And ſo with tho words / certayne knightꝭ of Spaygne came bytwene them: and ſo departed them a ſondre. And ſo wtin a whyle after the ſayd. 
                  〈◊◊〉
                capItēs ledde for the their priſoners toward the cytie of Burgꝭ in Spayn / to yelde them to kyng Henry / who as than was there a byding. And whan kyng Henry knewe of their comyng and that they aproched nere to the cytie: He ſent his eldeſt ſonne called Johan / who was called as than / the chylde of Caſtell with great nombre of knightꝭ and ſquyers / to mete with theſe englyſſhmen / to do theym honoure: for the king knewe tight well what aparteyned to nobleneſſe. And whā they were come to him he dyde them moche honour / bothe with wordꝭ and dedes. And than anone after the kyng ſent them into dyuers ꝑtes of his realme to be kept.
            HOwe let vs retourne to the buſyneſſe of Poitou / ye which was nat lytell: and let vs ſpeke of the gaſcoyns and englyſſhe knightes / who on ſaynt John̄s day at nyght came to the towne of Rochell (as ye haue herd before) & they wereſore diſpleaſed / in yt they cāe nat the day before to haue bene at the batayle / to haue 
                  •
               ought with the ſpanyerdes. So thā they toke counſayle what thyng was beſt for them to do / for they had great dout of thē of Rochell. Than they ordayned ſir Johan Deureux to be ſeneſhall of Rochell with thre hūdred men of warr to kepe ye towne / for they thought that as longe as they were ſtrong ynough in the towne / they durſt nat rebell. This order was taken by the Captall of Beufz / who was chefe gouernoure of that company: and ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Dangoſes ſir Richarde of Pontchardon / the Souldyche / ſir Bereas de la La
                  •
               de and other with their companyes / departed fro Rochell / to the nombre of foure hundred ſpeares / & toke 
                  〈◊〉
                way to Subyze for ther were certayne bre 
                  〈…〉
                helde churches and ſmall fortereſſes / and had fortifyed them. But as ſoone as theſe lordes came thyder they draue them away and wanne their holdes / and rydde clene thoſe marcheſſe of them. And the ſame ſeason there kepte the feldes in the marcheſſe of Aniou / Auuerne / and Berrey / the conſtable of Fraunce / the duke of Berrey / the duke of Burbone / the erle of Alē
               ſon the Dolphyn of Auuergne / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Loys of Sā
               xere / the lorde Clyſſon / the lorde de la Uale / the vycount of Rohan / and the lorde of Beaumanoyre / with a great nōbre of the barony of Frā
               ce / to the nombre of thre thouſande ſperes. And they rode ſo long / tyll they aſſembled all togyder with the conſtable in Poyctou / and ſo layd ſiege to a caſtell / called Mountmorillon: and with aſſaut wan it / and ſlewe all that euer wer within / and newe manned it with frenchmen. And than they went to Chauigny / ſtādynge by the ryuer of Cruſe and beſeged it / and ther lay two dayes / and on the thirde day the place was yelded vp & they within taken to mercy. Than they rode further and came to Luzat / wher ther was a towne and a caſtell: and ſo they alſo yelded them vp / without abyding of any aſſaute. Than they went to the cytie of Poicters / & lay one night without amonge the vynes / wherof they of the cytie were ſore abaſſhed and douted of a ſiege / howe beit they hadde none as at that tyme. For the next mornyng the frenchmen departed and went to the caſtell of Moncoūtour / wherof John̄ Creſuell and Dauyd Holegraue were capitayns / and had vnder them threſcore hardy and valyant men of warre / who greatly had conſtrayned the marches of Aniou and of Thourayne / and other frēche garyſons: wherfore the cōſtable ſayd he wolde nat deꝑte thens / tyll he had it at his pleaſure.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the conſtable of Fraunce beſieged Mountcomptour / and howe he departed thens to go to the duke of Berrey and of Limoſyn to beſege ſaynt Seuere. Cap. CCC .ii.
            
               THe cōſtable of France with all ye ſayd lordes and knyghtes rode ſo long that thei cāe to the caſtell of Montcountour / a ſixe leages fro Poycters. And whan they were come thyder they layd ſiege therto / and aſſayled it valyantly. And bycauſe

the dykes were ſo brode / they cauſed tymbre & wode to be cutte downe by the villayns of the countrey / and to be brought thyder and caſt in to the dikes to fyll it and to caſt ſtrawe & erthe theron. And ſo in four dayes they fylled ſo the dykes that they might with their eaſe go to ye walles. Than they made a ſore aſſaut / & they within defended them ſelfe valyantly 
                  〈◊〉
                of the whiche they had great nede ſo to do / for they were in great parell of takyng: howe be it they were ſo valyant and ſo good mē of warr / that they kepte thē ſelfe and their place with moche payne / from any hurt that day. And ſo the ſirt day / the cōſtable and bretons came agayne to the aſſaut: with paueſſes / pykes / and matockꝭ in their handes: and ſo pearſed the walles in dyuers places / ſo that they within wereſore a baſſhed. Howbeit they defēded thē ſelfe as valiātly as euer men dyde. And John̄ Creſuell & Dauyd Holegraue who were capitayns / ymagyned & conſydred the parell that they were in and parceyued howe the conſtable and his cō
               pany were nat in mynde to deꝑt / tyll they had wonne the caſtell. And they ſawe well / that yf they were taken by force / they ſhulde all dye. & alſo they parceyued howe there was no cōfort comynge to them fro any parte. Wherfore all thynges cōſydred / they entred into a treaty to yelde vp them ſelfe / their lyues and goodes ſaued. And the conſtable / who wolde no lengar greue his company / nor to ſore oppreſſe them of the caſtell / bycauſe he ſawe well they were valyant men of armes. He was contente they ſhulde departe without any hurte of their bodyes / ſo they toke no goodes with them except golde or ſyluer / and ſo they departed and were cōueyed to Poicters. Thus the conſtable had the caſtell of Montcountour / and newe fortifyed it: and ſo taryed there a ſpace to refreſſhe him and his company / bycauſe he wyſt nat as than whyder to drawe / other to Poicters or to ſome other place. Whan they of the cyte of Poicters knewe howe the conſtable & bretons had wonne agayne the caſtell of Montcountoure / than were they more abaſhed thā before. And ſent incontynent their meſſangers to ſir Thomas Percy / who was their ſeneſhall: & was rydynge in the cōpany of the Captall. And or ſir Thomas Percy knewe of thoſe tidynges / ſir Johan Deureur who was in the caſtell of Rochell / was enformed howe the conſtable of Frā
               ce hadde ben before Poicters and aduyſed the place: wherſore he thought verely they ſhulde be beſieged. And alſo he herde howe the ſeneſchall was nat there / wherfore he thought he wolde go and conforte them of Poicters. And ſo departed fro Rochell with a fyftie ſpeares / and ſette a ſquyer called Pbylpot Māſeyle to be capitayne there / tyll his retourne agayne. And ſo rode to Poiters and entred in to the cytie / wherof they within thanked him greatly. Than theſe tidynges came to ſir Thom̄s Percy / who was with the Captall from his men / in the cytie of Poicters. Deſyringe him to cōe to them / for they feared of a ſiege to be layed to them / and that he wolde bring with him as moche helpe and ayde as he coulde. Certifyenge hym howe the frenchmen were ſtronge. Than ſir Thomas ſhewed theſe tidynges to the Captall / to the entent to knowe what he wolde ſay therto. The Captall ſayde he wolde take aduyſe on that mater. And ſo the aduiſe taken / he was nat de
                  •
               myned to breke his owne iourney for that mater / but he gaue leaue to 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thom̄s Percy to departe fro hym / and ſo he dyde / and rode to Poicters: wher he was receyued with great toye of them of the towne / for they great lye deſyred his preſens. And ther he founde ſir Johan Deureux / & ſo eche of them made great there of other. All this was ſhewed to the conſtable / who was ſtyll at Montcountoure / and howe that they of Poicters were newly refreſſhed with men of warre.
            THe ſame ſeaſon came to his knowlege / howe the duke of Berrey with a great nombre of men of warre: of Auuergne / Berrey / and of Burgoyne / and of the marcheſſe of Lymoſyn. Was fully determyned to lay ſeige to ſaynt Seuere in Limoſyn / whiche parteyned to ſir John̄ Deureux. And capitayns therof vnder hym: were ſir Wyllyam Percy / Rycharde Gylle / and Richarde Horne / with acertayne nombre of good men of warr. And they hadde before ouerronne the countre of Auuergne and Limoſyn / and had done moche yuell: wherfore the duke of Berrey was determyned to drawe thyder. And ſent and deſyred the conſtable / that if he myght in any wyſe to come to hym / for the ſayd entent. The conſtable / who was a wyſe and a ſubtell knight in all his dedꝭ conſydred well / yt to lay ſiege to Poicters ſhulde lytell auayle him / ſeyng the cyte newe refreſſhed with men of warre / wherfore he ſayde he wolde drawe to the duke of Berrey. And ſo departed fro Moncoūtour with all his hoſt / and ordred for the kepyng of that garyſon. And ſo rode forthe tyll he came to the duke of Berrey / 

who thaked him moche of his comyng / and all his copany. So they was a great hooſt whan bothe hooſtes were aſſembled togyder. And ſo they toue toguyder tyll they came before ſaynt Seuere they were well a four thouſande men of armes / and ſo belieged the garyſon and determyned nat to departe thens / tyll they hadde won it / 
                  〈◊〉
                ſo fetrſly aſſayled it. And ſir Wyllm̄ Percy valiantly defended the fortreſſe. Theſe twdynges came to the cycle of Poycters and to ſir John Deureur who was lorde of ſaynt Seuere. Howe the duke of Berrey / the doulphyn of Auuergne the coſtable of Fraunce / the lorde Clyſſon / and the vicount of Rohan / with foure thouſande men of armes had beſieged the fortreſſe of ſaynt Seuer in Limoſyn wherof ſir Johan Deureur was right penſyue / and ſayd to ſyr Thomas Percy / who was there preſent at the report makyng. Sir Thomas / ye are ſe nelhall of this countrey, and haue great puyſſaunce. Sir I requyre you helpe to ſocour my men / who are but loſt if they haue no helpe. ſit quod he gladde wold I be to synde remedy for them / & for the loue of you / I wyll departe and go with you. and let vs go ſpeke with my lorde the caprall of Beufz who is nat farre hens / and let vs do our beſt to moue hym to go and helpe to reyſe y• ſiege and to fight with the frēchmen. Than they departed fro Poicters / and left the kepyng of the cytie with the mayre of the ſame / called Johan Reynalt / a good trewe and iuſte man. And ſo long they rode toygder / that they founde y• captall in the feldes / ridyng towarde ſaynt John Dangle. Than theſe two knyght
                  •
                ſhewed to hym / howe the frenchmen had taken Mountmorillon beſyde Poietres and alſo the ſtrong caſtell of Montcountour / and were as than at ſiege before ſaynt Seuere / parteyning to ſir Johan Deureur. & alſo they ſhewed hym howe ſir Wyllm̄ Percy was within the caſtell / Gylle / and Richard Horne: who were no men to be loſt. The Captall ſtudyed a lytell at thoſe wordes / and than anſwered and ſayd. 
                  〈◊〉
                what thynke you beſt that I ſhulde do? to the which coūſayle ther were dyuers knights called / and they all anſwered: and ſayd. Sir it hath ben a great ſeaſon that we haue herde you ſay / that ye deſyre greatly to fight with the frenchmen. And ſir ye can nat better fynde thē that nowe. Therfore ſir drawe thyder / and ſende out your cōmaundement into Poictou / and Amou: we ſhalbe men ynowe to fight with them, with the good wyll we haue therto. By my faythe 
                  〈◊〉
                the Captall I am cōtent / we ſhall ſhortely fight 
                  〈◊〉
                thē / by the grace of god and ſaynt George. In contynēt the captall ſent letters to the barons / knightes and ſquyers / of Poictou / & of Xaynton: prayeng and ſtraitly cōmaundynge thē to come to hym / to a certayne place lymytted. All ſuche as his cōmaundemēt came vnto / came towarde the Captall in all haſt they coude: there was the lorde of Partney / ſir Loys Harcourt / ſir Hugues of Uynou / ſir Perciuall of Colen / ſir Amery of Rochchoart / ſir Jaques of Surgeres / ſir Geffray of Argēton / the lorde of Puiſſance / the lorde of Roſyllon / the lorde of Campenac / ſir John̄ Dangle / ſir Wyllyam of Mō
               tender / and dyuers other. And whan they wer aſſembled togyder / they were a nyne hundred ſpeares / and tyue hundred archers.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they of ſaynt Seuere endutyng a great aſſaut / yelded them vp to ſir Bertram of Cleſquy: and how the cytie of Poicters tourned thēſelfe frenche. Cap. C C C .iii.
            
               THeſe tidyndes came into the hoſte before ſaynt Seuer to ſir Bertrā of Cleſquy / and to the other lords there. Howe that thengliſſhmen & poicteuyus aproched faſt to them warde / to thentent to reyſe their ſiege. Whan y• conſtable herd that / he cōmaunded euery man to harneſſe: & to go feirſly to the aſſaut ſo there was none that diſobeyed his commaūdement. Than they cam frenchmen and bretons before the fortereſſe / well armed and paueſſed / and ſo there began a great aſſaute: euery lorde vnder his owne baner. What ſhuld I ſay? it was gret beauty to beholde them / for ther were .xlix. baners and a great nombre of penons. And there was the cōſtable and ſir Loys of Sārere mat ſhall greatly traueyling to encorage their men to thaſſaut. There aduaūſed forthe knightes 
                  〈◊〉
                ſquiers of all nacions to encreaſe their honour and dyde marueyls marmes / for ſome paſſed clene through the dykes which were full of water / and ſo cāe to y• walles. And for all that they coulde do that were within / they wolde nat recule backe: but euer went forward. And on the dykes there was the duke of Berrey / the duke of Borbone / the erle of Alenſon / the dolphyn of Auuergne and the other great lordes in couragyng their people. & bycauſe theſe great lordes behelde thē / euery man auaūſed hym ſelfe more wyllingly / nat doutyng the parell of dethe. ſit

Willyam Percy 
                  〈◊〉
                the two other ſquyers of honour capitayns of the fortreſſe / ſawe well how they were ferſly aſſayled without any reſt and ſo to contynue / it was nat poſſyble for them to kepe the places and alſo they ſawe no conforte
                  •
                mynge to theym warde for any parte / for they knewe none of their frendes nere to thē by the ſpace of .x. leages. And therfore they entred into a treaty with y• conſtable in eſchewyng gretter domage. Howe be it ſir Bertram the coſſtable was well enformed / howe y• ſame nyght he ſhulde here tydinges of thenglyſſhmen: therfore he agreed the ſoner with them of the caſtell and ſo receyued them ſauynge their lyues / and entred into the fortreſſe with great ioy 
                  〈◊〉
                made great feeſt. Than he cauſed all his company to drawe in to the felde / and to ſette them in ordre of batayle redy to fight / and ſayd to thē. Sirs auyſe you well / for our enemyes aprocheth faſt I thynke yet or it be nyght / we ſhall haue batayle: therfore let euery man make hym redy. Howbeit the englyſſhmen made no great ha
                  ••
                whan they knewe that ſaynte Seuere was taken. ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of them of Poicters and / howe they maynteyned themſelfe.
            THe ſame ſeaſon it fell ſo / y• they of Poicters were in great diſcencyon among themſelfe: For thre partes of the towne wolde gladly haue tourned frenche. But John̄ Reynalt mayre of the towne and parte of the comē
               tie / wolde abyde ſtyll englyſſhe: howbeit y• rycheſt burgeſſes & the mē of the churche / wherof there were great plētie / wolde y• in any wyſe y• conſtable of France ſhulde be ſent for. & ſo they ſent ſecretly to hym: that he ſhulde come haſtelye and take poſſeſſyon of the cytie / for they promyſed him to open the gate agaynſt him. wherfore the co
                  ••
               able was right ioyouſe. And ſhewed the mater to the duke of Berrey / and to the duke of Burbone. And ſo they agreed that the conſtable ſhulde depart fro thehooſt: with thre hundred of the beſt horſed men of their company. And ſo he departed and rode that say and night folowyng with lytell reſt / more then .xxx. leages / by a nother way than the englyſſhmen kepte. And ſo in the mornyngethey arryued at Poitres / and there founde the gates open: and they redy there that ſhulde receyue them. And if they hadde taryed lengar / but the ſpace of a leage ridyng / they had come to late. For John Reynalt & ſuche of his part had ſent in all haſt / for ſir John̄ of Ubrues & for ſir Johan Percy / who with a hundred ſpeares and a hubre
                  •
                archers were redy the within a leage of the cytie. 
                  •
               f the takynge thus of the good cytie of Poicters were the knight
                  •
                and ſquyers of Gaſcone of Poictou / & of England ſore abaſſhed: ſuche as were aſſembled toguyder ther in Poyctou / who were to y• nombre of. viu. C. ſpeares / and four hūdred archers. Than they drewe to coū
               ſayle / to determyne howe to be ruled: for they ſawe well they were in greate parell / and wyll nat well in whome to put their truſt. Than the barownes and knyghtes of Poycton ſpake a worde / to conforte the englyſſhmen: and ſayd. Surely ſirs / it greatly diſpleaſeth vs / the beſy neſſes of this countrey & that we can nat amēde it. But ſirs / be you in ſuertie / y• as longe as we can endure / and that there is any houſe or fortreſſe in Poycton that we may drawe in to / we ſhall be true and faythfull to our naturall lorde the kyng of Englande: & to you. Than the englyſſ he knightis y• were ther ſayd. Sirs / that is our ſpecy all truſt / and to dye in the quarell: ye ſhall fynde vs euer true companyons. So thus in the felde ther was great coūſell among them (and ſo all thynges conſydred) it was determyned / that the poicteuyns ſhulde drawe to gyder one way / and the englyſſhmen a nother way. So ther they depted right amiably eche fro other: that is to ſay / the lorde of Pertenay / the lorde of Thouars and of Roſilly / ſir Aymery of Rochchoart / John̄ Dangle / Loyes Harcourt / Percyuall of Coloyne capitayn of Thowars / Hughe Briane / Reynalte of Thouars / Wylliam of Cāpenac / Jaques of Surgeres / and other knightes / toke the way to Thouars And the englyſſhmen: that is to ſay / ſir Johan of Ubrues / ſir Richard of Pontchardon / Thomas Percy / Dangoſes Geffray Dargenton / Mathewe Fonques / Thomas Gourney / Water Hewet / Johan Creſuell and other: toke the way to Nyorth / wher they thought to haue entred without any let. But whan they came thyder / they founde the gates shyt / and the bridgs drawen: & they of the towne ſayd to thē, howe ſurely they ſhulde nat entre there. Than they drewe togyder to counſayle / and determyned nat to ſuffre that dealyng: and ſo in good aray they aſſayled the towne / and they within defē
               ded them. Howebeit ther was within no gentylman that wyſt what the warrement / and ſo they were conquered by the englyſſhmen. But if they coulde haue kept the towne agaynſt thē 
               
                  •
               yll it had ben night / they had ben greatly conforted. For the conſtable of Fraunce had ſente thyber Thybalt of Pount / with two hundred

men to haue refreſſhed y• towne / how beit they came to late. The towne was taken with aſſaute and robbed / and a great nombre of men and women ſlayne: and ſo there abode ſtyll the englyſſhmen / to harken after other newes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frenchmen toke the Captall of Beufz before Soubiſe in batayle / and howe they of Rochell tourned frenche. Cap. CCC .iiii.
            
               THis whyle thengliſſhmen were in Nyorth / and durſt nat well deꝑte a ſondre / there cāe before Rochell yuan of Wales / in the cōpany of ye admyrall of king Hēry of Spayn called Dāpradigo de Roux / and with hym .xl. great ſhippes 
                  〈◊〉
                .viii. galys full of men of warr and ſo they layd them ſelfe before the towne in maner of a ſtege / ſo y• none coude yſſue nor entre without daunger. Than they within Rochell ſeyng thēſelf nat well aſſured / fell in treaty priuely with yuan of Wales and with the admyrall of Spayne / and ſo agreed yt they within nor they Woute / ſhulde nat trouble nor vexe eche other. but ſtyll the ſpanyerdes and frenchmen lay before the towne at ancre / & had their ſpies abrode in ye countre of Poitou and Xayn ton / to knowe and ſe what was done in euery place. The capitayne of the caſtell of Rochell / was called Philippe Manſell. The conſtable of Fraūce who was at Poicters ▪ ſent the lorde of Pouns and Thybault du Pont / with a thre hūdred ſpeares to the caſtell of Soubiſe / whiche was ſtronge and ſtādyng on the ſee ſyde open before ye mouthe of Tharent as the ſee gyueth. And Win the caſtell was the lady therof / with no great cōpany of men of warr / howbeit ſhe ſent by a ſquier for ſocour to John̄ of Granuyll and to the captall of Beufz coſtable of Acqtayne who were at ſaynt John̄s Dāgle. and in contynent as ſoone as he had worde therof / he ſent for ſir Henry Hay ſeneſhall of Angoleme / and for ſir Wylliam lorde of Marnell / nephue to ſir Raymond of Marnell / Johan Creſuell / and for ſyr Thomas Percy / who incontynent came to hym. All this aſſemble and ordynaūce of ye ſiege / yuan of Wales was enformed therof there he lay at Rochell. Than he toke four. C. ſpeares of the mooſt ſpecialleſt / and ſureſt men of warr of all his company and dyde put them in to thre barges. & ſo departed hym ſelfe and ſir James of Mount
                  ••
               ye / and Morellette his brother and lefte Radigo de Rouxe admyrall of Spayne there ſtyll / with the reſydue of his company. And ſo he rowed ſecretely towarde Soubiſe / and arryued on the other ſyde right agaynſte the lorde of Pouns / who knewe nothynge of that buſſhement. Nomore dyde the Captall who made his aſſēble at ſaynt John̄s Dangle / for if he had knowen therof / he wolde haue taken with hym a gretter cōpany than he dyde. For he ſent backe a great parte of his cō
               pany▪ & left another parte within the towne of ſaynt Johans Dangle / and ſo departed with two hūdred ſpeares and no mo. And ſo rode ſo longe / that about nyght tyme / he came nere to the hooſt of the frenchmen / & nere to the caſtell of Soubiſe: Than he alighted beſyde a lytell wode / and reſted a lytell their horſes and them ſelfe. And than moūted agayne and diſplayed their baners & penons / and ſo ſodenly daſſhed in to ye frenche hooſt / makyng their cryes. ther was a ſore ſcrimyſſhe / and many a man ſlayne and ſore hurt / for the frenchmen were nat ware of thē. & ſo there was taken the lorde of Pons and Thybault of Pount / and a .lx. of the beſt of their company / & the other put to ſlight. thā yuan of Wales came in with his rout / who had paſſed the tharent with their barges / and brought with theym great nombre of tortches / fagottes / and other ablementes for fyre: For the night was very darke. So he with four hundred ſperes of freſſhe men and luſty / daſſhed in among thēglyſſhmen & gaſcons / who thought that they had clene acheued all their enterpriſe and ſo were ſpred a brode and nat togyder / aboute their pyllage / and takynge hede of their priſoners and ſo by clene force they were beten downe / and within a ſhorte ſpace diſconfyted. There auaūſed forthe a hardy ſquyer of Uermādoyſe / called Peter Danyels: and he aproched ſo nere to the captall of Beufz that he toke him priſoner by clene feat of armes / whiche captall was as than the knyght / other of Gaſcon or of Englande / that the frenche kynge and the frēchmen deſired moſt to haue / bycauſe he was ryght hardy and a good capitayne. Alſo there was taken 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thom̄s Percy by a preeſt of Wales / called ſir Dauy / Alſo there was taken ſir Henry Hay / ſir Mores Lyne / & dyuers other. And ſir Water Huetſcaped with moche payne ſir Petyton of Corton / ſir Wylliam Ferencon and Carmyll / fled towarde the towne of Soubyſe / and hadde no ſocour: but that the lady of Soubyſe was at the barryers / and cauſed the gate to be opened / & ſo they entred and dyuers

other. The next daye yuan of Wales brought all his barges & ſhyppes before Soubiſe / and gaue a feirſe aſſaut / and alſo ſo dyde the lorde of Pons and Thybalte of Pont / who were before taken and reſcued. Howbeit they within y• towne defended them ſelfe right valiantly / but the lady ſawe well the towne was nat ſtrong ynough to endure a long ſpace agaynſt them / & had no hope of any ſocour: ſeyng that ye captall was taken priſoner. Thā ſhe called her knyghtes to counſell & toke ſuche aduyſe / that 
                  •
               he ſent to treat with the frenchmen. Which treaty toke ſuch effect / that all ſuche knightꝭ as were within the towne might deꝑt at their pleaſur Wout any domage / & to drawe to Niorth / to Xaintes and to Luſygnen: or whyder ſoeuer it pleaſed thē. and the lady of Soubiſe to put her ſelfe vnder the obeyſance of the frenche kyng / & all her lande. Thus deꝑted thenglyſſhmen fro Soubyſe / & were brought in ſauegard whider as it pleaſed thē. Thā the frēchmen toke poſſeſſyon of the towne & fealtie of the lady / and ſhe ſware fro thenſ forth / to obey the french kyng & all her land. Than yuan of Wales 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                James of Moūtioy / & their cōpany toke their ſhyppes / and ſo brought the captall & other priſoners into their great ſhippes / yt lay ſtyll before Rochell. and y• lorde of Pons & the other bretons haſted them greatly to ryde with a great cōpany / ſuche as y• cōſtable of Fraūce had ſent thē: as the vycont of Rohan / the lord of Clyſſon / Torayne / Beaumanoyre / & of Rochfort / ſir Wyllm̄ of Bordꝭ Olyuer of Māny / Reynalt of Limoſyn / Geffray Ricon / yon of Lanconet / Alayne of ſaynt Poule / Carsuell & dyuers other. And they cāe before the towne of ſ. Johan Dangle / & made great aſſemblant to aſſaut it. And they within the towne ſawe howe the countre began faſt to be loſt / & that their chefe capiten was taken priſoner and ſawe no ſocour fro no ꝑte / yelded thē vp and became french. Than the bretons rode to Augoleſme / & in lykewiſe they turned to the french ꝑtie / & ſo dyd after Talybourge. & than they cāe before Xayntes / where they lay before it two dayes for the capiten therof called Ferē
               con / ſayd how he wolde nat yelde vp ſo lightly and ſo made good sēblaut of defēce. & within y• towne was the byſſhop therof / who was good french: he turned ſo the cytezins that they toke their capitayne / and ſayd they wolde ſ
                  •
               e hym / without he wolde cōſent to yelde vp the towne to be french / & ſo for feare he agreed to thē / ſo y• he & all his might deꝑt quyte & clere. And ſo he dyde / & the frenchmen toke poſſeſſion of y• cyte & the caſtell of Xaintes. & ſir Willm̄ of Ferēcon was cōueyed to Burdeur. ¶ Before Rochell lay ſtyll at ancre yuan of Wales / in the cōpany of Dāpradigo the rour admyrall of Spayne / with .xl. great ſhippꝭ. 
                  •
               iii. barges / & .viii. galys of Spayne. There was great treaty bytwene thē of the towne & thē without / howbeit they 
                  〈◊〉
                in coude nat turne french as long as the caſtell was englyſſhe / & in the poſſeſſyon of englyſſhmē. wherfore they helde ſtyll diſſimulyng with thēglyſhmen / tyll euer lytell & lytell thenglyſſhmen deꝑted. And ſo the lorde Deureux had left the garyſon in the kepynge of a ſquyer / called Philyp Manſell / who had with hym aboute a hundred cōpanyons one & other. and a burges was mayre of the towne / called John̄ Caudrer who on a day aſſembled togiderꝑte of thē that were wyllinge to becōe frenche rather than englyſſhe / & ſayd vnto thē. ſirs / we ſe dayly howe our neighbours turne frenche / & I feare leſt y• ſhortly we ſhalbe ſo encloſed / that we ſhall nat knowe which way to ſtyrre / nor to yſſue out of this towne. Therfore it were good that be tymes we toke hede / how we might get ye caſtell / the which ſo often tymes hath done vs trouble and diſpleaſur / and nowe it is but eaſely kept. for Philyppe Manſell is nat greatly ingenyous: I ſhall ſhewe hym / that I haue receyued a cōmaūdement fro the kyng of Englande / cō
               teyning howe I ſhulde cauſe all the men of the towne to be armed / and to cōe into a place that I ſhall name / and ſo to take the muſters and a vieu the nombre of them: and alſo of thē of the caſtell / and ſo to write agayne the certētie therof to the kyng. And ſo therby I ſhall cōmaund hym in the kynges name to come out of the caſtell / and to make his muſters / and I beleue he wyll do ſo lightly. And than let vs be well prouyded of a buſſhment / of two hundred men in harneſſe / lyeng amonge the olde walles without the caſtell. So that whan they of the caſtell be yſſued out / than lette them ſteppe forthe / bytwene them and the bridge / the whiche as than wyll be auayled downe. And than lette vs all be redy to furnyſſhe oure enterpriſe / and ſo we ſhall take them at our pleaſure. and therby we ſhall haue bothe thē and the caſtell: and ſo they were all agreed to this purpoſe. And than they ꝑſeuered in this purpoſe ſo longe / tyll y• mayre who was chefe of this enterpriſe on a day / deſyred Philippe Manſell to come to him to dyner and dyuers other great burgeſſes / ſuche as were of the englyſſhe parte. And ſo he made a great dyner / and talked of dyuers maters par

taynynge to the kyng to Englande. And after dyuer the mayre brought for the a letter / ſealed with the kynges great ſeale to cauſe Philippe Manſell to beleue hym the better / who coulde nat rede / now be it he knewe well the ſeale. And ſo than the mayre redde the lettre as it pleaſed him / other wyſe than it was written. Than the mayre ſayd to Philippe. Sir yeſe & here how the kyng our ſouerayne lorde hath commaunded me / and alſo that I ſhulde cōmaunde you in his name / that ye make to morowe your muſtres and in lyke wiſe ſo ſhall we do ours. And he who thought none yuell / ſayd he was cōtent ſo to do / and ſo departed. The ſame nyght or it was day / the mayre toke two hundred men & put thē in a buſſhment nere to ye caſtell / among the olde walles that were ther: and in the mornyng the mayre cauſed ye watche bell to be ſow ned / and euery man in the towne to be armed. Philyppe Manſell in lykewyſe / cauſed all thē within ye caſtell to be armed / wherof ther were a. l
                  •
               . ſufficient and able men of warr. Than he yſſued out of the caſtell: and whā he was ones paſt the buſſhement / than they ſtepte forthe bytwene ye bridge and thenglyſſhmen than the englyſſhmen ſawe well how they were betrayed. Than they ranne at them of the buſſhment / to haue goten agayne thentre in to the caſtell / but the mayre came incontynent with all the comynaltie of the towne
                  •
                to the nombre .ii. M. men. So there the engliſſhmen were aſſayled bothe before and behynd / and all taken: for they were fayne to yeloe them / ſauyng their lyues. Howbeit for all that / yet they of the towne had nat ye caſtell 
                  •
               or thenglyſſhmen had lefte .xii. of their company ſtyll within the caſtell / who had drawen vp agayne the bridge. Thā the mayre cāe to Philippe ther capitayne and to his company / and ſayde. Sirs / harken what I ſay vnto you. Without ye yelde vp incōtynent the caſtell all your heedes ſhall be ſtryken of at the bridge fote. The englyſſhmen anſwered & ſayd: they wolde do the beſt of their powers / to delyuer to thē the caſtell / and ſo they went and ſpake with them that were in ye caſtell. And ſo they agreed to delyuer vp the caſtell / on the condycion that all thoſe within the caſtell / and alſo all ſuche as were taken ſhulde be put in to a ſhyppe / and cō
               ducted in ſaue garde / by the mayre & burgeſſes of Rochell to the cytie of Burdeur. Thus they were agreed and ſo they of Rochell had the caſtell. And aſſone as the dukꝭ of Berrey / of Bur bone / and of Burgoyne / the marſhall of Sanrere / the bycont of Rohan: the lordes of Sully / of Pons / of Clyſſon / of Beaumanoyre / and dyuers other barons of Fraūce: herde of theſe tidynges. They departed fro Berrey / and fro the marcheſſe of L
                  ••
               oſyn and Aniou: and determyned to drawe towarde Poicters / where the conſtable of Fraunce was. And in their goyng thyderward / theſe lordes toke by the way in Poictou a towne called ſaynt Maxāt / whiche was yelded to them: aſſoone as euer they came thyder / and the caſtell was taken with aſſaut / and all they within ſſayne. And after that they tooke the caſtell of Marle / and than̄e the caſtell of Dowaye / and dyuers other fortereſſes that they founde in their waye. And whan they were come to Poiters / they ſent certayne meſſangers to treat with the burgeſſes of Rochell: howe beit they of the towne wolde nat open their gates to let in thoſe lordes / and ſayd they wolde nat yelde vp ſo ſone. howbeit they ſayd / that if it wolde pleaſe ye duke of Berrey & the other lordes there / to ſend thē a ſaue cōduct to cōe to Poiters wtinsixe dayes: than they wolde bring their hole myndꝭ in that behalfe. The frenche meſſangers retourned to theſe lordes / and ſhewed them the mynde of thē of the town of Rochell. Than the cōduct was graūted thē / and to Poycters went certayne of the burgeſſes of Rochell / and ſayd to theſe lordes of Frā
               ce: how they were well content / to be vnder the frenche kynge / ſo that they myght caſte downe their caſtell to the erthe: and that ther beneuet caſtell made there more. And on that condicy / on the towne of Rochell & all rochellois / ſhulde be for euer / vnder the reſort and demayne of ye frenche kyng / and neuer to be put away by maryage or any maner of peace / that may happe to come to the realme of France / or by what ſo euer cōdycion it be. And alſo they of the towne to haue a mynt / to forge money bothe whyte & blacke: of the ſame forme and alay as is in Parys. But the lordes of Fraūce wolde nat agre to all this / tyll they knewe the frenche kynges pleasure in that behalfe. And ſo the lordꝭ gaue ſaue conduct to thē of Rochell / to go the the kynge to knowe his pleaſur. And ſo .xii. of the burgeſſes of the towne went to Parys to the kyng who accorded to their deſyre / and feeſted them greatly / and gaue thē great gyftes. And whan they were retourned to Rochell / they ſhewed their charters ſealed by the kynge / and confyrmed in the chābre of the kyng & of the peeres of Fraūce. And ſo incōtynent was beaten & raſed downe to the erthe the great caſtell of Rochell. And than they ſent to ye great lordes of Fraūce

at Poicters that they ſhulde come to Rochell / and that they wolde ſet open the gates to them And ſo thyder came the conſtable of Fraunce / and two hundred men of armes with hym / and there they were receyued with great ioye. & to hym they dyde feaultie & homage as to the frenche kynge / for he had good procuracion fro the frenche kyng to receyue it / for the kynge hadde ſtablyſſhed hym in thoſe parties of P
                  ••
               ardye / repreſentyng his owne body.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Bertram of Clesquy cō
               ſtable of Fraūce / toke dyuers caſtels in Rochelloys. And howe the kynge of England toke the ſee to come and reiſe the ſege at Thouars. Cap. ccc .v.
            
               WHan the conſtable of Fraunce / ſir Bertram of Cleſquy had be four dayes in ye towne of Rochell / and had ſhewed thē of the towne / how they ſhuld ordre thēſelfe for thens forwarde. Than he departed & went to Poycters to the foreſayd dukes and lordes. And ſo with thē he went into the felde to conquere certayne fortreſſes on ye marches of Rochell / and he was to ye nombre of thre thouſand ſpeares. And ſo they departed fro Poyctres / and went and beſteged the caſtell of Benon / whiche was a fayre caſtell and a ſtronge / and ſo they ſayde they wolde nat departe thens / tyll they had it at their pleaſure. And in this caſtell there was a capitayn vnder the captall of Benon / a ſquier of the countie of Foiz called Wyllm̄ of Pons / and with hym a knyght of Napless / named ſir James. There ye frenche lordes made dyuers aſſautes / & they within defended thēselfe right valyauntly / and nat farre thers there was the fortreſſe of Surgeres / wherin there were certayne englyſſhmen y• kept it vnderthe captall / & ſo in an euennyng they ſayd how they wolde go and a wake the frenche hooſt. And ſoo ther rode forthe a .xl. ſpeares / with ſome ye they had ſent for fro Marant / and ſo they came ſovenly into the conſtables lodgynge / and dyde hurte dyuers of his men: and ſpecially they ſſewe a ſquier of his. Than the hooſt began to ſtyrre & to arme them as ſoone as they myght / and the englyſſhmen who hadde done their enterpryſe without danger retourned agayne to their for treſſe without any domage. Wherof ye conſtable was ſo ſore diſpleaſed / that he ſware neuer to departe thens tyll he had taken the caſtell of Benon / & ſlayne all thoſe within it. And ſo the ſame mornyng / he cauſed all maner of men to arme thē and to drawe for the all maner of a bylementes of aſſaut. and gaue ſuche an aſſaut. y• long before was nat ſene ſuche another / for thā
               men of armes and bretons entred into dykes / nat ſparynge them ſelfe. And ſo came to ye fote of the walles with paueſſes on their heed
                  •
                and myned the walles with pikes / that it was marueyle to beholde them. And they dyde ſomoche that they beate downe a great pane of ye wall / wherby they entred without danger: & ſo the caſtell was taken / and all they within ſlayne / as many as coulde be founde. Than after the ſayd conſtable / cauſed the ſame caſtell to be agayn repayred / and ſet therin a newe garyſon of frenchmen. Than he drewe to the caſtell of Morant / and they within yelded them vp / ſauynge their lyues and goodes. And than they went to Surgeres / which alſo yelded vp to ye obeyſance of the frenche kyng / but the englyſhmen were deꝑted / for they durſt nat abyde the comyng of the conſtable. And ſo than after the conſtable went to the caſtell of Fountnay the countie / whiche the wyfe of ſir John Harpen / dan kept / and ſo they beſeged the towne and caſtell / and gaue therto dyuers aſſautes. Finally they within by compoſicyon departed with the lady as many as wolde / and ſo were by the conſtable cōueyed to Thouars. So the frēchmen had the poſſeſſyon of the towne & caſtell of Foūtuey / and refreſſhed it with newe people.
            THan the conſtable and lordes of Frāce went and layd ſege to Thouars / wher as the mooſt parte of the knightes of Poictou were. As the vycont of Thouars / the lordes of Pertney / Pouſanges / Corſe and Crupenac / and ſir Loyes of Harcourt / Geffray Dargenton / James of Surgeres and Percyuall of Coloyne. And theſe frenche lordes had made at Poicters & at Rochell dyuers engyns wher with they aſſayled / and traueyled greatly the poicteuyns within Thouars. And ſo all thynges conſydred / they entreated with the frenchmen to haue a peace for thēselfe & for their lādꝭ ſyll the feeſt of ſaynt Michaell next folowyng / whiche ſhulde be in the yere of our lorde. M .iii. C .lxii. And in ye meaue tyme / they to ſende to the kyng of England their lorde / to certifye hym of their eſtate and cōdycion / ſo that if they were nat ayded by him or by one of his ſonnes within the ſayd terme: than they to yelde them and their landes to the obeyſance of the french

               
                  〈◊〉
               . This treaty was agreed vnto / and than the knightes of France retourned to Parys / & thyder was brought the Captall of Beufz and put in priſon vnder ſure kepyng / in a towre in the temple. And the kyng who was right glad of his takyng cauſed to be delyuered to y• ſquyer that toke hym .xii. thouſande frankes. And ſo the meſſangers that went fro the poicteuyns came into Englande and ſhewed to the kyng / to the prince / and to their coūſayls: the ſtate of Poictou / and of Xaynton. And whan the kyng ſawe howe he loſt with ſo lytell warre / the coū
               treis and lades that had coſt hym ſo moche the wynning / he was in a great ſtudy a long ſpace And than he ſayd / howe that ſhortely he wolde go ouer the ſee hymſelfe with ſuche a puyſſance that he wolde abyde to gyue batayle / to the hole power of France. And ſayd how he wolde neuer retourne agayne in to Englande / tyll he had coquered agayne as moche as he had loſt / or els to leſe all the reſydue. The ſame ſeaſon ther was agreat army redy charged to attend on the duke of Lancaſtre / and ſhulde arryue at Calys. But than it was 
                  ••
               imyned by the king and his coūſayle / that they ſhulde go into Poyctou and in to Xaynton towarde Rochell / for yt was thought to be the next voyage / and mooſt nedefull. And the kynge made a great ſomons throughout the realme of Englande / cōmaundyng euery man to cōe in harnes to Hāpton / & ther about at a day aſſigned: and ther to take the ſee. So ther was none that durſt nor wold diſobey his cōmaundement / but euery man departed fro his owne countre / and drewe to the ſee ſyde / where ther was redy a foure hundred veſſels / of one and other. And the lordes drewe to the kyng to Weſtmynſter beſyde London. & ther it was ordayned bytwene the kynge & the prince his ſonne: that if the kyng of Englande dyed in this viage / or the prince: that than Rycharde the ſonne of the prince / who was borne at Burdeur / ſhulde be kyng of Englande. So that whan all the lordes were come before the kyng / or they departed / the prince ſhewed thē: that if it happed him to dye before the kyng his father than his ſonne Richarde to be kynge of Englande / after the diſceaſe of his graundfather. The prelates / lordes / knightes / and all ye comynalte / loued ſo well the prince / for the ma
               
                  •
               ay fayre iourneys that he had acheued / aſ well in Englande as beyond theſee / that they all a
               
                  〈…〉
                therto ioyouſly. The kynge firſt / & than all his ſonnes / and after all the lordes of Englande 
                  •
               o the which the prince cauſed thē all to ſwere and ſcale or he departed. All theſe thynges done: the kyng / the prince / the duke of Lā
               caſtre / therles of Cābridge / Saliſbury / War wyke / Arundell / Suffolke / and Stafforde / y• lorde Spenſer who was newly come oute of Lombardy. The lordes of Percy / of Uyen / of Roſe / of Dalawar / and all other barones and knyghtes of Englande / to the nombre of thre thouſande men of armes / and .x. M. archers / who came all to Hāpton wher they toke ſhyppyng / with as great a flete / as euer any kyng went before out of Englande in any voyage. And ſo they ſayled towarde Rochell / in coſtynge Normādy and Bretayne / and had dyuers wyndes. And the frenche kynge made a great aſſemble of men of warr in Poictou to holde his iourney at Thouars / at y• day apoynted. So all the countre was full of men of warre: alſo the gaſcons & the lorde Archēbalt of Grayly / vncle to the Captall of Beufz / at the deſyre of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thom̄is Felton ſeneſhall of Burdeux cāe wt thre. C. ſperes. And in the ſame cōpany ther was the lordes of Duras / of Corton / of Muſydent / of Roſſen / of Lāgoren / & of Landuras: 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Peter Corton & ſir Wyllm̄ Fereton englyſſhemen. All theſe deꝑted fro Burdeux & came to Nyorth / and ther they founde ſir Water Huet ſir John̄ Ubrues / ſir Thom̄s Percy / Johan Creſuell & dyuers other / ſo yt whan they were all togyder / they were a .xii. C. fightyng men. and ſir Richarde of Pontchardon cāe to them with other .xii. C. All this ſeaſon the kynge of Englande & his ſonnes with their great army were on the ſee / & coulde take no lande at Rochell nor ther about / for the wynde and fortune was cōtrary to thē. And in that caſe they were the ſpace of .ix. wekes / ſo that the feeſt of Myhelmas aproched / and yt the kyng & his coūſell ſawe well how they coude nat cōe tyme ynow to kepe the day of reſcuyng of Thouars / wher of the kyng was ſore diſpleaſed / & ſo gaue lycēce to all his people to deꝑte wheder they lyſt Thus retourned this great nauy of England and had wynde at wyll at their returnynge / & ther arryued at Burdeux .ii. C. fayles of marchauntes of Englande for wyne. And whan it was nere mighelmas / the barones of Englande and Gaſcone cāe fro Niorth to go towarde Thouars / to mete with the kyng of England: and whan they ſawe that the kynge came nat they hadde great marueyle. Than to acquyte thēſelfe / they ſent certayne meſſangers to Tho wars to the barons of Poictou / ſuche as were ther / which meſſāgers ſayd. Right dereſirs / 

we be ſent hyder to you fro y• lordes of Gaſcone and Englande / vnder they obeyſaunce of the kynge of Englande. Sirs there be about Nyorthe twelfe hundred fightyng men redy apparelled to ayde and ſerue you in all maners and ſirs they deſyre to haue knowlege ſro you / whyder that in the abſence of the kyng of England and of his chyldren / they ſhall ayde and confort you or nat. For ſirs they are well cōtent in your company / to aduentur their bodyes & goodes. The barones of Poictou ſayd: howe they wolde take counſayle and aduyſe in that caſ
                  •
                / but ſirs: we thāke greatly the barones of Gaſcone and Englade / who hath ſent you hyder: in that they be redy to ſocoure vs. Than the knightes of Poictou drewe togyder / and ſo the firſt day they greed nat / for the lorde of Parteney, who was one of the greatteſt of that company / woldeth at they ſhulde kepe their day / and receyue the ſayd ayde / repreſentynge the kynge of Englande. And the other lordes were of the cōtrary opinyon: ſayeng howe they had ſealed and ſworne / howe that if the kyng or one of his chyldren were nat there perſonally by the ſayd day / than they to yelde them vp to they obeyſance of the frēche kyng. Wherfore the lorde of Partney went to his lodgyng nat well content / howe be it afterwarde he was ſo entyſed by the other / y• he agreed to their myndꝭ. And ſo they ſent worde agayne by the ſayd meſſāgers, that they thā
               ked them of their good wylles. Howe be it the kyng of Englande or one of his chyldren muſt nedes be ther / acordyng to the treaty that they had ſworne and ſealed vnto. Wher with the gaſcoyns and englyſſhmen that were at Nyorthe were ſore diſpleaſed / but they coude nat amende it. And ſo myghelmas day came / & fro Poy cters ther came to Thouars to holde their iourney ▪ the dukes of Berrey / of Burgoyne / and of Burbone / the conſtable of France / the lorde of Clyſſon / the dycount of Rohane / the Dolphyn of Auuergne / ſir Loyes Saurere / the lorde of Sully / and other great lordes of France. And they were ten thouſande ſpeares beſyde other. And ſo before Thouars / the euyn and the daye ofſaynt Mychaell they ſtode in ordynaunce of batayle / and agaynſt nyght they withdrue thē to their logynges. And in the mornynge y• two bretherne of the frenche kynges and the conſtable of Fraunce / demaunded of the knightes of Poictou within Thouars to delyuer the town acording to their promyſe and othes in that be halfe. They anſwered / and ſayd: howe y• ſhortely they wolde come to Poicters / and put themſelfe and all their landes / vnder the obeyſaunce of the frenche kyng / whiche anſwere was ſufficyent to the lordes of France / and ſo departed fro Thouras / and the dukes gaue lyc
                  〈…〉
                to the mooſt parte of their companyons.
            THe lorde Clyſſon departed with a gret nombre of men of warre / apoynted him by the conſtable. And ſo went to Mortayne on the ſee / the whiche was as than englyſſhe / and capitayne therof was a ſquyer of England / called James Clere: and he had with hym a threſcore cōpanyons. And whan the lorde Clyſſon was come before Mortayne / he made a feirſe aſſaute / at the whiche he was hym ſelfe, Howe be it with that aſſaute he wanne nothyng / and ſ
                  •
                at night he drewe to his lodgyng. Than the capitayne within ſeynge him ſelfe ſore oppreſſed / he ſent priuely to the lordz of Gaſcoyn and of Englande beyng at Nyorth / ſhewyng thē yt if they wolde com thyder by night he wolde receyue thē into his fortreſſe: wherby they might lightly paſſe through the lodgynges of the lorde Clyſſon / who had with him but two hūdredmen. And ſo ſecretely theſe lordes departed fro Nyorthe with fyue hundred ſpeares / and rode by nyght tyll they came to Mortayne / for they habbe great beſyre to atrape the lorde Clyſſon / howbeit a ſpye / who departed with thē fro Nyorthe knewe all their ententes. And ſo he came haſtely to the lorde Clyſſon / and foūde himſyttynge at ſupper: and ſayd. Sir your enemyes are departed fro Nyorthe to the nombre of .v. hundred / and are commynge on you. Thanne the lorde Clyſſon put the table fro hym and armed him in haſt and moūted on his horſe and all his company. And ſo departed and all his ſodaynly / and left behynde them a great parte of their caryages / and rode ſo longe that they came to Poicters: And the englyſſhmen who ſayled of their ententes / retourned agayne to Nyorthe right ſore diſpleaſed. And anone after they departed fro Nyorthe and left in garyſon there: ſir Dangoſes and Creſuell. and ſir Johan He wet retourned in to Englande / and all the other went to Burdeur / & in their returnyng they brent the lorde of Partneys lā
               des. Thus all Poictou was cōquered / except theſe fortreſſes: as Nyorth / Elyſeth / Mortymer▪ Mortayne ▪ Lyſignen / Caſtell / Accart / la roche Suryone / Gauſar / the toure of Larbre Merris and other. Which fortreſſes made dyuers yſſues and aſſautes on their neighbours ſōtyme chaſyng & ſomtyme rechaſed agayne.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe ſir Bertram of Cleſquy beſeged the caſtell of Syreth / and how the englyſſhmen were diſconfyted / & howe all the countrey of Poictou / of Xaynton / and of Rochell / were clene delyuered out of thēglyſſhmens handes. Cap. CCC .vi.
            
               THe duke of Bretayne / who was peſably ī his owne countre / was ſore diſpleaſed of the domage of the engliſhmen. For it was ſayd / that y• kynge of Englande and his puyſſaunce had made hym as he was: and that he had / had nothynge / and the kynge of Englande had nat ben. For he alwayes made warr for hym / and lende him ſyluer and golde: and alſo he had his doughter in maryage. For the duke wolde gladly / that his countre ſhulde rather holde of the kyng of Englandes parte / than of Fraunce. Howe beit the mooſt parte of the lordes / knightes / and ſquyers of Bretayne / were in their hertes good frenche. And ſpecially the lorde Clyſſon / and de la Uale / and the vycount of Rohan / who as than were the chefe rulers in all Bretayne: and theſe lordes ſayd to the duke. Sir / aſſone as we can parceyue that ye take any parte with the kyng of Englande / agayne the frenche kyng our ſouerayne lorde / we wyll all forſake you / & leaue the countrey of Bretayne. Howe be it the duke coude nat hyde the corage of his hert: but ſayd. Sirs ye do great wronge to the kynge of Englande: and ſpake great wordes to certayne of the lordes of Bretayne. The french kyng / who had drawen to his loue the hertꝭ of them of Bretayne: except ſir Robert Canoll. Deſyred thē / that if they ſawe any defence made by their duke / that they wolde gyue him knowledge therof: to the entent to fynde remedy therfore. The duke parceyued well / how that his men hadde him inſuſpect / and layed great a wayt on him. Than he douted leeſt they ſhulde ſende hym to Parys / wherfore he ſent to the kyng of Englā
               de / ſhewyng him what caſe he was in: deſyring him to ſende hym men of warr to defende him if nede were. And the kynge of Englande ſent hym the lorde Neuyll / with foure hundred men of armes / and as many archers / who arryued at ſaynt Mathewes defyne poterne. And ther helde them in the to 
                  ••
               ne without doyng of any maner of domage to the coūtre / but payed truely for that they toke. And ſo there they were all the wynter: the duke wolde neuer put them in to any fortreſſe y• he had. And whan the knightes of Bretayne / ſawe theſe englyſſhmen come in to the countre / to the ayde and confort of the duke they toke it in great in dignacion / and cloſed their fortreſſes / & ſhewed moche yuell wyll towardes the duke. Thus the matters abode in great varyaunce all that wynter.
            ANd aſſone as wynter was paſt / ſir Bertram of Cleſquy conſtable of France / departed fro Poicters with .xiiii. hundred fyghtyng men. And ſo went and layd ſege to y• towne and caſtell of Syreth: and with hym there were of breton knyghtes / ſir Alayne of Beaumont / John̄ of Beaumanoyre / Arnolde Limoſyn Geffray Ricoynan of Lanconet / Geffray of Konyell and dyuers other knightꝭ and ſquyers. And ſo they layed ſiege to Syreth / and cloſed them ſelfe about with pales / to thentent nat to be troubled in the nyght. Often certayne of them aproched to the fortreſſe and ſcrimyſſhed with thē within / who defended them ſelfe right valyantly. So it fell this ſiege enduryng / that ſir Robert Mycon / and ſir Nicotyn the ſcotte / who were keꝑs of the fortreſſe / ſent knowledge of their eſtate to ſir Johan Ubrues / and to ſir Dangoſes / capitayns of Nyorthe. And they in contynent ſent to them of the garyſon of Luſygnen / and Dangoſey: and ſo they aſſembled at Nyorthe. And than departed to the nombre of ſixe hundred and ſeuyn ſpeares / of good men of warr / beſyde other folowers. And ſo long they rode that they came to Syreth / for it was but four leages fro Nyorthe. And whan they were come to Syreth / than they reſted them a ſpace of tyme / to apparell them ſelfe. But it had bene better for them to haue ſette on the lodgynges of the conſtable / for anone he had worde of their comyng / and howe they were araynged in the felde. Hobeit the conſtable was nat greatly afrayed / but made all his men to be armed and to drawe toguyder / and than he ſayde. Nowe fayre ſirs / howe ſay you? haue you any wyll to fight with your enemyes / for I beleue ſurely it muſt be houe vs to fyght. And they ſayd: ſir we thanke god / it ſhalbe welcome to vs. Than the conſtable aduyſed to ſet a buſſhment to watche them of the caſtell / for he thought well they wolde yſſue out / and ſo ſet ther two hūdred for that entent. Thanne he cauſed to be caſt downe the mooſt parte of the pales that were about their

hooſtꝭ to thentent they ſhulde nat lette hym nor his company whan he wolde yſſue out. And ſo ordayned two batayls / the one was gouerned by ſir Alayne of Beaumount / and the other by ſir Geffray of Carnuell / and commaūded that none ſhulde paſſe before his baner without his commaundement / and that euery man ſhulde kepe their lodgynge.
            NOwe lette vs ſpeke of ſir Robert Mycon and of ſir Robert le ſcot / who were aboue in the caſtell / & ſawe thengliſſhmen redy apparelled in the feldes. Than they ſayd / lette vs arme our ſelfe and yſſue out / we ſhall ſo one paſſe throughe theſe bretons / & aſſoone as our folkes knoweth that we be fightynge with thē / they wyll come on / & do great domage to them / or they ſhall knowe of our iſſuyng out. And ſo they armed thē / to the nombre of .lx. and yſſued out a horſebacke to ſkrymyſſhe with the hooſt / but they were encountred with the buſſhement that was layd for them. And ſo ther was a ſore ſcrimyſſhe / but the englyſſhmen were ſo encloſed / that they coude nother recule backe nor go forwarde: and ſo they were all taken or ſlayne ſo that none eſcaped. The two capitayns were taken. And all this ſeaſon the other englyſſhemen were on the felde / and the cōſtable ſtyll in his percloſe / and iſſued nat out: for they feared that the engliſſhmen had ſome great enbuſſhement in the wode behynde them. The englyſſhmen had brought thyder with them / a certayne nombre of poicteuyns & bretons / robbers and pyllers to the nombre of two hundred / whome the engliſſhmen ſent on before thē / to ſcrimyſhe with the frenche hoſt. And as ſoone as they cāe before the conſtables batayle / they tourned thē ſelfe / and ſayd. howe they were good frenche / and wolde be on the conſtables parte / if it pleaſed hym. The conſtable ſayd he was content to haue them. Than he ſette them on a wynge on the one ſyde / and lerned by them all the maner and dealynge of the englyſſhmen / and knewe by them howe they had no maner of buſſhmēt behynde them.
            ¶ Whan the conſtable of Fraunce vnderſtode that / he was more toyouſe than he was before. Than he drewe all his people toguyder / and cauſed de his bannerre to auaunce forthe / and drewe to the wynge of his two bataylles / and went forthe a fote: caſtynge downe their pales / cryenge ourlady Cleſquy. And whan the englyſſhmen ſawe them yſſue out of their holde / they raynged them ſelfe a fote / and auaunſed forwarde with great deſyre. And at their fyrſt metyng they encoūtred the cōſtables batayle / and fought there ſo valiantly / that they paſſed through the batayle / and brought many a man to the erthe. But than the bretons had wyſely ordred their two batayls / beyng on the wyng. And ſo they came on all freſſhe and luſty / and baſſhed in ſo among thenglyſſhmen / who were all wery / yt they were ſore reculed backe. Howbeit lyke valyant men and full of courage / they fought with axes and ſwordes of Burdeaux / wherwith they gaue great ſtrokes. Ther were good knyghtes on bothe partes / who nobly aduentured them ſelfe to exaulte their honours. This batayle was as well fought / and as many proper dedes of armes done / in takyng and reſcuynge as had bene ſene of many a day before in playne felde / without any aduauntage: for euery man dyde his beſt to his power. there was many a man ſore hurt and caſt to the erthe with great myſchefe. howbeit finally all thengliſſhmen were dicōfyted / ſo that fewe ſcaped / but other they were taken or ſlayn. Ther were ſlayne. it. good ſquyers / Richard of Meſuyll / and Wylliam Dursell: and James Ubille ſore hurte. And there was taken ſir John̄ Ubrues / Aymery of Rochchoart / Dauyd Hollegraue / Rycharde Olyue / John̄ Creſuell / and dyuers other of Englande and Poytou. This bataile of Syreth / was in the yere of our lorde god / a M. thre hūdred .lxxii. the .xxi. day of Marche.
            ¶ And than after the conſtable returned & his folkes in to their lodgynges / and toke hede to their hurte men and to their priſoners: wherof they had great plenty. And afterwarde the conſtable ſent to ſpeke with them of the caſtell / ſir Alayne of Beaumounte / who ſhewed them that if they were taken by force / they ſhulde all dye without mercy. Than they of the garyſon put thē in to the conſtables mercy / who receyued them to grace / for he ſuffred them to paſſe quyte / and had ſaue conducte to go to Burdeaux. Thus the frenche men had the caſtell and the lande: which was put vnder the obeyſaūce of y• frenche kyng. Thā the bretons in a great heate came before Niorth / whiche was a good towne in Poictou / and had all y• ſeaſon before euer ſuſteyned the englyſſhmen / for they kepte euer a great garyſon. And as ſoone as they of Niorth / knewe that the cōſtable came to them warde / they went out againſt him / and preſented to hym y• kayes of the towne: & ſo brought hym in to their towne with great ioye / & there

the bretons refreſſhed them a four dayes. And than depted with great aray / they were a xiiii. hundred ſpeares / & ſo went before the fortereſſe of Luſiguen / which was yelded vp to them by compoſicion ſo that they of the gariſon within departed: their lyues ſaued / and as moche as they coude cary before them of their owne: and ſo had a ſaue conducte / to conuey them to Burdeux. Thus the frēchmen had that caſtell and all the ſeignory / and all the men therof became ſubgettes to the french kyng. Thā the bretons rode before the caſtell Alart / and the conſtable ſent to the lady / wyfe to ſir Rycharde Dangle / who was there within to yelde vp the caſtell / And ſhe deſyred to haue aſſurance ye ſhe might go to Poicters to ſpeke with ye duke of Berry: The conſtable graūted her deſyre / and cauſed her to be cōueyed thyder / by one of his knyghtes. And whā ſhe came before the duke ſhe kneled downe / and the duke toke her vp / & demaū
               ded what was her requeſt. Sir ꝙ ſhe. I am required by the conſtable of Fraunce / yt I ſhuld put me and my landes / vnder the obeyſaūce of the frenche kyng. And ſir / ye knowe well y• my lord and huſbande lyeth yet priſoner in Spayne: & ſir his lande is in my gouernance I am a woman of ſmall defence. And ſir / I can nat do with the heritage of my huſbāde at myne owne pleaſure / for peraduenture: if I ſhulde do any thynge agaynſt his pleaſure / he wolde can me no thanke therfore / and ſo ſhulde I be blamed but ſir / to apeaſe you & to ſet my lande in peace: I ſhall cōpounde with you for my ſelfe and all myne that we ſhall make you no warr / ſo that ye wyll make no warre to vs. And ſir / whā my huſbande is come out of priſon / I beleue well he wyll drawe in to Englāde / than I ſhall ſend hym worde of this cōpoſicion / & than ſir I am ſure he wyll ſende me his mynde: and than I ſhall anſwere you. The duke anſwered / & ſayd dame: I agre me well to your deſyre / on this condicion / that you nor none of your fortreſſes prouyde for no men of warre / vitayls / nor artyllary / otherwiſe than they be at this preſent tyme: and ſo thus they were agreed. Than the lady retourned to her caſtell / & cauſed the ſiege to be reyſed / for ſhe ſhewed letters fro the duke of Berrey / cōtayning the ſame purpoſe. Than they deꝑted / & the conſtable went before Mortymer the lady wherof yelded herſelfe and put her and her landes / vnder the obeyſance of the frenche kynge: and alſo yelded vp the caſtell of Dyenne whiche partayned to her. Thus was all Poictou / Xainton / and Rochell quyte delyuered fro the englyſſhmen. And whan the conſtable had ſet garyſons and good ſure kepyng in euery place / and ſawe no rebellyon in thoſe marches vnto the ryuer of Gyronde / than he returned in to Fraunce: & alſo / ſo dyde the dukes of Berrey / of Burgoyn / and of Burbone / and the mooſt parte of the barons of Fraūce: ſuche as had ben in theſe ſayd cōqueſtes. The kyng greatly feeſted them at their retournynge / but all was but iapes / whan ſir Bertram came to Parys to the kyng / for the kyng coude nat honor him to moche. So thus the cōſtable abode with the kyng at Parys in ioye and myrthe.
         
         
            ¶ Of the ſeige of Bercerell / & of the dethe of the kyng of ſcottes / & of the peace bitwene the frēch king and the kyng of Nauar. And howe the duke of Bretayne fledde in to Englande / and howe the cōſtable of Fraūce conquered his duchy. Cap. CCC .vii.
            
               THe ſame ſeaſon the lordes of Cliſſon / of Lauall / of Uangour / of Tournemen / of Rieux / and of Rochfort / the vicount of Rohane / ſir Charles of Dignen bannerette of Bretayne / the marſhall of Blarouille / the lordes of Hambe
                  •
                / of Ruille / of Foūteuyll / of Granuyll / of Farnyll / of Denneuall & of Cleres / banerettes of Normādy. And of other people great plenty of bretayne / and of Normādy / and ſo they went and layde ſiege to the ſtronge caſtell of Bercerell / and greatly they conſtrayned it by aſſautes / within ther were two capitayns englyſſhmen ſir Johan Aparte & ſir Johan Cornwall / and with them certayne companyons / yt valiantly defended theym ſelfe. At this ſiege there was done many a noble feate of armes many iſſues many ſautes / and many a ſcrymyſſhe. And a lytell ther beſide ther were at ſege before ſaint Sauyour the vicount / ſir Thomas Trybles / ſir Johan de Bourge / ſir Philippe Pecharde and the thre bretherne of Maluriers. So that or the ſeige were layde before them / thoſe two garyſons ouerran all the countre of baſe Normandy / ſo that no thyng was abrode but all in the fortereſſes. Alſo they raunſomed and toke priſoners in the byſſhopriche of Bayeux / and Deureux / and the kyng of Nauer was conſen
               
                  •
               yng

therto / for he conforted thē dyuers tymes bothe with mē and vitayle / ſuche as wer in his gariſons in the countie of Deureux / for he was nat acorded with the frenche kyng / ſo that the garyſons of Chierbourg / of Gouerell / of Couches / of Bretuell / of Deureux / and diuers other vnder the obeyſanuce of the kyng of Nauerr / had greatly enpouered and waſted the coūtre of Normādy. But in the ſametyme there was ſo good meanes made bytwene ye two kynges / and ſpecially by the labour of the erle of Sale bruſes / who had taken moche payne bytwene thē / and alſo the byſſhop of Deureux. and they dyde ſo moche / that they brought thē to acorde And ſo the two kynges mette togyder right amyable at the caſtell of Uernon on the ryuer of Sayne. And there were ſworne dyuers great lordes of Fraūce to kepe peace / loue / vnite / and cōfederacyon togyder for euer. And ſo ye kyng of Nauer went with the frenche kyng in to the realme of Fraunce / and there the kynge dyde hym moche honour and reuerence / and all his. And than & ther / the kyng of Nauer put all his landes of Normandy / into the handes and gouernynge of the frenche kyng / and leſt his two ſonnes Charles and Peter / with ye kyng their vncle. Than he departed & went backe agayne in to Nauerre. Thus this peace endured foue yeres / howbeit after ther fell agayne bytwene them great diſcorde: as ye ſhall herafter in the hyſtorie / if ye wyll loke therfore. Howe beit I thynke ther wyll none ende be made therof in this preſent boke. ¶ The .viii. day of May: the yere of our lorde a. M. thre. C .lxxiii. there paſſed out of this lyfe in the towne of Edenborowe kyng Dauyd of Scotlande / and was buryed in the abbay of Dōfre
                  ••
               lyn / beſyde kyng Robert de Bruſe his father. He dyed without ſonne or doughter / laufully begoten of his body. But ther was kyng after him by right ſucceſſyon a nephue of his / named Roberts who was ſeneſhall of Scotlande a goodly knyght / and he had a ſonne.
         
         
            ¶ Howe there were a certayn ordeyned in Englande to kepe the countre / and howe the erle of Saliſbury / william Neuyll / and Phillyp Courtnay with dyuers other men of armes / enterd in to the ſee: and landed in Bretayne. & howe the cōſtable of Fraūce went thyder & the duke of Bretayne went in to Englande. Cap. ccc .viii.
            
               THe ſame ſeſon it was ordeyned in Englande / to the entent to kepe the coūtre: that the erle of Saliſbury / Willyam Neuyll / and ſir Phylippe Courtnay / ſhuld take the ſee with a certayne nombre of men of warr. For it was ſayd howe that yuan of Wales was comynge by the ſee / with ſixe thouſande men / to lande and brenne in the countrey. The lordes of Englande hadde .xl. great ſhyppes beſyde barges / and two thouſande menne of armes beſyde archers. Thus they departed fro Cornewayle and there toke the ſee / and toke their way towarde Bretayne. And ſo came to ſaynt Malo the Iſle / and there brent in ye hauen before the towne a ſeuen great ſpayniſſhe ſhyppes / wherof all the countre had maruayle / and ſayd: howe they thought ſurelye / that the duke of Bretayne hadde cauſed them ſo to do. So in all townes caſtelles / and cyties / they had the duke in great ſuſpect: and than kepte more ſtrayter their fortereſſes / than they dyde before. The ſecretneſſe of the dukes mynde was dyſcouered / for certayne knightes of Bretayne / ſhewed dyuers wordes y• ſhulde be ſpoken by the duke. In ſo moche that the fr
                  •
                the kyng ordeyned his cōſtable to make a iourney into Bretayne cōmaūdyng hym to take in to his poſſeſſion / townes / cytes / caſtels / and for treſſes / & to ſeaſe all rebelles: bothe their goodꝭ and bodyes. The conſtable deꝑted fro Parys and went to Angiers / & there made his ſomōs. And thyder came the duke of Burbon / the erle of Alenſon / the erle of Perche / therle of Porceau / the dolphyn of Auuergne / the vicountes of Meaulx / and of Dauſnay / ſir Rafe of Coucy / Robert of ſaynt Poule / Rafs Rauenall / Loys of Sanſere marſhall of Fraunce / and a great nombre of the barony and chyualry of Uermā doyes / Artoyes and Pycardy / beſyde thē that came thyder of the marches of Aniou / Poitou / and Tourayn. And on the other patte the erle of Saliſbury and all his army / beyng at ſaint Malo the Iſle / knewe well of this frenche aſſemble / and ſawe well howe all the countrey of Bretayne was agaynſt the duke. And ſo depted fro thens with all hysſhyppes / and ſayled ſo long that he came to Breſt / whiche was one of the ſtrongeſt caſtelles in all the worlde / and whan the duke of Bretayne knewe of the conſtables comynge / he durſte truſt no lengar in them of Uennes and Dignan / nor in them beyng in any good towne in Bretayn. & though
                  •
               
               
y• if he were ones incloſed he ſhulde be in great ꝑll. And ſo he went to the caſtell of Alroy whiche is bitwene Uēnes and Renes / which helde of his parte / for he had made ruler there an englyſſhe knight / called ſir Johan Auguſtyne.
            The duke left his wyfe with him deſiring him to kepe her well / and the knyght promiſed him ſo to do. than the duke rode to ſaynt Mathues of fyne potern / but ye towne was cloſed againſt hym / from thens the duke went to Kouke / and there tokeſhyppynge: to thentent to arryue in Englande. So thus the conſtable of Fraunce entred in to Bretayne / & ther came in his company the lordes & knightes of Bretayne / ſuche as had ben at the ſiege before Bercerell / & they had left vp the ſiege to the lordꝭ of Normandy. and whan the conſtable was come before Reynes / they within who knew well he was come to ceaſe in to his handes for the frēche kyng / all the dukes landes / for the kynge and his counſayle ſayd: howe the duke had forfayted all his landes / bycauſe he had ſuſtayned the englyſſhmen his enemys / in his townes and caſtelles. And alſo that he him ſelfe tooke parte with the kyng of Englande agaynſt the erowne of Frā
               ce / of whome he helde his duchy of Bretayne / by faythe and homage. Wherfore they of Reynes thought to make no warre / but peaſeably ceceyued the conſtable / and knowledged hym for their lorde in the name of the frenche kyng. And whan the conſtable had the poſſeſſyon of Reynes / than he roode haſtely to the towne of Dignan / the whiche yelded vp to be vnder the obeyſaunce of the frenche kyng. Than the conſtable went before the cyte of Uēnes / the which alſo yelded vp / than he went to Luzemont / the which was aſſayled & taken by force / & all they wtin ſlayne. than the cōſtable wēt to Jugon the whiche put thē ſelfe vnder the obeyſance of the frenche kynge. In lyke wyſe dyde the caſtell of Gouy and ye foreſt / and the Roch 
                  •
               yen / and the towne of Guigante / ſaynt Mathewe of Fyne Poterne and ſaynt Malo the Iſle. than after the conſtable went to Quipercorentyn / and it tourned alſo french / and after Campelly / and Credo / Galande / and dyuers other fortereſſes there about. Fyrſt the conſtable ouerran Breton bretouant / bycauſe always it enclyned tather to the duke Johan of Mountfortes parte / than Breton gallet. And as ye haue herde here before / whan the duke went in to Englande / he ſet ſir Robert Canoll to be gouernour of all ye duchy / howbeit ther were but a fewe lordꝭ that obeyed to him. Neuertheles he furniſſhed wel his caſtell of Dyriuall / and gaue the kepynge therof to a coſyn of his / called ſir Hughe Broit and ſir Robert went to Breſt. Than the cōſtable wēt to Hanybout / and capitayne therin vuder the duke was a ſquier of England / named Thomelyn Ubyche alſo therin was a knight ſent by ſir Robert Canoll / called ſir Thomas Priour and they were a fourſcore / what one & other. And aſſone as the frēchmen were come thyder they beganne to aſſayle the caſtell / and brought with them thyder fro dyuers places / certayne engyns and great gonnes / wherwith they had won dyuers caſtelles and fortereſſes and ſpecially the towne of Cāpelly was taken / wherof James Roſſe a ſquire of Englāde was capitayne / and he coude nat be taken to mercy / for he fell in the hādes of ſir Olyuer of Cliſſon who ſlewe him with a glayue and alſo he ſlewe dyuers other with his handꝭ for he had no pyte nor mercy of any englyſſhman / that fell in his daunger.
            NOwelet vs retourn to the ſiege of Hanibout. The conſtable of Fraunce / who had cauſed his engins to be reared vp agaynſt the towne and caſtell / and went to the ſaut and ſware yt he woldeſuppe in the caſtell: and they within defended them ſelfe valyauntly. Than the cōſtable ſayd / ſirs: ye that be within / it is of certayne that we ſhall cōquere you / for we wyll ſuppe this night within the towne. Knowe for trouthe / yt if any of you caſt ſtonne or quarell / wherby that the leeſt of our cōpany be hurt / I make myne auowe to god / ye ſhall all leſe your lyues. Whiche wordes abaſſhed ſo them of the towne / that they went into their houſes and let the englyſſhmen alone / who defēded themſelfe ryght valyauntly / as longe as they myght endure. But the towne was ſo great / that the englyſſhmen coulde nat take hede of euery place. So the frenchemen entred in to the towne and all the engliſſhmen ſlayne: except the two capitayns / who were taken. And bycauſe that they within the towne obeyed the conſtables commaūdement / he therfore cōmaunded that none ſhuld be ſo hardy to do any maner of domage.
            ¶ Whan the conſtable of Fraūce had thus conquered the towne and ſtronge caſtell of Hanybout he taryed ther. xv. dayes / than he went to the towne Kouke. And in ye meane tyme therle of Saliſbuty / ſir Wyllm̄ Neuyll / ſir Bertram Stapleton / and ſir Wylliam Luzy / who hadd newe refreſſhed the fortereſſe of Breeſt / bothe with men of armes / archers / artyllery / and vitayle tokeſhippyng: to thentent to defende the

countre / for the frēchmen were ſtyll in the felde in Bretayne / and ye ſayd engliſſhmen wyſt nat whyder the cōſtable wolde brawe. but whan ye cōſtable cāe before the towne of Kouke / whiche was a hauen towne / he wan it byforce of aſſaut and the engliſſhmen ſlayne that were wihin it / except the capitayne / named ſir John̄ Langay who was taken to mercy. This towne ye frēchmen newe repayred / than they drewe all to the towne of Breſt / wher the lorde Neuyll and ſir Robert Canoll were who had with them a. C. men of armes / & as many archers. And ſo ye lordes of Fraūce & of Bretayn beſeged the towne with a .vi. M. fyghting men / and as ſoone as they had layd theſiege / they ſent 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Olyuer Chſſon in the name of the duke of Aniou with a certayne nōbre with him / to go and lay ſege to the Roche ſur yon / which thenglyſſhmen kept / & ſo the lorde Clyſſon beſieged the towne rounde about. & reared vp dyuers engyns / whiche was brought him fro Angiers and Poiters / & with the bretons there cāe thyder dyuers noble men and gētylmen of Aniou & of Poictou / and ſo aſſauted it / and ſayd. howe they wolde nat deꝑte thens tyll they had it. And ye ſame tyme ye duke of Aniou / often tymes refreſſhed thē that lay at theſege / with vitayle & other thyngꝭ. And ſtyll the conſtable lay at ſege before Breſt / and with him the duke of Burbon / the erles of Alenſon / of Piergourt / of Dolphyn / of Auuergne / & byuers other lordes of Fraūce: but they wanther but a lytell / for Breſt was one of the ſtrōgeſt caſtels in the worlde / and bicauſe that ſir Robert Canoll was capitayne / and was there within / the lordes of Fraunce determyned to ſend and ley ſiege to his caſtell of Duriuall. & ſo thyder went dyuers lordꝭ of Bretayne and Tourayn with four hundred fightynge men.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frenchmen laye at 
                  •
               iege at four ſundry places all a tones / and howe they of Roche ſuryon / yelded them ſelfe and became frenche: And howe the englyſſhmen came before Breſt. Cap. CCC .ix.
            
               THus the lordes of Fraūce helde a / tones four ſeges. One before Bercerell / another before Breſt / the 
                  〈◊〉
               . before Roch ſur yon / and the .iiii. before Duriuall: & to eche of theſe was made many a great aſſaut. They within Roche ſur you / who were fartheſt of fro any copany or cōfort / made a compoſycion with their enemys / that wtout they were ſocoured within the ſpace of a moneth / they ſhulde deꝑte & put ye caſtell vnder the obeyſance of the french kyng. At whiche day / the lorde Clyſſon and the other knyghtes of his cōpany cāe thyder / & whan no reſcue cāe to reyſe their ſiege / the caſtell yelded vp / and thenglyſſhmen deꝑted / vnder the ſaue conduct of the lorde of Pons / & ſo went to Burdeur. Than the lorde Clyſſon & the other went from thens to the ſiege before Duryuall / and brought with thē great engins. And alſo to the ſameſege cāe the conſtable of Fraūce / the duke of Burbon / therles of Alenſon & of Perche / & a great nōbre of the barony & cheualry of Frāce. For they thought they dyde but loſe their tyme with lyeng before Breſt: howbeit they left ſtyll ther a two. M. and they fortifyed thē ſelfe in a place to kepe the wayes / y• non ſhulde entre nor iſſue out of Breſt / to refreſſh the fortreſſe. And whan ſir Broes & they within Duryuall / ſawe thē ſelfe ſo ſore oppreſſed / they douted greatly the takyng of their fortreſſe. Than they deuyſed a treaty to haue reſpyte for two monethes / ſo that without they were reſcued by the duke of Bretayne / or by ſome other / able to kepe the felde / & to reyſe the ſiege within the ſayd ſpace / 
                  〈◊〉
                to yelde vp the fortereſſe to the duke of Aniou or to the conſtable / & if men of armes came fro ye duke of Bretayne to cooſt the frenchmen / than they within to ſitte ſtyll in reſt and peace. This treaty was put for the and ſhewed to the duke of Aniowe and he agreed / ſo that they of Duryuall / durynge the ſayd terme / ſhulde nat take into their fortreſſe no more ayde nor help. Than ſir Broes delyuered certayne gētylmen knyghtꝭ and ſquiers for hoſtagꝭ in y• behalfe / & ſo after this treaty and cōpoſycion / the cōſtable rode to Naūtes / and they of the cytie ſhyt faſt their gates agaynſt him / bycauſe he came with ſuche a great army / and ſo they ſent to hym to knowe his entēcyon. The conſtable / anſwered and ſayd: howe he was ſent thyder by ye french kyng their lord / to take poſſeſſion in his name of the duchy of Bretayn / and that ſir Johan of Mountforte / who calleth hym ſelfe duke / hath forfayted it. Thā the burgeſſes of Naūtes demaunded to take counſayle / & than to anſwer. and whā they had long counſayled / they came forthe and ſayde. Sir: it is great meruayle to vs / that ye thus take the herytage of our lorde the duke for the frenche kyng / who commaunded

vs to receyue hym as our duke and lorde / and to hym we haue ſwerne fealtie & homage / and he hath ſworne to vs to gouerne vs as his ſubgettes. Thus haue we taken hym / and we knowe no cauſe in him of fraude or ſuſpection. Ifye cóe in to this towne by the vertue of ſuche procuraryon as ye haue / we agre that ye ſhall entre by condicyon. So that if it hap that the duke of Bretayne our lorde retourne in to this countre and wyll become frenche: than all prelates barones / gentylmen / & the good townes of Breten / all we to knowlege him as our lord and thā we to be quyte without domage / nowe or any other tyme. and alſo ye to receyue no rē
               tes nor reuenues of Bretayn / but let them ſtyll remayne in our handꝭ: vntyll ſuche tyme / that we haue other tydinges: y• whiche ſhalbe more agreable to vs than this. The conſtable ſware to thē to fulfyll all this / as procurer of the frēch kyng in that caſe. Thus the cōſtable entred in to the rytie of Nauntes / which was chiefe cytie of Bretayne / and all his company.
            WHan ſir Robert Canoll / who was ſouerayne of Breeſt / vnderſtode howe ſir Hugh Broes his coſyn / had made compoſycion of the fortreſſe of Duryuall with the frenchmen: & ſawe well howe he coulde nat departe fro thens ther as he was / to go and cō
               fort his caſtell of Duriuall / wtout ſo be he wolde make a cōpoſycion in lyke caſe. Than he began to treat with the frēchmen / that were there before Breſt / and they anſwered: that without the cōſtable they coude do nothyng. Than two knightes & two ſquyers of Englande had ſaue cōducte / and went to the conſtable beſyde Naū
               tes / wher as he lay by the ryuer of Loyre / with great copany of Fraūce and of Bretayne. And ſo this treaty toke ſuche effect / yt they of Breſt had reſpite for .xl. dayes: ſo that wtin that ſpace they ſhulde beſo conforted with men of warte / able to fyght with the conſtable / or els to yelde vp the fortereſſe. And in the meane ſeaſon they of Breſt / to abyde ſtyll in the ſame caſe as they were thā in / without reuitaylyng or enforſyng any thyng of their fortreſſe. Than the meſſangers retourned agayne to ſir Robert Canoll / and he ſent ſufficyent men bothe knightes and ſquiers to the conſtable for hoſtage. Than the conſtable put them in priſon / and all they yt had ben at the ſiege before Breſt departed: the conſtable gaue them lycence. And the frenche king ſent for them to fortifye the cyties / townes / caſtels / and fortreſſes in Picardy / for the duke of Lancaſtre was aryued at Calais with a great armye.
            
               WHan the erle of Saliſbury / who was on the ſee: and had all yt ſeaſon kept the fronters of Bretayne & Normādy / and alſo the kyng of Englande had newly reconforted them with a thouſande men of armes and two thouſande archers. Whan he vnderſtode the cō
               poſycion of them of Breſt / he ſayd: that with goddes grace he wolde fight with the frenchemen / and he ſayled ſo longe that he arryued at Breſt. Than he toke lande and all his cōpany before Breſt / and euery night went agayne to his ſhyppes / and euery daye raynged in batell to fight with his enemyes if they brewe thider. The conſtable / who had gyuen lycence to the mooſt parte of his cōpany / and helde ſtyll two ſieges: one before Bercerell / and the other before Duryuall: and thought full lytell that the erle of Saliſbury wolde haue come thyder / ſo ſtrongly as he dyde. Than he departed fro the marches of Nauntes / whan the day of the delyueraunce of Breſt dyde aproche: howe be it whā the day came he went nat thyder / for than he had knowledge howe the engliſſhmen were there with ſuche a ſtrengthe / able to fyght with hym. therfore he thought to warke by great & ſadde aduyſe / and ſo he dyd (for he taryed ſtyll there he was / & remoued nat) and ther taryed a .vii. dayes or more. & whan therle of Saliſbury beyng before Breeſt / hadde taken a place of grounde for his auauntage / And ſawe that the conſtable of Fraunce nor the bretons came nat forwarde / he ſent thyder an haraude / who whan he came before the conſtable / ſayd. Sir / the erle of Saliſbury & the lordes of England ſend you worde by me / who am an haraude of armes / how that before this tyme / ye haue layd ſiege before the caſtell and towne of Breſt. ſir / my lordes and maiſters vnderſtand / howe certayne compoſycions and treatyes were made / bitwene you and them of the towne / that if they were nat comforted by the daye lymytted / the whiche is nat nowe long vnto that they ſhulde yeld vp the towne and caſtell to you. Wherfore ſir. maye it pleaſe you to knowe / they be come before Breeſt to kepe their day / and to defende their fortreſſe. Therfore ſir / they deſyre you to drawe forwarde / and ye ſhalbe fought withall without dout / and if ye wyll nat / than they deſyre you to ſende them agayne ſuche hoſtages as ye haue for that entent. Than the conſtable

ſayde / haraulde: ye bringe vs good tidynges / wherfore ye be welcōe. ye ſhall ſay to your mayſters: howe we haue greatter deſyre to ſyght with thē / than they haue to fight with vs / how beit they be nat in that place / where the treaty was made and agreed vnto. Therfore ſaye to them / that lette theym drawe to that parte and place / and without fayle they ſhall be ſought withall. Than the haraud retourned to Breſt and dyde his meſſage / and than they ſent hym agayne to the conſtable with another meſſage and whan he came there / he ſayd. Sir / I am cōe agayne to you fro my lordes and maiſters / to whome I haue ſhewed euery thynge / as ye cōmaunded me to ſay / whan I was with you laſt. How be it ſir: nowe they ſay howe they be men of the ſee lately cōe thens / & haue brought no horſe with them. and ſir / they ſay they haue nat ben acuſtomed to go farre a fote / wherfore they ſende you worde that if ye wyll ſende thē your horſes / they wyll come to what place ye wyll apoynt them to fyght with you / & to kepe their day. Fayre fared ꝙ the conſtable: we are nat in mynde / to do to our enemys ſomoche auantage / as to ſend to thē our horſes: it ſhulbe be reputed for a great outrage and if we were ſo mynded to do / we wolde deman̄de good hoſtages and ſufficient / to anſwere vs of our horſes agayne. Sir ꝙ the haraud / I haue no ſuche commaūdement to anſwere to that mater / Howe beit ſir / they ſay that if ye wyll nat agre to this poynte: ye haue no lawfull cauſe to retayne ſtyll the hoſtages that yehaue. Therfor ſir: and yeſend thē / ye do as ye ſhulde do. The cōſtable ſayd he was nat abuyſed ſo to do. So retourned the haraude to the erle of Saliſbury and his company / before Breſt. And whan they vnderſtode that they ſhulde nat be fought wall / nor their hoſtages delyucred / they were ſore dyſpleaſed. Howe be it they taryed there ſtyll without remouyng / tyll the day was expyred / and parceyued well how the conſtable cāe nat to fight with them. Than they entred in to Breſt and newe reuitayled the towne / and refreſſhed greatly the fortreſſe. And on the other ꝑte whan the conſtable ſawe that the englyſſhmen cāe nat forwarde to fyght with hym / than he deꝑted and toke the hoſtages with him. and ſayd: how they were his priſoners (for he ſaid) that the englyſſhmen and they of Breſt / hadde nat kept truely their apoyntment / in reſcuyng of Breſt / bycauſe the erle of Saliſbury hadde newly refreſſhed and vitayled y• fortreſſe. And ſo than the erle of Saliſbury deꝑted fro Breſt and entred agayne in to his ſhippes / to kepe y• marches and fronters / as he was commytted to do. And alſo ſir Robert Canoll whan he departed fro Breſt he went ſtreight to his owne fortereſſe of Duryuall. And aſſoone as he was come in to the caſtell (it was ſhewed to y• duke of Aniou) and to the cōſtable / beyng as than in Nauntes. They ſuppoſed than / as it fortuned after / for ſir Robert Canoll brake all the treatie and apoyntment before made / and renounſed them all. And ſend worde to the duke of Aniou and to the conſtable / that he wolde kepe no ſuch apoyntmeut / as his men had made in his abſence without his leaue: ſayeng they had no ſuche authorite ſo to do. Whan the duke herde that / he came ꝑſonally to the ſege of Duriuall.
         
         
            ¶Howe dyuers englyſſhmen were ſlayne and diſconfited by the lorde of Soubyſe before Ribamont / & howe the garyſons of Soiſſons diſcōfyted the englyſſhmen. Cap. C C C .x.
            
               AT Calais there aryued the duke of Lancaſtre and y• duke of Bretayne / and mo than thre thouſande men of armes / and .x. thouſande archers englyſſhmen / whiche voyage had ben ordayning and imagenynge thre yere before. There was with theym: the erles of Warwyke / of Stafforde and of Suffolke. The lorde Edwarde Spcuſar / one of the greatteſt barones of Englande / and conſtable for that tyme of all the hooſt: and the lordes of Wylloughby / of Pole / of Baſſet / of Hubelles / of Holenton / ſir Henry Percy / Loys Clyfforde / Wylliam Beauchāpe / Chanoyne Roberſart / Water Hewet / Hughe Carleton / Stephyn Goſenton / Rychard Pōt chardon / and dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers of England / whōe I can nat all name. The french kyng / who knewe right well the paſſage of theſe englyſſhmen: prouyded ſufficyētly for the ſure kepyng of his townes / cyties / fortereſſes / and caſtelles: in Picardy / in Artoys / and in Uermandoyſe. And hadde ſet in them men of warreꝭ as bretons / burgonyons / pycardes / normayus / and dyuers other ſoudyers of the empyre.

Thus theſe englyſſhmen departed fro Calais / after they had aparelled their caryages / wherof they had great plenty: ſo they rode forthe in thre batayls aſwell ordred as coude be deuiſed Firſt ye batayle wt the marſhals / wherof the erles of Warwyke and of Suffolke were chefe: and than the two dukes / of Lancaſtre & of Bretayne and with them a noble cōpany. And the thyrde batayle led the conſtable the lorde Spē
                  ſer / and all thre batayls marched forwarde / kepyng themſelfe cloſe togyder: alwayes in harneſſe redy to fight / if they founde with whome. And euery night they lay togider & made gode wache / and went neuer paſt thre leages a day. None went before the marſhals baners without cōmaūdement / and ſo they paſſed by Motrell: wherof the lorde of Handboure was capitayne but they made ther none aſſaut / & ſo paſt by ſaynt Omer / & after by Turwyn. The currours brent the lande of therle of ſaynt Poule / and than went nere to Arras. And the two dukes lodged in the abbey of mount ſaynt Eloy / and ther taryed two dayes. Than they departed and coſted Arras / but they aſſayled it nat: for they knewe well they ſhulde but leſe their labour. and ſo they went to Bray on the ryuer of Some / & ther the two marſhals made a great aſſaut before the gate. Within ther were in garyſon good knightes & ſquyers of Picardy / of whome the vicont of Mealx was capitayne / & ſir Rafe of Menac. The chanon of Roberſart that day ſtrake downe with his glayue thre to the erthe before the gate / where ther was a ſore ſcrimyſſhe. Howbeit the frēchmen kept ſo well their fortereſſe that they loſt nothynge / & ſo the englyſſhmen paſſed by / cooſtynge the ryuer of Some / thynking to paſſe ouer at Ham in Uermandois / & at ſaynt Quintynes.
            THus went forthe thenglyſſhe hoſt / wher of the duke of Lancaſtre was chefe gouernour / by the ordynaūce of the kyng of England his father. Than the lorde Bouſyers of Heynalte cāe in to Fraūce and he paſſed by the bridge of Ham: & there they of the towne deſyred him effectuouſly yt he wolde be reteyned wt thē / and to helpe to ayde thē agaynſt thenglyſh men / & he agreed to them / and ther he taryed a two dayes / tyll the englyſſhmen were all paſt / who toke their way aboue to entre into vermā doys / & to paſſe the ryuer of Some / at a ſtrayter paſſage. And whan the lorde of Bouſyers knewe that thenglyſſhmen were nygh all paſt ouer / & howe yt they drue towarde ſaynt Quintynes and Rybamont / wher the lorde of Clyn (whoſe doughter he had in mariage) was: the which lorde had ther fayre lande & herytage. & alſo he had hym ſelf ther fayre lande by ye right of his wyfe / and knewe well how the caſtell of Rybamont was vnpurueyed of men of warr. Than he toke leaue of them of Ham / and they greatly thanked him of his ſeruice that he had done to them: ſo he departed with ſuche nombre as he had / whiche was no great nōbre. and he rode ſo long that he came to ſaynt Quintynes in great parell / for the countrey was full of englyſſhmen. He came in ſuche danger / that he was no ſoner entred / but that the engliſſhe currours chaſed hym in at the gate. And the lorde of Bouſyers founde in the towne ſir Wylliam of Bourges / who was capitayne there / vnder the french kyng who receyued him ioyouſly deſyring hym to a byde there / to helpe to defende the towne. The lorde of Bouſiers excuſed him ſelfe / and ſayde: howe he hadde enterpriſed to enter in to the towne of Rybamont / to kepe the towne and fortreſſe there / bycauſe it was with out capitayne / wherfore he deſyred ſo ſore the ſayd ſir Wylliam / that he hadde of hym out of ſaynte Quintynes .xii. croſ bowes / and ſo departed / and he went nat farre paſt / but that he ſpyed a company of englyſſhmen / but he toke another lowe way beſide thē for he knewe well the countre. So the ſame day he rode in great parell towardes Rybamount / and as he rode he encoūtred a knight of Burgoyne / called ſir Johan of Bulle / who was goynge towardes ſaynt Quitynes / but whan he had ones ſpoken with the lorde of Bouſyers / he retourned with hym to Rybamount / and ſo they were about a .xl. ſpeares and .xx. croſbowes. And thus they aproched Rybamont / & ſent before one of their currours to enforme them of the towne of their comyng to helpe to ayde / and to defende their towne. And in ye meane ſeaſon they ſawe wher there was comyng a company of engliſſhmen / to the nombre of fourſcore. Than the frenchemen ſayd / beholde: yōder be our enemys / who are comynge fro their pyllage / let vs go before them. Than they daſſhed their ſpurres to their horſe ſydes and galopped forthe as faſt as they might / cryeng our lady of Rybamont. And ſo came in amonge the englyſſhmen / and diſconfyted and ſlewe the mooſt parte of theym / for he was happy that myght eſcape. And whan the frenchemen / hadde thus ouerthrowen the englyſſhmen / they went to Rybamont / where they founde the lorde of Chyne / who was come

thyder but a lytell before with .xl. ſpeares / and xxx. croſbowes. And as they were before the caſtell / and their company in their lodgyngꝭ vnarmed / they herde the watchman of the caſtell cryeng to harneſſe ſirs / mē of armes aprocheth your towne. Than they drewe togyder / and demaunded of the watchman what nōbre by like lyhode they were of / he anſwered & ſayd: howe they were aboute the nombre of fourſcore men of armes. than the lorde Bouſyers / ſayd. ſirs it behoueth vs to go out and fyght with them / for it ſhuld be a great blame to vs / to ſulfre thē goby ſo nere to our fortreſſe. The lord of Chin ſayd / a fayre ſonne: ye ſay trouthe / cauſe oure horſes to cōe out and diſplay my baner. Than ſir John̄ of Bulle ſayd / lordes ye ſhall nat go without me. but my counſayleis y• we go wyſe lye / for parauenture they be but currours / whiche the marſhalles of Englande / or the conſtable hath ſent hyder / to cauſe vsto go out of our fortreſſe: our iſſuyng parauentur may tourne to folly. The lorde Bouſiers ſayd / if ye wyll be leue me / we ſhall go out and fight with them / 
                  〈◊〉
                that brefely: happe what may befall / I wyll go out and fight with theym. And ſo dyde on his helme and lepte on his horſe and ſo yſſued out / and with hym a ſixſcore / and the englyſſhmen were about fourſcore and they were of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hugh Caurelles company / but he was nat there hymſelfe / he was ſtyll with the duke of Lancaſtre. Howbeit there were ſixe knightes & many ſquiers / and they were come thyder to reuēge their companye / that were ouerthrowen before. As ſoone as the frenchemen were out of the gate / they founde incontynent the engliſſhmen / who couched their ſpeares and ranne in among the frenchmen / and the frenchmen opyned and let them paſſe through them / & ſo they dyd: wherby there roſe ſuche a duſt / that one coude nat ſe nor knowe another. Than the frenchmen cloſed them ſelfe agayne toguyder / and cryed our lady of Rybamont: there was many a man ouerthrowen on bothe ꝑtes. The lorde of Chyn had a plummet of leed in his hande / wherwith he brake baſſenetes / ſuche as he attayned vnto for he was a bygge and a goodly knyght / and well formed of all his membres. At laſt he had ſuche a ſtroke on the helme / that he had nere fallen / and a ſquyer had nat kept hym vp / whiche ſtroke greued hym after as longe as he lyued. Ther were dyuers englyſſhmen had gret marueyle / in y• they ſaw his penonſemblable to the armes / without difference of the lorde Coucy / and ſayd. Howe is it: that y• lorde Coucy hath ſent men hyder to be agaynſt vs / and he ought to be our frende. So ther was a harde batell: howe be it finally the englyſſhmen were taken and ſlayne / but fewe y• ſcaped. The lorde Bouſiers had priſoners / two bretherne of Pennenort / a knight and a ſquyer. And ſir Johan of Bulle had other two priſoners / than they went to Rybamont foreby the englyſſhe hooſt / withoute any ſcrimyſſhe. And alſo they forbare to brenne in the lande of the lorde Coucy / or to do any domage there / who was as than in Lombardy / and medlyd nothyng with the warr of Fraunce. Than the englyſſhmen went and loged in the valeys vnder Laon / and ther about Brueres and Creſcy. And they dyd moche domage in the countre of Lonnoys / howbeit before that tyme / the frenche kyng had cauſed all the goodes in the playne countre to be had into the fortereſſes / townes / and caſtelles / whiche were ſo well prouyded for / that the engliſſmen coude haue none aduantage / to aproche to aſſayle any of them. And alſo the englyſſhemen were nat in mynde to enploy their ſeaſon ther about / for they had rather that y• frenche kyng had ſente downe power of men to haue fought with them / but the frenche kyng alwayes commaunded in no wyſe to gyue them batayle / but wolde that they ſhulde be euer purſued / & kept ſhorte. And euery night the frenchmen laye in fortreſſes / and in the day purſued thenglyſſhe hoſt / who went euer cloſe toguyder.
            SO it happed that beyonde Soiſſous in a mornyng / a ſixſcore of thenglyſſhe ſperes ran ouer the countre / & came within the dā
               ger of a buſſhment of burgonyons & frēchmen wherof ſir John̄ of Uyen / John̄ Bulle / Wyllyam Bordes / Hugh Porcien / John̄ of Coucy the vycont of Mealx / the lordes of Rauenall & of Bone were capitens / & dyuers other. They were a thre. C. ſpeares alwayes coſtyng to get auātage of thēgliſhmen. The ſame night they had lyen in the felde & made their buſhment in a lytell wode in Soiſſons / and thenglyſſhmen cāe in the mornynge to ſeke for pyllage / & their hoſt was lodged behynde them: and whan the englyſſhmen were paſt / the frenchmen cāe out of their buſſhment & diſplayed their baners & penons. And whan thēgliſſhmen ſawe yt great company ſo nere them / they reſted and toke aduyſe / and ſent to their hooſt behynde thē / whiche was a longe leage fro them. And ſir Gaultyer / who was a great capitayne was nat farr thens / and whan he herde therof / he lept vpon his horſe in great haſte / his ſpeare in his fyſte / 

without 
                  •
               a
                  ••
               enet or vyſer: and ſo rode thyderwarde without aduyſe or coūſayle / his men ſolowed after as faſt as they might / and ſo ī that fray he was ſtryken through the necke / and ſo he fell downe deed. Thēglyſſhmen fought valiantly / but finally they were ſlayne and taken fewe eſcaped. There were taken of englyſſhe knightes priſoners: ſir John̄ Radwyn / Thomas Faulque / Hughe Bromewell / Thomas Spenſer / Thomas Ebreton / Nycholl Gaſcoyne / John̄ Candley / Philyppe of Cambrey / Hughe Harpe / Done Lyonet Dautryne / and ſquyers Johan Galarde / Thomas Brudlay / Henry Mamefort / Guy Chuet / Wyllm̄ Dautry / John̄ Menet / Antyquē / Wylliam Gauſull John̄ of Fōbret / Tomelyn Solerant / Wyllm̄ Quiteuyn Robert Bouchell / Ro. daudley / Rafe Stanby / & Thomas Arthus. Tydingꝭ came in to the englyſſhe hooſt / howe their company were fightynge: than the marſhals made haſt to remoue the hooſt to that parte / but he coude nat ſo ſoone auaunce / but that the mater was paſt and done / and the burgonyons and frēchmen withdrawen withall their priſoners / ſo y• the englyſſhmen wyſt nat where to ſeke them. Thus it fell of the encountre (as I was enformed) whiche was nere to Douchy beſyde Soiſſons: the .xx. day of February / the yere of our lorde a thouſande thre. C. threſcore and .xiii.
            ¶ After theſe two iourneys of Rabymont and Douchy / there fell none aduenture to the duke of Lancaſtre in the realme of Fraūce / that any mencyon ought to be made of. The englyſſhemen paſſed many a ſtrayte paſſage / but alway they rode wiſely and cloſe togyder. The frēche kynges counſayle / ſayd to the kyng / Sir: lette them go on / for finally they can nat attayne to your heritage. They ſhall wery them ſelfe and all for nought / for often tymes whan a ſtorme or tempeſt ryſeth in a countre / at laſt it waſteth away by it ſelfe. In lykewiſe ſo ſhall it be ſene by theſe englyſſhmen.
         
         
            ¶ How the hoſtages that were layd by them of Duriuall were beheeded and howe ſir Robert Canolle beheeded agayne / all ſuche priſoners as he had: And alſo of the duke of Lancaſtres iourney. Cap. CCC .xi.
            
               LE haue well herde here before / howe ſir Robert Canoll was come to his caſtell of Duryuall / ye whiche he helde as his owne herytage / and brake the treaty yt was made bytwene his men and the duke of Aniou wherfore the duke came thyder to the ſiege / for the duke claymed it as his owne enherita. and he had with him a great company of lordꝭ and knightes: of Bretayne / of Poictou / and of the lowe marches. The french kyng wolde his cō
               ſtable / ye lorde Clyſſon / and other yt were there ſhulde returne in to Fārce / to ayde his brother the duke of Burgoyne to purſue the englyſſhe men. Heſent often to them of the caſtell of Duryuall to obey to him / and to let hym haue poſſeſſyon of the caſtell. And whan the daye was paſt / that the caſtell ſhulde haue ben delyuerd / yet they lay ſtyll at ſiege and hadde great marueyle what they within thought. They knewe well that ſir Robert Canoll was entred into the caſtell / and had newe refreſſhed it. Than theſe dukes and lordꝭ ſent a haraude to ſir Robert Canoll and to ſir Hughe Broes / who had made before the treatie with them. And whan the haraulde was come in to the fortereſſe / he ſayd. Sirs / my lordes hath ſente me hyder to you / to knowe the cauſe why ye do nat acquyte your hoſtages / and delyuer this caſtell / as the couenant was: & as ye ſir Hugh haue ſworne. Than ſir Robert Canoll / ſayd. Haraude / ſay vnto your maiſters: howe that my men coude make no compoſycion / without me or myne agrement. Returne to them and ſhewe them ſo. The haraude retourned / and recounted to his lordes all that ſir Robert Canoll had ſaid. and ſo they ſent hym agayne with a newe meſſage / and whan he was there / he ſayd. Sirs / my lordes yet ſendeth you worde by me / that the compoſycion was / y• they ſhulde receyue in to their fortereſſe no perſon / tyll the day that was prefixed. And ſithe that tyme and before their day they haue receyued you / ſir Robert Canoll into their fortreſſe / which they ought nat to haue done. Therfore ſir / knowe for trouther y• without ye yelde vp the caſtell / your hoſtages ſhall be beheeded. Sir Robert anſwered / by god haralde / for all the manyſſhing of your maiſters I wyll nat ſo leſe my caſtell. And if ſo be y• the duke cauſe my men to dye / I ſhall ſerue him in lyke caſe / for I haue here within / bothe knightes and ſquyers priſoners: & though I myght haue for them / a hundred. M. frankes / I wyll ſaue neuer a one of thē. And whan the haraude

was departed / and hadde made his reporte. The duke of Aniou called forthe the hangman and made to be brought forthe the hoſtagꝭ two knightes and aſquier / and cauſed their heedes to be ſtryken of / nere to the caſtell / ſo that they within might ſe it / and knowe it. Incontynent ſir Robert Canoll made a borde to be put out of a wyndowe of the hall / and brought thyder four priſoners that he had / thre knightes and a ſquyer / for whome he might haue hadde great raūſome. But he made their four heedes to be ſtryken of / and dyde caſt them downe into the dykes / the bodyes one way / and their heedes a nother way. Than they brake vp their ſiege / & all maner of men went into Fraūce / and namely the duke of Aniou went to Parys to ye kyng his brother. The conſtable / the lorde Clyſſon / and other rode toward the cyte of Troyes / for the englyſſhmen were in that marches / & were paſſed ye ryuer of Marne / and toke their waye towarde Anxere. The ſame tyme pope Gregory the .xi. had ſent into Fraūce in legacyon / the archbyſſhoppe of Rohan / and the byſſhoppe of Carpentras / for to treat for a peace yf it might be / bytwene the frenche kyng and the kynge of Englande. Theſe prelates had moche laboure to ryde in and out / bytwene the frenche kynge and his bretherne / and the duke of Lancaſtre: but alwayes the englyſſhmen rode forthe / thorough the countreis of Foreſtes / of Auuergne of Limoſyn / and the ryuer of Loyre / to Dordone / and to Lothe. Thenglyſſhmen were nat all at their eaſe in that iourney: nor in lykewiſe were nat the frenchmen / that folowed and coſted them. In the which purſute ther dyed thre knightes of Heynault: ſir Fateres of Berlaumount / Bridoll of Montague / and the begue of Uerlan: and alſo of the englyſſhe part there dyed ſome. Solonge the dukes of Lancaſtre and of Bretayne rode forwarde / that they cam to Bergerath a four leages fro Burdeux. And alwayes the frenchmen had purſued them: the duke of Aniou and the cōſtable rode aboue / towarde Rouuergue / Roddes / and Tholouſe / & were come to Pyergourt. And ther the two for ſayd prelates reſted / and rode euer prechynge bytwene the parties: and layed many reaſons to bring them to acorde / but both parties were ſo harde that they wolde nat condiſcende to no peace / without a great aduātage. and ſo about chriſtmas / the duke of Lancaſtre came to Burdeux / and ther bothe dukes lay all that wynter and the lent folowynge / and ſome of his company departed. Whan the iourney was paſte: there retourned in to Englande the lorde Baſſet and his company / wherwith the kyng was nat content: but reproued hym / bycauſe he retourned and nat the duke his ſonne.
            THan anone after the feeſt of Eaſter / the yere of our lorde god. a thouſande thre hundred and .xiii. The duke of Aniou beynge at Pyergourt aſſembled a great army / & with hym was the conſtable of Fraunce / and ye moſt parte of all the barones and knyghtes of Bretayne / of Poictou / of Aniou / and of Tourayne Alſo there was of Gaſcoyne / ſir Johan of Armynake / the lordes: Dalbret / and Pyergourt The erles of Comynges / and of Narbone / the vycountes / of Carmayne / Uyllemure / and of Thalare / the erle Dolphyn of Auuergne / and the mooſt parte of the lordes of Auuergne and of Limoſyn / the vycount of Myndone / the lordes de la Barde / and Pyergourt / and ſir Robert de Charde. They were a .xv. thouſande menne a foote: and alſo they had a great nombre of geneways & croſ bowes / and tooke their way towardes highe Gaſcoyne / and came before ſaynt Syluere: wherof an abbot was lorde. Howe beit that there was a ſtronge towne yet the abbot douted y• he ſhulde loſe it by force Therfore he fell in a treaty with ye duke of Aniou / for he thought nother hym ſelfe nor his lā
               de ſhulde abyde the warre / nor be in the dukes indygnacion. Sayeng to him / how his town nor fortreſſe was but a ſmall thynge / as in regard of the townes & caſtels in hygh Gaſcone / whyder he ſuppoſed ye duke was goyng. Therfore he deſyred hym to leue him in reſt & peace / by certayne compoſycion / y• he nor none of his men ſhulde make any warre / ſo that non were made to him: and alſo to do in lyke maner / as herytours and lordes of Gaſcoyne dyde. The duke accorded to hym / and hadde hoſtages in that behalfe: and ſent them to be kepte in Pyergourt. Than all the hoole hooſt / wherof the duke of Anio we was chiefe: drewe towardes Mount Marſen / and to the towne of Lourde in highe Gaſcone / wherof ſir Arnold de Uyre was capitayne. Than the frēchmen layd ſiege therto / and demaunded if they wolde yelde thē vp to the duke of Aniowe. They of the towne were ſoone agreed therto / but the knyght that kept it / ſayde: howe the erle of Foiz delyuered hym the place / wherfore he ſayde: he wolde delyuer it to none other perſon. Whan the conſtable herde that / he cauſed euery man to aſſaute the Caſtell / in ſuche wyſe / that it was wonne

by force / and the capitayne ſlayne / and dyuers other: bo the men and women / and the towne ouerron and robbed and ſo left it / and at their deꝑtyng they left men therin. Than the frenchmen entred in to the lande of the caſtell Bone / and ouerran it. And thā paſſed by the lande of the caſtell Neufe whiche they aſſayled / and ſo went for the towarde Byenre / and came to the entre of the lande of the lorde of Leſcute & rode ſo forwarde / that they came to a good towne and to a good caſtell called Sault / which held of ye countie of Foiz and all his landes / & arere fees in Gaſcoyne. The prince of Wales before he went in to Spayne / was in mynde to haue made warr agaynſt ye countie of Foiz / bycauſe they wolde nat holde of hym. And alſo ye duke of Aniou / who had cōquered the mooſt part of all Acquitayne ſhewed hymſelfe as lorde ther / & wolde haue had it in poſſeſſyon. So he layd ſiege before the towne of Sault in Gaſcoyne / whiche was nat eaſy to wyn / and within there was capitayn ſir Wyllim̄ of Pans. And whan the erle of Foiz / ſawe howe the frenchmen conquered his landes and arerefees / the which by reaſon he ſhuld other holde of the french kyng / orels of the kyng of Englande. He ſent for the vicount of the caſtell Bone / and for the lordes of Merſalte / of caſtell Neufz / of Leſcute / & for the abbot of ſaynt Syluere. And whanne they were come to him / than he ſent for a ſaue cōduct to go and ſpeke with the duke of Aniowe / who lay ſtyll at ſiege before Saulte: the duke accorded therto. Than he and the other lordes went to the hooſt to the duke / and there agreed that they and their landes ſhulde abyde in a reſpite of peace tyll ye myddes of Auguſt / at the which tyme ther ſhulde apere before ye towne of Mō
               ſac by y• day / certayne nombre of men of warre other of the french kynges parte / or of the kyng of Englandes part. And that party that coude kepe the felde / of him they wolde holde their lā
               des in peace for euer. Whiche couenant to parforme / therle of Foiz and the other lordes layd good hoſtages. Than the duke of Aniou went to Pyergourte with all his hole army / & gaue lycence to no man to departe.
            IN that ſeaſon ther was an exchange made of certayne landꝭ for priſoners in ſpaygne / whiche landes the kynge of Spayne had gyuen to the conſtable of Fraūce / and the lorde of Manny / for ſuche ſeruyce as they had done in Spayne. The cōſtable gaue the lande of ſaryen caſtell in exchange for the erle of Pēbroke who was taken priſoner before Rochell / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Olyuer of Māny gaue his lande of Grece / for the lordes ſir Richarde Dangle / and Wyllim̄ his nephue / and for Othes of Grātſone John̄ de Gremeres / and Tanyboton. The ſame ſeaſon there began a treatie / bytwene the duke of Aniou and the duke of Lancaſtre at Pyergort by aſſurances towarde the duke of Aniou / for the duke of Lancaſtre helde himſelfe as kynge and regent of thēglyſſhe marches. And ſo ther was a reſpyte of warre agreed / bytwene them and all their ayders / to endure tyll the laſt day of Auguſt. So yt theſe two dukes ſhulde be at the begynning of Septēbre in the marches of Picardy: the duke of Aniou at ſaynt Omers / and the duke of Lācaſtre at Calys. After this truce thus taken / the duke of Lācaſtre and the duke of Breten / therles of Warwyke / of Suffolke / & Stafforde: the lordes Spenſer / Wyl loughby / Chanoyne / Roberſart / Henry Percy / and the lorde of Mauue / and all other lordꝭ and knightes / the .viii. day of July deꝑted fro Burdeux / and returned into Englande. And whan the capitayns of Bercerell / ſir Johan of Pert and Johan of Cornwall had kept the for treſſe the ſpace of a yere agaynſt the frēchmen / that lay there at ſiege / and ſawe no ſocoure nor ayde comyng to them warde / and that their vytayls began ſore to myniſſhe. Than they toke aduyſe togyder / and de
                  •
               myned to make ſome compoſycion: than they fell in treaty with the lordes of Hambuye / of Stonuyll / Blaynuyll / and Franuyll. The lordes of Normandy that lay there at ſiege were right wery / and wolde gladly haue fallen into ſome treaty / howe beit firſt they wolde knowe the kyngꝭ mynde / who acorded right well therto. So that if the duke of Bretayne were nat perſonally bitwene that tyme / and the feeſt of Allſayntes next comyng after / before ye towne of Bercerell / in ſuch wiſe able to reyſe the ſiege / els they within to yelde them vp. For which compoſycion ther were de lyuered hoſtages. therle of Penbroke was put to raunſome of ſixe thouſande frankes / & lomberdes in Bruges becāe dettours therfore / and promyſed payment therof / aſſoone as he were hole and in good poynt. So the erle rode vnder the conduct of the conſtable through Fraū
               ce / ſo that the feuer and ſickeneſſe toke hym by ye way / and ſo in a horſe lytter he was brought to the cyte of Arras / & there his ſickeneſſe toke hym ſo ſore that he lay in his bedde / and final / lye dyed there: and ſo the conſtable loſt his money. And therle of Penbroke left behynde hym

a ſonne of the age of two yere / and ſir Richarde Dāgle made his finaūce / as I ſhall ſhewe you. ye haue herde here before / howe y• lorde of Roy was priſoner in Englāde who had no children but a doughter / who was his heyre. The frendes of the ſayd lorde of Roy / fell in treaty with ſir Olyuer of Manny / a knyght of Bretayne / and nephue to ſir Bertram of Cleſquy: for the delyueraunce of the lorde of Roy / by this meanes / by exchaunge for one of his priſoners. and he to haue to his wyfe the lorde of Roys doughter / who was of great lynage. Thā ſir Olyuer of Māny, ſent to y• kyng of Englāde / to knowe what knyght he wolde gladlyeſt haue delyueced for the lorde of Roye / the kyng enclynod to haue ſir Rychard Dangleꝭ and ſo they were delyuered quyte eche for other. And the lord Mā
               ny wedded the doughter of the lorde of Royes / and the ſayde lorde of Roye / after maryed the doughter of the lorde of Wille and of Floren 
                  〈◊〉
                in Heynalt. And y• other knyghtes: as ſir Tanyboton / ſir Othes of Grantſon and Johan of Gruners were put to their fynaūce / and by the meanes of ſir Olyuer of Manny / they paſſed with eaſy and courteſſe raūſome.
         
         
            ¶ Howe dyuers townes yelded vp to the french kyng in Gaſcon / & how ſir Hugh of Chaſtellon retourned fro priſon / and howe the caſtell of Bercerell in Normādy yelded them vp frē
               che. Cap. CCC .xii.
            
               WHan the myddes of Auguſt began to aproche / and that the iourney ſhulde hold before Monſac. the duke of Anioue came thyder with a great nōbre of men of warr and ſo came and lay before Monſac ſixe dayes / and thyder came no body to apere of the other parte / for the englyſſhmen thought that by reaſon of the treaty that was made / bitwene the duke of Aniou and the duke of Lancaſtre / that iourney ſhulde haue ouerpaſt / but the duke of Aniou and his counſayle was nat of that mynde. Than the duke ſent to the erle of Foiz / the vicount of Chatell Boine / to the lordes of Marſen / of Chatell Neufe / of Leſcute / & to the abbot of ſaynt Syluere / that they ſhuld holde their couenaūt / or els the duke ſayd he wolde ſle all the hoſtagꝭ that he had for that entent / and wolde entre in to their landes with ſuche puyſſaunce / that he wolde compell them to cry for mercy. Than theſe lordes putte them ſelfe & their landes / vnder the obeyſance of the frenche kyng / and they of Monſac opened their towne whiche was a fayre gariſon / & went and preſented the keys to the duke of Aniou / and to hym dyde fealtie and homage. And ſo the duke and his company entred / and there taryed .xviii. dayes. & in the meane ſeaſon 
                  •
               oke counſayle to what parte they ſhulde drawe / as ſoone as the myddes of Auguſt ſhulde be paſt / and that the truce ſhulde be expyred. and whan the daye was paſt / the duke of Aniou went before the Ryoll / and whan he had layen there at ſiege thre dayes / than they of ye Ryoll put themſelfe vnder the obeyſaunce of the frenche kyng. than they went before Langon whiche alſo yelded vp / and after ſaynt Marquayre / Condoſe Baſylle / the towre of Prudēce / Mauleon / and the towre of Drowe / and to the nombre of a .xl. townes and caſtels tourned them ſelfe frenche / in the ſame viage. the laſt that tourned frenche was Dauberoth / & in euery place ye duke layd newe gariſons. And whan he had ordayned euery thyng accordyng to his pleaſure / than he retourned in to Fraunce / and the conſtable in lykewiſe for the kyng ſent for them / and ſo they gaue lycence to the mooſt parte of their company to departe / and the lordes of Cliſſon / of Beaumauoyre / of Dauangourt / of Ray / & of Ryon / the vycontes of Rohan / and of Lauall and other / came to ye ſiege before Bercerell to holde their iourney at ye day prefixed / for it was ſayd howe the duke of Bretayn / ſir Robert Canoll / and the lorde Spenſer / were comynge thyder to reyſe the ſiege.
            yE haue herd here before / how ſir Hugh of Chaſtellon maſter of the croſbowes was taken before Abbeuile by ſir Nycholas of Louuayn / and caryed into England. he coude come to no raūſome / bycauſe they axed ſo moche for his fynaūce / howe be it a marchaunt of Flaunders auaunſed hymſelfe / and dyde ſomoche / that ſubtelly he gate hym out of Englande: the maner howe / is ouer long to be tolde / therfore I paſſe it breuely. But whan he was come a gayne in to Fraunce / the kyng reſtored agayne to him his office / as maiſter of ye croſbowes / and ſent him to Abuyle to kepe the fronters there / & with him a two hundred ſpea
               
                  •
               es

and all the countre there aboute obeyed to him / as ſir Johan of Bertheouyllers capitayn of Boloyn ſir Henry of the Iſles capitayne of Dept. and all ſuche as were in the garyſons of Tyrwinnyn / ſaynt Dmers / Lykos / Fiennes / and Mount roye. So it was that the lorde of Comynges capitayne of Arde / and ſir Johan of Ubrues aſſembled at Arde an .viii. hundred ſpeares / and erly in a mornyng they departed and ran towarde Boloyne / to ſe if they coulde fynde any aduēture. The ſame day the capiten of Boloyne with a .lx. ſpeares iſſued out & rode towarde Calais / in lykewiſe to fynde ſome aduenture. And at his returnynge he encountred with the ſorde of Compynges and his company who had ryden to warde Boloyne. The capitayne of Boloyne ſaued hym ſelfe with moche payne / and loſt a .xiiii. of his ſpeares / and after this chaſe / the lorde of Comynges retourned agayne. The ſame mornynge the maiſter of the croſbowes had made his muſters / & had with hym a great nombre of them of Arthoys / and Uermādoyes and there aboute / ſo that he was to yt nombre of thre hūdred ſpeares. The ſame tyme the erle of ſaynt Powle was newly come out of Picardy fro his lande of Lorayne / and was the ſame day rydynge to our lady of Boloyne in pilgrymage / & herde by the way howe the maiſter of the croſbowes wolde in likewiſe tyde thyder / and ſo met him and rode forthe togyder and came by Arde / and taryed ther a certayne ſpace in ye felde / and knewe nothyng that thēglyſſhmen were a brode in the felde / nor the engliſſhmen knewe nothyng of thē / and whan the frenchmen had ben a certayne tyme before Arde and ſawe no man iſſue out / they returned to the abbey of Lyques. And as ſoone as they were departed fro Arde an engliſſhman iſſued out priuely / and rode ſo longe by priuy wayes (for he knewe the countre) that at laſt he mette with the lorde Comynges returnyng to warde Arde / and than he tolde hym / howe the frenchemen had ben before Arde / and were departed: and by that tyme that the frenchmen were paſt Tornehen / they were certifyed how thengliſſhmen were tydynge abrode / with the capitayne of Arde. Than they tourned and coſted on the one ſyde / and layd a buſſhment of thre hūdred ſpeares in a lytle wood beſyde Liques / wherof ſir Hugh Chaſtellon was chefe capitayn / and they ordayned yt the yong erle of ſaynt Poule / and a great nombre with him of knightes and ſquiers ſhulde tyde forthe. and nat far thens along by a great hedge / the lorde of Comynges and ſir Ubreues and their company / were reſtyng thē / and lighted a fote and were in good order. Than ſir Johan Harlſton went forthe with a .xx. ſpeares to breke the frenche buſſhement and was determyned to fly and to ſuffre the frēchmen to chaſe him / and ſo he rode forthe in to the feldes. Than the yonge erle of ſaynte Poule / who was a brode on the other ꝑte with a hundred ſpeares / ſayd to his company: let vs auance forthe yōder be our enemyes. than they baſſhed their ſpurres to their horſes / and ran to them as faſt as they might. & than ſir John̄ Harlſton turned and cauſed them to chaſe him along by the hedge / where thēglyſſhmen were redy rainged / & the archers before thē. Aſſoone as the frenchmen came there / the englyſſhmen receyued them with ſpeares and axes / and the archers began to ſhote / and ouerthrewe men of armes & beate downe horſes. There was done many a feate of armes / but fynally the frenchemen were encloſed and ouerthrowen. the yong erle of ſaynt Poule was takenne priſoner / by a ſquyer of the duchy of Guerles / and there was taken the lorde of Pouns & of Clarry / ſir William of Melle / Charles of Chaſtellon / Lionet Daraynes / Gauues of Uaiſnell / Henry of the Iſles and Johan his brother / the Chaſtellayn of Beauuoyſe / and dyuers other knightes and ſquiers. And in contynent after this diſconfyture / The lorde of Chaſtellon with his banner and thre hūdred ſpeares came to the ſame hedges ende / but whan he ſawe the diſconfyture of his company / he drewe his company toguyder and departed without any ſtrokes gyuen. Than thenglyſſhmen and haynowes / led their priſoners in to the towne of Arde. The ſame night / the lorde of Comynges bought therle of ſaynt Poule / of the ſquier that had taken hym priſoner. and anon after he went with him into Englande and preſented him to the kyng / who thanked hym therfore / and hadde therby great profyte. The ſame ſeaſon there was come in to Fraunce / the duke of Aniou / and the conſtable of Fraunce / and alſo the arche byſſhoppe of Rohan / and the biſſhoppe of Crapent as / who had ben long with the kyng at Parys. ſo they paſſed forthe to go to ſaynte Dmers / to kepe their daye of apoyntement with the duke of Lancaſtre / who was alſo come to Calys / and the lord of Bocnyer with hym / and after they wente to Bruges. And anone after the duke of Aniowe came to ſaynt Dmers in great array / & he ſent for to be there with hym / his coſyn ſir Guy of Bloys / who came thyder out of Haynalt. than

there lay in the frontres of Fraunce and of Flā
               ders towarde Arde / and Croyes / and aboute Ba
                  •
               llule in Flaunders / and about Caſſell and 
                  ther about. The conſtable of Fraunce / the lordes of Clyſſon / and Lauall / and ſir Dlyuer of Manny with mo than .vi. hundred ſpeares to kepe the countre / that no let ſhulde come by the erle of Flaūders / for they had no great truſt in him. nor alſo they wolde neuer come to Brugꝭ for nothyng that the entreatours coude vs.
            yE haue herd here before howe they of Bercerell were beſieged the ſpace of a yere / and howe they had made a compoſicion to yelde vp their fortres without they were reſkewed by the feaſt of All ſayntes / and whan the day began to aproche ye french kyng ſente thyder a great nombre of men of warre. There were all the knightes of Bretayne and of Normandy: excepte ſuche as were with the conſtable. ther were the merſhals of Fraūce / ſir Lewes of Sāxere / & ſir Mouton of Blanuylle / the erle of Harecourt / and ſir James of Uien / the admyrall of Fraunce / the doulpoyu of Auuergne / ſir Johan of Bulle / and dyuerss other lordes. And all theſe helde their iourney and day before Bercerell / but none came thyder to apere before them / and ſo the forte reſſe was yelded vp / and euery man departed who wolde / and ſo ſir John̄ Apert and his men of Cornewall tooke the ſee / and retourned in to Englande / and the lordes of Fraūce toke poſſeſſyon of the fortereſſe of Bercerell / and newe repayred it: and refreſſhed it with men / artyllary / and other puruyances. And anone after by the cōmaūdment of the french king / all theſe men of warre / went and layd ſiege before ſaynt Saluyour the vicount in Cōſtantyne / whiche parteyned before to ſir Johan Chandos / and after his dethe / ye kyng of Englande gaue it ſir Alayn of Boucqueſell / who as thā was in Englande / and he hadde lefte a capitayne there / a ſquier called Charenton / & with him ſir Thomas Cornet / Johan de Bourge / and the thre bretherne of Maulurier / and with them there were a ſixſcore men of warr. and ſo ſaynt Sauiour was beſieged by ſee by ſir Johan of Uien admyrall of Fraūce / and by lande by the other lordꝭ of Bretayne and Normandy. Ther was a great hooſt / and they dreſſed vp engyns agaynſt the towne whicheſore traueyled them within the fortereſſe.
            NOwe let vs ſpeke of the lordꝭ that 
                  〈◊〉
                at Bruges / to entreat for a peace of the frēche parte. The dukes of Anion / and of Burgoyne / the erle of Salebruch / the byſſhoppe of Amiens & the chiefe of Bayeux. And on the engliſſhe parte: there was ye duke of Lācaſtre the erle of Saliſbury / and the byſſhop of Lōdon. So at laſt / to thentent that none yuell nor trouble ſhulde cōe to any of theſe lordes / nor to none of their men / that rode in & out dayly bytwene the parties. Therfore they agreed on a truce to endure to the fyrſt day of May next after / in all the marches of Calais / and to the ryuer of Some / and other landes to be ſtyll in warre. Than there was ſent in to Bretayne / the lorde Clyſſon / and the lorde de Lauall with all their companyes to kepe the fronters there about.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Bretayne arryued in Bretayne: where he tooke dyuers caſtels and fortereſſes by force / and of the trewce that was made bytwene the french kyng and the kyng of Englande and their alyes. Cap. CCC .xiii.
            
               WHyle theſe lordes were entreatyng for peace at Brugꝭ. The duke of Bretayn who was in Englande (as ye haue herde here before) ſawe well howe his countre was in great trybulacion & nighe all the countre turned agaynſt hym. And as than the counteſſe his wyfe was in the caſtell of Alroye / and him ſelfe about ye kyng of Englāde / who right hertely loued him / and to hym ſayd. Fayreſon I knowe well howe for the loue of me / ye haue put in balance your landes / and are put out of your ſeignory & fayre herytage / but be ye in certayne / that I ſhall right well recouer it you agayne / for I woll make no peace with the frēchmen without ye be cōprſſed therin / and you to haue agayne your herytage. The duke hūbly thāked hym. And ſo y• ſame ſeaſon the duke of Bretayne aſſembled toguyder at Hāpton / thre M. archers. And they were all payed their wages by the ordynance of the kyng of Englande for halfe a yere / & with thē two. M. men of armes. And in yt iorney there went / therles of Cā
               bridge and of Marche / the lorde Spenſer / ſir Thom̄s Holāde / Nicholas Camoire / Edwarde Twyford / Richarde Pontchardon / Johan 
                  •
               eſſelle / Thomas Grantſon / Hugh Haſtyngꝭ the lordꝭ of Māue / & of Pole / and diuers other knightes & ſquiers. the duke of Bretayne with

all his company / arryued at ſaynt Mathewes of tyne Potern in Bretayne. and ſo toke lande and in contynent aſſayled ye caſtell / which was without the towne. the caſtell was nat greatly fortifyed nother with men nor artillery. and ſo the engylſſhmen toke it by force / and ſlewe all them that were within: and whan they within the towne of ſaynte Mathewes knewe therof / they opened their gates & receyued in the duke as their lord. Than thengliſſhmen went to the towne of Polle de Lyon / whiche was ſtronge and well cloſed. There they made a great aſſaute / and the archers beyng on the dykes ſhot ſo holy togyder / that fewe or none durſt ſhewe them ſelfe at defence / ſo the towne was wonne / ouerron and exyled. & than they went to Brue de Uaulx / which was well fortifyed with men of armes & other purueyaunces / for the lordes of Clyſſon and Beaumanoyre / the vycount of Rohan / and dyuers other lordes of Bretayne had been there but a lytell be fore / & had refreſſhed the fortreſſe with euery thing that neded. and ſo the duke and the engliſſhmen layd ſiege therto. And whan they of ſaynt Sauyour the vicoūt vnderſtode / howe the duke of Bretayn and theſe lordes of Englande were arryued in Bretayne / they truſted that they wolde come thyder and reyſe the ſiege about them / whiche they greatly deſyred / for they were greatly cō
               ſtreyned by their engyns / which dyde caſt day and nyght / ſo that they wyſt nat where to kepe thēſelfe out of danger. Than they toke aduyſe to entreat with the frēchmen to haue a truſe to endure to Eſter: the yere of our lorde. M. thre hundred .lxxv. whiche was but .vi. wekes after ſo that within that tyme they ſhulde be fought withall orreyſed fro the ſege / or els to yelde vp the fortereſſe their lyues and goodꝭ ſaued. this truce was taken but they lay ſtyll at ſiege / but they made no warre eche to other / duryng that ſeaſon.
            THe vicont of Rohan & the lordꝭ of Cliſſon and of Beaumanoyre / who laye in fronter agaynſt the duke of Bretayne and thē
               gliſſhmen who lay at ſege before ſaynt Bru de Uaulx / and they herde reported howe ſir John̄ Deureux was nere to Campelly & made great warre in the countre / and had newly repayred and fortifyed a lytell fortreſſe / wherin he was and made there his garyſon / and called it the Nouell fort / ſo that they of Cāpelly coulde nat iſſue out of their towne without trouble. And ſo they ſent worde therof to the lorde Clyſſon / who was at Lamballe than he and his company departed thens / and left men behynde them to kepe the towne / and rode ſo longe that they came to the newe forters / and layd ſeige therto whiche tidynges came to the duke of Bretayn / where as he was at ſiege / before ſaynt Brue de Uaulx / where as ye duke had made a myne / the which had bene a makyng ye ſpace of .xv. dayes and at the ſame tyme they had loſte their myne and labour. And whan the duke and the lordes of his hooſt knewe that / they ſayd all thynges conſydered: they thought they loſte their tyme to abyde there any lenger. wherfore they ſayd it were better for them to go and ayde ſir John̄ Deureux / for if we may fynde them in the felde that hath layde ſiege to hym: we truſt we ſhall haue a fayre iourney. So than they diſloged and rode towarde the newe fortereſſe / whiche the lordes of Bretayne made to be aſſayled / in ſuch wyſe: that they were at the fote of the wall and feared nothynge that was caſte downe on thē for they were well paueſſhed. and alſo they within had but lytell ſtuffe to caſt downe / and therwith / in all haſt there came one to thē: and ſayd. ſirs get you hens / for yonder cometh the duke of Bretayne with the englyſſhmen / they be nat paſt two leages hens. Than the trūpet ſowned the retrayte / than they drewe abacke and toke their horſes and ſo departed / & went into Campelly whiche was nat far thens / and cloſed their gates and lyfte vp their brydges. And by that tyme the duke of Bretayne was come thyder / with the barones of Englande in his company / and they had paſt by ye newe fortreſſe and hadde ſpoken with ſir Johan Deureux / who thāked them of their comyng: for els he had ben ſoone taken. And ſo the duke layde ſiege to the towne of Campelly / and ſet forthe their archers and brigātes well paueſſed / and there they made a great aſſaut. The englyſſhemen fayned nat no more dyd they within / ther were dyuers hurte on bothe partes. and euery day there was an aſſaute / or elles ſkrymyſſhe. They within ſawe well / howe they coulde nat long endur / nor they ſawe no ſocours comyng alſo they ſawe well yt they coulde nat yſſue out to departe / their fortreſſe was ſo cloſed on euery ſyde. And alſo they knewe well if they were taken byforce / they ſhulde haue no mercy / and ſpecially the lorde Clyſſon / thenglyſſhmen hated hym ſo ſore. thā the lordes of Bretayn that were within began to entreat with the duke to yelde them ſelfe vp / vpon a courtes raunſome / but the duke wolde haue them ſymply. ſo with

moche payne at laſt they gat areſpyte for .viii. dayes / and duryng the ſame reſpyte it fell well for them within the fortereſſe / for two knyghtes of England one ſir Nicholas Carſuell and ſir Water Durſwyke / were ſent to the duke of Bretayne fro the duke of Lancaſtre / cōmaundyng that by vertue of treatie of peace / as was made at Brugꝭ: bitwene the kyng of England and ye frenche kyng / wherof they brought charters ſealed of the trewce. that without delay on the ſight of them / to leaue and make warre no more. So incontynent the truce was reed and publyſſhed through the hooſt / and alſo ſhewed to them that were within Cāpelly / wherof they were right ioyfull. that is to ſay: the lorde Cliſſon / the vicont of Rohan / the lorde of Beaumanoyre and ye other / for the trewce came well for them: and thus brake vp the ſiege of Cāpelly. And ye duke of Bretayn gaue leaue to all them that were with him to departe: except ſuche as were dayly in his houſe / and ſo went to Alroy where his wyfe was. And than the erles of Cā
               bridge and of Marche / ſir Thomas Holande erle of Irelande / the lorde Spenſer / and the other englyſſhmen retourned agayne in to Englande. Whan the duke of Bretayn had ordred all his beſyneſſe by great leaſer / he refreſſhed the towne and caſtell of Breeſt and Alroy / and than he retourned agayne in to Englande and his wyfe with hym.
            THe ſame day that the trewce was made at Bruges to endur for a hole yere / bytwene the kynges of Englande and Fraunce / and all their alies. And the duke of Burgoyne for the one parte / and the duke of Lancaſtre for the other parte / ſware to come thyder agayn at the feeſt of Alſayntꝭ. and that eche parte ſhulde holde and enioye euery thyng that they had as than in poſſeſſion / during the ſaid terme. The englyſſhmen thought / that ſaynt Sauiour the vicount ſhulde be ſaued / by reaſon of that treatie / but the frenchmen ſayd: that the fyrſt couynant ſhulde paſſe the laſt ordynance. So that whan the day aproched that they ofſaynt Sauyoure ſhulde other yelde vp / or els be reſcued by their frendes. The french kyng ſent thyder a great nombre of men of warre / as a .vi. thouſande ſpeares knightes and ſquiers / beſyde other people / but none came thyder to reyſe the ſiege. and whā the day was expyred ther with in yelded them vp to the frenchlordes / full ſore agaynſt their wylles / for yt fortereſſe was well ſittyng for the englyſſhmen / and the capitayne ſir Thomas Tynet and Johan de Bourc / and the thre bretherne of Malurier / and the other engliſſhmen went to Carentyn / & ſo toke ſhyppynge and retourned into Englande. Than the conſtable of Fraunce newe refreſſhed the fortereſſe of ſaynt Saluyour the vicount / and ſette a breton knight capitayne therin / and vnderſtode ſo as than / that the frenche kynge had gyuen him that ſeignorie.
         
         
            Of the iorney that the lorde of Coucy made in Auſtrych / and of the deth of the prince of wales / & howe there coulde be founde no maner of treatie of peace bitwene the two kyngꝭ. and alſo of the dethe of the kynge of Englande Edwarde the thyrde. Cap. CCC .xiiii.
            
               THe ſame ſeaſon there was come in to Fraūce the lord of Coucy / who had ben longe in Lūbardy with the erle of Uertue / ſonne to ſir Galeas / makyng warre againſt ſir Barnabo and his alies / bycauſe of pope Gregory the .xi. and for the holy colledge of Rome. The lorde of Coucy by ſucceſſion of his mother / who was ſuſter to the duke of Auſtryche laſt diſſeaſed / wherby he ought to be enheryter to the duchy / for the duke was deed without iſſue / by waye of maryage. and they of Auſtrich / had gyuen the duchy and lande to another / farther of by lynage than the lorde Coucy / wherof the lorde of Coucy hadde often tymes complayned to the emperour / the lorde Charles of Behayne. Thēperour knewe well yt the lorde Coucy had right therto / howe be it he might nat with his eaſe conſtrayne thē of Auſtryche / for they were ſtrong in his countre / and many good men of warre. The lorde of Coucy had made warre there before / by the conforte of his aunt ſuſter to the duke / but lytell it auayled him. and whan he was thus cōe in to Fraunce the kyng made him great chere. Than he aduyſed and ſawe well / howe there was in Fraunce as than many men of warre / ſatte as ydell. Wherfore he thought they coude nat be better ocupyed / than to helpe him to his right: durynge the trewce bytwene Fraunce

and England. Than the lorde of Couey deſy
               
                  ••
               d the kyng to let him haue of the bretons ſuch as ouer ronne the realme / to make warre with hym in Auſtryche. the kyng who wolde gladly that the companyons were out of hys realme / accorded to his deſyre. So the kynge lende or gaue him I can nat tell wheder / a .lx. thouſāde frankes: to departe among the ſayd companyons. So they rode forthe to warde Auſtryche about ye feeſt ofſaynt Michell they dyd moche yuell all the wayes as they w
                  •
               t. Alſo ther were dyuers barons / knyghtes / & ſquiers of Fraūce of Arthoys / of Uermandoys / of Haynaulte / and of 
                  〈…〉
               rdy / as the vicountes of Meaul
                  •
                / and Daunoy / ſir Ra
                  •
               e of Co
                  ••
               y the 
                  •
               arone of Roy / Peter of Bare / & dyuers other: deſyring to 
                  〈◊〉
                their bodyes to get them honour.
            
               WHan the feaſt of Alſayntes began to aproche / thā there came agayn to Bruges to entreate for peace / fro the frenche kynge. the duke of Burgoyn the erle of Sal
                  •
               bruce / the byſſhoppe of & my
                  •
               ns / and the duke of An
               
                  ••
               we but he lay 
                  〈◊〉
                atſaynt Omers. And 
                  •
               ro the kynge of Englande thyder came: the duke of Lancaſtre / the duke of Bretayne / the erle of Sal
                  •
               ſbury y• byſſhop of London. The towne of Bruges was well garnyſſhed with dyuers aſtates / & ſpecially the duke of Burgoyn kept there a noble aſtate. And with the duke of Lan
               
                  •
               aſtre / ther was 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert of Namur and kept him good company / as longe as the duke was in Flaunders. & ther were the ambaſſadours the archebyſſhop of Rohan / and the byſſhoppe of Carpētras / who went ſtyll and laboured bytwene bothe 
                  •
               ties / and layd forthe many good reaſons / but none came to any effecte. Theſe lordes were farre a ſondre in their treaties / for the frenche kynge demaunded to haue agayne 
                  〈◊〉
               . hundred thouſande frankes / the whiche were payed for the redempcion of kyng John̄ / and to haue Cala
                  •
               s rayſed & beaten downe. to the whiche the kyng of Englande wolde neuer conſent. ſo y• trewce was contynued to the feeſt of ſaynt Johan Baptyſt next after: the yere of our lorde a thouſande thre hundred .lxxvi. and ſo theſe lordes 
                  •
               aryed ſtyll at Bruges all that wynter / and in ſomer they returned euery part to their owne coūtreis except the duke of Bretayne who taryed ſtyll in Flaunders / with the erle Loys his coſyn who made him gode cher. ¶ The ſame ſeaſon on Trynite ſonday: there paſt out of this worlde the 
                  ••
               oure of chi
                  •
               alry of Englande / Edwarde prince of Wales & of A
                  •
               
               tayne / at the kynges pala
                  •
               s of Weſtmynſter beſyde London. And ſo he was enbawmed and put in leed / and kept tyll the feaſt of ſaynt Michaell next after / to be entred with the greatter ſolē
               
                  •
               ytie whan the parliament ſhulde be ther. Kyng Charles of Fraunce bycauſe of lynage / dyd his obſequy reuerently in the holy chapell of the paleys in Parys. And there were many of the prelates & nobles of the realme of Fraūce and ſo than the truce was prolōged / to the firſt day of Aprill next after. Now let vs ſomwhat ſpeke of the lorde Coucy & of the almayns.
            WHan they of Auſtriche & the almayns / vnderſtode that the lorde of Coucy / was cōe with ſuch a ſtrength to make warre. They cauſed to be brent and diſtroyed thre dayes 
                  •
               ourney in to the countre / along by the ryuer. And than they went in to the mountayns and places inhabytable / and ſo whā the lorde of Cou
                  •
               y had wende to haue founde vytayle for his hooſt / he coude get none. Wherby he ſuffred that wynter moche trouble and dyſeaſe / for they wyſt nat whyder to go to forage / nor to gette vitayle for they
                  •
                nor their horſes: ſo that ſome dyed / for hūger / colde & ſickneſſe. And therfore whan the ſpringyng tyme began they returned agayne in to Fraunce / and went in to dyuers places to refreſſhe them ſelfe. And the frenche kyng ſent the mooſt parte of the cō
               panyons in to Bretayne / and in to baſe Normandy to a
                  •
               yde and reſt there / for he thought well he ſhulde haue ſōwhat to do in ſhort tyme after. And at the retournyng of the lorde Cou
               
                  •
               y in to Fraunce he began to be good frenche / bicauſe he 
                  •
               ounde the kyng ſo amyable to condiſcende to his deſyre. And alſo his counſayle ſayd / he ne
                  ••
                nat to a voide out of his heritage vnder the ſhadowe of the kyng of Englandes warr: for they ſayd he was frenche of name / of blode / of armes / & extraction. He ſent his wyfe into Englande / and kept ſtyll with him his eldeſt doughter / and left the yonger ſtyll in Englande / wher as ſhe had been brought vp and noriſſhed▪ Than y• frenche kyng ſent the lorde Coucy to Bruges to them that were ther to entreate for the peace / how be
                  •
               t as than the great lordes were nat there / but all onely the duke of Bretayne / who was ſtyll with his coſyn therle of Flaunders / but he buſyed him ſelfe but lytle in the treatie for the peace. And after the feeſt of ſaynt Mychaell / whan the obſequy of the prince was done and fyniſſhed / than the kyng

of Englande made to be knowen to his 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ The duke of Lācaſtre / the erle of Cambridge / and to the lorde Thom̄s the yongeſt / and to all the barons / erles / prelatꝭ / and knightes of Englande: howe that the yonge Richarde ſhulde be kyng after his diſceaſe. And ſo cauſed them all to ſwere ſolemly to maynteyne him / and on Chriſtmas day the kyng made hym to ſytte at his table / aboue all his owne chyldren in great eſtate / repreſentyng that he ſhulde be ky
                  •••
                alter his diſceaſe. And there was ſent to Bruges for the kyng of Englandes parte: John̄ lorde Cobham / the byſſhoppe of Herforde / and the mayre of London. And for the frenche partie / thyder came the erle of Salebruche / the lorde of Chaſtellon / and maiſter Phylbert Leſ
                  〈…〉
                / and the two byſſhoppes embaſſadr
               
                  •
                / alwayes went bytwene the parties treatynge for peace / and ſpake of a mariage to be had / bytwene the yong prince of Englande and my lady Ma
                  •
               y / doughter to the frenche kyng. And ſo they departed / aſwell they of Fraūce as of Englande and ſo made report to bothe kynges: and than about lent there was a ſecrete treatie 
                  〈◊〉
                / to be bytwene the two kyngesat Moutrell by the ſee. And ſo were ſent by the kynge of Englande to Calais / ſir Rycharde Dangle / Rycharde Stan / Ge
                  ••
               ray Cha
                     ••
                  er▪
                And fro the frenche kyng was ſent / the lorde of Cou
                  •
               y and of Riuyer / ſir Nycholas Braques / and Nycholas Braſier / and they along ſeaſon treated on the ſayd mariage. And the frenchmen offered as I was enfourmed dyuers thyng
                  •
               s / and they wolde haue agayne otherthynges / ſuche as they named or els nothyng. Than theſe entreatours went and made report to their lordꝭ / and ſo the trewce was agayne relonged to the fyrſt day of Maye / and ſo came agayne to Calais / the erle of Saliſbury / y• byſſhop of ſaynt Dauyd chaūcellour of Englande and the byſſhoppe of Herforde. And for the frenche kynge at Muttrell: there was the lorde of Coucy / ſir Wylliam of Dormans chaūcellour of Fraūce / but they durſt neuer truſt to mete toguy 
                  •
               er in any place bytwene Mutterell and Cal
                  •••
                / nor bytwene Mutterell & Boleyn / nor in the fronters for any thyng that the two byſſhoppes embaſſadours coude do orſhewe. Thus theſe entreatours abode in this aſtate / tyll the 
                  〈◊〉
                was expyred.
            ANd whan the warr was open / than ſir Hughe Caurell was ſent to be kepar of Calais. Whan pope Gregoriebeynge 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               non vnderſtod that no peace coude be had by
               
                  •
               wene Fraūce & England / he was right ſorouſull / and ordred his buſyneſſe ſhortly & went to Rome. And whan the duke of Breten who had 
                  •
               e
                  •
                more than a yere with the erle of Flaūders his coſyn / ſawe that ye 
               warr was open. he toke leaue of therle and wēt to Grauelyng / and thyder he came to therle of Saliſbury and ſir Rycharde Dangle / and ſo went with them to Calais and ther taryed the ſpace of a moneth / and ſo went in to Englande and came to Shene 
                  〈◊〉
                foure leages fro London / a long by the Temmes ſyde / where the kynge of Englande laye ſore ſy
                  •
               ke. And paſt out of this worlde / the 
                  〈◊〉
                gyll ofſaynt John̄ Baptyſt: y• yere of our lorde a thouſande thre hundred .lxxvii.
            THan was there great ſorowe made in Englande / and incontynent all the paſſages of the realme were ſtoppedde / that none ſhulde yſſue out of the realme. For they wolde nat that the dethe of the kyng ſhuld be ſo ſoone knowen in Fraunce / tyll they haddeſet the realme in ſome ordre. The ſame tyme ther came in to Englande the erle of Saliſbury / and ſir Rycharde Dangle. So the body of kyng Edwarde the thirde: with great proceſſyons / we
               
                  •
               ynges / & lamentacyons / his ſonnes behynde hym / with all the nobles and prelates of Englande: was brought a long the cytie of London with open viſage to Weſtmynſter / & there he was buried beſyde the quene his wyfe. And anon after the yong kyng Richard was crowned at the palays of Weſtmynſter with great ſolem
                  •
               ytie / and by him ſtode the dukes of Lā
               
               
                  ••
               llre and of Bretayne: the .xi. yere of his age in the moneth of July. The whiche day there was made four erles and nyne knightes. Firſt the lorde Nycholas his vncle / was made 
                  •
               rle of 
                  •
               olengy / the lorde Percy erle of Northumberlande / ſir Thomas Dangle erle of Huntyngdon / the lorde Mombray erle of Notyngham. And the yonge kyng was putte vnto the rule of the gentyll knyght ſir Rycharde Dangle / by the accorde of all the lande / to be inſtru
               
                  •
               ted in noble vertues / and the realme of Englande / to be gouerned by the duke of Lancaſtre. And as ſoone as the frenche kynge knewe of the dethe of kynge Edwarde / he ſayd: howe 
                  •
               yght
                  •
               obly / and valiantly he hadde reyg
                  •
               ed: and well he ought to be putte newly in remem
               
                  •
               raunce / amonge the nombre of the worthyes. Than he aſſembled a great nombre of the nobles and prelatꝭ of his realme / and dyd his obſ
                  •
               quy in ye holy chapell in his palys at Paris.

And anone after dyed ye eldeſt doughter of the frenche kyng / who was enſured to haue been maryed to Wylliam of Heynault / eldeſt ſonne of duke Aubert.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frēche kyng ſent a great nauy to the ſee / & howe dyuers townes were brent in Englande: & howe the duke of Burgoyne tooke dyuers caſtels about Calys. Cap. CCC .xv.
            
               IN the meane ſeaſone whyle this ſayd trewce endured / the frenche kyng ꝓuyded greatly for ſhyppes andgaleys. And the kynge of Spayne had ſent to him his admyrall ſir Ferraunt Sauſe. Who with ſir Johan de Uien admyrall of Fraunce / whan the tre wee was expired went and brent the towne of Rye / a four dayes after the dethe of kyng Edwarde / in the vigill of ſaynt Peter in July. & there ſlewe men and women / and all they founde. Theſe tidynges came to London / than therles of Cambridge and Bouligney went to Douer / with a great nombre of men of warre. And the erle of Saliſbury & the lorde Montagu / went to the marches towarde Hāpton. Than after the french army toke laude in the Ile of Ubyq̄ / and brent therm dyuers to wnes / as Lamēd Dartmouth Plomouthe / Pleſume / and dyuers other. and whan they had brente and pylled the towne of Ubique / they went agayne to ye ſee and coſted forewarde / & came to a porte called Poc. there was redy the erle of Saliſbury / and the lorde Montague / who defended the paſſage: howebeit they brente parte of the towne of Poc. and than toke the ſee agayne and coſted towardes Hāpton / and wolde dayly haue taken lande in Englande / but the englyſſhmen in the company of the erle of Saliſbury rode ſo dayly / alonge the ſee coſt: that they kept them euer fro takyng of any lande. Than ye frenchmen came before Hāpton / and there was redy ſir Johan Arūdell / with a great nombre of men of warre and archers who defended the towne / or elles it had ben taken. than the frenchmen departed and went towarde Douer / and toke lande on a day 
                  〈◊〉
                a lytle abbay called Lians. Ther were many men of the countre aſſembled / and they hadde made the priour of the place and ſir Thomas Cheyny & Johan Fuſelle their chefe capitayns / who ſet them ſelfe in good array to defende the paſſage / ſo that the frēchmen had but ſmall aduauntage / for it coſte them moche people or they coulde take lande / how be it fynally by force of good fightyng they toke lande. Ther was a ſore ſcrimyſſhe / howe beit the englyſſhmen were dryuen backe and putte to flyght / and two hundred ſlayne: and the two knightes and the priour taken priſoners. than the frenche men entred agayne in to their ſhippes / and lay ſtyll all that night at ancre before the abbey. There the frenche men knewe firſt of the dethe of kynge Edwarde of Englande by their priſonners / and of the coronacyon of kyng Richarde / and a great parte of the ordre made in Englande: for rulynge of the realme. Than ſir Johan of Uyenne cauſed a barke to departe / and ſent therin a knight / who aryued at Harflewe. And than the knight rode to Parys / and there he founde the kynge / and there ſhewed hym the certayne tidynges of the deth of kyng Edwarde. To whiche ſayeng the kynge gaue credence. Than the frenchmen & ſpanyardes departed / and ſayled forthe and had wynde at wyll / and came with the ſame tyde about threof the clocke to Douer. There was ſir Edmonde erle of Cambridge / and ſir Thomas his brother erle of Buckynghame / who were redy with a hundred thouſande with baners diſplayed / abydinge the frenchmen / who were a ſixſcore ſhippes and galyes. The frenchemen came foreby the porte and taryed nat / but paſſed by and toke the depe ſee / for the ſee began to ebbe. Howe beit the englyſſhmen taryed there ſtyll all that day and the nextnight / and the frenche men by the nexte tyde came before the hauen of Calays / and there entred.
            yE haue herde here before: how ſir Johan captall of Beufz / was taken priſoner before Soubiſe / and kept in the towre of the tēple of Parys. The kyng of England and the prince whyle they lyued / wolde gladly haue had hym delyuered: ther was alſo moche entreatie made for him at the coūſell at Bruges / and ther was offred for him in exchange / the yong erle of ſaynt Poule / & thre or four other knyghtes / but the frenche kyng nor his coūſayle wolde nat cōſent therto. Howbeit the french kyng made to be ſhewed him by the priour / who had hym in kepyng: y• if he wolde

ſwere / neuer to beare armes agaynſt ye crowne of Fraunce / that than he wolde condiſcende to his delyuerance. The Captall anſwered / that he wold neuer make that othe / to dye in priſon. ſo he abode in priſon in ſure kepynge a .v. yere with lytell ioye / for he toke his priſonment but with lytell pacyence / and ſo long he was there that at laſt he dyed in priſon. The french kyng cauſed hym to be entered ryght ſolemply / and therat were dyuers barownes / knightes / and prelates of Fraūce. Thus feblyſſed thengliſſh capitaynes / for y• ſame yere there dyed alſo the lorde Spenſar a great baron in Englande / & a good knight. And of hym & of his wyfe / who was doughter to ſir Bartylmewe of Brunes / there abode a ſonne and four doughters. And anone after the dethe of the ſayde Captall / the frenche quene was delyuered of a fayre doughter / named Mary: Of the whiche byrthe / the quene toke ſuche a ſickneſſe ye ſhe dyed. This quene / who was full of noble vtues: was doughter to the gentyll duke of Burbone the lorde Peter / who dyed at the batayle of Poycters. Her obſequy was done in the abbay of ſaynte Denyſe / where ſhe was buryed with great ſolempnyte / wherat ther was nighe all ye nobles and prelates of Fraunce: and namely they about the marcheſſe of Parys.
            ALl this ſeaſon / ſir Hughe Caurell capitayne of Calais / ſir John̄ Harlſton capitayn of Guynes / the lorde of Gomegines capitayne of Arde. Made many iourneys in to Picardy / euery weke thre or four: and often tymes ran before ſaynt Omers and Arkes / Moton Fyēnes and therabout / to Boloyne & ſomtyme to Tyrwyn. And ſpecially the garyſon of Arde dyde moche hurt in the countre / wherof the complayntes came oftentymes to the herynge of the frenche kyng. Whervpon he toke coūſayle to knowe how he might beſt reſtrayn them / and it was ſhewed hym howe that ye garyſon of Arde was nat ſo ſtronge: but that it might eaſely begoten. Than the kyng ſayd / to haue it we wyll ſpare for no coſt. Than within a lytell ſpace after / he made a ſomōs of men of warre ſecretely / no man wyſt whider he wolde ſende them. The chefe of them was the duke of Burgoyne his brother: he had a .xv. hundred ſpeares well furnyſſhed / and ſodenly they cāe to the baſtyde of Arde / and beſieged it rounde about. And with the duke of Burgoyne: there was the erle of Guynes / the marſhall of Blanuyle / the lordes of Clyſſon & of Lauall / of Rougemont / of the ryuer of Bregyde / of Frannyll / of Danuyll / of Dautoyng / of Raueuall / and of Angeſt / ſir James of Burbone / the ſeneſhall of Heynalte / and dyuers other knightes and barones. And they had engyns that caſt nyght & day / ſtones of two hundred weight / and aſſayled it right feirſly. The lorde Gomegynes lorde of the fortereſſe / whan he ſawe hym ſelfe encloſed with ſo many noble men of warre / and they promyſed him that if he were wonne with aſſaut / that he & all thoſe with hym ſhulde dye. And alſo he was nat well prouyded of artillary longe to endure: and ſo by the procurement of the lorde of Raneuall his coſyn germayn / he entred in to a treaty & to yelde vp the garyſon / their lyues and goodꝭ ſaued. This treaty was long a makyng / howe beit at laſt the fortereſſe was gyuen vp / and ſuche as wolde departed: & were brought to Calais by ſir Gawen of bayllule: and ſir Wylliam of Bourdes was made capitayne of Ard
                  •
               . And after him was kepar there a long tyme the vicount of Meaulx / and thirdly after him was capitayne ther / the lord of Sampy. The ſame day that Arde was delyuered / the duke went and layd ſiege to the caſtell of Arduyche. wherin were capitayns / the thre bretherne of Mauluryer. There the duke lay thre dayes / and made dyuers aſſautes: at laſt they within yelded vp the caſtell / and they were brought to Calys by the marſhall of Frā
               ce. Than the duke went and beſieged Uauclinen / Whiche alſo yelded vp as the other dyde. And whan the duke had newe refreſſhed theſe places with vitayls and men / than he gaue lycence to euery man to departe: and ſo wēt himſelfe in to Fraunce to the kynge / and the other lordes bretons went into Bretayne. For tidynges was brought them / that the duke of Bretayne was aryued at Breſt with a great army and the lordes of Burgoyne and other places / retourned euery man to their owne.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the warre began agayn / bytwene the frēche kyng and the kyng of Nauerre: and howe the kynge of Nauer loſt the coūtie of Deureux / except Chierbourge / whiche was beſeged by the frenchmen. And of the iorney that the duke of Lancaſtre made in to Bretayne. Cap. CCC .xvi.
            
               
               VE haue herde here before / of y• peace made at Uernon / bytwene the frenche kyng and the kyng of Nauar: and howe the kynge of Nauar left his two ſonnes with their vncle the frenche kyng. After ther was a great ſuſpect layde on a ſquyer beyng in the frenche kynges court / attendyng on the two ſonnes of the kyng of Nauarr. This ſquyer was called James of Rue. And alſo on a clerke / a great maiſter & of the kyng of Nauars coūſayle / and a great gouernour in the countie of Deuxeux / called maiſter Peter of Tartre. They were iuged to dethe / and ſo cruelly they were executed at Parys / and ther ſhewed before all the people / howe they were in mynde to haue enpoyſoned the frenche kynge. Than the kyng reared vp a great army of men of warr / and made the cōſtable chefe leader of them / and with him the lorde de la Ryuer / and dyuers barons & knightes. And ſo they all went into Normādy to the fortreſſes and caſtels of the kyng of Nauarre / whiche were fayre and noble / and well garnyſſhed. And ſo they layd ſiege to a fortereſſe called Ponteau de mere / they had dyuers gōnes engyns / and ablemētes for the ſaut / whet with they troubled ſore the fortereſſe / and them that were within: howbeit they dyde defende them ſelfe valiantly. Ther were dyuers ſautes and ſcrimyſſhes a longe ſpace durynge this ſiege. The caſtell was ſore bruſed and they wtin ſore oppreſſed / and deſyred oftentymes by the conſtable to gyue vp the fortereſſe / or elles yf they were taken by force / he promyſed thē that they ſhulde all dye: cuſtomably ſuche was the cōſtables promyſe. The naueroyſe ſawe how their vitayls began to myniſſhe / & knewe well howe the kyng of Nauer was farr fro them: ſo they yelded vp the fortreſſe / and they were cōueyed to Chierbourge / and had their goodꝭ with thē The fortreſſe was raſed and beaten downe to the erthe / whiche had coſt moche the makynge therof: alſo the walles of Pōteau de mere was beaten downe. Than the frenchmen went and beſieged the fortreſſe of Mortayne / and there lay a great ſeaſon: but they within ſaw no maner of ayde nor confort / comyng fro the kynge of Nauarr / nor alſo the other fortereſſes were nat able to make reſyſtence agaynſt the frenchmen: and ſo they gaue vp as other dyd before. The ſame ſeaſon the cōſtable brought into the frenche kynges obeyſaunce: all the townes / caſtelles and fortreſſes / in all the countie of Deureur. And all the fortereſſes beaten downe to the erthe and the townes vncloſed / to thentent that there ſhulde neuer after ryſe any warre vnto the realme of Fraunce / by the meanes of any caſtell or towne / y• the kyng of Nauer ſhulde haue in the countie of Deureux. Alſo the frē
               che kynge made the gabelles and ſubſydies to rynne there / aſwell as in any other parte of the realme of Fraunce.
            ALſo the ſame tyme / the kyng of Spaygne made his baſtarde brother to entre in to Nauarr / with a great nombre of men of warre / who began to wynne the countre / and aſſayled townes and fortreſſes: ſo yt the kyng of Nauerr coude make no reſyſtence agaynſt them. Than he ſent worde therof to the yonge kyng Richarde of Englande / deſyring him of ayde agaynſt the frenche kynge / in the countie of Deureux. And he him ſelfe to abyde ſtyll in Nauar to kepe his fortreſſes ther / agaynſt the kyng of Spaygne. And ſo kyng Richarde / by the aduyſe of his counſayle: ſent ſir Robert d
                  •
                Roux with a nombre of men of armes and archers to the ſee / and they toke lande at Chierbourc. And thyder came all thoſe that had ben put out of the fortreſſes in the countie of Deureux by the frenche conſtable. And whan they were ther all togyder / they were a great nombre of choſen men: and ſo they prouyded well for the fortreſſe / for they beleued to be beſeged. Whan the conſtable and the lorde de la Ryuer with their cōpany / had won all in the coūtie of Deureux / ſo that nothyng was left aparant for the kyng of Nauer / but all was vncloſed & vnder the obeyſance of the french king. Thā they cāe before Chierbourc / which was ſtrong and nobly foūded / firſt by Julyus Ceſar / whan he cōquered Englande: and there is a port of the ſee. The frenchmen layed ſiege rounde about it: except on the ſee ſyde / and ſo they determyned nat to departe thens / tyll they had won it. Sir Robert de Roux and his cōpany within / made many iſſues day & night for ther was no ther day nor nyght / but that there was a ſcrimyſſhe. The frenchmen coude ſeke for no dede of armes / but that they founde ynowe euer to anſwere thē. So there were many ſlayne and taken / aſwell on the one parte as on the other durynge the ſiege / whiche laſted all the remynaunt of the ſommer. Thanne ſir Olyuere of Cleſquy / made on a day a buſſhement / and ſo began to ſcrimiſſhe: And than the frenche men were driuen backe to the buſſhment. Than ſir Olyuer of Cleſquy cāe out of his enbuſſhment

and all his / and ranne feirlly at thenglyſſhmen and naueroyes. Ther was an harde encoūtre on bothe parties / many a man borne to y• erthe ſlayne / hurte / taken & reſcued: fynally ſir Olyuer of Cleſquy was taken priſoner / by aſquier of Nauer called John̄ Coq / and ſo was put into Chierbourge. And ſo the ſcrymyſſhe ended / more to the domage of y• frenchmen than to the engliſſhmen / and ſir Olyuer was ſent in to Englande / & there abode as priſoner a long ſpace at London / and after he was put to his raunſome. Thus in great coſt & charge / the frenchemen abode ſtyll a great parte of y• wynter with lytell conqueſt / and ſo they ſawe well how they loſt their tyme with lyeng ther. They thought well that Chierbourc was inprignable / for alwayes they might be newe refreſſhed with vitayls and men by the ſee / wherfore the frenchemen diſlodged and layde counter garyſons agaynſt Chierbource / as at Mountbourge / at Pount done Charentyn / ſaynt Lou / and ſaynt Saluiour the vicount / than euery man badde leaue to deꝑte. This was in y• yere of our lorde a thouſande thre hundred .lxxviii.
            yE haue well harde here before / howe the duke of Bretayne was departed out of Bretayn and had with hym his wyfe in to Englande / and ſo he abode on ſuche laude as he had in Englande / whiche was called the countie of Richemont / and he laboured ſore to the yong kyng Richarde and to his coū
               ſayle to haue helpe and ayde to recouer his lande agayne / whiche was tourned frenche: but he coude nat be herde as than. The ſame ſeaſon the duke of Lancaſtre was enfourmed that if he wolde go in to Bretayne with a great armye / there were dyuers fortereſſes and caſtels that wolde yelde vp to him / and ſpecially ſaynt Malo the Iſle a fayre fortreſſe and a hauen on the ſee. Than the duke of Lancaſtre reyſed vp an army and went to Hampton / and ſo toke the ſee with a great nombre of lordes and knightꝭ / men of warre and archers / and ſo ſayled forthe tyll they came at ſaynt Malos / and toke lande and diſcharged their purueyance / and ſo layd ſiege aboute the towne of ſaynt Malo. They within y• towne were nothyng afrayd / for they were well prouyded of vitayls / of men of warr and of croſ bowes / who valiantly defended thē ſelfe / ſo there the duke lay a longe ſpace. And whan the conſtable of Fraunce / and the lorde Cliſſon knewe therof / they made a great ſommons of men of warre / and cāe towarde ſaynt Malos to reyſe the ſiege. A man wolde haue thought dyuers tymes y• batayle ſhulde haue been bytwene the parties. The englyſſhmen often tymes ordred themſelfe redy to gyue batayle / but the conſtable nor the lorde Clyſſon / wolde neuer aproche ſo nere y• batayle myght be bytwene thē. And ſo whan the engliſſhmen had ben ther a great ſpace they ſawe well they of the towne hadde no wyll to yelde them vp. Than the duke of Lancaſtre had counſayle to diſloge / ſeyng they loſt their tyme with lyeng there / and ſo he toke agayne the ſee and returned in to Englande / and gaue leaue to euery man to departe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the caſtell of Alroy in Bretayne was yelded vp frenche / and of the frenche garyſon that was layd at Mountbourge / agaynſt the garyſon of Chierbourc. Cap. CCC .xvii.
            
               ALl this tyme the caſtel of Alroy was in the poſſeſſion of the duke of Bretayn who lay ſtyll in Englande. The frenche kynge ſent dyuers lordes of Fraunce and of Bretayne / with a great nombre to ley ſiege to the caſtell of Alroy / and they in Alroy knewe no ſocour comyng to thē fro any parte / wherfore they fell in treatie / ſo y• if they were nat ſocoured by the duke of Bretayne or by the kyng of England by a certayn day lymytted / than they to yelde vp the place: whiche treaty was agreed. So the day came and the frenchmen kept their iourney & none a pered / nother fro the duke of Bretayne nor fro the kyng of Englande. So the caſtell was gyuen vp & put vnder the obeyſaūce of the frēche kyng as the other caſtels and good townes of Bretayne were. And ſo they deꝑted fro Alroy ſuche as were 
                  •
               in for the duke of Bretayne.
            ¶ The yere of our lorde / a thouſande thre hū
               dred .lxxviii. Anone after Eaſter kyng Charles of Fraunce / ſawe well howe they of Chierbourc made ſore warre in the countie of Conſtantyne. he than ordeyned ſir Wyll
                  ••
                of Bordes a valiant knight and a good capitayne to be keper and ſouerayne capityne of Conſtantyne / and of all the fortreſſes ther about Chierbourc and ſo the ſayd ſir Wyllim̄ with a fayre company of men of armes and croſ bowes genowayes / wente and laye at Mountbourge / 

where he made counter garyſon agaynſt Chierbourc / for he deſired nothyng ſo moche / as to fight with the englyſſhmen in Chierbourc / cō
               ſydering: howe he had with hym the floure of men of armes / with them of the garyſons there about. The ſame ſeaſon there was ſent to be capitayne at Chierbourc an engliſſhe knight / called ſir John̄ Harlſton / of whome I haue often ſpoken here before / he had ben a long ſpace capitayne of Guyens / he toke ſhippyng at Hāmpton with .iii. hūdred men of armes & as many archers / and ſo arryued at Chierbourc. & with him was ſir Othes of Grantſon / & of engliſſhmen ther were / ſir Johan Aubourge / ſir John̄ Orſell / and dyuers other knyghtes and ſquyers / and aſſoone as they were arryued / they diſcharged all their horſes and baggages / and taryed ther certayne dayes / and made them redy to ryde abrode in the coūtre and to make warr. Alſo ſir Wylliam Brodes of the frenche partie / imagyned nyght and day / howe he myght do any domage to the englyſſhmen. The ſame ſeaſon theſe two knightes layd many buſſhementis eche for other / but it aueyled nothyng: for it was nat their fortunes to mete / but ſomtyme / ſome of their companyes met togyder / as they rode about ſekyng for aduentures / and as they mette often tymes they ouerthrewe eche other / ſomtyme the frenchmen wanne / and ſomtyme they loſt.
            SO long they rode forthe and layd wayte eche for other / that in a mornyng ſir Wylliam of Bordes and all his garyſon of Montbourge thought to ryde forthe towarde Chierbourc / and to fyght with ſir Johan Harlſtone / yf he myght encounter with hym / or to drawe him in to the felde. and ſo he rode forth withall his company and puyſſaūce / aſwell men of armes and croſbowes as mē a fote. On the other parte ſir John̄ Harlſton / who knewe nothyng that the frenchmen wer abrode / had alſo great deſire to ryde forthe the ſame mornyng / and ſo ſowned his trumpettes / and cauſed all his cō
               pany to be armed / aſwell a horſebacke as a fote And ſo went all out in to the feldes / and ordayned them that ſhulde byde in the fortereſſe / and ſo rode forthe in great array / and ordayned ſir Orſell to be capitayne of the fotemen / and than ordeyned his currours. in likewiſe ſo had done ſir Wylliam of Bordes / and ſo long bothe parties rode forthe / that at laſt their currours cā
               
                  •
                ſo nere toguyder / that eche of thē aduyſed well other & ſo eche of them retourned to their owne hooſt / and reported the certayntie of their enemyes. Than theſe two capitaynes were right ioyouſe for than they had founde that they had longe ſought. And whan theſe two capitayne had herde the reporte of their courrours / they drue their companyes togyder / and diſplayed their baners and ſtanderdꝭ / and aproched eche other. And as ſoone as they were nere togyder within the ſhotte of a bowe / than the frēchmen a lighted / and in lykewiſe dyde the englyſſhemen / and the archers and croſ bowes began to ſhote: and men of armes aproched with ſpeares in their handes / rainged and well cloſed to gyder. Than they aſſembled togyder in all ꝑtes / and began to foyne with ſpeares & ſtryke with axes and ſwexdes. There was a ſore and a harde bataile and well fought: men of armes proued well there / their valyātiſe and prowes. Sir Wylliam of Bordes was there armed at all peſes / with an axe in his hande ſtrikyng on the right ſyde and on the lyft / whome ſoeuer he gaue a full ſtroke went to the erthe. ther he dyd ſuche dedes of armes with his owne body 
                  •
               hat it ought to be prayſed foreuer. On the other / ſyde ſir Johan Harlſtone capitayne of Chierbourc / fought valiantly with an axe in his hād a fote amonge other with the formaſt / he had ynough to do: for he was matched with a hard parte. There was many a valyant dede done that day / and many a man ſlayne and hurte. & there ſir Johan Harlſton was borne downe to the erthe / and in great aduēture of his lyfe / but by force of armes he was reſcued. The batayle endured a long ſpace and well fought and well contynued on bothe ꝑties / ther was none that had any great aduauntage / for there were dyuers ſlayne and hurte on bothe parties / but fynally the englyſſhmen fought ſo long and with ſo good hertes / that they obtayned the place / & the frenchmen diſconfyted / ſlayne / and taken / and but fewe noble men ſayed. For they were ſo ſore fought withall / that they had no power to departe / thinkyng outher all to dye or els to vāqueſſhe their enemyes. There was taken 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wylliam of Bordes by a ſquyer of Heynault / called Wylliam de Beaulyau / a man of armes who had long lyen among the englyſſhmen at the garyſon in Calais / to whome the ſayde ſir Wylliam yelded him ſelfe / right ſoroufull that the iourney had nat ben his. Ther thengliſſhmen brought the frenchmen to great myſchefe / and many were taken priſoners at thende of ye batayle / but it was great pytie of thē that were deed. And whan thenglyſſhmen had diſpoyled

the deed men. than ſir John̄ Harlſton and his cōpany departed fro the place / and leyde with them their priſoners and ſpoyle: and ſo went agayne to Chierbourc. ye may well knowe that the engliſſhmen made great toye / for thiss iourney ye god had ſent them. ſir Wylliam of Bordes des was greatly feeſted / for his ꝑſon was well worthy to be made moche of. This diſcomfyture was bytwene Mountbourge and Chierbourc on ſaynt Martyns day: the yere of our lorde a thouſande threhundred .lxxir.
            WHan the frenche kynge knewe that tydinges: howe the gariſon of Mountbourge and his capitayne were taken and ſlayne / and howe that the countrey was in a great afray for yt discōfyture. The kyng who was ſage and well abuyſed in all his dedes / he purueyed incontynent for remedy / & ſent with out delay to Moūtbourge newe men of warre to kepe the fronters / fortreſſes / and countre / agaynſt the garyſon of Chierbourc. And cheife of thoſe men of warre was ſir Johan of Uyen / and ſir Hugh of Bremalles. & ſo they helde the marches agaynſt thenglyſſhmen / but after by the ordynance of the frenche kyng / they abandoned and forſoke Mountbourge / and all the countre of Conſtantyne / whiche was a goodly plentyfull countre: and cauſed men / women / and chyldren to iſſue out / and forſake the countrey of Conſtantyne / and lefte vp fayre houſes and poſſeſſions / and all the people went out of the coūtre of Conſtantyne. and than the frenchmen kepe frōter at Dune / at Carēton / at ſaynt Malo / and on all the marches ioyning to Conſtantyne.
         
         
            ¶ Of the iorney that the duke of 
                  ••
               
               iou made agaynſt thengliſſhmen / in the countre of Burdeloyſe. Cap. CCC .xviii.
            
               YE haue well herde here before howe the duke of Burgoyne made a viage into the marches of Picardy / the which was right honorable for him / & profytable for yt frenchmen. & howe he ordeyned in Arthoiſe / in ſuch caſtels as were in his poſſeſſion capytens and men of warre to kepe them / and ſpecyally in the towne of Iper / he ſtallyſſhed to abyde there the vycounte of Meaulx and the lorde of ſaynt Pee / and they newly fortifyed the towne how be it / it was ſtronger ynough before. The frenche kynge who was ryght glad of thoſe tydingess and reputed yt iourney right honourable / he ſent incontynent his letters to ſaynt Omers / and cōmaunded that the towne of Ayre ſhulde be well garnyſſhed / and well and largely prouyded of all neceſſaryes / and all thynge was done as he cōmaunded. ſo thus this iourney brake vp / howbeit the lorde of Cliſſon and the bretons brake nat their cōpany but aſſoone as they myght they drewe them to Bretayne / for tidynges was come to ye lorde Clyſſon and to y• bretons whyle they were before Ayre / how that Janequyn de Clere / a ſquier of Englande and a good mā of armes was iſſued out of Englande and come in to Bretayne / and kept the baſtydes before Breeſt. Wherfore the bretons drewe thyder as faſt as they might / & brought with theym ſir Jaques of Uertayne ſeneſhall of Heynalt / and the duke of Burgoyne retourned in to Fraunce to the kyng his brother.
            ¶ The ſame ſeaſon there was a great aſſembly of men of armes in the marches of Burdeuux / at the cōmaundement of ye duke of Aniou and of the conſtable. And they had a iourney agaynſt the gaſcoyns and engliſſhmen / wherof I ſhall ſpeke more playnly / whan I ſhalbe better enfourmed therof / than I am as yet. The ſame tyme that the duke of Burgoyn made his armye in Picardy as it hath been ſhewed before. The duke of Aniou was in the good cytie of Tholouſe with the good lady his wyfe / and night and day he ymagined ſubtelly: howe he myght do ſome thyng contrary to thenglyſſmen. for he ſawe & knewe well howe there were dyuers townes and caſtelles a longe the ryue
                  •
                of Dordone and in the fronters of Rouurgue / Tholoſen / and Duercy / that cōſtreyned greatlye the countre / and traueyled moche the poore people vnder their obeyſance. Wherfore he aduyſed to prouyde therfore ſome remedy / and ſo determyned in his mynde to go and laye ſiege to Bergerath / bycauſe it was the kaye of Gaſcoyne as on the fronter of Rouuergue / Duercy and Lunoſyn. And bicauſe yt he knewe that dyuers great barones of Gaſcoyne were contrary to him as the lorde of Duras / the lorde of Roſen / the lorde of 
                  •
               ucydent / yt lorde of Langurant / the lorde of Guernols / and of Carles / ſir Peter of Landuras and dyuers other. therfore he aduyſed to make hym ſelfe ſtronge and puyſſante / and made a great aſſemble to reſyſt

agaynſt the ſayd lordes and to be ſo ſtronge to kepe the felde. Than he wrote to ſir Johan of Armynake / deſirynge hym nat to fayle at that b
                  •
               ſynes / & in likewiſe he ſent to the lorde Dalbret: and all o he ſent in to Fraunce for the conſtable & marſhall of Fraunce / ſir Loys of Sā
               xere. and beſide all this the lorde of Coucy and dyuers other knightꝭ and ſquiers in Picardy / in Britayne and in Normandy: deſired greatly and had great wyll to ſerue him / & to auaūce their bodies by feates of armes to acheue to honour and praiſe / and ther was come to him the conſtable and marſhall of Fraunce. The duke knewe well howe ther was a great diſcorde bytwene the coſyns & frendes of the lorde of Pointers gaſcons and ſir Thom̄s Phelton great 
                  〈…〉
               ſhall of Burdeux and Burdeloys / the reaſon 
                  〈◊〉
                cauſe why / I ſhall ſhewe you here after.
            BEfore that tyme in the yere of our lorde a thouſande thre hūdred .lxxv. ther was done a cruell iuſtyce in the cytie of Burdeaux / done and compriſed by ſir Thomas Phelton / lieutenant to the kyng of Englande in the marches of Burdeur / on the lorde of Pomiers called ſir Wyllm̄ & all by maner of treaſon / wherof there was had great marueyle. In the cytie of Burdeur at the comaundement of the ſeneſhall was taken the lorde of Pomers & a clerke of his counſayle and ſecretary / of the nacyon of Burdeau
                  •
                / called Johan Coulone and it was proued on them as I was infourmed / how the lorde of Pomiers ſhulde yelde himſelfe and all his caſtels to the frenche parte / ſo that he coude make non excuſe to ſaue him fro deth / wherfore the lorde of Pomiers and his clerke were openlye beheeded in the cytie of Burdeux / before all the people / wherof there was hadde great merueyle. And they of his lynage toke that dede in great diſpyte / and thervpon departed fro Burdeu
                  •
                and fro Burdeloys the gentyll knight ſir Edmond of Pomiers / vncle to the forſaid lord of Pomiers and toke that dede in great ſhame and ſware y• for the kyng of Englāde he wolde neuer deare armur / & ſo he went ouer the ſee to the holy ſepulchre / and to dyuers other pylgrimages / and whan he retourned / he turned himſelfe frenche and put him ſelfe and all his landꝭ vnder the obeyſance of the frenche kynge. And incontynent defyed the lorde Leſpare gaſcone / and made to hym great warre / bycauſe he was at the forſayd iudgement / and alſo for the ſame cauſe & ſuſpectyon / bycauſe the caſtell of Fron
               
                  •
               a
                  •
                was taken / and delyuered in to the frenche hādes whiche was of the herytage of the lorde Pomiers before beheeded / ther was taken for the ſame ſuſpect of treaſon / ſir Johan of Pleſſac / ſir Peter of Landuras and ſir Bertram of Fraunce and were put in priſon in Burdeaur / & ſo remayned y• ſpace of. 
                  〈◊〉
               . monethes / howebe it after they were delyuered by y• labour and purchaſe of their frendes / & bycauſe ther coude nothyng be proued agaynſt them. Thus they endured a longe ſpace in great daunger / and in the ſame caſe / wordes ran agaynſt ſir Gaylart Uyghier wherof was had great marueyle / for he was nat in the countrey / he was in Lombardy with the lorde of Coucy in y• ſeruyce of pope Gregorie / who helped to excuſe hym whan he herde of that reporte / and ſo the knyght abode ſtyll by his right. ſo there engēdred in Gaſcon for ſuche beſynes great hatredes and couert enuy / wherby fell after many great myſcheues.
            WHan the duke of Aniowe ſawe / that it was tyme for him to deꝑte out of Tholouſe / and that the mooſt parte of his men of warr were come to him and drawen in to the felde / & ſpecially the conſtable of Frāce / in whome he had great truſt and confydence. Than he departed fro Tholouſe / and toke the right way to Bergerath / and keper therof and capitayn was 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Parducas Dalbret / who was in a caſtell a lytell leage fro Languedoc / called Mou
                  •
               ux a ryght fayre caſtell. ſo longe traueyled the duke of Anious hooſt / that they aryued before Bergerath / & ſo lodged about it as nigh the ryuer as they might / for ye eaſe of them ſelfe and of their horſes. there was with the duke of Aniou many noble men. fyrſt ſir Johan of Armynake with a great rout / the cōſtable of Fraū
               ce with a great company / ſir Loys of Sanxer ſir John̄ of Bulle / Peter of Bulle / yuan of Wales / ſir Mores Triſiquidi / who ſomtyme was on the engliſſhe parte of Bretayne / but as than he was one of the french bretons / alſo ſir Alayn of Beaumont / ſir Alayn of Houſey / ſir Wylliam and Peter of Mornay / ſir Johan of Uers / ſir Baudwyn Cremoux / Thybalte of Pount / Helyot of Calay / and dyuers other good men of warre. Ther they made their lodgynges alonge the fayre medowes / by the ryuer ſyde of Dordon / which was great pleaſur to beholde. nere to the dukes lodgyng was the conſtable of Fraunce lodged / often tymes theſe companyons deſired to auaunce their bodyes / and went and ſcrimyſſhed at the barryers / and ſoo ſome were hurte and wounded / as aduenture falleth

often tymes in ſuche dedes of armes / The ſ
                  ••
               iday after the ſiege was layd before Bergerath there came in to the dukes hooſt / well acompanyed with men of armes and brigātes / the lord Dalbret and ſir Bertram his coſyn: they were receyued with great ioye for y• hooſt was gretlye enforſed by thē. The .viii. day the duke an
                  •
                the capitayns of the hooſt were in counſayle to ſe howe they myght greue them of Bergerath / there were dyuers wordes and deuyſes / & they were long at one poynt / whiche was to aſſayle the towne. than it was thought agayne that by their aſſautes / their people myght be ſore hurt and to lytell effect / and ſo for that day the counſayle brake vp / and determyned on no full concluſyon / ſauyng to contynewe ſtyll their ſiege / for they loked dayly for mo men of warre commynge out of Fraunce / and ſpecially the lorde of Coucy.
         
         
            Of the ſcrymiſſhes done before Bergerath: & howe the engliſſhmen / frē
               chemen / gaſcoyns and other: feirlly recoūtred eche other. Ca. CCC .xix.
            
               IT was ſo that ſir Thomas Felton beyng at Burdeaulx / and knowynge that his enemyes were wtin .xii. myle of him / with ſuch a puyſſaunce that he was nat able to reſyſt agaynſt them / wherof he was nothyng ioyouſe. And all that ſeaſon he knewe well / howe the duke of Aniou had made his ſomons / and had ſente for all the ſtates of Fraunce. Than he ſent worde therof into England to the kyng and to his coūſayle / but they that he ſent thyder dyde lytell good or nothyng in the matter. For the realme of Englande was as than in great bariaūce among them ſelfe / one agaynſt an other / and ſpecially the duke of Lancaſtre was nat in the fauoure of the comen people / wherby dyuers incydent parels fell after in England. the whiche ſeaſon there deꝑted no men of warr out of England / nother to go in to Gaſcoyne / nor yet in to Bretayne. Wherof they that kepte thoſe fronters / vnder the yonge kynge of Englande / were nothyng ioyouſe. Than ſir Thom̄s Felton deſired the lorde Leſpare to go in to Englande the better to enfourme the kyng and his vncles of the ſtate of Gaſcoyn and therby to prouyde coū
               ſayle for them. And ſo at the deſyre of ſir Thomas Felton / the lorde Leſpare entred in to theſee but there roſe ſuche a tempeſt agaynſt him that he was driuen in to Spayne / & there was encountred by ſhippes of Spayne / and hadde ther a great bataile and ſuche was his fortune that there he was taken priſoner / & ledde in to Spayne / and there remayned more thā a yere and a halfe / for he was ſtyll behated with them of the lynage of the lorde Pomers. ſir Thom̄s Felton / who was a right valyaūte man / wrote and ſent ſpecially for the lord of Muſident / the lorde Duras / the lorde Roſen / and for the lorde Langurant / who were foure of the chefe barones and mooſt puyſſaūte in all Gaſcoyn / of the engliſſhe party / deſiryng them that for the honour and herytage of the kynge of Englande / they wolde come and helpe to defende the countre / and to cōe with all their puyſſance to Burdeaulx. So than all knyghtes / ſuche as wolde truely acquyte thē to their kyng and lorde and to his officers / were redy come to Burdeaulx. And whan they were all togyder / they were to the nōbre of .v. hundred ſpeares / and thus they were at Burdeaux and in Burdeloys / the ſeaſon whyle the duke of Aniou lay at ſiege before Bergerath. than ſir Thomas Phelton & thoſe foure barones of Gaſcone toke their counſayle & aduyſe / & determyned to ryde forthe agaynſt the frenchmen / and to entre in to ſome place to ſe if they myght ſpye any aduauntage / to conquere any thyng agaynſt their enemyes. And ſo they departed out of Burdeaux in one company / mo than thre hundred ſpeares / and toke the way to Ryoll and ſo came to a towne called yuret & there lodged. Of this buſſhmēt knewe nothyng the frenchmen wherby they had great domage. Thus helde ſtyll the ſiege before Bergerath wher many a ſcrimiſhe was made / and many a ſeate of armes acheued / bothe by them within and thē without / how beit lytell wanne therby the frenchmen / for ſir Parducas Dalbret who was capitayne / defended valiauntly the towne. Than they of the hooſt without / to thentent to greue the ſorer their enemyes / they ſent to Rioll for a great engyn called the truye. This engyn was ſo made yt it wolde caſt great ſtones / and a hūdred men of armes myght well be within it / to aproche to aſſayle the towne. ſir Peter de Bulle was ordeyned to fetche this engyn / and with him ſir John̄ of Uers / ſir Baudwen Cremoux / ſir Alayn Beaumont / the lord
                  •
               
               
o
                  •
                Mount calay and the lorde of Gaures. And ſo they departed fro the hooſt about a thre hundred ſpeares and paſſed by a gyde the ryuer of Dordon and rode towarde Ryoll. And ſo they came forby a place bitwene Bergerath and Rioll called yuret / wher as the engliſſhmen were mo than four hundred ſpeares / and knewe nothyng of the comyng of the frenchmen. Tidynges 
                  〈◊〉
                to the hooſt to the conſtable / that the englyſſhmen were ridynge abrode: but no man coude tell where they were. Than incontynent the conſtable for doute of his men ſent out another company of men of armes / to be a countergarde to the foragers that were gone before for the engyn. Of the whiche newe company there were capitayns ſir Peter of Mornay / yuan of Wales / Thybault of Pount / and Alyotte of Calay. In that company ther was a two hundred men of armes well apoynted / ſir Peter of Bulle and his company who were gone for the engyn / dyde ſo moche that they came to Ryoll / and ther charged many chares with the engyn and ſo returned agayne towardes the hooſt by another waye (than as they came) and a more broder paſſage bicauſe of their cariage. and ſo are they came to yuret or nere thervnto within a leage they had a fayre aduēture / for ther they mette with the other company of their owne felowſhy
                  •
                / and whan they were all togyder they were a .vi. hundred ſpeares / than they rode at more leyſer / thynking themſelfe more inſuerty than they were before. than tydinges cāe to ſir Thom̄s Phelton and to ye barons of Gaſcoyn bryng at yuret / how the frēchmen were abrode and were comynge fro Ryoll to paſſe that way towardes Bergerath with a great engyn. Of the whiche tydinges they were ryght ioyouſe / and ſayd: how it was the thynge ye they mooſt deſired. Than they armed them and mounted on their horſes and made them ſelfe redy / and whan they were abrode in the felde / it was nat long after but that they ſawe where the frenchmen were comynge in good ordre / and a great nombre. And aſſoone as eche of them knewe other reputynge eche other enemyes / deſirynge to auance to fight in prouyng their horſes / and couchyng their ſpeares and crieng their cryes / they encountred eche other. At the fyrſt metyng there was a goodly iuſtes / and noble dedes of armes acheued / and many a knight and ſquier ouet throwen to the etthe / by clene force of armes / in ſuch 
                  •
               ylous poyntes many a hard auēture falleth. Ther Helyot of Calay a right experte ſquter and a good man of armes / was ſtriken fro his horſe & was ſtryken in the throte with a tauelyn of Burdeaux / as ſharpe as a raſure / the whiche ſtroke cut a ſonder the vaynes of his necke and ſo he fell to the erthe / and ther dyed whiche was great domage / for by that aduenture he ended his tyme and dayes. There was a knight of Berrey or of Lymoſyn / called ſir Wyllm̄ of Lignac / an experte man of armes and a valyant / who dyde the ſame day many a valiant dede of armes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the engliſſhmen were ouer throwen / and the greatteſt lordes of Gaſcon taken / and howe Bergerath tourned and became frenche / and dyuerſe other townes & caſtels in thoſe marches / by the army that the duke of Aniou made. Cap. CCC .xx.
            
               THis ſayd encoūter was well fought on bothe partes in a place called yuret / nere to ye village. whan their ſperes were broken / they drewe their ſwerdꝭ / wherwith they fought ryght valiātly. there was doone many a noble feate of armes / many priſoners taken and reſcued agayne / and there was ſlayne of the englyſſhe partie / a knight of Gaſcone called the lorde of Gernos and of Calais / and of the frenche parte there was ſlayne / Thybaulte du Pount. This batayle endured a longe ſeaſon and well fought / for there were many valyant men / the which cauſed the batell to endure the lenger but fynally the englyſſhemen nor ye gaſcons coude nat obtayne the place The frenchmen conquered the victory by clene force of armes / and there 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wylliam of Lignac with his owne handes toke priſoner / ſir Thomas Phelton ſeneſhall of Burdeux / there was alſo taken the lorde of Mucydent / the lorde of Duras / the lorde of Langurant / and the lorde Roſen / and in ye batayle there were but a fewe that ſcaped / outher englyſſhe or gaſcoyns / but they were taken or ſlayne. And ſuche as ſledde toke the way towarde Burdeaux / and encountred the ſeneſhall of Landes / ſir Wylliam Helmen the mayre of Burdeaux / and ſir Johan of Multon with a hūdred ſpeares / who wers 
                  •••
               
               myng

 to yuret / but whan they herde tydingꝭ of the loſſe of the felde / they retourned agayne in all haſt to Burdeaux.
            AFter this batayle was clene done / and the priſoners putte in ſaue garde / than they retourned to Bergerath to the ſiege. The duke of Aniou was greatly reioyſed of thoſe tidynges / whan he harde howe his men hadde ſped / and howe the flour of all Gaſcoyne of his enemyes were taken priſoners and ſpecially ſir Thomas Phelton / who had done hym before many a great diſpleaſure. He reputed this aduenture of more valure than .v. hundred thouſande frankes. ſir Peter of Bulle and his company / at laſt retourned and came agayne to the hooſt before Bergerath / and they were well receyued and brought to ye duke of Aniou / by the conſtable / barons / and knyghtes / and by their frēdes: and they reputed this a noble and a profytable iourney for them. The next mornynge the great engyn was rered vp agaynſt Bergerath as nere as myght be / the whiche greatlye abaſſhed them of the towne. And ſo they tooke counſayle toguyder and ſpake with their capitayne / for they ſawe well they coulde nat longe endure / nor they coulde parceyue no maner of ſocoure comyng to them warde. Conſydering howe ſir Thom̄s Phelton their ſeneſhall was taken and all the chiualry of Gaſcon / in whom they ſhuld haue had any truſt. Sir Perducass ſayd to thē. ſirs: we are ſtrong ynough to kepe the towne / and we haue vitayle and artillary ſufficyent / therfore let vs make none euyll marchandiſe. So the mater abode ſtyll in that caſetyll the next mornynge that they ſowned in the hooſt trumpettes to the aſſawte / and the conſtable of Fraūce beyng in the felde / or he wolde aſſayle the towne / in exchewynge of hurtynge of his men / ſent to ſpeke with them of Bergerathe and made to be ſhewed to them / howe he hadde all their capitayns priſoners / by whom they ſhulde haue any ayde or ſocour / and howe they were in the caſe to become frenche / and to put themſelfe and their landes vnder the obeyſance of the frenche kynge. And alſo he ſhewed them / that if they were aſſayled and taken by force / howe all the towne ſhulde be putte to the fyre: and men / women / & chyldren to ye ſwerde / without any mercy. Theſe wordes abaſſhed greatlye them of Bergerath / and they deſyred to take counſayle and ſo they dyd / than the burgeſſes of the towne went to counſayle without callyng of their capitayne / and they agreed to become frenche / ſoo they myght lyue peaſably without hauynge any men of warre amonge them / the whiche was lightly agreed to them. and whan ſir Perducas Dalbret their capiten herde of that treatie / he mounted on his horſe & made his men to paſſe ouer the bridge / and ſo departed and went to the garyſon of Moneyn and Bergerah yelded vp to the frenche parte. And the conſtable of Fraunce toke poſſeſſyon therof / and ſet therin a capitayne & men of war to kepe it. Whan yt Bergerath was thus tourned french / the duke of Aniou was counſayled to go forthe and to ley ſiege to Chaſtellon on ye ryuer of Dordone The tidynges therof ſpred abrode in the felde / and euery man prepared to go thyder: as the duke / the conſtable and all other men of warre: except the marſhall of Fraū
               ce who abode behynde to abyde for the lorde of Coucy / who came the ſame night. and the marſhall rode to mete him with a great company & receyued him right amyably / and ſo taryed all that night in the ſame place / wher as the duke had ben the night before. The duke ye ſame day came to a fayre medowe in his way to Chaſtellon / on the ryuer of Dordon. And with ye lorde of Coucy ther was ſir Edmond of Pomyers / ſir Triſtram of Roy / the lorde of Faignels / the lorde of Jumont / ſir John̄ of Roſey / ſir Robr̄t of Cleremont / and dyuers other knightes and ſquyers. And in the mornynge they depted fro their lodgynge and rode in the company of the marſhall of Fraunce / tyll they came to the dukꝭ hooſt / wher they were receyued with great ioy goyng towarde Chaſtellon / in a towne called ſaynt Foy or the vowarde came to Chaſtello / and aſſayled the towne of ſaynt Foye right feerſly. Within the towne there were no men of warre / and ſo made but ſmall defence & wolde haue yelded them vp / and in their yelding they were all pylled and robbed. So the ſiege was layd about Chaſtellon / & endured a .xv. dayes there were many ſcrimyſſhes before the barryers / for within the towne were dyuers engliſſhmen and gaſcoyns / ſuche as fledde fro the dyſconfyture of yuret / who right valiantly defended the towne. And ſuche lordes of Gaſcone as were taken priſoners before / were with ye duke of Aniou in his hooſt / and dyd aſmoch as they might to cauſe the towne to yelde vp to ye duke howe beit ſir Thomas Phelton dyde nothyng in the mater / bycauſe he was an englyſſhman. And alſo he that toke hym priſoner ſir John̄ of Liguac had as than put hym to his raunſome / to pay .xxx. M. frankes / and whan the money

               
                  〈◊〉
                as payed he / was d
                  •
               lyuered but y• was nat ſo 
                  •••
               ne. So long theſe four barons of Gaſcone were deſyred & 
                  •
               ntyſed to becōe frenche / that at laſt they were content / & made promyſe to y• duke of An
                  •
               ou by their faithes and honours to be euer good frenche
                  •
                bothe themſelfe and their lā
               des. And ſo by that meanes the duke of Aniou delyuered them quyte and fre / and ſo departed 
                  •
               ro the duke on that promyſe. the lorde of Du
               
                  •
               as and the lorde of Roſen / to thentent to go into their owne countreis. And the lorde of Lan
               
                  •
               uras and the lorde of Mu
                  •
               y
                  •
               ent abode ſtyll in the hooſt with the duke at their pleaſur / and 
                  〈◊〉
                and 
                  〈◊〉
                daylye with hym in his lod
               
                  〈…〉
               
               ▪ Theſe barons of Gaſcoyne founde the 
                  〈◊〉
                of 
                  〈◊〉
                right 
                  ••
               yable / to let them paſſe 
                  〈◊◊〉
                as he dyde / whiche he repented after as 
                  〈…〉
                ſhewe you howe.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                lorde of Duras / and the lorde of Ro
               
                  •••
                / after they were departed and were in the 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ they comuned togyder ▪ and ſayde. 
                  •
               owe may we well ſerue the duke of Aniowe and the frenchmen ▪ 
               
                  ••
               the we haue alwayes be
                  •
                good 
                  〈◊〉
                / therfore it were moche bett
                  ••
                
               
                  •
               or
                  •
               s to 
                  〈◊〉
                our p
                  ••
               myſe to the duke of An
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                the kyng of Englande is our naturall 
                  〈◊〉
                and hath done moche for vs. And ſo they concluded to go to Burdeaur and to ſhewe the 
                  〈…〉
                of 
                  •
               and as ſir Wyllm̄ 
               
                  •
               elman howe th
                  〈…〉
                wyſe abyde frenche. So 
                  〈…〉
               the togyder tyll they came to Bur
               
                  〈…〉
                they were receyued with great 
                  •
               oy 
                  〈…〉
                that they were become frenche. 
                  •
               han the 
                  •
               en
                  •
               ſhall and the mayre of Bur
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                of them howe they had done / the
                  •
                anſwered: that by cōſtraynt and manaſ
               
                  •
               hyng
                  •
                / and for feare of their lyues / they were 
                  •
               ay
                  •
               e 
                  •
               o promyſe to the duke of Aniou to becōe french. But ſirs we ſay to you playnly that 
                  〈◊〉
                maky
                  ••
                of our promyſe ▪ alwayes in our hert
                  •
                we reſ
                  •••
               ed our faythes to our naturall lorde the kynge of Englande. And therfore what ſoeuer we haue ſaid or done▪ we wyll neuer becōe 
                  〈◊〉
               . 
                  〈◊〉
                the whiche wordes the knyghtes of England were right 
                  •
               oyouſe▪ ſayeng that they 
                  〈◊〉
                them ſelfe right val
                  •
               ātly to their lorde and 
                  〈◊〉
               . About a fyue dayes after / the duke 
                  〈◊◊〉
                beyng 
                  ••
               yll before Chaſtello
                  •
                / worde came to 
                  〈◊〉
               : how the lorde Duras & the lorde Roſen were turned agayne and becōe englyſhe of the whiche the duke the conſtable and other 
                  〈…〉
               . Than ye duke ſent for the lorde of 
                  〈◊〉
                and for the lorde of 
                  •
               ang
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                the mater / and 
                  〈◊〉
                ded of them what they ſayd thervnto. The lo
                  •
               
               des who were rightſore diſpleaſed / ſayd. Sir thought they breke their promiſes / we wyll
                  •
               at breke ours. For ſir ▪ that we haue promyſed we wyll vpholde / for it can be no reproche to vs / to abyde vnder your obeyſance / ſyth your men cō
               quered vs by clene force of armes. Sirs ꝙ the duke I beleue you well: and If were by god / y• whan I deptehens / the firſt thyng that I wyll do / ſhalbe to ley ſiege bef
                  •
               re ye to wne of Duras and next to ye towne of Roſen. Thus the duke of Aniowe abode ſtyll before the towne of Chaſtellon ryght ſore diſpleaſed / with th
                  •
               ſe two for ſayd lordes of Gaſcoyne. This towne of Chaſtellon parteyned to ye herytage of the Captall of Be
                  •••
                whome the frenche kyng had in priſon in Parys. the ſiege thus enduryng before Thaſ
                  •••
               lon ther fell a great famyn▪ nother for golde nor ſyluer coulde be gotte any thynge to lyue by / ſo y• the frenchmen were fayne to ryde a. 
                  〈◊〉
               . or .xv. myles to gette any vitayle for the hooſt / and often tymes they returned agayne in great parell / for there were dyuers caſtelles and fortereſſes englyſſhe on the fronters / the whiche iſſued out and made buſſhmentes / and encountred them at ſtreyghtes / and paſſages. and whan they ſawe they were ſtrong ynough for ye frenche foragers / they wolde ſet on them / and hurt / & 
                  •
               lee many of them / and take away their vitayls / wherfore the frenchmen durſte not ryde but in great companyes. So long the ſiege endured that they within were ſo cōſtray 
                  ••
               d / what with aſſawtes & with engyns / that they were fayne to yelde them vp / their lyues and goodes ſaued. and ſo all the men of warre within deꝑted with bagge and baggage / and wēt to ſaynt Macayre / wher ther was a good towne and a ſtronge caſtell. Whan Chaſtellon was yelded vp / the duke of Aniou toke poſſeſſion therof / & faythe and homage of the dwellers within the towne / and there he ſette newe officers / and made capitayne ther a knyght of Thowrayn / called ſir James Moūtmartyn. And whan the duke departed thens / he tooke his aduyſe whyder he ſhulde drawe / than he was counſayled to goo to ſaynt Maryne / but in his way there were dyuers lytell fortereſſes whiche the duke thought nat good to be left be hynde him / bi
                  •
               awſe of his foragers / & ſo fyr
                  ••
                he laydſiege to Sauueter / and than tidynges came to the duke otherwyſe than he had harde before of the lorde Duras / and of the lorde Ro
               
                  •••
                it was ſayd howe ſurely they were at Burdeau
                  •
                / but vnder what maner they could
                  〈…〉
               
               
as than knowe / whiche wordes spra
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                in the hooſt / and ſo came to the herynge of the lorde Mucydent / and of the lorde 
                  〈◊〉
               . Than they ſpake to the lorde of 
                  〈◊〉
                and ſo ſir Peter of Bulle deſirynge thē to helpe to excuſe the ſayd lordes: ſayng how it was a great ſymplenes to beleue ſo lyghtly ſuch fleyng wordes / and ſo they promyſed to do ▪ and ſo ſpake to the duke therof / and he anſwered and ſayd / he wolde be ryght glad to here & knowe the contrary of that he had harde before. This 
                  〈◊〉
                was before Sauueterre / whiche helde but thre dayes / for y• capitayne yelded vp the forter
                  •••
               e ſauynge his lyfe and all his / and their goodes. and ſo the duke paſſed forth and came to ſaynt Baſyll a good towne / whiche incontynent y
                  •
               lded vp / and put them ſelfe vnder the obeyſance of the frenche kyng. And than the duke went to Mountſegure / and at the fyrſt he gaue aſſaut and myſt it: and ſo lodged for that nyght. And the next mornyng they made them redy agayn to the aſſawte / wherof they within were abaſſhed and went to counſayle / and finally concluded to yelde vp the towne / their lyues and g
                  •
               
               des ſaued / & ſo they were receyued. Than the duke rode farder / and came to a cloſed towne bytwene ſaynt Ma
                  •
               ayre and the Ryoll / called Amberoche. Ther the duke was four dayes 
                  〈◊〉
                he could haue it / & than by treaty it was gyue
                  •
                vp. And thā the duke went to ſaynt 
                  〈◊〉
               .
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Aniou toke by force ſaynt Macayre / and the towne of Duras by aſſaute / & dyuers other fortereſſes agaynſt the engliſſhmen. Cap. CCC .xxi.
            
               DAyly the dukes hoost multiplyed and encreaſed / for men came to hym fro all partes / as knyghtes & ſquiers to auaūce their bodyes. So the ſiege was layne before ſaynt Macayre & within were all ſuche men of warre as were goone out of ſuche fortreſſes as had ben yelden vp before wherby the towne was ye ſtrōger / & the better defended / ther was dyuers great aſſautes made / and many a fayre 
                  〈…〉
               yſſhe before the barryers. Than the duke and the 
                  〈◊〉
                or
               
                  •
               ayned the ſiege endurynge / that certayne 
                  〈◊〉
                with their companyes ſhulde 
                  〈◊◊◊〉
                in the 
                  〈◊〉
                all 
                  〈◊〉
               . And ſo the men 
                  〈◊〉
                armes ſprad abrode. 
                  〈◊〉
                y• ma
                  •
               ſhal
                  •
                of Fraū
               ce with a great route / ſir Percyuall of M
                  ••••
               ll norman / and Wylliam of Moncontoure with a great company▪ 
               
                  〈…〉
                men of armes were a brode in the feldes
                  〈…〉
               ayes / and toke dyuer
                  •
                townes and ſmall holdes / & brought the coū
               
                  ••
               e all aboute / vnder the obeyſance of the frenche kyng. there were none that withſtode them for the countre was voyde / & vnprouyded of men of warre of thenglyſſhe part / and they yt ſ
                  •
               edde went to Burd
                  •
               ur. And than theſe men of war
                  •
                returned agayne to ye hooſt / they of ſaynt Macayre knewe well / howe they coude nat long 
                  〈◊〉
               
               dure / and it was dayly ſhewed thē / that if they were taken by force they ſhulde all dye without mercy / wherof they douted. And the comons ſecretly treated with ye frenchmen to yelde vp the towne their lyues and goodes ſaued. The mē of warr within parceyuing well their ententes douted greatly the comons / yt they ſhuld make some yuell bargayne for them. Wherfore they brue thē to the caſtell / whiche was right ſtrong and able to be kept / & therin they put all yt they had / & ſome pyllage of the towne: than they of the towne, yelded vp / & put thē ſelfe vnder the o
               
                  •
               eyſance of the frenche kyng. Tidynges cāe to the duke whyle he lay at ſiege before Moutſegu
                  •
               e / how that ye duches his wyfe was at Tho
               
                  •
               ouſe / & was ther delyuered of a ſonne / wherof the duke and all his hooſt was right ioyouſe / 
                  〈◊〉
                were of the more hardynes / to atempt dedes 
                  〈◊〉
                armes. Aſſone as ſaynt Ma
                  •
               ayre was gyue
                  •
                
               
                  •
               p / the duke entred & all his / and eaſed and refreſſhed thē / for in the towne was good loging and well furnyſſhed. & ſo ye caſtell was h
                  •
               ſ
                  •
               ged and 
                  ••
               gy
                  •
               s 
                  •
               eyſed before it the which dyd 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               ylous great ſtones of yron / which great 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               hed thē within. And thus whyle y• duke 
                  〈◊〉
                at this ſiege true tidynges cāe to him of the 
                  〈◊〉
                Duras & of the lorde Roſen / brought by 
                  〈◊〉
                haraudꝭ / & that was 
                  •••
               ely how they were 
                  ••
               the become englyſſhe agayne. Than y• duke ſayd / let vs make an end here & than I wyll go and lay ſiege before Duras / & ſo made a 
                  ••
               irſe aſſaut to the caſtell / for he wolde nat 
                  •
               eau
                  •
                it be 
                  ••
               nd him. And they of y• caſtell ſawe how they were a
                  ••
               ailed on all ſydes and codde 
                  〈◊〉
                no 
                  •
               onfort / and ſawe well how the duke nor the cā
               
               
                  ••
               able wolde nat deꝑte thens tyll they had y• caſtell at their wyll o
                  •
               ther with fayrneſſe or fou
                  •
               
               neſſe. So all thynge cōſydred / they fell in 
                  〈◊◊〉
                yelded vp the caſtell / their lyues & goodes 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ & they were receyued & coueyed to 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
                And ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                Macayres towne & 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
was become frenche / and therin the duke made newe capitayns / and than diſloged and toke ye way towarde Duras / and ſo long he rode that he came before Duras. And at the firſte aprochyng the duke ordayned to aſſayle the towne / and euery man prepared for the ſaut / & the croſbowes before well paueſſed. And ſo they aproched to the towne / and ſome had ladders redy to mount / ther began a ſore and a cruell aſſaut and ſuche as mounced / fought hande to hande with thē within. This aſſaut endured a longe ſpace / on the ladders ther were done many feates of armes / as in fightynge hande to hande. This aſſaut endured the moſt parte of the day than at laſt the trumpettes ſowned the retreat / and ſo euery man drewe to his logyng for that night. The ſame tyme there came to the hooſt / ſir Alayne de la Haye / and ſir Alayne of ſaynt Poule / and with them a great company of bretons / who had ryden towarde Lyburne / & had aſſayled an englyſſhe garyſon / named Cadyllac / the whiche they had taken byforce / & ſlayne all them within. In the mornynge / the duke of Aniou cōmaunded euery man to go to the aſſaut: deſyringe them to do their beſt / and by a haralude made to be cryed through the hooſt / who ſoeuer entred firſt in to Duras / ſhulde haue in rewarde / fyue hūdred frankes. For couytouſneſſe of wynning of this rewarde / many a one auaunced and icoꝑded themſelfe / ſo there were many ladders anone reared vp agaynſt the walles. There was a feirſe aſſaute / for the yong knightes and ſquyers deſyring to auaū
               ce their bodyes / aduētured them ſelfe right valiantly. The lorde of Langurant was moūted vpon a ladder / his ſwerde in his hande one of the firſt / and payned him ſelfe moch to haue entred firſt into the towne / nat for wynning of the fyue hundred frākes / but to exalt his name: for he was ſore diſpleaſed with ye lorde of Duras / bycauſe he was tourned ſo lightly englyſſhe agayne. The lorde Langurant dyde that daye marueyls in armes / ſo that his owne men / and alſo ſtrangers had marueyle of his dedes. He auaūced hymſelfe ſo moche forwarde / that he put his lyfe in great ieopardy. For they within by clene force raſed the helme of his heed / and ſo had ben deed withoute remedy and a ſquyer of his hadde nat ben / who folowed him ſo nere that he rouered hym with his targe. And the lorde and he togyder diſcended downe the ladder lytell & lytell / and in their dyſcendyng they receyued on ye targe many a great ſtroke. they were greatly prayſed of all that ſawe them. Alſo there was ſir Tryſtram of Roy / and ſir Percyuall Daneuall on another ladder / aſſayling and ſautyng right valiantly. In lyke wiſe dyd ſir John̄ Jumont and ſir John̄ of Roſey / eche of them doyng marueyls in armes / and at another lope of the wall on a ladder / there was the lorde of Sereell / and fought hande to hande with his enemyes / ſo that euery man that ſawe hym ſayd / if there were any likely to entre in to the towne / he was ſemyng to be the firſt. The knight dyde nat aduenture hym ſelfe all onely for the profyte / but rather to gette honour: but the fortunes of warre be ryght peryllous / and ſo it happed to hym / for he was putte downe feerſly with a glayue / ſo that he fell downe to the botome of the dyke / and with the fall brake his necke / and ther he dyed. And in lyke caſe dyed an other ſquyer of Bretayne / who bare in his armes: goules / two cheurons chekard: golde / ſyluer / and aſure: of whoſe dethe the conſtable was ſore diſpleaſed. Than the aſſaut began to be fierſar on euery part / the lorde of Mucydēt proued that day a good knyght / & ſhewed well by his dedes howe he was a true frenche man. So thus byforce the towne of Duras was cō
               quered / and the firſt that entred was ſir Tryſtram of Roy and ſir John̄ of Roſey: than the men of warre within the towne fledde in to the caſtell.
         
         
            ¶ Howe yuan of wales layd ſiege to Mortayne / and howe the ſcottꝭ toke by ſtelthe the caſtell of Berwyke: agaynſt the wyll of the kynge of Englande. Cap. CCC .xxii.
            
               THus the towne of Duras was takē and all ſlayne that were within / than the men of warre toke their logyng / and vnarmed them & toke their eaſe. the next mornyng the conſtable of Fraū
               ce mounted on his horſe & the marſhall of Frā
               ce with him / and went and aduyſed well the caſtell / and toke good hede on what ſyde it were mooſt beſt to aſſayle it. And all thynges conſydred / they ſawe well the caſtell was right ſtronge and harde to wyn / without long ſiege: and ſo they returned and ſhewed this to the duke of

Aniou. It maketh no mater ꝙ the duke / for I haue ſayd and ſworne that I wyll nat departe hens / tyll I haue the caſtell at my wyll. Than the conſtable anſwered. Sir / with goddꝭ grace / yeſhall nat beforſworne. Than they reared vp all their engyns agaynſt the caſtell / & whan they within ſawe the dealyng of thē in the towne and of the frenchmen / conſydering howe the aſſautynge ſhulde be right perylous for them. Than they thought to fall intreatie / and ſo entreated with the conſtable to take them to mercy / their lyues and goodꝭ ſaued / and ſo to yelde vp the caſtell. The duke of Anio we toke counſayle / and by the aduyſe of the conſtable / who wolde nat by his wyll trauayle any more his people. The thirde day receyued thē to mercy / and ſo they departed and were brought thyder as they wolde be / and ſo the conſtable toke poſſeſſion of the caſtell / but as I was enfourmed: the duke of Aniou cōmaunded / that the caſtell ſhulde be beten downe. and ſo after ye conqueſt of the caſtell and towne of Duras / the duke of Aniou ordayned to abyde there: ſir Johan of Jumont / ſir Triſtram of Roye and ſir Johan of Roſey with a hundred ſpeares / to kepe there the fronters agaynſt Burdelois. and the duke thought to returne to Tholouſe / to ſe the good lady his wife who was as thā newly churched of a fayre ſonne. & he thought at her churchyng to kepe a great feeſt at Tholouſe / and he ordeyned in all ſuche townes as he hadde conquered men of warre / and garyſons to reſyſt puſantly agaynſt his enemyes: and ſayd to yuan of Wales. Sir: yeſhall take in your charge / bretons poicteuyns / and angeuyns: and yeſhall go in to Poictou and ley ſiege to Mortaigne / on the ſee whiche the lorde of Leſtrade kepeth / & come nat thens for no maner of commaūdement fro the kyng or fro any other / tyllſuch ſeaſon as ye haue ye full poſſeſſion therof / for it is a garyſon that hath done moch trouble to vs. ſir: ꝙ yuan to the beſte of my power / I ſhall do your commaundement. Than the duke ordayned and apoynted all them that ſhulde go with yuan in to Poyctou / and ſo they departed fro the duke to the nombre of fyue hūdred ſpeares and toke the way in to Xaynton / to goo towardes ſaynt John̄s Dangle. And the duke / the cōſtable / the lorde of Coucy / the marſhall of Fraūce / and ſir Johan and ſir Peter of Bulle / returned backe to Tholouſe / and ther foūde the duches newly puryfied / at which tyme ther was made great feeſt and iuſtyng. than after the conſtable and the lorde Coucy retourned into Fraunce / and the marſhall of Sanxere went in to Auuergne to ayde the barōs / ſuch as made warre againſt the englyſſhmen / who were in Limoſyn / in Auuergne and on the frontres there. ¶ Howe let vs ſhewe howe yuan of Wales layed ſiege the ſame ſeaſon before Mortayne / and howe he cō
               ſtrayned them within the garyſon.
            
               THis yuan of Wales was gladd to obey the commaundement of the duke of Aniou / for he knewe well what ſoeuer the duke dyde / it was the pleaſure of the kyng. And alſo he knewe well that the kynge bare all the charges of his enterpriſes: and ſo came in to Xayntes in Poitou / and ther refreſſhed them in that plentyfull countrey. And in his company was the lorde of Pouns / the lorde of Thouars / the lorde of Umaroyſe / the lorde Jaques of Surgeres / and great nōbre of knightes and ſquyers of Poictou. And of the bretons & normans / there were capitayns / ſir Mores of Tryſiqdy ſir Alayne Houſey / ſir Alayne of ſaynt Poule / ſir Percyuall Daneuall / Wylliam of Mountcomptor / and the lorde of Momorette his brother. Theſe men of warre departed whan they were redy / and went & layed ſiege before Mortayne / whiche was the fayreſt and ſtrongeſt caſtell ſtandyng on the ryuer of Garon / and nere to the mouthe of the ſee. Thus yuan and his cō
               pany layed ſiege before Mortaigne / and made baſtydes lytell and lytell / and prepared for all thynges neceſſarie / for they knewe well by aſſaut they ſhulde neuer wynne the caſtell / nor by no way: ſauyng by long ſiege and by famyne. Ther yuan ordayned four baſtydes about the caſtell / ſo that none coude reuitayle the towne / nother by lande nor by ſee. And ye yong knightes and ſquyers / deſiryng to auaunce their bodyes / went often tymes to the barryers of ye caſtell and ſcrimyſſhed with thē within / and they with thē. And ſo bytwene them ther was done many a proper feate of armes. Within the caſtell there was a knight called the Souldiche / who was a gaſcoyn a right valyant knight / & a good man of armes / by whoſe counſaile they within were ruled / as moche as by their capitayns. Wyne and vitayls they had within ſufficyent / but of other ſmall neceſſaries they had great ſcarcyte durynge the ſiege. Kyng Charles of Fraūce though he helde hymſelfe at Parys / and ſported him at his pleaſur without armyng of his owne ꝑſon. yet he kept warr in diuers places agaynſt thēgliſſhmen his enemys

and gatte hym alyaunces / as well within the realme / as in any other countrey aboute / more than any of his predeceſſours / of foure or fyue kynges had before. And greatly he helde them in loue / ſuche as he thought to haue any ayde by. And bycauſe he ſawe well kyng Richard of Englande was but yong & the realme in trouble and diſcorde. Therfore he ſent in to Scotland dyuers tymes / bothe to kyng Robert and to kynge Dauyd his vncle / alwayes to entertayne them in loue. Deſyring thē euer to make good and ſharpe warr on thenglyſſhmen / and ſo to traueyle them / that they ſhuld haue no puiſſaunce to paſſe ouer the ſee. In ſo moche / ſo it happed that kynge Robert of Scotlande / the ſame ſeaſon that kyng Edwarde ye thirde was deed / and kyng Rycharde crowned: he aſſembled his coūſayle at Edenborowe in Scotlāde where as were the mooſt parte of all the barones and knyghtes of Scotlande and of other / ſuche as he thought ſhulde do him ſeruyce / ſhewyng them howe thenglyſſhmen in tyme paſt / hadde done them many great inconuenyences as in brennynge of their countreys / beatynge downe their caſtles / ſtayeng and raunſomyng their men / ſayeng alſo. Sirs: nowe is ye tyme come that we may be well reuenged / for no we there is but a yonge kynge in Englande / for kyng Edwarde is deed / who was wonte to haue ſo good fortune. Than the barownes and yong knyghtes that were there / ſuche as deſyred to be reuēged of the domage done to them by thēglyſſhmen / anſwered all with one voyce howe they were all redy apparelled to ryde in to Englande / and it were the ſame daye or the next / or whan it pleaſed hym. This aunſwere pleaſed greatly the kyng of Scotes and thanked them all / and ther the kyng ordeyned four erles / to be as chefe capitayns of all the men of warre. And that was the erle Duglas / the erle Moret therle of Maure / and the erle of Surlant / & the conſtable of Scotlande ſir Archambalt Duglas / and the marſhall of the hooſt / ſir Robert Uerſy. And ſo they made their ſomons to be at a certayne day at Morlane / and in the makynge of this aſſemble / there departed fro them a valiantſquier of Scotland called Alyſander Ramſey / who thought to enter priſe to acheue a great feate of armes / & toke with him fortie well mounted / and rode ſo long by night priuely that by the day in the morning he came to Berwyke whiche was engliſſhe / & capitayn of the towne was a ſquyer of the erle of Northumberlandes / named Johan Byſet: and in the caſtell was capitayne a valyant knight / called ſir Robert Abenton. Whan the ſcotes were come to Berwyke / they kept thē ſelfe priuy and ſente a ſpye to the towne and to the caſtell / to ſe in what cōdicyon it was / the ſpye entred downe in to the dykꝭ / where ther was no water nor none coude abyde there / for it was all a quycke boylyng ſande. And ſo the ſpye loked and harkened all aboute / but he coulde nat here nor ſe no creature / and ſo he returned and ſhewed all that to his maiſter. Than Alyſander Ramſey auaunſed for the / and brought all his company priuely into the dykes / and had with them ladders / and ſo dreſſed them vp to the walles. Alyſander was one of the firſt ye mounted vp with his ſwerde in his hande / and ſo entred in to the caſtell / and all his company folowed hym / for there was none that withſtode thē. And whan they were all within / than they went to ye chefe towre / wher as the capitayne was a ſlepe / and ſo there ſodenly with great axes they brake vp the dore. The capitayne ſodenly awoke & had ſlept all night / and had made but ſmall watche the which he derely bought. And ſo opened his chambre dore / wenyng to him the noyſe had be made by ſome of his owne ſoudiers that wold haue robbed or murdred hym in his bedde / bycauſe he had diſpleaſed them the weke before / & ſo lept out of a wyndowe downe into the dykes in great feare / without order or good aduyſe / ſo that with the fall he brake his necke and ther he dyed. The watchmen were halfe a ſlepe and herde the noyſe and woke / and parceyued well howe the caſtell was ſcaled and betrayed / and ſo ſowned in a trumpet trahey / trahey. Johan Byſet capitayne of ye towne / hearyng the voice of a trumpe armed him / and cauſed all them of the towne to be armed / and ſo drewe all before the caſtell / and herde well the noyſe that the ſcottes made within / but they coulde nat entre in / for the gate was ſhytte and the bridge drawen. Than the capitayne Johan Byſet remembred him of a great aduyce / and ſayd to them of the towne / that were aboute hym: Lette vs breke downe the ſtayes of the brige on this ſyde / and than they within can nat yſſue wtout our danger. Incōtynent with axes they beate downe ye bridge & ſtayes therof towarde the towne. And than John̄ Byſet ſent a meſſanger to Anwyke a .xii. lytell myles thens to the lorde Percy / certifyeng him of all ye mater. deſyring him to cōe without delay with ſome great puyſſaunce / to reſcue agayne the caſtell of Berwyke / ſo taken by ſtelthe by the ſcottes. And moreouer Johan

Byſette ſayd to Thomelyn Fryant / who was the meſſanger / ſhe we to my lorde in what caſe ye leaue vs / & howe the ſcottes are cloſed within the caſtell and canne nat yſſue out / without they leape ouer the walles: and therfore deſyre hym to make the more haſt. Alyſander Ramſey and his company / who had thus ſcaled the caſtell of Berwike / and thought they had done a great enterprice / and ſo they had don in dede and Johan Byſet had nat prouyded aſodayne remedy: for els they had ben alſo lordes of the towne. And ſo they ſlewe of theym within the raſtell whome it pleaſed them and the reſydne they toke priſoners / and ſhytte them vp faſt in a towre. Than they ſayd: nowe let vs go downe in to the towne for it is ours / and let vs take all the good therin & the riche men of ye towne / and bringe them all in to this caſtell / and tha
                  ••
               
               ſette fyre on the towne: for it is nat to be kepte by vs. And within thre or foure dayes we ſhall haue reſcue out of Scotlande / ſo that we ſhall ſaue all our pyllage / and at our departyng / let vs ſette fyre in the caſtell / and ſo pay our hooſt. To which purpoſe they all agreed / for they deſyred all to wynne ſome pyllage. And ſo they toke eche of them a glayue in their hādes / they founde ynowe in the caſtell / and ſo opened the gate and let downe the bridge. And whan the bridge was downe / the ropes ye helde it brake aſondre / for the reſtyng place of the brige was broken awaye towarde the towne. And whan Johan Byſet ſawe the maner of them / than he and all his company began to ſhoute and crye / and ſayd. Aſirs / kepe you there: ye ſhall nat departe thens without our leaue. and whan Alyſander Ramſey ſawe the maner of them without. Than he ſawe and knewe well / howe they were aduyſed of his beyng in the caſtell / and ſo cloſed agayne the gate for feare of ſhotte / and fortifyed the caſtell / thinkynge to haue kept it / and dyd caſt out in to the dykes all the deed mē and putte vp in to a towre all their priſoners. They thought the place was ſtronge ynough to kepe long / or at leeſt tyll ſome reſcue myght come to them out of Scotland / for the barons and knightes of Scotlande were aſſemblyng togyder at Morlane and ther about / and alſo therle Duglas was departed fro Alqueſt / and was come to Dombare.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of the ſquier ſent by Johan Byſet to Anwyke / to the lorde Percy erle of Northumberlande / ſignyfieng hym all this ſayd aduenture.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the erle of Northūberlande wan agayne the caſtell of Berwike / and howe he entred puyſſantly in to Scotlande. Cap. C C C .xxiii.
            
               SO longe rode Thomelyn Fryant that he cāe to Anwyke early in the mornynge / and the lorde Percy / was as than in his bedde. Neuertheleſſe he dyde ſo moche that he ſpake with hym / for his buſyneſſe had haſt / and ſayd. Sir: the ſcottes hath this mornyng taken by ſtelth the caſtell of Berwyke. And ſir the capitayne of the towne hath ſente me hyder to you / to gyue you knowledge therof / ſeyng ye be warden of all this countre. Whanne the erle herde thoſe tidynges he made haſt as moche as he might / to conforte them of Berwike / and ſent out letters and meſſangers ouer all the coūtre to knightes ſquyers & other to cōe to Berwike incōtynēt / to helpe and ayde hym agaynſt the ſcottes / who hadde taken by ſtelth the caſtell of Berwyke. Anone this was knowen through the coūtre / and ſo euery man departed fro their owne houſes knightes / ſquiers / archers / and croſbowes. And to Anwyke came the lorde Neuyll / the lorde Lucy / ye lorde of Blelles / ye lorde of Grayſtoke / the lorde ſtafforde / the capitayne of Newcaſtell / and a right valyant knight called ſir Thom̄s Moſgraue. And ſo firſt came to Berwyke the erle of Northumberlande / and euery day people came thyder to hym / ſo that he was a tenne thouſandemen / or there about. and than beſieged the caſtell ſo nere / that a byrde coulde nat come oute without knowledge. And than they began to myne vnder the caſtell / the ſoner to cōe to their ententes of the ſcottes / and to wynne agayne the caſtell. Than tidynges came to the barownes of Scotlande / howe the erle / barownes / knightes / and ſquiers / of Northumberlande / habde beſieged their company in the caſtell of Berwike. And ſo they were all determyned to go and reyſe vp the ſiege / and to refreſſhe and vitayle the caſtell / and they all ſayd: howe Alyſaunder Ramſeys enterprice / was valyauntly atempted. And ſir Archambault Duglas conſtable of Scotlande / ſayde. Alyſaunder is my coſyn: it cometh of a noble gentyll hert / to enterpriſe ſuche a feate / as for to wynne the caſtell of Berwyke / and we ought all greatly to comfort and helpe hym in his dede. And if we may

               
                  〈◊〉
                the ſiege, it ſhall tourne to our great nobleneſſe wherfore lette vs go thyder. And ther they ordayned who ſhulde go with hym & who ſhulde byde. And ſo he toke with hym fyue hundred ſpeares of the beſt of all the hooſt: and ſo they rode for the towarde Berwyke. Tidyngꝭ came to the englyſſhe lordes at Berwyke / how the ſcottes were comynge to reyſe their ſiege & to reuitayle the caſtell. Than they went to coū
               ſayle / and ſo determyned to take a place and to abyde their enemyes and to fight with them / it was all their deſyre. and ſo the lorde Percy cauſed all his company to be redy armed and aparelled to fight / and to make their muſters. and ſo they founde them ſelfe to the nombre of thre thouſande men of armes / and ſeuyn thouſande archers. And whan the erleſawe that he had ſo great a nombre he ſayd / lette vs kepe our place we are men ynough to fight with all the puyſſaunce of Scotlande. And ſo they abode in a fayre playne without Berwike / in two batails in good order. And they had nat been there the ſpace of an houre / but that they ſawe certayne currours of the ſcottes well horſed / ridynge to aduyſe thengliſſhe hooſt. Ther were certayne knightꝭ and ſquyers wolde gladly haue ryden to them to haue ſcrimyſſhed with them / but the lorde Percy wolde nat ſuffre them: but ſayde let their hole bataile come / for if they wyll fight with vs they wyll aproche nerer to vs. So the englyſſhmen kept them ſelfe ſtyll cloſe togyder and the ſcottes came ſo nere them / that they aduyſed well their two batayls / and the nombre of their people. And whan theſe currours had well aduyſed the dealyng of the englyſſhmen / than they retourned to their maiſters / and ſhewed them all that they had ſene / and ſayd. ſirs / we haue ryden ſo nere to the englyſſhe hooſt / yt we haue well aduyſed all their behauyng / and ſirs / we ſay vnto you: they be redy abidyng for you in two fayre batails in a fayre playne / and in euery batayle a .v. thouſand men. Therfore nowe take good aduyſe / we aproched them ſo nere that they ꝑceyued well howe we were currours of Scotlande / but they wolde nat ſtyrre nor ſend out one man to rynne at vs. Whan ſir Archambalt Duglas and the knightꝭ of Scotlande herde that tidynges they were penſyue / and ſayd / we can nat ſe that it ſhulde be for our profyte to ryde as nowe agaynſt the englyſſhemen for they are ten agaynſt one of vs & all choſen men wherfore we may loſe more than wyn / and of a folyſſhe en
                  •
               price cometh no good / as it proueth nowe by Alyſander Ramſey / & ther was an vncle of Alyſanders / called ſir Wyllyam Lindſey / who dyde great payne to confort his nephue. Sayeng / ſirs: on the truſt of you my nephue hath made this enterprice / and taken the caſtell of Berwike. It wyll tourne you all to great blame if ye leſe him thus / and paraduentur herafter / ther is none that wyll be ſo haſty to inpart ſuche another caſe. They than anſwered and ſayd: they coude nat amende it / nor it was nat behouefull that ſo many noblemen as was ther / ſhulde put them ſelfe in aduē
               ture to be loſt / for the reſcuynge of one ſquyer. And than they determyned to retourne agayn into their owne coūtre / and lodge on the mountayns beſyde the ryuer of Twyde / and ſo they withdrue thyder at good layſer. And whan the erle of Northumberlande / and the erle of Notyngham / and the other barones of Englande parceyued that the ſcottes came nat forwarde / they ſent forthe their currours to knowe where they were becōe / and they brought wordehow they were gone towarde Morlan / beyond the caſtell of Roſ bourge. And than agaynſt night the englyſſhmen drewe agayne to their logynges and made good watche that night / and in the morning euery man was redy aparelled to go and aſſayle the caſtell / & ſo there was a ferſe aſſaute / whiche endured almooſt all the day. ye neuer ſe more hardyer men of ſo fewe / than the ſcottes were / nor that better defēded a place than they dyde. For the englyſſhmen had ladders / whiche they reared vp to the walles / and the englyſſhmen moūted vp on them with targes before them / and ſo came and fought with the ſcottes hande to hande / and ſome of thē caſt downe into the dikes. And that thyng ye mooſt troubled the ſcottes was the archers / who ſhot ſo holy toguyder / that almooſt ther was none durſt come to the defence of the wall. So long this aſſaut contynued / that at laſt the englyſſhmen entred in byforce / and there ſlewe as many as they found / nat one of all them that were within that ſcaped / but all were ſlayne: except Alyſander Ramſay / who was taken priſoner. Thus the caſtell of Berwyke was delyuered fro the ſcottes: and the erlemade Johan Byſet capitayne there / and he newly repayred the caſtell and made the bridge newe agayne that was taken.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the erle of Northūberlande and the erle of Notyngham / and the other engliſſhmen entred with great puyſſaunce in to the realme of Scotlande. Cap. CCC .xxiiii.
            
               AFter the wynning agayn of the caſtell of Berwyke the erles of Northumberland & Notyngham / whiche were two of the greateſt men in al the englyſſh hooſt / whā they had aſſembled all their men togyder / they determyned to ryde after their enemyes / and if they coude fynde them to fyght with them. And ſo early in a mornyng they departed / & toke the way towardes Roſebourge / a long by the ryuer of Twyde. And whan they had ryden togyder ye ſpace of two leages / than they toke newe counſaile / and ſo deuyded their company / and ſent one parte toward Mauros a great abbey of blacke mōkes / by the ryuer of Aude / the whiche was the departure of bothe realmes / to thentēt to ſe or knowe if they might fynde any ſcottes there. And the other parte of their company rode towarde Morlane / thynkynge y• by one of theſe two wayes they ſhulde here ſome tidynges of the ſcottes. & of the company that rode to Mauros was capitayne / ſir Thomas Moſegraue / and with hym thre hundred ſpeares / & as many archers. And ſo thus they departed / the one ridyng on ye ryght hand and the other on the left hande / and ſir Thom̄s Moſegraue and his ſonne rode ſo longe / that they came to Mauros / and there toke their lodgyng at a good hour / to refreſhe them ſelfe and their horſes. and to knowe iuſtly wher the ſcottes were become / they ſent forthe two ſquyers well horſed / and ſuche as knewe the countre / to ſe if they coulde here any tidyngꝭ of thē. Theſe two ſquiers whan they were departed fro their maiſters rode ſo longe that ſodenly they were in a buſſhment of the ſcottes / of whome ſir Wyllyam Lyndſey was chefe / & was at aduenture to ſe if he coude here any tidynges of Berwike and howe his nephue Alyſander Ramſay had ſpedde in ye caſtell of Berwyke / or to here ſome tidynges of thenglyſſhmen. He had in his company a .xl. ſpeares. Aſſoone as theſe two ſquyers were entred within their buſſhement / they were ſodenly beſet rounde about and ſo taken / wherof the knight had great ioye / and demaū
               ded of them fro whens they came / and ſo they were in teare to ſpeke / and loth to dyſcouer the dedes of their mayſtres / but it behoued theym to ſpeke / for the knyght ſayd: they ſhulde leaſe their heedes / if they tolde him nat the trouth of euery thyng / that he wolde demaunde of them. And whan they ſawe there was none other remedy they ſpake / and ſhewed howe the caſtell of Berwyke was wonne agayne / and all that were within ſlayne / except Alyſāder Ramſay. And howe therle of Northumberlande and the erle of Notyngham / were ryden a long by the ryuer of Twyde to fynde the ſcottes / and howe ſir Thom̄s Moſegraue & his ſonne / ſir John̄ Aſheton / and ſir Richard Beton / with thre hū
               dred ſpeares & as many archers / were lodged and taryed at the abbey of Mauros / and alſo howe they were ſent to knowe iuſtly where the ſcottes were. By my faythe ꝙ ſir Wylliam of Lyndſay / ye haue nowe founde vs / howbeit ye ſhall tary with vs / than they were delyuered to beſauely kept fro ſtartyng away. And ſir Wylliam of Lindſey called a man of armes to him / and ſayd. Go your way and ryde to our hooſt / and ſhewe them all that ye haue harde of the engliſſhmen / and I woll abyde here ſtyll tyll it be nyght to ſe if I canne here any more tidynges. And ſo this meſſanger rode forthe / tyll he came to a great village beyond Morlan / called Hōdbray on the ryuer of Twyde / among the moū
               tayns / where there was fayre medowes and a good countre / wherfore the ſcottes taryed ther In the euenyng thyder cāe the ſquier / & founde there the erle Duglas / the erle Morette / therle of Surlant / and ſir Archambalt Duglas / and the other ſcottes. than the ſquyer was brought to theſe lordes / to whome he ſhewed all the mater (as ye haue herde before) and whan the ſcottes vnderſtode howe ye caſtell of Berwike was conquered agayne they were ſore dyſpleaſed / and ſorowfull / howe be it they were recomforted agayne / whan they herde howe ſir Thom̄s Moſgraue and his ſonne / and other knyghtes and ſquiers of England were lodged at Mauros. than they determyned to go thyder and diſlodge their enemys / and to aſſay if they coude recouer any parte of their domage / and ſo they moūted and departed fro Hondbray / and rode towarde Mauros on the right hande / for they knewe well the countre. And ſo they had come thyder before mydnight / but that ther fell ſuch a rayne and wynde / the whiche ſtrake them ſo in the faces / that the proudeſt of theym was ſo beaten with rayne and wynde / that they co
                  •
               de ſcant ſyt on their horſes. and their pages what

               
                  〈◊〉
                & we
                  •
               e 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               at 
                  ••
               re their may 
                  ••
               ers ſpeares but lette them fall / and ſo brake euery man fro other / and loſt their waye. Than the chiefe capitaynes reſted priuely vnder a great wood ſyde / and ſuche k
                  •
               yghtes as were ſage and wyſe ſayd howe they rode but folyſhly / for it was no good ſeaſon at that tyme to ryde / ſay
               
                  •
               ng: howe they myght rather leſe therby than wyn
                  ••
               . So they taryed and couered them and their horſes vnder the trees / tyll the day began to a
                  •
               ere ▪ and ſuche as were were & colde / made fyers to warme them / but or they coulde make any 
                  •
               yre they endured moche payne / for y• wod was gr
                  •
               ne and the grounde wete. This rayne and wether endured tyll the ſonne roſe / thā the wether 
                  •••
               an to clere vp / and the ſonne ſhone ▪ and the 
                  •
               arkes began to ſynge. Than theſe cap
                  •
               tayns drewe to gyder to take counſayll what they ſhu
                  〈…〉
                do / for they had fayled of their en
               
                  ••
               nt as to coe to Mauroſe by nyght tyme / than it was thought b
                  •
               ſt yt they ſhulde there refreſh them ſe
                  •••
                and their horſes / and to ſende out abr
                  •••
                th
                  •••
                foragers / and ſo they dyd. and they rode abrode in to villages there beſyde / and ſo brought to their companyes haye & hotes / for their horſes / and vitayle for their mayſters. The ſame mornynge the engliſſhmen that lay at Mauros ſent out their foragers / ſo that they and the 
                  ••
               ottyſſhe foragers encountred eche other / but there the engliſſhmen hadde none aduauntage for ther were dyuers of them ſlayne and hurte 
                  〈…〉
               e of them loſt. ſo that tidynges 
                  〈◊〉
                o
                  •
                
               
                  •
               ame to ſir Thom̄s Moſegraue and to thē that were at Mauros / wherby they knewe that the ſcottes were nat farre fro them. Than they founed their trompettes and ſadled their horſes / and armed them / and ſo determyned to take the 
                  •••
               de / and ſo they dyde. And anone the ſcottꝭ knewe therof by their foragers than they made halte to refreſſhe their horſes / and ſo armed them / and ſette them in good ordre of batayll 
                  〈…〉
               r couert a long by ye wode ſyde. they were a 
                  〈◊〉
                hundred ſpeares / and two thouſande or other called yomen with glay
                  •
               es / dagers / and other wepyns of warre. than ſir Ar
               
                  〈…〉
                Duglas / and the erle Duglas ſayd / 
                  〈◊〉
                can be none otherwyſe / but y• we ſhall haue 
                  〈◊〉
                do for y• engliſſhmen rydeth this mornyng / therfore let vs be redy / and lette vs 
                  •
               yght with them if we ſe tyme conuenyent. and ſo they 
                  〈◊〉
                out a certayne men of armes to 
                  •
               yſcouer their enemyes / and 
                  •
               aryed thē ſelf ſtyll in their 
                  〈◊〉
               .
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Thomas Moſegraue & the engliſſhmen were diſcomfytted by the ſcottes. And of the deth of the frenche quene. Cap. CCC .xxv.
            
               SIr Thomas Moſegraue and his ſonne & the engliſſhemen / who deſyred greatly to fynde ye ſcottes / departed fro Mauros / and toke the waye towardes Morlane / and left the ryuer of Twyde on their left hādes / & went vp a mountayne called ſaynt Gylle / and there were the ſcotyſhe currours / who ryght well aduyſed the engliſſhmen / and ſo returned to their company and ſhewed them all the dealynge of the engliſſhmen / and howe to their eſtimacyon they were nat paſt thre baners / and .x. penons. of the whiche tydinges the ſcottes were ryght ioyfull / & ſayd all with one wyll: let vs go and ryde to them / in the name of god & ſaynt Gylle for they ar all ours / than they cryed all one cry Duglas ſaynt Gylle. And they had nat ryden the ſpace of halfe a leage / but they ſawe their enemyes / and the engliſſhmen them. Thā eche party ſawe well how it behoued them to fyght. And ſo ye erle Duglas made his ſonne knyght / called ſir James / and made hym to reyſe his baner / and in lyke wyſe ſo he dyde two ſonnes of the kyng of ſcottes / ſir Robert and ſir Dauyd / and bothe reyſed their baners. and there was made a .xxx. knyghtes on the Scottyſſhe parte / & a knyght of Suede / called ſir George of Beſmede / who bare in his armes ſyluer / a myll pyn / gowles / a border endented gowles. Alſo ſir Thomas Moſegraue made his ſonne Thomas knyght / & dyuers other of his houſe in lyke wiſe ſo dyd the lorde Stafforde and the lord Gaſcope / and ſo they ordred their archers and ſet them on the wynge / and thengliſſhmen cryed that day our lady of Arleton. There beganne a ferſe recounter / and archers began to ſhote / and men of armes began to ſtyrre. The ſcottes were ſo great a nombre / that y• archers coulde nat take hede in euery place / there was bytwene the ꝑties many a goodly courſe of a
                  •
               
               mes / and many a man ouerthrowen to the erth dyuers taken and reſkewed agayne at the begynnynge. Sir Archambalt Duglas was a mighty knight and a 
                  •
               ygge / and ſore feared of his enemyes / whan it came to the aprochynge he lyght a foote / and had in his handes a longe

ſwerd / wherof the blade was two els of length it was to heuy for any other man lyghtly to lyft vp fro ye erthe / but for him it was lyght ynough and he gaue therwith ſuche ſtrokes / yt whome ſo euer he hytte full / wente to the erthe: ſo that there was nat the hardieſt there / of the engliſſh parte / but that refuſed his ſtrokes. There was a ſore batayle and well fought / as longe as hi
                  •
                endured / but that was nat long / for the ſcottes were thre agaynſt one. I ſay nat nay: but that the engliſſhmen bare them ſelfe ryght valyantly / howe beit fynally they were dyſcomfytted / and ſir Thomas Moſegraue taken priſoner / and his ſonne alſo: and dyuers other knightes and ſquyers / ſo that the ſcottes had a ſixe ſcore of good priſoners / and the chaſe endured to the ryuer of Twyde / and dyuers were ſlayne. After this diſcōfytur / the ſcottes drewe into their owne countre / and determyned to go to E
                  •
               enbourge / for they knewe by their priſoners that the erle of Northūberlande / and therle of Notyngham were in the countrey / by the ryuer of Twyde in the way towardes Roſeburge / and howe they were men ynowe / to fyght with the power of Scotlande for a daye / wherfore they thought they myght well br
                  •
               ke vp their army / and to drawe in to ſaue garde to kepe their priſoners. they toke a better aduyſe to drawe homward / for if they had gone agayne to their 
                  •
               lde lodgynge / they had been in a great aduenture to haue ben beaten / as I ſhall ſhewe you howe.
            THe erle of Northumberlande / and the erle of Notyngham / and the ba
                  •
               ones of Englande / whan they departed fro Berwyke / & ſir Thomas Moſegraue departed fro them / they had knowlege by their ſpyes / that the ſcottes were lodged at Hōdbray / wherof they were ryght ioyouſe / and ſoo determyned to come on them in the nyght / and ſ
                  •
               rymyſſhe with them. and ſo they came thyder ye ſame night that they were departed in the mornynge / but it rayned ſo ſore that they coulde nat attayne to their entrepriſe / and ſo lay in the woodes tyll 
                  •
               he mornynge / than they ſent out their ſpyes to knowe where the ſcottes were become / & they brought worde agayne howe 
                  •
               he ſcottes were departed and howe they coulde fynde none. Tha
                  •
                they drue towardes Mauros to here ſome ty
                  •
               yngꝭ of ſir Thomas Moſegraue / and ſent a longe the ryuer currours to ſ
                  •
                if they coulde here any tidynges of the ſcottes. After the 
                  •
               iſco
                  ••
               ſ
                  •
               ture of the felde ſaint Gylle / as ye haue harde before the currorrs met with ſome of their owne company ſleynge as falt as they myght / and ſo they ſhewed all that euer they knewe of the batayle / and the currous retourned / and had with them ſuche as they mette ſlyeng / and ſo tolde all the certaynte of the batayle / but they coude nat tell howe many were ſlayne / nor howe many were taken. Whan the engliſſh lordes herde theſe tydynges / they were than more penſyue than before / and good cauſe why. They were dyſpleaſed for two cauſes: one bycauſe they hadde loſt their men / y• other bicauſe they coude nat fynde the ſcottes / whom they deſyred ſo ſore to fyght withall. ſo they wolde fayne haue folowed but they wyſt nat what way the ſcottes were gone / and nyght drewe on. than they went to Mauros and lodged there / and incontynent trewe worde cāe to them of the batayle / and howe ſir Thom̄s Moſgraue and his ſon̄e / and ſirſcoremen of armes with them were taken priſoners and the ſcottes led them to Edēborowe. Than thengliſſhe lordes ſawe well yt it behoued them to bere this domage as for that preſent tyme / bicauſe they coude nat amende it / ſo they paſſed that nyght aſwell as they myght / & in the mornynge they dyſloged / and the lorde Percy erle of Northumberlande / gaue leue to euery man to departe home / & he went into his owne coū
               trey. Thus brake vp that iourney / and parte of the ſcottes went to Edenbourg
                  •
                and therle Duglas and his ſon̄e abode ſtyll on the way to Alqueſt. And great tidynges ran ouer all Scotlande / of the iourney that their men had made / and ſo knyghtes & ſquiers toke their pleaſure with their priſoners / and raunſomed them curteſly as they lyſt.
            
               ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of Scotlande for this preſente tyme / and lette vs ſpeke of other inſydentes that fell in Fraunce.
               ¶ The ſame tyme in the monethe of February the frenche quene dyed / and as the p
                     •
                  yſicyons ſayde through her owne faulte / for ſhe laye in chyld bed of a fayre lady named 
                     •
                  ateryne / who was after duches of Berrey / the qwene beyng in chyldbed was nat well at eaſe / and her phyſicions had defēded her in any wyſe that ſhe ſhul
                  
                     •
                  e▪ nat enter in to no bayne / for they ſayd it was contrary to her diſſeaſe / and ryght perylus for her / All that nat withſtandyng ſhe wolde nedes be bayned / and ſo ſhe was and ſo fell ſycker and dyed. And ſo kyng Charles of Fraunce was a wydower for he neuer maryed after.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the warre began agayne bitwene the naueroyſe and the frenchemen / and of the begynning of the ciſme of holy churche. Ca. CCC .xxvi.
            
               AFter the deth of the frēche quene / dyed alſo the qwene of Nauer / ſuſter germayne to the frenche kyng. And after the deth of this qwene of Nauer / great murmuryng roſe bytwene the ſagemen & cuſtomyers of the countie of Uire / whiche is in Normandy / the whiche by ryght ſucceſſyon of their mother ſhulde 
                  •
               all to the kyng of Nauers children who were as than within age / and vnder the rule and kepynge of their vncle / kynge Charles of Fraūce. and kyng Charles of Nauer was had in ſuch ſuſpect before tyme in that he had made / and conſented and reyſed ſo many euilles and incōuenyences in the realme of Fraunce / that he was nat worthy to holde any herytage in the realme of Fraunce / vnder the ſhadowe of his children. The ſame ſeaſon ther came out of Acquitayne ye conſtable of Fraūce / who hadde ben all that ſeaſon with the duke of Aniou. and brought with him in his company the lorde Mucydent of Gaſcon / to ſe the kyng / and to be acquaynted with him / and ſo he dyd. Bytwene the kyng and the conſtable ther was many ſecrete coūſayls / of the ſtate of the realme of Fraunce and of Nauer / whiche was nat ſodenly knowen we ſhall ſhortly ſpeke of yt mater. But iuſtly to cronycle all matters that fell in the ſame ſeaſon in the worlde / I ſhall ſhewe you of the begynning of the peſtylence and inconuenyens / that began in the churche of god / wherby all chriſtendome was in great trouble and varyance: and therby many great miſchefes grewe and folowed.
            yE haue harde here before / howe pope Gregorie the .xi. of that name / was in the cytie of Auygnon / & whan he ſawe that he coude finde no maner of peace to be had bitwene the kynges of Englande and Fraūce / wherwith he was in great dyſpleaſure / for he had greatly trauelled there about / & had made his cardynalles to do the ſame. Than he aduyſed him ſelfe / and had a deuocion to go and reuyſet Rome and the ſee apoſtolyke / the whiche ſaynt Peter and ſaynt Poule had edefyed. He had made before promyſe / that if euer he came to the degre to be pope / he wold neuer kepe his ſee / but there as ſaynt Peter kepte his and ordayned it. This pope was a man of feble complection and ſickly / and endured moche payne more than any other. And he thus beyng in Auignon, was ſo ſore lette with the beſyneſſes of Fraunce / and ſo ſore traueyled with the kyng and his brethern / that with moch payne he had any leyſer to take hede any thyng to him ſelfe / or to his churche. Than he ſayd to him ſelfe / he wolde go farther of fro them to be at more reſt / and ſo he cauſed prouyſyon to be made on the ryuer of Gennes / and all the wayes as he ſhuld paſſe / as it apertayned to ſuche an highe aſtate as he was / and than he ſayd to his cardynals. Sirs: make you redy for I woll to Rome / of that mocyon his cardynalles were ſore abaſſhed and diſpleaſed / for they loued nat the romayns / and ſo they wolde fayne haue tourned his purpoſe / but they coude nat. And whan the frenche kyng knewe therof, he was ſore diſpleaſed / for he thought he hadde the pope nerer at hande there / than in any other place. than the kyng wrote incōtynent to his brother the duke of Aniowe who was at Tholouſe / ſignyfieng him that after the ſyght of his letters / he ſhulde go to Auignon to the pope / and breke his voiage to Rome if it were poſſyble. The duke dyd as the kyng commaunded him / and ſo came to Auignon / wher the cardynalles receyued him with great ioy / and ſo was lodged in the popes palays the ofter therby to ſpeke with the pope ye may well knowe he ſpake with the pope and ſhewed him dyuers reaſons to haue brokē his purpoſe / but the pope wolde in noo wyſe conſent therto / nor take any hede of any beſineſſes on this ſyde the moūtayns. But the pope gaue the duke full puyſſance to do what he myght / reſeruyng certayne caſes papall / the whiche he myght nat gyue to no man / nor put them out of his owne handes. Whan ye duke ſawe he coude nat come to his entent / for no reaſon nor fayre wordꝭ that he coude ſhewe / he toke leaue of the pope / and ſayd at his departyng. Holy father ye go into a good countre among ſuche people where as ye be but lytle beloued / & ye woll leue the foūtayne of faithe and the realme / wher as holy churche hath mooſt fayth and exellence of all the worlde / and ſir by your dede the churche may fall in gret trybulacion / for if ye dye there the which is right likely / and ſo ſay the phiſycions. Than the romayns who be malycious and traytours ſhalbe lordꝭ and mayſters of all

the cardynalles / and ſhall make a pope at their owne wyll / howe beit for all theſe wordes and many other / the pope neuer reſted tyll he was on his way / and ſo came to Marcyll where as the galeys of Gēnes were redy to receyue him / and the duke retourned agayne to Tholouſe. Pope Gregorie entred into the ſee at Marcyll with a great company / and had good wynde and ſo tooke lande at Gennes / and there newe refreſſhed his galays / & ſo toke the ſee agayne and ſayled tyll he cāe to Rome. The romayns were ryght ioyfull of his comynge / and all the chiefe of Rhome mounted on their horſes / and ſo brought him in to Rome with great tryumphe / and lodged in ſaynt Peters palys. and often tymes he vyſited a churche / called our lady the great / within Rome. Wherin he had great pleaſure / & dyd make therin many coſtly warkes. And within a whyle after his comynge to Rome he dyed / & was buryed in ye ſayd church and there his obſequy was made as to a pope aparteyned.
            ANon after the dethe of the pope Gregory the cardynalles drewe them in to the conclaue / in the palays of ſaynt Peter. Anone after as they were entred to choſe a pope / acordyng to their vſage / ſuch one as ſhuld be good and profytable for holy churche / the romayns aſſembled thē togyder in a great nombre / and came in to the bowrage of ſaynt Peter. They were to the nombre of .xxx. thouſand what one and other / in the entent to do yuell / if the mater went nat accordynge to their appetytes. And they came oftentymes before the conclaue / and ſayd: harke. ye ſir cardynalles / delyuer you atones / and make a pope ye tary to longe / if ye make a romayne we woll natchaung him / but yf ye make any other / the romayne people and counſayles woll nat take hym for pope / and ye putte youre ſelfe all / in aduenture to be ſlayne. The cardynals / who were as than in the danger of the romayns / and herde well thoſe wordes / they were nat at their eaſe / nor aſſured of their lyues. and ſo apeaſed them of their yre as well as they myght with fayre wordes / but ſomoche roſe the felony of the romayns / y• ſuche as were next to ye conclaue / to thentent to make the cardynalles a frayde / and to cauſe them to cōdiſcende the rather to their opinyons / brake vp the dore of the conclaue / where as the cardynalles were. than the cardynalles went ſurely to haue been ſlayne / and ſo ſtedde away to ſaue their lyues / ſome one waye and ſome a nother but the romayns were nat ſo content / but toke them and put them togyder agayn / whether they wolde or nat. The cardynalles than ſeynge thēſelfe in the daunger of the romayns & in great parell of their lyues / a greed among them ſelfe / more ſor to pleaſe the people than for any deuocyon / howbeit by good electyon they chaſe an holy man a cardynall of the romayne nacion / whome pope Urbayne the fyfte hadde made cardynall / and he was called before the cardynall of ſaynt Peter. This electyon pleaſed greatly ye romayns / and ſo this good man had all the ryghtes that belonged to the papalyte / howe beit he lyued nat but thre dayes after / and I ſhall ſhewe you why. The romayns who deſyred to haue a pope of their owne nacion / were ſo ioyfull of this newe pope / ye they toke hym / who was a hundred yere of age and ſette him on a whyte mule and ſo ledde him vp and downe through ye cytie of Rome / exaltyng him / and ſhewyng howe they had vāqueſſhed the cardynals / ſeyng they had a pope romayn accordyng to their owne ententes / in ſomoche that the good holy man was ſo ſore traueyled that he fell ſycke / and ſo dyed the thyrde daye. and was buryed in the churche of ſaynt Peter and there he lyethe.
         
         
            ¶ Of the orgulous wordes / that the romayns ſayde at the electyon of the newe pope agayne. And howe the warre renewed bytwene the french kyng and the kyng of Nauerre. Cap. CCC .xxvii.
            
               OF the dethe of this pope the cardynalles were right ſorowfull / for they ſaw well howe the matter ſhulde nat goo well to paſſe. For they had thought if y• pope had lyued / to haue diſſimuled amonge the romayns for two or thre yeres / and at the laſte to haue brought the ſee apoſtolyke / in to ſome other place than at Rome / at Napoles / or at Gennes / out of the daunger of the romayns / but ye dethe of the pope brake their purpoſe. Than the cardynalles went agayne in to the conclaue in greater daūger than they were in before / for ye romayns aſſembled them togyder

agayne before the conclaue / and made ſemblant to breke it vp and to ſlee them all / if they dyde nat choſe a pope / acordyng to their myndes and cryed to the cardynalles & ſayd. Sirs aduyſe yo we well / if ye delyuer vs a pope romayne we be content / or els we woll make your herdꝭ reeder than your hattes be ſuche wordes and manaſſhes abaſſhed greatly ye cardynall / for they hadde rather a dyed confeſſours then martyrs. Than to bryng them ſelfe out of that daunger and parell / they made a pope / but he was none of the colledge of cardynals / he was archbyſſhop of Bare a great clerke / who greatly had traueyled for the welthe of holy churche. with his promocyon of papalyte / the romayns were a peaſed / for the cardynall of Genne put out his heed out at a wyndowe of the conclaue / and ſayd on hygh to ye people of Rome. Sirs: apeaſe you / for you haue a pope romayne / and that is Bartylme we des Angles / archbyſſhop of Bare. The people aunſwered all with one voyce: than we be content / the ſame archebyſſhoppe was nat as than at Rome. I thynke he was in Napoles. Than he was incontynent ſent for / of the whiche tydynges he was ryght glad / and ſo came to Rome / and at his comyng there was great feeſt made to hym. And ſo he had all the ryghtes that parteyned to the papalyte / & was called Urban the ſirt of that name / the romayns had great ioy: his creacyon was ſignifyed to all the churches of chriſtentie. And alſo to emperours / kynges / dukes / and erles / and the cardynalles ſent worde to all their frendes / that he was choſen by good and trewe eleciyon howbeit ſome of them repented them after / that they had ſpoken ſo largely in the mater. This pope renounced all graces gyuen before alſo ſo dyuers departed fro their countres and places / and went to Rome to haue grace. ¶ Now let vs leaue ſomwhat to ſpeke of this mater / and lette vp retourne to our princypall hiſtory of the beſyneſſes of Fraunce.
            yE haue harde right well here before / howe the kyng of Nauer / who hadde to his wyfe the freuche kynges ſuſter / for the loue of the one & of the other / it was ſayd and purpoſed that the herytage of the chyldren of the kyng of Nauer / the whiche was fallen to them by the ryght of their mother / ye the french kyng their vncle by the ſucceſſion of his ſuſter ought to haue power therof in name of the chyldren ſeyng the chyldren were in his kepynge / wherby all the lande that the kynge of Nauer helde in Normandy / ſhulde be in ye french kynges hand / as long as his nephewes were with in age. Of all theſe maters the kyng of Nauer doughted greatly / for he knewe well the vſage and cuſtome of Fraūce. Than he aduyſed him of two thynges / the one was to ſende the byſſhop of Panpilone and ſir Martyn Car / in to Fraunce to the kynge / Deſyring hym hertely / that for good loue and fauoure to ſend him his two ſonnes / Charles and Peter. and if it pleaſed him nat to ſend hym bothe two / than at leſt to ſende him his ſon̄e Charles / bycauſe he was towardes a treaty for a maryage for him / with the doughter of ye kyng of Caſtell. The ſecond thing was / nat withſtandyng that he ſent thus into Fraunce / yetſecretly he ſent alſo in to Normandy / to viſyte and to refreſſhe the caſtelles there / pertaynyng to hym: to thentent that the frenchmen ſhulde nat take them in to their handes / for he feared if they had them ones in theis poſſeſſiōs / he ſhulde nat haue thē agayn whan he wolde. And ſo he ſent two valyaunt men of armes naueroyſe / in whom he had great truſt the one called Peter Baſylle / and the other Ferando into Normandy / for ye ſayd enten
                  •
                The fyrſt meſſangers went into Fraūce / as the byſſhop of Panpylone / and ſir Marten Car / who ſpake with the kyng at great leyſar / right humbly recōmaundyng the kyng of Nauer to him deſyringe in his name / that he wolde ſende to hym his two ſonnes. The kyng anſwered and ſayde. He wolde take aduyſe and counſayle in the mater. And ſo after they were anſwered in the kynges name: the kyng beyng preſent and the two chyldren / alſo his nephewes / how that the kynge loued them right entierly. Wherfore they coulde nat be better in no place / and y• the kyng of Nauerre ought to be content rather to ſuffre thē to be in Fraunce with the kyng their vncle / than in any other place. And alſo ye kyng wyll in no wyſe depart fro them / but kepe them aboute hym in their eſtate / as the chyldren of a kyng / and lyke his nephewes: other anſwere ye meſſangers coude nat haue. And in the meane ſeaſon y• theſe meſſangers were in Fraūce / Peter of Baſylle and Ferādo / arryued at Chyerbourge with great prouiſyon / the whiche they putte in dyuers places / in townes and caſtels of the kyng of Nauers in Normandy. And ſo they viſyted in the kynge of Nauers name / all the countie of Eureux / and made newe officers and ſette in people at their pleaſures. and ſo retourned agayne into Nauerre / the byſſhoppe of Panpylone and ſir Marten Carr / and ſhewed

the kynge howe they had ſpedde in Fraū
               ce. The kynge of Nauer was nat very gladde of that tidyges / whan he coulde nat haue his owne ſonnes. And ſo began a great hatered in his hert towarde the frenche kynge / the whiche he wolde gladly haue ſhewed if he had might / but the puyſſance of him ſelfe was nat ſo great to greue the realme of Fraunce / without helpe and ayde of ſome other realme. So he ſuffred all theſe maters / tyll he had better cauſe to ſpeke / and more diſpleaſure done to hym / than he hadde as than.
            THe frenche kyng and his coūſayle were well enformed / that the kyng of Nauer had newe reuitayled his caſtels and townes in Normādy / but they knewe nat for what entent The ſame ſeaſon thenglyſſhmen made a ſecret army on the ſee of two thouſand men of armes but they had no horſe with them. Of the which army the duke of Lancaſtre and the erle of Cā
               bridge were chefe capitayns. This ye normans reported ſurely to the french kyng / and this armye came on the coſtes of Normādy / but they coulde nat tell to what parte they wolde drawe vnto. Some in Fraunce thought that ye kynge of Nauer had cauſed them to come in to Normandy / to delyuer to them ſuche caſtelles as he had there. Wherfore it was ſayde to the kynge. Sir go haſtely / and be lorde of thoſe caſtels before: for ye may happe to tary to long / for if the engliſſhmen haue thē / they may do moche hurt to the realme of Fraunce / for it ſhall be one of the beſt entrees that they can haue / if they were lordes in Normādy / of the cyties / townes / and caſtels / belongyng to the kyng of Nauer. The ſame ſeaſon there was taken in Fraunce / two ſecrataries of the kyng of Nauers / a clerke & a ſquyer. The cleke was called Peter of Tertre and the ſquyer James of Rue / and they were brought to Parys to be examyned. And ſomoche it was knowen by theym of the ſecrettes of the realme of Nauerre / howe they were determyned to haue done domage to the kyng or els to haue poyſoned him. ſo they were condempned to dye / and execucyen was done at Parys beheeded and quartred. Theſe tydynges multyplied ſo on the kyng of Nauer / that ye frenche kynge ſware y• he wolde neuer attende to none other thynge / tyll he had ryd Normandy / and taken in to his poſſeſſion / for the behoffe of his nephewes / all the townes and caſtelles that the kyng of Nauer helde there. ſo dayly ther came ſore informacions to the frenche kyng agaynſt the kynge of Nauer. Alſo it was ſayde openly / that ye duke of Lācaſtre ſhulde gyue his doughter Kateryn to the kynge of Nauer / and ſo by that meanes the kyng ſhulde gyue to the duke of Lancaſtre all the hole countye of Deureur. Theſe wordes were lightly beleued in Fraūce for the kyng of Nauer was but lytell truſted among them. So than the ſame tyme the french kynge came to Rohan / and there aſſembled a great army of men of warre / wherof the lorde Coucy / & the lorde de la Ryuer were chefe capitayns / and they all met togyder before a towne called Lyſeur / a cytie in Normandy / parteynynge to the kyng of Nauer. and theſe two lordes had the two ſonnes of the kyng of Nauer / Charles and Peter / to ſhewe to thē of the countrey / that the warre that they made was in the name of ye two chyldren / for their herytage that was fallen to them by ye ryght of their mother / And howe yt the kynge of Nauer had no right to kepe them / but the mooſt parte of the men of armes / were ſo ioyned in loue with the kyng of Nauer / that they coude nat departe out of his ſeruyce. And alſo the naueroyſe that were there aſſembled / ſuche as the kyng of Nauer hadde ſent thyder / cauſed his warr to be the more eaſyer and fayre.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frenche kynge ceaſed all the lande of the kyng of Nauers. Cap. CCC .xxviii.
            
               THe frenche kyng ſent commyſſioners to Mountpellyer / to ceaſe ye lande and ſeignorie in to his handes / the whiche the kyng of Nauerr helde. And whan theſe cōmyſſioners: that is to ſay ſir Wylliam of Dormans and ſir Johan Merger were come to Mountpellyer / they ſente for the mooſt nobleſt ꝑſons of the towne / and ſhewed them their cōmyſſions. They of Mountpellyer obeyed / for they myght do none otherwiſe / for if they had nat obeyed / it had benyuell for them. For the duke of Anio we and the conſtable of Fraunce / were in the countrey with a great armye / and deſyred nothynge ſo moche / as to haue had warre with them of Mountpellyer. Ther were taken priſoners / two knyghtꝭ of Normandy / who were before gouernours to the countre vnder the kynge of Nauer: and

alſo ſir Guy of Grauell / & ſir Lyger Dergeſy / who taryed in priſon a long tyme after. Thus the to wne of Mountpellyer / and all the barony was become frenche.
            NOwe let vs returne to the french army that was in Normandy / & ſhe we howe the lorde Coucy / & the lorde de la Ryuer ſped. they came before Eureur / and layd ſiege therto / they of the garyſons parteyning to y• kyng of Naue
                  •
                / cloſed faſt their garyſons a gaynſt the frenchmen / for they were nat in mynde ſoo ſoone to yelde them vp. Whan the kyng of Nauer vnderſtode that ye frenchmen had taken the poſſeſſyon of Mountpellyer and of all the coū
               tre: and yt great nombre of men of armes were in the countre of Eureux / pillyng and beatyng downe his townes and caſtelles. He hadde dyuers y magmacyons and counſayls with them that he truſted beſt / finally it was cōcluded by his counſayle / that he coulde haue no conforte without it were by the englyſſhmen / wherfore it was concluded / that he ſhulde ſende a ſufficyent ꝑſonage with letters of credéce to the yong kyng of Englande and to his counſayle. Deſyrynge to be alyed with hym / & he to ſwere fro y• day forwarde / to be good and trewe to the englyſſhe parte: and to putte in to their handes / all ſuche fortereſſes as he helde in Normandy. And to do this meſſage he cōmaunded a clerke to go / in whom 
                  •
               he had great truſt: called mayſter 
                  •
               aſchall. And ſayde to hym: maiſter Paſchall / go your wayes in to Englande / and do ſo moche that ye may bring me good tidynges / for fro he
                  •
               ſ forthe / I wyll be alyed with the englyſſhemen. This clerke dyde as he was commanded / and made hym redy: and toke ſhyppyng and ſayled ſo long yt he arryued in Cornwall. and than rode for the tyll he cāe to Shene beſyde London / where the kyng of Englande was: and ſo he ſpake with the kynge / and recō
               maunded the kynge of Nauerr his mayſter to hym. And ſo there the kynge made hym good there: and there was preſent the erle of Saliſbury and ſir Symond Burle / who toke on him to ſpeke and to gyue him his aunſwere for that tyme / and ſayd. Sir: on ſuche a day the kyng wyll be at Lōdon / and than ſend for all his coū
               ſayle / at whiche tyme ye ſhall be herde. And ſo at the day aſſigned / mayſter Paſchall ſhewed to the kyng and to his counſayle theffect of his meſſage / and ſpake ſo ſagely that he was well herde. And he was anſwered by the counſayle / that the kynge of Nauers offre ought nat to be refuſed: howe be it to make ſo great alyance as the kynge of Nauer deſyreth / it behoueth than that he come hyder into Englande in his owne proper perſon to thentent that he may be herde ſpeke hym ſelfe / wherby the mater ſhulde take the better effect. And ſo with that anſwere mayſter Paſchall departed / and returned in to Nauer / and ſhewed the kyng all that he had done / and how it behoued hym to go in to Englande him ſelfe / and to ſe the yong kyng of Englande and to ſpeke him ſelfe with hym & his coūſaile. than the kyng of Nauer anſwered and ſayd: I am cōtent to go theder. Than he made redy for him a ſhyp / called the Lyne: the whiche wolde go on the ſee withall maner of wyndes without parell. and ſo the kyng of Nauer toke this ſhip and entred in to the ſee with a preuy company / how be it he had with hym ſir Marten Carr & mayſter Paſchall / and ſayled ſo longe that he arryued in Englande.
         
         
            ¶ Of the alyences that the kynge of Nauer made with the kynge of Englande / and howe the frenche kynge had men of warre in dyuers places. Cap. CCC .xxix.
            
               ALytell before his deꝑtyng / the frenche kynge had the kyng of Nauer in great hate / and knewe couertly by ſome of the king of Nauers houſe / all the ſecremeſſe bytwene hym and the kyng of Englande: and howe that kyng Henry of Caſtell had defyed him / and made warre agaynſt him. The kyng of Nauer left at his deꝑtynge behynde him / ye vycont of Chaſtellon / the lorde of Leſtrade father to Uyen / and the Baſcle: & great nombre of men of warr / aſwell of his coū
               tre as of the countie of Foiz / to kepe the frōters agaynſt the ſpanyerdes. ¶ And whan he was in the ſee he hadde wynde at wyll / and arryued in Cornwall / and ſo rode to Wynſore / Where as kynge Richarde and his counſayle were / who receyued hym with great ioye / for they thought the better to ſpede of his lande in Normandy: & ſpecially of the caſtell of Chierbour
                  •
                / wherof thenglyſſhmen deſyred greatly to be lordes. The kyng of Nauer ſhewed ſagelye to the kyng of Englande the cauſe of his cō
               mynge

/ and he was well herde and ſo well conforted / that he was content. I ſhall ſhewe you howe this treatie went bytwene theſe two kynges. One thyng there was: the kynge of Nauer ſhulde fro thenſ for the alwayes be true englyſſhe / and ſhulde neuer make peace with the realme of Fraunce / nor with the kynge of Caſtell / without the knowledge and conſent of the kyng of Englande. And if the kyng of Englande or any of his men by their puyſſance / coude gette any townes or caſtelles that the kynge of Nauer ought to haue in Normandy agaynſt the frenchmen / that the ſame townes or caſtels ſhulde abyde for euer to be englyſſhe / the ſouerayntie euer reſerued to the kynge of Nauerr. The whiche thynge the englyſſhmen prayſed moche / bycauſe they thought by that meanes they ſhulde haue aſayre entre into Fraūce thorough Normandy. And the kyng of England ſhulde ſende the ſame tyme a thouſand ſpeares and two thouſande archers by the ryuer of Gyronde to Burdeur / or to Bayone: and the men of armes to entre in to Nauerr / and to make warre agaynſt the kyng of Caſtell. And nat to departe fro the kyng of Nauer or out of his realme / tyll he hadde made an ende of his warre with the ſpanyerdes. And the men of warre ſo ones entred in to Nauer: the kynge of Nauer than to pay them their wages / and to ſtuffe thē ſufficiently / acordyng: after the ſame rate that the kynge of Englande was wonte to paye his men of warre. Dyuers treaties and alya
                  •
               nces were there made and ordayned: and alſo written / ſealed / and ſworne to be kept / on bothe partes. And there were named ſuche as ſhulde go in to Normandy / and ſuche as ſhulde go in to Nauer. And bycauſe that the duke of Lācaſtre and the erle of Cābridge were nat at this treatie / it was ordayned that this treatie ſhulde be ſent to them ſealed / to then tent that they ſhulde make haſt to entre into Normandy. The duke of Bretayne was preſent at this treatie.
            
               RIng Charles of Frāce / who was right ſage and ſubtell: and ſoo he well ſhewed hymſelfe as longe as he lyued. He was well enfourmed of the armye of Englande / yet he knewe no certētie but by ſuſpecte / whyder they wolde drawe in to Normandy or els into Bretayne. And for dout therof / he helde many men of armes in Bretayne / wherof the lorde Clyſſon / the lorde de Lauall / the vycount of Rohan the lorde of Beaumanoyre / & the lorde of Rochfort were capitayns. And had beſieged Breeſt by baſtydes / and none otherwyſe: wherefore they might vitayle Breſt whan they lyſt. And in the rowne was capitayne / a valyant ſquye
                  •
                of Englande / called James Clerke. And bycauſe the frenche kyng knewe well that the kynge of Nauerr was alyed with Englande / and thought ſurely that or his returne / he wolde entre in to ſome treatie with his aduerſary y• kyn of Englande. And douted of this armye thus on the ſee / leſt they ſhuld take lande in Normā
               dy / and entre into the caſtelles parteyninge to the kyng of Nauer. Therfore he ſent haſtely to the lorde Coucy and to the lorde de la Ryuerr / that they ſhulde as ſhortely as they coulde / get by fayrneſſe or by foulneſſe / ſuche caſtelles as were belongynge to the kynge of Nauer / and ſpecially ſuche as were nere to the ſeeſyde. Ne knewe well that Chyerbourge wolde nat caſelye be wonne / how be it by lande they coude nat 
                  •
               euitayle it nor refreſſhe it with men / out of the baſſe marches of Bretayne and of Normandy And ſo for the bretons ſir Olyuer Clyſſon was capitayne / and for the normayns / ſir Diuoye and ſir Percyuall.
         
         
            ¶ Of the ſiege that the lorde Coucy / and the lorde de la Ryuer layd to Carentyne: and of the caſtelles and townes that the kynge of Nauerre loſt in Normandy Cap. CCC .xxx.
            
               THe 
                  〈◊〉
                and the lorde de la 
                  
                     •
                  yuer 
               
                  •
               eſieged Carentyne with great puyſſaunce / and they of Ca
                  ••
               
               tyne hadde as than no capitayne of name / nor had nat ſithe the deth of ſir Euſtace Dambreticourt / who dyed ther. He had been capitayne ther foure yere. So they hadde no conforte nor counſayle but of them ſelfe / & they ſawe well agaynſt them a great nombre / and alſo the admyrall of Fraunce ſir Johan of Uyen and the admyrall of Spaygne / and with them a great nombre of menne of warre before Chy
               
                  •
               rbourge. They knewe nothynge of the treatie of the kyng of Nauerr / nor howe he hadde ſpedde in Englande. And they were dayly aſſayled

two wayes: the one by armyes / and the other way by wordes: for the lorde Coucy and the lorde de la Ryuer / wolde gladly haue had the towne of Carentyne. And at laſt they dyde ſo moche that they had it by treatie / & ſo it was gyuen vp to the obeyſance of the frenche kyng / the right reſerued of the true enhery toure / who was the kyng of Nauers ſon̄e. In all treaties the lordes of Fraunce acorded to reſerue y• chyldes right / for they cared nat / ſo they might haue the townes and caſtels in their poſſeſſyon. Thus they had Carentyne / & put therin newe men of warre: and than departed and went to the caſtell of Molmeur and within thre dayes they had it by treatie. And than they wente to Couches and lay by the fayre ryuer of Dorne / whiche rynneth to Cane: and ther they taryed tyll they knewe the myndes of thē of Couches / and ſo they yelded vp by treatie. The lorde of Coucy / and the lorde de la ryuer / had alwayes with them the chylde of Nauer / whiche helped moch their mater. euer whan any yelded vp to the french kyng or to his cōmyſſioners / it was euer in the treatie by condycion / y• they might depart whan they lyſt / and whyder they wolde Suche as departed went no farther but to Eureur / wherof Done Ferant naueroyſe was capitayne. ¶ After the conqueſt of Couches / they departed and wēt to Paſt / and ther made aſſaut / and dyuers hurt on bothe parties: but the ſame day it was yelded vp / and ſo y• caſtell became frenche. And finally all that euer y• kynge of Nauer had in Normandy / excepte Eureux and Chyerbourge / was yelded vp and become french. And whan they had wonne all caſtels and ſmall holdes / and that all the countre was vnder their obeyſaunce. Than they went and layed ſiege to Eureux: and ther be & were wente to be of olde vſage / the mooſt ſtrongeſt naueroyſe in all Normany: and they of Deureur neuer loued perfitely none other lorde but the kyng of Nauer. So Eureux was beſieged right puiſſantly and endured a long ſeaſon for within was Feraudo capitayne / who dyde many a feate of armes with his owne handes.
            THe ſame ſeaſon the kynge of Nauerre was retourned in to his owne countre / and truſted ſome what to haue been ayded by the englyſſhmen / howe be it they dyde hym no profyte as apered. For the duke of Lancaſtre and the erle of Cambridge hadde the wynde agaynſt them to come in to Normandy. And alſoo the armye that was made in Englande / of the foure thouſande men of armes / and eyght thouſande archers. Aſſoone as they were come to Hampton they entred in to their ſhyppes / before the feeſt of ſaynt Johan the Baptyſt / and ſo departed: and they founde at Plommouthe the erle of Saliſbury and ſir Johan of Arundell / who ſhulde haue gone in to Bretayne / to haue refreſſhed thē of Breſt and of Hanybout but they coulde haue no wynde before. And ſo they entred in to the duke of Lancaſters army / and toke lande in the yle of Wight / where they taryed a longe ſpace / to here tidynges outher out of Bretayne or oute of Normandy. Than they herde tidynges / howe the army of Fraunce was one the ſee / wherfore they ſent ſir John̄ of Arundell / with two hundred men of armes and foure hundred archers to Hampton / to eſchewe all the parels that might fall by the ſee.
         
         
            ¶ Of the men of warr̄ that the duke of Aniou retayned agaynſt thēgliſſhmen / and of the ſiege that the ſpanyerdes helde before Bayone. Cap. CCC .xxxi.
            
               BIcauſe of this / the frē
               che kyng thought to ꝓuyde for remedy to reſyſt his enemies / for it was ſhewed him by the normayns / that the englyſſhmen were on the ſe with a great puyſſance / but he coude nat tell whyder they wolde go. Than be ſent a ſpecyall commaūdement through out his realme / that euery man knightes and ſquyers ſhulde be redy apparelled for the warre / to go and to come where he commaunded them. In lykewiſe the duke of Aniou had all that ſeaſon retayned men of warre on all ſydes / to the entent to haue layde ſiege to Burdeux. And in his company was his brother the duke of Berrey and the Conſtable of Fraunce: and all the flour of chiualry of Gaſcone / Auuergne / Poictou / and Limoſyn. And the better to come to his entent / and to haue y• more nombre of men of warre by the conſent of the kyng his brother he had gathered in Languedoc / to the ſomme of two hūdred. M. frankes. Howbeit he coude nat do his enterprice in that ſeaſon / for y• kyng ſent for the duke of Berrey his brother / and for the conſtable of Fraūce / and for all other barones / ſuche as he thought ſhulde do hym ſeruyce

For well he knewe / that the englyſſhmen were on the ſee / but he wyſt nat whyder they wolde drawe. And though this enterprice in Laquen doc were broken / yet the poore men that hadde payed great ſommes of money for that entent / had nat their money agayne.
            THe ſame ſeaſon y• kyng of Caſtell with xx. thouſāde ſpanyerdes and catelayns helde ſiege before Bayone / and ther lay all the wynter. And many a feate of armes was there done / bothe by lande and by water / for Radig
                  •
                de Rour and Dampe Ferrant of Caſtell / Ambroſe Bouchenoyr and Peter Baſcle lay at ancre before Bayone with two hundred veſſels / 
                  〈◊〉
                dyde moche trouble to them of Bayone. Of the whiche towne there was capitayne / a valyant knight of Englande / called ſir Mathewe Gorney. His wytte and prowes / conforted them of the towne greatly / how be it ſome ſayd of them that were within / that the ſpanyerdes had had their entent at length / yf a dethe had nat fallen among them. For ther fell ſuche a mortalyte in the hooſt / that of fyue ther dyed thre. and kyng Henry of Caſtell had there with hym a 
                  •
               ygr
                  •
                mācer of Tollet / who ſayd y• the ayre ther was ſo enuenomed & corrupted / that ther was no remedy / but that they were all in great danger & parell of dethe. And bycauſe of that doubt / the kynge dyſlodged and brake vp y• ſiege / but the ſpanyerdes & the bretons the ſame ſeaſon had wonne a brode in the countrey / dyuers caſtels and ſmall holdes / and ſo entred in to them. And the kyng of Caſtell wēt to Colongne / and ſent hys conſtable to laye ſiege before Paupylone / with .x. thouſande ſpanyerdes / in the whiche cytie the vicounte of Chaſtellon / and the lorde of Leſcute and the Baſcle / were with two hundred ſpeares / who greatly toke hede for the cytie. And the kyng of Nauer who was newly reuirned out of Englande / was at Tudela abydynge dayly for ſuche ſocours / as ſhulde haue come to him thens / as it was ordeyned. for the kyng of Englande and his counſayll / had ordeyned to haue come thyder / the lorde Neuyll / and ſir Thomas de Termes / and they were at Plommouthe / & there about with a thouſande men of armes / and two thouſande archers / to thentent to haue come to Burdeaul
                  •
                / how beit they coulde haue no paſſage at their deſire / but the great army of Englande / with the duke of Lancaſtre toke landyng at ſaynt Malo in the Iſ
                  •
               e / the whiche was anone knowen. Than departed for their houſes / the vicount of Bellyer / ſir Henry of Malatrayt / and the lorde of Co
                  ••
               
               bre / and ſo they came & entred in to ſaynt Malo with two hūdred men of armes / wherof the capitayne Morſonae was greatly reioyſed / for els they had been in great daunger.
         
         
            ¶ Of the iſſues & iourneys that the engliſſhmen made in that ſeaſon in dyuers places in Fraunce / and alſo of the piteous dethe of yuan of wales. Cap. CCC .xxxii.
            
               SIr Johan Arundell / who was at Hampton with two hundred men of armes / and four. C. archers / hard by his mē who had ben taken on the ſee in a ſhyppe of Normandy / howe the duke of Lancaſtre and his army hadde ſo ſcoured the hauyns of Normandy / that there were no frenchmen on y• ſee. Than incōtynent he ordeyned four great ſhippes / charged with prouiſyon / and ſo entred in to his ſhyppe / and ſayled tyll he came in to the hauen of Chierbourc / where he was receyued with great ioy / and at that tyme the caſtell was in the kepynge of the naueroyſe / but than they departed ſauynge Peter Baſcle / who aboode ſtyll. he was capitayne there before / and ſo taryed with the englyſſhmen. Chierbourc was nat likely to be wonne without famyn / for it is one of the ſtrongeſt caſtelles in the worlde and hath dyuers fayre iſſues. So ſir Johan Arundell taryed there a fyue dayes / and reuitayled the caſtell / and than departed agayne to Hampton / for there he was capitayne. ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of the ſiege of ſaynt Malo.
            wHan the englyſſhmen entred fyrſt into the Iſle of ſaynt Malo / they found there many veſſelles of Rochell / charged with good wyne / the merchauntes had anone ſolde the wyne & the ſhyppes burnt. Thā they layde ſiege to ſaynt Malo / for they were men ynowe ſo to do / and the engliſſhmen ſpred abrode in the countrey / and dyde moche hurt / a
                  ••
                they y• mooſt comonly kept the feldes was ſir Robert of Courbes / and ſir Hughe Brone his nephe we / who knewe right well the countre and the chanon Roberſarte with them / dayly they rode forthe ſomtyme they wanne / and ſomtyme they loſt. So they waſted & brent all

the countrey about ſaynt Malo. And the duke of Lancaſtre / & the erle of Cambridge his brother / and their army hadde vitayle plenty / for there came to them ynoughe out of Englande. So before ſaynt Malo / there were dyuers aſſautes / & marueylouſly well defended / for ther were ryght good men of warre within / wherfore they were nat eaſy to be conquered. They of the hooſt cauſed to be made dyuers mantels of aſſaute / and they had a foure hundred gonnes layed rounde about the towne / the whiche greatly conſtrayned them within. Among dyuers aſſautes / ther was one marueylous ferſe the whiche endured a hole day / therat were dyuers englyſſhmen ſlayne and ſore hurt for they with in defended them ſelfe ſo valiantly ▪ y• they loſt nat a man. There was ſlayne a knyght of Englande called ſir Peter Leſcume / for whoſe dethe the duke and his brother / were right ſore o
                  •
               ſpleaſed.
            ANd as ye haue herde here before: yuan of Wales / lay at ſiege before Mortayne in Poitou / in four baſtydes: of the which towne the lorde of Leſtrade was capitayne. The fyrſt baſtyde where as parte of the ſiege lay / as at the ſyde of a rock / before the caſtell of Geron one the ſee ▪ the whiche baſty de yuan hym ſelfe kept. The ſeconde was bytwene the water and the caſtell lowe before a poſterne / ſo that none coude entre nor iſſue therat. The third baſtyde was on the other ſyde of the caſtell. The fourth was in the church of ſaynt Legar / halfe a leage 
                  ••
               o y• caſtell. By theſe foure baſtydes they with in Mortayne were ſore conſtrayned / bycauſe of the lenght of the ſiege / for it endured a yere and a halfe. So that they within had nothyng to lyue by norſhowe on their fete / nor confort nor ſoc oure apered none to them fro any parte▪ wherfore they were ſore abaſſhed. This ſiege thus enduryng before Mortayne / there iſſued out of the realme of Englande / and out of the marches of Wales a ſquier a walſhman / called James Laube / he was but a ſmall gētylman & that well ſhewed a
                  •
               t / for a very gētylman wyll neuer ſet his mynde on ſo euyll an entent. ſome ſayde or he departed out of Englande / be was charged and enfourmed / by ſome knyghtes of Englande / to do the treaſon that he dyde. For this ynan of Wales was gretly behated in Englande and in Gaſcon / bycauſe of the captall of Beufz ▪ whome he toke and helped therto before Soubyſe in Poictou. For after he was taken / the frenchmen wolde nat delyuer hym agayne by no meanes / nother for raunſome nor for exchaunge / yet the erle of ſaynt Poule was offered for him / and golde and ſyluer / but it wolde nat be taken. And whan he ſawe that / for pure melancoly he dyed in y• temple at Parys / wherof all his frendes had great diſpleaſure. This walſſhe ſquier James Laube / the ſame ſeaſon arryued in Bretayne and dyd ſomoche / that he came in to Poictou / and euer as he went he named hym ſelfe to beſeruaunt to yuan of Wales for he ſpake good frenche / ſayeng howe he was come out of Wales to ſpeke with yuan / and ſo he was anone beleued / & was conueyd by them of the countre to Mortaygne / where the ſiege was. Than he wente wiſely to yuan / and ſhewed hym in his owne langage how he was cōe out of his countre to ſe hym / and to do hym ſeruyce. yuan who thought none yll ▪ lightly beleued him / and gaue hym moche thankes for his comynge / and ſayd: howe he wolde right gladlye haue his ſeruyce. And than he demaūded of him tidynges of the countrey of Wales / and he ſhewed him trewe tidynges / and vntre we for he made him beleue howe all the countre of Wales wolde gladlye haue hym to be their lorde. Theſe wordes brought this James greatly in loue with yuan / for euery man naturally deſyreth to go in to their owne coūtres / and to here therof / ſo y• yuan made him his chamberlayne. And this James euery day more and more / aquaynted him ſo with this yuan of Wales / that he had nat ſo moche truſt in no man / as he had in him. Somoch this yuan loued this James Laube that it was his diſtructyon / & the more pytie / for he was a good and a valyant man of armes. And was ſomtyme ſonne to a prince of Wales / who kyng Edwarde of England cauſed to leſe his heed / the cauſe why I can nat tell. and ſo kyng Edwarde ceaſed in to his handes / all the prouynce of Wales. And this yuan in his youthe came in to Fraunce / and ſhewed all his trouble to kyng Philyppe / than beyng frē
               che kyng / who kept him ſtyll about him as lōg as he lyued / and was as one of the chyldren of his chambre with his neuewes of Alenſon and other. And in lykewiſe ſo dyde kyng Johan / & than he bare firſt armes / and was at the batell of Poicters / how be it he was nat there taken: it had been better for hym / that he had ben ther ſlayne. and whan the peace was made bitwene the kynge of Englande and the frenche kynge / than this yuan wente in to Lombardy / & there contynued in warre. And whan the warre began agayne bytwene Englande and Fraunce / 

than he returned agayne in to Fraunce / & bare him ſelfe ſo well y• he was greatly prayſed / and welbeloued with the frenche kyng and with all the lordes. ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of his ende the whiche I am lothe to do / ſauynge to ſhewe truely what fell in that tyme.
            THis yuan of Wales hadde an vſage beyng before Mortayne at the ſiege / that gladly in the mornyng whan he was vp and redy / he wolde come before the caſtell / and ſytte downe and kembe his heed a good long ſpace / and ſyt and beholde the caſtell / and the countrey about / beynge out of doute or feare af any thynge / and lyghtly there went none with him but this James Laube / & oftentymes he made him redy / and none but he / wherby at laſt came his endyng day. On a mornyng betymes whā the wether was fayre and clere / and the nyght had been ſo hote that he coulde nat ſlepe / howebeit he roſe / and dyd on him but a ſyngle iacket and his ſhyrte / and a mantell or a cloke aboue / and ſo went thyder as he was wonte to go / and ſate hym downe / and this James Laube with hym / euery man beynge in their lodgynges a ſlepe / for it was early in the morning / and ther was made but lytell watche / for they thought thēſelfe ſure of the caſtell. And whan yuan was ſette on an olde ſtocke of wode / he ſayd to James / go to my lodgyng and fatche my combe / for I wyll refreſhe me here a tytell ſeaſon. ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                he it ſhall be done / and ſo he wente and came agayne with the combe / and as he was comyng I trowe the deuyll entred in to hym / for beſyde the combe / he brought with hym a lytell Jauelyne of Spayne with a large heed of ſtele / and with the ſame / ſtrake this yuan as he ſate clene through out the body / ſo y• he fell downe ſtarke deed. and whan he hadde done / he left ſtyll the dart in his body / and ſo went his way / & drewe vnder couert of the caſtell / and ſoo came to the barryers and was let in / for he made ſignes to enter / and ſo he was brought before the Soudyc of Leſtrade. Sir 
                  〈◊〉
                he / I haue delyuered you of one of the greateſt enemyes that ye had / of whom is that quod the Sowdic? of yuan of Wales 
                  〈◊〉
                James / and howe ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                the Soudic? thus 
                  〈◊〉
                James / & ſo ſhewed him all the hole mater: as ye haue herd before / fro poynt to poynt. And whan the Soudycherde that / he ſhaked his heed and behelde him right felly / and ſaid. A than y• haſt murdred him: knowe for 
                  •
               routhe all thynges conſydred. Sauyng but that this dede is for our profyte / it ſhulde coſt the thyne heed / but ſithe it is done it can nat be vndone agayne. howe beit / it is a great domage of that gentylman to be ſo ſlayne / we ſhall haue rather blame therby than prayſe.
            THis was the ende of yuan or Owen of Wales wheder ye wyll all is one / ſlayne by great vnhap and treaſon / wherwith they of the hooſt whan they knewe it / were ryght ſorie and diſpleaſed / and ſo was euery man y• herde therof / and ſpecially kyng Charles of Fraūce / who greatly complayned his dethe / howe beit he coulde nat amende it. And ſo this yuan was buryed in the church of ſaynt Leger / where as he hadde made a baſtyde / halfe a leage fro the caſtell of Mortayne. And all the gentylmen of the hooſt were at his buryeng / the whiche was done ryght honourably. Howe beit for all that the ſiege helde ſtyll before Mortayne / for there were good knyghtes & ſquiers / bretons poicteuyns / and frenchmen / who had geatter deſyre to conquere the caſtell / than they hadde before. and thought neuer to departe thens / tyll they had wonne it / or elles reyſed by puyſſance / they wolde ſo fayne haue ben reuenged of the dethe of yuan of Wales / and ſo they lay ſtyll without any ſawte geuynge / for they knewe well they lacked vitayle within the caſtell / & none coulde come to them. ¶ Nowe let vs leue to ſpeke of the ſiege of Mortayne and returne to the ſiege before ſaynt Malo / and fyrſt to ſpeke of y• ſiege of Eureux / and howe they dyd that lay there.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they within Eureux yelded them ſelfe frenche / & of the two hooſtes aſſembled to gyder before ſaynt Malo. Cap. CCC .xxxiii.
            
               THe ſiege beyng before Eureux / the lorde of Coucy and the lorde de la Ryuer / who were ſouerayns of the hooſt / herde often tymes tidynges fro the french kyng for he lay at Rohan / as nere to his men as he myght / for he thought to haue Eureux ſhortly out of hande / outher byforce or by compoſicion / for he perceyued well how the engliſſhmen began to waxe ſtrōg in Bretayne wherfore he wolde haue all his men of warre to drawe thyder / to reyſe the ſiege before ſaynt

Malos / & to fight with ye englyſſhmen. Theſe two lordes before Eureux / aquyted them ſelfe ryght valyantly: for euery daye they made aſſaute / and alſo ſente many treaties to the burgeſſes of the towne / ſhewynge them howe they ſuffred them ſelfe to be greued without reaſon / and mynyſſhe their goodeſſe / and ſuffre their houſes in the countrey / to be beaten downe and brent. For their naturall lorde was there with out with thē (Charles of Nauer) to whom the herytage of the countye of Eureux was fallen / by reaſon of the dethe of the counteſſe his mother. And counſayled them nat to holde the erroure and opynyon of the folyſſhe naueroyſe / and ſuche other as Ferando is: who careth nat to leaſe them all. for beſyde their ryghtfull quarell / they ſayd they wolde neuer departe thens / tyll they had the caſtell at their wyll: and if they had it by force / they ſhulde haue no mercy / and y• towne newe peopled with ſtrangers. Such offers / wordes / and manaſſhes were ſhewed to them of Eureux / and euery day they were aſſayled. Than they within began to doute / for there apered to them no maner of comfort / thā they ſayde one to another / we ſe well that the frenche kynge deſyreth nat the countre & caſtell of Eureux / for hym ſelfe: but for his nephewe Charles of Nauerre. Than they fell in treatye with the lorde Coucy. Whan Ferando knewe that the burgeſſes of the towne fell in treatye / he kept hym ſelfe within the caſtell / and wolde nat come out / nor be at none of their treatyes: finally they of the towne and coūtre yelded vp / their lyues and goodeſſe ſaued / and receyued Charles of Nauerre for their lorde. And than they beſieged Ferando within the caſtell / than he began to entreate / ſo that if they wolde ſuffre him and his to depart without daunger / he wolde yelde vp ye caſtell. The lordes were content. Than they departed out of the caſtell and ſo were brought to Chyerbourc. After the conqueſt of Eureux / all the capytayns of the hooſt drewe to Rohan / where the kyng lay to here tidynges / for well he knewe that thenglyſſhmen laye at ſiege before ſaynt Malos in Bretayne. The kyng receyued them ioyfully / and ſpecyally the lorde Coucy and the lorde de la Ryuer bycauſe they had ſo well ſpedde. Theſe lordes abode ſtyll in Normandy / and were ſtyll retayned in wages.
            THe french kyng / who all this ſeaſon lay ſtyll at Rohan / hadde ſure knowledge howe the englyſſhmen had puiſſantly beſieged ſaynt Malos: and howe they within were ſore conſtrayned: & euery day enpayred / he thought ve wolde be lothe to leſe his men / and the good towne of ſaynt Malos / for if that had ben ones engliſſhe / he thought Bretayn ſore weaked on that ſyde. therfore to reſyſt the engliſſhmen the kyng had made a great aſſemble / for none durſt diſobey his cōmaundement / as to ſytte ſtyll at home. And ſo the kynge ſent his two bretherne thyder / the duke of Berrey and ye duke of Burgoyn / the erle of Alenſon / the erle de la Marche the Dolphyn / of Auuergne / therle of Guefe / ſir Johan of Bolayne / and many other great barones and knyghtes of all countreys. Alſo the kyng cōmaunded his conſtable ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / yt he ſhulde nat be behynde. The conſtable wolde nat dyſobey / but went forthe with a great company of men of armes / of Poictou / Aniou / and Towrayne. Alſo ther was the two marſhals of Fraunce / and yt marſhall of Bleunylle: alſo there was ſir Olyuer of Cliſſon / the lorde of Leon / and all the barons of Bretayne. They were a .x. thouſande men of armes / and in ye feldes mo than a hūdred thouſande horſe / they lodged euer as nere to gyder as they coulde / but bytwene thē and the engliſſhmen there was a ryuer and an arme of the ſee. And often tymes whan the ſee was ebbed / ſome knyghtes and ſquiers wolde go and do dyuers feates of armes with their enemyes in the playne ryuer. There was neuer ſuche aſſemble made in Bretayne before / for if the frenchmen were puyſſāt / in lyke wiſe ſo were the engliſſhmen / and eche parte thought to fyght / for euery day they ſhewed them ſelfe in the felde / with baners and penons waueryng with the wynde / it was great pleaſure to behold thē. The frenchemen wolde come downe to the ryuer ſyde / and make ſemblant to fyght / and wolde ſay / beholde yonder our enemyes / anon ye ſee wyll ebbe / if they wollcome ouer we wyll ſe them come fight / but it ſemythe they haue no wyll therto / they feare the fortunes of batayle / we thynke their chiefe gouernours wyll nat ſuffre them to aduenture / to fyght with vs in playne batayle.
            THis faſynge and muſtryng was dayly bytwene them. So on a day the erle of Cambridge / ſware and ſayd: that if ther were any mo ſuche aſſembles / that if they wolde nat come & fyght / that he wolde go ouer and fyght with them / what ſoeuer fell therof. Than on a day the vowarde with the conſtable of Fraunce / who ſawe well howe the englyſſhmen were

hote and haſty / ordayned on a ſeaſon all his batayls on the ſandes / as nere to the ryuer as they coulde / all a fote. The erle of Cambridge whan he ſawe their maner ſayd / they that loue me folowe me / for I wyll go and fyght with thē / and ſo daſſhed in to the water / the whyche as than was lowe / but the fludde was comynge / and ſo came iuſt to the ryuerſyde with his baner. thā the engliſſhmen began to ſhote agaynſt ye frēchmen / and ye conſtable of Fraunce drewe abacke and all his people / and went back in to the felde who thought veryly y• the engliſſhmen wolde a come ouer the water / they wolde gladly haue cauſed them to haue done ſo. The duke of Lancaſtre with a great batayle / was redy to haue folowed his brother if he had ſene there hadde bene nede / & ſayd to Gerarde of Brees a ſquier of Heynaulte / who was by hym. Gerarde: beholde my brother / howe he aduentureth hymſelfe / it ſemeth howe he ſheweth enſample to ye frenchemen / howe he wolde fayne fyght with thē / but it ſemeth they haue but ſmall wyll therto. Thus they contynued and no deades of armes done on nother party / the fludde began to ryſe. Than the engliſſhmen drewe a backe out of the ryuer / and went to their lodgynges / and the frenchmen in lyke wyſe to theirs.
            IN ſuche muſters and aſſembles / the ſiege durynge: there was done dyuers feates of armes. The frenchmen kept well their fronter / ſo that the engliſſhmen durſt nat paſſe the ryuer. And ſoo it was / that dyuers tymes more hygher in the countre / certayne knyghtes and ſquiers bretons / ſuche as knewe well the countrey / rode a brode in certayne companyes / and paſſed the ryuer by gydes / and often tymes encountred with the engliſſhe foragers / and ſometyme they fought / and ſōe ouer throwen: ſometyme they wan / and ſometyme loſt / as aduentures of warre often tymes falleth. The ſiege thus endurynge the lordes of Englande more dilygently to attayne to their purpoſe / they concluded to make a myne / and ſo therby to entre in to ſaynt Malos / for otherwyſe they thought they coulde nat get the towne / it was ſo full of good men of warre / & ſo well furnyſſhed with all ordynance and artyllery: the whiche helped thē merueyluſly well. Alſo thengliſſhmen nigh euery day / were fayne to be armed and to aſſē
               ble to gyder to abyde batayle / if the frenchmen wolde haue come forwarde / wherfore they had no leyſer to make any aſſawtes to y• towne / but with their gonnes / wherof they had great plenty: which troubled them ſore within the towne. So they aduyſed the place to make their myne and ſet mynours a warke. ¶ Nowe lette vs a lytell ſpace leaue ſpekyng of this ſiege / & ſpeke of the ſiege of Mortayne in Poictou.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen came and reyſed the ſiege before Mortayne. Cap. CCC .xxxiiii.
            
               VE haue harde before: of the bethe of yuan of Wales / and howe he was ſlayne / and howe the bretons and poicteuyns / were ſtyll at the ſiege before Mortayne / and ſir James of Mountmore / ſir Percyuall Deyneuall / Wylliam of Mountcountour / and ſir James of Surgeres were capitaynes / and wold nat leaue the ſiege / for the dethe of yuan of Wales: who was their ſouerayne capitayne. they had great deſyre to reuenge his dethe on them of the fortereſſe. Alſo ye haue herde: howe ſir Thom̄s Triuet / ſir Wyllm̄ Scrope / ſir Thomas Berton / ſir Wylliam Sendrue / & a great nombre of men of armes and archers / were ordayned to go in to the marches of Burdeaux / for the reſkewe of them of Mortayne. And ſir Mathewe Gornay who was at Bayon / and was dayly occupyed therabout / in the marches agaynſt the gaſcons / and ſuche as helde fortereſſes there. Theſe ſayd four knyghtes & their companyes had layen at Plomouthe .vii. monethes / and could haue no wynde to ſerue them to go in to Gaſcoyne / wherof they were ryght ſore diſpleaſed / but they coulde nat amende it. Alſo ye haue harde / howe the lorde Neuyll of Englande was ordeyned with a great nombre of men of armes and archers / to go and comforte the kyng of Nauer agaynſt the ſpany ardes / for he was ordeyned to be ſeneſhall of Burdeux / & ſo he founde all theſe other men of warr̄
               ſtyll at Plomouth / and eche of them were glad of other. & anon after the lord Neuels comyng they had wynde at wyll. Than they toke ſhippynge and ſayled towardes Gaſcoyne / and ſo they were in one flete a ſixe ſcore veſſelles and xl. barkes / there myght well be a thouſāde men of armes / and two thouſande archers / & they hadde no let on the ſee but good wynde / and ſo they entred in to the hauen of Burdeux / the euen of our Lady in Septembre: the yer of our ſorde a thouſand thre hundred .lxxvii.

Whan the bretons and poicteuyns / that laye at ſiege before Mortaygne / ſawe ſuche a flete of ſhippes paſſe by / makynge great feaſt & brunt / and ſo w
                  •
               ynge of trompettes / they were ryght penſyue / and they within the caſtell ryght ioyfull: for they hoped well than to be ſhortely reſkewed / or elles their enemyes to haue batayle / for they thought ſurely they were nat come thyder for nought / but for to do ſome great feate of armes. Than ſir James of Mountmore and the capitaynes of the hooſt drewe to guyder to counſayle / to determyne what was beſt for thē to do. Than they repented thē of the forſakyng of the treaty that was offred thē before / for but a lytell before / the Soudic of Leſtrade / offred to rendre vp ye fortereſſe / ſo they myght departe to Burdeur / their lyues and goodes ſaued / but the frenchmen wolde nat therof. So than they ſent a 
                  •••
               aulde to the caſtell ſhewyng thē howe they were content to receyue their treatie. The Soudic anſwered: howe they were than in no mynd 
               
                  •
               o fall to no treatie / for their ſocour was come / wherfore they wolde frely departe or a 
                  •
               yde at their pleaſure: ſo ye ſiege lay ſtyll. The lorde Neuyll and his company came to Burdea
                  •
                / & they were ioyfully receyued of ſir Wylliam 
                  •••
               man seneſhall of Landes / ſir Johan of Multon mayre of the cytie / & of the archbyſſhop there / and of the burgeſſes / ladyes / and 
                  〈◊〉
               . The lorde Neuyll was lodged in the abbey of ſaynt Andrewes / and ſo was ſeneſhall of Burdeur. Than anone after he made an aſſemble of knyghtes and ſquiers gaſcons / ſuche as helde of the engliſſhe parte / ſo that he was a four thouſande. And he ordeyned ſhyppes and veſſelles on the ryuer of Garon / and ſo departed fro Burdeux to go and reyſe the ſiege before Mortayne. Anone theſe tydynges were knowen in the frenche hooſt / howe thenglyſſhmen & gaſcons were comyng downe the ryuer of Garon to reyſe their ſiege / or elles to 
                  •
               yght with them. Than the capitayns drewe to counſayle / & all thynges conſidered / it was thought they were nat able to abyde y• puyſſance / wherfore it was determyned that they ſhulde rather l
                  ••
               e 
                  •
               he tyme that they hadde ſpent / than to put themſelfe in to a farder daunger & parell. And ſo ſowned then diſ
                  •
               ogyng without any thyng doyng farder / and ſo drewe in to Poictou: but all departed nat / for a certayne bretons & walſhmen that were parteynynge to yuan of Wales / ſayd: howe they were able to abyde all ye 
               world and to kepe the fortreſſe of ſaynt Leger / and ſo they entred into it / & drue in all their artyllary.
            THe knightes of Englande and Gaſcon / who were comynge with full ſayles in barges / by the Ryuer of Garon: they reſted at thentre before Mortayne / and ſo toke lande lytell and lytell. And as they landed / they put thē
               ſelfe in order redy to aſſayle y• fortreſſe of ſaynt Leger / wherin the bretons were. And ſo at the firſt comyng ther was a ſore aſſaut / and whyle they were at the aſſaut / the lorde Neuyll ſent a haraude to Mortayn to the Soudic to knowe howe he dyde. The haraude dyde as he was cō
               maūded / and brought worde agayne how they dyd rightwell: but that they had no ſhowes on their fete. The aſſaut before ſaynt Legerendured well thre houres and wan nothing / but had dyuers of their men ſore hurt / and ſo lodged thē that night. And it was their myndes nat to depart thens tyll they had wonne that holde / and were ſore diſpleaſed that the lord of Mōtmore and the other french knightes had nat ben 
                  •
               in the fortreſſe of ſaynt Leger / but they were wiſelye departed and left ther the bretons.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen recouered dyuers caſtelles on the frenchmen in Burdeloys. Cap. CCC .xxxv.
            
               ANd in the next mornyng the lorde Neuyll & the knightes of England ordayned to gyue aſſaut to ſaynt Leger / and ſo ſowned their trūpettꝭ to ye aſſaute and aproched to the fortreſſe and ther began a ſore aſſaut The fortreſſe ſtode ſo on a rocke y• none coude eaſely aproche therto / and on y• wekeſt ſyde ther were dyuers great dykes / ſo that none coude eaſely aproche. The aſſaylers traueyled ſore and wanne but lytell / but dyuers of their men were ſore hurt / & ſome ſlayne. Than thaſſaut ceaſed / and it was thought beſt to fyll the dykes / to haue the more aduantage togyue aſſaut: ſo with great payne the dykes were fylled. Than the bretons that were within ſeyng that douted more than / than they dyde before: and good reaſon why / & ſo fell to entreat. The englyſſhmen who had great mynde of ye kyng of Nauers buſyneſſe: and alſo ▪ thought to delyuer certayne fortreſſes in Burdelois / holden by the frenche bretons / agreed to their treatie / and ſo the holde of ſaynt Leger was gyuen vp

ſo that they within departed whyder they lyſt / their lyues and goodes ſaued. Thus ſaynt Legers was englyſſhe / and than the lordes wente to the caſtell of Mortayne and founde y• Soudic of Leſtrade in the ſame caſe / as the haraud had reported to thē before. So than they were refreſſhed of euery thyng that they neded / and the caſtell newe furnyſſhed with mē. And than they retourned agayne to Burdeaux the ſame way they cāe by water / by the ryuer of Garon.
            wHan they were come agayne to Burdeaux and refreſſhed / in the meane ſeaſon they had knowledge / y• a ſire leagꝭ thens / ther was a barone that helde a fortreſſe called ſaynt Mauberen / in a coūtre called Medoc / who dyde moche hurt in the countre. Thā
               thenglyſſhe lordes charged all their prouiſyon on the ryuer of Garone and all their artyllary / and than toke their horſes aboute a thre hūdred ſpeares / and ſo came by lande to ſaynt Mauberen. And ther were of gaſcoyns with the lorde Neuyll / ſir Axchambalt of Grayle / the lorde of Rouſy / the lorde of Duras / and ye lorde of Ternon. And whan the barones and their companyes were come before ſaynt Mauberen they toke their lodgynge / and incontynent gaue aſſaut the whiche was feirſe and terryble / for the bretons within were good men of warre / and their capitayne was one called Huguelyn / by whom they were ruled. This firſt aſſaut dyde the bretons but lytell hurt / than thenglyſſhmen drewe to their lodgynge. The next mornynge they reyſed vp their engyns to caſt ſtones / and to breke downe the toppes of the byldinges in the towre. The .iii. day they ordayned to gyue aſore aſſaut / ſayeng how thoſe rybaudꝭ ſhulde nat longe endure agaynſt them. There was a ſore and a feirſe aſſaut / and many a man ſlayne and hurt: ther were neuer men that better defē
               ded them ſelfe than the bretons dyde. Howe be it finally / ſeyng no confort comyng fro no parte to them warde they fell in treatie / for they ſawe well their ennemyes wolde nat departe thens / tyll they hadde them at their pleaſure / thoughe they ſhulde lye longe there therfore. So ye treatie toke ſuche effect y• they gaue vp ſaynt Mauberen / and departed with their goodes without domage / and ſo they went in to Poictou or whyder they lyſt. And whan the lorde Neuyll was lorde therof / he newly repayred the fortereſſe and furnyſſhed it with newe men and artillary / and ſette therin gaſcoyns to kepe it. A ſquyer of Gaſcoyne / called Peter of Braſyas was capitayne there / and than y• lorde Neuyll returned to Burdeux. And dayly he herde how the ſiege endured before Panpilone in Nauer the whiche was beſieged by the chylde of Caſtell / but they herd no certayne tidynges of the kyng of Nauer / nor alſo the kynge of Nauerr herde no worde of them / the whiche greatly diſpleaſed hym. ¶ Nowe let vs retourne to the beſyneſſe in Bretayne and in Normandy / and ſpeke of the ſiege of ſaynt Malo.
         
         
            Howe the myne made by thengliſſhmen agaynſt ſaynt Malos was loſt / and the ſiege reyſed. Cap. ccc .xxxvi.
            
               BEfore the towne of ſaynt Malo ther was a ſore ſiege and many a ſoore ſaute gyuen / for thenglyſſhmen had well a four hundred gōnes / who ſhot night and daye into the fortreſſe / and agaynſt it. And the capitayne within called Morfonas a valyant man of armes / ſet all his mynde to ye defence of the fortereſſe / and by the good counſayle of ſir Hēry of Maletrait / of the lorde Cō
               bore / and of the vycont of Bellere / dyd ſo valyantly that they toke all y• tyme but lytell hurte. In the coūtre as ye haue herde before: was all about the floure of Fraunce / aſwell of great lordes as other / they were to the nombre of .xvi. thouſande men of armes / knyghtes and ſquyers / and well a hundred thouſande horſes / and gladly they wolde haue fought with thēgliſſhmen. And in lykewiſe the englyſſhmen wolde gladly haue done the ſame / if any parte coulde haue founde any aduauntage / but that thynge whiche brake their purpoſe oftentymes / was a ryuer that was bytwene them / ſo that whā the ſtudde came ther coude none paſſe ouer ſo that none of them might cōe at other. And alwayes the myne went forward / and they within were in great dout. ye may well knowe that in ſuche aſſembles it coude be non otherwyſe / but that the foragers of eyther ꝑtie ſomtymes met in the felde / for ther were expert knyghtes and ſquyers of bothe parties: and many a feat of armes done / and ſome ouerthrowen. Theſe myners wrought ſore day and night vnder y• erth to thentent to come in to the towne that way / & to make a pane of the wall to fall / ſo that their men might entre. Of this myne Morfonace &

they within douted gretly / for they knewe well by that they myght be loſt / they cared for none other aſſaut but for that. For their towne was well furnyſſhed with vitayls and artyllary / to kepe it for two yere yf nede were / but they had great thought how to breke this myne. ſo long they thought theron and traueyled ther about that at laſt they came to their ententes / and by great aduenture / as many thynges falleth in warre. The erle Richarde of Arundell ſhulde haue kept the watche one night / with a certayn with him of his owne men. And therle toke no great hede of that was his charge / ſo that they 
                  •
               in ſaynt Malos knewe therof by their ſpyes or other wyſe. And ſo wha
                  •
               ie they ſawe it was tyme / on truſt of the watche they departed ſecretly out of the towne / the hooſt beyng a ſlepe. And ſo they came without noyſe makynge to ye place wher as the myne was a makynge: & the myners had nigh made an ende of their warke Than Morfonace and his cōpany beyng redy to do that he was come for at their eaſe & without defence brake the myne / ſo that ſome of the myners cāe neuer out: for the myne fell downe on them. And whan they had done / they ſayde they wolde awake the watch that was next the towne / to thentent that the hooſt ſhulde knowe howe valiantly they had done. And ſo they entred in to the one ſyde of the felde cryeng their cryes / beatyng downe of tentes and lodgyngꝭ / and ſleynge of men: ſo that the hooſt began to ſtyrre. Than Morfonace and his cōpany with drewe them in to ſaynt Malos / without hurte or danger. Than the hooſt began to aſſemble / and ye duke had great marueyle what it might be ▪ and demaunded what it was. Than it was ſhewed him that in y• defaut of the watche their myne was loſt the ſame tyme. Than the duke of Lancaſtre ſent for therle of Arundell / and he was ſore rebuked for this aduenture: but he excuſed him ſelfe aſwell as he might. Howbeit he was ther with ſore aſhamed / and hadde rather haue ſpent a hundred thouſande frankes / than it ſhulde haue ſo fortuned.
            THys aduenture thus fallen / and their myne broken: than the lordes of ye hooſt drewe to counſayle / to knowe what were beſte for theym to do. Than they behelde eche other / and ſawe well howe they had loſt their ſeaſon / the whiche was nat likely to be recouered agayne. And to begyn a newe myne they thoght they ſhuld neuer bring it to an ende / for y• tyme paſſed and wynter drue on. So they determyned all thynges cōſydred for the beſt to dyll
                  •
               g
                  •
                and to retourne in to England agayne. And it was than ordayned / that euery man ſhulde dyſlodge and go to ſhyppe: their flete laye ſtyll at ancre in the hauen of ſaynt Malo. Anone euery man was diſlodged and in to ſhippe / and had wynde at wyll. And ſo ſayled towarde Englā
               de and aryued at Hāpton / and ther toke lande And ther they knewe that ſir John̄ Arūdell capiten of Hāpton was gone to Chierborc / to refreſh ye gariſon ther. Thus brake vp thēgliſhe army and euery man drue to his owne houſe & ſome repaſſed the ſee and went into their owne countreis. Than the comons of Englande began to murmure agaynſt ye noble men / ſayeng howe they hadde done all that ſeaſon but lytell good / and ſpecially bycauſe ſaynt Malos was ſo eſcaped / wherfore the erle of Arundell hadde but lytell grace nor loue.
         
         
            ¶ Howe ſir Olyuer of Cleſquy was taken by them of Chierbourge. Cap. CCC .xxxvii.
            
               ANone after the departure of the englyſſhmen fro ſaynt Malo / and that the frē
               chemen had refreſſhed newlye the towne and the caſtell. Than the conſtable of Fraū
               ce and the bretons / determyned to go and lay ſiege to Chierbourc ▪ wherof ſir Johan Har
                  •
               ſton was capitayn / & had with hym dyuers knightes bothe englyſſhe and naueroyſe. And the hole hoſt of Fraūce went nat thyder / for there departed the duke of Berrey / the duke of Burgoyne / the duke of Burbone / the erle de la Marche / the Dolphyn of Auuergne / and all the great lordes: and ſent their mē in to their countreis. And dyuers of them went to Rohan to ſe the kynge / who receyued theym right ioyouſly: and a thre hundred ſpeares of bretons and normayns / wente to Ualonges a thre leages fro Chierbourge / and there made their baſtydꝭ. And they knewe well that ſir Johan Arūdell had newly refreſſhed Chierbourc and they ſuppoſed that he was as thā bytwene Chierbourge and Ualōges. On that ſyde ther were highe wodes and foreſtes / that endured to the cyte of Cōſtances / ſo they of Chierbourg

might yſſue out and ryde aboute the countrey whan they lyſt / for they had in this wode away ſo ſore hedged on bothe ſydes / that whan they were ryding there coude none aproche to them this Chierbourge is one of the ſtrōgeſt caſtels of the worlde. They that were in the garyſon of Ualōges / were right ſore diſpleaſed / in that they coude do no domage to the englyſſhmen / that ſo haryed the coūtre. Than ſir Olyuer of Cleſquy brother to ſir Bertram came fro Catyminy / and rode throughe y• wode and aduyſed Chierbourg right nere / to thentent to ſe if ther might be any ſiege layde therto. Howe be it he thought at leeſt if he might gette the towne / the whiche ſtode higher than the caſtell / he ſhulde do a great enterprice. For than he thought he might ſo fortify the towne / that none ſhulde yſſue out of the caſtell / but to their great domage Sir Olyuer perſeuered ſtyll in this purpoſe / and toke with hym a fyftene ſpeares and guydes / ſuche as coude ſurely bring hym throughe the wodes. And ſo in a mornynge he departed fro Ualonges and came through the woodes / tyll he was agaynſt Chierbourg. And ye ſame day and tyme ſir Johan Arundell was come in to the towne out of the caſtell / and a ſquyer of Nauer called Johan Coq with hym / to the entent to ſhewe him the towne. And ther he herd tidynges howe the frenchmen were come thyder to aduyſe the place. Sir ꝙ Johan Coq / I haue herde howe ſir Olyuer of Cleſquy / brother to ſir Bertram / hath paſt the wodes: and hath aduyſed this towne. Sir / for god ſake let vs purſue hym. Sir I warrant to bringe you ſuche away that he ſhall nat eſcape vs / but that he ſhall fall in our handes: and ſo they ſhall be cōquered lytell and lytell. By my faythe quod ſir Johan Arundell I am content. And ſo they armed them ſecretly and toke with them a two hundred ſpeares / and ſo entred in to the wodes wher as the frenchmen rode the ſame day / and knewe nothyng eche of other. And whan ſir Olyuer had well aduyſed the towne / the whiche he ſawe was right ſtronge: and in a place impoſſyble to be beſieged. Than he withdrue and toke the way towarde Ualōges / the ſame way he came. And he hadde nat rydden the ſpace of two leages / but that ſir Johan Arundell & Johan Coq came ſtreyght on them / they were ſo well gyded: and cryed on thē our lady of Arundell. Whan ſir Olyuer herde that crye / & ſawe them redy to mete hym / he wyſſhed him ſelfe agayne in Ualonges. Than̄e he mounted on a good courſer / thynking to ſaue him ſelfe by 
                  ••
               eynge: for he ſawe well there was no tyme nor place to ſight / for his aduantage. So his men entred in to the thycke of the woode / ſome here ſome there they wyſt nat whyder: but a fewe of them kept togyder. Johan Coq lyke a valyant man of armes / folowed in the chaſe after ſir Olyuer ſo nere / that finally he toke hym priſoner / and a ten or .xii. other were ther taken: and the reſydue ſaued them ſelfe in the woodes / and ſo gate to Ualonges whan they might. And ther ſhewed ſir Wylliam of Bordes and his company / howe they had ſpedde by reaſon of a buſſhement / and howe ſir Olyuer of Cleſquy was taken / wherof all they that were ther were ſoore diſpleaſed / howbeit they coude nat amende it. Than ſir Olyuer was ledde in to the caſtell of Chierbourg / and he was ſhewed howe he ſhulde pay for his raunſome .x. thouſande frankes. Theſe tidynges were anone knowen bothe in Englande and in Fraunce / and ſo the mater abode ſtyll long in the ſame eſtate.
            SIr Olyuer of Cleſquy was priſoner a longe ſeaſon in Chierbourge / in the kepyng of Johan Coq of Nauer / who toke him. yet ſir Johan of Arundell had the profyte. And afterwarde ſir Olyuer made fynance for hymſelfe / and for all thoſe that were taken with him but it was a long ſpace firſt. And whan the gariſon of Chierbourg▪ was well refreſſhed / than ſir Johan Arundell departed and went agayn to▪ Hampton / wherof he was capitayne. Ther abode ſtyll in Chierdourg with ſir John̄ Harlſton capitayne there / dyuers knyghtes of Englande: as ſir John̄ Coplande / ſir John̄ Bulle / ſir Thom̄s Bygorne / & dyuers other knightes & ſquyers. And they and other toke ſo good hede to the fortreſſe that it toke no domage.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of Chierbourc tyll tyme come therto agayne / and let vs ſpeke of ſir Johan Neuyll ſeneſhall of Burdeaulx / and of his company / ſir Thomas Tryuet and other / and howe they perſeuered.
         
         
            ¶ How the chylde of Caſtell and the ſpanyerdes lay at ſiege before Panpilone / and of ſuche caſtelles as the englyſſhmen conquered out of the frenchmens handes. Ca. CCC .xxxviii.
            
               
               THe lorde Neuyll beynge at Burdeur was well entourmed howe the chylde of Caſtell with a great nombre of ſpanyerdes had layde ſiege to the good towne of Pāpylone / and the vycont of Chaſtellon / the lorde of Leſcute / & Raymon of Rameſen and dyuers other were within. and they coude here no certayne troynges of the kyng of Nauer wherof they hadde marueyle / but they ſuppoſed ſhortely to here fro hym. The coūtremen of Burdeaur and ther about / deſyred the lorde Neuyll nat to departe out of the countre / nor to ſuffre none of his men of warre to deꝑte / as long as the frenchmen had any fortreſſes in the coutre. And ſpecially they cōplayned of the fortreſſe of Berſat / the whiche they ſayde dyde 
                  •
               oche 
                  〈…〉
               we in the countrey. Than the lorde Neuyll demaunded what nombre of bretons they were within Berſatte / and it was ſhewed 
                  〈…〉
                fyue hūdred fightyng men. Than he called to hym the ſeneſhall of Landes and ſir Wyllyam Scrope / and ſayde: ſirs take with you a two or thre hūdred ſpeares & as many archers / and go your way and loke on them of Berſat / and do ſomoche as to delyuer the countre of thē and than we ſhall attende to a greatter mater. The two knightes wolde nat diſobey / but ſo toke two hūdred ſpeares and as many archers and paſſed the ryuer of Garon / and ſo rode towarde Berſat. And ye ſame ſeaſon they of Berſat were 
                  ••
               te abrode rydinge / to the nombre of 
                  〈◊〉
                coreſpeares all a long the ryuer of Garon / to thētent to ſe if they might fynde any ſhyppe. and their capitayne was one of Pyergourt called ſir Bertram Raymon / a good man of armes: and ſo within a litell leage of Berſat they encountred the englyſſhmen. And whan this ſir Bertram ſawe that he muſt nedes fight / he was affrayed: but ordred his men in good array / they were nere all gaſcoyns. And ſo the englyſſhmen came on them with their ſpeares couched and ſpurres to their horſes. And at the firſt comynge ther were dyuers ouerthrowen of bothe parties & many a feate of armes done Nowe b
                  •
               it finally the frenchmen coude nat endure thenglyſſhmens dedes alſo they were mo 
                  〈◊〉
                nombre and choſen men. In ſomoch that all they of the garyſon of Berſat were ſlayne or taken / but fewe that ſcaped. And ther was taken ſir Bertram Raymon / and ſir wyllm̄ Hemon / and than they rode to Berſat. And whā they of the gariſon ſawe that ther men were taken and ſlayne they were ſore abaſſhed / and ſo gaue vp the fortereſſe their lyues ſaued. So thus Berſat became engliſſhe and than they returned to Burdeur. ¶ The ſame day was ye night of Alſayntes / ye yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lxxviii. that thēglyſſhmen entred in to Berſat / and the ſame day the kyng of Nauer came to Burdeux or any man wyſt. And he was receyued ryght honorably and well lodged at his eaſe / and all his men. And than he was demaūded of the tidyngꝭ in his coūtre & of the ſpanyerdes: and he anſwered plainly ye the childe of Caſtell had beſieged Pāpylone with great puyſſance / ſo that they yt were within the cyte were ſore conſtrayned. Thā he deſyred thē acordyng to ye apoyntment made by the kyng of Englande / that they wolde helpe to confort his people / & to reyſe the ſiege. The knightes of Englande offred themſelfe & ſaid / how they were in good mynde ſo to do / ſo ye by their neglygēce the ſiege ſhulde nat be vnreyſed / and ſo ordayned therfore & ſaid to the kyng. ſir returne you into yor owne coūtre / and make a ſpiall aſſēbly of yor men / & we ſhallbe ther at a day apoynted & let vs aſſemble togyder / and ſo we ſhabe the ſtronger. your men alſo knowe the countre better than ours do / He anſwered & ſaid. ss ye ſay well: & thus it ſhalbe done. And ſo the thirde daye after he departed and toke the way by the ſee ſyde. For ther was about Bayon and Dare in Gaſcone / certayne fortreſſes holden by the bretons. So longe the kynge of Nauer rode yt he came to the towne of ſaynt Johans / and ther he abode. ¶ In the meane ſeaſon whyle the kynge of Nauer made his vyage to Burdeux / & taryed there & retourned agayne. John̄ of Caſtell ſon to the kyng of Spayne / and the cōſtable of the realme of Caſtell / who were chefe of that warr / who was called Dome Peter of Moriche. They helde theſiege before Panpylone / with a great nombre vnder them. With them ther was therle Done Alphons / therle of Medyna / therle of Manos therle of Ribydie / Peter Ferant of Saleſque / and Peter Gouſart of Modeſque and dyuers other knightes and ſquiers of Caſtell. And the ſpanyerdes as they came towarde Panpylone they had taken and brent the towne of Lornich and the cytie of Uyen beſyde Groynge. There was neuer a lorde in Nauerr that durſt apere before thē / but euery man kept his owne holde. All this knewe rightwell ye kyng of Nauer / for alwayes he had meſſangers comyng & goyng but he coude nat remedy it wtout ye helpe of thē
               gliſhmen. ye lorde Neuyll who was at burdeur

ſent thyder by the kynge of Englande and hiſſ counſayle. He knewe rightwell the liage and a lyāce that was made bytwene the kyngꝭ of Englande and of Nauer / yet he faynted and was ſlacke in the acomplyſſhing therof. All this he thought in hym ſelfe / and ſo called to hym ſir Thomas Tryuet a right valyant knight / and ſayd: ſir Thom̄s ye knowe well howe we were ſent hyder to take hede of the frōters of this coū
               tre / and to put out our enemyes. And alſo to cō
               fort ye kyng of Nauer / who hath ben here with vs / and hath ſhewed vs the nede that he hath / ye were preſent whan I promyſed him how we ſhulde ſerue him. wherfore it behoueth vs ſo to do / or els we ſhalbe blamed. Wherfore dere ſrē
               de and louer / I ordayne you to be chefe gouernour of that warre / and that ye take a ſixe hundred ſperes and a thouſande archers and go into Nauer / and I wyll abyde here in theſe marcheſſe bycauſe I am ſeneſhall of Burdeux / and haue the charge therof cōmytted me by the kynge of Englande. And therfore I wyll take hede of ſuche aduentures as ſhall fall / for as yet the coūtre is nat all rydde of our enemyes. Sir 
                  〈◊〉
                ſir Thomas / ye do me more honour than I am worthy / I ſhall gladly obey you as it is reaſon and ſhall aquyte me in this vyage to the beſt of my power. Than the lorde Neuell ſayd / ſir I am well conforted by that ye arwylling to go.
            wIthin a lytell ſpace after / ſir Thomas Tryuet departed fro Burdeux & toke the way to Dare in Gaſcoyne / & with him ther was ſir Wylliam Condone / ſir Thomas Berton / ſir John̄ Aſfull / ſir Henry Paule ſir Wyllm̄ Croquet ſir Loys Malyn / ſir Thomas Fourque / and ſir Robert Haſton all gaſcons with a great nombre. Whan all theſe men of warre were come to the cytie of Dare / than they herde tidynges that the kyng of Nauerre was at ſaynt John̄s du Pye du port / and there made his ſomons of men of warr / wherof they were right gladde. In the cytie of Dare there was a capitayne an englyſſhe knight called ſir Mathue Gorney vncle to ſir Thom̄s Tryuet / who receyued his nephewe right ioyfully and all his company / and ayded to lodge theym at their eaſe. Thentent of ſir Thomas Tryuet was nat to haue reſted / but to haue kept on his way to the kyng of Nauerr: but than ſir Mathewe ſayd. Fyre nephue / ſytheye be here with ſuche a puyſſaunce / it behoueth you to delyuer this countre of a certayne bretons and frenche / men / who kepeth well a .xii. fortreſſes bytwene this and Bayone / for if ye leaue them behynde you / they wyll do vs this wynter moche trouble. and ſir if ye do this / the coūtre wyll can you moche thanke / and ſir I deſyre you do it. Sir ꝙ ſir Thomas and I wyll do it. And than he ſette euery thyng in order / and ſo came before a fortereſſe called Mountpyn / the whiche ye bretons helde / and therin was a capitayn a ſquier of the countie of Foyz / called Tayllerdon. As ſoone as theſe men of armes were come thyder they made a ſore aſſaut / and ſo the fortres was taken / and all that were within ſlayne excepte the capitayne / who was taken priſoner: than the caſtell was newe furnyſſhed with newe mē. And after they went farther to an other caſtell / called Careyllat / kept alſo by the frenche gaſcons. And ſo theſe men of warre gaue aſſaute therto / but they fayled at yt aſſaut of winnynge of it / and ſo diſlodged. And the next mornynge they made ſo feirſe aſſaute ye by force they wan it / and all ſlayne that were within / except the capitayne / who was a breton bretonant and was called yuonet Apriſydie / and he was delyuered to the englyſſhmen as priſoner / and the caſtell brent. And than they paſſed farther / and came before another fortreſſe called Beſenghen / and therin was capitayne a ſquyer of Gaſcoyne called Roger of Morlac. The englyſſhmen were two dayes there or they had it / and that was by treatie ſo that all that were within deꝑted with out domage / and went whyder they lyſt.
            THan fro thens they went to Taſſegnon a caſtell ſtādyng a thre leages fro Bayoue / & there layd ſiege. And whan they of Bayone herde howe the ſiege was layde there / they were right ioyfull: and ſo cāe to the ſiege a .v. hūdred men of the towne with ſpeares and paueſſes / and brought with them the greateſt engyn that was in Bayone. They of the fortreſſe had done ſo moche trouble to them of Bayone / that they deſyred nothyng ſo moche as their dyſtructyon / but for all their ſtrength they coulde nat haue get it / and the aduyſe and helpe of the englyſſhmen had nat ben. They lay there .xv. dayes or they had it / & yet whan they had it / it was by treaty: ſo ye all that were wtin wēt their way without any domage / and wer brought in ſauegard to Bregent / whiche helde of ye french parte. Than they of Bayon bought the caſtell for thre. M. frankes / and after beate it downe / and caryed all the ſtones to Bayone / and there theſe men of warr were well receyued / and had euery thyng that they deſyred payeng therfore.
         
         
            
            ¶ How the ſpanyerdes departed fro the ſiege of Pāpylone / and howe the englyſſhmen arryued in Nauer: and howe they dyde. Cap. CCC .xxxix.
            
               THe kyng of Nauer beyng at ſaynt John̄s towne / was right ſore trobled and dyſpleaſed in his mynde y• thēgliſſhmen taryed ſo longe / for his countrey was in great ꝑell. Surely the cyte of Panpylone had ben won by the ſpanyerdes if the wyſdome & good kepyng of the vycont of Chaſtellon had nat ben / who was capyten ther with two. C. ſpeares gaſcons / but his wyſe order kept thē fro parell. In the towne of Tedula in Nauer was capitayne ſir Perducas Dalbret and in the cyte of Myranda / was capiten therle Pulloys / & with hym ſir Roger his brother. And in another ſtrong towne in Nauer / called Arkes was capitayne a knyght of Cateloy
                  •
               e / called ſir Raymon of Bageth. In truſt of theſe capitayns the kyng of Nauer held him at ſaynt John̄s towne / but all the countre was waſted and ouerrynne with enemyes for none kepte the feldes / but the ſpanyerdes: and they knewe well that at length by long ſiege the cyte of Panpylone ſhulde be wonne or yelded vp but they had no wyll therto / for the vycount of Chaſtellon / the lorde Leſcute / wyllm̄ of Paur toke ſo good hede / that they feared no danger. So at laſt the ſpanyerdes began to ware wery / for wynter drewe on about ſaynt Andrewes tyde and their vitayle began to fayle and ware ſcante. It had fayled ſorer / and the vycount of Roquebertyn had nat ben / for he refreſſhed thē with threſcore ſomers laden with vitayls / elles their vitayls had fayled them by Alhalowtyde Than the kyng of Nauer ſent a knyght of his called ſir Peter of Baſcle to the englyſſhmen / prayeng them to make haſt for he thought they taryed ouer long / ſeyng their promyſe and his nede togyder. The knight dyde ſo moche y• he came in to the marche of Bayone / and founde the engliſſhmen before a caſtell called Poulāt / there he dyde his meſſage. Than ſir Thomas Tryuet ſayd: y• caſtell that he lay at / ones won he wolde do nothyng tyll he came in to Nauer and ſo badde the knyght on that promyſe to retourne. And than he departed / and the caſtell within two dayes after was gyuen vp by treatie and they that were within departed / and the caſtell newe refreſſhed with newe men. Than the countre was well in peace / howe be it there were ſtyll lytell fortreſſes kept in churches and mynſters / the whiche dyde hurt in the countre: but they had no great puyſſaunce. So the englyſſhmen wolde tary no lenger / but ſayd they wolde go in to Nauer and reyſe the ſege before Pāpylone / or els fight with the ſpanyerdes.
            SIr Thomas Tryuet and ſir Mathewe Gorney and all their men retourned to Dar / and ther taryed four dayes / and than departed & toke the way to Nauer. But ſir Mathewe Gorney retourned to Bayone with his owne men to kepe the countre / and to conquere ſome ſmale fortereſſes that the bretons kept. ſo long ſir Thom̄s Tryuet iourneyd / that he cāe to ſaynt John̄s du Py du port / where he foūde the kyng of Nauer / who receyued them right ioyouſly. The knightes lodged in the towne & the men of warre about in the countre. Before that tyme the kyng of Nauer had ſomoned all maner of men to aſſemble at the cyte of Myrā
               da. Ther was none that wolde reſyſt agaynſt the kynges cōmaundement / but ſo euery man prepared him ſelfe to go to Panpylone to fight with the ſpanyerdes. Tidynges came into the hooſt / howe that thenglyſſhmen with great puyſſance were with the kyng of Nauer at ſaynt John̄s towne / to the nombre of .xx. thouſande men of warr. Than the capitayns drewe togyder to counſaile / to ſe what was beſt for them to do / outher to abyde the kynge of Nauer / orels to withdrawe backe. This coūſayle was long for ſome of the capitayns wolde that thēgliſſhmen ſhulde be byden / and ſome other ſayd nay / bycauſe they were nat ſtrong ynough to abyde them that were freſſhmen / for theymſelfe were ſore traueyled by reaſon of the long ſiege. And ſo finally they concluded to dyſlodge and euery man to drawe to his owne countre / and the mooſt that enclyned them to deꝑte was. Ther were ſome valyant knightꝭ vſed marmes ſaid that it was nat agaynſt their honour to deꝑte / cōſydring that kyng Hēry of Caſtell beyng in his owne countre had ſent a .xv. dayes paſt / for his ſonne to breke vp the ſiege. So thus y• ſpanyerdes dyſloged and departed / and ſet fyre in their lodgynges: and ſo drewe towardes Groyng and to ſaynt Domynikes in Caſtell. And whan they within Panpylone ſawe them deꝑt they were right ioyfull / for they had nat ben at all tymes at their eaſe.
            ¶ Tidynges came to the kynge of Nauer & to

thenglyſſhmen / beyng at ſaynt Johans towne howe the ſpanyerdes were all goone in to their owne countrees. & by ſemyng / they were therwt right ſore diſpleaſed / for gladly they wolo
                  •
                haue fought with the ſpaynyardes / & ſo they dyſlodged and went towarde Panpilon / and ther they founde the vicount of Chaſtellon / the lorde Leſcute and other / who receyued them ioyfully. And whan they had refreſſhed them there a two or thre dayes / than they determyned to 
                  •
               eparte and go and lye in garyſons to be at more large / for the mountayns in Nauer arre ryght colde in wynter / bycauſe of the great ſnowes. So thā it was ordayned that the engliſſhmen ſhulde go and lye at Tudela / and the lorde Leſcute at Pont de la Royne / and the erle of Pulloys / and ſir Roger his brother to go to Corell and the lorde Chaſtellon to Mundon. Thus theſe men of warre departed / and the kynge of Nauer abode ſtyll in Panpylone in his owne palys / and the garyſons of Nauer were kepte in peace / without doynge of any thynge / for in the wynter they wolde nat ryde abrode: in lyke wyſe all the ſpanyardes departed / and kynge Henry went to Cyuell / and with him his wyfe and his chyldren. Sir Thomas Tryuet and his company beynge at Tudela / remembring howe he had done nothyng ſythe he came in to Nauer / and he had worde by his eſpyes howe the ſpanyardes were departed & with drawen. Than he thought to ryde towarde Spaygne ſō what to enploy his tyme / and to veſerue his wages. And ſo ſecretely he gathered togyder a certayne nombre of men of armes and archers and he ſent worde therof to the erle of Pulloys and to ſir Roger his brother / who came to him with two. C. ſpeares and thre hūdred paueſſes They aſſembled togyder at Tudela / ſo y• they were a .vii. C. ſpeares / and .xii. C. archers / and as many of other brigantes. And ſo they charged on ſomers great plentie of vitayls / and deꝑted & loged on Chriſtmas euyn / in afayre medowe by a ryuerſyde / at the fote of the moūtain called moūt Cane / the whiche deꝑted thre realmes Nauer / Caſtell / and Aragone. and on y• other ſyde of the moūtayn / was a countre called the vale of Sorie: the ſame day was a marueylous hote day / for that tyme of the yere.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen and naueroyſe ran in to the realme of Spayne and of the pillage that they gat there Cap. CCC .xl.
            
               ANd whan they hadde dyned they went to coūſayle / to knowe if they ſhulde do any thyng y• day ornar / bicauſe it was Chriſtmas euyn / ſeyng they were entryng in to y• lande of their enemyes. Than it was determyned that they ſhulde ryde at night / ſo y• by the mornyng on Chriſtmas day / they might be redy to ſcale y• cytie of vale de Sorie. This counſayle was kept / and euery man made him redy to the ſame entente: and it was ordayned / that there ſhulde goo to do this enterprice / but thre hundred ſpeares: and the reſydue with all the fotemen ſhulde lye ſtyll ther as they lay / tyll y• mornyng / that they had worde howe their company had ſpedde. Therle Pulloys with a. C. ſperes / & ſir Thomas Tryuet & his cōpany / they had gydes to bring thē thyder: and they ſhulde 
                  •
               yde in foure cōpanyes / y• more ſecretlyer to do their entprice / & the more eaſly to come to their ententꝭ. And ſo about two houres within night they armed them and lept a horſbacke & had no trūpettes / but the capitayns and gydes knewe well wher they ſhulde mete agayn. and ſo they mounted the hyll & were in a fayre playne / and ſodenly ther fell ſuche an hayle and ſnowe / that it was marueyle / for all the grounde was couered with ſnowe: & ſo they rode tyll the morning or they coude fynde eche other. This vnhappy wether for the engliſſhmen / fell well for them in the cyte / who toke no hede of that buſhment / for they were nat ware therof / for if thengliſſhmēs apoyntment had kept at their houre apoynted / they had nat fayled to haue wonne the towne. ¶ Whan ſir Thom̄s Tryuet ſawe that he had fayled of his purpoſe / he was ſore diſpleaſed in his mynde / and ſo gathered togyder his cōpany as well as he might. Than they tooke newe counſayle / and ſo dranke and eate a lytell / and after dyner whiche was but ſhorte. Sir Raymon of Balgette naueroyſe / was choſen with a fortie ſpeares to go and rynne before the towne to drawe oute ſome of the genyciens that were within. And ſo the knight rode before the cytie and cāe to the barryers / and there was a great ſcrimyſſhe. For the genyciens / who were a two hundred yſſued oute and began to ſhote / and to caſt at the men of armes / who euer lytell and lytell drewe backe / to bringe them farther of fro the towne. They had yuell handled thoſe men of armes / if their buſſhmēt had nat drawen forward / but they cāe feirſly wt their ſperes & ſtrake in among thē & bete thē downe: many were ſlayue & driuen in to the towne agayne / to their

great 
                  ••
               mage. Thā they cloſed their barryers and gates and mounted to the walles / for they wende ſurely to haue had aſſaut but thēglyſſhmen thought to retourne by day light. And ſo they retourned agayne to their lodgyng / wher they foūde the reſt of their men / and ſo lay there that night. And the next mornyng whiche was ſaynt Stepbyns day / they drue to a towne called Quaſquam in Normandy. And there they founde the kyng of Nauer who was come thy
               
                  •
               er on Chriſtmas day / but as the englyſſhmen 
                  •
               āe to Quaſquam / the ſame day they brent certayne vyllages / and ſpecially they brent & robbed a great vyllage / called Nygret.
         
         
            ¶Howe the peace was made bytwene the kyng of Spayne and the king of Nauer: and of the dethe of kynge Henry of Spayne / and of the coronacyon of Johan his ſonne. Cap. C C C .xli.
            
               TIdynges came to kyng Hen
                  •
               y of Caſtell / who was at Cyuell in ye hert of his realme: howe that the engliſſhmen had brent the towne of the Uale de ſorie in makyng of warr for the kyng of Nauer / wherof he was ſore diſpleaſed: and ſware it ſhulde be amended. Than he wrote letters to John̄ of Caſtell his ſonne / that he ſhulde make a ſomons throughout his realme / and to aſſemble to guyder the noble men. Sayeng howe he wolde be ſhortely in Spayne / to reuenge hym of the kyng of Nauer / for the exceſſe that he had done to hym. The chylde of Caſtell wolde nat diſobey the cōmaundement of the kyng his father / but ſent out his commaundement: and ſo drewe to hym all maner of men of warre. And in the ſame meane ſeaſon ▪ ſir Thomas Tryuet thought to aſſemble a certayne nombre of men of warre / and to go to the towne of Alpharo in Spayne. And ſo he dyde / and departed in an euenynge fro Quaſquam and fro the kynge of Nauer / and had with hym but one hūdred ſperes of choſen men of armes. And ſo by the nexte mornyng they came within a lytell leage of the towne / and there they made their buſſhement. And ſir Wylliam Sendrine was ſent to rynne before the towne and Andrewe Andrac: & with thē a ten ſpeares. And ſo they cāe to a lytell ryuer or broke y• which went ſtreight to the towne and ſo paſſed it with great trouble / & Andrewe Andrac made their horſes to leape ouer / and ſo came to the barryers. Than there began great noyſe in the towne / and ſownyng of trumpettꝭ. The men of warr within the towne aſſembled togyder and opyned their gates and barryers and yſſued all out and ſo began to ſcrimyſſhe / and of the ſayd ten ſpeares / ther were but two of them that was paſt the ryuer / and ſo they retourned whan they ſawe the people comyng to them warde / and ſo made their horſes agayne to leape ouer the broke. Whan they of ye towne ſawe there were ſo fewe of their enemyes / and knewe nothyng of the buſhment: they folowed faſt after / and ſo paſt the ryuer a lytell aboue / wher as they knewe the paſſage / and ſo chaſed the tenne ſpeares to their buſſhment. Than ſir Thomas Tryuet and his company cāe forthe cryeng their cryes / and bare many of thē to the erthe. To ſay trouthe / y• ſpanyerdes coude nat longe endure / and ſo retourned as well as they might / but ther were but fewe that were ſaued but outher they were ſlayne or taken. The fray was great in the towne / and thenglyſſhmen beleued / that at the firſt comynge to haue had the towne / bycauſe there men were diſcōfyted / but they fayled of their purpoſe for ye women ſaued the towne. For aſſone as their men were iſſued out & were paſt the ryuer / they cloſed their barryers and gates and moūted vp to the walles / and made ſemblant to defende them ſelfe. And whan ſir Thomas Triuet ſawe the order and maner of thē / he ſayd: beholde yonder y• good wyues of the towne what they haue done. Let vs retourne agayne / for we canne do nothyng there. And ſo they returned and paſſed agayne the lytle broke / and ſo went to Queſquam and ledde with theym their priſoners. Of the whiche dede ſir Thomas Tryuet had great thāke / laude / and prayſe of the kyng of Nauer.
            ANd a fyftene dayes after that they had made this iourney before Alpharo / the ſpanyerdꝭ came in to the feldes with a twentie thouſande horſmen and fotemen / in great wyll to fight with the englyſſhmen. And whan the kyng of Nauer herde therof / he came to Tudela / and ſir Thomas Tryuet and his company with hym. And than he ſente for all them of the garyſons of the realme of Nauer to cōe to him they wolde nat diſobey his commaundement / 

for they deſyred nothyng els. And the ſpanyerdes taryed for nothyng / but for the comynge of kyng Henry / who as than was deꝑted f
                  •
               o Ceuyll with a great nombre / and ſo came to ſaynt Dominykes and ther reſted and lay in ye felde. Whan Johan of Caſtell knewe that the kynge his father was come / than he went fro Alphare to ſaynt Dominykes to the king his father. the entent of the ſpanyerdes was to haue goone to ley ſege to Tudela / and to haue cloſed in y• kynge of Nauer / or to haue fought with hym. Of all this the kyng of Nauer was well enformed and knewe well he was nat of puyſſaunce to abyde batayle agaynſt kynge Henry / for he had a .xl. thouſande men a horſebacke and a 
                  •
               ote.
            BItwene kynge Henry and the kynge of Nauer ther were certayne noble men of bothe realmes / prelates and barons / who ymagined the great parell and domage that might fall to bothe parties: if any of them ſhulde 
                  ••
               ee other. Than they entreated bytwene the ꝑties / to haue a reſpyte of warr bytwene them / to haue the more leyſar to entreat. And ſo they toke great payne with goyng and comyng / bytwen the parties / or they coude bring about their entent: for the engliſſhmen were a two thouſande and were feirſe agaynſt the ſpanyerdes / & coū
               ſayled the kynge of Nauer to batayle. On the other ſyde the ſpanyerdes were a great nōbre / wherfore they ſette but lytell by thenglyſſhmen nor naueroyſe: therfore it was harde to bringe this treatie to a good effect. They that had the buſyneſſe therof toke moche payne and labour / at laſt a reſpyte was taken bytwene them to endure ſixe wekes / to thētent in the meane ſeaſon to entreat for a full peace. Their entent was to make yf they myght / a maryage bytwene the chylde of Caſtell / eldeſt ſonne to kyng Henry: and the doughter of the kyng of Nauer. Wherby the peace ſhulde the ſurelyer cōtynue / to the whiche the kynge of Nauer was well agreed / bycauſe his doughter ſhulde be ſo highly maryed. ¶And moreouer the prelates and barons of both parties / thought alſo to mary the kyng of Nauers ſon / to kyng Henryes doughter. In ſomoche that this treatie toke effect: ſo that kyng Henry ſhulde ſende to the frēche kynge / deſyringe him to ſuffre Charles of Nauer / who was in his kepynge to come in to Nauer. And ſo he dyde / at his deſyre the frenche kynge ſente him. & ſo for the ꝑformance of this treati
                  •
                and mariage / the kyng of Nauer ſhulde 
                  •
               ay in pledge for the ſpace of ten yere to kyng Henry / the towne and caſtell of Leſtoyll / the cytie and caſtell of Tudela / the towne and Caſtell de la garde. And that kyng Henry ſhulde yelde and rendre to the englyſſhmen ſir Perſe Courtney / who was priſoner / and the lorde of Parre gaſcoyne. All theſe thynges were done / ſealed / confyrmed / accorded and ſworne: to be kept ſtable and ferme for euer / bytwene theſe two kynges and their realmes. And whiche of them yt euer ſhulde breke this peace by any maner of wayes ſhulde rynne in the ſentence of the pope.
            wHyle theſe treatyes were this in makyng / the kynge of Nauer who was bounde to the englyſſhmen / in ye ſōme of .xx. thouſande frankes: to acquyte hym ſelfe agaynſt them. He ſent the vycont of Chaſtelon in to Arragon to the kynge there / to borowe of hym the ſayd ſomme of money. And he to haue in pledge therfore / his good townes of Panpylone / and Myrando / the quenes towne / Corell and ſaynt Johans towne. Thus the englyſſhemen were payed and delyuered / and ſo departed fro the kynge of Nauer and went to Bur
               
                  •
               eux / and fro the
                  •
               s in to Englande. And y• maryage was made bytwene Charles of Nauer and kyng Hērys doughter called Jane / a right fayre lady. ¶The ſame yere dyed kyng Henry of Caſtell / and his ſon John̄ crowned kyng and ſo he was kynge by accorde of the prelates and barons of the realme of Spaygne / of Caſtell / of Cecyll / of Galyce / and Candonne: and they all ſware to him faithe & homage for euer. Than there began a warre bytwene the kynge of Portyngale and kyng Johan of Caſtell / wh
                  •
               
               che endured long / as ye ſhall here after. Nowe lette vs retourne to the buſyneſſes of Fraunce.
         
         
            ¶Howe the lorde of Lāgurant was wounded to dethe / and howe the capitayne of the garyſon of Boutuylle was diſco
                  •
               fyted / and the caſtell yelded vp frenche. Cap. C C C .xlii.
            
               VE haue herde here before: howe the lorde of Mucydent was tourned frenche / and was a yer or more at Parys / tyll at laſt he was wery: for he had thought to haue 
                  •
               ounde the frēche kyng otherwiſe to warde him

thanne he was / wherfore he was angrye in his mynde / and ſo repēted hym ſelfe in that he was tourned frēche. Sayeng howe it was for feare rather thā for any other thyng. And ſo thought to ſteale fro Parys & to go to his owne coūtre / to yelde him ſelfe agayne englyſſhe: for the ſeruyce of the kyng of Englande pleaſed him moche better than the ſeruyce of the frenche kyng. And as he hadde aduyſed ſo he dyde / and gaue knowlege to all them that he knewe / except his owne ſeruantes howe he was ſicke: and kepte his lodgynge. And ſo in an euenyng he lept on his horſe vnknowen / and toke but thre perſons with hym / and ſo deꝑted fro Parys / and rode toward his owne coutre / and his men folowed after him lytell and lytell. And ſo longe he rode that he came to Burdeux / and there he founde ſir Johan lorde Neuyll ſeneſhall of Burdeux / to whome he ſhewed all his aduenture / and ſo became agayne englyſſhe: and ſayde / howe he hadde rather be falſe of his faythe to the french kyng / than to his naturall lorde ye kyng of Englande. Thus the lorde Mucydent abode englyſſhe as long as he lyued / wherof the duke of Aniou was ſore diſpleaſed / and ſaid and ſware that if euer he coude get hym / he ſhulde leſe his heed. Wherof the lorde Mucydent was well enfourmed / and thought to kepe hym ſelfe ryght well out of danger.
            ALl this ſeaſon the lorde of Langurante was ſtyll frenche / who was an experte knight and dyde moche hurt and trouble / to ſuche landes as parteyned to ſuch lordes as were becōe englyſſhe. As the lorde of Roſen / the lord of Duras / and the lorde of Mucydent / wherwith theſe thre lordes wereſore diſpleaſed & ſo ſet all their myndes howe they might ſlee him / for he was vtterly their enemy. this lorde of Lā
               gurant rode forthe on a day with a .xl. ſpeares and came nere to an englyſſhe fortereſſe / called Cadylhatte: of the herytage of the Captall of Beufz / and his bretherne gaſcoyns. And ſo the lorde Lagurant made there abuſſhment of his company / and ſayd. Sirs / tary you ſtyll here: and I wyll go and ryde to yonder fortereſſe alone / & ſe if any wyll iſſue out agaynſt vs. And ſo he rode forthe and came to ye barryers of the caſtell / and ſpake to the kepars / and demaūded where was Bernard Courant their capitayne and ſayde: ſhewe hym howe the lorde Langurantis here / and deſyreth to Juſte with hym a courſe: yf he be ſo good a man / and ſo valyant in armes as it is ſayde / he wyll nat refuſe it for his ladyes ſake. yf hedo / it ſhall tourne hym to moche blame. For I ſhall repute wherſoeuer I go / that for cowardneſſe / he hath refuſed to ryn with me / one courſe with a ſpere. than a ſquyer of Bernardes anſwered / and ſayd. Sir Langurant / I haue well herde your wordes. Sir / and ye wyll ſuffre a lytell / I ſhall go and ſpeke with my maiſter. Ifye wyll abyde / I warrant you / ther ſhalbe no reproche in him of cowardneſſe. I wyll tarye ꝙ the lorde of Langurant. Than the ſquyer went / and founde his maiſter in a chambre / and ther ſhewed him all the wordes: as ye haue herde before. And whan Bernard herde that / his hert began to ſwell for pre: and ſayd. Gette me my harneſſe / and ſadell my horſe: he ſhall nat go refuſed. Than incontynent he was armed and mounted on his horſe / and toke his targe and his ſpeare / and opyned the gate and the barryers / and iſſued out in to the felde. And whan the lorde Langurant ſawe him comyng he was reioyſed / and couched his ſpeare lyke a good knyght / and ſo dyde Bernarde: and daſſhed to their horſes. They were bothe well horſed / and they hytte ſo euyn bothe that there ſheldes fell in peces: and in the paſſyng by / Bernarde ſholdred ſir Langurantes horſe in ſuche wyſe: that the lorde fell out of the ſadell. And whan Bernard ſawe hym on ye erth he was ryght ioyfull / and tourned ſhortely his horſe to him. and as the lorde Langurant was riſynge vp / Bernarde who was a bygge and a valyant ſquyer / toke hym by the baſſenet with bothe his handes / and drewe it ſo ſore to him / y• he reyſed it of his heed / and ſo dyde caſt his baſſenet vnder his horſe fete. The lorde of Langurantes men beynge in the buſſhement / ſawe all this. And than they brake out / & were comyng to reſcue their maiſter and lorde / and Bernard who ſawe thē comynge / drewe out his dagger and ſayde to the lorde Langurant. Sir / yelde you my priſoner: reſcue or no reſcue / or els ye are but deed. The lorde Langurant / who truſted on the reſcue of his men ſpake nat a worde agayne. And whan Bernarde ſawe y• / he was enflamed with feruentyre: and douted leeſt he ſhulde leſe the more for ye leſſe / and ſo ſtrake the lorde Langurante on the heed / whiche was all bare: in ſuche wyſe / that he brake the ſkoll in to the brayne. And than he daſſhed to his horſe / & entred in to the barryers / & than a lyghted and made him redy to defēde him ſelfe ifnede were. And whan the lorde Langurantꝭ men were cōe to hym / and founde him woūded to dethe / they were right ſoroufull: and ſo toke & caryed hym

aſwell as they might in to his owne caſtell / but the next day after he dyed. Thus it befell that ſeaſon of the lorde Langurant.
            THe ſame ſeaſon there was a dede of armes done in Rocheloys. For Helyot of Playſac / a gentyll ſquyer and a valyaunt man of armes / capitayne of Boutuyll / an englyſſhe garyſon of ſixſcore ſpeares englyſſhe and gaſcoyns. Who pylled ſore the countre / and ranne nigh euery day before the towne of Rochell / or els before the towne of ſaynt John̄s Dangle / And they helde theſe two townes in ſuche feare and doubte / that they durſt nat iſſue out but by ſtelth / wherof the knyghtes and the ſquyers of the coūtre were right ſore diſpleaſed. & thought one day to prouyde for remedy / or els to be ſlayne or taken by their ennemyes in the felde. And ſo on a day they aſſembled in the towne of Rochell / about two hundred ſpeares: for that was the towne that mooſt comenly Helyot of Playſac and his cōpany dyde mooſt hurt vnto. ther were of Poyctou and of Xaynton / the lorde of Thowars / the lorde of Puiſſāce / ſir James of Surgeres / Percyuall of Coloygne / ſir Raynolde of Gomers / ſir Hugh of Uynon and dyuers other knightes and ſquyers / hauyng gret deſyre to fight with their ennemyes. And theſe capitayns knewe by their ſpyes / that Helyot of Playſac was abrode / & was comynge to apere before Rochell / to gette ther ſome pray. Than all theſe lordes and knyghtes went out of Rochell in the euenyng / well armed and on horſebacke: and ſo toke the feldes. And at their deꝑtyng / they ordayned that in the next mornyng / they ſhulde put out in to the feldes all their catell at aduēture: and it was done as they deuyſad. And in the next mornyng Helyot of Playſac and his cōpany came before Rochell to the barryers / and ſome of their company gadered togyder all the catell they coude fynde: & made them to be driuen by them of the countre before them. And they hadde nat driuen this catell the ſpace of a leage / but that the frenchmen a .ii. C. ſpeares came ſodaynly on them on a wyng / of whome the engliſſhmen were nat ware: and ſo came in at the ſpeares poyntes amonge thē. ſo at their firſt metynge ther were many caſt to ye erthe. Than Helyot of Playſac ſayde / a fote a fote euery man. Let vs nat natflye / and let our horſes go / if the day be ours we ſhall haue horſes ynowe / and if it be agaynſt vs / we ſhall haue but a ſmall loſſe of our horſes. Ther Helyot and his cōpany a lighted a fote / and put thēſelf in good order. In likewiſe ſo dyd the frēchmen for they feared the ſleyng of their horſes. Ther was a ſore batayle and longe endured / for they fought hand to hand. ther was done many feates of armes / many a one taken and reſcued agayne. Finally the poicteuyns & xayntons had the vytorie / & their enemyes discōfyted & nighe all ſlayne or taken / but a fewe that ſcaped. and the pray of catell agayne reſcued: and Helyote of Playſac taken priſoner and led to Rochell. Anone after this aduēture theſe lordes of Frā
               ce wente to the caſtell of Boutuyll / whiche was anone taken / for it was eaſy ynough to wynne for ther was none within to make any defence. Thus was the caſtell of Botuyll frenche / wher of all the countre had great ioye: and Helyot of Plaiſac was priſoner a long ſpace after.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frenche kynges meſſanger was let of his vyage in to Scotlāde: and of the debate that began bytwene the frenche king and therle of Flaunders. Cap. CCC .xliii.
            
               IN the ſame ſeaſon retourned in to Englande / ſir Thomas Tryuet & ſir Wyllyam Helman / with dyuers other knightes and ſquyers ſuche as had ben in Spaine to ayde the kyng of Nauers warr. And ſo they cāe to the kyng of Englāde / who as than was at Chertſay and his two vncles / the duke of Lancaſtre and therle of Cambridge with him. And theſe knightes were ioyfully receyued / of the kyng and theſe lordꝭ: and ther they were deſyred to ſhewe ſome tidynges fro thoſe parties. And ſo they ſhewed all y• they knewe / bothe of Spayne and of Nauer / and of the peace made bytwene the two kyngꝭ / of ſpayne and Nauer. And howe the kynge of Nauer had maryed Charles his eldeſt ſonne / to kyng Hēryes doughter: and ſo fro poynt to poynt as the treatie was bytwene thē. The duke of Lancaſtre and therle of Cambridge were right pē
               ſyfe of thoſe wordes / for they thought & named them ſelfe to be heyres of Spayne / by ryght of their wyues. Than they demaūded howe long it was ſyth kyng Henry the baſtarde dyed / and whider the ſpanyerdes had crowned John̄ his ſon̄e or no. The knightes answered / and sayd.

               
                  〈◊〉
               : at the dethe of kyng Henry / nor at the cocona
                  •
               yon of Johan his ſonne / we were nat preſent / for by that tyme we were come backe in to Nauer. But ſir / here is an haraude was there preſēt / ye may knowe euery thyng by him / and it pleaſe you. Thau ye heralde was called forthe and demaunded by the duke of Lancaſtre how the mater was. He anſwered / and ſayde. Sir: at your requeſt I ſhall ſhe we you. In ye meane ſeaſon whyle theſe noble mē were at Pāpylone abyding the acomplyſſhment of the treatie / the whiche was made by their goode wylles and leaues. I taryed behynde ſtyll with the kynge of Na
                  •
               er / wher as I had good chere / bothe of hym and of his men. And ſo I went with hym fro Pa
                  •
               pylone to ſaynt Domynikes / agaynſt whoſe comyng / kynge Henry iſſued out of the towne with a goodly cōpany / and met vs with great ſigne of loue & peace. And ther the kyng of Nauer was gretly honoured by hym and all his / and gaue him the ſame night an honeſt ſupper. and after ſupper tidynges was brought to them / howe that a great wylde Boore was lodged in the laundes therby. And ſo it was ordayned / that the next mornyng they ſhulde go and hunt the ſame Boore / & ſo they dyde. at whiche huntyng ther was bothe kyngꝭ / and a great cō
               pany & the boore taken. and againſt night they returned agayne with great loue to ſaynt Domynikes. And the next day kyng Henry departed and went to Peter Ferando / for a day that he had there agaynſt his men: and there he fell ſicke and ſo dyed. And the kyng of Nauer was comyng to warde hym / to ſe hym there: and by the way he herde worde of his dethe / wherof he was right ſorie / and ſo retourned agayne. and than I toke leaue of hym and wente in to Caſtell / to knowe ſome tidynges ther. This kyng Henry dyed on Whitſonday. And anone after the .xxv. day of July / the day of ſaynt James and ſaynt Chriſtofer / Johan of Caſtell his eldeſt ſonne was crowned king in the cathedrall churche / in the cytie of Burgus. At the whiche coronacion were all the barons and prelates of Spaygne / of Galyce / of Cordowayne / and of 
                  •
               euyll. And all they ſware there on the holy e
               
                  •
               a
                  •
               gelyſtꝭ / to take and mentayne hym for their kyng. And there was made the ſame day / two hūdred and tenne newe knyghtes / and many a great gyft gyuen. The next mornynge with a great company of noble men / he went to an abbey of ladyes withoute Burgus / called 
                  •
               urches. And ther he herde maſſe and dyned / and after dyner ther was great iuſtyng and the vycont of Roq̄bertyn of Arragon had the price / & than he returned agayne to Burgus. And this feeſt endured .xv. dayes. Than the duke of Lā
               caſtre enquered if the kyng of Portingale was deſyred to be ther ornat. Sir ꝙ the heraud / he was deſyred / but for all that he was nat there / nor wolde nat come thyder. And as it was ſaid he anſwered the meſſanger that came to hym / howe he wolde nat go to the coronacyon of the ſon̄e of a baſtarde. By my faithe ꝙ the duke of Lancaſtre / he was rightwell counſayled / to ſay theſe wordes I can hym great thanke therfore. I truſt the mater ſhall nat longe abyde in that caſe. For my brother and I wyll demaūde that herytage / wherof he calleth hym ſelfe kynge vs nowe. And ſo they lefte talkynge and called for drinke. ¶Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of this mater / and retourne to the buſynes of Fraūce.
            KIng Charles of Fraūce who as than reygned / was ryght ſage and ſubtell / & that was well ſhewed as longe as he lyued. For tho that he kept hym ſelfe preuy in his chambre / takyng his pleaſure and ſporte. yet he conquered agayne / that his predeceſſours had loſt in the felde / armed with their ſwerdes in their hādes wherfore he was greatly to be cōmended. And bicauſe he knewe well yt kyng Robert of Scotlande / and all the realme ther had made warr / and had mortall hate to thēglyſſhmen / for thoſe two realmes coude neuer loue togyder. Therfore to the entent to noriſſhe more loue bytwene Fraunce and Scotlande. The frenche kynge thought to ſend a knight and a ſecretary of his counſayle to kynge Robert of Scotlande / and to y• ſcottes / to ſpeke with thē / and to aduyſe the countrey. And to knowe if he might make any good warre to Englande by Scotlande. For yuan of Wales in his lyfe tyme had enfourmed hym / that Scotland was the place in ye worlde wherby Englāde might be mooſt anoyed. And of this purpoſe the frēche kyng had many ymaginacio
                  •
               s. ſo that at laſt he ordayned a knight a ſage man called ſir Peter lorde of Bourneſell / and ſaid to him. Sir / ye ſhall go & do this meſſage in to Scotlande / and recōmende me to the kyng there / and to his barons. And ſhewe h
                  ••
                howe that we and our realme are redy to do thē 
               pleasur / and to haue a treatie with them as our frendes. So that therby in the ſeaſon to come / we may ſende people thyder / wherby we maye haue entre in to England that way / in lyke maner as our predeceſſors haue had in tyme paſt. and in your goyng thyder and comyng homewarde

/ I wyll ye kepe ſuche eſtat
                  •
                as a meſſager and cōmiſſary of 
                  〈…〉
               ng ſhulde do: on our coſt and charge. ſir ꝙ the knyght all ſhall be as it pleaſeth you / and ſo he taryed nat long after / but whā he was redy departed fro Parys / and dyde ſo moche by his iourneys / that he came to Scluſe in Flaūders / and there taryed & abode for wynde and paſſage a .xv. dayes / for y• wynde was cōtrary for him. And in the meane ſeaſon he held a great eſtate / and well ſtuffed with veſſell of golde and ſyluer through out his hall as largely / as though he had bene a lytell duke or better. His mynſtrels played before his ſeruyce dayly / and bare aſ werde garniſſhed with golde and ſyluer / and his men payed well for euery thynge. Of the great eſtate yt this knight kepte in his houſe and in the ſtretes / dy
                  •
               ers of the towne had great marueyle. The bayly of y• towne behelde it well / who was officer ther vnder the erle of Flaunders / and coude kepe it no lenger ſecret / wherin he dyde yuell. For he ſent worde therof to the erle / who lay at Bruges / & the duke of Bretayne his coſyn with him. And whan therle of Flaunders had ſtudyed a lytell on the mater / and by y• helpe of the duke of Bretayne / ordayned that the knight ſhulde 
                  •
               e brought to hym. The baylye retourned agayne to Sluſe / & came vncurteſly to the french knyght for he ſet his hande on hym / and reſted hym in the erle of Flaūders name. Wherof the knight had gret marueyle / and ſayd to ye bayly. What meaneth this? I am a meſſanger and comyſſary of the frenche kyng. ſir ꝙ the bayly I beleue well. howbeit ye muſt nedes go and ſpeke with therle of Flaunders / for he hath cōmaunded me to bring you to hym. ſo the knight coude make no ſcuſe / but that he and his company were brought to Bruges to therle. And whan he was in the erles chambre / therle and the duke ſtode togyder / leanyng out of a wynd
                  •
               we into the garden warde. Than the knyght kneled downe / & ſayd. ſir / beholde here is your priſoner. Of the whiche worde the erle was ſore diſpleaſed / and ſayd in diſpyte and yre. what ſayeſt y• rybaude? that thou art my priſoner / bycauſe I haue ſent to ſpeke with the. Thy maiſters ſeruantꝭ / may ryght well come and ſpeke with me. But thou haſt nat well acquyted thy ſelfe / ſythe thou haſt ben ſo long at Scluſe / and knowynge me here ſo nere to the: and yet nat to come ones to ſe or to ſpeke with me. Thou haddeſt diſdayne ſo to do. ſir ꝙ the knight ſauynge your diſpleaſure. Than the duke of Bretayne toke the wordes / & ſayd. Among you bourders and iāglers / in the palys of Paris / and in the kynges chambre. ye 
                  •
               ette by the realme as ye lyſt / and play with the kynge at your pleaſure and do well oryuell as ye wyll yourſelfe. for ther is no price of ye blode ryall / if ye among you haue ones brought hym in to any hate or diſpleaſur with the kyng / that can be herde after. But ones I truſt there wyll be ſo many of ſuche people taken / that the gybettes wyll be full of them. The knight who ſa
                  •
               
               ſtyll on his knees / was ryght ſore abaſſhed of thoſe wordes / for the hearyng of ſuche wordes was right harde to him. Howbeit he ſawe well it was better for hym to kepe his tonge than to ſpeke / and ſo gaue no anſwere to thoſe wordes And whan he ſawe his tyme / he toke his leaue of therle and of the lordes / and departed out of their preſence. and ſome noble men that were about the erle made hym way / and made hym to drinke: and than he returned agayne to Sluſe to his logyng. And I ſhall ſhewe you what f
                  •
               ll after. Though all his purueyance were redy aparelled / and that he had wynd at wyll to haue ſayled into Scotlāde / yet he durſt nat put himſelfe into the dangers of the ſee. For it was ſhewed him / how he was ſpyed by thēglyſſhmen y• he lay at Scluſe / & howe that if he kept on his voiage / he was likely to be taken & caryed into England. and bicauſe of thoſe doutes he brake his vyage and returned to Parys to the kyng. ye may well knowe / that the lorde of Burneſell tolde no leſſe to the frenche kyng / than was done to him by the erle of Flaunders. And alſo it was nedefull for him to tell all for his excuſe / for the kyng had marueyle of his retonrnyng. The ſame ſeaſon there were dyuers knyghtꝭ in the kynges chambre / and ſpecially ſir John̄ of Guyſtels of Heynalt / coſyn to therle of Fla
                  •
               nbers / who had great diſpleaſure at the wordes of this knight / that he had of therle of Flāders. ſo y• finally he coude kepe his tōge no lēger / but ſayd. I can nat ſuffre theſe wordꝭ thus to be ſpoken of my dere lorde. And ſir knight / if ye wyll ſay that he dyde as ye ſay / to let you of your vyage / in that quarell I appele you to the felde: & here is my gage. The lorde of Bourneſell was nothyng abaſſhed to anſwere / but ſayd. ſir Johan I ſay thus / howe I was thus taken by the bayly of Sluſe / and brought before the erle of Flaūders: and as ye haue herde he ſayd to me / and in lykewiſe ſo dyde the duke of Bretayne. And if ye wyll ſay contrary / to this I wyll receyue your gauge. I wyll ſay ſo ꝙ the lorde of Guyſtelles. With thoſe wordes the kynge was nat content / and ſayde. Let vs go hens / I wyll

here no more of theſe wordes / and ſo de
                  •
               ted 
                  〈◊〉
                went 
                  〈◊〉
                to his cha
                  •
               r
                  •
                all onely with his cham
               
                  〈…〉
                right 
                  〈◊◊〉
                at the lorde of Bu
                  ••
               
               
               
                  •
               ll had 
                  •
               o well and frely ſpoken agaynſt y• wordes of 
                  〈◊〉
                John̄ of Guyſtels: and ſayd all ſmylyng. He hath holden fote well with him / I wolde nat for xx. M. frankes but that he had done ſo. And after it fortuned ſo / y• this ſir Johan of Guyſtels who was chāberlayn with the kyng / was ſo yuell beloued in the courte / that he was wery therof: and thought nat to abyde the dā
               gers. So he toke leaue of the kyng / and departed fro the court / and went into Brabant to the duke Uy
                  ••
               elant of Brabāt / who receyued him toyfully. The french kyng was ſore diſpleaſed with therle of Flāders / bicauſe it was thought by 
                  •
               yuers of the realme / yt he had letted y• lorde of 
                  〈…〉
               ſell of his 
                  ••
               age in to Scotland. and al
                  •
               o in that he 
                  •
               eloe ſtyll about hym the duke of Bretayne his coſyn / who was greatly in y• kynges diſpleaſur. and ſo they that were about the kyng p
                  •
               rceyued well / howe the erle of Flaunders was nothyng in the kynges grace.
            ANone after the kyng wrote ſharpe letis to his coſyn the erle of Flaūders / thretnyng hym: bycauſe he ſuſteyned with hym the duke of Bretayn / whō he reputed to be his enemy. The erle wrote agayne to the kyng / excuſing himſelfe aſwell as he might: but it aueyled nothynge. For the kyng ſent him agayne more ſharper letters / ſhewyng him playnly / yt without he wolde putte the duke of Bretayne out of his cōpany he wolde ſurely diſpleaſe him. whā therle of Flaūders ſawe that the kyng purſued his cauſe with ſuche effect / than he toke aduyſe in hym ſelfe / and thought he wolde ſhewe theſe ma
                  •
               a
                  ••
                h
                  •
               s & thretnynges to his good townes / and ſpecially to Gaūt / to knowe what they wolde ſay to the mater. and ſo he ſent to Bruges / to 
                  •
               pre / and Cortrey / and after departed / and the duke of Bretayne in his cōpany. and ſo went to Gaunt and lodged at y• poſterne / wher he was 
                  •
               oyfully receyued of the burgeſſes / for they lo
               
                  •
               ed well to haue him among them. And 
                  〈…〉
               han the people of the good townes ſuch as were ſēt for were come: therle aſſembled them togyder in a pleace / and there he made be ſhewed to thē by John̄ de la Faucell his entency on / & the lett
                  ••
               s reed that the frēche kyng had ſent him two monethes before. And whan theſe letters were re
                  ••
               : than the erle ſpake and ſayd. All ye ſirs of my good townes of Flaūders / through y• helpe of god I haue ben your lorde a longe ſeaſon / & I haue kepte and gouerned you in good peace to my power. Nor ye haue nat ſene in me
                  〈…〉
                cō
               trary / but that I haue entertayned you in gret proſperyte / in lyke maner as a lorde ought to kepe his menne and ſubgettes. But it is to my great diſpleaſur and it ought to be to you that are my men / that the frenche kyng thus hateth me and wyll hate bycauſe I ſuſtayne about me and in my company / the duke of Bretayne my coſyn germayne / who as nowe is nat welbeloued in Fraunce. Nor he dare nat well truſt his men in his owne countre / bycauſe of fyue or ſix barons that loueth him nat. Wherfore the king wolde that I ſhulde driue hym out of my countre / the whiche ſhulde be a ſtrong thyng to him. I ſay nat nay / but if I dyde confort my coſyn: outher with townes or caſtelles agaynſt the realme of Fraunce / than the kynge myght haue good cauſe to complayne him of me. But I do nat ſo / nor am nat in wyll ſo to do: and therfore I haue here aſſembled you togyder / ſhewynge you the parels that may happe to fall. therfore I wolde knowe your myndes / whyder he ſhall abyde ſtyll with me or nat. They anſwered all with one voyce. Sir / let hym abyde ſtyll / why ſhulde he nat? And ſir / if there be any man lyuyng that wyll make you warre / ye ſhall fynde redy in your lande of Flaūders .ii. C. M. men of warr to ſerue you. Thoſe wordes greatly reioyſed therle and ſayd. ſirs I thanke you / and ſo ended that parlyament / and therle was well cōtent with his men / and gaue euery man leaue to deꝑte in peace. Than whan the erle ſawe his tyme he retourned to Bruges / and the duke of Bretayne with him. Thus theſe maters hāged in a traunce. the erle was in great grace wt his people / and the countre in peace and proſperite the which abode nat ſo long after. for it was in great trybulacion / as ye ſhall here after in this hyſtorie.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Bretayne deꝑted out of Flaūders / and howe therle of ſaynt Poule was taken priſoner / & howe he was maryed in Englande: & of the warres that fell than in Bretayne. Cap. CCC .xliiii.
            
               YE may well knowe / howe the frenche kyng had knowlege of all this mater / & howe the erle had anſwered. He loued hym nat one whyt the better / howe be it he muſt

let it paſſe / for more he coud nat haue as at that tyme / and ſayd: howe therle of Flaūders / was the mooſt proudeſt prince that he knewe. And a man myght haue ſene well by the maner of the kyng / that the erle was the lorde that the kyng wolde mooſt gladly haue brought ſomwhat to reaſon. Whan he ſawe that he withſayd him / & that he was no more diſpleaſed thā he was. the erle of Flaunders for all the kynges writyng / & that he was in his great diſpleaſur / bycauſe of kepyng about him the duke of Bretayne. yet y• nat withſtanding / he kept him ſtyll as long as it pleaſed him to tary / & made him kepe a goodlye eſtate. finally the duke of Bretayne had coū
               ſayle to drawe in to Englande / and ſo he tooke leaue of therle his coſyn & went to Grauellyng. and thyder came to him the erle of Saliſbury with fyue. C. ſpeares / and a thouſand archers / for dout of the frēche garyſons / and ſo brought him to Calais / wherof ſir Hugh Caurell was capitayne / who receyued him right ioyouſly. & whan the duke had taryed ther a fyue dayes he had wynde at wyll / and ſo toke the ſee / and the erle of Saliſbury in his company. and ſo aryued at Douer / and came to the yong kyng Richard / who receyued him with great ioye. And ſo dyde alſo the duke of Lancaſtre / and therles of Cambridge and of Buckynghame / and the great lordes of Englande.
            ye haue herde before: how ſir Ualeran of Luſenburge / yong erle of ſaynt Poule was taken priſoner / bytwene Arde and Calays / & was in Englande at the kyngꝭ pleaſure / for kyng Edwarde in his lyfe tyme / bought hym of the lord of Gomegines for he was firſt his priſoner / bycauſe he made the iourney whan he was taken / of a ſquier a mā of armes of the coūtre of guerles. So this yonge erle of ſaynt Poule / abode longe priſoner in Englande or he was delyuered. It was of trouthe the kyng offred hym oft tymes in exchāge for the captall of Bu
                  •
               z whyle he lyued / but the frenche kyng nor the coūſell of Fraūce wolde in no wyſe here therof / wherof y• kyng of Englande had great diſdayne. Thus the 
                  •
               ater cōtynued a long ſpace / and the yong erle ſtyll priſoner in Englande / in the fayre caſtell of Wynſore. and he had ſo curteſſe a kepar that he might go and ſport him a haukyng / bytwene Wynſore and Weſtm̄: he was beleued on his faythe. The ſame ſeaſon the princeſſe / mother to kyng Richarde lay at Wynſore / and her doughter with her: my lady Maude: the fayreſt lady in all Englāde. therle of ſaynt Poule and this yong lady were in true amours togyder eche of other / & ſomtyme they met togyder at daunſynge and carollyng / tyll at laſt it was ſpyed. And than the lady diſcouered to her mother / howe ſhe loued faithfully the yong erle of ſaynt Poule. Than there was a mary age ſpoken of / bytwene therle of ſaynt Poule / & the lady Maude of Holande. and ſo therle was ſet to his raūſome to pay ſixſcore. M. frākes / ſo that whan he had maryed the lady Maude / than to be rebated / threſcore thouſande: and the other threſcore thouſande to pay. And whan this couynant of maryage was made / bitwene therle and the lady: the kyng of Englande ſuffred the erle to repaſſe the ſee to fetche his raunſome / on his onely promyſe / to retourne agayne within a yere after. So the erle came in to Fraunce to ſe his frendes: y• kyng / therle of Flaunders / the duke of Brabant and his coſyns in Fraunce. In the ſame yere there was made an harde informacyon agaynſt the erle of ſaynt Poule / for it was layed to his charge / that he ſhulde delyuer to thenglyſſhmen the ſtrong caſtell of Bohaygne. and ſo the frenche kyng cauſed him to be reſted / and kept in ſuretie: and ſo the kynge ſhewed / howe therle of ſaynt Poule wolde haue made an yuell treatie for hym and for the realme / and the erle in no wyſe coude be excuſed. And alſo for the ſame cauſe / there was kepte in priſon in the caſtell of Mons in Heynaulte / the lorde Chanon of Roberſarte / the lorde of Uertayne / ſir James Duſarte / and Gerarde Dabyes / but at length all that mater came to none effecte / for there coulde nothynge be proued agaynſt them / and ſo they were delyuered. than the yong erle retourned agayne in to Englande / to acquyte him of his promyſe / and ſo wedded the lady: and dyde ſo moche / that he payed his threſcore thouſande frankes / and ſo paſſed agayne the ſee. But he entred nat in to Fraūce bycauſe the kyng loued him nat. And ſo he and the coūteſſe his wyfe went and lay at the caſtell of Han on the ryuer of Ewre. The whiche caſtell the lorde of Mor
                  •
               ane / who hadde wedded his ſuſter / lent hym to lye in. And there he laye / as longe as kynge Charles of Fraunce lyued / for the erle coude neuer gette his loue.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of this mater and retourne to the buſyneſſe of Fraunce.
            THe ſame ſeaſon all Bretayne was kept cloſe / what agaynſt the frenche kynge & agaynſt the duke. Howe beit ſome of the good townes of Bretayn helde them ſelfe cloſe in the dukes name / and many had great marueyle y•
               
they toke hym for their lorde. And alſo dyuers knightes and ſquyers of Bretayne were of the ſame acorde. And alſo ther was alyed to them the coūteſſe of Ponthyeute / mother to the chyldren of Bretayne. But ſir Bertram of Cleſqui conſtable of Fraūce / ye lorde Clyſſon / the lorde de Lauall / the vycont of Rohan / and the lorde of Rochfort. They helde the countre in warre with the puyſſance that came dayly to thē oute of Fraūce. for at Pontorſon at ſaynt Malo theyle and there about / lay a great nombre of men of armes of Fraunce / of Normandy / of Auuergne / and of Burgoyne: who dyde moche hurt in the coūtre. The duke of Bretayne who was in Englande had knowledge of euery thynge / and howe the duke of Aniou was at Angers & dayly diſtroyed his countre. Alſo he had knowlege howe ye good townes kept thē ſelfe cloſe in his name / and certayne knyghtes and ſquyers of the ſame parte / wherof he conde them good thanke. yet nat that withſtādyng / he durſt nat well truſt in them / to ieoparde to retourne in to Bretayne on the truſt of his men: for alwayes he douted of treaſon. Alſo the kyng of Englande nor the duke of Lancaſtre / wolde nat counſayle him to retourne.
         
         
            Of the rencounters that were made in Normādy / and howe Geffray Tetenoyre and Amergot Marcell & their cōpanyes toke dyuers caſtelles in Auuergne. Cap. CCC .xlv.
            
               IN Normandy and in Burgoyne ther were in garyſon / ſir Wylliam of Burdes / who was chefe capiten ther / and in his company ye lytell ſeneſchall of Ewe / ſir Wylliam Marſell / ſir Braq̄ of Braquemont / the lorde of Torcy / ſir Percyuall Danyuall / the begue of Dury / ſir Laūcelot of Lorrys / and dyuers other knyght and ſquiers of the frenche partie. And night & day they ymagined / howe they myght do domage to them of Chierbourg / wherof ſir John̄ Harlſton was capitayne. and they of the garyſon of Chierbourg iſſued out oft tymes whan it pleaſed thē for whan they lyſt they might ryde out in couerte / and no man preuy to their iſſuynge out / bycauſe of the great wodes that were nere to thē / wherin they had made ſuche a way that they might ryde in to Normandy at their pleaſure / without danger of any frenchemen. And ſo it fortuned in the ſame ſeaſon / that the french menne rode abrode / and they of Chierbourge in lykewiſe / none of them knowynge of other. and ſo by aduenture they mette eche other / at a place called Paſtoy in the 
                  •
               ode. Than like valyant knightes / deſyringe to fight eche with other a lighted a fote all / except ſir Launcelotte of Lorrys / who ſat ſtyll on his horſe / his ſpeare in his hande / and his ſhelde about his necke / & ther demaunded a courſe of iuſtyng for his ladyes ſake. Ther were ther that rightwell vnderſtode him / for ther were knightes and ſquiers of the englyſſhe parte in amours / aſwell as he was. And as I vnderſtode / ſir Johan Coplande a right hardy knight went to hym / and ſo they ran togyder / and rudely encoūtred eche other. But thenglyſſhe knight gaue ſir Laūcelot ſuche a ſtroke on his ſhelde / that the ſpeare pearſed throughout his body / and ſo was woū
               ded to dethe: the which was great domage / for he was a hardy knight yong and ioly / & ryght amorous / and his dethe was ſore complayned bothe ther and els where. Than the engliſſhemen and frenchemen encountred togyder / and fought hande to hāde. Ther were good knightes on the frenche parte / as ſir Wylliam of Burdes / the lytell ſeneſhall of Ewe / ſir Willm̄ Marſell / ſir Braque of Braquemont / and dyuers other who fought ryght valyantly. And alſo the englyſhmen ther fought that day valiantly / ſir Johan Harlſton / ſir Philypart Picourde / ſir John̄ Burle / ſir John̄ Coplande / and dyuers other. And ſo finally by good fightyng the engliſſhmen had the vyctorie / & all their enemyes knightes and ſquyers taken and ſlayne / ſpecially a ſquyer of Heynalt called Wylliam of Beauleu & ſir Wyllm̄ of Burdes were taken. So the priſouers were brought to Chierbourge / & there they founde ſir Dlyuer of Cleſquy who was taken priſoner. Thus it fell of this iorney as I was enformed. ¶ Alſo in Auuergne and Limoſyn there fell dayly feates of armes / and marueylous enterprices. and ſpecially of ye caſtell of mount Uētadore in Auuergne / the whiche was one of the ſtrongeſt caſtels in all ye coū
               tre / the whiche was betrayed and ſolde to a breton / the mooſt oruell knight of all other / called Geffray Tetenoyre / I ſhall ſhewe you howe it was. The erle of Tentadore and of Mountpeſer was a right auncyent knyght and a good peaſable man / who ocupyed nomore the warr / but kepte hym ſtyll in his houſe. This erle hadde a ſquyer with hym / called Pouns

de Boys / who had ſerued hym longe: and had but a ſmale lyueng or profyte by his ſeruyce. & he ſawe well / he ſhulde haue but a lytell profyte by his mayſter. Than ther ran in his thought an vngracyous deuiſe / for he went and made a ſecrete treatie wt this Geffray Tetenoyre / who was in Limoſyn / howe that he wolde delyuer hym the caſtell of Uentadore / for .vi. M. frankes. But he made in his couenant / yt they ſhulde do none yuell to his maiſter therle of Uentadore / but to putte hym out of the caſtell in courteſſe maner / and his good with hym. And ſo it was done: for the bretons nor engliſſhmen that entred dyde no maner of hurt to the erle nor to none of his men / nor kept nothyng ſauyng vitayle and artyllary / whereof ther was great plē
               tie. And ſo the erle / his wyfe / and his chyldren / went to Mountpeſer beſyde Agueperſe in Auuergne. And Geffray Tetenoyre and his company kept Uētador / wherby they dyde moche hurt in the countre. and ſo toke dyuers ſtronge caſtels in Auuergne / in Rouergue / in Limoſin in Quercy / in Gynalda / in Bygore / & in Agenoiſe. and with this Tetnoyre ther were other capitayns / who dyde many other feates of armes. as Amergot Marcell / a ſquyer of Lymoſyn of thengliſſhe parte / who toke the ſtrong caſtell of Caſuryell in Auuergne / in the byſſhopryke of Cleremont / and they ouerrant the countre at their pleaſure. And of the ſame company ther were other capitayns of diuers caſtels / as the Bourge Calart / the Bourge Angloys / the Bourge of Champayne / Raymonde de Fore gaſcoyne / and Peter of Bearne in Bearnoys.
            AMergot Marcell rode forthe on a ſeaſon / and .xiii. with hym at aduenture / & toke ye way to Aloys to warde ſaynt Floure / the whiche was a fayre caſtell in the byſſhoprike of Cleremont. They knewe well yt the place was nat kept / but by the porter all onely. and whan they cāe nere to ye caſtell / Amergot ſawe where the porter ſat on a blocke wtout the gate. than a breton who coude ſhote well with a croſ bowe / ſayd. ſir / wyll ye that I ſlee the porter at ye firſt ſhote. ye ꝙ Amergot I requyre the. the breton ſhot a quarell and ſtrake the porter right in the heed / the porter whan he felte hym ſelfe ſtryken entred in to the gate / thinkyng to haue cloſed it but he coude nat: for in thentryng he fell downe deed. than Amergot and his cōpany made haſt to entre / and ſo entred in at the wycket / & there they founde the porter deed / & this wyfe by hym right ſore afrayed / to whom they dyde no hurt / but they demaunded of her wher was the capitayne. and ſhe anſwered and ſaid / how he was at Cleremōt. Than they aſſured her lyfe / ſo ſhe wolde delyuer thē the keys of the caſtell / and of the mayſter towre / and ſo ſhe dyde: & than they put her out with aſmoche ſtuffe as ſhe coude cary away with her. & ſo ſhe went to ſaynt Flour a cytie but a leage thens / and they of the cytie were ſore abaſſhed whā they knewe that Alois was engliſſhe: and ſo was all the coūtre about. And anone after / Amergotte Marcell toke the ſtrong caſtell of Balon / by ſtelth of ſcalyng. & whan they were wtin / the capitayne was a ſlepe in the great towre / which towre was nat likely to be won by force / and by that towre the caſtell might be won agayne. Than Amergot aduyſed him of a ſubteltie. He had in his handes the father and mother of the Capitayne / and ſo he brought them before the towre / and made ſemblant to ſtryke of their heedꝭ / without he wolde yelde vp the towre. Theſe good folkes douted dethe / and ſayde to their ſonne / who was in the towre. Sir haue pyte on vs / and they wept pyteouſly. The ſquier thought yt his father & mother ſhuld neuer dye for his ſake / and ſo yelded vp the towre: than they put hym out of the caſtell. Thus Balone was englyſſhe / the whiche dyde after moche trouble to the countre. for all ſuche as thought to do yuell reſorted thyder / or els to Cauſuryell / a two leages fro Lymoges / els to Carlat / to Aloys / to Uentadore / or in to ſuche other places. and whan theſe gariſons aſſembled toguyder / they were to the nombre of ſixe hundred ſpeares: and ſo ranne ouer all the coūtre and into the coūtie of the dolphyn of Auuergue. It was of trouthe that the lorde of Cupyer was to them a great enemey / in lykewiſe ſo was the lord of Forterell and the baſtarde of Forterell his brother / and a ſquyer of Burbonoyſe / called Gordones. Who by clene feate of armes / on a day toke Amergot Marcell priſoner / and raunſomed hym at .v. thouſande frankes. Thus the dedes of armes fortuned in Lymoſyn / and in the countre there.
         
         
            ¶ Of the ciſme that was made in the church / and the maner howe. and of the bretons who made warr̄ to Rōc: and of the quene of Naples who put all her landes into the popes handes. Cap. CCC .xlvi.
            
               
               IT hath ben long ſithe I ſpake of holy church / now I wyll retourne therto / the mater requyreth it. ye haue well herde here before / howe by the exortacyon of the romayns. The cardynalles / who as than raygned / to apeaſe the people of Rome / who were greatly moued agaynſt thē. Made a pope of the archbyſſhoprike of Bare / called before Bartylmewe des Angles. Hereceyued the papalyte / and was called Urbayne the ſire / and ſo opyned grace as the vſage was Thentencyon of dyuers of y• cardynals was / y• whan they myght ſe a better hour & tyme / they wolde agayn returne to their election / bycauſe this pope was nat profytable for them / nor alſo to the church as they ſaid / for he was a f
                  •
               m
                  •
               ſſhe man and malincolyous. So that whā he ſawe hym ſelfe in proſperyte and in puyſſance of the papalyte / & that dyuers kynges chriſtned were ioyned to him / and wrote to him / and dyde put them vnder his obeyſaunce. Wherof he wared proude / and worked all on heed: and wolde haue taken away fro ye cardynals / dyuers of their rightes and olde cuſtomes / the whiche greatly diſpleaſed them. And ſo ſpake togyder / and ymagined howe he was nat well worthy to gouerne the worlde. Wherfore they purpoſed to thoſe another pope ſage and diſcrete / by whom the churche ſhulde be well gouerned. To this purpoſe the cardynals putte to all their payne / and ſpecially he y• was after choſen to be pope. Thus all a ſomer they wer in this purpoſe / for they that entended to make a newe pope / durſt nat ſhewe their myndes generally / bycauſe of the romayns. So that in the tyme of the vacacyon in the courte / dyuers cardynals departed fro Rome / and went about Rome to ſport thē / in dyuers places at their pleaſure. & pope Urbane went to another cytie called Tyeulle / and ther 
               
                  〈◊〉
                lay a long ſeaſon. in this vacacion tyme whiche myght nat longe endure / for at Rome ther were many clerkes of ſūdrie places of the worlde / abydinge for graces / the whiche was promyſed to dyuers of them. Than the cardynals all of one acorde aſſembled togyder: and their voyces reſted on ſir Robert of Geneſue / ſomtyme ſonne to the erle of Geneſue. His firſt promocyon was / he was byſſhoppe of Therouene / and after byſſhoppe of Cambrey: and he was called cardynall of Geneſue. At this election were the moſt parte of the cardynals / and was called Clement.
            THe ſame ſeaſon / there was in the marcheſſe of Rome: a right valyant knight of Bretayne / called Sylueſter Bude. And he had vnder hym a two thouſande bretons / and in the yere before / he had right well borne hymſelfe agaynſt the florentynes / vnder pope Gregorie / who had curſed them: bycauſe of the rebellyon. And by the meanes of this Sylueſter Bude / they were come to mercy. Than pope Clement and the cardynals of his parte / ſecretly ſent for him and his company. And ſo he cā
               
                  •
                and entred in to the caſtell Angle / the better to conſtrayne the romayns. So pope Urbayne durſt nat departe fro Tyeulle / nor ſuche cardynals as were of his acorde for doute of the bretons / they were ſo great a nombre: and all choſen men of warre. And whan the romayns ſaw them ſelfe in that danger / they ſent for other ſoudyers: almayns / and lumbardes / and ſo daylye they ſcrimyſſhed with the bretons. Clemēt opyned his graces to all clerkꝭ / ſuche as wolde haue it. And ſo he ſignifyed his name ouer all the worlde. And whan the frenche kynge / who as than raygned was certifyed therof: he had great marueyle / and ſent for his brother / & for all the nobles and prelates of his realme. And for the rectour and maiſter doctour of the vnyuerſyte of Parys / to knowe of them / to whiche electyon / outher the firſt or the ſeconde / that he ſhulde holde vnto. This mater was nat ſhortely determyned / for dyuers clerkes varyed: but finally all the prelates of Fraunce enclyned to Clemēt. And ſo dyde the kynges bretherne and the mooſt ꝑte of the vnyuerſite of Parys. And ſo the kynge was enformed by all the great clerkes of his realme / that he obeyed to pope Clement / & helde him for the true pope. and made a ſpecyall commaundement through oute his realme / that euery manne ſhulde take and repute Clement for pope. And that euery man ſhulde obey him / as god on erthe. The king of Spaygne was of the ſame opinyon / and ſo was the erle of Sauoy / the duke of Myllayne / and the quene of Naples.
            The beleuyng thus of the frēche kyng vpon Clement / coloured greatlye his dedes / for the realme of Fraunce was reputed to be the chiefe fountayne of beleue of the chriſten faythe / bycauſe of the noble churches and prelaſies / that be therin. As than lyued Charles of Boeſme / kyng of Almaygne & emperour of Rome / who was at Praigne in Behayne / and was aduertiſed of all theſe maters / wherof he had gret marueyle. and though y• his empyre of Almayne / except

the byſſhoprike of Trect beleued in faithe / courage / and entencyon in pope Urbane / and wolde nat here ſpekyng of any other. yet he fayned and diſſymuled all his lyfe tyme / & wolde anſwere whan he was ſpoken to of that mater ſo courteſly / that all his barons and prelates of his realme were contente. Howe be it the churches of the empyre obeyed pope Urbayne / but Scotlande helde of Clement. The erle Loyes of Flaunders was greatly agaynſt Clement / in the ꝑties of Brabant / Heynalt / and in Lege / for he wolde euer abyde to be Urbanyſt. Sayeng / howe they dyde the ſame pope great wronge. And this erle was ſo beleued and renomed in thoſe parties / wher he was conuerſant / that the churches and lordes helde of the ſame opynion. But they of Heynaulte and the churches there / and the lorde called Albert abode as neutre / and obeyed no more to one than to ye other. Wherfore the byſſhoppe of Cambrey / that reygned at that tyme called John̄ / loſt in Heynalt all the reuenewes of his temporalties. And in the ſame ſeaſon ther was ſent into Fraunce / into Heynalt / in to Flaunders / and in to Brabāt fro pope Clement. The cardynall of Poicters / a right wyſe / valyant / and a ſage clerke / to enſygne and to preche to the people / for he was at the firſt election. And ther he ſhewed howe by conſtraynt / they chaſe firſt the archebyſſhop of Bare to be pope. The frenche kyng and his bretherne and the prelates of Fraunce / mekely receyued hym / and gladly entended to his buſyneſſe & wordes: for it ſemed to thē that he ſpake all trouthe / & ſo gaue faythe to him. And whan he had ben a ſeaſon in Fraunce / than he went in to Heynalt / where he was alſo ioyouſly receyued. In lykewiſe ſo he was in Brabant / bothe of the duke and of the ducheſſe / but he dyd ther nothyng els. He thought in his retournyng to haue gone into Lege / but he toke other counſell and wente nat thyder / but retourned to Tourney / and thought to haue gone in to Flaūders / to haue ſpoken with therle. But it was ſhewed hym that he had nothyng to do ther / bycauſe ye erle helde and wolde holde of Urbayne / and ſo to lyue and dye. Than the cardynall departed fro Tourney and went to Ualencennes / and ſo to Cambrey / and there he lay a longe ſpace / in hope alwayes to here ſome good tidynges.
            THus the chriſten realmes were in variacyon / and the churches in great dyſference / bycauſe of the popes. Urbayne had the greatter partie / but to ſpeke of the mooſt profytable reuenewes & playne obeyſance / Clement had it. And ſo Clement by conſent of the cardynals / ſent to Auygnon to make redy the paleys there for hym / for his entent was to go thyder / aſſoone as he might. And ſo he went to the cyte of Foūdes / and there opyned his graces. Thyder drewe all maner of clerkes / ſuche as wolde take grace: and he kept about in vyllages many ſoudyers / who made great warre to Rome / and to the bourage of ſaynt Peter / and traueyled them day & night with dyuers aſſautes and ſcrimyſſhes. And alſo they that were in the caſtell Angle without Rome / dyd moche trouble to the romayns. But they of Rome enforſed thē
               ſelfe ſo with ſoudyers / almayns / and with the puyſſance of Rome / ſo that they aſſembled toguyder on a day / and cōquered the bourage of ſaynt Peter. Than the bretons drewe them in to the caſtell of Angle / howe be it they were ſo handled by force of armes / that they gaue it vp / their lyues ſaued. Thā the bretons deꝑted and drewe to Foundes / and there about in the countre: and the romayns bete downe the caſtel Angle / & brent the bourage of faynt Peter. Whan ſir Sylueſtre Bude / who was in the countre: herde howe his men hadde loſt the bourage of ſaynt Peter / and y• caſtell Angle. He was right ſore diſpleaſed / and ſtudyed howe to be reuenged of ye romayns. It was ſhewed him by his ſpyes / howe on a day the romayns / and the nobleſt men of the cytie of Rome / ſhulde aſſemble togyder in counſayle in the Capitolle. Aſſoone as he knewe that / he aſſembled toguyder a certayne nombre / and rode forth by couert wayes ſecretly / and ſo came to Rome in the euenynge / and entred in at the gate of Naples. Whā theſe bretons were within / they toke ye ſtreyght way to the Capitoll / & came thyder as the coūſell of Rome were iſſued out of the chābre. Than the bretons couched their ſpeares / and ranne in among them: and ſlewe and bete downe a great nombre of the mooſt notableſt of the cite. Ther was ſlayne a ſixe baneretes / and a two hūdred of other riche ꝑſons / and a great nombre hurt. and whan theſe bretons hadde done their enterpriſe / they withdrewe them agaynſt night / and than it began to be late ſo yt they were nat purſued: what for they night & for the ſodayne fray that they were in. for they wyſt nat what to do / but to take hede of their frendes that were ſore hurte. So they paſſed that nyght in great dyſtreſſe and ſorowe of herte / and ſoo buryed the deed / and dreſſedde the hurte. And in the mornyng / the romayns aduyſed thē ſelfe of a great

crueltie / for the poore clerkꝭ that were in Rome and were in no faute: they ſlewe and hurt of thē mo than thre hundred / and ſpecially bretons y• fell in their handes / ther was no mercy. Thus went the maters in Rome by reaſon of the ſtate of the popes / and dayly they bought it dere / ſuche as were without faute.
            IN the meane ſeaſon that Clemēt and his cardynals lay thus at Foundes / y• quene of Napoles came thyder to ſe hym / for ſhe dyde put her ſelfe vnder the obeyſaunce of pope Clement. This quene had ben longe in purpoſe to put the realme of Cecyll (wherof ſhe was lady / and the countie of Prouence / whiche depēdeth of the ſame realme) in to the hādes of the pope / to do with them at his pleaſur / and to gyue thē to ſome highe prince of the realme of Fraunce / beyng of ſuche puyſſāce to kepe them / agaynſt ſuche as ſhe hated deedly / who were diſcended out of the realme of Hūgry. And whan y• quene of Naples was come to Foundes / ſhe humbled her ſelfe lowly to pope Clement and was cōfeſſed of hym / and diſcouered to him all the ſecretes of her hert / and ſayd. Holy father: I holde dyuers noble herytages / as the realme of Naples / the realme of Cecyll / Puyll / Calabre / and the countie of Prouence. And it is of trouthe y• kyng Loyes of Cecyll / duke of Puyll and Calabre my father: whyle he lyued / knowledged all theſe landes to holde of the churche / and on his dethe bedde he toke me by the hande / & ſayd A fayre doughter / ye are enherytour of many a 
                  •
               che countre / and I am ſure many great lordꝭ wyll ſeke to haue you in maryage / bycauſe of y• fayre herytage that ye haue. Therfore doughter I wolde ye ſhulde vſe you after my coūſayle as to mary yourſelfe to ſo highe a prince / that may be puyſſant to kepe & maynteyne you and your herytage in reſt and peace. And if it ſo fortune that ye haue none heyres / than delyuer all your landes in to the handes of the pope / than beyng a lyue: for kyng Robert my father at the hour of his dethe / gaue me in lyke charge. therfore fayre dought / I charge you and diſcharge me. And than I promyſed him on my faithe in the preſence of all them that were in his chābre / that I ſhulde acomplyſſhe his laſt deſyre. And holy father / ſo it was that after his diſceaſe: by the conſent of all the nobles of Cecyll and Naples. I was maryed to Andrewe of Hungry / brother to kyng Loyes of Hungry: by whome I hadde no yſſue / for he dyed yonge at Ayes in Prouence. And after his diſceaſe / I was maryed agayne to the prince of Tarent / who was called Charles / and by him I had a doughter. Than the kyng of Hungry / for the diſpleaſure that he hadde to Andrewe his brother my firſt huſbande / went and made warre agaynſt my huſbande Charles of Tarent / and toke fro him Puyll and Calabre / & toke him in batayle and ledde him to priſon in to Hungry: and there he dyed. And yet after agayne by the acorde of the nobles of Cecyll / I maryed agayne kynge James of Maiogres / and ſent in to Fraūce for ſir Loys of Nauer to haue maryed my doughter / but he dyed by the way. Than it fell ſo / that the kyng my huſbande went to conquere his herytage of Maiogres / the whiche the kyng of Arragon had taken fro him byforce / and had dyſheryted him: and cauſed his father to dye in priſon. And or he departed fro me / I ſayd to him. Sir: I am a lady and haue puyſſance and rycheſſe ſufficyent to maynteyne your eſtate acordynge to your deſyre / howe beit he preached ſo moche to me / and ſhewed me ſo many fayre reaſons / deſyring to recouer his herytage / ſo that I was fayne to conſent to hym to take his pleaſure. But at his departynge I deſyred hym to haue gone to kyng Charles of Fraunce / and to haue ſhewed him his buſyneſſe / and to haue ordred hymſelfe by his counſayle. Howe be it he dyde nat ſo / the which was his hurt / for he wēt to the prince of Wales / who promyſed to haue ayded him. So he had greatter truſt in the price of Wales than in the frenche kyng / to whom I was nere of lynage. and in the meane ſeaſon whyle he was in his vyage / I wrote to the frenche kyng and ſent great meſſangers to him / deſyring him to ſend me a noble man of his blode to mary my doughter / to the entent that myne herytagꝭ ſhulde nat be without an heyre. The kyng ſent his coſyn ſir Robert of Artoyſe / who wedded my doughter: and in y• vyage that the kyng my huſbande made he dyed. And after agayne I maryed ſir Othe of Broſwyche / and bycauſe ſir Charles de la Paixe / ſawe that ſir Othe ſhulde haue myne herytage as long as I lyued / he made vs warre. And toke vs in the caſtell of Locufe / whan the ſee was ſo highe that we feared it wolde haue ouerflowen vs. at whiche tyme we were ſo afrayed / that we yelded vs all foure / to ſir Charles de la Paixe / our lyues ſaued. And ſo he helde vs in priſone: my huſbande and I / my doughter and her huſbande. And ſo it happed / that my ſonne and doughter dyed there: and after by treatie I and my huſbande were delyuered / ſo that Puylle and Calabre

might come to hym. And alſo he entēdeth to come to the heryrage of Naples / of Cecyll & of Prouence / for he ſeketh all about for alyance. and ſo wyll take a way the ryght of the churche as ſone as I am deed / if he may. Therfore holy father / I wyll acquyte me agaynſt god and you / & acquyte the ſoules of my predeceſſours / and put in to your handes / all y• herytages that I ought to haue / of Cecyll / of Naples / Punyll Calabre / and Prouence / I gyue them to you / to do with them your pleaſure / to gyue them to whome ſoeuer it pleaſeth you / ſuche as may obteygne them agaynſt our aduerſary / ſir Charles de la Paix. Pope Clement receyued ioyfully her wordes / and toke her gyft in great reuerence / and ſayde. A my fayre doughter of Naples / we ſhall ſo ordeyn that yor herytage ſhall haue ſuch an heryter of your owne blode / noble and puyſſant to reſyſt agaynſt them / that wyll do or offer you or thē any wronge. Of all theſe wordes and gyftes / there were publyke inſtrumentes / and autentyke made / to the entent that the mater ſhulde abyde ferme & ſtable / in tyme to come / and to be of more playne knowledge to all them that ſhulde here therof after.
         
         
            ¶ Howe pope Clement wente to Auygnon / & of the gyftes that he gaue to the duke of Aniowe / and howe ſir Silueſter Budde / and his company were beheded / and of the countre of Flaunders / and of their aduerſyte. Cap. CCC .xlvii.
            
               WHan the quene of Naples / and ſir Othe of Brouſwiche had done all thynges / wherfore they were come to Foundes to the pope / than they toke their leaue and departed and went to Naples Than it was nat longe after but that pope Clement imagyned in hym ſelf / that to abyde long about the parties of Rome / was nothyng protytable for him / & ſawe well howe the romayns and pope Urbayne trauayled greatly to gette the loue of the neapolitans / and of ſir Charles de la Paix. therfore he douted leſt the paſſages and wayes ſhuld be cloſed agaynſt him / ſo that he ſhulde nat get to Auygnon whan he wolde. and the princypall and ſpecyall cauſe / that inclyned hym to go to Auignon / was to thentent to gyue to the duke of Aniou / the ryghtes that the quene of Naples had gyuen vnto hym / of all the forſayd ſeignoris / wherof he had inſtrumentes paſt / and ſealed. So he ordayned ſecretely / and ſagely his beſyneſſe / and toke theſee / and his cardynals with him / in galies and veſſels that were come out of Arragone. They hadde wynde and wether at wyll / and arryued withoute domage at Merſeyll / wherof all the countre was ryght gladde. & for thens he went to Auignon / and ſent worde of his comynge to the french kyng / and to his brethern / who were ryght gladde of his comyng. And the duke of Aniou who lay at the cytie of Tholouſe / went to ſe y• pope. and at his comynge the pope gaue hym all the gyftes y• the wene of Naples had gyuen hym. The duke of Aniou / who alweys deſyred high ſeignories and great honours / receyued the gyftes in great magnyficence. And ſo had them to hym / and to his heyres for euer. and ſayd to the pope / that in as ſhorte tyme as he might / he wolde go ſo ſtrong in to thoſe marches / that he wolde be able to reſyſt them that wolde do any wronge to the quene of Naples. The duke taryed with y• pope a .xv. dayes / and than returned to Tholouſe to the ducheſſe his wyfe / and pope Clement delyuered his men of warre to ſir Bernard de la Sale / & to Flouremont / to make warre agaynſt his enemyes.
            THe ſame ſeaſon / there was in the marches of Thuſkayne in Italy / a valyant knight englyſſh / called ſir John̄ Haconde who dyde & had done many a noble feate of armes. he iſſued out of the realme of Fraūce / whan the peace was made bitwene y• two kynges at Bretigny beſyde Charters / and in y• tyme he was but a poore knyght / and than he thought to retourne agayne in to Englande in to his owne countre / he thought he coude wynne nothynge there. And whan he ſawe that all men of warre ſhulde auoyde the realme of Fraunce by the ordynaūce and treaty of peace / he made him ſelfe capitayne of a certayne nombre of cōpanyons called the late comers / and ſo went in to Burgoyne / and there he aſſembled a great nombre of ſuche rutters / engliſſhe / gaſcons / bretons almayns / and companyons of dyuers nacyons. And this Haconde was one of the cheyfe with Briquet and Carnell / by whome the batayle of Brumauxe was made / and helped to gette the Pount le Spiryte / with Bernard of Forges. and whan they had warred and haryed the coū
               trey agaynſt the pope and the cardynals / than

ther were entreated / and went to the marques of Moūtferrant / who as than kept warre with the lordes of Myllayne. and ſo this Marques brought them all beyonde the mountaynes / after he had delyuered to thē .lx. thouſande frankes / wherof Hacond had for his parte .x. thouſande for him and his company / and whan they had acheued the warr with the Marques / dyuers than returned in to Fraunce. for ſir Bertram of Cleſquy / the lorde de la Marche / and the lorde Beauiewe / the marſhall of Fraunce / and ſir Andrewe Dandrehen / brought them into Spayne agaynſt kyng Dampeter / on kyng Henries parte / and ſir Johan Hacond & his cō
               pany abode ſtyll in Italy. and pope Urbayne the fyfte as longe as he lyued / had hym in his warres of Myllayne / and in lyke wyſe ſo had pepe Gregorie / who raygned after him. & this ſame ſir Johan Hacond had for the lorde Coucy a fayre iourney agaynſt therle of Uertues / for it was ſayd for trouth / that the lorde Coucy had ben ouerthrowen by y• erle of Uertues and the lombardes / if this Haconde hadde nat ben / for he came to his ayde with fyue hundred / bycawſe the lorde Coucy had wedded the kynge of Englandes doughter / & for none other cauſe This ſir Johan Haconde was a knyght right hardy and of great experyence / and well renomed in the marches of Italy / and dyd there many great feates of armes. Than the romayns and Urbayne / who called him ſelfe pope / aduyſed in them ſelfe / whan Clement was departed fro the marches of Rome / to ſende for him / and to make him mayſter & gouernour of all their warre. So they ſent for him / and retayned him and all his company / and he acquyted him ſelfe right valiantly / for on a daye / with the helpe of the romayns he diſconfyted Sylueſter Bude / and a great company of bretons / ſo y• they were all ſlayn or taken. & Sylueſter Bude brought priſoner to Rome / and was in great daunger to leſe his heed. And to ſay the trouth / it had ben better for hym / to haue been beheeded the ſame day he was brought to Rome / than otherwyſe for the honoure of him and of his frendes. For afterwarde / pope Clement cauſed hym to leſe his heed in the cytie of Maſcon / and another ſquier of Breton with him called Wyllm̄ Boyleau / for they were had in ſuſpect of treaſon / bycauſe they were iſſued out of the romayns priſon / and coulde nat be knowen by what treaty or meanes / and ſo they came to Auygnon and there were taken. Of their takynge was culpable the cardynall of Amyens / for he hated them ſythe they made warre in Rome for the pope / bycauſe in the feldes on a daye / they and their companyes toke the ſayd cardynalles ſomersꝭ wherin they had a great quātyte of veſſell and plate of golde & ſyluer / and departed it among their companyes / who coulde nat be payed of their wages / wherfore the ſame cardynall toke the ſame deade in great diſpleaſure / and ſo couertly accuſed them of treaſon. So that whan they were come to Auygnon treaſon was layd to theym / howe they had falſly betrayed y• pope and thervpon ſent to Maſcon / and there beheeded bothe. Thus the maters went at that tyme in thoſe coūtreis / and ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was ſore diſpleaſed / for the dethe of Sylueſter Bude his coſyn / with pope Clement / and with the cardinals. ſo that it he had lyued long after they ſhuld well haue knowen that his d
                  •
               th had bene ryght ſore diſpleſant to hym.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of theſe maters and let vs entre to ſpeke of the warres of Flaū
               ders / the whiche began in the ſame ſeaſon. whiche were harde and cruell / wherby moche people were ſlayne and exyled / & the countre tourned in to ſuche a caſe. that it was ſayde: that in a hundred yere after / it ſhulde nat be recouered agayne. And I ſhall ſhewe you by what meane and occaſyons / the vnhappy warres began.
            Whan the tribulacyons began firſt in Flaū
               ders / the countre was ſo welthy and ſo riche / y• it was meruayle to here. and the men of y• good townes kept ſuche eſtate / that it was wonder to here tell therof. but theſe warres began firſt by pride and enuy / that the good townes in Flaū
               ders had one againſt another / as they of Gaūt agaynſt thē of Bruges / and they of Bruges agaynſt thē of Gaunt / and other townes one agaynſt another. but there was ſuche reſort that no warr coude ryſe among thē / without therle of Flaunders their lorde dyd conſent therto / for he was ſo feared and beloued / that none durſte diſpleaſe him. Alſo y• erle who was ryght ſage and ſubtell / kept vnder the warr̄ and yuell wyll of his people / for he wolde in no wyſe ſuffre no warre to ryſe among them and him. for well he thought in his ymaginacyons / that whan any differēce ſhulde ryſe bytwene him and his people / he ſhulde be the febler / and the leſſe ſet by of his neighbours. Alſo he kept vnder the warre for another cauſe / howbeit at thende he was driuen to vſe it. And y• was / he conſydred the gret diſtructyon that ſhulde fall therby / bothe of bodies and goodes. For alwayes he had lyued in

great proſperyte and peace / and had as moche his pleaſure as any other chriſten prince had / but this warr began for ſo light a cauſe and in ſydent / that iuſtely to conſyder & ſpeke. 
                  •
               f good wytte and ſage aduyſe had been in the lorde / he neded nat to haue hadde any maner of warre. What ſhall they ſaye / that redeth this or hereth it redde? But that it was the warke of the deuyll. For ye knowe / or els ye haue herde ſay of the wyſe ſages: Howe the deuyll ſubtelly tiſeth night & day to make warre / where as he ſey the peace. And ſeketh lytell and lytell / how he may come to his vngracyous entent: and ſo it fortuned in thoſe dayes in Flāders / as ye may clerelye knowe and ſe / by the treatie of the order / of the mater that foloweth.
         
         
            ¶ Of the princypall rote and cauſe of the warre / bytwene the erle of Flaū
               ders and the flemynges. And howe the whyte hattes were ſet vp by Johan Lyon. Cap. CCC .xlviii.
            
               THe ſame ſeaſon: whyle the duke Loys of Flaūders was in his greatteſt proſperyte. Ther was in Gaunt a burgeſſe (called Johan Lyon) a ſage man: cruell / hardy / ſubtell / and a great enterpriſer: and colde and pacient ynough in all his warkes. This John̄ Lyon was great with the erle / as it apered / for the erle entyſed him to ſlee a man in Gaūt / with whōehe was diſpleaſed. And at the erles cōmaundement couertly / this Johan Lyon made a matter to him / and ſo fell out with hym and ſlewe hym / the whiche burgeſſe was ſore complayned▪ and therfore John̄ Lyon went & dwelt at Doway / and was there a .iii. yere / and helde a great eſtate and porte / and all of therles coſt. and for this ſlaughter on a day / Johan Lyon loſt all that euer he had in Gaunt / and was banyſſhed y• towne foure yere but after the erle of Flaunders dyd ſo moch for him / that he made his peace / and ſo to returne a gayne to the towne of Gaunt / & to haue agayne as great fraunches as euer he had / wherof dyuers in Gaunt and in Flaunders hadde great meruayle / and were ther with ryght ſore abaſſhed / but for all that ſo it was done. And beſyde that / to thentent that he ſhulde recouer agayne his loſſe / and to mayntayne his aſtate / the erle made him chefe ruler of all the ſhyppes / maryners / and Nauy. This office was well worthe by yere a thouſand frākes / and yet to deale but trewely. Thus this Johan Lyon was ſo great with the erle that there was none lyke him.
            IN the ſame ſeaſon there was anotherlygnage in Gaunte / called the Mahewes. Ther were of them ſeuyn bretherne / they were the chiefe of all the maryners. And amonge theſe ſeuyn bretherne / there was one of theym called Gylbert Mahewe: a ryght ſage manne / moche more ſubtell than any of his bretherne. This Gylbert Mahue had great enuy couertly at this Johan Lyon / bycauſe he ſawe him ſo great with the erle / and ſtudyed night and day howe he myght put him out of fauoure with the erle. Dyuers tymes he was in mynde to haue ſlayne him by his brethern / but he durſt nat for for feare of the erle. So long he ſtudyed and ymagined on this mater / that at laſte he founde the way. The chiefe cauſe that he hated him for was: as I ſhall ſhewe you / the better to come to the found acyon of this mater. Aunciently ther was in the towne of Dan a great mortall warr̄ bytwene two maryners / & their lynages. The one called Peter Guillon / and the other John̄ Barde: Gilbert mahewe & his bretherne were come of the one lynage / and this Johan Lyon of the other. So this couert hate was long noryſſhed bitwene theſe two paties / how beit they ſpake and ete and dranke to gyder. and the lynage of Gylbart Mahewe / made more a do of the mater / than Johan Lyon dyd. In ſo moche that Gylbert Mahewe without any ſtroke gyuyng aduyſed a ſubtell dede. The erle of Flaū
               ders wolde ſome tyme lye at Gaunt / than this Gylbert Mahewe / came and aquaynted hymſelfe with one of them that was nere aboute the erle / and on a day ſayd to him. Sir: if my lord therle wolde / he might haue euery yere a great profyte of y• ſhyppes and nauy / wherof he hath nowe nothyng / whiche profyte the ſtraungers and the maryners ſhulde paye / ſo that Johan Lyon who is chiefe ruler there / wyll truely acquyte him ſelfe. This gētylman ſayd he wolde ſhewe this to the erle / and ſo he dyde. The erle than / in lykewyſe as dyuers lordes are lyghtly enclyned naturally to harken to their profytte / and nat regardyng y• ende / what may fall therby / ſo they may haue riches / for couytouſnes diſceyueth thē. he anſwerd and ſayd. let Gylbert

               
                  〈◊〉
                come to me / and we wyll here what he wyll ſay. Than cāe Gylbert and ſpake with the erle / ſhewynge him dyuers reaſons reſonable as the erle thought / and ſo anſwered & ſayd. I thynke it were well done yt it ſhulde be thus. Than John̄ Lyon was ſent for / who knewe nothyng of this mater / and there in the preſence of Gylbert Mahewe / the erle ſhewed him all the mater and ſayd: John̄ if ye woll / we may haue great profyte in this mater. Johan Lyon / who was a true man. ſawe well it was nat a thynge reſonable to be done howe be it he durſt nat ſay the contrary / but ſayd. Sir: that thyng that ye demaunde / and that Gylbert Mahewe hathe brought forthe / I can nat do it alone / for it wyll be a hard mater to all the maryners. Johan ꝙ therle / if ye wyll acquyte you truely in this mater / it wyll be done. ſir ꝙ he: I ſhall do therin the beſt of by power / & ſoo they departed. Gylbert Mahewe / who intended to brynge out of fauoure this Johan Lyon with the erle / entended to none other thyng / but to make hym leſe his offyce. Than he came to his ſixe bretherne and ſayd / ſirs. it is tyme nowe that ye ſocoure and ayde me / and to mayntayne this mater as good trendes and brethern ſhulde helpe eche other / it is for you that I haue dryuē about this mater / I ſhall diſcomfyt John̄ Lyon without any ſtroke ſtrykyng / and ſhall bryng him in as great diſpleaſure with the erle / as he is nowe great and in fauoure. Whatſoeuer I ſay in the ne
                  •
               t parlyament / kepe youre owne openyons / for if the erle requyre you to do ſuche a thynge debate you well the matter / but I wyll ſay ſtyll and mayntayne / yt it Johan Lyon wyll truely acquyte him ſelfe / this ordynāce may be done. And I knowe ſo moche / that my lorde the erle if the mater come nat to his entent / Johan Lyon ſhall leaſe his fauoure and offyce / and gyue the offyce to me. And whan I ones haue it than ye ſhall agre therto / we are puyſſant ynough in this towne to rule all the reſydue / there is none wyll ſay agaynſt vs: and thā I ſhall do ſo that John̄ Lyon ſhalbe ouerthrowen. thus we ſhall be reuenged on him wtout any ſtroke gyuyng / all his brethern accorded to him. So the parlyament came / and all the maryners were redy. There Johan Lyon / and Gylbert Mahewe ſhewed them the erles pleaſure on the newe ſtatute that he wold reyſe on the nauy of Lys and Leſcaulte / the whiche thynge ſemed to them all ryght hard / and cōtrary to their olde cuſtome. and the chiefe that ſpake there agaynſte were Gylbert Mahewes bretherne / more than any other. Than Johan Lyon who was chiefe ruler of them all. was ryght ioyouſe / for he wolde to his true power mayntayne them in their olde auncyent frauncheſſes and lyberties. And he went that all that they ſayde had bene for him / but it was contrary / for it was for an euyll entent towardes him. Johan Lyon reported to the erle the anſwere of the maryners / and ſayd. ſir: it is a thynge can nat be well done / for great hurt may come therby. ſir: and it pleaſe you let the mater reſt in the olde auncyent eſtate / and make no newe thyng amonge them. This anſwere pleaſed nothyng the erle / for he ſawe that if the mater might be brought vp and reyſed / it ſhulde be well worth to him yerely a ſeuen thouſande florens / ſo he helde his peace as at that tyme / but he thought the more. And ſoo purſewed by fayre wordꝭ & treaties theſe maryners / but alwayes Johan Lyon founde them ryght obſtynate in the caſe. Than Gylbert Mahewe came to the erle and to his counſayll / and ſayd: howe that John̄ Lyon aquyted him but ſlackely in the mater / but and ye erle wolde gyue him the offyce that Johan Lyon hathe / he wolde ſo handell the maryners / yt the erle of Flaunders ſhulde heretably haue ye ſayd profyte. The erle ſawe nat clere / for couytuſnes of the good blynded him / & by his owne counſayll he put John̄ Lyon out of the offyce / and gaue it to Gylbert Mahewe. Whā Gylbert Mahewe ſawe howe he had the offyce / within a lytell ſpace he turned all his ſyxe bretherne to his purpoſe / & ſo made the erle to haue his entent and profyt / wherfore he was neuer the better beloued of ye moſt parte of the maryners. howebeit it behoued them to ſuffer / for the ſeuen brethern were great and puyſſant / with the ayde of the erle. Thus by this ſubtell meanes Gylbert Mahewe get him 
                  •
               elfe in fauoure with the erle / and he gaue many gyftes / and ioweles to them that were nere about the erle / wherby he had their loues. And alſo he gaue many great preſentes to the erle / the whiche blynded him / and ſo by that meanes he gate his loue / and all theſe gyftes and preſentes this Gylbert Mahewe reyſed of ye maryners / wherof there were many that were nat well content / howbeit they durſt ſpeke no worde to the contrary.
            IOhan Lyon by this meanes / and by the purchaſe of Gylbert Mahewe / was out of y• erls fauoure & loue. and ſo kept his howſe and lyued of his owne / and endured and ſuffered paciently all that euer was done to him. for

this Gylbert Mahewe / who as than was chefe ruler of all the ſhippes / couertly euer hated this Johan Lyon / & toke away the thirde or fourth ꝑte of the profyte that he ſhulde haue had of his ſhyppes. All this John̄ Lyon ſuffered & ſpake no worde / but ſagely diſſymuled & toke in gre / all that euer was done to him / and ſayd. Ther is tyme to be ſtyll / & tyme to ſpeke. This Gylbert Mahewe had one brother called Stenuart a ſubtell man / who aduyſed well the maner of Johan Lyon / and ſayd to his brethern in propheſyeng as it came to paſſe. Sirs this John̄ Lyon ſuffereth nowe / and hangeth downe his heed / he dothe it all for policy. but I feare me he wyll at length make vs lower / thā we be nowe highe. but I coūſayle one thyng / that whyle we be thus in the erles fauour / letre vs ſlee hym. I ſhall ſoone ſ
                  •
               e him / if I take the charge to do it: and ſo we ſhall be out of all parelles. his other bretherne wolde in no wyſe conſent therto / and ſayd to him / that in no wyſe he ſhulde do him any hurt / ſayeng to him: howe a man ought nat to be ſlayne / without the ſentence of a Judge. Thus the matter contynued a certayne ſpace / tyll the deuyll who neuer ſlepeth / awaked them of Bruges / to digge about the ryuer of Lys / to haue the eaſment of y• courſe of the water / And the erle was well accorded to thē / and ſent great nombre of pioners and men of armes to aſſyſte them. Before that in tyme paſt they wold haue done the ſame / but they of Gaunt by puyſſance brake their purpoſe. Theſe tydynges came to Gaunt / howe they of Bruges were byggynge to turne the courſe of the ryuer of Lys / ye which ſhulde greatly be to the preiudyſe of Gaunte. many folkes in the towne began to murmure / and ſpecyally the maryners / for it touched thē nere. wherfore they ſayd. they of Bruges ſhuld nat be ſuffred ſo to dygge / to haue the courſe of theryuer to them / wherby their towne ſhulde be diſtroyed. And ſome ſaid preuely / a god help nowe Johan Lyon / for if he hadd ben ſtyll our gouernoure / it ſhulde nat haue been thus. they of Bruges wolde nat haue been ſo hardy to attempt ſo farre agaynſt vs. Johan Lyon was well aduertyſed of all theſe matters. Than he began a lytell to wake / and ſayd to him ſelfe. I haue ſlept a ſeaſon / but it ſhall apere / that for a ſmall occaſyon I ſhall wake / and ſhall ſet ſuche a trymble bitwene this towne and the erle / that it ſhall coſte perauenture a hundred thouſande mennes lyues. The tidynges of theſe dyggers encreaſed. So it was / ther was a woman that come fro her pilgrymage from our lady of Bolayne (who was wery) and ſate downe in the market place / where as ther were dyuers men / and ſome of thē demaūded of her fro whens ſhe came / ſhe anſwered fro Bolayne. and I haue ſene by the way / ye greateſt myſchefe that euer came to this towne of Gaunte. for there be mo than fyue hundred pioners / that night and day worketh before the ryuer of Lys / and if they be nat let / they wyll ſhortly torne the courſe of the water. This womans wordes was well harde and vnderſtande / in dyuers places of ye towne. Than they of the towne began to mone & ſayd, this dede ought nat to be ſuffred / nor conſented vnto. Than dyuers went to Johan Lyon / and demaunded counſayll of him / howe they ſhuld vſe them ſelfe in this mater. And whan Johan Lyon ſawe him ſelfe ſought on / by them whom he deſyred to haue their good wylles and loue / he was greatly reioyſed / howe be it he made no ſemblant of ioye. For he thought it was nat as than yet tyme / tyll the mater were better a certayned / and ſo he was ſore deſyred or he wolde ſpeke or declare his thought / and whā he ſpake he ſayd. Sirs: if ye wyll aduenture to remedy this mater / it behoue that in this towne of Gaunte / ye renewe an olde auncyent cuſtome / that ſomtime was vſed in this towne / and that is / that ye brynge vp agayne the whyte hattes / and y• they maye haue a chiefe ruler / to whome they maye drawe / and by him be ruled. Theſe wordes were gladly herde / and than they ſayd all with one voyce / we wyll haue it ſo. lette vs reyſe vp theſe whyte hattes. Than there were made whyte hattes / and gyuen and delyuered / to ſuch as loued better to haue warre thā peace for they had nothynge to leſe. And there they chaſe Johan Lyon to be cheife gouernoure of all the whyte hattes. The whiche offyce he toke on him ryght gladly / to the entent to be reuenged on his enemyes / and to bryng diſcorde bytwene the townes of Bruges and Gaunt / and the erle their lord. And ſo it was ordeyned / that they ſhuld go out agaynſt the dyggers of Bruges / with Johan Lyon their ſouerayne capytayne / and with hym two hundred with their companyes / of ſuche as had rather haue hadde warre than peace. and whā Gylbert Mahewe and his brethern ſawe the maner of theſe whyte hattes / they were nat very ioyfull therof. than Stenuart ſayde to his bretherne. I ſayde to you before / howe this Johan Lyon ſhulde diſcomfytte vs at length / it had ben better that ye had beleued me before / and to haue lette me haue ſlayne him / rather than he ſhuld be in this

               
                  〈…〉
               te that he is nowe in / and is likely to be in. and a
                  〈…〉
               s by the whyte hattes / that he hath brought vp. Nay nay quod Gylbert / whan I haue ones ſpoken with my lorde the erle: I warrant you / they ſhall be layde downe agayne. Lette them alone / to do their entpriſe agaynſt the pyoners of Bruges / for the profyte of this oure towne: for els to ſay the trouthe / the towne were but loſt.
            IOhan Lyon and his company with the white hartes departed fro Gaunt / in wyll to ſlee all the pyoners / and ſuche other as kepte thē. Theſe tidynges came to the pyoners howe the gauntoyes came on them with a great puiſſaunce / wherfore they douted to leſe all. And ſo lafte their warke / and went backe agayne to Bruges / and were neuer after ſo hardy to dyg there agayne. Whan John̄ Lyon & his company ſawe nothyng to do: they retourned agayne to Gaunt. But for all that / Johan Lyon lafte nat his offyce / but that the whyte hattes went dayly vp and downe the towne / and John̄ Lyon kepte them ſtyll in that eſtate. And to ſome he wolde ſay ſecretely. Holde you well content / eate and drinke and make mery and be nat afrayed of any thyng that ye diſpende. Suche ſhall paye in tyme to come for your ſcotte / that wyll nat gyue you nowe one peny.
         
         
            ¶ Howe by the exhortacion of John̄ Lyon / the gaūtoyes ſent certayne notable burgeſſes of the towne of Gaū
               te to the erle of Flaunders / for the cō
               ſeruacyon of their priuylegꝭ and olde frauncheſſes▪ and of the deſyre therle made to laye downe the whyte hattes. Cap. CCC .xlix.
            
               IN the ſame weke that Johan Lyon had been thus at Donſe / to haue met with the pioners of Bruges. ther came dyuers out of the fraū
               cheſſe of Gaunt / to cōplayne to them / that hadde as than th
                  •
                rule of the lawe: and ſayd. Sirs / at Erclo beſyde vs the whiche is within the frauncheſſe of Gaunt. There is one of our burgeſſes in the erles priſon / and we haue deſyred therles baylye there to delyuer hym / but he hath playnely anſwered / that he wyll nat delyuer hym. The whiche is playnely agaynſt y• priuylege of this towne of Gaunt. And ſo therby lytell and lytell your priuyleges ſhall be broken / the whiche in time paſt / haue ben ſo noble and ſo highly pray ſed: and beſyde that / ſo well kept and maynteyned / that none durſt breke theym. And that the mooſt nobleſt knight of Flaunders / helde hym ſelfe well reputed / to be a burgeſſe of Gaunte. Than they of the lawe aunſwered / and ſayde: howe they wolde write to the bayly / deſyringe hym / that the burgeſſe may be delyuered. For trewely his offyce extendeth nat ſo farre / as to kepe oure burgeſſe in the erles priſone. And ſo they wrote to the bayly / forthe delyueraunce of the burgeſſe / beynge in priſone in Erclo. The baylye anſwered / & ſayd. What nedeth all theſe wordes for a maryner? Say quod the baylye / who had to name Roger Dauterne: to them of Gaunt / that thoughe he were a richer man ten tymes than he is / he ſhall neuer go out of priſon without my lorde the erle commaunde it. I haue puyſſance to areſt / but I haue no powere to delyuer. The wordes of this Roger Dauterne were reported to them of Gaūt / wherwith they were ſore diſpleaſed / and ſayd: howe he had anſwered right proudely. By theſe anſweres and inſydentes as well for the pyoners of Bruges / who wolde haue dygged agaynſt the herytage and profyte of Gaunt. And for ſuche other ſemblable dedes / wherby the frauncheſſes of Gaū
               te ſhulde haue bene hurte. There began to ryn throughe the towne and abrode in the countrey theſe vnhappy rybaudes / called the whyte hattes: to the entent to be the more feared and renomed. For it behoueth in a lynage / that there be ſome folyſſhe and outragyous / to maynteyne and ſuſtayne the peaſable.
            
               THe tidynges of this maryner burgeſſe of Gaunt / beyng in the erles priſon at Erclo / whome the bayly
                  •
                wolde nat delyuer / ſpredde abrode in the towne of Graunte. And dyuers folkes beganne to murmure / and to ſaye: howe it was nat to be ſuffred. For in ſyttynge ſtyll and beynge to ſofte / in maynteyninge of their frauncheſſe / they might leſe all / the whiche hath ben ſo noble. Johan Lyon / who entended alwayes but to one thynge: and that was / 

to ſette in trouble the towne of Gaunt / agaynſt the erle their lorde. In ſuche wyſe / that he ſhulde nat apeaſe it agayne / but with moch ſorowe and great dommage: wherfore he was nothynge diſpleaſed of theſe aduentures / but he wolde alwayes / that for one of them there had fallen threttie. He put forthe his wordes / and couertlye dyde ſo we them throughe the towne. Sayeng howe: that whan ſoeuer offyces be bought in a towne / the iuryſdictyons and priuyleges canne nat be well kepte. For the erle receyueth nowe yerely thre or four thouſande frankes / beyonde the olde vſage or cuſtomes / wherby the marchauntes and maryners greatly complayneth theym / and leaueth to reſorte to the towne of Gaunt. bothe they of Ualencennes / of Doway / of Lyle / of Bethayne / and of Tourney. And this maye be a thynge / wherby the towne may be loſt: for lytell and lytell daylye the fraū
               cheſſes be takenne away / and auncyent priuyleges: and yet there is no manne dare ſpeke agaynſt it.
            
               GIlbert Mahewe and the ruler of the meane craftꝭ / who was of Gylbertes ꝑte / herde with their owne eares dayly ſuche wordes / & knew well / howe they dyde ryſe by Johan Lyon / but they durſt nat remedy it: for Johan Lyon hadde ſowed throughout the towne the whyte hattes / and gyuen them to ſuche cō
               panyons hardy and outragyous / in ſuch wyſe that none durſt aſſayle them. And alſo Johan Lyon wente neuer alone▪ for whan ſoeuer that he went out of his houſe / he had euer with hym a two or thre hundred whyte hattes about him / nor he neuer wente abrode in the towne / without it hadde bene for a great cauſe▪ for he was greatlye deſyred to haue his counſayle / on the inſydentes / that fell within Gaunt and without: conſeruynge the frauncheſſe of the towne and lyberties therof. And whan he was in coū
               ſayle / than he wold ſhewe a generall word to y• people. He ſpake in ſoo fayre rethorike / & by ſo great craft: that ſuche as herde hym / were gretlye reioyſed of his langage. And wolde ſay all with one voyce / that all was true that he ſayd. By great prudence Johan Lyon ſayd to y• people. Sirs / I ſay nat that we ſhulde hurt or my nyſſhe any parte of my lorde the erles enherytāce / for though we wolde we canna
                  •
               : For reaſon & iuſtyce wolde nat ſuffre vs. Nor that we ſhulde ſeke any crafte or incydent / wherby we ſhulde be in his diſpleaſur or indygnacion. for we ought alwayes / to be in loue and fauoure with our prince and lorde. and my lorde therle of Flaūders is our good lorde / and a right hye prince feared and renomed / and alwayes hath kepte vs in peace and proſperyte. The whiche thynges we ought to knowe / and to ſuffre the more largely. More boūde we are therto / than if he had traueyled vs or diſpleaſed vs / or made warre or hared vs / and to haue put to his payne to haue our goodes. But howe ſoeuer it be / at this preſent tyme he is yuell coūſayled or enformed agaynſt vs / and agaynſt the frauncheſſes of the good towne of Gaunte. In that they of Bruges be more in his fauoure than we. It apereth well by the pioners of Bruges / that he beyng there: they came to take away our herytage. and to take away the ryuer / wherby oure towne of Gaunt ſhulde be diſtroyed. And alſo he wolde haue made a caſtell at Donſe agaynſt vs / to bring vs in danger / and to make vs weaker. And I knowe well: howe they in Bruges had promyſed hym in tyme paſte / tenne or .xii. thouſande frankes yerely: to haue to theym the eaſment of the ryuer of Lys. Therfore I counſayle / lette this good towne of Gaunt: ſende to the erle ſome ſadde and diſcrete perſonages / to ſhewe hym boldely all theſe maters / as well touchynge the burgeſſe of Gaunt in priſone in Erclo / the whiche his baylye wyll nat delyuer: as all other maters / wherwith the good towne of Gaunte is nat content. And alſo theſe matters herde: than lette it be ſhewed hym alſo. that he nor his counſayle / thynke that we be ſo dull or deed (but y• if nede be / we may if we lyſt) make reſyſtence there agaynſt. And ſo his aunſwere ones herde. Than the good towne of Gaunte maye take aduyſe / to punyſſhe the treſpaſſe on them that ſhall be founde culpable agaynſt thē. And whanne Johan Lyon hadde ſhewed all theſe wordes to the people / in the market place: euery man ſayd. he ſaythe well. And than went home to their owne howſes. At theſe woordes thus ſpoken by John̄ Lyon / Gylbert Mahewe was nat preſente / for he douted the whyte hattes: but his brother Stenuart was there alwayes ▪ he propheſyed of tyme to come. & whan he was retourned to his brother / he ſayd. I haue alwayes ſayde / and ſay yet agayne: howe y• John̄ Lyon ſhall diſtroy vs all. Curſed be the hour y• ye had nat let me alone / for & I had ſlayne him / he ſhulde neuer haue ouercōe vs / nor cōe ſoo lyghtly vp. And nowe it is nat in our puyſſance / nor we dare nat anoy nor greue hym. He

is as nowe more greatter in the towne than the erle. Gylbert anſwered / and ſayde. Holde thy peaſe fole / for whan I wyll / with ye erles puyſſance / all the whyte hattes ſhall be caſt downe. And ſuche there be that bereth them nowe / that here after ſhall haue no nede of any hatte.
            
               SO than there were charged certayne burgeſſes / to go ambaſſade to the erle / of the ſaddeſt men of the towne. & Gylbert Mahewe was one of them that was choſen to go and that cauſed Johan Lyon / to the entent that if they ſpake any thynge contrary to the erles diſpleaſure / yt the erle ſhulde be diſpleaſed with him / as well as with any other. So they departed and founde the erle at Male / and dyde ſomoche that fynally they accorded ſo well / that the erle graunted them all their requeſtes / as touchyng their priſoner at Erclo. And promyſynge to kepe and mayntayne the frauncheſſes of Gaunt without brekyng of any of them. and defended them of Bruges that they ſhulde nat be ſo hardy to dygge on the herytage of them of Gaunt. And the better to pleaſe them of Gaunt he cōmaunded them of Bruges to fyll agayne the dykes that they had made. and ſo they amy ably departed fro the 
                  •
               rle & returned to Gaunt / and recorded all that they had done with therle their lorde / and howe he woll mayntayne them in their frauncheſſes / without brekynge of any of them / howe beit he deſyred them by fayrneſſe to laye downe the whyte hattes. And with tho wordes the erles ſeruauntes brought agayne the priſoner fro Erclo / & ſo yelded him agayne as by the waye of reſtablyſſhing / wherof they had great ioy. At this anſwere makynge was Johan Lyon / and a .x. or .xii. of the moſte notable of his company / and whan they herde that the erle requyred / yt the whyte hattes ſhulde be layd downe / euery man held his peace. Than Johan Lyon ſpake / and ſayd. All ye good people that be here preſent / ye know and haue ſene but late / howe ye whyte hattes hath better kept your frauncheſſes / than outher reed or blacke hattes haue done or of any other colour. Be ye ſure: and ſay that I ſayd it / aſſoone as ye whyte hattes be layde downe / by the ordynaunce that the erle wolde haue it ſo / I wyll nat gyue for all your fraūcheſſes after nat thre pens. The whiche wordꝭ blynded ſo ye people / that euery man departed thens / and the moſt parte went home to their houſes: & ſayde. Let them alone / John̄ Lyon ſay the trouthe: we haue nat ſene in hym but good and profitable for our towne. So the matter ſtode ſtyll in the ſame caſe. And Johan Lyon was than in more feare of his lyfe than he was before / and imagined anone as it fell after for he thought that Gylbert Mahewe hadde wrought ſome mater agaynſte hym & his company / in his laſt voiage with the erle / bycauſe therle made ſo amyable an anſwere. Than he thought to fynde ſome remedy / and ordayned and made ſecretely capitayns of the whyte hattes / as Senteners and Muquateners / and to them ſayd. ss / ſay vnto your cōpany: that they be day and nyght purueyed redy / and aſſoone as they knowe or here any mouyng / lette them come to me / for it were better we ſlewe than to be ſlayne / ſythe we haue begon ſo farre. and as he ordayned ſo it was done euery man redy.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the whyte hattes ſlewe the bayly in the market place / and of the goodꝭ and howſes of maryners that were diſtroyed / and of the great brullynge that was than in Gaunt. Cap. CCC. .l.
            
               IT was nat long after / but that the baily of Gaunt Roger Dauterne came too Gaunt with a two hundred horſe / and ordayned to do as the erle and Gylbert Mahewe and his bretherne had deuyſed. The bayly with two hūdred men that be brought with hym / came downe a longe the ſtretes with the erles baner in his hande. And whan he came in to the market place he reſted / and ſet the baner before him. Than anone drue to him Gylbert Mahewe and his brethern and the ruler of the meane craftꝭ. It was ordayned that his men of armes ſhulde go to Johan Lyons houſe / and to take him as chiefe ruler of the whyte hattes / and a .v. or ſire other of his company / of thē that were mooſt culpable / and they to haue ben brought to the caſtell of Gaūt / and ther to haue had their heedes ſtryken of. Johan Lyon who thought no leſſe / and was well aduyſed of this dede / for he had ſpyes and watcheſſe in euery corner of the towne. He knewe well of the comynge of the bayly (& knewe for

certayne / and ſo dyd all the whyte hattes) y• the ſame iourney was ſet for them. they all drewe togyder be tymes / and came to Johan Lyons howſe / who was redy in the ſtrete abydyng for them. So there came .x.. than .xx. and euer as they came they fell in aray in the ſtrete / & whan they were aſſembled to the nombre of four hundred. Than John̄ Lyon departed as fyrſe as a lyon / and ſayd. let vs go on theſe traytours that wyll betray ye good towne of Gaunt. I thought well that all y• ſwete wordes that Gylbert Mahewe brought vs the laſt daye fro the erle / was but diſceyte and diſtructyon for vs / but I ſhall make them repent it. Than he and his company went a great paſe / and alweys his nombre encreaſed / for there were dyuers that fell to his company that hadde no whyte hattes / but they 
                  •
               ryed treaſon treaſon / & came about by a ſtrayt lane in to the market place / where as the 
                  •
               ayly was repreſentyng y• erles parſon. And aſſoone as Gylbert Mahewe and his bretherne ſawe Johan Lyon come in to the place / they fledde a way as faſt as they myght / and ſo dyd all other except ſuche as ye bayly brought with him. As ſoone as John̄ Lyon was come in to the place / the capytayne of the whyte hattes / with agreat company with hym / came to ye bayly / and with out any wordeſpekyng / they toke and caſt him to the erthe / & ſlewe him there. And than the erles baner was caſt downe to the grounde / and torne all to peaces / & they touched no man there but the bayly. And than they came all aboute John̄ Lyon. And whan the erles men ſawe the bayly deed / and the erles baner all to torne / they were greatly abaſſhed / and ſo toke their horſes and voyded out of the towne.
            
               YE maye well knowe: that Gylbert Mahewe and his bretherne / who were enemyes to John̄ Lyon wer nat well aſſured of thē ſelfe in their owne houſes / wherfore they departed as faſt as they myght / and voyded ye towne one after a nother / and left behynde them wyfꝭ / chyldren / and herytages / and went aſſoone as they myght to the erle / and ſhewed hym howe his bayly was ſlayne. Of the whiche tydynges therle was ſore diſpleaſed and gode cauſe why: for they had done hym great diſpyte / and ſayde and ſware. howe it ſhulde be greatly recompē
               ſed or euer that he returned agayn in to Gaunt and that they ſhuld neuer haue peace with him in enſample to all other townes. So Gylbert Mahewe and his bretherne / abode ſtyll with the erle. And Johan Lyon / and the whyte hattes perſeuered ſtyll in their outrage. Roger Dauterne was thus ſlayne / and all other departed / and y• none apered before the whyte hattes to be reuenged. than Johan Lyon / who entented to ouer ryn the maryners / bicauſe he loued thē nat ▪ ſayd. Sirs on a fore to theſe falſe traytours the Mahewes / that wolde this day
                  •
                diſtroy the frauncheſſe of the towne of Gaunt. And ſo they ran alonge the ſtretes to their houſes / but they foūde no body there / for they were departed. then they were ſought for in lodgynges / ſtrete by ſtrete / and chambre by chambre. And whan Johan Lyon harde howe none of them coulde be founde / he was ſore diſpleaſed. Than he gaue all their goodꝭ to his company and ſo all their houſes were pilled and robbed / ſo that no thynge was left. as though they had ben falſe traytours to ye towne / and whan they had done / they returned in to their owne howſes. And after that there was no officerr of the erles / nother within ye towne nor without / that ones ſayd to them they had done euyll. and as at that tyme they durſt nat / for the whyte hattes were ſo multiplyed / that none durſte diſpleaſe them. they went in the ſtretes by great companyes / but there were none that wolde mete with thē. It was ſayd in dyuers places in the towne and without alſo / howe they had ſome ſupportacyon of ſome officers / and riche men in Gain the whiche was lykely to be ſo / for who durſt begyn ſuche a ryot / as to enterpriſe to ſle the erles bayly / holdynge the erles baner in his handes / doyng his office / without ſome bolſterer or cō
               forter in their dede. And after that they multyplyed / and were ſo ſtrong in ye towne that they cared for no maner of ayde / but of thē ſelf Ther were none that durſt diſpleaſe them or withſay any thyng that they wolde do. This bayly Roger Dauterne was taken by ye freers and ſo buryed in their churche.
            
               WHan this thynge was thus fortuned / dyuers good men / ſage and ryche of the towne of Gaunt were rightſory / and began to ſpeke and murmure. And ſayd ech to other: howe they had done a great outrage / in ſleyng thus therles bayly / in doyng of his offyce. And how of right their lorde therle muſt nede be diſpleaſed with thē / and by all likelyhode neuer to haue reſt nor peaſe with him. & howe that theſe vngracyous people had brought all the towne in parell to be dyſtroyed / withoute god fynde

ſ
                  •
               me remedy. Howe be it for all theſe wordes / there were none that durſt fynde the meanes to correct or to amende thē / that had done this out rage. Johan de la Faucell who as than was in Gaūt / a man right ſage and greatly renomed / ſawe howe the mater was gone ſo farre. & ſawe howe outragiouſly they had ſlayne the bayly / he thought the mater ſhulde be yuell at length. And for the entent he ſhulde nat be ſuſpect with the erle nor with the towne: he departed fro the towne as priuely as he might / And wente to a fayre houſe that he had without Gaunt / & there abode / and fayned hym ſelfe ſicke: ſo that none ſpake with hym but his owne men. And dayly he herde tidynges out of Gaunt for he had left behynde hym the mooſt parte of his goodes / & his wyfe and his chyldren / ſtyll in the towne. Thus he diſſymuled for a ſeaſon.
         
         
            ¶ Howe .xii. burgeſſes of Gaūt were ſent to the erle of Flaūders / and how in the meane ſeaſon the white hattes pylled and brente / the fayre caſtell of Andrehen. Cap. CCC .li.
            
               THe gode men in Gaūt and riche and notable marchantes / who hadde within the towne their wyues / chyldren / and marchandyſe / and their heritages bothe within the towne and without / & had to lyue by / right honourably without dangere. They were nat well at their eaſe in their hertes / to ſe the beſyneſſe in Gaunt. they knewe well they hadde ſore forfayted agaynſt the erle their lorde / and thought well howe he wolde ꝓ dyde therin ſome remedy / and that they ſhulde be fayne to make amendes of their treſpaſſes / nowe 
                  •
               rels another tyme and they to put them ſelfe in the erles mercy. Wherfore they thought it better to do it be tymes / rather than to late. Than they toke counſayle togyder / to ſe howe they might vſe them ſelfe / to the profyte and honoure bothe of them and of the towne. To this counſayle was called Johan Lyon / and the capitayns of the whyte hattes / or elles they durſt nat haue done it. There were many wordꝭ and dyue
                  •
               s purpoſes deuyſed / finally they were all of one acorde that they of the counſayle ſhulde choſe .xii. notable perſons / and ſende thē to the erle requyringe hym of mercy: for the dethe of his bayly / whome they had ſlayne. And ſo by that meanes if they might haue peace they wolde be gladde: ſo that all myght be compriſed in the peace / and nothynge els demaunded of the erles parte. Than theſe burgeſſes were choſen that ſhulde go on this viage / and alwayes Johan Lyon ſayd: it is good to be in fauour with our lorde and prince. Howbeit he wolde the cō
               trary / and thought and ſayde to him ſelfe / that the mater was nat yet there / as he wolde bring it vnto. So theſe burgeſſes departed and wēt to Male beſyde Bruges to ye erle: who at their firſt comyng / made a cruell & 
                  〈…〉
               ell countenance agaynſt them of Gaunt. Theſe .xii. burgeſſes made a pytefull complaynt before the erle / and requyred hym / holdyng vp of all their handes / that he wolde haue mercy on theym. And excuſed them ſelfe of the dethe of the bayly / both thē of the lawe / and the notable perſons of ye towne and ſayd. Right dere ſir / acorde ſo to vs: that we maye bringe peace with vs to the towne of Gaunt / the whiche loueth you ſo well. And ſir / we promyſe you / that in tyme to come / this out rage ſhalbe ſo greatly recompenſed on thē that hath done it / and cauſed it to be done: ſo that ye ſhall be content. And that it ſhall be to all other townes enſample. Theſe .xii. burgeſſes made ſo humble requeſtes / that the erle ſomwhat refrayned his yre / and by meanes of other yt was made to hym: that he acorded and ordayned at 
                  •
               ycles of the peace. And therle pardoned all his yuell wyll that he had agaynſt them of Gaunt / by the amendes that ſhulde be made: but than there came to them other newe tidynges / as I ſhall ſhewe you here after.
            
               IOhan Lyon who was at Gaunt / thought all cōtrary to that he had ſayde in the coūſayle. Howe that it was good to be in fauoure with their lorde: he knewe in certaynte that he hadde ſo moche treſpaſſed agaynſt the erle / that his peace ſhulde neuer be made with him. And if he had any peace graunted him / he thought it ſhulde be but diſſymulacyon / & that it ſhulde coſt him his lyfe at laſte. So therfore he thought he hadde rather to be ſhamed / than to be in parell and in aduenture of his lyfe euery day. I ſhall ſhewe you what he dyde. Whyle the counſayle of the towne were with therle for peace / he aſſēbled togyder all the whyte hattes

and of all the craftes in Gaunte / ſuche as were of his accorde / and ſo came to his purpoſe by a ſubtell meanes / and thā ſayd to them all. Sirs ye know well / how we haue diſpleaſed our lorde therle of Flaunders / and howe we haue ſent vnto hym / we knowe nat as yet what reporte they wyll bring outher peace or warr / for ye erle is nat eaſy to be apeaſed. for he hath about him ſuche as wyll rather ſtyre hym to diſpleaſure / than to quyetneſſe / as Gylbert Mahewe & his brethern. ther is a hūdred hyndrers of ye peace / rather than one forderer therfore it were good that we toke good hede to our ſelfe / if we haue warre / to knowe who ſhall ayde vs / and howe we ſhall get vs loue among you rulers / of ſuche a crafte and ſuche a craft. Cauſe to morowe to come in to ye feldes as many men as ye can get / and ther we ſhall ſe howe able euery mā is and howe they be furnyſſhed / it is better to be aduyſed be tyme than to late / this ſhall coſte vs nothynge / and yet we ſhall be the more feared and drad. they all anſwered / and ſayd: it is well deuyſed / ſo let it be done. The next day they went out all at Bruges gate / & ſo went in to the feldes in a fayre playne without Gaunt / called Andre hen. Than Johan Lyon behelde them gladly: for they were a .x. thouſāde / and all well armed than he ſayd beholde: here is a goodly company ▪ and whan he had ben there a certayne ſpace and hadde gone all aboute them / than he ſayd. Sirs / I counſayle: let vs go to the erles place here by / ſyth we be ſo nere it / for it is ſhewed me howe he maketh there great prouiſyon / it may fortune to be great preiudice to oure towne of Gaunt. They all agreed therto / and ſo came to Andrehen the whiche was as than without any great kepynge or defence / ſo they entred and ſought all about the houſe / and a none this vngracious company pylled and robbed it of all that euer they founde there. There was within it moche ryches / for the erle had made there his warderobe. Johan Lyon made ſemblant / as thoughe he had bene ſore diſpleaſed / howe beit that was nat ſo as it apered. for whā they were departed fro the caſtell / and come agayne in to the felde they loked behynde thē / and ſawe all ye place a fyre / and that the fyre was more than in xx. places in the caſtell / ſo that it was nat in the peoples puyſſance to quenche it / nor alſo they had no great wyll to do it. Than Johan Lyon as though he had great mernayle (ſayd) howe cometh yonder fyre in my lordes howſe? And ſome anſwered / and ſayd. We can nat tell
                  •
                but by aduenture. well 
                  〈◊〉
                he we can nat thā 
               amend it / it is better that it be brent by aduenture / rather than by vs. And alſo all thynges conſidered / it was a perylous neighbour to vs / for my lorde might ther a ſet ſuche a garyſon / y• might haue done vs great domage / if we ſhulde haue warr with him. They all anſwered / and ſayd: ye ſay trouthe. And ſo retourned in to ye towne of Gaunt / and dyde no more that day / for they had done yuell inough and to moche: for it coſt after / mo than two hundred thouſande mennes lyues. And it was one of the princypall thyngꝭ / wherwith the erle was mooſt diſpleaſed. And therfore Johan Lyon dyd it / bycauſe he wolde haue no peace / for he knewe well / what ſoeuer treatie were made: he was likely to leſe his life This caſtell of Andrehen / hadde coſt the erle of Flaūders the bylding therof / two hūdred thouſande frankes / and he loued it beſt / of all ye houſes he had. The good men of Gaunt / who de
                  •
               yred to haue had peace: was of this aduenture right ſorou
                  •
               ull / howbeit they coude nat am
                  •
               de it / nor they durſt make no wordes therof. For the whyte hattes ſayde: howe the caſtell was brent by vnhappe / and none otherwyſe.
            THeſe tidynges came to the erle of Flaū
               ders / who was atte Male: and he that brought him worde / ſayd. ſir: knowe for trouthe / your fayre houſe of Andrehen / the whiche hath coſt you ſo moch / and that ye ſo well loued is brent. Brent 
                  〈◊〉
                the erle: ye ſurely ſir quod he. And howe ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                the erle? Sir by vnhappe as it is ſayde. A 
                  〈◊〉
                the erle / that dede ſhall neuer haue peace in Flaunders / as long as Johan Lyon lyueth. He hath couertly made it to be ſette a fyre / but it ſhall be derely bought. Than he made the burgeſſes of Gaunte to come before hym / and ſayde to them. A ye yuell and vnhappy people / ye pray me with ſwerde in the hāde. I haue graūted to you all yor requeſtes / as ye wyll your ſelfe / and now your folkes haue brēt my houſe / the whiche I loued among all other. Thynke they nat / that they haue done me dyſpyte ynoughe / in ſleynge my bayly for doynge his offyce / and to teare there my baner and to treade it vnder their fete. Knowe for trouth / ſauynge myne honoure / and that I haue gyuen you ſaue conduct / I ſhulde cauſe all your needꝭ to be ſtryken of. Departe out of my preſence / & ſay to yonder vnhappy people of Gaunte / that they ſhall neuer haue peace nor treatie with me tyll I haue of theym whome I wyll / to ſtryke of their heedes: and none ſhall haue mercy the burgeſſes / who were fullſor
                  •
               e of theſe tidyngꝭ:

bycauſe they were natte culpable of that dede / they began to excuſe them. but there was none excuſe wolde ſerue / for the erle was ſo ſore diſpleaſed that he wolde nat here themſpeke / and ſo made them to auoyde his preſence / and they toke their horſes to returne to Gaunt / and ſhewed howe well they had ſpedde / and had great peace and apoyntment / and this caſtell had nat bene brent. And alſo they ſhewed howe the erle gretly manaſſhed thē and ſend thē worde: how they ſhulde neuer haue peace with hym / tyll he had as many of the towne at his pleaſur / as he lyſt to haue. The good people of ye towne ſawe well: howe the mater went but yuell for them / and howe the whyte hattes had cauſed all / but there was none ſo hardy that durſt ſpeke it.
            ¶ Therle of Flaūders went fro Male to Lyle and all his houſholde: and than he ſente for all his lordes and knyghtes of Flaūders / ſuche as helde of hym / to haue their counſayle. howe he myght do in all his beſyneſſes: and howe to be reuenged of them of Gaunte / who hadde done him ſo many diſpyghtes. All the gentylmen of Flaunders ſware to hym to be good and true / as they ought to be to their lorde / without any meane / wherfore therle was greatly reioyſed. Than he ſent men to all his caſtelles / to Teremont Rypemont / Aloes / Gaures Andwarpe / and all about he made great prouiſion.
         
         
            ¶ Of the deth of Johan Lyon and of other capitaynes that the gauntoyſe made / & of the good townes in Flaū
               ders: that alyed them ſelfe to Gaunt. Cap. C C C .lii.
            
               IOhn̄ Lyon was greatly retoyſed / whā he ſaw that therle of Flaunders wolde take no peace with them of Gaunte / ſeyng he coude cōe to no peace. And he hadde than put ye towne of Gaunt ſo forewarde in warre / ye they muſt nedes than whether they wolde or nat / contynue the warre than he ſayd openly. Sirs / ye may ſe and vnderſtande / howe our lorde the erle of Flaūders prouydeth him ſelfe agaynſt vs: and wyll haue no peace with vs. Therfore I coūſayle you for the beſt that or we be more greued or opreſſed / let vs knowe what townes in Flaunders wyll take our parte. I dare anſwere for theym of the towne of Graūtmont / that they wyll nat be agaynſt vs / but take our parte. And in lykewyſe ſo wyll they of Courtray / for they be within our frauncheſſe: and Courtraye is oure chambre. But beholde here thē of Bruges / who be great and prowde / for by thē all this mater was fyrſt moued. It is good ye we go to them ſo ſtrong / that other by fayreneſſe or by rygour: we may bring them to our acorde / they all ſayd: it were good it were ſo. Than by proceſſe of tyme / all ſuche as ſhulde go in this iourney were made redy / and ſo departed fro Gawnte aboute a .ix. or. 
                  〈◊〉
               . thouſande men / and had with them great caryages. And ſo laye the fyrſt nyght at Donſe and the next mornyng they aproched Bruges / and ſo came within a lytell leage therof. Than they araynged themſelfe in the feldes / and ſet them ſelfe in ordre of batayll / and their caryagꝭ behynde them. Than Johan Lyon ordayned / that a certayne of the rulers of dyuers craftes ſhulde go to Bruges / & to knowe their entētes. And ſo they went to Bruges and founde the gates faſt ſhytte and well kept / and there they ſhewed thentent / wherfore they were come thyder / the kepers ſayd they wolde go gladly / & ſhewe their myndes to ye borough maiſters and chefe rulers of their towne / and ſo they dyd / than the rulers anſwerd / go and ſhewe theym howe we wyll go to coūſayle and take aduyſe in this mater / ſo they returned and ſhewed their anſwere / and whan Johan Lyon harde that aunſwere / he ſayd / auaunce forewarde to Bruges / if we a byde tyll they take counſayll we ſhall nat entre but with moche payne / it is better that we aſſayle them or they take counſayll / wherby they ſhall be ſodēly taken. This purpoſe was kept / and ſo the gauntoyſe came to the barryers and dykes of Bruges. Johan Lyon with the formaſt mounted on a blacke courſer / and incontynent he alyghted / & toke an axe in his hande / and whan they ye kept the barryers / who were nat ſtronge inough to make defence / ſawe the gauntoyſe aproche redy to gyue aſſaut. They went in to the ſtretes of the towne / and in to the market place and cryed euer as they went. be holde here the gaūtoyſe redy at the gate / go to youre defence / for they arreredy to the aſſaute. Than they of ye towne who were aſſembled to gyder to haue gone to coūſayll / were ryght ſore abaſſhed / and had no leyſar to ſpeke to gyder / to ordayn for their beſyneſſe / and the moſt part of the comynaltie / wolde that the gates ſhulde haue ben opened / and it behoued ſo to be / or els it had ben yuell with the ryche men. Than the

borough mayſters & rulers of the towne with other went to the gate / where as the gauntoys were redy apperelled to make aſſaut. The borough mayſters and rulers of Bruges / who had the gouernynge of the towne for that day / opened the wycket to ſpeke with Johan Lyon / and ſo opened ye barryers and the gate to treat. And ſo long they ſpake togyder / that they were good frendes / & ſo entred in all toguyder. And Johan Lyon rode by the borough mayſter / the whiche became hym well. He was hardye and couragyous / and all his men clene armed folowed hym. It was a fayre ſight to ſe them entre in good ordre / and ſo came to the market place / and there he araynged his men in the ſtreres. And Johan Lyon helde in his hande a whyte warderere.
            SO bytwene them of Gaunt and of Bruges ther was made an alyance & ſworn alwayes to be good frendes togyder. and that they of Gaunt myght ſomou thē and lede them whyder ſo euer they wolde. And anone after ye the gauntoyſe were arnynged about the market place. John̄ Lyon and certayne capitayns with him / went vp in to the hall / and ther made a crye / for the good towne of Gaunt: cōmaundynge / that euery man ſhulde drawe to his lodgyng fayre and eaſely / and vnarme them with out noyſe or mouyng / on payne of their needes and that no man diſlodge other / normake no noyſe in their lodging / wherby any ſtrife ſhuld ryſe / on the ſame payne. and alſo that no man take any thynge fro another / without he paye therfore incontynent / on the ſayd payne. This crye ones made: than there was another crye made for the towne of Bruges / that euery man ſhulde mekely and agreable / receyue the gauntoyſe in to their houſes and to mynyſter to thē vytaylles / acordynge to the comen price of the towne / and that the pryce ſhulde nat be reyſed in no maner of thyng / nor no noyſe to be made or debate moued: & all theſe thynges to be kept on payne of their heedꝭ. Than euery man went to their houſes / and ſoo thus ryght amyably they of Gaunt were with them of Bruges two dayes. And there they alyed and bounde them ſelfe eche to other ſurely. Theſe oblygacyous were writen and ſealed: and on the thirde day / they of Gaunt departed and went to the towne of Dan / where the gates were ſet open againſt their comyng. And there they were curteſly receyued / and taryed there two dayes. Than ſodenly a ſekneſſe toke John̄ Lyon / wherwith he ſwelled / and the ſame nyght that ye ſyknes toke hym / he ſupped with great reuyll / with the damoſels of the towne. Wherfore ſome ſayde: he was ther poyſoned / wherof I knowe nothyng nor I wyll nat ſpeke to far therin. but I knowe well / the next day that he fell ſycke / at nyght he was layed in a lytter and caried to Ardenburg he coude go no farther / but there dyed. wherof they of Gaunte were ryght ſorie / and ſore diſmayed.
            OF the dethe of Johan Lyon / all his enemyes were ryght gladde / & his frēdes ſory. and ſo he was brought to Gaunt / and bycauſe of his dethe all the hooſt returned. Whan the tidyngꝭ of his dethe came to Gaunt / all the people were right ſory / for he was well beloued: except of ſuche as were of the erles parte. All the clergy came agaynſte him / & ſo brought him in to the towne with great ſolempnyte / as though it had bene the erle of Flaunders. & ſo he was buryed right honorably in the churche of ſaynt Nycholas / & there his obſequy was done. yet for all the deth of this Johan Lyon / the alyances and promyſes made bytwene them of Gaunt / and of Bruges: brake nat / for there were good hoſtages in the towne / wherfore it helde. Of the dethe of this John̄ Lyon / the erle was ryght glad / and ſo was Gylbert Mahewe and his bretherne / and the rulers of the meane craftes in Gaunt / and all ſuche as were of the erles parte. Than the erle made ſorer prouyſion than he dyde before in all his caſtelles and townes / and he ſent to the towne of Ipre / a great nombre of knightes and ſquiers / out of ye lyberties of Lyſle and Doway / and ſayd. howe he wolde haue reaſon of Gaunt. And anone after the dethe of Johan Lyon / all they of Gaunte aduyſed / howe they coulde nat be longe without capitayns. Than they ordayned of the aldarmen of the craftes / and of the Synkquateners of the portes: four of them / acordyng to their aduyſe / mooſt hardy and cruell perſons / of all other. Fyrſt they chaſe Johan Drunaur / Johan Boulle / Raſe de Harſell / & Peter du Boys. And all the other people ſware to mayntayne and obey them / as their capitayns / on payne of their heedes / that dyde the contrary. and the capitayns ſware agayne to kepe and maynteyne the honour and frauncheſſes of the towne. Theſe foure capytayns ſtyrred them of Gaunt / to go to ypre and to Franke / to haue obeyſance of them / or els to ſlee thē all. So theſe capitayns and their people

departed fro Gaunt / in good array. They were a .xii. thouſande clene armed / and ſo came to Courtrey. They of Courtay ſuffred them to entre in to their towne without daunger / for it parteyned to the fraūches of Gaunt / and there toke their eaſe two dayes. and ye thirde day departed and went to Ipre / and toke with them two hūdred men of armes / with the croſbowes of Courtray / and ſo toke the way to Touront. And whan they came there / they reſted & tooke counſayle / and aduyſed to ſend thyder a thre or foure thouſand of their men / and the capitayne of the whyte hattes with thē to treat with them of Ipre / and the great batayle to folowe after to confort them / if nede requyred. As it was ordayned ſo it was done / and ſo came to ypre and whan they of Iperre / and ſpecyally they of the meane craftes knewe the comynge of them of Gaunt / they armed them / and toke the market place / and they were a fyue thouſāde. So ther the ryche men of the towne had no puyſſance. The knyghtes that were there in garyſon ſet by the erle / went ordynatly to the gate of Touront / where as the gauntoyſe were without / deſirynge to haue fre entre. The knyghtes and ſquires were redy raynged before the gate and ſhewed good defence / nor in dede the gaūtoyſe had neuer entred without great domage / but that the auncyent craftes of the towne agaynſt the knyghtes wyll / wolde that the gauntoyſe ſhulde entre. The men of the towne went out of the market place / and ſo came to the gate / the whiche the knyghtes kept / and ſayd. Sirs open the gate: let our frēdes and neyghbours of Gaunt entre / we wyll they ſhall entre in to our towne. The knightes anſwered / yt they ſhulde nat entre / and ſaid: howe they were ſtabliſſhed there by the erle of Flaunders to kepe the towne the whiche they wolde do to the beſt of their powers. ſayng / howe it lay nat in the puiſſance of Gaunt to entre there. In ſomoche that wordes multiplyed in ſuche wiſe / bytwene the gentylmen and them of the towne / that at laſt they cryed. Sle and beate downe thē / they ſhall nat be mayſters of oure towne. There was a ſore ſcrimyſſhe and long endured in the ſtretes / the knyghtes were nat of ſufficyent force to reſyſt agaynſte them of the towne / ſo that there were fyue knyghtes ſlayne / wherof two were ſir Robert and ſir Thomas Hundrey / the which was great domage. And there was in great daunger ſir Henry Dautoynge / with moche payne ſome of the ryche men of the towne ſaued hym / and dyuers other. but the gate was ſette open and the gauntoiſe entred / and were lordes and maiſters of the towne / without domage of any hurt. And whan they had ben there two dayes / and taken ſurety of thē of the towne / who ſware in lyke maner and forme as they of Bruges / of Courtray / of Grantmont / and of Danne had done / and delyuered hoſtages for the ſame entent. Than they departed right courteſly / and ſo went agayne to Gaunt.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the gauntoyſe beſieged the towne of And warpe / & of the gret aſſaut they made at Teremond where as the erle lay. Cap. CCC .liii.
            
               THe erle of Flaunders / who lay at Lyle / vnderſtod howe they of Ipre were turned to the gauntoyſe parte. and that by y• meanes of thē of the meane craftes in the towne / he was ſore diſpleaſed / aſwell for the dethe of his knightes yt were ſlayne in the towne / as for other cauſes / howe be it / he ſayd. Well: if we haue loſt Ipre at this tyme / we ſhall recouer it agayne a nother tyme to their myſchiefe. for I ſhall ſtryke of ſo many of their heedes / that all other ſhall beware therby / and be abaſſhed. The erle ſpecyally entended to prouyde for ye towne of And warpe / both with prouiſion and good men of armes. For he ſuppoſed / that the gauntoyſe wolde come thyder and lay ſiege therto / for he thought it ſhuld be to him a great domage / if they were lordes of that towne. For therby they ſhulde haue the good ryuer of Leſcault / and the flete therofat their pleaſure. therfore therle sēt thyder a great nombre of knightes and ſquiers / of Flaunders of Heynalt / and of Arthoyſe. And ſo they were mayſters there / whyder they of yt towne wolde or nat. The capitayns of Gaunt / who were returned fro Ipre in to their towne agayn / herde howe therle made great prouiſion for ye towne of And warpe. Than they determyned to goo and lay ſiege therto / and nat to departe thens / tyll they had it / and ſlayn all them within / and beaten downe the gates and walles therof. ſo they made a cōmaundement in Gaunt / that euery man ſhulde be redy apparelled to go thyder / as their capytayns wolde lede them. To

whiche crye there was non wolde diſobey / and ſo charged tentes / pauilyons / and other prouiſions / and departed fro Gaunt / and came and loged before And warpe / in the fayre medowes a long by the ryuer of Leſcalte. and thre dayes after / came they of Bruges and lodged on the ſyde next their owne towne / and they brought with them great prouiſyons. Than came they of Ipre in great array / and they of Propringe / of Meſſanes / and alſo of Grantmont. The flemynges there before And warpe / were in nombre / mo than a hundred thouſande / and hadde made brydges of ſhyppes nayled toguyder on the ryuer of Leſcalte / to go one to another. The erle of Flaunders beynge at Lyſle / was in purpose to go to Teremont / for he hadde ſent in to Almayne / to Guerles / and in to Brabant / for a great nombre of knyghtꝭ and ſquiers / and ſpecially to ye duke of Mons his coſyn / who came to ſerue him / with a great nombre of knyghtes and ſquiers / and went in to Teremont / where he founde the erle of Flaūders / who was come thyder by y• fronters of Haynalt / and Brabant who were ryght ioyfull of his comynge.
            THus the ſiege contynewed before Andwarpe with many great aſſautes made by the flemynges / and ſcrimyſſhes nyghe euery daye / and manlye dedes of armes doone at the barryers / and men ſlayne and hurt. for the flemynges aduentured them ſelfe often tymes foliſſhely. So that often tymes by their pride / they were ſlayne and hurte. Within the towne ther were an .viii. C. ſpeares of knyghtes and ſquiers right valiant men. and alſo .vii. barōs as the lorde of Guyſtels / the lorde Uillers / the lorde Hullut / the lorde Scornayſe. flemynges and heno wayes / the lorde Danghen / the lorde Dantoing / the lorde Boſnell / ye lorde of Taux / the lorde of Gomegines / and the thre bretherne ſir Johan / ſir Dannyell / and ſir Joſſe / the lord of Stanburge / the lorde Carue / ſir Gerrarde of Marquelles / the lorde of Cohen / ſir Rafe Monteney / ſir Henry of Hamede / ſir Johan of Gres. And ſo many knightes that they were a hundred & fyue / and they made good watche / and hadde no truſt on them of the towne / and cauſed them to haue their wyfes and chyldren in to the mynſters and churches / and the burgeſſes to kepe their owne houſes / for feare of the gonnes and fyre / the which the flemynges caſt often tymes in to ye towne / to haue ſet the towne a fyre / wherfore they within cauſed the howſes to be couered with erthe / to the entent that the fyre ſhulde do no hurte.
            THis ſiege thus beynge before Andewarpe the flemynges and capitayns that were there / had knowledge howe their lorde the erle was at Teremonde / and the duke of Mons his coſyn with hym. than the gauntoyſe ſent a ſixe thouſand of their men to go thyder / and to gyue aſſaut to Teremonde / and Raſe of Harſell was their capitayne / and ſo they came on a tueſdaye at nyght / to a lytell village a leage fro Teremond by the ryuer of Ture / and there they lodged. The flemynges had ordayned a certayne nombre of ſhyppes to come downe the ryuer / & ſo to aſſayle it by water as well as by lande. And anone after mydnyght they armed / and made thē redy to fyght incōtynent / whan they were ones come to Teremonde. and ſo thought to take the lordes in their beddꝭ / and ſo they went forthe. But ſome men of the countre that were aduertyſed / howe the flemynges were goynge by night to Teremond / they went & gaue warnyng to the wachemen of Teremonde. Saynge / ſirs: take good hede / for certayne gauntoyſe lyeth this nyght nat farre hens / we can nat tell what they purpoſe to doo. Than the kepars of the gate went and ſhewed this to the knyght of the wach called ſir Terrey of Bredero a holandre. whan he knewe therof he toke the better hede & made the ſurer watche / and gaue warnyng therof to thē of the caſtell / & to euery houſe in ye towne / wher as the knightes were lodged. And at the poynt of the daye lyght / the flemynges came bothe by lande & by water / and were reoy to the aſſaute. And whan they of the towne and caſtell ſawe them aproche / than they began to ſownde their trompettes to awake all their company / and ſo there were the mooſt parte of all the knyghtes and ſquiers redy armed. And the erle who lay and ſlept in ye caſtell / whan he vnderſtode that the flemynges were come thyder to gyue hym aſſaut / he roſe and armed him and iſſued out of the caſtell / with his baner before him. The ſame tyme ther was with him / ſir Goſſuyn of Urle great bayly of Flaūders / and the lorde of Gau / ſir Gerard of Raſēghen / ſir Philyp of Mamynes and dyuers other / as ſir Philyp of Rungi burgonyon. all theſe lordes drewe vnder the exles baner / and went to the aſſaut / whiche was than begone ryght ferſe and cruell / for the flemynges had brought with them in their ſhyppes / gonnes and croſbowes / where with they ſhote ſo great quarelles / that whoſoeuer they hyt he dyed of the ſtroke. But agaynſt the ſhot

of quarelles / they within had a great nombre of paueſſes. and alſo the erle had within many good croſbowes the whiche dyde moche hurt amonge the flemynges. The duke of Mons was there with his baner before hym / and in his company there was the lorde of Bredero / ſir Joſſe and ſir Terey de la ware / ſir Wyuant of Chuperoyſe and dyuers other / euery man doynge ryght well their deuoyre. And at a nother gate within / there was ſir Robert Dalle / ſir Johan Uillayne / and the lord of Wyndſcot with ſir Robert marſhall. This was a ſore aſſaute / bothe by lande and by water / the flemynges had many hurte / and ſo ther were of bothe partes: howe beit mooſt of the flemynges. for they aduentured them ſelfe ſomtyme foliſſhly. This aſſaut endured without ceaſe / fro ye mornyng erly tyll it was none / and there was ſlayn a knyght of the erles parte / called ſir Hugh de Reny a burgonyon / which was great domage and ſore complayned / for by his hardyneſſe he was ſlayne. Without there was Raſe of Harſell / who dyde beare hym ſelfe right valiantly / with his wordes aſwell as with his dedes / whiche greatly encoraged the gauntoyſe.
         
         
            ¶ Of the aſſautes made before Andwarpe / & of the peace that was made bytwene the flemynges / and therle of Flāders by the means of the duke of Burgoyne / by his great wyt and aduyſe. Cap. CCC .liiii.
            
               THan at afternoon the aſſawte ſeaſed / for Raſe of Harſell ſawe well / how they traueyled in vayne / & howe ye within Teremond there were many good and valyantmen of armes / wherby he parceyued it was nat eaſy to get them / and alſo his men began to be wery. Than he ſowned the retrayte / and withdrewe a long the ryuer fayre and eaſly / and toke agayne their nauy / and ye next day went agayne to Andwarpe. The ſiege lay long ſtyll there / and the flemynges that were there / were lordes of the feldes / and of the ryuer. ſo that no prouiſyon coude entre in to the towne / without great parell / of the ſyde towarde Haynaulte. howe be it ſomtyme vitaylers wolde aduenture them ſelfe for wynnyng: whan the hooſt was a ſlepe / to put them ſelfe within the bailes of Andwarpe / and ſo had in to the towne. And amonge the aſſautes that were made / there was one that endured a hole day / and there were made dyuers newe knyghtes within the towne / of Heynalt / of Flaūders / and of Artoyſe. and ſo the newe knyghtes came and fought with the gauntoyſe at the barryers. There was a good ſcrimyſſhe and many a feate of armes doone / and dyuers flemynges ſlayne and hurte / but they made lytell therof / for lytell they feared the dethe / wherby they aduentured them ſelfe the more largely. for whan they that were before were ſlayne & hurte / they that folowed wolde pull them backe / and ſette themſelfe before & ſhewed hardy viſage. Thus contynued that aſſaut / whiche endured tyll it was nere nyght. Than they of Andwarpe retourned in to their towne / and cloſed their gates and barryers / and than buryed them that were dedde / and dreſſed buſely them that were hurte.
            THe flemynges that lay thus at ſiege before Andwarpe / truſted by their ſege to cōquere the towne / and them that were within by famyne or aſſaut. for they knewe well their ſiege lay ſo rounde about / that nothynge coude come in to the towne / nother by lande nor water. and the longe lyeng there coulde nat greue them moche / bycauſe they were in their owne countrey / and nere to their owne houſes / wherfore they lacked nothyng that was nedefull for them / for they hadde vitayle / and euery thynge there largely / & at a better price / than they ſhuld haue had outher in Bruges / or in Gaunt. The erle of Flaunders / who ſawe well ye there was in the towne a great nombre of knyghtes and ſquiers / douted greatly of one poynt / and that was / leſt by long ſege they ſhulde be famyſſhed within. wherfore he wolde gladly that ther had ben ſome honourable treaty for him / for in dede the warre thus with his men / greued him greatly / it was neuer with his good wyll. And alſo the lady hys mother Margarete / counteſſe of Arthoyſe / was ryght ſory to ſe it. And blamed the erle therfore / and toke moche payne to appeaſe it. This counteſſe lay in the cytie of Arras. Than ſhe wrote all the mater to the duke of Burgoyne / to whome the herytage of Flaū
               ders ſhulde fall after the dethe of therle / by reaſon of the lady Margaret his wyfe. The duke

who was well informed of all the mater / for euery daye he harde tidynges. He went to Arras and his counſayle with hym / as ſir Guy de la Tremoyll / ſir John̄ of Uyen admyrall of Frā
               ce / ſir Guy of Pountayllers / and dyuers other. The counteſſe of Artoyſe was glad to ſe them / and ſhewed the duke right ſagely all the warr / bytwene the erle of Flaunders her ſonne / and his countrey. ſayeng / howe it greatly diſpleaſed her / and ought to diſpleaſe euery reaſonable man. And howe that a great nombre of honourable men were within the towne of Andwarpe in great ꝑell: deſiryng therfore the duke for goddeſſake to fynde ſome remedy. the duke anſwered / and ſayd: He was bounde ſo to do / and howe that he wolde do the beſte of his power. Than anone after the duke deꝑted fro Arras / and went to Tournay / where he was receyued with great ioy / for they of Turnay deſyred greatly to haue peace / bycauſe of their marchandiſe to and fro / on the ryuer of Leſcalt / the whiche was as than cloſed fro them. The duke of Burgoyne ſent the abbot of ſaynt Martens to the hooſt before Andwarpe / to knowe if the capitayns of Gaunte wolde fall to any treaty. The abbot brought worde a gayne to the duke of Burgoyn / that for his loue they wolde be cō
               tent. And ſo ye duke gaue ſalue conduct to them to the bridge of Roone / and the flemynges in likewyſe to him. This treatie endured fro the mornynge tyll nyght / for the duke came to the bridge of Rone / to ſpeke with the flemynges. than the duke retourned to Tournay / and the erle in his company / who went in and out with hym. This treatye endured .xv. dayes / for it was harde to fynde meanes of peace / bycauſe the flemynges wolde haue had Andwarpe / to the entent to haue had it beaten downe / but the duke and his counſayle / wolde in no wyſe conſent therto. The flemynges / who were great / fierſe / and orgulous / and ſet nothyng by peace / for they reputed Andwarpe and all tho within in a maner yelded / Nor they coulde nat go out without their daunger. And the duke of Burgoyne / who ſawe the flemynges ſo proude and ſo harde to fall to any treatie hadde great maruayle what they ment therby. And on a day he gate a ſaue conduct for his marſhall to go in to the towne / to ſpeke with the knyghtes there. ſo the marſhall of Burgoyne went to Andwarpe and founde there the company in good poynt. howe beit they had great nede of ſome thyngꝭ / yet they ſpake valiantly / and ſayd. Say for vs to the duke of Burgoyne / that lette him make none euyll bargayn for feare of vs / for thanked be god we are in good poynt / and haue no feare of our enemyes. This aunſwere pleaſed greatlye the duke of Burgoyne / who was ſtyll at the bridge of Rone. Howe be it for all that / he lefte nat his purſute for peace. To ſay trouthe / they of Bruges and of Ipre with thē of Frāke were wery / and ſore anoyed / for they ſawe well the wynter aproched. ſo they ſhewed their myndes in counſayle / and ſayd: howe the duke of Burgoyne hadde taken great laboure / and is come hyder to vs / and hath offered vs / that all thynges ſhulde be pardoned. And the erle our lorde to returne to Gaunt and to abyde ther with vs and neuer to make ſemblant of any thyng paſt. theſe thinges ought to enclyne vs to peace / and truely we ought to knowe our lorde / and nat to take fro him his herytage. Theſe wordes apeaſed moche them of Gaunte / and accorded to their ſayeng. And on a daye the duke of Burgoyne gaue a dyuer to them of Gaunt / of Bruges / of Ipre / and of Courtray. and ye ſame day it was concluded that the ſiege ſhuld be reyſed and good peace to be in Flaūders / bytwene the erle and his men. And the erle to pardon euery thynge / and nothynge to reſerue without any excepcy on or diſſymulacion. & the erle to come and dwell in Gaunt / and within a yere they of Gaunt / to make agayne the caſtell of Dandrehen / the whiche the gauntoyſe hadde brente: as the noyſe ranne. And for the ſure confyrmacyon of all theſe thynges / Johan Prunaux ſhuld go to Courtray with the duke / and there charters of the peas ſhuld be made and ſealed. and ſo on this clauſe the duke retourned to Tournay. And Johan Prunaux / and Johan Boulle abode ſtyll in the hooſt. The next day the peace was cryed bytwene bothe partyes / and ſo the ſiege brake vp / and euery man went home too their owne howſes / and the erle gaue lycence to all his ſowdyers to departe. And thanked the ſtrangers of the good ſeruyce / y• they had done to him. and ſo than he went to Lyſle / ther to finyſſhe vp the alyances / that his brother of Burgoyne hadde made. And ſome of the countreys ther about ſayd: that this was a peas with two vyſages. ſayng howe they wolde rebell agayn ſhortely / & that the erle of his parte was agreed to the peace / but to the entent to haue out of danger the noble knightes and ſquiers that were in Andwarpe in great parell.
            
               
               IOhan Prunaux after the departynge fro the ſiege of Andwarpe / he went to Tournay / and ther the duke of Burgoyn mad him good there / and there was made parfyt all the ordynaūce of the peace / and the duke of Burgoyne / and ye erle of Flaunders ſealed therto. & than Johan Prunaux returned to Gaunt and ſhewed howe he had ſpedde. The duke of Burgoyne had ſo ſore deſyred them of Gaunt / and ſhewed ſo ſwete wordes to them / that they were cōtent to kepe the peace ferme and ſtable / bytwene them and And warpe. For at the reyſyng of the ſege / the gauntoyſe wolde haue had two gates of / the towne beaten downe / and the walles bytwene / bycauſe it ſhulde alwayes be open for them / to entre atte their pleaſure. And whan the erle of Flaunders had ben a certayne ſpace at Lyſle / and that the duke of Burgoyne was gone in to Fraunce. Than he went to the towne of Bruges and there taryed a longe ſeaſon after / & ſhewed couertlye great diſpleaſure to certayn burgeſſes of the towne / but he made none other prouiſyon among them. his diſpleaſure was bycauſe they hadde ſo ſoone forſaken him / and turned to the ſeruyce of thē of Gaunt. The burgeſſes excuſed them / as trouthe was / that it was nothyng in their faute / but the faut was in them of the meane craftes / who wolde nedes be alyed to them of Gaunt / whan John̄ Lyon cāe thyder. So ye erle paſſed his diſpleaſure aſwell as he myght / howe be it he thought neuer the leſſe.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of hym and of them of Flaunders / and let vs retourne to the buſyneſſes of Bretayne.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Bretayne returned out of Englande into Bretayne at the requeſt of his men / and of the wyll of the engliſſhe men for the maryage of their yonge kynge of Englande. Cap. CCC .lv.
            
               YE haue herde here before: how the duke of Bretayne was in Englande / with kynge Richarde and his vncles / who made hym right good chere / & his lande was in warre and in great trouble. For the frenche kyng had ſent thyder his cōſtable / with a great nombre of men of armes / who were about Pōt Toyſon / and about Mount ſaynt Mychaell. And made warre to the countre / cyties / & good townes in Bretayne. Wherfore all the countre greatlye deſyred the preſence of the duke their lorde / and they had ſent to hym dyuers meſſangers and letters / but he durſt nat truſt all that: tyll the prelates and barones of Bretayne / and all good townes murmured therat / and ſayde. We haue ſent for our duke by letters dyuers tymes / and alwayes he excuſeth him ſelfe. In the name of god quod ſome / he hath good cauſe ſo to do: for we ſende for hym to ſimply. It were well ſytting / that we ſent to hym a knight or .ii. dyſcrete and ſage / in whome he myght truſte: and they to ſhewe him playnly / the ſtate of this countre. This purpoſe was well alowed & holden. and ſo two valyant knightes were choſen to go in to Englande / as ſir Geffray of Quareſmell and ſir Euſtace Houſey. And at the deſyre and requeſt of the prelatꝭ and barons / they aparelled them ſelfe to go in to Englande. & ſo toke ſhippyng at Cone / and had wynde at wyll and arryued at Hampton. And fro thens they rode tyll they cāe to London / wher they found the duke of Bretayne and the ducheſſe / and ſir Robert Canoll / who receyued them with gret chere and ioye. The knyghtes than ſhewed to the duke their lorde / all the ſtate and diſpoſycion of his countre: and howe his people deſyreth to haue him cōe home. And delyuered him letters of credence / fro the barons and prelates and good townes of Bretayne. The duke beleued well theſe knyghtꝭ and the letters alſo / and had great ioye: and ſaid / howe he wolde ſhewe the mater to the kyng and to his vncles / and ſo he dyde. And whan the kyng of Englande and his vncles were enformed of all theſe maters / & howe all the countre of Bretayne: prelates / barons / and good townes. Except Claquy / Cliſſon / Rohen / Lauall / and Rochefort / had ſente for their lorde ye duke: deſyring hym to returne into his owne countre. Than the kyng and his vncles / ſayde. Sir: it is beſt ye go in to youre owne countre / ſyth ye be thus deſyred: & mayntayne yourſelfe amonge your noble men. And ſir / we ſhall ſende you men of warre and ſuche conforte / that they ſhalbe able to kepe your frō
               ters agaynſt your enemyes. And leaue the ducheſſe your wyfe here behynd you / with her mother and brethern / and go you and make warr agaynſt your ennemyes. Of theſe wordes the

duke was greatly reioyſed / and made hym redye.
            
               ANd ſhortely after / it was ordayned for his departynge at Hampton. And ſo he toke leaue of ye kynge and of his vncles / of my ladye princeſſe / and of the ducheſſe his wyfe. And at his departyng / made a great alyance with the kyng of Englande / and ſware to hym by his faythe / that if he were ſhortely conforted by the englyſſhmen. He wolde alwayes abyde with them / and do the beſt of his power / to tourne his countre englyſſhe. And the kyng promyſed him / that he ſhulde euer fynde the englyſſhemen redy to helpe hym / in what ſoeuer maner he wolde deſyre. And ſo he departed out of Englande and ſir Robert Canoll with him / and the two knyghtes that were come thyder for hym / and one hundred men of armes & two hundred archers / and toke ſhippyng at Hampton. And ſo ſayled to the porte of Guerrande / where they toke lande / and ſo rode to Uennes / where he was receyued with great ioye: and all the countrey was gladde / whan they knewe that he was come home. The duke refreſſhed hym there a fyue dayes / and thanne he went to Nauntes. Thyder came to ſe hym: barownes prelates / knightes and ſquyers / ladyes and damoſelles: offryng hym their ſeruyce / and putte them ſelfe vnder his obeyſance. Complayning greatlye of the frenchmen / and of the frenche cō
               ſtable who lay about Reynes / and dyde moche hurte in the countrey. The duke apeaſed them and ſayd: my frendes / I ſhall haue ſhortly comforte out of Englande / for without ayde of Englande / I can nat well defende my countrey agaynſt the frenchmen / for they are to bygge for vs / ſeynge we be nat all one in our owne countrey. And whan the ayde that the kynge of England ſhall ſende vs / be ones come: if they haue done vs wronge / we ſhall quyte them agayne. Of theſe wordes were right ioyfull / all tho that were of the duke of Bretayns parte.
            ¶ The ſame ſeaſon about ſaynt Andrues tyde ther dyed ſir Charles of Boeſme / kyng of Almayne and emperour of Rome. And whyle he was lyueng / he dyde ſo moche: what for golde and ſyluer / and great alyances that he hadde. That the electours of the emperour / ſware and ſealed to hym / that after his diſceaſſe / to make his ſonne emperour. And to ayde hym / to kepe the ſiege before Ays / and to abyde with him agaynſt all men / that wolde deny hym. So that whan he was deed / than Charles his ſonne as emperoure: wrote hym ſelfe kyng of Almayne / of Boeſme / and kynge of the romayns.
            THe ſame ſeaſon ther was great coūſaile in Englande / amonge the kynges vncles / and the prelates and barons of the realme for to mary their yonge kyng Richarde of England. And thenglyſſhmen wolde gladly haue had hym to ben maryed in Heynalt / for loue of the good lady quene Philyp / wyfe to kyng Edwarde the thirde. Who was ſo good and ſo gracyous a lady / for all the realme large and honorable / who was come out of Heynaulte: but as than the duke Aubert / had no doughters to mary. The duke of Lancaſtre / wolde haue hadde the kyng his nephewe / to haue hadde his eldeſt doughter / my lady Blanche of Lācaſtre to his wyfe. But the realme wolde in no wyſe conſent therto / for two reaſons. The firſt / bycauſe the lady was his coſyn germayne / the whiche was to nere of blode / to mary toguyder. The other cauſe was / they wolde the kynge ſhulde marry withoute the realme / to haue therby more alyaunce. Than was there ſpekyng of the doughter of the kynge of Boeſme and Almayne / and emperour of Rome. And to that aduyſe euery man was agreed. Than to go in to Almayne / to treate for this mariage / was ſēt a right ſage and a valyant knight / who had ben the kynges mayſter / and was nere of counſayle alwayes with the prince of Wales the kynges father / called ſir Symonde Burle. And ſo was ordayned for hym / all thynges neceſſarie for his iourney and than he departed and arryued at Calayes. and ſo to Grauellyng / and than to Bruſelles: and there he founde duke Uyncelant of Brabant and duke Aubert / the erle of Bloyes and the erle of ſaynt Poule / ſir Wylliam Mā
               lye. And a great nōbre of knightes of Heynalt / of Brabant / and of other places. For ther was a great feeſt and iuſtynge kepte: therfore there were all theſe lordꝭ assēbled. The duke of Brabant and the ducheſſe / for the kyng of Englandes ſake / receyued the knyght ryght honourably. And whan they knewe the cauſe / wherfore he went in to Almayne / they were right gladde therof: and ſayde. That it ſhulde be a goodlye maryage / bytwene the kynge of Englande and their nephue. And at the knyghtes departyng / they ſent letters by hym to the kyng of Almayne / ſhewynge hym howe they hadde great deſyre and affectyon / that this maryage ſhulde

take a good effecte. Than the knyght departed fro Bruſelles and went to Louuayne / and ſo to go to Colayne.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen that were ſent in to Bretayne / were tourmented on the ſee: and howe the gaūtoiſe deſyred to haue the erle of Flaunders their lorde / to cōe dwell in their towne of Gaunt. Cap. CCC .lvi.
            
               THe ſame ſeaſon it was ordayned in Englande / by the kyng and his counſaile: that two hundred men of armes and foure hundred archers ſhulde goo in to Bretayne. And the chyefe capitayne of that iourney ſhulde be ſir Johan Arū
               dell / and with hym ſhulde go ſir Hugh Caurell ſir Thomas Banyſtre / ſir Thomas Tryuet / ſir Water Pole / ſir Johan Bourchyer / ye lorde Ferres / and the lorde Baſſet. All theſe knyghtes drewe to Hampton / and whan they hadde wynde they entred in to their ſhyppes / and departed. The firſt day / the wynde was reaſonable good for thē / but agaynſt night / the wynde tourned contrary to thē / and whyder they wolde or nat / they were driuen on the coſt of Cornwall. The wynde was ſo ſore and ſtreynable / that they coulde caſte none ancre: nor alſo they durſt nat. In the mornyng the wynde brought them in to the yriſſhe ſee: and by the rage of the tempeſt thre of their ſhyppes braſt and wente to wrake / wherin was ſir Johan Arundell / ſir Thomas Banyſtre / and ſir Hughe Caurell: & a hundred men of armes. Of the whiche hundred / fourſcore were drowned: and ſir Johan Arundell their capitayne was their peryſſhed / whiche was great domage. and ſir Hugh Caurell was neuer in his lyfe before / ſoo nyghe his dethe: for all that euer was in his ſhyppe excepte hym ſelfe and ſeuyn maryners / were all drowned. For he and the ſeuyn maryners that were ſaued / toke holde of tables & maſtes / and the ſtrength of the wynde / brought them to the ſandes. Howebeit / they hadde dronke waterr ynoughe: wherof they were ryght ſicke and yuell at eaſe. Out of this daunger eſcaped / ſir Thomas Tryuet and ſir Johan Bourchyer / the lorde Ferres / the lorde Baſſet / and dyuers other: but they were ſore tourmented & in gret parell. And after that this tempeſt was ceaſed they retourned agayne to Hampton / and went backe agayne to the kynge and his vncles / and recounted all their aduentures / wenyng to thē that ſir Hughe Caurell had ben drowned with the other. How be it that was nat ſo / for he was gone ſicke to London. Thus brake vp that iorney / wherby the duke of Bretayne coude haue no comforte of the englyſſhemen / whiche was ryght contraryous to hym. For all that ſeaſon and the wynter folowyng / the frēchmen made hym right ſore warre: and the bretons. As ſir Olyuer Clyſſon and his company / toke ye towne of Dynāt in Bretayne / by reaſon of veſſels and barges. And ſo the towne was pylled and robbed / and was kept agaynſt the duke a long ſeaſon after. ¶ Nowe lette vs retourne to the buſyneſſe of Flaunders.
            
               WHan ye peace was agreed bitwene the erle of Flaunders and them of Gaunt / by the meanes of the duke of Burgoyne / wherby he gat him ſelfe moche thanke in the countre. The entent and pleaſure of them of Gaūt was / to haue their lorde therle of Flaūders / to dwell with thē in Gaunt / and there to kepe his houſeholde. The erle alſo was counſayled by ye prouoſt of Hardebeque / and of thē that were nexte about hym to do ſo / wherby he ſhulde noriſſhe great loue / bytwene hym and them of Gaunt. The erle laye ſtyll at Bruges and came nat to Gaunt / wherof they had great marueyle / and ſpecially the good and rychmen of Gaunt / and ſuche as were ſage and wyſe: for they deſyred nothyng but peace. But the palyerdes & white hattes / and ſuche as deſyred rather ſtryfe and debate / they cared nothyng for the erles comynge. For they knewe well that yf he came / they ſhulde priuely be corrected at laſte / for the yuell dedes that they had done. Nat withſtandynge that they were in this doubte / yet they that had the gouernyng of the lawe / the coūſaylers and good men of the towne / wolde for any thynge / that he ſhulde come thyder / and that they ſhuld go and requyre him ſo to do. For they thought they had no ferme peace / without the erle came thyder. And ſo ther was ordayned .xxiiii. men to go to Bruges: to ſhewe to the erle the great affection that they had to haue him. and ſo they deꝑted honorably / as it aparteyned for them ye ſhulde go for their lorde: and it was ſayd to thē
               
by them of the towne. Sirs / retourne neuer agayne to Gaunt / without ye bring therle with you: for if ye do / ye ſhall fynde the gates cloſed agaynſt you. Thus theſe burgeſſes of Gaunt rode forthe towarde Brugꝭ / and bytwene Bruges and Donſay / they herde ſay: howe the erle was comynge to Gauute warde / wherof they were right ioyouſe. And they hadde nat ryden paſt a leage farther / but that they mette the erle in the feldes. Than the burgeſſes ſtode ſtyll on bothe ſydes of the waye / and ſo the erle and all his company paſſed through them. As he paſſed by / the burgeſſes enclyned them ſelfe ryght lowe and humbly / and made great reuerēce to the erle. The erle rode through them / without any great regardyng of them / but a lytell putte his hande to his hat / nor all they way / he made to theym no ſemblant. So the erle rode on the one ſyde / and the gaūtoiſe on the other / tyll they came to Donſe / and there they reſted: for the erle dyde dyne there. And the gauntoyſe wente to other lodgynges and dyned alſo.
            
               ANd after dyner / the gauntoyſe in good array / came to the erle & kneled aldowne before him / for therle ſat. And there they preſēted ryght humbly / the affection and ſeruyce of them of the towne of Gaūt. and ſhewed hym howe by great loue they of Gaunt / who deſyred ſo moche to haue hym with them / hath ſent them to hym. And ſir / at our departynge / they ſayde to vs: that it were but a folly for vs to retourne agayne to Gaunt / without that we brought you thyder with vs. The erle / who right well herde theſe wordes / helde his peace a certayne ſpace. And at laſt whan he ſpake: he ſayd fayre and ſoftely. Sirs / I beleue well it be as ye ſaye: and that dyuers of Gaunt deſyreth to haue me among them / but I haue marueyle of that they remembre nat / nor wyll nat remēbre of tyme paſt / what they haue ſhewed me. and I haue been to them ſo courteſſe
                  •
                meke and gentyll / in all their requeſtes. And I haue ſuffred to be putte out of my countrey / my gentylmen / whan they haue complayned of thē / to acquyte their lawe and iuſtyce. I haue alſo opyned dyuers tymes my priſons / to delyuer oute their burgeſſes / whan they haue deſyred it. I haue loued and honoured them / more than any other of my countre / and they haue done to me clene contrary. They haue ſlayne my baylye / and diſtroyed the houſes of my men / banyſſhed and chaſed away myne offycers / and brent ye houſe in the worlde that I loued beſte. Enforced my townes / and brought them to their ententes / & ſlayne my knightes in the towne of Ipre. And haue done ſo many treſ paſſes agaynſt me and my ſeignorie / that it is noyfull to me to recorde it. and I wolde I coude neuer thynke on it / but I do & ſhall do / whyder I wyll or nat. A ryght dere lorde / ſayd they of Gaunt / for goddes ſake neuer regarde it: ye haue all thynges ꝑdoned. It is trouthe quod the erle. for all my wordes / in tyme to cōe I wyll ye ſhalbe neuer the worſe. But I ſhewe it vnto you ſirs / for the great cruelties and felonyes / that I haue foūde in them of Gaunt. Than the erle apeaſed hym ſelfe and roſe vp on his fete and cauſed them to ryſe / and ſayde to the lorde of Ruyſelyers / who was by hym: go gette ſome wyne. So they of Gaunt dranke and departed to their lodgynges / and taryed there all that night / for ſo dyde the erle. And the next day all togyder / they rode to wardes Gaunt.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the erle of Flaūders entred in to the towne of Gaunt / and of his departynge thens / withoute knowledge of any of the towne. and howe the walles of Andwarpe were beaten downe / by the whyte hattes and their felowes. Cap. CCC .lvii.
            
               WHan they of Gaunt vnderſtode that the erle was comynge / they were right ioyfull / and came and met hym / ſome a fote and ſome a horſe backe. And they mekely enclyned thē ſelf lowe / and dyd hym reuerence: and he paſſed forthe / withoute and worde ſpekynge to any of them / and but a lytell enclyned his heed. And ſo came to his logynge / called the Poſterne / & there dyned / and had many preſentes gyuen him / by them of the towne. And there came to ſe him they of ye lawe of the towne / and humbly enclyned themſelfe to hym / as reaſon requyred: and the erle ſayd. Sirs / good peace requyreth nothyng but peace. Wherfore I wolde / that theſe whyte hattes were layd downe / and amendes to be made for

the dethe of my baylye for I am ſore requyred therin of all his lynage. Sir quod the men of lawe / it is ryght well our entent / that it ſhulde ſo be. And ſir / we requyre your grace with all humylyte / that it maye pleaſe you to morowe nerte / to come in to an open place / and there to ſhewe your entent to the people. And whā they ſe you / they wyll be ſo reioyſed / that they wyll do euery thynge that ye ſhall deſyre them / than the erle accorded to their requeſt. The ſame euenynge many folkes knewe in ye towne howe the erle ſhulde be the next mornyng by .viii. of the clocke in the market place / and there preche to the people. The good men were ryght ioyfull therof / but the foles and outragious people gaue no feare therof / and ſayd: howe they were preched inough / & howe they knewe well what they had to do. Johan Prunaux Raſe de Harſell / Peter Boyſe / and Johan Boule capitayns of the whyte hattes douted leſt all that mater ſhulde be layd on their charge / and than they ſpake togyder / and ſent for ſuche of their company as were moſt outragious / and worſt of all other / and ſayd to them. Sirs / take hede this nyght and to morowe & lette your armure be redy / and what ſo euer be ſayde to you / put nat of your whyte hattes / and be all in the market place to morowe by .viii. of ye bell / but make no ſtyrring nor ſtryfe / without it be begon on you / and ſhewe all this to your companyes / or els ſende thē worde therof. They ſayd it ſhulde be done / and ſo it was. In the morning at .viii. of the cloke they came in to the market place / nat all togyder / but in dyuers plumpes. The erle came to the market place a horſebacke / a cō
               panyed with his knyghtes and ſquyers / and them of the lawe of the towne / and by him was Johan Faucyll and a .xl. of the moſt rycheſt of the towne. therle as he came a long the market place / he caſt his eyes on the whyte hattes / and was in his mynde right ſore diſpleſed with thē and ſo a lighted and all other. Than he mounted vp in to a wyndowe and leaned out therat / and a reed clothe before him: And there he began to ſpeke ryght ſagely / ſhe wynge them fro poynt to poynte: the loue and affectyon that he hath had to them or they diſpleaſed him. Ther he ſhewed howe a prince and lorde ought to be beloued feared / ſerued & honoured of his men: and howe they had done the contrary. Alſo he ſhewed / howe he hath kepte and defended them agaynſt all men: and howe he had kept them in peace / profyte / and proſperyte / in the paſſages of the ſee / the whiche was cloſed fro them. At his firſt entrynge in to his lande / he ſhewed thē dyuers reaſonable poyntes / whiche the wyſe men vnderſtode and conceyued it clerely / how all that euer he ſayde was trouthe. Dyuers gaue good care to hym and ſome neuer a whytte / ſuche as hadde rather haue warre than peace. And whan he hadde been there the ſpace of one hour / and had ſhewed them all this and more. Than finally he ſayde: howe he wolde be their good lorde / in lyke maner as he hadde been in tyme paſt. And pardoned them of all the iniuryes / hates / and yuell wylles / that he hadde agaynſt them: and all that they hadde done. He wolde here no more therof / and to kepe them in their rightes and ſeignories / as in tyme paſte had ben vſed. Howe be it he deſyred them / that they ſhulde begyn no newe thyng nor cuſtome / and that the whyte hattes ſhulde be layd downe. At all theſe wordes that he ſpake before / euery man helde their peace / but whan he ſpake of the whyte hattes / ther was ſuche a murmurynge and why ſperynge / that it might well be parceyued / that it was for that cauſe. Than therle deſyred theym ſwetely / euery man to drawe to their owne houſes. And ſoo euery man departed out of the place / but the whyte hattes were the firſt that came thyder / and the laſte that taryed. And whan the erle paſſed by thē they ſmyled / and foliſſhely behelde hym / and they made no reuerence to hym / wherof the erle was ſore diſpleaſed in his mynde / and ſayd to his knigh tes / whan he came to his lodgynge. I trowe I ſhall neuer come eaſely to myne entent / againſt theſe whyte hattes / they are vnhappye people. My hert gyueth me / that ye mater wyll nat reſt longe in the caſe that it is nowe in. For as ferr as I canne parceyue / they are likely to do many yuell dedes: for though I ſhulde leſe all / I canne nat ſuffre theym in their pride and yuell doynges.
            
               THus therle of Flaūders was there a foure or fyue dayes / and than deꝑted / ſo that he retourned no more thyder agayne. & ſo went to Lyſſe / and ther ordayned to lye all ye wynter. At his departyng fro Gaunt / he toke leaue of no man: but departed in diſpleaſure / wherwith dyuers of the towne were right yuell content / and ſayde. Howe they ſholde neuer haue any good of hym / nor he wolde neuer loue thē / nor they him. And howe he was deꝑted fro thē at that tyme / as he had done in tyme paſt. And

that Gylbert Mahewe and his bretherne / had counſayled him ſo to do. Seyng he was departed ſo ſodaynlye fro Gaunt. Johan Prunaur / Raſe Harſell / Peter de Boyſe / Johan Boule / and the yuell capitayns / were ryght ioyouſe of his departyng: and ſowed lewde wordꝭ about in the towne. Sayeng / howe that or ſomer cōe therle and his men wyll breke the peace. Wherfore they ſayd: it were good that euery mā toke hede to hym ſelfe / and that they prouyde for the towne / corne and other vitayls: as 
                  •
               eſſhe and ſalte / and ſuche other thynges. Sayeng howe they coulde ſe no ſuretie in the erle. So they of Gaunt made prouiſion of dyuers thynges that was neceſſarie for thē and for the towne. Wherof the erle was enfourmed / and had great marueyle / wherfore they douted them ſelfe in ſuche wyſe. To ſay trouthe / all thynges cōſydred: in that I ſay or haue ſayd before. It may be marueyled: howe they of Gaunt diſſymuled them ſelfe / ſo at the begynninge as they dyde. The riche / ſage / and notable perſons of the towne: can nat excuſe them ſelfe of theſe dedes at the begynnyng. For whan Johan Lyon beganne to bring vp firſt the white hattes / they might well haue cauſed them to haue been layed downe / if they had lyſt. And haue ſent other maner of perſons agaynſt the pioners of Bruges / than they but they ſuffred it / bycauſe they wolde nat medell / nor be in no buſyneſſe nor preaſe. All this they dyde and conſented to be done / the whiche after they derely bought / and ſpecially ſuche as were riche and wyſe. For afterward they were no more lordes of them ſelfe / nor they durſt nat ſpeke nor do nothynge / but as they of Gaunte wolde. For they ſayd: ye nother for John̄ Lyon nor for Gylbert Mahewe / nor for their warres or enuyes / they wolde neuer departe a ſondre. For whatſoeuer warre ther were bytwene one or other / they wolde be euer all one: and euerredy to defende the frauncheſſes of their towne the whiche was well ſene after: for they made warre / whiche endured ſeuyn yere. In the whiche tyme there was neuer ſtryfe amonge them in the towne. And that was the thynge that ſuſtayned and kept thē mooſt of any thyng / bothe within and without. They were in ſuche vnyte / that there was no dyſtaunce amonge them: as ye ſhall herafter in this hyſtorie.
            
               IT was nat long after / that therle of Flaunders was departed fro Gaunt and returned to Lyle. but that ſir Olyuer Dauterne / coſyn germayne to Roger Dauterne / ſlayne before in Gaunt. Sent his defyance to the towne of Gaunt / for the dethe of his coſyn: and in lykewiſe ſo dyde ſir Philyppe of Mamynes / and dyuers other. And after their defyances made: they foūde a fourtie ſhyppes / and the maryners to them parteyninge / of the burgeſſes of Gaunt / who were comyng on the ryuer of Leſcaulte / charged with corne. and ther they reuenged them of the dethe of their coſyn / on theſe ſhyppes and maryners. For they all to hewed the maryners / and dyde putte out their eyen: and ſo ſent theym to Gaunt / maymed as they were / whiche diſpyte / they of Gaunt toke for a great iniury. The lerned men of Gaūt / to whome the complayntes came / were right ſore diſpleſed / and wyſt nat well what to ſay. Great murmuryng was in the towne / and the mooſt parte of the people of Gaunt / ſayd: howe therle of Flaunders had cauſed all. ſo that ther durſt no manne excuſe hym. And aſſoone as Johan Prunax herde theſe tidynges / who was as thā capitayn of the whyte hattes / wtout any worde ſpekyng to thē of the lawe. I can nat ſay: whyder he ſpake with ye capitayns of other cōpanyons or nat. I thynke rather ye thā nay. So he toke the moſt parte of the whyte hattes / and dyuers other folowers / redy inoughe to do yuell: and ſo departed fro Gaunt and came ſo daynly to And warpe. Whan he entred firſt / there was no watche nor kepers / for they feared no man. And ſo he and his company entred in at ye gate to the nombre of fyue thouſande and mo. And the next mornynge / he ſette warkemen a warke carpentars and maſons / ſuche as were ther redy with hym / to do his commaundement. And ſo he ceaſſed nat / tyll he had beaten downe two of the gates / and ye walles and towres bytwene them / and layde them vp ſo downe / in the dykes towarde Gaunt.
            
               HOwe may they of Gaunt excuſe thē ſelfe that thus cōſented to this dede
                  •
                for they were at And warpe / beatynge downe theſe walles & gates more than a moneth. If they had ſent for theſe men to haue come backe agayne / whan they herde of it firſt / than they might well haue been excuſed but they dyde nat ſo. They wynked rather with their eyen / and ſuffered it / tyll tidynges

came to the erle / who lay at Lyſle / howe John̄ Prunaur had by ſtelthe come in to Andwarpe and beten downe two of the gates with the walles and towres. Of whiche tydinges the erle was ſore diſpleſed / and alſo he had good cawſe ſo to be / and ſayd. A theſe vnhappy curſed people the deuyll I trowe is with them. I ſhall neuer be in ioye as long as they of Gaunt haue any puiſſance. Than he ſent to Gaunt ſome of his counſayle / ſhewynge thē the great outrage that they hadde done / and howe they were no people to be beleued in makyng any peace. ſeyng yt the peace / whiche the duke of Burgoyne had made to his great labour and payne / was nowe thus broken by them. The mayre and lerned men of Gaunt excuſed them ſelfe / and ſayd. that ſauynge the erles diſpleaſure / they neuer thought to breke the peace / nor neuer had wyll therto. For though Johan Prunaur had done that outrage of him ſelfe / the towne of Gaunt wyll in no wyſe auowe / ſuffer / nor ſuſtayne it. And ſo playnely and truely excuſed them ſelfe / and ſayd moreouer. howe the erle had cōſented therto / for they be iſſued out of his houſe / ſuche as haue done this great outrage / ſlayne & may med our burgeſſes / the whiche is a great incō
               uenyence to the hole body of the towne. Howe ſay ye ſirs / to this 
                  〈◊〉
                they? Than therles comiſſaryes replyed / and ſayd. ſirs: than I ſe well ye be reuenged. Nay nat ſo ꝙ they of the towne / for though yt Johan Prunaur haue done thus at Andwarpe / yt it is done for any reuengyng. We ſay nat ſo / for by the treaty of the peace / we maye proue and ſhewe / if we lyſt. And that we take recorde of the duke of Burgoyne / that we myght haue done with Andwarpe / and haue brought it in to the ſame poynt / that it is nowe at. but at the deſyre of the duke of Burgoyne / we to ware and ſuffred it vndone as at ye tyme. Than the erles comyſſaries ſayde. It apereth well by your wordes / that ye haue cauſed it to be done: and that ye canne nat excuſe your ſelfe therin. Sithe that ye knewe that Johan Prunar was gone to Andwarpe / with an armye of men of warr: and by ſtelth vnder the ſhadowe of peace / hath beaten downe the gates and walles therof. ye ſhulde haue gone before thē / and haue defēded them fro doyng of any ſuche outrage 
                  〈…〉
               ll ye had ſhewed your complayntes to 
                  〈…〉
               . And of the hurtyng and mayminge of your burgeſſes of Gaunt / ye ſhulde therin haue gone to ye duke of Burgoyne / who made the peace / and haue ſhewed him all your cōplaynt. 
                  〈◊〉
                than ye had amended youre mater / but ye haue nat done thus. Nowe ſithe ye haue my lorde the erle of Flaunders thus diſpleaſed / ye ſende to excuſe your ſelfe. ye deſyre peace with your ſwerdes in your hādes: but I enſure you one day he wyll take ſo cruell vēgeance on you that all the worlde ſhall ſpeke therof. So the erles comyſſaries departed fro them of Gaunt / & went by Cortray to Lyle / and ſhewed to therle what they had done: and thexcuſacyons yt they of Gaunt made for them ſelfe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the gauntoyſe rendred And warpe / and of the houſes of the noble men of Flaunders that they bete downe. And howe the warre began bitwene them & the gauntoyſe right cruell / and without pytie. Cap. CCC .lviii.
            
               THe hearyng ſpekynge of the treatynge of this proceſſe / may well be marueyled / for the marueylous mater therin. Some gyueth ye right of the warre / the whiche was at that tyme / great and cruell in Flaūders: to thē of Gaunt. Sayeng / howe they had a good and a iuſt cauſe to make warre: but I can nat ſe that / as yet. For I coude neuer ſe nor vnderſtande / but that the erle loued euer peace rather than warre. Reſeruyng alwayes / his highneſſe & honour. Dyde he nat at their deſyre / delyuer their burges out of his priſon of Erclo? and yet for all that they ſlewe his bayly: and thā he agayne ꝑdoned thē that great outrage / to thentent to haue kept thē in peace. And ouerthat agayne: on a day / they moued all the countrey of Flaunders agaynſt him / and ſlewe in the towne of Ipre / fyue of his knightes. And went and aſſayled and beſeged And warpe / and dyde their payne / to haue dyſtroyed it. and yet agayne they had of the erle peace: but for all that / they wolde make none amendes / for the dethe of Roger Dauterne / the whiche his lynage often tymes deſyred. Wherfore they ſomwhat reuenged the dethe of their coſyn / on a certayne maryners: by whome all this warr and myſchefe was begon. Was this yet any reſonable cauſe / why they ſhulde beate downe the walles of Andwarpe? I thynke and

ſo dyd many other / that it was none occaſyon ſo to do. They ſayd therle was rather in their dette than they in his / and that he ſhulde make them amendes for that / that hadde ben done to their maryners 
                  •
               or euer they wolde delyuer agayne And warpe. The erle who was at Lyſle and his counſayll with him / was right ſore diſpleaſed / in that they kept And warpe / and wyſt nat well howe to gette it agayne. and ſo repented him of the peace that he hadde gyuen to the gauntoyſe / and he wrote often tymes to them / cōmaundynge them to delyuer vp And warpe / orels he wolde make them ſo cruell warre / that it ſhulde be euer had in remembrance. They of Gaunt / wolde in no wyſe auowe the dede / for if they had / they had broken the peace: finally certayne good people of Gaunte / and ryche men / who wolde haue no thyng by their wylles: but peace: went ſo bytwene in this mater. As John̄ Faucyll / Gylbert Guyſe / ſir Symon Bet and dyuers other. that the .xii. day / they of Gaunt beynge in the towne of And warpe retourned a gayne to Gaunte / and delyuered the towne to the erles ſeruaūtes. and to apeaſe the erles diſpleaſur / John̄ Prunaur was baniſſhed Gaūt and all Flaunders / bycauſe by his aduyce the comons had taken And warpe / without knowledge of the ſubſtance of the towne of Gaunt. And on the other parte / the erle banyſſhed out of all Flaunders: ſir Phylippe of Mamynes / ſir Olyuer Dautern / the Galoys of Manes / the baſterde of Wrydrymines / and all tho that were cauſe of the mayminge of the maryners / burgeſſes of Gaunt / without knowledge of the erle / and ſo by the reaſon of theſe baniſſhynges / bothe partyes were apeaſed. So Johan Prunaux forſoke the countrey of Flaunders / and went to Athe in Brabante / and there dwelled. and ſir Phylip of Mamynes went to Ualencennes in the coūtie of Haynalt / but whan they of Gaunt knewe therof / they dyd ſomoch to the prouoſt of Ualencennes / called John̄ Patryſe who in fayre maner / cauſed the ſayd knyght to departe thens. & ſo he departed with his good wyll and went to Warlam beſyde Do way / and there taryed tyll he harde other tydinges / and the other knyghtes and ſquiers voyded Flaū
               ders and went in to Brabant. And aſſoone as the erle had agayne poſſeſſyon of And warpe / he ſette warkmen a warke and newe repayred the towne better than euer it was before / bothe wallꝭ / gates / and dykes. The gaūtoyſe knewe well howe the erle newe fortefyed And warpe / but they made no ſemblaunce therof / bycawſe they wolde no faulte ſhulde be founde in them / as in brekynge of the peace. But the foles and outragyous people / ſayde amonge them ſelfe. lette the erle alone in his warke / for though he make And warpe ofſtele / yet it can nat endure agaynſt vs / if we lyſt. For all this peace thus in Flaunders / they of Gaunt were euer in ſuſpect with the erle / and the erle with them / for dayly there was brought to the erle harde tidynges of them of Gaunt. And in lykewyſe to them of Gaunt of the erle. Johan de Faucyll went and dwelled at Nazareth / in a fayre houſe that he had / a leage fro Gaunt: and ſo hel ay there ſtyl diſſymulynge as moche as he myght / & wolde nat be in counſayle with thē of Gaunt / bycauſe he wolde nat be noted by the erle. And alſo he kept him fro the erle as moche as he myght / to kepe him ſtill in loue with thē of Gaunt. Thus he ſwamme bitwene two waues / makyng him ſelfe newter / as nere as coulde. In the meane tyme whyle the erle repayred the towne of And warpe he procured ſoo moche by his letters / to his coſyn the duke of Burgoyne / to ſende hym Johan Prunaur beyng at Athe / that ſo he dyd / and ſent hym to the erle / and ſo he was ſent to Lyſle and there beheeded / and than ſette one a whele lyke a traytour. Thus dyed John̄ Prunaur. Than ye erle went to Ipre / and dyd there great Juſtyce / and beheeded many yuell ruled people / ſuche as had before been at the dethe of hys fyue knyghtes / there ſlayne / and had opened ye gates to them of Gaunt / and this he dyd to thentent that other ſhulde take enſample by them.
            OF all theſe maters ye gauntoyſe were well enfourmed / wherfore they douted more than they dyde before / and ſpecyally the capytayns ſuche as had bene forth in their iourneys and before And warpe. And they ſayd amonge them ſelfe / certaynly if the erle may: he wyll deſtroy vs all he loueth vs well / for he wyll haue nothyng but our lyues. Hath he nat put to deth Johan Prunar? To ſay trouth / we dyd John̄ Prunaur great wronge / whan we banyſſhed him fro vs. we are therfore culpable of his deth and to the ſame ende we ſhall all cōe / if he may gette vs at his wyll / therfore lette vs take good hede of ourſelfe. Than Peter de Boyſe ſayd. Sirs / yf ye wyll beleue me: there ſhall nat a houſe ſtande vpright / of neuer a genytlmans in the countrey aboute Gaunt. for by reaſon of the gentlemens houſes that be nowe ſtandyng we maye be all diſtroyed / if we take nat hede

therto betymes / and prouyde for ſome remedy. That is trouthe ꝙ all the other let vs go forthe and bere them all downe. Than the capitayns Heter du Boyſe / Johan Boule / Raſe de Harſell / Johan de Launoy and dyuers other with their companyes departed on a day fro Gaūt / and brent and beate downe all the gentylmens houſes there aboute / and toke all that euer was in them / and departed it among them ſelfe / and whan they had done / they retourned agayne to 
                  〈◊〉
               . They founde neuer a man that wolde ſay ſirs: ye haue done euyll. Whan the gentlemen knyghtes & ſquiers beynge at Lyſle with the erle and there about / harde tydinges howe their houſes were brent and beten downe / and 
                  〈◊〉
                goodes takenne awaye / they were ryght ſo
                  ••
                diſpleaſed / and nat without a good cauſe. They ſayd to the erle▪ ſir: this diſpyght muſt be 
                  〈◊〉
                and the pride of them of Gaunt beaten downe. Than the erle gaue leue and abandoned to the knightes and ſquiers to make warre agaynſte the gauntoyſe / and to counteruenge them of their domagꝭ. Than dyuers knyghtes and squyers of Flaunders alyed them ſelfe tog
                  •
               der / and deſyred their frendes of Heynalt to a
                  •
               de to reuenge them of the gaūtoyſe / and they made their capitayne the 
                  •
               aſ
                  •
               e of Flaunders / the yongeſt ſonne baſtarde of the erles a ryght 
                  〈◊〉
                knyght. this knyght with his company ſomtyme lay at And warpe another tyme at Gaures / and ſomtyme at Alos / and at Teremond / and scrunyſſhed with the gaūtoyſe dayly and ſotyme ran to the barryers of the towne of Gaunt. And beate downe the wyndmyls about y• towne / and dyd great diſpyght to them of Gaunt / and with them there was a knyght of Heynalt / called ſir James of Uerchyn
                  •
                ſene ſhall of Heynalt. he dyd many feates of armes in that ſeaſon aboute Gaunt / and aduentured hym ſelfe often tymes ryght ieoperdouſly. He fought two or thre tymes at the barryers / and wanne baſſenetes and croſbowes / and other a bylementes of warre. This knyght loued well the noble feate of armes / and had bene a valyant knyght if he hadde lyued long / but he dyed yonge in his bed in the caſtell of 
                  •
               ubre beſyde Mortayne / whiche was great domage.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the noble men of Flaūders made warre agaynſt the flemynges / and of the dethe of ſir Berteram of Cleſquy couſtable of Fraunce. Cap. CCC .lix.
            
               WHan the gauntoyſe ſawe them ſelfe thus mocked and warred by the gentlemen of Flaunders / they were right angry therwith / & thought to haue ſente to erle Aubert erle of Haynault / deſirynge him to haue founde the meanes / to haue cauſed theſe gentylmen / to leaue their warre a gaynſt them ▪ but whan they had all thynges conſydered / they thought they ſhulde leſe their payne / for they were ſure the erle Aubert / wolde do no thynge for them / nor they wolde nat dyſpleaſe him / nor put a thynge to hym / that ſhulde be to his diſpleaſure. For they might yuell lyue with out the fauoure of his countrey / for if Holand / zelande / and Haynault had ben cloſed fro them they thought them ſelfe but loſt. Therfore they left that purpoſe and toke a nother counſayle / and yt was / to ſend to the knyghtes and ſquiers of Haynalt / ſuche as had herytages / rentes / or reuenues in Gaunt or in ye precynct therof / that they ſhulde come and ſerue theym / or els to leſe their rētes and reuenues there. and ſo they ſent to them / but it auayled them but lytell / for they ſet but lytell by their cōmaundementes. Than they of Gaunt ſent to the lorde Dautoyng and to ſir Herne / who was an heryter in the towne of Gaunt / and conſtable of the ſame / that they ſhulde come and ſerue them / or els to leſe ſuche ryght as they had there. and bycauſe they came nat nor wolde come / they bete downe their houſes. The lorde Dautoyng ſent thē worde howe he wolde come and ſerue them at their coſt and charge to their diſtruccyon / and yt they ſhulde haue no nother truſt in him / but that he wolde be their ennemy / and holde nothynge of theym / but of the erle of Flaūders his lorde / to whome he owed ſeruyce and obeyſāce. The lorde Dautoyng helde well his promyſe / for he made mortall warre agaynſt them / and dyde them great domage / and made great prouiſyon in his caſtell / whiche garyſon dyde moche traueyle to them of Gaunt. Also ye lorde of Daughen / who was a yonge ſquier called Gaultyer / he dyd alſo great diſpyte to them of Gaunt. Thus contynued ſtyll the warre / and the gauntoyſe durſt nat iſſue out of their towne / without they were in great companyes / and whan they founde any of their enemyes they hadde no mercy / but hauyng the better ſlewe all before them. Thus began the warre to be ryght cruell bytwene the erle of Flaūders and the gauntoiſe / the whiche coſt after a hundred thouſande mennes lyues / 

twiſe tolde. it was great payne to fynde outher ende or peace / for the capitayns of Gaūt knewe well they had ſo treſpaſſed agaynſt their lorde / the erle of Flaunders / and agaynſt the duke of Burgoyn / yt for any treatie of peace ſealyng or ſweryng what ſoeuer it were. yet they thought they ſhulde neuer haue peace / but that it ſhulde coſt them their lyues. This dought and feare cauſed them to be of that opinyon / and to kepe ſtyll the warre agaynſt the erle and the gentylmen of Flaunders. & alſo this feare gaue them courage to kepe warre / and as their aduentures fell / ye ſhall here after in the ſtory.
            
               THe erle of Flaūders beyng at L
                  ••
               e harde dayly newes fro the them of Gaunt / and howe they brent and beate downe gentylmens howſes / wherwith he was ſore diſpleaſed / and ſayd. howe he wolde take ſuche vengeance on them / that he wolde bryng all Gaunt vnder flame of fyre / and the rebelles within it. Than the erle to be the more ſtronger agaynſt them / ſent for all his barons of Flaunders / and abandoned his countrey / to them to reſyte agaynſte the whyte hattes / and apoynted two gentylmen to be their captayns / that is to ſay: the Galoys of Mamynes / and Peter Deſtreueles. Theſe two with their cōpanies bare with them the erles baner / and ſo about a thre wekes they lay bytwene And warpe and Courtrey / on the ryuer of Lys / and dyde great domage to them of Gaūt. And whan Raſe of Harſell herde therof / he yſſued oute of Gaunte with all the whyte hattes and came to Douſe / and there he hadde thought to haue founde the erles company / but the men of armes / whan they knewe of the gaū
               toyſe comyng / they withdrewe towarde Tourney / and ſo taryed in the towne. And the gauntoyſe lay a great ſeaſon about Orches / Danne / and Uorlam / ſo that the marchantes durſt nat go bytwene Doway and Tourney for feare of them. And it was than ſayd: howe the gaūtoiſe wolde go and lay ſiege to Lyle / and therle with in the towne. They alyed them ſelfe with them of Bruges and Ipre / and they had Grantmont and Courtray of their acorde. But Brugꝭ and Ipre varyed and were nat agreed with y• craftes / for they ſayde: it ſhulde be a great folly for them / to 
                  •
               ay ſiege ſo farre of as Lyſle. and how that the erle might haue great alyaunce & ayde of the frenche kyng / as he hath had before. theſe doutes and other / ſtopped the good townes of Flaūders for makyng of any warre / or layeng of any ſiege in that ſeaſon. And for thētent that the erle ſhulde haue no helpe nor ayde of the frē
               che kyng / nor of the duke of Burgoyne / his ſon. They ſent meſſangers and meke letters to the kyng / deſyring hym for goddes ſake / yt he ſhulde gyue no counſayle nor ayde to therle of Flā
               ders / to their domage or hurte. For they wolde nothing but peace / loue / obeyſance / and ſeruice to their lorde. Wherfore they ſayde / their lorde dyde great wrong / ſo to traueyle and greue thē And all that euer they dyd / was to ſuſtayne the fraūcheſſe and lyberties / the whiche their lorde wolde take fro them in his crueltie. The kyng ſom what enclyned to them / without any ſemblant makyng. In lykewiſe ſo dyd the duke of Aniou his brother for all that the erle of Flaunders was their coſyn. yet he was nat greatly in their fauours / bycauſe of the duke of Bretayne whome he kepte with hym in his countrey / agaynſt their wylles a longe ſeaſon: Wherfore they tooke no great hede to his buſyneſſe. No more dyde pope Clement / for he ſayd that god had ſent therle of Flaūders that rodde and punyſſhment / bycauſe he was his enemy / & helde with pope Urbane agaynſt him.
            THe ſame ſeaſon the good knight and cō
               ſtable of Fraunce / ſir Bertram of Cleſquy was in Auuerne with a great nōbre of men of armes. And lay at ſege before New caſtell of Raudone / a thre leages fro the cytie of Pye in Auuergne / and had cloſed in the caſtell nyne englyſſhemen and gaſcoyns / enemyes to the realme of Fraunce. Who were yſſued out of Lymoſyn / where as were many fortereſſes. The cōſtable gaue many ſore aſſautes to the caſtell / and ſware: that he wolde neuer departe thens / tyll he had the caſtell at his pleaſure. But than a great ſickeneſſe tooke hym / and ſo lay in his bedde: but for all that the ſiege brake nat vp / for his men were more angrye than they were before. Of this ſickeneſſe ſir Bertram dyed / whiche was great domage to his frendes and to ye realme of Fraunce / and he was borne to the freers in Pye / and ther he was one night / and fro 
                  •
               hens he was caryed to ſaynt Denyſe in Fraū
               ce / and there he was layde in ſepulture / nere to the tombe of kynge Charles / whiche the kynge had made for hym in his dayes / and ſo he laye at the kynges fete. And there his obſequy was done right honorably / as though he hadde ben the kynges ſonne. And there was all the kyngꝭ bretherne / and notable perſones of the realme of Fraunce. Thus by the dethe of ſir Bertram

of Cleſquy / the office of the conſtable ſhyppe of Fraunce was voyde. Than it was ordayned and aduyſed / who ſhulde be conſtable. There were named dyuers great barons of Fraunce / and ſpecially the lorde Clyſſon / and the lorde of Coucy. The kyng wolde that the lorde Coucy ſhulde haue had the offyce / and that he ſhulde be regent of all Picardy. and the kyng gaue him all the lande of Mortayne / the which was a fayre herytage / lyeng bytwne Tourney and Ualencennes. And ſir James Uerchyne was put out therof / who was conſtable of Heynalt. He helde it by ſucceſſion of his father / who had ben lorde therof / a great ſeaſon before. The lorde of Coucy was in great fauour with the frenche kyng / and the kyng wolde haue hadde hym conſtable of Fraunce but the gentyll knight excuſed hym ſelfe by dyuers reaſons / and wolde nat take it on him / and ſayd. Howe ſir Olyuer Clyſſon was more worthy then he was to haue it / for he was a worthy knyght / hardye and beloued and knowen amonge the bretons. Soo thus the mater abode a longe ſeaſon / than ſir Bertrams men returned in to Fraunce / for the caſtell yelded vp the ſame day that 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Bertram dyed / and they of the gariſon went in to Lymoſyn to the garyſon of Uentadore. Whan the frē che kyng ſawe the cōſtables men / he gaue them great gyftes.
            ¶ Nowe let vs leaue to ſpeke of them / & ſhewe howe ſir Thomas erle of Buckyngham yongeſt ſonne of kyng Edwarde the thyrde / made a great armye of men of armes & archers / and paſſed with his hooſt throughe the realme of Fraunce / and went in to Bretayne.
         
         
            ¶ Of the erle of Buckyngham / yongeſt ſonne to kyng Edwarde the .iii. who paſſed with a great armye thorough the realme of Fraunce / to go in to Bretayne to the duke there. Cap. CCC .lx.
            
               VE haue herde here before: howe that whan the duke of Bretayne departed out of Englande / kyng Richard and his vncles had promyſed hym to ſende men of armes and archers to ayde hym. The kyng kept his promyſe / but yuell fortune came therof: for ſir Johan Arundell was ſent thyder with two hundred men of armes / and they had ſuche fortune / that they were nyghe all peryſſhed in the ſee by tempeſt. Sir Hughe Caurell & ſir Thomas Tryuet were ſaued with gret payne / ther was peryſſhed a foureſcore archers and as many men of armes or mo. And ſo by that fortune this army was broken for that tyme. The duke of Bretayne had great marueyle and all thoſe on his parte / that they coulde here no worde of them / they coulde nat conſyder nor ymagenne what lette they hadde. Fayne they wolde haue knowen / to the entent to haue hadde ſome comforte / for they were ſore ouerpreſſed by ſir Olyuer of Clyſſon / ſir Guy de la Uall / ſir Olyuer of Cleſqui erle of Langueuylde / and the lorde Rochforte: and the frenchmen that lay aboute the fronters of Bretayne. Than the duke was counſayled to ſende ſufficient meſſangers in to Englande / to knowe the cauſe why they came nat / and to haſt theym forther for they had nede of their helpe. The lorde of Beaumonoyre and ſir Euſtace Houſay / were deſyred by the duke and by them of the coūtre / to take on them that voyage in to Englande. They anſwered / how they were content to go. Than they had letters fro ye duke of Bretayne / and fro them of the coū
               tre / and ſo they deꝑted and toke ſhyppinge and had wynde and wether at their pleaſur / and arryued at Hāpton. And than yſſued out of their veſſell and toke horſe & rode to London. This was about Whytſontyde / the yere of our lorde god / a thouſande thre hundred and fourſcore.
            THe kynge of Englande was anone certifyed of their comynge. So the kynge went to Wyndſore: to kepe the feeſt of Penthecoſt there / and with hym his vncles / and a gret nombre of barons and knightes of Englande. And thyder came theſe two foreſayd knyghtes of Bretayne / and were honourably receyued of the kynge and of his vncles / and of all other / & there they delyuered their letters to the kynge and to his vncles. They reed them / and knewe therby / howe the duke of Bretayne & his countrey / deſyred them effectuouſly of ayde and confort. There theſe two knightꝭ knewe of ye dethe of ſir Johan Arundell / and the other that were peryſſhed in the ſee / goyng towarde Bretayne. and ſo there the duke of Lancaſtre excuſed the mater / and ſayd. Howe the kyng nor his counſayle was in no faute / but the fortune of the ſee / agaynſt the whiche no man canne reſyſt / whan

god wyll haue it ſo. So the knyghtes helde the kyng excuſed / and greatly complayned ye dethe of thoſe knyghtes / ſo peryſſhed in the ſee. The feeſt of Pēthecoſt paſſed / and than they helde a parlyament at Weſtmyuſter / and there was all the kynges counſayll. And in the ſame meane ſeaſon there dyed at Lōdon / ſir Rychard Dangle erle of Hūtyngdon / and was buryed in the frere Auguſtynes. The kyng cauſed his obſequy to be done right honourably / with a great nombre of prelates and barones of Englande / and the byſſhoppe of London ſange the maſſe. Than anone after began the parlyament / and there it was ordayned y• ſir Thomas of Wodſtocke youngeſt ſonne to kynge Edwarde the thirde / and dyuers barones / knyghtes / & ſquiers with hym / ſhulde paſſe the ſee and lande at Calayes / and ſoo to paſſe by the grace of god throughe Fraunce / with thre thouſande men of armes and as many archers / and ſo to come in to Bretayne: lyke the ſonne of a kyng.
            ¶ He toke on hym a great thynge as to paſſe throughe the realme of Fraunce / the whiche is ſo great and ſoo noble / and wherin there is ſo noble chyualry / and ſo valyant men of armes. WHan theſe thynges were thus determyned and the voiage cōcluded and agreed. Than the kyng of Englande & his vncles ſent letters to the duke of Bretayne and to them of the countre / gyueng them knowledge of their ententes / and of their counſayle and parlyament that they had concluded at Lō
               don. Howe that without faute / ſir Thomas of Wodſtocke erle of Buckingham yongeſt son̄e to kynge Edwarde the thirde / ſhulde ſhortely paſſe the ſee to come and ſocour thē. The kyng of Englande honoured greatly theſe knyghtes of Bretayne and gaue them great gyftes / and in likewyſe ſo dyd his vncles / and ſo they departed and returned in to Bretayne / and delyuered their letters to the duke / and he opened and red them / and ſawe what they contayned / and ſo ſhewed them to the lordes and knyghtes of his countrey / who were well content with that aunſwere. The kynge of Englande and his vncles forgate nat the voiage that was apoynted / but ſent for all them that were choſen and apoynted to go with the erle of Buckyngham / who were bothe barons / knyghtes / ſquiers / and other / and they were payed for their wages at Douer for thre monethes / their wages to begyn aſſone as they ſhulde be arryued at Calayes / as well men of armes as archers. and their paſſage was delyuered them franke and fre / and ſo they paſſed lytell and lytell and arryued at Calays / and it was a .xv. dayes or they were all paſt. They of Boloyne ſawe well howe men of armes & archers were iſſued out of Englande and landed at Calays / and gaue knowledge therof ouer all the countrey / and to all the frenche garyſons / to the entent that they ſhulde take hede euery man to his parte. So that whan theſe tydynges were knowen in bolonoyſe / and thoronyſe / & in the countie of Guynes / knyghtes / & ſquiers of the countrey drewe into the fortereſſes / and put therin all that they hadde for feare of leſynge. And the capitayns of Boloyne / of Arde / of Monteire / of Spirlo que / of Tornehen / of Hornes / of Lyques / and of other caſtelles on the fronters there / entended greatly to prouide for their places / for they thought / ſeynge the engliſſhmen were come ouer in ſuche a nombre / yt they ſhulde haue ſome aſſautes gyuen to ſome of them. The tydinges of this paſſage of ye engliſſhmen was brought to kyng Charles beyng at Parys. Than in cō
               tynent he ſent to ye lorde Coucy to ſaynt Quintynes that he ſhulde prouyde formen of warre and to go in to Picardy / to comforte his cyties townes / caſtelles / & forterſſes there. The lorde Coucy obeyed the kynges cōmaundement / as it was reaſon / than he made a ſomōs of knightes and ſquiers of Picardy / Arthoyſe / and Uermandoyſe to mete at Peron in Uermandoyſe. The ſame tyme the lorde of ſaynt Pye was capytayne of Arde / and of Boloyne / ſir Johan Bouillers. This ſir Thomas of Wodſtocke erle of Buckynghame yongeſt ſonne to kynge Edwarde the thirde: arryued at Calays thre dayes before Maudlyn tyde / in the moneth of July / the yere of our lorde god a thouſand thre hundred and fourſcore.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the erle of Buckyngham & the engliſſhmen departed fro Calats to go in to Fraūce / and of their order. Cap. CCC .lxi.
            
               WHan the erle of Buckynghame was aryued at Calays / the companyons had great ioye / for they thought well nat to tary long there / but to go forth on their vo
                  •
               
               age.

The erle refreſſhed him two dayes at Calays and on the thirde daye departed and toke the way to Marquegnes. It were reaſon that I ſhewe you the names of the bauers and penſels that were there with the erle. Firſt the erle of Buckyngham hymſelfe / therle Stafforde / who had wedded his nece / doughter to ye lorde Couey and therle of Dymeſtre. Theſe lordes rode with baners diſplayed / the lorde Spenſar conſtable of the hooſt / the lorde Fytz water marshall the lorde Baſſette the lorde Bourgthyer / the lorde Ferres / the lorde Morlay / the lorde Parſy ſir Wyllyam Wynſore ſir Hughe & aurell ſir Hugh Haſtyngꝭ / and ſir Hughes. all theſe by one aſſent rode with their ſtanderdes and penons: ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Thomas Tryuet / ſir Wyllyam Clynton / ſir yuon 
                  〈◊〉
                ſir Hugh Torell / the lorde of Uar
               
                  〈◊〉
                Euſtare and ſir Johan Harbeſton / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Wyllyam Feruytone / the lorde of Briame / ſir Wyllyam Fabre / ſir Johan and ſir Nycholas 
                  〈◊〉
                court ſir Johan Maſe / ſir Thom̄s Camoyſe / ſir Rafe ſonne to the lorde Neuell / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Henry baſtarde Ferres / ſir Hughe Broe / ſir 
                  〈◊〉
                Orsell / ſir Thomas Weſt / the lorde of 
                  〈◊〉
                More / Dauyd Holograue / Hugh Lyn / 
                  〈◊〉
                baſtarde Bernarde of Coderers and dyuers other. Theſe me of warre rode in good 
                  〈◊〉
                and great array. The firſt day they deꝑ
               
                  〈◊〉
                Calais / & went no farther than to Marquegues. And there reſted and toke counſayle what way were beſt for thē to take to furnyſſhe there voyage for there were dyuers in that cū
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                that had neuer ben in Fraunce before / as the e
                  ••
               e hymſelfe and dyuers other great barones and knightes. Therfore it was reſonable / that suche perſons as hadde ben in Fraunce before and knewe the countre / ſhulde haue ſuche rule and gouernynge / that it myght be to their honour. Threwe it was / that whan the englyſſhmen in tyme paſt had ben in Fraunce / they had euer ſuche ordynaunce amonge them / that the 
                  〈◊〉
                ſware euer to the kyng of Englande and to his counſayle two shynges. The one was: that they ſhulde neuer diſcloſe their ſecre 
                  〈◊〉
                perſon lyueng but among themſelfe / 
                  〈◊〉
               der they entended to go. The ſeconde thyng was: they ſware and promyſed to make no maner of treatie with their enemyes without the knowledge of the kyng or his couſayle.
            wHan cheſe barons / knightes / and ſquyers and their company: had reſted thē at Marquegnes thre dayes / and that euery man of their company was come to them out of Calais / and that the capitayns were determyned what way to take. They deꝑted and went for the tyll they came before Arde / & there reſted them before the baſtyde of Arde / to thentent to ſhewe themſelfe before the mē of armes / that were within the fortereſſe. And there was made newe knightes by the erle of Buckyngehanm; as therle of Dymeſtre / and alſo the lorde Morlay. and than thoſe two knightꝭ put for the their baners / and moreouer therle made knightes: all ſuche as foloweth. Firſt the lorde Fytzwaters ſonne ſir Roger Strange / ſir John̄ I pre / ſir John̄ Coll / ſir James Tytiell / ſir Thomas Ramſton / ſir Johan Neuell / and ſir Thomas Roſte: and than all the hoſt went and lodged at Hoſque. All theſe forſayd newe knyghtꝭ were made / bycauſe of the vowarde / the which went the ſame day to a ſtronge houſe stadynge on the ryuer ſyde / called Folant. Within was a ſquyer: owner of the houſe / called Robert / he was a good man of armes: and hadde well furnyſſhed his houſe with good men of armes the whiche he had gote therabout / to the nombre of xl. And they made good ſemblant to defēde thē
               ſelfe and their houſe. Theſe barons and knyghtes in their newe knyghthod / enuyroned about the towre of Folāt: and began fierſly to aſſayle them within / and they within valiantly defended themſelfe. There was done many feates of armes and they within ſhorte ſo holly and quickely togyder / that they hurt dyuers aſſaylantes ſuche as aduētured themſelfe to moche forwarde, for they had within dyuers good croſbowes ſent thyder by the capitayne of ſaynt Omers / at the requeſt of the ſquyer / for he feared before: that the engliſſhmen wolde paſſe by his houſe wherfore he thought to kepe it to the beſt of his power / and ſo he dyde: for he bare hymſelfe ryght valiantly. Than the erle of Dymeſtre ſpake a highe worde / as he ſtode on the dykes / his baner before hym / the whiche worde greatly encouraged his people. Sayeng ſirs: howe is it thus in oure newe knyghthode / that this peuyſſhe douchouſe holdeth agaynſt vs ſo longe? The ſtronge places and fortreſſes that be in the realme of Fraunce ſhall holde longe agaynſt vs / ſythe this ſmall houſe endureth ſo longe. Sirs on a fore / lette vs ſhewe our newe chiualry. They that herde theſe wordes noted it ryght well / and aduentured them ſelfe more largely than they dyde before / and entred in to the dykes and ſo came harde to the walles. and there thēgliſſh archers ſhotte ſo holly togyder / that ſcant non durſt apere at their defence, ther

were dyuers ſlayne and hurt / and ye baſe court wonne and brent: and ſo finallye they were all wonne. Howe be it / firſt they defended thēſelfe tight valiantly / and neuer a man within / that was wounded to dethe. Thus the houſe of Folant was taken / and Robert Folant within taken priſoner by therle of Dymeſtre / and all the temnant taken priſoners by his men. And all the hooſt lodged on the ryuer of Houſke / abydynge for ſir Wyllyam Wyndſore / who ledde the rerewarde / and was nat as than come / but he came the ſame night: and the nexte day they diſloged and rode to Eſperleque and there lodged. The capitayne of ſaynt Omers / ſeynge the englyſſhmen ſo nere to them / encreaſed the watche of the towne / for that nyght they watched 
                  •
               o than two thouſande men / to the entent that ſaynt Omers ſhulde nat be ſodayuly wonby the englyſſhmen.
            
               THe next mornyng about ſire of the clocke the engliſſhmen diſlodged / and rode before ſaint Omers. and whan they of the towne ſawe thengliſſhmen come / they armed them and ordayned them ſelfe in the market place to go to the gates and walles by good dely
                  〈…〉
               
               cyon / for it was ſhewedde theym / howe the englyſſhmen wolde aſſayle them: but it was nat in their thoughtꝭ. For they knewe well the towne was to ſtrong / and thought they ſhulde loſe there more than wynne. Howe be it she erle of Buckyngham / who had neuer ben in Fraunce before / thonght he wolde ſeſaynt Omers / bycauſe it ſemed ſo fayre a farre of: in walles / gates / towres / and ſteples. So he rested all his hooſt on a mountayne halfe a leage fro the towne araynged in good order / more than thre houres. And than ther were ſome yonge knightes and ſquyers thought to proue theymſelfe / and rode to the barryers of the towne / and hesyred to iuſt with ſome of the knighted or ſquyers in the towne / but they coulde haue none anſwere / and ſo they retourned agayne to the half. The ſame day that the erle cāe before ſaynt Omers he made agayne newe knightes. Firſt ſir Rafe Neuell / ſir Bartylmewe Bourgehter / ſir Thomas Camoyſe / ſir Fouke Corbette / ſir Thomas Danglure ſir Rafe Perypars / ſir Aoyes of ſaynt Albyne / and ſir Johan Paule. Theſe newe knyghtes in their firſt churalry to proue themſelfe / rode to the barryers of the towne
                  〈…〉
                deſyred iuſtes: but they wered / & ſo retourded agayne to their hooſt. Whan the erle and his company / ſawe that the 
                  〈…〉
                of Fraūce / ſuche as were within 
                  〈…〉
                wolde nat yſſue in to the feldes array 
                  〈…〉
                than they paſſed farther. And the same day 
                  〈◊〉
                and loged at Eſquyles / bytwene ſay
                  〈…〉
                and Tyrwyn: and the nexte daye they rodeth warde Tyrwynne.
            Whan they of the garyſons in the county of Bolayne / Artoyſe / and Guynes: ſawe the dealynge of the englyſſhmen / and howe they went alwayes forwarde without reſtyng. They ſhewed their wylles eche to others and determyned to purſue the englyſſhe hooſt / thynkynge therby ſomwhat to wynne. So they gathered togyder / and aſſembled vnder the ſtanderde of the lorde of Freſures / and of the lorde of ſaynt Pye. They were a two hūdred ſpeares: & than they cooſted and purſued the engliſſhmen / but the englyſſhmen kept themſelfe euer ſo cloſe to guyder without diſorderynge / that the frenchemen coude gette none aduantage. Howe be it ſomtyme the frenchemen encountred with the englyſſhe foragers and ouerthrue them
                  〈…〉
                fore they durſt nat go a foragynge but 
                  〈…〉
                companyes. Thus thenglyſſhmen rode forthe and paſte Tyrwynne without any thynge doynge: for the lorde of ſaynt Pye / and the lorde of Treſures were ther. And the hooſt lodged at Bethwyn / and there taryed a day / and I ſhall ſhewe you why.
            ye haue herde here before: howe kynge Rycharde of Englande / by thaduyſe of his vncles and of his couſayle. He had ſent in to 
                  •
               lmayne a knight of his (called ſir Symon Burle) to ye kynge of romayns / to haue his ſuſtre in maryage. The knight had ſo well ſpedde / y• the king of romayns aſſented therto by the counſayle of all the great barons of his court. And the kyng of romayns ſent in to Englande with ſir Symon Burle / the duke of Caſſon to aduyſe the realme of Englande / to ſe howe it ſhulde pleaſe his ſuſter / and to make an enue of the mater. for the cardynall of Rauene was all redye in Englande / who helde with pope Urbane and conuerted the englyſſhmen to the opinyon of Urbane / Haryed for the comyng of the ſaid duke, who at the kyng of Englandes deſyre / and the duke of Brahantes: bothe he and all his company had aſau
                  •
               cōduct / to paſſe through the realme of Fraūce to come to Calays / and he cāe by 
                  〈…〉
                and Bethwyn. And ſo came and ſawe therle of Buckyngham / who receyued him
                  〈…〉
               
               
norably / and the next daye they toke leaue eche of other. and ſo the almayns came to Ayre and to ſaynt Omers / and ſo to Calays. And therle and his hooſt went to Liques / and lodged that day at Bohayne. And alway the lorde of ſaynt Pye and the lorde of Freſures purſued y• hoſt / and in the morning the hoſt diſloged and went towarde Bethwyn. In the towne there was a great garyſon of knightes and ſquyers / ꝑteynyng to the lorde of Couty: as the lorde of Hā
               geſt ſir Johan and ſir Tryſtram of Roye / ſir G
                  •
               ffray of Chargney / ſir Guy Harcourt / and dyuers other. The hooſt paſſed by Bethwyn & went to Douchers / & at night the lorde of ſaynt Pye and y• lorde of Freſures entred into Bethwyn. 
                  〈◊〉
                the next day they went to Arras where they founde the lorde of Coucy / who receyued them ioyfully / and demaunded of theym what way the englyſſhmen toke. And they anſwered & ſaid: how they had lyen the ſame night at Dō
               chers / and ſhewed hym howe they rode wyſely and cloſe togyder. Than the lorde Coucy ſaid / than it ſemeth well y• they demaunde nothyng but batayle / the whiche they ſhall haue if y• kynge our lorde wyll a gretherto / or they haue acō
               plyſſhed their viage. Therle of Buckyngham paſſed by Arras in good order of batayle / and went and lodged at Anette / and the next day at Myramount / and ſo to Clery on the ryuer of Somme. Whan the lorde Coucy beyng at Arras / vnderſtode howe they tooke that way / he ſent the lorde Hangeſt to Bray / on the ſame ryuer of Somme / and in his company .xxx. ſpea
               
                  •
               es knightes and ſquyers. and to Peron he ſēt Jaques of Uerchyn ſeneſhall of Heynault / the lorde of Haureth / ſir John̄ of Roy and dyuers other. and went hym ſelfe towarde ſaynt Quitynes / and ſent the lorde of Clary and dyuers other in to Uermādorſe / For he wolde nat that by his neglygence / the countre ſhulde haue taken any domage.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the lorde of Brymewe and his chyldren were takenne by the englyſſhmen and all their cōpany. And howe they of the garyſon of Perone were chaſed into their towne haſtely Cap. CCC .lxii.
            
               THe ſame nyght that the englyſſhmen lodged at Clary / certayne knightes amō
               ge thē: as ſir Thomas Triuet / ſir Wyllyam Clynton / and ſir yuon of Fytzwaren / by the mouynge of their lorde Uarchyne / who knewe well the coūtre / and they knewe well howe the lorde of Coucy was with a great nombre at Arras / thinkyng ſurelye / that he wolde ryde the next mornynge to ſe yf they coude mete with any of their englyſſhe foragers / for they knewe well / his deſyre was to do dedes of armes: and as they thought ſo it fortuned. So the englyſſhemen with a thretie ſpeares rode forthe & folowed farre of fro their foragers at aduenture. The ſame day there departed fro the cytie of Arras / the lorde Coucy with a great cōpany / and toke his way towardes ſaynt Quyntines. and whan he was in the feldes / the lorde of Brimewe and his chyldren / departed fro the lorde Coucys company / with a thretie ſperes: lyke men that deſyred to fynde aduentures. and ſodaynly the frenche men and engliſſhmen mette eche with other / ſo that ther was no remedy but to fight. ſo they cryed their cryes / and at their firſt metyng there were many ouerthrowen / ſlayne / and hurt on bothe parties: and ther was done many a feate of armes and than lyghted a fote and dyde valyantly / ſo that for the ſpace of one houre / none coulde tell who hadde the better. Howe be it finally the englyſſhmen had the vyctorie: and ſir Thomas Tryuet toke the lorde of Brimewe and his. 
                  〈◊〉
               . ſonnes / Johan and Loyes / and there were taken a ſixtene men of armes / and thother ſaued them ſelfe. Than the englyſſhmen retourned a gayne to their hooſt / and ſo taryed aboute Peron / for they had knowledge by their priſoners howe the lorde of Coucy was at Perone with a thouſande ſpeares / and coude nat tell wheder he wolde fight with thē or nat. The ſame daye there wente out of the hooſt with the foragers / the lorde of Uerchyne & Ferchras his baſtarde brother / and ſir yuon Fytzwaren and dyuers other / and rode to the mount ſaynt Quyntyne and there laye in a buſſhment. For they knewe well / that the ſeneſhall of Heynalte was at Peron with certayne men of armes / & they knewe well he was ſo yonge and luſty / that he wolde yſſue out to ſeke for ſome aduenture / and ſo he dyd. The vowarde ſent. 
                  〈◊〉
               . men of armes to ren before Perone: as Terrey of Soubezmayne / the baſtarde of Uertayne / Hugelyn Caurell &

Hopkyn Haye / mounted on good horſes. And ſo they rode to the barryers of the towne / and within with the ſeneſhall of Heynaulte were a fyftie ſpeares. And he cauſed the barryers to be opined / and had thought to haue trapped thoſe fore ryders / and ſo fell to chaſyng of them / and they fledde for the nones towarde their buſſhemēt. And whan they of the buſſhment ſawe the frēchmen chaſe their company / they iſſued out of their enbuſſhment / but it was a lytell to ſone For whan the ſeneſhall and his company ſawe that great nombre agaynſt them / they retourned and fledde. And the englyſſhmen folowed after / as faſt as their ſpurres wolde driue their horſes / and the frenchmen founde the barryers opyn / as happe was for them. Howe be it they were ſo nere folowed / that dyuers of them wer taken priſoners / as ſir Richarde of Marquylles / ſir Loyes of Uerchyn / Honarde of Honardery / and vytall of ſaynt Hyllary / and a tenne other men of armes: and the other ſaued them ſelfe. And whan the englyſſhmen knewe / howe that the ſeneſhall / the lorde of Hauerathe / and the lorde of Clerey: and twentie other knyghtes were ſcaped away / they were ſorie / & ſayde. if we had taken them / they ſhulde well a payed fourtie thouſande frankes. And ſo they retourned to the hooſt / and there was no more doone that day. The hooſt taryed a thre dayes at Clery and ther about / and on the fourthe day / they departed and went to the abbey of Uancyll / a thre leages fro Cambrey / and the nexte day towarde ſaynt Quyntines. ¶ The ſame day / a company of the duke of Burgoynes rode abrode a .xxx. ſpeares / & came fro Arras to ſaynt Quyntines. And ſir Thomas Tryuette / ſir yuon Fytzwarenne / and the lorde of Uertayne / and dyuers other englyſſhmen / beyuge before with their forēgers / as they wolde haue taken their lodgynge / they encountred the burgonyons / and ſo fought togyder / but it endured nat longe / for anone the burgoyons were dyſceuered and fledde away / ſauyng them ſelfe as many as might. Howe be it ſir Johan Moruay a hode ſtyll in y• place and his penon before hym / and fought valiātly / but finally he was taken / and ten men of armes with hym. Than the englyſſhemen went to Fouſons a two leages fro Amyens / and ther the vowarde lodged.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen brent and waſted the countre of Champayne / and of the encounterynges that they hadde in their way / and of the priſoners that they toke. Cap. CCC .lxiii.
            
               THe next mornyng whā therle of Buckyngham had herd maſſe / he toke his way towarde ſaynt Quintynes / in y• which towne there was a great nombre of menne of warre / but they yſſued nat out. Ther were certayne currours that ran to the barriers but anon they deꝑted / bycauſe the hooſt paſſed by without taryeng / and went to Origny ſaynt Benet / and there lodged / and in the vyllages therabout. In the towne of Origney was a fayre abbey of nonnes / and y• ſame tyme the abbeſſe there / was aunt to the lorde of Uertayne / who was in the vowarde. and ſo at his deſyre / the abbey and towne was ſaued fro brennyng / and therle lodged in the abbey. But the ſame euenyng and the next mornyng / there was great ſcrimyſſhing at Ryllemont nat ferr fro the hooſt / and dyuers ſlayne & hurt on both parties. The next mornyng the hooſt diſloged fro Origny and went to Creſſy / and than paſſed at Uaux beſyde Laon / and lodged at Syſſone. and the next day they paſſed y• ryuer of Aigne at the bridge of Uayre / and ſo wēt to Hermouyll and to Hormiſſy a four leages fro Reynes / and founde nothyng in their way▪ for euery thyng was put into the good townes and in to fortreſſes. The french kyng had abandoned to his mē of armes / all that euer they coude get abrode in the countre. So thenglyſſhmen had gret nede / and ſpecially of fleſſhe: than they determyned to ſende to Reynes to treate with the to ſende vitayle to their hoſt / as a certayne quā
               tyte of beeſtes / brede / and wyne. They of Reynes anſwered / howe they wolde do nothyng at their deſyre / they badde thē do as they lyſt. the englyſſhmen were ſo ſore dyſpleaſed with that anſwere / y• within a weke after / their currours brent beyonde .lx. vyllages in the marcheſſe of Reyns. Alſo thēglyſſhmen had certayne know lege / howe they of Reyns had within their dykes a great nōbre of beeſtes. So the forwarde came thyder & made their men to entre into the dykes and chaſed out all thoſe beeſtes for none durſt iſſue out of the towne / nor make no deſēce for the archers were on the dykes and ſhotte ſ
                  •
                thicke / that non durſt apere on the walles. So there the englyſſhmen had mo / than .xx. thouſande beeſtꝭ of one and other: and yet they 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
agayne to them of the towne / ſhewyng thē how they wolde burne all their cornes without they wolde ſende out in to their hoſt ſeme brede and wyne. They of Raynes douted that tidynges / and ſo they ſent ſire chares laded with aſmoch brede and wyne as they coude cary / and by that meanes their corne was ſaued fro brennynge. So thenglyſſhmen paſſed by Reynes in good order of batayle / and went to Beaumount for they had paſſed the ryuer beſyde Reynes. And whan they diſloged fro Beaumount on the ryuer of 
                  •
               yell / they rode fort
                  •
               e to paſſe the ryuer of Maren / and ſo cāe to Conde: and ther they founde the bridge broken. Howe be it ye ſtayes and poſtes ſtode ſtyll / & there they founde plankes and tymbre / and ſo made agayne the brige / and than paſſed ouer and lodged in the vyllages about Maren. and the next day they came to the towne of Uertues / and ther was a great ſcrimyſſhe before the caſtell / and dyuers ſore hurte. Therle lodged in the towne of Uertues and in the nyght the towne was brent / all ſaue the abbey wherin the erle was lodged / elles it had been alſo brent. for they of the towne were withdrawen in to the caſtell / and wolde gyue nothyng to ſaue it. The next mornyng the hoſt diſloged and paſſed by the caſtell of Moymer / whiche parteyned to the herytage of the lorde of Chaſtellon / the ſcrimyſſhers came to the barryers / and ſo paſſed forthe and lodged at Pelayng / aprochyng towarde the cytie of Troys / and the next day at Plancy on the ryuer of Aube. Than they rode forthe / the lorde of New caſtell and Johan his brother / and Raymonde of ſaynt Marſyn gaſcoyns / and other englyſſhemen about a .xl. ſpeares of one and other. But they foūde none aduēture a great whyle / wher with they were ſore diſpleaſed. At laſt they ſaw comynge in the feldes a great company of men of armes ridyng towarde Troyes / which was the lorde of Hangeſt and his company. Than the englyſſhemen and gaſcoyns proched their horſes with their ſpurres / and folowed after them. The lorde of Hangeſt had well auewed them / and douted leſt they had been a greatter cōpany than they were in dede / and ſayd to his company. Sirs / lette vs ryde towarde Plancy and ſaue our ſelfe / for the englyſſhmen hath diſcouered vs / and are nere to vs / lette vs ſaue our ſelfe in the caſtell of Plancy. So they drue thyder. And the englyſſhmen fold wed faſt after. There was a man of armes of the lorde of Uertaygnes retynewe / an experte man of armes / named Peter Berton well horſed. he layd his ſpeare in the reſt / and ranne after the lorde of Hāgeſt / who fledde before him. So that his ſpeare poyat touched his backe behynde hym / thinkyng to haue ſtryken him out of his ſadell. Howe beit for all that / the lorde of Hangeſt loſt nother ſadell nor ſlyrroppe / and yet ſtyll the other man of armes helde ſtyll rennyng ye 
               ſpear poynt at his backe / and ſo he came to Plancy. And at the entryng in to the caſtell / the lorde of Hangeſt ſo daynly lepte fro his horſe and entred a fote in to the dyke. Than they of the caſtell entended to ſaue hym / and ſo came to the barryer / and there was a great ſcrimyſſhe / for they of the caſtell ſhotte ſore / for they had many good croſbowes. There was done many a proper feate of armes / of the one part and of the other. So with great payne the lorde of Hangeſt was ſaued / who right valiantly 
                  •
               ought at his firſt entryng in to the caſtell / and ſtyll came thyder people of ye vowarde. The lorde of Uer taygne / ſir Thomas Tryuet / ſir Hughe Caurell / and dyuers other came thyder / ſo that ther was aſore batayle / for ther were ſlayne and taken of the frenche parte about a .xxx. and ye baſe courte of the caſtell brent / and the caſtell aſſayled on all partes / ye whiche was well defended / and the mylles aboute Plancy brent and beten downe. So than the hooſt drewe agayne togyder and paſſed the ryuer of Aube / at the bridge at Angle and rode towardes Ualant / on the ryuer of Sayne. So thus that daye the lorde of Hangeſt was in great aduenture.
            THe ſame day the lordꝭ of the vowarde / ſir Thomas Tryuet / ſir Hughe Caurell / the lorde of Uertayne / the baſtarde his brother / Peter Berton & dyuers other / rode forthe and encountred ſir Johan of Roye / and a .xx. ſpeares parteyninge to the duke of Burgoyne rydinge to Troyes. The englyſſhmen ſpyed theym and folowed after as faſt as they coulde driue their horſes. The frenchemen thought to ſaue them ſelfe / for they were nat men ynowe to abyde them / and ſo the mooſt parte ſaued them ſelfe. And ſir Johan of Roy and dyuers other / put them ſelfe within the barryers of Troyes / for as than they were open. And ſo in the tournynge agayne of the englyſſhemen / they tooke four priſoners who came to ſhorte to ſaue them ſelfe. Amōg the whiche there was a ſquyer of ye duke of Burgoins (called Gyon) an expert mā of armes. his horſe was right ſore chafed. So he reſted in the felde / & had at his backe a myre / and ther he fought right valiātly / agaynſt two

englyſſhemen / who ſpake to hym in englyſſhe / and badde him yelde him: but he wyſt nat what they ſayd. The baſtarde of Uertayne / as he retourned fro the chaſe came to them / and ſayd to the ſquyer in frenche / yelde the. And whan he vnderſtode him / he ſaid agayne. what are you? a gētylman. The baſtarde anſwered / and ſayd yetrewely. Well ꝙ he / than I yelde me to you. And ſo toke him his gauntelet and his ſwerde. than the englyſſhmen wolde haue ſlayne hym / in the baſtardes hādes. Sayeng howe he was nat courteſſe / to take from hym their priſoner / howe be it the baſtarde was ſtronger than they and ſo ſaued his priſoner. Than at nyght queſtyon was made therof before the marſhalles / and ſo all thynges conſydred / the baſtarde kept ſtyll the priſoner / who raunſomed hym ye ſame night / and truſted hym on his faythe / and ſent hym the nexte day to Troyes. Than the hooſt lodged at Balāde on the ryuer of Sayne / and cāe to a village a leage fro Troyes / called Ber nare ſaynt Symple / and ther the great lordes had a great counſayle togyder.
         
         
            ¶ Howe thengliſſhmen came before Troyes / and of the baſtydes that the duke of Burgoyne made withoute Troyes / to reſyſt the englyſſhmen. Cap. CCC .lxiiii.
            
               IN the cyte of Troyes was the duke of Burgoyne and had made there his ſomons / for he had entenſyon & was in wyll to ſyght with thengliſſhmen / bytwene the ryuer of Sayne and yone. And alſo the barons / knyghtes and ſquyers of Fraunce / deſyred none other thyng. But Charles the frenche kynge / wolde in no wyſe acorde therto / bycauſe of doute of fortune. For he remembred moche the great loſſes and domagꝭ: that the nobles of his realme had of tyme paſt / by the vyctories of the englyſſhmen. Wherfore he wolde in no wyſe that they ſhuld ſight / with out it were to their great aduauntage. ¶ The duke of Burgoyne was at Troyes / and with hym the duke of Burbone / the duke of Bare / the erle of Ewe / the lorde Coucy / ſir Johan of Uyen admyrall of the ſee / the lorde of Uyenne and of ſaynt Croyſe / ſir James of Uyenne / ſir Water of Uyen / ye lorde of Tremoyle / the lorde of Uergy / the lorde of Rengemont / the lorde of Hambey / the ſeneſhall of Heynalte / the lorde of ſaynt Pye / the barone of Habers / the lorde of Roy / the vycont Daſſey / ſir Wyllyam baſtarde of Langers / and mo than two thouſand knightes and ſquiers. And it was ſhewed me / howe the lorde Tremoyle was ſent by the duke to the kyng to Parys / to get lycence to fight with the englyſſhmen: and he was nat returned ye ſame day / that thenglyſſhmen came before Troyes. The frenchmen within Troyes thought ſurelye / that the englyſſhmen wolde nat paſſe by / wt out lokyng on the towne. Wherfore they made without the towne / a bowe ſhotte of fro ye gate: a baſtyde of great tymbre / wherin myght well be a thouſande men of armes. In the euenyng in the hooſt / all 
                  〈…〉
               ayns went to coūſayle to determyne what they ſhulde do the next day. Than it was concluded / that euery man with their baners and penones well armed / ſhulde ryde before Troyes / and to abyde in the ſelde. and to ſende to them of the towne / to demaūde batayle. So in the next mornynge they armed them / and ſette theymſelfe in thre batayls / and ſo came in to a fayre playne before Troys / and there taryed. Than two harauldes / as Chandos and Aquitany / were ſente for to the erle of Buckyngham. And whan they were come the erle ſayd. Sirs / go your wa
                  〈…〉
               s to Troyes / & ſhewe the lordes there: howe 
                  〈◊〉
                beyſſued oute of Englande to do dedes of armes / and where as we might haue it / to demaūde therfore. And bycauſe we knowe well / howe a great parte of the ſ
                  •
               oure delyſe / and of the chiualry of Fraūce is within the towne. Therfore ſhewe them / we become this way. and if they wyll any thynge / ſay to them / they ſhall fynde vs in the felde / in the ſame forme and maner / as ye ſhall leaue vs and in ſuche wyſe / as they ought to fynde their enemyes. So the haraldes departed and rode towardes Troyes / thentre of the baſtyde was opyned to them / but they coude nat gette to the gate of the towne. There yſſued oute ſo many men of armes and croſ bowes / ſettyng thē ſelfe in order of batayle: the harauldes had on their cotes of armes of therle of Buckynghams. the lordes demaunded of them what they wolde / & they anſwered / and ſayd. howe they were ſente to ſpeke with the duke of Burgoyne.
            IN the ſame ſeaſon / that theſe harauldes ſhulde haue done their meſſage / the duke of Burgoyne and the lordꝭ with hym / were be

ſy to ſette their men in ordre of batayle. The engliſſhmen thought verely to haue had batayle / wherfore ther were made newe knyghtꝭ. Fyrſt ſir Thomas Tryuet brought his baner rolled vp toguyder / to the erle of Buckyngham / and ſayd. Sir / if it pleaſe you / I ſhall this day diſplay my baner / for thanked be god / I haue reuenues ſufficyent to mayntayne it withall. It pleaſethe me ryght well ꝙ the erle. Than the erle toke the baner / & delyuered it to ſir Thomas Tryuet / and ſayde. ſir Thomas: I pray god gyue you grace to do nobly this day / and alwayes after. Than ſir Thomas toke the baner and diſplayed it / and delyuered it to a ſquier / whome he truſted well. And ſoo went to the vowarde / for he was ordayned ſo to do / by the capitayue the lorde Latymer / and by the marſhall the lorde Fitz water. And ther were made newe knyghtes: as ſir Peter Berton / ſir John̄ and ſir Thomas Paulle / ſir John̄ Syngule / ſir Thomas Dortyngnes / ſir John̄ Uaſſecoq ſir Thomas Braſey / ſir Johan Brauyne / ſir Henry Uernyer / ſir Johan Coleuyll / ſir Wylliam Eurart / ſir Nycholas Styngule / and ſir Hughe Lunyt. And all theſe went to the fyrſte batayle / bycawſe to be at the firſt ſkrimyſſhe. Than the erle called forthe a gentyll ſquyer of the countie of Sauoy / who had ben deſyred be fore to haue ben made knight / both before Arde & ſaynt Omers. This ſquier was called Rafe of Gremers / ſonne to the erle of Gremers. The erle of Buckyngham / ſayd to him. Sir / if god be pleaſed / I thynke we ſhall haue this day batayle / wherfore I wyll that ye be a knight. The ſquier excuſed hym ſelfe / and ſayde. Sir god thanke you of y• noblenes that ye wolde put me vnto. But ſir: I wyll neuer be knyght / without I be made by the handes of my naturall lorde / the erle of Sauoy / in batayll: and ſo he was examyned noo farther. It was great pleaſure to be holde the Engliſſhmen in the felde and the frenchmen made their preparacyon in their baſtyde / for they thought well at the leeſt / to haue ſome ſcrymiſhe. Thinkyng that ſuche men as thengliſſhmen were wold neuer paſſe by / without ſōe maner of face or ſkrimyſſhe. The duke of Burgoyne was there without the towne armed at all peces / with an are in his hande / and ſoo all knyghtes and ſquiers paſſed by hym to the baſtyde / ſo that there was ſo great preaſe / that no man coulde go forewarde / nor the harauldes / coulde nother go forwarde nor backewarde / wherby they coulde nat come to y• duke to do their meſſage as they were cōmaunded.
            BEſyde the erle of Buckynghams commaundemēt to the two harauldes / there were dyuers other / that ſayd to them. Sirs / ye ſhall go forth and do your meſſage / and beſyde that: ſay to the duke of Burgoyne. Howe that the duke of Bretayne / and the countrey there / hath ſent to the kyng of Englande to haue comforte and ayde / agaynſt a certayne barons and knyghtes of Bretayne / rebels to the duke / who wyll nat obey to their lorde: as the mooſt parte of the countrey dothe. But make warre in the countre / & ſhadowe them ſelfe / vnder y• frenche kyng. And bycauſe the kyng of Englande wyll ayde the duke and the countrey / he hath nowe ſpecially ſent one of his vncles / the erle of Buckyngham / with a certayne nombre of men of warr / to go in to Bretayne / to confort the duke and the countre. Who arryued at Calays / and hath taken their way to paſſe throughe the realme of Fraunce / & ſo they be forwarde in their iourney hyder / to the cytie of Troyes, where as they knewe well / there is a great nombre of lordes / & ſpecially the duke of Burgoyne / ſonne to the french kyng diſſeaſed / and brother to the kyng that nowe is. wherfore ye may ſay to him howe ſir Thomas erle of Buckyngham / ſonne to the kyng of Englande diſſeaſed / and vncle to the kyng that nowe is / deſireth of him batayll. The harauldes or they went / they demaunded to haue hadde letters of credence / conſernynge that mater. and they were anſwered: how they ſhulde haue had letters the next day / but in the moruynge they had taken other counſayle / and ſayde. Howe they wolde ſende no letters / but badde them dept / and ſayd. Go your wayes / & ſay as ye haue ben enformed / ye are credable ynough / if they lyſt to beleue you. So the haraldes departed (as ye haue herde before) and the newe englyſſhe knyghtes hadde begon the ſcrimyſſhe / ſo that all was in trouble. And certayn knightes and other of Fraunce / ſayd to the haraudes. Sirs / what do you here? get you hens ye be here in great parell / for here be yuell people in this towne. Whiche doute / cauſed the haraldes to retourne agayne / without any thyng doyng of their meſſage. ¶ Nowe let vs ſhewe what was done in this ſcrimyſſhe.
            FIrſt ther was an engliſſhe ſquyre borne in the byſſhoprike of Lyncoln̄ / an expert man of armes / I can nat ſe whyder he coude ſe or nat: but he ſpurred his horſe his spear in his hande / and his targe about his necke. his horſe came ruſſhyng downe the way / and lepte clene

ouer the barres of the barriers / and ſo galoped to the gate / where as the duke of Burgoyn and the other lordes of Fraunce were / who reputed that dede for a great enterpriſe. The ſquier thought to haue returned / but he coulde nat / for his horſe was ſtryken with ſpeares and heaten downe / & the ſquier ſlayne. wherwith the duke of Burgoyne was ryght ſore diſpleaſed / that he had nat ben taken a lyue as priſoner. Therwith the great batayll of the erle of Buckynghams came on a foote / towarde theſe men of armes in the baſtyde / the which was made but of dores / wyndowes / and tables. And to ſaye the trouth / it was nothyng to holde agaynſt ſuche men of warre / as the engliſſhmen were / wherfore it coulde nat longe endure. Whan the duke of Burgoyne ſawe them comyng ſo thicke and ſo great a nombre / conſideryng howe his nombre was nat ſufficyent agaynſt them. cōmaunded euery man to entre in to the towne: except croſbowes / and ſo they entred in at the gate lytell and lytell / and whyle they entred / the genowayes croſ bowes ſhot continually / and hurte dyuers of the engliſſhmen. There was a ſore ſcrymiſhe / but anone the baſtyde was conquered / it coulde nat endure agaynſt engliſſhmen. So the frenchmen entred agayne in at y• gate / & as they entred: they ſet thēſelfe in ordre in the ſtretes. There was the duke of Lorayne / and the lorde Coucy / the duke of Burbon & dyuers other bytwene the gate and the barryers / there was many a feate of armes done. ſome ſlayne / hurt / and taken. Whan the engliſſhmen ſawe the frenchmen withdrawe backe / they in lykewyſe reculed backe / and ſtode ſtyll in ordre of bataile the ſpace of two houres / and than returned to their lodgyng / and y• next day they went to Maylleroys the Uycount / nere to Sence in Burgoyne / and there the hooſt taryed two dayes to refreſſhe them / and to get vitayles in the countre / for they had no great plenty.
            THus ye haue harde well: howe the engliſſhmen rode throughe the realme of Fraūce to go in to Bretayne / and it was ſayd / and they alſo mayntayned / howe the duke of Bretayne and the countrey had ſent for them / and made no warre in the name of their lorde the kyng of Englande / but named them ſelfe to be ſowdyers of the duke of Bretaynes. Kyng Charles of Fraunce was well in fourmed of all theſe maters / and ſagely and wyſely he abuyſed the parels and inſydētes that might growe by this warre / and ſawe well howe the countre of Bretayne with the ayde of the englyſſhmen were cōtrary to hym / and therby he feared leeſt the fortune of the warr ſhulde be to him y• more harder. And ſpecially by reaſon of the duke of Bretayne / for by him the good townes of Bretayne ſhulde be his enemyes / and be opyned to his enemyes / wherby he ſhulde haue great preiudyce. Wherfore he ſent ſwete letters and gracyous to them of Nauntes / the whiche was the key and chefe towne of all Bretayne. ſhewynge thē / howe thēglyſſhmen as they rydde through the realme do make their auaunt and afferme / howe they be ſoudyers and ſent for by thē / and by the other comons of Bretayne. And alſo ſhe wyng them / howe that if it be ſo / that they wyll ſo contynue / they do yuell and ronne in the maledyction & ſentence of the holy father the pope. And in the forfeyture of two hūdred thouſande florens / the whiche he maye than laufully take of them / and whervnto they are boūde by their writyngꝭ ſealed. and by the treaties made here tofore / wherof they haue y• copy / wherfore they ought nat to forget it. And alſo he ſhewed them howe he hath ben alwayes their frende and louer / and hath conforted and ayded thē always in their buſyneſſes / and counſaylinge thē / that they ſhulde nat do ſo farre / wherby they might take wronge. Sayeng: howe they had no ſuche tytell as to complayne of hym / or to entre in to ſuche a warre / as to receyue his ennemyes. Wherfore he counſayled them to be well aduyſed / and if they haue ben yuell exorted and coū
               ſayled by feble counſayle / yet he wolde pardon it / ſo that they opyn nat their towne to the englyſſhmen his enemyes. And in their ſo doyng he promyſed thē to menteyne and kepe vp their fraunchyſſes and lyberties / and to renewe it yf nede requyred. Whā theſe offers thus made by the frenche kyng / was preſented to thē of Naū
               tes / and well debated amonge them. Than the moſt notable of the towne (ſayd) howe the kynge had cauſe and right to ſay as he dyd / for ſurelye they ſayde: howe they had ſworne and writynges ſealed / howe they ſhulde neuer do none anoyaunce to the realme of Fraunce nor ayde nor aſſyſt none enemy to the kynge or to the realme. Wherfore they toke hede to y• mater / and ſent ſecretly to the kynge / deſyring hym to take no thought for that mater / for they ſayd: thenglyſhmen ſhulde nat be ſuſtayned by them / nor entre in to their towne / to renne or to make any warre to the realme of Fraunce. Howbeit they deſyred the kynge / that if nede requyred / to be ayded and cōforted by ſome of his men / to whō
               
they ſayde / they wolde open their towne / and to none other. Whan the frenche kynge herde this treatie he was right gladde therof / and beleued well their wordes / for Nauntes had ben alwayes good frenche. And of all this knewe no thynge the duke of Bretayne / who was at Uennes / he beleued ſurely that they of Nauntes wolde haue ben trewe and ſtedfaſt to hym / and to haue opened their towne to the englyſſhmen whan they came thyder. ¶ Nowe let vs retourne to the englyſſhmen / who were lodged nere to Sence in Burgoyne / in the whiche cytie was the duke of Bare / the lorde Coucy / the lorde of ſaynt Puye / the lorde of Freſures and their companyes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen rode and pylled the countre of gaſtenoyſe and of Beauſe. And howe a french ſquyer right valyaunt requyredde an engliſſhe ſquier to iuſt with hym. Cap. CCC .lxv.
            
               WHan the erle of Buckyngham and his hooſt had well reſted them at Maylleroyes the vicount. Than they toke counſayle to drawe in to Gaſtenoyes. Than they paſſed the ryuer of Dyone / & theyr 
                  •
               oreryders went to the faubories of Sēce. and the next day they lodged at ſaynt John̄s of Nemour and therabout and than at Beauſe in gaſtenoyes. And ther the hooſt taryed thre dayes bycauſe of the good plētyfull countre that they founde there. Than they toke counſayle / whyder they ſhulde holde and kepe the playne way of Beauſe / or els by the ryuer of Loyre. Than they determyned to take the way of Beauſe / & to go towardes Tourey in Beauſe. In the caſtell of Tourey was the lorde of ſaynt Pye / ſir Olyuer of Manny / ſir Guy of Baueux / and a great nombre of men of warre. And at yenuyll in Beauſe was the lorde of Uylames / the Barroyſe of barres and dyuers other / about .iii. C. ſpeares. So thus in all the caſtels and fortreſſes 
                  〈◊〉
                Beauſe / there were men of warr ſet / to re ſyſt agaynſt thengliſſhmen. The englyſſhe vowarde came and ſcrimyſſhed with thē of Tourey / and dyuers hurt on bothe partes. There the erle of Buckyngham and all his hooſt was lodged about / and founde ther great plenty o
                  •
                vitayls. At the ſcrimyſſhe before Tourey / ther was a ſquyer of Beauſe auaunſed him ſelfe wt
               out any ſettyng on by any other perſon / & came to the barryers ſcrimyſſhynge / and ſayd to the englyſſhmen. Sirs / is there any gentylman among you / that for the loue of his lady wyll do any dede of armes. If there be any / here I am redy to iſſue out armed at all peces a horſ backe to ren thre courſes with a ſpeare / to ſtryke thre ſtrokes with an axe / & thre ſtrokes with a dagger. Nowe let vs ſe if there be any amorous amonge you. This ſquyer was called Gawen Mychaell. This worde and requeſt was anon ſpredde among the englyſſhmen. Than an englyſſhe ſquyer / called Joachym Cathore: ſtept forthe / and ſayd. I am here / redy to delyuer his requeſt: let hym come out of the caſtell. Than the lorde Fitz water marſhall of the hooſt / came to the barryers / and ſayd to ſir Guy le Baueux Cauſe your ſquyer to cōe forthe / he ſhall fynde one wyll be gladd to delyuer him / and we ſhall aſſure hym in all thynges. Gawen Mychaell was right ioyouſe of thoſe wordes / and armed hym incontynent / and the lordes dyde helpe to arme hym / and ſette hym a horſ backe. So he yſſued out of the caſtell and thre with him / and the varlettes bare: thre ſpeares / thre axes / and thre daggers. He was greatly regarded by the englyſſhmen / for they beleued afore / that there was no frenche man that wolde fyght body for body. And in the ſame chalenge / they ſhulde haue thre ſtrokes with the ſwerde: ſo he had alſo thre ſwerdes borne after hym.
            THe erle of Buckingham was enformed of this chalenge / & ſayd. Howe he wolde go and ſe it hym ſelfe. And ſo he moūted on his horſe / and the erle Stafforde and the erle Dymeſtre with hym / and for this cauſe ſeaſed the aſſaut at Tourey▪ the englyſſhmen drewe thyder to ſe theſe iuſtes: than the englyſſhman cāe forthe armed at all peces moūted on a good horſe. Whan they were come in to the place / there ſpeares were delyuered them / and ſo ran eche at other / and myſſed by reaſon of ſtryuinge of their horſes. The ſeconde courſe they met and ataynted. Than therle of Buckyngham ſayd / hola: ceaſe for it is late. And than he ſayd to the conſtable / cauſe thē to ceaſe / for they haue done ynough for this day. They ſhall ende their enterpriſe another ſeaſon at more leyſar / than we haue as nowe. and take good hede / y• the french

ſquyer lacke nothyng / but lette hym be as well kept as oure owne ſquyer. And ſhewe or cauſe to be ſhewed to thē of the caſtell / that they take no care for their ſquyer / for he ſhall go with vs to ꝑforme his enterpriſe / nat as a priſoner / for if he ſcape a lyue / he ſhall returne agayne with out parell. The erles wordes were acomplyſhſhed / and it was ſhewed to the ſquier / by ye marſhall / howe he ſhulde ryde with them without any daunger / and whan the erle is content / ye ſhall be delyuered. ſir quod the ſquyer / as god wyll ſo be it. And a haraude was ſent to the caſtell / to ſhewe all the mater to them within.
            ¶ The next day they rode to yēuyll in Beauſe alwayes beyng in hope to fyght with their enemyes / for well they knewe / howe they were purſued and coſted on all parties by the frenchmen who were as great a nombre as they were / or greatter. And to ſay the trouthe / the frenche lordes / knightes and ſquiers / had great wyll and deſyre to fight with the englyſſhmen / and ſayd among them ſelfe. Howe it was a great ſhame to ſuffre them ſo longe vnfought withall. And whan they ſpake to the kynge therof / he ſayd euer to them. Sirs / let thē alone to kepe on their waye / they ſhall at lengthe leſe them ſelfe. So thus the englyſſhmen kept forthe their waye / to thentent to entre in to Bretayne. And as ye haue harde / in yenuyll in Beauſe / there were mo than thre hundred ſperes / and all the hooſt paſſed by before the barryers / ther was a lytell ſcrimyſſhe and ſo paſſed forthe / for they loſt their payne / and without yenuylle there was a fayre wyndmyll / the whiche was beaten downe. So the erle of Buckyngham came to yt
                  •
               ruyll / and alighted at the houſe of the tēplers / and the vouarde went to Puyſet. And they were aduertyſed / howe that there was a ſtronge towre and a xl. companyons within. Thenglyſſhmen went and aſſayled it ▪ it ſtode on the playne grounde with lytell defence. So there was a great aſſaut / but it endured nat longe / for the englyſſhe archers ſhotte ſo holly toguyder / that ther was none durſt apere at any defence: So the towre was taken / and all they within ſlayne or taken. And than thenglyſſhmen ſette fyre in the towre and ſo paſſed forthe / for they coulde fynde no good waters / whiche was a great myſchefe for them. Than they came to Ermoyne and loged ther and fro thens wente and lodged in the foreſt of Marcheaunoy.
         
         
            ¶ Of the iuſtꝭ bytwene Gawen Mychaell fraunſois / & Joahym Cathore angloys: and of the wordꝭ that kyng Charles of Fraunce ſayd on his deth bedde. Cap. CCC .lxvi.
            
               WIthin the foreſt of Mar cheaunoye was an abbey of monkes Seſteauſe / wherin were noble houſes and buyldynges of olde tyme. it was edified & bylded / by a valyāt & noble man therle of Bloys and he gaue thervnto reuene wes and rentes / but the warres had ſore myniſſhed their lyuelode. There the erle of Buckynghame lodged and herde maſſe on our lady day in Septembre. And there it was ordayned / that Gawen Mychaell ſhulde furnyſſhe his chalenge / agaynſt Joachym Cathore the nexte day. the ſame day thenglyſſhmen came towarde Marcheau noy / and within the towne ther was capitayne the ſame tyme / a knyght of that countre / called ſir Wyllyam of ſaynt Martyne / a ryght ſage knyght and a valyant in armes. Whan the englyſſhmen ſawe the maner of that caſtell / they withdrewe to their lodgynges. The lorde Fitz water came before the caſtell of Uerby / nat to gyue any aſſaute vnto it / but to ſpeke with the lorde therof at y• barryers / bycauſe they knewe eche other. They had ben toguyder before that tyme in Pruce. So the lorde Fitz water knowledged hym ſelfe to the lorde of Uerby / and deſyred hym for olde acquayntance / to ſende him ſome of his wyne of his courteſy / and promyſed to ſaue all his landes fro brennyng and waſtynge. The lorde of Uerby ſent hym wyne largely / and thretie myches therwith / for the whiche the lorde Fytz water gaue hym great thankes / and kept well his promyſe. The next daye after our lady day / Gawen Mychaell and Jochyme Cathore armed theym and mounted on their horſes / to performe their enterpriſe. So they met at the ſpeare poyntes rudely / the frēch ſquyer iuſted right pleſantly / the englyſſhman ranne to lowe / for he ſtrake the frenchman depe in to the thygh. Wherwith the erle of Bucking ham was ryghtſore diſpleaſed / and ſo were all thother lordes: & ſayd / howe it was ſhamefully ron. Than eche of them ſtrake thre ſtrokes with their ſwerdes / than therle ſayd howe they had done ynough (and ſayd) howe they ſhulde

               
                  〈◊〉
                no mo
                  ••
               : tor he ſawe the ſquyet blede ſore.
            
               
                  •
               han Gawen Mychaell was vnarmed / and the erle ſent hym by an haraude a hundred frā
               kes and gaue hym leaue to depte home agayn to his owne company. Sendyng them worde / howe he had acquyted hym right valiantly. ſo this Gawen Mychaell retourned agayne to ye frenche lordes / and the englyſſhemen departed fro Marcheaunoy / and toke the way towarde Uandoue / but or they came there / they lodged in the foreſt of Coulonbers.
            
               YE haue herde before: howe the frē
               che kyng had ſent dyuers treaties and couenauntes / to certayne townes in Bretayne: to the entent that they ſhulde nat open their townes to the englyſſhmen. Shewyng thē that if they dyde otherwyſe / they ſhulde ſoore treſpaſſe agaynſt hym / ſo y• it ſhulde be inꝑdonable. they of Naunces had ſent to the kyng ſecretely / that he ſhulde be in no doute of them. Promyſinge / they wolde make no treatie / that ſhulde be agaynſt the kynge their lorde / ſo that yf the englyſſhmen dyde aproche their towne / than the kynge to ſende them ſome ſocoure / to the whiche the frenche kyng was well agreed / and had charged his counſayle to take hede therto. Of all theſe treaties / ſir Johan de Bulle hadde the buſyneſſe therof vnder the duke of Aniou who lay at Angers. The duke of Burgoyne was in the cytie of Mans and therabout / and in the caſtelles and fortereſſes there aboute / there were theſe lordes. The duke of Burbone / the erle of Bare / the lorde Coucy / the erle Ducke / and the duke a
                  •
                Lorayne / and ſo moche people / that they were aboue the nombre of ſixe thouſande men of armes / who ſayde amonge them ſelfe. Howe they wolde whyder the kynge wolde or nat / fight with the englyſſhemen / or they were paſt the tyuer of Sartie / the whiche departeth Mayne and An
                  •
               owe. ¶ The ſame ſeaſon a ſickeneſſe toke the frenche kynge wherby hym ſelfe and all ſuche as loued hym / were greatlye diſcomforted: for they ſawe in hym no remedy but that ſhortly he ſhulde dye. He knewe it well hym ſelfe howe he coude nat lyue longe / for ſo ſayde all his phiſycions and ſurgyons / I ſhall ſhewe you why.
            IT was of trouthe as the common brunte ranne / that the kynge of Nauetr / whan the frenche kyng was but duke of Normandy and lay there / he wolde haue poyſoned him. ſo that the kyng receyued the poyſon / and was in the caſe / that all the heare of his body went of / and all the nayles of his handes and fete / and than all his body became as drie as a ſtaffe: ſo that he was without remedy. The emperoure of Rome his vncle / whan he herde ſpeakynge of his malady / he ſent hym a conyng phiſycion the greatteſt mayſter reputed in that arte / that was as than in all the worlde. Whan this mayſter was come in to Fraunce to the kynge / who as than was but duke of Normandy / and had ones knowlege of his diſeaſe: he ſaid he knewe well that he was poyſoned / and was in greate parell of dethe. And ſo he dyde there / one of the greatteſt cures that hath been herde of / for he kylled the venym within hym / or the beſt parte therof. and made his heer and nayles to growe agayne / and made hym hole / and brought him agayne to his ſtrength. This venym euer yſſued out of hym lytell and lytell at his arme by a lytell pype. and whan this mayſter departed out of Fraunce / he gaue the kynge a receyte to vſe as long as he lyued / and he ſayd to the kynge and to thē that were about him. Loke whan this yſſue by this pype drieth vp / than ſurely ye ſhall dye. But ye ſhall haue a fyftene dayes reſpyte after ye fall ſicke or euer ye dye / to remembre your ſoule. So the kynge remembred well his wordes / & bare this pype .xxii. dayes / whiche thynge often tymes abaſſhed hym. And ſuche phiſycions as he had mooſt truſt in / they of ten tymes reioyſed hym / and ſayd. Sir / by the good medycins that ye haue we ſhall make you to lyue long in great ioye / wherin he had great truſt. Beſyde this / the kyng had other diſeaſes right greuous / and ſpecially in his tethe / wherof he hadde marueylous payne. And the kynge knewe well by theſe maladyes / yt he ſhulde nat lyue longe. At his later dayes / the thynge that mooſt conforted hym was / that god hadde ſent hym thre fayre chyldren / two ſonnes and our doughter. Charles / Lewes / and Katheryne.
            
               WHan this iſſue in his arme began to drie vp / the doutes of his dethe began to aproche. Than he prouyed therfore / for like a noble / prudent / and ſage prince / as he was euer in all his warkes. He ſent for his thre bretherne / the duke of Berrey / the duke of Burgone / and the duke of Burbone. and he let his ſeconde brother the duke of Aniowe alone / and ſent nat for hym / bycauſe he knewe well he was ſo ſore gyuen to couy
                  •
               ouſneſſe. Than the king

ſayde to the other thre. My fayre bretherne / by the ordynaūce of nature I fele well and knowe howe I ſhall nat lyue long. Wherfore I recommaunde in to your kepyng my ſonne Charles / and loke that ye vſe youre ſelfe to him / as good vncles ſhulde do to their nephewe / and than ye acquyte your ſelfe to hym trewely / and crowne hym kynge as ſoone as ye can after my dethe. Counſayle hym alwayes well and trewely / for in you lyeth all my truſt. The chylde is yonge and lyght of ſpiryte / therfore it is great nede / that he be well counſayled and gouerned. And teche him or cauſe him to be taught / all the pointes and ſtates ryall / the which he ought to kepe and mary hym in ſo high a place that the realm maye fare the better therby. Longe a gone / I herde a mayſter of aſtronomy ſay and affirme that in his youthe he ſhulde haue moche a do / and ſhulde eſcape fro many daungerous parelles. Wherfore I haue had dyuers ymagmacyons howe it might be / without it growe by reaſon of Flaūders / for thanked be god / as for the buſyneſſe of this our realme of Fraunce / ſtandethe in right good poynte. The duke of Bretayne is a craftie and a ſubtell man / and hath hadde alwayes his herte rather englyſſhe than frenche. Wherfore it wyll be requyſite / that ye kepe the noble men and good townes of Bretayne in loue and amyte / wherby yeſhall breke parte of his entēt. I prayſe greatly the bretons for alwayes they haue ſerued me and helpte to kepe my realme fro myne ennemyes. And I wyll ye make the lorde Clyſſon cōſtable / for all thynges conſydred / I ſe no man ſo mete as he for that offyce. Seke for ſome maryage for my ſonne Charles in Almaygne / to the entent that our alyaunce might be the ſtronger. ye well vnderſtande / how our aduerſary the kyng of Englande wyll mary there / to haue the more alyaunce. The poore people of our realme / ar ſore oppreſſed and tourmented by him & his. Therfore putte them away as ſhortely as ye can / for they are thynges though I haue ſuſtayned thē / that greueth me ryght ſore / and lyeth heuy in my courage. But the great alyance that we haue in ye good townes of Bretayne / hath cauſed me to forbere fightynge with them / ſo longe as we haue done.
            THe kynge ſpake dyuers other wordes / the whiche I canne nat reſyte. At this reherſall was the duke of Aniowe abſent. The kyng douted hym / bycauſe he was ſo couytous but thoughe the kynge dyde abſent hym at the houre of his dethe / and putte hym farre of fro the buſyneſſes of the realme of Fraunce. yet the duke of Aniowe thought to medyll neuer the leſſe for all his abſence / for he had alwayes meſſangers comynge and goynge bytwene Paris and Angers / who euer reported to hym the certayntie of the kynge his brother. And alſo the duke had ſome ſecrete perſons alwayes about the kynge / by whome he knewe euery thynge. for the ſame day that the kynge dyed he was in Paris / and nere to the kynges chambre / and ſo thought to prepare for himſelfe (as ye ſhall her after) But nowe we wyll purſue on our mater as touchyng the englyſſhmen goyng in to Bretaygne.
         
         
            ¶ Of the lorde of Mauuoyſon who was taken priſoner by the engliſſhemen / and of the lorde of Hāgeſt who ſkaped / & of the dethe of kyng Charles of Fraunce the fifte of that name. Cap CCC .lxvii.
            
               WHan the erle of Buckyngham yongeſt ſonne to kyng Edward the thirde departed fro the foreſt of Marcheaunoy they rode towardes Uandon / and to the foreſt of Colombiers. There rode to gyder ſir Thomas Triuet / and ſir willyam Clynton / and with them a .xl. speres / and by aduenture they encountred on the way the lorde of Hangeſt comyng fro Uandone / with a xxx. ſpeares. The engliſſhmen knewe incontynent that they were frēchmen / and ſo ran feirſly at them. The frenchmen ſawe they were ouer matched / and thought nat therfore to abyde thē alſo they were nat farre of fro Uandone. So they rode thyderwarde as faſt as they myght / and the englyſſhmen after / and there was ouer throwen with a ſpeare / ſir Robert of Hangeſt / coſyn to the lorde of Hāgeſt / and John̄ of Mō
               decryes and ſyxe other were taken̄e priſoners. The lorde of Hangeſt came ſo to the barryers / that they were opyn as his happe was / and ſo entred in therat. And than toke his ſpeare / and tourned hym to defence right valiantly / but the englyſſhmen hadde a twelfe priſoners.

               
                  〈…〉
                The ſame day
                  •
                
               
                  ••
               de forthe ſir Robert Ca
               
                  •••
               ll and his company / who encountred ye lorde of Mauuoyſon / defendyng him ſelfe right valiantlye / Howe be it finally ſir Robert Canoll toke h
                  •
               m his owne handes. the ſame daye the hooſt paſſed by Uandone and wente to Auſey / and the next day to ſaynt Cales and ther reſted two dayes / and than went to Pount Uolayne. Thus the englyſſhmen rode forthe and founde no man that ſpake agaynſt them / ſo all the coū
               trey was full of men of warre. There were a great nombre in the cytie of Mauns / and the duke of A
                  ••
               ou rode by Towres in Tourayne / by Bloyes and by Orlyaunce / and ſo came to Parys. For he had knowledge howe his brother the kynge laye in great ieopardy / and nat likely 
                  •
               o ſcape / wherfore he thought to be at his dyeng. His men of armes kepte ſtyll their garyſons and purſued theng
                  •
               yſſhmen. The men of armes of Fraunce ordayned to trouble the englyſſhmen as moche as they might. Thynkynge to encloſe them in the countrey / and ſo to 
                  •
               amyſſhe them if they coude / and than to fyght with them at their aduantage / whyder the frenche kynge wolde or nat. And they made on the paſſage of the ryuer of Sartre / where as they thought the englyſſhmen ſhulde paſſe / great defence. and brought thyder great pyles of wode and dra
                  •
               e them downe by force in to the ryuer / wherby no man coude paſſe there. And alſo at the yſſuinge out of the ryuer / they made great and depe dykes / ſo that no mā coude paſſe out. The erle of Buckyngham and his cōpany departed fro Pount Uolayne / and came to the ryuer of Sartre and there reſted / for they coulde fynde no paſſage / for the ryuer was great and depe and yuell to paſſe / but at certayne places. The vowarde rode a longe the ryuer & coulde fynde no paſſage / but there as the pyles were driuen in the water. Than the lordes a lyghted and aduyſed well the paſſage / and ſayde. We muſt ned
                  •
               s paſſe this ſame waye / if we wyll go any farther. Therfore let vs go to it ▪ & by force drawe out theſe pyles. Thanne ye ſhulde haue ſene lordes knyghtes / and ſquyers entre in to the ryuer at aduenture / and toke great payne 
                  •
               r they coulde gette out theſe pyles. Howe be it finally they drewe them out / and ſo opyned the paſſage with great payne.
            NOwe ye may cō
               
                  •
               ydre / that if the french men had as than purſewed them / and knowen o
                  •
                their dede they might haue 
                  〈◊〉
                th
                  •
                great 
                  〈…〉
               age. For the formaſt coude nat haue ben ayded with them that came after / bycauſe of the great maryſſes that they hadde paſt / but ſo moche dyde the englyſſhe men that they paſſed ouer / and ſo came to Noyen on the ryuer of Sartre. ¶ The ſame day that the engliſſhmen paſſed the ryuer of Sartre / Charles the frenche kynge dyed in his houſe of ſaynt Poule in Parys. And as ſoone as the duke of A
                  •
               io we his brother knewe that his eyen were cloſed / he toke and ſeaſed all the kynges iewels the whiche were without nombre ▪ and dyde put them in to ſaue kepynge to his behoue. Thynkyng how they came right well to paſſe / to ayd hym in his warres that he thought to make / for he wrote hym ſelfe kynge of Cycell / of Pulle / of Calabre / and of H
                  •
               eruſalem.
            THe frenche kynge was caryed through the cytie of Parys with open viſage diſcouered / his bretherne and his two ſonnes behynde hym to the abbey of ſaynt Denyſe. and there he was buryed right honourably / in lyke maner as he hadde ordayned in his lyfe tyme / and ſir Bertram of Cleſquy his conſtable laye at his fete. And though that kynge Charles in his lyfe tyme had well ordayned for the gouernyng of the realme / howe it ſhulde haue ben ordayned. yet the duke of Aniou folowed nothinge that ordynaunce. For he toke on hym incontynent the gouernynge and reygned aboue all his bretherne. Howe be it he wolde that Charles his nephewe ſhulde be kynge / but he wolde haue the gouernyng of the realme aboue all other / bycauſe he was the eldeſt. And there was none in Fraunce that durſt ſaye agaynſt hym. Thus the kynge dyed about Myghelmas. Anone after his diſceaſe / the lordes of Fraūce aduyſed that ſone after Halowen tyde they wolde crowne the yonge kyng Charles at Reynes / to the which coronacy on the thre vncles to the kynge were well agreed. That is to ſaye / the duke of Aniowe / the duke of Berrey / and the duke of Burgoyne / ſo that they myght haue the gouernynge of the realme / tyll the kynge came to the age of one and twētie yeres. To this ſware all the nobles and prelates of Fraunce. Than knowledge of the coronacyon of this yong kinge was gyuen in to outwarde partes / as to the duke of Brabant / to duke Aubert of Bauyer ▪ and to the erle of Sauoy: to the erle of Bloyes to the duke of Guerles / to the duke of Julyers / to the erle of Armynake / and to the erle of Foim▪
               
(The duke of Barle / the duke of Lorayne / the lorde of Coucy / and the erle Dolphyne of Auuergne) were ſtyll in the purſute of the englyſh mē / wherfore they were nat ſent for to be at this coronacyon. The erle of Flaunders was deſyred to cōe thyder / the day was aſſigned on Alhalowen day / the whiche was on a ſondaye / as it fell that yere. Of the dethe of the frenche kynge were they of Gaunt ryght ſorie / for he dyde thē moche good in their warre / for he loued but lytell the erle of Flaunders. ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of the englyſſhmen / and leaue the coronacyon of the frenche kyng.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the engliſſhmen arryued in Bretayne / and howe the duke excuſed hym ſelfe of his long taryenge fro them. Cap. CCC .lxviii.
            
               ALl this ſeaſon the englyſſhmen knewe no
                  •
               hynge of the parell that the frenche kyng was in / and were paſſed the ryuer of Loyre / and were lodged at Nogen. and than departed and wente to Porle a two leages fro Sable / and all the power of France / was as than in the cite of Mās and therabout / but they dyde nothynge but alwayes cooſted the englyſſhmen. Some ſayde they wolde fight with theym / but whan the tydynges came amonge theym / howe the frenche kyng was deed. Than their purpoſe was broken / for dyuers of the lordes returned in to Frā
               ce to herken for tidynges. And ſo the englyſſhe men lay ſtyll a thre or foure dayes / than they departed and went to ſaint Peters of Auren / and fro thens to Argens. and the next day the hooſt paſſed the ryuer of Mayenne / thorough a marys with great payne / for they coulde nat paſſe but two or thre a front the ſpace of two leages▪ If the frenchmen had knowen therof / and had aſſayled the vowarde / the re
                  •
               ewarde coude na
                  •
                haue gyuen them any mane
                  •
                of helpe. The englyſſhmen doubted moche that paſſage / howe beit they paſſed it and came to Coſſe / and were there four dayes ▪ alwayes in hope to here ſome newes out of Bretaine. The duke of Bretayne was in Hanybout / in the marcheſſe of Uannes and herde often tymes worde of the englyſſhemen / howe they aproched nere to Bretaygne. And he wyſt nat well as than / how to be demeaned / for whan the dethe of the frenche kyng was ſhewed to hym / he lette it ſoone ouerpaſſe / for he loued hym but a lytell / and ſayd to them that were about hym. The rancoure and hate that I had to the realme of Fraunce / bycauſe of kynge Charles nowe deed / is miniſſhed more than the one halfe. Such haue hated the father / that haue loued right well the ſonne / and ſome haue made warre to the father / that after hath ayeded the ſonne. Howe be it I muſt acquyte me trewely agaynſt the englyſſhmen / for they been come hyder at my requeſt / and haue paſſed thoroughe the realme of Fraūce. Therfore I muſt kepe that I haue promyſed to them. There is one harde poynt for me and for them / for I vnderſtande that the good townes of Bretaygne are cloſed faſt / and wyll nat ſuffre them to entre And thervpon the duke called his counſayle to hym / as the lorde of Mounbourſyer / ſir Stephyn Guyon / ſir Wylliam Tanneguy / ſir Euſtace Houſſey / ſir Geffray Caiemelle / and the Leſ
                  •
               ewe of Lyon / and ſayd to them. Sirs / ye ſhall ryde and mete the erle of Buckynghame / who aprocheth nere to this our countre of Bretaygne. I thynke ye ſhall mete them nat farre hens / wherfore go and recōmaunde me to hym and ſalute all the other lordes / and ſay vnto th
                  •
                fro me / that ſhortly I wyll be at Reyns to mete them there. Therfore lette them take that way / and ther we ſhall all togyder take aduyſe / how we ſhall contynue forthe. And ſhewe them how I fynde nat my countre in the ſame poynt that it was in / whan I ſent for them in to England ▪ wherwith I am ryght ſore diſpleaſed / and ſpecially with them of Nauntes / who rebell more than any other. So theſe knyghtes departed with their meſſage and rode towarde Naūtes and in their company a fortie ſpeares. The englyſſhmen departed fro Coſſe / and entred into the foreſt of Grauell / and paſſed throughe and came to Uyter in Bretayne ▪ for ther they were better aſſured than they were before / for thanne they knewe well they ſhuld no more be purſued by the frenchemen / and fro thens they wente to Chateau Briant and ther reſted / bycauſe of comynge of the dukes knightes thyder to them.
            
               
UHe erle of Buckyngham and the other lordes of Englande / receyued the ſayde knightes meſſangers / to the duke of Bretayne right honorably / and there they had toguyder great counſayls / and the englyſſhmen ſayde to them / howe they had great marueyle / that the duke of Bretayne nor the countrey were nat otherwyſe aparelled. Than it apered to receyue them / ſeyng they were come thyder at their requeſt / and taken ſuche payne / as to paſſe thorought the realme of Fraunce. Than the lorde Mounbourſyer ſpake for all the reſydue / in excuſynge of the duke / and ſayde. My lordes / ye haue good cauſe & reaſon to ſaye as ye do. And as for the duke / he is in great wyll to kepe and to acomplyſſhe the ordynaunces and couenantes that he made with you / and you with hym / accordynge to his power / but he canne do acordynge to his wyll. And ſpecially he canne nat rule them of Naūtes / whiche is the kay of Bretaygne / who are as nowe rebelles / and haue determyned to receyue into their towne menne of warre of the frenche partie. Wherof my lorde the duke is gretly marueyled / for they were the firſt that alyed theym ſelfe with the other good townes of Bretaygne / to haue taken his parte and yours. Alſo my lorde thynketh / they haue made a newe treatie and aliance with the newe yonge frenche kynge / who ſhall be crowned at Halowmas next comyng. Wherfore ſirs. My lorde deſyreth you to holde hym excuſed. And moreouer / that ye wyll take the way towardes Reynes / & thyder he wyll come to you / hauyng great deſyre to ſe you / and of this he wyll natte fayle. Theſe wordes greatly contented the erle of Buckyngham and the englyſſhmen / & ſayd. howe the duke coulde ſaye no better. Than the dukes meſſangers retourned agayne to Hanibout / and ſo to Uannes to the duke. And the englyſſhemen taryed at the caſtell Briaunt foure dayes / and than departed and came to the ſubbarbes of Reyns but the gates of the cite were cloſed / and wolde ſuffre no man of armes to entre in to the cytie. But the erle of Buckingham the lorde Latymer / ſir Robert Canolle / and a ſixe other were lodged within the cytie / and the dukes coūſayle. and there they taryed a fyftene dayes abydinge for the duke of Bretayne who came nat / wherof they hadde great marueyle. Within the cytie of Reyns was the lorde Mon teraulewe the lorde of Mountforde in Bretaygne / ſir Geffray of Quarmell / ſir Alaye de la Houſſey capitayne of Reynes / and ſir Euſtace his brother: and dayly they excuſed the duke of Bretayne. I canne nat ſay whyder they hadde good cauſe ſo to do or nat but the englyſſhmen began nat to be well content / bycauſe the duke came nat. They of Nauntes kepte their cytie cloſe / for they were nat well aſſured of the englyſſhmen that were lodged at Reynes / wherfore they ſente to the duke of Aniowe / who had made all the treaties with them. ſhewyng hym howe they were nat ſtronge of thēſelfe to kepe and defende their cytie / if they ſhulde haue any aſſaut / without he wolde ſende them ſome men of armes: deſyringe hym ſo to do. To their requeſt agreed the foure dukes that hadde the realme in gouernaunce / Aniowe / Berrey / Burgoyne / and Burbone. And ſo they ſent thyder mo than ſixe hundred ſpeares of good men of armes / men of eſtate and of gret valure. Thus they of Nauntes were well cōforted / and theſe men of armes entended to repayre the towne in all poyntes / and to bringe it into that caſe / able to reſyſt any aſſaut gyuen therto.
            
               THe engliſſhmen beyng at Reynes and therabout / began to murmur and to grudge agaynſt the duke / bycauſe he came nat. And thā they determyned to ſende vnto hym / & ſir Thomas Percy and ſir Thomas Tryuet was ordayned to go to the duke / and with thē a fyue hundred ſpeares to conducte and dyſcouer them / and as many archers. And ſo they departed on a thurſdaye / and the hooſt on the ſaturday after. And than the erle of Buckyngeham wente and lodged at ſaynt Sulplyces in Bretaygne / and there taryed a thre dayes. and than he went to Cābore / and there taryed foure dayes. And the duke of Bretayne was as than departed fro Hanybout and was come to Uannes / and euery daye he knewe the demeanyng of thenglyſſhmen by his owne menne / ſuche as were with them. Than he determyned all thynges conſydred to ſpeke with them / for acordynge to his honour / and to ſuche alyaunces as he had made with them / he coude no lengar driue them of. And vnderſtode howe ſir Robert Canoll / ſir Thomas Percy / and ſir Thom̄s Tryuet were comyng towarde hym. Than he toke the way to go to Reyns / and the ſame day that he departed fro Uannes / he met with theſe engliſſhe knightes. Than they made great reioyſynge eche of other in the felde / and the duke demaunded tidynges of therle of Buckyngham.

The knihgtes anſwered & ſayd. howe they left hym at Reynes right marueylouſly diſpleaſed bycauſe he herde no worde fro hym. The duke excuſed hym ſelfe / and ſayd: howe by his faithe he was no leſſe troubled than he was. than they rode all toguyder / and were welcome to Uannes / and than they had knowledge howe the englyſſhe hooſt was dyſlodged fro Cambre / and were comynge towardes Hayde and to Mauſeyre they helde that waye. The next day therle of Buckyngham and the duke mette / ther was ſhewed great loue bytwene them. And ther the duke right honeſtly excuſed hym ſelfe to therle & to thēgliſſhmen / in that he had taryed ſo long but he ſayde the cauſe was / bycauſe he founde nat his countre ſo well diſpoſed / as he had truſted they had been / wherfore he coude nat kepe his promyſe that he had made to the englyſſhemen / in the begynnyng of ſomer. Than anſwered the erle and ſayde. Fayre brother of Bretayne for all that / & ye wyll we wyll nat abyde / but that we ſhall correcte your rebels / for what with the ayde and puyſſance that ye haue / and ours toguyder: and that day lye maye come to vs out of Englande. We ſhall bringe vnder yor ſubgettes in ſuche wyſe / that they ſhall be happy / whan they may cōe to axe your mercy, with ſuche wordes and other / they were long toguyder talkynge: and than eche of theym drewe to their lodgynge / and the next daye they rode toguyder. And it was determyned / that the erles counſayle ſhulde go to Reynes with the duke / and ther to cōclude all their maters. The ſame night the duke of Bretayne and the erles counſayle abode at the Mauſeyr / and the erle returned to Hayde. and ſo the next day the duke wēt to Reynes / and the lorde Latymer / ſir Robert Canoll / ſir Thomas Percy / ſir Thomas Try uet / and the erles counſayle in his company. ſo they were thre dayes coūſayling their maters.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Bretayne & the englyſſhmen beſeged Nauntes / and of the coronacyon of kynge Charles the ſixt of that name / and of the ſcrimyſſhe done before Nauntes. Cap CCC .lxix.
            
               AT the laſt counſayle it was acorded and ſworne on the holy euangelyſtes / that the duke of Bretayne ſhuld come and lay ſiege to Naū
               tes / in the erle of Buckynghams company / within fyftene dayes / after the comynge of the englyſſhemen thyder. And yt the duke of Bretayne ſhuld bringe and cauſe to be brought by the ryuer of Loyre / plentie of barges and barkes / the ſorer therby to conſtrayne them of Naūtes. And the duke nor his men nat to departe fro the ſiege / tyll the towne were wonne. All the thynges to conclude and to determyne / therle of Buckyngham was ſent for to Hayde / to be preſent at the confyrmynge of that treatie. So he came and lodged in the ſubbarbes of Reynes (as he had done before) So the erle and the lordes entred in to Reynes / and they dyned all with the duke And there the Duke ſolempnely ſware by his faythe and by the holy euangelyſtes / y• he wold come with all his power before Nauntes / and thervpon departed and went to Hanibout. and the englyſſhemen abode at Reynes / and there they were a fyftene dayes orderyng their buſyneſſe. Of all theſe maters they of Nauntꝭ were well enfourmed / and howe they ſhulde be beſeged. Wherfore they ordayned theym ſelfe redy to receyne them. One of the greatteſt capytens within Nauntes / was ſir Johan of Baroyes of Barres / a ryght valyant & an expert knight / and with hym ther was the capitayne Cleſſon Johan of Caſtell Moraunte / Morfonace / ſir Johan of Maletrayt / the lorde of Tournemyn and dyuers other / the floure of men of armes. They prouyded wyſely for ſuche thynges as they wanted / aſwell for the ryuer as for the gates and towres / on ſuche parte as they thought the ſiege ſhulde be on.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue ſpekyng of this mater and retourne to the coronacyon of the younge kynge Charles of Fraunce / who was the ſame tyme crowned at Reynes.
            yE muſt knowe / that nothyng was ſpared touchyng nobleneſſe / at the coronacyon of the younge kynge Charles of Fraunce / who was crowned kyng on a ſonday the .xii. yere of his age: the yere of oure lorde / a

thouſande thre hundred and fourſcore. At the ſolempnyte of his coronacyon / were great nō
               bre of great lordes. His foure vncles were ther 
               
                  〈◊〉
                we / Berrey / Burgoyne / and Burbone. And alſo his great vncles / Uyncelyn duke of Brabant / the duke of Bare / and ye duke of Lorayne / the erle of Sauoy the erle de la marche / the erle of Ewe / ſir Wyllyam de Namure / but the erle of Flaunders / and the erle Johan of Bloyes ercuſed them ſelfe. there were many other great lordes / whome I canne nat name. Thus the yonge kyng entred in to Reynes / the ſaturday at euenſongtyme / ryght well acompanyed with nobles and mynſtrelles. and ſpecial lye he had mo than .xxx. trumpettes before him and the kyng alighted before the churche of our lady of Reyns / his vncles and bretherne in his company. There were alſo his coſyns / yonge gentylmen of Nauer / of Labreth of Bare and of Harcourt. and a great nombre of yong ſquyers / chyldren two great lordes of the realme of Fraunce. Whome the yonge kynge / the day of his coronacyon made them all knightes. The ſaturday the kynge herde euenſong in the churche of our lady / and as the vſage was: there he was the mooſt parte of the nyght / and all the newe knightes with him. And than the ſonday Aſhalowen day / the churche was richely apparelled / and there at the highe maſſe ſolempnely he was ſacred and anoynted / by tharchbyſſhop of Reynes / with the holy ampell / wherwt ſaynt Remy conſacred Clouis / the firſt chriſten kynge that euer was in Fraunce. This oyntment was ſent downe by almighty god from heuyn by an holy angell. and euerſythe the kynges of Fraunce hathe be conſacred therwith / and yet it apereth as it were nothyng touched / the whiche is a right worthy and a noble thyng. before that: the kyng made all his yonge newe knightes and than they went to the offyce of ye maſſe right ſolempnely / and the archbyſſhop of Reynes ſange the maſſe. and there the yonge kynge was in habyte ryall in a chayre lypt vp on high apparelled with clothe of golde / and all ye yong newe knyghtes on lower ſcaffoldes at his fete / couered with clothe of golde. There was the newe conſtable of Fraūce / ſir Olyuer of Clyſſon / who was but late before choſen to that offyce / who dyde right well his offyce / as it aparteyned.
            THe great lordes of Fraunce were there richely aparelled. The kynge ſat in his mageſtie 
                  •
               oyall / with a right precyous & ryche crowne on his heed. The church that day was ſo full of nobleneſſe / that a man might nat a remoued his fete. And ſo at this newe begynninge of this yong kyng / to reioyſe therby the people of Fraunce: All maner of impoſycions / aydes / gabelles: fowages / ſubſydies / and other thynges yuell taken / wherby the realme was hurt & enpoueriſſhed / were vtterly layd downe and ſette a part: the whiche greatly pleaſed the people. After maſſe they wēt to the palais / and bycauſe the hall was to lytell to receyue ſuche a nombre of people. There was made in ye court of the palais / a hyghe and a great ſtage couered / where as the dyner was ordayned. & there ſatte the yonge kyng and his fyue vncles / Brabant▪ Aniowe / Berrey / Burgoyne / and Burbone / at the ſame table a farre of fro the kynge. and the archbyſhop of Reyns and other prelatꝭ ſat on his ryght hande / & great lordꝭ ſerued thē all. The lorde Coucy / the lorde Cliſſon / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guy de la Tremoyll admyrall of ye ſee / and dyuers other / on great courſers trapped to the erthe in clothe of golde. Thus in all honour that daye contynued / and the next day / many of the great lordes toke leaue of the kyng & his vncles / and ſo retourned in to their owne countrees. The ſame day the kynge went and dyned / at the abbey of ſaynt Therrey two leages fro Reynes / for they of the abbey ſhulde gyue hym that dyner / and they of Reynes the day whan he is ſacred. Thus ended the feeſt of the coronacyon of kynge Charles of Fraunce.
            tHan the kynge went to Parys / where as he was greatly feeſted at his entre. And after all this feeſt and ſolempnyte / there was a great counſayle on the gouernynge of the realme. and there it was ordayned that the duke of Berrey ſhulde haue the gouernyng of Languedocke / the duke of Burgoyne of all Picardy and Normandy / and the duke of Aniou to abyde about the kyng / and to haue the princypall gouernynge and myniſtracyon of the realme. Than the erle of ſaynt Poule was repealed agayne / who had been out of the fauour and grace of the kyng Charles laſt diſceaſed. And the duke of Aniowe and the duke of Brabant made his peace at Reyns in whoſe fauoure greatlye was the erle of ſaynt Poule / and ſo he departed fro Hanne on the ryuer of Hewre in the byſſhopriche of Leage / where as he hadde layne a longe ſpace. Than he retourned in to Fraunce and his wyfe with hym / and ſo brought her vnto the caſtell of Bouhaygne.

And ſo put out all thoſe that ocupyed his landꝭ and toke them agayne to his owne profyte. ¶ Nowe let vs a lytell leaue ſpekynge of theſe ſayd maters / and retourne to the inſydentes of Bretayne / and to the erle of Buckyngham.
            ye knowe howe the couenaūtes and treaties were made / bytwene the duke of Bretayne and the erle of Buckyngham / as to beſege Naūtes Whan the duke of Bretayne was departed fro Reynes / the lorde of Mounbrouſyer / ſir Stephyn Guyon / the lorde Houſſey in his company / rode to Uannes and towarde Hanyboute. And the erle of Buckyngham and his company ordayned to go to the ſege at Nauntes / and ſo departed fro Reynes and ther about where as they were lodged / and went the ſame day & lodged at Caſtell Briant / and the nexte day at Bayne / and the thirde day at Tyeull / and the fourthe lodgyng / they toke in the foubours of Nauntes. And the erle was lodged at the gate of Saluetout / and the lorde Latymer cōſtable of the hooſt / the lorde Fytzwater / and the lorde Baſſet / were loged at the gate ſaynt Nicholas on the ryuerſyde. and ſir Wyllm̄ Wynſore and ſir Hughe Caurell / were lodged amonge their folkes ryght honourably / as nere to the erle as they might. Within the towne was a great nō
               bre of knightes and ſquyers / of Bretaygne / of Beauſe / of Aniou / and of Mayne / who entended to defende the towne. So they had all the charge therof / in ſo moche that they of the towne had no buſyneſſe therwith. And it was ſo y• on ſaynt Martyns nyght / ſir Johan of Barroys of Barres / ſtyred and moued ſome of his company within the towne / and ſayde. Sirs / we ſe well our enemyes are nere vs / and as yet we haue nat waked them. Therfore I coūſayle that this night / we go and ſcrimyſſhe with thē. Certaynly ſir ꝙ they / ye ſpeke nobly: ſhewe vs what ye wyll haue vs to do / and we ſhall do it. So they gadered toguyder the ſame euenyng to the nombre of ſixſcore of choyſe men. Than they opyned the gate of ſaynt Peter / where as the conſtable / The lorde Baſſette and the lorde Fytwater were lodged. So the frenchmen ſet good order at the gate / bycauſe of their retrayt Capitayns of that company was / the Barrois of Barres / Johan of the caſtell Morant / and the capitayne of Clyſſon: and ſo they came on the hooſt as they were at ſupper / & had to their crye the barres. So they entred in to their lodginges / and beate downe and hurt many than anone the englyſſhemen were raynged before their lodgynges. And whan the frēchmen ſawe that / they retourned and kept theym toguyder ryght ſagely / and ſo retourned to their towne. Than the englyſſhmen came thyder and ſcrymyſſhed / ther was entryng and puttyng backe and beatynge on bothe parties / and ſo the frenchemen entred into their barryers. Ther were dyuers ſlayne and hurt on bothe ſydes / but the Barroyes of barres entred agayne the towne with lytell domage. And ſo this ſcrimyſhe was reputed to be well done on bothe parties.
            
               ANd on ſaynte Martyns daye at nyght / the Barroyes of Barres ſpake to his company / and ſayde. Sirs / I thinke it were well done yt tomorowe early / we toke a ſixe or ſeuyn great barges / and two hundred men and two hundred croſbowes / and let vs go by the ryuer and viſyte our ennemyes. They take but lytell hede on that ſyde. So they were all agreed / and the ſame nyght the gote their cōpany toguyder / & ſo by day they were entred their beſſelles / and ſo rowed downe the ryuer / and toke lande beſyde the lodgynges. Sir Johan Harleſton was lodged therby and had a great lodgyng / and at the brekyng of the day the frenchemen were rounde about his lodgynge / and aſſayled it. Anone ſir Johan Harlſton and his company were armed and redy at their defēce right valiantly / and archers ſhotte agaynſt the croſbowes. There was a ſore ſcrimyſſhe and dyuers hurt / and ſurely that lodgyng had ben taken & conquered / and ſir Robert Canoll had nat ben / who was lodged nat farre thens. And ſo he and all his company with his baner dyſplayed / came priuely to that parte. And alſo ſir Wyllyam Wyndſore hadde knowledge therof / and ſo he and all his cōpany came thyder / and ſtyll englyſſhmen drewe to them fro all partes. Than the frenchmen drewe backe to the ryuer warde to come to their veſſelles / ſo at their retourne in to their barges / there was a ſore ſcrymyſſhe / and ſo valiantly they departed. The capitayns dyde great feates of armes / howe be it there were ſome of the frēchmen taken / ſlayne and drowned / and ſo they retourned in to Nauntes. In ſo moche that all that herde of this enterpriſe / reputed it of gret valure.
         
         
            
            ¶ Of the lettes that the duke of Bretayne had / in that he might nat come to the lege before Naſites / and of the ſcrimyſſhes made there. Ca. ccc .lxx.
            
               WHan the englyſſhmen parceyued howe they of Nā
               tes woke them ſo often. than they tooke counſayle to kepe better watche. and ſo it fortuned on a night / the .vii. night after that the barroys of barres had made his ſcrimyſſhe he yſſued agayne in the night at the gate / where the erle of Buckyngham was lodged / and with him a two hū
               dred men of armes and a hundred croſbowes. The ſame night the almayns kept the watche / and ther capitayns were / ſir Algars & ſir Thomas of Rodes. Than the Barroys daſſhed in to the watche and hymſelfe one of the firſt / ther was a ſore ſcrimyſſhe and ſore beaten. Than they that were lodged about the erle / roſe and went to the ſcrimyſſhe. Whan the frenchemen parceyued howe the preaſe began to encreaſe & multyply / they withdrewe towardes the gate and scrimyſſhed euer as they wēt. Ther were dyuers hurt with ſhotte on bothe parties / and ſpecially ſir Thomas of Rodes / a knight of Almayne / was ſhotte through ye baſſenet into the heed / of the whiche ſtroke he dyed within thre dayes after / whiche was great domage / for he was a valyant knight. So the frenchmen and bretons entred agayne in to Nauntes with lytell domage / and had taken ſixe priſoners. So thus the mater ſtode / and thenglyſſhmen euer made good watche / for euery night they loked for none other thyng / but to be waked and reyſed fro their reſt.
            THus therle of Buckyngham lay before Nauntes / abyding dayly for the duke of Bretayne who came nat / and to that he had promyſed and ſworne nothynge kepte: wherof the erle hadde marueyle what he ment / that he coude here no tidynges fro him. The erle had ſent to him dyuers meſſangers and letters / ſhe wyng hym / howe he dyde yuell his deuoure / in that he wolde nat kepe his promyſe that he had made and ſworne to acomplyſſhe in the cytie of Reynes. But for all the letters that therle ſent / he hadde neuer none anſwere agayne. The englyſſhmen ſuppoſed that the meſſangers were ſlayne by the waye bycauſe none retourned agayne / and truely they were in great parell / & all other men. without ſo be they had ben of the ſame countre or well acōpanyed / for the wayes bytwene Nauntes and Hanybout were ſo ſore watched / that none coude ſcape that way without takyng. So that it ſhulde be knowen from whens they came and whyder they wolde / to ye entent that no letters nor worde ſhulde go bytwene the duke and the erle / yf any ſuche were taken they were ſlayne. Alſo the foragers of the hooſt durſt nat ryde forthe but in great companyes / for the knightes and ſquyers of the ſame countre were aſſembled togyder / and wolde in no wyfe that their landꝭ ſhulde be haryed or ouerryden. So that ſomtyme whan they foūde a .xx. or .xxx. of the englyſſhmen toguyder a foragynge / they wolde ſette on them and take all that they had fro them / and ſore beate and hurt them / wtout hauyng of any remedy. Wherwith they of the hooſt were right ſore diſpleaſed / but they wyſt nat of whōe to haue amēdes. To ſay the trouthe / the duke of Bretayne himſelfe dyd aſmoche as he coude to bring ye men of his coū
               tre to be agreed to go and ley ſege to Nauntes with hym / acordyng to the promyſe that he had made to therle of Buckyngham. But he coude nat bringe it about / for it was playnly ſayde to hym / howe that nother knight nor ſquyer of the countre wolde go with hym / to helpe to diſtroy their owne countre for the warre of the engliſſhmen / nor as long as the englyſſhmen ſhulde abyde in Bretayne / they wolde neuer arme thē to take his parte. Than the duke demaūded of them / why they dyde than conſente to ſende for thenglyſſhmen. They anſwered / howe it was more for to gyue feare to the frenchmen / ye they ſhulde nat leſe their auncyent vſages: rather than for any other thynge. And in caſe that the frenche kyng wyll nothyng with thē but good / they wyll make hym no warre. Other anſwere the duke coulde nat haue of them: on the other parte the lorde Clyſſon conſtable of Fraunce / the lorde of Dynant / the lorde de Lauall / the vicont of Rohan / the lorde of Rochforde / and all the great lordes of Bretayne / had all toguyder cloſed faſt their townes / and cauſed them to be well kept. And ſayd to the duke / and cauſed to be ſhewed hym by their meſſangers / howe he ſhulde be well aduyſed what he dyde. Sayeng howe he was but ſimply coūſayled / to ſende for the englyſſhmen to make warre and to diſtroy his owne countre. Promyſinge hym / howe he ſhulde haue no conforte of any of thē. And that yf he went to Nauntes to lay ſiege there / as he

had promyſed to the engliſſhmen to do / whiche he ought nat to haue done / they wolde diſtroy his landes in all parties / and put hym to ſuche trouble / that he ſhulde nat knowe well what to do. But if ſo be he wolde knowledge and putte hym ſelfe vnder the obeyſaunce of the frenche kyng / as he ought to do. Than they ſayde they wolde do their beſt to make his peace with the yonge kynge. Sayeng alſo / howe ſome haue had their corage agaynſt kyng Charles nowe deed / that wyll come and abyde in the loue of his ſon. Of the mooſt higheſt lordes of all Bretaygne the duke was thus ſerued / in ſo moche that the duke wyſt nat what to ſay / for he coude fynde no ſure aſtate in his people / wherfore it behoued hym to diſſēble. and alwayes the ſege lay ſtyll before Nauntes.
            ON our lady daye in aduent at nyght / the frenchmen went to counſayle / determynynge to awake the hooſt the ſame nyght / bycauſe they had ſo longe lyen ſtyll. So there yſſued oute of the towne a two hundred ſpeares / wherof ſir Almery of Clyſſon coſyn germayne to the lorde Clyſſon / and the lorde of Amboyſe were capitayns and gouernours. And ſo they entred in to the hooſt wher as ſir Wyllm̄ Wynſore was lodged / they iſſued at the gate of Richbourge / and the ſame night ſir Hughe Caurell kepte the watche. The ſame tyme the lorde of Amboyſe was made knight / and ſir Almery of Clyſſon made hym knyght. Than men of armes frenchmen and bretons cāe in with a fierſe wyll / and at the firſt comyng they wan the barres of the watche / whiche was kept by ſir Wyllyam of Gyſenton. There was a ſore ſcrimyſh and many a man ouerthrowen / ſir Willm̄ wyn ſore and ſir Hughe Caurell beyng in their tentes heryng the noyſe armed them / and cāe thyder as ye chiefe noyſe was / there bothe parties fought valiantly. The frenchmen and bretons entred agayne in at the poſterne Richebourge / wher they iſſued out wtout any great domage. And they had taken a knyght priſoner / and ten other mē of armes / and of their men ther were but thre taken.
         
         
            ¶ Of the ſcrimyſſhe that the barrois of Barres and Almery of Clyſſone made on Chriſtmaſſe euyn / agaynſt the englyſſhmen beyng at Nauntes. Cap CCC .lxxi.
            
               THe monday before the 
                  •
               ygyll of Chriſtmas / there yſſued out of Nauntes in the euenyng at the gate of Sauetout
                  •
                ſir Barrois of Barres and the lorde of Solette with ſixſcore men of armes. They came and daſſhed in to the erle of Buckynghams lodgynge / and the ſame nyght the erle of Domeſtre kept the wathe. There was a great ſcrimyſſhe and many a mā ouerthrowen but the englyſſhmen were byggerr thanne the frenchmen / wherfore they were driuen backe in to their baryers / and in at the gate byforce. and ther were ſlayne and taken of them about .xvi. and there was ſlayne an englyſſhe knight / called ſir Hughe Tytiell / he was ſtryken through his baſſenet / wherof he dyed. Than euery man drewe to their lodgynges / and no more done yt nyght. Than all the frenchmen determyned agayne to make a ſcrimyſſhe on chriſtmas night withall their power / and ſo kept their en
                  •
               priſe ſecrete. Therle of Buckyngham and the other englyſſhmen were awaked often tymes by the bretons & frenchmen beyng wtin Naūtes. and alſo the foragers in the feldes had great payne / in ſerchyng for vitayle and forage for their horſes / and durſt nat ryde out but in great companyes. Therle and his company had great marueyle of the duke of Bretayne who cāe nat / nor herde no maner of ridynges fro him / wher with they were nat content for they foūde euer worſe and worſe / and feble couynaunt kepte by hym / and wyſt nat to whome to complayne / nor who ſhulde do them right. And ſo they determyned that about Chriſtenmas to ſende agayne to the duke / ſir Thomas Tryuet / ſir Robert Canoll / and ſir Thomas Percy to Uannes or to Hanybout / and they to ſhewe to the duke fro the erle that he dothe yuell his deuoyre / that he hath nat acquyted him ſelfe otherwyſe thā he hath done agaynſt them. Howbeit this apoyntment was broken / and they ſayd among them. all thyngꝭ conſydered and ymagined / they thought they might nat 
                  •
               eblyſſhe their hooſt nor ſiege / nor yt they coude nat go to the duke without they wēt all toguyder / for if they went a fyue or ſixe hundred ſperes togyder / and happe to mete a thouſande / it ſhulde be for them but an yuell matche and for that dout they wolde nat depart fro the hooſt / but kept them ſelfe toguyder.
            ANd on Chriſtmas euyn at night ye barrois of Barres / ſir Almary of Clyſſon / 

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈…〉
               orde Damb
                  〈…〉
                / the lorde Deſtolet / the cha
               
                  〈◊〉
                of Clyſſon John̄ of Caſtelmorant / and 
                  〈◊〉
                the 
                  〈…〉
               ns within Naūtes / iſſued at the 
                  〈…〉
               te ſayut 
                  •
               e
                  •
               t / in gret deſyre to trouble their 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ and had in their company a .vi. hundred men of armes. and whan they were without the gate in two partes the one toke the way by the ſtrete / and the other through the feldes / and let on the lodgynge of the lorde Latymer / and of the lord Fitzwater who kept the watche the ſame nyght / and ſir Wylliam Renton. And at their firſt comyng they wan the bayles of the watche / and droue them backe with great force to the conſtables lodgynge the lorde Latymer. And ther taryed before the lorde of Uertaynes lodgyng and there was a great ſkrymiſhe and a great aſſaute / for the frenchmen had determyned to haue taken him / and ſo he was in agreat daūger of takynge. So they of the watche had moche a do or any ſocour came to thē. Sir you Fitz waren the lorde of Uertayne / and ſir Nycholas Trayton / dyd there many a great feat of armes. Than the conſtable and marſhall enfor
                  •
               ed themſelfe to come thider and ſowned the trumpettes and ſo armed them. Sir Wylliam 
                  〈…〉
               or
                  ••
                / and ſir Hugh Caurell harde ye noyſe of the trompettes / and knewe that the voward had a ſory. Than they ſowned trumpettes and made great baners and lyghtes / and diſplayed their baners / and came thyder with a hundred men of armes and as many archers. Alſo ſir Thomas Triuet / ſir Thomas Percy / and the lorde Baſſet / euery man vnder his owne ſtanderd came to the ſcrymiſſhe. y• ſame tyme they of the vowarde had great nede of ayde / for they were lykely to haue loſte their lodgynges / but whan theſe lordes & knightes were come / than the frenchmen reculed backe all to gyder right ſagely & ſo drewe a backe towardes the towne ſkrimyſſhyng. There was done many a noble dede of armes and ſome of the frenche knyghtes aduentured them ſelfe to auaunce their renowme / and for their ladyes ſake / ſoo that ſir Triſtram de la 
                  •
               aylle was taken priſoner / by his folyſhe haſty enterpriſe / by a ſquire of Haynalte / called Thierry of Sommayne.
            UHus contynued this ſcrymiſſhe / and ſo the mooſt parte of the frenchmen entred in to Nauntes / howe beit in ſuche dedes of armes euer ſome be ſlayne / hurt or taken. yet they retourned with no great domage / for they had as many priſoners / as the engliſſhmen hadde of theirs / and ſo went to their lodgynges. And whan the gate was clloſed / thā they cauſed theſe hurte men to be dreſſed / in likewyſe they of the hooſt drewe to their lodgynges. yet they brake nat their watch / but rather made ſtronger watche than they dyd before. on Criſtmas day nor all the feeſtes after there was nothynge doone / howe beit the englyſſhmen euery nyght loked to be waked with ſcryes / yet ye thyng that moſt touched thē / was that they coude here no tydin ges of the duke of Bretayne / and their vitayls and forages were ſoo ſcant / that it was moche payne to gette any. Howe be it they within the towne hadd ynough / for it came to them by the tyuer of Loyre / oute of the good countreys of Poictou / Xaynton / and Rochell.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen departed fro the ſeige of Nauntes / and of the fayre excuſes that the duke of Bretayne made to the erle of Buckynghame. Cap. CCC .lxxii.
            
               WHan the erle of Buekyngham and the englyſſhe men had bene longe at ſiege before Nauntes / aboute the ſpace of two monethes and foure dayes / they parceyued well yt the duke of Bretayne kept nat his promyſe / as in comynge to them, thā they determyned to diſlodge fro thens and go to Uannes / and there to ſpeke with ye duke / and to knowe all his entent. Than their diſlodgynge was knowen in the hooſt / and ſo diſoged the next day after Neweres day / and rode forthe in ordre of batayle / in lyke maner as they dyd whan they paſt through Fraunce / and the firſt nyght after their departure they lodged at Niorch and there taryed thre dayes to refreſhe them / and bycauſe the bridge was broken / they had moche trouble to make it agayne / to gette ouer their cariages. yet they made it / and the hooſt paſſed the ryuer of Uolayne / and on a ſaturday they wente and loged at Loheacke and there taryed two dayes / & ſo fro thens to Groſy and ther taryed two dayes / & the next day they paſſed the ryuer of Auſt at the brydge of Brehaigne / and there taryed in the fayre playne countre. The ſame day that they departed and

paſſed y• ryuer / they of y• cytie of Uannes were enformed by them of the countrey / howe that the erle of Buckynghame and the engliſſhmen were coming to lodge in their towne: they wiſt nat what to do / whyder to ſuffer them to entre their towne or nat. and ſo they went to Hanybout to the duke / but the ſame daye that they came towarde Hanybout / they mette the duke in the feldes within two leages of Uannes / comyng thyder. and whan y• duke ſawe the men of Uannes comyng to him warde / he demaunded of them / what tydinges / and whyder they went? ſir ꝙ they: as for tydinges we can ſhewe you ynowe. ſir / the erle of Buckynghame and the engliſſhmen are comynge yonder / and it is their entencyon / as we be enfourmed / to lodge in your good towne of Uannes. ſir / loke what it pleaſe you to do / for without your cōmaundement we wyll do no thyng. ſir they haue made agayne the brydge at Brehaigne / the whiche was broken on y• ryuer of Auſt. Whan the duke harde of this he ſtudyed a lytell / and ſayd: ſirs / be nat a frayde / haue no dought / euery thynge ſhalbe well ynough / they are ſuche men as wyll do you do hurte. I ame ſome what bounde to them by certayne treaties / the whiche I muſt nedes vpholde and acquyte me trewely therin / I wyll go to Uānes / and to morowe I thynke they wyll come thyder / and I will go and mete with ye erle my brother / and do to him as moche honoure as I canne do / for I am bounde ſo to do / moreouer ye ſhall do as I coūſayle you. ye ſhall offre and preſent to hym the keyes of the towne / and ſay vnto him howe that you and all the towne are redy to receyue him / howe beit deſyre him to be ſworne / yt within .xv. dayes that he be required to departe / that he wyll departe / and to yelde agayn to you ye keyes of the towne this is the counſayle that I wyll gyue you. the burgeſſes anſwered and ſayd / ſir: we ſhall do as ye haue ordayned. and ſoo they rode forthe with the duke to Uannes / and there the duke lodged that nyght / and y• engliſſhmen the ſame nyght lodged at ſaynt Johans / a lytell village two leages fro Uannes. The ſame nyght the erle of Buckynghame receyued letters fro the duke / who wrote to hym as his kynde brother / welcomyng him into the marches of Uannes. the next mornynge whan the erle hadde harde maſſe / he toke his horſe and all his cōpany and rode in good ordre towarde Uannes / the towarde fyrſt / and the erle and his batayle after / and the rerewarde folowyng the erles batayle. Thus they met with the duke of Bretayn / who was yſſued out of Uannes to mete with them the ſpace of a great leage / and whan they mette they made eche to other great honoure and reuerence. after this metynge whiche was right honourable / rydyng toguyder / the erle on the right hande / and the duke on the left. Than the erle began to ſay: ſaynt Mary fayre brother of Bretayne / what a long ſpace hath it bene / that we haue taryed before Naūtes at the ſiege ther abydynge for you / accordyng to the treaty and couenant made bytwene you and me in that be halfe / and yet ye came nat. By my faythe ꝙ the duke I coude do none otherwyſe / wherwith I enſure you I was greatly diſpleaſed / howbeit I coulde nat amende it / for my men of this coū
               trey / for any thynge that I coulde ſhewe vnto them / nor for any alyaunces at their requeſtes that I hadde made to you. yet for all that they wolde neuer go to the ſiege to you before Naū
               tes / but kept them ſelfe ſtronge on the fronters. the lorde Cliſſon / the lorde Dynant the lorde Dornall / the vycount of Rohan / and the lorde Rochforde / to kepe thentreis and iſſues of Bretayne / and all ſuche as were ioyned with me as well knyghtes and prelates as burgeſſes of the good townes / ar as nowe all rebell agaynſt me wherwith I ame greatly diſpleaſed / ſythe by their faulte ye fynde me vntrewe. Sir / I ſhall ſhewe you what ye ſhall doo / it is nowe in the harde of wynter / and colde and an cuyll ſeaſon to kepe an hooſt to gyder. ye ſhall come to Uannes and there abyde tyll it be Aprell or Maye and refreſhe you / and I ſhall ordayne other places for your company / and ſo paſſe the tyme aſ well as ye may / and in ſomer weſhall reuenge vs of all maters. the erle anſwered and ſayde / as god wyll ſo be it / for he ſawe well it wolde be none otherwyſe, ſo the duke brought hym in to Uannes / and at the entrynge in to the towne the comen people came in to the erles preſence / and ſayd: ſir / bycauſe of the reuerence of your great ſignory and noble honoure / we wyll nat be agaynſt your entryng in to this towne / but ſir: to apeaſe all the people of this towne / and for your ſurety ye ſhall ſwere vnto vs on the holy euangelyſt that within .xv. dayes after ye be required / to departe out of this towne: you and all yours / and that ye do nor ſuffre to be done to vs any maner of domage or hurt. By my fayth ꝙ the erle of Buckynghame I ame content to ſwere to you to kepe and fulfyll all this / than all the other lordes ſware the ſame othe / for they were fayne ſo to doo / or els to haue lyen in the feldes. Thus the erle of Buckynghame was

lodged in the eytie of Uannes hym ſelfe lay in the dukes houſe / a pleaſaunt and a fayre caſtell handyng within the towne named the Motte. and all his company were lodged in the towne and in the ſubbarbes / and the duke of Bretayn and his company went to Aſnotte and there a bode / and ſomtyme he came to Uānes to ſe the erle and to comen with hym. The lorde Latymer / and the lorde Fytz water / ſir Thom̄s Percy / ſir Thomas Triuet and y• vowarde / were lodged about the towne of Hambout / but they neuer came within the gates / but laye in the ſubbarbes and in the feldes. Sir Robert Canoll / and the lorde Fitz waren and diuers other ſhulde haue lodged in the towne / called Ouyn percorentyn. But they wolde neuer open their gates / wherfore they were fayne to lodge in the ſubbarbes and in the feldes. So thus they endured & ſuffered that ſeaſon great diſſeaſe and pouerty for that was nat worth thre pens / was ſolde to them for .xii. pence. yea? and worſe / for ſomtyme they coulde get nothynge for money. ſo that their horſes dyed for pouertie and colde for they wyſt nat whyder to go a foragyng / and whan they went they were in great parell / for their neighbours were their enemyes. The vicount of Rohan had that tyme in the marches of Uannes two ſtronge caſtelles / the one called Cayre and y• other Lynguiſſhant / and in theſe two caſtelles there was great garyſons layde by the vycount / the whiche dyd moche trouble to the engliſſh foragers / with the helpe of other garyſons / pertayning to the lorde of Clyſſon. as y• caſtell of Joſſelyn / Montagu / and Moncountour / all this ſuffred the duke of Bretayne and ſayde / howe he coude nat amende it. The ſame tyme the conſtable of Fraunce / & the lorde Cliſſon made warre for the frenche kyng / and was in the countre with a great nombre of men of warre / wherfore the englyſſhmen durſt nat departe one fro another. All thynges conſydered howe they were lodged in the feldes without defence / it was great marueyle they hadde no more hurt than they had / for they of Uannes coude nat lightly haue reſkewed them / that lay about Campernell / or Hanybout or Numpercorentyne. but to ſay the trouthe the duke went betwene them / and defended them to his power that they ſhulde nat be diſtroyed. And ſayde to his coūſayle / howe that he had but febly acquyted hym towarde the erle of Buckyngham / ſeyng ſuche promyſe as he had made vnto him.
            IN the ſame ſeaſon there was at Parys with the kyng / foure great lordes ſent by the duke of Bretayn to purchaſe his peace. that is to ſay / y• vicont of Rohan / ſir Charles lorde of Dynnant / ſir Guy lorde de Lawall / and ſir Guy lorde of Rocheforde. Theſe foure lordes of Bretayne hadde entyſed dyuers tymes the duke / ſayng thus. Sir / ye ſhewe your ſelfe to all the worlde / howe that your corage is all engliſſhe. ye haue brought in to this countrey the engliſſhmen / who wyll take fro you your herytage / if they may get the vperhande. What profyte or pleaſure haue you in them / to loue them as ye do? beholde how y• kyng of Nauer / who truſted ſo moche in them / that he ſuffred them to entre in to y• towne & caſtell of Chierbourge / and neuer ſyth they wolde departe out of it / but kepeth it as their owne herytage. In lykewiſe if ye put thē in any of your cloſed townes / they wyll neuer depart agayne out of them / for dayly they wyll be refreſſhed with newe men? beholde howe they kepe ſtyll Breſt / and they be nat in mynde to delyuer it agayne to you / the whiche is your right herytage. ſir / let it ſuffice you to be beloued with your owne men of this ſame countrey / who wyll neuer renounce the frenche kyng to ſerue the kyng of Englande. ſir / if your wyfe be of Englāde: wyll you for y• cauſe leue your owne herytage / the which hath coſt you ſo moche payne to gette / and alwayes abyde in warr. ye can do no more thā one man maye do / if youre countrey cloſe them ſelfe agaynſt you. ſir leaue your counſaylynge with them / for the frenche kyng / who loued you nat is deed. and there is nowe a yonge kyng fayre and good and of bolde ſpiryte / and ſuche hath hated his father that nowe ſerue him. Sir / we ſhall make your peace with him / and ſette you at acorde / and ſo ye ſhall abyde lorde and duke of Bretayne / and be of great puyſſance. and let the engliſſhmen returne home in to their owne countre. Theſe wordes and ſuche other the for ſayd barons / ſhewed to y• duke dyuers tymes / ſo that they had nyghe conquered him to their wylles. howe be it yet he fayned and diſſymuled with the frenche kynge and his counſayle / and with the englyſſhe men alſo / tyll he myght ſe to what ende his warre ſhulde come vnto. And of all theſe ſecrete treatyes / that theſe foure barones of Bretayne had made at Parys with the kyng and his vncles / the erle of Buckyngham and the barones of Englande knewe nothyng tyll the concluſyon was taken / but or they perceyued it / and or they departed out of Bretayn

there was done in Naūtes a dede of armes before the erle of Buckynghame. Wherof I ſhall make mencion / for it is a mater nat to be forgotone.
            
               SO it was y• ſame ſeaſon / that Gawen Mychaell and Jaques Cathore / dyd their dede of armes before therle of Buckyngham. there were dyuers lordes / knightꝭ / and ſquyers / that cāe thyder to ſe it. Some of Frā
               ce came thyder fro March caunoy and Bloys. In ſo moche that ſir Raynolde of Thowars / lorde of Pouſances a barowne of Poyctowe. Spake wordes to the lorde of Uertaygne / and ſayd. That gladly he woldedo dedes of armes with hym: as thre courſes with a ſpeare / and thre ſtrokes with an axe. And the lorde of Uertaygne wolde nat refuce his requeſt / but accorded therto. And wolde incontynent haue delyuered hym / what ſoeuer profyte or domage he ſhulde take therby / but the erle of Buckyngeham wolde nat ſuffre it. And commaunded the knight to do nothing / nor to ſpeke no more ther of. Howe be it the wordes of the enterpriſe of armes abode ſtyll in the purpoſe of the two knightes. And lyke wordes ther was ſpoken the ſame day by a ſquyer of Sauoy / called the baſtarde Clarens / to Edwarde Beauchampe / ſonne to ſir Roger / but all paſſed: as well the one as the other. In lykewiſe bytwene Galoys Daunoy / and ſir Wyllm̄ Clynton. and bytwene ſir Hoyan Dareyns / and ſir Wylliam Franke. Thus as the erle of Buckyngham was lodged in the ſubbarbes of Nauntes / and the knyghtes and ſquyers of Fraunce within Nauntes. Than̄e the lorde of Uertayne and the other of his ſyde / requyred thē that had apealed them in armes / that they wolde come and delyuer theym before Nauntes. The capitayns in Naūtes were nat agreed ſo to do. but excuſed their men and ſaid Howe they were within Nauntes as ſoudiers / ſette and ordayned to kepe the towne. So theſe wordꝭ paſſed ouer / tyll therle of Buckingham came to the towne of Hanybout: and to Campelle and Quynpercorētyne. but whan he was come to Areſtes. Than ſir Raynolde of Thowars lorde of Barroyes of Barres / ſir Hoyan Darreynes / and a great nombre of knyghtes and ſquyers came to the caſtell Joſſelyne / a ſeuyn myles fro Uannes / where as the conſtable of Fraunce was. And alſo the erle of Marche / and a great nombre of other knightes of Fraū
               ce. Than the wordes were ſhewed to the cōſtable / of the enterpriſe of the dedes of armes / agaynſt the Englyſſhmen. The conſtable herde well their wordes and ſayd. Sirs / ſende to thē worde / howe I ſhall gyue them ſaueconducte / to come to do theſe dedes of armes. And firſte Galoyes Daunoy and ſir Lyonell Darreynes ſende worde how they were redy to do their enterpriſe of armes / as thre courſes a horſebacke with a ſpear. And whan ſir Wylliam Clynton and ſir Wylliam Frāke / vnderſtode howe they were deſyred and ſommoned to do theſe dedes of armes by the frenchmen / they were right ioyfull. and toke leaue of the erle of Buckyngham and of the lordes of Englāde to go thyder. and ſo thyder they wente / and a certayne knyghtes and ſquyers in their company. and ther iuſted right valiauntly bothe parties / and dyde their dedes of armes / as it was ordayned. Than ſir Rainolde of Thouars and ſir John̄ of Caſtell Morant / and the baſtarde of Clarens / deſyred the lorde of Uertayne and ſir Johan Dambrety court and Edward Beauchampe / to delyuer their chalenge. And ſo theſe thre englyſſhe knightes / were of good wyll to go and fight with them / at the caſtell of Joſſelyne / on the conſtables ſaueconduct.
         
         
            Of the dedes of armes done before therle of Buckingham bytwene the Englyſſhemen and the frenchemen. and the anſweres made to the haraldes on their ſaueconductes. Cap. CCC .lxxiii.
            
               WHan̄e the erle of Buekyngham was come to Uā
               nes / and vnderſtode the frenchemens requeſt / he anſwered and ſayde to the harauldes. Sirs / ye ſhall ſay to the conſtable / that therle of Buckynghame ſendeth hym worde / howe he is as puyſſaunt and able to gyue his ſaueconduct to the frenchemen / as he is to gyue his to the Englyſſhemen. Therfore ſuche as deſyreth to do dedes of armes let them come to Uannes / and

I ſhall gyue them ſaue conducte to come and retourne / and to bringe in their company / ſuche as ſhall pleaſe them. And whan̄e the conſtable herde this anſwere / he ymagined in hym ſelfe / howe that therle of Buckyngham ſayd trouthe And howe it was but reaſon / that he ſhulde ſe the dedes of armes done at Nauntes. As well as he hadde ſene the dedes of armes / at the caſtell Joſſelyne. Than the conſtable ſayd. The erle of Buckynghame ſpeketh lyke a noble valyant knight / and ſonne to a kyng. And I wyll it be as he ſaythe. and for ſuche as wyll go thyder. I ſhall ſende to hym for his ſaueconducte for theym. Than knightes and ſquyers made them redy / to the nombre of .xxx. and a haralde came to Uannes / for their ſaueconducte. The whiche was gyuen and ſealed by therle of Buckyngham. Than there departed fro the caſtell Joſſelyne / the thre knightes that ſhulde do the dedes of armes / and their company. and ſo cāe to Uannes / and lodged in the ſubbarbes. And the Englyſſhe men made theym good chere. The nexte day they apoynted to fyght / and ſo they came in to a fayre playne place without ye towne. Than came thyder therle of Buckingham / the erle of Suffolke / and the erle of Deuonſhyre / and the other barownes of their cō
               pany. And brought theym forthe / that ſhulde do the dedes of armes. Firſte the lorde of Uertaygne agaynſte ſir Raynolde of Thowars / lorde of Pouſances. and ſir Johan Dambrety court / agaynſt 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Tryſtram de Lauall. and Edwarde Beauchampe / agaynſt the baſtarde of Clarens. There the englyſſhmen toke the one ſyde / and the frenche men the other. And they that ſhulde iuſt were a fote / armed at all peces with baſſenettes and vyſures / and good ſperes with heedes of Burdeaux / redy to fight.
            
               ¶ Here after foloweth their feates of armes.
               
                  FFirſt the lorde of Pouſances in Poictou / and the lorde of Uertaygne in Heynaulte. Two barownes of great priſe and hardyneſſe / came eche agaynſt other a fote / holdyng their ſpeares in their handes / ſparyng nothynge eche other. The lorde of Uertaynge was ſtryken but nat hurte / and he ſtrake the lorde of Pouſances in ſuche wiſe / that he pearſed ye mayle on his breſt and all that was theron / ſo that the blode folowed. And it was great marueyle / that he had nat been worſe hurt than̄e he was. And ſo they ſtrake out their thre ſtrokꝭ / and finyſſhed their armes / without any more domage. And than went and reſted theym / and behelde the other. Than came ſir Johan Dambreticourt of Hey nalt / agaynſt ſir Tryſtram de Laualle of Poictowe / and they dyde their armes right valyantly / without any domage / and ſo left. Than came Edwarde Beauchampe and Clarens of Sauoy the baſtarde / who was a ſquyer ryght hardy and ſtronge / and bygger in all his membres / than̄e the Englyſſhe man was. So they came eche agaynſt other / and mette with great wyll. and ſtrake eche other on the breſt / in ſuche wyſe / that Edwarde Beauchampe was ouerthrowen backewarde. Wherof the Englyſſhemen were ſore diſpleaſed. And whan̄e he was vp agayne / he toke his Speare and came agayne agaynſt Clarens / and ſo mette agayne. And there Edwarde Beauchāpe was agayne ouerthrowen to the erthe / wherwith thēglyſſhe men / were more ſorer diſpleaſed and ſayd. how that Edwarde was to weake / to medyll with the Frenche ſquyer / the deuyll was on hym to iuſte agaynſt hym. So than they were departed / and ſhewed howe they ſhulde do no more. And whan Clarens ſawe the maner / deſyringe to perfourme his armes ſayde. Lordes / ye do me wronge: And ſythe ye wyll that Edwarde ſhall do no more / than ſette ſome other to me in his ſtede / that I may performe myne entpriſe. The erle of Buckynghame demaunded what he ſayd / and it was ſhewed hym. Than he ſayd the frenche man ſpake valyauntly. Than ſtept forthe an Englyſſhe ſquyer / who was after a knight. and was called Jenequyn Fetaceilles. He came before the erle and kneled downe / and deſyred that he myght perfourme the batayle. And therle acorded therto. Than this Jenken Fetaceilles came forthe / & armed hym at all peces and toke his ſpeare / and the baſtarde Clarens his. and ſo mette eche at other and foyned and thruſt ſo ſore eche at other / that the ſpeares flewe all to peces ouer their heedes. And at the ſeconde coupe they dyde in lykewiſe / and at the thirde alſo. So all their ſpeares were broken / ſo that all the lordes on bothe parties / reputed

this dede / a goodly feate of armes. Than they toke their ſwerdes / the whiche were right byg. and in ſixe ſtrokes they brake foure ſwerdes. And than̄e they wolde haue fought with axes / but the erle wolde nat ſuffre theym. And ſayde he wolde nat ſe them fight at vttraunce. Sayeng / they had done ynough. Than they drewe abacke and other came forthe. As one Jeneken Clynton englyſſhe / agaynſt one Johan de Caſtell Morant frenche man / who made them redy to do armes.
               
                  THis Jenken Clynton was a ſquier of honour with the erle of Buckynghame / and ryght nere about hym. Howe be it he was but ſclender and ſmall of body. Therfore the erle was nat content / that he ſhulde haue to do in armes / with ſo bygge aman / as Johan of the Caſtell Morant was. How be it they were putte toguyder to aſſay / and ſo they came right rudely toguyder. But the englyſſheman coude nat endure agaynſt the Frenche man / but with their foyninge / the Englyſſhe man was ouerthrowen to the erthe. Than the erle ſayd. howe they were nothynge euenly matched. Thanne there came to Jenequyn Clynton / certayne of the erles company and ſayd. Jenequyn / ye are nat metely to acomplyſſhe out this feate of armes. And the erle of Buckyngham is nat content of your enterpriſe / and commaundeth you to go and reſt you / and ſo he departed. And Johan of the Caſtell Moraunt / ſeyng the maner / ſayde. Sirs / if ye thynke that your ſquyer be to lytell to deale with me / ſende another to me at your pleaſure / to the entent I may performe myne enterpriſe / or els it ſhulde be to my villany. And alſo I ſhulde haue wronge / if I ſhulde departe / withoute doynge of any dedes of armes. Than the Conſtable and the marſhall of the hooſt ſayde. ye ſay right well. and ſo it was done. Than it was ſayd to all the knightꝭ there about. Sirs / is there any of you that wyll delyuer this knight / to the whiche aunſwered ſir Wylliam of Fermyton / and ſayd. ſhewe vnto the knyght / howe he ſhall nat deꝑthens / without doyng of dedes of armes. If it pleaſe him a lytell to reſt hym / he ſhall anone be delyuered for I ſhall arme me agaynſt hym. This anſwere pleaſed moche John̄ of Caſtell Morant and ſo went and ſatte downe to reſt hym. Anon the Englyſſhe knyght was redy / and came in to the place.
               
                  SO the two knightꝭ cāe a fote eche agaynſt other rudely / with their ſpeares lowe couched / to ſtryke eche other within the foure quarters. Johan of Caſtell Moraunt ſtrake the englyſſhe knight on the breſt in ſuche wyſe / that 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   Wylliam Fermyton ſtombled and bowed / for his fote a lytell fayled hym. He held his ſpeare lowe with bothe his handes / & coude nat amende it. And ſtrake ſir Johan of the Caſtell Moraunt in the thighe / ſo that the ſpeare wente clene throughe / that the heed was ſene a handfull, on the otherſyde. And ſir Johan with the ſtroke reled / but he fell nat. Than̄e the Englyſſhe knightes and ſquyers were ryght ſore diſpleaſed and ſayd. How it was a foule ſtroke Sir Wylliam Fermyntone excuſed hym ſelfe / and ſayde. howe he was ſorie of that aduēture / and howe that if he had knowen that it ſhulde haue ben ſo / he wolde neuer haue begon it. ſayenge / howe he coulde nat amende it / bycauſe of glaūſynge of his fote / by conſtraynt of ye great ſtroke / that ſir John̄ of the caſtell Morant had gyuen hym. So thus the frenchmen departed and toke leaue of the erle and of the other lord. and toke with them in a lytter ſir John̄ of Caſtell Moraunt / and brought him to the Caſtell Joſſelyne / and he was after in great paryll of dethe / by reaſon of his hurt. Thus ended theſe dedes of armes / and euery man drewe to their owne parte. The engliſſhmen to Uannes / and the frenchmen to caſtell Joſſelyn.
            
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Bretaine made his peace with the frenche kyng / and howe the englyſſhmen retourned in to their countrey. and of a dede of ardone / bytwene a frenche ſquyer and an engliſſhe. Cap. CCC .lxxiiii.
            
               AFter theſe dedes of armes done / whyle the erle of Buckyngham lay at Uannes / ther was nothyng don that ought to be remembred and as it hath ben ſayd here before / the engliſſhmen laye at Uannes / at Hanyboute / at Camperle / and at Quynpercorentyne. And ſo they paſſed the wynter / as well as they might. Dyuers of thē
               
had great dommage / and were in ryght great daungers / and lacked vitayle / for theym ſelfe and for their horſes / for they coude fynde no forage in the countre. And in that tyme of ye yere / the graunges and barnes were all voyde / and the 
                  •
               odder ſpente. The frenchemen theym ſelfe had ſore waſted and diſtroyed it / bycauſe their ennemyes ſhulde haue no eaſe therby. In this daunger the Englyſſhemen were longe / for the frenchemen were in their gariſons on the fronters / wherfore the englyſſhmen durſt nat ryde. Some vitayle came to the englyſſhmen by the ſee frome Corne wall / frome Gerneſay / and fro the yſle of Wight / the whiche ſomwhat conforted theym ▪ or elles they and their horſes hadde dyed for famyne and hunger. And all this ſeaſon / there was at Parys with the kyng / fro the duke of Bretaygne / the Uycount of Rohane / the lorde de Laualle / ſir Charles of Dynaunt / and ſir Guy of Rocheforde. and they dyde purchase the dukes peace / to the whiche he agreed. For he ſawe well he coude nat kepe his promiſe to the Englyſſhe men / without he wolde leſe all his countrey. The entent of the Erle of Buckyngham and his company / was to paſſe ouer the wynter in the marcheſſe of Uannes / aſwell as they might. And in the begynnynge of Somer / to retourne in to Fraūce and make warr. And they hadde ſende worde of their ſtate and condycion to the kyng of Englande / and to the duke of Lancaſtre. And the kyng of Englande and his counſayle / thought the erle of Buckynghams entēcy on right good / and wrote to hym that they wolde he ſhulde ſo do. And ſende hym worde / howe the ſame ſeaſon they wolde ſende ouer another armye of men of warre / to lande at Chyerbourge / to thentēt that bothe armyes ſhulde mete toguyder. Wherby it was thought they ſhulde do a great feate of warr in Fraūce. The Frenche kynge / his vncles and his counſayle / ymagined well all thoſe poyntes. And alſo / they were ſomwhat enfourmed therof. And it was ſay de alſo among theym in ſecrete counſayle / that if the duke of Bretaynge / and ſome of his townes / toke parte with the Englyſſhemen. the realme of Fraunce / ſhulde than̄e haue moche to do. And theſe foure barownes of Bretaygne repreſentynge the duke / conceyued well all this buſyneſſe / and layde forthe all theſe doutes / and ſpecially / ſhewed it to the duke of Antowe. Who hadde the ſouerayne gouernynge of the realme of Fraunce / at that tyme. And alſo the duke of Aniowe was entending to make a voyage within two yere / or ſhorter tyme / In to Poule & Calabre. And was lothe that his vyage ſhulde haue ben broken or lette. Therfore he enclyned lightely to the duke of Bretaignes peace / ſo that he wolde become faythfull & true / and do homage to the frenche kynge. And ſo he was agreed and his peace made. And it was alſo agreed / that he ſhulde helpe the engliſſhmen with ſhyppes / to returne into their coūtreis. Alſo it was agreed / yt all they of ye gariſon of Chierbourge / that hadde ben in that viage to ſerue the erle of Buckyngham / that if they wolde retourne by lande to their gariſon / they ſhulde haue good ſaueconducte of the kyng ſo to do. And to go throughe the realme of Fraunce without harneſſe / and certayne knyghtes and ſquyers of Englande in their company / if they lyſt ſo to do. And after the departynge of the Englyſſhemen out of Bretaynge. Than the duke to come in to Fraunce / to the kyng & to his vncles / and to do faythe and homage to the Kynge / as the duke of Bretayne ought to do / to his naturall lorde the frenche kynge. All theſe maters were written and ſealed / and ſuffyciently brought to the duke of Bretaygne / who as than was in the marcheſſe of Uannes. And he accorded / to that his men hadde done / with right an yuell wyll / for he knewe well he coude nat do it / without ye yuell wyll of the englyſſhmen.
            
               WHan the knowledge of this treatie rāe to the erle of Buckyngham and to the Englyſſhe men / howe that the duke of Bretaygne was agreed with the frēche kyng. they were therwith greatly diſpleaſed / and were yuell content with the duke. Sayeng / howe he hadde ſente for them to come in to Bretaygne. And neuer ſythe they came / hē dyde neuer acquyte hym ſelfe trewely agaynſt theym / as he ought to haue done. Wherfore they ſayd / there was no poynt of trouthe in hym. Anone after the duke of Bretaygne came to Uannes / to the Erle of Buckyngham / and there ſhewed them ſecretely / howe his menne had made his peace with the frenche kynge. To the whiche he was fayne to agree / or elles to haue loſt his countre. There were great wordes bytwene them / but the duke humyled hym ſelfe / and excuſed hym as moche as he myght / For he knewe well in a maner / that he was in the wronge. Howe be it / he was fayne for to do it / to the entente that the

englyſſhmen ſhulde departe oute of Bretayne. Than therle made to be cryed through the cyte of Uannes / that if any of his men dyde owe any thynge in the towne / that they ſhulde come forthe and they ſhall be payed. And than therle rendred agayne the kayes of the towne / to the burgeſſes therof / and thāked them of the pleaſure that they had done to hym. And than they delyuered to the erle for his money: ſhippes at Uannes / at Hanybout / at Camperle / & where as they were lodged. And ſo the erle of Buckyngham departed fro Uannes the .xi. day of Aprell / with all his baners diſplayed in order of batayle / and ſo came to the hauyn. And thyder cāe the duke of Bretayne / ſir Alayne Houſey / the lorde of Monbroiſer / ſir Stephyn Gyon / ſir Wyllyam of Tribiquidy / ſir Geffray of Quareſmell / & dyuers other of the dukes counſayle. And they ſent to the erle in to his ſhyppe / deſyringe hym to ſpeke with the duke / but the erle wolde nat come agayne to lande / but ſent to theym the lorde Latymer / and ſir Thomas Percy. Theſe two came and ſpake with the duke of Bretaygne / and they comuned toguyder the ſpace of thre houres. And the englyſſhmen promyſed at their departyng / that they wolde do ſo moche / that the erle ſhulde ſpeke with thē another day: and ſo retourued agayne to their ſhyppe. and than ſhewed the erle all that they had done with the duke. And anone after myd night the fludde came / and the maryners had wynde at wyll. Than they demaunded of the erle what he wolde do? and the erle / who wolde haue no more ſpeakynge with the duke / ſayde. Sirs / drawe vp your ankers and aueyle your ſayles / and lette vs go / the whiche was incōtynent done. Thus departed the engliſſhmen fro the hauyn of Uannes / and ſayled towarde Englande. And ſo dyde all other englyſſhmen fro other hauyns. ſo they all came toguyder on the ſee. ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of ſome knightes and ſquiers / that retourned to Chierbourg by lande / and recorde what aduentures fell to thē by the waye.
            
               THe conſtable of Fraunce / was as than in the caſtell of Joſſelyn / a ſeuyn myles fro Uānes / and he had gyuen ſafecōduct to dyuers knightes englyſſhe and naueroſſe: to go by lande to the garyſone of Chierbourge / the which knyghtes hadde ſerued the erle of Buckynghame in his ſayde voyage. And amonge other there was ſir you of Fitz waren / ſir Wyllyam Clynton / and ſir Johan Burle. They departed fro Uannes / and toke their way by the caſtell of Joſſelyn / and there lodged in the towne without the Caſtell / thynkinge no more but to dyne there / and ſo departe. And whan they were alyghted at their lodgyng / certayne companyons of the caſtell / knyghtes and ſquyers came to ſe them: as men of warre often tymes wyll do / and ſpecially englyſſhmen and french men. And amonge the frenchemen there was a ſquyers a good man of armes / parteyninge to the lorde of Burbone erle of Marche / and one that he loued entierly / called Johan Boucmell: He had bene before that tyme in the garyſon of Boloyne with ſir Wylliam Bourdes / with the frenchmen / agaynſt the garyſon of Chierbourge / at whiche tyme there had bene dyuers wordes ſpoken of dedes of armes to haue ben done bytwene hym and an englyſſhe ſquyer / called Nycholas Clyfforde. The whiche Nycholas was as than there preſent. And whan the frēch men were come to the englyſſhmens lodgyng / and had comuned toguyder / and behelde eche other. Than Johan Boucmell began to ſpeke and ſayde to Nycholas Clyfforde. Nycholas / dyuers tymes we haue wyſſhed and deuyſed / to do dedes of armes toguyder / and nowe we haue foūde eche other in place and tyme / where we may accomplyſſhe it. Nowe we be here before the conſtable of Fraunce / and other lordes that be here preſent. Therfore I requyre you / let vs nowe haue thre courſes a fote with a ſpeare / eche of vs agaynſt other. Than Nicholas anſwered and ſayde. Johan / ye knowe ryght well / we be here nowe goynge on our waye / by the ſaueconducte of my lorde youre Conſtable. Therfore that ye requyre can nat nowe be done for I am nat the chiefe of this ſaueconduct / for I am but vnder theſe other knightes y• be here / for thoughe I wolde here abyde / they wyll nat do ſo. Than the frenche ſquyer anſwered. Nycholas / excuſe you nat by this meanes. let your cōpany departe if they lyſt / for I promyſe you by couenaunt / the armes ones doone bytwene you and me. I ſhall bringe you in to the vales of Chierbourge without domage or ꝑell / make ye no dout therof. Than Nycholas anſwered / and ſayd. I thynke well that ye wyll bringe me thyder / and I beleue it of a very trueth. But ye ſe well / howe we go throughe the countre without any harneſſe / we haue none with vs. So yt though I wolde arme me / I haue nat wherwith. Than anſwered Johan: excuse you nat

by that I ſhall ſhewe you what ye ſhall do. I haue harnes of dyuers ſortes at my cōmaundement / they ſhall be brought in to y• place / where as we ſhall do dedes of armes. Than beholde them well and choſe whiche ye wyll / and I ſhal arme me with the other. Whan Nicholas Clifforde ſawe himſelfe ſo ſore apoſed / he was ſham faſt: by cauſe of thē that were there preſent and her de the mater. & he ſawe well howe this John̄ offered hym ſo moche reaſon / that he coulde nat with his honeſtye refuſe hym. And moreouer Johan ſayde to hym. ſir / take what parte and what couenaunt ye wyll / and I ſhall nat refuſe it rather thanne we ſhulde nat do dedes of armes. Thā Nicholas ſayd: howe he wolde take aduyſe / and ſhewe him his mynde or he departed. And if it be ſo / that I may nat do it nowe / and that the lordes vnder whome Jame / wyll nat agre therto / I promyſe you / as ſoone as I come to Chierbourg and you to Boloyne letre me knowe of your comyng thyder / and I ſhall incōtynent come to you / and delyuer your chalenge. Nay nay ꝙ John̄ ſeke no reſpite / I haue offered and yet do offer you / ſo many thynges ſo honourable / that in no wyſe ye can departe / 
                  •
               auynge your honoure: without doyng dedes of armes with me / ſythe I requyre you of it. Than Nycholas with thoſe wordes was ſorer diſpleaſed than he was before / for he ſawe well (and trewe it was) ye he layd ſore to his charge / ther with the frenchmen went to their caſtel / and the engliſſhmen abode ſtyll at their lodgynge / and ſo dyned / and whan the frenchmen were in their caſtell / there was no lytell ſpeakyng of the wordes that hadde ben bytwene Johan Bourmell and Nycholas Clyfforde. In ſoo moche that the wordes therof came to the hearyng of the cōſtable / and he ſtudyed a lytell therat. than the knyghtes and ſquiers of the countrey deſyred hym that he wolde put to his payne / yt this dedes of armes myght be done / and the conſtable (ſayd) he was content ther with. And whan they had dyned / the englyſſh knightes ſuche as were there and wolde departe / they went to the caſtell to ſe ye couſtable / and to ſpeke with him: bycauſe he ſhulde ſende at the leſt .vii. knightes to conduct them through Bretayne and Normandy to Chierbourge. and whan they were come to the caſtell / the conſtable receyued them ſwetely / and than ſayd to thē. ſirs / Ja reſt you all: ſo that ye ſhall nat departe this day. and tomorowe after maſſe ye ſhall ſe dedes of armes done / bytwene our ſquier and yours. and than ye ſhall dyne with me / and after dyner / ye ſhall departe with ſuche guydes as ſhall bryng you to Chierbourge. So they agreed to hym and dranke of his wyne / and than returned to their lodgynge.
            THan theſe two ſquters / Johan and Nycholas aduyſed them well of ye batayle / that they muſt furnyſhe the next day / and ſo in the next mornynge they bothe harde one maſſe and were confeſſed / and ſo ſlept on their horſes and all the lordes of Fraunce on the one parte / and the engliſſhmen on the other parte / and ſo came all to gyder to a fayre playne place without the caſtell of Joſſelyn / and there taryed. Johan Boucmell had made redy two harneſſes fayre and good / accordyng as he promyſed too the englyſſhe ſquier / and than (he ſayde to hym) Nycholas choſe whiche ye wyll haue / but he wolde in noo wyſe choſe / and gaue the fyrſt choyſe to the frenche ſquier / and ſo he tooke the one and armed hym therwith / and Nycholas dyd helpe to arme hym / & ſo dyd he in lyke wyſe agayne / and whan they were bothe two armed they toke good ſpeares all of one lenght / and ſo eche of them tooke hys place and came a fayre pace a foote eche agaynſt other / and whan they ſhulde aproche they couched downe their ſpeares. and at the fyrſt ſtroke Nicholas Clyfforde ſtrake Johan Boucmell one the breſt / and the ſtroke dyd ſlyde vp to the gorget of mayle / and the ſpeare heed dyd entre in to his throte / and dyd cutte a ſonder the orgonall vayne / and the ſpere brake and the tronchion ſtacke ſtyll in the ſquiers necke / who was with that ſtroke woū
               ded to dethe. the engliſſhe ſquier paſſed for the and went and ſate downe in his chayre. Whan the lordes ſawe that ſtroke / and ſawe howe the tronchyon ſtacke ſtyll / they came to hym and toke of his baſſenet / & drewe out the tronchion / and as ſone as it was out he turned about with out any worde ſpekyng / and ſo fell downe deed ſodenly / ſo that the englyſſhe ſquier coulde nat come to him tyme ynough / for he had certayne wordes to haue ſtaūched hym / that wolde haue holpen. but whan he ſawe that he was deed / he was ſore dyſpleaſed bycauſe of that aduenture / ſeyng howe he ſhulde ſle ſo valyāt a man of armes. he that than had ſene the erle of Marche wold haue had pyte to ſe what ſorowe he made for his ſquier / for he loued hym entierly. The cōſtable reconforted him / and ſayd: in ſuche dedes of armes let no man loke for no thynge els / though this yuell fortune be fallen on our ſquier / the englyſſhman is nat to blame / for he can

nat amende it. Than the collable ſayd to thengliſſhmen / ſirs: let vs go and byne it is tyme / & ſo the conſtable agaynſt their good wylles had them with hym in to the caſtell to dyner / for he wold nat breke his promyſe for the dethe of the ſquier. The erle of Marche wept piteouſly for his ſquier / and Nicholas Clifforde went to his lodgyng and wolde nat dyne in ye caſtell / what for ſorowe and for doute of the frenche ſquiers frendes / but the conſtable ſent ſo for him / that it behoued hym to go to the caſtell. And whan he was come / the conſtable ſayd: certaynly Nicholas / I beleue verely and ſe well / how ye be ſory for the dethe of Johan Bourmell / but Jercuſe you for ye can nat amēde it / for as god helpe me if I had bene in the ſame caſe as ye were in: ye haue done nothyng but I wolde haue done the ſame / or more if I myght. for better it is a man to greue his enemy / thā his enemy ſhuld greue him / ſuche be the aduentures of armes. ſo they ſate downe at the table and dyned at their leyſar. And dyner done and the wyne drouke / the cōſtable called to hym the lorde Barrois of barres / and ſayd to hym. Sir: make you redy / I wyll that ye ſhall conduct theſe englyſſhmen to Chierbourg / and all they way open to thē townes and caſtels / and myniſtre to them all thynges neceſſary. The knight anſwered and ſaid. Sir / with ryght a good wyll it ſhall be done. Than they toke their leaue of the cōſtable and of the other knightes there preſent / and ſo went to their lodgynge / and moūted on their horſes and departed fro the caſtell of Joſſelyn / & rode to Pontorſon and to mount ſaynt Mychell / vnder the conduct of the gentyll knight the Barrois of barres / who neuer left them tyll they cāe to Chierbourge. Thus as ye haue herde / deꝑted the erle of Buckynghams army / bothe by ſee and by lande. ¶ Nowelet vs retourne to the buſyneſſe of Flaunders in that ſeaſon / how they of Gaunt maynteyned them ſelfe. And alſo of the erle of Flaunders their lorde / howe he parceyuered agaynſt them / who made to them right ſore and cruell warre.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the warre began agayne be twene the erle of Flaunders and the flemynges / and how they of Ipre were diſconfyted by a buſſhement. Cap. CCC .lxxv.
            
               IT is of trouthe / that the erle of Flaūders at this begynning / feared lytell the flemynges nor the gaūto is / for he thought well to bring thē vnder by wiſedome and by armes / lytell and lytell. and ſpecially ſithe that John̄ Lyon and John̄ Prunaux were deed. But the gaunto is had as than other great capitayns / in whom they had great affiaunce / and dyde all by their counſell. And Raſe de Harſell was capitayne of the chatelayne of Gaunt / and Johan of Bannoy capitayne of Courtrey. and there were other capitayns / as Johan Bulle / Peter Boyſe / Arnolde the Clerke / and Peter of Nuyte. The ſame ſeason there was a ſtryne / bytwene the great men & the comons / within the towne of Bruges / for the meane craftes wolde haue had euery thing at their pleaſure / and the great men wolde nat ſuffre it / and ſo they rebelled. And a tertayne weyuers and fullers were ſlayne / and the other apeaſed. Than the great men of Bruges ſente to the erle to Lyſle / deſyringe hym for goddes ſake to come to theym as their chiefe lorde / and to helpe to ſubdue the commons. The erle was gladde to here that tidynges / and ſo departed Lyſle / and ſir Wyllyam of Namure in his cō
               pany / and a great nombre of knightꝭ and ſquyers of Flaūders / and ſo came to Bruges / wher he was r
                  •
               ceyued with great ioye. And at the erles comyng / ther were taken all the principals of them that had their hertes gauntoiſe / & ſuche as were ſuſpecte. and ſo were put in priſon mo than fyue hūdred / and lytell and lytell their hee des were ſtryken of. And whan they of Franke vnderſtode that the erle was peaſably in Bruges / they feared. and ſo put them ſelfe in to the erles mercy / and he receyued thē and had great ioye / for dayly his power increaſed. And alſo they of Franke alwayes haue taken more the erles parte / than all the re
                  •
               ydue of Flaunders. The erle / ſeyng that he had brought vnder his ſubiection them of Bruges and of Franke / and that he had vnder hym knyghtes and ſquyers of the countre of Heynault and of Arthoyſe / he thought than lytell & lytell to conquere agayne his countrey / and to punyſſhe his rebels. And

firſt he ordayned and ſayd: he wolde go and ſe them of Ipre / for he hated thē greatly / bycauſe they opened their gates ſo lightly to theym of Gaunt, and ſayd / how that they that had made that treaty / and to let in his enemyes to ſlee his knightes ſhulde repent it / if he might gette the ouer hande of them. Than he made his ſomōs through Franke and Bruges / ſayeng howe he wolde go to Ipre. tidynges came to Ipre that the erle their lorde ordayned hymſelfe / to come and aſſayle thē. Than they toke counſayle and determyned to ſende worde therof to theym of Gaunt / to thentent that they ſhulde ſende them ſome men to aſſyſt the towne of Ipre / for they were nat bygge ynough of them ſelfe to kepe it without ayde of the gauntoyſe / who had ꝓmyſed and ſworne to ayde them / whanſoeuer they had any nede. So they ſent couertly letters to Gaunt and to the capitayns / & ſignifyed to thē the ſtate of the erle / and howe he thretned to cōe and aſſayle them. Than they of Gaunt remembred well / howe they were boūde by their fayth and promyſe / to ayde and confort them. Than they ſet for the two capitayns / John̄ Bulle and Arnolde Clerke / and they ſayd to them. Sirs / ye ſhall take with you thre thouſande of our mē and go haſtely to Ipre / to confort them as oure good frendes. Incontynent they departed fro Gaunte / and ſo theſe thre thouſande men came to Ipre / wherof they of the towne had great ioy Than the erle of Flaunders iſſued out of Bruges with a great nombre of men and ſo came to Tourande / and the nexte day to Pourpringue and there taryed thre dayes / tyll all his menne were come. And than he was aboute a twentie thouſande men of warre.
            THey of Gaunt who knewe right well all this mater / and how that the erle wolde go puiſſantly to Ipre. They determyned to aſſemble their puyſaunce / and to go by Courtrey to Ipre / and ſo all togyder to fight with therle. ſayeng: that if they myght one tyme ouercome him / he ſhulde neuer be releued after. Than all the capitayns departed fro Gaūt / Raſe de Harſell / Peter du Bouſe / and Peter le Nuyte / Johan de Launoy / and dyuers other: as Centenyers and Cinquantenyers. and whan they were in the felde they were a nyne thouſande / and ſo longe they reiourned that they came to Courtrey / where as they were receyued with great ioye / for John̄ de Launoy was capitayne there Therle of Flaunders beyng at Pourpringue and therabout / vnder ſtode that they of Gaunt were comyng to Ipre / & that they were at Co
                  •
               
               trey on their way. Than the erle toke aduyſe & helde all his company togyder. They of Gaut departed fro Courtrey & wente to Rolers / and there reſted. And ſent worde to theym of Ipre / howe they were come thyder / ſhe wyng thē how that if they wolde yſſue out of their towne with their power / and ſuche as were ſent to them before / how they ſhulde be all togider men ynowe to fyght with the erle. Of the whiche tidynges they of Ipre were right ioyfull / and ſo the next day they iſſued out mo than .viii. thouſande. & Johan Bulle & Arnolde Clerke were their gouernours. Therle of Flaūders and his power / who was in thoſe marcheſſe / knewe howe they of Ipre were yſſued out of their towne / to mete with them of Gaunt. I canne nat tell howe nor by what meanes / in ſo moche that therle ordayned at a paſſage / by ye which they of Ipre muſt paſſe / two great buſſhmentes with his ſon̄e the Haſe baſtarde of Flaunders / and the lorde Dā
               ghien / with dyuers other knightꝭ and ſquyers of Flaūders and of Heynalt / with them of Bruges and them of Franke / and in euery cōpany / ther were .x. thouſande men. Than whan they of Ipre and the gauntoiſe that were with them with Johan Bulle were in the feldes / and had nat iourneyed paſt one myle / they founde two wayes / the one went to Rolers and the other to Tourande. Than they reſted and toke aduyſe whiche way they ſhulde take. Than Arnolde le Clerke ſayd. I counſayle / let vs go and ſe oure felowes at Rolers. By my faythe ꝙ Johan de Bull / and I thynke it were better that we were lodged on the Mount dore. For be you ſure / I knowe ſo well Peter de Boyſe & Raſe de Harſell / ſithe that they haue ſent for vs / ſurely they wyll fyght with the erle. Wherfore I am ſure they wyll aproche as nere to hym as they can. Therfore I counſayle let vs go that way. So they determyned to take that waye / and whan they had gone a two myles / they were wery of goyng a fote / and or they were ware / they were bytwene the two buſſhmentes. And whan they ſawe that they cryed all / we be betrayed. Ther were neuermen yt made laſſe defence than they dyde as than / for euery man dyd what he coude to ſaue him ſelfe. Some retourned to Ipre and ſome toke the feldes / & fledde he that beſt might without array or order. And the erles men toke and ſlewe them without mercy / howbeit John̄ Bulle and Arnolde Clerke ſaued thē ſelfe. they that fledde towardes Courtrey mette with the gauntoiſe / who were departed fro Rolers / and

were in the way to Roſebeque. Whan Peter de Boyſe and the other ſawe them that fledd / they demanded of them what they ayled / They anſwered & ſayd / they coude nat tell / for they ſayde they had nat the leyſer to knowe the mater but they ſayd they fledde lyke men betrayed. Than Peter de boyſe had dyuerſe Imaginations / other to go forewarde / and to retourne agayne the fleers / & to fyght with theyr ennemies / who chaſed them: orelles to drawe to Courtray. All thynges conſydered / they determyned to drawe backe for that tyme. The whiche they thought was for them (as than) mooſt profitable. So they drewe abacke in a batayle raynged ī good ordre / and the ſame day returned to Courtray. And thither alſo drewe many of them that fled. So they lodged all within Cortray / and made the gates to be well kepte / to thentent that they ſhulde nat be ſodenly taken. And whan John̄ Bulle and Arnolde Clerke were returned / and had rekened all theyr people / than they knewe well / that of them of Gaunte / ſuche as had ben ſent to Iper before / they had loſte in nombre a xii. C. & as many of them of Iper. And if they of the buſſ hement had chaſed them that fled to Iper and to Cortray / there had but a fewe ſkaped / but all had ben deed or taken / but they chaſed nat farre. They toke hede to nothynge / but to ſlee them that were within theyr buſhement. the whiche ſaued all the reſidue. They of Iper were ſore abaſſhed / whan they ſawe theyr people returne beaten and diſcōfited / the ſame day that they were iſſued out: and demaūded howe it myght be. And dyuerſe anſwered / and ſayde howe John̄ Bulle had betrayed them / and had brought them to be ſhamfully ſlayne.
            ye haue hard often tymes recorded howe it is a harde warke to apeaſe a Commontie whā they be ſtyrred. I ſay this bycauſe of them of Gaunte. Whan they were the ſame day drawen backe to Courtray. They that were diſcō
               fytted knewe well that John̄ Bulle was in the towne. Than mo than a thouſand drewe together & ſaid / let vs go on the falſe traytour John̄ Bulle / who hath betrayed vs. For by hym and by nōe other we toke that way that brought vs into the buſhement of our ennemyes. For if we had beleued Arnold the Clerke / we had ben in ſuretie / For he wolde haue brought vs to oure owne company / and John̄ Bulle had nat ben / who hath ſolde and betrayed vs / and brought vs where as we were betrayed and diſcomfytted. Loo / ye may ſe howe theſe comons accuſed hym of treaſon / and yet I thynke veryly they had no cauſe ſo to do. For if it had ben as they ſayd / and that he had ſolde and betrayed them to the erle / he wold neuer haue returned agayn to them / but rather haue bydden ſtyll with the erle. Howe be it I can nat excuſe hym ſo / but yt it coſt hym his lyfe / and I ſhall tell you howe. The gauntoyſe went and toke hym in his lodgynge / and ſo brought hym into the ſtreat / and there he was ſtriken an to peces / ſo that euery man bare awaye a pece of hym. Thus ended John̄ Bulle. The next day the Gauntoyſe departed fro Courtray and returned to Gaunte / and dyd ſende John̄ de Lanuoy to the caſtell of Gaures / a caſtell of the erles / ſtandynge by the ryuer of leſcaulte / and there this John̄ made a garyſon.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they of Iper and Courtray turned to the erle of Flaunders parte / and howe the towne of Gaunte was beſieged. Cap. CCC .lxxvi.
            
               NOwe let vs ſpeke of the erle of Flaūders and of his cōpany. Whan they had thus by theyr buſhement ouerthrowen the gaūtoyſe & ſlayne a .iii. M. of them or there aboute / what of them of Gaūte and of Iper. Than the erle determyned to drawe towarde the towne of Iper / and to laye ſiege therto. And as he was counſayled ſo it was done / and he drewe thither with all his people / a great nōbre of knyghtes and ſquyers of Flaūders / of Heynault / and of Artoys / who were come thyther to ſerue the erle. And whan they of Iper vnderſtode that the erle came on them ſo ſtrōgely / they were all ſore afrayed / and the ryche men of the towne toke counſayle / and ſayd amonge them ſelfe / howe they wolde open theyr gates / and go and mete the erle / and put them ſelfe vnder his obeyſaunce / and crye hym mercy. and to ſhewe hym howe they were gaū
               toyſe by force / by reaſon of the comontie / as fullers / weauers / and ſuche other vnhappy people in the towne. And they thought that the Erle was ſo pytefull / that he wolde haue mercy on them. And as they ordeyned / ſo they dyd. And ſo mo than .iii. C. in a company came out of the towne of Iper / and had the keyes of the gates with them / & ſo they fell downe on theyr knees before the Erle cryenge for mercy / and dyd put them ſelfe and theyr towne at his pleasur. The

erle had pité on them and toke them to mercy / & ſo entred with all his puyſſaūce in to the towne of Iper and there taried a .iii. wekes / and ſent home agayne them of Frāke & of Bruges. And while therle lay in Iper he cauſed to be beheedded mo than .vii. C. of fullers & weauers and of ſuche maner of people as had brought fyrſt into that towne John̄ Leon and the gauntoyſe / and ſlayne ſuche valyaunt men as the erle had ſette ther. For the whiche cauſe the erle was ſore diſpleaſed / and to thentēt yt they ſhuld no more rebell / he ſent a .iii. C. of ye moſt notableſt of them into priſon in Bruges. and ſo thā toke his way to Courtray to brynge that towne to his obeyſaūce. Whan they of Courtray vnderſtode that therle theyr lorde came to them ſo ſtrōgely / and howe that Iper was vnder his obeyſaūce / than they greatly doubted / for they ſawe no comfort apparent fro them of Graunte. Wherfore they were aduiſed lyghty to yeld them to theyr lord / thynkynge it was better for them to hold with therle / to whom they ought to owe theyr fayth & homage / rather than to the gauntoyſe. Than they ordeyned a .iii. C. of the beſt of the towne a foote to go into ye feldes to therle / and the keyes of the towne with them. And whan therle came by / they all kneled downe and cryed for mercy. The erle had pitie of them / and receyued them to mercy / and entred into the towne ioyouſly / and they al made to hym reuerence and honor. Than he toke a .ii. C. of the beſt of the towne of Courtray / and ſent them to Liſle & to Daway in hoſtage / to then tent that that towne ſhuld no more rebelle. And whan the erle had ben there a .vi. dayes. than he went to Bruges / and there refreſſhed hym a .xv. dayes. Than he made a great ſomons / to thentēt to lay ſiege to Gaūte. For all the reſidue of Flaūders was as than at his commandement. Than the erle departed fro Bruges / and ſo came and layd ſiege before Gaūte / and lodged at a place called the Briet. Thither came to the erle 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert of Namure to ſerue the erle with a certayne nombre of men of warre / accordynge as the erle had wryttē vnto hym. But ſyr William of Namure was nat there / he was in Fraunce with the kynge / and with the duke of Borgoyn. This ſiege began about the feaſt of the decollacion of ſaynt John̄ Baptiſt. And 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                water Danhien was marſhall of all the ooſt of Flaūders. He was yonge and hardy / and feared no payne nor perill / whatſoeuer fell. For all that the erle lay thus before the towne of Gaūte / yet he coude nat ſo conſtrayne them of the towne / but that they kept ſtyll open iii. or .iiii. of theyr gates. ſo yt vitayles myght come in to them without any daſiger. For they of Bruſſels and of Brabant were right fauourable to them. And alſo they of Liege / to cōforte them in theyr opinion / ſent to them a meſſage / ſayenge thus, ye good people of Gaunte / we of Liege knowe well / howe ye be ſoretrauayled / and haue moche a do with the erle your lorde / wherof we are ſore diſpleaſed. But ſyrs knowe for treuth if we dyd marche nere you / as within iiii. or .v. leages / we ſhulde gyue you ſuche comforte as men ought to do to theyr good neyghbours and frēdes. but ye be farre of fro vs. and alſo the countrey of Brabant is betwene you & vs. wherfore we muſt forbeare. But thought it be ſo that ye be as nowe beſieged / yet be nat diſcomforted. For god knoweth / and ſo doth all other good townes / that ye be ī the ryght of this warre. Wherfore all your buſynes ſhall acheue the better. Thus they of Liege ſent to them of Gaunte to comforte them.
            THerle of Flaūders / who had thus beſieged the towne of Gaūte on the ſyde towardes Bruges / and towarde Courtray: but as toward Bruſſels therle coude nat come / nor lay his ſiege / bicauſe of the great riuers / that is to ſay the ryuer of Lyſe / and ye ryuer of leſcault. And I ſaye vnto you / all thynges conſydered / Gaūte is one of the moſt ſtrongeſt townes of yt worlde. For it behoueth mo thā .ii. C. M. men to beſiege it rounde / and to ſtoppe fro it all the ryuers and paſſages / and alſo that the oſtis lye nere together / for els they coude nat cōforte one another / bicauſe of the riuers. And alſo ther is moche people in the towne of Gaūte / they were in thoſe dayes / men of defence / a .iiii. ſcore. M. mēable to beare harneis / bitwene .lx. yere & .xv.
            ¶ And whan therle had layen at this ſiege the ſpace of a moneth / & that his men / and the Haze his ſone / & his marſhall had made many aſkrymyſſhe with them of Gaūt / and ſome day wōne and ſome day loſte / as the aduentures of warre falleth. Than therle was coūſayled on a day to ſende them of Bruges / of Iper / and of Pourprynge to ſkrymyſſhe with the gauntoyſe / at a place called ye longe brydge / for it was thought yt if they myght wynne that place / it ſhuld be a great aduaūtage and profitte for them / for thā they ſhulde entre into the .iiii. craftes / and therby aproche nere to Gaūte. And ſo there was ordeyned ſyr Joſſe Ualuin to be chief capitayne of that enterpriſe. And ſo whan they were come to this paſſage / they foūde it nat diſgarniſſhed but well prouyded for / with a great nombre of

men of Gaūte. There was Peterdu voyſe / Peter de Nuytee / and Raſe de harzelles. There beganne a ſore ſkrymyſſhe / there was ſhotyng of gonnes and croſbowes on both parties / wherby dyuers were ſlayne and woūded. And right well the gauntoyſe dyd acquyte them ſelfe / for they reculed theyr enemies / and wanne by force the goldſmythes baner of Bruges / and there it was caſt downe in to the water. And ther were of the goldeſmythes and other a great nombre ſlayne and hurte / and ſpecially 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Joſſe Ualuin was thereſlayne / Whiche was great vomage. And ſo the other returned agayne without doynge any more. So the gauntoyſe bare them ſelfe valiauntly.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the erle of Flaunders reyſed vp his ſiege fro the towne of Gaūte / and of the batayle betwene hym and the gauntoyſe. Cap. CCC .lxxvii.
            
               OUrynge this ſiege before Gaūte there were many ſkrymyſſhes before the towne / for the lorde Danghien & ye ſeneſchall of Heynault and the Haze of Flanders whan they myght ſpy any maner of aduaūtage / they toke none to raū
               ſome. And ſome tyme they were ſo put abacke / that they had no leyſer to loke behynde them. Than they of Gaūte drewe together to the nō
               bre of .vi. M. and Raſe of Harzelles / Arnolde Clerke & John̄ Launoy were capitaynes. And they departed out of Gaūte without any daunger of the oſte / and went to Alour a good cloſed towne / and the erle had lyenge there in gariſon dyuerſe knyghtes. But incontynent as they knewe of the comynge of the gaūtoyſe they fled out of the towne at the gate towarde Bruſſels / for els they had ben deed / for the towne incontinent was brent and ſpoyled by the gauntoyſe / wherin they conquered great pyllage. And fro thence they went to Teremōd a ſtronge towne yet by aſſaute they conquered it. And ther was ſlayne 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Philip of Namure. And ſo the gauntoyſe were lordes of the towne / but nat of the caſtell: for the lord of Wyndſcot kept it valiantly. Than the Gauntoyſe went to Granmout / the whiche was newly turned to the erles parte by the treatie of the lorde Dāghien. and I can nat tell whether it were by treaſon or nat but ye gaū
               toyſe entred by force / and many of them within ſlayne. And whan they had made this voyage / they retourned agayne to Gaunte with great praye and pyllage.
            ¶ Whan the erle of Flaūders ſawe that he loſt his tyme / with lyeng at the ſiege before Gaūte / and howe that he laye there at great coſte and charge / and great payn to hym & to his people: for he ſawe well that they within lefte nat for all hym to iſſue out & bren the coūtrey / and knewe well howe they had conquered Teremōde and Granmont duryng the ſiege. Therfore therle was coūſayled to departe thence / bicauſe wynter approched. And ſo he dyd / and ſent his people home to theyr owne houſes to refreſſhe thē. And he ſente the lorde Danghten and the lorde Montigny to And warp̄ in gariſon / & beſide ye men of armes he had a .ii. CC. good archers of Englande / wherof he made great counte. And the erle went than to Bruges. and they that lay in And warpe made dyuerſe ſkrymyſſhes with the gauntoyſe / for they iſſued out nere hande euery day into the feldes / ſo that none coude go to Gaunte to brynge thyther any vitayles or other marchaundiſe / withoute they were ſlayne or taken. And whan it came to the monethe of Aprill and that wynter was paſt / the erle than aſſembled agayne his people both fro Iper / fro Cortray / fro Pourprynge / fro Dan / fro Sluce and fro Franke / and ſo he departed fro Bruges and went to Nieule / and there he taried a certayne ſpace / and of all his men of armes he made capitayne the lord Danghien. So than the erle was to the nombre of .xx. M. and determyned to go to Gawres / where as John̄ Launoy was. And whan he knewe the comynge of the erle he ſente worde therof to Gaūte to Raſe de Harzelles for ſome ayde and comfort. Than Raſe aſſēbled together .vi. M. and iſſued oute of Gaunte / and wente towarde Gawres / but there he foūd nat John̄ de Launoy / for he was at Douze on the other ſyde of the ryuer and pylled the countrey there. and ſo they drewe together / and rode forth all that daye / and met with them of And warpe and Douze goyng toward therle. And there the gaūtoyſe dyd aſſayle them and ſlewe of them a .vi. C. but the lorde Danghiea was nat in that company / for he was gone to therle / who was in ye feldes betwene Bruges & Douze. And whā theſe tydynges came to the erle / and to the lorde Danghien / howe they of And warpe had receyued ſuche domage / they were ſore diſpleaſed. Than it was ordeyned / yt the lorde Danghien with .iiii. M. ſhulde go to

Gaures. thynking to fynde John̄ Launoy ther but he was nat there / for he was drawen backe to Gaunte with all his pyllage and priſoners / of the whiche ther was no great quantite. And the next day after / Raſe de Harſelles departed out of Gaūte / with .vi. M. and John̄ Launoy with hym. And alſo the ſame day there iſſued out of Gaunt Peter du boyſe with .vi. M. and Arnolde Clerke in his cōpany. and they went & brent the ſuburbes of Courtray / and than they retourned towarde Douſe / to mete with theyr owne company / but they came to late. for whan Johan Launoy and Raſe of Harſelles came to Nyeule. There they founde the erle and all his cōpany redy in the felde / abyding for non other thyng but for batayle. And ſo therles hooſt and the gauntoyſe founde eche other / without any knowledge in the mornynge. And whan Raſe of Harſelles and John̄ Launoy ſawe that they muſt nedes fight. than they ſet their men in thre batayles / and in euery batayle two thouſande men / of the mooſt hardyeſt of Gaunt. And Peter du Boyſe and Arnolde Clerke had as many with them / and they were abrode in the felde and knewe nothynge that their cōpany and the erle were ſo nere togyder / nor that they ſhulde fight as they dyd. For it was ordayned among them or they departed fro Gaunte / that if they founde therle with his hole puiſſaūce / that they ſhulde nat fyght with hym / without they were all toguyder. For they thought theymſelfe nat bygge ynoughe to encountre the erle / without they were all toguyder in one batayle. And to this they were ſworne to vpholde. And to ſaye trouthe / Raſe of Harſels might haue let the batayle / if he had lyſt. For if he wolde haue kepte himſelfe ſtyll in the towne / and haue taryed tyll Peter du Boyſe hadde come to hym. The erle wolde nat haue aſſayled theym in the towne ſo ſhortely. but aſſ one as Raſe de Harſels knewe that therle was there / incōtinent by great pride he yſſued out in to the felde and ſayd. Howe he wolde fight with his enemyes and haue the honoure hymſelfe / and nat to abyde for Peter du Boyſe and his company. He had ſo great truſt in his owne company / and ſo good hope in the fortune of them of Gaunte / that he thought he coude loſe nothyng. And well it ſhewed ye ſame day / the great wyll that he hadde to fight / as ye ſhall here after.
            O Reatly was therle of Flaūders reioyſed / whan he ſawe that Raſe of Harſels was iſſued out of Nieule / and was abrode in ye felde redy to fight. Than therle ordred his men / and he was about the nombre of .xx. thouſande / & he had a .xv. hundred ſpeares knightes and ſquyers / of Flaunders / Heynalt / Brabant / and Artoyſe. Of Heynault there was the lorde Danghien marſhall of the hooſt / and with hym the lorde Mōtigny / and my lorde the baſtarde Dā
               ghien / Gyles Ryſton / Johan Burlemont / and dyuers other. And of Flaunders ther was the lorde of Guyſtels / ſir Guy of Guyſtels / ye lorde Cornettes / the lorde Hulluc / the lorde of Halwyn / ſir Danyell of Halwyn / ſir Tyrrey Diſquetan / ſir Johan Diſcoubourcke / the lorde of Gentus / ſir Johan Uillayne / ſir Gerarde of Mortigiliet / and dyuers other. and ther were made a certayne of newe knightes. Before the yong ſeneſhall of Heynalt dyed on his bedde at Aubyes / beſyde Mortayne. Therle made fyue batayls / and in euery batayle foure thouſande men / euery man in great deſyre to ron on their enemyes. and that day the lorde of Lieurghien bare therles baner. Whan all the batayls were well ordred / the fyue batayls aproched agaynſt the thre batayles of the gauntoyſe. And at the firſt ſettynge on / there aproched but thre of the erles batayles / for the other two were as wynges / to comfort the bataylles if nede requyred. There the erle hym ſelfe prayed all his cōpany to do well their deuoyre / and to take vengeance of theſe outragyous gauntoiſe / who had putte hym to ſo moche payne. And alſo he ſayd to thē of the good townes. Sirs / be ye all ſure / for if any of you flye away / ye were better here to be ſlayne / for without mercy it ſhall cooſt you all your heedes. And ſo therle ſet them of Bruges in the firſt batayle / they of Frāke in the ſeconde and they of Ipre and of Courtray in the thirde and they of Propigne / of Bergues / of Caſſell / and of Bourge in the fourthe batayle. And he retayned with hym ſelfe / them of Lyle / of Doway / and of Andwarpe. Thus they aſſembled their batayls / and cāe eche agaynſt other. And of the gauntoyſe / Raſe of Harſelles ledde the firſt batayle / for he was the moſt hardyeſt / therfore he wolde be with the formaſt. To thentent to get honour if he coude / and ſo he encountred agaynſt the batayle of them of Bruges / ledde by the lorde of Guyſtell & his brotherne. & there was a ſore encountre / and ſo all the batayls aſſembled toguyder. Ther were many ouerthrowen on the one ꝑte and on thother / and the gaū
               toyſe dyd many proper dedes of armes / but the erle had a farre greatter nombre / for they were thre agaynſt one. Ther was a good aſſaut and

long endured or it coude be knowē or ſene / who ſhuld haue the better. and whan all the batayls were ioyned togeder / they of Flaunders cryed lyon / decōfortyng eche other. and thother cryed with an highe voyce / Gaūt gaunt. There was one tyme that the erles company were in aduē
               ture to haue had the worſe. And if they had loſt their grounde / they had ben all ſlayne without remedy. For Peter de boyſe with .vi. M. with hym / were in the feldes / and might well ſe ye batayle / but he coude nat come thyder / to comfort or ayde his company / bycauſe of the mariſſhes and waters that were bytwene them. But and therle had loſt the felde and his men fledde / Peter de boyſe ſhulde haue met with them / ſo that none ſhulde haue ſcaped / erle nor other. But all ſhulde outher haue ben ſlayne or taken / whiche ſhulde haue ben great domage to Flaunders / & by likelihod neuer to haue bē recouered agayn.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the gaūtoyſe were brent in the churche of Nieule. and howe the white hodes ſlewe dyuers noble mē of the erle of Flaunders parte. Cap. CCC .lxxviii.
            
               RAſe of Harſels & John̄ of Launoy had none auaū
               tage in aſſaylinge the erles men. For the erle had there many a noble knight / & many a goodman out of Bruges / Ipre / Courtray / Andwarpe / Danne / Sluſe / and Franke. Alſo the erle was foure men agaynſt one / ſo that whan all the erles batayls were aſſembled toguyder. there were ſo many / that the gauntoyſe coulde nat endure them / but opyned & reculed towardes the towne of Nieule. Aſſone as they brake their array / the erles men entred in among thē / and ſlewe them by heapes. Than the gaūtoyſe reculed towardes the mynſter of Nieule / whiche was a ſtronge holde. and ther was a great ſlaughter at the entryng of the gauntoyſe in to the mynſter. John̄ de Launoy all abaſſhed and diſcōfyted / entred in to the mynſter to ſaue him ſelfe / and went in to the ſteple / and ſuche of his cōpany as he coude get in with hym. and Raſe de Harſels abode behynde him and reculed his company / and dyde great feate of armes at the dore. But finally he was ſtriken with a longe pyke through the body and ſo ſlayne. ¶ Thus ended Raſe of Harſels / who had ben a great capitayne in Gaūt agaynſt therle. And the gauntoyſe loued hym greatly / bycauſe of his wyſedome and prowes / but for his valyātneſſe this was his ende & rewarde. Whan therle of Flaū
               came to the mynſter / and ſawe howe the gauntoyſe fledde in to the churche. Than he cōmaū
               ded to ſette fyre on the mynſter. His cōmaundemēt was ſhortely done / fyre / fagottes / & ſtrawe were ſet togyder rounde about the churche: the fyre anone mounted vp to the couerynge of the mynſter. There dyed the Gauntoyſe in great payne / for they were brent quicke / and ſuche as iſſued out were ſlayne / and caſt agayne in to ye fyre. Johan Launoy who was in the ſteple / ſeinge hym ſelfe at the poynt to be brent / cryed to them without / raunſome raunſome. and offred his cote / whiche was full of florens to ſaue his lyfe. But they without dyd but laughe & ſcorne at hym / and ſayde to hym. Johan / come out at ſome windowe and ſpeke with vs / and weſhall receyue you. make a leape in lykewiſe as ye haue made ſome of vs to leape wtin this yer. yt be houeth you to make this leape. whā John̄ Launoy ſawe him ſelfe in that poynt / and yt he was without remedy / and that the fyre toke hym ſo nere / yt he ſawe well he ſhulde be brent. He thought it were better for hym to be ſlayne than to be brent. and ſo helept out at a wyndowe amōg his enemyes / and ther he was receyued on ſperes and ſwerdes and cut all to peces / and caſt a gayne into the fyre. thus ended John̄ Launoy.
            OF ſixe thouſande men that Raſe de Harſels & Johan de Launoy had out of Gaūt and about Gaūt / & ſuche as ſerued the gaūtoiſe for their wages. ther ſcaped away alyue about thre hundred. all the reſydue were ſlayne in the dykes / in thefelde / and in the towne: and brent in the mynſter. And Peter de Boyſe / who had a great batayle in the felde coulde nat ayde thē / for bytwene his batayle and Raſe de Harſelles there was a great marys & moche water / wher fore he coude nat come to them. Than he departed fro the place there as he was and all his mē / well raynged in good order of batayle & ſayde. Lette vs go fayre and eaſely towardes Gaunt. Raſe of Harſelles and Johan of Launoy with their cōpany hath ſpedde but yuell / they are diſconfyted / I can nat ſay what ſhall fall of vs. yf we be folowed and aſſayled by the Erles men. Let vs kepe vs togyder and let vs fight valyātly / lyke theym that fight for our right. And all they that herde hym ſaid / ſo they wolde do. and ſo than he departed and toke the way towarde

Gaut in a fayre bataile well rainged & in good order. Some of thē that fledde fro the batayle retourued to Gaunt / and ſhewed all the aduenture / howe Raſe of Harſels and Johan of Launoy and their company were diſcomſyted and ſlayne in the batayle of Nieule. Whan they of Gaunt herde thoſe tidynges / they were ſore afrayed and ſorouſull for the dethe of Raſe / for he was welbeloued. and they had a great truſt in hym / for they had euer founde him a good capitayne and a true. And bicauſe that Raſe was a gentylman borne / and ſonne to alorde and to a lady / and that he had ſerued them trewely for their money / they loued and honoured him the more. Than they of the towne demaunded of them that were come thyder flyeng fro y• felde / wher Peter de Boyſe was / durynge the felde? and they that had nat ſene hym / nor knewe nat where he was / anſwered and ſayd. We can nat tell you wher he was / for we ſawe hym nat. thā ſome of them of the towne of Gaunt / began to murmure agaynſt Peter de Boyſe and ſayde / howe he had yuell aquyted hym ſelfe / in that he was nat at y• felde: ſeyng that he had a ſixe. M. men of warr with him. And ſo they of the towne were determyned that as ſoone as Peter du Boyſe ſhulde returne / they wolde ſlee him. and than agre with their lorde therle / and put them all in to his mercy. I beleue if they had doone thus / they had done wiſely / and I thynke ſortlye haue come to peace. But they dyde nat thus the whiche they derely bought after / and in like wyſe ſo dyde all the countre of Flaunders. For yet to this day / euery thynge is nat as it ought to be in Flaūders. Whan this bataile at Nieul was done / the Erle vnderſtode that Peter du Boyſe and a great batayle of Gauntoyſe were ſtyll abrode in the feldes / and were goynge to Gaunt. Than the erle demaunded counſayle / whyder he ſhulde go and fyght with thē or nat. and his lordes and knyghtes aunſwered hym / howe he had done ynoughe for that daye. And howe that his men were wery / and had nede of reſt. But they counſayled to ſende a fyue or ſixe hundred men of armes to purſue them / and to ſe what they dyde. Sayeng / howe parauēture they myght happe to fynde their enemyes lodged that night in ſuche a place / that they wolde loke on them / at their diſlodgynge in the mornyng. The erle was content with this coūſaile and ſo it was done. Anone they were apoynted out that ſhulde go in this cōpany / and the lorde Daughien was chefe capitayne. So they deꝑted fro Nieuie and rode vnder couert / to ſe the demeanour of the gauntoyſe. and at laſte they ſawe the gauntoyſe wher they diſcēded downe a hyll / kepynge them ſelfe cloſe and in good order. The lorde Danghien and his cōpany purſued them a farre of / on the one ſyde. And Peter de Boyſe and the gaūtoyſe ſawe them well / but they made no ſemblant. Than ſayd Peter de Boyſe to his company. Sirs / lette vs kepe on our way and breke none order. yf they come on vs / let vs receyue theym / but I thynke they wyll nat medyll with vs. Thus they rode tyll they came to Gaunt. Than the lorde Dāghien retourned to the erle / and Peter de Boyſe & his company entred in to Gaunt. Than Peter du Boyſe was ſo receyued / that he was at y• poynt to haue bene ſlayne / bycauſe he had nat holpen Raſe de Harſels / at the batayle of Nieule. Peter de Boyſe excuſed hymſelfe and ſayd / howe he had ſende to Raſe / that in no wyſe he ſhulde fight with the erle / without he were in his company / bycauſe the erle had ſo great a puiſſaūce / but Raſe dyde the clene contrary. And therfore though yuell become to hym / I can nat do therwith. And ſirs / knowe ſurely: that I am as ſorie and as moche diſpleaſed for his dethe / as any man may be. For the towne of Gaunte hath loſt of hym a right valyant man / and a ſage capitayne. Therfore it is conuenyent to ſeke out for another diſcrete / ſage / and of good renome / or els let vs all put our ſelfe vnder the obeyſāce of the erle. And he ſhall diſtroye vs all / & make vs to dye a villayne dethe. beholde nowe? choſe what ye wyll do / outher perceyuer and cōtynue as we haue done / or els to put vs in to the erles mercy? And as than ther were none that anſwered hym / but as for the batayle of Nieule / and of the dethe of Raſe de Harſelles / he was excuſed. And bycauſe they gaue hym none anſwere to that he ſayde / he was ſore dyſpleaſed in his mynde. And ſpecially he was nat content with ſome of the burgeſſes that were ther preſent / of the beſt and mooſt notableſt of y• towne. As ſir Guyſbert Grut / and ſir Symonde Brette. He made as than to them no ſemblant / but he ſhewed well his diſpleaſure to thē or the yere paſt / as yeſhall here after.
            wHan the lorde Dāghien and the lorde Montigny / the Haſe of Flaunders / and their routes were retourned from Nieule to the erle / and had ſhewed him all that they had ſene. Than therle departed and went to Bruges / and ſent home his people of y• good townes / and he ſende them of Franke with the

lorde Dāghien to And warpe. And whan they of Gaunte vnderſtode that the Erle was gone backe to Bruges / and that his people were departed fro hym. Than by the ſtyrring and mouyng of Peter de Boyſe / they of Gaunt drewe togyder / for he ſayd to thē. Sirs / let vs go forwarde / let vs nat be this a colde to make warr. let vs ſhewe ourſelfe / lyke people to do an entpriſe. And ſo there deꝑted out of Gaūt mo than fyftene. M. and ſo came ſtrongly before Courtray / and layd ſiege to the towne / whyle y• feeſt and proceſſyon was at Bruges. The whiche was the yere of our lorde / a thouſande thre hundred .lxxxi. There they were ten dayes and brēt the ſubbarbes / and the countrey about. & whan the erle herde therof / he ſente for all his gentylmen and gariſons / and for the cōmons of Ipre and Franke. and ſo departed fro Bruges / and he was to the nombre of. xxb. thouſande / and ſo he toke the waye towardes Courtray to fyght with the gauntoyſe / and to reyſe the ſiege. And whan Peter de Boyſe and the gaūtoyſe / herde how the erle was comyng to them warde with ſo great a nōbre / than they determyned no lenger to kepe the ſiege / but ſo departed and went and lodged at Douſe and at Nieule. Sayeng howe they wolde abyde the erle there / and ſent worde of their eſtate to Gaunt / and ſent for the rerebande / to the entent to be the ſtronger / and to haue the more people. And ſo there departed agayne fro Gaunte / to the nombre of .xv. thouſande / and ſo came to their company to Nieull and to Douſe / and there lodged all togyder in the feldes abydinge the erle. And whan the erle was come to Harlbecke beſyde Courtrey / than he vnderſtode that the gauntoyſe were departed to wardes Gaunte / and were lodged about Nieule and Douſe. Than the erle was coūſayled nat to purſue them / and ſo gaue leaue to his men to departe. and he ſent the lorde Dāghien and heynowers / & his baſtarde ſonne the Haſe of Flaūders to And warpe in garyſon. & whan the gauntoyſe ſawe that therle came nat on thē / than they departed fro Nieule and fro Douſe / and toke the highe way by And warpe to come to Gaunt. And the ſame daye that they paſſed / they ſente to And warpe a certayne nombre of their men / of whom Arnolde Clerke was capitayne / to y• barryers of the towne / to ſcrumyſſhe with them within the towne. and the knightes and ſquyers that were within / coulde nat abſteyne thēſelfe / but came and ſcrimyſſhed with them. ſo that ther were hurt and ſlayne dyuers on bothe parties. and at laſt they departed and entred into Gaūt / euery mā to his owne houſe. And thre dayes after / Arnolde Clerke was ordayned to go to Gaures with a .xii. hundred of the whyte hobes / to lye in the caſtell and ther about / in maner as a countre garyſone agaynſt And warpe. And ſo thyder went Arnold clerke with his cōpany / and he had nat ben ther long but he vnderſtode that certayne knyghtes and ſquyers were iſſued out of And warp to ſeke aduentures. Than Arnolde Clerke departed fro Gaures / and with him a. xb. C. and ſo layd thē ſelfe in a buſſhment / to mete with them yt were iſſued that mornynge out of And warpe. wherof there were dyuers gentylmen: as the lorde of Cornayſe / the lorde of Remſeles / ſir Johan of Uyllayns / the lorde Danghien / the Galoys of Mamynes / the baſtarde of Cornayſe / and the Blancharde of Calemey. And as theſe knightꝭ and ſquyers were retournynge to And warpe / the buſſhment brake out on thē. And ther were dyuers ſlayne / hurt / and ouerthrowen / for the gaūtoyſe toke non to mercy. Ther theſe knightes and ſquiers horſes dyde them good ſeruyce for they broched their ſpurres to their horſes / & ſo retourned to And warpe. and at the barriers of the towne they a lighted / and put them ſelfe to defence / abyding for their company and var lettes. yet they coude nat entre ſo clene / but that there were ſlayne mo than thre ſcore. And than Arnolde clerke retourned and lodged the ſame night at an abbey therby / called Chem. And in the abbey they foūde Peter Deſtonehoyr & the Galoys of mamynes / and a. C. of their copany with them. Than Arnolde Clerke aſſayled the abbey / and with great payne the Galois of mamynes ſaued hym ſelfe / and departed out at a backe poſterne and entred in to a bote / and by night tyme went to And warp / and ſhewed the lorde Danghien / the lorde Montigny / and ſir Danyell of Halwyn / and the other knightes y• were ther. How the ſame night Arnolde clerke and the whyte hodes were in thabbey of Chem and had ſlayne dyuers of their company. & ſaid howe he thought verily / that Peter Deſtonehoix was there ſlayne. & ſo he was in dede. For Arnolde clerke & his cōpany made him to leape out at a wyndowe / & ther was receyued Wt glayues and ſlayne / whiche was great domage.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the white hoodes and their capitayn were ſlayne. and how Phylyppe Dartuell was choſen capiteyn of Gaunt. Cap. CCC .lxxix.
            
               
               WHan the knightes and ſquyers yt were within Andwarpe / vnderſtode that Arnolde Clerke and the whyte hodes / to the nombre of .xii. hundred / were at the abbey of Chem / and had takē 
               ther dyuers of their companyons. They were right ſore diſpleaſed / and ſo determyned to ſende the ſame night their ſpyes / to ſe where they myght fynde their enemyes in the next mornyng. And as they ordayned ſo they dyde / and in the mornyng the ſpyes brought report / howe the white hodes were determyned to abyde there all that day / wherwith theſe lordes and knightes were right ioyfull. Than they armed theym: as the lorde Dāghien / the lorde of Mōtigny / the lorde of Breſuell / ſir Michaell de la Hamarde / and mo thā ſixe hūdred knightꝭ and ſquiers of Heynalt and as many of Flaūders. and out of And warpe a thre hūdred ſpeares / & mo than a thouſande croſbowes and other varlets. and whan they aproched nere to them / they ſent before ſir Olyuer of Chem / and a hundred ſpeares with hym to begyn the aſſaut. to the entent to drawe out of the abbey Arnolde Clerke / and to ocupy the tyme / whyle their fote men and croſbowes were come to theym. Than ſir Danyell and ſir Peter of Diſquemake / & the Haſe of Flaūders came before the abbey of Chem / and cryed flaū ders with the lyon of the baſtarde. The gauntoyſe / who were nat ware of the buſſhment bycauſe it was ſo early / nor they were nat fully redy. And are Arnolde Clerke coude bringe his men toguyder in good arraye: the lorde Danghien / the lorde of Lens / the lorde of Breſuell / the lorde of Cornayes / the lorde of Montigny. and their batayls entred behynde into the towne / in cryeng Danghien. And ſet on the gauntoiſe and whyte hodes ſo valiauntly / that they coulde nat endure but brake their order. So yt there was ſlayne of thē / what in the abbey and in the feldes .xi. hūdred / and they were but .xii. hundred in all. And there was Arnolde Clerke ſlayne with two pikes as he was flyeng. and ſo he was layd vp leanyng agaynſt a hedge. And after this diſconfytur the lorde Danghien and the other knyghtes retourned to And warpe. & ſo this dede was reputed a great prowes. And whan therle of Flaūders knewe theſe tidyngꝭ / he was greatly reioyſed / & ſayd to the lorde Dā
               ghien. how he was his fayre goodſon / & ſhulde proue a noble valiant man. To ſay the trouthe of the lorde of Danghien / in him was all the honour of the countie ol Flaunders. and ſo whyle therle lay at Bruges / he called him nat all onelye his coſyn / but alſo his fayre ſonne.
            Whan it was knowen at Gaunte / that Arnolde Clerke was deed and his men diſcōfyted there were many than that were ſore abaſſhed / and ſaid among them ſelfe. Our beſyneſſe proueth but yuell. Lytell and lytell / our capitayns and men are ſlayne. We thynke we haue done yuell to moue this warr thus againſt our own lorde / for he dothe minyſſhe vs thus lytell and lytell. The yuell wyll and hatered that was by twene Gylbert Mahue and Johan Lyon / turneth to our great domage. I trowe we haue to longe ſuſtayned the opinyons of Johan Lyon and Peter de Boiſe. They haue brought vs ſo depe into this warr / and into the hatered of the erle our lorde / that nowe we can nat nor knowe nat howe to fynde any remedy / to haue mercy and peace. yet it wer better that .xx. or .xxx. dyd repent it / than̄e all the hole towne. Thus there were dyuers yt ſayde eche to other priuely / they durſt nat ſpeke it generally / for dout of thē that were yuell. For they were all of one ſect / & daylye encreaſed in puiſſaunce. And in the begynnynge they were but poore companyons without any ſubſtaūce / but than they had golde and ſyluer ynough. For whan they neded & cōplayned to their capitayns / they were well herde & cōforted. For than anone ſome of the riche men of the towne ſhulde be ſent for to them / & whan they were come / for feare they durſte nat refuce ſo to do. Than the capitayns wolde ſay to thē. Sirs / it behoueth that the good towne of gaūt make ſome ſhyft to pay our ſoudyers / who aydeth and helpeth to defende and to kepe our iuryſdictyons and fraunchieſe / and it behoueth that our companyons muſte lyue. And ſo they wolde aſke of euery man as they lyſt them ſelfe and none durſt ſaye nay. For and they hadde / incontynent they ſhulde haue bene ſlayne / and borne in hande. howe they had bene traytours to the good towne of Gaunt / and loued nat the welthe / honoure / nor profyte therof. Thus the knaues and yuell dyſpoſed people / were mayſters in the good towne of Gaunt. And ſo contynued / as long as the warre was bytwene thē and the erle of Flaūders their lorde. And to ſay the verye trouthe / thoughe the ryche and noble men of the good towne of Gaūt / were thus beaten with ſuche roddes / ther ought none to be ſo rie therof. Nor they coude nat excuſe themſelfe / but that by theyr owne fautes / they were cauſe

of theyr owne trouble / reaſon proueth howe. for whan therle of Flaūders ſende to thē his baily / to haue done iuſtyce on certayne rebels / & euyll diſpoſed people. They myght if they had lyſt / abydden by hym / and haue gyuen hym confort in doyng of iuſtice / the whiche they dyd nat. but it ſemed / that they hadde leauer the mater had gone yuell as it dyd / rather than well. And had rather to haue warr with theyr owne lorde thā peace. For well they myght knowe / that if they had warre / that the yuell people ſhuld be lordes of the towne / and ſhulde be theyr maiſters / and nat to be put downe agayne whan they wolde. This proued well by John̄ Faucell / who (to y• entent to diſſymule the mater) departed out of the towne of Gaunte / and went and / dwelte in Heynaulte / wherby he thought to be pourged out of blame / for the warre bytwene therle and the towne / thynkynge to beare no blame of neyther party. Howe be it the matier was ſo layde to his charge / that he dyed therby / whiche was great domage. for this John̄ Faucell was in his tyme a right ſage and a noble wyſe mā / but it is hard haltynge before lordes and theyr coū
               ſayles / for they ſe clerely. This man coude well ayde and coūſayle other / but as touchyng hym ſelfe / he coude nat take the beſt waye. I can nat ſay / whyder he were culpable or nat / of the artycles that he was examyned of at Lyle / by 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Symon Rayn / but the knyghtes and yuell fortune turned all agaynſt hym / ſo that he dyed. And in like wyſe ſo is fallen of all y• capitaynes of Gaūt that ſuſteyned the rebellion agaynſt theyr lord. Alſo it hath coſte ſyth many a mās lyfe in Gaūt and parauenture many a one / that were in no defaulte.
            ¶ Whan Peter du Boyſe / ſawe that the towne of Gaūre dayly enpaired and febled / as well in theyr capitayns as in theyr men. And ſawe well howe the riche men began to waxe wery / and were in mynde to leaue the warre. Wherfore he doubted greatly / and imagined / and ſame well that by no meanes of the worlde / there coude any peace be made with the erle ſo that he ſhuld beſure of his lyfe. Than he remēbred hym ſelfe of John̄ Lyon / who was his maiſter / and ſtudyed by what meanes he wrought. And he ſaw well that he coude nat do all thynge alone / nor that he had nat the wytte and vnderſtandyng / to gouerne the hole towne of Gaūte. Wherfore he thought he wolde nat haue the pryncypall charge / but in all foliſſhe enterpriſes he thought couertly to haue the ſtudy of them. Than he remembred hym ſelfe of a man / the whiche was nat greatly taken hede of / in the towne of Gaūt. he was a wyſe man / but his wyſdome was nat knowen / nor he was nat taken hede of / tyll the ſame day. He was called Philip Dartuell / ſone to Jaques Dartuell / who in his tyme .vii. yere togyder had the gouernaunce of all the countie of Flaūders. And he harde Peter du boyſe and John̄ Lion his maiſter / and dyuerſe other auncient men of Gaunte often tymes ſaye / that the countrey of Flaunders was neuer more loued / honored / and feared / than it was in the tyme of Jaques Dartuell / the whiche endured y• ſpace of .vii. yere. And as than he hard dayly the gaū toyſe ſay / howe that whan Jaques Dartuell lyued / theyr buſynes was in good eſtate / for than they ſayd / they might haue peace at their wyls / & the erle was glad whan he might ꝑdon vs all. Peter de Boyſe remēbred well theſe wordes in hym ſelfe / and ſawe how Jaques Dartuel had a ſonne called Philip / a right couenable & gracious man. And the quene of Englande / while the lay at Gaūt / during the ſege before Turney was his godmother / and ſo for the loue of her / he was named Philyp. Than Peter de Boyſe in an euenynge came to this Philip / who was abydynge in his mothers houſe / and lyued honeſtely on theyr rentes. And Peter de boyſe began to reaſon with hym / and began to open the mater / wherfore he was come to hym / and ſayd thus. Philyp / if ye wyll take good hede to my wordes / and beleue my counſayle / I wyll make you the greatteſt man in all the countie of Flaū
               ders. Howe can that be ſyr ſayd Philip. I ſhall ſhewe you ſayd Peter. ye ſhall haue the gouernynge and myniſtration of all them in y• towne of Gaunte. for we be nowe in great neceſſyte to haue a ſouerayne capitayne of good name and of good renoume. And ſo by this meanes your father Jaques Dartuell / ſhall ryſe agayne in this towne / by the remembraunce of you. for euery man ſaythe / that ſyth his dayes / the countrey of Flaunders hath nat ben ſo loued / honored / nor feared / as it was while he lyued. and I ſhall lyghtly ſet you in his ſtede / if ye lyſt your ſelfe. And whan ye be in that auctorite / than ye ſhall gouerne your ſelfe by my counſaile / tyll ye haue ful vnderſtandyng of euery caſe / y• whiche ye ſhall ſoone lerne. Thā this Philip / who was at mannes ſtate / and naturally deſyred to be auaunced / honored / and to haue more thā he had / anſwered & ſayd. Peter du boyſe / ye offre me a great thynge / and I beleue you. And if I were in the ſtate that ye ſpeke of / I ſwere to you by

my faythe / that I ſhulde do nothynge without your coūſayle. Than Peter anſwerd and ſaid. Howe ſay you / can ye beare your ſelfe high and be cruell amonge the comons / and ſpecially in ſuche thynges as we ſhall haue to do. A man is nothynge worthe without he be feared / doubted / and ſome tyme renowmed with crueltie. Thus muſt the flēmynges be gouerned. Amā muſt ſet no more by the lyfe of men / nor haue no more pitie therof than of the lyues of ſwalowes or larkes / the whiche be taken in ſeaſon to eate. By my fayth ſayd Philip all this cā I do right well. That is well ſayd qd Peter. And I ſhall make you ſo / that ye ſhalbe ſoueraygne aboue all other. And ſo therwith he toke leaue of hym and departed. The nyght paſſed / the next daye came. Than Peter du boyſe came into a place / Where as there were aſſembled moo than .iiii. M. of his ſecte and other / to here ſome tydyng ꝭ and to knowe howe they ſhulde be ordered / and Who ſhulde be chief capitayne of Gaunte. And there was preſent the lorde of Harzelles / after Whom moche of the buſynes Within Gaunte was ordred. But of goynge outward he wold nat medle. And ſo there amōge them / there was named dyuers perſones of the towne of Gaūt. and Peter de boyſe ſtode ſtyll and harde them well. and than he ſpake openly and ſayd. Sirs I beleue well all this y• ye ſay / ye ſpeke of good affection / and by great deliberation of corage / that ye haue to the kepynge of the honour and profite of this towne. And alſo ſuche perſones as ye haue named be right able / and haue well deſerued to haue parte of y• gouernynge of the towne of Gaūte. but ss I knowe one that if he wyll medle therwith / I thynke ther ſhulde nat be a meter man therfore / nor of a better name. Than Peter was deſired to ſhewe his name / & ſo he named hym and ſayd. Sirs it is Philip Dartuell / who was criſtened at ſaynt Peters in this towne of Gaunte / by the noble quene of England called Philip. The ſame ſeaſon that Jaques Dartuel was before Tournay with y• kynge of Englande and the duke of Brabant / the duke of Guerles / and therle of Heynault / y• whiche Jaques Dartuell this Philips father gouerned the towne of Gaūte and the coūtrey of flaunders ſo well▪ that it was neuer ſo well ruled ſyth / as I haue hard ſay / and do here dayly of the auncient men / who had knowlege therof / Who ſay the towne was neuer ſo well kepte ſyth as it was in his tyme / for Flaunders was in a great iopardie to be loſt / & by his wyſdome he recouered it. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                s knowe for truthe we ought better to loue the braunches and membres that cometh from ſo high a valiant man as he was / than of any other. And as ſoone as Peter du boyſe had ſayd thoſe wordes / Philip Dartuell entred ſo in to euery mans courage / that they ſaid all with one voyce. Let vs haue hym / we wyl haue none other / go ſend for hym. Nay nat ſo qd Peter du boyſe / let hym nat be ſent fore / it were better we went to hym / we knowe nat as yet howe he wyll maynteyne hymſelfe / let hym firſt be examyned.
         
         
            ¶ Of the ordynaunce of Gaūte. And of the warre of Spaygne and of Por tyngale. Cap. CCC .lxxx.
            
               ANd ſo with Peter du boyſe wordes / all they y• were ther and dyuerſe other that folowed them came to the houſe / where as Phylyp Dartuell was / who knewe right well before theyr comynge y• mater. There was the lorde of Harzell / Peter du boyſe / Peter le mite and a .x. or .xii. of the chief aldermen of the craftes / and there they ſhewed to Phylyp Dartuell howe the good towne of Gaunte was in great daunger withoute they myght haue a capitayne and a ſouerayne / who both without and within might ordre al maner of people abidynge in Gaunte. Wherfore they ſaid they gaue al theyr voyces to hym / and dyd choſe hym to be theyr ſoueraygne capitayne for the good renome of his name / and for the loue of his good father / they were better cōtent with hym than with any other. Wherfore they deſyred hym affectuouſly / that he wold take on hym the charge / and they ſware vnto hym fayth and trouth / as to theyr lorde / promyſyng how euery body within the towne ſhuld be vnder his obey ſaūce. Philip vnderſtode well all theyr wordes & requeſtis / and than right ſagely he anſwered and ſayd. Sirs ye require me of a great thyng and I thynke ye remēbre nat well howe the caſe ſtandeth / whan ye wolde that I ſhuld haue the gouernynge of the towne of Gaūte / ye ſay how the loue y• your p̄deceſſors had to my father draweth you to this prpoſe / but for al y• 
               suice y• my father dyd / yet at the laſt he was ſlayne among you. and ſo if I ſhuld take on me y• gouernyng as ye ſpeke of & than at laſt to be ſlayne / than I ſhulde haue but a ſmall rewarde. Philip quod Peter du boyſe / y• is paſt can nat be recouered / 

worke by counſayle / and ye ſhall alweys be ſo well coūſayled / that euery mā ſhall prayſe you. Than ſayd Philip I wold be loth to do other wyſe. There he was taken vp amonge them & brought in to the Market place / and there they made to hym aſſuraūce both mayres / aldermē / and maiſters of euery crafte in Gaunte. Thus Philip was made chief capitayne in al Gaūte / & thus at the begynnyng he was in great grace / for he ſpake ſwetely to euery man that had any thynge to do with hym / and delt▪ ſo wyſely that euery man loued hym / for parte of the reuēnues that perteyned to the erle of Flaūders in Gaūt as his heritage / he cauſed them to diſtributed to the lorde of Harzels bicauſe of gentylnes and the more honeſtely to mainteyne his eſtate. For all that euer he had in Flaunders / without the towne of Gaunte / he had loſte it clerely.
            ¶ Nowe let vs leaue a lytell to ſpeke of the buſynes of Flaunders / and let vs ſomwhat ſpeke of Englande and of Portyngale.
            ye haue harde well before / howe that after that kyng Henry of Caſtile was drſſeaſed and his eldeſt ſone John̄ crowned kynge / and his wyfe crowned quene / who was doughter to Peter of Aragon. Than the warre beganne betwene the kynge Fernando of Portyngale / & the kynge of Caſtile for certayne occaſions betwene them / and ſpecially for the dealynge of y• 
               
                  〈◊〉
               . ladyes Conſtance and Iſabel / doughters to the kynge Dampeter / The fyrſt maryed to the duke of Lancaſtre / and the ſeconde to the Erle of Cambridge. And the kynge of Portyngale ſayd / howe that the kyng of Caſtile had wrōgfully withoute cauſe diſherited his two coſyns of Caſtile. and that it was nat to be ſuffred that ſuche two ſo noble ladyes ſhulde be dyſheryted fro theyr heritages / for the matier myght rōne ſo longe / that it ſhulde be forgoten / Wherby the ladyes ſhulde neuer recouer theyr ryght. The whiche thynge he ſayd he wolde nat ſuffr
                  •
               
               ▪ Seynge that he was one of theyr nexte kynſmen / and as wel for the loue of god / as for to kepe the reaſon of Juſtice / to the whiche he ſayde euery noble man ought to entend & inclyne. And ſo he defied y• kyng John̄ of Caſtile / who was crowned kynge of Spaigne / Galiſe / Caſtile / and Cyuyll. And ſo thus the kynge of Portyngale made hym warre on theſe ſayde articles. Kynge John̄ defended hym ryght valiantly agaynſt hym / and he▪ ſent to his frōters in to gariſon great nombre of men of armes to reſiſt agaynſt his enemyes / ſo that at the begynnynge he loſt no thynge. He had right ſage and good knyghtes of Fraūce with hym / who comſorted hym greatly in his warris and gaue hym good counſaile / as the Begue of Uilames / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Peter his ſōne / sir John̄ of Bergettes / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                William of Lignac / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Water Puiſſac / y• lorde of Taride 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Triſtram of Roy / and dyuerſe other that were gone thyther / after the erle of Buckingham had ben in Britayne / for y• frēche kynge had great aliaunce and confederacions with the kynge of Caſtile. Wherfore the kynge of Portingale aduyſed to ſende certayne meſſangers into England / to the kynge and to his vncles / to thentent to haue ayd of hym in ſuche wyſe that he myght be able to maynteyne hys Warre agaynſt the ſpaignardes. Than he called to hym a wyſe and valiant knyght & a great lord / called John̄ Ferrande / and to hym he ſhewed all his entēt / and ſayd. John̄ ye ſhall beare me theſe letters of credence in to Englande / I can nat ſende a better meſſanger than you / nor none that knoweth ſo well the beſynes of Frāce as ye do. ye ſhall recommende me to the kynge with theſe letters / and ſhewe hym howe I ſuſteyne my coſyns ī theyr right of Spaigne / Galice / & Cyuill. Wherfore ſay that I require hym to ſende to me his vncle the duke of Lancaſtre / and his wyfe / and a certayn nōbre of men of armes & archers. And whā they be come / we truſt than to make good warre / what with them and with our owne puiſſaūce / ſo that we truſt to recouer our heritages. Sir ſaid y• knyght / at yo
                  •
                
               pleaſur I ſhall fulfyll your meſſage. And nat lōge after he entred into ſhyp to do his voyage and ſo departed fro the hauyn & the citie of Liſſebone. And ſo longe ſayled that he arryued at Plommoth / the ſame day / the ſame houre / and ſame tyde that therle of Buckyngham arryued and certayne of his veſſels / as they returned fro Britayne. The engliſſhemē had ſo ſore fortune on y• ſee / that they loſt .iii. of theyr ſhippes charged with men & prouiſion / and all his flete was ſprede abrode by a great ſtorme of wynd & they arryued in great perill in .iii. hauyns of Englande. Of the comynge of this knyght oute of Portingale therle of Buckyngham was right ioyfull and made hym ryght good chere / and demaunded of hym tydynges / and he ſhewed hym dyuerſe thynges both of Portyngale & of Spaygne. And ſo after they rode together tyll they came to the good citie of Lōdon / where the kynge of Englande was. ¶ Whan therle of Buckynghā was come to Londū / they of y• cite made hym good chere / and than he went to the

kynge / who was at Weſtm̄ and his .ii. vncles with hym / the duke of Lancaſtre and the erle of Cakridge / and the knyght of Portingale was in his company. And whan the kynge and the lordes had knowlege of hym / they made great ſemblant of ioy / and greatly honored hym. He preſēted his letters to the kynge / Who red them in the preſence of his vncles. The kynge as thā dyd no thynge / but by the counſayle of his vncles / for he was but yonge. Than the knyght was exammed bicauſe he brought letters of credence / and demaunded the cauſe of his comyng out of Portingale into Englande. And he anſwerd ſagely / and ſhewed them all the mater as ye haue harde before. And whan the lordes had Well vnderſtande hym / they anſwered / Sayenge in the kynges name. We thanke our coſyn ye kynge of Portingale that he putteth hym ſelfe ſo foreward in our beſynes / in that he maketh warre agaynſt our aduerſary / and that he requireth is reaſonable. Wherfore he ſhall haſtely haue ayde / and the kynge ſhall take aduiſe howe it ſhall be ordered. And ſo as than there were no mo Wordes. This knyght ſtraunger for the loue of theſe tydynges yt he had brought pleaſaunt to the duke of Lancaſtre / and to the erle of Cambridge / he was feaſted and dyned with the kynge / and ſo taried the ſpace of .xv. dayes / tyll the vtas of ſaynt George / Where as ye kynge and his vncles were. And thyther was comeſyr Robert of Namure to ſe the kyng and to make his relef for that he helde of the kynge in Inglande. Than was there the parliament and counſaile aſſigned to be at Weſtm̄ / I ſhall tell you why / as well for the beſynes of Portingale the whiche was a newe mater / as for other for the truce was expired the fyrſt day of June / and ſo there was a great counſaile of the prelates and barones of England / howe they ſhuld ordre all theſe mats. And ſo they were in mynd to ſend the duke of Lancaſtre into Portingale / and ſome ſayd / it was a farre and a longe voyage to ſende hym thyther. And if he went / they myght happe to repent it / for they vnderſtode that the ſcottes made great apparell to entre in to England. And ſothan it was determined in theyr coūſaile / that the duke of Lancaſtre / who knewe well the marches of Scotland and the dealyng of the ſcottis. And it was thought that they wolde ſooner fall at a treatie with hym / rather than With any other great lorde of all England / and howe that the ſcottes wolde do more for hym than for any other. And how that the erle of Cambrydge / with .v. C. ſpeares and as many archers ſhulde goo in to Portingale. And if that the duke of Lancaſtre coulde do ſomoche with the ſcottes with the honour of the realme that a truce might be had to endure .iii. yere than he myght well go into Portingale about the moneth of Auguſte or Septembre / if the kynge and his coūſayle thought it beſt / and ſo therby to enforce the Army of hys brother. Alſo there was a nother poynt / Wherfore the duke of Lancaſtre went nat out of Englande / Bicauſe the kynge of Englande had ſente certayne meſſāgers with the duke of Taſſon and the Arche byſſhopp̄ of Rauenne to the kynge of Almayne / to haue his ſyſter to wyfe / orelles to knowe howe the mater ſhulde ſtande. For ther had be longe treatye therof more than the ſpace of a yere. Of Englande there was the byſſhop of ſaynt Dauys / & ſyr Symond Burle to haue a concluſion of this matier if they myght. And ſo to this counſayle accorded the kynge and all the lordes. And ſo the parliament brake vp on this poynt / and there were named and wrytten the barones and knyghtes that ſhulde go in to Portyngale with the erle of Cambridge.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the Erle of Cambrydge departed oute of Englande to goo in to Portyngale. And howe the comons of Englande rebelled agaynſt the noble men. Cap. CCC .lxxxi.
            
               THe duke of Lancaſtre ordered his buſynes and departed fro the kyng and fro his brethern̄. And at his goyng he ſware to his brother the erle of Cambrydge / that at his returnyng out of Scotlande he wolde ordre ſo his buſynes yt he wold haſtely folowe hym into Portyngale / if there were no great cauſe to lette. Thus the duke of Lancaſtre departed toward 
               Scotland / but wt his owne men. And at the ſame laſte parliamēt holden at London / it was ordeyned that 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Hē
               ry Percy erle of Northūberlāde ſhulde be wardeyn of all the lande of Northūberland / and of the byſſhopriche of Duram / and fro thens into Wales to the ryuer of ſeuerne. And ſo he departed fro Lōden to go to his charge / & that was a xv. dayes after that the duke of Lancaſtre was departed. Alſo thā departed fro the kynge and fro therle of Buckyngham his brother the erle

of Cambrydge / to go towardes his voyage in to Portyngale. And ſo made prouyſion about Ploumoth and vſtayled his ſhyppes / and toke with hym his wyfe the lady Iſabell / & his ſone John̄. his entent was to bryng them into Portingale / the whiche he accōpliſſhed. And wt the erle of Cambrydge were theſe lordes. Firſt the lord Mathue Gornay conſtable of the hoſt / the lorde Chanon Robſard / the lorde John̄ of new caſtell / the lord Wyllm̄ Beauchāpe marſhall of thoſt / ye Souldic of Leſtrade the lord of Barrere / the lorde Chalebore / ſir Willm̄ Helmon / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomasſymon / Mylles wyndeſore / ſir John̄ of Cāderut and diuers other / to the nombre of v. C. men of armes / and as many archers. So theſe lordes and theyr men came to Ploumoth and lodged there about / abyding for wynde. & lytle and lytell ſhypped all their ſtuffe. but they toke with them no horſes, bicauſe the way was farre a ſondre / bytwene Englande & Lucebone in Portingale. and ye Portingale knyght was alwayes ſtyll in their cōpanye. And ſo they taried ther .iii. wekes abydynge for wynde / the which was contrary to them. Ja the meane tyme the duke of Lancaſtre went toward Scotlande / & ſo came to the cyte of Berwike the next towne to Scotland of all England. And whan he was ther he reſted hym / and ſent an haralde of armes in to Scotland / towarde the barons ther. ſhewyng them / howe he was come thyder to ſpeke with thē on the marches / as the vſage had ben before. And if they wolde come & treat with him to ſend hym worde / or elles he knewe ryght well what to do. The harauld departed and rode to Edenbourg / wher kyng Robert of Scotland / therle Duglas / ye erle de la Marc / the erle Morette / and the other lordes of Scotland were aſſembled together. For they hadde knowledge how the duke of Lancaſtre was comyng thyder to treat with them. wherfore they were aſſembled in the chife towne of Scotland ioynyng to the fronters of England. And ther the harauld dyd his meſſage / & was well herde at length / and he had aunſwere that they were well content to here the duke ſpeke. And ſo the harauld brought a ſalueconduct for the duke & his company / to endure as longe as he were in the marches / and comuned togyder. Thus the harald retourned to Berwyke / & ſhewed howe heſped. And ſo the duke depted fro Berwyke / & left all his ꝓuiſion behynd hym in the towne / and ſo went to Roſebourge and there lodgyd. And the next day he went & lodged at the abbey of Mamos on the ryuer. yt was an abbey that departed England & Scotland a ſundre. there the duke taryed and his cōpany / tyll the ſcottes were come to Monbanne .iii. lytle myle thens. & whan they were come thyder / they ſent worde to the duke. Thus the treatie began bytwene ye Scottes and Englyſſhmen / the whiche endured a .xv. dayes. In ye meane ſeaſon whyle this treate was / ther fell in England great myſchife and rebellion of mouyng of the comon people. by which dede / England was at a poynt to haue ben loſt without recouery. Ther was neuer realme nor countrey in ſo great aduentur / as it was in that tyme. & all bycauſe of the eaſe and ryches that the comon people were of / whiche moued them to this rebellion / as ſomtyme they dyd in Fraunce / the which dyd moche hurt. for by ſuche incidentes the realme of Fraunce hath ben greatly greued.
            IT was a marueylous thing and of poore foundacion / that this myſchife began in Englande. And to gyue enſample to all maner of people / I wyll ſpeke therof as it was don / as I was enfourmed / and of the incidētes therof. Ther was an vſage in England / & yet is in diuerſe countreys / that the noble men hath great fraūches ouer the comons / and kepeth them in ſeruage. that is to ſay / their tenaūtes ought by cuſtome to laboure the lordes landes / to gather and bring home theyr cornes / & ſome to threſhe and to fanne. and by suage to make theyr hey / and to heaw their wood and bring it home. all theſe thyngꝭ they ought to do by ſeruage. And ther be mo of theſe people in Englande / than in any other realme. thus the noble men and prelates arre ſerued by them / and ſpecially in the countie of Brēdpeſt / Suſſetter / and Bedford. Theſe vnhappy people of theſe ſayd countreys began to ſtyrre / bycauſe they ſayde they were kept in great ſeruage. And in the begynning of the worlde / they ſayd ther were no bonde men. Wherfore they maynteyned yt none ought to be bonde / without he dyd treaſon to his lorde: as Lucifer dyde to god. But they ſayd they coude haue no ſuch batayle / for they were nother angelles nor ſpirittes: but men fourmed to the ſimilytude of their lordes. ſayng / why ſhuld they than be kept ſo vndre lyke beſtꝭ? the which they ſayd they wold no lengar ſuffre / for they wolde be all one. and if they labored or dyd any thyng for theyr lordes / they wold haue wages therfor aſwell as other. And of this imaginacion was a foliſſhe preeſt in the coūtie of Rent / called Johan Wall / for the which folyſſhe wordes he had

ben thre tymes in the byſſhop of Canterburies priſon. For this preeſt vſed often tymes on the ſondayes after maſſe / whanne the people were goynge out of the mynſter to go in to the cloyſter & preche: and made the people to aſſemble a dout hym / and wolde ſay thus. Aye good people the maters gothe nat well to paſſe in Englande / nor ſhall nat do tyll euery thyng be cō
               mon. and that there be no villayns nor gentylmen but that we may be all vnyed toguyder. & that the lordes be no greatter maiſters than we be. What haue we deſerued: or why ſhulde we be kept thus in ſeruage? We be all come fro one father and one mother / Adam and Eue. Wherby can they ſay or ſhewe / that they be gretter lordes than we be? ſauynge by that they cauſe vs to wyn and labour / for that they diſpende. they are clothed in Ueluet and chamlet furred with griſe / and we be veſtured with poreclothe. they haue their wynes / ſpyces / and good breed: and we haue the drawyngout of the chaffe / & drinke water. They dwell in ſayre houſes / and we haue the payne and traueyle / rayne and wynde in the feldes. And by that / that cometh of our labours, they kepe and maynteyne their eſtates. We be called their bondmen / and without we do redilye them ſeruyce / we be beaten. And we haue no ſeuerayne to whom we may cōplayne / nor that wyll here vs / nor do vs right. Lette vs go to the kyng / he is yonge: & ſhewe hym what ſeruage we be in. and ſhewe him howe we wyll haue it otherwyſe. or els we wyll prouyde vs of ſome remedy. And if we go togyder / all maner of people that be nowe in any bondage wyll folowe vs / to thentent to be made fre. And whan the kyng ſeyth vs / we ſhall haue ſome remedy / outher by fayrneſſe or otherwyſe. Thus John̄ Wall ſayd on ſondayes▪ whan the people iſſued out of the churches in the vyllages. Wherfore many of the meane people loued him / & ſuche as entended to no goodneſſe ſayde / howe he ſayd trouth. and ſo they wolde murmure one with another in the feldes and in the wayes / as they went togyder. Affermyng / howe Johan Wall ſayd trouthe. The archebyſſhoppe of Canterbury / who was enformed of the ſayeng of this John̄ Wall / cauſed hym to be taken and put in priſon / a two or thre monethes to chaſtice hym. Howbeit / it had ben moche better at the begynnyng / that he had ben cōdempned to perpetuall priſon / or els to haue dyed. rather than to haue ſuffred hym to haue ben agayne delyuered out of priſone / but the byſſhop had conſcience to let hym dye. And whan this Johan Wall was out of priſon he retourned agayn to his errour / as he dyde before. Of his wordes and dedes there were moche people in London enformed / ſuche as had great enuy at them that were riche / and ſuche as were noble. And than they beganne to ſpeke among them & ſayd. Howe the realme of Englande was right euyll gouerned / and how that golde & ſyluer was taken fro thē / by theym that were named noble men. So thus theſe vnhappy men of London began to rebell and aſſē
               bled thē togyder / and ſent worde to the forſayd countreys / that they ſhulde come to London / and bring theyr people with them. Promiſyng them / howe they ſhulde fynde London open to receyue them / and the comons of the cytie to be of the ſame acorde. ſayeng / how they wolde do ſo moche to the kynge / that there ſhulde nat be one bondman in all Englande.
            THis promiſe moued ſo them of Kent / of Eſſex / of Suſſex / of Bedforde / and of of the countreis about / that they roſe and came towardes London / to the nombre of. l
                  •
               . thouſande. And they had a capitayne / called Water Tyler / and with him in company was Jaques Strawe and Johan Balle. Theſe thre were chefe ſoueraygne capitayns / but the heed of all was Water Tyler / and he was in dede a tyler of houſes / an vngracious patron. Whan theſe vnhappy men began thus to ſtyre / they of London / except ſuche as were of theyr bande / were greatly afrayed. Than the mayre of London and the riche men of the cytie / toke counſayle togyder. And whan they ſawe the people thus comynge on euery ſyde / they cauſed the gates of the cite to be cloſed / and wolde ſuffre no man to entre in to the cytie. But whan they hadde well imagyned / they aduyſed nat ſo to do. For they thought they ſhulde therby / put their ſubbarbes in great parell to be brent. And ſo they opened agayne the cytie / and there entred in at the gates / In ſome place a hundred / two hundred / bytwentie / and by .xxx. And ſo whan they came to London they entred and lodged. And yet of trouthe / the thirde parte of theſe people / coude nat tell what to aſke or demaunde / but folowed eche other lyke beeſtes / as ye ſhepherdes dyde of olde tyme. Sayeng / howe they wolde go conquere the holy lande / and at laſt all came to nothynge. In lykewiſe theſe villayns and poore people came to London a hundred myle of .lx. myle .l. myle .xl. myle / and .xx. myle of / and fro all coūtreis about London. but the mooſt part cāe fro the countreis beforenamed / and as they

came / they demaunded euer for the kyng. The gentylmen of the countreis knightes and ſquyers began to doute / whan they ſawe the people began to rebell / and though they were in dout / it was good reaſon. For a leſſe occaſyon / they might haue bene afrayed. So the gentylmen drewe toguyder aſwell as they might. ¶ The ſame daye that theſe vnhappy people of Kent were comynge to London / there retourned fro Canterbury the kynges mother princes of Wales / comynge from her pylgrimage. She was in great ieopardy to haue ben loſt / for theſe people came to her chare and delt rudely with her. Wherof the good lady was in great doute / leſt they wolde haue done ſome vilany to her / or to her damoſels. Howe be it god kept her / and ſhe came in one day fro Caunterbury to London / for ſhe neuer durſt tary by the waye. The ſame tyme kyng Richarde her ſon was at the towre of London. There his mother founde hym / & with hym there was the erle of Saliſbury / the archebyſſhoppe of Caunterbury / ſir Robert of Namure / the lorde of Gomegines / and dyuers other. Who were in dout of theſe people yt thus gadered toguyder / and wyſt nat what they demaunded. This rebellyon was well knowen in the kynges courte / or any of theſe people began to ſtyre out of their houſes. But the kyng nor his coūſayle dyde prouyde no remedy therfore / whiche was great marueyle. And to thentent that all lordes and good people / and ſuche as wolde nothing but good / ſhulde take enſample to correct them that be yuell and rebellions. I ſhall ſhewe you playnlye / all the mater as it was.
         
         
            ¶ The yuell dedes that theſe comēs of Englande dyde to the kynges offycers / and howe they ſent a knight to ſpeke with the king. Ca. C C C lxxxii.
            
               THe monday before the feeſt of Corpus Chriſty. the yere of our lorde god a thouſande thre hundred .lxxxvii. theſe people yſſued oute of their houſes / to come to Lō
               don to ſpeke with the kynge to be made fre / for they wolde haue had no bōde man in Englande. and ſo firſt they cāe to ſaynt Thomas of Caunterbury. And there Johan Balle had thought to haue founde the byſſhop of Canterbury / but he was at London with the kyng. Whan Wat Tyler and Jacke Strawe entred in to Canterbury / all the comon people made great feeſt / for all the towne was of their aſſent. And there they toke counſayle to go to London to the kyng / and to ſende ſome of their cōpany ouer the ryuer of Thames / in to Eſſexe in to Suſſexe / and in to the counties of Stafforde and Bedford / to ſpeke to the people / that they ſhulde all come to the farder ſyde of London / and therby to cloſe London rounde about ſo that the kynge ſhulde nat ſtoppe their paſſages / and that they ſhulde all mete toguyder on Corpus chriſty day. They that were at Caunterbury entred into ſaynt Thom̄s churche and dyde there moche hurte / and robbed and brake vp the byſſhoppes chambre. And in robbynge and bearing out their pyllage they ſayd. A this chaūceller of Englande / hath had a good market to gette toguyder all this richeſſe. He ſhall gyue vs nowe accompte of the reuenues of Englande / and of the great profytes that he hath gathered ſythe the kynges coronacyon. Whan they had thys monday thus broken the abbey of ſaynt Uyncent / they deꝑted in the mornyng and all the people of Canterbury with them: & ſo toke the way to Rocheſter / & ſende their people to the vyllages about. And in their goynge they beate downe and robbed houſes of aduocates / and procurers of the kynges courte / and of the archebyſſhoppe / and had mercy of none. And whan they were come to Rocheſter / they had there good chere / for the people of ye towne taryed for them / for they were of the ſame ſec
                  •
               e. and than they went to the caſtell ther / and toke the knyght that had the rule therof / he was called ſir Johan Moton: and they ſayde to hym. Sir / it behoueth you to go with vs / & you ſhall be our ſouerayne capitayne / and to do that we wyll haue you. The knight excuſed hymſelfe honeſtly / and ſhewed them dyuers conſyderacions & excuſes / but all auayled hym nothyng / for they ſayde vnto hym. Sir Johan / if ye do nat as we wyll haue you / ye are but deed. The knyght ſeyng theſe people in that fury / and redye to ſlee hym. He than douted dethe & agreed to thē / and ſo they toke hym with them agaynſt his inwarde wyll. And in lykewiſe dyd they of other countreis in Englande / as Eſſexe / Suſſexe / Stafforde / Bedforde / & Warwyke / euyn to Lyncolne. For they brought the knightꝭ and gentylmen into ſuche obeyſance / that they canſed

them to go with them wheder they wolde or nat / as the lorde Molayne a great barone / ſir Stephyne of Hales / and ſir Thomas of Guyſighen and other.
            NOwe beholde the great fortune. If they might haue come to their ententes / they wolde haue diſtroyed all the noble men of Englande. And therafter all other nacyons wolde haue folowed the ſame / and haue taken fote and enſample by them / and by them of Gaunte and Flaunders / who rebelled agaynſt their lorde. The ſame yere / the pariſyens rebelled in lykewyſe / and founde out the mallettes of yron / of whom ther were mo than .xx. thouſande / as ye ſhall herafter in this hyſtorie: but firſt we wyll ſpeke of them of Englande.
            
               WHan theſe people thus lodged at Rocheſter deꝑted and paſſed y• ryuer and came to Brāforde / alway kepynge ſtyll their opynions / beatyng downe before thē / and all about / the places and houſes of aduocates & procurers / and ſtrikyng of the heedes of dyuers ꝑſons. and ſo long they went forwarde / tyll they came within a foure myle of London / and ther lodged on a hyll / called Blacheth: and as they went they ſayd euer / they were the kynges men and the noble comons of Englande. and whan they of London knewe / that they were come ſo nere to them. The mayre (as ye haue herde before) cloſed the gates / and kept ſtraitely all the paſſages. This order cauſed the mayre / who was called Nicholas Walworthe: and dyuers other riche burgeſſes of the cyte / who were nat of their ſect. But ther were in London of their vnhappy opinyons / mo than .xxx. thouſande. Than theſe people thus beyng lodged on Blacheth / determyned to ſende their knight to ſpeke with the kyng. And to ſhewe hym howe all that they haue done or wyll do / is for hym & his honour. And howe the realme of Englande hath nat ben well gouerned a greet ſpace / for the honoure of the realme / nor for the comon profyte / by his vncles and by the clergy. And ſpecially by the archebyſſhop of Caunterbury his chaū
               celler / wherof they wolde haue accompt. This knight durſt do none otherwiſe / but ſo came by the ryuer of Thames to the towre. The kynge and they that were with hym in the towre / deſyrynge to here tidynges / ſeyng this knyght comyng / made him way and was brought before the kynge in to a chambre. And with the kynge was the princeſſe his mother and his two bretherne / therle of Kent and the lorde John̄ Holland / the erle of Saliſburye / the erle of Warwyke / the erle of Oxenforthe / the archebyſſhop of Caunterbury / the lorde of ſaynt Johans / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert of Namure / y• lorde of Uertaigne / the lorde of Gomegynes / ſir Henry of Sauſelles / the mayre of London / and dyuers other notable burgeſſes. This knight ſir Johan Moton who was well knowen amonge thē / for he was one of the kynges offycers. He kneled downe before the kynge and ſayd. My right redouted lorde / lette it nat diſpleaſe your grace / the meſſage that I muſt nedes ſhewe you. For dere ſir it is byforce and agaynſt my wyll. Sir John̄ ſayd the kyng / ſay what ye wyll I holde you excuſed. Sir / the commons of this your realme hath ſente me to you / to deſyre you to come and ſpeke with them on Blacheth / for they deſyre to haue none but you. And ſir / ye nede nat to haue any dout of your perſone / for they wyll do you no hurte / for they holde and wyll holde you for their kynge. But ſir / they ſay they wyll ſhewe you dyuers thynges / the whiche ſhall be ryght neceſſarie for you to take hede of / whanne they ſpeke with you. Of the whiche thynges ſir / I haue no charge to ſhewe you. But ſir / & it may pleaſe you to gyue me an anſwer ſuche as may apeaſe thē / and that they may knowe for trouth that I haue ſpoken with you / for they haue my chyldren in hoſtage / tyll I retourne agayne to theym. And without I retourne agayne / they wyll ſlee my chyldren incontynent. Thaſie the kyng made hym an anſwere and ſayd. Sir / ye ſhall haue an anſwere ſhortely. Than the kyng toke counſayle what was beſt for hym to do. & it was anone determyned / yt the next mornyng the kynge ſhulde go downe the ryuer by water and without fayle to ſpeke with thē. And whan ſir Johan Moton herde that anſwere / he deſyred nothynge els. And ſo toke his leaue of the kyng and of the lordes / and retourned agayne in to his veſſell and paſſed the Thames & went to Blackeheth / where he had left mo than threſcore thouſande men. and ther he anſwered thē that the next mornynge they ſhulde ſende ſome of their counſayle to the Thames / and ther the kyng wolde come and ſpeke with them. This anſwere greatlye pleaſed theym / and ſo paſſed that night aſ well as they might. And y• fourthe part of them faſted for lacke of vitayle / for they had none. Wherwith they were ſore diſpleaſed / whiche was good reaſon.
            
            
               ALl this ſeaſon therle of Buckynghame was in Wales / for there he had fayre herytages by reaſon of his wyfe / who was doughter to y• erle of Northūberlande and Herforde / but the voyce was all through London / howe he was amonge theſe people. And ſome ſayd certaynlye / howe they had ſene hym there amonge them. And all was / bycauſe there was one Thomas in their companye / a man of the countie of Cambridge / that was very lyke the erle. Alſo the lordes that lay at Plummouth to go in to Portyngale / were well infourmed of this rebellyon / and of the people that thus began to ryſe. Wherfore they douted leſt their vyage ſhulde haue bene broken / or els they feared leſt the comons about Hampton / Wyncheſtre / and Arūdell / wolde haue come on them. Wherfore they wayed vp their ancres and yſſued out of the hauyn with great payne / for the wynde was ſore agaynſt them / and ſo toke theſee / and there caſt ancre abyding for the wynde. and the duke of Lancaſtre / who was in the marches of Scotlande / bytwene Morlane and Roſeburg entreatyng with the ſcottes / where it was ſhewed hym of the rebellyon / Wherof he was in doute. For he knewe well he was but lytell beloued with the comens of Englande. Howe be it for all thoſe tidynges / yet he dyde ſagely demeans hym ſelfe / as touchynge the treatie with the ſcottes. The erle Duglas / therle of Moret / the erle of Surlant / and therle Thomas Uer ſay: and the ſcotes that were there for the treatie. knewe right well y• rebelly on in Englande howe the comen people in euery parte began to rebell agaynſt the noble men. wherfore the ſcottes thought that Englande was in great daunger to be loſt. and therfore in their treaties they were the more ſtyffer agayne the duke of Lancaſtre and his counſayle. ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of the commons of Englande / and howe they perceyuered.
         
         
            ¶ How the cōmons of Englande entred in to London / and of the great yuell that they dyde. and of the dethe of the byſſhoppe of Caūterbury / and dyuers other. Cap. CCClxxxiii.
            
               IN the mornyng on corpus chriſty day kynge Rycharde herde Maſſe in the towre of Lōdon / and all his lordes. and than he toke his barge / with therle of Saliſbury / therle of Warwyke / y• erle of Suffolke & certayn knightꝭ. & ſo rowed downe a longe Thames to Redereth / wher as was diſcēded downe the hyll a .x. M. men / to ſe y• kyng / and to ſpeke with him. And whan they ſawe the kynges barge comyng / they beganne to ſhowt / and made ſuche a crye: as though all the deuylles of hell had ben amonge them. and they had brought with them ſir Johan Moton to the entent that if the kynge had nat cōe / they wolde haue ſtryken hym all to peces: & ſo they had promyſed hym. And whan the kynge & his lordes ſawe the demeanour of the people. The beſt aſſured of them were in drede. And ſo the kynge was counſayled by his barownes nat to take any landynge there / but ſo rowed vp and downe the ryuer. And the kyng demaunded of them what they wolde / and ſayd. howe he was come thyder to ſpeke with them. And they ſaid all with one voyce. we wolde that ye ſhulde cōe a lande / and than we ſhall ſhewe you what we lacke. Than the erle of Saliſbury aunſwered for the kyng and ſayd. Sirs / ye be nat in ſuche order nor array / that the kynge ought to ſpeke with you. And ſo with thoſe wordes no more ſayd. And than the kyng was counſayled to returne agayne to the towre of Lōdon: and ſo he dyde. And whan theſe people ſawe that / they were enflamed with yre / and retourned to the hyll / where the great bande was. And ther ſhewed thē what anſwere they had / and howe the kynge was retourned to the towre of London. Than they cryed all with one voyce. Let vs go to London / and ſo they toke their way thyder. And in their goyng / they beate downe abbeyes and houſes of aduocates / & of men of the court and ſo came in to the ſubbarbes of Lōdon / whiche were great and fayre / and ther bete downe dyuers fayre houſes. And ſpecially they brake vp the kynges priſones / as the Marſhalſe and other / and delyuered out all the priſoners that were within: and there they dyde moche hurt. And at the bridge fote they thret them of London / bycauſe the gates of the bridge were cloſed. Sayenge / howe they wolde brenne all the ſubarbes / and ſo cōquere London byforce: and to ſlee and brenne all the commons of the cytie.

There were many within the cytie of their accorde / and ſo they drewe toguyder / and ſayde. Why do we nat let theſe good people entre in to ye cyte / they are our felowes: and that that they do is for vs. So therwith the gates were opyned / and than theſe people entred in to the cytie and went in to houſes / and ſatte downe to eate and drinke. They deſyred nothynge but it was incontynent brought to them / for euery manne was redy to make thē good chere: and to gyue them meate and drinke to apeaſe them. Than the capitayns: as John̄ Ball / Jacke Strawe and Watte Tyler wente through out London / and a twentie thouſande with them. and ſo cāe to the Sauoy / in the way to Weſtmynſter / whiche was a goodlye houſe / and it ꝑteyned to the duke of Lancaſtre. and whan they entred / they ſlewe the kepars therof / and robbed and pylled the houſe. And whā they had ſo done / than they ſette fyre on it / and clene diſtroyed and brent it. and whan they had done that outrage / they left nat therwith / but went ſtreight to the fayre hoſpytalle of the Rodes / called ſaynt Johans. and there they brente houſe / hoſpytall / mynſter and all. Than they went fro ſtrete to ſtrete / & ſlewe all the flemmynges that they coulde fynde / in churche or in any other place / ther was none reſpyted fro dethe. and they brake vp dyuers houſes of the lombardes and robbed theym / & toke their goodes at their pleaſure: For there was none that durſt ſaye them nay. And they ſlewe in the cytie a riche marchaunt / called Richarde Lyon: to whome before that tyme / Watte Tyler had done ſeruyce in Fraūce. And on a tyme this Rycharde Lyon had beaten hym whyle he was his varlet. the whiche Watte Tyler than remembred / and ſo came to his houſe & ſtrake of his heed. and cauſed it to be borne on a ſpere poynt before him all about the cyte. Thus theſe vngracyous people demeaned them ſelfe / lyke people enraged and wode. and ſo that day they dyde moche ſorowe in London.
            ANd ſo agaynſt night / they wente to lodge at ſaynt Katherins / before the towre of London. Sayenge / howe they wolde neuer depart thens / tyll they hadde the kynge at their pleaſure. And tyll he had accorded to them / all that they wolde aſke acomptes / of the chaūcellour of Englande. to knowe where all the good was become / that he had leuyed through the realme. and without he made a good acompte to them therof / it ſhulde nat before his profyte. And ſo whan they had done all theſe yuels to the ſtraūgers all the day / at night they lodged before the towre.
            YE may well knowe and beleue / that it was great pytie / for the daunger that the kyng / and ſuche as were with him were in. Forſome tyme theſe vnhappy people ſhowTed and cryed ſo loude / as thoughe all the deuylles of hell had bene among them. In this euennynge / the kynge was counſayled by his bretherne and lordes / and by ſir Nicholas walworthe mayre of London / and dyuers other no table and riche burgeſſes. that in ye night tyme they ſhulde iſſue out of the towre and entre into the cyte / and ſo to ſlee all theſe vnhappy people / whyle they were at their reſt and a ſlepe. For it was thought that many of them were dronken / wherby they ſhulde be ſlayne lyke flees. Alſo of twentie of them / ther was ſcant one in harnes. And ſurely the good men of Lōdon might well haue done this at their eaſe / for they had in their houſes ſecretely / their frendes and ſeruauntes redy in harneſſe. And alſo ſir Robert Canolle was in his lodgyng kepyng his treaſure / with a ſixſcore redy at his cōmaūdemēt / In likewiſe was ſir Perducas Dalbret / who was as than in London. In ſo moche that ther myght well aſſembled toguyder / an eyght thouſande men redy in harneſſe. Howe beit ther was nothyng done / for the reſydue of the commons of the cytie were ſore douted / leeſt they ſhulde ryſe alſo. and the commons before were a threſcore thouſande or mo. Than the erle of Saliſbury and the wyſe men about the kynge ſayd. Sir / if ye can apeſe them with fayrneſſe / it were beſt and mooſt profytable / and to graunt theym euery thynge that they deſyre. For if we ſhulde begyn a thynge / the whiche we coulde nat atcheue / we ſhulde neuer recouer it agayne. But we & oure heyres euer to be diſheyrited. So this coūſaile was taken / & the mayre countermaunded. And ſo commaunded that he ſhulde nat ſtyrre. And he dyde as he was cōmaunded / as reaſon was. And in the cytie with the mayre there were .xii. aldermen / wherof nyne of them helde with the kynge / and the other thre toke parte with theſe vngracyous people / as it was after well knowen / the whiche they full derely bought.
            ANd on the friday in the mornynge / the people beyng at ſaynt Katheryns / nere to the towre. Began to apparell them ſelfe / and to crye and ſhoute / and ſayd. Without the kyng

wolde cōe out and ſpeke with them / they wolde aſſayle the towre / and take it byforce / and ſlee all them that were within. Than the kyng douted theſe wordes / and ſo was counſailed that he ſhulde iſſue out to ſpeke with thē. And than the kynge ſende to them / that they ſhulde all drawe to a fayre playne place / called Myleende / wher as the people of the cytie dyde ſport them in the ſomer ſeaſon. And there the kyng to graunt thē that they deſyred. And there it was cryed in the kyngꝭ name / that who ſoeuer wolde ſpeke with the kyng / let hym go to the ſayd place / and ther he ſhulde nat fayle to fynde the king. Than the people began to departe / ſpecially the cōmons of the vyllages / and went to the ſame place / but all went nat thyder. for they were nat all of one condycion. For ther were ſome that deſyred nothynge but richeſſe / and the vtter diſtruction of the noble men / and to haue Lōdon robbed and pylled. That was the princypall mater of their begynnynge / the whiche they well ſhewed. For aſſoone as the towre gate opyned / and that the kynge was yſſued out with his two bretherne / and the erle of Saliſbury / the erle of Warwike the erle of Oxenforthe / ſir Robert of Namure / the lorde of Bretaygne / the lorde Gomegynes / and dyuers other. Than Watte Tyler / Jacke Strawe / and Johan Ball / and mo than foure hūdred entred into the towre / and brake vp chā
               bre after chambre / and at laſt founde the archebyſſhoppe of Caunterbury / called Symon / a valyant man and a wyſe / and chefe chaunceller of Englande. and a lytell before / he hadde ſayd maſſe before the kynge. Theſe Glottons toke hym and ſtrake of his heed. and alſo they beheded the lorde of ſaynt Johans / and a frere mynour maiſter in medicyn / ꝑteyning to the duke of Lancaſtre / they ſlewe hym in diſpyte of his maiſter. and a ſergeant at armes / called John̄ Laige. And theſe four heedes were ſet on foure logn ſpeares / and they made thē to be borne before thē / through the ſtretes of London. And at laſt ſet thē a highe on Lōdon bridge / as though they had ben traytours to the kyng / & to the realme. Alſo theſe glottous entred in to the prices chambre and brake herhed / wherby ſhe was ſo ſore afrayed / that ſhe ſowned. and ther ſhe was taken vp and borne to the waterſyde / and put in to a barge and couered / and ſo conueyed to a place called the quenes Warderobe. And there ſhe was all that daye and night / lyke a woman halfe deed: tyll ſhe was conforted with ye kyng her ſonne / as ye ſhall here after.
         
         
            ¶ How the nobles of England were in great paryll to haue ben dyſtroyed. & howe theſe rebels were puniſſhed and ſende home to theyr owne houſes. Cap. CCC .lxxxiiii.
            
               WHan the kyng came to the ſayd place of Myleende without London / he put out of his company his two bretherne / the erle of Kent & ſir Johan Holande / and the lorde of Gomegynes: for they durſt nat apere before ye people. And whan the kynge and his other lordes were ther 
               
                  •
               he foūde there a threſcore thouſande men / of dyuers vyllages / and of ſondrie countreis in Englande. So the kynge entred in amonge them / & ſayd to them ſwetely. A ye good people / I am your kyng. What lacke ye? What wyll ye ſay? Than ſuche as vnderſtode him ſayd. We wyll that ye make vs free for euer / our ſelfe / our heyres / and our landes: and that we be called no more bōde nor ſo reputed. Sirs ſayd the king / I am well agreed therto. Withdrawe you home into your owne houſes / and into ſuche villages as ye cāe fro / and leaue behynde you of euery vyllage .ii. or thre. and I ſhall cauſe writynges to be made and ſeale theym with my ſeale / the whiche they ſhall haue with them / conteyning euery thynge that ye demaunde. And to thentent that ye ſhal be the better aſſured / I ſhall cauſe my baners to be delyuered in to euery Bayliwyke / ſhyre / and countreis. Theſe wordes apeaſed well the cōmon people / ſuche as were ſymple and good playne men / that were come thyder and wyſte nat why. They ſaid it was well ſaid / we deſyre no better. Thus theſe people beganne to be apeaſed / and began to withdrawe them in to the cyte of Lōdon. And the kyng alſo ſaid a worde the whiche greatly contented them. He ſayde: Sirs / amonge you good men of Kent. ye ſhall haue one of my baners with you / & ye of Eſſexe another / & ye of Suſſexe / of Bedforde / of Cā
               bridge / of Germeney / of Stafforde / & of Lyneche of you one. And alſo I pardon euery thinge that ye haue done hyder to / ſo that ye folowe my baners / and retourne home to your houſes. They all anſwered how they wolde ſo do. thus

theſe people departed and went in to London. Than the kynge ordayned mo than .xxx. clerkes the ſame fridaye to write with all dilygēce / letter patentes / and ſayled with the kyngꝭ ſeale and delyuered them to theſe people. And whan they had receyued the writynge / they departed and retourned in to their owne countreis / but the great venym remayned ſtyll behynde. For Watte Tyler / Jacke Strawe / and John̄ ball ſayd / for all that theſe people were thus apeſed. yet they wolde nat departe ſo / and they had of their acorde / mo than .xxx. thouſande. So they abode ſtyll / and made no preſe to haue the kynges writyng nor ſeale / for all their entētes was to putte the cytie to trouble / in ſuche wyſe: as to 
                  〈◊〉
                all the riche and honeſt perſons / & to robbe and pylle their houſes. They of London were in great feare of this / wherfore they kepte their houſes preuily with their frēdes / and ſuche ſeruauntes as they had / euery man accordynge to his puyſſaunce. And whan̄e theſe ſayde people were this fridaye thus ſomewhat apeaſed / and that they ſhulde departe aſſoone as they hadde their writynges / euerye manne home in to his own
                  •
                countrey. Than kynge Rycharde came in to the Royall / where the quene his Mother was 
                  ••
               ght ſore afrayed. So he cōforted her as well as he coulde / and taryed there with her all that night.
            YEt I ſhall ſhewe you of an aduenture that fell by theſe vngracyous people / before the cyte of Norwiche / by a capitayne among them: called Guillyam Lyſtre of Stufforde.
            
               THe ſame daye of Corpus Chriſty / that theſe people entred in to London and brent the duke of Lancaſters houſe / called the Sauoye: & the Hoſpytall of ſaynt Johannes / and brake vp the kynges priſons. And dyd all this hurte (as ye haue herde before) The ſame tyme there aſſembled toguyder: they of Stafforde / of Lynne / of Cambridge / of Bedforde / and of Germeney. And as they were comynge towardes London / they hadde a capitayne amonge them / called Lyſtre. And as they came they reſted them before Norwiche. and in their comynge / they cauſed euerye man to ryſe with them / ſo that they left no villayns behynde thē. The cauſe why they reſted before Norwyche / I ſhall ſhewe you. There was a knight capitayne of the towne / called ſir Robert Sale. He was no gentylman borne / but he had the grace to be reputed ſage / and valyant in armes. And for his valyauntneſſe / kynge Edwarde made hym knight. He was of his body / one of ye biggeſt knightes in all Englande.
            Lyſter and his company thought to haue had this knyght with them / and to make hym their chife capitayne / to the entente to be the more feared and beloued. So they ſende to hym / that he ſhulde cōe and ſpeke with thē in the felde / or els they wolde brenne y• towne. The knight conſydered / that it was better for hym to go & ſpeke with thē / rather than̄e they ſhulde do that outrage to the towne. than he mounted on his horſe and yſſued oute of the towne all alone / and ſo came to ſpeke with thē. And whan they ſawe hym / they made him gret chere and honoured hym moche. deſyring hym to a lyght of his horſe and to ſpeke with theym / and ſo he dyde / wherin he dyde great folly. For whan̄e he was a lyghted / they came rounde about hym / and began to ſpeke fayre to hym and ſayde. Sir Robert / ye are a knight and a man greatlye beloued in this countrey / and renowmed a valyaunt man. And thoughe ye be thus / yet we knowe you well: ye be no gentylmanne borne / but ſonne to a villayne ſuche as we be. Therfore cōe you with vs and be our maiſter / and we ſhall make you ſo great a lord / that one quarter of Englande ſhalbe vnder your obeyſaūce. Whan the knight herde them ſpeke thus it was greatlye contraryous to his mynde / for he thought neuer to make any ſuche bargayne / and anſwered them with a felonous regarde. Flye away ye vngracyous people / falſe and yuell traytours that ye be. Wolde you yt I ſhuld forſake my naturall lorde / for ſuche a company of knaues as ye be / to my diſhonoure for euer. I had rather ye were all hanged as ye ſhall be: for that ſhall be your ende. And with thoſe wordes he had thought to haue lepte agayne vpon his horſe / but he fayled of y• ſtyrroppe: and the horſe ſterted away. Than they cryed all at him and ſayde / ſlee hym without mercy. Whan he herd thoſe wordes / he let his horſe go and drue out a good ſwerde / & began to ſcrimyſſhe with them / and made a great place about hym / that it was pleaſur to beholde him. Ther was non that durſt aproche nere hym. Ther were ſome that aproched nere hym / but at euery ſtroke yt he gaue / he cutte of outher legge heed / or arme. Ther was none ſo hardye but that they feared hym. He dyde there ſuche dedes of armes / that

it was marueyle to regard / but there were mo than fourty thouſand of theſe vnhappy people. they ſhotte and caſte at hym / and he was vnarmed. To ſay trouthe / if he had bene of yron or ſtele / yet he muſte nedes haue ben ſlayne. But yet or he dyed he ſlewe .xii. out of hande / beſyde theym that he hurte. Finally he was ſtryken to the erthe / and they cutte of his armes and legges / and than ſtrake his body all to peces.
            This was the ende of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Robert Salle / whiche was great dommage. For whiche dede afterward all the knyghtes and ſquyers of Englād were angry and ſore diſpleaſed whā they hard therof. ¶ Nowe let vs retourne to the kynge.
            THe ſaturday / the kynge departed fro the Warderobe in the Royall / & went to Weſtmynſter and harde maſſe in the churche there / and all his lordes with hym. And beſyde the churche there was a lytle chapell with an image of our lady / whiche dyd great myracles / and in whom the kynges of Englande had euer great truſte and confydence. The kynge made his oriſons before this Image / and dyde there his offryng. And than he lepte on his horſe and all his lordes / and ſo the kynge rode towarde London. And whan he had ryden a lytle way on the lyft hande there was a way to paſſe without London. ¶ The ſame propre mornynge Watte Tyler / Jacke Strawe / and John̄ Ball had aſſembled their company to comon to gether / in a place called Smythfelde / where as euery fryday there is a markette of horſes. And there were together / all of affinite / mo than .xx. thouſande / and yet there were many ſtyll in the towne / drynkynge and makynge mery in the tauernes / and payed nothyng. For they were happy that made them beſte chere. And theſe people in Smythfelde / had with theym the kynges baners / the whiche were delyuered theym the daye before. And all theſe glottons were in mynd to ouerrenne and to robbe London the ſame daye / for theyr capitaynes ſayde / howe they had done nothynge as yet. theſe lyberties that the kynge hath gyuen vs / is to vs but a ſmall profitte. Therfore lette vs be all of one accorde / and lette vs ouerrenne this riche and puyſſaunt citie or they of Eſſex / of Suſſex / of Cambrydge / of Bedforde of Arundell / of Warwyke / of Reedynge / of Oxenforde / of Guylforde / of Linne / of Stafforde / of Germeney / of Lyncolne / of yorke / and of Duram do come hyther / for all theſe wyll come hyther. Wallyor and Lyſter wyll bringe them hyther. And if we be fyrſt lordes of London / and haue the poſſeſſion of the ryches that is therin / We ſhall nat repent vs. For if we leaue it / they that come after wyll haue it fro vs. To thys counſayle they all agreed. And therwith the kynge came the ſame waye vnware of theym. For he had thought to haue paſſed that waye withoute London / and with hym a .xl. horſe. And whan he came before the abbaye of ſaynt Bartilmeus / and behelde all theſe people. than the kynge reſted and ſayde / howe he wolde go no farther / tyll he knewe what theſe people ayled. ſayenge / if they were in any trouble howe he wold repeaſe them agayne. The lordes that were with hym taried alſo / as reaſon was whā they ſawe the kynge tarye. And whan Watte Tyler ſawe the kynge tary / he ſayd to his people. Syrs / yonder is the kynge / I wyll go and ſpeke with hym / ſtyre nat fro hence / without I make you a ſigne. and whan I make you yt ſygne / come on / and ſlee all theym / excepte the kynge / but do the kynge no hurte / he is yonge we ſhall do with hym as we lyſt / and ſhall leade hym with vs all about Englande / and ſo ſhall we be lordes of all the royalme without doubt. And there was a dowblette maker of London / called John̄ Tycle / and he hadde brought to theſe Glotons a .lx. doublettes / the whiche they ware. than he demaunded of theſe capitaynes who ſhulde paye hym for his doublettes / he demaunded .xxx. marke. Watte Tyler anſwered hym and ſayd. Frende appeaſe yourſelfe / thou ſhalte be well payed or this day be ended / kepe the nere me / I ſhall be thy credytour. And ther with he ſpurred his horſe / and departed fro his cōpany / and came to the kynge / ſo nere hym that his horſe heed touched ye crope of the kyngꝭ horſe. and the firſt worde that he ſayd was this / Syr kynge / ſeeſt thou all yōder people? ye truly ſayd the kynge / Wherfore ſayeſt thou? Bycauſe (ſayd he) they be all at my commaundement / and haue ſworne to me fayth and trouth to do all that I wyll haue theym. In a good tyme ſayd the kyng / I wyll well it be ſo. Than Watte Tyler ſayde / as he that no thynge demaunded but ryot. What beleueſt thou kynge that theſe people and as many mo as be in London at my cōmaūdement / that they wyll deꝑte frome the thus / without hauynge thy letters. No ſayde the kyng / ye ſhall haue theym / they be ordeyned for you / and ſhalbe delyuered euery one eche after other. Wherfore good felowes withdrawe fayre & eaſely to your people & cauſe them to deꝑte out of Lōdon / for it is our entent

that eche of you by villages and towneſhippes ſhall haue letters patentes / as I haue promyſed you. With thoſe wordes Watte Tyler caſte his eyen on a ſquyer / that was there with the kynge / bearynge the kynges ſwerde. and Wat Tyler hated greatlye the ſame ſquyer. for the ſame ſquier had diſpleaſed hym before / for wordes bytwene theym. What ſayde Tyler / arte thou there / gyue me thy dagger. Nay ſayde the ſquier that wyll I nat do. Wherfore ſhulde I gyue it the? The kynge behelde the ſquyer / and ſayd gyue it hym / lette hym haue it. And ſo the ſquyer toke it hym ſore agaynſt his wyll. And whan this Watte Tyler had it / he began to play therwith / and tourned it in his hande: and ſayde agayne to the ſquyer / gyue me alſo that ſwerde. Naye ſayde the ſquyer it is the kynges ſwerde / thou arte nat worthy to haue it / for thou arte but a knaue. And if there were no moo here but thou and I / thou durſte nat ſpeke thoſe wordes / for as moche golde in quā
               tite as all yonder abbaye. By my faythe ſayd Wat tyler / I ſhall neuer eate meate tyll I haue thy heed. And with thoſe wordes the mayre of London came to the kynge with a .xii. horſes well armed vnder theyr cootes / and ſo he brake the preaſe / And ſawe and harde howe Watte Tyler demeaned hym ſelfe / and ſayde to hym. Ha thou knaue / howe arte thou ſo hardy in the kynges preſence to ſpeke ſuche wordes. It is to moche for the ſo to do. Than the kynge began to chafe / and ſayd to the mayre. Sette handes on hym. And while the kynge ſayde ſo / Tyler ſayd to the mayre / A goddeſname / what haue I ſayde to diſpleaſe the? yes truely quod the mayre / thou falſe ſtynkynge knaue / ſhalt thou ſpeke thus in the preſence of the kynge my naturall lorde? I commytte neuer to lyue / without thou ſhalte derely abye it. And with thoſe wordes the mayre drewe oute his ſwerde and ſtrake Tyler / ſo great a ſtroke on the heed / that he fell downe at the feete of his horſe. And as ſoone as he was fallen / they enuironed hym all aboute / wherby he was nat ſene of his cōpany. Than a ſquyer of the kynges alyghted / called John̄ Standyſſhe / & he drewe out his ſworde and put it in to Watte Tylers belye / and ſo he dyed. Than the vngracious people there aſſembled perceyuynge theyr capytayne ſlayne / beganne to mourmure amonge them ſelfe and ſayde. A / our capitayne is ſlayne / lette vs go and ſlee them all. And therwith they araynged them ſelfe on the place in maner of batayle / and theyr bowes before theym. Thus the kynge beganne a great outrage / howe be it all turned to the beſte. for as ſoone as Tyler was on the erthe / the kynge departed from all his company / and all alone he rode to theſe people / and ſayde to his owne men. Syrs / none of you folowe me / let me alone. And ſo whan he came before theſe vngracious people / who put them ſelfe in ordinaunce to reuenge theyr capitayne. Than the kynge ſayde to theym. Syrs / what ayleth you / ye ſhall haue no capitayne but me. I am your kynge / be all in reſt and peace. And ſo the mooſt parte of the people / that harde the kynge ſpeke / and ſawe hym amōge them / were ſhamefaſt / and beganne to waxe peaſable / and to departe. But ſome / ſuche as were malicious and euyll / wolde nat departe / but made ſemblant as though they wolde do ſomwhat. Thā the kynge returned to his owne company / and demaūded of theym what was beſt to be done. Than he was coūſailed to drawe into the feld / for to flye awaye was no boote. Than ſayd the mayre / it is good that we do so. for I thynke ſurely we ſhall haue ſhortely ſome comforte of them of London / and of ſuche good men as be of our parte / who are pourueyed / and haue theyr frēdes and men redy armed in theyr houſes. And in this meane tyme voyce and bruyte ranne through London / howe theſe vnhappy people were lykely to ſle the kynge & the maire in Smythfelde. Through the whiche noyſe / all maner of good men of the kynges partye / iſſued out of theyr houſes and lodgynges / well armed / and ſo came all to Smythfelde / and to the felde where the kynge was. And they were anone to the nombre of .vii. or .viii. thouſande men well armed. And fyrſte thyther came ſyr Robert Canoll / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Perducas Dalbret well accompanyed / and dyuers of the aldermen of London / and with theym a .vi. hundred men in harneys. And a puſant man of the citie / who was the kynges draper / called Nicholas Mē
               bre / and he brought with hym a great company. And euer as they came / they raynged them a foote in ordre of bataylle. And on the other parte theſe vnhappy people were redy raynged / makynge ſemblaunce to gyue batayle / and they had with theym dyuerſe of the kynges baners. There the kynge made .iii. knyghtes. The one the mayre of London ſir Nycholas walworthe / ſyr Johan Standyſſhe / and ſyr Nycholas Braule. Than the lordes ſayde amonge theym ſelfe / what ſhall we do? we ſe here our ennemyes / who wolde gladly ſlee vs / if they myght haue the better hande of

vs. Sir Robert Canoll counſayled to go and fight with them / and ſlee them all. yet the kyng wolde nat cōſent therto / butſayd. Nay / I wyll nat ſo. I wyll ſende to theym / commaundynge them to ſende me agayne my baners / and therby we ſhall ſe what they wyll do. How be it outher by fayrneſſe or otherwiſe / I wyll haue thē. that is well ſayd ſir quod therle of Salyſbury. Than theſe newe knightes were ſent to them. And theſe knightes made token to them / nat to ſhote at them. And whan they came ſo nere thē that their ſpeche might be herde / they ſayd. ss the kyng commaundeth you to ſende to him agayne his baners / and we thynke he wyll haue mercy of you. And incontinent they delyuered agayne the baners / and ſent them to the kyng. Alſo they were commaūded on payne of their heedes / that all ſuche as had letters of the king to bring them forthe / and toſende them agayne to the kynge. And ſo many of them delyuered their letters / but nat all. Than the kyng made them to be all to torne in their preſence. And as ſoone as the kynges baners were delyuered agayne / theſe vnhappy people kept none array / but the mooſt parte of them dyde caſte downe their bowes / and ſo brake their array / & retourned in to London. Sir Robert Canolle was ſore dyſpleaſed / in that he myght nat go to ſlee them all. But the kyng wolde nat conſent therto / but ſayd he wolde be reuenged of them well ynough / and ſo he was after.
            
               THus theſe folyſſhe people departed / ſome one way and ſome a nother. And the kyng and his lordes and all his company / ryght ordynately entred in to London / with great ioye. And the firſte iourney that the kynge made / he wente to the lady princeſſe his mother / who was in a Caſtell in the Royall / called the quenes wardrobe. And there ſhe hadde taryed two dayes and two nightes right ſore a baſſhed (as ſhe had good reaſone) And whan ſhe ſawe the kyng her ſonne / ſhe was greatly reioyſed / and ſayde. A fayre ſonne / what payne and great ſorowe / that I haue ſuffred for you this day. Than the kynge anſwered and ſayd. Certaynly madame I knowe it well: but nowe reioyſe your ſelfe and thanke god / for nowe it is tyme. I haue this day recouered myne herytage and the realme of Englande / the whiche I hadde nere loſt. Thus the kyng taryed that day with his mother / and euery lorde went peaſeably to their owne lodgynges. Than there was a crye made in euery ſtrete in the kynges name / that all maner of men / nat beyng of the cytie of London / and haue nat dwelt there the ſpace of one yere / to departe. And if any ſuche be founde there the ſonday by the ſonne riſyng / yt they ſhuld be taken as traytours to the kyng and to loſe their heedes. This crye thus made / there was none that durſte breke it. And ſo all maner of people departed and ſparcled abrode euery man to their owne places. Johan Balle and Jaques Strawe / were founde in an olde houſe hydden / thinkyng to haue ſtollen away / but they coulde nat. For they were accuſed by their owne men. Of the takyng of them / the kyng and his lordes were gladde: and thanne ſtrake of their heedes / and watte Tylers alſo. and they were ſer on Lōdon bridge / and the valyaunt mennes heedes taken downe / that they had ſette on the thurſday before. Theſe tidynges anone ſpredde abrode / ſo that the people of the ſtrange countreis / whiche were comyng to wardes London / retourned backe agayne to their owne houſes / and durſt come no farther.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Lancaſtre kepte him ſelfe ſtyll in Scotlande / for feare of this rebellyon. And howe the kynge punyſſhed of theſe traytours / the chefe maiſters. Cap. CCC .lxxxv.
            
               NOwe lette vs ſpeke / how the duke of Lancaſtre in the meane ſeaſon of this rebellyon / was in the marcheſſe of Scotlande / treatyng for a peace with therle Duglas / and the other lordes of Scotlande. The Scottes knewe right well of this rebellyon in Englande / and in likewiſe ſo dyde the duke of Lancaſtre. Howe be it he neuer made any ſemblant ther ofto the ſcottes / but was as ſore in his treatie / as thoughe Englande had ben in good reſt and peace. So longe this treatie was debated amonge them / that at laſt a truſe was taken to endure thre yer bytwene Englande and Scotland. and whan this truſe was thus accorded / the lordes of eche parte made good chere eche to other. Than the

erle Duglas ſayd to the duke of Lācaſtre. Sir we knowe right well of the rebellion of the comon people in England / and the parell that the realme of England is in by that incidēce. Sir we repute & take you for ryght ſage & a valiant man ſith ye haue cōtinued your treaty ſo frely / as ye haue done / for ye wolde neuer make any ſemblant therof. Sir / we ſay to you yt we offre ourſelfe yfye haue nede / to be redy to ayde you with .v. or .vi. C. ſperes / and to do you ſeruice. by my faith ſayd the duke. fayre lordes I thāke you / I woll nat refuſe your offre. howe be it I thynke veryly / that the kynge my lorde hath ſo good counſayle / that the mater ſhall right well come to paſſe. how be it I deſyre you to haue a ſalucconducte for me and myne to returne in to your coūtrey / if nede be / tyll the mater be apeaſed. The erle Duglas and the erle Moret who had the kynges auctorite / graūted hym his deſyre / and ſo than thy departed. The ſcottes returned to Edenbourge / and ye duke & his went to Berwyk. wenyng to the duke to haue entred in to the towne / for whan he paſſed that waye: ther he left all his prouiſion. but the capitane of the towne / called 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Mathue Redmayn / refuſed to hym the entre / and cloſed the gates agaynſt hym and his. ſayng howe he was ſo comaūded by the erle of Northumberlande / who as than was princypall and ſoueraygne of all the marches and frounters of Northumberlande. And whan the duke herde thoſe wordes he was ſore diſpleaſed & ſayd. how ſo Mathue Redmayn. Is ther in Northūberlande a gretter ſoueraygne than I am / that ſhall lette me to paſſe this way / and left all my prouiſyon with you. what meaneth theſe tydyngꝭ? By my faith 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                ſayd the knyght. This is true that I ſay / and by the cō
               maundement of the kynge. Sir this that I do to you is ryght ſore agaynſt my wyll: how be it I muſt nedes do it. Therfore 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                for goddeſſake holde me excuſed / for I am thus commaunded on payne of my lyfe / that ye ſhall nat entre in to this towne / nor none of yours.
            yE may well knowe that ye duke of Lā
               caſtre hadde great marueyle / and was ſore diſpleaſed with theſe wordes / but nat with the knyght all onely / but with theym that ordeyned that mater. ſeyng that he hadde traueyled for the beſynes of England / and than to haue hym in ſuche ſuſpecte. As to ſtoppe fro hym the firſt to wne bytwene England & Scotlande. And ſo imagyned greatly in hymſelfe / & diſcouered nat all that he thought in his courage. & ſo he made no more preaſe on the knyght / and thought well the knyght wolde nat ſo do without ſome expreſſe commaundemēt. and ſo brake out of that mater and ſayd. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Red
                  •
               ayn / haue you any knowlege of ye tidyngꝭ ī Englād. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                ſayd he I know none / but that the countrey is ſore meuyd. and the kyng our ſoueraigne lorde hath written to all the lordes / knyghtes / and good townes of this contrey: to be all redy to come to him whan ſoeuer he ſendith for them. & all cōſtables and kepars of cyties / townes / and caſtelles in Northūberland. he hath ſent ſtrayt commaundement on payne of deth / to ſuffer no man to entre in to any place vnder theyr rules / and to take good hede of theyr charge. And as for the comon people that rebelleth about London / I knowe no certayn worde of thē. but that the offycers of the byſſhopryche of Lincolne / of Cambridge / of Stafforde / of Bedford / and of Norwich / haue writen: how that ye comon people vnder them haue great deſyre / that the mater ſhuld go euyll. & that ther ſhulde be trouble in England. ya ſayd the duke / what here you of our countreys of Lancaſtre / Derby / and Lynſetur. here you of any rebellion ther? Sir ſayd the knyght I here no thynge yt they paſſe Lyncolne. Than the duke muſed a lytle and deꝑted fro the knyght and toke his way to Roſeburge / and there he was receyued of the conſtable / for whan he paſſed he ſet him ther. Then the duke of Lancaſtre was coūſayled / bycauſe he knewe nat ſurely how ye maters dyd in Englande / nor of whome he was beloued nor hatyd. That he ſhuld ſend to the lordes of Scotland / deſyring them to ſend a quantite of men of warre to conuey hym in to Scotlande / with a ſaueconduct. And ſo thus he ſent to the erle Duglas / who lay as than at Alqueſt. and whan the erle ſawe his lettre he had great ioy / and made great cher to the meſſāger. And ſent worde therof to the erle Moret / and to therle de la Mare his brother / deſyring them incontinent without any delay / to mete with him at Morlane the thyrd day after / with a certayne nombre well horſed & aparellyd. Aſſone as theſe lordes knewe this / they ſent for theyr men and frendes / and ſo came to Morlan / and ther they foūde the erle Duglas / and ſo they rode all together / to the nombre of v. C. ſperes / and came to the abbey of Mauros a .ix. lytle myle fro Roſeburge. And on the way they met the duke / & ther they made great chere eche to other. And ſo longe they rode together tyll they came to the cite of Edenbourge / wher as the kynge of ſcottes was. And for the mooſt

parte euer the kynge lay there / for there was a good caſtell / a bigge towne / and a fayre hauyn but as at that tyme the kyng was nat there. He was in the wylde ſcottyſſhe. There the duke of Lancaſtre was greatlye honoured of the Erle Duglas / and of the barownes of Scotlande. and the caſtell was delyuered to the duke to lye in. And ſo there he lay a ſeaſon / tyll other tidynges came to hym out of Englāde / but that was nat ſo ſoone as he wolde. Than it was maruell to regarde the yuelles of theſe vnhappy people howe in malyce and hatered they ſpake of this duke / without cauſe. The voyce and brute ran about in Englande / the tyme of this rebellyon / Howe y• the duke of Lācaſtre was a traytor to the kyng / and howe he was become ſcottyſſhe. but anone after it was founde falſe and contrary. But theſe vngracyous people / to bringe the realme into trouble ſowed abrode theſe wordꝭ. and that they knowleged at ye hour / whan they were executed to dethe. That is to ſay: Lyſter / Watte Tyler / Jacke Strawe / Uaquyre / and Johan Balle. Theſe fyue were throughout all the realme chiefe and ſouerayne capitayns / for in fyue partꝭ of the realme / they were maiſters and gouernours. And ſpecially they had in hatered the duke of Lancaſtre / and that they well ſhewed. For at their firſt entryng in to Lōdon / they brent his houſe of the Sauoy / clene to the erthe. And beſyde y• / they had ſprede abrode in England by their falſe wordes / howe the duke was of the ſcottyſſhe parte. and in dyuers placꝭ they turned his armes vp ſo downe lyke a traytor the which was after derely bought / for they that dyde it / loſt their heedes for their labour.
            NOwe I ſhall ſhewe you the vengeaunce that the kyng of Englande toke of theſe vngracious people. In the meane ſeaſon while the duke of Lancaſtre was in Scotlande.
            wHan theſe people were repeaſed / and that Uaquyre was executed to dethe: and Lyſtre of Stafforde / Watte Tyler / Jacke Strawe / Johan Balle / and dyuers other at London. Than the kyng was coūſayled to go viſyte his realme / through euery ſhire bayliwyke / and vyllage: to pourge & punyſſhe all the ſayd yuell doers. And to gete agayne all ſuche letters as byforce / he had gyuen thē in dyuers places. and ſo to bring agayne his realme in good order. Than the kyng ſent ſecretely for a certayne nombre of men of armes to come to him / at a day apoynted. and ſo they dyde / to the nombre of a fyue hundred ſpeares and as many archers. and whan they were all come as the kyng had deuyſed. The kyng departed fro Lō
               don with his houſholdmen all onely / and toke the way in to Kent / wher as firſt theſe vngracyous people began te ſtyrre. And theſe forſaid men of warre folowed after the kynge / and coſted hym: but they rode nat in his cōpany. The kyng entred in to Kent / and came to a vyllage called Comprimbre / and called the mayre and all the men of the towne before hym. And whan they were all come in to a fayre place / the kyng made to be ſhewed them by one of his coūſayle howe they had erred agaynſt the kyng / & howe they had nere tourned all Englande / to trybulacyon and to loſſe. And bycauſe that the kynge knewe well that this buſyneſſe was begon / by ſome of them and nat by all. Wherfore it were better that ſome dyde beare the blame than all. Therfore he cōmaunded them / that they ſhulde ſhewe what they were yt were culpable / on pain to be for euer in the kynges indygnacion / and to be reputed as traytours agaynſt hym. And whan they that were ther aſſembled herde that requeſt / and ſawe well that ſuche as were culpable ſhulde excuſe all thother. Than they beheld eche other / and at laſt ſayd. Sir / beholde hym here / by whom this towne was firſt moued. in contynent he was taken and hanged / & ſo there were hāged to the nombre of ſeuyn. and the letters that the kyng had gyuen thē / were demaū
               ded agayne. and ſo they were delyuerd agayne and torne and broken before all the people / and it was ſayd to them all. Sirs / ye that be here aſſembled: We cōmaunde you in the kyngꝭ name on payne of dethe / euery man to go home to his owne houſe peaſably / and neuer to grudge nor ryſe agaynſt the kyng nor none of his offycers. and this treſpace that ye haue done / the kynge dothe pardon you therof. Than they cryed all with one voyce: God thanke the kynges grace and all his counſayle.
            IN lyke maner as the kyng dyde at Comprimbre: he dyd at Caūterbury / at Sādwyche / at Germeney / at Conculle / and in other places in Kent. In likewiſe he dyde in all other placꝭ of his realme / wher as any rebellyon had ben. And there were hanged and beheeded / mo than fyftene hundred. Than the kyng was coū
               ſayled to ſende for his vncle the duke of Lancaſtre out of Scotlande. ſo the kyng ſent for hym by a knyght of his houſe / called ſir Nycholas Carnefell. The knight rode ſo long that he cāe to Edenbroughe / and there he founde the duke

and his company / and delyuered his letters of credence fro the kynge. The duke obeyed as it was reaſon / and alſo gladly he wolde retourne in to Englande / to his owne herytage. And ſo toke his way to come to Roſ bourge, and at his departyng he thāked the lordes of Scotlande / of the conforte that they had done to hym / as in ſuſteyninge hym in their realme / as longe as it pleaſed hym. The erle Duglas / therle Moret / and other of Scotlande / brought him to the abbey of Mauroſe. Thus the duke came to Roſe bourge / and to Newcaſtell vpon Tyne / and ſo to Dyrham and to yorke. and in euery place he founde / cyties and townes redy apparelled / as it was reaſon. ¶ And the ſame ſeaſon there dyed in London a knight / called ſir Rycharde Dangle erle of Hūtyngdon / and maiſter to the kynge. He was reuerently buryed in the freres prechers in London. And on the day of his obſequy / there was the kynge / his two bretherne / the princeſſe his mother / and a great nombre of prelates / barownes / and ladyes of Englande: and there dyde hym great honour. And truely this getyll knight was well worthy to haue honoure / for in his tyme he had all noble vertues / that a knight ought to haue. he was mery / true amorous / ſage / ſecrete / large / prewe / hardy / aduenturous / and chyualrous. Thus ended the gentyll knight ſir Rycharde Dangle.
         
         
            ¶ The yuell wyll that the duke of Lā caſtre conceyued in his courage / For the refuce that was made him at berwyke. And howe the erle of Cābrige arryued in Portyngale. Cap. CCC .lxxxvi.
            
               WHan the duke of Lancaſtre was retourned out of Scotlande into Englande / and had ſhewed to the counſayle howe he hadde ſpedde with the trewſe / that he had taken with the Scottes. He forgate nat than / howe ſir Mathue Reedmane capitayne of Berwyke / had cloſed the gates agaynſt him / by the ſtrayte commaundement of the erle of Northumberlande. Than the duke enquered / if the kyng his nephue wolde auoqe that dede or nat / and ſo it ſemed to him / that the kynge dyde auowe it but faintly. So the duke helde his peaſe / and abode tyll the feeſt of oure lady in the myddes of the moneth of Auguſte. At whiche tyme the kyng helde a ſolēyne court at Weſtmynſter / and there were than a great nōbre of nobles and lordes of Englande. there was the erle of Northumberlande and the erle of Nottyngham / and dyuers other lordes of ye northe. And the kyng made knightes the ſame day / the yong erle of Penbroke and ſir Robert Maubre / ſir Nycholas Twyforde & ſir Adam Francoys. And after the feeſt / the kyng was in purpoſe to ryde to Reedyng / to Oxenforthe / & to Couentre: to punyſſhe the yuell doers of the ſayde rebellyon. And ſo he dyde / in lyke maner as he had done in Kent / in Suſſexe / in Eſſexe / in Bedforde / and in Cambridge. At this feeſt of oure lady at Weſtmynſter after dyner / there were great wordes bytwene the duke of Lancaſtre and the erle of Northumberlande. The duke ſayd to hym. Henry Percy / I beleued nat that ye hadde bene ſo great in Englande / as to cloſe the gates of any cytie / towne / or caſtell / a gaynſt the duke of Lancaſtre. The erle humyled hym ſelfe in his ſpekyng / and ſayd. Sir / I deny nat that the knight dyde / for I canne nat. For by the ſtrayt commaundement of the kynges grace here preſente. He ſtraitly enioyned & commaunded me / that on myne honour and on my lyfe / I ſhulde nat ſuffre any maner of perſon lorde or other: to entre in to any cytie / towne / or caſtell in Northumberlande / without he were heryter of the place. Sir / the kynge and the lordes of his counſayle can well excuſe me. For they knewe well ynoughe howe ye were in Scotlande / wherfore they ſhulde haue reſerued you. What quod the duke / ſay you that ther ought a reſeruacyon to haue bene made for me / who am vncle to the kyng. and haue kept myne Herytage / as well or better as any other hathe done / next to the kyng. And ſeyng / howe I was gone for the buſyneſſe of the realme in to Scotlande. This excuſe can nat excuſe you / but that ye haue done yuell / and greatly agaynſt myne honoure. And haue gyuen therby enſample / to bring me in ſuſpect that I haue done / or ſhulde do ſome treaſon in Scotlande. Whan at my retournyng / the kyngꝭ townes be cloſed agaynſt me: and ſpecially there as my prouiſyon was. Wherfore I ſay / ye haue aquyted yor ſelfe right yuell. And for the blame and ſclaundre that ye haue brought me in / to pourge me. In the preſens of ye kyng here preſent / I caſt agaynſt you

here my gauge. Reiſe it and yedare. Than the kyng ſtepte forthe and ſayd. Fayre vncle of Lā
               caſtre / all that was done I auowe it. I muſt excuſe the Erle of Northumberlande / and ſpeke for hym. For on payne of his lyfe / we commaū
               ded hym / that he ſhulde kepe cloſe all ye townes on the marcheſſe. and ye knowe well / howe our Realme was in great trouble and parell. The faulte was in the clerke that wrote the letters / and the neglygence of oure counſayle. For of trouthe / we ſhulde haue reſerued you. wherfore I wyll / and alſo deſyre you: to lay a parte this yuell wyll that ye haue to the Erle. And I take the charge on me / and diſcharge the erle in that behalfe. Than kneled downe before the Duke: the erle of Arundell / the erle of Saliſbury / the erle of Suffolke / ye erle of Stafforde / and the Erle of Dymeſter / and ſayde to hym. Sir / ye here howe amyably and truely the kynge ſpekethe. Wherfore ſir / ye ought to condiſcende to his pleaſure. Well quod the duke / who was enflamed with yre: I ſhall holde my peace. And ſo muſed a lytell / and made the lordes to ryſe / and thanked them and ſayd. Fayre lordꝭ / there is none amonge you / if ye were in lyke caſe as I am / but I am ſure / ye wolde be ſore diſpleaſed. But as it pleaſeth the kyng to haue it / it is reaſon that I be content ther with. So there ye peace was made bytwene the duke and the erle by meanes of the kynge and the other lordes. And the ſeconde day the kyng toke his iourney (as is ſayd before) and a fyue hundred ſpeares and as many archers folowed / and euer coſted the kynge in this vyage. The kyng dyde great iuſtyce on them that had rebelled agaynſt him.
            HOwe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of the kyng of Englande / and ſpeke of the erle of Cā
               bridge his vncle / & ſhewe howe he dyde in Portyngale.
            
               VE haue well herdhere before / how therle of Cambridge lay in the hauyn of Plummouthe / with a fyue hundred ſpeares and as many archers / abydinge for the wynde / to ſayle into Portyngale. So longe he lay there that at laſt wynde and wether came / and ſo diſancred and departed towarde Lyſbone / where they thought to arryue. And the firſt day / they coſted Englande and Cornewayle. and the .ii. day alſo. And the thyrde daye they entred in to the highe ſee of Spaygne / and there they had harde fortune. for there roſe ſuche a tēpeſt / that they and all their ſhyppes / were in great parell and harde aduēture of dethe. And ſpecially the ſhyppes / wherin were the gaſcoyns. As ſir Johan of Newcaſtell / the Souldicke of Leſtrade and the lorde de la Barde / and a fourtie knightes and ſquyers. They loſt the ſyght of the erle of Cambridge flete. The erle / and ſir Olyuete Beauchampe marſhall of the hooſt / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Mathewe Gourney conſtable / and the Chanoyne Roberſarde and the other / paſſed this tempeſt in great daunger. And ſo longe they ſayled by the wynde and ſtarres / that they arryued at the cytie of Lyſbone. Theſe tidynges came anone to the kynge of Portyngale / who taryed and loked euer for the comynge of theſe engliſſhmen. Than the kynge ſende of his knightes to mete theym / and ſo they were honourably receyued. And the kyng Dampferant came out of his caſtell / and mette with therle of Cambridge / and receyued hym and all his with great honoure. And ſo brought thē in to his caſtell / and called for wyne and ſpyce. And there was yonge Johan of Cambridge ſonne to the erle: Of whom the kynge of Portyngale made great ioye and ſayde. Beholde here my ſonne / for he ſhall haue my doughter: they were bothe proper & goodlye / and all of one age. Theſe children had gret ioye eche of other / and helde eche other by the hande. In the meane ſeaſon whyle the kyng of Portyngale made cher to the erle and to the other ſtraungers / all their companye were well lodged as they came oute of their ſhyppes / for the Cytie of Lyſbone was great and well furnyſſhed with euery thynge / for it was well prouyded for / agaynſt the comyng of the englyſſhmenne. So theſe lordes were mery and well at their eaſe: Howe be it they were ryght ſorie for their company / that they thought were loſt on the ſee / in the tempeſt. Or els driuen into the dā
               ger of the moores in Granade. the whiche yf it were ſo / they thought them as good as loſt / & ſo for them they made great complayntes. and to ſay trouthe / they were well worthy to be cōplayned. for they were ſo ſore toſſed with the tēpeſt / that there were neuer men in greater daunger of dethe / and ſcaped. They paſſed the ſtraytes and the boundes of the realme Trameſuynes and Bell maryne. And they were oft tymes in great aduenture of takynge with the ſarazins / and they all coūted themſelfe but loſt and deed / and neuer had truſt to cōe to lande. And in this great daunger they were .xl. dayes. & than they had ſuche a wynde that brought them / wheder they wolde or nat / agayne in to ye ſpayniſſhe ſee

And whan the wynde fayled / than they ancred / and by aduenture they founde two great ſhyppes / comyng (as they ſayd) fro Flaūders / charged with marchaundyſe / and goynge to Lyſbone. Than the Englyſſhe ſhyppe came to thē / and purte out their ſtanderdes. and whan they of Lyſbone / who were but marchauntes / ſawe the armes of ſaynt George / and in the ſhyppe men of armes / they were halfe afrayed. But at laſte / whan they aproched and ſawe who they were / they made theym great chere. And after theſe marchauntes dyde putte theſe knyghtes agayne in great parell (as ye ſhall herafter)
            THeſe knightes demaūded of theſe marchaūtes what tidynges / they anſwered and ſayd. Howe that the kynge of Portyngale with the englyſſhe men were in Spaigne / and had beſieged the kynge of Caſtyle in Ciuyll. Of theſe tidynges the knightes were right ioyfull / and ſayd. howe they wolde go thyder / for they were as than on the fronter of Ciuyll. And ſo they departed: and the marchaūtes left with theym wyne / and other prouyſion / to refreſſhe them with all. Than the gaſcoyns ſayde to the maryners. Sirs / bringe vs ſtreyght to Ciuyll for there our company lye at ſiege. The maryners ſayde / in the name of god: and ſo tourned thyderwardes / and ſayled ſo longe / tyll they aproched nere therto. Than the maryners / who were wyſe and ſage / and wolde nat that theyr mayſters ſhulde be loſt neglygently. Cauſed a ladde to moūt vp to the toppe of the ſhyp / to ſe if he coude ſpy any maner of ſiege layd to Ciuyll outher by water or by lande. and the ladde / who ſawe euery thynge parfitelye / ſayde. Surelye there is no maner of ſiege / nother by lande nor by water. Than the maryners ſayde to the lordes. Sirs / ye are nat well and truely enformed / for ſurely ther is no ſiege / nother by lande nor by water about Ciuyll. For if there were any / it ſhulde apere in the hauyn. Therfore ſirs / it is no goynge thyder / without ye wyll loſe all. For the kynge of Caſtyle is there / as in the cytie (wherin he wolde be) of any other in all his realme. So with great payne theſe maryners myght be beleued / and at laſte they were be lened. And ſo ſayled a longe the ſyde of Cyuyll: and entred in to the ſee of Portyngale / and at laſt arryued in the hauyn of Lyſbone. Theſāe houre and daye / there was done in the churche of ſaynt Katherine a ſolempne obſequy / for thē and all the englyſſhe men: morenyng for them in blacke. But than ye may well knowe / there was ioye ynoughe / whan̄e they arryued at the porte: and there was gret feeſt made. and theſe gaſcoyns for ioye / forgate the payne and feare / that they had endured in the ſee.
            'NOwe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of the buſyneſſe of Portingale / for ther was as yet no dede of armes done there. and lette vs nowe ſpeke of the buſyneſſe that was in Flaunders the ſame ſeaſon.
            
               IN this ſeaſon while all this buſyneſſe was in England / the warres of Flāders was nat in reſt / bytwene the erle and the gauntoyſe (ye haue herde here before) how Philyppe Dartuell was choſen as ſouerayne capitayne of Gaunt / by the oppynyon of Peter de Boyſe / who counſayled hym to take on hym the offyce / and to be cruell. To the entent to be the more feared. Philyppe folowed after his ſcole and doctryne / for he had nat bene long in offyce / whan he cauſed .xii. heedes to be ſtrykenne of before hym. And ſome ſayde / they were thoſe / that principally were cauſers of the dethe of his father. and ſo than he reuenged his cauſe. ¶ This Philyppe Dartuell began̄e to raygne in great puyſſaunce / and was greatly feared and beloued / & ſpecially of ſuche as folowed warre. And to wynne their fauoure and loue / he ſpared nothynge: but abandoned euery thynge to them. It might be demaunded howe they of Gaunt made their warre? I wyll aunſwere therto / acordynge as I haue herde. Of very neceſſyte / accordynge to their quantyties: they euer ſupported the poore. And ſo by reaſon of the vnyte amonge theym / they endured in great puyſſaunce. And all thynges conſydred / Gaunt is one of the mooſt ſtrōgeſt townes of the worlde. So that Brabant / Holande and zelande / make them no warre. But if thoſe thre countreis with Flaunders make warre to them / than they be encloſed and likely to be loſt and famyſſhed. And theſe thre countreis made no warr with them / wherfore they endured the lengar. In this ſeaſon / whyle that Philyppe Dartuell was made newe offycer. The alderman of the wayuers was accuſed of trayſon / & ſette in priſon. And to proue the trouthe in that he was accuſed / they went to his houſe / & foūde there certayne poudre of Saltpeter / wherwith he had done no helpe to the towne at ſiege / nor otherwyſe / of all the hole yere paſſed. Wherfore

he was beheeded / & drawen through the towne lyke a traytour: to gyue enſample to all other. Than the erle of Flaunders determyned to lay ſiege to Gaunt / and ſo he made a great ſomons of lordes / knyghtes / and ſquyers: and men of good townes. And he ſende to Malynes / from whens he had moche people. Alſo he ſende for his coſyns / ſir Robert of Namure and ſir Wyllyam. and out of Arthoiſe ther came moche people to him. And the coūteſſe of Arthoiſe his mother / was as than newely departed this lyfe.
            TO this aſſemble there cāe the lorde Dā
               piers / with a great company of knightes and ſquyers of the countie of Heynalt. And ſo therie went and layde ſiege to Gaunt / on the ſyde towarde Bruges and towarde Heynalte. & whyle this ſiege endured / there was many a ſcrymiſſhe / and ſomtyme a ſorte of wyght companyons wolde yſſue out of Gaūt. Somtyme they were driued home agayne to their loſſe / & ſometyme they wan. And in this ſeaſon he that dyde mooſt dedes of armes and was mooſt renomed / was the yong lorde of Danghien. And mooſt commonly all luſtye companyons / ſuche as ſought for dedes of armes / wolde be euer in his companye. And in this ſeaſon / the lorde of Danghien with foure thouſande horſe men beſyde fote men / wente and layde ſiege before the towne of Grauntmont / the which as than was gaūtoyſe. Before that tyme / the ſayd lorde had bene there / and traueyled and haryed thē ſore: but nothynge conquered. But at this tyme / he came puiſſantly and in good order / and on a ſō day he ſauted the towne / in mo than .xl. places. And was at the ſaute hym ſelfe / and ſette forthe firſt his owne baner. This was ſo gret aſſaute and ſo well cōtynued on euery ſyde / that about the houre of noone / it was taken and cōquered. And than entred in at ye gates / the lorde of Dā
               ghien and his company. And whan they of the towne ſawe / that their towne was loſt without recouery / they fledde out at the gates / wher as none of their enemyes were. and ſo euery man ſaued hym ſelfe that myght. There was great murdre / of men / women / and chyldren: for ther was none taken to mercy. Ther were mo than v. C. men of ye towne ſlayne / and a great nōbre of olde people men and women brent / lyeng in their beddes / whiche was great pytie. For they ſette fyre in the towne / in mo than thre hundred places / wherby the hole towne was brent churches and all: nothynge left hole. Thus Graūtmont was proſecuted and put to fyre and flame than the lorde Danghien retourned in to thoſt to the Erle of Flaunders / who gaue hym great thanke for his dede / and ſayde. Fayre ſonne / ye are a valyant man / and ſhall be if god be pleaſed a good knight / for yehaue a gode begining.
            AFter the diſtructyon thus of the towne of Grauntmont / on a ſonday / in the monethe of June / whyle the ſiege lay ſtylle before Gaunt. This lorde of Dāghien / called Water: wolde neuer lye in reſt in his lodgyng / but euery day ſought for aduētures. Some day with a great nōbre and ſome daye with ſo fewe / that he durſt nat parceyuer in his enterpriſe. So yt nere euery day / there was by hym or by ye Haſe of Flaunders / done ſome aduenture. And ſo it fortuned / that on a tueſday in the mornyng / the lorde Danghien was yſſued out of his logyng and the lorde of Montigny in his company / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Mychell of Hamſede his coſyn / & the baſtarde of Danghien his brother. Julyen of Toyſon / Hutyn Donay / and dyuers other. They went to ſcrimiſſhe before Gaunt (as they were wont to do) & aduentured thēſelfe ſo farre / that they toke no good therby. For they of Gaunt hadde layde a ſore buſſhment before their towne / mo than a hūdred pykes. And ſome ſayd there was in this buſſhmēt / ſuche as had fledde fro graūtmont: whan it was wonne. Their entente was ſet on nothyng els / but howe they might trap ye lorde Dāghien / to be reuenged on hym / for the domage y• he had done to them. They thought euer that he was free and hardy / and wolde aduenture him ſelfe largely. And as they thought ſo it came to paſſe / whiche was more pyte. The lorde Danghien and his rout / toke no hede tyll they were encloſed with the gauntoyſe / who eſcryed them to dethe. Than the lorde Dāghyen demaunded counſayle of the lorde of Mōtigny who was by hym. Than ſir Euſtace Mōtigny anſwered / and ſayd. It is nowe to late to take coūſayle. let vs defēde our ſelfe / & ſell our lyues derely or we dye: there is none other remedy. Than theſe knyghtꝭ made the ſigne of ye croſſe before them / and recōmended them ſelfe to god and to ſaynt George. And ſo entred in amonge their enemies / for they coude nat flye / they wer ſo forwarde in the enbuſſhe. And ſo there they dyde dedes of armes aſ well as they might: but they coude nat longe endure / for their enemyes were a hundred agaynſt one. And a great nombre of long pykes / wherwith the gaūtoiſe gaue

great ſtrokes and peryllous / as it well apered. Ther was the lorde Danghien ſlayne / and by hym his baſtarde brother / and Gyles of Toyſon / and dyuers other valyant knightꝭ of Haynalte. And the lorde of Montigny ſaynt Chriſtophe / and ſir Michell of Hamſede ſore hurte. And he had ben ſlayne without doute / and Hutyn Donay / by force of armes / hadde nat ſaued hym. And yet he had moche payne to ſaue him. Howe be it / in the meane tyme that the gaūtois were about to dyſarme the knyghtes that they had ſlayne / to the entent to beare them into the to wne of Gaunt. For they knewe well they had ſlayne the lorde Danghien / wherof they hadde great ioye. In the meane tyme / Hutyn Donay brought out of the preſe and parell ſir Mychell Hamſede. ¶ Thus this iourney fortuned agaynſt the lorde Dāghien. It is nat to be douted / but that the Erle of Flaunders had for his dethe great ſorowe / the whiche he well ſhewed / bycauſe: for ye loue of him he brake vp his ſiege before Gaunte. And night and day made great ſoro we for his dethe / and ſayd. O / Water Water my fayreſon. What aduenture is this? thus to fall on you in your youthe. I wyll that euery man knowe / that they of Gaunte ſhall neuer haue peace with me / tyll I haue ſo great amen des / that it ſhall ſuffyce. Than the erle ſende to Gaunt / to haue agayne the body of the lorde of Danghien / the whiche the gaūtoyſe wolde nat delyuer. Than the erle ſende them a thouſande frankes to haue his body / the whiche the gauntoyſe dyde departe amonge themſelfe. And ſo the body of the lorde of Dāghien was brought in to the hooſt / and ſo was ſente to Anghien the towne / wherof he was lorde.
            
               THus for the loue of the yong lorde of Danghien / theſege brake vp before Gaunte. And than the erle departed and wente to Bruges / and gaue leaue to all his people to departe / and ſende a certayne to his fortreſſes in Flaunders. As Gaures / Andewarpe / Teremonde / and Curtray: and all about in the fortreſſes nere to Gaunt. And the erle ſende to the legeoys / ſhewynge them / bycauſe the ycōforted Gaunt with vitayle and other prouiſyon: therfore he had broken vp his ſiege. Deſyringe thē / no more to cōfort thē with any vitayle. They of Liege anſwered proudely: that they wolde be aduyſed what they wolde do. Of them of 
                  •
               ayn ton / of Huy / and of Dygnet: therle coude haue none other anſwere. How be it he ſent to his coſyns / the duke of Brabāt / and the duke Aubert bayly of Heynalte / of Holande / and of zelande: dyuers meſſangers right ſage knyghtꝭ. & they to ſhewe hym / how ye towne of Gaūt / is ſtyll in their erroure / by the occaſyon of the great confort / that they of Gaunt hath / by their people & countreis. In bringynge dayly to them freſſhe vitayle: deſyring thē therfore / to prouyde for a r
                  •
               medy. Theſe two lordꝭ / who wolde nat gladlye do anythyng / to the diſpleaſure of their coſyn the erle. Excuſed them ſelfe honeſtly & ſayd. howe they knewe nothynge therof before. But fro thenſ forthe they wolde loke therto / and ſet a good order. This anſwere was ſuffycient to the Erle of Flaunders. The duke Aubert / who as than was in Holande / wrote to his bayly in Heynalte / ſir Symone de la Layne / and ſende hym the copy of the erles letters: and y• requeſt that the erle had made to hym. And beſyde that he commaunded him / that he ſhulde ſo deale in the countre of Heynalt / that he here no more tidingꝭ of diſpleaſure / towarde therle of Flāders his coſyn. For if he dyde / he wolde nat be content. The baylye obeyed as it was reaſon / and dyde his commaundement throughe all Haynalte / commaundynge them in no wyſe to cary any vitayle or any maner of thynge to Gaunte. If they dyde / they ſhulde ronne greatly in the dukes diſpleaſur. A lyke crye and defence was made in Brabante / So that none durſte go to Gaunte / but by ſtelthe. Wherof they of Gaunt beganne to be diſmayed / for their prouiſyon be gan ta fayle / and had ben in great famyne / and they of Holande had nat conforted them. Who wolde nat leaue to ayde them / for any commaū dement that duke Aubert coulde make. In the ſame ſeaſone / the ſage men and wyſe counſaylours of Heynalt / of Brabant / and of Liege: ſet a day of counſayle to be holden at Harlequebec beſyde Courtrey. And ſo there they mette: and they of Gaunt ſende thyder a twelfe of ye mooſt notableſt men of the towne. And ther they ſhewed how generally / the mooſt ꝑte of the towne. Except ſuche rybaudes & vnthriftye people / as deſyred nothynge but yuell and noyſe. All the other (gladlye they ſayde) wolde haue reſt and peace: what ſoeuer came therof. At this counſayle / were all the wyſe counſaylours of all the good townes in Flaunders. Ther was the erles counſayle / and they of Liege / of Brabant / and of Heynalte. And the maters were there ſo well debated / y• vpon certayne articles of peace

the gauntoyſe retourned to their towne. And all ſuche of Gaunte / as deſyred reſt and peace: drewe to the houſes of two riche men of Gaūt / who hadde bene at this treatie. The one called ſir Gylbert Gente / and the other ſir Symone Bette: demaundynge of theym tidynges. And they dyſcouered the mater to ſoone / to ſome of their frendes. Sayeng / good neyghbours: we ſhall haue ſo good peace (and it pleaſe god) that ſuch as loueth peace and reſt / ſhall haue it. And ſome of them that be yuell dyſpoſed in ye towne of Gaunt / to be corrected and punyſſhed.
         
         
            ¶ Howe two valyant men of Gauut were ſlayne / by Peter de Boyſe and by Philyppe Dartuell. And of the rebellyon at Parys / agaynſt the frenche kyng. Cap. CCC lxxxvii.
            
               IT is ſayd mooſt comē ly. If it be as he dothe / it is as he ſay the. Peter de boyſe who thought hym ſelfe nat well aſſured of his lyfe / and had his ſpyes about / to here euery newe tidynges. And ſuche as hadde ben at this ſayd treatie: had reported in the towne. How that this treatie was brought about / by Gylbert Gent and Symon Bette. And whan Peter de Boyſe vnderſtode it / he was madde in his mynde therfore / & toke the mater to hym ſelfe and ſayd. If any be corrected for this warre / yet I ſhall nat be the firſt for the mater ſhall nat go all as they wene. ſhall they that haue bene at this treatie: rule euerye thynge as they lyſt▪ May happe nay. I purpoſe nat yet to dye. I thynke the warr hath nat endured ſo long / as it ſhall do. As yet / ſuche as were my good mayſters / Johan Lyon & Wyllyam Craforde / their dethes is nat yet well reuenged. If the maters 
                  •
               e nowe in trouble / yet I wyll bring them in to more trouble / and ſo he dyde. I ſhall ſhewe you howe.
            THe ſame proper euennyng / that the coū ſayle ſhulde haue ben the next day in the counſayle Hall / there to here reported the treatie that was taken at Harlequebecke. Peter de Boyſe / came the ſame euennynge to Ph
                  •
               lyppe Dartuels houſe / and founde hym in his chambre lyenge in a wyndowe / muſynge and ſtudyeng. And the firſt worde he ſpake / he ſayd. Philyp Dartuell / here you any tidynges. Nay trulye 
                  〈◊〉
                he. But that I here ſay our men are returned fro the counſaile at Harlequebecke. And to mord we we ſhall here in the hall / what tidyngꝭ they haue brought. That is true 
                  〈◊〉
                Peter. But I knowe all redy / what wayes they haue taken and purpoſe to take. For ſuche as haue be there hath ſhewed it to ſome of my frendes. Certayn lye Philyppe / the treatie yt they haue made and wolde make / lyeth on the ieopardy of our heedꝭ For if there be peace taken / bytwene the Erle & this towne. Knowe for trouthe / that you and I and the lorde of Harſels▪ & all ſuche capitayns / as haue ayded vs in this warre / ſhalbe the firſt that ſhall dye: and the riche men ſhall go quite. They wyll bring vs in to daunger / and go thē ſelfe free. And this was euer the opinyon of Johan Lyon my maiſter. Alwayes the Erle hath theſe marmoſettes about him / as Gylbert Mahewe and his bretherne / and the prouoſt of Harlequebecke. Who is of the lynage of the alderman of the meane craftes / who fled away with them. We ought wyſely to loke on this mater / and to ſe what were beſt to do. Philyppe aunſwered and ſayd. Peter / I ſhall ſhewe you my mynde. Let vs gyue knowledge of this / to all oure aldermen and capitayns. That they be to morowe / all redy aparelled in the market place And than lette vs two entre in to the Hall / with a hundred with vs: to here the content of y• treatie. And than let me alone / ſo ye wyll auowe my dede / and abyde puiſſantly by me. For without we be feared among the cōmons / it is nothyng and ſo they agreed. Than Peter de Boyſe departed / And ſende to all rulers and capitaynes vnder hym / commaundyng them and all their men / to be redy in the mornynge in the market place to here tidynges. They all obeyed / they durſte do none otherwyſe. And alſo / they were euer redy to do yuell.
            THe next mornyng about the hour of .ix. the mayre and aldermen / and riche men of the towne / came into the market place and entred in to the Hall. And thyder came they that had ben at the treatie at Harlequebecke. Than thyder came Peter de boyſe and Philyp Dart

well / and ſuche of their ſecte well acompanyed. And whan̄e they were all aſſembled / and ſette ſuche as wolde ſytte. Than the lorde of Harſelz was myſte / for he was nat there. and ſo he was ſent for / but he excuſed himſelfe / bycauſe he was ſicke and nat well at eaſe. Saye what ye wyll ꝙ Peter du Boyſe / for I am here in his ſtede. Here beynowe: let vs here what they wyll ſay / that hath bene at Harlequebecke. Than there roſe vp two of the notableſt men of the companye / Gylbert Gente and Symone Bette: and one of them ſayde. Lordes of Gaunt / we haue bene at the parlyament at Harlequebecke / and haue had moche payne and traueyle. And alſo / ſo had the good men of Brabant / of Liege / and of Heynalte / to make acorde and agrement / bytwene oure lorde the erle of Flaunders and vs of Gaunte. Finally at their requeſtes / and by the helpe of my lady of Brabant / who ſent thyder her coūſayle / and the duke Aubert his. So that by their meanes the good towne of Gaunt is come to a peace and to agrement / with oure lorde the erle. In this maner / that two hundred men of ours / ſuche as he ſhall ſende vs their names in writyng. within fyftene dayes we muſt ſende them into the erles priſon at Lyſle / to put theym clerely to his mercy and pleaſure. He is ſo free and ſo noble / that it is no doute / but that he wyll haue mercy on theym. With thoſe wordes Peter de Boyſe ſtepte for the / and ſayde. Gylbert Gente / howe durſte you be ſo bolde to make ſuche agrement / as to ſende two hundred of oure men of Gaunte / in to the towne of oure enemye / in great rebuke and ſhame / to all the towne of Gaunt. It were better Gaunte were turned vp ſo downe / than they of Gaunt ſhulde haue ſuche reproche: as to make warre & ende it ſo ſhamefully. We that haue herde you / may well knowe / that ye ſhall be none of the two hū
               dred priſoners / nor alſo Symon Bet. ye haue choſen for youre ſelfe / nowe than we wyll choſe for ourſelfe. On for the Philyppe Dartuell / ſet handes on theſe falſe traytours / that wolde betray and dyſhonour the towne of Gaunt. Ther with Peter de Boyſe drewe oute his dagger / & came to Gylbert Gent / and ſtrake hym into the belly. and ſo he fell downe deed. And Philyppe Dartuell drewe out his dagger / and he ſtrake Symon Bet / and ſlewe hym in lykewiſe. And than they cryed treaſon treaſon. And they that were ſlayne / hadde of their men aboue and beneth: for they were men of great lygnage / and the richeſt men of the towne: but they gette thē ſelfe out of the towne to ſaue them ſelfe: ſo that there was no more done / but they two ſlayne. But to apeaſe the people / and to bringe them to their beleue. They ſende out of their men / cryenge and ſayenge. Theſe falſe traytours / Gylberte Gente and Symone Bette / wolde haue betrayed the towne of Gaunte. Thus the mater paſſed / theſe two notable men were ſlayne / and no man to reuenge them. And whan therle of Flaūders (beyng at Bruges) herde of theſe tidynges: he was ſore diſpleaſed / and ſayd. At the deſyre of my coſyns of Brabante / I lightly agreed to haue peace with them of Gaunt. and nowe and before this tyme / they haue wrought falſely. But I wyll they knowe / that they ſhall neuer haue peace agayne with me: but I wyll haue them at my pleaſure.
            
               THus ther was ſlayne in the towne of Gaunte / theſe two balyant men ryche and ſage. They might eche of them ſpende of their owne patrimony / two thouſande frākes yerelye. They were ſore be moned priuely / but non durſt ſpeke of theym openly. Thus the warre was more feyrſare than it was before / for they of the garyſons about Gaunte / were night and day buſye / to ſtoppe all prouiſyon comynge to Gaunt. So that they of Brabant nor of Haynalde / dutſt nat aduenture to bring any thyng to Gaunt. For if the erles men mette any vitaylers / they wolde ſlee their horſes / and bring thē priſoners in to Ande warpe or to Teremonde. So that all vitaylers / feared the parell therof. ¶In the ſame ſeaſon / the commons of Parys roſe and rebelled agaynſt the kyng and his coū
               ſayle / bycauſe the kyng and his coūſayle wolde generally / reyſe vp throughe all Fraunce: ayedes / fo wage / tayles / and ſubſydes: ſuch as had rynne in the dayes of Charles / father to y• king as than. The pariſyens rebelled & ſayde. howe that the kynge laſt diſceaſſed / had quyte them in his lyfe tyme. And howe the kyng his ſonne at his coronacyon at Reynes / had acorded to y• ſame. Than the kyng and his counſayle auoyded Parys / and went & lay at Myeulx in Bric As ſoone as the kyng was departed fro Paris the cōmons roſe in harneſſe / and ſlewe all thoſe that had ceaſſed the aydes. And brake vp y• priſons and dyuers houſes in the towne / and robbed & pylled thē: and toke all y• euer they foūde. and ſo came to the byſſhoppe of Paris houſe / & brake vp his priſons / & delyuerd Hugh Aubert

who hadde bene prouoſt of Parys / in the tyme of Kynge Charles. Who was in his dayes by iuſt ſentence condempned to priſon / for dyuers yuell dedes that he hadde done / and conſented to do. At whiche tyme / ſome wolde haue hadde hym brent: but theſe pariſyens delyuered him. This happe he had by the rebellyon of the commons / and ſo he departed the towne aſſoone as he myght / for feare leeſt he ſhulde be takenne agayne. And ſo he went into his owne countrey of Burgoyne: and ther ſhewed his frendes all his aduēture. Theſe people of Parys duryng their rebellyon / dyde moche hurte. But there were many good menne that were happy / that they fell nat to their rebellyon and company / for and they had / the mater had bene moche worſe than it was. Thus the kynge was at Myeulx and his thre vncles with hym: the duke of Aniowe / the duke of Berrey / and the duke of Burgoyne: who were ſore dyſpleaſed with this rebellyon. Than they determyned to ſende thyder the lorde of Coucy / who was a ſage knight to treate with the commons and to apeaſe them for he coulde do it better than any other.
         
         
            ¶Howe the lorde of Coucy apeaſed the diſcencion and rebellyon of them of Parys. And of the great preparacyon that the duke of Aniou made to make hym ſelfe kynge of Napoles. Cap. CCC lxxxviii.
            
               THan the lorde of Coucy / called Enguerrant came to Paris / nat with an army but in peaſable maner / with his owne ſeruauntes. and ſo lyghted at his lodgynge / & than he ſende for ſome of thē that were chiefe begynners of the rebellyon. & whan they were come to hym / he ſhewed them in fayre manere. Howe they hadde done ryght yuell / to ſlee the kynges officers / as they hadde done. And broken the kynges priſons / and delyuered the kynges priſoners. Sayeng / howe that if the kyng and his counſayle wolde be haſtye and rygorours / they ſhulde ſore repent it. The whiche the kyng wolde nat / bycauſe he loueth Parys ſo well / for he was borne therin: & alſo it is the chife cytie of his realme. Therfore he wyll nat diſtroye the people that be therin. Shewynge theym / howe he was come thyder / as to be a meane to bringe them to peace. Promiſynge them / howe he wolde deſyre the kynge and his vncles / to ꝑdone all that euer they had done. Than they aunſwered and ſayde. Howe they wolde none yuell / nor to haue warre with the kynge nor with his vncles. But they wolde that theſe impoſycions / ſubſedyes / and gables / ſhulde be layde downe in all Parys: and that the cytie ſhulde be exempte fro all ſuche maters Sayenge / howe they wolde ayde the kynge in ſome other manere. In what manere quod the lorde of Coucy. They anſwered and ſayd. We wyll be content to pay a certayne golde and ſyluer euery weke / to a certayne man apoynted to receyue it / to helpe to paye the Soudyers / and men of warr in Fraunce. What ſomme wyll ye paye quod the lorde of Coucye? Suche ſomme quod they / as we ſhall agree vpon. And ſo the lorde of Coucy treated ſo the mater with them / that with their owne good wylles / they ceaſed theym ſelfe to paye wekely / a tenne thouſande florence / to a certayne man admytted / to be receyuoure therof. And ſo thus the lorde of Coucy departed fro them / and wente to Myeulx in Brie / to the Kynge and to his vncles / and ſhewed them what he had done. Than the kynge was counſayled for the beſt / to receyue this offre of the Pariſyens. Sayenge / howe it was good to entre on theym lytell and lytell / For in lykewyſe they ſhulde do with the other good townes in Fraunce. Seynge that Parys dyde thus begynne. Than the lorde of Coucy retourned to Parys / and brought peace fro the kyng to the Pariſyence / ſo that they wolde kepe the promyſe that they hadde made: the which they ſayde they wolde do. And ſo a receyuer was apoynted to receyue the florence euery weke. ſo that the money ſhulde nat go out of Parys / for none other entent / but to pay men of warr whā nede requyred. And that the money ſhulde nat be enployed to the kyngꝭ vſe norprofyte: nor to none of his vncles. Thus the mater contynued a certayne ſpace / and the Pariſyence in peace / but the kynge wolde nat come in Parys / wher of the pariſyence were ſore diſpleaſed.
            IN lykewiſe they of Rohane rebelled / the common people roſe and ſlewe the Cathelayne ther / and all ſuche as had ſette the impoſycions / aydes / and gabelles on

them. And whan the kyng and his vncles herd therof / they were right ſore dyſpleaſedde. For they doughted greatlye / that other Cyties and townes wolde do in lyke caſe. Than the kynge was coūſayled that he ſhulde go to Rohan / & ſo he dyde / and apeaſed the cōmons there / and ꝑdoned them the dethe of his Chatelyne / and of all that they had done. And alſo they ordayned a receyuour / to whome they payed euery weke a certayne ſomme of florens. and ſo therby they were in peace. So thus ther began great yuel in Fraunce / and all toke fotynge and enſample of the gauntoyſe / for why: as than all the commonties throughout all the worlde ſayd. howe they of Gaunt were good people / and valyant lye had ſuſtayned their fraunchiſes. Wherfore they ſayde: they ought to be beloued / prayſed / and honoured.
            IT is to be knowen / that the duke of Aniowe had a great and an high entent and ymaginacion / to go to the realme of Napoles. For he wrote hym ſelfe kynge of Puyle / of Calabre / and of Cicyle. For pope Clement had gyuen hym that herytage / by vertue of the letters patētes / that the quene of Napoles had gyuen hym. The duke of Aniowe / who was ſage and ymaginatyfe / and of highe courage and enterpriſe. He ſawe well that in tyme to come / accordyng to the ſtate that he had begon / the whiche he was lothe to make leſſe. He thought therby / to be no lytell lorde in Fraunce. Whan ſo noble and highe herytages were fallen to hym / as .ii. kyngdoms / Napoles and Cicyle: and thre ducheris. as Puyle / Calabre / and Prouence. for by reaſon of theſe coūtreis / wherof he reputed hym ſelfe lorde and kyng. He thought he ſhuld attayne to great rycheſſe / and ſo therfore he ſet all his entent night and day / howe he might ꝑfourme that viage. And he knewe it wolde nat be / without great conforte of golde and ſyluer / and great company of men of warre / to reſyſt agaynſt all thoſe / that wolde let his viage. So the duke of Aniowe for this occaſyon / gadered toguyder as moche rycheſſe as he coulde / and kept hym in loue with them of Parys / aſmoche as he might. for he knewe well that within Parys / there was rycheſſe great habūdaunce. and alſo he ſende to the Erle of Sauoye / in whome he had great affyaunce. Deſyringe hym nat to fayle hym at this buſyneſſe / promyſynge: that as ſoone as he cāe in to Sauoy / he wolde gyue wages for a hole yere / for a thouſande ſpeares of that countrey. The erle of Sauoy had gret ioye of thoſe tidynges / for he greatly loued dedes of armes. And he anſwered to the meſſangers / howe he wolde gladly ſerue the duke / by the ſayde couynaunt. Wherof the duke of Aniowe was gladde / for he loued greatlye the cō
               pany of the erle of Sauoy. Beſyde y• / the duke of Aniowe retayned men of armes / to the nombre of nyne thouſande. Than he made preparacyon for hym ſelfe and for his company at Parys / of all maner of thynges. As tentes / pauylyons / and all other ordynaunce / as it ſhulde ꝑtayne for a kynge to do: whan he is in purpoſe to go in to a farre countrey. ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of hym for a ſeaſon / and returne to the erle of Cambridge and to his company / beynge as than in Portyngale / with the kynge there.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhmen rode with out any cōmaundement of the kyng of Portyngale. And howe the caſtell of Sygheire in portyngale was taken Cap. CCC lxxxix.
            
               THe erle of Cambridge and his company refreſhed theym a longe ſpace at Lyſbone / with the kyng of Portyngale. And the englyſſhemen and gaſcoyns aduyſed well the countrey / by cauſe they had neuer bene there before. And as I vnderſtode / there was a maryage accorded / bytwene the doughter of the kyng of Portyngale who was of the age of tenne yeres / and the erle of Cambridge ſonne of the ſame age. He was called Johan / and the Lady named Beatryce. At the weddynge of theſe two chyldrene / there was made great feaſte amonge the lordes and prelates of the realme / and as younge as they were / they were layde toguyder in one bedde. So this maryage thus ended / the whiche endured the ſpace of eight dayes. Than y• kynge of Portyngale and his counſayle / ordayned y• the men of warr / that were as than at Lyſbon ſhulde deꝑte in to other places / and kepe the frō
               ters. So therle of Cambridge and his cōpany were ordayned to go lye in another towne / called

               Eſtremour. And the englyſſhmen and gaſcons ſhulde lye in another countre / called Beſy ouſe / and yonge Johan of Cambridge ſhulde abyde with the kynge and his wyfe. Whan the Chanone Roberſarde / and the other englyſſhe knightꝭ and gaſcons toke their leaue of y• kyng to departe to go to their gariſons. than y• kyng ſayd to them. Sirs / I cōmaunde you ryde nat out agaynſt our enemyes / without my leaue & knowledge: for if ye do / I wyll nat he content. They anſwered / howe they wolde nat ryde tyll they had his lycence. and ſo thus they departed and ſo rode to y• towne of Beſyous / a .ii. dayes iourney fro Lyſbone / and aſmoche fro Ceuyll / wher as the kyng of Spayne lay. Who knewe ryght well of the comynge of the erle of Cambridge and his company. And ſent worde therof in to Fraunce / to ſuche as he thought wolde ſerue him. And whan they knewe therof & ſawe that warre was likely to be in Spaygne / they were gladde therof. And dyuers ſuche as deſyred to be auaunſed by the warre made them redy / and toke their way in to Spayne.
            THe Chanoyne Roberſarde / who lay in garyſon at Beſyouſe / with his company englyſſhe and gaſcoyns. On a tyme he ſayd to his company. Sirs / me thynke we lye here thus long ſtyll / nothyng to our honour. We haue done as yet nothyng agaynſt our enemyes / wherfore they ſette the leſſe ſtore by vs. Therfore and ye wyll it is my coūſaile / that we ſende to the kynge of Portyngale / deſyringe hym to gyue vs leaue to ride / & to do ſom what againſt his enemyes. and they all anſwered and ſayde. We are content. Than ſir Johan Chandonich was ſent on that meſſage. and ſo he came to the kynge to Lyſbone / and dyde his meſſage as he was charged to do. But y• kyng ſayd▪ he wolde in no wyſe they ſhulde ryde forthe. And ſo this knight coude gette none other thyng of y• kyng and ſo retourned to his lordes / and ſaid. Sirs the kyng wyll in no wyſe that ye ſhall ride forth Than they were ſorer diſpleaſed thā they were before / and ſaid among them ſelfe. howe it was nat the order of men of warr / tolye ſo long ſtyll in a garyſon / without doynge ſome dede of armes. And ſo thus they made couynaūt to ryde forthe at aduenture. And ſo on a day they rode out in to the feldes / to the nombre of a four hundred men of armes / and as many archers. And they enterpriſed to beſiege a great towne / parteyninge to the mayſter of ſaynt Johans. And as they wente thyderwarde / they toke another way and went to the caſtell of Sighyre / wherin there was a threſcore men of armes / ſpaynierdes in garyſon. Of whome Peter Gouſſes and his brother were capitayns. The chanone Roberſarde / who was chefemouer of that iourney rode before: and ther was with hym ſir Olyuer of Beauchampe / ſir Mathewe Gourney Mylles Wyndſore / the lorde Talbotte / ſir Adam Symon / and ſir John̄ Foūdre / who was baſtarde brother to the kyng of Englande / the Souldycke of Leſtrade / the lorde of Newcaſtell / the lorde de la Barde / Raymon of Marſon / & dyuers other. And ſo they rode tyll they came to the caſtell of Sighyre / and ſo made thē redy to aſſayle it. And whan they within parceyued that they ſhulde be aſſayled / they orday ned for their defence. And anone after day / the ſaulte began right ſore and cruell. and the Englyſſhmen entred in to the dykes / wherin there was no water / and ſo they came iuſt to the walles well paueſſhed for the caſt of ſtones / & there they hewe with pykes to entre the walles / and they within caſt downe on them / barres of yron and ſtones / and hurt dyuers of them. That day the Chanoyn Roberſarde dyde marueyls in armes / and ſo dyde Eperus a varlet of his. and y• archers ſtode a longe the dyke / and ſhot ſo holly toguyder / that there was none aboue y• durſt apere at their defence. The one halfe of theym within were ſore hurt / & there was ſlayne with the ſhotte / the brother of Peter Gouſſes capytayne of the caſtell / called Bartylmewe / a proper man of armes. And ſo by his hardyneſſe / & to moche aduenturyng he was ſlayne.
            
               THus this aſſaut contynued fro the mornynge tyll it was noone. The knyghtes and ſquyers bothe Englyſſhe & Gaſcoyns / ſpared nat to aſſayle the caſtell / with great wyll and courage / bycauſe they dyde that enterpriſe without the knowledge of the kyng of Portyngale. Therfore they dyde all their payne to conquere the Caſtell / to the entent that the renome therof / ſhulde come to Lyſbone. And that men myght ſay. howe they had well ſpedde at their begynnyng. Than the Chanoyne Roberſarde ſayde. A ſirs / we thought yeſterday / this Caſtell ſhulde nat haue holde ſo long agaynſt vs. But and we be ſo longe in conqueryng of townes and caſtelles in Spaygne and Galyſe / we ſhall neuer be lordes of thē / wherwith y• knightes and ſquyers toke more courage. And with thoſe wordes / the Chanoyne Roberſarde / for

all his paueſſe / receyued a great ſtroke: wherwith he was ſore hurte and broſed. And he had by hym a yong ſquiers of Heynalt / called Fro
               
                  •
               ſſart Mullyer. who bare hym ſelfe valiauntly at this aſſaut. and ſo dyde all other. The artyllary of the caſtell: as ſtones / and barres of yron began to myniſſhe. and they within ſawe well / that of .xxv. men of armes / there were but thre of them / but they were ſore hurt and in parell of dethe. So that they coulde nat longe endure / but that by force they ſhulde be taken. and they ſawe their capitayns brother was ſlayne. than they determyned to take ſome reſpyte / and in ye meane tyme to treate for a peace. Thanne they made token to ſpeke with the englyſſhmen / and ſo the aſſaute ceaſed. and the aſſaylantes came out of the dykes / wherof they had nede. for ther were many of theym ſore traueyled and hurte. Than ſir Mathue Gourney conſtable of that hooſt / and ſir Mylles Wynſore marſhall went to them / and demaunded what they wolde ſay. The capitayne ſir Peter Gouſſes ſayd. Sirs / we ſe well ye wyll nat depart hens / tyll ye haue this fortreſſe. ye hurt our people and we yours Let vs take counſayle one with another. I ſay for all my company of whom I am capitayne / that we wyll rendre to you the fortreſſe / our godes and lyues ſaued. ſirs / take this off re. This is a right couenaunt of armes. ye are as at this tyme more ſtronger than we be. Therfore it behoueth vs thus to do. The englyſſhe knyghtes ſayd / they wolde take counſayle / & ſo they dyde And whan they were determyned / they anſwered and ſayd. howe they within ſhulde departe whan they lyſt / but theyr goodes ſhulde abyde ſtyll in the caſtell: for they ſhulde haue nothing but their lyues. And whan Peter Goſſes ſawe there was none other remedy / he acorded therto / right ſore agaynſt his wyll. Thus this Caſtell was gyuen vp / and put in to the handes of thenglyſſhmen. And ſo the ſpaynierdes departed without any ſauecōduct / and went to Eſteryes / where the maiſters of ſaynt Jaques lay. Howe be it they founde hym nat ther / as than: for he vnderſtode that the englyſſhe men were abrode / therfore he was entred in to the feldes / with a foure hundred men of armes / ſpaynierdes and caſtylians / in truſt to mete with the englyſſhmen at their aduauntage / to fyght with them.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the Chanoyne Roberſarde and his company retourned to their garyſon. And of the maryage of the kynge of Englande / to the doughter of the kynge of Rhomayns. Cap. CCC lxxxix.
            
               WHan theſe knightꝭ of England had cōquered ye caſtell of Sigheir they were right ioyfull / and ſo they repayred it and lefte therin .xl. of their company / and dyd furnyſhe it with artillary & other purueyaunces / and ſette there a good capitayne to kepe it. Than they counſayled toguyder / what was beſt for thē to do. And ſo they determyned to go agayne to their firſt lodgynges: and the englyſſhmen and gaſcoyns deꝑted in thre routes. And behynde all to kepe ye felde / abode the Chanoyne Roberſarde / and with hym certayn englyſſhmen / gaſcoyns / and almayns. He was about a threſcore ſpeares and as many archers and ſo they rode all that day / & the ſeconde day in the mornyng all hole toguyder. and they entred in to a great towne of Portyngale / called Huence / and the caſtell of Concrelet / was right without a wode ſyde. In the which wode more nere to Concrelet than to Huence / was the maiſter of ſaynt James in a buſſhmēt / with a four hundred men of armes. And as ſoone as the englyſſhmen parceyued them / they drewe all togider and made no coūtenance of feare / but rode forthe a good paſe. And the ſpaynierdes for all their great nombre made no ſemblant to breke their buſſhement / but helde them ſelfe ſtyll and cloſe. for they beleued that the engliſſhmen had nere hande their great batayle / & therfore they durſt nat aſſayle them. So thus they departed eche fro other / without any more doynge. The ſpaynierdes retourned the ſame night to Eſteryes / and the Chanoyne Roberſarde to Ueſyouſe. And there he ſhewed his company / howe they had ſene the ſpagynierdes / bytwene Concrelet and Huence / and ſayd. If we had bene all toguyder / we wolde haue fought with thē / and ſo they were ſorie / that they had nat bene all toguyder. And whan theſe tidynges came to the knowledge of the kyng of Portingale / he made ſemblant that he was dyſpleaſed / bycauſe they rode forthe without his cōmaundement or ordinaunce. Thus the englyſſhmen and gaſcoyns

lay ſtyll in their garyſons all that wynter / without any thynge doyng / worthy to be made mē
               cyon of / the whiche greatly anoyed thē. There lyeng ſtyll / was nat by their wylles. ¶ In this meane tyme / Johan / kyng of Caſtyle: ſende to the frenche kynge and to his vncles for ſocour. Shewyng them / howe the erle of Cambridge was arryued in Portyngale. And how ye voice ranne through the realmes of Caſtyle and Portyngale. Howe that the kyng of Englande / the duke of Lancaſtre and his brother / puiſſantlye acompanyed: ſhulde come in to Portyngale / to the erle of Cambridges ayde / in the next ſomer. Wherfore / he deſyred the frenche kynge / accordynge to ſuche alyaunces and confederacions / as the realme of Fraūce & the realme of Spaygne hath toguyder / and by reaſon of good loue and amyte. That they wolde ſende ſome men of warre to hym the next ſomer / to the entent to reſyſt his enemyes. Than the french kyng and his counſayle / conſented well therto. For they ſawe well / howe the kyng of Spayne / deſyred nothyng but reaſon. Than it was ordayned in Fraunce / to gyue all maner of men of warre lycence to go thyder. And the kyng delyuered thē their firſt preſt money. So ſir Olyuer of Cleſquy / brother to ſir Bertram of Cleſquy conſtable of Fraunce / was ordayned to take his voyage / in the begynnyng of the ſpringyng tyme. And ſo dyde knightꝭ and ſquyers: of Bretayne of Fraunce / of Beauſe / of Picardy / of Aniowe of Berrey / of Bloyſe / and of Mayne. And ſo they paſſed by companyes to haue ye more eaſe / and their paſſage was opyn throughe ye realme of Aragon / and they founde euery thyng redy / and their wages payed. but they payed nat for euery thyng they toke / whan they were abrode in the countrey / whiche was great hurte to the poore commons.
            yE haue herde here before / howe kyng Richarde of Englande / the ſpace of a yere / hadde ben in treatie with kynge Charles of Almayne. Who wrote hym ſelfe the tytell of the kyng of Rhomayns / to haue his ſuſter / the lady Anne in maryage. And howe ſir Symon Burle had ſore traueyled in that mater. And howe the duke of Taſſon in Almayne had ben in Englande / for to confyrme that maryage. And the mater was ſo cōcluded / that the kynge of Rhomayns ſende his ſuſter in to Englande / and the duke of Taſſon with her. And a great company of knightes / ladyes / and damoſels / in royall aſtate / as it aꝑteyned to ſuche a lady. And ſo ſhe came firſt in to Brabante / to the towne of Brueſels. And there the duches of Brabant receyued her and all her company / in goodly maner. The duke of Brabant was her vncle / for ſhe was doughter to themꝑour Charles. And ſo thus ye lady Anne of Behayne helde her at Bruſels with her vncle and aunte / more than the ſpace of a moneth. She durſte nat go thens. I ſhall tell you why. ¶ It was ſhewed her / that ther was on the ſee a .xii. veſſels of nor mayns / bytwene Caleys and Hollande / & they robbed and pilled on ye ſee / they cared nat who. And ſo they kepte he boundes of the ſee / about Flaunders and zelande / abyding the comynge of this yonge lady. For the french kyng wolde gladly haue broken that maryage / for he greatlye douted the alyaunce / bytwene Englande & Almayne. Howe be it alwayes it is ſayd / that it is nat honorable to take ladyes in warre. In coloryng the warr bitwene lordes / to make their warr the fayrer. The prince of Wales / father to kyng Richarde of Englande. It was ſayd / he conſented to the takyng of the lady of Burbone mother to the french quene. She was taken by the prices ſeruaūtes / in the caſtell of Belperch. and ſo brought in to Guyen / and raunſomed. Wherfore the frēchmen thought / if they myght take the kyng of Englandes wyfe / in reuēgyng therof / they ſhulde do no wronge. So for feare and doute therof / this lady lay ſtyll at Bruſels / the ſpace of a moneth. Than the duke of Brabant ſende his counſayle into Fraunce / as the lorde of Rouſſelās / and the lorde of Bouſqueher: to ſhewe the kynge & his vncles / they were nephewes to the duke of Brabant: as chyldren of his ſuſter. Theſe lordes of Brabant ſpedde ſo well with the frenche kyng and his coūſayle / that they had a ſure ſaue conduct / for the lady to paſſe outher by lande or by ſee. Wheder it pleaſed her / throughe the realme of Fraunce / or by the frōters therof to Calais. And the normains that were on the ſee / were countermaunded agayne. And ſo the frenche kyng and his vncles wrote to the Duke of Brabant / that they dyde this for his ſake all onely / and for none other. This pleaſed moche the duke of Brabant & the ducheſſe / and all ſuche as wolde paſſe the ſee. So than they departed fro Bruſels / and the lady toke her leaue of the duke her vncle / and of ye ducheſſe her aunt. And of the ladyes and damoſels of the countrey / ſuche as had helde her company. And ſo the duke ſende with her / a hūdred ſpeares to conuey her to Gaunte / and there ſhe reſted her a day. And there the gauntoyſe dyde

her gret honour. and fro thens ſhe went to Bruges / & there the erle of Flaunders receyued her ryght honourably / & there ſhe reſted her a thre dayes. And than ſhe rode forth & came to Grauelyng / where as was redy / the erle of Salyſbury / and the erle of Dymeſter with a fyue hū
               dred ſperes: and as many archers / and ſo they brought her to Calays. And the brabanſies retourned / as ſoone as they had delyuered her to the barones of Englande.
            THis yonge lady taryed nat longe at Calayes / but that ſhe had wynde at wyll. and ſo than ſhe entred in to her ſhyppe on a friday in the mornynge / and all her company and horſes in other ſhyppes. And the ſame day ſhe aryued at Douer / and ther ſhe reſted her two dayes: & the thirde day ſhe rode to ſaynt Thomas of Caunterbury. And there ſhe founde the erle of Buckynghā / who receyued her honourably. and ſo long this lady rode forthe that ſhe came to London / where as ſhe was honourably receyued of the burgeſſes / ladyes / & damoſels of the countrey and cytie. And ſo the kyng of Englande wedded her / in the chapell of his palays of Weſtmynſter / the .xx. day of Chriſtmas: at which there was great feaſt & tryūphe holden. And euer ſyth ſhe deꝑted firſt out of Almayne / the gentle and noble knight ſir Robert of Namur left her nat / tyll ſhe was maryed to the kyng of Englande. Wherof he hadde great thanke / bothe of the kyng of Englande / and of the kyng of Almayne. And ſo the kyng of England after his maryage / brought ye quene his wyfe to the caſtell of Wyndſore / and there kept a great houſe. And ſo there they were ioyouſly togyder. And my lady princes the kynges mother / abode ſtyll with ye quene. And alſo ye ſame tyme there was in the court with the quene / the duches of Bretayne ſuſter to kyng Rycharde. for Lois her huſband duke of Bretayne / coude nat haue her delyuered out of Englāde for the kyng of Englande nor his counſayle / wolde in no wyſe cōſent to ſende her in to Bretayne / bycauſe her huſbande ye duke was become french. For the lordes and knightes in England / ſayd the ſame tyme. That the duke of Bretayne acquyted hymſelfe faſly / to the erle of Buckyngham and to our men / nowe at this laſt vyage y• they made in Frāce. And for all he hath ſent for his wyfe / yet wyll nat we ſende her to hym. but wyll rather ſend thyder his .ii. enemies / John̄ and Guy of Bretayne. Who were chyldrene to ſaynt Charles of Breten / who hath more right to the herytage of Bretayne than he hath. for he is duke but by reaſon of our puyſſaunce & ayde and be ſemyng: he cōſydreth but yuell / ye goodnes y• we haue done to hym. wherfore we muſt in lykewiſe / ſhewe hym the vylany that he doth to vs. Trewe it was / theſe two lordꝭ John̄ and Guy of Bretayne / children to ſaynt Charles of Bloyſe were priſoners in Englande. and kept in a ſtronge caſtell / in the kepynge of ſir Peter Dambreticourt. And they were deſyred in curtes maner / by the kyng of Englande & his counſayle / that they ſhulde holde Bretayne by fayth and homage of the kynge of Englande. And if they wolde thus do / than the kyng of England promyſed / to recouer their right in Bretayne. and John̄ to haue to his wife / ye lady Phylippe of Lancaſtre wydowe. But they anſwered: in no wyſe they wolde do ſo / nor for ſake to be frē
               che to dye in priſon. So thus ye materhanged. And after the kynge of Englande knewe ones fermly their myndes / they were no more deſyred therto.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the french kyng could haue no money of the receyuour of Parys. And howe the duke of Aniowe paſſed in to Italye / & of his noble chyualry. Cap. CCC. xCi.
            
               LE haue herd here before / howe the paryſiens were a greed with the kyng / to pay a certayne ſōme of florens euery weke. This ſome of floreyns was payed to a certayne receyuour apoynted by them / but the kyng had it nat / nor it wēt nat out of Parys. And ſo it happed / that the kynge had beſynes with money to pay his men of warre / ſuche as he ſent in to Caſtell. wherto he was boūde / by ye aliaunces that was made before. And ſo the kyng ſent to Parys to his receyuour / that he ſhulde prepare for hym a hundred thouſande frankes / for he ſayd he wold comforte and ayde kyng John̄ of Caſtell. The receyuour anſwered ye kyngꝭ letters and meſſage right graciouſly / and ſayd: howe he had money mough. howe beit he myght delyuer none without the hole conſent of ye towne of Parys. Theſe wordes pleaſed nothyng the kyng / but he ſayde he wolde puruey right well for remedy: whanne he myght / and ſo he dyd.

And ſo for his entente (as at that tyme) he purueyed hym of other money / by the helpe of his good townes in Pycardy. Thus there was a great diſcēcion / bytwene the kyng and them of Parys. and ſo the kyng wolde nat come to Parys / but he abode at Mieulx / at Senles / or at Compayne / & there a bout: wherof they of Parys were ſore diſpleaſed. And the greateſt ſure tie and meane that they hadde / was the duke of Aniou / who wrote hym ſelfe kynge of Cecyll / and of Hyeruſalem: and had taken on hym the armes therof. This duke moſt comonly lay at Parys / and there he gate moche good to helpe hym to his viage. He gate toguyder ſo great a ſōme of money (that it was ſayd) that he had at Roquemore beſyde Auignon / two myllions of florens. He entreated ſo them of Parys by his fayre langage. and by that he had ye ſoueraynte aboue all his bretherne / bycauſe he was eldeſt. that he had of them the ſōme of a hundred thouſande frankes. But the kyng coude gette none of them / nor his vncles of Berrey / nor of Burgoyne. and whan the duke of Aniou had made his prouiſion / in the ſpringyng tyme of the yere he toke his iourney / & ſo paſſed the realme / and came to Auignon: wher as he was greatly feaſted with the pope / and with the cardynals. and thyder came to hym the barones and rulers / of the good townes of Prouence / & receyued hym for their lorde / and dyd hym homage & feaulte. and dyd put them ſelfe in to his obeyſance. and thyder came to him ye gentle erle of Sauoy his coſyn: with certayne lordes and knightes / who were alſo well receyued of the pope and cardynals. And there the duke of Aniou delyuered to the erle of Sauoy a great ſōme of money / for thē of Sauoy / who were a great nombre. So than the duke and therle toke leaue of the pope and departed / and toke the way to the dolphyn of Uien / and ſo in euery good towne they had good chere. And ſo their men of warre went on before / and at laſt they entred into Lombardy / the whiche paſſage was redy open. And ſo the duke entred in to Lombardy / & in euery towne had great feaſt and chere / and ſpecially at Myllayne. There they were honored beyonde meaſure of ſir Galeas / and ſir Barnabo. and they had of them great riches and iuels / that it were marueyle to recounte it. And in euery place the duke of Aniowe helde aſtate lyke a kynge / and euer as he went he made money floreyns / and whyte money to pay his menne of warre. And whan they came in to Couſtane / and aprochyd Rome / than they kept them ſelfe nerer togyder than they dyde before. For the romayns / who knewe right well of their comyng / were greatly fortifyed agaynſt them. and ye romayns had a capitayn an engliſſhman / called ſir John̄ Ha
               
                  •
               onde / who hadde longe lyued amonge the romayns: and knewe all the fronters / and hadde many ſo wdyours in the felde / atte the wages of the romayns / as almayns / and other nacyons: in the quarell of pope Urban. who was at Rome. He was nothynge afrayde of the comynge of the duke of Aniowe. and whan any ſpake to hym and ſhewed hym howe the duke of Aniou: with the erle of Sauoy in his company / was comyng to Rome warde / by lykelyhode to put hym downe fro his ſiege apoſtolyke / bycauſe they were all clementyns. He wolde than aunſwere / and ſaye. Chriſte protege nos. Chriſt helpe vs. this was all the fray that he had / and all the aunſwere that he wolde make.
            THus the men of warre / and the duke of Aniou callynge hym ſelfe kyng of Napoles / of Cecyll / and of Hyeruſalem / Duke of Puylle / and of Calabre. And the Erle of Sauoy and his company / coſted Italy and Couſtane / and the marches of Denconnye / and the lande of Patrimone: and entred nat Rome / for the duke of Aniowe wolde make noo warre to Rome / nor to ye romayns. for he thought to do the viage that he enterpriſed or he departed out of Fraūce. and in euery place where as he went he kept ye ſtate of a kynge / and euery man prayſed hym. And all men of warre lyked well his paymēt. The ſame tyme in ye cytie of Napoles there was his enemye / ſir Charles de la Payx / who in lyke wyſe wrote hym ſelfe kyng of Napoles / of Cecyll / and of Hyeruſalem / Duke of Puyll / and of Calabre. He claymed to be kyng by rightfull enherytaūce / without any heyre in lawfull maryage / after the kynge of Napoles was deed. This Charles helde the gyft that the quene had made to the pope / but in vayne: and ſo ſhewed after his opinyon / by two reaſōs. the one was / he ſuſtayned and ſayd. and the neapolitans ayded hym / in ſuſtaynynge of the ſame. and the ceſilyens in lykewiſe (they ſayd) howe the quene of Napoles / coude nat gyue away another mannes herytage. and though her gyft hadde bene good / and ſo alowed in the court of Rome / yet ſhe dyd nat well. for ſhe helde with pope Urbane and nat with Clemēt. theſe were the queſtions and the debates / that ſir Charles de la Payx layde for him ſelfe / and in ye begynnyng he wrought wyſely. For he ſore fortifyed

and furnyſſhed the caſtell of Leufe / the whiche is the mooſt ſtrongeſt caſtell of the worlde. for it is ſet by enchaūtment in the ſee / and it is nat paſſyble to be wone / but by nygromancy or by the art of ye deuyll. he vitailed it for thre or four yere / & had with hym a certayne men of warre and ſo kept that place: for he knewe well they of Napoles wold nat forſake him though he loſt Puyll & Calabre for .ii. or thre yere. he thought to recouer it agayne as lyghtly. for he ymagyned in his mynd: that the duke of Aniou wolde entertayne ſuche a nombre of men of warre as he hadde brought with hym / the whiche ſhulde nat long lye in his puyſſaunce ſo to do / outher for faulte of vytayle: or for money. Wherby he thought they ſhulde be conſtrayned to departe within a two or thre yere. And than he ymagined / that whan they were wery and out of good rule / than he wolde fyght with them at his aduauntage. Theſe thoughtes and ymagynacions hadd Charles de la Payx / wherof he ſawe ſome take effect: or the terme paſſed that he preſired. For truly / there was no prince chriſtned: without it were the frenche kyng / or the kynge of Englande. that coude kepe four yere to gyder ſuche a nombre of men of warr / out of their owne countreys / as ye duke of Aniou had with hym. He brought ouer the mountaynes a .xxx. thouſande fyghtinge men / and to begyn ſuche an enterpriſe / behoueth in ye beginnynge wyſely to conſyder and ymagin.
            wHan the duke of Aniou and his company / entred in to Puylland in to Calabre / the countrey incontynent tourned to them. For the people ſhewed / howe they deſyred no other thyng / nor to haue none other lorde / but the duke of Aniou. And ſo thus with in a ſhorte tyme / all the lordes / cyties / and townes in that coūtrey / were vnder his obeyſance. Suche as had ben in thoſe coūtreyes / the whiche is one of the greateſt marches of the world. ſayde and affyrmed: howe yt for bycauſe of the great plenty & welthe that haboundeth in thoſe parties / the people are all ydell / and wyll do no laboure. And whan theſe men of warre were in this countrey / the whiche they founde ſo replenyſſhed with all welth / wherof they were right glade. And than the duke of Aniou / the erle of Sauoy / the erle of Uandon / & all the chyualry of Fraunce / of Bretayn / and of Sauoy paſſed forthe and came in to the marches of Napoles. They of Napoles / for all ye feare that they had of theſe men of warre / they wolde neuer cloſe gate of their towne / but kept thē ſtyll open. for they thought well / that ye duke of Aniou ſhulde neuer en
                  •
                in to their towne / with their diſpleaſure. for if he were within the towne with all the people that he had / they thought he ſhulde but leſe hym ſelfe and all his / and they lyſt. for their houſes were nat eaſy to be wonne / for they had plankes and boordes: to take away whan they lyſt. and vnderneth is the ſee / ſo that none dare enterpriſe there too fyght. Than there was an enchaunter / a connynge man in nygromancy / in the marches of Napoles / and ſo he came to the duke of Aniou / and ſayd. Sir / if ye wyll / I ſhall rendre to you the caſtell of Leufe / and all tho that be within / at your pleaſure. howe may that be ꝙ the duke. Sir quod he I ſhall ſhewe you. I ſhall by enchaūtment / make the ayre ſo thycke / that they within / ſhall thinke that there is a great bridge on the ſee / for ten men to go a front. And whan they within the caſtell ſe this bridge / they wyll be ſo afrayde / that they ſhall yelde them to your mercy. for they wyll thanne dout / if they be aſſayled / that they ſhulde be taken perforce. The duke had great marueyle of his wordes / and called to hym the erle of Uandon / and the erle of Geneſue / ſir John̄ and ſir Peter of Benill / ſir Moris of Maum & other. and ſhewed theym what this enchauntour had ſaid / wherfore they had great marueyle. Than the duke ſayd. Fayre mayſter: on this bridge ye ye ſpeke of / may our people aſſuredly go theron to the caſtell / to aſſayle it. Sir quod the enchauntour / I dare nat aſſure you that. for if any that paſſeth on the bridge / make the ſigne of the croſſe on hym / all ſhall go to noughte / and they that be on the bridge ſhall fall in to the ſee. Than the duke began to laugh / and a certayne of yong knyghtes that were there preſent ſayd / ſir. For godſake / let the mayſter aſſay his connyng / we ſhall leue makyng of any ſigne of the croſſe on vs as for that tyme / and a more redyer way can we nat gette our enemyes. Well ꝙ the duke / I ſhall take aduiſe in this mater. Therle of Sauoy was nat there preſent / but he came to the duke ſone after.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the erle of Sauoye / cauſed this enchaūters heed to beſtryken of. And howe the Chanone Roberſarde and his company toke dyuers caſtels in Spayne. Cap. CCC. xCii.
            
               
               WHan the erle of Sauoy was come in to ye tent of the duke of Aniowe / the maiſter enchauntour was as thanne departed. Than ye duke ſhewed hym all ye wordes of the maiſter / and what he offred. the erle bethought him a litle / and than ſayd. ſir ſende hym to my lodgyng / and I ſhall examyn hym ſir / I knowe well / it is the ſame enchauntour / by whome the quene of Napoles and ſir Othes of Breſuych were taken / ſir the caſtell of Leufe. for he cauſed by his craft / the ſee to ſeme ſo high / that they within the caſtell feared / that the ſee ſhulde haue ouer flowen y• caſtell. wherof they were ſoo abaſſhed / that they went all to haue dyed. Sir / a man ought nat to haue any great truſt in ſuche people. ſir / ye may ſe the vnhappynes of them of this coūtrey and their nature. All onely nowe to pleaſe you / and to haue profite by you. This enchaūtour wolde nowe betray theym / to whome ones he delyuered the quene of Napoles and her huſband / the which was to ſir Charles de la Payx. Than the duke ſayd. ſir / I ſhall ſende him to you / than the lordes fell to other maters. and than ye erle of Sauoy returned to his lodgynge / and the next day the enchauntour came to the duke / and ſaluted hym. Aſſone as the duke ſawe hym / he ſayd to one of his ſeruauntes. Go and bring this maiſter to the erle of Sauoy. The ſquier came to the mayſter / & ſayd. ſir / my lorde the duke / wyll that ye go & ſpeke with the erle of Sauoy. and he ſayd. ſir / I am cōtent. than ye ſquier brought hym to the erles tente / and ſayd. ſir: here is the maiſter / that my lorde ye duke hath ſent to you. whan the erle ſawe hym / he had great ioy / and ſayd. mayſter / is it of trouthꝭ that ye wyll cauſe vs too haue the caſtell of Leufe / ſo good chepe as ye ſay. ſir quod the enchaūtour / that ſhall I do. for ſir / by the ſame meanes: I cauſed before this / he y• hath it nowe / ſir Charles de la Payx to wyn it. And the quene of Napoles and her doughter / and ſir Robert of Arthoyſe her huſbande / and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Othes of breſuich. And ſir / I am the man of the world / ye ſir Charles dela Payx reputeth mooſt / and is in moſt feare of. By my faythe ꝙ the erle of Sauoy / ye ſay well. and I wyll that ſir Charles de la Payx / ſhall knowe that he hath great wronge to feare you. But I ſhall aſſure him of you / for ye ſhall neuer do enchauntmēt to diſceyue him / nor yet none other. I wolde nat that in tyme to come / we ſhulde be reproched / that in ſo highe an enterpriſe / as we be in / wherin there be ſo many noble knightes and ſquyers aſſembled. that we ſhulde do anythyng by enchaūtment / nor that we ſhuld wyn our enemyes by ſuche craft. Than he called to him a ſeruaūt / and ſayd. go & get a hangman / and let hym ſtryke of this maiſters heed / without delay. and as ſone as the erle had cōmaunded it / incōtinent it was done. for his heed was ſtryken of before ye erles tent. Thus ended this maiſter enchaūtour / and ſo was payed his wages / acordyng to his deſertes. ¶ Nowe wyll we leue to ſpeke of the duke of Aniou / and of his vyage. and ſpeke of the beſynes of Portyngale / and ſhewe howe the engliſſhmen and gaſcoyns parceueryd.
            Whan it came to the beginnyng of ye moneth of Aprill / the knightes yt were in garyſon in the towne of Ueſious / and had lyen ther a long ſeaſon & nat ryden forth / but whā they were before Syghiere. So than they toke aduyſe among thē ſelfe to ryde forthe / and they had great marueyle / what ye kyng of Portyngale & the erle of Cambridge thought. In ye they had bene a ten monethes in the coūtrey of Portyngale / & had ryden forthe but one tyme / whiche was to thē a great ſhame. Thā they determyned to ſende to the erle of Cambridge to ſhewe him their myndes. & ſo the Souldych of Leſtrad was ſent to him / and ſo he cāe to Eſtremouſe / where as the erle lay / & ſayd to hym. ſir: all our cōpany hath ſent me hyder to you / to knowe your pleaſure / what ye wyll do. for they haue great marueyle for what cauſe ye haue brought them in to this coūtrey / and lye ſo longe ſtyll / the whiche is to thē a great diſpleaſur. ſir they deſyre to knowe your pleaſure / what ye wyll do / for they wolde fayne be doynge of ſomewhat. Sir ꝙ the erle / ye knowe well / whan I deꝑted out of Englāde My lorde my brother / the duke of Lancaſtre / promyſed me by his faythe / that as ſoone as he were returned out of Scotlande / that he wold come hyder / with a certayne nombre of men of warre / as a thre thouſande & as many archers. for I was ſent hyder in this ſtate y• I ame in. for none other entent / but to aduyſe the coūtrey and I ame ſure / ſhortely we ſhall here ſome tydynges. for I haue great marueyle that he taryeth ſo long. recōmende me to all your cōpany and ſhewe thē as I haue ſhewed you: howbeit I may nat nor wyll nat let them to ryde forthe / if they haue ſore affection therto. but ye knowe well / the kynge of Portyngale payeth all our wages / therfore it muſt be ordred by hym. By

my fayth ſir ꝙ the ſouldich / he payeth but yuell and that all the hole company complayneth of. he oweth vs as yet wages for .vi. monethes. he wyll pay you right well ꝙ the erle / money ſhall come right well at poynt. Thus departed the Souldiche fro y• erle / and returned to his company / and ſhewed thē / as ye haue harde. Sirs ꝙ the Chanone Roberſard. for all this I wyll nat lye ſtyll. I ſe well he dothe but diſſēble with vs / he wolde nat that we ſhulde ryde forthe / to thentent we ſhulde haue no cauſe to demaunde our money. but I am of y• opynion to ride forth and ſo they all determyned the ſame / and thervpon made euery thynge redy / and apoynted the euenyng / whan they wolde ryde forthe the next mornyng. Than there cāe to thē / ſir John̄ Ferand / a knight of ye kyng of portīgales / who had ben infourmed howe they wold ryde forth / and ſo he brought letters to ye Chanone Roberſarde whiche he red: and founde therin / howe the kynge of Portyngale defended hym in any wyſe to ryde forthe: Sayeng further / howe he knewe well yt the ſtyrring of any rydyng forthe to do any enterpriſe / was by his procurynge. Of theſe tydyngꝭ was ye Chanone Roberſard ſore diſpleaſed / and ſayde to the knyght. ſir: I ſe well / the kynge wyll nat in any wyſe / that I ſhulde ryde forth. Take it ſo yt I a byde ſtyll in my lodgynge / thynke you yt theſe other knyghtes / who are better / and more valyaunt than I am▪ that they wyll leaue for all that their enterpriſe? I enſure you nay. and that ye ſhall▪ ſe tomorowe / for they are all determyned to ryde. ſir quod ye knyght / than cōmaunde ye them in the kynges name to a byde ſtyll: and nat to ſtyrre. by my faythe ꝙ the Chanone / that wyll I nat do. but ſir / cōmaunde ye thē ſyth ye come fro the kyng. So thus the mater reſted all that nyght and in the morning they ſowned their trūpets. Than knyghtes and ſquiers armed them / and mounted on their horſes / & ſo came to the Chanone Roberſardes lodging / who dyd nat arme himſelfe. And there theſe knyghtes / and ſquiers reſted. and the Chanone Roberſarde came to a wyndowe / and ſpake to them / and ſhewed them / howe the kyng wolde nat that he ſhulde ryde forthe / nor none with hym. By my faythe quod they: than wyll we / ſeynge we beſo forewarde / and ſo we counſayle you to do. it ſhalbe no reproche to vs / and we ryde forth: though ye abyde behynde. So the Chanone Roberſard ſawe well there was none other boote for hym / but to arme him / and to ryde forthe with them / and ſo he dyd / and ſo dyd y• knyght of Portyngale / ſir John̄ Ferande. wherfore after he was in ſore diſpleaſure with the kynge / and lyke to haue dyed there fore. So thus at the deſyre of theſe companyons they armed thē / and iſſued out of the towne of Ueſyouſe / and entred in to the feldes. They were to ye nombre of four .C. ſpeares / & as many archeres. & toke the way to Geuyll / and came to a towne called the Bane.
            So longe they rode forthe that they came to the towne of Bane / and ther lyghted a fote. on that parte / that they thought mooſt prignable. and ther they ſet thē ſelfe in array redy to gyue aſſaute / and ſo entred in to ye dykes which were drie / without any water / and ſo came to the walles / and mad a ferſe aſſaut / and myned & vnder hewed the walles. The ſame tyme in the towne of Bane / there were noo men of warre / but the men of the towne yuell armed. Howe beit they were at their defence / and dyd caſt dartes and ſtones aſwell as they might. but at lenght they coulde nat endure / but to be taken. Than they begā to treat / and ſo fynally they yelded vp the towne / their goodes & lyues ſaued. ſayng howe fro thens forthe / they wolde be vnder the obeyſance of the kynge of Portyngale. and ſo thus they were receyued / and all ye men of warre entred in to the towne / and well refreſſhed them sel
                  •
               e. Than they wēt and regarded the caſtell & ſawe well howe it was prignable. and ſo yt euenyng ſome of the hooſt / & they of the caſtell dyd ſkrymyſſhe. and in the mornyng they made aſſaut / and they within defended themſelfe. With in the caſtell there was capitayne / a gentleman of the countrey. Howbeit he was no very good man of warre / as it well apered. & he was called Peter Jagouſe / for as ſone as he ſawe yt he was aſſayled / with ſo many good men of warr̄ he was afrayd / and fell in treaty / and ſo yelded him ſelfe and ye caſtell / his lyfe ſaued. and ſuche as were within with him. and ſo it was taken & newe refreſſhed / with men of armes & archers. than they departed & came to a nother caſtell / a vii. myle thens / called Courtiſe. Than they ſet them ſelfe in ordre to gyue aſſaut / & ſo they dyd right ferſly / they yt were within defended them ſelfe ryght valyauntly / to their powers. And ſo at this aſſaut / the capitayne was ſlayne within the caſtell / called Radulphes / a right ſubtle and an expert man of armes / he was ſlayne with an arrowe / for he aduētured him ſelfe to far at the defēce. After that he was deed / the other coulde nat longe endure. and ſo the caſtell was taken / and they within moſte parte ſlayne. Thus the

Chauone Roberſarde & his company / had the caſtell of Courtyſe / the whiche was newe fortifyed / & repeopled agayne. and thau they depa
                  •
               
               ted aprochyng to the cyte of Ceuyll the great.
         
         
            ¶Of the great pillage & proyes / done by the Chanone Robarſarde and his company / agaynſt the kynge of Caſtyll / and of the diſcencyon that was among them. Cap. CCC. xCiii.
            
               SO moch dyd theſe men of warr / engliſſhmen and gaſcoyns / that they came to Ja
               
                  •••
               y a .x. myle fro Ceuyll / whiche was a towne but fe
                  •
               ly incloſed. But within the towne there was a mynſter right ſtronge / the whiche they of the countrey had fortefyed / and there in they were / in truſt of the ſtrenght of y• place. at the 
                  〈◊〉
                comyng 
                  〈◊〉
                towne was taken & brent / and the mynſter 
                  〈…〉
               ayled / the whiche aſſaut enduced but one hour
                  〈…〉
                but y• it was won. wherin ther was great pyllage for them that entred fyrſt / & there were many men ſlayne. And than they 
                  •
               ode forthe / for they were enfourmed that in a marys therby / there was a great boty. for downe in a valey beſyde the marys / there was mo than .xx. thouſand
                  •
                beaſtes / ſwyne / be
                  ••
               es / kene / and moutons. Of whiche tidynges they had great ioy / and ſo went thyder / and entred into y• marys. and ſo by their 
                  •
               o
                  •
               e men all theſe beeſtes were driuen before thē. Than they toke aduyſe to returne to Ueſyous their olde logy
                  •
               
               g
                  •
               s / and ſo returned and toke the way thyder. and ſo came thyder the next day by nyght with all their pray / wherby they were well vitayled. This becāe of this iourney. And whan 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                John̄ Ferande was come to Lyſ bone / to the kyng of Portyngale / and ſhewed hym howe they hadd ſped / and what great pray they had brought to Ueſyous. Wenyng / that the kynge wolde haue bene content the
                  •
                with / but he was nat. for the kynge than ſayd to hym. Why thou falſe 
                  ••
               aytour howe durſt yu be ſo hardy / agaynſt the cō
               maſidment that I made / y• none of them ſhulde 
                  •
               yde. to conſent to do y• contrary / and were thy ſelfe in their company. by ye holy ſaynt James I ſhall cauſe y• to be hanged. Than the knyght fell on his knees / and ſayd. ſir / their capitayne dyd aquyte him well and truly / in obeyng your cōmaundment. but the reſydue cawſed hym to go forthe with thē a gaynſt his wyll / and made me alſo to go with them to ſhewe thē the wayes in the countre. and ſir / ſyth the iourney hath taken good effect / ye ought to pardon it. howbeit for all thoſe wordes / the kynge made hym to be put in priſone. And ſo remayned / tyll the erle of Cābridge cauſed him to be delyuered / whan he cāe to Lyſ
                  •
               on to the kyng: as ye ſhall herafter.
            After that thenglyſſhmen and gaſ
                  •
               ōs / were returned to the towne of Ueſyous / and ther taryed a great ſpace. than they de
                  •
               myned to ſend to the kyng of Portingale for their wages / that they were behynde. and ſo they ſende forthe the lorde Tal
                  •
               ot a baron. And whan he was cōe to Lyſbone / & had ſpoken with the kynge / for that he was come for. The kyng anſwered and ſaid how they had two tymes rydden forth agaynſt his cōmaūdement / wherin they had diſpleaſed hym / the whiche delayed their payment. and ſo as than the lorde 
                  •
               albot coude haue non other anſwere. and ſo retourned to his cōpany / & ſhewed thē the kynges anſwere / wherwt they were ſore diſpleaſed. The ſame weke therle of Cambridge remoued fro Eſtremuſe / and came & lodged at Ueſious / in an abbey of freres wtout the towne. The knightes and ſquiers of Englāde and Gaſcone / were right gladde therof. Amōg theſe companyons / ther were ſome that myght natforbere their wages ſo longe / and amonge them ſelfe they ſaid. we are marueylouſly euyll delt / with all. for we haue ben here in this countre / nyghe the ſpace of a yere / and yet we haue had no wages. It can nat be / but that our capitayne hath recey
                  •
               ed it / for he wolde neuer haue ſuffred to haue forborne it ſo longe. Theſe ſayynges and murmuryng / multiplyed ſo among them / tyll at laſt (they ſayd) they wolde endure it no lengar. And ſo amonge them ſelfe they ſet a day to ſpeke togyder / in a fayre mynſter with out the towne / ryght ouer agaynſt the Freres / where as the Erle of Cambridge was lodged. And the Chanone Roberſarde ſayde / he wolde be there. And to ſay trouthe / it was nedefull for hym 
                  •
               o to be / for els the mater hadde ben worſe than it was.
            iN the mornynge / whan they were all aſſembled / except the Chanon Roberſard: for he was nat as than cōe to thē. Ther was ſir Willm̄ Beauchāpe / ſir Mathue Gorney his vncle / the lorde Talbot / ſir Wyllm̄ Helmon. & the gaſcons / as the lorde de la barde the lorde of Newcaſtell / the Souldyche of Leſtrade / and dyuers other. Than they began to ſpeke / & make their cōplayntes eche to other. & among thē 
               ther was a knyght / a baſtarde brother

of the kyng of Englandes / called ſir John̄ Soltier / who was right bolde in ſpekyng and ſayd. The erle of Cambridge hath brought vs hyder / alwayes we are redy to aduenture ourè lyues for hym. and yet he with holdeth our wages. I counſayle / lette vs be all of one alyaunce and of one accorde. and let vs amonge ourſelfe reyſe vp the baner of ſaynt George: and let vs be frēdes to god / and enemyes to all the worlde For without we make our ſelfe to be feared / we gette nothynge. By my faythe quod ſir Wyllyam Helmon / ye ſay right well / and ſo let vs do. They all agreed with one voyce / and ſo regarded among thē / who ſhulde be their capitayne. Than they aduyſed in yt caſe / howe they coude nat haue a better capitayne than ſir John̄ Soltier. For he ſhulde than haue good leyſed to do yuell / and they thought he was more metelyer therto thā any other. Than they reyſed vp the penon of ſaynt George / and cryed a Soltier a Soltier / the valyant baſtarde. frendes to god and enemyes to all ye worlde. And ſo they were determyned / firſt to ouerron the towne of Ueſyous / and to make warre agaynſt the kyng of Portyngale. Sir Mathewe Gourney and ſir Wyllyam Beauchampe / gaue counſayle nat to ouerron the towne of Ueſyous / but their counſayle coude nat be herde. And as they had reyſed vp the penon of ſaynt George / and were departyng out of the mynſter. The Chanone Roberſarde came to them and entred in to ye prese / and ſayde a loude. Fayre lordes what wyll ye do? haue good order and temperaunce in your ſelfes. ye ſe well ye be ſore diſmayed. Than cāe to hym ſir Johan Soltier and ſir Wyllm̄ Helmon and other. and ſhewed him what they had done / and what they were in purpoſe to do. thā the Chanone with fayre langage refrayned thē and ſayde. Sirs / remembre and ymagin well your dede yt ye enterpriſe / the which me thynke is but a folly / and an outrage. We can nat better be diſtroyed / than by our ſelfe. If we make warre to this countrey / our enemyes ſhall here tidynges therof. They ſhall therby enforce thē ſelf / whan they ſe that we go nat forward. thus we ſhall leſe two maner of wayes. we ſhall reioſe and aſſure our enemyes / in that they be as nowe in doute of. And alſo / we ſhall falſe oure trouthe / to therle of Cambridge. Why ꝙ Soltier / what wolde ye that we ſhulde do? we haue ſuende more than oure wages cometh to. And we haue had no money ſythe we came into Portyngale. Thoughe ye be payed and we be nat / yet ye haue had a fayre ſufferyng. By my fayth quod the Chanone / I haue had no more payment than ye haue had. nor without your knouledge I enſure you / I wyll receyue nothynge. Than some of the knightes that were by / ſayd. Sir / we beleue you well. But ſir / euery thyng muſt haue his courſe. Sir / ſhewe ye / howe we may honourably iſſue out of this mater / and to haue haſty delyuerāce / ye we might be payed of our wages. for if we be nat ſhortely well payed the mater wyll go yuell. Than the Chanon roberſard began to ſpeke / and ſawe well howe the englyſſhe cōpanyons were diſpleaſed with the kyng of Portyngale. & ſawe well money wolde apeaſe thē / than he ſayd to thē thus. Fayre lordes I counſayle / that in the ſame ſtate that we be nowe in. Let vs go and ſpeke with therle of Cambridge and ſhewe hym all our nedes▪ that ſhalbe ꝙ Soltier / ſo yt ye wyll auowe my ſayeng. they were all content ſo to do. And ſo in the ſame maner as they were / they went forth with the penon of ſaint George before thē / and ſo cāe to the freres / wher as therle lay. and he was as than goyng to dyner. The cōpanions were mo than .vii. C. and ſo they entred in to the court / & demaūded for therle: and he cāe out of his chā
               bre in to the hall to ſpeke with thē. Than all the knightes that were ther auaūſed forthe / & Soltier before thē: who with a bolde ſpyrite / ſpake and ſayde. ſir / we are come here in to your preſens / & dyuers other here without. ſir / ye haue brought vs out of Englande our owne nacion. and ſir / ye are our chefe capitayne / & wagꝭ haue we non. and we can aſke none of no man but of you. for as for the kyng of Portyngale / we had neuer come to do hym ſeruyce / if ye ſhulde nat haue payed vs. and 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                / if ye wyll ſay yt the warr is nat yours / but the kyng of Portyngals. We ſhall pay or ſelf / than well enough of oue wagꝭ. For firſt we wyll ouerron this coūtre / and than catche it who ſo wyll after. Soltier ꝙ therle / I ſay nat but that ye ſhalbe payed. but to ouerron this countrey / ye ſhall cauſe me to haue great blame of the kyng of Portyngale / & alſo of the kyng of Englande. Why ſir ꝙ Soltier / what wolde ye yt we ſhulde do? ſir ꝙ therle / I wolde ye ſhulde take thre of our knightes / one of Englande / another of Almayne / and the thirde of Gaſcone. and let theſe thre go to Lyſbon to the kyng / and ſhewe hym what nede ye be in. And cōplayne of the long delay of payment of your wages. and than if ye haue no remedy / ye haue more cauſe to folowe your entpriſe / by my faith ꝙ the Chanon roberſarde / my lorde here therle of Cābridge ſpeketh ſagely and valiantly. & ſo

to that purpoſe they all determyned. but for all that they kept ſtyll with thē / the penon of ſaynt George. Sayeng / howe lythe they had reyſed it by one accorde / in the realme of Portyngale. they wolde nat laye it downe agayne / as longe as they were there. Than they ordayned them that ſhulde go to the kyng on this meſſage / and ſir Wyllyam Helman / was named to go for the englyſſhmen / and ſir Thomas Symon for the almaynes: and the lorde of Newcaſtell for the gaſcoyns.
            THeſe thre knightes dyde ſo moche / that they came to Lyſbone / and there foūde the kyng / who made them good chere / and demaunded of theym / howe their companye dyde. Sir quod they / they be all in good poynt / and wolde ryde forthe with ryght a good wyll / to enploye their tyme otherwyſe than they do or haue done. For this lyeng ſtyll / is to them nothyng agreable. Well ꝙ the kyng they ſhall ryde forthe ſhortely / and I in their cō
               pany / and that ſhewe them fro me. Sir quod ſir Willyam Helman / we are ſent hyder fro thē to thentēt that we ſhulde ſhewe you on their behalfes. That ſythe they came in to this countre they haue had nother preſt nor wages of you / y• whiche they deſyre generally to haue. ſir / it is a harde thyng to haue the loue and ſeruyce of mē of warre / without they be otherwiſe payed / thā they haue bene or this. Sir / they haue bene in great thought a long ſpace / bycauſe they coude nat tell to whome they ſhulde be longe. And ſir they haue layde the charge therof on our capitayns / wherby there was & is lyckely to growe moche yuell. Sir / the capitayns are excuſed: in that it is knowen / that they haue receyued nothyng / and ye knowe well they ſay truely. Sir they wyll be payed of their wages / if ye wyll haue their ſeruyce. and if ye pay them nat / they certify you by vs / that they wyll pay them ſelfe of yours. Sir / take aduyce and make an anſwere / that we may ſhewe them your pleaſure / they abyde for nothyng els. The kyng than be thought hym a lytell / and ſayd. Sir Wyllyam it is reaſon they be payed / but they haue ſore diſpleaſed me / in that they haue rydden forthe cō
               trary to my cōmaūdement. and if that had nat ben / they had bene all payed or this tyme. Sir quod ſir Wyllyam / if they haue rydden / it hath ben to your honour and profyte. They haue taken townes & caſtels / and ouer rydden the coū
               tre of your enemyes / almoſt to Ceuyll / whiche was an honorable enterpriſe. They ought nat to loſe their tymes / nor alſo they wolde nat loſe it by their wyls. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                / at our returne / they ſay they wyll pay thēſelfe / without they haue ſome gracious anſwere of you: other than they haue had hyderto. Well ꝙ the kyng / within .xv. dayes at the fartheſt / they ſhalbe payed euery peny. But ſay vnto therle of Cābridge / that I wyll he the and ſpeke with me. ſir ꝙ the knight / ye ſay well I ſhall do your cōmaūdement. And ſo the king went to dyner / and made thē to dyne with hym at his owne table. & ſo paſſed that day / and the next day they returned to their cōpany. And as ſoone as it was knowen they were come home / their cōpany reſorted to thē / to knowe what tydinges they had brought. and they ſhewed thē / all the kynges wordes / ſo that they were cōtent. Loſirs ꝙ Soltier / ye may ſe well / ſōtyme ryot bothe good. We haue well aduaūſed forthe our payment with a lytell wyldneſſe / he dothe euer well that is feared. ¶ Than theſe thre knight
                  •
               ꝭ went to therle of Cambridge / and ſhewed hym howe they had ſped. & howe the kyng wolde / he ſhulde cōe and ſpeke with hym at Lyſbone. & ſo therle deꝑted the next day / & rode to Liſbone. & ther he was receyued of his ſon & his doughter right amiably. And ther the kyng and he made a certayne poyntment to ryde forthe. Than the kyng made his ſomōs through his realme / euery man to be in felde / bytwene Ueryous & Clemens / the .vii. day of June. And ſo euery man made hym redy to be at the ſayd place / the day before lymited. at the comyng of therle to Lyſbone / ſir Johan Ferand was delyuered out of priſon. Than therle toke his leaue & retourned to his cōpany / and ſhewed thē of the poyntmēt / wherof euery man was gladde. and anon after câe money to pay their wages & ſo they were al payed & contēt / capitayns & other: but alwayes they kept vp ſtyll the penon of ſaynt George.
         
         
            ¶ How the kyngꝭ of Caſtell & of Portyngale aſſembled their puyſſaūces. and howe peace was made bytwene them / agaynſt the wyll of thenglyſhmen. Cap. CCC. xCiiii.
            
               Kyng Johan of Caſtyle all this ſeaſon gadered togider his men of warre out of Fraunce / and other places. So that he had a two thouſande ſpeares knightes and ſquyers / and four thouſand of other / beſyde them of his owne coūtre / wherof

he had well a ten thouſande a horſbacke and as many a fote. Whan he knewe howe the kyng of Portingale wolde ryde / he ordayned y• more honorably to vſe his warre. ſeynge y• he knewe hym ſelfe p
                  •
               yſſant bothe of money and of men. And ſo ſent to the kyng of Portyngale / demaū
               dyng of hym / to delyuer a certayne peſe of lāde in Portyngale / where as they might de
                  •
               myne batayle / puyſſaunce agaynſt puyſſaunce. And if he reſuſed ſo to do / than he to offre to delyuer hym the ſame in Spayne. The kyngꝭ haralde had the charge to go with this meſſage / and ſo he rode to Lyſbon and ther dyde his meſſage. The kynge than anſwered the haralde / & ſayd. howe he wolde take aduyſe in this mater / whiche way he wolde take. And whan he were detmyned: than he promyſed to ſende worde ther of to the kynge of Spayne. Than the haralde departed agayne to Ceuyll / and there he foūde the kyng / and they of Fraunce / of Aragon / and of Galyce / who were as than all cōe to the kyng And ther he ſhewed his anſwere / ſo that euery man was well content. And it was nat long after / but that the kyng of Portyngale / by the aduyſe that he had of the Englyſſhemen / that he ſhulde delyuer a certayne place to do batayle / in his owne countrey. And than there was ordayned / ſuche as ſhulde go and a viewe a place conuenyent. And ſo for that entent went forthe ſir Thomas Symon and the ſouldiche of Leſtra
                  •
               : and they aduiſed a place bitwene Clues and 
                  •
               ale de Lore / whiche was a fayre playne place to fyghton. And theſe two knyghtes and their company / had a ſcrimyſſhe as they wente to aduyſe this place / with ſome of y• foreryders of the kyng of Caſtyls: and there were dyuers hurt and ſlayne on bothe parties. And ſo finally / they retourned to the kyng of Portyngale / and ſhewed hym / how they hadde aduyſed the place / and where it was / wherwith euery man was well content. Than the kynge ordayned a knyght of Almayne ▪ named ſir Johan Cuſtodore / to go to the kynge of Caſtyle on that meſſage / and an haralde with hym. And ſo they departed and rode to Ceuyll / and there dyd their meſſage. Shewyng hym howe he ſhulde haue place delyuered hym / bitwene Clues and Ualede lore. And that within fyue dayes after he departed fro 
                  •
               cuyll / he ſhulde fynde the kynge of Portyngale there redy / to gyue hym batayle. ſayeng / nowe he deſyred nothyng els. Of theſe tidynges the ſpanyerdes were ryght ioyfull / & alſo the frenche men. And there the knightes of Spaygne toke the meſſangers of Portyngale and made them great chere all that day / & helde them as good company as they coude. and the next day brought them to Jafreys / and than retourned. And the meſſangers retourned to the kyng of Portyngale / & ſhewed hym / howe they had done their meſſage / and the aunſwere that they had. Wherwith the kynge was well cōtent and all the other.
            It was nat long after / but that the kynge of Portyngale went and lodged hym & his hooſt / about the ſame place before aduyſed / bytwene Clues & Uale delore / in a fayre playne among the olyues / and he was to the nōbre of .xv. thouſandemen. And the fourthe daye after / thyder came the erle of Cambridge with the englyſſhe men in good order / and they were in nombre ▪ a ſixe hundred men of armes & as many archers / and ſo they lodged thēſelfe ioyninge to the kynges company. And whan the kyng of Spayne knewe / that the kynge of Portyngale was lodged in the felde / wher as the batayle ſhulde be. he made ſemblant / as though he had be gladde therof and ſayd. Let vs go forthe / our enemyes abydeth vs / it is tyme that we ryde. We deſyred of them the batayle / and they acorded to vs and ſo they kepte their promyſe / as they made. It can be none otherwyſe: but y• we ſhall haue batayle / lette vs drawe thyderwarde. Than it was cōmaunded / that euery man ſhulde go forwarde. And ſo they departed out of their logynges all knightes and ſquyers / geneuoys & genetours: and all folowed the kyugꝭ baner. And ſo he went and lodged within two lytell myles / of the place apoynted. The kynge of Caſtyle with the genetours / was to the nombre of threſcore thouſande men.
            THus in this maner theſe two hoſtes lay the one before thother / and bytwene thē the hyll and the towne of Uale de lore / parteynyng to the kyng of Spayne. and thyder reſorted his men / whan they lyſt to refreſſhe them. & the cytie of Clues was on the other parte of the hyll / ꝑteyning to the kyng of Portyngale. Bytwene theſe two hoſtes and the moūtayne / ther was done dayly dedꝭ of armes / by yong knyghtes and bachelers / deſyring to auaūce thēſelfe. This they contynued the ſpace of .xv. dayes or more. The faut was nat in the kyng of Caſtell that they had no batayle / but it was rather in y• kynge of Portyngale. For he ſawe well he was nat ſtronge ynough to fight with the ſpaynierdes / and ſo douted the parell that myght fall. For he ſawe well if he were ther diſcōfyted / his realme were loſt / for euer fro hym. And alſo / all

that ſeaſon: he loked euer after the comynge of the duke of Lancaſtre and his company out of Englande. For he had promyſed to bring with hym / a foure thouſande men of armes / and as many archers. For the erle of Cambridge had certifyed y• kyng of Portyngale / that he wolde come. And he thought nat the cōtrary / but that he wolde haue come. For the duke of Lācaſtre at the beginnyng / whan he departed out of Englande / promyſed hym by his faythe. That as ſoone as he were retourned out of Scotlande / that he wolde incontynent come into Portyngale / with ſuche a nombre: as to be able to fight with the kynge of Spaygne. And true it was / the duke of Lancaſtre dyde all that he might to kepe his promyſe. But bycauſe of the trouble y• had ben the ſame yere in Englande / and for certayne other incydentes that had fallen in Flaū
               ders. The kyng of Englande nor his coūſayle / wolde nat ſuffre hym to deꝑte out of Englande For they wolde nat conſent to the voyage in to Portyngale / at that tyme. Nor that any men of warre ſhulde go oute of Englande. And whan the kyng of Portyngale ſawe / that he coude haue none other conforte of the engliſſhmen / than he thought to ſeke another way. Than y• mayſter of Caſtrane / and Dāpeter of Modeſque / the byſſhoppe of Bruges / and the byſſhoppe of Lyſbon. Theſe entreated for a peace / bytwene Portyngale and Spayne: and ſo moche they dyde / that a peace was taken. But the englyſſhmen were neuer called therto / wherwith therle of Cambridge was ſore diſpleaſed. And wolde gladly haue made warre agaynſt the kynge of Portyngale / if he had thought him ſelfe ſtrong ynoughe in the countre / but he was natſo. therfore it behoued hym to ſuffre this peace / whider he wolde or nat. But thenglyſſhmen ſayd / how that the kynge of Portyngale / had right yuell delte with them. For euer ſyth the begynnynge to the endyng / he euer diſſymuled with the ſpanyerdes / and had neuer wyll to fyght with thē. And the kyng of Portyngale excuſed hym ſelfe and ſayd. Howe the faute was in the englyſſhemen & in y• duke of Lancastre / who ſhulde haue come and dyde nat. Wherfore he coude do none otherwyſe / but to take peace.
         
         
            ¶Howe the kyng of Spaygne was maryed agayne / to the kyng of Portyngales doughter. Cap. CCC. xCv.
            
               IN the kyng of Caſtyls hooſt / there was a younge knight of Fraūce / called ſir Tryſtram de Roy. Who deſyred greatly to auaūce his honoure / whan he lawe the peace was made bitwene y• two kyngꝭ / and that ther ſhulde be no batayle. Than he determyned nat to go out of Spayn / tyll he had done ſome dede of armes. Than he ſende on haralde in to thenglyſſhe hooſt / requyryng all knightes and ſquyers / ſyth the bataile fayled bytwene the two kynges. That ſome knight or ſquier wolde anſwere hym / thre courſes with a ſpeare / before the cite of Uale delore. Whan theſe tidynges came in to the englyſſhe hooſt. The knightes and ſquyers ſpake toguyder / and ſayd. howe his offre ought nat to be refuſed. Than a yonge ſquyer of Englande / called Myles Wyndſore: who wold for his hono• be made knight in that vyage. Sayd vnto the haralde. Frende / retourne to your maiſter / and ſay to ſir Tryſtram de Roy. that Myles Wynſore ſendeth hym worde / that to morowe nexte / before the cyte of Uale de Lore / he ſhall ther delyuer him of his deſyre. The haralde returned and recorded thoſe tidynges to his mayſters. and ſir Triſtram was right ioyouſe. The next mornynge / Myles Wyndſore departed out of the felde / and rode to warde the cyte of Uale de Lore / whiche was nat farr of. He had no more but the mountayne to paſſe / and he was well a companyed. Ther was with hym ſir Mathue Courney / ſir Wyllyam Beauchampe / ſir Thomas Symon / the Souldyche of Leſtrate / the lorde of Newcaſtell / the lorde de la Barde / and dyuers other. There was well a hūdred knightes and ſquiers at y• place / wher as the batayle ſhulde be bytwene them. And also than / thyder came ſir Tryſtram de Roy / well acompanyed with frenche men and bretons. There Myles Wyndſore was made knight / by the handes of the Souldyche of Leſtrade. As of hym y• was reputed the beſt knyght in that cōpany. Thus theſe two knightꝭ were armed at all peces / and well horſed with their ſpeares redy in their hā
               des. And ſo they ranne eche at other and brake their ſpeares / eche vpon other rudely / without any other hurt. and than they ran their ſeconde courſe. And at y• thirde courſe / they ſtrake eche other ſo rudely / in the myddes of their ſheldes / that the ſpeare heedes entred throughe the plates of their harnes / to the bare fleſſhe / but they had no hurt. and their ſpeares brake / & the tron

               
                  •
               hyons flewe ouer their heedes in to the ayre. This courſe was prayſed of all them that ſawe it. And than they toke leaue eche of other right honorablye / and retourned euery manne to his owne partie. And after there was no more war vſed for ther was peace bytwene bothe realms And ſo eycher partie departed and went home.
            THus this army brake vp. In the ſame tyme / tidynges came in to the kynge of Spaynes hooſt. Howe the kynge of Granade made great warre agaynſt the kynge of Barbary and the kyng of Trayne ſamayns. Wherfore all ſuche knightꝭ as wolde go thider / ſhuld be receyued in to wages. And that the kynge of Granade wolde ſende ſure ſaue conduct for thē / and that aſſone as they become in to Granade / they ſhulde haue preſt wages for a quarter of a yere before hande. Wherby certayne knyghtes of Fraunce / as ſir Tryſtram de Roy / ſir Geffray Carney / ſir Peter Cleremōt / and dyuers other toke leaue of the kyng of Caſtyle / & went thyder to ſeke aduentures. And in lykewiſe / ſo dyde ſome of the englyſſhe men / but nat many. For therle of Cambridge brought them home agayne into Englande: and his ſon alſo. wher by it ſhewed well / that he was nat content with the kynge of Portyngale: to take a way his ſon from hym / for all that he had maryed the kynges doughter. He ſayde / howe that his ſonne coulde nat endure the ayre of the countrey. For all that euer the kynge coulde ſay or do / the erle wolde nat leaue him behynde him. But ſayd to the kyng / that his ſonne was to yong to abyde in Portingale. wherfore it fell after / as ye ſhall here. ¶ About a yere after that this peace was thus made / bytwene Spayn and Portyngale and that the erle of Cambridge was retourned in to Englande. The quene of Caſtyle dyed / who was doughter to the kyng of Aragon. and ſo than the kyng of Spayne was a wydower. Than it was debated by the prelates and lordꝭ of bothe countreis / Spayne and Portyngale / that the lady Beatryce of Portigale / coude nat be more higher maryed thanne to the kynge of Spayne. And to bring theſe two realmes in a full accorde and peace / the kyng of Portyngale agreed to ye maryage. and deuorſed his doughter fro the erle of Cambridge ſonne / by the popes diſpenſacion: who cōfyrmed this newe maryage. Thus the kyng of Portyngales doughter was made quene of Spaygne / of Caſtyle / and of Galyce. And the firſt yere of the kyng of Spaynes maryage / he had by his wife a fayre ſonne / wherof they gad great ioye. Than after dyed Ferrande kyng of Portyngale. howbeit for all that / they of Portingale wolde nat ſuffre the realme to come to the kynge of Spayne / as in the right of his wyfe. But they made kyng / a baſtarde brother of the Kynges dyſceaſſed / who was called before maiſter Denys / baſtard of Portyngale. This Denys was a ryght valyant man in armes / and alwayes before / bare the armes of Portigale. So thus he was crouned kynge / wherby after grewe moche warre / bytwene Spayne and Portyngale. as ye ſhall here after in this boke.
            WHau therle of Cambridge and his cō
               pany / were retourned in to the realme of Englande. The kyng and the duke of Lancaſtre made them great chere / as it was reaſon: and demaūded of them tidynges. And there they ſhewed all the manere of the warre. The duke of Lancaſtre / to whome the matere mooſt touched / bycauſe of the chalenge that he made to the realme of Caſtyle. For he named hym ſelfe (as heyre therof) by the right and tytell of his wyfe: the lady Cuſtaunce / ſomtyme doughter to Dompeter / kyng of Caſtell. Therfore he demaūded of his brother the erle of Cā
               bridge / howe they had demeaned them ſelfe in Portyngale. Therle ſhewed hym / howe ye two kynges had layen in hooſt / more than fyftene dayes: the one before the other. And fayre brother / bycauſe the kynge of Portyngale coulde here no worde fro you / he lightly accorded to ye peace. And we coulde neuer ſe / ye euer he wolde cōdiſcende to batayle. Wherof we that were on his partie were ſore dyſpleaſed / for we wolde gladly haue put it at aduēture. And ſir / bycauſe I canne ſe no ſure a ſtate nor truſt in them / therfore I haue brought agayne with me my ſonne for all that he hath maryed the kyngꝭ doughter. Sir 
                  〈◊〉
                the duke / I thynke ye had good cauſe: ſauyng for feare of breakyng of that maryage. For paraduenture if the kynge may fynde / any aduaūtage in another place / he wyll than gyue his doughter at his pleaſure. By my faythe ſir quod therle / happe what wyll. I thinke I haue done nothyng / wherof I ſhulde repent me. and ſo than they entred in to other communycation of other maters.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs leaue to ſpeke of them and of the warres of Spayne and Portyngale. And retourne to the warres of Gaunte / and of the Erle and countrey of Flaunders / whiche were right feirſe and cruell.
         
         
            
            ¶ Of the great neceſſyte of vytales / that they of Gaūt endured. and how they were ſocoured by thē of Liege. Cap. CCC. xCvi.
            
               ALl the ſeaſon / after the diſtruction and brinnyng of the towne of Grauntmont / and of ye reyſyng of the ſiege of Gaunt. by cauſe of the diſpleaſure ye the erle of Flaunders had / for the dethe of his coſyn / the yonge lorde of Dangheyn. ſlayne by the enbuſſhment of the gauntoyſe (as ye haue herde here before) The knyghtes and ſquiers / nor good townes / made no warre to thē Gaūt: but by gariſons. ſo ye all the countre helde with the erle / agaynſt Gaunt: except the four meſtiers / and ſo by theym / ſome vytayle came in to Gaunte. And ſome vitayle cāe in to Gaunt out of the countie of Alos / but the erle of Flaūders / as ſone as he knewe that / he foūde remedy. For incōtynent / he ſent to the garyſon of Teremōt / cōmaūdyng them to ouerryn and to brenne / all the playne countrey of the countie of Alos: whiche was done at his cōmaundment. ſo that the poore folkes with their beaſtes / were fayne to flye a way in to Brabant / and in to Haynalte. and the moſte parte to go a beggyng. yet there was a countrey parteynyng to the foure meſtiers / fro whom ther came euer ſome ayde or vitayle into Gaunt. Thus all this wynter the erle and they of Flaūders / conſtrayned ſo ſore them of Gaunt / that they coulde haue nothyng come to them / nother by land nor by water. The erle had ſo wonne his coſyns / the duke of Brabant and duke Aubert / that their coūtreis were kept cloſe agaynſt them of Gaunt. ſo that nothynge came to thē fro thens / without it were by ſtelth. and by great aduenture and parell / for thē that dyd it. The ſage men ſayd: howe it coulde nat longe endure / but ye they muſt dye for famyne. for all their garners were voyd / and the people coulde gette no breed for no money. And whan any breed was baken in the towne / they were fayne to kepe it by ſtronge hande. or els the comon people that dyed for hunger / wolde haue taken it byforce. It was great pyte to ſe and to here the poore people / bothe men / women / and chyldren. ye / ſuche as were right notable / fell in this daūger. And euery day encreaſed the complayntes / wepynges / and cryes / made to Phylyp Dartuell / their ſouerayne capitayne. Who had of them great pytie and compaſſyon / and made many good orders: wherof he was greatly prayſed. For he cauſed the garners of the abbeys to be opened and of ryche men / and ſette a reſonable price of the corne / wherby the towne was greatly conforted. & ſome corne ther came to them by ſtelthe / out of Holande and zelande / and tonnes full of flower and byſket breed / the whiche greatly conforted them. for they hadde bene longe diſcomfyted before / if they had nat bene comforted by theſe ſayd coūtreys. It was defēded in all Brabant by the duke / ye on payne of dethe / they ſhulde cary any thyng to Gaunt / but if they of Gaunt wolde ieoparde to fetche any. thā they myght gyue them or ſell to them at their pleaſure. And whan ye tyme of lent came / than were they in great dyſtreſſe / for they had no lenton ſtuffe. Than ther departed out of the towne a .xii. thouſande of ſowdyers / and ſuche as had nothyng to lyue by / but were ouercome with famyne. And ſo they came to the towne of Bruſels / the towne cloſed their gates agaynſt them / for they feared them / they knewe nat their thoughtes. Whan̄e they were nere to Bruſels / they ſende a certayne of their cōpany vnarmed to the gate of the towne / and there they deſyred them of the towne / for godſake to haue pytie of them / as to ſuffer them to haue vitayle for their money. Saynge / howe they dyed for hunger. And ſware / howe they thought none yuell too them / nor to the coūtrey about. The good men of Bruſels had pytie on thē / and brought them vytayle for their money. & ſo they paſſed their tyme about in the countrey / the ſpace of thre wekes but they coulde entre in to no good towne. And ſo they came to Louayn / who had pytie on them / and dyde them moche good and refreſſhyng. Their capitayne and leader was Fraū
               ces Atreman / he made the treaties for thē with the good townes. And in this ſeaſon while they of Gaunt lay in the marches of Louayne / their capitayne ſpake with the mayſters of the cytie of Lyege / and they had compaſſyon on them. and ſo had the byſſhoppe of Liege / ſir Arnolde Darcle. and promyſed them to ſende to the erle of Flaunders / and to do ſo moche / as to make their peace / ſayeng vnto thē. A ye good men of Gaunt / if the coūtrey of Lyege were as nere to you as Brabant is / or Haynalte. ye ſhuld be otherwyſe comforted by vs / than ye be by them / to maynteyne your fraunches. Howe beit / we ſhall ayde you as moche as we maye. We wyll that ye that be marchauntes and vſe marchandyſe

/ may go and come through the coūtrey / as it is reaſon: to the ſōme of fyue or ſire hundred cartes / laded with corne / ſo that the owners of the corne may be truly payed therfore. they wyl ſuffer our marchaundyſe to paſſe thorowe Brabant they and we are at a peace. And though it be ſo that Bruſels be cloſed / we knowe it well / it is more for feare / than for any yuell wyll: for they haue of you great cōpaſſyon. but the duke of Brabant and ye duches / at the deſyre of their coſyn the erle of Flaunders / inclyneth rather to his parte than to yours: as it is reaſon. for all wayes great lordes wyll holde eche with other. Of theſe offers and loue that the legeoyſe offered to the gauntoyſe / they were therof greatly reioyſed / and thanked them hertlye / and ſayd: howe of ſuche people & frendes / the gauntoyſe had great nede.
            FRaunces Atreman and the burgeſſes of Gaunt / yt were in the cyte of Liege. toke leue of ye mayſters of Liege / who ordayned certayne men / to go with them in to the countrey / to gette them chares. and ſo in two dayes they had a ſixe hundred charged with corne / wherof they had mooſt nede. And ſo they wente forthe with their caryage / & paſſed bytwene Louayn and Bruſels. And whan̄e Fraunces Atreman came to his company / he ſhewed them the loue and courteſy / ye they of Liege had offred them. and offereth yet to do. and moreouer he ſayde / howe he wolde go to Bruſels to ſpeke with the duches of Brabant / and to deſyre her / to fynde ſome meanes / howe the good towne of Gaunt myght haue peace with the erle of Flaunders. And ſo he ſent vnto her to knowe her pleaſure / and ſhe was contente / that he ſhulde come and ſpeke with her / and ſo he went to Bruſels. The ſame tyme the duke of Brabant was at Luſenburge. And ſo this Fraūces and thre with him entred in to Bruſels / and ſo came to the duches to her lodgyng at Coleberge. The duches had parte of her counſayle about her. Than Fraunces Atreman kneled downe before her / & ſayd. Ryght honorable and dere lady: through your benygne grace. may it pleaſe you / to haue pyte and compaſſion of thē of Gaunt / who can come to no mercy / with the erle of Flaunders: by no meanes. right dere lady / if by your meanes: ye coude cauſe my lorde therle to diſcende to ſome reaſon. and to haue pytie of theſe poore men of Gaunt: ye ſhulde do herin a great almes dede. and madame / they of Liege wolde gladly help therto: to the beſt of their powers. Than the lady aunſwered ryght humbly / and ſayd. Howe that the diſcencyon / bytwene her coſyn the erle and them of Gaunt: diſpleaſed her right greatly. and howe that longe or that tyme / ſhe wolde gladly there had bene a peace bytwene them. if ſhe could haue founde any meanes howe. But alſo ſhe ſayd. A ye ſirs of Gaunt / ye haue ſo oft tymes diſpleaſed hym / & haue holden ſo marueylous opyniōs agaynſt him. which hath cauſed him to ſuſteyne ſtyll his diſpleaſur agaynſt you. howbeit for goddeſſake / and for pytie / I ſhall enploy me herin / to do the beſt I can. I ſhall ſende to him. deſyring / that he wyll come to Tourney / and there ſhall be my counſayle. and do you ſomoche / that ye may haue ther the counſayle of Haynalte and of Liege (as ye ſay they wyll) ye truely madame ꝙ he ſo they haue promyſed vs. well ꝙ the duches / and ye ſhall ſe that I ſhall do the beſt I can. Madame quod they god rewarde you / both bodely and goſtly. and ſo tooke their leaue and departed fro Bruſels / and ſo came to their company & chariotes / who taryed for thē. And than they dyd ſo moch that they came to their towne of Gaunt.
            WHan the tydinges came to Gaūt / that their men were retourned / and hadde brought with them / mo than ſixe hundred chares with vytayle / they were ryght ioyfull. howbeit all y• they brought / wolde nat ſuffyſe the towne of Gaunt / the ſpace of .xv. dayes yet to them y• were diſconforted / it was a great comforte. And ſo there went agaynſt this cariage moche people in maner of proceſſyon / and kneled and helde vp their handes too the marchaūtes that brought it / ſayng. A ye good people: ye haue done great almes / thus to conforte the meane people of Gaunt. who had nothyng to lyue by / if ye had nat come. Fyrſt / laude and prayſe be to god / and than to you. And ſo theſe chares were conueyed in to the market place / and there diſcharged. and ſo this corne was deuyded and delyuered by weightꝭ to them y• had mooſt nede. And ſo / fyue thouſande of them of Gaunt / cōueyed agayne theſe chares into Brabant out of daūger. All this knewe well the erle of Flaunders / beynge at Bruges. And knewe well they of Gaunt were ſo ſore cōſtrayned that they coude nat longe endure. He was nothyng ſory of their pouertie. nomore were his counſayle / who wolde gladly haue ſene the diſtruccyon of the towne / as Gylberte Mahewe and his brethern / with other. All this fell in the lent / in the monethe of Marche and Aprill / the yere

of our lorde god / a thouſande thre hūdred fourſcore & one. The erle of Flaunders was in purpoſe to come more puiſſantly / than euer he dyd to lay ſieg before Gaunt. and was determyned to entre on the four meſtiers / & to brinne all before hym / bycauſe they had ayded Gaunt with vytayle. The erle ſent his mynde and entent to all the good townes of Flaūders / cōmaundyng them to be redy. for ye proceſſyon day ones paſt at Bruges / he ſayd: he wolde departe to go and lay ſiege before Gaunt. and alſo / he wrote to all knyghtes and ſquiers that held of him in Heynalt / that they ſhulde be with hym at Bruges within .viii. dayes after.
         
         
            ¶ The harde aunſwere / that the erle of Flaunders made to thē of Gaunt. And of the nombre of men of armes that were than at Parys in Fraunce. Cap. CCC. xCvii.
            
               FOr all the ſomons that therle of Flaunders made. yet the duches of Brabant / and the duke Aulbert / and the byſſhope of Liege / traueyled ſo moch with therle / that a day was let that their coūſayle ſhulde mete / to treat for a peace / in the cytie of Tourney. Though the erle were lothe therto. yet at the deſyre of theſe lordꝭ / he a greed to haue a counſayle for that mater in the cyte of Tourney / ye weke after Eſter. The yere of our lorde a thouſande thre. C .lxxx. and two / and to be there hymſelfe. At this day aſſigned / thyder came the byſſhoppe of Lyege / and of the good townes to the nombre of .xii. and ſir Lambert of Perney a rightſage knight. Alſo the duches of Brabant / ſent thyder ye mooſt notableſt perſones of her coūſayle / & certayne of euery good towne. Alſo duke Albert ſent thyder out of the countie of Haynalte his counſayle / as ſir Symon de la Layne his baylife and dyuers other. All theſe came to Tourney in Eſter weke / and they of Gaunt ſent thyder .xii. notable perſons / wherof Phylippe Dartuell was chyfe. and all they of Gaunt were a greed / whatſoeuer ende theſe. 
                  •
               ii. made / ſo that none of them ſhulde ſuffer dethe. If it pleaſed ye erle / they were content to be banyſſehd Gaunt / and the coūtie of Flaū
               ders foreuer. & ſo here vpon they were concluded. and Philippe Dartuell had ſo moch pytie of the comon people / that for all the dyſpleaſure that he had done to the erle. yet he was content to put hym ſelfe into the Erles mercy. And ſo whan he departed fro Gaūt to go to Tourney / men / women / and chyldren fell downe on their knees before him: holdyng vp their handes. de ſyring hym / what ſoeuer myſchefe they endured / that he wolde bring them peace. of the whiche crye he had ſuch pytie / that he was determyned to do as it is ſhewed before.
            WHan they of Liege / of Heynalt / and of Brabant / hadde ben in Tourney the ſpace of thre dayes / after ye day apoynted was paſt. And ſawe that the erle came nat / nor was nat comyng / they had great marueyle and than toke counſayle togyder / and determyned to ſende to Bruſels to him: and ſo they dyd. and they ſent to him 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Lambert of Perney / and of Brabant ye lorde of Compelant / and of Haynalt ſir Willyam of Herman / and ſixe burgeſſes of the thre countreyes. And whan the erle ſawe theſe thre knightꝭ he made thē great chere: as it was reaſon. and whan he knew their meſſage / he aunſwered them: howe it was nat his eaſe to come to Tourney as at that tyme / howe beit he ſayde bycauſe they were come / and traueyled to haue hym to Tournay / and for ye honoure of ſuche as were come thyder / and at the inſtance of my lady of Brabant his ſuſter / and of duke Aulbert his coſyn / and the byſſhoppe of Liege. he ſayd: he was content to ſende haſtely to Tourney a fynall anſwere / by ſome of his coūſayle. Theſe thre knyghtes coude haue non other aunſwere of him: as at that tyme. and ſo they retourned agayne to Tournay / & ſhewed howe the erle anſwered them. And a ſixe dayes after there came to Tourney from the erle / the lorde of Raſels / and the lorde of Gountris / and ſir Johan Wylliam / and the prouoſt of Harlequebec. and they excuſe therle / bycauſe he came nat. and than they declared the erles full entent as touchyng ye peace / ſayng howe they of Gaūt can haue no peace with the erle / without y• they wyll generally / all maner of men in Gaūt of the ages bytwen .xv. and .lx. come out of the towne of Gaūt in theirſhyrtes / bare heeded with halters about their neckes / and ſo mete the erle bytwene Bruges and Gaunt. and the erle to doo with them his pleaſure / outher to let thē lyue or to put them all to dethe at his pleaſure. Whan this aunſwere was made / & the relacyon therof

declared to them of Gaunt / by the counſayls of theſe thre coūtreis. Than they were more abaſſhed than euer they were before. Than the baylyfe of Heynalte ſayd / to them. Sirs: ye be in great parell / euery mā take hede to himſelfe. I thynke if ye take this way / and put yourſelfe at his wyll. he wyll nat put all to dethe / that he ſeyth in his preſens. paraduenture ſome he wyll / as ſuch as hath diſpleaſed hym more thā other. I thynke he ſhall haue ſuche meanes of pytie / that paraduenture ſuche as weneth them ſelfe to be mooſt in parell / may hap to come to pardon and mercy. therfore ſirs / I wolde coūſayle you take this offre: and refuſe it nat. for if ye do I thynk it wyll be longe / or ye recouer agayne ſuche a nother offre. Sir quod Phylip Dartwell we haue no ſuch charge to go ſo far / as to bryng the good people of Gaunt in to y• poynt. for I enſure you / they wyll nat ſo do. For ſir: whan we be come agayne to Gaunt / and haue ſhewed them therles pleaſur. knowe for trouth they wyll nat do it. If they wyll / I enſure you / they ſhall nat be let for vs. ſir we thanke you for the traueyle and good dyligence / that ye haue ho
                     •
                  d in this mater. And ſo than they of Gaunt toke the
                  •
                leaue of y• coūſayls of theſe thre coū
               treis / and made well ſemblant that they wolde in no wyſe agre to this purpoſe. and ſo departed and returned to Gaunt / through Brabant.
            SO thus brake vp this coūſayle at Tour nay / and euery man went home. Than therle of Flaunders demaūded what aunſwer they of Gaunt made / and it was ſhewed hym. The erle as than ſette lytell priſe by them / for he knewe well / they hadd endured and ſuffred ſo moche / that they coulde nere ſuffre no longar. wherfore he thought he ſhulde haue ſhortely an honorable ende of the warre. & to bring Gaunt in to that poynt / y• all other townes ſhulde take enſample by it. ¶ The ſame ſeaſon y• comons of Parys began agayne to murmure / bycauſe the kynge came nat thyder. and they feared leſt the king wolde haue come ſodenly on thē / with a certayn men of warr / and ouerryn the cytie. and to haue put to dethe whome he hadde lyſt. And for dought of that parell / they made great watche euery nyght / in the ſtretes and market places / and reyſed vp their cheynes: y• no man ſhulde ryde nor entre in among them. and if any perſone were founde abrode after .ix. of the clocke / without he were well knowen amonge them / he was but deed. So they were in Parys ryche men and other men of armes / to the nombre of .xxx. thouſande / as well harneſſed at all peces / as any knyght ought to be. And alſo they had ſeruauntes right well harneſſed / bearynge great malettes of yron and ſtele / to confounde helmes. And whan they were nombred and viewed / they thought thēſelfe able to fight with the greateſt prince in all the world. Theſe people were called the rowtes and malettes of Parys.
         
         
            ¶ Howe that a fyue thouſande gaū
               toyſe yſſued out of Gaunt / to fyght with therle / and with them of Bruges / after the aunſwere that Phylip Dartuell had ſhewed them. Cap. CCC. xCviii.
            
               WHan Phylip Dartuell and his company: entred agayne in to Gaunt. A great nombre of the comon people deſyring nothing but peace / were ryghte ioyfull of their comynge / truſtynge to here ſome good tidynges. they came agaynſt hym / and coude nat reſtrayne: but demaūded tidyn ges / ſayng. a dere ſir Phylip Dartuell / reioyſe vs with ſome good worde: let vs knowe howe ye haue ſped. to whiche demaundes Phylippe gaue none aunſwere / but paſſed by / holdynge downe his heed. the more he helde his peace / the more the people folowed hym / precyng to here ſome tydinges. and ones or twiſe as he rode to his lodgynge warde / he ſayde to them that folowed hym. ſirs: retourne to your houſes / for this day god ayde you / and to morowe at .ix. of the clocke / come into the market place / and than ye ſhall here y• tydinges that I can ſhewe you. other aunſwere coulde they haue none of hym / wherof euery man was greatly abaſſhed. And whan Phylippe Dartuell was alighted at his lodgynge / and ſuche as had bene at Tourney with hym: & euery man gone to their owne lodgynges. Than Peter de boyſe / who deſyred to here ſome tydinges. came in y• euenyng to Phylyps houſe. and ſo than they two went togyder in to a chambre. than Peter demaūded of hym howe he had ſpedde. and Phylippe who wolde hyde nothyng fro hym / ſayd. By my fayth Peter / by that therle of Flaunders hath anſwered / by his coūſayle ſent to Tourney. He wyll take no maner of perſone within the towne of Gaūt

to mercy / no more one thanne another. By my faythe quod Peter / to ſay the trouthe / he dothe but right to do ſo. he is well counſayled to be of that opynion / for they be all ꝑte takers / as well one as another. Nowe the mater is come euen after myne entent. And alſo it was the entent of my good mayſter / John̄ Lyon that is deed. for nowe y• towne wyll be ſo trowbled / that it wyll he harde euer to apeaſe it agayne. Nowe it is tyme to take bridell in the tethe. Nowe it ſhall be ſene / who is ſage and who is hardye / in the towne of Gaunt. Outher ſhortly the towne of Gaunt / ſhall be the mooſt honoured towne in chriſtendome / or els the mooſt deſolate. At the leeſt / if we dye in this quarell / we ſhall nat dye all alone. therfore Philyp / remembre your ſelfe well this night / howe ye may make relacyon to morowe to the people / of the determynacion of your counſayle holden nowe at Tourney. and that ye may ſhewe it in ſuch maner y• the people may be cōtent with you. For ye haue all redy y• grace of the people / for two cauſes. One / is bycauſe of your name / for ſomtyme Jakes Dart well yor father / was marueluſly well beloued. The other cauſe is / ye entreat y• people mekely and ſagely / as the comon ſayng is through out the towne. wherfore the people wyll beleue you to lyue or dye. And at the ende ſhewe them your counſayle / and ſaye howe ye wyll do thus and thus / and they wyll all ſaye the ſame. therfore it behoueth you to take good aduyce / in ſhewyng wordes / wheron lyeth your honour. Truely ꝙ Philyppe ye ſay trouthe / and I truſt ſo to ſpeke and ſhewe the beſynes of Gaūt. That we / who are now gouernours & capitayns / ſhall outher lyue or dye with honour. So thus they departed for that nyght eche fro other. Peter de boyſe went home to his howſe / and Philyp Dartuell abode ſtyll in his
            yE may well knowe and beleue / yt whan the day deſyred was come / that Philyp Dartuell ſhulde generally reporte the effect of the coūſayle / holden at Tourney. All y• people of the towne of Gaūt / drewe them to the market place / on a wedniſday in the mornyng. And about .ix. of the bell / Philyp Dartuell / Peter de Boyſe / Pe
                  •
                de myrt / Fraūces Atreman & thother capitayns came thyder / and entred vp in to the comon hall. Than Philyp leaned out at a wyndowe / and began to ſpeke / and ſayde. O all ye good people / it is of trouth: that at the deſyre of the ryght honourable lady / my lady of Brabante / and the ryght noble duke Aulbert / baylife of Heynalt / Holande / and zelande / and of my lorde the byſſhop of Liege. There was a coūſayle agreed and accorded to be at Tournay / and there at to be ꝑſonally therle of Flaū
               ders. And ſo he certyfyed to theſe ſayde lordes / who haue nobly aquited thēſelfe. For they ſent thyder ryght notable coūſaylours / and knightes and burgeſſes of good townes. And ſo they and we of this good towne of Gaūt / were ther at y• day aſſigned. lokyng and abyding for the erle of Flaunders / who came nat nor wolde nat come. and whan they ſawe that he came nat nor was not comynge. Than̄e they ſente to him to Bruges / thre knyghtes for the thre countreys / and burgeſſes for y• good townes. and they traueyled ſo moche for our ſakes / that they went to him to Bruges / & there they founde hym / who made thē great chere (as they ſayd) and harde well their meſſage. but he anſwered thē & ſayd. that for the honoure of their lordes / and for the loue of his ſuſter the lady of Brabant (he ſayd) He wolde ſende his coūſayle to Tourney / with in fyue or ſixe dayes after. ſo well inſtructed by him / that they ſhulde playnly ſhewe the full of his entencyon / and mynde. Other aunſwere coude they none haue / and ſo they retourned a gayne to vs to Tourney. and than the day aſſygned by therle / there came fro hym to Tourney / the lorde of Raneſſels / the lord of Goutris ſir Johan Uillayns / and the prouoſt of Harlequebec. And ther they ſhewed graciouſly their lordes wyll / and certayne areſt of this warre. howe the peace myght be had ▪ bytwene the erle and the towne of Gaunt. Fyrſt / determynatly they ſayd. therle wyll y• euery man in the towne of Gaunt / except prelates of churches and religions. all that be aboue the age of .xv. yere ▪ and vnder the age of .lx. that they all in their ſhirtes bare heeded & bare foted / with haulters about their neckes / auoyde the towne of Gaunt. And ſo go a .xii. myle thens / in to the playne of Burleſquans. And there they ſhall mete the Erle of Flaunders / acompanyed with ſuche as it ſhall pleaſe hym. And ſo whā he ſeyth vs in that caſe holdyng vp our handes / and cryeng for mercy. than he ſhall haue pytie and compaſſyon on vs if it pleaſe hym. But ſirs / I can nat knowe / by the relacion of any of his counſayle / but that by ſhamefull punycion of iuſtyce. there ſhall ſuffre dethe / the mooſt parte of the people / that ſhall appere there that day. Nowe ſirs / cōſyder well if ye wyll come to peace by this meanes or nat. Whan Philyp Dartuell had ſpoken theſe wordes / it was great pytie to ſe: men / women / and

chyldren wepe / and wryng their handꝭ for loue of their fathers / bretherne / huſbandes / & neyghbours. And after this tourmēt and noyſe / Philyp Dartuell began agayne to ſpeke / and ſaid. Peaſe ſirs peaſe. and in contynent / euery man was ſtyll. Than he began to ſpeke / and ſayde. A ye good people of Gaunt / ye be her nowe aſſembled the mooſt parte / & ye haue harde what I haue ſayde. Sirs / I ſe none other remedy but ſhorte counſayle. for ye knowe well / what neceſſyte we be in for lacke of vitayle. I am ſure there be .xxx. thouſande in this towne / that dyd eate no breed this. 
                  •
               v. dayes paſſed / ſirs: of thre thynges we muſt of neceſſyte do the one. The fyrſt is / if ye wyll let vs encloſe ourſelfe in this towne / and mure vp all our gates. and thā confeſſe vs clene to god / and lette vs entre into the churches & miſters / and ſo let vs dye for famyn repētant of our ſynnes / lyke martyrs. and ſuch people as noo man wyll haue mercy of / yet in this a ſtate god ſhall haue mercy of our ſoules. and it ſhalbe ſayd / in euery place where it ſhall be herde / that we be deed valyauntly / and lyke true people. Or els ſecondly / let vs all men / women / and chyldren: go with halters about our neckes in our ſhyrtes / & crye mercy to my lorde the erle of Flaunders. I thynke his herte wyll nat be ſo indurate (as whan he ſeyth vs in that a ſtate) but that his hert wyll molefy / and take mercy of his people. and as for my ſelfe / I wyll be the fyrſt of all / to a peaſe his diſpleaſure. I ſhall preſent my heed / and be content to dye / for them of Gaunt. Or els thyrdly let vs choſe out in this towne fyue or ſixe thouſande men / of the moſte able and beſt apoynted / and let vs go haſtely and aſſayle the erle at Bruges / and fyght with hym. and if we dye in this voiage. At the leaſt / it ſhalbe honourable / and god ſhall haue pytie of vs. and all the world ſhall ſay / that valiantly and truly / we haue kept & maynteyned our quarell. And in this batayle / if god wyll haue pytie of vs / as aunciantly he put his puiſſance in to ye handes of Nabugodonoſor / duke and mayſter of his chyualry. by whome the aſſyrience were diſcomfyted. Than ſhall we be reputed the mooſt honorable people / that hath raygned ſyth the dayes of the romayns. Nowe ſirs / take good hede whiche of theſe thre weyes ye wyll take / for one of thē muſt ye nedes take. Than ſuche as were next hym / and had harde hym beſt ſaid. A 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                / all we haue our truſt in you to coūſayle vs. and ſir / loke as ye coūſayle vs / ſo ſhall we folowe. By my faythe ꝙ Philyppe / than I counſayle you: let vs go with an army of men agaynſt the erle / we ſhall fynde hym at Bruge. And as ſoone as he ſhall knowe of our comynge / he wyll iſſue out to fyght with vs / by the pride of them of Bruges / and of ſuch as be aboute hym / who nyght and daye enfourmeth and ſtyreth hym to fyght with vs. And if god wyll by his grace / that we haue the victory / and diſconfyte our enemyes. than ſhall we be recouered foreuer / and the mooſt honoured people of the worlde. and if we be diſconfyted / we ſhall dye honourably and god ſhall haue pyte of vs. and therby all the other people in Gaunt / ſhall eſcape. and the erle wyll haue marcy on them. and therwt they all anſwerd with one vocye. we wyll do thus / we wyll do thus. we wyll make none other ende. Than Philyppe aunſwered / and ſayd. Sirs / if it be your wylles to do thus / than retourne home to your howſes / and make redy your harneſſe. for to morowe ſomtyme of the day / I wyll that we departe out of Gaunt / and go towarde Bruges / for the abyding here / is nothynge for vs profytable. and within fyue dayes / we ſhall knowe if we ſhall dye or lyue with honoure. and I ſhall ſende the conſtables of euery paryſſhe / fro howſe to howſe / to choſe out the mooſt able and beſt apoynted men.
            IN this a ſtate euery man departed out of the market place / and made thē redy. and this wednyſday they kept ye towne ſo cloſe / that nother man nor woman entred / nor iſſued out of the towne / tyll the thurſday in the mornyng / that euery man was redy / ſuche as ſhulde departe. And they were to the nombre of .v. thouſand men and nat paſt / and they had with them two hundred chares of ordynaunce / and artyllary / and but .vii. cartes of vitayle / fyue of byſket breed / and two tonne of wyne / for in all they hadde but two tonne / and left no more behynd them in the towne. This was a harde departynge / and they that were lefte behynde / were hardly beſtadde. It was pytie to beholde them that went forthe. And they that abode behynde ſayde to them. ſirs / nowe at your departure / ye knowe what ye leaue behynde you / but neuer thynke to come hyder agayne / without ye come with honor, for if it be otherwyſe / ye ſhall fynde here no thynge. For as ſoone / as we here tidynges / that ye be outher ſlayne or diſconfytted. we ſhall ſette the towne a fyre / and diſtroy ourſelfe lyke people diſpayred. Than they yt went forthe / ſayd to comfort them. ſirs: pray to god for vs / for we truſte / he ſhall helpe vs and you alſo / or we retourne agayne. Thus theſe fyue

thouſande deꝑted fro Gaunt / with their ſmall ꝓuyſion. and that thurſday they went and lay a myle without Gaunt / and brake nat vp their prouiſyon / but paſſed y• nyght / with ſuch thynges as they founde abrode in the countre. And the friday they went forth / nat touchyng as yet their vitayle. for the forēgers founde ſomwhat in the countre / wherwith they paſſed that day. And ſo lodged a ſeuyn myle fro Bruges / & ther reſted and toke a place of grounde at their deuyſe / abyding their enemyes. And before them there was a great plaſſhe of ſtandynge water / wherwith they fortifyed theymſelfe on the one parte / and on the other parte with their caryages. And ſo they paſſed that night.
         
         
            ¶ Of the order of the batayle of the gauntoiſe / and howe they diſcōfited the erle and them of Bruges / and by what meanes. Cap. CCCxCix.
            
               ANd whā it came to the ſaturday in ye mornyng / the weder was fayre and clere & a holyday called in Bruges for that day of cuſtome they made proceſſyōs. Than tydinges cāe to them / howe ye gauntoyſe were cōe thyder. And than ye ſhulde haue ſene gret murmuringꝭ in Bruges / ſo that at laſt / worde therof cāe to therle and to his cō
               pany. Wherof the erle had great marueyle / and ſayde. Beholde yonder vngracyous people of Gaunt. I trowe the deuyll hath brought them to their diſtruction. Nowe is the tyme come to haue an ende of this warre. And ſo thanne his knightes and ſquyers came to hym / and he receyued them graciouſly. and ſayd to them. We ſhall go and fyght with yonder vnhappy people of Gaunte. yet quod the Erle / they had rather dye by the ſwerde / than by famyne. Than the erle was counſayled to ſende thre men of armes in to the felde / to ſe the demeanoure of his enemyes. And ſo than the marſhall of Flaunders apoynted out thre ſquyers / valyaunt men of armes / to go and ſe the behauyng of the gaū
               toyſe. ¶ As Lambert of Lambres / Damas of Buffey / and Johan of Beart. And ſo they thre departed fro Bruges / and rode towarde their ennemyes. And in the meane tyme / whyle theſe thre went forthe: they of Bruges made them redy to yſſue out / to go and fyght with the gauntoyſe. Of whom I ſhall ſhewe / ſōwhat of their order.
            THis ſaturday in the mornynge. Phyllyppe Dartuell ordayned and cōmaunded / that euery man ſhulde make hym redy to god. And cauſed maſſes to be ſonge in dyuers places / by certayne freers that were with him. And ſo euery man cōfeſſed hym / and prayed to god for grace & mercy. And ther were certayne ſermōs made / enduryng an hour and an halfe. And there it was ſhewedde to people / by theſe freers and clerkes / figurynge them to the people of Iſraell / whome kynge Pharaon kepte long in ſeruytude. And howe after / by ye grace of god they were delyuered / and ledde in to the lande of Beheſt / by Moyſes and Aaron. And kyng Pharaon and the Egypciens ſlayne and taken. In lykewiſe quod theſe freers / ye good people. ye be kept inſeruytude / by youre lorde the erle of Flaunders / and by your neighbours of Bruges. Before whome nowe ye becōe / and ſhall be fought with / by all lykelyhode. for your enemyes haue great wyll to fight with you / for they feare lytell your puyſſaūce. But ſirs / take no hede to that. For god / who knoweth and ſeythe all thynge / ſhall haue mercy on you. Nor thynke nothynge / of that ye haue lefte behynde you. For ye may well knowe / it is without recoueraunce / if ye be diſconfyted. Therfore ſell your lyues valyantly: and dye if there be none other remedy honorably. And be nat diſmayed thoughe great puyſſaunce of people yſſue oute of Bruges agaynſt you. For vyctorie lyeth nat in puyſſaunce of people: But it is all onely in god. And by his grace / it hath ben often tymes ſene / as well by the Macabeus / as by the Rhomayns. That a ſmall people of good wyll / truſtynge in the grace of god / hathe diſconfyted agreat nombre of people. And ſirs / in this quarell ye haue good right and a Juſte cauſe. And therfore by many reaſons / ye ought to be hardy / and of good cōfort. Thus with ſuche wordꝭ and other / theſe freers preched to ye people that mornynge: wherwith they were well content. And thre partes of the hooſt were houſeled / ſhe wynge theym ſelfe to haue great truſt in God. And after theſe maſſes ſonge / than they aſſembled toguyder on a lytell hyll. And there Phylyppe Dartuell by great ſentence / ſhewed them fro poynt to poynt / the ryght that they thought

               
                  〈◊〉
                had in their quarell. And howe that often 
                  •
               mes the towne of Gaunt had requyred their 
                  •
               ode
                  〈…〉
                Erle / to haue mercy on them. but they coulde neuer come to no poynt with hym / But to the great confuſyon and domage of y• towne of Gaunt: and to the enhabytaūtes therof. Alſo ſayeng / howe they were than come ſo farforthe that to recule agayne they coude nat. And alſo / than to retourne (all thynges conſydered) they coude wynne nothynge therby. For they hadde lefte nothynge behynde them / but pouertie and heuyneſſe. And moreouer he ſayd. ſirs / thynke nother of your wyues nor chyldren / but thynke of your honour. Thus ſuche fayre wordꝭ Philyppe Dartuell ſhewed among thē / for he was well langaged / and coude ſpeke rightwell / and well it became hym: and finally he ſayd. Now fayre lordes. Lette vs truely and equaly deꝑte oure vitayle eche to other lyke bretherne / wtout any maner of outrage. for whan this is ſpende it muſt behoue vs to ſeke for newe / if we thinkē to lyue. And ſo than right humbly / the chayres were diſcharged and the bred was deuyded by the conſtables▪ and the two tonnes of wyne / the bottomes were ſet vpwarde. And ſo there they dyned with the bredde and with the wyne / and were contente with their ſmall repaſte / for that tyme. And felt them ſelfe better diſpoſed / bothe in courage and in their membres / than̄e & they had eaten more meare. And whan̄e this dyner was paſt / than they ſet them ſelfe in order / and drewe them ſelfe within their rybaudeur. The whiche were hyghe ſtakes / bounde with yrone and ſharpe poynted / whiche they vſed euer to beare with them in their warre. And ſo they ſet them before their batayle / and cloſed them ſelfe within them. And in this eſtate / the thre ſquyers that were ſende fro therle / to ſe their demea nynge founde them. For they aproched ſo nere / that they might well auiewe them / for they cāe iuſte to their ſtakes. But the gauntoyſe neuer ſtyred for all theym / but lette them alone. And made ſemblaunt / that they were right ioyefull of their comynge.
            THan theſe currours rode to Bruges to therle / and founde hym in his lodgyng / with a great nombre of knightes and ſquyers with hym. So they came through the preace to the erle / and they ſpake out a loude / bycauſe the Erle wolde they ſhulde be herde. And ſo there they ſhewed / howe they hadd rydden ſo nere to the gauntoyſe / that they myght haue ſhotte at them / if they had lyſt. But they ſuffred them to paſſe peaſably. And alſo they ſhewed / how they had ſene their baners. Than the erle demaunded what nombre of people they were / by eſtymacyon. They anſwered / that ſurely: as farre as they coude diſery / they paſt nat a fyue or ſixe thouſande. Than the erle ſayd well. Let euery man appareyle hymſelfe / I wyll go fight with them they ſhall nat deꝑte without batayle▪ and therwith the trumpettes dyde ſowne throughe Bruges / and than euery man armed him. And aſſembled in the market place / and ſet thēſelfe in order with their baners / as was the vſage. And before the Erles lodgynge aſſembled: lordes / knightes / and ſquyers. Whan euery thing was redy: than therle went to the market place and ſawe there great nombre of people well ordred and araynged / wherof he reioyſed. And ſo at his cōmaūdement / euery man drewe in bone order in to the feldes. It was great pleaſure to beholde them. They were a .xl. thouſande armed men. And ſo / what a horſ hacke and a fote: they came nere to the place where the gauntois were / and there they reſted. And by that tyme that therle was come thyder / it was paſt noone and the ſonne began to declyne. Than ſōe ſayd to the erle. ſir / ye ſe yonder your enemyes / they be but a handefull of men / as to the regarde of your company. And ſir / they can nat flye away We wolde counſayle you / nat to fight with thē this night. Let them alone tyll to morowe. and ſir / therby ye ſhall ſe what they wyll do. They ſhall be febler than they be nowe / for they haue nothynge to eate. The erle acorded well to that counſayle / and wolde that it ſhulde ſo haue ben done. But they of Bruges were ſo hote & haſty to fight / that they wolde nat abyde. But ſayd: ſet on them / they ſhall nat long endure. And ſo than they of Bruges began to ſhote gonnes at thē. And than they of Gaūt diſcharged at ones thre. C. gonnes at one ſhotte: and ſo tourned a bout the plaſſhe of water. and cauſed the ſon / to be in the eyen of thē of Bruges / the which greued them ſore: and ſo entred in among thē and cryed Gaunt. And as ſoone as they of Bruges herde them crye Gaunt / and herde ſo many gō
               nes come in among them / and ſawe howe they ſer full front on them. Lyke falſ herted people & of yuell courage / they gaue way to the gaūtois to entre in among them. And ſo without any de fence / they caſt downe their weapens and tour ned their backes. Than y• gaūtoyſe ſeyng well howe their enemyes were diſconfyted / kept thē ſelfe ſtyll cloſe toguyder / and beate downe on bothe ſydes and before theym. And euer wente

forth cryeng Gaūt. ſayeng alſo / folowe folowe our enemyes are diſcomfyted / and let vs entre in to Bruges with thē. God hath regarded vs this euenyng by his pytie. And as they ſayd ſo they dyd / for they purſued thē of Bruges ſharp lye. And as they ouer toke them they ſlewe thē / and taryed nat / but kept on ſtyll their way / and euer they of Bruges fledde on before. There were many ſlayne & beaten downe / for among them of Bruges there was no defence. I trowe there was neuer ſo vnhappy people / nor more recreantly maynteyned them ſelfe. For all the great pride and bobance / that they were of before. Some wolde thynke and ſuppoſe by ymaginacyon / that there had ben ſome treaſon / the whiche was nat ſo. It was non other / but their ſymple defence / & yuell fortune that fell on thē.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the towne of Bruges was taken by the gaūtoyſe▪ and howe the erle of Flaunders ſaued hym ſelfe / in a poore womans houſe in the towne of Bruges. Cap. CCCC.
            
               WHan the erle of Flaunders / and the cōpany y• was about him. ſawe the yuell or der and rule of them of Bruges. & ſawe howe they were diſcōfyted by their owne follye / and coude ſe no recoueraunce / for they fledde awaye before the gauntoyſe. Therle than was abaſſhed / and all they that were about him. And ſo diſcōfyted / y• they fledde away / euery man to ſaue hymſelfe. Of a trouthe / if they of Bruges wolde haue retour ned agayne / and aſſayled the gauntoyſe with their helpe / they had bene lykely to haue recoue red all agayn. but they ſaw no remedy / for they fledde towarde Bruges as faſt as they myght. the fader taryed nat for the ſonne / nor the ſonne for the fader. So than the men of armes and all brake their array / but they hadd no lyſt to take the way to Bruges. the preaſe was ſo great in the way towarde Bruges / y• it was maruayle toſe and to here / the clamoure and crye of them that were ſlayne and hurt. And the gaūtoyſe fo lowyng them of Bruges / cryeng Gaunt gaunt ſtyll goynge forwarde / and beatyng downe of people. The mooſt parte of the men of armes / wolde nat put themſelfe in that parell. Howbeit / therle was counſayled to drawe to Bruges / and to be one of y• firſt that ſhulde entre. & than to cloſe the gates / to thentent that the gauntoys ſhulde nat be lordes of Bruges. Therle ſeyng none other remedy / nor no recoueraūce / by abydynge in the felde. For he ſawe well euery man fledde / and alſo it was darke nyght. Wherfore he beleued the coūſayle that was gyuen hym / & ſo toke the way towarde Bruges / with his baner before him. And ſo came to the gate / and entred with the firſt and a .xl. with him. Than he ſet men to kepe the gate / and to cloſe it if y• gaū
               toyſe dyde folowe. Than the Erle rode to his owne lodgyng / and ſende all about the towne / commaundyng euery man on payne of dethe / to drawe to the market place. Thentenſyon of the erle / was to recouer the towne by that meanes / but he dyde nat. as ye ſhall here after.
            In the meane tyme that therle was at his logyng / & ſende forthe the clerkes of euery warde fro ſtrete to ſtrete / to haue euery man to drawe to the market place / to recouer the towne. The gauntoiſe purſewed ſofierſly their enemyes / y• they entred in to the towne with them of Brugꝭ And aſſone as they were within the towne / the firſt thyng they dyde / they went ſtreyght to the market place / and there ſet them ſelfe in array. The erle as than had ſende a knight of his / called ſir Robert Marſhall to the gate / to ſe what the gaūtoise dyde. And whan he cāe to the gate he founde the gate beaten downe / and the gaū
               toyſe maiſters therof. and ſome of them of Bruges met with hym & ſayd. ſir Robert / retourne and ſaue your ſelfe if ye can / for y• towne is won by them of Gaunt. Than the knight retourned to therle as faſt as he might / who was comyng out of his lodgynge a horſ backe / with a great nōbre of creſſettꝭ & lyghtes with hym / & was go yng to the market place. Than the knight ſhewed therle all that he knewe. howe beit the erle wyllyng to recouer the towne / drewe to y• market place. And as he was entryng / ſuch as were before hym. ſeyng the place all raynged with y• gauntoyſe / ſayd to therle. ſir / retourne agayne / if ye go any farther / ye are but deed / or taken wt your enemyes. For they are raynged on y• market place / and do abyde for you. They ſhewed hym trouthe. And whan the gaūtoyſe ſawe the clereneſſe of the lyghtꝭ / comyng downe y• ſtrete they ſayd. yonder cometh the erle / he ſhall come in to oure hādes. And Philyppe Dartuell had commaunded / fro ſtrete to ſtrete as he wente. That if the Erle came amonge theym / that no man ſhulde do to hym any bodely harme / but

take hym a lyue. and than to haue hym to gaūt and ſo to make their peace as they lyſt. Therle who truſted to haue recouered all / came ryght nere to the place / where as the gauntoyſe were. Than dyuers of his men ſayd. Sir / go no farther / for the gauntoyſe are lordes of the market place and of the towne. If ye entre in to ye market place / ye are in daūger to be ſlayne or taken A great nombre of the gauntoyſe / are goynge fro ſtrete to ſtrete / ſekynge for their ennemyes. They haue certayne of them of the towne with them / to bringe them fro houſe to houſe / where as they wolde be. And ſir / out at any of the gates ye can nat yſſue / for the gauntoyſe are lord therof. Nor to your owne lodgynge ye can nat retourne / for a great nombre of the gauntoyſe are goyng thyder. and whan therle herde thoſe tidynges / whiche were right harde to hym / as it was reaſon. He was greatly than abaſſhed. and ymagined what parell he was in. than̄e he beleued the counſayle / and wolde go no farther but to ſaue hym ſelfe if he myght: and ſo tooke his owne counſayle. He cōmaunded to put out all the lyghtes / and ſayd to thē that were about hym. I ſe well there is no recouery. Let euery man departe / and ſaue hym ſelfe as well as he may. And as he cōmaunded it was done. The lyghtes were quenched and caſt in to the ſtretꝭ / and ſo euery man departed. Therle than went in to a backe lane / and made a varlette of his to vnarme hym / and dyd caſt away his armure / & put on an olde cloke of his varlettes. And than ſayd to hym. Go thy way fro me / and ſaue thy ſelfe if thou canſt: and haue a good tonge / and thou fall in the handes of thyne enemyes. And if they aſke the any thyng of me / be nat be knowen that I am in the towne. He anſwered and ſayd. 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                / to dye therfore / I wyll ſpeke no worde of you. Thus abode there the erle of Flaūders all alone. He might than well ſaye / that he was in great daunger and harde aduenture / for at that tyme / if he had fallen in the handes of his enemyes / he had bene in daunger of dethe. For the gaūtoyſe went fro houſe to houſe / ſerchyng for the Erles frendes. And euer as they founde any / they brought them in to the market place. and there without remedy / before Philyp dart well and the capitayns / they were put to dethe. ſo god was frende to the erle / to ſaue him out of that parell. He was neuer in ſuche daunger before in his lyfe / nor neuer after. As ye ſhall here after in this hyſtorie.
            This about the hour of mydnight / the Erle went fro ſtrete to ſtrete / and by backe lanes. ſo that at laſt he was fayne to take a houſe / or els he had be founde by thē of Gaunt. and ſo as he went about ye towne / he entred in to a poore womans houſe / the whiche was nat mete for ſuche a lorde. ther was nother hall / palys / nor chābre it was but a poore ſmoky houſe. there was nothyng but a poore hall blacke with ſmoke / and aboue a ſmale plācher / and a ladder of .vii. ſteppes to mount vpon. And on the plancher / there was a poore couche / wher as the poore womās chyldren lay. than therle ſore abaſſhed & trymblyng / at his entryng ſaid. O good womā ſaue me / I am thy lorde therle of Flaūders. but now I muſt hyde me / for myne enemyes chaſe me. & if ye do me good now / I ſhall rewarde you her after therfore. The poore woman knewe hym well / for ſhe had ben often tymes at his gate to fetche almes / and had often ſene hym / as he wēt in and out a ſportyng. And ſo incōtynēt as hap was ſhe anſwered. For if ſhe had made any delay / he had bene taken talkynge with her by the fyre. than ſhe ſayd. ſir / mount vp this ladder / & ley your ſelfe vnder the bedde y• ye fynde there / as my chyldren ſlepe. and ſo in the meane tyme the woman ſat downe by the fyre with another chylde / that ſhe had in her armes. So the Erle moūted vp the plancher as well as he myght / & crept in bytwene the couche and the ſtrawe and lay as flatte as he coude. & euyn ther with / ſome of the rutters of Gaūt / entred in to ye ſame hous for ſome of them ſayd. How they had ſene a mā entre in to the houſe before thē. and ſo they foūd the woman ſyttyng by the fyre with her chylde. than they ſayd. Good woman / where is the mā that we ſawe entre before vs in to this houſe / & dyde ſhytte the dore after hym. ſirs quod ſhe / I ſawe no man entre in to this houſe this nyght / I went out rightnowe & caſt out a lytell water / and dyd cloſe my dore agayne. if any were here I coulde nat tell howe to hyde hym. ye ſe all the eaſment that I haue in this houſe. Here ye may ſe my bedde / & here aboue this plācher lyeth my poore chyldren. Than one of thē toke a candell and moūted vp the ladder / & put vp his heed aboue the plācher. & ſawe ther none other thyng but the poore couche / where her chyldren lay & ſlept. And ſo he loked all about / and than ſayde to his company. Go we hens / we leſe the more for the leſſe. the poore woman ſayth trouth / her is no creature but ſhe and her chyldren. & than they deꝑted out of the houſe. After y• / ther was none entred to do any hurt. all theſe wordes the Erle herde ryght well / where as he laye vnder the poore couche. ye may well ymagin / thā that

he was in great feare of his lyfe. He might well ſaye? I am as nowe / one of the pooreſt princes of the worlde. and myght well ſay / that the fortunes of the worlde are nothynge ſtable. yet it was a good happe / that he ſcaped with his lyfe Howe be it / this harde and peryllous aduēture myght well be to hym a ſpectacle all his lyfe after: and an enſample to all other. ¶ Nowe let vs leaue the erle of Flaunders in this harde eſtate / and ſpeke of them of Bruges / and howe the gauntoyſe parceyuered.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they of Gaunte / ſpared the marchauntes ſtraungers: and howe the erle parted fro Bruges and went to Lyſle. And howe he was receyued there ioyouſly. Cap. CCCC .i.
            
               FRaunces Atreyman / was one of the chefe capiteynes of theſe rutters. he was ſent by Philyppe Dartuell and by Peter de Boyſe / to ſeke aboute Brugꝭ for their enemies. and to kepe ye markette place all nyght tyll the next day. that they might ſe / that they were lordes of all the towne And they were ſtraytely cōmaunded / that they ſhulde do no hurte / to any marchaunt ſtraunger / beyng than in Bruges. Sayeng / howe it were no reaſon: that they ſhulde take hurte / for their warre. This commaundement was well kept. The chefe occaſyon fell on the foure Meſtyers / for they had alwayes ben fauourable to the erle / before And warpe and in other places. The gauntoyſe went all about ſerchyng for thē and as they were foūde / they were ſlayne without mercy. The ſame nyght there were ſlayne / 
                  〈…〉
               han .xii. hundred / what of one and other: with many other robberyes and yuell dedes / ye whiche came nat all to knowledge. As dyuers houſes robbed and pylled / womē defoyled and diſtroyed: and coffers broken vp. So that the mooſt pooreſt of Gaunt / were than becōe riche.
            tHe ſondaye in the mornynge / the ioyfull tidynges cāe to the towne of gaūt. Howe that their company had diſconfyted the erle and all his chiualry: and were lordes and mayſters of Bruges. ye may well beleue and knowe / that this tidynges greatly reioyſed the people / beyng before in tribulacyon. And ſo for ioye they made dyuers proceſſyons / laudynge god: in that he had ſo regarded them with his eye of pytie / and ſo conforted them. as to gyue them vyctorie of their enemyes. And ſo alwayes / there came freſſhe tidynges to theym of their vyctorie: wherby they were ſo reioyſed that they wyſt nat what to do. The lorde of harſels / who was as than abidynge in Gaunt. If he had taken the ſame ſonday or the monday after / a thre or foure thouſande men in harneſſe / and gone to Andwarpe: he had taken ye towne at his pleaſure. For they of the towne were ſo abaſſhed whan they herde the tidyngꝭ / that nigh for feare / they had fledde out of the towne in to Heynaulte / or in to other places / to haue ſaued them ſelfe. Therto / they were redy aparelled. but whan they ſawe that they of Gaunte came nat to them warde / than courage came to them and alſo / ſuche knyghtes as came thyder dyde confort them. As ſir Johan Bernage / ſir Tyrrey du Ban / and ſir Flureant of Hurle. Theſe thre knightes conforted them of Andwarpe / vnto ſuche tyme / as ſis Damas of Hallone came thyder fro the erle. as ye ſhall here after.
            
               THer were neuer people / that dyde with their enemyes / as they of Gaunte dyde with them of Bruges. They dyde hurt no man of any of the ſmale craftes of the towne / without he were ſore accuſed. Whan Philyp Dartwell and the capitayns of Gaūt / ſawe how they were lordes of Bruges / and all at their cōmaū
               dement and vnder their obeyſaūce. Than they made a crye / that euery man on payne of dethe ſhulde drawe to their logynges / & nat to robbe nor pylle / nor to make no debate / without they were cōmaunded. Than it was enquered / if any man knewe where therle was become. ſome ſayd / howe he was fledde the ſaturday. & ſome other ſayd / howe he was ſtyll in the towne / hyd and coude nat be founde. the capitayns of gaūt toke lytell hede therof / for they wereſo reioyſed with their vyctorie / y• they cared for nothynge. Nother for erle / baron / knight / nor other in all Flaūders. They reputed them ſelfe ſo great / y• they thought to haue all / vnder their obeyſāce. Than Philyp Dartuell and Peter de boyſe remēbred / that whan they deꝑted fro Gaūt / they left no vitayle / nor other purueyaūce in ye town Therfore they ſent ſtreyght a certayne nombre of men / to Dan and to Scluſe: to thētent to belordes therof / & of the vitayle in thē. And whan ſuche as were ſent cāe to Dan / they opyned the

gates to them. And all that was in the towne / was put in to their handes / and euery thyng at their commaūdement. Than there was taken out of the fayre cellers / the good wynes of Poyctou / of Gaſcone / and of Rochell: and of other farre coūtreis / a fyue or ſixe thouſande tonnes. And it was layde in to ſhippes and in to chares and conueyed to Gaunt / what by lande and by water. And than they went farther and came to Scluſe. Whiche towne incontynent was opyned to theym / and put vnder their obeyſaunce. And there they founde great quantyte of corne and meale / in ſhyppes and cellers of marchaū
               tes ſtraungers. So all was bought and payed for / and ſende to Gaunt / by water and by lāde. Thus the towne of Gaunt / was refreſſhed and delyuered fro miſery / by the grace of god / other wyſe it coude nat haue ben done. The gaūtoys than ought well to remembre / that god playnly had holpen them. Seyng / that fyue thouſandemen nere famyſſhed / diſconfyted .xl. thouſandemen / at home at their owne doores. The capitayns nor they / had no cauſe to be proude therof but they were ſo proud therof / that god was diſpleaſed with theym. And that was well ſene or the yere paſſed. as ye ſhall her after in the ſtorie: to gyue enſample to all people.
            I Was enformed / and I beleue it well. that the ſonday at night / the erle of Flaūders yſſued out of the towne of Brugꝭ / by what meanes I can nat ſaye. If any dyde helpe to make his way I can nat tell / but I beleue yes. He yſſued out a fote all alone / in an olde ſymple cloke And whan he was in the feldes he was ioyfull / for than he might well ſay / howe he had eſcaped a daūgerous paſſage. And ſo went forthe at aduenture / and went to a thicke buſſhe / toſe what way he myght take. For he knewe nat well the wayes / nor he was nat wonte to go a fote. And as he ſtode vnder a thicke buſſh in the night / he herde by aduenture a man ſpeke / as he came by and it was a knight of his / who had maried his baſtard doughter: and he was called ſir Robr̄t Marſhall. Therle knewe hym well by his wordes / and as he paſſed by / he ſaid. Robert / are ye there. The knight / who knewe the erle well by his ſpeche / ſayde. A ſir: ye haue made me this day to ſeke in many places for you about Bruges. Howe are ye gette out? Let vs go our way quod the erle. It is no tyme to tell our aduentures. I pray you let vs do ſo moche / that I may haue a horſe / for I am ſore wery with goyng a fote. and I pray you: let vs take ye way to Lyſle and ye knowe it. yes ſir ꝙ the knight I knowe it well. And ſo they wente forthe all that nyght tyll it was the next mornyng / or they coude get a horſe / and yet they coude gette none. But the firſt that they founde was a Mare / the whiche they toke fro a poore man in a vyllage. So the erle lept on her without ſadyll or panell. And at night came to Lyſle / wher the mooſt ꝑte of his knightes that fledde out of the felde were come thyder: ſome a fote / ſome a horſ backe / and ſōe were gone in to Hollande and in to zelande. as ſir Guy of Guyſtels / he arryued at a good port for he founde in zelande in a towne there / therle Guy of Bloyes / who made hym good chere / & departed largely with hym / and wylled him to tary ther with hym / as long as it ſhulde pleaſe hym. Thus they that were deſolate / were recō
               forted by the lordꝭ that they reſorted vnto / who had pyte on them: as it was reaſon. For nobleneſſe and gentylneſſe / ought to be ayded by nobles and gentyls.
         
         
            ¶ Of the great richeſſe that the gaū
               toyſe founde in Bruges. And howe all the townes of Flaunders / yelded them to Gaunte / except And warpe. Cap. CCCC .ii.
            
               THe tidynges ſpredde a brode in to dyuers coūtreis / of the diſconfyture of thē of Bruges / and of therle their lorde / done by the gauntois. wherwith ther were diuers people reioyſed / and ſpecially commynalties. All the good townes aboute Gaunt / and in the byſſhoprike of Liege / were as ioyfull / as thoughe the mater had ben their owne. In lykewiſe / ſo were they of Rohan and Parys in Fraūce / if they durſt haue ſpoken it. And whanne pope Clement herde therof / he be thought hym a lytell / and ſayde. Surely / this diſconfyture was a ſtroke of god / to gyue enſample to the erle. And that god had ſende him that tribulacion / bycauſe he was rebell againſt his opinyons. Alſo other great lordꝭ in Fraūce and in other places / ſayd. howe the erles aduerſytie / was nat greatly to be complayned / for he had well deſerued to beare it. For he had ben ſo preſūptuous / that he loued no lorde / neighbour

frenche kyng nor other: wherfore they cōplayned leſſe his ꝑſecucyōs. Howbeit it is an olde ſayng / he that hath any yuell fortune / men wyll ſpeke the worſt therof. and ſpecially they of the towne of Louayne were greatly reioyſed / with the victory of the gauntoyſe / & of the erles trouble. for they were but in harde caſe with ye duke of Brabant their lorde / who was in purpoſe to make them warr / and to beate downe their gates / to kepe them therby the rather vnder. Alſo it was ſayd in the towne of Louayn / y• if Gaunt hadde bene as nere them as Bruſels was: they wolde haue ioyned togyder / and haue been all one. Of all their wordes and deuyſes / the duke and duches of Brabant were enformed / but it behoued thē / as at that tyme / to cloſe their eyen and to holde downe their heedes / for it was no tyme for them than to ſpeke.
            THus they of Gaunt beynge in Bruges: deuyſed many newe thynges. & among other / they deuyſed to beate downe two gates that were towarde Gaunt / and to fyll the dykes to thentent that they of Bruges ſhuld neuer rebell after againſt Gaunt. and whan they ſhuld departe / to take with them a fyue hundred men of thē of Bruges / to thentent to kepe thē in the more feare and ſubiectyon. Thus in the meane ſeaſon whyle theſe capitayns were at Bruges / beatyng downe gatꝭ and walles / and fillyng of dykes. They ſent to Ipre / to Courtray / to Berges / to Caſſell / to Propringne / to Bourbourc / and to all the townes and caſtels of Flaunders on the ſee coſt. that they ſhulde be all vnder the obeyſaūce of them / and to ſende them the keyes of their townes and caſtels. ſubmittynge themſelfe to their obeyſaūce and ſeruyce. and ſo they all obeyed / none durſt ſay agaynſt it / but came all to Bruges / puttyng them ſelfe vnder the obeyſaūce of Philyppe Dartuell / and Peter de Boiſe. For theſe two named & wrote them ſelfe ſouerayn capitayns of all other / and ſpecyally Pihlyppe Dartuell / was he that mooſt beſyed him ſelfe with the charge of all Flaunders. and as longe as he abode in Bruges / he kept the eſtate of a prince. for euery day he had playenge at his lodgyng dore / mynſtrels dyner and ſupper / & was ſerued in veſſell of ſyluer / as thogh he had been the erle of Flaunders. And well he myght kepe than that eſtate / for he had all the Erles veſſell / golde and ſyluer / and all his ieowels founde in his houſe at Bruges / ther was nothyng ſaued. Alſo there was ſent a certayne nombre of gauntoyſe to Merlle / a fayre houſe of the erles / ſtandyng halfe a myle fro Bruges. they that went thyder dyd moche hurt / for they brake downe all the howſe / and brake downe the fownte / wherin the erle was chriſtned / and layd in charyotes / all the golde and ſyluer ieowels / and other thynges that they founde ther and ſent it to Gaunt. The terme of .xv. dayes there was goyng and comynge with caryages fro Bruges to Gaunt / with their pyllage that they had get that iourney. It was harde to exſteme the profyte that they gate there.
            ANd whan̄e they of Gaunt had done all their wyll and pleaſure / in the towne of Bruges. they ſent a fiue hūdred of the notableſt burgeſſes of the towne to Gaunt / to lye ther in hoſtage. and Fraunces Atreman and Peter de Myter / and a thouſande of their men / cōueyed theym thyder. And Peter de Boyſe / abode as capitayne of Bruges / tyll the gates and walles were beaten downe / and the dykes fylled. And Philyppe Dartuell departed with four thouſande men / and went to Ipre. and there all maner of people came out agaynſt hym / and receyued him as honourably / as though he had bene their owne naturall lord / that had come firſt to his lande. and there they all dyd put them ſelfe vnder his obeyſaūce. And there he made newe mayres and aldermen / and made newe lawes. And to him came thyder they of Caſſell / of Berges / of Bourbourcke / and of Propringne. they all / ſubmytted them ſelfe vnder his obeyſaūce / and ſware to him faythe and trouthe / & to holde of hym as to their lorde the erle of Flaunders. And whan he had thus done / and taken the aſſurance of thē / and had taryed at Ipre the ſpace of .viii. dayes. Than he departed and came to Courtray / where as he was alſo receyued with great ioy / and there he taryed thre dayes. And than he ſent meſſangers & letters to And warpe cōmaundynge them to come to hym / and to be vnder his obeyſaūce. ſeyng / howe all the countrey was tourned to them of Gaunt. and howe they were behynde / and dyd nat as other dyd. wherfore he ſent them worde ſurely / yt the gauntoyſe ſhulde lay ſiege to thē. And nat to departe tyll they had the towne / and ſlayne all thē with in. Whan theſe tydinges and meſſage came to And warpe / ſente fro Philyp Dartuell. Than the thre knyghtes anſwered hotely / and ſayde. howe they ſet but lytell by the manaſſyng of the ſonne of a tryer of hony / nor that ye herrtage of therle their lorde / ſhuld be ſo ſone gyuē to him / nor to none ſuche. ſayeng howe they wolde de
               
                  ••
               no
                  •
               
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                to dye in the quarell. Thus the meſſangers retourned agayne to Courtrey.
         
         
            ¶ Howe therle of Flaunders was at Lyſle / and howe Andewarpe was be ſieged by the gauntoyſe and flemynges. Cap. CCCC .iii.
            
               WHan Philyp Dartuell herde his meſſanger ſpeke / and report / howe they of the grayſon of And warpe ſette nothynge by hym. Than he ſware / y• what ſo euer it coſt him / or the coūtrey of Flaunders▪ he wolde nothyng entende / tyll he had taken that towne and caſt it downe to the erth / he was ſo ſore dyſpleaſed. He thought this to do / had bene well in his puyſſaūce / ſeynge that all flaunders was inclyned to hym. Whan he had ſoiourned a ſixe dayes at Courtrey / and had renewed their lawe / and hadde taken fealtie and homage of them / as though he had bene erle of Flaūders. than he returned to Gaunt / and ther he was met with proceſſion / with ſo great ioye. that the erle their naturall lorde: was neuer ſo honourably receyued. the people worſhypped hym lyke their god / bycauſe he gaue the counſaile wherby their towne recouered their eſtate and puiſſaūce. For it coude nat be eſtemed / the great riches and welth that came daily to them by water and by lande. Fro Bruges / fro Dan / and fro Sluce / and the lofe of breed that in thre wekes togyder / was worth an olde grote / was than worthe but four mytes. and the wyne that was worth .xxiiii. grotes / was than valued but at two grotes. As than euery thynge in Gaunt was better chepe than at Tourney / or at Ualencennes. Philyppe Dartuell than kepte a great ſtable of good horſes lyke a great prince / and he was as well ſtuffed in all thynge in his howſe / as though he had bene erle of Flaunders / and better than therle was apoynted at Lyſle. And alſo / he had through all Flaunders his offycers bayliffes / cōſtables / receyuours and other. who dayly brought him ſubſtaūce / wherby he maynteyned his aſtate. and he ware ſcarlet gownes / furred with myneuer: lyke as the duke of Brabant / or erle of Haynalt dyd. Alſo he hadde his chambre of accompte / to paye and to reken for euery thyng / as y• erle had. And he gaue dyuers ſuppers and banketes / to ladyes and damoſels in lyke maner as the erle had done before / and ſpared nother golde nor ſyluer for his pleaſure. And he wrote and called himſelfe Phylip Dart well / the regarde and ouer loker of Flaūders.
            THe erle of Flaunders beynge at Lyſle / had moche to thynke on / whan he ſawe his countrey ſo ſore rebelled agaynſt hym / and coude nat ſe that he was of puyſſance / as of himſelfe euer to recouer it agayn / for all the townes were in vnite / and of one acorde agaynſt hym / the whiche he coulde neuer for do / but by great force & puyſſaunce. for all the countrey ſpake nomore of him / nor dyd him no more honour / nor wolde nat knowe hym for their lorde / no more than he had neuer bene ſo. Than the alyaunce that he had with the duke of Burgoyne / who had maryed his doughter / the lady Margaret by whome the duke had two fayre ſonnes. this alyaunce / ſtode the Erle as than in good ſtede. It was happy alſo than for hym / y• kyng Charles was deed / and that the yonge kyng as than was vnder the gouerning of his vncle / the duke of Burgoyn / who myght leade the kyng at his pleasur. And alſo the kyng was yong and had good wyll to the warre / wherfore it was y• leſſe mayſtrie to ſtyrre him therto. And therle hoped that the duke of Burgoyne wolde ſone ſet hym theron / if he wolde ſhewe him howe he is boūde to ayde his men / whan their men wyll rebell agaynſt them. But ſome thought / that if kynge Charles had lyued ſtyll tyll that tyme / that he wolde haue done nothynge. and if he had: men ſuppoſed that he wolde therby anexed the countie of Flaunders / to the crowne of Fraunce / for therle of Flaūders was nat ſo well in his grace that he wolde haue done any thynge for hym / without he had knowen well why.
            ¶ Nowe let vs leaue to ſpeke of theſe deuyſes / tyll tyme be that we retourne therto agayne. but lette vs ſhewe howe the erle of Flaunders / beynge at Lyſle / After the great loſſe that he had at Bruges. he vnderſtode howe ſir Terrey Damayn / and ſir Fiurant de Heulle / kept ſtyll the towne of Andwarpe. and had kept it / euer ſythe the beſynes before Brugꝭ. and knewe well / that theſe knyghtꝭ were nat able to reſyſt agaynſt the puyſſance of Flaunders / if they came to lay ſiege therto: as it was thought y• they wolde do ſhortlye. Than to refreſſh the towne / therle called to him ſir Danyell of Halwyn / and ſayd. Sir: I wyll ye go to And warpe / and be ſouerayne capitayn there / and take with you a hundred and

fyftie ſpeares / a hundred croſbowes / and two hundred other varlettes / with ſpeares and paueſſes. and take ye hede to that gariſon / I gyue you the charge therof. and newe vitayle it with corne / whete / and otes / & ſault fleſſhe / and with wyne out fro our frendes / and neyghbours of Tourney / they wyll nat fayle vs at this nede. Sir ꝙ the knyght all this ſhalbe done / and ſir: I ſhall take as good hede to y• towne as I can / ſythe it pleaſe you that I ſhall ſo do. there ſhall none yuell come therto / by my fawte. Danyell ꝙ the erle / of that I am ſure. And ſo the knyght toke leaue of the erle / and went to Andewarpe / and there refreſſhed the towne with newe men of warre / vitayle and other thynges neceſſary.
            WHan Philyp Dartuell beyng in Gaūt vnderſtode the tydinges / howe they of Andwarp were refreſſhed with newe men. than he ſayd / he wolde prouyde for remedy / ſayng: howe it was nat to be ſuffred. For it was greatly to the preiudyce and dyſhonour of the countre of Flaūders / that this towne helde ſo agaynſt them. wherfore he ſayd / he wolde go and lay ſiege therto / and nat to departe thens / tyll he had beaten it downe / and put to dethe all tho that were within / knyghtes & other. Than he ſent his cōmaundement through the countre of Flaunders / that euery man ſhulde be redy the .ix. day of June / to be with him before Andwarpe. There was none that durſt diſobey his cōmaundement. ſo the men of all the good townes in Flaūders / and they of the franke of Bruges / made them redy. and came and layd ſiege before Andwarpe / and lay abrode in the feldes / in medowes and in marſſhes / and there about. And there was Philyppe Dartuell their capytayn / by whome they were all ordred / who helde a great eſtate before Andwarpe. Than he reared a tayllage in Flaunders / euery fyre: euery weke to pay four grotes / the ryche to beare out the feble / wherby he gate togyder moch money for there was none excuſed / but all payed. For he had ſeruaūtes for the nones through / all the countrey / who made euery man to paye / poore and ryche / whyder they wolde or nat. It was ſayd / he had at y• ſiege mo than a hūdred thouſande men / and the flemynges had pyled in the ryuer of Leſcalt / great pyles of great tymbre. ſo that no ſhyppe coulde come / fro Tourney to Andewarpe. & they had in their hooſt all thynges plentyfull / market with clothe / furres and other mercery. and euery ſaturday they had a market. and all the vyllagꝭ therabout brought thyder frutes. butter / mylke / cheſe / pulleyn / and other thynges. And they had tauernes as plentyous with wyne / as though they had bene in Bruſels / both renyſhe wyne / wyne of Poyctou / and of Fraunce / malueſeys and other wynes of ſtraunge countreis / & good chepe. Euery man myght go and come / paſſe and repaſſe without any parell. They of Heynalt / of Brabāt / of Almayne / and of Liege / but none out of Fraunce.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the gauntoyſe aſſayled the towne of Andwarpe dyuers tymes / and howe they ran before Lyſle / and in the countrey about on the realme of Fraunce. Cap. CCCCiiii.
            
               WHan̄e that ſir Danyell of Haulwyne / capytayne of Andwarpe / entred firſt in to the towne. he deuyded ye vitayle ther egally euery man his porcyon / and ſent away all the horſes▪ & beate downe all the howſes ioyninge to the walles. And couered them with erthe for feare of fyre & gonne ſhotte / wherof they of the hooſt had great plenty. Alſo they made all the women and chyldren to lodge in the churches and mynſters / and dyuers to auoyde the towne / and all dogges were clene auoyded or ſlayne / and caſt in to ye ryuer. The companyons that were within / made dyuers iſſues / and dyd moche domage to them of the hooſt without. There were within two bretherne ſquyers of Arthoyſe / Lambert of Lambres and Tryſtram. theſe two dyd dyuers tymes great feates of armes / and toke away dyuers tymes vitayle fro the hooſt / and priſoners alſo. Thus this ſiege contynued all the ſomer / and it was the entenſyon of Philyp Dartuell / and of his coūſayle to abyde ther / tyll they had famyſſhed the towne. for they ſawe well / by aſſautyng they ſhulde leſe moche of their people. They of Gaunt made on the hyll of Andwarpe a marueylus gret engyn .xx. fote large and .xl. foote longe. they called this engyn a moton / it was to caſt gret ſtones in to the towne / to beate downe houſes. alſo to make thē within afrayd / they made a marueylous great bombard of .l. fote of lengthe / ſhotyng ſtone of a marueylous weyght. & whan this bombarde ſhot / it might

well be harde by day tyme fyue myle of / and by nyght ten. and it made ſuche a noyſe in the goynge / as though all the dyuels of hell had bene in ye way. dyuers other engyns they had / wher with they put them of ye towne in great trouble howbeit the capitayns within dyd cōfort them of the towne / and made as good reſyſtence as they coulde. & wolde iſſue out a thre or four tymes in ye weke / wherby they gate more honour than blame / and more profyte than domage.
            WHyle this ſiege / laye thus ſtyll before And warpe / there deꝑted fro the hooſt a .xii. hūdred men / thynkyng to beate downe knightes and gentylmens houſes / ſuch as were 
                  •
               led out of Flaunders / & gone to dwell in Heynault / in Brabāt / and in Arthoyſe / with their wyues and chyldren / and ſo theſe gauntoiſe dyde as they purpoſed / & dyd moche hurt in Flaunders. they lefte no gentylmans houſe vnbrent or caſt downe to the erthe. And thanne they came agayne to Marlle the erles howſe / and beate downe all that they had left ſtādyng before. and ther they founde the cradell / wherin the erle was kept in his youthe / and brake it all to peces. And a fayre bayne / wherin he was wont to be bayned. Alſo they beate downe the chapell and bare away the bell / and than they went to Bruges / where they founde Peter de Boyſe / & Peter de Myrt / who dyd them great there / and gaue them great thanke of that they had doone. Than theſe rutters whan they had well refreſſhed them ſelfe at Bruges / toke their way to the bridge of warueſton / and paſſed the ryuer of Lyſe / and ſo came before the towne of Lyſle / and beate downe certayne wyndmyls / and ſet fyer of dyuers vyllages in Flaunders. Than there iſſued out of Lyſle a fote & a horſback / mo than four thouſande / and ſo ther were dyuers of the flemynges ſlayne and taken / and beheded after at Lyſle. & if they had bene well purſued there had ſcaked but a fewe. howe beit theſe rutters of Gaunt than entred in to Tourneſes / and dyd there moche hurt. and brent the towne of Helehyer / and other vyllages there about / parteyning to the realme of Fraūce. and than they returned with great ioy and proy / to the ſiege of Andwarpe. Tydinges came to the duke of Burgoyn / who was as thā at Bapaulmes in Arthoyſe / howe the gauntoyſe had pylled and ouerryn the coūtrey / and brent certayne vyllages in the realme of Fraūce. Than incontynent the duke wrote to the kyng / who was at Campayne / and to the duke of Berrey his brother / and to the duke of Burbon / & to the kyngꝭ counſayle / to the entent that they ſhulde fynde ſome remedy. and the duke of Burgoyn wolde nat / but yt the flemynges had done as they dyd for than he thought well / that the erle of Flaunders ſhulde be fayne to requyre the frēche kyng to helpe and ayde him / or els he was neuer likely to entre in his herytage of Flaunders. And alſo / all thynges conſydered / this warre ſomwhat diſpleaſed the duke of Burgoyne. for he was by the reaſon of his wyfe / after the deth of therle of Flaūders / next heryterto Flaunders.
            IN this ſeaſon the erle of Flaunders was at Heden / and it was ſhewed hym / howe theſe rutters of Gaunt had bene at Merlle / and beaten downe his howſe in the diſpyte of hym / and ye chambre wherin he was borne. and alſo howe they had broken the fount wherin he was chriſtened. And alſo his armery and bayne all to broken / where with he was ſore dyſpleaſed / and had many ymaginacyons. for he ſawe his countrey loſt / and tourned agaynſt him / except Teremount and Andewarpe. And he coulde ſe no recouery / without it were by the puyſſaunce of Fraūce. Than he determyned / all thyng conſydered / that he wolde goo and ſpeke with his ſonne in lawe / the duke of Burgoyn / who was as than at Bapaulmes / and ſo to ſhewe him all his beſynes. and thervpon departed fro Hedyn and went to Arras / and ther reſted two dayes. and the next day he went to Bapaulmes / and ſo alyghted at the erles place / whiche as thanne was his owne. for he was erle of Arthoyſe / for the good lady his mother was deed. The duke of Burgoyn had great compaſſyon of the erle his father in lawe / and ryghtſwetely dyd comforte him / and ſayd. Sir: by the faythe that I owe to the kyng / I ſhall entēde to nothyng / but to helpe you / or els we ſhall leſe all the remnant. for it is nat conuenyent / that ſuch raſkall as be nowe in Flaunders / ſhulde be ſuffred to rule a countrey. for by them chyualry and gentylnes myght be diſtroyed / ye? and conſequentlye all chriſtendome. The erle was well recomforted in y• the duke ſayd / he wolde helpe to ayde him. and ſo than he departed and went to the cyte of Aras. All this ſeaſon therle had in priſon a two hūdred men of dyuers good townes in Flaunders / who were hardly kept / they had nothyng but breed and water. and euery day it was ſhewed them / ye they ſhulde leſe their heedes. And whan the erle was retourned and come to Arras / in ye honour of god and of our lady / he caused

thē all to be delyuered. for he ſawe well / that all that was fortuned in Flaūders / was nat by their meanes / nor they were nothyng gilty therof. And ſo he made them to be ſworne to be true and faythfull to him / and ſo dyd gyue to eche of thē golde and ſyluer / to go to Lyſle and to Doway / or whyder as they lyſt them ſelfe / wherby therle dyd get great loue. And ſo than he went to Heden.
         
         
            Of the requeſt that the duke of Burgoyne made to the frenche kyng / and why the kynge toke on hym to beare the flyenge harte. Cap. CCCC .v.
            
               THe duke of Burgoyn for gate nat the couenaunt / that he made with his father in lawe / th erle of Flaūders. And ſoo he departed fro the towne of Bapaulmes / and with hym ſir Guy of Tremoyle / and ſir John̄ of Uyen / who was admyrall of Fraunce / who dyd all his payne to comfort the erle. And they two were chyefe of counſayle with the duke. And ſo the duke & his company came to ſaynt Lyſe / where as the kynge was / and his two vncles with hym / the dukes of Berry and of Burbone. and ſo ther the duke of Burgoyn was receyued with great ioy / and he was demaūded tydinges of Flaunders / and of the ſiege of Andwarpe. and the duke anſwered them right ſagely / and ſhewed all the mater. And whan he ſawe his tyme / he toke aparte the duke of Berrey / and ſhewed hym howe the gauntoyſe full of pride / had done their deuoyre and payne / to diſtroy all noblenes. And alſo he ſhewed / howe they had brent and pylled on the realme of Fraunce / the which was a thyng preiudicyall / and to the confuſyon and ſhame of the realme of Fraunce. ſayng howe it ought nat ſo to be ſuffered. Fayre brother quod the duke of Berrey / we wyll ſpeke with the kynge in this mater / we two are chyfe of his coūſayle. ſo yt if we enfourme the kyng therof / ther is none ſhall ſay agaynſt our ententes. Howe beit / to moue warre bytwene Fraunce and Flaunders / the whiche hath bene longe in peace. It behoueth that we haue ſome laufull tytell / and that the other barones and lordes of Fraunce / be ioyned and agreed therto. or els ꝑaduenture we might be blamed / and beare all the faut / if it fortuned nat well. for the kyng is yonge / and euery man knoweth: that he wyll ſoone agre to y• we counſayle him. If the mater do well / than well ſhall come therof. And if any yuell come therby / we ſhall than beare ye charge / and be more blamed than any other: and good cauſe why. For euery man ſhall ſay / beholde yonder the kyngꝭ vncles / the duke of Berry and of Burgoyn / howe yuell they haue counſayle the kynge. they haue brought ye realme of Fraūce in to warr / where as it neded nat. wherfore dete brother I ſay / let vs call togyder / the mooſt parte of the prelates and nobles of the realme of Fraunce. and than let vs ſhewe them all the mater / in the preſence of the kyng. to whom the matter perſonally toucheth / bycauſe of the herytage of Flaūders. and ſo therby we ſhall here generally euery mannes wyll / and opinyon. ye ſay ryght well quod the duke of Burgoyne / and as ye haue deuyſed / ſo ſhall it be done. And with thoſe ſame wordes / the kynge entred in to the ſame chambre / with an hauke on his hande / and ſo he ſpake merely to his vncles / & ſayd. Amy fayre vncles / what mater is that ye ſpeke of: in ſo great counſayle / I wolde gladly knowe it / if I myght. Sir ꝙ the duke of Berrey / ye may knowe it right well for it parteyneth greatly to you. Sir: beholde here your vncle ye duke of Burgoyn / who complayneth greatly of them of Flaunders. for the falſe villayns of Flaūders / hath put out of his herytage therle their naturall lorde / and all noble men. And as nowe: they lye at ſiege before Andwarpe / with mo than a hūdred thouſande flemynges / wherin they haue beſieged a great nombre of gētlemen. and theſe flemynges haue a capitayn / called Philyppe Dartuell / pure englyſſhe in his courage. and he hath ſworne / neuer to depart thens / tyll he haue his wyll of the towne / and of them that be within it. without ſo be that your power of Fraūce reyſe / hym fro the ſiege / ye which he hath reſarued in his othe. therfore ſir / how ſay you? wyll ye ayde your coſyn of Flauuders / and conquere agayne his herytage / the whiche theſe proude villayns hath taken fro hym. By my faythe ꝙ the kyng fayre vncles / I haue great wyll therto. and for goddꝭ ſake let vs do it / I deſyre none other thyng / but to be armed. for as yet I neuer bare armure. it behoueth me / if I thynke to raygne in puyſſāce and honour / to lerne the feates of armes. theſe two dukes eche of thē regarded other / and had great pleaſure of the kynges wordes. Than the

duke of Berry ſpake agayne and ſayd. Sir / ye haue ſayd paſſingly well: and thus to do ſir / ye are bounde for dyuers reaſons. Sir the coūty of Flaunders / is of the demayne of Fraunce. & ye haue ſworne and we for you / to kepe & maynteyne in their right all your liege men. and alſo ſir / therle of Flaūders is your coſyn / wherfore ye ought to loue hym. And therfore ſir / ſythe ye be in this good mynde / kepe you ſo ſtyll: & anſwere therafter / to euery perſon that ſpeketh to you therof. And ſir / we ſhall aſſemble haſtely y• prelates and barones of your realme / and ſhall ſhewe thē all the mater in your preſens. And ſir than if ye wyll ſpeke as hertely as ye do now to vs / than euery man wyll ſay / we haue a kynge of highe enterpriſe & of noble wyll and corage. by my faithe ꝙ the kyng fayre vncles / I wolde we ſhulde be redy to morowe next / to go to that iourney. for fro henſ forth / the gretteſt pleaſure that I deſyre / is to go in to Flaūders / to abate the pride of the flemynges. Of the whiche wordes the two dukes had great ioye. than came to them the duke of Burbone & they ſhewed hym all the mater: as ye haue herde before. And of y• great deſyre that the kyng had to go in to Flaū
               ders / wherof y• duke of Burbon had great ioy. Thus the mater hanged in this eſtate. And the kyng and his vncles wrote letters to the lordes of the counſayle of Fraūce. Deſyring them / to come at a day aſſigned to Campyen / to a ꝑlyament that ſhulde be ther holden / for certayne beſyneſſe of the realme of Fraūce. & ſo euery man obeyed as it was reaſon: & the kyng was right gladde of that tidyngꝭ. His mynde was ſo ſore therof / that no man coude ſet hym therfro. And the kyng ſayd oft tymes / that ther was to gret delayes made in the mater. for he ſayd / that he thought / if one ſhulde enterpriſe a great mater it ſhulde nat be long delayed. for in the delay / y• enemyes take aduyce to their aduaūtage. And alſo whan the parels of warr was layd to hym than wolde he anſwere and ſay. ye / he that neuer enterpriſeth / lytell or no thynge atchyueth. Thus the yonge kyng oft tymes deuyſed / with the knightes and ſquyers of his chambre.
         
         
            ¶ Nowe ſhall I ſhewe you a dreme / that fortuned to the king in the ſame ſeaſon / whyle he lay at ſaynt Lyſe: by occaſyon of whiche dreme / he ordayned the deuyſe of the flyeng Hart / as I was than enformed. Ca. iiii. C .vi.
            IT fortuned whyle the kynge lay at ſaynt Lyſe: on a night as he lay in his bedde a ſlepe / he had a viſyon. It ſemed to hym proꝑly that he was in the cyte of Aras / wher as he had neuer ben before / and with hym all the chiualry of the realme of Fraūce. And he thought y• thyder came to hym therle of Flaunders / & dyd ſet on his fiſt a fayre faucon pelerin / ſayeng to him thus. Sir / I gyue you this faucon / for the beſt that euer I ſawe: y• beſt flyeng & beater downe of foules. Of whiche preſent / the kyng thought he had great ioye / & ſayd. Fayre coſyn I thāke you. And therwith / he thought he regarded the conſtable of Fraunce ſir Olyuer Clyſſon / and ſayd vnto hym. ſir Olyuer / let vs two go in to the feldes to proue this gentyll faucon / that my coſyn of Flaūders hath gyuen me. And than he thought / the cōſtable anſwered hym & ſayd. ſir lette vs go whan it pleaſeth you. and ſo than he thought / that they toke their horſes they two alone / and went in to the feldes: & founde plentic of heerons to flye at. Than the kyng ſayd / conſtable / let the faucon flye / & we ſhall ſe howe ſhe wyll chaſe her game. Than the cōſtable caſt of the faucon / & ſhe mounted ſo highe in to y• ayre / that they coude ſcant ſe her. & the kyng thought ſhe toke her way ſtreyght in to Flaūders. than the kynge ſayd / lette vs ryde after my byrde / I wolde nat leſe her. and ſo he thought they rode after / tyll they came to a great maryſe / and to a thicke wode. Than y• kyng ſayd / let vs light a fote / for we can nat paſſe this wode a horſ backe And ſo they a lighted: and thā he thought that varlettes came to thē and toke their horſes. & ſo the kynge and the conſtable entred in the wode with great payne / and traueyled ſo long y• they came to a fayre great launde. And ther y• kyng thought / he ſawe his faucon chaſyng herons / & fightyng with them & they with hym. And it ſemed to the kyng / that his faucon chaſed ſo y• herons / that at laſt he loſt the ſight of her. Wherwith he thought he was ſore diſpleaſed / ſeyng that he coude nat folowe his hauke. & thought he ſayde to the conſtable. A / I feare me I ſhall leſe my faucon / wherof I am ſorie. And I haue no lure nor nothynge els / wherwith to call her agayne. And at this poynt / the kynge thought that there apered ſodenly before hym / a great Hart with wynges / and enclyned hym ſelfe before hym: wherof he had great ioye. & thought howe he ſayd to the conſtable. Sir / abyde you here / and I wyll mount on this Hart / and ſo folowe my faucon. And ſo the kynge thought / he mounted on this flyeng Hart, and howe y• hart

acordyng at the kynges deſyre / dyde beare him ouer all the great wodes and trees. and ther he ſame howe his faucon beate downe great plentie of foules / ſo y• it was marueyle to beholde. And than it ſemed to the kynge / whan his faucon had long flyen and beaten downe many herons. Than he thought he called her / and incō
               tynent y• faucon came and ſat her downe on his fyſt. And than the Hart flewe agayne ouer the wodes / & brought the kyng to the ſame launde / where as the cōſtable taryed for hym: who had great ioye of his comynge. And aſſoone as he was a lyghted / he thought the Hart departed / and than neuer ſawe hym after. and ſo ther the kyng thought howe he ſhewed to the conſtable howe that the Hart had borne hym eaſly: he neuer rode ſo eaſly before. and alſo he thought he ſhewed hym / of the bountie of his faucon. And therwith it ſemed to hym / that his varlettꝭ cāe to them and brought them their horſes. And ſo they mounted and toke the hyghe waye / and ſo came agayne to Arras. And therwith the king awoke and had great marueyle of that viſyon / And he remembred euery thynge therof ryght well / and ſhewed it to them of his chābre / that were about hym. And the fygure of this Hart pleaſed hym ſo moche / that all his ymaginacion was ſet theron. And this was one of y• firſte incydentes / that whan he went in to Flaūders to fight with the flemynges / he toke to his deuyſe to beare the flyeng Hart.
            PHilyppe Dartuell / for all his good aduentur at the begyuning of his batayle agaynſt them of Bruges / and for all the good fortune / that he had in the diſcontyture of therle and of them of Bruges. yet for all that he was no ſubtyll man of warre / nother in ſautyng nor layeng of ſiege. For he had nat ben brought vp therin in his youthe / he had bene more vſed to fiſſhe with an angle rod in the riuer of Leſcalt. The whiche well apered whyle he laye at ſiege before And warpe / for he coude nat get y• towne He thought by preſumpcyon / that the ſyght of hym ſhulde haue made them of Andewarpe to haue yelded thē to hym / but they were nothyng ſo diſpoſed. For they bare them ſelfe lyke valyant men / and made often tymes ſcrimyſſhes at the barryers / and ſlewe and hurt dyuers of the flemyngꝭ: and drewe agayne in to their towne without any domage. And of ſuche iſſues Lā
               bert of Lambres and Tryſtram his brother / & the lorde of Lunelhyen bare the greatteſt renōe The flemynges ſawe well / howe the dykes of the towne were large and full of water / ſo that they coude nat a ꝓche to aſſatle it / but with moche payne & danger. Than they determyned amonge them ſelfe to gette fagottes and ſtrawe / and ſo to fyll the dykes to come to the walles / to fight hande to hande. And as they ordeyned ſo it was done. Howe be it / they within made no count of thē / and ſayd. that if ther were no treaſon among thē ſelfe nor in the towne / they wold ſet no thyng by the ſiege that they ſawe layde to them. And ſo therfore ſir Danyell of Halwyn / who was capitayne there / to bring euery thyng out of doute / kept hym ſelfe day and night euer aboue thē of the towne. and he ſo ordeyned that there was none of them of y• towne ſhulde come on the walles of the towne / without cōpany of ſome of the men of warr: if they dyde / they loſt their heedꝭ for their labours. this lay ſtyll this ſiege. the flemyngꝭ had great plenty of vitayls comyng to them by land and by water / for they were lordes of all the countrey of Flaūders. for alwayes for wynning of money / the countreys of Flaunders / Holande / zelande / and Brabant / and alſo parte of Haynault by ſtelthe / brought euer vitayles to their hooſt. This Philyp dartuell had euer his courage more engliſſhe than french / and wolde gladly that he had ben alyed with y• kyng of Englande. Wherby he thought that if the frenche kynge / or duke of Burgoyne came on him with an army / that he ſhulde be ayded by the englyſſhmen. He had all redy in his hooſt a. CC. archers of Englande / the whiche were ſtolen out of y• garyſon of Calys / & ſo toke wages ther of him / and were wekely payed.
         
         
            ¶ Of the meſſangers that Philyppe Dartuell ſent in to Englande and alſo in to Fraunce / and of the deth of ſir Parducas Dalbret. Cap. iiii. C .vii.
            
               PHilyp Dartuell / to the entent to coloure his dedes / & to knowe what was ſayde of hym in Fraūce. He determyned to write in the name of the hole countre of Flaunders / to the frēche kyng. ſubmytting them ſelfe / & requyring y• kyng to tak
                  •
                ſome buſynes for thē: as to bring thē agayne i
                  •
                to parfyte loue with their lorde the erle of Flaū
               ders.

So thus he wrote certayne letters to the kyage and to his counſayle / and delyuered thē to a meſſanger. Commaundyng hym / to go to the kynge with the letters / and ſo he dyde. And rode ſo long / that he came to ſaynt Lyſe / where he founde the kynge and his vncles / to whome he delyuered his letters. The kyng toke & reed his letter / in ye preſens of his vncles and of his counſayle. Aſſoone as they were reed and well vnderſtande / they dyde nothynge but laughed therat. And than̄e it was ordayned / to take the meſſanger / and to ſet hym in priſon / bycauſe he was come to the preſens of the kyng / wtout any ſaue conduct. & ſo ther he remayned more than thre wekes. Whan Philyppe Dartuell knewe it / he had great indygnacion therat / and cauſed to come before hym all the capitayns of the hooſt / and than he ſayd to them. Sirs: ye may ſe what honour the frenche kynge dothe to vs / ſythe we haue written to hym ſo amyably, and ther vpon he hath recayned our meſſenger / and kepeth hym in priſon. Certainly this conſtrey / neth vs ſore / to be alyed with the engliſſhmen. for thynke nat the contrary / but that the duke of Burgoyne / who is all in Fraunce. and leadeth the kyng there as he lyſt hym ſelfe / for the kyng is but a chylde. thynke you yt he wyll leaue this mater as it is: nay ſurly▪ enſample by our meſſanger / whome he kepeth in priſone. Wherfore we haue good cauſe to ſende in to England / as wel for the comon weale of Flaūders / as for our ſuretye / and to gyue dout and feare to our enemyes. Therfore I wolde we ſhulde ſende a ten or .xii. of the moſt notableſt of our men / wherby the knowledge therof might come in to Fraūce ſo that the kyng ther and his counſayle / ſhulde thynke / how we wyll alye our ſelfe with y• kyng of Englande / their aduerſary. how beit I wyll nat that the ſame alyance be ſhortly made without we haue more nede / thanne we haue as yet. but I wolde our men ſhulde entre in to a communicacyon / and ſo to doo we haue iuſt cauſe. and to demaunde of the kyng of Englande the ſōme of two hūdred thouſande crownes / which ſomme / Jaques Dartuell my father / and the countrey of Flaūders. lent ſomtyme to ye kyng of Englande / whyle he was before Tourney at the ſiege / to pay therwith his ſowdyers. and ſo I wolde our men ſhulde ſay to the kyng of Englande and to his vncles / and to his counſayle. howe that generally / all the countye of Flaunders / and the good townes therof ſuche as lent the ſayd sōme / deſyreth to haue agayn the ſayd ſōme. And ſo that done / than to offre the kynge of England to enter into Flaunders / and ſo into Fraūce if he lyſt. For ſurely I thynke it were bett for vs to ayde ourſelfe with our owne / than to haue helpe of ſtraungers. And I thynke / we ſhall neuer attayne to it / ſoner than nowe. for y• kynge and realme of Englande / I thynke wyll nat forſake the alyaūce / of ſuche a coūtre as flā
               ders is nowe. For as nowe / thēglyſſhmen haue nat on y• ſee coſt / bytwene Burdeux & Scluſe. Except Calys / Chierburge / and Breſt: where for to lande and entre in to Fraunce. Therfore the countre of Flaunders / ſhulde ſerue thē well at the poynt. For Bretayne except Breſt / is cloſed agaynſt them. And the duke of Bretaygne hath ſworne to be good french. And if he be nat he wyll cōe therto / bycauſe of the loue of his coſyn germayne / therle of Flaunders. Than all they that herde Philyp ſpeke / anſwered & ſayd. Philyp / ye haue full well ſpoken: & we all wyll that it be thus done. For whoſoeuer wyll the cō
               trary / loueth nat the comon ꝓfyte of Faūders.
            Philyp Dartuell taryed nat long / but that he wrote to Peter de Boyſe & to Peter de myrt who were capitayns of Brugꝭ. And alſo to thē of Ipre and Courtrey: ſhewyng them his ſaid purpoſe. And all they thought it good / ſo to be done. So ther were choſen of the good townes of Flaunders / one or two burgeſſes of euery towne / and out of the towne of Gaūtſixe. Firſt there was choſen / Fraūces Atreman & Raſe de Uerdell / Loys de vaux / ſir John̄ ſtotler / Martyn bondrell / water iacob berner / and a clerke who was choſen to be byſſhop of Gaūt by pope Urbane. For mayſter John̄ dalbreſt / who had ben deane of our lady church in Turney / he aduyſed in his tyme / that ther ſhulde be a biſſhop in Gaunt. And to poſſes & haue the profytes / y• the byſſhop of Turney ſhulde haue had. and ſo whan theſe .xii. burgeſſes were redy aparelled / they toke their leaue and departed fro the ſiege before And warpe / about the begynning of the moneth of July. And dyde ſo moche / that they came to Calais: and the capitayne ther / called ſir Johan Dalbrenes receyued thē. And whan he knewe that they wolde go into Englāde / he purueyed them of ſhyppes. And ſo they taryed there but thre dayes / & toke their paſſage & aryued at Douer / and ſo went to Lōdon. at which tyme the kyng & ꝑte of his coūſayle: as 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Johh̄ mōtagu / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Symon burle / & ſir Willm̄ beachāp were at Weſtm̄. To enheryte 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Perducas dalbret / of all the barony of Chaumont in gaſcone the which was as than / in the kynges handꝭ. I

ſhall ſhewe you by what maner. king Edward of olde tyme / had gyuen it to ſir Johan Chandos / and he helde it as long as he lyu
                  ••
               : & after his dethe / it was gyuen to sc Thomas Felton. And he was as than newly deed. and ſo therby the landes fell agayne into the kynges handes the whiche lande / might nat long be without a gouernour to kepe it. For it ioyned to y• landes of the lorde Dalbret / who as than̄e was good frenche. Than it was abuyſed / by the kyng of Englandes counſayle / that ſir Perducas Dalbret / who had well ſerued y• kynges of Englād / bothe Edwarde / Richarde / and the prince: and all the countre of Burdeloyſe / more than .xxx. yer. wherfore it was thought / he was well worthy to haue that lande / and was well able to defende & kepe it fro all men. Sir Perducas dalbret / whan he receyued this lādes. He ſayd vnto the kyng / in the preſens of his coūſayle / and other noble men. ſir / I take and receyue this herytage / to me and to myne heyres / on the condycion to ſerue you agaynſt all men: except the houſe of Dalbret / fro whens I am come. For agaynſt them ſhall I neuer make warre / if they ſuffre myne heritage to be in reſt and peace. the kyng anſwered and ſayd: he was content. And ſo put hym in poſſeſſyon of the lande.
            Nowe ſhall I ſhewe you / what fell of this Parducas Dalbret. Whan he was come in to Gaſcoyne / and had taken poſſeſſyon of the landes / and the ſeneſhall of Burdeloyſe / had gyuen hym poſſeſſyon. Than the lorde Dalbret had great ioy therof / for he thought well than / that his coſyn wolde make hym no warr. And ſo y• landes of Dalbret and Chaumont / abode in good loue & reſt. And the lorde Dalbret held in great loue his coſyn / for he hoped euer / after his dyſſeaſe / he wolde put hym in poſſeſſyon of the ſayde landes of Chaumounte. But this ſir Parducas / was nat ſo mynded. for at laſt whan he lay on his deth bed / and that he ſawe he muſt nedes dye. he called before him all his men / and dyd ſēde for a yong ſquier of his / a proper man of armes: called Parduche / and ſayd to him. I gyue the here in the preſence of all my men / all the landꝭ of Chaumōt / ſo thou be euer good englyſſhe: and true & faythfull to the kyng of Englande. but I wyll yt the houſe of Dalbert / out of the whiche we become / that thou make there agaynſt no warre / wtout they do ſome outrage to the. The ſquier anſwered & ſayd. ſir / your cō
               maūdement ſhalbe done. this Perduche of Albert was lorde of Chaumōt in gaſcone. & thus dyed ſir ꝑducas / I can ſhewe no more of hym.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the kyng of Englandes coū
               ſayle mocked the flemynges / and of the priſoners that were exchaunged. Cap. CCCC .viii.
            
               WHan theſe gauntoyſe were come to London / the kynge & his counſayle was certifyed therof. & ſo he ſent to them / to knowe what they wold haue. and ſo they came all in a company to the palays of Weſtmynſter and there they founde redy the duke of Lancaſtre / the erle of Buckyngham / therle of Saliſbury / and the mooſt parte of the kynges counſayle. Howe be it / the kynge was nat preſent at their firſt comynge. Theſe men of Flaunders and of Gaunte / enclyned them to the lordes of Englande. and than the clerke that was choſen byſſhop of Gaūt / ſpake for them all / and ſayde. My lordes / we become hyder / and ſent fro the towne of Gaunt / & fro the hole countre of flaunders. To haue counſayle / confort / and ayde of the kyng of Englāde. Upon certayne artycles and good reaſons / of the aūcyent alyaūces / bytwene Englande and Flaūders. They deſyre nowe to renewe y• ſame. for it is nowe nedefull to the coūtre of Flaūders / the which is as now without a lorde. The good townes and the coū
               tre / hath as nowe but a gouernour / the whiche is a man called Philyp Dartuell. who recommaundeth hym principally to the kyng / and to you all y• be of his counſayle. & he deſyreth you to take in gre / this offre that we ſhall make to you. And that is / whan ſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe y• kynge of Englande / to arryue in Flaunders / he ſhall fynde the countre opyn to receyue him / And there to reſt and refreſſhe hym / as longe as it ſhall pleaſe hym. And alſo / he ſhall haue at his commaundement / of the countre of flaū
               ders / a hundred thouſande men armed redy to do hym ſeruyce. Moreouer my lordes / the coū
               tre of Flaunders / maketh one requeſt / and that is this. To haue agayne / two hundred thouſande crownes / that ſomtyme Jakes Dartuell and the good townes of Flaūders / lent to king Edwarde of good memorie. At the ſege of turney / and at the ſiege of Calais. For it is the entencyon of the good townes of Flaūders / that or this alyaūce paſſe any farther / to be firſt repayed of this ſayd ſom. And that done / than y• king of England & all his / may well ſay / y• they & the flemyngꝭ are frendes togyder. and y• they haue fre entre into Flaunders / to go where as

it ſhall pleaſe them. And whan the lordes of Englande herde thoſe wordes and requeſt / they began eche of thē to regarde other: and ſome ſmyled. Than the duke of Lācaſtre sayd. Fayre lordes of Flaūders / your wordes and demaunde requyreth to haue coūſayle. Go your wayes to London to your logynges / and the kyng ſhall take aduyſe on your requeſtes: and ſhall ſo anſwere you / that ye ought to be contente. The gauntoyſe anſwered and ſayd. God graunt it. and ſo they departed fro the counſayle / and the lordes abode ſtyll to guyder: & began to laughe amonge them ſelfe / and ſayd. Haue ye nat ſene theſe fleminges / and herde their requeſtes that they make. They demande to be conforted / & ſay / howe they haue nede therof. and yet for all that / they demaunde to haue our money. It is no reſonable requeſt / that we ſhulde both ayde and pay. So thus they reputed the flemynges right proude and preſumptuous ▪ to demaūde to haue agayne / two hundred thouſande crownes: of ſo olde dette (as they ſayd) of a .xl. yere paſte. There was neuer a better poynt for the frenche kyng / if he wyll / than to come into flaū
               ders. For if the flemynges had nat as than / demaunded the foreſayd ſomme of crownes / but haue deſyred the kyng of his confort and ayde. The kyng wolde haue gone or ſent into Flaū
               ders / ſo puiſſauntlye: to haue bydden batayle (with the ayde of the flemynges) to any prince of the worlde. But it wente otherwyſe: as ye ſhall herafter in the ſtorie.
            UIdynges came into Fraunce to the coū
               ſayle there. Nowe that Philyp Dartwell (whoſe courage was all englyſſhe) and y• countre of Flaunders / had ſent in to Englande certayne of their men / to make aly aūces with thenglyſſhmen. And the voyce ran / and the comon renome: that the kyng of Englande with a great puiſſaūce / ſhulde come in that ſeaſon & aryue in Flaūders ▪ and to lye in Gaunt. theſe tidinges were lightly to be beleued / howe that the flemynges wolde fortify them ſelfe ▪ in ſome maner awyſe. Than it was deuyſed / y• the meſſanger that was come fro Philyppe Dartuell / whōe they helde in prison ▪ ſhulde be delyuered. And to ſay the trouthe / ther was no cauſe why to retayne hym. ſo he was delyuered / & ſent to thoſt before And warpe. The ſame ſeaſon they of Bruge▪ had taken certayn burgeſſes of turney / and kept thē in priſon. The flemynges ſhe wed well / howe they had as lyue haue warre wt Fraūce as peace. And whan they of Tourney / ſawe that they dyde ſo moche ▪ than they atrapped / and toke certayne burgeſſes of Courtrey and ſo kept them in priſon in Tourney. Thus ther engendred hatred dayly / bytwene Fraūce and Flaūders. howbeit the lordes of Tourney wolde nat that their dede / ſhulde be a tytell of warr to the flemynges / who were their neighbours / without it were by the cōmaūdement of the frenche kyng. The whiche cōmaundement they had nat as than. Therefore they deuyſed to ſende two of their burgeſſes to y• flemynges / & to haue in eſchange / priſoners for priſoners. ſo ther was choſen to go on this meſſage / Johan Bone and John̄ Pycart. And ſo they wente to thooſt before And warpe / and ſpake with Philyp dartuell. Who for the honour of the cytie of Tourney / and nat for loue of the frenche kyng (as he ſayd) welcomed: and receyued thē amyably. For Philyp ſayd: howe the kyng had nat deſerued their loue. Whan that their meſſāger ſent to hym for a good entent / ſhulde be put in priſon. ſir ꝙ the two burgeſſes. ye haue agayn your meſſāger. That is true ꝙ Philyp / but y• was more for feare than for loue. But ſirs / tell me wherefore ye become to vs. ſir ꝙ the burgeſſes / it is to haue agayne our men of the cytie of Tourney / that be in priſon at Bruges. A ſirs ꝙ Philyp / if they kepe them / in lyke wiſe / ſo do ye kepe of our men of Cortrey. but ſirs / ye ſhall nat leſe your comyng. Rendre agayne ours / & we ſhall rendre yours. ſir ꝙ they / ye ſpeke well and ſo ſhall it be done. So ther they were acorded to make this eſchange. and ſo Philyp dart well wrote to Peter de Boyſe and to Peter de Myrt / beyng at Bruges: that they ſhulde delyuer the priſoners of Tourney / & to receyue for them the priſoners of Courtrey. And ſo whan they deꝑted / Philyp Dartuell ſayd to thē. ſirs / take hede what I ſay / I wyll nat betray you. ye be of the towne of Turney / the which is vnder the frenche kyng / with whom we wyll haue no treatie / vntyll the ſeaſon y• Teremonde & Andwarpe be opyned to vs. Therfore ſirs / come no more to vs / for they that do / ſhall nat go home agayne. Therfore cōſtrayne your people & marchauntꝭ / nother to come nor go in to Flaūders. & they do on their ieoꝑdy. For we loke for none other thyng / but that the frenche kyng wyll cōe and make vs warre. The burgeſſes of Tourney vnderſtode well thoſe wordꝭ / & ſo deꝑted & returned to Turner: & ſhewed as ye haue herd before. Than ther was made a cōmaūdemēt / y• non ſhulde go a marchandiſe in to flaūders. on payne / to be in the indygnacyon of the frenche

kyng. and ſo the priſoners were delyuered but they of Tourney durſt nat marchaūdyſe with them of Flaūders. But whan they wolde haue any marchaūdyſe of Flāders: than they wolde go to Ualencennes. For they of Heynaulte / of Holande / of zelande / of Brabant / and of Liege might go and come / and make their marchaū
               dyſe through all Flaunders. ¶ Thus the ſege laye ſtyll before Andwarpe. Philyp Dartuell and they of Gaunt / lay on the mount of Andewarpe / on the ſyde towarde Heynalte. & there were his engyns / and great bombardes & gonnes: The whiche made ſuche noyſe whan they were loſed / that the noyſe therof ▪ might well be herde ſixe leages of. and next were lodged they of Bruges / beyonde the ryuer of Leſcalt. And next them: they of Ipre / of Courtrey / of Proprigne / of Caſſell / and of the franke of Bruges ſo that they vyroned rounde aboute the towne. Thus the towne was enuyroned. And the flē
               mynges thought by this ſiege / to famyne them within. And ſomtyme they within wolde yſſue out / & ſomtyme wan and ſomtyme loſt / as auē
               ture falleth often tymes in ſuche caſes. but ther was none aſſaut made. for Philyppe dartuell wolde nat foliſſhely aduenture his men / for he ſayd: he wolde haue them without any aſſaut. Seyng / howe they coude haue no conforte fro any parte. A byrde coude ſcant haue flyen in to the towne / but that ſome of the hoſt ſhulde haue ſene her. It was ſo ſet rounde about.
         
         
            ¶ Letters ſent to Philyp dartuell fro the cōmyſſaries of the frenche kyng. And howe the meſſangers that bare the letters / were taken and ſet in priſone. Cap. CCCC .ix.
            
               NOwe let vs retourne to the french kyng. His vncles & the coūſayle of Frāce detmyned to ſende to Turney / certayne prelates and knyghtes of the realme / to treate with the flemynges / and to knowe more playnly their entētes. So ther were apoynted to go to Tourney / ſir Myles of Ormayns byſſhop of Beauuoys / the byſſhop of Anxere / the byſſhop of Lan / ſir Guy of Honcourt / and ſir Tryſtram de boyſe. And ſo all theſe came to Tourney / as cōmyſſaries fro the frenche kynge. And ther was Johan Bone enfant and John̄ Pycart / who were newly cōe thyder / fro the ſege before Andwarpe. and they ſhewed to theſe cōmyſſaries and lordꝭ of Frāce howe that Philyppe Dartuell / whan they toke their leaue of hym / ſayd to them. ſirs / we wyll neuer harken to any treatie / tyll And warp and Teremonde be to vs opyned. Well ꝙ theſe lordes / Philyp Dartuellis of great pride. how beit / yet he is nat mayſter of all the good townes in Flaunders. Therfore / let vs ſende & write to Gaunte / to Bruges / and to Ipre: & let vs ſende to euery towne a letter & a meſſanger. We muſt haue ſome maner of entre of comunycacion / yf we purpoſe to begyn. Than they wrote thre letters to the thre pricipall townes of Flaūders / & in euery lr̄e / they began euer with Philyp dart well the cōtent of the ſayd letts here foloweth.
            TO Philyppe Dartuell and to his cōpanyes / and to the good people of the thre townes of Flaūders / and to the franke of Bruges. Pleaſe it you to knowe / that the frēch king hath ſent vs into theſe parties. In hope y• good peace and concorde may be made / bytwene the noble prince therle of Flaūders his coſyn / & the comors of the countre of Flaūders. For the renome and brute rynncth / Howe y• ye go about / to ſeke alyaūce with y• kyng of Englande. Whiche thyng is agaynſt reaſon / & to the preiudice of the realme of Fraūce / & of the crowne royall the which the kyng may in no wyſe ſuffre. wherfore we deſyre you / in y• name of the frēch kyng / that ye wyll gyue vs ſauecōduct. To thētent y• we may go and cōe / and ſende in & out to make the peace. And to bring the mater to ſuche a cō
               cluſyon / that the kyng may be cōtent. Prayeng you / to write to vs an anſwere of your ententes in this behalfe. And thus oure lorde kepe you. Written at Tourney / the .xvi. day of Octobre.
            Whan theſe thre letters cōteyning one thing were writen and ſealed / they were delyuered to thre men. And it was ſayde to them. ss / ye ſhall go to Gaūt / ye to Bruges / and ye to Ipre. And bring vs agayne an anſwere. they anſwered it ſhulde be done / & ſo they deꝑted euery man his way. And whan the one of thē aryued at Gaūt / Philyp dartuell was ther the ſame tyme / or els they of Gaūt / wolde nat haue opyned the letter without hym. & ſo he opyned y• letter & reed it / & whan he had done he laughed therat. & ſo depted fro Gaūt / & returned to the ſege before Andwarp & bare the lr̄e with hym / but the meſſāger

abode ſtyll in priſone in Gaunte. And whan he was come to the ſiege / he called to him the lorde of Harſels / & other of his cōpanyons: and reed to them the letter / ſende fro the frenche kynges commyſſaries: and ſayd. Sirs / me thynke the frenchmen do but tryfell with me / and with the countre of Flaūders. I ſayd or this to the burgeſſes of Turney / whan they were here before me. That I wolde here no tidyngꝭ out of Fraū
               ce / nor entende no no treatie: Wtout And warpe and Teremonde were yelden to vs. and therwith came tydinges to them fro Bruges / and fro I pre / howe they had receyued lyke letters / and the meſſengers retayned and ſet in priſon. that is well ſayde 
                  〈◊〉
                Philyp / and than he ſayd: howe he wolde write agayne to the commyſſaries of Fraūce / and ſo he dyd. He wrote on the ſuꝑſcripcyon. To the ryght noble and diſcrete lordes / cōmyſſaries of Fraunce / the content of whiche letter foloweth.
            RIght dere and puiſſaunt lordes / to your right noble diſcreſſyons. pleaſe it you to knowe / that we haue receyued right amiably / the letters to vs ſent▪ fro y• ryght excellent Charles of Fraūce. Makyng mencyon / how that ye ryght noble lordes ar come to Tournay / for to treat for peace and acord in his name. bytwene vs / and the ryght hygh prince the erle of Flaunders / and his ſayd countrey. And howe that ye haue / by the ſayd kyng and his counſayle: ſuffycyent puyſſance and authorite / to conclude and acomplyſſh. as they of Tourney our right dere and good frēdes beare wytnes / by their letters patētes: by vs ſene and reed. And bycauſe that the kynge writeth: that it is ryght diſpleſaunt to hym / that the diſcorde hath ſo long endured. Wherof we haue great marueyle / howe it may be. for in tyme paſt: whan Gaunt was aſſyſed / And warpe was of lytle valur. And alſo / whan that we by the comon▪ coūſayle of the thre good townes of Flaūders / wrote vnto him as to our ſouerayne lorde / to haue made peace & accorde. and as than / it pleaſed him nat ſo to do / the whiche nowe ſemeth to vs he wolde do. and alſo in lyke maner: we haue receyued letters patentes cōteyning / howe that two tymes ye haue written to vs / and that ye haue come two tymes for the ſame ententes. But acordyng to y• anſwere we haue ſent you or this / that we haue no wyll nor entēt to harken to any treaty of peace. with out the townes and fortreſſes / whiche be cloſed agaynſt the countrey of Flaunders / and ſpecyally agaynſt the towne of Gaūt. Wherof we be regard / be opyned at our wyll / and at the commaūdement of the good towne of Gaunt. And Wtout this be firſt done / we can make no treatie as ye deſyre. For we thynke the king dothe and may do aſſemble great puyſſaunce / for y• ayde of his coſyn in the colour of this treatie. For we ſe well / y• falſ hed may be wrought in the meane tyme / as there hath ben done or this. Wherfore our entencyon is / to be ſure and redy at our defence. Our hooſt ſhall be redy apparelled to defende our enemyes: for we hope by the ayde of god / to haue y• vyctorie / as we haue had or this tyme. Moreouer / we gyue you knowledge: that the brute is. Howe ye thynke / that we of Flaunders treate / to haue alyaunce with the kynge of Englande: and to haue ſocoure of hym. Wherin ye ſaye / we do agaynſt right / bycauſe we be ſubiectes to the crowne of Fraunce. And howe that the kynge there / is our ſoueraygne lorde. Wherfore ye ſay / we ought to aquyte vs truely agaynſt hym. And ſo we haue done or this / for in tyme paſt / we haue ſende to hym our letters / as to our ſoueraygne lorde / requyring hym to haue made our peace: whervnto he hath gyuen vs none anſwere / but our meſſāger taken and ſette in priſone. The whiche we thynke a great blame in ſuche a lorde. And moreouer / yet we repute in hym more blame / in that we wrote to hym / as to our ſouerayne lorde: and he nat wyllynge to ſende vs an aunſwere▪ And bycauſe it pleaſeth hym nat ſo to do. We thought and yet thynke / to ſeke for the profyte of the countrey of Flaūders / by ſome other meanes / and to ſuche as wyll helpe vs. Howe beit / as yet there is nothynge: but that the kyng may helpe all the mater / ſo that the fortereſſes be opyned to vs. And therfore / we defended them of Tourney / whan they were laſte with vs in oure hooſt / that they ſhulde nomore come in ſuche maner to vs / with any maner of letters or credēce by mouth / without ſauecōduct. And yet for all that / they be cōe to Bruges & to Gaunt with other letters. wherfore we haue taken the meſſangers / in gyueng enſample to other / to bringe any ſuche letters. For we thynke ye ſtudy ſome treaſon / and ſpecially agaynſt me Philyppe Dartuell / fro the whiche god defende me. Wherfore / we wyll ye knowe / that your traueyle is for nought / without ſo be the fortreſſes be opyned to vs: the whiche we truſt by the ayde of god ſhortely ſhalbe. And thus God kepe you / written before Andewarpe / the .xx. day of Octobre. The yere of our lorde god / a thouſande thre hundred .lxii. By Philyp Dartuell regarde of Flaunders.
            
               
Whan Philyppe Dartuell had thus writen his letter / by the aduyce of his counſayle / & had well examyned it / and ſo ſealed it: than he bethought hym who ſhulde beare it. & ſo demaunded / if there were no priſoner taken before Andwarpe. and it was ſhewed him / how there was a varlet of Arthoyſe / taken the day before at a ſcrimyſſhe. than he cōmaunded / that he ſhulde be brought before hym / and ſo he was. Than Philyppe ſayde / thou art my priſoner / I may make the to dye and I wyll. howbeit / ſyth thou art here / thou ſhalte be delyuered / vpon couenaunt on thy faythe. y• thou ſhalt delyuer ſuche letters as I ſhall take the: to the french kynges counſayle / nowe being at Tourney. And whan the varlet harde ſpekyng of his delyueraunce / he was neuer ſo ioyouſe / for he went verely to haue dyed / and ſayd. ſir: I ſwere to you by my faithe / that I ſhall beare your letter / whyder it ſhall pleaſe you / & if it be into hell. Than Phylyp began to laughe. and ſayd: thou ſayeſt well and ſo Philyppe gaue hym two crownes / and delyuered hym the letter / and cauſed hym to be conueyed out of the hooſt / and ſet in the way to Turney. And whan he cāe to Turney he went to the lodgynge of the byſſhoppe of Laon / and ſo he came before the byſſhop / and dyd his meſſage / fro poynt to poynt. and ther was demaū
               ded of hym tydinges / of the hooſt before Andwarpe / and he ſhewed as moche as he knewe / and ſo dyned there. And after dyner y• byſſhop departed to his company / and wolde nat open the letter / tyll they were preſent. And whan the thre byſſhoppes were all togyder / they opyned the letter / and redde it at good leyſer / and made due examynacion therof. Than they ſpake togyder / and ſayde: howe that Philyp Dartuell by that he ſhewed / was full of pride & preſumpcion. and ſayd / howe that he loued but lytle the maieſte royall of Fraūce. And ſo toke coūſayle togyder / and ſayd: howe that the Prouoſt and coūſayle of the towne of Turney. knewe right well / howe they had ſent letters to Philyp Dartuell / & to the other townes of Flaunders. wherfore they ſayd: it ſhulde be well done / that they shuld here the anſwere that Philyp had made. And ſo ſent for the prouoſt / and ſowned the comon bell / and all the counſayle drewe togyder. and than before thē all the letter was red two or thre dtymes. The wyſe men ha great marueyle of the preſūptuous wordes y• were therin written. & ſo it was determyned that a copy of the letter ſhulde remayne ſtyll in Turney. & therwith the coūſayle deꝑted / euery man to his logyng.
            PHilyp Dartuell / beyng ſtyll in the hooſt before And warpe. repēted him nothyng of that he had writen ſo roughly to the comyſſaryes of Fraūce. but he repented hym / in that he had written ſo amiable / to the ꝓuoſt & thē of turney. ſhe wyng them honour / by way of diſſymulacion. but he dyd it / bicauſe he wold nat beare all the blame / nor noriſſhe all the hate y• myght fall therby. So thus Philyppe wrote to them in maner as foloweth. And the ſuperſcripcyon was. To y• right honorable and ſage / our dere frendes / the prouoſt and cytezins of Tourney.
         
         
            ¶ Of the letters ſent to Tourney fro Philyp Dartuell. and howe the frēch kynge and his counſayle / were enformed of the anſwers that the flemynges had made to the comyſſaries. Cap. CCCC .x.
            
               RIght dere and good frē
               des. Pleaſe it you to knowe that we haue receyued your letters. makynge mencyon of .ii. of your burgeſſes / and yuell bearers of letters / to Gaunt and to Bruges / fro the comiſſaryes of Fraunce / who be retayned by vs. & at your requeſtes to be delyuered out of priſone. wherby the good loue and affectyon that hath bene / bytwene you and the comons of Flaūders / ſhulde perceyuer as ye write. the whiche loue right dere frendes: ſemythe to vs to be ryght lytell. For it is come to our knowledge / that the frenche kynge / and the dukes of Burgoyne and of Brytayne / aſſembleth them togyder / to come & ayde the erle of Flaunders. and to recouer his countrey / and to fyght with vs (for all y• letters that ye haue ſent vs. to treat for peace) Wherfore / we thynke this no way to treat for peace. But we ſhall take hede therof / and are redy & ſhalbe / euer at our defence / day and nyght. And as for the priſoners your burgeſſes / we ſhall kepe thē with vs: tyll we know the certētie of the aſſēbles of theſe ſaid lordes / & tyll it be our pleaſure to delyuer thē. For whan your burgeſſes were laſt in Fladūers / to treat for peace. ye knowe well / ther it was ordeyned and cōmaunded / that no perſon fro thenſ for the

with letters nor otherwyſe / ſhulde go nor come without ſauecōducte. & theſe ſayd comyſſaries haue done the contrary / to thentent to make debate and dyſcorde. Wherfore dere frendes / we deſyre you that ye wyll ſende no parſone / burges nor other in to Flaunders / fro you nor fro none of the lordes. but if there be any thyng tou chynge your owne cawſes / that we may do for you. we ſhall do: in lyke maner as we wolde / ye ſhuld do for vs. for we haue aſpeciall truſt and affyaunce in you / as we ought to haue in our good neyghbours. For it is the generall entencyon of all Flaunders / that all marchantes and their marchādyſes: ſhulde paſſe & repaſſe ſafelye / out of the one countrey in to the other / without any interupcyon or let. And thus god kepe you. written in our hooſt before And warpe / the xxii. day of the moneth of October. The yere of our lorde god / a thouſande thre hundred fourſcore and two. By Philyp Dartuell regarde of Flaunderrs.
            ABoute a thre dayes after that ye firſt letters were ſent to the lordes comiſſaryes of Fraūce. as the lordes were in the hall in counſayle / there was brought to them theſe other letters by a varlet of Doway / and he ſhewed them / howe that they of the hoſt before Ande warpe / had ſent it to thē. So there the letter was receyued / and redde at good leyſour. & than finally the lordes of Fraunce / ſayd to them of Tourney. Sirs: we counſayle you for the beſt / that ye make none alyaunce / nor a quayntance with them of Flaūders. for and ye do / ye ſhall haue no thanke therof in Fraunce. nor receyue no letters ſent to you fro them. for if the kynges counſayle knowe that ye do / ye ſhall receyue blame and domage therby / for the mater can nat longe contynue as it is. and they of Turney anſwered / and ſayd: howe they wolde perceyuer in their counſayle. ſayng / that by the grace of god / they wolde do nothynge / wherby they ſhulde haue any reprofe. & ſo a thre dayes after / the commiſſaryes departed fro Tourney / and went to the kynge to Peron. and with hym was his thre vncles / the dukes of Berrey / Burgoyne / and Burbon.
            ANd the day before the erle of Flaunders was come to the kyng / to ſhewe him the greues yt he had / and to do feaulte for the countye of Arthoyſe / the whiche was fallen to hym the ſame yere / by the dethe of his mother. And whan ye ſayd comyſſaries were cōe to the kyng / before him and all his counſayle / there was red the two letters / that Philyp Dartuell and they of Flaunders had ſent to them of Tourney. the which they toke in great diſpyte / and ſayd: that in the begynninge of the kynges raygne / ſuche pride / as was than vſed in Flaunders / Ought nat to be ſuffred. With the whiche wordes / the erle of Flaunders was no thynge dyſcontent. And ſo there the Erle before the kynge and his counſayle / made his complayntes / which were well harde. And the kynge anſwerde hym / and ſayd. Coſyn / retourne you in to Arthoyſe / and breuely we ſhalbe at Aras. for we can nat ſhew better that the quarell ſhulde be ours / but to a proche our enemyes. the erle was well content with that aunſwere / and ſo departed and went to Hedyn. And the kynge (as he that wolde go in to Flaunders / to abate the pride of the flem mynges / as his predeceſſours had done before) ſet all his clerkes awarke / and ſent letters and meſſangers in to euery coſt of his realme. commaundynge euery man without delay: in their beſt aparell for ye warre / to come to hym to Arras / at a day lymited. ſhewyng them: howe by the pleaſur of god / he wolde go and fight with the flemynges in Flaunders. No man durſte diſobey / but euery man made them redy bothe nere and farr. as they of Auuergne / of Rouergue / of Tholouſyn / of Gaſcoyne / of Limoſyn / of Poyctou / of Xaynton / of Bretayne / & of Bur bonoyſe / of Foreſtes / of Burgoyne / of Doulphyn / of Sauoy / of Barroyſe / of Lorayn / and of all the cyrcuites and countreys of Fraunce. And ſo euery man came towarde Arras in Arthoyſe. There was ſo great an aſſemble of men of warre / that it was marueyle to conſyder.
         
         
            ¶ Howe Philyp Dartuell made the paſſages in Flaūders to be kept / and howe dyuers french knyghtes were loſt in Flaunders / and coulde nat retourne agayne. Cap. CCCC .xi.
            
               THe Erle of Flaunders beyng at Heden / harde euery day newes fro the kynge / and fro ye duke of Burgoyn and of ye gret aſſemble that was made in Fraūce. Than the erle cōmaunded through all the countre of Arthoyſe / y• no man on payne of dethe / ſhulde put out of the countrey nor out

of their logynges no maner of thyng in to any forteres / nor in to no cloſed towne. for he wolde that the men of warre ſhulde be ſarued and eaſed / with euery thynge abrode in the countrey. And ſo the kynge came in to Arthoyſe / where they founde euery thyng in great plenty / euery grange full of corne. and ſo therle of Flaūders came to Arras & there dyd homage to the kyng for the countie of Arthoyſe. And there the kyng receyued hym for his liege man / and ſayde to him. Fayre coſyn / if it pleaſe god and ſaynt De nyce / we ſhall ſette you peaſeably in your herytage of Flaunders / and ſhall abate the pride of Philyp Dartuell and of the flemynges / in ſuch wyſe / that they ſhall neuer be able here after to rebell agayne. Sir ꝙ the erle: of this I haue great truſt / and therby ye ſhall attayne to ſuche honour / that all the worlde ſhall prayſe you / for certaynly great is the pride of Flaunders.
            PHilyppe Dartuell beyng at ſiege before And warpe / was well enfourmed. howe the frenche kyng with his puiſſance / was commyng on hym. Than he ſayd to his men. ſirs: what wenyth the yonge ryottouſe kynge to entre in to Flaunders? he is a yere yet to yong to aſſayle vs. I ſhall cauſe ye paſſages and entres to be ſo kept / that it ſhall nat lye in his power of all this yere to paſſe the ryuer of Lyſe. And ſo than he ſent to Gaunt for the lorde of Harſels / and whan he was come to him / he ſayd. Sir of Harſels: ye knowe well and here dayly / howe the frenche kyng apareleth hym ſelfe to diſtroy vs all. it behoueth vs to regarde wiſely / and to take counſayle in this mater ſir: ye ſhall abyde here at the ſiege / and I wyll goo to Bruges to lerne more certayne tidynges / and to encorage the people of the good townes. and I ſhall ſtabliſſh ſuche people at the paſſages / y• the french men ſhall nat paſſe ouer. Therto accorded the lorde of Harſels. Than Philyppe dartuell departed fro the ſiege / and ſo rode to Bruges like a great lorde / with his penon diſplayed before him of his armes: he bare a felde ſable / thre hat tes ſyluer. Whan he came to Bruges he founde ther Peter de boyſe & Peter de myrt / who were capitayus of Bruges. and ther he ſhewed them howe that the frenche kynge with all his puyſſance / wolde come in to Flaūders. Wherfore I wyll that ye Peter de Boyſe / go to the paſſage of Comynes / and kepe the ryuer. and ye Peter de Myrt / ſhall go to the bridge of Warneſton and kepe that paſſage / and cauſe all ye bridges to be broken aboue on the ryuer / tyll ye come to Gerge / to Haſels / to Meureuylle / and to Cour tray / and ſo the frenchmen can nat paſſe. and I ſhall go to Ipre to refreſſhe thē / and to comfort them. Erortyng them to kepe fermly the v
                  •
               yt
                  •
                that we haue ſworne eche to other. & it ſhall nat be in the frenche kynges puyſſance / to paſſe the ryuer of Lyſe / and to entre in to Flaunders / if the paſſages be well kept. Than bothe Peters anſwered / and ſayd. Sir ye ſay well / lette it be done as ye ſay / but s: what worde here you out of Englande. Truely ꝙ Philyppe we here as yet none / wherof I marueyle / but as nowe the parlyament is at London / wherfore I thynke ſhortly / we ſhall here ſome worde. The frenche kyng can nat be ſo haſty / but y• I truſt we ſhall haue ſome ayde out of Englande. I hope the kynge of Englande maketh ſome aſſemble / ſo that ye englyſſhmen wyll aryue here in a nyght / with ſuche a nombre / that we ſhall nat nede to feare the frenchmen / with the ayde of Flaūders for all is vnder our obeyſaunce / excepte Teremonde / and And warpe. ¶ In the mean ſeaſon that all this beſynes was / and that ye kyng was at Arras / and that theſe men of warre aſſembled in Arthoyſe and Tourneſyes / and about Lyſle. Certayne knyghtes and ſquiers beyng aboute Lyſle / by the entyſinge of the Haſell of Flaūders: thought to do ſome enterpriſe / wher by to be renomed. And ſo on a day ther gadred togyder a ſire ſcore men of armes / knightꝭ and ſquiers / and rode and paſſed the ryuer of Lyſle at Pounte amenyn a two le ages fro Lyſle / the whiche bridge was nat broken. and ſo rode to the towne of Harle / and ſo ther chaſed nigh all the people out of the towne / ſo y• the laram roſe and the townes all about range their belles alarum. And whan the Haſell of Flaunders and ſir Johan of Jumōt / the Chatelyn of Wyllone / ſir Henry Du
                  ••
               le / and the other knyghtes and ſquyers had well moued the coūtrey / and ſawe that it was tyme to returne. They toke agayne the way to returne by the ſame bridge that they had paſſed / and there they founde a great nombre of the flemynges breakyng the bridge / and whan they had broken a parte therof / they couered it agayn with hey and ſtrawe / that it ſhuld nat be aſpyed. and ther theſe knyghtes founde redy aparelled to gyue thē batayle a great nombre of villayns of the countrey. than the knightes couched their ſpeares / and ran at thē withall their force / and the flemynges opened and gaue them way. it was ſayd for the nones / and fledde and ſayde amonge themſelfe / let vs flye and gyue them way / for we are ſure the bridge

wyll nat beare thē / we ſhall ſe anon good game. And ſo the Haſell of Flaunders and the other knyghtes daſſhed all at ones on the bridge / the which was nat able to beare ſo many mē. howe be it the Haſell and a .xxx. with him paſſed ouer and as the other wolde haue paſſed / the bridg brake vnder them / and ſo fell downe horſe and men / and many were ſlayne. And whan̄e they that were behynde ſawe that / they were ſore abaſſhed / & wyſt nat whyder to flye to ſaue themſelfe. ſome entred in to the ryuer / thynkinge to ſwymme ouer / but they coude nat ye water was ſo depe / and the bankes hyghe. that the horſes coulde nat gette vp / the which was great myſchefe for them. for the flemynges came on them and ſlewe them without mercy / and mad ſome to fall agayne in to the water / and were drowned. ſir Johan Jumont was in a great aduenture to be loſt / for the bridge brake vnder hym. yet through the valyantnes of his body / he ſaued hym ſelfe. How be it he was ſore hurt on the heed and on the body / ſo that it was ſire wekes after or he coude helpe him ſelfe. In this recoū
               tre was ſlayne ye Chatelayn of Wyllon of Bouchars / and of ſaynt Hilary / and dyuers other ſlayne and drowned / and alſo ſir Henry Duffle. There were ſlayne and drowned mo than threſcore / for he was happy that coude ſaue him ſelfe / and many hurt and ſore woūded that ſcaped. Tydinges came to the lordes of Fraunce beynge at Arras / howe their men had loſt the iourney / and howe the Haſell of Flaūders had folyſſhly taken on hym y• enterpriſe. ſome complayned them and ſome nat / and ſuche as were expert men of warr / ſayd: they dyd great folly to paſſe a ryuer without any gyde / and to entre in to a great towne / and to retourne agayne the ſame waye they went / without kepynge of the 
                  •
               aſſage in the meane ſeaſon. it was none enter
               
                  ••
               ſe of wyſemen of warre / & bycauſe they rode 
                  〈…〉
               the lyke foles / ſo it came by them.
         
         
            ¶The ordynaunce that the frenche kyng made for to entre in to the countie of Flaunders / after that the paſſages were ſtoped and broken. Cap. iiii. C .xii.
            
               SO this mater paſſed ouer and was forgote / and Philyppe Dartuell departed fro Bruges and wente to Ipre / wher as he was receyued with great ioy. and Peter de boyſe went to Cō
               mynes / wher as all men of the coūtrey were aſſembled. they made all ye bridge to be vnuayled redy to be broken downe incōtynent / if nede requyred / but they wold nat clerely pull it downe as than. for the aduaūtage of them of the countrey to paſſe and repaſſe / with their beaſtes ouer the water of Lyſe. The ſame proper hour that Philyp Dartuell came to Ipre / tydinges came / howe that at the bridge of Amenyn / the frenchmen were dyſtruſſed / and howe the Haſe of Flaunders was nere taken. Of theſe tydinges Philyppe Dartuell was greatly reioyſed / and laughyng / to encourage them that were about him / ſayd. Sirs: by the grace of god and the good ryght that we haue / this mater ſhall take ſuche an ende / y• if the kyng with his yong counſayle paſſe the ryuer of Lyſe / he ſhall nat retourne agayne into Fraunce. Thus Philyp Dartuell was fyue dayes at Ipre / and preched openly in ye market place / to encourage his people / and to cauſe thē to kepe their promyſe. And alſo he ſhewed them / howe the frenche kynge / without any tytle of reaſon / was comyng to diſtroy thē / wherfore he ſayd. Good people be nat abaſſhed though he cōe on vs / for he ſhall nat be of puyſſaunce to paſſe the ryer of Lyſe. I ſhall cauſe the paſſages to be well kept / and I haue ordeyned to be at Commynes / Peter de Boyſe with agreat nombre of men. he is good & trewe and loueth the honoure of Flaunders / and Peter de Myrt is at Warneſton / and all the other paſſages on the water of Lyſear broken / ſo that they can cōe ouer at no place / but at one of thoſe two. and alſo I haue harde tidyngꝭ of our men that we ſent in to Englāde / we ſhall haue ſhortly great comfort of ye englyſſhmen / for we haue good alyaunce with them. Therfore let vs lyue in hope / for honoure ſhall be with vs. therfore good frendes of Ipre be ye true / and kepe faythfully the promyſe that ye haue promiſed 
                  •
               o me / and to the good towne of Gaunt / who hath endured ſo moche payne / to mayntayne the right and fredome of Flaūders. and all ſuche as wyll kepe true promyſe with me / lette them holde vp their handes towarde heuen / in token of loyalte. And therwith all ſuche as had harde hym ſpeke lyfte vp their handes. Than Philyp diſcended

fro the ſcaffolde / wher as he hadde preched / and went to his lodgynge & taryed there all that day / & the next day depted and wente towarde And warpe to the ſege / and he paſſed by Courtrey / and there taryed two dayes.
            NOwe let vs leaue to ſpeke of Philyppe Dartuell / and retourne to ye yong kyng Charles of Fraūce who was at Aras / hauyng great wyll and deſire to entre into Flaunders / to abate the pride of the flemynges. And dayly there repayred to him men of warre fro all partes. And whan the kynge had ſoiourned there viii. dayes / than he went to Lens in Arthoyſe / and ther taryed two dayes / and the thirde day of Nouembre he departed and wēt to Seclyn / and there reſted. And there the chiefe conſtable of Fraunce / and the marſhals of Fraunce / of Burgoyn / and of Flaūders / were in counſayle howe they ſhulde be ordred. for it was a comon ſaynge in all the hooſt / howe it was a thyng impoſſyble to entre into Flaunders. ſeyng howe the paſſages were ſo ſtrongely kept. And alſo dayly it rayned ſo ſore / that the wayes were ſo enpayred / that men coulde ſkant go forthe / and ſome of the wyſe men of Fraunce ſayd. home it was a great outrage to enterpriſe that voyage in that ſeaſon of the yere / and to bring the kyng ſo farre forwarde into that countre. ſayng alſo howe it had bene better for hym to haue taryed tyll. Somer / than to make warre in that countrey / where as he hadde neuer bene before / and ſpecially in that ſeaſon of the yere. and alſo they ſayd / howe the ryuer of Lyſe is ſo yuell to paſſe / that there is no place to ſkape / but at certayne places. Thanne the marſhals demaunded fro whens the ryuer dyde come / and it was ſayde / howe it came fro Ayer / and fro ſaynt Omers. well ꝙ the conſtable / ſythe it hath a begynning we ſhall paſſe it well inough / lette vs ordre our peple / and let vs take the way to ſaynt Omers / and there ſhall we paſſe ye ryuer at our eaſe / and ſo entre into Flaunders. and let vs go alonge the countrey / and the flemynges are ſo proude that outher before Ipre or in ſome other place / they wyll cōe and fyght with vs. And ſo to this purpoſe agreed all the marſhals and thervpon reſted all that nyght. Than the next mornyng / the lorde Dalbret / the lorde of Coucy / ſir Aymemon of Pompers / ſir John̄ of Uyen admyrall of Fraunce / ſir Willyam of Poyctres / the baſtarde of Langres / the Begue of Uyllanes / ſir Raoll of Coucy / the erle of Conuerſant / the vycount Dacy / ſir Raoll of Rayneuall / the lorde of ſaynt Juſt / ſir Arture of Hedyn / ſir Anton y Darchyes / the lorde of ſaynt Pye / ſir Willyam of Bordes / the lorde Lōgeuple / ye lorde of Sully / ſir Tryſtram of Leſtouet / ſir Olyuer Cleſquyn / ſir Moryce of Treguidy / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guy of Bayeur / ſir Lucas of Leſtrughen / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Nycholas Pamell / the two marſhalles of Fraunce / ſir Loys of Saurere / and ſir Loys of Blanuell / ye marſhall of Burgoyne / the marſhall of Flaunders / and ſir Anguerant of Helwyn. all theſe came to the conſtable of Fraunce to take aduyſe / howe they ſhuld paſſe outher by Lyle to go to Comynes / or els to Arualueſton / where as the paſſages were kept / or els to go hygher vp towarde the Gorge of Uenoy / and to ſaynt Uenant / and ſo to paſſe ye ryuer of Lyſe. And ſo among theſe lordes there were dyuers opinyons / and ſuche as knewe the countre ſayde. Surely as at this tyme / it is no goynge into that countrey nor in to the land of Caſſell / of Surmes / nor of Uerthes. why what way ſhall we than holde ꝙ the conſtable? Than ye lorde of Coucy ſayd: I coū
               ſayle let vs goo to Tourney / and there lette vs paſſe the ryuer of Leſcaulte / and take the way to Andewarpe / that way is eaſy ynoughe / and there lette vs fyght with our enemyes / we ſha'l haue no let / and we be ones paſſed ye ryuer and Tourney. and than let vs go ſtreight to Andewarpe / and do ryghtfull iudgement on Philyp Dartuell / & ſo we ſhall be daily refreſſhed with vitayle & 
                  •
               uruyance out of the coſt of Haynalt / the which ſhall folowe vs / fro Tourney along by ye ryuer. Theſe wordes were well harde and with dyuers well vpholden / but ye cōſtable and marchals inclyned rather to go the right way / nother on the ryght hande nor on the lyfte. and to ſuſtayne their opinyon they layd dyuers reaſons. ſayng: if we ſhuld go & ſeke for any other paſſage but ye right way it myght be ſayd / that we do nat lyke good men of warre / at leſt with out we aſſay to paſſe by Comynes / the whiche is kept. & alſo if we withdrawe our ſelfe fro our enemyes warde / they wyll be reioyſed therby / and haue newe refreſſhynge & take newe counſayle / and ſay / howe we be fled away. And alſo there is one poynt that ought to be dowted / we knowe nat in what aſtate they be in / with ye engliſſhmen / for by incydēt if ayde ſhulde come to them out of yt coſt / it ſhulde be a great let for vs therfore we thynke it were beſt to delyuer ye mater as ſhortly as coud be deuiſed / therfore a goddes name let vs take the way to Comynes / and god ſhall helpe vs / we haue or this tyme paſſed and repaſſed great ryuers / more greater than

the ryuer of Lyſe / it can nat be kept long fro vs. at leſt whan we are at the ryuer ſyde than let vs take aduyſe. Suche as be in our cōpany in the voward haue ſene this .xx. or .xxx. yere / often tymes paſſed / a more daūgerous ryuer than this is. and if we be ones ouer / our enemyes ſhalbe a hundred tymes more abaſſhed / than and we went at our eaſe / on ye right hande or on the left out of our right way. and alſo beyng ones ouer we may reken our ſelfe lordes of all Flaunders. And ſo euery man acorded to this laſt apoyntment / the which was kept and nat broken. and bycauſe ye all the lordes were as than togyder / they ſayd. it is nedefull that we aduyſe and regarde ye ordre of our batayls / and apoynt them that ſhall go with the conſtable in the vowarde and to knowe who ſhall make ye wayes before the batayle / and who ſhalbe the fotemen and to ordeyne thē that ſhalbe currers to diſcouer our enemyes. & who ſhall be in the kynges batayle / and what ſeruyce they ſhall do / and who ſhall beare the Oriflambe of Fraūce / and to apoynt thē that ſhall aſſyſt it / and to knowe who ſhall be in the wynges / and who in the reregard. Of all theſe thynges they toke aduyſe & counſayle / and it was determyned by the ſayd lordes and offycers / that 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Joys of Halwyn and the lorde of Rambures / ſhuld be gouernours of the fote men / ſuch as ſhulde go before the hooſt & make the wayes. And to cut downe hedges / wodes / and buſſhes / and to fyll valeys and pull downe hyls / and to do all other neceſſary thynges / and of them there were in nombre a .xvii. hundred and .lx. and than in the vowarde were the marshals / of Fraunce / of Flaunders / and of Burgoyne / and they hadde vnder their rule a .xvii. hundred men of armes / and ſeuen hūdred croſbowes / beſyde four thouſande men a foote that the erle of Flaunders had delyuered them / well paueſſed and harneſſed. And it was ordeyned that therle of Flaunders and his batayle / wherin he hadde men of armes / knyghtes / ſquiers / and fotemen / to the nombre of .xvi. thouſande ſhulde be the wynge to the vowarde / for to recomfort it if nede required. Alſo it was ordeyned / that bytwene the batayle and the erls vowarde / the kynges batayle ſhulde folowe. and therin to be ye kynges thre vncles / Berry / Burgoyn / and Burbon / the erle of Marche / ſir James of Burbon his brethren / the erle of Cleremount and Dolphyn of Auuergne / the erle of dampe Martyn / the erle of Sanxere / ſir John̄ of Boloyne / and to ye nombre of ſixe thouſande men of armes and two thouſande croſbowes / genoways & other. And than it was ordeyned for the reregarde / two. M. men of armes & two hundred archers. & chyefe gouernour of them was ſir John̄ dartoyſe erle of Ewe / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guy erle of Bloyſe / ſir Warans erle of ſaynt Powle / ſir Wyllm̄ erle of Harecourt / the lorde of Chaſtelon / & the lorde of Sere. and to beare the Oryflambe was apoynted ſir Peter villers / & ſour knyghtes to acompany hym. As ſir Robert of bayeux / ſir Moris of ſancourt / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Guy of Triguidy / and Bandon de laheuſe / and to kepe the baners the Bourge of ruet / and the Bourge of moūt dowſet. Theſe lordꝭ entēded ſurely neuer to retourne in to Fraunce / tyll they had fought with Philyppe Dartuell and his puyſſaunce. and therfore they made all thyng redy to fyght the next day if nede requyred. Alſo the lorde de la Bret / the lorde of Coucy / & ſir Hugh of Haulon were apoynted to ſet and ordre the batayls in aray. and the marſhals of ye lodgynges were apoynted to lodge the kyng and ye batayle / and that was ſir Willyam of bannes / and the lorde of Champreny. Alſo it was ordeyned yt the day that the batayle ſhulde be on / the kynge to be a horſebacke / and none other but he / except .viii. valyant men / to be a horſbacke about hym. As the lorde of Rayneuall / the Begue of villanes / ſir Aymemon of Pomyers / ſir Anguerant of Halwyn / the vycount Dacy / ſir Guy of Bayeux / ſir Nycholas Penuell / and ſir Willyam of Bourdes. Of the whiche eyght / the lorde of Rayneuall and ſir Anguerant of helwyn / to be in the fronte before the kynge. And the Begue of Uyllayues / and the vycount Dacy / who is called in dyuers places before the Uycoūt dan noy / theſe two knyghtes to be beſyde hym. and behynde hym the other foure knyghtes before named / and ſir Olyuer Clyſſone Conſtable of Fraunce / and ſir Willm̄ Poycters baſtarde of Langres ſhulde ryde before / and dyſcouer and aduyſe the maner of their enemyes / the daye of the batayle. And whan̄e all theſe thynges were apoynted & determyned / euery thynge as was nedefull. Thanne the counſayle brake vp / and euery man departed to their lodgynges. And ſuche as hadde nat bene at the counſayle: were ſhewed what they ſhuld do and alſo it was ordeyned yt the next day / the kyng ſhulde departe and to paſſe through the towne of Lyſle / & nat to reſt there▪ but to lodge at the abbay of Marquettes / and the vowarde to paſſe farther towarde Comynes and Warneſton / as ſoone as they myght.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the frenche men coulde nat paſſe by the bridge of Comynes / and how they paſſed without knowledge of the flemynges. Cap. iiii. C .xiii.
            
               AS it was thus ordeyned euery thynge was done and the next day / they of the vowarde dyſlodged & went toward Comines / and they foūde the wayes redy made for ye 
               lord of Franſures and ſir Joyſe of Helwyn / had taken great laboure to make the wayes redy / & this was on a monday / and whan the conſtable and marſhals and they of the vowarde were come to the bridge of Comynes / there they were fayne to ſtoppe / for they foūde the bridge ſo broken that it was nat poſſyble to make it agayne / if any defēce were made to the contrarie. And the flemyngꝭ were beyond the ryuer puyſſaunt ynough. To lette them and to kepe the paſſage agaynſt any that wolde ſcrimyſſhe or aſſaut them / for they were 
                  •
               o than .ix. thouſande. And there was Peter de Boyſe capitayne / who made good ſemblant to defende the bridge. for he and his men were by the bridge on the cauſey / raynging on bothe ſydes. Than the conſtable and the other lordes of Fraunce behelde the maner of the countrey. And ymagined well / that it was a thynge impoſſyble to paſſe that way / without the bridge were newe made. Thafie they cauſed ſome to ryde vp and downe by the ryuer ſyde a myle or two / to ſe if there were any paſſage / and they ſo dyde / and retourned agayne and ſhewed their mayſters / that they coulde nat fynde no place / where as their horſes coude take any lande on the other ſyde of the ryuer. Than the conſtable was ſore dyſpleaſed and ſayde. We haue bene but yuell coūſayled to take this way. yet it had bene better to haue gone by ſaynt Omers / than to byde in this dāger. Orels to haue paſſed the ryuer of Leſcaulte at Tourney / as the lorde of Coucy ſayde. And ſo to haue gone the ſtreyght way to And warpe / & to haue fought ther with our enemyes / ſythe we muſt fight with thē and wyll. They be ſo proude / that they wolde haue bydden vs at theirſege. Than ſir Loyes of ſā
               xere ſayd. I counſayle let vs lodge here for this daye / and cauſe our people to lodge as well as they can whan they come. And lette vs ſende to Lyle by the ryuer / and gette ſome ſhyppes and nayles. And with them lette vs make a bridge to morowe agaynſt ye fayre 
                  •
               aedowes / ſithe we can do none otherwyſe. Than ſir Joys of Halwyn ſayd. Sir / we haue well aduyſed / howe ye there is a great let bytwene this and Lyſle. ſir / the ryuer is called Menyn. And by this ryuer the ſhyppes or barkes muſt paſſe / if they ſhulde come hyder. And ſir / the flemynges haue broken ye bridge / and haue put in bytwene the ioyſtes great tymbre and ſtakes / that it is impoſſyble for any veſſell to paſſe by. I can nat tel than ꝙ the conſtable what we ſhall do. it were good we toke the way to Ayre / and ther paſſe the ryuet of Lyſe / ſythe we can haue no paſſage here. In the meane ſeaſon that the conſtable / and the marſhals of Fraunce and of Burgoyne / were about Comynes in this abuſyon / and wyſt nat what to do / there were a certayne knightes and ſquiers enterpriſed valiantly to aſſay to paſſe this ryuer by ſome meanes / & to go fyght with the flemynge / and to wynne the towne and paſſage of Comynes / as ye ſhall here after.
            
               THus as the vowarde was cōe fro Lyle to Comynes / the lorde of ſait Pye and dyuers other knyghtes. Of Heynalt / of Flaunders / of Arthoyſe / and alſo of Fraunce / without knowledge of the conſtable or marſhalles. They were determyned togyder and ſayd. We wyll go gette two or thre lytell botes / & launche them in to the ryuer of Lyſe beneth Comynes / in ſome couerte place. And we wyll ſette great ſtakes on bothe ſydes of the ryuer to tye ropes therto / for the ryuer is nat very large. And by that meanes / we ſhall get ouer a great nombre of men in a ſhorte ſpace. And than we may go and aſſayle our enemyes behynde them or they beware / and wyn the paſſage. And acordynge to this counſayle / the lorde of ſaynt Pye made to be brought out of Lyſle / a barke and ropes with other neceſſaries. Alſo ſir Herbert of belperche / and ſir Johan of Roy / who were companyons toguyther in that voyage / broughte with theym another barke. Alſo ſir Henry of Manny / ſir Johan of Maleſtrayt / & ſir John̄ Chaudronne bretons / brought another. The lorde of ſaynt Pye was the firſte that entredde with his barke cordes / and ſtakes. And there he pytched a great planke and ſtake on the one ſyde / and tyed a corde therto. Than̄e thre varlettes paſſed ouer to the farther ſyde with the barke / and caryed the other ende of the Corde with them. And there they ſette another great ſtake / and tyedde that ende of the Corde to the

ſtake. & that done / than the varlettes retourned with the barke to their mayſters. and ſo it was that the conſtable of Fraunce and the two marſhals who were at the bridge fote of Comynes were anone enformed of the ſaid beſynes. than the cōſtable ſayd to ſir Loys of Sāxere one of the marſhals. ſir go your way / & ſe if it be poſſible to paſſe the ryuer by y• meanes / as ye haue herde deuyſed. And if ye ſe that it be poſſyble / than fynde y• meanes to get mo barkes. and ſo theſe ſayde knyghtes prepared thē ſelfe redy to paſſe whan they ſawe the barkes redy. & ther wt 
               ther came to them the ſayd marſhall of Fraūce with a great rout / & he behelde well the maner. Than the lorde of ſaynt Pye ſayd to hym. ſir / may it pleaſe you that we ſhall paſſe. it pleaſeth me right well ꝙ the marſhall. Howbeit ye put yourſelfe in a great aduenture / for if your enemyes at Comynes knowe of you / they may do you great domage. ſir ꝙ the lorde of ſaynt Pyhe that nothyng aduētureth nothynge getteth. In the name of god and ſaint Denys / we truſt to paſſe / ſo y• ar to morowe at night we truſt to fight with our enemyes. than the lorde of ſaynt Pye ſet his penon in the barke and entred hymſelfe firſt / and with hym to the nōbre if .ix. and a none they were laūched for the by the corde that was tyed on the other ſyde of the ryuer. & than they iſſued out and wēt in to a lytell wode there beſyde / bycauſe they wolde nat be ſene. & they on the rerewage drue agayne to thē the barke. Than entred therle of Cōuerſant ſir Dāghien and his baner with him / & alſo the lorde of Uertayne his brother. and ſo .ix. of thē paſſed & no mo / and agayne the thirde tyme ther paſſed as many. And therwith there cāe two other barkꝭ with ſir Herbert of Belperch & ſir John̄ of roy and with the bretons. & anone they were lāged in to the ryuer / and ordred as the other were. & ſo knigh
                  •
               ꝭ paſſed. and ther was none that paſſed but good men of armes / & they paſſed with ſo good wyll / that it was great marueyle to be holde them. And there was ſuche preſe to paſſe that and the marſhall had nat bene there / they wolde haue ouer charged the barkes.
            Tidynges came to the cōſtable and to the lordes of Frāce beyng at Comynes / how their peple paſſed as ye haue herde. than the conſtable ſayd to the ſeneſhall of Reur. go I requyre you and ſe yonder paſſage / & whider our people do paſſe as it is ſayd or nat. This knight was neuer ſo ioyouſe of nothyng that euer he herde. & ſo ſtrake his horſe with the ſpurres / & in his cō
               pany .xl. men of armes. and whan he cāe to the paſſage and ſawe the maner therof / & how that ther were paſſed all redy / to the full nōbre of a C. and .l. Than he a lighted and ſayd. howe he wolde paſſe in lykewiſe / the marſhall of Frāce coude nat let hym. Tidynges came to the cōſtable / howe that his coſyn the lorde of Rieux was paſſed ouer y• ryuer. Than the cōſtable a lytell began to muſe & ſayd. Cauſe the croſ bowes to come forthe and ſcrimyſſh with theſe flemyngꝭ beyond the bridge to kepe thē buſy / to thentent that they take no hede to our men that are paſſyng the ryuer. for if they knewe it / they wolde ryn to thē and diſtroy their paſſage. ye / and ſle all them that are paſſed / y• whiche I had rather dye / than it ſhulde cōe to paſſe. Than the croſbowes and men a fote & gonners / ſhote ouer y• brige in to the towne. And ſo ther began a ſore ſtrimyſſhe / & they made ſemblaunt to paſſe the bridge. And the flemynges who were well paueſſed / made thē redy to defende the paſſage. & thus they endured all that monday / & anone it was night / for the dayes were as than but ſhort and ſtyll ther paſſed men of armes by the ſayd barkes. & as they were ouer / they drue togyder in a lytell groue ther beſyde in couert. Nowe beholde all thynges cōſydred / whan parell and harde aduenture that they were in. For if they within Comynes had ꝑceyued them / they had bene diſtroyed / or the mooſt parte of them / and had loſt bothe their barkes and ropes. but god dyde for them / to thentent to abate the pride of the flemynges.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frēchmen that were paſſed the ryuer of Lyſe / put them ſelfe in batayle before the flemynges. Cap. CCCC .xiiii.
            
               I Repute and alſo euery man ought to reken this enterpriſe to be of great valyantneſſe / for them that paſſed. For the knightes & ſquiers of the vowarde / whan it was late / ſtale fro thoſt and went to the paſſage to paſſe with their cōpanyons. So there paſſed the lorde de Lauale / the vycount of Rohan / the lorde de La belyer / the lorde of Cambort ſir Olyuer / the lorde of Cleſquyn / the barroys of Barres / the lorde of Colet / ſir Raynalde of Thouars / the lorde of pouſanſes / ſir Wyllyam of Lignacke / 
                  〈◊〉
                Water paſ

               
                  〈◊〉
                / the lorde of Thouars ▪ ſir Loyes of 
                  〈◊〉
                / ſir Tryſtram de la Gayle / the vycount of 
                  〈◊〉
               
               aur / and the lorde of Mailly. And what of bretons / poicteuyns / beruyers / francoys / burgonyens / ſtemynges / arthoyſens / troyens / & heynouers a great nombre. Whan they were paſſed the ryuer / the ſame nyght they were to the nombre of four hundred men of armes / of choſen men of warre. There was nat a varlet that paſſed ouer. And whan ſir Loyes of Sanxere ſawe ſo many paſſed ouer / as ſixe baners and xxx. penons. He thought it ſhulde haue bene a great ſhame for hym / without he paſſed in lyke wiſe. And ſo he and his knightes and ſquyers entred in to y• barkes / and with hym paſſed the lorde of Haygeſt / ſir Perciuall of Raynuall / & dyuers other. And whan they were all togyder they ſayd. Nowe it is tyme that we go toward Comynes and loke on oure enemyes / and ſe yf we may lodge in the towne / than they dyde on their baſſenettes and made thē ſelfe redy. And ſo went forthe through the mareſſes / a long by the ryuerſyde in good order / with their baners and penons wauyng before them redy to fight And the lorde of ſaynt Pye was in the formaſt front / and chyefe gouernour and leader of that company / bycauſe he knewe the countre better than any other that was there. Thus as they were comyng in good order towarde y• towne / Peter de Boyſe and the flemynges / who were redy raynged on the cauſey dyd caſt their eyen a long the ryuer ſyde / and ſawe theſe men of armes aproche / wherof they had marueyle. than Peter de Boyſe ſaid. What d
                  •
               uyls of hell hath brought theſe men of armes hyder? which way haue they paſſed the ryuer of Lyſe? And ſome that were by hym ſayd. We are ſure they be paſſed by ſome barkꝭ or botes wt out our knowledge for ther is no bridge nor paſſage bytwene this & Curtrey / that they coude paſſe. what ſhall we do? ſhall we go and fight with them? Nay nat ſo quod Peter / lette them come / and lette vs abyde in oure ſtrength / they be beneth and we a highe ouer them / therfore we haue a great aduauntage on them. And if we ſhulde dyſcende downe to fight with theym / we dyde nat well. Lette vs abyde tyll it be darke night / and than let vs take coūſayle what is to be done farther. They be no ſuche nombre that can long endure agaynſt vs in batayle. We knowe all the ſhyfte in the countre and ſo do nat they. His coūſayle was beleued / for the flemynges neuer remoued out of their place / but helde thē ſelfe ſtyll at the foote of the bridge / and raynged all a louge the cauſey in good order of batayle. and made 
                  〈…〉
               
               tenūce by ſemyng / as though they ſet nothyng by them. And they that were paſſed / came thorough the maryſe by the ryuer ſyde aprochyng to Comynes. The conſtable of Fraunce / who was on thother ſyde of the ryuer dyde caſt his eyen / and ſawe on the other ſyde the men of armes / with their baners and penons in a lytell batayle comynge towardes Comynes. Than his blode began to trymble / for feare y• he had of them. for he ſawe well there were a great nō
               bre of flemynges raynged in good order of batayle agayuſt them. Than he ſaid in great diſpleaſur. O ſaynt Jues. O ſaynt George. O lady of heuen / what is this that I ſe yonder? I ſe in parte the chefe flour of all our army / the whiche are nowe in an harde aduenture. Wolde to good I were deed / ſyth I ſe them do ſo great an outrage. O ſir Loyes of ſanxere / I wolde haue thoughtye had ben more atemꝑate and wyſer than I ſe ye be nowe. Howe is it / that ye durſt put in aduenture / ſo many noble knightes and ſquiers as be nowe in your company? & ſo fewe in nombre / agaynſt ten or .xii. thouſande fierſe and proude people / who wyll take none to mercy. And if ye nede we can nat helpe you. O Rohen. O Lauall. O Rieux. O Beaumanoyr. O longuyle. O rochfort. O mauuy. O maleſtroit O cōuerſant. O ſuche and ſuche I cōplayne of you all. that without my counſayle / ye wyll put yourſelfe in this aduēture. Wherfore am I cō
               ſtable of Fraūce? if ye leſe / the faut ſhalbe layd to me. and it ſhalbe ſayd / that I ſent you thider He had gyuen a cōmaundement before / y• none ſhulde departe fro the hooſt / to i
                  •
               opart to paſſe the bridge. But whan̄e he ſawe ſo many noble men paſſed / and ſawe the dealyng of thē. than he ſayd with an highe voyce. I abandon y• paſſage to euery man that wyll aſſay to paſſe / by any maner of meanes. And with thoſe wordes / knightes & ſquyers auaunced thē ſelfe to fynde way and engin / howe to paſſe the bridge. but it was incōtynent night / ſo that of neceſſyte they muſt leaue their labours / as in caſtyng of bordes and plankes on y• ioyſtes / & ſome layd their paueſſes to paſſe ouer. ſo that the flemyngꝭ had moche a do to defēde thēſelfe / for they wyſ
                  •
                nat well to whō to take hede. For they ſawe beneth the bridge in the maryſe / a great nōbre of men of armes ſtandyng cloſe to gyder / and ſtyll m
                  •
                comyng to them. And alſo they ſawe them that were on the other ſyde of the bridge / ſcrimyſſhyng ſore with them / & dyde what they might to make the bridge agayne.
            
            
               THus as ye haue herde before / the frenche men paſſed by the barkes that nyght / and came priuely thoroughe the maryſſes and myre to their anclees. Nowe beholde and conſyder the payne that they endured / and the valyantneſſe of them. Seyng / howe in ſo long nightes and wynter / as in Decembre. They a bode all the longe colde night in their harneſſe / on their fere in y• myre / their baſſenettꝭ on their heedes without meate or drinke. Certaynly I ſay / this ought to be reputed for a great valyātneſſe. And trewely they were but a handfull of men / to the regarde of the flemynges that were within Comynes / and about in the countre. ſo thus they ſtode and nouther durſte enuade nor aſſayle / but determyned to ſtande ſo ſtyll tyll it were fayre day / ſayeng eche to other. We ſhall ſe whan it is day / the flemynges wyll come out of their ſtrēgth and aſſayle vs. And whan they come / let vs crye our cryes all with one voyce / euery man his owne crye orels his lordꝭ. thogh it ſo be / that the lordes be nat here: for by ſuche cryes / we ſhall abaſſhe them / and than lette vs ſtryke in among them with good courage and wyll. It is in god / to gyue vs grace to diſconfyte them / for they are but yuell armed. And we haue good ſpeares well heeded / and good ſwerdes. The habergyns that they beare ſhall nat defende them. Thus in this good conforte they abode all that night. And y• conſtable who was on the other ſyde of the ryuer towarde Lyſle / had great feare in his hert of thē / and wyſſhed hym ſelfe and all his puiſſaūce / within ye towne of Comynes. Than the marſhals of Burgoyn and of Flaunders / ſayd to conforte hym. Sir / be nothynge abaſſhed. they that be paſſed ouer be choſed men of warre / valyaunt and of great wyſdome. They wyll do nothyng but by good order and diſcrecyon. Sir / they wyll nat fight this day / the night is to nere aprochynge. And ſir / ye haue abādoned the paſſage to paſſe who wyll. To morowe aſſoone as it is day / we ſhall do oure beſte to paſſe the bridge. We haue prouyded this daye for woode and tymbre / more than we ſhall nede. I truſt we ſhall be ſoone ouer / and reconforte them if they haue any nede / and yonder vnhappy people: ſhall nat endure agaynſt vs. Thus the cōſtable was recōforted / by the ſayeng of ſuche valyant ꝑſons as were in his cō
               pany.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frenche men that were paſſed the ryuer of Lyſe / diſconfyted the flemyngꝭ and ſlewe many of thē / and wan the paſſage of Comynes. Cap. CCCC .xv.
            
               PEter de Boyſe: who knewe well that theſe mē of armes in the maryſſe / were nere ioyning to Comynes. thought him ſelfe in no ſuretie / bycauſe he knewe natte what thēde ſhulde be. How be it he ſawe well / y• he had in his cōpany a ſixe or ſeuyn thouſande men. Than he ſayd to thē. Sirs / yonder men of armes that haue paſſed the ryuer / they be nat made of ſtele. They haue all this laſte day traueyled / and all this nyght ſtamped in the myre. I thinke nowe at the brekyng vp of this newe mornyng / it were beſt we ſet on them. We are men ynoughe to cloſe thèm rounde about. and if we beate them ones / ther is none wyll medyll with vs after. let vs make no noyſe tyll the tyme come to do our feate. On the otherſyde / the french knightes that were in the maryſſes / nat farre fro their enemyes / were nat at their eaſe / They ſtode ſo in the myre. ſōe to the ancles / ſome to the mydde legge. Howe be it / the greate pleaſure and deſyre that they had to cōquere the paſſage with honour / made them forget their payne and traueyle. yf it had bene in Somer as it was in wynter / it had ben but a pleaſure for theym. but as than the erthe was colde and wete / and the nightes long. and ſome tyme rayned on their heedes / the whiche ran downe by their baſſenettes. For they ſtode euer redy to fight / and loked euer whan̄e they ſhulde be aſſayled. The remembraunce wherof / made them to forgette their paynes. There was the lorde of ſaynt Pye / who aquyted him ſelfe right nobly. He was the formaſt / and euer went priuely: to ſpye / ſe / and harken / the dealyng of his enemyes. And whan he retourned he ſhewed his companye / howe there was no noyſe amonge them. Sayeng / paraduenture they do it / bycauſe they wyll be redy to do that is their purpoſe. Thus he wente in and out to ſpye what his enemyes dyde / tyll at laſt about the breakyng of the day / the flemynges all in a plumpe without any maner of noyſe / came ſoftely towarde the maryſe. Whanne the lorde of ſaynt Pye / who was watchyng for them / ſawe

certaynly that they were comyng: than he cam to his company and ſayd. Sirs / let vs ſette on them / for our enemyes are comynge at hande. They come fayre and ſoftely without noyſe / wenyng to ſette on vs / or we beware of them. therfore nowe / lette vs all ſhewe ourſelfe lyke men of warre: for incōtynent we ſhall haue batayle. And with thoſe wordes / euery man apparelled hymſelfe redy / and ſet them ſelfe in as good order as coude be deuyſed.
            ANd ſo whan they aproched / they made their cryes / as they were apoynted before to do. And receyued the flemmynges with the ſpeare poyntes / in ſuche wyſe / that ye mayle in their cootes / coulde holde out no more: than two or thre folde of clothe wolde haue doone. The conſtable of Fraunce / herde well the crye and noyſe / and ſayd. Sirs / ſurely our company are fightynge / god ayde them: for we canne nat / as at this tyme. Thus the frenche men receyued the flemynges / with ye good ſpeare heedes of Burdeaux. The whiche went throughe / habergyns / ſhulders / bellyes / and heedes: in ſuche wyſe / that the flemyngꝭ gaue backe / and the frenche men wanne grounde. There was Peter de Boyſe in the formaſt front / hurt with a ſpeare through the ſhulder / & alſo in the heed. And he had bene deed without remedy / if his men had nat ſaued hym. For he had a .xxx. gret varlettes / whome he had apoynted to wayte euer on his owne perſon. And ſo they toke hym in their armes / and bare him out of the preaſe. the myre was ſo great / that euery man waded to the mydde leg. The men of armes / who had bene vſed to great feates of armes / They beate downe the flemynges / and ſlewe them without mercy. Some cryed ſaynt Pye Lauall / Sanxere / Rieux / Anghien / and other cryes. The flē
               myngꝭ began to be abaſſhed and to be diſcomfyted / and began to recule backe: and to fall one vpon a nother. And the frenche men entred in among the thyckeſt of them / and ſpared no more to ſlee thē / than they had ben dogges. and ſurely they had good cauſe ſo to do. For if ye flemynges had achyued the priſe ouer them / they had bene ſerued of the ſame ſauce. ¶ Whan the flemynges ſawe howe they were aſſayled ſo valyauntly / and that the men of armes had conquered the cauſey / and the bridge. Than they determyned to ſet fyre in their owne towne / for two cauſes. The one was / to thentent to cauſe the frenchmen to recule backe. And ſecondly to cauſe their owne company alſo to recule backe to the towne. And as they deuyſed ſo they dyd they put fyre in to dyuers howſes in the towne. thynkynge therby / to haue abaſſhed their enemyes / whiche auayled them nothynge. for the frenchmen: as valyauntly as they dyd before / ſo they purſewed them ſtyll / betyng and ſleyng of them. Than the ſlemynges forſoke the towne and entred in to the feldes / and drewe togyder. and than ſent about in ye countrey / to ſtyrre and reyſe vp the people. As to Uertaygne / to Propringne / to Uergues / to Rolers / and to Meſiers / to Warneſton / & to all other townes about / to cauſe them to come to Comynes. And belles began to braule / wherby it myght well be knowen / that ther was beſyneſſe in hande. ſo ſome drewe to the noyſe / and ſome went to ſaue themſelfe and their goodes / to Ipre / and to Courtrey. women and children forſoke their houſes / and left their beſtes / corne / and other mouables behynde them. and ſome went towarde Comy nes to ayde their company / where as they were fyghting. In ye meane ſeaſon whyle theſe frēchmen / that had paſſed the ryuer of Liſe by the lytell barkes / were in hande with their enemyes. The conſtable with the great bande of the vowarde / dyd what they myght to paſſe ye bridge / and there was great preaſe / bycauſe the conſtable hadde abandoned the paſſage to euery man who ſo wolde aduenture. So euery man preaſed forthe / they had no lette to paſſe. So theſe lordes, paſſed the ſame day ye bridge with moch parell / for they were fayne to lay paueſſes and targes on the ioyſtes of the bridg to paſſe ouer. The ſame nyght they had cauſed to be brought two lode of nayles / the which greatly dyd helpe them to amende y• bridge. and ſo within a ſhort tyme the bridge was made agayne: good and ſtronge. And ſo all the company paſſed ouer the ſame tuiſday in the mornynge / and ſo fought at the paſſage. Therle of Flaunders vnderſtode howe they fought at the paſſage of Comynes / and he ſent thyder a ſixe thouſande men a fote / to ayd their company / but or they came all was done / and ye bridge newe made. Than the conſtable ſent them to the bridge of Warneſton / to make that bridge agayn / that all their caryage myght eaſly paſſe ouer.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the french kynge paſſed the ryuer of Lyſe. And howe Philyppe Dartuell made his ordynaunce to reſyſt the kyng and his puiſſance. Cap. CCCC .xvi.
            
               
               TIdynges came the tuiſdaye to the kynge / who was at the abbey of Marquetes / & his vncles with him / howe that ye paſſage of Comynes was conquered / and his vowarde paſſed ouer. wherof they were greatly reioyſed. Thā was it ordeyned / that the kyng ſhulde paſſe / and ſo he harde maſſe and the lordes alſo. and dranke and lept on their horſes / and ſo toke the way to Comynes. They of the voward delyuered the towne clene fro the flemynges / and there were ſlayne in the ſtretes & in the feldes / about a four thouſande / beſyde thoſe that were kylled in ye chaſe. and in mylles and churches / where as they had hyden them ſelfe for feare. for as ſone as the bretons were ouer / they lept on their horſes / and entred in to the chaſe / to fynde out the flemynges. and to ouer ryn the countrey / whiche was as than fat and ryche. The lorde of Ryeux / the lorde de Lauall / the lorde Maleſtroyt / the vycount of Bellyer / the lorde of Comborte & their company / rode ſo long. that they came to Uerayne / agreat towne. the whiche anon was taken and brent / and all they within put to dethe. ther the bretons had great pillage / and profite. and in lykewiſe ſo had other / as they ſpredde a brode in the countrey. for they founde the houſes full of clothe / fethers / cloth of golde and ſyluer. for the flemynges in truſt of the ſtrength at Comynes / had nat a voyded their goodes out of the countrey. The bretons that entred fyrſt in to the countre / dyd ſet no thyng by the clothe nor other ryches / but by ye golde and ſyluer that they founde there. but ſuche as came after toke all and left no thyng behynde them / for all was fyſſhe that came to net.
            yE may well knowe / tydinges wyll anon ſpredde abrode. the ſame tuiſday worde cāe to Philyp Dartuell / where as he lay at ſiege before Andewarpe. howe that the frenchmen had paſſed the ryuer of Lyſe / by barkes ye monday. and howe they had conquered the paſſage at Comynes. & howe ther were a ſixe thouſande of his menne ſlayne / and as it was thought / Peter de Boyſe was alſo ſlayne. Of theſe tidynges Philypp̄ was greatly abaſſhed / and began greatly to marueyle. And demaūded of the lorde of Harſels / what was beſt to do? He anſwered and ſayd. Go you to gaūt and aſſemble togyder / all the men ye can gette in the towne / and than come hyder agayn. and ſo with all youre puyſſaunce / drawe towarde Courtrey. And whan the kyng vnderſtandeth that ye come ſo ſtronglye / he wyll be aduyſed or he come moche farther in to the countrey. Alſo / I truſt we ſhall here ſhortlye tidynges fro oure company that be in Englande. And it may be ſo / that the kynge of Englande and his vncles wyll paſſe the ſee with great puyſſaunce / or ſōe of thē. The whiche ſhall come well to paſſe for vs. I marueyle greatly quod Philyppe Dartwell / that the englyſſhe men tary ſo long. Seyng they knowe / that the frenche men be entred in to our countre. I wotte nat what they mean therby? And ſpecially I marueyle of our owne men / that we here nat fro thē. But howe ſoeuer it be / I wyll go to Gaunt / to fetche ye rerebande and ſo ſhall come agayne and fight with the frē
               che kyng / whatſoeuer come therof. I am enformed / howe the kynge hath twentie thouſande men of armes / the whiche mounteth to .lx. thouſande men of warre. I ſhall bringe as many agaynſt hym in batayle. And yf it pleaſe god of his grace / yt I may diſcōfyte hym / wt the good ryght that we haue / I ſhalbe the mooſt honoured lorde of the worlde. And if I be diſcōfyted / as great a fortune hath fallen on a gretter lorde than I am. Thus as Philyppe Dartuell and the lorde of Harſels were toguyder deuyſinge / Ther came certayne perſons to them / ſuche as had bene in the batayle before Comynes / who verifyed all: as ye haue herde before. Than̄e Philyppe Dartuell ſayd. Is Peter du Boyſe deed or a lyue. They anſwered and ſayd. Sir / he is nat deed. But he was ſore hurt in the batayle / and is gone to Bruges. And ſo therwith Philyp lepte on his horſe / and a .xxx. men with hym / and toke the way to Gaūt. And he went a lytell out of the way / to ſe certayne men yt were deed / of the garyſon of Andwarpe. Who were iſſued out the ſame night / to make a ſcrye in the hooſt / and ſo ther were a .xii. ſlayne. And as he ſtode and behelde them / he ſawe where an haraude was comyng from Gaunt warde / belongyng to the kyng of Englande / and he was called Irelande. Of the comyng of this haraude / Philyppe was right ioyefull / bycauſe he came out of Englande / and demaūded of hym tidynges. Sir quod the haraude / there is fyue of yor men with a knight of Englande / called ſir Wyllyam Fermeton / are come to Gaunt. And they by the acorde of the kynge of Englande and of his vncles / and generally / by conſent of all the realme of Englande. They haue brought you letters (as I am enformed) the whiche letters

comyth to you as Regent of Flaunders. And whan ye knowe what the letters conteyne / and the great alyances that ye ſhall haue with them of Englande and your men ones retourned. ye ſhall knowe what 
                  ••
               oforte ye ſhall haue of thē. Well quod Philyppe / ye 
                  ••
               otente me moche of this deuyſing / but I feare me it wyll be to late. Go your way to the hooſt to our lodgynge / and ſo he was brought to the lorde of Harſels / and Philyppe rode forthe to Gaunt ryght penſyfe / in ſuche wyſe / that no man coude haue a worde of hym.
            NOwe let vs ſpeke of the frenche kynge / and let vs ſhewe howe he parceyuered. Whan he harde howe that ye paſſage of Comynes was won / and the bridge newe made. than he departed fro the abbey of Marquettes / and ſo rode forth towardꝭ Comynes / in good order euery man in his degre. So the kyng came the ſame tuyſday to Comynes / and he and his vncles lodged in the towne / and the vowarde was dyſlodged / and went and lodged on the mount of Ipre. and ſo all his people and caryage paſſed by Comynes and Warneſtone. And on the wedniſday / the kynge came and lodged on the ſame mount of Ipre. and on the ſāe wedniſday the rerewarde paſſed by ye bridge of Comynes / wherin was two thouſande men of armes and two thouſande croſbowes. and the erle of Ewe and the erle of Bloyſe / the erle of ſaynt Powle / the erle of Harcourt / the lorde of Chatelon and the lorde of ſere / were gouernours of thē. And whan it was night / and yt the lordes had thoght to haue reſted thē after their traueyle / there fell ſodenly a larum and a ſkrye. ſo that the lordes thought ſurely to haue had batayle / & thought that the flemynges of Ipre / of Caſſell / and of Bergues had bene gadred togyder / and come to gyue them batayle. than theſe lordes armed them agayne / and ſet on their baſſe nettes / and ſet forthe their baners and penons / and ordred their men / euery man vnder their owne enſygnes. Thus they ſtoode nygh all nyght / in the myre to the myde legge. Theſe lordes endured moche payne / as the erle of Bloyſe and other / who had nat bene acuſtomed to ſuffre ſuch cold in ſuch longe nyghtes / as in Nouēbre / but they ſuffred it for their honour. for they went ſurely to haue bene fought with all incontynent / but all was nothing / for the ſkrye aroſe by certayne varlettes amonge them ſelfe. Howe be it theſe lordes endured this payne / and bare it as well as they myght.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the towne of Ipre and dyuers other / put them ſelfe vnder the obeyſance of the french kyng / and of the ordre of the kynges hooſt. Cap. CCCC .xvii.
            
               ANd on the thurſday in the mornyng the rerewarde diſlodged fro comynes / and drue to their company / who were on the mount of Ipre. And there the kyng and the lordes toke counſayle what was beſt to do / whether they ſhulde go before Ipre / or before Courtrey / or before Bruges. in the meane ſeaſon the french forangers ran ouer the countrey / and they founde catayle and other thynges / that it was maruayle to conſydre. for after they were ones ouer the paſſage at Comynes they lacked no thynge. Whan they of Ipre ſawe the kynge with all his puyſſaunce ſo nere them / and the paſſage at Comynes conquered they were nat well aſſured of them ſelfe / and ſo they drewe togyder to coūſayle. The rych and notable men of the towne / wolde euer that they ſhulde haue ſent to crye the kyng mercy / and to ſende hym the keyes of the towne. but the capitayne who was of Gaunt / and ſet ther by Philyp Dartuell / wold in no wyſe that they ſhulde yelde. ſayng ſirs: our towne is ſtronge inough and well prouyded / we may byde a ſiege longe ynogh if nedebe. and in the meane tyme Philyppe Dartuell our regent wyll gather his puyſſance / and come and fyght with ye kyng / and rayſe the ſiege: thinke nat the contrary. The other anſwered / and ſayd: we be nat in ſurety of this / for we thynke it can nat lye in Philyppe Dartuells power / to withſtand the kyng / with out the helpe of the englyſſhmen / the whiche is nothyng lykely. therfore we thynke it were beſt to yelde vs to the french kyng / & to none other. So moche roſe wordes bytwene thē / that they roſe agaynſt the capitayne and ſlewe him / who was called Peter Uanelayre. And whan they of Ipre hadde done this dede / they cauſed two freres to go to the kynge and to his vncles / deſyring the kyng that he wolde take an amyable treaty with them of Ipre. The kynge than by the aduyce of his counſayle / gaue ſaue conduct to .xii. of them of Ipre and an abbote / to come and go ſaue / to knowe what wolde be their deſyre / than ye frers returned to Ipre. And ſo than

xii. were choſen out in the towne & an abbote / to go to the kyng on ye mount of Ipre. and whan they came before the kyng they kneled downe / and offred hym to become alwayes vnder his obeyſance / without any meane or reſeruacion. The kyng than by the conſent of his counſayle / as he yt thought to reduce the countrey by faire meanes if he myght / receyued their offre / on a cōdicyon: and that was this. that they of Ipre ſhulde pay to the kynge .xl. thouſande frankes towardes his charges comynge thyder / to the whiche they of Ipre made no refuſe / but were ryght ioyfull therof. Thus they of Ipre were taken to mercy / and they deſyred the kyng and his vncles / to come in to their towne to refreſſh them / wherof they ſayd all the towne wolde be ryght gladde. the kyng agreed therto / conſyde ryng howe fro thens he myght go in to Flaunders / to whiche parte he wolde. So thus they of Ipre returned in to their towne / and the people therof were right ioyfull / whan they knewe how they were receyued to mercy. And ſo anon this .xl. thouſande frankꝭ was gadered among them / and payed to the kynge or he entred in to Ipre.
            ALl this tyme the kynge lay ſtyll on the mount of Ipre / and than there came tydynges to him / howe yt the paryſiens rebelled / and had determyned / as it was ſayde amonge them ſelfe / to haue beaten downe the caſtell of Beautye / ſtandyng in the wode of Uyncenes. and alſo the caſtell of Lowre / and all the ſtrong howſes about Parys / to thentent yt they ſhulde nat be greued by any of them. There was one amonge them thought to haue ſaid well / but he ſpake right yuell: as it apered after / for he ſayd. Sirs: let vs nat do thus / iyll ſuch ſeaſon as we knowe howe the kynge our lorde dothe / in his iourney in Flaūders. if they of Gaunt come to their entent / as we truſt they ſhall / than it wyll be good tyme to do it. let vs nat begyn a thyng and afterwarde repent vs. He that ſayde this / was called Nycholas the flemynge. and ſo by his wordes the paryſiens ſeaſed to do that outrage / but they helde them ſelfe ſtyll in Parys / and prouided for all thynges. as harnes and other abylmentꝭ / as richely / as though they had bene great lordes. And they were of harneſſed men cape a pe / lyke men of armes / mo thā .xxx. thouſand / and as many with malles / and dayly they cauſed harnes to be made / and ſolde to euery man that wold bye. beholde and ſe what a myſchiefe ſhulde haue fallen / if the kyng & the noble chiualry that was with hym had bene diſcomfyted in Flaūders. it may be well thought that all noblenes ſhulde haue ben deed / and loſt in all Fraunce / & as well peraduenture in other places. The rebellyon called the Jaquery / was neuer ſo great nor horible as this was likely to haue bene. In lykewiſe at Reynes / at Chalons in Champayne / and on the ryuer of Marewe / the villayns rebelled / and thretened the gentlemen / ladyes / and chyldren / ſuche as were abydinge behynde the kynge. Alſo at Orleance / at Bloys / at Rohan in Normandy / and at Beau uoyſen / the dyuell was entred in to their heeddes to haue ſlayne all noblemen / if god had nat purueyed of remedy. as ye shall here af
                  •
                in this hyſtorie. Nowe let vs retourne to Flaunders.
            WHan they of Caſſell / of Bergues / of Bourbourcke / of Grauelyns / of Furnes / of Dunkyrke / of Propringe / of Tourront / of Uaylant / and of Meſſyne / vnder ſtode howe they of Ipre were become frenche / and had yelded vp their towne vnder the obeyſance of the frenche kyng / and that gracyouſly he had receyued theym to his mercy / they were greatly reioyſed / and recomforted. And thus whan̄e they had well ymagyned / all theſe ſayd townes / toke their capitayns and bounde them faſt / to thentent that they ſhulde nat ſkape. and ſo they brought theym to the mount of Ipre to pleaſe the kyng / and cryed hym mercy on their knees / ſayng. Noble kyng we put our bodyes goodes / and townes / to be vnder youre obeyſance. and ſir / to ſhewe more playnly that ye be our ryght lorde / we haue brought you here our chyefe capitayns that Philyppe Dartuell had ſette to rule vs / and agaynſt our wylles to obey them. ſir / do your pleaſure with thē / as it ſhall lyke you beſt. for ſir: they haue ruled vs at their pleaſure. Than the kynge was counſayled to take them to mercy / ſo that amonge them they ſhulde gyue to the kyng .lx. thouſande frankes / towarde his charges / and therby all their catayls / and other thynges that they had abrode in the feldes / ſhuld be ſaued / and nat brent nor diſtroyed. Of the whiche cōpoſicion they were ryght gladde / and thanked the kynge and his counſayle / that they were ſo ſkaped. but all the capitayns that had bene ſette by Philyp Dartuell / in the ſayd townes / were all beheeded on the mounte of Ipre. Of all theſe apoyntmentes and treaties / the erle of Flaunders was nat made preuy to noue of them / nor he was nat cal led to counſayle. Somewhat it anoyed hym / 

for all that voyage he and his men lay euer on a wynge / bycauſe they were flemynges. and it was ordeyned and cōmaunded / in the kynges name on payne of dethe / yt no man in the hooſt ſhulde ſpeke any flemyſſhe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frenche kynge departed fro the moūt of Ipre / and howe Philyppe Dartuell and the flemynges apareled them ſelfe to fyght. Cap. CCCC .xviii.
            WHan the frenche kyng with all his hooſt / vowarde and rerewarde / had lyen on the mount of Ipre as longe as it hadde pleaſed him / and that his men had ſolde there moche marchādiſe / of ſuche ſtuffe as they had won abrode in the countrey, to them of Lyſle / of Doway / and of Tourney / they ſolde for a franke that was worthe foure. and there were ſome bretons yt thought to wyn more than̄e other / they charged their wagans and horſes with ſtuffe. as with cloth lynen and wollen / golde and ſyluer / plate and veſſell / and dyd ſende it in to ſauegarde / ouer the ryuer of Lyſe / and ſome in to Fraunce by their ſeruauntes. So than the kynge went to Ipre and lodged in the towne as many as myght / and there they refreſſhed them a fyue or ſixe dayes. They of Bruges were well enfourmed howe ye kyng was at Ipre / and howe that all the countre to Grauelynge / was yelded to hym. ſo they wyſt nat what to do / outher to yelde or nat / howbeit they dyd no more at that tyme. the mooſt prīcypall cauſe that moued thē nat to yelde / was bycauſe they hadde agreat nombre of their men of the towne with Philyppe Dartuell / at the ſiege of Andwarpe / to ye nombre of ſeuen thouſande. and alſo in the towne of Gaunt / they had lying in hoſtage of the mooſt notableſt marchauntes of Bruges / to the entent that Peter de Boyſe ſhulde be the more ſurer to rule them. Alſo Peter de Boyſe and Peter de Myrt / was there a monge them / ſhewyng and ſayeng to thē thus. Fayre ſirs: and good men of Bruges / diſmay you nat / though the kynge be come to Ipre. ye knowe well / howe auncyently all the puyſſance that was ſent by kyng Philyppe to Courtrey / by our auncetours / they were all diſcomfytted and ſlayne. in lyke wiſe ſo ſhall they all be ſlayn and diſconfyted / for Philyppe Dartuell hathe a great puyſſance. he wyll nat leaue the mater thus / he wyll fyght with the kyng / he may well do it / for the right is ours / and fortune is fauorabell to them of Gaunt. ſo nowe if he may diſcomfyte the kyng / there is nat one ſhall ſkape nor repaſſe agayne the ryuer of Lyſe. & ſo thus in an hour / all our countrey is wonne agayne. And ſoo thus ye of this towne ſhall be reputed good and true / mayntayninge your fraunches and to be in the grace of Philyp Dartuell / and of vs of Gaunt.
            THeſe wordes and ſuche other lyke / ſhewed dayly by Peter de Boyſe / and by Peter de Myrt / refrayned them of Bruges to fall to any treatie with the french kyng. In this meane ſeaſon the burgeſſes of Gaunt / that had bene in Englāde aryued at Calayes / and with thē ſir Willym̄ Fermeton an englyſſhe knyght ſent in to the countre of Flaunders / by the kyng of Englande / to conclude with the flemynges a peace to be taken / bytwene thē and their coun treys. Than the capitayne of Calys ſir Johan Deluerays / ſayd to them. ſirs: ye are welcome / but as at this preſent tyme / ye may paſſe no farther / for the frenche kyng is at Ipre / and all the countrey bytwene this and that / is tourned to hym. ſhortly ye ſhall here other tydinges / for it is ſayde / that Philyp Dartuell aſſembleth his power to fyght with the kyng / and than it ſhall be knowen who ſhall haue the better. If the flemynges be diſcomfyted / than ye haue nothyng to do in Flaunders / and if the kyng leſe ye felde / than all is yours. Thus the men of Gaunt and ſir Willyam Fermeton taryed ſtyll at Calays.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of Philyppe Dartuell howe he parceyuered. He hadde great deſyre to fyght with the kynge / and that he well ſhewed / for he came to Gaūt / and there he ordeyned that euery man that was able to beare armes / and the towne kept / ſhulde folowe hym. euery man obeyed him / for he made them to beleue that by the grace of god / they ſhuld discōfyte the french men / and ſhuld be ſtyll lordes of Gaunt / and of dyuers other countreys. And ſo he hadde with hym out of the towne / a ten thouſande men in harnes / for the arerebande. and ſo he came before Courtrey / & he had ſent to Bruges / to Audyn / to Ardanbourc / to Sluſe / and to the four meſtyers / and to the chatelayne of Grātmont / Teremonde / & Aloys. and ſo he rayſed among

th
                  •
               m a .xxx. thouſade / and ſo lodged one nyght before Andewarpe / and the next day he departed and went before Courtrey / and he hadde in his company a fifty thouſande men in harnes.
            TJoynges came to the kynge and to the lordes of Fraunce / that Philyppe Dartuell and his puyſſance aproched faſt towarde them and it was ſaid ye he had in his company a threſcore thouſande men. Than the vowarde departed fro Jore and the reregarde / and all the hooſt. Whyle the lordes were thus in the feldes they endured moch payne / for it was in the hart of wynter / in the begynnig of December / and it rayned nygh euery day. the lordes were fayne to lye euery nyght in the hygh wayes / for euery houre they loked for batayle. For it was dayly ſaid in the hooſt / howe their enemyes cō
               meth to morowe / and that was ſayde by the foragers that went dayly forthe a foragyng. the kynge was lodged in the myddes of his felde a monge his men. And in that Philyppe Dartwell and his cōpany taryed ſo long or he came / the lordes of Fraunce were ſore dyſpleaſed / for the wether was ſoo ſore / that they wolde fayne the mater had bene determyned. With the kyng was the floure of all chiualry of Fraūce. Philyp Dartuell and ye flemynges were to proude / whan they were ſo hardy to fight with ye kyng. for if they had leyen ſtyll at ye ſiege before Andwarde / and a fortefyed them ſelfe there / and by the reaſon of the rayne / and foule wether that fell. The frenchmen wolde neuer haue gone to haue fought with them there / and if they had / they coulde nat lightly haue fought with them / but to their great payne and parell. But Philyppe glorifyed ſo in his fayre fortune and victory / that he had before Bruges / that it ſemed to him / that no thynge coude go agaynſt hym / for he hoped well to be lorde of all the worlde. this was all his ymaginacyon / for he doughted nothyng the french kyng / nor all his puyſſance / for if he had he wolde nat haue done as he dyd. as ye ſhall here after.
         
         
            ¶ Of the maruayle that came to the flemynges in the nyght / and howe they ordeyned their batayle all in one company. Cap. CCCC .xix.
            
               THe Wedniſday at night that ye batayle was the next day / Philyp Dartuell with all his puyſſance came and lodged in a fayre grounde / right ſtrōge bytwene a dike and a lytell groue of woode with a ſtrong hedge ſo yt lightly no man coulde come well at them. And this was bytwene the hyll and Roſebeque, where as ye kyng lay. The ſame night Philyppe Dartuell made a ſupper in his lodgyng to all his capitayns right plenteous / for they had prouiſyon ynoughe folowynge them. and after ſupper / he ſayd to them. faire ſirs: ye ſe well we be here in armes / I hope well to morowe we ſhall haue ſome beſynes / for the kyng who hathe great deſyre to fynde vs to fyght / is lodged at Roſebeque. nowe I require you all / kepe faythe and trouthe / and be nat abaſſhed of any thyng that ye ſe or here / for this that we do is in the vpholdynge of our ryght / and lette vs frely fyght / to mayntayn the iuriſdictyons of Flaūders. Admonyſt your people to do well their deuoyre / and ordre them ſo well and wiſely / that by our good order and array we may haue the victory of the iourney to morowe. by ye grace of god we ſhall fynde no lorde that dare fyght agaynſt vs in the felde / and it ſhall be more honoure for vs / than though we had comfort of the engliſſhmen / for if they were in our company / they ſhulde haue the renome / and nat we. Alſo ſay to your company that they ſaue no parſone alyue / & ſo therby we ſhall lyue in reſt / for here is with the kynge all the floure of Fraunce / there is none leſt be hynde. Wherfore I cōmaunde on payne of deth that no man take any priſoner without it be the kynge hymſelfe / for I wolde he were ſaued / for he is but a chylde 
                  〈…〉
               e ought to be pardoned / he knoweth nat yet what he dothe / but as he is led / we ſhall bring hym to Gaūt to lerne to ſpeke flemyſſhe. but as for dukes / erls / and other parſones / ſlee them all. The comons in Fraunce wyll nat be dyſpleaſed there with / for I am in ſurety they wolde that none of them ſhuld returne agayne in to Fraunce / and no more I truſt they ſhall. All ſuch as were with Philyppe at this ſupper / acorded to his opinyon / and ſo anſwered with one voice / and ſayd. Sir: ye ſay well / and thus it ſhalbe done / than they toke their leaue of him and retourned to their lodginges to their companyes to ſhewe them as ye haue harde before. Thus paſſed the nyght in the hooſt with Philyppe dartuell / but about midnyght as I was

enfourmed / there fell in their hooſt a maruaylous thynge / I neuer harde of none lyke it in any maner.
            THus whan̄e the flemynges were at reſt in their lodginges / howbeit they knewe well their enemyes were on the hyll / nat paſt a leage fro them. As I was enfourmed / Philyp Dartuell had brought a damoſell with him out of Gaunt. and as Philyppe lay and ſlept on a couch beſyde a lytell fyre of coles in a pauilyon / this ſayd damoſell about ye houre of mydnight iſſued out of the pauilyon to loke out on ye ayre / and to ſe what tyme of the night it was by likly hode / for ſhe could nat ſlepe. ſhe loked towarde Roſebeque / and ſhe ſawe in the ſkye dyuers fumes and fyre flyeng / it was of the fyres that the frenchmen made vnder hedges & buſſhes. this damoſell harkened / & as ſhe thought ſhe harde great brute / bytwene their hooſt and the french hooſt / ſhe thought ſhe harde the frenche cryes / cryeng moūtioy ſaynt Denyce and other cryes and this ſhe thought was on mount Dorre bytwene them and Roſebeque. Of this thyng ſhe was ſore afrayed / and ſo entred in to the pauylyon / and ſodenly awaked Philyp / and ſayd. Sir: ryſe vp ſhortly and arme you / for I haue harde a great noyſe on the mount Dorre / I be leue it be the frenchmen that are comyng to aſſayle you. with thoſe wordꝭ he roſe and caſt on a gowne / and toke his axe in his hande and yſſued out of the pauylion to ſe what it was. And as the damoſell had ſhewed hym / he herde the ſame hym ſelfe / and it ſemed to hym that there was a great tournement onthe ſayd hyll. than incōtynent he entred in to his pauilyon / & cauſed his trumpet to be blowen. As ſoone as the trumpet had blowen / euery man aroſe and armed them. They of the watche ſent incōtynent to Philypp̄ Dartuell / to knowe for what 
                  ••
               uſe he ſtyrred vp the hoſt / ſeyng there was no cauſe why. ſhewyng him / howe they had ſent to their enemyes hooſt and there was no ſtyrring. why quod Philyppe / wherof roſe that noyſe on the mount Dorre? Sir ꝙ they we herde the ſame noyſe / & ſent thyder to knowe what it was. and they that went hath made report / y• whan they came there / they herde nor ſawe nothyng. And ſir / bycauſe we founde nothynge we made no noyſe therof / for ſtyrring vp of your hooſt. If we ſhulde haue ſtyrred them without a cauſe / we ought to haue ben blamed for our labour. & whan they of the watche had ſhewed Philyppe theſe wordes / he apeaſed hym ſelfe and all the hooſt. Howbeit he had marueyle in his mynde what it myght be. Some ſayde it was fendes of hell / that played and tourneyed there as the batayle ſhulde be the next daye / for ioye of the great pray that they were likely to haue ther.
            
            EUer after this ſodayne afray / Philyppe Dartuell and the flemyngꝭ were in dout of betrayenge. And ſo at good leyſar they armed thē and made great fyres / and eate meate and dranke / wherof they had ſufficient. and an hour before day Philyppe ſayd. Sirs / it were good we drewe in to the felde and order our peple / to the entent that thoughe the frenche men come on vs at the breakyng of the day / that we may be redy to receyue thē. They all accorded to his ſayeng / and ſo iſſued out of their lodgynges and came in to a hethe without the woode. And before them there was a great large dyke newly made / and behynde them full of buſſhes of genepar and other ſmall buſſhes. there they ordered their batayle all in one company / and by the report of their cōſtables / they were to the nombre of .l. thouſande choſen men / who dyde ſette but lytell by their lyues. Alſo there were a threſcore archers englyſſhmen ſtolen away fro Calys / thynkyng to haue more profyte by Philyppe Dartuell. So thus euery thyng was ordred / their cariage / women / and varlettes. and Philyppe Dartuell had his page by hym on a good courſer / worthe to a great lorde fyue hundred florens. He had hym nat by hym / to the entent to flye away or to ſteale fro his company / but it was the gretter therby to ſhewe his eſtate and to moūt on hym if nede were to folowe the chaſe of the frenchmen. He had of the towne of Gaūt about a nyne thouſande men well armed whom he kept euer about his owne perſon / for he had more truſte in them than in any other. & he and they with their baners were in the formaſt front / and they of Aloyes and Grantmōt next them. And than they of Courtrey / of Bruges / of Danne / of Scluſe / and of Franke / who were armed the mooſt partie with malles & chapeauſe of ſtele / and hocquetons & gantlettes of ſteele and baleyne / eche of the bearynge a ſtake typped with yron. Theſe townes had differēce in armes and lyuereis / to knowe one company fro another. Some had cotes of yelowe & blue / ſome with blacke bandes on reed cootes / ſome bordered with whyte on blewe cotes / ſome plā
               ted with grene and blewe. Sōeloſenged with whyte and blacke / ſome quartred whyte & reed ſome all blewe and one quarter reed / ſome reed

cutte vpon whyte / and their baners accordyng to their craftes / with great holmeſſes hāgynge at their gyrdels. So thus they taryed for the day light / whiche was nere aprochyng. Nowe I ſhall ſhewe you the order of the frenchmen.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the conſtable and admyrall of Fraunce / and the baſtarde of Langres wente to ſe the flmynges / and howe they fortifyed them ſelfe Cap. CCCC .xx.
            
               THe frenche kynge and the lordꝭ about hym / knewe right well howe the flemynges aproched nere to them. And ſawe well ther was no remedy but batayle / for ther was no mocion made of tretie of peace. The wedniſdaye there was a crye made in the towne of Ipre / yt all maner of peple as men of warre / ſhulde drawe to ye felde to the kynge / and to do as they oughte to do. Euery man obeyed the kynges cōmaundement as reaſon was. And drue to the felde / except ſuche bar lettꝭ as were cōmaūded to kepe their mayſters horſes. Howbeit in the bowarde they had many horſes for ye aduēturers / and to dyſcouer the feldes. Thus this wedniſday the frenche men kept the feldes nere vnto Roſebeque. & at night the kyng made a ſupper to his four vncles and t
                  •
                the cōſtable of Fraūce / & to the lorde of Coucy and to other great lordes ſtraūgers / of Brabant / of Heynalte / of Hollande / of zelande / of Almayne / of Lorayne / & of Sauoy / who were come thyder to ſerue the kyng / wherof he thanken them greatlye. The ſame nyght the erle of Flaūders kept the wache / and with hym a ſixe hundred ſpeares and .xii. hūdred men of other perſons of warre. And after ſupper whan theſe lordes were departed / the conſtable abode ſtyll to ſpeke with the kyng and his vncles. It was ordayned by the kynges counſayle / that the cō
               ſtable of Fraunce ſir Olyuer of Clyſſon ſhulde leaue his office for the next day / bycauſe it was thought yt they ſhulde haue batayle / and that the lorde of Coucy ſhulde occupy the offyce for that 
                  •
               yme / and ſir Olyuer to be about the kynges perſon. And ſo whan he wolde haue taken leaue of the kyng / the kynge ſayd to hym ryght ſwetely and amiably. Sir cōſtable / we wolde that ye rendre vp your offyce in to our handes / for this night and to morowe all day. We haue ordayned another to occupy the rome / and we wyll that ye abyde about our perſone. Of theſe wordes the conſtable had great marueyle / and anſwered and ſayde. Right dere ſir / I knowe well I can nat haue ſo great honour / as to ayde to kepe youre perſone. But ſir / this ſhulde be right diſpleſaunt to all my company / and to all theym of the vowarde / if they haue nat me in their company. Paraduenture they maye leſe more therby than wynne. Sir / I ſay it nat bycauſe I ſhulde thynke my ſelfe ſo valyant / that for lacke of me they ſhulde nat do well. But ſir / ſauyng the correctyon of your coūſayle / I ſay that all theſe fyftene dayes paſt / I haue done none other thynge / but purſewed myne offyce / to the honoure of you and of your people. And ſir / I haue ſhewed euery man what they ſhulde do. And ſir / if they fight to morowe / and ſe nat me amonge them / they wyll be abaſſhed / wher by I ſhall receyue blame. And ſome wyll ſaye / that I haue deuyſed many thynges / and flye a way fro the firſt ſtrokes. Sir / I requyre your grace breke nat that hath ben firſt ordayned / I enſure you ye ſhall haue profyt therby. So the kynge and ſuche as were about hym / wyſt nat what to ſay. At laſt the kyng right ſagely ſaid. Conſtable / I knowe well ye haue in all cauſes right well acquyted your ſelfe and ſhall do. the kyng my father that deed is / loued and truſted you aboue all other / and for the great truſt and affyaunce that he had in you / therfore I wolde haue you aboute me in this beſyneſſe. Ryght dere ſir quod the conſtable / ye are ſo well acompanyed / and with ſo valyant and ſo noble men and are ſo ordred by delyberacion of wyſe counſayle / that there is nothynge can be amended. Wherfore ſir / ye and youre counſayle ought to be content. And I therfore requyre you in goddes behalfe / to ſuffre me alone in myne offyce. And I truſte to morowe ye ſhall haue ſo good fortune in your iourney / that your frendes ſhal be gladde and your ennemyes diſpleaſed. To the whiche wordes the kynge gaue none aunſwere of a great ſpace / but at laſt ſayd. Conſtable / in the name of god and ſaynt Denyce exercyſe your offyce at your pleaſure / I wyll ſpeke no more therof. For ye ſe farther in this matter than I do / or ſuche as moued firſt the matter. Be to morowe with me at my maſſe. ſir quod

the conſtable with right a good wyll. & ſo toke leaue of the kyng and retourned to his logyng And on the thurſdaye in the mornynge / euery man apparelled thēſelfe redy armed ſaue their heedes / for they knewe well by all lykelyhodde / that they ſhulde haue batayle the ſame day. the frenche kyng herde maſſe be tymes in the mornyng / and all the great lordes with great deuocyon / prayeng to god to ſende thē honoure that daye. The ſame mornynge there aroſe a great myſt / ſo that one coulde nat ſe an acre of brede before hym / wherof the lordes were ryght ſore diſpleaſed / but they coude nat amende it. And after maſſe the kynge and the conſtable / and other great lordes wente to / counſayle / to determyne what they ſhulde do. And ther it was ordayned / that ſir Olyuer of Clyſſon cōſtable of Fraunce / ſir Mathue of Uyenne admyrall of Fraūce / and ſir Wylliam of Poicters baſtarde of Langres. Theſe thre ſhulde go and vyſette the demeanour of the flemyngꝭ / as nere as ther might and to come agayne and make report to the kynge and to his vncles / of the trouthe of euery thynge. and in the meane tyme / the lorde de Labreth & ſir Hughe of Chatelone ſhulde order the ba
                  •
               aylles. So thus theſe thre departed fro the kyng moūted on good horſes / and rode ſtreyght where as they thought to fynde their enemyes. The ſame mornyng in ye great myſt the flemynges roſe and drewe toguyder in the ſame ſtronge place that they had fortifyed / and ſo ſtode toguyder all in one batayle tyll it was eyght of the clocke / and coude here nothyng of the frenchmen. And than by great pride the capitaynes ſayd eche to other. What do we here / thus ſtandyng ſtyll on our fete and take colde? Why do we nat go forthe with great courage / ſythe we haue ſo great wyll to fight with oure enemyes? We tary here for nothynge. the frēch men wyll neuer ſeke vs here. Lette vs go at the leeſt to the mount Dorrel / and take the aduauntage of the hyll. Theſe wordes ſo multiplyed / that they all agreed to auaunce forthe / to take ye hyll that was bytwene them and the frēchmen. And ſo than to eſcape fro the dyke that was before them / they went about the lytell wode that was behynde them / and toke the playne feldes And as they came about this wode / the forſaid thre knyghtes aduyſed them by great 
                  •
               eyſar / & ſo rode in coſtyng their batayle / within a bowe ſhot of them. and whan they were paſſed on the lyft ſyde / than they rode agayne on their ryght ſyde / ſo that they well aduyſed their hole batell. The flemynges ſawe them right well / but they brake none aray for all them. Than 
                  〈◊〉
                Dartuell ſayd ſoftely to his capitayns. 
                  〈◊◊〉
                dreſſe vs and make vs redy to the batayle / 
                  〈◊〉
                our enemyes are nere vs. I se right well y• thre knightes that haue paſſed and 
                  ••
               paſſed by vs / haue well auiewed oure batayle. 
                  •
               h
                  •
               ſie th
                  •
               y drewe all in to one batayle as they wente to the hyll. Than Philyppe ſayd a loude. ſirs / whan we come to the batayle / lette vs thynke on oure enemyes / howe they were diſconfyted at the batayle of Bruges / by reaſon that we helde oure ſelfe cloſe toguyder. Let vs beware that we opyn nat / euery man beare his weapen ryght before hym / and enterlaſe your ſtaues ouer your armes / one within another / wherby they ſhall nat entre vpon vs. And lette vs go a good paſe by leyſar / and nother tourne on the lyfte hande nor on the right. And ſhote our gonnes all atones / and ſhote with oure croſ bowes. And this we ſhall abaſſhe our enemyes.
            wHan Philyppe Dartuell had thus ordred his men and ſette his batayle in arraye / and ſhewed theym what they ſhulde do. Than he made out a wynge of part of his men / ſuche as he beſt truſted / and by him was his page with his courſer / to whōe he ſayd Go thy waye with my horſe behynde yonder buſſhe / and whan thou ſeyſt the frenchmen flye than bring me my horſe and crye my crye. than men wyll gyue the roume / to the entent that I may folowe in y• chaſe with the formaſt. y• page dyde as he was commaunded. Than he ſet beſyde hym on a wynge .xl. archers englyſſhmen whome he had in wages. ¶ Nowe beholde if Philyp ordred hym ſelfe well or nat. I thynke and ſo dyde many / ſuche as were expert in bataylles / that he dyde nat well nor wyſely in one thynge. And that was / whan̄e he depatrted in the mornynge out of the ſtronge place that he was in. For it is to be thought / that the frenche men wolde neuer haue ſought theym there / to haue fought with thē / for they coulde nat haue done it without great domage. But lyke foles they thought to ſhewe them ſelfe valyaunt and lytell fearyng their enemyes / and ſo they were ſerued therafter.
         
         
            ¶ The maner of the batayle of Roſebeque / and howe the flemyngꝭ were

               
                  〈…〉
               yted by the coūſayle of the thre for
                  ••
               a
                  ••
                knightes / who had a
                  •
               ewed all their b
                  •
               hauyng. Cap. iiii. C. xx
                  •
               .
            
               SO theſe thre foreſayd knyghtes retourned to the kyng and to the bataylles / ye which were redy in good a
                  •
               ey as the
                  •
                ought to be. for ther were many noble and wyſe men and well experte in armes bothe in the vowa
                  •
               de and in the reregarde / and in the kynges batayle. & they knew right well what ought to be done / for ther was the 
                  ••
               our of all the good ch
                  ••
               alry of the worlde So thus euery man gaue theſe thre knyghtes way to cōe to the kyng / the lorde Clyſſon ſpake firſt en
                  •
               lynynge his body to the kynge / doyng of his hatte and ſayde. Sir / be mery: yonder people be all yours / 
                  •
               ure varlettes ſhall beate them. Conſtable quod the kynge / god graunt it. Let vs go forwarde than in the name of god and ſaynt Denyce. Than̄e ſuche knyghtes as were apoynted to attende on the kynges body were ſette in good order. And there the kynge made many newe knightes / and ſo dyde euery lorde in his owne batayle / and dyuers baners were newe reyſed vp. Than it was ordayned / that wha
                  •
               e they ſhulde 
                  •
               oyne to fyght / that the kynges batayle with the 
                  •
               riflambe of Fraūce ſhulde be in the fore fronte / and the Uo warde ſhulde paſſe by a ſyde on a Wynge on the one ſyde of the kynge. And the rerewarde to paſſe by / a lytell on the other ſyde of the kynge. So that all thre batayls might atoues / cloſe about the 
                  •••
               mynges batayle / who came cloſe toguyder all in one batayle. So the arereward were ſhewed of this apoyntmēt / the erle of Ewe / the erle of Bloyſe / the erle of ſaynt Poule / the erle of 
                  •
               arcourte / the lorde of Chatyllone / and the lorde Sere were chiefe of that warde. And before the erle of Bloyſe there was made barone the yonge lorde of haurell / ſir Thomas Dyſtre ▪ & ſir James 
                  •
               ameth baſtarde were made 
                  •••
               ght
                  •
               s. There were made the ſame day by the reporte of the haraudes / foure hundred thre ſcore and ſ
                  •
               uyn knightes. And ſo than the thre knight
                  •
               s departed fro the kyng and went in to the vowarde / where as their romes were. than 
                  〈◊〉
                the 
                  •
               riflambe was diſplayed that ſi
                  •
                
               
                  •
               e
                  •
               e
                  •
                of 
                  •
               yllers dyde beare. And ſome ſay as they haue founde written / that it was neuer before ſene diſplayed agaynſt chriſtēmen. but tha
                  •
                in that voyage there was great queſtyon made / whyder it ſhulde be diſplayed ornatte. Howe be it dyuers reaſons conſydered / finally it was determyned to be diſplayed as than / by cauſe the flemynges helde the opynion contrarie to pope Clement. And therfore the frenchemen called theym Urbanyſtes / wherfore they ſayde they were hery
                  ••
               kes / and oute of the true beleue. That was the chyefe cauſe that it was borne and diſplayed in Flaunders. This Ori
               
                  ••
               ambe is a precyous baner / and was ſent firſt fro heuyn for a great myſterie / the whiche was euer a great comfort to them that ſawe it. And the ſame daye it ſhewed ſome of his vertue / for all the mornyng there was a great thicke myſt / that one coude ſcanteſe another. But as ſoone as it was diſplayed and lyfte vp on hyghe / the myſt brake away / and the ſkye was as clere as any tyme in the yere before. The lordes of Frā
               ce were greatlye reioyſed / whan they ſawe the ſonne ſhine ſo clere / that they might ſe all about them / this greatly dyde reconfort them. it was great beautie than to regarde the baners and ſtremars waue with the wynde. And behelde well the great batayle of the flemmynges / who euer ſtyll aproched / faſt ioyned toguyder with their ſtaues vpright / that it ſemed a lytle groue of wode / there were ſo many of them.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the flemynges were diſcō
               fyted at the batayle of Roſebeque. Cap. iiii. C .xxii.
            
               IWas as than enfourmed of the lorde of Deſtenort / who ſhewed me / howe that he was there and ſawe it / and ſo dyde dyuers other That whan the Oriflambe was diſplayed and the myſt gone away. There came a doue and made dyuers flyghtes ouer the kynges batayle. and a lytell before they fought / ſhe ſat downe on one of the kynges baners / the whiche euery manne toke for a good token. ſo thus aproched the flemynges and began to ſhote gōnes and arowes fethered with ſteele. Thus the batayle began the whiche was right ſharpe & feirſe at the firſt encoūtryng. for ye flemyngꝭ ſet on proudly thruſtyng Wt their ſpeares & ſhulders lyke wylde 
                  •
               o

res / and they helde themſelfe ſo cloſe toguyder that they coulde nat be opyned. ther was with the ſhot of the gonnes at the fyrſt thruſt ſlayne / of the french parte / the lorde Del
                  ••
               rwyn baneret / Morlette of Harwyn / and James Dorre / and ſo therwith the kynges batayle was reculed / but the vowarde and ye arerewarde paſſed on forth / and encloſed about the flemynges / and helde theym ſtrayte / I ſhall ſhewe you howe. On theſe two wynges the men of armes ferſly aſſawted / with their ſtronge ſpeares well heeded with heedꝭ of fyne ſtele / wherwith they perſed the flemynges cotes of mayle in to ye harde bones / ſo that the flemynges were glad to eſche we the ſtrokes. So thus theſe men of armes kept the flemynges ſo ſhort / that they coude nat well helpe them ſelfe / nor put downe their armes to gyue any ſtrokes. So there were many that loſt their ſtrength and brethe / and fell one vpon a 
                  •
               other / & ſo dyed for lacke of breth with out ſtrikyng of any ſtroke. And ther was Philyppe Dartuell wounded and beaten downe amonge his men of Gaunt / and whan his page with his horſe / ſawe the diſcōfyture of his mayſter / he departed and lefte his mayſter / for he coulde nat helpe hym / and ſo rode to Courtray towardes Gaunt.
            THus theſe batayls aſſembled to gyder. So the 
                  •
               lemynges batayle was incloſed on bothe ſydes / ſo that they coulde paſſe no way / than ye kynges batayle came forth agayne the whiche was before a lytell drawen a backe. The men of armes beate downe the flemynges on euery ſyd
                  •
                / ſome had good axes of ſtele / wher with they brake a ſonder baſſenetes / and ſome had malles of leade. wherwith they gaue ſuche ſtrokes / that they beat all downe to the erthe be fore them / and as the flemynges were beaten downe / there were pages redy to cut their throtes / with great knyues / and ſo ſlewe them with out pytie / as though they had bene but dogges / the ſtrokes on the baſſenetes were ſo great yt no man coulde here other ſpeke for noyſe. I harde reported yt though all the armorers of Bareys / and Bruſels hadde bene workynge toguyder / coulde nat haue made ſo great a noyſe. There were ſome that aduaūced ſo ſore in to the preaſe that they were ſ
                  •
               ayn / and ouercome for lacke of brethe. as ſir Loys of Gouſalles a gētle knight of Berrey / and ſir Fleton of Renyell & dyuers other / whiche was great domage. but ſo great a batayle as the flemynges were / coulde nat be ouercome without great loſſe / for yong knightes and ſquiers wyll lightly auaunce them ſelfe to get honour. and the preaſe was ſo great and the beſyneſſe ſo parylous / that whan they were in the thicke of the preaſe / they coude nat releue them ſelfe / but were troden vnder fote to dethe. and ſo by that meanes there were dyuers of the frēchmen ſlayne / but to no great nombre. The 
                  •
               lemyngꝭ were ſlayne by hepes / one vpon a nother. And whan̄e they that were behynde ſawe the diſcomfyture of their company / they were abaſſhed / and caſt downe their paueſſes / and armures / and tourned and fled away towarde Courtrey / and other places / and had mynde of nothynge but to ſaue them ſelfe. And ye bretons and frenchmen chaſed thē through dykes / groues / and buſſhes / and euer foughte and ſlewe them downe ryght. there were many fledde bytwene Courtrey & the batayle / to go to Gaunt. This batayle was on the moūt dorre / bytwene Courtrey / and Roſebeque. In the yere of our lorde god / a thouſande thre hundred sourſcore and two / the thurſday next before aduēt in Nouember / the .xxvii. day. the french kyng Charles than beyng of .xiiii. yere of age.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the body of Philyp dartuell was brought to the kynge and ſo hā
               ged vp. and howe the towne of Curtray was brent. Cap. C C C C .xxiii.
            
               THus as ye haue herde the flemynges were diſconfyted on the mount Dorre / their pride abated and Philyppe Dartuell ſlayne. and of them of Gaunt / & of their parteners ſlayne with hym in the felde / to the nombre of nyne thouſande / acordynge to the report of the herauldes / and in the chaſe .xxv. thouſande ſlayne. And the batayle endured nat paſt halfe an hour / or it was diſconfyted. And after this diſcōfyture / the whiche was right honourable for all chriſtendome / and for all nobleneſſe. For if theſe ſayd villaynes had atchyued their ententes / there had neuer ſo great crueltie haue ben ſene before in all the worlde. For the comonties in dyuers countreis had rebelled / to haue diſtroyed all nobleneſſe.
            
               
What thynke you that they of Parys wolde ſaye / whan they knewe of this diſconfyture? I thynke they were nothynge ioyfull therof. thus whan this batayle was atchyued / at laſte they left the chaſe / and trūpettes ſowned the retrait. And ſo euery man drewe to his lodgynge / and the vowarde lodged forwarde / there as the flemynges had lyen the nyght before. And there toke their eaſe & were well refreſſhed / for newe purueyaunce came to them fro Ipre. And ſo y• night they made great fyres / with ſuche paueſſes and ſtaues as the flemynges had broughte to the felde. And whan the kyng was in his lod gynge / there was pyght vp a pauilyon of crymaſyn ſendall right noble and riche. And there the kynges vncles 
                  〈…〉
               ed hym / and dyuers other lordes of Fraunce came thyder to ſe hym as reaſon requyred. Than the kynge ſayde to them that were about hym. Sirs / if Philyppe Dartuell be a lyue or dedde / I wolde fayne ſe hym. they anſwered / howe they wolde do their payne that he ſhulde ſe hym. And thanne there was made a crye throughe the hooſt / that who ſoeuer coude fynde Philyppe Dartuell / ſhulde haue a hundred frankes for his laboure. Than there were many that went among the deed bodyes / who were nyghe diſpoyled of all their clothes. At laſte ther was ſuche ſerche made / that he was founde and knowen / by a varlette that had ſerued hym longe tyme before / & he knewe hym very well by dyuers tokens. So he was drawen and brought before the kynges pauylyon. And the kyng behelde hym a longe ſpace and ſo dyde all thother lordes. And he was turned and retourned / to ſe what hurtes or woundes he had / but they coude ſe no wounde wherby he ſhuld dye. But it was iudged that he fell in a lytell dyke / and a great meny of the gauntoyſe on hym / wherby he was preſſed to dethe. And ſo whā they had well regarded hym / than at laſt he was taken fro thens and hāged vpon a tre. This was the ende of Philyp Dartuell.
            Sir Danyell of Helwyn / who was within Andewarpe with other knyghtes and ſquyers the whiche had kepte the garyſon right honourably / the wedniſdaye before the batayle. bycauſe he knewe well that the kyng was in Flaū
               ders / and ſhulde haue batayle with the flemynges. Late in the nyght / he cauſed foure fagottes to be ſette a fyre and caſte a highe out of the towne / in tokenynge to thē that lay at the ſege / howe their ſiege ſhulde be reyſed. The thurſdaye / tidynges came to the lorde of Harſelles / howe that their company were diſcōfyted and Philyp Dartuell ſlayne. And as ſoone as thes tidynges were knowen they diſlodged / & toke their way to Gaunt / and left behynde them the mooſt parte of their prouyſion. But they with in And warpe knewe nothynge therof / tyll the next mornynge. And whan they knewe therof / they iſſued oute / and brought in great pyllage that they founde hydden there about. The ſāe thurſday at nyght / tidynges came to Bruges of the diſconfyture of the batayle / wherof they were greatly abaſſhed / and ſayde. Lo / we may nowe ſe our owne diſtructyon. If the bretons come hyder and entre in to our towne / we ſhall all be pylled and ſlayn / for they wyll haue of vs no mercy. than the burgeſſes and their wyues / toke all their beſt iowelles and riches / and put it in to ſhyppes to ſaue it / to ſende it by water in to Hollande and in to zelande. In this caſe they were four dayes / ſo that they left no diſſhe nor cuppe of ſyluer in all Bruges / but all was put in to ſhyppes for dout of the bretons. whan Peter de Boyſe who laye there ſore wounded / with the hurtes. that he toke at the paſſage of Comynes. Underſtode the diſconfyture of his company / and howe that Philyppe Dartuell was deed and ſlayne / and howe the people of Bruges were ſo abaſſhed. Than he was in no ſuretie of hym ſelfe. And ſo determyned to departe and to go to Gaunte / for he thought that they of Gaunt wolde alſo be ſore abaſſhed. and ſo made a lytter to be dreſſed for hym for he coude nat ryde. ye may knowe well / whan theſe tidynges came to Gaunte / of the loſſe of their men and of the dethe of Philyp Dartuell / they were ſo ſore diſconforted / that if the frenchmen had come thyder / the daye of the batayle or the next day after / or ye ſaturday after / or euer that Peter de Boyſe came thyder. they wolde haue ſuffred them to haue entred in to ye towne with out any reſyſtence / to haue done what they had lyſte: but the frenche men toke no hede therto. They thought right well to be lordes therof at their pleaſure. ſeynge that Philyppe Dartuell was deed / they thought ſurely: that the people of Gaunte wolde haue yelded them to the kynges mercy. Howbeit they dyde nat ſo / for they alone made greatter warre than euer they dyd before. As ye ſhall herafter in this hyſtorie.
            ON the friday the kyng diſloged fro Roſbeque / bycauſe of the eyre of the deed bodyes. And he was counſayled to go to Courtray to refreſſhe hym there. The Haſe and dyuers

other knightes & ſquyers / ſuche as knewe the countrey / lepte on their horſes and galowped ſtreyght to Courtray / and entred in to the towne / for there was made no defence agaynſt them. The burgeſſes and their wyues / and all other men / women / and chyldren / entred in to cellars and into the churches to flye fro ye doth / ſo that it was pytie to ſe it. Suche as entred firſt in to Courtray / had great profyte by pyllage. And ſo than after there entred the frenche men and bretons / and euery man toke vp their lodgynge as they came. And the kynge entred the firſte day of Decembre. Than there was a newe perſecucyon made in the towne on the flemynges / ſuche as were hydden about. For as they were founde out they were ſlayne / for ther was no man taken to mercy. The frenche men and they of that towne hated eche other mortal lye / bycauſe of a batayle that was ones fought before Courtray / where as ſir Robert Arthors and a great parte of the 
                  ••
               oure of Fraūce were ſlayne. It was ſhewed the kynge / howe y• there was in Courtray / in the churche of oure Lady a chapell / wherin were fyue hundred gylte ſpurres parteyninge of olde tyme to the lordes and knyghtes of Fraunce / ſuche as had bene ſlayne at the ſayde batayle of Courtray. The whiche was in the yere of oure lorde god / a thouſande thre hundred and two. And they of Courtray ones a yere made therof a great triumphe and ſolempnyte. Wherfore the kyng ſayd. it ſhulde be derely bought / and ſo it was after. for at his departynge he ſette the towne a fyre / to the entent that it ſhulde be knowen euer after / howe that the frenche kynge had bene there. And anone after that they kynge thus come to Courtray / there came thyder a fyftie ſpeares fro the garyſon of And warpe / with ſir Danyell of helwyn to ſe the kynge / who made thē ryght good chere / and ſo dyde all the lordes. And whanne they had bene there a day / than they retourned to And warpe to their company.
         
         
            ¶ Howe they of Bruges yelde them ſelfe vnder the obeyſāce of the french king / and howe they of Gaunt were reconforted by Peter de Boyſe. Cap. CCCC .xxiiii.
            
               THe bretons and they of the voward ſhewed well by their demeanoure / that they hadde great deſyre to go to Bruges / to pylle & to robbe the towne. The erle of Flaū
               ders / who loued ryght well the towne of Bruges / & wolde nat by his wyll that the towne ſhulde be clene diſtroyed. and alſo he was enformed / howe they of Bruges were diſconforted and greatly abaſſhed. He had pytie on theym / and ſayde to his ſonne the Duke of Burgoyne. Sir / if they of Bruges wolde come to aſke mercy / for goddeſſake lette them nat be refuſed. For if the towne be ouer ronne with theſe bretons / it ſhall neuer be recouered agayne / but loſt for euer. the duke agreed well therto. Thus whyle the kyng lay at Courtrey / they of Bruges lyued in great feare / and wyſt nat what to do / outher to avoyde the towne / or els to abyde the aduenture. And ſo at laſt they determyned to ſende two freres to the kyng to Courtrey / to obtayne a ſaueconduct for twelfe of the beſt of their towne / to cōe and ſpeke with the kynge and his counſayle. Theſe two freres came to Curtrey and ſpake with the kyng and his counſayle and with the erle of Flaunders / who molefyed the mater as moche as he might The kyng graunted for theſe twelfe burgeſſes this ſaueconduct / to go and come to ſpeke with hym. So thus theſe freres retourned to Bruges. And ſo twelfe of their burgeſſes departed and went to Courtrey / to the kynge and to his vncles. They kneled downe on their knees before hym and ſayd. Sir / we requyre yor grace to take and accepte vs as your owne / and to do with all the men of the towne at your pleaſure. But ſir / for goddeſſake haue pytie of vs. Let nat the towne be diſtroyed nor loſte. For ſir / yf it be diſtroyed / many good men are vtterly vn done for euer. And ſir / in that we haue ben contrarie to oure naturall lorde / it was by the puiſſaunce of Philyppe Dartuell and of the gaū
               toyſe. For and that hadde nat bene / the towne of Bruges hadde benefull trewe to their lorde. The kynge entended well to their wordes / by the meanes of the erle of Flaunders / who was there preſent. Who kneledde downe before the kynge / and deſyredde to haue mercy for theym. Than it was ſhewed theym / that to apeaſe the bretons and the menne of warre lyenge in the feldes / bytwene Courounte and Bruges / that it muſte behoue theym to paye ſome certayne

ſome of money. and ſo there was comunyng on that mater / and it was demaunded of them to pay two hūdred thouſande frankes. So at laſt it was determyned yt they ſhulde pay ſixe ſcore thouſande frankꝭ / thre ſcore thouſāde in hande / and the reſydue at Candelmas next after. and ſo therby to lyue in reſt and peace / and clerly to become liegmen to the french kyng / and to owe to hym faythe homage and obeyſaunce. Thus the good towne of Bruges abode in peace / and nat robed nor pylled / wherwith y• bretons were ryght ſore diſpleaſed / for they had thought to haue had great profyte therby. ſo that ſome of them ſayd / whan they ſawe that the peace was made / and lykely to haue no more warre. This warre of Flaunders is no thyng profytable for vs / for we haue lytle aduauntage therby. let vs returne in to our coūtrey / but let vs go through Haynalt / for duke Aubert who hath the gouernynge there / came nat to ayde nor to helpe his coſyn therle of Flaūders / but hath diſſymuled with hym. wherfore it is good that we go and vyſet hym / for he hathe a good countrey and a fat / we ſhall 
                  
                     •
                  ynd none that wyll let vs the way / and ſo let vs recouer our domagꝭ / and our wages yuell payed. So there were all of one accorde to the nombre of .xii. hundred ſpeares / what of bretons / burgonyons / ſauoſyns / and of other countreis. O what ieopardy the good countre of Heynalt was in. but the knowledge therof came to the gentyll erle of B
                  •
               oyes / who was there as one of the great lordes among other / and one of the chiefe gouernours of the arere garde / & one of the kynges counſayle. And anone whan he knewe that ye bretons and burgonyons deſyred nothyng but pyllage / & howe they ma
                  •
               aſſhed the good countre of Heynalte. Than to fynde remedy therfore / he aduaunced forthe and ſayd. Howe it was nat a thyng to be conſented vnto / that the good countre of Heynalt ſhulde be ouer ronne. And ſo called to hym his coſyns / the erle of Marche / the erle of ſaynt Poule / the lorde of Coucy / the lorde Dangeen and dyuers other / hauyng landes 
                  •
               n the coūtie of Heynault. And heſhewed them / howe in no wyſe they ought to conſent / that the good countre of Heynalt ſhulde be ouer ronne / fro whens they be dyſcended / and haue therin fayre herytage. Alſo he ſayd. ſirs / ye knowe well that the countre of Heynalt hath done no maner of treſpaſſe. For in all the warre bytwene the erle of Flaunders and his countre / alwayes Heynalt bare no faute. But hath ſerued the kyng in this voyage well and truely / with the barones and knyghtes therof. And alſo or the kyng came in to Flaūders / the knightes and ſquyers of Heynalt ſerued truely the erle of Flaunders. ſo that ſome of them were cloſed and beſeged in Tere monde and Andwarpe / and there aduentured bothe body and goodes. So moche the erle of Bloys dyde and went fro one to another & gat ſuche frendes / that all the mater was broken / & ſo abode ſtyll in peace. Alſo the ſame erle dyd another thyng. Ther was as than in Flaūders a knyght / called the lorde of Eſquymyn / who for the loue of a kynſman of his / called ſir Danyell Buſe / who throughe his owne faute was ſlayne in the towne of Ualencennes. And ſo to reuenge his quarell / the ſayde lorde: ſayde he wolde make warr / and harry the towne of Ualencennes. And he had goten ſuche frendes toguyder to do yuell / as drewe to the nombre of 
                  •
               yue hundred ſpeares / redy to go in to Heynalt to harry the towne of Ualēcennes. Affirmyng / howe he had a good quarell ſo to do. but whan the erle of Bloyes was enformed therof / he defended the ſayd knightꝭ that he ſhulde nat be ſo hardy to entre in to Heynalt / nor in to the countrey of his coſyn duke Aubert: for if he dyde / it ſhulde be derely bought. So moche dyde the gentyll erle of Bloys / that he ſtopped the ſayde knightes enterpriſe / and the mater put clerely in to his handes and to the lorde of Coucy. and ſo thus the towne was in peace. Suche ſeruice dyde the erle of Bloys in this army to them of Heynalt and to them of Ualencennes / wherby he gatte greatloue / and ſpecially of the towne of Ualencennes.
            ALl this ſeaſon the lordes & men of warr lay ſtyll at Courtray / and there about. For they knewe nat what the kynge wolde do / whyder he wolde go to Gaunte ornat. For the frenchmen beleued / that whan they of Bruges were yelded vp / that they of Gaunte wolde do ſo in lykewiſe. Seyng they had loſt their capitayne / and had receyued great domage & loſſe of their men / at the batayle of Roſebeque. And of trouth
                  •
                / ones they of Gaunt were in mynde ſo to haue done. For they were thre dayes they wyſt nat what to do / outher to departe & leaue the towne / or els to ſende the kayes therof to the kynge / and to yelde▪ them to his mercy. They were ſo abaſſhed that they wyſt nat what to do Nor the lorde of Harſels who was there / wyſt nat howe to reconforte theym. Whan Peter de Boyſe entred in to the towne / he founde the gates wyde opyn without any kepyng or defence / 

wherof he had great marueyle. And demaunded what it ment / that they kept no better their towne. And ſuche as were come to ſe hym / anſwered and ſayd. A ſir / what ſhulde we do? ye knowe well we haue loſt oure good capitayne and men of our towne beſyde ſtraūgers / to the nombre of nyne thouſande. This domage toucheth vs ſo nyghe that we haue no recouery. A folyſſhe people quod Peter de Boyſe / ye are abaſſhed and wot nat well why / for the warr as yet is nat at the ende. For the towne of Gaunt was neuer ſo renomed as it ſhalbe yet herafter. if Philyp dartuell be deed / it was by his owne outrage. Cloſe vp your gates and entende to your defences / ye nede nat feare that the kynge wyll come hyder in this wynter tyme. And in the meane tyme or the newe ſeaſon cōe / we ſhall be newe releued with our men / out of Holande zelande / Guerles / Brabant and other places. We ſhall haue men ynowe for our money. Frā
               coys Atreman / who is in Englande ſhall retourne / and he and I ſhall be your capitayns. the warre was neuer ſo ſore as we ſhall make it. We are better nowe alone / thā whan we had all the helpe of Flaūders / and we are nowe better expert than we were before. Therfore lette vs entende nowe to prouyde for the warre / and we ſhall do more thā euer we dyde before. thus with ſuche wordes Peter de boyſe reconforted thē that were ſore abaſſhed at his returnyng to Gaunt. For and he had nat bene / they had yelded themſelfe ſymply to the frenche kynge. Lo / thus ye may ſe what counſayle and confort ther is in one man / in tyme of nede. And whan they of Gaunt ſawe that fyue or ſixe dayes were paſſed / and that no man cāe towardes their towne nor no lykelyhod of any ſiege. Than they were greatly reconforted / and more prouder than euer they were before.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the treatie of alyaunce / bytwene the englyſſhe men and the flemynges was broken. And howe the french kyng deꝑted out of Flaūders. Cap. CCCC .xxv.
            
               YE haue herde before: howe ſir Willyam Fermeton was at Calys / ſent thyder by the kyng of Englande and by his counſayle / and brought letters with hym to haue bene ſealed by the good townes of Flaunders. Makynge men
                  •
               yon of great alyaunces / to be taken bytwene thenglyſſhmen and the flemynges. And at Calais with hym was ſtyll Fraunces Atreman and ſixe burgeſſes of Gaunt. and whan tidynges came to them of the diſcōfyture at Roſebeque / they were ſore abaſſhed. and the engliſſhe knight ſawe well that he had no more to do / to entre any farther in to Flaunders. For he ſawe well that the treatie was broken. So he toke the letters vnſealed / and retourne in to Englande agayne aſſoone as he might / and ſo ſhewed the mater howe it was fallen. Wherof the gentylmen of the countre were nat greatly diſpleaſed. For they ſayd and alſo ſay yet: that if the comons of Flaunders had wonne the vyctorie / and that the noble men of Fraunce had ben ſlayne. The pride of the comons in euery countre wolde haue ben ſo great / that all noble men ſhulde haue repented it / The whiche was well ſene but a lytell before in Englande. wherfore of the loſſe of the flemynges there was but lytell thought taken. And whan they of Flaunders / ſuche as had ben in Englande with Fraū
               ces Atreman knewe theſe tidyngꝭ / it was right greuous to thē. And ſo departed by water and arryued at Mydelborowe in zelande / & ſuche as were of Gaunt retourned to Gaūt / and euery man home to their owne townes. And Fraū
               ces Atreman and his company beyng at Calis departed and went to Gaunt / but that was nat as long as the frenche kyng was in Flaūders. but as I was enfour
                  ••
               ed they retourned by zelande.
            In the ſame ſeaſon that the frenche kyng lay at Courtrey / he had dyuers coūſayls to knowe howe he ſhulde parceyuer in his warre / & whether he ſhulde go and ley ſiege to Gaunt or nat. The kyng was well wyllyng to haue gone thy
               
                  •
               er. In lykewiſe ſo were the bretons and burgonyōs. But the lordes cōſydred: howe it was in the moneth of Decembre and in ye deed tyme of wynter / and dayly it rayned. Wherfore they thought it was no good hoſtyng tyll ſomer ſeaſon. And alſo they ſawe well howe their horſes were but feble / by reaſon of ye colde ſeaſon / and the ryuers great and large about Gaūt. Wherfore they thought but a loſt tyme to ley any ſege there. And alſo the lordes were wery & ſore traueyled / with ſo long lyeng in the feldes / in that colde tyme and tayny. So all thynges conſydred / it was determyned that the kynge ſhulde go to Tourney / and there to refreſſhe him and to kepe his Chriſtmas. And they of farr countreis / as of Auuergne / of Dolphyn / of Sauoy

& of Burgoyne / ſhulde returne home into their owne countreis fayre & eaſely. And the bretons normayns / and frenchmen / ſhulde abyde ſtyll with the conſtable to attende on the kyng. for it was thought / that they ſhulde haue ſome buſyneſſe with the pariſyēs / who had newly forged a great nōbre of malles. wherfore they thought to ſet another rule and order amonge thē. And whan the kynge ſhulde departe fro Courtrey / he and his counſayle forgate nat the gylt ſpurres that they founde in a churche there in Courtray / the whiche of olde tyme parteyned to the noble men of Fraūce / ſomtyme ſlayne with erle Robert of Arthoyſe / at the batayle of Curtrey. So than the kyng ordayned that at his departyng the towne ſhulde be ſet a fyre / & diſtroyed. Whan the knowledge therof came to the erle of Flaunders / he thought to haue founde ſome remedy therfore. And ſo came before ye kyng and kneled downe / and requyred hym to do none yuell to the towne of Curtrey. The kyng anſwered / howe that ſurely he wolde nat here his requeſt. And ſo therle durſt ſpeke no more of that mater / but ſo departed and went to his logyng Before they fyre began / the duke of Burgoyne cauſed an horaloge to be taken downe / ye mooſt fayreſt and goodlyeſt that coude be founde on that ſyde of the ſee. The whiche horaloge was taken downe by peces and layed in chares / and the bell alſo. And after / it was caryed to Diyon in Burgoyne / and there it was ſette vp. & there ſowneth the .xxiiii. houres of ye day and night.
            AT the departyng of the kyng fro Courtrey / the towne was clene diſtroyed and brent. And the knyghtes / ſquyers / and men of warre / toke ſome of the men / women / and chyldren to raunſome. And ſo the kyng rode & came to Turney / and was lodged in the abbey of ſaīt Martyne. and they of the towne dyde great reuerence to the kynge / as reaſon requyred. And all they of ye towne were arayed in whyte / with thre barres of grene on the one ſyde. The cytie was deuyded to lodge the lordꝭ. The kyng lay at ſaynt Martyns / and his company had one quarter of the towne. The duke of Berry was lodged in the byſſhoppes lodginge / the duke of Burgoyne at the crowne / the duke of Burbone at the golden heed / the cōſtable at ſaynt James heed. Ther was a cry made in the kingꝭ name on payne of dethe / no man to do any hurt to the people of the cytie. and that no manne take any thyng without he pay truely therfore / and that none entre in to the countie of Heynaulte / to do any hurte or domage there. All theſe thynges were well kept and holden / there the lordes refreſſhed thē well. And they of ye 
               farr countreis departed and retourned homewarde / ſome by Lyſle / ſome by Doway / and ſome by Ualencē
               nes. The erle of Bloyſe toke leaue of the kynge and of his vncles / and of his companyon therle of Ewe / and ſo returned to his herytage in Heynalte. And he lay a day and a nyght at. Ualencēnes / wher he was well refreſſhed. For he had achyued entierly the loue of the good people of the towne / for the ſeruyce yt he dyde to the countre / whan the bretons / burgonyons / and ſauoy ſyns / wolde haue ouerron the countre / whiche was let by his meanes. And alſo for ſir Tyrrie of Diſquemyne / who helde them of Ualencennes in great feate. Whiche mater was putte in to the erles handes and in to the lorde of Couces / and ſo therby they were in peace. Than the erle departed fro Ualencennes and went to Lē
               decheries / and ther he taryed a ſeaſon with the lady Mary his wyfe and Lewes his ſofie. And the ſomer after he went to Bloyſe / but the coū
               teſſe his wife and his ſonne taryed ſtyll in Heynalt and for the mooſt parte lay at Beaumont.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frenche kyng cāe to Parys / and howe he cauſed to be putte downe the cheyns and harnes in the towne: and howe the pariſyēs were raunſomed at his pleaſure. Cap. CCCC .xxvi.
            
               IN lykewiſe the erle of Marche and ſir James of Burbone his brother / deꝑted fro Tourney and went to refreſſhe them at Scluſe in Heynault / on their owne herytages. Sir Guy de lauall breton went to Cheure in Heynault / wher he had parte of enherytaūce: for he and ſir Robert of Namure were lordꝭ therof. And y• lorde of Coucy went to Mortayn on the ryuer of Leſcalt / and there refreſſhed hym and his cōpany / but for the moſt parte he hym ſelfe was with the kyng at Turney. The erle of ſaynt Poule had cōmiſſyon to chaſtyce the Urbanyſtes / wherof ther were many in that towne. And ſo he foūde

many / and euer as he founde thē in the churche of our lady or els where: they were taken & put in priſon and ſore raūſomed. And by that meanes / the erle of ſaynt Poule gathered toguyder in a ſhorte ſeaſon / more than ſeuyn thouſande frankes. For there was none that ſcaped hym / but that payed or founde good ſuretie to paye. And whyle that the kyng lay at Tourney / they of Gaunt had a ſaueconduct to go and cōe / and to entreate for a peace. But in all their treaties they were as harde and as proude / as thoughe they had won the vyctorie of the batayle of Roſebeque. They ſayd they wolde gladly put thē ſelfe vnder the obeyſaunce of the frenche kyng / to holde of hym / and to haue their reſort to the court of Parys. But they ſayd / they wolde neuer haue nor take to their lorde the erle Loyes. For they ſayde / they coude neuer loue hym / bycauſe of the great domages that they had receyued by hym and by his meanes. All that euer ye kyng and his counſayle coude do / coude neuer tourne them fro that opinyon: They wolde neuer make other anſwere / butſayde. Thoughe they had lyued this two or thre yere / in payne / trouble / and daunger. yet they truſted at laſte / to recouer it / and to bringe vp their towne agayne / in to great proſperyte and welthe. than it was ſhewed them / they might departe whan they lyſt. And ſo they deꝑted fro Tourney and retourned to Gaunt: and ſo the mater hanged ſtyll in warre. The frenche kyng and his lordꝭ toke great payne / to cauſe the countie of Flaunders to be good Clementyns / & to obey to pope Clement. But the good townes and churches were ſo ſore anexed and bounde to the opinyon of pope Urbane / that they coude nat be turned. Therle of Flaunders hym ſelfe was of ye ſame opinyon / and ſo they anſwered by the coūſayle of therle to take aduyce / and to anſwere detmynatly by the feeſt of Eſter: and ſo thus the matter hanged. The kynge kept his Chriſtmas at Turney / and whan the kyng deꝑted / he ordayned the lorde of Guyſtell to be capitayn of Bruges / the lorde of ſaynt Pye at Ipre / & the great lorde of Guyſtell to be regarde of Flaunders / & ſir John̄ of Jumont to be capitayne at Courtrey. And he ſent two. C. ſperes bretons and other in garyſon to Andeburge. & to Andwarpe he ſent ſir Wyllm̄ of Langhien and about a. C. ſpeares with hym in garyſon. Thus the garyſons of Flaūders were purueyed for to kepe garyſon warr all wynter / and none otherwiſe tyll the next ſomer. Theſe thynges thus ordred / the kynge departed fro Tourney and went to Arras and his vncles with hym / and the Erle of Flaunders in his company.
            The kyng taryed at Arras / & the cytie was in a great aduenture to haue ben ouer ron and robbed with the bretons / For there was great wages owyng to them. Alſo they had endured great traueyle in that voyage / & they were nat well content with the kyng it was great payne to refrayne them fro doyng yuell. The cōſtable and marſhals of Fraunce apeſed them / promyſyng / howe they ſhulde be clerely payed of their wages whan they came to Parys. ſo thus the kynge deꝑted and went to Peron. The erle of Flaunders toke leaue of the kyng and went to Lyle. ſo long the kyng iurneyed that he paſſed Peron / Noyon / and Cōpayne: and ſo came to ſaynt Lyſe and there reſted. And all his men of warre were lodged in ye vyllages bytwene ſaīt Lyſe and Meaulx in Bry / and on the ryuer of Marne / and about ſaynt Denyce: ſo that all ye countre was full of men of warre. And ſo than the kyng departed fro ſaynt Lyſe and went towarde Paris / and he ſent before his officers to prepare for hym his lodgynge / at the caſtell of Loure. And alſo his thre vncles ſent of their ſeruauntes to prepare their lodgynges: & in lykewiſe ſo dyd other lordꝭ. And all this was done for a cautell and wyle / for the kyng nor theſe lordes were nat determyned to entre ſo ſodenly in to Parys / for they douted them of Parys. But they dyde this to proue what countenance & order they of Paris wolde make at the kyngꝭ entre / they thought they wold make this aſſay be fore. The ſeruaūtes that went before were commaunded to ſay / if any man demaūded of thē if the kyng were comyng / that they wolde be ther incōtynent. By the whiche the pariſyens aduyſed among them ſelfe to be armed / and to ſhewe the kyng at his entre what puyſſance they were of: & what men of warr they were able to make to ſerue the kyng whan it pleaſed him. but they had ben better to haue ſytten ſtyll in their houſes / for the ſhewe that they made was cōuerted to their great ſeruytude / as ye ſhall here after. Ther ſayd they dyde it for good / but it was taken to yuell. And wher as the kyng ſhulde haue lodged at Lour / he made his lodgynge to be prepared at Bourgell. And than voyce ran thorough Parys / how the kyng was nere at hāde to entre in to Parys. Than mo than .xx. thouſande pariſyens armed them and yſſued out in to the feldes / and ordred themſelfe in a fayre batayle / bytwene ſaynt Lader & Parys / towarde

Mount martyr. And they had with them croſbowes / paueſſes / and malles redy apparelled / as thoughe they ſhulde haue fought incōtynent in batayle. The kyng was as than at Borgell and all the lordes / & thider to them was broght all the tidynges of all the demeanoure of them of Parys. Than the lordes ſayde. A / ye may ſe the pride of theſe rybauldes. Wherfore do they nowe ſhewe their eſtate? yf they wolde haue ſerued the kynge / in the ſame poynt as they be in nowe: whan the kynge went into Flaunders. Than̄e had they done well / but they hadde no mynde ſo to do. They rather prayed to god yt we ſhulde neuer retourne agayne / the whiche wordes dyuers that were ther helped / well forwarde / to thentent to greue the pariſyens. ſayeng if the kyng be 
                  〈◊〉
                counſayled / he ſhall nat aduenture hym ſelfe 
                  •
               o come among ſuche people / as cometh agaynſt hym with an army arrayed in batayle. They ſhulde rather haue cōe humbly with proceſſyon / and haue rong all the belles in Parys. In thankynge god of the vyctorie / that the kyng had in Flaunders. Thus the lordes were abaſſhed / howe they ſhulde mē
               tayne them ſelfe / Finally it was apoynted / that the conſtable of Fraunce / the lorde Dalbret / the lorde of Coucy / ſir Guy of Tremoyle / and ſir Johan of Uyen / ſhulde go and ſpeke with thē. And demaunde of them the cauſe / why they be iſſued out of Parys in ſo great a nōbre / armed in order of batayle agaynſt the kyng / the whiche thynge was neuer ſene before in Fraunce. And vpon their aunſwere / the lordes ſayde the kynge ſhulde take aduyſe. They were wyſe ynoughe to order as great a mater as that was / and gretter. So theſe ſaid lordes departed fro the kyng without harneſſe / & for the more ſuretie of their buſyneſſe / they toke with thē thre or foure herauldes / and ſende them ſomwhat before to the pariſyens / and ſayd. Sirs / go ye on before to yonder people of Parys / & demaūde of them a ſaue conduct for vs to go and cōe / tyll we haue ſpoken with them fro the kyng.
            THeſe heraudes departed & rode a great pace / and cāe to theſe people. And whan the pariſiens ſawe them comyng / they thought full lytell they hadde come to haue ſpoken with them: they thought they had but rydden to Parys as other dyde. The heraudes had on their cote armures / and whan they aproched nere to the pariſyens / they ſayd on high. Where be the mayſters? Wher be the rulers? Whiche of you be capitayns? We become to you / ſende fro the lordes. Than ſome of them of Parys parceyued well by theſe wordꝭ / that they had nat done well. They caſt downe their heedes and ſayde. Here be no mayſters / we are all of one accorde / and at the kynges commaundement and ye lordes. Therfore ſirs / ſaye in goddes name what ye wyll to vs. Sirs quod the heraudes / the lordes that ſente vs hyder / and named them they knowe nat what ye thynke or entende. They requyre you that they may peaſably without parell come and ſpeke with you / and retourne agayne to the kyng / and ſhewe hym the anſwere that ye make to them / otherwyſe they dare nat come to you. By oure faythes ſirs quod they / they ought to ſay no ſuche wordes to vs / but of their gētylneſſe we thynke ye do but mocke vs. Surely ſirs quod the heraudes / we ſpeke it in good certentie. Than quod the pariſyens / go your way and ſay to them / that they may come at their pleaſure to vs / without daunger or parell / for they ſhall haue no hurt for none of vs / for we are all redy to fulfyll their commaundementes. Than the herauldes retourned to the lordes / and ſhewed them as ye haue herde. thā the four lordes rode for the and their company / and came to the pariſyens whome they founde in good array and order of batayle / and there were mo than .xx. thouſande malles. and as the lordes paſſed by them / and behelde theym well within them ſelfe / they prayſed moche their maner. & alſo as they paſſed by / euer the pariſyēs enclyned them ſelfe to thē. And whan theſe lordes were as in the myddes amonge them / than they reſted and ſtode ſtyll. And the Conſtable ſpake a highe and ſayde. ye people of Parys / what hath moued you to iſſue out of the cytie in this order of batayle? It ſemeth ye wyll fyght agaynſt the kynge our ſouerayne lorde / whoſe ſubgettes ye be or ſhulde be. Sir quod they / ſaue youre grace. We were neuer of wyll to do any thynge agaynſt the kynge. But ſir / we be yſſued out for non other cauſe / but to ſhewe the kyng what puyſſance the pariſyens be of. The kyng is but yonge he neuer as yet ſawe it / and without he ſe it he can nat knowe it / nor how he may be ſerued if nede be. Sirs quod the cōſtable / ye ſpeke well. But we ſaye vnto you fro the kynge / that as at this tyme he wyll not ſe you in this maner / for this that ye haue done ſuffyſeth. Therfore we counſayle you to retourne agayne peaſeably to Parys / euery man to his owne lodgynge and do of youre harneſſe / if ye entende that the kynge ſhall come hyder. Sir quod they / we ſhall with right a good wyll fulfyll

youre commaundement. And ſo therwith they all retourned in to Parys / euery man to his owne houſe to vnarme hym. And the ſayde four lordes retourned to the kyng / and ſhewed vnto hym / all the wordes that ye haue herde before. Than it was determyned / that the kyng / his vncles and lordes / and certayne men of armes with them / ſhulde entre in to Parys. And the great bande to 
                  •
               yde without the cyte roūde about / to gyue the more feare to the pariſyens. And the lorde of Coucy and the marſhall of ſā
               xere were ordayned / that aſſoone as the kynge were entred in to Parys / that they ſhulde take downe the leaues of the gates of the four princypals of the cytie / towarde ſaynt Denyce and ſaynt More. So that the gates myght ſtande open day & night / for all maner of men of warr̄ to entre in and out at their pleaſur / to thentent to mayſter them of Parys if nede were. And alſo / they to take downe all the cheneſſe in euery ſtrete / to ryde in and out at their pleaſure. And as it was ordayned ſo it was done. And ſo the kyng entred in to Parys and lodged at Loure and his vncles by him / and thother lordes in dyuers logynges. So thus the gates were taken out of the gouges & layd downe on ye grounde / and the cheneſſe of euery ſtrete taken downe & brought in to the palayes. Than the pariſyens were in great dout / and feared that they ſhulde be ouer ron / ſo that none of them durſt loke out in to the ſtrete / nor open dore nor wyndowe. & thus they were a thre dayes in great parell and feare to receyue greatter domage / as they dyd. for it coſt many of them great fynance and raū ſome. For they were called in to the chambre of counſayle one after another / ſuche as the lordꝭ wolde haue. And ſo there they were raūſomed / ſome at ſixe thouſande frankes / ſome at thre / & ſome at one. So that ther was leuyed in Parys to the kynges profyte / to his vncles / and to his myniſters / the ſōme of foure hundred. M. frankes. Ther was nothyng demaūded of the poore people but of the great mayſters / & ſuche as might bear it. They were right happy that might eſcape with payeng of raūſome. And euery man by him ſelf / was fayne to bring their harneſſe in ſackes to y• caſtell of Beautie / other wiſe called the caſtell of Uycēnes: and there it was cloſed in a great towre / & their mals alſo. thus the pariſyēs were delt
                  •
               all / to gyue enſā
               ple to all other good townes of Frāce. and ther were reyſed vp: ſubſydꝭ / gabels / aydꝭ / fouages douzimes / trezimes / & all other ſuche thyngꝭ. & alſo / all the playne coūtre about cleneryfled.
         
         
            ¶ Howe dyuers notable men of Paris were beheeded with mayſter Johan Marettes at Parys / & in dyuers other townes of Fraunce: and of the warr̄ of the gaūtoiſe that was newe begon agayne. Cap. CCCC .xxvii.
            
               THere were alſo diuers taken and put in priſon and many drowned. and than to apeaſe the remynant / there was a crye made in the cyte / that none on payne of dethe ſhuld do any hurt to any pariſyen / nor ro
                  〈…〉
                nor take any thynge out of any houſe / without payeng therfore. This cry apeaſed greatly them of the cyte. Howe be it on a day / there were dyuers perſones ledde out of the caſtell iudged to dye for their defaulꝭ / & for ſtyrring vp of the comons. Howbeit there was great marueyle made of mayſter Johan Marettes / who was reputed and renoumed a ſage and a notable man. Some ſaid he had wrong to be iudged to dye / for he had alwayes bene a man of great wyſedome and good counſayle. And was one of the mooſt autētyke men of the court of parlyamēt: and had ſerued kyng Philyppe / kyng Johan / and kynge Charles: and was neuer founde in no defaute. Howe be it he was than iudged to be beheeded and a .xii. in his company. And as he was caryed on a charet to the place of execuſion. He ſpake and ſayd Where be they that hath iudged me to dye? Let them come forthe & ſhewe the cauſe why. Thus he preached to the people as he went to his execuſyon. The people had great pyte on him / but they durſt ſpeke no worde. He was brought to the markette place of the halles / and there firſt were beheeded / ſuche as were brought thyder with hym. There was one called Nicholas flamant a draper / and ther was offred to ſaue his lyfe / threſcore thouſande frankes / but it wolde nat be taken / but there he dyed. And whan they came to mayſter Johan Marettes / they ſayde to hym. Mayſter Johan / crye mercy to ye king to forgyue you your myſdedes. Than he tourned hym and ſayde. I haue ſerued kyng Phylyppe his great graunt father / kynge Johan / and kynge Charles his father / well and truelye. Theſe thre neuer layed any thynge to my charge / nor no more the kyng y• nowe is wolde haue done / and he had bene at his full age / and

of mānes knowledge. I beleue in the iudgyng of me / he is nothyng culpable. I haue nothyng to do to crye hym mercy / but I crye god mercy and none other: I requyre hym humbly to forgyue me my miſdedꝭ. And ſo than he toke leaue of the people / ſo that many wept for hym. After this maner dyed mayſter Johan Marettes.
            iN lykewiſe in the towne of Rohan to mayſter the towne / ther were dyuers putte to dethe and raunſomed. Alſo at Reynes / at Chaalons / at Troyes / at Sence / and at Orlyaunce. Theſe townes were taxed at great ſommes of florens / bycauſe at the begynninge they diſobeyed the kyng. Ther was gadered in the realme of Fraunce ſuche a ſōme of florens / that it was marueyle to ſpeke therof. And all went to the profyte of ye duke of Berrey and of the duke of Burgoyne / for the yong kynge was in their gouernaunce. And to ſaye the trouthe / the Conſtable of Fraunce and the marſhalles / had a great parte to paye the men of armes / that had ſerued the kynge in his vyage in to Flaunders. And the erle of Bloys / the erle of Marche / the erle of Ewe / therle of ſaynt Poule / the erle of Harcourt / the erle Dolphyn of Auuergne. The lorde of Coucy and the gret barons of Fraunce / were aſſigned to be payed on ſuche tares as ſhulde be payed in their countreis / for ſuche ſeruyce as they had done to the kyng in Flaunders: and they to pay their company. Of theſe aſſignacyons / I canne nat tell howe the lordes were payed / for incontynent after: newe taylles were ceaſſed in their countreis for the kynge. And ſo before all other / the kynges taxe ſhulde be payed and executed / and the lordes dueties putte abacke.
            yE haue herde before: howe whan̄e the kyng deꝑted fro Courtrey / the towne of Gaunte abode ſtyll in warre / as it was before. And capitayns of Gaunte at that tyme / were Peter de Boyſe / Peter de Myrt / & Fraunces Atreman. And ſo they renewed the towne with newe ſoudyers / that came to them fro dyuerscountreis / and they were nothynge abaſſhed to make warre / but as freſſhe and as quycke as euer they were. And the capitaynes of Gaunt / vnderſtode that ther were certayne bretons and burgonyōs in the towne of Dardenbourge: They determyned to go thyder to loke on them. And ſo Fraunces. Atreman deꝑted fro Gaunt with thre thouſande men / and ſo came to Dardēbourge / and ther made a great ſcrimyſſhe. And finally the gauntoyſe wan the towne / but ye coſt many of their lyues / for there were a two hundred of his men ſlayne / and the towne was robbed and pylled / and the mooſt parte therof brent. And ſo than they retourned to Gaunt with their boty and conqueſt / & were receyued with great ioye. And anon after they went to the cytie of Dabes and to Teremonde iuſte to And warpe / and pylled and robbed all the countrey.
         
         
            ¶ Of the alyaunce that was purchaſed bytwene thenglyſſhmen and the flemynges: & of the bulles that pope Urbayne ſent in to Englande to dyſtroy the clemētyns. Ca. iiii C .xxviii.
            
               THe erle of Flaunders who lay at Lile: vnderſtode howe the gauntoyſe auaunſed them ſelfe to ryde and to ouer ron the countre / and to diſtroy that they might. He was ryght ſore diſpleaſed. He thought they had nat had the wytte nor puyſſaunce ſo to do / ſythe that Philyppe dartuell was deed: Howbeit his counſayle ſayd to him Sir / ye knowe well and ye haue alwayes herd ſay / howe the gauntoyſe are right ſubtyll people / the whiche they haue well ſhewed and wyll ſhewe. And alſo agayne / they haue ben in Englande and are retourned agayne. And ſpecially Fraunces Atreman / who was companion to Philyppe Dartuell in all his faytes / as long as he lyueth ye ſhall haue warre with thē. Alſo ſir / we knowe well he hath made great alyaūce with the kynge of Englande for the towne of Gaunt. And hath a certayne penſyon out of Englande ſecretely by Johan Saplemon / who is pure englyſſhe / and dwelleth vnder you in the towne of Bruges / and hathe done the ſpace of this .xxiiii. yere. And to verify that this is true Raſe of Ueyrte / Loyes de Uos / & Johan Ser colacke of Gaunt / and the clerke that procureth to be byſſhoppe of Gauut. All theſe are ſtyll behynde in Englande / to performe this alyaūce. And ſir / ye ſhall here more trewer tidyngꝭ than we can tell you / or the myddes of May be paſt. The Erle of Flaunders beleued well all theſe ſayenges to be trewe / and ſo they were in dede. Than he began to ymagin agaynſt this John̄
               
Saplemon / and on thenglyſſhmen dwellynge in Bruges. Than he cauſed them to be ſomoned / to be at a certayne day aſſigned before the erle at Lyſle. And ſo the erles ſeruauntes came and ſomoned Johan Saplemon and dyuers other riche englyſſhmē / or they were ware ther of: commaundynge them the fyftene day after / to be with the erle at his caſtell of Lyſle. Whan the englyſſhmen herde therof they were ſore abaſſhed and toke counſayle toguyder / hauyng great marueyle / why the Erle ſhulde ſende for them. All thynges conſydred / they douted gretlye / for they knewe well the erle was fierſe and fell / in his haſt. Than they ſayd amonge themſelfe. He that kepeth natte his body kepeth nothyng. We dout leſt the erle be enfourmed ſore agaynſt vs. For with Fraunces Atreman who hath a penſyon of the kyng of Englande / whan he was in Englande / there was with hym two burgeſſes of this towne of Bruges. And parauenture they haue made ſome enformacyon agaynſt vs to therle / for as nowe they be on his parte. So on this purpoſe reſted the englyſſhemen / that they durſt nat abyde the erles iudgement / nor to go to Lyle at the day before lymyted. So they departed fro Bruges and wente to Scluſe / and dyde ſo moche that they founde a ſhyppe redy aparelled. And ſo they bought it with their money / and ſo departed and ſayled / tyll they arryued at London. And whan therle of Flaunders was enfourmed of this mater & ſawe that the englyſſhmen apered nat at theyr day he was ſore diſpleaſed / and ſende incontynēt to Bruges / and cauſed to be ceaſed all that euer coude be founde / parteyninge to the Englyſſhmen / and all their herytages gyuen and ſolde. And Johan Saplemon clene banyſſhed out of Flaunders / for a hundred yere & one day and his cōpanyons / & ſuch as were taken were put in priſone: where as ſome dyed. And ſome recouered agayne all that euer they had loſt.
            THere is a comune prouerbe / the whiche is true: & that is / howe enuy neuer byeth. I ſay it / bycauſe englyſſhmen are right en uyouſe of ye welthe of other / and alwayes hath ben. It was ſo / that the kyng of Englande and his vncles and the nobles of Englande / were right ſore diſpleaſed of the welthe and honour that was fallen to the frenche kynge / and to the nobles of Fraunce at the bataile of Roſebeque. And the knightes of Englandeſpake and ſayd to eche other. Ah ſaynt Mary / howe the frenchmen are nowe moūted in pride / by the ouerthro wyng of a ſort of rude villayns. Wolde to god Philyp Dartuell had had of our men a .ii. M. ſpeares & ſixe. M. archers? Ther had nat than ſcaped one frenchmen / but outher ſlayne or taken / but and god wyll this glorie ſhall nat long endure thē. Nowe we haue a fayre aduaūtage to entre in to Flaūders / for the countre is nowe cōquered for the french kyng: & we truſt to conquere it agayne for the kynge of Englande. It ſheweth well at this tyme / that the erle of Flaū
               ders is greatly ſubget to the frenche kyng / and that he wyll pleaſe hym in all poyntꝭ. whan our marchantes dwellyng in Bruges & haue dwelt ther beyonde this .xxx. yere be nowe banyſſhed & chaſed out of Flaūders. the tyme hath be ſene they durſt nat haue done it: but nowe they dare do none otherwyſe for feare of the frenchemen. We truſt it ſhall nat abyde longe in this poynt. This was the langage among thenglyſſhmen through the realme of Englāde / therfore it was to be ſuppoſed / ye this was done but by enuy.
            iN this ſeaſon / he that wrote hym ſelfe pope Urbane the ſixt / came by the ſee fro Rome to Gēnes / where as he was well receyued and reuerently of the genoways and there he kept his reſydens. ye knowe well / howe all England was obeyſāt to hym / aſwell the churche as ye people: bycauſe ye french king was Clementyne / and all Fraunce. This Urbane / on whome the englyſſhemen and dyuers other countreis beleued: He beyng at Gennes / aduyſed howe he might anoy the french kyng / and ſo he thought to ſende in to Englande for ſocoure. I ſhall ſhewe you by what maner. He ſent his Bulles to the archebyſſhoppes and byſſhoppes of Englande / makyng mencyon: how he aſſoyled from payne & from ſynne / all ſuche as wolde ayde to diſtroy the Clementyns. For he knewe well / howe Clement his aduerſarye / had done in lykewiſe in the realme of Fraunce / and dothe dayly. And they called the vrbanyſtꝭ in their faythe and beleue / to be but dogges. ſo this Urbane ſawe well / that the Clementynes wolde condēpne and diſtroy hym if they might And he ſawe well / he coude nat more greue the frenchmen / than by the englyſſhmen. But firſt he ſawe well / he muſt fynde the meanes to gather toguyder great ryches. For he knewe well the nobles of Englande / for all his abſolucyons / wolde nat ryde forthe in warre / without money. For menne of warre lyue nat by pardons / nor they ſet nat moche therby / but in the artycle of dethe.

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
Than̄e he determyned beſyde theſe Bulles / to ſende in to Englande to the prelates / that they ſhulde ordayne a full Dyſme on the churches. The noble men and men of warre therof to be payed their wages / without greuynge of any parte of the kynges treaſur / or of the comontie of the realme. The whiche thynge the Pope thought the barons and knightes of England gladly wolde herken vnto. Than he cauſed to be writen and engroſſed Bulles / as well to the kynge and his vncles / as to the prelates of Englande / of playne abſolucyon from payne ▪ and ſynne. And beſyde that / he graunted to ye kyng and to his vncles / a playne Dyſme to be taken and leuyed throughe out all Englande. ſo that ſir Henry Spenſar byſſhoppe of Norwyche / ſhulde be chiefe capitayne of all ye men of warr bycauſe the goodes came fro the churche. therfore the pope wolde / yt one of the churche ſhulde be chefe gouernoure. And to the entent that the churches and comons of the realme / ſhulde the better beleue the mater. And beſyde yt / bycauſe he knewe the realme of Spaygne contrarie to his opinyon / and ſom what alyed with ye frēche kyng. He aduyſed / that with parte of the ſame golde and ſyluer that ſhulde be gadered in the realme of Englande That the duke of Lancaſtre / who reputed hym ſelfe kyng of Caſtell by the right of his wyfe / that he in lykewiſe ſhulde make another army in to Caſtell. And alſo / yf the duke of Lancaſtre take on hym the ſayd viage / than the pope ſaid: he wolde graunt to the kynge of Portyngale / who made newe warre with kyng Johan of Caſtell / for kyng Fraunces was deed: a playne dyſme throughe out all Portingale. Thus pope Urbane ordeyned all his buſyneſſe / and ſent a .xxx. Bulles in to Englande / the whiche were receyued with great ioye. Than the prelates in their iuryſdictions / began to preche this voiage in maner of a croſey / wherby the people of Englande / who light lye beleued gaue therto great faythe. & beleued verilye / that they coulde nat go to paradyſe yf they dyed that yere / without they gaue ſō what in pure almes towarde this warre. At Lōdon and in the dyoſes / there was gathered a tonne full of golde and ſyluer. And accordynge to the popes Bulles / he that mooſt gaue mooſt pardon obteyned. And whoſoeuer dyed in that ſeaſon and gaue his goodes to theſe ꝑdones / was clene aſſoyled from payne and from ſynne. and accordynge to the tenour of the Bulles happy was he that dyed in that ſeaſone / for to haue ſo noble abſolucyon. Thus they gathered money all the wynter and lent ſeaſon / what by the pardons and by the dyſmes. That as it was ſayd it drewe to the ſomme of .xxv. hundred thouſande frankes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the byſſhop of Norwiche & the englyſſhe men yſſued out of Englande / to ron and to make warre agaynſt all those that helde with pope Clement. Cap. CCCC .xxix.
            
               WHan the kynge of Englande / his vncles and coū
               ſayle / vnderſtode what money was gadered: they were right ioyouſe & ſayd. Howe they had money ynoughe to make warre agaynſt two realmes / that was to ſaye: agaynſt Fraunce and Spayne. To go into Spayne in the name of the pope and of the prelates of Englande with the duke of Lancaſtre / was ordayned the byſſhoppe of London called Thomas / brother to therle of Deuonſhyre to be chefe capitayn / and with him two. M. ſpeares and four thouſande archers: & they to haue halfe of the money thus gadered. But it was ordayned / that they ſhuld nat ſo ſoone departe out of Englande as ye byſſhop of Norwiche / bycauſe that army ſhulde aryue at Calys / and ſo to entre in to Fraunce. & they wyſt nat what ſhulde fall therby / nor whider the frenche kyng wolde reyſe any puyſſāce to fyght with thē or nat. Alſo ther was another poynt contrary to the duke of Lancaſtre yet he had great ioye of that vyage. For generally all the comontie of Englande more enclyned to be with the byſſhop of Norwiche / than to go with the duke of Lācaſtre: for a long ſeaſon ye duke was nat in the grace of ye people. And alſo / they thought the realme of Fraunce to be nerer iourney / than into Spayne. And alſo ſome ſayd / yt the duke of Lācaſtre for couytouſnes of theſyluer and golde that was gadered of the churche and of the pardons / wherof he ſhulde haue his parte: that he dyde enclyne rather therto for the profyte / than for any deuocyon. But they ſaid / howe the biſſhop of Norwiche repreſented the pope / and was by hym inſtytuted. Wherby the greatteſt part of Englande gaue to hym great faythe / and the kyng alſo. And ſo there was ordayned at the wages of the churche to go with

this byſſhoppe Henry Spenſar / dyuers good knightes and ſquyers of Englande and of Gaſcoyne. As the lorde Beaumont / ſir Hugh Caurell / ſir Thomas Tryuet / ſir Wyllm̄ Helmon / ſir Johan Ferres / ſir Hugh Spenſar coſyn to the byſſhoppe / ſonne to his brother / ſir Wyllyam Fermeton / ſir Mathewe Reedman capytayne of Berwike: all theſe were of Englande. And of gaſcoyns / there was the lorde of Newcaſtell and ſir John̄ his brother / Raymon marſen / Guyllonette de Pauxe / Garyot Uyghier / Johan de Cachytan and dyuers other / and all counted they were a fyue hundred ſpeares and fyftene hundred of other men. And a great nō
               bre of preeſtes / bycauſe the mater touched the churche and moued by the pope.
            THeſe men of warr prouyded themſelfe for the mater / and paſſage was delyuered them at Douer and at Sandwyche. And this was about Eſter / and ſo they paſſed ouer lytell and lytell as they lyſt / this voiage was in the maner of a Croyſey. Thus they paſſed the ſee / or the byſſhoppe and other capitayns were fully redy. For the byſſhop and ſir Hugh Caurell / ſir Thomas Tryuet / and ſir Wyllm̄ Helmon were with the kynge and his counſayle. & there they ſware ſolempnely in the kynges preſens / to bringe truely to an ende their voyage. Nor to fight againſt no man nor countrey that belde with pope Urbayne / but to fight & make warre agaynſt them that were of the opinyon of Clemēt. Thus they ſware. and than y• kyng by the aduyſe of his counſayle ſayd to them. ſir byſſhoppe and all ye / whan ye come to Calais / I wyll ye ſoiourne there in that fronter y• ſpace of a moneth / and in that terme▪ I ſhall refreſſhe you with newe men of warr / of armes / and archers. And I ſhall ſende you a good marſhall / a valyant man ſir Wyllyam Beauchampe / for I haue ſende for hym / he is in the Marche of Scotland / wher as he kepeth fronter agaynſt the ſcottes / for the trewſe bytwene the Scottes and vs falleth nowe at ſaint Johans tyde. and after his retourne / ye ſhall haue hym in youre cōpany without any fayle. Therfore I wolde ye ſhulde tarye for hym / for he ſhall be to you ryght neceſſarie / bothe for his wyſedome and good counſayle. The byſſhoppe and his company promyſed the kynge ſo to do. And thus they departed fro the kynge and toke the ſee at Douer and arryued at Calayes the .xxiii. day of Aprill. the yere of our lorde god / a thouſand thre hundred fourſcore and thre.
            tHe ſame ſeaſon there was capitayne at Calais ſir Johan Deluarnes / who receyued the byſſhoppe and his company with great ioye. And ſo they landed lytell and lytell / & all their horſes and baggage. and ſo lodged in Calays and there about / in baſtylles that they made dayly. And ſo there they taryed tyll the fourthe day of May / abidyng for their marſhall ſir Wylliam Beauchampe / who came nat of all that tyme. Whan the byſſhoppe of Norwiche / who was yonge and couragious and deſyrous to be in armes (for he neuer bare armure before / but in Lumbardy with his brother) Thus as he was at Calays / & ſawe how he was capitayne of ſo many men of armes. he ſayde one day to his company. Sirs / why do we ſoiourne hereſo long / and tary for ſir Wyllyam Beauchāpe / who cometh nat? The kyng nor his vncles I trowe thynke lytell of vs. Let vs do ſome dedes of armes / ſythe we be ordayned ſo to do. Lette vs enploy the money of the churche truely whyle that we lyue / let vs conquere ſomewhat of our enemyes. That is well ſayd ſir quod all thoſe that herde him ſpeke / let vs warne all oure company that we wyll ryde forthe within this thre dayes. And let vs take aduyſe whiche way we ſhall drawe / we can nat iſſue out of the gates / but we entre in to the landes of oure enemyes / for it is frenche all aboute on euery parte / we were as good to go towardes Flaunders as to Boloyne. For Flaunders is a lande of conqueſt / conquered by the puyſſaunce of the frenche kyng. We can nat beſtowe our tyme more honourably all thynges conſydred: than to conquere it agayne. And alſo the erle of Flaunders hath done of late a great diſpyte to men of our countre / for without any tytell of reaſon / he hath banyſſhed and chaſed thē out of Bruges and out of all Flaūders. It paſſeth nat two yere / ſythe that he wolde haue ben lothe to haue done ſo / but as nowe he is fayne to obey to the pleaſure of the frēche kyng. wherfore quod the byſſhop if I may be beleued / the firſt iourney y• we ſhall make ſhalbe into Flaū
               ders. Sir quod ſir Thomas Tryuet and ſir Wylliam Helmone / ye ſhall be well beleued. Lette vs ryde into that partie within this thre dayes / for it is of the lande of our enemys. To this counſayle they all agreed and gaue war nynge eche to other.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the englyſſhe men toke the towne and mynſter of Grauelynge / and howe the erle of Flaunders ſent to ſpeke with thē. Cap. CCCC .xxx.
            
               AT all this agremēt was nat ſir Hugh Caurell / for he was gone to ſe a coſin of his the Capitayne of Guynes / called ſir Johan Droithton and ſo he was there all day / and retourned agayne the nexte day. Than the byſſhoppe ſent for hym to the caſtell / for the knightes had ſayd to the byſſhoppe. howe they wolde haue the aduyſe of ſir Hughe Caurell or they dyde any thynge / bycauſe be had mooſt ſene & vſed the warre. than the byſſhop ſayd to hym (as ye haue herde before) and commaunded hym to ſay his aduyſe. Than ſir Hughe anſwered hym and ſayde. ſir ye knowe well on what condycion we be departed out of Englande. Our enterpriſe toucheth no thynge the warre bytwene the kynges▪ / but all onely agaynſt the Clemētyns / for we be ſoudyers of pope Urbane. Who hath clene aſſoyled vs from all ſynne and payne / if we do oure power to diſtroy the Clementyns. If we go in to Flaunders / thoughe the countrey hath bene conquered by the frenche kyng and the duke of Burgoyne / yet for all that we ſhulde do amyſſe For as I vnderſtande / the Erle of Flaunders and all the flemynges / be as good Urbanyſtes as we be. Alſo ſir / we haue nat men ynowe to entre in to Flaunders / for they are all redy and vſed in the warre / and they are a great nombre of people. They haue done nothyng els / but lyned in warre this thre or foure yere: and alſo it is a ſtronge countrey to entre in to. Alſo the flē
               mynges haue done vs no treſpaſſe. But ſir / yf we ſhall ryde lette vs ryde in to Fraunce / there be our enemyes in two maners. The kyng our lordes warr is nowe opyn. And alſo the frenchmen are good Clementyns / cōtrarie to our beleue and agaynſt our pope. Alſo ſir / we ſhulde abyde for our marſhall ſir Wyllm̄ Beauchāpe / who ſhulde haſtely come to vs with a good nō
               bre of men: And the laſt worde that our kynge ſayd / was that he wolde ſende hym to vs. But ſir / my counſayle is if we ſhall nedes ryde / let vs drawe towardes Ayre or Mouſtrell. Ther is none I thynke as yet / that wyll cōe agaynſt vs. And alwayes men wyll come to vs oute of Flaūders / who hath loſt all that they haue. they wyll be gladde to go with vs / in hope to wynne ſome what agayne. They beare yuell wyll in their hertes to the frenchmen / who hath ſlayne in the warres: their fathers / bretherne / kynſmen and frēdes. Sir Hughe coude ſcant ſpeke theſe wordes / but that the byſſhop toke the mater hote and haſty / and ſayde. A ſir Hughe / ye haue ſo well lerned to ryde in Fraunce / that ye can nat ryde in to none other place. We can nat better ryde to our profyte / thanne to entre in to the fronter of Flaūders by the ſee coſt: as to the towne of Bourbourge / of Duneſſhe / of Meſport / of Bergues / of Caſſell / of Ipre / & of Proprigne. In theſe ſayd countreis as I am enformed by the burgeſſes of Gaunt / they had neuer warre that greued them. Let vs go thyder and refreſſhe vs and abyde there / for our marſhall if he wyll come. Howe be it weſe nat yet but lytell aparence of his comynge. Whan ſir Hughe Caurell / ſawe that the byſſhop dyde take hym vp ſo ſhortely. And he conſydred well / howe he was their chyefe capitayne / and that he was a great man and of great lygnage / he helde his peace. For he ſawe well alſo / howe that his opynyon ſhulde nat be ſuſteyned / nother by 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Thomas Tryuet nor by ſir Wylliam Helmon. than he departed and ſayd. Sir / if ye ryde forthe / ſir Hughe Caurell ſhall ryde with you. nor ye ſhal nat go that way but y• he dare well go the ſame. I beleue well quod y• byſſhoppe / ye haue good wyll to ryde forthe / therfore make you redy / for we wyll ryde to morowe.
            oN this purpoſe they were all agreed / and their rydinge forthe was publyſſhed throughe out the towne. And in the mornynge the trumpettes ſowned / and euery man departed in to the feldes / and tooke the way to Grauelyng. And they were in nombre / aboute a thre thouſand men armed / and ſo they came to the porte of Grauelynge. Theſee was as than but lowe / and ſo they paſſed forthe and aſſayled the mynſter / the which they of y• towne had fortifyed. The towne was cloſed but with pales / the whiche coude nat long endure. Nor alſo the men of the towne were but ſee men. If ther had ben gentylmen / it wolde haue helde lē
               gar than it dyde. Nor alſo they coūtre was nat ware therof / for they feared nothyng thēglyſſhmen. Thus thēglyſſhmen cōquered y• towne of Grauelyng & entred in to it / and than drue to y• mynſter / wherinto the people of y• towne were drawen. And putte therin all their goodes / on

truſt of the ſtrēgth of the place / and their wyues and chyldren / and made rounde about it great dykes / ſo that the englyſſhmen coude nat haue it at their eaſe / for they were ther two dayes or they wanne it. yet finally they wan it / & ſlewe all them that kept it with defence / and with the reſydue they dyde what they lyſte. Thus they were lordes and mayſters of Grauelynge / and lodged toguyder in the towne / and founde ther plentie of prouiſyon. Than all the countrey beganne to be afrayed / and dyde put their goodꝭ in to the fortreſſes / and ſende their wyues and chyldren to Bergues / to Bourbourcke / and to ſaynt Omers. The erle of Flaunders who lay at Lyſle / whan̄e he vnderſtode theſe tidynges / howe that the englyſſhe men made hym warre and had taken Grauelynge: than he beganne to dout of them of Franke and of Bruges / and called his counſayle to hym and ſayde. I haue great marueyle of the englyſſhe men / that they ronne this on my lande. They demaunded neuer nothynge of me? and thus without any defyaunce to entre in to my lande. Some of his counſayle anſwered hym and ſayde. Sir / it is a thyng well to marueyle of. But it is to be ſuppoſed / that they repute you therle of Flaūders to be frenche / bycauſe the frenche kyng hath ſo rydden in this coūtre / that all is yelded to hym. Why quod therle / what is beſt than to be done? Sir quod they / it were good that ye ſende ſir Johan Uillayns and ſir John̄ Moulyn / who be here preſente (and alſo they haue a penſyon of the kynge of Englande) in to Englande to ſpeke with the kyng there fro you / and to ſhewe him ſagely all this buſyneſſe. And to demaūde of him / why he dothe make you warr. we thynke whan he hereth youre meſſangers ſpeke / he wyll nat be content with theym that thus warreth agaynſt your countre / but call them backe to their great blame. yea quod the Erle / but in the meane tyme whyle they go in to Englande / they that be nowe at Grauelynge wyll go farther: and do great domage to them of Franke. ſir quod they / than let thē firſt go to thē at Grauelynge / and deſyre of them a ſaue conducte to go to Calayes / and ſo in to Englande. And to knowe of them / what it is that they demaunde of you. We thynke theſe two knyghtes are ſo well aduyſed / and wyll handell them ſo wyſely that they ſhall ſette the countrey in reſt & peace. I am content it be thus ꝙ the erle. Than theſe two knightes were enfourmed by the erle & his counſayle / what they ſhulde ſay to the byſſhop of Norwych / & to ſhewe him what charge they haue to go in to Englande / to ſhewe the mater to the kyng there / and to his vncles.
            iN the meane ſeaſon that theſe knyghtes prepared to go to Grauelynge / to ſpeke with the byſſhop of Norwyche. All the countre aroſe / about Burbourcke / Bergues / Caſſell / Propringe / Furnes / Newport / and other townes. And they came to Dōkyrke / and there abode in the towne. Sayeng / howe they wolde ſhortely iſſue out and defende their fronters / and fight with the englyſſhmen. And theſe men of Flaunders had a capitayne / called ſir Johan Sporequyn / gouernoure of all the landes of the lady of Bare / the which lande lyeth in the marcheſſe about Ipre. And this ſir Johan Sporequyn / knewe nothynge that the erle of Flaunders wolde ſende in to Englande For the Haſe of Flaunders was newly come to hym with .xxx. ſpeares. And ſhewed hym howe that the erle was at Lyſle about a maryage to be had / bytwene his ſuſter and thē lorde Delbaryn. So theſe two knightes dyde as moche as they coulde / to ſtyrre the countrey to ryſe / ſo that they were to the nōbre of twelfe thouſande pykes / with paueſſes and cootes of ſteele: hoctons / ſhapeauſe / and baſſenettes. And in a maner / they were all of the lande of y• lady of Barres / bytwene Grauelynge and Donkyrke / as I was enfourmed. And a thre leages in y• way there ſtode the towne of Mardyke / a great vyllage on the ſee ſyde vncloſed. And thyder came ſome of the englyſſhmen and ſcrimyſſhed. And ſo thus came to Grauelynge / ſir Johan Uyllayne and ſir Johan de Moulyne / for the Erle of Flaunders / by a ſaueconduct that he had attayned fro the byſſhoppe / or he came fro Burbourcke. Than they came to the byſſhoppe of Norwiche / who made to theym by ſemblaunt ryght good chere. He had with hym at dyner y• ſame day all the lordes of the hoſt / for he knewe well / the erles knightes ſhulde come to hym the ſame tyme. And his mynde was / how he wolde that they ſhulde fynde them all toguyder. than theſe two knightes beganne to ſpeke and ſayd. Sir / we be ſende hyder to you / fro the Erle of Flaunders our lorde. What lorde quod the byſſhoppe? They anſwered agayne and ſayde. fro the erle: there is none other lorde of Flaūders. By the good lorde quod the byſſhoppe / we take for the lorde of Flaunders the frenche kynge / or els the duke of Burgoyne our enemys. For by puyſſance but late / they haue conquered all the countre. Sir quod the knightes / ſauyng your

diſpleaſure. The lande was at Tourney / clerelye rendred agayne and put in to the handꝭ and gouernyng of the erle of Flaunders / who hath ſent vs to you. Deſyring you that we two / who haue penſyon of the kynge of Englande / may haue a ſauecōduct to go in to Englāde to ſpeke with the kynge / to knowe the cauſe why / without any defyaunce / he maketh warre agaynſt the erle and his countre of Flaūders. Sirs ꝙ the byſſhop / we ſhall take aduyce and anſwere you to morowe. So thus they went to their logynge and left the englyſſhmen in counſayle / & ſo all that day they toke counſayle togyder / and concluded as ye ſhall here.
         
         
            ¶ The aunſwere that the byſſhoppe of Norwyche made to the knightꝭ of Flaunders / and of the aſſemble that they of Caſſell and of the countrey about / made agaynſt thenglyſſhmen. Cap. CCCC .xxxi.
            
               ALl thynges conſydred & regarded / they ſayde they wolde graunt no ſafecōduct to thē to go in to Englande / for it was to farre of. For or they coude retourne agayne the coūtre wolde be ſore ſtyrred / & greatly fortifyed. And alſo therle ſhulde by that tyme / ſende worde therof to the frenche kyng & to the duke of Burgoyne / wherby they might come with ſuche nōbre of people againſt them / that they ſhulde nat be able to reſyſt thē / nor to fight with them. So on this determynacyon they reſted. Than it was demaunded amonge thē / what anſwere they ſhulde make to the knightes of Flaunders the next day. Than ſir Hugh Caurell was cōmaūded to ſpeke and to gyue his aduyce. Than he ſayde thus to the byſſhoppe. Sir / ye are our chefe capitayne. ſir ye may ſaye to them / howe ye be in the lande of the ducheſſe of Bare / who is Clementyne. and howe for Urbane ye make warre and for no body els. And offre thē that if this lande with the churches and abbeys wyll become good Urbanyſtes / and to ryde with you and to bring you throughe the countre. ye wyll than cauſe all yor company to paſſe through the countre peſably / and to paye for all that they ſhall take. But as touchyng to gyue them ſaueconduct to go in to Englande / ye wyll nat graūt therto in no wiſe For ye may ſay / that youre warre toucheth no thyng the warre of Englande nor of Fraunce / but that we be ſoudyers of pope Urbane. Sir as I thynke this anſwere ſhulde ſuffyce. Euery man agreed well to this / and ſpecially y• byſſhoppe / who had mynde of nothynge that was ſayd but to fight and to warre on the countrey. Thus the mater abode all night. And in y• mornyng after maſſe / the two ſayd knightes of the erles. Deſyringe to haue an anſwere / cāe to the byſſhoppes lodgynge / and abode there tyll he came out to go to maſſe. And ſo than they ſtept forthe before hym / and there he made thē good chere by ſemblant. And deuyſed with them a lytell of other matters / to delay the tyme tyll his knightꝭ were come about hym. And whan they were all aſſembled toguyder / than the byſſhop ſayd to them. Sirs / ye tary for an aunſwere / & ye ſhall haue it / on the requeſt that ye make for the erle of Flaunders. I ſay vnto you / ye may retourne agayne whan ye lyſt to the Erle your mayſter / or els to go to Calais on your ieoꝑdy or in to Englande: but as for ſauecōduct ye get none of me. For I am nat the kyng of Englāde nor I haue nat ſo farr authorite ſo to do. I and all my company are but ſoudyers of pope Urbane / and of wages of hym: & take his money to ſerue him truely. And nowe we be in y• lande of the ducheſſe of Bare / who is a Clementyne: and yf the people be of that opynion / we wyll make them warre. And if they wyll go with vs and take our parte / they ſhall haue part of our pardons and abſolucyons. For Urbayne oure pope for whom we are in voiage / hath aſſoyled vs clene frome payne and frome ſynne / and all thoſe that wyll ayde to diſtroy the Clemētyns. Whan the knightes herde theſe wordes / ſir Johan Uillayns ſayd. Sir in that as touchynge the pope / I thynke ye haue nat herde the cōtrary / but that my lorde therle of Flaunders hath ben alwayes good Urbanyſt. Wherfore ſir / ye do yuell to make warr to hym or to his coūtre. Nor I thynke the kyng of Englande yo
                  •
                lorde hath nat charged you ſo to to. for he is ſo noble that if he wolde haue made hym warre / firſt he wolde haue defyed him. With thoſe wordes the byſſhoppe began to were angry and ſaid. Well ſirs / go to your erle and ſaye vnto hym / that he getteth nothyng els of vs. And if ye wyll ſende in to Englande to knowe the kynges pleaſure / do as ye lyſt: but as for this way nor by Calys

they ſhall nat
                  〈…〉
               sse. And whan theſe knyghtes ſawe they coulde nat attaygne to their purpoſe none otherwiſe / they departed and returned to their lodgynge and dyned. And after dyuer departed / & went the ſame night to ſaynt Omers.
            THe ſame day that the knyghtes deꝑted / there came tidynges to the byſſhoppe / y• there was at Donkyrke and theraboute / a .xii. thouſande men in harneſſe / and the baſtarde of Flaunders in their company / as their chefe capitayne: and dyuers other knightes and ſquiers with them. In ſomoche it was ſhewed him that on the thurſdaye before / they had ſcrimyſſhed with his companye / and ſlayne a hundred of them. Lo quod the byſſhoppe ye may ſe wheder the erle do medyll in this mater or nat / it is he that dothe all. He entreateth for peace with the ſwerde in his hande. Let vs ryde forthe to moro we and go to Donkyrke / and ſe what people they be that be there gadered Euery man agreed therto: and the ſame day there cāe to the byſſhoppe two knightes / the one fro Calys the othe▪ fro Guyſnes / and with them a .xxx. ſpeares and threſcore archers. The knyghtes were called ſir Nicholas Clyncon and ſir John̄ dracton capitayne of Guyſnes. In the nexte mornynge they made them redy to ryde forthe / and ſo drewe in to the felde: They were mo than. vi hundred ſpeares and ſixtene hundred archers. And ſo they rode towarde Mardyke and Dō
               kyrke / the byſſhop made to be borne before him the armes of the churche / the baner of ſaynt Peter: felde goules two keyes ſyluer / lyke ſoudyers of pope Urbane. And in his penon he bare his owne armes / ſyluer and azure quarterly / a fret golde on the azur / a bende of goules on the ſyluer. And bycauſe he was yongeſt of y• Spē
               ſars / he bare a border of goules for a difference There was alſo ſir Hugh Spēſar his nephue with his penon. And with baner & penon / there was the lorde Beaumont / ſir Hughe Caurell / ſir Thom̄s Tryuet / and ſir Wylliam Helmon. And with penon without baner / there was ſir Wylliam Dractone / ſir Johan his brother / ſir Mathue Reedman / ſir John̄ Ferres ſir Wyllyam Fermeton / and ſir Johan of New caſtell gaſcone. Thus theſe men of armes rode towardes Mardyke / and there refreſſhed them and dranke / and ſo paſſed forthe and toke the waye to Donkyrke. And the flemmynges that were there aſſembled / were aduertyſed that the Englyſſhmen wolde come that way / redy aparelled to fight with them. So they determyned among them ſelfe to drawe in to the felde / and to be redy in good aray to fight / if nede requyred. for they thought to abyde in the towne / and to be cloſed therin / ſhulde be nothyng to them profytable. And as they ordayned ſo it was done: euery man armed hym ſelfe in the towne / and iſſued out in to the felde. Than they ſette them ſelfe in good array on a lytell hyll without the towne / and they were in nōbre a .xii. M. or mo.
            ANd ſo therwith there came the englyſſhmen aprochyng to Donkyrke / and they behelde the mountayne on heir right hande to warde Burbourcke / towarde the ſee ſyde. And there they ſawe the flemyngꝭ in a great batayle well ordred. Than they taryed / for it ſemed to them y• the flemynges wolde gyue thē batayle. Than the lordes drewe toguyder to coūſayle & there were dyuers opinyons / and ſpecially the byſſhop of Norwyche / wolde that they ſhulde incōtynent go and fight with them. And other / as the lorde Beaumont and ſir Hugh Caurell / ſayde to the contrarie. Layeng dyuers reaſons and ſayeng. Sir / ye knowe well the flemyngꝭ that be yonder haue done vs no forfayte. And to ſaye the trouthe / we haue ſente to the Erle of Flaunders no defyaunce / and yet we be here in his countre. This is no courteſſe warr that we make / we do nothyng but catche it and we may without any reſonable warre. And alſo all this countre that we be in / be as vrbanyſtes as well as we be / and holdeth y• ſame opinyon that we do. Beholde nowe therfore and ſe / what iuſte cauſe we haue to ron thus on them? Than the byſſhoppe ſayde / howe knowe we that they be Urbanyſtes or nat? In the name of god ꝙ ſir Hughe Caurell / me thynke it were good that we ſende to theym an heraude / to knowe what thyng they demaūde / thus to be raynged in batayle agaynſt vs / and lette it be demaunded of what pope they holde of. And if they aunſwere and ſay howe they be good vrbanyſtes / than requyre them by the vertue of the popes bull that we haue / that they wyll go with vs to ſaint Omers / Ayre / or Arras / or thyder as we wyll brī
               ge them. And whā they be thus requyred / than therby we ſhall knowe their entenſyon / & thervpon we may take aduyſe and coūſayle. This purpoſe was holden / & an heraude called moūt forde parteyning to the duke of Bretayne / was cōmaunded by all the lordes to go to the fleminges / and to ſhewe them as ye haue herde before The heraulde obeyed their cōmaūdement as it was reaſon / and ſo went to ſpeke with them.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the flemynges of the coūtre and they of the lande of Caſſell were diſconfyted by the englyſſhmen / and Donkyrke taken: with dyuers other caſtelles in the countrey. Cap. CCCC .xxxii.
            
               THus the heraude deꝑted fro the lordes / and had on his cote of armes / and ſo went to warde the flemyngꝭ and thought non yuell / they were all toguyder in a gret batayle. And ſo the heraude wolde haue goone to ſome knyghtes that were there / but he might nat. For aſſoone as he aproched nere to the flemynges / they toke and ſlewe hym without any demaundynge fro whens he cāe / or wheder he wolde. Thus they ſlewe hym lyke people of ſmall knowledge. The gentylmen that were there coude nat ſaue hym / whan the englyſſhmen ſawe their dealyng / they were ſore diſpleaſed. So were the burgeſſes of gaūt ſuche as were there / who were right gladde to moue for the the mater / ſo that there might be a newe brewlynge in Flaunders. Than the Englyſſhe men ſayde. 
                  〈◊〉
                yonder rybaudes haue ſlayne our heraude / but he ſhall be dere ſolde to them / or els we wyll all dye in the place. Than they commaūded their archers to ſteppe for the towarde the flemynges. And there was a burgeſſe of Gaunt made knight / and incontynent the batayle began ſore and ſharpe. For to ſaye trouthe / the flemynges marueylouſly defēded them ſelfe / but the archers ſhotte ſo thicke / that they ouerthrue many and greued thē ſore. And the men of armes entred in amonge them with ſharpe ſpeares / and at the firſt front ouerthrue many. Finally the englyſſhmen wan the place / and the flemynges diſcōfited and fledde a way / thynkinge to entre in to Donkyrke. But the englyſſhmen chaſed them ſo ſore / that they entred in to the towne with them. So that in the ſtretes and on the ſandes / there was many a flemmyng ſlayne. Howe be it ther were many Englyſſhmen flayne / to the nombre of foure hundred or mo▪ they were foūde after in the towne here and there / by tenne atones / twentie .xxx. ye and by fourtie. For as they dyde chaſe the flem minges in the ſtretes they were fought withall howe be it finally / the flemynges were nere all ſlayne or taken. Thus fell of this rēcountre at Donkyrke / where ther were ſlayne of the flem mynges a nyne thouſande.
            tHe ſame day of the batayle / there retourned to Lyſle to the erle of Flaunders ſir Johan Uyllayns and ſir Johan de Molayne / and ſhewed hym all y• report that they had ſene and herde of thenglyſſhmen / wher with the erle was right penſyue to thynke howe he ſhulde deale in the mater. And alſo he was more penſyue / and ſo he had cauſe: whan he herde the tidynges that his men were ſlayne and diſcōfyted at Donkyrke. So he bare it paciently / and dyde reconfort hym ſelfe and ſayd. Well / if we haue loſt at one tyme / we ſhall wyn agayne at another tyme and it pleaſe god. So incōtynent he wrote therof to the duke of Burgoyne / to the entent that ſome reſyſtence might be made. For he ymagined well / that the Englyſſhmen hauynge ones that entre in to Flaū
               ders / that they wolde do more hurt in the countrey / or they departed agayne. And whan̄e the duke of Burgoyne vnderſtode therof / he ſende knightes and ſquiers in to the garyſons on the fronters of Flaunders. As to ſaynt Omers / to Ayre / to ſaynt Uenaunt / to Baylleule / to Bergues / to Caſſell / and to all the bayliwykes / to kepe thentre of Arthoyſe. ¶ Nowe let vs ſpeke of thenglyſſhmen and howe they ꝑceyuered.
            aFter y• diſconfyture at Donkyrke and the towne taken. The Englyſſhe men entred in to great pride / for it ſemed to them / that all Flaunders had ben theirs. And to ſay the trouthe / if they hadde as than gone to Bruges (as they ſayd that knewe the dealyng of thē of the towne) the towne had bene gyuen vp to them. But the Englyſſhmen wrought otherwyſe / for they tooke ad
                  •
               yſe to go to Bourburcke and to gette that towne / and ſo to go to Ayre and to Caſſell / and to conquere all y• coū
               trey. And to leaue nothyng behynde them that ſhulde be contrarie to theym / and than to go to Ipre. They thought verily / that the towne of Ipre wolde ſoone yelde vp / if they ſawe all the countre yelden before. So thus the englyſſhemen departed fro Donkyrke and went to Burbourcke / and whan they of the towne ſawe thē aprochenere to their towne / they yelded vp the towne / ſauyng their lyues and goodes. And ſo they were receyued / and the Englyſſhmen entred with great ioye. ſayeng / howe they wolde make ther a good garyſon for to kepe warre agaynſt

them of ſaynt Omers / and the fronters nere adioyning. And ſo than after they wanne the caſtell of Driceham / & they were thre dayes before it or they wan it. And than they conquered it byforce / and therin were ſlayne a two hū
               dred men that were there in garyſon. And than the englyſſhemen repayred agayne the caſtell and ſayde. Howe they wolde kepe it to the beſt of their powers / and ſo ſette therin newe men. And thanne they wente forth and came to Caſſell and tooke the towne / and had therin great pyllage. Than they departed▪ and ſayde they wolde go and ſe the towne of Ayre. Howe be it there was many of them that knewe right well that the towne was nat eaſy to be wonne / without great loſſe of their men. Howe be it the byſſhoppe of Norwiche ſayde / he wolde go nere it and loke theron.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the engliſſhmen conquered all the countre of Flaunders / fro Dō
               kyrke to Scluſe: and howe they be ſeged the towne of Ipre. Cap. CCCC .xxxiii.
            
               THe ſame ſeaſon capytayne of Ayre was ſir Robert of Bethune vycount of Mealr / and with hym ther was ſir Johan Roy / the lorde of Clary / ſir Johan of bethune his brother / the lorde of Montigny / ſir Perducas of Pount ſaynt / ſir Johan of Chauny / and ſir Floreyns his ſon and dyuers other / So that they were a ſixſcore ſpeares of good men of armes knightes & ſquyers. Whan the byſſhoppe of Norwiche / and ſir Hugh Caurell / ſir Henry Beaumont / ſir Thomas Tryuet / ſir Wyllyam Helmon / ſir Mathewe Reedman / and the other englyſſhemen. Whan they dyde aproche nere to Ayre / at a place called the Newe dike. They putte them ſelfe in order of batayle / & ſo paſſed forthe with baners and penons wauyng withthe wynde / for they knewe nat what the vycount of Meaulxe was mynded to do. The vycont and his company beyng as thanne there in garyſone / were rainged in good order on the cauſey / before the barryers of the towne. And there they might ſe clerely the englyſſhemen paſſe by / takynge the way to ſaynt Uenaunt: but they were nat men ynowe to ſtoppe theym their way. Thus they ſtode ſtyll kepynge watche and warde / redy at their defence. And the Englyſſhmen paſſed by and ſo wēte the ſame night a two myles fro ſait Uenaunt / wherof a knyght of Picardy was capitayne / called ſir Wyllyam de Melle: Who had fortifyed the mynſter for hym and his company / to drawe in to if nede requyred / and ſo he dyde. For the towne was cloſed but with ſmall palys and dykes / wherfore it coulde nat longe endure agaynſt the englyſſhmen. So the frenche men withdrewe them ſelfe / ſome in to the caſtell and ſome into the churche / the whiche was right ſtronge. They of the caſtell were nat aſſayled / for it was marueylous ſtronge. There coude no manne aproche nere therto / the dykes rounde about were ſo large and depe. But the mynſter was incontynent aſſayled by the Engliſſhmen / whan they had entred the towne / by cauſe they had knowledge that the men of armes were withdrawen in to it.
            ſIr Wyllyam of Melle Was a good knyght and a valyant / and nobly defē
               ded the churche of ſaynt Uenant. the Englyſſhe archers were rounde about it / and they ſhotte vp arowes ſo thycke and ſo rudely / that they within durſt ſcant apere at any defēce Howe be it they aboue had ſtones and artyllarye great plentie / and dyde caſte downe ſtones and other thynges / & hurt many beneth. howe be it the aſſaut was ſo ſore contynued by the englyſſhmen / that the mynſter was won byforce: And ſir Wyllyam de Melle within / who valyantly fought at his defence / and ſo dyde all his company. And if they had parceyued any confort of reſcue / they wolde lēgar haue cōtynued: but there was no conforte that they coulde parceyue / and therfore they were the eaſier to wyn. Thus ſir Wyllyam of melle was priſoner with the englyſſhmen / and ſo ſette to his fynaunce. And ſo went in to Fraunce by his bonde of oblygacion: as all gentylmen engliſſhe and frenche were wont to do eche with other. but ſo dyd nat the Almayns / for whan an almayne hath taken a priſonere he putteth hym in to yrons and in to harde priſone without any pytie / to make hym pay the greatter fynaunce and raunſome.
            THus whan the byſſhoppe of Norwyche and thenglyſſhmen departed fro ſaynt Uenant / they wente and lodged in the wode of Mepce whiche was nat farr thens / and about

Baylueufe in Flaunders. And ſo entred into ye bayliwyke of Proprigne and Meſſynes / and toke all the cloſe townes and therin foūde great pyllage / and conueyed all their pillage and votie to Bergues & to Burborke. And whan they had all the countre at their pleaſure / & that they were lordes of the ſee ſyde: as of Grauelyng to Sluſe / of Donkyrke of Newport / of Furnes / and of Blācque Berque. Than they went and layed ſiege to Ipre and ther they reſted & than ſende to Gaunte. As I vnderſtode they ſende Fraūces Atreman / who had ben at the batayle and at all their cōqueſtes / for he was their gyde fro towne to towne.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the Englyſſhmen ſende for them of Gaunt / and how they came to the ſiege of Ipre: And of the lorde ſaynt Leger and his company / who were diſconfyted by thenglyſſhmen and howe the byſſhop of Liege came to the ſiege of Ipre. Ca. iiii C .xxxiiii.
            
               WHan̄e Peter de Boyſe and Peter de Mirt / and the capitayns of Gaunt. vnderſtode howe the englyſſhmen ſende for them to come to the ſege of Ipre. they were gretlye therof reioyſed / and ordayned incōtynent to go thyder. And ſo departed fro Gaunt on a ſaturday in the mornynge / next after the vias of ſaynt Peter and ſ. Poule to the nombre of twentie thouſande / and with great caryage and ordynaunce: and ſo wente through the countre beſyde Courtrey to Ipre. And of their comynge the Englyſſhmen were greatly ioyfull / and made them good chere and ſayd. Sirs / ſurely we ſhall nowe ſhortely conquere Ipre / and than we wyll wynne Bruges Dan / and Sluſe. Thus they made no dout yt or the ende of Septembre / they ſhulde cōquere all Flaūders. Thus they glorifyed in their for tunes. The ſame ſeaſon there was a capitayne in Ipre / a right ſage and a valyant knight / called Peter de la Syeple. He ordered all the buſyneſſe of the towne. Ther were men of armes with hym / ſette there by the duke of Burgoyne and therle of Flaunders: As ſir Johan of Bougrayne chatelayne of Ipre / ſir Baudwyn Del beden his ſonne / the lorde Dyſſegien / the lorde of Stades / ſir Johan Blancharde / ſir Johan Meſelede ſir Hamell / ſir Nycholas Belle / the lorde of Harleq̄becke / the lorde of Rollechen / ſir John̄ Ahoutre / John̄ la Sieple ſquier nephue to the capitayne / Fraūces Bell / ſir George bell and dyuers other expert menne of armes / who had dayly great payne and wo to defend their towne. And alſo they were in great feare / leeſt the comons of the towne ſhulde make any treatie with them of Gaunt / wherby they ſhulde be in daunger and be betrayed by them of Ipre.
            THe ſame ſeaſon there was in the towne of Courtrey a valyant knyght of Heynalte / called ſir Johan of Jumont. He was ſet there at the requeſt of the duke of Burgoyne & of therle of Flaunders. Whan he toke it on him there was neuer a knyght in Flaunders durſt enterpriſe to kepe it: it was ſo perylous to kepe For whan the frenche kynge went oute of that countrey it was vnrepayred. And fewe folkes abode therin / for all was brent & beaten downe ſo that it was moche payne to lodge therin any horſe. So this ſir John̄ Jumont toke on hym to kepe it / and incontynent dyde repayre it. and dyde ſo thanked by god / that he attaygned nothyng therby: but honour and prayſe. The duke of Burgoyne to whom the buſyneſſe of flaū
               ders touched right nere / toke great ſtudy to brige well all thing to paſſe. And ſo he ſende a thre ſcore ſpeares bretons to Courtrey / to thentent to refreſſhe the towne: and ſo firſt theſe ſpeares came to the duke to Liſle. And on a friday they departed thens and toke the way to Comynes / and the lorde of ſaynt Leger and yuonet of Cā
               temat were capitayns of the ſayd ſpeares. And in to the towne of Comynes the ſame morning at the breakynge of the day / there was cōe two hundred Englyſſhe ſpeares to fetche forage abrode in the coūtre / to bringe it to their hooſt before Ipre. The ſaid bretons or they were ware fell in their handes and daūger. So ther was a harde and a ſore encountre / at the foote of the bridge of Comynes: and valiantly the bretōs dyde beare them selfe. If they had bene reſcued with as many mo as they were / by lykelyhode they had ſcaped withoute domage. Howe be it they were fayne to flye / for they were to fewe mē to endure long. The mooſt parte of them were ſlayne and taken in the felde / retournynge towardes Lyſle. The lorde of ſaynt Leger was ſore woūded and lefte for deed in the place / they were happy yt ſcaped. The chaſe endured within halfe a myle of Lyle: to the whiche towne the lorde of ſaynt Leger was caryed / wounded as

he was / and a fyue dayes after he dyed / and ſo dyde fyue of his ſquyers. thus fortuned of this aduenture.
            THus ſtyll the ſiege lay at Ipre. The engliſſhmen and gaūtoys made many aſſautꝭ & they of the towne trymvled for feare. the erle of Flaunders beyng at Lyſle feared greatlye the takyng of Ipre / for he knewe well the engliſſhmen were right ſubtell. and cōfort might dayly come to thē fro Calys / by reaſon of ye garyſons that they had won in their way. And indede they might haue had great ſocoure out of Englande and they had lyſt / but at the begynnyng they ſet nothyng by the erle / nor by all the power of Fraūce. Ther were dyuers great lordes of Englande about the marches of Douer and Sandwiche / redy apparelled to paſſe the ſee to Calys / and to haue ayded their company if they had ben requyred. Ther were redy M. ſpeares and two thouſande archers. Sir Wyllyam Beauchampe and ſir Wyllm̄ Wyndſore marſhals of Englande were ſoueraygne capitayns / ſet there by the kyng and by his coūſell. And for that cauſe the duke of Lācaſtre loſt his vyage that ſeaſon into Portyngale. For all the realme of Englāde was rather enclyned to the byſſhop of Norwiches army thā to the duke of Lācaſtres. Therle of Flaunders knewe ryght well all this beſyneſſe & inſydentes / as they fell in Englāde: and euery thyng that was done at the ſiege of Ipre / thynkyng to fynde remedy to his power. He thought well yt the duke of Burgoyne wolde moue the frenche kyng and ye lordes of the Realme / to reyſe and to aſſemble to driue the englyſſhemen out of Flaunders / the whiche they had wonne the ſame yere. And bycauſe he knewe that the aſſemblynge of the lordes of Fraunce wolde belonge / and ſpecially of thē that ſhulde ſerue the kyng out of farre countries. and that many thinges might fall or they came toguyder. Therfore he aduyſed to ſende to the byſſhoppe of Liege ſir Arnolde Deſorge who was good Urbanyſt. To the entent that he ſhulde come to Ipre / to treate with the Englyſſhmen to depart fro thens / and to drawe to ſome other parte: bycauſe he hadde great marueyle that they ſhulde make hym warre. Seynge that he was good Urbanyſt / and all the countre of Flaunders: as all the worlde knewe. So moche dyde the erle of Flaunders / that the byſſhoppe of Liege came in to Heynaulte and paſſed Ualencennes / & ſo came to Doway and than to Lyſle and ſpake with the erle. And ther determyned what he ſhulde ſay to thenglyſſhemē. And ſo thus the byſſhop of Liege cāe to the ſiege before Ipre / to ſpeke with the byſſhoppe of Norwiche and thenglyſſhmen / and with thē of Gaunte: and they receyued hym right well / and were gladde to here hym ſpeke.
         
         
            ¶ Of the great cōmaundement of aſſemble that the frenche kynge made to the entent to reyſe the ſiege before Ipre / and of them that were dyſconfyted by the Englyſſhemen. Cap. CCCC .xxxv.
            
               ANd as I was than enfourmed / the erle of Flaunders by the wordes of ye byſſhop of Liege: offred to the biſſhoppe of Norwiche and to the englyſſhmen. That if they wolde leaue their ſiege before Ipre / and to go to ſome other parte / and to make warre agaynſt the Clementyns. howe he wolde fynde fyue hundred ſpeares to ſerue them thre monethes / at his coſt and charge. the byſſhop of Norwiche and his company anſwered: howe they wolde take aduyſe. And ſo they went to counſayle / and there were many opinyons. They of Gaūt ſayd / howe it was no truſt on the promyſe of the erle. For ſurely they ſayd / howe he wolde begyle them & if he might. So all thynges conſydred / the englyſſhmen anſwered to the byſſhop of Liege / howe yt he myght departe whan it pleaſed hym / for as to his requeſtes they wolde in no wyſe agre therto. ſayeng howe they wolde neuer departe fro ye ſiege / tyll they had the towne of Ipre at their cōmaū
               dement. So whan the byſſhop of Liege ſawe that the coulde do no more in the mater / he toke his leaue and retourned to Lyſle / and ſhewed the erle his anſwere. Whan the erle ſawe that it wolde be none other wyſe / he was more pēſyue than he was before. & parceyued clerely yt with out the puyſſaunce of Fraunce reyſed the ſiege / he was lykely to leſe the good towne of Ipre. Than he wrote all the matter and anſweres to his ſonne in lawe the duke of Burgoyne / who lay at Compayne. And the byſſhoppe of Liege departed fro the Erle and went to Doway / to Ualencennes / and ſo to his countre
            
               
tHe duke of Burgoyne ſawe well how the ma
                  ••
               ers of Flaunders dyde ryght yuell and were lykely to do / without the kynge putte to his hande / and purueyed for ſome remedy. He dyde ſo moche / that a great counſayle was ſomoned to be holden at Compayne with the great princes and lordes of the Realme of Fraunce. So thyder came euery man that was ſende for / and thyder came perſonally the duke of Bretayne. And ther it was agreed by the kynges counſayle: the Duke of Berrey / the duke of Burbone / and the duke of Burgoyne. Howe the kynge ſhulde go agayne in to Flaūders as puiſſantly / as whan he went to Roſebeque to the entent to reyſe the ſiege at 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ and to fight with thenglyſſhmen / if they wolde abyde hym. All theſe thyngꝭ agreed and accorded the frenche kynge ſende his cōmaundement throughe out all his realme / that euery man ſhuld be redy in their beſt apparell for the warre: and to be the fyftene daye of Auguſt at Arras ▪ and there about. The kynge ſende alſo to them of farre countreis / as to the erle of Armynake and of Sauoy / and to the duke Frederyke of Bauyers. This duke was of hyghe Almaygne / and was ſonne to one of the dukes bretherne / and greatly he deſyred ones to bere armes 
                  •
               or them of Fraunce / and to ſe the eſtate of Fraūce: for he loued all honour. Alſo he was enfourmed that all the honoures of the worlde was in Fraunce. And bycauſe this duke was farre of / therfore he was ſende for firſt. He prepared hym ſelfe redy and ſayde / howe he wolde paſſe throughe Heynalt to ſe his vncle & his coſyn the erle of Bloys & other. In the meane ſeaſon that theſe lordes aparelled themſelfe / y• ſege endured ſtyll before 
                  •
               pre / and dyuers ſautes & ſcrimyſſhes made / and dyuers hurt of bothe ꝑ
               
                  •
               ies. But the capitayne of Ipre ſir Peter de la ſieple toke ſo good hede / y• he had no domage.
            THis ſiege thus endurynge / the Erle of Flaunders beynge at Lyſle / was enformed / howe the mynſter of ye towne of Emenyn was ſore in decay. And howe that if thenglyſſhmen came thyder / they ſhulde lightly wynne it for it was nat kept. Wherfore the erle was coū
               ſayled to ſende and to repayre it. Than the erle called ſir Johan de Moulyne / and ſayd. Sir Johan / take men out of this towne and croſ bowes / and go to Emenyn and repayre agayne the mynſter. And kepe and defende it fro the englyſſhmen for if they ſhulde haue it / they wold yuell trouble the countrey all about▪ the knight anſwered he was content / and ſo prepared himſelfe. And the next day departed and with hym a yonge knyght / a baſtarde ſonne of the Erles / called ſir Johan Sanſterre / and they were in nombre about a threſcore ſpeares and threſcore archers. Thus they departed fro the towne of Lyſle and rode towarde the towne of Emenyn and ſo came thyder and founde no body there / but ſuche as were there at their pleasur. Than they cauſed the mynſter to be newly repayred / and ſette men a warke theron. The ſame daye there rode forthe fro the ſiege of Ipre a two hū
               dred ſpeares Englyſſhe and Gaſcoyns / who knewe by the forangers y• they mette / that ther were men of armes and croſ bowes in the towne of Emenyn / and repayringe and fortifyeng the churche. Than the Englyſſhmen rode thyder / and as ſoone as they came before the mynſter / they a lyghted a fote and beganne to crye their cryes. Whan̄e ſir Johan of Moulyn and the baſtarde of Flaunders ſawe their maner / & that it behoued them to fight / they putte theym ſelfe in order / and cauſed their Croſbowes to ſhote / wherwith dyuers englyſſhmē were hurt howe be it incōtynent the Englyſſhmen entred in amonge them. There was of ſo fewe men a ſore ſcrimyſſhe / & many ſlayne and hurt. howe be it finally the englyſſhmen were ſo many that the flemynges coulde nat endure theym / but ſo they were diſconfyted and the two knyghtes taken / yet right valyantly they had defended thē ſelfe. There were but a fewe that retourned to Lyſle / for nigh they were all taken and ſlayne. Thus it fortuned of the aduenture of Emenyn wherwith the erle of Flaunders was right ſore diſpleaſed / but he coude nat amende it. The englyſſhmen brought their priſoners to the ſiege of Ipre / and within a whyle after they put thē to their raunſome.
         
         
            ¶ Howe thenglyſſhmen and flemynges of Gaunt made dyuers aſſautes before Ipre. & howe the frēche kyng departed fro Compayne and wente towarde Ipre to reiſe the ſiege there. Cap. CCCC .xxxvi.
            
               THus often tymes falleth the aduētures of dedes of armes / ſomtyme to wyn ſomtyme to leſe. the aduentures therof are ryght marueylous / as they knowe rightwell

that folowe it. This ſtyll cōtynued the ſiege before Ipre / and it was thentēcyon of the byſſhop of Norwiche / of the englyſſhmen / of Peter de Boyſe and of the gaūtoyſe / to wyn Ipre by aſſaut or otherwyſe. And accordyng to their entē
               tes / often tymes they aſſauted and ſcrimyſſhed with them of the towne. And amonge all their aſſautes / there was one ſpeciall great aſſaute / whiche endured all a day tyll it was nere night And there was done many a proper dede of armes▪ aſ well by them without as by thē within. There was made the ſame day foure knightes within the towne / as ſir Johan de la ſyeple coſyn to the capitayne / ſir Fraunces Bell / ſir George Bell / and ſir Johan Bell was the fourth. They were good knyghtes / and dyde acquyte them ſelfe right well the ſame day. There was ſlayne with a gon a proper ſquyer of Englāde / called Lewes Lynne. This was a ſore aſſaute and many hurt on bothe ꝑties / as ſuche as aduentured them ſelfe to ſore. The archers of Englande who ſtoode on the one ſyde of the dyke / ſhotte vp arowes ſo thicke / that almooſt there was none within the towne durſt loke out ouer the walles / nor ſcant ſtande at their defēce. they of Ipre gadered bp the ſame day two tonne full of artyllary / & ſpecially of arowes: for they fell ſo thicke in the ſtretes that none durſt go without they were well armed or paueſſed. This aſſaut endured tyll it was night. Than thēglyſſhmen and flemynges that hadde aſſauted all the day in two batayls / retourned to their lodgynges right wery and ſore traueyled / and in lykewyſe ſo were they of the towne of Ipre.
            wHan the englyſſhmen and flemynges that lay at the ſiege before Ipre / ſawe howe they coulde nat wynne the towne / and howe they loſt moche of their artyllary. Than they aduyſed to make a great nombre of fagottes and to caſt them in to the dykes / with ſtrawe and erthe to fyll vp the dykes / to the entent that they might come to the walles to fight hande to hande with them of the towne / and to vndermyne the walles / thinkynge therby to cō
               quere it. So ther were ſette men a warke to fell downe wode and make fagottes / and to bring them to the dyke. This was nat ſo ſoone done nor their warke accomplyſſhed / but the frenche kynge / who had great deſyre to reyſe the ſiege and to fight with the Englyſſhmen / auaunſed forthe his buſyneſſe and departed fro Cōpaygne / & ſo came to Arras. And than paſſed forth the conſtable of Fraunce with a great nombre of lordes ordayned for the vowarde and loged in Arthoiſe. The duke of Bretayne came with two thouſande ſperes / who had great deſyre to confort the erle of Flaunders his coſyn. And he was greatly bounde ſo to do / for he had founde hym euer redy aparelled in tyme paſt in all his buſyneſſe. Thus lordes aproched bothe farre and nere. Than came the Erle of Sauoy and therle of Geneſue with ſeuyn hundred ſpeares of pure ſauoſyns. The duke Frederyke of Bauyere came forwarde in to Heynalte and was at Qeuſnoy / and refreſſhed him with his vncle the duke Aubert / and with his aunt the duches Margarete: & with his coſyns the duke of Lorayne and the duke of Bare / and ſo fro thens he came in to Arthoiſe. Sir Wyllyam of Namur who had nat bene in none of the foreſayd warres / for the erle had excuſed hym. He came than to ſerue the kyng and the duke of Burgoyne wt two hūdred ſpeares of good men of warr / and ſo paſſed by Heynalte and came and lodged at Torneſys. Lordes came fro euery parte right ſtrongly & with ſo good wyll to ſerue the kyng
                  •
                that it was marueyle to conſyder. Therle Guy of Bloyſe had aſſembled his men at Lādrechis but his men coude nat tell if he were able or coude endure the payne to ryde with the kyng in y• army. So he was brought in an horſelytter to Beaumont in Heynalte / there he was better at eaſe / the ayre was better for hym there than at Lādreches. Howe be it he was ſore ſicke and feble / yet he purueyed his men to ſerue the kyng. So his cōpany and the lorde of Mōtigny / the lorde of Uſeryn / ſir Uyllaynes of ſaynt Martyne / ſir Ualleraunce of Ouſtyen capitayne of Remorentyne / and other knightes and ſquiers auaunſed forwarde to ſerue the kynge.
            tIdynges came to the ſiege before Jpre to the byſſhoppe of Norwyche / to ſir Hugh Caurell / and to the englyſſhmen. Howe the frenche kynge was comynge to them / with mo than twentie thouſande men of armes knightes and ſquiers / and mo than thre ſcore thouſande of other people. Theſe wordes ſo multyplyed in the hooſt / tyll at laſt they foū
               de it trewe. In the beginnyng they wolde ſcant beleue it. But than it was ſaid playnly / howe y• king wolde come & fight with thē as they lay at their ſiege. And they had marueyle whan they knewe howe the duke of bretayne was coming agaynſt them. Than they toke counſayle togyder / to determyne what they ſhulde do. And all

thynges conſydered / they ſawe well howe they were of no puyſſaūce to abyde the kyng. Than they ſayd / it was beſt that Peter de Boyſe / Peter de Myrt / and the gauntoyſe ſhulde returne to the towne of Gaunt / and the englyſſhmen to Bergues and to Burborke. And ſo to abyde in their garyſons / without that ſome puyſſaunce come out of Englande: as kyng Richarde him ſelfe to paſſe the ſee / or els ſome of his vncles / & thervpon to take better aduyſe. This coūſayle was vpholden & euery man dyſlodged: they of Gaunt drewe to their towne / and the engliſſhemen went towarde Bergues and Burbourke / and ſo entred in to ſuche garyſons as they had before conquered. The ſame day that the Englyſſhmen departed from the ſiege / there came to them ſir Thomas Percy ſonne to the erle of Northumberlande. He came out of Spruce / and whan he was a lytell fro thens / it was ſhewed hym for certayne / that the frēche kyng and the kyng of Englande ſhulde fight togyder in the marcheſſe of Flaunders or Arthoyſe / puyſſaunce agaynſt puyſſaūce. Wherof the knight had great ioye / and hadde great deſyre to be at that iourney. He was as than̄e .xl. dayes iourney from thens / but he made ſuche haſt that he rode it in fourtene dayes / but he left all his people and baggage behynde hym. And he rode ſo faſt without chaungyng of his horſe / and with hym no mo but his page / that he came to ye towne of Gaunt in the ſayd ſpace / whiche tourned to hym a great valyantneſſe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke Frederyke of Bauyer aryued in the frēche kyngꝭ hooſt and howe therle Guy of Bloyſe and his men cāe to Arras / and howe the kynges vowarde toke Caſſell. Cap. CCCC .xxxvii.
            
               TIdynges cāe to the frenche kyng as he lay at Arras howe the englyſſhmen were departed fro the ſiege and ye gauntoyſe in lykewiſe / and euery man deꝑted to theyr holdes. Thā the kyng was counſailed to make haſt and to folowe them / to thentent they ſhulde nat ſcape. And ſo he departed fro Arras and went to Mount ſaynt Eloy a fayre abbey / and there he taryed foure dayes / abyding tyll the duke of Berry was come. ſtyll people gadered thider fro all parties / and than it was reported by the conſtable and marſhals / and by ſir Guyſſ harde erle Dolphyn mayſter of the croſ bowes / howe that the kyng had ther mo than a hundred thouſande men. Than the kyng departed fro Moūt ſaynt Eloy / and toke his way to ſaynt Omers and cāe to Ayre / wherof the vycount of Meaulx was capitayne. And there the kyng taryed two dayes / and alwayes ſtyll aproched men of warre. and the conſtable and they of the vowarde were on before / and loged at the towne of mount Caſſell. And ſo the kynge came to ſaynt Omers / and there abode and taryed for his people that came from all ꝑties. And whan̄e duke Frederyke of Bauyers came to the hooſt / the great barownes of Fraū
               ce went and mette with hym to do hym honour bycauſe he came fro ſo farre a countrey to ſerue the kynge. The kyng made hym great chere / & gaue hym great thankes for his comynge: and lodged hym all the voiage after / as nere to his perſon as myght be. In the kynges hooſt there were to the nōbre of thre thouſand horſes / wherfore it was greatly to be marueyled / howe prouiſyon myght be had to ſuffyce ſuche an hooſt. Howe be it ſomtyme they lacked and ſomtyme they had great habundaunce.
            tHe erle Guy of Bloyſe beynge at Beaumont in Heynault / though it were ſo that he was nat in good helthe / for the longe malady that he was in / ymagyned in him ſelf / that it ſhulde nat be honorable for him to lye ſtyll / and ſo many great lordes beynge in the felde / and alſo he was ſent for / he was one of the chiefe apoynted to the reregarde. Therfore he thought it were better for hym to go forthe & putte hym ſelfe at the pleaſure of god than to abyde behynde / and that men ſhulde ſuppoſe in him any cowardnes. This gētyll knight went forthe / but he coude in no wyſe endure to ryde / therfore he was caryed in a horſelytter: and ſo toke leaue of the lady his wyfe and of Loys his ſonne. Dyuers of his coūſell were agaynſt his voyage / bycauſe the ſeaſon was very hote for a ſicke man. But euery man that herde ſpekyng therof / reputed in hym a great valyantneſſe. & with hym departed out of Heynault: the lorde of Sanzeſt / the lorde of Hauſelles / ſir Gerard of Warryers / ſir Thomas of Dyſtre / the lorde of Douſtrenent / ſir Johan of Guyſenell / who was made knight the ſame vyage / and dyuers

other. So thus this erle paſſed by Chambrey / and ſo cāe to Arras. And the more he rode and traueyled the better he had his helth
                  •
                his owne men were before with the kyng. And whā they herde howe their lorde was comynge / they cāe and mette hym. And ſo than he was to the nombre of foure hundred ſpeares / and prouiſyon euer folowed after hym out of Heynaulte great plentie.
            ¶ Nowe lette vs ſpeke of the kynge. tHe frenche kyng ſo ſpedde in his iourney / that he came to ſaynt Omers and there reſted / and refreſſhed hym & his vowarde. The cōſtable and the marſhals went towarde Mount Caſſell / that the Englyſſmen kepte. They aſſayled the towne and wanne it with aſſaute / and all that were within ſlayne. Suche as ſcaped wente to Bergues / where as ſir Hughe Caurell was / & with hym thre thouſande englyſſhmen / but the byſſhoppe of Norwiche was gone to Grauelynge / the ſoner to be at Calays if nede were. All the countrey about Caſſell was brent and pylled by thēglyſſhmen. and the frenche kyng deꝑted fro ſaynt Omers / and lay at an abbey called Raynombergues / & ther reſted all that friday. The ſaturday in the mornyng the vowarde / the conſtable & the marſhals / the lorde of Coucy and a great nombre of good men of armes went to the caſtell of Trughen / where ther were a thre hūdred men of armes / that kepte it all that ſeaſon. And there the frenchmen made a great and a ſharpe aſſaut / & the englyſſhmen that were within defended thē ſelfe marueylouſly. How be it by pure dedes of armes the Caſtell was conquered / and all that were within ſlayne / for the cōſtable wolde take none to mercy. And in the baſe court / ther was foūde the fayreſt white horſe that might be ſene the whiche was preſented to the conſtable / and he ſende him incōtynent to the kyng. The horſe pleaſed ſo the kyng / in ſuche wyſe: that he rode theron the ſonday all day. Than came therle of Bloys in to the hooſt: he was of the reregarde as he was the yere before / at the batayle of Roſebeque. Therle of Ewe / therle of Harcourt / ye lorde of Chatellon / and the lorde Fere: all theſe in his cōpany. And ſtyll aproched men of warr on all ſydes. The ſeaſon was clere and fayre or els there wolde haue ben moche a do / ther was ſuche a nombre of men and horſes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe thēgliſſhmen after the ſege of Ipre / were withdrawen in to the towne of Bergues: and howe they departed thens & went to Burborke whan they ſawe the kyngꝭ puiſſāce. Cap. CCCC .xxxviii.
            
               IN the towne of Bergues / whiche was cloſed wt nothing but with pales and ſmall dikes. Thēgliſſhmen were gone thider ſaue ye byſſhop of Norwich / who was at Graueling ſore abaſſhed and repēted hym that he had made that vyage / for he ſawe well he was likely to forſake his cō
               queſtes with great blame. And alſo / in that he had beforeſayd and vaunted / howe & the kynge came to reyſe the ſiege before Ipre / he wolde abyde & fight with hym & all his puiſſāce / which wordꝭ were ſpred abrode thrughout all the real me of Frāce. and than he ſaw well how he was fayne ſodenly to deꝑte fro the ſege / for his puiſſance was nat able to reſyſt agaynſt the frenche kyngꝭ puyſſāce / which he thought ſhulde turne to his great blame. And alſo thēglyſſhmen beynge in Calys / ſayd howe they had right yuell enployed the popes money. & to ſay the trouthe the duke of Lācaſtre beyng in Englande / who had by the byſſhopes iourney loſt his vyage in to Portyngale / was nothyng ſorie that the mater went as it dyde. For whan ſir Wyllm̄ Wynſore ſent to thē as they lay at ye ſege / & offred thē newe ayde and cōfort: the byſſhop / ſir Thom̄s Tryuet / & ſir Wyllm̄ helmon / anſwered & ſaid. howe they had men ynowe & wold haue no mo to fight with the frēche kyng / & all the might of Fraūce. But ſir Hugh Caurell / who had ſene more of ſuche maters than all thother / ſpake alwayes to the cōtrarie. For he ſayd to ye byſſhop and to thother / whan thoffre was made thē out of Englande for more ayde. What wyll ye do? ſirs / ye wyll truſt to moche in your owne puyſſaunce. Why ſhulde we refuce the confort of our cōpany / whan it is offred to vs? and the realme of Englande wolde we had it: paraduenture a day maye fall / that we ſhall repent it. But his wordes coulde nat be herde / but euer they ſayd they had men ynowe. So thus the mater went ſo that at length they loſt more than they wan.
            wHan ſir Hughe Caurell was withdrawen to Bergues / he founde ther with the Englyſſhe archers / mo than foure thouſande. Than ſir Hughe ſayd. Let vs kepe this towne it is ſtrōg ynough / and we are people

ynowe to kepe it. I thynke within fyue or ſixe dayes / we ſhall haue confort out of Englā
               de / for they of Englande knowe by this tyme / what caſe we be in. And euery man ſayde they were cōtent. Than they ordred the towne and their company / and ſette euery man to his defence to kepe the walles and the gates. they cauſed all the women and chyldren to drawe in to a churche / and nat to dparte thens. The french kynge beyng at Raynombergues / vnderſtode howe the englyſſhemen were withdrawen in to the towne of Bergues. Than he toke coūſayle and it was determyned to go thyder / and that the conſtable and marſhall ſhulde go firſt / and lye in a wynge on the fartherſyde of the towne. And than the kyng / the duke of Berrey / the duke of Burgoyne / the duke of Burbone / & their companyes ſhulde folowe. And than the erle of Bloyes and the erle of Ewe and the reregarde ſhulde go on another wynge of the towne / and ſo cloſe the Englyſſhmen rounde about. This purpoſe was holden. The kynge departed fro Raynombergues / and all his people ordred in the felde. It was great beautie to beholde ſhynynge agaynſt the ſonne: to ba
                  〈…〉
               s / penons & clere baſſnettes and ſo great nombre of people that the eye of man coude nat nombre thē. their ſpeares ſemed a great thicke wode. Thus they rode in four batayls towarde Bergues: and about the hour of thre / an heraude of Englande entred in to the towne / & he had paſſed through the frenche army by ſufferaunce. He came to ſir Hughe Caurell / and ſir Hughe demaunded of hym a high that euery mā herde hym. heraude fro whens comyſt thou? Sir quod the heraude I come fro the frenche hooſt / wher I haue ſene the mooſt fayreſt ſyght of men of armes / & the greatteſt nōbre that euer I ſawe. I trowe ther is no kynge can aſſemble ſo many to guyder agayne. Theſe goodly men of armes quod ſir Hughe / what nombre doeſt thou call them of? 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                quod he / they are well .xxvi. thouſande men of armes / the moſt goodlyeſt men and beſt armed that can be deuiſed. Ah quod ſir Hugh Caurell who was ſore diſpleaſed with thoſe wordes: y• art well made to forge a gretlye / I knowe well thou lyeſt falſely. For I haue often ſene the aſſē
               blies of Fraunce / but they were neuer yet foūde togider .xxvi. thouſād / nor yet ſcant ſixe. M. of good men of armes. Therwith the watchman of the towne ſo wned his trumpet / for the kyngꝭ vowarde was comyng to paſſe by ye towne walles. Than ſir Hughe ſayd / to ſuche knightes & ſquyers as were about hym. let vs go & ſe theſe xxvi. thouſande mē of armes / they are comyng I here by oure watchman. So than they went to the walles and leaned out and behelde ye kynges vowarde / paſſynge forby the towne / in the whiche warde there were .xv. C. ſpeares. The cōſtable and the marſhals / the maiſter of ye croſbowes the lorde Coucy & after them the duke of Bretayne / therle of Flaūders / and therle of
                  •
               a
                  ••
                Poule / and with them about a .xv. C. ſpeares. Than ſir Hugh Caurell / wenyng to haue ſene the hole army of Fraūce ſayd. beholde if I ſaid true or uat. yonder ye may ſe the .xxvi. M. men of armes / if they be thre. M. they be .x. M. Let vs go to dyner / for as yet I haue nat ſene no nō
               bre that ſhuld cauſe vs to leaue the towne / this heraude wolde abaſſhe vs well if we wolde beleue him. the heraude was a ſhamed / but yet he ſayd. ſir / ye haue ſene as yet no more but ye vowarde. The kyng and his vncles are as yet behynde & all their puyſſaunce. And behynde thē is the reregarde / wher as there is mo than two thouſande ſpeares. and ſir / all this ſhall yeſe Wt in this four houres / if ye wyll tary to ſe it. Sir Hugh Caurell made no force at his wordꝭ / but went to his lodgynge and ſayd. I haue ſene all togyder & ſo ſat downe to his dyner 
                  〈…〉
                and as he ſat the watche began again to blowe as ſore as he coude. Than ſir Hugh roſe fro the table and went to the walles to ſe what is was. Ther he ſawe comyng the kyng & his vncles & duke Fre deryke / the duke of Lorayne / therle of Sauoy the dolphyn of Auuergne / the erle of Marche & there cōpanyes. In this gret batayle ther was well a .xvi. M. ſpeares. than ſir Hugh Caurell thought himſelfe deſceyued & ſayd: the heralde ſayd truely / I was in the wrong to blame him. let vs go hens lepe vpon our horſes. let vs ſaue our bodies and our goodes / it is nat good here to abyde. I neuer ſawe ſo moche before of the ſtate of Fraunce. I neuer ſawe ſo many men togyder before / as I ſe yonder in the vowarde & myddell warde. & yet I am ſure ther is a reregarde behynde. Than he deꝑted fro the walles and went to his logyng. and ſo they truſſed all their baggages & moūted on their horſes wtout makyng of any noyſe. and opyned the gate towarde Burbourke & ſo deꝑted / and ledde with thē all their pyllage. but if the frēchmen had taken good hede / they might haue ben before thē / but they knewe it nat of a long tyme / they were firſt nere at Burborke. ſir Hugh Caurell right ſore dyſpleaſed / tourned his horſe & taryed tyll his cōpany were cōe togyder: & than he ſayd to ſir Thom̄s Tryuet and to other y• were preſēt.

Sirs / by my faythe we haue made this ſeaſon a ſhamefull iourney / there iſſued out of Englande neuer a more vnhappye armye. ye haue wrought at your pleaſur / and haue beleued the byſſhoppe of Norwiche / who thought to haue flyen or he had wynges. Nowe we may ſe ye honourable ende that we muſt abyde. All this viage my wordes might nat be beleued / what ſoeuer I ſayd. yonder nowe we may ſe Burbur
                  •
                if any of you wyll go thyder ye may / but as for me I wyll go to Grauelynge and ſo to Calais / for I ſe well we be nat men ſuffycient to fyght with the armye of Fraunce. Some of the Englyſſhe knightes / who knewe right well that he ſayd trouthe / anſwered and ſayde. Sir a goddeſſe name / we wyll go to Bourbourke and abyde there / ſuche aduenture as god wyll ſende vs. And ſo ſir Hughe Caurell departed fro thē and they entred into Burbourcke.
            THe frenche kynge was anone certifyed that thenglyſſhmen were departed our of Bergues and gone to Bourborke / and lefte Bergues clene voyde. Than the gates of the towne were ſette opyn and the kynge entred / & all ſuche as wolde. The firſt that entred foūde great pyllage / whiche the Englyſſhmen coude nat cary away. The ladyes of the towne were ſaued & ſent to ſaynt Omers / but the men were nere hande all ſlayne. And ſo the towne of Bergues was ſet a fyre / and the kyng departed bycauſe of the fyre / and went and lodged in a vyllage therby. This was on a friday / and the lordes lodged abrode in the feldes / aſ well as they might: they were happy the ſeaſon was ſo fayr and drie / for if it had bene colde and were / they ſhulde full yuell agone any farther to gette any forage. It was marueyle howe the forage was gette for ſo many horſe / for there were mo than thre hundred thouſande. It was great wonder howe ſuch an hooſt myght be vitayled: but the ſaturday whan they came before Bourborke / they determyned to cloſe in all the engliſſhmen and to aſſayle the towne / in truſt to wyn it. ſpecially the bretons had great deſyre to aſſayle ye towne / for the great pyllage that they truſted to fynde therin.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the frēche kyng withall his hooſt came to Burborke / and of the order of the englyſſhmen within the towne: & howe Fraunces Atreman wan And warpe. Cap. iiii. C .xxxix.
            
               ON the ſaturday in the mornyng it was right faire and clere / the hoſt prepared them ſelfe to cōe before burbourcke. The vowarde the duke of Bretayne / the erle of Flaunders / therle of ſait Poule / the conſtable of Fraunce / and thre thouſande ſpeares / paſſed forby the walles of ye towne: and taryed on the otherſyde ryght agaynſt the kynges hoſt / wher was the mooſt goodlyſt men of armes that coude be ymagined. Thentent of the lordes / was to aſſayle ye towne. there were baners & penons wauyng wi
                  •
               h the wynd and euery lorde with his men vnder his owne baner. The lordes of Fraūce ſhewed ther gret honoure and richeſſe. There was the lorde of Coucy in great eſtate / he hadde courſers trapped and barded with the aūcyent armes of coucy / and with other ſuche as he bare than̄e. And hym ſelfe on a goodly courſer / ridynge in and out ſettynge his men in array: euery man that ſawe hym prayſed him for his goodly behauo•. So ther eue
                  〈…〉
                ſhewed their eſtate / there was made the
                  〈…〉
                day mo than four hundred knightꝭ / and th
                  •
                heraldes nombred ye knightes that were there to a nyne. M. there were in nō
               bre / a .xxiiii. M. men of armes knightes & ſquyers. ¶ Thenglyſſhmen yt were in the towne of Burboure & ſawe the frenche kynges puiſſāce / they hoped well to haue an aſſaut / of the which they were right well cōforted. But in that they ſawe thē ſelfe encloſed in the towne / which was cloſed but with palis they were nat therof well aſſured. Howebeit lyke men of good cōfort and great corage / they ordred their people about ye towne. The lorde Beaumont who was an erle in Englande / called Hēry: with a. C. men of armes & thre. C. archers / kept one warde. ſir Wyllyam Helmon with as many men kept another ſir John̄ of Newcaſtell with the gaſcōs kept another / & the lorde Ferres of Englande kept another ward with .xl. men of armes & as many archers / ſo that thus the towne was ſet with mē rounde about. ſir Mathue Reedman / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                wyllm̄ Fermton / & ſir Nicholas tracton with two. C. men of armes and as many archers / kept ye place before the mynſter. Alſo they ordayned a certayne nombre of men to take hede for fyre and to quenche it if nede were / without diſordringe of any of their wardes / for thengliſſhmen douted the fyre / bycauſe the towne was than mooſt parte all the houſes couered with ſtrawe. thus in this eſtate were the englyſſhmen.
            
               
¶Nowe ſhall I ſhewe you of an highe enterpreſe that 
                  〈◊〉
                raūces Atreman dyde the ſame proper friday at night ▪ that the frenche kynge paſſed by Bergues / and howhe wanne the towne of And warpe.
            fRaunces Atreman / Peter de Boyſe / Peter de Myrt / and the capitayns of Gaunte / whan they retourned fro the ſiege fro Ipre and came to Gaunte. They ſtudyed night and daye / howe they might do any domage to their enemyes. Than Fraunces Atreman vnderſtode ▪ howe the capitayne of Ande warpe ſir Gylbert of Lienghien was nat Wt
               in the towne ▪ nor no menne of warre / but howe they were all with the kyng in his army / for theerle of Flaūders had ſende for them. Wherfore Fraunces thought well that the towne of Andewarpe was but eaſly kept. and howe the dikes to warde the medowes agayuſt theym were as than drie. For the water had bene let out for the fyſſhe that was therin / ſo that one might eaſely go with a drie fote to the walles of the towne / & by ladders to entre in to the towne. The ſpyes of Gaunt had brought this worde to Fraūces Atreman. They of And warpe were as than in no feare of them of Gaunt / but in a maner had forgoten them. whan Fraunces Atreman was iuſtely enformed howe it was / he came to Peter de Boyſe and ſayd. Peter / thus in this caſe is the towne of And warpe at this tyme / I wyll aduenture to gette it / & to ſcale it by night. ther was neuer tyme ſo good as is nowe / for the capitayne ther of and the men of warre / are nowe with the frenche kynge in the fronters of ſaynt Omers: and they are in feare of no body. Peter ſo one agreed to his purpoſe and ſaid. If ye may come to your entent / there was neuer man dyde ſuche a dede to haue prayſe. I can nat tell quod Fraunces what wyll happe / my courage is good. For my herte gyueth me / that we ſhall haue this ſame night And warpe. Than Fraū
               ces chaſe out a foure hundred men / in whom he had beſt truſte: and ſo departed fro Gaunte in the euenyng / and toke the way to warde Andewarpe. This was in the moneth of Septēbre / whan nightes be of a reſonable length / and the wether fayre and clere. And ſo about mydnight they came to the medowes of Ande warpe / and had ſcalynge ladders redy with them. And as they paſſed by the mareſſe / there was a woman of the towne gaderynge graſſe for her kene ▪ ſhe bydde her ſelfe whan ſhe herde noyſe of men comyng that way. She herde them well ſpeke / & knewe well howe they were gaūtoyſe comyng towarde the towne to ſcale it: ſhe ſawe well the ladders. This woman was ſore abaſſhed / & at laſt ſayd to her ſelfe. I wyll go to And warpe & ſhewe all that I haue herde and ſene to y• wache menne of the towne. And ſo leyd downe all her baggage / and toke a preuy way that ſhe knewe and ſtale to the towne or the gauntoyſe cāe ther and than ſhe called. and at laſt one that went on the walles fro gate to gate / herde her and ſayd. What art thou? I am quod ſhe a poore woman I ſay to you ▪ herby is a certayne nōbre of gaū
               toyſe. I haue ſene them / they bringe with them ladders to ſteale this towne if they can. Nowe I haue gyuen you warnyng I wyll retourne / agayne / for if they mete with me I am but deed. Thus the poore woman departed and the man was abaſſhed / and thought to abyde ſtyll to ſe if y• woman ſayd trouthe or nat. The gaūtoyſe who right priuely dyde their enterpriſe / made no noyſe nor had no trumpette / but the noyſe of their langage. Than Fraunces Atreman ſent foure of his company on before / and ſayde. Go your way ſecretely Wtout any wordes or cough hynge to the towne walles / and harken aboue and beneth if ye can parceyue any thynge. And ſo they dyde / and Fraunces and his companye abode ſtyll in the mariſſhe / and ſtode ſtyll nere where as the woman was. She ſawe thē well and herde what they ſayde / but they ſawe nat her. Theſe forſayd four men went to the dykes and behelde the walles / and ſawe nor herde nothyng. Lo / ye mayſe what yuell aduenture fell to them within: for if they had fortuned to haue had but a cādell lyght / that the gaūtoyſe might haue ſene it they durſt nat haue come ther. For than they wolde haue thought that there hadde ben good watche made.
            THeſe four men returned agayne to Frā
               ces Atreman and ſayde. Sir / we canſe nor here no maner of thynge. I thynke well 
                  〈◊〉
                Fraūces. I trowe the watche hath made theyr tourne / and are nowe gone to their reſt. Let vs go this hyghe way towarde the gate / and than entre lowe downe in to the dykes. The poore woman where as ſhe lay priuely herde all theſe wordꝭ. Than ſhe went agayne to the wall and came to the mā that watched there / and ſhewed hym as ſhe dyde before: and declared all y• ſhe had ſene and herde / and counſayled hym to go to the gate to ſehowe it was kept. For ſurely 
                  〈◊〉
                ſhe / ſhortly ye ſhall here of the gaūtoyſe. I wyll go my way I dare no legarabyde. I haue ſhewed

you all that I haue ſene & herde: do nowe as ye lyſt / for I wyll come no more this nyght. And ſo the good poore womandeꝑted / and the man remembred her wordes and wente to the gate / where he founde the watchmen playenge at dyſe / and ſayd to them. Sirs / haue ye ſurelye cloſed your gates and barryers. there was a woman cāe right nowe to me and ſhewed me thus and thus / as ye haue herde before. They anſwered and ſayd: all is ſafe ynoughe. In an yuell tyme of the night that woman is come hyder to trouble vs. It is kene and calues are broken loſe / and ſhe weneth the noyſe be gaūtoyſe: I warrant you they haue no lyſte to cōe hyder. In the meane ſeaſon whyle they were thus talkynge / Fraunces Atreman and his company were come and entred the dykes / wherin there was no water. And there they brake downe a certayne of the pales before the wall / and ſo rered vp their ladders and entred in to the towne and went ſtreight to the market place / without ſo wnynge of any noyſe tyll they came thyder & there they founde a knight called ſir John̄ Florence of Hulle / who was lyeutenant vnder the capitayne of the towne. And he kepte there the ſtandynge watche with a .xxx. men in harneſſe with hym. And as ſoone as the gauntoiſe were entred in to the place / they cryed Gaunt Gaunt and ſtrake at the watche: and the ſayde knyght was ſlayne and all his cōpany. Thus the towne of And warpe was taken.
         
         
            Howe they of And warpe were put out of the towne / & none abode there but gauntoyſe. And howe Amergot Marſell toke the caſtell of Marquell in Auuerne: and howe it was gyuen vp by cōpoſycion for fyue thouſande frankes / to the erle Dolphyn of Auuergne. Cap. C C C C .xl.
            
               SUche as were a ſlepe in theyr beddes in Ande warpe / were ſore abaſſhed whan they herd that cry / and ſaw their towne taken and coude nat remedy it. For the gaūtoyſe brake vp their houſes byforce / & ſlewe them without any defence makyng / they were taken ſo ſodenly / wherfore there was no recouery / therfore euery man ſaued him ſelfe y• might beſt. The men fledde out of their houſes all naked & lept ouer the walles / and left all behynde them / and waded throughe the dykes and waters about the towne. The ryche men bare nothyng away with thē / for they were happy that might ſaue thē ſelfe a lyue. Ther was the ſame night a great nombre ſlayne in the towne / and drowned in the dykes and waters. Thus it for tuned of this aduenture. And in the moruynge whan the gauntoyſe ſawe howe they were lordes of the towne / than they put all women and chyldren out of the towne naked / in their ſhertꝭ and ſmockes / or in the worſt tayment they had and ſo they went to Tourney. & ſuche as were eſcaped ſome went to Mount to Achacondent to Ualencennes / and to Tourney. Tidynges came to many places howe And warpe was taken / wherof they of Gaunt were greatly reioyſed and ſayd / howe Fraunces Atreman had achyued a great and an highe enterpriſe / whiche ought to tourne to his great valur and prayſe. Thus Fraunces Atreman abode capitayne of And warpe / and wanne there great riches and great prouiſyon / which came well to poynt for the towne of Gaunt: as whete / otes / and wyne the whiche they of the towne had gadered togyder out of Fraunce / Flaunders / and Turney. But all that was of Heynalte was ſaued / they toke nothyng therof but that they payed for.
            In y• ſame ſeaſon ther fell nere ſuche a lyke aduēture in Auuergne / where as englyſſhmen helde dyuers caſtels / marchyng on the lande of the erle Dolphyn / and of the byſſhop of ſaynt Fleure & of Cleremont. And bycauſe they that were there in garyſon / knewe well howe all the countre was voyde of men of warre / and howe that the lordes and knightes therof / or at leeſt: mooſt parte of them were with the kyng in his voyage in Flaunders. Therfore they thought they wolde aſſay to ſteale and to ſcale ſome towne or fortreſſe. And ſo it happed that Amargot Marſell capitayne of Aloyſe a right ſtrong caſtell within a myle of ſaynt Fleure / toke a .xxx. of his company / and rode couertly towarde the lande of therle Dolphyn. And his entent / was to aſſay to take by ſtelthe y• caſtell of Marquell wherby the erle Dolphyn beareth his armes. & ſo he came thyder throughe the wodes / and taryed in a lytell woode nere to the caſtell tyll the ſonne went downe / and that all the beeſtes and men of the caſtell were entred in. & in the meane

ſeaſon that the capitayne called Grandon Buyſſell ſatte at ſupper. The Englyſſhmen redy apparelled to do their en
                  •
               priſe / dreſſed vp their ladders and entred into the caſtell at their eaſe. They of the caſtell were walkyng beneth in the courte / and whan they ſawe their enemyes on the walles / they cryed treaſon treaſon. & whan the capitayne herde that / he thought there was no remedy but to ſaue him ſelfe by a preuy way that he knewe / whiche went out of his chambre in to the great towre / whiche was cheife defēce of all the caſtell. He drewe thyder and toke the keyes with hym and cloſed him ſelfe in ye towre whyle that Amergotte entended to other thynges. And whan they ſawe yt the capitayne was ſcaped in to the towre / whiche was to ſtrong to be wonne by them. Than they ſayd they hadde done nothyng / and repented thē that they were entred / for they were encloſed within the caſtell and coude nat get out agayne at the gate. than Amergotte went to the towre to ſpeke with the capitayne / and ſayd to hym. Grandon delyuer me the keyes of the gate of the caſtell / and I promyſe the / we ſhall departe hens without doyng of any more hurt. No ꝙ Grandon / but ye wyll lede away my catell / wherin I haue great truſt Gyue me thy hāde quod Amergot / and I ſhall ſwere to the by my faythe / that thou ſhalt haue no domage. Than the folyſſhe capitayne putte out his hande at a lytell wyndowe / to thentent that he ſhulde ſwere to hym. And as ſoone as Amergotte had his hande in his / he drewe it to hym and ſtreyned hym ſore: and drewe out his dagger and ſware / that without he wolde delyuer all the keyes to him / he wolde nayle faſt his hande to the gate. Whan Grandon ſawe hymſelfe in that caſe he was ſore abaſſhed / and nat withoute a cauſe. For he ſawe well that Amergot wolde nayle faſt his hāde to the gate / without he delyuered the keyes. and ſo he delyuered them with the other hande / for they were nere hym. Nowe quod Amergotte to his company haue I natte well diſceyued this foole / I ſhall lerne well ſuche dedes. Than̄e they opyned the towre and ſo were mayſters therof / and put the capitayne & all they that were within clene out / and dyde them no more hurt of their bodyes.
            tIdynges came to the erle Dolphyns wyfe / who laye in a caſtell in a good towne called zaydes / but a lytell myle thens / howe the caſtell of Marquell was taken by the Englyſſhmen. The lady was ſore abaſſhed / bycauſe her lorde was nat in the countre. She ſende to the knightes and ſquyers of the countre to come to ayde her to cōquere agayne the caſtell. Knightes and ſquyers came anone to the lady and layde ſiege to the caſtell / but the englyſſhmen made no force therof / and ſo helde it fyftene dayes. Than̄e the lady fell in treatie with them and a compoſycion was taken. And ſo Amergot departed and had fyue thouſande frankes / and than retourned to his owne gary ſone agayne. In lykewiſe they of Caluylcell / wherof Peter de Brenoiſe was capitayne / and dyde moche hurt about Auuergne and Lymoſyn. The Englyſſhmen the ſame tyme helde in the fronters & lymyties of Auuergne / of Quercy / and of Lymoſyn / mo than threſcore ſtronge caſtels: ſo that they might go and come fro fortereſſe to fortreſſe / tyll they came to Burdeux. And the fortres that dyde mooſt hurt was Uā
               tatoure / one of the ſtrōgeſt caſtels of the worlde and chiefe capitayne therof was a bretone / called Geffray Teſtenoyre. this was a cruell mā and had pytie of no man / for as ſoone he wolde put to dethe a knight or a ſquyer as a vyllayne for he ſette by no body. He was ſo feared of his men / that none durſt diſpleaſe hym. He hadde with hym a foure hundred companyons in his wages / and well and truely he payed them fro moneth to moneth. He helde the countre about hym in peace & in ſubiectyon / none durſt ryde in his countre he was ſo feared and douted. he had all maner of purueyaunce about hym. No man of the worlde coude haue better: as clothe of Bruſels and of Normandy / of peltre ware and of mercery / and of all other thynges neceſſarie: he ſolde it to his people and abated it on their wages. alſo he had to ſell all prouiſyon as yron / ſteele: leddar / ſpyce / and of all other thynges / as plentyfull: as thoughe it hadde bene at Parys. And ſomtyme he moued warre as well to the Englyſſhmen as to the frenchmen / to the entent to be the more redouted. The Caſtell of Uantatour was euer purueyed of all thynges to abyde a Siege / and it ſhulde endure ſeuyn yere. ¶ Nowe lette vs retourne to the buſyneſſe of Flaunders.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the french Kynge aſſayled Burbourke / and howe he ordayned that who ſoeuer brought thyder a fagotte ſhulde haue a blanke. Cap. CCCC .xli.
            
               
               THe ſaturday as is ſaid before / the frenche kyng cāe before Burbourke. There was neuer ſene a goodlyer army / and euery man redy apparelled to aſſaut the towne / with great courage and wyll. And they ſayd / the towne ſhulde nat long endure agaynſt them / howe be it firſt it coſt thē many of their men. Some had great marueile why they went nat incōtynent to the ſaut. ſome ſaid agayne / that the duke of Bretayne and the erle of Flaūders / who were on the farther ſyde of the towne / were in trea
                  ••
               e with the Englyſſhmen to yelde vp the towne without any aſſaut. The bretons / burgonyōs / normayns / almayns and other peple / who thought ſurely that within the towne was great pyllage and protyte for them / yf they might wynne the towne byforce. Wherfore they were ſore diſpleaſed y• they went nat ſtreyght wayes to the aſſaute. Some ſcrymyſſhed at the barryers without any commaū
               dement or ordynaunce of the conſtable or marſhalles. The mater multiplyed in ſuche wyſe / that the frenchemen ſhotte fyre in to the towne / ſo that there was fyre in mo than in .xl. places / ſo that they myght ſe the flame and ſmoke in euery parte of the hooſt. Than began̄e the crye and aſſaut / and there was in the formaſt front / ſir Wyllyam of Namure and his cōpany / who valyantly dyde aſſayle. There was done many a feate of armes. The aſſaylātes with great courage and wyll entred in to the dykes / ſome to the knees in water and myre / and came and ſhotte and fought at the pales with thenglyſſhmen / who defended theym ſelfe as well as any men myght do / and it was nede for them ſo to do. They within had ſo moche to do / that they wyſte nat well what to do. They were aſſayled on euery ſyde / and ſtyll brent the houſes of the towne / whiche abaſſhed the englyſſmen mooſt of any thyng. But for all that they went nat fro their wardes / but abode ſtyll at their defences. And ſir Mathue Reedman and ſir Nycholas Traicton / and ſuche as were ſtablyſſhed in the towne. They dyde as moche as they myght to quenche the fyre / but the wether was ſo fayre & the ſeaſon ſo drie / that the houſes flamed. And for certayne / if the aſſaute had begonſoner the ſame ſaturday / and that the night hadde nat ſo ſoone cōe / they had wonne the towne by aſſaut / but it behoued them to ceaſe the aſſaut / bycauſe of the nyght. Of ſir Wyllyam Namures company there were a .xxxvi. ſore hurt and ſlayne / and of them of the hooſt. as the heraldes reported / there were ſlayne and hurte mo than fyue hundred. Than ceaſed the aſſaut bicauſe of the night / and the frēchmen drewe to their lodgynges / and entended to their hurte people / and to bury the deed. And it was ſayd in ye hooſt / that the next day in the mornyng / they wolde newe agayne aſſaut the towne. Sayeng ſurely / how they wolde wynne it / and that it ſhulde nat endure agaynſt them. The englyſſhmen all that nyght entended to repayre their pales whiche were broken / and to quenche the fyre in the towne. So they ſawe them ſelfe all thynges conſydered in a harde caſe / for they ſawe well they were cloſed in rounde about / ſo that they coude in no wyſe flye out.
            aNd on the ſonday in the mornyng after the kynge had herde maſſe. There was a crye made in the hoſt / that who ſoeuer brought a fagot before the kynges tent / he ſhulde haue a blanke of Fraūce / and as many fagottes as many blankes. To thentent to caſte in to the dykes for men to paſſe to the pales / and on the monday to gyue aſſaute. Than there was good makyng of fagottes / and bringynge of theym before the kynges tent / ſo that within a whyle there was a great ſtacke of thē. So thus they draue of the ſonday without any aſſaut. And ſome ſaid the ſame ſonday / that the duke of Bretayne / who was on the farther ſyde of the towne / fell in treatie with thēglyſſhemen / for they ſawe well what caſe they were in. He counſayled them to yelde vp the towne / ſauynge their bodyes and goodes / to the whiche counſayle they were gladde to folowe. And deſyred the duke for goddes ſake and gentylneſſe that he wolde helpe to make a treatie for them: and for that cauſe the ſonday / the duke ſende to the kyng and to his vncles / to his counſayle / to the conſtable / and to therle of ſaynt Poule / that they ſhulde helpe to make this treatie. And to counſayle the kyng to take the fortreſſe as they were offred. For as to aſſayle theym it ſhulde coſt the kynge moche of his people / and as for Bourbourke it wolde be harde to wynne. For therin were a fewe poore menne of warre / that wolde defēde themſelfe to the dethe. The kyng and his vncles / bycauſe the duke of Bretayne ſpake for them: ſayd he wolde here their treaty with a good wyll. So thus the ſonday paſſed all in peace / and as it was ſaid: in the euenyng on aſſuraunce. Johan of Newcaſtell Gaſcone and Raymonette of ſaynt Marke / came to the

lodgynge of ſir Guy dela Tremoyle to ſporte them / and taryed there all night / and on the mō
               day in the mornynge they retourned to Bourburke / and at their departure ſir Guy ſayde to them. Sirs: or it be night ye ſhall be my priſoners. Sir quod they / we had rather be yours than a poorer knyghtes. The ſame euenyng tidynges came to the hooſt howe And warp was taken by ſtelthe / wherwith the capitayne therof was ſore diſpleaſed bycauſe he was ther / the whiche was loſſe of the towne: but he was excuſed bycauſe the erle of Flaunders had ſende for hym. The ſame ſonday at night the erle Blois kept the watche / wenynge to aſſayle the towne in the mornynge.
            oN the monday in the mornyng there was a crye made / that no man ſhulde be ſo hardy to make any aſſaute to the towne / tyll they were commaūded. Whan this crye was publyſſhed throughe the hooſt / euery man ceaſed. And ſome ymagined that the Engliſſhmen ſhulde departe by ſome treatie / ſithe they were cōmaunded nat to aſſayle the towne And at noone there yſſued out of the towne / ſuche as ſhulde comune for the treatie. Sir Wyllyam Helman / ſir Thomas Tryuette / ſir Nicholas Traicton / ſir Mathue Reedman / and to the nombre of .xiiii. knyghtes and ſquyers. And the duke of Bretayne / the cōſtable of Frā
               ce / and the erle of ſaynt Poule brought them in to the kynges tent. The kyng was gladde to ſe them / for as than he hadde ſene but a fewe Engliſſhmen except ſir Peter Courtney / who had ben before at Paris to do dedes of armes with ſir Guy de la Tr
                  •
               moyle: but the ſame tyme the kynge and his counſayle agreed them ſo / that they fought nat toguyder. And bycauſe that in tyme paſſed great renome and brute ran / howe that the Englyſſhmen were valyant in armes. Therfore the yonge kyng was gladde to ſe thē & their treatie aueyled moche the better. Thus this monday they were in the kynges tent. and with the kyng ther was the duke of Berry / the duke of Burgoyne / the duke of Burbone / the duke of Bretaygne / the erle of Flaunders / and the conſtable of Fraunce and no mo. The duke of Bretayne toke great payne in this treatie. ſo at laſt they concluded / that they ſhulde departe fro Burbourke and leaue the towne of Grauelynge / and to take with them as moche as they coude cary of their owne. of this treatie dyuers bretons / frenchmen / normayns / and burgonyous were ſore diſpleaſed. for they had hoped to haue had parte of their goodes / but they fayled of their entētꝭ / for the kyng wolde haue it thus / as is ſayd before. After this treatie theſe knightes toke leaue of the kyng and of his vncles / of the duke of Bretayne / of the erle of Flaunders / and of the cōſtable. Than therle of ſaint Poule toke and had theym to ſupper in his lodgynge and made them right good there ▪ and after ſupper he conueyed them to the gates of the towne wherof they thanked hym greatly.
         
         
            ¶ Of the miracles that were done in the towne of Burbourke. and howe ſir Thomas Triuet and ſir Wylliam Helman englyſſhmen were putte in priſone for the domage of Fraunce. Cap. CCCC .xlii.
            
               THe tuiſday all the day they ordered all their buſyneſſe and ſhodde their horſes and ſtuffed their males / wherof they had great plentie. The wedniſday in the mornynge they truſſed and toke their way / and paſſed by ſaueconduct thorough the kynges hooſt. The bretōs were ſore diſpleaſed / whan they ſawe them departe with ſuche baggage / & ſuche as abode behynde dyde hurt ynoughe. Thus the englyſſhmen departed and went to Grauelyng and there reſted / & on the thurſday in the mornyng they departed and ſet fyre in the towne / and brent it clene vp. And ſo came to Calais and all their pyllage / & there taryed for the wynde to haue paſſed to retourne into Englāde. The thurſday in the mornyng / the frenche kyng entred in to Burburke and all the lordes and ther companyes. Than the bretons began to pyll and robbe the towne / and left nothynge in the towne nor in the churche of ſaynt Johans. In the whiche churche a vyllayne among other lept vpon the auter / and wold haue taken away a ſtone out of acrowne on the heed of an ymage of our lady: but the ymage tourned away fro him. This was a true thynge: and the vyllayne fell fro the auter and dyed a ſhamefull dethe. Many men ſawe this myracle: and after that ther came another that wolde haue done the ſame: but than all the belles in the church rang without any helpe of mā
               nes

hādes / nor alſo they coude nat be ronge / for the ropes were tyed vp a lofte. For theſe myracles the churche was moche viſyted of all ye people. And the kynge gaue to the ſame ymage of our lady a great gyfte / and ſo dyde all the lordꝭ. The ſame day ther was offred and gyuen well to the valure of thre thouſande frākes. the next day they diſlodged. The kyng gaue leaue to euery man to departe / and the kyng thanked thē that were of farre countreis / and ſpecially the duke of Bauyer / bycauſe he was come to ſerue hym ſo farre of: and alſo the erle of Sauoy. ſo thus euery lorde drewe to their owne / and than the kyng retourned / but the duke of Burgoyne taryed a lytell behynde with the erle of Flaunders / to ſet his buſyneſſe in good order / and taryed at ſaynt Omers. The lorde of Coucy / nor mayns and diuers other knightes and ſquiers of Poictou / of Uymewe / and of Picardy / entred in to Grauelynge whan the Englyſſhmen had lefte it. And newe repayred it / and made it a countre garyſon agaynſt Calays. And lytell and lytell peopled agayne the countre of Furneys / of Dōkyrke / of Diſqueme / and of Newporte / the whiche was all loſt before: but than they conquered it newe agayne.
            yE may knowe well / that ye duke of Lā
               caſtre was nothynge dyſpleaſed / that the byſſhoppe of Norwyches armye ſpedde no better than it dyde. For by reaſon of that army / he loſt his viage into Spayne and Portyngale. And whan theſe englyſſhe knightes were retourned in to Englande / they were ſore taken vp with the comens. They ſayde to them / howe they had right yuell quyted thēſelfe in their vyage / whan they had ſo fayre a begynnynge in Flaūders / and conquered nat the hole coūtre: and ſpecially ſir Thomas Tryuet and ſir Wyllm̄ Helman were mooſt blamed. As for ſir Hughe Caurell there was no faute layde to his charge / nother by the kyng nor his coūſayle nor by the comons. For it was well knowen / y• if his counſayle might haue bene beleued / they had ſpedde better than they dyde to their honores. And ſo it was layde to the two other knightes / howe they had ſolde Burborke and Grauelynge to the frenche kyng / ſo that all the realme was ſore moued agaynſt thē / ſo that they were in parell of their lyues. And they were cōmaunded by the kyng in to priſon to the towre of Lō
               don. And while they were in priſon the comons apeaſed / and whan they were delyuered out of priſon / they were boūde to the kyng to be at his wyll and pleaſure. Than ther was put forthe a treatie to be had bytwene the englyſſhmen and frenchmen. And they of Gaūt were cōpriſed in the treatie / wherwith therle of Flaunders was ſore diſpleaſed / how be it he coude nat amēde it.
            At the deꝑtynge out of Burborke / the duke of Bretayne abode ſtyll at ſaynt Omers with the erle of Flaūders his coſyn. And wolde gladlye haue ſene that a good peace or a longe truſe might haue ben had / bytwene the frenche kyng his naturall lorde / and the kyng of Englande. And to ſet forwarde the mater / the mōday whā the engliſſhmen were with the kyng in his tent he moued the mater to ſome of them. And they promyſed hym / that aſſoone as they cāe in Englande to the kyng they wolde ſpeke to hym / to his vncles and to his counſayle of that mater. & ſo after to ſhewe that he was wyllyng to bring the mater to a good ende. He ſent in to Englād two knightes of his owne good aſſuraunce / as the lorde of Houſey / and the lorde of Maylly. And they dyde ſo moche that the duke of Lācaſtre and the erle of Buckyngham his brother / the byſſhoppe of Suffolke / ſir Johan of Hollande brother to the kyng / ſir Thomas Percy / and other of the kynges counſayle ſhulde come to Calays / hauyng full puyſſaunce and authoryte of the kyng and of ye realme to make peace or to ordayne a treuſe at their pleasure. And on the other parte there ſhulde come to Boloyne / the duke of Berry / the duke of Burgoyne / the byſſhoppe of Laon / and the chaūceler of Frāce. Hauyng alſo full authorite fro the frenche king his coūſayle and realme / to take peace with the englyſſhmen / or to take truſe ſuche as they coude agre vpon. and ſo whan all theſe ꝑties were cōe to Calys & to Boloyne / they taryed a lytell or they met for the counſayle of Spaygne that ſhulde come thyder / for the frenchemen wolde make no treatie without the ſpanyerdes were encloſed therin. Finally there cāe fro the kynge of Spayne a byſſhop / a dyacre and two knightes. Than it was aduyſed by all the parties / bycauſe they thought it no ſuretie for the frenchemen to come to Calais / nor the englyſſhmen to come to Boloyne. Therfore it was ordayned / that ther comunyng ſhulde be in the mydway bytwene the ſayde townes / in a lytell vyllage: where ther was a churche called Abolyng. thyder came all theſe parties / & dyuers dayes ther they met. And there was the duke of Bretayne and theerle of Flaunders. And there in y• felde was pyght vp the great tent of Bruges. & the erle of Flaūdes made a dyner in the ſame tent / to the duke of Lancaſtre / to therle of Buckyng

ham / and to the other lordes of Englande / ther was great eſtate holden on bothe parties. but all thynges cōſydred / they coude fynde no meanes to haue a peace: for the frēchmen wolde haue had agayne Guynes / Calays / and all the fortreſſes that thenglyſſhmen helde on that ſyde of the ſee to the ryuer of Garon: aſwell in normā
               dy / Bretayne / Poictou / Xaynton / as in Rochell to the whiche thenglyſſhmen wolde in no wyſe agre / & ſpecially Guynes / Calys / Chierburge / nor Breſt in Bretayne. They were comunyng on this treaty more than thre wekes / euery day the lordes or els ſome of their counſayle.
            The ſame ſeaſon there dyed in the duchy of Luſenburgh and in the towne of Luſenburgh / the gentyll and ioly duke Uincelyns of Boem / duke of Luſenburgh and of Brabāt. Who had ben in his tyme: freſſhe / ſage / amorous / & hardy. And whan he dyed / it was ſayd: yt the moſt highe prince and gretteſt lynage and mooſt noble of blode was deed / god haue his ſoule. And he was buryed in y• abbey of Uauclere / beſyde Luzēburgh. And my lady Jane duches of Brabant / was as than wydowe & neuer after was maryed. Of the dethe of this noble duke / ſuche as knewe hym were right ſorie.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the lordes of Englande and Fraunce were aſſembled togyder / to make a peace: whiche by them coude nat be done. And howe Loyes erle of Flaunders dyed and of his obſequy. Cap. CCCC .xliii.
            
               NO we let vs retourne to their aſſemble / that was bytwene thengliſſhe lordes and the frēche / bytwene Calays and Boloyne. Whiche treaty coude neuer come to none effect of peace / nor profyte for the one partie nor other. Some ſayd / ye erle of Flaūders was in a great defaut therof / for he wolde in no wyſe haue thē of Gaunt compriſed in any treatie / wherwith thenglyſſhmen were diſpleaſed / wherfor the treatie ſpedde the worſe. For ther was great promyſe made / that no peace ſhulde be made without the gaūtoyſe were cōpriſed therin. This they had ſworne at Calays / therfore this brake the treatie: finally ther coude be made no peace / that ſhulde ſeme good to any of the ꝑties. than they fell to treat for a truſe / and thervpon their treatie ꝓceded. Therle of Flaūders wolde gladly that they of Gaunt ſhulde haue ben out of the truſe / but the englyſſhmen wolde in no wyſe conſent therto / but that Gaunt ſhulde be cōpriſed in the truſe. And that euery partie ſhulde ſyt ſtyll with that he hath / and no partie to rēdre vp any fortreſſe to other. & for all that this treatie was thus bytwene Calays and Boloyne / the gauntoyſe of the garyſon of And warpe / came and brent the ſubbarbes of Tourney / and retourned ſauely agayne to And warpe. and in the feeſt of Chriſtmas the gauntoyſe gadered vp the rentes / parteyning to the lorde of Tourney / wherwith he was right ſore diſpleaſed / & ſware a great othe that whatſoeuer treatie was made bytwene flā
               ders end the gauntoyſe / he wolde neuer entēde to no peace / but alwayes to make thē the gretteſt warre that he coude. For he ſayd / they toke fro hym his herytage. Wherfore he wyſte natte howe to lyue / without his frendes of Brabant and Heynalt had ayded him: the gaūtoyſe had ſo diſtroyed his herytage.
            Theſe treaties that were thus bytwene Boloyne & Calys / bytwene the lordes of Englāde and of Fraunce was cōcluded with moche a do that a truſe ſhulde be had bytwene the frenche kyng and the kyng of Englande / and all their adherentes & alyes. That is to ſay: on the frenche kynges parte / all Spayne / Galyce / & Caſtell and all in thē encloſed / as well by water as by lande / & alſo the realme of / Scotlande. And the frenche kyng aſſoone as he may / to ſignifie this truſe to the kyng of Scottes and to the barons of Scotlande / and they that ſhulde go on that meſſage / to haue ſaue cōduct to go and cōe through the realme of Englande. Alſo on thenglyſſhe parte / ther was cōpriſed all his adherē
               tes and alyes / in whatſoeuer ꝑtie they were in. And they of Gaunt were expreſly named & encloſed in this truſe / wherof therle of Flaunders was ſore diſpleaſed. And this truſe to endur to the feeſt of ſaynt Michell / in the yere of or lorde god. M. CCC .lxxxiiii. & than theſe parties to retourne agayne to the ſame place / or els other for them: hauyng full puyſſaunce to apeaſe the ſayd realmes. Of all theſe thynges there were letters autentyke & inſtrum
                  •
               tes publykes writen and ſealed to holde and accōplyſſhe this truſe & poyntment. The lordes ſware nat to breke it in no poynt. Thus this counſayle brake vp / the frenchmen retourned in to Fraunce / & thenglyſſhmen to Calys: the duke of Bretayne retourned

than into his owne countre / and therle of Flaūders to ſaynt Omers / and ther a ſickeneſſe toke hym wherof he dyed. And it was ordayned that he ſhulde be entred in the churche of oure lady in Lyſle. This erle of Flaunders dyed ye yere of our lorde. M. CCC .lxxxiii. the xx. day of January. And he was brought to an abbey beſyde Lyſle / and in lyke wiſe the counteſſe his wyfe: who dyed. a fyue yere before that in the countie of Reches / was brought thyder alſo / & bothe toguyder buryed in the churche of ſaynt Peter in Lyſle. ¶ Nowe I ſhall ſhewe you thordynaūce that was had at his buryeng and of his conueyeng in to Lyſle.
            HEre foloweth the ordynaūce of the buryeng of therle of Flaunders & of the counteſſe his wyfe / whoſe bodyes were brought to an abbey beſyde Lyſle. And whan he entred in to Lyſle / a great nombre of lordes of Fraunce / of Flaūders / of Heynalt / and of Brabant were redy in the euenynge of the obſequy at the gate of the ſicke people. And ſo brought the bodyes through the towne to the churche of ſaynt Peter / and they were armed for the warre and the ſquiers that ledde thē. Firſt ther was ſir John̄ of Helwyn mooſt next to the body / and he was ledde by Angurant of Uelomy and by Roger of Leſpyre. The lord of Markdeuant was led by Marquemene and by Johan Eſpyre. The lorde of Sauſſe ledde by Fretynand ſir John̄ of Molyn. The lorde of Mauuesledde by Geffray Denoyle and Henry of Uaquery.
            ¶ Item ther folowed ſuche as were ordayned for the conioy. Sir Peter of Baylleule next to the body before / ſir John̄ of Molyn ledde of 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Johan of Quynhen and of Haubeken the marſhall / ſir Sohyre of Gaunt before. ſir Peter of Baylleule ledde of Guyot of Lōpre and of Johan Loys. the lorde Bretēcourt ledde of Hyart of Quynhen and of Mychell de la Quare.
            ¶ After folowed y• baners of the bere. and firſt ſir Fraūces of Haſurquene / ſir Gouſſayn le ſauage before / ſir Lācelot the ꝑſon before ſir gouſayne / ſir John̄ de la Hell before ſir Lancelot.
            ¶ Than folowed they that barethe baners of the bere and of the conuoy. Sir Mathe
                  〈…〉
                of Hunyers before / ſir Johan de Helles the lorde Aueaux alſo before / ſir Mathue / ſir Cyrchelart de la Bare before the ſaid lorde of Aueaux / and ſir Johan of Parys before Cyrchelart.
            ¶ Item herafter foloweth the names of them that ayded to beare the body fro the gate of the ſicke folkes / throughe the towne of Lyſle to the church of ſaynt Peter. Firſt ſir John̄ de Uyen admyrall of Fraunce on the ryght hande / & the lorde of Guyſtell on the lyft hande / ſir Ualerāt of Raneuall alſo on the right ſyde / and the chatellayne of Diſq̄nyue on the left ſyde / the lorde Diſtenoy on the right ſyde / and ſir Aunſell of Salyns on the lyfte ſyde.
            ¶ Herafter foloweth the barons that ayded to beare the body of the counteſſe of Flaūders / fro the gate of ſaynt Leder to the churche of ſaynt Peter. Firſt the lorde of Sully on ye right ſyde and the lorde of Chatellone on the lyfte ſyde / ſir Guy of Pōtayle marſhall of Burgoyne on the right ſyde / and ſir Guy of Guyſtels on the lyft. And than ſir Henry at the right corner / and the Chatellayne of Furnes at the lyft corner.
            ¶ Here foloweth the ordynaūces of the day of the obſequy / done in the churche of ſaynt Peter of Liſle. The names of them that were ther and of ſuche ſquiers as helde the ſheldes all the maſſe to the offrynge.
            The duke of Burgoyne was firſt alone and the firſt ſhelde borne before hym. and the ſhelde was ſuſtayned with the lorde of Raneuall / the lorde de la Goneſe / Labequen de la coutre / and Johan de Poūt Alters brother to the marſhall of Burgoyne. And than the ſeconde ſhelde before the lorde Johan of Arthoyſe erle of Ewe / and ſir Philyppe de Bare: the ſhelde was holden by Ualerāt de la Sale and Leſquans Denekyn. Than the erle of Marche and ſir Phylyppe Darthoiſe / and the ſhelde holden by Gyllon delabret & by Robyn of Florigny. and after ſir Robert de Namure and ſir Wyllm̄ de Namur his nephue: ye ſhelde was borne by Chaux Bernarde and Gerarde Deſtrenayle.
            ¶ Item for the ſheldes of Conuoy.
            THe lorde Dangyen and by hym ſir Johan of Namure / the ſhelde was holden of Ayllert of Pouthees and Henry of Moucy. Than next was ſir Ewe of Chaſtellon and the lorde of Fere: the ſhelde holden by John̄ of Helwyn and Edwarde of Caſtren. And after was the lorde Dautoyne and the lorde of Guyſtels: the ſhelde ſuſtayned by Tryſtram of Landres

and Johan du Beart. And than was the lorde of Mori
                  •
               nes and the lord of Sully: the ſhelde holden by Freſinguy and Dames of Bucy.
            ¶ Item the names of thē that offred the courſers of warre. Firſt the lorde of Chatellon & ſir Symon de la Layne bayly of Heynalt. the lordes a fote / and the horſe armed and couered. for the ſecōde ſir Ualerant of Raneuall and ye Cathelayne of Diſq̄made. for the thyrde ſir Hewe of Meuleun and the lorde Daucy. The fourth the lorde of Brunell and the lorde of Brumen.
            ¶ Here foloweth thoſe that offred the courſers of Conuoy. Firſt ſir Henry Datoygne and ſir Gerarde of Guyſtels. The ſeconde the lorde of Montigny and the lorde of Raſenghien. The thyrde the lorde de la Haurade and the Chatelayne of Furnes. The fourthe / the lorde of Fagumelles and ſir Roulande de la Clycque.
            ¶ Here foloweth the names of thē that offred the glayues of warre. Firſt the lorde admyrall of Fraūce and the lorde of Rary. The ſeconde / the marſhall of Burgoyne. The thyrde ye lorde of ſaynt Pye. The fourthe the lorde of
            ¶ Here foloweth ſuche as offred ye ſwerdes of Conuoy. Firſt ſir Wyllm̄ of Ponthue. The .ii. ſir Wyllm̄ de Tremoile. The thirde the Chatelayne of Ipre. The .iiii. ſir Guy de Hancourt.
            ¶ Item the names of them that offred the helmes of warre. Firſt the lorde of Maylly. The ſeconde ſir Wyllyam de Hornes and ſir Anſell de Salyns. The thyrde / ſir Johan Doppeyn and the Chatelayn of ſaynt Omers. The .iiii. ſir Guy de Guyſtels and the Galoys Daunoy.
            ¶ Itē for the helmes of Cōuoy. Firſt ſir Joiſe de Hallayn and ſir Olyuer de Guffey. The .ii. the lorde of Dyſobeque. the thyrde the lorde de Lalayne. The fourthe ſir Tryſtram de Boys and ſir Johan of Jumont.
            ¶ The names of thē that offred the baners of warre. Firſt the lorde of Lyſtrenayle. The .ii. ſir Leoncell Dareynes. The thyrde / ſir Gyles de la Goneufe. the .iiii. ſir John̄ de Lyſolom.
            ¶ Item for the baners of Conuoy. Firſte ſir Orenges of Rely. the ſeconde ſir Rafe Alayne. The thyrde ſir Johan Diſquenyue. The .iiii. ſir Uyllayns de la Clycque.
            ¶ The names of them / that after the obſequy done: layde the body of the erle in the erthe. ſir John̄ de Uyen admyrall of Fraunce / the lorde of Guyſtell / ſir Ualerant of Raneuall the Chatelayne of Diſquenyue / the lorde of Ray / and ſir Anſell of Salyns.
            ¶ The names of them that layd the counteſſe body in the erthe. Sir Guy de la Tremoyle / the lorde of Chatellon / ye ſeneſhall of Burgoyn the lorde Gerarde of Guyſtles / ſir Henry Datoygne / and the Chatellon of Furnes. And all ſuche as entred in to the churche of ſaynt Peter in the euenyng / were at the offyce in the day at maſſe / aſwell the knightꝭ armed as thoſe yt bare the baners. & alſo the ſquyers y• led the horſes.
            ¶ Item there were that went with the bodyes of the erle and of the counteſſe through the towne of Lyſle to the churche of ſaynt Peter / to the nōbre of four hundred men all in blacke / euery man bearyng a torche / and they helde the ſame torches the nexte day all the maſſe tyme / & they were all marchātes of good townes or officers of his houſe. and tharchbyſſhop of Rayns ſang the maſſe / acōpanyed wt the byſſhop of Parys / the byſſhop of Turney / the byſſhop of Cābrey the byſſhop of Arras / & with them .v. abbottes.
            ¶ Itē there was alſo in the churche duryng the obſequy .vii. C. candels or therabout / euery taper cōteyning in weyght .i. 
                  •
               i. of waxe. And on the trayle of the herſe ther were fyue baners / in the myddes the baner of Flaunders / on ye right ſyde the baner of Arthoys / on the lyfte ſyde the baner of Burgoyne / the .iiii. the baner of Newers / the .v. of Rethell. The trayle on the one ſyde was poudred with the ſcochyns of the armes of Flaūders / and on the lyft ſyde of the lady / the ſcochyns of Flaunders and of Brabant and downe a long in the mynſter / ther were .ii. hūdred and .xxvi. candels / lyke vnto thē of the herſe. Ther was nother lady nor damoſell but ye gouernors wyfe of Lyſle. Ther was a great dyner / and the coſtes of all the knightes & ſquiers were borne quyte / for the nyght and day of the obſequy / & they had all blacke gownes. and whan all this was done euery man returned to their owne / & the duke of Burgoyne left in the garyſons of Flaunders knightes and ſquyers for all the truſe yt was taken bytwene Englāde and Faunce / for all that euery man toke hede to his charge. And the lady his wyfe taryed ſtyll for a ſeaſon in Arthoyſe.
         
         
            
            ¶ Howe the erle of Northūberlande the erle of Notyngham / and the Englyſſhmen made a iorney in to Scotlande. And of the ambaſſadours of Fraunce that were ſende in to Scotlande / to notify the truſe that was taken bytwene Englande and Fraūce. Cap. CCCC .xliiii.
            
               LE haue well herde here before: how the lordes of Frāce whā they made the truſe with englyſſhmen. They were charged at their deꝑting to ſignify ye truſe to thē of Scotlande: to the entent that no hurt ſhulde be done bytwene thē of Englāde nor Scotlande. Howe be it to ſaye the trouthe: thy of Fraunce dyde nat their dilygence in that mater: as they ought to haue done: for they ſhulde haue ſende incontynent but they dyde nat. I thynke the let therof was bycauſe of the great buſyneſſe that the duke of Burgoyne had for ye obſequy of his father in lawe therle of Flaunders: as ye haue herde here before. Alſo they thought full lytell that the englyſſhmen wolde haue done as they dyde / for anone after Eſter the erle of Northū
               berlande / the erle of Notyngham & the barons of the northe coūtre / made an army of two thouſande ſpeares and ſixe thouſande archers / and paſſed by Roſebourge and entred in to Scotlande / and began to brinne the countre and the lande of therle Duglas and of the lorde of Lynſey / and left nothyng vnbrent to Edenborowe: The lordes and knyghtes of Scotlande was nothyng ware of this iourney / and toke the mater in great diſpyte: ſayeng / howe they wolde amēde it to their powers. For they ſaid as they herde reported / they ſhulde haue had truſe with the englyſſhmen. Howe be it they were nat warned therof / wherfore they knewe well the warr was opyn. ye wotte well tidynges wyll ſprede anone abrode / wherby it was ſhortely knowen in Flaunders and ſpecially at Scluſe / by marchantes that cāe out of the realme of Scotlāde. Howe thenglyſſhmen were entred in to Scotlande / and howe that kynge Robert of Scotlande and the lordes of the realme / dyde ſomon their people to aſſēble to fight with thenglyſſhmen. Alſo it was knowen in Fraūce that the englyſſhmen were in the felde / and the ſcottes alſo: & that in ſhort tyme they were likely to mete The dukes of Berrey and of Burgoyne & the coūſayle of Frāce / whan they vnderſtode theſe tidynges / they ſayd they had folyſſhly done / in that they had nat ſende worde of the treuſe in to Scotlande be tymes / as they had promyſed to do. Than was it ordayned that ſir Hamart de Marſe ſhulde go in to Scotlande / who was a ſage and a diſcrete knight / ſir Peter Framell / & a ſergiant of armes / who was of the nacyon of the ſcottes / called Janequyn Chāpenoyſe. He went bicauſe he knewe the lāgage & the coūtre.
            In the meane ſeaſon y• theſe ambaſſadours ordayned them ſelfe to go in to Scotlande / the englyſſhmen ouer ran the coūtre of Scotlāde. ther was the ſame tyme at Scluſe men of war of Fraūce / that lay ſtyll and ſlept and wyſt nat what to do: for the truſe bytwene Englāde and flāders ſtyll endured. And they herde howe thē
               glyſſhemen and ſcottes made warre eche with other / and it was ſayd at Scluſe for certayne / that haſtely ther ſhulde be batayle bytwene thē / There was ſir Geffray of Charney / ſir John̄ of Plaſy / ſir Hughe of Boloyne / ſir Sayng of Uyllers / ſir Garnere of leborne / ſir Garnere of Guſſāguyn / ſir Oden of Metyn / ſir Robert of Cāpyhen / Jakes of moūtfort / John̄ of heluyn / John̄ of Melles / Michell dela bare / & Gyllam Gobert / they were a .xxx. men of armes knightes & ſquyers. They made promyſe togyder to go and aduēture their bodyes. & they wyſt nat wher better to enploy their ſeaſon / than in ye realme of Scotlāde. and ſo they deꝑted fro ſcluſe and toke a ſhyp & left their horſes behynde thē / for danger of the ſee / and for the long iorney. the maryners knewe well they coude nat arryue at the hauē of Edēborowe / at Dōbare / nor at non of thoſe hauyns nere / for thengliſſhe army was aſwell by ſee as by lande. And the englyſſhmen were lordes & maiſters of the firſt portꝭ of ſcotlande / bycauſe their ꝓuiſyon might folowe thē by ſee. In this ſeaſon the frēche ambaſſadours cāe in to Englande to go to Scotland / and the kyng & his vncles made them great chere & the firſt day ſomwhat diſſimuled with thē to delay the tyme / bicauſe their men were makyng war in Scotlande. and whan they vnderſtode that their men hadde done their enterpriſe / and that they retourned agayne in to Englande. Than they let the frenche ambaſſadours departe / and gaue them ſaueconduct to paſſe through the realme in to Scotlande / and made townes & caſtels to be opyned agaynſt their comynge. So they departed and went towarde Scotlande.
            So long theſe men of warre that went fro Scluſe ſayled by the ſee / coſtyng Holāde & En

glande / eſchewyng the ꝑels of theſ
                  •
               e / for encoū
               tryng of thēglyſſhmen / that at laſt they aryued in Scotlāde at a lytell porte called Mōſtres. & whan the ſcottes that dwelt in the towne knew howe they were frenchemen / that were come to exerciſe dedes of armes / they made them good chere / and dyde helpe to get them all that they neded. And whan theſe knightes and ſquyers had refreſſhed them there two dayes / and had lerned tidynges. They d
                  •
               ꝑted & rode on hakeneis and cāe to Dondem / & ſo fro thens to ſaint Johans a good towne in Scotlande / on the ryuer of Tare / & there is a good hauen to ſayle whyder a man wyll. And whan they were cōe thyder / they vnderſtode howe the englyſſhmen were withdrawen / and howe the kynge of ſcottes and his lordes were at Edēborowe at a coū
               ſayle. Than they ordayned that ſir Garnyer of Cuiſſangyn and Mychaell de la Bare / ſhulde go to Edenborowe to ſpeke with the kyng and his counſayle / to knowe what they ſhulde do. at leeſt to ſhewe theym the good wyll that they had to come out of Flaūders in to Scotlande. And ſir Geffray de Charney & the other / wolde abyde there tyll they had worde agayne. And as they ordayned ſo it was done / and ſo they departed and went to Edēborowe wher the kyng was / and therle Duglas called James / for his father Wyllyam was newly diſceaſed. There was alſo the erle of Moret / therle of Orkeney / the lorde of Uerſey / the lorde of Lynde / y• lorde of Surlant / and ſixe bretherne of therle of Orkenes all knightes. Theſe lordes of Scotlāde made good cher to the knightes of Frāce. than ſir Garnyer ſhewed to the kyng and to the barons of Scotlande / thentencyon of his cōpanions and the cauſe of their comynge in to the realme. Than the ambaſſadours of Fraunce cāe thyder / ſir Hemart de Percy / 
                  
                     
                  
                  ser
                Peter Framell and Janequyn Chāpenoiſe / and they brought the truſe that was deuyſed bytwene Frāce and Englande / but the ſcotteshelde agaynſt it and ſayd / howe they came to late. and y• they wolde haue no truſe / bycauſe thēglyſſhmen in that ſeaſon had done them moche hurt. And thus while the king and the knightes were at differēce / the erle Duglas and therle Moret / the chyldren of Lindſey and dyuers other knightꝭ & ſquiers of Scotlande / deſyringe to be armed: helde a ſecrete counſayle togyder in the churche of Edē
               borowe / and the knightes of Fraunce were ſent for to thē. As ſir Michaell de la bare & ſir Garnyer. Deſyring them to go to their cōpanyons and to ſhewe thē their entent / and to kepe their purpoſe ſecrete. So theſe two knightes returned to ſaynt Johans towne / and ſhewed their company all that they had herde and ſene.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the barons and knightes of Scotlande and they of Fraūce made apoyntment to entre in to the realme of Englāde / without the knowlege of the kyng of Scottes / who was at Edenborowe. Cap. CCCC .xlv.
            
               OF theſe tidinges ſir Geffray de Charney & the other knyghtes and ſquiers greatly reioyſed / & ſo deꝑted thens and came to Edenborowe / and made no knowlege of that they ſhulde do. They had nat bene ther two dayes / but that the erle Duglas ſende for them to come to his caſtell of Alqueſt / and ſent to them horſes / and ſo they came to him the next day. And incontynent he brought them to a certayne place / wher the ſcottes aſſembled. & ſo in thre dayes / they were mo than .xv. thouſande a horſ backe / armed after y• vſage of their coūtre. Than they ſayd they wolde make a iourney in to Englande / and reueng their hurtes and domages that had ben done to thē. So they went forthe and paſſed foreſtes and woodes of their countre / and entred in to Northūberlande into the lande of the lorde Percy / and there they began to brinne / to robbe / and to ſteale. And than retourned by the lande of therle of Notynghm̄ and the lorde Moubray / and dyde there moche hurt & paſſed by Roſebourg▪. But they taryed nat there / bycauſe they had great pyllage wt thē as well of priſoners as of catell. And ſo retourned without daunger in to their coūtre agayne for the Englyſſhmen were all withdrawen and coude nat ſo ſoone agayne aſſemble toguyder to fyght with the ſcottes. Therfore it behoued them to beare that brunt / for they had gyuen be fore ſuche another to the ſcottes.
            Of this iourney the kynge of ſcottes myght ryght well excuſe hym ſelfe / for of the aſſemble nor of their departyng he knewe nothyng / and thoughe he had knowen therof / he coulde natte haue let it / whan they were ones onwarde. For all theſe iorneys y• was thus made / bothe in to Scotlande & in to Englande / there abode ſtyll with kyng Robert / ſir Hamarde de marſe & ſir Pe
                  •
                framell / bycauſe they wolde be layde in no faut to breke the truſe that was taken / bytwene

Englande / Fraunce / and Caſtell. The kynge of Scottes and the ambaſſadours of Fraunce ſende an heraude of armes in to Englāde. and whan he was cōe before the kyng of Englande and his vncles / he founde the countre ſore moued to ryde agayne in to Scotlande. The duke of Lancaſtre and the erle of Cābridge / who deſyred greatly in that yere to go in to Portyngale and in to Caſtell / or els one of them with a great puyſſaunce of menne of armes. For they helde thē ſelfe heryters therof by ryght of their wyues children of Caſtell. To renewe the war bytwene the kynge of Portyngale and y• kyng of Caſtell / for as than kyng Ferādo was deed. And the portyngales had crowned dan Johan a baſtarde brother a valyaunt man / who deſyred nothynge but warre with the ſpanyerdes / ſo he myght haue alyaunce with the Englyſſhemen / and their confort and ayde. Therfore the duke of Lancaſtre dyde with his frēdes as moche as he might / that there ſhulde be none aſſē
               bly to go in to Scotlande. Alſo it was ſayde playnly: howe the kynge of ſcottes denyed the knightes of Scotlande & of Fraunce / to make any rode in to Englande. And in that they dyd the cōtrary was againſt his wyll or knowlege.
            wHan the ſcottyſſhe heraude was come to the kynge of Englande and to his vncles / well inſtructed of that he ſhuld ſay and do. He kneled downe before the kynge and requyred that he might be herde / as an heraude of the kyng of ſcottes to do his meſſage. The kyng was content: ther he ſhewed wherfore he was ſende / ſingulerly fro the kynge and fro the ambaſſadours of Fraunce / in excuſyng them. Sayeng / howe the kynge of ſcottes mekely receyued the meſſangers of the frēche kynkes / and alwayes entended to kepe the trewſe / bothe he and all his. Howbeit ſome of the marches of his realme: as the elre Duglas / the erle de la Mare his vncle / ſir Archēbale / ſir Rame ſir Peter / ſir Wyllm̄ / and ſir Thom̄s Duglas and all the bretherne of Lyndſey / & they of Rā
               ſey and ſir Wyllim̄ Aſweton. Theſe wolde neuer agre to the truſe / ſayeng howe the englyſſhmen had done in their lande great hurt and domage / whiche was ryght ſore diſpleſant to thē and to their frēdes: and ſayd / howe they wolde be reuenged whan they might. and whan theſe lordes aſſembled them togyder to go in to Englande as they dyde / they neuer made the king nor his counſayle preuy therof. For they knewe well if they had / they wolde neuer haue conſented therto. Howbeit they ſay playnly in Scotlande / that the firſte incydent and occaſyon of this warre moued firſte by you. For they ſaye howe your grace & your counſayle knewe right well / of the truſe that was taken bothe by lande and by water. Alſo they ſay. howe y• frenche ambaſſadours whan̄e they paſſed this way / were let by you of their comyng in to Scotlande. ye draue them forthe with pleaſure and ſolace / ſo that they taryed ouer longe / wherby this myſchiefe is fallen bytwene Englande and Scotlande. And ſo vnder the ſhadowe of diſſymulacyon theſe thynges are done: but my redouted ſouerayne lorde the kynge of Scottes and his counſayle / and the ambaſſadours of Fraunce that are with hym / excuſeth them ſelfe and wyll do at all tymes. that this laſt iourney that y• lordes and knightes of Scotlande made into Englande was vnknowen to them / and that they were ignorant therof. And to addreſſe and reforme all theſe thynges and to bring them in to good eſtate / I am charged to ſay to you. That they deſyre your grace to entēde to kepe and obſerue the truſe taken beyonde the ſee / by y• high and noble diſcrecyon of counſayle / bothe of the frenche kynges and yours. And to cōfyrme the ſame truſe to endure y• ſayd terme / with my ſoueraygne lorde the kyng of ſcottes / and he and his noble counſayle to cōfyrme the ſame on his parte / to be vpholden & kept. And of this pleaſe it your grace to gyue me anſwere. The kyng of Englande and his vncles well vnderſtode the heraude: than the duke of Lācaſtre ſayd / howe he ſhulde be anſwered. Than they made hym tary at London for his anſwere.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the truſe taken bitwene Englande and Fraunce was publiſſhed in Englande and in Scotlande. Cap. CCCC .xlvi.
            
               AT thende of two dayes / the heraulde was anſwered by ſir Symon Bulle / chamberlayne with the king. and ſo y• mater was ſet at a good poynt. For to ſay the trouth all thynges conſydered / the lordes of Englande that had bene beyonde the ſee and toke▪ the truſe / dyde nat honorably to cō
               ſent to ſende their men to ouer ron Scotlande ſeyng they knewe the truſe was taken. the beſt excuſe that they coulde make / was: howe they

were nat boūde to ſende worde therof to ye ſcottes / but that the frenchemen were bounde therto. So than it was ſayd to the heraude / that in the name of god he was welcome. And howe yt it was thentency on of the kynge of Englande / of his vncles / and of their counſayle: yt all that they had ſworne and ꝓmyſed to do / they wolde in no wyſe breke it / but wolde cōfyrme it to the beſt of their powers. For in that hath ben done to the contrarie / they that had mooſt done had mooſt loſt. Of all this the haraulde deſyred to haue writyng to thentent he might be beleued. There was gyuen hym great gyftes ſo that he was well cōtent / and thanked the kyng and the lordes. And ſo departed fro London and returned in to Scotlande / where the meſſangers of Fraunce were ſtyll taryeng for his anſwere / deſyring to knowe howe the englyſſhmen wolde do. And whan it was knowen what anſwere ye king of Englande and his vncles had made by their letters ſealed / they were than greatly contented and reioyſed. Thus endured the trewſe for a yere bytwene Englande and Scotlande / and was publyſſhed throughe bothe Realmes for the more ſuretie. And the ambaſſadours of Fraunce retourned in to their countre / and paſſed throughe Englande ſafely without parell. And ſhewed the frenche king and his vncles at their returnyng howe they had ſpedde / and the lettes that they founde in their iourney. And ſo ſhewed all the caſe / as ye haue herde before.
            wHan ſir Geffray de Charney and the knightes and ſquiers of the realme of Fraunce / ſuche as had bene in Scotlande / ſawe that there was peace bytwene Enlande and Scotlande. Than they tooke leaue of the lordes of Scotlande / and ſpecially of the erle Duglas / and the Erle of Moret / who had kepte them ryght good company: And they of Scotlande ſayd vnto them at their deꝑtynge. Sirs / ye haue ſene the maner and condycion of our coſitre / how be it ye haue nat ſene all our puyſſaunce. Knowe for certayne / that Scotlande is the lande in all the worlde that the Englyſſhmen 
                  〈◊〉
                mooſt. For we may as ye haue ſene / entre in to Englande at oure eaſe / & ryde farre in to the countre without daunger of the ſee: ſo that & yf we were men ynowe / we might do them moche more hurt than we do. wherfore ſirs / and ye wold ſhewe this to ſuche knightes and ſquyers as wolde auaūce them ſelfe to get honoure / and to come in to this countre to ſeke dedes of armes / we thike they ſhulde do a gret feate. For if we had but a thouſande ſpeares of knightes and ſquyers of Fraūce with our people that we haue in this countre / we ſhulde do ſuche a dede in Englande / that it ſhulde be ſpoken of .xl. yere after. Sirs / we deſyre you remē
               bre this whan ye come in to Fraunce. They anſwered and ſayd / they wolde nat fayle to do it / for it was a mater nat to be forgoten. So thus they departed and toke the ſee and thought to haue ſayled to Scluſe / Howe be it the wynde was contrarie to them whan̄e they were on the ſee / ſo that they were fayne to take lande in zelande / in a towne called Uorell. thā they thoght they were in ſauegarde / but it was nat ſo: For the Normayns but a lytell before had ouer ron the countre therabout / & done to the zelanders great domage / Wherfore theſe knightes & ſquiers of Fraunce were in great daūger / for while this brute was thus in the towne / their ſhyppe was entred / their cofers broken & their armure taken / and they all in great parell to be ſlayne.
            THe ſame daye there was in the towne a ſquyer of the erle of Bloyes / called Jacob Graſyns / he dyde helpe to ayde the frenche men as moche as he might. He ſpake to y• mayſters of the towne and dyde ſo moche by his lā
               gage / that parte of their goodes was reſtored agayne to them / and to bring thē out of the parell and daunger that he ſawe they were in (for he knewe well the people of the towne were ſore moued agaynſt them / and were in mynde to ly in waite for them on the ſee / and to execute that purpoſe they had warned other townes by) the ſayed ſquyer ſhewed them what daunger they were in / & the countre was ſore moued agaynſt them. But he ſayd / for the loue of the kyng and for thonour of the realme of Fraunce / he wolde ordayne ſome remedy for them. Than he went to a maryner and hyred a ſhippe to go wher as pleaſed hym with his company: ſayeng / howe he wolde ſayle to Dondreſt. So the maryner made couynaunt with him / and ſo he entred in to the ſhyppe / and all the ſayde frenchmen with hym. And ſo firſt the maryner ſet his courſe to Donderſt. Whan̄e Jacob ſawe his tyme / than he ſayd to the mariners. Sirs / take hede what I ſay. I haue hyred this ſhyppe for this viage to ſayle whyder as me lyſt / therfore tourne yo
                  •
                ſayle towarde ſtreneghen / for I wyll ſayle thyder. The maryners wolde nat agre therto but ſayd. Sir / ye ſayd ye wolde ſayle to Dondreſt / and thyder wyll we bringe you but to none other place. than Jacob ſayd / marke well what

I ſay. Do as I commaunde you / or els ye ſhal dye therfore / than the maryners durſt no more ſtryue it lay nat in their powers. So they tourned the helme and ſayle / and ſayled toward the towne of Streneghen / and came thyder without any parell. The towne belonged to the erle of Bloyes and there they refreſſhed them / and ſo departed at their pleaſure / and retourned in to their countre by Brabant and by Heynault. Jacob dyde thē this ſeruyce a ſquyer of Guyes the erle of Bloyes.
            wHan̄e ſir Geffray of Charney and ſir Johan of Blaſſey / and the knightes & ſquyers that had bene in Scotlande were retourned in to Fraūce / they were enquyred of the tidynges of Scotlande. There they ſhewed all that they had herde and ſene / & ſhewed the myndes of the barons and knightes of Scotlande. Sir Johan of Uyen admyrall of Fraunce ſpake with ſir Geffray of Charney / & he ſhewed him all as ye haue herde before. than the Admyrall aduyſed well / and ſo dyde other barōs of Fraūce / howe they might haue a fayre entre in to Englande by Scotlande / alſo they knewe well that naturally the ſcottes loued nat the englyſſhmen. Sir Amery of Marſe confyrmed the ſame: ſayeng / howe he was deſyred of the kynge of Scottes and by his counſayle / to ſhewe the ſame to the frenche kynge and to his counſayle. So thus the frēchmen had an ymaginacyon yt the truſe ones expyred / they wolde ſende a great puyſſaunce in to Scotlande to waſt parte of Englande. This purpoſe was cō
               cluded by the duke of Berry & the duke of Burgoyne / who had as than the gouernynge of the realme / but they kept it ſecrete.
         
         
            ¶ How the lorde of Deſtornay made his aſſemble to wynne agayne Andwarpe / and howe by his policye he wanne it. Cap. CCCC .xlvii.
            
               WE haue herde here before / howe Fraunces Atremanne in the meane tyme whyle the frēche king was in his iourney in Flaunders / toke by ſtelthe the towne of Andewarpe / wherof they of Tourney and of other townes therabout were ſore diſmayde / for the garyſon there before the truſe was taken / dyde moche domage in the coūtre of Turneſyn / and ſpecially all the lādes of the lorde of Deſtornay was in their obeyſaūce. And at the feeſt of Chriſtēmas / they gadered vp the rentes as capons / and other thynges in his townes / wherwith he was ſore diſpleaſed / and his ſeruaūtes and frē
               des. He ſayd / that whatſoeuer truſe or reſpyte of warre was taken bytwene Englande / Fraū
               ce / and Flaunders: he wolde in no wyſe kepe truſe with the gaūtoiſe. For they had done him ſo moche hurt that he was nat able to beare it / but in a maner vndone therby. So thus this lorde of Deſtornay dyde caſt his aduyce to get agayne Andwarpe / and atchiued his entent by the ayde of ſome knightes and ſquyers of Frā
               ce / of Flaunders / and of Heynalte / who helped hym to his purpoſe. yet whan he ſende for thē / there were many that knewe nothyng what he wolde do. This chaunce happed the .xvii. day of May. the lorde of Deſtornay knewe by his ſpyes / that Fraunces Atreman was as than in Gaunt and nat in Andwarpe. For he truſted ſo on the truſe bitwene them and Fraunce / that he feared nothyng / whiche was a great folly. For he tooke nat ſo good hede to Andewarpe as he ſhulde haue done: as ye ſhall herafter.
            The lorde of Deſtornay made an aſſemble of foure hundred knyghtes and ſquyers good men of armes. And ſo he came into the wode of Lart agaynſt the gate towarde Grauntmount right nere to the gate of Andwarpe. And with hym there was ſir Johan of Molyn / ſir Jakes de la Tremoyle / ſir Gylbert / ſir Johan Cacq̄
               lon / ſir Roulande Deſpyre / ſir Blaynchard de Calonne / and the lorde of Deſtripouylle / who was ther made knight. I ſhall ſhewe you now the maner howe they of Andwarpe were diſceyued. They toke two cartes laded with vitayle and four carters in gray cotes harneſſed vnder neth / right hardy and aduenturous felowes. So they came and draue their Cartes before Andwarpe / & ſhewed the watchmen howe they had brought prouiſyon out of Heynault to vitayle the towne. The watchemen thought nothyng but good / and ſo lette downe the portcolyſe. Than the carters priuely loſed the horſes fro the cart / the watchmen ſayd. ſirs / why driue you nat forthe your cartes / and the watchemen toke the forehorſes by the heed and drewe them forthe? And ſo they paſſed in & the cartes abode ſtyll in the gate and on the bridge. Than̄e the watchmen ſawe well they were betrayed / and

began to fight with the carters / who defended them ſelfe right well / for they were well armed vnder their cotes. And ſo they ſlewe two of the watchmen / and incontynent they were reſcued for the lorde of Deſtornay and his cōpany purſewed faſt after and entred in to the towne. thā the watchmen fledde into the towne / and cryed treaſon treaſon. But or the towne was reyſed / the mē of armes were entred and ſlewe all that they encountred / that made any defence / and ſo cryed the towne is wonne. Thus Andwarpe was taken agayne / and there were of the gauntoyſe ſlayne and drowned a thre hundred / and there was founde great richeſſe parteyning to Fraunces Atreman. It was ſayd / it amoūted to a fyftene thouſande frankes.
            THese t
                  ••
               ynges were ſone knowen in dyuers places howe Andwarpe was takē / the truſe duryng by the frenchmen. And ſpecially they of Gaūt were ſore diſpleaſed therwith as it was reaſon / for it touched thē right nere. Than they toke counſayle togyder / and determyned to ſende to the duke of Burgoyne / ſhewyng hym howe in the aſſuraūce of peace / Andwarpe had ben taken fro hym: deſyring him / y• it might be reſtored agayne / or els y• truſe was broken. So they ſende to hym / but the duke excuſed hym and ſayd: that he medled nothynge with that mater / and ſo prayed god to helpe thē For he ſayd / he knewe nothyng of the lorde Deſtornayes en
                  •
               priſe. but he ſayd / he wolde write to hym with a good wyll / and ſo he dyde / commaundynge hym to rendre agayne Andwarpe to the gaūtoyſe. Sayeng / howe it was nat honourable to take any towne / caſtell or fortreſſe / duryng the peace. The lorde of Deſtornay anſwered to the dukes letter / and ſayd to the meſſangers. Sirs / alwayes the garyſone of Andwarpe hath made me warre / bothe in the warr ſeaſon and in peace tyme / and hath takē fro me myne herytage / and as for me I neuer agreed to be at peace with them. Thus I haue taken Andwarpe by good feate of warre / and I purpoſe to kepe it as my proper herytage / tyll Flā
               ders and Gaunt be all one / for I haue nothyng els / for all is loſt by the warre. So thus the mater abode / the gaūtoyſe coude get nothyng els. Of the yuell kepynge of Andwarpe Fraunces Atreman was ſore blamed / and ſpecially of the lorde of Harſels / ſo that there were great & heynous wordes bytwene them. Fraunces ſayde: howe he had done better ſeruice to Gaunt / than euer he dyde. Their lāgage multiplyed ſo farr that eche of them belyed other / with foule wordes. And anone after the lorde of Harſels was ſlayne: ſome ſayd it was by the meanes of Frā
               ces Atreman & Peter de Boyſe for enuy. The ſame ſeaſon the gaūtoyſe made a requeſt to the kyng of Englande ▪ to haue ſome noble man of his blode to be gouernoure of Gaunt. So the kyng and his counſayle ſende to Gaunt a valyant knyght and ryght ſage / to haue the gouernyng of Gaunt / he was called ſir Johan Bourchyer / he had the gouernynge of Gaunte more than a yere and an halfe.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Aniou dyed in a caſtell beſyde Naples / and howe the quene of Cicyle was counſayled to go to the pope. Cap. CCCC .xlviii.
            
               VE haue herde here before / howe the Duke of Aniowe wrote hymſelfe kyng of Cicyle and Hieruſalem. And went to Puyle and to Calabre / and conquered all the countre to Naples / but the neapolytās wolde neuer tourne to his parte / but they euer ſuſtayned and helde with ſir Charles de la Payx. the duke of Aniou abode in this vyage thre yeres / whiche was a great coſt and charge. Though a man be neuer ſo riche / men of armes & warre waſteth all. For he that wyll haue ſeruyce of mē of warre / they muſt be payed truely their wages / or els they wyll do no thynge aueylable. Certaynly / this ſayde iourney coſt the duke of Aniou ſo moche / that it canne nat be well eſtemed. And they that waſted & confoūded mooſt of his richeſſe / was the erle of Sauoy and the ſauoſyns. Howe be it the erle of Sauoy and a great parte of his company dyed in this viage whiche was great pytie / ſo that the duke of Aniowe began to waxe feble / bothe of men and of money. and for thoſe two cauſes he ſende for ſo coure in to Fraunce to his two bretherne / the duke of Berry and the duke of Burgoyne. Deſyring them nat to fayle him at his nede / but to ſocour hym with men and money: and ſo they ſayd they wolde. Thā they aduyſed what men were mete to be ſende on that voyage. And all thynges conſydred / they ymagined that they coude not ſende a better / nor one that knewe better all men of warre / than̄e the gentyll lorde of Coucy / and with hym the lorde Dāghien erle

of Conuerſant / whiche Erldome is in Puylle. These two lordes were deſyred by y• kyng and by his vncles to take on thē that iourney / to the whiche they wyllingly agreed / and thought it was for thē right honorable. And ſo they made them redy & went forthe as ſone as they myght with their men of warre. But whan they were come to Auignon / and intēded to their beſynes and made their men to paſſe forthe. Tydinges than came to them howe y• duke of Aniou was deed in a caſtell beſyde Napoles. Whan y• lorde of Coucy harde the tydinges / he wente no farther forth / for he ſawe well than that his voyage was broken. But the lorde Conuerſant paſſed forthe farther / for he had moche a do in his coū
               trey / in Puylle / and in Conuerſant. Tydinges was knowen anon in Fraūce of the dethe of the duke of Aniou. So thus the dethe of y• kyng of Cicyle was paſſed ouer as well as it might be.
            WHan the duches of Aniowe beynge at Angers harde of the dethe of her lorde and huſbande / ye may well beleue ſhe was ſore diſcomforted. And as ſone as the erle Bloys / who was his coſyn germayne knewe that the duke was deed: he deparred fro Blois with all his trayne and came to his coſyn to Angers / and helde hym with her / in comfortynge and counſayling her / to the beſt of his power. Than ſhe came in to Fraūce (writyng her ſelfe quene of Napoles / of Cicyle / of Puylle / of Calabre / & of Hieruſalem) to ſpeke with the kyng / the duke of Berrey / & the duke of Burgoyne / to haue coūſayle & comforte of them / and brought with her her two ſonnes / Loys / and Charles. The lady was counſayled of y• nobles of Fraū
               ce and of her blode / that ſhe ſhulde go to Auignon to the pope / and promyſe him the poſſeſſyon of the erledome of Prouence / whiche lande parteyned to the kyng of Cicyle. The lady beleued their counſayle and ordeyned her ſelfe to go to Auignon / and to leade with her: her eldeſt ſonne Loyes / who was than̄e called kynge by ſucceſſion of his father. but theſe maters were nat ouerſone accomplyſſhed as I ſhall deuyſe to you.
            ALl this wynter the frenchmen ordeyned to ſende in to Scotlande an armye / to 
                  •
               rowble the realme of Englande. The truce bytwene Fraunce and Englande was relonged / 
                  〈…〉
               d all their adherentes fro Mighelmas to the 
                  〈…〉
               ſt day of May. There was great prouyſion 
                  〈…〉
               e by lande & by ſee. The entent of the counſayle of Fraunce was / that the next ſomer they wold make Englāde great warre on all ſydes / and the admyrall of Fraunce to go in to Scotlande with two thouſande ſpeares / knyghtes / and ſquiers / and the duke of Burbone and the erle de la Marche with other two thouſand to go and conquere certayne caſtels holden by the Engliſſhmen / whiche ryght ſore traueyled the countrey. And the frenche kyng cauſed a great nombre of axes to be made in Picardy / and in Haynalt to ſerue for y• voyage into Scotlāde / And in Arthoyſe / at Lyſle / at Doway / and at Turney. There was moche byſquet made and other prouyſion a longe the ſee ſyde / for Harflewe to Sluſe / whiche was the princypall hauen / where they thought to take ſhippynge.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the lady of Brabant cauſed to be called a counſayle wherat there was the duke of Burgoyn / the duke Aubert and ſhe / in the cytie of Cambray / to treat for the mariage of their chyldren. Cap. CCCC .xlix.
            
               THe duches of Brabāt beyng a wydow (for y• duke Wyncelent of Boeſme was deed / for whoſe deth ſhe had greate ſorowe at her▪ harte) lay at Bruſels. and it greatly diſpleaſed her: y• trowble that ſhe ſawe in Flaunders / & gladly ſhe wolde haue made a peace and ſhe might / for ſhe vnderſtode that the gauntoyſe dayly fortifyed them ſelfe / by reaſon of the engliſſhmen / who promyſed them great comforte. Alſo ſhe ſawe well her nefewe y• duke of Burgoyne / who ſhulde be by right enherytoure of Flaunders / and one of the greatteſt enherytours of the worlde / as than̄e likely to be / was ſore troubled by the gaūtoyſe. Alſo ſhe ſawe well that the duke Aubert chefe of Haynault / and the duches his wyfe: had fayre chyldren to gyder / two ſonnes and doughters as thā vnmaryed. Alſo ſhe knewe that the duke of Lācaſtre was in treaty of maryage for Philyppe his doughter / had by the lady Blaunche his firſt wyfe / and the eldeſt ſonne of duke Aubert / who ſhuld be right enherytour to the erledome of Haynault / of Holande / and of zelande.

And ſo the ſayd lady douted that if there were alyaunce made bytwene Englande and Haynaulte / that the frenche men wolde haue indygnacion therat. and ſo ther by the ioly countre of Haynalt / outher couertly or openly / ſuche as ſhulde paſſe out of Fraunce in to Flaunders / comynge or goyng / ſhulde be ſore troubled and greued. and the rather / bycauſe that duke Aubert by the meanes of the holāders and zelanders ſuche as be marchyng on the ſee ſyde / dyd comforte dayly y• gauntoyſe in dyuers maners. wherof the duke of Burgoyne & his counſayle / were well infourmed therof. wherfore he loued duke Auberte neuer the better / and yet he was therof nothyng gylty. for as for the holanders / and zelanders / the warre of Flaūders touched thē no thynge / they wolde nat therfore defende their marchaundyſes to rynne. The ſayd good lady conſideryng all theſe thynges and parels that myght enſe we / ſhe aduyſed to bringe theſe two dukes togyder / y• duke of Burgoyne and the duke Aubert / and y• ſhe wolde be the meane to treate bytwene them. Alſo ſhe though to entreat the duke of Burgoyne that the gauntoyſe myght cōe to mercy. So this lady on this aduyſe and ymaginacyon / wolde nat let it ſlepe / but ſet clerkes and meſſāgers a warke / and ſhe dyd ſomoche bytwene theſe two dukes / y• there was a day aſſygned to mete at Cambray / they and their coūſayls. howbeit bothe dukꝭ knewe nat the full entent why this lady cauſed y• counſayle. To this counſayle acordyng as they had promyſed in the moneth of January / about the xii. day / there came to the cytie of Cambray the duke of Burgoyne / the duke Aubert and their counſayls / and the duches of Brabant who opened to thē all the mater / why they were there aſſembled. Firſt ſhe ſhewed to y• duke of Burgoyne / howe he was a great lorde / and lykely to be / and howe he had fayre chyldren / & howe that he ſhuld be happy to beſtowe thē well and nobly / and to the mooſt auauntage for him and his countrey. ſaynge / howe as than in her opynion / ſhe knewe no place ſo metely for them / as the coūtrey of Haynalt / Holande / and zelande / to bringe their coūtreys to a perfyte peace / and to gyue feare and doute to their enemyes. For fayre nephewe ꝙ ſhe: I knowe for trouthe that the duke of Lancaſtre is right puyſſant in England / and dothe that he can that his doughter were maryed to Wyllim̄ of Heynalt your ſōne and heyre. And ſir: I had rather ſe the profyt of you and of your chyldren / than of the englyſſhe men. Fayre aunt quod the duke I thanke you: I beleue you well / I am content and ye canne bringe it a boute / to let my doughter Margarete be maryed to the heyre of Haynalt. Than the lady went fro one parte to the other / to treat for this maryage. The duke Aubert to whome theſe tydinges were newe. anſwered right curteſly / and ſayd: howe he hadde there as than no counſayle / ſuche as he wolde haue. What counſayle wolde ye haue quod the duches / or what want you to do well / and to bringe your countrey in peace? I lacke my wyfe ꝙ the duke / and without her I wyll do nothyng in this mater / for ſhe hathe as moche parte of my chyldren as I. Alſo fayre aunt ▪ it is metely that the nobles of the countrey be enfourmed therof. well ꝙ the duches I pray god all be for the beſt. And than ſhe thought at their departinge / to deſyre them to mete agayne in the ſame place in Lent tyme / and to bringe their wyues and their counſayls with them. This lady dyde all this ſo ſecretly / that fewe folkes knewe wherfore the coūſayle was. Thus the two dukes departed fro Cambray. The duke of Burgoyne went to the cytie of Arras / where as the lady his wyfe was. and the duke Aubert returned in to Holāde / where as the lady his wyfe was. And the Duches of Brabant retourned in to her countrey / and euer ſecretly ſhe wrote and ſent to eyther party / and tooke great payne to bringe agayne theſe lordes and their wyues in to the cytie of Cambray: for greatly ſhe deſyred this mariage to be confyrmed / for to bringe in vnite and concorde / Flaunders / Brabant / and Haynalt to gyder.
            SO moche dyd this good lady / y• ſhe and the ſayd dukes / their wyues and counſayls came agayne to Cambray / and ther was done great honoure / for eche of them enforſed them ſelfe to do honoure eche to other. There was the duches Margarete of Burgoyn / and the duches Margaret of Heynault / who helde ſore in this treaty. ſaynge / y• if her ſonne ſhulde mary Margarete of Burgoyne / ſhe wolde alſo that her doughter ſhuld mary John̄ of Burgoyne / and ſo to make a croſſe maryag
                  •
                / wherby ſhulde be y• more coniunction of loue. And ſo two of the chyldren of Burgoyne ſhulde be maryed in to one howſe. The duke of Burgoyne thought it was ynough to mary his doughter / and excuſed Johan his ſonne. ſaynge / howe h
                  •
                was to yonge of age to be maryed. for the duk
                  •
                of Burgoyne had ymaginacion to mary Jo
                  〈…〉
                his ſonne with Katheryne of Fraunce / ſuſter
                  〈…〉
                his nephewe the french kyng. So thus on 
                  〈…〉
               
               
poynt the treaty was lyke to haue fayled / for the duches of Bauiers ſayd / howe there ſhulde be made no maryage of any of her chyldren / with out they were both maryed. Alwayes ſhe helde this purpoſe / ther coude no man breke her therof. The duches of Brabant hadde great payne to go fro the one to the other / and to bringe the treaty toguyder. So moche ſhe dyd alegynge and ſhe wynge ſo good reaſons / ſpecially to the duke and duches of Burgoyn / that finally they went through / and concluded that y• ſonne and doughter of the duke of Burgoyne / ſhulde be maryed to the ſonne and doughter of the duke Aubert of Bauiers. And y• let of the mater fyue dayes before / was for a mater that the duke of Burgoyns coūſayle feared. for they vnderſtod that duke Aubert had nat bene in trewe poſſeſſion of Heynalt / but in poſſibylite therof / for as than lyued erle Willyam of Haynault his brother / and lay ſore ſycke at Oueſnoy / the whiche erle myght recouer and ouerlyue duke Aubert his brother. and if he ſo dyd they thought clerely and feared greatly / that his other bretherne ſhulde haue the gouernynge of Haynault / and the chyldren of duke Aubert to be put clene out. For this dought they made a delay in this maryage the ſpace of fyue dayes / tyll at laſt it was clerely knowen / that duke Aubert hadde no mo bretherne but the Erle of Haynault / ſo that he coulde nat put the herytage fro duke Aubertes chyldren. Whan̄e theſe thynges were knowen / there was than̄e no lenger delay / but theſe maryages were ſworne & couenaunted / that Willym̄ of Haynalt ſhulde haue in maryage Margaret of Burgoyne. And Johan of Burgoyne to haue to his wyfe Margarete of Haynault / and that all theſe ſhulde retourne to Cambray / 
                  •
               o parforme the ſolempniſacion of theſe maryages at the vtas of Eſter than next after. In the 
                  •
               ere of our lorde a thouſande thre hundred four 
                  •
               ore and fyue.
         
         
            ¶ H
                  •
               we the frenche kynge & the lordes of Fraūce and of Heynalt / made their 
                  •
               rouiſyon to be at Cābray. And of 
                  ••
               neſſage of the duke of Lancaſtre 
                  〈…〉
               it to the erle of Haynalt. and of the 
                  〈…〉
               yages of the chyldren of Haynalt a
                  〈…〉
                Burgoyne. 
                  •
               p. CCCC .l.
            
               THus euery man departed fro Cambray / & the duke of Burgoyne returned in to Fraunce to the king / and the duches his wyfe returned to Arras. the duke Aubert and the duches his wyfe retourned to the towne of Oueſnoy in Haynalt. And the lady of Brabant in to her countrey. Than warkmen were ſette awarke to make redy lodgynges in the cytie of Cambray / and men were ſent thyder to make prouiſyon / ſo great and ſo coſtly that it was marueyle to conſydre. This feaſt was cryed & publyſſhed abrode / to be holden at Cambray the weke after the vtas of Eaſter. Whan the frenche kyng was enfourmed of this beſynes / he ſayd he wolde be at the maryages of his coſyns. And ſo he ſēt to Cābray the ſtewardes of his howſe to make prouiſyon for him acordyng. The byſſhopes palays was taken vp for the duke of Burgoyne / and his prouyſion made there / howbeit they were fayne to delyuer it vp for y• kyng. Than carpenters and maſons were ſet a warke in the palays to make it after aſtate royall / whiche warke as yet apereth / for before this feaſt it was nat in remembraūce of man / nor harde of two hundred yere before / ſo great a feaſt and ſolempnyte as was than aꝑelled. For the lordes to make thē freſſhe and gorgious / & to exalte their eſtates / ſpared no more money / than it had fallen fro the clowdes / and euery man helped other.
            Tidynges of theſe mariages came to Englande. the duke of Lancaſtre who alwayes hoped / that Willyam of Haynalt ſhulde haue had to his wyfe his doughter / at leeſt he was borne ſo in hande ▪ he was right penſyue and ſore troubled with thoſe newes. And whan̄e he had well ymagined to knowe the trouthe therof / he ſent certayne perſons of his howſe to Gaūt / to ſpeke wi
                  •
               h duke Auberte. And whan̄e theſe meſſangers came to Gaunt / there they foūde ſir John̄ Bourchier / and the aldermen of Gaunt / Peter du Boyſe and Fraunſes Atreman / who made them right good chere. And ſo ther they taryed two dayes / and fro thence they went to Mons in Heynalt / and ſo to Queſnoy / and there they came to the duke / and he and the duches and his children receyued them goodly / for the honour of the duke of Lancaſtre / and made them good chere. And in lykewiſe ſo dyd the lorde of Gouuighen. Than the mayſter of the byenge of the wolles of Englande ſpake firſt / after he hadde

de lyuered his letters of credence / & recōmaunded the duke of Lancaſtre to the duke Auberte his coſyn. And than he ſpake of other thynges as he was charged to do. And amonge other thynges / he demaunded of duke Auberte as I was enfourmed / if it were his entent to perceyuer in the maryage with y• chyldren of the duke of Burgoyne. With thoſe wordes the duke a lytell chaunged colour / and ſayd: ye ſir truely by my faythe / wherfore do you demaunde. Sir 
                  〈◊〉
                he: I demaunde it bycauſe the duke of Lancaſtre hathe alwayes hoped vntyll this tyme / that my lady Philyp his doughter / ſhuld haue had my lorde Willyam your ſonne. Than̄e the duke ſayd / cōpanyon: ſay to my coſyn y• whan ſoeuer he mary his chyldren / I ſhall nat marueyle / nor be diſmayed therat▪ no more he hath to do to take any care for the maryenge of any of my children / nor whether I wyll mary them or nat / nor whan / nor to whome. This was the anſwere y• thengliſſhmen had of duke Aubert. So thus they toke theie leaue & departed / and went the ſame nyght to Ualencennes / and the next day to Gaunt. Of them I can tell no more but I thynke they retourned in to Englande.
            WHan Eaſter came as than acounted / a thouſande thre hundred fourſcore and fyue yeres of our lorde / the frēche king the duke of Burgoyne / the duke of Burbon / the duke Aubert / the duches his wyfe / the duches of Brabant / the duches of Burgoyne / ſir Willyam and ſir John̄ of Namure / came to Cambray. The kynge went to y• palys that was his lodgynge / & euery man drewe to their lodgynges. ye may well beleue and knowe that where the frenche kyng was / and where as there was many noble princes & great ladyes / there was great and noble chiualry. The king entred the monday at none / and all lordꝭ and ladyes met him without the towne. and ſo he was conueyed with trompettes / and great plenty of mynſtrels. And ſo brought to the palys. The ſame monday in the preſence and before all the great lordes: was renewed the couenauntes of maryages. and Willm̄ Dorſet ſhulde haue the countye of Oſtrenant / the lady Margaret his wyfe was endowed with the lande of Acque in Brabant. And y• duke of Burgoyn gaue his doughter a hundred thouſande frankes. Thus they made their porcyons. The tuyſday at the hour of Maſſe / they were wedded in the cathedrale churche of our lady of Cambray with great ſolempnyte. The byſſhoppe of Cambray dyd the obſeruaunce / who was called Johan Borne of Brucels. At the dyner ther was ſhewed moche noblenes. The kyng cauſed the two lordes and the two ladyes newly maryed to ſyt at his table and other lordꝭ ſerued. There ſate at dyner the conſtable of Fraunce / & the marſhall of Fraūce ſir Guy de la Tremoyle / & ſir Willyma de Namure ſerued / and ſo dyd dyuers other great lordes of Fraūce. In fyue hūdred yere before there was nat ſene ſuche a ſolempnite in Cambray. And after dyner knyghtes and ſquiers were armed to iuſt. And ſo they iuſted in the markette place .xl. knightes of the one ſyde. The yonge kyng Charles iuſted with a knight of Heynalt called ſir Nycholas Eſpinot. So theſe iuſtes were nobly contynued / and a yonge knyght of Haynalt had the price / called ſir Johan of Deſternne / beſyde Beawmont in Haynalt. This knyght iuſted greatly to the pleaſure of the lordes & ladyes. He had for his priſe a gyrdell ſet with precyous ſtones / gyuen hym by y• duches of Burgoyne: from her owne waſt. the admyrall of Fraunce / & ſir Guy de la Tremoyle dyd preſēt it to him. Thus in great reuell they contynued all that weke / and on y• friday after dyner / the kyng toke leaue of the lordes & ladyes / and they of him / and ſo departed fro Cambray. And alſo the dukes & ducheſſes deꝑted / and the duches of Burgoyn brought margaret of Haynalt her doughter to Arras. and y• lady of Haynalt brought y• lady Margarete of Burgoyne to Queſnoy. Thus paſſed forthe this beſynes.
         
         
            ¶ Howe the duke of Berrey enſured his doughter / to the ſon̄e of therle of Bloyſe. and howe therle of Matche and the duke of Burbon made their ſomons to entre in to Lymoſin. Cap. CCCC .li.
            
               THe ſāe ſeaſon there was trety of maryage / bytwene Loys of Bloys / ſon to therle Guy of 
                  •
               oy
                  •
                and y• lady Mary / dought 
                  〈◊◊〉
                Johan of Berry. And ſo th
                  〈…〉
               rle of Bloys well acōpanyed with lordes and ad
                  〈…〉
               s brought his doughter to Bergues in 
                  〈◊〉
                / where the duke and duches were redy 
                  〈…〉
               de for them / who tyght nobly receyued 
                  〈◊〉
                and all their company. And there was 
                  〈…〉
               rmed the aſſurance of that maryage / an
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               chebyſſhop of Bergues enſured them 
                  〈…〉
               der in the preſēce of many lordes and lad
                  〈…〉
                howbeit they were natte wedded as than 
                  〈…〉
               ey were

bothe very yonge. So ther was great feeſt / reuelyng and daunſyng / and ſo at laſt therle and the counteſſe retourned to their countre / & their ſonne with them. And the lady abode ſtyll with the duches her mother in Barrey / in a fayre caſtell beſyde Bergues called Mehune on the ryuer of yure. The ſame ſeaſon the duke of Berry went in to Auuergne and Lāguedocke / and ſo to Auignon to ſe pope Clement. And it was ordayned that the duke of Burbone and therle of Marche with two thouſande men of armes ſhulde go in to Lymoſyn to delyuer that countre / fro all the englyſſhmen and theues that robbed and pylled the coūtre. For in Poictou and in Xaynton / they had as than certayne fortreſſes whiche dyde moche domage to the coūtre / wherof complayntes came to the heryng of the duke of Berrey▪ who was in mynde to remedy it. and he had deſyred the duke of Burbone his coſyn / that in any wyſe whan he were come into Limoſyn and Xaynton / that he ſhulde cōquere the garyſon of Bertuell / for that was the fortereſſe that dyde mooſt hurt in that countre. And the duke of Burbone promyſed hym ſo to do. And he hadde made his ſomons at Molins in Burbonoyſe to be there the firſt daye of June / and ſo thyder drewe at that tyme all maner of men of warre. The duke of Burbone had with hym a gentyll ſquyer called Johan bone laūce. He was mayſter and capitayne of his men of warre. Certaynly the ſquyer was well worthy to haue ſuche a charge / and the erle of Marche who ſhulde be in cōpany with the duke of Burbone made his ſomons at the cytie of Toures.
            tHe ſame ſeaſon there came to Scluſe in Flaunders / all ſuche men of warre as were apoynted to paſſe the ſee into Scotlande / with ſir Johan of Uyen admyrall of Fraunce: & he ſhulde haue with hym a thouſande ſpeares knightes and ſquiers. And I beleue well they were all there / for they had great deſyre to go. In ſo moche that ſome that were nat deſyred / aduaunſed them ſelfe to go in that voyage with the admyrall. All their ſhyppyng was redy apparelled at Scluſe / and they caryed with them harneſſe for .xii. hundred men of armes. They had taken that harneſſe out of the caſtell of Beauty beſyde Parys. The harneſſe was parteyning to the pariſyens / the whiche they were cauſed to bring to the ſayd caſtell in the tyme of their rebellion. In the admyrals company / there were a great nombre of good men of warr. And their entenſyon was to delyuer the ſayd harneſſe to the knyghtes & men of Scotlande / bycauſe ſir Geffray de Charney had enformed the kynges counſayle / howe the men in Scotlande were but eaſely harneſſed. I ſhall name vnto you / parte of thē of Fraunce that wente in to Scotlande the ſame ſeaſon▪ Firſt ſir Johan of Uyen admyrall of Fraunce the erle of graunt pre / the lordes of Uerdnay / of ſaynt Crouſe and of Mountbury / ſir Geffray of Charney / ſir Wyllyam of Uyen / ſir Jaques of Uyen / the lorde deſpaigny / ſir Gerard of Burbone / the lorde of Hetz / ſir Floromonde of Quiſſy / the lorde of Marny / ſir Ualerant of Rayneuall / the lorde of Beauſaige / the lorde of Uaynbrayne / the lorde of Rynoll baron dury / the lorde of Coucy / ſir Percyuall Daneuall / y• lorde Ferrers / the lorde of Fountaygnes / ſir Braquet of Braquemont / the lorde of Graunt court / the lorde of Landon breton / ſir Guy la ꝑſon / ſir Wyllm̄ de Couroux / ſir Johan de Hangyers / ſir Henry de Uyncelyn / coſyn to y• great maiſter of Pruce: & diuers other good knightꝭ whiche I can nat all name / ſo that they were to the nōbre of a thouſande ſpeares knightes and ſquyers / beſyde croſ bowes and other varlettꝭ. They had gode wynde and a fayre ſeaſon on y• ſee / the wether was fayre / it was in the moneth of May. That tyme y• truſe bytwene Englāde and Fraūce was expyred / and bitwene the gaū
               toyſe and flemynges lykewiſe: for as it ſemed than euery parte deſyred warre / knyghtes and ſquiers deſyred greatly to go in the voyage to Scotlande / for they thought by the ayde of the ſcottꝭ to haue a fayre iourney agaynſt their enemyes in Englāde. Thenglyſſhmen who were enfourmed of their comynge / loked for theym euery day.
         
      
      
         
            Thus endeth the firſt volume of ſir Johan Froiſſart: of the cronycles of Englāde / Fraunce / Spayne / Portyngale / Scotlande / Bretayne / Flaūders / and other places adioynyng. Tranſlated out of frenche in to our maternall englyſſhe tonge: by Johan Bourchier knight lorde Berners. At the cōmaundement of our mooſt highe redouted ſoueraygne lorde kyng Henry the .viii. kynge of Englande and of Fraunce / and hygh defender of the chriſten faithe. &c. Imprinted at London in Fleteſtrete by Richarde Pynſon / printer to the kynges noble grace. And ended the .xxviii. day of January: the yere of our lorde .M. D .xxiii.
            Cum priuilegio a rege indulto.
         
         
            
            
               
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
         
      
   