
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
THE ANCIENT, FAMOVS And Honourable Hiſtory of Amadis de Gaule.
                  DISCOVRSING THE ADVENTVRES, Loues and Fortunes of many Princes, Knights and Ladies, as well of Great Brittaine, as of many other Kingdomes beſide, &c.
                  
                  Written in French by the Lord of Eſſars, Nicholas de Herberay. Ordinarie Commiſſarie of the Kings Artillerie, and his Lieutenant thereof, in the Countrie and gouernment of Picardie, &c.
                  
                  Printed at London by NICHOLAS OKES, 1619
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR PHILLIP HERBERT, Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of our dread Soueraigne King James; Lord Baron of Sherland; Earle of Mountgomerie, and Knight of the moſt Noble Order of the Garter, &c.
                  
                  
                     HAuing already preſented your Honour, with the Third and Fourth Bookes of this famous Hiſtory of Amadis de Gaule, and ſtanding engaged by my promiſe, to tranſlate ſo many more of them, as time and your noble acceptance ſhall thereto enable me; finding alſo thoſe two imprinted parts, to appeare as a body without an head, becauſe theſe former Bookes are the guide and dirction to them all: I haue now finiſhed them, and therefore make a freſh repreſentation of them all foure to your Honour. The fift, ſixt, ſeuenth and eight Bookes (being already in good forwardneſſe of tranſlation) with as much expedition as poſsible may bee, and your worthy encouragement for their proceeding; ſhall very ſhortly preſent themſelues before you, in the beſt habit that mine ability can put vpon them.
                  It is not vnknwne to your honour, that the manifolde impreſſions of this hiſtory, the Bookes thereof being now come to be fiue and twentie in number, and printed in places farre diſtant a ſunder: through neglect in the publiſhers, or defect of the Bookes which are perfect indeede, many falſe volumes haue flowne abroade, and the world thereby v
                        •…
                      much abuſed.

But by the helpe of that worthy Lady, I haue had ſuch Bookes as were of the beſt editions, and them (as I haue already begun) I intend to follow.
                  In the meane time (Noble Lord) accept of theſe foure Bookes I beſeech you, and defend them from the venomous tongue of foule mouthde detraction, burying all my imperfections heerein committed, in the vrgent importunitie of that worthy Lady, by whom I haue thus boldly preſumed, & the reſt will beare me blameleſſe againſt your leaſt miſlike.
                  
                     Your Honours in all duty. A. M.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE FIRST BOOKE OF AMADIS DE GAVLE.
               
                  Diſcourſing the Aduentures and Loue of many Knights and Ladies, as well of the Realme of great Brittaine, as ſundry other Countries, &c.
               
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  
                     Of whence the Kings Garinter and Perion were, and the Combate betweene Perion and two Knights, as alſo how he fought with a Lyon that deuoured a Hart in their preſence: with the ſucceſſe following thereon.
                  
                  
                     SOone after the paſsion of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, there reigned in little Brittaine a King named Garinter, enſtructed in the lawe of veritie, and highly adorned with many laudable vertues: hauiug a Noble Ladye to his Wife, by whome he had two beautifull Daughters. The eldeſt (beeing maried with Languines King of Scotts,) was commonly called the Lady of the Garland: becauſe the King her Huſband, taking great pleaſure to behold the golden treſſes of her haire, would haue them no otherwiſe couered then with a faire circle or chaplet of flowers: Languines enioying by his Queene, Agrates and Mabila, of whom this preſent Hiſtory often maketh mentiō. The other yongeſt Daughter to this King Garinter, was named Eliſena, very much excelling the eldeſt in beauty, & though ſhe had been oftētimes deſired in mariage, by ſundry Princes and great Lords: yet as then ſhe had no wil thereto, but for her ſolitary and holy life, was commonly called of euery one, The loſt Virgin in deuotion, conſidering that in a perſon of ſuch eſtate, endued with ſuch excellent beauty, and ſolicited by ſo many great Princes, this ſtrickt religion was not conuenient. King Garinter being ſumewhat in yeeres, for recreatiō tooke pleaſure in Hunting, whē at one time amōg other it happened, that hauiug appointed a meeting neure one of his Cities called Alyma, a Hart was put forth, in purſuite whereof himſelfe wandred very farre: wherefore ſeeing

he had loſt both his people and game, commending himſelfe to God, he began to make ſumwhat the more haſt, til hauing trauerſed firſt one way and then another, at the very entrance into a Wood, he ſaw two Knights fighting againſt one. Soone had he knowledge of the twaine, in that they were his owne Subiects, of whome he had heard ſundry complaintes: but ſlender order was taken in the cauſe, by reaſon of the great alliance they had in the Country, as alſo for that they kept themſelues ſtill in this greatforreſt. Who the third ſhould be, he meruailed, and for that time he ſo well liked the valour of the one Knight, as he feared not what might happen to the other twaine: wherefore he withdrew himſelfe a little further into the Forreſt, becauſe he might the better beholde the iſſue of the fight, which ſorted to ſuch effect, as by the ſtrength of the one Knight, both the other were vanquiſhed and ſlaine. The King beholding what had happened, came forth of the Wood, when the Knight ſeeing one ſo neere him alone, thus demaunded. Gentle Sir, what Country is this, where Knightes errant arc thus aſſayled by robbers and theeues; Let this be no wonder to you Sir, anſwered the King, for this Country yeelds as others doe, both good and bad: as for them that thus aſſaulted you, they haue done diuers & villainous outrages, not only in this Wood, which hath been their accuſtomed receptacle: but likewiſe in many other places, and cheefely againſt their Lord & King, who could not execute iuſtice on them, in that they were allyed to the beſt houſes in this Realme. And where may I find the King you ſpeake of; ſaid the Knight, for I am come to ſeeke him, to bring him newes from a great friend of his. Happen what ſhall, anſwered Garinter, I will tell ye ſo much as I know: vnderſtand then for a truth, that I am the man you aske for. At theſe words the Knight tooke off his Helmet, and throwing downe his Sheeld, ran to embrace him: ſaying that he was King Perion of Gaule, who of long time had been deſirous to know him. Greatly were theſe Kings contented, that their meeting was in ſuch fortunate manner, and conferring together on many matters, they tooke the waye through the Wood toward the Citie, where they thought to find the Hunters: but ſuddenly a Hart ranne before them, which with ſome danger had eſcaped the toyles: wherefore the Princes gallopped after the Deere, hoping to kil it ere they gaue ouer. But it fell out otherwiſe, for in the purſuite, as they came into the thickeſt of the Wood, a chafed Lyon ran before them: which in their ſight ſeazed on the Hart, and hauing with his ſtrong pawes torne it in peeces, turned againe, when running furiouſly againſt the two Princes, he watched his aduantage, as if they had angred him, which the King Perion perceiuing, in laughter ſaide. You ſhall not be ſuch a glutton, maiſter Lyon, but you ſhall leaue vs parte of the game. And herewith preſently he alighted, becauſe his Horſe would not come nere the beaſt, ſo drawing his Swoord, and claſping his ſheeld on his arme, not regarding the cryes of King Garinter, who laboured to diſſwade him from the attempt, he marched to the Lyon, who for defence of his pray, ran eagerly againſt the King, and ſo betweene them began a new warre. But the Lyon being quicke and

nimble, did ſo much as he got his enemy vnder him, yet was the Kinges heart ſo good, that albeit he was in very great perill of his perſon, he was not abaſhed one iotte: but turned himſelfe in ſuch ſorte, as he thruſt his Swoord into the belly of the beaſt, which at that inſtant fel downe dead before him. The King ſeeing what had happened, was ſo ouercome with meruailing at this deed as he ſaid within him ſelfe. In ſooth it is no ſhame to renowne one of the beſt Knights in the worlde. In this meane while, the reſt of the traine came thether, who for to finde their king, had ſearched long time vp and downe the Forreſt. Then was their pray and Veniſon laid on two horſes, and caryed to the Citie, where the Queene was immediatly aduertiſed of king Perions arriuall, and therefore made ſpeedy prouiſion of all things neceſſarye, to welcome and feaſte ſo great a Prince. At their coming they found Dinner ready, and the tables couered: wherfore (after the welcomes and reuerences done on all ſides) the two kinges ſat downe, ſo did the Queene, and faire Eliſena her Daughter. Now had loue ſecretly ambuſhed himſelfe, becauſe he had long time aſſayled this yong Princeſſe, without any power to ouercome her: but now he ſaw her ſo vnprouided, as at this inſtant hower he might touch her to the quick, and thence forwarde hold a ſure conqueſt of her. The like in king Perion, who thought of nothing but a friendly entertainment, yet when he caſt his eye on the Lady Eliſena, & ſhe in like ſorte vpon him: by vertue of this pearcing regarde, her wonted chaſte and holye life had no longer power to priuiledge this Princeſſe, but ſhe was wonderfully thralled in extreame loue to this yong king, and he in ſelfe ſame manner to her, albeit till that hower, he had his hart francke and free, without ſubiection in any other place. In this ſorte during dinner tyme, they found themſelues (for each other) in a ſtrange opinion, till the tables were with drawen, whē the Queene would departe to her Chamber, wherefore Eliſena aroſe to follow her: but as ſhe ſtepped forward, ſhe let fall a Ring which ſhe had put in her boſome when ſhe waſht her handes, and ſo had forgot it, by reaſon of this new loue, that made her thinke on other matters. Now was king Perion ſomewhat neer her, and deſirous to let her know how willingly he would be hers, ſtooped downe as ſoone as ſhe to take it vp, and ſo right did their handes meete together, as the king had the meane to cloſe her fingers, yet feigning to take vp her Ring. Wherevpon this amourous Lady began to change collour, and (notwithſtanding) by a ſweete regard humbly thanked him. Ah Madame, quoth he, this ſhall not be the laſt ſeruice I hope to doe you, for my whole life time ſhalbe imployed to obey you. Cō
                     ſtrained was Eliſena (without anſwering him) to follow the Queen her mother, ſo ſurprized & altered, as very neere ſhe had forgoten her ſelfe: ſo that not able to endure this new fire of loue (which ſo ſudden & vehemently had conquered her wonted chaſte and choice determination:) with the teares in her eyes, and her hart full of anguiſh, ſhee went and diſcouered the ſame to a faithful Damoſelof hers, named Darioletta, praying her moſt inſtantly to councel her, how ſhe might ſafely know, if King Perion had not elſewhere placed his loue, and whether the affectionate ſemblaunce he had

ſhowne her, might proceed from force of that impreſſion, which had ſo lately ſeazed on her hart. The Damoſell meruailing at this ſo ſudden mutatiō, & in a perſon thought ſo farre from any ſuch matter: taking (neuertheleſſe) compaſſion on her piteous teares, thus anſwered. I ſee well Madame, that according to the extreame paſſion, wherewith the tirant Loue hath tormented ye, he hath leſt no place in your iudgement, where counſell or reaſon may be entertained: and therefore following not what I ought for your ſeruice, but the will I haue to obey you, I ſhall do what you haue commaunded me, by the moſt honeſt meanes that my little diſcretiō and great deſire I haue to pleaſe ye, will permit me. So without any more woords, Darioletta went to the Chamber where King Perion was, and at the doore ſhe found his Squire, who brought other garments for his Lord to weare, which the Damoſell tooke of him. For (quoth ſhe) it is neceſſary that I performe this ſeruice, and you (gentle Squire) may goe if you pleaſe about your other affaires. The Squire thinking it was the cuſtome of the Country, made no deniall, but willingly ſuffered her to take the Garments, whereupon ſhe entred the Chamber, where ſhe found the King laid on his bed: who ſeeing her enter, and knowing well it was ſhe, whom he had ſeene to conferre with Eliſena moſt priuatly, & in whom (aboue al other) ſhe put chiefeſt truſt, he thought that ſhe wold not come in that ſort to him, without bringing him ſome remedy for his mortall paſſions, for which cauſe, all in trembling, he ſaid. Faire friend, what demand ye; If it may ſo like you my Lord, quoth ſhe, I haue brought other garments for ye. Much rather would I, ſaid the King, that you had brought ſome comfort to my hart, which at this preſent is left & deſpoyled of all pleaſure. As how my good Lord; anſwered the Damoſell. Thus quoth he. When firſt I arriued in this country, I was free from all paſſions, and doubted nothing but of aduentures that might happen to Knights errand: but now (I know not in what ſort) entring this Court, by ſome one of your Ladyes, haue I receiued a deadly wound, for which if you (faire Damoſell) know how to giue me any remedy, your recompence ſhall be ſo good, as you ſhall repute your ſelfe beholding to me. Certes, quoth ſhe, I ſhould imagine my ſelfe happy, by doing ſeruice to ſo high a perſonage, and ſo good a Knight as you are, if I could tell wherein. If you wil promiſe me ſaid the King, as you are a loyall Damoſell, not to diſcouer me but where it is requiſite, I ſhall tell ye. Say boldly your pleaſure, anſwered Darioletta, for by me (without your liking) it ſhall not be knowen to any. Damoſell and my friend, quoth he, I giue you to vnderſtand, that at what time I beheld the excellent beauty of Eliſena your Miſtreſſe, I became extreamely tormented with her loue, and in ſuch ſorte, as I cannot excuſe my ſelfe from death, if I find not remedy for my greefe the ſooner. Darioletta (who knew thorowly the mind of the Princeſſe) hearing what the King had ſaide, returned him this anſwer. My Lord, if you will aſſure me by the faith of a King, which before all other things ought to be kept, as a perſon moſt bounden to vertue, and as a loyall Knight, who ought (as is ſaide) to ſuffer much, for maintenance of right

and equitie, that you will take to wife my Lady Eliſena when time ſhall ſerue: right ſoone will I bring ye to the place, where not only your hart ſhalbe ſatisfied but hers likewiſe, who (it may be) is in as much or more thought and dolour, then you are, by reaſon of the new anguiſh that toucheth her thorow the ſelfe ſame meanes. But if you do not (my Lord) what I haue ſaid, you ſhall not there recouer her, nor ſhall I haue other cauſe then to thinke, that your words proceeded from no loyall hart, nor to credit any thing you ſay hereafter. The King whome loue had already depriued of liberty, to vnite him ſelfe with Eliſena, (to the end that hee might be adorned with the great & gratious fruite, which afterwarde happened, as ſhalbe recited vnto ye,) tooke his Swoord, and ſetting his right hand on the Croſſe there-of, ſaide theſe wordes. I ſweare by this Croſſe, and on this Sword, wherewith I receiued the order of Knighthood, to do what you (faire Damoſell) ſhall commaund mee, at all times, and when ſoeuer your miſtreſſe Eliſena ſhalbe thereto aduiſed. Be you then frollicke & merrye, anſwered Darioletta, for I ſhall likewiſe accompliſh what I haue promiſed. And at that inſtant ſhee returned to the Princeſſe, declaring to her what ſhee had concluded with king Perion, wherewith the amorous Lady was ſo pleaſed, as ſhe had vtterly loſt her former countenance, and inceſſantly embracing Darioletta, thus demaunded. My deere friend, when will the hower come, that I ſhall holde betweene mine armes, my Lord whom thou haſt giuen me? I ſhall tel ye anſwered the Damoſell, you know that in the Chamber where King Perion lodgeth, there is a doore on the Garden ſide, which your father ſundry times vſed for his recreatiō, & which at this preſent is couered with the cloth of Arras, but I haue the key thereof: wherfore at night when euery one is at reſt, we may eaſily there enter vnſeene of any, and when needfull time of returne cometh, my ſelfe will call ye. When Eliſena heard this deuice, ſhe was highly contented therewith, yet breathing forth a ſighe, ſhe ſaid. Alas my faithfull friend: how ſhall we bring this to paſſe? ſeeing my father is determined to lodge with King Perion: & if he perceiue vs, we ſhalbe both in very great danger. Refer that doubt to me, anſwered Darioletta, & I ſhal eaſily prouide for this matter: wherupon for this time they brake off conference, becauſe the tabels were couered for Supper. And in like manner as the feaſting began in the morning, ſo now it continued, till the tables beeing voyded, each one prepared himſelf to reſt. Now a little before, Darioletta went to King Perions Squire, & thus ſaide to him. Gentle Squire, & my friend I pray ye tel me in good faith, whether you be a Gentleman or no, why aske ye? anſwered the Squire. For the deſire I haue, ſaid the Damoſell, to know one thing of you which I entreat ye (by the faith you owe to God and to the King your Maiſter) not to hide from me. By Saint Mary, quoth he, I will tell you what you pleaſe to aske, prouided, that it be not to the domage of my Lord. Herein, ſaide the Damoſell will I conſent with ye, for I would not demaund any thing of you that ſhould giue him diſpleaſure, nor were it reaſonable that you ſhould acquaint me with any ſuch matter: but I deſire to know, who is the Lady he loueth moſt perfectly. The king my Maiſter,

quoth the Squire, loueth all ingenerall, and I aſſure ye, that I know no one, to whom he beareth ſuch affection as you ſpeake of.
                  While they were thus talking, the King Garinter came, who ſeeing Darioletta conferring with King Perions Squire, demanded what ſhee had to do with the Gentleman? In ſooth my Lord quoth ſhe, he telles me that the King his Maiſter is wont to lye alone, and therefore I thinke he loueth not to haue any company. When Garinter vnderſtood that, he went preſently to King Perion, ſaying, My noble Brother, there are certaine affaires ſuddenly befallen me, and likewiſe I muſt riſe ſomewhat early in the morning, which hath made me thinke, that (not to trouble you) the beſt way is, that I breake company from lodging with ye. My Lord, anſwered king Perion, do as ſhall ſeeme beſt to your liking, this anſwer appeared to king Garinter, conformable with that the Damoſell had ſaid, wherefore right ſoone he commaunded his bed to be fetcht from king Perions Chamber. When Darioletta heard there-of, ſhee imagined their affaires would fall out the better, and therefore returned to Eliſena, acquainting her with all that had paſſed betweene the two kinges. In good faith quoth ſhe, I now beleeue, that ſeeing God hath granted ſo good a beginning, our enterpriſe, which at this preſent ſeemeth a great ſin, wil hereafter redound to his ſeruice: but tell me what wee ſhall do? for the great ioy which I haue, hath taken from me the moſt healthfull parte of my iudgement. Madam, ſaid Darioletta, this night will wee execute what we haue determined, ſeeing the doore (whereof you knowe) is certainly open. To my ſelfe I keep it, anſwered Eliſena, & to you only I commit the charge, to prouide when the hower ſhall permit: and ſo they remained attending for the fauourable time.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     How the Princeſſe Eliſena and her Damoſell Darioletta, went to the Chamber where King Perion was lodged.
                  
                  
                     THe time being com, when each one moſt commonly betake themſelues to reſt: Darioletta (who for the contentment of her Miſtreſſe, had vſed extreame diligence) came and tolde her. Madame, now is the time to finiſh our enterpriſe, then let vs go if you pleaſe. When Eliſena heard what ſhe ſaide, you muſt thinke ſhe gaue no occaſion to be reproued with ſlothfulnes: but haſtily aroſe, & without tarrying, caſting only a mantle about her ſhoulders, went forward, and afterward they both entred the Garden. The time was then calme & gratious, the Moone faire and ſplendant, giuing cleere light to the two Ladyes: but ſurely the one had more cauſe of content then the other, who gladly would haue taſted this good hap, or ſuch an other for her ſelfe, if ſhe could any way haue compaſt the meane, & ſo much ſhe gaue in outward apearance, as Eliſena perceiued well, that ſhe wanted but the executor to performe the ſame: for Darioletta
                     
feeling in her ſpirit, the caſe at hand which ſhee ſhould receiue whom ſhee conducted, could not but very pleſantly ieſt & dally with her Miſtreſſe, breaking many a bitter ſigh among, as though ſhe were to participate in Eliſenaes future good fortune, to whom ſhe ſaide. Alas Madame, how happy is the Prince, by whom this night you ſhall receiue ſuch pleaſure? You ſay true anſwered Eliſena, but what? thinke you not that fortune is as fauourable to me, as to him? for if I be faire, is not he one of the moſt perfect men that hath beene heard of, either in perſonage, good grace or hardines? aſſure thy ſelfe, Darioletta my friend, that I imagine myſelfe ſo happy, as I thinke it is impoſſible for me to be more, & therfore let vs make haſt I praye thee. Theſe words ſhe vttered with ſuch affection, that ſhe trembled like the little leafe on the high tree, and as ſhe ended thoſe ſpeeches, they arriued at the Chamber doore where King Perion was lodged: who (for the ſtrangnes of this new amorous flame, as alſo the hope he had in Darioletta) had not as yet taken any reſt. Neuertheleſſe, beeing as then wearye with trauaile, & ouercome with ſleepe: began (euen as they opened the doore) to ſlumber, and dreamed that one entred his chamber at a falſe dore, without knowledge who it ſhould be: but he thought that he thruſt his hands into his ſides, and rent forth his hart, afterward he ſaw him throw it into the Riuer, when the king ſaide. Wherfore commit ye ſuch cruelty? This is nothing at all anſwered hee that did this outrage, for with you ſhall remaine another hart, which I muſt take from ye againſt my wil. In great feare he ſuddenly awaked, & making the ſigne of the Croſſe, commended himſelfe to God. Now had the Ladyes opened the dore & entred the Chamber, wherfore he hering the noyſe, ſuſpected ſome treaſon, eſpecially by reaſon of his feareful dreame, & lifting vp his head beheld thorow the curtans the dore open, wherof he knew nothing, and afterward by the light of the Moone, he ſaw the ſhadowe of the Ladyes that were entred. For this cauſe in feare he ſtarted out of bed, tooke his Sword, and went to the place where he had ſeene them: but when Darioletta ſaw him ſo affrighted, ſhe ſpake to him in this manner, What ſhalbe done here? Do you draw armes againſt vs, that come to you with ſo ſlender defence? the king who quickly knew them, eſpecially Eliſena whom hee ſo much deſired, threw his Sword to the ground, and caſting a mantle about him which lay neere at hand: in great affection hee came to her, whom he loued better then him-ſelfe, kiſſing, embracing & ſhewing the beſt countenance could be deuiſed, which Darioletta ſeeing, as one iealous and enuious of ſuch fauour, ſaid to Eliſena. Now are you ſomewhat better contented, for in my iudgement, although till this time you defended your ſelfe from many. And he likewiſe hath withſtood ſundry aſſaultes: notwithſtanding at this preſent, neither the one or orher of you hath force or meane, which way any longer to warrant or defend your ſelues. As thus ſhe ſpake, ſhe looked where the king had throwen his Sword, which ſhe took vp, as a witneſſe of the oath and promiſe he made her, concerning the future mariage of Eliſena and himſelfe: then ſhutting the dore after her, ſhe went into the Garden, and ſo the king remained alone with his faire freind, whom

(after many amourous embracings, infinite kiſſings, and execution of delights) he behelde, verily perſwading himſelfe, that all the beauty of the world was in her, reputing himſelfe much more then happy, that the heauens had allowed him ſo good an aduenture. See now how it chaunced to this Princeſſe, that for ſo long time, in the cheefeſt flower of her youth, beeing requeſted by ſo many mighty Princes and great Lordes, ſhe had withſtood all, to remaine in the liberty of a Maiden: now won in leſſe ſpace then one day, and at ſuch time as her fancie (in her one thinking) was fartheſt off from ſuch matters.
                  Thus Loue breaking the ſtrong bandes of her holye and chaſt life, cauſed a ſudden alteration of her purpoſe, making her ſoone after, of a faire virgen, a faire woman: ſeruing for example to many other, who aſſaying to withdraw their thoughtes from worldly things, & deſpiſing the great beauty wherwith nature hath endowed them, & tender youth, which maketh them ignorant of the pleſures & delights in their Fathers Courts, whereof ſometime they might haue taſted: yeelde themſelues (for ſaluation of their ſoules) in poore and religious houſes, thereto in offering their free will, vowing themſelues to the ſubiectiō of others, hoping to paſſe their time without any renowne or glory of this▪ world. Certes ſuch Ladyes, ought with great ſollicitude to ſtop their eares, cloſe their eyes, and giue themſelues to continuall deuoute contemplatiōs & prayers, accepting them as their true and ſingular paſtimes, as to ſuch they are: and aboue all, they ſhould exempt themſelues from ſight of Parents neighbours and freinds, becauſe oftentimes the talk and frequenting of ſuch, procureth achange of their holy & chaſt will. and not without cauſe haue I made this little diſcourſe, for it is to the end that it happen not to them, as it did vnto the faire Princeſſe Eliſena, who ſo long labored in thought to preſerue her ſelfe: yet notwithſtanding in one only moment, ſeeing the beauty and good grace of King Perion, changed her will in ſuch ſorte, as without the aduiſe & diſcretiō of Darioletta, who would couer the honor of hir Miſtreſſe vnder the mantle of mariage: you may ſee ſhe was at the poynt to fal, into the very loweſt parte of all diſhonor. As it hath happened to many other, of whom hath commonly beene heard ſpeech: who not keeping them ſelues from what I haue ſaide before, haue beene taken bad enough, and taken will be, if they admit no better foreſight.
                  Now then are theſe two louers in their ſolace, Eliſena demanding of the king, if his departure ſhould be ſhortly or no. Wherfore Madame do you aske? ſaid king Perion. Becauſe, quoth ſhe, this happy fortune that with ſo great delight hath giuen eaſe to our affectionate deſires: doth threaten me already with extreame anguiſh & ſorrow, which by your abſence I ſhall receiue, and feare it will rather cauſe my ſudden death, then long life. Haue no doubt thereof ſaide the king, for although my body is ſeperated from your preſence, my hart for euer ſhal remain with ye, which ſhall giue ſtrength to vs both, to you to ſuffer, and to me by my ſpeedye returne. Theſe two contented louers are thus deuiſing, when ſhe that had bin the cauſe of their meeting (ſeeing it was time to call her miſtreſſe, who by this pleaſure forgot her ſelfe in her louers armes)

entred the Chamber, & ſpeaking ſomewhat loude ſaide. Madme, I know that heretofore you thought my company more agreeable, then you doe at this preſent: but it is needfull that you ariſe, and let vs goe, for the time calleth vs. When the King heard her, knowing that perforce it muſt be ſo, he played Darioletta to walke into the Garden, and to bring him word in what corner the winde ſat: in meane while he tooke his amourous conge, with ſuch reciprocall pleaſure, as you that loue may eaſily iudge, then ſweetly kiſſing her, he ſaide, I aſſure you Madame, that for your ſake I will ſtay longer in this Country then you imagine, therefore I pray ye be not vnmindfull of this place. So aroſe Eliſena, and went to her Chamber with Darioletta, leauing the king alone, not a little contented with his new acquaintance: but dreading his dreame, as you haue heard, and willing to know what it might ſignifie, he became deſirous to returne to his owne Country, where as then were good ſtore of Philoſophers, that were well ſeene in thoſe Sciences: himſelfe likewiſe in former times tooke great pleaſure therein, and vnderſtood ſundry rules thereof. Neuertheleſſe, he ſoiourned ten dayes with king Garinter, after his ſporting with Eliſena, who neuer a night failed to viſit her louely haunt. The ten dayes being ſpent, king Perion (forcing his will, and notwithſtanding the teares and intreaties of Eliſena which were exceſſiue) reſolued to depart, and therefore tooke his leaue of the Court: but as he wold haue mounted on horſebacke, he perceiued that he wanted his good Sword, whereat he became ſomewhat offended, becauſe it was one of the beſt, and faireſt in the world, yet durſt he not demand it, fearing leaſt the loue of him and Eliſena ſhould thereby be diſcouered, or King Garinter angry with them that viſited his Chamber. In theſe thoughts, accompanied with infinite regrets, without longer ſtay, he tooke his way toward Gaule: albeit before his departure, Darioletta came & intreated him, to be mindfull of the great griefe wherein he left his Eliſena, and of the ſolemne promiſe he had made her. Alas my deere friend, ſaide the King, I pray ye to aſſure her on my parte, that ſhe ſhall haue no cauſe of offence, and that right ſoone I meane to ſee her, in meane while, I commend her to you as mine owne proper hart. Then taking from his finger a Ring, ſemblable to an other that he had, he ſent it to the deſolate louer, intreating her earneſtly (for his ſake) to giue it her. This preſent did no whit leſſen her great greefe, but encreaſe it, ſo that if ſhe had not beene comforted by Darioletta, without doubt, ſhe had then finiſhed her dayes: but ſo well ſhe perſwaded her to take good hope, that by the alligations ſhe laid before her of dangerous occurrences, ſhe came ſomewhat better to her ſelfe, and learned thence forward more ſmoothly to diſſemble her ſorrowe, till ſhe felte her ſelfe great with Childe, by meanes whereof, ſhe not onely loſt the taſte of her food, but alſo the pleaſure of reſt, and the faire cullour of her countenance.
                  Now on the higheſt ſtep of miſ-hap was her ſorrow ſet, and not without cauſe, for in that time was there an inuiolable lawe, that any woman or maiden, of what quality or eſtate ſoeuer, offending in ſuch ſorte, could no way excuſe her ſelfe

from death. This ſharpe and cruell cuſtome, endured til the comming of the vertuous King Arthur, the beſt Prince that euer raigned in that Country: which he reuoked at the time, as be killed Floian in battaile before the Gates of Paris. But many other Kinges were betweene him and Garinter, who maintained that lawe, and for this cauſe the ſorrowfull Lady could not be abſolued by ignoraunce thereof: albeit that by the oathes and promiſes of King Perion on his Sword, God would remit the offence, yet knew ſhe not how to excuſe her faulte to the worlde, becauſe it was done ſo ſecretly as you haue heard. See here the diſtreſſe wherein King Perion left his Eliſena, which gladly ſhe wold giue him to vnderſtand, if poſſible ſhe could: but it might not be for ſhe knew the prompritude of this yong Knng, that tooke no reſt in any place where he came, nor was his hart ſatiſfied, except in this, with following armes, as alſo ſeeking ſtrange and hazardous aduentures, and therefore he was the harder to be found. Thus diſpairing of this ſuccour, ſhe thought there was no remedy for her life, for which ſhe made not ſo much mone, as the loſſe of the ſight of her true friend and onely Lord. But at that inſtant the great and puiſſant maker of all thinges, by whoſe permſſion this act was appointed to his ſeruice, inſpired Darioletta with ſuch councell, as ſhe onely ſhould remedie theſe occurrances, in ſuch ſort as you ſhall preſently vnderſtand.
                  In the pallace of King Garinter, there was a Chamber-vault ſeperated from the reſt, neere to which was a riuer, whereto one might eaſily diſcend by a little Iron dore, this Chamber (by the aduice of Darioletta) did Eliſena requeſt of her father, as well for her eaſe, as to cōtinue her accuſtomed ſolitary life, and would haue none other companion then Darioletta, who (as you haue heard) knew the occaſion of her dollorous greefes. This requeſt ſhe lightly obtained, the King thinking his daughters intent to be as ſhe feigned, and heereupon was the keye of the Iron dore giuen to Darioletta, to open when it pleaſed Eliſena to recreate her ſelfe on the water. By this meane had ſhe a place proper to her affaires, and ſo was in better reſt & aſſurance then before: for well was ſhe aduiſed, that in this place more commodiouſly then any other, might ſhe prouide to eſcape without danger. Wherefore beeing there one day alone with her Damoſell, they fell in conference, & ſhe requited councell, what ſhould be done with the fruit: that ſhe trauailed withall. What? anſwered Darioletta: Mary, it muſt ſuffer to redeeme you. Oh poore maidenly mother, ſaide Eliſena, how can I cōſent to the death of the creature, begoten by the only man of the worlde, whome moſt I loue? offend not your ſelfe, quoth Darioletta, for if you ſhould dye, hardly would it be permitted after you to liue. In ſooth, ſaide Eliſena, although I dye beeing culpable, it were no reaſon the little innocent ſhould ſuffer. Leaue we this talke, anſwered Darioletta, ſeeing it were great folly to hazard the ſafety of that, which hereafter may be the onely cauſe of your loſſe, and your friend likewiſe: for well you knowe, that if you be diſcouered, you ſhall dye, and the infant ſhall not liue, & you dying, no longer can he liue that ſo d
                        •
                     er
                        •
                     
                     ly loueth you. So ſhall you alone cauſe the death of all three, where

contrarywiſe, if you eſcape the perill, the time will come, when you may haue together children enow, which will make you forget the affection you bare to this firſt. And as this Damoſell was thus inſpired, ſo would ſhe before hand ſeeke to preuent the inconuenience, in this manner. She got foure little boards, of ſuch largenes as was neceſſary to make a Cheſt wherein to put the infant, with the clothes & the Sword which ſhe kept, then did ſhe giue them together in ſuch ſorte, as the water ſhould haue no place to enter. This beeing done & made fit, ſhe put it vnder the bed, without declaring any thing there-of to Eliſena, vntil the time of child-birth approched, and then Darioletta ſaide. What thinke ye Madame this little Cofer is made for? In good faith I know not, quoth ſhe. This ſhalbe to ſerue vs, ſaide the Damoſell, when we haue need. Beleeue me anſwerd Eliſena weeping but little doe I care for any thing that may happen, for I feele my ſelfe too neere the loſſe of my good, 
                        〈◊〉
                      my ioy. Very ſoone after, the Princeſſe felt the anguiſh of trauaile, which was to her very ſtrange & troubleſome, oppreſſing her hart with ſundry bitter paſſiōs: yet notwithſtanding al her yrkſome plunges, poore ſoule ſhe durſt not but be ſilent, greatly fearing leaſt ſhe ſhould be heard. Her agonies thus redoubling, the moſt mighty (without danger of her perſon) gaue her in deliuerance a faire Son, which the Damoſell receiued, and as ſhe held it, it ſeemed to hero wonderfull feature, and happy would ſhe haue reputed him, had he not bene borne to hard fortune, where-to Darioletta was conſtrained to ſend him for the redemption of the ſorrowfull mother, and therefore ſhe deferred it not. But euen as before was concluded, ſhe wrapped the infant in riche clothes, and afterward brought it with the Cofer to Eliſena: which when the good Lady ſawe, ſhe demanded what ſhe would do therewith. Madame quoth ſhe, herein ſhall your little Sonne be put, then will I ſend it forth on the water, and if it pleaſe God, he may eſcape and liue. Alas my ſweete infant, ſaide Eliſena, how full of danger is thy deſtiny? In meane while, Darioletta tooke inke and parchment, and writ therein theſe words, This is Amadis without time, Sonne to a King: by theſe words without time, ſhe meant, that ſhe thought his death to be neere at hand, and the name of Amadis was of great reuerence in that Country, becauſe of a Saint there ſo called, to whom this little infant was recōmended. The letter beeing written and ſealed, was couered and wrapped in ſilke, & then with a little golden Chaine, faſtened about the Childes necke, with the Ring that King Perion ſent Eliſena at his departure. Each thing thus appointed, Darioletta came to the wofull mother, and in her ſight put the Childe into the Cheſt, laying by him the King his Fathers Sword, which he threw on the ground the firſt night he came to Eliſena, and this is the cauſe wherefore the Damoſell had ſo well kept it: then after the Mother had kiſt her Sonne, as her laſt farewell, the Cofer was made faſt very arteficially, and Darioletta opening the iron dore, commending the babe to the heauenly protection, ſhe ſet it on the water, the courſe whereof beeing very ſpeedy, full ſoone caried the Cofer into the Sea, which was leſſe then halfe a mile from the place.
                  
                     
Now began the breake of day to appeare, and the little infant followed his fortune, now throwne heere, then there, according as the boyſtrous waues pleaſed: but by the will of the higheſt, who (when he pleaſeth) makes impoſſibilities eaſie, cauſed it ſo to fall out, that at the ſame time as this was done, a Scottiſhe Ship ſayled on the Sea, wherein was a Gentleman named Gandales, who from little Brittaine ſailed with his wife into Scotland, ſhe hauing beene lately deliuered of a ſonne called Gandalin. The morning was both calme & cleere, wherefore Gandales might eaſilye perceiue the Cheſt floting on the waues, which he preſently ſent out for, thinking it to be ſome matter of great value: then the Mariners caſting forth a Skiffe, made toward the Cofer and tooke it vp: when they had brought it to Gandales, he got open the couer; and beholding the goodly infant within, as alſo the rich clothes wherein it was wrapped, he ſuſpected that it came from no meane place, as he gathered by the ring & the good Sword. So taking it in his armes, he was filled with ſuch compaſſion, as he began to curſſe the mother thereof, who through feare had forſaken ſo cruelly ſuch a beautifull creature: and carefully did he cauſe al things to be kept which he found in the Cofer, deſiring his wife, that this infant might be nouriſhed as his owne Sonne. She was heerewith very wel contented, and ſo the two children were equally foſtered together, for neuer had yong Amadis ſuckt the teat, but ſo ſoone as it was giuen him by his new nurſſe, he made no refuſall thereof, but being very thirſtie ſucked very hartily, whereat Gandales and his wife were exceeding glad. Now had they the time ſo fauourable, as ſhortly they landed in Scotland, neere to a Citie named Antallia, and ſoone after they came to their owne Country, where little Gandalin, and the Childe found in the ſea were nouriſhed together. And becauſe Gandales forbad his ſeruāts to vſe any ſpeech of his good hap, requeſting the like of the Mariners, to whom the ſhip belonged, and were to ſaile els where: the two children were eſteemed bretheren by ſuch as were ignorant of their fortune.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     How King Perion parting from little Brittaine, trauelled on his iourney, hauing his heart filled with grieſe and melancholie.
                  
                  
                     KIng Perion being on his way toward Gaule, as already hath beene recited, entred into a marueilous melancholy, as well for the greefe wherein he had left his Eliſena, to whom in his hart he wiſhed well: as alſo for his doubtfull dreame, being in ſuch ſorte as you haue heard. So long rode he in this heauines, till he ariued in his country, and ſoone after he ſent for all his great Lords as alſo the Prelates of his Realme, giuing them expreſſe charge, to bring with them the moſt learned Clarks in their Countryes, and this he did, to the end they might expound his dreame. When his vaſſailes had made knowne his will,

not only thoſe he ſent for, but many other came to the court, ſhewing the deſire they had to ſee him, & their readines to obey his command: for they did ſo loue and reuerence him, as oftentimes (being fearefull to looſe him) they were for him in very great greefe and ſorrow, thinking on the dangerous perils, that in chiualry (to win honor) he hazarded himſelfe, ſo that they would more gladly haue had him dayly with them, which could not be, becauſe his hart was diſcontented, til by armes he had brought the greateſt aduentures to end.
                  The Lordes and Princes thus aſſembled, the King conferred with them on the eſtate and affairs of the Realme, but it was with ſo ſad countenance as could be: for the occaſion of his dreame made him ſo penſiue, as his Subiectes (being abaſhed thereat) were in meruailous doubtes, notwithſtanding, after he had giuen them to vnderſtand his will, and appointed all requiſite matters in order, he gaue them leaue to departe, ſending each one home to his houſe, only ſtaying with him three Aſtrologers, reputed the moſt skilfull in thoſe actions, and therefore he made choiſe of them. Theſe men he called into his chappell, there cauſing them ſolemnely to ſweare & promiſe, that without feare of any thing, how dangerous ſoeuer it were, they ſhould interprete to their vttermoſt, and truely expreſſe what he would declare to them, whereupon he told them his dream, as hath bin already before rehearſed: then one of them being named Vngan the Piccard, the moſt experte of them all, thus anſwered. My Lord, dreames are vaine thinges, and for ſuch ought to be eſteemed: notwithſtanding, ſeeing it is your pleaſure that ſome account ſhould be made of yours, giue vs ſome time to conſider thereon. It liketh me wel, ſaid the king, within 12 daies look that you make me anſwer. But to the end they ſhould not diſguiſe o
                        •
                      conceale the truth from him, he cauſed them to be ſeperated, ſo that during the time agreed vpon, they might neither ſee or ſpeake together: wherefore to their vttermoſt they trauailed in what they had promiſed the King, ſo that the day being come, when they ſhould render an occompt of their labour, he firſt tooke Albert of Champaigne aſide, and ſaid to him. Thou knoweſt how thou haſt ſworne and promiſed, to tell me what thou haſt found by thy ſkill. Sir anſwered Albert, let then the reſt be called into your preſence, for before them will I tel ye. Well haſt thou aduiſed, ſaid the King: whereupon they were ſent for, afterward Albert thus began. My opinion is, my Lord, that the cloſed Chamber, and him whom you ſaw enter by the ſecret dore, ſignifieth this Realme which is cloſe & well guarded: notwithſtanding by ſome right thereto, ſome one ſhall come to take it from you. And like as he thruſt his handes into your ſides, renting forth thence your hart, and afterward threw it into the Riuer: euen ſo ſhall your Townes and Caſtles both more & leſſe, be priuily ſtolen from you, and put into his hand from whom you ſhall not eaſily recouer them. And what meaneth the other hart, ſaid the King, which I dreamed ſhould remain with me, and yet he ſaid, that ſoone after I ſhould loſe it, againſt the will of him that took the firſt from me? It ſeemeth by

this, anſwered Albert, that ſome other ſhall inuade your Country as the firſt did, yet conſtrained more by force of another that commanded him to do ſo, then by any will thereto in himſelfe: thus ſee ye (my Lord) all that I can tell ye. Now ſaid the king to the ſecond named Antalles, tel vs your aduiſe. Me thinkes Sir, quoth he, that Albert hath very well ſaide, and I am of his opinion, except in this, (for ought I can learne, & as the cauſe ſheweth me) that what he ſaith ſhall happen, is already effected, & by the perſon that moſt loueth ye: notwithſtanding I am greatly amazed thereat, ſeeing there is not as yet any part of your Realme loſt, & if you do looſe any thing hereafter, it muſt be by ſuch a one as loueth you decrely. When the king heard this, he nodded his head, for it ſeemed to him, that he came neere the marke: but Vngan the Piccard, who knew much more thē the other, fel into a laughter, which he was ſildome wont to doe, becauſe he was a man very ſad and melancholly, yet (by chance) the King perceiued it, wherefore he ſaid. Maiſter Vngan my friend, now remaineth none but you, ſay boldly what you haue gathered. My Lord, quoth he, peraduenture I haue ſeene into things, which is not neceſſary to be knowne to any other then your ſelfe, & therefore let theſe giue place a while, if you pleaſe. At theſe words they with-drew themſelues, leauing the King and Vngan alone, who thus ſpake.
                  If your Maieſty ſaw me ere while to laugh, it was at one word which little you thinke on, yet it is true, and will you know what? It was that which Antalles ſaid, that what he found by your dreame was already happened, & by the perſon that beſt loueth ye: Now ſhall I reueale what you keepe in ſecret and thinke that none knowes but your ſelfe. You loue (my Lord) in ſuch a place, where you haue already accompliſhed your will, and ſhe whom you loue is ſurpaſſing faire, then tolde he all the geſts and faſhions of her, as if ſhe had bene there preſent. But as for the chamber you found ſhut, you know Sir, full well what it meaneth, and how ſhe whome you loue, deſirous to deliuer her heart and yours from griefe and ſadneſſe: came to ye, entring your chāber by the falſe dore that was hid from you. The hands that opened your ſides, is the conuinction of you twaine: then the heart taken from ye, ſheweth that ſhe hath by you a Son or a Daughter. Now tell me ſaid the King, what meaneth the caſting thereof into the Riuer? My Lord, quoth he, that nothing concerneth you, therefore neuer labour for further knowledge thereof. Yet would I, ſaid the King, faine vnderſtand it, and therefore feare not to tell me for any harme that may happen. Seeing you will needes haue it, anſwered Vngan, I beſeech ye Sir aſſure me while you liue, for any thing that I ſhal reueal, you wilnot be diſpleaſed with her who loueth you ſo loyally. That promiſe do I faithfully make thee, ſaid the King. In good ſooth Sir, quoth Vngan, that heart that you ſaw throwen into the water, is the firſt infant ſhe ſhall haue by you, who muſt of neceſſity be forſaken. And the other, ſaid the King, that ſhall remaine with me, what meaneth that? You may, anſwered Vngan, vnderſtand by the one, deſſeigne of the other, which is, that ſhe ſhall conceiue another childe, who

ſhall be caryed away againſt the will of her, that cauſed the loſſe of the firſt. Thou haſt told me ſtrange things, ſaid the King, and would God the miſ-fortune of my Children were not ſo true, as what thou haſt told me concerning the Lady I loue. For things ordeined and appoynted by the higheſt, anſwered Vngan, none knoweth how to gaine-ſay or remedy, and therefore men of wiſdome ſhould neuer be ſad or reioyce at them, becauſe oftentimes the Lord diſpoſeth matters beyond the capacity of men & farre otherwiſe then they expect. For this cauſe my Lord, forgetting all that I haue ſaid, and which you haue bin ſo curious to vnderſtand: referre all things to God, deſiring him in theſe your affaires and all other, to limit the end of them to his honor and glory, and thus (in mine opinion) you ought to ſet downe your reſt. The King was highly contented with Vngan, and ſo eſteemed of him, that from thēce forward he had him neere his perſon, by meanes whereof he receiued many great fauours. Now it happened, that at that inſtant as the king parted from the Philoſophers, a Damoſell preſented her ſelfe before him, right coſtly in garments and faire in beauty, thus ſpeaking. Vnderſtand King Perion, that when thou recouereſt thy loſſe, the Kingdome of Ireland ſhall looſe her flower. So giuing her Palfrey the bridle, and the King not able to ſtay her, ſhe rode away: theſe wordes made the good Prince more ſad & penſiue then he was before.
                  For this time the Auther leaueth this purpoſe, & returneth to ſpeake of the infant, that Gandales cauſed to be nouriſhed, whom he made to be called the Gentleman of the Sea. Now was he curiouſly entertained, wherefore in ſhort time he grew and became ſo faire, that all which beheld him meruailed thereat, but one day among other it happened, that Gandales rode to ſport himſelfe in the fields, arming himſelfe as became a good Knight: for he had dayly accompanied the king Languines, at ſuch time as he ſearched after aduentures, and albeit the king diſcontinued Armes, yet Gandales would oftentimes exerciſe himſelfe, and as he rode, he met with a Damoſell that thus ſpeake to him. Ah Gandales, if many great perſonages were aduertiſed of what I know certainly, I aſſure thee they would cauſe thee to looſe thy head. Wherefore? quoth he. Becauſe, ſaid the Damoſell, thou nouriſheſt their death in thy houſe. The knight knew not the woman that thus talked with him, but you muſt vnderſtand, how ſhe was the ſame that ſaid to king Perion, that when he recouered his loſſe, the Kingdome of Ireland ſhould loſe her flower, yet notwithſtanding he was farre from the matter, becauſe he knew not whereof ſhe ſpake, and therefore thus replyed. For Gods ſake (Damoſell) I pray ye tell me, on what occaſion you vſe theſe ſpeeches. Beleeue me Gandales, qooth ſhe, I haue tolde thee nothing but truth. At theſe wordes ſhe departed from him, leauing him very ſad and penſiue: yet long he did not continue in theſe thoughts, but he ſaw her returne againe, in great haſt, thus crying & calling. Ah Gandales, for Gods ſake ſuccor me: then Gandales turning about, beheld a knight follow her with his Sword drawne, wherefore he gaue his horſe the ſpurres to meete him, and placed himſelfe for the defence of the Damoſell,

then comming to him that purſued her, he ſaid. Stay thou bad aduiſed knight, what moueth thee thus trecherouſly to outrage Ladyes? What now? anſwered the other, doeſt thou hope to ſaue her, who by trumpery hath made me looſe both body and ſoule? That meddle not I withall, ſaid Gandales, but I will defend her to my power, well knowing that Ladyes ought not to be corrected in this manner, albeit they did deſerue it. We ſhal preſently ſee that, anſwered the knight, and ſo gallopped to the place from whence he came, which was a little thicket of trees, where ſtayed a very beautyfull Lady, who when ſhe ſaw him returne, came forth, bringing him a Sheeld and a ſtrong Launce, which he tooke, and without longer tariance, returned to his enemy, Gandales being a ſterne knight, would not refuſe him: whereupon they met together in ſuch ſorte, as their launces were broken no their Sheelds, and they with their horſes caſt to the ground, yet quickly did they recouer footing, when began betweene them a meruailous combate, which worſe would haue bin, but that ſhe which deſired ſuccor of Gandales, ſtepped betweene them, ſaying. Stay Gentlemen, fight no more. At theſe wordes, the Knight who before purſued her went back, then ſaid the Damoſell to him. Come now and aske pardon of me. Moſt willingly, anſwered the Knight, then throwing his Sword and Sheeld down, came and humbled himſelfe on both his knees before her, whereat Gandales was greatly amazed, afterward the Damoſell ſaid to the Knight. Goe cōmand the Lady vnder the trees, that ſhe get her away immediatly, vnleſſe thou ſhalt take her head from her ſhoulders. To this charge the Knight yeelded himſelfe obedient, and to her whom he loued more then himſelfe (by ſudden change from loue to hatred) he came and angerly ſaid. Trayterous woman, I know not how I ſhall defend my ſelfe from killing thee preſently. Well perceiued the poore Lady, that her friend was enchanted, and that conteſtation would nothing at all profit her: wherefore incontinent ſhe mounted on her palfray, and rode away, making the moſt grieuous ſorrow that euer was heard, and there remained ſhe whom Gandales had defended, ſpeaking to him in this manner. You haue (Sir) done ſo much for me, as I ſhall be beholding to you while I liue, and now you may depart at your pleaſures for if the knight offended me. I haue pardoned him with all my heart. As touching your pardon, anſwered Gandales, I haue nothing to doe therewith: for my ſelfe, I will end the Combate, or he ſhall hold him-ſelfe vanquiſhed. It behoueth that you acquite him, ſaid the Damoſell, ſeeing that if you were the beſt Knight in the world, eaſily can I make him ouercome yee. Do therein what you can, replyed Gandales, but I will not acquite him, except you firſt declare to me, wherefore (euen now) you ſaid, that I kept the death of many people in my houſe. Then will I rather tell ye, quoth ſhe, becauſe I loue you both: He as mine owne Soule, & you as my defender, albeit conſtraint cannot make me doe it: ſo taking him aſide, ſhe ſaid. You ſhall ſweare to me as a loyall Knight, that no other ſhall know it by you, vntill ſuch time as I command it: hereof he made her faithfull promiſe. Know then, ſaid the Damoſell, that he

whom you found in the Sea, ſhall one day be the flower of chiualdry, and ſhall cauſe the very ſtrongeſt to ſtoope, he ſhall enterpriſe, and with honor finiſh what other ſhall faile off: and ſuch deedes of armes ſhall he doe, as no one thinkes can be begun or ended by the ſtrength of one man. The proud ſhall he make humble and gracious, being cruell and pittileſſe, as alſo benigne and amiable to the debonaire: this Knight moſt loyally will maintaine loue, and ſhall effect in place anſwerable to his magnanimitie. Moreouer, I aſſure thee Gandales, that he is the Sonne of a King, and (without doubt) all this will happen which I haue told thee: but if thou keepe it not ſecret, it may returne thee more harme then good. Madame, anſwered Gandales, I pray ye tell me where I may meete with you hereafter, to conferre with you on the affaires of this infant. That muſt you not know by me, ſaid the Damoſell, or any other. Yet tell me your name, quoth Gandales, if ſo it be your pleaſure. By the faith you beare to the thing you moſt loue in the world, replyed ſhe you cō
                     
                        •
                     ure me ſo, as you ſhall know it: albeit the thing that moſt I loue, is he that wiſheth me leaſt good, and would you know what he is? it is the Knight againſt whom ere while you combated: notwithſtanding, I will not leaue to intreat him at my pleaſure, without he being able to remedy him-ſelfe. My name is Vrganda the vnknowne: and to the end you may remember me an other time, beholde me well at this preſent. At that inſtant, ſhe who ſhewed her ſelfe to Gandales faire, yong and freſh, as one of eighteene yeeres, became ſo olde and ouer ſpent, as he meruailed how ſhe could ſit on her horſe, if then he was ſtricken into admiration, you may iudge. But when ſhe had beene a prittie while in that ſtate, ſhe tooke out of a little bottell (which ſhe caryed) a certaine vnguent, wherewith ſhe rubbed her face, & right ſoone recouered her former countenaunce, ſaying to Gandales. What iudge ye now Sir? thinke you to finde me hereafter againſt my will, vſing all the dilligence you can deuiſe? neuer therefore put your ſelfe to ſuch paine: for when all liuing creatures goe about it, if I liſt, they ſhall looſe their labour. In good faith Madame, anſwered Gandales, I now make no doubt thereof, yet I beſeech ye to be mindefull of the Gentleman, who is forſaken of all but my ſelfe. Doe not you trouble your ſelfe therewith, ſaid Vrganda, this forſaking wil be a recouering of much more. My loue to him in greater then you can imagine, being ſhe that ſhortly intendes to receiue by him two aydes, which no other can giue me. In recompence whereof, I will giue him two likewiſe, wherewith he ſhall thinke himſelfe highly ſatiſfied. Let this ſuffiſe ye for this time, becauſe of neceſſitie I muſt be gone: aduiſing ye, that you ſhal ſee me againe ſooner then you thinke for. At theſe wordes the Damoſell departed, and Gandales, who had not all this while regarded the Knight againſt whom he fought, ſeeing him now bareheaded, reputed him one of the goodlyeſt Gentlemen that euer he had ſeene: who after he had taken vp his Sheeld, and laced on his helmet, followed the Damoſel, wherefore for this time we will let them goe, continuing what happened to Gandales.
                  
                  
                     Vrganda being departed, he returned

toward his Caſtel, meeting by the way with the Lady, whō 
                     Vrganda had cauſed to be chaſed frō her friend, and this ſorrowfull woman was heard by a Fountaine, where ſhe wept & lamented very bitterly: when ſhe eſpyed him that came toward her, ſhe eaſily knew him, wherefore ſhe thus ſpake. Is it poſſible, Sir Knight, that the wicked creature whom you ſuccoured, hath done ſo much as to let you liue? wicked ſhe is not, anſwered Gandales, but wiſe and vertuous: and if you be otherwiſe, I will make you deny theſe fooliſh wordes. Ah God, ſaid the Lady: how can the villaine deceiue euery one? How hath ſhe deceiued you; replied Gandales. Alas, quoth the Lady, ſhe hath taken from me the faire Knight that ſhould be mine: and ſo may I well ſay, ſeeing he would be more content to be with me, then with her. This is meere folly, anſwered Gandales, for in mine opinion, both you & ſhe doe loue without reaſon. How euer it be, ſaid the Lady, if I can I will be auenged. You trauile in vaine, quoth he, thinking to iniurie her that knowes it, not onely before you execute it, but when you imagine it. In ſooth anſwered the Lady, this afternoone ye may be gone when you pleaſe: and neuertheles it often happeneth, that thoſe which thinke they know moſt by preſumption, fall into the greateſt dangers. Gandales ſeeing her ſo impatient, commending her to God, followed his way, thinking more of the yong Gentlemans affaires, then what the Lady had ſpoken to him. Being come to his Caſtell, and ſeeing the little boy come running towards him, he tooke him vp in his armes, and louingly embracing him, remembred what Vrganda had ſaide to him, which made the teares ſtand in his eyes with ioy, ſaying within himſelfe. Faire Childe, I pray God I may liue ſo long, as to ſee thee ſuch a one as I hope for. At this time the yong Prince was about three yeeres olde, who ſeeing his Lord weepe, (as one moued with compaſſion) he wiped his eyes, which made Gandales imagine great humanity in him: and that as the childe grew in age & ſtrength, ſo waxed he in will, the better to helpe him if he had occaſion. Wherefore thence forward, he was very carefull of him, deuiſing all meanes for his beſt education, and compayning continually with his play fellowe Gandalin, he took very great delight in ſhooting.
                  He being come to the age of ſixe yeeres, King Languines and his Queene riding through the Country, came to Gandales Caſtell, where they were royally feaſted: but before they there ariued, Gandales being aduertiſed of their comming, cauſed the yong Prince and his companions to be hid in a backe Chamber, fearing that in reſpect of his beauty and good grace, the King would be deſirous to take him away with him, or elſe that the childrē would be troubleſome to the houſe. But it fortuned, that the Queene being lodged in one of the higheſt roomes in the Caſtell, as ſhe looked forth at a windowe, which was on that ſide where the Children were, ſhe eſpied the yong Prince and his play-fellowes drawing their bowes, and marking him very well, ſhe liked him aboue all the other, taking great pleaſure to behold his countenance, thinking he was Sonne to the Lord of the houſe: yet being doubtfull, and not ſeeing any of

whom ſhe might aske the queſtiō, ſhe thus called to her Ladyes. Come and behold the faireſt yong creature that euer was ſeene. At theſe words they al came running, and ſoone after, the Childe being drye, left his bowe by his companions, going to drinke at a conduit pipe, which was hard by: in meane while, one of them that was bigger then the Prince, tooke vp his bow to draw it, but Gandalin would not ſuffer him, whereupon a great ſtrife full betweene them, and Gandalin being the weakeſt, cryed out: Gentleman of the ſea, come helpe me. When the Prince heard him, he left his draught, and ran to him that miſuſed his brother, taking his bowe from him, giuing him therewith a great ſtroke ouer the head, ſaying: In an euill hower (varlet) doſt thou outrage my brother. The other not content therewith, came to the Prince, & they fought together: yet he that began the noyſe was glad to run thence, and by the way met their Gouernour, who ſaid: Whether runneſt thou; Maiſter, quoth he, the Gentleman of the ſea will beate me: then the Gouernour cōming to the Prince, rigorouſly threatned him, ſaying. What; are you already ſo bolde to beate your companions; you ſhall be talked withall by and by for it. When the Prince heard his threatning, he fell downe on his knees, ſaying. If you will appoynt that I ſhall be beaten, more gladly will I take it, then ſuffer my brother to be wronged in my preſence. With theſe words the teares trickled downe his cheekes, which moued pity in the Gouernour, wherefore he thus anſwered. If euer you doe ſo againe I will make ye weepe in an other ſorte. The Queene who had heard and ſeene all the debate, was greatly abaſhed, wherefore they called the little boy, the Gentleman of the ſea.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     How King Languines caryed away with him the Gentleman of the ſea, and Gandalin the Sonne of Gandales.
                     
                  
                  
                     WHile the Queene thus beheld the Gentleman of the ſea, the King entred her Chamber accompanied with Gandales, of whom ſhe preſently demanded, if that faire yong Sonne were his. Yea Madame anſwered Gandales. And (quoth ſhe) why ſuffer you him to be called the Gentleman of the ſea? Becauſe Madame, ſaid he, that at returne of my laſt voyage into little Brittayne, he was borne vpon the ſea. Truely quoth ſhe, he reſembles you but little: & this was her opinion, becauſe the Prince was exellent faire, and Gandales ſomewhat heard fauoured, yet a moſt gentle companion. It chanced during theſe ſpeeches, that the King caſt his eye on the little Prince, to whom he ſeemed no leſſe beautyfull then he did to the Queene, wherefore he commanded Gandales to fetch him: for when I goe hence (quoth he) I will take him with me, and haue him brought vp with mine one Son. In ſooth my Lord, anſwered Gandales, he is yet to yong to leaue his Mother: but hauing brought him, preſented him to the King,

who ſaid. Faire Child will ye go with me to the Court; My Lord, anſwered the Childe, I will goe whether you pleaſe, if my brother ſhall goe with me. And I quoth Gandalin, will not tarry here without him. I perceiue my Lord, ſaid Gandales, that if you take the one, you muſt needes haue the other, for they will not be ſeperated. I am the better pleaſed, anſwered the King: then calling Agraies to him, ſaid. My Son, I will that you loue theſe two Gentlemen, as I do their Father. When Gandales ſaw, that the King would haue them away in good earneſt, with the teares in his eyes, he thus ſpake in his hart. My childe, that ſo ſoone beginneſt to proue fortunate, now I ſee thee in the ſeruice of them, who one day may (happily) ſerue thee, if it pleaſe God to guide and protect thee, as I ſhall humbly pray for, & ſuffer that the words of Vrganda the vnknowne ſpoken to me, may proue true: making me ſo happy, as to liue to ſee the time, of thoſe great meruailes, promiſed thee in Armes. The King who noted Gandales, ſeeing that his eyes were filled with teares, came to comfort him, ſaying. Beleeue me, I neuer thought you had bene ſuch a foole, as to weepe for a Childe. Ah my Lord anſwered Gandales, it may be vpon greater occaſion then you thinke for, and if it pleaſe you to know the truth, I will preſently tell ye heere before your Queene. So he tolde the whole diſcourſe, how he found the Gentleman of the ſea, and in what equipage: and he had proceeded with that which Vrganda foretold him, but that he remembred the oath he tooke. Now my Lord ſaid Gandales, deale for him as you ſhall pleaſe, for (ſo God helpe me) according to his beginning, I thinke him to be iſſued of great linage. Whē the King heard this, he eſteemed much the better of him, that he had ſo carefully nouriſhed the child he found, and thus anſwered. It is great reaſon (ſeeing god hath done ſo much for him, as to preſerue him frō ſo great a danger) that now we be diligent in his education, and endowe him with habilities when time ſhall ſerue. In good faith my Lord, ſaid the Queene, ſo pleaſe you, he ſhalbe mine during his young yeeres, and when he comes to mans eſtate, I will deliuer him to ſerue you. Well Madame, quoth the King, I giue him you. Now early on the next morning, the King would ſet forward, wherefore the Queene, not hauing forgot the gift of her Lord, tooke with her Gandalin and the yong Gentleman of the ſea, whom ſhe commanded to be ſo carefully attended as her owne Sonne, for ſhe tooke ſuch pleaſure in beholding him, that dayly ſhe would haue him neere her owne perſon, becauſe he had ſuch a cheerefull ſpirit, and ſo well gouerned withall, as he was well liked of euery ore, ſo that whatſoeuer he did, paſſed with generall allowance, & no other paſtime had he, but in ſhooting and cheriſhing dogges for the chaſe.
                  Now doth the Authour leaue this matter, returning to that which happened to King Perion, & his new freind Eliſena. King Perion (as you haue already heard) being in Gaule, where he vnderſtood by his Philoſphers the expoſition of his dreame, as alſo what the Damoſell had told him: That when he recouered his loſſe, the Kingdome of Ireland ſhould looſe her flower: he became more penſiue then before, yet could he vnderſtand nothing

thereof. As he thus ſadly ſpent his dayes, it chanced that another Damoſell entred his Pallace, who brought him a letter from Eliſena, whereby ſhe gaue him to know, that King Garinter her Father was dead, and ſhe remained alone, and for this cauſe he ſhould pitty her, in that the King of Scots would take her Kingdome from her. For the death of King Garinter was Perion ſomewhat ſorrowfull, but yet he comforted himſelfe, by thinking he ſhould goe to ſee his friend, towards whom he had not diminiſhed one iot of his affection, wherefore he quickly diſpatched the Damoſell, ſaying to her. Returne and ſay to your Miſtreſſe, that without ſtaying one whole day, I ſhall be in ſhort time with her. The Damoſell well pleaſed with this anſwere, returned, and after the King had ſet his affaires in order, he parted in good equipage to ſee his Eliſena, and iournied ſo ſpeedily, as he ariued in little Brittaine: where he heard newes that king Languines had already gotten all the cheefe of the Country, except thoſe Cities which Garinter gaue to Eliſena, who now abode (as he vnderſtood) at a place named Arcate, whether he addreſſed himſelfe. If he were there well receiued, I leaue to your iudgments, and ſhe likewiſe of him whom ſhe loued ſo much. After the welcomming & feaſting of one another, the King told her that he would now marry her, and for that cauſe ſhe aduertiſed her kindred and Subiects: which ſhe did with all diligence could be deuiſed, as alſo with ſo great contentation as her heart might deſire, for herein only conſiſted the ſumme of her affections. Which being heard by the King of Scots, and how to accompliſh this, King Perion was already arriued with his Siſter: he ſent immediatly for all the noble men of his Realme, to beare him company in doing honor and wel-come to the King his brother. At his comming, he was gratiouſly receiued by King Perion, and after by embracings they had ſaluted each other, and the nuptials likewiſe thorowly ended: the kings determined to returne home into their owne Countryes.
                  King Perion trauailing toward Gaule with his Queene Eliſena, & ſomewhat weary with tediouſneſſe of the way, he would refreſh himſelfe along by a Riuer ſide: & while the tentes were erecting, he rode ſoftly alone by the waterbancke, imagining how he might know the truth, whether Eliſena had a child, aaccording as his Philoſophertold him in expounding his dreame. But ſo long continued he in this thought, that riding on without any regarde, he came to an Hermitage which was neere at hand: wherefore finding him-ſelfe at a place of deuotion, he alighted, tying his Horſe to a tree, that he might goe in to ſay his prayers. And entring the Church, he found there a very antient religious man, who comming to meete him, ſaid, Knight, is it true, that king Perion is marryed to our kings daughter? yea verily, anſwered the king, Praiſed be God, ſaid the good Hermit, for I know certainly, that ſhe loueth him with all her hart. How can you tell that; replied the king. Euen from her owne mouth, ſaid the good olde man. The king then hoping he ſhoud heare of him the thing which he moſt deſired to know, ſaid. I pray ye Father tell me, what you haue vnderſtood of

her and me, for I am King Perion. Truely Sir, anſwered the wiſe man, herein ſhall I greatly fault, and iuſtly might ſhe repute me an heretique, if I ſhould manifeſt what ſhe hath told me vnder confeſſion: ſuffiſe your ſelfe with that I haue declared, namely, the true and ſincere loue ſhe beareth you. But ſeeing I haue met ye in a place ſo conuenient, I will that ye know, what a Damoſell (in mine opinion very wiſe) ſaid to me at the time you came firſt into this country: yet ſpake ſhe to me ſo darkely, as I neuer knew well how to comprehend her words, for ſhe ſaid. That from little Brittaine ſhould come two great Dragons, that ſhould hold their gouernment in Gaule, and their hearts in great Brittaine, and from thence they ſhould go to deuoure the beaſtes of other Countryes: but againſt ſome they ſhould be braue and cruell, and againſt other ſome humble and gracious, as though they had neither nayles or hart. At theſe words I became very penſiue, nor could I euer ſince learne the ſignification hereof. Nor did the King at this inſtant vnderſtand them, but was in no leſſe meruaile then the Hermite: notwithſtanding, no long time after he found this propheſie to be true. Now the king hauing commended the holy man to God, returned to his tents, where he ſaluted his Queene, yet would he not tell her (as then) any thing of that wherewith his mind was troubled: but diſſembled the ſame till they were in bed, and after their accuſtomed embracings, the king by an apt meane recoūted to her, what his Aſtrologers had ſaid on his dreame, earneſtly deſiring her to tel him, whether ſhe had any Child by him or no. When the good Lady heard this, ſhe was ſurpriſed with ſhame in ſuch ſorte, as willingly ſhe could haue wiſhed her ſelfe dead: and therefore altogether denied the truth, ſo that at this time the king might not know what he deſired. On the morrow they departed thence and arriued in Gaule, where this noble Queen was generally receiued with great ioy. And becauſe that (as it hath bene heretofore rehearſed) the king bare her ſinguler affection, he did for her ſake ſtay more in his Realme, then he was wont to doe: ſo that not long after, the Queene brought him a Sonne, who was named Galaor, and next a daughter called Melicia.
                  
                  But the little Galaor being two yeeres and a halfe olde, it chaunced that one day the king his father, ſoiourning not farre from the ſea ſide, in one of his Cities named Orangill, ſtanding at a window toward the Garden, where was then the Queene with her ſon & Ladies ſporting: there entred at a poſtern dore ſuch a horrible Giant, as no man that euer ſaw him but was exceedingly affraide, bearing on his neck a huge & mighty Mace. When the company of women eſpied him, ſome fled among the trees, and other (not to ſee him) fell on the ground: but the Giant made no reckoning of them, only he came to little Galaor, whom he tooke in his armes, and in a laughter ſaid. By my faith, the Damoſell ſaid true. So without any thing elſe, taking away the Child, returned the ſame way he came: and entring a Brigandine that there ſtayed for him, departed vnder ſaile. In meane while the ſorrowfull Queene, who ſaw her ſon caryed away. (Forgetting through motherly loue the feare of the Giant) followed him very

neere, hoping to recouer her little Galaor: but when ſhe ſaw him enter the Brigandine, God knowes in what anguiſh ſhe was, for her Sonne in crying ſaid: Ah helpe me mother. Alas ſhe could not, and more ſtrange then death ſhe tooke it, to ſee him caried away, whom ſhe loued as her owne life: and in this extreame dollour, ſhe remembred her other Sonne throwne into the ſea, wherefore the wofull mother fell downe in a ſwoune. King Perion her husband, who ſaw all this in the place where he ſtood, from whence he could not quickly come to aide the Queene or her Son: at laſt came to the Queene, finding her in that caſe, and did ſo much as he recouered her againe. Then began ſhe to make the moſt grieuous mone in the world, regreeting this new loſſe, by whom the before hoped to vnderſtand of the firſt: and diſpayring euer to heare any newes of comfort, moued great compaſſion in all that beheld her. All this while the king laboured to perſwade her, whereby at laſt ſhe reobtained the reaſon that before was abſent, whereupon the king ſaid. Madame, we muſt thank God for all, and cheefely in this caſe, for now I euidently ſee hath happened, the effect of my dreame, whereof ſometime I tolde ye: thus is little Galaor the laſt hart, that muſt be taken from vs againſt our will. Henceforth therefore feare not to declare, what is become of the firſt, for conſidering the eſtate you then were in, you ought not in reaſon to be blamed. At theſe words the mournefull mother forgetting none of the fault committed, told him the miſ-fortune of her firſt borne Sonne, entreating him to pardon her, ſeeing ſhe did it throw feare of death, according as was the law of the Country. In good faith Madame, anſwered the king, well may ye aſſure your ſelfe, that while I liue I will not be offended with ye on your behalfe, therefore I pray ye, take their deſteny ſo ſecretly as you may: for I truſt in God, that ſeeing it hath pleaſed him at our beginning, to afforde vs ſo little ioy and comforte by our children, in time to come he will recompence vs with better ſucceſſe, and it may be yet one day, that we ſhall heare good tidings of them.
                  Now leauing this, ye muſt note, that the Giant who bare away the yong Prince, was of the Country of Leonois, Lord of an Iſle named Gandalan, wherein he had two ſtrong places. He was not a bloudy man, as many other were, but of a gentle and peaceable conuerſation, except when he was offended, for in his fury he would doe great cruelties. At one inſtant was the little barque ſo caried by the wind, as he arriued in his country, which he had cauſed to be peopled with Chriſtians, & there he kepta Hermite of moſt holy life, to whom he went ſaying. Father take this child, and nouriſh him for me, teaching him all that is conuenient in a knight, for I aſſure ye, he is the ſon of a king and a Queene. Ah, ſaid the Hermet, why haue you doone ſuch a cruell deede? I will tell ye, anſwered the Giant. Being minded to go combate with the Giant Albadan, who moſt vnhappily killed my father, as you know, and at this preſent forcibly holds from me the Rocke of Galteres, which by right appertaineth to me: being thus embarqued to execute mine intent, there came a Damoſell to me, who ſaid. Thou

abuſeſt thy ſelfe, for what thou goeſt about, muſt be done by the ſon to king Perion of Gaul, who is much more ſtrong and hardy then thou art. I demanded by her faith, whether ſhe told me true or no. That ſhalt thou ſee, quoth ſhe: At what time the two bra
                           •
                        ches of one tree ſhall be ioyned, which at this inſtant are ſeuered: then did ſhe tell me, where I ſhould find him of whome ſhe ſpake, and this is he I giue you in guard, euen as you loue me. By theſe meanes remained little Calaor in the holy mans charge, and there he ſtaied ſo long, till he was of yeeres to receiue the order of Knight-hood, as hereafter ſhalbe recited to you.
                  At this time reigned in great Brittaine a king named Falangris, who dying without children, left one of his bretheren his heire: no leſſe prudent in all affaires, then prompt at armes, and Knightly chiualry, being called Liſuart, who maried (not long before) with Briſana, daughter to the king of Denmarke, the faireſt Lady that then was to be found in all the North parts.
                  And albeit ſhe had bene requeſted in mariage by great Princes of the country, notwithſtanding for feare of ſome, the father durſt not conſent to the other: for which he would prouide by chooſing one himſelfe, and ſo maried her to the yong Prince Liſuart, who for loue ſerued him, nor was he ignorant of the vertues harbouring in hi
                        •
                      ge
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     e hart. Now after the death of Falangris, the Princes of great Brittaine, knowing the right of Liſuart, ſent for him to ſucceed in the Realme: for he being in a ſtrange country, whereby his hauty deeds and chiualry, he was maried in ſo good a place, therefore they piſpatched their Ambaſladours to him, intreating him to accept the Realme and ſubiects of great Brittaine, and to come to inueſt himſelfe therein.
               
               
                  CHAP. V.
                  
                     How King Liſuart ſayling by ſea, landed in Scotland, where he was greatly honoured, and well entertained.
                  
                  
                     PRince Liſuart vnderſtanding his Subiects deſire for his ſhort returne, prouided his equipage by Sea, being aided and aſſiſted by the king of Denmarke his father in law, and afterward ſet ſaile toward great Brittaine. And becauſe he coaſted along Scotland, he tooke landing there, whereof Languines being aduertiſed, came and receiued him very royally. Now was this new king of great Brittaine accompanied with the Queene his wife, and a faire Princeſſe their daughter, aged (as is thought) about ten yeeres, named Oriana, one of the faireſt creatures that euer was ſeene: and therefore (during the time of her aboad in Denmarke) ſhe was commonly called The only, becauſe her paragon was not to be found in beauty. This yong Lady Oriana, being not vſed to trauaile on the ſea, found her ſelfe ſomewhat weary, and her father fearing a worſe miſ-hap, intreated the king of Scotland ſhe might ſtay with him till he ſent for her. Right gladly

did king Languines and his Queene accept this charge, wherefore king Liſuart, (without longer ſtay in Scotland) went to ſea; where weighing Anckers and hoiſing ſailes, in ſhort time landed in his owne Country, where being arriued, before he could abide in quiet, as in ſuch occaſions it often falleth out: certaine rebels were found, whom in time he ouer-maiſtred, which was the cauſe he could not ſo ſpeedily ſend for his daughter that he left in Scotland.
                  
                  In this place the author leaueth the new King peaceably ruling in great Brittaine, and returneth to the Gentleman of the ſea, who by this time hath attained the age of twelue yeeres: albeit in ſtature he ſeemed paſt fifteene, and for his good grace (both of the Queene and the other Ladies) was loued and eſteemed more then any other. Now according as hath beene already declared, the yong Princeſſe Oriana, daughter to King Liſuart, was left with the Queene of Scots to refreſh her ſelfe, till the King her father ſhould ſend for her, and to her did the Queene vſe all the gracious curteſies could be deuiſed, ſaying to her withall: Faire Madame, henceforth (ſo pleaſe you) ſhall the Gentleman of the ſea ſerue you, and be yours. Which the Princeſſe Oriana willingly accepted, wherefore the yong Prince made ſuch an impreſſion of this kindnſſe in his ſpirite, as during life he ment to ſerue nor loue any other, and therefore for euer bequeathed to her his heart: but ſo well it came to paſſe, that this loue was mutuall and equall betweene them both. Notwithſtanding, the Prince for a while hauing no knowledge thereof, thought him-ſelfe vnworthy ſo great good: reputing it a very bold enterpriſe to thinke thereon, which was the cauſe he durſt not ſpeake, but ſhew his good will in outward ſemblance. The yong Princeſſe who was of the fame minde, and alſo in like paine, forbare to talke more with him then any other, thereby to auoyde all ſuſpition: but the eyes of the two louers doing their deuoire and office, entercourſed the thing which moſt they eſteemed, and thus couertly they liued, without acquainting each other with this amorous affectiō. Soone after, this yong vnknowne Prince, ſeeing that to attaine the good grace of the Lady he loued, it was neceſſary he ſhould take Armes, & receiue the order of Knighthood, he ſaid to himſelfe. If once I were a Knight, I would do ſuch exployts, as ſhould deſerue the fauour of my Lady, or die in the attempt. And in this deſtre, one day finding king Languines at leyſure for his requeſt, and comming to him in the garden where he walked, he fell on his knee, vſing theſe ſpeeches. My Lord, might it ſtand with your pleaſure, I gladly would receiue my Knight-hood. When the King heard him, ſeeing his yong yeeres, he was greatly abaſhed, and thus anſwered. How now Gentleman of the ſea? Do you thinke your ſelfe already ſtrong enough for ſuch a weightie charge? In ſooth it is an eaſie thing to receine honor: but to maintaine it as behooueth (
                        〈◊〉
                      may be) is more hard then you eſteeme, ſo that oftentimes a right good hart is troubled therewith. For if through feare or cowardiſe he forſake what he ought to doe, more better is death to him, then a ſhamefull life: therefore by mine aduiſe, I would ha
                        •
                     e you yet a while to forbeare. The Prince not

contented with this anſwere, replied. I will not forgoe honor, my Lord, through any ſuch feare as it pleaſeth you to alleadge, for if I had not the deſire to doe all that appertaineth to Chiualrie, I would not haue beene ſo bold to make this requeſt: but ſeeing by your gracious fauour I haue beene hitherto nouriſhed, moſt humbly I beſeech ye to grant me this petition, that I may receiue no occaſion of looſing your ſeruice, to ſeeke elſe where for obtaining my ſuite. The king highly eſteemed the courage of the youth, and doubting leaſt he would depart indeed, anſwered. Aſſure your ſelfe Gentle-man, that I wil do it whē I ſee it neceſſary for ye, in meane while prouide your Armes and what elſe belongeth: Yet tell me (faire Sir) to whome (if I reſuſed) would you go for your order. To King Perion, ſaid the Prince, who is reputed a good and hardie Knight, for he hath maried the Siſter to your Queene, who maketh me beleeue that he will not denie me: when I ſhall let him vnderſtand, how ſhee hath nouriſhed me, and that I am her ſeruant. It is true, quoth the King, but for this preſent haue a little patience, and when time ſerueth, you ſhalbe honorably knighted: in meane while he gaue charg, that all his needfull accou
                        •
                     rements for the cauſe ſhould be prouided.
                  Now did the king aduertiſe Gandales heereof, who was ſo contented therewith, as he ſoone diſpatched a Damoſell toward the yong Prince: by whome he ſent the Sword, the Ring, and the letter couered with waxe, which he found in the cheſt he tooke out of the ſea. Such ſpeede made the Damoſell, as ſhe came to the Prince, at what time he was ſporting with Oriana and the other Ladies, while the Queene ſlept. At that inſtant was he in ſuch a ſollemne thought of Oriana, as not daring to lift vp His eyes to behold her, ſaid within himſelfe. Ah God, why haſt thou endued this Lady with ſuch exellent beauty, that vnhappy I ſhould ſuffer ſo extreame paſſions by louing her? Ah mine eyes, too high did ye looke when ye beheld her, of whome you are not worthy: but if the worſt happen, death ſhall ſatiſfie this timeritie, whereto my hart (for her) is humbled. In this thought he was like to fall downe, ſo had he forgotten and ouergone himſelfe: when a page came to him, ſaying. Gentleman, there is a ſtrange Damoſell attending without, who hath brought you certaine preſents, and would ſpeake with ye. When ſhe (who loued him) heard this meſſage, her hart began to tremble in ſuch ſorte, as being not able to endure this new flame, ſhe called to the Prince, ſaying. I pray ye ſtay heere, and let the Damoſel come in, that we may haue the ſight of what ſhee hath brought: which he did, & the Damoſell being entred, thus ſpake to him. My Lord, your good friend Gandales ſaluteth you, as the man whom he onely loueth, and hath ſent ye this Ring, this waxe, & this Sword, which he deſireth ye (for his ſake) to keepe while you liue. The Prince hauing receiued the preſents, laid the Ring and waxe aſide, to behold the Sword, which being without a ſheath, was wrapped in a fine linnen cloth, whereat he greatly meruailed: and while he was muſing thereon, Oriana tooke the waxe, thinking it to be ſome other thing, and ſaid. Beleeue me Gentleman, for my part I would haue this waxe. You may haue it

if you pleaſe Madame, quoth he, but me thinkes this faire Ring were better for ye. I will haue nothing but this waxe, ſaid Oriana, and ſo tooke it. During theſe diſcourſes, the King came, who ſaid to the Prince: What thinke ye of that Sword? My Lord, quoth he, I find it a very faire one, but I maruaile wherefore it hath no ſcabbard. It is ſaid the King, very neer fifteene yeeres ſince it had one: & hauing ſo ſaid, he laid it aſide, proceeding thus. You would be a Knight, and know not whether you ought to be one or no: therefore it is neceſſary that you vnderſtand what you are, and I to tell you ſo much as I know. Heereupon he declared, how he was found in a cheſt on the ſea, with the Sword & the Ring, as you haue already heard. I beleeue my Lord, quoth the Prince, that for your pleaſure you vſe this inuention, becauſe the Damoſell when ſhe entred ſaid: that my good friend Gandales ſent me theſe preſents, but I think ſhe fayled in her words, and would haue ſaid my father Gandales. Notwithſtanding (my Lord) if it be ſo as you haue reherſed, I am not diſpleaſed thereat: except in not knowing of whence I am, nor they me, yet do I thinke my ſelfe a Gentleman, for my hart perſwades me of no leſſe. Now therefore it is more neceſſary that I be Knighted then before, to the end I may labour to become ſuch a one as may acquire honor and reputation, ſeeing I haue no parents by whom I may be named, not knowing what I am. When the King heard him ſpeake ſo vertuouſly, he eſteemed much better of him then before, thinking him-ſelfe, that he could not but be a man of calling and hardy.
                  As thus they were deuiſing, a Gentleman came to the King, and ſaid. My Lord, King Perion your brother is come to the Court. The King very glad thereof, departed to receiue his brother, & embracing him, thus ſpake. I ſee my good brother, you meant to take me vnprouided, for little did I thinke of your ſo ſudden arriual in this country. Noble brother, anſwered King Perion, I come to requeſt the ayd of my friends, becauſe I haue more neede of them at this time then euer I had: for Abies King of Ireland threatneth me with ſtrong warre, and is with great puiſſance entred my Kingdome, ſo that he and Dagauel his Cozin, haue laid very ſeuere ſiedge to me. And which is worſt of all, Fortune hath ſo hardly dealt with me, that certaine whome I truſted haue forſaken me, and the greateſt part of my other friends are ouerthrown in the skirmiſhes we haue had together, ſo that now I come to requeſt your ſuccour in this extreame neede
                        •
                      Truely brother, anſwered Languines, you may be ſure thereof, and your miſ-fortune grieueth me not a little: but I wil prouide therefore ſo well as I can. Agraies who was newly knighted, being hot and ready to Armes, hauing heard the re
                     
                        •
                     ueſt of his Vnckle, and the grant the King his father had made him of aſſiſtance: came and fell on his knee before him, ſaying. I beſeech ye father let me obtaine one boone at your hands. The King who loued him as himſelfe, anſwered. Demand what thou wilt, for it ſhall not be denied thee. I deſire your ſufferance, quoth Agraies, that I may go to Gaule to aid the Queene my Aunte. In good faith, said the King, well content am I, 
                        〈◊〉
                      in good equipage ſhalt thou goe and ſtrongly accompanied. When the

                     Gentleman of the ſea heard this determination, he was more earneſt to compaſſe his enterpriſe then before: and ſeeing king Perion was preſent, he could not glut his eyes with beholding him, onely for the good reporte he had heard of him: for he thought not then of any affinitie or parentage, but would rather be Knighted by his hand then any other, in reſpect of his high & hautghy deedes of Armes. And to attaine his purpoſe, he thought beſt to entreat the Queene, hoping that if ſhe would doe ſo much for him, as to moue the King her brother therein ſhe ſhold not be gainlaid: and for he ſaw her ſo ſad, that he durſt not ſpeake to her, he boldly went to Ortana, and ſetting his knee to the ground, ſaid. I pray ye Madame tell me what cauſeth the Queene to be ſo penſiue? Oriana beholding the man before her, whom ſhe loued in her very Soule, albeit neither he or any other knew it: was ſurprized whith ſuch vehemency of loue, as ſhe could hardly tell how to diſſemble it, yet thus ſhe anſwered. Gentleman of the ſea and my friend, I will take paine to know, then ſhall I tell ye with all my hart, ſeeing it is the firſt requeſt that euer ye made to me. Madame, quoth he, I know in my ſelfe ſo ſmall deſeruing toward you, that I account my ſelfe vnworthy to requeſt any thing of you: but I ſhould thinke I were happy if I had the meane to obey you, or that it would pleaſe you to cōmand me. What? ſaid ſhee, haue you ſo baſe a mind, & ſuch ſmal eſtimatiō of your ſelfe? Madame, anſwered he, in what ſort ſoeuer it be, I haue no forces at all, but ſuch as haue left me in great deſire to ſerue you: for my hart is altogether yours, and can receiue nothing but from you. Mine? quoth Oriana, and ſince when? Since the time it pleaſed you Madame, replied the Prince. And when was it, quoth ſhe, that it pleaſed me; At that time, anſwered the Prince, when the king your father left you in this Country, if you remember, and when the Queene preſented me to you, ſaying: I giue you this Gentleman to ſerue you, and at that time you accepted me as yours, when you anſwered, that you were well contented. Then was I giuen to you, and yours onely I reputed my ſelfe, ſo that I haue no authoritie ouer my ſelfe. Certes, ſaid Oriana, you tooke her words to better end, then at that time ſhe meant them: which I take in good part, and am content it ſhall be ſo. No ſooner had ſhe thus ſaid, but the Prince was ouercome with ſuch ioy, as he had no power to anſwer. Oriana perceiuing it, made no ſhew thereof, but ſaid ſhe would goe to the Queene, to doe what he had deſired: and returned ſoone after, telling him, that her griefe was for the Queene of Gaule her ſiſter, becauſe the King of Ireland ſo oppreſſed her country. So pleaſe you Madame, anſwered the Prince, if I were Knighted, I gladly would go ſuccor her, with your leaue. And without my leaue, quoth Oriana, will ye not goe? Not for death, ſaid he, for without your gracious fauour, my conquered hart can haue no force or vertue in any perill. At theſe words Oriana ſmiled, ſaying. Seeing then you are mine, I grant you to be my Knight, and you ſhall aide the Queenes ſiſter. Moſt humbly did the Prince giue her thanks, telling her, how the King thought it not good to giue him the order of Knighthood, but had denied him: yet, quoth he, is King Perion
                     
heere as you know, at whoſe hands (ſo pleaſed you to intreate it) I would more willingly receiue it, then of any other. Nor will I let for that, ſaid ſhe, and the better to compaſſe your deſire: I will cauſe the Princeſſe Mabila to beare me company, for whoſe ſake he will the ſooner grant it. So preſently ſhe went to her, and told what ſhe and the Gentleman of the ſea had concluded, to attaine his Knight-hood, and how faine he would haue it at King Perions hand, for which cauſe ſhe intreated her aſſiſtance in the ſute. Mabila who loued the Prince very well, thus anſwered. I aſſure ye (ſiſter) there ſhal be no want in me, for ſo well doth the Gentleman deſerue, as would make one do much more then this for him, wherefore let him be ready this night in the Queens Chappell: then when time ſhall ſerue, we will go with our women to accompany him, and I will ſend for the King mine Vncle (which ſhall be ſomewhat before the breake of day) that he may come ſee me, and he being come to vs, you and I will moue him in the matter, which I hope he will grant vs, conſidering he is a very gracious and affable Prince. This is very well appointed, anſwered Oriana: wherefore they ſent for the Prince, and tolde him al the platforme they had laid: who humbly thanking them, wold prouide all things ready for him-ſelfe, and therefore departed. Then went he to finde Gandalin, making him acquainted with the whole, ſaying. I pray ye brother, conuay mine armour ſo cloſely as you can into the Queenes Chappell, becauſe I hope this night to receiue mine order: and for I muſt right ſoone depart hence, I would know if you haue any will to beare me company. Beleeue me, quoth Gandalin, neuer with my will ſhall I depart from ye. Of theſe words was the Prince ſo glad, that the teares ſtood in his eyes with ioy. Well ſaid he, prouide all things ready as I told ye: wherein Gandalin failed not, for ere ſupper he tooke ſuch order, as all was done vnſeene of any, and the Prince got him ſecretly into the Chappell, where he armed himſelfe except the head & hands. So ſtaying there for the Ladies & King Perion, he fel on his knees before the Alter, deſiring God to be his aide: not onely in conquering ſuch as he ſhould deale withall in Armes, but alſo in obtaining her, who cauſed him to endure ſo many mortal paſſiōs. The night being come, & the Queen with-drawne, the Princeſſes Oriana and Mabila with their womē, came to the chappel where the Gentlemā of the ſea attended, & Mabila hauing ſent for K. Perion, he was no ſooner entred but ſhe thus began. My L. ſeeing you haue taken ſo much paines for me as to come hither, I pray you grant Madame Oriana, daughter: to King Liſuart, a ſmall requeſt ſhe will make to ye. I would be loath, ſaide the King to deny her, as well for her Fathers honor as her own ſake. Oriana aroſe to thanke him, whom whē he beheld ſo faire, he thought all the world could not match her in beauty: thus ſpeaking to her. Madame, doth it pleaſe you to command me any thing? Not cōmand my Lord, quoth ſhe, but intreat ye to giue my Gentleman the order of knight-hood: this ſaid ſhe, pointing to him as he kneeled before the Altar. When the king ſaw him, he wondred at his goodly ſtature, and ſaid to him. My friend, would you receiue the order of Knight-hood; Yea my good Lord, anſwered

the Prince, may it pleaſe you to giue it me. In Gods name be it done, ſaid the King, who giue you grace ſo well to proceede therein, as he hath beſtowed ſeemely perfection on you. Then putting on his right ſpur, and dubbing him with his Sword, thus ſpake. Now haueye the Order appertaining to a Knight, but I would oppertunity had ſerued me, to haue giuen it you with greater honor: notwithſtanding, according to mine opinion of you, I hope you will proue ſuch, as your renowne ſhall ſupply what wanteth here in performance. Afterward King Perion took leaue of the Ladies, who highly thanked him, & then ſet on his way toward Gaule, cōmending the new Knight to the heauenly protection: this was the firſt act, that might beare teſtimony of theſe louers ſweete deſires. If it ſeeme to the Reader, that their purpoſe was not according to affection, but ſimple in reſpect of their vehement paſſions: I anſwer, that they ought to excuſe their age, likewiſe it often commeth to paſſe, that they which thinke themſelues moſt expert in thoſe pleaſing and amorous actions, haue beene by this God ſo ſtrongly bound, and liuely attainted: as not only he depriued them of ſpeech, but of iudgment alſo, & it is neceſſary for ſuch perſons to vſe greater words, then theſe two who as yet had not learned them. But this new Knight being thoroughly furniſhed, and ready to his iourney by his Ladies conſent: would in thanking the company, take a more ſecret conge of Oriana. And ſhe who for his ſudden parting, felt new paſſions in her heart, yet neuertheleſſe diſſembling thē: tooke him by the hand, and walking aſide, thus ſpake. Gentleman of the ſea, you will be gone then, but firſt I pray ye tell me, whether you be the Sonne of Gandales or no: for according to the good opinion I haue of you, I thinke you to be iſſued of better place. Then reherſed he all that King Languines had told him, wherein ſhe conceiued very great pleaſure: which done, they committed each other to God. So departed the Prince from this company, and right-ſoone found Gandalin, who attended for him at the Kings lodging dore, with the reſt of his Armes and his Horſe, whereon he mounted, and left the Citie vnſeene of any, becauſe as yet it was not day ſo rod they on till they came into a Forreſt.
                  Now is the greateſt part of the day ſpent, before they would refreſh themſelues in any place: but hunger conſtrained them to feede on ſuch viandes as Gandalin had brought with him from the Citie. During this time, they heard in the Wood on their right hand the voyce of ſome one, which ſeemed to them very doleful, wherefore the Prince rode preſently that way: where he foūd a knight dead, and hard by him another in little better caſe, for he was ſo wounded, that he had no hope to liue. As for the partie that ſo cried, it was a woman who lay vpon the knight, preſſing him ſo ſoore, as made his hart to faile him: and which was worſt of all, the villanous woman tocauſe his death the ſooner, cruelly thruſt her hands into his wounds. But when the wounded knight eſpied the Prince, ſo well as he could he craued ſuccor, ſaying. Ah gentle Sir, for Gods ſake ſuffer me not to be thus murthered by this ribaud. Greatly was the Prince abaſhed at this wicked dealing, and therefore very roughly

thus ſpake. Woman withdraw your ſelfe, for you doe the thing not beſeeming you or your like. She as one aſhamed, retired, and the Knight full of anguiſh fell in a ſwoune, which made the Prince very deſirous to know what he was: but fearing that he had already yeelded his breath, quickly alighted, & vſed ſuch good meanes as reuiued him againe, when he began to cry. Ah I am dead, good friends bring me to ſome place where I may haue councell for my ſoule. Take courage, anſwered the Prince, for you ſhal haue what you demand: but I pray ye tell me, what fortune brought ye hither, or where is he that hath thus hardly intreated ye? It is, ſaid the Knight, through this wicked woman, who (albeit I was rich and puiſſant, yea far much more then ſhe) I made choiſe, for the good loue I bare her, and eſpouſed her as my wife: neuertheleſſe ſhe diſcourteous creature, forgetting the good and honor I had done her, hath ſundry times abandoned her honeſt regarde, namely this night paſt with this Knight here dead, whom I hauing neuer before ſeene, by chance yeſterday he came to me: and this laſt night thus villanouſly abuſed me, where taking him with the head, we had a combate together, wherein (as you ſee) he loſt his life. But when this ſtrumpet ſaw I had ſlaine him, fearing I would do as much to her: ſhe fell at my feete and deſired pardon, whereto I eaſily condiſcended, prouided, that ſhe offended no more. Hereupon, I intreated her to bind vp my wounds, but ſhe perceiuing how grieuouſly I was hurt, and brought into very weake eſtate through ouer-much loſſe of my bloud, to reuenge the adulterous villaines death, ſhe aſſaied to kill me outright: and to make me languiſh the more in dying, cruelly ſhe thruſt her hands into my wounds, ſo that well I perceiue I cannot long liue. Therefore I beſeech ye good Sir, helpe me to an Hermitage which is neere at hand, where I ſhall find ſome religious man, to comfort me in the agonie of my Soule. Such compaſſion tooke the Prince on him, as he and Gandalin taking him in their armes, caried him on a Horſe to the Hermitage: in meane while the wretched woman ſtole away priuily, and a little before, ſhe fearing that her Husband would be reuenged on her, ſent for helpe to three of her bretheren, who dwelled not far from that place, giuing them to vnderſtand which way they ſhould come. In her wandring they met with her, and ſhe had no ſooner eſpied them, but ſhe thus cried out. Ah helpe me good bretheren, for heere before is a theefe, who hath ſlaine this Knight which lieth heere, and hath beſide ſo wounded my Husband: as there is no hope of life left in him: let him not therefore eſcape ye, nor he that is in his company, becauſe the one is as deepe in the euill as the other. Such like ſpeeches vſed this Harlot, that by the death of the Prince and Gandalin, her treaſon might be couered: therefore that her Husband ſhould not dy alone with her will, ſhe ſhewed them the Gentleman of the ſea, euen as he returned from the Hermitage where he left the wounded Knight. Here-upon the three bretheren (too light of beleefe) galloped toward him, crying. Traitour thou art but dead. You lye villaines, anſwered the Prince, for right well ſhall I defend my ſelfe from ſuch traitours as you

are. Beſtirre thy ſelfe then, ſaid the bretheren, for thou haſt offended vs all three, and we all wil be reuenged on thee if we may. By good hap the Prince had his Sheeld and Launce ready, and his Helmet very well laced, wherefore without any further anſwer, he ſharply charged them, and meeting with the firſt, pearced through both his Sheeld and arme: and withall threw his Horſe & him ſo fiercely againſt the ground, as his right ſhoulder was broken in the fall: in like manner was one of the Horſes legges, ſo that neither the one or other could riſe. At this encounter he brake his Launce, wherefore he ſuddenly drew his Sword, and addreſſing himſelfe to the other twaine, gaue one of them ſuch a forcible ſtroke, as ſlicing through his Armour, entred the fleſh to the very bone on his ſhoulder likewiſe, ſo that therewith he fell from his ſaddle. Being thus diſpatched of two, he came to the third, and ſaluted him with ſuch a ſound blow on the Helmet, as the poore Gentleman was conſtrained to imbrace the necke of his Horſe, thereby to ſheeld himſelfe from falling, finding himſelfe as greatly amazed as the other were. Here-upon the woman that brought them thether fled away, which the Prince perceiuing cried to Gandalin that he ſhould ſtay her: in meane while the firſt Knight hauing recouered himſelfe, vſed theſe ſpeeches to the Prince. We know not Sir, whether this fight hath beene for right or wrong, For right it could not be, anſwered the Prince, vnleſſe you thinke I haue done wrong, in ſuccouring the husband to this traiterous woman, whom cruelly ſhe hath cauſed to dy. When the three Knights heard that, they were very much abaſhed, and then thought they had bene abuſed by their ſiſter, wherefore they thus replied. In ſooth my Lord, ſo pleaſe you to aſſure vs, we will ſhew on what occaſion we aſſailed you. You ſhall haue good aſſurance ſo to doe, ſaid the Prince, yet will I not acquit ye from the combate. Then he that firſt ſpake, reherſed all the words of their ſiſter, according as hath beene already declared. In good ſooth quoth the Prince, neuer was villanie diſguiſed in ſuch ſorte, for ſhe hath done far otherwiſe: as you may vnderſtand by her husband himſelfe, who being nere his death, I conuaied to an Hermitage hard at hand. Seeing it hath ſo fallen out, ſaid the three bretheren, diſpoſe of vs as they that remain at your mercy. And mercy ſhall ye haue, anſwered the Prince, if firſt ye will loyally ſweare to me, that you will cary this woman and her husband, to the Court of King Languines, & there before him recite al that hath happened: ſaying withall how you were thereto conſtrained by a yong Knight that ſent ye thether, & who this day departed from his Court, deſiring him to cenſure on this miſ-deed as he ſhall thinke good. All this they promiſed and ſwore to performe: wherefore commending them to God, he rode away, leauing them together.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     
                        How Vrganda the vnknowne, brought a Launce to the Gentle-man of the ſea.
                  
                  
                     THis quarrell thus ended with the three Knights, the Gentle-man of the ſea tooke the way which before he had left: but they had not ridden long, till they ſaw two Damoſels come toward them by two ſundry waies, who addreſſed them-ſelues to meete together, which when they had done, they entred into communication. One of them bare a Launce in her hand, and whē they were come to the Prince, ſhe with the Launce aduanced her ſelfe to him ſaying. My Lord, take this Launce which I giue ye, becauſe I can aſſure ye, that within three dayes it will ſtand ye in good ſteed, as therewith you ſhall deliuer from death, the houſe from whence ye are diſcended. The Prince amazed at theſe words, thus anſwered. How can it be Lady, that a houſe ſhould, liue or dye; It ſhalbe, quoth ſhe, euen ſo as I haue ſaid, and this preſent I was deſirous to bring ye, as a beginning of recompence, for two fauours I hope to receiue by you, the firſt whereof ſhall be: When one of your beſt friends, ſhall by you haue one of the greateſt honors that euer he can receiue, whereby he ſhall fall into the deepeſt danger, that any Knight hath done theſe ten yeeres ſpace. Beleeue me Lady, anſwered the Prince, ſuch honor (if God pleaſe) I will not doe my friend. Full well I known, quoth the Damoſell, that ſo it ſhall come to paſſe: then putting on her Palfray, departed: this Damoſell you muſt note, was Vrganda the vnknowne. When the other Damoſell (who heard the words) ſaw her forſake her company, ſhe determined for certaine daies to ſtay with the Prince, to ſee what he ſhould doe, wherefore ſhe ſaid. My Lord, although I am a ſtranger, if you thinke it conueneient, I would gladly for a while abide with ye, deferring a iourny that I haue to my miſtreſſe. The Prince well perceiued ſhe was a ſtranger, which made him to demand of whence ſhe was: where-to ſhe replied, that ſhe was of Denmarke. And that himſelfe could not gain-ſay, becauſe her language gaue aſſurance thereof, for hauing heard his Lady Oriana at her firſt comming into Scotland, it made him the better remember that Country ſpeech, whereupon he ſaid. If you pleaſe (faire Damoſell) to goe with me, I will defend ye to my power: but I pray ye tell me, if you know the other Lady that euen now gaue me this Launce? Truely Sir, quoth ſhe, neuer did I ſee her, till now I met her on the way, and then ſhe ſaid to me: that the Launce ſhe caried, ſhe would giue to the beſt Knight in the world, deſiring me (withall) to let you vnderſtand after her departure, that ſhe bare you great affection, and how ſhe was named Vrganda the vnknowne. Ah God, quoth he, how infortunate am I 
                        •…
                     ot knowing her, if I forbare now preſently to follow her, you muſt thinke Lady the cauſe is, that I cannot find her againſt her will: and thus deuiſing they rode on,

vntill the dark euening ouer-tooke them.
                  At this time it ſo chanced that they met with a Squire, who demanded where they intended to find lodging trauailing ſo late. Where we can, anſwered the Prince. In good faith, ſaid the Squire, if you meane to haue lodging, you muſt leaue the way which now you take, for you cannot long time come to any that way: but if you will follow me, I will conduct you to a Caſtle belonging to my father, who ſhall do you all the honor and good entertainment may be deuiſed. The Damoſel thinking this councel good, deſired the Prince to accept there-of, which he did, therefore the Squire rode before them as their guide, leading them derectly forth of the way, becauſe he had neuer ſeene the combates of Knights errand: and hoping to conduct them the day following to a Caſtell where ſuch paſtime was vſed, but that night he brought thē to their lodging, feaſting and entertaining them very ſumptuouſly: yet could the Prince take no reſt all the night, for thinking on the Lady that brought him the Launce. On the morrow very early they would be gone, and taking leaue of their hoſte, the Squire ſaid he would bring them againe into their way, acquainting the Prince as he rode, with the cuſtome of the Caſtell, which being very neere at hand he ſhewed them: the Caſtell ſtanding very ſtrong and pleaſantly, for before it ran a huge ſwift Riuer, and no paſſage thereto, but ouer a long draw-bridge, hauing at the end a faire Tower for defence thereof. When the Prince beheld it, he thought he muſt needs paſſe thether by the bridge, yet he asked the Squire if there were any other way. No my Lord, quoth he, for this is the vſaull paſſage. March on then, ſaid the Prince, wherewith the Squire, the Damoſell and their company ſet forward, but the Gentleman of the ſea remaining behind, entred into ſuch thought of his Lady Oriana, as he had well neere forgotten himſelfe: but at length he heard the noyſe of ſixe Halberders, armed with Corſlets and Helmets, who at the entrance of the bridge had arreſted the Damoſell, and there would force her to take an oath, that ſhe ſhould neuer beare loue to hir friend, if he would not promiſe her to aide King Abies of Ireland againſt King Perion: which ſhe refuſing, cried to the Prince for his aſſiſtance. This clamour made him forget his muſing, when adreſſing himſelfe to the Palliardes, he ſaid. Traiterous villaines, who commanded you to lay hands on this Lady being in my charge; In ſpeaking theſe words, he came to the chiefeſt of the ſixe, from whom right-ſoone he caught his hatchet, and gaue him ſuch a ſtroke therewith, as he fell to the ground. All the other together preſently ſet vpon him, but one of thē he ſliced to the very teeth, and ſooner after another bare him company, with the loſſe of his arme. When the three that were left ſaw their companions ſo handled, they tooke themſelues to flight, and the Prince followed them ſo neere, as one of them left his legge behinde him, the other twaine he let go, returning where he left the Damoſel, to whom he ſaid. Now boldly go on, and like euill fortune may they haue, that encourage any villany, to lay forſible hand on Lady or Damoſell. She being aſſured by theſe words, went on with the

Prince and his Squires: but ere they had gone any thing far, they heard a great noyſe & tumult within the Caſtell. Me thinkes Sir, ſaid the Damoſel, I heare a meruailous murmuring within this Fortreſſe, therefore I would aduiſe ye to take the reſt of your armour. Goe on quoth the Prince, and feare not, for where Ladies are euill entreated (who ought euery where to goe in ſafety) there hardly abideth any man of valew. In ſooth, ſaid ſhe, if you doe not what I haue deſired, I will not paſſe any further: and ſo much ſhee perſwaded him, that at length he laced on his Helmet: afterward he went into the Caſtell, at the entrance whereof, he met a ſquire weeping, who ſaid. Ah God, why will they murder (without cauſe) the beſt knight in the world? alas they wold inforce him to promiſe, what is impoſſible for him to accompliſh. Theſe words of the Squire, could not ſtay the Prince, for he ſaw King Perion (who had ſo lately Knighted him) very hardly vſed by two Knights, who with the helpe of ten armed Halberders had round beſet him, ſaying ſweare, if not, thou dieſt. Greatly did it grieue the Prince, to ſee ſuch out-rage offered to King Perion, wherefore he thus called to them. Traiterous villaines, what moues you to miſuſe the beſt Knight in the world; by heauen you ſhall all die for him. At theſe words, one of the Knights left the King, and taking fiue Halberders with him, came to the Prince, ſaying. It likewiſe behoueth you to ſweare, if not, you can eſcape no better then an other. What? quoth he, ſhal I then ſweare againſt my will; by Gods leaue it ſhall not be ſo. Then they of the Caſtell cryed to the Porter, that he ſhould ſhut the gate, wherefore the Prince now ſaw he muſt ſtand vpon his defence: whereupon hee ran fiercely againſt the Knight, charging him in ſuch ſorte, as he fell downe dead ouer the crupper of his Horſe, for in the fall he brake his necke. Which the Prince beholding, not tarring any longer with the Halberders, came to the other knight that combated with K. Perton, piercing his Launce quite through his body, ſo that he accompanied the firſt in fortune King Perion ſeeing himſelfe thus ſuccoured, ſo cheered vp his hart, as he did much better then before againſt his enemies, cauſing them by ſharpe ſtrokes of his Sword to retire: in meane while the Gentle-man of the ſea, (being on Horſe-backe) ranne among them and ſcattered them, tumbling one downe heere, and another there, ſo that at length by the aid of the king, they were all ſlaine, except certaine that fled away on the top of the walles. But the Prince alighted and followed them, whereat they were ſo affrighted, as they caſt themſelues downe headlong frō the wals: only two got them into a Chamber, where they thought to remaine in ſafetie, notwithſtanding he purſued them ſo neer, as he buckled pel mel with them. But within the Chamber on a bed lay an ancient knight, whoſe vnweldy age had taken from him the vſe of his legges, to them that came in he vſed theſe ſpeeches. Cowardly villaines, frō whom run ye ſo ſhamefully; From a knight, anſwered one of them, who hath plaide the Diuell in your Caſtell, for he hath ſlaine your two Nephewes, and all our companions. As thus he ſpake, the Prince caught him by the head, ſaying. Tell me (villaine) where is the Lord of this place, o
                        •
                     
                     
eſſe thou dieſt. The poore man ſeeing himſelfe in ſuch perill, ſhewed him the old knight lying on the bed: but when the Prince ſaw him ſo old and decrepite, he blamed him in this manner. Thou wretched olde man, hath death already ſeazed on thy bones, and yet dooſt thou cauſe ſuch a wicked cuſtome to be maintained heere? Well dooth thine age excuſe thee from bearing Armes, yet ſhall I giue thee thy deſert belonging to ſuch a villaine. With theſe words he made offer to ſmite off his head: Wherefore the affrighted olde man cried: Alas my Lord, for Gods ſake mercy. None at all, quoth the Prince, thou art dead if thou ſweareſt not to me, that while thou liueſt, ſuch like treaſon ſhall be no more maintained in this place: whereto the olde knight right gladly tooke his oath. Now tell mee, ſaide the Prince, wherefore haſt thou heeretofore kept this cuſtome heere; For the loue of King Abies of Ireland, anſwered the Knight, who is mine Nephew, and becauſe I cannot aid him with my perſon in his warre, I was deſirous to ſuccour him with ſuch Knights errand as paſſed this way. Falſe villaine, anſwered the Prince, what haue Knights errand to do with thy deſire: ſo ſpurning the bed with his foote, threw it downe, and the olde Knight vnderit: where commending him to all the Diuels, he left him, and comming downe into the Court, tooke a Horſe which was one of the ſlaine Knights, and bringing it to the King, ſaid. Mount your ſelfe my Lord, for it little likes me to ſtay any longer here, where ſuch bad people haue their habitation. The king preſently went to Horſe-bake, and ſo they rode together out of the Caſtell: but the Prince fearing leaſt the king ſhould know him, would by no meanes take off his Helmet, notwithſtanding as they rode along, the king thus ſpake to him. I pray ye Sir knight tell me of whence you are, that haue ſuccoured me when I was ſo neere my death: warranting me alſo hereafter frō the enimies of this place, & ſhewing your ſelfe a good friend to Ladies and knights errand. As for me, I am the ſame man againſt whom they kept this ſtraight paſſage, importing the cruell oath for which you combated. My Lord, anſwered the Prince, I am a knight deſirous to do you any ſeruice. Beleeue me, quoth the king, that haue I already well perceiued, for hardly ſhould I haue found ſo good a friend to helpe me: yet will I not giue ouer till I know ye. Alas my Lord, ſaid he, that will little profit ye. Notwithſtanding, quoth the King, I pray ye take off your Helmet: which he would not do, but put downe his Beuer a little. Whē the king ſaw that his intreatie would not preuaile, he deſired the Damoſell to obtaine ſo much for him: whereto ſhe condiſcended, tooke the Prince by the hand, ſaying. I beſeechye Sir, grant the king what he hath requeſted. He ſeeing her importunate, took off his Helmet, when preſently the king knew him, that it was the ſame man he had knighted at the Ladies motion, wherefore embracing him, he ſaid. Right glad am I to know ſo deere a friend. My Lord, quoth the Prince, I knew you ſo ſoone as I came to the Caſtell, to be the man that gaue me mine order of knight-hood, wherewith (ſo pleaſe it God) I meane to ſerue you while your warre continueth in Gaule: & willingly I would not be knowne

by any one till your troubles be finiſhed. You ha ue already, ſaid the King, done ſo much for me, as I reſt bounden to you while I liue, allowing you to diſpoſe of me and mine: and if (as you ſay) you come into Gaule, you ſhall augment with aduauntage the honor due to you, then iuſtly may I tearme the hower happy, that it was my fortune to make ſo good a Knight. Such like words vſed King Perion, litle thinking how neere they were allied together, & thus they rode deuiſing, till at length they came to a double way, when he demanded of the King, which of thoſe waies pleaſed him to take. This on the left hand, anſwered the King, becauſe it guideth directly to my Country. God haue you then in his keeping, ſaid the Prince, for I muſt needes ride this other way. I pray ye, quoth the King, remember your comming into Gaule as you promiſed me, for the hope I haue in you, hath abridged part of my ſorrow, and giueth me aſſurance withall, that by your meanes I ſhall recouer my loſſe. So tooke they leaue of each other, the king toward Gaule, and the Prince in company with the Damoſell and Gandalin: but becauſe ſhe had now ſeene what ſhe deſired, namely the proofe of the Launce which Vrganda gaue him, ſhe wold trauaile no further out of her way, but turning to the Prince, ſaid. I haue hetherto (my Lord) with right good will kept ye company, becauſe the Lady that gaue ye the Launce, ſaid ſhe brought it to the beſt knight in the world, and ſurely I haue ſeene ſo much, as I ſtand in no doubt of her ſpeeches: wherefore I ſhall now ſhape my courſe to find her I am ſent to, as before I tolde ye. I pray ye Lady, quoth he, tell me what ſhe is. It is, ſaid ſhe, the Princeſſe Oriana, Daughter to king Liſuart of great Brittaine. When he heard her named whom he loued ſo deerely, his hart began to tremble in ſuch ſorte, as he had fallen beſide his Horſe, but that Gādalin ſtaied him, yet fetching a great ſigh, ſaid. Ah God, my hart faileth me, the Damoſell thinking ſome ſudden ſicknes was the cauſe thereof, would haue had him vnarmed: but hee tolde her it was needleſſe, for he was oftentimes wont to feele ſuch paſſions. The Squire (who all this while had beene their guide) tooke leaue of the Prince, as king the Damoſell if her way lay toward the Courte of King Languines: which ſhe affirming, he ſaid he would accompany her thether, becauſe hee had buſines of ſome importance there. So hauing courteouſly ſaluted each other, they returned the ſame way they came, & the Prince rode on with Gandalin to ſeeke aduentures.
                  Heere leaueth the Author, to tel ye what happened to Galaor, whom the Giant caried away, and gaue in keeping to the aged Hermet, as already you haue heard. By this time had Galaor attained the age of ſixteene yeeres, meruailouſly encreaſing in ſtature & comely perfection: hauing no other exerciſe, then reading on a Booke which the olde man lent him, diſcourſing the deeds of Armes of ſundry ancient Knights. Heerein he tooke ſo great pleaſure, as on this occaſion, as alſo by a naturall inſtinct, he was deſirous to be Knighted, neuertheleſſe, he knew not whether by right ſuch honor appertained to him, Very earneſtly he queſtioned thereon with the Hermet, but the holy man who knew right well, that ſo ſoone as he receiued the

order, he ſhould combate againſt the Giant Albadan: his eyes being filled with teares, he thus anſwered. My ſoone, much better were it for you to labour in the ſafetie of your ſoule, then to aduenture on the order of Knight-hood, which is to be maintained with wonderous trauaile. Father, quoth Galaor, very hardly ſhall I follow the calling, which I take againſt my will: but in that whereof my hart hath made choyſe, if God grant me good ſucceſſe, will I aduance his ſeruice, for there-out may I not be during life. The good Hermit, who then well perceiued his grounded reſolution, replied. Certes my Sonne, ſeeing you are determined to follow Armes, I can well aſſure ye, that through fault of high linage, you neede not diſpaire of good hap, in reſpect you are ſon to a King and Queene: but keepe that to your ſelfe, and let not the Giant know how I told ye ſo much. When Galaor heard this, he was exceedingly contented, ſaying to the Hermit. In ſooth Father, the care I haue had all my life time to be a Knight, hath beene very great: but now I thanke God and you, I am rid thereof, for by that you haue tolde me, I cannot miſſe ofit. The Hermit noting his earneſt affection, doubted leaſt ſoone after he would be gone: wherefore he gaue the Giant to know his Schollers forwardnes, as alſo how his conſtitution did now very well ſerue him, being wonderfull deſirous of his knight-hood, and therefore he ſhould now deale in the cauſe as beſt himſelfe pleaſed. No ſooner was the Giant enformed hereof, but preſently he got him to Horſe-backe, and rode to the Hermit, with whom he found Galaor, of more large ſtature then his yeeres expreſſed, very comely and beautyfull in euery parte, whereupon he thus ſpake to him. I vnderſtand Sonne, that you would be a Knight to follow Armes, truely you ſhall, prepare your ſelfe to go with me when time ſerueth, and your deſire ſhalbe honorably ſatisfied. Father anſwered Galaor, heerein conſiſteth the ſumme of mine affection: ſo not long after, the Giant departed from the Hermit, taking Galaor with him, who falling on his knee before the reuerent olde man, deſired that as he had fatherly nourſhed him, ſo ſtill he would remember him in his deuout oriſons. The holy man with the teares tricling downe his cheekes, kiſſed and bleſſed him, then mounted Galaor on Horſ-back and followed the Giant, who brought him home to his Caſtell: where for certaine time he practiſed to combate at Armes, as alſo brauely to manage Horſes, hauing all things conuenient for the ſame, and two maiſters very expert therein. When he had continued a yeere at theſe exerciſes, the Giant ſeeing him worthy to receiue honor, & ſtrong enough to endure chiualrie: diſpoſed thereon as you ſhall read hereafter.
                  Now againe doth the Author leaue him, and diſcourſeth of that which chanced to the Gentleman of the ſea, who after he departed from King Perion and the Damoſell, rod two daies together, without any aduenture: and on the third about mid-day, he arriued at a very goodly Fortreſſe, that appertained to a Gentleman named Galpan. This Galpan was then the moſt valiant Knight in all that Country, and therefore was greatly feared of all his Neighbours, yet did he there maintaine an abhominable and

wicked cuſtome: forgetting God, who was cheefely to be honored, bequeathed his endeuours to the ſeruice of the Diuell. For he conſtrained all Ladies and Damoſells that paſſed by his Caſtell, to enter in, where vilainouſly he tooke his pleaſure of them: and not contented therewith, enforced them to ſweare, that while they liued they ſhould beare affection to none but him, if any denied, he cauſed them cruelly to be put to death. Likewiſe he compelled ſuch Knights as trauailed that way, to combate one alone, againſt his two bretheren, but if they were vanquiſhed, he would force the conquerour to deale with himſelfe, he being the moſt hardy knight in al thoſe parts. If it happened that he brought thē into any debilitie, he would take from them all they had, turning them away on foote, after he had made them ſweare, to name them-ſelues while they liued, the vanquiſhed by Galpan, otherwiſe, hee would depriue them of life. But God diſpleaſed with the cruelty, which ſo long time he had vſed to the hurt of many good people, would now alter this great inconuenience, and that Galpan with his complices ſhould receiue guerdō to their deſerts, making them an example to all other, as you ſhall heare preſently recited.
               
               
                  CHAP. VII.
                  
                     How the Gentleman of the ſea, combated with the guarders of Galpans Caſtell, and afterward with his bretheren, and in the end with Galpan himſelfe.
                  
                  
                     BY this time the Gentlemam of the ſea is come nere the caſtle, where he ſaw a Lady comming towards him greatly afflicted, hauing no other company then a Squire and a Page. This ſorrowfull woman breathed forth many griueous ſighes, ſhewing a violent kind of warre, betweene her hands and the golden treſſes of her haire, which ſhe diſcheueled and rent very pitifully. Hereat was the Prince not a little amazed, and willing to know what moued her to theſe extreames, he came to her with theſe ſpeeches. Faire Gentlewomā, I pray ye tel me the cauſe of your ſorrow. Ah my Lord, qd. ſhee, death would be now right welcome to me, being the onely friend to beare me company: for ſuch is my misfortune, as teares are more conueniēt for me then rememberance of the cauſe. In ſooth Lady, ſaide the Prince, if in any reſpect I can do ye good, you ſhall find me ready withall my hart. Being ſent Sir, quoth the Damoſell, by my miſtreſſes commandement, to a yong Knight, a man of ſome account in theſe parts, and paſſing along this way: foure cruell villaines ſet vpon me, and (whether I would or no) brought me into this Caſtel where a traiterous Knight diſhonorably forced me, compelling me afterward to ſweare, that I ſhould neuer loue any friend but him. This complaint moued the Prince to great admiration, and thus he anſwered. Follow me Lady, for your iniury ſhalbe reuenged, if God

give me leaue. Heereupon the Damoſell immediatly went with him, and by the way he deſired her to tell him, what the man was to whom ſhe was ſent. If you reuenge my wrong quoth ſhe, I will tell ye: but I can aſſure ye he is ſuch a one, as will be right ſory when he hears of my miſuſage. Great reaſon, ſaid the Prince, hath he ſo to do: and as thus they communed together, they came to the place where ſhee ſhewed him the foure Gardants, to whom he preſently ſaid. Diſloyall varlets, wherefore haue ye abuſed this Lady as ſhe trauailed on her iournie? Becauſe (quoth they; wee ſtood in no feare of you: but if you get ye not the ſooner, your entertainment ſhalbe worſe then hers was. Without any more talking he drew his Sword, and comming to one that heaued his hatchet againſt him, quite cut away the right arme from his body: then turning to another, cleft him ouer the face to the very eares. When the reſt ſaw their companions thus mained, they fled away ſo faſt as they could, running through a by way along a Riuer ſide: but the Prince making no ſhew of purſuing them, wiped his Sword and put it vp againe, then comming to the Damoſell, bad her go forward. My Lord, quoth ſhe, hard by is a gate, where I found two armed Knigthts attending. Well, ſaid he, and I ſhall find them when I come thether. So rode they on, & as the Prince entred the baſe court, he ſaw the Dungeon dore open, and an armed Knight on Horſe back come forth, after whom they within let downe a Port-cullis, and ſhut the dore againe: then the Knight of the Caſtell aduancing himſelfe, very boldly thus ſpake to the Prince. Poore wretch, too ſoone art thou come hether to receiue ſhame and diſhonor. Diſhonor? quoth Prince, tuſh theſe are but words, leaue what ſhall happen to the preſence of God, who only is skilfull therein: and tell if thou be the villaine that did force this Lady? No, anſwered the Knight, but if it were I, what then? I meane, quoth the Prince, to reuenge her wrong if I can. Go to, ſaid the Knight, I ſhall ſee then what kinde of reuendge you vſe. So giuing the Spurrs to his Horſe, ran as fiercely as he could againſt the Prince, yet he failed in the attaint: but the Prince meeting him with full carire, gaue him ſuch a greeting with his Launce through the Sheeld, as the armour being vnable to reſiſt it, let paſſe the yron through both his ſhoulders, whereby he fell downe dead in the place. Hauing with-drawne his Launce, prepared him-ſelfe for another that came to ſuccor the firſt, who pearcing quite through the Princes Sheeld, left the head of his Launce in his armour, which was of ſufficiēt profe: but in the encounter he met his enimie ſo derectly, as he rent his Helmet from his head, caſting him ſo violently off his Saddie, as hee was able to ſit no more on Horſe-backe. The Knight ſeeing himſelfe thus vnarmed, cried for ſome other to come helpe him, whereupon three Halberders iſſued forth, to whom he ſaid: Looke well my friendes that this man eſcape vs not. At theſe words, they ranne all three violently on the Prince, and buckled ſo neere him, as they ſlew his Horſe betweene his leggs, whereby he was conſtrained to fight on foote: and ſo offended was he thereat, that hauing recouered himſelfe, he ſmote 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
Launce through the Knights head, which made him preſently yeeld the ghoſt. And now he beſtirres himſelfe againſt the other three, who cowardly ſtealing behinde him, woūded him on the ſhoulder, whereby he loſt a great quantity of his bloud: but full well he recompenſed the villaine that did it, letting forth the deereſt bloud he had in his body, by cleauing him with his Sword as it bad beene an Axe. The other two terrified heer-with, ranne vp into a long Gallery, crying: Come my Lord, come quickly, for we are all vanquiſhed. In meane while, the Prince ſeeing his owne Horſe was ſlaine, mounted on that belonged to the knight he ſlew laſt: ſoone after he ſaw another Knight ſtand looking forth at a dore, who perceiuing the Prince had eſpied him, ſaid. What hath moued thee to come in heere and kill my people? Nothing els, anſwered the Prince, thē the deſire I haue to reuenge this Lady, who hath beene here wronged moſt diſhonorably. As thus he ſpake, the Damoſell came to him, and knowing the Lord of the Caſtell that forced her, ſhe ſaid. Ah gentle Knight, ſee that this monſter eſcape you not, for by him haue I loſt my former honor. Libidinous Ruffian, quoth the Prince, deerely ſhalt thou pay for thy diſloyall dealing: Goe arme thee, elſe will I ſlay thee naked as thou art, for to thee or ſuch like villaines ought to be vſed no fauour: but the Damoſell more and and more ſtill cried. Kill, kill the Traitour, that hereafter he liue not to abuſe any more, otherwiſe will their ſhame be laid to your charge. Lewde woman, anſwered the Knight, in an euill hower came he hither by thy councell, and in thy company. And thou that threatneſt me ſo brauely, attend my cō
                     ming, and flie not away, for by no other meanes canſt thou warrant thy ſelfe. So he departed, and ſoon after came armed into the Court, where he mounted on a luſty white Courſer: then comming to the Prince, he began to menace him, ſaying. Well maiſt thou curſſe the time that euer thou ſaweſt this Damoſell, for it will coſt thee the price of thy head. Each one, ſaid the Prince, muſt keepe his head ſo well as he may, and he that cannot, let him looſe it. Without longer ſtay they coutched their Launces, which at their encounter ran into their Sheelds and armour, wounding ſome-what deep into their fleſh: and ſo forcibly did their bodies meet together, as they were both laid along on the gound, when quickly recouering themſelues, with their Swords drawne they prepare to the combate. Fierce and cruell ſtrokes were giuen on either ſide, to the great admiration of ſuch as beheld them, for many peeces of their Sheelds & armour was ſcattred round about them: & which is more, their Helmets were ſo torne and battered, as oftentimes their bare heads bore off the blowes, ſo that the ground was coloured with their bloud: but Galpan had receiued a wound through the ſight of his Helmet, which made the bloud trickle into his eyes, and he to wipe them retited backe alittle. What Galpan? ſaid the Prince, deſireſt thou to breath? doſt thou not remember that thou fighteſt for my head? if thou defendeſt not thine owne well, thou art like to looſe it. Be patient a while, anſwered Galpan, and let vs breath a little, for we haue time enough to

make an end. It is no reaſonable motion, ſaid the Prince, ſeeing I fight not with thee for curteſie, but to reuenge the diſhonor thou haſt done to this Lady. With theſe words he gaue him ſuch a ſtroke on the head, as made him fall to the ground on his knees, yet quickly he aroſe and tooke hart a freſh: but the Prince would not let him range about as he deſired, for hee was ſo out of breath, that he could hardly lift vp his Sword, wherefore he did nothing but croutch vnder his Sheeld, yet was it ſo ſliced away in peeces, as very little was left to defend himſelfe withall. Galpan ſeeing he had no other remedie, began to flye before the Sword of his enimie, and at length (as his laſt refuge) thought to ſaue him-ſelfe in a little Tower which his Gardants vſed to ſtand in: but the Prince following him hard at the heeles, got him by the Helmet and puld it off, and giuing a full ſtroke at him, therewith ſmot his head from the ſhoulders, afterward he came to the Damoſell, ſaying. Faire Lady, now may you chouſe an other friend if you pleaſe, for he to whom you promiſed, hath diſcharged ye of the bargaine. Thankes be to God and you Sir, quoth ſhe: and as they returned from the Tower, they heard the dore ſhut too, wherefore he moū
                     ted on Galpans Horſe, which was eſteemed one of the goodlyeſt in the world, and ſaid to the Damoſell. I pray ye Lady, now let vs be gone hence. My Lord, quoth ſhe, if it like you, I will cary his head to him whom I am ſent, and preſent it to him on your behalfe. Do not ſo, ſaid the Prince, for the cariage will be too troubleſome, but take the Helmet if you will. The Damoſell liking well of his aduiſe, commanded her Squire to cary it with him: and ſo they rode from the Caſtell, the ſeruants whereof were all gone, & had left the gates wide open. But the Prince not forgetting the Damoſels promiſe, that ſhe would tel him the Knights name ſhe was ſent vnto: therefore earneſtly he entreated her to ſatiſfie him therein. Good reaſō, quoth ſhe, his name is Agraies, Sonne to the King of Scotland. Praiſed be God, ſaid the Prince, who made me able to do ſo much, as ſo good a Knight ſhall be no more wronged by traiterous Galpan: for you are (in mine opinion) well auenged, and worthily may you call Agraies a good Knight, in reſpect he is one of the beſt I know, and if for him you haue receiued diſhonor, it now returneth to your commendation. Go then and ſay to him, that a Knight of his, humbly ſaluteth him, whom he ſhall field at the warres in Gaule when he commeth thither. Gentle Sir, quoth ſhe, ſeeing you loue him ſo well, I pray ye grant me one requeſt. That will I, quoth the Prince. Let me then, ſaid ſhe, vnderſtand your name. Lady, quoth he, at this time forbeare the knowledge thereof, and command what elſe you pleaſe, you ſhall not be denied. No other thing will I deſire anſwered the Damoſell. Beleeue me, ſaid the Prince, it is little courteſie to requeſt the thing, which willingly I would not reueale to any one. Yet muſt I needs know it, quoth the Damoſell, or elſe you do not performe your promiſe. When he perceiued ſhe would not be diſſwaded, ſome-what moued with anger he replied. Such as know me, call me the Gentleman of the ſea. So ſetting ſpurres to his horſe, he gallopped away from the Damoſell, who was

not a little glad that ſhe knew his name: but when he was gone from her, he remembred the wound on his ſhoulder, which ſtill bled very freſhly, ſo that he might eaſily be tract by his bloud, & on his white Horſe it had dropt in many places. At euening he came ſome-what neere a Fortreſſe, where he beheld a knight vnarmed comming toward him, and after he had well viewed him, he ſaid. My Lord, I pray you tell me where haue you beene ſo wounded? In ſooth, quoth the Prince, at a Caſtle not very far hence. And how, ſaid the Knight, came you by that goodly white Horſe; I tooke it, anſwered the Prince, in requitall of mine owne, that was there ſlaine by traiterous villaines. But would Galpan, quoth the Knight, ſuffer ye ſo to do? Yea mary Sir, replied the Prince, he is now become more patient, for hee hath endured the loſſe of his head. When the Knight heard of Galpans death, he preſently alighted from his Horſe, and ran to kiſſe the Princes feete: but he would not ſuffer him, yet could he not hold him from embracing his Sheeld, ſaying. Ah Gentle Knight, how highly am I indebted to you; you are to this place the moſt wellcome man in the world, for by your meanes haue I thorowly recouered mine honor. Leaue wee this talke, ſaid the Prince, & ſay where I may quickly finde ſome remedy for my wounds. In my houſe, anſwered the knight, abideth a Neece of mine, who ſhal heale your hurts better then any other. So riding on they arriued at the caſtle, where being diſmounted, they walked into the great hall, the Knight reporting by the way, how Galpan had kept him from bearing Armes one whole yeere and a halfe, compelling him to change his name, and ſweare to call himſelfe while he liued, the conquered by Galpan: but now, quoth he, ſeeing he is dead, mine honor is reſtored me againe. Afterwarde he cauſed the Prince to be vnarmed, and laid in a ſumptuous bed, where his wounds were dilligently attended by the Lady, who aſſur ed him in ſhort timeto make him well againe: if he would be aduiſed by her councell, which he promiſed faithfully to do.
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     How the third day after the Gentleman of the ſea departed from king Languines, the three Knights, came to the Court, bringing with them the wounded Knight in a Litter, and his diſloyall wife.
                  
                  
                     ON the third day after the Prince left the Court of King Languines, where hee receiued the order of Knight-hood, the three Knights came thither, with their wounded brother and his trothleſſe wife, of whom the diſcourſe hath beene already recited. At their arriuall they preſented him before the King, letting him vnderſtand the cauſe of their comming, and deliuering their priſoner on the new Knights behalfe, to deale with her as he ſhould thinke conuenient. Greatly did the King meruaile at the womans diſloyaltie, not imagining ſuch wickednes could haue harboured in her: notwithſtanding,

he thanked the Knight that had ſent them to his Courte, yet could he not gueſſe who it was, for he nor any body elſe knew that the Gentlman of the ſea was Knighted, but the Princeſſe Oriana, and the Ladies which accompanied her in the Chappell. Full ſoone was hee aduertiſed of his abſence from the Courte, but he thought hee was gone to viſite his father Gandales: thē the King turning to the knight in the Litter, ſaid. Me thinkes that a woman ſo vnfaithful as your wife hath beene, deſerueth not to liue. My Lord, quoth the Knight, doe therein as it ſhal like your maiſtey: as for me, I will neuer conſent that the thing I moſt loue ſhould die. This ſaid, the Knights tooke their leaue of the King, carying backe againe with thē their brother in the Litter: leauing their ſiſter to receiue iuſtice by the Kings appointmēt, who after their departure called for her & ſaid. Womā, thy malice hath bene too great in reſpect of thy husbands kindnes, but thou ſhalt be made an example to all other, that they heereafter offend not in the like: and ſo he commanded her to be burned aliue. The execution being doone, the King was in greater penſiueneſſe then before, becauſe he knew not who the new knight ſhould be, that parting ſo ſuddenly from his Court: but the Squire ſtanding by, which lodged the Gentleman of the ſea, & afterward conducted him to the Caſtell, where he deliuered King Perion from death, began to imagine that it was his gueſt, wherefore he ſaid to the King. It may be (my Lord) a yong Knight, with whom the Damoſell of Denmarke and my ſelfe were certaine daies, and then we left him when wee came thither. Knoweſt thou his name? quoth the King. No my Lord, quoth the Squire, but hee is both yong and very beautyfull: beſide I ſaw him do ſuch rare deeds of Chiualrie in ſo little time, as in mine opinion if I liue, he will proue one of the beſt Knights in the world. Then diſcourſed he at large euery action, as alſo how hee deliuered King Perion in the time of great danger. When the King had noted well his taile, his deſire to know him increaſed now more and more. My Lord, quoth the Squire, the Damoſell that came hether with me, happily can tel ye more tydings of him, for it was my chance to meet them together. Of what Damoſell ſpeakeſt thou? ſaid the King. Of her, anſwered the Squire, that lately came from great Brittaine to Madame Oriana. Preſently was ſhe ſent for, and hee demanded what the Knight was of whom there went ſuch reporte. Whereupon ſhe declared ſo much as ſhe knew, cheefely the occaſion wherefore ſhe rode with him, and in what manner the Launce was giuen him by Vrganda, as to the onely Knight in the world: but in ſooth, quoth ſhee, I know not his name, for neuer could I learne it of him. Ah God, ſaid the King, how may it be? Now was Oriana voyde of all doubting, for ſhee well knew it was her Gentleman of the ſea, but ſhee was ſo grieued with the news, which the Damoſell of Denmarke had brought her, as ſhee well knew not whom ſhe might cōplaine to: for the king her father ſent her word how ſhe ſhould prepare her ſelf in readineſſe to come to him, ſo ſoon as his Ambaſſadours ſhould bee ſent for her into Scotland. But much more willingly could ſhe affoord to ſtay in that Country, then there whether ſhe ſhould now goe againſt

her mind, not onely in reſpect of her gentle vſage there, but becauſe ſhe imagined by being far thence, ſhe ſhould be further from him that had the prime of her affection: beſide, ſhe might there hardly afterward heare any newes of him, but continuing in Scotland ſhe could eaſily compaſſe it. In theſe melancholly thoughts was the amourous Princeſſe, and the King (on the other ſide) in dayly muſing, what he might be that ſent the foure Knights, with the wicked woman whom the fire had conſumed. But fiue or ſixe dayes after theſe matters were thus paſſed, as the King was conferring with his Sonne Agraies, (who now ſtood vpon departing toward Gaule to ſuccour the king his Vnccle) there entred a Damoſell, who falling on her knee before all the aſſembly, framed her ſpeeches to Agraies in this manner. May it pleaſe ye my Lord, that in the preſence of his highnes and this aſſembly, I deliuer a meſſage of importance to ye; then taking the Helmet from her Squire, ſhe thus proceeded, This Helmet thus broken and battered as ye ſee, I preſent ye in place of Galpans head, as a token to you from a new Knight, to whom (in my iudgment) it better belongeth to beare Armes then any other: and the cauſe why hee ſends it you, is, for that Galpan vilainouſly abuſed a Damoſell, that came to you on vrgent affaires. What; quoth the King, is Galpan ouercome by the hand of one man; beleeue me Damoſell you tell vs meruailes. Worthy Lord, anſwered ſhe, he onely of whom I ſpeake hath done him to death, after hee had ſlaine all the other that reſiſted him in Galpans Caſtell: and he thinking to reueng their foile himſelfe, combated hand to hand with the Knight, but ſuch was his bad ſucceſſe, as there with diſhonor hee loſt his head, which I would gladly haue brought to this Court, yet doubting the corrupt fauour thereof, and being otherwiſe aduiſed by him that ſent me to my Lord Agraies, as teſtimony of his victory this Helmet may ſuffiiſe. Vndoubtedly, ſaid the king to al there preſent, it it the ſame Knight of whoſe name we are ignorant: how ſay you Lady, cannot you reſolue vs My Lord, quoth ſhe, I obtained it by exceeding importunity, for otherwiſe he would neuer haue told me. Say then good maiden, replied the King, to rid vs of all other doubtes. He nameth himſelfe, ſaid the Damoſell, the Gentleman of the ſea. When the King heard this, he was greatly abaſhed, and ſo were all the other likewiſe, afterward he thus ſpake. By my faith, I am aſſuredly perſwaded, that whoſoeuer Knighted him, neede not be aſhamed thereof, ſeeing ſo long time he requeſted it of me, and I deferred it for occaſions which I needed not to haue done, ſeeing Chiualry is in him already ſo well accompliſhed. Then Araies taking occaſion to ſpeake, demanded of the Damoſell, where he might meet with his gentle friend. My Lord, quoth ſhe, he humbly commendeth him-ſelfe to your good grace, giuing you to vnderſtand by me, that you ſhall finde him at the warres in Gaule if you come thether. Good newes faire Damoſell, ſaid Agraies haue you brought me, now am I more deſirous to be gone then before I was: and if I may find him there, with my good will ſhall I neuer leaue his company. You haue reaſon ſo to do, anſwered the Damoſel, for he loueth you as becommeth

a Gentleman. Great was the ioy for theſe good newes of the Gentleman of the ſea, and if any one receiued diſpleaſure, you muſt thinke it was Oriana aboue all the reſt, yet was it handled ſo couertly, as the watchfulleſt eye could not deſcerne it. Now in meane while the king enquired by diuers meanes, how and by whom the Prince was Knighted, when at length he was aduertiſed, that the Ladyes attending on the Queene, could tell better then anybody els, which with much a do he obtained of them. Then may the Gentle-man of the ſea, quoth he, vaunte, that he hath found more curtiſie in you then in me: but the cauſe why I prolonged the time of his honor, was that he ſeemed too yong for ſo great a charge. In this time Agraies courteouſly wellcomed the Damoſell who beſide the Helmet, deliuered him letters from a Lady that deerely loued him, of whome the Hiſtory hereafter maketh mention. But now for this preſent occaſion, the Reader muſt imagine, that Agraies (without longer tarying in Scotland) is departed with his Army, trauailing toward Gaule to his Vnckle King Perion.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. IX.
                  
                     How King Liſuart ſent for his Daughter the Princeſſe Oriana, for that long before he had left her in the Court of King Languines: who ſent her accompanied with the Princeſſe Mabila his onely daughter, as alſo a noble traine of Knights, Ladyes and Gentlewomen.
                  
                  
                     ABout ten daies after Agraies was departed the King his Fathers court with his troup, three Ships of great Brittaine tooke port in Scotland: wherein as cheefe was Galdar of Raſcuit, accompanied with an hundred knights of king Liſuarts, as alſo many Ladyes and Gentlewomen that came for Oriana. Being arriued at the Court of king Languines, they were very graciouſly entertained, eſpecially Galdar, for he was eſteemed a wiſe and hardy knight. After he had giuen his Maieſty to vnderſtand his Ambaſſadge, which was harty thanks frō king Liſuart his Maiſter, for the gentle entreatance of the Princeſſe his daughter: he requeſted now to haue her home, & Mabila his daughter with her, to whom he would do all the honor could be deuiſed. Right thankfully did king Languines accept this offer, and was content that his daughter ſhould go with Oriana, thence-forward to be educated in the Court of King Liſuart. Certaine dayes ſoiourned Galdar and his traine in Scotland, during which time they were moſt honorably feaſted, and in this while the king prepared other Ships to accompany the voyage. When Oriana ſaw that matters fell out in this ſorte, ſhe knew well it was impoſſible longer to diſſemble or tarry: wherefore as ſhe placed all her little trifles in order, ſhe found among her Iewels the waxe, which ſhe had taken from the Gentleman of the ſea. This gaue her ſuch a remembrance of him, as the teares entred her eyes, and (through vehement

loue) often wringed her hands, ſo that the waxe which ſhee held in them, ſuddenly brake, & ſhe eſpied the letter encloſed therein, which ſo ſoone as ſhe vnfolded, ſhe found there writtē theſe words. This is Amadis without time, Sonne to a King. At theſe newes ſhee conceiued ſuch ioy, as quickly ſhe left her former countenance, and not without cauſe, for ſhe was now aſſured, that he who before was eſteemed (at the moſt) but the ſon of a ſimple Gentleman, or it might be of leſſe, becauſe he was vnknowne both of name and parents: the man whom ſhe ſo faithfully loued, was Sonne to a King, and named Amadis, therefore without longer deferring, ſhe called the Damoſell of Denmarke to her, on whom ſhe intirely truſted, & thus ſpake. My good friend, I will declare one thing to ye, which no other then mine owne hart and you ſhall know: therefore regarde it as the ſecret of ſuch a Princeſſe as I am, and of the beſt Knight in the world beſide. On my faith Madam, anſwered the Damoſell, ſeeing it pleaſeth you to honor me ſo much, more willingly ſhall I dye thē faile therein, & wel may you be aſſured, that what-ſoeuer you diſcloſe to mee, ſhalbe altogether kept ſecret, & executed to my power. Thē ſo it is deere friend, ſaid Oriana, that you muſt needs go ſeek the Gentle-man of the ſea, whom you ſhall find at the warres in Gaule, and if you chance to come thither before him, there muſt ye of neceſſitie ſtay for him: but ſo ſoone as you ſee him, giue him this letter, ſaying, he ſhall find his name therein, w
                        ••
                     ttē on the day that he was caſt into the ſea, whereby I know him to be the ſon of a king, which ought inſpite him with higher courage & hardines, to encreaſe the ſame hee hath already ſo well begun. You ſhall likewiſe tel him, how the king my father ſent for me, and therefore I am gone toward great Brittaine: which I was deſirous to acquaint him withall, and when hee returneth from the warre where he is, he ſhould immediatly come to the place of my aboad, limitting al things in ſuch ſorte, as he may liue in my fathers Court, vntill he receiue other commandemēt of me. Such was the ſpeedy diſpatch of the Damoſell, as without longer ſtay ſhe iourned toward Gaule, and executed her enterpriſe, whereof heereafter you ſhall vnderſtand more. But not to diſcontinue the purpoſed voyage of Oriana, after that Languines had prouided all things necſſary for the ſame, Oriana, Mabila & their company were imbarqued: thē taking leaue of the King & Queene at the ſea ſide, they ſet faile hauing the winde ſo proſperous, as in few daies they landed in great Brittaine, where they were all right worthyly wellcommed.
                  Heere of doth the author at this time make no more mention, becauſe he meaneth to tell ye what happened to the Gentleman of the ſea, hauing left him at the Knights Caſtell that was vanquiſhed by Galpan, in the Damoſels charge who attended his wounds, which in fifteene daies were almoſt thorowly healed. Notwithſtanding, deſpiſing reſt, determined to ſet on his way, ſo that on a Sunday morning, taking leaue of his hoſte and his gentle Chirurgion: he mounted on Horſe-backe, accompanied onely with Gandalin who neuer would forſake him, and not farre from the Caſtle they entred a great Forreſt. It was now about the moneth of Aprill, when the Birdes

tune their Notes moſt pleaſantly, and that all Trees, Herbes, and Flowers declare the comming of the Spring time: this delightſome change made him remember her, who aboue all other flowred in excellent beautie, and for whom (abandoning his libertie) Loue hath taken him captiue, ſo that in theſe thoghts, he thus (ſomewhat loud) parled with himſelfe.
                  Ah poore Gentleman of the Sea, without Parents or Lands, that thou canſt auouch, how durſt thou lift thy heart ſo high, as to loue her who is beyond all other in beautie, bounty, and birth? Ah wretch as thou art, oughteſt thou not to conſider by theſe three things, wherein ſhe is moſt perfect: the beſt Kinght in the world may not be ſo hardy as to thinke of louing her? And thou poore vnknowne, art wrapt in a labirinth of folly, louing and dying, not daring to tell it, or make ſhew thereof. In this complaint was the Gentleman of the Sea ſo carryed away, as forgetting all other matters, hee rode croſſe the forreſt a long ſpace, with his Helmet cloſed: till at length lifting vp his head, hee behelde a Knight well mounted, in the wood by him, who long had kept company to heare his ſadde diſcourſe. When the knight ſawe the Prince had diſcryed him & for that cauſe held his peace, he approched neerer him with theſe words. Beleeue me knight, it ſeems you more loue your Friend then ſhee doth you, when in commending her you diſpraiſe your ſelfe: and for ought I vnderſtand by your ſpeeches, you are no ſuch man as ought to pretend loue, therefore it is neceſſarie I ſhould know who ſhee is, to the end I may ſupply your defect and ſerue her. Sir knight (anſwered the Prince) you haue ſome reaſon for theſe ſpeeches, yet hap what ſhall, you can know no more then you doe: and I can aſſure yee, that by louing her you can get no aduantage. So doe not I beleeue, ſayd the knight, for a man ought to conceiue glory in trauaile, or any danger in the ſeruice of ſo faire a Ladie, ſeeing that in the end, he cannot but gaine his long looked for recompence: wherefore hee that loueth in ſo high a place as you doe, ſhould not be agreeued at any thing that happeneth. When the Prince heard him ſpeake ſo ſenſibly, imagining hee vſed theſe wordes to comfort him, he was of better cheere, and came more neere to him to continue this talk, but the Knight ſayd. Keepe yee backe, for either by friend-ſhip or force, you muſt tell mee what I haue demaunded. Now truſt me, anſwered the Prince, it ſhall not be ſo. Goe too then, quoth the knight, ſee what wil happen thereon and defend your ſelfe. With right good will ſayde the Prince. So gan they lace their Helmets, taking likewiſe their Shieldes and Lances: but as they ſeuered them-ſelues for the Iouſt, a Damoſell came and ſpake in this manner.
                  Knights, I pray you forbeare a while, and tell mee one thing before the combate if you can: for ſuch is my haſte, as I haue no leaſure to tarry the end of your fight. At theſe words they ſtayed them-ſelues, demanding of her what ſhe deſired. I would faine, quoth ſhee, heare ſome news of a Knight, called the Gentleman of the Sea. And what would you with him? ſaid the Prince. I haue brought him tydings, anſwered the Damoſell, from Agraies Sonne to the King of Scotland. Attend a little, replyed

the Prince, and I will tell ye ſo much as I know of him. All this time was the Knight of the Forreſt ready for the Iouſt, and much offended at her that came to ſtay them, wherefore hee called to the Prince to gaurd him-ſelfe, giuing him ſuch an attaint in the encounter, as his Launce flew in pieces: but the Prince met him full, as both Horſe and Man were thrown to the ground, when the Horſe (being more nimble then his Maiſter) ſeeing him ſelfe at libertie, ran about the field, yet the Prince found the meanes to take him againe, and bringing him to the diſmounted knight, ſayd, Heere Sir, take your Horſe, and hence-forth deſire not to know any thing againſt a mans will. The knight would not refuſe his gentleneſſe, for he found him-ſelfe ſo ſhaken with his fall, as hee could hardly follow to catch him again & in meane while he aſſayed to remount on his Horſe, the Prince left him, comming to the Damoſell that ſtayed for him, demaunding if ſhe knew the man ſhe enquired after. No truely, quoth ſhe, I did neuer ſee him: but Agraies told me, that he would preſently make himſelfe knowne, ſo ſoone as I ſhould ſay that I came from him. He did not deceiue you therein anſwered the Prince, therfore ye muſt vnderſtand I my ſelfe am the man: and with theſe words he vnlaced his Helmet, when the Damoſell ſaw his face, ſhe ſaid. In truth now doe I verily beleeue it, for your beauty I haue heard very much commended. Then tell me, quoth the Prince, where haue you left Agraies? Hard by a Riuer not farre hence, ſayd ſhe, where he ſtaieth with his Troupe, attending a fit winde for Paſſage into Gaule: and is very deſirous (before he go any further) to know if you will beare him companie. With all my heart, replyed the Prince, ride then before and conduct mee the way. So rode he on with the Damoſell, and in ſome ſhort time after, they came neer the place where Agraies and his Armie were encamped: but yet before they arriued there, they heard behinde them one cry: Stay knight, for thou muſt tell me what I demanded. The Prince turning backe, behold the knight whō he ſo lately diſmounted, and another that bare him company, wherfore hee ſtayed to take his Armes. Now were they ſo neere the Prince Agraies Campe, and he as they all might ſee the Tourney, hauing a farre off noted the Princes comming, maruailing what he was that ſo gallantly managed his Horſe: and to ſay ſooth, hee was (in his time) a Knight of the comlyeſt grace that euer was ſeen, & where he ſtroue to hide himſelfe, he was ſooneſt diſcouered, by reaſon of his brauery in horſeman-ſhip. The two Knights ran together in full courſe againſt him, breaking their Lances in pieces on his ſhield: but the Prince meeting him that had the foile in the forreſt, threw him again frō his ſaddle ſo roughly, as in the fall he brake his arme, the grief whereof made him lie ſtill as if he had bin dead. When he perceiued he was ſo well rid of one, hee drew his ſword: & came to the other, giuing him ſuch a ſtroke on his Helmet, as the Sword entring in, hee puld it backe with ſuch force, that the laces brake, wherby he broght it quite frō his head vpō his ſword: then he lifted vp his arme to haue ſmitten him, but the knight quickly clapt his Shield before. In mean while the Prince got his ſword into his left hand (which hee could

doe very hardly) and with his right hand tooke holde on his enemies ſhield, renting it violently from about his necke, and afterward gaue him ſuch a blow on the head, as in great amazement hee fell to the ground. Thus did hee leaue him there with his companion, and rod with the Damoſell to the Tents of Agraies: who hauing ſeen the concluſion of this quarrell, meruailing what he was that had ſo ſoone ouer-come two knights, therefore when he came towardes him, hee went foorth to meete him, and ſo ſoone as they knew each other, you need not make no doubt of their kinde ſalutations. Soone after the Prince alighted, and by Agraies was conducted into his Tent to be vnarmed, but firſt hee gaue commandement, that the knights diſmounted in the fielde ſhould bee brought thither, where they were no ſooner ariued, but Agrais thus ſpake to them. Beleeue mee, my friends, you attempted great folly to meddle with this Knight. You ſay true my Lord, anſwered hee whoſe arme was broken, yet once to day I ſaw him in ſuch plight, as I little thought of any ſuch reſiſtance. Afterward he declared all that happened in the Forreſt, and the communication they had together: yet he omitted the Princes complaints becauſe hee ſtood in feare to diſpleaſe him. During the repitition of theſe matters, the patience of the one and boldneſſe of the other, was entercourſed among them, and all that day they ſoiourned there, but on the morrow Morning they mounted on horſe-backe, ſhaping their courſe to Palingues, a right good City on the frontires, and the outmoſt part of Scotland, where they found ſhipping, and embarqued them-ſelues toward Gaule. The winde ſeruing according to their deſire, in fewe dayes they landed in the Hauen of Galfrin, and marching thence in ſeemely order, without any hinderance, they came to the Caſtle of Baldain, where King Perion was beſieged, hauing already loſt great number of his people. When he was aduertiſed of this ſuccour, you muſt imagine him comforted thereby, and their welcome to bee good and gracious: chiefly by the Queene Eliſena, who hauing knowledge of their arriuall, ſent to entreat her Nephew Agraies to come viſite her: which he did, being accompanied with the King, and the Gentleman of the Sea, and two other knights of good account. But you muſt note, that king Periō
                      knew not the prince at the firſt ſight, yet at the length hé called him to remēbrance, that it was the ſame man whom he had knighted, and afterward ſaued his life at the Caſtle, wherefore thus he ſpake. My deare friend, on my faith I had forgotten ye, you are moſt welcome to this place, for your preſence giueth aſſurance, that I neede feare this warre no further, hauing the onely Knight of the world ſo neere mee. Dread Lord, anſwered the Prince, God giue me grace to ſerue you accordingly, for perſwade your ſelfe, that while theſe troubles endure, I will make no ſpare of my perſon.
                  As thus they deuiſed, they entred the Queenes Chamber, when the King taking the Prince by the hand, preſented him to her ſaying. Madame, this is the good Knight of whom here-tofore I tolde ye, he defēded me from the greateſt danger that euer I was in: and therefore I pray ye let no ſpare of curtiſie be made to him here, but giue

him the beſt entertainment the time will affoord. The Queene aduanced her ſelfe to embrace him, but he fell on his knee with theſe wordes. I am ſeruant (Madame) to the Queen your ſiſter, and frō her I come to ſerue you, with like obedience as to her owne perſon. Right graciouſly did the good Lady giue him thankes, yet little thought ſhe that he was her Sonne, for ſhe imagined the ſea had deuoured him: yet was the Princes preſence at that very inſtant ſo pleaſing to her, as her eyes could not be ſatisfied with beholding him, and (through a ſecret mouing of nature) ſhe wiſhed more good to him thē any in the troupe. At this time likewiſe was her remembrance ſolicited, with the former loſſe of her two Childrē, whoſe yeeres ſhe thought would haue equaled the Princes, if God had preſerued them, & theſe occaſions vrged the teares in her eyes. Thus wept ſhe for him that nature touched her withall, and yet vnknowen was in her preſence, but when the Prince beheld her ſo ſorrowfull, he reputed it to the reaſon of the warre begun, wherefore hee ſaid. Madame, I hope with the aide of God, your King, and the freſh ſupply we haue brought: in ſhorte time to recouer your ioy, and for mine owne part, truſt me I will make no ſpare. Heauen proſper ye, anſwered the Queene, with happy ſucceſſe, & for you are the Queene my ſiſters Knight, I wil that ye prouide no other lodging, but abide here with vs, and all things ſhall be appointed for yee to your owne contentment. Such was their conference together, vntill Agraies would goe refreſh himſelfe, wherfore taking leaue for that night, he went to his lodging where it was prouided: and gladly would the Prince haue followed him, but the Queene with-held him by ſuch importunity, as he was cōſtained now to remaine in his vnknowne mothers cuſtody. Right ſoone was the news of this freſh ſuccour, brought to K. Abies of Ireland & Daganel his Cozin, who made very ſmall account thereof, becauſe (in thoſe times) was King Abies accounted for one of the beſt Knights that euer was heard of, and in reſpect of his hot deſire to the fight, determined (ſeeing new aide was come to his enimy) very quickly to bid him battaile, and for this cauſe he ſaid before all his people there preſent. If King Perion were ſo gentle a cō
                     panion as to come ſee vs, I had rather he would do it to day then to morrow. Aſſure your ſelfe, anſwered Daganel, he is nothing ſo haſty as I thinke: for hee feareth you to much, albeit he maketh little ſhew thereof. Know you, ſaid Galin Duke of Normandy, by what means we may thereto conſtraine him? Firſt let vs make an ambuſh of the greater part of our Army, which ſhall remaine with the King in this Forreſt of Baldain, then you Lord Daganel and my ſelfe will go with the reſt, to preſent our ſelues at breake of day before the Cittie: & I am certaine that being deſcried by our enemies, who imagining our ſtrength is altogether, wil take hart, and not faile to come running forth vpon vs. When we ſee them approch, we will diſſemble a timerous feare, and take our flight toward the Forreſt, where ſhall abide the King with his company: then our enemies purſuing aſſured victory in their own conceit, wil ſecke aduantage by our ſhamefull retire, & ſo be takē thēſeues in the ſnare. Very well haue you aduiſed, anſwered King Abies, do you your ſelfe

worthy Duke giue order, that all things bee done as you haue appointed. Now might ye there behold armed men on Horſe-backe, the Souldiers muſtring, the drums thundering, and the Trumpets cheerefully ſounding, as in one inſtant, matters were ſo well ordered, that the Kings Commandement failed in nothing: whereupon the next morning at the breake of day, Daganel and the Duke of Normandie, ſhewed themſelues with their Squadron before the Towne. Little did King Perion at that time thinke of any ſuch enterpriſe, but altogether refreſhed his ſuccour, and honoured the Prince by whō he had found ſuch friend-ſhip. And to make ſome ſhew of his affection towardes him, in the morning he came with his Queene to the Princes Chamber, where they foūd him waſhing his hands, and perceiuing his eyes red, ſwollen & blubbered with teares, they eaſily gathered hee had taken no good reſt that night: and very true it was, for continually hee thought of her, whoſe loue had depriued him of libertie, and likewiſe compared withall the ſlender means he had to attaine ſo high, which made him enter into ſuch profound griefe, as he expected no other remedie but death. The Queene deſirous to know the cauſe of his ſadneſſe, tooke Gandalin aſide, thus ſpeaking to him. My friend, your Maiſters countenance berayweth ſome inward diſpleaſure, hath any one heere offended him in ought? No Madame, anſwered Gandalin, he hath by your Maieſtie receiued great honor: but he is wont to bee tormented in ſleepe as you ſee. During theſe diſcourſes, the Sentinell came to aduertiſe the King, how he had diſcoured the ambuſh and the enemies were very neere the Citie, where preſently he commanded to doraine the Armie. Now was each one ready to horſe-backe, eſpecially the King and the Prince, who went directly to the Citie gate, where they found Agraies chiding, becauſe they would not let him goe forth, thinking he ſhould tarrie too long from the fight: for he was one of the hardieſt Knights, and the beſt to giue aſſiſtance in neede that could bee found, ſo that if good aduiſe had beene as ready with him, as he was poſſeſſed of vnconquerable courage, his like might not haue beene found in the world. At the Kings comming the gates were ſuddenly opened, and then went foorth the men of Gaule in order, who ſeeing their enemies to be ſo great a number, albeit the whole Armie was minded to goe no further, reputing it ouer-much boldneſſe to aſſaile ſuch an vneaquall ſtrength, and therefore aroſe among them a murmuring conteſtation. Which Agraies perceiuing, without further trifling gaue the ſpurres to his horſe, crying aloud, Beſhrow him that tarrieth any longer: ſeeing them hee is to deale withall, ſhall we not venter? So ſaying, he gallopped toward his enemies, in like manner did the Gentleman of the Sea, and the reſt of their traine, who without any order of marching, ran among them, and were immediatly mingled together. He whom the Prince firſt met withall, was the Duke of Normandie, whō he charged ſo couragiouſly, as breaking his Launce on him, ouer-threw both man and horſe to the earth, and with this rough fall, his legge was broken. So paſſed on the Prince ſetting hand to Sword, as a chafed Lyon entred the preaſſe,

ſhewing ſuch deeds of Armes, as none durſt with-ſtand him: for he ouer-threw all that encountred him, killing ſome outright, chining and diſmembring others, ſo that euery one was glad to giue him way. When Daganel ſaw his men in ſuch diſorder, by the meanes of one Knight, he got the moſt of them together ſo well as he could, and round about beſet the Prince to beate him downe: which they had done, but that Agraies Perceiuing it, came with his troupe to reſcue him. At their arriual you might behold Launces broken, Knights tumbling downe, helmets rent, and ſhields ſcatred on the ground making a great conflict & diſorder amongſt the Iriſh-men, for King Perion likewiſe came freſh vpon them with his band. Daganel (on the cō
                     trary ſide) did the beſt he could to retire backe, but the Gentleman of the Sea was among the thickeſt, ſhewing ſuch chiualry, as he found before him not any reſiſtance, each one was ſo abaſhed at his behauiour: and Agraies aboue the reſt, ſhewed that his arme was not benummed, for the more to hearten and cheere vp his men, he cryed aloude to them: follow my friends, follow the beſt Knight that euer bare Armes. When Daganel ſaw his ſide to haue the worſt, & what great damage he receiued by the Prince, he determined to kill his horſe, and ſo to make him fall among the crowde: but he was deceiued, for the Prince comming to him, let fall ſo mightie a ſtroke on his Helmet, as rent it cleane from off his head, and ſo remained Daganel vnarmed. Which when King Perion eſpied he reached him ſuch a ſalutation with his Sword, as cleft his head through the very braines: whereupon his men ſeeing him ſlaine, they that had the beſt horſes fled away for life; and ſtayed not till they ſaued them-ſelues where King Abies was ambuſhed. But King Perion ſtill purſuing victory, diſcouered the rereguard (that came from the Forreſt) marching in very great haſte toward him, ſhewing by their countenance a reuenge of their loſſe, wherefore ioyning together, they cryed; Set on them men of Ireland, ſee that none of them eſcape vs, but let vs enter pellmell in the field. When the Gaules found themſelues thus ſurpized, neuer were people more aſtoniſhed, for they imagined the ambuſh had not beene ſo great: and which moſt of all affrighted them, was, that they muſt now deale with freſh and luſtie men, them-ſelues being ſore wearyed, & their horſes ſo ouerlaboured, as they could hardly indure their burden. Beſide, they knew king Abias was there in perſō, being (as you heard before) accounted one of the beſt knights in the world: and for this cauſe the moſt part of the Gaules began to tremble. But the Gentle-man of the Sea foreſeeing the diſorder was like to enſue, came & perſwaded them rather to die then looſe one iot of their honour and reputation, ſaying: My friends and companions, be of good cheere, each one make knowne his vertue, and remember the eſteeme the Gaules haue gotten by Armes. We are to deale with the people aſtonnied & halfe ouercome, let vs not make change with them, taking their feare, and deliuering our victorie: for if they but onely behold your reſolute countenances, I am certaine they are not able to endure yee, let vs then enter among them, for God is our defender. At

theſe words the moſt diſheartened tooke courage, concluding to ſtay and fight manly with their enemies, who ſoone after in great furie ſet vpon them. Now did King Abies make knowne his magnanimitie, and hardly could Prince Agraies men endure the aſſault, nor the Squadron that King Perion brought: for King Abies maimed ſome, other he ouerthrew, & while his Launce held, he diſmounted euery knight that met with him. Afterward he layd hand to Sword, wherewith hee carried himſelfe ſo valiantly, as the hardyeſt were amazed thereat, for he made way where euer he came: ſo that king Perions men, not able longer to hold out, began to retyre ſo faſt as they could toward the Citie. Whē the Gentleman of the Sea, ſaw that Fortune was ſo contrary to them, in great ſpight he entered the throng, and fought ſo fiercely, as the moſt part of the Iriſh-men were glad to ſtay, while the Gaules without diſorder retyred toward the Caſtle, then turning his horſe, he followed them. To defend this brunt there was alſo king Perion, and the Prince Agraies, who deliuered teſtimonie to their enemies (by the keen edge of their Swords) how well they knew to gouerne themſelues in ſuch extremities: notwithſtanding, the Iriſh-men ſeeing they had the better, ſtil purſued them with eager courage, driuing them confuſedly into the Citie, hoping that now would be the end of their warre. Such was the retire of the Gaules, ſtill more and more preſſed by their enemies, as doubtleſſe the Iriſh had entred the Citie after them, but that they were hindred by king Perion, Agraies, and the Prince, who wholly did repulſe the throng, till their people by them were gotten in. But now was tydings brought to king Abies, that his couſin Dagenel, and Gallin Duke of Normandie were ſlaine, whereat he waxed very diſpleaſant: and ſeeing King Perion with his people were incloſed in the Citie, he reſolued to take leyſure for his reuenge, wherein he was deceiued, for ſoone after he was very ſtrongly repulſed, which made him almoſt mad with anger. And as he thus raged vp & downe, one of his knights ſhewed him the Prince, ſaying: My Lord, hee whom you ſee mounted on the white Horſe, is the man that ſlewe Prince Daganel and the Duke of Normandie, with many other, the beſt in our Armie. When King Abies heard that, he rode to the Prince with theſe words: Knight, thou haſt ſlaine the man whom moſt I loued in the world: but if thou wilt combate, I hope to be reuenged ſo well, as I ſhall haue cauſe to be quit with thee. Your men (anſwered the Prince) are two little trauailed to meddle with ours, notwithſtanding if thou wilt as (a Knight) reuenge him thou louedſt, and declare the great hardineſſe for which thou art renowned: chuſe of thy men ſuch as thou ſhalt like, and I (if it pleaſe the King) will doe as much of mine, for being equall in number, thou ſhalt gaine more honor then with ſo great an Armie, which thou haſt brought into this Countrey without iuſt occaſion.
                  Beleeue me, quoth the King, thou talkeſt well, go to, chuſe thou thy ſelfe the number of men, how many or few thou thinkeſt good. Seeing you leaue it in my choyſe, replied the Prince, I will make another offer, which (it may be) you will account more cōuenient. You

are mine enemy for that which I haue done, and I yours for the wrong you haue done to this Realme, ſo for our ſeuerall cauſe of anger, it is not reaſonable any other then our ſelues ſhould ſuffer: let then the battaile be betweene you and me onely, and preſently (if you will) without longer dallying, yet ſhall you aſſure me from your men, as I will do you from mine, ſo that none ſhall moue, whether the one or the other be vanquiſhed. Right well ſaid King Abies, do I allow of thy offer: whereupon he choſe ten Knights on his parte to garde the field. And as the Prince laboured to gaine the like of the King, with his conſent, hee found King Perion and Agraies ſomewhat loath to grant the Combate: as well for the conſequence that might enſue, as alſo becauſe the Prince was much wearyed and ſore wounded beſide, wherefore they entreated him to déferre the matter till the day following. But the deſirous affection he had to be conquerour, as alſo to make a finall concluſion of the warre, that hee might returne vnder her obeyſance, from whom he came to ſerue king Perion: would not ſuffer him to make any longer delay, of the glory and honor which he ſaw ſo neere at hand. For this cauſe he vſed ſo many perſwaſions to the king, as in the end hee was granted the Combate, and on his ſide likewiſe were tenne knights appointed, for his guard and ſafetie in the field.
               
               
                  CHAP. X.
                  
                     How the Gentleman of the ſea fought a Combate with King Abies, on difference of the warre he made in Gaule.
                     
                  
                  
                     YOu haue heard in what maner the combat was accorded betweene King Abies & the Gentleman of the ſea, and now already is the greateſt part of the day ſpent: wherefore it was agreed by the Lords on either ſide, (very much againſt the wils of the two Combatants) that all ſhould be deferred till the morrow morning: as well that they might refreſh themſelues, and repaire their battered armour, as alſo for regarding ſuch wounds, as they had receiued in the paſſed encounters. Hereupon the two Kings withdrew themſelues, the one to his Campe, and the other to his caſtle. But ſuch is the bruite ſpred through the Cittie, what worthy exploits the Gentleman of the ſea had done: as he could not paſſe by them, but thus they ſpake with generall voyce. Ah famous Knight, God giue thee grace to proceed as thou haſt begun: impoſſible is it to find a Gentleman, ſo accompliſhed with beauty and Chiualrie as he is, for our eyes are iudges of the one, and our enemies full well haue felt the other. But you muſt note, that in the morning when they went to the field, the King had giuen the Queene in charge, that ſo ſoone as the Prince returned frō the warre, ſhe ſhould ſend one of her Ladyes to him, requeſting him not to be vnarmed in any other place then in her chā
                     ber: wherefore as he went neere the Kings lodging, the Lady came

vnto him, ſaying. Sir Knight, the Queene deſires you not to be elſwhere vnarmed, but in her Chamber, where ſhe ſtayeth your comming. In ſooth, ſaid the King, you muſt needes grant this requeſt, and I deſire it may be ſo. The Prince condiſending, went where the Queene ſtaied with her Ladies, and no ſooner was he entred, but preſently the Ladyes holpe to vn-arme him: yet the Queene her ſelfe tooke the greateſt paine of all, and as ſhee had off his coate of Mayle, ſhee perceiued he was ſore wounded, which ſhe ſhewing to the King, he ſaid. I maruaile Gentle-man, ſeeing you are ſo hurt, that you tooke no longer time for your cōbat. It had bin needleſſe, anſwered the Prince, for I haue no wound (I thanke God) that can keepe me from the Combate. Right ſoone were the Chirurgions commanded to looke thereon, and they found it greater in ſhew then danger. In the meane while ſupper was prepared, during which time, they had much talke of the accidents that day paſt: vntill the houre of reſt came, when each one departed till the next morning. Which being come, after they had ſerued God, the king ſent a rich & goodly Armour to the Prince, of better proofe and ſtrength then that hee had on the day before: wherewith he armed himſelfe, and hauing taken leaue of euery one, mounted on Horſe backe in company of the King, who bare his Helmet, the Prince Agraics his Sheeld (wherein was portrayed two azured Lions in a golden field, rampant the one againſt the other, as if they both intēded murder,) & another Prince carried his Launce. In this equipage he ſet forward to the field, where the King of Ireland attended his comming, well armed, and mounted on a goodly blacke Courſer: but becauſe King Abies had in former time fought hand to hand with a Giant, and vanquiſhed him with the loſſe of his head, therefore he brought to the Combate the like figure in his Shield, deſcribing the whole order as the deede was done. On either ſide reſorted thither a number of people, placing themſelues for moſt conuenient ſight of the Combate. And now were the Champions entred the lyſts, each one couragiouſly reſoluing againſt his enemy, wherefore without longer tarying, lacing downe the ſight of their Helmets, and commending them-ſelues to God: they gaue the ſpurres to their horſes, meeting together ſo furiouſly, both with Launce, body and horſe, as their ſtaues flew in ſhiuers, yet piercing their Armour, and both were laid along in the field. But heat of hart and deſire of conqueſt, made them recouer footing quickly, and plucking forth the ſpields of their Launces wherewith they were wounded: ſet hand to Sword, beginning ſuch a ſtrange and cruell fight, as each one was amazed to ſee them endure ſo much. For this fight was not equally matched, in reſpect the Prince was but yong, well proportioned, and of a reaſonable height: but King Abies was ſo great, as he neuer found any knight that exceeded him a handfull euery way, being (withall) ſo ſtrongly made, that he was rather to be accounted a Giant thē a man, yet was he highly loued & reuerenced of his ſubiects, for the vertue and proweſſe which remained in him, albeit he was too much audatious and proud.
                  Now were theſe Champions ſo

animated againſt each other, as well for honor as the conſequence of the Combate, that without any ſtay for breathing they layde on ſuch load, as their ſtrokes reſounded the fight of twentie men together. And well they witneſſed no great good will betweene them, for there might ye ſee the earth tainted with their blood, the pieces of their Shields, the plate of their Armour ſcattered abroad, and their Helmets ſo bruiſed: that by reaſon their Armes being ſo ſquandered, they were vnable to hold out their ſtrokes, for euery blow cauſed the blood to guſh out abundantly, yet were they of ſuch inuincible courage, as they ſeemed to feele none of this annoyance. Hereupon they maintained ſuch brauery the one againſt the other, as it could not be iudged who had the better or worſe: notwithſtanding, about the houre of three, the Sunne gaue an exceeding warme and violent heate, whereby they found themſelues ſo chafed in their Armour, as they began to wake ſomewhat feeble: eſpecially King Abies, inſomuch as hee was conſtrained to retire backe, thus ſpeaking to the Prince.
                  I ſee thee very neere failing, and my ſelfe am likewiſe out of breath, if thou thinke it good, let vs reſt awhile, for afterward we may more eaſily finiſh our enterpriſe. And thus much I tell thee (although I haue no cauſe or deſire to fauour thee) that I hold better opinion of thee, then any knight that euer I combated withal: moreouer it diſpleaſeth me that I had an occaſion to ſee thee, & much more that I am ſo long in conquering thee, whereby I might take vengeance for his death whom moſt I loued in the world, and as thou didſt ſlay him in open battaile, ſo likewiſe will I ouercome thee in ſight of both our Campes. King Abies replyed the Pince, I now perceiue it diſpleaſeth thee that thou canſt doe no more harme, entering ſo like a Tyrant as thou didſt to ruinate this Countrey. And as it often happeneth, that he which delighteth in euill, can neuer broke any other ſaour: ſo hope I to reward thee ſo well for thy paines, as thou ſhalt confeſſe thou haſt wronged theſe people, Beſide, thus much I aduiſe thee before hand, that I ſhall giue thee as little leiſure or reſpite, as thou haſt giuen them who haue taſted thy crueltie: therefore ſticke cloſe to thy tackling, and defend thy ſelfe againſt the Knight, whom thou reputeſt fayling. The King then taking his Sword, and what was left of his Shield, thus anſwered. Well mayſt thou curſſe the boldneſſe that made thee enter theſe Lyſtes, for hence thou ſhalt not eſcape without loſſe of thy head. Doe what thou canſt ſaid the Prince, for thou ſhalt reſt no more, till thou or thine honour be dead. Herewith more cruelly thē before they began againe their Combat, as if they had euen then entred the field, & albeit king Abies was ſo expert, by reaſon of his long exerciſe in Armes, that he knew right well how to defend and offend: neuertheleſſe the lightnes, hardines, and promptitude of the Prince, made him in the end forget all his induſtrie, for hee was cloſely followed at an inche, as he loſt altother the reſt of his Shield, by which means the Prince could endomage him farre better then before: whereof he failed not, and in ſo many places withall, that the blood ſtreamed downe his Armour in meruailous aboundance, cauſing him by

little and little to loſe his ſtrength, and being in this agony, ſtaggering from one ſide to another, hee could not deuiſe what to do, to eſcape the purſuing ſword of his enemy. Seeing himſelfe now deuoyd of all hope, he concluded either ſoone to dye or haue the victory, and taking his ſword in both hands, he ran with all his might againſt the Prince, and pierced it ſo farre into his Shield, as he was not able to pul it forth againe. Which when the Prince beheld, he gaue him ſuch a furious ſtroke on the left leg, that being quite cut from the reſt, the King was enforced to fall downe: and right ſoone did the Prince ſet foote vppon him, tearing violently his Helmet from his head, ſaying. Thou art dead King Abies, if thou doeſt not yeeld thy lelfe vāquiſhed. Beleeue me I am dead, anſwered th
                        •
                      King, not vanquiſhed alone, but of both the one and other, my ouer-weening hath beene the onely cauſe. Notwithſtanding, ſince it is ſo come to paſſe, I pray thee let aſſurance be giuen to my Souldiours, that without iniury they may carry me into my Country, and dying like a Chriſtian, I may pay my debt both to God & men. Faine would I haue councel for my ouer burdened Soule, then afterward ſhall I render to King Perion what I vſurped from him. And as for thee who haſt vanquiſhed me, I deſpiſe not to dye by the valiance of ſo gentle a Knight as thou art: but withall my hart pardon thee my death, wiſhing thou mayeſt continue honorable, and yet hereafter to remember me. When the Prince ſaw him in ſuch debilitie, he was exceeding ſorowfull for his death, although he knew aſſuredly, that if he had woon the glory of the combate, he would haue dealt much worſe with him. During theſe ſpeeches, the Knights appointed on each ſide came to them, wherefore King Abies commanded his Captaines, to render King Perion what he had conquered in Gaule: which was accompliſhed, and by theſe meanes the Iriſh-men had aſſurance to carry home their King, who dyed ſoone after order was gifor their affaires. Theſe matters thus ended, King Perion, Agraies, and all the Lords of Gaule came to the Prince, accompanying him with great ioy from the fielde into the Citie, euen with ſuch triumphant glory as to Conquerours is accuſtomed: who by their proweſſe not onely ouercome their enemies, but reſtore the Country that is well neere ruinated.
                  Now muſt ye vnderſtand, that a little before the beginning of the Combate, the Damoſell of Denmarke who came from faire Oriana to the Prince, was arriued at king Perions Courte: and before ſhee would make her ſelfe knowne, ſhe deſired to behold the iſſue of the fight. Afterward, ſeeing him returne with ſo honorable a victory, ſhe ſhewed her ſelfe, and taking him aſide, ſaid. Knight, may it pleaſe you to heare a word in ſecret, of ſuch matter as doth verie neere concerne ye? Euen what you will, anſwered the Prince: with which words he tooke her by the hand, and keeping her from the throng, ſhe thus ſpake. The Princeſſe Oriana who is onely yours, hath ſent me to you, and this Letter withall, wherein you ſhall finde your name written. When he heard her named, by the remembrance of whom only he liued, he was ſo perplexed, that without vnderſtanding what elſe the Damoſel

ſaid: hauing taken the Letter, he let it fall, being readie himſelfe to beare it companie, which the Damoſell ſeeing, ſhee tooke vp the Letter and came to him againe. Euery one that beheld him in theſe paſſions, meruayled what newes ſhe brought to procure this alteration: but ſhe puld him by the arme ſo roughly, as made him forget his former Traunce, thus ſpeaking. What now my Lord? Take you the Meſſage in ſo ill part, that comes from the onely Lady in the world, and who aboue all other loueth you? for whoſe ſake likewiſe I haue taken ſo great paine to find you? Ah Ladie (quoth he) on my faith I knew not what you ſayd to me, for euen as you began to ſpeak, I felt the paine to renewe in mee, which heretofore you haue ſeene me endure. It is true (ſaid the Damoſell) but now it is needleſſe for ye to conceale your ſelfe any longer from me, for I know more of your affayres and my Ladies, then you imagine, becauſe her ſelfe hath bewrayed them to me. And if you beare her affection, you neede not be aſhamed thereof, in that ſhe loueth you beyond all other: in reſpect whereof, ſhe telleth you by me, that ſhe muſt goe to the King her father; requeſting after your departure from this warre, you would come ſee her in great Brittaine, appointing all things in ſuch order, as at your arriual you may remaine there in the Court, vntill more amply you vnderſtand her mind, Beſide, ſhe gaue me charge to tell ye, how ſhe certainly knowes you are Sonne to a King, wherewith ſhe is no leſſe pleaſed then ſhee thinkes you will be: and ſeeing (being ignorant of your Linage) you haue proued ſo good a Knight, now vnderſtanding your Nobilitie, you ſhould labour to increaſe your Fame if you can. And then againe ſhee gaue him the Letter, ſaying. Take here the Letter wherein your Name is written, and which you had hanging about your necke, at ſuch time as you were found in the Sea. The Prince tooke the Letter, and when he looked on it, remembring to what good purpoſe his Lady had taken it from him, fetching a vehement ſigh, ſomewhat ſoftly, he thus ſpake.
                  Ah happy Letter, moſt diuinely waſt thou found, in reſpect thou haſt beene kept by her, who hath my heart in her cuſtodie, and for whom I haue ſo often aſſayed to die, yet cannot. For thinking on her perfection, I ſeeke to augment it by ſtrength and commendation, but of ſo ſlender value is my puiſſance found: that ſtriuing thereby to gaine her fauor, the leaſt paine I feele ſurpaſſeth a thouſand deaths: which (neuertheleſſe) are now recompenced by this preſent benefite. O higheſt God, when ſhall I ſee the time, wherein I may giue her to vnderſtand, how great my deuotion is to obey her by ſome agreeable ſeruice? Hauing finiſhed theſe words, he opened the Letter, and ſaw his Name written therein, which was Amadis: then thus ſpake the Damoſell againe to him. I was charged, Sir, when I had done my Meſſage, to returne with all ſpeed to her that ſent me to you; therefore be thinke your ſelfe if you will command me any thing. You ſhall not depart (ſo pleaſe you) in ſuch haſte, anſwered the Prince, but ſtay with mee two or three dayes: during which time, for what occaſion ſo euer it be, you ſhall not forſake me, and then will I conduct you whither you pleaſe. In obeying-you (ſayd the Damoſell,

I truſt I doe ſeruice to my Ladie Oriana. Their talke thus breaking off, he returued to the King and Agraies, who ſtayed for him him at the entrance of the Citie, where the people were wonderfully aſſembled in the ſtreetes. Then came the Queene with her Ladyes & Gentle-women to vnarme him, and the Chirurgions to viſite his wounds, which when they had regarded, albeit they were many and yrkeſom to behold, yet were they to bee healed without any great daunger of his perſon. For this night the king deſired, that he and Agraies, would ſupp with him, but the Prince making his excuſe by his wounds, went to his Chamber, willing to haue no other company then the Damoſel: to whom he did all the honour that could be deuiſed, hoping through her to finde remedie for part of his griefes. This Damoſell ſoiourned with him certaine time, and in reſpect of the good Newes ſhee brought him, no wound could hinder him from viſiting the great Hall, there walking and conferring with euety one: but moſt with her whom he cauſed to ſtay, attending his diſpoſitiō till he might beare Armes. And betweene them happened a ſtrange occaſion, which was cauſe of his longer abode in Gaule, then hee expected: ſo that the Damoſell returned to Oriana without him, as you hereafter ſhall vnderſtand.
               
               
                  CHAP. XI.
                  
                     How the Gentleman of the Sea was knowne by King Perion, his Father, and by the Queene Eliſena his Mother.
                  
                  
                     IN the beginning of this Hiſtorie, it hath beene recited, how King Perion gaue his Queene Eliſena, being then in little Brittaine, a Ring like another that commonly hee wore, and theſe two Rings were of ſuch an vniforme, as there was no difference to bee diſcerned betweene them. Likewiſe ye haue vnderſtood how when the yong Prince was put vpon the water, this Ring was faſtened about his necke, which Gandales kept, till time he ſent it by the Damoſell (a little before he was knighted) with the Sword and the waxe. Now had the King ſundry times demaunded of the Queene for the Ring, who made him diuers doubtfull anſwers, and in the end ſayd ſhe had loſt it. But it came to paſſe, that as the Prince walked with Orianaes Damoſell, which commonly he was wont to do, yong Melicia daughter to king Perion, paſſed by him weeping, when the Prince ſtaied her; ſaying. Faire friend, why weepe ye? Ah my Lord, quoth the Princeſſe, I haue euen now loſt a Ring, which the King my Father gaue me to keepe while he ſlept. Weepe not ſo faire Virgin, anſwered the Prince, you ſhall haue another of me to giue him: So taking his owne Ring from his finger, he gaue it her. When ſhe beheld it, (thinking it was the ſame ſhe had loſt) ſhe ſaid. Ah my Lord, haue you found it, wherewith I am not a little glad, for I haue all this while ſought it. What nowe? quoth the Prince, this is not your

Ring. In mine opinion it is, anſwered Melicia, or the onely thing of the world that moſt reſembles it. So much the better, ſaid the Prince, for more eaſily will it be iudged the ſame you loſt. Herewith went Melicia to the Kings Chamber, and finding him awake, he asked her for his Ring, then gaue ſhe him the ſame ſhe had of the Prince, which the King put on his finger, thinking it was his owne. But ſoone after as he walked through the Gallary, he eſpied in a corner lying the other Ring, which he gaue his daughter before to keepe, and taking it vp, he compared them together: where-upon he remembred, that one of theſe two was the ſame he ſometime gaue the Queene, ſo he asked of Melicia where ſhe had the Ring. The yong Princeſſe affraid of beating, durſt not lye, but thus anſwered. My Lord and Father, your Ring I loſt, and as I ſearched for it, I met with the Gentleman of the ſea: who becauſe he ſaw me weepe, gaue me one of his, which I deliuered you in ſtead of your owne, and if that be not it, I know not where it is. When the King heard this, he preſently conceiued ſuſpition betweene his Queene and the Prince, imagining in reſpect of his beauty, how ſhe was fallen into ſome diſhoneſt liking of him. and therefore had giuen that token. Hereupon he went to the Chamber where ſhe was, and ſhutting the dore, ſate downe by her, not ſpeaking one word a good ſpace, but ſilently fixed his eyes on the ground: then breathing forth a paſſionate ſigh, he ſaid. I will not maruaile any longer Madame, why you would neuer make me any certaine anſwer, when I demanded for the Ring Igaue ye in little Britaine: you haue loſt it in ſuch a place, where you would be loath I ſhould know of it, but hardly can you conceale affection, when it proceedeth to ſuch effects. The Gentleman of the ſea inconſideratly gaue it to Melicia, little thinking that it came at the firſt from me: and thereby do I know what he ſuſpecteth not, and your ſelfe would I ſhould not vnderſtand. When the Queene (who already by his countenance ſaw he was troubled) heard what he had ſaid, ſhe now determined not to diſſemble with him in any thing, but ſummarily made a true diſcourſe of her child-birth. And (not without teares) ſhe recounted to him, how ſtanding in feare of the king her father, as alſo the ſeuere law vſed in his Kingdome, ſhe was conſtrained to commit her ſonne to the mercy of the ſea, and in his cradle coffin put with him, both the Ring, ſword, & what elſe hath bene already declared. Confounded was the king with maruaile when he heard the whole truth, and preſently imagined the Prince might bee his firſt ſonne, whom God had ſo miraculouſly preſerued, wherefore he ſaid to the Queene. According to your circumſtances reuealed, it may be, that he who is vnknowne to vs, is our ſonne, and the rather I coniecture ſo by the name he beareth of the ſea. Ah God, ſaid the Queen, may it fall out ſo haply? I beſeech ye my Lord, ſend preſently for him, and we will deſire him to tell vs of whence he is. Let vs go then, quoth the King, to ſeeke him.
                  So went they to his Chamber, where they found him ſleeping, wherefore (without making any noyſe) he approched nere the bed, eſpied his Sword, which he tooke, and after he had well viewed it, knew it to be the ſame he eſteemed

ſo much, and wherewith he had finiſhed many famous aduentures, whereupon he ſaid to the Qeuene. On my faith, this is the ſword I left in the Chamber of the King your Father, the firſt night we were acquainted together, and now do I the better beleeue what you haue ſaid vnto me. Ah God, ſaid the Queene, let vs ſuffer him ſleepe no longer, for my hart cannot endure this weighty burden: herewith ſhe tooke him by the hand and awaked him, ſaying. My Lord, ſleepe no more at this time, for other accaſions calleth you. Eaſily was the Prince raiſed from ſleepe, but whē he beheld the Queene weeping, as one amazed thereat, he ſaid. Madame, from what occaſion proceede theſe teares? is there any thing I may do ye ſeruice in, to remedy them? Noble friend, quoth the Queene, you onely may quallifie my griefe by your words, in telling me whoſe ſonneyou are. So God helpe me Madame, anſwered the Prince, I know not, for by ſtrange aduenture was I found in the ſea. The good Lady was then ſo ouercome with ioy, as not onely ſpeech, but vitall ſence was taken from her, and ſhe fell downe in a ſwoune: which the Prince perceiuing, quickly ranne to recouer her, ſaying. What aile ye Madame? further could he not imagine on the cauſe of this alteration. Ah my ſonne, quoth ſhe, now know I better then thy ſelfe who thou art. The King likewiſe was ſo caried away with ioy and admiration, as he ſtood not able to ſpeake a word: now was it hard to iudge, which of theſe three felt greateſt contentation, but the mother throwing her armes about the Princes neck, ſaid. Now may I boldly dare to kiſſe in ſafetie, hauing beene ſo long depriued of thyſight and knowledge: highly am I beholding to the deuine bounty, who hath fauoured the offence I committed through feare, which was, in deliuering thee to the courtiſie of the waters, and ſee heere thy Kingly father that begot thee. With theſe words the Prince fell at their feete, extreame ioy reducing the teares into his eyes, and altogether praiſed God for this good aduenture: eſpecially the Prince, becauſe he had beene preſerued in ſo great danger, and now at length to finde ſuch honor and good hap, as to meete with his Parents, being all this while vnknowne to them. As thus they deuiſed on the fortunes paſſed, the Queene demanded of him if hee had no other name, thē that which now he called himſelfe by? Yes Madame, quoth he, but it is not fully three daies paſt ſince I knew there-of, for as I came from the Combat againſt King Abies, a Damoſell brought me a Letter which I haue, and (as ſhe ſaith) was faſtened about my neck, being wrapped in waxe, when I was found in the ſea, wherein I finde that my name is Amadis: and herewithall he ſhewed the letter to the Queene, which ſhe full well knew ſo ſoone as ſhe ſaw it. Beleeue me, ſaid the Queene, this truely is the Letter that Darioletta wrote, when ſhe made the ſeperation betweene you and me: thus though I was ere while in great griefe and ſorrow, yet now (praiſed be God) I feele as much ioy and pleaſure. Now ſeeing aſſuredly your name is Amadis, it is needleſſe you ſhould beare any other contrary title: ſo thence forward he was called no more the Gentleman of the ſea, but Amadis, and ſometime Amadis de Gaule. It was not long before the bruite

hereof was ſpread through the city, that the good & famous knight was ſonne to King Perion and the Queen Eliſena: wherefore if euery one reioyced (you muſt thinke) the Prince Agrates was not ſorry, for they were found to bee Cozin germames. Among the reſt, the Damoſell of Deamarke had knowledge here-of, wherefore conſidering what comfort this would bee to the Princeſſe Oriana, ſhe laboured ſo much as ſhe could to return toward her: knowing ſhe would giue her friendly countenance, bringing her ſo good Newes, what gracious fortune had happened to him whom aboue all other ſhe loued. For this cauſe ſhe intreated Amadis, to diſpatch her returne to her Miſtreſſe: In that I well perceiue, quoth ſhe, you can not ſo ſpeedily depart hence as you would, nor were it reaſonable, but you ſhould giue ſome contentation to them, who for the loue of you haue ſhedde ſo many teares. Theſe wordes cauſed the teares to trickle downe his cheekes, yet ſmothering his griefe ſo well as he could, he made this anſwere to the Damoſell. Lady, I will pray that the Heauens may ſafely conduct ye; yet let mee entreat your friendly remembrance, commanding the vttermoſt of my endeauours, for without your gentle care my life cannot endure: withall, I finde my ſelfe ſo endebted to my gracious Miſtreſſe, as I dare not requeſt any thing at her hand. Neuertheleſſe you may ſay to her, that right ſoon ſhall I come to ſhew my obedience, and in like Armor will I be clad, as when you ſaw me combate with the King of Ireland: becauſe both ſhe and you may the more eaſily know me, if I cannot compaſſe the meane to ſpeake with you; & in this manner departed the Damoſel of Denmark. On the other ſide, Agrates ſeeing his Cozin Amadis was to remaine / longer in Gaule, determined to take his leaue, and calling him aſide ſayd. Faire Cozin, for this time I muſt be enforced to leaue ye, albeit your company is more pleaſing to me then any other: but my paſſionate heart will allow me no quiet, vntill I be with her, who both farre and neere hath power to command me. It is Madame Oliuia, daughter to the King Vanain of Norway, who ſent for me, (by the Damoſell that brought me the Helmet of Galpan, which you ſent me, in reuenge of the diſhonour ſhe receiued by him) that I ſhould come to her with all conuenient ſpeed: and therefore I neither may or dare faile, which is the onely cauſe of my parting with you.
                  Now muſt you note heere-withall that at the time as Don Galuanes brother to the king of Scotland, was in the Realme of Norway with Agraies his Cozin: this yong Prince became ſo enamoured of the Lady Oliuia, as he concluded neuer to loue any other then her, and this made him the more earneſt to depart by her commandement. And to tel ye what this Galuanes was, he had the name of Galuanes without lād, becauſe al the portiō his father left him, was onely a poore Caſtle: for the reſt he had ſpent in following armes, & entertaining Gentle-men, whereupon he had the Sirname of without land. Such as you haue heard were the ſpeeches Agrates had with Amadis, of whō he requeſted to know, where he ſhould finde him at his returne from Norway. Cozin (qouth Amadis) I hope at my departure

hence, to viſite the Court of king Laſuart, where I haue heard Chiualrie to be worthily maintained, with greater libertie and honour, then in the kingdome of any Emperour or King. But ſeeing it liketh you to take another way, I deſire when you ſhall ſee the King your Father, and the Queene, to remember my bounden dutie to them both: aſſuring them (on my behalfe) that they may command mein their ſeruice, euē as your ſelf, or any other, as well in reſpect of our alliance together, as alſo for the gracious entertainment I had in my youth, being by them moſt carefully educated and eſteemed. This done, Agraies took his leaue, beeing Honourably conducted through the Cittie, by the King and all the Lords of his Court: but ſo ſoone as the King entred the fields, he ſaw a Damoſell comming toward him, who boldly laying hold on the raine of his Horſe bridle, thus ſpake.
                  Remember thy ſelfe King Perion, what a Damoſell ſome-time ſayd vnto thee: That when thou didſt recouer thy loſſe, the Kingdome of Ireland ſhould looſe her flower. Thinke now (I pray thee) whether ſhe ſayd true or no, thou haſt recouered thy Sonne whom thou reputedſt loſt, and euen by the death of valiant King Abies, who was the Flower of Ireland, and ſuch a one as that Countrey ſhall neuer haue his like: Vntill time the good brother of the Ladie muſt come, who ſhall by force of Armes cauſe to be broght thither the tribute of other Countryes, and he muſt die by the hand of him, that ſhall accompliſh for her the onely thing of the world, which moſt he loueth. And ſo it hap ned by Marlot of Ireland, brother to the Queene of that Countrey: whom Triſtan of Leonnoys killed, on the quarrell of tribute demanded of King Marke of Corne wall his Vncle: which Triſtan afterward dyed for the loue he bare to Queene Yſeul, being the onely thing of the world that hee moſt loued. Now muſt thou be mindefull hereof, ſayd the Damſel to the King, for Vrganda my Miſtreſſe ſo cōmandeth thee. When Amadis heard her ſpeake of Vrganda, he tooke occaſion thus to anſwere. Damoſell, and my friend, I pray you ſay to her who ſent you hither, that the Knight to whom ſhe gaue the Launce, commendeth him-ſelfe to her good grace: being now aſſured in the matter whereof then ſhe ſpake, how with that Launce, I ſhould deliuer the houſe from whence I firſt diſcended: and euen ſo it fell out, for I deliuered my Father vnknowne to me, being then at the very point of death, So without any other reply, the Damoſell turning bridle rode backe the ſame way ſhe came, and the King into the Citie, with Amadis his Soune ſo lately recouered: for which cauſe he aſſembled all the Princes and Lords of his Realme, meaning to keepe a more magnificent Court then euer he had done before, to the end that euery one might behold Amadis, in regard of whoſe honour and happie comming, there were Knightly Tourneys daily vſed, beſide great ſtore of other paſtimes and delights.
                  During theſe pleaſures, Amadis was aduertiſed in what maner the Gyant had carryed away his brother Galaor, wherefore hee determined (happen what might) to goe ſeeke him, and if poſſible hee could to recouer him, either by force of Armes or otherwiſe. Notwithſtanding, his heart being dayly

mooued to goe ſee her that hourely expected his preſence, one day he entreated the King his Father: ſeeing now he had peace with his enemies, that with his leaue he might goe ſeeke aduentures in great Brittaine, becauſe he was loath to remaine idle. But little pleaſing was this requeſt to the King, and much leſſe to the Queen, yet by opportunitie hee obtained permiſſion for his Voyage: nor could they all haue power to with hold him, by reaſon of the loue he bare to Oriana, which made him obedient to none but her. Herevpon, being clad in ſuch Armour, as he promiſed the Damoſell of Denmarke, he ſet forward on his iourney, embarqing himſelfe at the neereſt Port of the Sea, where by good happe he found paſſage readie. Not long was his cut into great Brittaine, landing at Briſtow, a moſt noble and auncient City of that Countrey, where hee heard that King Liſuart ſoiourned at Windſore, royally accompanyed with Knights and Gentlemen: for all the Kings & Princes (his neighbours) did highly fauour and ſhew him obeyſance, which made Amadis ſhape his courſe directly to the Court. Not long had he ridden on the way but he met with a Damoſell, who demanded of him, if that were her readie way to Briſtow? Yea marry is it (anſwered the Prince.) I pray ye then tell me, quoth ſhe, if I may finde any ſhipping there, for my ſpeedie paſſage ouer into Gaule? What affayres calles you thither? ſayd Amadis. In ſooth, replyed the Damoſell, I goe thither to finde a Knight named Amadis, whom King Perion not long ſince had knowne to bee his Sonne. Greatly did Amadis meruaile hereat, for hee thought theſe newes had not been ſo farre ſpread abroad, wherefore hee demaunded how ſhe heard thereof? I know it, qouth ſhe, from her, to whom the moſt ſecret things of all are manifeſt: for ſhe knew Amadis before he knew himſelfe, or that his Father heard of Amadis; and if you would vnderſtand what ſhee is, her name (by common report) is Vrganda the vnknowne. She hath at this time eſpeciall affayres with him, and by no other can ſhe recouer that, which ſhee now ſtandeth in feare to looſe. Beleeue me Damoſell, anſwered Amadis, ſeeing ſhe who may command euery one, doth now pleaſe to employ Amadis, I aſſure ye it is needleſſe for you to trauaile any further: for I am the man you are ſent to ſeek, and therefore let vs goe, whither you thinke conuenient. What? ſayd the Damoſell, are you Amadis? Yea, verily am I, anſwered the Prince. Come, then and follow me, quoth ſhe, and I will conduct yee where my Miſtreſſe is, who attendeth your arriuall in good deuotion. Heere-with Amadis rode after the Damoſell, and thus are they gone together in company.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XII.
                  
                     How the Gyant bringing Galaor to King Liſuart, that hee might dubbe him Knight, mette with his brother Amadis, by whoſe hand hee would bee Knighted, and no other.
                  
                  
                     THe Gyant of whom ſundry times we haue ſpoken heereto-fore, cauſing yong Galaor to bee inſtructed in managing horſes, & all other exerciſes beſeeming a Knight: found him ſo capeable of euery thing, as in leſſe ſpace then a yeere, hee was growne meruailous perfect, ſo that now nothing remained, but to know of him, by whom hee moſt willingly would receiue his order of Knight-hood. Notwithſtanding, before the Gyant mooued this matter to him, one day among other, Galaor came to him in this maner. Father, quoth he, you haue dayly promiſed me that I ſhould be Knighted, I deſire you would bee ſo good as your word: for there is too much time ſpent ſince I ought to haue had it. In ſooth my ſon (anſwered the Gyant) you haue reaſō for your words: yet tell me by whō you would receiue your Order? King Liſuart, quoth Galaor, is reputed a gentle Prince, and a right good Knight, wherefore if ſo it like you, I ſhall be contented to haue it at his hand. Wel haue you aduiſed, ſayd the Gyant: ſo preſently preparing all things in order, they ſet forward on their iourney. About fiue dayes after their departure, by good hap they came neere a very faire and ſtrong Caſtle, named Bradoid, ſeated on the toppe of a mountaine, enuironed about with Fennes and Mariſhes, as alſo with a ſalt water, that ran before it wondrous ſwiftly, ſo that without a Barque it was impoſſible to get thither. And becauſe the Mariſh was very long, there was to paſſe ouer it a faire long Cauſey, being ſo broad that two Chariots might well meet together on it: and at the entrance of the Cauſey was a draw-bridge, where-under the water ran with ſuch a violent fall, as no one was able by any meanes to paſſe it. Heere muſt ye note, that equally facing this bridge, there grew two goodly Elme trees, where-under the Gyant and Galaor beheld two Damoſels and a Squire, with a knight mounted on a black Courſer, this Knight was armed, bearing figured in his Shield, two Lyons rampant: and becauſe the bridge was drawne vp, hee could paſſe no further, but called with a loude voyce to them within, that ſome ſhould come to giue him entrance, which Galaor perceiuing ſayd to the Gyant. My Lord (if it pleaſe you) I would glady ſee what this Knight will doe here. Soone after, they eſpyed at the further end of the Cauſey, by the Caſtle ſide, two other Armed Knights, accompained with tenne Halberders, who came and demaunded of the knight, what he would? Marie enter in, anſwered the Knight. It may not be, ſaid one of the two Knights, except you meane to combate firſt. I will not ſticke for that, anſwered hee that would enter, cauſe you the bridge to bee let

downe, and come to the combate: which preſently they did. But one of the twaine (more haſty then his companion) aduanced himſelfe firſt, and placing his Launce, ran with a ſwift carrier againſt the knight, who receiued him ſo brauely, as he ſent both Horſe and man to the ground. The friend to the diſmounted knight thinking to reuenge his iniury, gaue forth to meete him, and failing in the attaint with their Launces, ſo furiouſly encountered with their bodies, as the knight of the Caſtle fell into the water where he was drowned, and the conquerour rode on, which the Halberders ſeeing, preſently drew vp the bridge againe after him.
                  When the Damoſels ſaw he was thus cloſed in, they cryed out aloud vnto him that he ſhould returne, & as he was about ſo to do, he eſpied three other Knights well armed come toward him, who very audaciouſly thus ſpake. Vnhappy was the houre to thee whē thou dideſt paſſe this bridge, for thou ſhalt dye in this water, where he is drowned that was of greater reputation then thou art. Here with they all three together ran againſt him, and met him ſo firmely, as his Horſe was like to haue fallen ouer backward, yet hauing broken their Launces on him, he was at this encounter wounded in two places, neuertheleſſe, one of them he met in ſuch order, as his armour vnable to reſiſt the pointe of the Launce, pierced through with ſuch violence, that the trunchion ſtill remained in his body. This done, couragiouſly he drew his ſword, adreſſing himſelfe to the other twaine, and they in like manner againſt him; where-upon began a dangerous Combate betweene them: but he with the Lions in his Shield doubting his death, laboured ſo much as he could to ouer-come his enemies, giuing one of them ſuch a ſtroke on the right arme, as (being cut from the body) it fell ſword and all to the ground: wherefore feeling himſelfe thus wounded, he galopped with all ſpeed to the Caſtell, crying. Helpe my friends, helpe your Lord who is in danger of killing. When the Knight of the Lions heard, that he with whom he muſt yet deale, was the Lord of the Caſtell: he deliuered him ſuch a rigorous blow on the Helmet, as made him looſe his ſtirrops and ready to fall, had he not got hold about the neck of his Horſe: in this ſtaggering the Knight of the Lions rent his Helmet from his head, and he perceiuing himſelfe vnarmed, thought to eſcape by flight as the other did, but his enemy got betweene him and the Caſtell, ſaying. Thou art dead, if thou yeeld not thy ſelfe my priſoner. Alas, anſwered the amazed Knight, I am dead indeede if you pleaſe, but as you are a Gentleman take pitty on me, for I doe yeeld my ſelfe your vanquiſhed. Suddenly the Knight of the Lions looking about, eſpied other Knights and armed men on foote, that came in great haſt from the caſtell to ſuccour their Lord: wherefore he ſtepped to his conquered priſoner, and holding his ſword againſt his throate, ſaid. Command thy men to returne elſe ſhalt thou preſently die. Then he who faw his life in ſuch perill, cryed to them, & made a ſigne with his hand, that if they loued him they ſhould returne: where-upon, they beholding their Lords life at his enimies ſwords pointe, obeyed his command with all poſſible ſpeed. Yet

is not this enough, ſaid the conquerour, cauſe now the bridge to be let downe: which he did, and they came both forth on the cauſey where the Ladyes taried: but when the Knight of the Caſtell beheld them, and that one of them was Vrganda the vnknowne: Ah my Lord, quoth he, if you keepe me not from this Lady, I am but dead. Nay beleeue me, anſwered the Knight, that will not I do, but rather am to deale with thee as ſhee ſhall command me: then ſtepping to Vrganda, he ſaid. Madame, ſee here the Lord of the Caſtell, what is your pleaſure I ſhall do with him? Smite off his head, anſwered Vrganda, if he will not deliuer you my friend whom he keepeth in priſō. Here-with he lift vp his ſword to feare him, when the Knight falling on his knee, cried. Ah my Lord, kill me not, I will obey whatſoeuer ſhe commandeth. Diſpatch it quickly then, ſaid the Knight of the Lions. So caled the Lord to one of the halberders within, ſaying. Go to my brother, and tell him if euer he intend to ſee me aliue, let him quickly cauſe the impriſoned Knight to come hither, and the Damoſel that brought him with her. Right ſoone was the meſſenger gone on this errand, returning immediatly with the Damoſell and the Knight, to whom the Knight of the Lions thus ſpake. Thanke this Lady who hath done ſo much for ye, and truely great cauſe you haue to loue her, in that ſhe hath taken wonderfull paines to deliuer you from this thraldome. I do loue her, anſwered the reſtored Knight, and ſo will continue better then I haue done heretofore. But before he could finiſh theſe words, Vrganda ran and embraced him, the like did he to her: afterward the conquerour demanded, what ſhould be done with her that brought him thither. It is neceſſary that ſhe dy, replied Vrgàda, to let her know the price of ſo hainous an offence. Preſently was the poore Damoſel ſo ſtrangely enchanted, as ſhe ran skipping ouer the marriſh quag-mires, and turning backe againe, would haue throwne her ſelfe into the water, had not the knight of the Lions intreated Vrganda, to pardō her treſpaſſe for this time. Prouided, ſaide Vrganda, that ſhe returne no more to offend me, otherwiſe ſhe ſhall pay for altogether. Whē the Lord of the Caſtle ſaw the Damoſell was remitted, at his requeſt who ouer-came him, he thus ſpake. My Lord, I haue performed what hath bin commanded, therefore I pray ye giue me leaue to depart from her that neuer loued me. In ſooth, anſwered Vrganda, for honor of him by whom you make your ſuite, I am content, and you may returne. He being gone, the Knight of the Lions (who yet maruailed, by what occaſion the Damoſell was driuen into that furie) asked what moued her ſo to do? Ah my Lord, quoth ſhe, me thought one came round about me, and would haue burned me with a lighted torch, therefore to ſaue my ſelfe, I ſought to leape into the water. At theſe words the Knight fell into a laughter, ſaying. Your folly hath beene ouer great, faire Damoſel, to worke her ill who knowes how to reuenge it.
                  
                     Galaor ſtood and had ſeene all theſe things, where-upon he thus ſpake to the Giant Beleeue me father, I very much deſire that this worthy man ſhould giue me my order, for if King Liſuart be renowned, it is for his poſſeſſions, but this Knight deſerues it by his ſtrength and valour. I am well content

anſwered the Giant, go and requeſt it of him, if he deny you the fault is his owne. So Galaor went forward, accompanied with foure ſquires and two Damoſels 
                        •
                     , when comming to the Knight of the Lions, he found him yet vnder the trees. At his arriuall he was curteouſly receiued by the Knight, who reputed him one of the moſt comely Gentlemen that euer he had ſeene, afterward Galaor thus began. Gentle Sir, I am come to entreat a fauour at your hand. Truely, anſwered the Knight, if your requeſt be reaſonable, it will the ſooner be granted. My ſuite Sir, quoth Galaor, is for nothing elſe, but that it might pleaſe you to giue me the order of knight-hood, and in ſo doing, you ſhall ſaue me a great deale of trauaile to king Liſuart, to whom I am going for the ſame cauſe. My friend, replied the knight, you ſhall do your ſelfe ouer-much wrong, to leaue ſo good an occaſion by the beſt king in the world, for ſo poore a knight errand as I am. My Lord, quoth Galaor, the great ſtate of the king can put no ſuch ſtrenght into me, as I haue ſeene performed by you in the late Combats: therefore (ſo pleaſe it you) accompliſh in me my earneſt deſire. I can be much better content, anſwered the knight, to grant any other thing you will demand: for ſuch authority appertaineth not to me, nor to you likewiſe is it ſo honorable. As thus they ſtood on theſe tearmes, Vrganda (vnlooked for) came to thē, where-with the knight of the Lions was very glad: and ſhe hauing as yet not heard any of their talke, thus ſpake to her champion. What is your opinion of this Gentleman? Me thinks, quoth he, a brauer perſon was neuer ſeene: but he requireth ſuch a thing of me, as is neither in him or me conuenient. What is it? ſaid Vrganda. That I, quoth he, ſhould giue him the order of knight-hood, and yet he is now in trauaile, with determination to requeſt the ſame of the famous king Liſuart. Certainly, anſwered Vrganda, to make him ſtay, will be a greater cauſe of euill to him then good, and I will councel him not to deſiſt from his former motion: for you ought nor to deny him, ſeeing I can aſſure ye, that honor will be better imployed by him, then any other in all the Iſles of the ſea, except one. Seeing it is ſo, replied the knight, in the name of God let it be done: goe we then to ſome Church to performe the vigill. It ſhall be needleſſe, quoth Galaor, to ſtand about ſuch matters now, in that I come not vnprouided of them already. It ſuffiſeth then, anſwered the Knight: ſo put he on his right ſpurre, and embracing him, ſaid. You are now a knight, wherefore take the honor of the ſword by whom you ſhall thinke it more conuenient. Do you then giue it me, ſaid Galaor, if you pleaſe, for by no other will I receiue it with my will. Then he called a Squire that held a ſword ready, but Vrganda ſtepped before, ſaying. No, no, you ſhall haue a better: take that which hangeth on yonder tree, and you ſhall finde it farre more faire and good. Heere-with they looked vpon the tree, yet ſaw it not, wherefore they all began to ſmile, and ſhe doing the like, ſaid to them. In ſooth it is almoſt ten yeeres ſince it firſt was hanged there, yet no paſſenger by euer ſaw it: looke better about the tree, for ſure you cannot but eaſily behold it. Now did they all perceiue it tied to a branch of the tree,

euen as though it had but euen then beene hanged there: and by it was a Scabberd couered with gold, ſhewing moſt fine and curious Worke-manſhip on it. The Knight of the Lyons tooke it downe, and afterward girded it about Galaor, ſaying. So faire a Sword beſeemeth a knight ſo formall, and thinke ſhee hated you not, who of ſo long time hath kept it for you. Moſt cheerefully did Galaor giue her thankes, and the knight likewiſe, thus ſpeaking to them. I beſeech ye to hold me excuſed, for I am conſtrained preſently to depart from ye, and were it not I muſt goe where I am attended, no companie in the world would I deſire more then yours; therefore I deſire ye Sir, to tell me where I may find ye at my returne. In the Court of king Liſuart, anſwerd the knight, where I ſhalbe very glad to ſee you: and becauſe it is no long time ſince I was knighted, I am the more deſirous of ſome abode there to attaine honour, as you cannot chuſe but doe the like if you come hither. Certes, ſaid Galaor, to that place will I ſhortly follow ye: and Madame, quoth he to Vrganda, you haue ſo ſtrictly bound me to your ſeruice, as may it pleaſe you to account me your knight, I am readie whereſoeuer you ſhall command mee. So departed he from them, returning to the Gyant who ſtayed for him by the Riuer ſide, where hee had hid himſelfe, leaſt he ſhould bee ſeene.
                  But now you muſt here obſerue, that as Galaor thus deuiſed with Vrganda and the Knight, one of the Damoſels that was in Galaors company, had conference with her that attended on Vrganda, of whō at large ſhee vnderſtood, how the knight of the Lyons was Amadis, Son to king Perion of Gaule: whoſe cōming thither Vrganda had cauſed, to deliuer by force of Armes her friend that there was kept priſoner, for by inchantmēt ſhe could not compaſſe it, by reaſon the Ladie of the Caſtle was too cunning in that Arte, and there had firſt enchanted him in deſpight of her, fearing no way to looſe him againe but by knightly chiualrie.
                  On this occaſion the cuſtome there was appointed, which Amadis ended, and reſtored (as you haue heard) the man for whom they came thither: and hee by the Damoſell, Neece to the Ladie of the Caſtle, that in enchaunted furie would haue leapt into the Riuer, was conducted to this place.
                  So ſoone as Galaor had left Vrganda, ſhee demaunded of Amadis, if he knew the man to whom hee gaue the Order of Knight-hood. No, truely Madame, quoth he. In ſooth anſwered Vrganda, it is great reaſon you ſhould knowe what he is: for he beareth ſo braue a minde, that if you both ſhould meet without further knowledge, there might happen betweene yee great inconuenience. Therefore I giue ye to vnderſtand, how he is your owne brother both by father and mother, and the very ſame whom the Gyant caryed away, being then but two yeeres old and a halfe: now he is of ſo goodly ſtature as you haue ſeene, for whoſe ſake and yours likewiſe, I haue a long time kept the Sword, where-with (I aſſure ye) he ſhall do more in exploits of Armes, then euer any knight did in Great Brittaine. Amadis concieued hereat ſuch inward ioy, as the teares trickled downe his cheekes, wherefore he ſaid to Vrganda. I beſeech ye Madame,

tell mee where I may finde him. It is not neceſſarie, quoth ſhe, that as yet you ſhould ſeeke him. Why ſaid Amadis, is he then conſtrained to accompliſh ſome predeſtinate matter, before I may finde him? Yea verily, anſwered Vrganda, and it is not ſo eaſie to know as you may imagine. Long time thus continued their conference, till Vrganda would depart alone with her friend: ſo ſhe commended Amadis to God, who preſently tooke his way toward Windſore, where at this time King Liſuart ſoiourned.
                  Our Hiſtorie (at this time) pauſeth of him, continuing what hapned to Galaor the new Knight, who beeing arriued where the Gyant ſtayed for him, thus ſpake. Father, I am now thanks bee to God, and him you ſent me to, a confirmed knight. My ſonne, quoth the Gyant, I am not a little glad thereof: and ſeeing it is ſo well effected, will yee graunt mee one requeſt? What? ſaid Galaor, am I to denie you any thing, except you would with-hold mee from ſeeking honor? My ſonne, anſwered the Gyant, I rather deſire thy happy proceeding therein, and that which I would haue appertaineth thereto. Demand then what you will, ſaid Galaor for I graunt it. Faire Sonne, quoth the Gyant, heretofore you haue heard mee complaine of the Gyant Albadan, who by treaſon ſlewe my Father, and yet forcibly detaineth from me the Rocke of Galteres, which iuſtly doth belong to me: I pray ye to take reuenge on my behalfe, for no other then you may doe it: remember how well I haue nouriſhed and vſed you, as alſo my true and vnfained loue, which is ſuch, as I will yeeld my perſon euen to the death for ſafetie of yours. This matter ſaid Galaor, you need not requeſt, but command me to doe it: as for my ſelfe, I deſire you to reſt content, till with Albadan I haue tryed this difference, ſeeing it concerneth you ſo neere. Beſide, heereof you may bee perſwaded, that if I eſcape with life, I ſhall continue euermore in readineſſe, to accompliſh any thing elſe for your honour and profit: in which deuoire, the whole circuit of my time is bound, as witneſſe of the dutie I owe to you, therefore without any longer trifling, let vs ſet forward to him with whom I muſt try my fortune. So tooke they the way to the rocke of Galteres, but before they had trauailed farre, Vrganda ouer-tooke them, and being acquainted with each other, ſhe ſaid to Galaor. Know yee (gentle Sir) who hath this day made you Knight? That doe I Madame, anſwered Galaor, euen the beſt knight that euer I heard of. It is very true (quoth ſhe) yet is hee of greater eſteeme then you thinke, but I would haue you to know his name: then called ſhe Gandalaz the Gyant, ſaying. Gandalaz, doeſt not thou know that this knight (whom thou haſt nouriſhed) is the Sonne to king Perion, and his Queene Eliſena, and how by ſuch like wordes I bad thee take him, ſince which time thou haſt beene his Foſter father? It is very true, anſwered the Gyant. Now then Galaor, my friend, ſaid Vrganda, the man that made thee knight is thy brother and elder then thou by two yeers: wherefore when thou ſeeſt him, giue him honour, and labour to reſemble him in hardineſſe and kindſhip. May it be poſſible? replyed Galaor, that King Perion is

my Father, and Queene Eliſena my mother, and I the brother to ſo good a knight? Doubt not thereof (quoth ſhee) for it is ſo. Praiſed be God, ſaid Galaor, now may I aſſureye, that I am in greater care thē before: nor wil I make any ſpare of my life, ſeeing it is neceſſary I ſhould reſemble him you talke of. Thus returned Vrganda the ſame way ſhee came, and the Gyant with Galaor rode on as they purpoſed, the Prince demanding of the Gyant, what the Lady was that had communed with them? It is quoth hee, Vrganda the vnknown, as ſhe nameth her ſelfe, becauſe ſhe often tranſ-formeth and maketh her ſelfe vnknowne. As thus they deuiſed together, they came to a Riuers ſide where they would refreſh themſelues, and by reaſon the heate of the day was very vehement, they cauſed a Tent to bee erected: where long they had not ſitten, but they beheld two Damoſels comming toward them by two ſeuerall wayes, and met together directly before the Pauillion. So ſoone as they eſpied the Gyant, they would haue fledde, but Galaor came to aſſure them, and curteouſly cauſed them to returne, demanding afterward whether they trauailed. I goe (quoth one of them) by the commandement of my Miſtreſſe, to ſee a ſtrange fight, which one onely Knight hath enterpriſed in Combate, againſt the ſtrong Gyant at the Rocke of Galteres, to the ende I may bring her true tidings there-of. When the other Damoſell heard her ſay ſo, ſhe thus replyed. I am amazed at your ſpeeches, is there any knight in the word dare venter on ſuch follie? Certes, ſaid the firſt, it is moſt true. Beleeue me, anſwered the other, although my occaſions be elſe-where, I am content to ſtay and goe with you, to ſee a matter ſo incredible. Hereupon they would haue taken leaue of Galaor, but hee ſaid to them. Make no haſt faire Damoſels, but tarrie if you pleaſe, and we wil beare ye companie: where-to they condiſcended, as well for the good grace they noted in this new Knight, as alſo in reſpect of his amiable countenance, which made them take great pleaſure in beholding him: then Galaor walking with the Giant aſide, ſaid, Father, I could wiſh that you would goe no further with vs, but let me goe with theſe Damoſels to accompliſh what I haue promiſed: this hee ſpake becauſe hee would not be knowne what hee was, or that his enterpriſe ſhould bee ſuſpected by them, whereto the Gyant (vnwillingly) did accord. So rode Galaor with the Damoſels, and three Squires the Giant left him to beare his Armour, making ſuch ſpeede in their iourney, that they arriued within two Miles of the Rocke of Galteres, where they lodged in the little Cottage of an Hermite, to whom Galaor imparted ſome of his ſecret thoughts: but when hee reuealed that hee came for the Combate, the good Hermit (abaſhed thereat) diſcourſed with him in this manner.
                  My Sonne, who hath aduiſed thee to this boldnes, ſeeing there is not in all this Countrey ten ſuch Knights, as dare aſſaile the Gyant, ſo fearefull and monſtrous is he to behold: and you being but yong, to hazard your ſelfe in this danger, aduenture the loſſe both of bodie and ſoule, becauſe ſuch as wilfully ſeeke their owne death, are very homicides of themſelues. Father, anſwered Galaor, God

worke his will with mee, for by no meanes may I let paſſe mine enterpriſe. Greatly was the good man mooued to compaſſion, ſo that the teares be deawed his milke-white beard, beeing able to make no other anſwere, but thus: If not my Sonne, I deſire God to aſſiſt yee, ſeeing you will giue no better credite to me. Good Father, quoth Galaor, be mindfull of mee in your deuout Prayers: and thus till next morning they ſpent the night.
                  
                     Galaor hauing armed himſelfe, went to the Rocke which was not farre from the Hermitage, for there might be eaſily diſcerned the Fortreſſe & great Towers, which deliuered good marke of a moſt ſtrong Caſtle. When one of the Damoſels ſaw they approched ſo neere, ſhe demaunded of Galaor, if he knew the Knight that ſhould performe the Combate? I thinke (quoth he) I haue ſeene him ſome-time: but tell me (I pray yee) from what place are you come to behold this paſtime? And what is the Lady that ſent you? None muſt know ſo much, ſayd the Damoſell, but the Knight him-ſelfe which dealeth in the Combate. Thus continued their talke, till they arriued at the Caſtle of Albadan, the gate wherof they found faſt ſhut, but Galaor ſtepping thereto called the Porter: at which noiſe, two menſhewed themſelues ouer the Porch, demaunding of him what he would haue. Goe, quoth Galaor, and ſay to Albadan, that heere is a Knight, who is ſent from Gandalaz to defie him: and if he come not out the ſooner, he will ſhew himſelfe of leſſe valour then reputation. You haue reaſon (ſayd one of them in mockage) but he will quickly bring a remedie for your chollor, if you doe not helpe it your ſelfe by running away. So departed the Watch-men to enforme the Gyant of theſe Newes, and when the Damoſels vnderſtood, that Galaor him-ſelfe muſt execute the enterpriſe, being terrified with amazement, they ſayd. Ah my Lord, you attempt a matter of ouer-much folly, would God you might ſpeed ſo well, as with honor to accompliſh an enterpriſe of ſuch conſequence: As for me (quoth one of them) I dare tarrie no longer with ye, for I ſhall die at the ſight of the Monſter with whom you haue to deale.
                  Damoſels, ſayd hee, ſeeing you may not be aſſured heere, depart I pray ye to the Hermitage, where we lodged this laſt night, and if I dye not in fight, I will not be long from ye. Beleeue me, replyed the other Damoſell, what-ſoeuer happen I will not goe, for I determine to ſee the ende.
                  The boldneſſe of the one made them both tarrie, yet did they ſunder themſelues by the Forreſt ſide, becauſe the Gyant ſhould not ſee them, and hoping the better to eſcape away if the Knight ſped not well.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     How Galaor vanquiſhed the Giant at the Rocke of Galteres.
                     
                  
                  
                     SOone was the Giant aduertiſed of theſe newes, wherefore not long after he came forth of the Caſtell, moūted on a horſe proportionable to ſuch a huge body: for it ſeemed an elephant, & he on his back made ample reſemblance of a huge Coloſſus, or like a mountaine mouing, rather then a man. Armed he was in plates of iron ſo long, as from his throate they couered all the ſaddle on the horſe, hauing on his head a bright ſhining Helmet, and in his hand a mighty iron Mace, being the weapon where-with hee commonly vſed to fight. Wonderfully affraide were the Squires and the Ladies that beheld him, and Galaor was not ſo aſſured, but hee ſtood ſome-what abaſhed: notwithſtanding, he reſolued ſo couragiouſly, as the neerer he approched, the leſſe account he made of his huge enemies Mace. When the Giant ſaw him come marching ſo brauely toward him, he ſaid. I maruaile demie man, how thou dareſt with ſuch boldneſſe tarry thy death he that ſent thee hither might either borow thy courage, or thou his corpulence, but he intended I ſhould breake my faſt, before the houre of dinner came. Galaor ſomewhat diſcontented with theſe deſpiſings, thus anſwered. Thinkeſt thou huge beaſt that thy barking can aduantage thee, or hinder me? my confidence is in him who abated the pride of the great Philiſtine, and can likewiſe deliuer thee more baſe and vile thē the duſt. Exceeding angry was the Giant at theſe words, wherefore without any more talke, he lifted vp his Mace to ſtrike, ſeeming in his marching as though a Tower had beene caried about, but Galaor being prompt & nimble, ſtooped his Launce, and with a rough cariere of his horſe, attainted him on the ſtomacke ſo brauely, as he cauſed the mighty Poliphemus forgoe one of his ſtirrops, his Launce therewith ſhiuering in pieces in the aire. At this encounter the Giant thought to haue ſtroken him downe with his Mace, but he was too roughly and ſuddenly ſtaied, whereby his blow was giuen in vaine: for the Mace which was heauie, and comparable to a huge beame in bignes, being deliuered with ful force of both his armes: fel downe ſo weightily, as the Giant himſelfe was not able to hold it, whereby it lighted on the head of his owne horſe ſo peazantly, as being feld there-with, dyed preſantly vnder him, the Giant tarying a good while before he could recouer himſelfe againe. Yet the horſe being of courage, did oftē ſtriue to get vp, but Galaor thruſting his ſword into his belly, cauſed him at length to lie there ſtill enough: but in the end, the Giant did the like to Galaors horſe, and he ſeeing in what great danger now he was, by his wonted dexterity quickly got footing. Then approching his enemy, drew the ſword Vrganda had giuen him, wherewith watching when the Giant lifted his Mace, he gaue ſuch a ſtroke at it where he held his hands, as breaking the ſtoke in pieces, he left but

little length for the Giant to holde it by: yet he made ſhift to buffet Galaor there-with in ſuch ſorte, as he was conſtrained to ſet one hand to the ground to ſuſtaine himſelfe. But all this did no iot aſtoniſh him, for comming to the Gyant, (who yet kept play with the remander of his Mace, which by wary eſcapes the Prince ſtill preuented) he gaue a ſtroke at him with ſo full force, as cleane cut away the left arme from his ſhoulder, and the ſword paſſing further with like ſtrength, met the Giants leg ſo directly, that it wounded him through the fleſh, with a wide gaping wound to the very bone. Feeling great paine by both theſe maimes, he cried out aloud: Ah vnhappy wretch that I am, to be thus ouercome by the ſtrength of one man. Being in extreame rage, he ſought to faſten hold on the body of Galaor, but the ſore wound on his leg would let him ſtand no longer, conſtraining him to fall on his knees to the ground: & as the Prince aproch't to him, he thought with his other arme to pull him down, but Galaor perceiuing his intēt, ſtroke at him againe & ſmot off his hand. Now was the Giant deſpoiled of all force, being ſo wounded and ouer-trauailed withal, that he was no longer able to endure: by which meanes Galaor more eaſily parted his head frō his ſholders, which he deliuered his Squires to cary with him. Whē the Damoſels beheld this famous conqueſt, they left their ambuſh, & came to regard this maruaile, ſaying to Galaor. In ſooth worthy Knight, great good nurture hath beene beſtowed on you by your educator: for as we haue here-tofore heard, he hath the profit and vengeance, and you the honor exceeding all.
                  As they were about to rerurne, they ſaw ten Knights come forth of the caſtle chained together, who cried to him. Come my Lord, come take this place, ſeeing you haue done him dead that ſo miſerably detained vs priſoners. What thinke you? ſaid Galaor to the Damoſels, may we ſoiourne here this after noone? Truely, quoth they, we thinke nothing to the contrary. So went they into hhe Caſtle, where Galaor diſcharged the priſoners: & ſoone after, viands for dinner was brought him and his company by the ſeruants. When they had refreſhed them-ſelues, and at their pleaſure viſited the Fortreſſe, the ſubiects inhabiting the Rock came all to him, and would haue done him honor as to their Lord: but he by no meanes would accept thereof, for he tolde them that what he had done, was on the behalfe of Gandalaz, to whom that place by right appertained. And I, quoth he, as bound to him by duty, came hither to prepare his lodging: therefore I pray ye that he may be well receiued of you all, and obey him as your true and naturall Lord, for wel am I aſſured, that he wil in 
                        •…
                     eat you with loue & gentlenes. Theſe requeſts were preſently anſwered by one for thē all, who ſaid. Hither ſhall he be moſt hartely welcome, becauſe we hope, that he to whom we ſhall be vaſſailes and Subjects, will cheriſh and fauour vs: in ſto
                        ••
                      whereof, the other vſed vs as villaines and ſlaues, and you (being the conquerour) we hold for our only deliuerer. All things thus debated and accorded, Galaor departed thence with his company, returning to the Hermitage, where the Hermit attended for happy newes: but he was not alittle glad to ſee Galaor come with ſuch ſucceſſe,

wherefore he thus ſpake. My ſon, daily are you bound to praiſe the diuine bounty, whoſe loue hath giuen you grace to execute this notable vengeance. On the morrow, after he had receiued the good mans benediction, he ſet forward on hias way, & one of the Damoſels intreted him, that he would ſuffer her to trauaile in his company, whereto right willingly he gaue conſent. And I, quoth the other, muſt take another way, in that I had not come thus farre, but onely to behold the iſſue of the combat, which I haue ſeene with ſuch content, as I muſt needs make cōmendable reporte thereof to other, & ſo ſhall I not faile to do in the Court of King Liſuart, whether now I go to finde a brother of mine gone thether before me. Faire Damoſell, anſwered Galaor, if you meete a yong Knight, who beareth in his Shield a couple of Lions, I pray ye ſay to him, that the Gentleman, to whom not long ſince he gaue the order of Knight-hood, doth humly ſalute him, adding this withall, how he endeuoureth to honor the order, and when they both ſhall meate, he will acquainte him with ſuch matter betweene them, as yet perhaps he knoweth not. So tooke the Damoſell her leaue of Galaor, who afterward thus began to commune with the other. You know Lady, that I haue finiſhed the combate with the Giant, and you ſaide to me before I began it, how the Knight himſelfe ſhould know what ſhe is that ſent you thether. Very true, anſwered the Damoſell, but if you would be reſolued therein, follow me, and within fiue daies I will ſhew you her. That ſhall not let me, ſaid Galaor: thus rode they on together ſo long, till at length they came to a forked way, and Galaor who rid muzing before, thought ſhe had followed him: but ſhe arreſted behind a little, and when ſhe hoped to ouer-take him againe, it was her hap to take the wrong way. This chanced at the entrance of the Forreſt of Braganda, which ſeuereth the Countries of Claire and Greſca, where long he had not erred, but he heard a voice thus calling to him. Ah good Knight, help me. Galaor turning his head to ſee what was the cauſe: I thinke, quoth one of his Squires, it ſhould be the Damoſell that departed from vs. What? ſaid Galaor, hath ſhe left vs? Yea truely, anſwered the Squire, ſhe tooke the way leading on the left hand. Beleeue me, quoth he, I had very little care of her, & haſtly without taking his Helmet, hauing only his Shield and Lance, he galopped ſo faſt as he could to the place where he heard the voice, and hard at hand he eſpied fiue men on foote, armed with Croſlets and Halberds, and a Dwarffe on horſe-back, who cruelly laied on the Damoſell with a ſtaffe. When Galaor approched neere them, hee came to the Dwarffe, ſaiyng. Thou villainous and deformed creature, ſoone ſhall I ſend thy ſoule to the Diuell: and running fiercely againſt him with his Launce, threw him againſt the ground maruailouſly amazed. Then came the other eagerly vppon him, compaſſing him on euery ſide: but to the firſt he gaue ſuch a grieting with his Launce, as he lay ſprangling on the earth. Another of them buckled cloſe to him, laying load on his Shield with his Halberd, but at length he pierced his Lance quite through his body. When the other three ſaw this maſſacre, they ranne away ſo faſt as they could ouer-thwart the Forreſt, and Galaor not

able to ouertake them, returned backe againe to the Dwarffe, who being gotten on horſe-back, fled away after the other, crying. Accourſed Knight, in hapleſſe houre haſt thou miſuſed my men, for thou ſhalt dy an euill death. Galaor ſeeing the Dwarffe laboured ſo hard as he could to ſaue himſelfe, would follow him no further, but went to ſee if his Launce were vnbroken, which he had left in the body of the dead man: and finding it ſound as it was before, gaue it to his Squire, ſaying to the Damoſell. Ride now before me, and I will guard you better then I haue done.
                  So tooke they the way againe they had left, that brought them to a Riuer named Braz, which could not be paſſed at the foord: now rode the Damoſell ſomewhat farre before Galaor, finding the paſſage ſo ready, as ſhe went ouer before he came. In meane while he ſtaied the returne of the boate, he eſpied the Dwarffe come after him crying. Villainous traitour thou art dead, if thou deliuer not the Damoſell thou tookeſt from me. Little account did Galaor make of his words, but looking backe, he ſaw three Knights come after the Dwarffe well mounted, one of the three thus ſpeaking to the reſt. It were great diſhonor for vs, to ſet all three together vpon one man: and as for my ſelfe, I thinke ſcorne to be aſſiſted by any. Hauing ſo ſaid, with a full courſe he ran againſt the Prince, who likewiſe was ready to entertaine him, and they encountred in ſuch ſorte, as the Knight pierced Galaors Armour, making him feele the naked pointe of his Launce: but Galaor bad him ſo brauely welcome, caſting him from his ſaddle with ſuch might as he lay on the ground not able to ſtirre, whereat the other twaine were ſo abaſhed, that they ranne againſt the Prince, the one failing, and the other breaking his Lance: which Galaor determining to reuenge, ſtroke his Launce into the ſight of the laſt Knights Helmet, as he made it fall from his head, and he (hauing loſt his ſtirrops) ready to lye along. Meane while, the ſecond who had not broken, returned againſt Galaor, & ſped in meeting. Now albeit the encounter was with great vigour, yet eſcaped the armour on either ſide. Hauing thus galantly ſhiuered their ſtaues, they drew forth their ſwords, beginning a fierce and cruell combat, and while the fight endured, the Dwarffe without ceaſing cryed to his men. Looke well that he eſcape not, but kill him leaſt he get away. Then Galaor comming neere him who had loſt his Helmet, reached him ſuch a ſtroke on the head, as he tumbled downe dead before him. And when the third ſaw his companion ſlaine, being affraid of him-ſelfe, he turned his back and away: but Galaor purſued him ſo neere, that he gaue him a blow betweene the neck and the ſhoulders, which brought off a great many plats of his Armour. Now did the run-awaies feare more & more encreaſe, when he felt his enemy ſo neere at hand, wherefore the better to ſaue himſelfe, he caſt his ſhield back ouer his ſhoulders, & fled away faſter then he did before: which Galaor perceiuing, would follow him no longer, but haſtily returned, thinking to take the Dwarffe and binde his legs to a tree, from which the Dwarffe kept himſelfe wel enough, for he had gotten more ground in running away then the other. Here-upon he came to the firſt that he diſmoūted, who hauing ſome-what

recouered himſelfe, Galaor thus ſpake to him. Inſooth your misfortune grieueth mee more then your fellowes doth, for like a good Knight you came alone to me, albeit I know not on what occaſion, in reſpect I neuer offended ye as I remember. It is very true, anſwered the Knight, notwithſtanding you muſt note what the Dwarffe ſayd to vs: how you had beaten him, ſlaine his men, and taken a Lady perforce from him, that was in his companie.
                  Beleeue me, quoth Galaor, ſhewing him the Damoſell on the other ſide of the Riuer) he falſly lyed, and were it that I had brought her away perforce, ſhe would not tarry for me, ſo willingly as ſhee doth: but ſhe vnhappily ſtraying in this Forreſt, the Dwraffe met with her, offering to leade her away againſt her will, and becauſe ſhe would not obey him, he gaue her many cruel ſtrokes with a ſtaff. Ah, Traitour that he is, anſwered the knight for this villainie ſhall I reward him if euer wee meete againe. And becauſe Galaor found the Knight in ſo good ſort, he holpe to take his horſe that had eſcaped: deſiring him to puniſh the Dwarff for his treaſon. This done, he entred the boate and paſt the water, afterward hee and the Damoſell rode on their way, ſhee ſhewing him ſoone after a Caſtle neere at hand, which ſtood very brauely on the toppe of a Mountaine, ſaying. Here will be the beſt lodging we ſhall finde this night: and alighting from their horſes, they were entertained there with maruailous curteſie, it being the dwelling of the Damoſels mother. Soone after was the Prince vnarmed, and then the Damoſell came to him in this manner.
                  To the ende (my Lord) I may keepe promiſe with yee, if you pleaſe to ſtay heere till I returne, which credite me ſhal be very ſpedily: I will bring ye newes of her whom you deſire to ſee. I am content, anſwered Galaor, prouided that you make no tarriance, becauſe I haue affaires of importance elſe-where. Let it ſuffice, replyed the Damoſell, you ſhall ſee me againe ſooner then you imagine. And ſo ſhe departed, vſing ſuch diligence, as Galaor was not diſpleaſed with her ſtay. At her returne, they mounted on horſe-backe, and rode together croſſe the Forreſt, which when they left, the night ouer-tooke them: whereupon the Damoſell forſaking the out-right way, turned aſide, and by time the greater part of the night was ſpent, they arriued at a very faire Citie, named Grandares, where comming to a Caſtle gate, the Damoſell ſayd. Now let vs alight, and follow me, for here will I ſhew you her, I promiſed: but leaue not your weapous and Armour, becauſe one can ſcant tell what may happen. The Damoſell went before, and Galaor followed her till they came neere the wall. Get vp heere ſaid the Damoſell, and I will goe on the other ſide to attend you. With much adoe he aſcended the wall, by reaſon of his weightie Armor, as alſo beeing troubled with his Shield and Helmet. When the D
                        •…
                     oſell ſaw hee was amounted, ſhee entred the Pallace to guide him as ſhe begun: in meane while Galaor was diſcended, and ſate hard by a Poſterne that entred a Garden, where he tarryed ſo long, till the Damoſell came and opened the doore with one of her companions, but ere hee entred,

they thus ſpake. Although you haue attained thus farre, yet before you paſſe any further, you muſt needs tell vs whoſe ſonne you are. Let that alone anſwered Galaor, for I haue ſuch a Father, as til the time of better happe, I am content not to name him. Neuertheleſſe, quoth one of them, it is very neceſſarie we ſhould know, for it ſhall not be any way to your hinderance. I am (anſwered Galaor) Sonne to King Perion of Gaule, and the Queene Eliſena, and it is not ſixe dayes paſt ſince I could not tell yee ſo much. Stay then ſaid the Damoſell: ſo they cauſed him to be vn-armed, caſting a Mantle about his ſhoulders and afterward went on, the firſt Damoſell going before, and the other comming behinde him. In this manner they entred the Pallace, paſſing through a chamber, where many Ladies and Gentlewomen were in bed: and if any one demaunded who went by ſo late, the Damoſels (his guides) made anſwere for him. Thus not perceiued by any, they came to another Chamber, wherein when Galaor entred, he ſaw ſitting on a gorgious bedde a moſt beautifull Ladie, with an Iuory combe kembing her faire locks: but when ſhe eſpied Galaor, ſhe preſenly caſt on her head a Chaplet of Flowers, and came to meete him whom the Damoſels had brought, ſaying. My Friend, you are right heartily welcome, being the beſt knight in the word that I know. And you, Madame, quoth he, are moſt happily found, being the faireſt Ladie that euer I ſaw. Then the Damoſell that had guided him thither, thus ſpake. My Lord, ſee here my Miſtreſſe, now am I diſcharged of the promiſe I made ye, and if you would haue me ſay any more: ſhe is named Aldena, daughter to king Serolys, and becauſe the wife to the Duke of Briſtoya, is ſiſter to her mother, ſhe nouriſheth her here, as her owne daughter. And you Madame, (quoth ſhee to the young Princeſſe, haue here preſent (as I can aſſure yee) the Sonne to King Perion of Gaule: wherefore you being both the children of Kings, excelling in beautie and natures perfections, if ye loue together no one dare blame ye. Here-with ſhe went preſently foorth of the chamber, and making faſt the doore after her, left the two loues alone: by which meanes they ſpent this night ſo amorouſly, as they that haue taſted like fortune may conceiue, and therefore meed I make no further talke thereof.
                  But the houre being come when Galaor ſhould depart, he was warily aduiſed thereof by the Damoſels, who brought him to the place were ouer-night hee had left his Armour: and after hee was inueſted therein (as hee ought to be) he went along the Garden againe where-through he came in. And as neuer any good chanceth, without ſome miſhap attending thereon, ſo nowe came it to paſſe for there found he the Dwarffe ambuſhed, that had ſo miſuſed him before, as you haue heard, who no ſooner eſpied him, but hee cryed out. Beleeue me, Sir Royſter, vnwiſe waſt thou to enter heere, for thou dyeſt, and the traitereſſe that did conduct thee. Come foorth Knights, come foorth, here is a man that ſecretly came out of the Dukes Chamber. It was no time then for Galaor to ſleepe, but lightly getting vp the wall, caſt him-ſelfe on the other ſide, where finding his horſe readie, he preſently mounted: notwithſtanding, the

Dwarffe and the reſt (well acquainted with the ſecret iſſues of the Caſtle) with all ſpeed purſued him, and perceiuing how this villainous Dwarffe was cauſe of all this trouble, ſtayed, ſaying to him-ſelfe. Either I will die, or bee reuenged on this rediculous creature, if I catch him. Then came the other and ſet vpon him, but ſo brauely did he defend himſelfe, as none of them durſt be bold to tary neere him: for he being mooued to exceeding impatience, thruſt himſelfe in the midſt among them, laying about with courage, as well they found who they dealt withall. Galaor ſeeing the Dwarffe ſtill kept aloofe, determining to die, but he would lay hold on him, and entring among the thickeſt of them, before his Launce brake he ſlew two out-right: then drawing his Sword, made them ſo ſoundly acquainted with the ſharpe edge thereof, as he that thought him-ſelfe hardyeſt, was glad to giue him way, for no one medled with him but was layd along. At length they compaſſed him in ſuch ſort, as they found meanes to kill his horſe, which made him fall to the ground in very great danger, for now they verily intended to murther him, and the Dwarffe perſwading himſelfe that hee could not eſcape, came neere to ſhew ſome part of his man hood: but when he ſaw Galaor had in ſpight of them recouered his feet, and happy was he which kept furtheſt from him, hee turned his horſe to eſcape away, yet by chaunce Galaor got hold on the reines of his bridle, giuing him ſuch a blowe on the ſtomacke with the hilts of his Sword, that he fell to the ground ſo loutiſhly, as the blood guſhed foorth at all the conduits of his head. Then lightly mounted hee on the Dwarffes horſe, and the Beaſt ſeeming to ſtorme at this change, from an euill fauoured Dwarffe to one of the beſt knights in the world, made proofe whether his Rider could ſit faſt, or no, running violently with him a good diſtance from his enemies. And turning to make an ende of his worke, as by chaunce he lifted his eyes to the Caſtle, he ſaw in one of the windowes the Ladie whom he had choſen as his friend, ſhee ſhaking a white hand-kercher to him, meaning he ſhould be gone with all poſſible ſpeed, which hee did, becauſe hee perceiued more enemies at hand. With nimble pace he hyed him away, not tarrying till hee recouered the Forreſt, where to refreſh himſelfe a while, he gaue his Helmet to his Squire.
                  Now ſhall ye vnderſtand, how when the Dukes Knights ſaw him make ſuch haſte away, ſome were of the opinion to follow him, the reſt ſaid it was in vaine, ſeeing hee had gotten into the wood, & thus debating, they went no further, but ſtood as men confounded, with maruailing howe one man could be able to vanquiſh ſo many. Meane while the Dwarffe was come to himſelfe againe, but hee felt his body ſo ſore and bruiſed, as very hardly could he ſtand on his feet, yet ſtill he cryed to them in this manner.
                  My friends, cary me to my Lord the Duke, for I will let him know what hee muſt needes reuenge. Through theſe importunate acclamations, he was brought by them before the Duke, to whom he declared, how he met the Damoſell in the Forreſt, & becauſe he would haue accompany her home, ſhee cryed out till a Knight came to and

her, who killed his men, and beate him likewiſe very cruelly. Afterward, how hee followed him againe with three Knightts to haue her from him, and they in like maner were diſcomfited.
                  Laſtly, that ſhee brought the ſame Knight to his Honours Caſtle, and ſuffered him to bee with her in the Dukes owne Chamber. The Duke being highly offended herear, demaunded if he knew the Damoſell he thus complained on. Yea, my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, if I ſee her againe. Here-upon all the Ladyes, and Gentle-women were ſent for, and ſo ſoone as the Dwarffe beheld her he ſayd. This is ſhee (my Lord) by whom your Pallace is diſhonoured. Ah Traytour, anſwered the Damoſell, thou lyeſt faſly, for had not the Knight come to reſcue mee in the Forreſt, thou wouldeſt haue abuſed mee: & villanouſly didſt beate me, becauſe I would not conſent to thee. Very much incenſed with anger, was the Duke againſt the Damoſell, and ſayd to her. By mine honour (falſe woman) I will make thee to reueale the truth. Afterward he ſent her to cloſe priſon: yet not-with-ſtanding all the paine ſhe endured, ſhee would not diſcouer any thing touching her Ladyes ſecrets, albeit ſhee was there very long tormented: to the no little griefe and ſorrow of Aldena that dearely loued her, and knew not by any other how to vnderſtand of her Galaor. But the Author thinking he hath kept ye too long from Amadis, returneth to him: intending when place & matter ſhall ſerue, to finiſh that which afterward happened to Galaor.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     How after Amadis departed from Vrganda the vnknowne, he arriued at a Caſtle where it chanced to him as you ſhall read in this diſcourſe.
                  
                  
                     GReat ioy had Amadis at his departure from Vrganda, as well for vnderſtāding that the man whom hee had Knighted, was his owne Brother, as alſo becauſe he approched neer the place where his Oriana ſoiourned, hoping ere-long to haue a ſight of her. And ſo long trauailed he through a Forreſt where-into he had entred, as he was ſurprized with darke night before he could finde any houſe for lodging, yet notwithſtanding the obſcuritie of the night, he eſpied in the wood a great fire: wherefore he rode thitherward, and by the way chanced on a faire Fortreſſe, as he gathered by the lights he beheld through the glaſſe windowes, and comming neere thereto, he heard the voyces of men and women ſinging, tunable to ſweet Muſicke that conſorted with them. When he came to the gate, he knocked and called for ſome to open it: but the harmony of the Muſicke, and other noyſe in the Caſtle, made ſuch hinderance, as hee was not heard. Notwithſtanding, hee ſtill more loud knocked and called, till certaine came and peeped foorth at ſmall creuiſes in the gate, and ſeeing him, one of them demaunded what he would haue there ſo late. Sir, anſwered Amadis, I am a ſtrange Knight that ſeekes for lodging.

Strange? quoth he within the Caſtell, it appeareth ſo by thy language, but more by thy manner of walking ſo late: our country-men deſire the day time, and thou ſhunneſt it, fearing to be ſeene, or leaſt thou ſhouldeſt haue occaſion to Combate, and at ſuch an houre as this is, none trauaile the way except they be Diuels. Beleeue me, anſwered Amadis, little courteſie doe you know or ſhew, that vſe theſe words, ſeeing without further knowledge what I am, you not only rebuke but condemne me: and I thinke if you are poſſeſſed either with ſence or man-hood, you haue ſometime beene in like diſtreſſe as I am, and hauing found it in your ſelfe, neuer reproue it in another. Thou maieſt make triall thereof if thou wilt, quoth he in the Caſtell: but get thee walking, for here ſhalt thou ſet no foote this night. Now truſt me, ſaid Amadis, I thinke thou wouldeſt haue no man of valew in thy company: yet before we part, I am deſirous to know what thou art. That will I tel thee, quoth the other, on this condition, that when ſo euer we meete, thou ſhalt combate with me. I will not ſtick for that, anſwered Amadis. Know then, ſaid he within, how I am Dardan, who commands thee not to ſtray ſo farre this night, but that I may find thee to morrow morning. Thou vaunteſt of thy ſelfe very much, quoth Amadis, but if thou wilt cauſe Torches to be brought hither to giue vs light, and come forth preſently without longer ſtay: we ſhall ſoone ſee who ought to haue the worſſe lodging this night. What? ſaid Dardan, to cō
                     bate with an Owle, the enemy of the day, muſt I bring Torches, and this night take Armes? vnwiſe is he, that ſo late to gaine ſuch ſimple honor, will either put on ſpurre or Cuyrate: and with theſe words he went from the gate.
                  Heere may the Reader by him-ſelfe diſcourſe awhile, what fruite ouer-braining commonly bringeth with it, & contrariwiſe, what perfection (among all other vertues) is in modeſtie. No well grounded courage, or gallant diſpoſed body, can duely put in exerciſe the benefit of the one or other, if moderation & temperance be not their guids therein. And albeit valiance & hardines is a great gift of God: yet are they ſo pernitious in ſuch as haue them, (who are tranſported with paſſions, or the glory of ambition,) as they be euen no better then cowardiſe & preſumtion. Eloquence, and the facultie of well ſpeaking, is a rich and precious gift of nature, augmented and encreaſed by long vſe and ſtudy, to giue light and decking to the faire conceptions of the ſpirit: but it is there a more hurtfull peſtilence in a cō
                     mon wealth, then when a well ſpoken Oratour will miſuſe his art & ſweetnes of language? Haue not ſome bin knowne to perſwade ſimple people, to enterpriſe things which afterward haue brought their ruine and ſubuertion? I leaue the confidence of the wiſe, and the opinitiue in their owne beauty, the one procuring to many the loſſe of their ſoules, and the other to infinite number the deſtruction of honor: ſo hurtfull in all things it too much vſurpatiō of ouer-weening, and immoderate eſtimation of our ſelues. I will not heere compare the wiſdome of Vliſſes, with the arrogancie of furious Aiax, or the violence of Turnus, with the temperance of Aeneas: nor make other remonſtrances by the ſucceſſe of great matters, happening to

mighty perſonages both Greekes & Latines. It ſhall content me, to ſet for example this only accident of indiſcreete Dardan, to the end that yong Gentlemen, who take delight to read this Hiſtory: ſeeing on the one ſide the patient magnanimity of Amadis, and on the other the furious brutality of Dardan, may propoſe the vertues to be imitated, & the vices to be deteſted and puniſhed.
                  
                     Amadis then ſomewhat diſpleaſed with the outragious ſpeeches of Dardan, departed, not ſo much caring for his lodging, as how to be reuenged: & concluded, ſome-time in walking about, and other while in reſting by a buſh, to paſſe the incommodity of this night in the Forreſt, thus to beguile the time till day riſing. As there hee traced vp and downe, he heard the ſpeech of ſome body nere him, and looking about, eſpied two Damoſels on horſe-back accompanied with a Squire: after they had ſaluted him, and he them, they demanded from whence he came ſo late armed, wherewith Amadis throughly reported, all that had happened to him at the Caſtell. Know you, ſaid the Damoſels, the name of the Knight? That doe I, quoth he, for he tolde me his name is Dardan. Very true, ſaid they, hee is called Dardan the proud, the moſt audatious Knight in this country. I beleeue it well, anſwered Amadis. Sir Knight, quoth they, ſeeing you are ſo vnprouided of lodging, if you will take patience to remaine this night in our tentes, which are pitched heere hard at hand, you ſhall be welcome. He glad of this courteſie, rode with them, and being there alighted, Amadis cauſed his Squire to vnarme him. When the Damoſels ſaw him ſo faire, and of ſuch honeſt conuerſation, they were well pleaſed with his company: and ſo they ſupped together merily, afterward they gaue him a pallad to reſt vpon. Neuertheleſſe, before they parted, they demanded of him whether he trauailed. To the Court of King Liſuart, anſwered Amadis. And ſo do we replied the Damoſels, to ſee what ſhall happen to a Lady, one of the beſt and moſt noble in the Country, who hath committed her welfar to the triall of a Combate, and it muſt be within few dayes following bee performed before King Liſuart: but yet wee know not who will be the man, for he againſt whom the cauſe muſt be defēded, is one of the beſt Knights in all great Brittaine. What is, ſaid Amadis, the Knight ſo much eſteemed, eſpecially among ſo many good? It is the ſame Dardan, anſwered the Damoſels, from whome ſo lately you came. And on what cauſe, ſaid Amadis, ariſeth the Combate? I pray ye (faire Ladyes) if you know, let mee vnderſtand it. Sir, quoth one of them, this Dardan loueth a Knights daughter of the Country, who at his ſecond nuptials maried her I am to ſpeake of: now hath this Damoſell the beloued of Dardan, conceiued ſuch hatred againſt her faire mother, that ſhe hath ſaid to her friend, how ſhe will neuer loue him, except he bring her to King Liſuarts Court, and there openly maintaine, that all the poore Ladyes goods appertaineth to her, and if any gain-ſay it, he to iuſtifie the ſame in Combate. Theſe news were highly pleaſing to Amadis, for by theſe meanes he intended to compaſſe occaſion, to be reuenged of the wrong he did him: and that in the preſence of Oriana, who ſhould there perceiue what her

Knight was, which made him enter into ſuch thoughts, as the Damoſels well noting it, one of them thus ſpake. I pray ye Sir, for courteſie, acquaint vs with the reaſon of your ſudden muſing, if it may without offence be knowne. Faire Ladies, anſwered Amadis, if you will promiſe me as loyall Gentle-women, to keepe it ſecret and reueale it to no one, willingly ſhall I tell ye: all which they ſolemnely ſware to performe. I intend (quoth he) to combate for the Dame you ſpake of, and minde not to faile: but I would haue it concealed from any but your ſelues. When they heard what he ſayd, they were much abaſhed, notwithſtanding they made great eſteeme of him: ſeeing what they had vttered in praiſe of Dardan, could not affray him, but hee would hazard the Combate, and therefore ſhee that alreadie had broken the matter, thus replyed. Gentle Sir, your intent proceedeth frō a high reſolued minde, and wee will pray for your proſperons ſucceſſe. So gaue they ech to other the good night, and went to reſt till the morning, when they diſlodged together. Then entreated the Damoſels, that ſeeing hee went to the ſame place they did, and in the Forreſt kept men of euill behauiour: therfore hee would not forſake their company, whereof he made them promiſe.
                  Along they ride with ſundrie diſcourſings, where among other talke, they deſired, in reſpect they met ſo happily together; that he would bee content to let them know his name. My name, quoth he is Amadis, but I pray you keepe it onely to your ſelues. Proceeding on by vaſte and vnfrequented places, one day, when furtheſt they were from doubt, they beheld before them vnder a tree, two Armed Knights prepared for the Iouſt: who ſeeing them comming, ſtepped into the midſt of the way, the one ſaying to his companion. Which of theſe two Damoſels wouldeſt thou haue, and the other I meane to take my ſelfe? I will ſaid (the other) haue the firſt. And I her companion, anſwered the other: ſo without more words they came to lay hands on them. Amadis who miſliked ſuch dealing, without the Damoſels conſent, addreſſed himſelfe to the Knights: demaunding what manner of behauiour this was, to Ladyes comming from honeſt place? Such, quoth they, as beſeemeth women of their age. What anſwered Amadis, would you then force them? Who ſhall let vs (quoth they) if wee pleaſe? Marie, that will I replyed Amadis: then lacing his Hemet, he tooke his ſhield & Lance, ſaying. Let the Damoſels alone you ſhameleſſe men, and defend your ſelues. Without any more talke they gaue their ſpurres to their Horſes, meeting together with ſuch puiſſance, as the Knight brake his Launce, and Amadis gaue him ſuch an attaint, that hee carryed him from his horſe to the ground, with his head vnder, and his heeles vpward: breaking the laces of his Helmet in the fall, ſo that his head remained without ſhelter.
                  When the other ſaw his companion downe, he would reuenge him, and couching his Launce againſt Amadis, met him ſo full, as piercing his Armour, wounded him a little, and his ſtaffe was ſhiuered all in pieces: but the Prince falling with his Launce, encountred him ſo fiercely with his body

and Horſe, as he lay tumbling hard by his fellow, thē comming to the Damoſels, he ſaid. I pray ye heere-after come no more behinde, but for your better ſurety keepe ye before. A while he taried to ſee if they would riſe againe, but perceiuing they made no ſhew thereof, he forbare to charge them any further, & ſo rode on with his company. Soone after they came to a faire plaine, whereby a pleaſant Riuer had his courſe, and there they cauſed their Tents to be erected: as well to regard the hurt of Amadis, as alſo to refreſh themſelues. But as they ſate at meat, the two diſmounted Knights came riding thither, ſaying to Amadis. Sir Knight, you haue won the Ladies at the Lance, now muſt ye defend them by the ſword, otherwiſe we will cary them hence in deſpite of you. But you ſhall not, quoth he, if I can let it: ſo drawing his ſword againſt him that firſt made offer, in ſhort time he brought him into ſuch diſtreſſe, as without the ſnccour of his companion, he was vnable to hold out any longer: which Amadis perceiuing, ſaid. Ah Knight, the Ladyes make ſlender account of you, that you muſt come both vpon one man. Yet notwithſtanding he wold not forbare, but as the patterne of vnconquerable valour, gaue him likewiſe worke enough to doe, ſo that all their wrong turned to his honor: for he gaue the laſt ſuch ſtrokes on the helmet, as the ſword glaunſing on his ſhoulders, cut in twaine the cuyrates of his armour, & ſliced his fleſh to the very bone, which made him let fall his ſword, and run away halfe dead. Then turning to the other, he cut off his hand vnder his Shield, the paine whereof was ſo yrkeſome to him, as he cryed. Ah I am ſlaine. Thus ſpeaking, he threw his ſword to the ground, and the Shield from about his neck. All this auaileth not, ſaid Amadis, for I wil not leaue thee, except firſt thou ſware, neuer to offend Lady againſt her will. Alas, quoth he, I promiſe faithfully, and will performe it. Here-with Gandalin came, who gaue him his ſword and Shield againe, permitting him to go for helpe whether he would: and Amadis returned to the Tent, where the Damoſels reioyſing for his ſafe returne, ſaid. In ſooth Sir, we had beene diſhonored without your aide, which is much better then we expected, and ſuch, as not onely aſſureth your reuenge for Dardans iniurie, but the Ladyes alſo, if fortune permit, you doe vndertake her quarrell. Then was hee vnarmed, and after his wound was dreſt, he ſate downe to meat againe.
                  At their departure thence, they lodgded at a good Ladies Caſtle, where they were moſt courteouſly entertained, and on the morrow trauailed all day, without any aduenture worthy rehearſal, arriuing neere Windſore where King Liſuart lay, when Amadis thus ſpake to the Damoſels. Faire Friends, I would not be known to any one, therefore til ſuch time as the knight come to the combate, I intend to with-hold my ſelfe from the place: and when the houre is, let your Squire bring me tydings thereof hither. Sir, quoth the Damoſels, as yet there wants two daies of the aſſignation, therefore if you pleaſe we wil tarry with you: and our Squire ſhall goe into the Towne, and bring vs word when the Knight is arriued. I am well content, ſaid he: whereupon they pitched their Tent betweene a little wood and a Riuer, and Amadis preently put off his armour.

Now did the Damoſels change their opinion, and thought it better for them to go into the Towne, to ſee how things were in preparation, ſaying, they might returne when they pleaſed. Amadis not miſliking thereof, willed them to do ſo, in meane while (being vnarmed) he mounted on horſe-backe, intēding to ſtray abroad a little for his pleaſure & Gādalin guided him through the wood. Riding along, as they were on the ſide of a little mountaine, he might eaſily behold the Towne, and when they were at the higheſt, they alighted from their horſes: when Amadis ſitting downe vnder a tree, caſt his eye toward that part where he iudged the Princeſſe Oriana ſhould be, then regarding the walles, the Towers, and the whole Caſtle, breathing forth a vehement ſigh, hee ſayd. Ah happy Towers, within you is the onely flower of the world: and thou faire Towne, how fortunate art thou in containing that, which all the harts and praiſes of men cannot comprehend? High in diuine grace were he, who for maintenance of this quarrell ſhould ſpend his life: but much happy he, that without other combate then his ſmall deſert, ſhould reach a bliſſe ſo incomparable. Then reſting his head on his arme, he entred into a deepe conceit, which prouoked him to ſudden ſilence, and in this melancholly the teares trilled downe his cheekes: in mean while Gandalin who knew his complexion, ſtanding where he was vnſeene of any, eſpied a goodly troupe of Lords and Ladyes comming toward them, whereof he made haſt to aduertiſe the Prince, but he was ſo perplexed, as he could not anſwere, wherefore Gandalin tooke him by the arme, ſaying. My Lord, ſee you not what a great traine maketh toward vs? At theſe words he came to himſelfe, beginning to ſigh, and lifting his eyes to heauen, ſaid. Gandalin, if in this loue I were maiſter of my ſtrength, as I am in diuers other actions neither ſhouldeſt thou haue neede to aduertiſe me, nor my ſelfe be without councell ſo much as I am. But I feele my ſelfe ſo oppreſſed, as all the enemies in the world cannot bring me to ſuch extremity, as this ouer ruling paſſion doth: therefore I pray thee talke to me, of the felicity a man ſhall enioy in death, for other may I not taſte, and practiſe no meanes of my life, ſeeing the contrary doth ſurmount it. What my Lord? anſwered Gandalin, eſteeme you the victory ouer your ſelfe ſo difficult, after ſo many conqueſts of ſtout and bold ſtrangers? Why do you not think, that peraduenture ſhe loueth you well, for whom you endure ſuch aſſaults, and happily by as great reaſon as you loue her? your perſoage, proweſſe, beauty, and nobility of linage, can they deſerue leſſe, then the good grace of the moſt rare & and exellent Lady in the world? let theſe humours (my Lord) repell your deſperations. Further hee would haue proceeded, but Amadis brake him off in anget, ſaying. Wretch dareſt thou blaſpheme ſo much, as to ſay, that he who hath merited no conditiō in the world, may be equalled with ſo perfect a thing as is my Lady? enter no more into ſuch tearmes, if thou wilt not haue me thine enemy, and ſo looſe my conuerſation. Well, well, ſaid Gandalin, I pray ye wipe your eyes, leaſt thoſe that come hitherward perceiue you haue wept. What? anſwered Amadis, comes their any body? Yea mary, quoth Gandalin,
                     
and now they be at hand: here-with he ſhewed him the Knights & the Ladyes, who were hard by them, by time Amadis was mounted. Then (as though hee had ſtayed for their companie) hee ſaluted them, and riding among the traine hee beheld a Ladie (very comely and beautifull) who wept very grieuouſly, where-upon hee left the reſt, and rode with her, ſaying. Madame, God comfort yee, and giue you ioy. In ſooth, anſwered the Lady, and thereof haue I need, in that (as now) it is very farre from mee, which except Heauen fauour me with better grace, I am vtterly out of hope euer to ſee againe. And ſo high a Maieſtie, ſaid Amadis can prouide therefore when he pleaſeth: Not-withſtanding, if you were ſo contented, I gladly would know the cauſe of your ſadneſſe.
                  Beleeue mee my friend, quoth ſhe, all that euer I enioy in this world, conſiſteth in the tryall of a Combate. By theſe wordes hee knew this to be the Lady of whom the Damoſels had tolde him before, wherefore hee enquired further, if as yet ſhee had found a knight on her behalfe? No truely, ſayd the Lady, and (which greiueth mee moſt of all) to morrow muſt my delay bee exterminate. What will ye then doe? anſwered Amadis. What would you that I ſhould doe? quoth ſhee but lament and looſe all vnleſſe (by hap) I finde one in the Kings Court, who mooued thereto by charitable compaſſion, will courteouſly defend the right of a deſolate widow. Such fortune ſayd Amadis, ſhall I pray may befall yee, for I ſhould not be a little glad thereof, as well for your owne ſake, as alſo becauſe I neuer thought well of your aduerſarie. I thanke ye gentle Sir, quoth ſhe, to God, I commit the reuenge of my wrong. So paſſed on the Ladie, and Amadis turning bridle, rode backe to the Pauillion, where he found the Damoſels, who were already returned from the towne: and preſently they told him, how Dardan was come into the field, with full reſolution to doe his deuoire. And truſt me, ſayd Amadis, it was my happe to meet the diſtreſſed Lady, euen the ſame whom the caſe concerneth: heere-with hee declared all the talke they had together.
                  But now is the houre of quiet come, and each one went to reſt till the point of day, when the Damoſels being riſen, came to tell Amadis, how they would goe before to the Towne, and ſend him worde when Dardan was readie. Not ſo, quoth Amadis, I will not bee farre behinde yee, but let one ride before, to aduertiſe me when Dardan ſhews himſelfe in the field. After he was armed, they went all to horſe-backe, and being come to the iſſue of the Forreſt, he ſayd to the Damoſels. Now may you goe (if you pleaſe) for I will not depart this place till I heare ſome newes from you. Away they went, when Amedis alighting, tooke off his Helmet to refreſh himſelfe.
                  No ſooner did the Sunne appeare in the Eaſt, but the King came to the place appointed for the Combate (which was without the Towne, hard by the Walles) where Dardan not long after ſhewed himſelfe, in ſuch manner and equipage, as an ambitious man vſeth to gaine goods & honour, alſo like an amourous Champion to maintaine the quarrell of his beloued: who to countenāce him with the greater fauor, was queintly led

by the reines of his Palfray, thē preſenting himſelfe before the king on his knees, he ſayd. My Lord, according to the ordinance by you appointed, this Ladie and I humbly beſeech ye, that the goods may be deliuered her, as is no more then reaſon: for if any Knight oppoſe him ſelfe againſt her, heere am I readie for the Combate. The king then called for the Ladyes defendant, but ſhe (poore ſoule) appeared alone. Why Lady, quoth the King, are you vnprouided of a Champion, that you come without any to defend your right? So helpe me God (anſwered ſhe weeping) I am (my Lord) forſake of all, except you grant me mercie. Great compaſſion had the King on her, for he knew her to be very vertuous: but he could not together order reaſon and the Law. In the meane while, Dardan who thought no reſiſtāce would come, ſate downe in the middeſt of the field, attending the third houre, which was the time according to the cuſtome, when the King would pronounce ſentence to the Conquerour: but one of the Damoſels ſeeing nowe the needefull time, made haſte to let Amadis vnderſtand, what want of his preſence was in the field. For this cauſe he immediately mounted on horſe-backe, and being armed as appertained, commanded the Damoſell and his Squire to goe ſome other way, for he would not be ſeene by any from whence he came: aſſuring them, that if he were Victor, hee would returne againe to the Tent. So departed Amadis alone, riding on a braue white Courſer, (as he promiſed the Damoſell of Denmarke in Gaule) and arriued at the place where Dardan held the world in wonder of him. The king and his Nobles ſeeing him come from the Forreſt, ſtood ſomewhat in doubt of him, for hee carryed ſuch a gallant and Knightly counteuance, as promiſed a-farre off that his enemie ſhould finde him of hautie diſpoſition: which made the King (aboue all other) deſirous to know him, and thinking ſhe for whoſe cauſe hee came knew his name, he called and demanded of her the queſtion.
                  Dread Lord (anſwered the Ladie) I neuer ſaw the man before, nor doe I know what he is. By this time was Amadis entred the field, when doing reuerence to the king and the Ladyes, without longer ſtay he came to Dardan: demauuding if hee were the man, that would maintaine the quarrell of her, for whom the poore Ladie was put to ſuch trouble; becauſe, quoth hee) I am come in her defence, and alſo to keepe promiſe with thee. What didſt thou promiſe me? replyed Dardan. That I would ſee thee in the day-time, ſaid Amadis, & wetteſt thou when? It was at ſuch a time, as thou being whitled with wine, or glorie, or elſe the truſt thou hadſt in thy ſtrong Caſtle, ſpeakeſt ſo out-ragiouſly to me ſtāding without, wearied both with trauaile & hunger. And therefore doe I make the leſſe account of thee, anſwered Dardan: but cauſe her to come hither, for whom thou wilt doe ſuch a doubtie deed, to know if ſhe will accept thee as her Champion, and afterward doe the vtter-moſt thou canſt. When the King ſaw they talked ſo long together, he would haue heard what they ſaid: but the good Widdow came, and to her, Dardan thus ſpake. Dame, this Knight would maintaine thy right, wilt thou ſubmit all to what he can

doe? With all my heart (quoth ſhe) ſeeing it pleaſeth him to ſtand ſo much my Friend, and God ſpeed him no otherwiſe then my cauſe is iuſt. Whē the two knights were at the very point to combate, the King perceiued that Amadis Shield was bruiſed in two places, both with ſtrokes of the Sword, and point of the Launce, wherefore he ſayd to ſuch as ſtood neere him, that if the Knight demanded another ſhield, he would gladly giue him one: but Amadis was ſo hot in deſire to reuenge himſelfe and the Ladie, that he liſtened to nothing but the Combate. Thus the Ladyes accord being receiued, the two Champions tooke their carrire againſt each other ſo roughly, as their Launces pierced their Armour and flew in pieces, without any other harme as yet: but when their bodies met, Dardan was ſent to the ground, yet it happened ſo wel for him, as holding faſt the reines of his horſe, he recouered himſelfe more nimbly, and mounted againe, as one both valiant and branely diſpoſed, boldly ſetting hand to his Sword. Whē 
                     Amadis ſaw him ſo quickly vp againe, & in ſuch readineſſe for his owne defence: hee approached to him, when began ſuch a battaile betweene thē, as euery one preſent maruailed thereat. On all ſides were placed the inhabitants of the Towne, and many other that came farre off, as well on mightie Scaffolds in the fielde, as alſo on the towers and walles of the Caſtle: but aboue the reſt, the Queene was there preſent with her Ladies, moſt deſirous to behold who ſhould beare away the honour of this cruell Combate; for they ſeemed two ſo gallant companions, as it was hard at firſt ſight to iudge the better. Such were the rigorous ſtrokes deliuered on either ſide, that ſparkes of fire flew foorth of their Helmets and Armonr, their Shields cut in pieces, and their blood colouring the groūd, which mooued exceeding compaſſion in the Regardants, who ſeemed copartners in their danger, according as ech one fauoured the wel-fare of his Friend: but the two Champions gaue no reſpect there to, becauſe their deſire was to make knowne both to the Ladyes and themſelues, the man deſeruing higheſt account.
                  When King Liſuart ſaw them endure ſo long, he ſayd aloud, that hee neuer beheld a more ſingular Combate, purſured with greater courage and man-hood: wherefore he determined not to depart, vntill he had ſeene the finall iſſue thereof, permitting them to proceed as themſelues pleaſed. And to the ende (quoth hee) that the Conquerour may bee dignified with more then accuſtomed honour, I will cauſe his deſerts to be liuely carued in Marble, at the entrance of my Pallace, to prouoke the like perfection in all other, that are deſirous to follow Armes. In ſuch manner as you haue heard continued the two Knights a lone time, the ſtanders by being not able to diſcerne who had the better: for without taking breath or reſt their fury continued, as thogh their ſtrength had more and more encreaſed. But Amadis who by chance turning his head to the place where the Ladyes ſtood, eſpyed his faire Miſtreſſe, louely Oriana, whereby hee felt his vertue augmented in ſuch ſort, that hee was as freſh and luſtie, as if but then he entred the field, imagining he was become more then a man.

Now followed hee the fight with ſuch cruell extreames, as in ſhort time he diſſolued the doubt who ſhould be ſuperiour: for Dardan (not-withſtanding all his defence) was conſtrained to draw backe, ſeeking how to eſcape the wreakefull ſtrokes of his enemie, which without ceaſing wounded his bodie in many places: his horſe likewiſe no longer able to endure, ſtumbled ſo often, till at length he ſet both his knees to the ground, which made Dardan thinke it better to fight on foot, wherefore he ſayd to Amadis. Knight, our horſes are wearie, and faile vs, by reaſon we cannot doe as we would: and if we were on foot (me thinks) in ſhort time the doubt would be deſcided. Theſe wordes did Dardan ſpeake ſo loud, as the King and his Lords eaſily heard them: wherat Amadis ſeemed aſhamed, thus anſwering. Althought it be vnhonourable in a Knight, to forſake his horſe ſo long as he can keepe him: yet ſince thou thinkeſt to combate better on foot then on horſe-back, we will a light, and defend thy ſelfe well, for thou ſhalt haue need.
                  Here with they diſmounted, aſſailing ech other ſo furiouſly, as if but now they begun the Combat, ſhewing more ſharpe cruelty then before they had done: yet Amadis euer-more kept the aduantage, commonly deliuering two ſtrokes for one, which made Dardan doe nothing, but defend his enemies blowes, who compelled him to turne & reqoile, as himſelfe pleaſed, ſo that ech one accounted him very neere vanquiſhed, blaming him becauſe hee kept not ſtill on horſe-back. But as he turned here and there, flying the ſlicing Sword of Amadis, he was driuen vnder the Ladies Scaffold, which made them cry: Dardan can hold out no longer, he is ouer-come if he enter the Combate againe. Yet for all this Amadis would not leaue him, but preſſed him ſtill with ſuch purſuite, as hee brought him hard by the Queens Scaffold, when ſhe and all the Ladies ſayd. Without queſtion, Dardan is dead.
                  At this clamour, Amadis vnderſtood the voyce of the Damoſel of Denmarke, and lifting vp his head, eſpyed her ſtanding by the Princeſſe Oriana: by means wherof, he became ſo farre beſide him-ſelfe, as hee ſet the point of his Sword to the ground, forgetting not onely the daunger wherein he was, but alſo ſtood amazed at the ſight of his Miſtres. Which when Dardan beheld, he tooke heart afreſh, and charged his enemie ſo brauely, that if he had longer continued, he would haue gone away Conquerour: but the Damoſell of Denmarke noting this change, ſpake out aloud. In an vnhappy houre did the Knight behold any Lady in this company, whereby he hath loſt what he wun of Dardan: it is no time now for his heart to faint. Theſe words confounded Amadis with ſhame, that gladly could he haue giuen entertainement to death, fearing leaſt his Lady would ſuſpect cowardize in him. For this cauſe lifting vp his Sword, he gaue Dardan ſuch a ſtroke on the Helmet, as made him ſet both his hands to the ground: then falling vpon him, he rent the Helmet from off his head, & trampled in ſuch ſort on him with his feet, as he fell downe like one depriued of his ſences. Afterward, taking him by the locks of his haire he beate him on the face with the pummell of his Sword, ſaying. Thou dyeſt Dardan, if thou confeſſe

not the Lady free. When Dardan ſaw himſelfe in ſuch eſtate: he replied: Ah gentle Knight, for Gods ſake mercy, kill me not, I will acquit her.
                  Now approached the King and the other Lords to heare what hee ſaid, and while they ſtood conferring with him, Amadis as yet aſhamed of his fault committed, drew backe through the throng: and ſeeing hee had gotten behinde them all, ſo couertly as he could he ran toward the Forreſt, leaning them al muſing at Dardan, who filled the empty arie with his complaints. In meane while his beautifull friend came to him, who inſted of giuing comfort for the foile he ſuſtained through her, began to deteſt and deſpiſe him, ſaying. Dardan, hereafter ſeeke thee ſome other friend then me, for while I liue, will I neither loue thee, or any other, then the good Knight who valiantly ouercame thee. How now Lady? quoth he, is this the reward of my honor & life aduentured for you? you then are not the friend to Dardan, but to fortune, who is no ſooner contrary to me, but preſently you are mine enemy. Haue I then eſcaped death by the mercy of my foe, to endure worſſe then death by the cruelty of my friend? Heauen ſuffereth me to liue, and yet you repine at my infortunate life: now ſhal I make knowne to all women by your example, that ingratitude is no leſſe hurtfull to ſuch as exerciſe it, then to any one offended there with. Hereupon he tooke his ſword, and before it could bee imagined what he meant to do, he ſmote her head quite from her ſhoulders: then as a man tranſported with madnes, ſtaring euery where round about him, declared by his angry, countenance, that high and not vulgare, was the enterpriſe he imbraced in ſuch an extreamity.
                  The King ſent his archers to conuay him thence, but ere they came to him, he ſtroke himſelfe ſo violently to the heart, as the bloud ſpouted in the archeis faces, and then he cryed out, ſaying. Now friend art thou reuenged by my vengeance, and thine enemy ſatiſfied with the deſpiſed life thou leſtſt me. So falling downe, he deliuered the laſt figne of his death, where at each one was confounded with maruaile, as well for the nouelty of the caſe, as pitting the very laſt words he breathed: but whethey remembred his paſſed life, wholly addicted to ouer-weening folly, they reputed this vnfortunate end happened to him, not ſo much by accident, as the deuine ordenance, which made them ſorrow no more, but couerted their thoughts to commend the conquerour.
               
               
                  CHAP. XV.
                  
                     How King Liſuart cauſed a Sepulchre to be made for Dardan and his friends with an Epitaph in rememberance of their death: and the honor he did 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Amadis after he was found and kcowne.
                  
                  
                     AFter the vnfortunate end of theſe ill aduiſed Louers, the King in memory of this ſtrange accident, cō
                     manded that in the fielde where they lay dead, ſhould be erected a ſumptious Sepulchre of blacke Marble ſtone, faſhioned like a Romaine Obeliſque, and thereon was engrauen in the Brittaine language an Epitaph, declaring the whole

matter as it happened. And when he had knowledge of the conquerour (as hereafter the manner how is declared,) his name was placed thereon, and foure great Lyons at the foure corners of the ſepulchre, importing the de uiſe which Amadis bare in his Shield.
                  But now the rumour being appeaſed, and they teturned to the Pallace, he called for the ſtranger that won the honor of the day: but after long enquiry, no one could certainly tell what was become of him, albeit certaine comming frō the wood, reported how they ſaw a Knight returne from the field thither-ward, being alone and making great haſt. He that is worthy, ſaide the King, to beare him company, may imagine himſelfe happy enough: for ſeeing he hath ſhewed himſelfe ſo braue a combatant, it is impoſſible but he ſhould be a wiſe and vertuous Knight. And for no leſſe each one reputed him, who vnderſtood the i
                        •
                     uries of Dardan vſed to him, and ſaw how he requited them with gentlenes and courteſie: albeit I make no doubt but he knew right well, that if Dardan had got the better, he would not haue pardoned him. Such as you haue heard were the words of king Liſuart, but Oriana, who day by day expected the arriuall of Amadis, ſeeing the incomparible valour of him that fought againſt Dardan, began to ſuſpect that it was he: for (quoth ſhe to the Damoſell of Denmarke) I am ſure hee would not ſend me a fabulous meſſage, and this is the iuſt time he aſſured you of his cōming. In good ſooth Madame, anſwered the Damoſell, you ſay very true, & which maks me conceiue the better hope, is, that he promiſed me to ride on a white courſer, with the like armes he had when he combated againſt King Abies: and I remember how the knight who ouercame Dardan, had the like horſe. But did you, (quoth Oriana) take no regard of his Armes? Yea mary did I, replied the Damoſell, albeit the cruell ſtrokes receiued thereon, made me hardly perceiue what deuiſe was there figured: yet me thought the ground was a golden field, and the like I told ye he bare in Gaule, with two azured Lions rampant portrayed therein, which being battered all in pieces, he preſently made him ſuch another, aſſuring me to weare no other when hee came into this country, and therefore I will doubt no further but it is he. Sweete friend, ſaid Oriana, if it be he, either he will ſhortly come, or ſend into the Towne, therefore you muſt be watchfull & diligent to heare thereof. Madame, quoth the Damoſell, referre theſe matters to my charge. This conference cauſed Oriana to remain
                        •
                      very penſiue, and breathing forth many bitter ſighs, ſhe ſaide. Ah gratious heauens, what fauour haue you done me if this be Amadis? now ſhall I compaſſe the meanes (better then euer I could) to ſpeake with him.
                  So attended the Princeſſe for tidings from her friend, who returned as he promiſed to the Damoſels Tent, yet was it ſomewhat late ere he came thither, finding them ready to ſit downe to ſupper. After he had vnarmed himſelfe, they told him the misfortune of Dardan and his friend, as alſo the whole circumſtance of their deaths, hereat he was very much abaſhed: then falling to their cheer, they begiled the time with ſundry pleaſant deuiſes, yet Amadis could thinke of nothing elſe, but how he might

make his arriuall knowne to Oriana, wherefore they were no ſooner riſen from the table, but he tooke Gandalin aſide, and thus began. My friend, thou muſt of neceſſity goe to the Court, and labour ſecretly to finde the Damoſel of Denmarke, to whom thou ſhalt report that I am here, attending to heare from her what I ſhall do. Gandalin with all poſſible ſpeed departed, and the better to execute his enterpriſe, he went on foote, when being come to the Pallace, not long had hee ſtayed till he ſaw her he looked for, who was as buſie as he in the ſelfe-ſame cauſe: yet at the firſt ſhe knew him not, but quickly remembred ſhe had ſeene him in Gaule with Amadis, and embracing him, demanded where his Maiſter was. Why Lady? quoth Gandalin, did not you ſee him to day? it was hee that vanquiſhed proud Dardan, and hath with drawne himſelfe to the Forreſt to heare from his miſtreſſe, d
                        •
                     ſ
                        •…
                     g you by me, to let him vnderſtand what he muſt do. Right welcom
                        •
                     , ſaid the Damoſell, is he into this Country, being the man deſired aboue all othes: but my Lady muſt needes ſee thee, therefore follow me. If any one aske who thou art, ſay thou bringeſt letters to Oriana from the Queen of Scots, and likewiſe thou art come to look for Amadis, who is arriued heere as thou haſt heard: by theſe meanes thou mayeſt come to her without heere-after ſuſpition.
                  Thus was Gandalin conducted into the Queenes chamber, where the Princeſſe Oriana was, to whom the Damoſell of Denmarke came, and ſpeaking ſome-what loude, ſayd. Madame, heere is a Squire ſent to you from the Queene of Scots. Oriana weening ſhe had ſaid true, aroſe to wel-come him: but when ſhe knew Gandalin, the vermillion collour aroſe in her cheeks and was ſo ouer-come with ioy, as ſhee knew not well what countenance to vſe: yet Gandalin (as well aduiſed) ſet his knee to the ground ſaying. Madame, the Queene my Miſtreſſe heartily ſaluteth you, as the Lady ſhe loueth and eſteemeth aboue all other of her Kinred, deſiring to heare ſome newes from you, for here ſhe greetes you with all that ſhe doth know.
                  Then gaue he her a Letter, which he had ſeigned, hauing nothing written therein, but the ſuperſcription on the out-ſide: where-upon ſhe went aſide with Gandalin to one of the Windowes, making ſhewe to heare the reſt of his charge, but ſhe demaunded where he had left his maſter? Madame, anſwered Gandalin, he with-drew himſelfe into the Forreſt, ſo ſoone as he had conquered Dardā. Good friend, ſaid Oriana, tell me, by the faith thou beareſt to him, how he fareth? Euen ſo (faire Princeſſe) quoth Gandalin, as the man that is altogether yours, he liueth onely by remembrance of you, and yet ſuffereth ſuch anquiſh in his ſoule as neuer Knight endured: by the onely feare he ſuſteineth leaſt hee ſhould not be yours: miſtruſting his owne deſerts for ſo high a ſeruice. His greateſt hope is in your princely kindneſſe, and knowing him ſo long, as alſowhat he is, that you will not forget him. Wherefore, I beſeech yee Madame, take compaſſion on him, appoint a meeting together, then reſolue him, make me a happie meſſenger, and diſcharge your ſelfe of your deuoire: for hitherto hath hee endured ſuch ſorrow, as no man is able to ſuffer the like. Often haue I ſeene him (thinking on you) ſo

farre beyond himſelfe, as he hath fallen downe dead in (a manner) before mee, ſo that I haue imagined (noting the abundance of his teares) his poore heart to be diſtilled into water, through the conduits of his eyes. If he ſhould die ye offered him great wrong: for he is yours, & eaſily can ye not finde another ſo worthy of you. Nor need you doubt, but if you graunt the houre of lengthning his life, he will ſurpaſſe in Chiualrie the beſt Knight that euer bare Armes: wherein if he be happy by his vertue, yet hath he miſhap to counterpo
                        •
                     ſe the ſame, onely through the paſſions he endureth for you. If now you will not deigne to afford him remedy, much better had it beene for him, that fortune had let him preiſh in the ſea, to the mercy whereof in his cradle coffin he was commited: then after his preſeruation by ſuch ſtrange meanes, to ſuffer him dye by a worſe ſhipwrack then the other. But if his diſmall ſtarres wil not diuert this danger, happy might he haue accounted himſelfe, if he had neuer come to the knowledge of his parents, whoſe griefe likewiſe he greatly increaſeth, to ſee him ſo conſume & dye before his day, being vnable to diuine or vnderſtand the cauſe thereof.
                  
                     Gandalin all this while accompained his words with ſuch teares, and often among breathed foorth ſo many mournefull ſighes, as would haue enforced the very Rocks to rueth: but perceiuing Oriana was touched to the quicke, he began againe in this manner. Ah, gentle Madame, conſent not to the death of ſuch a Seruant of yours, and ſo good a Maiſter of mine: for beſide the common loſſe which will be great, in you alone ſhall conſiſt the fault, more-ouer you ſhall maculate that perfect beautie, with the high condemned ſtaine of crueltie and ingratitude. Here did he knit vp his perſwaſion, attending an anſwere from the Princeſſe, but ſhee was not able to deliuer one word, ſo vehemently was her heart ſurprized and ouer-come: and holding downe her head, let fall wonderfull ſtreames of teares downe her daintie checkes, which enforced her to turne on the other ſide, leaſt ſhe ſhould be diſcried: then when as Gandalin would haue begun againe, ſhe ſtayed him with a piercing ſigh, ſaying. Ah, my friend, I pray thee ſay no more, vnleſſe thou be willing to ſee me die here preſently. Now ſtood ſhee ſilent a prettie while, often wringing and ſtraining her fingers with griefe, then ſetting apart all diſſimulation, ſhe ſoftly thus ſpake. The aſſurance thou giueſt me of thy maſters loue, is highly pleaſing and agreeable to me: but the paſſion thou ſayeſt he endureth, tormenteth me to the very death, ſo that I feele both his paine & mine owne. Ah God, let me not be the occaſion of death, to a man ſo high and precious of deſert as hee is, rather let me worke mine owne death, for if he die, I may not liue one houre. Thou art come to tell me his painefull trauaile, & now thou mayeſt goe to let him vnderſtand mine, which if thou kneweſt ſo wel as thou doeſt thy maiſters, inſtead of blaming me with crueltie, thou wouldſt rather iudge me vnfortunate, and if I vſe any crueltie, it is againſt my ſelfe, whom I haue depriued of reſt, pleaſure, and well-neere life it ſelfe. The leſſe ſuccour can I giue to mine owne deſtreſſe, becauſe (as it often happeneth

to our ſects, when thinking to draw neere ſuch as we deſire, we are furtheſt off, and ſeeking for a harbour of contentment, glaunce into a place of torment and vexation: ſo falleth it out with 
                        •
                     ee by thy maiſter, whom fortune hath euer kept mee furtheſt from, but God knowes my good wil hath alway beene with him: and gladly would I prouide for his griefs and mine owne, if I were able to compaſſe the meanes.
                  Doe then, Madame, what you may, anſwered Gandalin, if you loue him (as I am ſure he doth you) and begin at this inſtant to let him know how hee ſhall behaue him-ſelfe in this Countrey. Oriana then ſhewed him a Garden, which was vnder the window where they talked, ſaying. Returne to thy maſter, and tell him, that this night he muſt ſecertly come to the place thou ſe
                        •
                     ſt, & remember this withall, how the chamber (vnder where we ſtand) is the ſame that Mabila and Hodge in, and there is a croſſe barred window neere the ground, where-through we may eaſily diſcerne ech other, and talk together: for his Cozin is acquainted with mine affaires, nor is it neceſſarie they ſhould bee concealed from her. Then taking a coſtly Ring off her finger, ſhee thus proceeded. Deliuer him this token from mee, as the onely Iewell I moſt eſteem, and ere thou goeſt thou ſhalt ſee the Princeſſe Mabila, who is ſo wiſe and diſcreet, as ſhe will eaſily vnderſtand thee: yet thou muſt ſay ſome-what loud to her, that thou haſt brought her tydings from her mother. Here-upon Oriana called her to talke with the Squire, whom the Queene of Scots (her mother) had ſent to her: but when ſhe ſaw it was Gandalin, ſhe then ſuſpected how matters went: wherefore Oriana went to the Queene, leauing them in deepe talke together. In meane while the Queene demaunded of her daughter, if the Gentleman were to returne ſhortly, or no: For, quoth ſhe, I would ſend a token to the Queene of Scots by him. Madame, anſwered Oriana, the chiefe cauſe of his comming into this Countrey, was to ſeeke for the good Knight Amadis, Son to the King of Gaule, of whom you haue heard ſuch famous report. And where is he? ſaid the Queen. The Squi
                        •
                     e ſaith, quoth Oriana, it is more then ten moneths ſince hee heard that he was heere, and now he maruaileth to miſſe of him in this Court. Now truſt me, anſwered the Queene, right glad would I be, to ſee ſo good a Knight in the Kings company, for it would be a great comfort to him many wayes hauing to deale with ſo many Countres: wherefore I aſſure ye, if he doe come hither, hee ſhall finde here ſuch honourable entertainment, as he ſhal haue no cauſe to depart in haſte. Of his Proweſſe Madame, replyed Oriana, I know little, but what common bruite hath blazed abroad: but heereof I am certaine, how hee was one of the moſt braue yong Gentle-men that euer I ſaw, when in the King of Scots Court he ſerued Mabila and me. All this while Mabila continued with Gandalin, enquiring if his maſter were as yet arriued. Yea Madame, anſwered Gandalin, the ſame was he that vanquiſhed Dardan, and expreſſe charge hee gaue me to ſalue you on his behalfe. The name of Heauen be for euer prayſed, quoth ſhee, hauing preſerued our Kinſ-man from ſuch exceeding danger, and now ſent him hither ſo honourably. Ah Madam,

ſaid Gandalin, hee were happy indeed, if the force of loue made him not in worſe caſe then dead: for Gods ſake therefore doe you aſſiſt him, being thus fully perſwaded, that if he finde no eaſe to cure his afflictions, you ſhall looſe the beſt Knight in the world, and the vpholder of your fathers fame. He may be well aſſured, anſwered Mabila, how hee cannot with greater deſire employ mee, then I haue to doe him pleaſure: and will him not to faile in what the Princeſſe hath commanded him: as for thy ſelfe, being iudged to come from the Queene, my mother, thou mayeſt come and ſpeak with vs at al times as need ſhall require.
                  
                     Gandalin tooke his leaue for that time, returning toward Amadis, who attended the anſwere of life or death, and into ſuch debilitie was he brought by theſe extreams as hee had ſcant force enough to ſupport himſelfe: for the ſhort ſight hee had of his Ladie at the Combate, encreaſed ſuch a deſire in him to ſee her at more libertie, as euery houre ſeemed to him longer then a yeare. When hee ſaw that Gandalin was returned, in hope of happy newes, hee came and embraced him, not daring to demaund any thing of him, fearing leaſt matters ſhould not fall out to his contentation: but Gandalin with a cheerfull coūtenance, told him that he brought no fadde tydings, and ruſhing into the matter at firſt, ſaid. My Lord, God make yee as conſtant, as you haue cauſe to be conteut, for if you haue that vertue, you are the moſt happy and accompliſhed Knight in the world. Ouer-whelmed with ioy, Amadis caught him in his armes, demaunding what he had done, ſeene, and heard? I haue ſeene and heard, anſwered Gandalin the felicities of Paradiſe, and know that they are prouided for you, if you hinder it not your ſelf. Ah Gandalin, quoth Amadis, ieſt not with me, but tell me the very trueth. Then Gandalin declared word by word, how euery thing happened, firſt of the counterfeit Letter, and next the appointed meeting at the window: and (by the way) reported ſome part of his owne ſpeeches, moouing a change of conntenance in Oriana, then her anſwere, euen to the concluſion before rehearſed: likewiſe how he talked with Mabila, and how willing ſhe was to aſſiſt him with her vttermoſt habilitie. Amadis was ſo fed with content by theſe reports, that hee made him rehearſe one thing ten times, and I cannot tell which of them was moſt affectionate: either Gandalin in reporting, or Amadis in hearing, for both the one and the other ſeemed inſatiable, in the end Amadis thus ſpake.
                  My faithfull Companion, I thought my ſelf altogether indebted to thy Father, who ſaued me from the daunger of drowning in the Sea, but I confeſſe, that duty belongs more neceſſarily to thee: becauſe (by thy diligence and diſcretion) thou haſt giuen me a better life then he preferued. But tell me now, didſt thou take good marke of the place to which ſhe commuanded me? Aſſure your ſelfe thereof, quoth Gandalin. for ſhe her ſelf ſhewed it me. Ah God, ſayd Amadis, how ſhall I deſerue the great good ſhe doth for me? Away from me now all ſorrowe and complaining. Yet this is not all my Lord, quoth Gandalin, See here a token ſhe hath ſent ye, as a teſtimonie of her honourable loue

to you: ſo he gaue him the Ring which came from Oriana, and after he had long beheld it, kiſſing it a thouſand times, put it on his finger, ſaying. Faire Ring, that haſt beene ſo happy, as to be caried and accounted deere by the moſt accompliſhed creature in the world, albeit thou be now in a place of much inferiour honor yet haſt thou not changed thy miſtreſſe, for both thou and 
                        •…
                     re hers, and ſhe doth compaſſe my heart hith greater force, thē thou canſt poſſibly binde in my finger. Let vs leaue this talk, anſwered Gandalin, and returne to the Damoſels, who tarry for vs in the Tents but you muſt diſſemble conningly, for if they ſee you altered from your wonted mellanchollie. it may be ſome hinderance to your determination.
                  So they brake off cōmunication, and went into the Pauillion, where Amadis, (notwithſtanding) Gandalins councell) could not but ſhew himſelfe pleaſantly diſpoſed, whereat the Damoſels were verie glad, becauſe ſuch behauiour, better beſeemed him then his former penſiuenes.
                  When the houre of reſt was come, each one went to his accuſttomed lodging, and ſoone after Amadis ſeeing the time commodious for his enterpriſe, aroſe and found Gandalin, who had already prepared for their iourney: wherefore being armed, they mounted on horſe-backe, taking the moſt conuenient way for their purpoſe to the Towne. When they came to the Garden, which Oriana had before ſhewed Gandalin, they alighted, and tied their horſſes at a tuft of trees nere adioyning, afterward they went through a hole which a water-courſe had made in the Garden wall, and approched the window where Oriana lay: faire and ſoftly did Amadis knock thereon with his finger, ſhe not yet ſleeping who expected his comming, and when ſhe heard the louing ſignall of her friend, ſhe awaked Mabila, ſaying Sweete ſiſter, I thinke your coſin knocketh at the window. My coſin? anſwered Mabila, it may be ſo, but you haue greater intreſt in him then I, or all other of his linage together. Mabila preſently aroſe, and lighted a waxe taper which ſhe had hid for the nonce, when Oriana likewiſe was got out of bed, they came together and opened the caſement, where they found Amadis no more attending then hec was attended. If they were then well pleaſed, it were folly to inquire, for all the contentments in the world, might not be compared to the ioy of ſeeing each other. And without queſtion, they had two inducing reaſons thereto, for beſide the nouriſhment they receiued together in their yonger yeeres, and their firſt amity, continued by the rememberance and good opinion they had of each other: their beauty and perfections were ſo correſpondent, as if they had neuer ſeene one another till that very inſtant, yet had they cauſe enough to loue together. Oriana had on ſuch braue attire beſeeming the night, as ſet the heart of her loue on fire, for vnder a fine & dainty white frontlet, appeared the rareſt golden treſſes of haire that euer nature made, and about her ſhoulders ſhe had a mantle of figured cloth of gold, imbroidered all ouer with rich and coſtly flowerts, as it might beſeeme the greateſt Maieſtie in the world. And for her ſelfe, a thing more faire was impoſſible to be found, the inward conceite of her preſent comfort, decked

her face with ſuch a heauenly beauty, as it ſeemed that nature in pride of her art, made this piece to excell all other in perfection. I will leaue you then to conſider on the iudgement of Amadis, who (when ſhe was nothing ſo glorious in fairenes) thought her worthy the loue of the beſt Knight in the world: now if he ſtood mute, blame him not, hauing the only iewell of his heart before him, and therefore ſhe to breake off this ſilence, firſt ſpake in this manner. My Lord, if I haue giuen you the liberty (contrary to my duty and cuſtome) to ſee me in this place at an houre ſo vnfitting you muſt commit the offence to the ſecurity, which our former nurturing together loyally promiſed, and likewiſe to the good opinion of your great vertues ſi
                        •
                     ce that time encreaſed: which hath conquered no leſſe fauour in me, then honor and renowne in all other places. Amadis to auoide further ſilence, thought it better to let his ſpeeches paſſe at aduenture, then (by holding his peace) to be reputed vnworthy this happines, or not ſo feruently touched with loue as ſhe was, to exclude all which doubts, he thus replied. Madame, I account my ſelfe not ſo much fauoured by fortune in any thing elſe, as honored at my firſt entrance into your ſeruice, euen the very higheſt tipe of grace ſhe could affoord me: nor do I feele my ſelfe ſo beholding to my vertues, as I reſt double bound to thē that report ſo wel of me. But when both theſe benefits ſhall be excluded, yet is my loue and ſeruice to you ſo affectionate, as they can deſerue no leſſe then this ſecret gentlenes: and whē you ſhall allow me more ample courteſie, it may command a ſtricter bond of duty, but not affection, for that is already ſo ſubſtantially grounded, that the vttermoſt good you can do me, is neither able to augment it, or the ſharpeſt vnkindnes diminiſh it. I know not whether it be ſeemely for a man, to cō
                     feſſe the extremities he hath infinite times endured by this paſſion, the very leaſt griefe I receiued, hath beene the loſſe of reſt, and baniſhment of ſleepe frō mine eyes: and yet to afflict me with greater torment, my ſpirit hath ſeene in a dreame what it vnceſſantly deſired. How many times hath it happened to me, in thinking on you to be ſo cōfounded, that ſuch as haue ſeene me, reputed me not only depriued of common ſince, but euen of very life it ſelfe? What moman, what child well beaten, hath euer powred forth ſo many teares, as I poore Knight haue done? yea my very chiefeſt enterpriſes huae I ſprinckled withall for your ſake: not as feeling my ſelfe a happy ſubiect in loue, but rather too little merit of my ſelfe, and much leſſe hope. This fauour proceeding frō you in deigning to heare me, is greater then euer I durſt hope for, and ſo farre doth it ſurmount my paſſions, as I cannot expreſſe the leaſt part of my ioy: my tongue likewiſe ſeemeth as vnprofitable & ignorant of his office, hauing bin ſo long from ſeruing me to you. But aboue all, this impuiſſance in ſpeech, ſhall on my behalfe teſtifie to you, what all the words in the world cannot deliuer with ſufficient truth: for as all other beauty in cōpariſon of yours is nothing, ſo before mine affection, al the other habilities of my ſoule vaniſh away, and become of no reckoning Will you thē (good madame) with your courteſie ſupply my inſufficiencie, and (with pittie) giue me both life

and my ſelfe: and conſerue that which elſe cannot be, vnleſſe it be yours onely. Theſe words vttered Amadis with ſuch interruption of ſighes and teares, as witneſſed he had no intent of feigning, but rather knew how to ſuffer then ſpeake: wherewith Oriana moued to compaſſion, thus anſwered. I make no doubt (deere friend) but you loue me in reſpect of the pains you haue taken for me, as alſo by what you haue now tolde me: and though I ſhould haue no ſigne thereof by ſpeech or ought elſe, yet am I 
                        •…
                     ent to beleeue, becauſe my heart hath no other de
                        •…
                     e, but heerein concerneth greateſt contentment. And yet the torment I ſee you in with impacience, troubleth my quiet, for you being aſſured by ſufficient proues, and eſpecially this, that I loue ye: me thinks you ſhould haue no further cauſe of ſo ſeuere affliction, but rather ought to temper your paines, in that (through the vnion of our ſpirits) I feele no leſſe then you do your ſelfe. If you will not appeaſe them for your owne ſake, I pray ye let it be done for mine, the rather, that we may the oftner meete (if you pleaſe) publiquely: when ſuch ſadnes will but diſcouer, what wee moſt willingly would keepe vnknowne, whereby may ariſe two great inconueniences, and be a meane to hinder the thing we chiefeſt deſire Sweete Lady anſwered Amadis, I haue ſuch felicitie in ſeeing and hearing you, as wanting ſtrength enough to vnder-prop the burden of ſo eſpeciall contentation I am faine to fall downe vnder it, experimenting no leſſe the paine of not accuſtomed pleaſure, then the other beſide of continuall p
                        •…
                     ſiuenes, which makes me wonder that I cannot dye heere in this ſolace. If then I haue offended you by this tranſportation, pardon it in your owne ſelfe, who brought me to this happy miſ-fortune, and likewiſe gaue me this hurtfull medicine: ſuffer me then yet longer to vſe it, that in the aſſurance of your grace, I may by little and little learne to ſupport it, and attaine the knowledge of liuing content: excuſing my apprenti-ſhood in this felicity, being yet ſcant skilfull enough how to vſe it. Loue is ſickneſſe, and be it fauourable or contrary, it cannot be without paſſion, working the like affect in other, which you reproue in me. Well haue you ſaid my friend, anſwered Oriana, how you are as yet but an Apprentiſe: and ſo you ſhew very well by your words, prouing that loue cannot be without paſſion. I hope to ſee the time, when you (attaining greater and more perfect knowledge therein, then yet you haue) ſhall be in higher tranquility of minde, which (it may be) you thinke cannot be had in this world. Nor ſhall it not happen to you by admiration of that which now you moſt loue, and is likewiſe of farre more leſſe account: but by the fruition of the thing wherein felicity conſiſteth, the knowledge whereof vniteth and lifteth the ſpirits ſo high as heauen. And albeit I am yet ſo yong in yeeres and diſcretion, as I cannot be exempt from the ill you complaine on: yet am I not vnprouided of deſire to haſten the time, when we ſhall liue together merry & contented. Ah Madame, ſaid Amadis, the hope of that happy day, ſhall make mee paſſe this mournfull life in patience, ſupporting for your honor my inward paines ſo couertly as I can, & bearing the outward with what courage poſſible I may: but I beſeech

ye do me the fauour, as to tell mee when it will be. Well perceiued Oriana, that he had not thorowly vnderſtood her meaning, wherefore in ſmiling ſhe ſaid. It is already begun, but the dazling of your eyes will not let you ſee it. Heere-with Amadis became very penſiue, holding his eyes ſtedfaſtly fixed on her, and ſhe to change his ſadnes, tooke 
                        〈◊〉
                      by the hand thorow the window: which Amadis kiſſed a thouſand times, without any word paſſing betweene them, and Mabila 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      ſhe came to them ſaying. 
                        〈◊〉
                      you forgot your ſelues. Amadis lifting vp his head, courteouſly ſaluted her, ſhe doing the like to him, and after ſundry ſpeeches of wellcome, as alſo how long they deſired to ſee him: Mabila demāded, what length of time he intended to ſtay in the Court. So long as it ſhall pleaſe Madame Oriana, anſwered Amadis. It muſt be th
                        ••
                      continually, quoth Oriana, and you ſhall grant it if the King requeſt it. Sweete Madame, anſwered Amadis, if it pleaſe his Maieſtie ſo much to honor me, I will obey both him and you: yet will I diſſemble ſtrangnes a while. All the better, replied Mabila, and in the meane time I pray ye viſit vs often. Longer they would haue continued in talke, but Gandalin gaue them warning how the day appeared, wherefore he ſaid to Amadis. My Lord, me thinkes you are importunate, but then you muſt needs accuſe the day. Amadis gaue no eare to him, for he proceeded on ſtill with his deuiſe: but Oriana perceiuing Gandalin ſaid 
                        〈◊〉
                     , thus ſpake to Amadis. Now goe my Lord if you pleaſe, for it is 
                        〈◊〉
                      & forget not your promiſe. Then taking her by the hand, and kiſſing it, he went to horſe-backe, returning to the wood where he left the Damoſels, who had by entreaty earneſtly perſwaded him, to goe deliuer their coſin that the King held captiue, vntill ſuch time ſhee preſented her Champion, as you haue heard: wherefore after they had 
                        •
                     eſted till morning, they returned to the Towne, in the greateſt fauour and expectation of the world.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     How Amadis made himſelfe knowne to King Liſuart, as alſo the Princes and Lords of his Court, of whom he was honorably receiued and feaſted.
                  
                  
                     EArely the next morning, Amadis armed himſelfe, and mounting on horſe backe, rode preſently to the Towne accompanied with the two 
                        〈◊〉
                     : where being arriued, they 
                        •…
                     ght him to their coſins lodging, when the good Lady knowing her worthy 
                        •…
                     pion, falling on her knees before him, ſayd. My Lord, all the goods I haue you gaue me, for of you I hold them and no other, diſpoſe therefore of them as you pleaſe▪ 
                     
                        •
                     ut Amadis brake her off in this maner. Come Lady, let vs goe before the King, to the end he may acquit you, and I returne where vrgent affaires call me: ſo taking off his Helmet, hee rode on to the Pallace with the three Ladyes. The people knowing

him to be the man that ouer came Dardan made ſuch thronging in the ſtreetes to ſee him, as the king was giuen to vnderſtand thereof: and he reioycing at his comming, honored him ſo much, as he came to meete and receiue him on the way, thus ſpeaking to him. Worthy knight, hither are you ſo wel-come, as may be deuiſed, becauſe we haue beene very deſirous to ſee you. Amadis noting this gracious entertainment, ſetting his knee to the ground, thus anſwered. The God of Heauen giue your Maieſtie a long and happie life: then the king taking him by the hand, cauſed him to ariſe, ſaying. Right glad am I to haue knowledge of you, being a knight of ſo excellent deſeruing: theſe wordes enforced Amadis to bluſh, yet he replyed in this manner. My Lord, to deſire the Ladyes diſcharge whom you cauſed to be detained, I am bold to come before your Highneſſe: and ſeeing ſhe hath anſwered the Law according to your appointment, (hereafter) I hope ſhe may enioy her libertie: yet till this preſent, ſhe knew not who maintained her quarrell againſt Dardan.
                  
                  While the King & Amadis thus conferred together, a great number of people gathered about thē; ſome commending his beautie, other his gallant youth, and all in generall his famous Chiualrie: in that hee being ſo young, had the power to vanquiſh Dardan, who was redoubted & feared through all Brittaine. By this time, ſundry ſpeeches paſt betweene him and the King, where-among he diſſembled his ſpeedie departure, to prouoke a deſire in him to ſtay him, and thus ſpake Amadis.
                  
                  Dread Lord, ſeeing the Ladie is free, I deſire leaue for my returne againe: but if in ought I may doe your Maieſtie any ſeruice, I am the man readie to bee commaunded: and you the Prince whom moſt I deſire to honour. Good Friend, quoth the King, your departure muſt not be ſo ſoone, except you delight to diſpleaſe me. God forbid, anſwered Amadis, in reſpect my endeauour is altogether to obey you. Doe you thinke, ſayd the King, it is any obedience, if I may not entreat a longer ſtay? In ſooth, my Lord, quoth Amadis, you may and ſhall command, for in greater matters then this I will not offend ye. Goe then and vn-arme you, replyed the King; and ſpeaking theſe wordes, him-ſelfe tooke him by the hand conducting him to a ſumptuous chamber, where he left him to take ſome refection, with Arban King of Norgalles, and the Duke of Gloceſter, whom he commanded to keepe him companie: for King Liſuart was a Prince, that eſpecially fauoured and honoured ſtrange Knights. Hauing left Amadis thus worthily accompained, he went to the Queene, and tolde her in what manner hee had ſtayed the good Knight who ouercame Dardan. But doe yee (my Lord, quoth ſhe) know his name? No verily, anſwered the King, for in reſpect of the promiſe I made him I durſt not demaund that queſtion of him. It may be, ſayd the Queen, he is the Sonne to King Perion of Gaule. I would it might fall out ſo well, anſwered the King. Doe you know, quoth the Queene, who may put vs out of this doubt? euen the Squire that talked with Mabila, who came to ſearch him in your Court, and ſaid, how hee was aduertiſed of his arriuall in this Countrey long before. Immediately the King cauſed Gandalin to

be called, and without declaring any thing to him, thus ſpake: Follow me, for I muſt ſhew a Knight to thee, that I may bee reſolued if thou know him or no. Gandalin attended on the King, entring the chamber where Amadis was, and Gandalin viewing him very earneſtly, feigned to haue ſeene him long time ſince, then ſetting his knee to the ground, ſayd. Ah my Lord, great trauaile haue I endured to finde you, ſince I departed from the Scottiſh Court. Gandalin, my good friend, right heartily art thou will-come to mee, what newes doeſt thou bring? None but good, my Lord, anſwered Gandalin, all your noble Friendes are in perfect health, commending them-ſelues to your Excellencie, but hence-forth Sir, you muſt conceale your ſelfe no longer: then turning to the King 
                        •
                     e thus proceeded. Mightie King, hee that hath beene ſo long time vnknown, is this braue Prince, the famous Amadis, Sonne to the inuincible king Perion of Gaule: and then came his Fathet to vnderſtand ſo much, when he ſlewe in combate the puiſſant King Abies of Ireland, by meanes whereof he recouered his Realme which was well-neere loſt. By theſe deuiſes was Amadis diſcoured, and better wel-commed then before: for till thē he was not knowne, but through his famous deedes, the renowne whereof was euery-where blazed abroad, and now was hee ſo well honoured for his vertue as his Nobleneſſe required. So ſpent they the whole day in honourable Feaſting, vntill ſuch time as each one with-drew him-ſelfe; when king Liſuart commanded the King of Norgalles, that he ſhould lodge in Amadis chamber: afterward when they were alone, to ſound his minde, & vnderſtand by all meanes poſſible, if he would conſent to remaine in his ſeruice. Thus leauing them together, hee returned to the Queene, and to her thus ſpake. Madame, hardly ſhall I cauſe Amadis to ſtay (as mine) nor can I tell which way to compaſſe it, albeit, I neuer had greater deſire to any Gentle-man of long time, for the high account is helde of him, would cauſe mee to bee much more feared and redoubted. My Lord, quoth the Queene, graunt him any thing he ſhall demaund, and doe your ſelfe preſent him what you imagine will beſt pleaſe him. Hee requeſteth nothing of me, replyed the king, for if he did, I would conſent thereto more willingly then he could deſire. Me thinkes it were good, ſayd the Queene, to entreat him firſt, by ſome other of our Court, & if they cannot preuaile, will him to come ſee mee, your daughter, and our Cozin Mabila: they likewiſe ſhall ſolicite the matter, for they knew him when hee ſerued them as a Squire. Then ſhall we let him vnderſtand, how all the Knights here are yours, and none but thinks him-ſelfe honoured thereby: him will we deſire to be one of the Company, that you may enioy his ſeruice when need ſhall require. This will be a good meane, anſwered the king to procure his ſtay, and if he will not be wonne by you, we may well iudge him of leſſe ciuility thē Chiualry. Now becauſe it waxed ſome-what late, the King bade his Queene good-night, & went to his Chamber. On the other ſide, the king of Norgalles perſwaded his new-come gueſt, that he would abide in the Court of king Liſuart: but Amadis could ſo cunningly diſſemble,

that he altogether diſguiſed the chiefe point of his deſire, and might not by all theſe entreaties be wonne. When he perceiued he laboured in vaine, on the Morrow-morning hee brought him to the king, of whom Amadis made offer to take his leaue: But the king anſwered him in this manner. My good friend, you ſhould haue done me pleaſure not to depart ſo ſoone, yet can I not conſtraine ye to tarrie againſt your will, but my Queene would gladly ſee you before your departure. Nor will I goe my Lord, anſwered Amadis, before I haue done my dutie to her: where-upon taking him by the hand, he brought him into her Chamber, and thus ſpake to her. See heere, Madam, king Perions Sonne of Gaule, who is come to ſalute you before his departure. In ſooth my Lord, anſwered the Queene, he doth mee great honour, and he is very heartily wel-come hither.
                  Then Amadis ſtepping to her, fell on his knee to kiſſe her hand, but ſhe cauſed him to riſe and ſit downe by her: when the king perceiuing they would enter into further talke, with drew himſelfe to diſcourſe with his knights, while they conferred together. In mean while the Queene courteouſly entertained Amadis, but the other Ladies and Gentle-women, who had heard ſuch fame of his beautie and excellent perferfections, beganne to eye him very diligently, maruailing that Nature had ſo enriched him, with the onely thing they moſt deſired. Now knew Amadis by their countenances what iudgement they held of him, yet durſt he not turne his head aſide, fearing leaſt ſeeing his Oriana, by ſome ſudden mutation, hee might reueale what carefully he couetted to hide. And as he continued in this perplexitie, the Princeſſe Mabila came and did him reuerence, where-upon the Queene (the better to compaſſe her intent) called her daughter, who diſſembled as if ſhe ſcant knew him, and thus ſhee ſpake to her. Faire daughter, remember you not the ſonne of king Perion of Gaule, who ſerued you well while he was your Squire, and yet may doe (if it pleaſe him) now he is a Knight? in ſoothe, you muſt al aſſiſt me in deſiring him to grant mee one requeſt. And know ye what it is? quoth ſhe to Amadis, the king earneſtly entreateth you to remaine in his Court, and yet as I vnderſtand, you haue no wil to afford him ſo ſmall a fauor. We ſhal ſee anon, if Ladies hold greater Priuiledge in knights, then men doe, therefore wee all ioyne together in one ſuite, that you would be knight to my daughter and my ſelf, & likewiſe to them whom you ſee in this faire cōpanie. And if you will doe ſo much for vs, you ſhall deliuer vs from ſeeking ſupport in any other, who happily cannot be ſo agreeable to vs: for wel we know if you be our knight, we ſhall ſurpaſſe all them that attend on the king. The Ladyes were before aduertiſed, what they ſhould doe in this caſe, wherefore they flocked about him altogether, and with ſignes of earneſt Supplication, confirmed the Queenes requeſt: eſpecially Oriana, who gaue him a ſigne that he ſhould conſent, but very wiſely diſſembled it, although he had no other deſire in the world: wherefore the Queene ſeeing him ſo ſlow in anſwering, as if ſhe would haue preſſed him thereto, ſaid. Well, Sir Amadis, wha
                        ••
                      ſhall we be denyed? Madame, replied

                     Amadis, what is he that dare do otherwiſe, then grant your will and theſe Ladyes preſent, ſeeing you are the moſt honorable Queen of the world, and they likewiſe deſerue the higheſt point of ſeruice? therefore madame, by your commandement and the Princeſſe Oriana, as alſo theſe other Ladyes who are loth to be denied, I am content to tarry with you: yet vnder this condition, that I will doe nothing but for you onely, and if I accōpliſh any ſeruice for the King, it ſhall be yours and none of his. Then as our Champion, anſwered the Queene, all we accept you: & theſe glad tidings ſhe ſoone ſent to the King, who was ſo highly pleaſed therewith, that he commanded the King of Norwales to goe and beare him company, and himſelfe for ioy went preſently to him, whē taking him in his armes, he ſayd. Gentle Knight, right glad am I of your conſent to the Queene, and for my part be you well aſſured, that my deſire is to entreat you according to your deſerts. Amadis on his knee humble thanked him, albeit he only ſtaied by the commandement of Oriana, and no ſuch other matter as he feigned to the Queene.
                  For this time the author leaueth Amadis, returning where he left the Prince Galaor, who being departed from the Duke of Bryſtoyaes Caſtle, where the villainous Dwarffe vnhappily diſcouered him: all that day he wandred in the Forreſt of Arinida, not meeting any one to direct him a more ready way, yet toward euening, he ſaw a Squire come toward him, mounted on a right good Courſer. Now had Galaor receiued a certaine wound, by one of the three Knights that aſſailed him as you haue heard, which by reaſon of dallying with his new friend the night paſt, began to feſter and ranckle very much, and feeling himſelfe not halfe currant, he ſaid to the Squire. My friend, knoweſt thou where I may finde cure for a ſmall wound I haue? What if I do? anſwered the Squire, yet will I not company any ſuch coward as thou art, becauſe it were to my ſhame and diſcredit if I ſhould. Enough of that, ſaid Galaor, tell mee where I may finde helpe for my wound? Rather, quoth the Squire, would I ſeeke one to giue thee another. Shew me the way, anſwered Galaor, and I will aduenture what thou feareſt me withall. I may chuſe, ſaid the Squire, except I liſt. Nay thou ſhalt do it, quoth Galaor, by friendſhip or force. By force, replied the Squire, thinkeſt thou I will do any thing for ſo bad and falſe a Knight as thou art? Whē 
                     Galaor heard him ſpeake ſo imperiouſly, he drew his ſword, making ſhew as if he would ſmite off his head, ſaying. Villaine thou ſhalt conduct me, elſe will I ſend thy ſoule to all the Deuils. The Squire being affraid, thus anſwered. Seeing thou enforceſt me, I will bring thee to a place where thy folly ſhall be chaſtiſed, and my outrage reuenged. Heere-with he rode before, leauing the right way, Galaor following ſome diſtance behinde him, and by time they had ridden the length of a mile, they came to a Fortreſſe ſeated in a pleaſant vally, brauely enuirōed about with trees: the Squire thē pointing him to the place, ſaid. Now mayſt thou let me goe, for here I hope will be reuenged the iniury thou haſt done me. Go thy way to al the Deuils, replied Galaor, for I haue enough of thy company. Scant wilt thou like my conducting, ſaid the Squire,

before thou departeſt from this caſtell: wherewith he turned brible and away, but Galaor followed the path that guided to the Caſtle, which in his iudgement was but newly edified, and being come to the gate, he ſaw within a Knight armed mounted on horſebacke, attended on by fiue h
                        •
                     l
                        ••
                     rders, prouided to forbid e
                        •
                     trance into the Caſtle who comming to him, dema
                        •
                     ded if he were the man that abuſed th
                        •••
                      S
                        ••
                     ire I know not, anſwered 
                        〈◊〉
                      whether he be your S
                        •…
                      I come by 
                        〈…〉
                      that eue
                        •
                      I know 
                        •…
                     d the Knight of 
                        〈…〉
                     : but what would you h
                        •
                     u
                        •
                      in this place. Sir, quoth Galaor, I am 
                        •
                     ore wounded, and ſeeke for one to giue me helpe. Enter then, ſaid the Knight. Galaor rode in, but preſently the Knight & his ſouldiers very fiercely aſſailed him, 
                        ••
                     t the firſt that came before h
                        •…
                     , 
                        •…
                     king to ſtrike at his head with 
                        〈…〉
                     , was folowed ſo nee
                        •
                     , as Gal
                           •••
                        
                      ſnatched his weapon out of his hand, giuing the Knight ſuch a wound therewith, that he fell down dead. Then entring among the other, he gaue them ſo many rough and ſharpe charges, as in the end three of them were ſl
                        •
                     ne outright, the other two ſted ſo faſt as they could 
                        •…
                     to the Caſtle▪ and Galaor would haue purſued them, but that his Squire cryed to him. My Lord take your Armes, for within mee thinkes I heare a great 
                        •…
                     our of people, my ſelfe will take this hatchet to aſſiſt if ye ſtand in need: and although I am vnworthy the order of Chiualry, yet will I defend my Lord to my vttermoſt ha
                     
                        •…
                      he downe the hat
                     
                        •…
                     alberd and a 
                        〈◊〉
                      belonging to one of them that were ſlaine. Aſſure thy ſelfe, anſwered Galaor, ſo ſoone as I finde him that gaue me Knight-hood, thou ſhalt for thy forwardnes likewiſe haue thine. So paſſing further, they ſaw two other armed Knights come forth, and ten Soulders with them, who were brought out at the gate by the other that fled away. Now was the Squire that conducted Galaor to this Caſtle, ſtanding ſhewing himſelfe at one of the caſements, and he cryed aloude to this freſh ſupply. Kill him, kill him, but ſaue his horſe to do me ſeruice. Galaor looking vp, preſently knew him, at whoſe words his heart was ſo enraged, that he fiercely ran to meete the new 
                        •
                     ſſ
                        •…
                     lants in which encounter their Launces brake, eſpecially Galaor on him that gaue the firſt charge, as he made him ſure enough from euer bearing armes afterward. The ſetting hand to ſword aduanced himſelfe to the other, deliuering him ſo ſound a greeting, that he tumbled from his horſe with his heeles vpward: and turning to the halberders on foot, he ſaw his Squire had diſpatched two of them, wherefore to harten him the more, he thus cried to him. My friend thou haſt begun very well, not one of the reſt ſhall eſcape vs, becauſe ſuch villaines are vnworthy to 
                        •
                     ue. Whē the Squire that was in the windowe ſaw this bloudy conflict, he haſtely ranne vp a ladder into a high Tower, crying out ſo loud as he could in this manner. My Lord arme your ſelfe vnleſſe you meane to be ſl
                        •
                     ine. By chance Galaor vnderſtood him, whereupon he ſtepped aſide to behold what ſhould enſue, whē preſently he ſaw a Knight come forth armed, and one bringing a horſe for him ready to mount: but Galaor ſtepping betweene, laid hand on

the bridle, giuing theſe ſpeeches to the Knight. Another time Sir, learne to mount your horſe ſooner, for I haue occaſiō to vſe this horſe, & mean to keep him til you can get him from me. Greatly aſtonied was the knight when he heard him, becauſe all this while he had not ſeen him, whrefore he returend this anſwer. Are you he that haue ſlaine my two Nephewes, & the other heere in the Caſtle? I know not who you aske for, replied Galaor, but this I can aſſure ye how I found here the moſt diſloyall & bad minded people, that euer I delt withal. I tel thee, ſaid the Knight, they whō thou haſt ſlaine were better then thou art, & deerely ſhalt thou pay for thy boldenes. Heerewith they began a fierce and cruell combate on foot, for the Knight of the Caſtle was a man of great valour, and ſuch as had ſeene this dangerous fight, would haue maruailed that they could endure halfe ſo many blows. Yet in the end, the Knight found himſelfe too weake for Galaor, wherefore he thought to ſaue him-ſelfe by flight: but he was followed ſo neere, as hauing entred a porch, he was conſtrained to leap out at a window, and falling on a great heape of ſtones, with weight of his armour brake his neck. When Galaor ſaw his deſparate end, hee returned backe curſing the Caſtle & the wicked inhabitants, and paſſing by a chamber, he heard a very dol
                        •
                     full voice crying. Ah my Lord, leaue me not to ſuffer any more. Galaor ſtepping neere, ſaid. Open the dore then. Ah Sir, I cannot, anſwered the voice, for I am tied with a ſtrong chaine. By theſe words, Galaor knew well it was ſome priſoner, wherefore he ranne againſt the dore with his foote ſo ſtrongly, that he made it flye from off the hindges, & entring, beheld a faire Damoſell tied by the neck with a great chaine, who thus ſpake to Galaor. Alas my Lord, what is become of the maiſter of this Caſtle and his company? They be all dead, quoth he, for comming hither to ſeeke cure for a wound I receiued in fight, they cauſed me to enter, and afterward ſet vpon me: but by the helpe of God I haue ſo well defended my ſelfe, as they ſhall neuer doe more harme to any liuing body. Heauen be praiſed, anſwered the Damoſell, for your happy ſucceſſe, and leaue me not in this miſery, for being deliuered, right ſoone ſhall I make whole and found your wounds. Preſētly did Galaor breake the chaine, and the Damoſel tooke out of acofer two little bottles, with other pretious things belonging to the Lord of the Caſtle, and ſo came downe together into the Court: where Galaor perceiued how the firſt Knight hee 
                        •
                     ouſted withall was not yet dead, but trauailing to his end, wherefore to let him languiſh no longer, he ſo trapled on his breſt with his horſe feete, as quickly his ſoule forſooke the body, afterward they rode away deuiſing on many matters.
                  This Damoſell was wiſe, well gouerned, & of good grace, whereby ſhe could ſo queintly anſwer & intreate Galaor, that he became highly enamoured of her: and being able to endure no longer this kindled fire of affection, thought good to make ſome proofe if ſhee would loue him, whereupon hee thus began. You know (faire Damoſell and my friend) that I haue deliuered you from priſon, but in giuing you liberty, I am become my ſelfe captiue, and brought into great danger vnleſſe you helpe me.

You may be well aſſured my Lord, quoth ſhe, that the matter were verie difficult, wherein I would not obey you, ſtanding ſo deepely bounden to you as I do: for otherwiſe I might be reckoned among the moſt ingratefull women of the world, conſidering the miſery you ſo lately deliuered me from, and therefore doe I remaine at your diſpoſition. In theſe familiar conferences they proceeded ſo far, as the execution of this hotte loue ſoone after followed, taſting together the b
                        •…
                     fi
                        •
                      of ſuch content, as other may do the like that haue ſo good fortune: & thus merily they paſſe night, in the Pauilion of certaine Hunturs they met with 
                        •…
                     e Forreſt. So Galaor receiued by this Damoſell, eaſe of his new wound loue had made, & cure of the other he got in fight.
                  For certain daies they remained in this wood, during which time the 
                        〈◊〉
                      told him, how ſhe was daughter to Thelois the Fleming, not long ſi
                        •
                     ce County of Clare by the gift of King Liſuert, and a Lady whom he had often entreated as his friend. But one day, quoth ſhe, being with my mother in a M
                        •
                     naſtry not far hence, the Lord of this Caſtle (whom you haue ſl
                        •
                     ine) dema
                        •
                     ded me in mariage, and becauſe my parents miſliked thereof, by reaſon of his vngracious behauiour: he watched a day when I was ſporting among other Damoſels, from whom he forcibly caried me away, furiouſly thruſting me into the priſon where ye found me, ſaying. Be well aſſured Damoſell, that ſeeing thou haſt diſ
                        •
                     ained to match with me in mariage, and made ſo little account of my great renowne: while thou liueſt thou ſhalt not depart hence, til thy mother and the reſt of thy kindred come entreate me to take thee as my w
                        •
                     fe. Perceiuing how ſeuerely he was bent againſt me, I ſet downe my reſt on patient hope, thinking it better for a time to endure that captiuity, then by making him my husband ſuffer a worſe. Great reaſon had ye therein, anſwered Galaor, but tell me now I pray ye, at parting hence what ſhall become of you? for I am conſtrained to make little ſtay, and muſt trauaile very farre, being too much trouble for you to follow me. I deſire yee, quoth ſhe, conduct me to the Monaſterie from whence I was taken, for my mother is there, who will be right ioyfull to ſee me at liberty. With all my heart, replied Galaor: ſo mounting on horſeback, about Sun ſetting they arriued at the monaſterie, where they were receiued with great ioy, eſpecially when the Damoſell had declared his worthy deeds of Chiualry done for her: and albeit he determined a ſpeedy departure, yet at the requeſt of the faire ſiſters, he taried there longer then before he intended. Heere pauſed the Author on this matter, to tell ye what happened to the Prince Agraies, ſince his returne frō the warres in Gaule.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     What were the aduenturs of the Prince Agraies, ſince his returne from Gaule, where he left Amadis.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        AGraies returned from his enterpriſe in Gaule, after Amadis had vanquiſhed king Abies of Ireland, and was knowne to his father and mother as you haue heard: addreſſed his iourney toward Norway, where be hoped to finde his Lady Oliuia. Riding one day along ſomewhat neere the ſea ſide, on a ſudden hee had a Hart in chaſe, which when he had ſome prittie while purſued, he gained at length the top of a mountaine, from whence he might eaſily deſerne the raging bellowes of the ſea. Suddenly aroſe an exceeding great tempeſt, which with mighty windes ſo troubled the water, and the thunder ratled with ſuch violence, as if heauen and the neather religion would haue met together. At length he eſpied a ſhip toſſed in the tempeſt, vnterly deſtitute of any ſafety, and (which was worſe) ſubiect to the mercy of a darke comfertleſſe night inſuing: wherewith he being moued to pittie, commanded his Squires (as a ſignall) to make certaine blazes of fire, that they in the ſhip might chuſe their beſt lading place, without periſhing in the darke, him-ſelfe minding to ſtay to ſee the end: which happened ſo well, by the helpe of God and dilligence of the mariners, as the ſhip tooke ſafe harbour nere where Agraies was, when they landed certaine Ladies, who were greatly affrighted with the maruailous tempaſt, thinking they could not haue eſcaped ſo long, Agraies being one of the moſt courteous Princes in the world, ſeeing them ſo well landed and free from danger, ſent one of his Squires, to will them come and refreſh themſelues in his pauillion: which gentlenes they refuſed not, and becauſe he was loth to be troubleſome to them; knowing they had now neede of nothing more then reſt, he concluded this night not to ſee them, keeping himſelfe cloſe in his chāber. The Ladyes being ſeperated to their owne cōtentmēt, the mariners made great fiers on the ſhoare to dry their garmēts, and afterward fell to ſleeping, that they wakened not till next morning. Agraies deſirous to ſee ſtrange women, yet more to ſerue and honor them, then to remoue his affection from where it was ſetled: priuily pried in to behold their countenances, they being round ſet about a fiere, reciting to each other pleaſantly their paſſed danger. As thus he liſtened their diſcourſes, among the reſt he knew the Princeſſe Oliuia, toward whom he was trauailing by vertue of her meſſage: and you muſt imagine him ſo intirely addicted to her ſeruice, as alſo ſhe in affectiō to him, that they might well be tearmed happy in their loue. No ſooner had Agraies eſpied her, but he was ſo ouercome therewith, as being no longer able to diſſemble, hauing before his eyes her ſo late perill of ſhip-wracke, he breathed forth a vehement ſigh, ſaying. Ah diuine comfort, helpe me. When the Ladies heard this cry, eſpecially Oliuia, thinking ſome one of their

company was not well, commanded her women to open the dore: which preſently they did, when Agraies told one of thē who he was, that ſhee might ſecretly imparte the ſame to her miſtreſſe, the news whereof were ſo welcome to her, as immediatly ſhe commanded him to enter. Then were embracings & kiſſings freely entercourſed, with al other gracious fauours ſo kind louers could deuiſe, euen the very point wherein loue triumpheth: ſo that the faire Princeſſe loſt the name of a maiden, with like conte
                        •…
                     
                     ▪ as other who haue aſſaied, and can more then imagine what I meane. So pleaſing was this happy meeting, as they ſoiourned there ſix dayes together, beguiling the tune with reciptocall courteſies, yet ſo ſecretly, as none in the company (except her Damoſels) perceiued.
                  Meane while the ſea became nauigable, the weather faire, and the waters calm: which made the Princeſſe determine to goe aboord her ſhip, that ſhe might paſſe into great Brittaine, whither the King her father had ſent her, to be nouriſhed by the Queene Briſena. Which being vnderſtood by Agraies, after he had acquainted her with the cauſe of his iourney, hee gaue her aſſurāce: that very ſhortly he would come to her, as well to ſhew her his faithfull ſeruice, as alſo to ſeeke his coſin Amadis in king Liſuarts Court, according as hee made him promiſe; wherewith ſhe was not a little contented, deſiring him earneſtly not to tary long frō her. Thus courteouſly taking leaue of each other, the Princeſſe Oliuia departed vnder ſayle, and in fewe dayes after they landed in great Brittaine, when comming to Windſore, where King Liſuart kept his Court: both by him, the Queene, Oriana, and all the other Ladyes, was the Princeſſe and her trayne graciouſly welcommed, as well to honor the King her father, as alſo in reſpect of her excellent beauty.
                  Now remained Agraies on the ſea ſhore, giuing many a long look after the ſhip which caried away the iewell of his heart; and hauing loſt the ſight of it, he tooke his way to Briantes, a right good towne in Scotland, where the King his father ſoiourned, and his Vncle Gaiuanes Without land, in whoſe company he intended ſhortly to viſit King Liſuarts Court. For there, quoth hee to Galuanes, ſhall we finde more good Knights, then in any other Court of King Chriſtian, there likewiſe may we gaine honor and renowne better then in Scotland: where we haue none to trye our ſelues againſt, vnleſſe ſome fewe that ſlenderly follow Armes. This Galuanes was of gentle heart and a good Knight, deſirous among other to reach the top of honor, yet of ſimple habilitie, as you haue heard before: now the enterpriſe of theſe twaine thus concluded, after they had obtained licence of the King, they went on boord with their horſe & armour, ech one likewiſe a Squire attēding on him. Hauing wind at wil, in ſhort time they landed at Briſtow, where they made no long aboad, but riding through a Forreſt, they met a Damoſell who demāded of them, if that way would conduct her to the Rock of Galteres. No, quoth they, but tell vs Damoſell why you trauaile thither? To ſee if I can finde the good Knight, ſayd ſhee, who knoweth how to remedy a griefe I endure at this preſēt. You abuſe your ſelfe Damoſell, anſwered Agraies, for at the Rock you demanded, you

ſhal finde no other Knight then the great Gyant Albadan, to whom if you bring any cauſe of ſorow, he wil quickly double it on your own head. If you knew ſo much as I doe, quoth the Damoſell, you would not imagine me to be abuſed: becauſe the Knight I aske for, hath vanquiſhed the Gyant, and killed him in battaile hand to hand. Beleeue me virgin, replied Galuanes, you tell vs matter of great maruaile, in reſpect neuer any Knight dealt alone with a Gyant, vnleſſe it was King Abies of Ireland, who combated with one, himſelfe being armed, and the Giant naked, which was the cauſe of his death; and yet this attempt of the King, is thought the greateſt ſtratageme that euer was heard of: then ſound not your ſpeeches, to any likely-hood, for this Gyant ſurpaſſeth all other in ſtrength & cruelty. Gentleman, anſwered the Damoſell, the Knight I ſpeake of hath done no leſſe then I told ye: wherewith ſhe 
                        〈◊〉
                      the whole manner thereof; they reputing it ſtrange, and almoſt incredible which cauſed Agraies to aske her, if ſhe knew the Knights name. His name (quoth ſhe) is Galaor, ſon to King Perion of Gaule. Ah Lady, ſaid Agraies, you declare the only newes of the world to content me withal, naming my Coſin, who more commonly was reputed dead then liuing. Hereupon he reported to Galuanes, what he had heard concerning Galaor, how he was taken away by the Gyant, and till this inſtant he neuer heard of him. By my faith, anſwered Galuanes, the life of him and his brother is miraculous, and their beginning of Chiualrie ſo famous, as I thinke their like is not to be found through the world; but Damoſell, what would you haue with that Knight? My Lord, quoth ſhe, I ſeeke his ayde on the behalfe of a Damoſell, who is impriſoned by the accuſation of a Dwarffe, the moſt villainous creature that euer was born: hereto ſhe added the whole diſcourſe of Galaor and the Dwarffe, as hath beene already declared to you, yet ſhe cōcealed the louely pranck of Aldena. And becauſe Sir, ſayde ſhe, the Damoſell will not confirme what the Dwarffe hath auouched, the Duke of Briſtoya hath ſworne, that within ten dayes ſhe ſhall be burned aliue: which is an occaſion of great griefe to the other Ladyes, doubting leaſt ſhee through feare of death will accuſe ſome of them, and tell withall to what end Galaor came into the Dukes Caſtle: more-ouer, of the ten dayes, foure are already expired. Seeing it falleth out ſo, anſwered Agraies, you neede trauaile no further, for we will performe what Galaor ſhould doe, if not in ſtrength, yet in good will, and therefore be you our guide to the place. The Damoſel turned her haqueney, and led them with ſuch ſpeede to the Dukes Caſtle, that they arriued there the day before the execution ſhould be. Now was the Duke ſet down to dinner, when the two Knights entring the great hall, humbly ſaluted him, & when he ſaw them, he requeſted they would ſit downe to dinner with him: but they anſwered, that hee ſhould preſently know the cauſe of their comming, where-upon, Galuanes thus began. My Lord, you detaine a Damoſell priſoner, by the falſe and diſloyall accuſation of a traiterous Dwarffe; we deſire that ſhe may be deliuered▪ ſeeing ſhe hath no way miſ-done: and if it be needfull to proue her innocency

by battaile, let come two other to maintaine the quarrell, for we are ready as her defēders. Wel haue you ſayd, replyed the Duke: and calling for the Dwarffe, thus ſpake to him. What anſwereſt thou to theſe Knights challenge, who ſay that falſely thou haſt cauſed me to impriſon the Damoſell, and will proue it againſt thee in open battaile? it behoueth thee to find ſome defence for thy ſelfe. For that I am not to ſeek my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, I haue ſuch on my behalfe, who ſhall make known the truth of what I haue ſaid. Here-with he called a frollick Knight his Nephew, ſo like him in pitch and proportion, as one would haue thought he had no other father, to him he ſayd. I pray ye Nephew maintain my quarrell againſt theſe two Knights. Scarſe had he thus ſpoken, but his Nephew returned this anſwer to Galuanes and his companion. Well Gentlemen, what will you ſay againſt this loyal Dwarffe, who was ſo iniured by the Knight the falſe Damoſell brought hither? It may be one of you is the man I ſpeake off: but whether it be or no, I will proue in Combate he dealt villainouſly, & the Damoſell ought to dy, becauſe ſhe brought him into my Lord the Dukes Chamber. Agraies who found himſelfe moſt touched in his owne conceite, ſtepped forth with this anſwer. In ſooth, neither of vs is the man, albeit we deſire to imitate his vertues, but wee auouch he hath done no wrong, & if the Duke pleaſe, this difference ſhall be ſoone decided: for on his behalfe will I maintaine, that the damoſel ought to be deliuered, & the Dwarfe in her ſtead burned as a traiterous villaine. I iuſtifie the cō
                     trary, replied the Dwarffes Champion: then calling for his armour, full ſoone was he mounted on a gentle Courſer, and turning to Agraies who preſented him the Cō
                     bare, thus ſpake. Would God Knight thou wert the man by whō this quarrell begā, too high a price ſhould I ſet on thy folly. We ſhall quickly ſee, quoth Agraies, what thou canſt doe, but I am aſſured if he were preſent, he would make no account of two ſuch braggers as thou art, how iuſt or vniuſt the cauſe were on his ſide, by greater reaſō then do I leaue thee to iudge, how notably he would handle thee in this, conſiſting on truth and equitie. While theſe menaces thus paſſed on either ſide, the Duke ſtirred not from the table till dinner was done, when ſeeing the Knights prepared to execute their ſpeeches, he conducted them with a braue company of Gentlemen, to the place apointed to end ſuch controuerſies, where all accuſtomed ceremonies being obſerued, the Duke thus ſpake to Agraies. Performe the vttermoſt of your habilitie, yet ſhall not the Damoſel be deliuered: for to the Dwarffe hath not been offered iniury alone, but to ſuch beſide as are of higher reckoning then your ſelfe. My Lord, quoth Agraies, you cauſed her to be apprehended only by his falſe accuſation, and he hath deceiued your iudgement with a lye: wherefore if my fortune make mee Conquerour, you ought by good reaſon to deliuer her. I haue tolde you what I meane to doe, ſaid the Duke, and otherwiſe it ſhall not be. Agraies tarrying for no more wordes, turned his horſe, running a braue carrire againſt the Dwarfes Knight, and in the encounter brake their ſtaues gallantly, meeting likewiſe ſo furiouſly with their bodies,

as they were both laide along on the ground: yet quickly they recouered themſelues, and vnſheathing their weapons, deliuered fierce and cruell ſtrokes to each other; their Swordes being verie ſharpe, the Knights valiant and hautily diſpoſed, by means where-of, their Armour, Helmets and ſheeldes, were in ſhort time made of ſlender reſiſtance: yet Galuanes well ſaw, how his Nephew had ſtil the better of his enemy; if then he had before eſteemed him a good Knight, farre greater reaſon had he ſo to doe▪ notwithſtanding, hee was ſo hot and vigorous, as often-times he ſeemed out of breath, which made euery one imagine (regarding his violence) that hee could not long endure. But in him it proued farre otherwiſe, for the longer the Combate endured, his courage and ſtrength the more increaſed, by reaſon whereof he became the Conquerour, as ſhall hereafter be declared. The Nephew to the Dwarffe found him-ſelfe ſo hardly handled, as he drew back a little, thus ſpeaking to Agraies. Me-thinkes Sir Knight wee haue made proofe enough, of what we are able to performe in theſe affaires, wherefore I am of the opinion, that he whoſe quarrell I vndertake, & the other for whom you entred fight, are not faulty in any thing wherewith they are charged; otherwiſe our combate could not thus long haue endured, but victory wold fal to one of vs. Wel haſt thou ſayd, anſwered Agraies, that the Knight for whom I venter is iuſt and loyall, but the Dwarffe is a villaine and a traitour: nor will I ſuffer thee to reſt, till with thine own mouth thou cōfeſſe as much: defend thy ſelfe therefore better then thou haſt done. Theſe angry wordes did ſomewhat eleuate the Dwarffes Knights courage, but he had loſt ſo much bloud, that he was no longer able to holde out; by meanes whereof Agraies took his pleaſure on him, becauſe the other did nothing but defend his ſtrokes which when the Duke beheld, by reaſon he fauoured him, he was highly diſpleaſed, and to ſhun the ſight of his death, departed toward his Caſtle, ſwearing thence forward to worke reuenge for him on all Knights errant, by doing then: all the ſhame he could poſſibly deuiſe. He being in this furie ſpake ſo loude, as Galuanes ouerheard him, wherefore he thus anſwered Duke thou dooſt enterpriſe a great war, eſpecially againſt ſuch as are known to more worthy Lords thē thou art, ſeeking thus to ſmother vp the blame of others. As thus he contended with the Duke, the Dwarffes champion fell at Agraies feete, who immediatly ſnatching off his Helmet, caught him by the head, giuing him many blowes with the hil
                        •
                     s of his Sword on the face, ſaying: Confeſſe the diſloyalty of the Dwarffe, otherwiſe thy life is at an end. Ah gentle Knight, quoth he, giue me my life, for I truely confeſſe, that hee who you fight for is vertuous and loyall, & promiſe withall to gaine the Da moſels releaſe from impriſōment but for Gods ſake I deſire ye, let me not reprooue the Dwarffe mine Vnckle with treaſon. Theſe words were by all the aſſiſtance eaſily vnderſtood, which mouing Agraies to pit
                        ••
                     e, he thus anſwered: For the Dwarffe I will do nothing, but for you being a good Knight, I grant the fauour of your diſcharge: prouided that you labour to your vttermoſt for the Damoſels releaſe from priſon, according

as you haue faithfully promiſed.
                  All this while the Duke heard none of theſe words, becauſe hee was gone ſomewhat further off: but Galuanes laid hold on his horſe bridle, ſaying: By God (Duke) you ſhall not departe hence, vntill you haue ſeene he extreamity of your Champion: for he is either dead or vanquiſhed; what anſwer then make ye concerning the Damoſels right, & the treacherous iniury offered her by the Dwarfe? What? ſaide the Duke, thinkeſt thou I will breake mine oath, or do any otherwiſe then I haue determined? I know not, quoth Galuanes, what concluſion you haue appointed. Mary this, replied the duke, that ſhe ſh
                        ••
                     be to morrow morning burn'd, if ſhe tell not what moued her, to cauſe the Knight come hither whō ſhe conducted. Why? quoth Galuanes, will ye not then deliuer her? No, ſaid the Duke, and if thou prouide not for thy ſpeedy departure out of my Country, thou ſhalt well know that thou haſt diſpleaſed me. Is it true? anſwered Galuanes, doe ye threaten me contrarie to all equity, and will not diſcharge the Damoſell ſo honourably iuſtified? By heauen henceforth I defie thee, as well on mine own behalfe, as all other Knights errant whatſoeuer. Very well, quoth the Duke, the like do I to thee, and al ſuch as thou reſembleſt. So went the Duke into his Caſtle, and Galuanes returned in an exceeding chafe to Agraies, but reioycing at his Nephewes glorious victory, he ſomewhat quallified his angry choller: yet did he tel him all the Dukes menaces, and what defiance had paſſed on either ſide, wherewith Agraies was very much moued, chiefely for the wrong he threatned to the Damoſell; whereupon he thus replied: In ſooth my Lord and Vncle, it is againſt all reaſon, that ſuch a pa
                        •
                     liard as the Duke, poſſeſſed of ſo great a ſignorie, ſhould cary ſo vile and bad a minde. Hauing thus ſpoken, he called for his horſe, which being brought him, he moūted thereon, ſpeaking thus to the vanquiſhed Knight: My friend remember your promiſe, & accompliſh it ſo ſoon as you can, that the Damoſell may be releaſed from her impriſonment. In good faith, quoth he, I will performe my vttermoſt hability therein. So rode away Agraies and Galuanes toward the Forreſt of Arinida, where whē they entred, Galuanes thus began: You know Nephew, that I haue defied the Duke, in reſpect of the iniurie he offered vs: but if I might giue aduiſe, I would thinke it good for vs, to ambuſh our ſelues a while in this wood, where we may eaſily take him or ſome of his. I promiſe ye, ſaide Agaies, I like well your counſell: wherefore without paſſing any further, they made choyce of a little thicket, where they alighted, ſending their Squires to the Towne to prouide them victuals.
                  On the other ſide, the Duke (as you haue heard) being with-drawn to his Caſtle, grewe into ſuch diſpleaſure againſt the Damoſel, as he thought preſently to ſend her to the fire: where-upon he called for her, & willed her for to haue minde of her ſoule, becauſe the next morning ſhee ſhould bee burned, if quickly ſhe declared not the truth of the Knight: but all theſe threatnings could not drawe one word from her. Now becauſe the vanquiſhed Knight had promiſed Agraies, to labour for her deliuerāce to the Duke, ſo ſoone as hee returned

from the field, hee came and fell on his knees before the Duke: beſeeching him moſt inſtantly to graunt, what he had promiſed on the Ladies behalfe. But the Duke by all meanes excuſed the matter, ſaying, he had ſollemnely vowed ſhe ſhould dye, if ſhe reuealed not the thing he was deſirous to know. Therefore (quoth he) I will rather conſent to the ruine of my whole Eſtate, then in one iotte to the breach of my oath. In this manner was the Knight denyed and the next morning, very earely he ſent for the Damoſell, to whom hee ſpake thus as followeth.
                  Thou lewd and diſobedient woman, now make choice of the fire, or reſolue me in the matter I haue demanded, for one of them thou muſt doe. My Lord, quoth ſhee, you may appoint what you thinke good; but if I die in this manner, it will be againſt all law and reaſon. Preſently he committed her to two Sergeants at Armes, accompanied with ten Knights well prouided for their defence: and for the more ſuretie that ſhee ſhould not be reſcued, himſelfe mounted in perſon on a goodly great horſe; then leauing the towne, along they ride thorow the fieldes by the Forreſt ſide, and being come to the place prepared for execution, he commanded foorth-with ſhe ſhould be throwne into the fire, ſaying: Let the ſtubborne Strumpet die in her obſtinacie. But Agraies and Galuanes being ready armed to aduenture their fortune, diſcerned when the troupe came from the towne toward the forreſt; wherefore without longer tarying, (hauing giuen expreſſe charge to one of their Squires, to haue a ſpeciall care of the Damoſels ſafety) ſlyly left their ambuſh, beholding the poore maiden readie for the fire; when ſhee perceiuing her preſent daunger, cryed to the Duke, that ſhe would tell what he deſired, onely to delay the time of her death. The Duke beleeuing ſhee intended as ſhe ſayd, came to her; when ſuddenly he eſpied Agraies and Galuanes gallopping toward him, calling ſo lowd that hee might eaſily heare them; Duke, now ſhalt thou be forced to deliuer the Damoſel. At theſe words were all the Dukes Knights greatly aſtoniſhed, yet prepared they for their owne defence, where-upon began between them a fierce and cruel fight. Now though Agraies and Galuanes were alone againſt ſo many, yet did they ſo brauely behaue themſelues, as at the firſt on ſet they quailed the greater part of them, before they could deuiſe which way to turne themſelues: wherea
                        •
                      the Duke was ſo amazed, that fearing his owne death was neere at hand, he with-drew himſelfe behind his men; yet Caluanes perceiued it, wherefore he cryed to him: Trayterous Duke, This day thou beginneſt to feele the warre thou didſt enterpriſe againſt Knights errant: then ruſhing through the preaſſe, hee minded to charge the Duke, but he retyred aſide, willing his Knights to kill their enemies horſes, which they on foote might eaſily compaſſe. In briefe, theſe two Champions ſhewed ſuch chiualrie on their foot-men, as they were vanquiſhed and driuen to flight, the moſt of them ſo cruelly wounded, that they were ſcant able to keepe themſelues on horſe-backe in their eſcaping away: and the Duke who was better mounted then any of them, made ſuch haſte, as hee brought the firſt newes hereof to the towne, being eagerly purſued

awhile by Galuanes: but when hee ſaw it was in vaine, he returned to the Forreſt where hee found his Nephew and the Squires with the Damoſell.
                  Such was the reſcue of the poore mayden, & ſhamefull foyle of the Duke, who being arriued at the Towne, cauſed with all ſpeed a great number to arme them-ſelues, returning to the Forreſt to reuenge their 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     , thinking to finde the Knights there as yet, but they were diſlodged: wherefore 
                        •…
                     ling of their purpoſe, they diſperſed themſelues in ſeuerall troupes, by fiue and fiue in a company to 
                        •
                     ecke them, the Duke likewiſe (being one in the ſearch) haiug foure of the beſt knights hee could make choyce off. And as they rode along in a valley, he eſp
                        •
                     ed the Knights conducting the Damoſell, wherefore hee ſayd to his men: Behold (my Friends) the Traytours wee haue to deale withall, let vs ſet on them before they get leyſure to eſcape: for if they gaine but a ſight of vs, they will run away faſter then euer wee did. But Galuanes eſpyed them ere they came neere, and ſhewed them to his Nephew Agraies, who hee thought was ouer-wearyed with the laſt aſſault, which made him ſay: Wee already haue felt what theſe villa
                        ••
                     es can doe, but now muſt we warily defend our ſelues, that we may be no more followed in this 
                        〈◊〉
                     . I know the Duke to be he comes 
                        •…
                     moſt, if good h
                        •
                     p be
                        •
                     ail vs, I hope he ſhall haue his payment firſt of all: be now (good Nephew) mindfull of your wonted courage, hauing paſſed through greater dangers then this can bee. Why 
                        〈◊〉
                     ? quoth Agraies, in time of perill doe you thinke I wil forget my ſ
                        •
                     ite? eſpecially being in your companie? Dreame of no ſuch matter I pray yee, but let vs ſerue theſe as we did their companions. By time hee had thus ſpoken, the Duke gaue the ſpurres to his horſe, and comming neere them ſayd: I am ſorry (villaines) you ſhould dye ſo honourably, but afterward I meane to hang yee by the heeles on the toppes of theſe trees. Galuanes and Agraies buckled cloſe with them, ſhewing how much they deſpiſed ſuch ſhamefull buriall: on the other ſide, the Duke and his knights ſtucke to it cloſely, eſpecially himſelfe, to whom Agraies came, and angerly reached him ſuch a blow with his ſword, beneath the ſight of his helmet as quite cut away the noſt
                        ••
                     ils from his face. The Duke imagining himſelfe wounded to the death, turned his backe and fled, Agraies following him, but ſeeing he could not ouer-take him, hee commended him to all the deuils, returning to ſuccour Galuanes, whom the other foure had very ſore laboured, yet did he hold out ſo courageouſly, as none of them durſt come neere him; for one was tumbled head-long from his horſe not ſhewing any motion of life was left in him. Agraies being now come from purſuing the Duke, buckled ſo cloſely with the firſt he met, as he fell downe depriued of life: ſo that there remained but two, who found themſelues too weake to vphold the honour of the vanquiſhed, and therefore truſted to the ſpeede of their horſes, following the firſt run-away toward the Forreſt, by which meanes they eſcaped the fury of Agraies and Galuanes, they ſuffering them to enioy that benefit, & returned where the Damoſell attended for them, of whom they demanded, if any

Towne or place of lodging were neere. Gentlemen, quoth ſhee, I know the dwelling of a Knight hard by, named Oliuas, who is a mortall enemie to the Duke, by reaſon he ſlew a coſin of his, which makes me thinke he will the better welcome vs. Be you our guide thither, ſaid Galuanes, and ſo ſhe was, they being very kindly entertained there, eſpecially when he knew what had happened. On the morrow they tooke their leaue of Oliuas, but calling them aſide, he thus ſpake. Gentlemen, the Duke treacherouſly killed a coſin germaine of mine, who was a good Knight, wherefore I am determined to accuſe and combate with him before King Liſuart. Now ſince I vnderſtand you are Knights errant, and ſuch as know how, or elſe your ſelues can redreſſe the wrongs offered to the vnable, yea, by them who (without care of God or their honor) durſt proceed ſo farre. In ſooth, anſwered Galudnes, you are deepely bound to proſecute the murder, being committed in ſuch ſhamefull manner, & we will aſſiſt ye in your quarrel on ſo iuſt a cauſe: if the Duke wil bring any Knights to maintaine his wrong, we will be for you; for ſo little account makes he of vs, that he hath openly giuen vs defiance. Moſt heartliy I thank ye, replied the Knight, and for this cauſe I will goe with yee if you pleaſe. Content quoth they. Here-upon Oliuas armed himſelfe, and ſo they rode together to Windſore, where they had good hope to find King Liſuart.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                     How Amadis tarying with his good will in the Court of King Liſuart, heard t
                           •
                        dings of his brother Galaor.
                     
                  
                  
                     BY the diſcourſe paſt you haue vnderſtood how Amadis (after he had in open field foyled & ouer-come the audacious proud Dardan) was ſtayed in King Liſuart Court by the Ladies requeſt, expreſſely to be the Queenes Knight: his entertainment by the King, fauour and manifolde other courteſies, you haue likewiſe heard. It now came ſo to paſſe, that as he was one day among the Ladyes, a Damoſel entred the Queenes Chamber, who falling on her knees before the Queene, ſaid. Madame, is not a Knight heere that beareth azured Lyons in his Armes? The Queene perceiuing ſhe meant Amadis, anſwered, Damoſell, what would you with him? Madame, quoth ſhe, I haue brought him tidings of a new Knight, who hath begun in deeds of Armes ſo rarely as euer did any. You ſpeake very much, anſwered the Queene, but you perhaps being acquainted with none but him, thinke therefore he is beyond all other. It may be ſo, replied the Damoſell, yet when you vnderſtand what he hath accompliſhed, I thinke your ſelfe will agree to my ſaying. I pray ye then, quoth the Queene, tell vs what he is. When I ſee the good Knight, anſwered the Damoſell, hee who carryeth ſuch eſtimation from all other: I will tell him in your preſence, and other new
                        •
                      which I am charged to

acquaint him withall. The Queene was now more deſirous to know him then before, wherefore ſhewing her Amadis, ſhe ſayd: See here (Damoſell) the man you aske for. Madame, quoth ſhe, in reſpect you ſpeake it, I beleeue it, for a Queene of ſuch ſtate as you are, is free from beguiling: then comming to Amadis, ſhe thus proceeded. My Lord, the young Gentle-man whom not long ſince you Knighted before the caſtle of Bradoid, when you vanquiſhed the two Knights on the bridge, and the other on the cawſey, where you took the Maiſter thereof priſoner, and deliuered by force of armes the friend to Vrganda: moſt humbly ſaluteth you by me, being the man whom he reputeth as his Lord, & giueth you to know, how he endeuoureth to reach the height of honor, which he will attaine, or dye in the attempt: likewiſe when he ſhall performe ſome-what worthy the name of Chiualrie, he will acquaint you with more then yet you know, vntill which time hee ſhrowds it in ſilence. Amadis ſoon remembered ſhe ſpake of his brother, wherefore with ioy the teares dewed his cheekes, and the Ladies well noting this alteration, maruailed thereat, eſpecially Oriana: who (as you haue heard heereto-fore) was grounded in ſuch affection toward him, as ſhe was well neer depriued of power to diſſemble it. In meane while, the Queene deſirous to heare what deedes of proweſſe the new Knight had performed, ſayd to the Damoſell, I pray ye continue your meſſage, & tell vs the braue beginning of chi
                     
                        •
                     alrie you ſpeake of. Madame, quoth ſhe, the firſt place where he made proofe of himſelfe, was at the Rock of Galteres, where hee combated with the great and terrible Gyant Alb
                           •…
                        , whome (in open field hand to hand) he euercame and ſlew: hereto ſhe added the manner of the fight, aſſuring her that ſhe had ſeene the ſame. Greatly were all the hearers abaſhed at theſe newes, but aboue all the reſt the Queene: who demanded of the Damoſell, if ſhee knew whither he trauailed from thence. Madame, quoth ſhe, I parted from him ſoone after, leauing him in the company of a Damoſell, who came from her miſtreſſe to ſeeke him, becauſe ſhe was deſirous to know him; at which time he went with her, & ſince I neuer ſaw him. What thinke you heere of Sir Amadis? ſayd the Queene, do not you know of whence he is? Yes truely. Madame, anſwered Amadis, although I can ſay but little herein: I thinke he be mine owne brother, for ſo Vrganda not long ſince aſſured me, Doubtleſſe, quoth the Queene, the fortune of you both is admirable, & I maruaile how you could come to the knowledge of your Parents, or they of you? yet would I be glad to ſee that Knight in the Kings ſeruice. While theft ſpeeches endured, Oriana who ſate farre from the Queene, and heard none of theſe newes, was in ſuch greefe to ſee Amadis ſhed teares, as being vnable to conceale the ſame, ſhe ſayd to Mabila: I pray ye (faire friend) call your coſin Amadis, that we may know what hath happened to cauſe him mourne. Mabila made a ſigne to Amadis to come, and when he was with them. Oriana ſhewing her ſelfe ſome-what griened, thus began. Sir Amadis, it may full well be ſayd, that by ſome Lady you are now moued to pittie, I pray ye tell vs what ſhe is, and from whence this Damoſell

brought you theſe tydings. Amadis quickely perceiued his Miſtreſſes diſeaſe, wherefore hee declared all that the Damoſell told the Queene: which appeaſed the iealouſie of her hote Louer, and made this ſhew more amiable conntenance, thus ſpeaking to Amadis. Alas, my Lord, I muſt intreat you to pardon the fault, raiſed onely by falſe ſuſpition againſt you. I promiſe ye Madame, quoth he, there is no cauſe of pardon, nor did my heart euer thinke amiſſe againſt you: but could you like thereof, that I ſhould goe ſeeke him the Damoſell departed from, and bring him hither with me to ſerue you? for this I am aſſured, if I bring him not, it will be very hard to get him hither. Beleeue mee, anſwered Oriana, I would gladly wiſh ſo good a knight in his company, and therfore you ſhal doe well to goe ſeeke him: yet before you depart, acquaint the Queene herewith, that ſhe may imagine, how by her commandement onely, you enterpriſe this iourney. Humbly did Amadis regratiate his Miſtreſſe: and according to her counſell hee went to the Queene, to whom he began in this manner. It were good (in mine opinion, Madame, that the King had this knight likewiſe, to attend on his ſeruice. Certes, quoth ſhee, I would it might be ſo if it were poſſible. If you will grant me leaue, ſaid Amadis, to goe finde him, I haue no doubt of bringing him hither: otherwiſe I know you ſhall hardly ſee him, till hee haue made himſelfe knowne in many other places. You doe very much for the king, quoth ſhe, if hee doe come; neuertheleſſe, I referre it to your owne diſcretion.
                  Thus Amadis obtained licence to depart, which hee did very early the next Morning, hauing no other company then Gandalin; and ſpending moſt part of the day ryding through the Forreſt, he ſaw a Lady come toward him, accompanyed with two Damoſels and foure Squires: who weeping very grieuouſly, conducted a knight in a Litter, whereat Amadis being abaſhed, demaunded what mooued them to be ſo ſorrowfull, and what he was they had in the Litter. He is, quoth the Ladie, the onely cauſe of my care and penſiueneſſe, my Lord and Husband, who is wounded in ſuch ſort as I feare his death. Amadis aduanced him-ſelfe to behold the man, and lifting vp the couerture of the Litter, ſaw a Knight lye there, of goodly perſonage: but of his face hee could make no iudgement, by reaſon it was cruelly cut and mangled; whereupon hee called to him, ſaying. My friend, who hath thus wronged thee? yet did the Knight make no anſwere; which made him goe to the Lady againe, and aske her the queſtion. Gentle Sir, quoth ſhee, a knight that keepeth a Bridge not farre hence, did it, who as we paſſed by ſayd to my Lord, how hee muſt ſweare whether he were of king Liſuarts court or no: which made my husband demand why he would know. Becauſe, ſaid the knight, no friend of his ſhall paſſe here, but I will kill him. What is the occaſion of your hatred, replyed my husband? I wiſh ſo much ill, quoth the knight, to that vngracious king, as I would gladly haue him in my power, to take vengeance on him at my pleaſure: and in deſpight of him, heacefoorth ſhall I ſlay all ſuch as are belonging to him. Becauſe he keepeth a knight that killed the valiant

                     Daodan, for whoſe ſake I meane to deale in ſuch ſort, as the king and his wel-willers ſhall receiue by me infinite diſpleaſures and diſhonours. When my husband heard him, as one agreeued at his villainous ſpeeches, he anſwered. Know thou that I am one of his Court, & his vowed ſeruant, who neither for thee or any other will deny him. Highly diſpleaſed was the knight of the Bridge with this anſwere, and without any more wordes charged my husband, ſo that betweene them grew a cruell combate: but in the end, my Lord was brought into this hard extreamity, and farre more worſe in the knights opinion; for hee reputed him to be ſlaine out-right, cōmanding vs within three dayes to carry him before king Liſuart, to deſpight him withall. Lady, quoth Amadis, I pray you lend me one of your Squires, who can ſhew me the knight when I come where he is: for ſeeing your husband hath been ſo wronged for my ſake, it behoofeth me (more then any other) to re
                        •
                     enge the ſame. What? ſaid the Lady, are you hee for whoſe cauſe he ſo hateth the king? Yea verily, anſwered Amadis, and if my hap prooue ſo good, hee ſhall neuer heereafter abuſe any other. Ah, gentle Knight, quoth ſhee, I will pray for your proſperous ſucceſſe. Afterward ſhee gaue him one of her Squires, and committing him to GOD, rode on with her husband; and Amadis neuer ſtayed till hee came to the Bridge, where hee ſawe the knight playing at Tables with another: but quickly leauing his paſtime, being ready armed, hee mounted on horſe▪ backe, calling for Amadis in this manner. Holla, holla Sirra, I forbid ye to paſſe any further till yee haue ſwome. What ſhall I ſweare? anſwered Amadis. Whether thou be of king Liſuarts Court, or no, ſaid the Knight: for if thou belong to him, heere muſt thou leaue thy head behinde thee. It is a queſtion, quoth Amadis, if thou canſt doe ſo much: but I aſſure thee, I belong to the Queene his wife, euer ſince not long agoe. Since when? replyed the knight. ſince a diſinherited Lady, ſayd Amadis, came hither for her right. But thou art not hee, quoth the knight, that foughteſt the Combate for her? I am the man, anſwered Amadis, who wonne her peace. By my head, ſaid the knight, now ſhalt thou looſe thine, if I can; for thou didſt kill the onely honour of my linage. I killed him not, ſaid Amadis, but made him diſcharge her of his outragious demand, and afterward he became a murtherer of himſelfe. All this cannot profit thee, quoth the knight, for by thee and no other he dyed: now for his ſake, ſhalt thou looſe thy life. Hereupon they gaue the ſpurres to their horſes, and breaking their Lances brauely, met ſo furiouſly with their bodies, as the knight of the Bridge was thrown to the ground; whereof he was not a little aſhamed: but by reaſon the helmet of Amadis was vnlaced in the running, while hee amended it, the knight had leiſure to mount him-ſelfe againe, and to giue his enemie two or three ſtrokes with the ſword, before he had time to draw out his. All which afterward hee very well requited; for ſtriking full at his head, hee brake away the skirts of his helmet, and redoubling his blow, me
                        ••
                     e ſo directly with his necke, as his head hung downe behinde his ſhoulders, his

ſoule paſſing to the Author of his pride and cruelty. When his gardants of the bridge ſawe him thus ſlaine, they truſted to their heeles, yet Amadis would not follow thē, but returned to the Squire that cō
                     ducted him thither: willing him to make haſte to his Lady, and let her vnderſtand how he had reuenged her husbands iniurie: which he immediately did, not ſparing the worthy attaints at Sword and Launce, which he had ſeene Amadis beſtow on the Knight of the bridge.
                  
                     Amadis hauing there no more to do, iſſuing forth of the Forreſt, entred on a large & goodly plaine, brauely beautified with violets, ſweete hearbs, and all other deuiſes of natures tapiſtrie, which preſently prouoked the remembrance of his Oriana: riding on in diuers amorous thoughts, he ſaw come toward him an euill fauoured Dwarffe, on a ſimple Palfrey, whō he called to know from whence he came. My Lord, quoth the dwarfe, I come from the houſe of the coū
                     tie of Claire. Haſt thou not ſeene a young Knight, ſayd Amadis, named Galaor? No truely, anſwered the Dwarffe, but I know where (within three dayes) I can ſhew you the beſt Knight that euer bare Armes in theſe parts. When Amadis heard this, thinking hee had meant his brother, he ſayd: I pray thee my friend conduct me to the place where I may ſee him. With all my heart, replied the Dwarffe, on condition you will graunt me one requeſt, and goe with me whither I ſhall guide ye. The great deſire he had to finde his brother, made him ſoone conſent. Come with me then, quoth the Dwarffe, and I will bring ye where you ſhall behold the good Knight. So rode they on till darke night ouertooke them, which the Dwarffe perceiuing, he ſayd to Amadis, My Lord, hard by is a Caſtle where we may lodge this night, for there is a Lady who will friendly welcome vs. Thither they rode, and had kinde entertainment, when ſupper being ended, Amadis was brought to lodge in a ſumptuous bed: but he could take no reſt, his thoughts ſo hammered on the perfection of his miſtreſſe. And taking leaue the next morning of their friendly hoſteſſe, continued on their iourney till about mid-day, when they ſaw two Knights fighting againſt one, then Amadis approching to them, ſaid: Gentlemen, may it pleaſe ye to pauſe a while, and tell mee on what occaſion your quarrell ariſeth? At theſe words they ceaſed, & one of the two thus replied: It is becauſe this Knight maintaineth, that he alone is as able as we two together, to bring a hauty enterpriſe to end. In ſooth, ſayd Amadis, your difference is very ſlender, for the bounty of the one diminiſheth no iot of the other. The Knights perceiuing he ſpake the truth, ended their ſtrife, demanding of Amadis, if hee knew the Knight in King Liſuarts Court, who cōbated for the iniured widdow, whereby the good Knight Dardan was ſlaine. Why aske ye? quoth Amadis. Becauſe, ſaid the Knights, we would gladly meete with him. I know not, anſwered Amadis, whether your meaning be good or bad, yet is it not long ſince I ſaw him in the Court of King Liſuart. Hauing ſo ſayd, he rode on his way, when the three Knights hauing conferred a little together, they began to gallop after him: & he no ſooner heard them, but turned againe; then doubting they inded

ſome harme to him, he claſped on his Helmet and his Shield, yet had he no Lance, nor they likewiſe. Alas my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, what will ye doe? conſider you not they be three, and you alone? What matters that? anſwered Amadis, if they aſſayle me without reaſon why; by good right I muſt aſſay for mine owne defence.
                  On theſe ſpeeches, they came to him in this manner. Sir knight, we would demaund one thing of you, which we deſire ye not to denie, otherwiſe you may not ſo eaſily eſcape vs. The ſooner ſhall I grant it, quoth Amadis, if it bee reaſonable. Tell vs then, as you are a loyall Gentleman, where you imagine we may find him that ſlew Dardan? Hee who could doe no leſſe then ſpeake the trueth, thus replyed. I am hee, albeit I would haue you thinke, that I doe not ſo ſoone fulfill your requeſt, in reſpect of adding any praiſe to my ſelfe. When the knights heard him, they cryed altogether: Ah traytour, thou dyeſt; and drawing their ſwords ſet violently vpon him. Amadis offended to ſee him-ſelfe thus aſſailed, by them whom ere-while he had ſo friendly pacified: reſiſted them with ſuch reſolute courage, as at the firſt ſtroke he ſmote one of their armes from the body, the griefe whereof made him fall beſide his horſe: the ſecōd alſo felt his ſword ſo peizantly, that hee cleft his head to the very teeth, and ſent to keepe his fellow company. When the third beheld their bad ſucceſſe, hee put the ſpurres to his horſe and got him away, but Amadis being not ſo well mounted, let him eſcape, returning to Gandalin and the Dwarffe, who thus ſpake. Credite me my Lord, hence-foorth will I truſt better to your wordes then I did: let vs therefore make haſte hence if you pleaſe. So riding along, at length the Dwarffe ſhewed him in a pleaſant valley two high Pine-trees, neere which was a Knight mounted on a luſtie Courſer, and two other whom not long before hee had vanquiſhed, they running to catch their horſes there ſtrayed about the field. And looking againe, hee eſpied another knight lay leaning on his helmet, hauing his ſhield by him, and twentie Launces reared againſt the Pines, with two ſpare horſes likewiſe ready furniſhed. My Lord, quoth the dwarffe, doe you ſee the Gentleman that leaneth on his Helmet? What then? ſayd Amadis. He is, replyed the Dwarffe, the good Knight I promiſed to ſhew you. Knoweſt thou his name? quoth Amadis. He nameth himſelfe, anſwered the Dwarffe, Angriote diſtranans, and is the beſt knight that I haue heard report of. Tell mee then, ſaid Amadis, why he keepeth there ſo many Launces? I can therein, anſwered the Dwraffe, full well reſolue ye, liſten then a while. He loueth a Ladie of this countrey, who hateth him aboue all other: neuertheleſſe, he hath preuailed ſo much by fight, as her parents were conſtrained to giue him her. After he had gotten her into his power, he thought himſelfe the happieſt man in the world: but ſhee tolde him, he ſhould wade into no ſuch fond opinion, becauſe hee tooke a yong Ladie againſt her will. And albeit, quoth ſhee, perforce you haue enioyed me, yet while I liue neuer ſhall I loue, ye if you do not performe one thing for me. What Lady anſwered Angriote, is it

within compaſſe of my puiſſance? That is it, ſaid ſhe. Cōmand then ſweete Madame, replied Angriote, for I will accompliſh it euen to the death. The Lady whoſe euill will was toward him exceeding great, thinking to appoint him a place moſt conuenient for his death, or elſe to get him there ſo many enemies, as her Parents might enioy better aſſiſtance to take her from him: intreated him and his brother to guard this vale of Pines, againſt all knights errant that ſhold paſſe this way, cauſing them by force of Armes to take an oath, how they ſhould afterward trauaile to King Liſuarts Court, there to confeſſe her more beautifull thē the Ladyes they loued. And if it ſo fell out, that the brother to Angriote (whome you ſee on horſe-back) were vanquiſhed, and could endure the combate no further: then Angriote ſhould keepe this paſſage alone, during the ſpace of one whole yeere. 
                        〈◊〉
                      this cauſe they depart not hence all the day time, and at night returne to a Caſtle on the mountaine you ſee at hand: hauing already maintained their enterpriſe three moneths, in all which time Angriote neuer ſet hand to Sword againſt any Knight, becauſe his brother hath ſtil beene conquerour. Truſt me, ſaid Amadis, I beleeue thou ſayeſt true, and ſo I heard in the Court of King Liſuart, where not long ſince a Knight arriued, who confeſſed Angriotes Lady to be more faire then his friend, and me thought he called her name Grouoneſa. Very true, quoth the Dwarffe: but now ſeeing you are reſolued, remember your promiſe to me, and bare mee company as you ſayd you would. With right good will, anſwered Amadis, which is the way? Euen ouer this vale, replied the Dwarffe, but becauſe of this hinderance, as yet I thinke wee ſhall very hardly paſſe. Care not thou for that ſayd Amadis: ſo giuing his horſe the ſpurres, he rode on, and ſoone after he met a Squire, who thus ſpake to him. Go no further Gentleman, if you will not grant the Lady vnder the Pine, to be more beautifull then your Miſtreſſe. Neuer will I yeelde to ſuch a ſlander, replied Amadis, without force or extreame conſtraint. Returne then, ſayd the Squire, otherwiſe you muſt combate with the twaine you ſee before. If they aſſaile me, quoth Amadis, I muſt defend my ſelfe ſo well as I can: ſo vſing no more words, he rode on forward.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIX.
                  
                     How Amadis combated againſt Angriote and his brother, who guarded the paſſage of the valley, againſt ſuch as would not confeſſe, that their Ladyes were inferiour in beauty to Angriotes choyce.
                  
                  
                     WHen Angriots brother ſaw him comming, he tooke vp his weapons and met him, ſaying: Beleeue me Knight; you haue committed folly, in not graunting what our Squires gaue you warning of, you muſt therfore enter combate with me. As for the combate, anſwered Amadis, I like it much better, then to confeſſe the greateſt lye in the world. I know

well, ſayd the Knight, you muſt do it with diſaduantage in an other place. And truſt me, quoth Amadis, I thinke not ſo. Stand on your owne defence then, replied the Knight: wherewith they gaue the carrire againſt each other, meeting together ſo furiouſly, as the knight was vnhorſſed: yet held he faſt the raines of his bridle, till they brake in his hand, which cauſed him to fall on his necke to the ground, where hee lay without remembrance of himſelfe or any other. Heereupon Amadis alighted, and pulling the Helmet from his head, perceiuing that he was in a ſound, wherefore he buffetted him in ſuch ſorte, as he came to himſelfe againe. Thou art but dead, ſayd Amadis, if thou yeeld not thy ſelfe my priſoner. When the Knight ſaw the naked ſword ouer his head, fearing his death, he yeelded. Then Amadis mounted againe, perceiuing Angriote already on horſe-backe, ready to reuenge his brothers iniurie: and a Squire came to the Prince, bringing him a Launce, which he preſented him withall from Angriote. Soone after they encoūtered ſo galantly, as their Launces flew in pieces without any further harme, and ending their carrire, Amadis quickly drew his ſword, turning to Angriote, who thus ſpake. Make not ſuch haſt (Knight) to combate with the ſword, becauſe thou ſhalt haue time enough for that anon, (this he ſayd, in reſpect he reputed him-ſelfe the beſt at the ſword that might be found:) But I pray thee, quoth he, let vs iuſt till our Launces faile, or one of vs be ſent to the earth. Knight, anſwered Amadis, I haue weighty buſines elſe-where, and may not trifle time with tarrying heere. What? ſaid Angriote, thinkeſt thou to eſcape me ſo light ly? I promiſe thee it is the leaſt part of my thought: yet I pray thee let vs try one courſe more. Amadis was content, and taking ſuch Launces as each of them liked, finiſhed the Iuſt with ſuch violence, as Angriote was caſt downe and his horſe vpon him. Amadis leaping from his ſaddle, ſaw that a ſmall trunchion of a Launce had a little entred his body, yet ſcorning any ſhame ſhould be deſerned on his ſide, fighting for the honor and beauty of his Goddeſſe Oriana: ſnatching forth the trunchion, and marched with his ſword drawne againſt Angriote, who ſeeing him come, ſayd. I ſee Sir Knight thou art very young, and me thinkes before it be worſe with thee, thou wert better to confeſſe my Lady fairrer then thine. Then ſhould I lye very fowlly, anſwered Amadis, and (by my will) I ſhall not diſſent ſo farre from the truth. Theſe ſpeeches enkindled collor on either ſide, which made them charge ech other with ſuch vigour, as not onely they that beheld them, but euen themſelues were driuen into doubts, thinking it impoſſible to endure ſo extreamely. And to ſay ſooth the cauſe was hard, for Amadis vndertooke the honor of his Lady, for which hee could rather chuſe a thouſand deathes, then ſhe ſhould looſe one iot of her excellence: and this opinion ſtill whetted on his courage, that Angriote was compelled to diuers ſimple ſhifts, to auoyde the fierce aſſaults of his valiant enemy, who had wounded him in twenty ſeuerall places, and he perceiuing his death at hand, ſtepped aſide, thus ſpeaking to Amadis. Beleeue mee Sir Knight, there is more valour in thee then I imagined. Yeelde thy

ſelfe, ſayd Amadis, ſo ſhalt thou do wiſely, ſeeing thou art already brought into ſuch danger, for with the finiſhing of our combate, thy life will likewiſe end: which can be no pleaſure at all to me, in that I eſteeme of thee better then thou weeneſt. Theſe words he vſed, as well for the braue Chiualrie he noted in Angriote, as alſo the great honeſtie he ſhewed to the Lady in his poſſeſſion: whereupon Angriote returned this anſwer. It is reaſon I ſhould yeeld my ſelfe to the beſt Knight in the world, and the like all other to doe that beare armes: Beleeue me then gentle Knight, I not ſo much ſorrow for my foyle, as the wrackfull chance threatned to me, by looſing this day the onely thing in the world I moſt loue. That ſhall you not, quoth Amadis, if I can helpe it, beſide, the Lady ſhould ſhew her ſelfe very ingratefull, if ſhe acknowledge not your honorable paines in her defence, and it cannot be, but ſhe will requite ye with the good you haue deſerued. As for me, I promiſe ye to imploy my vttermoſt hability, in cauſing her conſent thereto, ſo ſoone as I ſhall returne from a ſearch I haue now in hand. My Lord, ſayd Angriote, in what place may I hereafter finde you? In the Court of King Liſuart, anſwered Amadis, where (hy Gods helpe) I meane ſhortly to be. So tooke he leaue of Angriote, who gladly would haue had him in his Caſtle, but he might not be hindered of his iourney.
                  Thus doth Amadis followe the Dwarfe, who guided him fiue daies without any aduenture, ſhewing him at length a meruailous ſtrong and pleaſant Caſtle, ſaying: Sir, within yonder hold you muſt performe the promiſe you made me. And I will doe it for thee, anſwered Amadis, if it confiſt in my power. I am in good hope thereof, quoth the Dwarffe, in reſpect I haue ſeene ſome proofe of your fortune: but know ye Sir how the place is named? No verily, ſayd Amadis, for till now I was neuer in this Country: It is called Valderin, replied the Dwarffe: and thus deuiſing, they came neere the Caſtle, when the Dwarffe willed him to take his Armes. Why? ſaide Amadis, ſhall we haue any ſuch neede? Yea mary, quoth the Dwarffe, for they ſuffer none to come forth that enter ſo lightly. Amadis buckled on his helmet, riding in before, the Dwarffe and Gandalin following after, then looking on euery ſide they could ſee no creature. This place ſayd Amadis is not inhabited, where is the requeſt thou ſaidſt I ſhould do for thee? Credit me Sir, ſayd the Dwarffe, I haue ſome-time ſeene heere a moſt braue Knight, and the ſtrongeſt in Chiualrie that euer I ſaw, who in that porch killed two Knights, one of them being my maiſter, him hee put to death very cruelly, without regard of fauour or mercy: In reuenge whereof, I would deſire that traytors head, which I haue long failed in obtaining, becauſe all ſuch as I brought hither, haue loſt their liues or remaine here in captiuity. Thou doeſt the part of a loyall ſeruant, anſwered Amadis: yet oughteſt thou to bring no Knight hither, before thou tell him againſt whom he ſhall fight. My Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, the man is knowne well enough, and reputed for one of the beſt Knights in the world: therefore when I haue named him, I could not meet with any ſo hardy as to reuenge my cauſe. Belike then thou knoweſt

his name, ſaid Amadis. Yea my Lord, replied the Dwarffe, he calleth himſelfe Arcalaus the enchanter, Amadis hereupon went further in, looking round about if hee might ſee any body: but all was in vaine, wherefore to reſt his horſe, he ſtaied there till euening, ſaying to the Dwarffe. What wilt thou I ſhall doe now it is ſo late? Alas my Lord, quoth he, the night being ſo neere at hand, me thinkes it were good wee departed hence. Nay truſt me, anſwered Amadis. I wil not budge hence till the knight come, or ſome other that can tell me tidings of him. But I dare not tarry, ſayd the Dwarffe, leaſt Arcalaus chance to know me, and imagine I practiſe the meanes of his death. Yet ſhalt thou beare me cō
                     pany, replied Amadis, as I will not excuſe my ſelfe from the promiſe I haue made thee. As thus they cōmuned, Amadis eſpied a Court ſomewhat more backward, where-into he entred and found no body: but he ſaw a darke place vnderneath, and certaine ſteps leading into the earth. Gandalin got holde on the Dwarffe, who would haue run away, and Amadis tooke great pleaſure to beholde his trembling, ſpeaking thus merily to him. Feare not tall fellow, but let vs go down theſe ſtaires, to ſee who is beneath. My Lord; quoth the Dwarffe, for Gods ſake ſpare me, nothing in the world can make mee goe into ſuch a fearefull place. If thou goe hence, ſaid Amadis, how wilt thou enioy the thing I promiſed thee, or know that I do my indeuour therein? Ah Sir, quoth he, I acquite you, and holde my ſelfe fully ſatisfied. But ſo do not I, anſwered Amadis, becauſe hereafter thou ſhalt not ſay I brake my promiſe. On my faith Sir, ſayd the Dwarffe, I freely diſcharge ye, and if you pleaſe to let me go, I will tarry for you in the way as we came hither. Get thee gone then, replied Amadis, for heere will I abide till to morrow morning attending the Knight.
                  In this manner the poore dwarfe eſcaped thence, and Amadis went downe the ſtaires, comming into a plaine place ſo darke, that hee could not imagine where he was: yet he proceeded on, and by groping on a wall felt a barre of iron, whereat hung a key which he took, opening therewith a chaine that locked a port-cullis, then heard he a lamentable voyce thus complaining. Ah God, how long ſhall we remaine in this miſerie? ſweete death why ſtayeſt thou from ſuccouring vs, who call to thee as our laſt refuge? Soone after the voyce ceaſed, which made him holde on his way, and enter a vault hauing his ſword and Shield ready: then paſſing further, he came into a great Pallace, at the entrance whereof hung a lampe burning, & ſixe men laide along aſleepe, with their Shields and Hatchets lying by them, the beſt of which he took himſelfe. They not awaking hee went on by them, and ſoone after heard another grieuous lamentation in this manner. Ah God full of pitty and mercy, ſend death if it pleaſe thee to deliuer vs from this hell. Now was Amadis in worſe caſe then before, for one of the ſixe Souldiers ſuddenly awaking, ſayd to his fellow: Ariſe, take theſe rods and make that curſed creature ſing another kinde of ſong, who hath thus diſturbed vs in our ſleepe. Mary and I ſhall, anſwered the other: ſo hee aroſe and tooke the rods, but as he went, he chanced to ſee Amadis before him, whereat he was ſomewhat affraid,

yet to be better aſſured, he demanded, who is there? I, quoth Amadis. What art thou? ſaid the other. I am, quoth he, a ſtrange Knight. Who brought thee hither, ſayde the Souldier, without any licence? No body, anſwered Amadis, but my ſelfe alone. The worſe for thee, replied the Souldier, now muſt thou be encloſed among theſe infortunate people, who cry as thou heareſt. Then ſtepping back, he ſhut the dore againſt Amadis, and waking his companions, ſaid. My friends I haue found a ſtrange knight, who to his harme hath entred on his good will. Let me talke with him, anſwered the Iaylor, and if I lodge him not worſe then the reſt, then blame me. So taking his hatchet and Shield, he came to Amadis with theſe words. Caitife, if thou wilt not die, throw downe thy weapons, leaſt with my hatchet I ſlice thy fleſh, & make carbonadoes of it. Very angry was Amadis to be thus threatned, wherefore he returned this anſwer. Slender is thy reaſon in thinking to feare me with thy words, but the Deuils ſhall affright thee a great deale more: for I will make them a preſent with thy ſoule, which ſo long hath giuen power to thy wicked body in doing euill. Preſently they ſmote at each other with their hatchets, the ioylor deliuering his ſtroke on the helmet of Amadis, ſo that it entred very far therein, & Amadis cutting through the iaylors Shield, enforced him to throw both it and his hatchet downe to ſtand to the only defence of his ſword: which endured not long likewiſe, wherefore he minded to grapple Amadis about the body, becauſe he was a man of maruailous ſtrength, yet could he not do ſo much as hee meant, in reſpect Amadis was a Knight both ſtiffe and ſturdy. Neuertheleſſe, the iaylor griped him very cruelly, till the Prince gaue him ſuch a blow on the face, as brake his iaw bones, which compelling him to fall downe amazed, Amadis had the meane to accompliſh his promiſe, ſeperating with his ſword the body from the ſoule.
                  The other Souldiours that beheld this fight, not thinking the iaylor was dead indeede, cryed to Amadis: how on perill of his life he ſhould not kill him, leaſt they likewiſe ſhould ſend him after. I know not, anſwered Amadis, what may become of me, but I am certaine he is ſafe enough for doing any more harme: herewith hee drew his ſword, and taking vp his hatchet againe, marched toward them that came againſt him, who charged him very ſharpe and roughly: yet the firſt he encountred with, followed the iaylor, ſo did the ſecond, and the fourth being ſmitten on his knees to the ground, had dyed, but he appealed for mercy, the other twaine bearing him company in the ſame ſuite. Caſt downe your weapons, ſayd Amadis, and ſhew mee them that complained ſo wofully: which they did, guiding him the way to the captiues, when Amadis hearing another voice ſomewhat neer him, demanded what he was. My Lord, replied the Souldier, it is a Lady in extreame anguiſh. Open the dore, quoth Amadis, that I may ſee her. Then one of them ran where the iaylor lay dead, and taking two keyes from his girdle, opened the dungeon where the Lady was encloſed: but ſhe imagining the iaylor entred, cryed. Alas man, take pitie on me, and oppreſſe me with no more torments.

Ah King, quoth ſhe, breathing forth a bitter ſigh: hard was my lot to be beloued of thee, ſeeing I buy my affection ſo deerely. Her grieuous moanes moued ſuch cō
                     pation in Amadis, as the teares trickled downe his cheekes, returned her this anſwer. Lady, I am not the iaylor that locked you heere, but the man who meanes to deliuer you hence if I can, a ſtrange Knight, ſeeking my fortune euery where. Alas my Lord, ſayde ſhe, what is become of the iaylor and his companions? He and ſome of them, anſwered Amadis, are ſent to hell to looke their copeſ-mates: then one of the Souldiers hauing brought a light, the Prince ſaw how the Lady was tied by the neck with a great chaine, which had ſo worne & diſployed her garments, as the naked fleſh appeared in many places, and when ſhe beheld that Amadis pittied her, ſhee thus ſpake. Although (my Lord) I am at this preſent ſequeſtred frōal my lifehood, yet time hath been, when I was the wealthy daughter to a King, and for a King you finde me in this miſery. Lady, quoth Amadis, it behooueth you to embrace patience, theſe are but the mutabilities of fortune, which no one is able to preuent or eſcape: and if the man for whom you haue thus ſuffered, be of any account, or loueth you, I am ſure he will conuert right ſoone this poore eſtate into rich aboundance, and remunerate your long ſorrowes with ioy and gladnes. So he cauſed the chaine to be taken from her neck, commanding garments to be brought and put about her: wherefore hee that brought the lights, ran for a ſcariet mantle, which Arcalaus not long before gaue the iaylor, and caſt it about the Ladies ſhoulders. This being done, Amadis tooke her by the hand, conducting her forth of the darke priſon, ſaying; She ſhould neuer returne thither againe, but he would looſe his life before: and paſſing by where the iaylor and the other lay ſlaine, the Lady began thus to complaine. Ah cruell hands, how many woūds and torments haue you giuen me, and diuers in this Caſtle without deſert? althought your bodies at this inſtant cānot receiue cōdigne vēgance, your damned ſoules may euermore abide in ſufferance. Madame, ſaide Amadis, while I go to deliuer the reſt of the priſoners, I leaue ye in my Squires cuſtody, ſo paſſing on to the port-cullis, he met the Souldier that brought the lights, ſaying. Sir, Arcalaus demandeth where the Knight is that entred heere, whether he be dead or taken. He who caryed the torch before the Prince, was ſo affraid at theſe words, that he let it fal, which Amadis made him take vp againe, thus ſpeaking to him. Villaine, feareſt thou being in my guarde? goe on. Thē aſſending the ſtaires, they came into the open Court, where they ſawe the greater part of the night was ſpent, the Moone ſhining cleare, and the weather faire: but the Lady feeling the aire, and beholding the heauens, was ſo repleat with ioy, that ſhe fell on her knees before Amadis, ſaying: Ah gentle Knight, the Almighty protect thee, and require the good I haue receiued by thee, deliuering me from comfortleſſe darkeneſſe. Amadis looking round about for Gandalin, and finding him not, ſearing he had loſt him, wherefore he ſaide: If the beſt Squire in the world be dead, I will take ſuch reuenge for his death may I but find his murderer, as neuer was the like

heard before. Being thus ouer-come with griefe, hee heard one crie, wherefore hee ran which way he thought beſt, and found the Dwarffe (that parted from him the night before) hanging by one leg on high at a great piece of wood, hauing a fire vnderneath him full of filthy ſtinking ſauours: & neere him he eſpied Gandalin tied to a tree, toward whom hee was going to vnbinde him, but hee ſaw the Dwarffe had greateſt need of help, wherefore he cut the cords in twaine that held him vp, catching him in his armes to ſet him on his feete, afterward he vnlooſed Gandalin, ſaying: In ſooth my friend, whoſoeuer entreated thee thus, made little reckoning of thy good deſerts. Now becauſe he would deliuer the other priſoners, he met the Lady comming forth of the Caſtle, as he returned back againe, but going on, he found the gates faſt ſhut againſt him: whereupon he ſtaied ul day light in a corner of the Court, ſitting downe by the Lady, accompanied with two of the Souldiers, the Dwarffe and Gandalin. And as they communed together, Gandalin ſhewed the Prince a place where-into he ſaw a horſe led, which Amadis being deſirous to ſee, came to the dore and found it ſhut: but he ran ſo ſtrongly againſt it with his foote, that he made it fly open, finding the horſe there ready ſadled and bridled, whereon he mounted, attending the day and ſight of Arcalaus, who he knew was already arriued at the Caſtle, by matters he heard of Gandalin and the Dwarffe. In meane while he conferred with the Lady, demanding what the King was ſhe loued ſo deerly, and for whom ſhe had ſuſtained ſuch iniury. Worthy Lord, quoth ſhe, Arcalaus getting intelligence, of the Princes affection toward me whom I loue ſo loyally, this diueliſh enchanter being his mortall enemy: thought he could be no better reuenged on him, then by depriuing me of his preſēce, imagining the griefe here-of would be greater to him then any other. Being thus perſwaded, he ſtole me away, at what time I was with many great perſonages, who were not able to giue me any ſuccor, by reaſon of the traiterous villainous ſorceries: for they could not deuiſe what was become of me, becauſe a wonderfull darke cloud enuironed me, which hindred them from following mee to this place, ſince when, I neuer ſaw light till now you brought mee forth. The diſloyall wretch ſaid by the way as he brought me, that he would be reuenged on my loue & my ſelfe by theſe meanes: I poore ſoule enduring the torments, and my loue the griefe of my abſence, yet ignorant where. Madame, ſaid Amadis, I pray ye name the man you ſpake of. It is King Arban of Norwales, anſwered the Lady, whom it may be you know. I know him right well, replied Amadis, for he is one whom I deerly loue, and now do I leſſe pitty your ſufferings then before: becauſe they haue bin for one of the beſt men in the world, who will ſo well recompence them, as by rendring you incomparable ioy, your loue and honor ſhall both be ſatisfied.
                  While thus they communed together, faire day appeared, when Amadis ſaw a Knight leaning in a window, who thus demanded. Art thou he that didſt kill my iaylor & my ſeruants? Art thou he, anſwered Amadis, that ſo treacherouſly putteth knights to death, abuſing likewiſe both Ladyes and Gentlewomen?

by heauen thou art one of the vileſt villaines that euer I heard of. As yet thou knoweſt not, ſaid Arcalaus, the vttermoſt of my power, but ſoone ſhalt thou haue experience thereof, to rid thee of ſuch boldnes in asking me what I can do, whether it bee wrong or right. Herewith hee went from the window, and not long after came downe into the Court, being well armed, & mounted on a luſty bay courſer. Now you muſt note that this Arcalaus, was one of the mightyeſt Knights in the world, yet no Gyant, wherefore when Amadis behelde him of ſuch ſtature, hee doubted not of his great force and ſtrength. Arcalous perceiuing hee eyed him ſo much, demāded what moued him ſo to doe? I imagine, anſwered Amadis, that according to thy large proportion, thou ſhouldeſt be a man of exquiſite Chiualrie: but thy peruerſe and humaine actions are a foule blemiſh thereto. Now truſt me ſayde Arcalaus I thinke my ſelfe highly beholding to fortune, who hath brought thee hither to make mee ſuch a ſmooth ſermon: but all this will not helpe thee, therefore defend thy ſelfe. So charging their Launces, they brake ſo brauely on their Shields, as the ſhiuers flewe vp into the aire, and with ſuch violence met their horſes and bodies, that they were both laide along on the ground. Quickly they aroſe, & with their ſwordes began a bloudy combate, wherein deſire of victorie, and hauty reſolution of vncō
                     querable courage, made thē continue a long time, till Arcalaus retiring aſide, thus ſpake to Amadis. Knight, thou art in danger of death, and becauſe I know not who thou art, tell me, that when I haue ſlaine thee, I may yet commend thy boldnes in entring heere. My death, anſwered Amadis, is in the hand of God whom I reuerence, and thine in the power of the Deuill, who is weary of helping thee: and bequeatheth thy body to ſo innumerable miſchiefes, as a preſent periſhing of ſoule and altogether. But ſeeing thou wouldeſt ſo gladly know my name. I am commonly called Amadis of Gaule, Knight to the Queene Briſana: let vs now then chat no longer but fall to the combate, for on my parte I promiſe no more reſting. A calaus aduancing his Shield, came with foming fury againſt Amadis, who knew full well how to welcome him: and ſuch eager ſtrokes paſt on either ſide, as their ſhields were ſcattered in pieces about them, & likewiſe many plates of their Armour. Now was it about the third houre, whē 
                     Arcalaus hauing ſuſtained great loſſe of his bloud, was forced to ſend vp and down before his enemy, and ſeeing the imminent death before his eyes, fled to that part of the Caſtle where he came out: yet Amadis by cloſe purſuit ſtill continued his feare, whereupon he ſtept into a chamber, at the dore whereof ſtood a Lady beholding the combate, and he was no ſooner encred the roome, but be caught vp another ſword, turning his face 
                        •
                     o Amadis, ſaying. Enter this chāber to make an end of our combate. The open Court, anſwered Amadis, is more ſpacious and conuenient. I will not come foorth, quoth Arcalaus, for thy pleaſure. What? ſaide Amadis, thinkeſt thou ſo ſlily to eſcape? ſo placing his ſhield before, he entred the chamber: but as hee lifted vp his ſword to ſtrike, he was depriued of ſtrength and the vſe of his members, ſo that hee fell to

the ground as he had beene dead. Yea mary, ſaid Arcalaus, this is the way to make thee dye as I deſired, ſleepe then till I wake thee. How ſay you Lady? quoth he to her that ſtood by, am I not (in your opinion) well reuenged on him? Indeed ſaide ſhe, he is now altogether at your commandement. Preſently he vnarmed him, Amadis not feeling any thing was done to him: afterward Arcalaus put on himſelfe the Princes Armour, thus ſpeaking to the Lady. Madame, looke (on perill of your life) that no one remoue him hence, vntill his ſoule haue forſaken his body: then hee intended to iourney to the court, where each one ſeeing him in the Armour of Amadis, might thinke he had ſlaine him.
                  But now the ſorrowfull Lady ſo lately deliuered from priſō, made ſuch mone as would haue melted a heart of Adamant, and what Gandalins countenance was, you may eaſily iudge: when Arcalaus ſawe the Lady lament, he ſayde. Dame, ſeeke ſome other to deliuer you from priſon, for I haue diſpatched your hardy Chamhion. Theſe wordes made Gandalin in ſuch deſpare, as he fell downe like one ſenceleſſe, and Arcalaus called the Lady to him in this manner. Come hither miſtreſſe, and you ſhall ſee him dead that durſt ſo boldely combate with me. When he had ſhewed him to her, he demāded if he were not now quiet enough, The comfortleſſe Lady ſeeing him in ſuch eſtate, wanted no teares to expreſſe the aboundance of her griefe, and withall: Ah God, quoth ſhe, how yikſome will the reporte of his death be to many? then Arcaldus calling his wife, ſayde. So &;soone as this wretch is dead, impriſon this Lady where ſhe was before, for I will go to the Court of King Liſuart, and there declare how I combated with Amadis, by couenant, that the conquerour ſhould cut off the head of the vanquiſhed, and within fifteene daies following, to publiſh his victory openly in great Brittaine. By theſe meanes none ſhal quarrel with me about his death, and I ſhall obtain the greateſt glory in the world, hauing ouercome him that conquered everyone. Thē went he where he left Gandalin and the Dwarffe, commanding them to be locked vp in a priſon: but Gandalin who wiſhed death, thinking his maiſter was dead indeede, would not goe with him, deſiring ſome one to kil him: and to enforce Arcalaus doe him ſo much fauour, reuiled him with names of traitour & villaine, hauing ſlaine the moſt loyall knight in the world, Arcalaus made no account of his words, but beecauſe he would not goe willingly, he dragged him by the eares, and thruſt him into the dungeon, ſaying. If I preſently kill thee, thou ſhouldeſt endure no more paine, but heere thou ſhalt ſuffer worſe then death. So mounted Arcalaus on the horſe of Amadis, and accōpanied with three Squires, rode toward the Court of King Liſuart.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XX.
                  
                     How Amadis was enchaunted by Arcalaus, when he would haue deliuered the Lady Grindaloya, and other from priſon: and how afterward eſcaped the enchantments by the ayde of Vrganda.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        GRindaloya the Lady deliuered by Amadis from priſon, made ſuch exceſſiue lamenrations for him, as euery one pittied her, ſhee thus ſpeaking to the wife of Arcalaus, and the reſt in the company. Ah faire Ladies, beholde yee not the beauty of this braue Gentle-man, who in ſo young yeeres was the onely Knight in the world? miſ-hap attend on ſuch, who by enchantment, iniurie men of vertue: O ſoueraigne creator, why dooſt thou ſuffer ſo bad minded people to liue? The wife of Arcalaus, who though her husband was addicted to ſhameleſſe crueltie, yet ſhe being of gracious and pittifull diſpoſition, grieued in her very ſoule to beholde his dealings, and continually praied for his amendmēt, comforting the wofull Lady ſo well as ſhe could. As thus they were deuiſing together, they ſaw two other Ladyes enter the chamber, each one bringing in her hand good ſtore of candles lighted, which they ſet round about on the cantons of the chamber: finding Amadis thus lying before the wife of Arcalaus and the reſt, they being not able to lift or ſtirre him. Then one of the Ladyes ſo lately there arriued, tooke (out of a little caſket ſhe carried) a Booke, whereon ſhe began to reade, and diuers times another voyſe anſwered her. As thus ſhe continued her lecture, many other voyces were heard, as they imagined them more then an hundred: then came another book flying into the chamber, ſeeming as if the winde caryed it, and fell downe at her feete that reade, ſhe pulling it in foure parts, burned it at the foure corners of the chamber where the candles ſtood. This done, ſhe returned to Amadis, and taking him by the right hand, ſaid. Lord Amadis ariſe, you haue ſlept too long vneaſily. Immediately, Amadis awaked, and riſing vp, thus ſpake. Alas where am I? I maruaile that I am aliue. Beleeue me Sir, anſwered the Lady, ſuch a one as you are muſt not dye in this ſorte, rather wil the heauens permit, that they who haue deſerued it ſhall dy by your hand. Herewith the two ſtrange Ladyes, not ſaying any more, returned the ſame way they came, leauing Amadis much amazed at this aduenture, and looking about for Arcalaus: but he was aduertiſed by Grindaloya, how he was gone to the court of King Liſuart, clad in his Armour, and mounted on his horſe, to reporte that he had ſlaine him in combate. Indeede I felt, quoth Amadis, when he vnarmed me, but on my faith methought I dreamed: and ſeeing he is gone with my armour, I will make his to ſerue me at this time. Hauing put on the armor of Arcalaus, he demanded of Grindaloya, what was become of Gandalin and the Dwarffe: ſhe tolde him they were impriſoned. Euill befall the villaine that ſo hardly vſed them, ſayde Amadis: and Lady, quoth he to Ar
                           •…
                        
                      wife, vpon your life

looke to the ſafetie of this noble woman till I returne. Comming fourth into the Court, it was a paſtime to ſee how Arcalaus ſeruants fled his ſight: but Amadis let them run, and went to the darke vncomfortleſſe priſons which were filled with captiues.
                  Now to tel ye in what diſtreſſed manner they were, you muſt note, the place was a vault of an hundred toyſes long, yet no more thē one foote and a halfe in breadth, without aire or light, and (which was worſt of all) ſo ful of priſoners, as they could ſcantly ſtand one by another. Amadis called Gandalin, who being in a manner dead, hearing his maiſters voyce, began to tremble: yet thinking it was not he, becauſe he verily imagined him to be dead, entred into diuers doubts of himſelfe, whither hee dreamed, or was enchanted. All this while Amadis greatly grieued, becauſe Gandalin made no anſwer, wherefore he called aloud againe: Gandalin where art thou? why doſt thou make me trauaile ſo much? ſpeake I pray thee. When he ſaw (for all this) Gandalin anſwered not, he asked the other priſoners, if a Squire ſo lately brought in there, was dead or aliue: but the Dwarffe remembering the voyce of Amadis, cryed out. Alas my Lord, we are both heere together aliue as yet, albeit we haue often enough wiſhed for death. Then Amadis cauſed candles to bee lighted at the lamp, which hung at the entrance of the dungeon, commanding them all to come forth, to their no little ioy and comfort, ſeeing themſelues deliuered from ſuch miſerable ſeruitude: and when they came into the open Court, they fell on their knees before the Prince, thanking God and him for this happie benefit. Amadis beholding their faces ſo pale, wan, and ouer-ſpent, ſeeming rather bloudleſſe ghoſtes then liuing creatures, was moued to exceeding compaſſion, eſpecially they being an hundred and fifty priſoners in all, and thirty of them were Knights at Armes: as he caſt his eye euerie where among thē, hee made more account of one then all the reſt, who notwithſtanding his ſicknes and debility, ſeemed of braue and comely conſtitution, and he perceiuing that Amadis noted him ſo much, ſtepped to him in this manner. Who ſhall we ſay (my Lord) hath done vs this grace, by deliuering vs frō ſo long wretched thraldome? Such as know me, anſwered the Prince, doe call me Amadis of Gaule, Sonne to King Perion, Knight to the Queene Briſana, and domiſticall ſeruant to king Liſuart her husband: in ſearch of a Knight I was brought hither by this Dwarffe, to whom I made promiſe in a ſute he had. In ſooth my Lord, replied the other, I am a Knight likewiſe, and ſeruant to the ſame King, who knoweth me full well, as likewiſe the moſt in his Court doe, with whom I haue been ſeene in greater honor then now I am: becauſe euer ſince my departure from the Court, I haue liued in the miſerie from which you redeemed me. How may I call your name? ſaide Amadis. Brandoyuas, anſwered the Knight. Full well did the Prince remēber, that he had heard report of him in the Court, wherefore courteouſly embracing him, he ſayde. Right glad am I, my ſtars ſo fauoured me, to deliuer you & theſe other frō ſuch a helliſh place: and though I neuer ſaw you til this preſent, yet oft haue I heard the King and his Barrons talke of your

Chiualrie, your long abſence beeing no little griefe to them. The reſt of the priſoners cōfeſſed their bounden dutie to him, deſiring him to appoint them what they ſhould doe: hee willing them to ſhape their courſe whether they thought beſt. My Lord, quoth they, albeit we know not what ſeuerall Countryes may harbour vs, yet will we ſtill continue your deuoted ſeruants, to attend on you when and whereſoeuer need ſhall require. So each one kiſſing his hand, they tooke their leaue, limiting their iournys as they thought good, not any of them tarying with Amadis, but Brandoyuas.
                  
                  Now go they to the wife of Arcalaus, Amadis thus ſpeaking to her. Lady, for your ſake and theſe other Gentlewomen, I forbeare to ſet this Caſtle on fire, albeit the euill behauiour of your husband is ſufficient warrant therefore: but in regarde of the courteſie Knights owe to Ladies, I am content to remit all at this time. Alas my Lord, quoth ſhe, heauen beareth record of the griefe my ſoule hath endured, through the behauiour of Arcalaus my husband: yet could I do nothing but ſhew obedience, as beſeemed a wife to her wedded Lord, with interceſſion for his change, notwithſtāding, I remaine at your diſpoſition. What I will doe, anſwered Amadis, I haue already toldeye, it now remaineth, that at my requeſt you giue this Lady Grindaloya honorable attirements, becauſe her birth and behauiour deſerueth no leſſe: in like manner, I would haue an Armour for this Knight, to requite his own which was taken from him, and a horſe as beſeemeth one of his profeſſion. If you miſlike of my demand, doe more or leſſe as you thinke good, but ſo
                        •…
                      owne part, I will haue hence the armour of Arcalans in liew of mine, and his horſe, by reaſon mine own was better: yet muſt I tell ye withall, that hee hath taken a ſword from me more worth then all the reſt. Sir, anſwered the Lady, your requeſt is ſo reaſonable, that beyond the power you alone haue heere, I ſtand bound in dutie to fulfill your commandement. Then ſent ſhe for the ſame armour belonged to Brandoyuas, and cauſed a horſe to be deliuered him: as for the Lady, ſhe brought her into her chamber, where ſhe clothed her in moſt ſumptuous accouſtrements, and returning to Amadis, deſired him to eate ſomewhat before he departed, whereto he willingly condiſcended. Now was the beſt viandes brought foorth, ſo ſhort warning might affoord, but Grindaloya was in ſuch haſt to be gone, as ſhe was loth to be troubled with any: whereat Amadis and Brandoyuas merily ſmiled, eſpecially at the Dwarffe, who looked ſo pale and wan with feare, that it was impoſſible for him to offer one word, which made Amadis, thus to ieſt with him. Tell mee Dwarffe, wilt thou that we tarry heere till Arcalaus come, and I to giue thee the ſuite thou deſireſt? In ſooth, my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, ſo deere hath the requeſt coſt me I made to you, as (while I liue) neither of you or any other will I craue the like: for Gods ſake then let vs be gone ere the Diuell come againe, for I cannot ſtand on the leg he hung me by, beſide, my noſe is ſo full of ſulphurous and ſtinking ſmels, as neuer ſhall I giue ouer ſneezing till I die. The Dwarffes words made them all laugh hartely, and after they had repaſted, Amadis
                     
bidding Arcalaus wife farwel, moū
                     ted on horſe-back with his company, the Lady thus ſpeaking at his departure. I ſhall pray Sir Knight, that God may ſend peace between my husband and you. Beleeue me Lady, quoth he, though I neuer care for it with him, yet ſhall it remaine twixt you and me, becauſe you deſerue it. So fortuned it after-ward theſe words tooke effect, and highly profited the good Lady, as in ſome part of this hiſtory you ſhall heare recited.
                  Now are they departed from the Caſtle of Arcalaus, riding till the night ouer-tooke them, lodging at a Ladyes place fiue leagues thence, where they were entertained with very gracious welcome: and on the morrow, after they had thanked their friendly hoſt, as they rode together, Amadis thus communed with Brandoyuas. Courteous Sir, I trauaile in ſearch of a Knight, as here-tofore I told ye, & imagining it will be little pleaſure to you to follow me, it were not amiſſe then if we parted. In ſooth Sir, anſwered Brandoyuas, I gladly would goe to King Liſuarts court, notwithſtanding, if you thinke it good, I will keepe ye company. Little neede ſhall I haue thereof, anſwered Amadis, I thanke ye, becauſe I muſt be cōſtrained to wander alone, ſo ſoone as I haue brought this Lady into ſuch ſafety as ſhe thinkes meete. My Lord, quoth ſhe, I will accompany this Gentleman if you pleaſe, ſeeing he trauaileth to the Court of King Liſuart: and there I hope to finde him for whom I was priſoner, who I am aſſured will be glad of my deliuerance. Now truſt me, anſwered Amadis, very well ſayde, goe then together, and God be your guid. Thus are they ſeperated, now remaining none with Amadis but Gandalin & the Dwarffe, of whom the Prince likewiſe demanded what he meant to do. Mary be your truſty ſeruant, ſayde the Dwarffe, if you like ſo well as I. I am well pleaſed, replied Amadis, and thou ſhalt doe what thou wilt thy ſelfe. In ſooth my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, ſeeing you releaſed me, I would gladly remaine in your ſeruice, for I know not where I may be halfe ſo well: the man and the maiſter being both agreed: they tooke their way as fortune liked to conduct them.
                  Not farre had they trauailed, but they met one of the Ladyes, that reſcued him from enchantment at Arcalaus Caſtle, ſhee weeping and mourning very grieuouſly: which mouing Amadis to pitty her complaints, made him demand the cauſe thereof. A Knight who rideth not farre before, quoth ſhe, hath taken from me a little caſket, wherein is matter of great cō
                     ſequence, yet no way able to pleaſure him: for ſuch things are therein, as within theſe three dayes one in my company and my ſelfe, reſtored from death the beſt Knight in the world, and ſhee likewiſe of whom I tell ye, is violently caryed away by another Knight, who is ridden before intending to force her. Heere you muſt obſerue, that the Damoſell now talking with Amadis, knew him not, by reaſon his helmet beuer couered his face: but when he heard how her casket was taken from her, hee neuer left gallopping till he ouer-tooke him, to whom hee thus ſpake, Knight, you deale not courteouſly, giuing this Lady cauſe thus to complaine of you, and me-thinkes you ſhould do a great deale better, to deliuer the casket againe you tooke from

her: but when the Knight heard him, hee fell in a great laughter. Why do ye thus laugh Sir? ſayd Amadis. I laugh at you, anſwered the Knight, whom I thinke ſcant wiſe in giuing councell to him that demands it not, the leſſe hope may you haue in ſpeeding in your ſuite. It may be, quoth Amadis, you care not for my words, yet it were good to deliuer the thing is none of yours. Belike you threaten me thē? ſayde the Knight. Not you Sir, anſwered Amadis, but your ouer-much boldnes in vſing force where it ought not to be. Is it true, quoth the Knight: with theſe words hee ſet the casket aſide in a tree, and returning to Amadis, ſayd. If your brauery be ſuch in deedes as it ſeemeth in words, come teach mee know it and receiue the law. So giuing the ſpurres to their horſes, they encountred together in ſuch ſorte, as the Knight being diſmoū
                     ted, his horſe fel ſo heauily on him, that he was not able to riſe againe: in meane while Amadis fetched the cofer, and deliuering it to the Damoſell, ſayd. Take your owne faire Lady, & tarry here till I bring your companion. Preſently he poſted after the other Knight, ouer-taking him at a thicket of trees, where he had tyed both his horſe and the Ladies, trayling her by the haire of the head into the wood, there to commit his villainous deſire, but Amadis cryed to him aloude in this manner. Of an euill death maiſt thou dye traytor, that wrongeſt a Lady in this ſorte without offending thee. As the Knight ſtrougled with her to get her into the wood, hee looked vp and ſaw Amadis, whereupon he left her, making ſpeede to his weapons and mounted on horſeback, then approching neere the Prince, hee ſayd. By my hand Knight, in hapleſſe time for thee didſt thou hinder me of my will. Such a will, anſwered Amadis, as diſtaineth honor, both men and beaſts deſpiſe. If I take not reuenge for it, quoth the knight then let me neuer weare armour againe. The world therein ſhall ſuſtaine a great loſſe, replied Amadis, of one addicted to ſuch villainy, that ſeeks to force Ladies, who ought in all liberty and honor to be defended, and ſo they bee by all loyall Knights. With a braue courſe they met together, when though the knight brake his lance, yet was hee hurled againſt the ground ſo violently, as the weight of his armour and ſtrength of his fall, made him lye trembling in a trance. Which Amadis perceiuing, to rid him out of his paine altogether, he trampled on his belly with his horſe feete, ſaying. Thus ſhalt thou looſe thy deſire of forcing Ladyes. And as for you faire ſoule, I hope heereafter you are rid from any danger of him. The more am I to thank you my Lord, quoth ſhe, would God my companion who hath loſt her casket, were as well deliuered as I am. She was the firſt, I met withall, anſwered Amadis, wherefore firſt of all I ſuccored her ſo well, as ſhee hath recouered what was taken from her, and beeholde where my Squire conducteth her hither-ward.
                  Now becauſe the heat was ſome-what violent, Amadis put off his helmet to take the ayre, when the Damoſell immediately knew him: for it was ſhee that at his returne from Gaule, conducted him to Vrganda the vnknowne, when by Chiualry he deliuered her friend at the Caſtle of Bradoy
                           •
                        , which made her remember him, and ſo did Amadis her, when alighting they embraced

each other, the like courteſie he ſhewed to the other Damoſell. Alas! quoth they, had we but dreamed on ſuch a defender, no villain could haue wronged vs halfe ſo much. On my faith, ſaid Amadis, the help you gaue me within theſe three daies, may not be compared with this matter of no validitie: for I was in greater extreamity thē you, but how could you poſſibly vnderſtand thereof? My Lord, (quoth ſhe that tooke him by the hand when hee was enchanted) mine Aunt Vrganda ſent me to the Caſtle of Arcalaus, by whoſe meanes we came thither, and you were recouered. Heauen ſhielde from euill that good Lady, anſwered Amadis, who hath ſo many waies bound me her obedient ſeruant: and you faire Damoſels, the meſſengers of this fauour, haue you any thing elſe wherein to cō
                     mand me? No my Lord, ſaid they, take you the way you left, and wee wil returne from whence we came. Fare well ſweet Virgins, replied Amadis, remember my humble duty to the health of your Miſtreſſe, telling her, ſhe knowes right well I am her Knight. In this manner rode the Damozels one way, and Amadis another: wherefore wee muſt now tell what happened to Arcalaus, ſince his departure from the Caſtle of Valderin.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXI.
                  
                     How Arcalaus brought newes to the Court of King Liſuart, that Amadis was dead, which cauſed his friends to make manifold lamentations and regreets, eſpecially the Princeſſe Oriana.
                     
                  
                  
                     SVch ſpeede made Arcalaus after his departure from Valderin, where he left Amadis enchanted, hee being (as I haue ſaide) clad in his armor, and mounted on his horſe: that the tenth day following, hee arriued neer the court of king Liſuart, who was riding abroade in the fields to take the aire, accōpanied with his Lords along the forreſt ſide. They ſeeing Arcalaus come a far off, hauing on the armor of Amadis, imagining it was hee indeede, diuers rode before to welcome him: but when they came more neere, they found thēſelues deceiued, by reaſō 
                     Arcalaus had his head and hands vnarmed, wherefore without ſaluting the Gentlemen, he ſtepped to the King with theſe words. Sir, I come to acquite a promiſe wherein I ſtand bound, namely to let you vnderſtand, how I haue ſlaine a Knight in battaile, that ſome-time bare theſe armes. And albeit I muſt be content to declare mine owne prayſe, which were more honorable for me, being reported by another in mine abſence: yet am I conſtrained to do no leſſe, ſeeing the couenant was betweene me & him whom I haue ſlaine: viz. that the conquerour ſhould diſpoyle the vanquiſhed of his head, and preſent it before you as this day. Full loth was I to be ſo cruell, becauſe hee tolde mee hee was your Queenes Knight, commonly called Amadis of Gaule, and ſo hee named himſelfe whom I vanquiſhed. As for me Sir, I tolde him in truth that I was Arcalaus, whom fortune

hath graced with ſuch ſinguler fauour: for I haue ſlaine the man, ſome-time owner of this armour and horſe, which as a teſtimony of my victory I brought with mee. Ah God, ſayde the King, is then the moſt vertuous and accompliſhed Knight in the world dead? you lowring heauens, why began ye ſo braue to courſe in him, and now on ſuch a ſudden to cut it off? Theſe ſorrowfull newes prouoked ſighes and teares, both in the King and his royall company, which Arcalaus perceiuing, not ſpeaking any thing elſe, returned the ſame way he came, feigning himſelfe likewiſe very ſad and grieued: but you muſt thinke he went not without great ſtore of curſes, euery one inſtantly deſiring God, to ſend him an euill and ſpeedy death, which with their Swordes they could gladly haue beſtowed on him themſelues, but that they heard howe Amadis was ſlaine by an accorded battaile.
                  The King being ouercome with penſiueneſſe and ſorrow, returned to the Towne, where theſe newes were ſo opened to euery one, that at length the Queene and her Ladyes heard thereof, which preſently conuerted their former pleaſures in to mourning. At this time was the Princeſſe Oriana in her chamber with the Damoſell of Denmarke, where hearing the ſudden clamour and noyſe, ſhe commanded her to goe vnderſtand the cauſe thereof. Alas good Lady, too ſoone was it brought to her, for no ſooner was ſhe acquainted with the death of Amadis, but her immoderate paſſions expreſſed the anguiſh of her heart: and more to afflict this gentle Princeſſe, the other Ladyes came weeping into her chamber, ſaying. Ah Madame, what tongue can deliuer this wonderfull miſhap? yet durſt ſhe not (good Lady) bee too forward in enquiring the manner thereof, leaſt the cinders of her affection might be diſcouered: and as if ſhe had beheld Amadis dead before her, ſhe ſayde. Alas! he is dead, it can not be otherwiſe. It is true madame, anſwered the Damoſell, but what remedy? you muſt not likewiſe dy for company. Theſe words made Oriana fall into a ſwoune, which the Damoſell of Denmarke beholding, thought ſhee had too indiſcreetly brought her theſe bad tidings, whereupon ſhe called the Princeſſe Mabila, ſaying. Helpe Madame, my miſtreſſe dyeth. She being come, ſaw that ſhee neither moued or breathed, doubted leaſt life had taken leaue indeed, wherefore ſhe commanded the Damoſell to ſhut the dore, to the end her loue all this while ſo well concealed, might not breake foorth into open ſuſpition. Then vnlacing her garments to giue her more libertie, as alſo bathing her temples and pulſes with vineger & cold water, ſhe recouered againe, when deliring a faint figh, with a feeble voiſe ſhe thus ſpake. Ah ſweete friends, hinder me not in the way of death, if you deſire my reſt, and would haue God find him another world, who knew not how to liue one day without me. Ah flower and mirrour of chiualrie, thy death is inſupportable not to me alone, but to the whole world, who is replete with griefe for thee, becauſe they haue loſt him who in bounty, prudence, hardines, and all other vertues, did honor them aboue the compaſſe of all deſire. And were yet any feeling in thee, I am certaine thou wouldſt not ſorrow for thy loſt life, but for my loue, enduring

by thy miſſe maruailous afflictions: for thou haſt left ſuch honor in the world behinde thee, conquering ſo incomparable reputation in this ſhort time of thy life, that (rekoning thy merites) thou diedſt poſſeſſed with many yeeres. Thus liueſt thou in place immortall, I remaining heere alone after thee, can giue but wounding and vnthankfull ſpeeches. Ah cruell death, ſufficed it not that mighty loue murdered him with his feathered ſteele, but thou muſt kill him out-right with thy cureleſſe ſtroke? well, in reſpect it is ſo, offend not thy ſelfe my loue, for thou ſhalt ſoone ſee reaſon proceede frō her that did thee wrong, who beeing the cauſe, will beare thee company in death. And I may iuſtly challenge him of wrong, ſeeing equall loue had vnited our willes to ſeperate our perſons in this ſorte: where hauing affoorded our ending together, wee likewiſe might haue inioyed one ſepulchre. After theſe words ſhe ſwounded againe in Mabilaes armes, and in ſuch manner altered her countenance, as they reputed her verily dead, her faire and golden lockes being diſcheueled, her armes and legges depriued of vitall motion, euen as when the ſoule hath taken his flight, from the body. Mabila deſparing of any life left in her, was ſo ſurpriſed with griefe, that ſhee was conſtrained to leaue the Damoſell alone with the Princeſſe, & walking ſome-what aſide by her ſelfe thus lamented. Incomprehenſible wiſdome, let mee not liue to endure theſe trauailes, ſeeing thou haſt taken theſe two from me whom I loued as my life. But when the Damoſell of Denmarke ſaw her ſelfe thus alone betweene two extreames, ſhee was maruailouſly abaſhed: yet as one wiſe and well gouerned, ſhee ſpake in this manner to the Princeſſe Mabila. Why Madame? when were you wont to abuſe your honourable vertues? is it now time to forget your ſelfe? will you thus conſent to the death of my Lady? you rather ought to aide and comfort her, then thus to forſake her, and procure her further danger if ſhee reuiue againe. Come I pray yee ſuccour her, for now is the time of greateſt neede, and let theſe lamentations be referred till another time. Mabila perceiuing the Damoſell ſaide true, wherefore ſhe came to Oriana, and feeling by her warmeneſſe ſome hope of life to bee expected, they lifted her vpon the bed, when ſoon after her ſpirites returned to their office: and to qualifie this agonie, they could deuiſe no better means, then to buſie her eares with ſome or other ſpeeches. Why Madame? quoth one, will ye leaue vs? at leaſt yet ſpeake to vs. Madame ſaide the other, your Amadis is yet aliue and well. At the name of Amadis, ſhee opened her eyes, turning her head here and there as if ſhe looked for him: which good humour Mabila deſirous to continue, proceeded thus. Amadis commeth Madame, and ſhortly you ſhall ſee him. Oriana giuing a great ſigh, ſtarted vp, ſaying. Alas ſweete friend, where is he? We vnderſtand, quoth ſhee, that he is in very good health, and how the Knight who brought theſe bad tidings, is wont to vaunt of himſelfe without cauſe feeding himſelfe with falſe praiſe of deceiuing Knights. Why? ſaide Oriana, haue I not heard that hee brought his horſe and armour? A matter of nothing, anſwered Mabila, they may as wel be borrowed or ſtolne, or he (happily) ſent with that falſe

allarme, to try out conſtancy: then finding vs thus weakely diſpoſed, hee ſhould haue had the thing he deſired. I would not haue you thinke ſo ſimply Madam, that Amadis could be ouercome by one and no better a knight then he, nor were it reaſon to credit a commender of himſelfe, bringing his owne glory for teſtimony and no other approbation: I am aſſured that Amadis will come ere long, and if he finde you not onely dead in a manner, but thus giuen ouer to griefe: it will coſt his life, ſo ſhall you deliuer vnhappy proofe, what wicked feigning by malice can do, and thus you both ſhall die one for another, When Oriana remembred, how by this meane ſhe might be the death of her friend, if by good hap he yet enioyed life, and imagined likewiſe that Mabila ſpake the truth▪ ſhe tooke courage, caſting her eye on the windowe, where many times Amadis and ſhe had amorouſly conferred, when firſt he ariued at her fathers Court, and intercepting a number of forced ſighes, thus ſpake. Ah window, the witneſſe of my abādoned pleaſures, how piercing is the doubt of him whom thou cauſeſt me remember, and by whoſe gracious words both thou and I were made happy? Of this I am certaine, that neuer canſt thou indure ſo long as two ſo loyall louers might (by thee) enioy ſuch delight as he and I haue done: which fayling mee now, giueth me ſtrange and inſupportable torments to bee my companions, and hence-forth ſhall my ſad ſpirit remaine in bitter ſadnes, vntill the comming of him or my death. Mabila perceiuing the cheefeſt danger was paſt, laboured to confirme her opinion more ſtrongly then ſhee had done, in this manner. Why Madam? thinke you if I held theſe babling newes for truth, I could haue the power to comfort you in this ſort, the loue I beare to my Cozin is not ſo little, but rather I ſhould incite all the world to weepe, then want conſolation for you, who ſtand in ſuch neede thereof. But I ſee ſo ſlender appearance of beleefe, as I will not before time require, repute you vnfortunate, becauſe diſcomforting our ſelues without aſurance: The euill hereby may be amended, and the good made much more worſe, eſpecially it will be the meane of diſcouering, what hath ſo long time beene ſhaddowed in ſecret. Alas, quoth Oriana, if he bee dead, I care not though our loue were openly knowne for all our miſhaps in reſpect of it are nothing.
                  Thus debating and deuiſing together, the two Ladies all that day kept their chamber, not ſuffering any other to come in: for when the Damoſell of Denmarke (who paſſed often in and out) was demanded for Oriana, ſhe anſwered that ſhe accompanied Mabila, whom ſhe would not ſuffer to part from her, by reaſon of her griefe for her Coſin Amadis. Thus was the princeſſes ſecret ſadneſſe couered, all night ſhe being vnable to take any reſt, ſuch were her aſſaults between doubt and deſpaire, not forgetting any thing that paſt betweene her and Amadis ſince their younger yeeres. But on the morrow about dinner time, Brandoynas entred the palace, leading Grindaloya in his hand, which gaue great ioy to ſuch as knew them, for of long time they could not imagine what was become of them: they falling on their knees before the king, were quickly called to remembrance,

his maieſty thus ſpeaking. Sir Brandoyuas, how chaunce you haue tarryed ſo long from vs? Alas my Lord, quoth he, impriſonment hath bin the cauſe, whereout (had not the good Knight Amadis of Gaule, giuen liberty to me, this Lady and many more, by ſuch deedes of Armes as are vnſpeakable) we could neuer haue been deliuered. Yet was he once in danger of tarying there himſelfe, by the villainous coniurations and ſorceries of Arcalaus: but he was ſuccoured by two Damoſels, who deliuered him from all the exorciſmes. When the King heard him name Amadis, whom hee verily thought to be dead? What my friend? quoth he, by the faith thou oweſt to God and me, is Amadis liuing? Yea my good Lord, anſwered Brandoyuas, it is not ten dayes ſince I left him in good diſpoſition: but may it like you to tell me, why you demanded ſuch a queſtiō? Becauſe, ſayd the King, Arcalaus yeſterday tolde vs he had ſlaine him: heere-with he declared his ſpeeches, and the manner how. What a traiterous villaine is that? replied Brandoyuas, but worſe is befalne him then he weeneth as yet: hereto he added what paſſed betweene Amadis & Arcalaus, as already you haue heard, whereby each one forſooke the ſorrow of the former falſe newes, the King preſently commanding, that Grindaloya ſhould be conducted to the Queene, that ſhee might vnderſtand theſe happy tidings.
                  Into the Queenes chamber is ſhe brought, and the Damoſell of Denmarke hearing her reporte, ran with all ſpeede to the Princeſſe Oriana, who hearing by her the truth of all, the paſſage of her ſpeech was ſtopt for a long time, ſeeming as one confounded with enchantment, thinking in theſe newes ſhee gaue her the bag, or that ſhe dreamed them, but when ſhe recouered the vſe of her tongue, ſhe thus anſwered the Damoſell. Alas my friend, did I raue? or toldeſt thou me that Grindaloya teſtified to the Queene, how Amadis is not dead? In good faith, quoth the Damoſel, I came but euen now from her highnes chamber, where Grindaloya declared how Arcalaus had deceiued thē. Happy bee this houre, ſayde Oriana, but I pray thee goe tell my mother, that Mabila entreates her to ſende the Lady to comfort her: which ſhe did, returning right ſoone with Grindaloya to Oriana. I leaue to imagine whether ſhee were well entertained or no, with all the modeſt courteſies ſo glad tidings deſerued, likewiſe whether Oriana and Mabila gaue her audience, when ſhe recounted Amadis deedes of armes at Valderin, the miſery of her and many other, the danger whereinto he fell afterward by the enchantments of Arcalaus, from which hee was deliuered by two ſtrange Damoſels. The diſcourſe hereof ſo pleaſed & contented them, that I think Grindaloya had an endleſſe taske in the reporting, for Oriana muſt heare euery thing often redoubled. But repeating the dangers of Amadis, and the miſery from which he deliuered the poore captiues, cauſed teares ſo thick as winters haile to trill downe her cheekes. Thus taried Grindaloya all day wiih the two Princeſſes, and had not ſo ſoone departed, but that ſhee was aduertiſed, how that King Arban of Norwales, (who loued her deerely) expected her returne in the Queenes chamber. Good reaſon had ſhe to take leaue of Oriana, and ſeeke him

from whom ſhee ſuffered ſuch ſorrow: But when theſe loyall louers met together, each one was delighted ſo ſubſtantially, as Grindaloya thought her griefes well recompenced. Now becauſe the Queene vnderſtood, how ſhee was daughter to King Ardroyd of Seralis, and all her miſeries had been for the loue of king Arban: with inſtant intreaty ſhee procured her ſtay in the Court, doing her all the honour and fauour could be deuiſed. Grindaloya was not curious in granting the Queenes requeſt, becauſe king Arban was partaker in the ſame ſuite: by this occaſion the Queene was aduertiſed, that ſhee had a maruailous faire ſiſter named Aldena, who was nouriſhed in the Duke of Briſtoyaes caſtle, which made her preſently diſpatch a Gentleman thither, with requeſt that the Dutcheſſe would ſend her to the Court. This Aldena was the friend to Galaor, ſhee for him ſuffered ſuch iniurie by the Dwarff as you haue heard before diſcourſed. We haue a long time continued with Amadis, now let vs returne againe to Galaor, leauing King Liſuart in hope to ſee him ſoone in his Court, whom Arcalaus ſaid he had ſlaine in combat.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXII.
                  
                     How Galaor came very ſore wounded to a Monaſtery, where he ſoiurned fiue dayes attending his health, and at his departure thence, what happened to him ſhall be declared in this Chapter.
                  
                  
                     FIue dayes together aboade Galaor at the Monaſtery, whether he was conducted by the Damozell he deliuered from priſon, attending there the recouery of his wounds: but when hee found himſelfe able to weare his Armor, he tooke leaue of the ſiſters, and rode on his iourney, euen which way fortune pleaſed to guide, for he had minde to no part more then another. About mid-day he arriued in a valley, in the middeſt whereof ſtood a fayre fountain, where he found a knight armed hauing no horſe: Galaor maruailing thereat, demanded if hee came thither on foote, the knight returning this anſwere. Beleeue me no, but riding through this Forreſt to a Caſtle of mine, I met with certaine theeues that ſlew my Horſe: thus am I brought into the ſtate you behold me, by reaſon my ſeruants heare not of my misfortune. Why? You ſhall haue my Squires monture, anſwered Galaor: I thanke you ſir, quoth the Knight, yet before wee part hence, you ſhall know the great vertue of this fountaine, for there is no poyſon in the world ſo ſtrong, that hath any force againſt this water, wherefore by reaſon of ſo ſoueraigne a benefit, often times enuenomed beaſts doe drink here-of, and are preſently healed: beſide, diuerſe of this Countrey vſe to come hither, and finde redreſſe for all their infirmities. In ſooth you tell me meruailes, replied Galaor, and ſeeing I am now ſo neere it, I will alight to drinke thereof as others haue done. Good rraſon you ſhould anſwered the Knight, becauſe you are ignorant of comming this way againe. Galaor leaped

from his Horſe, bidding his Squire alight to drinke as he did: but while they were drinking, the knight claſped on his owne head Galaors helmet, and taking his Launce mounted on his Horſe, when leauing the Prince drinking he rode away, ſaying. Farewell Knight, I muſt be gone, tarry thou here to beguile another as I haue done thee. Galaor lifting his head from the water, and ſeeing the Knight make ſuch haſt away, thus called to him. Ah villaine, neuer did theefe ſuch a treacherous pranck as thou haſt done: for thou haſt not alone deceiued me, but committed an act of great diſloyalty, which thou ſhalt well know, if euer I meet with thee. Yea mary, anſwered the knight, reſt your ſelfe there, till you recouer ſome other meane to combat with me.
                  Gone is the Knight ſo faſt as he could gallop, leauing Galaor chaſing like a mad man, but ſeeing there was no remedy, he mounted on his Squires horſe and purſued him, til at length he came to a double way: when not knowing which of them to take, becauſe he had loſt the ſight of him, hee ſtood ſtill in great penſiuenes, till at length hee ſaw a Damoſel come riding a pace toward him, of whom hee demanded, if ſhe met not a knight mounted on a bay Courſer, bearing in a whi
                        ••
                      ſheeld a vermilion flower. What would you with him? replyed the Damoſell. I would quoth he recouer again my horſe & Armes, for they be mine, and by falſe villanies hee hath carried them from me. When happened this? ſaid the Damoſell: wherewith Galaor told her all the diſcourſe. Well, quoth the Damoſell, what can you doe to him being thus vnarmed? for I thinke hee tooke them not away to reſtore them againe. I care for nothing elſe, ſaid Galaor, but to finde him once more. Truſt me, anſwered the Damoſell, if you wil grant me one boone, ſoone ſhall I bring ye together againe, Galaor being very deſirous hereof, agreed to any thing ſhe would demand. Follow me then, quoth ſhe, ſo turning her horſe, rode the ſame way ſhe came, keeping cōpany a while together: but the Damoſell being better mounted then he, left him behinde with his Squire, & rid before ſo faſt, that they had loſt the ſight of her, trauailing the ſpace of 3. miles without any news of her, but at laſt on a great plain they ſaw her returne againe, here you muſt note, that the cauſe of her riding thus before, was to aduertiſe the other knight (being her deere friend) of their comming, and hee had expreſſely ſent her to fetch Galaor, to deceiue him of the reſt of his Armour: which he imagined eaſily to do without danger, ſeeing hee had gotten the chiefeſt thing of his defence, and afterward he intended to kill him, or put him to ſome notorious ſhame. For this cauſe he taryed in a Pauilion, erected by him on the plaine, and no ſooner came ſhe to Galaor, but thus ſhe ſpake. Gentlemā, to the end I might not faile in my promiſe, I forſooke your cō
                     pany a while, only to ſee if the man you looke for, were in the place I left him or no: there haue I found him, little thinking on your coming, and in yonder Pauilion may you ſpeake with him at pleaſure. As thus they deuiſed together, they came to the Tent, wherefore Galaor alighted to enter, but the Knight meeting him at the doore, ſaid. Sir knight, what moueth thee to come in here without licence, truſt me it is but little for thy profit,

becauſe thou muſt here leaue the reſt of thine Armour, or die preſently. Thou mayſt be therein deceiued, anſwered Galaor, and the wordes of ſuch a wretch as thou art cannot feare me.
                  This reply very angerly incenſed the Knight, lifting vp his ſword to ſmite the Prince on the head, but Galaor cunningly eſcaped the blowe, giuing his enemy ſuch a ſtroake on the top of his helmet, as made him ſit one knee to the ground: then quickly laying hold on him, got the helmet beſide his head, ſpurning him ſo ſtrongly with his feete, that therewith hee fell on his face to the earth. When the Knight beheld himſelfe in ſuch danger, he called with a loud voice to the Damofell for ſuccor, where-upon ſhe ſtepped to Galaor, ſaying: that hee ſhould holde his hand, for this was the boone he promiſed to giue her. But he being in extream choller, gaue no eare to her ſpeeches, bringing the Knight into ſuch eſtate, as hee left no vitall motion in him: whereat the Damoſell being ready to deſpaire, breathed forth many grieuous lamentations, ſaying. Alas wretch that I am, too long haue I trifled time: for in ſeeking to beguile another, my ſelfe am worthiely requited with deceite. And thou traytor quoth ſhee to Galaor, who haſt thus cruelly put him to death, heauen ſend thee a more worſe and hapleſſe end, for by thee haue I loſt my only felicity in this world: for which (bee well aſſured) it ſhall coſt thee thy life, becauſe thou haſt broken promiſe with mee, and in ſuch a place will I demand reuenge on thee, as nothing but thy death ſhal expiate my anger, wert thou a Knight of greater hardineſſe then thou art: if then thou make refuſall there, I ſhall haue more then iuſt occaſion to publiſh in all places, the puſillanimity of thy faint hearted courage.
                  Faire Damoſell, anſwered Galaor, if I had thought his death would haue beene ſo grieuons to you, I could haue ſpared part of my diſpleaſure, though iuſtly hee deſerned no leſſe, but you ſpake when it was too late. The worſe for thee, replyed the Damoſell, becauſe thy death ſhall recompence his. Galaor ſeeing ſhee continued her threatning ſpeeches, without any further anſwere left her, lacing on his helmet, mounting on the horſe the dead Knight tooke from him: and hauing ridden a pretty while, hee looked backe to ſee if the Damoſell followed him, when perceiuing her hard at his horſe heeles, demanded of her whither ſhee trauailed. With thee, anſwered the Damoſell, and neuer will I leaue thee, till I haue found opportunity to requeſt the boone thou didſt promiſe me, which ſhal be the loſſe of thy head by ſome euill death. Me thinkes it were better, ſayde Galaor, for you to take ſome other ſatisfaction of me, and happily might bee more pleaſing to you. Not any thing elſe, quoth ſhee, thy ſoule ſhall accompany his whom thou haſt ſlaine, elſe neuer ſhalt thou accompliſh what thou haſt promiſed mee. Well, well, anſwered Galaor, I muſt ſtand to the hazard of that as I may: thus quarreling, they rode on three dayes together, and entered the Forreſt of Angaduze, an aduenture there happening to them, whereof the Author hereafter maketh mention.
                  But now he returneth againe to Amadis, who taking his leaue of Vrgandaes Damoſels, as you haue

heard before recited: rode on till about noone time, when iſſuing forth of the Forreſt, hee ſaw on a plaine a very faire Caſtell, whereout came a goodly Chariot, ſo brauely equiped as euer he beheld any, it being drawen by two braue red ſteedes, which were couered with imbroydered crimſon ſattin, as it made a very dainty and ſeemely ſhew. The Chariot was guarded by eight armed Knights, yet Amadis being deſirous to ſee who was in it, drew ſomewhat neere to lift vp the rich couering, but one of the Knights came to him with theſe rough wordes: Keepe backe Sir Knight, and bee not ſo bold to come thus neere. What I doe, anſwered Amadis, is for no harme. Whatſoeuer it bee replyed the other, trouble your ſelfe no further, in reſpect you are not worthy to ſee what is here couered: for if you enterpriſe the like againe, it will value your life, becauſe thou muſt deale with all in this troupe, and ſome ſuch one is amongſt vs, as is able alone to get the maiſtrie of thee, more eaſily then may wee altogther vſe thee as we liſt. I know not, ſayd Amadis, the Knights valour you ſpeake of, but hap good or bad, I will ſee what is in the Chariot. Herewith hee tooke his Armes, which the two Knights ſeeing that rode formoſt, they ran both againſt him, the one breaking his Launce, and the other miſſing: but Amadis ſped otherwiſe, for the firſt very eaſily hee caſt from his ſaddle, & the other he threw both horſe and man to the ground. Then Amadis went towarde the Chariot, yet was he ſtayed by two other Knights, one of them being likewiſe diſmounted, and with his ſword hee gaue the other ſuch a welcome on the pate, as hee was glad to keep himſelfe from falling, by catching faſt holde about his horſe necke, when the other foure ſawe their companions ſo vſed by one Knight, they maruailed not a little, and being willing to reuenge their iniury, altogether fiercely charged Amadis. With this laſt aſſault hee found himſelfe ſore combred, for one of them tainted him in the ſhield, and another in his armour, as hee eſcaped hardly from beeing ouerthrowne: notwithſtanding hee held out valiantly, deliuering ſuch ſtroakes to the firſt he met, as hee fell beſide his horſe in a ſwoune. The three that remayned turned their faces, ſeeking which way they might ſooneſt hurt him: but hee ſnatched a Launce from one of them, which yet remayned whole, and met one with ſuch a full carriere, that piercing quite thorough his throate, hee fell to the ground and gaue vp the Ghoſt.
                  After his death, he came to another of them, and with his ſword ſmote the helmet from his head: when ſeeing hee was a very ancient knight, hauing his head and beard ſo white as ſnowe, mooued with pittie, he friendly thus ſpake. Father, henceforth it were good you left the vſe of armes to younger then your ſelfe, ſeeing you haue liued ſo long without gayning honour or commendation, marry your age doth now excuſe yee. In good faith anſwered the Knight, your ſpeeches are very contrary, becauſe if it bee ſeemely for young men to ſeeke renowne and fame by armes: it is more neceſſarie that an auncient man ſhould doe his endeauour, to maintayne thoſe affaires ſo long as he can. Beleeue me Father, ſayd Amadis, your reaſon is good.

While thus they talked together, Amadis ſaw him who was firſt vn-horſed, make great haſt toward the Caſtle, and ſo did the other which were wounded: wherefore hee approached to the Chariot, and lifting vp the couering, beheld there a tombe of Marble, hauing a crowned King figured thereon, clothed in his royall ornaments, yet was his Crowne and part of his head ſome what ſeuered aloofe from the reſt. Hard by ſat a very antient Lady, and neere her a yong Damoſell of moſt excellent beauty, whom very gratiouſly hee ſaluted, ſpeaking to the antient Lady in this manner. I pray ye tell me Madam, what figure is this which you accompanie ſo carefully? What Sir Knight? quoth ſhee, (not knowing her gardants were diſcomfited) who gaue you permiſſion to ſee our ſecrets? None other, ſaid Amadis, then my deſire thus to doe. In good faith, quoth the Lady, this is in you a great part of preſumption, and I meruaile that my Knights would ſuffer it: then putting her head forth of the Chariot, ſhee ſaw ſome of them 
                        •
                     laine, others flying to the Caſtle for their ſafeti, & ſom ran after their Horſes that were eſcaped, whereat ſhe was ſo amazed, as ſhe thus cryed out: Ah Knight, curſed be the houre of thy birth, who haſt done me this cruell outrage. Madam, anſwered Amadis, your people aſſayled me: but now may it pleaſe ye to ſatisfie my demand? Neuer ſhalt thou, quoth ſhe, be reſolued therein by me, hauing offered mee ſuch monſtrous abuſe: ſo ſaying, ſhe cauſed the horſes to hie away with the Chariot. Amadis, beholding her ſo agreeued, would trouble her no more but rode on his iourney: then were the dead bodies put into the Chariot, and preſently conueyed into the Caſtle.
                  Now had the dwarffe heard all that paſſed betweene Amadis and the Lady, but hee knew not what was within the Chariot, wherefore he deſired to know of his Maſter. I cannot tell thee, quoth he, for ſhe would make no anſwere thereof to me. In ſooth, ſaid the Dwarffe, it is ſtrange that women haue learned to hold their peace. As thus they rode beguiling the time, on a ſudden they eſpied the old Knight now vnarmed, gallop apace after them, crying ſo loud as he could to Amadis, that he ſhould ſtay, which he did, when he deliuered him this meſſage. My Lord, I come to you by commandement of the Lady whom you ſaw in the Chariot, and ſhe being willing to make amends for the iniury ſhe did ye, deſires you to take a lodging this night in her Caſtle. Ah Father, replyed Amadis, I found her in ſuch griefe for the debate betweene me and your cōpanions, that I think my prefēce will rather be hurtfull then pleaſing to her. Aſſure your ſelfe, ſaid the knight, your returne will be very acceptable to her. Amadis thinking a knight of ſuch yeeres would haue told no leaſing, was content to goe with him, ſeeing with what affection he coloured his ſpeeches and by the way hee demanded of him, why the pictures head was made in ſuch ſort, but he would tel him nothing, ſaying, the Lady would thorowly reſolue him in all. Beeing come to the Caſtle, he ſaw the Lady and the Damoſell awayting his comming on the bridge, who bad him very heartily welcome. Ladies, quoth he, I would be glad to doe you good, but loath to offend yee. When hee was entered, hee ſaw a great

many armed men, who flocking about him, cryed. Yeeld Knight elſe thou art but dead. Nor ſhall you ſaid hee, with my will, keepe me your priſoner. So hee laced his Helmet, but he had no leyſure as yet to take his ſhield, ſo ſharpely was he aſſayled by his enemies: yet did he worthily defend himſelfe, ſending them to the Earth he met withall, at length by the multitude of his aſſaylants, he was driuen into a corner of the Court, which he recouering, and keeping them therein all before him, endomaged them much better then hee did before. But while hee was thus combatting, he ſaw the Dwarffe and Gandalin carried into priſon, whereat hee conceiued ſuch diſpleaſure, as being exempt from feare of death, he layed ſuch loade on his enemies, that no one durſt come neere him: albeit they were ſo many, as often times hee was in danger to fall on his knees, yet looking for no mercy at ſuch mens hands, would deerely buy his death among them, cauſing diuerſe of them to fall dead at his feete. And the diuine bounty regarding him in pitty, deliuered him from this perill by the young beautifull Damoſell, who marking his braue behauiour in Chiualrie, intended to ſaue him, calling one of her women to whom ſhe ſaid. The gallant minde of this Knight moueth me to compaſſion, ſo that I had rather all mine ſhould die, then he, therefore follow me. Why Madam? anſwered the Gentlewoman, what meane ye to doe? Let looſe my Lyons, anſwered the Lady, that they may bee ſcattered, who offer wrong to the beſt Knight in the world: and thou (being my vaſſaile) I command thee preſently to goe let them looſe. Which ſhe duſt not deny, but immediately ſent them forth of the Caue: then the Lady to make them retire that combatted with Amadis) cryed to them: Looke to your ſelues my friends, for the Lyons are gotten looſe by ſome miſchaunce. The men being all afraide, fled vp and downe to ſhunne the fury of the beaſts, but the Lyons made ſuch ſpeede after them, as diuerſe they ouertooke and rent in pieces. When Amadis ſaw himſelfe thus rid of his enemies, ſeeing the wicket of the Caſtle was yet open, he went out and held the doore faſt to him, while the Lions deuoured the other in the Court.
                  In this manner Amadis eſcaped his bloody foes, yet was he ſo ouer-trauailed, as he could hardlie ſuſtaine himſelfe: Wherefore he ſate downe on a ſtone, holding his Sword ſtill ready drawne, a great part whereof was broken, and the Lions being yet ſo hungrie, as they ranne about the Court to ſeeke way into the fields: nor was there any man in the Caſtle ſo hardie, that durſt come downe to ſhut them vp againe, no, not the Damoſell who had the gouernment of them, for they were ſo chafed, as no obedience was looked for in them, not the wiſeſt of them knew how to remedy it: Except the olde Ladie ſhould intreate the ſtrange Knight to let them forth, imagining becauſe ſhee was a woman, hee would grant her requeſt ſooner then to the reſt But ſhee conſidering her falſe dealing toward him, durſt not aduenture to moue the ſuite: Yet when ſhe beheld it was her laſt refuge, ſhee put her head foorth of the window thus ſpeaking to Amadis. Although (Sir Knight) wee haue intreated ye very hardly, yet let your

courteſie excuſe what is paſt: and to ſaue our liues, open the gate that the Lyons may come ſoorth, to the end our preſent feare may be quallifyed, and they raunge the fields as is their deſire. This fauourable kindnes let vs obtaine at your hands, whereby wee ſhall yeeld amends for the wrong wee haue done ye: and on my faith I ſweare to you, our intent was no otherwiſe thē to gaine you our priſoner, vntill you conſented to bee our knight. Madame, anſwered Amadis, you ſhould haue labored your determination by a more honeſt way: for without conſtraint I would willingly haue yeelded my ſelfe, as I haue to diuers Ladies, who knowe full well my ſeruice. Will ye then Sir, quoth ſhe, open the gate? No, replied Amadis: wherewith ſhe went from the window, and the young Lady trembling ſhewed her ſelfe, thus calling to Amadis. Ah gentle Sir, ſuch are within heere, who could not ſuffer the iniurie done to you, the better they deſerue to finde ſome fauour. With ſuch ſeemely modeſty vttered the Ladie theſe words, as Amadis asked her, if ſhe would haue the gate opened? Yea mary Sir, quoth ſhe, I humbly deſire ye. Preſently he aroſe to obey her requeſt, but ſhe willed him to ſtay a while, till the olde Lady warranted him aſſurance from the reſt of her ſeruants: nor could he but commend her wit and diſcretion, who getting him ſecurity from all the Caſtle, made promiſe likewiſe, that Gandalin and the Dwarffe ſhould be deliuered from impriſonment. Then came the ancient knight, of whom we ſpake before, and calling to Amadis, he ſayd. Becauſe me thinkes (Sir) your Shield is greatly impared, and your ſword in like manner broken, take this ſhield and this mace, wherewith you may defend the Lyons when they come forth: ſo throwing the mace and the ſhield downe, Amadis willingly tooke them vp, returning this anſwere. Let me neuer be ingratefull to them that ſuccor me in neede. By heauen, ſaide the knight, ſeeing you vſe loyaltie to worſe then beaſts, no doubt is to be made of your mercy to reaſonable creatures. Amadis opening the wicket, the Lyons furiouſly ran foorth, and he entred the Caſtle, which they within perceiuing, came with the Ladies to entertaine him, deſiring pardon for their offences committed, and preſenting him Gandalin and the Dwarffe. By my ſoule, ſaide Amadis, neuer was I ſo miſuſed vpon no occaſion, but ſeeing all enmity is ouer-blowne, you muſt giue me a horſe, for your ſeruants (I thanke them) haue flaine mine. Sir knight, anſwered the olde Lady, it is now ſomewhat late, if you pleaſe to vn-arme your ſelfe, and reſt here this night, to morrow you ſhall haue a horſe, or what elſe you neede. In hope you meane no worſe then you ſay, quoth Amadis, I will not refuſe your offer, becauſe the time doth requeſt no leſſe.
                  Foorth-with was he vnarmed in a ſumptuous chamber, and a coſtly mantle brought to wrap about him, then returning to the Ladyes who attended his comming, they were ſtricken into admiration of his excellent beauty, but much more at his valour being ſo young: and caſting his eye on her, at whoſe entreatance he let foorth the Lions, he reputed her one of the faireſt that euer was ſeene, but he ſpake nothing to her as yet, by reaſon hee proceeded in this

manner with the old Lady. I pray yee Madame let mee vnderſtand, why the picture which I ſaw in the Chariot, hath his head ſo ſeperated. Sir Knight, quoth ſhe, if you will promiſe to accompliſh the couenants, before you be acquainted with the accident: I will tell ye, if not, I pray ye holde me excuſed. It were no reaſon Madame, replied Amadis, to promiſe any thing ouer-lightly, being ignorant to what it may relate: but if you will let me heare the couenants, they ſeeming reaſonable, and in compaſſe of a Knights power to execute, feare not to tell me, for I will imploy my vttermoſt therein. You haue reaſon, anſwered the Lady: then cauſing each one to with-draw, except the faire young virgin, ſhe thus began. Vnderſtand gentle Sir, that the figure of ſtone you behelde, was made in the remembrance of this Ladyes father, who lyeth entombed in the Chariot, being in his time a crowned King, but on an eſpeciall feſtiuall day, as he helde open Court and royall, hee was aſſailed by his brother the vnckle to this mayden, who came to tell him, that the Crowne hee wore was his, by as good right as hee could clame it, they being both iſſued from one roote. Then drawing a ſword, which he had hid vnder his mantle, gaue him ſuch a ſtroake therewith on the head, that it parted in ſuch ſorte as you ſaw in the picture. Long time before did the traitour excogitate this treaſon, and to the end he might the better execute it, hee confederated himſelfe ſecretly with certaine of the Kings ſeruants, by whoſe meanes he waxed the ſtronger in his enterpriſe. But the King being dead, this diſloyall wretch was honoured with the Crowne, for the murdered Prince had no other heire then this his faire daughter, whom the aged Knight that brought you hither had in guard, he ſhewing him-ſelfe ſo faithfull to her, as he conuaied her thence ere her vnckle could take her, & performed ſuch painefull dilligence, that hee brought my orpha
                        •
                     ne Neece hither for her better ſaiety. Afterward finding the meane to recouer the body of the King her father, each day we put into our Chariot, riding there with about the fields as you ſaw vs, we hauing all ſollemnely ſworne not to ſhew it to any one, vnleſſe by force of armes we ſhould be compelled thereto: and though ſuch a one happened to ſee it, yet would we not reueale why we conducted it ſo, except he would promiſe to reuenge this horrible treaſon. Now if you be a noble Knight, bound to proſecute vertue, and on ſo iuſt occaſion, you will imploy the forces God hath lent ye in a matter of right: for my part, I will continue as I begun, vntill I finde two other Knights on this behalfe, that you three for vs may confoūd the traitour and his two ſons, who will alow no combate, vnleſſe they fight altogether, which they haue often publiſhed abroade: how ſuch as will reproue their dealings, muſt come in this ſorte. In ſooth Madame, anſwered Amadis, great reaſon haue you to ſeeke meanes of reuenge, for the moſt famous iniurie that euer I heard of, and he who hath done it, ſurely cannot long endure without ſhame and miſ-fortune, becauſe heauen ſcorneth ſuch monſtrous actions: but if you can bring it to paſſe, that one after another they will come to▪ the combate, by the helpe of

God I ſhall diſpatch th
                        •
                     m. Ah ſir, quoth ſhe, they will neuer conſent hereto. What would you haue me do then? (replyed Amadis.) Mary if it ſtand with your liking, ſaid the Lady, a yeere hence to repaire hither againe, if you liue ſo long, you ſhall finde ſome other heere, for by that time I hope to get two knights more, and you the third to maintaine this quarrell, I promiſe ye, ſaid Amdis, not to faile in this requeſt, therfore neuer trouble your ſelfe to ſeeke other twaine, becauſe I meane to bring them with mee, yea, ſuch as ſhall well defend the right of this Lady, and reuenge the treaſon done the king her Father. Theſe words he ſpake in reſpect he hoped ere then to find his brother Galaor, and intended to bring his Cozin Agraies with him, by whoſe aſſiſtance he doubted not to finiſh the enterprize. Right humbly the Ladies thanked him for his good will, and becauſe, quoth they, they whom you muſt deale withall are valiant, rough, & expert in Arms, as any the circle of the world enioyeth: wee requeſt your choice may be made of ſuch Knights, as ſhall be able to run through this worke▪ Beleeue me Ladies, anſwered Amadis, if I had found one I am in ſearch of, I would not ſtand long ſtudying for the third, were our enemies Diuels and no Men. Tell vs then gentle Sir, ſaid the Lady, if you pleaſe, of what Countrey you are, and where we may finde you in time of our need? Madame, quoth he, I am of King Liſuarts Court, Knight and ſeruant to his Queene Briſana.
                  
                  By this time was ſupper ready, and the tables couered, wherefore they brake off talke and went into a very faire Hall, where ſuch good cheere and honour was made him, as might be deuiſed, euen vntill the houre of reſt came. The good night being giuen on all ſides, by the Damoſell that let looſe the Lyons, hee was conducted to his chamber, where ſhe kept him company an indifferent while, and among other ſpeeches, ſhe vttered this. You haue her neere you my Lord, who ſuccoured you this day more then you imagine. Wherein faire Lady? anſwered Amadis. My ſelfe, quoth ſhe by commandement of the young Princeſſe, ſhe pittying your perill and the wrong offered you: was charged to let looſe the Lions from their Denne. I neuer ſaw, replied Amadis, a more wiſe and diſcreete Lady of her yeares. In ſooth, ſaid the Damoſel, if ſhe liue, ſhe ſhal be endued with two extremities, the one in beauty, and the other in wiſedome. I deſire ye, quoth Amadis, to thanke her moſt humbly on my behalfe, and how in acknowledging the good ſhe did me, henceforth I will remayne her Knight. I am wel content my Lord, anſwered the Damoſell, to carry her this meſſage, becauſe I know it will bee moſt wel-come to her: ſo bidding him good night, ſhe departed the chamber. Now was Gandalin and the Dwarff lodged in the next roome where they heard what had paſſed betweene Amadis and the Damoſell, and becauſe the Dwarffe knew nothing as yet of his Maiſters loue to Oriana, he imagined ſome new affection was kindled betweene the young Princeſſe and him, in reſpect of the offer he made to bee her Knight. And to ſuch end did he retaine this opinion, as wofull Amadis after-ward had ſmall ioy thereof: for hereby he thought to receiue a cruell death, as in continuance of this Hiſtory ſhall

be declared. The night being ſpent & bright day appearing, Amadis came to bid the Ladies farewell, requeſting to know their names againſt whom he ſhould combat. The Father, quoth the Lady, is named Abiſeos, his eldeſt ſonne, Darriſon, and the other Dramis, all 3. moſt valiant Gentlemen atarms, excelling al other in that countrey: which likewiſe is commonly called Sabradiſa, confining on the Kingdome of Serolys. Very well replied Amadis, by Gods leaue we ſhall one day ſee what they can do. When he was armed, as he mounted on a luſty courſer, the ancient Lady had giuen him, the young Princeſſe preſented him a goodly Sword, which ſometime belonged to the King her Father, ſaying. Sir Knight, I pray ye henceforth (for my ſake) to weare this Sword ſo long as it will laſt, and I ſhall pray it may be helpefull to you in all your affaires. I aſſure ye faire Ladie, anſwered Amadis, for your ſake will I carefully keepe it, and thanke you therefore with all my heart: hereof likewiſe ye may be perſwaded, that I remaine to obey you, and ſhal aide you in all things concerning your eſtate and honour. Well might it be diſcerned in the Lady, how theſe humble thankes and his former offer, pleaſed her not a little, wherefore the Dwarffe, (who noted the geſtures on eyther ſide) ſoftly ſaid to her, Madame, you haue this day made no ſmall conqueſt, hauing ſo good a knight at your commandement.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                     How Amadis departed from the Ladies Caſtle, and of the matters which were occurrent to him by the way.
                  
                  
                     
                        AMadis being gone from the Ladies Caſtle, rode on without finding any aduenture, till he entered the Forreſt of Angaduze, and the Dwarffe riding ſomewhat before, ſaw a farre off, a Knight and a Damoſel cōming toward them. When the Knight came right againſt the Dwarffe, hee drew his ſword to offer him outrage: but he ſtarted aſide, ſo that the blow lighted on his ſhoulders, wherewith he was in ſuch feare, as he fell downe from his horſe, crying out for help to his Maiſter, who ſeeing when he ſmote him, made haſt for his defence, thus ſpeaking to the Knight. What mooues you (Sir) to wrong my Dwarffe without cauſe: now truſt mee it is but ſimple man-hood, to lay hand on ſuch an excrement of nature as hath no defence of himſelfe, but being in my guard the preſumtion is great. I am ſory ſir, anſwered the Knight, to giue you any diſpleaſure, but I muſt needes take his head from his ſhoulders, becauſe it is my gift to this Damoſel. Sooner ſaid Amadis, ſhalt thou looſe thine own. So encoūtred they together, with ſuch force, as they were both caſt beſide

their horſes: yet quickly recouering themſelus, they began a moſt ſharpe and cruell combate with their Swords. Now were they in greater danger of their perſons, then euer they had beene before, for their Shields being ſliced in peeces, their ſwords coloured with their blood, their Armor broken, their helmets battered, and them-ſelues ſo ſore laboured: as they were conſtrained to draw back a while to take breath, when the knight that conducted the Damoſell thus ſpake to Amadis. My frend you may iudge the danger wherein we both may fall, if longer we continue the Combat: therefore I pray ye let mee haue my will on the Dwarffe, and I will amend the offence afterward, if it may bee tearmed an offence to you. What? ſaid Amadis, doe you thinke me of ſuch ſlender ſtomacke, as that I will ſuffer any thing of mine to bee wronged in my preſence? not ſo, I muſt and will defend him to the vtter-moſt. And I muſt needes haue his head, anſwered the Knight. By Heauen quoth Amadis, one of ours ſhall firſt acquit him and that immediately. Herewith they charged each other againe, with ſuch wonderfull courage appearing in eyther, as ſeuerall deſire to gaine the honor of the combat, made them ſhew extream violence one againſt another: ſo that the beſt reſolued of them both thought to die, by aboundance of blood which iſſued from infinite wounds on his body, eſpecially the Damoſels champion, who thought he felt himſelfe greatly impairing, yet made he no ſhew thereof, but held out with ſuch braue viuacity of ſpirit, as his enemy found he had a hard taske in hand.
                  At this inſtant an other knight chanced to paſſe by, who ſeeing the combattants ſo 
                        •
                     ierce againſt each other, determined to expect who ſhould depart with victorie: and placing himſelfe by the Damoſell, demanded if ſhee knew them, or the cauſe of their quarrel, I muſt needes know them anſwered the Damoſell, becauſe I ſet them together as you ſee, and this good hap is not a little pleaſing to mee: for it is impoſſible but one of them muſt die, nor doe I greatly care which of them it be, but if both end together, my ioyes would bee the greater. Now truſt me, ſaid the Knight, full well doe you manifeſt a wicked diſpoſition, practiſing (for your pleaſure) the death of two ſuch braue men, whoſe health and ſafety you rather ought to deſire, then imagine ſuch a diſloyall thought toward them: but tell me I pray ye, what reaſon you haue to hate them ſo? That can I ſufficiently, quoth ſhe. He whoſe ſhielde is moſt defaced, is the onely man of the world, to whom mine Vncle Arcalaus wiſheth moſt harme, he being named Amadis. And the other that combats with him, is Galaor, who not long ſince, ſlew the chiefeſt man I loued. It ſo fel out, that Galaor here
                        •
                     ofore made me promiſe of any thing I would requeſt, and becauſe this day I was moſt affectionate to his death: I haue brought him to deale with fuch a one, as will hardly permit him to eſcape with life. For I knew the other to bee one of the beſt Knights in the World, on whom this Dwarffe (which you ſee) attendeth: I therefore deſired Galaor to giue the little villaines head, being perſwaded Amadis would rather die then ſuffer it. Thus the one to deliuer me my requeſt, and the other for his

Dwarffes defence, are fallen into the extreamitie of their liues, which doth me good at the heart to behold. By my conſcience Damoſell, replyed the Knight, I neuer thought ſuch malice had remained in a woman of your ſort, and I beleeue aſſuredly (being yet ſo yong) if longer you liue, you will accuſtome your ſelf to ſuch vilainie as this you begin withall: whereby you ſhall infect the ayre and the other elements, to the diſaduantage of the honeſt and vertuous Ladies liuing at this day. But to ſhielde them from ſuch danger, and theſe two good Knights, whom treacherouſly thou wouldeſt ſhould kill each other, I will make a Sacrifice of thee according to thy deſerts: then lifting vp his Sword, he ſmote her head quite from her ſhoulders, that it fell on the ground at her horſe feete, ſaying. Take the reward of thy merits, for the loue I beare to thine Vnckle Arcalaus, who kept me his priſoner, till the vertuous Knight Amadis deliuered me: then running to the combatants, he cryed out aloud: Holde Lord Amadis, hold your hand, for the man you fight againſt is your brother Galaor. When Amadis heard theſe words, he threw down his Sword and Shield to the earth, and embracing Galaor, ſaid. Alas my friend, my brother, rightly may I be tearmed the moſt vnhappy Knight in the world, offering you ſuch outrage as I haue done. Galaor amazed at this aduenture, knew not what to ſay: but ſeeing how Amadis humbled himſelfe on his knee, he fell downe likewiſe, deſiring pardon, reputing himſelfe wonderfull vnfortunate, in wronging thus his Lord and brother: then Amadis weeping with inward conceite of ioy, thus anſwered. Noble brother, and my friend, I eſteeme the paſſed perill well imployed, becauſe it beareth witnes of what we are able to doe. So taking off their helmets to refreſh themſelues, they heartily thanked the Knight that rhus cauſed their acquaintance: whereupon he told them all what the Damoſell ſaid, & the execution hee committed on her. Now truſt me, quoth Galaor, neuer was falſe ſtrumpet more rightly ſerued, and now am I diſchargd of the promiſe I made her. All the better for mee, ſaid the Dwarffe, and thereby haue I ſaued my head: yet I meruaile why ſhee ſhould hate me ſo much, in reſpect I neuer ſaw her till now to my knowledge. Then did Galaor at large diſcourſe, what happened betweene him, the Damoſell, and her friend, as you haue heard already rehearſed: but the Knight that ſeperated them, ſeeing their Armour all couered with blood, thus ſpake to them. My Lords, your Armours deliuer teſtimony enough, how diſcourteouſly your Swords haue intreated your bodies, wherefore me thinks long tarrying in this place, will but endanger your wounds: let me requeſt ye then to mount on horſeback, and accompany me to the Caſtle, whether you ſhall not onely be welcome, but finde helpe for your hurts by one skilfull therein. Wee will not refuſe your gentle offer, ſaid Amadis. Let vs ſet forward then anſwered the Knight, and happy ſhall I thinke my ſelfe, in doing any ſeruice that may be liking to you▪ for you Lord Amadis deliuered mee from the cruell impriſonmēt, as neuer poor knight endured the like. Where was it I pray? replied Amadis. At the caſtle, quoth he, of Arcalaus the enchanter, whē you

reſtored ſo many to liberty. How are you named? ſaid Amad
                           •…
                        lays▪
                      anſwered the Knight, and becauſe my Caſtle is cleped Carſanta, I am often tearmed Balays of Carſanta, therefore my Lords vſe mee and mine as your owne. Brother, ſaid Galaor, ſeeing the Knight reputeth himſelfe ſo much bounden to you, let vs goe with him.
                  In ſhort time they arriued at the Caſtle of Balays, where they found Gentlemen and Ladeies that courteouſly entertained them: by reaſon Balays had ſent them word before, how he brought with him the two beſt Knights in the world, Amadis who deliuered him from the ſtrong priſon of Arcalaus, and his noble brother Galaor. For this cauſe were they welcommed much more honourably, and brought into a goodly chamber to bee vnarmed, where likewiſe ſtood two coſtly beds, and a table furniſhed with ſoueraigne medicins for their wounds, the cure whereof, two Ladies (being Neeces to Balays) vndertooke, for they were very learnedly skilled in Chirurgery. Now did they imploy their vttermoſt cunning, to recōpence Amadis for his worthy pains, in reſtoring their Vnckle from the ſlauerie of Arcalaus: ſo that within few daies, they felt themſelues indifferently amended, and almoſt able to beare their Armour as they did before. Here-upon, Amadis comming with his brother Galaor, declared how to ſeeke him, he departed, from the Court of King Liſuart, promiſing not to returne without his company: wherefore he intreated him to yeelde no den
                        •
                     all, in reſpect no Princes Court was better frequented with Chiualrie, nor could he finde more honour in any other place. My Lord, quoth Galaor, I intend to accompliſh what you pleaſe to command me, albeit I deſire not as yet to be knowne among men of account: firſt would I haue my deedes giue ſome witneſſe, how deſirous I am to imitate your proceedings, or elſe to die in this religious affection. Certes brother, anſwered Amadis, for this matter you neede not abandon the place, ſeeing your renown is already greater then mine, if ſo be I haue any at all: yea it is darkened by the illuſtrate ſplendour of your Chiualrie. Ah my Lord, replyed Galaor, neuer diſguiſe matters in this order with me, ſeeing not in deedes, no, not ſo much as in thought, am I able to reach the height of ſuch honour. Leaue we then this talke, ſaid Amadis, for our kingly father maketh no difference of vertue betweene vs: but will ye know what I haue preſently deuiſed? I ſee well we muſt ſtay here longer for our health, then otherwiſe we would, for which tauſe I intend if you thinke good, to ſend my Dwarff before to King Liſuarts Court, that he may aduertiſe the Queene of our ſtay, and ſo ſoone as we are able to trauaile, we meane not to tarry long from her Doe as you pleaſe, anſwered Galaor. Preſently was the Dwarffe diſpatched thence, who made ſuch good ſpeed in his iourney, as within few dayes he arriued at Windſore, where King Liſuart was then accompanied with many good Knights.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                     How King Liſuart being in the chaſe, ſaw a 
                           •…
                        e off three Knights armed comming toward him, and what followed thereupon.
                  
                  
                     IT chanced on a certaine day, that King Liſuart ſummoned a meeting in Windſore Forreſt, which was well ſtored with red Deere, and all other game needefull for hunting. And as he was in chaſe of a Hart, hee eſpied a good diſtance from him, three armed Knights to croſſe the way: wherfore he ſent a Squire to them, with requeſt that they would come vnto him: vpon this meſſage they immediatly obeyed, returning with the Squire to the King, and when they drew neere him, he quickly knew Galuanes, becauſe he had ſeen him many times before: when embracing him, the King bad him hartily welcom, and the reſt in his company likewiſe, for he was a Prince, that moſt graciouſly entertayned all Knights, eſpecially ſtrangers: then hee demanded what the other were. My Lord, quoth Galuanes, this young Prince is my Nephew Agraies, ſon to the king of Scottes, and one of the beſt Knights in the world I dare aſſure ye: the other is Oliuas, whom your Maieſty hath well knowne heretofore. The King embraced them very louingly, ſaying to Agraies: Faire Cozin, I muſt needes take this gentleneſſe very kindely, that you would voutchſafe to ſee me. As for you ſir Oliuas, I thought you had forgotten vs, confidering the long time ſince you were here: and in ſooth it is a matter very diſpleaſant to mee, when ſo good a Knight as you are would ſo abſent himſelfe. Dread Lord, anſwered Oliuas, my earneſt affaires kept mee hence againſt my will, which hath made me the more negligent in your ſeruice: and yet I am not free from them, as (if you pleaſe) I ſhall let ye vnderſtand. Then he reported, how Galuanes and Agraies came to his Caſtle, by meanes of the Damoſell that conducted them thither, whom they very worthily deliuered from death: likewiſe how the Duke of Briſtoya treacherouſly ſlew his Cozin, for which hee humbly craued Iuſtice, with free liberty to combat before his Maieſty, where he doubted not to make him confeſſe his treaſon. After the King had well pondered his diſcourſe, and vnderſtood the hard dealing of the Duke: he was highly diſcontented for he knew Oliuas Cozin to bee a good Knight, whereupon he thus anſwered. Beleeue mee ſeeing the Duke hath committed ſuch a fault, & you requeſt iuſtice of me, aſſure your ſelfe to obtaine it, and I will ſend for him to come iuſtifie it in perſon.
                  Preſently the King gaue ouer hunting, returning with the 3▪ knights to his court, conferring on many matters by the way: among which the King demanded of Galuanes, why the Duke of Briſtoya would haue burned the Damoſell whom they reskued. Becauſe Sir, quoth he, ſhe brought a knight named Galaor into his pallace, and (as we vnderſtand) it was in the night time, and no other reaſon had hee to alledge. Why? ſaid the king, Amadis is gone to ſeeke Galaor, but ſince his departure wee were put in a terrible feare, by A
                           •
                        calaus, who ſaid hee had ſl
                        •
                     ine him. But are you certaine ſir, anſwered

                     Agraies, that he liueth? Yea indeede, quoth the king, Brand
                           •
                        yuas and Grindalo
                           •
                        a came hither ſince then, and they gaue vs ſuch credible teſtimony of his welfare, as I may full well aſſure ye thereof: for loth am I to offend any other, becauſe no one can deſire his good and honour more then I doe. It is the argument af your good nature replyed Agraies, likewiſe in reſpect of his bounty and valour, hee deſerueth to be loued of you, euen with like affection as good men wiſh to their like.
                  By this time are they come to the Court, where theſe news were quickly brought to the Queene, which reioyced very many, eſpecially faire Oliui
                           •
                        , who loued Agraies deere
                        •
                      then her ſelfe, and the Princeſſe Mabila his ſiſter was not ſorry: for as ſhee came from the Queenes chamber, ſhe met Oliuia, who thus ſpake to het. You cannot chuſe (Madam) but bee well pleaſed with your Brothers comming. Very true, quoth Mabila, for I loue him as mine owne heart. Deſire then I pray ye the Queene, ſaid Oliuia, to ſend for him to her chamber, to the end we may haue the meane to confer with him together, ſo ſhall the pleaſure of you both be fully ſatisfied. That ſhall I doe, anſwered Mabila, ſo going to the Queenes chamber, ſhe thus ſpake to her Maieſty. It were good (Madam) you ſhould ſee my brother and mine Vnckle Galu
                           ••
                        es, in reſpect they are come hither to honour you with the
                        •
                     r ſeruice. Sweete friend, ſaid the Queene, I take it very gently that you haue ſo well adu
                        •
                     ſed me, for I promiſe ye I am very deſirous to ſee them: wherewith ſhe ſent one of her Ladies to the King, deſiring him that they m
                        •
                     g
                        •
                     t come to her, which he liking very well, ſaid. Gentlemen, my Queene is deſirous to ſee you all three, let me then requeſt your conſent herein. You muſt iudge if Agraies liked this motiō, becauſe he certainely knew to finde there, the princeſſe Oliuia, the choice Lady and Miſtreſſe of his heart. But when they came among the Ladies, their entertainement was good and gracious, eſpecially by the Queene herſelfe, who cauſed them to ſit downe by her, as meaning matter of more priuate conference. Many familiar ſpeeches were enter courſed betweene them, and practiſing by all meanes to welcom them honourably: for ſhe was the onely Queene of the world that ſooneſt could win the hearts of Gentlemen, and therein tooke no little pleaſure, by means where-of, ſhe was loued of moſt and leaſt, being reputed the moſt vertuous Lady liuing.
                  Now had Oliuia made choice of her place next Mabila, thinking Agraies would ſooneſt come to his ſiſter when he left the Queene: but while hee beguiled the time with her, his eye glanced on the obiect of his heart, which he being vnable to diſſemble, was compelled to a ſodaine alteration of countenance, and could not withdraw his lookes from the Adamant of his thonghts: which the Queene ſomwhat noted, yet imagined his Siſter Mabila was the cauſe, and that he was deſirous to talke with her, wherefore ſhe thus ſpake to him. My Lord Agraies, will ye not ſee your ſiſter whom you loue ſo deerly? Yes Madam, quoth he, 
                        •
                     o it pleaſe you to giue me l
                        •…
                      with he aroſe and came 
                        〈…〉
                      who ſtepping forward to meet him you muſt think Oliuia was not one iote behinde her, but welcōmed

him both with ſemblable reuerence. But Oliuia louing him as you haue heard, (ouermaſtring her will with reaſon, as a moſt wiſe & well aduiſed Princeſſe) gaue little in outward ſhew: till after ſundry amiable ſpeeches paſſing betweene them three, they had ſome leyſure to ſtand a while aſunder from all the reſt. Yet did Agrates keep neere his Miſtreſſe, taking her by the hand, and playing with her fingers often ſent her a ſweete kiſſe in imagination: ſo that by intire regarding her, he was tranſported with ſuch ſinguler delight, as he neither heard or made any anſwere to his ſiſter. She being ignorant as yet of his diſeaſe, knew not well what to thinke, for notwithſtanding all her courteous ſpeeches, his minde was otherwiſe buſied then on her: yet in the end ſhe diſcouered the cauſe of this ſuddaine mutation, perceiuing that Oliuia and her brother were ſurprized with each others loue. Whereupon ſhe thought it beſt to fauor them with more libery, feigning a deſire to ſpeake with her Vnckle Galuanes, which ſhe prettily coloured in this manner. Brother, quoth ſhe, I pray ye intreate the Queene that my Vnckle may come hither, becauſe it is long time ſince I ſaw him, and I haue, ſome that to acquaint him with all ſecretly. I hope to obtaine ſo much of her, anſwered Agrates: whereupon he went to the Queene & thus ſpake. Madam, if you could, ſpare mine vnckle a little, you might doe his Neece a very great pleaſure, for ſhe is deſirous to talke with him. And reaſon good, ſaid the Queene: at which words Galuanes went with him, which Mabila ſeeing, ſhe humbly met him, making great reuerence, when Galuanes vſing the like to her, began in this manner. Fayre Neece, I am glad to ſee you in ſuch good diſpoſition: but tell me I pray ye, do you like Scotland or this Countrey better? We ſhall confer, quoth ſhe, more conueniently at the window, becauſe I haue many things to tell ye which were needeleſſe for my brother to vnderſtand: nor ſhall he, they being of ſuch importance as they are. Theſe words ſhee vttered ſmiling, and with a marueilous good grace: cheefely becauſe her brother might court his friend alone. And well ſaid Neece, anſwered Galuanes, our ſecrets are ſo great, as they muſt needes bee kept from him. So taking her by the hand, they went aſide to one of the windowes, by meanes whereof, Agraies and Oliuia were left alone: When the Prince perceiuing hee had liberty to ſpeake, trembling in aboundance of affection, he began thus. Madam, to accompliſh your commandement when you parted from mee, as alſo to ſatisfie my heart which neuer enioyeth reſt, but in the gratious contentment, conueyed thereto through mine eyes by your preſence, I am come hither to ſerue and obey you: aſſuring you on my Faith, that being neere your perſon, my ſpirits feele themſelues viuified in ſuch ſort, as they ſuffer with great ſtrength the anguiſhes of continuall affection, which makes them dead in time of your abſence. Therefore I deſire ye (if it bee your pleaſure) to limit mee ſome better hap hereafter, in place where I may often ſee and doe you ſeruice: And as hee would haue proceeded further, Oliuia interrupted him in this manner. Alas my Lord, I am ſo aſſured of the loue you beare me, and alſo of the griefe you endure,

we being abſent one from another: as no other proofe is required, then what mine owne heart doth plainely teſtifie, ſmothering a diſpleaſure worſe then death it ſelfe: whereto oftentimes I could very gladly ſubmit my ſelfe, did not a cheerefull hope rebacke this deſpaire, how one day our loue ſhall meet together with happy contentation. And perſwade your ſelfe, that I daily trauaile in remē
                     brance of our mutuall loue: meane while (ſweete friend) remporize and diſmay not. Miſtreſſe, ſayde Agrates you haue already ſo boūd me to you, as I muſt (in duty) temporize till time you pleaſe, but I deſire yee to conſider, how I haue no forces, but ſuch as you muſt fortifie mee withall: ſo that if you continue your graces to me as you haue begun, I ſhall haue ſtrength to ſerue according to your deſerts. While I liue my Lord, quoth ſhe, neuer will I faile yee, be you then ſo well aduiſed, as euery one may loue and eſteeme yee: whereby I may ſtriue to loue you more then any other can, in reſpect you are none of theirs, or your owne, but mine onely. And if it happen ſome to ſpeake of you, you muſt thinke I receiue incomprehenſible ioy therein, for it cannot bee without recital of your haughty courage & chiualry: yet my heart dreading the dangerous occurrences, which may enſue by ouer bold venturing, accompanieth the former pleaſure with as great a paine. Agraies abaſhed to heare himſelfe ſo praiſed, vayled his lookes, and ſhee loath to offend him, altred her ſpeech, demanding what hee was determined to doe. On my faith, Madam, quoth he, I wil do nothing but what you pleaſe to cōmand me I will then, ſayd Oliuia, that hence-forth you keep company with your Coſen Amadis, for I knowe hee loueth you intirely, and if he counſell you to bee one of this Court, deny it not. Beleeue me (Madam) anſwered Agrayes, both you and ſuch good counſelling will I obey: for ſetting your diuine ſelfe aſide, there is no man liuing whom I wil more credite with mine affaires, then my honourable Coſen Amadis.
                  
                  At theſe words the Queene called him and Galuanes likewiſe, hauing hnowledge of him in her fathers kingdome of Denmark, where hee performed many braue deedes of armes: and likewiſe in Norway, ſo that fame reported him a right good Knight. They being with her, the Queene remembred Galuanes of her auncient acquaintance, at which inſtant the Princeſſe Oriana came to them, wherefore Agraies aroſe to ſalute her, leauing Galuanes with the Queene, and ſetled himſelfe to conferre with Oriana: who entertayned him maruailous kindely, as well for Amadis ſake whom hee loued, as alſo the curteſie hee ſhewed her in Scotland, when king Liſuart left her there at his returne from Denmarke, as you haue heard before declared: the Princeſſe thus ſpeaking to Agraies. Coſen, we haue daily deſired your preſence heere, eſpecially your ſiſter, who not many dayes ſince was in great grief, by falſe newes that came hither of Amadis death your kinſeman, as truly you would haue wondered therat. Good reaſon had ſhe Madam, quoth Agraies, to be ſorrowful, and not ſhe alone, but all the reſt of his linage were bound to no leſſe: knowing when our Coſen dyeth, the chiefe and moſt excellent of vs all dyeth, yea the beſt Knight that euer bare Armour

on his body, and you muſt thinke, his death would haue beene auenged and accompanied with many other. Ah, ſayde ſhe, the villaine Arcalaus ſhrewdly affrighted vs, and euill death betide him, for troubling this royall Court in this ſorte.
                  By this time the King was ready to the table, wherefore he ſent for the three knights from the Queen, commanding them to ſit downe by him in company of many great Lords and Barrons. And as the ſeruice came in, two Knights entred the hall, who falling on their knees before the King, the firſt of thē thus ſpake. God proſpet your Maieſtie with increaſe of ioy and honor, moſt humbly I deſire to know, if Amadis of Gaule be in this Court. Not at this preſent, anſwered the King, but we could wiſh he were heere. Right glad would I be, ſayd the Knight, to finde him, becauſe by his meanes I hope to recouer what I am now farre from. Tell vs my friend, quoth the King, if you pleaſe, who you are. My Lord, replied the ſtranger, I am a ſad Knight named Angrioted' Eſtranaus, and this other is my brother, when King Arban of Norwales (who was there preſent) heard him ſpeake of Angriote, hee ſtarted from the table, and ſtepping to the King, ſayde. Doth not your Maieſtie know Sir Angriote? ſuch as haue dealt with him, wil ſay he is one of the beſt knights in your Kingdome. My friend, quoth the king to Angriote, I pray you ariſe and pardon me, if I haue not honoured you according to your deſerts: for the fault was only cō
                     mitted through ignorance, but be ſure you are welcome & that with heart, but ſay I deſire ye, how came you acquainted with Amadis. My Lord, replyed Angriote, I haue knowne him no long time, and my firſt ac quaintance was very deerely bought, for I neuer thought to dye till I was wounded: but he that did me the harme, promiſed after-ward to giue me help, which is very needfull now to cure me: hereto he added the whole accidēt as you heard it before. In ſooth, ſayde the king, I would be glad theſe matters ſhould haue a good end, but now come ſit downe with vs to dinner, afterward we will conſider thereon as we may. Next to king Arban was Angriote placed, and as they were about to riſe from the table, Dardan the Dwarffe to Amadis entred the hall: whom Angriote knowing, called him, demanding where he had left his Maiſter, becauſe he ſaw him laſt in his company. Sir, quoth the Dwarffe, whereſoeuer I haue left him, hee maketh good account of you: then falling on his knee before the King, hee thus began. Amadis my Lord humbly ſaluteth your maieſtie, and all the reſt of his friends in this Court. Dwarffe, ſayd the king, where didſt thou leaue him? In ſuch a place my Lord, quoth the dwarffe, where he is of good cheere: but if you would knowe any more, it muſt be in the preſence of the Queene. With right good will, anſwered the King, and heereupon ſent preſently for the Queene, ſhee quickly comming, being attended on by diuers beautifull Ladyes, the moſt part of them the amourous friends to the knights then wayting on the king, whereby they purchaſed leaue (during the Dwarffes diſcourſe) to deuiſe with them, at better leyſure, then long time before they could: but the Dwarffe beholding the Queen preſent, thus proceeded. Madame,

my Lord and maſter Amadis in all humble reuerence ſaluteth your excellency, commanding mee to tell ye, that he hath found Prince Galaor his brother hee ſought for. Now truſt me, ſaid the Queene, I am heartily glad thereof. But on my credit Madame, quoth the Dwarffe, neuer was heard of ſuch a perillous meeting of two brethren, for if God had not the better prouided, both the one and the other had neuer beene ſeene againe, ſo neere were they both at the point of death: but by hap a good Knight arriued there, who names himſelfe Balays, and hee found the meanes to agree them. Then tolde hee all the whole accident, how Balays ſlew the Damoſel that procured their quarrell, for which, Balays was highly commended of them all. But where haſt thou left them replyed the Queene? At the Caſtle of Carſanta Madame, ſayde the Dwarffe, where Balays dwelleth, frō whence I was diſpatched hither with this meſſage. But tel me Dwarff, quoth the Queene, what thinkeſt thou of Galaor? I thinke Madame anſwered the Dwarffe, that hee is one of the goodlieſt knights in the world, carrying a reſolution not one iot inferiour to the beſt: and did you ſee him in company of my Lord, you could make little difference betweene them.
                  I maruaile ſaide the Queene that they come not hither. Aſſure your ſelfe, replied the Dwarffe, no ſooner ſhall they recouer health, but they will be here with you, for ſo they expreſly cōmanded me to tell yee. So ioyfull was the King hereof, that he minded to keepe open Court after they were come: commanding his Lords & Barons not to depart his Court, whereto they all willingly cōdeſcended. He likewiſe deſired the Queen, to ſend for all the chiefe Ladies in the Realme: For the more honorably quoth hee, you are attended on by Ladies, the more Knights ſhall they finde heere to deſerue their loue, on whom I will beſtow many rich gifts and preſents.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXV.
                  
                     How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays determined to trauaile to King Liſuart, and what aduentures happened by the way betweene them.
                  
                  
                     SO long ſoiourned Amadis and Galaor, at the Caſtle of Balays of Carſanta, as their wounds beeing thorowly healed: they intended to returne to King Liſuarts Court, before they would enterpriſe any other aduenture. Balays who deſired to beare them company, for the familiar acquaintance he had now with them: intreated them to afford him ſo much fauour, where-with they were very well cōtented. Departing thence, they rid toward Windſor, and after they had iournied fiue dayes, they came into a foure corned way, 
                        〈…〉
                      the middeſt whereof ſtood a tree, 
                        〈…〉
                      vnder it a dead Knight lay on a rich bed, with great waxe tapers ſtanding burning at the boulſter and feete; which notwithſtanding any great winde could not be extinguiſhed. The dead knight was vnarmed, & not couered with any thing, wherfore

eaſily might a great many wounds be deſerned on his head, and a trounchion of a Lance, peirced with the iron quite through his necke and throate: beſide, in ſuch manner did the dead Knight holde vp his hands thereon, as if he would haue pulled foorth the Lance. Greatly was Amadis and the reſt amazed hereat, and faine they would know what the knight ſhold bee, but they could ſee no body of whom they might enquire, nor any place neere that was inhabited, which moued Amadis thus to ſpeake. Doubtleſſe without ſome great occaſion, this knight was not brought into this place, beeing alone and furniſhed in this ſtrange manner: if wee ſtay heere a while, ſome aduenture or other muſt needes enſue thereon. And ſo think I, anſwered Galaor, whereupon hee thus ſpake. Brother, this raſh oath, ſome-what diſpleaſeth me, for I doubt it will be an occaſion of our long tarying in this place. What I haue ſaid, anſwered Galaor, is done: with theſe words he alighted from his horſe, and ſate downe at the dead knights feete: which the other twaine perceiuing, concluded not to leaue him, but euen to take ſuch part as he did.
                  Now was it between noone and euening, when they being thus diſmounted, might at more eaſe viſite the wounds of the dead man: and Amadis ſeeing his hands on the trunchion in his throate, confounded with griefe and maruaile, hee ſayd. Doubtleſſe hee yeelded his ſpirite as he now holdes his hands, becauſe they ſtill remaine in the place. And as they were thus communing together, they heard a great noyſe of ſome comming toward them, when preſently they eſpied a knight and two Squires, the one bearing a ſhielde and helmet, and the other driuing a Damoſell before him, ſhe giuing many ſhreekes and out-cryes, becauſe the knight ſmote her often with the end of his Launce: and thus they paſſed by the bed where the dead knight lay, when the Damoſell ſawe the three knights by the coatſe, cryed Ah good knight who lyeth on the bed, wert thou aliue, I am ſure thou wouldeſt not ſuffer me to bee thus cruelly handled, if hazarding thy body in a thouſand perrils might defend me: would God the death of theſe villaines had excuſed thine. Sayſt thou ſo? quoth the knightt that vſed her ſo hardly, and thou ſhalt know the price of thy words: then ſmote her with his Lance ſo cruelly ouer the head, as made the blood in great aboundance to trickle downe her face, and ſo rode on ſtill beating her: which Amadis grieuing to beholde, ſaid to his companions. In ſooth, neuer did I ſee ſuch a bad minded knight, to out-rage a poor Damoſell in ſuch pittifull manner: but (if God be my guide) he ſhall not long abuſe her ſo. Therefore brother, quoth he to Galaor, if I tarry too long, ſet forward I pray ye to Windſore with Balays, and I will come thither with what ſpeede I may: thē mounting on horſe-back, hee commanded Gandalin to follow him, and gallopped after the knight, who by this time had gained a great deale of ground.
                  Thus remained Galaor and Balays alone there till night, which being very darke, they could not ſee, but heard a knight come riding the ſame way which Amadis took, who complaning of griefe in his legge, lay holding himſelfe about his horſe necke, but when hee eſpied Galaor and Balays, he demanded if

they knew the knight that rid ſo faſt the ſame way he came. Why aske you? anſwered Galaor. Becauſe ſayd the knight, I would hee might breake his necke, for hee runneth ſo rudely, as if hee followed ſome Diuell. What rudeneſſe hath hee offered you? anſwered Galaor. He would not tell mee, quoth the knight, neither by entreatance or other curteous meane, why hee made ſuch haſte: and I ſeeing him ſo ſelfe willed, layde holde on his horſe bridle, reſolued to make him pay for his boldnes, and to ſatisfie me either by friendſhip or force. Well, anſwered Balays, what did hee there tell ye? Nothing to my demand replyed the knight, but peremtorily thus ſpake. That hee would tarry no longer to tell mee, except I firſt combated with him. Hereupon we charged each other, he giuing me ſuch a ſhrewde puſh with his Lance, as I and my horſe were tombled quite ouer, and in the fall I brake my legge as you may beholde. When Galaor and Balays heard his reporte, knowing full well hee ſpake of Amidis, they fell into a great laughter, ſaying. In good faith now are you taught againſt another time, not to bee ouer importunate to knowe any thing againſt a mans will. Belike you mocke me then, anſwered the knight, and truſt mee you may happen to repent it: then comming neere Galaors horſe, hee gaue him ſuch a blowe on his noſe, as making him furiouſly to break his bridle, gaue him liberty likewiſe to run about the field, and thinking he was not reuenged enough, ſought how to ſerue Balays horſe in the ſame ſorte, but they both ſtepped between with their Lances, & kept him off: which the knight perceiuing, giuing the ſpurs to his horſe, he rode away, ſaying. If I had ſped the other knight ſo well, I would haue thought my ſelfe halfe recō
                     penced: learne you then to ſcorne me another time. Is it true, ſaid Balays, and God neuer help me in my need, if I make thee not leaue thy horſe for the other thou haſt ſent raunging. Preſently he leapt into his ſaddle, deſiring Galaor to ſtay for him til morning, for then at the vttermoſt he hoped to returne.
                  By theſe accidents is Galaor left alone, attending newes of the matter he vowed: for hee had ſent his Squire to recouer his horſe, which by mishap tooke his way into a thicke woode. In meane while the greater part of the night is ſpent, & Galaor could enioy no reſt, through extreame affection after his enterpriſe: but about breake of day hee found his ſpirits ſo ouer-watched, as (whether he would or no) he was complled to take off his helmet & ſhield, and leaning on them forgot himſelfe ſo much that when hee awaked, hee neither ſaw the candles burning, or the dead knight which lay on the bed, whereat he became ſo ſorrowful, as he entred into theſe complaints. Well I perceiue, that I am vnworthy ſo high an enterpriſe, ſeeing ſo fondly I haue fayled in ſuch an eaſy matter. Now ſee I how Fortune (through this my ſioathfulnes) ſcorneth the little fauour ſhe ſhewed mee at the beginning: and well may ſhe do ſo, ſeeing I would ſo careleſly fall aſleep, at ſuch a time as ſhe commanded me to watch. But ſeeing I haue ſo wilfully offended, I will amend it by an anſwerable penance: for I will recouer on foote with the trauel of my body, the murdered man carried from me in my ſleep. Then followed he the track of their feet, whom he imagined had conuayed

thence the Knight, and walking on warily, as loth to faile thereof, he heard the neighing of a horſe: which made him ſhape his courſe thither-ward, albeit hee could diſerne nobody, yet paſſed he further, becauſe hee heard the like noiſe of other horſes. Not far had he gone, but he eſpied two Knights armed, one of them being alighted from his horſe, & reading cert
                        •
                     ine letters engrauen on a ſtone, after-ward he ſayde to his companions. In vaine did they make mee come to this place, for I vnderſtand not one word of them: wherewith hee mounted againe, and they rode away not ſeeing Galaor, but hee called to them, ſaying. Gentlemen, can ye tell me who hath caryed away a dead knight, who not long ſince, lay vnder a tree in the foure cornered ſtreete behinde? Verily, anſwered one of them, wee knowe nothing thereof, but about mid-night we ſaw three Damoſels paſſe by, and ten Squires with them conducting a litter. Which way did they take? ſaid Galaor. This on the left hand, replied the knight▪ ſo giuing them thankes, he went the ſame way he was directed, & ſoon after ſaw a Damoſell comming toward him, to whom he ſaid. It may be (Lady) you can tell me who hath caryed away the dead knight, that lay vnder the tree not farre hence. If you wil promiſe me, quoth ſhe, to reuenge his death, which is an exceeding great griefe to many: I will reſolue you therein. I will not ſtick for that, anſwered Galaor, for it ſeemeth by your words, it is an act of iuſtice to do it. Very true, ſaid the Damoſell, mount vp before me on my Palfary, and I ſhall direct ye to your deſire. Whē they had ridden about two miles, ſhee ſhewed him a maruailous faire caſtle, and alighting at the gate, ſhe bad him enter: But remember, quoth ſhe, what you haue promiſed. And becauſe I haue ſolicited, you heereto, I pray yee let me vnderſtand your name. I am called Galaor, quoth hee, and thinke you ſhall heereafter finde mee in king Liſuarts Court, then any where elſe. I am ſatisfied, ſaid the Damoſell, to God I commend yee then thee turned bridle and rode away, but Galaor entred t
                        •…
                     ſtle, where he found the dead laid in the middeſt of the Court, & by him ſtood many making great lamentation. Neuertheleſſe Galaor approching neere, and ſtepping to an anciant knight, demanded of him what the dead knight was. Sir, anſwered the olde man, while hee liued hee was ſuch a one, as all the world may bemone his miſ-fortune. Do you know his name? ſaide Galaor. He is called Anthebon replied the other, one of the moſt vertuous Gentlemen that euer liued in Gaul. When Galaor heard he was a ſubiect to king Perion his father, his heart began to ſtorme, and as hee pittied him the more, ſo his deſire encreaſed to reuenge his death: whereupon hee entreated the knight to acquaint him with the truth of this tragicall accident: Sir, quoth he, this infortunate Gentleman which you ſee, was (in reſpect of his bounty and vertue) maryed to a wife, who now lamenteth for him, ſhe being the Lady of this Caſtle. In time they had a very faire daughter, and ſhe growing in yeeres, was beloued by a knight, our too neere neighbour: but the young Damoſell euer hated him, and aboue all other could not abide him. Where-of he getting intelligence, determined by ſome meane or other to

ſteale her hence, and being ſo reſolued, (forgetting God, as alſo his owne honour) watched when this goodknight, (as cuſtomely he vſed) ſhould goe to the cornered ſtreet there to ſucour ſuch as often were diſtreſſed, becauſe it is the moſt dangerous place in this countrey.
                  Knowing him thus to bee from home, the diſloyall wretch entred this Caſtle, and finding the maiden in com
                        •…
                     y of her mother, with diuerſe Gentlewomen heere diſporting: mauger them all, forcibly hee tooke her away, before wee could fall the bridge to ſucc
                        •
                     r her. Hereupon (as wee afterward vnderſtood) ſhee did nothing day and dight but grieuouſly mourne, deſpiſing all the inticing blandiſhments the knight vſed to her: which in the end diſpleaſed him ſo much as hee began in this ſort to reprooue her. Lady you know that I loue yee with all my heart, deſiring onely to haue the like of you, meaning no otherwiſe then honorably to make you my wife: but you ſcornefully diſdaine me, albeit I am diſcended of a more noble houſe then your father is, which maketh mee maruell very much, what ſhould moue you thus to bee mine enemy? In good faith I will tell yee, quoth ſhee. I heretofore made promiſe to my mother, and ſuch is ſtill my deliberation: that I would neuer match with any huſband, if hee were not ſo good a knight, and comparable with my father in chiualry, for which ſhee made choyce of him among all ot
                        •
                     er knights: to which wordes, he thus anſwered. By heauen I ſee you loue me now, for 
                        •
                     re it bee long I will make ſufficient proofe, that I am a better man at armes then he. Within a while after, hee left his Caſtle, beeing well mounted and armed, placing himſelfe vnder the tree where you ſawe this knight dead, to what intent I cannot tell: but vnhappily the Lord of this Caſtle came that way, hauing left his horſe and Armour, becauſe hee onely intended to take the ayre. The cowardly wretch ſeeing what aduantage hee had of him, and remembring the promiſe hee made his Lady, thought it place commodious to get him reputation, and no witneſſes by to report the contrary, ſo without giuing him warning, or ſpeaking one word to him, ſtealing behinde him, ſmote his Launce thorough his necke, as you heere beholde.
                  Thus, vnprouided of defence, likewiſe ſuddenly and moſt villainouſly, was this good knight ſlain▪ and yet the blody traytour not ſatisfied, alighting from his horſe, gaue him many needleſſe cruell woundes with his ſworde, and ſo deſpitefully left him there. In good faith, anſwered Galaor, the deede is monſtrous, vnable to paſſe without common reprehenſion: but ſeeing you haue vouchſafed mee this fauour, I pray ye tell me, why was he afterwarde laide on ſuch a coſtly bed vnder the tree? Becauſe it being a continuall paſſage for knights errant, ſaid the olde man, to try if any would be ſo honourably prouoked, as to reuenge an act of ſuch ſ
                        •
                     ame and contempt, after wee had acquainted them with this ſad diſcouſe. I found him alone at the tree, replyed Galaor, what was the cauſe then you left him ſo? Your demaund is not amiſſe, 
                        •
                     quoth the olde man, for foure Squires were euer wont to guarde him: but becauſe the knight who did the murther came and threatened to kill

them, we were cōſtrained to bring away the body hither. I maruell, ſayde Galaor, that I heard not the noyſe, it may well bee ſayd I ſlept ſoundly. Are you he, replyed the old man, whom we found leaning aſleep on your helmet? The very ſame man, anſwered Galaor. Why did you reſt ſo homely there? quoth the old man. To reuenge his death, ſayd Galaor, if by reaſon I might doe ſo much. Ah worthy Sir, anſwered the old man, heauen grant the finiſhing thereof to your honour: then taking him by the hand, he brought him to the bed whereon the dead man lay, thus ſpeaking to the ſorrowfull Lady. Madame, this knight ſaith (to his power) he will reuenge the death of your Lord. Alas gentle knight quoth ſhe, the God of heauen keepe you in that good minde, for I can finde no kinred or friend in this countrey, who will doe ſo much for me, becauſe my Lord was a ſtranger: yet whlie he liuid, euery one ſhewed great friendſhip in lookes, but now their kindnes is cold enough. Lady, anſwered Galaor, in reſpect both he and I were borne in one countrie, my deſire is the greater to reuenge his death. Are you, ſaid the Lady, the ſonne to King Perion of Gaule, whom my deceaſed Lord often told me was in king Liſuarts Court? Neuer came I there Madame, replyed Galaor, in all my life: but tell me what he is that did this treaſon, and in what place I may find him? Gentle Lord, quoth ſhe, you ſhall be conducted thither if you pleaſe: neuertheleſſe I ſtand in doubt, (conſidering the perill) you will miſlike the enterpriſe, as many others haue done, who were heretofore accompanied thither. Herein Madame, ſaid Galaor, is the difference between good and bad, yet if you will allow mee ſo much, as you did them that made refuſal, happily I may ſpeede better then they did. The Lady noting his honourable diſpoſition, called two of her Damoſels, commanding them to conduct Galaor to the knight that held her daughter perforce. In footh Madame, ſayd the Prince, little credite ſhall you haue by ſending me on foote, my owne horſe I loſt (not long ſince) in the woode by hard fortune: I pray ye then let mee haue another on this condition, that if I reuenge not your cauſe, I may ſland bound to deliuer him againe. You ſhall haue one Sir, anſwered the Lady, for I hope by your proweſſe: not onely our poſſeſſions ſhall remaine at your diſpoſing, but our ſelues likewiſe your obedient ſeruants.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVI.
                  
                     How Galaor reuenged the death of the Knight whom he found ſlaine on the bed vnder the tree.
                  
                  
                     THus departed Galaor 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      conduct of the two Damoſels, who leading him the neereſt way through a Forreſt, at the further ſide therof ſhewed him a Caſtle, beeing the place whither they were commanded to bring him, whereupon they thus ſpake to the Prince. Beholde my Lord, at this Fortreſſe you may reuenge the murdered Knights

death. Tell me his name, replyed Galaor. Hee is called Palingues, anſwered the Damoſels. Being now come hard by the Caſtle, they ſaw the gate was faſt, which made Galaor call out aloud, whereat an armed Knight came on the battlements, demanding what he ſought for. I would enter the Caſtle anſwered Galaor. This gate, quoth hee, is appointed to no other end, but for the comming forth of ſuch as remaine heere within. Which way ſhall I enter then? ſaid Galaor. I will ſhew you▪ quoth the Knight: But I doubt I ſhall trauell in vaine, and that you dare not come to vs. Now truſt mee, replied Galaor, I would faine haue beene within long ſince. Wee ſhall quickly ſee that, ſayd the Knight, if your hardineſſe be ſuch as you make ſhew of: alight from your horſe, and come neer the Caſtle wall. Which Iaor did, giuing his horſe to the Damoſels, went to the place where hee was appointed.
                  Then came the Knight againe and another with him, ſeeming of greater ſtature then his companion: they two winding a winche about, ouer the wall let downe a basket with a cord, ſaying to the Prince. If you will enter here, the paſſage by the basket is this high way. But if I put my ſelfe therein, anſwered Galaor, will yee promiſe to draw me vp in ſafety? Yea truely, quoth they, albeit afterwarde wee will not warrant yee. Crediting their wordes, hee entered the basket, ſaying. Drawe mee vp, for on your honeſt promiſe I aduenture. Herewith they beganne to winde vp the basket, which the Damoſels ſeeing, marueling not a little at Galaors hardineſſe, ſayde. Ah good, Knight God ſhield thee from treaſon, for doubtleſſe thou ſheweſt a gentle and valiant heart.
                  By this time the Knights had drawen him vp, taking him and the basket in at the top, afterwards the knights thus began with him. Gentleman, it is neceſſary you ſweare to aide the Lord of this Caſtle, againſt ſuch as would quarrell with him for the death of Anthebon, otherwiſe you neuer ſhall depart hence. What? ſayd Galaor. Did one of you twaine kill him? Why demand you? replyed the other. Becauſe, quoth hee, I am come to let the murderer knowe, how hee hath committed a deed of horrible treaſon. Come yee for that intent? ſayd they, now ſurely you might haue beene a great deale better aduiſed: Dareſt thou threaten vs, and art in our cuſtody? alas, wee muſt haue another manner of account at thy hands, & we muſt chaſtice the folly wherewith thy braine is troubled: then drawing their ſwordes, they layde vpon him very furiouſly. When Galaor ſawe himſelfe thus wronged both in words and deeds, hee entred into ſuch choller, as quickely hee made them feele the edge of his ſword, ſo that the Damoſels might eaſily heare the clanching of the ſtroakes on the Armour: for the two knights were ſtrong and vigorous, and Galaor well mooued with hot diſpleaſure. Ah God, quoth one of the Damoſels, harke how the worthy knight dealeth with the traytors, let vs not depart hence till wee ſee ſome end thereof. All this while Galaor ſo laboured his enemies with ſuch ſharpe charges, as their hearts began ſomewhat to deſpaire, for to one of them hee gaue ſuch a blow on the helmet, as his ſword entred three fingers deepe into his headafterard

hee buffeted him with the hilts of his ſword, that hee made him fall on his knees to the ground. In meane ſpace the other ſpared not Galaor, but layd loade on him to reuenge his companion, whoſe head the Prince had now ſeuered from his ſhoulders: and comming to the other, the coward began to turne his backe, running downe the ſtaires faſter then euer hee came vp: but Galaor followed ſo nimbly, that laying holde on him, hee made him ſure for euer letting downe the basket againe, to drawe vp any more knights on the wals.
                  Now becauſe the Prince knewe not Palingues, and doubting one of theſe twaine to be he, he threw them ouer the battlements to the Ladies, bidding them to looke on them & afterward to reſolue him: but they anſwered they were ſo mangled as they could not iudge of them, and they were perſwaded that Palingues was neither of theſe twaine. Whereupon Galaor went downe into the Caſtle, and as hee looked euery where about him, he eſpied a faire young Lady, who cryed aloud: Palingues, Palingues, is this the great chiualry for which thou wouldeſt be renowned? now thou flyeſt like a cowardly and faint hearted knight, yet ſayeſt thou wert a better man at armes then my murdered father, whom thou killedſt (as thou vaunteſt) in combate hand to hand. In ſooth what euer I doubted is now come to paſſe: why doſt thou not attend this Knight who looketh for thee? if there be any manly heart or ſpirit in thee, ſhew it now in need when thy life depends thereon. At theſe words Galaor looked more aſide, and eſpied Palingues well armed, who was opening the doore of a Tower to ſaue himſelfe, wherefore he ſtepped to him, ſaying. Beleeue mee Knight, this flying wil little aduantage thee, and leſſe the ſtrong holde thou wouldeſt enter into: for thou muſt anſwer the life of good Anthebon, whoſe death thou diddeſt compaſſe by monſtrous villany. Palingues ſeeing there was no other remedy, turned and fiercely ſmote at Galaor, his ſworde entring ſo farre into the Princes ſhield, as he was not able to pull it out againe: by meanes whereof Galaor reached him ſuch a blowe, that therewith his right arme was cut quite from his body, the griefe whereof ſo pained him, as hee ran into the chamber where the Ladie was, thinking by this poore ſhift to defend his life. But Galaor getting hold on his legges, dragged him along on his backe out againe, and with his ſworde ſmote his head from his ſhoulders: This is, quoth hee, the rewarde of thy treacheries done to Anthebon, and payment for thy treaſon in the action of his death.
                  The daughter of Anthebon being preſent at this deede, hauing heard Galaor often name her father, fell on her knees before him with theſe words. Alas my Lord, you haue boūd me in ſuch duty to you, as neuer ſhall I be able to requite your paines, my ſelfe being of ſuch ſimple and ſlender ability: but the good will I haue to recompence this benefit, hath imprinted daily prayers in my heart to God for you, hauing ſo iuſtly reuenged the death of my father, and the wrongfull forcing of this traytour. Galaor curteouſly taking her vp, embracing her in his armes, thus anſwered. On my faith faire friend, hee were a man of little ſence, that would offer

diſpleaſure to ſuch a one as you are, ſeeing you much bettet deſerue to be loued and ſerued, then with griefe or fauour to bee offended: but tell mee, haue you any more enemies in this Caſtle? No Sir, replyed the Damoſell, thoſe which remaine, are to doe you honour and obeyſance. Let vs goe then, quoth hee, to let in two Damoſels, who were my guides hither from your Lady mother. So taking him by the hand, ſhee commanded the gate to bee opened, & the two Damoſels entered leading Galaors horſe: but when they ſawe their yong Miſtreſſe, they humbly made her reuerence, demanding if her fathers death were reuenged to her deſire. Yea verily, quoth ſhee, I thanke God and this knight, who hath done that many other could not doe.
                  It was now the vehement hot time of the day, wherefore Galaor tooke off his helmet to refreſh himſelfe, when the Lady ſeeing him ſo young and beautifull, as alſo ſo valiant in deedes of armes: began to bee touched with loue, and ſetting aſide both feare and baſhfulneſſe, ſhee began to imbrace and kiſſe him, ſaying. My honorable Lord & friend, more cauſe haue I to loue you then any other creature liuing. In good faith, quoth he, and I loue you likewiſe, as well in reſpect of your beauty and good grace, as alſo for your deceaſed fathers ſake, he and I being borne in one Countrie. May if it pleaſe ye Sir, ſayde ſhee, to tell mee your name? Such as are acquainted with mee, anſwered the Prince, tearme mee Galaor. In ſooth my Lord, quoth ſhee, often haue I heard my father ſpeake of Sir Amadis your brother, and of you likewiſe, ſaying you were the ſons to the King of Gaul, his liege Lord and Soueraigne. As thus they deuiſed, they entered alone into a chamber, while the Damoſels with the reſt were pouiding viands: wherefore Galaor ſeeing time and place ſo commodious, to requeſt the loue of her that vſed him ſo kindly, ſhee being a Lady, young, freſh and faire, named Brandueta: himſelfe likewiſe actiue and deſirous of ſuch ſweete baytes, thus ſpake. Madame, if Palingues loued you as I haue heard, hee had great reaſon for it, knowing you to bee ſuch a one as I ſee you are: for my ſelfe, who haue ſo little acquaintance with you, am already ſo deepe in deuotion to your gracious nature, as I would repute my ſelfe happy, if you granted me the fauour I deſire, accepting mee as your friend and ſeruant.
                  The Lady not one iot behinde him in amorous affection, ſhaped him this anſwere. I haue tolde yee my Lord, that I loue you more then any other liuing creature, therefore you 
                        〈…〉
                      ſured, how m
                        •…
                      you in all things whatſoeuer. 
                        •…
                     
                     ring theſe ſpeeches, Galaor ſtill held his loue in his armes, kiſſing and toying with her ſo pleaſantly, as Diana ſoone after loſt her intereſt in the maiden, whereto Brandueta yeelded with greater contentment, then all her former reſiſtances to Palingues: from whom ſhee kept her virginity ſo long, that ſhee was now content to beſtow it on the French Prince, and hee hauing a good ſtomacke to ſuch dainty dyet, made her loue him the better for it while ſhe liued. But ſee an vnhappy inconuenience, after many mabracings and amorous conferences, as they would once more haue

beſieged the Footreſſe of loue: the Damoſels came to tell them that dinner was ready, wherefore (though loath) they were forced to leane off, accompanying the Damoſels to the place where the tables were couered, which was vnder a Gallery inuironed with trees.
                  As they ſate at the table, and diſcourſed of many matters, among other things Brandueta declared to him, how Palingues (ſtanding in feare of him and his brother Amadis) cauſed this Caſtle to be kept ſo ſtrongly: conſidering that her Father Anthebon was of Gaule, and king Perions ſubiect, the ſooner would they aſſay to worke reuenge for his death. For this reaſon, quoth ſhe, hee allowed no other entrance then by the basket into this Caſtle, where I haue liued in maruailous griefe and ſorrowe, as neuer ſhall I deſire to tarry here longer: therefore right gentle Lord and friend, might it ſo like you, without any longer ſtay I would gladly ſee my mother, who will not bee a little glad of my returne, and yours likewiſe. Galaor was very well contented, and though
                        •…
                      were late, yet got they to horſe-backe, departing from the Caſtle: but for all their haſte they were two houres benighted, which brake no ſquare in reſpect of the good newes, the good Lady with all her family ioyfully receiuing them, with all honourable meanes could bee deuiſed, beſide, the comforted widow caſt herſelfe at his feete, vſing theſe ſpeeches. Worthy Lord, both I and mine are bound to you for euer, referring to your diſpoſition whatſoeuer wee enioy, becauſe you are the reſtorer & confirmer of all. I thank you Madame, anſwered Galaor, for your friendly offers, but where no deſert is, the requitall muſt of force be farre more eaſie. Now the greater part of the night beeing ſpent, they brake off talke and bequeathed themſelues to reſt, and Galaor being alone in his chamber, remembred his louely breakefaſt before dinner with his new friend: who likewiſe was ſo deepe in conſideration thereof, that ſhee could wiſh ſuch another ere ſupper, and whether ſhe did or no, iudge you. For no ſooner knew ſhe euery one to bee in bedde, but ſecretly ſhee came to Galaors chamber, where ſhee had no churliſh ſpeeches to driue her away, but moſt dainty, ſweete, and gracious entertainement: what elſe they did I know not, but ſhee tarryed there till morning, and then returned vnſeene of any.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                     How Amadis purſuing the Knight that miſuſed the Damoſel, met another Knight with whom he combated, and what happened to him afterward.
                  
                  
                     YOu haue heard what haſte Amadis made after the Damoſell, whom the knight led away perforce, bearing and miſuſing her very cruelly: but hee happened to meet with another Knight, who demanded of him why he rid ſo faſt. What haue you to do? anſwered Amadis, whether it be my pleaſure to ride faſt or ſoft. In good faith, ſaid the knight,

Iſpeake it as one willing to helpe you, if you be offered wrong by any, that you may goe in better aſurance if you bee affraid. Truely you may ſpare this labour, replyed Amadis, for at this time I haue no neede of your helpe. When the other heard this anſwer, hee imagined that Amadis mocked him, which made him come and lay holde on the bridle of his horſe, ſaying. By God Sir, you ſhall anſwere my demand, otherwiſe, I meane to breake your pate. I know not what thou canſt doe, quoth Amadis, but I will diſpatch my ſelfe of thee by combate, and that way reſolue thee in thy requeſt: for raſh mindes muſt haue rough medicines, and ſuch as ſeeke to knowe more then they neede, often feele more then they would. So fetching their carrire, the Knight ſhiuering his Launce in pieces: but Amadis ſent both horſe and man to the ground, and with ſuch violence, as the Knights legge was broken in the fall, and Amadis had leaſure to follow his iourney: this was the man you heard of before, that made Galaors Squire goe looke his maiſters horſe.
                  But now to proceede with Amadis, who tarryed not to helpe the Knight vp againe, ſuch ſpeed made he after his intent, as at length hee ouer-tooke him that led away the Damoſell, & comming neere him, thus ſpake. Forbeare Sir I pray ye, and wrong the Ladie no more. What wrong haue I done her? anſwered the Knight. The moſt ſhamefulleſt, ſaide Amadis, could be deuiſed. What? quoth the Knight, you would then chaſtiſe me? No Sir, anſwered Amadis, but aduiſe ye by reaſon for your owne benefit. I heare yee well enough, ſaid the Knight, but you may returne as wiſe as you came. Is it true, quoth Amadis, then ſtepping to the Squire that led the Damoſels Palfray, he ſtearnely ſayd. Villaine, let the woman alone, or thou dyeſt the death. The Squire being affraid, fled away, which the knight ſeeing, and being very angry thereat, hee came to Amadis with theſe words. Beleeue me Sir, you command very audatiouſly: but if I know not how to charme ſuch brauers, let armour neuer come on my backe againe. So placing their Launces in their reſts, they brake their ſtaues in the encounter: but the knight was caſt headlong out of his faddle, and before he could recouer him ſelfe againe, Amadis ſtood ready with his ſword to take his life, which he perceiuing, and that he muſt bee forced to beg his pardon, thus ſpake. Gentle Sir, take pittie on mee, and looke what offence I haue committed by any hard dealing, ſhall be amended by better vſage. Sweare then, ſayd Amadis, neuer to wrong Lady or Damoſell againſt her will. With all my heart, replied the Knight, and as Amadis was comming to receiue his oath, the villaine thruſt his ſword into his horſe belly, which made him preſently fall downe dead, and Amadis vnderneath in very great danger: ſo that before he could get vp againe, the knight deliuered him many cruell ſtrokes, ſaying. By God Sir, now ſhall I deerely teach ye, how you enterpriſe another time to correct your better. At length Amadis recouered footing, and gaue his enemy ſuch a blow through the ſight of his helmet, as cut the one ſide of his face cleane away: wherewith he was ſo aſtonnied, that he fell to the ground, when Amadis ſetting his foote on him, quickly ſeperated

his heade from his ſhoulders. The night induring all this while, yet comfortably lightned by faire Cynthia, whereby the Damoſell ſawe the death of her aduerſary, which made her fall at the princes feete with theſe wordes. Alas worthy knight, the God of heauen (not I) muſt require this honourable kindneſſe, for without your helpe, much better had death beene to mee then life: yet let mee requeſt this further curteſie, no more but your company to a Caſtle not far hence, where I ſhall be in ſafety to my owne deſire, and to trauell alone thither will be dangerous for mee. Nor ſhall you faire Damoſell, ſayd Amadis, be in ſuch feare, for I will not leaue yee till you be where you would: ſo hee willed Gandalin to bring him the knights horſe, and to helpe the Damoſell on her palfray, afterward they rode as ſhee conducted them. Of many matters they conferred by the way, ſhee acquainting him with the whole hiſtory of the dead knight, whole death you haue heard how Galaor reuenged. And comming into a meddowe by a riuers ſide, they alighted from their horſes, betaking themſelues to ſleepe a little, becauſe it was night, ſhee lying on a mantle that Gandalin ſpread for her, and Amadis leaning on his helmet as his beſt pillowe. But as they all thus ſlept, it chanced a knight came riding by, who ſawe them, and without making any noyſe, with the great end of his Launce, hee iogged the Damoſell till ſhe awaked. When ſhee behelde him on horſe-backe, thinging it was Amadis that conducted her, ſhee ſtarted vp as one halfe aſleepe, demanding if it pleaſed him to departe. Yea marry, quoth the knight, and taking her by the hand mounted her vp behinde him. Why doe ye ſo? ſaid the Damoſell, your Squire might helpe mee to mine owne horſe, without troubling you in this mā
                     ner. It were needleſſe, anſwered the knight, for ſeeing a booty is ſo well offered, I meane to haue the carriage of it my ſelfe. Theſe wordes made the Damoſell ſuſpect her ſelfe deceiued, and looking backe, ſhee behelde where Amadis lay faſt aſleepe, wherefore ſhe cryed out ſo loud as ſhe could. Ah helpe me Sir, quoth ſhee, for heere is one I knowe not will forcibly carry mee away. When the knight heard what a noyſe ſhee made, hee gaue the ſpurres to his horſe, riding away in a maine gallop: but Amadis awaking and not ſeeing the Damoſell, was greatly diſpleaſed, haſhly calling Gandalin to bring him his horſe, afterward hee poſted the ſame way the knight had taken. At length hee got a ſight of them, marking their entrance into a thicket of trees where he miſtooke his way in ſuch ſort, as hee knew not which ſide of the woode to take: when (though hee was one of the moſt patient men in the world) he conceiued this griefe marueilous vnkindly, ſaying to himſelfe. Now may the Damoſel well report, that I haue done her as much ſhame as ſuccour: for if I defended her from one forcer, by my ſloathfulneſſe I haue left her in the power of one worſe then he.
                  Thus riding in and out among the brambles, offering much iniutie to his horſe, at length he heard the winding of a horne, which made him follow the ſound there-of, imagining: the knight did it for his pleaſure. Soone after hee eſpied a ſtrong Caſtle on the top

of a mountayne, and approaching neere perceiued it was begirt with a high wall, whereon were many great Towers, and the gate made ſure with mighty barres. As hee was ſeeking ſome place of enterance, the watch diſcrying him, ſaid. What man at ſo late an houre commeth armed ſo neere? I am a ſtrange knight, anſwered Amadis. What would you haue? ſayde the watch. I ſeeke for one, quoth Amadis, who not long ſince tooke a Damoſell from mee. Wee ſawe none ſuch, anſwered the watch. Hereupon Amadis paſſed further, and diſcerned a little doore open, and the Damoſell with the knight to enter thereat on foot, becauſe they could not come neere it on horſe backe: then Amadis calling to the knight, thus ſpake. Stay a while I pray you Sir, and tell mee before you ſhut the gate, if you be the man that tooke a Damoſell from mee? If I tooke her from you, anſwered the knight, you had the leſſe care of her keeping. And the leſſe manhood, ſayde Amadis, was in you, to ſteale her from mee while I ſlept, beeing aſſured you could no otherwiſe haue carryed her from me ſo lightly. My friend, quoth the knight, I haue her indeede, and of her owne good will ſhe came with mee, without any manner of ſoliciting or forcing. In good faith, anſwered Amadis, if you ſhew her me, and ſhee affirme as much, I ſhall reſt contented. It is not long to morning, ſayde the knight, and then I will let yee ſee her here, if you will enter vpon the cuſtome of the Caſtle? What is the cuſtome? replyed Amadis. You ſhall be tolde it, quoth the knight, and I thinke you will finde it too hard for your enterpriſing. If I would preſently agree thereto? ſaid Amadis, might I now enter? Not as yet, anſwered the knight: but if you tarry till day light, wee ſhall behold what you can doe. So going in, he clapped too the door, wherefore Amadis was contented to awaite the breake of day, vnder a tuft of trees hard by the Caſtle, and when the Sunne began to appeare, hee heard the gate open, which made him quickely mount on horſe backe: then comming forwarde, hee ſaw a knight armed at all points, and vnder him a luſty courſer, whereupon the Porter called Amadis, demanding if he would enter. Why haue I tarryed heere elſe, anſwered Amadis, all this while? But firſt, quoth the Porter, you muſt vnderſtand our cuſtome, to the ende you may not ſay after-warde that you were deceiued. I therefore thus aduiſe ye, how whē you ſhall be entred here, you muſt enter combate with this knight, and if he get the victory, you muſt ſweare to doe the commandement of a Lady heere within, or elſe be committed to a miſerable priſon. If hee chance to be vanquiſhed, it is nothing in reſpect, for you muſt be commanded to another gate, and there enter combate with two other, whom if your fortune likewiſe be ſo good as to ouer come: you haue then to deale with three other, they being right valiant and tryed men at armes, and all theſe you muſt fight againſt vnder the firſt condition: but if you beare away the honour in each of theſe attempts, right ſhall bee done in whatſoeuer you demand. On theſe conditions, replyed Amadis, I am well content to enter, and the rather becauſe I would ſee the man, who tooke the Damoſell from are this night paſt.
                  So ſoone as hee was entred, the

firſt Knight and he encountred together: but Amadis ouerthrew his enemy ſo furiouſly, as his right arme was broken in the fall, which made him glad to yeelde for ſafety of his life. At the ſecond gate hee found the other two ready tarrying for him, threatening him with priſon, if he did not well defend him-ſelfe: I muſt buy my libertie, quoth Amadis, with your deereſt blood, keepe it therefore from me ſo well as you can. Then couering them-ſelues with their ſhields, hee met one of them ſo directly that he fell to the ground, and his horſe vpon him, very ſore ſhaken and bruſed with his fall, then comming to the other with his ſword drawne, hee ſmote the helmet quite beſide his head, when being loth to proceed any further with him, he ſaid. Now truſt me knight, it is the greateſt folly in the world to fight, thy head being bare. Care not you for that, anſwered the knight, I will keepe as ſafe as you ſhall do yours. And I wil trie your cunning, quoth Amadis: then ſtriking a full blow at him, which the knight ſhifting his body aſide to eſcape, loſt his ſtirrops and fell beſide his horſe, when Amadis quickly ſtepping to him, got holde of him by the necke, ſaying. See knight how well thou defendeſt thy head, art thou not well worthy to looſe it for thy wordes? When the knight ſaw what danger he was in, he fell on his knee, and thus ſpake to the Prince. Ah worthy Sir, for Gods ſake mercy, and ſeeing you haue ſo well aduiſed me, neuer will I hereafter bee ſo raſh in folly, therefore I yeeld my ſelfe to your mercy.
                  
                     Amadis being thus pacified, took a freſh Lance & mounted on horſe-back againe, riding now to the laſt gate, where he eſpied Ladyes and Gentlewomen on the wales, who ſaid to each other: If he paſſe the bridge in deſpite of our guardants, hee ſhall performe a moſt rare deede of Chiualrie? While thus they communed, the three knights came foorth to aſſaile Amadis, the firſt of them vſing theſe words. Knight yeeld thy ſelfe, or ſweare to doe the commandement of this Lady. Theſe are but wordes, anſwered Amadis, from which I can defend my ſelfe well enough: I cannot put on the minde to yeeld my ſelfe, or accompliſh the Ladyes will you ſpeake of, becauſe I know not what ſhe is. Here-upon a fierce combate began betweene the Prince and the three, who ſhewing themſelues to bee right hardy knights, and Amadis full loth to receiue the foyle, made a long doubtfull iudgement of victory: till at length by many wounds & great loſſe of blood, the knights were able to holde out no longer, flying into the caſtle for ſafety of themſelues, yet one of them fell downe by the way, whom Amadis ſware ſhould die if hee yeelded not preſently. Alas my Lord, quoth he, with all my heart I ſubmit my ſelfe, and ſo ought all other to do that combate againſt you, conſidering your happy fortune ſince you came to this Caſtle. With theſe words hee deliuered his ſword to the Prince, who gaue it him again, and followed the other twaine into the Pallace, where hee met diuers Ladies and Damoſels, when the choyce of them all in beauty, thus ſpake to him. Stay awhile Sir knight if you pleaſe, for already you haue done ſo much, as you ſhall obtaine what you demand. Lady, quoth Amadis, command then your Champions to yeelde themſelues vanquiſhed.

And what ſhall you bee the better for that? ſaid ſhe. When I accepted the conditions of entrāce here, anſwered Amadis, it was ſaide, that I muſt either be killed, or vanquiſh him that I combated withall: otherwiſe I haue not the right was promiſed. You miſunderſtood it replyed the Lady, for it was tolde ye, that if perforce you entred thus farre, you ſhould haue reaſon in what you demanded: ſay now therefore what is your pleaſure? I demand a Damoſell, quoth hee, which a Knight tooke from mee this laſt night paſt, while I ſlept by the riuers ſide not farre hence, and hither hee brought her againſt her will. I pray ye Sir, ſaid the Lady to ſit downe and reſt ye: in meane while I will ſend for the Knight who ſhall anſwere ye. Then ſate they downe together, and ſhe proceeded on this manner. I entreate yee Sir to reſolue me, if you knowe a Knight that is named Amadis? Why aske ye Lady? quoth hee. Becauſe, replyed ſhee, all the guard you found in this Caſtle was appointed for him, and aſſure your ſelfe if hee entred heere, hee neuer ſhould depart hence againe, if firſt hee denyed not a promiſe that he made. What was it? anſwered Amadis. I wil tel ye Sir, ſaid ſhe on this condition, that with your vttermoſt indeauor you will cauſe him to acquite it, either by Armes or otherwiſe, by reaſon hee hath not done it iuſtly. In ſooth Madame, quoth hee, if Amadis, hath promiſed any thing wherein hee is to bee touched, I will (if I can) cauſe him to diſcharge it. Shee who vnderſtood not to what ende hee thus ſpake, anſwered as followeth. I heartily thank ye Sir, wherefore vnderſtand that Amadis promiſed Angriote d'Eſtrau
                           ••
                        s, how hee would procure his Ladies liking to him, and yet ſhee neuer could loue him in all her life: this is a matter againſt all right, ſeeing forced affection is no loue, but dolour and miſery, then according to your promiſe, you muſt labour to cauſe Amadis reuoke this vnreaſonable offer.
                  Now truſt mee Madame, replyed the Prince, you ſay right well I will endeauour to make him acquite you. Theſe wordes procured many thankes from her, ſhee not comprehending his meaning heerein: for hee hoped to accompliſh his promiſe both to Angriote and her, without derogating either to one or other, as you hereafter ſhall vnderſtand. But Madame, ſaide hee, are you ſhee whom Angriote loueth ſo? Yea truely, quoth ſhee. I know him very well anſwered Amadis, that hee is one of the beſt Knights in the world, and me thinkes there is no Lady or Gentlewoman ſo rich or faire, but might thinke herſelfe happy and fortunate to haue ſuch a Knight as he. Neuertheleſſe, what I ſay, is not to exempt my ſelfe from the promiſe I made ye, for I will perform it if I can, becauſe hee is a much better Knight then Amadis, albeit he made him that gentle offer.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXXIII.
                  
                     How Amadis combated with the Knight, that did ſteale the Damoſell from him when he ſlept, and vanquiſhed him.
                  
                  
                     WHile thus they were deuiſing together, there entred another Knight of large proportion and ſtrong, all armed except with his helmet and gauntlets, who thus ſpake to Amadis. It is tolde me Sir knight, that you demaund a Damoſell which I brought hither yeſter night, and how I did it againſt her will▪ but aſſure your ſelf, ſhe would more willingly goe with mee then ſtay with you, therfore you may be aſhamed thus to quarrel, no
                        •
                      haue I any reaſon to deliuer her againe to you. I would faine ſee her, anſwered Amadis. It muſt bee then, ſaide the Knight, whether I will or no: but if you will maintaine that I haue wronged her, and ſhe ought not to be mine, I preſently will approoue the contrarie on your perſon by combat. Thou canſt not pleaſe mee better, quoth Amadis, and in this cauſe will I ſtand not onely againſt thee, but reſolutely againſt all other: that by right ſhe appertayneth not to thee, if willingly ſhe gaue not her conſent. Let vs ſee then, ſaide the Knight, which of vs ſhall haue her. This man of whom we ſpeake, was Vncle germaine to Angriotes Ladie, named Gaſinan, ſhee louing and honouring him aboue all her other kinred: for hee was the beſt Knight of his race, wiſe and diſcreete, ſo that ſhee was altogether gouerned by his counſell. A goodly horſe beeing brought forth for him, hee laced on his helmet, and ſtood prouided to enter the combate: which Groueneſa the Lady perceiuing, ſhee came to her Vncle with theſe wordes. Certes my Lord, it were better you ſhould forbeare this difference, becauſe I would bee ſory any harme ſhould come to either of you, in reſpect you Vncle are the only man of the world, whom I am moſt bound to loue: and this knight I haue greateſt hope in, for he hath promiſed to deale with Amadis, as hee ſhall acquite the offer made to Angriote. What Neece? anſwered Gaſinan, thinke you that hee or any his like, can diſſwade the moſt gentle Knight on the earth from accompliſhing his promiſe? I know not quoth ſhee, what you imagine of him, but I repute him one of the beſt in the worlde: otherwiſe hee could not haue entered heere by ſtrength of Armes as hee did. Say you ſo? replyed Gaſinan, you praiſe him ouer much, for paſſing the defended gates, when men of ſuch mean account had them in charge. I ſay not this, but that hee may be a gentle Knight, yet I hope to take him forth a new leſſen, and a better then he if he were here▪ in witneſſe of my wordes, your ſelfe ſhal preſently be iudge, ſeeing him vanquiſhed, and my ſelfe peaceably poſſeſſed of the Damoſel we quarrell for. Herewith the Lady left them, and they giuing the ſpurres to their horſes, brake their Lances gallantly in the encounter, and with ſuch fury met their bodies, that Gaſinan was diſmounted, hauing a ſhrewd fall againſt the ground: yet he aroſe quickly, and drawing his ſworde, ſtood by a Marble pillar in the middeſt of the

Court, thinking Amadis could there little endo
                        •
                     ge him being on horſe-backe, and hee on foote. When Amadis ſawe how his enemy dallied with him, he waxed very angry, and ſtriking fiercely at him, by miſhap his ſworde lighted ſhort on the pillar, and ſo was broken in three peeces: now grew he into greater choller, and ſeeing in what danger hee was, vnprouided of a weapon to defend himſelfe withall, hee leaped from his horſe ſo quickely as hee could, when Gaſinan thus ſpake to him. Knight, thou 
                        •
                     eeſt thy death at hand, if thou grant not the Damoſell to be mine. Nor will I yeelde thereto, ſaide Amadis, vnleſſe herſelfe doe firſt conſent. Thou ſhalt ſee, quoth Gaſinan, how deere this fooliſh humor will coſt thee. With theſe wordes he deliuered him many ſharpe ſtroakes, but Amadis awarded them very cunningly, ſo that the moſt of them were beſtowed in vaine rather wearying his enemy, then doing him any harme. And ſo long endured the combate, as the beholders were not a little amazed thereat, wondering that Gaſinan got not the victorie all the while, conſidering what aduantage hee had of the Prince: but Amadis concluded with himſelfe (being thus extreamely handled) to hazard rather a ſpeedy conqueſt, then a lingring ſhame, and therefore ranne violently vpon Gaſinan, getting faſt holde about his body ſo ſuddenly, as he had ſcant leaſure to lift his armes for reſiſtance, but was conſtrained to let fall his ſworde and ſtruggle with Amadis, who griped him terribly, ſo ſtroue they to ouerthrow each other. But Amadis threw him with ſuch might againſt the Marble pillar, that hee was not able to ſtirre hand or foot, and afterward taking vp Gaſinans ſword, brake the buckles of his helmet, then catching him by the head, hee ſayd. Knight thou haſt offered mee great wrong ſince my ſworde brake, but now ſhall I bee reuenged on thee: then made hee a proffer to ſmite off his heade, which Groueneſa ſeeing, cryed: Ah gentle Knight, haue pittie on him and mee together. With aboundance of teares trickling downe her cheekes, ſhee came and fell at the feete of Amadis, ſhewing the affection of her requeſt, and her inwarde griefe to beholde her Vncles death: all which Amadis well noting, feigned himſelfe more willing to kill him then before, ſaying. If your ſuite were reaſonable, I would conſent thereto: but hee hath ſo wronged mee and without occaſion, as I cannot bee ſatisfied but with the loſſe of his head. Alas my Lord, quoth ſhee, for Gods ſake demand ſome other ſatisfaction, for I will doe whatſoeuer you pleaſe, to redeeme his life. Lady, anſwered Amadis, there be but two things which may ſaue his life: firſt the deliuerance of the Damoſell againe to mee: ſecondly, that you ſweare to me as a loyall Lady, to meet me at the firſt open Court held by king Liſuart, and there to graunt a boone I ſhall deſire of you. Gaſinan beholding the danger of his life, ſaide to her: Faire Niece, ſuffer me not thorough your default to die, but take compaſſion on mee, and promiſe the knight faithfully what he ſhall demand: which ſhee preſently did, wherefore Amadis permitted him to ariſe, & ſaid to the Lady. I aſſure yee Madame, the ſuite I muſt obtayne of you, gaine-ſaith nothing of my promiſe cōcerning Amadis:
                     
for I will accompliſh it to my vttermoſt, ſee then no default bee made on your behalfe. In ſooth my Lord, quoth ſhee, I will performe my duty effectually, knowing well, ſuch men ought to bee honoured for vertue, in whom ſo ſingular proweſſe is apparant: much leſſe then neede any doubt be made, of any thing preiudiciall tomy vnſtayned report. Be bolde thereof ſayd Amadis: then was the Damoſell ſent for, and ſhee being come, Amadis demanded if ſhee would accompany him any further? Worthy Sir, anſwered the Damoſell, I will doe what you pleaſe to command mee, in reſpect I haue beene ſo painefull to you, as while I liue I am yours in all obedience. But were it your liking, conſidering the affection Gaſinan beares mee, as hee would rather hazard the combate, then deliuer mee, albeit by treachery hee carried mee away: I gladly could afford to ſtay with him. By heauen faire Damoſell, replyed Gaſinan, moſt true and ſincere is my affection towarde you, and as I requeſt yee not to forſake mee, ſo doe I deſire your good opinion. You haue choſen (Damoſell) one of the beſt knights in the worlde, ſayd Amadis, and ſeeing you like each other ſo well, with all my heart I leaue yee together. They both thanked him very humbly, intreating hee would reſt himſelfe there certaine dayes: but hee would returne to his brother Galaor, whom hee left vnder the tree by the dead knight, by meanes whereof he excuſed his departure, and mounting on horſe-backe, commanded Gandalin to carry the broken peeces of his ſword with him. By hap Gaſinan ouer-heard him, wherefore hee preſented him with his ſworde, which hee accepted, and a Launce that Gr
                           ••
                        eneſa gaue him: then leauing the Caſtle, hee tooke the way againe toward the tree, where hee hoped to finde Galaor and Balays.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIX.
                  
                     How Balays behaued himſelfe in his enterpriſe, purſuing the Knight that made Galaor loſe his horſe.
                  
                  
                     
                        BAlays of Carſa
                           •
                        ta offended as you haue heard, with the Knightes iniurious pranckes to Galaors horſe, followed him ſo faſt as poſſibly hee could: but the other had gotten ſo farre before, as Balays heard no tydings of him, neuertheleſſe hee rode on till about mid-night, when hee heard a voyce a long by a Riuers ſide. And ſhaping his courſe thither, hee found there fiue theeues well armed with Croſlets and Hatchets, who villainouſly would force a Damoſell: one of them dradging her by the hayre of the head in a ſtraite way on the mountaine, and the other beating her forwarde with great ſtaues, Balays ſeeing them vilely abuſe her, entred among them ſaying: Trayterous murderers, dare you ſo boldly lay holde on a Damoſell? let her alone, elſe ſhall you die according to your deſerts. Then running fiercely at one of them, his Launce paſſed quite thorow his body, ſo that he fell downe dead without any mouing. Wherupon

the other foure would reuenge their companions death, & altogether inuironed Balays with ſuch ſharp aſſaults, as one of them ſmote downe his horſe vnder him: yet Balays diſmayed nothing thereat, but beeing couragiouſly reſolued, quickely recouered footing, and drawing his ſworde, layde ſo fiercely about him, that another of them fell downe headleſſe at his feet. In briefe, two more of them accompanied their fellowes in like fortune, when the laſt ſeeing hee could not preuent like doome, fell on his knees before Balays, ſaying. Good my Lord haue compaſſion on me, for if I die in this wicked life I haue ſo long vſed, vndoubtedly both body and ſoule will periſh together. Since thou doeſt, anſwered Balays, ſo willingly acknowledge thy fault, thy life I giue thee, to the ende thy repentance hereafter may make amends for al: & faithfully hee kept promiſe with Balays, for ſoone after he became a religious Hermit, ſpending the reſt of his dayes in great deuotion.
                  But now returneth Balays to the Damoſell, who being not a little glad ſhe was ſo happily deliuered, gaue him thankes for the ſuccour ſhee found in ſuch neceſſity, and hee requeſting to know how ſhee happened into this daunger, ſhee thus begun. Hauing occaſion (Sir) to trauell in theſe parts, in the narrow way on the mountaine they ſtaied mee, it beeing the common place for their theeuiſh aſſaults: and after they had ſlaine my ſeruants, they brought mee into this place, all of them ſwearing to force me one after another, but God and you haue graciouſly deliuered me. Her modeſt behauiour in ſpeech and comely beauty, made Balays to waxe ſomewhat enamoured, which made him thus to interrupt her. In ſooth faire Damoſell, I perceiue they haue dealt with ye vngently, for they were very loath to parte with yee: but ſeeing fortune hath allowed ſuch a conuenient meeting, euen where wee may lay a foundation of loue, let me requeſt this fauourable kindneſſe, that wee may not loſe ſo good an oportunitie. I know not Sir, quoth ſhee, how you are minded, but had they compelled mee to their laſciuious deſires, both God and the worlde might holde mee excuſed: contrariwife, if I ſhould willingly grant you ſuch an vnhonourable requeſt, what excuſe might then ſerue either you or me? Hitherto you haue ſhewed your ſelfe a well diſpoſed knight, let mee intreate yee to accompany chiualrie, with continence and vertue, as by duty you are bound. When Balays heard her anſwere ſo ſoberly, hee repented that hee had offered her ſuch vndecent wordes, ſaying. With reaſon (faire virgin) you haue fully ſatisfied mee, yet pardon me for attempting ſo bad a ſuite: in reſpect it is no leſſe ſeemely for knights to moue Ladies with loue, then for them modeſtly to deny as you haue done. And albeit at the firſt we imagine it a great conqueſt, to obtayne of them what we moſt deſire: yet when wiſely and diſcreetely they reſiſt our inordinate appetites, keeping the thing (without which) they are worthy no praiſe: they bee euen of our ſelues more reuerenced and commended. This is the cauſe, quoth ſhe, why I more eſteeme your ſuccour to mine honour then my life, becauſe the difference betweene the is farre incōparable. Well, ſaid Balays, what will you now I ſhall do for you? Let vs leaue theſe dead

carcaſſes, replyed the Damoſell, and goe where wee may ſtay till day light. I like your counſell, anſwered Balays, if I had another horſe, but being now deſtitute, I know not what to doe. We will ride on my horſe, ſaide the Damoſell, till wee finde further remedy: ſo he mounting vp before the Damoſell, they rode till they came to a pleaſant meddow, where they reſted themſelues till Sunne riſing, and then they went to horſe backe againe. Now becauſe Balays, intended to ſeeke the knight, who cauſed Galaors horſe to eſcape away from him, hee asked the Damoſell what ſhould become of her. My Lord, quoth ſhee, not farre hence is a houſe, whither when you haue brought mee, you may depart to what place you pleaſe.
                  As thus they rode communing together, he ſawe a knight come towarde him, carrying his legge on his horſes necke, but drawing neerer, he put foote in ſtirrop, couching his Launce againſt Balays, and running at him, threwe him and the Damoſell both from the horſe, afterward he vſed theſe ſpeeches. In ſooth Lady, I am ſorie for your fall, but to amend the wrong I haue done ye, I will bring yee where you ſhall be contented, becauſe he that hath the charge of you, is vnworthy to haue ſo faire a creature in his cuſtody. Ere this had Balays recouered himſelfe, and knowing him to bee the knight he ſought for, hee drew his ſworde ſaying. By thee villaine haue I loſt my horſe, and my companion thou haſt in like ſorte abuſed, now finding mee vnprouided, thou takeſt delight in offering me wrong: but both for him and my ſelfe will I be reuenged on thee, elſe let mee be thought vnworthy of my order. What? quoth the knight, art thou one of them that mocked mee as I rid in the darke? I hope now I haue put the mockerie on thee. Heereupon they preſently fell to combate, and many ſharpe blowes were giuen on either ſide, till Balays at length faſtning holde on his enemy, got him vnder foot, when renting his helmet from his head, hee tooke his life as ranſome for his villany: and breaking his ſword in peeces, layd them by him, then mounting on his horſe, and the Damoſell on her owne, they tooke their way toward the tree where he left Galaor.
                  
                  But becauſe their ſtomacks well ſerued them to meat, they alighted at a little Lodge, where dwelt two women of auſtere and holy life, who beſtowed on them ſuch cheer as they had: the Damoſell acquainting them with all her mishap, and how Balays deliuered her from the theeues, at what time they intended to diſhonor her hauing ſlaine her ſeruants, and ſhee deſtitute of helpe, whereof the holy women were very glad, by reaſon thoſe theeues did much harme in that countrey. After they had refreſhed themſelues, Balays and the Damoſell took their leaue, and comming to the tree, met Amadis there newly returned from his enterpriſe: wherefore they concluded no more to ſunder themſelues, vntill they arriued at King Liſuarts Court. By this time the night drew on apace, whereupon the Damoſell earneſtly intreated them, to lodge that night at her Fathers which was not farre off: they liking well of her friendly offer, wene with her, beeing there entertayned and vſed very honourably. Early in the morning arming thē
                     ſelues, they thanked their gentle

hoſt & his daughter, framing their courſe towarde Windſore, but by the way you muſt note, how Balays (according to his promiſe) preſented his horſe to Galaor which he won from the knight, and he refuſed it becauſe he had another, ſo that Balays ſaued his oath thereby.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXX.
                  
                     How King Liſuart held open Court moſt royally, and of that which happened in the meane time.
                  
                  
                     I Haue heretofore declared, the ioy and cōtent of good king Liſuart, for the newes brought by the Dwarffe, concerning the health of Amadis and Galaor: but the more to ſhew his princely minde, hee concluded at their comming to keepe a moſt royall and magnificient Court, as all his anceſtors in Great Brittaine neuer did the like. Which Oliues perceiuing, who came (as you haue heard) to make his complaint on the wrong done him by the duke of Briſtoya, in putting to death trayterouſly his Coſen germaine: fell on his knee againe before the King, deſiring hee might haue iuſtice in the cauſe.
                  When the King had conſidered thereon with them of his blood, as alſo diuers other knights and auncient Gentlemen: he decreed that within one moneth (all excuſes ſet apart) the Duke ſhould come in perſon to anſwere Oliuas, and if with two knights more beſide himſelfe hee would iuſtifie his cauſe, Oliuas ſhould likewiſe prepare two other knights. Warning hereof was preſently ſent to the Duke, and open Proclaymation made the ſame day: that all Gentlemen following Armes, ſhould bee ready at the Citty of London, on the day of our Lady following in September. Like ſummons was ſent abroade by the Queene, to aduertiſe the Ladies and Gentlewomen of the countrey, by which meanes great reſorte came to the Court, where all kindes of paſtimes and ſporres were inuented: without reſpect of fortunes malice any way, who commonly in great aſſemblie of ſtates, when leaſt they thinke of her variable changings, often telleth them, that men purpoſe, but ſhe will diſpoſe.
                  All this royall company being in ioy and pleaſure, a Damoſell ſtrangely attryred entered the Pallace, and a Gentleman that bare her company, demanding where the King was: whereof being reſolued by his Maieſty him-ſelfe, the Damoſell thus ſpake. In ſooth (my Lord) well do you ſeem a King by your porte and countenance, yet may it bee doubted what your heart is. Damoſell, quoth the King, you muſt iudge of what you ſee, and hereafter knowe the reſt when you haue occaſion to prooue. Mee thinkes my Lord, anſwered the Damoſell, you ſpeake according to the magnanimitie of, your minde, and euen as I my ſelfe doe deſire: remember therefore what you haue ſpoken before ſo many great perſons, for ſeeing you make mee ſuch a liberall offer, I hope one

day to try the matter I doubted. Neuertheleſſe I will deferre it till the feaſt of September, becauſe I heare you will then keepe Court at London, where muſt bee aſſembled many valiant men, who ſhll know by the promiſe you haue made me, how worthy you are to gouerne ſuch a noble Realme, and how highly Chiualry is honoured by you. Damoſell, ſayde the King, ſo much as effects may better my wordes, ſo much the more will it glad me, to ſee good ſtore of hardy knights there preſent. My Lord, quoth ſhee, if effects anſwere your wordes, I ſhall haue great reaſon to bee contented. So tooke ſhee leaue of him, returning the ſame way ſhee came, whereat euery one was much abaſhed, and diſpleaſed with the Kings raſh promiſe, not knowing any reaſon for it: and now they began to miſdoubt, that the enterpriſe of this woman would bring the Kings perſon into ſome danger. But his heart was ſo addicted to magnanimity, as (whatſoeuer happened) hee would not be reprooued with cowardice: and ſo dearely did his ſubiects loue him, that they rather deſired a thouſand deaths, then to ſee him ſuffer any mishap or iniury. Wherupon the Lords and Barons perſwaded him, (greatly fearing ſome threatned inconuerience) to alter the promiſe, hee had ſo lightly made: ſhewing it was not beſeeming his Maieſty, to deale with ffaires of knights and Gentlemen, he being placed in authoritie ouer them.
                  While they ſtood on theſe tearmes, there entred three knights, two of them being very well armed, and the third hauing on no Armour at all, for hee was a man of ancient yeares, as ſeemed by his white head: yet in his countenance appeared a more cheerefull colour, then commonly hath been noted in a man of age, who likewiſe was of tall and comely ſtature. This knight carryed in his armes a very coſtly Cofer, and demanding for the King, the Gentle-men ſhewed where hee ſate, making him way to his Maieſty, before whom hee fell on his knees, thus ſpeaking. God bleſſe ſo good a Prince as is king Liſuart, for within theſe few dayes, hee hath made the moſt worthy promiſe, that euer King did, if he intend to keepe it. Beleeue me knight, anſwered the King, I neuer promiſed ought, but it was in my power, & and therefore the eaſier to be performed: but I would faine knowe your meaning heerein. I vnderſtand Sir, quoth the knight, that you intend to maintaine chiualrie in the very higheſt honour, a matter wherein (now a dayes) fewe Princes delight, therefore are you to bee commended aboue all other.
                  Heerein you were tolde truth, ſayde the King, and you may bee well aſſured, that I will doe my vttermoſt to aduance the cauſe of vertue, while I liue. Long may you continue in this minde replyed the knight, and becauſe I haue likewiſe heard, how you haue ſummoned the Princes and Lords of your countrie, to be ready at your Court the next feaſt of September: I haue brought you heere a thing with mee, which ſuch a king as you are ought moſt royally to receiue. Then opening the Cofer, hee took forth a Crowne of gold, ſo ſumtuouſly embeliſhed with Orientall Pearles, and pretious ſtones, as neuer was ſeene a more coſtlier Iewell: euery one being

of the minde, that it was to impale the head of ſome eſpeciall mighty Lord.
                  When the king had long and earneſtly beheld it, he was very deſirous to haue it, at what price ſoeuer, which the knight perceiuing, ſaide. This Crowne my Lord is of ſuch workemanſhip, as no ieweller in the world can make the like, and beſide, the vnualuable riches thereof, it hath a vertue highly to be eſteemed: for the king that keepeth it in his power, ſhall encreaſe in all felicitie and honor. So will it happen to the king who muſt enioy it while he liueth, and long time haue I kept it, no king but you that euer ſaw it: but if you like it ſo well, I will make ye a preſent thereof, prouided, you helpe to ſaue my head, which I am in ſome danger to loſe. All this while was the Queene in place, earneſtly wiſhing that the king her husband might haue it, where-upon ſhe ſaide to the king. Me-thinkes (my Lord) it would full well become your Maieſtie, if you may haue it at ſo eaſie a rate as he demandeth. Madame, quoth the knight, I haue a better thing for you if you pleaſe to buy it, it is this mantle, the richeſt and faireſt that euer was ſeene: for beſide, the precious ſtones wherewith it is beautified, it is imbroydred with all ſorts of beaſts and birds, which nature hath giuen life to. On my faith, anſwered the Queene, it is a moſt rate and curious piece of worke, not wrought (as I thinke) by humaine capacity. You ſay true, Madame, replied the knight, for the like hereof is not to bee found, yet may not the riches compare with the property, and great vertue of this mantle, which is ſuch, as it rather belongeth to maried Ladies, then any other: becauſe ſhee that weareth it, ſhall neuer be offended with her husband. A vertue of cheef regard, anſwered the Queen, if it haue any ſuch indeede? I haue tolde ye true, Madame, quoth the knight, if you will buy it, you may proue. Now grew ſhe maruailous deſirous of it, what-ſoeuer price ſhould be paide for it, eſpecially to conſerue peace and loue betweene the king and her, wherefore ſhe ſayde to the knight: Say Sir, how do you eſtimate this mantle and the Crowne? My Lord, quoth he, and you good Madame, I beſeech you to vnderſtand my fortune. I am but lately eſcaped the hands of him, who long time kept me priſoner on a ſtrange condition, which is no little cauſe of griefe to me, for I am out of all hope to finde remedy while I liue: and becauſe I know not well the valew of theſe iewels, I will leaue them in your coſtody; vntill the day you holde open Court at London, where you ſhall deliuer them againe to me, or giue ſo much for them as I then demand. In meane while you may make triall of them if you pleaſe, for hauing experimented what I haue ſayd, you may the more willingly pay well for them. Now truſt me, ſayd the king, ſeeing you repoſe ſuch confidence in mee, aſſure your ſelfe to haue whatſoeuer you requeſt, or elſe they ſhall bee reſtored againe. It ſuffiſeth, quoth the knight, thē turning to the Lords, he thus proceeded. Worthy Lords, you haue all heard what the king hath promiſed me, that he will reſtore the mantle & the crown, which I leaue in your preſence, or giue me whatſoeuer I ſhall demād. So much his Maieſty hath ſaid, replied the Lords, & we are witneſſes thereof. Adiew then,

anſwered the ancient Knight, for perforce I muſt returne to the moſt cruell priſon, that euer poore Knight was encloſed in. But here you muſt note, how during the time of this conference, the two armed Knights, which conducted the old man, was ſtill in preſence, the one of them hauing the beuer of his helmet open, and ſeemed a young man, the other held downe his head as loth to bee knowne, being of ſo tall and mighty ſtature, as no Knight in the Kings Court might bee equalled with him. So departed they againe all three together, leauing the Mantle and the Crowne in the Kings cuſtody.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXI.
                  
                     How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays arriued at the Court of King Liſuart, and what happened to them afterward.
                  
                  
                     
                        AMadis, Galaor, and Balays, being all happily met together, rode on without any occaſion to trouble them, vntill they came to the Court of King Liſuart, where they were wel-commed with exceeding ioy, becauſe Galaor was neuer there before, nor knowne but by renowne of his famous Chiualry. Beſide, ech one reioyced to ſee Amadis, who by the falſe report of Arcalaus was thought to be dead: and graciouſly did the King entertain them all, conducting them to a chamber where they were vnarmed, blaming the vilanous inuention of Arcalaus and the Damoſell that cauſed their Combat together, practiſing the death of two ſo noble Princes, who were but euen now in the prime and flower of their youth. Right ſoone did the King aduertiſe the Queene of their arriuall, when accompanied with Agraies, Galuanes and King Arban, he went with them among the Ladies: but Amadis caſting his eye on Oriana, and ſhe on him, I leaue their ioyfull paſſions to your iudgment, remembring that when long abſent louers meete, lookes, ſighs, and teares are familiarly entercourſed, being the only meanes to content ech others heart. Yet Amadis thought it not beſt to ſtand ſtill thus muſing, left euerie eye ſhould grow cunning in coniecturing the cauſe: which to auoide, he fell on his knee before the Queen, ſaying. Madam, according to your charge at my departure from the Court, I haue brought this Knight, whom I preſent as onelie yours. I thanke ye Sir Amadis, quoth the Queene, both he and you are welcome to our preſence. In good faith Maddam, ſaid the King, you doe me wrong if you take them both: Amadis alreadie is yours, me thinks you ſhould be content with him, and leaue Lord Galaor for mee. You aske no ſmall matter, anſwered the Queene, but if he be ſo pleaſed, I am not againſt it, albeit ſuch a preſent was neuer giuen in great Brittaine: Notwithſtanding, ſeeing you are the beſt King that euer raigned here, ſo good a Knight is well beſtowed on you. But what ſay you Lord Galaor? the King is deſirous to haue you, will ve then be his?

Madame, quoth Galaor, me thinks that any thing ſo great a prince demandeth, ſhould be granted if it were poſſible: here am I to obey you in euery reſpect, ſo pleaſe my Lord and brother to like thereof, becauſe he hath greateſt authority ouer me. It contents me very well, ſaid the Queene, that you ſhould doe as your brother commandeth,, for through him ſhall I haue title in you, by reaſon he is mine. I am yours indeede Madame, anſwered Amadis, and brother you muſt be my fellow ſeruant to the Queene. With all my heart replyed Galaor, I am content, and ſeeing you haue giuen mee to her ſeruice, for euer I ſhall remaine at her diſpoſition. I thanke you ſir, quoth the Queene, now may I boldly giue you to the King, for I ſee he would be glad of ſo good a friend: then ſtepping to the King, ſhe ſaid. My Lord you are deſirous of this knight, I giue him you, on this condition, that you loue and intreate him according to his deſerts, which may not be valued at any meane rate. Beleeue me Madam, anſwered the King, I take this gift moſt kindely at your hand, aſſuring you, he ſhall ſoone perceiue how I loue and eſteeme him: nor can I be ſo affectionate to him, as he hath noble vertues whereby to induce me, which none can value or compare withall. But if Amadis durſt haue ſpoken, he gladlie would haue maintained the contrary, for he perſwaded him-ſelfe, that he loued his Oriana, beyond his brothers deſert, or any other whatſoeuer. So remained Galaor in the Kings ſeruice, from which he could not be ſeparated, for any quarrell concerning Amadis, as wee ſhall haue occaſion to declare hereafter.
                  All this while Oriana Mabila, & Oliuia, had withdrawne themſelues from the other Ladies, likewiſe Agraies and Amadis were talking together, when Galaor was thus gratiouſly entertained by the King and Queene: wherefore Mabila called her brother, ſaying. I pray ye cauſe the knight to come hither that ſtandeth with you conferring, becauſe we are deſirous to ſee him. Agraies returned where he left Amadis, who diſſembled as if hee thought not on the Ladies, till the Prince thus ſpake: My Lord, theſe Gentlewomen would faine ſpeake with you, and deſire you to come a little more neere them: which he preſentlie did. But Mabila being wiſe and diſcreete, no 
                        •…
                     gnorant what medicines ſhould be applied to paſſionate mindes: after they all three had ſaluted them, Mabila took Amadis by the hand, deſiring him to ſit between Oriana and her, leauing Agraies to court his Oliuia: they being ſet, ſhe merily thus began. Although I am now among thoſe foure friends, whom I haue moſt cauſe to loue and regard: yet haue I ſuch preſent buſineſſe elſe-where, as I muſt of neceſſity leaue you a while. Thus deuiſed ſhe bring the louers together and by a pretty wile gaue them oportunitie, to content their thoughts with ſecret communication.
                  Now beginneth Amadis to confer with his Ladie, and thinking to declare the great affection, which vnder good hope gaue him life and eſſence: extreme loue took him frō the facultie of ſpeech, yet his eyes not vnmindfull of their office, ſupplied the defect of the tongue, deliuering teſtimony to their diuine obiect, how farre the ſad and languiſhing heart was

tranſported by eaſe and pleaſure. Which Oriana perceiuing, ſhe ſecretly tooke his hand vnder her mantle, and wringing him by the fingers ſighing thus ſpake. My lord and friend, what dolour and griefe did the traytor procure in me, who brought hither tidings of your death? neuer was poore maiden in greater perill, and not without cauſe: for neuer did woman ſuſtain ſuch a loſſe, as I ſhould haue done in looſing you. And as I am better loued then any other, ſo hath my fortune graciouſly fauoured mee, that it ſhould be by him who is of higher deſert then any other. Here-with Amadis caſt downe his lookes as baſhfull to heare himſelf ſo praiſed, by her to whom all commendation was due▪ and feeling his ſpirits altered, ſtroue to make anſwere, but the words died in his mouth, which cauſed Oriana thus to proceede. How can it be otherwiſe my Lord, but I muſt needes loue you aboue all other, when they that neuer ſaw you, do highly loue, honor, and eſteeme you? and I being ſhee whom you affect moſt deerely, haue I not great reaſon to loue you better then my ſelfe? On my faith Madam, anſwered Amadis, your ſweete and gentle words, are ſufficient to make mee die a thouſand deaths, & as many times to reuiue me againe: but how? I pray you at this time onely to excuſe my extremity with pitty, enduring worſe then death by louing you too vehemently: for if I had died as Arcalaus reported, euen then had begun my reſt and quiet, if I had not known you before. And albeit the houre of your acquaintance is my intire felicity, yet am I aſſaulted with ſuch violent paſſions, as my heart would altogether conſume in griefe, without the pleaſure it receiueth in doing you ſeruice, and the good it ſuſtaineth by your remembrance of me. But neceſſity conſtraineth me, to craue the mercy as yet vndeſerued, by ſuch intreatance as no deſert may value, onely to increaſe my hability in ſeruing you, which if you grant me not, a ſudden and cruell death will take hold on me. Theſe words were accompanied with ſuch aboundance of teares, as was no ſmall griefe to her to behold. Alas my Lord, quoth ſhe, forbeare theſe often repetitions of your death, the thought thereof is inſupportable to mee, for ſhould you die, I were vnable to liue one houre after: conſidering all the pleaſure I haue in this world, is in the ioy of your health and welfare. Nor can I but be aſſured of your words, by reaſon mine owne caſe is ſufficient therein, being copartner with you in euery torment: but if yours ſeeme more violent, this is the reaſon, my will being equall with yours, wanteth the ſtrength you haue in ſuffering, & cannot effect the deſire of our hearts, which vrgeth loue and griefe more in you then me, albeit my ſhare is not one iote the leſſe. But this I promiſe you on my faith, if fortune or our owne endeauour, can compaſſe no meane to yeelde vs content, my ſelfe will ſearch ſome way whatſoeuer happen, bee it hate of Father, Mother, Kinred, & Friends: for we may not thus procraſtinate our ioy, and groane vnder the weighty burden of deſire the flame whereof climeth ſo high, as the martyrdome of our hearts may eaſily bee diſcouered. No doubt theſe wordes were pleaſing to Amadis, and gaue ſuch cheerefull life to his hope, that hee was rauiſhed with inwarde

conceit thereof: when ſhee ſeeing him mute, trode vpon his foote, ſaying. Diſcomfort not your ſelfe my Lord, for I will not fayle what I haue promiſed, nor ſhall you depart till you perceiue it: and ſhortly will the King hold open Court, when both he and the Queen muſt depend on your aſſiſtance, knowing well that your preſence ſhall honour the company.
                  As they would haue continued in longer talke, the Queene called Amadis, cauſing him to ſit downe by Galaor, for the King was gone to his chamber. Then began the Ladies to cenſure on the brethren, but they reſembled each other ſo like, as little difference could bee diſcerned betweene them: euery one being of the opinion, that theſe twayne were the moſt perfect amongſt all Knights, both in beauty, nobleneſſe, bounty, and good grace: but Galaor was ſomewhat whiter in complexion, and Amadis of bigger bone, his locks more criſpt and faire, and hauing a little more red in his face then Galaor had. Soone after, the Queene willed Galaor to go ſee her daughter and the other Ladies, when he regarding the excellent beaury of Oriana, imagined ſuch another was not to be found in the world, and by her often ſighing with alteration of colour, he ſuſpected her to be the onely cauſe, that his brother liked ſo well to ſtay in King Liſuarts Court. Right courteouſly was hee welcommed among the Ladies, and diuerſe familiar ſpeeches paſſed betweene them: till the King being ſet to meate, ſent for Amadis and Galaor to beare him company, as alſo Agraies and his vnckle Galuanes.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXII.
                  
                     How King Liſuart departed from Windſore to the Cittie of London, there to hold open and royall Court.
                  
                  
                     IN the beginning of this book it hath been declared, how the diuine bountie calling Liſuart to the Realme of great Brittaine, ſoone after of a diſinherited Prince, made him the peaceable King of ſuch a Monarchy, by the death of his elder brother Falaugris, who dyed without any heire of his body begotten. Likewiſe how he was reputed ſuch a great Lord through the world, as many Knights came from ſtrange Countries to ſerue him, not thinking themſelues happy, except they might bee named Knights of his Court. But within a while after, whether this fortunate king forgot the author of his good, or elſe it happened by diuine permiſſion: this happy Realme fell into perſecution, and the illuſtrous ſtate of King Liſuart was troubled and obſcured, that all men might know: how he onely is Lord and King of all liuing creatures, who exalteth and abaſeth when him pleaſeth, according as you ſhall here vnderſtand. For King Liſuart hauing cō
                     cluded, to hold the moſt royal and ſtately Court, that euer king did in the Realme of great Brittayne, commanded that on the 5. day following, all the Lords of his Kingdom ſhould appeare perſonally at

                     London, there to determine on matters of chiual
                        •
                     ie, which he intended to maintaiue with all honour might be deuiſed. But in the ſelfe-ſame place, where he thought the greater part of the world ſhould yelde him obeyſance, began the firſt mutabilities of Fortune, bringing his eſtate and perſon in danger of vtter ruine, according as you ſhall vnderſtand at large.
                  King Liſuart departing with all his traine from Windſore, to keepe his Court at the famous Cittie of London, it was wonderfull to beholde the Lords, Ladies, and Gentlewomen that gaue their attendance, eſpecially ſo many young Gentlewomen beeing there preſent: ſome to regard the magnificeuce of the Court, other to do ſeruice to their louely miſtreſſes, and nothing now generally minded but paſtime and pleaſure. The King likewiſt (for greater maieſtie of his Court) ordained that none of this aſſembly ſhould lodge in the Cittie, but to erect their Pauillions in the fields and meddowes, along the banckes that hemmed in the faire riuer of Thames, leaſt the extreame heate might be hurtfull to them: all which being done according to appointment, the fields ſeemed as a moſt royall Camp, or as if the greater part of the world were there aſſembled. But becauſe the king arriued there two or three daies before the feaſt, he went to his Pallace, accompanied onely with his Queene, Amadis, Galaor, Agraies, Don Galuanes, and certaine other his moſt fauoured: the reſt kept themſelues in their tents, according as the herbingers had in quarters limited them. With ſundry ſorts of paſtimes was the King entertained, which continued till fortune (enuying his felicitie) changed them into griefe & tears: by the meanes of a Lord, no ſubiect to the King, but his nerrer neighbour then friend, named Barſinan, a man opulent in riches, and endued with few vertues, as may be gathered by the matter enſuing.
                  This Barſinan was Lord of a Countrey, called Sanſuegua, and very familiar with Arcalans the enchanter, who not long before came to him, and conferred with him in this manner. My Lord, quoth hee, the great deſire I haue to doe you ſeruice, hath made me inuent the meane (if you like thereof) to deliuer in ſhort time the Realme of great Brittaine quietly into your hands, without much hazarding your perſon, or any great expence. When Barſinan (who was a very ambitious man) heard the wordes of Asculaus, who promiſed to make him King if he would: he thus replied. In good faith, my deere friend Arcalaus, if thou canſt performe the thing thou vaunteſt of, no feare ſhall hinder me to hazard my perſon, much leſſe will I reckon of expence, if I ſee any likely-hood in the compaſſing. It is a thing, ſaide Arcalaus, very eaſie to bee done, and preſently ſhall you vnderſtand by what meanes: prouided, that you ſweare to me, after you are ſeated in the regiment, to make me ſuper-intendent and cheefe maiſter of your houſe-holde. That will I, anſwered Barſiinan, with any thing elſe thou ſhalt deſire. Marke then the platforme, quoth Arcalaus. You know how King Liſnart hath openly publiſhed, this feaſt of ſeptember to holde open Court, whether you muſt goe well accompained with knights, then ſhall I order the matter in ſuch ſort, that I

will carry away the King priſoner, no man aliue being able to ſuccour him: in like manner will I carry thence his Daughter, whom you ſhall take to wife, and afterward will I ſend ye the Kings head. Thus in reſpect the Princeſſe is right heire to the Crowne, and you enioying her in Mariage, being well accompanied with Knights as I tolde ye: eaſily may you make ſeizure on the Realme, nor ſhall you finde any to ſpeake againſt it. In ſooth, anſwered Barſinan, if ſuch an enterpriſe might ſort to effect, I would make thee more rich and mighty then euer were any of thy linage, as alſo the chiefe cōmander my houſe. It ſufficeth ſaid Arcalaus, your ſelfe ſhall ſoone perceiue that ſeldom I enterprize any thing but it comes to paſſe: then faile not to bee preſent in the aſſembly at London. So came the traytour Barſinan to King Liſuart, feighning his intent to do him honor, wherefore the King ſent many of his knights, entertaining him as a moſt noble friend, appointing his lodging, and all things elſe neceſſary for him, and being with the King in his pallace, he entred into theſe ſpeeches. My Lord, vnderſtanding what royall magnificence you meane to keepe in your Court, as alſo the good Knights and braue men were here to be ſeene, this day I intended to honour you with my perſon: not as your vaſſaile or ſubiect, holding my Countrey of God and by the Sword, but as your good neighbour and friend, if you pleaſe. Truſt me, quoth the King, you do me very great pleaſure and honour, and I thanke you for this gentle paines, that you would bee ſeene in ſo good company: aſſuring you Lord Barſinan and my friend, this courteſie ſhall bee remembred in what I may, for I make very eſpeciall account of you. Your Maieſty dealeth very kindely with me, replied Barſinan, and I proteſt on my faith, to bee ready in councelling your affaires for the beſt, according as I haue a long time deſired. See how the traytor lied in euery word, but the good king miſdoubting nothing, requited his offer with many thankes, and to do him the greater honour, appointed his lodging in his owne Palace, himſelfe and his Queene going forth of the Citty with their Tents and Pauilions, immagining he could not do too much for the traitour. And firſt he acquainted him with the whole enterprize, and wherefore he cauſed this great aſſembly, declaring the names & Sir names of the beſt commended Knights, their haughty proweſſe and reſolutions, among whom hee forgot not Amadis and Galaor, whoſe hardines was impoſſible to be equalled, they two being accompliſhed with all the vertues required in Chiualrie. When the king was withdrawn to his Tents, and Barſinan to the Pallace, he began to conſider on the ſtrength of his Maieſty, as alſo the loue and obeyſance ſo many great Princes ſhewed him: which made him vnable to enioy any reſt, and often times he repented his fooliſh enterprize, ſeeing how hard it would proue in execution.
                  Now he minded to alter his determination, when ſodainely another opinion entred his braine, ſo that wauering vp and downe in his thoughts, he could not reſolue one any certainety. On the next morning he came to the King, who was now clothed in his royall ornaments, becauſe it was the firſt day of open Court: and he commanded

one to goe to the Queeene, willing her to ſend him the Crown he had of the Knight, and ſhee to clothe her ſelfe in the ſumptuous mantle. Hereupon ſhe preſently ſent for the Cofer, and opening it, found nothing therein, whereat ſhe was greatly amazed, conſidering ſhee truſted no body with the key thereof, but her owne ſelfe, and euermore carried it about her. But knowing not how to remedie this miſhap, ſhee acquainted the King therewith, who in great diſpleaſure came to her, ſaying. I meruaile Madam you haue kept ſo badly, the lewel which would haue ſo greatly honoured this time, conſidering vnder what condition it was left with vs. On my faith my Lord, quoth ſhe, I know not what to ſay, I found the Cofer faſt lockt, and none but my ſelfe hath kept the key of it. But in a dreame this laſt night, me thought a Damoſell willed mee to ſhew it her, which I did: afterward ſhe demanded the key, and I gaue it her, when opening the Coffer, ſhee tooke forth the Mantle and the Crowne, locking it againe, and laying the key where I tooke it. This done, ſhe put the Mantle about her, and the Crowne on her head, they beſeeming her ſo well, as I receiued great pleaſure in beholding her, and thus ſhe ſpake. That her ſelfe, or ſhe from whom ſhe came, before fiue dayes, ſhould rule in the Countrie of a mighty King, who at this time laboured to defend it, and to conquer it from other. Hereupon I demanded what ſhee was, and ſhe anſwered: You ſhall know at the time I haue ſpoken of. So ſhe vaniſhed from me with the Crowne and the Mantle: but on my faith I know not if this viſion came to me ſleeping, or whether it be of truth. The King was now in greater meruaile then before, willing her to diſſemble the matter, and not to reueale it to any body: then taking her by the hand, they left the chamber, comming among the knights and Ladies in the place appointed for the ceremonies of the Day, where ſitting down in the 2. chayres of ſtate, the King called his Knights about him, and the Queene her Ladies, with whom ſhe communed. Now had his Maieſty giuen order, that neereſt his perſon ſhould be Amadis, Galaor, Agraies and Don Galuanes, and at his back King Arban of Norwales, well armed, holding his Sword ready drawne, and two hundred Knights for his guard, then by a Herald hee commanded ſilence. But as the King began to ſpeake, there entred a moſt beautifull Lady vere richly attired, and with her twelue other Damoſells in like brauery: for in thoſe dayes, the great Lords and Ladies were wont to bring their people to ſuch aſſemblies, clothed according to their owne perſons, without any difference at all betweene them: this fayre Lady adreſſed her ſpeeches to the King, deliuering them in forme following. My Lord, moſt humbly I beſeech you to grant me audience, and giue mee reaſon in a matter of difference, which I haue againſt the Knight that ſtandeth by your Maieſty, meaning Amadis. Long time haue I beene requeſted by Angriot d'Eſtrauaus to be his wife, who I am aſſured is in this royall preſence: hereto ſhe added how euery thing happened, the cauſe why hee kept the vale of the Pines, and how Amadis trauailing that way, made him perforce to abandon Armes. Neuer theleſſe, quoth ſhe, they

departed friends, and Amadis ſollemnely promiſed Angriote, that he ſhould enioy me as his Wife: whereof when I attained knowledg, I withdrew my ſelfe to a Caſtle of mine, where I kept ſuch a ſtrong guarde and cuſtome, as it was thought impoſſible for any ſtrange knight to enter there, without licence: but that knight comming thither, vanquiſhed my guardants, and hath vtterly aboliſhed the drift I intended. Yet afterward of his owne good will he promiſed mee, to cauſe Amadis recall his offer to Angriote: then chanced an vnhappy combat betweene him and this knight mine Vnckle, who being at the lateſt extremitie of his life, at my requeſt he was ſpared, on this condition: that on the firſt day your Maieſty held open Court, I ſhould here preſent my ſelfe, to grant a requeſt he muſt demand of me. To ſatisfie my promiſe I am come hither, and deſire to know what he will command me: At which words Amadis ſtepped forward, ſaying. My Lord, the Lady hath told ye nothing but truth, concerning the ſeuerall promiſes at the Combats: therefore am I ready here to accompliſh, that Amadis ſhall call back his word to A
                           •…
                        iote, prouided, ſhe performe her owne promiſe. On my conſcience, quoth ſhee, if you effect what you haue ſaid, you pleaſure me more then you can imagine: and to let you know I am ready to fulfill my offer, demand what you pleaſe, for if it be in my power you ſhall preuaile. I requeſt nothing elſe anſwered Amadis, but that you would accept Angriote as your huſband, he louing you ſo deerely as he doth. Out alas, cryed the Lady, what maner of demand is this? I wiſh Madame ſaid Amadis, that you would marry with ſuch a one, as is well worthy to haue ſo faire a Lady. In ſooth knight, quoth ſhee, this is not according to the promiſe you made me. I promiſed nothing, replied Amadis, but I will performe it: for if I ſtand bound to you, to cauſe Amadis diſcharge his word to Angriote, herein I accompliſh it. I am Amadis, and I reuoke the promiſe I made him, wherein you muſt needes confeſſe your ſelfe ſatisfyed: hee gladly would enioy you as his Wife, and I ioyne with him in the ſame requeſt, thus ſtand I free diſcharged to you both. May it be poſſible? quoth ſhe, that you are the man ſo highly renouned? Credit me Lady, anſwered the King, this is Amadis. Ah wretch that I am, ſaid ſhe, now do I wel perceiue, that art not cuning can preuent what God hath appointed, for I haue done my vttermoſt to eſcape Angriote, not onely for the euill I wiſh him, diſdaining his good and vertuous deſerts: but carying this reſolution, that keeping my ſelfe chaſt and ſingle, I would not bring my liberty into ſubiection: and now when I thought to be furtheſt from him, I am come neerer then euer I intended.
                  Lady, quoth the King, you haue great occaſion to reioyce, for you being faire and rich, he is a yong and braue diſpoſed knight: as you are rich in goods and poſſeſſions, euen ſo is he in bounty and vertue, not onely in deedes of Armes, but in all other good qualities beſeeming a knight, therefore your mariage together is very requiſite, and I thinke all in this preſence are of mine opinion: heereupon, ſhee ſtepped to the Queene, ſaying. Madam, you are eſteemed one of the moſt vertuous Princeſſes in the

world, moſt humbly I deſire your councell what I ſhall do.
                  Faire friend, anſwered the Queene, according to the reputation Angrtote had gotten among the good, he well deſerueth, not onely to bee aboundant in riches, but to bee loued of any Lady he ſhall chuſe.
                  Why Lady? ſaid Amadis, think you not that by accident or affection, my promiſe was made to Angriote, for had he compelled me to one of theſe twaine, then might you well haue condemned mee of folly: but making tryall of his valour and hardineſſe, yea, to mine owne coſt I dare aſſure ye, and knowing likewiſe his earneſt loue to you: me thinkes the iuſtice of the cauſe commands, that not only my ſelfe, but all ſuch as are acquainted with him, ought to labor in ſeeking remedy for you both: in him, the extreame paſſions hee endureth through your loue, in you, by making his reſtleſſe griefes known to you.
                  Now truſt me Sir, quoth ſhee, ſuch prayſe haue I heard of your vſage to euery one, as I imagine you would not ſay (before ſuch an aſſembly) otherwiſe then truth: wherefore following your counſell, as alſo the pleaſure of the King and Queene, I will forget my former ſtubborne opinion, and am ready to accompliſh what you ſhall command mee. Then Amadis taking her by the hand, called Angriote, and preſenting him his loue, ſaid: Sir Angriote, I promiſed to do my vttermoſt in this matter, ſay now, is this the Lady you would haue? Euen ſhe quoth Angriote, is the life and eſſence of my Soule, and I am deuoted to none but her. Then here I giue her you, replied Amadis, on this condition, that you ſhall be forth-with married together, and continue in honourable loue to her as ſhe deſerueth.
                  I thanke you my Lord, quoth he with all my heart, and will obſerue your gentle commandement. Preſently the King called for the Biſhoppe of Salerne, who conducted them to the Church, where they were eſpouſed in the preſence of many great Lords. Afterward they returned to the Citty, and there the wedding was ſolemnized with great ioy and Triumphs: wherefore wee may well ſay, that not men, but God appoynteth mariage, who perceiued the honeſt and continent loue, which Angriote euer-more bare to this ſelfe-willed Lady. For albeit hee had her in his cuſtodie, neuer did he meane diſhonorablie againſt her, but by vertuous cogitations bridled vnlawfull deſire: onely to expreſſe how intirely he loued her, and by obeying her ſeueere charge, loſt his life wel-neare when he combatted with Amadis.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXXIII.
                  
                     How King Liſuart would haue the aduiſe of his Princes and Lords, as concerning his former determination, for the high exalting and entertayning of Chiualrie.
                  
                  
                     AFter the end of this mariage, which by diuerſity of opinions cauſed much talke, as commonly it happeneth in ſuch caſes: the King commanded ſilence againe by his Herauld, when euery one being attentiue to heare what he would ſay, he thus began. My friends, no one of you is ignorant of the heauenly fauour toward me, by appointing me the greateſt earthly Lord, that liueth this day in the Iſles of the. Ocean: Wherefore I thinke it conuenient, that as wee in this countrey are the chiefe, ſo ſhould we be ſecond to no other Prince, in rendring immortall thankes by good and vertuous workes, whereon we are now minded to determine. In this reſpect I intreate & command albeit Kings are the heads of their Monarchies & you the members, that you would altogether take aduiſe, and giue mee counſell euen from your conſciences, what you thinke moſt expedient for mee to do, as well for the benefit of my Subiects, as alſo for our eſtate. And I aſſure ye, I am minded to beleeue your opinions, as proceeding frō loyall and ſaithfull ſubiects: wherfore againe I deſire ye, that without feare, each one would in particular and generally aduiſe, what we ought to doe as matter moſt commendable. Herewith he held his peace, and Barſinan Lord of Sanſuegua was intreated by all the aſſiſtants to ſpeake his opinion, which they did for no other reaſon but becauſe the King would haue euery one honour him: whereupon, after many excuſes on his own behalfe, he aroſe from his ſeate; & making humble reuerence, thus ſpake: ſeeing it liketh you, I ſhould firſt declare my cenſure, I deſire the King and this company to pardon my ignorance, being vnworthy of this honorable and gracious fauor. But me thinks (vnder ſubmiſſion to his pleaſure, and better aduiſe of al you my Lords) that wee ſhould with-draw our ſelues a while from the preſence of his Maieſty, where we may more freely conceiue our ſeuerall humors. This anſwer was generally well liked, wherefore the King and Queene left them together, walking into another of their Pauillions: then Seroloys the Fleming, Countie of Clare, began in this manner. You haue all heard my Lords, the good zeale the King hath to the gouernement, not only of the cōmon wealth in his Realm, but particularly to the honorable encreaſe of Chiualry, which he deſireth to continue in greater preeminence then euer it hath beene. And therefore my Lords humbling my ſelfe to better opinion, I thinke it good (to ſupply the intent of our King,) that wee all ought to counſell him, to ſtrengthen himſelfe with men and money: for they are the ſinnews of warre and peace, whereby, all Kings on the earth are maintained in their puiſſant authority. For it is moſt certaine, that treaſure is for Souldiers and men

at armes, by whome Kings reigne, nor ought it for any cauſe to bee elſe-where diſpended, without committing of true ſacrilidge: for theſe affairts are termed holy, cauſing the ſtate to liue in tranquility, and winne glorious conqueſts of ſuch as ſeeke to inuade them. Beſide, to attaine the better thereto, his Maieſtie muſt ſeeke meanes to get all the knights he can heare of, as well ſtrangers as other: entreating them with liberality, to ſend his renowne on winges through the world, which will fetch from the furtheſt parts men to his ſeruice, in hope of condigne recompence to their labour. By their aid he may eaſily make himſelfe Monarch of al the Princes by Eeaſt and Weſt, for it hath neuer beene read or heard, that any Prince could make himſelfe great, except by the aſſiſtance of valiant a
                        •
                     d hardy Knights, hauing bought their vallour in braue attempts. I tearme it bought, by fauouring honoring, and diſtributing their treaſure among them: that they may receiue no occaſion of diſlike, but with vnconquerable reſolution to purſue victorie. As he would haue proceeded in further perſwaſion, the greater part of the Lords ſeemed to allow of his opinion, afferffing that better conncell could not bee giuen: which when Barſinan heard, he requeſted audience for him-ſelfe, and hauing grant thereof, he intended to reuerſe this firſt aduiſe, becauſe he might very hardly elſe goe forward with his ſecret purpoſe: the ſilence being made, Barſinan thus begins. It ſeemeth by your countenance my Lords, that the County of Clares opinion is a grounded truth, for I ſee the moſt part of you auerre the ſame, not hauing heard any thing to the contrary: notwithſtanding, I hope to make it knowne to you all, and to the king himſelfe hereafter, how much I deſire to be friend him, you and the whole Realme. The county of Clare hath laid before you. that the King your maiſter ought to ſtrengthen himſelfe, by the multitude & force of ſtrange knights, whom he would haue called from all parts of the world: in ſooth if his opinion were to bee credited, and you your ſelues bound to follow it, I am certaine in ſhort time their number would be ſuch, as your king, who is a good Prince and liberall: would not only congratulate them with what he was wont to beſtow on you, but likewiſe take your owne from you, and giue to them, for naturaly, matter of nouelty and neuer ſeene before, is moſt pleaſing. Hereupon it followeth, that whatſoeuer ſeruice you performe, bee it of neuer ſo high eſteemation, yet ſhall you fall into his diſdaine and obliuion, and ſtrangers lift you from the ſeats, which now do promiſe your ſecureſt quiet. Therefore my Lords, before you conclude, this matter is of ſo great importance, as you all ought to bee aduiſed, by good and deſcreete delibera
                        •
                     ion in your graue iudgements. I hope there is no one in all this aſſembly, that will preſume I ſpeake otherwiſe, then reaſon and the good loue I beare yee doth admoniſh me, for I thanke God I am ſuch a one, as neede to regard the greateſt Prince my neighbor, no more then he doth me: but conſidering I am in ſo noble compay, and haue here receiued ſuch fauour and honour, I rather deſire (God is my witneſſe) I had neuer beene borne, then to flatter men with vaine perſwaſions. You muſt therefore (my

Lords) diligently fore-ſee, leaſt afterward you repent with too much leyſure. And heere he pauſed, for the murmour was ſo great among them, as they hardly gaue him time to conclude, becauſe the moſt part of them that accorded to the firſt opinion, were now changed and helde with Barſinan, by meanes whereof, they could determine nothing, but it was appointed how the king ſhould bee acquainted with this controuerſie, that hee might ſet downe ſome better order: and after it had againe beene debated in his preſence, hee thus ſpake vnto them all.
                  My honourable friends, I am ſure that the loue you beare me, & your forward deſire in doing mee ſeruice, hath brought you into theſe intricate difficulties: and I thinke there is no one of you all, but hath ſpoken ſo neere to truth as is poſſible, whereby your iudgements are ſo ſound and good, as better cannot bee heard from any. Notwithſtanding, it is a thing moſt ſure and certaine, that the Kings of the earth are not eſteemed great, by the number of places in their poſſeſſion, but by the quantity and multitude of their people, ouer whom they rule and command. For what can one king alone do? it may be much leſſe thē the ſimpleſt of his ſubiects: and beſide, it ſhal ſeem a matter aboue his power, to gouerne & maintain his eſtate without people, let him abound in neuer ſo much wealth: nor can theſe tranſitorie gifts of fortune be better imployed, then diſtributed among ſuch as well deſerue them. Whereby I gather, how euery man of good iudgement will ſay, that good counſell and ſtrength of men, is the very treaſure indeede. If yet you will haue better inſtance hereof, looke on the liues of great Alexander, ſtrong Iulius Caeſar, gentle Hannibal, and many other, whoſe names beare the title of immortality: they by the treaſure of men, and not mony, were made Kings, Emperours & Monarchs, for they could bountifully diſtribute their coyne, to ſuch as they well knew had beſt deſerued it; and likewiſe would vſe them with gracious behauiour, as they might be termed Lords both in heart and hand, the only meane that made them be ſerued with fedelity. Therefore my good friends, I deſire you all, euen in the moſt intire affection I can vſe, that you aſſiſt me to your vttermoſt, in recouery of good Knights, either of our owne or ſtrangers: promiſing you by the faith and word of a king, ſo honorably to entreate and eſteeme of them, as both they and you ſhall remaine contented. Nor are you ignorant my noblē friends, that the better we bee accompanied, the more we ſhall be feared of our enemies, our ſtate in greater ſafety, and your ſelues more ſecurely defended and loued. If then any vertue at all abide in vs, you may eaſily iudge, how new friends cannot make vs forgetfull of our olde: let none then differ from the requeſt I haue made, but rather yeelde and conſent thereto. Againe I entreat ye, and expreſſely command, that each of you preſently name ſuch to me as you know, happely they being yet vnknowne to me: to the end if any be in this Court, they may receiue ſuch fauour of vs, as the abſent may bee the better affected to our ſeruice; likewiſe we entreat them, not to depart our company, without giuing vs ſome aduertiſement. All which was preſently done, many

openly called, and their names ſet downe▪ but becauſe the tables were couered for dinner, the King aroſe from his chaire, withdrawing him-ſelfe into the appointed Hall, where many Tables were prouided, which he commanded to bee well furniſhed with Knights. You may eaſily coniecture, that during the ſeruice, they diuerſly communed together, ſome on the kings deliberation, and other, of his magnificence, vntill the Tables were with-drawne againe: when the King cauſed them all to be called, and thus ſpake. You ſee my good friends, how earneſtly I loue and deſire your company, wherefore you muſt grant me one requeſt, not to depart this Court without my leaue: for I would particularly know the ſeruice you haue done me, and you 
                        •
                     aſt ſuch reward of my treaſure, as may continue your loue to me. Hereupon they were ſeuerally called by name againe, and euery one confirmed the kings requeſt, except Amadis, becauſe he was the Queenes knight: and al this while was ſhe preſent at theſe matters, wherefore after the noiſe was ſomewhat appeaſed, ſhe framed her ſpeeches to the King in this manner. My Lord, ſeeing it hath pleaſed you ſo to fauour and honour your Knights, me thinks it were reaſonable that I ſhould doe the like to the Ladies and Gentle-women, of what part ſoeuer they be. Wherefore I humbly deſire one boone, with aſſurance likewiſe if you conſent, theſe Gentle-men after you ſhall not deny mee: conſidering that in ſemblable company, good things deſerue to bee demanded and granted. Then the King looked on all the aſſiſtants, ſaying: What anſwer (my friends) ſhall we make the Queene? ſhall we agree to her demand? Yea Sir, if it be your pleaſure, anſwered they. What? ſaid Galaor, were it poſſible to deny a princeſſe ſo vertuous? Seeing you are all ſo well content, quoth the King, ſhe ſhall obtaine whatſoeuer ſhe asketh. At theſe words the Queene aroſe, and thanking her Lord, ſaid. Seeing it pleaſeth you to giue place and fauour to my requeſt, I deſire hence-forth you would doe ſuch honour to Ladies and Gentlewomen, as to take them into your protection and defence: maintayning their quarrells againſt all ſuch as would moleſt them any manner of way. Beſide, if you haue made promiſe of ſome ſuite to a man, and the like to any Lady or Gentlewoman: you firſt ſhall accompliſh the womans requeſt, as being the weakeſt perſon, and who hath moſt neede to be holpen. This granted, hereafter they ſhall be better fauoured and defended then euer they were: for villaynes that are wont to do them iniurie, meeting them in the fields, and knowing they haue ſuch knights as you are for their protect ours, dare no way wrong them. In ſooth Madame, ſaid the King, your requeſt is reaſonable, and I thinke none will gaine-ſay it: wee will haue it therefore regiſtred and ſet downe as a law inuiolable.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXXIIII.
                  
                     How while this great and loyfull aſsembly endured, a Damoſell came to the Court cloathed in mourning, requeſting ayde of King Liſuart, in a cauſe whereby ſhe had beene wronged.
                  
                  
                     MEane while this honorable company thus continued, free from all danger and miſ-hap, thinking on nothing but pleaſure and delights: there entred a Damoſell clad in mourning, who falling on her knees before the King, thus ſpake. My Lord, ech one is merry but my poore ſelfe, who am ſo croſſed with griefe and ſorrow, as death were the beſt friend could come to me: yet would your Maieſtie take compaſſion on me, I eaſily might recouer my ioy againe. Theſe wordes were dipt in ſuch aboundance of teares, as the King being moued therewith to pittie, thus anſwered. Lady, I would be very glad to relieue your ſadneſſe, but tell me who is the cauſe thereof? Dread Lord, quoth ſhe, my Father and Vncle are detained priſoners, by a Lady who hath vowed neuer to releaſe them vntill they deliuer her two ſo good knights as one was whom they killed in fight. On what occaſion did they kill him? ſaid the King. Becauſe he vanted, replied the Damoſel, that he alone would combat with them, and ſo proud he grew in ſpeeches, as at length he defied them. Not long after they meeting one day together, the knight vſed ſuch reproouing tearmes of cowardiſe, as my Father and vncle could not indure the iniurie: but falling to the combat, the knight was ſlaine in the preſence of a Lady, named Galdenda, who, as ſhe ſaid, procured his comming to maintain a difference, which ſhe had with a neighbour of hers, being her great enemy: wherfore ſeeing him dead, ſhe cauſed the conquerors to be taken, & put them into the moſt miſerable priſon in the world: albeit my father, and vncle often told her, that they would performe for her what the knight ſhould haue done. But ſhe anſwered, how ſhee well knew they were not ſufficient for the cauſe, & therefore ſhould neuer be releaſed, vntill they deliuered her two knights of like account, each of them valuing him in ſtrength whō they had ſlaine, to finiſh the attempt himſelfe was able to doe. Know you not Damoſell, ſaid the King, againſt whom they ſhoulde combat, or the place where it is appointed? No truely Sir, anſwered the Damoſell, but I haue ſeene my father and vncle cruelly put in priſon, where their friends cā compas no meanes to ſee them. Herewith ſhe began again to weep, that euery one pittied to behold her, which made the king aske her, if the place were far off: In fiue daies my Lord, quoth ſhe, it may eaſily be gone & returned. Now truſt me, ſaid the king, you ſhall not want your ioy for two knights, wherefore looke among al theſe gallants, and chuſe ſuch as you beſt fancy. My Lord, replied the Damoſell, I am a ſtranger, and know not any one in this Court: But if you pleaſe, I will i
                        •
                     treate the Queene to doe me ſo much grace, as to appoint me twaine after her owne minde. Doe ſo, ſaid the King, if you thinke good: then came the Damoſell,

and falling at the Queenes feete, proceeded thus. Madame, you are ſayde to bee one of the wiſeſt and moſt vertuous dames in the world, you vnderſtand the cauſe of my mourning, and the gracious offer the King hath made me: moſt humbly I beſeech ye thē, for the honor of God, to take cōpaſſion on a poore Gentlewoman, and counſell me which two knights I ſhall chuſe, that are beſt able to ſupport my want. Beleeue me Damoſell, anſwered the Queen, you demand a matter of great importance, yet in ſuch ſort doe I pittie your cauſe, as I am the more willing to giue you aduiſe: albeit I would be loth to forgoe them twaine, whome I could name in this company. Thē ſhee ſhewed her Amadis, ſaying: This is my knight. And pointing to Galaor, ſayde. This other is the Kings, yet be they both bretheren, and the beſt Knights (as I haue heard) this day liuing. I deſire your Maieſtie, quoth the Damoſell, to tell me their names. The one, ſayd the Queene, is called Amadis, and the other Galaor. But by your fauour, replied the Damoſell, is this Amadis, the knight ſo much renowmed? I am very certaine, Madame, ſo ſoone as hee and his brother ſhall arriue where I can bring them, my cauſe will be ſufficiently executed, therefore I deſire you to obtaine mee their company. Hereupon the Queen called them, ſaying: I beſeech yee both to ſuccour this woman, who ſtandeth in neede of your aſſiſtance. Amadis was ſomewhat ſlow in anſwering, for he caſt his eye on the Princeſſe Oriana, to note if ſhe would like of his departure: and ſhe who likewiſe pittied the womans cauſe, let fall her gloues, which was an appointed ſignall betweene them, and thereby he was certified of her conſent, wherefore hee thus ſpake to the Queene. I am at your diſpoſition, Madame, to do whatſoeuer you ſhall command me. Go then, in Gods name, quoth ſhe, and returne again with all poſſible ſpeed, without tarying for any thing that may happen. Hereto they willingly condeſcended, and taking leaue of her, Amadis fained hee would ſpeake to Mabila, when comming neere her and Oriana, hee ſayde to his Goddeſſe. Madame, well may I ſay that the faireſt Lady in the world, ſends mee to ſuccour the moſt wofull woman I euer did beholde. Sweete friend, quoth Oriana, I repēt that I gaue you ſo much libertie, becauſe my minde telleth me, this attempt will proue ſome-what dangerous to you, which I hope the heauens will powerfully defend. I am perſwaded Madame, anſwered Amadis, that as the wonderfull worke-man of the world, hath enriched you with beauty beyond all other women, he will not ſuffer you to feele diſpleaſure, by any miſ-fortune happening to mee: for being yours as I am, I imagine my ſelfe ſo happy, as I thinke no euill can chance to mee, if I continue in your gracious fauour. If it lay in my power, replied Oriana, I would reuoke your licence of departure: but ſeeing it may not bee, I will remaine in prayer for your proſperous ſucceſſe. So taking leaue of her, hee and Galaor went to arme them-ſelue, then doing their humble duty to the king, they rode away in company of the Damoſell. As thus they trauailed, about mid-day they entred the fortreſt, which commonly was called the vnfortunate Forreſt, becauſe

neuer any knight errant entred into it, that could eſcape without ſome michiefe: and ſo theſe two bretheren deerely experimented, for ſuch miſhap befell them, as they verily thought to loſe their liues. Still rode they on without any aduenture, till the Mo one begā to grace the euening, yet would not the Damoſell ſhew any ſigne of ſtay, which made Amadis aske this queſtion: Gentlewoman, ſhall we reſt out ſelues here awhile? Yea mary, quoth ſhee, here before wee ſhall finde tents ready prouided, and people in them who expect your comming: make then a little haſt I pray you, becauſe I will goe before to aduertiſe them. They were very well content therewith, and ſo the Damo ſell left them, till ſoone after they eſpied the tents, where they ſaw her among other Ladyes and knights, who bad thē welcome at their arriuall: and being alighted from their horſes, they were conducted into a Pauillion, hauing ſeruants ſtanding ready to take their armour, which they had no ſooner put off, but was caryed by them into another roome, where-upon Amadis demanded why they did ſo. Becauſe, replied the Damoſell, you muſt lodge where they haue caryed your armour. He imagining ſhee ſayde true, made no further enquirie, but ſate downe with his brother on ſtooles that ſtood ready for them, attending the houre of ſupper. Not long had they ſitten there, but fiue knights well armed entred furiouſly vpon them, ſaying: Yeelde your ſelues, elſe you are ſlaine. When Amadis heard and ſaw their bad behauiour, he knew right well they were betraied, and ſtarting vp, ſaide to Galaor. By God brother, wee are treacherouſly deceiued. The
                        •
                      finding no remedy but preſent death, after they had ſtrugled with the knights, who e
                        ••
                     ily might haue taken their liues, A
                           •…
                        
                        dis thus ſpake. Ah villaines, you haue vs now at too much aduantage, deliuer vs our armes, and this quarrell ſhalbe otherwiſe decided. Theſe wordes will little profit yee, anſwered the Knights, yeeld your ſelues our priſoners, or we will kill ye. So may you doe, ſayd Galaor, like traitours as you are, and I will maintaine my wordes againſt two or three of you, if you dare deliuer me mine armes. We need no ſuch proofe, replied the knights, but if you contend in further ſpeeches, you ſhall deerely buy them with the loſſe of your liues. Now truſt me, quoth Amades, wee rather will dye, then be priſoners to ſuch villaines as you are. Herewith one of the knights went foorth, and comming to a Lady, he ſaid. Madame, they will not yeelde, ſhall wee kill them? Stay awhile, quoth ſhe, and if they graunt not my will, deale as you pleaſe with thē. Then came the Lady (who was mauaileous beautifull) into the tent and ſhewing the countenance of a very angry woman, thus ſpake to Amadis and Galaor: Knights yeeld your ſelues my priſoners, otherwiſe you muſt die. Brother, anſwer
                        •
                     d Galaor, it may bee ſhee will pittie vs, let vs yeelde our ſelues to her. And Madame, quoth hee, wee beſeech yee deliuer our horſes and armour, when if all your ſeruants can conquer vs, wee will bee content to ſubmit our ſelues: but if you d
                        •
                     
                     nie vs this reaſonable requeſt, wee muſt eſteeme the leſſe of you, and they that deale with vs ſo diſcourteouſly. I willgiue no credence to you at this time, replyed

the Lady, but would counſell ye to yeeld your ſelues to mee. Whereto at length they accorded, ſeeing they could no way elſe ſaue their liues: yet knew ſhe not▪ their names, for the Damoſell that conducted them thither, would not tell her, becauſe if her Miſtreſſe vnderſtood what they were, ſhe knew they might not eſcape the death. Wherefore ſhee was content to conceale them, in reſpect of the offence ſhe ſhould commit, by cauſing the death of two ſo good knights: beſide, ſhee repented her vnhonorable iourney, which now ſhe could no way remedie, but only by keping their names vnknown. They being thus priſoners to the Lady, ſhe entred into theſe ſpeeches. Knights, you may ſee in what eſtate I hold ye, and there is no meane but one for deliuerance, which I will acquaint ye withall: mary if you doe not fulfill it, in ſteed of giuing you liberty, I will cauſe you to be incloſed in ſuch a dolorous priſon, as ſhall be worſe to you then death it ſelfe. Lady, anſwered Amadis, the matter may be ſuch, that we ſhall eaſily conſent thereto: and in ſome ſort againe, we will rather die then obey you. I know not (quoth the Lady) how you may conceiue thereof, but I can aſſure ye, that if you promiſe mee not to forſake the ſeruice of King Liſuart, and to go tell him at your departure hence, how you do it by commandement of Madaſima Lady of Gantaſi, who enuies his welfare, becauſe he keepeth one in his court, that ſlew the moſt renowned Knight Dardan: you neuer ſhale eſcape this mereileſſe captiuity. Madame, ſaid Galaor, if you do this, thinking thereby to offend king Liſuart, you much abuſe your ſelfe: for we are two poore knights, who haue no other riches then our Armour and Horſe, and hee hath ſuch ſtore of redoubted Seruants, as he will little care whether you impriſon vs or no: yet ſhall it bee ſuch a ſhame to vs, as you can neuer imagine the like, becauſe wee are vnable to do it. What? quoth ſhe, loue you better to ſpend your life time in a moſt miſerable priſon then to forſake the ſeruice of the moſt diſloyall king liuing? Now truſt me Madame, anſwered Galaor, but ill beſeems you theſe bad ſpeeches: for he is one of the beſt Princes in the World, and againſt any knight I will maintaine, that neuer was diſloyalty found in him. In luckleſſe time for thee, ſaid Madaſima, haſt thou vttered thy loue: wherewith ſhee commanded their hands to be bound. That ſhall I do, replied a knight, and cut off their heads, if you pleaſe. Hereupon he laid hold on Amadis, who was ſo offended thereat, as he lifted his fiſt to giue him a blow on the eare: but the knight eſcaping, Amadis caught him about the middle, throwing him ſo violently againſt the ground, that he thought his heart was broken, for he lay ſtill and moued not. Now grew the Lady and her knights into ſuch anger with Amadis, as preſently they would haue ſlaine him, and he had not eſcaped, but that an ancient knight ſtepped before him with his Sword drawne, vſing ſuch threatnings and other behauiour, as he cauſed them all to goe forth of the Pauillion: yet could he not defend him ſo well, but Amadis was wounded on the right ſhoulder. Then ſtepped the auncient knight to Madaſima, with theſe wordes. By God Madame you deale like a very vnreaſonable Woman, cauſing your

people in your preſence to murder two knights, after they haue yeelded themſelues your priſoners. Why Sir? quoth ſhe, did you not ſee their preſumptuous boldneſſe? eſpecially this varlet, who before my face hath ſo vſed this Man, as he is not able to riſe againe? Madame, replied Galaor, we rather chuſe to die, then any other but your ſelfe ſhall binde vs: for you by nature are gentle and courteous, and we as priſoners wil ſhew obeyſance to you. Seeing you ſay ſo, anſwered Madaſima, I will binde you my ſelfe: hereupon ſhe bound their hands with ſtrong cords, and preſently taking downe the Tents, they departed thence, Amadis and Galaor being ſet on horſes without Saddles, and led along by two S
                        •
                     rgeants: as for Gandalin and Galaors Squire, they followed on foot, hauing their hands bound behinde them, in manner as if they had gone to hanging, and thus were they conſtrained to trauaile al night through the Forreſt.
                  But Amadis was weary of his life, not ſo much for his hard vſage, in reſpect he could gouerne himſelfe with wonderfull patience: but for the matter Madaſima would enforce them to, the refuſall whereof, gaue hope of no better vſage at her hand, but for euer to be depriued of his faire Oriana. And contrarywiſe, if he conſented, he ſhould in like manner be baniſhed from her preſence, being compelled to ſerue king Liſuart no longer: theſe two extremitys troubled his thoughts, which the ancient knight well perceiued that ſaued their liues, yet he imagined the cauſe to proceede from his hurt, and was moued to pitty him, for the Damoſell had told him, that he was one of the beſt knights in the world.
                  Here you muſt obſerue, how the Damoſell was the ancient knights Daughter, and repented her treaſon in deceiuing them, ſeeing how diſcourteouſly they were intreated which made her earneſtly to perſwade her father, to practiſe ſome meane for their ſafety: for, quoth ſhe, if they be put to death, perpetuall ſhame will attend on my life. Haue pitty then (good Father) on them and me, in reſpect the one is famous Amadis of Gaule, and the other his brother Gai
                           •
                        or, who ſlew the Giant at the Rock of Galteres. Full wel knew the knight the cauſe why his Daughter brought them, and therefore pittied their vſage the more, deuiſing how he might compaſſe the meanes to ſhielde them from death, which was neere at hand, ſo comming to Amadis he thus ſpake. Be of good cheere, Sir Knight, for I hope by (the helpe of God) ere long to deliuer you from this cruell Lady: and if your wound offend ye, I will perſwade her to let you haue ſome cure. When Amadis heard him ſpeake ſo friendly, knowing likewiſe it was the Man, who deliuered him from them that would haue ſlaine him, hee thus anſwered. Father, I haue no Wound which greatly annoyeth me, but I haue more cauſe to complaine of the Damoſell, ſhe hath brought vs hither by the falſeſt treacherie in the World. I know very well, ſaide the Knight, you haue beene deceiued, and can tell what you are better then you weene, which makes mee the more carefull in ſeeking your good: Therefore I ſhall giue you profitable counſell if you will accept it. But did the Lady know you, you ſhould die without any remedy, becauſe nothing might ſerue elſe to expia
                        •
                     e

her wrath: beleeue then what I ſay, and put it in practiſe. You are fayre, young, and of gallant ſtature, beſide, Madaſima hath beene told, how you are one of the beſt Knights in the World, whereby ſhee conceiueth good opinion of you: now muſt you cunningly cloſe with her, requeſting ſhee would accept you as her husband or perpetuall friend: for ſhe is a woman not to refuſe you, if you can neuer ſo little diſſemble with her. But what you doe, do quickly, becauſe at that place whither we are now going, ſhe intends to ſend one of her ſeruants to King Liſuarts Court, whoſe errand 
                        〈◊〉
                      onely to enquire your names: for ſhe that conducted you 
                        •
                     ither, (perceiuing you ſhould aſſuredly die, if her miſtreſſe knew the names of you both) diſguiſed the matter ſo wi
                        •
                     h her, as ſhe ſaid, ſhe forgot to aske your names: onely thus perſwading her, that you were two of the very beſt Knights in the World. The daunger thorowly conſidered, I ſweare to you by the faith of a Chriſtian, that I can deuiſe no better meane for your deliuerance, then this I haue told ye: and ſhall I ſay more? If you do it not, worſe will come to you then you ſuſpect. But Amadis loued the Princeſſe Oriana ſo do
                        ••
                     ely as he rather deſired death, then to hazard himſelfe in ſuch a compoſition, whereupon he thus replyed. I thanke you Sir hartily for your great kindneſſe, but I haue no ſuch authoritie ouer my ſelfe, as will permit me to proceede ſo far: though your Lady her ſelfe intreated neuer ſo deepely, yet liberty nor life can perſwade me. Alas Sir, anſwered the Knight, I wonder you will not conſider how neere your death is? It is all one to me, quoth Amadis, but if you will deale herein with my brother, he is a knight more braue and beautifull then I am: happely hee wil conſent to follow your deuiſe. Preſently he left Amadis, and comming to Galaor, deliuered the whole diſcourſe he did to his brother: Which he liking very well, made this reply. Good Father, if you could bring it to paſſe, that the Lady would accept me as her friend, my companion and I were for euer at your command. Referre the matter to me, quoth the Knight, immediatly will I goe to her, and hope to ſtrike it dead on her behalfe. So departing from Galaor, hee went to Madaſima, who rode formoſt, and thus began to breake with her.
                  Madame, you carry two priſoners with you, but you doe not know what they are. Why aske you me ſuch a queſtion? anſwered Madaſima. Becauſe the one of them, quoth the knight, is eſteemed the beſt knight that euer bare Armes, and the moſt accompliſhed in all other good gifts. Is he not then named Amadis, ſaid ſhe, whoſe death I haue ſo long deſired. No Madame, anſwered the Knight, I ſpeake of him which rideth next vs, whoſe youth and beauty had you well regarded, your ſelfe would ſay you haue been too outragious in iniurie. What though he be your priſoner, it is not for any offence committed againſt you, but onely through the hatred you beare to another: all which you may yet redreſſe in much better ſort then you began, conſidering if he conceiued liking of you, you may thereby eaſily induce him to loue, and vnder that ceremony, draw him to do what your ſelfe ſhall deſire. In ſooth,

plyed Madaſima, I will aſſay, to know if he be ſuch a one as you report him to be. Do Madame, quoth he, and you ſhall finde him one of the faireſt Knights that euer you beheld.
                  Here you muſt note, that the Knight no ſooner left Galaor when he went to the Ladie, but he tooke occaſion thus to talke with his brother. You ſee (my Lord) the eſtate wherein we are, which requireth ſome notable diſſimulation at our hands: I beſeech ye therefore moderate their anger, becauſe alreadie it endangereth our liues, and for a while follow my direction. By Heauen, brother, anſwered Amadis, death had beene very welcome to mee: but ſince you wiſh me to be gouerned by you, I am content, deſiring the conſeruation of our honours, which being loſt, we are vnworthie to line. Further they could not proceede, becauſe Madaſima came and interrupted them, when calling him aſide, and faire day was diſplayed on the earth▪ his beautie and good grace ſo eſpecially contented her, as ſhe became ſurprized with his loue, which ſhe ſhaddowed vnder demanding how he fared. Madame, ſaid Galaor, I fare worſe then you ſhould, were you in my power as I am in yours, for I would do you what ſeruice and pleaſure poſſible I could, and you vſe the contrarie to me, I hauing giuen no occaſion of offence: reaſon willeth I ſhould rather be your knight, to loue and honour you, then your priſoner thus vnkindelie bound as I am.
                  And ſurelie I cannot but meruaile hereat, conſidering the ſimple conqueſt you haue thereby: vſe then ſuch rigor to vs, as women ſo diuinelie adorned are wont to do. Madaſima hearing his gentle language, was more and more enflamed with his loue, yet ſtriuing to diſſemble it, ſhe merrilie ſaid. Tell me faire Sir, if I chuſe you as my friend, and deliuer you from priſon, will you (for my ſake) leaue the ſeruice of King Liſuart, and afterward tell him how you did it by my meanes? With all my heart Lady, anſwered Galaor, and to performe it, you ſhall haue what oath you pleaſe, both of mee and my companion, for he will doe no more then I requeſt him. Credit me, quoth Madaſima, if before this company you wil promiſe to obey me, preſentlie you ſhall enioy your libertie.
                  Behold me ready, replied Galaor. Yet is not this enough, anſwered Madaſima, for you ſhall ſweare it in the preſence of a Ladie where I am intended to lodge this night: In meane while you muſt aſſure me, not to depart my company. We will not on my faith Madame, quoth Galaor: and calling Amadis, cauſed him to affirme as much, whereupon they were vnbound and ſet at libertie, their 
                        •
                     quires likewiſe as friendlie vſed, and mounting on their owne horſes, rode at their eaſe as they did before.
                  But Madaſima and Galaor ſtill continued their amorous diſcourſes, till they arriued at a Caſtle named Albies, the Lady where-of receiued them very honourably, in reſpect of great friendſhippe betweene Madaſima and her. Needeleſſe were it to tell you of their good cheere, it could not but be anſwerable to the time and company, but after ſupper Madaſima demanded of Galaor, if he meant to keepe his promiſe he made her by the way. What elſe Madame?

quoth he, prouided you be ſo good as your worde to me. Make no doubt thereof, replyed Madaſima: then framing her ſpeeches to the Lady of the Caſtle, and alſo to two knights that were her Sonnes, ſhe proceeded in this manner. My good friends, I pray you heare a couenant betweene me and theſe two Gentlemen, becauſe hereafter you may be my witneſſes. They are my priſoners, and vnder theſe conditions I haue releaſed them, that one of them ſhall continue my friend, and both of them forſake the ſeruice of King Liſuart, telling him: how for my ſake, and in deſpight of him they haue done it. Hereupon I intreate this fauour at your hands, as to meete me at the Court of that wretched King, on the day they muſt declare this meſſage, to ſee how contentedly he will take it: But if they fullfill not their promiſe, hence-forth you ſhall publiſh in all places the heynous offence by them committed, and ten dayes I giue them to execute this charge. I am well pleaſed, ſaid the Lady of the Caſtle, to doe a greater matter for you then this, if they as willingly conſent thereto. We pray you, quoth Galaor, not to faile herein, for we haue promiſed and will performe it. Receiue then your libertie, anſwered Madaſima, yet muſt you not depart this night: Theſe words ſhe ſpake, becauſe ſhe intended to ſeale the bargaine with Galaor.
                  
                  When the time came that ſummoned them to reſt, Amadis was conducted to one chamber, and Galaor to another, whither ſoone after Madaſima repaired, ſhe being young, beautifull, and aduenturouſly giuen: Galaor likewiſe, a man forward to ſuch fortunes, when Loue had erected his ſcaling-ladders to the walls, quickly got poſſeſſion of the Forte. And ſo well liked ſhee theſe amorous skirmiſhes, as afterward ſhe reported in many places, how ſhe neuer taſted a more pleaſant night, and had ſhe not promiſed him departure, hardly would ſhe haue let him goe ſo ſoone, nor did ſhee but in hope of his ſpeedie returne.
                  Thus was ſhe enclined to voluptuous deſire, as without care of her honour, ſhe often fell in this ſort. By theſe meanes eſcaped Amadis, and Galaor, vnder the conditions you haue heard, which they hoped to preuent without impeach, as hereafter ſhall be declared vnto you. All that day they rode, not hindered by any thing, and at night were friendly entertained in an hermitage, ſetting forward the next morning to the Court of King Liſuart.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXXV.
                  
                     How King Liſuart was in danger of his perſon and his ſtate, by the vnlawfull promiſes he made too raſhly and vnaduiſedly.
                  
                  
                     FOure dayes after Amadis & Galaor departed from the Court, the ancient Knight came to the Cittie of London, who left the Crowne and the mantle with the Queene, as you haue heard: when falling on his knee before the King, he began in this manner. I marueil my Lord, that in a time of ſuch honor, you weare not the Crowne I left with you. And you Madame, quoth he to the Queene, is it poſſible you ſhould make ſo ſlender account of the ſumptuous mantle I gaue you in charge, not deigning as yet to proue it, or how it will become ye? When the King heard his words, knowing they were loſt, he ſate a good while without any anſwere, which made the knight thus begin againe. On my faith I am glad you like thē not, for had you pleaſed to keepe them, you muſt likewiſe haue granted my demand, and happely it would proue greater then you expect: otherwiſe, in falſifying your promiſe, you might procure the loſſe of my head. Moſt humbly therefore I beſeech ye my Lord, to will them be deliuered me againe, becauſe I may tarry no longer here.
                  At which words the King ſeemed much offended, and not being able any longer time to conceale his hidden anger; earneſtly fixing his eyes vpon him (which were then ouer clouded with a diſcontented brow) he brake forth into theſe following ſpeeches. Know knight, that whatſoeuer promiſes, I haue made to thee, are (like thoſe decrees, which ſtand regiſtred in the booke of Fate) immutable, and thou ſhalt finde that I will keepe them inuiolable, Although I muſt confeſſe, (for the which I am heartily ſorry, not ſo much for my ſelfe; who am a partner with thee in the loſſe: as for thy ſake who committed them to my truſt) that both the Crowne and Mantle are vtterly loſt, how, or by what meanes I cannot relate, would heauens would pleaſe to be ſo propitious as to bring to light this deede of darkeneſſe; then ſhould my now troubled heart, finde comfort, and you, your wiſhed deſire: Which till then cannot reſt contented, my much perplexed minde would then bee at peace, which now is at ciuill Warres, and inteſtine contention within me. At which words, not being able any further by his tongue (the hearts beſt interpreter both for ioy and griefe) to expreſſe himſelfe, he abruptly pauſed, partlie moued thereunto by the knight who gaue a loud ſhrike, ſaying.
                  Ah wretched and miſerable old man, now comes the time I ſo much feared, bringing with it, my lateſt and vnluckie exigent: haue I not long enough endured torments, but now muſt after all thoſe miſeries, finiſh mine olde age in the moſt ſore, cruell death

was euer heard of, hauing by no offence deſerued it? While thus he complained, the teares aboundantly trickled downe his white beard, which moued the moſt conſtant to pitty his griefe, and the King himſelf ouercom with cōpaſſion, returned this anſwere. Feare not (Knight) to ſpeede any thing the worſe for my loſſe, you muſt be ſatisfied whatſoeuer it coſt me, according as I faithfuly promiſed. At theſe words the Knight would haue kiſſed his feete, but the King reſtrained him, ſaying: Demand what thou wilt, for thou ſhalt haue it. I know my Lord, quoth the Knight, you remember your promiſe to deliuer my Crowne and Mantle, or whatſoeuer I requeſted for them: God is my witneſſe, I intended not to deſire what now I muſt needes, by reaſon I haue no other meane whereby to bee deliuered, if I had, I would acquit you of the griefe I know you will endure, granting me the thing I muſt of neceſſitie demand: but now it may not be otherwiſe, except you infringe your faith & loyaltie. Rather will I loſe my Kingdome, replied the King, then make apromiſe and not fulfill it, ſay boldly therefore thy minde. I thanke your Maieſty, quoth the knight, there now remaineth nothing, but to haue aſſurance from the Lords of your Court, that they ſeeke not to take from me the gift you muſt deliuer: otherwiſe your promiſe cannot be perform'd, or I ſatisfied, hauing a reward now, and taken from me anon. Great reaſon, ſaid the King, my word ſhall ſtand for their warrant. Seeing my Lord, quoth the knight, Fortune hath ſo permitted, that you haue loſt my Mantle and the Crowne, it is impoſſible to ſaue my head, except you giue me Madame Oriana your Daughter. Be therefore now aduiſed, either reſtore my Iewells, or giue me her, albeit I loue the one better then the other: for neuer can I haue ſo much good by her, as I ſuſtaine harme by your vnhappie loſſe. Now began all the Lords and Barons to murmur againſt the knight, perſwading the king to deny his word: but he rather deſired death, he was ſuch a good and loyall Prince, and this anſwere hee made them. Be not offended my good friends, the loſſe of my Daughter will not be ſo preiudiciall to me, as the breach of my promiſe: for if the one be enuious, the other is iniurious, and to be ſhunned euery way. The proofe is ready, if Subiects finde not their Prince faithfull, and his word inuiolable, what care will they haue of the loue and fidelitie they owe to him? much better vnborne then any ſuch blemiſh: this knight therefore muſt haue my daughter, and I will deliuer her according to my promiſe. Hereupon he ſent for her but the Queene being preſent all this while, little thought the king would ſo forget his fatherlie loue: and when ſhe heard this rigorous ſentence pronounced againſt her Daughter, ſhee good Lady fell at the kings feete, when weeping (as a Mother for the loſſe of her Childe) ſhe ſaid. What will ye doe my My Lord? will ye bee more inhumane to your owne blood, then the bruite Beaſts are to their contraries? Notwithſtanding all their brutiſh qualities, yet be they neuer ſo vnnatural to ſhew any violence to their young ones. May it then be thought reaſonable vnder ſhaddow of an accorded promiſe (without knowledg there-of) to commit ſo great wrong, not

onely againſt your ſelfe impitious father, or mee a woefull and vnfortunate mother, but likewiſe againſt the whole common weale of this Realme? Alas Sir, let my inceſſant teares perſwade you, to bethinke ſome other meane for your diſcharge, and alſo to content the knight. Madame, quoth the King, my word is paſt, I pray you talke no more thereof to me. Thus ſpeaking, the teares ſtreamed downe his cheekes, whereat the Lords were not a little agrieued, and that which moſt troubled him, was the acclamations of the Ladies, wherefore the King commanded them to their chambers. The Queene ſeeing the might not preuaile, fell in a ſwoune, but by her Ladies ſhe was conueighed thence, the King giuing charge on paine of death, that no one ſhould ſeeke to alter his promiſe. My daughter, quoth hee, I commit to the pleaſure of God, but my promiſe ſhall not be broken if I can help it.
                  By this time the newes came to O
                           •…
                        a, how her Father had conſented to her departure, whereat ſhee fell downe in ſuch a traunce, as they neuer expected life in her againe: when Mabila and the Ladies reputing her dead indeede, thought beſt to acquaint the King therewith, yet by forced remedies ſhee reuiued againe, breathing forth many dolorous ſighes. Now the moſt of the women ſeueted themſelues, ſome neare, and ſome further from her, becauſe ſhee ſhould not heare their complaining: and ſuch compaſſion tooke they on her, as would haue conuerted a ſtony heart into teares, eſpecially, when the Princeſſe recouered the power of ſpeech, and faintly vttered theſe regreets. Full wel, quoth ſhee, doe I well beholde mine owne ruine. Ah ſweete friend, wert thou heere, eaſily wouldſt thou deliuer me from this paine: but thus much my heart foretolde mee, euen at the very houre of thy departure. Ah curſed bee that houre, becauſe I conſented to it. When thou ſhalt heare of theſe rydings, I feare (being vnable to endure them) thou wilt die immediately: yet this is the beſt hope, we ſhall not be long one after another. Ah death, the onely refuge to the vnfortunate, ſeeſt thou not me foremoſt in this ranke? why ſtayeſt thou? Fortune will triumph ouer thee, in dealing ſo extreamely as ſhee can with me, albeit I knowe thou art able to reuenge thy ſelfe
                        •
                      make haſte therefore, and let her not get ſuch preeminence on mee, in deſpight (as it were) of thy authority. Adiew then ſweete friend, for neuer ſhall wee ſee each other more in this life: at theſe wordes ſhee fell in a ſwoune againe. When the King ſaw ſhee tarryed ſo long, hee ſent to cōmand her make more ſpeed: but the meſſenger found her in the deadly agony, and ſtaying till ſhe was recouered againe, as ſhee began to renew her moanes, he thus ſpake to her. Madame, the King is offended becauſe you come not to him.
                  When ſhee heard this meſſage, ſhee aroſe, hauing her heart ſo ſealed vp with griefe, as it ſeemed to enable her vitall forces, and being followed by none of her women, but the Damoſell of Denmarke, ſhee came before the King, and caſting her ſelfe at his feete, ſayde. My Lord and Father, what is your pleaſure with mee? Faire Daughter, quoth hee, I muſt accompliſh my promiſe. Theſe ſpeeches prouoked her former paines.

when the King grieuing to behold the ſight therof, turned his head aſide, ſaying to the knight. See my friend, here is the gift, you demand, and the onely thing in the world I moſt loue: but intend you to carry her hence alone? My Lord, ſayd the knight, ſhe ſhall be accompanied with two Gentlemen and their Squires, which were in my company when you made mee this promiſe at Windſore: & more may I not allowe, vntill hee haue her, vnto whom I am conſtrained to deliuer her. Yet let her haue the company of this Damoſell, ſaide the King, for it were vnſeemely, ſhe ſhould bee alone among ſo many men. Well, quoth the knight, for one woman it matters not. So taking the Princeſſe in his armes, ſhee being ſcant reuiued from her ſwoune, he ſet her vp on horſe-backe, & cauſed a Squire to ſit behind her on the horſe, who might hold her faſt leſt ſhe ſhould fall: and a very ſad countenance ſhewed the knight, ſaying, there was none in the Court more ſorrowfull then himſelfe. After the Damoſell of Denmarke was mounted, the King intreated her not to leaue his daughter whatſoeuer happened. And while they were thus preparing, the Princeſſe looking woefully about her: a tall knight well armed came among them, who not taking off his helmet, or ſaluting the company, tooke Orianaes horſe by the bridle. This was Arcalaus the enchanter, and came in this ſort leſt he ſhould bee knowen: ſoone after he commanded the Squire to ride away with her, which the Princeſſe perceiuing, and ſeeing there was no other remedy, deliuering a ſigh as if her heart would haue ſplit, ſhee ſayde. Ah my deere friend, in a happleſſe houre for you was the boone granted, becauſe it will bee both your death and mine. Herein ſhee meant Amadis, whom ſhee gaue leaue to depart with the Damoſell, yet the ſtanders by vnderſtood it of her father and her ſelfe.
                  Thus departed Oriana with them that conducted her, who rode apace till they were entred the Forreſt neere at hand: and the King himſelfe was mounted on horſe-backe, to conduct his daughter ſomewhat on the way, as alſo to forbid any rescue from following, according to his former promiſe. But the Princeſſe Mabila ſtanding at a windowe, to ſee this ſad and penſiue ſeparation, could come no nearer to Oriana, her heart was ſo ſurpriſed with griefe: yet by hap ſhee eſpyed Dardan the Dwarffe that ſerued Amadis, making ſpeed after the Princeſſe on horſe-backe, when calling him to her, ſhe ſaide. Dardan, if thou loue thy Maſter, ſtay not any where till thou acquaint him with this mishappe: if now thou faile him, it may returne to thine owne daunger, for this is the time of greateſt neceſſity. By God Madame, anſwered the Dwarffe, I will with all diligence performe my duty. So giuing the ſpurres to his horſe, hee galloped the ſame way his Maſter rode with the Damoſell.
                  But leaue wee him poſting, and tell what now happened to King Liſuart, who accompanied his Daughter to the entrance of the Forreſt, cauſing all ſuch to returne as followed him. Euen in the houre of his trouble, a Damoſell came to him mounted on a ſwift Palfray, with a ſworde hanging about her neck, and a Launce richly painted, hauing the point gilded ouer: after

ſhee had ſaluted him, ſhe thus ſpake. My Lord, God increaſe your ioy, and make you willing to performe what you haue promiſed me at Windſore, in the preſence of all your worthy knights. At theſe wordes the King knew her, remembring it was ſhe that ſayde, how ſhe would prooue the vertue of his heart, whereupon hee thus anſwered. In good faith Damoſel, I haue now more neede of 
                        •
                     oy then euer I had: notwithſtanding, I am readie to accompliſh any thing I promiſed you. It is the only thing my Lord, quoth ſhe, of my returne to you, being the moſt loyall King in the world, wherefore humbly I intreate yee, preſently to reuenge my cauſe on a knight that paſſed through this Forreſt, who not long ſince ſlew my father, by the moſt horrible treaſon that euer was heard of: yet not content there-with, the villaine violently tooke mee away, and perforce made me yeeld to his vnlawfull will. But in ſuch ſort is hee enchanted, as hee cannot bee done to death, except the moſt vertuous man in the Realme of Great Brittaine, giue him a wound with this Launce, and another with this ſword: both which he gaue in keeping to a Ladie, of whom hee had good hope to be loued, yet therein he was deceiued, for ſhee hateth him aboue all others, for which cauſe ſhe gaue mee this ſword and Lance, whereby we might both be reuenged on him. Nor can it bee done but by you onely, who are the chiefe and moſt vertuous man in this countrey: wherefore as you promiſed mee before ſo valiant men, may it pleaſe ye to execute this iuſt action of vengeance. And becauſe I haue often tolde him, that by this day I would bee prouided of a knight to combate with him, he is come alone into this Forreſt, attending onely for my Champion. It is likewiſe ordered, how you muſt haue no company but my ſelfe, for hee little thinketh that I haue the Sworde and Launce ſo hurtfull to him: and this is our agreement together, if hee remaine conquerour, I muſt pardon him mine iniury, but if he be vanquiſhed, hee muſt doe what I command him. Preſently the King ſent a Gentleman for his Armour, which when hee had put on, he mounted on a braue Courſer, girding the Damoſels ſworde about him, leaning his owne that was one of the beſt in the world: then without any other company hee rode on with her, ſhee carrying his helmet. Not farre had they ridden, but ſhe cauſed him to forſake the high beaten way, conducting him by a little path among the ſhrubs, where not long before they had paſt that led away Oriana: then the Damoſell ſhewed him a huge knight armed, mounted on a black Courſer, whereupon ſhe ſayde. My Lord, take your helmet, for this is he you muſt deale withall: which the King quickly did, & approaching neare the knight, ſayd. Proud Traytour, defend thy ſelfe, and thy lawleſſe luſt. So couching their Launces, they encountred together, when the King perceiued how his painted Launce brake like a ſtalke of hempe, hauing no ſtrength at all in it: which made him drawe his ſword to charge the knight, but at the firſt ſtrok, the blade broke cloſe to the hilt, whereby hee imagined himſelf betraied, for the knight did what he pleaſed to him. But as hee would haue killed his horſe, the King being quick & nimble caught holde by his gorget, and in ſuch

ſort they ſtrugled together, as they both fell to the ground, the knight vnderneath, and the King vpon him, by meanes whereof, hee got his ſword from him, and vnlacing his helmet to ſmite off his head, the Damoſell cryed out ſo loude as ſhee could: Sir Arcalaus, helpe your Coſen quickely, or elſe hee dies. When the King heard her name Arcalaus, hee looked vp, and ſawe ten braue knights come running vnto him, the one of them vſing theſe wordes: King Liſuart, ſpare the knight, otherwiſe thou ſhalt not reigne one houre. If I die, anſwered the King, ſo ſhall you all for mee, like traytours as you are. Then one of them gaue him ſuch a blowe with his Launce, as not onely ſore hurt him, but made him fall on his face to the ground: yet did hee recouer himſelfe very quickely, like one reſolued to defend his life, albeit hee ſawe death preſent before his eyes. But being vnable to reſiſt ſo many, at length they got ſure holde on him, when renting off his helmet & his ſhield, they bound him faſt with a double chaine. Afterward they ſet him on a ſimple horſe, two knights ſtill holding the ends of the chain, and ſo leading him along, ſought where they might finde Arcalaus, Oriana, and the Damoſell of Denmark: but the knight againſt whom the King firſt fought, rode before apace, and wauing his gauntlet aloft to Arcalaus, ſayde, Beholde Coſen, kin Liſuart is ours. A very good prize, anſwered Arcalaus, henceforth ſhall his enemies haue no cauſe to dread him. Villaine, quoth the King, well know I thou waſt neuer other then a traytour, and though I am wounded, yet will I maintayne my words if thou dareſt combate with me. By God, ſayde Arcalaus, neuer ſhould I make reckoning of my ſelfe, to vanquiſh ſuch a Lord as thou art.
                  Thus contending as they rode, they came to a double way, where Arcalaus ſtayed, thus ſpeaking to his Page. Sirra, ride with all ſpeed to London, and ſay to Lord Barſinan, that hee muſt execute what I willed him, for I haue begunne indifferently, if hée can make an end as well. Gone is the Page toward the Citie, in meane while Arcalaus deuiſed, to ſend the King one way, and Oriana another, wherefore hee ſayde to his Coſen. Take tenne knights with you, and conduct Liſuart to my priſon at Daguanell: theſe other foure ſhall keepe mee companie, for I will leade Oriana to mount Aldin, where I will ſhew her ſtrange and wonderfull things. This mount Aldin was the place of his moſt vſuall aboade, beeing one of the ſtrongeſt and faireſt in the worlde: thus the ten knights carryed away the King, and Arcalaus with the reſt had charge of the Princeſſe. But certainely, if heere wee conſider the properties of fortune, we may eaſily repute her as mutable, or rather more, towardes great Princes and Lords, then the meaner ſort: as well ſhee witneſſed by king Liſuart, euen in the time when hee intended moſt honourably, to bee twharted with ſuch a contrary chance. For at one inſtant, hee ſawe himſelfe in the hands of his greateſt enemies, his Daughter (and heire to his kingdome) taken from him, and all his eſtate in danger of ruine. Hee that was wont to be honored of all, was now iniuriouſly deſpiſed, bound and led as a theefe, by a villainous enchanter, a meane Gentleman, and

out of any other hope then death. Is not this then a faire example for ſuch, as at this day are called to the greateſt honours in the world? wherewith oftentimes they are ſo blinded, that they forget both God and themſelues. King Liſuart was a right good, vertuous, and wiſe Prince, yet the diuine ordenance ſuffred him to fall in theſe dangers: to the end hee might remember, how al creatures remaine at his heauenly diſpoſition. This leſſon he taught him, for in ſhort time hee was brought ſo lowe as might be, and afterwarde reſtored againe, as you ſhall preſently vnderſtand.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXVI.
                  
                     How Amadis and Galaor vnderſtood, that King Liſuart and his Daughter were carried away priſoners, wherefore they made haſte to giue them ſuccour.
                  
                  
                     WE haue before declared, by what meanes Amadis and Galaor eſcaped from Madaſima the Lady of Gantaſi, who would haue put them to death if ſhee had knowne their names: likewiſe how they tooke their way toward London, as men right ioyful of their good ſucceſſe. But by the way, they met Dardan the Dwarffe, ſo faſt as horſe could gallop, whereupon Amadis thus ſpake to Galaor. Brother, me thinks my ſeruant Dardan commeth toward vs, and doubtleſſe about ſome matter of importance, for do you not ſee what ſpeed he maketh? By this time Dardan brake off their talke, rehearſing euery thing that happened ſince their departure: but when hee tolde how the Princeſſe Oriana was carried from the Court againſt her will, and what ſorowfull lamentations ſhe made: Amadis entered into a deſpairing fury, demanding which way they went that had her in charge. In ſooth my Lord, anſwered Dardan, they rode thorough the Forreſt, which lieth on the otherſide of the City. Without more words Amadis gaue the ſpurres to his horſe, galloping amaine toward London, ſo confounded with the terrour of theſe newes, as he could not ſpeake to his brother Galaor, who left him not but followed at hand. Thorow the City they ride not making any ſtay, enquiring which way they took that led away the Princeſſe, & euery one ſhewed it him very readily. As Gandalin came poſting after his Lord, it was his hap to paſſe by the Queenes lodging, where ſhee ſtanding at a window, ouer-come with griefe: eſpied Gandalin, whom ſhe called to her, and asked where he left his Maſter. Madame, quoth he, he is gone after thē that haue away the Princeſſe. Stay a little, I pray thee, ſaid the Queen: thē ſent ſhe for the Kings ſword, which was accounted one of the beſt in the world, ſaying. I deſire thee carrie this ſword to Amadis, and tell him the King forſooke it this morning, he being gone with a Damoſell to combate for her, & ſhe hath giuen him another ſword: as yet we heare no tydings of him, either when he wil returne, or whither he is gone. Gandalin hauing receiued the ſword, ſet away with ſpeed after

his maiſter, whoſe impatience vrging him to more haſt, then care of his iourney, made him ride ſo farre into a foule ſlough, as he was faine to alight ere hee could get foorth againe. And leading his horſe by the bridle to eſcape the mire, Galaor & Gandalin ouer-took him, acquainting him with the Queenes meſſage, and deliuering the ſword ſhe ſent him. When hee heard how the King was likewiſe gone, his deſire of ſpeede encreaſed to giue him ſuccour, but his horſe was ſo wearied with ſtriuing in the bogge, as hee was conſtrained to take Gandalins: which trauailed much worſe then his owne, yet with the helpe of his ſpurres he made him goe. At length they found the tracke of horſes, and by good hap met with certaine poore labouring men, whom they asked if they met not any by the way. Yes my Lord, quoth one of them, wee met certaine men leading a knight and two Ladyes, albeit wee durſt not ſhew our ſelues, but kept vs hidden in the thickeſt of the wood, for doubtleſſe they beſome bad people: hereto they added ſuch a deſcription of the priſoners, as they eaſily gathered them to be the King and Oriana betraied. But tell me good friends, ſaide Amadis, know you none of the other? for the priſoners are the King and his daughter. In ſooth, replied the poore man, wee are altogether ignorant what they are, yet we heard one that led the horſe of the fairer Lady, often-times name Arcalaus, Now truſt mee, quoth Amadis to his brother, it is the villaine that enchanted me: Oh that it might be my hap to finde him. Gentle-men, ſaid the man, ten of them went this way on the right hand, with the Knight priſoner, and fiue more this way on the left hand, with the Ladyes. Brother, quoth Amadis to Galaor, I beſeech ye to follow the King, leaſt worſe befall him then we can remedy, and I will after the Princeſſe Oriana. So ſhaking hands in equall reſolution, they parted the ſeuerall waies: but Amadis found his horſe ſo ouer labored, as he was able tohold out no longer. Being thus hindered, by chance he looked aſide, and ſawe where a Knight lay ſlaine, with a Squire ſtanding by holding his horſe: whereupon Amadis ſtepped to him, demanding who committed that murther. A traitour hath done it, anſwered the Squire, who is not yet gone very farre, and leadeth with him the faireſt Lady in the world: no other reaſon had he for my maiſters death, but becauſe he asked what the Lady was. What wilt thou do, ſayd Amadis, tarrying heere? I ſtay Sir, quoth he, till ſome one come, who may helpe me with my maiſters body to ſome buriall, and afterward I intend to ſeeke my fortune. If thou, anſwered Amadis, wilt giue me the horſe thou holdeſt, I wil leaue thee mine, and my Squire to helpe thee, and one day will I giue thee two better beſide. The ſquire was cōtent, whē 
                     Amadis mounting on the horſe, commanded Gandalin to help him bury his maiſters body, and after-ward to follow him the ſame way he rode.
                  Thus Amadis hies ſo faſt as horſe can run, and eſpying an hermitage, went to ſee if any body were within: at his call, the hermit came foorth, of whom he asked, if he ſaw not fiue Knights paſſe by, leading two Ladyes. No verily, anſwered the olde father: but do you not enquire for a Caſtle, which is not far from this place? Why aske yee

ſuch a queſtion? quoth Amadis. Becauſe a Nephew of mine tolde mee, ſaide the Hermit, how Arcalaus the enchanter is going thither, and two Ladies with him, whom hee carryeth perforce. Ah Father, replyed Amadis, you name the traytour I looke for. Truſt me Sir, quoth the Hermit, hee hath done many miſchieues in this countrey, would God wee were either rid of him, or elſe his life amended: but haue you no bodie to helpe you? No body, but God and my ſelfe, anſwered Amadis. Why Sir? ſayd the Hermit, you tell mee they bee fiue in company, and you but one: beſide, Arcalaus is counted one of the beſt knights in the world, and with whom few or none dare meddle. Whatſoeuer hee bee, quoth Amadis, I am certaine hee is a diſloyall traytour, and they no leſſe that keep him company: what leſſe cauſe then haue I to feare him? for God is iuſt, in whom is onely my confidence. I pray you Sir, replyed the Hermite, knowe you of whence the Ladies be? One of them, ſaid Amadis, is the Princeſſe Oriana, daughter and heire to the vertuous king Liſuart: the other is a Lady attending on her. The God of heauen, anſwered the Hermite, further your intent, that ſo good a Princeſſe may not be long in ſuch a wretches cuſtody. If you haue any prouender Father, quoth Amadis, I deſire you giue my horſe a little. The Hermit brought forth ſuch as hee hee had, and while the horſe fed, Amadis demaunded, to whom the Caſtle belonged. To a knight called Grumen, ſayde the Hermit, Coſen germaine to proud Dardan, who was ſlaine at the Court of king Liſuart: which makes mee the rather coniecture, that he will lodge ſuch as are enemies to ſo good a Prince. Good father, replied Amadis, I beſeech you haue minde of mee in your prayers, and now ſhew me the neareſt way to the Caſtle. Which the Hermite did, when Amadis mounting on horſe-backe, tooke his leaue, following the way hee was directed. Not long after he got a ſight of the Caſtle, which was compaſſed with ſtrong Towers and high wals, wherefore ſo cloſely as hee could hee approached neare it, where hee heard what ioy they made for the arriuall of Arcalaus: whē marking how many gates of iſſue it had, hee found there was no more but one, wherefore tying his horſe, where he might not be ſeen, he hid himſelfe ſo conueniently, as none could paſſe in and out but he muſt needs ſee them: thus was hee glad to watch there all that night. At the breake of day, doubting leſt the watch of the Caſtle ſhould deſcry him, hee entered a little thicket, where long hee had not ſtaied, but hee ſawe a knight come forth on a little hill before the Caſtle, looking all about if he could diſcerne any ambuſh: which done, hee went in againe, and very ſoon after, Arcalaus with his foure companions iſſued forth well armed, conducting the two Ladies, whom Amadis well knew ſo ſoone as hee ſawe them. Heereupon hee fell downe on his knee and prayed, that God would ſtrengthen him in this enterpriſe, then looking to the well guiding of his horſe, and that euery part of his Armour were as it ought to be, taking his Launce, hee mounted, tarrying till they paſſed by him. But becauſe this place was vnfit for the combate, hee intended to ſuffer them enter on the plaine neere at hand, ſtill keeping himſelfe in the thicket: and ſo neer

did Arcalaus with his company paſſe by Amadis, as hee heard the Princeſſe Oriana thus complaine. Alas ſweet friend, quoth ſhe, great reaſon haue you to bid mee adiew, when I would permit you to goe ſuccour her, that ſeemed the moſt wofull woman in the world: for I feare this ſhall bee our laſt conge, and neuer may you ſee me againe, becauſe death giueth ſuch due attendance, as it is impoſſible for me to eſcape. Theſe words were of ſuch vertue, that albeit Amadis could not refraine from teares, yet did they ſo liuely inflame his heart, as ouer-reaching them ere they knew any thing, hee thus ſpake to them. You lye falſe traitours, for theſe Ladyes ſhall paſſe no further. The voyce of Amadis was quickly knowne by Oriana and the Damoſell of Denmarke, when imagining themſelues already reskewed, their mindes were ioyfully cheered, eſpecially to ſee their conductours ſo ſuddenly amated. But Arcalaus perceiuing how Amadis out-raged his friends, approched more neere him, and Amadis well knowing him from the reſt, met him ſo brauely, as hee ſent him headlong to the ground: thē entring among the other foure, hee gaue ſuch a charge to Grumen, the Lord of the Caſtle where they lodged, that his Launce paſſed quite through his body, and breaking therein, he fell downe dead from his horſe. Now drew he the ſword the Queene ſent him, wherewith he laide ſo valiantly about him, as his enemies were cleane diſmaied in their hope, whē they beheld Arcalaus not yet recouered, whoſe power they reputed able to ouer-throw an armie. As hee continued the combate with them, the Damoſell of Denmarke ſeeing the friends of Arcalaus fight ſo timorouſly, and himſelfe lie ſtill as one in a traunce, ſhe ſayd to Oriana. Madame, beholde how your Amadis honoureth your loue, ſee you not how he hath vſed Arcalaus and our hoſte? in ſooth wee are already ſuccoured, for theſe other villaines can holde out no longer. Ah happy Amadis, quoth Oriana, the mirrour of all vertue and chiualrie, heauen giue thee grace to finiſh our deliuerance, with victorie ouer theſe malicious traitours. When the Squire who had the charge of Oriana, as you heard, vnderſtood that ſhee named Amadis, he was in ſuch feare, as preſently hee leaped from the horſe, ſaying. By my faith I might full well be reputed a foole, to tarry for ſuch blowes as my companions haue: and with theſe words he run away ſo faſt, that hee neuer looked behinde if any purſued him. In this time Amadis had diſpatched three of the knights, and the fourth miſdoubting like lot would fal to him, truſted to his horſe legges for ſafetie of himſelfe: but as Amadis followed him, he heard the Princeſſe giue a loude crye, when looking backe, hee ſaw that Arcalaus had got her with him on horſe backe, and gallopped away ſo faſt as hee could. Hereupon hee let goe the knight, to helpe Oriana, ouer-taking Arcalaus ere hee got much ground, and lifting his ſword to ſtrike at him, hee doubted leaſt he ſhould hurt the Princeſſe: but turning to the other ſide he gaue him ſuch a wound on the ſhoulder, as he was glad to let fall Oriana, that himſelfe might eſcape more lightly: for he knew if Amadis laid hold on him, al the treaſure in the world could not ſaue his life. When Amadis ſaw himſelfe ſure of his Lady, hee ſtill purſued the cowardly

run-away, ſaying: Tarry Arcalaus, tarry, and thou ſhalt ſee if Amadis be dead, according as thou lyedſt not long agoe. But Arcalaus had no leaſure to anſwere, hee rather tooke his ſhield from his neck and threw it to the ground, becauſe nothing might hinder his horſe in running. At length as Amadis ſtrook at him, the blowe fell ſhort on the horſe buttock, and the beaſt feeling himſelfe wounded, made greater haſte away then he did before, leauing Amadis very farre behinde, who earneſtly deſired the death of Arcalaus: but ſeeing all his labour was in vaine, and doubting leaſt ſome harme might happen to his Miſtreſſe, to loſe her againe by negligence, hauing by hardy valour ſo well recouered her: he turned back againe, and attayning the place where ſhe ſtayed for him, hee alighted from his horſe, then falling on his knee humbly kiſſed her hand, ſaying. Madame, heauen hath affoorded mee more grace, in ſtrengthening me to ſuccour you, then euer it did to any other knight, for I was out of hope to ſee you againe. But ſhe good Lady remained ſtill ſo paſſionate, in reſpect of her vngentle vſage, as alſo affrighted with feare when Arcalaus let her fall: that ſhe could returne no anſwer, but gaue him thankes by many kind embracings. By this time, the Damoſell of Denmarke came to them, and by the way found the ſword of Arcalaus, which ſhee bringing to Amadis, thus ſpake. See heere (my Lord) a very faire ſword. Right ſoone did Amadis know it, to bee the ſame was found with him on the Sea, which Arcalaus took from him when he lay enchanted, being not a little glad hee had recouered it.
                  While many affable ſpeeches paſſed betweene them, Amadis ſtill comforting his diſmayed Miſtris, and ſhee reioycing in her louely friend: Gandalin arriued, who had ſought his Maſter all that night, and happily found him there with his Lady. Now minded they to tarry no longer in this place, wherfore making choyce of the knights horſes to their owne liking, they all mounted, Amadis leading Orianaes Palfray by the bridle, and ſhee rehearſing to him by the way, what iniury the dead knights had done her, as in her life time ſhe neuer endured the like: Madame, anſwered Amadis, much greater griefe haue I ſuffered by a liuing creature, yet leſſe to be feared then the dead, who can doe no harme: but beauty onely hath hazarded my life. Albeit Oriana well knew his meaning, yet ſhee demanded who was the cauſe thereof. Euen you Madame, quoth he, who hold mee in a life more irkeſome then death. My Lord, ſaid the Princeſſe, neuer with my conſent did you ſuſtaine any harme, and very ſorie would I be you ſhould thinke mee ſo vnkinde: for rather could I affoord to eaſe your griefe, were it in my power to compaſſe the meane. Ah Madame, replyed Amadis, as by you onely I took my hurt, ſo from you onely muſt I haue my help, and reaſon reputes it a matter of great inconuenience, that ſuch rare perfections ſhould cauſe ſo rough paſſions. But if you be indued with ſuch pitty, as the reſt of your excellencies do plainly promiſe, you will not beholde that in me, which you grieue to ſee in your chiefeſt enemies: euen death, gentle Princeſſe, who in my torments awaiteth on me, forbearing to ſtrike, beeing conquered

with this hope, that did opportunity and place ſerue, your paſſed promiſe ſhold eaſe your thoughts, and deliuer me from this weighty oppreſſion. But ſee how ſweete occaſion fauoureth vs, and fortune ſtands alooſe from hindering our content: doe not you then (good Madame) let ſlip this gracious offer, when time and place challenge it at your hand, conſidering the argument is vrgent, and being now loytered, may hardly be againe ſo well recouered. Oriana (not ſo much for theſe reaſons, as becauſe her pain was equall with his, & had not he begun the motion, her ſelfe would haue ſolicited the ſame) thus anſwered. Great is the force of your perſwaſiōs, but greater the vnfained loue I beare you, which hath ſuch authority ouer me: as when you ſhall haue leaſt occaſion to demand, I am content and conſtrained to obey, yea, to repoſe ſuch a thing in your truſt, as very hardly can I holde faſt in my thoughts. Yet I deſire you, albeit you ſee me not ſtored with prouidence, that you will carefully mannage our enterpriſe, by warie keeping it from knowledge or ſuſpect: rather ſubmitting our ſelues to the higheſt diſpleaſure, then common reproofe, which is containd within no limits. Sufficient proteſtation made Amdais hereof, but little batterie needed when the hole was won, and riding through a verie thick wood, the Princeſſe became deſirous of ſleepe, becauſe the night before ſhe enioyed no reſt: whereupon ſhee acquainted Amadis therewith, ſaying, ſhee muſt needes ſleepe ere ſhe went any further. 
                        •
                     Hee beeing no vnprofitable counſeller, and ſeeing a daintie plot by a riuers ſiue, ſhaddowed with boughes from the heate of the ſunne: aduiſed her to reſt there awhile, and diſmounting from their horſes, hee thus ſpake. So pleaſe you Madame, in this place we may ſtay till the heate be gone, and you reſt in tarying for the cold euening: in meane ſpace I will ſend Gandalin to the Towne, to bring ſome viands to refreſh vs withall. Your reaſon is good, ſaide Oriana, but how ſhall hee come by meate? He ſhall leaue his horſe in pawne, anſwered Amadis, and returne on foote. Yet I (quoth Oriana) haue a better helpe then that: hee ſhall ſell this ring, which can doe vs no better ſeruice then now in our neede. So pulling the ring from her finger, ſhe gaue it to Gandalin, who taking his leaue, as hee came by his Maiſter, ſaide: So good time loſt, will neuer bee had againe. Amadis knew his meaning well enough, yet made he no ſhew thereof, but vnarmed him-ſelfe, and Oriana ſpreading the Damoſels mantle on the graſſe, laide her downe vpon it: the Damoſell likewiſe went aſide into the wood, where ſhee fell ſoundly aſleepe, by reaſon ſhe watched all the night before. Thus remained Amadis alone with his miſtreſſe, ſo glad of her gentle grant, and the fauourable houre at hand: as hee could not withdraw his eyes from comfort, which made him delay time in needeleſſe gazing. In the end, though his hands had beene ſlow in vnarming him, all his other members were in better ſtate, for not one of them but did his duty. The heart was rauiſhed in thoughts, the eye, in contemplatiō of excellent beauty, the mouth, with ſweete kiſſes, the armes, with kinde embracings: and no one mal content in any poynt, except the eyes, which wiſhed themſelues in

number like the ſtarres in heauen, for their better ability in function, thinking they could not ſufficiently beholde ſo diuine an obiect. In great paine were they likewiſe, becauſe they were hindered from the pride of beauty, for the Princeſſe held her eyes cloſed, as well to diſguiſe her deſire of ſleepe, as alſo for the diſcreet ſhame conceiued by this pleaſure, ſo that ſhee durſt not boldly looke on him ſhe moſt loued. Hereupon, careleſly ſpreading her armes abroad, as though ſhe ſlept in deed, and by reaſon of the exceeding heate, leauing her gorget open, two little alablaſter bowles liuely ſhewed themſelues in her boſome, ſo faire and ſweetly reſpiring, as Nature neuer ſhewed more curious workmanſhippe. Now Amadis forgetting his former baſhfulneſſe, ſeeing Fortune allowed him ſo quaint a fauour, let looſe the reines of amorous deſire with ſuch aduantage, as notwithſtanding ſome weak reſiſtance of the Princeſſe, ſhe was enforced to prooue the good and bad together, which maketh friendly maidens become faire women. Dainty was the good grace and ſubtiltie of Oriana, in ſhadowing her ſurpaſſing pleaſure, with a feminine complaint of Amadis boldneſſe, ſhewing in countenance ſuch a gracious choller & contented diſpleaſure: as in ſtead of conſuming time in excuſes, Amadis reſaluted her with ſundry ſweet kiſſes, as alſo another cauſe to chide if ſhe wold. But ſhe being loth to mixe angry ſpeeches with amiable ſollace, or with frowning lookes to croſſe an equall content, thought it better to commend the controule of ſo kinde a louer, and therefore continued this pleaſing recreation, as neither party receiued occaſion of miſlike: rather with kiſſes (which are counted the ſeales of loue) they choſe to confirm their vnanimity, then otherwiſe to offend a reſolued patience. Ah, how many repetitions made Oriana, of the paines ſhe ſuffered in expectation of this day? confeſſing thoſe priuate particularities, which none but ſhe & her deſire were acquainted withall. How many matters likewiſe alleadged Amadis, expreſſing thereby his ſingular contentment, and credible aſſurance of his perpetuall faith? now reckoning all his trauels well imployed, & more then ſufficiently recompenſed. In theſe diſcourſes and pleaſures they ſpent moſt part of the day, carryed ſo farre from remembrance of any thing elſe, as they thought not on the time, how day waſted, & night enſued, whether Gandalin were returned, or the Damoſell awake, all theſe things were now caſt into obliuion. They imagined to haue viands good ſtore, being thus delighted the one with the other, which ſeemed more delicious to them, then all the Nectar or Ambrofia of Iupiter. Yet at length they remembred themſelues ſomewhat better, when hearing the Damoſell and Gandalin ſo neare them, their paſtime ended, and taking each other by the hand, walked among the trees to take the ayre: in the meane while Gandalin and the Damoſell ſpread a cloath on the graſſe, and ſet thereon ſuch victuals as they had. Now though there wanted rich cup-boords of plan, as were in the houſes of King Liſuart and Perion, as alſo the ſolemnity of great ſeruices: yet the fortunate entertaynement at this time, was held by them of higher eſtimation.
                  During their repaſt, as they regarded

the woods and fountaines, they began to eſteem it no ſtrange matter, why the Gods ſometime forſooke the heauens, to dwell in groues and delightful Forreſts. Iupiter they imagined wiſe, when he followed Europa, 10, and his other friends. Beſide, Apollo had reaſon to become a Shepheard, for the loue of Daphne, and the daughter of Admetus. They being willing to imitate their example, wiſhed continually to tarry there, without returning to the Pallace and royall pompe: reputing the Nymphes of the woods moſt happy Goddeſſes, excelling ſuch as remayned in the walled Cities. Pitty were it to trouble theſe louers in their amorous deuiſes, wherefore wee will leaue them, and ſee what happened to Galaor, following the ſearch of King L
                           •
                        ſuart.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXVII.
                  
                     How Galaor reſcued King Liſuart from the ten Knights that led him to priſon.
                  
                  
                     
                        GAlaor parting from his brother Amadis, in ſuch ſort as you heard, followed the way whereby the King was led priſoner, and making great haſte, in reſpect of his earneſt deſire to ouer-take him, had minde of nothing elſe hee met by the way. As thus hee continued gallopping, hee ſaw a Knight well armed come riding towarde him, who maruelling why the Prince vſed ſuch extreame diligence, when hee came neare him, ſayd. Stay a while knight, and tell mee what affaires cauſe you make ſuch ſpeed. Forbeare Sir I pray yee, anſwered Galaor, for by my tarrying may happen too great an inconuenience. By God, ſayde the knight, you muſt not ſo eſcape, for you ſhall tell mee whether you will or no. I may not tri
                        •
                     le the time, quoth Galaor, and ſo rode on ſtill without any 
                        •
                     ariance. Nay Gallant, replyed the knight, I will bee reſolued in my demaund, though to your coſt. Hereupon hee poſted after Galaor, ſtill exclaiming on him with hard words, weening he fled away for feare of him, and often times hee thought to ſmite him with his Launce, but the Prince euermore eſcaped his attempt: yet his horſe beeing ſore wearied, hindered him very much, when the knight ouer-taking him, thus ſpake. Infamous palliard, and without heart, of theſe three things chuſe the beſt, either to combate, returne or anſwere my demaund. Now truſt me, ſayd Galaor, the eaſieſt of theſe three is hard to mee, wherein you make no ſhew of curteſie▪ for returne I may not, and if I combate, it muſt be againſt my will. But if you deſire to know the cauſe of my haſte, followe me and you ſhall ſee: for I ſhould tarry too long in telling it, and happely you would ſcant beleeue mee, ſo horrible and diſloyall is the deed which compelleth me to this impatience. Beleeue mee, quoth the knight, & I will follow thee three whole dayes, onely to ſee whether thou lyeſt or no.
                  Thus Galaos held on his way, & the knight haſting after, till hauing

ridden the ſpace of a mile, whē they eſpied two other knights, the one being on foote running to catch his horſe, and the other gallopping away ſo faſt as hee could. Hee on foot was Coſen germaine to the knight that followed Galaor, who in iouſting with the other knight, had beene diſmounted: & knowing his kinſman, acquainted him with the whole accident, requeſting his aſſiſtance in reuenge of his wrong. It may not be now, anſwered the other, till I haue followed the knight you ſee before, three dayes together: hereto bee added all the ſpeeches betweene Galaor and him. In ſooth, replied his Coſen, hee ſhould ſeeme (by your wordes) the greateſt coward in the world, elſe mindeth he ſome enterpriſe of higher conſequence: therefore I will adiourne the reuenge of mine iniury, and beare you company, to the ende I may beholde the ſum of your attempt. While thus they talked, Galaor had gotten very farre before, which cauſed them make the more haſte after him: till at length the Prince eſpied the ten knights that conducted the King, they riding vppe a narrow ſtraite, fiue before him, & fiue behinde. Now did he fully reſolue to die, or purchaſe his deliuerance, for hee was ſo offended to ſee the King bound with chaines, as hee imagined himſelfe able to conquer them all, & as many more if they had been there, whereupon he thus cryed to them: Traytours, durſt you vnreuerently lay hand on the beſt King in the world? With theſe wordes he met one of them ſo directly, as his Launce paſſing through his body, hee fell downe dead beſide his horſe. When the other foure ſaw their companion ſlaine, they willed the for moſt fiue to guard the King, for they would reuenge his death ſufficiently: but they found themſelues very much deceiued, for though the Princes horſe (by reaſon of his ſore trauell) often ſtumbled, and thereby put him in danger of falling, yet laide hee ſuch loade vpon his enemies, as two more of them accompanied the firſt, and the other twaine were brought into hard extreamity. Then came the other fiue with a freſh charge vpon him, when Galaor perceiuing his owne danger, intended to reuenge his death and the Kings together, entring couragiouſly among the thickeſt, ſhewing moſt rare and haughty chiualry. When the two Coſens that followed him beheld his behauiour, confounded with maruell, the one ſayd to the other. By God we did him wrong to tearme him a coward, for hee is the moſt hardy knight that euer I ſaw: except the world ſhall twit vs with ſhame, let vs not ſee him die in this extreamity, le
                        •
                     t the beauty of chiualry bee gone for euer. Reſolued thus to ſuccour him, they valiantly thruſt themſelues into the skirmiſh, deliuering ſuch friendly blowes on euery ſide, that Galaor ſoone felt himſelfe well aſſiſted: becauſe his enemies were ſomewhat more diſperſed, and hee had leaſure to take a little breathing, but wondering whence this aide ſhould proceed, hee fell to worke againe, giuing them good cauſe to miſdoubt their liues. When the Coſen to Arcalaus ſawe how his ſide decayed, and his knights diſhartened, ſlaine and ſore wounded: hee purpoſed to kill the King: who by this time found the meanes to vnbinde himſelfe, and alighting from his horſe, got one of the ſlaine knightes ſwordes, where-with

hee reſiſted his enemies brauely. As the coſin to Arcalaus followed his intent, the king gaue his horſe ſuch a blow ouer the face, as by rearing vp, hee fell downe back-ward; yet the Knight recouered himſelfe, and Galaor ſeeing one fight with the king, came to aſſiſt him, when ſnatching off his helmet, hee would haue ſmitten his head from his ſhoulders: but the king would not ſuffer him, ſaying, hee ſhould liue and dye a theefe. The two coſins, who were named Don Guilan and Ladaſin, purſued another knight, whome they ſlew, and returning backe againe, they knew the king, which ſtroke them into no little maruaile, becauſe they heard nothing of his miſ-fortune: then alighting from their horſes, they took off their helmets and did him reuerence, when hee knowing them right well, embraced them in his armes, ſaying. My friends, you haue ſuccoured me in a needefull time, for which I may liue to requi
                        •
                     e you with thankes: yet haue you wronged me by your abſence from the Court, and for your loue to each other I loſt you both, eſpecially, you Lord Guilan, your minde being elſe-where, made you forget me. Theſe words cauſed a modeſt bluſh in Don Guilan, beauſe the king diſciphered his loue, which was the Ducheſſe of Briſtoya, who was not one 
                        •
                     ot behinde him in affection: as well witneſſed the good entertainment ſhe gaue him, taſting together the fruit of their contentment. Which the Duke ſo doubted, and dayly conceiued ſuch ſtrange ſuſpition thereof, as it procured the iniurie was done to Galaor, when the Dwarffe eſpied him in the garden, at his returne from faire Aldena; whereby the Damoſell was in danger of burning, as the hiſtory here-tofore hath declared to you.
                  But while the king thus communed with Don Guilan, Galaor had got the Nephew of Arcalaus beſide his horſe, and tyed the chaine about his neck, the king was bound withall: then taking the beſt horſes belonged to the dead knights, they rode toward London. And by the way, Ladaſin recounted to the king, how he contended with Galaor for riding ſo faſt, offering him the combate, which he refuſed becauſe he would delay no time for his ſuccour: which cauſed the king to require him with many thankes, that he could ſo well forbeare in a caſe of ſuch neceſſity. But my Lord, quoth Don Guil
                           ••
                        , my hap was more hard, for by thinking on her, who oftentimes makes mee to forget my ſelfe, a knight encountred with mee, and by force of his Lance, caſt me from my ſaddle. In ſooth, anſwered the king, I haue heard talke of many louers, and what they enterpriſe for their Ladies, yet neuer of any folly comparable to yours: which giueth me good cauſe to coniecture, that you were not in vaine named Guilan the penſiue, for you are the greateſt muſer I euer heard of. As thus they beguiled the time, they ariued at the houſe of Ladaſin, which was not farre thence, whither ſoon after came Galaors ſquire and Dardan the Dwarffe, who thought his maiſter had taken that way. Then did Galaor tell the king, how his brother Amadis was gone to reskew his daughter, and in what manner they heard of their ſeperation by the poore labourers, wherefore he aduiſed him to ſend ſpeedily to London, leaſt his miſ-hap being publiſhed iu the Cittie, might raiſe ſome cōmotion amōg

the people. Credit me, quoth the king, ſeeing Amadis vndertooke to follow my daughter, I will not as yet account her loſt, if the traytor Arcalaus worke no new villany by his enchantments: but as concerning my happy deliuerance, I like well that my Queen ſhould vnderſtand thereof. Whereupon Ladaſin called a Squire, whom the king preſently ſent to the Court as Galaor aduiſed. After they had well refreſhed themſelues, they were conducted to their chambers, and on the morrowe ſet forward on their iourney, the king cōmuning with the Nephew of Arcalaus, as concerning the enterpriſe of his kinſman: which made him reueale the whole determination, and how Barſinan was in hope to be king of Great Brittain. Hereupon the king concluded to make the more haſte, thinking to finde Barſinan as yet at London, and to puniſh him for his audacious preſumption.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXVIII.
                  
                     How newes came to the Queene that the King was taken: And how Barſinan laboured to vſurpe the City of London.
                     
                  
                  
                     I If you haue well noted the former diſcourſe, you may eaſily remember, how the poor labouring men, (not knowing the king & Oriana) ſeeing how iniuriouſly they were intreated by Arcalaus and his complices, were glad to hide them-ſelues in the wood: in like manner, how afterward they vnderſtood by Amadis and Galaor, that the priſoners were king Liſuarts and his daughters. Whereupon, ſo ſoone as the two knights were parted from them, they haſted to report theſe newes in London: which cauſed ſuch a murmuring through the Citty, eſpecially among the knights, as they preſently armed themſelues, and mounted on horſe backe in ſuch troupes, as the fields were quickly couered with men & horſes. At this time was king Arban of Norwales talking with the Queene, little thinking on any miſ-fortune: when one of his Squires bringing his Armour, ſayde My Lord, you tarry heere tri
                        ••
                     ing too long, arme your ſelfe quickely & followe the reſt, who by this time haue gotten ſo farre as the Forreſt.
                  What is the matter, anſwered King Arban. Ah my Lord, quoth the Squire, newes is brought to the Citie, how certaine villaines haue carried the King away priſoner. Priſoner? replyed king Arban, may it be poſſible? Too true my Lord, anſwered the Squire. When the Queene heard theſe vnhappy tydings, not able to vndergoe ſo great an oppreſſion, ſhe fell downe in a ſwoune: but king Arban hauing more minde on the King, left her in her Ladies armes, haſting with all ſpeed hee could to horſe-backe. When he was ſetting foot in ſtirrop, hee heard the allarme ſounded, and the aſſault which Barſinan gaue to the Caſtle, whereby hee gathered they were betraied: wherefore hee cauſed the Queenes lodging to bee guarded, and returning to the Citie, ſawe euery one ready in Armes, when chuſing ſo many as hee pleaſed,

as alſo two hundred well approoued knights, hee ſent two of the cheefeſt to the Tower of London, to vnderſtād the cauſe of the allarme. To them it was reported, how Barſinan had forcibly entred with his traine, killing and caſting ouer the walls al that he met. Herein he followed the meſſage of the Page from Arcalaus, finding very ſlender reſiſtance: for moſt part of the knights and men of account, were gone to ſuccour the king. Highly diſpleaſed was king Arban at theſe newes, perſwading himſelfe the king had been betrayed, wherefore to preuent ſuch other inconueniences that might happen, he ordained his men in battaile, placing good watch about the Queenes lodging. And thither Barſinan now prepared, hoping to take the Queen as hee had done the tower: but he met with ſtronger reſiſt thē he expected, and the skirmiſhes proceeding on either ſide, Barſinan took a priſoner, by whō he was aduertiſed, how king Arbā
                      wold with-ſtand him euen to the death. Now began hee to deuiſe, how by faire ſpeech and falſhood he might take the king, crauing a parle with him, whereto king Arban willingly agreed, and ſilence being made on both ſides, Barſinan began in this manner.
                  I euer thought til now, my Lord, that you were one of the beſt aduiſed knights in the world, but by proofe I perceiue a man may finde the contrary: yet this I think withall, that what you doe, is for the ſafetie of your honor. Herein you appeare of ſimple iudgement, conſidering in the end, it will bee but the loſſe of you and your men: in reſpect king Liſuart your late Lord is dead, for proofe whereof, euen he that ſlew him will ere long ſend me his head. Sith fortune then hath dealt ſo hardly with him, and I at this inſtant am the greateſt Lord in this countrey: dare you denie to make me king? Alas, you abuſe your ſelfe! the beſt will be for you, to yeelde your ſelfe louingly, and I ſhall entreate you ſo well as any Prince in my Realm: ſuffering you ſtill to enioy the countrey of Norwales, and particularly beſide will ſo honor you, as you ſhall haue great reaſon to be content. Auaunt villaine, anſwered king Arban, full wel dooſt thou manifeſt thy horrible treaſon: for beſide thy treacherie in compacting the death of my Lord, thou wouldeſt haue mee become a traitour to his friends, as thou thy ſelfe haſt prooued. Thou art deceiued, doe the worſt thou canſt: thy villainie onely will take vengeance on thee according to deſert, with ſuch good helpe as we will put thereto. What? ſaid Barſinan, think'ſt thou to hinder me frō ſitting as king in London? Neuer ſhall traitour, replied Arban, bee king of London, by Gods leaue, while the moſt honourable king of the world liueth. I called for thee, quoth Barſinan, in reſpect of thine owne good, becauſe I fauoured thee more then any other, imagining thou wert of ſound diſcretion: but (as I haue ſaid) I finde my ſelfe deceiued, wherefore reaſon requireth, that thy ouer-weening ſhould fall, and (in deſpite of thee) I will reigne king in great Brittain. Aſſure thy ſelfe, anſwered Arban, I will keepe thee frō ſuch climbing, as if the king my maiſter were here perſonally preſent. Then began the aſſault afreſh, king Arban with-drawing himſelfe to harden his men, being maruailouſly offended at Barſinans words. Now though he were very ſharpely aſſailed, yet

ſtood hee brauely on his defence, many being ſlaine and ſore wounded: neuertheleſſe, he was euer-more formoſt in the fight, and laſt in the retreits which was cauſed by the night enſuing. Nor neede wee doubt, conſidering the puiſſance of Barſinan, and they fewe on the contrary ſide, but king Arban would take his aduantage in reſiſtance, by compelling them to narrow ſtreets, where foure on a ſide could hardly deal together, which turned to the great diſaduantage of Barſinan, becauſe Arban well fortified euery place in good order, and with reſh ſupply ſtill encouraged his men.
                  The retreit being founded, and either ſide with-drawne, King Arban ſeeing his ſouldiers ſore wearied, by the hotte skirmiſhes they had endured: as is the office of a good Captaine indeede hee came and comforted them in this manner. My louing companions and friends, this day haue you worthily fought, as none of you but deſerueth eſtimation, among the moſt forward men in the world, and hauing begun ſo well, I hope you will proceede better and better. Remember the cauſe of your fight, not onely to maintaine your good king, but your owne liberty: againſt a tirant, traitour, and what worſe? who would buy his vſurping in this Kingdome, with the blood of you, your wiues and children. Saw y ou not how he vſed them hee tooke in the Tower? Beholde you not the end of his purpoſe? which is to ruinate this noble Realme, that hath (by diuine prouidence) beene ſo long time preſerued, and euer-more continued in reputation, flouriſhing with loyal ſubiects to their Prince? Heard you not the flattering perſwaſions, which the Rebell vſed before the aſſault, thinking to cōquervs by his golden tongue? In vaine is his labour, I am right well aſſured, that no one of you but will die a thouſand deathes, before he ſhall conceiue any other minde in you, I ſee by your reſolued countenances, if I ſhould thinke or ſay otherwiſe, I were a monſtrous offender▪ for if he haue more men then wee, wee haue more hearts of courage then he, which forbiddeth all accaſions of diſmaying, ſetting before your eyes, the famous account you ſhal liue in hereafter. By their looks you might diſerne at their retire, how vnwillingly they wil be to trie you againe: and reſpect not the traiterous words of Barſinan, our king liueth, and will right ſpeedily come to ſuccout vs. In meane while I intreat as my friendly companions, let nothing diſmay your hope, but continue as you haue begun: with famous reſolutiō, that is more honourable to die for liberty, then to enioy a life by thraldome and ſlauerie, vnder a wicked, iniurous, and traiterous Prince. When the king had ended his oration, there was no one in the company, how ſore hurt ſoeuer he was, but would couragiouſly encounter Barſinans power, and bid him brauely good-morrow next day in the Tower: wherewith the king not a little contented, returned to the Queenes lodging his face couered with ſweate, and his armour all bloody, by reaſon of fiue woundes he receiued in fight. The Ladyes ſeeing him in ſuch pittious plight, were maruailouſly abaſhed, eſpecially the Queene, who well neere dead with griefe and fear together then as a woman in middeſt of deſpaire, ſhe ſaid: Alas deer Nephew, what ſhall wee doe? wee are all but

dead. Madame, anſwered king Arban, all will go well if God be pleaſed, in vaine doe you thus diſcomfort your ſelfe, for I hope to heare good tydings of the King: and his traytours that ſeeke to vſurpe the kingdome, by your good and loyall ſubiects ſhall receiue deſerued puniſhment. God grant it, quoth ſhe, but you are ſo wounded, as I thinke it impoſſible for you to bee at the battell, if Barſinan come to morrow againe, nor can our men doe anything without you. Be not you troubled therewith Madame, replyed king Arban, for while my ſoule ſucks her ſpirit from the ayre, I will not forſake my charge. So bidding her good night, hee went to haue his wounds dreſſed, and afterward turned to his ſouldiers, merrily paſſing the night among them.
                  
                     Barſinan on the other ſide, got into the Tower of London which he had wonne, and numbring his men, found that his power was greatly weakened: yet would hee make no ſhew thereof for diſmaying the reſt, but ſhewing a diſſembling countenance, thus ſpake to them. My friends, it ſufficeth that I haue ſhewen mine enemies what you are, and they (if I think good) to ſtand at my mercy: wherfore I am determined (without any further loſſe of you) to reſt our ſelues fiue or ſixe dayes, till Arcalaus ſend me the head of king Liſuart, and then the ſight therof, wil make thē not dare to reſiſt mee any longer, but in hope of fauour, will yeeld themſelues. Each of you therefore reioyce and be of good cheere, for when I am King, right richly will I reward you all. So went they to reſt till the next morning, when Barſinan (being armed) mounted on horſe-backe, with twenty knights in his company, and came to a Port which one of king Arbans knights kept, who ſeeing this troupe, preſently ſounded an allarme. But Barſinan ſent him word how hee came to parle onely, and deſired truce beſide for ſix houres: whereof king Arban was immediatly aduertiſed, who granted the truce Barſinan required, & likewiſe for fiue dayes. Conditionally, that he ſhould offer no violence to any houſe in the City, or practiſe any entrance during the limited time: beſide, if the King returned in that ſpace, the difference ſhould bee left to his diſpoſition. Barſinan was contented with theſe conditions, becauſe hee accounted king Liſuarts death certaine, whereupon hee ſaide to Arban. I hope this little truce, will be an entrance into a perpetuall peace betweene vs: for I dare aſſure yee, king Liſuart is dead, and his daughter muſt be my wife, as within theſe fiue dayes enſuing you ſhall euidently ſee. What? quoth king Arban, thou haſt then put him to death: and couldſt thou deale ſo treaterouſly with him, that gaue thee ſuch honourable entertainement in his Court? rather will I preſently die, then continue one houre of peace with thee, get thee gone therefore quickly, or I will ſend thee hence in peeces. Is it true? quoth Barſinan, well mayeſt thou threaten me, but it is in me to make thee repent it. Thus returned hee to his ſouldiers, acquainting them with his honeſt offers to king Arban, and the audacious anſwere he returned for them.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXXIX.
                  
                     How Amadis came to the ſuccour of the City of London, when it was in this diſtreſſe.
                  
                  
                     NOt long agoe we left Amadis in the wood, familiarly deuiſing with the Princeſſe Oriana, thinking on nothing but their ſweete contentation: and among other diſcourſe, Amadis intreated her to tell him, what ſpeeches Arcalaus had with her by the way. On my faith Sir, quoth ſhe, he confounded my ſenſes with perſwading mee to reioyce, ſaying. Before fiue dayes were expired, I ſhould raigne as Queene in Great Brittaine, enioying Barſinan to my husband: him-ſelfe likewiſe ſhould be chiefe Gouernour and Maiſter of his houſe, in recompence of the ſeruices hee did for him, in giuing him my fathers head, and mee to be his wife. Ah heauens, ſayde Amadis, what treaſon is this in Barſinan, who ſhewed himſelfe ſuch a friend to the king? God ſhield hee doe no wrong to the Queene. In ſooth, I greatly doubt it, replyed Oriana, it were good therefore wee haſted to ſee. With all my heart, quoth Amadis: ſo mounting on horſe-backe, they rode toward London, meeting many knights by the way that followed the King, whom ſtill hee directed in their courſe, certifying them that Galaor was gone likewiſe in his ſearch. Within a while after, Oriana eſpied Don Grumedan an auncient knight of honour to the Queene, and twenty knights more with him, who all that night had ſearched the Forreſt for the king: but when hee ſawe her, the teares ſtoode in his eyes with ioy, deſiring to heare ſome newes of the King her father. Credit mee Sir, quoth ſhee, not farre from the Citie were we ſundered, when God ordayned ſo well for me, that Amadis deliuered me frō the villaines, and ranſomed mee with the price of their liues. They were vnwiſe to reſiſt, ſaide Grumedan, when you had ſo good a Champion: but I pray you my Lord, what is become of your brother? Euen in the ſame place, anſwered Amadis, where they ſeparated the father from the daughter: we ſeuered our ſelues, hee poſting after the King, and I followed Arcalaus, who led away Madame Oriana. The better hope haue I of his ſuccour, quoth Grumedan, ſeeing ſo good a knight hath taken it in hand.
                  Hereupon, Amadis tolde him the horrible treaſon of Arcalans and Barſinan: Let me therefore intreate yee, quoth hee, to conduct the Princeſſe leaſurably after, while I make haſte before leaſt the Queen be diſtreſſed, becauſe I doubt the traytor will her offer iniury. I think it likewiſe expedient, that you cauſe all the knights to returne you meete withall: for if the King ſhould bee reskewed by multitude of men, there is enow before already, and more then needs. So leauing his Lady with Don Grumedan, hee made all the haſte hee could towarde London, ouertaking the Squire by the way that came from the king, who told him all the newes of his deliuerance, which was no little ioy to Amadis,
                     
hearing the fortunate ſucceſſe of his brother Galaor. There met hee with another likewiſe, who made report of Barſinans dealings at London, wherefore entring the Citie ſo couertly as hee might, the firſt hee met withall was king Arban, of whom hee was louingly embraced and welcommed, with requeſt of what newes he brought. None but good, anſwered Amadis, and ſuch as you are deſirous to heare: but becauſe I doubt the Queene is ſcant merry, let vs goe ſee her, for happely ſhee will bee glad of our comming. So rode they to the Court together, Amadis ſtill keeping the Squire with him that came from the king, and when they entered the Queenes preſence, Amadis falling on his knee, beganne in this manner. Madame, this Gentleman left the King well this morning, and at liberty, whereof his Maieſty certifieth you by him: my ſelfe likewiſe (not long ſince) left your daughter with Don Grumedan, and very ſhortly they will be with you. But becauſe I vnderſtand that Barſinan moleſteth you with trechery, ſuffer vs I pray you to goe ſee what hee can doe. When the Queen heard theſe ioyfull tydings, her inwarde content tooke away the liberty of of her ſpeech, nor could ſhe doe any thing but lift her hands & eyes to heauen, applauding his name from whence this good proceeded, and by geſtures deliuering ſome ſigne of thankes to Amadis. At length hauing ouercome this delightfull paſſion, and intending to queſtion further concerning theſe newes: the allarme was ſounded, wherefore king Arban and Amadis hyed to the barres, where they found Barſinans men giuing an eager charge, as hoping to conquer the contrarie part. But Amadis thruſting himſelfe for-moſt, cauſed the bars to be taken down, and accompanied with king Arban, brake in couragiouſly vpon the enemy, a noble preſident to their ſouldiers, who beeing cheered by this onſet, tooke heart and followed. Now wexed the skirmiſh to be hot indeed, ſo that on both ſides very many were ſlaine, which Barſinan perceiuing, & truſting in his multitude to ſuppreſſe the weaker part, came formoſt himſelfe in perſon, thinking (now hee ſaw the barres open) to driue his aduerſaries backe againe into the Citie. When Amadis noted his forwardneſſe he ſtepped backe, & changed his Creaſt and Shield with a ſimple mercinary ſouldier: yet reſeruing his Launce, which with a ſtrong carreer pierced thorough his Armour, and wounding Barſinan, brake in peeces in his fleſh. Then drawing his ſword, he gaue him ſuch a ſtroke on the helmet, as hee was aſtonied therewith, and redoubling his blowe, cut his right arme quite from his ſhoulder: when Barſinan (feeling himſelf ſo wounded) would haue retyred backe, to ſaue himſelfe by the ſpeed of his horſe, but hee fell to the ground as depriued of his ſences. Wherefore Amadis left him, and ſet vpon the reſt, who beeing vnable to endure theſe hotte aſſaults, likewiſe beholding their Lord diſmounted: took thēſelues to flight for ſafety of their liues, yet were they ſo cloſely followed, as the moſt part of them were ſlain in the field, and ſome few of them eſcaped into the Tower, cauſing the bridge to be quickly drawen vp after them.
                  Hereupon Amadis returned where he left Barſinan & becauſe he

was not yet dead, commanded he ſhould be carried to the Queenes lodging, there to bee kept till the Kings returne: and as hee would haue put vp his ſword, hee ſawe it ſoyled with blood, wherefore in wiping it, hee ſaide: Thou truſtie ſworde, in a happy houre was the knight born to whom thou belongeſt: and as thou art one of the beſt in the world, ſo is thy Maſter the moſt vertuous Prince liuing. He vſed theſe words, becauſe it appertained to King Liſuart, and was ſent him from the Queene by Gandalin, as you heard before: but now returnes hee with king Arban to the Queenes lodging, to comfort her with newes of happie victory.
                  All this while the King is haſting toward London, giuing order to returne all the knights hee met by the way, among whom were Agraies, Galuanes, Soliuan, Galda
                           •
                        , Dinada
                           •
                        s, and Bernas: all which were highly in the Kings fauour, as men of vertue and no ſmall deſeruing: and his Maieſty hauing imbraced them, ſaid. My noble good friends, you had almoſt loſt mee, but God bee thanked, you haue recouered mee againe, by the helpe of theſe three worthy knights Galaor, Guilan, and Ladaſin. In ſooth my Lord, anſwered Dinada
                           •
                        s, ſo ſoon as your miſhap was knowen in the Citie, each one prepared to bring you ſuccour. I knowe my good Nephew, quoth the king, that I am greatly beholding to you all: but I pray you take good ſtore of theſe knights, and poſt with ſpeed to aſſiſt the Queene, for I doubt ſhe is in no little danger. This Dinada
                           •
                        s was one of the beſt knights of the kings linage, and well eſteemed among men of account, as well in reſpect of his vertues, as alſo his braue behauiour in chiualry: ſo according to the kings command, he rode away preſently very brauely accompanied.
                  The king likewiſe followed an indifferent pace, left his Nephew ſhould ſtand in need of helpe, and by the way he ouertooke Don Grumedan with his daughter Oriana. How ioyfull this meeting was, you may eaſily conceiue, that the ſeparation was not ſo grieuous, but this was as gladſome. Grumedan told his Maieſty, how Amadis left the Princeſſe with him, while hee rode before to aſſiſt the Queene: thus with repetition of many matters, they beguiled the time till they arriued at London, where hee vnderſtoode the ſucceſſe of Barſinans enterpriſe, and how valiantly King Arban had reſiſted him, not forgetting the worthy behauiour of Amadis, in taking him priſoner and diſcomfiting his men, except a few that ſaued themſelues in the Tower.
                  Here would it aske a worlde of time, to report the ioy, pleaſure, and contentment betweene the King and Queen at their meeting, likewiſe the mothers comfort hauing recouered her daughter againe: but as your iudgements can better conceiue then I ſet downe, matter aboue the reach of common capacity, ſo doe I leaue it to you, and proceed to the King. Who to terrifie the traytours thus gotten into holde, beſieged them ſeuerally, and to diſhearten them the more, brought Barſinan & Arcalaus Nephew before the walles, where before all the people they confeſſed their treaſon. Which being done, a great fire was made, wherein they were aliue conſumed, but when they in the Tower beheld this ſpectacle, and that

they were in great want of victals, they yeelded themſelues to the Kings mercy, the moſt part of thē being (for examples ſake) hanged on the battlements, and the reſt ſet at liberty vpon humble ſubmiſſion. Yet this matter bred very great trouble afterward, betweene them of Great Brittaine & Sanſuegua: for the ſonne of Barſinan being a good knight, vexed king Liſuart with contagious warre, as in the Hiſtory hereafter at large is mentioned.
                  After the King had eſcaped theſe misfortunes, the former ioyes and paſtimes beganne againe: during which time, the Lady and her two ſonnes (the meſſengers of Madaſima, who were witneſſes when Galaor and Amadis promiſed to forſake king Liſuarts ſeruice) arriued at the Court. When the two Princes were aduertiſed thereof, they went and friendly entertained her, ſhee ſaying: Gentlemen you know the cauſe of my comming, are you determined to keepe your promiſe? We are, quoth they, and will not breake our couenant with Madaſima, but preſently will performe it before the King. Entring the great Hall, the Lady fell on her knees before his Maieſty, deliuering theſe ſpeeches. My Lord, I am come to your Court, to ſee if theſe two knights will obſerue a couenant, which in my preſence they made to a Lady. What was it? anſwered the King. A matter that will ſcant like you, quoth the Lady, or any ſuch as beare you affection: and thereto ſhee added the whole circumſtance. Wherat the King waxing ſomewhat offended, told Galaor that hee had very much wronged him. My Lord, replyed Galaor, it was better to do ſo, then be trecherouſly ſlaine, for had wee beene knowne, neither you, nor all the world could haue ſaued our liues: but let not your Maieſty be offended, for the remedy ſhall be more ready then you expect. In accompliſhing my promiſe to Madaſima of Gantaſi, my Lord I take my leaue of you, departing altogether from your ſeruice: certifying you that it is her will to doe you this diſpleaſure, and worſe if ſhe ſhould compaſſe it, for the extreame mallice ſhe beareth to you. Amadis affirmed what his brother had done, then Galaor turning to the Lady & her two ſonnes, ſayd. Haue we not now accompliſh our promiſe? Yes truely, quoth the Lady, wee muſt needs auouch ſo much. You may then returne when you pleaſe, anſwered Galaor, but tell Madaſima, ſhe did not ſo much as ſhe weened, as you may perceiue by the preſent effect. Now my Lord, quoth he to the King, we haue fulfilled our promiſe to Madaſima, and becauſe in graunting her earneſt deſire, the time was not limited how long we ſhould leaue your ſeruice: we may enter thereinto againe when you pleaſe to command, ſo that we are yours as faithfull as before. When the King and all that were preſent heard what had paſt, they reioyced exceedingly, eſteeming Galaor & Amadis well aduiſed herein: where-upon the King thus ſpake to the Lady. According to her great treaſon vnder ſhaddowe of good meaning, they are bound to no more then they haue accompliſhed: for to deceiue the deceiuer is no deceit. And ſay to Madaſima; ſeeing ſhe hateth me ſo vnreaſonably, ſhe once had thē in her power, who might haue grieued me all my life time: but God hauing in other places deliuer'd me frō many perils wil not ſuffer me to periſh by ſo bad

woman as ſhe is. I deſire yee my Lord, quoth ſhe, to tell mee their names. The one is Amadis, anſwered the King, and the other his brother Galaor. May it be poſſible, ſayde the Lady, that Madaſima had Amadis in her power? Credit me, quoth the King, I haue tolde yee truth. Their fortune was good, replyed the Lady, for they might not haue eſcaped if ſhe had known them: and in ſooth the deede might bee reckoned ominous, if two ſuch worthy perſons had periſhed. Yet when ſhe ſhall knowe hereof, ſayd the King, I thinke ſhe will forbeare to wrong me any further. With that the Lady tooke her leaue, ſhaping her courſe the ſame way ſhe came.
               
               
                  CHAP. XL.
                  
                     How King Liſuart held open Court in the Cittie of London many dayes, in which time ſundry great perſonages were there feaſted, the greater part whereof remayned there long time afterward.
                  
                  
                     TWelue dayes together (after theſe mishaps) did King Liſuart continue his Court in all magnificence, many noble perſonages being there aſſembled, as wel ſtrāgers as others, hoping now to make little ſtay but to return home to their owne houſes: yet the greater part of them aboad with the King, in like manner did ſundry worthy Ladies accompany the Queene. Among other knights attending on the King, were Don Guilan the penſiue, and his Coſen Ladaſin, who (as I haue ſayde) were very good knights: but Guilan was the better of the twaine, for very fewe were found in the Realme of Great Brittaine, that carried more account for deeds of Armes, and all other graces beſeeming a knight, ſetting aſide his muſing and melancholy. By meanes whereof, fewe or none could bee pleaſant with him, or haue any words from him in company: but loue procured theſe extreames, buſying his thoughts in ſuch ſort with his Lady, as hee had minde of none but her. And ſhee of whom wee ſpeake, was endued with ſingular beauty, being named Brandaliſia, ſiſter to the Kings wife of Sobradiſa, and ioyned in marriage with the Duke of Briſtoya: who now was arriued at the Court, to anſwere the accuſation Oliuas laide againſt him. The King gaue him very gentle welcome, and beeing in the preſence of many great Lords, the Duke beganne in this manner. Sir, you haue commanded my appearance here this day, to iuſtifie my ſelfe before your Maieſty, concerning a crime Oliuas chargeth mee withall: whereof I hope ſufficiently to cleare my ſelfe, by the rightfull iudgement your ſelfe ſhall giue, and hee reſt condemned like a varlet as hee is: for here am I ready to approue againſt him, or any other hee ſhall bring, that I neuer committed treaſon or ſo foule a deed.
                  At theſe wordes Oliuas aroſe, and with him a great nūber of knights errant, all reſolued to maintayne this quarrell againſt the Duke: when the King beheld them in ſuch a mutiny, hee maruelled whence the cauſe ſhould proceede, when

                     Grumedan ſpeaking for all the reſt, ſayd. My Lord, becauſe the Duke of Briſtoia hath threatened and defied all knights errant, we are ready to anſwere his challenge. In good faith, anſwered the King, if it bee ſo, hee hath attempted an ouer fond warre, for I thinke there is no knight in the worlde ſo puiſſant, that will bee induced to ſuch an entetpriſe. But forbeare at this time, and offer him no iniury, becauſe he is heere to receiue iuſtice: which ſhall be done, according to the counſell of the Princes and Lords preſent, without fauouring any one. Then Oliuas falling on his knee before the King, beganne in this manner. My Lord, the Duke who ſtandeth before your Maieſty, hath ſlaine a Coſen germaine of mine, hee neuer giuing him occaſion of offence: wherefore I will iuſtifie him to bee a villaine and a traytour, and will make him confeſſe it with his owne mouth, elſe ſhall I kill him and caſt him forth of the field. The Duke tolde him hee lyed, and hee was ready to accompliſh what the King and his Court ſhould ordaine: wherupon it was determined, that this emulation ſhould bee decided by combate, which the Duke accepted, deſiring the King to permit him & his two Nephewes in this cauſe, againſt Oliuas and two other knights. This being granted, the Duke was very glad thereof, for he made ſuch account of his kinſmen, as hee thought Oliuas could not bring the like: notwithſtanding, all was deferred till the morrowe following.
                  In meane while, Don Galuanes asked his Nephew Agraies, if hee wold aſſiſt Oliuas againſt the Duke, and hee conſenting thereto, Galuanes came to Oliuas, ſaying. Sir Oliuas, ſeeing the Duke is deſirous to fight three againſt three, my nephew and I are determined to take your part: which when the Duke heard, hee remembred that he had defied them in his owne houſe, when Agraies combated with the Dwarffes champion, at what time the Damoſell ſhould haue beene burned: wherefore hee became very penſiue, in reſpect though he eſteemed his Nephewes approued good knights, yet he repented his wilfull offer, & gladly would haue excuſed the matter if hee could, being ſo well acquainted with the behauiour of Galuanes & Agraies. But conſidering his promiſe paſt before the King, and ſo many noble perſonages there preſent, hee muſt of neceſſity ſtand thereto: wherefore the next morning hee entered the Liſtes with his Nephewes, and Oliuas on the contrarie with his copartners. Now were the Ladies ſtanding at the windowes, to beholde the iſſue of this quarrell, and among the reſt ſtood Oliuia the faire friend to Agraies, who ſeeing him ready to enter ſuch perill, was ſo diſmayed, as ſhe could ſcant tell what countenance to vſe. By her ſtood Mabila, ſhee being in no leſſe griefe for her Vncle and brother together: likewiſe the Princeſſe Oriana, louing them both, in reſpect of the reaſons heretofore declared, accompanied the two Ladies in ſorrowe, fearing their danger: but the knights being ready to the combate, the King by a Herald commanded the Champions to doe their deuoyre. Heereupon with a braue carreer they encountred together, Agraies and Galuanes vnhorſing the two Nephewes, and albeit Oliuas receiued a wound on the ſtomacke, yet had not the Duke caught

hold about his horſe neck, his fortune had proued as had as his Nephewes. Thē drawing their ſwords, they ſmote ſo violently againſt ech other, as the ſtanders by wondered at their fiercenes: beholding their ſhields defaced, their armour battred & coullered with their blood, that the victorie hung a long time in ſuſpence. For Agrates horſe being ſlaine vnder him, brought his life in maruailous hazard, becauſe the Duke and one of his Nephews ſtroue to keep him downe, ſeeking to thruſt their ſwords into his belly, or elſe to ſmite his head from his ſhoulders: but he was ſo well armed, and of ſuch courage withall, as hee held them both play, though with exceeding perill. Well may you thinke, that his friends grieued to ſee him in this diſtreſſe, eſpecially the three Ladyes, of whom we ſpake ſo lately, whoſe cheekes were bedewed with whole fountaines of teares, and wofull Oliuia ſeemed rather dead then liuing. But had he long continued in this extreamity, her lateſt houer muſt needes haue enſued, yet at length he recouered him-ſelfe, charging the Duke and his Nephewes with ſuch puiſſant ſtrokes, as well declared his hardy courage. Oliuas all this while was in ſuch caſe, by reaſon of the ſore wound the Duke gaue him, that he could hardly defend himſelfe: which the Duke perceiuing, hee left his Nephew with Agraies, and aſſailing Oliuas very roughly, made him fall downe in a great aſtoniſhment. But as he would haue ſlaine him, Agraies ſtepped betweene thē (hauing diſpatched his enemie of his head) and hindred the Duke from his determination, wounding him in many places on his body, that he could ſcant tel which way to turne him. Don Galuanes likewiſe hauing ſlaine the other Nephew, came to aſſiſt Agraies againſt the Duke, who ſeeing his life at the lateſt exigent, turned his horſe to eſcape away: but Agraies gaue him ſuch a ſtroke on the helmet, as hee fell beſide his ſaddle, with one of his feete hanging in the ſtirrop, when the horſe being at libertie, feeling his burthen hang on the one ſide, ranne flinging vp and downe, none being able to reskew the Duke, till his necke was broken with dragging along. Hereupon Agraies left him, returning to his vncle to know how he fared. Very well I thanke God, anſwered Galuanes, but it grieueth mee that Oliuas is dead, for hee lieth ſtill and moueth not. Right ſorry likewiſe was Agraies to heare theſe words, wherefore commanding the Duke and his Nephewes bodyes to be throwne foorth of the field, they came both to Oliuas, and finding him aliue, as alſo his wounds not to be mortall, they bound them vp ſo well as they could, ſaying. Friend Oliuas, be of good cheere, for though you haue loſt very much blood, yet doubt wee not of your health, becauſe wee finde little danger in your hurts, Alas my Lords, quoth Oliuas, my heart fainteth, and albeit I haue beene heeretofore wounded, yet neuer was I in ſuch debilitie. Then the King deſired to knowe whether hee were dead or no, and when it was tolde him, how hee wanted nothing but ſpeedy cure: hee commanded him to bee honourably caryed into the Citie, and his own cirurgions to attend on his health, euen as it were his owne perſon: which he did, promiſing, to deliuer him well againe within few daies.
                  
                     
Thus euery one returned, diſputing diuerſly on the end of the Combat, and according to their particular affections, ſo that ſoone after, the Queene (who was one of the beſt Ladies in the world) was aduiſed to ſend for the wife to the deceaſed Duke, that in the Court ſhee might weare away the cauſe of her melancholly, and to diſpatch this buſineſſe, ſhee ſent Don Grumedan to her requeſting ſhe would bring her, Neece Aldena with her, whereof Galuanes was not a little glad, eſpecially Don Guilan, who was the friend and beloued of the Dutcheſſe. Not long after, ſhe and her Neece arriued at the Court, where they were right nobly feaſted and entertayned. Thus the King ſpent the time in the Citty of London, accompanied with many great Lords, knights and Ladies, becauſe the fame was blazed throught the world, of his honourable courteſie to ſtrange Knights: which drew an exceeding number to his court, whom he rewarded very bountifully, hoping (by their meanes) not onely to confirme his Realme in peace, but likewiſe to conquere other, which ſome-time had beene ſubiect and tributary to his Crown, yet through the puſillanimity and negligence of the Kinges his predeceſſors, were loſt and diſcontinued their former obedience.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLI.
                  
                     How Amadis determined to goe combat with Abiſeos and his two Sonnes, to reuenge the Kings death, who was Father to the fayre Briolania, and of that which followed.
                  
                  
                     HEretofore it hath beene declared, how Amadis, being with Briolania, promiſed to reuenge the King her Fathers death, againſt Abiſeos, and his two Sonnes, which in one year after he ſhould performe, being accompanied with two other Knights. Alſo how when he tooke his leaue of her, ſhee gaue him a Sword, becauſe his owne was broken, deſiring him to weare it for her ſake: which Sword was afterward broken at the Ladies Caſtle, who was the beloued of Angrioted Eſtrauaus, when he combatted with Gaſinan, and commanded Gandalin to bring away the peeces thereof: which occaſioned great harme not long after, not by any fault of him, but by the indiſcretion of Dardan the Dwarffe, who imagined his maſter loued the faire Briolania, in reſpect he offered himſelfe to be her Knight.
                  One day therefore, Amadis being with King Liſuart, euermore delighting with his Lady Oriana, to the no little contentation of thē both: Loue, who often-times prouoketh his Subiects, would no longer continue them in ſo great eaſe, but rayſe ſome cinders of diuiſion, wherby they might receiue diſcontentment. For this cauſe he made Amadis remember his promiſe to Briolania, that he ſhould combat Abiſeos within one yeare the end whereof was now at hand: and being loth to faile therein, he ſought all conuenient meanes to take his leaue of the Princeſſe Oriana, determining to acquaint her with the whole cauſe, in what ſort Briolania was diſinherited of her fathers kingdom: ſuch were his diſcourſes on her behalf, that although

                     Oriana was loth to grant what hee demanded, or to permit his abſence from her: yet being ouercome with compaſſion, ſhe reſtrained her will, and in middeſt of her ſorrow, ſaid: Deere friend, I know well that your ſpeeches are reaſonable, but the wrong you do me; aloweth no excuſe: Yet in reſpect I loue ye, as you are well aſſured, it is conuenient I ſhould preferre your honor before mine own pleaſure. You haue promiſed (as you tell me) to ſuccour a disinherited Lady, I am content, ſeeing there is no other remedy, though my conſent be with greater griefe then you weene: for my minde is perſwaded, ſome miſchiefe will happen to me by this voyage. Madam, anſwered Amadis, vnwilling am I to giue you any occaſion of diſlike or to attempt any thing againſt your minde, rather could I wiſh neuer to haue beene borne: Let Briolania then pardon my tarrying, for I hold my ſelfe ſufficiently excuſed, ſeeing my departure is not agreeable to you. Not ſo ſweete friend, replyed Oriana, I am willing you ſhall go: but make a ſpeedy returne I pray you. With twenty kiſſes was this ſeparation ſealed, and ſhee deſired him to acquaint the Queene there with, that this iourney might be ſhaddowed vnder her commandement: which he did, and on the morrow departed with Galaor and Agraies, when they had not ridden paſt halfe a Mile, but he asked Gandalin, if hee had brought with him the peeces of the Sword that Briolania gaue him when hee left her. No my Lord, anſwered Gandalin. Returne then quoth Amadis to the Dwarffe, and when thou haſt them, make what ſpeede thou canſt to ouertake vs. Alas, had he but miſdoubted the miſhap followed hereon, hee neuer would haue ſent ſuch a meſſenger: For by his rechleſſe ſpeeches, he endaungered the liues of Amadis and Oriana together, as ſhall hereafter be largely deſcribed.
                  Gone is the Dwarffe to his Maſters lodging, and finding the pecces of the Sworde, in the place where Gandalin had directed him, returned haſtily toward his Maſter: but paſſing by the Queenes lodging, he heard one call him, when looking about, he eſpied the Princeſſes Oriana and Mabila, who demanded wherefore he had left Amadis. Madame, quoth he, I haue not beene ſo long from him, but I can quickly ouertake him: for this which I carry, will let him make no great haſt till I come. What is it? ſaid Oriana. What? anſwered the Dwarffe, I can aſſure ye Madame, he prizeth them more then they be worth, for her ſake that gaue him the Sword. What is ſhe? quoth Oriana. The Lady, replyed the Dwarffe, for whom he now vnder-takes the combat. And though you be daughter to the beſt King in the World, as alſo fayrer (in mine opinion) then any other: yet rather ſhould you haue gained her conqueſt, then all the wealth in this kingdome.
                  I know not what thou meaneſt ſaid Oriana, vnleſſe thy maſter haue giuen himſelfe to her? You haue gueſſed right Madam, anſwered the Dwarffe, he is altogther at her commandement, thinking himſelfe happy to be her Knight. So taking his leaue, hee poſted to ouer-take his Maſter, who little thought on theſe ſlanderous reports: But Oriana entred into ſuch a Iealouſie, as without regard of any thing whatſoeuer,

ſhee would haue caſt her ſelfe forth at the window, had not Mabila and the Damoſell of Denmarke ſtayed her. Now riſeth frowning anger in her brows, and ſhe to miſconceiue of the man, whoſe onely deſire was to do her ſeruice, With often wringing her hands, ſhe calleth to remen brance, in what earneſt affection he deſired leaue for this voyage, which augmented her ſuſpition of the Dwarffes wordes: and in ſuch ſort was her heart ſhut vp, as no teare might fall from her eyes, becauſe thoſe vapours were withdrawne to the moſt worthie places in her. Hereupon her torments redoubled in extreames, as Dido for the the tromperie of AEneas, or ſad Medea, ſeeing her ſelfe forſaken of her friend Iaſon, neuer feltſuch anguiſh: and in fatall fortune ſhee would haue ſucceeded them, but that ſhe was hindred by them about her, who found the meanes to defend her from ſuch miſhap.
                  By this time the Dwarffe ouer-tooke Amadis and the reſt, when they began to ride ſomwhat faſter, Amadis not requiring any thing of him, nor he reciting what he tolde the Princeſſe, but ſhewed him the peeces of the Sworde he brought. Not farre had they ridden, but they met a Damoſell, who after ſhe had ſaluted them, demanded whither they trauailed, ſaying, ſhee would aduiſe them to forſake that way. Wherefore? anſwered Amadis. Becauſe, quoth ſhe, for the ſpace of fifteene dayes, no Knight errant paſſed this way, but he hath beene eyther wounded or ſlaine. And who hath done them ſuch diſpleaſure? ſaid Amadis. A Knight, anſwered the Damoſell, the moſt valiant man at Armes that euer was ſeene. I pray ye Damoſell, quoth Agraies, bring vs where wee may ſee him. You cannot ride far in this Forreſt, ſaid ſhe, but he will quickly ſhew himſelfe. So trauail they on with the Damoſell, and long time they neyther heard nor ſaw any one, which made them thinke ſhee ſpake theſe words to feare them: yet ſooreafter, Amadis eſpyed the Knight, who ſeemed a man of goodly ſtature, and ready prepared for the combat. As hee and his companions ſtood beholding him, they heard him ſpeak to a ſquire, who reared foure Launces againſt a Tree, and afterward came to them, ſaying. Gentlemen, my Maiſter giueth you to vnderſtand, how during the ſpace of fifteene dayes, hee hath vndertaken the guard of this Forreſt, in all which time his fortune hath beene, not to be vanquiſhed by any one: And though it be a day and a halfe ſince his intended tearme is expired, yet ſtayeth hee here till now for the pleaſure he hath in Iouſting. And as he was departing hence, he eſpied you comming: wherefore hee letteth you know, that if each of you will breake a Launce, he careth not to try his fortune with you, prouided, that the combat at the Sword be ſpared, becauſe hee ſildome proceedeth ſo farre without doing more harme then willingly he would.
                  When Agraies heard this meſſage, hee tooke his Armes, returning this anſwere. Friend, goe tell thy Maiſter I am content to try the louſt with him. Hereupon, he gaue the ſpurres to his horſe, and the knight ſeeing him coming, gaue forth to meete him, their Launces being broken in the incounter: But Agraies was eaſily caſt from his Horſe, of which foyle he could not but be aſhamed.

                     Galaor beholding his Cozin difmounted, determined to reuenge his wrong, bidding the knight to prepare himſelfe, who taking another Launce, ran againſt Galaor with ſuch furie, as after their ſtaues were broken, their bodies met together ſo vehemently, that Galaors horſe being more feeble then the other, fell downe with his Maſter on bis back, but the Prince not recouering himſelfe, was left on the ground, when the horſearoſe, and ran about the field, as the other of Agraies did. Amadis abaſhed at theſe accidents preparing himſelf, ſaid to the Knight. I know not what thou art, but thou maiſt vant, that thou haſt diſmounted two approued good Knights. So coutching his Launce, proceeded forward, but Galaor ſtayed him, calling the Knight to the combat, which made Amadis thus to anſwere. Brother, finde not your ſ
                        •…
                     e agrieued with him, becauſe he ſent vs word before the Iouſt, that he would not combat with the Sword: but I hope to take reuenge for all.
                  Herewith they encountred valiantly together, breaking their Launces ſo couragiouſly, and meeting with their bodies ſo violently, as Amadis was thrown to the earth his horſes ſhoulder being broken in the fall: in like manner was the Knight diſmounted, bat keeping the reynes of his bridle in his hand, he quickly mounted on horſe back againe, when Amadis, thus ſpake to him. We muſt trie one courſe more, if thou wilt haue the honor, for as yet it is not won, becauſe we both were vnhorſed. I will not now Iouſt any more, anſwered the Knight. Then you do me wrong, replied Amadis. Redreſſe it if you can ſaid the Knight: for according to my order before the Iouſt, I am bound to no more then what I haue done. After theſe words, he gallopped away through the Forreſt ſo faſt as he could: which when Amadis, and his companions ſaw, they being all on foote, they ſtood as men aſhamed, for they could not imagine what he was that thus intreated them, whereupon Amadis mounted on Gandalins horſe, ſaying to his friends: Follow me if you pleaſe, for it would grieue me not to know the name of this Knight. In ſooth, anſwered the Damoſell, it were the greateſt folly in you, aboue all the knights belonging vnto King Liſuart, to thinke you can finde him in one whole yeere, vnleſſe you be directly guided. Faire Damoſell, ſaid Galaor, it may be you know what he is, and the place where he abideth. On my faith, quoth ſhe, if I know any thing thereof, I meane not to tell it you: for neuer will I iniurie ſo good a Knight. Damoſell, replied Galaor, by the affection you beare to the thing you moſt loue in the World, tell vs I pray ye what you know in this matter. You coniure me in vaine, quoth ſhe, for neuer will I diſcouer his affaires, except you deliuer me ſome good preſent.
                  Demand what you will anſwered Amadis, and you ſhall haue it, on condition you helpe vs to finde the knight. I am content, replyed the Damoſell, if firſt you will tell mee your names, and afterward each of you grant me a boone, at what time I ſhall demand them of you: With all our hearts, quoth Amadis: as for our names, the one is Galaor, the other Agraies, and my ſelfe am Amadis. When the Damoſell heard this, ſhee was very glad, ſaying:

Certes my Lord, my iourney is ſhortned, for I ſeeke you. Then you haue now found me, anſwered Amadis, what is your will with me? That you ſhall know, quoth ſhee, when time ſerueth: but do you not remember the combate, which you promiſed to performe for the king of Sobradiſaes daughter, when ſhee ſuccoured you by meanes of the Lyons? Yes that I doe, ſayde Amadis, and now am I riding toward her. Would you then, quoth the Damoſell, follow a knight ſo hard to be found, and the time for the combate beeing neerer then you weene? She ſaith very well my Lord, anſwered Galaor, doe you therefore and Agraies proceede on your iourney, and I will ſeeke the knight with this Damoſell: for neuer ſhal I reſt til I haue found him: & if it be poſſible, I will be with you before you deale with Abiſeos. Be it ſo, replied Amadis, but ſhe promiſed vs to tell his name, & where we may find him. His name, quoth the Damoſell, I cannot tell ye, for I know it not my ſelfe, and yet I haue beene a moneth with him, in which time I haue ſeene him doe ſuch deedes of armes, as without fight thereof I would neuer haue credited: but where he is now, I can conduct him thither that will goe with me. It is all I requeſt, anſwered Galaor. Follow mee then, quoth ſhe: ſo taking their leaue, they ſeperated themſelues.
                  Thus Amadis and Agraies hold on their way, arriuing within fewe dayes after at the Caſtle of Torin, where they ſound the faire Brtolania, with the ancient Lady: but when Amadis beheld her, he found her maruailouſly changed, for if ſhee were faire when hee firſt ſawe her, ſhe now ſeemed of ſuch excellent perfection, 25 (except Oriana,) he reputed her the moſt beautifull creature in the world, whereupon he ſayde to Agraies. If nature was deſirous to expreſſe her cunning in a creature, in this Lady ſhe hath moſt ſufficiently accompliſhed it. My Lord, quoth ſhe, full long haue we expected your comming, for in you conſiſteth our onely hope. Madame, anſwered Amadis, by the helpe of God, I truſt you ſhall recouer your loſſe, and we will doe our vttermoſt therein. As thus they deuiſed, they entred a faire chamber, where mantles were brought to wrap about them, and Briolania holp to vnarme Amadis, for ſhe could not be ſatisfied with beholding him, becauſe ſhe counted him the faireſt knight that euer was ſeene, being now but twenty yeeres of age. And ſo piercingly did hee regard her, as long time after ſhe waved amourous, ſo that when ſhe had recouered her Kingdome, ſhe wiſhed him ſole Lord of her and her countrye together, as ſhall heereafter be declared. But Amadis was elſe-where addicted, and gaue ſufficient proofe to her, that the extreame anguiſhes hee endured for his Oriana, were manifeſt examples of his ſtedfaſtloyalty. Neuertheleſſe, the young Lord of Portugall pitrying faire Brtolania, would diſguiſe this hiſtorie in another manner, deſcribing farre otherwiſe the loue of her & Amadis, which report is worthy of no credit. For he ſaith, that Brtolania being reſtored into her Kingdome, prouiding for the health of Amadis and Agraics, who were wounded, ſhe cōtinuing euermore amorous of Amadis, ſeeing by no means ſhee could winne him to bee her friend, tooke aſide the Damoſell, to whome Amadis, Galaor
                     
and Agraies made the ſeuerall promiſes, at what time ſhe conducted Galaor to the knight that iouſted with them in the Forreſt, and diſcouering the chiefeſt ſecrets of her Heart to her, with aboundance of teares and affectionate ſighes, requeſted her counſell and remedy in theſe amorous paſſions. The Damoſell compaſſionate on her Ladies ſickneſſe, promiſed to giue her redreſſe for it, whereupon ſhe ſaid to Amadis, that the boone ſhe would deſire of him, was his entrance into the Tower, from whence he ſhould not depart, vntill he had begotten of Briolania a Sonne or a Daughter. Amadis willing to keepe promiſe with the Damoſel, yeelded therto, yet without any will to touch Briolania: whereby he grew into ſuch melancholly, as he refuſed all bodily ſuſtenance, and fell into ſuch danger of his perſon, as euery houre he expected death. Which being heard in the Court of king Liſuart, as alſo his deadly dangerous extreamitie: Oriana (loth to loſe him) ſent him word and licence, that he ſhould do what the Lady requeſted. Whereupon Amadis conſidering hee might no way elſe eſcape, and his gracious Miſtreſſe pittyed him ſo much, he begat a Sonne and a daughter of Briolania, whereof ſhe was deliuered of at one labour: but this Hiſtory is altogether falſe and faigned. It might be that Amadis was priſoner in the Tower, and Briolania beheld his daily pining away: but ſhe deſired the Damoſell to remit him this boone, on condition he ſhould not depart till his brother Galaor returned, as willing to comfort her ſelfe with the ſight of him, while ſhe attended his brothers ariuall: for Galaor eſpouſed her afterward, as you ſhall reade in the fourth booke of this Hiſtory. Let it then ſuffice at this time, that Amadis and Agraies ſoiourne certain daies in the Caſtle, while all needfull things were ready for their combat.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLII.
                  
                     How Galaor went with the Damoſell after the Knight that diſmounted him and his companions in the Forreſt, whom when he found, they combated together, and afterward in the ſharpeſt point of their combat, they knew each other.
                  
                  
                     Four daies together, rode Galaor with the Damoſell, ſeeking the Knight that vnhorſed him in the Forreſt, for which he was ſo ouercome with anger, as euery knight hee met withall deerely felt it, becauſe in combat many receiued their death. Then eſpying a faire Caſtle on the top of a high mountaine, the Damoſell told him, there was no other place neere where they might lodge that night: wherfore he being glad to accept there-of, they came to the Caſtle, finding many Gentlemen and Ladies ſporting together, among whom was a Knight aged about threeſcore yeares, who taking Galaor by the hand, did him all the honour might be deuiſed. My Lord, quoth, Galaor, your courteſie to vs is ſo great, that albeit we were determined

to paſſe further on our way, yet for your ſake we are content to ſtay with you this night. Then the knight conducted Galaor, into a faire Chamber, leauing the Damoſell among the other Ladies; and after the Prince was vnarmed, the knight ſpake to him in this manner. Here Sir may you reſt and take your eaſe, calling for any thing you ſtand in neede of: for God knows I haue vſed ſuch entertainement not onely to you, but to all knights errant that paſſed this way, becauſe ſome time I haue beene as now you are. Yet hath nature giuen mee two Sonnes, whoſe onely delight is in ſearch of aduentures, but now they lie ſicke in their beds, beeing cruelly wounded by a Knight, who with one Launce caſt them both from their Saddles. But they were ſo aſhamed at this foyle, as they mounted againe and purſued the knight, ouertaking him as hee entred a Barque to paſſe the water, where my Sonnes ſaid to him, that in reſpect he had iouſted ſo well, they would trie his fortune in combat with the Sword: but the knight made anſwere he could not now intend it, yet would they needes preſſe him ſo farre, as to hinder his entrance into the Barque. Where upon a Lady being in his company ſaid, they wronged her ouer much to ſtay her Knight: but they were not to depart, til he had combated with them at the Sword. Seeing it will be no otherwiſe replied the Lady, he ſhall enter ſight with the better of you both, on condition, that if he be conqueror, the other do forbeare the Combat. They anſwered, if the one were vanquiſhed, the other would reuenge his foyle, which when the Knight heard, he was ſo angry, as he bad them both come together, in reſpect they were importunate and would not reſt contented. In the triall, one of my ſons ſuſtained the worſt, wherefore his brother ſeeing him in ſuch perill, ſtroue to reskue him from death: yet all was in vaine, for the knight handled them ſo roughly, as he left them like dead men in the field, and afterward paſſed away in the Barque. No ſooner heard I of this miſhap, but I ſent for my Sonnes, & home were they brought in this daungerous plight: but that you may giue credit to my words, behold here their Armour cut and mangled, as I thinke the like ſtroakes neuer came from any mans hand. Galaor maruailing at this diſcourſe, demanded what Armes the conquering knight bare: when he was anſwered, his Shield to be of vermilion colour, with two black Lions figured therein: By theſe tokens Galaor knew him, that it was the ſame man he trauailed to finde, which made him demand of his friendly hoſt, if he had no further knowledge of the Knight. No verily Sir, quoth the auncient Gentleman. For this night, anſwered Galaor, let vs take our reſt, and to morrow I intend to ſeeke the man you talke of. For already I haue trauiled foure daies in his ſearch: but if I meete with him, I hope to reuenge the iniuries of your Sonnes, and other likewiſe whom he hath offended, or elſe it will coſt the price of my life. I could rather wiſh ſaid the Knight, that leauing this perillous enterpriſe, you would take ſome other courſe, ſeeing my two Sonnes haue beene ſo hardly intreated, their own wilfull folly being cauſe thereof. So breaking off talke, Galaor took his reſt till the next morning,

when taking leaue of the ancient knight, he rode away with the Damoſell, who brought him to the place of paſſage in the Barque: where croſſing the water to the other ſide, they came to a very beautifull Caſtle, whither the Damoſel rode before, aduiſing the Prince to ſtay her returne. She taryed not long, but comming back againe, brought another Damoſel with her of excellent beauty, and ten men beſide all on horſe-back: after the faire Gentlewoman had ſaluted Galaor, ſhe ſaid. Sir, this Damoſell that came in your company, telleth me, how you ſeeke a knight, who beareth two black Lyons in a vermillion ſhield, and are deſirous to know his name: this is very certaine, that you nor any other can finde him for three yeeres ſpace, but onely by force of armes, a matter not ſo eaſie to be accompliſhed by you, for perſwade your ſelfe, his like is not to be found in all the Iſles of great Brittaine. Lady, quoth Galaor, yet will I not giue ouer his ſearch, although hee conceale him ſelfe in this ſort: and if I meete with him, it ſhall like mee better to combate with him, then to know my demand by any other way. Seeing then, anſwered the Damoſell, your deſire is ſuch, I will ſhew you him within three dayes enſuing, for this Gentlewomans ſake, being my coſin, who according to her promiſe hath earneſtly entreated me. Galaor requited her with many thankes, and ſo they trauailed on, arriuing in the euening at an arme of the Sea, where they found a Barque ready for paſſage to a little Iſland, and certaine mariners in it, who made them all ſweare, if they had any more then one knight in their cō
                     pany. No, credit me, replied the Damoſell: hereupon they ſet ſayle and away. Then Galaor demanded of the Damoſell, the reaſon why they tooke ſuch an oath. Becauſe, quoth ſhe, the Lady of the Iſle whither we goe, hath ſo ordained it, that they ſhall let paſſe but one knight at one time: and no other muſt they bring till his returne, or credible intelligence of his death. What is hee, ſaide Galaor, that vanquiſheth or killeth them? The ſelfe ſame knight you ſeeke, anſwered the Damoſell, whom the Lady hath kept with her more then halfe a yeere, intirely louing him: and the cauſe of this affection proceedeth from a Tourney, which not long ſince hee maintained in this countrey, for the loue of her and another faire Lady, whom the knight (being a ſtanger here) conquered, defending her cauſe with whome he now is, and euer ſince ſhee bare him ſuch affection, as without grant of his loue ſhe wold haue dyed. Sometime hee is deſirous to ſeeke after ſtrange aduentures, but then the Lady to detaine him ſtill in this place, cauſeth ſuch knights as come hither to paſſe one after another againſt whom he combateth, and not one hath yet returned vnuanquiſhed: ſuch as die in fight are there interred, and the foyled ſent back againe, deſpoyled of their horſe and armes, which the knight preſenteth to his Lady, ſhee being one of the faireſt creatures in the world, named Coriſanda, and the Iſle Brauiſande. Know you not the cauſe, ſaid Galaor, wherefore the knight went not many dayes ſince, to a Forreſt where I found him, and kept the paſſage there fifteene dayes together, againſt all ſuch as trauailed that way? Yes mary, quoth the Damoſel, he promiſed a boone to a

Lady before he came hither, wherfore ſhe intreated him to keep the Forreſt for the ſpace of fifteene dayes: yet hardly hee got licence of his faire Miſtreſſe, who allowed him but a moneth to ſtay and returne.
                  By this time they were landed, and come before a goodly Caſtle, where ſtood a pillar or Marble, with a horne hanging on it, which the Damoſell bad him winde, and the Knight would come forth at the ſound thereof. After he had giuen a good blaſt, certaine Pages came forth of the Caſtle, who ſet vp a Pauilion in the middeſt of the field, and ſix Ladies (ſoone after) came walking forth one of them ſeeming by her geſture and countenance, to be commander of the reſt, taking her place accordingly in the Tent. I maruaile, ſaid Galaor, the knight tarryeth ſo long, I deſire one of you to will the Lady ſend for him, becauſe buſines elſe-where of great importance, forbiddeth me to trifle time here in vaine. One of the Damoſells fulfilled his requeſt. What? anſwered Coriſanda, maketh he ſo ſmall account of our Knight? thinketh hee ſo eaſily to eſcape from him? hath he ſuch mind of other affaires before hee ſee the end of this attempt? indeede I thinke he ſhall returne ſooner then he expecteth, but with ſlender aduantage for him to bragge of: then calling a Page, ſhe ſaid. Goe and bid the ſtrange Knight come forth. The Page quickly did his meſſage, and ſoone after, the Knight came forth on foote, being all armed except with his Helmet, which was brought after him with his Launce, and another Page leading his Courſer when he came before his Lady, ſhe ſaid. Behold Sir, here is a braue Knight, who thinketh lightly to ouercome you, & accounteth him-ſelfe aſſured of the victory: I pray you let him know the price of his folly. After theſe wordes ſhe kiſſed and embraced him, but Galaor noting all theſe miſteries, thought he tarried too long from the combat: at length the Knight being mounted, they prepared themſelus to the cariere, and breaking their Launces in the encounter, were both wounded. Galaor preſently drew his Sword, but the knight intreated him to Iouſt once more. With all my heart, replyed Galaor, yet I am ſory my horſe is not ſo good as yours, for if it were: I could be content not to giue ouer till one of vs lay along on the ground, or all theſe Launces broken in peeces. The Knight made him no anſwere, but commanded a ſquire to bring them other ſtaues, and meeting together, Galaors horſe was almoſt down: the knight likewiſe loſt his ſtirrops, being glad to catch holde by the mane of his horſe, whereat as one ſomewhat aſhamed, he ſaid to Galaor. You are deſirous to combat with the Sword, which I haue deferred, not for any doubt of my ſelfe, but onely to ſpare you, notwithſtanding, we muſt needs now try the iſſue thereof.
                  Do what you can anſwered Galaor, I meane to bee reuenged for your kindneſſe in the Forreſt: theſe words made the Knight ſoone to remember him, ſaying: You muſt do no more then you can, and happily before you depart hence, you may ſuſtaine a foyle worſe then the firſt. Hereupon they fell to the combat, which began and continued with ſuch fury, as the Ladies, were driuen into wonderfull amazement, yea, themſelues were abaſhed

that they held out ſo long, hauing their Armour mangled, their Shields defaced, their Bodies ſore wounded, and the blood ſtreming downe vpon their horſes: Galaor neuer being in ſuch daunger of his life, but when hee fought with his brother Amadis, which made him carry better opinion of the Knight, and both of them being glad to breath a while, Galaor entred into theſe ſpeeches. You ſee Sir I haue the better of the combat, let me therfore know your name, and why you conceale your ſelfe ſo cloſely: wherein you ſhall doe me very great pleaſure, and wee may continue friends, elſe worſe will enſue then you imagin. Be wel aſſured anſwered the knight our ſtrife ſhall not be ended ſo eaſily, nor am I to bee ouercome ſo lightly as you weene, beſide, I was neuer more deſirous to prolong a combat, then I am at this inſtant, becauſe I neuer met with the knight that tryed me ſo well: but to you nor any other will I bee knowne, except one Knight who hath power to command me. Be not ſo opinitiue, replyed Galaor, for I ſweare to you by the faith I owe to God, neuer to leaue you till I know what you are, and why you conceale your ſelfe ſo ſecretly. And I ſweare to you, quoth the knight, while breath is in my body you ſhall not know it by me, and rather would I preſently die, then any but two ſhould vnderſtand what I am: yet I know not them, but they may and ſhall haue knowledge of me. And what are they, ſaid Galaor, you eſteeme ſo much? Neither will I diſeloſe them to you, anſwered the knight. Both them and my former demaund, quoth Galaor, I will know, elſe one of vs ſhall die, or both together. I am well pleaſed therewith, replyed the Knight.
                  So began they to charge each other a freſh, as if they had not fought together before at all: but the ſtrange knight receiued many cruell wounds, which made his ſtrength more and more to faile: and the Lady ſeeing the great danger of his life, would ſuffer him to endure no longer perill, but comming to Galaor, ſaid. Forbeare ſir Knight, would God the Barque and Mariners had ſunke, before they brought you hither. Lady, quoth Galaor, you ought not to blame me in doing my deuoire againſt this knight, who hath outraged me, & many beſide, for which I meane to bee reuenged this day. Forbeare, ſaid the Lady, to wrong him any more, otherwiſe you may fall into an extremity without any mercy.
                  It matters not what may happen anſwered Galiaor: but nothing ſhall make me giue ouer, vntill he haue ſatisfied my demand. And what is that? quoth ſhe. He muſt tell me his name, replyed Galaor, and why ſo cloſely hee concealeth himſelfe, likewiſe what the two Knights are of whom he told mee but euen now. Proceede no further in combat ſaid the Lady, and I will ſatisfie your demand. This Gentleman is named Don Floreſtan, concealing himſelfe in this ſecret manner to finde his two brethren, who are in this country accounted ſuch men at Armes, that albeit hee hath well tried himſelfe with you, yet will hee not bee commonly knowne, till he haue accompliſhed ſuch deedes in chiualrie, as ma deſerue to equall him with them, who are at this time in King Liſuarts Court, one of them being named Amadis, the other Galaor, and all

three the Sonnes to King Perion of Gaule. Alas, what haue I done? quoth Galaor, heere brother take my Sword, and therewithall the honor of the fight, for I haue offended ouer much. What? ſaid the knight am I then your brother? According to this Ladies ſpeeches, anſwered Galaor, you are, and I am your brother Galaor. Floreſtan amazed at this accident, fell on his knee, ſaying. My Lord, I deſire you to pardon me, for this offence in combatting vnknown with you, was cauſed by no other reaſon: but that I durſt not name my ſelfe your brother, till I had made ſome immitations of your noble vertues, Galaor courteouſly embraced him in his armes, the teares ſtreaming from his eyes with ioy, and greeuing to ſee him ſo ſore wounded, doubting leaſt his life was in great danger: but when the Lady ſaw them ſo good friends, and the enmity conuerted into ſuch Humility, as one right glad thereof, ſhee ſaid to Galaor. Worthy Sir, though firſt you gaue me occaſion of great heauineſſe, yet now with ſufficient ioy you haue recompenced me. So taking each of them by the hand, ſhe walked with them into the Caſtle, where they being lodged in two ſumptuous beds, her ſelfe (skilfull in Chirurgerie) cured their wounds. Thus remained the two brethren with the rich and beautifull Lady Coriſanda, who deſired their health as her owne wel-fare.
               
               
                  CHAP. XLIII.
                  
                     How Don Floreſtan was begotten by King Perion, on the faire Daughter to the Countie of Zealand.
                     
                  
                  
                     AT what time King Perion ſought after ſtrange Aduentures, he ariued in the countrey of Almaigne, where he ſoiourned the ſpace of two yeares, accompliſhing many braue deedes of Armes, the renowne whereof continueth to this day. And as he returned toward Gaule hee lodged in the Counties houſe of Zealand, where he was entertained very royally, as well in reſpect of his owne reputation, as alſo becauſe the County himſelfe had ſometime beene a Knight errant, which made him loue all ſuch as followed Armes. After ſupper, the King was conducted to his Chamber, where being in bed, and ſomewhat wearie with trauaile, he ſell a ſleepe ſoundly: but to ſhake off this heauineſſe, he felt himſelfe embraced and kiſſed he knew not by whom, when ſtarting vp to ariſe, he was ſo held down that he could not. Why Sir? quoth ſhe that thus maſtred him, take you no pleaſure in me who am alone with you? the king looking on her, by meanes of the light which ſtill burned in his Chamber, he diſcerned her to be a moſt beautifull Lady, wherefore he thus anſwered. I pray you faire friend, tell me what you are. What ſoeuer Iam, quoth ſhe, I loue you exceedingly, as one that freely giues her ſelfe to you. In ſooth, replyed the King, I very gladly would know your name. You trouble me, ſaid the Lady, with this importunity, yet can I vſe no other continence thē you ſee but it were neceſſary quoth the king, I ſhould

know your name, if you meane to be my friend. Seeing you conſtraine me thereto, anſwered the Lady, know that I am the Counties Daughter, who hath ſo friendly entertained you. Now truſt me Madam, replyed the King, you muſt hold me excuſed, for I had rather die, then abuſe the man I am ſo much beholding to. Will you then refuſe me? quoth ſhe, well may you bee tearmed the worſt nurtured Prince in the world, in denying the conqueſt, which all your life time you might haue fayled of. You may ſpeake your pleaſure, anſwered the King, but I will do what is conuenient for your honour and mine, and not offend in ſo foule a manner. I ſhall, quoth ſhe, cauſe my Father to thinke himſelfe more iniuried by you, then if you grant what I deſire. So ſtarting from the bed, ſhe tooke the Kings Sword (euen the ſame which was afterward found with Amadis, when he was taken vp on the Sea) and drawing it forth, ſhe ſet the point againſt her heart, ſaying. Now ſhall my Fathers life be ſhortned by my death, whereof you are the onely cauſe. As ſhe vttered theſe words, ſhe offered to ſtab her ſelfe with the Sword: when the king ſuddenly ſtaying her hand and meruailing at her impatient loue, thus replyed. Hurt not your ſelfe Madam, for I am content to ſatisfie your will. Hereupon hee kindely embraced and kiſſed her, paſſing the night with her in ſuch ſort, as her hot deſire was quallified, and at that inſtant ſhe conceiued with childe: the King little thinking thereon, for the next morning he tooke his leaue of her, and the Countie, returning with all ſpeede he could into Gaule. But the time of deliuerance drawing on, and ſhe (deſirous to couer her offence) determined to goe viſit an Aunt of hers, whoſe dwelling was not paſt two or three miles off, and many times ſhe reſorted thither for her pleaſure. So taking no other company with her but a Damoſell, as ſhee rode through the Forreſt, the payne of trauaile made her alight from her Palfrey, ſhe being ſoon after deliuered of a goodly Sonne. The Damoſell that was with her, ſeeing what had happened, bringing the childe to the mother, ſaid. Madam, as your heart ſerued you to commit the offence, ſo muſt it now practiſe ſome prepreſent remedy, while I returne from your Aunt againe. Then getting on horſeback, ſhe rode apace to her Ladies Aunt, and acquainted her with the whole matter: which cauſed the old woman to be very ſorrowfull, yet ſhe prouided ſuccour for her Niece, ſending a Litter with all conuenient ſpeede, wherein the Lady and her childe were brought to her Caſtle ſecretly, euery thing being ſo cunningly handled, as the Countie neuer knew his Daughters fault. After ſuch time as theſe matters require, the Lady returned home to her Father, leauing her Sonne in her Aunts cuſtody, where he was nouriſhed till the age of eighteene yeeres, hauing Squires and Gentlemen attending on him, who daily inſtructed him in managing Armes, and all braue qualities beſeeming a man of value. He being growne of goodly ſtature, the old Lady brought him one day to the Countie his Grand-father, who gaue him his knight-hood, not knowing what he was: & returning againe with his motherly Nurſe, by the way ſhe brake with him in this manner. My Sonne, I am

certaine you are ignorant of your parenatge, but credit my words, you are the ſon to King Perion of Gaule, begotten on his daughtr that gaue you your order of knight-hood: endeuour your ſelfe therefore to follow your fathers ſteps, who is one of the moſt renowmed knights in the world. Madam, quoth Floreſtan, oftentimes haue I heard great fame of King Perion, but neuer imagined my ſelfe to be his ſon: wherefore I vow to you, being my long and carefull nurſe, that I will trauaile to fiude my father, and not make my ſelfe known to any one, till my deedes declare me worthy to be his ſon. Not long after, hee departed from the olde Ladie, and accompanied with two ſquires, iournied to Conſtantinople, which at that time was greatly vexed with warre, where he remained the ſpace of foure yeeres, performing ſuch haughty deedes of Chiualrie, as he was counted the beſt knight in all thoſe parts. When he perceiued himſelfe in ſome account, he intended to viſit Gaule, and make himſelfe knowne to the king his father: but comming into great Brittaine, hee heard the fame of Amadis to be maruailous, which was the cauſe of his ſtay there, to win ſome report by armes, as his bretheren had done, whom he longed to acquaint himſelfe withall. At length he met with them both in the forreſt, as you heard, and afterward combated with his brother Galaor, which cauſed their aboad at the Caſtle of Coriſanda, vntill ſuch time as their wounds were healed.
                  But now let vs returne to Amadis and Agraies, who ſtaied with faire Briolania fiue daies together, preparing their armour and euery thing in order: which being done, they ſet forward on their way, accompanied with Briolania, her Aunt, certaine waiting Gentlewomen, and ſquires to doe them ſeruice by the way. When they drew neere the Realme of Sobradiſa, they came to the Caſtle of an ancient Lady named Galumba, who ſometime liued in Briolanias fathers Court, and there they were welcomed very honouarbly: yet whether Briolania trauailed thus accompanied, the olde Lady Galumba could not chuſe but maruaile, which made her requeſt to be ſatisfied therein. Briolanias Aunt tolde her, how Amadis was one of the beſt knights in the world, and had promiſed to reuenge the murthered kings death: likewiſe how hee diſcomfited them that guarded the Chariot, and after-ward ouercame the reſt in the Caſtle, at what time the Lions eſcaped, as you haue heard. Galumba wondering at ſuch ſinguler proweſſe, anſwered. If he be ſuch a one as you make report, his companion muſt needes be of ſome eſtimation, and well may they bring your enterpriſe to end, conſidering the truth and iuſtice of the cauſe: but take heede leaſt the traiterous king worke ſome treaſon againſt them. That is the chcefeſt pointe of my fear, ianſwered Briolania, wherfore wee came to craue your aduiſe herein. Heereupon ſhee wrote a letter, and ſealed it with the Princeſſes ſeale at Armes, then caling a Damoſell, after ſhee had giuen her inſtructions, ſhe bad her make haſt in deliuering the letter. Preſently went the Damoſell to horſe-back, and trauailed ſo ſpeedily that ſhe arriued at the great Cittie of Sobradiſa, which the whole Realme tooke this name by. There was Abiſeos and his Sonnes, Dariſon
                     
and Dramis, and theſe three muſt the Combat be waged withall: for Abiſeos ſlew the Father of Briolania, by couetous deſire he had to the Crowne, which he euer ſince vſurped and held, more by tyranny then any conſent in the Subiects. The Damoſell entred the Palace on horſ-back, when diuerſe knights came to her, requeſting her to alight: but ſhe made anſwere ſhe would not, til ſhe ſaw the king, and that hee commanded her to leaue her Palfrey. Soone after came the king; accompanied with his two Sonnes and many great Lords, and after ſhee had ſaluted him, hee boldly bad her ſay what ſhe would. My Lord, quoth ſhe, I ſhall fulfill your command, on condition I may abide in your protection, and receiue no iniurie for any thing I ſay. By my Crowne, ſaid the king, I warrant your ſafety: whereupon the Damoſell thus began. Sir, my Lady and Miſtreſſe Briolania, diſinherited by you, greetes you with this letter, which may openly bee read before this royall company, and I afterward receiue anſwere for my diſcharge: whē the king heard openly the nāe of Briolania, remorſe of conſcience touched him with the wrong hee did her: yet was the letter openly read, which was to giue credit to the Damoſells words. The moſt of the Lords there preſent, who ſometime were ſubiects to the ſlaughtered king, ſeeing the meſſenger of their lawfull Queene indeede: pittyed ſhe was ſo vniuſtly diſinherited, and in their hearts deſired of God, to plague the treaſon done to her Father: Proceede Damoſell, quoth the king, and let vs heare your meſſage. My Lord, ſaid ſhe, by treaſon you murdred my Ladies Father, and vniuſtly keepe her from her inheritance: wherefore according to your former promiſe, which you haue not once but often times made, that you with your two Sons would maintaine by Armes, the right you pretend to haue in this Realme: ſhee ſends you word by me, if ſtill you ſtand vpon ſuch triall, ſhee will bring two knights hither, who ſhal in combat maintaine her cauſe, making you know your diſloyalty and treaſon committed. Dariſon eldeſt Sonne to the king, hearing his Father menaced in this ſort, grew into great choller, and as one moued with deſpight, he aroſe, when (without the kings conſent) hee thus ſpake. Damoſell, if your Miſtreſſe Briolania haue two knights with her, men reſolued to ſight on her behalfe: here do I accept the combat for my father and Brother, and if I faile, I promiſe in the preſence of all theſe Lords, to ſend her my head in requitall of her fathers, whoſe death was not accompliſhed without great reaſon. In ſooth Sir Dariſon, anſwered the Damoſell, you ſpeake as a knight of haughtie mind, yet may I doubt theſe words to proceed from choller, becauſe I diſcerne an alteration in your countenance: but if you will requeſt the king to confirme your ſpeeches, I ſhall thinke your proffer came from a heart of courage.
                  This anſwere Damoſell, quoth he, may you boldly make her that ſent you hither. Cauſe then his Maieſty, ſaid the Damoſell, to giue my Ladies knights aſſurance, that for any miſhap you may receiue in the Combat, they ſhall ſuſtaine no iniurie, nor be medled withall but by you three: And if you purchaſe them ſuch a ſafe conduct, they ſhall bee here within

three dayes at the vttermoſt, Dariſon falling on his knee before the King, ſaid. You heare (my Lord) the Damoſells demaund, and the promiſe I haue made before your Maieſty, in the preſence of all theſe great Princes and Lords: humbly therefore I beſeech you, ſeeing my honor is yours, that both you and all the reſt will confirme her requeſt, otherwiſe, to our great diſaduantage, the preſuming knights, who dare aduenture in the cauſe of fooliſh Briolania, will imagine themſelues conquerors, and vs diſmaide faint-hearted Cowards: hauing openly publiſhed, that if any one will touch your illuſtrious renowne for matters paſt, by the combat of vs three you intend to be purged. And albe it you would make them no ſuch promiſe, yet ought not we to refuſe them, for as I vnderſtand, they be ſome fooliſh knights of King Liſuarts Court, who by their ouer-weening and aſpiring thoughts, make high acompt of their owne deedes in the contempt of others. The King who loued Dariſon as himſelfe, though the death of his brother condemned him culpable, and thereby made him feare the combat: granted them ſafe conduit, according as the Damoſell requeſted for the two knights, and ſuch as came in their company. Here is to be conſidered, that the period of this traitours Fortune was now limited, and the iuſt auenger of all wrongs, pointed out rewarde for the treaſon of him acd his Sonnes, as in this diſcourſe may bee euidently ſeene.
                  The Damoſel ſeeing her meſſage had taken ſuch effect as ſhee deſired, ſaid vnto them: Make your ſelues ready, for to morrow without fayle ſhall this difference bee deſided. So mounting on her Palfrey, ſhe returned to the Caſtle of Galumba, where being arriued, before the knights and Ladies, ſhe reported her anſwere: but when ſhe told them, that Dariſon reputed them fooliſh knights of king Liſuarts Court, they were ſo offended, as Amadis entred into theſe ſpeeches. By God, there are ſuch in company of that good king, as can eaſily abate the pride of Dariſon, and humble his head ſo low as they liſt: but I thinke his choller ouer-maſtred him, when he vttered words of ſuch great indiſcrerion. Truſt me my Lord, anſwered Briolania, you cannot ſay or doe ſo much againſt theſe traytours, as they iuſtly deſerue. You know what vilanie they did to the king my Father, and how long time they haue diſinherited me · let pitty then preuaile on my behalfe, ſeeing in God and you I haue repoſed my ſelfe, with aſſured hope of ſufficient reuenge. Amadis whoſe heart was ſubmiſſe to vertue and all gentleneſſe, moued with compaſſion, ſaid.
                  Madam, if God be ſo pleaſed, ere to morrow at night, your ſorrow and ſadneſſe, ſhall be conuerted into pleaſure and content: herupon they concluded, to ſet forward very early the next morning, which made them depart to their chambers, except Briolania, who ſat conferring with Amadis on many matters, when often times ſhe thought to motion marriage between him and her: but ſuſpecting by his continuall ſighs, as alſo the teares ſtreaming from his eys, that ſome other Lady was cauſe of theſe paſſions, ſhe kept ſilence, and taking her leaue bad him good night. On the morrow they go all to horſe-back, & comming to the

Cittie of Sobradiſa, their arriuall was very welcome to many, who ſeeing the Daughter of their late ſoueraigne Lord, and knowing the monſtrous treacherie of his brother, they inſtantly deſired her proſperous ſucceſſe, becauſe they bare her ſinguler affection, Abiſeos remembring the wrong hee had done her, and his bloody treaſon ſo vnnaturally committed, ſeemed terrified in countenance, becauſe the worme of conſcience reuiued his heinous offence: yet hauing beene ſo long abſtinate and indurate in his ſinne, thought fortune would now aſſure his quietnes, and confirme his eſtate to continue in tranquility. But when he ſaw how the people flocked about her, not ſhewing any reuerence to him and his ſonnes, albeit they were royally accompained with Lords, hee exclamed on them in this manner. Ah wretched and bad minded people, I ſee what comfort you take by the preſence of this Girle, and how your ſences are caryed away with her: now may I well iudge, you rather could except her as your ſoueraigne, ſhe beeing a woman not capable of ſuch an office, then I that am a hardy knight. Her weakneſſe you may note, becauſe ſhee hath in ſo long time gotten but two knights, who are come to receiue an ignominious death, which in ſooth I cannot chuſe but pittie. When Amadis heard theſe taunting words, he was ſo enraged, as if the blood would haue guſhed from his eyes, and raiſing himſelfe on his ſtirrops, that euery one might heare him, hee thus anſwered. Abiſeos, it may bee eaſily diſcerned, that the arriuall of the Princeſſe is ſcant pleaſing to thee, in reſpect of thy horrible treaſon committed, murdering her father thy eldeſt brother: but if thou haue any feeling of vertue, & art repentant for thy foule miſ-deed, yeeld to her what thou haſt vniuſtly vſurped, ſo ſhall I diſcharge thee of the combate: prouided, thou aske God forgiuenſſe, and vſe ſuch repentance as beſeemeth a ſin ſo hainous, that by loſing honour in this world, thou mayſt ſeeke the ſaluation of thy ſoule hereafter. Dariſon prouoked to anger by theſe ſpeeches, aduanced himſelfe, & before his father had leiſure to reply, hee preuented him in this manner. Thou fooliſh Knight of King Liſuarts Court, hardly can I endure thy iniurous words to my father in my preſence: but I am content to defer them, till we proceede to the effect of thy demand, then ſhall I take ſuch vengeance for them as I deſire, for when thy heart ſhal faint in time of neede, weening to ſaue thy life by flight: if thou make not good haſt I will ſo chaſtife thee, as each one ſhall pittie thy miſerable eſtate. This is too long a proceſſe, ſaid Agraies, to defend thy fathers treaſon withall, goe arme thy ſelfe, and come to the combate as thou didſt promiſe, then ſhalt thou ſee if fortune bee ſo fauourable, to giue thee the victory which thou reckoneſt aſſured: if ſhe doe otherwiſe, perſwade thy ſelfe, both thou and thine ſhal haue the meed of your wicked derſeruing. Say what thou wilt, anſwered Dariſon, ere long thy iniurious tongue puld from thy head, ſhall be ſent to the court of thy maiſter king Liſuart, that ſuch as behold thy worthy puniſhment, may be afraid to hazard the like by their liberall language. So calling for their armour, the king and his two ſons were quickly armed, then mounting on horſe-backe, they went to the place

appointed for Combats. Where-upon, Amadis and Agraies lacing their Helmets, tooke their Shields and Launces, and afterward entred the field. Then Dramis (who was the youngeſt brother, yet a Knight ſo valiant, as two of the beſt in that Countrey durſt not deale with him in Combat) ſaid to his Father. My Lord, where your Maieſty and my brother are preſent, wel may I be excuſed from ſpeech, but now effects muſt ſhew it otherwiſe, by ſuch ſtrength as Heauen hath enabled me withall: therefore I deſire to try my Fortune with the Knight who hath ſo wronged you, and if I kill him not at the firſt taint of the Launce, neuer ſhall Armor come on my back againe: but if I meete him not ſo right as I deſire, he ſhall haue but little reſpite of life, for at the firſt ſtroake of my Sword, I will diſpatch him. Many heard the words of young Dramis, and eſteemed highly of his enterprize, nor did they greatly doubt the performance, conſidering what deedes of Armes they had ſeene him accompliſh. Now place they their Launces in their reſts, and Dramis prepared himſelfe againſt Amadis, who met him ſo full in the cariere, as his heart brake in his belly, and he fell to the ground ſo waightily, as if it had beene the fall of an Oxe. Get thee to all the Diuels, ſaid Dardan the Dwarffe, my maſter is very well rid of thee: but me thinks his threatning hath lighted on himſelfe, which commonly falls out ſo with ſuch great crakers. Agraies and Dariſon brake their Launces in the encounter, but no other harme happened betweene them as yet.
                  When Abiſeos ſaw his Son Dramis was dead, he was meruailouſly diſpleaſed, and intended to reuenge his death on Amadis, where-upon he gaue forth to meete him, and piercing his Launce thorow the Princes ſhield, gaue him a ſore hurt on the Arme, which made the beholders doubt, that Amadis could hold out no longer. If then the young Princeſſe Briolania was diſmaide, it were in vaine to demand the queſtion: for now her heart dreaded further miſhap: but he who could not be daunted with common wounds, drew the ſword which he recouered from Arcalaus, giuing Abiſeos ſuch a ſound greeting therwith on the head, as made him coutch his neck to his ſhoulders, and the Sword ſliding downe vpon his right arme, gaue him a wound to the very bone, by means whereof Abiſeos found himſelfe ſo diſtreſſed and amazed, that hee fell down from his horſe as it were in a Trance. Now did the people meruaile not a little, to ſee Amadis at two ſtroakes ouerthrow two ſuch puiſſant Knights, eſteemed amongſt them the beſt in the World: but Amadis beholding no other reſiſtance, returned to Dariſon who fought with Agraies, they behauing themſelues ſo manfully againſt each other, as the people thought they neuer ſaw a brauer combat.
                  At length Abiſeos recouered againe, and ſeeing his Sonne Dariſon in danger of his life, came to aſſiſt him, giuing Agraies ſuch a wound in the throate, as his Cozin thought he had beene ſlayne outright: But ſoone did hee requite Abiſeos for it, by ſeperating his wounded Arme from his body, euen the ſame Arme wherewith he killed the King his Brother, which made him fall downe dead to the ground, whereupon Amadis called to him, ſaying. Abiſeos,
                     
this is puniſhment in member, whereby thou didſt thruſt thy ſelfe into the Crowne, and now haſt receiued death according to thy deſert. Then hee turned about to helpe Agraies, but he met him with the head of Dariſon in his hand: whereat all the people gaue a great ſhoute, and humbled themſelues to Briolania as their lawfull Queen. This was the end of the wretched Father and his Sonnes, ſeruing at this day for an example to ſuch as ſhamefully vſurpe the right of others: which though they enioy for a ſmall ſeaſon, yet when the God of power letteth looſe his arrows againſt them, they fall into open and deteſted ruine. Let euery man therfore ſet before his eys that no euill remaineth vnpuniſhed, and the end concludeth theſe two principles, the eternall beatitude of the celeſtiall Soules, and the mercileſſe excruciaments of miſerable damned creatures.
                  Thus ſee you what lot fell to Abiſeos and his children, vſurping the kingdome by homicide and tyrany, euen by the death of his own naturall brother: therefore heauen repayed him with a miſerable end, by the conquering Sword of Amadis and Agraies, who dragged them along out of the field, demanding if any other would withſtand the right of Briolania. By one of the chiefeſt Lords in the Country named Goman, they were anſwered, ſhe had no more enimies to gaine-ſay her, which he teſtified with an hundred knights of his owne kinred: All the people being there ready to receiue their Queen Briolania, and do her homage as beſeemed faithfull Subiects. Here-upon Amadis and Agraies conducted the new Queene to the Palace Royall, where they were preſently vnarmed, and Chirurgeons commanded to attend their wounds: in meane while Briolania was confirmed in the regiment, by a generall oath of the Subiects taken to their Soueraigne, with ſuch ioy, as neuer was the like in Sobradiſa. But becauſe the two knights were very ſore wounded, and their hurts found to be ſomewhat dangerous, all ſports and paſtims accuſtomed at ſuch ſolemnity, were referred til the time of their recouery: which to compaſſe the ſooner, their lodgings were appointed in ſeuerall chambers, that none might trouble them with tedious talking, leſt a continuall feuer ſhould come vpon them. Notwithſtanding, Briolania, as one not ingratefull for the good ſhe receiued by them, would not depart from them eyther day or night, but onely at the time of repaſt: ſo that by her kinde and diligent attendance, the danger of their ſickneſſe was expelled the ſooner. See here the true and certaine hiſtory, for what is ſaid more concerning the loue of Amadis & this Princeſſe, hath been inuented and falſely faigned, according as I haue ſaid before: therefore we will ceaſe, ſeeing here it goes no further, vntill the contrary may apparantly be knowne, as in the Hiſtory following is declared.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XLIIII.
                  
                     How Galaor and Floreſtan riding toward the Realme of Sobradiſa, met with three Damoſels at the Fountaine of Oliues.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        GAlaor and Floreſtan being at the Caſtle of Coriſanda, as you haue heard, they ſoiourned there til their wounds were healed: afterward they concluded on their departure, to ſeek Amadis in the realme of Sobradiſa, deſiring they might come thither before the beginning of the cōbat, to haue part of the perill in fight, and glory in conqueſt. But when Floreſtan ſhould take leaue of his Lady, her griefe and teares vnſpeakable, able to mooue ruth in a heart of fl
                        •…
                     t, although Floreſtan aſſured her of his ſpeedy returne. Notwithſtanding all theſe mones, forward they ſet to the Realme of Sobradiſa: Floreſtan crauing a boon of his brother by the way, to wit: that he would not combate on the way for any thing which might happen, vntill he were able to hold out no longer. With much a doe he obtained his requeſt, & ſo rode they on foure dayes together, not meeting with any aduenture worthy the rehearſall: but toward Sun ſetting they met a knight hard by a Tower, who intreated them earneſtly to lodge there that night, which gentle offer they accepted, and entring with the knight, they conferred on many matters till ſupper was ready. The knight was of comely ſtature, & well ſpoken, but his countenance was ſo ſad & melancholly, as Galaor began thus to queſtion with him. Me thinkes Sir you are not ſo merry as you ſhould be, but if wee may any way help your penſiueneſſe, tell vs, and you ſhall finde vs willing to performe it. I beleeue aſſuredly, quoth their hoſt, that like good knights you would doe as you ſay, but my ſadneſſe is cauſed through extream loue, a matter not to be reuealed, and therefore the rather to be pardoned. So ſate they downe to ſupper, which beeing ended, Galaor, and his brother were condcted to their chamber, where they repoſed themſelues till the next morning: when mounting on horſe-backe, their hoſt would accompany them a little on the way, and calling for his Iennet, but putting on no Armour, hee rideth with them: this did hee to ſee what ſhould happen to them, becauſe in the way hee guided them, he hoped to ſee ſome proofe of their manhood, when if they were vanquiſhed or ſlaine, he might the more eaſily eſcape from them.
                  Not farre had they trauelled, but they came to a place called the fountaine of Oliues, becauſe in the midſt of the water grew three high Oliue trees. Heereby they eſpyed three beautifull Damoſels, and a Dwarffe ſitting aloft in one of the trees: whereupon Floreſtan ſaluted them very curteouſly, as one not to learne his behauior toward Ladies, then one of the Damoſels requiting his ſalutation, ſayd. Sir knight, if heauen haue endued you with as great bounty as comely perfection, no doubt but you are ſufficiently enriched. Faire Damoſell anſwered Floreſtan, if my outward appearance doth pleaſe you, my inward vertue you may try if you haue any need. You ſpeake ſo kindely, quoth the, that I will preſently make proofe of your valour, to ſee if you can carry mee hence from this place. In ſooth Lady, replyed Floreſtan, if of your ſelfe you

be willing to goe, I know no reaſon to the contrary why you ſhould not. Herewith he commanded the ſquire to ſet her on a palfray, which was tied (ready furniſhed) at one of the oliue trees: but whē the dwarfe behelde it, hee cryed out aloude. Come forth ſir knight, come forth, for here is one will cary away your friend. Preſently came out of a valley a knight brauely prauncing, & well armed, who ſaid to Floreſtan. What moues you ſir to touch my Lady? I cannot think ſhe is yours, anſwered Floreſtan, ſeeing ſhee entreateth mee to cary her hence away. Albeit ſhee would, quoth the knight, yet I thinke it not at this time ſo conuenient, becauſe I haue defended her from better then you are. I know not how well you haue defended, replied Floreſtan, but ſhe ſhall goe with me if I can helpe it. By God ſir, anſwered the other, you muſt firſt talk with the knights of this valley, and feele how ſafely they can keepe ſuch as they loue. So placing their Lances in their reſts, they ran couragiouſly againſt each other, the knight breaking his ſtaffe: but Floreſtan ſmot his ſhield ſo ſtrongly againſt his helmet, as the lace brake, and his head was bare, but worſt of all, he fel ſo heauily vpon his ſword, that with his weight brake in two pieces. Floreſtan finiſhed his carrire, hauing his Launce whole and ſound, when turning againe to the knight, hee ſaw that he moued neither hand or foote, wherefore punching him with his Lance vpon the ſtomack, ſaid: Pillard, thou art dead, if thou yeeld not. The knight being recouered frō his traunce, & beholding the preſent danger of his life, deſired mercy: which Floreſtan granted, ſo he would freely reſigne the Damoſell. She is at your pleaſure, replied the knight, but curſed bee the houre when firſt I ſaw her. For by her folleys ſhe hath oftentimes endangered my life, Floreſtan leauing him, came to the Damoſell, ſaying: Faire Lady, now you are mine. You haue ſo nobly won me, quoth ſhe, as I remaine at your diſpoſition. As they were departing thence, one of the other Damoſels thus ſpake: Alas ſir, will you ſeperate ſo good company? it is a yeere and more ſince wee haue liued together, and we would be loth now to depart in this manner. If you pleaſe to accompany her, anſwered Floreſtan, I can be content to conduct you together: and more I hope you will not requeſt, becauſe I meane not to leaue my conqueſt. I thinke not my ſelfe ſo foule, replithe other damoſel, but ſome good knight may enterpriſe as great an aduenture for me: mary it is to be doubted, whether ſuch hardineſſe remaine in you or no. Why Lady? quoth Floreſtan, thinke you that feare can make me leaue ye? I promiſe you on my faith, but that I would not forcibly cary you away, you ſhould preſently goe with me: but if your will be ſo good, let my ſquire helpe you vp on your hackney. Which ſhe did, & the dwarfe cryed againe as he did for the firſt, whereupon another knight came immediatly foorth, and alter him a ſquire bearing two Launces, the knight vſing theſe words to Floreſtan. You haue (ſir) already won one Lady, and (not c̄ontent with her) you ſeeke for another: but now in one inſtant you muſt looſe them both, and your head I doubt to keepe them company, becauſe you beeing of no better race, are vnworthy a Lady of ſo high calling. Thou vaunteſt very much, anſwered Floreſtan, yet haue I two

knights of my linage, whom thou, nor three ſuch as thou art, may bee thought worthy to ſerue. Thy cō
                     mendations extend very far, ſayde the knight, yet am I to meddle with none but thee, who haſt got a Lady from him that could not defend her: but ſhe muſt be mine if I conquer thee, elſe by vanquiſhing me, thou ſhalt be maiſter of them both together. Now thou ſpeakeſt reaſon, quoth Floreſtan: defend thy Lady well, or without doubt ſhee will fall to my ſhare. So giuing the ſpurres to their horſes, they committed this controuerſie to be tryed by the Lance, when though the Prince failed in the race, and the other brake his ſtaffe very manfully: yet (being angry at his miſ-hap) at the ſecond courſe he ſēt the knight ſo violently to the ground, as hee thought euery bone of him was broken in pieces. Thus was he ſafely poſſeſſed of the ſecond Damoſell, and very loth hee was to leaue the third there alone, but ſhee beholding their hoſt that conducted them thither, ſpake to him in this manner. My friend, I would aduiſe ye to bee gone, becauſe you know theſe two knights cannot reſiſt him will preſently come: then if you be taken, you are ſure to dy the death. Beleeue mee Lady, quoth hee, I meane now to ſee the end of all, for my horſe is quick of pace, and my tower ſtrong enough to defend me from him. Well, looke to your ſelues, ſaid the Damoſell, you bee but three, and one of you vnarmed, but if he were, it might not auaile him. When Floreſtan heard how ſhee praiſed him that was to come, he was more deſirous to cary her away then before, onely becauſe hee would haue a fight of him, and therefore bad his Squire to ſet her on horſe-backe as he did the other, when the Dwarffe in the oliue tree deliuered theſe wordes. Beleeue me Sir knight, in an euill houre came this boldneſſe on you, for preſently commeth one who will reuenge his companions. Foorth of the valley came a knight in gilt armour, mounted on a luſty bay courſer, the man reſembling a Giant in proportion, and reputed to be of incredible ſtrength. After him followed two Squires armed, each of them carying a hatchet in his hand, and ſo ſoone as he came neere Floreſtan, he thus ſpake. Stay knight & fly not, for by flight thou art not able to ſaue thy life, better is it for thee to dye like a good knight then a coward, eſpecially when by cowardiſe thou ca
                        •
                     ſt not eſcape. Floreſtan hearing ſuch menaces of death, contemning likewiſe a man of no value, incenced with anger, hee returned this anſwere. Monſter, Beaſt, Diuell, or whatſoeuer thou art, reaſon I ſee thou wanteſt: ſo little do I eſteeme thy prodigall words, that I thinke thou haſt no better weapons to fight withall. I greeue, ſaide the Knight, that I cannot haue my fill in reuenge on thee, but I would foure of the beſt of thy linage were here with thee, for mee to ſlice off their heads as I wil do thine. Look to thine owne thou wert beſt, anſwered Floreſtan, for I hope I am ſufficient to excuſe them, and bee their Lieutenant in this matter on thee. Thus ſundring themſelues, in rage and fury they met together, that the beating of their horſes hoous made the earth to groan and the breach of their Launces made a terrible noiſe: but the great knight loſt his ſtirrops, and had fallen to the ground, if by catching hold about his horſe necke hee had not eſcaped. As Floreſtan helde on

his courſe, hee caught a hatchet from one of the ſquires, wherewith he ſmote him quite beſide his horſe: and by time he returned; the Knight had recouered his ſeate againe, and the hatchet which the other Squire held. Now begins a dreadfull combat betweene them, ſuch cruell ſtrokes being giuen at each other with their hatchets, as though their helmets were of right truſty ſteele, yet they cut and mangled them very pittifully. Many times was Floreſtan enforced to ſtaggering, by the mighty blowes of his monſtrous enemy, yet at length the Prince ſmote at him ſo furiouſly as he was faine to lie along vpon his horſe neck, when redoubling his ſtroake betweene the helmet and the brigandine he parted his head from his ſhoulders. Being thus cōqueror of all the Damoſells, and they not a little meruailing at this ſtrange victory, the Knight who had beene their hoſt the night before, ſpake to Floreſtan. My Lord, this Damoſell haue I long time loued, and ſhe me with like affection, but for the ſpace of this yeare & more, the great knight (whom laſt you ſlue) hath forcibly detained her yet beeing now recouered by your worthy proweſſe, I beſeech ye Sir, I may enioy her againe. If it be ſo as you ſay, anſwered Floreſtan, my pains haue ſtood you in ſome ſteede at this time, but againſt her will, neither you or any other can get her from me. Alas my Lord, quoth the Damoſell, no one but he hath right to my loue, then ſunder not them that ſhould liue together. Nor will I ſaid Floreſtan, you are, Lady at your owne liberty, and may depart with your friend when you pleaſe. They both requited him with manifold thanks then taking leaue of Galaor & Floreſtan, the knight rides home ioyfully with his new conquered Lady. The other two Damoſells deſired the Princes to accompany thē to their Ants houſe which was not far off, Galaor queſtioning with thē by the way, why they were kept in ſuch ſort at the Fountaine, where-to one of the Damoſells thus replied. Vnderſtand my Lord, that the great Knight who was ſlaine in the combat, loued the Lady which your hoſt carried away with him, but ſhe deſpiſed him aboue all other, fancying no other then him who now enioys her. But in reſpect this knight was ſo puiſſant, as none in this country durſt contend with him, he kept her violently whether ſhe would or no, yet offering her no iniury, becauſe he loued her deerely, and one day among other he thus ſpake to her: faire Miſtreſſe, to the end I may compaſſe your gentle affection, and be eſteemed of you the only knight in the world liſten what I will do for your ſake. There is a Knight named Amadis of Gaule, accounted the onely man for valour this day liuing, who ſlew a Cozin of mine in the Court of king Liſuart, a knight of great fame called Dardan the proud: him (for your ſake) will I ſeeke, and by cutting off his head, conuert all his glory to mine owne commendation. But till I compaſſe what I haue ſaid, theſe two Ladies (meaning vs) and theſe two knights of my linage ſhall attend on you, and each day conduct you to the fountaine of Oliues, which is the only paſſage for knights errant through this Countrey: if any dare be ſo bold to cary you thence, there ſhall you ſee many braue combats, & what the honor of your loue can make me do, to cauſe the like opinion in you towards me, as your diuine prfections,

haue wrought in me to you. Thus were wee taken and giuen to the two Knights who were firſt diſmounted, and with them we haue abode the ſpace of one whole yere, in which time many combats they fought for vs, yet neuer conquered till this preſent. In ſooth Lady, anſwered Galaor, the knights intent was too high for him to accompliſh, becauſe he could not deale with Amadis, and eſcape the Fortune now fallen vpon him: but how was he named? He called himſelfe Alimias, quoth ſhe, and had not ouer-weening pride too much ruled him, he was a moſt gentle & courteous Knight. By this time were they come to their Aunts Caſtle, where Galaor and Floreſtan found gracious entertainement, the old Lady being very glad to ſee her Neeces, as alſo to vnderſtand the death of Alimias. After they had taken leaue of the friendly Ladies, they iourney toward the Realme of Sobradiſa, where they heard before they entred the Citty, how Amadis and Agraies had ſlaine Abiſeos and his Sonnes, by meanes whereof, Briolania ruled as a peaceable Queene, which news highly contented them, & made them reioyce for their happy fortune. To the palace they come vnknown of any, till they were brought to Amadis & Agraies, whoſe wounds were already indifferently recured, and they deuiſing with the Queene at her arriuall. Here you muſt note, how the Damoſell that conducted Galaor to finde Floreſtan, left them after the combat, and comming before to her Miſtreſſe, told her and Amadis, how Galaor and Floreſtan knew each other, and what iſſue their combat had: which made Amadis very kindely to embrace them both, and Floreſtan offered on his knee to kiſſe his hand, which Amadis would not permit, but cauſing him to ariſe, ſate downe & communed of their aduentures paſt. But one day among other, the new enſtalled Queen Briolania, after many honorable feaſtings ſhe had made thē, ſeeing theſe foure knights determined to depart, conſidering the good ſhe had receiued by Amadis and Agraies, & that ſhe (being before a diſinherited Princeſſe) was by their meanes reſtored to her Kingdome: beholding likewiſe the wheele of fortune turned, and how ſuch perſonages were not alone to aide and defend her Countrey, but puiſſant enough of themſelues to be Kings and mighty Lords: falling on her knees before them, firſt rendring thankes to God, who had done her ſuch grace as to regard her in pitty, continuing her diſcourſe, ſhe ſaid. Thinke my Lords, theſe mutations are the meruailes of the Almighty, which are admirable to vs & held of great accoūt, but to him they are (in manner) nothing. Let vs ſee if it be good then to ſhun Signories & riches, which to obtaine we take ſuch paine and trauaile, and to keepe, endure innumerable anguiſhes and diſtreſſe: as ſuperfluous therefore vtterly to deiect them, becauſe they are torments of body & ſoule, vncertaine and haue no permanence. As for my ſelfe, I ſay no, but affirme, that they being lawfully begotten, modeſtly vſed, & according to Gods appointment: they are in this world, reſt, pleaſure and ioy, and the way to bring vs to eternall glory.
               
               The end of the firſt Booke.
            
            
               
                  
                  A Table for the ready finding of the Chapters Contayned in this Booke, directing by the Number to euery ſeuerall Leafe.
                  
                     
                        CHAPTER 1. OF whence the Kings Garinter and Perion were, & the Combat betweene Perion and two Knights, as alſo how hee fought with a Lion that deuoured a Hart in their preſence: with the ſucceſſe following thereon. Fol. 1.
                     
                        Chap. 2. How the Princeſse Eliſena, and her Damoſell Darioletta, went to the chamber where King Perion was lodged. Fol. 6.
                     
                        Chap. 3. How King Perion parting from little Brittaine, trauailed on his iourney, hauing his heart filled with griefe and melancholy. Fol. 12.
                     
                        Chap. 4. How King Languines carried away with him the Gentle-man of the Sea, and Gandalin the Sonne of Gandales. Fol. 19.
                     
                        Chap. 5. How King Liſuart ſayling by the Sea, landed in Scotland, where he was greatly honoured, and well entertained. Fol. 24.
                     
                        Chap. 6. How Vrganda the Vnknowne, brought a Launce to the Gentleman of the Sea. Fol. 33.
                     
                        Chap. 7. How the Gentleman of the Sea, combatted with the guarders of Galpans Caſtle, and after-ward with his Brethren, and in the end with Galpan himſelfe. Fol. 39.
                     
                        Chap. 8. How the third day after the Gentleman of the Sea departed from King Languines, the three Knights came to the court, bringing with them the wounded Knight in a Litter, and his diſloyall wife. Fol. 43.
                     
                        Chap. 9. How King Liſuart ſent for his Daughter the Princeſſe Oriana, for that long before he had left her in the Court of King Languines: who ſent her accompanied with the Princeſſe Mabila his onely daughter, as alſo a noble traine of Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen Fol. 46.
                     
                        Chap. 10. How the Gentleman of the Sea fought the combat with King Abies, on difference of the warre he made in Gaule Fol. 55.
                     
                        Chap. 11. How the Gentleman of the Sea was knowne by King Perion his Father, and by the Queene Eliſen a his Mother. Fol. 60.
                     
                        Chap. 12. How the Giant bringing Galaor to King Liſuart, that he might dub himknight: met with his brother Ama. by whoſe hāa he would be knighted and by no other. Fol. 66.
                     
                        Chap. 13. How Galaor vanquiſhed the Giant at the Rock of Galteres. Fol. 76.
                     
                        Chap. 14. How after Amadis departed from Vrganda the Vnknowne, he arriued at a Caſtle, where it chanced to him as you ſhall reade in the diſcourſe. Fol. 81.
                     
                        Chap. 15. How King Liſuart cauſed a ſepulchre to be made for Dardan and his friend, with an Epitaph in remembrance of their death: and the honor he did to Amadis, after he was found and knowne. Fol. 91.
                     
                        Chap. 16. How Amadis made himſelfe knowne to King Liſuart, as alſo the Princes and Lords of his Court, of whom he was honorably receiued and feaſted. Fol. 100.
                     
                        Chap. 17. What were the aduentures

of the Prince Agraies, ſince his returne from Gaule, where he left Amadis. Fol. 108
                     
                        Chap. 18. How Amadis tarrying with his good will in the Court of King Liſuart, heard tidings of his brother Galaor. Fol. 206.
                     
                        Chap. 19. How Amadis combatted againſt Angriote and his brother, who guarded the paſsage of the valley, againſt ſuch as would not confeſſe, that their Ladies were inferior in beauty to Angriotes choyce. F. 122
                     
                        Chap. 20. How Amadis, was inchanted by Arcalaus, when he would haue deliuered the Lady Grindaloya and other from priſon: and how after-ward he eſcaped the inchauntments by the ayde of Vrganda. Fol. 131
                     
                        Chap. 21. How Arcalaus brought news to the Court of King Liſuart, that Amadis was dead, which cauſed his friends to make manifold lamentations and regrets, eſpecially the Princeſſe Oriana. Fol. 136.
                     
                        Chap. 22. How Galaor came very ſore wounded to a Monaſtery, where he ſoiourned fiue dayes attending his health, and at his departure thence, what happened to him. F. 141
                     
                        Chap. 23. How Amadis departed from the Ladies Caſtle, and of the matters which were occurrent to him by the way. Fol. 150.
                     
                        Chap. 24. How King Liſuart being in the chaſe, ſaw a farre off three knights armed comming toward him and what followed thereupon. F. 154.
                     
                        Chap. 25 How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays determined to trauaile to King Liſuart, and what aduentures happened by the way betweene them. Fol. 159.
                     
                        Chap. 26. How Galaor reuenged the death of the Knight, whom hee found ſlaine on the bed vnder the Tree. Fol. 164.
                     
                        Chap. 27 How Amadis purſuing the Knight that miſuſed the Damoſell, met another knight with whom he combatted, and what happened to him afterward. Fol. 168
                     
                        Chap. 28. How Amadis combatted with the Knight that did ſteale the Damoſell from him when he ſlept, and vanquiſhed him. Fol. 174.
                     
                        Chap 29. How Balays behaued himſelfe in his enterpriſe, purſuing the Knight that made Galaor looſe his Horſe. Fol. 176.
                     
                        Chap. 30. How King Liſuart held open Court moſt royally, and of that which happened in the meane time. Fol. 179.
                     
                        Chap. 31. How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays arriued at the Court of King Liſuart, and what happened to them afterward. Fol. 182
                     
                        Chap. 32. How King Liſuart departed from Windſore to the good Citty of London, there to hold open and royall Court. Fol. 185.
                     
                        Chap. 33. How King Liſuare would haue the aduiſe of his Princes and Lords, as concerning his former determination, for the high exalting and entertaining of Chiualrie. F. 191
                     
                        Chap. 34. How while this great and ioyfull aſſembly endured, a Damoſell came to Court, cloathed in mourning, requeſting ayde of King Liſuart, in a cauſe whereby ſhee had beene wronged. Fol. 195.
                     
                        Chap. 35. How King Liſuart was in danger of his perſon and his ſtate, by the vnlawfull promiſes he made too raſh and vnaduiſedly. Fol. 201.
                     
                        Chap. 36. How Amadis and Galaor vnderſtood, that King Liſuart and his Daughter were carried away priſoners, wherefore they made haſt to giue them ſuccour. Fol. 209.
                     
                        Chap. 37. How Galaor reſcued King Liſuart from the ten Knights that led him to priſon. Fol. 216.
                     
                        Chap. 38. How news came to the Queene that the King was taken: and how Barſinan laboured to vſurpe the

Citty of London many dayes, in which time ſundry great perſonages were there feaſted, the greater part whereof remained long time after-ward. Fol. 227.
                     
                        Ch. 41. How Amadis determined to goe combat with Abiſeos and his two Sons, to reuenge the kings death, who was father to the faire Briolania, and of that which followed. Fol. 230.
                     
                        Chap. 42. How Galaor went with the Damoſell after the Knight that diſmounted him and his companions in the Forreſt, whom when hee found they combatted together, and afterward in the ſharpeſt point of their combat, they knew each other. Fol. 235
                     
                        Chap. 43. How Don Floreſtan was begotten by King Petion, on the faire Daughter to the County of Zealand. Fol. 240.
                     
                        Chap. 44. How Galaor and Floreſtan, riding towards the Realme of Sobradiſa, met with three Damoſels at the Fountaine of Oliues. Fol. 248.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
THE SECOND BOOKE Of Amadis de Gaule.
                  CONTAINING THE DESCRIPtion, Wonders and Conqueſts of the Incloſed or Firme-Iſland: As alſo the triumphes and troubles of Amadis, in the purſuit of his fayreſt Fortunes.
                  Moreouer the manifold Victories hee obtained, and admirable ſeruices by him performed for King Liſuart: And his notorious ingratitude towards him, which was the firſt occaſion of the broyles and fatall warres that (no ſmall time) continued betweene him and Amadis.
                  
                  
                     Tranſlated out of French, by A. M.
                  
                  
                     LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OKES, dwelling in Foſter-lane. 1619.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT HONORAble, Sir Phillip Herbert, Earle of Mountgomerie; And Knight of the moſt noble Order of the Garter.
                  
                  
                     
                        AMadis, in his firſt Booke kiſſing your noble hand, the ſecond followeth to finde the like fauour, encouraged thereto by your euer knowne moſt honourable nature, and affable graces affoorded to the very meaneſt deſeruers. The third and fourth Bookes ſucceſſiuely enſue, to make vp the firſt volume of ſo famous an hiſtory; till foure more may in the like manner be finiſhed, to preſent themſelues to you their gracious Patrone.
                  
                     Your Honours euer to be commanded. A. M.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
THE SECOND BOOKE OF AMADIS DE GAVLE.
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  
                     The Deſcription of the firme Iſland. Who made the inchantments, and placed thoſe great riches which were found in the ſame.
                  
                  
                     THere was a King in Greece, who was married vnto the Emperours daughter of Cōſtantinople, by whom hee had two ſonnes, excelling in all perfection, both of body and minde. Eſpecially the eldeſt (named Apolidon) who was ſo well brought vp and conditioned, that hee found not his equall in any vertuous quality wherein he exerciſed himſelfe. This Apolidon ſtudied all ſciences, wherein he profited ſo much, that hee was not onely counted one of the beſt knights in the world, but alſo ſurpaſſed all men of his time for wiſedome: excelling them in learning, as farre as the moone exceedeth the ſtarres in light, and chiefly in the art of Nigromancy, by the which he brought to paſſe many great matters, which ſeemed beyond the capacity of men. Now was the King (father of theſe two young Princes) moſt mighty in lands, and wealthy in treaſure: but very weake in body by reaſon of his age. Wherefore knowing the end of his daies to approach, he would before his death, make partition of all his goods vnto his children, becauſe no contention or debate ſhould happen betweene them after his deceaſe. And for that end he appointed the kingdome to Apolidon, being his eldeſt ſonne and heire, the other he inueſted with all his riches, and moueable goods, among which there was many excellent bookes, of ineſtimable value. Yet the youngeſt nothing liking this partition, bewayled his eſtate vnto the King, beſeeching him moſt humbly to conſider, that his patrimony being ſo ſmall, hee was not onely left poore, but in a manner diſinherited. Then the aged father perceiuing the diſcontentment of his ſonne (being the thing hee moſt feared) was exceeding ſorrowfull, but yet would he not alter that which hee had done, without the conſent of Apolidon: who beeing aduertiſed thereof,

came vnto him, and in the preſence of his brother ſaide thus. It may pleaſe your Maieſtie, I heard within theſe few dayes that my brother is not content with that portion, which it hath pleaſed you to appoint vnto him: and therefore becauſe I knowe how grieuous the ſame is vnto you, ſeeing the brotherly loue betwixt him and mee likely to be broken: I moſt humbly beſeech your highneſſe, to take all that againe which it hath pleaſed you to giue vnto mee, and diſpoſe therof as it ſhal ſeeme beſt to your owne minde, for I ſhall thinke my ſelfe thriſe fortunate, to doe any thing that may breede your ſoules felicity, and very well apaid, with that which to him was appointed.
                  When the King behelde the bounty of his ſonne Apolidon, and the obedience hee ſhewed vnto him, hee was therewithall ſo pleaſed and exceeding ioyfull, that his ſoule (knowing it, could not leaue his body in greater contentment) fled vp into heauen: leauing his two ſonnes in ſuch friendſhip as he deſired. Notwithſtanding, after the body was buried, and all accuſtomed funerall rights ended, Apolidon cauſed certaine ſhippes to he rigged and furniſhed for the ſea, wherein being embarked, with diuerſe Gentlemen of his friends, ſeeing the winde and weather fauour them, he commanded the ankers to bee waied, and the ſailes to be let fall: the which were incontinently filled with ſo ſtiffe a gale, as in leſſe then one houre they were paſt the countrey of Greece. And yet Apolidon had not dertermined to bend his courſe vnto any certaine coaſt: but following his fortune, driuen by the winde, he diſcouered the Countrey of Italie, whereunto approching, he landed in a certaine port thereof. The Emperour Sindan beeing aduertiſed of his landing, ſent many great Lords vnto him, to requeſt him to come to Rome: where hee ſhould be as royally entertained as might be deuiſed. To which requeſt Apolidon willingly condiſcended, and beeing there already arriued, the Emperour receiued him with honor, yet although at his comming hee determined to ſoiourne no more then eight daies with him, hee changed his purpoſe, and remained there a longer ſeaſon: in which time he accompliſhed ſuch haughty deedes of armes, and behaued himſelfe ſo worthily, that amongſt the Romans he gained the reputation of the beſt knight in the world: and obtained the loue of a young Princeſſe, the onelie ſiſter to the Emperour, named Grimaneſa, the faireſt Lady then liuing. And although that their loue was alike, yet was this faire Lady ſo ſtreightly looked vnto, that neither could her affection bee ſatisfied, nor the common deſire of them both bee performed. Wherefore one day conſulting more priuatly, then they euer yet before had done, loue wrought ſuch a conſent in them, as they agreede to depart vnto ſuch a place, where they might without controle, enioy the fulneſſe of their content: ſo as what they ſecretly intended, they as ſuddenly executed. For euen as they had appointed it, ſo the faire Grimaneſa came forth one night to meete her loue Apolidon, who ſtayed for her at the water-ſide, hauing prepared ſhippes ready for their flight, and wherein they preſently embarqued themſelues. Then by force of the winde, they were in few dayes driuen to arriue at the foote of the Firme-Iſland, which

was then inhabited by a mighty Giant, whereof Apolidon and thoſe in the ſhip were ignorant. Where-upon thinking they were in a place of ſafety, came on ſhoare, and tents and Pauilions were ſet vp, wherein they might refreſh them: for Grimaneſa (who was not vſed to trauaile by ſea) was as wearie as might be. But at that inſtant when they thought themſelues moſt ſecure, the Giant which had diſcouered them, took them ſo ſuddainly, that Apolidon had ſcant ſo much leiſure, as to arme himſelfe: where-with Grimaneſa was ſo amazed, that ſhe was ready to die for feare: for the Giant taking her by the hand, ſaid vnto Apolidō. Baſe ſlaue, although I am not accuſtomed to be kind vnto any, yet am I content for this once, to ſuffer thee to fight againſt me alone, on this condition, that if thou be ouercome, this faire Lady ſhall be mine, and then afterwards I ſhall cauſe thee to bee hanged vpon the pole of this tent. When Apolidon heard that by fighting with ſuch a monſter, he might both ſaue himſelfe & his miſtreſſe: his hart was ſo great, as he thought it a very eaſie matter to ouercome him: and eſteemed himſelfe happy, that fortune had offered him ſo fit an occaſion, as to make known vnto Grimaneſa how much was his courage, and how great was his Knight-hood. Wherefore without longer delay the combate began betweene them, the which laſted but a while, for the Giant was purſued ſo valiantly, as hee fell downe back-ward. Then Apolidon ſtreight ſtepped ouer him and cut off his head. Which the inhabitants of the Iſle vnderſtanding, they all came and offered them-ſelues vnto him; becheeching him to remaine with them, and to bee their Lord and protector. Vnto this their requeſt he condiſcended: wherefore they conducted him with great triumph to the cheefe Fortreſſes of the Countrey, all which he found ſo well fortified, and furniſhed, as from that time forward hee nothing feared the power of the Emperor, if he ſhold attempt war againſt him for the taking away of his ſiſter. Afterwards by the perſwaſion of Grimaneſa he cauſed to be builded in that place, one of the faireſt places that was to be found in all the Iſles of the Ocian: the which he beautified ſo gorgeouſly, and furniſhed ſo righly, that the greateſt monarch of the earth would haue found it a very difficult matter to haue builded the like. But it chaunced that fifteene daies after his there arriuall, the Emperour of Conſtantinople (his vnckle) died without heirs of his body; by meanes whereof, they of the Countrey diſpatched Embaſſadors vnto Apolidon, to beſeech him to take vpon him the Empire, the which hee willingly accepted, being (as moſt men are) neuer contented with their eſtate, but ſtill deſirous of change, eſpecially of a pettie Iſland, for an Empire. Yet Grimaneſa ſorrie to leaue ſo pleaſant an Iſland, did moſt inſtantly entreat her Lord, that before their departure, (in remembrance of the pleaſure which they had enioyed in this Palace, the firſt witneſſe of the full fruition of their loues) hee would worke ſuch a meanes by his Art and great knowledge, that from thence forth, none might bee Lord thereof, except hee were as good a Knight as he, and as true in loue as hee was. Truely, Madame, anſwered Apolidon,
                     
I will doe more for your loue then ſo: for not onely no man ſhall enter into this Pallace except he be ſuch a one as you haue ſayde, but further, no Lady, nor Gētlewoman ſhall ſet her foote therein, vnleſſe ſhe be as faire, and excellent in all perfections as your ſelfe. Then at the entrie of an Orchard (planted with diuerſe ſorts of trees) he cauſed a vault to bee made: ouer the which hee placed the image of a man made of copper, holding a horne, as though hee would winde it: and vpon the gate of this Pallace he ſet vp his owne and Grimaneſa her picture, ſo artificially wrought that they ſeemed verie liuely: right ouer againſt which, he planted an high ſtone of Iaſper, and about half a bow ſhoot off, towards the garden hee ſet a piller of iron fiue cubits high.
                  Theſe things beeing in this ſort framed, hee asked Grimaneſa if ſhe knew what hee had done. No ſurely, anſwered ſhee. I will tell you then preſently ſayde Apolidon: aſſure your ſelfe Madame, that no man nor woman which hath falſified their firſt loue, ſhall paſſe vnder this vault: for if they aduenture to enter the ſame, the image which you ſee, ſhall blowe ſuch a terrible blaſt, & ſhall caſt through this horne, ſuch a flame, & ſtench, that it ſhall be impoſſible for them to paſſe on further: moreouer, they ſhall bee caſt forth with ſuch force, that they ſhall bee throwne downe and remayne in a ſwound before the vault. But if it chance that any loyall louer, man, or woman, doe aſſay this aduenture, the image ſhall ſound a tune ſo melodious, as it ſhall greatly delight the hearers: & there may ſuch faithfull louers paſſe, without any impechment. Furthermore, they may beholde our portraytures, & their own names writtē in this Iaſper, yet ſhall they not know by whom they were ingrauen. For tryall whereof if it pleaſe you, wee will proue the ſame forthwith. Then hee tooke Grimaneſa by the hand, and paſſing vnder the arch, the Image of copper beganne to ſound marueilous ſweetly, but when they came to the Iaſper ſtone, they beheld their names newly ingrauen therein, which greatly pleaſed Grimaneſa. And to beholde what would be the ſucceſſe of ſuch as followed them, they called certaine Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen to make tryall of the aduenture: but as they thought to haue paſſed thorough the vault, the Image blew ſuch a hideous blaſt, and caſt forth fire, ſmoake and flame ſo horrible, that they all fell downe in a ſwound, & were throwne foorth moſt rudely. Wherewith Grimaneſa began to laugh, knowing that they were in more dread then danger, thanking Apolidon moſt heartily for that which hee had done for her ſake. But yet my Lord, ſayde ſhe, what ſhall become of this rich chamber, in which you and I haue enioyed ſuch great cōtentment? You ſhall knowe by and by, ſaid hee. Then cauſed hee two other pillers to bee brought: one was of Marble, which hee had placed within fiue paces of the chamber: and the other of Braſſe, was ſet fiue paces before that. Afterwards he ſaid to Grimaneſa: Madame, henceforth there ſhall neither man nor woman enter into this chamber, vntill that hee who ſhall ſurpaſſe mee in proweſſe, and knight-hood, or ſhe which ſhall excell you in beauty bee firſt entered into the ſame: but when fortune ſhall bring hither thoſe which ſhall be worthy of a

place ſo excellent, all men after-wards, without any let may therein enter. Then he wrote vpon the piller of Braſſe, theſe words: Euery knight which ſhall make proofe of this aduenture, ſhall paſſe ſome further then other, according as they excell each other in chiualrie & courage. Vpon the Marble piller thus: Let no man aduenture to paſſe this piller to enter the chamber, except hee paſſe Apolidon in knighthood. And ouer the entry of the chamber: Hee which ſhall enter herein, ſhall exceed Apolidon in armes, and ſhall ſucceed him as Lord of this countrey.
                  Before any man could come neere the chamber, hee muſt of force touch the two pillers, & there trie his manhood. He likewiſe ordayned that they ſhould bee diſarmed which hereafter ſhould aduenture to paſſe vnder the arch of faithfull louers, if they receiued the repulſe: and that all ſuch ſhould bee driuen forth of the Iſland, as falſe and diſloyall men: but ſuch as were faithfull, ſhould bee entertertayned with all honour and ſeruice that might be deuiſed. Such as aduentured to paſſe the pillers to enter the forbidden chamber, if they did not paſſe the Braſen piller, they ſhould bee vſed neither better nor worſe then thoſe which were falſe in loue. If by chance they went beyond it, becauſe there ſhould bee a difference betweene them and the others, their ſwordes onely ſhould bee taken from them. And if there came any better knight which attayned not vnto the Marble piller, hee ſhould loſe but his ſhield: yet if hee paſſed on further, and entered not the chamber, his ſpurres onely ſhould be taken from his heeles.
                  And touching the Ladies and Gentlewomen, married or vnmaried, which ſhould proue the aduenture of conſtant louers, if they were repulſed, hee willed that they ſhould be conſtrayned to tell their names, that they might be written vp at the entry of the vault, with the iuſt number of paces that each of them had entred forward in the ſame.
                  When the time is come (ſaid Apolidon) that this Iſle ſhall recouer ſuch a Lord as is promiſed vnto it, theſe enchantments ſhall no more be hurtfull vnto any, and the place ſhall be free for all men: but yet it ſhall not bee ſo for women, vntill the faireſt Lady ſhall firſt be entred into it, who ſhall free the paſſage for all others. Then did hee eſtabliſh a Gouernour to receiue the reuenue of the countrey, vntill he ſhould come that deſerued it. And ſhortly after, hauing taken order for all his affaires, his ſhips being ready, they imbarqued, and had ſo faire a winde, that within fewe dayes they arriued in Conſtantinople, where they were moſt royally receiued.
                  But becauſe my meaning at this preſent is onely to continue the deeds of Amadis, I will leaue Apolidon to gouerne his Empire, to declare vnto you what happened vnto the ſame Amadis, and vnto them which followed him at his departure from the Citiy of Sobradiſa.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     How Amadis, Galaor, Floreſtan, and Agraies. hauing taken leaue of the faire Briolania, to returne vnto King Liſuart, were carried into the Firme-Iſland to proue the arch of Loyall louers, and the other aduentures in the ſame.
                  
                  
                     IN the end of the firſt Book you haue heard how Amadis and Agraies remained a while in the great Citie of Sobradiſa, vntill their wounds were healed that they receiued in the battell againſt Abiſeos and his two ſonnes: moreouer how Galaor & Don Floreſtan came thither afterward, & with what entertainmēt they were receiued. Now to continue our Hiſtory you muſt know, That not all the hurts which Amadis had, nor any dangers which hee doubted, no nor all the kinde entertainements of Briolania, were once able to expell the continuall remembrance of the beautifull Princeſſe Oriana forth of his mind: but as her rare perfections ſeemed continually to ſhine before his eyes, ſo did his deſire to beholde her againe, dayly increaſe. Thus hee endured an exceeding torment which the more he thought to hide, the more it appeared: yet was the cauſe thereof vnknowen, for euery one iudged diuerſly thereof, as a paſſion finely diſſembled, proceeding from ſome excellent thing, the which hee could well ſuſtaine but better conceale. In the end not being able to ſupporte this long abſence, which depriued him from the ſight of her, that wrought this his happie torment, hee with his friends tooke leaue of the Queene of Sobradiſa, with an intent to returne to the Court of King Liſuart. Notwithſtanding they had not rode farre on their way, but fortune offered them an occaſion of longer ſtay, as you ſhall heare. It happened that by chaunce comming neere vnto an Hermitage, they perceiued a Gentlewoman (accompanied with other women, & foure Eſquires) comming forth of a Church. Wherefore Amadis and his fellowes being deſirous to knowe what ſhee was, rode before and ſaluted her moſt curteouſly: and ſhee which was the chiefeſt reſoluted them, and demanded whither they were going, Gentlewoman ſayd Amadis, wee are going to the Court of King Liſuart, whither (if it pleaſe you, ſo that it be not out of your way) wee will beare you company. I thanke you heartily ſayde the Gentlewoman, my iourney is another way. But becauſe I thinke you be wandring knight, who commoly ſearch for great aduentures, I deſire to know if any of you will go to the Firme-Iſland, to behold ſuch ſtrange and maruailous things as there are to be ſeene. For I am the daughter of him that is Gouernour there-of, vnto whom I am preſently going. Faire Lady, anſwered Amadis, I haue oftentimes heard of the wonders of this Iſland, and I ſhould account my ſelfe happy if I might prooue them as I deſire, but I repent that I aduentured them no ſooner. By my faith ſayd ſhee, you neede not bee ſo ſory for your ſlackneſſe: for there

hath beene a number ſuch as you, who haue had the like deſire to aduenture themſelues, yet did they not thinke their comming thither ſo ſweete, as they found their departure thence ſowre. I make no doubt thereof replyed Amadis, becauſe I haue heard ſo much: but tell mee, ſhall wee goe out of our way any thing farre, if we followe you? Two dayes iourney at the moſt, anſwered the Gentlewoman. I beleeuee ſayd Amadis, that hee which will ſee the arch of loyall louers, muſt turne vpon the left hand and keep along the Sea ſide: vnder which arch no man that hath falſified his firſt loue, may paſſe. You ſay true ſayd ſhe, and you may alſo there behold many other ſights more ſtrange.
                  Then Agraies enflamed with deſire to ſee ſuch rare things, ſayd vnto his fellowes: My maiſters I know not what you meane to doe, but ſure I intend to accompany this Gentlewoman, if it pleaſe her, and I will prooue the wonders which ſhee hath tolde vs of. If you bee ſo loyall ſayde ſhee, that you may paſſe vnder the enchanted arch, you ſhall finde beyond the ſame, both many nouelties which will greatly pleaſe you, and alſo you ſhall beholde the Images of Apolidon and Grimaneſa, who built that wonderfull place: and that (which more is) you ſhall ſee your owne name written vpon a Iaſper ſtone, without perceiuing by whom it is done. All the better ſayde Agraies, I will if I can make the third that there hath entered.
                  When Amadis vnderſtood the determination of his Coſen, hee was deſirous to follow him, for he knew his loyalty to bee firme both in deed and thought, which by all likelihood did promiſe him the maiſtry of the adueneure, before all others. But yet hee diſſembled his intention, and ſayde vnto his brethren, My friends although we are not amourous, as is my Lord Agraies, yet me thinkes we ſhould for this once doe as hee doth, and keepe him companie. Let vs goe ſayd Galaor, and I hope that all will fall out as wee deſire, to our glory and our honour: heereupon they followed the Gentlewoman. Then Floreſtan, who had neuer before heard what the Firme-Iſland was, beeing alone with Amadis, ſayde vnto him. My Lord, I perceiue you know all the wonders of this place, whereunto wee are going, whereof I neuer heard any ſpeech, although I haue trauailed many farre countries. Truely anſwered Amadis, that which I know, I learned of a young Prince, my very good friend, named Arban of Norwales, who hath prooued many ſtrange aduentures, and chiefly theſe of the Firme-Iſland, which he could not atchieue, but was cō
                     ſtrained to returne with ſome diſgrace. This Gentlewoman dwelleth in the place, of whom you may vnderſtand as much as you deſire to knowe. Wherefore Don Floreſtan came vnto her, and intreated her very earneſtly, that ſeeing the length of their way miniſtered thē occaſion of conference together, ſhee would bee pleaſed to recite vnto him, all that which ſhe knew of the Iſland. I will very willingly declare vnto you (ſayde ſhee) that which I haue learned of ſuch, as by their owne reports were well acquainted with the place, and the wonders thereof. Then ſhee rehearſed the particularities of all that which hath beene before declared: whereat the

more they admired, the more were they encouraged to aduenture the enterpriſe of thoſe ſtrange things, wherein ſo many valiant men had receiued the foyle. Thus together they rode ſo long, that night comming, they were in doubt to go aſtray, vntill the moon began to ſhine: and then they knew that they were in a great meddow, in which they beheld many Pauillions ſet vp, and people ſporting all about them. Then ſaid the Gentlewoman vnto Amadis, Sir, becauſe I ſee my father, you may if it pleaſe you, come faire and ſoftly, and I will goe before to aduertiſe him of your cōming, that he may do you that honour as you deſerue. So ſaying, ſhee gallopped her horſe, vntill ſhee came vnto the tents, where ſhe alighted. Then ſhee tolde her father, how theſe foure knights had followed her, hauing a deſire to trie the aduentures of the Firme Iſland, which he vnderſtanding, came to meete them, and receiued them very courteouſly: afterwards hee led them vnto one of the Pauillions, where they reſted vntill their ſupper was ready. When they were ſet downe, the gouerner of the Iſle diſcourſed vnto them the aduentures of ſuch Knights and Ladyes, which had proued the arch of loyall louers, and the other nouelties thereof, vntill it was time to goe to reſt. Whereupon they all with-drew themſelues, and when day appeared, they mounting all on horſe-back, rode ſo long, that they came to a place which was in breadth no more then a bow ſhoot of firme ground, and all the reſt was water. And they went on in this ſtraight, vntill they came into the entrie of the Iſland, the which was onely fiue leagues in breadth, and ſeuen in length. There might they ſee the ſumptuous Pallace of Apolidon, whoſe gates were open: and as they drew neerer, they perceiued more then an hundred targets or ſhields, placed in three rankes, the moſt parte leaning againſt two poſtes, and tenne other nailed a little ouer them. But there were three which were very high aboue the reſt, faſtned vpon another poſt which ſtood forwarder then the firſt, yet did they likewiſe differ in height, for the higheſt was a faddom aboue the middle-moſt, and the middlemoſt was a cubit ouer the loweſt. Then Amadis demanded, why they were thus ranked. Truely, anſwered the gouernour, according to the vallour and knight-hood of thoſe which would haue entred the forbidden chamber, their ſhields are honoured: and theſe which you ſee neereſt the ground, belonged to ſuch Knights which could not come neere the braſen piller; but theſe tenne that are higher came vnto it, & they which ought theſe two other ſhields, which you ſee ſeperated and placed aboue the reſt, haue done more: for they haue paſſed the piller, yet could they not come neere the other of marble, as the other hath done, whoſe ſhield is therfore placed aboue theſe two, which are ſo much eſteemed. Then Amadis approched more neere to ſee if he might know any of them, for there was none of them, but had written vpon them the names of ſuch as heretofore did owe thē: and he caſt his eye vpon the lowermoſt of the three, which hung by themſelues ouer the other tenne: which had in a field Sables a Lyon Or, fanged and armed Argent, with a Cheife Gules: this hee knewe to boe the

ſhield of Arcalaus. Then hee beheld the two vppermoſt, the lower bearing in a field Azure, a knight Argent, cutting off the head of a Gyant, the which hee remembred to bee the ſhield of king Abies of Ireland, who prooued this aduenture, two yeares before that Amadis did kill him in Gaule. The third which was aboue all the reſt, had a fielde Azure, three Flowers, or which he could not know without reading the ſuperſcription, which ſayd, This is the ſhield of Don Quedragant brother to king Abies of Ireland, the which was ſet ouer all the others within theſe twelue dayes. For Quedragant behaued himſelfe ſo valiantly, that he came vnto the Marble piller, whereunto none other had before approached. He by chance paſſed by the Firme-Iſland, in ſeeking for Amadis, with an intent to fight with him, and to reuenge the death of King Abies his brother.
                  Much amazed was Amadis ſeeing the ſhields of ſo many good Knights, which had all fayled in their purpoſed enterpriſe, and hee greatly feared leaſt hee might performe as little as they. For this cauſe, hee and his company with-drew themſelues, to goe towarde the arch of loyall louers, the which was ſhewed vnto them. Agraies ſuddenly alighted, and approaching neere the forbidden place, hee with an indifferent high voice thus ſpake, Loue if e
                        •
                     er I haue beene conſtant, let mee now be remembred. This ſayde, hee paſſed on, and entred vnder the arch. Then the copper Image began to ſound ſo ſweetely, as it greatly reioyced the hearers: and Agraies ſtayed not, but went on vntill hee came vnto the Pallace where the pictures of Apolidon and Grimaneſa were, which ſeemed vnto him, as if they had been aliue. And he came neer vnto the Iaſper piller, wherein he beheld two lines written. The firſt contayned Madanil ſonne to the Duke of Burgoine, hath paſſed vnder the arch of loyall louers, and ended that aduenture. The other was the name of Don Bruneo de bonne mer, or of the lucky Sea, ſonne to Vaillades, Marques of Troques. Scant had he read the laſt line, but he beheld a third, which cōtained: This is the name of Agraies ſon to Languines King of Scotland. This Madanil loued Aquinda Counteſſe of Flanders: & Don Bruneo, Melicia daughter to King Perion of Gaule. When Amadis did ſee that his Coſen was entred without any let at all, hee ſayde vnto his brethren. Will not you proue the aduenture as hee hath done? No, anſwered they, for we are not ſo much ſubiect vnto this paſſion, that wee deſerue to make tryall of our loyalty. Seeing then that you bee twaine, keepe you one another company, and I will accompany Lord Agraies if I can. Then he boldly entered vnder the arch, and as hee paſſed, the copper Image ſounded vpon his horne another ſound, far more melodious then hee yet before had done. Moreouer, in ſtead of fire and ſ
                        •
                     inking flame, that it caſt forth againſt the diſloyall louers, flowers and ſweete leaues came forth of his horne, in ſuch abundance, that the place were all couered therewith. But for all this Amadis, ſtayed not, but paſſed on euen hard vnto the Images of Apolidon and Grimaneſa, the which ſeemed vnto him ſo well formed, as they wanted nothing but ſpeech. When Agraies which was entered before, perceiued him, he came to him and ſayde, My Lord

and Coſen, me thinkes we ſhould not hence-forth hide our loues from one another. But Amadis without any anſwere, tooke him by the hand, and walking together, they beganne to diſcourſe of the excellency of the place. In the meane ſeaſon Galaor and Floreſtan diſpleaſed with ſtaying ſo long for them, did intreate Iſania (the Gouernour of the Iſle) to ſhew them vnto the forbidden chamber▪ the which he did.
                  Whereupon Floreſtan ſayde vnto Galaor, my Lord, are you determined to try yourſelfe? No, anſwered hee, for I neuer deſired to prooue ſuch enchantments. I pray you then ſayde Floreſtan, to ſport you whileſt I haue tryed this aduenture. Then commending him-ſelfe to God, with his ſhield vpon his arme, & his ſword in his hand, hee marched right towardes the forbidden place. But he went not farre forward, when hee felt him-ſelfe layd at ſo ſore, and ſo often ouercharged with the ſtroakes of Launces and ſwords, as hee verily beleeued that no man was able long to ſuffer them: notwithſtanding bearing his head lowe (mauger all the reſiſtance) he marched forward, laying about him heere and there, but knewe not vpon whom. Yet he thought that which hee did hit, were ſo well armed, as his ſworde could in no ſort hurt them, and hee paſſed the piller of Braſſe, euen hard vnto the other of Marble, againſt the which hee fell downe, not being any longer able to ſtand vp: for hee felt himſelfe ſo wearie, and bruiſed with the forcible blowes which hee had ſuffered, that he thought he ſhould die. And in the ſame inſtant he was ſo rudely lifted forth of the place, that hee loſt all his vnderſtanding▪ wherewith Galaor was ſo diſpleaſed, that he thought himſelfe worthie of blame if he did not reuenge his wrong. And therefore hee betooke him to his armes, and ranne right vnto the forbidden chamber: yet his haſte was not ſo great, but that hee was as ſuddenly reſiſted & ſmitten,, and ſo violently layde at, as very hardly hee came vnto the Marble piller, againſt the which hee leaned, thinking to take breath. Notwithſtanding the ſtroakes which on all partes lighted vpon him, were ſo many and ſo waighty, that hee was inflamed with rage in ſuch ſort as hee went on ſomewhat further, hoping yet to withſtand them. Then did he imagine his enemies to bee ſo many, that for euery one blowe hee had before, he now thought that hee receiued twaine, ſo as his ſtrength quite failed him, and hee fell downe on the ground a great deale more weake then Floreſtan was.
                  All this while Amadis and Agraies beholding the pleaſantneſſe of the place wherein they were entered, perceiued a new writing in the Iaſper piller, which contained: This is Amadis of Gaule, the conſtant louer, ſonne to King Perion. At the ſame inſtant was Galaor throwne foorth from the pillars, wherewith the Dwarffe began to cry: Out alas, my Lord Galaor is dead. This voyce was heard of Amadis and Agraies, who preſently came forth to ſee what the matter was, and they asked the Dwarffe what moued him to cry ſo loud. My Lord anſwered hee, I beleeue your two brethren are dead, in prouing the aduenture of the forbidden chamber: for they haue beene ſo rudely repulſed, as ſee where they lie without moouing hand or foot.
                  
                     
Truſt mee ſaide Amadis worſe could not haue happened to thee. Then he went vnto them, and hee found them ſo ſorely bruiſed, that they lay ſpeechleſſe. But Agraies (thinking becauſe fortune had fauoured him vnder the arch of loyall louers, that ſhee would bee as fauourable vnto him againſt the perill of the chamber) without ſtaying to beholde his Coſens any longer, hauing his ſhield vpon his arme, and his ſworde naked in his hand, bearing his head lowe, hee ran right to the braſen piller, yet had hee not marched farre beyond it, when hee felt ſo many blowes, that hardly could hee reſiſt them. But his heart was ſo great, as mauger all lets, he paſſed euen vnto the marble piller, and there was hee conſtrained to ſtay, hauing no power at all to ſtand any longer vpon his feet, being ſo aſtonied that hee loſt his remembrance, and hee was as rudely caſt out as his Coſens had beene before, the which Amadis perceiuing, beeing much diſpleaſed, hee began to curſe the houre of that their fond enterpriſe▪ and approaching vnto Galaor, who was now come to himſelfe, he ſaid. In troth brother I perceiue I muſt of force followe, though I ſhould die therein. Ah my Lord, anſwered Galaor, it ſhould ſuffice you to take warning by our example, I beſeech you flie ſuch diueliſh forceries, for nothing but miſchiefe can come from them. Come what will, ſaide Amadis, accurſed may I be, if I faint in the matter. Then drawing his ſword, hee well couered him with his ſhield, and hauing firſt made his deuout prayers vnto God, hee cryed, O my deare Lady Oriana, from you onely proceedeth all the ſtrength and courage that euer I had: I beſeech you now not to forget him, who ſo conſtantly craueth your ayde and good aſſiſtance. Which ſayd, hee ranne ſo lightly towards the chamber as in ſpight of all impeachments hee came without taking breath, euen vnto the firſt piller, althought hee felt ſo many ſtrokes light vpon him, that hee did thinke hee fought with more then a thouſand knights together: yet his courage ſo much increaſed with the onely remembrance of Oriana, that there were neuer any knight before which could come neere him. Then was there heard the voyces of an infinite number, ſaying: If this knight do not end this aduenture, neuer may any knight performe the ſame. But for all theſe things hee left not to purſue his fortune, for the further he went, the more encreaſed his deſire to approach the chamber: ſo as notwithſtanding the force of the Diuels, or inuiſible company which gaue him many ſore and heauy ſtrokes, hee gained the entry of the chamber, from whence he beheld a hand and an arme couered with green woſted to come forth, which drew him in. And preſently there was heard another voyce, which ſayde: Welcome is the gentle knight that exceedeth him in armes, which eſtabliſhed ſo many maruailes in this place, who in his time was ſecond to none, but this ſurpaſſeth him, and therefore the ſigniory of this Iſland of right belongeth to him, hauing aboue all other deſerued it. He which had ſeene this hand, would haue iudged it to haue beene the hand of a very ancient mā, it was ſo withered: the which vāquiſhed away ſo ſoon as Amadis was entred into the chā
                     ber, where he felt himſelfe ſo freſh, and in ſo good eſtate, as if he had

receiued neither blow nor trauell in comming thither. Wherefore hee tooke his ſhield from his neck, ſheathed his ſword, and to Oriana he aſcribed the glory, for the great honour which he had gotten: for hee imagined that all his ſtrength proceeded onely from her, and no other. The moſt part of the Inhabitants in the Iſle, with many other ſtrangers had ſeene the proweſſe he had ſhowne, and how the hand brought him into the chamber: eſpecially hauing heard by the words of the voyce, the ſoueraignty of the countrey was attributed to him, for which cauſe they all reioyced very greatly. But none were ſo ioyfull as Galaor and his fellows, who in ſtead of emulation, (where-with they might wrongfully haue beene ſuſpected) they were all ſo glad of the good and honour of Amadis, as if the like had chanced particularly to euery one of them: and they cauſed themſelues to bee carried to him in the chamber, where they were thoroughly and preſently healed by the vertue of the place. Thither likewiſe came Iſania Gouernour of the countrey, accompanied with many of the inhabitants, who all did their duty vnto Amadis, as to their new Lord, vnder whom they hoped not onely to liue in peace and reſt, but alſo hereafter to ſtretch their Dominions euen ouer their bordering neighbours and further. Then euery one might view the rare deuiſes of this palace: amongſt which there was a wardrobe (whether Apolidon & his Lady did moſt commonly withdrawe themſelues) ſo beautifull and ſumptuous, as it was not onely impoſſible to make the like, but alſo it was thought very ſtrange and wonderfull, how any man might imagine that hee could build ſo rare a peece of worke: ſeeing that they which were within, might ſee what any man did without very eaſily, but they which were without could not perceiue any thing that was within the ſame. Thus was the firme Iſland conquered by Amadis, which had beene a thouſand yeeres and more without a Lord, ſince Apolidon had there ſet vp his inchantments: and the next day the people came from all parts of the Iſland to offer their dutie and homage vnto their new Lord, who receiued them curteouſly. I leaue you then to imagine whether Amadis had occaſion to be glad and content or no. They which haue oftentimes bin croſſed with aduerſitie may better iudge therof thē any others can: for they know how to beare, and when to bewaile their misfortunes, more orderly then ſuch who are accuſtomed with all proſperity & happineſſe. Neuertheleſſe I know not whether of theſe two extreamities are more cōmendable: for the one commonly draweth vnto it an intollerable vaine glory, and pride moſt damnable: the other a continual care fraught with deſperation, very dangerous. Therefore euery wiſe man (conſidering there is nothing parmanent) will neither bee proud with the proſperity that fauoureth him, nor appaled for any aduerſitie that befalleth him: but he will ſwim vprightly as in a calm Sea betweene them both, without abuſing the one, or affrighted with the other. The which Amadis could not doe, when inconſtant fortune made him taſte theſe poyſons, which for him ſhee prepared, euen in the midſt (as hee thought) of all his proſperities. And euen as ſhee beyond all meaſure fauoured him, (holding him vp by the

chinne) in all chances that hapned to him, without croſſing him in any thing whatſoeuer: in like ſort did ſhee turne her face from him, and brought him into ſuch perplexity and ſorrow, that neither force of armes, the continuall remembrance of his Lady, nor the magnanimitie of his heart were once ſufficient to procure him remedy: but onely the grace, and mery of our Lord God (who in pittie regarded him) after hee had ſometime remained in the rocke of aduerſitie in ſorrow and tribulatiou, as you may vnderſtand: from the which hee deliuered him, and placed him in greater eaſe, and contentment then before, as by the ſequel of this hiſtorie you ſhall perceiue.
                  You haue heard in the firſt booke of Amadis, in what anguiſh the Princeſſe Oriana was, for the falſe report of Ardan the Dwarffe, at ſuch time as hee returned backe from his maiſter, to fetch the pieces of the ſword, which Gandalin had forgotten behinde him at his departure from the Court: and how ſhe ſoſtered vp in her minde the hate, which ſhe had conceiued againſt Amadis, not being able to accept any councell either from Mabila or the Damoſell of Denmarke, wrongfully ſuſpected him of falſhood, who thought on nothing but only how he might ſerue and honour her with all faithfulneſſe. Now it reſteth to ſhew vnto you what happened thereof. Know you then that from the day, wherein this ielouſie was firſt imprinted in her, it increaſed in ſuch ſort, as it wholly made her forget her accuſtomed manner of life, thinking thence forth on nothing ſo much, as how ſhe might ſufficiently reuenge her on Amadis, who had (as ſhe thought) ſo grieuouſly offended her. And hereupon ſeeing hee was abſent, and that ſhee could not declare vnto him by word of mouth, the anguiſh of her ſoule, ſhee determined to let him vnderſtand it by writing. So as one day amongſt others, beeing alone in her chamber, ſhee tooke pen in hand and writ this letter which enſueth.
                  
                     
                        The letter of the Princeſſe Oriana to Amadis.
                        
                        
                           MY intolerable paſſions proceeding from ſo many cauſes, compelleth my weake hand to declare by this letter, that, which my ſorrowfull heart can no longer 
                                 〈◊〉
                               from thee Amadis of Gaule, moſt diſloyall, and pertured louer-For ſieing the diſloyaltie and inconſtancie wherewith thou haſt abuſed mee (who am infortunate, and fruſtrate of all good ha
                                 •
                              , onely in louing thee abone all things in the world) which is now very apparent, cheefely in that ſowrongfully thou forſookeſt vs to go with her, who (conſidering her young yeeres and indiſcretion) cannot haue that kindeneſſe in her either to fauour or entertaine thee: I haue alſo determined for euer, to baniſh from mee, this exceeding loue which I did bare vnto thee, ſeeing my ſorrowfull heart can finde no other reuenge. And although I would take in good part the wrong which thou profereſt me, yet ſhould it bee a great folly for mee to deſire the welfare of ſuch an vnthankfull man, for the faithfull louing of whom, I hate both my ſelfe & all other things. Alas I now perceiue very well (but it is too late) that moſt vnluckely I enthraled my liberty, to a perſon ſo ingratefull, ſeeing that in recompence of my continuall ſighs and paſſions. I finde my ſelfe deceiued, and ſhamefully

abuſed. wherefore I charge thee neuer to come in my preſence, nor vnto any place where I doe remayne: & be thou aſſured that I neuer loued thee ſo exceedingly, but now by thy ill deſerts I hate thee farre more extreamely. Packe thee henceforth elſe where, and try if thou canſt with thy falſified faith and hony ſpeech, abuſe others as vnhappy as my ſelfe: and neuer hope that hereafter any of thy excuſes ſhall preuatle with mee: but without further deſire to behold thee, I will bewaile the reſt of my ſorrowfull life, with aboundance of teares, the which ſhall neuer ceaſe but by the end of
                        
                        
                           Her who forceth not to die, but onely becauſe thou art her murderer.
                        
                     
                  
                  This Letter being ſealed, Oriana called a young Eſquire brother to the Damoſell of Denmarke, in whom ſhee greately truſted, and commanded him very expreſſely, without ſtaying one onely houre, that hee ſhould goe finde out Amadis in the Realme of Sobradiſa, and then preſently deliuer this Letter which ſhee had written to him: but chiefly that hee ſhould marke his countenance whilſt he read the ſame, and that he ſhould bring backe no anſwere, though Amadis would giue it him.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     How Durin departed to goe toward Amadis, vnto whom hee deliuered the Letters from Oriana, and what hurt happened thereby.
                  
                  
                     WHen Durin had at large vnderſtood the will of the Princeſſe, he mounted on horſe backe, and haſted him ſo well that the tenth day following, hee arriued in the great City of Sobradiſa, where hee found the new Queene Briolania, whom hee thought to be the faireſt Lady that euer he had ſeene, except the Princeſſe Oriana. Then did he tell her how he was come to ſeek Amadis, but ſhee tolde him, that now two whole dayes were paſſed ſince hee and his fellowes were departed towards Great Brittaine, ſince which time, ſhe heard that they had taken their way vnto the Firme-Iſland. Whereupon Durin without any longer ſtay, tooke leaue of her, and rode ſo long, that he arriued in the Iſland the ſame houre that Amadis entred vnder the arch of Loyall louers, where hee beheld how the Image had done more for him, then for any other knight that euer entered the ſame before, as it was tolde him. Now as Amadis together with Agraies returned to the ſuccour of his brethren, Durin thought to haue ſpoken with him, but Gandalin entreated him to ſtay vntill he had tred the perill of the forbiden chamber, beeing aſſured that he brought Letters to him frō 
                     Oriana, the which perchance might haue been a meane (as he thought) to cauſe him either to forſlow or to faile in the achieuing of ſo great an enterpriſe: for Amadis was ſo ſubiect to the Princeſſe, as hee would not only haue left off the conqueſt of the Firme-Iſland, but alſo of the whole world beſide, if ſhe had cō
                     manded. Wherefore after hee had

finiſhed al the ſtrange aduentures, and the inhabitants of the Iſle had receiued him for their Lord, Durin came before him. Then Amadis demanded of him, what newes was in the Court of King Liſuart. My Lord, anſwered Durin, I left it euen in the ſame eſtate that it was in at your departure. And as he would haue proceeded in his ſpeech, Amadis tooke him by the hand, and went with him alone into a very pleaſant Orchard, where they walked together: then he demanded how he came to the Firme-Iſland. My Lord, ſaid he, my Lady Oriana ſent me vnto you, for ſuch affaires as in this letter you ſhal vnderſtād, the which he gaue vnto him. Amadis tooke it, and without changing his cheere, he turned his face from Durin, becauſe hee ſhould not beholde his colour alter, for his heart began to leap with great ioy, ſo as he knew not wel how to ſet his coutenance. But this ſudden mutation was as ſoone changed into a great deſpare, becauſe, that reading theſe rigorous lines, which pronounced his baniſhment, it ſtroke ſo great ſorrow to his heart, as hee was no longer able to diſſemble his griefe, but burſt out into ſuch vehement weeping, that hee was all drowned in teares. Then Durin repented that euer hee was the bringer of ſuch heauie letters, for although the contēts thereof were vnknown vnto him, yet becauſe he knew not how to remedy it, hee durſt not come neere Amadis, who was ſo confounded, as hee fell proſtrate on the ground, and in falling, the letters which hee helde, did fall foorth of his hand. Notwithſtanding, he preſently tooke them vp, and began to reade them againe: for the beginning had ſogreatly troubled him, that he had not yet ſeene the end. But caſting his eye vpon the ſuperſcritiō, which contained theſe words. She who forreth not to die, but onely becauſe then art her murtherer. Hee then fetched ſo deepe a ſigh, as if his ſoule had parted from his body, and therewithall fell downe back-ward. Where-with Durin was greatly amazed, & ran ſpeedily to helpe him, but hee found him to moue no more then a dead man. Wherefore fearing ſome greate inconuenience, hee thought to haue called Galaor, or ſome other, yet fearing that thereby he might be blamed, he ſtaed, & comming vnto Amadis, lifted him vp, who cryed. Oh heauens, why do you thus ſuffer mee to die, and haue not deſerued it? Alas Loyaltie, what recompence dooſt thou offer thoſe that neuer offended thee, now I ſee my ſelfe forſaken of her, for whoſe ſake I would rather ſuffer a thouſand deathes, then one of her commandements by mee ſhould be diſobeied. Then pittifully looking vpon the letter, which he had in his hand, he ſayde Ah happy letter, becauſe thou wert written by the excellenteſt perſonage this day liuing, and yet moſt vnhappy, in that thou procureſt the cruell death of the trueſt louer that euer ſerued Lady, which death that it may bee the ſooner, I will neuer forſake thee, but will place thee in the neereſt & deereſt place that I haue. So hee put it in his boſome, and asked Durin if hee had ought elſe to ſay? No, anſwered he. Well then, ſaide Amadis, thou ſhalt preſently returne with my anſwere. In good ſooth my Lord, anſwered Durin, ſhee hath expreſly forbidden me to receiue any. And what, did not Mabila nor thy ſiſter wil thee to ſay any thing to me? No my Lord, anſwered he, for they

knew not of my departure, becauſe my Lady ſtrictly charged mee to acquaint no body therewith. Ah God, ſayd Amadis, I ſee well now, that my miſery is voyd of remedy. Then he roſe vp and went to a riuer which paſſed along by the garden, where hee waſhed his eyes, which done, he willed Durin to call Gandalin, and that hee ſhould come back againe with him alone, which hee did: but at their returne they found him in a ſwound againe, yet recouering incontinent, and ſeeing Gandalin, he ſaid. Friend I am vndone, therefore go ſeeke out Iſania the Gouernour of this Iſle & bring him hither alone. Then Gandalin ran for him and ſtaied not long vn till they returned together: who being come, Amadis ſaid vnto him, Iſania you know the oath you haue ſworne vnto me, & the duty wherein you are vnto mee bound, notwithſtanding, I pray you yet to promiſe me as you are true knight, to keep ſecret whatſoeuer you ſhal ſee me doe, vntill to morrow morning after my brethren haue heard diuine ſeruice, and then ſecretly goe thou and cauſe the gate of this Caſtle to be opened, which being done, let Gādalin bring thither my horſe & armour, but take heed that none perceiue it, and I will follow ſtraight after thee: they were no ſooner departed from him, but he began to remēber a dream which he had the night before, wherein he thought that being armed, and ſet vpon his horſe hee was on the higheſt part of a peece of land enuironed with diuerſe ſorts of trees, and that round about him were many perſons ma
                        •
                     ing the greateſt ioy in the world, then one of them preſented him with a box, ſaying. Sir taſte of that which is herein: which he did, and hee thought hee did eate of a moſt bitter meat. And as hee caſt it from him, the raines of his horſe did breake, whereupon the horſe ran vp and downe ſo that he was not in any ſort able for to ſtay him. When he ſaw he was ſo farre from this merry company, he looked backe, and hee thought that hee beheld their great mirth changed into ſuch exceeding mone, as it greatly pitttied him, & willingly would he haue returned backe to aſſawage their ſorrow, if hee could haue maſtered his horſe, who at that inſtant entred into a tuft of trees, where hee found a rocke enuironed with water, againſt the which the horſe ſtayed. Then hee alighted for the great deſire he had to reſt him, and vnarmed himſelfe: herewithall he beheld a very aged man clothed with a religious habit, who tooke him by the hand as if he had pittied his trauaile, & ſpake to him certain words in a ſtrange language which he did not vnderſtand: & being in this trouble he awaked. Vpon this dreame Amadis muſed a great while, thinking that oftentimes they foreſhow ſome thing that followeth, becauſe he did ſee part of that which hee had dreamed to fall out. Thus hee came to the gate where Gandalin and Iſania ſtayed his with furniture, & there armed himſelfe: afterwards he mounted vpon his horſe, keeping neither way nor path vntill he came neere vnt an Hermitage, then he demanded of Iſania what place that was: My Lord anſwered hee, this Chappel is dedicated to the Vrgin Marie, wherein oftentimes are diuerſe ſtrange miracles wrought. For which cauſe Amadis allighted from his horſe, entred into the Church, and kneeling downe with great deuotion, hee made his prayers to

God. The which being ended, hee roſe vp, & called Gandalin to him, whom he held a long time embraced in his armes, not being able to ſpeake one word, yet in the end he thus ſaid vnto him. My deere Gandalin, thou and I haue beene foſtered vp with one milke, and alwaies brought vp together, and I neuer felt any paine or ſorrow, wherein thou haſt not had thy part: Thy father tok me vp in the ſea, whē I was yet but a ſmall thing, beeing but newly borne the very night before, afterward he cauſed thy mother to cheriſh mee as tenderly as if I had their deerieſt childe. Now haue I oftentimes tried thy loyalty, knowing very wel what ſeruice thou haſt done for me, the which I did hope in time with the fauour of God to haue recompenſed, but this great miſ-fortune is fallen vpon me, the which I feele more ſharpe and cruell then death it ſelfe, eſpecially ſeeing I am conſtrained to forſake thee, hauing no other thing to beſtow vpon thee, but the Iſle which I haue newly conquered, which I do giue thee, commanding Iſania, with my other ſubiects (vpon that faith and homage which they haue ſworne vnto me) to receiue thee as their Lord, ſo ſoone as they ſhall be aſſured of my death. Yet is it my wil that thy father and mother ſhal enioy the ſame, during their liues, and afterwards it ſhall remaine vnto thee: which is in recompence of the good I haue receiued of thē, whom I thought to haue better rewarded, according to their deſerts and my deſire. And as for you, Lord Iſania, I pray you that of the fruits and reuenues of this Iſle, which of long time you haue had in your keeping, you ſhould build here in this place a Moneſtarie, in the honor of the virgin Mary, and to endow it with ſo much liuing, as thirtie religious men may hence-forth liue vpon the ſame. Ah my Lord, ſaid Gandalin, I neuer forſooke you for any trauaile or perill which hitherto you haue ſuffered, neither yet will I leaue you if God be pleaſed: and if you dye, I will not liue after you, neither for all the world will I loſe you. Therefore you may (if it pleaſe you) beſtowe this gift vpon my Lords your brethren, ſeeing I will not haue it, neither do I deſire it in any ſort. Holde thy peace, ſaid Amadis, let me heare theſe words no more, vnleſſe thou deſireſt to diſpleaſe me: but do as I would haue thee: for my bretheren may prouide far greater liuings for thē and their friends, then this ſmall thing which I doe giue vnto thee. But touching you, my deere friend Iſania, it very greatly grieueth me that I haue not the means to gratulate you according to your deſerts: notwithſtanding, I leaue you amongſt ſo many of my good friends, as they ſhall ſupply that which I cannot. I pray you my Lord, anſwered hee, ſuffer mee onely to accompany you, that I may be partaker of any wealth or woe that ſhall happen to you: Wherein you ſhall fully ſhew mee your loue, and I reſt ſatisfied to my liking. My deere friend, ſaide Amadis, I doubt not but that you would follow with a good will, notwithſtanding my miſeric is ſo exceſſiue, as beſides my maker, none can eaſe it: whome onely I humbly beſeech to bee my conductour, for I will haue no other companion. And therefore Gandalin if thou deſireſt Knight-hood, holde take it preſently with my armour, which I doe giue thee, for ſince thou haſt heeretofore

ſo well kept them, it is reaſon they ſhould now ſerue thee, conſidering how little I ſhall hereafter need them: if not, thou maieſt receiue this honour of my brother Galaor, vnto whom my Lord Iſania here, ſhall in my behalfe make requeſt to the ſame ende: and I entreate thee to ſerue him, euen as faithfully as thou haſt ſerued mee. For my loue vnto him is ſo great, as amongſt all my moſt afflictions I ſhall bewaile his abſence, becauſe I haue euermore foūd him an hūble obedient & a louing brother. You ſhall further requeſt him, to take into his ſeruice Ardan my Dwarffe whom I recommend vnto him, & to the Dwarffe ſay, that I will him to ſerue my brother dilligently. This ſayd, both hee and thoſe to whom he ſpake burſt forth into aboundance of teares, & comming vnto them he embraced them, ſaying: Now my friends, ſeeing I neuer hope to ſee you any more, I entreate you to pray to God for mee, and vpon your liues, I charge you that none of you doe follow mee. Then hee got vpon his horſe, ſet ſpurres to his ſides, and galloped from them, remembring not at his departure to take either Launce, ſhield, or helmet with him. Thus he entred into a deſert place at the foot of a mountaine, taking no other way but whither his horſe would carry him, and ſo long hee rode vntill the moſt parte of the night was now ſpent, when the horſe entred into a little brook enuironed with many trees, where he would haue drunken. But as hee paſſed on further, Amadis was ſtrucken on the face with certaine branches of trees, ſo rudely as it wakened him out of his ſtudy, and therewithall looking vp, hee perceiued that hee was in a couert and ſolitary place, beſet with ſtore of thick buſhes, which greatly reioyced him, becauſe hee thought hee ſhould very hardly bee found out in this thicket. There he alighted, tyed his horſe, and ſate him downe vpon the graſſe, the better to meditate vpon his melancholy: but hee had wept ſo long, and his braines were ſo light, that at the laſt hee fell aſleepe.
               
               
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     How Gandalin and Durin followed the ſame way that Amadis had taken, brought the reſt of his armour which he had left behinde, then found him ſleeping, & how he fought againſt a Knight whom he did ouercome.
                  
                  
                     
                        AMadis beeing departed, Gandalin who remayned in the Hermitage with Iſania & Durin, as you haue heard, began to make the greateſt lamentation in the world, and ſaid. Although he hath forbidden mee to follow him, yet will I not ſtay for any thing behinde him, at leaſt I will carry him his armour. I will gladly beare you companie for this night, ſayd Durin. I would to God we might finde him in better caſe then hee was at his departure. Then they tooke their leaue of Iſania, and getting to horſe-backe, they followed the ſame way that Amadis had tooke, coaſting heere and there about the wood, ſo long till fortune brought them where hee lay. When his horſe ſented

their horſes, hee began to neigh, whereby Gandalin knew his Maſter was not farre off, wherefore the more ſecretly to behold his countenance, hee allighted, comming ſo neere vnto him as he might eaſily behold where he ſlept hard by the riuer ſide: whereupon he ſtood cloſe, watching when he ſhould awake, & he had not ſtaied long before his ſlumber left him. Then he ſuddenly ſtarted vp as if hee had been frighted. At that inſtant was the Moon withdrawne by the daies approach, yet ſate hee ſtill on the graſſe, beginning his moane in a moſt ſtrange and pittifull manner, and bitterly weeping, he burſt out into theſe words. Alas fortune too inconſtant & ſickle, why haſt thou firſt aduanced mee, and afterwards ouerthrowne me. Now I well perceiue, thou canſt doe more hurt in one houre, then thou wilt do good in a thouſand yeares, for if heretofore thou haſte giuen me any pleaſure or ioy, thou haſt now in a moment cruelly robbed me of all, leauing me in bitter tormēts far worſe then death: and ſeeing thou waſt minded ſo to ſerue mee, why haſt thou not at the leaſt made the one equal with the other? becauſe thou knoweſt that if heeretofore thou didſt beſtow vpon me any contentment, yet was it euermore mingled with great ſorrowe. In like ſort ſhouldſt thou reſerue for me ſome ſparke of hope, with this cruelty wherewith thou now tormenteſt me, executing vpon me an incomprehenſible thing, in the thought of thoſe whom thou fauoureſt: who becauſe they feele not this miſchiefe, doe thinke thoſe riches, glories, and honours which vnto them thou lendeſt, to bee euerlaſting. But they forget, that beſides the troubleſom trauels which their bodies doe ſuffer for the keeping thereof, how their ſoules are in danger to periſh therefore. For by thy flatteries & wanton intiſemēts, thou vtterly ouerthroweſt them, & in the end compelleſt them to enter into the labyrinth of all deſolation, from whence they are neuer able to depart. And quite contrary are thy aduerſities, for ſo much as if a man doe reſiſt thē patiently, flying greedy couetouſnes, & diſordinate ambition, he is lifted out of this vilde place into perpetuall glory. Notwithſtanding I beeing moſt vnfortunate, could not chuſe this good, ſeeing that if all the world were mine, and ſhould bee taken from me by thee, yet hauing only the good grace of my Miſtris, it ſhould be ſufficient to make me as mighty as the greateſt monark, the which I alſo lacking, how is it poſſible for me in any ſort to liue? Therefore in fauour and recompence of my loyalty, I beſeech thee not to giue mee a languiſhing death: but if thou art appointed to ende my dayes, doe it without delay, taking compaſſion of him, whoſe longer life thou art ignorant how irkeſome it is. This ſayd, hee fell downe backward vpon the graſſe, and was as ſilent as if he had beene in a ſwound. Then within a while after hee cryed, Ah louely Oriana, you haue wounded me deadly, in baniſhing me diſcurteouſly, for I will neuer tranſgreſſe your cōmandements, what danger ſoeuer may happen mee, ſeeing that if therein I failed, my life alſo were thereby finiſhed: notwithſtanding for as much as I wrongfully receiue my death, the more extream is my dolor. But ſeeing that with my end you ſhall reſt ſatisfied, I neuer eſteemed my life at ſo high a price, but I wold, if it were

poſſible, change it into a thouſand deaths, to afford you neuer ſo little pleaſure. In like ſort ſince it liketh you to execute your anger againſt me, I am very well content, if for my affliction you may hence-forth liue at your eaſe, for whether ſoeuer my Soule flyeth, it ſhall receiue moſt quiet when it ſhal know that you remaine contented. And vntill mine innocencie ſhall bee known vnto you, I will endeauor to finiſh the reſt of my ſorrowfull daies in all bitterneſſe and diſpleaſure, and being dead, my ſpirit ſhal lament the griefe which wil happen vnto you for the wrong which you haue done to me, ſpecialy wanting power to ſuccour you. O king Perion my Lord and father, how little occaſion ſhall you haue to bewaile my death, when you ſhall neither know the ſame nor the cauſe thereof? But becauſe that knowing the ſame, it would bee to you a griefe intollerable, and yet it could be no mittigation of my torment, I pray, that my misfortune may to you neuer be manifeſt, leaſt the ſame ſhould abridge the remainder of your dayes, which yet are not determined. Then after a ſmall pauſe he cryed, O my ſecond father Galuanes, truely I do greatly grieue that my aduerſe Fortune doth not permit me to diſcharge that great bond in which to you I am bound, for if my father gaue me life, you preſerued the ſame, in deliuering me from the danger of the Sea, being launched forth into his mercileſſe waues, euen when I had but newly left my mothers womb, and afterwardes I was by you as carefully cheriſhed, as if I had beene your deereſt childe. I am aſſured good King Arban that you will greatly bewaile my ſorrowfull 
                        •
                     nd, yet valiant Angriotta d'Eſtauaux, Guillan, and a number of my other friends, ſhall aſſiſt you to bemone his death, who euer loued and held you deere. Ah good coſin Mabila, what haue I deſerued of you, or of the Damoſel of Denmark, that by you I am abandoned when I haue moſt neede of your ayde? Haue you ſo many times preſerued my life, & doe you now (without deſert) make me pay tribute for my receiued pleaſure, in conſenting to my miſerable death? Beleeue mee, if need were, deare friends, for your ſakes would I bee ſacrificed: and yet you make no conſcience to forſake mee, which maketh mee verily to beleeue, that you haue denied mee your cōfort, heauen and earth haue deſired my confuſion, which ſhall the leſſe grieue me in that I ſee no remedy. Gandalin and Durin hearing theſe lamentations of Amadis, the were ſo much agrieued therewith, that they wept as bitterly as hee, yet durſt they not ſhew themſelues, becauſe hee had ſo ſtraitly charged them not to follow him. But Amadis ceaſed not his mone vntill hee heard a knight who paſſed hard by him ſinging this ſong
                  
                     LOue, ſacred Loue, 
                           〈…〉
                         I remaine
                     To thee, for 
                           〈◊〉
                         exceeding bounteous grace:
                     On earth what Gentleman may 
                           〈◊〉
                         like game?
                     Beloued thou makeſt me in euery place.
                     Happy ſuch 
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        , when loue 
                           •…
                        pect me,
                     N
                           •…
                        d I Lad
                           •…
                         me.
                  
                  
                     To witneſſe 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Sweet Sard 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Whom 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     An
                           •
                         ſort 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         was 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         retire,
                     
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                         daug
                           •
                        ter of a 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Whom 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     My 
                           〈◊〉
                         is great 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     But to enioy 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
Hauing ended his ſong hee alighted vnder a tuſted tree planted by the high way ſide, thinking there to paſſe the reſt of the night: but worſe happened to him then he hoped, for Gandalin which had heard what hee ſayde of Oriana, (doubting that Amadis had not marked it, becauſe his minde was otherwiſe occupied) ſayde vnto Durin, It were beſt for mee to goe to my Maſter to know what hee intendeth to doe. Then came hee forth of the buſh where he was hidden, & beheld Amadis that ſought for his horſe to depart frō thence, who as he looked here & there he eſpied Gandalin: When not knowing him at the firſt, he cryed. Who art thou that commeſt to ſurpriſe me? ſpeake and hide thy ſelfe no longer. My Lord, anſwered he, I an Gandalin, who will helpe you to finde your horſe, if ſo it pleaſe you. When Amadis heard this, Ah ſaid hee, how durſt you perſume to follow me, hauing ſo expreſly forbidyou? beleeue mee thou haſt greatly diſpleaſed mee, let mee ſee thee no more but depart, or elſe be ſure thou ſhalt die. My Lord, anſwered Gandalin, mee thinkes you ſhould forget this manner of behauiour, and bethinke you how to reuenge the fooliſh ſpeeches which euen now were vttered by a knight, who is not yet far from you, for they are greatly to your diſaduantage. This ſayde Gandalin to pacifie his diſpleaſure towardes him, that hee might bee the more incenſed againſt the other. I did heare him as well as you (ſayd he) and therefore am I content to ſeeke reſt elſe-where, and to depart from hence where all misfortune doth follow me. What ſayd Gandalin, is this all that you are determined to doe? What wouldſt thou more? ſaid he. That you fight with him anſwered Gandalin, to make him confeſſe his preſumption. I beleeue ſayd hee thou wouldeſt ſay otherwiſe, ſeeing thou knoweſt very well that I neither haue ſpirit, heart, not any force, hauing loſt all in loſing her who gaue me life, ſo as now I am no better then a dead man, neither is there in Great Brittaine any knight ſo cowardly, that could not eaſily ouercome mee if I ſhould combate with him, ſo hapleſſe and hopelſſe am I. Truſt me anſwered Gandalin, you are in a great errour thus to ſuffer your heart to ſaint & to let your courage faile, euen whē it ſhould moſt ſerue you to aduance the honour of her, who ſo neerely toucheth you. What report will Durin make here of thinke you, who hath heard and ſeene all, and is greatly abſhed, that now you behaue your ſelfe no better. How (ſayd Amadis) is Durin here? I truely ſayd Gandalin, wee came both together: and I beleeue hee followeth you thus, to declare your manner of behauiour vnto her that ſent him vnto you. Get thee gone ſayd Amadis, thou vrgeſt mee too much. Yet when hee thought that Durin ſhould returne to Oriana, his heart was ſo inflamed, that hee called for his armes, and mounting on his horſe he went toward the knight, whom hee found layd vnder the tree, holding his horſe by the bridle. Then Amadis, in a great rage ſayde vnto him, Sir knight who ſo greatly extolleſt thy fortune in loue, I beleeue that againſt all right thou haſt receined that good that loue hath doue for thee (if good it may be tearmed) and that thou neuer deſeruedſt it, the which I wil proue with the loſſe of thy head. What art thou anſwered the other, that

ſpeakeſt ſo audaciouſly? doſt thou think that I am fauoured of the faireſt Lady in the worlde for any other cauſe but onely for my valour and high knighthood? wherewith I will make thee preſently confeſſe that loue hath reaſon to fauour me, and that it is not for thee to ſpeake thereof. It is but thy opinion ſayde Amadis: but thou muſt knowe that in deſpight of thee, I am hee who hath leaſt occaſion to praiſe loue, becauſe hee hath ſo vildely deceiued me, that I wil neuer dayes in my life put any truſt in him, knowing how falſely and treacherouſly he commonly vſeth thoſe that moſt faithfully do ſerue him. And becauſe I haue ſufficiently prooued it, I will maintaine that he can neuer be ſo faithfull, as I haue found him falſe. That it is ſo, let vs ſee whether hee hath gained more in thee then he hath loſt in me. Then the knight mounted on his horſe, and beeing ready to fight, he anſwered, Vnhappy knight depriued of all good, and baniſht iuſtly from loue, beeing vnworthy of his fauor, get thee from my preſence, for I ſhould commit a moſt horrible fact, to lay my hands vpon ſuch a vild & miſerable fellow. So ſaying, he turned his horſe to haue fled away, if Amadis had not ſtaied him in calling him. Villaine, wilt thou then defend thy loue which ſo highly thou priſeſt onely with thy countenance, and ſo get thee gone becauſe thou wouldeſt fly the combat. Truſt me anſwered the other thou art in a right opinion, for it is true that I haue no deſire to proue my ſelfe againſt a perſon of ſo ſmall deſert, but ſeeing thou wouldeſt that I ſhould breake thy head, I am content, and if thy heart will ſerue, defend it if thou canſt. Herewithall they ran one againſt the other with ſuch force, as their Lances flew to ſhiuers, pearcing their ſhields quite thorough, neuertheleſſe their armour being good & ſtrong ſtaied the ſtroke, yet the knight fell to the ground carrying the raines of his horſe with him, wherefore he roſe again lightly. The which Amadis beholding, he ſaid vnto him, Truely knight if the right which you pretend in ſo faire a friend bee not better maintained with your ſword then it hath beene with your ſtaffe, Loue hath made but a bad choyce of you for a valiant champion, & your Lady a far worſer match in lighting vpon ſuch a carpet knight. He made no account at all of theſe reproaches, but boldly drew out his ſword, and comming neere to Amadis laid at him ſo luſtily, that hee had beene wounded if with his ſhield hee had not well warded himſelfe, wherein his ſword was ſo farre entred, that he could not pul it forth again, but was forced to let go his holde, leauing it ſticking faſt in the ſhield of Amadis. Who lifted himſelfe vp in his ſtirrops hitting him ſo ſound a blow vpon his head-peece, that it pearced euen vnto the quick: & the blow gliding downe, it lighted vpon his horſe neck, wounded him to the death, falling downe in the place and his maſter vnder him all aſtonied. But Amadis ſeeing him ariſe ſaid vnto him, Gentle louer, I am of the minde that Cupid henceforth ſhould erect a trophie for the high proweſſe which you haue ſhewed in his ſeruice: & that as long as you liue you ſhould not ceaſe to ſing his praiſes, & declare thoſe benefits which vpon you hee hath beſtowed: As for mee I will goe ſecke my fortune elſe where. So he ſet ſpurres to his horſe, & as he departed, he beheld Gandalin &

                     Durin, when cōming neere them, he tooke Durin by the hand, and ſayd vnto him: Friend Durin, I ſee my misfortune ſo ſtrange, and my ſorrow ſo intollerable, as of force I muſt die, which God grant it may be without delay: for death onely will giue reſt and eaſe to this torture which vexeth mee. Salute from me the Princeſſe Mabila, and thy good ſiſter, the Damoſell of Denmarke, vnto whom thou mayſt declare my cruel death, which I ſuffer with as great wrōg as euer any knight ſuffered. Before the which, I would to God I had the meanes to doe them any ſeruice, in recompence of the duty I doe owe them for all the good they haue done, and the fauours they haue purchaſed for mee. Then hee beganne his moane, weeping ſo bitterly as Durin therewith had his heart ſo ſtopped with woe, that hee was not able to anſwer one word: Wherfore Amadis embraced him and committed him to God. At that inſtant began the day to appeare, when Amadis perceiuing that Gandalin followed him, hee ſayd vnto him: if thou determineſt to come with me, take heede vpon thy life that thou turne me not from any thing which I ſhall ſay or doe, otherwiſe I pray thee forthwith to turne another way that I may ſee thee no more. Beleeue me Sir, ſayd Gandalin, I wil do whatſoeuer ſhal pleaſe you. Then Amadis deliuered him his armor to bear, cōmanding him to pul the ſword forth of his ſhield & to cary it to the amorous knight.
               
               
                  CHAP. V.
                  
                     Who was the Knight vanquiſhed by Amadis, and what happened vnto him, before he fought with him.
                  
                  
                     SEeing that it falleth out ſo fit, I will declare vnto you (before I paſſe any further) the eſtate of the amorous Knight, of whom wee ſpake euen now. You muſt knowe that hee was called Patin, brother to Don Sidon the Emperor of Rome, and hee was the beſt knight that was to be found in all Romania. By meanes whereof he was feared and famous through all the Empire, chiefly becauſe hee was to ſucceed in his brothers dignitie, for there was none more neare the ſame then hee, and the Emperour was already ſo olde, that hee neuer hoped to haue any heire. Now this Patin was one day talking with the Queene of Sardinia, named Sardamira, one of the faireſt Ladies in the world, whom hee loued extreamely. And as hee gaue her to vnderſtand what feruency and torment hee endured in ouer-louing her, ſhe anſwered him: My Lord, I aſſuredly beleeue that which you tell mee, and the better to witneſſe the ſame, I let you know that there is no prince liuing for whō I would do more then for you, nor whom I would more willingly take for huſband: becauſe I know your good parts, and the high knight-hood where withall you are ſo famouſed. Theſe ſpeeches bred ſo great preſumption in the heart of Patin, as beſides that hee was by nature one of the proudeſt Gentlemen in the world, hee entred into ſuch glory, that he anſwered her: Madame, I

haue heard that King Liſuart hath a daughter eſteemed the faireſt Princeſſe in the worlde, but for the loue of you I will goe into Great Brittaine, there to mainteine againſt all men, that her beauty is not cōparable to yours: the which I alone will prooue in combate againſt two of the beſt knights that dare ſay the contrary: whom if I cannot ouercome, I will that King Liſuart doe cauſe my head to bee cut off. In good faith my Lord, anſwered the Queene, I am of a contrary opinion: for if the Princeſſe haue any beauty in her, it nothing impaireth that which God hath beſtowed vpon mee, if any beauty there bee: and me thinks that you haue other means more fit to make known your proweſſe in all places. Hap what may hap anſwered hee, I will doe it for your loue, to the end that euery one may knowe that as you are the faireſt Lady in the world, ſo you are beloued of the valianteſt Knight aliue. Hereupon continuing in this minde, within a while after hee tooke leaue of the Queene, and paſſed into Great Brittaine accompanied onely with two Eſquires. Then hee enquired where he might find King Liſuart, vnto whoſe Court he ſhortly after came: and becauſe hee was more richly armed then wandering knights were accuſtomed to bee, the King thought him to be ſome great perſonage: For this cauſe hee receiued him moſt honourably, appointing him into a chamber to ſhift himſelfe. When he was vnarmed hee returned to the King who ſtayed for him, marching with ſuch grauity, as thoſe that beheld (ſeeing his comely ſtature) iudged him to bee of great courage. But the King tooke him by the hand, and conferring together hee ſayde vnto him, gentle friend, I pray you thinke it not ſtrange, if I deſire to know who you are, becauſe I may the more honor you in my Court. It may pleaſe your Maieſty, anſwered Patin, I am not come into this countrey, to hide mee, but rather to make my ſelfe knowne as well vnto your Highneſſe as vnto all others: I am that Patin brother to the Emperour which humbly beſeecheth you to enquire no further of my affaire, vntill I haue ſeen my Lady Oriana your daughter. When the King heard that, he embraced him, and in excuſing his ignorance he ſayd to him. My good Coſen, I am maruailous glad of the honour that you haue done me, In cōming thus to viſit me in my owne countrey, aſſuring you that ſince you are deſirous to ſee my daughter, ſhe ſhall not onely be ſhewed vnto you, but likewiſe the Queene, and all her trayne. And ſo long they continued their talke, vntill they had couered for ſupper. Then the King cauſed him to ſit next vnto him, where hee found himſelfe compaſſed with ſo great a number of knights, as hee much marualled thereat: and began to deſpiſe the Court of the Emperour his brother, as alſo of all other Princes in reſpect of this which hee ſaw. After the tables were taken vp, it being time to goe to reſt, the King cōmanded Don Grumedan to bring Patin to his lodging and to ſhew him all the honor and good entertainment hee could. So for that night they departed, vntill the next morning that hee came and found the King hearing diuine ſeruice, after the which hee was conducted to the Ladies, who receiued him curteouſly: for at his comming the Queen took him by the hand, praying him to ſit betweene her, & her

daughter Oriana, whom at that inſtant he beheld with ſuch an eye, as the loue which before he did beare vnto the Queene Sardamira, was wholly changed vnto her, beeing captiuated with her excellent beauty and goodly grace. You may iudge then how he would haue eſteemed her if he had ſeene her in the time of her perfect health, which was now much decaied by reaſon of this new iealouſie which ſhe had conceiued againſt Amadis which made her looke leane, pale, and wan: but theſe defaults could nothing quench the heate of the fire already kindled in the heart of Patin, who was ſo far beſide him-ſelfe, that hee determined to beſeech the king to beſtow her vpon him in mariage: making account that it would be eaſily granted, conſidering his birth and high eſtate. Hereupon he tooke leaue of the Ladies, and returned towards the King, who was ready to ſit downe to dinner, the which being ended hee went aſide towards a window, and calling Patin vnto him, they talked long together. Afterwards falling from one matter to another, Patin ſaid vnto him. It may pleaſe your maieſty, yeſter-day I promiſed to tel you (ſo ſoone as I had ſeene my Lady Oriana your daughter) what moued me to come from Rome into Great-Brittaine, I beſeech you not to bee offended if I haue taken ſo far a iourney, to come in perſon to require her of you in mariage. I haue choſen her as wel to haue your alliance as alſo for the beauty and good grace which remaineth in her. I am ſure you are not ignorant (conſidering the place from whence I am deſcended, & the great meanes which cannot faile me, as one day to be Emperor of Rome) that if I would elſe where ſet my liking, there is no Prince this day liuing, which would not be very glad to receiue mee for his ſonne in law. Good coſin, anſwered the king, I thanke you for the kindneſſe and honour you do offer me, but the Queene hath alwaies promiſed Oriana that ſhe ſhal neuer be maried againſt her will, wherefore before wee grant you any thing, we muſt know of her how ſhe will bee content therewith: this the King ſayd becauſe he would not diſcontent Patin, for he was not minded to beſtowe his daughter vpon any Prince or Lord that ſhould carry her forth of the land. Patin was ſatisfied with theſe wordes, and expecting ſome other anſwere of the King, hee ſtayed fiue dayes at the Court, yet the king neuer ſpake to Oriana thereof, although he aſſured him that hee had done as much as he could, to cauſe her conſent thereto, but he could in no ſort preuaile with her. Therefore win her your ſelfe if you can, ſaid he, and pray her to doe that which I ſhall command her. Then Patin came vnto her and ſaid. Madame I am to deſire a requeſt of you, that ſhall be both honorable and profitable for you, the which I pray you not to deny me. My Lord (anſwered the princeſſe) there is no reaſon to refuſe the grant, being ſuch a reaſonable requeſt as you aſſure me it is, therefore if it pleaſe you, defer not to declare it vnto me. I beſeech you, ſaid Patin, to obey whatſoeuer the king your Father ſhall command you. Oriana (who vnderſtood not his meaning) anſwered him. You may bee aſſured Sir, that I ſhould be very ſorry to do otherwiſe. This anſwere wonderfully contented Patin, for he now aſſuredly thought Oriana
                     
to be his, and ſaid vnto her, Madam I haue determined to go thorough this countrie to ſeeke ſtrange aduentures, and I hope to performe ſo high deeds of Arms, as you ſhall ſhortly heare news of my prowes, ſo much to mine aduantage, as very eaſily you will cōdiſcend vnto that which the king will command you for the loue of me. Herewithall he tooke leaue of her, manifeſting at this time his intention vnto her no farther, and returned vnto the king vnto whom he declared the anſwer of Oriana, together with the deſire he had to proue himſelfe againſt al wandring Knights. Do as it pleaſe you, anſwered the king, notwithſtanding I would aduiſe you to deſiſt from ſuch an enterpriſe: for you ſhall finde many ſtrange and very dangerous aduentures, with a great number of knights well exerciſed in armes, who may happily in ſome ſort diſpleaſe you. If they be valiant and hardy, ſaid he, I hope they ſhall not finde any faintnes or cowardlines in me, as my deedes hereafter may witnes. Wel, anſwered the king. Do what you ſhall thinke beſt. Thus Patin departed in the hope which he had to enioy Oriana, for the loue of whom he had framed this ſong, which he ſung when fortune brought him neere the place where Amadis made his mone, who vſed him as you haue heard. But now we will leaue him, and recount vnto you what hapned to Durin, who hauing left Amadis, returned the next way paſſing by the place where Patin lay wounded, who had taken off his Helmet for the grief of his woūd, hauing already loſt ſuch ſtore of blood, that his face and armour was all ſtained and couered therewith. He beholding Durin, ſaid to him, Gentle-man, my friend, tell me where I may finde a place to cure my wounds. Truly anſwered hee, I know no place but one, and thoſe whom you ſhall finde there, are ſo ſorrowfull, that I beleeue they cannot looke vnto you. Wherefore? ſaid Patin. For a Knight (quoth Durin) who newly hath wonne the place that I tell you of, and ſeen the images of Apolidon and his Lady, which till then no other might behold: ſince when he is departed thence ſecretly in ſuch melancholy, as his death is greatly feared Belike ſaid Patin, you ſpeake of the Firme-Iſland. True (quoth Durin.) What ſaid Patin, is it conquered already? certes, I am heartily ſorry, for I was going thither, with intention to proue my ſelfe, hoping to haue won the ſame. Durin ſmiled, and anſwered him, Truely knight if there be no more proweſſe hidden within you, then that which you haue now manifeſted, I thinke in ſtead of honour, you might there haue gotten ſhame and infamy. Patin thinking himſelfe iniuried roſe vp, and thought to haue taken hold of the ra
                        •…
                     es of Durins horſe: but Durin turned from him: herefore Patin ſeeing hee was farre enough from him, hee called him againe and ſaid. I pray you faire ſir, tell what he is that hath gotten this famous conqueſt. Then tell me firſt what you are, anſwered Durin. I will not ſtick for that, ſaid Patin, I am ſir Patin, brother to the Emperour of Rome.
                  
                  God bee praiſed, anſwered Durin: Yet ſo farre as I ſee you are of higher birth then bounty, and your courage is as ſlender as your Courteſie is ſmall: Witneſſe the ſpeech which of late you had with the Knight that you enquire after, who 
                        〈◊〉
                      the very ſame that euen now went

from you, whom I beleeue (conſidering how hee hath handled you) you will grant that he is worthy of ſuch a victory, and not Patin whom he hath vanquiſhed. This ſaid, he ſet ſpurres to his horſe, taking the right way vnto London, in full purpoſe to recite vnto the Princeſſe Oriana all that hee had ſeene and heard of Amadis
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     How Don Galaor, Floreſtan and Agraies, vndertooke the ſearch of Amadis: who hauing left his Armour, changed his name, and withdrew himſelfe to an hermitage, in the company of a very old hermit, there to liue ſolitarily.
                  
                  
                     I Haue of late told you that when Amadis departed from the firme Iſland, it was ſo ſecretly, that Galaor, Floreſtan, Agraies and others, neuer perceiued any thing thereof: you haue alſo heard the oath which he had taken of Iſania the gouernour, that he ſhould not declare any thing which he had ſeene, vntill the next morning when maſſe was ended: the which Iſania performed. For the day following, when the Lords were ready to ſit downe at the Table, they perceiued that Amadis was abſent: and enquiring for him, Iſania told them that they ſhould know after dinner where hee was become. Thereupon they ſat down thinking that he was gone ſomwhether for his pleaſure. After the Tables were taken vp, Iſania ſaid vnto thē. My lords the misfortune of my Lord Amadis is far worſe then you thinke it is, as I ſhall preſently declare vnto you. Then he recited in what order he deparded from thē, the great ſorrow wherein hee was, and what he had commanded him to ſay vnto them, eſpecially how he had diſpoſed of the Iſland, and he earneſtly intreated thē not to follow him, ſeeing that he hoped for no remedy of his miſery: For his death was not to bee preuented. When they heard theſe pittifull news, there was not any of them whoſe eyes were not filled with teares, and they began to make a moſt ſorrowfull lamentation. But Galaor made the greateſt moane of all, ſaying. If I may releeue him from diſtreſſe, the beſt knight in the world ſhall not in this ſort die. Although he hath commanded vs to ſtay, yet ſhall he not be obeyed for me at this time: but I will ſeeke vntil I ſhal haue found him, & wil know who hath wronged him, that I may eyther reuenge it, or die in the quarell. Beleeue me anſwered Agraies, we will not be far behinde you: and if we cannot remedy his misfortune by force of courage, or counſell, yet at the leaſt we will altogether die with him for company. Moreouer ſaid Iſania, he deſireth you my Lord Galaor to make Gandalin a knight, and take Ardan his dwarff into your ſeruice, whom he recommendeth vnto you. Then Galaor called the Dwarff, and ſaid vnto him: Ardan, thy maſter hath forſaken vs, and willed that thou ſhouldſt be mine, aſſure thee that ſo long as I line, I will not leaue thee for his ſake. How? anſwered the Dwarffe, is my Lord dead then? So ſaying, he fel down where he ſtood, and began to teare his haires, making ſo great ſorrow as it was wonderfull, & ſaid: I might well be coū
                     ted a traytor to liue after my Maſter, wherwithal he had ſlain himſelf if they had not takē heed vnto him. Floreſtan his heart was ſo ouercharged with griefe that he could neyther weep, nor ſpeak, but ſit le
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     g as if he had been in a traunce. And

when he recouered his ſpeech, he ſaid vnto his fellowes: my Lords, it is no time for vs to weepe nor lament when we ſhould rather indeuour to ſuccour my Lord Amadis: let women waile, but let manly mindes conioyne together, & deuiſe how we may prouide a remedy for ſo great a miſchiefe. As for me, I thinke that without longer delay we ſhould all to horſeback, making as great ſpeede as we may to finde him, then we may know if there be any meanes to cure his malady: for the time paſſeth, his ſorrow increaſeth, and he ſtill goeth farther from vs. The Lord Iſania (as he ſaith) hath brought him ſome part of his way, he may ſhew vs then which path he hath taken, but if we ſhall longer tarry, wee may loſe him, without hope euer to ſee him againe. Therefore my Lords I pray you let vs make haſt to follow him. Vnto the which they all agreed, & cauſed their horſes to be preſently brought. Then Iſania conducted them to the place where Amadis had left him, and from thence they rode till they came whereas Patin lay wounded, whom they beheld lying vpon the ground, whileſt his two eſquires did cut down boughs and poles, to make him a litter: for he was ſo feeble with the loſſe of his blood, that he could not ſit on horſeback, nor anſwere one onely word vnto the knights who ſaluted him, and enquired of him, what he was that had done him ſuch out-rage: but he made a ſigne that his Squires ſhould tell them. Where-upon Galaor came, and demanded the matter of them, they anſwered him that he had iouſted againſt a knight which came from the Firme Iſland, by whom hee was ouer-throwne at the firſt encounter, and how that afterwards thinking to reuenge him with his Sworde, he ſped ſo illas they might per
                        •…
                      by his hurt. What is become of the knight, ſaid Galaor. By our faith anſwered the ſquires, we know not, for we were not preſent at the cō
                     bat. Notwithſtanding we do think that we did meete him in our comming hither, and he did ride ouer the forreſt ſo faſt as his horſe could run, hauing none following him but one Squire, who wept bitterly carrying after him his Armour and ſhield, vpon the which were 2. Lyons ſables, in a field Ore. In faith ſaid Floreſtan it is he whom we doe ſeeke. Shew vs therefore what way he tooke, the which they did. Then the knights went after him, and ſo long they rode, vntill they came to a croſſe way, where they ſtaid to aduiſe what was beſt to be done: for there was not any body that might tell them any newes of that which they ſought: and therefore they determined to ſeparate them-ſelues, promiſing one vnto another to meete at the Court of king Liſuart, vpon S. Iohns day next enſuing: but if by that time they heard no news of Amadis, then they would determine further what to do in the matter, thus taking leaue of each other, they departed with weeping: and afterward they did what they might, but it was all in vaine, although they had ridden through many ſtrange countries in which they found many great accidents & perilous aduentures. But you muſt know, that ſo ſoone as Amadis had ſent Durin away, he ſet ſpurres vnto his horſe, neyther caring, nor determining what way he ſhould take, & he went euen as fortune guided him: in the end hee came to the bottom of an obſcure valley, ful of vnderwood & buſh
                        •
                     s which place he thought moſt commodious

to hide himſelfe from being found out of any that might follow him. Here did he alight, letting his horſe goe where hee would, but vnbridled him not: then he ſate down by the ſide of a brook, which deſcended from the mountaine, and tooke a little water to refreſh him withall. By this time Gandalin had ouertaken him, who had ſtayed behinde to deliuer Patin his Sword, who finding Amadis laid all along vpon the graſſe, ſo ſtill that he heard not one word to proceede from him: hee durſt not ſay any thing to him, but ſate downe hard by him, and within a while after Amadis roſe vp, and beholding Gandalin laide vpon the ground by him, hee puſhed him with his foote ſaying, ſleepeſt thou Gandalin? By my faith ſir no, anſwered he, for inſtead of ſleeping, I thought vpon two things which concerne you greatly, the which (if it pleaſe you) I will declare, if not, I will hold my peace. Go to riſe ſaid Amadis, and take our horſes, for I will get me gone, becauſe I ſhould be very ſory to be found of thoſe (who it may be) do follow me. Truly anſwered Gandalin, me thinks you are farre enough out of the way: beſides your horſe is ſo wearie, as if you let him not reſt a little, it is impoſſible for him to beare you any longer. I pray thee ſaid he, (in weeping) do what thou ſhalt thinke beſt, for whether I ſtay or goe, my ſorrows are remediles. Eate then a little of this bread which I haue brought for your ſuſtenance, anſwered Gandalin, but he refuſed it. What will you then do ſaid he, ſhall I tell you whereupon I ſtudied euen now? It is all one to me anſwered Amadis, I thinke on nothing ſo much as my death. Then hearken vnto me if it pleaſe you, ſaid Gandalin, I haue long time muſed vpon the letter which Oriana ſent vnto you, as alſo vpon the words which the knight vttered againſt whom you did fight, and ſo conſequently vpon the lightneſſe and inconſtancy where-with women are endued: for ſeeing ſhe hath changed her loue and your ſelfe for a ſtranger, ſhee witneſſeth very well what truſt a man ſhould repoſe in ſuch as ſhe is: and on the other ſide, when I conſider her vertues, I thinke it in a manner impoſſible, that ſhe ſhould ſo farre forget her ſelfe. But it may be that in your abſence, ſome falſe report of you, hath been made vnto her, whereby ſhe hath conceiued this diſpleaſure againſt you, the concealing whereof ſo much the more increaſed her grief. Notwithſtanding, ſeeing you are aſſured that you neuer offended her, although ſhe haue beene too credulous, yet in the end the truth will be knowne, and thereby your innocency the more apparant, it ſeemeth vnto me that you ſhould not thus deſpaire, ſeeing that ſhee may repent her folly, and acknowledge the wrong which ſhe hath done vnto you, in ſuch ſort as requiring pardon for her miſconceit, ſhe may make you amends with more ioy & contentment then you euer yet enioyed together: & therfore inforce your ſelfe to eate, that you may be able hereafter to preſerue your life, but if you do wilfully ſuffer the ſame thus to be loſt, you ſhall alſo looſe all the good & honor that euer you may or can hope for in this world. Hold thy peace ſaid Amadis, for thou haſt ſo ſhamefully and wickedly lied, as I know no man which would not be diſpleaſed to heare thee thus to accuſe her, becauſe that ſo wiſe a

Princeſſe neuer did amiſſe at any time: and if I die, I haue well deſerued it, ſeeing that ſhe ſhall be obeied and ſatisfied euen vntill my death. And be thou aſſured, if I did not thinke that thou ſpeakeſt this, onely with intent thereby to aſſwage my ſorrow: I would preſently ſtrike thy head from thy ſhoulders, for the offence which thou haſt done vnto me, and take heed that henceforth you commit not the like fault.
                  When he had ſo ſaid, he aroſe vp in a great rage, and walked vp along the riuer, ſo penſiue that he knew not what way he ſhould take. Which Gandalin perceiuing, (fearing his anger, and thinking alſo that he would not goe farre) he let him alone and laid him downe to ſleepe, his eyes beeing very heauie with watching. When Amadis was returned vnto him, and perceiued him ſo ſound aſleepe, hee would not wake him, but took his owne horſe and ſadled him, then did he hide the bridle and harneſſe of Gandalins horſe in the buſhes, to the end when he awaked he might not follow him. Then he armed himſelfe and mounted on horſe-backe, coaſting ouer the top of the mountaine. Thus without any ſtay at all, hee rode till it was within foure houres of the ſun ſetting, diſcending then into a great plaine, where there were two high trees, and vnder them a faire fountaine, commonly called, The fountaine of the plaine field: to which hee went to water his horſe. And as he approched neere the fountaine, he beheld a religious man clothed poorly in a garment made of gotes haire, hauing his beard and head all white, who was watering his Aſſe. Amadis ſaluted him, asking him if he were a Prieſt. Truely, ſaid the olde man, it is more then forty yeeres ſince I firſt ſaid Maſſe. The gladder am I thereof, ſaid Amadis. Then he alighted & took his ſaddle and bridle from his horſe, who finding himſelfe at liberty, began to run towards the Forreſt, Amadis minding not to follow him, but threw off all his armour, which done, he kneeled at the olde mans feete, who taking him vp by the hand, made him ſit downe by him: & beholding him well, he thought him to bee the faireſt Gentleman that euer he ſaw, although hee was pale and wan, hauing his face all bedewed with teares: whereat the Hermit was moued with ſo great compaſſion, that hee ſayde vnto him. Knight, you ſeeme to bee full of ſorrow, and if your griefe proceede from the repentance of any ſinne that you haue committed, In truth my ſon you are very happy: and if it bee for any temporall loſſe, then I thinke (ſeeing your youth, and the eſtate wherein you haue liued vnto this preſent, you ſhold not thus vēxe your ſelfe, but pray for forgiueneſſe. Then hee gaue him his bleſſing, ſaying. Goe too, now confeſſe your ſins. Here-upon Amadis began to tell the whole diſcourſe of his life, without letting any thing paſſe. Truely, ſaide the holy man, ſeeing that you are diſcended of ſo high a birth, you ought to bee the more vertuous: yet you muſt not diſpaire for any tribulation that may happen vnto you, cheefely, for this that proceedeth from the occaſion of a woman, who is as eaſily won as ſhe is lightly loſt. Wherefore my ſon, I councell you to forget ſuch vanities, and henceforth to baniſh the thought of ſuch a miſerable manner of life from you, for it will not onely be yrkeſome vnto you, but

alſo euery vertuous perſon will condemne you for it. Ah father, anſwered Amadis, I am now in ſuch extreamitie, that it is impoſſible I ſhould liue any long time, wherefore I humbly pray you to receiue mee into your company, and to comfort my poore ſoule, for that little time which it hath to remain in this vnhappy body. When the good olde man heard him ſpeake with ſuch affection, he ſayde vnto him, I promiſe you my friend, it is ill done of you, who are a knight, yet young and of a comely ſtature, to fall into ſuch deſparie, ſeeing that women cannot continue their loue, but by preſence of thoſe whome they loue: for by nature they are quickly forgetfull, and light of beleefe, eſpecially where any thing is reported vnto them of ſuch as haue fondly yeelded them-ſelues to them, who when they think to haue nothing but ioy and contentment, do finde themſelues plunged in all ſorrow and tribulation, as you now feele by experience. Wherefore I pray you henceforth to be more vertuous and conſtant: and ſeeing you are borne a Kings ſon, and likely to gouerne a Kingdome, returne to the world, for it ſhould be a great hurt to looſe you in this ſort: and I cannot preſume what ſhe might bee that brought you into this extreamitie, ſeeing that although ſhee were a woman ſo requiſit as ſhee could not bee equalled, yet for her ſuch a man as you are to be caſt away. Father, anſwered Amadis, I aske not your counſell herein, for I now neede it not, but for my ſoules ſake I deſire you henceforth to receiue mee into your company, which if you refuſe to do, I ſee no other remedy for me, but to die amongſt the beaſts of this forreſt. The old man ſeeing him ſo reſolute, had ſuch compaſſion of him, as the teares fell down his long white beard, and anſwered him: Alas my ſon, my abiding in a deſert place, and I liue a life too ſtrickt for you, my Hermitage is at the leaſt ſeuen leagues within the ſea, vpon the top of a poore Rock: vnto the which no liuing creature can come vnleſſe it bee at the beginning of the ſpring time. Notwithſtanding, I haue already remained thirty yeeres there, exempted from all worldly pleaſure, liuing onely vpon ſuch ſmall almes, which ſome people of this Countrey doe beſtow vpon me. I promiſe you father, ſaide Amadis, it is the life which I deſire, and I once intreat you, that you would giue me leaue to go with you. The which the Hermit at the laſt granted, notwithſtanding, that he had a long time denied him. Heere-withall Amadis kiſſed his feete, ſaying: father command whatſoeuer you ſhall pleaſe, for to my power I will euer obay you. Then the Hermit ſaide his euening ſeruice, after the which (becauſe hee had eaten nothing all day) hee tooke out of his wallet a little bread, and fiſh dried in the ſun, which was giuen vnto him: and willed Amadis to eate with him, but he refuſed it, although he had beene three daies without taſting any ſuſtenance. Wherefore the hermit ſaide vnto him: My ſonne you haue promiſed to obey me, doe this then which I command you, and eat, for if you ſhould die in this obſtinacie, your ſoule ſhould be in very great danger. For this cauſe Amadis durſt not denie him, but did eat a very little, for hee ſighed continually, not being able to forget the great ſorrow wherein he remained. After he had taken this ſmall refrection,

the good old man ſpread his cloake abroad and laid him downe thereon, and Amadis at his feete, who was a great while before hee could take any reſt, tumbling and toſſing himſelfe as a perſon ill at eaſe, neuertheleſſe in the end, being heauie with long watching, he fell aſleepe: and hee dreamed that hee was locked in a chamber ſo darke, that he could ſee no light at all, neyther could he finde any way to come out thereof, wherewith he greatly lamented: moreouer hee thought that his Cozin Mabila and the Damoſell of Denmarke came vnto him, hauing before them a beame of the Sun, which gaue a great light in ſo darke a place: they taking him by the hand ſaid vnto him, My Lord, come forth from hence, if it pleaſe you, and follow vs into the palace, the which he did. But at his comming forth, he thought that he did ſee Oriana inuironed with a great flame of fire, which made him ſo afraid, that hee cried out helpe, helpe, my Lady Oriana burneth: and there withall he leaped into the fire to ſaue her. Then he tooke her in his armes, comming through the flame againe without any hurt at all: afterwards hee carried her into a garden, the greeneſt and pleaſanteſt that he had ſeene. At the lowde cry which Amadis did make, the good Hermit awaked, and taking him by the hand, hee asked him, what he ailed? Father, anſwered he, I haue euen now in my ſleepe felt ſuch exceeding paine, that I meruaile I am not dead. Your cry hath witneſſed the ſame, ſaid hee, but let vs riſe, for it is time to depart. Then he got vpon his Aſſe, and tooke the way toward the Hermitage, and Amadis followed him a foote, talking together of many things, at the laſt he prayed him to giue him one gift, which ſhould not bee hurtfull vnto him, the which the old man granted, I pray you then ſaid Amadis, that ſo long as we are together, you would not tell any man who I am: and hence-forth to giue mee another name, ſuch as it ſhall pleaſe you: then after my death you may tell my brethren of me, that they may come fetch my body, and carry it into Gaule. Your life and death, anſwered the hermit, are in the hands of God, therefore ſpeake no more thereof, for therein you offend him very grieuouſly: and therefore ſeeing you know him, loue him, and ſerue him as you are bound to do, he wil ſuccour and helpe you: notwithſtanding what other name wil you haue? Such as it ſhall pleaſe you to giue me, ſaid Amadis. And as they talked together, the olde man had his eye continually vpon him, and the more he looked on him, the fayrer he thought him to be: but he did ſee him ſo full of griefe as he determined to giue him a name conformable to his excellency, and agreeable to his melancholy. Whereupon he ſaid vnto him: my Sonne you are yong and of a faire complexion, notwithſtanding your life is obſcure, by reaſon of your ſorrow, therefore my will is that you bee called the Faire Forlorne. Wherewith Amadis was contented, liking very well of the Hermet his deuiſe, who not without great occaſion had impoſed that name vpon him. And euen as they were ouertaken with the night, they came vnto the Sea ſide, where they found a little boat which the day before was come to ſeeke the Hermet at his hermitage, wherin they imbarked, and within a ſmall time after tooke landing at

the poore Rock, ſo called becauſe of the barrenneſſe of the place, as the old man had declared to him. Who continuing his diſcourſe, ſaid, Sonne I haue heretofore followed the world as you haue done, and my name was Andahod, aſſuring you that during my young yeeres, I ſtudied many vaine ſciences▪ but in the end being wearie thereof, I withdrew my ſelfe into this poore place, where I haue already remained thirty yeeres and more, and neuer departed thence vntill yeeſterday, that I was at the buriall of my ſiſter, who died within theſe few dayes. When the Faire Forlorne came into this Solitary place, he was exceeding glad: hoping that in a very ſhort time his ſadneſſe and his life would both end at once. Thus he remained in the company of the hermit, conſuming his youth with weeping and continuall lamentations, ſeting at naught all worldly honours, eſpecially the glory which he had gotten in fighting with Galpan, Abies King of Ireland, Dardan the proud, and many others whom he had ouercome, and he began to deſpiſe in himſelfe all vanities, conſidering the variableneſſe of Fortune. who not long before had ſo highly aduanced him, that hee had entred into the forbidden Chamber of Apolidon, as in the beginning of the Hiſtory hath beene mentioned. But if he had beene demanded what moued him ſo to do, what would hee (thinke you) haue anſwered? no other thing (as I gueſſe) but that the diſpleaſure of a weake woman, had brought him to this extremity: he would haue tried to colour his fault by the examples of the ſtrong and valiant Hercules, Sampſon, the wiſe Salomon, Virgill, and an infinit number of other great and vertuous perſonages which haue all faln into the like miſery, being no more able to reſiſt the ſame then he. And Amadis would haue thought their misfortunes ſufficient to ſhaddow his miſerie, and yet it is quite contrary: for their example might haue warned him to haue ſhunned the like folly. Was it likely then that Fortune would bring him out of his calamity, he being thus ouercome for ſo ſmall a cauſe, and to beſtow vpon him afterwards more fauours and victories then euer ſhe had done before? me thinketh that ſhe ſhould not: neither yet had ſhe done it, if thoſe things by her executed againſt him, had not turned to the profit of the perſons whom ſhe would fauour, whoſe liues depended vpon Amadis his ſafety, whom ſhe tormented in ſuch ſort, as it ſeemed ſhe had more compaſſion vpon them, then care of him, as your ſelfe may iudge. Becauſe that Amadis being as it were brought vnto the period of his life, (when he leaſt hoped of remedie) euen then was he reſtored vnto his former eſtate by ſuch meanes, as ſhal be hereafter recited vnto you. But to the end that we ſtray not too farre from the order of our hiſtory, you muſt firſt vnderſtand that which happened to Gandalin after he awaked and found neither Amadis nor his horſe: who riſing vp in a fright, miſdoubted that which was happened, and looked in all places thereabout, notwithſtanding he could ſee nothing but Trees and Buſhes. By meanes whereof he began to cry and call, yet no body anſwered him but the Eccho which reſounded thorow the valley: whereby he knew well that Amadis was departed. For this cauſe he began to make a moſt

ſorrowfull lamentations, determining to follow him, and to doe what he could to find him againe, which that he might the better accompliſh; hee returned where hee had left his horſe, the which hee found, hauing neither ſaddle nor bridle vpon him, which made him almoſt beſide himſelfe. But as hee fretted and ſought from one place to another, in the middeſt of the buſhes hee eſpied the harneſſe of his horſe, which he ſought, wherefore incontinently he ſadled him, and mounted vpon him, gallopping through the forreſt not knowing which way to take▪ and in this frenſie he rode fiue daies together without any ſtay at all, but at the ſide of the villages, where he onely taried to enquire after Amadis. Notwithſtanding, he could heare no newes of him till the ſixt day, that he entred into a meddow wherein was a fountaine, hard by the which Amadis had left his armour. There he beheld a Pauillion ſet vp, and two Gentlewomen, vnto whom hee came, asking them if they had ſeene a knight paſſe by, bearing in his ſhield two Lions ſables, in a field Or. Wee haue not ſeene the knight which you demand after, anſwered they, but we did finde his ſhield and the reſt of his armour vpon the brinke of this fountaine. When Gandalin heard this, hee cryed out mainely, and bearing his haire, he ſaid weeping, Ay me, is he dead. Alas what miſ-fortune is hapned, the beſt knight in the world, is he loſt? heerewithall did hee encreaſe his laments ſo ſtrangely, as both the Gentlewomen had great compaſſion vpon his miſerie: Alas my Lord, ſayde hee, how badly haue I kept you: truely I am worthy to bee accounted the moſt wicked eſquire that liueth on the earth, hauing ſo lewdly forſaken you, and you who were wont to be the defence and refuge of all diſtreſſed perſons, haue now nor coūcel nor cōfort of any liuing wight, no not of me caitife as I am, that through my great fault and ſluggiſhneſſe, haue left you in your greateſt neede, euen when I ought beſt to haue ſerued you. No ſoner had he ſaid theſe words, but that hee fell downe in a ſwound: which when the Gentlewomen behelde, they cryed: Alas this eſquire is dead, and therewithall they ran vnto him, but hee moued not in any ſort. Neuertheleſſe, they beſtirred them ſo well, as they brought him againe to himſelfe, & afterwards they ſayd vnto him: my friend, you are to blame thus to deſpaire for a thing whereof you are yet vncertaine. It were more conuenient for you to goe ſeeke your maiſter, ſeeing that the vertuous (as you ought to bee) do encreaſe their ſtrength, euen when aduerſitie moſt aſſaileth them. Gandalin knew that they ſayde true, and for the ſame cauſe he determined (following their counſell) to trauaile ſo long from place to place, vntill he had newes of Amadis. But I pray you Gentlewomen, anſwered hee, tell me where you haue found his armour? That will wee willingly, ſaid they: Wee were of late in the company of Don Guillan the penſiue, who within theſe few dayes paſt, deliuered vs from the priſon of Gandinas the malicious, with more then twentie other Ladies and Gentlewomen, behauing him-ſelfe ſo valliantly, that he hath broken the wicked cuſtome of the Caſtle, and conſtrained the Lord thereof to ſweare, neuer more to maintaine the ſame. And becauſe euerie one had liberty to goe whether

they would, my fellow and I haue followed him vnto this place, and wee haue already ſtayed here this foure daies, becauſe that when we came hither firſt, Guillan knew the armour of him whom you enquire after, which were left vpon the ſide of the fountaine. And I promiſe you that neuer knight was more ſorrowful then he for as ſoon as he beheld them, hee alighted from his horſe ſaying. Beleeue me this place is farre vnworthy to hold the ſhield of the beſt Knight in the world. Then did hee take it vp from the ground, and hanged it vpon this Tree. Which done hee mounted againe vpon his horſe, commanding vs expreſſely that we ſhould keepe it vntill hee had found the Knight to whom it appertained: And to that end we did ſet vp theſe Pauilions which you ſee. Notwithſtanding after we had kept the ſame three whole dayes, he returned, and arriued but yeſterday very late hauing no news of him at all, and very early this morning he commanded his Eſquires to take the reſt of his Armour which were here found, and he tooke off his owne ſhield, to hang about his necke, the other which we did keepe. In the doing whereof he wept bitterly and ſaid. Truly ſhield thou makeſt a bad exchange of thy Maſter, for me: afterwards he told vs that he went to the Court of king Liſuart to preſent thoſe ſpoyles vnto Queene Briſena, being aſſured that ſhee would be no leſſe ſorrowfull then he, for the ſad miſchance, and wee likewiſe do follow after him, to thanke the Queene for the good which Guillan hath done for vs, for her ſake, as he hath commanded vs to do. Then Gandalin bid them farewell, aſſuring them, that hee would finde him, vpon whom his death or life depended, or elſe hee would end his daies in the ſeeking of him.
               
               
                  CHAP. VII.
                  
                     How Durin returned vnto the Princeſſe Oriana, vnto whom he declared the ſorrowfull news of Amadis: and of the great ſorrow which ſhe made, after ſhe vnderſtood of his deſpaire.
                  
                  
                     
                        DVrin hauing left Patin in the forreſt (as you haue heard) made ſuch great haſt to returne vnto Oriana, to let her know what he had ſeen of Amadis, as the tenth day following he arriued in the Citty of London. But ſo ſoone as Oriana perceiued him, her heart throbbed in ſuch ſort, as ſhe was faine to goe into her chamber, & lay her down vpon her bed before ſhee would ſpeake vnto Durin: and ſhortly after ſhee commanded the Damoſell of Denmarke to cauſe him to come in, and to ſee that while ſhe talked with him no other ſhould come where ſhe was.
                  Then Durin beeing on his knees before her, ſhee ſaid vnto him: Durin my friend, by the faith thou oweſt vnto mee, tell mee in what eſtate thou diddeſt finde Amadis, what was his countenance whileſt hee red my Letter, and what thou thinkeſt of the Queene Briolania? Madam anſwered he, by my faith I wil tell you the very truth, although I am ſure

that vnto you and others it will ſeeme in a manner incredible. At my departure from hence (as it pleaſed you to command mee) I went without any ſtay, vnto the Citty of Sobradiſa, where I found the Queene Briolania, who (in my opinion) next vnto you, is the fayreſt princeſſe of the world, and of the beſt grace. There I heard news that my Lord Amadis and his fellows were departed to returne vnto this Court, but vpon the way they did meete with a Gentlewoman, who carried them vnto the firme-Iſland to proue the ſtrange aduentures thereof: whereupon incontinently I tooke my way thither, and there I arriued euen as my Lord Amadis paſſed the Arch of Loyall-Louers, vnder the which none might paſſe that had in any ſort falſified his firſt Loue. How? ſaid ſhe, hath he ſo raſhly enterpriſed ſuch an aduenture, hauing his diſloyalty ſo freſh before his eyes? I know not Madam anſwered Durin, how you beleeue it, but ſure I am that it hapned better vnto him then you thinke for, ſeeing that he hath gotten more honour then euer any loyall Knight receiued, as many can witneſſe by the ſignes which then appeared. And although at that inſtant Oriana would haue ſeemed for to diſſemble the pleaſure which ſhe conceiued of theſe news, yet could ſhe not ſo cunningly do the ſame, but that with extreame ioy her ſudden bluſhing did increaſe her beautie, for the aſſurance ſhee had in the loyaltie of Amadis. But Durin continuing his diſcourſe, ſaid vnto her Madam, he hath yet done greater things, for after hee had finiſhed this ſo ſtrange aduenture, he heard news that my Lords Galaor, Floreſtan and Agraies thinking to winne the forbidden Chamber, were ſo rudely repulſed from the marble Pillar, that their liues were in great perill, by meanes whereof my Lord Amadis deſirous to reuenge their wrongs, with an inuincible courage he paſſed through all the garded places, and maugre all the inchantments, hee entred into the Chamber, yet was it not without great danger and trauaile. Thus did he win the Signory of the firm Iſland, and al the inhabitants there-of haue already ſworne vnto him homage, and fealty, according to the cuſtome of the Country, which is one of the faireſt and ſtrongeſt places in the world. And I aſſure you Madame, that it is more then an hundred yeeres ſince any liuing creature hath paſſed the pillars, but onely my Lord Amadis: by whoſe force and ſtrength we haue ſeene all the ſingular things and riches of the pallace of Apolidon, and the aduentrous Chamber, which is renowned thorow all the parts of the Earth. During this diſcourſe of his, Oriana was almoſt rauiſhed with the great eaſe, and pleaſure that ſhe conceiued in the hope that one day ſhe ſhould bee Lady and owner of ſuch ſinguler things, to her owne and her louers contentment, and ſaid vnto Durin. Truly Durin fortune hath beene very fauourable vnto him. Ah Madame anſwered he, nay rather too rigorous, ſo as I would to God ſome other had carried him that vnhappy Letter which you writ, & I deliuered: how ſaid Oriana, I pray thee tell me, what countenance he ſhewed in reading it? Madame I wil tel you ſince it pleaſeth you, anſwered he, although I am ſure that you will bee very ſort when you ſhal vnderſtand what conſequence it turned vnto, and the miſchiefe

it brought vnto the beſt and faithfulleſt knight in the world. In what ſort, ſaid ſhe. You are the cauſe of his death, anſwered Durin. Out Alas, ſaid Oriana, what is it thou telleſt mee? You haue forged the ſword that hath wounded him to death, and I carried it to him, ſo as we are both his murtherers. Then declared hee the whole circumſtance and manner how he deliuered the letter, and the deſpaire hee entred into after he had read it: ſo as, ſaid Durin, he did ſhortly after that, ſecretly departe from the Pallace of Apolidon, with Gandalin, Iſania the Gouernour of the Iſle, and me, and we brought him vnto an hermitage, where hee charged vs ſteightly to follow him no further: then hee mounted on horſe-back, and taking with him neither Helmet, Shield, nor Lance, he fled ouer a mountaine like vnto a mad man. Afterward hee reherſed vnto her all the talke which particularly he had vſed vnto them, in taking his leaue of them, and Durin made this diſcourſe with ſo many teares, as it was very hard to iudge whether hee or Oriana had the more ſorrowfull heart. And know you Madame, ſaide hee, that after his departure (notwithſtanding his command to the contrary) Gandalin and I followed him, and found him aſleepe by the ſide of a fountaine, yet his ſleepe was not long: for ſuddainly hee awaked, and raiſing himſelfe vp, he began to make the greateſt lamentation in the world, bewaling King Perion his father, then Mabila, and others his friends. All this while Gandalin and I had our ſelues for feare of his furie, by meanes whereof without any impeachment of vs, he paſſed the moſt part of the night in the like lamentations, vntill about the breake of day, that there chaunced a knight to come ſinging a ſong, which he had made for the loue of you, the which Durin recited vnto her, as alſo that which happened vnto Patin, which ſo ouer-charged the heart of Oriana, that ſhe remained in a ſwound, looking like one that were dead. The which Durin fearing, he called the Princeſſe Mabila, and the Damoſell of Denmarke, vnto whom he ſaide. Goe helpe my Lady, who is in a greate perplexitie for a thing which is now too late to be remedied: and if ſhee hath miſ-done, the puniſhment is of due vnto her. Herewithall he departed, leauing the women much amazed, for they knew not the cauſe of this inconuenience, much leſſe how they might remethe ſame: neuertheleſſe, they vſed her in ſuch ſort, that ſhee came againe vnto her ſelfe, and caſting forth a ſigh, ſhe ſaide with a feeble and low voice: Ah wicked woman that I am, whē with ſo great wrong I haue depriued him of life, whom in this world I moſt loued. And ſeeing it is out of my power now to reuoke that miſchiefe, whereof I am the repentant cauſer, I beſeech you (friend) to take my lament in ſatisfaction of the hurt which I haue purchaſed vnto you, with the ſacrifice which I ſhall make of mine owne life to follow you vnto the death: ſo the ingratitude which I haue committed againſt your loyaltie, ſhall bee manifeſted, your ſelfe reuenged, and I puniſhed. And as ſhee thought to haue proceeded further, her ſpeech failed her againe, wherewith Mabila and the Gentle-woman were more abaſhed then before, ſo that they called Durin to know what heauie newes hee had brought vnto Oriana, who wholly

declared it vnto them. Let me alone the ſaid Mabila, for I know wel how to remedy this matter. Hereupon they vnlaced her, and beſtirreth them ſo well, that ſhe brought her to life againe: then Mabila demanded of her how ſhe did. Gentle friend (anſwered ſhe) farre better then I deſire: So as I rather deſire death then life, for now I do nought elſe but languiſh. Wherefore Madame, ſaid Mabila: do you thinke my Coſin ſo inconſtant, that hee will not willingly excuſe the iniurie that you haue done vnto him, knowing that extreame loue rather then any other thing conſtrained you thereunto? And if he be gone, as Durin hath tolde you, it is but to paſſe away part of his melancholy, tarrying vntill his innocency bee knowne vnto you: But I am certaine, if it pleaſed you to call him back againe, that he is as ready to obey you as euer he was And behold what you ſhall doe: intreate him by a Letter, that hee take no regard vnto that which you did command him by Durin, and that which you did, was ſuddenly after a falſe report made vnto you of him: and therefore will him to come vnto you to Mireflure, where you ſtay for him to amend your fault at his diſcretion. Ah my Coſin, anſwered Oriana, do you think that he will euer vouchſafe, either to reſpect me, or make one ſteppe for me? But do you thinke, ſaide Mabila, that the loue he beareth to you, is of ſo little force, that he will not bee farre more glad to recouer your good fauour, then he hath beene ſorry to be by you forſaken? I am verily aſſured, that to die he will not diſpleaſe you. And to accompliſh this matter well, it behoueth the Damoſell of Denmarke to vndertake the charge to finde him out, becauſe he knoweth her, and putteth his truſt in her. Well, anſwered Oriana, I am content to be aduiſed by you. So ſhee tooke paper and inke, and as they had determined ſhe did write vnto Amadis, afterwards the Letter was giuen to the Damoſel of Denmark, with expreſſe commandement to paſſe firſt into Scotland, thinking that he might be there with Gandales, rather thē in any other place. And the better to colour their enterpriſe, they aduiſed the Damoſell to tell the Queene, that Mabila ſent her towards the Queene of Scotland her Mother, to vnderſtand ſome news from her: With the which the Queen was well pleaſed, and gaue her a Letter and tokens to preſent vnto her. Thus was the Gentlewoman diſpatched, who departed with Durin her brother, and Enil the Coſin of Gandales. And ſo long they rode till they came vnto a port towne called Vegill, which ſeparateth great Brittaine from the Realme of Scotland. There they tooke ſhipping, and they had the winde ſo faire, that the ſixt day following they landed in the Citty of Poligez. Then tooke they their way toward the Knight Gandales, whom they met a hunting: but when he beheld the Damoſell of Denmarke (knowing that ſhe was a ſtranger) he ſtayed, enquiring of her what ſhe did ſeek in that Countrey. Your ſelfe anſwered ſhe, towards whom, two Princeſſes your friends haue commanded me to come, to preſent from them certain preſents, which I carry vnto the Queene of Scotland. Gentlewomā ſaid he, may it pleaſe you to tell me their names: yea willingly ſir ſaid ſhe, the one is my Lady Oriana daughter to the mighty king Liſuart, & the other the Princeſſe

                     Mabila whom you know well enough. Ha ſaid Gandales, you are moſt luckily here arriued: and they haue reaſon to accompt me their moſt humble ſeruant, for ſo I am, & I pray you moſt heartily to come and alight at my houſe, then tomorrow we will go together to ſee the Queene: in the meane while doe mee this pleaſure, as to tell me how Amadis doth. The Gentle-woman was herewith much aſtoniſhed, ſeeing that ſhe had miſſed of her purpoſe: notwithſtanding diſſembling her ſorrow, ſhe anſwered Gandales: that he was not returned to the Court ſince he departed thence to reuenge Briolania: and it is thought that he is come into theſe parts with his coſin Agraies, to ſee the Scottiſh Queene his Aunt, and you alſo: for this cauſe the Queene and other Ladies of his kindred and deere friends, gaue me in charge to deliuer him a Letter, which will be very welcome vnto him I am ſure. And the Gentlewoman ſaid thus much, becauſe ſhe knew certainly, that although Amadis would hide him frō (knowing that ſhe brought him news from Oriana) others, yet hee would change his minde to ſpeake with her. I would ſaid Gandales that he were here, for I haue a long time greatly deſired to ſee him. Thus talking together at the laſt they arriued at the Caſtle of Gandales, where hee feaſted the Gentlewoman three dayes: and the fourth day following, hee conducted her vnto the Court, where ſhe deliuered to the Scottiſh Queene the Letters and preſents which the Queene Briſena had ſent vnto her.
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     How Don Guillan the Penſiue did bring vnto the Court of King Liſuart, the Shield, Armour, and Sword of Amadis, which he had found lying by the Fountaine of the plaine field.
                  
                  
                     AFter that Don Guillan the Penſif was departed from the Fountaine where he found Amadis his Armour, he rode ſix daies before he ariued in the Court of King Liſuart. And he ordinarily carried the ſhield of Amadis about his necke, and neuer tooke it off, except when hee was conſtrained to fight: then he tooke his owne, fearing to deface the other. And as he rode he met with two knights, Coſins to Arcalaus, who incontinently knew the ſhield of Amadis, and they thought Guillan to be he. Wherefore they (who hated him to the death) determined to aſſaile him, and ſaid one to another: euen now will we carrie the head of this villaine vnto our vncle Arcalaus. This they ſpake ſo lowd that Guillan heard it, where-with being throughly chafed he anſwered them. Palliards you reckon without your hoſt, for neuer did traitor affright me, no more ſhall you, ſeeing I know you for kinſemen to Arcalaus, and as wicked as himſelf: then pulled he downe the viſor of his Helmet, couched his launce and ran vpon them. Now they were yong and ſtrong, ſo that they defended themſelues ſtoutly: notwithſtanding at the laſt they could not long reſiſt him that had

charged them. Who after hee had ſome ſmal time fought with them, thruſt his ſword in the throat of the eldeſt, and the other fled vp towards the top of the mountaine, who was not long purſued by Guillan, becauſe hee was a little wounded, whereupon he let him go and followed on his way, along the which he rode ſo far, vntill he arriued at a Caſtle, belonging vnto a knight of his acquaintāce, where hee lodged for that night, beeing then very late. But the next day (as hee would haue departed from his lodging) his hoſt ſeeing him without a Launce gaue him one, from thence hee rode ſo long, that hee came neere a riuer named Guinon, ouer the which there was a bridge no broder then for two horſes to paſſe ouer afront. And approching more neere thereunto, he beheld a knight entering vpon the ſame, whoſe ſhield was vert, a bent Argent. This he knew to bee his coſin Ladaſin; and on the other ſide hee ſaw another knight ready to fight, who forbad Ladaſin from paſſing ouer, except hee would breake a Lance with him, but Ladaſin anſwered him, that he would not ſtay for ſo ſmall a thing, and herewithall couering him with his ſhield, he ſet ſpurres vnto his horſe. As much did hee that kept the paſſage, who was mounted vpon a great bay courſer, and did beare in his ſhield Argent a Lion Sables, and his helmet all blacke. Their encounter was ſo ſtrong, that Ladaſin fell into the water, where without doubt he had beene drowned (as well for the weight of his armour, as alſo for the high of the place from whence he fell) if he had not taken holde of certaine willowes, by meanes whereof hee got vnto the banck ſide. In the meane ſeaſon he that had ouer-throwne him returned faire and ſoftly from whence he was departed. Then Guillan ſeeing his coſin in ſuch danger, ranne ſpeedily to helpe him, and cauſed him to be pulled vp by his ſquires, and afterwards he ſaide vnto him: truſt me coſin without the helpe of theſe boughes you had beene in great danger, and therefore all ſtrange knights ſhould feare to iuſt vpon ſuch bridges: for thoſe which do keepe ſuch paſſages▪ haue their horſes no ſmall time experimenced for the purpoſe, with whome (more then by their owne proweſſe) they gaine the honour and reputation ouer a number of better knights then themſelues are. And as for me, I would rather turne out of the way a dayes iourney, then put my ſelfe in ſuch hazard, were it not to reuenge you if I can. Now the horſe of Ladaſin had not followed his maiſter, but was paſſed ouer to the other ſide of the riuer, and the knight of the bridge his eſquires were there ready to take him, who caried him into a pleaſant and ſtrong tower, ſeated in the middeſt of the water. Wherefore Guillan tooke his ſhield, and couched his Lance, he called vnto the knight of the bridge, that he ſhould take heede of him, who ran againſt him, and they met together with a moſt ſtrong encounter: neuertheleſſe it fell out ſo well for Guillan, that he ouerthrew his enemy together with his horſe into the riuer, and himſelfe had ſped little better, for he was vnhorſed as well as the other, if in falling his horſe had not ſlipped by the one ſide of him, and he taken hold of certaine ſtakes, by the which he got vpon the bridge again, from whence he might perceiue the knight in the riuer, who hauing cought hold by the taile of

the horſe of Guillan, was brought to ſhoare on the one ſide, and his horſe came to the other ſide, where the Squires of Ladaſin were ready to take hold of him. Thus againſt their willes the two knights made exchange of their horſes, and therfore Guillan ſent vnto the knight to tel him, that if he would reſtore his horſe and his fellowes, that they would ſend ouer his which their Eſquires had taken, and then they would depart. What anſwered the knight vnto him that brought the meſſage, thinke they to eſcape ſo lightly from my hands? yea truely ſaid the other, for they haue done as much as the cuſtome of the paſſage requireth. Not yet anſwered the knight, becauſe wee were both ouerthrowne: and therefore they muſt win the bridge by the ſword, if they will paſſe ouer. Will you then ſaid the other, compell them to fight? I thinke you ſhould be ſatisfied with this iniurie which already you haue done vnto them, ſeeing that all bridges ought to be free for euery paſſenger. I care not anſwered the knight, go tell them, they muſt feele (will they nil they) how my ſword cutteth: then hee leaped vpon his horſe moſt lightly without any helpe of his ſtirrop, afterwards comming neere vnto Guillā, he ſaid vnto him very fiercely and boldly: knight your embaſſadour hath beene ouer tedious in deliuering his meſſage, but before you eſcape me, you muſt of force tell me, whether you be any of the ſubiects to a king called Liſuart, or any of his houſhould. Wherefore? anſwered Guillan, I would it were my luck, ſaid the other, to haue him no 
                        〈◊〉
                      your ſteede, for by my head he ſhould not raigne one day longer. When Guillan heard him ſay ſo, none could be more angry then he was, & therefore anſwered him: in good faith knight, if king Liſuart my Lord were in my roome, I am very ſure, that he would eaſily make thee acknowledge this thy great preſumption: but ſince he is abſent, and that I know the hurt that thou wouldſt doe vnto him, I haue a greater deſire to fight againſt thee, then euer I had againſt any other knight. And if I can (being his ſubiect, and a knight of his houſe) I will chaſtiſe thee in ſuch ſort, that ſo good a Prince ſhall be hence-forth free from all thy malice. I doe not beleeue that ſaid the other: for before it be noone, I will make thee glad to carry a meſſage vnto him notwithſtanding before thou receiueſt thy deſert, my will is, thou ſhalt know both who I am, and what preſents I will ſend vnto him by thee, Guillan was very much diſpleaſed with the knights words, & hardly would he haue deferred the combat ſo long, had it not beene that hee promiſed to tell him his name, wherefore he ſtayed a while to heare what he would ſay. Know thou then ſaid the Knight, that I am Gandalod ſonne to Barſinan, late Lord of Sanſuega, whom King Liſuart moſt treacherouſly did put to death in the Citty of London. The preſents which I will ſend vnto him by thee, ſhall be the heads of foure knights of his Court whom I keep piſoners (and one of them is Giontes his nephew) together with thy right hand alſo, which I will hang about thy necke, after I haue ſeparated it from thy arme. Vild traitor anſwered Guillan, if thou canſt performe that thou braggeſt of, it were a great deale, but I beleeue thou ſhalt proue thy ſelfe a lier, and ſo ſaying h
                        •
                     e ſtrooke at him. Then there began between them a ſharpe and cruell Combat: For

withoot any breathing, they laid at each other ſo fiercely, that Ladaſin and his eſquires who were preſent, did not thinke that any of them could eſcape the death. Neuertheleſſe, they behaued themſelues ſo valiantly, that one could not iudge who had the beſt: for they were expert knights, hardy, and exerciſed in armes, ſo that knowing how to defend themſelues, few blowes could hurt them to the quicke. Now when their battaile was at the hotteſt, they heard the winding of a horne from the top of the tower, wherewithall Guillan was abaſhed. thinking it to be ſome new ſupply come to his enemy▪ and on the other ſide, Gandalod ſuſpected it to bee ſome reuolt of the captiues which he had in his priſons. And therefore either of them did their beſt to vanquiſh his enemy▪ before the ſuccours ſhould come: ſo that ſuddainnly Gandalod ruſhed vpon Guillan thinking to vnhorſe him, but Guillan embraced him ſo hard, that they both fell to the ground tumbling one ouer another, yet holding their ſwords faſt in their hands, but it happened ſo well for Guillan, that he had his enemy vnder him. By meanes whereof, before the other could riſe, hee gaue him fiue or ſix great blowes with his ſword, which in ſuch ſort amazed him, that from thenceforth he waxed more feeble. Notwithſtanding, getting vp vpon his feet, hee both well defended himſelfe, and better aſſailed his aduerſary, giuing ſufficient knowledge of the little good will he wiſhed vnto his enemy: who ſo ſorely oppreſſed vpon him, that hee was conſtrained to recoile and turne his back. Therefore Guillan marking where he was worſt armed, did hit him ſuch a blow with his ſword vpon the arme, that hee quite parted it from his ſhoulder. So as with the extreame griefe thereof he caſt forth a loude crie, flying towards the tower: but Guillan ouertooke him, and laide ſo faſt holde vpon his helmet, that hee pulled it from his head. Then ſetting his ſword to his throat, hee ſaide vnto him. Beleeue mee Sir, you ſhall now goe to the king to preſent him with other heads then you determined, but if you will not obey me, your owne ſhall ſatisfie me. Alas, anſwered Gandalod, I had rather yeelde my ſelfe to the mercy of the King, then to die preſently. Whereupon after hee had giuen his faith vnto Guillan, they mounted on horſeback, and Ladaſin with them. At that inſtant, they heard a great tumult within the tower, and beheld one of the warders running away, whome they ſtaied to know what the matter was: who told them that the priſoners had found the meanes to vnbinde themſelues, and to come forth of the dungeon wherein they were kept, afterwards how they were armed, and had already ſlaine the moſt part of his fellowes. Hee had no ſooner ended his ſpeech, when hee behelde ſome of thoſe, which he ſpake of, ouer the gate of the tower, and three or foure others which purſued a knight, and ſeuen halberders, that fled towards a wood hard by, and when thoſe which had gained their liberty, perceiued Guillan and Ladaſin, they cryed vnto them that they ſhould kill thoſe tratours that had ſcaped frō them, Wherefore Guillan & his coſin ran before and ſlew foure of them: the reſt ſaued thēſelues with their lightnes, excepting onely the knight who was taken. Then came the priſoners

to ſalute Guillan, whom they all knew, & after ſome talke which they had together, Guillan ſaid vnto them: my Lords, I cannot tarry long with you, for I am conſtrained to goe forthwith to King Liſuart, but my coſin Ladaſin ſhal bear you company vntill you haue refreſhed you, and afterwards I pray you to come vnto the Court, & to bring with you theſe two knights, whom I deliuer into your keeping, vntill king Liſuart haue taken ſuch order for them, as to his Maieſtie ſhall ſeeme beſt: and let one of you remaine here for the guard of this place, vntil I haue otherwiſe prouided for it. The which they promiſed him to performe, thus taking leaue of them hee tooke his ſhield from his neck, and gaue it vnto his eſquires, and taking the ſhield of Amadis (as he was accuſtomed) the teares ſtood in his eyes. Where-withal the others being much abaſhed, demanded of him, what mooued him thus to take his ſhield frō his neck, and place another in ſteed thereof with ſo great ſorrow. Ah, anſwered he, this ſhield belongeth to the beſt knight in the world, thē he reherſed vnto them the manner how hee had found it, with the reſt of the armor of Amadis, whom he had ſince ſearched for through all the countrey, without hearing any newes of him: wherewithall euery one of them were very ſorry, fearing leaſt ſome great miſ-fortune had happened him. Thus Guillan followed on his way, and rode ſo long that (without any further trouble) hee ariued in the Court of king Liſuart: where it was already known how Amadis had ended the aduentures of the Firme-Iſland, & gained the ſignorie thereof: in like ſorte how hee was departed from thence ſecretly, in great anguiſh. Neuertheleſſe they knew nothing of the cauſe thereof, except thoſe whom I before haue tolde you of. Thus Guillan entred into the hall, hauing about his neck the ſhield of Amadis, who was preſently known of all the aſſembly, wherefore they flocked about him to heare what he would ſay, but the king was for-moſt, who demanded what newes hee had of Amadis. It may pleaſe your maieſtie, anſwered Guillan, I knowe none: neuertheleſſe, if it pleaſe you I will before the Queen recite how I did finde his armour, ſword, and his ſhield which heere you may ſee. Truely ſaid the king, I am very well pleaſed, for ſince hee was her knight, it is reaſon that ſhe firſt know what is become of him. Saying ſo hee tooke Guillan by the hand, & led him where the Queen was. Then Guillan kneeling down, ſaid vnto her weeping. Madame, not many daies ſince I found al the armour of Amadis, with his ſhield left all alone hard by a fountaine, which is called the fountain of the plaine fielde: wherewithall I was ſo ſorrowful, that euen at the ſame inſtant I faſtned the ſhield vpon a tree, leauing in it the keeping of two Gentlewomen, that were in my company, vntil that I had gone through the countrey, to enquire where hee was become. But I was neither ſo fortunate to finde him, nor ſo happy to heare any newes of him, wherefore knowing the diſert of ſo good a knight, who had neuer any deſire, but to imploy himſelfe to doe you ſeruice, I determined ſeeing I could not bring him to you, to bring you his armes, as witneſſe of the duty which I doe owe both to your Maieſtie, and alſo to him: the which you may command (if you pleaſe) to bee ſet in an open

place, where euery one may ſee them, as well to heare news of him, by ſuch ſtrangers as ordinarily repaire vnto his Court, as alſo to encourage all ſuch as follow armes, to take example by him that was owner of them: who by his high knight-hood, hath gained the chiefeſt reputation amongſt all thoſe that euer buckled cuiraſſe on their backs. When the Queene vnderſtood ſuch news of Amadis, neuer was any Lady more ſorrowful, and anſwered Guillan: It is great pitty for the loſſe of ſo good a Knight: for I am ſure that many at this day do liue, which will be ſorry for his loſſe: and I giue you moſt hearty thankes for that which you haue done for him and me together: aſſuring you, that thoſe which will put themſelus forward to find him ſhall giue me and all other Ladies cauſe to wiſh them wel for his ſake, which was ſo much at their commandement. But if the Queene for theſe newes was any whit ſorry, the king and thoſe of his company were no leſſe ſad: yet was it nothing to the griefe which Oriana ſuſtained. For if before ſhe was vexed for the great fault which ſhe had committed, at that inſtant her paine redoubled with ſo great a melancholy, that it was impoſſible for her to ſtay there any longer, but ſhe withdrew her ſelfe into her chamber. And caſting her downe vpon her bed ſhe began to cry: Ah wicked woman that I am, I may now well ſay, that all the felicity that euer I had is but a plaine dreame, and my torment is a very certaine truth, ſeeing that if I receiue any contentment, It is onely by the dreames which do nightly ſolicit me, for when I awake all froward Fortune afflicteth my poore ſpirit, ſo as if the day be vnto me a grieuous martyrdome, the darkeneſſe only bringeth me pleaſure and comfort, becauſe in my ſleepe I thinke that I am before my ſweete friend, but being awake and quite depriued of that great ioy, maketh me too much to feele his abſence. Ah my eyes, no more eies but floods of teares, you are much abuſed, ſeeing that being ſhut you onely behold him that contenteth you: and no ſooner opened, but all the torment in the world commeth at once to blinde them: at the leaſt this death which I feele ſo neere at hand ſhall deliuer me from this care: and you ſweete friend ſhall be reuenged of the moſt ingratefull woman that euer was borne. Then like a furious woman ſhee roſe vp, determining to throw her ſelfe headlong from the window downe to the ground: but Mabila who had followed her preuenting ſuch an inconuenience ſtayed her, ſetting before her the infamy which ſhe might get, if it were but known that ſhe were ſo minded: and more-ouer ſhe did aſſure her that Amadis would ſhortly returne, ſaying vnto her: How now Madam? where is the conſtancy of a Kings daughter, and that wiſedome for which you are ſo much renowned? Haue you already forgotten the miſchiefe that was likely to haue happened vnto you, by meanes of the falſe newes that Arcalaus brought vnto the Court this laſt yeare? And now becauſe Guillan hath found my Coſins armes, is it therefore likely that he ſhould be dead? Beleeue me, you ſhall ſee him againe ſhortly, & he wil come vnto you ſo ſoone as hee hath ſeene your Letters.
                  This Counſell was authoriſed with ſuch perſwaſine reaſons, that Oriana apeaſed part of her tormēt:

But yet theſe newes ſo greately troubled her minde, that had it not beene for the wiſedome of Mabila (who often times perſwaded her to be quiet) there had happened a merueilous incōnenience: but in the end ſhee knew ſo well how to preuaile with her, that ſhe reſolued vpon this, that the Gentlewoman of Denmark would bring him againe. And as they were in theſe tearmes, one came to tell them that the knights and Gentle-women which Guillan had deliuered from priſon were arriued, wherefore Mabila ſeeking to with-draw Oriana from fancies, brought her where the Queene was, vnto whom the two Gentlewomen (that had kept the ſhield of Amadis) recited the lamentation which they had ſeene an Eſquire make, when he knew the Armour and Shielde that Guillan had found vpon the ſide of the Fountaine of the plaine field. The King was likewiſe preſent in whoſe eyes ſtood a floud of Teares, thinking aſſuredly that Amadis was dead. Then Ladaſin and his fellows were ſeene to come in, who brought with them Gandalod priſoner, together with the other knight, whom they preſented vnto the king on the behalfe of Guillan, declaring vnto him both the manner of the Combat, the talke that paſſed betweene Gandalod and Guillan, and alſo how that during their incounter, the knights that were in the deepe dungeon of his tower had found the meanes to deliuer themſelues. Is this true ſaid he to Gandalod, I cauſed not long ſince thy father to be burned in this citty, for his great treaſon, and thou ſhalt likewiſe be there hanged with thy companion, becauſe thou hadſt conſpired my death. Then forthwith he commanded them to bee hanged ouer the Citty wales right ouer againſt the place where Barſinan was burned as it hath been recited vnto you.
               
               
                  CHAP. IX.
                  
                     How the Faire Forlorne being in the poore Rocke with the Hermit, there arriued a ſhip, in the which was Coriſanda, who ſought for her friend Floreſtan, and of that which happened vnto them.
                  
                  
                     ONe day the Faire Forlorne being ſet hard by the Hermit, neere vnto the dore of their little houſe, the olde man ſaid vnto him: I pray you my ſon, tel me the dream that you had, when you awaked on a ſuddaine ſleeping hard by me neere vnto the Fountaine of the plaine field. Truely father anſwered he, I will willingly tell it you, and I moſt humbly beſeech you likewiſe to let mee vnderſtand, be it for good, or bad, what you thinke thereof. Afterwards hee recited the dreame in ſuch ſort as you haue heard, keeping onely the names of the Gentlewomen ſecret.
                  Then the Hermet remained a good while penſiue, when he beholding the Faire Forlorne, he began to ſmile, and ſaid vnto him: My child, I aſſure you, that you haue now more cauſe to reioyce then euer you had: but yet I would haue you know how I vnderſtand it. The darke chamber in the which you thought your ſelfe to be, out of which you were not able to comforth,

ſignifieth this great tribulation wherein you now are. The Gentlewomen which afterwardes opened the doore vnto you, are ſome of your friends that continually ſolicit your cauſe vnto the Lady whom you ſo feruently loue, with whom they haue ſo much preuailed, that they ſhall withdraw you from this place. The Sunnebeame which went before them, are Letters of reconciliation that ſhe ſendeth vnto you: by meanes whereof you ſhall leaue me. The fire that inuironed this lady, ſheweth the great loue, together with the ſad laments that ſhe maketh for your abſence, as well as you doe for hers. And by the faire garden whereunto you did beare her, drawing her forth of the flame, ſignifieth the great pleaſure which you ſhall both haue at your meeting. Truely my Son, I know that ſeeing the habit and eſtate whereunto I am called, ſuch ſpeeches as theſe become me not at all: neuertheleſſe knowing that it is for your good, I am ſure that I doe not amiſſe in this counſelling a perſon ſo comfortleſſe as you are. Here-with all the Faire Forlorne fell vpon the ground to kiſſe his feete, reioyſing that he had happened into the company of a perſon ſo holy, that knew how to comfort him ſo well in his aduerſity, deſiring very heartily, that whatſoeuer the holy man had told him, might ſo come to paſſe, and he ſaid vnto the Hermit, my Father ſeeing it hath pleaſed you to do me ſo much good, as to expound this dreame, I pray you likewiſe to tell me the meaning of one other, which I dreamed the night before I came from the firm-Iſland.
                  Then did hee recite it word by word vnto him. Whereupon the aged man anſwered him. My ſon, by this you may plainely ſee that which already is happened vnto you, for I aſſure you that the place ouer ſhaddowed with trees, where you thought that you were, & the great nūber of people which at the firſt made ſuch great ioy about you ſignifieth the firm Iſland which you haue conquered, to the great pleaſure of al the inhabitants thereof. But the man which came vnto you with a boxe full of bitternes, is the meſſenger of the Lady that gaue you the letter: and your ſelfe doth know better then any other, whether he brought you bitterneſſe or no, by the diſcourſe which he had with you. The ſorrow which afterwards you did behold in the perſons which before were ſo ioyfull, are they of the Iſle, who at this preſent are very heauy for your abſence. The apparell which you threw off, are the teares which you haue ſhed. The ſtony place wherin you entred inuironed with water, this rock witneſſeth to you what it is. The religious mā that did ſpeake vnto you in an vnknown lā
                     guage, is my ſelfe, who do inſtruct you in holy writ, which you neither vnderſtand, nor can comprehend. Father anſwered the Fair-Forlorn. I know verily that you ſay the truth which giueth me great hope of that which you haue declared of the other: but the continuall griefe and melancholie wherein I liue, hath already ouer-maſtered mee, that I beleeue if the good which you promiſe vnto me do not the ſooner caſe my care, death will firſt ſeize vpon my ſorrowfull corps.
                  Notwithſtanding the Hermit knew how to perſwade him ſo wel, that from thenceforth he ſhewed a little merrier countenance then before he had done, and began to

turne his ſorrow to ſome ſolace, vſing to angle for fiſh with two Nephwes of the olde man, that kept him company. Neuertheleſſe, the moſt part of the time he with-drew himſelfe into a ſecret place hard by the ſea ſide, which was ouer-ſhadowed with diuerſe ſorts of trees: and there oftentimes he caſt his ſight vnto the Firme-Iſland, which put him in remembrance of thoſe fauours whereunto fortune had called him, & the wrong that Oriana did vnto him, hee hauing neuer offended. Alas, ſaide he, haue I deſerued this entertainment to be baniſhed, without hauing offended ſo much as in thought? Truely deere friend, if my death were agrieable vnto you, you haue meane enough to giue it me more ſpeedily, without making mee thus to liue in languiſhing. The onely deniall of your good grace, the very firſt day that you accepted me for your knight, had beene ſufficient at that time to haue made me die a thouſand deathes. Many other lamentations did the Faire Forlorne euery day make, in this ſolitary place, wherein he tooke ſo great pleaſure, that oftentimes hee there paſſed away both the day and the night: ſo as one time finding himſelfe more frollick in his minde, then of a long time he had beene, hee made this ſong following.
                  
                     Sith that the victory of right deſerued,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         they do withhold for which I ſerued;
                     Now 
                           〈◊〉
                         my glory thus hath had a fall,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         it is, to end my life withall.
                     By 
                           〈…〉
                         is my death likewiſe my woes releaſe,
                     My 
                           〈…〉
                         loue doth ceaſe.
                     But euer 
                           〈…〉
                         my during paine:
                     For 
                           〈…〉
                         my glory, and my gaine,
                     My ſelfe haue 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and my glory ſlaine.
                  
                  Thus the Faire Forlorne paſſed away the time, waiting vntill fate or better fortune ſhould bring him forth of this miſerie. But it happened that one night lying vnder the trees (as hee was accuſtomed) about the breake of day hee heard very nigh him the ſound of a moſt ſweete inſtrument, wherein he tooke ſo great pleaſure, that he gaue attentiue eare thereunto a good while, amazed notwithſtanding from whence it might proceede. Knowing the place to bee ſolitary that no other there remained but the hermit, his two Nephewes, and himſelfe: wherefore he roſe vp, without making any noyſe at all, and approched more neere to ſee what it might be. Then he beheld two young Gentlewomen ſitting by a fountaine, who (tuning their voyſes to the ſound of a lute) did ſing a moſt pleaſant ſong: neuertheleſſe fearing to trouble their mirth, hee ſtood ſtill a great while without being by them perceiued. Afterwards he came forth and diſcloſed himſelfe, ſaying vnto them: Truely Gentlewomen your muſicke hath made me this day to looſe Matins, for the which I am very ſorry. When theſe women heard him ſpeake (hauing not ſeen him at all vntill that time) they were much afraide. Norwithſtanding, one of them more bold then her fellow, anſwered him: My friend, we did not thinke to offend you with this our mirth, but ſeeing we haue ſo luckily found you, tell vs (if it pleaſe you) who you are, and how this deſert place is called. In truth faire Gentlewomen, ſaide the Faire Forlorne, this place is called the poore Rock: wherein there liueth an Hermit, vpon the top thereof in his little hermitage. As for me, I am a poore man that keep him company, doing great and hard penance for the ſin and wickedneſſe which I haue committed. Gentle friend, anſwered they,

may we finde in this place (for two or three dayes onely) any houſe wherein we may place at eaſe a Lady both rich & mighty, ſo tormented with loue, that ſhe is euen at deaths dore therewith. Truſt me ſaid he, there is no other lodging in this Rock, but the little cabinet wherein the Hermit doth lie, and one other that I do ſleepe in ſome-time: but if the Hermit will lend you mine, I am content (to do you a pleaſure) to lie in the meane time abroad in the fields, as I commonly vſe to do. The Gentlewoman gaue him hearty thankes, and bidding him good morrow they departed towards a Pauilion: within the which the Faire Forlorne beheld a moſt beautifull Lady vpon a bed. Wherupon he knew that the ſame was ſhee of whom they told him. But looking farder off, he did ſee foure armed men walking by the Sea ſide, who ſcouted abroad, whileſt fiue others did take their reſt, and he alſo perceiued a ſhippe at Anchor well appointed. The Sun was already vp, when he heard the Hermitage bell to ring, which made him go vp thither. Where he found the Hermit making him ready to goe to ſeruice: vnto whom he tolde that there were people newly arriued in the Rock, and that if it were his pleaſure, hee would willingly goe call them to heare Mattins. Goe then anſwered the Hermit, and I will ſtay for them. And as he went downe the Rocke, he met the Lady, whom the knights carried toward the hermitage: wherefore he returned, to helpe to make ready the Hermit, who ſeeing the Lady was come, began ſeruice. Then the Faire Forlorne being amongſt the women, began to remember the time when he was in the Court of king Liſuart, and of the pleaſure hee was wont o haue with the Princeſſe Oriana, there-withall he began to weepe ſo bitterly, that the Gentlewomen perceiued it, and did very much wonder thereat. Notwithſtanding they thought that it was for the contrition of his ſinnes, and ſeeing him young, fayre, and comely, they could not thinke what to preſume thereof. When the Hermit had made an end of ſeruice, they came to ſalute him, praying him for Gods ſake, to lend them ſome little chamber for their Lady (who was wearie of the Sea, and extreamely ſicke) wherein ſhe might take her reſt, for a day or twaine. In truth faire Ladies, anſwered he, there are here no more then two ſmall Cabinets, in one of them I remaine (and if I can ſo long as I liue, neuer woman ſhall come therin) and the other is for this poore man, which doth ſuch great penance, wherein ſometimes he ſleepeth, and I would be very ſory that he ſhould bee put out thereof againſt his will. Father ſaid the Fare Forlorne, do not let for me to doe them a pleaſure, for I am very well content for this time to haue no other lodging then vnder the Trees. Well ſaid the hermit, let it be ſo a Gods name. Then the Faire Forlorne conducted them vnto his Cabinet, where the Gentlewomen ſet vp a rich bed for their Miſtreſſe, who was forthwith carried thither. And becauſe it was told the Faire Forlorne that her ſickneſſe proceeded of extreame loue, he tooke more heede to her behauiour then to any of the reſt: and he perceiued that her eyes were ſtill full of Teares, and her ſighs were at commandement: Wherefore hee drew the two Gentlewomen apart, whom in the morning hee

had found playing on the Lute, & earneſtly entreated them to tell the occaſion of the great ſickneſſe that their Miſtreſſe ſuſtained. Friend anſwered they, if you marke her well you ſhall find that ſhe is very faire, although that now her diſeaſe hath abated a great part of her beauty: for ſhee hath neither comfort nor ioy by reaſon of the abſence of a knight that ſhee goeth to ſeeke in the houſe of King Liſuart, whom ſhe ſo feruently loueth, that if ſhort time doe not graunt ſome eaſe to her paſſion, it is impoſſible that her life ſhould continue long. When the Faire Forlorn heard king Liſuart named, hee could not refraine from teares, and hee had a greater de
                        •
                     ire then before, to know the name of the knight that ſhe loued: therefore he requeſted them very earneſtly to tell him his name, in good ſooth anſwered the Gentlewoman, hardly may you knowe him: for hee is not of this countrey: yet is hee eſteemed the beſt knight in the world, next vnto two other of his kin. Alas my faire gentlewoman ſayd hee, for Gods ſake name him vnto me, and the two other whom you ſo much extoll. Truely anſwered they, we are contented, vpon this condition, that firſt when wee haue done, you doe tell vs whether you bee a knight or not, and afterward your name. I am content therewith, ſayde the Faire Forlorne, ſo great is my deſire to knowe that which I demand of you. Then one of them ſayd vnto him: the knight which this Lady loueth, is called Don Floreſtan, brother to the good Knight Amadis of Gaule, and to Don Galaor, and hee is the ſonne of King Perion of Gaule, and of the Counteſſe of Salandria. You ſay true anſwered hee, and I verily beleeue that you cannot ſay ſo much good of him as hee deſerueth. What? ſayde the Gentlewomen, doe you know him then? It is not long ſayd he, ſince I did ſee him in the houſe of Queen Briolania, for whom his brother Amadis, and his Coſen Agraies did fight againſt Abiſeas and his two ſonnes, and thither hee with his brother Galaor arriued ſome fewe dayes after the combate: and I thinke him to be one of the faireſt knights in the worlde. As concerning his proweſſe, I haue many times heard Don Galaor himſelfe ſpeake thereof, who fought a combate with him as hee ſayde. This combate ſayde ſhee, was the cauſe that hee left my Lady in the ſelfe ſame place, where they firſt knew one another. I thinke then anſwered the Faire Forlorne, that ſhee is called Coriſanda. You ſay true ſayd the Gentlewomen. In truth anſwered he, I am no leſſe ſory for her ſickneſſe then before, for I knowe Floreſtan to bee ſo wiſe, and of ſo good behauiour, that I am ſure hee will doe all that which ſhe ſhall cōmand him. God grant it ſayd ſhee, but ſeeing wee haue ſatisfied you, acquite you of your promiſe and tell vs who you are. Gentlewoman anſwered the Faire Forlorne, I am a knight who haue heretofore had more pleaſure in the vanities of the worlde then now I haue, for the which I heere abide ſharpe penance, my name is the Faire Forlorne. By my truth ſaid one of them, you haue taken a good courſe, if you are able therein to continue. And becauſe there is no reaſon now to leaue our Miſtreſſe all alone in this her great melancholy, wee bid you farewell, and doe goe vnto her to paſſe away the time with ſuch muſicke as you did heare this morning.
                  
                     
Then the Faire Forlorne departed, but hee was preſently called backe againe, for as ſoone as the gentlewomen had played two or three ſongs, they rehearſed vnto Coriſanda all that hee had ſaide of Floreſtan, and that the poore man which did penance, had ſeen him not many dayes before. Wherefore ſhe ſent to pray him to come vnto her, and in the meane while ſhee ſayde vnto her women: aſſure you this Hermit that knoweth Floreſtan, muſt needs be ſome great perſonage diſguiſed. At the ſame inſtant the Faire Forlorne was come, and ſhe ſayd vnto him: my friend, my women tell me that you know Don Floreſtan, and that you doe very well loue him, I pray you (by the holy order that you profeſſe) to tell me what acquaintance you haue had with him, and where you did laſt ſee him. Then the Faire Forlorne told her more of him then hee had tolde vnto the Gentlewomen, and how hee knew very well, that he and his brethren, with their Coſen Agraies, had beene in the Firme-Iſland: for he had there left them, and neuer ſince had ſeene them. Ah ſayd ſhe, I beleeue that you are ſomething a kinne vnto him, ſeeing the great good you report of him. Madame, anſwered the Faire Forlorne, I loue him intirely, as well for his valour, as alſo for that his father made me knight, which maketh me the more bounden vnto his children: and I am very ſory for the newes that I haue hard of Amadis before I did come vnto this deſert. What are they ſayd Coriſanda. Truely anſwered hee, comming hither I met with a Gentlewoman at the entry of a Forreſt which ſung a pleaſant ſong for the tune, but very pittifull by reaſon of the matter that it contayned. Then I enquired of her who made it, and ſhee anſwered me, that it was a knight, vnto whō God (if it bee his pleaſure) ſend more ioy then hee had when hee made it, for his ſong doth very wel witneſſe, that his griefe proceeded from too extreame loue. And becauſe I liked it wel, I remained with the Gentlewoman ſo long vntill I had learned it: moreouer ſhe did aſſure me that Amadis did make it, and that he did ſhew her the ſong at that time when by his melancholy hee was moſt maiſtered. I pray you ſayde Coriſanda, teach it vnto theſe two Gentlewomen, for by that which you ſay, loue held him then in as great bondage as he now holdeth me. I will doe it anſwered hee, both for the honour of him and alſo of you, althought it be a thing farre vnſeemely for me to do. Herewithall he withdrew the Gentlewomen a part, and taught them the ſong with the tune there-of, wherein they tooke great pleaſure, becauſe the Faire Forlorne did ſing it with a lamentable and ſoft voyce, which yeelded more harmony and aptneſſe, both to the tune and the matter, then he could if hee had beene at more liberty in body and minde: and the Gentle-women learned it ſo cunningly, that many times after they did ſing it before their Miſtris, who tarried foure dayes in the poore Rocke, & the fift ſhee embarqued. But before ſhe departed, ſhee demanded of the Faire forlorne, whether hee would remaine any long time in that place. Madame, anſwered he, nothing but my death ſhall drawe me from hence. I doe much maruaile ſayde Coriſanda, what mooueth you to doe ſo: yet ſeeing that you are in ſuch a minde, I will in no ſorte diſſwade yon from it:

ſo ſaying, ſhe entred into her ſhip with her companie, bidding the Hermit farewel. Then ſetting ſaile, the winde was ſo fauourable, that in fewe dayes after they landed in Great Brittaine, and arriued in the Citie of London, where at that time King Liſuart remayned. Who knowing of her arriuall, hee together with his Queene receiued her royally. The King to honour her the more, cauſed her to bee lodged in his owne Pallace. And ſome few dayes after, as they were diſcourſing together, the Queen ſayd vnto her, Good Coſen, the King charged mee to tell you, that hee t
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •
                     our comming hither to ſee 
                        •
                     im 
                        •
                     o th
                        •
                     nkefully, that if you haue any thing to doe with him, he will imploy his beſt meanes to pleaſure you. Madame, anſwered Coriſanda. I giue the King moſt humble t
                        •…
                     kes, and your grace alſo: there is nothing that importuneth mee more, then the abſence of Don Floreſtan, whom I thought to haue found in this Court. Coſen ſayde the Queene, wee haue at this time no other newes, of him, but that hee is gone in ſearch of his brother Amadis, who of late is loſt, we not knowing the cauſe thereof. Then ſhee tolde her how hee had wonne the Firme Iſland, and that after-wardes hee departed ſecretly from his fellowes: eſpecially the manner how Don Guillan did finde his armour, and what diligence hee had vſed to vnderſtand what was become of him. When Coriſanda did ſee that ſhee was fruſtrate of her intention, and vnderſtood the loſſe of Amadis, the teares ſtood in her eyes, ſaying: Alas what wil become of my Lord and friend Floreſtan, I am ſure (conſidering the loue that he beareth vnto his brother) that if hee cannot finde him, he will loſe himſelfe, ſo that I ſhall neuer while I liue ſee him any more: the Queene comforted her ſo well, that ſhee receiued ſome hope to heare news from him very ſhortly. Now Oriana was by, who had heard all this talke, and the loue that Coriſanda did beare vnto Don Floreſtan, brother to Amadis: for which cauſe ſhee had the more deſire to doe her honour, ſo as ſhe and Mabila did ordinarily keepe her company, taking great pleaſure to heare her recite the loue that paſſed betwixt her and hee friend, the cauſe of their parting, and the trauell which afterwardes ſhee had endured in hope to finde him. And as ſhee made this diſcourſe, ſhe remembred her of the time when ſhee remayned in the poore Rocke, where ſhee found a knight doing penance, who during her abode there, taught a ſong vnto her women: which Amadis had made being in great melancholy, as the companion of the Hermit had aſſured her. Madame anſwered Mabila, I pray you feeing your Gentlewomen haue learned it, cō
                     maund them to ſing it before my Lady Oriana: for I ſhall bee very glad to heare it, ſeeing it is made by Amadis, who is mine owne Coſen. Beleeue mee ſayd Coriſanda, I am very well content, aſſuring you that it cānot better pleaſe you then it will delight me, becauſe of the neerneſſe of the linage that is betwixt my Lord Floreſtan & him. Then ſhee ſent for the Gentlewomens Lutes, who played and did ſing the ſong of Amadis ſo ſweetely, that it miniſtred both mirth & mone vnto the Ladies which vnto them liſtened: ioy to the eare, cō
                     tent for the melody, and griefe to the minde, in feeling his paſſion, that was ſo grieuouſly pained. But

                     Oriana whom it moſt of all touched, tooke more heede vnto the matter then the muſicke, knowing the miſchiefe whereof ſhe was cauſe, and the great reaſon that Amadis had to complaine. Where-upon ſhee was ſuddenly ſtricken w
                        •…
                      ſo great ſorrow, that ſhe went into a wardroabe, aſhamed for the te
                        ••
                     e
                        •
                      that had iſſued from her eyes i
                        •…
                      good a company, from which ſhe could not abſta
                        •
                      Notwithſtanding as ſhee withdrew her ſelfe, Mabila (to couer this fault) ſayd vnto Coriſan
                           •
                        a So farre a
                        •
                      I perceiue, Oriana is not well, wherefore I am cōſtrained to leaue your company at this t
                        ••
                     e, and to goe helpe her▪ neuertheleſſe, if it pleaſed you, I would willingly knowe what was the behauior of him that taught your Gentlewomen the ſong, and wherefore he remayned in the poore Rocke: for no doubt hee did then knowe what was become of Amadis. Then Coriſanda rehearſed vnto her in what ſorte they did finde him, and the talke he had with her: but ſayd ſhee, I did neuer ſee a man more penſiue, not more faire, conſidering the miſeries he endured. Mabila very ſuddenly began to ſuſpect that it was Amadis himſelfe, who being ſo far from all hope, had choſen ſuch a ſolitary place, becauſe hee would not be ſeene of any liuing wight, and at the ſame inſtant ſhee departed towardes Oriana, whom ſhee found weeping bitterly. Vnto wh
                        •
                      (with a ſmiling countenance) ſhee ſayd. Madame, in ſeeking after newes, ſometimes one learneth more then hee thinketh vpon, witneſſe this which I haue vnderſtood of Coriſanda. The knight ſo ſad, that is named the Faire Forlorne, in the poore Rocke, is Amadis and no other, who deſirous to obey your commandement hath in ſuch ſort withdrawne himſelfe, becauſe hee would neither be ſeene of you, nor of any other perſon▪ therefore I pray you reioyce, for you ſhall ſhortly drawe him hither againe. Alas anſwered Oriana may it bee poſſible? I would I might bee ſo fortunate to 
                        ••
                     brace him in my armes before I die and beleeue 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     en ſayd ſhe to Mabila, tha
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      I may once againe haue him. 
                        〈…〉
                      giue him ſuch an occaſion 
                        〈…〉
                      d
                        ••
                      me▪ that he ſhall forget all 
                        〈…〉
                      wrong which I haue done vnto him. But then very ſuddenly like a perſon doubtfull and fearefull to loſe that which ſhe loued, ſhee began to make a greater lamentation then before, crying: Ah my Co
                     
                        •
                     en, haue pittie vpon mee, I am in worſe caſe then if I were dead, vnfortunate woman as I am: I haue iuſtly loſt by my folly, him vpon whom my good, my ioy, and my life doth wholy depend. How now Madame, ſayd Mabila, euen when moſt hope is preſented 
                        •
                     nto you doe you then 
                        •
                     oſt torment yo
                        ••
                      ſelfe▪ Aſſure you vpon nvfaith of the Gentlewoman of Denmarke do not bring you newes of him, that I will finde the meanes to ſupply her want: being ſure, that it is he which nameth himſelfe the 
                        
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        re 
                           ••
                        rlorne, and no other, and repoſe you vpon me herein.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. X.
                  
                     How the Gentlewoman of Denmarke going in ſearch of Amadis, afect long trauell, coſting along many ſtrange Iſlands, by chance ſhe arriued in the poore Rocke, where Amadis was, who was called the Faire Forlo
                              •
                           e, whom ſhe knew, & how they returned together towards Oriana.
                     
                  
                  
                     TEn whole dayes did the Damoſell of Denmarke remaine with the Queene of Scotland, not ſo much for her pleaſure, nor for to reſt herſelfe from the ſtormes of the Sea, as for the deſire ſhee had to learne ſome newes of Amadis, in the countrey wherein ſhee thought aſſuredly to finde him: being aſſured that if ſhe ſhould returne vnto her Miſtreſſe, without bringing her ſome newes, that ſhe could not afterwards liue one houre, knowing in what anguiſh ſhe had left her. Neuertheleſſe, not being able at that inſtant to take any better courſe in her affaires, after ſhe had vſed all the diligence therein that poſſibly ſhee could, ſhee determined to returne into Great Brittaine, ſo ſorrowfull as might be. Then ſhee cauſed a ſhip to be ready, wherein ſhee embarqued: but the deſtinies pittying theſe two perſons, would in this matter make manifeſt how much they could performe, in giuing worldlings to vnderſtand, that no man (how valiant or diſcreet ſoeuer) can helpe themſelues without their diuine ayde. For as ſoon as the Mariners had weighed their anchors & hoyſed their ſailes, hoping to ſet their courſe for London, the winde and tempeſt rayſed ſuch a ſtorme, that without any ſtorage at all, the ſhippe was toſſed with ſo great rage, that the Mariners and all the reſt deſpairing of health, expected no other buriall but in the fiſhes bellies. And thus they remayned two dayes and two nights, not knowing where they were, much leſſe what they ſhould doe. In the end, the Sea being appeaſed, and the ſtorme paſt, about the breake of day they diſcouered the poore Rocke, where they took landing: and becauſe ſome of the Mariners (who knew the place) did tell the Damoſell of Denmark, that Andahod the deuout Hermit had there his reſidence, ſhee determined to goe heare diuine ſeruice, & to giue God thankes for the good that hee had done for them in deliuering them from ſuch perill: and without longer ſtay ſhee began to goe vp the Rocke, accompanied with Durin and Enil. At the ſame time the Faire Forlorne (who by chance had paſſed that night vnder the trees, as hee was accuſtomed) perceiued them, and ſeeing that they came towards him, becauſe hee would not be ſeene hee turned another way, and got to the Hermitage before them, where hee found the Hermit ready to ſay ſeruice. But hee tolde him that there were people newly arriued, who were comming vp the Rocke, and therefore it were good to ſtay, if he pleaſed, vnto the which the Hermite willingly agreed. At the ſame time was the Faire Forlorn ſo leane, wanne, and ſo tanned with the heat of the Sunne, that hee could hardly be knowen for Amadis, for his continuall weeping made ſuch ſurrowes in his face, that there was

nothing to bee diſcerned but skin and bone. And as the Gentlewoman and her company entred into the Chappell, hee was vpon his knees lifting vp his eyes to the heauens and praying that either by his ſpeedy death his c
                        •
                     re might be ended, or in prolonging his dayes ſome preſent comfort might be afforded vnto him. Whileſt he was thus praying, the Hermit beganne his ſeruice, during which time the Faire Forlorne did not once looke vp, to beholde any of them 
                        •
                     r riued vntill it was ended, who caſting his eyes vpon them, hee knew the Damoſell of Denmarke & the reſt. Therewithall hee felt ſuch a motion that (both by reaſon of his great weakeneſſe, as alſo by ſeeing of her that put him in minde of all his martyrdome) he fell downe all along vpon the ground, wherefore the Hermit thinking that hee had beene dead, cryed out: Ay me is he gone? then God haue mercy vpon his ſoule. Saying ſo, a flood of teares fell from his eyes downe vpon his long hoary beard. Then he ſayd vnto the Damoſell of Denmarke: I pray you Gentlewoman for charity ſake, command your Eſquires that they may helpe mee to beare my fellow into his chamber, for ſo farre as I ſee it ſhall bee the laſt good that wee can doe for him. Whereupon E
                           •
                        il and Durin tooke him vp, neither of them knowing him. But the Damoſel of Denmarke demanded of the Hermit what he was. Truely anſwered hee, it is a knight which liueth here in penance. Truſt me ſayd the Damoſell, hee hath choſen a very auſtere life, and in a very deſert place. Hee hath done it, anſwered the Hermit, to ſeparate himſelfe from the vanities of the world. Verily ſayde the Gentlewoman, ſeeing you aſſure me that he is a knight, I will ſee him before I depart: and if there be any thing within the ſhip, which may ſerue his turne, I will cauſe it to bee left for him. It ſhall be well done anſwered hee, but ſo farre as I ſee, he is ſo neare his end, that I beleeue hee will eaſe you of that labour. Herewithall the Damoſell entred into the little chamber where the Faire Forlorne was layd, who ſeeing her ſo neere vnto him, knew not what he ſhould do: for hee thought that making him-ſelfe to be known, he ſhould tranſgreſſe the commandement of his Oriana, and alſo if ſhee departed, and he not diſcouered, hee ſhould remaine voyde of all hope. In the end he concluded that it were leſſe hurtfull for him to die, then his Ladie ſhould be diſpleaſed, therefore hee determined for reſolution not to manifeſt himſelfe in any ſort vnto the Damoſell of Denmarke, who ſayd vnto him. My friend I haue been enformed by the Hermit that you are a knight, and becauſe all Gentlewomen are greatly bound vnto good knights, for the benefits and pleaſures that they commonly receiue at their hands in defending them, and deliuering them from many and great dangers, I had a great deſire before I departed to ſee you, to giue vnto you ſuch prouiſions as are in my ſhip, that ſhall be neceſſarie for your health. Notwithſtanding, he anſwered her nothing, neither did hee any other thing but lament and ſigh: and becauſe that in that little Cell wherein hee remayned, there was little light, the Gentlewoman did not know whether hee were a dying or no. Whereupon ſhe was ware of a window, which ſhe opened, by the light whereof ſhee might behold him more at eaſe: but all the while

that ſhe beheld him, hee neuer caſt his eyes off from her, neuertheleſſe hee ſpake not one word, but ſighed without ceaſing, like vnto a wight, whoſe heart was ouercharged with woe, which moued the Damoſel to exceeding pittie. And comforting him in the beſt ſorte ſhe could, by chance ſhee eſpied a ſcarre which he had vpon his face, with a blow that Arcalaus the Enchanter had giuen him, when hee reſcued Oriana, as hath beene recited in the firſt Booke. Wherefore ſhee thought in her minde that without doubt this was Amadis whom ſhee 
                        •
                     ought, and at the inſtant ſhee did know that he was euen the ſame, & for the ſame cauſe ſhee being grealy amaſed, cryed out, Alas what do I ſee? My Lord you are he that hath made me haue many a weary iourney to find you: this ſayd, ſhe embraced him. Alas my Lord ſayd ſhee, it is now high time to extend both pitty and pardon vnto her, who (procured thereunto by ſome ſiniſter report, hath brought you to this great extreamitie) beleeue me, doth now iuſtly endure a life worſe then death: then did ſhe deliuer him the Letter that Oriana had written vnto him. Hold ſayd ſhe, your Lady ſendeth you this, and commandeth you by me, that if you be the ſame Amadis that you were wo
                        •
                     t to be, and hee whō ſhe ſo much loueth, that (forgetting all paſſed faults) you come vnto her to the Caſtle of Mirefleur, where a full ſatisfaction ſhall bee made vnto you, for the ſorrowes and anguiſhes which you haue ſuffered for your ouer feruent loue. Here withall was the Faire Forlorne ſo greatly rauiſhed, that it was a long time before hee could anſwer one word, but hee tooke the Letter which hee kiſſed without ceaſing, and afterwards put it next vnto his heart, ſaying▪ O poore heart ſo long time paſſioned, that hardly haſt thou beene able to reſiſt ſuch a tempeſt, notwithſtanding the abundance of teares, which thou ſo continually haſt diſtilled, that it hath almoſt brought thee euen to the point of death, receiue now this medicine, the which only is conuenient for thy health, and come forth of this darknes, which ſo long hath blinded thee, taking thy ſtrength againe vnto thee, to ſerue her that of her owne free grace cauſeth thee to reuiue. Then opened hee the Letter which contayned
                  
                     
                        The Letter of Oriana to Amadis.
                        
                        
                           IF great faults committed by enmitie (acknowledged afterwards by humility) are worthy of pardon, what ought thoſe to bee which are cauſed by too much abundance of loue? Neuertheleſſe my loyall friend I will not deny but that I haue deſerued exceeding puniſhment: for I ought to haue conſidered that at ſuch times when any are in the greateſt proſperity and mirth, then fortune commeth and ouerthroweth them into ſorrow and miſery: furthermore I ought to haue remembred me of your exceeding vertue and honeſty, which was neuer yet found faulty, and moſt of all though I had died, yet ſhould I not haue forgotten the great ſeruitude of my penſiue heart, which proceedeth from no other cauſe, but onely from the ſame wherein your owne is tyed: being certaine that ſo ſoone as any flame had beene therein quenched, mine had as ſuddenly beene there-withall acquainted: in ſuch ſort as the care which it hath had to aſwage the mortall deſires thereof, hath been

the onely cauſe to encreaſe the ſame. But I haue done amiſſe, like vnto them who being in the top of their felicity, and moſt aſſured of the loue of thoſe, by whom they are beloued (not being able to comprehend in them ſo much good) become iealous and ſuſpicious, more by their owne imagination, then by any reaſon, ouer ſhadowing this bright happineſſe with tha cloud of impatience, beleeuing the report of ſome men (it may bee wicked ſlanderers) of ſmall credit, and vitious, ſooner then the witneſſe of their owne conference, and certaine experience. Therefore my conſtant friend, I beſeech you bartely to receiue this Damoſell 
                                 •
                              as beeing ſent from her, who acknowledgeth in all humility, the great fault which ſhe hath committed againſt you) who ſhall (better then my letter) acquaint you with the extremitie of my life, where of you ought to haue pittie, not for any of mine own deſert, but for your owne reputation, who are neither accounted cruell, nor deſirous of reuenge, where you finde repentance and ſubmition, eſpecially ſeeing that no penance may proceede from you more rigorous, then that which I my ſelfe haue ordained for me, and the which I doe b
                                 •
                              re patiently, hoping that you will releaſe it, reſtoring vnto me your good fauour and my life together, which thereupon dependeth.
                        
                     
                  
                  Herewithall a new ioy poſſeſſed the minde of the Faire Forlorne, and hee quite baniſhed the continuall melancholy which had ſo long tormented him▪ neuertheleſſe, the perplexity wherein Oriana remained, in expecting newes from him, with held part of pleaſure: wherefore he praied the Damoſell of Denmarke, to aduiſe her ſelfe what ſhe had to do for I feele my ſelfe, ſaid he, ſo farre beſide my ſelfe, that I can thinke vpon no other thing, but vpon the new reſtitution of my life, which I haue receiued by your meanes. I am of the opinion, anſwered the Damoſell, ſeeing that theſe in my company do not know you, to tell them that for pittie ſake, I will cary you to the Firme Iſland, only to ſee if by changing the aire, you may alſo change your malady: the which was accordingly performed. Notwithſtanding, the Faire Forlorne before his departure, declared vnto the Hermit, how the Gentlewoman had ſo long ſought for him, that now they were heere caſually met together, onely by meere chance, and the ſtorme which had brought her vnto the poore Rock. And for this cauſe my father, ſaide he, I am conſtrained to leaue you and to follow her, aſſuring you that ſo long as I liue, I ſhall neuer forget the good which you haue done for mee, for without your good help, I had periſhed both body and ſoule. And ſeeing that by your deuout praires (as I beleeue) I haue beene preſerued hitherto, I moſt humbly beſeech you to haue your poore gueſt ſtill in remembrance. And moreouer to do ſo much for me, that hereafter you would doe your beſt to reforme the Moneſtary which I haue cauſed to be builded in the Firme-Iſland, as heere tofore I haue tolde you: the which the holy man promiſed to accompliſh, and with the teares in his eyes, bleſſed the Faire Forlorne, who without longer ſtay, went aboord with the Damoſell of Denmarke. The ſailes were no ſooner horſed, and the ſhip lanched out into the main, but they had ſo ſtiffe a gale in their poupe, that within a fewe daies after they arriued in a port of great Brittaine, he not being as yet knowne by any other but

the Damoſell. Then came they on ſhoare and tooke their ready way towardes Mirefleur, where Oriana ſtayed their comming, being well aduiſed to amend the fault that ſhe had made. And the Damoſell in riding together with the Faire For
                        
                           ••
                        rne, ſayd. What ioy will my Ladie receiue when ſhe ſhall beholde you? belecue mee that neuer woman was in a more deſperate caſe then ſhe, when ſhe 
                        •…
                     ſtood by 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      the 
                        •…
                     t at you had in 
                        〈◊〉
                      her Lett
                        •
                     r 
                        〈◊〉
                      aſſure you that ſhee was 
                        〈◊〉
                      haue 
                        〈◊〉
                     , I doe greatly wonder how 
                        ••
                     ee hath beene ab
                        •…
                      vntill this time to ſupp
                        •…
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                      which 
                        •
                     he yet poſſeſſeth▪ And you neede not to doubt but that Mabila and I were greatly troubled, for none of vs did know that my hrother was ſent vnto you, and my Lady had expreſly charged him that in no ſort hee ſhould tell vs thereof, which had like v
                        •
                     to haue beene the cauſe of 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                     iſchiefe then is yet happened. Beleeue me ſaid the Faire For
                        
                           •••
                        ne. I was neuer in greater danger 
                        〈◊〉
                      death and I doe maruell where
                     
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      framed this imagination that ſhee hath conceiued againſt me, ſeeing that I neuer thought to doe any thing which might diſpleaſe her: and although I ſhould haue ſo fa
                        •…
                     e forgotten my ſelfe, yet did I not deſerue ſuch a cruell Letter as ſhee did write vnto mee. For although I make not thoſe bragges & hipocriſies that a number can doe, yet doe not I forget to meaſure the fauours and graces which I haue receiued at her 
                        ••
                     nd: and were not this thought 
                        〈◊〉
                      in bad ground, I am ſure ſhe would not be ſuſpicious of the fruit thereof, ſeeing that both the one and the other, are wholly dedicated to ſerue and obey her. Alas when Coriſanda arriued in our Hermitage, I did then verily think that my ende was come: the good Lady bewailed her paſſion which ſhe indured in louing my brother Plo reſtan, too vehemently, and I died with diſpleaſure, to bee ſo wrongfully baniſhed by Oriana. H
                        ••
                      many pa
                        ••
                     es, what 
                        〈◊〉
                     , what intollerable torments, haue I ſuffered in the poore Rocke, without receiuing conſolation from any liuing creature, but the good Hermit, who perſwaded mee to pati
                     
                        •…
                     ? Alas what h
                        •…
                     d p
                        •…
                      
                     
                        ••
                     ne I indured for her wh
                        •…
                     m I neuer offended? beleeue me Damo 
                        〈◊〉
                     , I was ſo excee
                        •…
                      troubled, that euery houre I d
                        •…
                     red death, and as often did I feare to loſe my life. But I pray you imagine, the deſpaire wheren I remayned, when I ſhewed vnto the Gentlewomen of Coriſanda, the ſong that I made in my greateſt tribulation. And as hee would haue proceeded in diſcourſing his dolours, the Damoſell of Denmarke ſayd vnto him, in good faith, ſo farre as I perceiue you haue both indured much ſorrow, one for another: and therefore you muſt forget what is paſt, and amend what is to come.
                  With theſe and ſuch like diſcourſes thy arriued neere vnto a Nunnery, which was in the midſt of the forreſt, foure dayes iourney from London. Doe 
                        〈◊〉
                      know ſayd the Damoſell, what I have thought vpon: I thinke it for the beſt you doe tarry heere to reſt your ſelfe, and I will go vnto my Lady, to tell her of your arriuall, which done I will ſend Durin backe againe, to let you know what you are to do. Not withſtanding I thinke it beſt that Enil ſhould not yet know who you are no more then he now doth, & that hee ſhould tarry heere with

you to ſerue you: but Durin already vnderſtandeth ſomewhat of the affaires betwixt Oriana & you, wherefore you neede not feare to diſcloſe your ſelfe vnto him. Here-upon they called him, and the Damoſell of Denmarke ſayd vnto him. Brother, you were partly cauſe of the loſſe of Amadis, by the Letter which you carried to him, and yet ſo farre as I perceiue you haue not hither to knowne him, but doe you thinke it poſſible that this Hermite may be my Lord Amadis? and neuertheleſſe it is he without doubt, but take heede vpon your life that he be not diſcloſed by you neither to Enil, nor any other: when Durin knew that his ſiſter ſayde true, neuer was man more amazed then hee: in the meane while they entered into the Nunnery, where the Damoſell called Enil and ſayd vnto him, Enil I pray thee tarry with this knight vntill hee haue a little recouered his ſtrength, and in the meane ſeaſon my brother and I will depart about certaine buſines that wee haue to doe. By Saint Mary anſwered Enil, I will obey whatſoeuer you ſhall commaund mee. Then they departed, and the Faire Forlorne remayned in the Nunnerie for the occaſion aboue rehearſed.
               
               
                  CHAP. XI.
                  
                     How Galaor, Floreſtan, and Agraies departed from the Firme-Iſland, to goe ſeeke Amadis, of whome they could heare no tydings at all, where-upon they all returned vnto the Court of King Liſuart.
                     
                  
                  
                     IT hath beene heretofore tolde you that Golaor, Floreſtan, and Agraies departed frō the Firme-Iland, to begin the ſearch of Amadis, who was ſecretly departed from them. You muſt now vnderſtand that after they had trauayled thorough many ſtrange countries (wherein they performed many worthy deedes of armes and perillous aduentures, without hearing any newes of Amadis) ſeeing that their time approached wherein they promiſed one another to meete in the Court of King Liſuart, they determined to returne thither: and they all did meete euen vpon Saint Iohns day earely in the morning at an Hermitage hard by London, according as they had appointed. And the firſt that came thither, was Galaor, Agraies next, and ſhortly after Floreſtan, accompanied with Gandalin. Glad were they all to ſee each other in health, but ſo ſorrowfull for the little good that they had done in this enterpriſe, as the teares fell from their eyes. Where-upon Gandalin ſhewing the dutie of a good and faithfull ſeruant, ſaid vnto them. Beleeue me Lords, all your teares cannot bring him whō you deſire to finde, except it be by another diligent ſearch, which you may a freſh vndertake. And allthough that you haue already done your beſt endeauour, yet ought you not to thinke much of your labour, but ſeeke him better then euer you did, ſeeing that you are aſſured thoroughly what hee would haue done for euery one of you particularly, if fortune had offered any occaſion. Now

then if behooueth you to doe the like for him, for if you doe loſe him in this ſort, it ſhall not onely bee the loſſe of the moſt gentle knight in the world, but of the neereſt kinſman that you haue, and ouer and beſides, it will be vnto you a great blemiſh. Therefore my Lords I beſeech you, in performing the duty of a brother, a friend, and a companion, to begin his ſearch a freſh, without ſparing therein at all either time or toile. This perſwaſiō did Gandalin make, in weeping ſo extreamly, that it greatly putied the three knights to behold him, ſo as they concluded, after they had beene in the Court (if they heard not news of Amadis) to begin a new purſuit, & to compaſſe the whole world about till they had found him: and vpon this determination (after they had heard diuine ſeruice) they departed from the hermitage, and tooke the way towards London. But as they approched nere vnto the Cittie, they were ware of the King, who was already in the fields accompanied with many noble men, and valiant knights: for hee celebrated that day with all magnificence, becauſe that vpon the ſame he was crowned peaceable king of great Brittaine, which was the principall occaſion that many knights came to ſerue him. Who beholding Galaor, and his fellowes comming towards them, ſhewed the king thereof, and they in the mean ſeaſon were hard at hand. But becauſe Floreſtan had neuer before ſeene ſuch an aſſembly, Galaor ſaid vnto him. Brother behold the king. Now had they all three their headpieces off, wherefore ſome in the company did know them all forth-with except Floteſtan, the King imbraced them, demanding how they fared. Then Floreſtan 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to kiſſe his hands, the which he refuſed. And becauſe he was the Gentleman that did moſt of all reſemble Amadis, and that heretofore he had heard ſpeaking of him, he began to ſuſpect that it was his brother, and therefore he ſaide vnto Galaor, I beleeue that this is your brother Floreſtan. It is he indeede, if it pleaſe your Maieſtie, who hath a great deſire to doe you ſeruice. Ah, ſaid the king, I would Amadis were now heere that I might ſee you all three together, what, ſaide Galaor, hath your grace heard 
                        〈◊〉
                      newes of him? No, ſaide the king: but what haue you heard? It may pleaſe your Maieſtie, anſwered he, wee haue all three ſought him a whole yeere, yet haue we done no good, but loſt our labour, and we did thinke to haue found him here in your Court: wherefore ſeeing your grace hath certified me to the contrary, I am in worſe hope of his recouery then before. So am not I, ſaide the king, for I am perſwaded the heauens haue not endued him with ſuch perfections, to forſake him after this manner, which maketh me to beleeue, that we ſhall very ſhortly heare ſome tidings of him. Whē they had ended their talke, they entred into the Cittie, where the Queene and the other Ladies were incontinently aduertiſed of their arriuall, wherewith they were as glad as might bee, eſpecially Olinda, the friend to Agraies, who very lately was aduertiſed, that he had paſſed vnder the arch of faithfull louers, and ſhee expected his comming with as great deuotion, as Coriſanda did the arriuall of Floreſtan. Then M
                           •…
                        
                      imagining to do Orian
                           •
                        
                      a pleaſure, 
                        〈◊〉
                      to aduertiſe her: but ſhe 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     wordh-drawn

i
                        •
                     to 
                        •…
                     er, where ſhee ſawe her 
                        •…
                     ing her head vpon one of h
                        •
                     r h
                        ••
                     ds, and reading in a booke, to whom ſhe ſaide: Madame, will you pleaſe to come downe to ſee Galaor, Agr
                           •…
                        
                      and Floreſtan, who are now newely heere arriued? Whē ſhe heard her ſpeake nothing of Amadis, a new feare ſtrook at her heart, ſo that ſhe knew not what to doe, and the teares diſtilled from her eyes in ſuch aboundance, that her ſpeech failed. Neuertheleſſe, in the end, not beeing able to diſſemble her griefe, ſhee anſwered Mabila: my coſin and ſweet friend, how would you haue me to go ſee them? in good ſooth, I haue not my minde ſo well ſetled that I may diſſemble or hide that, which in their preſence I ought to doe. Moreouer mine eyes are ouerſwollen with much weeping, and (that which worſe is) it is impoſſible for to behold thoſe, whom I did neuer ſee but in the company of your coſin, whom I haue ſo highly offended. Heerewithall her heart was likely to haue left her ſorrowfull body, and ſhe cryed. My God how doe you permit mee wretched woman to liue, being ſo worthy of death? Ah my deere loue, I doe now feele a double griefe for your abſence, ſeeing Galaor & the reſt to returne without you, whome you loued as deere as your ſelfe, who knowing the iniury and wicked act that I haue cōmitted againſt you, ſhall haue iuſt cauſe to procure my ruine, whereunto I conſent with a good will, ſeeing that ſo vnaduiſedly I haue beene the meanes of your loſſe. Herewithall ſhe had fallen downe all along, if Mabila who ſtreight eſpied it, had not ſtaied her vp, ſaying vnto her: Madame, will you alwaies continue theſe ſtrange paſſions? I know well that in the end, you will publiſh that to your ſhame, which we doe moſt deſire ſhould be kept ſecret. Is this the conſtancy which you ought to haue, eſpecially ſeeing that day by day we expect to heare good newes by the Damoſell of Denmarke? Alas, anſwered ſhee, you ſpeake at your pleaſure, is it poſſible that ſhee may finde him, hauing the charge but to ſeek him onely in Scotland, ſeeing that his brethren haue in a manner compaſſed all the Weſt▪ without hearing any newes at all of him? You abuſe your ſelfe, ſaide Mabila, it may bee that they had found him, but that hee kept himſelfe ſecret from them, the which he wil neuer do frō your Gentlewoman, knowing that ſhe is priuie to both your loues. And therefore be of good cheere vntill her returne, and then doe as you ſhall thinke good: and for this time, let vs goe if it pleaſe you towards the Queene who demandeth for you. Well, anſwered Oriana, I am content to doe what you will. Then ſhee dried her eyes, and went in the Queenes chamber, into the which the three knights were already entred: who ſeeing her comming did their duty vnto her: at the ſame time the King held Galaor by the hand, vnto whom he ſaid: behold I pray you, how your good friend Oriana is impaired, ſince you did laſt ſee her. In good faith, anſwered Galaor, your Maieſtie ſaith true, and I would with all my heart, that I might doe her any pleaſure, that might purchaſe her former health. Herewithall Oriana ſmiled, ſaying vnto Galaor. God is the only comforter of all men, ſo that when his pleaſure is, my health ſhall bee reſtored, and your loſſes recouered, which no doubt are great, for ſo

deere a brother Amadis was vnto you. And I would that the trauell which you haue taken to ſeeke him in farre countries, had brought ſome fruit, as well for the good of you and yours, as alſo for the ſeruice of the King my father, vnto the which hee was wholly adicted. Madame anſwered Galaor, I truſt that wee ſhall very ſhortly heare ſome newes of him, becauſe he is the knight that I haue euermore ſeene moſt valiantly to reſiſt all extremities. God grant it ſaid Oriana, but I pray you cauſe Don Floreſtan to come neere vnto vs, that I may more plainely beholde him, for I haue beene tolde that hee is the knight that doth moſt reſemble your brother Amadis. Whereupon Galaor called him, and he came & ſaluted Oriana, who tooke him by the hand, & they three ſate downe together. Then the Princeſſe imagined that ſhe did verily beholde him, who beeing abſent from her, ſhee had day and night before her eyes, and therefore ſhee began to bluſh and change her colour. Now had Mabila in like fort withdrawn her ſelfe, together with Olinda, to giue a better occaſion vnto her brother Agraies more priuately to ſpeake vnto her: and there withall hee ſeeing them in a place ſo conuenient, came and ſaluted them, then at their requeſt he ſate downe betweene them, in taking Olinda ſecretly by the hand. And ſhe who did languiſh for his loue, was the gladdeſt that might be, being ſure of his conſtancy, by the proofe which he had made paſſing vnder the arch of loyall louers in the Firme-Iſland, in recompence whereof ſhe would willingly haue giuen him better intertainement, if ſhe durſt. But the preſence of ſo many witneſſes, took from them not o
                        •…
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , which otherwiſe they would h
                        ••
                     e g
                        •…
                      the one to the other, but all
                        •
                      the facility and liberty of ſpeech: ſo that their eyes onely ſerued to ſupply this default, which 
                        •
                     hey imploied therein according to the affections of their paſſioned harts. And as they were in theſe pleaſant tearms there was heard from the chamber as if it had been the voyce of ſome oppreſſed with grief, wherfore the king would needs know who it was? It may pleaſe your Maieſty anſwered an Eſquire it is Gandalin & the Dwarffe, who no ſooner beheld the ſhield and armour of Amadis, but they made and yet continue the ſtrangeſt lamentation that poſſibly may be. What ſayde the King, is Gandalin here? He is if it like your Maieſty anſwered Floreſtan. It is very neere two monethes ſince I did finde him at the foot of the hill of Sang
                           •
                        in, as hee was ſeeking his Maiſter, and becauſe I did tell him that I had already ſought him in euery place, hee was content to come with me. In good faith ſaid the King, I haue alwaies eſteemed Gandalin for ſuch a one, as now he ſheweth himſelfe to be, for I did neuer ſee any Eſquire to loue his Maſter better then hee doth.
                  When Oriana heard theſe words, eſpecially how that Gandalin was returned without Amadis, ſhe was in ſuch a perplexity, that ſhee was likely to haue ſwouned betweene Floreſt
                           ••
                        
                      his armes, who not knowing the cauſe of her ſudden paſſion, and fearing to affright the King and the company, called Mabila, who forthwith doubted ſuch a miſchance. Wherefore leauing Agraies alone with Olinda, ſhee came vnto Oriana, and cauſed her ſecretly to depart into her chamber, and to lie downe vpon her

bed, where ſhee remained not lo
                        •
                     g, but that riſing vp as it were almoſt beſide her ſelfe, ſhee ſayd vnto M
                           •
                        bila: Coſen, you knowe that ſince our comming to this Cittie, there hath paſſed neuer a day wherein wee haue not receiued 
                        •
                     ore diſpleaſure. Therefore I am determined to withdrawe my ſelfe for a certaine time vnto my Caſtle of Mirefleur, for my heart telleth me that in changing the ayre, I ſhall alſo change my afflictions, and that my troubled ſpirit ſhall there finde reſt. Madame, anſwered Mabila, I am of the ſame opinion, to the end that when the Damoſell of Denmarke doth returne, you may more priuately ſpeake with her, and pleaſure him that ſhee (I hope) ſhall bring with her, the which would be very hard, yea almoſt impoſſible to doe in this place. As you loue mee then ſayd Oriana, let vs not tarry any longer: for I am ſure the King and Queene will very willingly giue vs leaue.
                  Now you muſt vnderſtand, that this place of Mirefleur, was a little Caſtle moſt pleaſantly ſeated two leagues from London, built vpon the ſide of a hill, and compaſſed vpon the one ſide with the Forreſt, and vpon the other with many Orchards, full of all ſorts of trees and pleaſant flowers: moreouer it was inuironed with many great Fountaines, which watered it on all parts. And becauſe that once the King (being there on hunting with the Queene) ſeeing that his daughter tooke great pleaſure in the place, hee beſtowed it vpon her, and afterwards ſhe cauſed a Nunnerie to bee builded within a bow ſhot thereof, whereunto ſhe ſometimes went to recreate her ſelfe. But that I may not degreſſe ouer farre from my firſt diſcourſe, Ori
                        
                           ••
                        a according as ſhe had determined, came and demanded leaue of the King and Queene for her departure, the which was eaſily granted vnto her: and therefore ſhee purpoſed to depart the next day very earely in the morning. And becauſe that Galaor and his conſorts would in like ſort returne to make a new ſearch for Amadis, finding the King at leaſure, they ſayd vnto him: If it pleaſe your Maieſty, wee were greatly to be blamed if wee ſhould any longer deferre the ſeeking of Amadis, becauſe my fellowes and I haue ſworne neuer to reſt in any place, before wee haue heard of him, therefore it may pleaſe your grace to giue vs leaue to depart to morrowe, to doe our endeauours. My friends anſwered the King. I pray you deferre your departure yet a fewe daies longer, in the meane ſeaſon I will cauſe thirty knights to depart from hence, who ſhall goe & begin this voyage: for I haue great neede of ſuch knights as you are, for an enterpriſe which is happened vnto me, the which importeth me greatly both in goods and honour, it is a battaile which I haue appointed againſt King Cildadan of Ireland, who is a ſtrong and mighty Prince. And to let you vnderſtand the cauſe of this warre, Cildadan hath married one of the daughters of King Abies, whom Amadis ſlew in Gaule. And although time out of minde, the realme of Ireland hath euer beene tributarie vnto the King of Great Brittaine: neuertheleſſe to haue an occaſion of quarrell this Cildadan refuſeth the payment thereof, and ſendeth me word that he will put one hundred of his knights in battaile againſt the like number

of mine, vpon this condition, that if he be ouercome he will redouble the tribute which I doe demand of him, otherwiſe he will hence-forth remaine free and acquitted, the which I haue condiſcended vnto. So my friends, I doe moſt earneſtly entreat you, euen as you loue mee, not to forſake mee in this my greateſt neede, knowing aſſuredly, that my enemies are ſtrong, and determined to worke my diſpleaſure, but by your good helpe and the right that we haue, we ſhal eaſily ouercome them, then ſhall you goe ſeeke out Amadis, as you haue determined, and you ſhall take as many of my knights with you as you pleaſe. When they heard this requeſt which the King did make vnto them, there was not any amongſt thē, that was not content to obey him, ſeeing his neceſſity ſo great, although that thereby the queſt of Amadis was delaied: and at the ſame inſtant they promiſed not to forſake him. During this cōference, Mabila ſent to ſeeke Gandalin, for ſhee would ſpeake with him before ſhee went to Mirefleur, who came vnto her: and as ſoone as hee did ſee her, he could not poſſibly refraine from weeping, nor ſhe likewiſe. Afterwards hauing ſome-what eaſed their hearts with their exceeding teares, Gandalin ſpake firſt, ſaying vnto Mabila: Alas Madame, what wrong hath Oriana offered, not onely to you, hut vnto all your lignage together, cauſing you to loſe the beſt Knight in the world. Ah, how ingratefull hath ſhe ſhewed her ſelfe vnto you for the ſeruice which you haue done vnto her? and that which is yet worſt of all, ſhe hath wronged him that neuer offended her either in word or thought: wherefore I may well ſay, that God hath very ill beſtowed vpon her that great beauty, and other excellent gifts where-with he hath endued her, ſeeing they are gouerned and ouer-ruled with ſo great treaſon: and yet I am well aſſured that none hath loſt more then ſhe. Gandalin my friend anſwered Mabila, I pray thee put that thought forth of thy minde, for thou art ouer-much deceiued, ſeeing that all which my Lady Oriana hath done, hath beene for the griefe and diſpleaſure that ſhe cō
                     ceiued for one word which was ouer-lightly reported vnto her, through which ſhe hath conceiued ſome occaſion of iélouſie, imagining, that thy maiſter had forgotten her, and that the affection which he did beare vnto her, was turned and beſtowed vpon another. Notwithſtanding, ſhe did neuer imagine, that her letter (written in choller) ſhould haue beene of ſuch conſequence, nor that ſo much hurt ſhould haue proceeded thereof: but ſhee committed this fault as one that was caryed away with too extreame loue, which fault is the more pardonable in her, for the repentance which ſhe hath endured euer ſince. Ay
                        •…
                      ſaide Gandalin, how was the diſcreete vnderſtanding of my Lady, and you abuſed at that time, i
                        ••
                     
                     gining that my maiſter could only but thinke to commit ſo hainous 
                        〈◊〉
                      fault againſt her, whom before hee ſhould haue offended, hee would haue ſuffered himſelfe to be buried quick vnder the ground? and I p
                        •…
                      you Madam, tel me if it pleaſe you, the roote of this miſchiefe, and what was that vnhappy worde, which ſo troubled the vertue & ſpirit of you both, to ca
                        •…
                     e the death of the moſt perfect Knight that euer was borne. Ardan the Dwarffe,

anſwered Mabila, (thinking to ſpeake for the aduantage of Amadis) was the occaſion of all this miſchiefe. Then ſhe recited vnto him at large, the whole diſcourſe of the three peeces of the ſword, as you haue heard in the firſt booke. And aſſure thee Gandalin, ſaid ſhe, that neither the Damoſell of Denmarke nor I, were euer able to driue it from the fantaſie of Oriana, but that ſhe was forſaken by him, ſo as ſhee ſtill perceiuing that ſhee was cōtraried by the Damoſell of Denmarke and me, did hide her ſelfe from vs, and vnawares to vs both ſhe wrot vnto him, that vnhappy letter which Durin did bring him, by the which is ſprung the whole ſourſe of this miſchiefe. Whereof ſhee hath ſince that time, often enough repented her: for from the firſt houre that ſhe did heare of Amadis his loſſe, ſhee hath receiued ſo great ſorrow and griefe, that it is impoſſible to receiue any more: and neuertheleſſe, we haue been in a manner very glad of her puniſhment, ſeeing that ſhe hath not yet feared to procure his diſpleaſure, that of her hath ſo well deſerued. All this diſcourſe did Oriana heare, who was in her wardrobe: and perceiuing that they had changed then talke, ſhee came forth as if ſhe had heard nothing at all. And as ſhee would haue ſpoken vnto Gandalin, the teares diſtilled from her eyes, and ſhe began to tremble ſo extreamely, that ſhe fell downe all along vpon the floore, crying. Gentle Gandalin, if thou art the ſame that thou ſhouldeſt be vnto thy maiſter, reuenge vpō me forth-with, the greate miſerie which vniuſtly he endureth. Madam, anſwered hee, what would you haue mee to do? I pray thee, ſaid ſhe, kill me: and ſince I haue moſt iniuriouſly cauſed his death, thou oughteſt not in reaſon to defer the reuenge thereof, for I am ſure he wold haue done more for thee. Saying ſo her ſpeech failed, and ſhee ſwouned as though ſhe had bin departed. But Mabila accuſtomed to ſuch qualms, did releeue her with a preſent and fit remedy, that when ſhe came to her ſelfe againe, ſhe cried wringing her hands. Ah Gandalin, thou doeſt mee great wrong, thus long to defer my end: I would to God that thy father were in thy place, I am ſure that hee would beſtir himſelfe better thē thou doeſt: Madame, anſwered Gandalin, God defend me from ſuch diſloyalty, I ſhould truely play the part of the notableſt villaine in the world, if I ſhould but onely thinke ſuch a thought, much more if I ſhould commit two ſo great treaſons, one againſt you, and the other againſt my Lord, who cannot liue one only houre after you. And I would neuer haue thought that ſo wicked coūſell ſhould haue had any place within your ſpirit, for the incertainty that you haue of my maiſter his death, who could haue hardly endured this wrong which you now in theſe words haue offered him, without endangering his life, for death commeth not but at the will and pleaſure of God: who hath not beſtowed theſe fauours vpon him euer ſince his natiuitie, that for any iniurie that you haue done vnto him, he will permit that he ſhould yet die. Many other reaſons and perſwaſions did Gandalin vſe to Oriana which gaue great eaſe to her matirdom, by means where-of ſhe ſaid vnto him: Gandalin my friend, I am determined to morrow morning to depart vnto Mirefleur, to expect either life or death, according to the newes which the

Damoſell of Denmarke ſhall bring vnto me. And becauſe I ſhall remaine there ſome long time, I pray thee vnder the colour of ſeeing Mabila, to come and viſit vs often-times, for me thinkes my ſorrow decreaſeth when I doe ſee thee. Madame, anſwered Gandalin, I am ready to obey you in whatſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe you to command mee. This ſaid, he tooke his leaue of her, and as he departed from thence, he paſſed by where the Queene was, who cauſed him to be called, and then ſhee ſaide vnto him. Gandalin my friend, wherfore didſt thou forſake thy maiſter? Madame, anſwered he, it was ſore againſt my will, and to my great griefe. Then hee reherſed the manner how hee departed from the hermitage, and the complaints and lamentations that he made, eſpecially he declared what his manner and behauiour was, when he found him in the bottom of the valley, which moued the Queene vnto ſuch pittie, that ſhee ſhed luke warme teares thereat. Whereunto Gandalin taking good heed, ſaid vnto her. Madam, your highneſſe hath reaſon to lament the loſſe of my Lord, for hee was your graces moſt humble ſeruant. Nay rather my good friend and protector, anſwered ſhe, and I would it were the Lords pleaſure, that wee might heare ſuch ſpeedy newes from him, as might giue vs cauſe to reioyce. And as they talked together, Gandalin caſt his eye vpon Floreſtan, who was talking with Coriſanda, whome Gandalin knew not: but hee thought her to be one of the faireſt Ladies that euer he had ſeene, therefore hee beſeeched the Queen to tell him who ſhee was, the which ſhee did, and the occaſion wherefore ſhee was come into great Brittaine, as alſo the loue which ſhe did beare vnto Floreſtan, for whoſe ſake ſhe ſtaied at the Court: if ſhe doe loue him, ſaid Gandalin, ſhee may well vaunt that her loue is imployed vpon him, in whome all bounty remaineth, and he is ſuch a one, that hardly may his equal be found in all the world: and moreouer Madame, I aſſure you, that if your grace did know him ſo well as I, you would not eſteeme any knight more then he, for he is of a moſt valiant heart and high reſolution. He ſeemeth to be ſuch a one, anſwered the Queen, further-more hee is of ſo good a grace, and alied to ſo many good knights, that it is impoſſible but that hee ſhould bee ſuch a gentle knight as thou haſt reported him to be. In the meane ſeaſon Floreſtan entertained his Lady and Miſtris, whom he loued moſt feruently, & not without a cauſe: for ſhee was paſſing faire, a rich Lady, and alied to the nobleſt houſes in all great Brittaine. Who hauing remained yet ſome few dayes in the Court after his returne, ſhee determined to depart, and taking her leaue of the king and Queene, ſhe took her iourney toward her own countrey. Two whole daies together did Floreſtan accompany her, who promiſed her that ſo ſoone as he heard any newes of Amadis, and that the battaile was paſt betwixt the two Kings, Liſuart and Cildadan, (if he remained aliue) hee would come vnto her to tarry with her a long time: then taking his leaue of her, hee returned vnto the Court. But you muſt vnderſtand, that Oriana who had not forgotten her determination of going to Mirefleur, departed the next morning with her traine, where ſhee had not long remained, but that ſhe perceiued the amendment of her

health, and with the ſame, her hope increaſed to ſee him, whom ſhee ſo greatly deſired. And becauſe that the king had appointed, that during her aboade in that place of Mirefleur, the gate ſhould continually bee kept, and that no body ſhould enter thereinn: Oriana foreſeeing (for the great deſire ſhee had that it ſhould be ſo) the comming of Amadis, ſhee ſent to tell the Abbeſſe, that ſhee ſhould ſend vnto her the keyes of the Nunnerie gardens, to walke thither ſometimes for her recreation, the which ſhee accompliſhed, which were hard adioyning to the Caſtle, but yet incloſed with very high walles. And one day as Oriana walked there, accompanied onely with Mabila, ſeeing the place fauourable and fit for her purpoſe, as if Amadis were returned, ſhe began to thinke of him in ſuch ſort, and vpon the pleaſure ſhe ſhould receiue by his preſence, that in ſpeaking to herſelfe ſhe ſayd: Ah my onely hope, my ſollace and my intire refuge, wherefore art thou not beere with mee, ſeeing at this preſent I haue the meanes both to giue vnto thee, and alſo to receiue of thee, ſuch caſe and contentment as we haue ſo oftentimes deſired to receiue one of another? At the leaſt I wil not depart from hence vntil I haue wholy ſatisfied the hurt which by my ouer-great folly I haue procured vnto you, but I will here attend your comming. And if Fates or fortune doe permit mee to beholde you here ſhortly, I promiſe you, ſweete loue, to giue you the ſure contentment that your ſeruent loue hath promiſed vnto you a long time: but if my misfortune ſhall bee an hinderance vnto your ſpeedy returne, your only abſence ſhall bee the meanes to haſten my end: wherefore I beſeech you to take pitty on this my weakeneſſe, and to ſuccour mee, for I liue and yet languiſh in extreame bitterneſſe. And ſeeing that euer hitherto you haue beene obedient vnto mee, without contradicting me in any ſort, now the neceſſity beeing ſuch, I pray you by that power which you haue giuen mee ouer you, that you would come to deliuer mee from death (which I feele to approach) and tarry not: otherwiſe your delay will cauſe you ouer late to repent my vnhappy end. In this ſort did ſhe ſpeak as if Amadis had beene preſent, when Mabila brake off her thought, and Oriana changing her talke, ſayd to her: Coſen, ſeeing that wee haue the keyes of this place, it were beſt that Gandalin ſhould make ſome other like vnto them, to the ende that your Coſen beeing returned, may goe and come hither when & as often as hee ſhall pleaſe. It is wel aduiſed anſwered Mabila. And as they were conſulting, there was one of the Porters ſayd to Mabila: Madam, Gandalin is without, who deſireth to ſpeake with you. Let him come in anſwered Oriana, for he hath beene brought vp with vs a long time: and alſo he is foſter brother vnto Amadis, whom God preſerue. God ſo doe ſayde the Porter, it were a great damage that ſo good & vertuous a knight ſhould ſuſtaine any hurt. Then went he forth to goe ſeeke Gandalin, and in the meane time Oriana ſaid vnto Mabila, I pray you ſee how your Coſen is beloued and eſteemed of all men, yea euen of the baſeſt ſort of people, that are in a manner, voyde of all vertue, it is true anſwered Mabila. Then Oriana ſayde, what would you

haue mee doe but die? hauing beene the onely cauſe of the ruine of him who is more worth, then all the men in the world, and who did better loue me, then his owne ſelfe? Ah accurſed be the houre wherein I was borne, ſeeing that by my folly and light ſuſpition, I haue done vnto him ſo great and ſo much wrong: Madame, anſwered Mabila, I pray you forget theſe imaginations, and onely arme you with hope, for all this which you both ſay and doe, ſerueth in no ſort to eaſe your dolour. Herewithall Gandalin entred in, whom Oriana cauſed to ſit downe by her: and after ſome conference which they had together, ſhe recited how ſhe had ſent the Damoſell of Denmark to ſeeke Amadis: vnto whom ſhee had written a Letter containing that which you haue heard, and what words alſo ſhe had giuen her in charge to ſay vnto him, therefore ſaid the Princeſſe, in thy opinion doeſt thou thinke that he will pardon me? Madame, anſwered Gandalin, Me thinks you are little acquainted with his heart, for I am ſure for the leaſt word that is in the letter, hee will teare himſelfe into an hundreth peeces for you, if you do but onely command him: by more likelyhood may you imagin whether he will be glad to come ſee you, yea or no. And be you aſſured that ſeeing the Damoſel of Denmarke, hath vndertaken the charge to finde him, that ſhe will ſooner accompliſh the ſame, then all the perſons in the world beſide: for I do not thinke (ſeeing hee did hide himſelfe from me that it is euer poſſible for any other but ſhee to finde him out. For this cauſe Madam, you ought henceforth to liue in good hope, and to reioyce more then euer you did, to the end, that when he returneth he may not finde your beauty in ſuch ſort decayed. What ſaiſt thou Gandalin? anſwered ſhe laughing, doeſt thou thinke me now ſo vgly? Nay rather Madame, what do you thinke of your ſelfe, that in this ſort you doe hide you from the ſight of all men. I do it to this end, ſaid Oriana, that when thy Maſter commeth if he would flie me for my deformity, I might in this place ſtay him as my priſoner. I would ſaid he, that he were here already, and free from that other priſon, wherein hee remaineth for your loue. Well ſaid Oriana, we haue now other matters in hand, his Coſin and I haue done ſo much, that wee haue gotten the keyes of theſe gardens, by the which at his returne, he may come in hither to ſee vs, at al times and as often as he will, and thou muſt do ſo much, to cauſe two other keyes like theſe to bee made, the which he ſhall keepe. In good faith, ſaid Gandalin, it is well and wiſely aduiſed. Then the Princeſſe deliuered him the keyes, and without any longer ſtaying in Mirefleur he returned to London, where he executed his commiſſion ſo diligently, that the next morning he came vnto Mabila, vnto whom he deliuered the counterfeit keyes, who ſhewed them ſtraight vnto Oriana, ſaying vnto her: behold already a good beginning, for the recompencing of the hurt which you procured vnto your Amadis. Mine? anſwered Oriana, I would to God he were here. I then might well call him mine, whether hee would or no, Go to, go to, let vs not come out of Gods bleſſing into a warme Sun, ſaid Mabila, but let vs ſee this night if Gandalin haue performed his taske well, and whether the keyes will open the

dores or not. I pray you let vs, ſaid Oriana. And for that preſent they made an end of their talke, waiting a conuenient time to finiſh their enterpriſe: and according to their appointment, about mid-night (when euery one were ſound aſleepe) they ſecretly roſe vp, and came down into the Court, it was then in the time of the moones waining, and for that cauſe the darknes did beare the more ſway: wherefore Oriana began to bee afraid, and ſaid vnto Mabila: I pray thee hold me by the hand, for I am almoſt dead with feare. No, no, I will defend you well enough, anſwered ſhee, am not I coſin to the moſt valiant knight in the world? But although Oriana did tremble, yet could ſhee not refraine from laughter, & ſaid vnto her. Let vs go then garded: for I will henceforth thinke me ſafe being to be garded by you, who are ſo valiant in deeds of armes. Seeing that you knowe me ſo well, anſwered Mabila, let vs march on boldly, and you ſhall ſee how I will finiſh this aduenture: wherein if I faile, I ſweare that for one whole yeere, I will neither hang ſhield about my necke, nor ſtrike one ſtroke with the Launce. Heerewithall they began to laugh ſo loude, that they might haue bin heard very eaſily, and at the ſame inſtant they came vnto the dore, where they tried the firſt key, which they found maruailous fit, and the ſecond alſo, wherefore they opened them without any difficultie, and entered into the Orchard. Then ſayde Oriana vnto Mabila: Coſin all that wee haue done is to no end, except ſome-what more be done: how may your cofin returne when wee once haue brought him into the place, conſidering the height of the wals? I haue already thought vpon that, anſwered ſhe, it ſhall be very eaſie for him by the corner of this wall, againſt the which wee will ſet by this peece of timber, and with the ſame and our helpe together, hee may eaſily mount vp to the top thereof: but it behooueth that the chiefeſt helpe come from you, for you onely reape the commoditie thereof. Wee ſhall ſee what will happen, ſayde Oriana, and therefore for this time let vs depart, and goe to ſleepe, the which they did. And as they laid them downe in their bed, Mabila on bracing Oriana, ſaide vnto her. Madame, I would that the knight for whome you attempt ſo many fair enterpriſes, were now in my place, vpon this condition, that I did goe to ſleepe elſe-where, becauſe I would heare none of your complaints, for the harme that hee might doe vnto you. Gentle coſin, anſwerrd ſhe, if he were here, I would endure very much before I would complaine of it. And ſo long they continued this pleaſant diſcourſe, that loue ſtinged them ſo vehemently, as euery amorous Reader may eaſily imagine what they wanted, to cauſe them ſleep till the next morning that they went to hear diuine ſeruice: and at their returne they found that Gandalin was already come from London, whom they led with them into the garden, where they told him how they had tryed the keyes, and what words Mabila had vſed in the proouing of them. By my faith Madame, anſwered he, you do now put me in minde of ſome iniurious ſpeech that I vſed of you vnto my Lord, thinking thereby to haue comforted him, but therewithall he had thought to haue taken my head frō my ſhoulders, and ſhortly after I did abide

ſore penance for thus leaſing, becauſe that I fell aſleepe, and when I awaked, I neyther found my bridle nor ſaddle, for my Maſter rode away, and had hidden them of purpoſe to ſtay me from following of him. Wherefore ſeeing that he was loſt, and that he had left mee, for the words that I had ſpoken of you, I was driuen into ſuch a Melancholy, that I had ſlaine my ſelfe if I had had a ſword to do it: friend, Gandalin, anſwered Oriana, thou needeſt not to excuſe him, I kn
                        •
                     w that he loueth me without 
                        •…
                     
                     lation, therefore I pray th
                        ••
                      put mee no more in remembrance of that miſchiefe, whereof I am the chiefe cauſe, except thou wilt force my Soule and body to part aſundet, for thou knoweſt that I ſtand betweene life and death, according to the newes that the Damoſell of Denmarke ſhall report vnto mee.
               
               
                  CHAP. XII.
                  
                     How King Liſuart being ſet at the Table, there came before him a ſtrange knight armed at all points, who defied him: the conference that Floreſtan 
                        
                           •
                        ad with him, and how Oriana was comforted with the good newes that ſhe receiued from Amadis.
                     
                  
                  
                     KIng Liſuart being ready to riſe from dinner as Galaor, and D
                           ••
                         Floreſtan were taking their leaue of him, to conduct Coriſanda onward of her iourney, there entred into the hall a ſtrange knight armd at al points, except onely his head-peece, and gauntlets. Who kneeled before the King, and deliuered vnto him a Letter ſealed with fiue ſeales, hee ſaid vnto him. It may pleaſe your Maieſty to command this Letter to be read that you may vnderſtand the cauſe of my comming vnto you. Then the king tooke the Letter and read it, and becauſe it referred to the knights report, he anſwered him thus. Friend you may performe your charge when it ſhall pleaſe you. Hereupon the knight roſe vp, and ſaid aloude, King Liſuart I defie thee, and all thy allies in the behalfe of the mighty Princes, Famangomad Giant of the burning Lake, Cartadaque his Nephew, Giant of the inuincible Mountaine, Mandafab
                           •
                        ll his brother in Law, Giant of the vermillian Tower, D
                           ••
                         Q
                           •…
                        
                      brother to the late deceaſſed King of Abies of Ireland, and Ar
                           •…
                        
                      the ench
                        ••
                     nter: who doe all ſ
                        •
                     nd thee word by me, that they haue ſworne the death of thee and 
                        〈◊〉
                     . And the better to accompliſh 
                        〈◊〉
                      their enterpriſe, they will all come in the aid of king Gild
                           •…
                        , & be of the number of his hundred knights who will aſſuredly deſtroy thee. Notwithſtanding if thou wilt giue thy daughter and heire Oriana, vnto the 
                        ••
                     ire Madaſim
                           •
                        , daughter to the moſt redoubted Fa
                           •…
                        , to ſerue her for her Gentlewoman, they will let thee li
                        •
                     e in pe
                        •…
                     , and be thy friends, for they will ma
                        •
                     y her with the Prince B
                           •
                        ſigant, who doth well deſerue to be Lord, 
                        〈◊〉
                      of thy Land and Daughter alſo. Therefore King Liſuart ch
                        •
                     ſe thee of theſe two conditions the beſt, either peace, which I aduiſe thee

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      except, or the moſt cruell 
                        ••
                     rre that may happen vnto th
                        ••
                     , hauing to doe with ſuch mighty and redoubted Princes. When the King had long giuen eare vnto him (to ſhew that he made ſmall account of ſuch threats) he ſmiling thereat, anſwered him. Truſt mee Knight, they that gaue thee this commiſſion, doe thinke farre amiſſe of me, for I haue all my life time thought a dangerous warre, better then a ſhamefull peace, becauſe I were worthy of great reprehenſion, both of God and man, being King ouer ſuch a mighty nation, if I ſhould now through baſe cowardiſe, ſuffer them to bee afflicted with cruelty. Wherefore returne and tell them, that I had rather deſire all the daies of my life, that warre which they do threaten me withall, and in the 
                        •
                     nd to di
                        •
                      in battaile, then to 
                        ••
                     cord vnto a peace ſo much to my diſhonor. And becauſe that I deſire to know their mind at large, I will ſend a Knight of mine owne with you, who ſhall in like ſort declare vnto them my whole intention, and yet I know not if by their lawes all Embaſſadors or meſſengers are a
                        •
                      free from danger with them, as they are with Chriſtian Princes. If it pleaſe your Maieſtie, ſaid the knight, that he ſhal go with me, I will bee his warrant, and will cōduct him vnto the burning lake, which is in the Iſle of Mongaza, where they are aſſembled with the reſt of the hundred, to come and meet with you: aſſuring you that whereſoeuer Don Q
                           •
                        edragant abideth, ne will neuer ſuffer wrong to be done vnto any. Truely anſwered the King, hee ſheweth himſelfe therein to bee a noble Prince: but tell mee, if it pleaſe you, what your name is. Sir, anſwered hee, I am called Landin, Nephew to D
                           ••
                         Q
                           •…
                        gant, who am come with him to reuenge the death of King Abies of Ireland mine vnckle, neuertheleſſe wee could neuer yet meete with him that did ſlay him, and further we doe not well know whether hee bee dead or not. I beleeue you well, anſwered the king, and I would you did certainely know him to be liuing, and that he were here, for all the reſt would go forward well enough. I know well, ſaid Landin, wherefore your grace ſaith ſo, you eſteeme him to be the beſt knight in the world, neuetheleſſe, I hope to bee in the battaile which is prepared for you, and there to performe ſuch worthy deedes of armes, to your diſaduantage, that it may be you will change your opinion. By our Lady, anſwered the King, I am ſorry for that, I had a great deale rather, that you had a deſire to remaine in my ſeruice, notwithſtanding, this much I tell you, that there you ſhall finde thoſe that can tell how to anſwere you well enough. And you (ſayde the Knight) many other that will purſue you euen vnto ſhamefull death. When Floreſtan heard him ſpeake ſo boldly, and to the preuidence of Amadis, his coller was mooued therewithall, and hee ſaide vnto La
                           •
                        din. Knight, I am a ſtranger in this Countrey, and none of the Kings ſubiects, ſo that for any thing which you haue ſaide vnto him, I haue no occaſion to anſwer you, chiefely becauſe that here are preſent, ſo many Knights my betters, ouer whome I will not in any ſort inſult. Neuertheleſſe, ſeeing that you cannot finde. Amadis, which is (as I think) for your great profit, I am ready to fight with you, and will in his ſtead defend the quarrel that you haue againſt him.

And to the end that you may the better know me, I am his brother Floreſtan, who doe offer vnto you the combat vpon this condition, that if I can ouercome, you ſhall be bound to giue ouer the quarrel that you haue againſt him, and if you ouercome mee, reuenge part of your anger on mee. Yet thus much by the way, you muſt not thinke it ſtrange that I haue beene ſo forward in the matter, for I haue no leſſe cauſe to ſuſtaine his quarrell againſt you (he being abſent) then you haue to maintaine that of King Abies, whoſe nephew you are, being very well aſſured that my Lord Amadis is of power ſufficient to reuenge me, if Fortune permit you to haue the aduantage ouer me. My Lord Floreſtan anſwered Landin, ſo farre as I perceiue, you haue a deſire to fight, but I cannot ſatisfie you at this time, being in no ſort at mine owne diſpoſition, as well for the a
                        •…
                     ires which by another I am appointed to diſcharge, as alſo for that I did promiſe before my departure from thoſe Lordes that haue called me into their company, not to enterprize any matter before the Battaile, that might hinder me to aſſiſt and do my beſt endeuour therein: and therefore at this preſent hold me excuſed, vntill the battaile be ended, then I promiſe you to accept the combat which you demand, and ſooner I cannot intend it. Beleeue me ſaid Floreſtan, you ſpeake like a worthy Knight: for thoſe that haue the like charge that you now haue, ought to forget and denie the fulfilling of their owne will, to ſatisfie thoſe from whom they are ſent, otherwiſe they might bee blamed, ſeeing that although you ſhould get the victory of this co
                        •…
                      our honour, yet it mi
                        •…
                      their affaires might be 
                        •…
                     ſlowed thorow your 
                        ••
                     ay and hinderance, becauſe they doe all repoſe themſelues vpon your charge, therefore I am content to defer it vntill the time that you require, and becauſe you ſhall not afterwards faile, behold here is my gage. At the ſame inſtant he threw downe his gloue, and Landin his Gauntlet. Wherefore by their owne conſent all was remitted vntill the thirtieth day after the battaile. Then Landin tooke his leaue of the king, who deliuered vnto him a Knight that was called Filipinel to goe with him to defie the Giants as Landin had done him, and became that the Court was troubled for theſe vnhappy newes, the king deſiring to make the company merry, ſaid vnto Galaor, it is come into my remembrance faire knight to doe one thing princely for you, that will greately delight you. Then 
                        •
                     ie cauſed his youngeſt daughter Le
                           •
                        
                        nor, with all her Gentlewomen to be called, who were all aparrelled in one liuerie, each of them hauing chaplets of floures vpon their heads: Whom hee commanded to dance and 
                        •
                     ing, as they were accuſtomed to doe often-times. And you my darling (ſaid he to Leonor) begin with the ſame ſong that Amad
                           •
                        s, made for the loue of you being your Knight. Herewithall the young princeſſ
                        •
                      did ſing.
                  
                     The Song.
                     
                        
                           Leonor (ſweete Roſe, all other floures excell
                              •…
                           ,
                        For thee I feele ſtrange thoughts in 
                              〈◊〉
                            rebelling.
                     
                     
                        I loſt my liberty when I did 
                              〈◊〉
                           ,
                        Vpon th
                              •
                           ſe lights which 
                              〈…〉
                           ,
                        And 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            free, 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            become a 
                              〈…〉
                           ,
                        
                           
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           .
                        
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                            doe I 
                              〈◊〉
                            this 
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            for that 
                              〈…〉
                           .
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ſweete roſe, &c.
                        For thee I 
                              〈◊〉
                           , &c.
                     
                     
                        I 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            in 
                              〈◊◊〉
                           , 
                              •
                           ight,
                        My heart is 
                              〈◊〉
                           , thy ſelfe my chie
                              •
                           e delight.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            yet I ſee the 
                              ••
                           re that I doe loue,
                        More ſmart I feele, more paine, more griefe I 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            let loue r
                              •
                           g
                              •
                           , 
                              〈◊〉
                            he be angry euer,
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              ••
                           ke my 
                              •…
                           e for g
                              •…
                           e, though I gaine neuer.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ſweete roſe, &c.
                     
                     
                        And though 
                              〈◊〉
                            you I manifeſt my 
                              •…
                           s,
                        My 
                              •…
                           e, my ſmart another knowe
                              •
                           :
                        One vnto whom, I ſecretly inuoke,
                        Who is the cauſe, of this 
                              •
                           y 
                              •
                           ire, my ſmoke.
                        She hath a ſalue to cure my endleſſe griefe,
                        And onely ſhe may yeelde me ſome reliefe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Leonor ſweet roſe, all other flowers excelling.
                        For thee I feele ſtrange thoughts in 
                              〈◊〉
                            rebelling.
                     
                  
                  And ſeeing that it happeneth out ſo conueniently, I will tell you vpon what occaſion Amadis made this ſong. One day the Queene being talking with Oriana, Mabila and Oli
                           •
                        da (Amadis comming into her chamber) ſhee called her daughter Le
                           •
                        n
                           •
                        r, and ſaide vnto her: that ſhe ſhould Princely goe, and requeſt Amadis to bee her knight, and that from thenceforth he ſhould ſerue her, without bearing affection to any other but to her. The little Princeſſe thinking that her mother did ſpeake in good earneſt, did riſe vp, & with a good grace came and made this requeſt vnto Amadis, whereupon all the Ladies and Gentlewomen began to laugh But Amadis taking her vp in his armes, ſaid vnto her. My little Lady, if you will haue me to be your Knight, beſtow ſome pretty fauour vpon me in token that you are my Miſtreſſe, and that I am your ſeruant. I haue nothing, anſwered ſhee, but this carquent of gold that I were vpon my head. The which ſhe ſuddainly vntied & gaue it vnto him, wherewithal euery one againe began to laugh, ſe
                        •
                     
                     ing how verely ſhee beleeued the words of Amadis, who for her ſake did make this ſong. And the ſame did Le
                           •
                        n
                           •
                        r and her playfellowes ſing, as you haue heard, the which did greatly delight all the company: which being ended, they made a lowly obeiſance, & returned vnto the place where the Queen ſate. Then the king tooke Galaor, Floreſtan and Agraies apart, who were deſiring leaue of his Maſtiſtie to accompany Coriſanda ſome part of her way, and he ſaid vnto them: My friends you are the three perſons of the worlde, vpon whome I doe chiefly rely. You know the battaile that I haue agreed vnto with King Cildada
                           •
                        , which is to be performed in the firſt weeke of the moneth of Auguſt: wherein wee ſhall finde againſt vs many ſtrong Giants, who are bloudy people, & full of crueltie. Wherefore I pray you not to vndertake henceforth any matter or aduenture, that may let you from keeping of mee company, otherwiſe you ſhall doe me a moſt great diſpleaſure, becauſe that by your ayde I truſt in God, that the pride and preſumption of mine enemies ſhall bee abated, and wee ſhall remaine conquerours, and they quite ouerthrowne and diſcomfited.
                  Moſt royall King, anſwered Galaor, there is no neede to vſe either prayer or commandement vnto vs, to perſwade vs to bee in a place ſo famous: for although wee had not at all any ſuch intention as we haue to ſerue your Maieſtie, yet the deſire to fight againſt ſuch perſonages, ſhould neuertheleſſe not bee diminiſhed in vs, ſeeing that it is the onely duty of all good Knights, to hazard them-ſelues in ſuch enterpriſes, where they may gaine honour and reputation.

Therefore your Maieſty may be aſſured that our returne hither ſhall bee very ſhortly, and in the meane ſeaſon▪ you may communicate this matter vnto the reſt of your knights, to incourage and to confirm them in the ſame good will that now they haue to ſerue your Maieſty, the which counſell the King liked well of, and there-withall hee gaue them leaue to depart. Thus they went together in the conduct of Coriſanda, as I haue already recited. Now had Gandalin heard all this talke that had paſſed, & ſeene how the three knights were departed, whereuppon hee went to M
                           •
                        refluer, to declare the ſame vnto Oriana & Mabila, who were very much diſquieted with this new defiance that the Gy
                        ••
                     ts had ſent vnto the King. Neuertheleſſe Oriana ſayde vnto Gandalin. In good 
                        •
                     ooth, ſeeing that Coriſanda now hath Floreſtan ſo much at her commandement, conſidering the vehement loue that ſhe doth beare vnto him, mee thinkes ſhee ſhould bee very glad thereof, and long may ſhe ſo continue, for ſhe is a moſt ſober, and wiſe, and vertuous Lady, and ſuch a one that deſerueth it well. Saying ſo ſhe began to weepe, & with a deepe ſigh, ſhe ſayd. A
                        •
                      fortune why doeſt thou not yet permit me to beholde my Lord Amadis, one onely day? I beſee
                        •
                     h thee either to grant me this good, or to ſpare my life no longer, becauſe my ſoule doth loath it. Herewithall ſhee became ſo ſad, that it greatly pittied Gandalin to beholde her, who notwithſtanding diſſembling his griefe, faigning not to be content with this talke, anſwered her: M
                        •
                     dame you muſt not bee offended if henceforth I come no more in your preſence: for I did alwaies hope that my Lord Amadis would haue returned hither again every ſhortly, and now hearing you 
                        •
                     n theſe 
                        ••
                     armes, I am quite depriued of this benefit. I pray thee good friend Gaudalin ſayd ſhee, be not angry, I ſwear to thee by my faith, that if I could looke with a merr
                        •
                     
                     er countenance, I would willingly doe it, but I cannot otherwiſe do: for my heart yet remaining in continuall heauineſſe, will in no ſort permit me, and were it not for the conſolation which thou haſt giuen me, I aſſure thee that I ſhould not haue the power to ſtand vpon my feet, ſo much doe I feele my ſelfe grieued with this warre that my father hath vndertaken, the ſucceſſe whereof I doe exceedingly feare, by reaſon of thy Maſter his abſence. Madame anſwered Gaudalin, hee ſhall not now bee any where ſo ſecret, but that hee ſhall haue newes thereof: and I am very ſure, that notwithſtanding all the diſgraces and disfauours that you haue done vnto him, by diſcharging him from your preſence, yet will hee not faile to be there, knowing that it is a thing of great importance both vnto the King & you: not that hee will preſume to come before you, but hee will make himſelfe knowne in place where hee may doe you ſeruice, in hope that you will pardon him for the fault that he neuer did, no
                        •
                      euer thought to doe. God grant ſayd Oriana, that thy words proue true. And as they were in theſe diſcourſes, there came a Gentle-woman who told Oriana that the Damoſel of Denmarke was ariued, and ſhee hath brought vnto you many faire preſents. Then feare & hope ſeaſed vpon the Princeſſe heart, in ſuch ſort, that without power to anſwer one worde, ſhee

began to tremble, the which Ma
                        
                           •
                        ila perceiuing, ſhe anſwered the Gentlewoman: friend will her to come in hither all alone. The gentlewoman returned to performe her charge, but in the meane time beleeue mee, neither M
                           •
                        bila nor Gandalin knew how to behaue thē
                     ſelues, beeing either hopeleſſe of the good, or fearefull of the bad newes that the Damoſell of Denmarke might bring. Who ſhortly after entered in with the countenance of a perſon more pleaſant then penſiue: and after her duty done vnto Oriana, ſhee preſented her with a Letter from Amadis, ſaying vnto her: Madame, my Lord Amadis recommendeth him muſt hūbly vnto your good grace, whom I haue found, as this Letter (written with his owne hand) will aſſure you. Oriana receiued the Letter, and as ſhe thought to haue opened it, her ſpirit was ſo rauiſhed with exceeding ioy, as all the parts of her body remained without any power, or ability once to moue or ſtirre, becauſe they would ſupply no other office, but to participate in this moſt happy newes: ſo that Oriana therewithall fell down in the place where ſhe ſtood. But very ſuddenly ſhee was raiſed vp againe, & ſhe opened the Letter, wherein ſhee found the ring that ſhe ſent vnto Amadis by Gandalin, at the ſame time that hee fought with Dardan at Winſore, which ſhe preſently knew. Wherefore in kiſſing it ſhee ſayd ſo loud that ſhe might eaſily be heard: O ring diuinely kept, bleſſed be hee, that euer did make thee ſo fortunate, giuing from hand to hand all the pleaſure that may bee deſired, then put ſhe it vpon her finger, and beganne to reade the Letter. And when ſhe beheld the ſweet words that Amadis vſed, & the the thanks that he did yeeld vnto her, for the careful remembrance that ſhe had of him, by the which he was raiſed from death to life, there was neuer any woman more ioyfull, and caſting her eyes vp to heauen, ſhee ſaid: O God of heauen and earth, creator of all things, praiſed be thy holy name, becauſe thou haſt vouchſaſed in mercy to looke vppon mee, by the diligence of this Gentlewoman. Herewithall ſhee withdrew her ſelfe apart and tooke the Damoſell of Denmarke by the hand, ſaying vnto her: I pray you faire Lady tel me how you did find him, how long you haue bin together, and the place where you haue left him. By my faith Madam anſwered the Damoſell, after my departure from you, I ariued in Scotland, where I remained certaine dayes without hearing any news of him, by meanes whereof (beeing as it were voide of hope to ſatisfie your deſire) I tooke ſhipping intending to returne vnto you: but wee had ſo ſore a tempeſt vpon the Sea, that mauger all our Mariners, the ſhip was driuen vnto the poore Rocke, where my Lord Amadis thē remained. Whom at the firſt ſight we did not know, for he was changed in name, habite, and countenance, and hee was likely to haue died in our preſence, when in a manner hee was not ſuccoured by any of vs. Notwithſtanding in the end I was ware of a wound that he had vpon the face, the which was heretofore giuen vnto him by Arcalaus, wherby I ſtill ſuſpected that it ſhould be he, and in the end hee manifeſted himſelfe vnto me. And continuing her diſcourſe, ſhee recited wholly all that which you haue heard in the beginning of this Hiſtory. Then loue & pitty aſſailed

the heart of the Princeſſe, in ſo ſtrange a manner, that ſhe entreated the Gentlewoman to ſpeake no more of the troubles of Amadis: but onely to tell her how hee did at that preſent. Madame, anſwered ſhee, I haue left him in the Forreſt, ſtaying to heare ſome newes from you. And how may wee ſecretly ſend vnto him, ſaide Oriana: for if you returne vnto him ſo ſuddainly, there might ſome matter bee ſuſpected. For the ſame occaſion, anſwered the damoſel, I haue brought with me Durin, whome I will ſend back when it ſhall pleaſe you, faining that I haue forgot parte of the preſents that I brought vnto Mabila. It is very well aduiſed, ſaid the Princeſſe. Afterwards ſhee declared vnto her, how Coriſanda gaue vnto them the firſt hope that Amadis was not dead, and that hee it was that named himſelfe the Faire Forlorne. It is true, anſwered the Damoſell, and hee is yet ſo called, neither is hee determined to change his name, vntill hee haue firſt ſeene you, except you command him the contrary. That ſhall then be very ſhortly, ſaide Oriana, for his coſin and I haue taken ſuch order, that hee may come hither when it ſhal pleaſe him and not be perceiued by any body. We haue the key of this gardē (by the which the way ſhal be eaſie and ſecret for him) the which wee will ſend vnto him by Durin, therefore call him vnto vs, to tell him what Amadis muſt doe at his hither arriuall. Hereupon Durin came vnto them, & Oriana ſhewing him the garden, ſaid vnto him. Durin doeſt thou ſee this orchard, Amadis muſt enter into it ouer the corner of this wall, & when hee is once in, heere are the keyes of the dore thorow which he muſt come vnto vs, the which thou ſhalt carry vnto him, and ſhall further aduertiſe him, whatſoeuer thy ſiſter ſhall tell thee in my behalfe. Which ſaid, ſhe departed leauing them together, and as ſoone as ſhe was entred into a great Hall, ſhee forthwith ſent vnto the Damoſell, willing her to bring thoſe preſents which the Scottiſh Queene had ſent vnto her & Mabila, the which ſhe did. But as ſhee vnfolded the clo
                        •
                      wherein they were wrapped, (as if ſhee had ſuddainly bethought her ſelfe) ſhe cried. Alas Madam, I haue left the tokens that were ſent vnto Mabila, there as we did lie the laſt night, and if Durin do not ſpeedily returne, they may be in dangar to be loſt: now Durin knew the matter well enough, and therefore hee made as though hee were vnwilling, and on the other ſide, Mabila faining to be very angry, ſaid vnto him: Durin my good friend, will you do me this pleaſure, to returne and fetch that which your ſiſter hath forgotten? Madam, anſwered he, I will do whatſoeuer you ſhall pleaſe, but by my faith, I could bee very well content, that it would pleaſe you to appoint ſome other to doe it, becauſe of the toyle that we haue indured in our weariſome iourney. My friend, ſaid ſhe, I pray thee do ſo much for me, & be thou ſure that I wil reward thee: in good ſooth, ſaide Oriana, it were greate reaſon ſo to doe, I vnderſtand you well enough, anſwered Durin, although you mocke mee. At this word they all began to laugh, ſeeing the counterfait diſcōtentment that he made to returne back. Well goe to, ſaid hee, ſeeing that I muſt beare this flout with mee, I will tomorrow morning depart. Thē they all retired, and Durin went to London to ſee Gandalin, vnto whom he declared all that you haue heard:

afterwards he departed to returne vnto the Abbie where Amadis remayned expecting newes from Oriana. Neuertheleſſe before hee departed, Gandalin willed him to tell Euil his Coſen, that he ſhould endeauour himſelfe to ſerue the faire Forlorne diligently, and that whileſt he remayned with him, hee ſhould likewiſe enquire after ſome newes of Amadis: and this meſſage did Gandalin ſend vnto him, to cauſe him the leſſe to ſuſpect him in whoſe ſeruice hee remayned, that Amadis might the more ſecretly bring his matter to paſſe.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     How the Faire Forlorne ſent Enil his Eſquire vnto London to cauſe a new armour to be made for him, and what aduenture chaunced vnto him in going to Mirefleur.
                     
                  
                  
                     BVt becauſe wee will not too much digreſſe from that which happened vnto the Faire Forlorn, you ſhall vnderſtand, that after he had made ſome ſmall ſtay in the Moneſtarie where he was left to waite for newes from Oriana, hee found himſelfe very able to put on armour: and therefore hee ſent Enil to buy him horſe and armour with 2 ſhield of Sinople, ſet full of golden Lions. Who returned vnto him the ſelfe ſame day that Durin arriued at the Abbie, where he was well entertayned by the Faire Forlorne, who in the preſence of Enil demanded of him, where he had left the Damoſel of Denmark his ſiſter: my Lord anſwered hee, at her departure from you ſhee forgot behinde her certaine preſents, that the Queene of Scotland did ſend vnto my Lady Mabila, the which I doe come to ſeeke. Then turning vnto Enil hee ſayd, Enil your Coſen Gandalin recommendeth him very heartily vnto you. Which Gandalin anſwered the Faire Forlorne. My Lord ſaid Enil, hee is a Coſen of mine, that long time hath ſerued a Knight called Amadis of Gaule.
                  
                  Then the Faire Forlorne without further enquiring tooke Durin apart, who did wholly recite vnto him all that which he was commanded to tell him on the behalfe of Oriana, and how ſhee ſtayed for him at Mirefleur, being very well determined to giue him kind entertainement: likewiſe what order was taken for his ſecret comming and going, when and as often as hee pleaſed, and alſo how his brethren Galaor, Floreſtan, and Agrates his Coſen, remayned at the Court, expecting the battaile that is to bee performed very ſhortly, betweene King Liſuart, and Cildadan of Ireland, especially the challenge of a combate that Famongomad and the other Gyants and knights had ſent vnto the King, if hee would not giue Oriana to be a waiting maide vnto Madaſima, and to be married ſhortly after to Baſigant the eldeſt ſonne to the ſayde Famongomad. When the Faire Forlorne heard this diſcourſe, his heart

was ready to breake with extream rage: purpoſing with himſelfe, that the firſt enterpriſe that hee would vndertake (after hee had ſeene his Lady) ſhould be to finde out Famongomad, and to fight with him, for the iniury that hee would doe vnto Oriana. After that Durin had thoroughly aduertiſed him of all that hee had in charge, hee tooke leaue of him to returne vnto Mirefleur, leauing him in the Abbie, fully determined from thenceforth to abate the pride of theſe Gyants: beeing glad notwithſtanding in that hee had recouered the good fauour & grace of Oriana, on whom his life and honour did wholly depend. Then the next morning before the breake of day, he armed him with the ſame Armour that Enil had brought, and mounting on horſe-backe, hee tooke the way towardes Mirefleur: but hee had not ridden farre, (thinking vpon the pleaſure that was promiſed vnto him, and knowing how neere hee was vnto it) when making a carreer he beganne to curuet and mannage his horſe ſo gallantly, that Enil was greatly amazed thereat, thinking that hee had neuer beene other then an Hermite, and he ſaid vnto him: my Lord, vntill I may iudge of the effect and force of your courage, I may very well ſay that I did neuer ſee a more expert knight, nor one that can doe more with a horſe then you. Enil, anſwered the Faire Forlorne, it is the valiant hearts of men, not their outward ſhew, that doth accompliſh haughty deedes and hardy enterpriſes, therefore thou hauing ſaid thy mind by my countenance, mayeſt iudge hereafter of my courage according as I ſhall deſerue, thou and diſcerne.
                  Thus rode the Faire Forlorne all the day long diſcourſing with Enil of diuerſe pleaſant matters, for thoſe gloomy cloudes which in times paſt had ouer-ſhadowed his thoughts, were now ouer-blowne, and the deſire to beholde her by whom hee liued, ſhined only in his minde. But when it grew to bee ſomewhat late, hee lodged in the houſe of an ancient knight, that both gaue him kinde entertaynement and great cheere: neuertheleſſe the next morning hee departed. And becauſe he would not be knowne at any time, at his departure from his lodging hee put his helmet vpon his head, neuer putting it off but when hee tooke his reſt, and hee did ride from that time forth ſeauen dayes together without finding any aduenture, vntill vpon the eight day following, hee arriued at the foot of a mountaine, and hee did ſee comming towardes him along a path, a knight mounted vpon a mighty courſer, who ſeemed ſo great and ſo ſtrongly made that hee was almoſt like a Gyant. Who comming ſomewhat neere, he called vnto the Faire Forlorne: knight I forbid you to paſſe this way, except you doe firſt tell mee that which I deſire to knowe. There-withall the Faire Forlorne did preſently knowe him (although hee had neuer ſeene him before) for the ſhield which he did beare had in a field Azure three flowers Or, the like whereof he remēbred that he had ſeen in the Firme-Iſland, & that he was Don Quedragant. For the which hee was very much diſpleaſed, as well becauſe he had not determined to fight, vntill he had firſt found out Famongomad, as alſo becauſe hee would not in any ſort diſobey the commandement that

                     Oriana had ſent vnto him by Durin: and hee greatly feared ſuch a let, knowing that Quedragant was one of the beſt knights in the world: neuertheleſſe hee made himſelfe ready for the Iouſt. The which Enil perceiuing, hee ſayde vnto him: my Lord I beleeue that you will combate this Diuell. Hee is no Diuell, anſwered the Faire Forlorne, but one of the ſtrongeſt knights I knowe, of whom I haue heretofore heard great commendation. Then Quedragant drew neere and ſayde vnto him: Knight, you muſt tell me whether you belong vnto King Liſuart or not. Why ſo ſayd the Faire Forlorne. Becauſe ſayde he, that I am mortall enemy to him and all his, and when I ſhall either knowe or meete with any of thē, I will cauſe them to die an euill death if I may.
                  The Faire Forlorne was ſo greatly enflamed with rage to heare him thus to menace, eſpecially the King and all his Knights, that hee anſwered Quedragant: You then are one of them that haue defied that good King? I am euen the ſame ſayde hee, that will doe all the iniuric that poſſibly may bee done both to him and his. And how are you called? anſwered the Faire Forlorne. Don Quedragant ſayde hee. Truſt me Don Quedragant anſwered the Fair Forlorne, although you are a valiant Knight and deſcended of a Royall linnage, yet haue you enterpriſed an exceeding great folly, in defying thus the moſt mighty and beſt King in the worlde: for euery diſcreete knight ought to attempt no more then hee may well effect, ſeeing that they who doe once paſſe the bonds of their ability, and power, are to bee accounted more haire-braind then hardy, and more vaine-glorious then valiant, the which is no better then folly. As for mee I am no ſubiect but rather a ſtraunger vnto the King againſt whom your quarrell is: yet haue I alwaies had a deſire to doe him what ſeruice I could, and therefore you may account mee of the number of thoſe whom you doe defie, and combate with mee if you liſt, otherwiſe followe on your way. Beleeue mee ſayde Quedragant, I thinke the little experience you haue of mee, maketh you to vtter theſe braues: notwithſtanding I would very willingly know your name. I am called anſwered hee, the Faire Forlorne: but I thinke for the ſmall renowne that yet is blaſed abroade of mee, you doe now knowe mee as well as you did before. And although I am a ſtraunger, yet haue I heard that you doe ſeeke Amadis of Gaule: neuertheleſſe I beleeue it were moſt for your profit, not to meete with him, conſidering but what I haue heard reported of him. What ſayd Quedragant, doſt thou thinke better of him (vnto whom I doe wiſh ſo much hurt) then of mee? Truſt mee thou ſhalt repent it, therefore defend thee if thy heart will ſuffer thee. Although (anſwered the Faire Forlorne) that againſt another I would haue bin content for this time to haue excuſed mee from the combate, yet will I very gladly vndertake it againſt you, for the threatnings & preſumptions that you doe offer vnto me.
                  This ſayd, they ran one againſt the other with ſo great force that the horſe of the Faire Forlorne was likely to haue liſt the groūd with his noſe, & himſelfe was wounded

in the right breaſt with the ſhiuer of a Launce, and Don Quedragant vnhorſed and wounded betweene the ribbes. Yet hee roſe vp againe lightly, and drew his ſword running againſt the Faire Forlorne, whom hee tooke vpon a ſudden whileſt that hee was buſie in mending and ſetting his helmet right: and before that hee was aware, Quedragant ſlew his horſe vnder him, but the Faire Forlorne feeling him to founder, alighted downe. Then hee being exceedingly vexed for ſo vilde a part, hee ſayd vnto Quedragant: knight, it ſeemeth that you haue neuer done any valiant deeds of armes, in that you haue ſo villainouſly ſlaine my horſe, it might haue ſufficed you to haue wreaked your anger on mee, and not vpon a poore beaſt. Neuertheleſſe I am in good hope that the wrong which you haue done both to him and mee ſhall redound vpon your owne head. Don Quedragant anſwered him not one word, but couering him with his ſhield, he came and layd at the Faire Forlorne, who in a ſhort time made him feele how well hee could repay whatſoeuer was lent vnto him: and to heare them fight, one would haue iudged that more then tenne knights had been fighting together. Then ioyned they ſo cloſe that they left their weapons, and fell to wraſtling, endeauouring to throw one another downe, but that was impoſſible for them: wherefore they let goe their holde, and without any breathing, they betooke them againe to their blades, and layd loade one vpon the other ſo couragiouſly, that their Eſquires beholding that cruell combate, did thinke it impoſſible but that they ſhould both twaine die by the hands of each other.
                  And thus they continued from three of the clocke in the afternoone vntill it grewe towardes night, without either reſting them or ſpeaking together: but euen at the ſame inſtant Don Quedragant was ſo wearie and faint, that his heart failed him, and he fell downe in this place. By meanes where-of the Faire Forlorne ſtepped vnto him, & as hee pulled off his helme to ſtrike off his head, Quedragant taking ayre beganne to breath: the which the Faire Forlorne perceiuing (although hee was ready to performe with his arme, the reuenge that he meant to take of his enemy) hee ſtayed his blow, the ſworde being ready to lop off any limme vpon the which falling downe it might chaunce to light: and hee ſayde vnto Quedragant, it is hight time for thee to think vpon the health of thy ſoule, for thou art but a dead man. Whō 
                     Quedragant perceiued that he was in ſuch daunger, hee was ſo aſtoniſhed that hee anſwered vnto the Faire Forlorne, Alas if I muſt die, yet at the leaſt let mee firſt be confeſſed.
                  If thou wilt liue any longer ſaid the Faire Forlorne, yeelde thy ſelfe vanquiſhed, and promiſe to performe all that I ſhall commaund thee. I will willingly fulfill what-ſoeuer ſhall pleaſe you, anſwered Don Quedragant, although I am not vanquiſned: for hee is not ouercome that without ſhewing one iot of cowardiſe, hath defended his quarrell euen with the loſſe of his breath, and vntill that he did fall at his enemies feet: but he onely is ouercome, that for want of heart, feareth to doe what he may. Truely ſaid the Faire Forlorne you ſpeake the very truth, and

I am very glad that I haue learned ſo much of you. Goe to, ſweare to me thē to obey my cōmandement. The which Quedragant did. But the Faire Forlorne called his Eſquires to witneſſe, and then ſayd: I will that at your departure from hence, you goe vnto the Court of king Liſuart, from whence you ſhal not depart, vntill the ſame Amadis (that you ſeeke bee there arriued. Then you ſhall yeelde your ſelfe vnto his mercy, pardoning him for the death of your brother King Abies of Ireland, for that as I haue heard, they both of their owne free will challenged each other, and had Combate together, ſo as this reuenge ought not to bee purſued. Moreouer I will that you giue ouer the challenge that you haue made againſt the King, and thoſe that ſerue him, without bearing armes heereafter againſt any one of them. All which conditions Quedragant promiſed to performe, although it was to his great griefe. Then he commanded his Eſquires to prepare a litter for him, to carry him vnto London, according to his promiſe. In like ſort the Faire Forlorne hauing ſeazed vpon the horſe of Quedragant, inſtead of his owne that was dead, deliuered his ſhield vnto Enil, and followed on his way: vpon the which hee behelde foure young Gentlewomen that were flying with a Marlin, who had both ſeene the Combate, and heard all the talke of the two Knights: and for the ſame cauſe, they ſpake vnto the Faire Forlorne, earneſtly entreating to come and lodge in their Caſtle, where hee ſhould bee entertained with all the honor that might bee deuiſed, for King Liſuart his ſake, vnto whoſe ſeruice hee had ſhewed himſelfe ſo affectionate. The which offer of theirs hee refuſed not, for hee was weary with the great trauail he had ſuſtained al the day. And as ſoon as he was come into his lodging, they themſelues vnarmed him, to ſee if hee were in any ſort dangerouſly wounded: but hee had no other hurt then that vpon his breſt, which was a matter of nothing. Three whole daies together did the Faire Forlorne tarry there, and then departed, riding all day long without finding any aduenture, and the night following he lodged in a little Inne that ſtood on the way, from whence he departed the next morning very early, and about mid-day hee came vnto the top of a ſmall hill, from whence he might behold the citty of London, and the caſtle of Mirefleur, where his Lady Oriana remained.
                  Heere withall he was ſurpriſed with exceeding ioy. neuertheleſſe, hee fained as though he knew not the Countrey where hee remained, and demanded of Enil if he did know it. Yea very well, my Lord, anſwered Enil, beholde yonder is the citie of London where King Liſuart at this preſent remaineth. In faith, ſaide the Faire Forlorne, I would be very ſorry that either he or any other ſhould know mee, vntill my deedes deſerue it, and that by my deedes of Armes I might be thought worthy to be in ſuch an aſſembly. Therefore goe thou to ſee the Eſquire Gandalin, from whom Durin did of late bring the commendations: and ſee that thou doeſt wiſely enquire what euery one ſaith of me, as lſo when the battaile of King Cildadan ſhall be performed. What? anſwered Enil, ſhall I leaue you all alone? Care not thou for that, ſayd he, I haue beene many times accuſtomed

to go in that ſort: yet before that thou doeſt depart, let vs eſpy together a fit place where thou maiſt find meat thy returne. Then they rode on a little further, when vpon a ſudden they beheld cloſe by the ſide of a riuer two pauillions armed, & in the midſt of them a moſt faire tent. Before the which were many knights & Ladies ſporting, and ten other knights armed for their guard: and there was neuer a pauillion that had not fiue ſhields hanged vp, and as many Lances ſtanding before it. Here-withall the Faire Forlorne fearing to bee diſturbed of his enterpriſe, would auoid the combate & took his way vpon the left hand. The which the knights perceiuing, called vnto him, ſaying, that he muſt needes giue one ſtroke with the Launce for the loue of the Ladies. But he anſwered them that at that inſtant hee had no deſire thereunto. For ſayd he, you are freſh and many, and I alone, and very wearie. Beleeue me ſayd one of them, I thinke rather that you feare to loſe your horſe. And why ſhould I loſe him ſayd the Faire Forlorne. Becauſe ſayd the knight, hee muſt haue him that doth throwe you downe, & I am ſure that your loſſe were more certaine then the gaine that you ſhould get vpon vs. Seeing it is ſo, anſwered hee, I had rather depart, then come into any ſuch danger, which ſaid, he paſſed on. Truly ſayd the knights, in our iudgements your armes are defended more with faire wordes then valiant deeds, ſo that they may euer bee ſound enough to place ouer your Tombe when you are dead, yea although you ſhould liue one hundred yeares and more. You may thinke of mee what you pleaſe anſwered the Faire Forlorne, yet cannot that in any ſort deminiſh my reputation. I would it were your pleaſure, ſayd one that ſtepped ſomewhat before his fellowes, that you would breake onely one ſtaffe with mee, I would be accounted a traytor, or not in one whole yeare to mount vpon a horſe, if you departed not by and by to ſeeke your lodging without yours. Sir anſwered hee, it is that which I doe feare, and which cauſed mee to turue out of the high way. At this they all began to laugh, and to ſcoffe him ſaying, behold the valiant champion, that ſpareth himſelfe againſt a battaile: yet for all this the Faire Forlorne made no account, but followed on his way vntill he came vnto a riuer ſide, but as hee would haue paſſed ouer, he heard a voyce that cryed: ſtay knight, ſtay. Then he turned his head and looked backe to 
                        〈◊〉
                      who it was, and perceiued a
                        •…
                     
                     tlewoman, in very good
                        •…
                      moūted vpon a Palfrey co
                        •…
                      towardes him, who at her arri
                        •…
                      ſaid vnto him, Leonor daughter to King Liſuart, together with her Gentlewómen, doe all deſire you to maintain the Iouſts againſt theſe knights, and to ſhew that you will doe ſomething for the loue of Ladies. How? anſwered hee, the daughter of the King, is ſhe there? I truely anſwered the Gentlewoman. Beleeue me ſayde the Faire Forlorne, I ſhould be very ſory to haue a quarrell with any of her knights, for ſooner would I doe them ſeruice for the honour of ſo faire a Lady. Notwithſtanding ſeeing that it is her pleaſure that I ſhould otherwiſe do, I am cōtent: vpon this condition, that they require no more then the Iouſt only. Hereupon he tooke his ſhield, and Lance, and rode ſtraight vnto the 
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
ſhould finde him at his returne from London. And as they were in this ſorte diſcourſing together, they perceiued vpon the ſame way a cart which was drawne with twelue horſes and guided by two Dwarffes, within the which were many armed knights inchained, their ſhields were hanged all along the ſides thereof, and amongſt them were Ladies & Gentlewomen that cryed out, & wept moſt pitifully: before whom marched a Gyant armed with plates of fine ſteele, hauing vpon his head a marueilous bright ſhining helme. But hee ſeemed to bee ſo great, that it would haue feared any man to behold him, & he rode vpō a mighty black horſe, holding in his right hand a Bore-ſpeare, the head whereof was more then a cubit in length, and there followed (behinde the cart) another Gyant farre more monſtrous then the firſt, of whom the Damoſels of the fountaine were ſo much afraid, as they fled to hide them amongſt the buſhes. At the ſame inſtant the Gyant which marched before (ſeeing how the Ladies that were in the cart did teare the hairs from their heads, for it ſeemed by their furious behauiours, that they very willingly would haue procured their owne death) ſayde vnto the Dwarffes, If you cauſe not theſe girles to hold their peace, by loue you villaines, I will make a thouſand peeces of your entrails, for I would haue them charily kept, to ſacrifice them vnto the God that I adore. When the Faire Forlorne heard him, hee preſently knewe that it was Famongomad, who was wont to cut off the heads of all thoſe that hee might take, and to ſhed their blood before an Idoll that hee had in the burning lake, by whoſe counſell hee was gouerned in all his affaires, & although hee then had no deſire to fight, as well becauſe he would not faile to be at Mirefleur (according as Oriana had willed him) as alſo becauſe he was wearie, and tyred with the encounter that he had had againſt the ten knights, yet knowing the perſons that were in the cart, amongſt whom was Leonor the Kings daughter, her Gentlewomen, and the ten knights that hee had ouerthrowne, hee determined either to die or deliuer thē, knowing what grief the loſſe of her ſiſter would be vnto Oriana, whom Famongomad and his ſonne did take at vnawares, and all the reſt of her traine, in a manner as ſoone as the Faire Forlorne had left them, and in this ſort they had bound and fettered them in the cart, that they might afterwards moſt cruelly put them to death. For this cauſe hee willed Enil to giue him his armes. My Lord ſayd he, doe you not ſee theſe diuels that are comming towards vs? For Gods ſake let vs begone and hide vs from them, then may you arme your ſelfe at eaſe, for I would not tarry their comming for all the wealth in London. I will doe better if I may, ſayd the Faire Forlorne, I will firſt try my fortune, and although thou doeſt thinke them diuels) thou ſhalt ſee them ſlaine by one onely knight: for their life is ſo odious before God, that hee will giue mee the ſtrength to reuenge (as I hope) all thoſe miſerable cruelties which they from day to day doe commit.
                  Alas my Lord ſayde Enil, you will wilfully loſe your ſelfe: ſeeing that if twenty of King Liſuart his beſt Knights had vnder-taken that which you alone thinke

to doe, yet might they hardly eſcape with honor. Care not thou for that, anſwered hee, if I ſhould let ſuch an aduenture paſſe before mine eyes, and not bee an actor therein, I were vnworthy euer to come into the company of good and vertuous men, and therefore whatſoeuer may chance thereof, I care not. This ſaid, he left Enil weeping, and went vnto that ſide where he might eaſily beholde Mirefleur: becauſe the remembrance of Oaiana, was ſtill preſent before him, and he bagan to ſay. O my Lady and onely hope, neuer did I enterpriſe any aduenture, the which I haue not by your means atchiued: and now that I knowe you are ſo neere vnto mee, and that it is for a thing that ſo much importeth you, forſake mee not I pray you, in this extreamity. Herewithall he imagined that his ſtrength was redoubbled, and ſetting apart all feare, hee went toward the cart, and ſaid vnto the Dwarffes: ſtay you baſe ſlaues, for you ſhall all die, and your maiſters alſo. When the Gyant heard theſe threats, hee entred into ſuch fury, that the ſmoke proceeded from his eyes, in ſuch ſort, as it ſeemed they had beene on a fire, and hee did ſhake his bore-ſpeare with ſuch force, that he almoſt doubled both ends together. Then hee anſwered the Faire Forlorne. Vnhappy and vnfortunate wretch, how durſt thou bee ſo bold to come before me? Yet hee made as though he heard him not, but couched his Launce, and ſetting ſpurres to his horſe, he ſmote the Gyant a little beneth the waſt, with ſuch ſtrength, as pearcing the ioynts of his harneſſe, the Launce entred into his tripes with ſuch exceeding force, that paſſing quite through, it hit againſt the hinder part of the ſaddie, and broke the gi
                        ••
                     s of the horſe, ouerthrowing both 
                        〈◊〉
                      and ſaddle euen in a moment
                        •…
                      uertheleſſe before the Gyants 
                        •
                     all
                        •
                      he couched his bore ſpeare, thinking to haue hit the Faire Forlorne, but it miſſed him & ſtroke thorow his horſes flankes: wherefore he feeling that hee was wounded to death, did very himbly alight downe. and although that Famongomad was in like ſort deadly woū
                     ded, with the great rage that hee felt, hee roſe vp, and with both his hands hee pulled forth the trounchon of the Launce that ſtucke in his body, and threw it at the Faire-Forlorne with ſuch extreame fury, that hee thought to haue ouer-throwne him, and ſo greatly did he ſtraine himſelfe to hurle the ſame, that the tripes came out of his belly, and he tumbled ouer and ouer. Therewithall he cried. Baſigant my deere ſon reuenge the death of thy ſorrowfull Father if thou canſt. At this crye Baſigant approched, holding a weighty bill, wherewithall hee thought to haue ſtrooken the Faire Forlorne, but he ſtepped aſide, and the blow paſſed by ſo forcibly, that if it had hit him it had clouen him quite aſunder. Then the Faire Forlorne being very ready, and expert, ſtretched forth his arme, and ſtroke the Gyant ſo great a blowe, that hee cut the one halfe of his legge away, although that with the great fury wherein hee remained, hee could not as then feele it, but lifted vp his bill, the which turned in his fiſt, which was a happy chance for the Faire Forlorne; who receiued the blowe vpon his Shielde, within the which it entered ſo farre, that the Gyant could not pull it forth And as hee ſtriued to get it out, hee raiſed him vpon his ſtirrops to haue

the more ſtrength. By the meanes where of, the ſinues of his legge, which were cut a ſunder fayled him, wherewithal he felt ſuch great greefe, that (not being able to keep his ſadle) he kiſſed the ground with his noſe: and in falling, the Faire Forlorne ſtroke him another blow vpon his right arme, ſo that he was forced to forſake his bill, and leaue it in the power of his enemy. Notwithſtanding his hart was ſo great, that hee roſe vp againe and drew forth his ſword, that was maruailous long, with the which he layed at the Faire Forlorne with all his ſtrength, and hee ſtrained himſelfe ſo much, that the blood iſſued frō his wounds, in ſuch great aboundance, that all his ſtrength fayled him, and he fel down together with his blow, which lighted vpon the ſtones, wherewith the ſword brake in two pieces. The which the Faire Forlorne perceiuing, hee ſtepped aſide, and ſet his hands vnto the bill in ſuch ſort, that by force hee pulled it out of his ſhield, wherewith he ſtroke ſo great a blow vpon the Giants helmet, that he made it flie from his head: but the Giant with that little remainder of his ſword, that hee yet helde, pared away the top of his helmet, together with a little of the skin and haire of his head, the which blow if he had ſtroken ſomewhat lower, hee had cut his head off. Therewithal they that were in the cart, thought that the Faier Forlorne had beene wounded to death, and himſelfe was ſo aſtoniſhed, that hee thought his dayes to bee ended, wherefore deſiring to bee reuenged, hee gaue him ſuch another great blowe with the bill, that hee cut off his eare, with halfe of his face, with the which he yeelded vp the ghoſt. During all this combate, the Princeſſe Leonor and all her company, were deuoutly praying for the good ſucceſſe of the Faire Forlorne: who ſeeing that he was diſpatched of Baſigant, turned vnto Famong
                           •
                        mad, who had behelde the death of his ſonne, for whome hee made ſo great mone, that he was likely to haue gone mad. And although that hee was likewiſe at the point of death, yet notwithſtanding hee had throwne his helmet from his head, holding both his hands before his wound, to keepe in his blood, that thereby he might prolong his life, the more to blaſpheme God and his ſaints: not being ſorry for his death (as he ſaid) but becauſe that he had not in his life time, deſtroyed al the churches wherein he had neuer entred. And he cryed as loud as he could: Ah thou God of the chriſtians, it is thon alone that haſt wrought the meanes, that both I and my ſonne (who were mighty inough to ouer-throwe one hundred of the beſt knights in the world) are ſlaine by the hand of a moſt wretched and feeble villaine. And as hee would haue proceeded in his his blaſphemy, the Faire Forlorne ſtroke off his head from his ſhoulders, ſaying: Receiue thy reward for all thy cruelties which thou haſt committed againſt a number of people. And ſpurning him vpon the belly with his foote, hee ſaid: Now get thee vnto all the Deuils, who haue long expected thy comming. Then he tooke vp Baſigant his Helmet, and threw downe his owne which was broken. Enil in like ſort brought vnto him Famong
                           •
                        mad his horſe, vpon the which he mounted, and came both to vnbinde the priſoners, and to doe his duty vnto the Princeſſe Leonor, who gaue him great thankes for his good helpe. In like ſort ſo did all the

reſt of the company. Now had the Giants tyed all their horſes at the tayle of the Cart: wherefore the faire Forlorne went to ſeeke out the Princeſſe her Palfrey, the which he brought, and mounted her vpon the ſame, commanding all the reſt to take euery one their owne horſe, and to get them to London, and to carrie vnto king Liſuart the bodies of the two Giants, and Baſigant his horſe, which will ſerue him well in the battaile againſt king Cildadan. But the Knights anſwered him, ſir who ſhall wee ſay hath done this good for vs? you ſhall tell the king ſaid he, that it is a ſtrange knight, who is called the faire Forlorne: and you may both declare vnto him at large the cauſe of the combat that I had with the Giants, as alſo the great deſire that I haue to doe his Maieſty all the ſeruice I may, whether it be againſt king Cildadan or any other, herewithall they layed both the bodies in the Cart: but they were ſo great, that their legs trayled along vpon the ground more then ſix foote, and taking leaue of the faire Forlorne, they went towardes London, praiſing God, and the good knight that preſerued them from death. But by the way Leonor and the yong Gentlewomen that were with her (forgeting their paſſed perill) made them garlands of flours which they ſet vpon their heads in entring into the Citty: thē the people wondring to ſee the Giants, followed the Cart euen vnto the caſtle, to vnderſtand who had done ſuch valiant deedes of armes. The king did already know that his daughter was arriued, and how ſhee brought with her two dead Giants, wherefore he went downe into the Court with the Queen, and many knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen with them, to ſee what the matter was: the which the Princeſſe Leonor recited vnto him, together with all that you haue already heard, whereat euery one wondred. And euen as ſhee had ended her diſcourſe, in came Don Quedragans, who yeelded him priſoner into the kings hands, as being ſent thither by the faire Forlorne, the which increaſed in all the aſſiſtants, farther deſire to know him, that lately had done ſo many knightly deeds. And the king ſaid, in good faith, I doe greatly meruaile what he may be: but is there none of you that doe know him. And it was anſwered him no: ſaying that Coriſanda Lady and friend to Don Floreſtan had found in the poore Rock (as heretofore ſhe had declared vnto many) a ſick knight that was named the faire Forlorne. I would ſaid the king, that he were in this company, beleeue mee that he ſhould not depart from vs, for any thing that hee would demand of me.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     How that after the Faire Forlorne had ended his aduenture hee went vnto the Fountaine of the three Chanels: from thence he tooke his way to Mirefleur, where he found Oriana, with whom hee remained eight daies together: and at the ſame time there arriued in the Court of King Liſuart, an ancient Gentleman bringing with him two lewels of ſingular vertue, whereby the faithfull louer, from the fayned might be tried, the which Amadis and Oriana determined to make proofe of, in ſuch ſecret manner, that they would neyther be knowne of the king nor any other.
                  
                  
                     AFter that the Princeſſe Leonor and her trayne, had taken their leaue of the Faire Forlorne, he returned towards the Gentlewomen whom hee had found hard by the fountaine, who hauing ſeene the victory which hee had atchieued, had already forſaken the buſhes, & came to meete him. Then he commanded Enil to get him to London vnto Gandalin, and that during his abode there, he ſhould cauſe ſuch another armor as that of his owne was, to be made for him, becauſe they were all to broken and battered with the blowes that he had receiued in the former combats: moreouer that he ſhould not faile to returne vnto the fountaine of the three chanels vpon the eight day following. Thus Enil departed from him, and on the other ſide the Faire Forlorne (hauing taken his leaue of the Gentlewomē) rode through the Forreſt, and they tooke their right way to Mireflure, where being arriued, they declared to Oriana and Mabila, the dangerous combat, and glorious victory that was performed in their preſence by a knight called the Faire Forlorne, When Oriana knew for truth that he was ſo neere vnto her caſtle, ioy and extreame pleaſure, accompanied with a moſt feruent deſire, entred into her immagination, in ſuch ſort that vntil ſhe had him in her armes, ſhe neuer loſt ſight of the high way that led from the Forreſt, by the which he was to come. By this time was the Faire Forlorne alighted from his horſe, hard by a little Riuer, ſtaying vntill it were night: for he would not be ſeene by any, at his entring into Mireflure. Then hee put off his Helmet, and laide him downe vpon the graſſe: and there-withall hee began to thinke vpon the inſtabilitie of Fortune, and vpon the miſerable deſpaire wherein (not long before) he remained when with his owne hands, he was ready to haue effected his death: and alſo how he was not only now reſtored to his former felicitie, but alſo aduanced to greater honour, glory and contentment then before, knowing that he was ſo neere that ioy which hee ſhould receiue with his Lady Oriana. In this cogitation remained the Faire Forlorne vntill after ſun ſet, when hee mounted on horſeback, and came vnto the place that Durin had aſſigned him, where he foūd him together with Gandalin, who ſtayed there for him to take his horſe. Thē he alighted down, & demanded of them, what the ladies were doing, my Lord, anſwered Gandalin, they are on the other ſide, in the gardē,

where they haue already ſtaied for you more then foure houres. Help me then to get vp. The which they did: and hee being vpon the wall, beholding Oriana and Mibila, on the other ſide (hauing not ſo much patience as to ſtay for their helpe) he leaped from the top of the wall downe to the ground, and as hee would haue kneeled to haue done his dutie, the Princeſſe ran to embrace him, and in kiſſing him ſhe was like to haue fallen in a ſwound betweene his armes. But who could imagine the pleaſure that they yeelded the one vnto the other? Amadis hee trembled like a leafe not being able to ſpeake one Word, holding his mouth cloſe vnto Oriana
                           •
                        s: who as it were in an extaſie did behold him with ſuch an eye, that it made them both twaine to liue and die together. In this ſort they remained more then a good quarter of an houre, and euen vntill that Mabila ſmiling, ſaid vnto Oriana: Madam, I pray you at the leaſt before my coſin do die, let vs haue a ſight of him if it pleaſe you. Soft and faire, anſwered Oriana, let mee a while alone with him, and then you ſhall after-wards haue him at your pleaſure. Herewithall Amadis ſaluting Mabila, ſaid vnto her. My good Coſin, this is not the firſt day that you haue knowne how much I am yours. I beleeue you well ſir, but my Lady would haue you wholly to her ſelfe. Alas, ſaid ſhe haue I not reaſon, ſeeing that I alone was likely by my fault, to haue beene the cauſer of his loſſe? Beleeue me deere friend, the griefe which you felt and the teeres that you haue ſhed (by the fault that I committed) ſhall be now both acknowledged, and thorowly recompenced. Madam, ſaid Amadis, you haue neuer been at any time, but the procurer of all my happineſſe and fauor, and if I haue felt any tribulation, I, and not you, haue been the cauſer thereof: therefore haue I iuſtly ſuſtained, whatſoeuer ſorrow I haue ſuffered. Alas ſweete loue, anſwered Oriana, when I thinke vpon the eſtate wherein Coriſanda and the Damoſell of Denmarke did finde you, and the abundance of teares and lamentations that continually diſtilled from your eyes (as they haue told me) I aſſure you that yet my mind is troubled therwith. Madam, ſaid hee, the teares wherof you ſpeake, were no teares▪ for long before the comming of Coriſanda to the poore Rock, the ſpring whereof was dried vp: but it was an humor proceeding from my heart, the which did ſo continually burne in your loue, that being conſtrained by the force of the flame, it did draw vp to the eyes that moyſture, which nature had placed about the heart to preſerue it, and to giue it life: and I beeleue that if the Damoſell of Denmarke had ſtayed from bringing me that reliefe which I receiued of her, in ſteede of teares which diſtilled from mine eyes, the ſoule it ſelfe had departed. Sweete loue, ſaid the Princeſſe, I know well that I committed a great errour in writing that letter which Durin did bring to you, but you ſhould then haue remembred how that all women are weake, and very light of beleefe, eſpecially in things wherein they are affectioned, and wherein by too extreame loue they are often times carried away, & made ſuſpitious, euen as I haue beene againſt you, wherefore the greater that mine offence is, the greater praiſe ſhall you win in pardoning me: the which I beſeech you to do,

being ready to receiue ſuch puniſhment therefore, as it ſhall pleaſe you to giue vnto me, and to ſatisfie you at your owne diſcretion. Alas Madam, ſaid Amadis, it is I that ſhould demand pardon of you: for if I ſhould die for your loue, moſt pleaſant would that death be vnto me. But this much I aſſure you, that I had neuer beene able to haue reſiſted this great ſorrow that I haue ſuffered, had it not beene that my martiredome was eaſed (knowing the pleaſure which you would receiue in the ſame) that it tooke ſuch force vnto it, as death was not of ſufficient power in any ſort to bring it to an end. Let vs leaue off this talke for this time ſaid Mabila, you haue both ſuffered wrong, determine therefore henceforth how it may be recompenſed: and now to eſchue the vapours of the night (which may be vnto you ſomewhat hurtfull) let vs retire vnto ſome couert. I like your counſell well anſwered Oriana. Therewithall Amadis was brought into her chamber, and preſently Mabila and the Damoſel of Denmarke (knowing that they ſhould do them a pleaſure to leaue them alone) went forth, faining to goe about ſome other affaires. Then the princeſſe requeſted Amadis to ſit downe in a chayre couered with veluet, which ſtood in a corner of the chamber, and ſhe ſtood leaning vpon him, that ſhee might at more eaſe kiſſe him, and hang about his necke: whereupon he being ouercome with an extream amorous paſſion, left off his wonted modeſty, thruſting one of his hands into Oriana her prettie breaſts, and the other towards the place by him moſt affected: where-with Oriana halfe aſhamed in ſtretching her ſelfe along, becauſe ſhe would not looke in his face, ſaide vnto him, My deere loue, I beleeue that the hermit of the poore Rock, taught you not this leſſon, Madame anſwered hee, I beſeech you to pardon my raſhneſſe, takeing pitty of me, and ſeeing that both time and place is ſo fauourable vnto vs, be not you more contrary vnto me then they, but ſuffer mee to continue that fauour, wherof by your good grace I haue taken poſſeſſion, when I deliuered you from the handes of Arcalaus. My ioy, anſwered Oriana, you know that I am ſo wholly yours, that you cannot diſpoſe of your ſelfe more then of me, neuertheleſſe how may I poſſibly at this time ſatisfie your deſire, ſeeing that your Coſin, and the Damoſel of Denmarke are ſo neere vnto vs? Alas ſaid he, they haue hitherto been the cauſe of my life, and now ſince they haue farther aſſiſted me do you thinke that they will deſire my death? Aſſure you Madam that they are already ſo well acquainted with our affections (eſpecially the Damoſell of Denmarke) that although they haue not ſeen them effected, yet it mny be they haue preſumed as much and more: therfore I beſeech you (in acquiting you of your promiſe) to ſuccour me. Which ſaid, hee gaue ſuch large ſcope vnto his paſſions, that notwithſtanding all the faint reſiſtance that Oriana could make againſt him, hee had that of her which he moſt deſired, taſting together of the ſweete fruit, which they did firſt ſow in the Forreſt, at ſuch time as Gandalin was gone to ſeeke for ſome victuals for them: as you haue heard in the firſt booke. And although that Oriana made refuſal thereof at the firſt, yet Amadis vſed her ſo courteouſly

that before they departed from the place, they determined to continue their ſport, whilſt they had ſo good oportunity, and from thenceforth not to bee in any doubt eyther of Mabila or the Damoſell of Denmarke. Eight whole dayes did Amadis remaine at Mirefleur with Oriana, leading a life as pleaſantly as they could wiſh, during all the which time he was not ſeene of any, except of thoſe that were the meanes of his bringing thither, as it hath beene tolde you, for all the day long hee was cloſe with the Ladies in the chamber, and when the euening approched they came forth into the garden, where often times after many amorous diſcourſes, Amadis alayed the heate of his fire (by the ſweete embracings of Oriana) at the muſick of the birds, who chanting out their pleaſant notes, were witneſſes of the pleaſure that theſe two louers receiued, vnder the ſhade of the little young Trees, wherewith this place was ſufficiently ſtored. Now did Gandalin euery day go and come from London to Mireflure, to bring newes, from the Court: ſo that one time amongſt others, hee told Amadis that the Armour which by Enil he had cauſed to bee made for him, would bee very ſhortly finiſhed. Moreouer hee told him, that the King was in great doubt for the battaile which he had enterpriſed againſt king Cildadan: for the moſt part of thoſe that hee had to deale withall, were cruell Giants, and without reaſon, and therefore hee had ſtayed Galaor, Floreſtan, Agraies, and Don Galuanes, to aſſiſt him in that encounter. Who (ſaid Gandalin) are ſo angry for the famous report that is ſpread abroad, of the Faire Forlorne to the diſprayſe of Amadis, as if they had not already paſſed their promiſe to the king, ſeeking not to enterpriſe any combat or voyage before the battaile, they had beene already vpon their way to haue ſought him out to fight with him, and they ſecretly giue it out, that if they doe eſcape aliue, they will not reſt vntil they haue both found him, and fought with him. In good faith, anſwered Amadis, they ſhall ſee me the ſooner if God pleaſe, but it ſhal be after another manner then they hope for: wherefore do thou returne to the Court, and I arne if any thing hath ſince happened. Herewithall Gandalin departed, who went directly to London, where hee found the king ready to ſit downe to dinner, and euen as they were taking vp the Table, there entred in a very antient Gentleman, attended vpon with two Eſquires, apparrelled both in one liuery. This old mans beard was ſhauen, and the hayre of his head was white with age, who came and kneeled before the king, and ſaluting him in the Greeke tongue (in which countrie he was borne) hee ſaid vnto him. It may pleaſe your Maieſty, the high renowne that is ſpread in all parts of the world, of the knights, Ladies and Gentle-women that are in your Court, hath beene the only cauſe that enforced me to addreſſe my iourney hither, to ſee if in the ſame I may finde that which this threeſcore yeeres I haue ſought in diuerſe countries farre and neere, to ſmall purpoſe. Therefore moſt renowned Prince. I beſeech your Maieſty to be pleaſed, that to finiſh my trauaile, I may make a proofe of the knights, Ladies and Gentle-women in this aſſembly, the which (as I thinke) will neyther be hurtfull

nor diſpleaſing eyther to your Maieſty, or to any other. Then all the Lords that were preſent, deſired to ſee a thing ſo rare, intreating the king to grant his requeſt, the which he eaſily condiſcended vnto, therewithall the ancient Gentleman tooke from one of his Eſquires, a little cofer of Iaſper, which he did carrie, which was in length about three cubits, and in breadth a ſhaftmont, and it was garniſhed with Gold, and the moſt curious damaske worke in the World: this little cofer he opened, afterward he tooke out of it a Sword, ſo ſtrange, as the like was neuer ſeene, the ſcabberd therof was made of two bright ſhining bones, and as greene as any fine Emeraud, ſo as the blade was to be ſeene through it, not after the manner of other blades, for the one halfe of it ſhewed meruailous bright, and the other ſeemed, as if it burned, being as red as fire, and it hanged in a Belt of the ſame ſtuffe as the ſcabberd was of, ſo cunningly made, that any man might eaſily gird it about him. This Sword the Gentleman did hang about his necke, that hee might likewiſe take out of the cofer a kercheif, the one halfe where-of, was be ſet with floures as freſh and greene, as if they had beene euen then newly gathered: and the other halfe was couered with other violets, as withered and dry, as if they had beene ten yeeres in the Sun, neuertheleſſe both the one & the other ſeemed to ſpring from one and the ſelfe ſame roote: wherewithal the king being abaſhed, demanded of him how theſe things might bee. If it like your maieſty anſwered the old man, this ſword cannot bee drawne forth of the ſcabbard, but onely by that knight that amongſt all louers, is the moſt conſtant, and that doth beſt loue his Lady: and as ſoone as hee ſhall haue it in his hands, that part which burneth ſhall become as cleere and bright as the reſt, ſo as the blade ſhall bee all of one colour. In like ſort if this kerchiefe beſtrewed with ſo many flowers, be ſet vpon the head of ſuch a Ladie or Gentlewoman that doth loue her husband or friend with the like conſtantneſſe, the withered and drie floures ſhall appeare againe, of a moſt freſh and liuely colour: and your Maieſty may be pleaſed to know, that I cannot be made a Knight, but by the hands of this perfect louer that ſhall draw forth this Sword, neyther may I take armes but of her that ſhall deſerue this pretious kercheife. For this cauſe haue I theſe threeſcore yeeres continually ſought in many ſtrange Countries for thoſe by whom I ought to receiue knight-hood, but yet hitherto I haue trauailed in vaine, & now proſecuting my voyage (in a manner for my laſt refuge) I am come into your Court imagining that euen as it farre exceedeth the Courts of all other Emperors and kings, ſo I might in like ſort in the ſame find that which in all others I haue failed of. I pray you ſaide the king, let mee know the reaſon why the fire that remaines in the one halfe of this blade, doth not burne the ſcabbard. It may pleaſe your Maieſty, anſwered the olde man, betwixt Tartaria and India, there is an arme of the Sea which is ſo hot, that the water thereof (beeing meruailous greene) boiles as if it were vpon the fire, and in the ſame there is brought forth a kinde of Serpents more great then Crocodiles, the which doe flie very

lightly, by reaſon of their long wings, but they are ſo infectious, that euery one ſhun them ſo much as they poſſible may. Notwithſtanding when a man findeth any one of them hee eſteemeth of him as a thing much worth, becauſe they are profitable for diuerſe medicines, and theſe Serpents haue a bone that reacheth from the neck to the tayle, the which is ſo great, that vpon the ſame is formed al the whole body which is greene, as you ſee by this ſcabberd, and furniture, for as much as they are bred vp (as I haue ſaid) in this burning ſea, no heate of any other fire may hurt them. Thus hath your Maieſty heard the ſtrangeneſſe of this ſword, and of the ſcabberd, now I will tell you of the floures of this kertchiefe. In the ſame Countrie of Tartarie, there is alſo an Iſland enuironed with the moſt ſtrange and dangerous gulfe that is in any part of all the Sea. By meanes whereof (although the floures of theſe two branches, are rare & pretious) yet there is no mā ſo valiant that dare goe to gather them: but if it ſo chance, that any one be ſo madde as to aduenture himſelfe therein, and if hee may bring them away, aſſure your Maieſty, he ſelleth them at as great a price as he pleaſeth: for amongſt other ſingular vertues that they haue, this is one, that whoſoeuer doth charily keepe them, they doe neuer leaue their greeneneſſe, and liuely colour, as you may behold in this kertchiefe. And ſeeing that I haue declared vnto you the excellency of theſe Iewels, it may pleaſe your Maieſty likewiſe to vnderſtand who I am, and after what ſort I came by theſe thinges. I beleeu that you haue many times heard ſpeaking of Apolidon, who in his time, was one of the beſt Princes of the Earth, he it was that did beautifie the firme Iſland, with many rare and ſingular things, as euery one knoweth, my Father was his Brother, and king of Ganor who being in loue with the daughter of the king of Canonia, did beget me of her. And when I was of ſufficient age to bee made knight, my father commanded me, ſeeing I had been cōceiued with far more perfect and loyall loue, then euer was any other prince, that I would not in like ſort receiue knight-hood, but by the hand of the moſt faithful louer that might be found in all the World, neyther to take armes, but from that Lady, or Damoſell who ſhould loue her huſband or friend, with the like conſtancy as the knight doth. The which I both promiſed and ſwore vnto him to performe, thinking to accompliſh his will very eaſily, only in going to mine Vncle Apolidon and Grimaneſa his wi
                        •
                     e, towards whom I went: neuertheles, my misfortune was ſuch, that I found Grimaneſa dead, wherefore Apolidon (knowing the cauſe of my comming) was very ſorrowfull. For Grimaneſa being deceaſſed, elſe where very hardly might I finde (as he told me) that which I had promiſed vnto my Father, the ſucceſſion o
                        •
                      whoſe Crowne was denied vnto mee except I were a knight, as by the ſtatute and ordinance of his Realme was appointed, and therefore mine Vncle willed me to returne vnto Ganor, and that within one yeere following, I ſhould come againe vnto him: during which time hee would endeauour to finde ſome remedy for the fooliſh enterpriſe which I had vndertaken: and according to his appointment I returned. Then he

gaue me this Sword, and kerchief, by the which I might know thoſe whom I was to finde, telling mee that ſeeing had beene ſo raſh in my promiſe, therefore I ſhould from thenceforth trauaile ſo long vntil that I finding ſuch a conſtant knight and Lady, had accompliſhed whatſoeuer my Father was commanded. And thus your Maieſty may ſee the reaſon of my long trauaile and ſearch, therefore if it like your Highneſſe, you may trie the Sword firſt, and your knights afterward. And in like ſort the Queene and her Ladies, may prooue what ſhall bee the euent of the kerchiefe, and he or ſhe that ſhall finiſh theſe aduentures, ſhall poſſeſſe the Iewels as their owne, I gaine reſt thereby, where-of I ſhal reape the profit, and your Maieſty honour and renowne amongſt all other Kings and Princes, hauing found that in your Court, of the which I haue fayled in all other Countries. Thus the old man hauing ended his diſcourſe, there was not any that were preſent, who did not generally deſire to ſee the matter in proofe: and although the king was as deſirous to ſee the triall there-of as any other, yet did he defer it off vntil the fift day following, vpon the which day, was the feaſt of Saint Iames to be celebrated, and the more to make it manifeſt, he ſent for a great number of his knights. For the more full my Court is (ſaid the king) the more is the likely-hood to haue this aduenture throughly tryed. Vnto the which determination euery one agreed: all this diſcourſe did Gandalin heare, who by good fortūe was not 1. houre before arriued at Lon. But ſo ſoone as the Concluſion was agreed vpon, he got againe to horſe-back and rode forthwith to Mireflure, where he found the faire Forlorne playing at Cheſts with Oriana, who ſeeing him returne ſo ſuddainly, ſhee demanded of him what new euent was chanced in the Court. Madam, anſwered he, I am ſure that you will bee wonderfull glad to vnderſtand what it is. And what is it ſaid Ortana? then Gandalin recited all the whole diſcourſe of the olde Gentleman, with the ſtrangeneſſe of the ſword and kerchiefe: as alſo how the king had put off the proofe thereof vntill the feaſt day of Saint Iames next enſuing. During all this long diſcourſe, the Faire Forlorne became more penſiue then hee was accuſtomed to bee, which Oriana ſtraight perceiued, neuertheleſſe ſhe made no ſhew thereof, vntill Gandalin and the company were departed, and that ſhee came and ſat downe vpon the knees of the faire Forlorne. Then ſhee kiſſing him and hanging about his neck, ſaid vnto him: My loue I pray you tell mee whereupon you muſed, whilſt Gandalin declared vnto vs the newes at London. In faith Madam, anſwered the faire Forlorne, if my will were to my wiſh, you and I ſhould all our life time after liue in more reſt and contentment then hitherto we haue done, for the kerchiefe ſhould be yours, and the ſword mine, and ſo all ſuſpition and iealouſie ſhould neuer more raigne betwixt vs. What ſweete loue ſaid ſhe, do you doubt that I would not gaine the Kerchiefe if it were by firme loue to be gained? No Madame, anſwered he, but I did feare, becauſe the tryall is to bee made in the king your Father his Court, that you would make it difficult to enterpriſe the ſame, and yet I know that I am able

both to carrie you thither, and bring you back againe (if it pleaſe you) ſo that none that doe ſee vs, ſhall know who we are, My Lord ſaid ſhe, you know that I will obey you all my life long, and that you may diſpoſe of me at your pleaſure ſo as I doe more feare the danger whereinto theſe Gentlewomen may fall, if wee ſhould be diſcouered, then any of our owne, and me thinks it were good to heare what their opinion is, before we vnder-take any thing. Whatſoeuer ſhall pleaſe you Madam, anſwered the faire Forlorne, that do. Then ſhee called Mabila and the Damoſel of Denmarke, who were talking with Gandalin, vnto whom they declared all that you haue heard. And although that vndoubtedly the danger was very great, neuertheleſſe the gentlewomen ſeeing that they whom it did neereſt touch, were (as they thought) moſt forward therein, they would not ſpeake that which they thought thereof, and anſwered Oriana that in troth ſhe ſhould nener in all her life, haue the like occaſion to win the moſt pretious Iewell in the world. Well ſaid the Princeſſe, v
                        •
                     to the faire Forlorne, doe then what you thinke beſt. I will tel you anſwered hee, how wee may goe I will anſwered Enil (who as yet doth not know what I am) to tell the King, that a ſtrange Knight with his Lady will make triall of thoſe Iewels, if it ſo pleaſe his Maieſty to giue them ſafe conduct, that nothing ſhal be ſaid nor done vnto them againſt their wil, which granted I will conduct my Lady diſguiſed in ſtrange apparell, hauing a very fine laune or cipreſſe before her face, thorow the which ſhe may ſee euery one, and yet ſhall not ſhe bee knowne of any, and I being wholy armed with my beuer downe, will leade het. By my faith, ſaid Mabila, your enterpriſe is great: but I haue a garment that my mother did lately ſend vnto me by the Damoſell of Denmarke, of the rareſt faſhion in the world, which will be fit for this purpoſe, and if it pleaſe my Lady, wee will preſently try it vpon her, herewithal they went for it, which being brought, ſhe and the Damoſell of Denmarke apparelled her there-with, after ſo ſtrange a manner, that they all began to laugh, ſeeing the Princeſſe ſo diſguiſed, and whatſoeuer the faira Forlorne had before determined to doe, they thought might now be very eaſily performed. Whereupon they forth-with commanded Gandalin to go buy ſome faire Palfrey for Oriana: and that hee ſhould not faile to bring him to the end of the Caſtle wall of Mirefleur, the night before the trial of theſe Iewels was to be performed, and further that he ſhould aduertiſe Durin to bring his horſe the ſame euening into that place where hee firſt alighted when hee entred into the garden. For I wil depart, ſaid he, this night to goe vnto the Fountaine of the three channels, where Enil is to meete mee, whom I will forth-with ſend vnto the King, to purchaſe out ſafe conduct. Thus Gandalin departed, who did effectually performe whatſoeuer was committed to his charge. Therefore ſo ſoone as the euening was come, the faire Forlorne tooke his leaue of the Ladies, who brought him vnto the foote of the garden wall, and ſliding down on the other ſide, he found where Durin held his horſe, vpon the which he mounted, taking his way towards the Eorreſt, and about the breake of day he arriued

at the fountaine, where within a while after E
                           •
                        il came bringing with him the Armor which he had cauſed to bee made, with the which he armed himſelfe, and then demanded of him what newes there was in the Court. My Lord, anſwered hee, euery man there ſpeaketh of your proweſſe: and there is not any one but is very deſirous to be acquainted with you. Then falling from one ſpeech to another, hee began to tell him the newes of the old Gentleman, who had brought the Sword, and the Kerchiefe, Truſt me, ſaid the faire F
                           •••
                        orne, it is now foure dayes ago, ſince a Gentlewoman aduertiſed mee thereof vpon this condition, that I ſhould cary her to the court, to make triall of this aduenture, therefore I am conſtrayned to go thither, neuertheleſſe thou knoweſt how much I deſire, not to bee yet knowne of the King, not of any other, vntill my deedes do giue them further teſtimony of my valour then yet they haue. For this cauſe thou muſt returne vnto London to tell the King, that if it pleaſe him, to giue ſecurity vnto a Gentlewoman and me, that nothing ſhall be eyther ſaid or done vnto vs againſt our wils, we will come to make trial of the ſtranger his requeſt: but faile not in like ſort to aduertiſe the Queene and her Ladies how the Gentlewoman conſtrayneth mee to conduct her thither, according to the promiſe that I haue made vnto her, and that otherwiſe I would not haue come there, and after thou haſt fulfilled my commandement, faile not in any caſe to returne hither the night before theſe Iewels muſt be ſhewed. In the meane ſeaſon, I will goe ſeeke the Gentlewoman who is ſomewhat far from hence: and according to the anſwere that thou ſhalt bring vnto vs, wee will eyther go forward, or return back againe. Then Enil departed, and the faire Forlorne tooke the way to Mirefleur, where hee arriued as ſoone as day was ſhut in, and there he found Durin ready to receiue his horſe. By whoſe helpe hee got ouer the wall, and entred into the garden where Oriana, and the other gentlewomen were, of whom he was moſt courteouſly entertained: but when Mabila eſpied him comming, ſhe ſaid vnto him: what is the cauſe my good Coſin, that you are more braue now, then you were this laſt morning? Haue you met with any good booty of late? You know not the meaning there-of, anſwered Oriana, hee went of purpoſe for this faire Armour thinking to eſcape by force from this priſon wherein we kepe him. Is it true? ſaid Mabila, if you determine to fight with vs, ſee that you be well aduiſed firſt, for you haue ſomewhat to do, And in this ſort ieſting together, they came vnto the Princeſſe her chamber, where his ſupper was brought vnto him: for all that day he neyther had eaten nor drunken, fearing leaſt hee ſhould haue been diſcouered.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XV.
                  
                     How the Damoſell of Denmarke was ſent vnto London to know what anſwere Enil had receiued from the King, touching the ſafe conduct which was demanded by the faire Forlorne, who did afterwards bring Oriana thither to proue the ſtrange Iewels.
                  
                  
                     AS ſoone as the faire Forlorne was returned to Mirefleur, he told Oriana how Enil was gone to the Court according to their determination concluded the day before. Wherupon the Princeſſe deſirous to know an anſwere, and alſo to prouide all things neceſſary for their ſafety before hand, ſhee ſent the Damoſell of Denmarke vnto the Queen to certify her Maieſty, that becauſe ſhe found her ſelfe ſome-what ill at eaſe, it would pleaſe her grace to hold her excuſed, if ſhee could not as yet come and do her dutie vnto her Highneſſe. So the Damoſell departed, and returned not vntill it was very late, for ſhee ſtayed the arriuall of the Queene Briolania, to meet with whom the king himſelfe did go, and ſhe came into the court with one hundred knights, ready to begin the ſearch of Amadis, according to the appointment of Galaor and Floreſtan, and therefore ſhe was determined not to depart from Queene Briſena, vntil they were returned again, neyther would ſhe nor her women bee apparrelled with other Garments then of black cloth, vntill he were found, for ſuch weeds did ſhe weare at ſuch time as hee did make her Queene, and now would ſhee neuer change her manner of life, if he were loſt. In your iudgment ſaid Oriana, is ſhe ſo faire as the report goeth of her? So helpe me God, anſwered the Damoſell, except your grace, ſhe is the faireſt woman, and of the beſt behauiour that euer I did ſee, ſhee was very ſorry when ſhe heard of your ſickneſſe, and ſhee ſendeth you word by me, that ſhe will come and doe her dutie vnto you ſo ſoone as you ſhall thinke conuenient. Truely, ſaid Oriana, I am more deſirous to ſee her then any other that I doe know. Madam, anſwered the faire Forlorne, beleeu me ſhe well deſerueth that you ſhould ſhew her all the honour you may, although heretofore you haue wrongfully ſuſtayned ſome griefe for her ſake: gentle loue, ſaid the Princeſſe, for Gods ſake, let vs ſpeake no more of paſſed melancholies, for I am aſſured that I did thinke amiſſe. You ſhall yet be better aſſured, anſwered he, by the teſtimony that you ſhall receiue, of thoſe Iewels which we ſhall gaine, the which will henceforth quite extinguiſh all thoſe vnhappy fancies that you haue conceiued againſt me, if they ſhould chance to returne againe into your thought, increaſing in you the opinion of that zeale and dutie which I doe owe and beare vnto you. My Lord, ſaid Oriana, I am well aſſured that the kerchiefe ſhall make you beleeue, that what wrong ſoeuer you receiued of me, proceeded of no other cauſe, but by the extreame loue which I did beare vnto you: we ſhall ſee ſhortly ſaid the Damoſell of Denmarke, what will happen. For the king hath granted your requeſt by Enil.
                     
In this ſort did Oriana, and the teſt of her company paſſe away the time, vntill the day came wherein they muſt depart, to make triall of that which you haue heard, which cauſed her to riſe about midnight, attiring her as the faire Forlorne had deuiſed, and hee likewiſe was armed at all points, that done they paſſed through the garden, and came to the place where Gandalin held their horſes in readines. Then mounted they vpon them, taking their way toward the Forreſt, right vnto the Fountaine of the three channels. But there Oriana thinking vpon the enterpriſe which ſhe went about, foreſeeing the inconuenience and danger thereof, not onely if ſhe were diſcloſed, but alſo how if ſhe failed in gaining the kerchiefe, Amadis might haue iuſt cauſe to ſuſpect her, and by that meanes ſhe might looſe that good reputation which ſhee had gotten with him. Herewithall ſhe began to repent her forwardneſſe, and to tremble ſo extreamly, that the faire Forlorne perceiued it, who ſaid vnto her. Madam, had I thought you would haue been ſo ill at eaſe with this voyage, I ſweare vnto you that I would rather haue died then haue brought you out of doores, therefore if it pleaſe you, let vs returne againe to Mirefleur. So ſaying, he turned his horſe head, neuertheleſſe Oriana conſidering that by her an aduenture ſo recommendable ſhould bee deferred, changed her minde and anſwered him. I beſeech you ſweete loue not to take any heede vnto the feare that a timerous woman may haue in the middeſt of this great wood, but vnto the vertue and valor that remaineth in you. Very ſorry was the faire Forlorne becauſe hee had ſpoken in ſuch ſort vnto her, doubting leſt he had offended her, and he ſaid vnto her. Madam, ſeeing that your diſcretion hath ſurmouted my 
                        •
                     olly, I beſeech you to pardon me: for I aſſure you, my meaning was not to ſpeake any thing that ſhould be offenſiue vnto you. As they had ended their conference, they came vnto the fountaine being yet an houre from day, where they had not long ſtayed before Enil came vnto them, whereat they were very ioyfull. Then the faire Forlorne ſaide vnto Oriana: Madame, behold the Eſquire which I promiſed you to ſend vnto king Liſuart, by whoſe anſwere we may determin what to do. In faith my Lord, anſwered Enil, he ſendeth you by me all the aſſurance that you demand, and further he aduertiſeth you that the triall of the aduenture beginneth this day after his Maieſties comming from the Chappell. All the better ſaid the faire Forlorne, wee ſhall then haue no great cauſe of ſtay. Hereupon hee gaue him his ſhield and launce, and without putting off his Helmet at all, they tooke the right way to London: the people had already heard that the knight which did ouercome the Giants ſhould come vnto the kings lodging, they ſaid one to another: Heauens ſhield the faire Forlorne from all miſchiefe, for he is worthy of great praiſe, and moſt happy may that Lady thinke her ſelfe, to whom he remaineth a ſeruant. Theſe words might Oriana vnderſtand very well, wherewith ſhe was not a little ioyfull, knowing that ſhe was Lady & Miſtris of him, whom ſo many people did both loue & honor: afterward they came and alighted at the Palace: where they found the king, Queen Ladies, and a great number of

knights already aſſembled all together in a great hal, to make trial who ſhould gaine the old mans Iewels. And as ſoon as they knew of the arriuall of the Faire Forlorne, the King roſe vp with his traine to receiue them: wherefore the Faire Forlorne kneeling down would haue kiſſed his hands: but the K. lifted him vp, ſaying vnto him: My good friend, you are moſt hartily welcome hither, where you ſhall be as free as you would wiſh, for you haue done as much ſeruice for me, in ſo ſmall a time, as euer any knight performed either for King or Prince. The Faire Forlorne anſwered not one word, but onely bowed himſelfe to his maieſtie in ſigne of thankes: and without ſtepping one foote from Oriana, (whom he held by the hand) they came towards the Ladies, who did all ſalute them very courteouſly. You may imagine if the young Princeſſe were not now in ſome feare to be diſcouered, being in ſuch an aſſembly, for the Queene her mother ſtepped vnto her, looking her ſtedfaſtly in the face, although it was couered with a laune, and ſhe ſaid vnto her. Gentlewoman, I do not know who you are, for to my knowledge I did neuer ſee you, neuertheleſſe, for the loue of this knight (in whoſe cuſtody you are) that hath done the king ſo great ſernice, aſſure you that in this place ſhal be ſhewed vnto you, all the honour and ſeruice that poſſibly may bee. For the which the Faire Forlorne humbly thanked her Maieſtie, but Oriana without ſpeaking one word held her head down continually. Therewithall the king and all his knights withdrew them to one ſide, and the Queene and her Ladies to the other. And in the meane time the Faire Forlorne leading Oriana by the hand, came and beſeeched the King, that he and his Lady might remaine in the midſt of the hall, for they were not determined to touch the Iewels, except that all the aſiſtance did firſt miſſe the gaining of them. The which the king did grant vnto him, who did firſt of all take vp the ſword, which was layd vpon the table by the olde Gentleman named Macandon: and the King did draw it out one ſhaftmont and no more. Wherefore Macandon ſaid. It may pleaſe your Maieſty if there bee not found in your Court any, more amorous then you are, I ſhal not depart from hence ſo contented as I hoped to doe. There-withall he took the ſword and laid it again vpon the table, for ſo muſt he doe after euery triall. Then Galaor tooke it vp, but yet he performed leſſe then the King did. The which Floreſtan, Galuanes, Grumedan, Brandoinas and Landin ſeeing, they all one after another tryed what they could doe, and yet none of them could vnſheath it ſo much as Floreſtan did, who drew it ſorth a foote and more: but then Guillan the penſiue tooke it, and he paſſed Floreſtan about halfe a foote, ſo that hee came vnto the middeſt thereof. Truſt me then, ſayde Macandon, if you did loue but as much againe as you do, the ſword ſhould bee yours. After him there came more then a hundred Knights, who did little or nothing therin, where-upon Macandon 
                     
                        •
                     eſting with them, called them heretiques in loue. Then Agraies who had ſtaied to bee the laſt, beeing ſure (as hee thought, conſidering the firme loue which hee did bare vnto his Ladie Olinda) that the aduenture was ordained for him and on other, ſtepped forth, and beholding his Miſtreſſe hee tooke

the ſword and drew it forth of the ſcabbard within 3. fingers breadth and as he ſtrained himſelfe to pull it quite forth, the fire iſſued from the blade ſo hot, that it burned part of his apparrel, ſo that he was conſtrained to leaue it there, being very ioyfull neuertheleſſe, that he had performed more then any of the reſt. Truly ſaid Macandon you are a loyall knight, and you haue almoſt had occaſion to bee content, and I ſatisfied. Laſtly Palomir & Dragonis approched, who were but the day before arriued at the court, and they gained no more then did Galaor: which cauſed Macandon to laugh, ſaying vnto them. My ad
                        •••
                     ers, that you ſhould put both of your parts in the ſword together, & it may be that you ſhall haue ſufficient to defend you hereafter. You ſay true anſwered Dragonis: but if you be this day made knight, you ſhall not be of ſo yong yeeres but that you may very well remember it hereafter. At that word euery one began to laugh, in the meane ſeaſon there was neuer a knight remaining in the Court who did not put himſelfe forward to gaine the ſword, and yet it was all in vaine. Wherefore the faire Forlorne holding Oriana by the hand, came to take it vp: when Macandon ſaid vnto him: knight this ſword wil fit you better (if you may gain it) then that which you haue, & yet it cannot be gotten by force of Armes without conſtancy in loue. It muſt then be mine anſwered the faire Forlorne, who there-withall did draw it forth of the ſcabbard as eaſily as if it had beene his owne, and that part of it, which ſeemed to be burning, became like vnto the other, and was as bright as euer was ſeene.
                  Therewithall Macandon (exceeding ioyfull) caſt himſelfe, at the feete of the faire Forlorne, ſaying, vnto him, O noble knight, God increaſe thy honour: for in ending my long trauaile you haue greatly honoured this Court. And truly that Lady who is ſerued of you, hath cauſe to loue you well, except ſhe be the moſt miſchieuous & diſſoyalſt woman in the world. Now therefore do me this fauour (if it pleaſe you) as to giue me the order of knighthood, for by no other then you, may I obtaine it, nor yet enioy the ſignory which of right belongeth vnto me ouer many great perſonages. Cauſe firſt a triall of the Kerchiefe to be made, anſwered the faire Forlorne, and afterward I will performe whatſoeuer I ought to do vnto you. Then girded he the ſword vnto his ſide, leauing his owne for him that would take it vp, and returned to the place from whence hee departed. Great was the praiſe that all mē gaue vnto him: but more great was the emulation of Galaor and Floreſtan towards him, concluding in their minds that ſo ſoone as the battell againſt king Cildadan was finiſhed (if they thence eſcaped with life) they would preſently ſeeke him out, and chalenge him to the combat, wherin they would die, or elſe make it knowne vnto euery one that their brother Amadis was a far better knight then he, who (as they thought) did eclipſe his honor, by the reputation whch he had gotten in gaining the ſtrangers ſword. At that inſtant the Ladies approched to proue which of them might obtaine the Kerchiefe, and firſt of all the Queene began, putting it vpon her head: notwithſtanding the floures did not any whit change their colour for her: Whereupon Macandon
                     
ſaid, Madam if the king your huſband haue ſhewed the little loyaltie that remaineth in him, in his triall of the ſword, me thinks you do now well enough requite him for it. The Queene bluſhed and being halfe aſhamed ſhe returned to her place: then came the faire Queen Briolania, who therein performed as much as the firſt. Vnto whom Macandon likewiſe ſaid. beleeue me Madam, co
                        ••
                     idering the great beauty wherewith you are indued, you are more beloued thē louing, as wee may plainely ſee by this kerchief. After her came foure kings daughters, meruailous faire Eludia, Eſtreletta, Aldena, and the ſage Oliada, vpon whoſe heads the kerchiefe being placed, the withered floures began a little to flouriſh, ſo that there was not any one of them which did not imagine that ſhe ſhould be the owner there-of, wherwith Oriana was in a great perplexity. Yet in the end the floures returned to their withered colour. And for the ſame cauſe the Gentlewomen ſet them downe againe in their places: neuertheleſſe it was not without receiuing ſome little frumpe from the olde Gentleman, who for one of his age could very fitly apply them. In the end Oriana perceiuing that euery one had failed, ſhee was very glad thereof, and therefore ſhe made a ſigne vnto the faire Forlorne that he ſhould leade her to the Table, where the triall was to bee made, but ſo ſoone as the kerchiefe was ſet vpon her head the blaſted floures were as greene and as faire as thoſe that were moſt freſh, ſo that there was no difference at all to be perceiued. Wherefore Macandon cried out: Ah Madam, you are ſhee whom I haue ſought for fortie yeeres before you were borne, now ſaid he to the faire Forlorne, I pray you ſir deferre not the honour which is by you two due vnto me: but if you pleaſe (as already I haue intreated you) make me knight, then of this faire Lady (according as I am bound) I will receiue my Armes. Let it be then preſently ſaid the faire Forlorne, for I am not to tarry long here. Therefore Macandon cauſed forthwith his Armour to be brought, where-with he was preſently armd puting it vpō his white coate according as new knights are wont to doe, then the faire Forlorne, laying his ſword vpon his ſhoulder, and faſtning on his right ſpurre, gaue him his order, Oriana girded on his Sword which was in like ſort brought by his Eſquires. Which ceremony being finiſhed, the Gentlewomen beholding him in that order, would in ſome ſort bee reuenged for the flouts which he had giuen them, and therefore they all burſt into a laughter, eſpecially Aldena, who ſpake ſo loud that all might heare her.
                  Behold the countenance of this faire Lad how like a young knight hee looketh: Surely wee ought all to reioyce, becauſe hee ſhal all his life long ſeeme as freſh and luſty as now he is. How know you that, anſwered Eſtreletta? By his apparrell ſaid ſhe, which ſhall euen laſt as long as hee. Faire Gentlewomen ſaid Macandon, I would not change my pleaſure for the beſt of your fauours: and if I am not ſo youthfull as you ſay, yet am I not therefore to bee tearmed leſſe diſcreete, but as for you who are yet yong and fooliſh, it were good that you learne to bee more aduiſed and modeſt then you are. This anſwere of his pleaſed the King very well, who in

no ſort liked of the gentlewomens ſpeeches. Whilſt theſe thinges were in doing, the faire Forlorne was ready to depart, when the Queene who knew not her owne daughter, ſaid vnto her, Gentle-woman although you are not deſirous to be knowne in this company, yet bethinke you what it will pleaſe you to command either of the king or me. By my faith, Madam, anſwered the faire Forlorne, I am as little acquainted with her as you, although ſhee hath beene ſeauen daies together in my company, but for that little that I haue perceiued by her, I can aſſure you that ſhee is moſt excellent faire. Truſt me faire Lady, ſaid Briolania (ſpeaking vnto Oriana) I know not your name, but conſidering the loyaltie wherewith you are endued, if your friend doe affect you with the like conſtancy as you doe loue him, you may well bee tearmed the faireſt couple that euer loue vnited together. Oriana ſmiled at the words of Briolania, when the faire Forlorne tooke his leaue, who ſeeing that the King would leade her towards her horſe he ſaid vnto him. Your Maieſty hath reaſon to honour her, by whom your Court hath this day beene more highly exalted, then euer heretofore by any other Lady it hath beene. In good ſooth anſwered the king, you ſay true, and therefore I will my ſelfe conduct her forth of the Citty, in the which I could willingly deſire that it would pleaſe her, (and you alſo) to make ſome longer abode. Saying ſo, they all mounted on horſe-back, and the king held the raines of his daughters horſe, ſpeaking all the way vnto her, who anſwered him not one word againe, fearing to bee knowne. Galaor in like ſort entertained the faire Forlorne. But he ſo much hated him for the reaſons before rehearſed, that hee could not ſpeake one courteous word vnto him, whereat the Faire Forlorne laughed ſeeing his brothers countenance, and thus they rode together a good way from the citty, vntill the faire Forlorne ſaid vnto the King: I beſeech your Maieſty (if it pleaſe you) to paſſe no further, otherwiſe you may chance to diſpleaſe this Gentle-woman, beleeue me ſaid the King, I will rather returne. Therewithall he embraced him, and ſaid, I would ſir knight that it liked you, to be one of my knights. If it pleaſe your Maieſty, anſwered he, I will willingly bee one of the hundred that ſhall accompany you againſt king Cildadan. If you do me that fauour ſaid the king, I hope that thereby our enemies would be no leſſe diſcouraged then thoſe on our part would be encouraged, & therefore I intreate you ſo to bee. Thus they departed, the king taking his way back to the citty, and the faire Forlorne with Oriana towards the Forreſt, being very ioyfull that they had ſo well finiſhed that dangerous aduenture. But they were no ſooner ariued at the Fountaine of the three channels, when they beheld an eſquire comming towards them mounted vpon a ſtrong horſe, who at his a
                        •…
                     
                     uall ſaid vnto the faire Forlorne▪
                      knight, Arcalaus commandeth thee that thou bring this Gentle-woman vnto him, which if thou denieſt to accompliſh, hee ſaith that he will himſelfe come take thy head from thy ſhoulders. And where is Arcalaus? Anſwered the faire Forlorne. The Eſquire ſhewed him where hee ſate vnder a tuft of Trees, together with another

knight, both twaine armed & ready to mount on horſeback. When Oriana heard this meſſage, the poore ſoule was in ſuch extreame feare, that ſhee was likely to haue fallen from her horſe, wherefore the faire Forlorne ſaid vnto her. How now ſweete Lady, are you afraid of Arcalaus being in my keeping? no, no, hee threatneth to haue my head, and yet he ſhall quit him-ſelfe well if hee can ſaue his owne. Then he betook him to his armes, & ſaid vnto the eſquire, go, return vnto thy maſter and tell him, that I am a ſtrange knight that knoweth him not, and therfore I will not do that. The eſquire returned to Arcalaus who was ſo mad angry there-with, that hee ſaid vnto the other knight which was with him, good nephew Lindora
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      go take the kerchief from that Damoſell, for I do giue it to Madaſima your loue, & if he that conducteth her will cōtradict it, cut off his head forthwith, & afterwards hang it vp by the hair vpon the next tree. Therewithall Lindoraq went towards the faire Forlorne, who had heard all the words of Arcalaus, whereupon hee came to meete him. And although he ſeemed to be very great, as hee which was the ſon of Cartadaque, the giant of the inuincible mountaine, begottē vpon one of the ſiſters of Arcalaus, yet did the Faire Forlorne make ſo little account of him, that he ſaid vnto him, knight paſſe no further: wherefore? anſwered Lindoraq. Becauſe ſaid the faire Forlorne, it pleaſeth me not. Thou wilt bee far more diſpleaſed when thou muſt loſe thy head. Indeede ſaid the faire Forlorne, ſo I would, but thou art more like to loſe thine own, if thou keep it not the better. And without any longer debating, hee clapped the ſpurs to his horſe, couching his ſtaffe againſt Lindora
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      & Lindoraq in like ſort againſt him, ſo that they met one another with ſuch force, that their launces (hitting in the middeſt of their ſhields) flew in ſhiuers. Neuertheleſſe the faire Forlorne finding Lindoraq at aduantage, vnhorſed him, and the truncheon of the ſtaſſe remained in his body, yet did he riſe vp againe ſpeedily, for hee was a knight of a ſtout heart, and beholding that his enemy turned to charge him againe, thinking to recoile back to auoide his blow, hee fell downe ouer & ouer, ſo that the truncheon in his body paſſed further into him, with the extreame paine whereof, hee gaue vp the Ghoſt, Arcalaus who had ſeen his Nephew throwne downe, did ſuddenly put his ſtaffe in his reſt to reuenge him, and running againſt the faire Forlorne he had ſurely hit him, if hee had not turned ſome-what out of the way, but hee ſtepped on the one ſide, letting Arcalaus paſſe by, and in his paſſing, he ſtrooke him ſuch a blow ouer the left hand, that hee cut off foure of his fingers leauing him no more then his thumbe to hold his ſhield which he was forced to let fall, the great paine whereof enforced him to fly as faſt as his horſe could run, without ſo much as once looking behind him, and the faire Forlorne after him, who made all the haſt he could to ouertake him. Notwithſtanding Arcalaus was ſo wel moū
                     ted, that in leſſe then an houre hee had ſo far gotten the ſtart, that the Faire Forlorne wiſhing all the diuells in hell to follow him, returned againe to Oriana, and therewithall hee forthwith commanded Enil to carry the head of Lindora
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      and the peece of Arcalaus his hand vnto the

king, and that he ſhould recite vnto him at large vpon what occaſion he was in ſuch ſort aſſailed. So Euil departed leauing Amadis and Oriana together, who ſhortly after arriued at Mireflour, where they found Gandalin and Durin ſtaying without the garden walls, to take their horſes when they ſhould come: they came to helpe the Princeſſe down, and they told her that Mabila and the Demoſell of Denmarke were on the other ſide of the wall in the Orchard. Here-upon they rayſed vp a Luther, and Oriana mounted vpon it, whom the faire Forlorne led by the hand, when they were at the top of the wall they beheld Mabila and the Damoſell of Denmarke lying faſt aſleepe vpon the graſſe, very heauy with the feare that they had endured all the day, leaſt matters ſhould not ſort to ſo good effect as they wiſhed. Then Oriana called them ſhewing vnto them the Kerchief which ſhe had gotten, which ſo ſoone as they beheld they preſently ran to helpe her downe: and when ſhee was come into the Orchard, Mabila ſaid vnto her, Madame, I neuer had greater dſire to ſee you returne, then I haue had euer ſince your departure from hence. For if you had beene diſcouered, the Damoſell & I had been but in a bad taking: neuertheleſſe we determined to arme vs withpatience. My good Coſin anſwered ſhe, thankes be to God, all goeth well, I haue the kerchiefe, and your Coſin hath the ſword. I, but thanke our Teares (ſaid Mabila) by the which they were chiefely gotten. My Coſin ſaid the faire Forlorne, I will not ſtick to ſhedde for you as much blood, as you haue for mee done teares, whenſoeuer you haue neede of me, but I pray if you haue any thing to eate, bring it into my Ladies chamber, for we haue gotten vs good ſtomacks. Herewithal he led Oriana by the hand into the caſtle. Now becauſe wee will not digreſſe ouer far from that which happened to king Laſuart, we will leaue Oriana and her company at Mirefleur, to tell you what happened vnto his Maieſty and Galaor, as they returned from the faire Forlorne, before they came back vnto the citty. For a yong Damoſell did meete them, who deliuered vnto each one of them a letter, ſent from Vrganda the Vnknowne, and without ſaying any other thing vnto them, ſhe turned her horſe toward that way from whence ſhee came. Wherefore the king opened his Letter which contayned this that enſueth. Vnto you Liſuart king of great Brittaine, ſuch health & happineſſe as beſeemeth your Royall Maieſty. I Vrganda the Vnknowne, your humble ſeruant, doe certifie you, that the battell which is appointed betwixt you and king Cildadan ſhal be one of the moſt dangerous and cruelleſt that euer was ſeene, in the which the faire Forlorne, who hath newly giuen ſuch great hope vnto your Maieſty ſhal loſe his name, & by one blow that he ſhall giue, all his valiant deedes ſhall be quite forgotten, and then ſhall you bee in the greateſt extremity that euer you were: for many good knights ſhall loſe their liues, and you your ſelfe ſhal fall into the like danger, at that ſame inſtant when the faire Forlorne ſhall draw blood from you, neuertheleſſe by three blowes which hee ſhall giue, thoſe on his ſide ſhall remaine conquerors.
                  And be your Maieſty aſſured that without doubt all this ſhal happen therfore prouide for al your affairs

with good aduiſe. After that the king had read this letter, although that he was a ſtout prince, valiant, and of a couragious heart, yet (knowing Vrganda worthie to bee beleeued in all her propheſies) he was afraid, doubting leaſt the faire Forlorne in whom he moſt truſted, would reuolt vnto the ſide of the Ireland king, and knowing alſo what danger was likely to enſue, hee neuertheleſſe diſſembled the matter whatſoeuer he though therof. And after hee had a long while muſed thereupon, he declared the whole circumſtance of it vnto Galaor, ſaying vnto him. My faithfull friend, I doe wholly determine to impart this ſecret vnto you, and to none other, that I may vnderſtand what is your aduiſe therein. Beleeue me, if it like your Maieſty anſwered he, conſidering what Vrganda hath written vnto me, I haue more neede of counſell my ſelfe, then to counſell another, and if it were poſſible to conclude a peace betwixt you and the king of Irelana (prouided that your honour were not thereby to be impared) me thinks it ſhould be for the beſt, or at leaſt if that cannot be, it were good that you ſhould not bee preſent in the battaile. For I do ſee in this Letter two ſtrange accidents likely to fall out, the one is that the faire Forlorne, ſhal wound you ſo cruelly, that he ſhall ſhed your blood vpon the ground, and the other that by three blowes which he ſhall giue, thoſe on his ſide ſhal remaine conquerors, and by this aduertiſement it ſeemeth, that hee ſhall be againſt you. Truely ſaid the king I am ſo throughly aſſured of your good will that I know you doe faithfully and louingly aduiſe me, ſo as if my truſt were not in God (who hitherto hath beſtowed innumerable fauours vpon me, as in chuſing mee king ouer his people) or if I did not ſtedfaſtly belieue that no liuing man is able to with-ſtand his diuine determination, I ſhould haue great reaſon to bee in doubt, but you know that the hearts & diſcretion of kings ought to bee anſwerable vnto the greatneſſe of their eſtate and calling, endeauouring as well to preſerue their ſubiects in ſafety, as to prouide for their owne ſecurity. And therefore I determine to remit all into the hands of my God, and patiently to endure whatſoeuer danger he ſhal lay vpon me, for in him only remaineth the diſpoſition of things to come, for which cauſe my good friend, I aſſure you, that I will bee preſent in this battaile, for becauſe I would be partaker of all the good, honor, or hurt that may happen vnto thoſe which ſhall accōpany me. Greatly did Galaor like of the kings magnanimous determinations and anſwered him, beleeue me it is not for nothing that your Maieſty is eſtemed the moſt vertuous and valianteſt Prince of the world, and if all kings could as well repreſſe the counſell of thoſe who diſſwade them from their haughtie enterpriſes, none durſt be once ſo bold as to ſay any thing vnto them, but that which ſhould bee for their honour and glory, but now your Maieſty may bee pleaſed to ſee what Vrganda hath written vnto me. Herewithall he began to reade his Letter, wherein was contained this which enſueth.
                  Vnto you Don Galaor of Gaule, moſt valiant and hardie Knight, I Vrganda the Vnknowne, doe ſend all hearty ſalutations, as ſhe who both loueth and eſteemeth you, & I will that you ſhould vnderſtand

that which muſt happen vnto you, in this cruell battell betweene the two kings, Liſuart and Cildadan. If you be there be you ſure that in the end thereof, your large and ſtrong members, ſhall want power to aſſiſt your inuincible heart, & at the departure from the Combat your head ſhall bee in his power, who with the three blowes that he ſhall ſtrike ſhall remaine conqueror. In faith ſaid the king, if the contents of the Letter be true, and that you bee in this conflict, you ſee your death prepared, which ſhould bee a great loſſe conſidering your valiant beginning in deeds of armes, therefore I ſhall ſo order the matter, as at this time you ſhall be excuſed from thence. It may pleaſe your Maieſty, anſwered Galaor, I now do very wel perceiue, that the counſell which euen now I deliuered vnto you, hath diſpleaſed your Maieſty, when ſeeing mee ſound and able of body, you would perſwade me to a matter ſo greatly to my diſhonour, God forbid that I ſhould herein obey you. Gentle friend ſaid the king, you ſpeake both vertuouſly, and valiantly, for the which I thanke you: and for this time, let vs leaue off this talke, and my aduice is, that none do ſee our Letters, for (it may bee) they may cauſe ſome feare & aſtoniſhment euen in the hearts of thoſe that doe thinke themſelues to bee moſt hardy and valiant. By this time they were come ſo neere vnto the Citty, that they entred vnder the gate thereof, & as the king looked behinde, he beheld two knights armed at all points, whoſe horſes were ouer-trauelled & weary, and their armour all to broken, in ſuch ſort that it was very eaſy to be perceiued that they had been at ſome bickering. One was Brunco de Bon' Mer, and the other Branfil his brother, who came of purpoſe vnto king Liſuart, to be of the number of thoſe hundred knights which ſhould bee in the battaile, if it pleaſed him to accept of them. But by the way Brunco had beene aduertiſed, how the aduenture of the Sword was atchieued, where-with he was meruailous diſpleaſed that he came no ſooner, becauſe hee would haue tried his fortune therein, as he had done vnder the Arch of loyall louers, the which he had paſſed, and for the firm and conſtant loue that he did beare vnto Melicia ſiſter vnto Amadis, hee did verily beleeue that no ſuch like aduenture might eſcape him: theſe two knights being come neer, did their dutie vnto the king, who receiued thē very courteouſly. Then ſaid Brunco, it may pleaſe your Maieſty we haue beene aduertiſed of a battell which you haue agreed to be executed by a few knights, & ſo much the rather ought they to be ſelected and choſen men. For this cauſe if it would pleaſe your highneſſe to doe vs this honor that we might be of the ſame number your Maieſty may bee aſſured that wee would bee very deſirous to ſerue you. The King who had many times beene aduertiſed of the proweſſe of theſe twaine, eſpecially of the valour of Don Brunco (who for a yong knight, was as much eſteemed as any other that might be found) accepted of them very willingly, and thanked them for their good will.
                  Now did not Brunco as yet know Galaor, but at the ſame inſtant they entred into ſuch acquaintance and familiarity together, that vntill the Battell was finiſhed, they parted not aſunder.
                  And as the king entred into his

lodging, Enil came before him, with the head of Lindoraq which did hang by the hayre at the paitrill of his horſe, and he had in his hand the ſhield and fingers of Arcalaus the Enchanter, by meanes whereof before he was come neer the Palace, a great number of people did follow him, to know what newes he did bring. Afterwards being come into the kinges preſence, hee declared vnto him the meſſage that the faire Forlorne had ſent by him, wherewith he was no leſſe glad, then amaſed at ſo many good and bleſſed chanſes that euery day happened and proceeded from this ſtrange knight, and hee remained a great while praiſing & extolling him without ceaſing. In like ſort Filipinel who had been to giue defiance vnto the Giants, at the ſame inſtant approched, & he recited the names and ſirnames of thoſe which were appointed to be in the battell of king Cildadan, amongſt whom there were found many ſtrong Giants, and other knights of great worth, who were all embarked already, and how before that foure dayes were paſt, they would all take landing in the bay of Vega, where the battell was to be foughten, then hee told the king how he had found at the burning Lake (which ſtands in the Iſle of Mongaſa) king Arban of North Wales, and Angriotta d'Eſtrauaux priſoners vnto Grumadaca wife vnto Famongomad: who cauſed them to ſuffer infinit miſeries and calamities, whipping them euery day moſt cruelly ſo that their bodies were wounded all ouer, and they wrote a letter vnto the king, which Filipinel deliuered vnto him, the tenure whereof enſueth. Vnto the moſt high and mighty Prince Liſuart king of great Brittaine, and to all our Friends and Allies within his Dominions. We Arban once king of North wales, and Angriotta d'Eſtrauaux, now detained in dolorous priſon, doe let you know that our misfortune, more cruell then death it ſelfe, hath brought vs into the power of the moſt pittileſſe Grumadaca wife to Famongomad, who in reuenge of the death of her Husband and Sonne, doth daily cauſe vs to bee tortured with ſo many and ſtrange torments, that it is impoſſible to bee imagined, ſo as euery houre wee deſire the abridging of our daies, that thereby we might bee releaſed of our dolors. But this miſchieuous womā, the more to lengthen our paine, deferreth our death as much as ſhe may, the which with our owne hands we had effected, but that the feare of the loſſe of our ſoules withheld vs.
                  And for as much as we are at this preſent ſo extreamely wounded, that wee are no longer able to reſiſt our deaths, we ſend you this Letter, written with our blood, by the which wee beſeech God both to grant you the victory againſt theſe traitors, that haue in ſuch inhumane ſort tormented vs, and alſo that he will bée pleaſed to haue mercy vpon our ſoules. Great ſorrow and compaſſion had the King for the loſſe of theſe 2. knights, neuertheleſſe ſeeing that for the preſent hee could in no ſort remedie their misfortun, he diſſembled his griefe, ſhewing as good a countenance as hee could, & becauſe he would in no ſort diſcourage the other Gentlemen there preſent, he ſet before their eyes the accidents whereinto many others had fallen, for the maintenance of their Honour of Knighthood, from the which many times they haue with

great glory and honour eſcaped. But aſſure you my friends, ſaid the King, that if wee doe gaine the Battaile, I will take ſuch reuenge hereof, that the rumor thereof ſhall fill the eares of all the people in the World. Therefore they who are appointed to goe with mee, let them bee ready to morrow, for I will depart to goe meete mine enemies. And according as it was appointed ſo was all performed.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     How that after the Faire Forlorne had brought Oriana back againe to Mirefleur he departed, that he might be in the battel with King Liſuart, and what happened vnto him.
                  
                  
                     THree dayes did the faire Forlorne remain with Oriana after the gayning of the ſword and Kerchiefe, and the fourth day following about midnight hee tooke his leaue of her, and being armed at all points, he rode all the night long. Now had hee commanded Enil to goe and ſtay for him at a Caſtle ſcituated at the foote of a Hill, neere vnto the which the Battaile was to be foughten, and it belonged vnto an ancient knight named Abradan: for in his houſe were all aduentrous knights often-times honoured and ſerued, when they came thither to lodge. And the ſame night did the faire Forlorne paſſe hard by king Liſuart his Campe not being perceiued at all, afterwards hee rode ſo long that vpon the 5. day following he came vnto Abradan his houſe, where he found Enil which was there ariued but a little before: greatly was the faire Forlorne feaſted by his Hoſt, and as they were talking together, there entred in two of his nepheus that were returned from the place where the combat ſhould be who aſſured them that already King Cildadan and his troop, were there arriued, and had ſet vp their Tents and Pauillions hard by the ſea ſide. In like ſort Don Grumeda and Giontes Nephew to king Liſuart were there come, with whom a Truce was concluded vpon eyther part, to bee holden vntill the day of the battaile, and that neyther of the two Princes ſhould enter into the Combat with any more then one hundred knights in his company, according as it was promiſed and ſworne by them. Nephewes, ſaid the hoſt, what do you thinke of the Iriſh-men, whom God confound? Vncle anſwered one of them, they haue with them ſo many Giants, that if God doe not miraculouſly aſſiſt our good king, beleeue me it is impoſſible for him to withſtand them. Herewithall the teares fell from their Vncles eies, and he ſaid, I hope that God will protect the beſt and iuſteſt king in the world, from falling into the hands of ſuch wicked people. Mine hoſt, anſwered the faire Forlorne, be not afraid as yet, for it happeneth out very often that courage and equity ouerthroweth the pride and preſumption of the ſtrongeſt. But I pray you goe vnto the king, and tell him that there is lodged in your houſe a knight called the

                     Faire Forlorne, and that hee deſireth his Maieſty to ſend word by you, when the day of the battaile ſhall be. What ſayd the olde man, are you hee that of late did ſend Don Quedragant vnto his Court, and ſlew Famongomad and his ſon, when they had taken my Lady Lenor and her knights? beleeue mee Sir, if euer I did any pleaſure vnto aduenturous knights, I doe euen at this preſent acknowledge me throughly to be recompenced, my houſe beeing now honoured with your preſence, and I will not faile to accompliſh that which it hath pleaſed you to command me. Then he mounted vpon his horſe, and tooke with him his two Nephewes, and rode vntill hee came where king Liſuart was encamped, within halfe a league of his enemies, vnto whom he declared the meſſage of the Faire Forlorne, at the which all the company did greatly reioyce. And the King anſwered: ſeeing that we haue the Faire Forlorne on our ſide, I doe alſo hope that wee ſhall haue the honor of the our enterpriſe. And now ſee the number of one hundred knights very well furniſhed, had wee but one knight more. It may pleaſe your Maieſty ſaid Grumedan, you now haue the aduantage, for the Faire Forlorne is well worth fiue. This ſpeech did nothing at all pleaſe Galaor, Floreſtan, nor Agraies, for they hated the Faire Forlorne vnto death, for the wrong which they thought he did vnto Amadis, neuertheleſſe they held their peace, and Abradan hauing receiued his anſwere of the King, returned to his gueſt, vnto whom he recited the pleaſure that euery one receiued at the newes that he brought from him, and of the hundred knights there was no more then one miſſing, but that they were all aſſembled. The which beeing vnderſtood by Enil, hee did ſo much that he found his Maſter apart and falling downe vpon his knees, he ſayd vnto him: My Lord, although my ſeruice vnto you hath not beene ſuch as it ſhould, and therefore haue I nothing at all deſerued, yet am I ſo bolde at this time to requeſt one gift of you, which I beſeech you moſt humbly to graunt vnto mee. Demand it ſayd hee, and riſe vp. My Lord ſayd Enil, I pray you thē make mee knight, to the end that I may goe vnto the King to entreat his Maieſty that hee will bee pleaſed to accept of mee for the laſt knight of his number. Friend Enil ſayd the Faire Forlorne, me thinkes that thou ſhouldſt beginne to try thy proweſſe in a place leſſe dangerous then this battaile will bee, not: becauſe I would deferre to make thee knight, but in that I know it is too waighty a charge for thee. My Lord ſayde Enil, I knowe that in all my life I cannot haue a better meanes to gaine honour: for if I die amongſt ſo many men of worth, my reputation ſhall bee thereby encreaſed, and if I may eſcape, my renowne ſhall be perpetuall, hauing been one in number with a hundred of the beſt knights in the world. The Faire Forlorne hearing Enil ſpeake ſo vertuouſly, with a kind pittie that he had of him, he ruminated theſe words to himſelfe. Thou doſt well ſhew thy ſelfe to bee a kinſman vnto the good knight Gandales my ſecond father. Then hee anſwered Enil, if thou haue ſo great a deſire to proue thy ſelf ſuch a one as thou ſayeſt, I will no longer diſſwade thee. And therewithall he preſently went vnto his hoſt, and entreated

him to giue him an armour for his Eſquire, who deſired to bee made a knight, the which he granted, wherefore Enil according to the cuſtome, watched all night in the Chappell, and the next morning about the breake of day, after ſeruice was ended, hee receiued the order of knighthood by the Faire Forlorne, which done they all mounted on horſe-back, in the companie of Abradan and his two Nephewes, who ſerued them for their Eſquires. In the end they arriued where king Liſuart had already ordered his battaile, being ready to goe meete his enemies, who ſtayed his comming in a plaine field, but when the King beheld the Faire Forlorne, hee was exceeding ioyfull, and there was not any in the company, whoſe courage was not increaſed at his comming. Then hee approached neer vnto the king, vnto whom he ſayd, it may pleaſe your Maieſty, I am come to accompliſh my promiſe, and alſo I do bring another knight with me, for I was aduertiſed that your number was not full▪ where-withall the king gaue him moſt hearty thanks, and although there was not any one of the hundred knights, who were not all approomen, and eſteemed amongſt the beſt, yet king Liſuart (after he had ordered his battallion, ſeeing his enemies aproached) beganne to make this Oration vnto his armie. My fellowes, louing friends and countriemen, I am ſure there is not any one amongſt you, who knoweth not very well, how wee haue vndertaken this battaile with great right, eſpecially for the defence of the honour and reputation of the Realme of Great Brittaine, which king Cildadan and thoſe of Ireland would abaſe, in denying vnto vs the tribute which they haue time out of minde paid vnto our predeceſſors, for the acknowledgement of the fauours that in times paſt they haue receiued at their hands. Moreouer I am throughly aſſured that there is not any of you all, whoſe heart is not both valiant and inuincible, for which cauſe there is no need that you ſhould bee further animated, or incouraged, againſt thoſe with whom you are to encounter, hauing your honor before your eyes, which I knowe you doe more eſteeme then an hundred liues, (if it were poſſible that ſo many you might haue) one after another. Therefore then my deere friends let vs boldly march on, not reſpecting a ſmall number of cruell and bloody minded Gyants, that are in their troupe, for a man is not to be eſteemed the valianter by the outward appearance of his great, ſtrong, and huge members, but by the magnanimious & couragious heart that remaineth within him: you doe oftentimes behold the dogge to maſter the bull, and the ſparrow hawke or hobbie to beate the kite. Our enemies truſt in the force of theſe monſters, without hauing any reſpect vnto the wrong that they maintaine, and wee onely put our truſt in God, who being the righter of all iniuries, will giue vnto vs ſufficient ſtrength to vanquiſh them, by the dexterity of our perſons & our owne endeauours. Let vs boldly then march on my friends, euery one bearing this minde, that hee is able both to combate and conquer the proudeſt of their troupe, aſſuring you if this day we gaine the honour of the battaile, that beſides the honour and glory that ſhalbe ſpread of vs thorow the

whole world, neuer enemy to great Brittaine dare once hereafter be ſo bold as to lift vp his head to doe vs the leaſt iniury that may bee. Thus did king Liſuart incourage his knights: and king Cildadan on the other ſide did the like vnto his, for he went from ranke to ranke to animate them, ſaying vnto them: Gentle knights of Ireland, if you vnderſtand vpon what occaſion you goe to fight, there is not one of you that will not blame his predeceſſor, for being ſo ſlacke in the vndertaking of ſo glorious an enterpriſe. The kings of Great Brittaine, Vſurpers and Tyrants (not onely towardes their ſubiects, but alſo vpon their neighbours) haue heretofore without any right, exacted vpon their anceſtors ſuch a tribute, as is very well known hath often beene payd, and for this cauſe wee haue made this aſſembly, and are come vnto this place to defend our liberty, which cannot bee paid by any treaſure. It is your cauſe, it is your right, and not you
                        •…
                      but your childrens, who vntill this preſent time haue beene held, and reputed by thoſe whom you ſee determined likewiſe to make you ſeruants and ſlaues. Will you then alwayes liue in this ſort? Will you continue this yoake vnto your ſucceſſors? are you of leſſe courage, or of leſſe ſubſtance then your neighbours? Ah if wee are conquerours they ſhall reſtore that which they haue had of vs. I am very ſure that Fortune doth fauour vs, for you ſee what men of worth are come vnto our ayde, knowing our great right. Let vs reſiſt them, let vs reſiſt them valiant knights. I ſee King Liſuart and his troupe now in feare & ready to turne their backs vnto vs. They are as they ſay, accuſtomed to vanquiſh, but wee will teach them to accuſtome themſelues to be vanquiſhed. One thing I would aduiſe you, that euery one helpe his fellow, keeping you as cloſe together as poſſibly you may. And longer would hee haue continued his Oration, if hee had not ſeene King Liſuart prepared to ioyne with him. Wherefore he retyred into the midſt of his ſquadron, and ſayd very loud, Now haue at them, ſince they will care, giue them cold iron enough.
                  At this cry euery man prepared to receiue his enemy, ſhewing by their countenance that they were men moſt hardy, and couragious. And formoſt of all did march the Faire Forlorne, accompanied with Enil, as alſo Galaor, Floreſtan, Agraies, Gandalac the Gyant (who ſtole Galaor away when he was but two yeares olde) and his two ſons Bramandill, and Gainus, whom Galaor had newly made knights. After them Nicoran de Pont Craintif, Dragonis, Palomir, Viuorant, Giontes (Nephew to the King) the moſt renowmed Brunnio de Bonne Mer, his brother Branfill, and Guillan the Penſif, who all marched after old Grumedan, (a knight of honour belonging to the Queene) who carried King Liſuart his ſtandard.
                  On King Cildadan his ſide the Gyants made the front of the battaile, with twenty knights all neere a kinne vnto the King, who (like a prouident Generall) appointed that Mandafabull the Gyant of the Iſle of the Vermilliō Tower, ſhould remayne vpon the top of a little hill, with ten of the beſt knights in their troupe, cōmanding them not to ſtir from thence, vntill they ſhould perceiue aſſuredly toward the end of the battell that the moſt

valiant knights of Knig Liſuarts fide ſhould be ſcattered and weary, and that then they ſhould ruſh in vpon them, without ſpearing any man, ſauing the Kings perſon. Whom they ſhould take priſoner, and if they ſhould perceiue any great reſiſtance to be made, they ſhould kill him if they could not carry him vnto their ſhips. Thus the two battailes approched ſo neere one to another, that they came to the ioining together: there might you haue ſeene Lances broken, armour clattering, armes ſtroken off, ſome crying, others breaking the ranks of their enemies ſo that this day might be well called a ſorrowfull and diſmall day, for thoſe that were in this conflict, the which continued ſo long, vntill the moſt part of the day was paſt, yet none of them had ſo much time as once to breath, and yet it was ſo hot, that there was neither horſe not Knight that was not weary, & exrteamly trauailed: for ſome lay vpon the ground, and the moſt part of the reſt (in little better caſe) were ſo weake, that they could ſcant ſit vpon their horſes. At the ſame time the Faire Forlorne fearing leaſt the loſſe ſhould fall vpon their fide, begā to ſhew al his force and ſtrength, and he lighted vpon neuer an Iriſhman nor giant, but that hee drew the blood from his body. Cloſe by his ſide did King Liſuart ride, who did well ſhew the great proweſſe that remained in him, and hee was not ignorant of what conſequence the end of this battaile was, for looſing the victory thereof, he loſt his dignity, his life and honor, by meanes whereof without ſparing his perſon, hee was entred in amongſt his enemies, hauing his right arme all dyed with the blood of thoſe, whoſe liues had paſſed by the edge of his ſword. On the otherſide, Agraies, Galaor, Floreſtan, hauing from the beginning ſeen the great force and high Knight-hood that the Faire Forlorne had executed vpon his enemies, they who of long time did maligne him, determined either to dye, or to make knowne vnto euery one, that they could alſo fight as well or better then hee, ſo that this emulation was partly the cauſe of the animating of them ſo far, that they all had likely to haue loſt their liues, for Galaor chafed like a Lion that is purſued, came ruſhing in among the Giants, and encountred Cartadaque of the inuincible mountaine, who already with his battaile axe, had ouerthrown at his feete ſix of king Liſuarts knights, although that hee was wounded vpon the ſhoulder, with a blowe that Floreſtan had giuen him, whereby hee loſt much of his blood, then Galaor came vnto him, and with all his ſtrength, hee gaue him ſo great a blowe vpon the head, that hee cleft his helmet, and the ſword paſſing down along cut of his eare, and the helue of his axe cloſe vnto his fiſt.
                  Wherefore the Giant finding himſelfe disfurniſhed of his weapon, ran vpon Galaor, and lifted him vp with ſuch force, that hee tooke him vp from his horſe, cruſhing him betweene his armes ſo ſtreightly, that one might eaſily haue heard his bones cracke. Neuertheleſſe, the Gyant could not ſit ſo ſure in his ſaddle, but that hee was forced to fal to the groūd with his burthē, wherfore Galaor (which yet held his ſword in his hand) foūd the meanes to thruſt him in the beuer of his helmet, and it entred ſo farre into his head, that hee there

withall yeelded vp the Ghoſt. But Galaor was ſo tyred, that after hee was gotten vp from vnder Cartadaque he had not power to pull his ſword from the place wherein hee had thruſted it, and (that which was worſt) he was ſo crouded with the preſſe of people, that hee was likely to haue died vnder the horſes feet, for many good knights both of the one and of the other ſide, (hauing ſeene the encounter betweene him and the Gyant, and the perill of them both) were approached, of purpoſe to ſuccour them, by meanes whereof the battaile was then very great and maruailous hot, for King Cildadan ſuddenly came to that place, who ouerthrew all thoſe hee found in his way, and had not the Faire Forlorne beene (who with one blowe of his ſworde ſtroke him off his horſe) Galaor had there ſurely died or beene taken, but when hee beheld King Cildadan on foot beſide him, he princely ſeaſed his ſword which hee held, and began to defend himſelfe, and that ſo valiantly as mauger all his enemies, hee made them giue him roome. Notwithſtanding hee had ouerchafed himſelfe ſo much in this laſt bickering, that hee was quite out of breath, and hee fell downe flat vpon the earth. There was the Gyant Gandalac, who had foſtered him vp in his infancy, hee ſeeing him fall, was ſo angry that with great rage hee buckled with Albadanor another Gyant, and ſo many ſtrokes they gaue vnto each other with their clubs, that they & their horſes were ouerthrowne, where-with Albadanor had his arme broken and Gandalac his legge. But they were not alone that were thus ill intreated, for one might haue ſeene more then ſix ſcore knights lying vpon the ground, and yet was not halfe the day ſpent. Then Mandafabull the Gyant of the Iſle of the red Tower, who had beene appointed not to depart from the little hill wheee hee remayned, vntill the extreamity of the battaile, ſeeing ſo many knights dead, ſcattered and wounded, thought that he might well end this enterpriſe, and that it were very eaſie for them to defeate the reſt, by meanes whereof hee began to runne right vnto that place where was the greateſt preſſe, crying vnto his knights: Take heed that none eſcape away aliue, let all paſſe by the edge of the ſword, as for mee, I haue vowed to take King Liſuart in hand, for hee is mine dead or aliue. This cry was heard of euery one, eſpecially of the Faire Forlorne, who returned from taking of a freſh horſe, which one of the nephewes vnto his hoſt had reſerued for him, and fearing that the Gyant would doe as hee ſaid, hee came and ſtepped before the King, with Agraies, Floreſtan, Brunco de Bonne Mer, Branfil, Guillan the Penſif and Enil, who had all day long behaued himſelfe ſo valiantly, that hee was had in very great reputation. Now was Mandafabull better ſeconded then he thought, for as hee approached neere vnto the eſquadron of King Liſuart, Sarmadan the Leonnois, Vncle to King Cildadan, one of the beſt knights of his ſtocke, came foorth of the troupe, and running againſt the Faire Forlorne, he hit him ſo right a blow through his ſhield, that he wounded him, yet not very much, and in paſſing by, the Faire Forlorn did hit him ſuch a thwart blow with his ſword vpon the beuer of his helme, that he cut both his eyes and the halfe of his viſage off,

throwing him downe ſtarke dead vpon the ground.
                  Herewithall Mandafabull and thoſe that were with him beeing mad angry, entered pell mell among King Liſuart his knights with ſuch furie, that mauger their reſiſtance, Mandafabull took hold of the King by the coller, and lifted him from his horſe, carrying him vnder his armes right vnto his ſhippes. But the faire Forlorne was ware of it, who ran after him and ouertooke the Gyant, hitting him ſo forcibly with his ſworde vpon the arme, that hee cut it off hard by the elbow, and the blowe ſliding downe, wounded the King in ſuch ſort, that the blood ſell downe vpon the ground. Then Mandafabull with the great griefe that hee felt, gaue a loud cry, and without going any further, he fell downe dead in the place, where-upon the Faire Forlorne ſeeing that his blow had ſo well profited, as that therewithall hee had ſlaine ſuch a Gyant, and deliuered the King in like ſort, hee began to cry aloud Gaule, Gaule, here is Amadis who is yet aliue. So ſaying hee entred amongſt the thickeſt of his enemies, who had in a manner loſt their hearts, by ſeeing two of the principalleſt of their army in that ſort to be ſlaine, eſpecially knowing that Amadis (whom they long before thought to bee dead) was preſent to their confuſion. And had not Gandaturiell one of the ſtrongeſt Gyants in their troupe encouraged them againe, they had then ſurely turned their backs, but hee valiantly made head againſt his enemies, which being perceiued by Amadis, who was deſirous to reuenge his brother Galaor, whom hee imagined to bee dead, he thruſt himſelfe amongſt his enemies, and entred into the thickeſt of the preſſe, ſo farre that there he had remained, without the ayd which King Liſuart brought vnto him, who had recouered his horſe, and there were in his companie Bruneo, Floreſtan, Guillan, La
                           •
                        aſin, Galuanes, Olinas, and Don Grumedan, who carryed his ſtandard, which was cut aſunder betweene his armes. All thoſe ſeeing Amadis in ſo great danger (although the moſt part of them were very ſorely wounded) had ſuch exceeding ioy when they knewe that it was hee, that they beſtirred them in ſuch ſort, as notwithſtanding all the reſiſtance that theſe Iriſhmen could make, they gaue ayde vnto Amadis, and paſſing on further they found Agraies, Palomir, Branfil and Dragonis, manfully fighting on foote againſt thoſe that had throwne them downe. Yet they were ſo neerely driuen, that they could not any longer withſtand the force of their enemies, although they had already ſlaine more then ſixe, as well Gyants as Iriſhmen which would haue ouer-runne them, and without doubt they had beene ſo handled had not theſe ſuccours come vnto them. So that they which would haue forced them, had enough to doe to defend themſelues, becauſe that Amadis (in ſpight of them) made them to recoyle backe, and that in ſuch ſort as with the ayde of his troupe hee was the meane that his Coſen Agraies and his fellowes did remount their horſes. Then the forces of King Liſuart encreaſed, and the Iriſh troupes decreaſed, who diſpairing of all helpe, had recourſe vnto their veſſels which were afloate hard by the ſhoare to ſaue their booty if Fortune had not contradicted them:

but Amadis purſuing the victory, chaſed them with ſuch fury, that the moſt part of the vanquiſhed, deſired rather to be buried amidſt the waues of the Sea, then on the ſhoare, which was ſo died and watered with their blood. The which Gandaturiell perceiuing (being eſteemed amongſt all the Gyants one of the ſtouteſt) without any feare at all of his death, which hee ſaw ready prepared for him, deſiring before the end of his dayes to bee reuenged, bearing his head ſomewhat lowe, and holding his ſharp ſword in his hand, he would haue ſtroken at king Liſuart, but Floreſtan ſtepped before him, who hit him ſo ſound a knock with his ſword vpon the Helmet, that hee made it flie from his head, and the King who was hard at hand, ſeeing him bare, diuided his pate into two parts. Then was there a great ſlaughter of the Iriſhmen, for they were all now ouerthrowne by Amadis, Floreſtan, and Agraies: who perſued them euen into the Sea, where they were ſwallowed vp with waues, wherewith king Liſuart and his people retyred. And becauſe that Amadis had marked the place where hee had ſeene Galaor ſtroken downe, hee prayed his Coſen Agraies & others that they would helpe him to finde him amongſt the dead. Neuertheleſſe they had not found him without the helpe of Floreſtan: who knew him by a greene ſleeue which hee did weare, wrought full of white flowers, but hee was ſo couered with blood & duſt, that they could ſcant knowe him. And I doe not knowe ſo hard a heart which had then ſeene the mone that Amadis did make for him, that would not haue burſt forth into teares, for he beholding him in this eſtate, fell down all along vpon him. Whereby his wounds did open, againſt which the congealed blood was already ſetled, and I thinke that Amadis had died vpon him if twelue Damoſels had not by chaunce come thither ſuddenly, who were very richly attyred, and had cauſed a rich bed to bee brought by their Eſquires, theſe finding Amadis ſo deſperate, ſayde vnto him: My Lord wee are come hither to ſeeke your brother Galaor, and if you will euer ſee him aliue, ſuffer vs to carry him preſently away, otherwiſe there is no Chyrurgion in all Great Brittaine that is able to heale him.
                  Herewithall Amadis was greatly aſhamed, becauſe the Damoſels had found him in that order, and although that hee knew them not, yet hearing them ſpeak of his brothers health, hee determined (ſeeing the extreame perill wherein he was) not to refuſe their requeſt, though it was to his extreame griefe. And therefore he anſwered them, my faire gentlewomen, may in pleaſe you to tell vs whither you will carry him. Not now ſaid they, but if you will deſire to haue him liue, giue him vnto vs without any longer delay, otherwiſe wee will be gone. Alas anſwered he, I pray let mee followe you. You may not, and yet for your ſake wee are cōtent that Ardan the Dwarffe and his Eſquire ſhall accompanie him. Then they layd him vpon the bed (all armed as hee was) & they cauſed him forthwith to be carried into the ſhip from whence they were come, which was yet cloſe to the ſhoare. Afterwards they returned againe vnto king Liſuart, to entreate him that hee would giue them king Cildadan, who lay among the dead, and to induce him

thereunto, they ſhewed vnto him that although Fortune had fauoured him in this exployt, yet hee ſhould not extēd his cruelty vpon his enemy. The which the King conſidering, permitted them to carry him away dead or aliue, wherefore the Damoſels took him vp and carried him away with Galaor, and ſo ſoone as they came into the ſhip they ſet ſayle, hauing the winde ſo faire, that ſuddenly they were out of all mens ſight.
                  Thus king Liſuart remayned cō
                     querour ouer his enemies, going quite through the field to find out as well ſuch of his owne people as thoſe of his enemies, that were not yet thoroughly dead, to cauſe them carefully to bee looked vnto by skilfull Surgeons. And as hee went from one place to another, hee met with Amadis, whoſe face was all to be blubbered with tears, vnto whom he had not as yet ſpoken ſince his returne, and ſeeing him ſo heauy, after he had knowne the cauſe of his mone, hee ſhewed an euident ſigne of the ſorrow that he ſuſtayned for Galaors ſake, whō hee loued as dearely as himſelfe, & not without cauſe, for from the firſt day that hee receiued him for one of his knights, he alwaies ſerued him faithfully, neuer forſaking him for any warre or debate that happened betweene his maieſty & Amadis, as hereafter ſhall bee rehearſed vnto you. But the King deſirous to manifeſt the force of his vertue, the better to comfort his knights, all wounded as hee was, lighted from his horſe to imbrace Amadis, who kneeled down to ſhew his duty vnto his Maieſty. My deere friend ſayd king Liſuart, you are moſt happily met, I know now very well, that without your ayde the realme of Great Brittaine had beene in no ſmall danger, and I pray you be not ſo heauy for the loſſe of your brother, ſeeing that the Damoſels haue aſſured you of his health.
                  In this ſorte want king Liſuart comforting of Amadis, whom hee cauſed to mount on horſe-backe, and afterwards hee brought him into his tent where there was brought ſomewhat for them to eat, & becauſe he would depart the next day, he appointed ouer night that the dead ſhould bee buried in a Moneſtarie hard by the place where the battaile was giuen, vppon the which place hee had beſtowed great riches, to cauſe them to pray for him. In like ſort hee diſpatched a knight to goe in haſte to aduertiſe the Queene of the victory that hee gad gotten ouer his enemies, and the next morning he tooke his way toward the Citty of Gonata (which was about foure leagues off) where hee remayned vntill he and his people were healed. While theſe things were in doing, the Queene Brialania got leaue of Queene Briſena, that ſhe might goe to Mirefleur to viſit Oriana, hauing a great deſire to ſee her, becauſe ſhe was renowmed through all the world for her moſt excellent beauty. Of whoſe comming Oriana being aduertiſed, ſhe cauſed the place to bee decked vp as well as poſſibly it might be, and ſhe receiued her moſt honorably, but when ſhe beheld her to bee ſo faire, the ſuſpition that ſhee had conceiued againſt Amadis, was not ſo thoroughly mortified but that it ſomewhat reuiued againe in her, notwithſtanding all the proof that ſhe had had of him, eyther by his paſſing thorough the Arch of loyall louers, or by his winning of the olde mans ſworde, beleeuing

aſſuredly that 'it was a thing impoſſible that any man could be ſo conſtant as hee might forbeare from louing a creature ſo beautifull as Briolania was. On the other ſide Briolania verily thought that the often ſighes of Amadis in her preſence, proceeded of no other cauſe, but the affection which hee did beare vnto Oriana: for ſhee was the moſt rare Princeſſe and of the ſweeteſt grace that euer ſhee had ſeene. Thus were theſe two Ladies ſuſpitious one of another, and they remayned together diſcourſing of diuerſe matters agreeable to their affections, eſpecially of the vertues and perfections of Amadis. But Oriana (the better to diue into the thought of Briolania) ſayde vnto her, I doe much maruaile gentle Coſen, conſidering the bond wherein you are tyed vnto Amadis, (as alſo ſeeing that hee is decſended from Emperours, and the ſonne vnto the king of Gaule) that you haue not choſen him for your husband. Madame anſwered Briolania, beleeue me I ſhould haue thought my ſelf moſt happy if the ſame might haue beene brought to paſſe, but yet of one thing I can aſſure you, the which I pray you to keepe as ſecret as it deſerueth. Many times did I motion ſuch a matter vnto him, but his continuall ſighes did preſently yeelde me an anſwere in his behalfe, yet could I neuer vnderſtand in what place his loue was ſo ſetled, ſo couert and ſecret is hee in all his affections: neuertheleſſe let him be whatſoeuer hee will be, he ſhall diſpoſe of me, and all that mine is foreuer, as he ſhall thinke good. Exceeding glad was Oriana to vnderſtand theſe newes, by the which ſhee appea
                        •
                     ed her new conceiued iealouſie againſt Amadis, and ſayd vnto Briolania, I doe greatly maruaile what ſhee is whom hee loueth as you ſay, and there is no doubt but that he is one of the number of theſe louers, by the teſtimony which the image of the enchanted Arch hath declared of him, for according vnto that which hath been recited vnto me, it ſhewed more for him then euer it did for any that there before had paſſed. He loueth without doubt anſwered Briolania, but it is ſo ſecret that non may knowe what, or where ſhe is.
                  In this ſort did the two Princeſſes paſſe away their time, ſtill talking of Amadis during their aboad in the Caſtle of Mirefleur, from whence within a fewe dayes after they departed to go towards Fenuſa to ſee the Queene Briſena, where ſhe ſtayed for King Liſuart, who was very glad to ſee her daugter returne in ſo good health. There they had newes of the victory that the King had againſt the Prince of Ireland, wherewith their ioy redoubled, and God was highly praiſed: but when Queen Briolania knew that he which was called the Faire Forlorne was Amadis of Gaul neuer was there woman more ioyful then ſhe. And although that Oriana and Mabila knew the cauſe thereof very well (as you haue heard) yet did they diſſemble the matter, and ſeemed to wonder thereat no leſſe then the reſt, by meanes whereof Briolania did often times ſay thus vnto them: would you euer haue ſuſpected that Amadis would haue thus diſguiſed himſelfe, & taken a ſtrange name amongſt his deereſt friends, deſiring thereby to extinguiſh his owne renowne by the great pro
                        •
                     
                     eſſe that hee performed vnder the title of a ſtranger. By my faith,

anſwered Oriana, if hee returne with the King, wee muſt know of him wherefore hee did it, and alſo what ſhee was that gained the kerchiefe with him. I aſſure you ſaid Briolania that we will not ſticke to demand it of him, and I beleeue he will willingly tell vs.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     How King Cildadan and Galaor were vnawares to themſelues, carried away by twelue Damoſels, and one of them was put into a ſtrong Tower inuironed with the Sea, and the other in a garden incloſed with high wals, where they thought they had beene in priſon, and of that which happened there vnto them.
                  
                  
                     NOw wee will rehearſe vnto you, the ente
                        •
                     
                     taynement that was made vnto King Cildadan and Galaor, whom the Gentlewomen had put into the ſhip, and they were carried and ſo well looked vnto, that the third day following they began to amend, for vntill then they had loſt all manner of feeling and remembrance. And Galaor found himſelfe to bee layd in a chamber (within a garden) furniſhed in the moſt ſumptuous order that euer he had ſeene, the which was ſupported vp with foure Marble pillers, inuironed notwithſtanding with great gates of iron, through the which he might eaſily ſee from his bed where hee lay, all the circuit of the garden, the which was cloſed about with high walles, not hauing any entrance into it but one little dore couered ouer with plates of iron, whereby he thought that hee was in priſon. Then did he begin to feele ſuch great griefe in his wounds, that hee hoped for nothing but death. Then did hee remember that hee had beene in the battaile, but he knew not who had either brought him away, or layd him in a place ſo ſtrange as this was. And no leſſe abaſhed was king Cildadan to ſee that hee was locked vpon a ſtrong Tower, compaſſed about with the maine Sea, although that the chamber wherein hee remayned was moſt richly hanged, and he laid in a good bed. Neuertheleſſe hee was alone, and he thought that he did heare ſome people talking right vnder the vault, but hee could neither perceiue doore, nor place where thorough any body might enter into his chamber. Wherefore he roſe vp, and put his head foorth at the window, and he could ſee nothing but the Sea, whoſe waues did beat againſt the place wherein hee remayned ſhut vp, the which was built vpon the top of a moſt ſteep and hard Rocke, neither did hee know how hee was brought from the place where hee was ſmitten downe among the preſſe of people. Notwithſtanding hee knew very vell ſeeing hee was in ſuch a place that he had loſt the battaile, and that his knights were either all dead, or taken, but yet he comforted himſelfe as well as he could, & layd him downe againe vpon his bed, bewayling greatly the griefe which hee did feele in his wounds. Thus was Galaor lying ſicke on the other ſide, as hath beene recited, who heard the little doore of the

garden open: which cauſed him to riſe from his bed, as well as hee could, and hee perceiued a faire Gentlewoman comming vnto him, being very richly attired, the which did bring with her a knight ſo olde and crooked, that it was wonder how hee could bee able to ſtand. Theſe approching nere vnto Galaor, ſayd to him through the grates of yron, without opening the chamber dore. Knight, prouide for your ſoules health, for we will not henceforth warrant you. Then the Damoſell tooke forth two littleboxes, one of iron, and the other of ſiluer: and ſhewing them vnto Galaor, ſhe ſayd vnto him. Knight, the party which hath cauſed you to come hither, will not that you ſhould die, before ſhe doe knowe whether you will accompliſh her will or no, and in the meane ſeaſon ſhe will cauſe your wounds to bee cured. Gentlewoman, anſwered Galaor, if ſhee deſire that I ſhould do any thing contrary to mine honour, I had rather die. You may doe, ſayd ſhe, as you liſt, although it is your choyce either to liue or die. Herewithall the olde man opened the gate, and ſo ſoonas they were entred into the chamber, the the Gentlewoman preſently gaue vnto him the yron boxe, willing him to ſtep back, the which he did. Afterwards ſhe ſayde vnto Galaor. My Lord, I am ſo ſorry for your ſickneſſe, that for to ſaue your life, I will hazard mine owne death, and I will declare that which I was put in charge to doe. Which is, that I ſhould fill theſe two boxes, the one with poyſon, and the other with oyntment to make you ſleepe, to the end that when you did awake, you might feele ſuch extreame paine, that with the rage thereof, you might cruely end your life, but I haue done cleane contrary, for I haue filled them with ſuch a ſalue, that if you vſe it but ſeuen dayes together, you ſhall finde your ſelfe whole, ſound, and able to mount on horſe-backe. Then ſhe rubbed his wounds with the oyntment, the which was of ſuch vertue, that at the ſame inſtant his paine was appeaſed, and hee felt ſuch eaſe, that he ſayde vnto the Damoſell. Faire Gentlewoman, you doe binde me ſo greatly vnto you, that if euer I come forth from hence, you may bee ſure that neuer any Gentlewoman was better recompenced by any knight, then you ſhall be by me, neuertheleſſe, if you haue not the meanes to deliuer mee, I beſeech you at the leaſt, doe ſo much that Vrganda the vnknowne may be aduertiſed thereof, for I haue euer-more had a great confidence in her. The Gentlewoman began to laugh, and anſwered him. What? doe you make ſuch account of Vrganda, ſeeing that hitherto ſhe hath been ſo careleſſe of your wealth or woe? I know well, ſayd he, that as ſhe knoweth the ſecret thoughts of men, ſo is ſhee not ignorant how much my deſire is to ſerue her. Neuer care you for any other Vrganda (anſwered ſhe) the
                        •
                      me, and haue only a good hope, e
                        •
                     deuouring to haſte
                        •
                      your health, taking vnto you the courage of a valiant man, ſuch as you haue alwaies bin eſteemed, ſeeing that you know that man-hood and valour, is not onely requiſit at combats and dangerous encounters, but in other accidents that may ſuddainly happen, like as at this preſent the ca
                        •
                     e ſtandeth. And for the recompence of the perill that I doe vndertake, to heale you and deliuer you from hence, I pray you grant vnto me one gift, which ſhall neither be hurtfull not

diſhonurable vnto you. Truſt me Damoſell ſayd hee, you ſhall haue of mee euen whatſoeuer you ſhall pleaſe, if it may well and lawfully be performed. Goe to, then anſwered ſhee, let this ſuffice you now, vntill it bee time for mee to returne againe to dreſſe you, in the meane ſeaſon couer you, and feigne as if you ſlept ſoundly, the which hee did. Then the Gentle-woman called the olde man, and ſayd vnto him, ſee how the knight ſleepeth, the poyſon doth now worke vpon him. All the better, anſwered the olde man, hee which hath brought him hither, ſo farre as I ſee ſhall be ſufficiently reuenged vpon him, and ſeeing that you haue ſo well obeyed that which you were commanded, I am content henceforth that you doe come without any guard at all to viſite him. But vſe him after this manner fifteene dayes together, for at that time they ſhall come hither, who (for the iniurie that hee hath done vnto them) ſhall take ſuch ſatisfaction of him, as they pleaſe. Galaor heard all their talke, and hee knewe very well that the old man was his mortall enemie, neuertheleſſe hee had ſome hope in the Damoſels promiſe, who had aſſured him that hee ſhould be healed in ſeauen dayes, hoping (if ſo ſhee did) that hee might eaſily ſaue himſelfe from their hands. Hereupon the olde man and the Damoſell departed: but ſhee tarried not long before hee did ſee her returne with two other young virgins, exceeding faire, who brought victuals vnto Galaor, and cauſed him to eate. This done the Damoſell commanded the other two to keepe him company, and to reade before him ſome pleaſant Hiſtories, to keepe him from ſleeping in the day time, ſo that Galaor being greatly comforted by the Damoſels kinde entertaynement, was thoroughly aſſured that ſhee would helpe him as ſhee had promiſed, and ſo ſhutting the gate, ſhe departed & left the two yong Gentlewomen diſcourſing with him. Farre otherwiſe did it happen vnto king Cildadan, who beeing ſhut vp within a Tower, and layd vpon his bed, did ſee a doore of ſtone to open (the which was cloſe faſtened in the wall, that it ſeemed as if it had beene the wall it ſelfe) by the which there entred in a gentlewoman of middle age, accompanied with two armed knights, the which came cloſe to his bed ſide. The King ſaluted them, but they anſwered not, the gentlewoman lifted vp the couering that he had vpon, and looking vpon his wounds, ſhe dreſſed thē, afterwards ſhe gaue him ſomewhat to eate, & returned both ſhe and the knights the ſame way they came, not once ſpeaking vnto him. When the king beheld their maner of behauiour, he beleeued that he was in the priſon of ſuch a one where his life was in no great ſafety, neuertheles he took as good comfort vnto him as he could, not being able otherwiſe to remedy his miſhap. But the gentlewoman that looked vnto Galaor ſeeing that it was time to dreſſe him went vnto him, and aſked him how he fared. Paſſing wel anſwered Galaor, & I hope (ſeeing the good beginning of my amendmen) that I may be healed within the time that you haue promiſed. There is no doubt thereof ſaid ſhe, therefore I will that you promiſe me as you are a loyall knight, not to depart from hence without my leaue, otherwiſe your life may bee in perill of death Galaor did ſweare

vnto her ſo to doe, beſeeching her moſt inſtantly to tell him how ſhe was called. But ſhe anſwered him. How now Galaor, doe you not yet know my name? Truely now I am greatly deceiued conſidering the ſeruices that heeretofore I haue done for you, when you are ſo forgetfull of me? I am called, The wise among the wiſeſt: ſaying ſo, ſhee went forth of the chamber fayning to bee very angry, and pulled the dore rudely after her. Wherewith Galaor remained more penſiue then before, and hee remembred him of the faire ſword that Vrganda had giuen vnto him, when his brother Amadis made him knight, whereby hee ſuſpected that it was ſhe her ſelfe, neuertheleſſe, hee was in ſome doubt, becauſe that when he ſaw her firſt, ſhe ſeemed to bee olde and crooked, and this was young, faire, and in good liking. And as he was in this ſtudy not being able to ſleepe, hee turned his head toward the place, where the young Gentlewomen were accuſtomed to ſit in keeping him company, but in ſtead of them he perceiued Gaſauel his eſquire, and Ardan the Dwarffe of Amadis: at which he was no leſſe abaſhed then ioyfull, and he called them becauſe that they ſlept. Who at their awaking, ſeeing their Maiſter, they became no leſſe amaſed then he, and they roſe vp doing their duty vnto him, and hee demanded how they were come thither, who anſwered, that Amadis, Floreſtan and Agrates, had commanded them to follow him. They further declared vnto him, in what eſtate the Damoſels tooke him vp, for which cauſe Amadis ſeeing in what extremity you remained, permitted them to carry you away, together with King Cildadan. What do you ſay? ſayd Galaor, was Amadis in this aſſembly? My Lord, ſayd Gaſanel, it was hee that was called the Faire Forlorne, by whoſe ſtrength and courage the battaile was gayned. Then he recited vnto him the manner how he deliuered the King, and killed Mandafabull, and that then he made himſelfe knowne, crying Gaul with a loude voyce. Thou 
                        •…
                     
                     leſt me wonders, ſayde Galaor, but by my faith, he was too blame to hide himſelfe from mee. This was the eſtate wherein Galaor and Cildadan remained, who in few dayes felt ſo great eaſe of their wounds, that they began to walke about the chamber. Wherefore Vrganda (in whoſe power they remained in her vnknowne Iſland) made her ſelfe knowne vnto them ſaying vnto them. That the feare wherein ſhee had put them, had beene the meanes to effect their health the ſooner, otherwiſe they had beene in danger of their liues. Afterwards ſhe commanded her two Nieces to be fetched to keepe them company, which were daughters vnto King Falangris, brother vnto King Liſuart, who had begotten vpon them the ſiſter of Vrganda, one of them was called I
                           •
                        lianda (whome Galaor did ſhortly after beget with childe of a ſon, that was named Talanqua, and afterwards proued a valiant Knight) and the other was called Soliſa, who alſo had by King Cildadan Manely the Diſcreete. And theſe two Knights ſtaied with theſe two Damoſels, till Vrganda ſet them at liberty, as hereafter it ſhall be declared vnto you.
                  In the meane time King Liſuart, Amadis, and the other Knights ſtaied at Gonata, and after they were healed of their wounds, they determined to goe viſit the Ladyes which ſtaied for them in the Cirtie

of Fenuſa, of whom they were receiued with great ioy. But during their aboad there, as Amadis talked with Queen Briolania (in the company of Oriana) ſhe ſayd vnto him. My Lord, I aſſure you I was ſo ſorrowfull when it was told mee that you were loſt, that I can in no ſort expreſſe vnto you the diſpleaſure that I receiued therewith, and at the laſt ſeeing that you ſtaied ſo long before you returned, I determined to come vnto this Court, with a hundred of my Knights, to cauſe the ſearch of you to begin, according to the appointment of my Lords your bretheren. Neuertheleſſe by meanes of the battaile which the King had appointed with King Cildadan, my enterpriſe was ſtored and that in a good houre, ſeeing that it pleaſed God ſo ſoon to bring you home againe. Therefore aduiſe you now (if it pleaſe you) what you will that I ſhall doe for you, for I will obey you all my life long. Madame, anſwered Amadis, if you were in any perplexity for mee, you had great reaſon, for I am well aſſured, that there is no knight in the world more ready to do you ſeruice then is Amadis of Gaul. But ſeeing that it pleaſeth you to refer all your affaires vpon me, I pray you to tarry yet in this Court eight or tenne daies longer, vntill we may heare ſome newes from my brother Galaor, in the meane time you ſhall haue the paſtime of a Combate, which my brother Floreſtan muſt performe againſt Laudin, and afterwards I will conduct you home into your Countrey, and from thence I will take my way vnto the Firme-Iſland, where I muſt needs be. I will do, ſaide Briolania what-ſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe you, prouided that you doe tell vnto vs the wonders and nouelties that you haue there ſeene. And as he would haue excuſed him, Oriana tooke him by the hand, and ſaide vnto him. My Lord Amadis, you haue ſome-what to doe, for we will not leaue you in peace, before you haue tolde vs ſomething. In faith my Ladies, anſwered hee, although I take in hand to re
                        •…
                     e the particularities of the whole, yet do I finde it impoſſible: neuertheleſſe, I may truely tell you that the forbidden chamber is the moſt faire & richeſt in all the world, and if it bee not gained by one of you two, I verily beleeue that ſo long as we liue, neuer may any other ſet footing therein. Briolania remained a while without anſwering him, in the end ſhe ſaid vnto Amadis: truly I doe not thinke that I may deſerue to finiſh ſuch an aduenture, yet notwithſtanding (ſuch as I am) if it were not to bee reputed a folly in me, I would willingly make proofe thereof. Madame, anſwered he, it is not to bee counted a preſumption, to trie that wherein all others haue failed vntill this preſent, becauſe they were not faire enough, and you which are one of the moſt excellent creatures in the earth, ſhould doe ſo much amiſſe to deſerre this ſingularity, as your feare might turne you greatly vnto blame, in not performing your endeuour. Amadis did ſuddainly perceiue by her countenance that Oriana was not greatly pleaſed with this diſcourſe, and although hee thought that hee had ſaid nothing, but what might redound vnto her honor, yet did it greatly repēt him that he had ſpoken ſo much, for he had ſeene the old image of Grimaneſa, was in no ſort equall vnto her in beauty, therefore could ſhe

not attaine vnto that glory, the which hee made no doubt at all in Oriana. But Oriana iudged farre otherwiſe, for ſhee imagined that there was not any thing in the world that Briolania might not accompliſh, if by beauty it might bee conquered, and diſſembling before her the malice that ſhe now had cō
                     ceiued againſt her, ſhee praied her that if ſhee entred into the forbidden chāber, that ſhe would vouchſafe to ſend her news thereof. Then ſhee roſe vp, and went to ſeeke out Mabila, whom whē ſhe had found, ſhe recited all the conference that had paſſed betwixt Amadis and Briolania, (in her preſence) ſaying vnto her. By my faith your Coſin doth very often giue mee the like alarmes, although hee bee aſſured that I take no pleaſure at all in any thing, but onely in that wherein I may beſt pleaſe and obey him, without reſpect of mine honour, feare of God, or obedience to my parents. But he knoweth that hee hath ful power ouer me, which cauſeth him now to diſpiſe me, for the which I may onely blame that priuate familiarity which I haue ſhewed vnto him, thinking that I had done all for the beſt. In vttering theſe her ſuppoſed wrongs, aboundance of teares fell from her eyes, which Mabila perceiuing (as being very diſcreete) ſhe bethought her of a preſent Antidote to expell this poiſon. And therefore faining to bee exceeding angry, with the iniury that Oriana offered vnto Amadis, ſhe anſwered her very ſharply and ſhrewdly: Madame, I doe greatly wonder at you, and your manner of behauiour, for ſo ſoon as one miſchiefe hath forſaken you, another doth preſently follow you, and you ought (methinkes) to take better regarde vnto that which you ſay of my coſin, and not to bee perſwaded that he hath ſpoken either one thing or another to anger you, ſeeing that you may be aſſured that he neuer imagined to offer you any offence, either in word or deede. And heereof ſufficient witneſſe you haue, in the proofes & triall that he hath made, as well in your preſence as in your abſence, but I ſee well what your meaning is, you would haue mee know (being weary of my company) that you would put mee away vnder the coullour that my cofin is ſo wholly yours, abuſing your ſelfe with the bondage wherein he is ſubiected vnto you. Neuertheleſſe, when you ſhall haue forſaken me, it will be no great matter, ſo that your Amadis (for your may I call him) be not worſſe vſed. For you know very well and I alſo, that the leaſt diſpleaſure he ſhall take at your griefe, will bee ſufficient to cauſe his death, therefore I maruaile what pleaſure you take to torment him ſo often, hee aduenturing himſelfe for you as much as is poſſible to bee done for any other Lady liuing. Doe you not conſider, that Apolidon willed the proofe of the forbidden chamber ſhould be cōmon to all the world? What a great error ſhould my Coſin then commit, to diſwade Briolania that ſhee ſhould not doe as much as others? Tuely I beleeue that neither you nor ſhe are yet faire enough to performe that, which all the faireſt during theſe hundred yeeres could neuer obtaine. Therefore I am throughly aſſured, that this new iealouſie proceedeth not from any fault which he hath committed, whoſe minde is wholly adicted to obey you. Moreouer his miſ-fortune hath ſo much ouermaiſtered him, that to pleaſe

you hee hath not onely forgotten himſelfe, (but alſo regarded none but you) hee hath quite diſdayned all his kindred, and hath accounted them as meere ſtrangers, not knowing them at all, nor any other but you whom hee adoreth as his God, and yet you would by your folly procure his ouer-throw. Ay mee, the dangers and euident perill wherein hee and his haue oftentimes beene brought vnto for your ſake, as well againſt Arcalaus as in this laſt battaile, are very ill acknowledged by you, ſeeing that now in ſatisfaction there-of, you deſire the deſtruction of the chiefe and principalleſt of my kindred. Is this the fauour and recompence for the ſeruices that I haue done vnto you? Truely my hope is now greatly deceiued, ſeeing before mine eyes, a complot is layd for the ruine and fall of a wight whom I doe moſt loue in the world, and hee that is yours more then his owne, notwithſtanding (if it pleaſe God) it ſhall not be ſo, nor ſhall ſuch a misfortune happen ſo neere vnto mee. For I will intreate my brother Agraies and my Vncle Galuanes to carry mee into Scotland, whereby they ſhall doe mee a great pleaſure to take me away from your company who are ſo vngratefull. Herewithall ſhee wept ſo extreamely, as though ſhee would haue drowned her ſelfe with teares. Alas ſayd ſhe God grant that the cruelty which you commit againſt your Amadis, light not vpon your owne head, to ſatisfie all his kindred, who ſhall not loſe ſo much (in his lacke) as you alone ſhall doe, although it ſhould be the greateſt misfortune that could happen vnto vs. When Oriana did heare Mabila ſpeake in ſuch choller, her heart was ſo ouercharged, that her ſpeech failed vntill ſhee had a little while reſted her, when burſting out into teares, ſhee mainely cryed out, ah mee poore ſoule, aboue all deſolate and ſorrowfull women, moſt wretched: who would euer haue imagined this which you haue now made manifeſt vnto mee, could euer haue proceeded forth of your heart? Alas I haue diſcloſed my ſecrets vnto you (hauing about me no other worthy to vnderſtand my ſorrowes) to haue counſel & comfort at your hands, but you diſcomfort mee, and vſe mee worſe then I haue deſerued, reputing me to be farre otherwiſe then I am, or euer ſhall be ſo long as breath remayneth within my ſorrowfull heart, which maketh mee to preſume that nought but my misfortune hath brought vpon mee this vnhappy vſage, ſeeing that you haue taken in ſuch ill part that which I did tell you for the beſt. And let God neuer helpe mee if I did thinke dayes of my life vpon that wherewith you doe blame and accuſe mee, for I haue ſo great confidence in your Coſen, that I ſtudy vpon nothing ſo much, as how to content him: yet thus much I muſt tell you, that I had rather die then any other but my ſelfe ſhould gaine the honour of the forbidden Chamber. Iudge you then what griefe it would be to me if Briolania (who goeth before to make proofe thereof) ſhould accompliſh it, notwithſtanding my good Coſen & deere friend, I pray you to pardon mee, and (if it pleaſe you) deferre not to aduiſe me what you think is beſt for mee to doe. For your Coſen might bee very angry if hee did know that which I haue ſuſpected of him. Madame, anſwered Mabila,
                     
ſeeing you acknowledge your fault, you muſt be better aduiſed hereafter. You haue had experience enough, by that which is paſt, what inconuenience may happen vpon ſo light occaſions, take heed henceforth then, how you commit the like errors. Thus were theſe two Ladies reconciled together as before, neuertheleſſe ſhortly after Mabila came vnto Amadis, vnto whom ſhe declared all the talke that Oriana had with her, reproouing him ſharpely for that which he had ſaid to Briolania before her, knowing that already ſhe had been ſuſpitious of them both. Therefore my good Coſen ſayde Mabila, endeauour henceforth not to giue her any farther occaſion to vſe you ill, ſpeaking hereafter more diſcreetely then you haue done, eſpecially before my Lady, for it is a very hard matter wholly to baniſh and extinguiſh iealouſie from a woman after it is much rooted in her mind, and had it not beene for my ſharpe anſwer vnto her, by my faith ſhee had paſſed the bounds of reaſon. Sweet Coſen anſwered Amadis, I doe much maruaile at the phantaſie of my Lady, but yet I doe giue you exceeding great thankes, for the counſell that you giue vnto mee, although I doe ſweare vnto you that whatſoeuer. I did ſpeake, I thought was wholy for her aduantage. And I will tell you how euery one knoweth that Briolinia is reputed one of the faired Ladies in the world, ſo as one would thinke her ſufficient to enter into the forbidden chamber, but this thought is falſe: for I haue ſeene the Image of Grimaneſa, vnto whoſe beauty Briolania in no ſorte comes neere, wherefore it is moſt ſure that ſhee ſhall neuer attaine to this honour, the which my Ladie ſhall obtaine without any difficultie. Neuertheleſſe if it were firſt before Briolania had made her tryall therein, one might ſay after-ward, If ſhe had begun before Oriana, that then ſhee had firſt atchieued the aduenture: by means whereof I was ſo bold (in the preſence of my Lady) to giue her that counſell which you haue heard, Mabila liked well this excuſe of Amadis, and tolde Oriana thereof, who did greatly repent her that ſhee had ſpoken ſo much, fearing leaſt Amadis would haue been offended with her, and to make amends for this fault which ſhe had committed, ſhe ſent him word by Mabila, that he ſhould come to ſee her in her lodging, where ſhe and Briolania ſtayd for him, the which he did. At his cōming the Ladies tooke him by the hand, and made him ſit betweene them, then they prayed him to tell them the truth of what which they would demand of him, wherunto hee diſcōended. Tell vs then ſayd Oriana, what is the Ladie that gained the kerchief with the flowers, when you conquered the burning ſword? Amadis perceiued well that he was not onely ouertaken, but alſo conſtrained to tell the truth, for which cauſe he anſwered Oriana: In faith Madame I know no more what ſhe was then you doe, although I remained in her company ſixe daies together. But thus much did I ſee in her, that ſhe had the faireſt haire that any Lady or Damoſell could poſſibly haue, and ſhee is beſides moſt beautifull, and of a moſt excellent grace, for the reſt you know as much as I doe. By my faith ſaid Oriana, if ſhee got the kerchiefe with great honour, it had bin like afterward to haue coſt her

very deere as it was tolde mee, for without your aſſiſtance Arcalaus the enchanter and his Nephew Lindoraq had taken it from her, & alſo done her ſome villany. It was not hee anſwered Briolania (if hee be Amadis) but another who was called the Faire Forlorne, from whom wee muſt not derogate the honour to attribute it vnto another. And although I am greatly bound vnto Amadis, yet will I not let to ſpeake the truth of the Faire Forlorne, becauſe if the one haue ſurmounted Apolidon in proweſſe by winning of the Firme-Iſland, the ſame being vnto him an exceeding great reputation, ſo in like ſorte was the other worthy of no leſſe praiſe, who in one onely day ouerthrew tenne of the beſt knights in Great Brittain, and ſlew the moſt redoubted Gyant Famongomad, and Baſigant his ſonne▪ if Amadis did paſſe vnder the Arch of loyali louers, in whoſe fauour the Images of copper did ſound a more melodious tune, then it did for any other that euer proued the ſame aduenture, thereby manifeſting his loyalty, it ſeemeth in like ſort that the Faire Forlorne had as great an aduantage in gaining the the burning ſword, the which for the ſpace of threeſcore years no other could draw forth of his ſcabbard. Therfore Madame, it is not reaſon to take away the honour from the Faire Forlorne, and without deſert to giue it vnto Amadis, ſeeing that both in proweſſe and loyalty they may (as I thinke) equall one another. And as they were in theſe pleaſant diſcourſes, a Damoſell came and told Amadis that the King asked for him, becauſe that Don Quedragant and Laudin his Nephew were before him to acquite them of the promiſe that they had made by the meanes whereof Amadis was conſtrained to leaue the Lady, and to goe vnto the Court. By the way hee met with Bruneo and Branfil, who followed him, & they found that Quedragant had begunne his ſpeech vnto the King, ſaying: It may pleaſe your Maieſty, I haue ſtayed heere for Amadis of Gaule, according to the couenant that I made with the Faire Forlorne, and now that hee is in the Court I will diſcharge me of my promiſe True it is that by force of armes, I was conſtrained to graunt vnto the Faire Forlorn that I ſhould not depart from your company, vntill Amadis were returned, and then hee being come before your highneſſe. I ſhould ceaſe all quarrels that I had enterpriſed againſt him, for the death of king Abies of Ireland my brother, and neuer after to demand any thing at his hands, therefore and in like ſort that I ſhould neuer hereafter beare arms againſt your Maieſty, or any of yours. Which matter hath ſince grieued me more then one would thinke, becauſe I could not be preſent at the battaile, the which you had vndertaken againſt king Cildadan and his followers, of the number of whome I thought to haue beene, but fortune was ſo contrary that my intent was turned farre otherwiſe then I had purpoſed, for the hate which I did beare vnto Amadis, is conuerted into a moſt great amity, th
                        •
                      which I am determined to holde inuiolable with him, if he think it good being aſſured that I was ouercome by him, vnder the name of the Faire Forlorne, the which he had taken becauſe hee would not be knowne. So that I doe manifeſtly perceiue that fortune is wholly

determined to aduance him, as the the force which hee did ſhew in this laſt battaile can ſufficiently witneſſe, the honour whereof ought wholly to bee yeelded vnto him and to no other. For this cauſe it may pleaſe your Maieſty, ſeeing my Lord Amadis is heere preſent, that firſt you will diſcharge mee of that which I haue promiſed vnto him vnder a contrary name, and as for him I remit all the euill will that I did beare vnto him, for the death of my late deceaſed brother king Abies, and I doe further intreate him to accept mee for his companion and perpetuall friend. Sir Quedragant anſwered the King, you ſpeake like a prudent and wiſe knight, for what proweſſe or courage ſoeuer a Gentleman hath, if hee bee not gouerned by counſell & reaſon, he is not worthy that any man ſhould make account of him. You are ſufficiently knowne for one of the beſt knights in the world, yet you may be aſſured that the fellowſhip which you demand of Amadis ſhal in no ſort deminiſh your praiſe & renowne, you two continuing in mutuall amity together: and you may beleeue that hee will bee very glad to accept of the offer which you doe make vnto him. Is it not true gentle friend? ſayd the King vnto Amadis. If it like your Maieſty anſwered he, Quedragant is ſo worthy a knight-that his fame is ſpread abroad in many places, and ſeeing that it pleaſeth him to chuſe mee for his conſort, I doe thankefully accept his kind offer. Herewithall they embraced, and ſo long did their friendſhippe thenceforth continue, that it was neuer ſeperated but by death. At the ſame time was Floreſtan & Landin before the King, purchaſing their leaue to enter into the field, according to their appointed agreement (a good while before) in maintenance of Amadis his quarrell againſt Quedragant: but when they ſaw them friends their combate was finiſhed, and their hatred conuerted into amity, wherewith Landin was exceeding glad, for hee had already proued Floreſtan in the iourney againſt king Cildadan, and ſeene his valour and proweſſe.
                  Thus were theſe quarrels ended, & how much the Court had here-tofore been troubled, by ſo much was the ioy and paſtime thereof increaſed, neuertheleſſe the King hauing not forgotten the miſerie wherein king Arban of Northwales and Angriota de Eſtrauaux remayned, (after he had ſome few dayes ſtayed with the Ladies) he vndertooke their deliuerance, and the better to effect the ſame, hee determined to paſſe into the Iſle of Mongaza, to ſet them at liberty, wherewith hee made his knights acquainted. Then Amadis anſwered him, your Maieſty doth know that my brother Galaor hath beene loſt in your ſeruice, therefore I beſeech you to excuſe mee from accompaning your grace in this voyage, for if God pleaſe my coſins and I will goe ſeeke him as it is reaſon, and ſo ſoone as we haue found him, I aſſure your Maieſty that incontinently wee will follow vnto that place where wee ſhall heare your grace abideth. Friend Amadis, anſwered the King, I promiſe you of my faith, that I my ſelfe would willingly accompany you, ſo ſorry am I for Galaor: but you know the preſent affaires that I haue, whereby I am in truth to bee excuſed, yet neuertheleſſe I am well pleaſed with your departure,

both when you liſt, and with ſuch companie as you like. Here-withall there roſe vp more then a hundred of the moſt approoued knights, who did all ſweare the ſearch of Galaor. For ſaide they, hardly may we vndertake a worthier or more ſtrange aduenture: & they preuailed with the King ſo much that they got leaue to depart the next morning.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                     How the euening enſuing, the King being riſen from the table, walking about the galleries of his Pallace, he beheld two great fires vpon the Sea, that came directly towards the Cittie.
                  
                  
                     NOw it happened the ſame day after the King had ſupped, as hee walked along a gallerie, being almoſt bed-time, hee beheld two ſtrange fires vpon the Sea, which came with great ſwiftneſſe directly towards the Cittie. Wherewith he was greatly amaſed, becauſe hee thought it very difficult that water and fire ſhould continue together, eſpecially when hee beheld in the midſt of theſe fires, a galley, at the maſt whereof were many great burning torches, ſo that one would haue iudged the veſſell had beene all on fire. This wonder did aſtoniſh the people ſo much that in a manner they came all forth of the Cittie, preſuming that ſeeing the Sea was not able to quench this fire, it was impoſſible to defend the Cittie from being burnt to aſhes, if the ſame once tooke hold thereof, wherefore the King as fearfull as the reſt mounted vpon his horſe, and came forth with them vpon the ſands. And as hee came neere the water ſide, he did ſee that the moſt part of all the knights were already arriued, and amongſt the reſt was Amadis, Euil, and Guillan, who were at that time ſo neere the galley, which was hard at ſhore, that he thought it impoſſible for them to eſcape from the fire thereof. Hereupon he ſet ſpurres to his horſe, becauſe hee tooke on exceedingly with the noyſe that was made, and whether hee would or no hee brought him cloſe to the galley ſide: vpon the which ſhortly after he ſaw a cloth lifted vp which couered it, and a Damoſell appeared clothed in white ſilke, that held a ſmall Cofer of gold in her hand, which ſhe opened, then ſhee tooke out of it a burning taper which ſhe caſt into the Sea, and preſently the two great fires vaniſhed away ſo ſuddenly, that it was not perceiued what was become of them. Wherwith all the people were maruailous glad, ſeeing that they were out of danger, for there remained no more light then that of the torches, which burned vpon the maſ
                        •
                      of the galley, with the brightneſſe whereof all the ſhoare receiued light. Then the galley was plainly perceiued which was decked with many garlands of floures, & inſtrumēts began to ſound very ſweetly. Herewithal there apeared vpō the poupe twelue Damoſels richly apparelled, euery one of thē hauing a chaplet of roſes vpon their head, and a rod of gold in their hands.

And ſhe marched forth firſt of all that had throwne the taper into the Sea, who comming a ſhoare did her duty vnto the King, and he receiued her very kindely, ſaying vnto her: Madame in ſatisfaction of the feare wherewith your fire affrighted vs, tell vs if you pleaſe who you are, although wee alreadie ſurmiſe that we know you well enough. Your Maieſtie anſwered ſhe, is of ſuch a valiant courage, that it is impoſſible to terrifie you with ſo ſmall a thing, yet the fires which you haue ſeene were ordayned to no other ende but for the ſafety of my women and me when we are determined to goe by Sea. For the reſt if you thinke mee to bee Vrganda the vnknowne, your thought is true, and I am expreſly come into theſe parts to viſit you, as the beſt Prince in the earth, and the Queene alſo, who is one of the wiſeſt Ladies that liueth. Then ſhee called Amadis ſaying vnto him. My Lord Amadis come neer and I will tell you, (to eaſe you of the trauaile that you ſhould haue in ſeeking of Galaor) that your brother is well, and ſo throughly healed, that you ſhall ſee him heere very ſhortly, therefore leaue off your determined ſearch of him, for hee is in ſuch a place as all the men in the world can neuer finde him. Madame anſwered Amadis, when hee was demanded of me by the Damoſels that carried him away, I imagined that he ſhould be ſaued by you, and that no other but Vrganda would haue vndertaken ſuch an enterpriſe, which hath euer ſince put mee in good hope, without the which I thinke I had beene dead. For this one thing I am ſure of, that there is no knight in the world more bound to Lady or gentlewoman then I am to you, for the which I am not able to yeeld you ſuch condigne thanks as I doe owe, and you deſerue, but you know very well, that Amadis his life ſhall neuer be ſpared to do you ſeruice. Madame ſaid the king, will it pleaſe you to come and reſt you in my Pallace? Your Maieſty anſwered Vrganda, ſhall pardon me, for I will remayne this night in my galley, and to morrow I wil doe whatſoeuer it ſhal pleaſe you, but Amadis, Agraies, Bruneo, and Guillan ſhall keepe mee companie, becauſe I knowe they are as amorous as my ſelfe, and their companie will be a meanes to driue away all melanchollie. Doe what you will ſaid the King, for you ſhall be obeyed. Then he cauſed the people to returne vnto the Citty, and he himſelf (bidding Vrganda good night) departed, leauing for her guard a number of archers vpon the ſands: the next morning the Queene ſent vnto Vrganda twelue of her owne hacknies richly trapped, vpon the which ſhee and her women entred into the Cittie, and Vrganda rode in the midſt of the foure knights which ſhe had ouernigh detained to keep her companie. They intertained her with diuerſe diſcourſes by the way, wherein ſhe tooke ſo great pleaſure that ſhee ſaid vnto them, Beleeue me
                        •
                      it would bee a long time before ſhould be wearie of ſo good companie as this of yours is: for I aſſure you that I finde you all foure ſo agreeable to my nature, that you are particularly euen all one with my ſelfe, for if I bee in loue, you are no leſſe, holding Ladies in moſt great eſtimation. And this ſaide Vrganda, becauſe that ſhee languiſhed with extreame loue which ſhee did beare vnto the faire Knight, of whom in our

firſt booke wee haue mentioned vnto you. Their conference was no ſooner ended, when they approached neere vnto the Pallace, but the King who there had ſtaied, came forth to meete them, and as hee embraced Vrganda (bidding her heartily welcome) ſhe looked round about her vpon the companie, and beheld a great number of knights, in each place. Whereuppon ſhe ſayd, me thinks your Maieſty is now royally accompanied, not onely for the multitude of great perſonages that are with you, but eſpecially for the loue which I am ſure they do beare vnto you, for which you ought greatly to praiſe God. For the Prince that is beloued of his ſubiects, may be ſure to maintaine his eſtate in great ſafety, therefore your Maieſty muſt endeauour to entertaine and vſe them Kingly, that your fortune (which hitherto hath fauoured you) do not forſake you if you doe otherwiſe: and aboue all things take heede of falſe reports, ſeeing that it is the very poyſon and ruine of ſuch Princes as giue credit vnto them. And as the King would haue brought her to her chamber, ſhe ſaid vnto him: may it pleaſe your Maieſty that I may firſt goe and doe my duty to the Queene? I with all my heart gentle Lady anſwered hee, I am ſure that ſhee will be moſt glad to ſee you, as ſhee that hath greatly deſired to honour and pleaſe you. Herewithall hee conducted her where the Ladies were, and ſo ſoone as the Queene did ſee her, ſhe roſe vp and kiſſed her, ſaying, that ſhe was exceeding welcome: then ſhee made her ſit downe betweene Oriana & Briolania, whom Vrganda had neuer yet ſeene: and ſhee found that Briolania was the faireſt Lady in they world, if Oriana by her excellency had not blemiſhed her beauty, and to ſpeake truth there was great difference betweene them two. Then Vrganda ſayde vnto the Queene: Madame, I doe now finde that true which I haue euer heard reported: Which is, that the King was more accompanied with worthy knights then any other Chriſtian Prince, and you alſo attended vpon by the faireſt Ladies on the earth, for hee which conquered the Firm-Iſland (being a better knight then Apolidon) & the famous victory which ſo lately hath beene obtayned againſt King Cildadan, by the effuſion of the blood of ſo many Gyants as there dyed, are ſufficient witneſſes of the one, and I am ſure (to proue the other) it will eaſily be granted vnto me, that vnder the firmament it is not poſſible to finde fairer Ladies then theſe two heere, pointing to Oriana and Briolania: but if your Court hath this preheminence, it is yet honoured for one thing and farre more recommendable, which is the loyalty wherein loue is there maintayned, as well to be ſeene by the proofe of the burning ſword, and the kerchiefe beſet with flowers, which aduenture was performed in your preſence. When Oriana heard her goe ſo farre in her talke, her heart beganne to tremble, and ſhe became ſorry and penſiue, fearing leaſt Vrganda would ſpeake more, in diſcloſing the ſecreſie betweene Amadis and her. But Amadis who was preſent, knowing the wiſedome of her that knew all things, and the doubt of Oriana, hee approached vnto her, whiſpering thus in her eare, I aſſure you Madame, that Vrganda is ouer diſcreete to ſpeake any thing fooliſhly

or vnaduiſedly. And therewithall hee turned vnto the Queene, ſaying vnto her, Madame, your grace may demaund (if it pleaſe you) of Vrganda what ſhe was that gained the kerchiefe. I pray you ſayd the Queene, tell vs that. By my faith anſwered Vrganda, there is great cauſe why Amadis ſhould know better what ſhee was then I, for ſhee followed him, and after-ward hee deliuered her from the hands of Arcalaus the enchanter, and from Lindoraq his Nephew, not without great daunger of his perſon. Madame ſayd Amadis it was impoſſible that I ſhould either know her of my ſelfe, better then you did, ſeeing that you knowe that ſhee deſiring to remaine vnknowne would neuer vncouer her face before me, yet from you nothing may bee ſo well concealed, that is not at your pleaſure reuealed. Truely anſwered Vrganda, for your ſake I will preſently declare vnto you as much as I know. The D
                        •…
                     ell (whoſe loyalty is ſo knowne) is no maide, for ſhee is a faire 
                        〈◊〉
                     , aboue all others moſt excellent: and for the ſame cauſe did ſhee conquer the kerchiefe ſo renowined, eſpecially through the conſtant loue which ſhe did beare vnto her Lord. She is by birth, of the Kings countrey, by her Mother an Alien, and her continuall abiding is in this Realme, where ſhee liueth ſo aboundantly, that if ſhe wanteth any thing, it is onely becauſe ſhee cannot (at all times when ſhee pleaſeth) enioy him whom ſhee loueth better then her ſelfe, further ſhall you not knowe what ſhe is by me. Oriana who feeling he 
                        〈◊〉
                      touched by Vrganda, was not wel contented, (doubting leaſt ſhee ſhould haue proceeded further) vntill ſhee held her peace, and that the Queen anſwered: truly gentle Ladie you haue ſo cunningly deciphered her vnto vs, that there is not any heere, in my opinion, the better for her knowledge, ſauing onely that wee did thinke her a maide, and you aſſure vs that ſhee is a wife. A time will come ſaid ſhe, that you ſhal know her better. Herewithall the King who was minded to feaſt Vrganda, came to ſeeke her, that hee might lead her to dinner▪ hee made her ſit cloſe beſide him, & afterwards they ſpent the reſt of the day in ſpotting & making good cheare, vntill it was time to goe to reſt. Then Viganda came vnto the Queene, to entreate her that ſhee would be pleaſed to 
                        〈◊〉
                      her to lie in Oriana her chāber, the which ſhee willingly did grant vnto her. Neuertheleſſe ſayd the Queene, I feare that her youthfull behauiour will ſomewhat diſquiet you. In faith Madame anſwered ſhee, her beauty ſhall be more hurtful vnto many good knights, whoſe proweſſe cannot be ſo great as that it may defend them from ſundry perils, which they are likely to fall into for her loue, for that their deaths will hardly be eſchewed, if they do not wiſely preuent it. The Queene could not refraine from laughter, and ſaide vnto Vrganda. Hitherto ſhe may be pardoned for any ſuch danger that ſhee hath as yet brought thoſe vnto of whom you ſpeake: and therefore for this time I bid you good night. Here-upon the Queene departed, and Vrganda was brought vnto the Princeſſe her lodging, where ſhee found the Queene Briolania, and Mabila, that kept her companie, with who
                        •
                      ſhe diſcourſed ſo long of diuerſe pleaſant matters, vntill ouercome of ſleep, they were conſtrained

to lay them downe. Now they were all foure lodged in one chamber together, notwithſtanding Vrganda perceiuing Briolania and Mabila to be faſt aſleepe, and Oriana awake, ſhee ſayd vnto her, Madame, if you now doe not take your reſt for thinking vpon him, that day and night doth wake for your loue, your quiet and his are both alike. I knowe not what you meane anſwered Oriana, but ſure I am, that loue neuer hindered me from ſleepe. Vrganda knew very well that ſhe made her this anſwer, becauſe ſhee would not that Briolania ſhould vnderſtand the loue betwixt her and Amadis, wherefore ſhe ſayd vnto her: aſſure you that I am ſo carefull that your ſecrets be not diſcloſed, as I will not offend you with any thing that I ſpeak, for I know what is needfull for you better then your ſelfe. Madame anſwered Oriana, you may waken the Gentlewomen that are in this chamber. Let me alone for that ſayd Vrganda, I will rid you ſtraight of this feare. Therewithall ſhee tooke forth a booke which was ſo little one might haue couered it with his hand, and after ſhe had read therein a little while, ſhe ſayd vnto Oriana, let this ſuffice you, that now wee may ſpeake in ſafety, for what noyſe ſoeuer we make, they ſhall not ſtirre, vntill I awake them, and if any doe enter into this chamber, they ſhall fall downe vpon the ſloute in as ſound a ſleepe as they, and harke how they ſnort already. Heereat Oriana began to laugh, and riſing forth of her bed ſhee came vnto Mabila and Briolania, whoſe armes ſhe pulled very rudely, but for all that euer ſhe could doe, they ſtirred no more then a ſtone, will you yet ſee ſayd Vrganda the paſtime of thoſe that ſhall come ouer the threſhold of your chamber doore? call the Damoſell of Denmarke who is in this wardrobe, which Oriana did. And as the Damoſell had ſet her foote in the chamber, ſhe fell downe vpon the floure, & beganne to ſleepe and ſnort more ſoundly then either Mabila or Briolania. Wherefore Oriana went & layd her downe by Vrganda, and ſayde vnto her: Madame, ſeeing that you know ſo much of my affaires, I beſeech you to tell mee what muſt happen vnto me. How? anſwered Vrgāda, do you think the ſooner to eſcape that which is predeſtined vnto you by being aduertiſed thereof aforehand? You may beleeue that it is not in the power of any mortall man to alter that which God hath appointed vnto him, bee it good or bad, vnleſſe it be by his free will and grace: neuertheleſſe ſince you ſo greatly deſie to know your fortune, I am content, afterwards make your profit thereof as you can. Harken now then, at ſuch time as your heauineſſe ſhall bee at the higheſt, many good knights̄ ſhall periſh for your loue. Then the ſ
                        •…
                     g Lion accompanied with his beaſt, ſhall come forth of his denne, & with his loud roaring & cries, ſhal in ſuch ſort aſtoniſh thoſe that ſhall haue you in keeping, that mauger all their force you ſhall remaine in the pawes of that royall beaſt, who ſhall throwe from your head the rich crowne that ſhall no more bee yours. Afterwardes this famiſhed beaſt hauing your body in his power, ſhal beare you into his caue, where hee ſhall feede in ſuch ſort, as his extreame hunger ſhall be ſlaked. Therefore my daughter take heed what you do, for this which I haue foretold

you ſhall without doubt come to paſſe. By my faith anſwered Oriana, I could haue beene well content to haue forborne this curioſity, for the ſorrowfull end that is prepared for mee doth trouble all my ſpirits. Faire Lady, ſaide Vrganda, another time bee leſſe curious to vnderſtand that which is beyond your capaſitie: neuertheleſſe, oftentimes ſuch things as are miſticall and fearefull, doe for the moſt part turne into ioy, pleaſure, and profit, therefore be not you diſcomforted in any ſort, ſeeing that you are daughter vnto the beſt king, & moſt vertuous Queene that liueth vpon the earth, beeing endued with ſuch excellent beauty, that your renowne is ſpreade ouer all countreies, and more-ouer you are beloued of him, who is honoured and eſteemed more then any other Knight. You know as well as I that hee loueth you, by the experience not onely of that which hath beene tolde you, and you haue made knowne vnto him, but alſo by the aduentures which hee hath brought to paſſe in your preſence: therefore you ought to thinke your ſelfe happy aboue all thoſe that are beſt beloued, being miſtreſſe of him, that deſerueth (by his chiualrie) to be Lord of all the world. Now it is time to wake the Ladies, & end our diſcourſe. Here-withall ſhee began to read againe in her booke, and at that inſtant the Ladies that were aſleepe, began to breath as if they had beene ouerwearied, and ſhortly after they roſe vp, but when the Damoſell of Denmarke perceiued, that ſhee was laied in ſuch ſort naked in the middeſt of the chamber, there was neuer woman more amaſed then ſhe, the which when Oriana perceiued, ſhee demanded (ſmiling to her ſelfe) if ſhee were come thither to ſeeke freſh aire. By my faith Madame, anſwered ſhe, I know neither who brought me hither, nor can I remember how I came hither. Whereat they all began to laugh: and after they were ready they went vnto the Kings lodging, whome they foūd together with the Queen in the church: and ſo ſoone as ſeruice was ended, the King came vnto Vrganda, and bid her good morrow, and ſhee after her duty done vnto his Maieſtie, ſaide, that if it were his pleaſure to cauſe the Knights and Ladies in his Court to aſſemble together, that before her departure (which ſhould bee very ſhortly) ſhee would declare ſomething before them that ſhold happen vnto him, heereupon the King appointed a large hall to bee made ready, in the which the next morning a great number of Lords and Ladies were come. Then Vrganda beeing in the midſt of them all, addreſſing her ſpeech vnto the King, ſhee ſaide vnto him. Seeing that your Maieſtie hath kept the letters which I did write vnto you and Galaor, preſently after the Fair Forlorne had obtained the burning ſword, and the Damoſell the kercheife with flowres, it may pleaſe you now to cauſe them to be read, that euery one may plainely know that I am not ignorant of things before they happen. Heereupon hee ſent for them, and they were read before al the aſſiſtance, whereby it plainely appeared that ſhee had wholly foretold the manner of the battaile, euen as it happened out, and they all greatly wondred thereat, eſpecially at the ſtout hears of the King, that would be in a battaile ſo dangerous, when hee was before hand threatned ſo rigorouſly by his better. In like ſort was it

certainly known that the Faire Forlorne had been the cauſe of the victory, by the three blowes that hee gaue. The firſt when he caſt King Cildadan at Galaors feet, the ſecond in killing Sarmadan the Leonnois, and the third when hee ſuccoured the king, whom the ſtout Mandafabul of the virmillion tower did carry vnto his ſhips, whoſe arme hee cut off cloſe by the elbow, which was the cauſe of his preſent death. And in like ſort that which ſhe had ſaid of Galaor was come to paſſe, for his head was certainly at the mercy of the Faire Forlorne, at that time when the Damoſels demanded to carry him away. But now, ſaid Vrganda, I will tell you in order that which muſt happen, great contention ſhall ariſe between the mighty ſerpent & the ſtrong Lion, which ſhall be aided by many cruell beaſts, they ſhall come with ſuch fury, that a great numder of them ſhall ſuffer moſt cruel death. The ſubtill Roman foxe ſhall bee wounded with the clawes of the ſtrong Lyon, and his skin ſhall be cruelly torne, wherewith the mighty ſerpent ſhall bee brought into wonderfull perplexitie. In this time the me
                        •
                     ke ſheepe couered with blacke wooll, ſhall come into the midſt of them, who by his great humilitie and pittifull bleatings, ſhal pacific the pride and fierceneſſe of their courages, cauſing them to depart one from the other, but preſently the ſtarued wolues ſhall diſcend from the ſteepe mountaines againſt the mighty ſerpent, who being by them put to fight with a great part of his traine, ſhall bee cloſed vp in one of his dens. The tender licorne putting his mouth to the eare of the fierce Lion, ſhall awake him out of his ſound ſleepe with his loud crye, making him afterwards to take part of his beaſts, with the which hee ſhall ſpeedily goe to the ſuccour of the mighty ſerpent, whom they ſhall finde ſo bitten and wounded by theſe ſtarued wolues, that his blood ſhall bee aboundantly ſhed vpon the earth, at the ſame time ſhall he be deliuered from the teeth of the wolues, and they be cut in pieces. Then the life of the mighty ſerpent being reſtored (leauing within his den all the poyſon of his entrails) he ſhall bee contented to put him-ſelfe betweene the clawes of the ſtrong Lyon, and the white hind, who in the dreadfull Forreſt did lift vp her greeues to Heauen, ſhall bee taken from thence and called home againe. Wherefore noble King, may it pleaſe your Maieſtie to cauſe this to bee written, which before all this company I haue vttered, for there is no doubt but all this ſhall come to paſſe. I will ſo doe, anſwered hee, ſeeing it pleaſeth you, but I beleeue there is not any of vs that at the preſent vnderſtands this propheſie. Aſſure you, ſaide ſhee, that a time will come when it ſhall be manifeſted vnto all of you. So ſaying ſhe caſt her eies vpon Amadis, whom ſhe perceiued to be maruailous penſiue, and ſaid vnto him. My Lord Amadis, you muſe vpon that which cannot auaile you, wherefore expel this fancy from your minde, and harken vnto a match that you ſhall make, wherein you ſhall get little gaine. At ſuch time as you ſhal be wounded to death in the defence of anothers life, the ſmart being yours, and the profit his, the recompence that you ſhall reape thereby, ſhall be a wonderfull diſcontent, and a baniſhment from that whereunto you ſhall moſt deſire to approach. Then ſhall your good

rich and ſharpe Sword ſo bruiſe your bones, and in ſo many places wound your fleſh, that with the loſſe of your blood you ſhall become very feeble, and moreouer you ſhall bee ſo ſharpely purſued, that if halfe the world were yours, you would giue it, that your ſword were caſt into the bottom of ſome deepe lake, from whence it could neuer be taken forth againe, therefore bethinke you of your deſtiny, which ſhall be ſuch as I haue foretold you. Amadis ſeeing that euery one had their eyes fixed vpon him, looked vp with a ſmiling countenance and anſwered Vrganda, Madame, by the things that are already come to paſſe wherof you foretold vs, we may wel credit and beleeue that which now you tell vs, and knowing that I am mortal, I am very ſure that my life ſhall not be prolonged one minute longer then it pleaſeth God, and therfore whilſt I may, I will endeauour to gaine ſome reputation, rather then ſeeke to conſerue my life, Notwithſtanding if any perill were to be doubted, I ſhould haue more occaſion to feare thoſe that doe hourely happen vnto mee, then ſuch as are hidden & yet to come. I know well ſaid Vrganda that it is more eaſie to draw the Sea drie, then afright your vndaunted and magnanimious courage with any further dread of danger. And becauſe if it pleaſe your Maieſty (ſaid ſhee to the king) that I muſt preſently take my leaue of you, remember I beſeech you what I haue aduertiſed you of, before this great and honourable company, as ſhee that deſireth the honour and profit of your Maieſty, and ſtop your eares henceforth from thoſe, whoſe words you ſhall know to be vniuſt and peruerſe. Herewithall ſhe aroſe from her place and al the company in like fort, and ſhortly after ſhe tooke leaue of the King, and of the reſt of his court, which done ſhe returned into her galley, accompanied onely with the foure knights that had conducted her to the Court, who hauing ſeene her embarked, returned backe to the Citty, but they had no ſooner turned their backs, when a thicke and great Cloude ſo ouerſhaddowed the ſhip, that preſently they loſt the ſight thereof.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIX.
                  
                     How after the departure of Vrganda, the king being ready to mount on horſe back, to execute the enterpriſe which he had determined to make vpon the burning lake, there came before him a Damoſell Gianteſse, to vnderſtand whether his Maieſty would be pleaſed to referre the quarrell that he pretended in this voyage, vpon the combat betwixt Ardan Canila, and Amadis of Gaule, with ſuch conditions as ſhall bee declared vnto you.
                  
                  
                     SOme few dayes after the departure of Vrganda, king Liſuart walking vpon the ſea ſand conſulting with his knights about the voiage which hee determined to make vnto the Iſle of Mongaza, to ſet at liberty king Arban, and Angriotta, they beheld a ſhippe making towards the ſhoare which caſt anchor hard by them. Whereupon they all approched

to know who or what newes it had brought, when ſuddainely they perceiued two Eſquires waiting vpon a Damoſell, comming forth thereof, who was no ſooner landed but ſhee demanded for the king. Thoſe vnto whom ſhe ſpake, anſwered that he was there: but they did all wonder at her greatneſſe, for there was not a man in all the Court whom ſhe exceeded not in height a hand breadth: for the reſt, ſhee was indifferent faire, and well apparrelled. Then ſhe approched neer vnto the king, to whom ſhe ſaid, if it pleaſe your Maieſty, I am hither come to let you vnderſtand that which I am commanded to declare vnto you in the behalfe of ſome great perſonages, but if it pleaſed your highneſſe, I would haue the Queene preſent. Here-withall the king tooke her by the hand, and brought her to the Pallace, and afterward he ſent for the Queene and her Ladies, that they might heare what the Damoſell would ſay, they being all come, the Damoſell enquired if Amadis of Gaule (lately called the Faire Forlorne) were in this company or no. And Amadis (vnto whom by chāce ſhe ſpake) anſwered her, that hee was the man, ready to doe her any pleaſure if ſhe would imploy him: notwithſtanding, for all his courteous ſpeech, the Damoſell looking vpon him with a ſterne countenance began to raile at him, ſaying, the leſſe do I eſteeme thee: for thou waſt neuer ought worth, not neuer ſhall be, and by the effect of this my meſſage all this company may know whether there bee any heart or courage at all in thee: then ſhe tooke forth two Letters of credit, ſealed each of them with a ſeale of Gold, the one of them ſhe preſented to the king, the other to the Queene. But ſo ſoone as the king had red his letter, he commanded her to declare whatſoeuer ſhe pleaſed. Wherefore ſhee ſpake aloude and ſaid, It may pleaſe your Maieſty, Grumadaca the giant of the burning lake, and the faire Madaſima, with the moſt redoubted Ardan Canila (who is at this preſent with them, to protect and defend them againſt you) haue knowne for certaine, that you determine to paſſe into their country to aſſaile them, and becauſe the ſame cannot bee done without the loſſe of many worthy men on eyther ſide, they haue deuiſed a meanes (if your maieſty think good to auoid the effuſion of blood, & the loſſe of diuers valiant knights, which is this, that the combat of two perſons onely ſhall determine the quarrell betweene you and them, vpon the victory of him that ſhall win the field, the one is the valiant and famous Ardan Canila, the other Amadis of Gaule here preſent: vpon this condition, that if Amadis bee ouercome, Ardan may freely cut off his head and carry it with him, to the burning lake vnto Madaſima, and alſo if fortune proue contrary to the ſaid Ardan, & that Amadis remaine conqueror, the land & the countrie that you intend to conquer, ſhal without contradiction be yeelded vp into your hands. And moreouer my Lady ſhall in like ſort preſently ſet at liberty king Arban of North Wales, and Angriotta d'Eſtrauaux, who hath beene a long time her priſoners, as you know. Therefore if Amadis do loue them as they thinke and doe imagaine he doth, let him preſently condiſcend, vnto this Combat for the liberty of two ſuch great friends of his otherwiſe he may be

aſſured that Ardan to deſpight him the more, will ſend their heads vnto him for a preſent, very ſhortly. Damoſell anſwered Amadis, if I agree to this combat, what ſecurity ſhall the king haue for the performance of this your promiſe? I will tell you ſaid ſhe, The faire Madaſima accompanied with twelue Gentlewomen of great birth, ſhall bee ſent as hoſtages and become the Queenes priſoners, vnder this condition, that if this which I haue ſaid be not wholly accompliſhed, the king may cauſe them all to die in what ſort hee pleaſeth, and as touching you, I demand no other aſſurance, then this, that if you be vanquiſhed Madaſima may afterward haue your head without contradiction. And to let you know that they from whom I bring this meſſage, will not gaine-ſay that which I haue promiſed, I will yet further cauſe Andaugel the old giant, with his two ſons, and nine of the chiefeſt knights of the countrie, to enter into the king his priſon, as pledges for the performance of the former couenāts. Truly anſwered Amadis, if the king and Queene haue theſe perſons which you ſpeake of in their power, the ſecurity is ſufficient, but yet you ſhall haue no anſwere of me, vnleſſe you firſt grant to dine with me in my lodging, with theſe two Eſquires that attend vpon you. I do greatly wonder ſaid ſhee, what moueth thee ſo inſtantly to intreate and inuite me to dine in thy company, ſeeing that I hate thee more then any man that I know. I am ſorry for that ſaid he, for I loue you, and will willingly doe you all the honour and ſeruice that I am able, but if you will haue an anſwere, grant mee that which I demand of you. I do grant it, ſaid the Damoſell, more to take away all occaſion from thee to deferre the combat, then for any deſire that I haue to remaine in thy company. I thanke you anſwered Amadis, and becauſe it is reaſon that I aduentur my perſon, not onely to ſaue two of my beſt companions & friends from death, but alſo doe my beſt for the enlarging of the limits and authority of the king, and his Realme, I accept the combat againſt Ardan, and let the hoſtages come when it ſhall pleaſe you, becauſe for my part, ſo glorious an enterpriſe ſhall not be foreſlowed. Certainly ſaid the Damoſell, thou haſt greatly ſatisfied me, neuertheleſſe I feare mee thou haſt ſaid this eyther in choller, or to auoide the ſhame that otherwiſe thou mightſt incur before ſo many valiant men, and therefore it may pleaſe the king to aſſure me, that if thou flie before the fight, hee will not ayde thee at any time againſt the kindred of Famangomad. Damoſel anſwered the king, I promiſe you I will not. Now let vs goe to dinner ſaid Amadis, for conſidering the iourney which you haue made you muſt needes haue a good appetite to your meate. Truely anſwered ſhe, I will go more contented then I hoped for, and ſeeing it hath pleaſed the king to grant mee that which I requeſted, I aſſure you that without faile Madaſima and her Gentlewomen with the knights, ſhall yeelde themſelues priſoners vnto his Maieſty and the Queene, ſo that alſo hee will bee pleaſed to warrant Ardan from all the reſt of his Court, except Amadis, from whom I hope he ſhall carry away the head. When Don Brunco heard this, hee anſwered the Damoſell, I haue many times ſeene one make account of

another mans head when hee hath loſt his owne, and the like may happen vnto Ardan, whom you ſo much exalt. Gentle friend ſaid Amadis, I pray you let this Gentle-woman ſpeake at her pleaſure, for one like vnto her ſelfe, for ſhe and ſuch as reſemble her, haue liberty to ſay what they liſt, and often-times more then they know. What are you ſir? anſwered the Gentle-woman vnto Bruneo, that ſo well can pleade for Amadis? I am, ſaid he, a knight that would willingly beare a part in this enterpriſe, if Ardan Canila had a companion with him. By my faith, anſwered ſhe, I beleeue that if you did think to bee receiued you would not ſpeake ſo proudly, but you haue already heard that Ardan and Amadis muſt bee alone without any more, which maketh you to ſpeak ſo haughtily, neuertheleſſe if you be ſuch a one as you ſay; I am aſſured that the combat of them two, ſhall be no ſooner ended, but that I will bring before you a brother of mine that ſhall teach you to hold your peace, and I aſſure you that hee is as great an enemy vnto Amadis as you profeſſe to bee his friend. He ſhall be very welcome, and better entertained ſaid he, and tell him hardly that he forget none of his Armour behinde him at his lodging, for be he neuer ſo valiant le will be all little enough for him. Herewithall hee threw downe his gloue. See here ſaid he my gage, take it vp for your brother, if hee will alow you to do it, and will accept the combat that you haue vndertaken for him. The Damoſell tooke vp the gloue, and afterward vntying from about her head a carquenet of Gold, ſhe ſaid vnto the king, If it like your Maieſty, I accept the combat for my brother againſt this knight in his abſence, in witneſſe whereof, your grace may keepe (if it pleaſe you) theſe two pledges, the which ſhee gaue vnto him, and the king receiued them, although hee would willingly haue remitted this quarrell, for hee already doubted the other, for that he had heard of the valiant deedes of Ardan Canila, who neuer did meete (as it was ſaide) with any knight in foure yeeres before, that durſt combat him. When the Damoſell perceiued that ſhe had executed her commiſſion, according vnto her deſire, ſhe tooke leaue of the Court, and went with Amadis, who brought her vnto his lodging but it had been better for him that he had beene at that time a ſleepe, for the courteſie which hee did ſhew vnto her, turned him to ſo great diſpleaſure, that ſhortly after he was in great danger to haue loſt his life. Becauſe that he would the more honour this Damoſel, he brought her into that Chamber wherein Gandalin did beſtow his Armour. But ſhee had no ſooner ſet her foote in the ſame, but ſhee caſt her eyes vpon Amadis his good Sword, which ſhee thought was of ſo ſtrange a faſhion, that from that time forth, ſhe determined to ſteale it, if ſhee might finde the meanes, and to doe the ſame more cleanly, ſhe walked ſo long about the chamber, that as Amadis and his people had their backs towards her, ſhe ſlily drew the ſword forth of the ſcabbard, and held it vp cloſe vnder her cloake. Afterwards ſhee preſently went forth of the chamber, and taking aſide one of the Eſquires (in whom ſhee moſt truſted) ſhe gaue it vnto him, ſaying: doeſt thou know what thou ſhalt do? run quickly into my ſhip, and hide me this Sword vnder the

ballaſt in ſuch ſort that none doe ſee it vpon thy life. The Eſquire was diligent and departed. Then Amadis entred into talke with the Damoſell, demanding of her at what houre Madaſima would arriue in the Court. I beleeue anſwered ſhe, that you may ſee her, and ſpeake with her before the king haue dined: but what moues you faire ſit to enquire ſo much after her? Becauſe ſaid Amadis I would go meete her vpon the way to doe her honour and ſeruice, to the end that if ſhee haue receiued any diſpleaſure by mee, I may make her ſuch mends as ſhe ſhall demand of me. I know anſwered ſhe, that if thou run not away, Ardan Canila ſhall be he that ſhall make thee anſwere the wrong that thou haſt done vnto her, with the loſſe of thy head, the which hee ſhall preſent vnto her, for other ſatisfaction ſhe deſireth not to accept. I will keepe them both faſting without that (if God pleaſe) ſaid Amadis, neuertheleſſe if ſhee will haue any other thing of mee, I ſweare vnto thee, by my faith Damſel, that ſhe ſhall haue it, as ſhee whoſe good will and fauour I doe moſt deſire. Then were the Tables couered, & dinner was brought in, wherefore Amadis cauſing her to ſit downe, deſirous to leaue her alone, ſaid vnto her, that the king had ſent for him, and that ſhee in the meane time ſhould make good cheere, for hee would returne preſently againe. The Damoſell ſhewed by her countenance that this departure of his did not a little pleaſe her and fearing leaſt her theft ſhould be perceiued, ſhe made as ſhort a dinner as ſhe could. Which ended, ſhe roſe from the Table, and ſaid vnto thoſe that ſerued her, you may tell Amadis that I giue him no thankes at al for the entertainement that he hath ſhewed me, thinking thereby to do me honor, and aſſure him that I am ſhee that wil purchaſe (as long as the breath remaineth in my Body) his death and vtter deſtruction. So God me helpe, anſwered Enil, I beleeue it well, and according to that which you haue already manifeſted, in my opinion you are the moſt iniurious woman that I haue ſeene in all my life. Whatſoeuer I am, ſaid ſhe, I care not for thee, and leſſe for him, and if thou thinkeſt mee iniurious, yet is it not ſo much as I would be both towards him and thee, and for the paines that thou haſt taken in ſeruing mee this day at dinner, I would in recompence thereof, that I had ſeene you both twaine hanged. Saying ſo, ſhe departed and got into her ſhip, very ioyful of the Sword which ſhe had 
                        •…
                     e, which ſo ſoone as ſhee was returned back vnto Ardan, ſhee preſented vnto him, letting him know and M
                           •…
                        
                      alſo, 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Amadis had conſented vnto the combat which ſhe had demanded of him. Is it true? anſwered Ardan, let me neuer bee accounted a knight of any worth, if I doe not then bring back againe my Lady to her honour and reputation, deliuering henceforth her countrey from the attempts of king Liſuart, and if I take not the head of Amadii from off his ſhoulders in leſſe time then the beſt footeman in the world may haue run halfe a league, I am content (ſaid he vnto Madaſima) not to deſerue your loue ſo long as I liue. But ſhee hearing him ſpeake ſo raſhly, held her peace: and although ſhe greately deſired to be reuenged of him for the death of her Father, and brother whom Amadis had ſlaine, yet

did ſhe ſo extreamely abhorre Ardan that ſhee a great deale rather wiſhed his death then his life, becauſe hee pretended to marry her. For ſhe was exceeding faire, and be a deformed villaine and voide of all humanity, and this combat was not practiſed by her meanes, but by the perſwaſion of her Mother, who had ſent for him, for the defence of her Countrie vpon this condition, that if he reuenged the death of her husband and ſonne, ſhe would giue it vnto him, and her daughter Madaſima in marriage, for hee was ſo feared and had in ſuch reputation, that ſhee thought ſhe could not beſtow her daughter better. And to let you know his manners and perfections, hee was deſcended from the race of giants, borne in a Prouince called Canila, the which was in a manner wholly inhabited by ſuch kinde of people, notwithſtanding hee was ſomewhat leſſe of body then they, but not in ſtrength: his ſhoulders were narrow, his necke and breſt vnreaſonable thicke, his hands and thighes large, his legs long and crooked, his eyes holow, flat noſed like an Ape, his noſtrels wide and lothſome, his lips great, his haire red and thicke briſtelled in that ſort, as very hardly might it be cu
                        •
                     led. To conclude, he was ſo beſet with freckles and blacke ſpots, that his face ſeemed as though it had been of ſundry ſorts of fleſh, hee was of the age of thirty yeeres or thereabout, bold and expert in armes, furious, ſpitefull, and as vncourteous as might bee. And yet ſince hee was twenty and fiue yeeres of age, he neuer fought with any Giant or other knight, eyther a foote, a horſeback, or at wreſtling, that was able to reſiſt him, & whom he did eaſily not ouercom: ſuch was the beauty, faſhion, and gentle behauiour of Ardan Canila. When the iniurious Damoſell heard Ardan make ſuch large promiſes vnto Madaſima, & perceiued that ſhee made no account thereof, ſhe tooke vpon her to ſpeake in her behalfe, me thinks my Lord that you ſhould thinke the victory very ſure on your ſide, ſeeing that Fortune is ſo fauourable vnto you, and ſo contrary vnto your enemy, as you may well perceiue, in that ſhee hath cauſed him to loſe the beſt part of his armes. And this ſhee ſaid in reſpect of the ſword which ſhe had ſtolne. By my Gods, ſaid Ardan, I am more glad of his diſpleaſure for the want thereof, then for any good that I hope to receiue thereby, for although Amadis had the force of three ſuch as hee is, yet were hee not able to withſtand the ſtrength of my arme, accuſtomed to tame his betters. The next morning very early hee departed, accompanied with Madaſima, and and the reſt which ſhould be deliuered vp as hoſtages, according to the promiſe that the Damoſell had made vnto king Liſuart before the Combat was agreed vpon, and Canila did aſſuredly hope, that he ſhould eaſily obtaine the victory. By meanes whereof hee departed with great ioy, ſaying vnto thoſe that were with him, Amadis is famouſed for one of the beſt knights in the world, neuertheleſſe I will haue his head, if he dare enter into the liſts againſt me, and by that meanes my glory ſhal be the more increaſed in the ouercomming of him, my Lady ſhall reſt well reuenged, and I remaine her husband and louer. And becauſe he would know before hee entred into the court, whether Amadis had repented

him or not, hee ſent the iniurious Damoſell before, to aduertiſe the King of their comming, and in the meane ſeaſon hee cauſed his tents to be ſet vp, ſomewhat neere the Cittie where King Liſuart did remaine. But you muſt know, that incontinently after the Damoſell was departed from Amadis his lodging, Enil told him thereof: therefore becauſe he would prouide all things neceſſary for his enterpriſe, hee withdrew him vnto his chamber, accompanied with ſome of his moſt priuat friends, and in like ſort there came at that inſtant vnto him, Floreſtan, Agraies, Galuanes without land, and Guillan the penſiue, who were altogether ignorant of the enterpriſe of this new combate. But when they were aduertiſed thereof, thinking that it ſhould haue beene performed with a greater number of knights, ther was not any of thē who were not diſpleaſed with Amadis, in that he had not choſē thē to aſſiſt him therein, eſpecially Guillan who greatly deſired to proue his man-hood againſt Ardā Canila, for he had heard that he was eſteemed for one of the ſtrongeſt Knights in all the Weſt. And as he was about to reprou Amadis in forgetting him, Floreſtā
                      preuēted him, ſaying vnto his brother. So God helpe me, my Lord, I now doe very wel perceiue, the little loue and the ſmall account that you doe make of me, in that you would not ſend for me to be with you in this combate. In faith, anſwered Agraies, if hee had thought mee any thing worth, he would not haue left mee behinde, and what of me? ſaid Galuanes. My Lords, anſwered Amadis, I beſeech you all to holde mee excuſed, and not to bee diſpleaſed with mee, aſſuring you that if it had beene in my choyſe to haue elected a companion 
                        ••
                     ſſiſt mee in this encounter (ſeeing the great proweſſe wherewith you are all endued) I could not tell which of you to chuſe. But Ardan deſired to fight with mee alone, for the hate hee beareth vnto mee, and the loue he hath to Madaſima, and ſeeing that hee hath ſo required it, I neither could, nor ought to refuſe it, without ſhewing my ſelfe to be a recreant and a coward, nor I could not make any other anſwere, then that which was agreeable to his demand. And when he ſhould haue compriſed any more Knights with him, where doe you thinke I would haue ſought for a
                        •
                     d and ſuccour but with you, beeing my friends? ſeeing you know how my ſtrength is redoubled when we are together. In this ſort did Amadis excuſe himſelfe, praying thē all to beare him company the next day, 
                        •
                     o go meete Madaſima, both to receiue her, & ſhew her as much honor as they might deuiſe. Wherunto they all agreed: ſo that the day following (knowing that ſhe was neere at hand) Amadis accompanied with eight of the beſt knights in King Liſuarts Court, mounted on Horſe-backe in very good order. But they had not long ridden when they did behold her a farre off, comming with Ardan Canila, who did lead her, & ſhe was apparrelled all in black, mourning as yet for the death of her father, whō 
                     Amadis had ſlain. This ſad apparrell did ſo much grace her, that although of her ſelfe (without any other helpe) ſhe was eſteemed one of the faireſt that might be ſeen, yet was her beauty much more encreaſed by this mourning weede, with the which the liuely whiteneſſe of her face was the more manifeſted, by the grace which this blacke

colour added thereunto, and her two cheek
                        •
                      ſeemed like two white roſes, beautified with a naturall redneſſe, ſo as euen then thoſe which had conceiued a mortall hate againſt her for the miſchiefe which ſhe procured vnto Amadis, were now forced to loue her. Behinde her marched the twelue gentlewomen, apparrelled with the like attire. After them came the old giant, and his ſon followed with nine knights, which all came as pledges. Great was the entertainement that Amadis ſhewed vnto her and the reſt of her traine, and ſhee in like ſort ſaluted them moſt courteouſly. Then Amadis approching more neere, ſaid vnto her, I promiſe you Madame that if you bee accounted faire and of good behauiour it is not without great cauſe, ſeeing that I am now my ſelf an eye witneſſe of the truth thereof, and truly that man ought to thinke himſelfe happy, whoſe ſeruice it ſhal pleaſe you to like of, aſſuring you that I am willing to do you any pleaſure, and ready to obey your commandements: when Ardan Canila heard him ſpeake ſo courteouſly (although hee was finally fauoured by Madaſima) hee was ouercome with iealouſie, and anſwered Amadis, knight ſtand back and ſpeake not ſo priuately vnto her, whom you know not. Sir ſaid Amadis, the cauſe of my comming hither is not onely to be acquainted with her, but alſo to offer vnto her my perſon and my goods. You are no doubt anſwered he ſome good fellow, and worthy to be by her greatly imployed, neuertheleſſe faire ſir, get you gone from her, otherwiſe I will make you know that it is not for ſo baſe a companion as you, to vſe ſo great familiarity with a woman of ſo high worth as ſhe is. Whatſoeuer I am anſwered Amadis, yet do I deſire to ſerue her, notwithſtanding your threats, for although I am not of that worth as I would be, yet ſhall not the affection that I beare vnto her, bee abated by thy malapert boldneſſe. But ſir, you that are ſo luſty, who would make me know my duty & depart from her, for whom willingly I would employ my beſt meanes, tell mee what you are? Ardan Canila exceeding angry, beholding Amadis with a ſterne and ſcornefull countenance anſwered him, I am Ardan, who am better able to increaſe her welfare and honour in one day, then thou canſt with the beſt meanes thou haſt, doe her ſeruice in all thy life. It may very well be ſaid Amadis, notwithſtanding I know that this whereof thou vanteſt ſhall neuer by thee bee executed, ſo indiſcreete and ſpightfull art thou.
                  And becauſe that thou greatly deſireſt to know whether I am a ſufficient man or not, know thou that my name is Amadis of Gaule, againſt whom thou deſireſt to fight: and if this Lady be diſpleaſed with ought that I haue ſaid vnto her, I wil make her ſuch amends therefore as ſhee ſhall pleaſe to command at my hands. By my Gods, anſwered Ardan Canila, if thou tarrieſt the combat, the ſatiſfactiō which ſhe ſhall take ſhall be thy head. That would diſpleaſe me meruailouſly, ſaid Amadis, but I will giue her a head that ſhall bee more welcom to her (if ſhe pleaſe) breaking the marriage of you two, being ſo far vnfit one for another: for ſhe is faire, wiſe, and of courteous behauiour, & thou deformed fooliſh & churliſh, Hereat Madaſima & the Gentlewomen began all

to laugh, & Ardan to be extreamely angry, that to behold his countenance and the rage wherein hee was, one might eaſily haue iudged the little good that hee wiſhed to Amadis, vnto whom hee anſwered not one word more, yet he ceaſed not grumbling and gnaſhing his teeth vntill hee came before the king. Then very indiſcreetely he began to ſay, King Liſuart behold here the knights that muſt now enter into your priſon, according to the promiſe which yeſterday a gentlewoman made vnto you, in my behalfe. Wherefore if Amadis dare be ſo bold to do as he hath boaſted, I am here ready to breake his head. What will you doe anſwered Amadis? Thinkeſt thou my heart ſo weake or my right ſo ſmall that I cannot abate the pride of a man ſo audacious as Ardan is? I aſſure thee that although I had not vndertaken it, yet would I combat thee onely to hinder the marriage betweene thee and Madaſima. And therefore deferre not to deliuer vp theſe hoſtages which thou doeſt brag off, for I verily hope to reuenge the good and valiant King Ardan, & Angriotta, for the great wrong they haue receiued, during their impriſōment, I haue brought them along with me, ſaid Ardan knowing that you would demand them, but I am in good hope to reſtore them againe into the power of the faire Madaſima, and to giue her therewithall the mold of thy cap, to teſtifie that it becommeth not ſuch a gallant as thou art to vſe mee with ſuch proude and ſpightfull tearmes, and that (
                        •
                     o the executing therof) ſhe may receiue the greater pleaſure, it may pleaſe your king to appoint that ſhe may he ſet in a place hard at hand, to the end that ſhe may both plainely ſee the reuenge thee 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſhall take of thee, and 
                        〈…〉
                      where with thou 
                        〈…〉
                      ſame inſtant the 
                        〈…〉
                      brought, and th
                        •
                      faire Madaſima together, with her twelue Gentle women came to doe their humble duties vnto the Queene, and by her ſide was the old Giant, his two ſons, and the nine knights, who all fell vpon their knees before the King. At the ſame time euery one did attentiuely beholde th
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      faire Madaſima, who ſhewed ſuch an humble countenance, that ſhe was greatly eſteemed, yet could not Oriana caſt one good looke vpon her, thinking that ſhee (of her owne will) did procure the ruine of Amadis, for the which none was more ſorrowfull then ſhee. But Mabila who was in like ſort neerely touched with the matter, 
                        〈◊〉
                      her in hope that God would 
                        •
                     yde him, and that her Coſin might as eaſily ouer throw and vanquiſh Ardan Canila, as hee did the pro
                        •…
                      
                     Dardan, and many other knights, both valiant and ſtout. The pledges then being receiued as the cuſtom was, both the knights re
                        •
                     ired each of them to the place appointed for them, ſtaying vntill the time that they ſhould enter into the field, the which the king had commanded to bee cloſed in with pa
                        •
                     es. Then Gandalin went to 
                        〈◊〉
                      his maſters Armour. And as hee would haue taken it downe he perceiued that ſome one had ſtoln his good ſword forth of the ſcabberd, which had almoſt made him the for anger, ſeeing the fault that hee had done vnto Amadis, towardes whom he ranne, and at one beſide himſelf, he cryed. My Lord, I haue ſo much & ſo grieuouſly offended you, that you haue great reaſo
                        •…
                      kill me forthwith. Why 
                        •
                     anſwered

                     Amadis, art thou fooliſh or mad. My Lord ſaid 
                        
                           •…
                        lin, it had beene 
                        〈◊〉
                      for you that I had died ten yeer
                        •
                      ago, ſo much I haue deceiued you in your neede, for I haue let your good ſword to bee loſt, the which ſome body hath ſtolne ſince yeſterday, leauing only the ſcabbard where it did hang. Is this all thou makeſt this great ſtir for? anſwered Amadis, beleeue me I 
                        •
                     hought (in hearing thee rage in this ſort) that ſome body had beene carrying thy Father to his graue. Go, go, neuer care thou, for I care not ſo much for the goodneſſe thereof, but onely becauſe I did win it ſo honourably as euery one knoweth, and by the meanes of my conſtancy in loue. Yet ſee thou tell no body thereof, but go vnto the Queene and tell her that I intreate her grace, if ſhee haue yet that ſword which Guillan found at the fountaine with my armour, that ſhe will bee pleaſed to ſend it vnto me. And if thou meeteſt Oriana by chance, tell her alſo that I deſire her to ſet her ſelfe in ſuch a place, where I may behold her at my eaſe, when I ſhall bee in fighting, for I ſhall receiue by her 
                        •
                     ight more force by far, thē ſhe being abſent I ſhould. So Gandalin departed, who did wiſely accompliſh all that his maſter had commanded him. And as he returned vnto him, he met with the Queene Briolania together with Olinda, who called him and ſaid vnto him, friend Gandalin, what doeſt thou thinke thy maſter will doe againſt this deuil, that will fight with him? what anſwered he, my Ladies doe you doubt that he ſhall not do wel enough with him? I am ſure that I haue ſeene him eſcape far greater dangers then this which now hee vndertaketh. God grant hee may ſaid the Ladies. Herewithall hee came vnto Amadis that ſtayed for him, who hauing the Sword that the Queene did ſend vnto him and being throughly well armed, he mounted on horſeback. And as hee would haue entred into the field, the king met him, and ſaid vnto him, how now my moſt deer friend, this day doe I hope to ſee ſome part of your courage, to the coſt of Ardan Canila. In faith if it like your Maieſty anſwered hee, there is a great miſchance happened vnto me, ſome one hath robbed me of the beſt ſword that euer knight did weare. Is it poſſible ſaid the king? Who hath done you this ſhrewd turne? I know not anſwered Amadis, but whoſoeuer hath done it, ſure I am he is not my friend. Truly ſaid the king, that is likely, but take you no thought therefore, for although that I haue made an oath neuer to lend mine in any combat that is made by two knights in my court, yet am I content for this time to ſtretch my conſcience ſo far as to giue it you. Nay if it like your Maieſty, God forbid that the oath of the beſt king in the world, ſhould be broaken for my ſake. What will you then do ſaid the king? The Queen anſwered Amadis, hath done ſo much for me as to keep that ſword which I left at the fountaine of the plaine field, the which Guillan did bring with the reſt of my Armour, when I became a Hermit. And it is the very ſelfe ſame which I had, when I was caſt into the Sea, which is ſo fit for the ſcabbard of the other which is ſtolne, that it ſeemeth to bee the very ſame. By the faith that I owe vnto God, anſwered the king, I am very glad, for by the vertue of this ſcabbard that is left, you ſhall bee both defended

from ouermuch heat, or too great cold, neuertheleſſe the difference is great betweene the two blades, but God ſhall ſupply this default if it be his pleaſure. And becauſe it is already very late, and that the night approacheth, it were better to deferre the combate vntill to morrow morning. I will ſayde Amadis doe whatſoeuer ſhall pleaſe your Maieſty, ſo that Ardan bee content. I will goe ſend vnto him anſwered the King, whereunto Ardan did eaſily agree, and returned vnto his tents to vnarme himſelfe, afterwards he cauſed diuerſe ſorts of inſtrumens of muſicke to bee brought, & all the night long both he and his neuer ceaſed from dancing, feaſting, & royalting. But all that while was Amadis in the Church deuoutly praying. After hee had like a Chriſtian confeſſed his ſinnes, he beſeeched God to aſſiſt and ſuccour him, in ſuch ſort continued hee vntill about day breake, when he withdrew him to his lodging, where ſhortly after the King came vnto him with a great troop of knights. Who after they had bidden him good morrow, they armed him, and brought him with great triumph vnto the Cathedrall Church to heare ſeruice, & at his returne from thence Floreſtan preſented him with an excellent faire courſer, which Coriſanda had ſent vnto him not long before. Then euery one got to horſebacke to accompanie him to the field. And Floreſtan carried Amadis his Launee, Bruneo his helmet, and Agraies his ſhield, before thē did the King ride with a white truncheon in his hand, he rode on a Spaniſh Iennet, beeing as fine a made horſe & as proudly paced as any could be ſeene. The Inhabitants of the City, and many ſtrangers were already ſtanding all along the barriers, & the gentlewomen and Damoſels placed in the windowes. In this ſort did Amadis enter into the field, into the which he was no ſooner come but that he did his dutie vnto the Ladies, and amongſt them all he ſpied out Oriana, who the more to encreaſe his courage did put her head forth of the window. And ſmiling kindely vpon him, ſhe made a ſigne vnto him that he ſhould ſomethings do for her loue, wherwith Amadis did imagine that all the force in the world was at that inſtant placed round about his heart, and hee thought that Ardan Canila ſtayed too long before hee came. In the meane time he buckled on his helmet & retyred to that part of the field where they appointed. Iudges were ſeated, which were Don Grumedan, Quedragant, & Brandoinas. And ſhortly after came Ardan in richly armed, mounted vpon a great ſtrong horſe, and hee had about his neck a ſhield of fine ſteele ſhining as bright as burning glaſſe. At his ſide did hang the good ſworde of Amadis, holding in his hand a great huge Launce, the which he weelded ſo ſtrongly, that notwithſtanding the thickneſſe thereof, hee ſhaked it with ſuch force, that he made it double in his fiſt. Whereat Oriana, Mabila, and the other Ladies beholding the ſterne countenance of Ardan (as it often happeneth in thoſe things which one feareth to to loſe) they beganne to bee in doubt of him whom they all fauoured, ſo as Oriana ſayd: Alas if God take not pittie vpon Amadis, this day will be his laſt. But Mabila preſently reproued her ſaying: Madam, if you ſhew not a pleaſant countenance vnto my Coſen, hee ſhall be eaſily

vanquiſhed, although Ardan ſtrike neuer a ſtroke. Hereupon the trumpets ſounded. Then Amadis beholding Oriana, ſet ſpurres vnto his horſe, and they both met ſo rudely, that their Launces were broken into ſhiuers, encountring together with their ſhieldes & bodies ſo forcibly, that Ardan his horſe fell down dead in the place, and the other of Amadis had his ſhoulder broken, neuertheleſſe Amadis with great lightneſſe roſe vp, although the truncheon of his enemies Lance remained ſticking in his vambraces, the which hee preſently pulled forth, and drawing out his ſword, hee valiantly marched againſt Ardan Canila, who in like ſort with great paine was riſen vp. And as hee ſtayed to mend his helmet which was ſome-what ſhaken with his fall, ſeeing his enemy approach, hee made head againſt him, and there began betweene them ſo cruell an encounter, as there was not any man preſent that did not greatly wonder thereat, for with the ſparkles of fire which preceeded by their ſtrokes from their helmets, they ſeemed to bee all on fire, and by their waighty blowes which with great proweſſe were beſtowed, they mainfeſted the hate which they did beare vnto each other, for there was not one blowe ſmitten but the blood followed, neuertheleſſe it ſeemed that Ardan had the aduantage ouer his enemy, as well becauſe of the ſhield of ſteele which he had, as alſo for the hurt which hee did with the ſword of Amadis, which the iniurious Damoſell had giuen him. But yet Amadis followed him ſo neare, as oftentimes hee brought him out of breath, wherewith Ardan was much abaſhed, and hee verly thought that in all his life hee had not found a knight that handled him ſo rudely, eſpecially hee imagined his enemies force to bee redoubled when moſt of all his impaired. Whereat as it were diſdaining that hee ſhould ſo long continue, couering him with his ſhield, hee ran vpon Amadis, who had all his armour and ſhield in ſuch ſort hacked and broken, that he could not wel tel wherewith to defend him any more, becauſe that Ardan neuer faſtened blowe vpon him but that his fleſh f
                        •
                     lt it, whereby euery one iudged that he would carry away the victory. Then was Madaſima very ſorry hereat, for ſhe was a woman of ſo ſtout a heart that ſhe would rather haue loſt her land and herſelfe then to marry him, and ſo long theſe two knights maintained the combate, that euery one did maruaile how they were able to continue. But Oriana ſeeing the pittious eſtate of Amadis and the danger whereunto hee was brought, by the reaſon that his armour was ſo broken, ſhe was likely to haue ſounded, & ſhe became very pale and out of heart, vntill Mabila perceiuing it, ſayd vnto her. Madame it is no time now to leaue Amadis in this perill, ſeeing that if you turne your backe, you haſten his end, and depriue him of his victory, at the leaſt if you cannot beholde him, turne your face quite from him. At that time was Amadis ſo ſorely preſſed by Ardan, that Brandoinas one of the iudges ſayd vnto Grumenan, and Quedragant, Truely my Lord Amadis is in great neceſſity for want of good armour, ſee how his ſhield is hacked, & his haubert ſo broken, that in a maner he hath not where-withall to defend one blowe.

Truſt mee you ſay true anſwered Grumedan, and I am very ſorry for it. Of my faith ſayd Quedragant, I haue prooued Amadis when I fought with him, but the longer he fighteth, the ſtronger and more inuincible hee waxeth, ſo that it ſeemeth each houre his force increaſeth, the which is not ſo with Ardan, as by proofe you may now ſee by his vnweeldineſſe, & more ſhall you ſee before the battaile be ended. This ſpeech was heard by Oriana and Mabila, where-with they were greatly comforted, and becauſe he had ſeene Oriana almoſt ready to depart from the window, not daining any longer to behold him, hee thought ſhee was diſpleaſed, for that hee deferred ſo long to get the victorie of his enemy. Whereat hee was ſo grieued, that griping his ſworde faſt in his fiſt, hee ſtroke ſo ſound a blow vpon the helmet of Ardan, that hee made him bowe one knee to the ground, but by miſchance his ſword broke in three peeces, the leaſt whereof remained in his hand. Then did hee thinke his life in very great danger, & there was not any of the beholders that did not ſuppoſe him vanquiſhed, and Ardan victor: who began to lift vp his arme, ſaying ſo loud that euery one did heare: behold Amadis the good ſworde which with wrong thou gotteſt, by the which thou ſhalt receiue a ſhamefull death. See gentle Ladies ſee, look forth of your windowes, to behold my Lady Madaſima reuenged, and ſay whether I am not worthy of her loue. When Madaſima heard Ardan make this bragge, and ſeeing that without doubt fortune fauoured him, ſo as according to the promiſe which her mother had made vnto him, ſhe ſhould be conſtrained to take him for her huſband, ſhee came and caſt herſelfe at the feete of the Queene, beſeeching her moſt humbly that it would pleaſe her grace to hinder this marriage, the which ſhe might iuſtly doe, becauſe that Ardan had ſayd vnto her that if hee got not the victory of Amadis in leſſe ſpace then the beſt lackie in the world could run halfe a league, that he was cōtent that ſhe ſhould neuer loue him ſo long as ſhe liued, and that now it was more then foure houres ſince the combate began. Gentle Lady anſwered the Queen, I will doe that which ſhall be reaſonable. In the meane time Amadis was much aſtoniſhed, and ſeeing that hee had no meanes to defend himſelfe, he began to remember that which Vrganda had foretold him, which was that if hee were Lord of halfe the world, hee would giue it vpon condition that his ſworde were in the bottom of ſome deepe lake. Moreouer looking vp towards Oriana, he perceiued that to encourage 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſhee was come againe to the 
                        •…
                     dow, whom when hee had behel
                        •…
                      hee thought that hee had recou
                        •…
                     ed new force and helpe. By meanes whereof, hee either determined to die ſpeedily, or to be reuenged vppon his enemy ſuddenly, and the better to execute his determination, hee leaped vnto his enemy ſo lightly, that before Ardan could ſtrike him, hee pulled the ſhield from his necke, and then ſtepping alittle aſide, he took vp a truncheon of a Lance, that lay in the field, and hee thought to haue thruſt it thorough the ſight of Ardan his helmet: but hee went backe, and lifting vp his ſworde hee ſtroke ſo ſtreat a blowe within the ſhield which Amadis did hold, that alalthough

it was of fine ſteele, yet did it enter therein more then a great hand breadth. And as hee ſtriued to pull it forth, Amadis thruſt the head of the truncheon through his arme, wherewith hee felt ſuch extreme grief, that he forſooke the ſword which hee held, on the which Amadis preſently faſtened his hand, & pulled it forth, thanking God for ading him in his greateſt need. When Mabila beheld the caſe thus altered, ſhee called Oriana, who hauing ſeen her friend in ſuch extreamity, was newly layd downe vpon a bed, ſtudying with her ſelfe what death ſhe might chuſe for the ſpeedieſt, if Amadis were vanquiſhed. And Mabila ſayd vnto her, Madame, come ſee how God hath holpē vs, Ardan (without doubt) is ouer-come. The great ioy which Oriana receiued at theſe newes made her ſuddenly to ſtart vp, and looking out of the window, ſhee perceiued how Amadis had ſtroken his enemy 
                        〈◊〉
                      mighty a blow vpon the ſh
                        •…
                     der, that hee ſeparated it from 
                        〈◊〉
                      necke, wherewith he felt ſuc
                        •…
                     guiſh, that hee turned his b
                        •…
                     , but hee ran not farre before 
                        
                           •…
                        dis ſtroke him againe, and he purſued him ſo ſharpely, as that hee made him recoyle backe euen to the top of a Rocke, againſt the which the Sea did beat, ſo that he could goe no farther. Then was Ardan Canila brought between two extreamities, for on the one ſide the deepe and vnmericifull waues ſet before his eyes his vnhappy end, on the other ſide hee perceiued the ſharpe ſword of his enemy which did no leſſe terrifie him. Who purſued him ſo cloſe, that he pulled his helmet from his head, and lifting vp his arme hee wounded him moſt cruelly, ſo that hee fell from the top of the Rocke downe into the Sea, and was neuer after ſeene. For the which many praiſed God, eſpeciall king Arban of Northwales, and Angriotta de Eſtrauaux, becauſe they had ſeen Amadis in ſuch daunger that they greatly ſtood in feare of his ſafety. Heerewithall Amadis wiping his ſword did put it vp into his ſcabbard, and came whereas the King and the other knights were, who in great triumph brought him into his lodging, and the more to honour him, hee was led between thoſe whom hee had deliuered frō cruell priſon, that is to ſay by Arban King of Northwales, and Angriotta de Eſtrauaux. And becauſe they were leane, pale, and almoſt ſpent, as well with the euill vſage which they had receiued during their impriſonement, as alſo with the griefe and melancholly that they had taken, Amadis was deſirous that they ſhould lodge in his chamber, where they were ſo well tended and dyeted, by the aid of expert Phyſitions and cunning Surgeons, that they did ſhortly after recouer their health, as by the ſequell of our Hiſtory you may vnderſtand.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XX.
                  
                     How Bruneo de Bonne Mer did fight with Madamaine the ambitious, brother to the Damoſell iniurious, and of the accuſations that were made by ſome of the enemies of Amadis vnto the King, for which cauſe hee and many others (that were deſirous to follow him) departed from the Court.
                  
                  
                     THe next day after the combate was ended between Amadis and Ardan (as hath beene related heretofore) the iniurious Damoſell came and preſented herſelfe before the king, beſeeching his Maieſty to ſend him that ſhould fight with her brother, whom according vnto promiſe ſhee had cauſed to come thither. For (ſayd the Damoſell) although my brother be conquerour and cannot take that reuenge of his enemies as the friends of Ardan may reſt ſatisfied for his death, yet will it bee ſome ſmall comforth vnto them notwithſtanding. Now Brunco was there preſent, who (without making ſtay, anſwered to the reſh ſpeeches of the fooliſh woman) ſaid vnto the the King. If it like your Maieſty, I am the man ſhe ſpeaketh of, and ſeeing that her brother is come hither as ſhee ſaith, if it be your pleaſure and his will, wee ſhall quickly know if hee be ſuch a gallant as hee vaunteth. Vnto the which the King condiſcended. Wherefore they both went immediatly to arme them, and anon after they entred into the field, whither they were accompanied with certaine knights their friends. They beeing then in the place aſſigned for that purpoſe, the Trumpets ſounded to warne them to begin the combate. Forthwith they charged their Launces, and ſetting ſpurres to their horſes, they ranne the one againſt the other ſuch force that their Launces flew into ſhiuers, & encountring each other with their ſhieldes and bodies, Madamain loſt his ſtirrops, and was vnhorſed, & Bruneo wounded in the left ſide. Notwithſtanding ſo ſoone as hee had finiſhed his carreer, hee turned himſelfe to his enemy, and ſaw that he had already recouered his feet, and held his ſword in his hand in a readines to defend himſelfe: but as Bruneo drew neere to charge him, he ſayd to him: Sir knight alight, or elſe aſſure you that I will kill your horſe. Truely ſayd Bruneo, at your choyce bee it, for it is all one to me, to ouercome you on foote or on horſebacke. When Madamain ſaw that his wiſh came to a good end, being as he thouhgt ſtronger then his enemy, who was but little, and himſelfe in a manner a Gyant, he was moſt glad thereof, and ſayd to Bruneo, It were better for you to alight, and then you ſhould ſoon make profe whether you were able to effect that which you make brags of: well quoth Brunco, & ſo withdrawing himſelfe he alighted & left his horſe, then he tooke his ſhield & ſet hand to his ſword, approaching vnto Madamain, who like a valiant & ſtout knight receiued him coragiouſly. They began to lay on load the one at the other both of thē pretending to get the victory, which was the cauſe that

neither ſhield nor armour of how good temper ſoeuer, was able to withſtand their blowes, for they hacked them to peeces, ſo that the field in many places was couered with peeces of their ſhields. Now if the knights did aſſaile one another with great hardineſſe, their horſes did no leſſe, for they ſet vppon one another, and with their feete and teeth fighting together, they did ioyne in ſuch ſort, that the moſt part of the lookers on, were more intentiue to the combate of the beaſts, then the fight of the knights. Notwithſtanding Madamain his horſe in the ende had the worſe, being conſtrained to leape ouer the barriers, and to run away. This gaue a great preſumption to euery man to imagine that Bruneo ſhould obtaine the victory, and ſo it fell out, for hee purſued Madamain ſo neere, and brought him to that extreamity, that being almoſt out of breath, he ſayd vnto Bruneo. I doe beleeue conſidering the rage thou art in, that thou imagineſt the day will not bee long enough to end our quarrell. Howbeit, if thou doeſt conſider, that thy armour is almoſt vnriuited, thou ſhalt finde that it were better for thee to reſt thy ſelfe, then to aſſaile mee ſo vndiſcreetly as thou doeſt, and therefore I being vnwilling to vſe thee ſo rigourouſly as thou deſerueſt, I am content to giue thee leaue to take breath, that we may afterwards begin the fight more hotly then before. Bruneo anſwered, thou declareſt in plaine tearmes that which is needfull for thy ſelfe. Wherefore I pray thee as luſtie as thou art, not to ſpare mee a whit. Art thou ignorant of the occaſion of our combate? Knoweſt thou not that either thy head or mine muſt ceaſe this ſtrife? I doe aſſure thee that I am no more determined to liſten vnto thy preaching: wherefore if thou determine not to dy preſently, looke to thine owne defence, better then thou haſt done here-tofore. Immediately without any further diſputations hee aſſailed Madamain afreſh, but hee was already ſo weake (as not being able ſo much as to defend Bruneo his blowes) hee drew himſelfe by little and little to the top of a Rock, euen to the place where Amadis had caſt the body of Ardan into the Sea. And there Bruneo thruſt him ſo rudely downe, that he ſent him to be buried in the Sea, but before hee came to the bottome, his body was torne in twenty ſeuerall peeces. Which the iniurious Damoſell perceiuing, ſhe entred into ſuch fury and diſpaire, that as a mad woman ſhee ranne vnto the place where Ardan and Madamain were throwne downe headlond, where finding Madamain his ſword, ſhe ſet it to her breaſt, crying ſo loud that all the companie heard her, Seeing that Ardan the flower of chiualrie, & my brother haue choſen their graue in this raging Sea, I will beare them compani
                        •…
                      And ſo caſting herſelfe downe headlong, ſhe was immediately couered with the water. Then Bruneo (mounting on horſ
                        •
                     
                     backe againe) was conducted by the King and many other knights to the lodging of Amadis, where hee deſired to keep him company, in whoſe honour hee had vndertaken the combate. And becauſe that the Queene Briolania perceiued that Amadis was not like to be cured in a ſhort ſpace, nor to accompany her as hee had promiſed, ſhe tooke her leaue of him to go
                        •
                      ſee the ſingularities of the

Firme Iſland, wherefore Amadis commanded Enil to conduct her, and to deſire Iſania the Gouernor thereof, to doe her all the honour, and giue her the beſt entertainement hee could deuiſe. So Briolania departed, bidding Oriana farewell, aſſuring her that ſhe ſhould be aduertiſed what happened vnto her in trying the aduentures of the Iſland, but ſhee was no ſooner gone from the Court, when it ſeemed that Fortune endeauoured the ruine of the kingdom of great Brittaine, which had ſo long time liued in happineſſe. Yea euen king Liſuart himſelfe, who (forgetting not onely the ſeruices hee had receiued of Amadis, of his kindred and friends, but eſpecially the aduice and counſell of Vrganda) liſtened to flatterers, two ancient knights of his houſe, to whom (vnder the colour of the long education they had receiued, as well of the King Falangris his eldeſt brother, as of himſelfe) hee gaue credit, beleeuing their vntrothes which he ought not to haue done, as you ſhall preſently vnderſtand. Theſe two of whom I ſpeake as wel by reaſon of their ancient age, as of a kinde of hypocriſie, cloaked with wiſedome, tooke more paines to ſeeme good and vertuous, then to bee ſo in deede, by meanes whereof they entred into great authority, and were often-times called and made priuie to the moſt ſecret affaires of their Lord, one of them was named Brocadan, and the other Gandandell. This Gandandell had two ſonnes, who before the comming of Amadis and of his followers into great Brittaine, were eſteemed two of the moſt hardieſt knights in all the countrey, notwithſtanding the proweſſe and dexteritie of the other, did abate the renowne of thoſe whom I ſpeake of. Whereat their father was ſo diſpleaſed, that forgetting the feare of God, the faith which hee ought to his Prince, and the honour which all men of honeſty ought to be endued withall, determined not onely to accuſe Amadis, but likewiſe all thoſe whom hee eſteemed as his friends, and did conuerſe withall, hoping to build his treaſon in ſuch ſort, that by the ruine of ſo many good knights, he would worke his owne & his friends profit. Wherefore finding the King on a time at leaſure, hee vſed ſpeeches of like ſubſtance vnto him. It may pleaſe your Maieſty, I haue all my life long deſired to bee faithfull vnto you, as to my King and naturall Lord, euen as my duty bindeth mee, and will yet continue, if it pleaſe God, for beſides the oath of fidelity which I haue ſworne vnto you, you haue of your gracious fauour heaped ſo many benefi
                        ••
                      a vpon mee, that if I ſhould not counſell you, in that which did concerne your royall Maieſty, I ſhould commit a great fault both towardes God and men. In conſideration whereof if it like your Maieſty, after I had long weighed with my ſelfe that which I will declare vnto you, I haue often repented that I deferred the matter ſo long, not for any malice I beare vnto any man (as God is my witneſſe) but onely for the damage which I ſee ready to enſue, if your Maieſty do not ſpeedily and wiſely ſeeke remedy to preuent it. Your Maieſty knoweth that of long time there hath beene great controuerſie betweene the kingdomes of Gaule and great Brittaine, becauſe that the Kings your predeceſſors, haue alwaies pretended title of

ſoueraigntie thereunto. And albeit that for ſome time this quarrell hath line dead, notwithſtanding it is likely that thoſe of that Countrey (calling to minde the warres and domages they haue endured by your ſubiects) haue ſecretly determined to take reuenge thereof. And in my opinion, Amanis who is chiefe and principall amongſt them all, is not come into this Countrey, but to practiſe and gaine your people: who (ioyned with the forces which he may eaſily land heere) will ſo trouble you, that it will be hard for you to reſiſt them. And I beſeech you to conſider whither the likelyhood there-of bee not already very apparent. Moreouer your Maieſtie may bee pleaſed to conſider that he of whō I ſpeake, and thoſe of his aliance likewiſe, haue done mee ſo much honour and pleaſure, that both I and my children are greatly bounden vnto them, and were it not that you are my ſoueraigne Lord, I would in no wiſe pleake againſt Amadis, but in thoſe things which concerne your perſon, let mee rather receiue death, then that I ſpare any man liuing were he mine own ſonne. You haue receiued Amadis with ſo great number of his parents and other ſtrangers into your Court (like a good and liberall Prince as you are) that in the end, their traine will become greater then your owne, wherefore if it like your Maieſty, it were good to fore-ſee this matter before the fire bee kindled any further. When the King heard Gandandel ſpeake in this ſort, he became very penſiue, and afterwards anſwered him: In faith louing friend, I beleeue that you aduertiſe mee as a good and faithfull ſubject, neuertheleſſe ſeeing the ſeruices that they of whom you ſpeake haue done vnto me, I cannot be perſwaded in my mind, that they would procure or imagine any treaſon againſt me. May it pleaſe your Maieſty, anſwered he, that is it which deceiueth you, for if they had heretofore offended you, you would haue beene ware of them as of your enemies, but they can wiſely cloake their pretended treaſon, colouring it with an humble ſpeech, accompanied with ſome ſmall ſeruices, wherein they haue employed themſelues, watching a time of more fit opertunity. The King turned his head on the one ſide without anſwering any farther, becauſe there came ſome Gentlemen vnto him, neuertheleſſe Gandandel being as yet ignorant how the King had taken his aduertiſement, he practiſed with Brocadan, and drew him vnto his league, declaring vnto him the whole diſcourſe which he had with the King, aſſuring him that if they might baniſh Amadis and his alies, that from thenceforth they two alone ſhould gouerne the king and his Realme peacebly. Brocadan receiuing this counſell for good, did afterwards imprint in the King his minde ſo great iealoſie, and ſuſpition againſt Amadis and his fellowes, as from that day hee hated them in ſo ſtrange a ſort, that hee could not in a manner abide to ſee them, forgetting the great ſeruices performed by them, as well when he and Oriana were deliuered from the hands of Arcalaus, as afterwards in the battaile againſt King Cildadan, and in many other places heretofore recited. Truely if this King had well remembred the counſell and aduiſe which hee had receiued of Vrganda, hee had not ſo farre digreſſed from the bounds of reaſon, although that

the like malady doth often haunt al Princes, when they take not heed of falling into the like accidents and danger as King Liſuart did. Who giuing credit to the deceitfull words of theſe traitors, did neuer afterwards viſit (as hee was accuſtomed) Amadis and the others that were wounded, whereat they were not a little abaſhed, but to doe them the more diſpite he ſent for Madaſima and other pledges, vnto whom he ſayde, that if within eight dayes the Iſle of Mongaza were not yeelded vnto him according to their promiſe, that then hee would ſuddainly cauſe their heads to be ſmitten off. When Madaſima heard this rigorous conſtraint, neuer was woman more afraid, conſidering, that in performing the will of the King, ſhee ſhould remaine poore and vtterly diſhereted, and on the other ſide, denying to ſatisfie his beheſt, ſhee did ſee her death prepared, ſo that ſhe was in ſuch perplexitie, as not being able to anſwere him, ſhe had recourſe vnto her teares. Wherefore Andaugell the old Gyant anſwered the King, ſaying. If it pleaſe your Maieſtie, I will go with thoſe whom you ſhall appoint to ſend, vnto the mother of Madaſima, and I will deale with her in that ſort, as ſhee ſhall accompliſh your will, yeelding the Countrey and places which you demand, otherwiſe your Maieſtie may doe your pleaſure with vs. This the King liked well of, and euen that day he ſent him with the Eearle Latin, and cauſed Madaſima and her women to bee carryed back to their accuſtomed priſon, whether they were brought by diuers Gentlemen. Whom ſhe moued greatly to pittie her eſtate, by the complaints and ſorrowfull lamentation that ſhe made vnto them, praying euery one of them particularly to labour in her behalfe vnto the King, ſo that there was not one amongſt them all, who promiſed not to doe for her as much as poſſibly they could, eſpecially Don Galuanes, who at that time held her by the arme, beholding her with ſuch an eye, as hee became of her enamoured, and ſaid vnto her: Madame, I am ſure that if it would pleaſe you to accept mee for your husband, the King would freely beſtow vpon vs all the right that he pretendeth in your Countrey. I beeleeue alſo that you are not ignorant of my nobility, being brother to the King of Scotland, and that by me your authoritie ſhall not be deminiſhed. For the reſt, aſſure your ſelfe that I will vſe you as you are worthy. Now Madaſima had known him of long time, & ſhe was aſſured that he was one of the beſt Knights in the world. Wherefore accepting the offers of Galuanes, ſhee fell downe at his feete, moſt humbly thanking him for the good and honour which he did offer vnto her, and euen then was the marriage betweene them agreed vpon, the which afterward Galuanes laboured to effect to his vttermoſt power. And the better to accompliſh it, ſome few dayes after he came vnto Amadis and Agraies, making them acquainted with that which you haue heard, and Agraies ſaid vnto him: Vnkle, I know very well that loue hath no reſpect of perſons, ſparing neither young nor olde, and ſeeing that you are become one of his ſubiects, we will beſeech the King ſo much in your behalfe, that you ſhall enioy your deſired loue, therefore determine to behaue your ſelfe like a luſty champion for

                     Madaſima is a woman, not likely to bee pleaſed with a kiſſe onely By my faith (anſwered Amadis) my Lord Galuanes, the King in my opinion, will not refuſe vs, and I promiſe you that ſo ſoone as I am able to walke, your Nephew and I will goe vnto his Maieſty to entreat that which you demand. But you muſt vnderſtand that whileſt theſe things were in doing, Gādandell the better to couer & diſſemble the treaſon which he had conſpired, did goe oftentimes to ſee and viſit Amadis, ſo that one time amongſt the reſt hee ſayd to him: my Lord, it is long ſince you ſaw the King. What is the cauſe there-of anſwered Amadis? Becauſe ſaide Gandandel, by his countenance it ſeemeth hee beareth you no great good will. I know not anſwered Amadis, yet to my knowledge I neuer offended him. For this time they paſſed no farther, vntill at another inſtant this traytour came againe to ſee him, ſhewing vnto him a better countenance then he was accuſtomed, ſaying: my Lord, I told you the other day, that I thought by the ſpeeches which I heard the King ſpeake of you, that his friendſhip was not ſo firme vnto you as it was wont to be, and becauſe that I and mine are ſo greatly bound vnto you, for the pleaſures which you haue done vnto vs, I will truly let you vnderſtand how the King hath a very bad opinion of you, and therefore looke vnto it. So many times did hee repeat this and the like matter vnto Amadis, that hee began to ſuſpect leaſt hee had layd ſome ſnare to entrap him in, whereby the King might conceiue ſome euill opinion of him. And therefore one day when Gandandel perſeuered in his aduertiſements, Amadis being very angry, anſwered him: My Lord Gandandel, I doe greatly wonder what mooueth you to vſe this ſpeech ſo often vnto me, ſeeing that I did neuer thinke vpon any thing but onely wherein I might doe the King ſeruice? And I cannot beleeue that a Prince ſo vertuous as hee is, would euer ſuſpect mee for a thing which I neuer committed. Wherefore neuer breake my head more with ſuch follies, for I take no pleaſure therein. For this cauſe Gandandel durſt neuer after that ſpeake any more thereof vnto him, vntill that Amadis beeing healed, went vnto the Court, but ſo ſoone as the King beheld him hee turned his head from him & his fellowes, not vouchſafing ſo much as once to looke vpon them. Then Gandandel who was hard by them ſeeing the Kings countenance, came to embrace Amadis, ſaying vnto him, that hee was glad of his recouery. But by my faith ſayd he, I am very ſory that the king vſeth you no better, notwithſtanding now you may know whether the aduertiſements that I gaue you were falſe or not. Amadis anſwered him not one word, but came vnto Angriota & Bruneo, who thinking that hee had not marked the coūtenance which the King ſhewed vnto them, aduertiſed him thereof. There is no cauſe anſwered Amadis, that you ſhould take it in ill part, ſeeing that very often a man is intentiue vnto ſome thing whereon his minde is ſet, that hee taketh no heed vnto that which others doe, it may be that the king muſed vppon ſome other matter when wee ſaluted him, therefore let vs returne and ſpeake vnto his Maieſty for that which Galuanes entreated vs. Herewithall they approached

vnto him, and Amadis ſayde vnto the King. Although, if it pleaſe your Maieſtie, that I haue not here-tofore done you that ſeruice that I deſire, yet haue I preſumed (truſting in your good bounty) to requeſt one gift of your highneſſe, which can not but turne greatly to your honour, moreouer you ſhall binde thoſe vnto your Maieſtie, whom you may pleaſnte with your gacious grant. At this time was Gandandel preſent, who playing the hypocrite (as he was accuſtomed) very malapertly took vpon him to ſpeake, and anſwered Amadis. Truly if it bee ſo as you ſay, the King ought not to denie your ſu
                        •
                     e. If it like your highneſſe, ſaide Amadis, the gift which I and my fellowes here preſent, do beſech your highto grant vnto vs, is, that it would pleaſe you to beſtow vpon the Lord Galuanes the Iſle of Mongaza, for the which he ſhall yeeld you fealty and homage, in marying with Madaſima, by the which fauour your grace ſhall both aduance a poore Prince, and extend your pitty vnto one of the faireſt Gentle-women in the world. When Brocadan and Gandandel heard this demand, they looked vpon the King, making a ſigne vnto him that hee ſhould not grant it to them Yet neuertheleſſe it was a great while before hee ſpake, conſidering the deſerts of Don Galuanes, and the ſeruices which hee had receiued of him in many places, eſpecially how that Amadis had conquered with the price of his blood, the land which he required for another, neuertheleſle hee gaue no eare vnto him, although by verture hee was bounden to condiſcend vnto a requeſt ſo reſonable, yet hee thus anſwered Amadis.
                  
                  That man is ill aduiſed who requeſteth a thing that cannot bee granted. I ſpeake this becauſe of you my Lord Amadis, who doe entreate mee for that which within theſe fiue dayes I haue beſtowed, as a gift vpon my youngeſt daughter Leonor. This excuſe had the King fayned of ſet purpoſe to refuſe Galuanes, whereupon Amadis who was greatly diſcontented with the ſlender entertainment that he ſhewed vnto them, knowing that this was but an excuſe, hee could not ſo much command him-ſelfe as to hold his peace, but that he ſaid vnto the King. Your Maieſtie doth very well manifeſt that the ſeruices which for you we haue done, ha
                        •
                     e beene little pleaſing vnto you, and leſſe profitable for vs. And therefore (if theſe my companions will bee ruled by me) wee will hence-forth bethinke vs what to doe. Beleeue me my Nephew, anſwered Galuanes, you ſay true, and thoſe ſeruices are very ill imployed, which are done vnto thoſe that haue no deſire to acknowledge them, and therefore euery man of courage ought to beware for whom he aduenture him-ſelfe. My Lords, anſwered Amadis, blame not the King for not granting that which hee hath promiſed vnto another, and let vs onely entreat him that he will be pleaſed to permit that Galuanes may marry with Madaſima. And if he grant this fauour, I will giue vnto him the Firme-Iſland. Madaſima (anſwered the King) is my priſoner, and if ſhe deliuer not vnto mee the land which ſhe hath promiſed me, ſhee ſhall loſe her head before the moneth be paſt.
                  By my faith, ſaide Amadis, had your Maieſtie anſwered vs more kindly, you had done vs no wrong at all, if at the leaſt you had a

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
deſire in any ſort to thinke well of vs. If my entertainement like you not anſwered the King, the world is large enough to finde out ſome other, that may vſe you better. Truely this word hardly digeſted, turned afterward into a greater conſequence, then the King thought it would, who perceiued ſhortly after by Brocadan and his companion, how hurtfull a thing, hatefull and vncourteous ſpeech is, as the forgetting of good and his honour, is oftentimes the ouerthrow both of a king and realm Amadis was ſo diſpleaſed with this farewell, that he ſaid vnto the king. If it like your Maieſty, I haue hitherto thought that there was neither King nor Prince in the world more indued with vertuous and honourable qualities then you, neuertheleſſe we now by proofe perceiue the contrary. Therefore ſeeing you haue changed your ancient good cuſtome, by the aduiſe of ſome latter bad counſell, wee will goe ſeeke out another manner of life. Do anſwered the king, what you will, for you know my minde. Saying ſo, hee roſe vp in a great rage, and went vnto the Queene, vnto whom he imparted the whole diſcourſe that he had with Amadis and his companions, and how hee was diſpatched of them, where-with hee was very glad. I am in great doubt ſaid the Queene, leaſt this your pleaſure doe not hereafter turne you to diſpleaſure, for you are not ignorant, from the firſt day that Amadis and his confederats entred into your ſeruice, how your affaires haue alwaies proſpered better and better, ſo as if you conſider that which they haue done for you, you ſhall finde that they haue deſerued no ſuch anſwere as you haue made vnto them. Beſides when it ſhall bee manifeſt vnto others what they both haue done and can doe, and the little account you doe make of them for their deſerts, they may hereafter hope for no better at your handes, and therefore will they deſiſt to employ themſelues for you, reputing them fooles, that ſhall do but the leaſt ſeruice for ſo vngratefull a man. Tell mee no more of it ſaid the king, for it is done but if they make their complaint vnto you, tel them that long ſince I haue giuen that land which they required of me to our daughter Leonor, as I did tell them. I will doe it anſwered the Queene, ſeeing it is your pleaſure, and God grant that all may turne to the beſt.
                  But you muſt vnderſtand, that after Amadis and thoſe in his company had ſeene in what ſort the King had left them, they went forth of the Palace, and as they went to their lodging they concluded to ſay nothing thereof vnto their friends vntill the next morning, againſt which time they would pray them all to meete together, and that then they would take counſell what was beſt to be done. And at the ſame inſtant Amadis ſent Durin to tell the Princeſſe Mabila that he would (if it were poſſible) the night following ſpeake with Oriana about ſome matter of importance newly fallen out. In this ſort the day paſſed, and the night approched, being alreadie apparrelled in his ſable weede: wherefore at ſuch time as euery one was in their ſoundeſt ſleepe, Amadis called Gandalin, and came vnto that place by the which hee commonly entred into the chamber of Oriana, who ſtayed for him according to the meſſage which

ſhee had receiued by Durin, where being arriued, without acquainting her at the firſt with any thing that might diſpleaſe her, after they had a little while diſcourſed pleaſantly together, Mabila & the Damoſell of Denmark (who were deſirous to ſleep, or it may be not being able to endure that heat where-with loue did pricke them, ſeeing the kiſſings & embracings where-with theſe two louers entertained one another) ſayd vnto them, the bed is bigge enough for you two, and the darkneſſe fit for your deſires, it is now late, lie you downe if it pleaſe you, and afterwardes talke together as much as you wil. Madame ſaid Amadis vnto Oriana, by my faith their counſell is very good. It is beſt for vs then to beleeue them anſwered ſhee, and therewithall hauing nothing vpon her but a cloake caſt about her, ſhe had quickly gotten her in between a paire of ſheets, and as ſhee layd her downe cloſe in her bed, hee lent ſo neere vnto her ouer the beds ſide, that after the curtains were drawne (not to encreaſe his paſſion, but to redouble his pleaſure) a wax taper being onely lighted vp in the chamber, they began to kiſſe and embrace each other ſo inceſſantly, that remaining in this great eaſe, their ſpirits entertained a double delight, by the ſweet ſollace which their metamorphoſed ſoules did mutially receiue from the outward parts of their lippes, being brought at the ſame inſtant into ſuch an extaſie, that they were thereby vnable to ſpeake one worde, vntill the Damoſell of Denmarke (thinking that Amadis had beene aſleepe) pulled him by the garment, ſaying. My Lord you may lightly take colde, get you into the bed if it pleaſe you. With this waking as it were forth of a ſound ſleepe, hee ſetched a deepe ſigh. Alas deare loue ſayd the Princeſſe, ſhould you not be as well at your eaſe if you were laid downe in the bed by mee, as to take ſo much paine and hurt your ſelfe. Madame (anſwered he) ſeeing it pleaſeth you ſo to command me, I will not make it daintie to ſtraine a little curteſie with you.
                  No ſooner had hee ſayde theſe wordes, but that hee threwe him-ſelfe ſtarke naked betweene the Princeſſe her armes, then begunne they againe their amorous ſports, performing with cōtentment that thing which euery one in the like delight doth moſt deſire: after-wardes they began to conferre of diuers matters, vntill that Oriana demāded of him wherefore he had ſent her word by Durin that he had ſomewhat of great importance to tell her. Madam anſwered he, I wil declare it vnto you, ſeing that you deſire to know it, although I am ſure it will be both ſtrange & grieuous vnto you, neuertheles I muſt of neceſſity aduertiſe you thereof, becauſe it is of ſo great cōſequēce. You muſt vnderſtand therefore Madame, that the King your father yeſterday did ſpeake vnto Agraies, Galuanes, & me in ſuch diſcurteous ſort, that thereby we wel perceiued little good hee wiſheth vs, afterwards he recited vnto her word by word, of all that had happened, & how in the end the king riſing vp in a great rage, told them that the worlde was large enough for them to goe ſeeke ſome other place where they might bee better requited then of him. And for this cauſe Madame ſayde Amadis, wee muſt of force doe what hee hath commaunded, otherwiſe

wee ſhould greatly preiudice our honours, remaining againſt his wil in his ſeruice, ſeeing that he might preſume that wee had no other place to goe vnto, where we might be entertained, therefore I beſeech you not to be offended, if in obeying him I am conſtrained to leaue you for a ſeaſon. You know what power you haue ouer mee, and that I am as much yours as you can wiſh, more-ouer I know very well that if I ſhould gaine any bad reputation, you are ſhe that would bee moſt offended therewith, ſo much am I ſure that you doe loue and eſteeme mee, which maketh mee againe to entreate you to allow of my departure, and to giue mee leaue, vſing your accuſtomed conſtancy and vertue. Alas, anſwered ſhee, my deere loue, what doe you tell me? Madame, if it pleaſe God the King heereafter will acknowledge the wrong that he hath done vnto vs, and I ſhall bee as well wel-come vnto him as euer I haue bin. Gentle friend, anſwered the Princeſſe, you do much amiſſe to complaine of my father, for if he hath receiued any good from you, it was for my loue, & by the commandement that I gaue vnto you, and not for his ſake, for I alone did bring you hither, and was the cauſe that you remained with him. And therefore it is not hee that muſt recompence you, but I, vnto whom you belong. It is very true that hee hath alwaies thought otherwiſe, for which hee is the more to bee blamed for anſwering you ſo vndiſcreetly. And although that your departure is the moſt grieuous thing that could happen to me (being a matter of conſtraint) I am content to ſortifie my ſelfe, and to prefer reaſon before the delights and pleaſures which I receiue by your preſence. Therefore will I frame my will to your liking, becauſe I am ſure that in what place ſoeuer you ſhall bee, your heart (which is mine) ſhall remaine with mee, as pledge of the power which you haue giuen me ouer your ſelfe, and yet moreouer, my father in loſing you ſhall know by thoſe few that he ſhall haue left, what he hath loſt by you. Madame, ſaid Amadis, the fauour which you ſhew vnto me is ſo great, that I eſteeme it no leſſe then the redemption of mine owne life. For you know that euery vertuous man ought to haue his honour in ſuch eſtimation, that hee ought to preferre it before his owne life. In like ſort Madam, ſeeing that to conſerue it I muſt of force depart from you, doe thus much if it pleaſe you for mee, as (during my abſēce) to let me heare very often from you: And to hold mee alwaies in your good fauour, as he who was neuer borne but only to obay and ſerue you. And truely whoſoeuer had ſeene the Princeſſe then, when Amadis took this ſorrowfull farwell, he might eaſily haue bin witnes of the paſſiō which ſhe indured. Neuertheleſſe Amadis ſeeing the day conſtrained him to depart (in kiſſing her ſweetly) hee roſe vp, leauing her ſo ful of ſorrow & heauines, that although ſhee diſſembled as well as ſhee could, this her extreame greefe, yet had ſhee not ſo much power ouer her ſelfe, but that ſhee awaked Mabila and the Damoſell of Denmarke with her loud ſighes, who thinking her to bee taken with ſome new diſeaſe came haſtily vnto her, and found that Amadis was already apparrelled. Then they demanded of him, what moued Oriana in ſuch extreame ſort to complaine. Amadis tolde them the whole diſcourſe in

what ſort hee was conſtrained to forſake the court, and the ſeruice of the king, wherefore my louing friends ſaid he, I pray you to go & comfort my Lady. Which ſaid he tooke his leaue of them, and d
                        •
                     
                     parted, leauing al the three Ladies accompanied onely with ſorrow, and extreame paſſion. Now you muſt know that ſo ſoon as Agraies and Galuanes were come vnto Amadis his lodging, they ſent vnto all their friends particularly, to intreate them to meet there the next morning, the which they accordingly performed, then they went altogether to the Church to heare ſeruice, at their returne from whence, they all walking in a great field, Amadis began to ſpeake vnto them in this manner: My Lords becauſe that ſome one may wrongfully blame my Lord Galuanes, Agraies, me, & ſome others here preſent, for leauing the king his ſeruice (as wee are determined to do) they and I haue thought good to let you vnderſtand what is the occaſion thereof. I beleeue that there is not any in this company that knoweth not whether ſince our arriuall in great Brittaine the authority of a Prince bee increaſed or diminiſhed. Wherfore without ſpending the time in rehearſing the ſeruices which wee haue done vnto him, for the which we had great hope to haue receiued (beſides his good will) a great reward, I will declare vnto you particularly, with what ingratitude he vſed vs yeſterday, & euē as, fortune which is mutable & inconſtant, doth often times ouerthrow all things, ſo hath hee changed his conditions, eyther by ſome bad counſaile which he hath receiued, or for ſome ſleight occaſion wherof we are ignorant. But this much I am ſure, that my Lord Galuanes did deſire vs to bee a meanes for him vnto his Maieſty not paſt eight or ten daies ſince, that hee would bee pleaſed to permit him to marry with Madaſima, and in ſo doing, to ſuffer him likewiſe to inioy her lands, vpon this condition that he ſhould hold them of him, and of his Crowne, by fealty and homage, the which wee promiſed to performe. By meanes wherof, ſo ſoone as I was able to goe, I and others in this company did make this requeſt vnto him, but he without any regard eyther vnto vs that were ſutors, or vnto him for whom we ſued, who is (as euery on knoweth) brother vnto the King of Scotland, as valiant and hardy a knight as poſſible may be, & ſuch a one as in the late battell againſt king Cildadan hath not ſpared his life, but hath done as much as any other that was there, he hath not only refuſed our requeſts, but alſo giuen vs ſuch iniurious words, as were far vnfit and vnworthy ſuch a king. And notwithſtanding at the beginning wee made ſmall account thereof, vntill hee ſaid vnto vs all (as we ſhewed vnto him ſome reaſons for our requeſt) that we ſhold goe ſeeke elſe where for ſuch a one as would acknowledge, and better eſteeme of vs then he did, and that the world was wide enough, without importuning him any further. Therefore my fellows and friends ſince that being in his ſeruice, wee haue beene euer dutifull vnto him, ſo for my part I am yet very well content in this caſe not to diſpleaſe him and to get mee forth of his countrie.
                  But becauſe it ſeemeth vnto mee that this his licence to depart doth not onely touch mee, and thoſe vnto whom hee ſpake,

but all others who are none of his ſubiects, I thought it good to acquaint you therewith, to the end, that you might bethinke what to doe. Much were theſe Knights amaſed at the words of Amadis, conſidering that if the great ſeruiſes of him and his brethren were ſo badly requited, that very hardly would that little which they had done be recompenſed. Wherefore they determined to forſake the King, and to go ſeeke their fortune elſe-where, eſpecially Angriotta de Eſtra
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        x, who to draw the reſt vnto his opinion and to follow Amadis, hee began to ſay with a loude voyce. My Lords, it is yet no long time ſince I knew the King, and for that little acquaintance that I haue had with him, I did neuer ſee a Prince more wiſe, vertuous and temperate, then he hath bin in his affaires, wherefore I doubt mee greatly, that this which hee hath done vnto Amadis, and to theſe Lords preſent, proceedeth not of his own fancy: but he hath bin incited thereunto by ſome wicked malicious perſō, who hath perſwaded him to vſe thē in that ſort. And becauſe that for theſe eighteene daies, I haue ſeen Gandandel & Brocadan very often conſulting with him, and that ſo he hath been more priuat with them then any other, I feare me that they are the men that haue bin the chiefe workers of this miſchiefe, for I haue known thē of long time for the moſt malicious perſons in all the world. Therefore I am determined euen this day to demand the combat againſt them, and to maintain that faſly and wickedly they haue ſet diſcord betweene the king and Amadis, and if they will make excuſe becauſe of their age, they haue each of them a ſonne which of long time haue borne Armes, againſt whom I alone will fight, if they dare bee ſo bolde to maintaine the reaſon of their wicked parents. Ah my Lord Angriotta, anſwered Amadis, I ſhould bee very ſorry that you ſhould hazard your body in a matter ſo vncertaine. By my faith, anſwered Angriotta, I am very ſure thereof, and I haue perceiued it of long time, ſo that if the king would bee pleaſed to tell but what hee knoweth, hee would affirme them to be ſuch as I ſay. I pray you Gentle f
                        •
                     iend, ſaid Amadis, deferre it yet for this time, to the end, that the king may haue no cauſe to bee diſcontented, for if thoſe whom you ſpeake of (who haue alwaies ſhewed to mee a friendly countenance) haue beene ſo malicious as to play falſe play behinde my backe, aſſure you that at length their wickednes ſhall bee diſcouered, and their deſert recompenſed, then ſhall you haue reaſon to accuſe them. Well, anſwered Angriotta, although this is againſt my will, yet I am content to deferre it, but beleeue mee that heereafter I ſhall both complaine, and bee reuenged of them well enough.
                  For the reſt, my good friends, ſaide Amadis, if it pleaſed the King and Queene to vouchſafe to ſee mee, I am determined to goe forthwith and take my leaue of them, and ſo to retire vnto the Firme-Iſland, in hope that thoſe which will follow mee, ſhall wholly bee pertakers with mee, in all the good and pleaſure which there I ſhall haue. And as you doe know the Countrey is pleaſant and wealthy, full of faire women, ſtore of forreſts, and many riuers fit for hauking, furthermore, diuers as well of our acquaintance as of ſtrangers, wil come and

viſit vs: beſides, in our neede if we ſhall want any aide, and that king Liſuart will attempt any enterpriſe againſt vs we ſhall bee ſupported by my father, from the Countrey of little Brittaine and from Scotland, eſpecially from the Realm of Sobradiſa, the which the Queene Briolania will wholly yeelde into our hands, at all times when wee ſhall pleaſe. Seeing that you are in theſe tearmes anſwered Quedragant, now may you know thoſe which do loue your cōpany, from thoſe which doe not. By my faith ſaid Amadis, I am of the opinion if any loue his owne particular profit, that hee ſhould not forſake ſo good a Maſter, yet thoſe which will follow mee ſhall neither fare better nor worſe then mine owne ſelfe. And as they thus conſulted in the meddow the king happened to come by them, accompanied with Gandandell and many other knights, and ſeeing them together he did paſſe on, making as though he ſaw them not.
                  Then cauſed he a caſt of Iackes or Hobbies to be let flie at a Larke, and after hee had a while ſolaced himſelfe with this paſtime, hee returned backe vnto the Citty, without ſpeaking eyther to Amedis or any other in his companie.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXI.
                  
                     How Amadis with many others his confederats for ſooke the ſeruice of King Liſuart, and went as well to proue the aduentures of the Arch of loyall Louers, as alſo of the forbidden chamber.
                  
                  
                     WHen Amadis did ſee that the king perſeuered ſtill in the euill opinion which he had conceiued againſt him and his, according to his former determination at his coming forth of the meddow, he went vnto the court and he found the king ready to ſit downe to dinner. Then approching vnto him he ſaid, may it pleaſe your Maieſty if in any thing I haue offended your grace, God and your ſelfe can witneſſe, aſſuring you, that although the ſeruices which I haue done vnto you haue beene very ſmall, yet the will which I haue had to acknowledge the benefits and honour which it hath pleaſed you to beſtow vpon mee hath beene exceeding great. You tell me that I ſhould ſeeke abroad for one that would better requite me then you, giuing me therby to vnderſtand the ſmall deſire you haue, that I ſhould obey you, not that I will depart from you as my liege Lord and Soueraign, for I was neuer ſubiect to you, nor any other Prince (God only excepted) but I take leaue of you as of him who hath done me great good and honour, and vnto whom I doe be are affectionate loue and deſire of ſeruice. Scant had hee ſpoke this word when ſuddenly theſe in like ſort did take their leaues viz. Galuanes, Agraies, Dragonis, Palomir, Bruneo de Bon'Mer, Branfill his brother, Angriotta d'Eſtrauaux, Grindonan his brother, Pinores his Coſin, and Don Quedragant who ſtepped before all the reſt, ſaying vnto the King.
                  Your Maieſty knoweth that I neuer had come nor remayned in your Court but at the inſtance and requeſt of Amadis,
                     
willing and desirous to bee his friend for euer, and ſeeing that by his occaſion I became yours, by the like reaſon will I now leaue your ſeruice, and hereafter forſake you, for what hope may I haue that my ſmall ſeruices ſhall bee regarded, when his being ſo many and great, are ſo badly requited, without remembrance how greately you are indebted vnto him, in deliuering you from the handes of Mandafabull, and for the victory alſo which you haue obtained of king Cildadan, with the price of his blood and other of his kindred. I could well remember you of the good turne which he did vnto you when hee deliuered you and your daughter Oriana (as I haue many times heard it ſaid) from the hands of Arcala
                           •
                        s, and now of late my Lady Leonor, whom Famangomad and Baſigant his ſonne the crulleſt giants in the world had taken priſoner, with intent to put her to death, for which cauſe the ingratitude which now you ſhew vnto him is ſo great, that it quite depriueth you from all knowledge of the truth. And therefore he ought to make no leſſe account of this his ſhort farewell then of the ſlow reward hee hath receiued for the ſeruices paſt. As for me, I am determined to follow him and to forſake your court togither with him. Whereunto the king replied, Don Quedragant your tongue doth well declare the little loue you beare vnto me, yet notwithſtanding mee thinks you are not ſo tied nor alied vnto Amadis, as in accuſing me you ſhould excuſe him as you do: but your thought is otherwiſe, you ſay more then you thinke. Your Maieſty may ſpeake what you pleaſe, ſaid Quedragant, like a mighty Lord as you are, neuertheleſſe you much miſtake mee in thinking me to be a diſſembler or a counterfeiter of leaſings, as a number of others about you are, by whom I am ſure that in the end you ſhall finde your ſelfe but badly ſerued. Moreouer before many dayes be paſt, you ſhall perceiue who are the friends of Amadis. Which ſaid, hee retired, and Landin ſtepped forth, ſaying to the king, may it pleaſe your Maieſtie, I haue not found one in all your court, that was able to giue any ayde or comfort to my wrongs, but onely my Lord Amadis, whom I now do ſee ready to depart from your ſeruice, for the wrong that you haue done vnto him, for which cauſe not deſiring to forſake him, nor my Vncle Don Quedragant alſo, I do take my leaue of you. Truly Landin anſwered the king, ſo far as I perceiue wee are aſſured that henceforth you haue no deſire to remaine with vs. Beleeue mee if it like your Maieſty ſaid he, looke what they are ſo will I bee, for during my life will I obey them. At that inſtant there ſtood in a corner of the hall (whiſpering together) Don Brian of Moniaſta, a moſt renowned knight, ſonne to King Ladaſan, and to one of the ſiſters to king Perion of Gaule, Vrlandin, ſon to the Earle of Orlanda, Grandores, and Madanſill of Pont d'argent, Liſtoran of the white Tower, Leda
                           •
                        
                      of Fryarqua, Tantilies the haughty, and Don Grauat de Val Craintif. All theſe came vnto the king and ſaid. Your Maieſty may be pleaſed to vnderſtand that the occaſion of our comming hither was to ſee Amadis and his brethren, and to be their friends, if it were poſſible. And euen as they were cauſe of the ſeruice that you haue receiued of vs, they alſo ſhall bee the

meanes that we will forſake you, and we do take leaue of your grace to keepe them company. When the king perceiued that hee was ſo ſuddenely forſaken of ſuch a great number of good knights, hee was highly diſpleaſ'd, for very ſpight he would not permit Amadis to goe take his leaue of the Queene, who (as much as in her lay) did wholy oppoſe her ſelfe againſt the counſell of Gandandell and his companion. And therefore Amadis intreated the auncient knight Don Grumedan to make his excuſe vnto her Maieſty. Afterwards taking his leaue of the king with great reuerence, he retired vnto his lodging with his friends and companions, where they found their dinner ready, and as ſoone as the Table was taken vp, euery one went to arme him, and they trouped altogether in a place where Oriana might behold them, and their number was ſo great, as they were thought to be fiue hundred knights and more, the moſt part of them being Sons vnto kings, dukes or earles. Afterwards in very good order they all paſſed along hard by the Queenes lodging. Then Mabila being in one of the windows called Oriana who was laid vpon her bed as melancholy as might be, ſaying vnto her, Madame, I pray you forget your heauineſſe, and come ſee how many knights you haue at your commandement. All the while my coſin was in the ſeruice of the king your father, he was accounted but as a ſimple wandring knight, but no ſooner is he departed from him when hee ſheweth that hee is a Prince and mighty Lord, as you may now behold, and if you haue power ouer him, by greater reaſon haue you power ouer all his troope, of whom hee is the chiefe and principall Leader. Oriana was ſo greatly comforted with this ſight, that euer after ſhe was more merry and at better hearts eaſe. In this ſort did Amadis and his followers paſſe through the Citty, and there accompanied them king Arban of North Wales, Grumedan, a knight of honour belonging to the Queene, Brandoinas, Queuorant Giontes Nephew to the King, and Liſtoran the good iouſter. All theſe were very ſorry for the departure of ſo many good knights, eſpecially for Amadis, who prayed them that in any matter wherein his honour might bee blemiſhed, they would ſhew themſelues to be ſuch friends for him, as hee eſteemed them. And although the king (without any occaſion) had conceiued a hate againſt him, yet they ſhould not ceaſe for all that to be his friends, without forſaking the ſeruice of ſo good a prince, and they anſwered him that excepting their ſeruice and loyalty in the which they were by duty bounde vnto the king, they would bee ready to pleaſure him at all times and places, when and where he would employ them, for the which hee heartilie thanked them. Afterwards hee ſaide vnto them, If you finde the king fit to be ſpoken vnto, you may aduertiſe him that which Vrganda declared to mee in his preſence is now accompliſhed, for ſhee told mee that the recompence which I ſhould haue in gayning Dominions for another, ſhould be hate, anger, and baniſhment from that place where moſt I deſired to remaine. I haue conquered as euery one knoweth with the edg of my ſword, and the loſſe of my blood, the Iſle of Mongaza, thereby enlarging the limits of the realme of great Brittaine, and notwithſtanding

al this, the king without cauſe at all, hath requited mee with hate, but God is iuſt, and will recompence euery one according to his deſerts.
                  By my faith, anſwered Grumedan, I will not faile to let the King know as much as you haue ſayde. And curſed be Vrganda for propheſing ſo right, which ſaide, they embraced one another and tooke their leaue, but Guillan the penſil whoſe eyes were full of teares, ſaid vnto Amadis. My Lord, you know my occaſion, and how I cannot of my ſelfe doe any thing, being ſubiect ſo the will of another, for whoſe ſake I ſuffer and endure ſtrange greefes and anguiſhes, which is the cauſe that I cannot follow you, for which I am very ſorry and aſhamed, ſo great a deſire haue I to acknowledge the fauour and honour that I haue receiued of you, being in your company, beſeeching you moſt humbly at this time to holde me excuſed Now did Amadis vnderſtand in what ſubiection loue did holde him, and hee knew very well by himſelfe what paine hee might ſuffer, by meanes whereof he anſwered him: My Lord Guillan, God forbid that by my occaſion you ſhould commit any offence vnto the Lady whom you loue ſo conſtantly, but I rather counſell you to be obedient vnto her, and to ſerue her as hitherto you haue done, and the King likewiſe being ſure that your honour ſaued, you wil be vnto me in all places a faithfull friend and louing companion. Heere withall he embraced him, & taking his leaue, Guillan and his fellowes returned vnto the Cittie, and Amadis and his followed on their way to the Firme-Iſland, vntill at the laſt they arriued along by a riuer, vpon the ſide whereof Amadis had ſent before to cauſe his Tents and Pauillions to be armed and ſet vp. There they lodged for that night, praiſing God in that they had ſo happily been warned of the Kings ingratitude, with whom if they had remained any longer, ſpace, they had but loſt their time. But Amadis was ſo heauie for his baniſhment from Oriana (ignorant when he ſhould ſee her again) that he knew not in what ſort to diſſemble his malancholie, and thus they paſſed away the night vntill the next morning, that they had rode forward on their way. In the meane time King Liſuart was in his Pallace, who after the departure of ſo great a number of Knights, perceiued that he now was but meanly accompanied. Then he began to acknowledge the fault which he had committed, and to repent him greatly for the words which he ſaid vnto Amadis. At the very ſelfe ſame time, Gandandel and Brocadan were aduertiſed what Angriotta had ſaid of them, whereat they were maruailouſly abaſhed, fearing leaſt the King and the reſt ſhould diſlike of the bad counſell, which they had giued vnto him, neuertheleſſe, ſince there was no remedy: they determined to paſſe it ouer, and to worke ſuch meanes that neuer any of thoſe Knights who were departed ſhould enter into the King his fauour againe. And the better to bring it to paſſe, they both came vnto him, ſaying. Your Maieſtie ought greatly to praiſe God, that you are ſo honeſtly rid of thoſe men who might haue wrought you much miſchiefe, for your highneſſe knoweth there is nothing more dangerous then a ſecret enemy.
                  Wherefore you haue now no other thing to trouble you, neither

neede you take any care for your affaires, becauſe that wee two will take order, and warily prouide for any perill that may happen to this Realme. When the king heard them ſpeake ſo audaciouſly, hee looked vpon them with a ſowre countenance, and anſwered them: I do much meruaile how you dare bee ſo preſumptuous to perſwade me that I ſhould leaue vnto you the gouernment, not onely of my houſe, but alſo of my whole realm, knowing that you are nothing fit, not ſufficient for ſuch a charge. Doe you imagine that the Princes and Lords of this monarchie will obay you, knowing the place from whence you are deſcended? And if you thinke to play the good huſbands, deſiring to enrich mee by ſparing of my treaſure, vpon whom doe you thinke that I may better imploy it, then vpon ſuch Gentle-men and knights as are in my ſeruice? Seeing that the Prince cannot be named a king, but only becauſe hee hath many at his commandement. And if in times paſt I haue ſhewed my ſelfe liberall vnto thoſe whom at your inſtance I haue driuen away, cuen by them was I maintained, feared, and redoubted, and therefore content you with that you haue done, without any farther diſſembling & forging of matters, otherwiſe you ſhal know that you nothing pleaſe me therewith.
                  Saying ſo he left them, much abaſhed at theſe wordes, and hee mounted on horſebacke to goe chaſe a hart which his hunters told him was incloſed within his toiles. As theſe things were in doing there arriued at the Court a Damoſell that was ſent from Queene Briolania vnto Oriana, who after ſhee had done her duty, ſaid vnto her, Madame the Queene my Miſtreſſe hath her commended to your good Grace. And ſhe hath expreſly ſent me vnto you, to declare vnto you at large how ſhee hath beene in the firme Iſland, and what happened vnto her in prouing the aduentures which there ſhe found.
                  God keepe ſo good a Queene from miſchiefe, anſwered Oriana, and you alſo that haue taken ſo much paine. Then all the Ladies and Gentlewomen deſirous to heare newes, came round about her, and the Damoſell beganne to rehearſe that which ſhe had ſeene, ſaying. Madam, at the departing from this Court, the Queene my Miſtreſſe and her companie, arriued the fift day following in the Firme-Iſland, where ſo ſoone as ſhe was come, ſhe was demanded if it pleaſed her to prooue the forbidden Chamber or the Arch of loyall Louers, but ſhee anſwered that ſhee would firſt ſee the other maruailes of the place. And for that cauſe Iſania cauſed her to bee conducted to a moſt faire houſe, ſcituated halfe a league or thereabout, from the principall Palace of Apolidon, in the which after ſhe had a little while walked, beholding the excellent building there-of, ſhee came vnto one of the corners of a Parke which was very darke and deepe, that none durſt approch vnto the ſame, ſo fearefull a thing was it. Afterward my Lady was brought into a moſt fair Tower, well furniſhed with windowes, from whence ſhee might ſee all the waies round about her, and there we were ſo well ſerued and entreated as might bee. And as the ſecond ſeruice was brought in, wee did ſee come forth of that deepe ditch, a great ſerpent, which

did caſt fire and ſmoake as well from her eyes and eares, as from her throate, who came and entred into this Tower, ſhewing a countenance ſo furious, that the ſtouteſt in the company trembled with great feare, after him there ſuddenly followed two Lions, who in like ſort came forth of this ditch, they came leaping in and aſſailed the Serpent, herewithall there began a battaile betweene them, the crueleſt that may poſſibly be ſeene betweene brute beaſts, and it laſted halfe an houre and more, and ſo long continued it, that the two Lions became ſo wearie as they fell downe in the place as if they had been dead, & the Serpent likewiſe ſo out of breath, that hee remayned a great while lying vpon the ground. In the end hauing reſted a little, hee roſe vp and ſwallowed one of the Lions down his throat, and carried him into the ditch, and preſently after he returned, & did the like vnto the ſecond, and were no more ſeene all the day after. Thoſe of the Iſle (accuſtomed to ſuch wonders) beholding our feare laughed at vs, aſſuring vs that all the day long wee ſhould ſee no other nouelty. Whereupon we began to laugh at our folly, reproching one another, for the affright that had happened vnto vs, & thus we paſſed all the afternoone vntill it was bed time, that my Lady and wee her women were brought into a chamber richly hanged, in the which wee were all layed. But about midnight, wee did heare our chamber doore open with ſo great noyſe, that wee awaked with great feare thereof, and therewithall we ſaw entring in a Hart, one ſide of whom was as white as ſnow, and the other ſide more blacke then a rauen: hauing vpon his head thirtie hornes, vpon euery one of which there was a burning candle, which gaue ſo great a light, that one might haue ſeene as plaine within the chamber, as if it had beene broad day. The Hart entred in running with great force, for hee was purſued by a cry of ſwift hounds, that laboured to ouertake him, and incourage them thereunto, there was heard an Iuory horne ſounding after the beaſt, who in the ende was ſo hardly purſued, that after hee had long turned about the chamber, hee leaped vpon our beds euen thorough the midſt of vs. The feare whereof made vs to cry, and ſuddenly to riſe vp, all naked as wee were, ſome of vs ran vnder the beds, others vnder the benches, but the more we thought to ſaue our ſelues, the more were we purſued by the Hart and hounds that followed him, till at the laſt hee ran towarde the windowes, afterwardes being a little better aſſured, we took vp our aparell which was fallen downe vpon the ground, and wee began to chat of the feare which we had. And as wee were in theſe tearmes, there came a Damoſell, accompanied with two other women, who asked vs what mooued vs to riſe ſo earely. By my faith ſayde my Lady, we haue had ſuch an alarme, that my heart yet trembleth with feare. This Damoſell ſmyled and ſayde vnto her, that ſhee and wee might ſleep in ſafety, for we ſhould haue no more ſtirre all the night after. Whereupon wee layd vs downe in our bed, and there wee remained vntill it was indifferent late the next morning, when my Lady cauſed vs to riſe vp, and after wee had heard ſeruice, as ſhee walked in a great meddow watered with many pleaſant brookes going

through a pleaſant and delectable wood where we found at the end thereof many pleaſant orchards, and a houſe very round, ſet vpon twelue pillars of Marble, ſo artificially wrought, that in ſtead of ſtone and morter, the walls there-of were of fine Chriſtall, through the which they that were within, might eaſily ſee thoſe without, and there was neuer a doore thereof which was not of Gold or Siluer. And (that which was moſt admirable) there was about it many Images of copper, made in the likeneſſe of Giants each of them holding in their hands a bended bow, and an arrow therein, the head whereof was of ſuch a burning brightnes, that it ſeemed fire came out therof. And it was told vs that no ſooner was any ſo hardy to enter therein, but preſently he ſhold bee ſlaine by the arrows which by them are ſhot, whereupon my Lady was deſirous to make proofe thereof, by a Horſe and two Apes, who being put into the Chamber were preſently conſumed by the fire, proceeding from theſe Arrows that compaſſed them about. And there was grauen vpon the portall theſe words. Let no man nor woman be ſo hardy as to ſet foote within this Palace, except it be he or ſhee that loueth as conſtantly as Grimaneſa and Apolidon, that made this enchantment. And they muſt of neceſſity enter in both together for the firſt time, otherwiſe let them be aſſured to die moſt cruelly, and this enchauntment ſhall laſt, and all the reſt of this Iſland, vntill that the knight & Lady (who do ſurpaſſe in loyalty thoſe that made the defences of the forbidden Chamber) bee entred in, and there haue taken their pleaſure. Hereupon my Lady cauſed Iſania to be called, and tolde him ſhe was glad that ſhe had ſeen theſe wonders, but ſhee would yet ſee the Arch of loyall Louers, and the chamber ſo renowned, and in the meane ſeaſon, ſhe deſired him to tell her what was meant by the Hart, Serpent, Dogs and Lions, Madame anſwered Iſania, I know no other thing thereof, but that euery day at thoſe houres and places that you did ſee them, the combats of the beaſts are made, and the Hart doth alwaies leape downe from the window, and the Dogs after, who purſue him into a Lake not far from hence, where they are hidden and ſeene no more vntill the next day and houre that the chaſe beginneth againe, as you haue ſeene it this night paſt. But thus much you ſhall know, that if you were one whole yeere in this Iſland, yet ſhould you not haue time enough to ſee all the wonderfull things which there are. For this cauſe my Lady and her company mounted on horſeback, and we came vnto the Palace of Apolidon to ſee the arch of loyall Louers and the forbidden Chamber. Whereunto my Lady was no ſooner come but ſhe alighted, and approched vnto the Image of copper (as ſhe that had neuer falſified her loue) and paſſing vnder, there was heard the moſt ſweete, and melodious tune in all the world, and the Queene paſſed through euen vnto the place where the portraitures of Apolidon and Grimaneſi were, which ſeemed vnto her as though they had been aliue. And from thence ſhee came vnto the piller of Iaſper, where ſhe ſaw written theſe wordes. Briolania the daughter to Tagadan king of Sobradiſa, is the third Damoſell that did euerenter into this place. But 
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
ſeruice all vpon one occaſion: and therefore it is reaſon that all of vs ſhould ſuccor him that hath moſt need of helpe. And although wee had no deſire to aide Don Galuanes heere preſent, yet are wee bound to fauour Ladies in all that we can, and amongſt other Madaſima and hers, aſſuring you that through my fault they ſhall neither haue hurt nor diſpleaſure. By my faith ſaid Quedragant, you ſpeak vertuouſly, and according to good reaſon, for doing otherwiſe we ſhould be vnworthy of the name of knights, and although I were my ſelfe alone yet would I ſeeke aide to execute that which you haue determined: knowing that the poore Madaſima (forſaken of euery one) hath freely yeelded her ſelfe into the King his priſons, not by her owne will, but by the dutifull obedience which ſhee deſired to ſhew vnto her mother. For which cauſe if the king pretend any right vnto the lands of the Iſle of Mongaza, I ſay hee doth wrong. My Lords anſwered Amadis, thoſe things which are debated by ſound deliberation, doe aſſuredly come vnto good end, & you need not doubt that enterpriſing this which you determine, you ſhall performe it vnto your honour, yea although it were more dangerous and difficult then it is, neuertheleſſe (if it pleaſe you) I will declare what I thinke thereof. You doe all conclude (ſo farre as I ſee) to ſet at liberty the twelue Damoſels now priſoners with king Liſuart. Therefore I am of the opinion that twelue of you without any more ſhould vndertake this enterpriſe, ſo euery one of you ſhall haue one of them, and the twelue gentlewomen ſhall bee particularly bound vnto twelue knights, and the reſt of this company ſhall ſpare themſelues, and tarry heere to preuent ſuch inconueniencies as may happen.
                  Mee thinkes that Galuanes vnto whom this matter doth chiefly appertaine, deſerueth well to be the firſt man that ſhall be named, next Agrates his nephewe, Floreſtan my brother, Palomir, Dragonis, Brian, Nicoran, Orlandid, Garnat, Imoſil brother to the Duke of Burgoine, Madanſil, and Eaderin. You twelue are ſuch valiant knights as you may anſwere twelue others whatſoeuer they bee, and King Liſuart cannot deny the combate although it ſhould bee againſt the chiefeſt of his Realme, conſidering the houſes from which you are deſcended. This counſaile was ſo well allowed of all, that about mid-night following, the twelue knights mounted on horſe-backe, taking their way vnto the Citie of Thaſsillana, in the which the King ſoiourned.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXII.
                  
                     How Oriana remayned in great perplexity, not onely for the departure of Amadis, but alſo becauſe ſhe felt her ſelfe great with childe: and of that which happened to the twelue Knights that were departed from the Firme-Iſland, to deliuer Madaſima and her Damoſels.
                  
                  
                     A Little before it hath beene tolde vnto you, how Amadis remained eight daies in Mirefleur with Oriana, contenting their affections and deſires to the full: in ſuch ſort as two moneths after, or there about, the Princeſſe doubted that ſhe was with childe, neuertheleſſe for the little experience that ſhe had in ſuch matters, ſhe made no account thereof, vntill after the departure of Amadis, whē the liuely coulour in her face beganne to fade and decay, and her ſtomack waxed very bad, and weake, ſo that this doubt was turned into a certaintie, wherefore ſhee determined to acquaint Mabila and the Damoſell of Denmarke therewith, as vnto thoſe whom ſhe eſteemed the true treaſurers of her ſecrets. For which cauſe beeing one day withdrawne into her cloſet, hauing her eyes full of teares, and her heart oppreſſed with griefe, ſhee ſayd vnto them: Alas my deare friends and louing counſellors, I do now well perceiue that Fortune wil wholy work my ruine and ouerthrowe: You haue ſeene what inconuenience hath happened of late vnto the perſon whom I doe moſt loue in the world, and now (that which is worſt of all) the thing which I haue moſt feared and doubted, is lighted vpon mee: For certainely I am with child, and I know not what I ſhall doe, that I be not diſcouered and vndone. Much abaſhed were theſe two Damoſels at this: neuertheleſſe (as thoſe which were wiſe & well aduiſed) they diſſembled that which they thought thereof. And Mabila anſwered Oriana. Take no care Madame, God ſhall prouide well enough for you, (if it pleaſe him) but by my faith, (ſaid ſhee in ſmiling) I alwaies doubted that vnto ſuch a Saint ſuch an offering would be brought. Oriana ſmiled to ſee with what a prettie grace Mabila deliuered this pleaſant ſpeech, & anſwered her: For the honour of God doe you both aduiſe to giue mee ſome remedy, and then you ſhall ſee if I cannot requite your frumps. As for mee I thinke it beſt, that wee find the meanes to retyre vnto Mirefleur, or elſewhere frō the Court, ſtaying the time, vntill it ſhall pleaſe God to regard me in pitty: for I feele my belly to riſe, and I ſee my face already waxen leane. Madame ſayde the Damoſell of Denmarke, it is an eaſie matter to preuent an inconuenience, when it is foreſeene before it happen: I will tell you anſwered the Princeſſe) whereupon I haue bethought mee: It is neceſſarie that you (Damoſell) doe hazard your life for the ſauing of my honour. You ſee that I doe put more truſt in you, then in any other perſon that liueth. Madame ſayde ſhee, you knowe (or at the leaſt you ſhould know mee ſo well) that I haue neither life nor honour 
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
named Sarquiles, Coſen vnto Angrietta de Eſtranaux (being in lou
                        •
                      with one of the Neeces of Broquadan) was by chance hidden behind the Tapeſtrie of the ſame chamber, ſtaying for ſome ſigne or watch word, which was to be giuen vnto him by his louing Miſtreſſe, hee I ſay heard all their counſaile, whereat hee was wonderfull abaſhed. For which cauſe incontinently after the traytours were departed, hee came foorth from his place, where hee had almoſt all that day beene hidden: and the next morning hee armed him, and as if he had beene come ſome farre iourney, he entred into the Pallace where the king was; vnto whom he came and ſayd: If it may pleaſe your Maieſty, I am none of your ſubiect nor liege man, but in requitall of the bringing vp and education that I haue had in your Court, I am bound to preſerue and defend the hono
                        ••
                      of your Maieſty. Wherefore your highneſſe may be pleaſed, to bee aduertiſed that within theſe three dayes, I was in ſuch a place, where I heard that Broquadan and Gandandel did not only then conſpire (but already had committed againſt God and your grace) the greateſt treaſon that might be imagined. It is ſure that they determined to counſell & perſwade you to put Madaſima and her gentlewomen to death, and for the reſt I hope if it like your Maieſty, before ten dayes be paſt, that their wickednes ſhalbe wholy laid open & proued vnto you. And becauſe that in maintayning ſuch traitors, you haue of late baniſhed my Lord Amadis, and many other good knights from your cōpany, I am not determined to ſtay any longer with you, and therefore I take my leaue of your grace, to goe ſeeke out my Vncle Angriotta, whom (if God pleaſe) you ſhall ſee in theſe parts, and I with him, determined to auouch by force of armes againſt theſe two traytors, their vniuſt conſpiracies. God be with you (anſwered the king) ſeeing that you haue ſo great haſte. Herewithall Sarquiles roſe vp, leauing the king alone very penſiue for the wordes which hee had ſaid vnto him, and ſome few dayes after he arriued in the Firme-Iſland, as Amadis, Angriotta, Bruneo, and others were walking by the Sea ſide, cauſing certaine ſhips to be prepared and rigged, to paſſe into Gaule: where king Perion had ſent vnto Amadis that he ſhould come for certaine affaires which were lately happened vnto him. When Angriotta beheld his Nephew Sarquiles, he wondred thereat, inquiring of him why hee had left king Liſuart. My Lord, anſwered Sarquiles, it is for a matter whereat you & all this cōpanie wil greatly admire, Hereupon hee recited vnto them the whole diſcourſe of the practiſes and counſailes that Broquadan and Gandandel had held vpon the accuſation of Amadis & his companions. Well anſwered Angriotta, I did alwaies thinke ſo of them. And you my Lord, ſaid hee vnto Amadis, doe now finde that to be true which I haue here-tofore told you: But ſeeing it is ſo, I proteſt they ſhall repent their treacherie: for I will depart hence tomorrowe morning to goe and fight with them, and make them acknowledge their villany. Gentle friend anſwered Amadis, the matter being ſo certaine as it is, you haue no reaſon to deferre the execution of your enterpriſe: and if you had any ſooner performed

that which you now determine, it had beene (perchance) with leſſe aſſurance then you now haue. And after many other diſcourſes they went vnto their lodging, vntill the next morning that Angriotta took his leaue of Amadis, and accompanied with his Nephew Sarquiles, tooke the right way towards great Brittaine, where within few dayes after he arriued. Now you muſt vnderſtand that euer ſince the departure of Amadis, king Liſuart was ſo melancholly as no man could be more, and hee ſpent all the day long in ſtudying with himſelfe: whereof one time aboue all the reſt, Broquadan and Gandandel ſeeing him alone very penſiue, came vnto him and ſayd. May it pleaſe your Maieſty, it ſeemeth vnto vs, that the ouer great care which you take in theſe your affaires, depriueth you of your wonted manner of life, and you take matters more to heart then you neede. It may wel be anſwered the king, but what meane you to tell me ſo? Is it (if it like your Maieſty) ſayd they, for doubt of thoſe that come from the Firme-Iſland, in the defence of Madaſima and her Damoſels? by the faith wee owe vnto God, if it pleaſe your grace to credit our counſell, you and your eſtate ſhall be henceforth in greater ſecurity then euer yet it hath beene. And to bring that to paſſe, commaund the heades of thoſe pledges which you haue, this day to bee ſmitten off: Then afterwardes ſend vnto Galuanes and the reſt of his compapanie (your enemies) that vpon their liues they be not once ſo hardy as to enter into your countries, and if by chance they be already arriued, command them foorth-with to depart, or otherwiſe you will cauſe them to bee cut in peeces. When the King heard this wicked ſpeech, and vngodly counſaile of theirs, hee remembred that which Sarquiles had tolde vnto him, & therwithall he knew that without doubt theſe two traytors did with wrong procure the death of theſe Damoſels: notwithſtanding becauſe he would not at that time amaſe them, hee onely anſwered this. You counſaile mee to things farre vnfitting my eſtate: the one that I ſhould without proceſſe or order of Iuſtice, put Madaſima and her Damoſels to death: and the other, that I ſhould forbid frō my Court thoſe knights that are minded to come thither. But if I ſhould doe this which you ſay, I might bee grieuouſly reproued for it before God, who hath by his great bounty and mercy inſtituted mee King, to adminiſter Iuſtice vnto euery one alike: therefore the counſell which you doe giue vnto mee, is wicked and vnworthy to be receiued. Let it ſuffice you therefore that I haue already liſtned vnto you in the accuſation which you haue contriued againſt Amadis, whereof I doe greatly repent mee: for I neuer receiued of him, nor any of his, but all honor, pleaſure, & ſeruice, wherefore I charge you vpon your liues, that you mooue me no more thereof.
                  Saying ſo he roſe vp, ſhewing by his countenance that hee was very angry, whereat Gandandel and Broquadan were greatly abaſhed, and they were conſtrained to departe vnto their lodging, to determine what was beſt for thē to be done, ſeeing that already fortune had maruailouſly croſſed them, & they came not in the King his preſence all that day after vntill the next morning, when they attended

vpon him as hee rode into the fields. The King beeing halfe a league from the Cittie, he behelde comming toward him the knights of the Firme-Iſland, for the deliuery of Madaſima and her Damoſels, being come ſomewhat neere they all did their duties to his Maieſtie. Then Galuanes who marched for-moſt, took vpon him to ſpeake for all his fellowes, ſaying vnto the King. If it like your Maieſtie, wee (being all of vs well aſſured of your accuſtomed vertue) are come to demand iuſtice of your grace for Madaſima and her Damoſels, and to defend their right if by force of armes it is defenſible. My friends, anſwered hee, ſeeing that you haue already ſet vp your Tents in this place, if you thinke good you may heere abide for this day, and to morrow you may come vnto mee, to aduiſe vpon that which ſhall be reaſonable to bee done. If it pleaſe your highneſſe, ſaid Brian of Moniaſta, wee all are aſſured that accorto your, ancient royall behauiour, iuſtice ſhall not bee denied vnto vs, and if wee finde it otherwiſe, it is rather by the counſaile of ſome wicked traitors that are about you, then any of your owne motion. Brian, Brian, ſaide the King, I am well aſſured that if you had beleeued your father, you would neither haue departed from my ſeruice (as you haue done) neither would you in this ſort haue helde argument againſt mee. The argument which I do hold againſt your Maieſtie, ſaid Brian, is not for any il will, or that I would not performe any dutifull ſeruice for your grace, for I know well that in time you will acknowledge that which I ſay true. And where your Maieſtie doth tell me that if I had beleeued my father, I would not haue forſaken you, ſauing the reuerence of your Maieſtie I did neuer forſake you, for I neuer did belong vnto you: but I onely came into your houſe to ſeeke my cofin Amadis, who ſo long as hee was yours, ſo long had I a deſire to ſerue you, and neuer did I whilſt I there remained offend you, Well, well, anſwered the King, wee will debate of this another time more at large. Which ſaid, he bad them good night, and depa
                        •
                     ted: for it was already ſomewhat late. Heeretofore you haue heard how the King had the day before, after dinner, taken vp Gandandel and Broquadan, who beeing very heauie, did conſult a great while how they might with honour finiſh theyr wicked enterpriſe, for the next morning the twelue Knights of the F
                        •
                     rme-Iſland met the King at Church, who after ſeruice was ended, called Broquadan and Gandandel, vnto whom he ſaid. You haue of long time counſailed me to put Madaſima and her Damoſels to death, beeing our priſoners, and that in their behalfe I ſhould heare no iuſt fication whatſoeuer. Therefore you muſt now make anſwere vnto that which theſe 12 Knights will maintaine. Then Imoſell of Burgoine ſtepped forth, ſaiyng vnto the King. If it like your Maieſtie, I and my fellowes are come into your Court to beſeech you moſt humble, that you would extend your iuſtice and mercy to Madaſima and her Damoſels. Whereupon Gandandel ſtepped forth and anſwered: My Lord I
                           ••
                        ſel, you requeſt that iuſtice ſhould bee extended to Madaſima, and ſo farre as I perceiue, you twelue wil maintaine, that they ought to be heard in their iuſtifications, but by the faith that I owe vnto the King, if he

conſent thereunto he doth amiſſe, conſidering vnder what condition they are entred into his priſon.
                  Beleeue me Gandandel ſaid Imoſel, had you held your peace you had done but your duty, for the king hath not yet commanded you to ſpeak, & alſo becauſe you know that by the cuſtome of great Brittaine no woman ought to ſuffer death, except it bee in two caſes, the one for Leze maieſtie, the other for treaſon. But there is not any in this company, who knoweth not how theſe poore women were brought into the king his hands, more by compulſion then their owne conſent. Therefore we beſeech your Maieſty and you my Lords all to conſider of the matter, for reaſon and pittie are moſt fit to be vſed therein. You are to blame anſwered Gandandel, to requeſt a thing ſo vnreaſonable, and ſeeing it hath pleaſed the king to heare vs both, let him order the matter as to his maieſty ſhall ſeem moſt conuenient. Then the king cauſed euery one to depart, & called ſome of the moſt principall of the realme vnto him, and amongſt others his Vncle the Earle Argamont, an auncient & moſtvertuous Prince, vnto whom he ſaid, Good Vncle, I pray you and all the reſt alſo, to counſell me vpon this controuerſie. But there was not any that would ſpeake their opinion, before they had heard the king. Seeing it is ſo ſayde the king, you ſhal preſently know mine opinion, It ſeemeth vnto me Imoſel of Burgondie hath both reaſonable and wiſely ſpoken, and that the Damoſels ought to be heard, what they they can ſay in their own defence. Truely if it like your Maieſty, ſayd the old Earle, you ſpeak like a vertuous king, and it is not poſſible to giue a righter iudgement, of which opinion they were all. Wherefore he commanded Gandandel & 
                        
                           •
                        roquadan to bee ſent for, and in the preſence of the knights of the Firme-Iſland, hee gaue the ſame ſentence, for the which they humbly thanked his maieſty, beſeeching him that Madaſima & her women might be ſet at liberty. For we hope ſaid they, to haue them acquited either by reaſon or arms. It is well ſaide anſwered the king, who ſent for the Damoſels to come vnto him, and afterward ſaid vnto them, Looke vp Ladies, behold theſe Gentlemen which will defend your right, will you be cō
                     tent to put your quarrell and aduenture your liues vpō their force. Alas if it like your Maieſty anſwered Madaſima, ſeeing it pleaſeth them to affoord vs this good, wee doe put our liues into their hands, and your good mercy. Truſt mee Madame ſaide Imoſel; If there bee any heere which will gaineſay that you are not deliuered and ſet at liberty, behold me ready to proue the contrarie, & if there be twelue together of the like opinion, wee are twelue likewiſe that wil hazard our liues for yours. Therewithall the king did caſt his eyes vpon Gā
                        dandel and Broquadan, and he perceiued that they hanged downe their heads, looking vpon the ground, ſo much amaſed, that they were not able to anſwer one word, wherefore the king ſaide vnto the knights of the Iſle. My Lords, I pray you to withdraw your ſelues for this day, and to morrow you ſhall haue anſwere of thoſe with whom you are to deale. Where-upon they all departed, and preſently after the king called apart Broquadan & Gandandel, vnto whō he ſaid, come hither, you knowe

that many times you haue ſolicited me to put theſe poore Damoſels to death, perſwading mee that it was iuſt and reaſon ſo to doe, and that if need were you & your ſons would maintain this counſaile vnto the death. You haue heard what Imoſel and his fellowes haue ſaide vnto mee, which I doe thinke to be good & right, wherefore it is time that you determine what to do. For by the faith that I owe vnto God, I will not permit that any other of my knights ſhall fight with them, & if you look not vnto it, you ſhall bee anſwerable for all, and the Damoſels deliuered. If it pleaſe your Maieſty, anſwered they, to morrow we will be ready to maintain what-ſoeuer we haue ſaide. And for that time they departed to their lodging, greatly troubled for that which they were to do. Neuertheleſſe, ſeeing that now there was no remedy, they determined to perſeuer in their daurned opinion by argument of words onely, without putting themſelues or their children in danger: knowing aſſuredly that they were not able to reſiſt any of thoſe that were come from the Firme-Iſland. But it happened out ſo well for them, as the very ſame night newes came vnto the King, that Grumeda
                           •
                        a the olde Gianteſſe was dead, and that a little before her death, ſhee had yeelded vp her ſtrong places into the hands of the kings people, beſeeching him to haue pitty vpon her daughter Madaſima.
                  
                  Whereupon the next morning at their returne from church, hee cauſed the twelue knights of the Firme-Iſland to bee called, vnto whom he ſaid. My friends, you may carry away with you the Damoſels which you demand, when it ſhall pleaſe you, for I ſet them at liberty, becauſe that this night the Earle Latin hath written vnto me, that he hath the Iſle of Mongaza in his hands, and that the olde Gianteſſe is deceaſed. If any were glad here-of, you may beleeue that the two traitors Broquadan and Gandandel were nothing ſorry, for as much as they did perceiue that if this had not happened, their treaſon had bid diſcouered. Thē 
                     Imoſel anſwered the king. If your Maieſtie doe but Madaſima right, ſhee muſt not remaine poor nor diſinherited, ſeeing your grace knoweth that children are bound to obey their parents as ſhee hath done, more by feare then free will. And ſo if it pleaſe your Maieſty, vſing your accuſtomed liberality, you ſhould ſhewe her ſome grace and fauour, ſhewing thereby an example to all other vertuous and couragious Princes to do the like. Imoſel, ſayde the king, let it ſuffice you that the Damoſels are at liberty, for I cannot reuoke the gift which I haue made to my daughter Leonor, of the land which you demand. I moſt humbly beſeech your Maieſtie, anſwered Galuanes, to haue pitty vpon her and mee, who at this preſēt ought to hold the place deſcended frō her anceſtors, of whom ſhee is the lawfull inheretrix, eſpecially of the land which you doe take from her: and if it pleaſe your highneſſe, in remembrance of the ſeruices which I haue done vnto you, you may reſtore them vnto vs to hold them of your grace by fealty and homage. I haue ſaid enough my Lord Galuanes, anſwered the king, that which is done, cannot be vndone. Truſt me, anſwered he, ſeeing I can neither haue right nor reaſon of you, I will trie if I may get it ſome other way. Doe what you can, ſaid the king, I am in good

hope ſeeing I haue won if frō greater then you, to deſend it againſt thoſe that are leſſe thē they. Sir, anſwered Galuanes, he which got it for you, hath bin very badly recōpenſed therefore. Care not you for that, ſaide the King, if he of whom you ſpeake dare but aduenture to aide you, I dare bee ſo bolde as to withſtand him, and to make him beſhrew himſelfe. Agraies hearing theſe threats, was exceeding angry, and in great choller anſwered: Sir, although my Lord Amadis was neuer other thē a wādring knight, yet did he that good for you which as yet you neuer recompenſed, for he hath many times defended you, and deliuered you from death. Floreſtan did well perceine that Agraies entred into farther tearmes then was fit hee ſhould, for which cauſe he a little pulled him back, and ſaid vnto the king. Sir, although you be a king and a great Lord, yet it may be you ſhall finde ſomewhat to do, to vſe my Lord Amadis in ſuch ſort as you threaten him. By my faith, ſaid Brian, Amadis hath done you too many ſeruices to be thus badly requited eſpecially he being ſonne vnto a Prince as worthy as your ſelfe. Soft and faire Don Brian, ſaide the king, we know wel enough that you are one of his friends. I am and ſo ought to be, ſaid Brian, for euery one knoweth that I am his coſin german, and therefore it were a ſhame not to ſuccour him in his neede. Truely, anſwered the King, for the ſame cauſe doe I hold you excuſed. And as they were in theſe tearmes, Angriotta de Eſtrauaux, & Sarquiles his Nephew came before the King, who beeing armed at all points, did their duty vnto his Maieſtie: but when the knights of the Firme-Iſland did beholde them, they greatly wondred, for they knew nothing at al of this their enterpriſe. Then Angriotta with a loud voice began his ſpeech in this manner. May it pleaſe your Maieſtie, my Nephew and I heere preſēt, do beſeech your grace to cauſe two traitors that are in your Court, Broquadan and Gandandel, to appeare before your Maieſtie, vnto whom I will declare the treaſon which they haue done againſt you. Much affrighted was Broquadan and his companion, hearing Angriotta ſpeake after this manner, who continuing his ſpeech ſaide: If it like your highneſſe, theſe two wicked perſons of whom I ſpeake, without reſpect or feare of God or men, haue falſly accuſed my Lord Amadis & other of a matter wherein they neuer ſo much as in thoght offended. By means whereof I dare well ſay, that you haue baniſhed from you the beſt Knights that euer entered into Great Brittaine, therefore if thoſe traitours dare maintaine that they be not ſuch as I tearme them, I alone, by the help of God, and the edge of my ſword will make them confeſſe it. And if they ought to bee excuſed by reaſon of their age, there is neither of them both which hath not a ſonne of long time bearing armes, and well enough eſteemed of amongſt the Knights of your court, againſt whom I will fight if they will maintain the quarrell of their wicked fathers. Moſt mighty ſoueraigne, anſwered Gandandel, doth not your grace ſee the boldnes of this proud iniurious fellow, who is come into this countrey to no other end, but onely to ſhame the Gentlemen of your court? By my faith if your Maieſtie would haue beleeued me long agoe, ſo ſoone as hee had entred into your Realme, hee ſhould haue bin hanged vp, vpon the firſt

tree that he had come vnto, but ſeeing that your grace doth ſuffer him, you muſt not hereafter be abaſhed if Amadis in his owne perſon doe come euen hither to iniurie your owne ſelfe. Notwithſtanding, thus much I proteſt, that by the liuing God, if I were as young now as when I began to enter into the ſeruice of the late deceaſed king your brother, vnto whom I haue done many great ſeruices, I am well aſſured that Angriotta durſt not ſo much as haue dreamed to vtter halfe theſe iniurious words of me, as hee hath proferred now before your Maieſty. But the gallant doth well know that I am olde and craſed, as well by the great number of my aged yeeres, as by the infinit wounds which I haue receiued, in a manner in all the parts of my body, in the warres of your predeceſſors, witnes wherof are yet theſe relikes. Saying ſo he opned his breaſt, vpon the which were many ſcarres apparrantly to be ſeene. Villaine, ſaid Angriotta, thou doeſt thinke to defend thee with the eloquence of thy tongue. But by the faith of a Knight, if the King do but iuſtice vnto vs both, hee ſhall apparrantly perceiue thy great treaſon. There-withall Sarquiles ſtepped forth and kneeling downe, hee ſaid vnto the King: It is long ſince I did aduertiſe your Maieſtie, that ſo ſoone as my Lord Angriotta heere preſent, ſhould come vnto your Court. I would let you vnderſtand that, which with my two eares I did hear ſpoken by the mouth of theſe two traitors: heereupon hee recited word by word, the whole conſultations which he had heard, whereat al they that were preſent did greatly wonder to heare ſuch conſpiracies repeated. And for as much if it like your Maieſtie, ſaid Sarqailes, as they can in no ſort excuſe them-ſelues, my Lord Angriotta and I will combate with their three ſons, if they dare maintaine the contrary. Now were they preſent of whō they ſpake, who ſeeing the iniury that was done vnto their aged fathers, and that euery one gaue credit to the words of Sarquiles, in a great rage they thruſt through the preaſe, and falling on their knees before the King, they ſaid: May it pleaſe your Maieſtie, Angriotta and Sarquiles haue moſt falſly and wickedly lied in the words which they haue ſaide before your Maieſtie, and whereſoeuer, or whenſoeuer they doe ſay ſo they ſhall lie, and therfore it may pleaſe you preſently to grant vnto vs the combate which they haue demanded. Truely, anſwered the King, it is now very late, but I am content that to morrow after ſeruice you ſhall do that which you can, as well on the one part as on the other. Then Damas one of the ſonnes of Broquadan by the ſiſter of Gandandel, a valiant and expert man at arms (but wholly adicted to villany) ſtepped forth ſaying vnto the King. Sauing the reuerence of your Maieſtie, Sarquiles hath vniuſtly and leaudly lied in all that he hath ſaid, and I ſhall be one of them that will maintaine it againſt him. By my faith, anſwered Angriotta, if there were a fourth here too, he ſhould be as wel handled as I hope thou ſhalt. Go too then, ſaide the King, depart you all for this day, and to morrow thinke vpon your buſineſſe.
                  Afterwards hee called Grumedan and Giontes his Nephewe, and after hee had conſulted with them a little while, hee commanded Gandandel and Broquadan to come before him, vnto whom hee ſayde: Come hether, you

haue ſo many times declared vnto me, that Amadis and his aſſociates had determined to betray me, and to vſurpe vpon mee the land of Great Brittaine, yet neuertheleſſe when it is come to an iſſue, you excuſe your ſelues from the combate, ſetting your ſons to maintaine your wickedneſſe, who cannot doe therewithall, notwithſtanding God is iuſt, & by all that I do owe vnto him, it is very lewdly ſpoken of you, neuer would I euer haue thought you ſuch as you are. May it pleaſe your Maieſty anſwered Gandandel, our children ſeeing vs too ſlow in our iuſtification, put themſelues forward to maintaine the honour of their fathers. They had reaſon ſayd Grumedan, for hardly could you haue recouered any other, & no doubt but you are men of little worth, or reputation, for the Diuell could neuer haue inuented ſuch wickedneſſe as you haue ſet abroach, ſo as if the King ſhould cauſe a thouſand ſuch as you are to be hanged, yet could hee not holde him ſatiſfied for the treacherie which you haue done vnto him, but your children ſhall beare the puniſhment for you. My Lord Grumedan ſaid they, although you wiſh it ſo, yet ſhall it not haphen ſo, if God pleaſe: for our ſonnes deliuering vs from ſhame, ſhall obtaine the victorie with honour. You ſhall ſee ſayd Grumedan what the iſſue will bee. And becauſe this talke continued longer then the King liked, hee ſent euery man vnto his lodging. And the ſame night thoſe which the next morning were to performe the combate, did looke that nothing might be wanting in their armour, eſpecially Angriotta and his Nephew, who withdrewe them vnto a Chappell where they continued in prayer vntill the day breake. And becauſe the King had receiued iniurious ſpeeches by the twelue knights of the Iſland, they went vnto their tents, with Madaſima and her Damoſels, where they remained all that night. But the day appearing, they all moūted on horſeback, & came to accompany their fellowes Angriotta and Sarquiles, vnto the place of combate, there were already arriued the King, Princes, and Lords, with the Queen & the other Ladies. Thus the combatants entred into the field, Angriotta and Sarquiles on the one ſide, Tarin, Corian and Damas on the other ſide. Then the trumpets ſounded, whereupon each of thē pulled downe the beauer of his helmet, and with their Lances in their reſts, they ſet ſpurs to their horſes, running with ſuch force one againſt another, that Corian and Tarin brake vpon Angriotta, & Damas vpon Sarquiles: but Angriotta hit Corian ſo ſound a ſtroke with his Launce that he vn-horſed him. Then turning his face, he ſaw Tarin ready with his ſword in his hand: who beholding his brother ouerthrowne, came with great rage againſt Angriotta, & thinking to ſtrike him vpon the top of the helmet, the blow fell ſhort, and lighted vpon the head of his horſe, wherewith hee was grieuouſly wounded. Notwithſtanding Angriotta finding that he was neere his enemy, he hit him ſo ſoundly with his ſworde, that with the ſtroke hee vnhorſed him, and at the ſame inſtant he himſelfe perceiued his horſe waxed faint, with the wound hee had receiued vpon his head, forſooke him and leaped on the ground. Then with his ſhield on his arme, he came againſt him whom he had firſt ouer-throwne,

who was already riſen vp & marched againſt Angriotta. And thus began the combate betweene thē two, where ſhortly after came Tarin in like ſorte, and Angriotta was to anſwere them both: neuertheleſſe he did make knowne, that he was not to ſeeke in ſuch an extreamity: for hee had led them ſo roundly that hee gaue them not ſo much leaſure as to take their breath, ſo that in leſſe ſpace then an houre, their armour was hacked in peeces, & they ſo wounded that the blood ran downe on all parts. I belecue there is none of you all that doth heare this Hiſtory, who vnderſtandeth not well enough, that Angriotta could not defend himſelfe ſo well, but that hee felt ſome part of the ſtrokes, for he was ſore wounded in many places, yet was it nothing in reſpect of the others. In the meane time Sarquiles, whom Damas had in hand, began to be aſhamed with the ouer great reſiſtance that his enemy made vnto him, and for the ſame cauſe ſetting ſpurs vnto his horſe, he found the meanes to buckle with his enemy: and as they were ſtrugling together and ſtriuing who ſhould fall firſt, Angriotta doubting that his Nephew would haue the worſt, drew towards him, but before hee came neer vnto him, Sarquiles and Damas fell down one vpō another: By this means was their incounter re-enforced, becauſe that Angriotta endeauoured to ſuccour his Nephew, & the others to relieue their kinſman: Who being vnder Sarquiles could by no meanes riſe vp, for Sarquiles held him ſo ſhort, that pulling off his helmet, hee thruſt his ſword into his throat, then ſeeing his enemy dead hee left him there, & came running vpon Tarin and his companion, who were in a manner out of breath, & ready to yeeld, or to aske mercy. The which the King, Broquadan & Gandandel perceiuing, they were ſo ſory that they departed. Notwithſtanding although they were diſpleaſed with this ſight, yet all the reſt of the Court there preſent, tooke pleaſure to behold it, for the loue which they did beare vnto Amadis & his friends. And more gladder yet were they when they ſaw them brought to the extreamity of their vnhappy end. For ſcant had the King turned his head frō the window, but that Angriotta did hit Corian ſo forcible a blow, that hee quite cut off all his right ſhoulder: with the extreame griefe whereof, giuing a ſigne of his death, he fell downe kiſſing the ground with his noſe, after whom Tarin ſtaied not long before he did as much.
                  Thus were the ſons of theſe traitors ſlaine, for the which Madaſima, Oriana, and many others did greatly reioyce. Then Angriotta & his Nephewes tooke the bodies of the vanquiſhed, and dragged them forth of the fields, afterwards they demaunded of the ludges if they had performed as much as was requiſite, who anſwered that they had. Whereupon they both retyred in great triumph, & accompanied with their friends, they came vnto the tents of their fellowes, cō
                     ducting with them Madaſima and her women, becauſe they knew aſſuredly that King Liſuart was very angry for the good fortune which had hapned vnto thē, ſo much hurt did he wiſh vnto Amadis, notwithſtāding that he wel perceiued how his affairs proſpered very badly euer ſince he had driuen him away, & the Frēch knights of his cōpany.
               
               The end of the Second Booke.
            
            
               
                  
                  A Table of the Chapters contained in this Second Booke.
                  
                     
                        CHAPTER I. THe deſcription of the Firme-Iſland. who made the inchantments, and placed thoſe great riches which were ſound in the ſame. Fol. I.
                     
                     
                        Chap. 2. How Amadis, Galaor, Floreſtan and Agraies, hauing taken leaue of the faire Briolania, to returne vnto King Liſuart, were carried into the Firme-Iſland to prooue the arch of Loyall louers, and the other aduentures in the ſame. Fol. 6.
                     
                        Chap. 3. How Durin departed to goe towards Amadis, vnto whom he deliuered the Letters from Oriana, and what hurt hapned thereby. F. 14.
                     
                        Chap. 4. How Gandalin and Durin followed the ſame way that Amadis had taken, brought the reſt of his armour which hee had left behinde, then found him ſleeping, and how he fought againſt a Knight whō hee did ouer come. Fol. 18.
                     
                        Chap. 5. Who was the Knight vanquiſhea by Amadis, and what happened vnto him, before he fought with him. Fol. 23.
                     
                        Chap. 6. How Don Galaor, Floreſtan and Agraies, vndertooke the ſearch of Amadis: who hauing left his armour, changed his name, and withdrew himſelfe to an Hermitage, in the company of a very olde Hermite. There to liue ſolitary. F. 27.
                     
                        Chap. 7. How Durin returned vnto the Princeſſe Oriana, vnto whom hee declared the ſorrowfull newes of Amadis: and of the great ſorrow which ſhe made, after ſhe vnderſtood of his diſpaire. Fol. 35.
                     
                        Chap. 8. How Don Guillan the Penſiue did bring vnto the Court of King Liſuart, the ſhield, armour and ſword of Amadis, which hee had found lying by the fountaine of the plaine field. Fol. 39.
                     
                        Chap. 9. How the Faire Forlorne beeing in the Rocke with the Hermite, there arriued a ſhip, in the which was Coriſanda, who ſought for her friend Floreſtan, and of that which happened vnto them. Fol. 46.
                     
                        Chap. 10. How the Gentlewoman of Denmarke going in ſearch of Amanis, after long trauaile coaſting along many ſtrange Iſlands, by chance ſhe arriued in the poore Rocke, where Amadis was, who was called the Faire Forlorne, whom ſhe knew, & how they returned together towards Oriana. Fol. 53.
                     
                        Chap. 11. How Galaor, Floreſtan and Agraies, departed from the Firme-Iſland, to goe ſeeke Amadis, of whom they could heare no tydings at all, wherupon they alreturned vnto the Court of King Liſuart. Fol. 60.
                     
                        Chap. 12. How King Liſuart being ſet at the Table, there came before him a ſtrange Knight armed, at all points, who defied him: The conference that Floreſtan had with him, and how Oriana was comforted with the good news that ſhe receiued from Amadis. Fol. 71.
                     
                        Chap. 13. How the Faire Forlorne ſent Enil his Eſquire vnto London, to cauſe a new armour to be made for him, & what aduenture chanced vnto him in going to Mireflour. Fol. 78.
                     
                        Chap. 14. How that after the Faire Forlorne had ended his aduenture,

be went vnto the fountaine of the three Channels: from thence he tooke his way to Mireflcur, where he found Oriana, with whom he remained eight dayes together: and at the ſame 
                           ••
                        me there arriued in the Court of King Liſuart an auncient Gentlemen, bringing with him two Iewels of ſingular vertue, whereby the faithfull louer, from the fained might be tryed, the which Amadis & Oriana, determine to make proofe of, in ſuch ſecret manner, that they would neither be knowne of the King nor any other. Fol. 90.
                     
                        Chap. 15. How the Damoſell of Denmarke was ſent vnto London, to know what anſwer Enil had receiued from the King, touching the ſafe conduct which was demanded by the Faire Forlorne, who did afterwards bring Oriana thither to proue the ſtrange Iewels. Fol. 99.
                     
                        Chap. 16. How after the Faire Forlorne had brought Oriana backe againe to Mirefluer, he departed, that he might be in the battell with King Liſuart: and what happened vnto him. Fol. 110.
                     
                        Chap. 17. How King Cildadan and Galaor were vnawares to them-ſelues, carried away by twelue Damoſels, and one of them was put into a ſtrong Tower, enuironed with the Sea, and the other in a Garden encloſed with high walles, where they thought they had beene in priſon, & of that which happened there vnto them. Fol. 120.
                     
                        Chap. 18 How the euening enſuing, the King being riſen from the Table, walking about the galleries of his Pallace, he beh
                           •
                        ld two great fires vpon the Sea, that came directly towards the Citie. Fol. 130.
                     
                        Chap. 19. How after the departure of Vrganda, the King beeing readie to mount on horſebacke, to execute the enterpriſe which he had determined to make vpon the burning Lake, there came before him a Damſel Gyanteſſe, to vnderſtand whether his Maieſty would bee pleaſed to referre the quarrell that hee pretended in his voyage, vpon the combate betwixt Ardan Canila, and amadis of Gaule, with ſuch conditions as ſhall be declared vnto you. Fol. 137.
                     
                        Chap. 20. How Bruneo de bonne Mer did fight with Madamine the ambitious, brother to the Damoſel iniurious and of the accuſations that were made by ſome of the enemies of Amadis vnto the King, for which cauſe he and many others (that were deſirous to follow him) a
                           •
                         parted from the Cou
                           •
                        t. Fol. 151.
                     
                        Chap. 21. How Amadis with many others his confeder
                           •
                        tes forſook the ſeruice of King Liſuart, and went as well to proue the aduentures of the Arch of loyall louers as alſo of the forbidden chamb
                           •
                        r. Fol. 163.
                     
                        Chap. 22. How Oriana remained in great perplexitie, not onely for the departure of Amadis, but alſo becauſe ſhe 
                           ••
                        lt herſelfe great with childe: and of that which happened to the twelue Knights that were departed from the Firme-Iſland, to deliuer Madaſima and her Damoſels. Fol. 173.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   