
      
         
            
            
               
VIRGIDEMIARVM Sixe Bookes.
            
               Firſt three Bookes, Of Tooth-leſſe Satyrs. 1. Poeticall. 2. Academicall. 3. Morall.
            
            
            LONDON Printed by Iohn Hariſon, for Robert Dexter. 1602.
            
         
         
            
            His Defiance to Enuie.
            
               Nay: let the prouder Pines of Ida feare
               The ſudden fires of heauen: and decline
               Their yeelding tops, that dar'd the skies whilere:
               And ſhake your ſturdie trunks ye prouder Pines,
               
               VVhoſe ſwelling graines are like be gald alone,
               VVith the deepefurrowes of the thunder-ſtone.
            
            
               Stand ye ſecure, ye ſafer ſhrubs below,
               In humble dales, whome heauns doe not deſpight:
               Nor angrie clouds conſpire your ouerthrow,
               Enuying at your too-diſdainfull hight.
               Let high attempts dread Enuy, and ill tongues,
               And cowardly ſhrinke for feare of cauſles wrongs
            
            
               
               So wont big Okes feare winding Yuy-weed:
               So ſoaring Egles feare the neighbour Sonne:
               
                  
                     •
                  o golden Mazor wont ſuſpicion breed,
               deadly Hemlocks poyſoned Potion,
               So Adders ſhroud themſelues in faireſt leaues:
               So fouler Fate the fayrer thing bereaues.
            
            
               Nor the low buſh feares climbing Yuy-twine:
               Nor lowly Buſtard dreads the diſtant rayes.
               Nor earthen Pot wont ſecret death to ſhrine:
               Nor ſuttle Snake doth lurke in pathed wayes.
               Nor baſer deed dreads Enuy and ill tongues,
               Nor ſhrinks ſo ſoone for feare of cauſeleſſe wrongs.
            
            
               
               Needs me then hope, or doth me need miſ-dread:
               Hope for that honor, dread that wrongfull ſpight:
               Spight of the partie, honor of the deede,
               VVhich wont alone on loftie obiects light.
               That Enuie ſhould accoaſt my Muſe and me,
               For this ſo rude, and reckleſſe Poeſie.
            
            
               VVould ſhe but ſhade her tender Browes with Bay,
               That now lye bare in careleſſe wilfull rage:
               And trance her ſelfe in that ſweete Extaſey,
               That rouzeth drouping thoughts of baſhfull age.
               (Tho now thoſe Bays, and that aſpired thought,
               In careleſſer age, ſhe ſets at worſe then nought.)
            
            
               
               Or would we looſe her plumy pineon,
               Manicled long with bonds of modeſt feare:
               Soone might ſhe haue those Keſtrels proud out gone,
               VVhoſe flightie wings are dew'd with weeter aire;
               And hopen now to ſhoulder from aboue
               The Eagle from the ſtayrs of friendly Ioue
               
            
            
               Or liſt ſhe rather in late Triumph reare
               Eternall Trophees to ſome Conqueror,
               VVhoſe dead deſerts ſlept in his Sepulcher,
               And neuer ſaw, nor life, nor light before:
               To lead ſad Pluto captiue with my ſong,
               To grace the triumphs he obſcur'd ſo long.
            
            
               
               Or ſcoure the ruſted ſwords of Eluiſh knighes,
               Bathed in Pagan blood: or ſheath them new
               In miſty morall Types; or tell their fights,
               VVho mightie Giants, or who Monſters ſlew.
               And by ſome ſtrange inchanted ſpeare and ſhield▪
               
               Vanquiſht their foe, and wan the doubtfull field.
            
            
               May be ſhe might in ſtately Stanzaes frame
               Stories of Ladies, and aduenturous knights,
               To raiſe her ſilent and inglorious name,
               Vnto areach-leſſe pitch of Prayſes hight.
               And ſomewhat ſay, as more vnworthie done.
               VVorthie of Braſſe, and hoary Marble ſtone.
            
            
               
               Then might vaine Enuy waſte her duller wing,
               To trace the aeryſteps, ſhe ſpiting ſees:
               And vainly faint in hopleſſe following
               The clouded paths her natiue droſſe denies.
               But now ſuch lowly Satyres here I ſing,
               Not worth our Muſe, not worth their enuying.
            
            
               To good (if ill) to be expos'd to blame:
               Too good, if worſe, to ſhadow ſhamleſſe vice.
               Ill, if too good, not anſwering their name:
               So good and ill infickle cenſure lies.
               Since in our Satyre lyes both good and ill,
               And they and it, inuarying readers will.
            
            
               
               VVitneſſe ye Muſes how I wilfull ſong
               Theſe heddy rimes, withoutē ſecond care:
               And wiſh't them worſe, my guiltie thoughts among:
               The ruder Satyre ſhould go rag'd and bare:
               And ſhow his rougher and his hairy hide:
               Tho mine be ſmooth, and deckt in careleſſe pride.
            
            
               VVould we but breath within a wax-bound quill.
               
                  Pans ſeuenfold Pipe, ſome plaintiue Paſtor all:
               To teach each hollow groue, and ſhrubby hill,
               Ech murmuring brooke, each ſolit arie vale
               To ſound our loue, and to our ſong accord,
               VVearying Eccho with one changeleſſe word.
            
            
               
               Or liſt vs make two ſtriuing ſhephards ſing,
               VVith coſtly wagers for the victorie,
               Vnder Menalcas iudge: whiles one doth bring
               A caruen Bole well wrought of Beechen tree:
               Prayſing it by the ſtorie, or the frame,
               Or want of vſe, or skilfull makers name.
            
            
               Another layeth a well-marked Lambe,
               Or ſpotted Kid, or ſome more forward Steere;
               And from the Payle doth praiſe their fertile dam:
               So doe they ſtriue in doubt, in hope, in feare,
               A wayting for their truſtie Vmpires doome,
               Faulted as falſe, by him that's ouercome.
            
            
               
               VVhether ſo me liſt my louely thought to ſing,
               Come daunce ye nimble Dryads by my ſide:
               Ye gentlewood-Nymphs come: and with you bring
               The willing Faunes that mought your muſick guide
               Com Nimphs and Faunes, that haunt thoſe ſhady groues
               VVhiles I report my fortunes or my loues.
            
            
               Or whether liſt me ſing ſo per ſonate,
               My ſtriuing ſelfe to conquer with my verſe:
               Speake ye attentiue ſwaynes that heard me late,
               Needs me giue graſſe vnto the Conquerers.
               At Colins feete I throw my yeelding reede:
               But let the reſt win homage by their deed.
            
            
               
               But now (ye Muſes) ſith your ſacred heſts
               Profaned are by each preſuming tongue:
               In ſcornfull rage I vow this ſilent reſt,
               That neuer field nor groue ſhall heare my ſong.
               Only theſe refuſe rymes I here miſpend,
               To chide the world, that did my thoughts offend.
            
         
         
            
            De ſuis Satyris.
            
               Dum Satyrae dixi, videor dixiſſe Satirae
               Corripio; aut iſtaec non ſatis eſt Satyra.
            
            
               Irafacit Satyram, reliquum Sat temperat iram;
               Pinge two Satyram ſanguine, tum Satyra eſt.
            
            
               Ecce nouam Satyram: Satyrum ſine cornibus! Euge
               Monſtra noui monſtri haec, & Satyri & Satyrae.
            
            
         
      
      
         
            
               VIRGIDEMIARVM.
            LIB. I.
            
               Prologue.
               
                  
                     I Firſt aduenture, with foole-hardie might,
                  To treade the ſteps of perilous deſpight:
                  I firſt aduenture, follow me who liſt,
                  And be the ſecond Engliſh Satyriſt.
                  Enuy waits on my backe, Truth on my ſide:
                  Enuy will be my Page, and Truth my Guide.
                  Enuie the margent holds, and Truth the line:
                  Truth doth approue, but enuie doth repine.
                  For in this ſmoothing age who durſt indite,
                  Hath made his pen an hyred Paraſite.
                  
                  To claw the back of him that beaſtly liues,
                  And pranck baſe men in Proud Superlatiues.
                  VVhence damned vice is ſhrouded quite from ſhame
                  And crown'd with Vertues meed, immortall Name:
                  Infamy diſpoſſeſt of natiue due,
                  Ordain'd of old on looſer life to ſue:
                  The worlds eye bleared with thoſe ſhameleſſe lyes,
                  Mask'd in the ſhew of meal-mouth'd Poeſies.
                  Go daring Muſe, on with thy thankleſſe taske,
                  And do the vgly face of vice vnmaske:
                  And if thou canſt not thine high flight remit,
                  So as it mought a lowly Satyre fit,
                  Let lowly Satyres riſe a loft to thee:
                  Truth be thy ſpeede, & Truth thy Patron bee.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. I.
               
                  NOr Ladies wanton loue, nor wandring knight,
                  Legend I out in rimes all richly dight.
                  Nor fright the Reader with the Pagan vaunt
                  Of mightie Mahound, and greate Termagaunt.
                  Nor liſt I Sonnet of my Miſtreſſe face,
                  To paint ſome Bloweſſe with a borrowed grace,
                  Nor can I bide to pen ſome hungrie Scene
                  
                  For thick-skin eares, and vndeſcerning eyne.
                  Nor euer could my ſcornfull Muſe abide
                  With Tragick ſhooes her ankles for to hide.
                  Nor can I crouch, and writhe my fauning tayle
                  To ſome greate Patron, for my beſt auayle.
                  
                  Such hunger-ſtaruen Trencher Poetrie,
                  Or let it neuer liue, or timely die:
                  Nor vnder euerie bank, and euerie Tree,
                  Speake rymes vnto my oten Minſtralſie:
                  Nor caroll out ſo pleaſing liuely laies,
                  As mought the Graces moue my mirth to praiſe.
                  Trumpet, and reeds, and ſocks, and buskins fine,
                  
                     I them bequeath: whoſe ſtatues wandring Twine
                  Of Yuy, mixt with Bayes, circlen around
                  Their liuing Temples likewiſe Laurell-bound.
                  
                  Rather had I, albee in careleſſe rymes,
                  Check the miſ-ordered world, and lawleſſe times.
                  Nor need I craue the Muſes mid-wifry,
                  To bring to light ſo worth-leſſe Poetry:
                  Or if we liſt, what baſer Muſe can bide,
                  To ſit and ſing by Grantaes naked ſide?
                  They hunt the tyded Thames and ſalt Medway,
                  
                  Ere ſince the ſame of their late Bridall day.
                  Nought haue we here but willow-ſhaded ſhore,
                  To tell our Grant his banks are left for lore.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. II.
               
                  VVhilome the ſiſters nine were Veſtall maides,
                  And held their Temple in the ſecret ſhades.
                  Of faire Parnaſſus that two-headed hill,
                  Whoſe auncient fame the Southern world did fill.
                  And in the ſtead of their eternall fame,
                  Was the coole ſtreame, that tooke his endles name,
                  From out the fertile hoofe of winged ſteed:
                  There did they ſit and do their holy deed,
                  That pleaſ'd both heauen and earth: till that of late,
                  Whome ſhould I fault? or the moſt righteous Fate?
                  Or heauen, or men, or fiends, or ought beſide,
                  That euer made that foule miſchance betide?
                  Some of the ſiſters in ſecurer ſhades.
                  Defloured were:
                  
                  And euer ſince diſdaining Sacred ſhame.
                  
                  Done ought that might their heauenly ſtock defame.
                  Now is Pernaſſus turned to a ſtewes:
                  And on Bay-ſtocks the wanton Myrtle grewes.
                  
                     Cythêron hill's become a Brothel-bed,
                  And Pyrene ſweete, turnd to a poyſoned head
                  Of cole-blacke puddle: whoſe infectious ſtaine
                  Corrupteth all the lowly fruitfull plaine.
                  Their modeſt ſtole, to gariſh looſer weede,
                  Deck't with loue-fauors: their late whordoms meed.
                  And where they wont ſip of the ſimple flood,
                  Now toſſe they bowles of Bacchus boyling bloud,
                  I maruelled much with doubtfull iealouſie,
                  Whence came ſuch Litturs of new Poetrie;
                  Mee thought I fear'd, leaſt the horſe-hoofed well
                  His natiue banks did proudly ouer-ſwell
                  In ſome late diſcontent, thence to enſue
                  Such wondrous rablements of Rime-ſters new:
                  But ſince, I ſaw it painted on Fames wings,
                  The Muſes to be woxen Wantonings.
                  
                  Each buſh, each bank, and ech baſe Apple-ſquire,
                  Can ſerue to ſate their beaſtly lewd deſire.
                  Ye baſtard Poets ſee your Pedigree
                  From common Trulls and loathſome Brothelry.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. III.
               
                  VVith ſome Pot-furie rauiſht from their wit,
                  They ſit and muſe on ſome no-vulgar writ:
                  As frozen Dung-hils in a winters morne,
                  That voyd of Vapours ſeemed all beforne,
                  Soone as the Sun, ſends out his piercing beames,
                  Exhale out filthie ſmoke and ſtinking ſteames:
                  So doth the baſe, and the fore-barren braine,
                  Soone as the raging wine begins to raigne.
                  One higher pitch'd doth ſet his ſoaring thought
                  On crowned kings that Fortune hath low brought:
                  Or ſome vpreared, high-aſpiring ſwaine
                  As it might be the Turkiſh Tamberlaine.
                  
                  
                  Then weeneth he his baſe drink-drowned ſpright,
                  Rapt to the threefold loft of heauen hight,
                  When he conceiues vpon his fained ſtage
                  The ſtalking ſteps of his greate perſonage,
                  Graced with huf-cap termes, and thundring threats,
                  That his poore hearers hayre quite vpright ſets.
                  Such ſoone, as ſome braue minded hungrie youth
                  Sees fitly frame to his wide-ſtrained mouth,
                  He vaunts his voyce vpon an hyred ſtage,
                  With high-ſet ſteps, and princely carriage;
                  Now ſoouping in ſide robes of Royaltie,
                  That earſt did skrub in lowſie brokerie.
                  There if he can with termes Italianate,
                  Big-ſounding ſentences, and words of ſtate,
                  Faire patch me vp his pure Iambick verſe,
                  He rauiſhes the gazing Scaffolders:
                  Then certes was the famous Corduban
                  
                  Neuer but halfe ſo high Tragedian.
                  
                  Now, leaſt ſuch frightfull ſhowes of Fortunes fall,
                  And bloudy Tyrants rage, ſhould chance appall
                  
                  The dead ſtroke audience, midſt the ſilent rout,
                  Comes leaping in a ſelfe-mis formed lout,
                  And laughes, and grins, and frames his Mimik face,
                  And iuſtles ſtraight into the princes place.
                  Then doth the Theatre Eccho all aloud,
                  With gladſome noyſe of that applauding croud.
                  A goodly hoch-poch; when vile Ruſſettings,
                  
                  Are match with monarchs, and with mightie kings.
                  A goodly grace to ſober Tragick Muſe,
                  
                  When each baſe clowne, his clumbſie fiſt doth bruiſe
                  And ſhow his teeth in double rotten-row,
                  For laughter at his ſelfe-reſembled ſhow.
                  Meane while our Poets in high Parliament,
                  Sit watching euerie word, and geſturement,
                  Like curious Cenſors of ſome doughtie geare,
                  Whiſpering their verdit in their fellowes eare.
                  Wo to the word whoſe margent in their ſcrole,
                  Is noted with a blacke condemning Cole.
                  But if each periode might the Synode pleaſe,
                  Ho, bring the Iuy boughs, and bands of Bayes
                  
                  Now when they part and leaue the naked ſtage,
                  Gins the bare hearer in a guiltie rage,
                  To curſe and ban, and blame his likerous eye,
                  That thus hath lauiſht his late halfe-penie.
                  Shame that the Muſes ſhould be bought and ſold,
                  For euerie peaſants braſſe, on each ſcaffold.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. IIII.
               
                  TOo popular is Tragicke Poeſie,
                  Strayning his tip-toes for a farthing fee,
                  And doth beſides on Rimeleſſe numbers tread,
                  Vnbid Iambicks flow from careleſſe head.
                  Some brauer braine in high Heroick rimes
                  Compileth worm-eate ſtories of olde times:
                  And he like ſome imperious Maroniſt,
                  Coniures the muſes that they him aſſiſt.
                  Then ſtriues he to bumbaſt his feeble lines
                  With farre-fetcht phraſe:
                  And maketh vp his hard-betaken tale
                  With ſtrange enchantments, fetcht from darkeſome vale
                  Of ſome Meliſſa, that by Magicke doome
                  To Tuſcans ſoyle tranſporteth Merlins toombe:
                  
                  Painters and Poets holde your auncient right:
                  Write what you will, and write not what you might:
                  Their limits be their liſt, their reaſon will.
                  But if ſome Painter in preſuming skill,
                  Should paint the ſtars in center of the earth,
                  Could ye forbeare ſome ſmiles, and taunting mirth?
                  But let no rebell Satyre dare traduce
                  Th'eternall Legends of thy Faerie Muſe,
                  Renowmed Spencer: whom no earthly wight
                  Dares once to emulate, much leſſe dares deſpight.
                  
                     Saluſt of France, and Tuſcan Arioſt,
                  
                  Yeeld vp the Lawrell garland ye haue loſt:
                  And let all others willow weare with me,
                  Or let their vndeſeruing Temples bared be.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. V.
               
                  ANother, whoſe more heauie hearted Saint
                  Delights in nought but notes of rufull plaint,
                  Vrgeth his melting Muſe with ſollem teares
                  Rime of ſome drerie fates of luckleſſe peeres.
                  Then brings he vp ſome branded whining Ghoſt,
                  To till how old miſfortunes had him toſt.
                  Then muſt he ban the guiltleſſe fates aboue,
                  Or fortune fraile, or vnrewarded loue.
                  And when he hath parbrak'd his grieued minde,
                  He ſends him downe where earſt he did him find,
                  Without one penie to pay Charons hire,
                  That waiteth for the wandring ghoſts retire.
               
            
            
               
               SAT.
               
                  ANother ſcorns the home-ſpun thred of rimes,
                  Match'd with the loftie feete of elder times:
                  Giue me the numbred verſe that Virgill ſung,
                  And Virgill ſelfe ſhall ſpeake the Engliſh toung:
                  Manhood and garboiles ſhall he chaunt with chaunged feete
                  
               
               
                  And head-ſtrong Dactils making Muſicke meete.
                  The nimble Dactils ſtriuing to out-go
                  The drawling Spondees pacing it below.
                  
                  The lingring Spondees, labouring to delay,
                  The breath-leſſe Dactils with a ſodaine ſtay.
                  Who euer ſaw a Colte wanton and wilde,
                  Yoakt with a ſlow-foote Oxe on fallow field?
                  Can right areed how handſomely beſets
                  Dull Spondees with the Engliſh Dactilets?
                  If Ioue ſpeake Engliſh in a thundring cloud,
                  
                     Thwick thwack, and Riffe raffe, rores he out aloud.
                  Fie on the forged mint that did create
                  New coyne of words neuer articulate.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. VII.
               
                  GReat is the folly of a feeble braine,
                  Ore-rulde with loue, and tyrannous diſdaine:
                  For loue, how-euer in the baſeſt breſt,
                  It breedes high thoughts that feed the fancie beſt.
                  Yet is he blinde, and leades poore fooles awrie,
                  While they hang gazing on their miſtreſſe eye.
                  The loue-ſicke Poet, whoſe importune prayer
                  Repulſed is with reſolute diſpaire,
                  Hopeth to conquer his diſdainfull dame,
                  With publike plaints of his conceiued flame.
                  Then powres he foorth in patched Sonettings,
                  His loue, his luſt, and loathſome flatterings:
                  As tho the ſtaring world hāgd on his ſleeue,
                  When once he ſmiles, to laugh: and when he ſighs, to grieue.
                  
                  Careth the world, thou loue, thou liue, or die?
                  Careth the world how faire thy faire one be?
                  Fond wit-wal that wouldſt lode thy wit-leſſe head
                  With timely hornes, before thy Bridall bed.
                  Then can he terme his durtie ill-fac'd Bride
                  Ladie and Queene, and virgin deified:
                  Be ſhee all ſootie-blacke, or berie browne,
                  Shee's white as morrows milk, or flakes new blowne.
                  And tho ſhe be ſome dunghill drudge at home,
                  Yet can he her reſigne ſome refuſe roome
                  Amids the well-knowne ſtars: or if not there,
                  Sure will he ſaint her in his Calendere.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. VIII.
               
                  HEnce ye prophane: mell not with holy things,
                  That Sion Muſe from Paleſtina brings.
                  
                     Parnaſſus is transform'd to Sion-hill,
                  
                  And Iury-palmes her ſteepe aſcents done fill.
                  Now good S. Peter weepes pure Helicon,
                  
                  And both the Maries make a Muſicke mone:
                  Yea and the Prophet of the heauenly Lire,
                  Great Salomon, ſings in the Engliſh Quire,
                  And is become a new found Sonetiſt,
                  Singing his loue, the holy ſpouſe of Chriſt:
                  Like as ſhe were ſome light-skirts of the reſt,
                  In mightieſt Ink-horniſmes he can thither wreſt.
                  
                  Ye Sion Muſes ſhall by my deare will,
                  For this your zeale, and farre-admired skill,
                  Be ſtraight tranſported from Ieruſalem,
                  Vnto the holy houſe of Bethleem.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. IX.
               
                  ENuie ye Muſes, at your thriuing Mate,
                  
                     Cupid hath crowned a new Laureat:
                  I ſaw his ſtatue gayly tyr'd in greene,
                  As if he had ſome ſecond Phoebus beene.
                  His Statue trimd with the Venerean tree,
                  And ſhrined faire within your Sanctuarie.
                  What, he, that ea
                        •
                     ſt to gaine the riming Goale
                  The worne Recitall-poſt of Capitol,
                  Rimed in rules of Stewiſh ribaldrie,
                  Teaching experimentall bauderie?
                  Whiles th'itching vulgar tickled with the ſong,
                  Hanged on their vnreadie Poets tongue.
                  Take this ye patient Muses: and foule ſhame
                  Shall waite vpon your once profaned name.
                  
                  Take this, ye Muſes, this ſo high deſpight,
                  And let all hatefull luckleſſe birds of night:
                  Let Scriching Owles neſt in your razed roofes,
                  And let your ſloore with horned Satyres hoofes
                  Be dinted and defiled euerie morne:
                  And let your walles be an eternall ſcorne.
                  What if ſome Shordich furie ſhould incite
                  Some luſt-ſtung letcher: muſt he needes indite
                  The beaſtly rites of hyred Venerie,
                  The whole worlds vniuerſall bawd to be?
                  Did neuer yet no damned Libertine,
                  Nor elder Heathen, nor new Florentine,
                  Tho they were famous for lewd libertie,
                  Venture vpon ſo ſhamefull villanie
                  Our Epigrammatarians olde and late,
                  Were wont be blam'd for too licentiate.
                  Chaſt men, they did but glaunce at Lesbias deed,
                  And handſomely leaue off with cleanly ſpeed.
                  But Arts of Whoring: ſtories of the ſtewes,
                  Ye Muſes, will ye beare, and may refuſe?
                  Nay let the Diuell, and Saint Valentine,
                  
                  Be goſſips to thoſe ribald rimes of thine.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            VIRGIDEMIARVM.
            LIB. II.
            
               Prologue.
               
                  OR beene the Manes of that Cynick ſpright,
                  Cloth'd with ſome ſtubborn clay & led to light?
                  Or doe the relique aſhes of his graue
                  Reuiue and riſe from their for ſaken caue?
                  That ſo with gall-weet words and ſpeeches rude,
                  Controls the maners of the multitude.
                  Enuie belike incites his pining heart,
                  And bids it ſate it ſelfe with others ſmart.
                  Nay, no deſpight: but angrie Nemeſis,
                  
                  VVhoſe ſcourge doth follow all that done amiſſe:
                  That ſcourge I beare, albe in rude fiſt,
                  And wound, and ſtrike, and pardon whom ſhe liſt.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. I.
               
                  FOr ſhame write better Labeo, or write none,
                  Or better write, or Labeo write alone,
                  Nay call the Cynick but a wittie foole,
                  Tnence to abiure his handſome drinking bole:
                  Becauſe the thirſtie ſwaine with hollow hand,
                  Conueied the ſtreame to weet his drie weaſand.
                  Write they that can, tho they that cannot, doe:
                  But who knowes that, but they that do not know.
                  Lo what it is that makes white rags ſo deare,
                  That men muſt giue a teſton for a queare.
                  Lo what it is that makes gooſe-wings ſo ſcant,
                  That the diſtreſſed Semſter did them want,
                  So, lauiſh ope-tyde cauſeth faſting-lents,
                  And ſtarueling Famine comes of large expence.
                  
                  Might not (ſo they where pleaſd that beene aboue)
                  Long Paper-abſtinence our death remoue?
                  Then manie a Lollerd would in forfaitment,
                  Beare Paper-fagots ore the Pauement.
                  But now men wager who ſhall blot the moſt,
                  
                     And each man writes. Ther's ſo much lobour loſt,
                  That's good, that's great: Nay much is ſildome well,
                  Of what is bad, a littl's a greate deale.
                  Better is more: but beſt is nought at all.
                  Leſſe is the next, and leſſer criminall.
                  Little and good, is greateſt good ſaue one,
                  Then Labeo, or write little or write none.
                  Tuſh but ſmall paynes can be but little art,
                  Or lode full drie-fats fro the forren mart.
                  With Folio-volumes, two to an Oxe hide,
                  Or elſe ye Pamphleter go ſtand a ſide,
                  Reade in each Schoole, in euerie margent coted,
                  In euerie Catalogue for an autour noted.
                  There's happineſſe well giuen, and well got,
                  Leſſe gifts, and leſſer gaines I weigh them not.
                  
                  So may the Giant rome and write on high,
                  Be he a Dwarfe that writes not their as I.
                  But well fare Strabo, which as ſtories tell,
                  Contriu'd all Troy within one Walnut ſhell.
                  His curious ghoſt now lately hither came.
                  Arriuing neere the mouth of luckie Tame:
                  I ſaw a Piſmire ſtrugling with the lode,
                  Dragging all Troy home towards her abode.
                  Now dare we hither, if we durſt appeare,
                  The ſubtile Stithy-man that liu'd while eare:
                  Such one was once, or once I was miſtaught,
                  A Smith at Uulcans owne forge vp brought,
                  That made an Iron-chariot ſo light,
                  The coach-horſe was a Flea in trappings dight.
                  The tame-leſſe ſteed could well his wagon wield,
                  Through downes and dales of the vneuen field.
                  Striue they laugh we: meane while the black ſtorie
                  Paſſes new Strabo, and new Straboes Troy.
                  
                  Little for great: and great for good: all one:
                  For ſhame or better write, or Labeo write none.
                  
                  But who coniur'd this bawdie Poggies ghoſt,
                  From out the ſtewes of his lewde home-bred coaſt:
                  Or wicked Rablais dronken reuellings,
                  To grace the miſ-rule of our Tauernings?
                  Or who put Bayes into blind Cupids fiſt,
                  That he ſhould crowne what Laureats him liſt?
                  Whoſe words are thoſe, to remedie the deed,
                  That cauſe men ſtop their noſes when they read?
                  Both good things ill, and ill things well: all one?
                  For ſhame write cleanly Labeo, or write none.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. II.
               
                  TO what end did our lauiſh aunceſtours,
                  Erect of old theſe ſtately piles of ours?
                  For thred-bare clearks, and for the ragged Muſe
                  Whom better fit ſome cotes of ſad ſecluſe?
                  Bluſh niggard Age, and be aſham'd to ſee,
                  Theſe monuments of wiſer anceſtrie.
                  And ye faire heapes the Muſes ſacred ſhrines,
                  (In ſpight of time and enuious repines)
                  Stand ſtill and flouriſh till the worlds laſt day,
                  Vpbrayding it with former loues decay.
                  Here may you Muſes, our deare Soneraignes,
                  
                  Scorne each baſe Lordling euer you diſdaines,
                  And euerie peaſant churle, whoſe ſmokie roofe
                  Denied harbour for your deare behoofe.
                  Scorne ye the world before it do complaine,
                  And ſcorne the world that ſcorneth you againe.
                  
                  And ſcorne contempt it ſelfe that doth incite
                  Each ſingle-ſold Squire to ſet you at ſo light.
                  What needes me care for anie bookiſh skill,
                  To blot white papers with my reſtleſſe quill:
                  Or poare on painted leaues: or beat my braine
                  With far-fetch thought, or to conſume in vaine
                  In latter Euen, or midſt of winter nights,
                  Ill ſinelling oyles, or ſome ſtill-watching lights.
                  Let them that meane by bookiſh buiſineſſe
                  To earne their bread: or hopen to profeſſe
                  Their hard got skill: let them alone for mee;
                  Buſie their braines with deeper bookerie.
                  Great gaines ſhall bide you ſure, when ye haue ſpent
                  A thouſand Lamps: and thouſand Reames haue rent
                  Of needleſſe papers, and a thouſand nights
                  Haue burned out with coſtly candle lights.
                  Ye paliſh ghoſts of Athens; when at laſt,
                  Your patrimonie ſpent in witleſſe waſt,
                  Your friends all wearie, and your ſpirits ſpent,
                  Ye may your fortunes ſeeke: and be forwent
               
            
            
               
               SAT. III.
               
                  VVho doubts? The lawes fel down frō heauēs height,
                  Like to ſome gliding ſtarre in winters night.
                  
                     Themis the Scribe of God did long agone,
                  Engraue them deepe in during Marble-ſtone,
                  And caſt them downe on this vnruly clay,
                  That men might know to rule and to obay.
                  But now their Characters depraued bin,
                  By them that would make gain of others ſin.
                  And now hath wrong ſo maiſtered the right,
                  That they liue beſt, that on wrongs off all light;
                  So loathly flye that liues on galled wound,
                  And ſcabby feſters inwardly vnſound,
                  Feedes fatter with that poyſnous carrion,
                  Then they that haunt the healthy lims alone.
                  
                  Wo to the weale where many Lawiers bee,
                  For there is ſure much ſtore of maladie.
                  T'was truely ſaid, and truely was foreſeene
                  The fat kine are deuoured of the leane.
                  
                     Genus and Species long ſince barefoote went,
                  Vpon their ten-toes in wilde wanderment:
                  Whiles father Bartoll on his footcloth rode,
                  Vpon high pauement gayly ſiluer-ſtrowd.
                  Each home-bred ſcience percheth in the chaire,
                  While ſacred artes grouell on the groundſell bare.
                  Since pedling Barbariſmes gan be in requeſt,
                  Nor claſſicke tongues, nor learning found no reſt.
                  The crowching Client, with low-bended knee,
                  And manie Worſhips, and faire flatterie,
                  Tels on his tale as ſmoothly as him liſt,
                  But ſtill the Lawyers eye ſquints on his fiſt:
                  If that ſeeme lined with a larger fee,
                  Doubt not the ſuite, the law is plaine for thee.
                  Tho muſt he buy his vainer hope with price,
                  Diſclout his crownes, and thanke him for aduice.
                  
                  So haue I ſeene in a tempeſtuous ſtowre,
                  Some bryer-buſh ſhewing ſhelter from the ſhowre,
                  Vnto the hopefull ſheepe, that faine would hide
                  His fleecie coate from that ſame angrie tide.
                  The ruthleſſe breere regardleſſe of his plight,
                  Laies holde vpon the fleece he ſhould acquite,
                  And takes aduantage of the careleſſe pray,
                  That thought ſhe in ſecurer ſhelter lay.
                  The day is faire, the ſheepe would fare to feede:
                  The tyrant Brier holdes faſt his ſhelters meed,
                  And claimes it for the fee of his defence:
                  So robs the ſheepe, in fauours faire pretence.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. IIII.
               
                  VVOrthie were Galen to be weighed in gold,
                  Whoſe help doth ſweeteſt life & helth vphold
                  Yet by S. Eſcnlape he ſollemne ſwore,
                  That for diſeaſes they were neuer more,
                  Fees neuer leſſe, neuer ſo little gaine,
                  Men giue a groate and aske the reſt againe.
                  
                     Groats-worth of health, can anie leech allot?
                  Yet ſhould he haue no more that giues a groate:
                  Should I on each ſicke plliow leane my breſt.
                  And grope the pulſe of euerie mangie wreſt:
                  And ſpie out maruels in each Vrinall:
                  And rumble vp the filths that from them fall,
                  And giue a Doſſe for euerie diſeaſe,
                  In preſcripts long and tedious Recipes:
                  
                  All for ſo leane reward of Art and me?
                  No Horſe-leach but will looke for larger fee.
                  Meane while if chaunce ſome deſp'rate patient die,
                  Com'n to the Period of his deſtinie:
                  
                  (As who can croſſe the fatall reſolution,
                  In the decreed day of diſſolution:)
                  Whether ill tendment, or recureleſſe paine,
                  Procure his death; the neighbours all complaine,
                  Th'unskilfull leech murdred his patient,
                  By poyſon of ſome foule Ingredient.
                  
                  Hereon the vulgar may as ſoone be brought
                  To Socrates-his poyſoned Hemlock-drought,
                  As to the wholſome Iulap, whoſe receat
                  Might his diſeaſes lingring force defeat.
                  If nor a dramme of Triacle ſoueraigne,
                  
                     Or Aqua vitae, or Sugar Candian,
                  Nor Kitchin-cordials can it remedie,
                  Certes his time is come, needs mought he die.
                  Were I a leech, as who knowes what may be,
                  The liberall man ſhould liue, and carle ſhould die.
                  The ſickly Ladie, and the gowtie Peere
                  
                  Still would I haunt, that loue their life ſo deare.
                  Where life is deare, who cares for coyned droſſe?
                  That ſpent, is counted gaine, and ſpared, loſſe:
                  
                  Or would coniure the Chymick Mercurie,
                  
                  Riſe from his horſ-dung bed, and vpwards flie:
                  And with glaſſe-ſtils, and ſticks of Iuniper,
                  
                  Raiſe the Black-ſpright that burnes not with the fire:
                  And bring Quinteſſence of Elixir pale,
                  Out of ſublimed ſpirits minerall.
                  Each powdred graine raunſometh captiue kings,
                  Purchaſeth Realmes, and life prolonged brings.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. V.
               
                  SAw'ſt thou euer Siquis patch'd on Pauls Church doore,
                  To ſeeke ſome vacant Vicarage before?
                  Who wants a Churchman, that can ſeruice ſey,
                  Read faſt, and faire, his monthly Homiley?
                  And wed, and burie, and make Chriſten-ſoules?
                  Come to the left-ſide Alley of Saint Poules.
                  Thou ſeruile Foole, why could'ſt thou not repaire
                  To buy a Benefice at Steeple-Faire?
                  There moughteſt thou for but a ſlender price,
                  Aduowſon thee with ſome fat benefice:
                  Or if thee liſt not waite for dead mens ſhoon,
                  Nor pray ech morn th'incumbents daies were doon:
                  A thouſand Patrons thither ready bring,
                  Their new-falne Churches to the Chaffering,
                  
                  Stake three yeares Stipend; no man asketh more:
                  Go take poſſeſſion of the Church-porch-doore:
                  And ring thy bels; lucke ſtroken in thy fiſt:
                  The Parſonage is thine or ere thou wiſt.
                  Saint Fooles of Go
                        •
                     am, mought thy pariſh be,
                  For this thy baſe and ſeruile Symonie.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. VI.
               
                  A Gentle Squire would gladly intertaine
                  Into his houſe, ſome trencher-Chaplaine:
                  Some willing man that might inſtruct his ſons,
                  And that would ſtand to good conditions.
                  Firſt that He lie vpon the Truckle-bed,
                  Whiles his yong maiſter lieth ore his hed.
                  Second, that he do, on no default,
                  Euer preſume to ſit aboue the ſalt.
                  Third, that he neuer change his trencher twiſe.
                  Fourth, that he vſe all common courteſies:
                  Sit bare at meales, and one halfe riſe and wait.
                  Laſt, that he neuer his yong maſter beat,
                  But he muſt aske his mother to define,
                  How manie ierkes ſhe would his breech ſhould line.
                  All theſe obſeru'd, he could contented bee,
                  To giue fiue markes and winter liuerie.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. VII.
               
                  IN th'heauens vniuerſall Alphabet.
                  All earthly thinges ſo ſurely are foreſet,
                  That who can read thoſe figures, may foreſhew
                  What euer thing ſhall afterwards enſue
                  Faine would I know (might it our Artiſt pleaſe)
                  Why can his tell-troth Ephemerides
                  
                  Teach him the weathers ſtate ſo long beforne:
                  And not fore-tell him, nor his fatall horne
                  Nor his deaths-day, nor no ſuch ſad euent
                  Which he mought wiſely labour to preuent?
                  Thou damned mock-art, and thou brainſick tale,
                  Of old Aſtrologie: where didſt thou vaile
                  Thy curſed head thus long: that ſo it miſt
                  The black bronds of ſome ſharper Satyriſt.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  Some doting goſſip mongſt the Chaldee wiues,
                  Did to the credulous world thee firſt deriue:
                  And ſuperſtition nurſ'd thee euer ſence,
                  And publiſht in profounder Arts pretence:
                  That now who pares his nailes, or libs his ſwine,
                  But he muſt firſt take counſell of the ſigne.
                  So that the Vulgars count for faire or foule,
                  For liuing or for dead, for ſicke or whole:
                  His feare or hope, for plentie or for lacke,
                  Hangs all vpon his New-yeares Almanack.
                  
                  If chance once in the ſpring his head ſhould ake:
                  It was foretold: Thus ſayes mine Almanack.
                  
                  In th'heauens High-ſtreete are but dozen roomes,
                  In which dwels all the world, paſt and to come:
                  Twelue goodly Innes they are, with twelue fayre ſignes,
                  Euer well tended by our Star-diuines.
                  
                  Euerie mans head Innes at the horned Ramme,
                  
                  The whiles the necke the Black-buls gueſt became:
                  The'arms by good hap, meet at the wraſtling twins,
                  Th' heart in the way at the Blew-lion innes.
                  
                  The legs their lodging in Aquarius got,
                  That is the Bride-ſtreete of the heauen, I wot.
                  The feete tooke vp the Fiſh with teeth of gold:
                  But who with Scorpio lodg'd, may not be told.
                  What office then doth the Star-gazer beare?
                  Or let him be the heauens Oſtelere:
                  
                  Or Tapſters ſome: or ſome be Chamberlaines,
                  
                  To waite vpon the gueſts they entertaine.
                  Hence can they reade, by vertue of their trade,
                  When anie thing is miſt where it was laide.
                  Hence they diuine, and hence they can deuiſe:
                  If their ayme faile, the Stars to moralize.
                  
                     Demon my friend once liuer-ſicke of loue,
                  Thus learn'd I by the ſignes his griefe remoue.
                  In the blinde Archer firſt I ſaw the ſigne,
                  When thou receiu'dſt that wilfull wound of thine:
                  And now in Uirgo is that cruell mayd,
                  Which hath not yet with loue thy loue repaide.
                  But marke when once it comes to Gemini,
                  
                  Straight way Fiſh-whole ſhall thy ſicke liuer be.
                  
                  But now (as th'angrie Heauens ſeeme to threat
                  Manie hard Fortunes, and diſaſtres great:
                  If chance it come to wanton Capricorne,
                  
                  And ſo into the Rams diſgracefull horne,
                  Then learne thou of the vgly Scorpion,
                  
                  To hate her for her fowle abuſion:
                  Thy refuge then the Ballance be of Right,
                  Which ſhall thee from thy broken bond acquite:
                  So with the Crab, go backe whence thou began,
                  From thy firſt match: and liue a ſingle man.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            VIRGIDEMIARVM.
            LIB. III.
            
               Prologue.
               
                  Some ſay my Satyres ouer-looſely flowe,
                  Nor hide their gall inough from open ſhowe:
                  Not riddle like, obſcuring their intent;
                  But packe-ſtaffe plaine, vttring what thing they ment:
                  Contrarie to the Roman ancients,
                  VVhoſe words were ſhort, and darkeſome was their ſence.
                  VVho reades one line of their harſh poeſies,
                  Thriſe muſt he take his winde, and breath him thriſe.
                  My Muſe would follow them that haue fore-gone,
                  But cannot with an Engliſh pineon,
                  
                  For looke howfarre the ancient Comedie
                  Paſt former Satyres in her libertie:
                  Sofarre muſt mine yeeld vnto them of olde.
                  'Tis better be too bad, then be too bolde.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. I.
               
                  TIme was, and that was term'd the time of Gold,
                  When world and time were young, that now are old.
                  (When quiet Saturne ſwaid the mace of lead,
                  And Pride was yet vnborne, and yet vnbred.)
                  Time was, that whiles the Autumne fall did laſt,
                  Our hungrie ſires gapte for the falling maſt of the Dodonian oakes.
                  Could no vnhusked Akorne leaue the tree,
                  But there was challenge made whoſe it might be.
                  And if ſome nice and licorous appetite,
                  Deſir'd more daintie diſh of rare delite,
                  They ſcal'd the ſtored Crab with claſped knee,
                  Till they had ſated their delicious eye:
                  
                  Or ſearch'd the hopefull thicks of hedgy-rowes,
                  For brierie berries, or hawes, or ſowrer ſloes:
                  Or when they meant to fare the fin'ſt of all,
                  They lickt oake-leaues beſprint with hony fall.
                  As for the thriſe three-angled beech nut-ſhell,
                  Or cheſnuts armed huske, and hid kernell,
                  No Squire durſt touch, the law would not afford,
                  Kept for the Court, and for the kings owne bord.
                  Their royall Plate was clay, or wood, or ſtone:
                  The vulgar, ſaue his hand, elſe had he none.
                  Their onely ſeller was the neighbour brooke.
                  None did for better care, for better looke.
                  Was then no playning of the Brewers ſcape,
                  Nor greedie Uintner mixt the ſtrained grape.
                  The kings pauilion, was the graſſy green,
                  Vnder ſafe ſhelter of the ſhadie treen.
                  Vnder each banke men layd their lims along,
                  Not wiſhing anie eaſe, not fearing wrong:
                  Clad with their owne, as they were made of old,
                  Not fearing ſhame, not feeling anie cold,
                  
                  But when by Ceres huſwifrie and paine,
                  Men learn'd to burie the reuiuing graine:
                  And father Ianus taught the new found vine,
                  Riſe on the Elme, with many a friendly twine..
                  And baſe deſire bad men to deluen low,
                  For needleſſe mettals: then gan miſchiefe grow.
                  Then farwell fayreſt age, the worlds beſt dayes:
                  Thriuing in ill as it in age decaies.
                  Then crept in Pride, and peeuiſh Couetiſe:
                  And men grue greedie, diſcordous and nice.
                  Now man, that earſt Haile fellow was with beaſt,
                  Woxe on to weene himſelfe a God at leaſt.
                  No aerie foule can take ſo high a flight,
                  Tho ſhe her daring wings in clouds haue dight:
                  Nor fiſh can diue ſo deepe in yeelding Sea.
                  Tho Thetis-ſelfe ſhould ſweare her ſafetie:
                  Nor fearfull beaſt can dig his caue ſo lowe,
                  All could he further then earths center go:
                  As that the ayre, the earth, or Ocean,
                  
                  Sould ſhield them from the gorge of greedie man.
                  
                  Hath vtmoſt Inde ought better then his owne?
                  Then vtmoſt Inde is neare, and rife to gone.
                  O Nature: was the world ordain'd for nought,
                  But fill mans maw, and feede mans idle thought?
                  Thy Grandſires words ſauor'd of thriftie Leekes,
                  Or manly Garlicke, But thy furnace reekes,
                  Hote ſteams of wine: and can a loofe deſcrie
                  The drunken draughts of ſweete Autumnitie.
                  
                  They naked went: or clad in ruder hide:
                  Or home-ſpun Ruſſet, void of forraine pride:
                  But thou canſt maske in gariſh gauderie,
                  To ſuit a fooles far-fetched liuerie.
                  A French head ioyn'd to necke Italian:
                  
                  Thy thighs from Germanie, and breſt fro Spains:
                  
                  An Engliſhman in none, a foole in all:
                  Many in one, and one in ſeuerall.
                  Then men were men, but now the greater part
                  Beaſts are in life, and women are in heart.
                  Good Saturne ſelfe, that homely Emperour?
                  In proudeſt pompe was not ſo clad of yore,
                  
                  As is the vnder-groome of the Oſtlerie,
                  Husbanding it in work-day yeomanrie.
                  Lo the long date of thoſe expired daies,
                  Which the inſpired Merlins word fore-ſaies:
                  When dunghill Peſants ſhall be dight as kings,
                  Then one confuſion another brings:
                  
                  Then farewell faireſt age, the worlds beſt daies,
                  Thriuing in ill, as it in age decaies.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. II.
               
                  GReat Oſmond knowes not how he ſhalbe known
                  When once great Oſmond ſhalbe dead & gone:
                  Vnleſſe he reare vp ſome rich monument,
                  Ten furlongs nearer to the firmament.
                  Some ſtately tombe he builds, Egyptian wiſe,
                  
                     Rex Regum written on the Pyramis:
                  
                  Where as great Arthur lies in ruder oke,
                  That neuer felt none but the fellers ſtroke.
                  Small honour can be got with gaudie graue:
                  Nor it thy rotten name from death can ſaue.
                  The fairer tombe, the fowler is thy name.
                  The greater pompe procuring greater ſhame,
                  Thy monument make thou thy liuing deeds:
                  No other tombe then that, true vertue needs,
                  
                  What? had he nought whereby he might be knowne,
                  But coſtly pilements of ſome curious ſtone?
                  The matter, Natures, and the workmans frame,
                  His purſes coſt; where then is Oſmonds name?
                  Deſeru'dſt thou ill? well were thy name and thee.
                  Wert thou inditched in great ſecrecie,
                  Where as no paſſenger might curſe thy duſt,
                  Nor dogs ſepulchrall ſate their gawning luſt.
                  Thine ill deſerts cannot be graued with thee,
                  So long as on thy graue they ingraued bee.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. III.
               
                  THe curteous Citizen bad me to his feaſt,
                  With hollow words, and ouerly requeſt:
                  Come, will ye dine with me this Holy day?
                  I yeelded, tho he hop'd I would ſay Nay:
                  
                  For had I mayden'd it, as many vſe:
                  Loath for to graunt, but loather to refuſe.
                  A lacke ſir, I were loath, Another day:
                  I ſhould but trouble you: pardon me, if you may.
                  No pardon ſhould I need; for, to depart
                  He giues me leaue: and thanks too, in his heart.
                  Two words for monie, Darbiſhirian wiſe:
                  
                  (That's one too manie) is a naughtie guiſe,
                  Who lookes for double biddings to a feaſt,
                  May dine at home for an importune gueſt.
                  
                  I went, then ſaw, and found the greate expence:
                  The fare and faſhions of our Citizens.
                  Oh: Cl
                           •
                        lopatricall: what wanteth there
                  For curious coſt, and wondrous choiſe of cheare?
                  Beefe, that earſt Hercules held for fineſt fare:
                  Porke, for the fat Boeotian, or the hare
                  For Martiall: fiſh for the Venetian,
                  
                  Gooſe-liuer for the likorous Romane,
                  
                  Th' Athenians goate, Quaile, Iolans cheere,
                  The Hen for Eſculape; and the Parthian Deere, 
                  
                  
                     Grapes for Arceſilas, figs for Platoes mouth,
                  And Cheſnuts faire for Amarillis tooth.
                  Had'ſt thou ſuch cheere, wer't thou euer there before
                  Neuer: I thought ſo: nor come there no more.
                  Come there no more; for ſo ment all that coſt:
                  Neuer hence take me for thy ſecond hoſt.
                  For whome he meanes to make an often gueſt,
                  One diſh ſhall ſerue; and welcome make the reſt.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. IIII.
               
                  VVEre yeſterday Polemons Natals kept
                  That ſo his threſhold is all freſhly ſteept
                  With new-ſhed bloud? could he not ſacrifice
                  Some ſorry morkin that vnbidden dies:
                  Or meager heifer, or ſome roten Ewe:
                  Rut he muſt needs his Poſts with bloud embrew,
                  And on his way-doore fixe the honned head,
                  With ſlowers, and with ribbands garniſhed?
                  Now ſhall the paſſenger deeme the man deuout.
                  What boots it be ſo, but the world muſt know't?
                  O the fond boaſting of vaineglorious man:
                  Does he the beſt, that may the beſt be ſeene?
                  Who euer giues a paire of veluet ſhooes
                  To th'holy Road: or liberally allowes:
                  
                  But a new rope, to ring the Couure-feu Bell,
                  
                  But he deſires that his great deed may dwell,
                  Or grauen in the Chancel-window-glaſſe,
                  Or in the laſting tombe of plated braſſe.
                  For he that doth ſo few deſeruing deeds,
                  T' were ſure his beſt ſue for ſuch larger meeds.
                  Who would inglorious liue, inglorious die,
                  And might eternize his names memorie?
                  And he that cannot brag of greater ſtore,
                  Muſt make his ſomewhat much, and little more.
                  Nor can good Myſon weare on his left hond,
                  A ſignet ring of Briſtol-diamond:
                  
                  But he muſt cut his gloue, to ſhew his pride,
                  That his trim Iewel might be better ſpide:
                  And that men monght ſome Burgeſſe him repute,
                  With Satten ſleeues hath grac'd his ſackeloth ſure.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. V.
               
                  FIe on all Curteſie, and vnruly windes,
                  Two onely foes that faire diſguiſement findes.
                  
                     Strange curſe! But fit for ſuch a ſickle age,
                  When Scalpes are ſubiect to ſuch vaſſalage.
                  Late trauailing along in London way,
                  Mee met, as ſeem'd by his diſguis'd aray,
                  A luſtie Courtier, whoſe curled head,
                  With abron locks was fairely furniſhed.
                  I him ſaluted in our lauiſh wiſe:
                  He anſweres my vntimely courteſies.
                  His bonnet vail'd, ere euer he could thinke,
                  Th'unruly winde blowes off his Periwinke.
                  He lights, and runs, and quickly hath him ſped,
                  To ouertake his ouerrunning head.
                  
                  The ſportfull winde, to mocke the Headleſſe man,
                  Toſſes apace his pitch'd Rogerian:
                  And ſtraight it to a deeper ditch hath blowne:
                  There muſt my yonker fetch his waxen crowne.
                  I lookt, and laught, whiles in his raging minde,
                  He curſt all Curteſie, and vnruly winde.
                  I lookt, and laught, and much I meruailed,
                  To ſee ſo large a Cauſ-way in his head.
                  And me bethought, that when it firſt begon,
                  T'was ſome ſhroad Autumne, that ſo bar'd the bone.
                  Is't not ſweete pride, when men their crownes muſt
                  With that which ierks the hams of euery iade
                  Or floor-ſtrowd locks from off the Barbers ſheares?
                  But waxen crownes well gree with borrowed haires.
               
            
            
               
               SAT. VI.
               
                  WHen Gullion di'd (who knowes not Gullion?)
                  
                  And his drie ſoule arriu'd at Acheron,
                  
                  He faire beſought the Feryman of hell,
                  That he might drinke to dead Pantagruel.
                  
                  
                     Charon was afraid leaſt thirſtie Gullion,
                  
                  Would haue drunke drie the riuer Acheron.
                  
                  Yet laſt conſented for a little hyre,
                  And downe he dips his chops deepe in the myre,
                  And drinks, and drinks, and ſwallows in the ſtreeme,
                  Vntill the ſhallow ſhores all naked ſeeme.
                  Yet ſtill he drinkes, nor can the Botemans cries,
                  Nor crabbed oares, nor prayers make him riſe.
                  So long he drinkes, till the blacke Carauell,
                  
                  Stands ſtill faſt grauel'd on the mud of hell.
                  
                  There ſtand they ſtill, nor can go, nor retyre,
                  Tho greedie ghoſts quicke paſſage did require.
                  Yet ſtand they ſtill, as tho they lay at rode,
                  Till Gullion his bladder would vnlode.
                  They ſtand, and waite, and pray for that good houre:
                  Which when it came, they ſailed to the ſhore.
                  But neuer ſince dareth the Feryman,
                  Once intertaine the ghoſt of Gullian.
                  
                  Drinke on drie ſoule, and pledge ſir Gullion:
                  
                  Drinke to all healths, but drinke not to thine owne.
               
               Deſunt nonnulla.
            
            
               
               SAT. VII.
               
                  SEeſt thou how gayly my yong maiſter goes,
                  Vaunting himſelfe vpon his riſing toes,
                  And pranks his hand vpon his daggers ſide,
                  And picks his glutted teeth ſince late Noon-tide?
                  Tis Ruſſio: Trow'ſt thou where he din'd to day:
                  In ſooth I ſaw him ſit with Duke Humfray.
                  
                  Manie good welcoms, and much Gratis cheere,
                  
                  Keepes he for euerie ſtragling Caualiere:
                  
                  An open houſe haunted with greate reſort,
                  Long ſeruice mixt with Muſicall diſport.
                  Manie faire yonker with a fether'd creſt,
                  Chooſes much rather be his ſhot free gueſt,
                  To fare ſo freely with ſo little coſt,
                  Then ſtake his Twelue-pence to a meaner hoſt.
                  
                  Hadſt thou not told me, I ſhould ſurely ſay,
                  He touch't no meat of all this liue-long day.
                  For ſure me thought, yet that was but a gheſſe,
                  His eyes ſeeme ſunke for verie hollowneſſe,
                  But could he haue (as I did it miſtake)
                  So little in his purſe, ſo much vpon his backe:
                  So nothing in his maw: yet ſeemeth by his belt,
                  That his gaunt gut, no too much ſtuffing felt.
                  Seeſt thou how ſide it hangs beneath his hip?
                  
                     Hunger, and heauie Iron makes girdles ſlip.
                  Yet for all that, how ſtifly ſtrits he by,
                  All trapped in the new-found brauerie.
                  The Nuns of new-woon Cales his bonnet lent,
                  In lieu of their ſo kind a Conquerment.
                  What needed he fetch that from fartheſt Spaine,
                  
                  His Grandame could haue lent with leſſer paine?
                  Tho he perhaps neuer paſt the Engliſh ſhore;
                  Yet faine would counted be a Conquerour.
                  His haire French like; ſtares on his frighted hed,
                  One locke Amazon-like diſheueled:
                  
                  As if he ment to weare a natiue cord,
                  If chaunce his Fates ſhould him that bane afford,
                  All Brittiſh bare vpon the briſtled skin,
                  Cloſe noched is his beard both lip and chin:
                  His linnen collar Labyrinthian-ſet,
                  Whoſe thouſand double turnings neuer met:
                  His ſleeues halfe hid with elbow-Pineonings,
                  
                  As if he ment to flie with linnen wings.
                  But when I looke and caſt mine eyes below,
                  What monſter meets mine eyes in humane ſhow?
                  So lender waſt with ſuch an Abbots loyne,
                  Did neuer ſober Nature ſure conioyne.
                  Lik'ſt a ſtrawne ſcar-crow in the new-ſowne field,
                  Reard on ſome ſticke, the tender corne to ſhield:
                  Or if that ſemblance ſuite not eueric deale,
                  Like a broad ſhak-forke with a ſlender ſteale.
                  Deſpiſed Nature ſuit them once aright,
                  Their bodie to their cote: both now miſ-dight:
                  Their bodie to their clothes might ſhapen bee,
                  That nill their clothes ſhape to their bodie.
                  
                  Meane while I wonder at ſo prowd a backe,
                  Whiles th'emptie guts lowd rumblen for long lacke,
                  The bellie enuieth the backs bright glee,
                  And murmurs at ſuch inequalitie.
                  The backe appeares vnto the partiall 
                        •
                     ine,
                  The plaintiue belly pleads they bribed beene:
                  And he for want of better Aduocate,
                  Doth to the eare his iniurie relate.
                  The backe inſulting ore the bellies need,
                  Saies: thou thy ſelfe, I others eyes muſt feed.
                  The maw, the guts, all inward parts complaine
                  The backs great pride, and their owne ſecret paine.
                  Ye witleſſe gallants, I beſhrew your hearts,
                  That ſets ſuch diſcord twixt agreeing parts,
                  Which neuer can be ſet at onement more,
                  Vntill the mawes wide mouth be ſtopt with ſtore.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE CONCLVSION of all.
            
               THus haue I writ in ſmoother Cedar tree,
               So gentle Satyrs, pend ſo eaſily.
               Henceforth I write in crabbed oake-tree rindes
               Search they that meane the ſecret meaning finde.
               Holde out ye guiltie, and ye galled hides,
               And meete my far-fetch't ſtripes with waiting ſides.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   