
      
         
            
            
               
                  Articles whereupon it was agreed by the Archbiſhoppes and Biſhoppes
                      of both prouinces and the whole cleargie, in the Conuocation holden at London in the yere of our Lorde GOD. 1562. according to the computation of the Churche of Englande, for the auoiding of the diuerſities of opinions, and for the ſtabliſhyng of conſent touching true religion.
                  
                     Put foorth by the Queenes aucthoritie.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Articles Of fayth in the holy Trinitie.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     THERE is but one lyuyng and true God, euerlaſtyng, without body, partes, or paſſions, of infinite power, wyſdome, & goodneſſe, the maker and preſeruer of al things both viſible and inuiſible. And in vnitie of this Godhead there be three perſons, of one ſubſtaunce, power, and eternitie, the father, the ſonne, and the holy ghoſt.
            
            
               Of the worde or ſonne of God which was made very man.
               
               THE Sonne, which is the worde of the Father, begotten from euerlaſtyng of the Father, the very and eternall GOD, of one ſubſtaunce with the father, toke mans nature

in the wombe of the bleſſed Virgin, of her ſubſtaunce: ſo that two whole and perfect natures, that is to ſay the Godhead and manhood, were ioyned together in one perſon, neuer to be diuided, whereof is one Chriſte, very GOD and very man, who truely ſuffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his father to vs, and to be a ſacrifice, not only for originall gylt, but alſo for all actuall ſinnes of men.
            
            
               
                   Of the goyng downe of Chriſte into hell.
               AS Chriſte dyed for vs, and was buryed: ſo alſo it is to be beleued that he went downe into hell.
            
            
               
                   Of the Reſurrection of Chriſte.
               CHriſte dyd truely aryſe agayne from death, and toke agayne his body, with fleſh, bones, and all thinges apparteyning to the perfection of mans nature, wherewith he aſcended into heauen, and there ſitteth, vntyll he returne to iudge all men at the laſt day.
            
            
               
                   Of the holy ghoſt.
               THE holy ghoſt, proceedyng from the father and the ſonne, is of one ſubſtaunce, maieſtie, and glorie, with the father and the ſonne, very and eternall God.
            
            
               
               Of the ſufficiencie of the holy Scriptures for ſaluation.
                  
               
               HOlye Scripture conteyneth all thinges neceſſarie to ſaluation: ſo that whatſoeuer is not read therein, nor may be proued therby, is not to be required of anye man, that it ſhoulde be beleued as an article of the fayth, or be thought requiſite neceſſarie to ſaluation. In the name of holy Scripture, we do vnderſtande thoſe Canonicall bookes of the olde and newe Teſtament, of whoſe aucthoritie was neuer any doubt in the Churche.
               
                  Of the names and number of the Canonicall Bookes.
                  
                  
                     Geneſis.
                  
                  
                     Exodus.
                  
                  
                     Leuiticus.
                  
                  
                     Numerie.
                  
                  
                     Deuteronomium.
                  
                  
                     Ioſue.
                  
                  
                     Iudges.
                  
                  
                     Ruth.
                  
                  
                     The .1. boke of Samuel.
                  
                  
                     The .2. boke of Samuel.
                  
                  
                     The .1. booke of Kinges.
                  
                  
                     The .1. booke of Chroni.
                  
                  
                     The .2. booke of Chroni.
                  
                  
                     The .1. booke of Eſdras.
                  
                  
                     The .2. booke of Eſdras.
                  
                  
                     The booke of Heſter.
                  
                  
                     The booke of Iob.
                  
                  
                     The Pſalmes.
                  
                  
                     The Prouerbes.
                  
                  
                     Eccleſia. or preacher.
                  
                  
                     Cantica, or ſonges of Sa.
                  
                  4. Prophetes the greater.
                  
                  
                     The .2. booke of Kinges.
                  
                  12. Prophetes the leſſe.
                  
               
               
                  And the other bookes (as Hierome ſayth) the Churche doth reade for example of lyfe and inſtruction of maners: but yet doth it not applie them to eſtabliſhe any doctrine. Such are theſe folowyng.
               
                  
                     The third boke of Eſdras.
                  
                  
                     The fourth boke of Eſdras
                  
                  
                     The booke of Tobias.
                  
                  
                     The booke of Iudith.
                  
                  
                     The reſt of the booke of Heſter.
                  
                  
                     The booke of VViſdome.
                  
                  
                     Ieſus the ſonne of Sirach.
                  
                  
                     Baruch, the prophet.
                  
                  
                     Song of the .3. children.
                  
                  
                     The ſtorie of Suſanna.
                  
                  
                     Of Bel and the Dragon.
                  
                  
                     The prayer of Manaſſes.
                  
                  
                     The .1. boke of Machab.
                  
                  
                     The .2. booke of Macha.
                  
               
               All the bookes of the newe Teſtament, as they are commonly receaued, we do receaue and accompt them for Canonicall.
            
            
               
                   Of the olde Teſtament.
               THE olde Teſtament is not contrary to the newe, for both in the olde and newe Teſtament euerlaſtyng lyfe is offered to mankynde by Chriſte, who is the onlye mediatour betweene God and man, being both God and man. Wherefore they are not to be hearde whiche faigne that the olde fathers dyd looke onlye for tranſitorie promiſes. Although the lawe geuen

from God by Moyſes, as touchyng ceremonies and rites, do not bynde Chriſtian men, nor the ciuile preceptes therof, ought of neceſſitie to be receaued in any common wealth: yet notwithſtandyng, no Chriſtian man whatſoeuer, is free from the obedience of the commaundementes, whiche are called morall.
            
            
               Of the three Credes.
               
               THE three Credes, Nicene Crede, Athanaſius Crede, and that whiche is commonlye called the Apoſtles Crede, ought throughlye to be receaued and beleued: for they may be proued by moſte certayne warrauntes of holye ſcripture.
            
            
               Of originall or birth ſinne.
               
               ORiginall ſinne ſtandeth not in the folowing of Adam (as the Pelagians do vaynely talke) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of euery man, that naturally is engendred of the ofſpring of Adam, whereby man is very farre gone from originall ryghteouſnes, and is of his owne nature enclined to euyll, ſo that the fleſhe luſteth alwayes contrary to the ſpirite, and therefore in euery perſon borne into this worlde, it deſerueth Gods wrath and

damnation. And this infection of nature doth remayne, yea in them that are regenerated, whereby the luſte of the fleſhe, called in Greke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which ſome do expounde the wiſdome, ſome ſenſualitie, ſome the affection, ſome the deſyre of the fleſhe, is not ſubiect to the lawe of God. And although there is no condemnation for them that beleue and are baptized: yet the Apoſtle doth confeſſe that concupiſcence and luſte hath of it ſelfe the nature of ſynne.
            
            
               
                   Of free wyll.
               THE condition of man after the fall of Adam is ſuche, that he can not turne and prepare hym ſelfe by his owne naturall ſtrength and good workes, to fayth and calling vpon God: Wherefore we haue no power to do good workes pleaſaunt and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Chriſte preuentyng vs, that we may haue a good wyll, & workyng with vs, when we haue that good wyll.
            
            
               
                   Of the iuſtification of man.
               WE are accompted righteous before God, only for the merite of our Lord & ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, by faith, & not for our owne

workes or deſeruynges. Wherefore, that we are iuſtified by fayth onely, is a moſt wholeſome doctrine, and very full of comfort, as more largely is expreſſed in the Homilie of iuſtification.
            
            
               Of good workes.
               
               ALbeit that good workes, whiche are the fruites of fayth, and folowe after iuſtification, can not put away our ſinnes, and endure the ſeueritie of Gods iudgement: yet are they pleaſing and acceptable to God in Chriſte, and do ſpring out neceſſarily of a true and liuely fayth, in ſo muche that by them, a lyuely fayth may be as euidently knowen, as a tree diſcerned by the fruit.
            
            
               Of workes before iuſtification.
               
               WOrkes done before the grace of Chriſte, and the inſpiration of his ſpirite, are not pleaſaunt to God, foraſmuche as they ſpring not of fayth in Ieſu Chriſt, neither do they make men meete to receaue grace, or (as the ſchole aucthours ſaye) deſerue grace of congruitie: yea rather for that they are not done as GOD hath wylled and commaunded them to be done, we doubt not but they haue the nature of ſynne.
            
            
               
               
                   Of workes of ſupererogation.
               VOluntarie workes beſydes, ouer and aboue Gods commaundementes, which they call workes of ſupererogatiō, can not be taught without arrogancie and impietie. For by them men do declare that they do not onely render vnto God as muche as they are bounde to do, but that they do more for his ſake then of bounden duetie is required: Wheras Chriſte ſayth playnly, When ye haue done al that are commaunded to you, ſay, We be vnprofitable ſeruauntes.
            
            
               
                   Of Chriſte alone without ſinne.
               CHriſte in the trueth of our nature, was made lyke vnto vs in al thinges (ſinne only except) from which he was clearey voyde, both in his fleſhe & in his ſpirite. He came to be the lambe without ſpot, who by ſacrifice of hym ſelfe once made, ſhoulde take away the ſinnes of the worlde: and ſinne, (as S. Iohn ſayeth) was not in hym. But al we the reſt, (although baptized, and borne agayne in Chriſte) yet offende in many thinges, and if we ſay we haue no ſinne, we deceaue our ſelues, and the trueth is not in vs.
            
            
               
               Of ſinne after Baptiſme.
               
               NOT euery deadly ſinne willingly committed after baptiſme, is ſinne agaynſt the holy ghoſt, and vnpardonable. Wherefore, the graunt of repentaunce is not to be denyed to ſuch as fal into ſinne after baptiſme. After we haue receaued the holy ghoſt, we may depart from grace geuen, and fall into ſinne, and by the grace of God (we may) aryſe agayne and amend our lyues. And therefore, they are to be comdemned, whiche ſay they can no more ſinne as long as they lyue here, or denie the place of forgeueneſſe to ſuche as truely repent.
            
            
               Of predeſtination and election.
               
               PRedeſtination to lyfe, is the euerlaſtyng purpoſe of God, wherby (before the foundations of the world were layd) he hath conſtantly decreed by his councell ſecrete to vs, to deliuer from curſe and damnation, thoſe whom he hath choſen in Chriſte out of mankynde, and to bryng them by Chriſte to euerlaſtyng ſaluation, as veſſels made to honour. Wherfore they which be indued with ſo excellent a benefite of God, be called accordyng to Gods purpoſe by his ſpirite workyng in due ſeaſon: they through grace obey the callyng: they be iuſtified freely: they be made ſonnes of God by adoption: they be made lyke

the image of his onelye begotten ſonne Ieſus Chriſte: they walke religiouſly in good workes, and at length by gods mercy, they attaine to euerlaſtyng felicitie.
               As the godly conſyderation of predeſtination, and our election in Chriſte, is full of ſweete, pleaſaunt, and vnſpeakeable comfort to godly perſons, and ſuch as feele in them ſelues the working of the ſpirite of Chriſte, mortifying the workes of the fleſhe, & their earthlye members, and drawing vp their mynde to hygh and heauenly thinges, aſwell becauſe it doth greatly eſtablyſhe and confirme their fayth of eternall ſaluation to be enioyed through Chriſt, as becauſe it doth feruently kindle their loue towardes God: So, for curious and carnal perſons, lacking the ſpirite of Chriſte, to haue continually before their eyes the ſentence of Gods predeſtination, is a moſt daungerous downefall, whereby the deuyll doth thruſt them either into deſperation, or into recheleſneſſe of moſt vncleane liuing, no leſſe perilous then deſperation.
               Furthermore, we muſt receaue Gods promiſes in ſuch wyſe, as they be generally ſet foorth to vs in holy ſcripture: and in our doynges, that wyl of God is to be folowed, which we haue expreſlye declared vnto vs in the worde of God.
            
            
               
               Of obtaynyng eternall ſaluation, only  by the name of Chriſte.
               THey alſo are to be had accurſed, that preſume to ſay, that euery man ſhalbe ſaued by the lawe or ſect which he profeſſeth, ſo that he be diligent to frame his lyfe accordyng to that lawe, and the lyght of nature. For holy ſcripture doth ſet out vnto vs onely the name of Ieſus Chriſte, whereby men muſt be ſaued.
            
            
               Of the Church.
               
               THe viſible Church of Chriſte, is a congregation of faythfull men, in the which the pure worde of God is preached, and the Sacramentes be duely miniſtred, accordyng to Chriſtes ordinaunce in all thoſe thynges that of neceſſitie are requiſite to the ſame.
               As the Church of Hieruſalem, Alexandria, and Antioche haue erred: ſo alſo the Church of Rome hath erred, not only in their lyuing and maner of ceremonies, but alſo in matters of fayth.
            
            
               Of the aucthoritie of the Church.
               
               THE Church hath power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and aucthoritie in controuerſies of fayth: And yet it is not lawfull for the Church to ordayne any thyng that is contrarie to

Gods worde written, neyther may it ſo expounde one place of ſcripture, that it be repugnaunt to another. Wherefore, although the Churche be a witneſſe and a keper of holy writ: yet, as it ought not to decree any thing agaynſt the ſame, ſo beſides the ſame, ought it not to enforce any thing to be beleued for neceſſitie of ſaluation.
            
            
               
                   Of the aucthoritie of generall Counſelles.
               GEnerall Counſels may not be gathered together without the commaundement and wyll of princes. And when they be gathered together (foraſmuche as they be an aſſemblie of men, wherof all be not gouerned with the ſpirite & word of God) they may erre, and ſometyme haue erred, euen in thinges parteynyng vnto God. Wherfore, thinges ordayned by them as neceſſary to ſaluation, haue neyther ſtrength nor aucthoritie, vnleſſe it may be declared that they be taken out of holy Scripture.
            
            
               
                   Of Purgatorie.
               THE Romiſhe doctrine concernyng purgatorie, pardons, worſhipping and adoration aſwell of images, as of reliques, and alſo inuocation of Saintes, is a fonde thing, vainly inuented, and grounded vpon no warrantie of Scripture, but rather repugnaunt to the worde of God.
            
            
               
               Of miniſtryng in the congregation.
               
               IT is not lawful for any man to take vpon hym the office of publique preachyng, or miniſtring the Sacramentes in the congregation, before he be lawfully called and ſent to execute the ſame. And thoſe we ought to iudge lawfully called and ſent, whiche be choſen and called to this worke by men who haue publique aucthoritie geuen vnto them in the congregation, to call and ſende miniſters into the Lordes vineyarde.
            
            
               Of ſpeakyng in the congregation, in ſuch a tongue as the people vnderſtandeth.
               IT is a thing playnely repugnaunt to the worde of God, & the cuſtome of the primitiue Churche, to haue publique prayer in the Churche, or to miniſter the Sacramentes in a tongue not vnderſtanded of the people.
            
            
               Of the Sacramentes.
               
               SAcramentes ordayned of Chriſte, be not onely badges or tokēs of Chriſtian mens profeſſion: but rather they be certaine ſure witneſſes and effectuall ſignes of grace and Gods good wyll towardes vs, by the which he doth worke inuiſiblie

in vs, and doth not only quicken, but alſo ſtrengthen and confirme our fayth in hym.
               There are two Sacramentes ordayned of Chriſte our Lorde in the Goſpell, that is to ſay, Baptiſme, and the Supper of the Lorde.
               Thoſe fyue, commonly called Sacramentes, that is to ſay, Confirmation, Penaunce, Orders, Matrimonie, and extreme Vnction, are not to be compted for Sacramentes of the goſpel, being ſuch as haue growen partly of the corrupt folowing of the Apoſtles, partly are ſtates of life alowed in the ſcriptures: but yet haue not lyke nature of Sacramentes with Baptiſme and the Lordes Supper, for that they haue not any viſible ſigne or ceremonie ordayned of God.
               The Sacramentes were not ordayned of Chriſt to be gaſed vpon, or to be caryed about: but that we ſhould duely vſe them. And in ſuch only, as worthyly receaue the ſame, they haue a wholeſome effect or operation: But they that receaue them vnworthyly, purchaſe to them ſelues damnation, as S. Paul ſayth.
            
            
               
                   Of the vnworthyneſſe of the miniſters, which hinder not the effect of the Sacramentes.
               ALthough in the viſible Churche the euyl be euer myngled with the good, & ſometime the euyll haue cheefe aucthoritie in the miniſtration

of the worde & Sacramentes: yet foraſmuch as they do not the ſame in their owne name but in Chriſtes, and do miniſter by his commiſſion and aucthoritie, we may vſe their miniſterie, both in hearing the word of God, & in the receauing of the Sacramentes. Neither is ye effecte of Chriſtes ordinaunce taken away by their wickedneſſe, nor the grace of Gods gyftes diminiſhed from ſuch as by fayth & ryghtly do receaue the Sacramentes miniſtred vnto them, which be effectuall, becauſe of Chriſtes inſtitution and promiſe, although they be miniſtred by euyll men.
               Neuertheleſſe, it apparteyneth to the diſcipline of the Churche, that enquirie be made of euyl miniſters, and that they be accuſed by thoſe that haue knowledge of their offences: and finally, beyng founde gyltie by iuſt iudgement, be depoſed.
            
            
               Of Baptiſme.
               
               BAptiſme is not only a ſigne of profeſſion, and marke of difference, whereby Chriſtian men are diſcerned from other that be not chriſtened: but is alſo a ſigne of regeneration or newe byrth, whereby as by an inſtrument, they that receaue baptiſme rightly, are grafted into the Church: the promiſes of the forgeueneſſe of ſinne, & of our adoption to be the ſonnes of God, by the holy ghoſt, are viſibly ſigned and ſealed: fayth is confyrmed: and grace increaſed by vertue of prayer

vnto God. The baptiſme of young children, is in any wyſe to be retayned in the Churche, as moſt agreable with the inſtitution of Chriſte.
            
            
               
                   Of the Lordes ſupper.
               THE Supper of the Lord, is not only a ſigne of the loue that Chriſtians ought to haue among them ſelues one to another: but rather it is a Sacrament of our redemption by Chriſtes death. Inſomuch that to ſuche as ryghtlie, worthyly, and with fayth receaue the ſame, the bread whiche we breake is a partrakyng of the body of Chriſte, and likewyſe the cuppe of bleſſing, is a parttakyng of the blood of Chriſte.
               Tranſubſtantiation (or the chaunge of the ſubſtaunce of bread and wine) in the Supper of the Lorde, can not be proued by holye writ: but is repugnaunt to the playne wordes of ſcripture, ouerthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath geuen occaſion to many ſuperſtitions.
               The body of Chriſte is geuen, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an heauenly and ſpirituall maner: And the meane whereby the body of Chriſte is receaued and eaten in the Supper, is fayth.
               The Sacrament of the Lordes Supper was not by Chriſtes ordinaunce reſerued, caryed about, lyfted vp, or worſhipped.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the wicked which do not eate the body of Chriſte in the vſe of the Lordes Supper.
               
               THE wicked, and ſuche as be voyde of a liuelye fayth, although they do carnally and viſibly preſſe with their teeth (as Saint Auguſtine ſayth) the Sacrament of the bodye and blood of Chriſt: yet in no wyſe are they partakers of Chriſte, but rather to their condemnation do eate and drinke the ſigne or Sacrament of ſo great a thing.
            
            
               Of both kindes.
               
               THE cuppe of the Lorde is not to be denyed to the laye people. For both the partes of the Lordes Sacrament, by Chriſtes ordinance and commaundement, ought to be miniſtred to all Chriſtian men alike.
            
            
               Of the one oblation of Chriſte finiſhed vppon the Croſſe.
               
               THE offering of Chriſt once made, is the perfect redemption, propiciation, and ſatiſfaction for all the ſinnes of the whole worlde, both originall and actuall, and there is none other ſatiſfaction for ſinne, but that alone. Wherefore the ſacrifices of Maſſes, in the which it was commonly ſaid that the Prieſtes did offer Chriſte

for the quicke and the dead, to haue remiſſion of payne or gylt, were blaſphemous fables, and daungerous deceites.
            
            
               
                   Of the mariage of Prieſtes.
               BYſhops, Prieſtes, and Deacons, are not commaunded by Gods lawe eyther to vowe the eſtate of ſingle lyfe, or to abſtayne from mariage. Therefore it is lawfull alſo for them, as for all other Chriſtian men, to mary at their owne diſcretion, as they ſhall iudge the ſame to ſerue better to godlyneſſe.
            
            
               
                   Of excommunicate perſons, howe they are to be auoyded.
               THat perſon whiche by open denuntiation of the Churche, is ryghtly cut of from the vnitie of the Churche, and excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the faythfull as an Heathen and Publicane, vntill he be openly reconciled by penaunce, and receaued into the Churche by a iudge that hath aucthoritie thereto.
            
            
               
                   Of the traditions of the Churche.
               IT is not neceſſarie that traditions and ceremonies be in al places one, or vtterly like, for at all

times they haue ben diuerſe, and may be chaunged accordyng to the diuerſitie of Countreys, times, and mens maners, ſo that nothing be ordeyned againſt Gods worde. Whoſoeuer through his priuate iudgement, wyllyngly and purpoſely doth openly breake the traditions and ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnaunt to the worde of God, and be ordayned and approued by common aucthoritie: ought to be rebuked openly, (that other may feare to do the lyke) as he that offendeth agaynſt the Common order of the Churche, and hurteth the aucthoritie of the Magiſtrate, and woundeth the conſciences of the weake brethren.
               Euery particuler or nationall Churche, hath aucthoritie to ordaine, chaunge, and aboliſhe ceremonies or rites of the Churche ordeyned onlye by mans aucthoritie, ſo that all thinges be done to edifiyng.
            
            
               Of Homilies.
               
               
                  THE ſeconde booke of Homilies, the ſeuerall titles wherof we haue ioyned vnder this article, doth conteyne a godly and wholeſome doctrine, and neceſſarie for theſe tymes, as doth the former booke of Homilies, whiche were ſet foorth in the time of Edwarde the ſixt: and therefore we iudge them to be read in Churches by the Miniſters diligently, and diſtinctly, that they may be vnderſtanded of the people.
               
               
                  
                  Of the names of the Homilies.
                  1 Of the right vſe of the Churche.
                  2 Agaynſt perill of Idolatrie.
                  3 Of repayring and keping cleane of Churches.
                  4 Of good workes, firſt of faſtyng.
                  5 Agaynſt gluttony and drunkenneſſe.
                  6 Againſt exceſſe of apparell.
                  7 Of prayer.
                  8 Of the place and time of prayer.
                  9 That common prayers and Sacramentes ought to be miniſtred in a knowen tongue.
                  10 Of the reuerente eſtimation of Gods worde.
                  11 Of almes doing.
                  12 Of the Natiuitie of Chriſte.
                  13 Of the paſſion of Chriſte.
                  14 Of the reſurrection of Chriſte.
                  15 Of the worthie receauing of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Chriſte.
                  16 Of the gyftes of the holy ghoſt.
                  17 For the Rogation dayes.
                  18 Of the ſtate of Matrimonie.
                  19 Of repentaunce.
                  20 Agaynſt Idleneſſe.
                  21 Agaynſt rebellion.
               
            
            
               
                   Of conſecration of Biſhops and miniſters.
               THE booke of Conſecration of Archbyſhops, and Byſhops, and orderyng of Prieſtes and Deacons, lately ſet foorth in the time of

Edwarde the ſixt, and confyrmed at the ſame tyme by aucthoritie of Parliament, doth conteyne all thinges neceſſarie to ſuche conſecration and orderyng: neyther hath it any thyng, that of it ſelfe is ſuperſtitious or vngodly. And therefore, whoſoeuer are conſecrate or ordered accordyng to the rites of that booke, ſence the ſeconde yere of the aforenamed king Edwarde, vnto this time, or hereafter ſhalbe conſecrated or ordered accordyng to the ſame rites, we decree all ſuch to be ryghtly, orderly, and lawfully conſecrated and ordered.
            
            
               Of the Ciuill Magiſtrates.
               
               THe Queenes Maieſtie hath the cheefe power in this Realme of Englande, and other her dominions, vnto whom the cheefe gouernment of all eſtates of this Realme, whether they be Eccleſiaſticall or Ciuile, in all cauſes doth apparteine, and is not, nor ought to be ſubiect to any forraigne iuriſdiction.
               Where we attribute to the Queenes Maieſtie the cheefe gouernment, by whiche titles we vnderſtande the mindes of ſome ſlaunderous folkes to be offended: we geue not to our princes the miniſtring either of Gods word, or of Sacraments, the which thing the Iniunctions alſo lately ſet forth by Elizabeth our Queene, doth moſt plainlie teſtifie: But that only prerogatiue whiche we ſee to haue ben geuen alwayes to all godly Princes

in holy Scriptures by God him ſelfe, that is, that they ſhould rule all eſtates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Eccleſiaſticall or Temporall, and reſtraine with the ciuill ſworde the ſtubberne and euyll doers.
               The Byſhop of Rome hath no iuriſdiction in this Realme of Englande.
               The lawes of the Realme may puniſhe Chriſtian men with death, for heynous and greeuous offences.
               It is lawfull for Chriſtian men, at the commaundement of the Magiſtrate, to weare weapons, and ſerue in the warres.
            
            
               
                   Of Chriſtian mens goodes, which are not common.
               THE ryches and goodes of Chriſtians are not common, as touching the ryght, title, and poſſeſſion of the ſame, as certayne Anabaptiſtes do falſely boaſt. Notwithſtandyng euery man ought of ſuche thinges as he poſſeſſeth, liberally to geue almes to the poore, accordyng to his habilitie.
            
            
               
                   Of a Chriſtian mans othe.
               AS we confeſſe that vayne and raſhe ſwearing is forbidden Chriſtian men by our lord Ieſus Chriſte, and Iames his Apoſtle: So

we iudge that Chriſtian religion doth not prohibite, but that a man may ſweare when the Magiſtrate requireth, in a cauſe of faith and charitie, ſo it be done accordyng to the prophetes teaching, in iuſtice, iudgement, and trueth.
            
            
               The Ratification.
               
               
                  
                     THIS Booke of Articles before rehearſed, is agayne approued, and allowed to be holden and executed within the Realme, by the aſcent and conſent of our Soueraigne Ladye Elizabeth, by the grace of GOD, of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande Queene, defender of the fayth. &c. VVhich Articles were deliberately read, and confirmed agayne by the ſubſcription of the handes of the Archbyſhop and Byſhoppes of the vpper houſe, and by the ſubſcription of the whole Cleargie in the neather houſe in their Conuocation, in the yere of our Lorde GOD .1571.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Table.
            
               1 Of fayth in the Trinitie.
               2 Of Chriſte the ſonne of GOD.
               3 Of his goyng downe into hell.
               4 Of his Reſurrection.
               5 Of the holy ghoſt.
               6 Of the ſufficiencie of the Scripture.
               7 Of the olde Teſtament.
               8 Of the three Credes.
               9 Of originall ſinne.
               10 Of free wyll.
               11 Of Iuſtification.
               12 Of good workes.
               13 Of workes before iuſtification.
               14 Of workes of ſupererogation.
               15 Of Chriſte alone without ſinne.
               16 Of ſinne after Baptiſme.
               17 Of predeſtination and election.
               18 Of obtayning ſaluation by Chriſte.
               19 Of the Churche.
               20 Of the aucthoritie of the Churche.
               21 Of the aucthoritie of generall Counſels.
               22 Of Purgatorie.
               23 Of miniſtring in the congregation.
               24 Of ſpeakyng in the congregation.
               25 Of the Sacramentes.
               26 Of the vnworthyneſſe of the Miniſters.
               27 Of Baptiſme.
               28 Of the Lordes ſupper.
               29 Of the wicked whiche eate not the body of Chriſte.
               
                  30 Of both kyndes.
               31 Of Chriſtes one oblation.
               32 Of the mariage of Prieſtes.
               33 Of excommunicate perſons.
               34 Of traditions of the Churche.
               35 Of Homilies.
               36 Of conſecration of Miniſters.
               37 Of ciuill Magiſtrates.
               38 Of chriſtian mens goods.
               39 Of a chriſtian mans othe.
               40 Of the ratification.
            
         
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie, in Anno Domini. 1571.
            * Cum priuilegio Regiae maieſtatis.
         
         
            
            
               
                  LOVE KEPYTH THE LAWE OBEYETH THE KYNGE AND IS GOOD TO THE COMMEN WELTHE
                  PRVDENCIA IVSTICIA PRO LEGE REGE ET GREGE
               
            
            
         
      
   