
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A BOOKE of certaine Canons, concernyng ſome parte of the diſcipline of the Churche of England.
            In the yeare of our Lord. 1571.
            
            
               AT LONDON Printed by Iohn Daye, dwellyng ouer Alderſgate.
               
            
            ¶ Cum gratia & Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
         
            
            
               3. Of Byſhops.
               6. Of Deanes of churches.
               9. Of Archdeacones.
               11. Of Chauncelors. &c.
               17. Of Churchwardens.
               22. Of Preachers.
               24. Of Reſidence.
               25. Of Pluralities.
               25. Of Scholemaſters.
               27. Of Patrones. &c.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Of Byſhoppes.
               ¶ Here foloweth in this booke ſome certayne articles of the holy miniſterie, and of the offices of the Church, fully agreed vpon by Matthew Archbyſhoppe of Caunterburie, Primate of all England, and Metropolitane, and all other Byſhops of the ſame Prouince, which were partly preſent in perſon, and partly ſubſcribed by the handes of their Proctors, in a Synode begonne at London in the Church of S. Paule, the thirde day of April. 1571.
               
                  ALl Byſhoppes ſhall diligently teach the Goſpell, not onely in their Cathedrall Churches which they 
                     •…
                  uerne, but alſo indifferently in all the Churches of euery of their Dioces, where they ſhall thynke it moſt needfull.
               
                  
                     〈◊…〉
                   
                  
                     ••…
                  pally they ſhall exhort their people 
                     〈◊〉
                   the reading & hearing of the holy ſcriptures, and that they come together in times appoynted, euery man to his owne Church, and that they geue eare diligently to the preachers of the Goſpell, and that both they do heare reuerently the godly prayers, which ſhall be ſpoken by the Miniſter, and alſo pray them ſelues with hym, and that they be partakers of the heauenly miſteries, as they be now godly ordeined

and lawfully in our churches by the authoritie and commaundemente of the whole Realme.
               Euery Byſhop before the fyrſt day of September next, ſhall call vnto him the publique preachers, ſuch as ſhall be in his owne dioceſſe, and ſhall require againe of them, their licences of preaching, which they haue ſigned with any autenticall ſeale, which they ſhall retaine with themſelues, or els aboliſh. After prudent choiſe made of them, he ſhall geue readilye agayne new licences to them whom he ſhall finde able to that great office, in reſpect of they 
                     •••
                  res, doctrine, iudgement, honeſtie of lyfe▪ 
                  
                     •••…
                  ie, and grauitie: and yet ſo that they 
                     〈◊…〉
                  he to the articles of Chriſtian religion, 
                     ••••…
                  ly approued in the Synode, and that 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ake promiſe willingly to mayntayne 
                     〈◊…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  hat doctrine, which is contayned in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   moſt agreeable to the veritie of Gods w
                     •••…
                  
               
               The Biſhop muſt very diligently 
                     〈◊…〉
                   what maner of men he do admit into hys houſholde: for it chaunceth ſometymes where thys foreſight is not vſed, that wicked men, & enemies to the true religion, vicious men, and corrupte in all theyr life, yea, and men voyde of grace, be admitted. Whereby the aduerſary wyll ſoone take occaſion to ſpeake euill.
               The Byſhops ſeruauntes ſhal ſo modeſtly & orderly apparel thēſelues, in euery part of their garments, that they do not offend their brethrē whom Paule calleth of the houſholde of fayth.
               
                  The Byſhop ſhall lay his handes on none henceforward, but ſuch as haue bene trayned vp in good letters, eyther in the vniuerſitie, or ſome other inferior ſchole, or that doth vnderſtande the Latine tongue competently, and hath bene well exerciſed in the holy ſcriptures: nor yet on any, except he be of that lawfull age which is appoynted by the ſtatute and lawe: nor except hys lyfe & honeſt behauiour, be commended by the teſtimony of graue and godly men, and ſuch as are well knowne vnto the byſhop: nor on any that hath bene brought vp in huſbandrie, or ſome other baſe and handicraft labour: nor on any, but ſuch as haue ſome title (as they call it) whereby he may liue, if by Gods ſufferaunce, he become blinde, or fall into greeuous ſickneſſe of the body, or into a continuall & languiſhing diſeaſe: nor except he will exerciſe the holy miniſtery wythin hys owne dioceſſe: nor at any other time, but when it ſhal chaunce, that ſome place of miniſtration is voyde in the ſame dioceſſe. And he ſhall admitte no ſtraunger, nor any that he knoweth not, eyther to the profites of any benifice, or to eccleſiaſticall miniſterie, except he bring wyth him that Byſhops letters of commendations, which they cal letters dimiſſories, out of whoſe dioceſſe he came.
               The byſhop ſhal not graunt vnto any man the next, or ſecond, or thirde aduouſon (as they cal it) of any prebend or benefice belonging vnto him: for thoſe aduouſons are far from good

doynges and chriſtian charitie: neyther ſhall he ratifie and confirme the leaſes of any profites or reuenewes of any parſonage, or eccleſiaſticall benefice, for terme of many yeares, in any wiſe.
               The Byſhop ſhall ſuffer no man to be occupyed in the miniſtration of the Church, which calleth himſelfe by the idle name of a Reader, not hauing receiued impoſition of handes.
               Euery Archbiſhop and Biſhop ſhal haue in hys houſe The holy Bible in the largeſt volume, as it was lately printed at London, and alſo that full and perfect hiſtory, which is intituled Monumentes of Martyres, and other ſuch lyke bokes, fit for the ſetting forth of religion. Theſe bookes muſt be placed eyther in the hall, or in the great chamber, that they may ſerue to the vſe of their ſeruauntes, and of ſtraingers.
            
            
               Deanes of Cathedrall Churches.
               
                  THe very ſame bookes, which we ſpake of laſt, euery Deane ſhall cauſe to be bought, and to be beſtowed in his Cathedrall Church, in ſuch conuenient place, that the vicares and peticanons, and other miniſters of the Church, as alſo ſtraungers and forrieners may eaſely come vnto them, and read thereon.
               The Deane, and euery chiefe Reſidentarie,

whome they call the dignities of the Church, ſhall buye the ſame bookes euery one for hys owne family, and ſhall lay them in ſome fitte place, eyther in hall, or in the chamber.
               The Deane & his prebendaries ſhall preach the worde of God diligently, not onely in the cathedrall Church where they liue, but in other Churches alſo of the ſame Dioces, and eſpecially in the ſame places whence they receaue yearely reuenewes and profites. Which if they do not, they ſhall be puniſhed according to the diſcretion of the Byſhop.
               No Deane, nor Archdeacon, nor Reſidentarie, nor maſter, nor warden, nor head of any colledge, or cathedrall church, neither preſident nor rector, nor any of that order, by what name ſoeuer they be called, ſhall hereafter weare the Graye Amice, nor any other garment which hath bene defiled with ye like ſuperſtition. But euery one of them in their churches ſhall weare onely that linnen garment, which is as yet reteined by the Queenes commaundement, and alſo hys Schollers hoode, according to euery mans calling, and degree in ſchole.
               Euery Deane ſhalbe reſident in hys cathedrall Church, foure tymes a yeare at the leaſt. And ſhall continue there, by the ſpace of a moneth euery time (if he may poſſibly) in preaching the worde of God, and keeping good hoſpitalitie, except he ſhall be otherwyſe letted with weighty, and vrgent cauſes. Which cauſes he ſhall at euery ſuch time, declare vnto hys

Ordinary. When he is come to the Church, he together with hys prebendaries reſident, ſhall foreſee that the ſtatutes of his church, if they be not contrary to the woorde of God (as many are) and that the ſtatutes of this realme whatſoeuer, concerning eccleſiaſticall order, and all Iniunctions, eyther ſet foorth by the Queenes Maieſtie, or enioyned by the biſhop in his viſitation of the ſame Church, be diligently obſerued. Moreouer the Deane and Reſidentaries ſhall endeuour as much as lyeth in thē, that the peticanons or vicares, and other miniſters of their Church, (leſt they lyue idlely and vnprofitably in ſlouthfulnes, and geue themſelues to vnlawfull gaming) be conſtrayned to the ſtudye of the holy Scriptures, and that euery one of them haue the new Teſtament, not onely in Latine, but alſo in Engliſh.
               The Deanes and Reſidentaries ſhall ſee that there be no other forme obſerued in ſinging, or ſaying prayers, or in the adminiſtration of the Sacramentes, but onely that which is ſette foorth, and preſcribed in the booke of Common Prayers: neyther ſhall they ſuffer any ſtraunger to preach vnto the people, except the Queenes Maieſtie, or the Archbiſhop of the ſame Prouince, or the Byſhop of the ſame Dioces, haue graunted him licence thereunto. And if ſuch a Preacher ſo allowed, eyther by the Queenes Maieſtie, or by the Archbiſhop, or Byſhop, ſhall in hys Sermon publiſh any doctrine eyther ſtraunge, wicked, or diſagreeable

wyth the worde of God: or with the Articles of our Religion, agreed vpon in the Conuocation houſe (which no doubt are conſonant to the Scriptures,) or with the booke of common Prayers: the Deane, or the Reſidentes, ſhall aſſone as may be, geue notice of the ſame to the Byſhop, by theyr letters, ſubſcribed alſo with ſome of theyr handes, which hearde him preach: that he may determine on the matter, as he ſhall ſee good.
            
            
               Archedeacons.
               
                  EVery Archedeacon ſhall haue in hys houſe, both the other bookes, and namely thoſe which are entituled, Monumentes of Martyrs.
               
               Euery Archedeacon whiche hath authoritie to viſite, eyther by common law, or by preſcription, ſhall viſite hys territory once euery yeare in hys owne perſon: and he ſhall not ſubſtitute any to be his Officiall, but ſuch a one as hath bene brought vp in the vniuerſities, and hath ſtudyed the ciuill law, and is of the full age of xxiiij. yeares, beyng able not onely in learnyng, but alſo in grauety, and modeſty to diſcharge that office.
               Archedeacons and theyr ſubſtitutes (whom they call Officialles) ſhall call the clergie to accompt in theyr viſitations, how much euery one of them hath profited in the ſtudy of Scripture, and ſhall geue vnto ſo many of them, as

haue not taken the degree of a maiſter of Arte vpon them in the vniuerſitie, ſome parte of the new Teſtament to be learned without booke, and at the next Synode ſhall compell them to make repetition thereof: and they ſhall detecte vnto the Biſhop, ſuch as are eyther ſtubburne, or negligent herein.
               When the viſitation is finiſhed, the Archedeacon ſhall ſignifie vnto the Byſhop, whome he hath founde in euery Deanery, ſo furniſhed with learnyng and iudgement, that they may be thought worthy to enſtruct the people in ſermōs, and to rule and gouerne others. Of theſe the biſhop may chuſe ſome, whome he wil haue rural Deanes.
               Archdeacons ſhall ſtraightly and ſeuerely puniſh all offenders; & not winke at their faultes, or ſuffer any man to eſcape vnpuniſhed, who is knowen to haue offended.
               Archedeacons ſhall haue a ſpeciall care, that the monumentes of theyr actes, and doinges be faythfully and ſafely preſerued: and ſhall once euery yeare bryng to theyr biſhop, all the originall copies of ſuch teſtamentes, which ſhalbe proued before them the yeare before, that they may be preſerued by the Biſhops Regiſter. They ſhall write out the copies of the ſame Teſtamentes to their owne vſe, if they wyll.
            
            
               
               Chauncellors, Commiſſaries. and their Officials.
               
                  EVery Chauncellor, Commiſſary and officiall, ſhalbe learned in the eccleſiaſticall and ciuil lawes, and ſuch one as is twenty and ſixe yeres olde, and hath taken ſome degrée in the ſcholes for learninges ſake, and is reaſonably well practiſed in courſe of law, touching whoſe lyfe and maners, no euill reporte be heard. Beſides, euery one of theſe either ſhall be in the miniſterie, or if he be not, yet ſhall he be well affected, and zealouſly bent toward religion, and ſuch he ſhall openly and freely ſhew himſelfe, and before he enter his office, he ſhall take an othe of the authoritie and ſupremacy of the Prince, and alſo ſhall ſubſcribe to the articles of religion allowed in the conuocation of Biſhops.
               None of theſe, neyther Chauncellor, Commiſſary nor Officiall ſhal proceede in examination of matters vnto the ſentence of excommunication, but onely in cauſes of inſtances. In matters of correction, they ſhall doe all other things which lawfully they may and are wont to be done.
               But the ſentence of excommunication they ſhall leaue onely to the Byſhoppe, which either he himſelfe ſhall pronounce, or ſhall commit the pronouncing therof to ſome graue man, which is in the miniſterie. After that he hath geuen ſentence, he ſhall alſo adde, for a warning and terror to the people, a certaine order of wordes

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
vpon in the conuocation, and whereſoeuer the Byſhop ſhall commaunde, ſhall declare hys conſcience to the people, what he thynketh of thoſe articles, and the whole doctrine. And he beyng once admitted into the holy miniſtery, ſhall from thencefoorth neuer departe from it, nor ſhall vſe himſelfe as a laye man, eyther in apparell, or in any part of his lyfe.
               Euery Parſon, Vicar, or Curate ſhall yearly before twenty dayes after Eaſter, exhibite to the Biſhop, or to his Chaūcellor or Commiſſary, the names and ſurnames of his pariſhoners, as well men, as women, (of thoſe I ſay) which beyng fourtene yeares of age, come not to the holy Communion (as by the ſtatutes and eccleſiaſticall lawes of thys Realme, they are bound) & ſuch as refuſe to be examined by the miniſter of the church, in learnyng the Catechiſme, and articles of chriſtian religion, and what parentes or maiſters thincke ſcorne to ſende theyr children or ſeruauntes to churche, at the tymes appoynted, to heare and learne the ſame Catechiſme. They ſhall ſuffer none to vndertake for an Infante at Baptiſme, except he haue receiued the Communion, and haue bene partaker of the holy miſteries, and he ſhal admit none to the partaking of the ſacramēts, which hath not learned the Catechiſme, and articles of the fayth.
               Euery ſonday and holiday, the parſons, vicars, and curates, ſhall come to the churche ſo timely and conueniently in due ſeaſon, that the

pariſhioners hauyng done theyr buſines, may come thether wt their children & ſeruantes. And there they ſhall reuerently, (as it is fit) & godly ſay or ſing the holy ſeruice, ſo plainly, ſo manifeſtly, & diſtinctly, that the people may heare & vnderſtand, what is ſayd or ſong, & therof receaue comfort and commoditie. The lyke reuerence and godlynes they ſhall obſerue in celebratyng the moſt holy Sacramentes, ſo that they turne not to ſuperſtition, or worſhipping, or Idolatrie. But if that in tyme of the holy Communion there ſhalbe no ſermon, they ſhall on the booke in the pulpit read ſome one, or other of thoſe homelies, which we haue to that end ſet foorth before. In the meane tyme they ſhall exhorte the people, to come diligently to Church, that they attentiuely heare that which is read and ſayd, and that all the tyme thereof, they vſe themſelues reuerently and modeſtly: and leaſt the godly may be offended thorough wantonnes and lightnes, voyde of religion, they ſhall take heede that young men, eſpecially contreymen, (whoſe nature is more prone to the contempt of godlines, and to diſorder) neyther ryng belles, neyther walke in the churches, nor haue idle talke together, nor by laughing, or noyſe, or vnhoneſt ieſting, eyther let the miniſter, or offend the people.
               They ſhall admoniſh the people to come oftner to ye holy Cōmunion, & that before, they prepare themſelues wt a perfect minde, as it is fit. And that all may vnderſtand, what duty they owe

to God: what dutie to the Prince whome they ought to loue & reuerence as the vicar of God: what they owe to the lawes, what to the magiſtrates, what to their brethren, what to the people of God: they ſhall be ready in the church ſtraight after noone, euery ſonday & holyday, & there at the leaſt, they ſhall read two houres, and teach the catechiſme, and therein ſhall inſtruct all theyr flocke, of what age or degree ſoeuer, not onely maydens and children, but alſo the elder, if neede be. But eſpecially they ſhall warne young folkes, not onely men, but alſo women, that it is prouided by the lawes, that none of them may either receiue the holy communion, or be maried, or vndertake for a childe in Baptiſme, except before, they haue learned the principles of Chriſten religion, and can fitly and aptly aunſwere to all the partes of the Catechiſme.
               But if the parſons, vicars, or curates, either can not preache, or haue not receiued licence to preach of the Byſhop, yet they ſhall teach children to read, to write, and know theyr duty toward God, toward theyr parentes, and alſo others: and if they perceaue any of them to be of that diſpoſition, that by teachyng and inſtruction, they may attayne to the knowledge of learnyng, they ſhall counſell theyr parentes, to ſet them to ſchole, that beyng endewed wyth learnyng, they may one day become fit for the holy miniſtery of the mighty God: but whome they perceaue to be duller, and not diſpoſed to

learnyng, to ſee them ſet to ſome other ſcience, or to huſbandrie.
               They ſhall alſo warne their pariſhioners, that for great and weightie cauſes it was appointed in the cōuocation by the Reuerend father in God, Matthew Archbyſhop of Canterburie, and the other biſhops, that children mary not, without conſent of the parentes, and that no young man hath power in hymſelfe to contract mariage, before he be xvj. yeares of age, and no mayde before ſhe be xiiij. yeares olde.
            
            
               Churchewardens and and ſyde men.
               
                  CHurchewardens according to the cuſtome of euery pariſhe, ſhalbe choſen by the conſent of theyr pariſhioners, and theyr miniſter: otherwiſe they ſhall not be churchwardens: neyther ſhall they continew any lenger then one yeare in that office, except perhaps they be choſen againe. And all churchwardens once euery yeare ſhal geue vp iuſt accounte of ſuch money, as they haue receaued: and alſo particularly ſhall ſhewe, what coſte they haue beſtowed in reparations, and for the vſe of the Church. Laſt of all goyng out of their offices, they ſhall truly deliuer vp to the pariſhioners, whatſoeuer money, or other eccleſiaſticall thinges ſhall remayne, & be in their handes, that it may be redeliuered by them to the next churchwardens.
               
                  The Churchewardens ſhall ſee, that the churches be diligently and well repayred, with lead, tyle, lyme, and glaſſe, that neyther the miniſter, nor the people, either in the holy miniſterie and worſhippyng of God, or in celebratyng the heauēly miſteries, or in receauing and hearing the Communion, be troubled wyth tempeſtuous weather. But eſpecially they ſhall looke vnto, that in euery meting of the congregation peace be well kept: and in all viſitations of byſhops and archdeacons, they ſhal truly and perſonally preſente, and name all thoſe, which rudely behaue themſelues in the church, or whiche by vntymely ringing of belles, by walkyng, by talking, or noyſe, ſhall let the miniſter or preacher.
               Churchwardens ſhall ſee, that the churches be kept cleane & reuerently, yt they be not lothſome to any, either by duſt, ſande, or any filthynes. They ſhall alſo ſee, that the holy Bibles be in euery church in the largeſt volume (if it may conueniently be) ſuch as were lately imprinted at London: that the booke of common prayers, that the holy homelies, and the homelies which lately were written againſt rebelliō, be in euery church. It is meete that theſe bookes be whole and cleane, not torne or foule in any wiſe, leſt it breede irkſomnes or contempte amongeſt the people. They ſhall ſee, there be a fayre ioyned table, which may ſerue for the adminiſtration of the holy Communion, and à cleane clothe to couer it: à conuenient pulpit, whence the heauenly

doctrine may be taught. Moreouer they ſhall ſee, that all roodloftes, in which woodden croſſes ſtood, & all other reliques of ſuperſtitiō be cleane takē away, that the walles of ye churches be new whited, and decked with choſen ſentences of the holy Scripture, that by the reading and warning thereof, the people may be moued to godlines. Laſt of all they ſhall ſee, that in euery church there be à holy founte, not a baſen, wherein Baptiſme may be miniſtred, and it be kept comely and cleane.
               They ſhall alſo warn tauerners, alehouſekepers & victualers, which ſel meat or drink, that they receiue none into their tauern or alehouſe, all ye time, wherin either is preaching, or cōmon ſeruice. If any do contrary, vpon contempte or ſtubbernes, they ſhall preſent both him, & them whome he receaued, by name in the next viſitation. If any offend theyr brethren, eyther by manifeſt adultery, or whoredome, or inceſt, or drunkennes, or much ſwearing, or baudry, or vſurie, or any other vncleanes and wickednes of life, let the churchwardens warne them brotherly and freendly, to amende. Which except they do, they ſhall by name ſhewe them to the parſon, vicar, or curate, that they may be warned more ſharply and vehemently of them: and if they continue ſo ſtill, let them be driuen from the holy Communion, till they be reformed: And that all which liue vnchaſtly and looſely, be puniſhed by the ſeueritie of the lawes, according to their deſertes. The ſame Churchwardens

ſhall preſent thoſe adulterers, whoremongers, inceſtuous, drunkardes, ſwearers, baudes, and vſurers in the Biſhops, and Archdeacons viſitations.
               Churchwardens ſhall ſuffer no feaſts, bankets, ſuppers, or common drinkings to be kept, in the church, neyther the belles to be rong ſuperſtitiouſly, either in the feaſt of all ſoules, or ye day after all ſaintes (which day not long ſince was kept holy for the ſoules of the dead) neyther at any tyme at all, whereas the cuſtome of ringing ſhall ſeeme to encline to ſuperſtition. They ſhall ſuffer ringing onely at thoſe tymes, which are appoynted in the booke of aduertiſementes, and to that onely vſe, and after that onely order.
               It ſhall not be lawfull to keepe fayres, and common markets vpon the ſonday: neyther on that day to put to death, and openly puniſh offenders cōdemned by the ſentence of ye Iudge.
               They ſhall not ſuffer, that any of theſe light wanderers in markettes, and pelting ſellers, which carry about, and ſell pinnes, points, and other ſmall trifles, whom they call pedlars, to ſet out their wares to ſale, either in the churchyeardes, or in the porches of churches, or any where els, on holidayes or ſondayes, whileſt any part of the holy miniſtery is in doing, or any ſermon is preached, neyther that beggars, or vagabondes, which haue no certain dwelling, abyde eyther in the churchyearde, or in the church porch, all the time of ſeruice, or preaching:

but ſhall commaunde them, either to come in, or to depart.
               They ſhall alſo ſearch, and diligently enquire, if any of the pariſhioners eyther come not at all to church, or come later or ſlower at ye times appointed by the lawes: and whom they ſhall finde ſo to offende, they ſhall puniſh them, according to the appointing of the lawe. They ſhall marke whether al & euery of the pariſhioners come ſo often euery yeare to the holy communion, as the lawes & ſtatutes do cōmaund: and whether any ſtraingers from other pariſhes, come more often and commonly to their church, and ſhall ſhew their curate of them, leſt perhaps he admit them to the Lordes table amongſt others, but ſhall ſende them rather to their owne curates.
               They ſhall receiue no parſon, nor vicar, to the miniſtery of theyr church, but whome the Biſhop ſhall allow by his inſtitution, and by hys mandate ſhall put in poſſeſſion of that church. They ſhall receyue no curate, but him that by the letters, and ſeale of the Byſhop, is ſpecially appointed for that church. But if the Parſon, Vicar, or Curate, behaue hymſelfe otherwiſe in hys miniſtery, or that he read ill, darckly, and confuſedly, or that he lyue more loſely and licentiouſly then is fitte for à man of that calling, and therby great offence be taken: the churchwardens ſhall ſpedely preſent him to the Biſhop, that by and by he may be puniſhed, and amendment of his fault may follow.
               
                  And that the Byſhop may vnderſtande, what ſermons are made in euery church of hys dioces: the Churchwardens ſhall ſee, that the names of all preachers, which come to them from any other place, be noted in a boke, which they ſhall haue ready for that purpoſe, and that euery preacher ſubſcribe his name in that boke, and the name of the Byſhop, of whom he had licence to preach.
               Laſt of all, the Churchwardens ſhall ſee, that all thinges be diligently obſerued, which pertayne to theyr offices, and that are contayned in the Queenes iniunctions, and the boke of aduertiſementes, and that ſhall be ſet foorth by the Archbiſhop or Biſhop in euery their viſitations, for the vſe of the Churches. But if any do rayle vpon them, or goe to law with them, for doing theyr dutie, and detecting of offenders, that alſo they ſhall preſente vnto the Biſhop, that by his meanes and trauaill they may more eaſely be deliuered from that trouble.
            
            
               Preachers.
               
                  NO man ſhal openly preach in his pariſh, but being licenced by ye Biſhop, neyther hereafter ſhall be ſo bold, as preach out of his own cure & church, except he haue obtayned licence ſo to preach, eyther of the Queenes Maieſtie, ouer all her realme: eyther of the Archbiſhop, through hys prouince: or of the Biſhop, in his dioces. And

no licence to preach, ſhall hereafter ſtande in force, but that which hath bene obtayned after the laſt day of Aprill, which was in the yeare, 1571. Preachers ſhall behaue them ſelues modeſtly and ſoberly in all their life.
               But chiefly they ſhall take heede, that they teach nothing in their preaching, which they would haue the people religiouſly to obſerue, and beleue, but that which is agreeable to the doctrine of the olde Teſtament, or the newe, and that which the catholike fathers, and auncient Biſhops haue gathered out of that doctrine. And becauſe thoſe articles of Chriſtian religion, agreed vpon by the Biſhoppes, in the lawfull, and godly conuocation, and by the commaundement, and aucthoritie of our noble princeſſe Elizabeth aſſembled and holden, vndoubtedly are gathered out of the holy bookes of the olde, and newe Teſtamente, and in all pointes agree with the heauenly doctrine contayned in them: becauſe alſo the booke of common prayers, and the booke of the conſecration of Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Miniſters and Deacons containe nothing repugnant to the ſame doctrine, whoſoeuer ſhall be ſent to teach the people, ſhall not onely in theyr preaching, but alſo by ſubſcription confirm the authoritie, and truth of thoſe articles. He that doth otherwiſe, or troubleth the people with contrary doctrine ſhall be excommunicated.
               In preaching they ſhall weare à very modeſt and graue garment, which may becomme

and ſet foorth the miniſter of God, and ſuch as is preſcribed in the booke of aduertiſementes. They ſhall require no money or rewarde for theyr preaching, but ſhall be content with meat and drincke, and playne prouiſion, and one nightes lodging.
               They ſhall teach no vayne, and olde wiues opiniōs, no hereſies, nor popiſh errors, diſagreeing from the doctrine and fayth of Chriſt: neyther any thing at all, whereby the rude people may be ſtirred vp to the deſire of nouelties, or contention. But they ſhall alwayes teach that, which may make for edifying, and may vnite the hearers in Chriſtian peace and loue.
            
            
               Reſidences.
               
                  THe abſence of the ſhepheard from the Lords flocke, and that careles negligence, which we doe ſee in many, and forſakyng of the miniſterie, is à thing in it ſelfe to be abhorred & odious to the people, and pernitious to the Church of God. Therefore we exhort all paſtors of Churches, in the Lorde Ieſu, that foorthwith they returne euery one to theyr pariſhes, and diligently teach the Goſpell, according to their liuing to keep houſe, to helpe the poore by hoſpitalitie, and there to be reſident euery yeare no leſſe then lx. dayes.
            
            
               
               Pluralitie.
               
                  IT ſhall be lawfull for no man, of what degree, or order ſo euer he be, to haue at one time, any more then two eccleſiaſtical benefices: neither ſhal it be lawful for any man at all, to obtain two benifices, if they be diſtant more then xxvj. miles.
            
            
               Of Scholemaſters.
               
                  IT ſhall not be lawfull for any to teach the Latine tongue, or to inſtructe children, neyther openly in the ſcholes, neyther priuately in any mans houſe, but whome the Byſhop of that dioces hath alowed, and to whom he hath geuen licence to teach vnder the ſeale of hys office. And here we except (for honours ſake) the Lordes of the Parliament: but the Biſhop ſhall allow no Scholemaiſter, nor accompt him worthy of yt office, but whom he ſhal finde in his iudgement to be learned, and worthy of that place, and whome he ſhall ſee commended by the teſtimonie of godly men, touching hys life and manners, and eſpecially hys religion.
               Scholemaiſters ſhall teach no Grammer, but onely that, which the Queenes Maieſtie hath commaunded to be read in all Scholes, through the whole Realme, neyther any other Latine Catachiſme, then that which was ſette

forth, in the yeare. 1570. The whiche alſo, that is tranſlated into Engliſh, we wil haue taught vnto children that are ignoraunt of the Latine tongue.
               All other bookes they ſhall teach, whereby the fulnes and finenes of the Latine & Greeke toung may be learned, & thoſe eſpecially, which profite to the knowledge of Chriſt and godlynes. And once euery yeare they ſhall ſignifie to the Byſhop, what choſen ſcholers they haue of all their number, which are of that aptnes, and ſo forward in learning, that there may be good hope they will become fitte, either for the common wealth, or for the holy miniſterie. By this hope the parents beyng allured, will more willingly keepe them at ſchole.
               But chiefly they ſhal ſo order and frame the tongues of children, that they may pronounce openly, plainly, and diſtinctly. And as often as any ſermon ſhalbe, they ſhall either ſend them, or bring them to church, that from their childhode they may be brought vp in godlines: & leſt they ſhould heare it negligently: at their return to ſchole, they ſhall call and examine euery one, what they haue learned out of that ſermon: and that the myndes of children, may be the more ſtyrred vp to vertue and diligence: they ſhall rebuke the idle and ſluggiſh, and ſhall prayſe the attentiue and diligent.
            
            
               
               Patrones and Proprietaries.
               
                  THe Biſhop ſhall earneſtly and diligently exhorte patrones of benefices, to conſider the neceſſities of the churches, and to haue before theyr eyes the laſt day, and iudgement, & the tribunall ſeat of God. Therefore that they preferre no man to any eccleſiaſtical liuing, but him whiche by doctrine, iudgement, godlynes, honeſtie, & innocencie of life, is able to beare ſo heauy a burthen, yt they do nothing therin, but vprightly, vncorruptly & truly: & he ſhal profeſſe that he will vſe all honeſt, & lawfull meanes to ſearch out the truth. But if, either in the pre
                     •
                  ē
                  tation, or els after he ſhall perceiue any corruptiō, or ſimony to be committed any way, either cloſely, either directly, or indirectly, by him, or any other, either that money, or moneyworth, or that any commoditie, or any part of the profites ſhould come vnto him: yt he then wil publiſh and declare this wicked deed and ſimonie, not onely in the cathedrall Church, but alſo els where, to his ſhame & perpetuall reproch, & alſo thruſt out that miniſter, whom he ſo wickedly preſented, not onely from the office of a Prieſt, which he vnlawfully entred: but alſo from all miniſtery, and out of the whole Dioces.
               Humble petition muſt be made to the Queenes maieſtie, that ſome way by her leaue and commaundement may be found, that the

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
our byſhop, by the name and authoritie of the moſt mightie God, hath excommunicated him from all company of the churche of God, & hath cut him of as a dead member, from the body of Chriſt: In this ſtate, & in ſo great daūger of his ſoule is he at this time. S. Paule being taught by the inſpiration of the holy ghoſt, commaundeth that we eſchue the fellowſhip, & company of ſuch men, leaſt we be partakers of the ſame wickedneſſe. Yet, as chriſtian charitie warneth vs, becauſe he will not pray for himſelf, neither vnderſtandeth hys daunger, let vs all in hys name pray vnto God, that once he may acknowledge his miſerye and filthines of life, and may repent, and turne vnto God. For our God is mercifull, and can cal them from death, that were fallen.
            
         
      
   