
      
         
            
            
            To the Honourable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgeſſes of the Commons Houſe of Parliament. The Humble Petition of Ierom Hawley Eſquire, for and on the behalfe of Phillip Sture an infant, the ſonne and heire of Triſtram Sture.
            
               
                  Phillip Sture.
                  
                     
                        Iohn Sture.
                        
                           
                              Henry
                              
                                 
                                    Henry, who died without iſſue.
                                 
                                 
                                    Frances a daughter 15. yeeres old.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Triſtram
                              
                                 
                                    Phillip, ſix yeeres olde
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               HVmbly ſheweth, That Phillip Sture the common anceſter, 21. Eliz. vpon the marriage of Iohn Sture his ſon and heire, with Elizabeth one of the daughters of Sir Robert Denis, made a conueyance of his Lands, whereof the greateſt part he limited by that conueyance, to the heires males, ſome to the heyres of the body of Iohn Sture. And the reſt he ſuffered to diſcend in fee-ſimple.
            This eſtate taile, hath bin found in foure ſeuerall ſucceeding Offices, vpon the ſeuerall deaths of Phillip Sture, Iohn Sture, Henry Sture, & Henry Sture, wherof in the 2. firſt offices the deeds are found in hec verba.
            
            There are fifty Leaſes, all reſeruing rent to the heires males, whereof the firſt Leaſe recites a power contained in the deed of intaile to make Leaſes.
            Yet Sir Miles Fletwood, hauing gotten the Wardſhip of Frances the heire generall, and to aduance a marriage for his ſonne after 35. yeeres peace, that is to ſay, Hil. 12. Iac. to draw into queſtion this intaile againſt Triſtram then heire male, did ſo farre preuaile, as that Hil. 13. Iac. he obtained a Decree.
            This Decree hath theſe parts.

                  1. It doth direct a Iury in matter of fact, and commandeth them to finde, that the moſt part of the Lands limited to the heires male, did not paſſe by the conueyance.
                  2. It reſtraines a Iury to finde otherwiſe then is thereby directed.
                  3. It inioynes the defendant from giuing of euidence vnto the Iurie.
                  4. It forbids the Commiſſioners to take any verdict offered by the Iury, if it purſue not the directions of the Decree.
               
Sir Miles Fletwood vpon this Decree tooke forth three ſeuerall Commiſſions, 18. Martij, 13. Iac. a Iury was impannelled in the Country, heard their euidence, were agreed for the heire male. Sir Miles Fletwood, a iudiciall officer in the Court, did proſecute this cauſe in perſon, and diſcouering the opinion of the Iury, did publikely chide them, and with much importunity perſwaded the Iury to craue further time to conſider of their euidence: and thereuppon at the inſtance of Sir Miles Fletwood they were adiourned ouer vnto the next Seſſions.
            But in the meane time, Sir Miles got that Iury to be diſcharged vpon a bare ſuggeſtion, that the Iury was too meane to trie ſo great a matter: whereas M. Thomas Iſacke the Foreman, is a wiſe vnderſtanding Gentleman, and hath aboue 800. li. Land per annum, and 14. of the reſt of that Iury, he that had leaſt, was worth 3000. li.
            In Eaſter Terme, 14. Iac. a new Iury of Eſquires and Gentlemen was returned, in Iuly 14. Iac. they heard their euidence in the Country (Sir Miles ſtil proſecuting in perſon.)
            But Sir Miles Fletwood afterward perceiuing, that the Iury had declared themſelues to be againſt his pretended Title, got that ſecond Iury likewiſe to be diſcharged, and a new Iury of Knights and Eſquires to be returned, who were enioyned to appeare at the barre. Which Iury accordingly appeared in Eaſter Terme, 15. Iac. the heire male brought his witneſſes out of Deuon, & his Councell to the barre. But none were heard, the Iury was ſent from the barre, and charged to find according to the Decree. This matter being notorious to the Country, the Iury returned anſwer, that the Decree alone gaue their conſciences no ſatisfaction, & vnleſſe they might receiue euidence, they could finde no office. Whereupon after 3. or 4. dayes attendance, they were adiourned ouer til Michaelmas Terme following. No. 3. they appeared againe at the barre, continued ſtill of the ſame minde, were bound to appeare de die in diem, were examined vpon Interrogatories, were threatned with fines and impriſonment, were continued ſo from day to day, aboue 3. weekes, and then M. Hingſton dying in that ſeruice, the reſt of the Iury were diſcharged.
            By this time Sir Miles Fletwood did perceiue, that able and vnderſtanding men were not for his purpoſe; and therefore it was deuiſed, that a meaner Iury would be found more tractable, and thereupon a fourth Iury was returned, but that was ſo meane, as that vpon the Commiſſioners certificate, 8. of them were diſcharged for inſufficiency, and 8. others put into their roomes.
            This Iury was often ſummoned, but the example of the precedent Iury ſo terrified them, as that ſo long as there was any order to force them vp to the bar, they could neuer be drawne to appeare: but that order being diſcontinued, the Iury preſently appeared, were ſworne and charged in the Country: the heire-male brought his witneſſes and Councell; preſſed the Commiſſioners to proceed, but the Councell for Sir Miles Fletwood pretended they were not ready, and therefore deſired, that the Iurie might be diſcontinued, which vpon their motion was done accordingly.
            This Iury being thus diſcharged, Sir Miles inuented a new proiect, got an order for the reſummoning of the ſame Iury againe, drew paper draughts of ſuch offices as he deſired to be found, procured the Court to ſigne thoſe paper draughts, and by order to giue directions vnto the Commiſſioners, not onely to fine the Iury, but likewiſe to binde them ouer to the barre, if they refuſed to finde the ſaid offices.
            Depending this Iury, the heire male was a ſutor to the Court to review the Decree, & vpon a long ſuit, and many daies hearing in Court, by the honorable Iuſtice of the now Maſter, the heire male was ſet at liberty from that Decree.
            Onely this inconuenience ſtill reſts vpon the heire male, That there is a ſixt Iury returned, and by the ſolicitation of S. Miles they are enioyned to appeare at the bar, there to heare their euidence. This courſe is conceiued to be,
            1. A great taxation to the Country, to draw Iurors to London, almoſt 200. miles from their dwellings, to finde offices.
            2. A great miſchiefe to the heire male. For by this deuice, he ſhall loſe the benefit of his witneſſes, they being many in number, and ſome of them blinde and very old, and cannot be brought to London, beſide the great charge hee hath already ſuſtayned, amounting to 1200. li. by meanes of this vexation.
            Sir Miles Fletwood hath bin finding of an office now full 7. yeares and more. He hath had 14. ſeuerall Commiſſions, and 6. ſeuerall Iuries. Thoſe Iuries haue attended aboue 20. ſeuerall adiournments. The Wards rents are ſequeſtred. His Maieſtie is kept by theſe ſuits, from the compoſition and benefit of Wardſhip.
            
               Therefore it is humbly prayed, That by the wiſedome of this honourable Parliament, ſome prouiſion may be made:

                     1. That the conſcience of Iurors be not from henceforth reſtrained in queſtions of fact.
                     2. That the ſubiect may be at liberty to giue euidence.
                     3. That no Iury be drawne to the Barre, out of the proper Countie to finde any office.
                     4. That no Office be an informer in the ſame Court.
                  
               
            
            
               〈…〉
            
         
      
   