
      
         
            
            
               ❧ A loyfull continuance of the Commemoration of the moſt proſperous and peaceable Reigne of our gratious and deare Soueraigne Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God of England, Fraunce and Irelande, Queene. &c.
Nowe newly enlarged with an Exhortation applyed to this preſent tyme.
Set foorth this xvii. day of Nouember beyng the fyrſt day of the .xxi. yeere of her Maieſties ſaid reigne.
            
            By Edw. Hake. Gent.
            
               Herevnto is added a Thankeſgiuing of the godly, for her Maieſties proſperitie hitherto: with an earneſt deſire of the longe continuſance of the ſame to Gods glory and our comfort.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, and are to be ſould at his ſhop without Newgate.
         
         
            
            ¶ An Exhortation to all the Queenes Maieſties faythful and obedient Subiects, conſideratly
                to be peruſed of the ſame.
            
            
               
                  MAny are the circumſtances, and thoſe moſte notable (gentle Reader) which in ye review of this my ſmal Pamphlet, haue oft ſoonès agayne offered them ſelues to my conſideration, in the dutiful remembrance of the Quéenes Maieſties moſt proſperous reigne. And I would to God I were able to expreſſo ſome part of that which of ſo many conuenient wryters hath (hitherto in a maner altogether) bene omitted, and yet in my ſimple iudgement, a matter very requiſité to be taken in hand by ſome godly learned, for the prouoking and procuring of ours, and her Maieſties due thankfulneſſe vnto that merciful and marueylous God, of and from whoſe bountifull graces, the ſame hath onely and wholly procéeded. It was in my mynde to haue continued a yéerely remembraunce of the premiſſes, at ſuche tyme as I fyrſt ſet foorth this ſayd Pamphlet, being

then the xviif. yéere of her Maieſties reigne: or at the leaſt, to haue continued the ſame vntil ſome good wryter had bin knowen to haue dipped his penne in this kynde of Argument: But (much to my trouble, and litle to my comfort) I haue bene helde backe by other buſineſſes occaſioned neceſſarily, though not profitablic, in ye vocation wherein I liue. And the tyme being now inſtant, wherein theſe thyngs ought rather to be put foorth, then enterpriſed and begonne. I am conſtrayned with griefe of mynde, to leaue vndone that which I haue bene hytherto as deſirous to accompliſhe, as I am and haue bene willing to enjoy the benefites of ſo excellent a gouernement in common with my brethren..
            It is not a ſlight and vulgare thing (my deare brethren and countreymen) that a royall perſonage ſhoulde be firſt afflicted, & then aduaunced: fyrſt humbled, and then cralted: fyrſt brought downe to the gates of death, and then agayne ſet vp in the wayes of lyfe, and in the throne of principalitie and rule. This is the order of the Lordes ſchoole, this is the courſe of the almightie, and theſe are the onely wayes of the higheſt. By whome ſoeuer hee pleaſeth to worke his worke, in

thoſe he expreſſeth the good tokens of his election. And hath he not dealt ſo with our Elizabeth? Hath not his hand humbled her as a Ioſeph? Hath ſhe not as an Heſter bene proſcribed, and as a Dauid daungerouſly afflicted, before ſhe coulde ſit her downe in the ſeate of her Soueraintie? Hath not tanquam Ouis touched her hart, before the Scepter of Dauid coulde come to her handes? Or hath the Lord of Hoſtes led her vp to the glory of Iacob, before ſhe was throwen downe amongſt ye Habitations of Edom? This (brethren) this is not mans worke: nay, this to the wiſdome of fleſh and blood is vtterly vnknowen, & therefore vtterly vnregarded. A Domino factum eſt iſtud, et eſt mirabile in oculis
               Pſal. 118. 
               noſtris. This (I ſay) is the Lordes worke, and it is marueylous in our eyes. But what? did the Lord for all this, forget to be faythful to the true ſéede of Abraham? or left he the ſoule of poore Ioſeph in the priſon? Gaue he not to good Heſter a Mardocheus? and to his deare Dauid, a Ionathas? And (to ſpeake it playnly) did the Lord leaue our Elizabeth in ye pawes of the Lyon? or gaue be her ouer a praye vntoPſal. 116. her enemies? Hath he not rather deliuered her ſoule from death, her eyes from teares, and her feete from falling? Hath he not broken

aſunder the iawes of the Lyon, reſkued her Maieſtie from the rage of her aduerſaries, & exalted her farre aboue her enemies? Obſerua (ergo) innocentem, et attende iuſtum,
               Pſal. 37. 37 
               quoniam ad extremum erit huic viro pax. And nowe, that all the worlde may knowe this déede to haue bene the Lords deede, loe now, her Maieſtie after all theſe manifolde afflictions, ſitting, and hauing many yeres peaceablie ſitten in the ſeate of her Kyngdome: hath ſhe now bene vnmyndful of the Lords worke? or hath ſhe all this while forgotten beautifullie to begyn, and gloriouſly to enlarge the frame and furniture of the Lords houſe? God graunt that the mercies of the higheſt may herein be vouchſafed vnto her aboundantly, that conſulting with the ſincere & beſt buylders throughout al Iſrael and Iuda, ſhe may procéede to the full finiſhyng thereof according to the true platforme and rule preſcribed in the worde.
            Truely my brethren and Countreymen, if God haue at any time requyred that his mercies ſhould vniuerſally be knowen & celebrated of his people, (as no doubt with ſuch ſacrifices he is wel pleaſed): He hath in the Regiment of this our Soueraigne, called for, and exacted a thankefull memoriall of his ſo memorable and yet vnſpeakeable benefites, not of Prince onely, but of all and euery her highnes Subiects. Looke vpon your peaces Hath there ben like peace with any the nations about you, ſo firme, ſo ſound, and of ſuch continuance? Haue

either domeſticall attempts, or foreyne practiſes as yet preuailed to the ouerthrow of the ſame? Hath either ambitious deſire of Conqueſt drawen you forth to warres abroad? or vnſatiable deſyre of greedy myndes broken aſunder or vntwyned your ſafetie at home? what ſhould I ſay? Who getteth and enioyeth not? Who encreaſeth and poſſeſſeth not? In whoſe hands (my brethren) hath the aboundance of ryches as yet bene ſayd to be the danger of his lyfe, or the ouerthrowe of his welfare?
            Nowe then, if theſe benefites, be benefites which you delite in: if the continuance of them be comfortable: and the onely inſtrument hereof, be our deare Soueraigne, Queene Elizabeth: what els doeth wiſedome then require, but that we ſhould wiſely foreſee to doe the things towards God and her Maieſtie that may eſtabliſhe an happie continuance thereof? And what els doeth thankfulnes looke for at our handes, but that there be in vs a readines to accompliſh the wyll of the higheſt, to hym warde in the obediente of his worde: and to her Maieſtie warde, in the obedience of her Lawes?
            I knowe there are of the faythfull watchmen and good ſhepheards of this lande, that exceedingly feare the continuaunce of theſe ſo glorious benefites: They feare I ſay, that the vnrecouerable wickednes of the people of this tyme and Nation is ſo oppoſed agaynſt the great mercifulneſſe of our God, that theſe heaped tranquilities are nothing els but iudgementes forerunnyng the approchyng dayes of deſolation. I would God therefore, the wayes of Engliſh people were once called to accompt, O I woulde to God we coulde once ſet before vs, on the one ſide, a ſingle view of theſe mightie & marueylous things, which the Lord, the Iehouah, hath wrought and brought to paſſe for our Prince and vs: and on the other ſide, what we haue done, or rather what (like wretches) we haue left vndone of that which mere duetie in common thankefulnes hath requyred at our handes. Touching the one, beſides the miraculous preſeruation of our Prince, euen in thoſe dayes wherein

Antichriſts tyrannie ſwylled vp the blood of Saintes, ſparyng neither ſexe, age, condition nor degree: It is alſo ſet farre beyonde the reache and reaſon of man, that her Maieſtie beyng euer ſince placed, as it were in a Goshen, enuironed about with Egyptians, malitious, aſpyring & blooddy: her royal perſon, her Religion and Peace ſhould neuertheles ſtyl be preſerued from the impeachments of thoſe aduerſaries, & that in ſuch degree, as ye enemies them ſelues haue bene rather tyred in their practiſes, then the one or other of theſe benefites weakned by theyr attemptes. The Rebellion of Abſolon and his complices hath bene ſuppreſſed at home. The trayterous counſailes of Achitophel haue bene confounded both abroad and at home. Dauid hath had an Huſay: yea, the annoynted our Elizabeth hath had and alwayes ſhall haue a Sobi, a Machir and a Berſelai, which wyl laye both goods and lyues at her feete. As for the thundring rage and terrours of Antichriſt and his Champions, what better or greater iſſue hath there ben of them, then of the crackling of thornes flaming vnder a potte? And touchyng the Enchauntments of Egypt, (ſome curſed practiſers whereof haue bene lately ſurpriſed) the true myracles of Moſes and Aaron haue from tyme to tyme ſtil deuoured them. Briefly, the enemies haue wearyed them ſelues in the wayes of trecherie & treaſon, and haue not yet preuayled: They haue graſped at vnhappie conqueſts, and haue bene alwayes yet confounded: their glory hath bene no better yet then the glory of graſſe vpon the houſe toppe, whereof the wycked reapers neuer hytherto fylled their handes, muche leſſe haue layd vp fruits thereof in their impious barnes. O that men would therefore prayſe the LordPſal. 107. for his goodnes, & declare the wonders that he hath done for the children of men: That they would exalt him alſo in the congregation of the people, and loue him in the Seate of the Elders.
            
            
               Now, touching the other part, what hath procéeded from vs towards our God: as the Argument thereof more fitly apperteyneth to be handled by men of greater gyftes: ſo, the time beyng nowe ſhort and the matter large (the Printer alſo enfourming me that euery Page hath his proportion) I muſt for this tyme giue ouer all further diſcourſe thereof: Theſe thinges are onely added to my former ſmall tranayles that I might thereby the better procure a due and true Commemoration of the matter which we nowe celebrate. The God of glory & peace, who hath created, redéemed and continually kept vs vnder the ſhadowe of his mercifull protection, bring to paſſe that thoſe his mercies may worke the ſpéedy amendement of our lyues, to the eſtabliſhing of our peace, and to the euerlaſtyng honour of his name.
            Amen.
         
         
            
               ❧ The Printer to the Reader.
            BY following of the old copy (gentle Reader) of Anno. 18. of her M. raigne, there is a fault eſcaped in the accompt of this preſent 21. yeere: which with thy pen, I pray thee amende .v3. in the fift L cafe for 17. reade 20. and for 18. (in the margent of that leafe) reade 21.
            
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
         
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            ¶ To the worſhipfull, his verie louing Cowſen M. Edwarde Eliotte Eſquier, the Queenes Maieſties Surueyour of all her Honours Manours, Landes and poſſeſſions vvithin her highnes County of Eſſex.
            
               
                  BEinge entred (worshipfull and my beeloued Cowſen) into the meditacion of ye rare gouernment of our renowmed Queene Elizabeth, ſo high and ſo aboundaunte matter of admyration offered it ſelfe to the view of mine vnderſtanding, that I felt my thoughts in ſuch ſorte ſurpriſed with the conſideration thereof, that (for the ſolace of my minde) I yeelded my ſelfe a ioyfull man to ſet downe in wrytynge ſome sup
                  •
               rfitiall diſcourſe vpon the ſame: ſuch, as (at the leaſt within mine owne ſoule) might ſtyre vp and procure the prayſes of God, and draw forwards a dewe thankfulnes vnto his maieſty for the wonderfull benefites that largely (thereby) haue accrewed to the whole body and to euery particuler member of this our Engliſhe Nacion. And loe, no ſooner had I accompliſhed this mocion of my mind (in ſuch ſorte as you may ſee it heere ſet downe in printe) but another Cogitacion began with importunitie

to aſſayle me a freſhe: for beholdinge (with the feruencye of my harte) the truthe of that matter which I had already compyled, and ſeeing yet (farther) ſo gloryous and ſo plentifull a treaſourie remayning to be diſcouered, and that, In perpetuam rei memoriam: I could not chooſe but ſo farre miſtike with the ſclendernes of that which I had alreadye done, as I wiſhed (and not ſlightly) that it woulde pleaſe almighty God (to the eternall praiſes of his holy name) to ſtirre vp the zeale of ſome learned and well approued member to geue abroade for an vniuerſall view, to all Countreies and Nacions of Chriſtendome, in ye hereyicall garniſhment of learning and truth, an exact hiſtorye and declaration of the ſame. And in this cogitaciō, repairing vnto your houſe for the comforte of your friendlye conference, it was the good will of God that I ſhuld diſcloſe mine affections (that way) vnto you, as alſo yt I ſhoulde offer vnto you the hearing of this matter, as it was at that time, thus vnlearnedly penned: where findyng by the like good fauour of god, your learned & friendly neighbour, it was recokned for Gods diuine prouidence, that I ſhould require him alſo to be a hearer of ye ſame. Which learned man (as you know) vpon the hearinge thereof, ſo largely diſpenſed with al thoſe wantes that by learning might (peraduenture) haue binne ſupplyed in this booke, as that by fauoryng & chiefly regarding the vndoubted truth of the matter, he perſwaded that it wold grow no blemyſh at all vnto my credit, neither in reſpect of the breuitie of the woorke, nor yet for the playneſſe and rudenes of the ſtile, yf I ſhould agree to the publiſhing of the ſame in prynt:

whervnto on the one parte, the admyrable works of God ſo exceedingly, aboue humane reaſon, ſhininge forth vnto the world in the royal perſon & regiment of our moſt louing & gracious Queene, and on the other parte, ye ſilence of ye learned ſort (ſilence I may terme it in reſpect of that vehemency which ye woorthines of ye cauſe requireth) & the more then ſtoical & colde conſideraciō of al our engliſh people, who are for ye greateſt part ſo far from thanking, yt they haue no thinking of the ſame: theſe motions I ſay, together wt ye fauorable cēſure & encouragemēts of your ſaid learned neighbor at one inſtant concurringe, I was zealouſly bold to caſt abroad into the view of ye world, this my ſmalle treatiſe, as it were to prouoke the pen of ſome renowmed Homer, & to prepare the harts of al her highnes ſubiects to a further & deper conſideratiō of Gods exceeding & ſuperaboundaunt mercies, yt in the thankfulnes and ſinceritie of their hartes, they might (not for one day ſuperſticiouſly, but for euer) kepe holy vnto ye Lord, ye 
               cōmemoratiō
                of ye moſt proſperous & peaceable raigne of ye ſame our gracious & dere ſoueraigne lady queen Elizabeth. And now (my worſhipful cowſen) bicauſe ye forces of theſe my priuate motions haue in this ſort effected, yt nedes they muſt breake forth (I truſt to ye honor of the higheſt) and the ſame not meanely by occaſion of the encouragemēts which I receiued in your houſe: I cānot reſiſt, but (coactedly as it were by loue) I muſt confer yt dedication thereof (digeſted into this litle boke as you ſee) vpon you, before & aboue ye reſt of my beloued friends: aſſuring you yt (in ye great ioy of my hart) I haue founde you ſo equall vnto mine affections in the fauouring of this cauſe, and in the

comfort that you take by beholdyng the bliſful daies of our ſanctified DEBORA, as alſo ſo Ialous for the Regeſtryng of her highneſſe prayſes (or rather ye prayſes of our God) vnto poſteritie, yt if I knew by what other meane, more acceptably, then thus by the firſt view of theſe my trauayles (employed to ye glory of god) I might manifeſt vnto you the ſincerity of mine affection, vndoubtedly you ſhuld finde me ſo for ward to accompliſhe the ſame, that ye deede it ſelf, to ye vtmoſt limit of my poore degree, ſhuld be enough to make knowne what vnfayned loue I do beare you. And wheras the dedication of all other bookes (for the moſt part) doe ſeeme to craue countinaunce and defence at ye hands of ye patron, this my ſmall booke (aſſure your ſelf) for the dignitie of the perſonage of whom it treateth, as alſo for the truth of ye matter yt it conteineth, ſhalbe able enough (beſides the defence of it ſelfe) to geue both countinaunce and commendation to your perſon, being indeede, the verye man (amongſt men of your place and calling) whoſe loyall harte and religious minde (beſides the conſideracion of priuate duties of loue) may challenge frō me ſuch affection as beſt of al becōmeth a chriſtian louer to his friend ſo wel approued. And though the booke be but litle, yet ye perſonage of whō it treateth is great: and ſo great, as that ye Booke may ſooner be countenaunced with the royaltie of her highneſſe name, than be able (by ye thowſande parte) to ſhow foorth ye number of her princely vertues, much leſſe, of the large benefites that infinitely ariſe vnto our common wealth of England and to euery member of the ſame, by the goodneſſe of her rareſt gouernment: Some particuler partes whereof are (as before is

declared) in theſe Quaires, though brieflye, yet truely diſcourſed.
            But nowe, that you may ſome way anſwere the name of a Patron of this my Booke: although the matter of the ſame hath defence ſufficient in it ſelfe, & in the truth thereof, is able enough to ſtand againſt the faces of al ye enimies of truth: Yet becauſe there is a ſorte of people, which I feare me, more of enuy, then of any true zeale or care of my well doynge (as hauyng an awſtere regard vnto my vocation, which in deede, reſteth in the Study, or rather in a meane place of practiſe of ye cōmon lawes of this Realme) will recken it a matter more then ordinary that I ſhould after this ſorte ſo tranſcende the limits of my ſayd vocation, as ſpendyng my time, or at the leaſt, ſome parte of the ſame, in thyngs by ſemblaunce, ſo far diſcrepaunte from my profeſſion: let my defenſe be ſo made, I beſeeche you, that it may in equall ſort be conſidered, or at the leaſt wiſe by you enforced, not only how muche and how largely loue and zeale are hable to woorke and brynge to paſſe in men otherwhyles conuerſaunt in the conſideration of thynges high and precious, but alſo how ſeemely a thyng it is and how well agreeable with euery vocation to aduaunce and ſet foorth the high prayſes of vertue and vertuous perſonages, as alſo to batter & beate downe the enforcementes of vyce and vicious monſters.
            And for my ſelfe, I haue boldly to affirme vnto all ſuche diſcontented myndes (eſpecially vnto thoſe that haue the common lawes for theyr profeſſion) yt the matter of this my littel booke is not ſo voyde of excuſe, but that by view of the ſubſtaunce & ful ſcope

therof, it may yeelde foorth a ſtronge and ryghtfull defenſe agaynſt theſe nice and ouer curious reprouers: for, as it concerneth the ſpeciall prayſe of God in the Commemoration of the Queenes Maieſties moſt proſperous and peaceable gouernment: So, it is not vnknowne that touchinge the Regiment of Princes, the nature of Lawes, the office of Counſaylers, and the authorytie of Iudges, the volumes of our Lawes are not ſo barrein, but that they may and do miniſter matter aboundantlye to the profeſſors and ſtudents of the ſame, whereby to diſcerne and to deeme indifferently of them all: for whether we would conſider the good and godly gouernment of a Prince by often pardoning of offences in mercye, or by ſharplie puniſhing of offenders in iuſtice, by planting of good & wholeſome lawes, or by repealyng of euill and vnneceſſary Statutes: Not onely Bracton, but alſo the worthy and worſhipfull Knight maſter Foreſcue in ſundrye places of his litle Commentary, verie copiouſly geue foorth matter for the furtherynge of ſtudious wittes in the conſideracion thereof. And no leſſe may be gathered touthyng a difference and ſownd cenſure of honourable Counſayllers: but eſpecially of Iudges & of lawes. Wherupon I truſt I may inferre, yt to praiſe and extolle the admirable gouernment of our renowmed Soueraigne, or to commende the ſowndnes of her lawes, or to aduaunce and ſet forth the wonderfull vertues of her highnes counſayllers, or to acknowledge the rare learning & holyneſſe of her reuerende Iudges: ſo farforth as they be matters (though but ſuperfitially) to be diſcerned and deſcyphred by the Bookes of our Lawes, ſo farre, they are not to be

thought diſcrepaunt or impertinent for a ſtudent of the lawes to treat or to write of.
            But wherfore ſhould I thus carefully ſeeke to defend that which I ſuppoſe, nedeth no reprehenſion? why ſhuld I not rather challenge that liberty that is graunted to euery vocation of learninge, yea to the lawyer himſelf? namely, to intermingle with painful trauayles of the minde, ye pleaſures of ſome exerciſe more plauſible and milde, eſpecially, where the ſame may be practiſed to the glory of god & to the profit of our brethren, as I truſt, this is, or at the leaſt wyſe was intended. Well, if all this notwithſtanding, theſe curious carpers wil neuer be ſatiſfied, let them at their pleaſures blow abroade what they liſt, and holde on in their myſlikings, vntyll in the vanytie of their purpoſes, and the rage of their enuie, they ſhal at the length be glutted with the fulneſſe of rancoure and vnciuill reproches. You (finally) I doubt not, wyl take this gyfte as I meane it, and deeme of it as a thing not vnneceſſarily ſent abroad at this inſtant. God graunt vnto it ſuch effect in the harts of all thoſe vnto whom it ſpecially appertayneth, that they, or rather euery Engliſh ſoule may ſay in ye feruency of a ſownde faith: Domine, quid ego re
                     ••
                  ibuam tibi pro omnibus quae tribuiſti mihi? What rewardPſal. 116. ſhall I geue vnto thee (O Lord) for all the benefittes that thou haſt done vnto me? In which prayer I think it conueniēt here to make an ende. At Barnards Inne this ioyful Eue of our 17. day of Nouember. 1575. with his hande whoſe hart loueth this inſtaunt day and you.
            
               Edward Hake.
            
         
         
            
            The Authours minde vpon the matter of this his litle Booke.
            
               A Publicque peace our highe Iehoue hath wrought:
               A priuate warre, with hate tweene man and man
               Doth Sathan breede. Good ſtate, but life right nought:
               Alas alas, what wretches are we than?
               A Vineyard fenſt, well fenced from decay,
               A State preſeru'd, but people frowarde ay.
               Ah moſt vnkinde that neuer wyll obay.
            
         
         
            Prou. 8. b. Deut. 17. 2
            ¶ Thorowe me doe Kinges reigne: thorowe mee, Counſaylours make iuſt lawes: thorowe mee do Princes beare rule, and all the Iudges of the earth execute iudgement.
            
            Prou. 28. a. Leuit. 26. c.
            ¶ Becauſe of ſinne the lande doth oft chaunge her Prince. But through men of vnderſtandinge and wiſedome a Realme endureth longe.
            
            Prou. 28. c.
            ¶ Where the Prince is without vnderſtanding, there is great oppreſsion and wronge. But if he be ſuch a one as hateth couetouſnes, he shal longe raigne.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Commemoration of the moſt proſperous and peaceable Reigne of our gratious and deere
                Soueraygne Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England, Fraunce and Ireland Queene &c.
               
            
            
               
                  IEhoua, with our ioyned hands,
               and hartes replete with ioye,
               Wée prayſe thée for our noble Quéene,
               the ſhield of our annoye.
               Not wée, not wée (oh greate Iehoue)
               not wée, but thy right hande
               Hath wrought this calme and quiet ſtate,
               in this our Engliſh lande.
               Great Bulles of Baſan roare abroad,
               great curſe from Balac commes,
               Eache Foreyn eare is fild with fight
               and ſownde of fearfull droommes.
               Woe, woe, waymenting woes and feare
               through forein Soyle doth raunge:
               No Coaſt ſo clere where face of warre
               ne makes the cruell chaunge.
               Blood, blood is ſhed in monſtrous wiſe:
               each forein State doth iarre,
               
                  And open Murthers wanting Law,
               in forein Countreies are.
               Fowle fraude & faithleſſe fawning wordes
               in forein Coaſtes do dwell:
               High Seates of ſway in forein Soyles
               of fraude and falſhod ſmell.
               Men, Beaſtes, & fieldes, lawes, loue & truth
               there fall from former ſtates:
               Each thing, each Sexe vncertaine ſtandes
               and honeſt order hates.
               No courſe kept right, no ſeaſons knowne,
               nought there, in ſauety lyes.
               Each good growth yl, each yll growth worſe
               each worſe to worſte doth riſe.
               There, Soyles lie ſackt, there, Mountaines quake
               there loftie Hilles downe ſway:
               There, pleaſant plots yéelde filthy wéede,
               where Fragrant odoures lay.
               The plowed Fields, are there layde waſte
               there, fertile grounds lye baard
               Eache Meadow there, lieth cleane defaſte,
               no plotte of pleaſure ſpaard:
               No lofty Pallace ſtands vpright,
               no place where vertue dwelt,
               Standth there ſo ſownd which of the dinte
               of Battaile hath not felt.
               
                  No Seate in ſauety, nothing helps:
               no dewe Regarde preuailes:
               No right of cauſe there frees from force:
               no Sexe of ſorrow fayles.
               Each noble face ly'th there forlorne,
               each mighty head brought lowe:
               Each valeaunt viſage ſprente with bloude
               there, through the Streates they throw.
               No law relieues: no iuſtice helpes,
               no truthe from daunger frees:
               None there, that liues in godly feare,
               true hope of ſauetie ſees.
               The aged man there drowpth in woe,
               the younge and luſtie Rowte
               Are there ſent foorth to leade their life
               in pyllage round aboute.
               The armed Knights with treaſons trapt,
               the Sages of the land,
               In ſuſpenſe lodge to liue or die:
               thus each ones caſe doth ſtand.
               There, wronged wights with ſilēce ſmart
               and there, th'oppreſt want ayde
               There, Lawes wherby the iuſt ſhuld liue,
               doe make the iuſte afrayde.
               There dwelles no ſounde of ſacred ſonges
               that ſwéetely ſende forth health:
               
                  But there, both dowle and double plaints
               way menting ſorowes telth.
               No Fountaine there ſtands frée from filth:
               no chriſtall Spring runnes cleare:
               In ſtéede of ſtreaming Flouds of life,
               deepe dampes of Death are there.
               And whilſt theſe woes do wander thus,
               as forein coaſtes haue tride,
               Thine engliſh People, Lord, dwell ſafe:
               with them doth peace abide.
               With them doth liue a louing Quéene
               who like a Mother raignes,
               And like a choſen ſacred Impe
               immortall glory gaines.
               Her handes ſhée holdes not foorth to warre,
               her hart doth reſt in peace:
               Shée Ioyes to ſée her peoples wealth
               and wayles their harmes increaſe.
               Thy goſpelles ſownde ſhée ſendes abroade:
               ſhée ſtoppes no wholſome Spring:
               But popiſhe Puddles dammes ſhée vp
               which noyſome humours bring.
               A Prince of price, moſt worthy prayſe
               for thée and in thy name
               Of all that euer Scepter bare,
               of all that euer came
               
                  From Engliſhe loynes to royall Seate:
               I ſay, none worthy more
               Amongſt the race of Engliſhe kings
               that euer Scepter bore.
               I would conteine my ſeruent Muſe,
               Ah Iemme, thy name denyes.
               My prayſe nor all the Poetes pennes
               thy merite can ſuffiſe.
               And higheſt kinge that Welkin wéeldſt
               if hence thy glory come,
               That of a virgin Queene whom thou
               haſt ſet in ſacred Roome,
               Thy peoples peace ſhould be ſuſtainde,
               thy Goſpell ſhould be ſpred,
               Why ſhould my burning Muſe lye ſtill?
               why ſhould my penne lye dead?
               Is hand of fleſhe her firmeſt force?
               is frowning face her ſwaye?
               Doth ſubtile drifts drawe forth her peace,
               or vaunting glory? Nay:
               Of Fleſhe, the feebleſt▪ Sexe by kinde:
               of face not Iunoes féere:
               But mylde Suſanna in her lookes
               and Heſter in her chéere.
               The worke is thine, tis thine Iehoue:
               
               no iote begonne by man:
               
                  Thou fram'dſt her onely for thy praiſe:
               by thee her dayes began:
               All onely thou Iehoua, thou
               haſt wrought her for thy praiſe:
               All onely thou haſt made her déedes
               a wonder to our daies.
               From thée therfore, what ſo ſhee hath,
               from thee her vertues came,
               And her wee praiſe as gifte of thine
               and glory to thy name.
               So planted is her ſouereigne Seate,
               ſo fixed is her Throne,
               That thicke and thréefold wronged wights
               there lay abroade their mone.
               Truth, mercy, peace, and loue poſſeſſe
               her Chayre of royall State:
               No Subiect Soule complaining griefe,
               goes helpleſſe from her gate.
               And what ſhée Rules, by loue ſhée Rules.
               No Force, where loue may winne.
               Firſt friendly warnings fendes ſhee forth
               Eare ſmarting Lawes beginne.
               Her Subiectes bloud ſhée ſéekes to ſaue
               as Apple of her eye:
               They lyue and ſhall, ſaue ſuch as law
               and Iuſtice bids to dye.
               
                  They liue and Ioye, her Foes and all,
               full many kept from Death:
               No eaſe to her, but griefe of minde,
               is loſſe of Subiectes breath.
               Her Subiects goodes ſhée neuer ſéekes:
               none lyues whom ſhée hath ſpoyld
               Her very Foes are frée from force:
               no Foe with force is foyld.
               Yea foes and all, they ſow and reape:
               they plant and eate the fruit,
               They build and buye, no loſſe they take
               vnleſſe by lawfull ſuite.
               Each wight within her royall Realme
               poſſeſſeth as his owne,
               Such ſubſtaunce as by lotte he hath
               and vnto him is growne.
               With quiet courſe in equall ſorte,
               each man in his degree,
               Draw'th forth his daies and ſpend'th his time
               full orderly to ſee.
               Wrong reſteth no mannes right by might
               wher Princes ayde is crau'de:
               The poore with ritche contend a like:
               by Law their Rights bee ſau'de.
               No Law lockt vp, no Iuſtice ſtopt,
               no one through her takes wrong.
               
                  O noble Prince, and haſt thou liu'de
               a vertuous Quéene ſo longe?
               And hath thy name Elyzabeth,
               
               ſo many yeares ſuſtainde
               The cauſe of Trueth, and runne that race
               that vertue hath ordeinde?
               Now, bleſſed be thoſe daies of thine:
               Thriſe bleſſed be our God,
               By whom our Quéene Elyzabeth
               
               thoſe vertuous ſteppes hath trod.
               Not force of Fleſhe hath held her vp,
               not ſharpe deuiſe of man,
               Not crafte, not ſkill, not worldly ſhifte
               her bleſſed ſtate beganne.
               Before her raigne, bereaft of peace,
               bereaft of outwarde Ioy:
               Purſude to death by Romiſhe beaſtes
               ſtill ſéeking her annoy:
               Whoſe foamy frothye murthrous Iawes,
               with ſtomackes ſtuft with guile
               Each day deuiſde her graces death
               and ſacred ſtate to foyle.
               Whome high Iehoue preſerued hath
               in ſpite of Sathans rage,
               To liue a Quéene in bleſſed peace:
               to lyue an happye age.
               
                  Oh, graunt her God, an hart to prayſe
               and magnifie thy name:
               And as thou haſt preſeru'de her life,
               ſo ſtill preſerue the ſame.
               Let dewe remembraunce neuer ſlippe
               from forth her royall breſt,
               But let her alwayes beare in minde17. Nouemb. an▪ 18. Elizabeth R.
               
               how thou haſt wrought her reſt.
               Full ſeauentéene yeares this day her grace
               hath raign'de with vs a Quéene:
               No Treaſons force hath yet preuaild,
               that euer could be ſéene.
               No drift, deuiſe, no deuils déede,
               no falſhod fetchte from hell
               Hath yet tane place: in ſauetie yet
               her noble grace doth dwell.
               Thyne hand Iehoue hath founde them out,
               thine owne right hand hath broughte
               Each darke deuiſe to open viewe
               and treaſons guile to nought.
               Thine hand hath held her kingdome faſte:
               thine owne right hand hath ſtayde
               The running rage of rancour bent,
               and made her foes afrayde.
               Of wiſdome haſt thou lent her ſtoare
               to guide thy folcke aright:
               
                  What giftes of grace haue Princes more
               obtayned in thy ſight?
               Graue counſaile guiding all by Truth
               thou Lorde, with her haſt plaſte
               Whoſe careful works for common wealth
               can neuer be defaſte.
               Whoſe mindes to rigoure they ne bende:
               no hartes they haue to harme:
               No woe they worke to any wight:
               to none they cry Al arme.
               
               No lawe they wreſt to worke their willes
               no ſleightes they doe impoſe,
               No burthen on her Subiectes backes
               obtruded is by thoſe.
               They enuy not her peoples good:
               no trappes they laye to traine
               Nor ſubtile baytes by pinching lawes
               at any time ordeyne.
               Their Princes wrath they whet not on:
               no wayte they lay for blood.
               Oh noble wightes, and haue you liu'de
               to worke your Countreyes good?
               Haue all your Foes fownde endleſſe bale
               that ſought your honors ſpoyle?
               And ſtande you yet in Countreys ſight,
               to ſéeke fowle Treaſons foyle?
               
                  With teares we hold our hands to heauen,
               and from our hartes we crie
               Lyue, liue you noble Counſayllers,
               liue, liue and neuer dye.
               Let Princes loue remayne on you,
               and loue you her againe.
               So ſhall no treaſons drifte diſioynte
               our engliſhe peace in twaine.
               So ſhall you gaine a guerdon iuſte
               for your ſo noble déedes,
               And ſo ſhall wee poore Subiecte ſortes
               ſtill ſticke to you at néedes.
               Lorde, bleſſed be thy name alwaies,
               thriſe bleſſed by thy name,
               That guyd'ſt to good their graue attemptes
               dyrecting ſtill the ſame.
               Theſe giftes for thine we doo proclame
               euen all theſe giftes for thine,
               A gratious Quéene with Counſayle graue
               that to thy will encline:
               A noble race of royall wittes
               a Senate ſurely knit,
               A prudent ſort of poliſhte heads
               who neuer (hapleſſe) yet
               Attempted ought that might redownd
               to wealth of Engliſhe ſoyle
               
                  Who neuer yet empriſed ought
               wherein they tooke the foyle.
               By thée wée ſtill enioy her grace:
               by thée this Counſayle ſo:
               By thée the ſame doe plant good lawes
               all vice to ouerthrow.
               And for thoſe lawes ſuch Iudges ſet
               as Iuſtice well maintayne,
               Such Iudges, ſome, as doubtleſſe yet
               no former times could gayne:
               Not moody ſorte of wandring heades
               not hartes corrupt with guyle,
               Not wrangling wittes, not bribinge hands
               our Iudgementes Seates defile.
               But ſéemely ſortes of ſacred heads
               but Sages ſownde and graue,
               But goodly viewe of learned wittes
               our Iudgement places haue.
               Where, looke what Lawe and Iuſtice wil,
               that Iudges doo pronounce:
               Where, looke what lawe and Iuſtice nill,
               that, Iudges doo renounce.
               Where, hée (my Lorde) amongs the reſt,
               whoſe handes regard no méede,
               Whoſe harte Dyes no deceyte at all,
               with honour doth procéede
               
                  (As others eke) in ſoundeſt ſort
               to Ioyne together aye,
               With Mercy, Truth: with Iuſtice, Peace:
               in firme and perfecte ſtaye.
               Ah hawtie Hall with honours deckt,
               ah Roofes of royall viewe,
               Ah Seates poſſeſt with Iuſtice ſelf,
               with peace and Iudgements trewe.
               Sith laude, ſith thankes, ſith endleſſe praiſe
               be dewe vnto thy name:
               Swéet lord, ſwéet Chriſt, for theſe thy gifts
               we magnifie the ſame.
               Lord, bleſſe therfore theſe benefittes,
               Lord, giue them large increaſe,
               Lord, let thy mercies ſtill endure,
               Lord, let them neuer ceaſe.
               Lord, bleſſe our Quéene, Lord proſper her,
               Lord, leade her with thine hand:
               Lord teach her aye thy will to know
               and worde to vnderſtand.
               Lord, graunt that ſhée in harte maye loue
               thy law and thy decrée:
               That ſhée may knowe how all theſe giftes
               procéede good Lord from thée.
               And for thy works of wonder done,
               let her extoll thy praiſe:
               
                  Let her in truth and holy lyfe
               continewe all her dayes.
               Let (Lorde) her graces eyes ſo pearce
               into thy Churches ſtate,
               That ſhe with Iudgement ſound and pure
               remooue from thence debate.
               And let her (Lorde) ſo loue to heare
               thy godly Preachers voyce,
               That ſhée reiecte not what they teache,
               but take the beſt in choyſe.
               Let pompous ſtate be vnto her
               no ſtoppe of dew regarde,
               Ne let the faults of faythleſſe mates,
               at any time be ſparde.
               Let all her royall howſholde ſo
               reformed be from ſinne,
               That they to all the worlde may ſhowe
               what vertue is therein.
               That ſhée may bring a laſting praiſe
               and glory to thy name:
               That life and doctrine fownde alike,
               her foes may ſuffer ſhame.
               Lorde giue her Iudgement to diſcerne,
               and that with Counſayle graue
               Shée may finde out what ſownde redreſſe
               our common wealth ſhould haue.
               
                  To cut of crafte from wholſome lawes:
               and (chiefly) to ſupplant
               From place of Rule and Iuſtice, ſuch
               as ſownde profeſſion want.
               Whoſe handes how hurtfull they ſhall be
               in times of troublous ſtate
               Our ſondry ſortes of troublous heades
               expreſſed haue of late.
               Lorde, graunt therefore that Lawes be had
               to bynde each place to chooſe
               To office, ſuch as loue thy worde,
               and others to refuſe.
               That whenſoeuer forein driftes
               or home deuiſe ſhall riſe,
               Such men of truſt prepared ſo,
               may treaſons guile ſurpriſe.
               Lorde, finally, with humbled mindes,
               and Sowles we thée deſire
               Unite both Prince and Peoples harts
               with loue and zeale entire.
               That th'one with vpright courſe may rule.
               the other ſo obaye,
               As Prince may be her peoples Ioye,
               and people Princes ſtaye.
            
            
               
                  Lorde graunt that none within this Lande
               
               
                  no one that beareth breath,
               
               
                  Refuſe in harte to crie God ſaue
               
               
                  Our Queene Elizabeth.
               
            
            Amen.
         
         
            
            ¶The Authour moſt humblie to all the Queenes highnes moſt honourable Counſaylers.
            
               THough Poets pennes in theſe our later daies
               In works of waite gaine credit neare a deale.
               Becauſe that ſome ſeduced many waies,
               Their fond affectes and fancies do reueale
               In rymyng frames, wherein they do conceale
               No want of wyt, nor learning dew regarde,
               As in their Bookes full many haue declarde:
               Yet hope I muſt that truth may take no harme
               Where ſhe is cloathd with cloake of ſimple Ryme
               Deuoyd of dark deuiſe and Poets charme:
               Which learned wits full rifelye in our time
               Haue ſet to view as ſooteſt heathes in Prime,
               Although the blunt and bitter byting brayne,
               Each rymed truth doth blot with black diſdayne.
            
            
               You noble wights that win immortall fame
               By gyding well our engliſh common wealth,
               To you I wryte, as one that loues the ſame
               And ioyes in heart to ſee your Honours health:
               Reiect him not that riming fancies telth:
               But beare him out where he deferues no blame,
               And heere ſuch termes as he in truth ſhall name.
               Your godly, graue, and prouident foreſightes
               Theſe paſſed times and bliſfull daies foreſpent
               Haue ſo preferd in peace vnto your mightes,
               That calmer daies of yoare were neuer lent.
               Your God therfor that ſo your harts hath bent,
               Extolle with praiſe, and watch to worke his wyll:
               Seeke treſons foyle and loue your countrey ſtill.
               
                  Beware of forrein fraude and falſe pretenſed loue:
               Accept goodwill, but ſecreat woorks preuent:
               So ioy in league, that cloſe compacts you proue:
               So liue in peace, as you to warre were bent.
               Yeeld truſt, but try, for feare ye do repent.
               Geue heede to peace, but lyue not vnpreparde.
               The ſtrongeſt ſtate the longeſt time is ſparde.
               And as you watch, each one in your degree,
               Teſtabliſh peace, and plant right wholſome lawes,
               So, noble wights, (as you true noble be)
               Keepe men oppreſt from rage of ramping pawes.
               Pluck, pluck ye ſpoyle from foorth deuouring iawes
               And let not Crewes of cruell waſting wightes
               Thus prank in pride wt ſpoile of pore mens rights.
               To taxe the Trades that wickednes findes out,
               To touch the liues that lewdneſſe hath begonne,
               To blaſe the pride yt runnes the Realme throughout
               To preach ye Spoyles yt priuate gaine hath wonne,
               To ſhew the ſhifts that poore men haue vndone,
               O noble wights, and honourable all,
               No pen of mine hath force or euer ſhall.
               Men craue, you graunt: men pray, you pardon ſtil:
               Men ſweare, you truſt: men crouche, you think them mylde:
               Ah, out alas, heerein is errour ſtyll:
               Heerein your godly meanings are begilde.
               Herein the waſtful Crewes & luſty heads wax wyld
               Heerein the trades that wickedneſſe doth breed
               On Common welth with priuate pawnche do feed.
               Heerein the pompe of Pride withouten end,
               Hath put it ſelfe in preaſe, and vaunting ſpreddes
               With daringe face, where none ſhould dare offende:
               No Caeſars looke nor Princes eye it dreddes:
               In frank outrage alas it trampling treddes.
               
                  Heerein, the rowtes of cutting royſters grow,
               And bankes of peace with braules do ouerflow.
               Heerein, the bloudy papiſtes do conſpire,
               And begging broodes of bankrowts (in their kind)
               Do take the courſe to ſet our peace on fire,
               By fawnyng force a filthy fetch to finde,
               A few to raiſe with ryches yll aſſygnd,
               Though thouſands thence doe reape their endleſſe neede
               Whence, hate for loue in conſequence doth breede.
               Heerein, (to fine) the feweſt ſorts do right:
               Heerein, the lawes that godlynes haue fixt,
               Heerein, the peace appearing in our ſight,
               By pryuate heades with wickednes are mixt,
               And this our peace hath dangers Drawne betwixt.
               Heerein, therefore to finde redreſſe with ſpeede
               Shal make your names true noble ſtill indeede.
            
            
               In moſt humble wiſe.
Edward Hake.
            
            
               ¶Gentle Reader, hauing this prayer folowing imparted vnto mee by a learned and worshipfull gentleman, very behooufull to be vſed in this the end of our reioyſinge, I haue according to the dutie of godlynes, heere published the ſame as the fitteſt & ſeemelieſt concluſion to be had in this my lytle Booke.
            
         
         
            
            A Meditation wherin the godly Engliſh geueth thankes to God for the Queenes Maieſties
                proſperous gouernment hitherto, and praieth for the continuance therof to Gods glory.
            
            
               
                  AMongſt other thy benefites great and innumerable (heauenly father our moſt mercifull Lorde and God) by thee of thy excéeding goodneſſe beſtowed vpon the children of men, the ſeruaunts of thy houſehold, diſperſed vpon the face of the earth, it hath pleaſed thée ye wée thy people of England liuing in theſe daies ſhould in aboundance beyonde the meaſure of the graces of our brethren, and the proſperous courſe of our fathers, beholde and perceiue thine ineſtimable goodwill in the amiableneſſe of thy countinaunce ſhininge vpon vs, to whom thou haſt geuen thy choſen Handmayden Elizabeth for ſoueraigne Lady and gouernour. For what ſo euer is the glory of thy houſe (O Lorde) for vs, wt the iſſue of the ſlime of the earth, to ſtande and looke vp to Heauen, made into veſſels after thine image that were not: to bee redéemed

& borne a new after the ſeconde Adam that periſheth not, in the ſprinkling of the bloud of Chriſt and ſanctificacion of the ſpirit, that were vtterly loſt, to ſtande faſt in thy handes, ſealed accordinge to thine eternall loue, and written in the Booke of lyfe, that dayly runne headlong to our own deſtructiō: As the ſence therof reioiſeth the hartes of all thoſe whom thou haſt knit into this felowſhip of the ſaintes, and called into the bleſſed hope of the eternall kingdome, ſo againe how vngrateful ſhould we be to whom thou haſt dealt theſe benefites from thy diuine maieſtie by the perſon reiſed vp for thine inſtrument therof toward vs, if we ſhould not in ſpeciall ſort ſhew vs thankfull vnto thee therfore? And if not to liue tearing & eating one, the other, like the Giantes in the old world, and euery man to doo what ſéemeth him beſt in his owne eies, as when there was no Iudge in Iſrael, if, that Princes raigne & gouernors geue iudgment, it is thy gift: & then in the worſt diſpoſition of their thoughts for the ſinnes of the people, they are redowbted, thou O Lord haſt appointed them, they are ſacred, thou O Lorde haſt annoynted them, they

are feared, thou chaungeſt their hartes like the ſtreames of waters, they are honoured, thine owne image and lickenes in guiding Angels and all creatures is pregnaunt and cannot deuayle in them, bearinge rule in earth ouer the children of men: what praiſe is due vnto thée, from thoſe, vnto whome thou leaueſt not an Anarchy and headleſſe diſſolution, as to the Cánibals, a monſtrous and miſſhapen gouernment and flaminge with fyre, and ſtreaminge with bloud, and ſmoking with miſt and darkneſſe of error and ignoraunce, as to ye Antichriſts greaſed in the browe with the marke of the Image of ye great Beaſt, & whoor of Babilon: not a waſte and barbarous perpetuall heathen cōtricion as vnto the Tartarian hoords of curſed Cham, vnto the Rusty and waſted with miſery th'inhabitants of Meſchech, or to ye 
               Turbulent and rauenous ſwarmes and hoſts of Tubal-Gog, or ſuch lyke as thoſe: but contrarywiſe whome thou leadeſt like a flocke of ſhéep by ye hands of Moyſes and Aaron, and haſt choſen Dauid thy ſeruaunt whom thou haſt loued, to feede as the people of thine owne Inheritaunce, geuing vnto thē for war, peace: for inciuilytie,

ſocyetie: for ignoraunce, knowledge: for ſuperſticion, religion: for errour, truth: for hunger, plenty: for vnproudiency, polycie, for diſſonancye, harmony: for myſerie, felicyty: & making them to dwell in ſafetie as vnder the wings of thy defence, and ſhadow of thy protection. Now, ſuch hath ben thy mercy towards vs, yt no tongue is able to expreſſe in geuinge vs in thy gracious pleſure & thine vnrecountable largeſſe and liberalitie, thy ſelect Seruant Elizabeth Quéene and ſupreme gouerneſſe to vs of the liege Nations and peoples of her obeyſaunce and regiment: that as by a ſtar the light and influence ouer thinges beneth frō thée, the firſt cauſe and fowntaine of brightneſſe not to be attayned vnto, and as by a cléere riuer and plentifull brooke the courſe of the waters from thée, ye euerlaſting head ſpring: euen ſo the ſhininge beames, and flowing ſtreames of all thoſe thy mercies, and good gifts hath ben and are ſithence the daies of her happye and gracious gouernment, from thée conuaied and devolued vnto vs. And we that before were no people, not ſo much in regarde of ye ſtate in which wée haled, when we were ſauadge, as wood

men, cruell as Mendeuourers, terrible as ſpirites, brutiſhe as beaſtes in the olde age at the firſt callinge home of our grand Aunceſtors to human ciuilitye, but in theſe daies in few yeeres degenerate from the true knowledge of thée and thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſt vnto the conſuminge nakedneſſe of idolatrie and playinge inordinat, before ye golden Calfe of our owne making and our prieſtes: now the eightenth ſunne moſt happely enuironeth in the firmamēt, ſithence by the meanes of a poore veſſell of the weaker ſex, & a ſelly mayden, thou perfourming the gloryous delyuerance of thy people out of the thraldome and ſlauerye of Pharao & Egipt, dyddeſt annoynt the Kings daughter with an holy oyle ſetting a crown of pure golde vpon her head, and inueſting her with the purple and Scepter and regal Diademe of this Realme. Sithence which time, O Father, we owe, to thée and to her, our God and our Moyſes, the ſight of this light, the vſe of this ayre, the eaſe of our hartes, the peace of our conſciences, & the whole worke of our welfare. By her inſpired by thée, ſpreding her beames at her appearing, the bloudy lawnces & claunching

Murreans, and redoublinge ſhieldes, haue ben ſhattered aſunder in ſhiuers, and bated and foyled into mattokes and ſpades, the flames of our furies quenched and put out, and the coole of grace flowed ouer ye realme, the Lion reconciled with the Lambe, the wilde Aſſe ſet to be paſtured with the ſeely Kyd, the abhomynation of deſolation remoued from the holy temple, and the ſun of man exalted and lifte vp on high in his owne kingdom, for all that were ſtonge by the fiery ſerpēt to looke vpon and be ſaued. In admyrable lenytie, Babylon hath put on Syon, Egypt is become our owne, Rahab the harlot denizoned in Ieruſalem: wee become of the wilde olyues the true garden plants: of Iſmael, Iſraell: of miſcreant, chriſtian: of paynim, proteſting and profeſſing: of Antichriſtian Romaneſt heathen idolaters, faithfull euangelycall ſincerely beleeuing worſhipers of thée in ſpirit and verytie, according to thy holy worde. Neither hath coſt ben ſpared, nor occaſiō foreſ
                  •
               owd, nor time ouer paſſed, nor trauel intermitted, to rayſe that was fallen, to win that was witholden: to call that was ſtrayed, to heale that was wurryed: to finde that was

loſt, to reſtore that was ruined, to repayre that was decaied, to make good and enhable that was abandoned. Preachers haue bene ſent forth plenteouſly, Lawes haue ben executed mercyfully, Orders haue bene ſet downe polytickly, dangers haue ben declyned diſcretly, tumultes haue bene apeaſed victoryouſly: the whole ſpacious dominyons of both Iles and the adiacent Landes gouerned triumphantly. So as it is harde to finde the man that more orderly hath manedged the charge of any one houſhold: then the Daughter of thy houſe with her virginall hands hath welded the weightye ſcepter of ſundry and mighty populous nations. Inher time hath béen ſeen the golden yéeres of the reigne of her Father Dauid, and the peacefull kingdome of Salomon to haue ben aduanced. The earth not to haue denied her fruitfulnes, the ſea her encreſe, the clowdes their drops, the heauens their fayreneſſe, the ſun his warmth, the yeare her goodneſſe. But the valleys ſtand thicke with corne, the wylderneſſe crowned with gladneſſe, the furrous watred, the mountaines laugh & ſing, the folds full of ſheepe, our ſonnes and daughters grow vp like to

ye poliſhed corners of ye Temple, our yongmen ſée viſions, and our olde men prophecy: Hieruſalē
                her light ſhining vnto her, and the glory of the Lorde ryſen vnto her. The Quéene bringing her honor vnto the citie of Dauid, and the nations walkinge in the light thereof. Great is the honour ye thou haſt heaped vpon vs, and honourable in foreine regions is the work yt thou haſt wrought by thy choſen. Yea and ſo much the more hath the brightnes of this bewty ben powred abroad, yt whiles Egipt round about hath bene darkned (euen the whole world in a manner beſides vs, whom thou haſt gathered into paſtures of this Goſen) and the thicke miſtes of errour hath blinded the eyes of the earth: the cloudy piller hath not departed from vs, by the day, nor ye fiery flame by night. Whiles other lands round about haue warred to the deſtructiō of one another, our Moyſes hath guided vs in peace: whiles other nations lyke Egipt rounde about hath béen plaged by the deſtroyer from the firſt borne, ſyttinge vpon the princes trone, vnto the ſlaue grindyng at the handmyll, our Moyſes hath not deminiſhed of her flocke: whiles the firme

landes haue bene ouerwhelmed by ye rage of the ſeas and waters: our Iland hauing dwelt in peace, in peace hath ſent her ſhips into Opher for golde, and prepared her nauye againſt the daunger of the enemie. Whiles Athalia hath murdered her owne blood, our Ioas hath learned the lawe of the Lord of Iehoiada. Whiles Achaz conſecrateth his owne ſonne in the fier, and Samaria eateth her owne children on the wals, our Eliza directeth the children of the prophets in their offices. Whiles Iezabel ſetteth vp Baal, and embreweth Achab with the blood of the Prophetes and of Naboth: our Elias gathereth the people of God to mounte Carmell, to beholde the wonder of the fire of God lighting from Heauen vpon the ſacrifices, and repleniſhing the harts with ioy, and toungs, with giftes of languages. This is then ſo worthy an inſtrument of thy goodneſſe and expreſſe Image of thy Maieſtie, and the ample matter of this daies celebritie. And now what doth thy people deſire at thine handes, but that firſt O Lorde thou geue vs thankfull hartes, & make vs al the dayes of our liues mindfull of this thy fatherly and gracious

bountifulnes. Then, as preſētly ye Quéens highnes hath gloriouſly atchieued the trauayll of full ſeuentéene yéeres, and now the annuell celebritie of our voluntary ſacrifice of praiſe and thanksgeuing therefore, returneth: ſo it may by thy benefit full often returne, & not once or twiſe, but yéere by yeere, and yeere heaped vpon yéere, we and our ofſpring may behold this felycity, vntill wée and ſhe ſatiſfied in aboundance, the time draw alonge which thou haſt appoynted for the veling of her Crowne at the féete of thy ſun Ieſus: and the courſe of this earthly pilgrimage ouerrunne, we and ſhe, at our determined ſeaſons he takē to raigne in the euerlaſting kyngdome of thy glory. Agayne, where much is the miſchief of man, great and enormous the rage of Sathā, ſuttle the practiſes of Antichriſt, euyll our deſertes, lamentable the ſtate of thinges, whiles open colouring hideth priuie conſpiring, poyſoned lippes geue ſugered words: the breath of Cocatrices, the embraſings of Scorpions, the roringe of Buls, the raging of Rabſake, the ſworde of Herod, the deſtructiō of Abbadon hath ben ſéene in our ſtréets, hath bene hard on our

walles, hath multiplyed before the gates of our cities: that thou deſtroy vs not in the mideſt of thy workes of thy mercy, to leaue vs headleſſe and make vs a ſcorne and prouerbe to the enemye: but rather to beholde the number of the faithful ſubiectes, in the dread of their ſouls, and iuſt ieloſye of thyr common intereſt, bowinge the knées of their harts, for the long ſafetie of Quéene Elizabeths ſacred Princely perſon: rather then in thy iuſt fury for auenging of our ſins, to ſuffer ye deuill wt the wicked to preuaile in the vniuſt zelouſneſſe of their prepoſterous vowes graceleſly ſwearing the death of thy Saints and thine annoynted. Laſtly that what remaineth of the happye building of thy Church by the hands of thy deare daughter: thou plentyfully powre of thy principall ſpirit vpon her, and rauiſhe her hart with the flame of the loue of thée and thy houſe, with Moyſes to lead, & with Ioſue to bring in to ye land of promiſe, with Debora to fight thy battaile, & wt 
               Iahel to knock Siſera of Rome in the temples of his vſurped headſhip: to his vtter deſtruction, with Dauid, to bring home the Ark, & with Salomon to finiſh & conſecrate to eternity

thy Temple, amongeſt thy people: on the earth for the time to géeue largelye her foſtermilke to Hieruſalem, in Heauen at the time in the pureneſſe of her virginitie to be preſented to the Lambe, and ſing the ſong of her weddinge day with thy Angels and thy Saintes, to the praiſe of thy glorious Maieſty, the father, the ſonne and the holy Ghoſt, in one eternall Deitie for euer and euer. Amen.
            
               
            
            ¶FINIS.
            
            A.j.
            
         
      
   