
      
         
            
            
            PHILADELPHVS, OR A Defence of Brutes, and the Brutans Hiſtory.
            Written by R. H.
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Wolfe. 1593.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST NOBLE LORD, the Lord Robert Deuoreux, Earle of Eſſex, of her Maiesties priuie Counſell, Knight of the Princely Order of the Garter.
            
            
               RIght Noble, my verie eſpeciall good Lord, I preſent nowe vnto your Lordſhip, this hiſtoricall Eſsay, in print, which I offered before in writing, eyther becauſe I am vrged to this dutie by your moſt honourable munificence toward me, or becauſe I cannot prouide my other exerciſes written of greater and grauer matters. Yet I take the defence of mediocritie for a matter of ſome weight, both in this hiſtorie of Brute, which is made litigious, and in any other poſition of much leſſe importance, euen of haire it ſelfe; inſomuch as mediocritie cannot be diſalowed.
            It is manifeſt, that ſome haue written more of Brute then behoued them, but ſome haue behaued themſelues vnkindly againſt Brutans, and done leſſe for them, then they ſhould.
            They are on both partes, too learned for me, I am not worthy to be their moderator, in this queſtion of Brute: howbeit, as they haue freely deliuered their opinions with out any ſtop, ſo would I ſhew the good will I beare to the one part, without any hatred to the other. God forbid,

that diuerſitie of ſtudies, ſhould bring forth a diuorcement of heartes among neighbours and friendes: it were better no bookes at all were written, then to a breake the bond of vnitie, and looſen the yoke of obedience by them, ſeeing wee may liue better without them, men without theſe.
            I hope, I am cleane from any abuſe in this preſent treatiſe, I will euer honour ſtrangers, for their good qualities of learning and life: but I muſt not hold my hand and pen ſtill, when I ſee them too buſie, in toſſing our hiſtories and actes, at their owne pleaſure, which appertaine not vnto them: they cannot ſtay mee from my ſtudie, more then I kept them from this practiſe. I fauour the hiſtorie of Brute, without regard of their disfauour, as they diſlike it, without reſpect of other mens liking. I cannot in loyaltie defend euery Brute, but I may without any breach of dutie, defend this great Brute of Brutanie.
            
            Wherefore I moſt humbly beſeech your moſt excellent good Lordſhip, to accept of this mightie Captaines preſent defence, euen as your worthy honour, vſeth to allowe the reaſonable ſutes of approued men, which are like to do God good ſeruice, and this kingdome.
            Thus truſting to your Lordſhips magnificent, & ſweete fauour heerein, I moſt heartily commend your true renowmed honour, to the bleſſed eſtate of immortalitie.
            
               
                  Your Lordſhips in all thankfull dutie. Richard Haruey.
            
         
         
            
            A DEFENCE OF BRVTES HISTORIE.
            
               MAſter Buchanan, though ſome call you the trumpet of Scotland, and ſome the noble Scholler, yet I will be ſo bold, as anſwere your larum, touching the hiſtory of mighty Brute: becauſe your inuectiue treatiſe, is in trueth, more factious, then effectuall. You and ſuch hotbraines, haue deuiſed a faction, and diuorcement of opinions, (I dare ſay) without fruit, and I beleeue, without cauſe: For my part, your deniall is not able once to moue me, and your reaſons againſt Brutes hiſtorie, ſhall neuer perſwade any ſufficient reader, to agree with you, and remoue the markes and circuites, that Geffry Monmouth hath ſet downe. Yet by reading your allegations and probations, we may beſt areede, who is moſt credible, he or you, a Monmouth or a Scot, a Moonke or a Trauailer, and if neither barrell be better herring, then by their wordes they ſhalbe ſaued from blame, and by their wordes they ſhalbe damned, ſayth the wiſe Iudge: wherefore I take you of your worde, and I ſay: that
            We ſeeke no Noilitie, from Brute, we count not of our forefathers nobleneſſe, but of our owne. Nobilitie I can tell you, goeth not by byrth and riches in Brutany,
               
but by vertue: it ſtandeth not vpon antiquitie, but vpon right: we euer ſay, that nobleneſſe is a ſuperioritie or dominion in vertuous actes, and that other thinges without vertue are but minoritie and ſubiection, and colours, and naught worth.
            We cannot thinke that Brute was 
                  
                     •
                  atricide: let them that iudge him ſo, proue him ſo. I paſſe not for that he hath done aforetime in other landes, but I onely reſpect his Actiōs in this Iland. Yet, if he were in that huge and maine fault, hee may well enter into Sanctuarie, till you and yours haue proued the deede voluntary. Miſhap is not raſhneſſe, chaunce is not counſell, there is a folly in meeting an arrowe, there is no ſinne in ſhooting it at a beaſt in the forreſt.
            We compare not Brutus
                with Romulus, no more then we compare your Chronicle now with this that ſhall write one 200. or 300. yeares heereafter: but this is your floriſh, to no other purpoſe, then to ſhew reading, where it doth no good, and may do ſome little hurt to a young Reader; who by your wordes will go nigh to ſay, that Brute and Romulus are much of a time, becauſe you ſet them together in a Chronicle, which ſhould report that is paſt, or record that is preſent onely.
            We are not Brittons, we are Brutans: we account not Brute our authour & founder, ſeeing here dwelt as Noble men afore Brute as euer ſince that time. No good country or bad, hath been without noble men from the beginning, and to let go all Hiſtories, I dare ſay this word, That nature hath made as auncient a generation of men vpon the earth, as of other creatures, and of chiefe men in their companies at firſt, aſwell as of other chiefe creatures in their kindes and their heardes

at firſt, yea and much rather of men, becauſe of more gouernment and order.
            We ſpeake not of Brutes wealth and language, before he came hither, neither can you proue, that hee had not wealth inough to ſerue his vſes, or tongue enough in euery place of his trauell. Cannot an Egle flie from place to place, and take heere a lambe, there a kid, here a gooſe, there a ſwanne, vnleſſe hee can ſpeake the language of lambes, and kids and geeſe and ſwannes? what traffique ſhould a venturer haue with any people, when he hath ſet all the earth or one part therof before him, to make himſelfe king in ſome place or other? He will not aſke, what price beareth your marchaundiſe? but a Brute will haue it for taking: hee will be aboue your commercies, and throw you into the marſhes, if you giue him not whatſoeuer you would not, whenſoeuer he will.
            What if the Romans coulde ſcarſely ſet foote in this Iland, when they were in their greateſt fortune and ſtrength? could not Brute therefore poſſibly get into it? how know you, whether his natiuitie, or his good hap, or his maner of entering, were not better or happier then Caeſars?
            
            If one company cannot enter by force, cannot another company enter by wit and fairer meanes? It is not number, nor money that make a Conquerour, it is good ſucceſſe, which commeth of a good forecaſt, that is in a Grecian more then in a Roman, and why not in Brute more then in Caeſar? If Brutes Chronicles had been preſerued aſwell as Caeſars, I doubt not of this matter and of Brutes immortalitie in all writinges, then Caeſar had beene halfe a Brute.
            
            
               We haue not any thing heere for Italians, till wee be ſerued our ſelues, we are onely in Brutanie and among Brutans. Let other men haue leaue to ſpeake of Saturne and Latium, of Ianus and Ianiculum, and other thinges before Brute, who might be among his neighbours, as ſingular and fortunate a man for foreſight, as Noah was among the men of former times. It is no reaſon that Brute coulde not be giuen to trauell, becauſe the Italians were not giuen to trauelling, among whome you ſay hee dwelt afore. So you may deny almoſt euery actors Actes, that hath liued admirably in the worlde. It may bee, that Brute and is fellowes ſwornemen were worth all the reſt in liuely and manly action abroad, as Abraham and his company were ſingular among the Aſsyrians, and proued the rare man of the world.
            Wee ſay not, that Brute walked on the Sea, or came hither by land, and therefore your Alpes, and your Hercules haue no preſent vſe, but as table talke to paſſe time, and make a noyſe. Yet men hauing liued more then 2800. yeares from Adam to Hercules vppon the earth, and Comer the ſonne of Lamech, and Cham and Sabati, and other great men lying in Italy before Hercules was borne, and ſeeking out the partes of the earth euery way, we can beleeue reaſonably, that they paſſed ouer the Alpes before him. Or if Hercules muſt needes be the onely man, what a ſingle reaſon is it? that Brute might not follow him that way, becauſe Hercules onely had gone before. I had rather conclude thus: Hercules made a way through the Alpes ſo eaſily, that any hardy trauailer might followe him that way. Since Brutes time the Alpes haue been paſſable enough, and the

               Gaules haue ouerrunned them; and other people trode on them, your Adhuc alienis is ſomwhat vnſkilfully written of you.
            Truely I would Tamerlane were euen now here, to anſwere your Ocean argument: hee could tell you, that his multitude of rude Scythians and ſhepheardes could do more Actes then all the fine gay troopes and rankes of Baiazete, that it is no good conſequent which you bring forth, as if the Albane ſhepheardes and clownes might not be as valiant in vanquiſhing the Alpes, as the Carthaginian ſouldiers: vnleſſe it be an infallible Item, that the iollieſt men are euer greateſt actors by ſea and land: your argument à maiori is eaſily ſet à minori in this maner: The lightheaded Grecians and ſuch other haue paſſed the Ocean, much more is it probable, that the manly and moſt hardy Albanes haue done the ſame thing, hauing neither leſſe wit by compariſon of their Actes, nor leſſe courage in any point. The actions of one doe not proue any thing of another, but of that one pro or contra: or elſe howe ſhould we haue argumentes of contradictories, of vnequals, of vnlikes, of diuiſions? or if your reaſon be an hiſtorie, I ſee no cauſe, why mine hiſtorie of Brute, may not be credited aſwell as yours of the Maſſilians, who were long enough after Noahs Arke and other ſhippes of other men, I beleeue, to haue ſome aunceſtors in ſhipmaſtry and many fellowes. He that goeth aſpying goeth aſpeeding: opportunitie maketh men doe ſtraunge workes: haue you neuer heard of players and ieſters, that by deuiſes of games and paſtimes haue obtained very great victories? Remember man, I ſay, the famous and ſtrong name of Brute, and conſider the nature of warly trauailers, and neuer ſtand ſo ſtiffly

in your naked coniecture.
            
            How knoweth Buchanan, that there was no ſuch renowmed Brute in the world before the banniſhment of the Tarquines in Rome? might there not be another Brute 500.
                yeares before this counterfeit Brute of Rome? or was there none ſuch, are you ſure, becauſe the Roman and Greeke Hiſtorians of other nations, forſooth, haue made no ſuch record? It is no ſufficient reaſon, to carry Brutans from their owne old Regiſters by the wordes and ſilence of outlandiſh writers. You knowe and I am ſure, there are no meane matters left out of prophane Hiſtories, which are in eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories, and neuertheleſſe allowed. The more they leaue out the glorie of our land, the more I preſume by the nature of forraine countries, that our land was enuied, becauſe it was moſt glorious. I tell you I cannot thinke it neceſſarie, that he which is named Brute in our Chronicle muſt bee ſo named in other Chronicles: the ſame man may haue diuers names ſeuerally ſet downe in ſeueral bookes of ſeuerall languages, and as for this moſt Noble Brute, it is like enough, he chaunged his name, as he chaunged his habitation.
            You may eaſily ſay, A Moonke was the deuiſer of this Brute, you will ſay, that he played the Poet, that hee carued & painted him in this maner: but you cannot yet proue in this haſt, that the Moonke or ſtudent had not good proofe in his readings of this Brute, that he had not his Authour for them. It is out of queſtion, that manie books haue been written but once, and that many ſuch ſingular bookes haue been loſt for want of coppies, and it is probable, that this Moonke had ſome olde monument or booke, which may bee in Cambry to this day,

though Buchanan and Liuy neuer heard of it, and may be as true of Brute, as their olde Scottiſh Thinges and Romiſh Decades are accounted true by their fauourers and countrimen. If the hiſtorie of Brute be not true, becauſe they haue not ſeene the proofe thereof, no more is their hiſtorie true, becauſe we haue not ſeene the proofe thereof, which was acted ſo many yeares ere we were borne: thus it is as lawfull to coniecture for Brute as againſt him, ſeeing he is but denied onely by coniectures and probabilities.
            But what is this you ſay? are mens mouthes ſtopped with a maſke and ſhewe of Religion? cannot men tell what to ſay againſt A ſhewe and appearance? doe men that name the heatheniſh religion account it religion in Chriſtendome? I warrant you, the Moonke was ſo far from purpoſing, to ſtop mens mouthes with the idolatry of Diana, that he neuer eſteemed halfe the tenth part ſo much of her, as Demetrius did for his profite in Epheſus, and I dare ſay, that the Religious Authour thought it no religion, or imagined, that the Brutanes would ſo eſteeme it, but onely named Diana, as Caſtor and Pollux are named of S. Luke the Euangeliſt.
            Your Synchroniſme of Faunus, of Sybilla and Praeneſtine is to no purpoſe: it ſeemeth by this Hiſtory of Brute, that Dianaes Oracle was not vnknowne, as you ſeeme to auouch. But heere you will take the Moonke at a dead lift, as you ſuppoſe, and yet I tell you me-thinkes you and very bookiſhly and literally wiſe, not reaſonably and diſcourſiuely. Muſt Diana needes ſpeake latine, becauſe this Hiſtorian reporteth her Oracle in latine? Are you not aduiſed, how many things are writtē in Greek and Latine of the Beginning of the world, though there

were neither Greeke nor Latine 2000.
                yeares and more after the Creation of heauen and earth? and ſuch a reaſon might partly be brought againſt your ſelfe in your firſt king Ferguſius, if I would follow ſo needleſſe a cauſe, in comparing his time with the times of the latine tongue, wherein you write of him. You might haue done well, to proue that the Moonke ſaith, howe Brute receiued his anſwere of Diana, and aſked her Counſell in latine ſpeach, which becauſe you haue not proued, your Horatius and your Saliare carmen, and your Numa, and your wordes are but winde. Cannot an Hiſtorian report the Orations of the Indians, of the Germans, of the Numidians in latine, vnleſſe the Numidians & Germans and Indians ſpake latine? were the Orations in your Chronicles, Maſter Buchanan, ſpoken firſt in latine? So your Penitus obliti and ne tenue quidem, and other bootleſſe words are vain and little, or nought worth in this preſent queſtion. Tis not euer true that hath a quidem. I cannot certainly ſay, that the Brutans language was vſed in Italy in the dayes of Brute: but I may well ſay, notwithſtanding your trifling mycteriſme, that if the Oracles and men had ſpoken it, they had been neuer the worſe, nor the language neuer the better. But you were in a running thought and ſuppoſed your ſelfe ſubtle enough, when you had brought your inuention to a diſiunctiue propoſition, with much effect, I promiſe you, when it tendeth hitherto, euen to proue, that the Brutan ſpeach then was not the ſame our Brutans vſe now in Cambry.
            
            Yet by your leaue, Buchanan, it is no proofe againſt this language, in that many tongues appeare in it in your time, ſeeing Brutaniſme might at firſt bee as full of diuerſe tongues by reaſon of much trauell as it is nowe, and then

your argument hath nor vſe nor force in your queſtion: and in trueth, though Scots be called generally falſe, yet Buchanan may be true: ſo Moonks may dreame dreames, and yet Geffry Monmouth write a trueth. Why ſhould not a Moonke be as credible as a Paedanty? or a ſolitarie ſtudent vnderſtand that he readeth as much as a buſie ſchoolemaſter? or a Cambrian read Chronicles which a Scot neuer ſaw? or Geffry be as plaine and verifiable as Buchanan, being not ſo deep ouer head and eares in verſes and Poetry as he? yet now at laſt the George confeſſeth, that his owne reaſons are but minims, and minute perſecutions and ſlender thinges, and is faine to ſay, that the Moonke himſelfe ſeemeth to acknowledge his fiction, though it appeareth not ſo by the Moonkes wordes. Thus it cannot be proued euidently, that the hiſtory of Brute is a fained and poeticall narration, vnleſſe it be firſt proued, that there were no more Intelligences and Regiſters in the life of Geffrey then of George, and that Geffrey had no Authours for his defence, becauſe George cannot knowe them. If nothing be true in one country which hath not ſuffragees from another Countrey, I cannot tell what hiſtorie may ſtand irrefragably by this determination, no not when we read the auncienteſt partes and primitiue recordes of beſt hiſtoriographers. Was there not an Apoſtle Paul vnder Nero, becauſe Suetonius and Tacitus name none ſuch? much Iuſtine teach the Iewes howe to thinke of the deliuery of Iſrael? But I omit thoſe inſtances which might be giuē againſt you, becauſe in a queſtion I regard the argument more then the illuſtration thereof, and ſo ſhould you too by your leaue, for all your 24. yeares trauell.
            
            Are they malè callidi, and is vanitie in them that call

               Diana an huntreſſe and ſay, that in the time of Brute Diana was accounted a Goddeſse? I confeſſe, I cānot ſee, how they are lewdly and fraudulently vaine that write thus: then it remaineth, that you make theſe words good, if you can: The chaſt body the painfull bodie, but labour and continencie in mans body breede a kinde of diuinitie in man. I pray, when you in your Pſalmes, as they call them yours, deuiſe the moſt kindes of verſes that you can, do you confeſſe, that Dauid made them at firſt in ſo many ſortes of verſes as you haue written them? ſurely you will denie it. Iwis, it is not neceſſarie, that Brute and Diana ſhould ſpeake verſes, becauſe Geffry Monmouth recordeth their wordes in verſes. But, let be, ſuppoſe they did ſpeake in theſe or in other verſes, then he, doubtleſſe, or ſome other for him tranſlated their words into hexameters and pentameters, as you ſee. What vanitie or falſhood is on either ſide? neuer thinke to carry it away with threedbare wordes, or to leade your Readers where you liſt.
            A wiſe perſwader are you: is Diana called Loxias in your bookes? or if Apollo be oblique and crooked, and intricate in his anſweres, muſt Diana needes be ſo? or if Dianaes Prieſt be commonly obſcure & foulded vp in ſpeach, cannot it be, that hee ſhould be perſpicuous at anie one time? are you to appoint him how to ſpeake ſo manie yeares after his death? I pray, if Pythia be euer doubtfull, and oblique, becauſe ſhee is ſo for the moſt part, what doubtfulneſſe or obliquitie is in this aunſwere? You are come to my rich temples, Lycurgus beloued of God and of all that inhabite the heauenly houſes, I am in doubt whether I ſhould call thee a mon or a God, but I much rather beleeue, that thou art a God, Lycurgus,
                as Herodotus hath recorded in his Clio: and what ambiguitie is in that Anſwere

which Pythia gaue vnto Craeſus in the ſame booke of Herodotus? what ſaye to Ariſtodocus in the ſame booke, who neither aſked in verſe nor was anſwered in verſe? what ſaye to them of Marea and Apia, which aſked Hammons Oracle in proſe, and were anſwered in proſe? as it appeareth in Euterpe. What ſaye to the Doue of Dodona, or the Oracle of the cittie Butis giuen to Pheron that ſpake in proſe? in the ſame booke: to let paſſe ſuch anſweres a good manie giuen without verſe or ambiguitie: Or if they were giuen in verſe being nowe written otherwiſe with allowance of Readers, what hath the Moonke done amiſſe in the maner of theſe verſes? he may aſwell regiſter proſe in verſe, as they regiſter verſe in proſe.
            As for your Opinor, this may bee well anſwered in your verball manner, O pinor narras? non rectè accipis: you know the maker Terentius. I that am young may aſwell beſtowe my labour to anſwere you, as you being olde may obiect ſo vnfruitfully. Howe is that proued a manifeſt fiction that this Iland at Brutes comming was a wilderneſſe, being yet ſo this daie ſtill in manie places? Can two Gyantes and their two families, or ſo manie Giantes as make an Armie, ſo fill this countrie, that it ſhall not rightly be called a deſart? when they are all in one ſhire, the other ſhires are verie deſarts: when they being ſo few, are ſcattered into ſo manie ſhires betweene the Orcades and the Ile of Wight, how can they ſo fill it, that it may not be well named of Diana a deſart? in compariſon of the Cities and Kingdomes in other landes, where ſhe abode moſt.
            The name of Gogmagog is no more monſtrous then the name of Onoſconcoleros, nor Tentagol more vaſt and ſtrange
               
then Nabuchodonozor, neither ſhall thoſe Names preiudice the Hiſtorie more with vs then theſe Names haue done with other in the Hiſtorie of the Aſſyrians.
            
            Thus I may verie iuſtly and reaſonably maintaine and vphold the hiſtorie of Brute, for anie thing that maſter Buchanan hath ſaid againſt it. Concerning Diocleſian and his daughters, I haue willingly loſt all that delight of reading and anſwering, although I ſee euidently, that this Hiſtorie which you account a tale may be defended for ought you haue alledged. Yet maſter Buchanan taketh much vpon him and chargeth ſome bodie with impudencie and a lye, and plaieth the Terrible ſchoolemaſter, and yet when he hath done his beſt and his worſt, it is not proued, that 24. yeares were not ſufficient for Brutes retinue, and the inhabitantes of this land, togither with other of their kindred that reſorted hither and remained here, to repleniſh the Country with men of War, to erect three kingdomes, to accompliſh great Actes by ſea and land. Let him looke into the kingdomes of Grecia in olde time, and he ſhall finde fewer men in a kingdome then Brute alone with his companie might raiſe in 24. yeares:
                let him remember the huge kingdomes of three men, Sem, Ham, and Iaphet: let him conſider, that mightie Actions are not done by money and number, but by induſtry and vertue: let him proue, eyther that this Generation of Brute cannot poſſibly be true, or elſe ceaſe to ſpend his time with opinions and likelihoodes, that may be repelled with the like againe: ruſty Antiquities more reuerend then ſcoured Nouelties. Yet, we are not deſirous, that Brute ſhould be our Conquerour, we wiſh not ſubiection to him, or anie other outlandiſh Nobleman: we had rather winne the land that this Brute came from, and ſubdue it vnder

our feete: but when Brutans haue publiſhed an Hiſtorie and allowed it a long time, we would not haue a Scot ſo preſumptuous, as to controll it, much leſſe to reiect it, as this one Scot hath done very rawly and vnaduiſedly.
            So I leaue you, maſter Buchanan, and wiſhe you to ſacrifice vnto the wiſer dimi-goddeſſe Palinodia.
            
         
         
            TO HIS MOST LOVING BROther, Maſter Gabriell Haruey, Doctor of Lawes.
            
            
               WHen I ſaw, both how ieſtingly, and ſeriouſly our Hiſtorie of Brute was reiected of ſome auncient and newe bookmen, I tried their maruellous ieſtes and reaſons, and felt them too weake to moue me. Now my Anſwere is on foot with their Reply, I may iuſtly hold mine owne, and ſtand on Brutes ſide againſt all challengers that are or will come. I ſaye, Puiſſant Brute is no fabulous Prince, but a true example, no counterfeit man, but a corporall poſſeſſor of this Iland; let them ſaye what they can. With this minde I haue here taken one Eſſay of our Chronicles in the beſt hiſtoricall Methode that I could make out of the beſt Hiſtoriognomers. I am ſure, any Hiſtorie is eaſier for memorie, and readier for vſe this way, then any other way, which I haue hitherto ſeene in other mens Collections, Tables, Directories, or any ſuch other inuentions: yet as it is proofe, ſo approue

it, or reproue it; I am not wedded to myſelfe, nor tyed to any ſect in the world, but heartily wiſh euery man to take euerie thing as it is, not as it is made of this and that ſcribler or pratler, which can tell better, howe to play the mocking Ape, then the iuſt controller. Almightie God defend you dayly, and amend them one day: you know my minde in all my matters, and that I would thoſe petite Momes had better manners: the ſchollers head without moderation is like the merchantes purſe pennileſſe without all credite: I deſire that euerie ſtudent may ſmell as the Lillies of Salomon, and that euerie wilde Lilly may be ſet in his Gardens. I ſaye, out Hemlocke, out Bramble, out Weedes, and let the bloud of furious Aiax himſelfe, ſaith Ouid, be turned into a pleaſant herbe. I write not this, to flatter any that ſhould ſeeke after me, but to follow you, good Brother, in your laſt Letters, in whoſe Example I euer yet dwelt, and am like to dwell, euen till my Soule ſhall dwell in the Commonwealth of Heauen. I cannot bid you farewell in a better minde, and in this reſpect I ſet me reſt here, I remember your counſell, and beginne my Eſſaye. 1592. the 14. of Iune.
            
               Your louing brother R.H.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               AN ESSAY, OR TASTE OF THE firſt part of our Brutan Chronicles.
               
                  The Hiſtory of Brute and Brutans ſetteth forth.

                        Principally and antecedently their perſons, & in them ſheweth the

                              geneallogy or iſſue which they had.
                              
                              artes which they ſtudied.
                              
                              actes which they did.
                                 
                                    
                                       This part of Hiſtory is named Anthropology.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Acceſſorily and conſequently the

                              
                                 times
                                 
                                    
                                       when they beganne to Rule. How long they ruled.
                                       
                                          
                                             This part of Hiſtory is named Chronology.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 places
                                 
                                    in the Iland, of Brutany; This part of Hiſtory is named Topography
                                       
                                    
                                    out of the Iland of Brutany; This part of Hiſtory is named Topography
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               When a man is borne into the world, he learneth ſome thing or other: by learning he is brought to do ſomwhat: but as all deeds are done in the compaſſe of a place, ſo are they bounded with their beginning and ending.
            
            
               
               THE GENEALOGY OR ISSVE of Brute.
               
                  
                     BRute the firſt begat three ſonnes of Innogen: the firſt was Locrine the ſecond Camber, the third Albanact.
               
               
                  Locrine the eldeſt ſonne begat Madian of Guendolin and Habren of Elſtrid which had a ſkinne as cleere and white as Iuory, or Lillies, or Snow it ſelfe.
               
                  Madian begat Mempriſe,
               
               
                  Mempriſe begat Ebranke,
               
               
                  Ebranke a very goodly perſon among thouſands and ſtrong, begat Brute the ſecond, and nineteene ſonnes and thirtie daughters: theſe fiftie children were borne vnto him of twentie women.
               
                  Brute the ſecond begat Leyl,
               
               
                  Leyl begat Hurdibras,
               
               
                  Hurdibras begat Bladud,
               
               
                  Bladud begat Leyr,
               
               
                  Leyr begat three daughters, the firſt was Gonorill, the ſecond Ragan, the third Cordeil, but left no ſonne behind him. Cordeil the youngeſt daughter, as it came to paſſe ſucceeded hir father, but Morgan and Conedag her two nephewes depoſed her: Conedag the ſonne of Ragan being prouoked by Morgan the ſonne of Gonoril his cooſin german ſlew him in battell and ruled alone, and begat Riuall, Riuall begat Gurguſt, and Siſill Gurguſts brother ſucceeded Gurguſt, and Iago Siſils next kinſman ſucceeded

                  Siſill, and Kymer, Iagoes brother ſucceeded Iago, and begat Gorbodug, Gorbodug begat Ferrex and Porrex of Wyden, whoſe generations and iſſues are vnknown to vs, as the iſſues of Ebranks nine and fortie children are not knowne very well, nor the generations of Camber, of Albanact, of Morgan, of Gurguſt, of Siſill and of Iago.
               
               Thus the eighteene Rulers that came of Brute the firſt are come to an end, as a tale that is tolde in ſport, or as a tree that is digged vp in earneſt. Yet neyther ſeuen Polydores more, nor ten Buchanans ſhall perſwade me, that this Genealogy is a fabulous Tale. Let Polydore get him to Vrbin in Italy, and Buchanan hye him to Buchany in Scotland: it becommeth not theſe outlandiſh intruders to vſurpe the cenſure of the Brutan Hiſtories: if they looke well about them they haue enough to doe at home: we neede none of their goſſiping cups: but they are dead, and their hiſtoricall iudgementes are interred with them: if any man will raiſe them from the graue, who will beleeue their mortified Ghoſts? A Brutan may iuſtly except againſt the witneſſe of an Italian, or a Scot: Ielouſie and malignity are two blinde guids: Then hold your owne, ye braue Brutans, and guide your ſelues, your owne heades are fitteſt for your owne bodies.
            
            
               
               THE ARTES AND ACTES OF Brute, and his Brutans were in their Vertues and Vices.
               
               
                  Their vertue and Temperance appeared in
                  
                     Friendſhip and communion
                  
                  
                     Betweene man & wife in marriage. Locrine married Guendolin: Leyr married his two eldeſt daughters with two Dukes: Cordeil was married to Aganip Duke of the Gaules for her womanly vertues, and vertuous womanhoode.
                  
                     Talke and conference,
                  
                  
                     Betweene ſuperiour and inferiour, the ruler and the ſubiect. Guendolin after her huſbandes death liued contentedly and louingly with her kindred and acquaintance in Cornewall till ſhee dyed. Brute the ſecond carried euer a greene ſhield with him, to ſignifie, what a minde he did carry withall, euen a mind and deſire, to haue all thinges grow and floriſh like the fruitfull fieldes vnto a ioyful harueſt: whereupon hee was named Greeneſhield, a Prince gentle toward all men, and merciful to the needie. Leyl liued peaceably in his young dayes. Hurdibras allayed the factions and quarrels that hee found among his people, and of vnquiet men made them very quiet. Leyr liued moderately with his ſubiectes. Cordeil behaued her ſelfe ſo louingly and paciently, that ſhe would not puniſh the two ſonnes of Maglan and Hennine for their fathers: ſhe thought it no reaſon, to plaiſter one bodie for an other bodies ſores, to beate

one for anothers fault. Riual liued quietly. Gurguſtus kept his countrey in reſt and wealthy peace by ſome learned counſell.
                  
                     Betweene the father and the childe: Cordeil being euer modeſtly and maydenly ſhamefaced, either would not or could not flatter her father Leyr with needleſſe phraſes and vain othes, but anſwered him mildly and ſimply without oſtentation or deceite, that ſhe loued him as her naturall father with an obedient euer and thankfull hearth vnfainedly.
                  
                     Betweene two cooſins: When Conedag was informed by his olde truſtie friendes, and tolde from his mortall ennemies, that Morgan began roundly to make open warre agaynſt him, he himſelfe deſired peace by letters, and ſought it with all good meanes otherwiſe by Embaſſadours, he was ſo vnwilling to ſhed bloud, if he might chuſe, or euen to carry armour againſt his kinſman.
               
            
            
               
               THIS WAS THEIR TEMPERANCE in Deedes and Wordes.
               
                  Their vice and Intemperance appeared in
                  
                     Wordes: Firſt, Gonoril told Leyr, ſhe loued him more then her owne ſoule: then Ragan ſayd, ſhe loued him vnſpeakably.
                  
                     Leuity: When Locrin ſaw Elſtrid, he would haue reiected Guendolin: Mempriſe liued looſely, and ſpent moſt of his time in paſtime and licentious games.
                  
                     Drinke: Gurguſt by ſome naturall infirmitie of braine was dronken once a day: this dronkenneſſe neither ſhortened his life, nor hindered his actions, as it ſeemeth by the yeares of his gouernement and life.
                  
                     Diſcord: Madian was ſubiect to much impatience and tyrannie. Mempriſe, procured the death of thoſe great men whom hee feared for their vertue and therefore hated for his owne guiltie life.
                  
                     Venery: Locrine kept Elſtrid his captiue for his Concubine, and accompanied her a long time, too long by ſixe yeares and twelue monethes. Mempriſe ſolde himſelfe to adultery, he gaue his body to buggery and beaſtly loue, which was loue, ſauing your reuerence. Ebrank had twentie wiues, ſome ſaye, but I think nineteene of them were huſwifes, as we commonly ſaye, and ſhe his wife onely that married him and knew him firſt: A right line is betweene two, to go aſide is to go amiſſe.
               
               
                  
                  Their vertue, or wiſdome is ſeene in
                  
                     Diſcipline or deſire of knowledge: Madian, though he were borne a mortall Prince or earthly God, was in his childhood ſent into Cornewall to his moſt valiant grandſir Corin, that he might learne of him all experienced manhood fit for a ſoueraigne Ruler. Bladud in his young yeares was ſent otherwiſe and carried ouer ſeas to Athenes, that hee might, forſooth, be taught the wiſedome of the Grecians: this Athenian Engliſh Prince at his returne brought home with him no leſſe then foure great Philoſophers, to teach the Brutans, and either found or founded Schooles for them at Stamford or Stanefoda after the ſmootheſt and Atticall Idiome.
                  
                  
                     Artes, both Geometry, and Aſtrology: Brute preſently vpon his Arriuall ſearched this Iland optically and throughly, he and his ſurueyed it quantitatiuely and queintly to the purpoſe. Hurdibras taking in his head and hand, to build the cittie, or woodworke & ſtoneworke of Caerpalladour, called for the iudiciall aduiſe & deuiſe of Aquila his Aſtrologer in laying the foundations of that ſtarry and elementary Citty, that the worlde might better eſteeme it.
                  
                     Philoſophy, both naturall and morall: the foure wiſemen of Athens, that taught ſome of the Brutans, euen as Bladud the king appointed them, had many times for their variable and ſtrange voices a wonderfull great audience, and thoſe wiſemens ſchollers ſucceeded them and continued orderly about the times of fourteene hundred yeares after with great glorie, but but how good, I knowe not. Bladud found the hote

Bathes in this Iland by his Geomanticall and Hydromanticall ſkill and ſubtiltie. Brute the firſt made many good politicke laws for the benefit & direction of himſelfe and his ſubiectes. Guendolin miniſtred true iudgement to the people well and wiſely, at laſt, fearing by reaſon or inſpiration that the king Madian her ſonne would ſcarſely vſe her Honourably, as the ſon ſhould vſe his mother, went her way and dwelt far enough ought of ſight in Cornewall among them that were glad euer of her daily company. Ebranke for his ſonnes ſake and his owne, ſent his thirtie daughters to Siluius an Italian Duke, that they might be married with their owne bloud, the old Troian bloud, and thereby get their father many friendes or welwillers abroad, to ſtrengthen him in his neede, if nede were.
                  
                     Wordes of counſell: Cordeil tolde her father in a melancholicke vaine, That as his riches were more or leſſe, ſo he ſhould be loued and feared more and leſſe.
                  
                     This was their Prudence in teaching and learning.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Their vice or folly is ſeene in
                  
                     Deceite by bulding: Locrine for want of better conueiance built a caue for his Concubine, and made ſome few men of his priuy Counſell, but tolde other men, that it was a ſecret place for praier and ſacrifice in the maner of his owne outlandiſh religion: when he heard and knew of Corins death, he crowned Elſtrid queene and reiected Guendolin, whom he ſeemed to loue hitherto for feare of Corin, and not for liking.
                  
                     Deceit by weapons: Mempriſe ſlewe his manly brother Manlius by faithleſſe craft, to be out of his emulatiue danger and dangerous emulation.
                  
                     Magicals: Bladud dedicated his Bathes to Minerua a dead woman: he taught Necromancy in all parts of his country: he vndertooke to flie aloft in the ayre with deuiſed winges and meanes artificially, and ſo fell downe inartificially and died ſenſibly, neither could he become admirable this way, as he hoped.
                  
                     Wordes: Leyr forgetting his Honour aſked his three daughters a fond needleſſe queſtion, as ſome vſe to dally with young children, and would forſooth, heare of them that were women grown, How much they loued him: they might haue ſhewed on their finger.
                  
                     Ignorance: the Gyantes of this Iland being onely ſtrong, and wild men without any great forecaſt, were ſubdued for want of arte and gouernment. Siſill let all matters go and runne at auenture. Iago had the ſame vile fault, and died of a frenſie, as he liued with a megrim.
               
               
                  Their vertue & fortitude is known by their Acts in
                  
                     
                     Peace,

                           Theſe honourable Rulers approoued their Princely magnificence, and Philotimy in a braue maner. Brute the firſt named this Iland Brutanie of his owne Noble and famous Name: He built a fortunate Cittie by the Tems, and called it Troy-new in perpetuall honour of his owne Countrey. Ebranke built a faire Cittie in hys land Northward, which he called Caerbranke after his owne name: He built another Cittie with a Caſtle in Albany, and called it Edenbrough, in regard of his daughters. Leyl built a Citie in this land Northward, which he called Caerleyl by his own name. Leyr built a Citie in the midſt of his land, and called it Caerleyr in reſpect of his owne name. Thus they purchaſed their Glorie with heroicall expences, and publicke actions profitably.
                           Then the vertuous ſubiectes ſhewed their excellent magnanimitie in good ſorte: They ſuffered not Madian to rule ouer them, till hee was able to carry armour in the Field, and lead an armie. Duke Corin went to king Locrin with his ordinary battle Axe in his hand, and behaued himſelfe ſo manly, and plainly with the king, that he would not or durſt not reiect Guendolin his ſpouſe, as he before had purpoſed. Good warly rhetoricke.
                        
                     
                     
                        Warre

                           at home

                                 Thoſe Dukes Maglan and Hennine ſuffred not their wiues king Leyrs two eldeſt daughters to be kept frō the Crowne by Cordeil the youngeſt daughter. Locrin fought with Humber and flewe him in battle, becauſe he had ſlaine his younger brother Albanact the Prince and ruler of Albany.
                                 
                                 
                                    Conedag and Morgan the ſons of thoſe two Dukes depoſed euen Cordeil their aunt from hir vſurpation and royall gouernment.
                                 
                                    Conedag defended his land againſt Morgan, and put him to flight, and ſlewe him, and ioyned Morgans kingdome to his owne. Guendolin the queene gathered an army againſt her huſband Locrin the king, and in their conflict he was ſlaine with an arrow.
                              
                           
                           abroad.

                                 
                                    Ebranke got great victories, and rich ſpoiles both in ſtrange countries far off, & neere hand, & then returned home with his mony and men in ſafety & ioy: it is no leſſe courage, to get out of troble, then to go through it.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     This was their Fortitude, in doing for their friends, and vndoing their foes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Their vice or extream fortitude is knowen by
                  
                     Couetous ambition: Manly warred with his elder brother Mempriſe to depriue him of the kingdome, accounting it his owne, if he could win it. Leyrs two ſons in law Maglane and Hennine expelled him out of his land, and vſurped his place a while, no time to count of. Morgan raiſed war againſt Conedag his cooſin german, with whom he liued neighbourly aforetime, but now he aſpired to Conedags kingdome. Porrex made ſodaine war vpon Ferrex his brother, and put him to flight, and ſlewe him, to be ruler himſelfe alone.
                  
                     Audacious anger: When the people might do what they would in the raigne of Siſill, they being naturally giuen to fighting, fell to ciuil war among themſelues, and ſpilt much innocent bloud. Rage is blinde: villanes ſomtime turne wars to their vile vſes.
                  
                     Puſillanimity or baſe idleneſſe: Leyl for want of a good heart coulde not rule his ſubiectes when he was olde. Cordeyl being at her wits end deſpaired of her libertie, and murdered her ſelfe in priſon. Gorbodug liued without any memorable act, like an idiote or a verie ſwaine. Siſill by continuall eaſe fell into many colde and phlegmaticke diſeaſes, and at laſt a lethargy made an end of him: as hee ſowed, ſo hee reaped: of a laſie life, came a lothſome death.
               
               
                  
                  Their vertue or Iuſtice is proued in
                  
                     Diuiding in the generations of the eighteene kings the Crown is euer iuſtly poſſeſſed, either by the ſons, or by the brethren, or by the next of the kings bloud, except the next to king Leyr.
                  
                  
                     Brute the firſt deuided Brutany among his three ſonnes, the eldeſt had the beſt third, the youngeſt the worſt part, the middle ſonne the meane part, not ſo good as the beſt, nor ſo ill as the worſt.
                  
                     Ebranke built a Temple in Caerbrank and appoynted an archflamin to ouerſee it. Leyl built a Temple in Caerleyl and ordained a flamin to rule ouer it. Hurdibras built Caerkent, Caeruin and Caerpalladour, for the benefit of the countrey, and in euery of them he made a Temple. Bladud built a Temple in his Citie Caerbadon, which was made by him for theyr vſe that kept the Bathes or came to them.
                  
                     Conedag and Morgan the ſonnes of two ſiſters parted Brutany betweene them, and liued quietly: So did Ferrex and Porrex two brethren for a time: but the comedie became a tragedie.
                  
                     Rewarding: Brute the firſt gaue Cornewall to Corin his fellowſouldier for ouercomming Gogmagog the Gyant in wraſtling. Locrin beſtowed the ſpoyles of Humbers armies vpō the ſouldiers that woon them in battell. Cordeil welcomed her father Leyr moſt reuerently when he fled vnto her for ſuccour, and reſtored him to his kingdom. Kymar kept his land in right frame and order, by giuing all braue men that they truely deſerued: the chiefe pollicy with good natures.
                  
                     Challenging: Corin ſeeing changeable affections of Locrin charged him with a promiſe and contract

made betweene him and Guendolin, and vrged him ſo ſtraitly and ſeuerely, that hee made him content to ſtand to his word, the rather for that good ſeruice which Corin did his father Brute.
                  
                  
                     Reuenging: Locrin reuenged the death of Albanact his brother with the death of Humber. Guendolin fought againſt her owne huſband, to plague him for his whoredome and other iniuries, and prouided ſo well for her ſelfe, that in the triall of their Cauſe hee was ſlaine, and his whore drowned with her baſe daughter, the fiery and deceitfull roote Baaras with the leafe. Conedag and Morgan depoſed Cordeil from the kingdom which ſhe held from them a long time with ſome title by her father though inſufficient, ſeeing theſe were the ſonnes of her eldeſt ſiſters. Wyden with her waiting women chopped her ſonne Porrex in peeces by night, for killing his brother Ferrex without any iuſt cauſe.
                  
                     Puniſhing: Gurguſt was abhorred of the Brutans for his daily dronkenneſſe, but ſuffered to be king for his birthrightes ſake. Madian and Mempriſe were hated of good men and feared of wicked men for theyr extreame and beaſtly crueltie: ſo betweene both they were ſecretly forſaken in time of hunting and the wild beaſtes ſuffered to deſtroy them. Here we may very fitly conſider, how the Power from heauen puniſhed the people of Brutanie with raining bloud three dayes, and vexing them with infinite ſwarms of venimous ſtrange flies, that ſtung their king Riual and many other to death. See, what life is that flies may take away, euen litle flies with their little ſtings.
                  
                     This was their Iuſtice in Religion and Pollicy.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Their vice or Iniuſtice is proued in
                  
                     Diuiding: Locrin crowned Elſtrid his concubine queene, when Guendolin his true wife liued. Ebranke dedicated the Temple of his Cittie to a liuing name and dead carcaſſe Diana, that coulde not defend it or him. Leyr gaue halfe his goodes to his two eldeſt daughters at their marriage, and made them mightier then himſelfe, for ſpeaking to him fairely or paintedly, but he gaue nothing with Cordeil to her dowry, becauſe ſhe told him an open truth without anie forgerie.
                  
                     Rewarding: Leyr at his death, gaue his halfe kingdome to Cordeyl, for defending him in trouble: the people made her queene by common conſent, and thereby hindered the right of her two Nephewes the very next apparant heires.
               
            
            
               THE CHRONOLOGY OF Brutes offſpring.
               
                  
                     BRute the firſt began to rule in the yeare of the world, 2855. and ruled 24. yeares, about the time of Samuell the mightie Prophet in Iſrael.
               
                  Locrin began in the yeare 2879. and rule 20. yeares, in which time hee kept Elſtrid ſeuen yeares, about the time of Saul the firſt king of Iſrael.
               
                  
                  Guendolin began in the yeare 2899. and ruled 15. yeares, about the time of Dauid the kingly Prophet in Iſrael.
               
                  Madian beganne in the yeare 2914. and ruled 40. yeares, about the time of faire Abſolons fame in Iſrael.
               
                  Mempriſe began in the yeare 2954. and ruled 20. yeares, about the time of Salomons magnificent buildings in Iſrael.
               
                  Ebranke began in the yeare 2974. and ruled 60. yeares, in the 23. yeare of his raigne he built Caerbrank, about this time the fierie Prophet Elias of Iſrael began to teach.
               
                  Brute the ſecond began in the yeare 3034. and ruled 12. yeares: about this time Baals Prophets were ſlain at the brooke Kiſon by the commaundement of Elias the Prophet of God.
               
                  Leyl beganne in the yeare 3046. and raigned 25. yeares: about this time Eliſeus the great Prophet beganne to worke wonders in Iſrael.
               
                  Hurdibras began in the yeare 3071. and raigned 30. yeares: now Lycurgus the Lacedemonian law-maker floriſhed.
               
                  Bladud began in the yeare 3101. and raigned 21. yeares: now Heſiodus the Poet was famous, now Homer liued.
               
                  Leyr beganne in the yeare 3122. and raigned 40. yeares: now Sardanapalus the laſt king of Aſsiria was in his pride and ſenſualitie.
               
                  Cordeyl began in the yeare 3162. and ruled 5. yeares: nowe Eſaias the Prophet began to propheſie among the Iewes.
               
                  
                  Conedag began in the yeare 3167. and raigned 33. yeares: now Romulus and Remus were borne: now the Olimpiades began.
               
                  Riuall began in the yeare 3200. and raigned 46. yeares: now Roome was builded: now Sennacheribs army was deſtroied by an Angel of God in one night.
               
                  Gurguſt began in the yeare 3246. and raigned 38. yeares: now Gyges got the kingdom of Lydia and Numa of Roome: heereaboutes Herodotus beginneth his hiſtories, which containe 230. yeares.
               
                  Siſill beganne in the yeare 3284. and raigned 49. yeares: nowe Tullus ruled in Roome, and Ieremias the Prophet began to propheſie.
               
                  Iago began in the yeare 3333. and raigned 25. years: now Ancus Martius ruled in Roome and Nabuchodonoſor in Babilon.
               
                  Kymar began in the yeare 3358. and raigned 54. yeares: now Daniel and Ezechiel the Prophets began to propheſie: nowe the ſeuen wiſemen of Greece were famous.
               
                  Gorbodug began in the yeare 3412. and raigned 64. yeares: now Tarquinius was expelled out of Roome: now Pythagoras liued: now Cyrus the great, was in his glorie.
               
                  Ferrex and Porrex beganne in the yeare 3475. and raigned 5. yeares: now Xerxes beganne his Greeke wars: now Anaxagoras the Teacher of Pericles, Socrates and Thucydides was famous and ſomwhat ſingular.
               Thus Brute and his offſpring ſeeme to ende in the yeare of the world 3480. and to haue continued in the Gouernment of Brutanie 735.
                   yeares. There is a time

of life, and a time of death, a time to ariſe, and a time to fall, a time for one ſtock and a time for another. Yet infinite be that time, which is predeſtinated for the name of Brute and his Brutans, euerlaſting be that honor which is due to the branches of ſuch a Tree as groweth without withering, is ſtrong without decay, and may beſt ſerue euen for the Phenix of all men, and Vna of all the women in the earth.
            
            
               The Topography ſet downe in the Hiſtorie of Brutes generation.
               
               
                  The places mentioned in this Iland are vniuerſall
                  
                     More: Locry the ſouth part of Brutanie, Cambry the weſt part, Albany the north part ſo named, of Locrin & Camber and Albanact the ſonnes of Brute. All the kings that ſucceeded Locrin raigned in Locry, and Conedag ruled it as his heritage. Morgan fled into Cambry from Conedags armie: he was ruler in Albany, which was aſſigned him for his portion. One of Leyrs ſonnes in law was Duke of Albany.
                  
                  
                     Leſſe: Cornewall ſo called of Corin, is in the boundes of Locry: there Guendolin wrought her chiefe practiſes: there Madian was brought vp: one of Leyrs ſonnes in law was Duke thereof. Glamorgan is in the limits of Cambry, there Morgan was ſlaine, and his Armie ouerthrowne, of whom that part had the name.
               
               
                  
                  Other places ar leſſe particular.
                  
                     In the water: Brute built Troynew by the Riuer Tems. Locry and Albany are deuided by the riuer Humber, where Locrin vanquiſhed the Duke of the Albans called Humber, of whome that riuer had the name.
                  
                     Cambry is parted from Locry by the riuer Seuerne, called otherwiſe Habren, in which Elſtrid and her daughter Habren were drowned by Guendolins commandement, and of that daughter the Riuer had the name.
                  
                     In the land: Brute landed at Totnes Hauen. Troynew built by Brute: heere Locrin made Elſtrids caue: heere Bladud, Conedag and Gorbodug were buried. Caerkent the Cittie of Kent or Canterbury, Caerwin or Wincheſter, Caerpalladour or Shaftsbury built by Hurdibras. Caerbadon or the Citty Bathe, and Stamford built by Bladud. Caerleyr or the Cittie of Leyr or Leeceſter built by Leyr. There hee was buried: there Cordeyl was buried: Theſe are in Locry: Caerbranke, or the cittie of Ebrank, or Yorke, and Edenbrough, or the cittie of Maides, built by Ebranke. Caerleyl the cittie of Leyl: theſe are in Albany.
                  
               
               
                  Places more particular are
                  
                     Temples and religious houſes: Ebranke built a Temple in Caerbranke, and there he was buried: there was Riuall buried, there Iago was buried. Leil built a Temple in Caerleyl, and there was he buried.
                  
                     Hurdibras built three Temples in his three Citties,

and in the Temple of Caerwin was he buried. Bladud built a Temple in Caerbadon: there Siſill was buried. Bladud fell downe vpon the aultar of Apollo, when his flying failed him.
                  
                     Prophane places: Ebranke built a Caſtle in Edenbrough. The Caue of Elſtrid built by Locrin. The bellies of beaſtes were the toombers of Madian and Mempriſe.
                  
               
               
                  Places out of this Iland mentioned are
                  
                     Neerer vs: Germany: thence Elſtrid was brought by Humber: thence Ebranke brought great ſpoyles. Gallia whence Ebranke got many riches: there Aganip the huſband of Cordeil was Ruler: Leyr and Ferrex in their neede fled thither.
                  
                     Farder from vs: Latium in Italy: whether Ebranke ſent his 30. daughters.
                  
                     Athens in Greece, where Bladud was taught and ſchooled. For the trauailes of Brute before hee came to vs pertaine not to vs in reſpect of the places or otherwiſe. Till hee was of our Commonwealth, he was not with vs, but againſt vs.
               
            
            
               
               THE GENEALOGY OR ISSVE OF CLOTO.
               
                  
                     CLoto Duke of Cornwall deſcending from Corin, Great Brutes nephew began the ſecond family of the Brutan kinges, and begat Mulmucie,
               
               
                  Mulmucie begat two ſonnes of Conwen his wife, the firſt was Belin, the ſecond was Brenne, a verie perſonable man, yet hee left no knowne ſeede behinde him.
               
                  Belin begat Gurguint.
               
               
                  Gurguint begat Guintelin.
               
               
                  Guintelin begat Siſill, the ſecond of Martia his wife.
               
                  Siſill begat Kymar the ſecond.
               
                  Kymar begat Elane.
               
               
                  Elane begat Morind of his concubine Tangueſtela.
               
               
                  Morind begat 5. ſonnes, the firſt Gorboman, the ſecond Archigall, the third Elidure, the fourth Vigeny the fift Peridure, which died without any naturall iſſue, onely Elidure begat Gorboman the ſecond.
               Theſe are the 14. Generations of Cloto in the kingdome of Locry, which 14. onely are well regiſtred, and acknowledged as true heires in the ſucceſſion of the Brutan Crowne. There are differences of Houſes aſwel for number as for time: but opinion deſtroieth nature often, or elſe ſome families would laſt euer, the force of education is mightie.
            
            
               
               THE ARTES AND ACTES OF Cloto, and the Clotoans, are in their Vertues and Vices.
               
               
                  Their vertue or Iuſtice appeareth in
                  
                     Diuiding: Mulmucy of all the kings was firſt crowned with gold: hee founded the Temple of Troynew. Belin the firſt brother poſſeſſed the firſt part, and Bren the ſecond inherited the ſecond: after that Bren fled out of this Iland and left no children, Belin tooke his kingdome for his owne. Elidure being a younger brother to Archigall, gaue ouer the kingdome vnto him, accounting it rightly Archigals good for his life time. Peridure after the death of his elder brother Vigeny tooke the kingdome into his handes, becauſe Vigeny died without iſſue, and ioyned his owne kingdome and this in one.
                  
                     Rewarding: Mulmucy made of his Temples priuiledged ſanctuaries, that none ſhould die or ſuffer any violence in them: his lawes which he writ approue his righteouſneſſe. Belin repaired the olde Citties which other kinges had built aforetime: hee offered ſacrifices and giftes freely to the Gods, and moſt ſolemnly thanked them for the victorie he got againſt Brenne and his Norwaies. He ordained three archflamins in three Citties, hee confirmed his fathers lawes. Martia was generally allowed for Ruler and king of the realme, euen in the dayes of her huſband and her ſonne, becauſe her gift in iudgement was moſt ſingular, and vnmacheable. Gorboman repaired all the Temples in his whole kingdome throughout. Elidure was choſen king three ſundry

times for his vpright dealing in all caſes. That conſtant vertue is happy that findeth her friendes conſtant like herſelfe.
                  
                     Puniſhing: Belin would not reſtore Brens kingdome vnto him, becauſe hee had loſt it by falſhoode, and in triall of warre. Belin would not deliuer Guilthdake the Daniſh intruder out of priſon, and ſend him home to his kingdome in Denmarke, vntill hee had taken a moſt ſure order for a yearely tribute in conſideration of his preſent deliuery to bee payd to Belin and his heires for euer. Gurguint, when the Dane denyed hys yearely tribute, plagued the Dane inceſſantly by fire and ſword, till hee agreed to pay him the yearely tribute, which was lawfully due to the king of Brutanie. Archigall was depriued of the kingdome by his ſubiectes for his wicked life. When Morind had ouerthrowne the Mores that inuaded his land, hee burnt them before his face, becauſe they had burnt in ſome partes of this Countrey. Heere wee may well conſider the Iuſtice of Heauen, which ſlewe many of Brens ſouldiers, and wounded him to death, when hee had ſpoyled a Temple.
               
               
                  Their Vice or Iniuſtice appeared in
                  
                     Diuiding: Archigall ſought by all meanes, to aduaunce baſe men and rude vaſſals, whom hee fauoured moſt, and to pull downe the great and rich men, whom hee liked not ſo much as them. Like will to like: tyranny reſpecteth onely herſelfe. Peredure and Vigeny enuying the grace and glory of their brother Elidure, made warre againſt him and tooke him priſoner, and kept him in hold while they liued, without

any other reaſon, but the vnreaſonable power of forcible entry.
                  
                     Puniſhing: Kymar the ſecond being hated of ſome vngratious and deſperate ſubiectes was ſlaine by them moſt wrongfully: the more vnhappy man hee that coulde not foreſee. Morind was of ſo violent and boiſterous a nature, that whoſoeuer offended him ſhould ſurely dye for his fault, though it were but a ſmall treſpaſſe, becauſe hee was diſpleaſed. Euery offence is not deadly: no man liueth without offences: but a Prince without patience doth euer moſt miſchiefe.
               
               
                  Their Vertue or fortitude, is ſeene in
                  
                     Peace at home: Mulmucy built Blackwell Hall and Malmesbury: hee beganne to cut and lay out 4. Highwaies vniuerſall to this Land: he reſtored chiualry. Belin built thoſe 4. waies, and finiſhed them: he built a Citie and a Hauen with faire gates in Troynew and a Tower. Guintelin built a Cittie: Gorboman the firſt, built two Citties.
                  
                     Peace abroad: Bren built ſome Citties in Italy and repayred ſome.
                  
                     Warre at home: Mulmucy vanquiſhed 4. great Dukes, which warred with him for the crowne of this kingdome. Belin ouerthrew Brens armies twiſe, he took Guilthdake priſoner, and thoſe ſhips that were ſent againſt the Land. Morind ſlewe an Iriſh Sea Monſter: he deſtroyed a Duke of the Mores and hys men, that arriued in this Iland to deſtroy it.
                  
                     Warre abroad: Belin and Bren ſayled together with both their forces into Gallia and ſubdued it.
                  
                     
                     Bren ſought afterward newe kingdomes abroad, he vanquiſhed great partes of Italy, and ſacked Rome it ſelfe: he got infinite ſpoyles in Macedonia. Gurguint ſayled into Denmarke, and forced the king there in his owne Land to yeald vnto him.
                  
                     Reuenging: Bren gathered himſelfe an Army in Norway, to recouer his kingdom of Belin thereby. So he prouided for himſelfe afterward in Armoricke againſt Belin vppon the ſame cauſe, and for the like purpoſe.
               
               
                  Their Vice or extreme Fortitude is in
                  
                     Ambition: Bren aroſe with all his powers againſt Belin, to take from him his right Dominion, if hee could. Vigeny and Peredure conſpired againſt Elidure, and tooke his kingdome from him by open force.
                  
                     Rage: Bren threatned Belin with wordes of great defiance, if he had not his kingdome of him againe. He ſpoyled the Temple of Macedonia in deſpite of all gouernment.
                  
                     Puſillanimitie: Elidure was content to bee taken and priſoned, rather then giue any cauſe of bloudſhed among his people by meanes of warre.
               
               
                  Their Vertue or Prudence is ſet forth in
                  
                     Writinges: Mulmucy made many poſitiue lawes in his natiue language, and cauſed them to be publiſhed, that all men might read them for their direction and better aduiſement.
                  
                     Marcia a queene made many ſtatutes, to teach the ſubiects aright and eaſie way of morall life. Right in reſpect of the crooked way, and eaſie in reſpect of the looſe and careleſſe way which breedeth ſorrowes.
                  
                     
                     Doinges: Mulmucie fauoured all learned men of all kindes, being minded to vſe euery one in his miſtery. Belin fortified the late kingdome of his brother, and now his owne kingdome, with his owne ſouldiers, and put out all Brens men for his ſake, and his owne ſafetie: hee allowed his fathers lawes for his time, leſſe any man ſhould obiectiuely quarrell with him. Archigall ſeeing by dayly experience, the dayly miſeries of a wicked and inconſiderate life, learned a new leſſon, and led his life orderly euer after. Bren knowing his owne bodily beautie applied himſelfe to that vaine, and got goodwill by marrying great women in forraine Landes, when he could not ſtay at home. Belin was more carefull of his owne land, then for outlandiſh goodes, and returned from Gallia to Brutanie, where his greateſt charge was.
               
               
                  Their vice or folly is in
                  
                     Conceite or opinion: Mulmucy dedicated a Temple to Apollo, as if the dead man were wiſe and mightie.
                  
                     Ignoraunce: Elane ruled fondly and vnrulily.
                  
                     Preſumption: Morind fought with a Sea monſter, and made no man of his counſell herein.
                  
                     Improuidence: Kymar was ſlaine by his enemies in time of hunting, where they tooke him alone at a dead vantage.
                  
                     The beſt Remedie againſt Follies Wichery is, a tryall of all cauſes, which belong to any effect. Hee that can follow this Rule infallibly, cannot be foyled in his Actions.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Their Vertue or Tē
                     perance is known by
                  
                     Liberalitie: Mulmucy, accounting the Cittie, and the Countrey two pillars of his kingdome, priuiledged the waies which went to Citties, and which were for plowes, that the Cittizens and huſbandmen of the land might be loued the more, and better vſed for their immunities among themſelues, and with ſouldiers. Bren gaue much treaſure to his Noble Lordes in little Brutanie, to winne their goodwill, and wage battell with their helpe againſt Belin. A man alone is but halfe himſelfe.
                  
                     Marriage: Bren married the Duke Elfinges daughter in Norway: he married the dukes onely daughter of little Brutany, and thereby was mightie in both places for fauour and power: but I cannot tell certainly, what became of his firſt wife: he was an od man of wit and practiſe.
                  
                     Concord: Conwen the mother of Belin, and Bren ioyned her two ſonnes in one, yea euen them two, which was ſomewhat ſtrange: but what may not wordes do, if they be well tempered, and ſeaſoned with true modeſtie? when they were readie with their armies to ioyne in battell, inſomuch that ſtraitwaies they ruled their former rages, and went brotherly together againſt the common enemy. Gurguint liued peaceably: ſo did Guintelin: ſo did Siſill the ſecond: ſo did Kymar the ſecond: ſo did Gorboman the ſecond. A ſober heart maketh peace, a drunken head, ſtrife.
                  
                     Mercie: Gurguint meeting with a Nauy of 30.
                     
ſtrange ſhippes in the Scottiſh Seas, and ſeeing plainly their extreame neede, and hearing withall their pittifull Supplication, gaue them his goodwill to dwell in Ireland, and aſſured them of his good fauour, ſo long as they liued well and neighbourly. Elidure for his notable mildneſſe, and mercifull nature was named Meeke: he heartily lamented his brother Archigals poore and wretched eſtate, therefore he fayned himſelfe ſicke, that by theſe meanes all his Noblemen, and Lordes might come and viſite him, and at their being with him, hee ſued to them, as it had been for his life, That he might reſigne his kingdom vnto Archigall.
                  
               
               
                  Their Vice or Intemperance is known by
                  
                     Anger: Morind was outragious alwaies and intollerable in his heate.
                  
                     Maleuolence: Archigall gaue himſelfe to breede quarrels chiefly againſt his Noblemen and Richmen.
                  
                     Incontinency: Bren being wounded to death in a tempeſt ſent from the cloudes, ſlew himſelfe in a deſperate rage. Who can ſaue him whom God hateth? It was wonderous, that the Heauens ſhould fight for Apollo. I may thinke the Sprite of the Ayre was ſuffered, to play this part, to vpholde Apolloniſme.
                  
               
            
            
               
               THE CHRONOLOGY OF Clotos offſpring.
               
                  AFter the yeare of the worldes Creation, 3480. there was ciuill Warre continually in this Iland for the ſpace of 50. yeares: in which time vainglorious Xerxes was weakened of the Greekes, both by Sea and Land: then the 12. Tables of Lawes were brought to Roome: then Euripides was born: then Eſdras began to reſtore the Temple at Ieruſalem.
               
                  Mulmucy began in the yeare 3530. and raigned 40. yeares: in which time Bellum Peloponneſiacum began and ended: then Socrates died violently by poyſon & malice.
               
                  Belin began in the yeare 3570. & raigned 26. yeares: in the firſt fiue yeares he and his brother Bren liued quietly together: in this time Roome was taken of the Gauls: now Ariſtotle was borne, may the world be glad thereof?
               
                  Gurguint began in the yeare 3596. and raigned 19. yeares: in this time Xenophons greeke Hiſtory is ended: now Alexander the great is borne, to begin a peece of a new world.
               
                  Guintelin beganne, 3615. and ruled 26. yeares: in which time Plato dyed, the more the pitie: then Iſocrates and Demoſthenes plaied their partes with Philip: then the Greeke Monarchy began to go on foote: hereabout Buchanan begins his Scottiſh kinges, 330. yeares before Chriſtes Natiuitie.
               
                  Siſill began, 3641. and ruled 7. yeares: in this time Alexanders kingdoms were deuided betweene his worthies.
               
                  Kymar the ſecond began, 3648. and ruled 3. yeares: in this time Caſſander reſtoreth the Cittie Thebes the 20. yeare after Alexander deſtroyed it.
               
                  
                  Elane began, 3651. and raigned 9. yeares: in this time Seleucus beganne his raigne in Syria, and Demetrius deliuered Athens from the Macedonian yoke.
               
                  Morind began 3660. and raigned 8. yeares: in this time Flauius a Secretary publiſhed the Ciuill Lawe, which the high Prieſt onely knew aforetime.
               
                  Gorboman began, 3668. and raigned 11. yeares: in which time Decius the ſonne deuoted himſelf to death for his Country Rome in the wars of the Samnites.
               
               
                  Archigall began, 3679. and ruled 5. yeares: in this time the Conſul T. Coruncanus began firſt to profeſſe the Ciuill Law: now Pirrhus the Epyrote made warre with the Romans.
               
                  Elidure began, 3684. and ruled 5. yeares: in this time Ptolomeus Philadelphus entertained many learned and wiſe men.
               
                  Archigal began again, 3689. and ruled 10. yeares.
               
                  Elidure began againe, 3699. and ruled 2. yeares.
               
                  Vigeny and Peredure began, 3701. and ruled 9. years: in this time the 70. tranſlated the Bible into greeke: in this time the firſt Punick war beganne: now Phalereus the Rhetorician, now Theocritus the Poet, now Euclides the Geometrician, now Aratus the Aſtrologian liued.
               
                  Elidure began again, 3710. and raigned 4. yeares.
               
                  Gorboman the ſecond began in the yeare of the world, 3714. and raigned 10. yeares: in this time the people created T. Coruncanus the high Biſhop in Roome.
               
                  Thus the Time of Clotoes offſpring ſeemeeh to end in the yeare of the word, 3724. and to haue endured 194. yeares in the Rule of Brutany: a verie little time of continuance for ſo many kings: but all plantes haue not roote alike: ſome are rooted broadway, as Elmes, and fall quickly: ſome are rooted downward, as Okes, and ſtand in the mids of the windes, euen till the violent axe or verie age ouerturne them.
               
            
            
               
               THE TOPOGRAPHY MENTIOned in Clotoes Offſpring.
               
                  
                     The places named are in the Iland
                     
                        general

                              
                                 Cambry, where Rudank ruled in the conflict of Mulmcy.
                              
                              
                                 Locry, where Pinnor ruled in that conflict. Belin and his ſucceſſors ruled there. Vigeny ruled ther.
                              
                                 Albany, where Statery was Ruler in that time of conflict. Bren and Peredure raigned there.
                              
                                 Northumberland, there Yeuan ruled in the time of the conflict: here Belin prepared an Army againſt Brens comming.
                           
                        
                        ſpeciall,

                              More burials,

                                    
                                       Mulmucy buried in Troynew Tēple:
                                        ſo was Gurguint: Belin at Belinſgate: Guintelin
                                        in the Temple: Archigall
                                        at Grantam: Elidure
                                        at Caerleyl.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Leſſe, cities and the foure highwais. &c

                                    
                                       Warwicke built by Guintelin: Cambridge
                                        & Grantam built by Gorboman: Caerusk
                                        built by Belin, here he ordained an archflamin. Troynew, where Belin conſulted with his Lords and with Bren.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Other places not ſo generall are theſe: the Tower of Troynew built by Belin: there Elidure was impriſoned. Belinſgate built by Belin: Blackwell Hall, an Malmesbury, and Pauls founded by Mulmucy: Briſto by Bren: Calater a wood neere Caerbranke, where Bren was diſcomfited

in his firſt and ſecond wars againſt Belin: there Elidure met Archigal. Caerbranke the place where Belin counſelled with his Lordes about Guilthdake: there hee ordained an archflamin: there Elidure reſtored Archigall by the aſſent of his Lordes.
               
               
                  
                     The places named out of the Iland
                     
                        general

                              
                                 Ireland: there Gurguint placed the 30. ſayle of ſhippes that he met on the Sea.
                              
                                 Orcades: there he met thoſe ſhips wādring.
                              
                                 Norway: Bren
                                  fled thither from Belin, and there he gathered his ſecond army againſt him.
                              
                                 Armorica or litle Brutany, where Bren prepared his third Army.
                              
                                 Denmark, from that countrey Guilthdake, came in armes againſt this Iland. Gurguint ſayled thither, to fight for his owne goodes.
                              
                                 Gallia: there Bren ruled, & repaired ſome Cities.
                              
                                 Italy: here Bren became moſt victorious.
                              
                                 Macedony: here Bren ſpoiled himſelf & all. Mauritany: Morind
                                  ouercame an Army of Mores, which came againſt this Iland.
                           
                        
                        ſpeciall

                              
                                 Roome: here Bren made hauocke of all.
                              
                                 Capitoll: Bren
                                  beſieged it, and for one thouſand poundes of gold, brake vp and departed.
                              
                                 Millan, Pauy, Bergomum, Comum, Brixia, Verona, Tridentum, Vincentia, and other Cities built or repaired by Bren the rauenous and magnificent Prince.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Thus one Generation of men paſſeth, and another commeth, but the vertues of men are euerlaſting, yea & their bodies by traduction are immortall: So a vertuous man ſhall be a mortall God, if his minde or body haue their iſſues.
               
            
            
               
               THE THIRD GENERATION or rather ſucceſsion of Brutan Kings.
               
                  THe death of Gorboman the ſecond begat a politicke body in this Iland without an head. This Acephalia begat Vnrulineſſe in the lower partes.
               Vnrulineſſe begat Strife, among the Nobles and Commons,
               Strife begat Trouble on both partes.
               Trouble begat Wearineſſe and Weakneſſe,
               Weakneſſe begat Deſire of reſt,
               Deſire of reſt begat Election, and
               Election begat Morgan, and made him Ruler.
               
                  Morgan begat Goodwill in his ſubiectes,
               Goodwill for his ſake begat Emerian his brother, who died as the other did without iſſue, his death let Ambition a traytor out of priſon,
               Ambition begat Sedition,
               Sedition begat Confuſion,
               Confuſion begat Vnquietneſſe,
               Vnquietneſſe begat Deſire of order,
               Deſire of order begat Deliberation, and
               Deliberation begat Iual and made him king.
               The death of Iuall begat Emulation,
               Emulation begat Wit and Inuention.
               Inuention begat Friendſhip,
               Frendſhip begat Rimo, and made him Ruler. When he was dead his companion Geruncie was made king

in reſpect of that familiaritie which he had with Rimo. Then Cathel ſo handled hys matters in pleaſing the chiefe men by hys liberall behauiour, that hee raigned next and dyed. Then Coil ouercame mens hearts with hys vertuous actiuitie, and was annointed king, and dyed: then Porrex the ſecond wrought many good works, and was next king to him, and dyed.
               Then Cheryn fed all the mad fellowes humours in the realme that he could heare of, and by voices got the kingdome.
               
                  Cheryn begat a ſonne, and called hym Fulgen, who dyed without iſſue: then Eldrid by faire and large promiſes got the Crowne and dyed: then Androgy outwent hym in all kinds of allurement, and ſucceeded him and begat Vrian that dyed without iſſue. Then Eliud by his miſticall artes did extraordinary and admirable acts, and thereby was made king.
               After him Merian by inuenting newe practiſes for warres, and occupations was ſo honoured generally, that he was Ruler. Then Bladune aroſe from priuate deſertes to publicke fauours, and at length hee was king: the ſame kinde of nature begat Capene, and next hym Ouine, and euen ſuch a pacificatory mind preferred Sily. After hym Bledgabrede by hys pleaſant demeanour and merrimentes, pleaſed all the Nobles, and became theyr Ruler. Then Redargy aroſe next him in ſuch a ſort, and ſo did Samuly: But Peniſell being vnmachable in ſtrength ſucceeded hym: then Pirrhy for his ſtrange ſwiftneſſe, and incomparable dexteritie in all feates of manhood, was ruler of his brethren. In thoſe dayes publicke actions made kings.
               Theſe are the 24. rulers, which ſucceeded Gorboman
                  
the ſecond, & make a line of ſucceſſion rather then of genealogy. Yet wee may call this a politicke generation rightly in the whole body of the realme, though it be not a naturall generation in theyr owne proper bodyes from Morgan to Pirrhy. All men haue not the gift of children: of all theſe Rulers here are but two ſons, and their two fathers, the other ſeeme to haue left no ſeede behinde them. Sometime the imperfection is in the wife, ſometime in the huſband: there are watry loynes, and rotten thighes in both ſexes. Some men are barren naturally, ſome are barren artificially, ſome are barren by olde age, ſome make themſelues barren with preternaturall dyet, ſome are made of other men by chirurgicall inciſions. Or if they had children and were not barren, the more vnhappy they that coulde not continue as they began. Some families are taken away by ſickneſſe, ſome by wars, ſome by miſchances in theyr dyet and exerciſe, ſome are put from theyr owne, and are euer in thraldome, and are neuer againe heard of in the worlde. God almighty knoweth all thinges from the firſt to the laſt: but if a man ſhoulde ſucke the ſtars, or be ſucked himſelfe as they ſay, of the king of Fayries, he ſhould not finde a perfite Hiſtory of this time of theſe Kinges. Yet ſuch as it is, I beleeue, a reader may go farther and ſpeed worſe: the moſt morals the beſt Hiſtorie, but a man may inſert phiſicall obſeruations vpon occaſion to good vſe and purpoſe, ſo long as Hiſtory is an example of life in both wayes of Action.
            
            
               
               THEIR ARTES AND ACTES are ſet downe in their Vertues and Vices.
               
               
                  Their Vertue or Iuſtice was approued in
                  
                     Diuiding: Emerean ſucceeded Morgan, becauſe hee was his brother: for brethren are twigs of the ſame branch, fingers of one hand, partes of the ſame body. If one twig fall off, the ſap of the tree muſt feed the other twig which ſtandeth on. If ſome of the fingers be cut off, the vaines muſt ſerue the fingers that remaine: if one arme be rotted of, the other arme muſt be in ſtead of both armes. Fulgan ſucceeded his father Cherin, and Vrian his father Androgy. For the ſonnes body is the fathers body deriued and continued: it is the old body made young againe: the ſons and fathers body are as the ſame body of one tree in right length: the ſeedes of trees bring forth all theyr owne kindes: in which reſpect Morind is a true king by Natures law.
                  
                     Rewarding: Iual among the Noblemen was choſen the king for his moderate vertues, and equall iudgementes that appeared euer in all his wordes and works. A rare inſtance of worthineſſe worthily conſidered, and may of it ſelfe deſerue a Treatiſe to proue the Ciuilitie of olde Brutanie, which many diſgrace for malice, and more for ignorance, and moſt for company.
               
               
                  
                  Their vertue or prudence was ſhewed
                  
                     In the art of Muſicke: Bledgabrede both ſtudied and practiſed muſicke: hee was very famous: and I thinke, in reſpect of his charge and gouernment, very wonderfull. A monaſticall liuer, and much more an oeconomicall hath no partes of time for ſuch young childiſh ſtudies, if he looke wel about him: and how can a king that is the keeper of all other men haue any time for ſuch vaine inſignificant voices? Yet the circular wiſdome of this king had ſuch a capacitie by ſome myraculous infuſion from heauen, that hee was fit both for the graueſt and the lighteſt ſtudies, either to learne them by contemplation, or to vſe and teach them by action. He ſaw by his inſtrumentes, how to tune and ſtring his kingdome: he could preuent and pacifie tumultes with his muſick: he might perhaps allay the waues of the Sea, and breake the thunders aloft with his diuine melodie: he coulde keepe himſelfe from wearineſſe by his muſicke: he could mitigate the violence of diſeaſes with his ſweete voices: muſicke was his proſody, his pronunciation, his diſpoſition, his inſtrument of inſtrument, and the life of his life.
               
               
                  Their vertue or Temperance appeared in
                  
                     Behauiour: Coil liued all his time quietly without any war and tumult: A contented mind is not contentious. Porrex the 2. behaued himſelfe, either fatherly toward his youngers, or brotherly toward his equals, or gently toward all men. By this meane he was more happie with the helpe of the Graces, then the firſt Porrex, whome the Furies deſtroied. The Graces are moderate Vertues, the Furies are immoderate Vices.
               
               
                  
                  Their vice or Intemperance was in
                  
                     Diet: Cheryn was a drunkard, a cupleache, a bellygod, a water rat, he had been well vſed if hee had been puniſhed with abaſement, and turned out of his throne into a wineſeller, and of a winebibber, made a winedrawer.
                  
                     Manners: Vrian was nothing but a carnall man, his wit was carnall, his bodie was carnall his life was ſenſuall, he was without anie diuine or humane excellencie. What ſhould ſuch a man haue an excellent place in the commonwealth? why may the Heauenly Power abide ſo vnholy a beaſt, to repreſent his inuiſible king in ſo holy a Seat as the imperiall Seate of a Prince? a ſingular place, a ſingular incumbent.
                  The other kinges that are not once noted with any vertuous or vicious actes might as good haue not been borne: they are certainly miſerable men that leaue no memorable act behinde them: but are onely named, as a man may giue a name for diſtinctions ſake to a tree, or a hill, or a houſe, or a field, or a ſtone, or anie dead thing, without any father account, or regard of them. The greateſt Name maketh and ſheweth the greateſt man, the leaſt name, the leaſt man: the greateſt name ſpringeth from the greateſt actions, it is not the number of Actes which beget a great Name. All goodes that a man hath within and without him, all are giuen and lent him to doe good: the Pillars of the life are Health, Wiſedome and Riches, yet ſome men are famous for their ſickneſſe, folly and beggery: A memorable man euen with theſe three plagues is happier then

an obſcure man with thoſe three bleſſings: al the goods we haue ſerue for the life, and yet the life conſiſteth not in the poſſeſſions which wee haue: Riches ſerue for Health, and Health ſerueth for Wiſedome, and the actions which belong vnto her, Wiſdome ſerueth for life, and to keepe vs from the pathes of deſtruction & death. Life ſerueth to get a Name by doing good. I would reioyce more in this, to haue my name written in heauen, where it may euer be in ſight and remembrance, then be all theſe 24. kinges fortunati infoelices, whoſe renowne is layd in Hell, and deuoured of the Graue. A liuing Cynick, more happy then a dying Caeſar. A liuing dogge better then a dead Lyon. Yet let go vainglory and banniſh ſelfewill: A name without true vertue deſerueth no memorie: Many are recorded that are not worthy of a regiſter: now there is no remedie: or elſe it might haue probably been wiſhed, that no obiect or vile examples of baſe men had been written. For my part, I cannot thinke, that ſo many kinges could liue and die without ſome glorious actions, howſoeuer miſhap, or enuie, or the Deuill hath blotted them out from our eye-ſight.
               
            
            
               The Times of theſe Kinges.
               
                  
                     MOrgan began to raign in the yeare of the world. 3724. and ruled 14. yeares: now the Panareton of Syracides was written, and then the

                  Panareton of Brutanie fell into a dead ſleepe, wherein it lay ſtill aboue 100. yeares.
               
                  Emerian began in the yeare, 3738. and raigned ſeuen yeares: now was Ennius the Poet borne: now Archimides the Mathematician liued with admiration.
               
                  Iual beganne, 3745. and raigned 20. yeares: now Naeuius and Plautus flouriſhed: now Hanniball began the ſecond Punick warre.
               
                  Rimo began▪ 
                  3765. and ruled 16. yeares: in this time Hanniball fled to Antiochus for ſuccour.
               
                  Geruncy began, 3781. and raigned 20. yeares: in this time Antiochus raged in Iewry.
               
               
                  Cathel began▪ 
                  3801. and ruled 10. yeares: nowe the Macabees beſtirred them like Bees: now Terence the Poet flouriſhed.
               
                  Coil began, 3811. and raigned 20. yeares: in this time the third Punick Warres began.
               
                  Porrex the 2. began, 3831. and ruled 4. yeares: now the Citty of Numantia in Spaine was raſed.
               
                  Cherin raigned one yeare: Fulgen two yeares.
               
                  Eldred ruled one yeare: Androgy one yeare.
               
                  Vrian raigned 3. yeares: Eliud 5.
                   yeares.
               
                  Merian ruled two yeares: Bladune two yeares.
               
                  Capen ruled 3. yeares: Ouine two yeares.
               
                  Sily raigned 2. yeares, eleuen kinges in 24. yeares: About this time the Saduces and Phariſees beganne their ſects in Iewry: now the warre of Iurguth began and ended: nowe Tully was borne in the yeare of the world. 3859, an hundred and three yeares before Chriſt.
               
                  Bledgabrede began, 3860. and raigned 20. yeares: in this time was Pompei borne into the world.
               
                  Redargy began, 3880. and ruled 3. yeares: in this

time was I. Caeſar borne into the world.
               
                  Samuly ruled two yeares? Peniſell three yeares.
               
                  Pirry raigned 2. yeares, foure kinges in 10. yeares, and ended in the yeare of the worlde, 3890: in which time Antony and Craſſus the Oratours of Roome, and in Q.M. Scaeuola the Lawyer liued:
               
                  So theſe 24. kinges continued 166. yeares in the Gouernment of Brutanie.
                  
               
               Heere is no Topography, heere is no place named: they were now I may well ſay kinges Abſtracts: that they did it no where, either incomprehēſibly like Gods, or metaphiſically like ſtrange men. The muſicke of Bledgabred and the actions of the reſt were, belike, in no place of any great account. Yet becauſe they were kinges and enioyed their kingdomes, theyr doomes muſt needes be giuen ſomewhere, and their cunning muſt needes be ſhewed in ſome place, and that was euen the generall Land of Brutany, without any particular nomination of leſſe places. Right Soueraignes and perfit kings, whoſe Actes were vniuerſall & common to the whole realme, not appropriate or fancied to any one Region therein. If the head moue and guide the body it doth more then if it moue or guide one part thereof. A generall praiſe is greateſt, and this was theſe kinges ſpeciall glory aboue others, to rule all places, to rule the Land. The beſt vſe of one commendation or other is, to encounter ſome one diſpraiſe or other that hath been or may be, but they that do all thinges well, haue no neede themſelues of particular Hiſtory. If Sily ruled 2. yeares, ſuppoſe in reaſon, hee was no ſilly one. If the other kinges were kinges, that was all in

all. A king cannot poſſibly be without his excellencies, and memorials.
               Now I diuine modeſtly, heere were actors without recorders of their actions, patrons of learning, but no learned men: or, they were of both ſortes, but their ſtudies came to no effect, by ſome force: or, they were very old when they came to the Crown, and could do nothing: or, the furies and helhoundes raged ſo extreamely, that the Muſes and Graces coulde not bee quiet for them: or, their actes were wrought in needleworke onely, and ſo worne out: or, the ſenſes, and ſenſleſſe deſires ſo ruled them, that theyr liues were not ſo ſhort as their actes: or, the Hiſtories were written in ſome ſtrange kind of polygraphy and ſteganography, and coulde neuer yet be read, but remaine in ſome obſcure place: or, they made little account of writers, and theſe ſet as light by them: or, they that take moſt pains at their booke, were not moſt regarded: and thereupon ſtudied to themſelues: or, ſome infortunate and maleuolent configuration of mouable ſkies and ſtarres, and ſpirites remoued all Hiſtories out of the way: or, the Kinges and People agreed among themſelues, to bee remembred by being not remembred, wiſhing to haue their time called The vnknowe Regiment, adiudging ſecrecie greateſt wiſedome: or, our Countrimen liſtened ſo much after other Noble Actors in the earth, that they had no leiſure, to doe any thing themſelues: or, they diſdained to haue them theyr iudges after their death, whom they would ſcorne to haue their iudges in their life: or, ſome outlandiſh enuy deſtroyed the rowles and regiſters of our Hiſtories, to make vs ſeem barbarous: or, the Vniuerſitie men of Stamford had by

ſome Priuiledge got them wiues, and ſo forth: and had no leiſure to do any thing but liue: or, before the kings were crowned, they were worthy men, and after theyr coronations they fell to make books of nothing: or they could tell, how to get a Soueraigntie, but they knewe not, how to keepe it: or, they writ their Chronicle hieroglyphically, and ſet the pictures of other creatures in the places of their kinges, and by the ignorance of ſome careleſſe men were eſteemed as gaies, and not otherwiſe regarded: or, it was not thus, or ſo: perhaps, neither this, nor that, but ſome other way, I cannot tell howe, nor I care not greatly, for feare I may bee thought neither idle, nor well occupied. Now, good Reader, albeit I ioyne a morall genealogy with a naturall, and ſeeme to breake the ſtile of hiſtory, yet, becauſe affections rule otherwhile aſmuch as kinges, I may truely ſay, my deuiſe is allowable in itſelfe. Where iſſue wanteth in the Prince, there the iſſue of the people is conſidered, ſeeing ſome Princes are begotten of the people, as ſome are of their parents: theſe are heires by the law of particular nature, and they by the reaſon of vniuerſall nature and of grace. As for the other partes of this third Offſpring, I hope, they are ſeemely and fit enough for this place. It is lawfull to make the beſt vſe and moſt gaine that wee can honeſtly, of anie thing that we read or write: probable additions, and reaſonable collections are neuer amiſſe: it is better, of the two extreames, to make more then wee neede of our Countreimen, rather than make leſſe of them then wee ſhould: ſuperfluitie is not beſt, nor ſcarcitie: that hiſtory is moſt worth which doth a man moſt good.
            
            
               
               THE FOVRTH GENEALOGY or iſſue of Capor.
               
                  
                     LAbour the ſonne of Parſimony the daughter of Queene Temperance, made Capor a man of infinite wealth: then Order, the ſonne of Reaſon, the daughter of the Empreſſe Truth, made him a man of greateſt fauour in this Land: by theſe two meanes ioyned with his royall bloud, he became Ruler of Brutany, and begat Dinel,
               
               
                  Dinel begat Hely,
               
               
                  Hely begat three ſonnes: the firſt Lud, the ſecond Caſſiuelan, the third Stenny.
               
               
                  Lud begat 2. ſonnes: the firſt Androgy, the ſecond Tenancy. Then came Death, and tooke away Lud and hys brother Stenny, while his two ſonnes were children, and Age made Caſsiuelan Ruler: then came Diſcontent and begat Rage in the minde of Androgy, that hee went away: then aroſe Parentage, and created Tenancy for the king.
               
                  Tenancy begat Cimbelin,
               
               
                  Cimbelin begat 2. ſonnes, the firſt Guinder, the ſecond Aruirage: then came Deceite, and ſlew Guinder: then Deuiſe ſet forth Aruirage, and made him right king.
               
                  Aruirage begat Marius of his wife Seniſsa, the daughter of Claudius the Emperour.
               
                  Marius begat Coil the 2. Coil
                   begat Lucy, which dyed without iſſue.
               
                  Theſe are the 11. heires males and ſucceſſors of Capor in his kingdom: for the Generation of Caſsiuelan, of Stenny, of Androgy and of Guinder, are vnknown, the more is the pity, ſeeing they were very ſingular men in their kinds. Albranches of a tree proſper not, euer ſome are withered & rotten.
               
            
            
               
               The Arts and Actes of Capor, and the Caporites are ſeene by their Vertues and Vices.
               
               
                  Their Vertue or Iuſtice is in
                  
                     Defending and regarding: Lud and Stenny were at great variance betweene themſelues, becauſe Lud would haue the City of Troy new called Caerlud by his owne name, but Stenny would haue it keepe the olde name in honour of the predeceſſors, and Troians from whom he came. It is iuſtice, both to reſpect our aunceſtors, and iuſtice to conſider our own glory: This were a pretty queſtion for diſcourſe, which name ought to take place, and ſtand in force, if it were well handled.
                  
                     Diuiding and depoſing: Caſsiuelan the 2. ſonne of Hely, was the Protectour and Gouernour of the Realme in the minoritie and nonage of Luds two ſonnes, hys two nephewes. Kingdomes are too heauy for childrens ſhoulders. Caſsiuelan ordained a common ſacrifice to God that gaue him the victory againſt the Romanes, and a publicke feaſt to his Nobles that helped him in the battels, & deuiſed many paſtimes, in honour of God and men.
                  
                     Tenancy was made king by the treaſonable abſence of his elder brother Androgy. Euery one of theſe kings hath his right ſucceſſion, except Caſsiuelan which vſurpeth.
                  
                     Puniſhing and correcting: Caſsiuelan ſummoned Eueline to appeare before him & the Councell, to anſwere for the death of Hirelda. When he could not preuaile with Androgy by faire meanes, he made warre vpon him, to plague him for his ſtubborneſſe. Ought Androgy
                     
to bee at his call? a diſputable matter of great vſe. Nature preferreth the kings ſon to the Crowne before the kings brother, but Pollicie preferred Caſſiuelan before Androgy, a good man before a bad.
               
               
                  Their Vice or Iniuſtice is in
                  
                     Diuiding: Caſsiuelan appointed vnto Androgy the eldeſt ſonne of Lud the Citty of Caerlud, and the land of Kent, and to Tenancy the younger ſonne the Land of Cornewall, and kept the kingdome from them, though they were his elder brothers true ſons, and vſurped it himſelfe by force. He is not fit to be a Protector that is ambitious: it is a wofull thing, to be a childe among our enimies, or amongſt the enuious ſectaries.
                  
                     Reuenging: Androgy being vnable of himſelfe to withſtand Caſsiuelan ſent letters to I. Caeſar in Gallia, and certified him, that if he would come into Brutany he ſhould be welcome: when hee had gotten Caeſars Army to ſet vppon Caſsiuelan in the valley of Dorobernia or Canterbury, and the fight had endured till both partes were almoſt weary, he came vpon Caſsiuelan with a freſh reply, and put him to flight: and thus he diſpleaſed the whole realme to pleaſe himſelf, yet his owne hurt was neuer the leſſe for making the miſery of his Country greater. But when Caſsiuelan thought to puniſh Androgy, he puniſhed himſelfe as much as him, he did euen put fire to Brimſtone, and flaxe to the flame. It was traiterouſly done of him, to warre againſt his legitimate king, and of Androgy, to make his natiue Country ſubiect to outlandiſh Powers.
               
               
                  
                  Their Vertue or Prudence is in
                  
                     Order: Caſsiuelan brought vp Androgy and Tenancy, Princes ſonnes, princely in all points. Caſsiuelan conſidering, that the two victories which he had gotten of the Romans, concerned himſelfe, and all his Noblemen moſt ſpecially, cauſed an aſſembly of them to be made, that in a generall meeting, there might bee a generall thankeſgiuing to God almighty, and to one another for their ſeruices and actes done in the Field. Nothing teacheth men more courage then a beleefe of heauenly aſſiſtance, with an honourable remembrance of their vertues: this way of harting men is chiefeſt.
                  
                     Deſire of knowledge: Lucy ſeeking al means to make his people true and louing among themſelues, and hearing that Chriſtians were without hatred and falſhood, deſired to heare their religion and receiue their doctrine, and ſent two Noble ſchollers, Eluane and Meduine to Eleuthery Biſhop of Roome with letters, deſiring to be taught Chriſtianitie.
                  
                     Reformacion: Lucy changed the three Archflamins, and the 28. Flamins into three Archbiſhops, and 28. Biſhops: he deſtroyed the Temple of Apollo in the Ile Thorney, and made a Temple in honour of the Almighty God, which we now call Weſtminſter.
                  
                     Diſcipline: Lucy ſeeing that men were executed for diſobeying the law, becauſe heerein they diſobeyed God, and that the kings pardon was not ſo much to be eſteemed as a pardon from God, and perceiuing the heartie and vnfained repentance of ſome offenders, and knowing that God forgaue ſuch men,

thought it no reaſon, that ſuch Penitents ſhould be put to death, but reſerued to a better vſe: wherefore he ordained, that if any man did offend by miſchance and repent him, or any one were oppreſſed, and could not otherwiſe eſcape oppreſſion then by appealing to Gods word, that ſuch men ſhould get them into the Temple of God, and ther approue themſelues to be true godly men, and ſo be ſafe both body and goods.
               
               
                  Their vice or folly is in
                  
                     Permiſsion: the Brutans forgetting the true title that Luds two ſonnes had to the kingdom of their father, and feeling the liberall gifts of Caſsiuelan an vſurper, ſuffered him to keep the Rule & Key of all the Land, and taught one another, to diſinherit one another by cauſeleſſe and deceitfull popularitie and flattery.
                  
                     Hatred: the Brutans could not agree vpon a king, no not in fifteene yeares ſpace when Lucy was dead, though euery countrey muſt needs ſee one nearer the Crowne then another, if they could aduiſe thēſelues & marke euery family in good māer. They could not foreſee the miſeries of forrain Dominion, they were blinded with malice, & ſelfewill among themſelues.
                  
                     Improuidence: Cymbelin was brought vp in Roome, both in contempt of all his own countrey learning, & in ſlauery to outlandiſh with. Coil the ſecond was brought vp in Roome, as if hee were borne to ſerue Roome, and not to ſerue Brutany. Of the two extreames, it is ſafer to haue our men vplandiſh, then outlandiſh, plain then perilous.
                  
                     Deceit: the Brutans ſet great long ſharp ſtakes cloſely in the bankes where the Romanes ſhould arriue, and ſo troubled them extreamely in theyr landing: a poore and pittifull inuention to ſlay and Hoſt.
               
               
                  
                  Their vertue or temperance, is in
                  
                     Behauiour: Lud was bountifull in houſekeeping, and by that means beloued generally. Cimbelin with the moderate vſage of himſelfe, ſo pleaſed the Emperour, that he loued him greatly, and receiued manie good words and gifts from him: if this were not intemperance, to pleaſe an enemy. Aruirage got into ſuch fauour with Claudius the Emperor, that he married his daughter Geniſsa: if this were not incontinence, to be linked with outlandiſh, that was mightier then himſelfe. He was beloued of his ſubiectes for his vſage toward them in all caſes.
                  
                     Marius was of honourable demeanour euery way. He accepted the pitition of the vanquiſhed Pictes, he allotted to them the fardeſt part of Albany: afterward he gaue himſelfe to the wealth of the realme. Lucy was loued of all his ſubiectes for his good life: hys loynes were in the cloudes, and hys ſeed among the ſtarres: he had rather be a father in Morals, then in Naturals: ſuch was his abſtinence. It may be, Galaxias the milky & bright way in heauen was made in honour of ſuch men as Lucy was, no meaner then a Saint.
                  
                     Marriage: the Brutans would not in any caſe ioyne their daughters in wedlocke with the Pictes, whom they knew to be barbarous Scythians by diſcent of bodies, and conſent of mindes, and very vnfaithfull.
               
               
                  Their vice or intemperance is in
                  
                     Raſhneſse: Hirelda and Eueline two knightes in gaming fell to wraſtling, and in heate fell to wordes, and in anger fell to blowes, & in rage fell to wounds,

and Hirelda was ſlaine in the tumult that aroſe by theſe meanes. A gaming not ſo profitable as the death of a good knight is hurtfull in a realme.
                  
                     Diſobedience: Eueline being ſent for by the Protector Caſsiuelan and the Councell departed from the Court with Androgy his kinſman, and tooke no leaue of them: Will is it ſelfe witleſſe: a ſtomacke without a heart, maketh a man a ſwine.
                  
                     Reuenge: Aruirage vſed ſuch meanes, that he got Hammon the Romane, who ſiue his brother Guinder guilefully, and when he had him in his handes he cauſed him to be cut in peeces, and threw him peece by peece into the Sea at South-hampton, ſatiſfying herein his inſaciable anger for his brothers death and ſuppoſing vainly and madly, that he killed Hamon ſo many times as he had peeces of him.
               
               
                  Their vertue or fortitude is in
                  
                     Glorious deſire: Hely called the Ile of Ely after hys name, that he might be famous for euer. Marius ſet vp a Coloſſe in remembrance of the victory he had of the Picts, with Marij Victoria grauen in it: a warly Regiſter.
                  
                     Magnificence: Lud repaired olde Temples and Cities and built new. He made walles about Troynew, and called the Weſt gate Ludgate in honour of hys owne name, and then dwelt moſt there becauſe he had built moſt there. Aruirage road about the realme, to renew the decayed Cities which the Romans defaced: he built a Caſtle at Douer to ſtrengthen that

part of the Land againſt forraigne Powers.
                  
                     Wordes: When the Romanes thought to terrifie the Brutans by their letters, theſe ſent them word, that as they muſt, ſo they would defend their Countrey from all forces. Aruirage being for his Nobleneſſe made the Emperours ſonne in law, and wiſhing to haue a memoriall of Claudius his queenes and wiues owne father, called the Cittie where he married Claudioceſtria or Gloceſter, the rather, to be free frō tribute in reſpect of his wife, though he were free of himſelfe by his vertue.
                  
                     Victories: Caſsiuelan made the Romans flie to their ſhips at their firſt battell, and at the ſecond: beware the third.
                  
                     Deſertes: Cymbelin in his youth led ſo manly a life in Roome, that the Emperour Auguſtus made him a knight there in his order of knightes.
                  
                     Exerciſe: Hirelda and Eueline two braue knightes wraſtled openly at the Feaſt which was made after the victories againſt the Romanes.
                  
                     Warre: Guinder denied to pay tribute to the Romans, & choſe rather to ſight with them then yeald otherwiſe. Aruirage did the like, and when they came againſt him; he made them flie from the ſoutheaſt part of this Iland to the ſouthweſt, there he draue them from Exceſter and Totnes, & within ſeuen daies made all well. Marius ſtaied the fire and ſword of the Picts in Albany and ſlew their armies.
                  
                     
                     Deuiſe: Aruirage ſeeing his brother Guinder dead, took on him preſently his armour and Princely cogniſāce, that the Brutans might not ſuſpect their kings death and be diſcomforted: then hee continued the battel ſo ſtedfaſtly and heartily, that the Brutans were ſtirred vp to fight valiantly by his liuely example, till they ouerthrew the Romans.
               
               
                  Their vice or extreme fortitude is in
                  
                     Bold raſhneſſe: Stenny Caſsiuelans brother in the wars againſt the Romans canne to I. Caeſar and puld hys ſword out of his hand, and ſlew Labienus a tribune of the Romans therewith, and was ſlaine.
                  
                     Obſcure glory: When Stenny was dead, he was buried at Caerlud: and the ſword which he puld from Caeſar with his deaths wound was buried with him, that it might be a remembrance of one venturous action euen in a hole.
                  
                     Abaſement: Caſsiuelan was tributary to Roome nine yeares. Tenancy was too deligent in paying tribute to Rome, euen 3000. pounds in gold. Cimbelin hauing choice to pay or not to pay tribute, forgat the ſlauery of the act and payd it. Aruirage was perſwaded by his wife to pay tribute when he had reſiſted the Romanes valiantly. He ſhould haue ſent ſuch a wife for the tribute vnto Roome from whence ſhe came, and kept the mony in his cofers for warres. Coil ſaw in his poreblinde eyes, that it was beſt to yeald to Roome, and agreed to pay tribute. Androgy departed to Roome with Caeſar: a mad and fickle courage.
               
            
            
               
               THE TIMES OF THESE KINGS.
               
                  
                     CApor began his raigne in the yeare of the world, 3894. and raigned two yeares: now Mithridates raiſed warres in Aſia, and Lucullus was ſent againſt him.
               
                  Dinel began in the yeare, 3894. and rule 4. yeares: in this time Verres ſpoiled Sicilia three yeares together: now Vergill the Poet was borne.
               
                  Hely beganne, 3898. and raigned one yeare: in this time Hortentius the Oratour flouriſhed in Roome.
               
                  Lud began, 3899. and rule 11. yeares: in this time the Poet Horace was borne, the conſpiracie of Catiline was detected, Ieruſalem was taken of Pompey, Caeſar entered the wars in Gallia.
               
                  Caſsiuelan began, 3910. and rule 19. yeares: in this time M. Craſsus ſpoyled the Temple of Ieruſalem, the ciuill wars began betweene Caeſar and Pompey, Caeſar corrected the Roman yeare, Ouid the Poet was borne.
               
                  Tenancy began, 3929. and raigned 23. yeares: in this time Mecaenas liued, the patrone of Horace, Vergill, and other learned men, and gouerned Roome and Italy in the abſence of Caeſar Auguſtus ſo named for that reuerence was giuen him in a diuine maner: now Vergill dyed.
               
                  Cymbelin began, 3952. and raigned 35. yeares: now Horace died: the Angel Gabriel was ſent to Zachary and Mary: Chriſt was borne the 13. yeare of his raigne, Onid and Liuy dyed.
               
                  
                  Guinder began, 3987. and ruled 28. yeares: nowe Iohn-baptiſt preached and was ſlaine, Chriſt taught the Iewes, Paul was conuerted, Iames was ſlaine, Seneca was made Neroes teacher.
               
                  Aruirage began, 4015. and ruled 30. yeares: in this time Paul did moſt of his Actes, Iames the leſſe was ſtoned, 70000. Romanes were ſlaine of the Brutans. Paul was beheaded, Peter crucified, Seneca and Lucan bled to death.
               
                  Marius began, 4045. and raigned 52. yeares: in this time Iohn euangeliſt writ his Reuelation, Plutark and Tacitus liued, Timothy was ſtoned, Dyoniſius ſlaine with the ſword.
               
                  Coil began, 4097. and raigned 54. yeares: now Ptolony and Galen liued, the Chriſtians by their praier got a ſtrange victory of the Marcomanni, and obtained a mighty great raigne from heauen: now Lent was appointed by Teleſphorus.
               
               
                  Lucy began; 4151. and ruled 12. yeares: in this time the Goſpel was firſt preached in Brutany by Fugacius and Damianus: Commodus would be called Hercules and Deus, but was ſtrangled of his owne man in Veſtilians houſe.
               
                  So this Generation of Capor, and the 11. Caporites ended in the yeare of the world, 4163. and ſeeme to haue endured the times of 274. yeares in the kingdome of Brutanie.
                  
               
            
            
               
               THE PLACES IN THIS HISTORY.
               
                  
                     The places are
                     
                        
                           at home
                           
                              
                                 more vniuerſal
                                 
                                    
                                       Albany the Prouince of the Archbiſhop of Caerbrank or Yorke,
                                    
                                    
                                       Cambry the Prouince of the Archbiſhop of Caerusk.
                                    
                                    
                                       Locry the Prouince of the Archbiſhop of Caerlud or London.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 leſſe vniuerſal
                                 
                                    
                                       Kent, Cornewal.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       VVeſtmaria named of Marius, the Ile of Ely.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 more particular
                                 
                                    
                                       Ludgate: the Temple of Apollo: the bankes
                                        where the Romanes landed in Caſsiuelans time: the Northgate of Caerlud where Stenny was buried: Hamons hauen: Douer Caſtell: the hauens of Sandwich and Totnes.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 leſſe particular
                                 
                                    
                                       Caerlud, there Tenancy and Cymbelin where buried.
                                    
                                       Dorobernia or Cantorbury: the valley there.
                                    
                                       Caerbrank, there Caſsiuelan and Coil were buried.
                                    
                                       Claudiocaer or Gloceſter, there was Aruirage buried.
                                    
                                       Exceſter, the Towne vnder the Wood.
                                    
                                       Caerliel, there was Marius buried.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           abroad
                           
                              
                                 Gallia.
                              
                              
                                 Roome.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The reaſonable metaphors of this fourth genealogy may well be allowed, becauſe they ſtand vpon reaſonable cauſes. The morals which follow them might be more ſententious and effectuall by much then they are, if I might ſpeake no more then good reaſons fitly vſed: but all wordes are not fit perſonally which are moſt fit really, and ſo I let them go for this time, perhaps looking for a better conuenience of time and place to vtter them. The Synchroniſme which followeth is right, if the chronology be right, which neuertheleſſe agreeth with one writer, though it differeth from another: that is worth the labour which is materiall: the quantities of times teach vs no qualities of good life: Mathematicks haue not the rules of moralities: the heart of hiſtories is the actions of men: the life of the actions is the vertue of the actors. If the phraſe be not exquiſit, or the obſeruation not ſingular, or the method not exact and perfit, it is but one part of an Eſſaye among the reſt, it is but a tryall of that may be done, it is but the token of a good minde to this buſineſſe. Yet take me euen as I am, and I know that my Eſſaye is not behinde any other writer in this theame, whome I haue ſeene for thoſe vſes, which are required in a Hiſtory: euen take me as ye finde me, not as any momes feigne vpon me.
            
            
               The Genealogy of the Romano-Brutans.
               
                  
                     BRutany by meanes of much trouble, bred doubtfulneſſe in it ſelfe, and hereof grew Reſiſtance, till Reſolution held with Kindred, and tooke

the ſonne of a Brutan before the child of a Romane: thus Baſianus Caracalla was for his good mothers ſake made king, but his elder brother Geta was refuſed. Buſines ſent Caracalla to his Romane Empire: Fauour made Caraſse the Viceroy for a time, and Flattery with Perſwaſion and Vſurpation made him Ruler: War ouerthrew him: Victory created Alectus a Roman the king of Brutany: Diſpleaſure puld him downe, and Compariſon ſet vp Aſclepiodate, Duke of Cornewall: yet Coil the Earle of Colecheſter brought the peoples goodwill into ſuch a wheele, and ſo turned it to himſelfeward, that he ſlew Aſclepiodate, and was the third of that name king next him: then Feare amazed Coil, till Marriage ioined Conſtantius a Roman Duke with his daughter Helen, the fayreſt mayd aliue: then Contentment ſetled them both in the kingdome, and Loue brought them foorth into the world Conſtantine the firſt, whom Excellency lifted vp to the Roman Empire: but Agreement appointed Octauy Duke of Cambry the ruler of this Iland: then Enuy flew from Roome, and brought Traherne on his winges againſt Octauy, and made him fly abroad for a time, but Strength and Hope carried him home againe, and Prouidence counſelled him to marry his daughter with Maximinian one of Helens kindred, and him Conueyance made king againſt Conans minde: then Superioritie remoued Maximinian to Roome, and Gracian by grace and deſert ſupplyed hys roume in Brutany: but Crueltie ſo alienated the people from him, that Force deſtroyed him as an vngratious Ruler: then ill Neighbourhood in Albany made the Brutans to ſeeke vppon Roome, and Submiſſion obteined help of the Romans two times, but varietie of Wars

made Roome leaue Brutany at this time, and good Neighbourhood in little Brutanie cauſed their king Aldroene to aſſiſt the great Brutans, but yet dangers held them without a Ruler many yeares.
               When Romanes raigne as much as Brutans, I muſt not make long account of them both, and in this reſpect I call them Romanobrutans or Brutanoromans, which you will: their Genealogy is ſo mingled and put together, that a Grammarian Doctor might make a great queſtion of the name, and ſhew much conceit. I had rather point at ſuch ſlight and needleſſe queſtions, then intreate of them more or leſſe: and partly vppon ſuch a cauſe I containe Topography, at this time in the morall Tables of Vertues and Vices, and would chuſe to ioyne the places with the actions hereafter, rather then diuide them, and ſet them ſeuerally, as I did before with more reaſon then I can now. One day telleth an other, and one night certifieth another: new and old names are diuerſly conſidered.
            
            
               Their Arts and Acts are in their Vertues and Vices.
               
                  Their Vertue or Iuſtice is in
                  
                     Diuiding: the Brutans knowing, that Baſsian the ſecond ſonne of Seuerus the Emperour was borne of a Brutan woman, and that the firſt ſonne Geta was borne of a Romane, iudged that a Brutan had more to do in Brutanie then a Roman: and therefore ioyned with Baſsian againſt Geta and made him king, but Geta was ſlaine: Conſanguinitie is more valuable then Primogeniture, the part then the adiunct, life then time.
                  
                     
                     Correcting: the Brutans feeling, how Alectus brought in many exactions cruelly vpon them, forſooke hym and choſe Aſclepiodate a Brutan for their king, and purſued the Romans from place to place, til they had ſlaine their captaine Alectus by Caerlud for his crueltie. Aſclepiodate threw Liuius Gallus a Roman captain into the Brooke which ranne from More-field into the Tems, and drowned him for his rebellion: in remembrance of this iuſtice, hee called the riuer Galbrooke, or Walbrooke to this day, that other outlandiſh might euer learne, to be quiet with our Princes in their owne Countries and Kingdomes.
                  
                     Obeying: the Brutans ſeeing, how Gracian held hys Rule onely by force of armes againſt all right and reaſon, aroſe againſt him, and ſlew the Romane by force, and rid himſelfe from his enforcementes. Conan Meriadock being commanded from Octauy his Prince, to be quiet, and not once ſeeme to hinder the comming of Maximinian into this Land whome he ſent for, obeyed his Princes rather then his owne will, layd away his armour, ſuffered him to enter, and do euen as Octauy would. What ſhould a ſubiect ſtriue againſt his Soueraigne? a ſtranger may come into the land if he be ſent for.
                  
                     Rewarding: When Maximinian had ouercome the Gauls in Armorica, the Brutans and Romans his ſouldiers proclaimed him Emperour in the field for hys glorious Act. See what it is to pleaſe good ſubiects: A Princes chief treaſure. Seuerus buried at Caerbrank, ſo was Conſtantius: Alectus in Caerlud, Coel at Colcheſter, Caraſſe in the field: Octauy in Caerusk: Aſclepiodate where Coil ſlew him.
               
               
                  
                  Their vice or Iniuſtice is in
                  
                     Perſecuting: Maximinian liuing quietly and honourably, both becauſe he was a choſen Prince, & married a Brutan kings daughter, was not content with the Brutans due reuerence toward him, but he ſought meanes to deſtroy them, yea the moſt honeſt and innocent men among them, euen the good Chriſtians which were like harmeleſſe lambes in the Land, whom he perſecuted vnrighteouſly vpon the opinion of his owne heatheniſh religion more then any right iudgement. A true chriſtian neuer deſerueth death, he is ſo moderate and reaſonable in al points, ſo that he is moſt vniuſt that will trouble ſuch a man. Hee that aforetime was iniurious to a Philoſopher was accounted a tyrant, but he that tormenteth a true Chriſtian, which is a true Philoſopher, and a perfite wiſe man, is worthy to be iudged a deuill incarnate, a bloudſuccour, a monſtrous man. Such a man was Maximinian, and may well be chronicled the king with the helliſh heart and bloudy hand.
                  
               
               
                  Their vertue or temperance is in
                  
                     Marriage: Helen the daughter of Coil the third married Conſtantius, a Roman by the agreemēt of the Brutans, not on her owne head, leſſe ſhe ſhould ſeeme incontinent: ſhe was but a part of hir countrey, not aboue it, or out of it. Octauy married his daughter to Maximinian a Roman, by the conſent of his Lordes, leſſe he ſhould ſeeme to make more of his owne will then the benefite of all other men: a publicke matter muſt be allowed publikly of them whom it concerneth moſt. Dionote Duke of Cornwall ſent his daughter Vrſula and 11000. Virgins with her to Conan a Brutan the king of Armorica, that he ſhould not ioyne

himſelfe and his knightes, and men with ſtrange bloud, but with very right Brutans.
                  
                  
                     Conan deſired this, and Dionote perfourmed it, both conſtant and prouident to auoide confuſion of nations, which cauſeth all Tragedies and Rages in the end.
                  
                     Wordes and liberalitie: Conſtantius was a man of ſpeciall affabilitie, & familiaritie with all his men, which propertie if he had not at Roome, he learned in Brutanie, where the people are generally of freeſt heartes, fardeſt from bondage, and muſt bee well vſed in ſpeach, of all thinges: he was of a ſingular liberalitie, he cared more for his ſubiects goodes then his owne: his ſaying was, That wealth doth more good in many handes then in few or none, or in the Princes Treaſure houſe: a ſaying farre enough from tyranny. Octauy ſo behaued himſelfe toward the Brutans of all ſortes in the time of his Royal Lieuetenantſhip, that all men for the moſte part fauoured, and furthered him greatly, euen to the attainement of the kingdome it ſelfe: the chiefeſt wonders and nobleſt acts, and famous thinges haue euer commonly begunne and ended with the power of wordes: the ordering of wordes maketh a man aboue beaſtes, and that man a king of men that can order them beſt of all other. Maximinian gaue the country of Armorica to Conan a Brutan, to hold it from him and his heires for euer, and to content him for miſſing the kingdome of great Brutany: by this meanes they were good friendes at the laſt, and forgat old enmities.
                  
                     Toleration: Conſtantine the ſonne of Helen ſuffered

the Brutans, to vſe their religion: he was no tyrant in forcing them againſt their conſciences, as other had been, although he were a Pagan, becauſe he deſired chiefly to keep them in peace.
                  See what a good mother doth otherwhile in time of neede: I beleeue, Helen played the Princely Oratour for Chriſtians, and defended them before her ſonne for good men and good ſubiects, and was their beſt friend in Brutany next the inuiſible and immortall defence that came from heauen, and bred a deſire of peace in Conſtantines minde, by beſetting him with buſineſſe on euery ſide.
               
               
                  Their vice or intemperance is in
                  
                     Flattery: Caraſse being vnable to ouerthrow the Picts, and louing them ſomwhat for helping him againſt the Romanes, ſtoode in a maze betweene hope and feare, and gaue them a part of Albany for their poſſeſſions, that they might be quiet, and not ſtirre vp warre againſt him: liberalitie or courteſie ſhewed to a barbarous nature, is a weapon turned vpon your ſelfe: Bores and Bares cannot vnderſtand fayre wordes and deedes: neuer hold vp a candle to the diuell.
                  
                     Ruſticitie: Conſtantius was of ſo vile prouiſion in houſekeeping, though he were a king, that on feſtiuall dayes hee borrowed plate of his friendes to furniſh his tables and cupbordes therewith: It is an vnſeemly thing for any man, to ſet forth himſelf with other mens goodes: it is ſmall credite for a ſcholler to ſeeke credite by vſing that oration or ſermon that is not his owne: among all men a Prince muſt be

ſufficient of himſelfe for all matters that pertaine vnto him, if he be deficient, his grace is loſt, his maieſtie diminiſhyd, and hee euen rurified like a priuate ſubiect. Let not the beaſtes eate mans fleſh in anie caſe, leſſe they loue it.
               
               
                  Their vertue or prudence is in
                  
                     Diſcerning: Helen in her virginitie was learned in all points of true morall wiſedome: afterward, eyther by ſome diuine inſpiration, or by ſome humane information at Hieruſalem, ſhee found the Croſſe whereon Chriſt was crucified, and the three nayles wherewith he was nayled: they that ſeeke in zeale ſhall finde in ioy. Conſtantine vſed to haue the booke of God, which is the Spirite and Rule of Regiment, carried before him whereſoeuer he want: he cauſed the Bible to be copyed out, and ſent into the partes of his kingdome: he ſawe by a viſion a croſſe in heauen with theſe wordes vpon it, In this ſigne is victory. Such are the heauenly fruites of a heauenly minde: ſo we ſhall reape euer as we ſowe.
                  
                     Prouiding: Octauy being reſtored to his kingdome, gathered together infinite riches, to be better able then he was aforetime, to wage warre againſt the ambitious and laborious Romanes: Souldiers run to the greateſt pay. He ſent for Maximinian cooſin german to Conſtantine the Emperor, and offered him his daughter in his life time, leſſe hee ſhould be marred with ill Counſell, and married to another after his death, which he perceiued to be at hand: guide them that cannot guide themſelues. Maximinian made his ſonne Victor fellow with the Emperour of

Roome, that he might ſtrengthen himſelfe on both ſides, both at home and abroad: it is ſurer ſtanding on two legges then on one: ſurer holding with two handes then with one.
               
               
                  Their vice or imprudence is in
                  
                     Murder: An Earle of Brutany that fauoured Octauy much, ſeeing how wofully he was fled into Norway for feare of Traherne and the Romanes, which ouercame him in Weſtmerland, & conſidering in his hot wit, that Traherne being Helens vncle and a Brutan, ought not to haue done ſuch wrong for the Romans ſakes to the king of Brutany, but haue rather fought for him, neither vndermined him one way nor other, but with a butcherly wiſedome layd violent handes vpon him, and ſlewe him, that Octauy might returne ſafely into the realme againe: Defect of inuention turneth a man into a bloudy beaſt.
                  
                     Improuidence: Maximinian gathered his riches ſo vnauiſedly, that with them he gathered the ilwill of the Brutans.
                  
                  To haue is not the rule, but to get well: a mans glorie is not in mony, but the glory of mony is in a man.
               
               
                  Their vertue or fortitude is in
                  
                     Victories: Baſsian and the Brutans ſlew Geta, and the Romanes by night. Maximinian ouerranne great partes of Gallia and Germania. Octauy ouerthrew Traherne and the Romanes three legions neere Wincheſter, and made them flie euen into Albany, and purſued them into Weſtmerland. Gracian being ſent into the field from Maximinian, ouercame Guany the Duke of the Huns, and Melga the Duke of the Pictes,
                     
and kept this Land from their furor by the helpe of the Brutans. Coil Earle of Colcheſter, which hee built roſe againſt Aſclepiodate, and ſlew him and was made king.
                  
                     Battels: Baſsian was able to endure all the pains of war: a right Emperour for the campe. The Brutans ſeeing the valiant wit of Caraſse, made him their king in ſpite of the Romans, & rather then they would yeeld to Roome they dyed in battell: Death is better then ſlauery among enemies. Conſtantine the firſt armed himſelfe with the Brutans, and fought againſt Maxentius: did he not good among them to doe them the more miſchiefe, as the Philiſtines ſuſpected Dauid who was a true ſaint of God? Conan Meriadocke made war with Maximinian at diuers times, becauſe hee was a Roman: O it is an hard bone to digeſt Rome which counteth all birdes dawes beſides her owne chickens: the man that hath another maiſter beſide himſelfe in his owne houſe is beſide himſelfe, or elſe I beleeue, he ſhalbe ſet beſide his cuſhion at the laſt.
                  
                     Magnanimitie: Maximinian
                      called Armorica Litle Brutany in honour of Brutans, becauſe they conquered it: that a man winneth is his owne: a man may call his owne poſſeſſion by what name it pleaſeth him: new Lordes will haue newe names for their newe landes. Octauy being appointed king in the abſence of Conſtantine, and hearing that Conſtantine was then made Emperor of Rome, thought verily, that he had enough to do in Roome, though hee medled not with Brutany, and tooke the Crowne to himſelfe, and chaſed

the Romanes vp and downe in the land, and played Rex with them at all handes, to redeeme his Countrey from thraldome as hee counted it. Home is for the homeborne.
               
               
                  Their vice or extreme fortitude is in
                  
                     Ambition: Caraſse a Brutan of lowe birth, of a high heart, but a venturous man, a very hardydardy in deede as euer liued, keeping the Hauens, and playing the Sea captaine, aſpired to the kingdome and got it, both by greater promiſes then hee coulde perperforme, and by gathering more bankrupts & ruffians to his ſide then he could keepe, and contemning all noble and great men in the Land: there was but one way with him, and that was in his head onely: all was one with him, ſo that one might be all: ſelfe-loue was ſelfewill, and both were for himſelfe.
                  
                     Abiection of minde: When Coil the third ſaw, that Conſtantius was come from Roome with a great armie, he feared and graunted him tribute and peace, and euery thing els, to be out of danger, yet the moſt danger and damage in graunting theſe: A babies wit in a kings eſtate. The Brutans being afflicted by the Picts two times promiſed the Romanes a tribute to helpe them: then they ſubmitted themſelues to Aldroene of little Brutany, that he might ſuccour them. O Heauens: where was olde Brutanie now? where, but in the Sea as a dead ſea Whale?
               
            
            
               
               THE TIMES OF THESE Romano-Brutans.
               
                  AFter there had been a king for 15. yeares ſpace, (in which time Clemens Alexandrinus liued: the Prophets were tranſlated into Greeke) Baſsian began his Raigne in the yeare of the world, 4179. and raigned 6. yeares: in this time Papinian the great Ciuilian Chauncellor to Seuerus flouriſhed.
               
                  Caraſse began in the yeare, 4185, and ruled 8. years: in this time Origen began to ſhew himſelfe: Tertullian flouriſhed.
               
                  Alectus beganne in the yeare, 4193. and raigned ſixe yeares: about this time Zephirine chaunged the Communion cuppe into glaſſe for more decency, which had been of wood commonly.
               
                  Aſclepiodate began, 4199. and ruled 30. yeares: now Caliſtus appointed the 4. Ember weekes for the 4. quarters: Vrban ordained that diuine veſſels ſhould be gold or ſiluer.
               
                  Coil the third began, 4238. and raigned 27. yeares: now Philip was the firſt chriſtened Emperour: Cyprian was martyred. Decius the perſecuter was ſwallowed of a quagmire: Paul the firſt Hermite liued.
               
                  Conſtantius began, 4265. and ruled 30. yeares: in his time Eutychian biſhop of Roome buried 300. martyrs with his owne hands: Carus the Emperour was killed with lightning: the Citty Spira in Germany was built.
               
                  
                  Conſtantine the firſt began, 4295. and raigned ten yeares: nowe 20000. Chriſtians were burnt in a Church on Chriſtmas day at night: Arnobius was famous.
               
                  Octauy beganne, 4305. and ruled 54. yeares: now Silueſter refuſed to weare a golden Crowne, which great Conſtantine offered him: the great Nicene Councell was held: Lactantius and Hilary were famous: Moonkes beganne in Antonie the Hermite, and Nuns in Marcella and Sophronia: Conſtantinople was built.
               
                  Maximinian began in the yeare, 4359. and raigned 8. yeares: about this time Athanaſius and Baſilius flouriſhed: the Thalmud of the Iewes was compiled by Rabbi Iohanan: Iulian the Apoſtata and Libanius raged.
               
                  Gracian began, 4367. and ruled 4. yeares: now Epiphanius wrote againſt heretickes: Vphila found out the Gotes Letters, or a b c: about this time Gregory Nazianzene and Ambroſe flouriſhed.
               
                  So the Gouernement of theſe Brutanoromans continued for the ſpace of 183. yeares: but heere was no certaine Ruler in Brutany for 36. yeares after.
               
            
            
               THE SIXT GENEALOGY OF Brutan Kinges.
               
                  THe Brutans choſe Conſtantine the ſecond, the ſonne of Aldroene king of litle Brutany for their king, and he raigned ouer them and begat three ſonnes, the firſt was Conſtancie, the ſecond Aurely, the third Vter, but then Credulity ſlew him.
               
                  
                  Conſtancie the eldeſt ſon ſucceeded his father, but died without iſſue: for Doltiſhneſſe and Treaſon ſlewe him, and Force lifted vp Vortiger to the kingdome, but Self-will ſharpned him ſo, that the people hated him, and by plaine might created his ſonne Vortimer their king: then Wichery puld him downe, and Inſinuation reſtored Vortiger: yet Right and Vengeance at laſt deſtroyed him: then Common Conſent made Aurely the ſecond ſon of Conſtantine the ſecond a king, but the diuels Art ſlew him, and he dyed without iſſue: ſo Vter the third ſon of Conſtantine ſucceeded him in the kingdome, and begat vppon Igerne his wife, or rather concubine Arthur the king, who raigned and left no ſeede behind him: then Conſtantine the third, the ſonne of Cador a Corniſh Duke Arthurs cooſin was made king, but laſted not, for Conan his kinſman ſlew him and became king, & begat Vortipory, who liued and dyed without iſſue: then Malgo the nephew of Conan raigned as king: hee was of ſtature and perſonage the goodlieſt among all men of his time, but left no Royall ſeede behinde him: thus Carency got the kingdome by the goodwill of Brutans, and loſt it by his quarrellous nature: ſo Cadwan was choſen king, and hee begat Cadwallin the king, who died and left no ſeed behinde him: then Cadwallader by his Nobleneſſe and manhood together obtained the Crowne and dyed without iſſue, and was the laſt king of the Brutans in the ſeate of Locrine. But, who can tell the genealogies of Camber? how happy is hee in his dwelling places, which no man taketh from him? His loynes are like a ſpringing well: he runneth within his bankes, and is not ſtopped: ſurely his Riuer is one of Gods Riuers: his Hils are the mountaines of Safety. Locrine
                  
lay more open to the windes then Camber: hys braunches are dryed vp with the Northeaſt windes, and the boyſterous ſtormes haue broken them, but Camber had the fauourable Weſtwindes euer in his borders. The waters of Camber grow full of ſoothſaying reedes, the pens of Writers haue ſet him in more honour then hys brethren, he alone vpholdeth his fathers houſe. The great God of the world keepe him euermore with his inuincible right hand and ſtretched out arme, make his naule whole, and fil his bones with marrow and heat, giue him plentie of the fruites of the earth, and increaſe his cattle without number: leade forth hys ſonnes in Triumphs and his daughters to the marriages of the mightieſt, make hym bleſſed among all the nations of men, and raiſe vp the meaneſt of his people to renowne and glory: exalt thy frendes and conuert thy foes, fill thy coaſts with all earthly and heauenly ioyes that be or may be.
            
            
               THEIR ARTES AND ACTES are in their Vertues and Vices.
               
                  Their vertue or prudence is in
                  
                     Diſcipline: When Conſtantine the ſecond ſaw, that his eldeſt ſonne Conſtancy was ſlow of wit, and giuen to be ſolitary, he made him a moonke in the Abbey of Saint Swithune in Caerguent, and committed his other two ſonnes to Guetheline Archbiſhop of Caerlud to be taught. If children be ſet into that way which they haue moſt minde vnto, they will prooue beſt in that way. A yoong Prince cannot bee brought vp better vnder any, then vnder a reuerend & Princely

churchman, ſeeing they are both paſtors of the people, and biſhops of men.
                  
                     Prouidence: the two ſonnes of Conſtantine being vnable to get the Crowne by might of arms, and fearing, that treaſon ſhould be wrought againſt them as it was againſt their eldeſt brother, looked to the ſafetie of their liues, and fled into little Brutanie. If we cannot do that is right and due, the beſt way is to ſaue the principall that is moſt worth. It is no ſhame to flie, when reſiſting is wilful death. Bruciuall ſaued 50. moonks of Bangor by flying from Ethelfride duke of Northumbeland, when 1200. had been ſlaine by him. The Biſhops of Caerlud and Caerbranke in Carencies time fled to Rome for feare of the cruel Saxons, and dealt ſo wiſely with Pope Gregory, that they were ſaued from bloudy handes.
                  
                     Doctrine: Aurely deſiring to teach the Brutans, to beware of outlandiſh friendſhip, which had in his days ſo intrapped and infected them, cauſed Merlin by his Art Soueraigne, to fetch the great ſtones out of Ireland, which are now vpon Salſbury plain, and ſet them neere the place where Hengiſt and the Saxons againſt their Oath did murder hundreds of the beſt Brutans with kniues ſecretly prouided for the purpoſe, and tooke Vortiger their king priſoner, and ranſomed him at their pleaſure, That when they ſhould ſee thoſe ſtones or heare of them, they might remember the ſtony heartes of outlandiſh friendes, the hypocriſie of Saxons, the vntrueth of ſtrangers, and either appoint them true ouerſeers, or els away with them out of the Land.
                  
                     Gouernement: Vter after hys brother Aurelius death

ruled the Realme ſo orderly and circumſpectly, both in reſpect of trecherous flatteries, and truſty friendſhip, and all matters both common and extraordinarie, that he was ſurnamed Pendragon, A Prince as mightie and ſubtle among men, as the Dragon is among the beaſtes of the field. A good name is a treaſure, but why do men commend a man, which ought to be the phraſe onely of diſpraiſe? Hee that can ſhut his handes from ſtraungers, as Vter did, ſhall preuent many woes. Arthur diſpoſed all things in order, ſailed into Gallia, left his nephew Mordred for king, and wrought great myracles abroad. It had been more wiſedome, to haue wrought them at home, if they were good, to do his owne people good: or if they were deceites, to haue practiſed them priuily, that his name might not be blotted and diminiſhed.
               
               
                  Their vice or imprudence is in
                  
                     Credulitie: Conſtantine the ſecond fauoured a Pict ſo much, that he might haue acceſſe to him at all times, euen into his bed chamber, though hee had been the greateſt enemy that the Picts had in Brutanie manie yeares: this Pict knewe it too well, and wayted his time: and at laſt tooke him alone, and ſlew him in his bed chamber. Straungers cannot be true friendes, if they and we haue at any time been at ods. Thy deſire to pleaſure vs with their ſeruice, to ſerue vs ſuch a turne, as the Fox doth the ſimple Kid or Lambe. Vortiger entertained Hengiſt the ſecond time for this daughters ſake, that is one foe for another foes ſake: he neuer imagined, that Hengiſt was his foe, though Vortimer his ſon had chafed him, and

chaſed him out of the land: he met him on Salſbury plaine, to intreate of peace that ſhould be betweene them, & came peaceably with his men, as the agreement was, without weapons, but preſuming childiſhly, that all was well, when nothing could poſſibly be ſafe in any reaſon: hee ſearched not Hengiſtes company, to ſee if they carried any weapons vnder their long gowns, and by this babiſh credulitie ſpoiled himſelfe of his libertie, and 460. noblemen Brutans of their liues.
                  When Aurely lay ſick in his bed, his friends that wer about him, being as ſick in their wits as he was in his body, ſuffered a Saxon to be hys Phiſition, & to miniſter vnto him, till he poiſoned him. If the Brutans knew not, that he was a Saxon, they were vnreaſonable to take they knew not whō, if they knew him, and yet truſted in his helpe, they were ſenſeleſſe and vtterly out of their wits. Cadwallin ioyned in friendſhip with Penda a Saxon, but afterward hee neuer thriued in any wars which hee tooke in hand as he did aforetime: hee that could not ſee, that the Saxon would onely vndermine him, was vnwiſe: he that would truſt him at all, was not wiſe, ſeeing he might liue well inough without his help.
                  
                     Diſsimulation: Vortiger Duke of Cornewall prouided king Conſtance the Sheep a gard of 100 Wolues or Picts, and then vſed all means to pleaſe them with words and gifts: when he had made them dronken, hee complained to them of his pouertie euen with teares: anon they deuiſed ſuch an helpe for him as they could, he ſo pierced their headleſſe heartes, and heartleſſe heades, that aſſoone as he was gone from

them in ſorrow, they followed him with the head of Conſtance: he lamented for ioy of his death, and leſſe he might be ſuſpected of the fact, hee cauſed the 100. Picts
                      to be executed after the law, and of all men was moſt againſt them, yet ſo, that ſome men perceiued his ſhites. He that hath any lawfull title in any poſſeſſion is wiſeſt, if he ſeeke it lawfully, or els, he may be put iuſtly from his owne. The Duke of Cornwall had more right to the Crown then the Dukes ſonne of little Brutanie, but was it not extreame folly to chalenge it in ſo villanous a maner? and was not Conſtance a moſt improuident creature, to be garded with them which ſcarſely regarded him ſo much as a countriman doth his beaſt? Surely God was angry with Brutans, when hee ſuffered their Rulers to liue ſo rudely without the Rule of wiſedome. O yee Heauens bleſſe ye our Nobles, and al other Regents on the earth, or els they will be without Regiment in their liues and end baſely with vile death. Conſtance had been fit to be a poore mans Sowe in a ſty, which is content with any vſage, ſo the trough be ful and the bones at reſt: lay a logge into a cloyſter, and it will come out all worme eaten, and fit onely to be burnt.
               
               
                  Their vertue of fortitude is in
                  
                     Magnificence and Magnanimitie: When Vortimer ſaw that he muſt die, hee called his ſouldiers before hym, and gaue all that he had among them, and exhorted them, euer to hold their owne againſt the Saxons, and all forraine enemies. A true heart is vertuous to the laſt gaſpe. Ambrius built the Abbey of Amſbruy, Arthur built the caſtle of Windſor, and founded

the order of knightes of the round table: Artgall the firſt Eare of Warwicke, one of Arthurs knights choſe a Beare for his beaſt, becauſe Arth in that language ſignified a Beare, in remembrance of his name among all his poſteritie. Quicheline gaue ſeuen myles compaſſe of land to Berine Biſhop of Wincheſter, to build his See there, and Kenwalke his ſonne finiſhed it. Saint Oſuald gaue his daughter Elfleda xii. Lordſhips, to build xii. Monaſteries with them, vi. in Bernicia, and vi. in Deyra. When Cadwallader had conquered the Saxons in Kent, and in the Ile of Might, hee gaue the fourth part of the Ile, that is, 300. houſeholds to Wilfride in honour of religion and of his owne name.
                  
                     Victories: Edolf Earle of Cheſter ſeeing how Hengiſt ſlew the Brutans with ſecret kniues, got him to a hedge, and defended himſelfe with a ſtake, and ſlew of the Saxons 70. men and eſcaped.
                  
                     Vortimer the ſonne of Vortiger hated the Saxons more then hys father loued them: hee purſued them and gaue them battell at the riuer of Darwent, and ouerthrew them, at Epyford he ouercame them, hee chaſed them by the ſea ſide into the Ile of Might, he vanquiſhed them at Cole More, he turmoyled them in Norfolk, in Eſſex, in Kent, he put them out of their poſſeſſions, he droue them to the Ile of Tenet, there he beſieged them by water and by land, and neuer left them till they fled out of the land. Aurely with the aid of the king of little Brutany tooke Caerbranke from Octa and tooke him priſoner: he ſought with Hengiſt at Crekinford, and ſlewe 4000. ſouldiers and 4. Dukes of the Saxons: he droue them out of Locry

euery where, except Kent: hee quitted himſelfe from Ella and Porth, two mightie Saxons. Vter in the time of his brothers ſickneſſe put to flight Paſcenty the ſonne of Vortiger with his army of Germans, and afterward ſlew him, and Guillioman the Iriſh Prince at S. Dauids in Cambry, and Coſſa and Octa the Saxons. Arthur fought 12. battels with the Saxons, and euery time ouerthrew them: he made them pay him tribute: when hee was in Gallia, and heard of Mordreds treaſon, he returned and fought with him at Sandwich and ouercame him, and againe hee ouerthrew him at Wincheſter, and at Bathe he ſlew him. Conſtantine the third vanquiſhed the two ſons of Mordred and put them to flight when they roſe againſt him and chalenged the Crowne by theyr fathers title. Vortipory the ſon of Conan diſcomfited the Saxons in many battels and got the vpper hand of them alwaies. Malgo ſubdued the Saxons in all his wars, he conquered Ireland, Scotland, Iſeland, Norway, Denmarke, the Orcades, and poſſeſſed them. Arthur ſlew in one day an hundred and fortie Saxons with his owne hand. Cadwallader ſlew Lothary Prince of Kent, and Athelwald king of Southſex, and poſſeſſed thoſe landes. Cadwallin droue the Saxons all along to Middleſex and made Penda pay him tribute. Now armies ſtay in Saxony, and papermen flye from thoſe coaſtes: theſe do more harme in many places then thoſe old armies did: theſe will be ſauced as they were, and hunted out of the land by order of diſcipline: none ſo buſie as they, and yet none more ſlight then they: there is an Arthur in paperworke againſt their inuaſions, which may in all

right and equitie giue them twelue diſgraces at the leaſt, and perhaps twelue times twelue: let the triall proue all, or let that labour be loſt, if they can recouer there 12 loſſes of this newe Arthur.
                  
               
               
                  Their vice or extreme fortitude is in
                  
                     Ambition: Vortiger tooke Conſtance out of a Monaſterie to be king, that he might do what he liſt in the kingdome vnder ſuch an innocent and milkſop, and make his ſimplicitie a meanes for himſelfe to get the Crowne, as it proued afterward. Mordred Arthurs kinſman being appointed Vicegerent in his royalty, gaue great giftes and caſtels more then his owne to Cerdrick a Saxon, and agreed with him to be crowned at Wincheſter with his goodwill, ſo that himſelf might be crowned at Caerlud by his liking. The two ſonnes of Mordred the vſurper rebelled againſt Conſtantine the third for the kingdome and loſt it. No right or trueth can ſtay an aſpyring humour.
                  
                     Puſillanimitie: Arthur gaue two Shyres to Cerdrick Duke of the Weſtſaxons, to the end hee might be quiet: thoſe two ſhyres could do Brutans more good then Arthurs peregrination: an enemie muſt not giue or take any thing, but winne all by might or ſleight. When Cadwallader had raigned 12. yeares, hee forſooke all his princely attyre, and went to Roome, and led a monaſticall life euer after: he preferd reſt before riches, the hood aboue the Crowne.
                  
                     Rage or crueltie: The Pictes to pleaſe their captaine Vortiger ſlew Conſtance their king, and preſented hys head to Vortiger, imagining they had done the beſt act that coulde be, to redreſſe his poore eſtate, wherof he had complained to them. Renowne the daughter

of Hengiſt, the concubine of Vortiger, ſeeing what Vortimer had done in ſpight of the Saxons her countreymen and friends, how he had taken away their poſſeſſions, howe he reedified Churches which they deſtroyed, howe hee was like to deſtroy them all, if he liued a while, ſought out witches and magicians, to charme or charactize him to death by ſome practiſe, but when they could not worke vpon him, ſhe inſinuated her ſelfe to one of his neereſt men, and ſo corrupted his minde and ſenſe with wordes & gifts, that he conſented to poyſon his Lord, and ſo hee did. Conan loued quarrellours aboue other men, he made away his owne vncle that ſhould haue bin king, and ſlew his two ſonnes. Ethelfride Duke of Northumberland maſſacred 1200. moonks of Bangor in a beaſtly immanitie, to pleaſe Ethelbert king of Kent, which had offered praiers to God againſt him. Carencie was ſo giuen to ciuill warres, that he loued them aboue all other acts, wherby he fell into ſuch hatred, that hee was not able to ſtand againſt the Saxons. Out of all queſtion, it is extreame madneſſe, to admit any ſtrangers into our countrey, that are eyther more militar or more politick then the commonaltie, vnleſſe it be for a time, and then away with them, or they be kept in their boundes with certaine companie, and neither ſee nor heare more then belongeth to ſtrangers: what ſhuld ſtrangers but be vſed ſtrangely? they pretend pouertie, but they intend to weaken our land: they flie for religion, but they foſter hereſies: draffe is their errand, but drinke they would: either they are diuels in their owne likeneſſe: or elſe they are Angels with the entrals of Diuels: fooliſh

pitty deſtroyeth the Cittie: prouide for the weakeſt, the ſtrongeſt can ſaue it ſelfe: the malignant hand will ſpoyle the impotent people, when it cannot ſpill the bloud of Nobles: but if Hares wurry Hounds, and Harts be wounded of Ferrets, then is the world turnd vpſide downe, the Hunters are vile keepers, and the keepers are vileſt men: Let Brutans be fedde and taught as is meete for them, and let my life go, if they make not their ennemies round about them like Hares and Ferrets, which euer auoyd the preſence of men.
               
               
                  Their vertue or temperance is in
                  
                     Life and maners: the Clergy in the time of Cadwallin behaued themſelues ſo ſoberly and fatherly in all points, that they were honoured of moſt men, inſomuch, that as they went too and fro in the ſtreetes and other places, the people would kneele downe to them, and aſke them their bleſſing, and gaue them whatſoeuer they demanded.
                  
                     Wordes: Berine Biſhop of Dorcheſter conuerted Kingeliſt the king of the Weſtſaxons, and chriſtened him, which he could neuer haue done without moſt temperate and well ſeaſoned ſpeech: by the like moderation Pauline conuerted Edwine king of Northumberland to the chriſtian faith. Melite Biſhop of Caerlud conuerted Sebert king of Eſſex to Chriſtian religion. The Clergy of Kent delt ſo with their king Ercombert, that he puld downe the Temples of his falſe Gods, and kept the Lent faſt, and became a Chriſtian. When the Brutan Biſhops ſaw, that Auſtin took vpon him as their ſoueraigne, they would not reſiſt him preſently, but ſtayd a while, to ſee his life and behauiour,

and then to vſe them therafter, either frendly or aduerſly.
                  
                     Liberalitie: When Ethelfride had put away his wife being great with childe, Cadwan receiued her into his Court, and kept her honourably till ſhee was deliuered, and ſo long after as ſhee would. Oſuald Duke of Bernicia liked ſo wel of Cedda Biſhop of Wincheſter, that hee gaue him land to build and Abbey thereon. The more is giuen for the promotion of Gods Maieſty, the more he giueth to our benefite.
               
               
                  Their vice or intemperance is in
                  
                     Loue: When Ronowen had ſaluted Vortiger with a golden cup of wine, and deſired him to drinke of it, he beheld her bewtie, and was preſently ſo inamored of her, that he could not be quiet, till he had put away his owne wife, by whom he had three ſons and married her, and for her ſake loued Saxons more then Brutans: he lay with his owne daughter to haue iſſue of her, but in vaine. Vter fell in loue with Igerne the wife of Gorleis Duke of Cornewall, and ſlewe him at his caſtell Tintagel, and tooke her to wife. Malgo fel into the ſinne of Sodom, and loſt all that he had gotten aforetime: let not ſenſe rule reaſon.
                  
                     Liberalitie: Vortiger entertained Hengiſt, and Horſus with their three ſhips, he gaue them ye hire of ſouldiers, he beſtowed the Ile of Tenet vpon them: hee graunted Hengiſt ſo much ground as hee could compaſſe with a buls hide: he took away the Earldom of Kent from Garangon, and gaue it him.
                  
                     Anger: Conſtantine the third ſiue one of Mordreds ſonnes for rebelling againſt him euen in the Minſter of Wincheſter: the other for the ſame cauſe in the

temple at Caerlud. Dionote Abbot of Bangor would not yeeld to Auſtin, becauſe he was of another Prouince, neither would he preach to the Saxons, becauſe they ſpoyled the land, do Ethelbert king of Kent what he could vnto him.
               
               
                  The vertue or iuſtice is in
                  
                     Rewarding: Conſtantine the ſecond receiued the crowne and rule of Brutanie by a couenant that hee made with the Brutans, when he deliuered them from the tyranny of the Picts. When Aurely remembred, how faſt the Brutans reſorted vnto him, and Vter at their landing at Totnes, and how truely they ſerued him in his warres, did them one good turne for another, and repaired their temples and houſes, which the Saxons deſtroyed, and reſtored their religion to them againe.
                  
                     Deuiding: In the time of Carency it was determined at Worceſter by a Councell of the chiefeſt men, That the goodes of the Church ſhould be beſtowed on the Biſhops, their Clergy, the Churches the poore people, and then Gregory the great, appointed the two Archbiſhops of Brutany at Caerbrank, and Caerkent. The Archbiſhop of S. Dauids had vnder thim theſe 7. Biſhops. Hereford, Cardiff, Landaff, Bangor, S. Aſaph, Worceſter, Morgan.
                  
                  
                     Puniſhing: The Pictes to reuenge the death of the 100. Picts
                      that garded Conſtance, made war agaynſt Vortiger: the friends of Conſtance deuiſed to ouerthrow him for the death of their Prince: thus he was toſſed vp and downe the land, that hee could not be ſafe. The Brutans ſeeing Vortigers extreame affection toward the Saxons, depoſed him: when hee was taken

priſoner by Hengiſt, they forſooke him: Aurely and Vter burnt him to aſhes in his Caſtle. The Biſhops refuſed Auſtin by the aduiſe of an old Anchorite, who iudged him no man of God which vſed his brethren like his ſeruants. Cadwan ſlew Edwine and Oſricke and Eufricke Saxon kinges for the bloud of the Brutans which they had poured out like water on euery ſide of the Realme.
                  
                     Burials: Vortimer was buried ſolemnly at Caerlud. Aurely & Vter were buried at Stoneheng in Salſbury plaine. Arthur was buried in the valley of Glaſcenbury. Conſtantine the third at Stoneheng. Vortipory, Vortiger, Malgo, and Carency were not orderly buried for their vile liues. Cadwan died in war, and was buried accordingly. Conſtance deſerued his faire buriall.
               
               
                  Their vice or iniuſtice is in
                  
                     Couetouſneſſe: Vortiger forgetting his loyaltie to his Prince abuſed him intollerably, and got him by his own conſent the ſtrongeſt Caſtels, and beſt treaſure that he had: he euer defended the 100. Pictes
                      what naughtineſſe ſoeuer they committed in the Court.
                  
                     Vnthankfulneſſe: the Brutans being deſired by Vortimer on his death bed, to bury his body at the hauen where the Saxons vſed to land, in a ſepulchre of braſſe ſpire like, to put them in feare with the remembrance of him and his acts, eyther neglected his will or forgat it. O vniuſt men that take ſuch a farewell of their friends. Vter died by force of poyſon at Verulam in Hertfordſhire neere S. Albons. Conſtantine and Conſtance, the father and his ſonne were not buried after the maner of Princes.
                  
                     I haue not that peculiar regard of places nowe, which I had before, partly by reaſon of forenamed cauſes, and partly in that they are ſufficiently ſet foorth in theſe morall tables. I deſire heerein and euer a quiet iudgement, and then I doubt not of any cenſurer, but he will ſpeake fairely. Yet I muſt leaue euery man to himſelfe, to doe as he is cauſed in his deliberatiue and conſiderate inſight. If I omit ſome hiſtories of Saxons, I do but my duetie: what haue I to do with them, vnleſſe it were to make them tributary to Brutans? otherwiſe, let their owne men commend them if they wil, I owe them no ſeruice by writing or ſpeaking. Yet I haue named ſome of the Saxons, though I doe it more for their ſakes with whome they dwelt, then for any merite of their owne. Let them lye in dead forgetfulneſſe like ſtones, that haue deſired, or doe deſire the trouble of Brutanie: let their names be cleane put out, and not come among the righteous. When men play the parts of beaſts, let them go among the numbers of cattell in Zoography and keepe their fit place. An ape muſt not come among Churchmen, Serpentes muſt not dwell in chambers of Counſell, make bates are not in caſe to cōuerſe in the dwellings of peaceable Lords, who can abide, to haue a deformed mocker with hys diſtorted mouthes, a venimous hiſſer with his noyſom breath, a rayling ſtage player with his trifling actions for his companion? Ariſe ye ſonnes of Ebranke, and yee kinſmen of true auncient Brutans, and make thoſe ſtonehearted creatures know, that they are made to be your ſeruants and drudges: let not any double forked toong perſwade you, that Brutanie is vnder any part of the earth.
               
            
            
               
               THE TIMES OF THESE KINGS.
               
                  BEtweene the death of Gracian, and the raigne of Conſtantine the ſecond, were about 36. yeares paſſed ouer in Brutanie without a Ruler. In this time Theodoſius was excommunicated by Ambroſe for murder: Ierome and Auſtin and Gouldmouth flouriſhed: Claudian the Poet was famous: Siricius Biſhop of Roome forbad Prieſts to marry.
               
                  Conſtantine the ſecond began to raigne in the yeare of the world, 4407. and raigned ten yeares: in this time the Goths and Hunnes inuaded Italy, and poſſeſſed it: the Vandals entred into Spaine and ſpoiled it: the firſt Councell was ſet againſt Pelagius the heretick a Brutan.
               
               
                  Conſtancy began in the yeare 4417. & ruled 5. yeares. In this time Ierome died: S. Alban was martired at Moguntia: Saluian the teacher of Biſhops
                   flouriſhed in Maſſilia: Burgundians were conuerted to chriſtian religion.
               
                  Vortiger began to rule, 4422. and ruled 16. yeares: Then Vortimer beganne 4438. and ruled 7. yeares. In this time Auſtin died: Cyrill, S. Patricke and Caſsian flouriſhed: Theodoſius founded a generall Schoole at Bononia: Attila with 500000. ſouldiers ſpoyled the Romans horribly, and all partes where he went. Clodoue the firſt famous king of Fraunce liued.
               
                  Vortiger began to rule again, 4445. & ruled 9. years:
               
                  Aurely began, 4454. and raigned 19. yeares: in this

time Genſerick with the Vandals ſubdued Roome: the Venetians began to dwell in their Ilands where they dwell now: Mamertus a Biſhop inuented Letanies: Hilary of Roome adorned Churches with gold & ſiluer.
               
                  Vter began, 4473. and ruled 16. yeares: in this time Honorick the ſon of Genſerick baniſhed 334. Biſhops and Prieſtes out of Africke, and ſlew many thouſand chriſtians, but at laſt he was eaten vp of wormes: Fulgentius the Biſhop of Hiſpalis flouriſhed: Theodoricke the king of Gothes did many noble and vertuous acts in Italy, and builded decayed places.
               
                  Arthur began 4489. and raigned 26. yeares: in which time S. Patricke dyed in Scotland being 62. yeares old: Theodorick would not ſuffer the Romans to practiſe any feates of war, or to haue any weapons, for feare they ſhould rebell: Caſsiodore of a Senatour became a Moonke.
               
                  Conſtantine the third, began, 4515. and ruled 3. years: at this time Gildas the Brutan liued, ſurnamed Sapiens, Boethius the Chriſtian Philoſopher liued and was martired.
               
                  Conan beganne 4518. and raigned 3. yeares: in this time Symmachus the Roman prelate tooke vpon him to be ſupreme ruler and iudge of all Councels in Chriſtendome.
               
                  Vortipory beganne 4521. and ruled 4. yeares: now Clodoue the French king vowed chriſtianiſme and was baptiſed: Olympius an Arrian, for blaſpheming the Trinitie was ſlame with lightning from heauen.
               
                  Malgo began, 4525. and raigned 35. yeares: now Iuſtinus the Emperour was firſt crowned by the Roman Biſhop: Iuſtinianus made the Codex of the ciuill

law: Tribonianus diſpoſed the Digeſts of the ſame law: S. Benedict and his ſiſter Scholaſtica wrought woonders. Priſcian liued.
               
                  Carency began, 4560. and ruled 3. yeares: but after his death the Brutans had no king for 24. yeares ſpace, till Cadwan was made king: now Totilas the tyrant of the Gothes raged in Italy, and Narſes ſent from the Emperour ſlew him: the nation of the Hunnes was almoſt vtterly extinguiſhed in Greece, by the Emperor: Armenij receiued Chriſtian faith.
               
                  Cadwan began 4587. and raigned 22. yeares: in this time S. Brigit the Scot was famous: Gregory of Roome called himſelfe Seruaunt of Seruauntes: the Latine toong was not vſed in Roome, becauſe all men conuerſed there.
               
                  Cadwallin began 4609. and ruled 48. yeares: now Heraclius ſlew Phocas and got the Empire, and married his ſiſters daughter: the Arabians receiued the law of Mahomet, and were called Saracens: Iſidore Biſhop of Hiſpalis liued: Sabinianus Biſhop of Roome appointed bels to diſtinguiſh the times of the day: Honorius ſpoiled the Temple of Romulus to build the Temple of Saint Peter.
               
               
                  Cadwallader began 4657. and ruled 12. yeares: in this time the Saracens got great part of Africk. Martin of Roome conſtituted that his Clergy ſhould vowe chaſtitie, or looſe their liuings.
               
                  Thus theſe kinges raigned 238: yeares. I omit the interraignes, before Conſtantine the ſecond, and Cadwan: one was 36. yeares, the other 24. yeares.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THREE SVPPOSES OF A STVdent concerning Hiſtorie.
            
               The firſt Suppoſe.
               
                  A Nobleman or Captaine of men deſpiſeth common matters in his own perſon: he deſireth to find in himſelfe the commendable ſingularities of ſingular men in all ages: he would be loquent as Mithridates, that could ſpeake 22. languages: he would be eloquent as Orpheus, that could perſwade the Diuels and men as he liſted: hee would be logicall as Ramus, that coulde iudge euerie mans writings and not be deluded by any writer: he would be arithmeticall as Pythagoras that was admirable by the knowledge of Numbers: he would be geometricall as Arithimedes that compaſſed many great matters by the miſterie of proportions: he would be aſtrologicall in all queſtions, as Stoflerinus was in one, who foreſaw and foretold the fall of monaſteries: hee would be effectually muſicall, as Timotheus that coulde either inflame, or quench Alexanders ſpirites with hys melody: in a word, he would be a right noble Artiſt in all theſe ſeuen Arts, or in ſome of them.
               Now I am ſure, that all the hiſtoricall Recordes, which I haue yet ſeene, and I beleeue are commonly to be ſeene of Mithridates, Orpheus, Ramus, Pythagoras, Arthimedes,

Stoflerinus and Timotheus, are not able by the hundred part to make any ſtudent as renowned an Artiſt as they were, though the be read and peruſed moſt exquiſitly.
               Another Nobleman or Captaine of men, deſireth to be Honourable by Nauigation as Veſpuſius was: delighteth to ſearch the ſecretes of warfare as Hanniball did: wiſheth to riſe from an obſcure Countrey life, to a Princely ſeat as Numa did: could be glad of ſuch a medicinal facultie as Aeſculapius had in raiſing a dead man to life: he wiſheth to himſelf the ſpirit of Moſes in making lawes and working myracles: in a word, He ſtudieth to purchaſe himſelfe a glorious Name, both for his life time, and after his death, as theſe men haue done aforetime.
               Now I dare ſay vppon ſufficient reading, that the Hiſtories which are written of Veſpuſius, Hanniball, Numa, Aeſculapius and Moſes, are not able to beget ſuch a man, as euery of them was in his kind, neither can the cauſes that ſerued them, according to their regiſters, ſerue other men for effecting of like actions.
               I cannot of a Man be made a Bee, and gather hony out of all ſweet flowers and herbes, but if God will I may be a Collector of the wiſdome of all ancient books, & make Ambroſia rather then hony out of them. I haue need of theſe men once, to ſee what they did, as younglings do: and againe I read them, to ſee if their Hiſtories can inſtruct me to do the like: and now I muſt depend vppon the proofe of other Artes, then are comprehended in Hiſtories: theſe giue but a light in the way, which I would walke in: I muſt haue eyes in my head ere I come to that way, and feete and ſtrength to

beare me through it: els the way is not for me, but for them that can go in it, what make I there? I heare much of it, and when I would go in it, I want eyes and feet to bring me thither, and am driuen to ſay, That God which giueth eyes to the blind, and walkes to the lame, had neede giue me more then Hiſtories haue in them, or els I ſhal neuer be that I would be in one Art or other. Then ſeeing Hiſtories breed onely deſires and wiſhes and expectations in the hearts of ſtudents & nothing but affections, ſeeing they neuer create any habit or perfection in them: I omit the verball and talkatiue vſes of hiſtories, which other men ſtand vpon, and conceiue in my mind this Idaea of one that would be a man of men, as God is named the Lord of Lords.
            
            
               The ſecond Suppoſe.
               
                  A Man that is borne of healthful and ſtrong parents, that are vnder thirtie years and aboue twentie, is commonly in good health, and of great ſtrength: for ſound timber muſt needes make a ſtrong building, if aduiſed workemen haue the framing of it.
               He that is brought vp in all kindes of labour from his childhood will indure any paines in his manhood: for cuſtome is a ſecond nature, as thoſe armes of an oke or other tree, are ſtrongeſt ordinarily which are toward the North.
               A man will not feed aboundantly for pleaſure, but neceſſarily for health: for he hath ſeene, that a body neither full nor empty is ſeldome or neuer diſtempered and ſicke.
               
                  He will not be idle at any time, but either ſtudying, or practiſing great and ſmall matters for himſelfe and his friendes continually: for the more good we thinke and do, the neerer we are to God almightie.
               A man wil not reiect the ſpeech and face of any man on the earth, but he will onely haue vſe of them that are like himſelfe in diſpoſition and action: for the hatred of any man is hurtfull, and where all agree in one, there is happieſt ſucceſſe.
               He doth not reſpect, how they liued and apparelled and emploied themſelues that are dead, but what good ſoeuer he can do, he doth it with all his minde & might, and neuer ceaſeth from his work till it be finiſhed in the beſt maner: for commonly men may doe greater actes then they doe, if they meaſure not themſelues by other men, ſeeing he that trieth his owne parts moſt, is euer moſt glorious.
               A man will be ſkilfull in all thinges which prolong life or ſhorten it, that hee may preſerue himſelfe and hys friends, and deſtroy his and their enemies: for in death al Noble Acts are cut off, and the ouerthrow of contraries is the generation of concord, and multiplication of conſent.
               He will beleeue that he knoweth himſelf by triall, he hath an eye in his hand and heart that neuer ſleepeth: for he that truſteth other mens words and deeds without proofe of them, is carried euery way with euery faction and fiction of the world.
               A man will ſo arme his body with moderate antidotes, that no poyſon ſhall eaſily ouercome him: for hee prouideth for the worſt, and remembreth withall, that the beſt can ſaue it ſelfe.
               
                  He is prepared for all changes and chances that may come vpon him in this life, & conſidereth rather what may happen vnto him then peruſe the fortunes of other men. Thus I haue written generally, but I may not tell my tale and idee particularly in euery poynt, till I be a few yeares elder.
            
            
               The third Suppoſe.
               
                  TWo noblemen that partly by nature, and partly by art, could make their bodies indefatigable for euery attempt and exploit agreed betweene themſelues to try, whether books of hiſtorie, or deuiſes of their own would make the more braue man. He that followed books, deſired onely to be like the beſt Worthies of other ages: he that relyed vpon his owne deuiſe was not content with the examples of bookes, but inuented the means to excel the beſt that euer was: the bookman putting his felicitie in imitation, came ſhort of thoſe patterns, and yet was glad whē he came neere them: the deuiſer ſetting his mind on emulation, ſearched the cauſes of auncient excellencies, and by adding to the cauſes added to the effectes, and went beyond them all in what caſe he would. The bookman ſaith, giue me the life of Alexander, the life of Caeſar, the life of Sanderbeg, and then thinketh he hath gotten the ſpoyles of the Eaſt and Weſt, and all patterns of glory that may be gotten: the deuiſer ſaith, let me ſee the cauſes that made thoſe three men ſo eminent aboue other men: ſo I ſhall perceiue a defect of theſe cauſes in Hiſtorians: then I muſt ſupply them, and excell thoſe

three in mine own perſon, or in ruling others: the moſt od and ſpeciall acts that euer they did, may not onely be matched, ſaith he, but alſo ouermatched wel enough, I beleeue, and to be plaine, I ſee nothing euen in Vliſſes or Achilles, but it may be ſeen, I hope, in another, vnleſſe theſe books will giue me leaue to trie, whether I may ſurmount their Nobilities, I will be ſo bold in reaſon as to ſay, that books were made to keep men vnder a certain height, and within a certain compaſſe, and to make men half the men that they might be, and as it were very woodcocks in compariſon of that they ſhould proue, by trying all and truſting none, but which they find certainly, and experimentally true. Thus the bookman is a gallant man with an eare mark and chains of bondage about his necke, but the deuiſer himſelfe is a ſoueraigne authour of manhood, hauing no cogniſance of ſubiection about him beſides the mortalitie of his fleſh, which notwithſtanding he maketh in ſome ſort immortall, eyther in leauing the life therof in his ſucceſſion, or in ſpending the might of it in contemplatiue aſſaults and atchiuements: for ſtudy ſpendeth the outward man more then action. The Deuiſer ſaith, that men of chiefeſt note haue euer been of his mind: they haue not beleeued that old bookiſh rule, Oporter diſcentem credere, for then they had neuer been better then other mens ſchollers, whereas by the meanes aforeſaid they are become captaines in their kind: yet if they had neuer been borne I am ſure, ſaith he, that I had been of this mind, Mundus eſt omnes libri, this rule is manly, Oporter diſcentem dubitare, vnleſſe he will be deceiued, and runne on the head halfe his life time: in a word, it appeareth plainly, that many men which cannot

read in bookes vſe daily the ſame or better meanes to try out mayſteries then the graundeſt bookmen: if my iudgement be an error, I would know, from what cauſe the firſt Doctors had their Artes before bookes were made: the ſworde makes not the warrior: no help is equall with the principall: nature is mightier then Art: the actor more worthy man then his ſcribe.
               Wherefore in reſpect of the premiſes, and ſuch other conſiderations, I haue rather taken an Eſſay in our Brutan hiſtory, then made a Worke. If I be faultie in writing too much, I confeſſe I knowe no method of writing briefly: If I be blamed in writing too litle, I wil not deny, that the old Brutans deſerue a large Chronicle: if I haue kept in the midſt of both, it agreeth moſt with my deſire. But why ſhould I doubt of this or that? of friend or foe? Let euery one ſpeake and write freely, not licentiouſly, in honour of his owne Countrey, that is, not againſt his kindred and himſelfe, which are partes thereof. It is a dangerous poſition to refuſe the offſpring of Brute, both in regard of all reuerend antiquities of hiſtorie, and in reſpect of our owne Countreimen and neighbours, to whome I wiſhe all concord and agreement among themſelues and againſt their enemies for euer.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   