
      
         
            
               
                  
                  Three Sermons vpon ſome portions of the former leſſons appointed for certaine Sabbaths.
                  The firſt containing, A diſplaying of the wilfull deuiſes of wicked and vaine vvorldlings.
                  Preached at Tanridge in Surrey the firſt of February 1597.
                  The two latter deſcribing the dangers of diſcontentment and diſobedience.
                  Preached the one at Tanridge and the other at Crowhurſt in Iuly then next following.
                  
                     By Simon Harwarde.
                  
                  LONDON, ¶ Imprinted by RICHARD BRADOCKE for RICHARD IOHNS. 1599.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT honorable and moſt Reuerend Father in Christ, my ſingular good Lord Iohn Lord Archbiſhoppe of Canterbury, primate of all England, and Metropolitaine, and one of the Lords of her Maieſties moſt Honorable priuie Councell, manie healthfull and happie yeares, in all ioy and continuance of all honorable felicitie.
                  
                  
                     IT hath often fallen out (moſt Reuerend my very good Lord) that ſmall things haue beene offered informer ages to mightie and noble Potentates. But then though ſmall

in quātity, yet haue they either bene ſuch matters as like Pearles haue in a little roome contained greate worth, or els they haue beene ſuch as in caſe of neceſſitie haue ſupplied a want, or ſtode in ſome good steade to thoſe great Perſonages to whom they haue beene deliuered and preſented. The treatiſe of Iſocrates 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſent to king Nicocles was ſhorte and compendious. The water, which Plutarch doth report to haue beene taken vp with the palme of a poore mans hand and with a cheerefull countenance exhibited to King Artaxerxes, was but of very ſmall quantitie, yet was the one very precious, eloquent and full of well compacted inſtructions,

and the other very needfull & cō
                     modious to remooue or eaſe ſome preſent diſtreſſe and extremitie. But this my diſcourſe being penned as it was vttered in rude and homely manner, and containing alſo nothing but that which is ſo farre and ſo many degrees better knowne to your Grace than I am any way able to expreſſe and make manifeſt: I ſhould in no caſe aduenture to preſent it vnto your Grace, but that I haue had heretofore ſo often and ſo plentifull experience of your Graces exceeding clemencie, that not only it hath often accepted great and exquiſite volumes written by them who haue had a calmer quietneſſe for their ſtudies, and haue beene

that way of farre more fit ſufficiencie, but alſo hath ſometimes fauorably receiued ſuch poore tokens of my humble and deutifull affections as my troubleſome eſtate of ſuſtenāce and ſlender talent of knowledge haue bene able to addreſſe & afford.
                  In the Preface of my Sermon next following, which was firſt printed (becauſe indeede I ment not at this time to haue ſet forth any more) I haue ſignified that when I conſented to the publiſhing thereof, my purpoſe was, before it & in the ſame volume to haue prefixed one other Sermon made ſome eight years ſince vpō the beginning of the firſt pſalme. But ſeeing that both there are now no more copies of that Sermon to be

had amongſt the Stationers & that alſo I perceiue there haue bene a cō
                     uenient & ſufficient nūber of them alreadie printed & disperſed, I haue thought it not amiſſe in lieu & ſteed therof to adde this ſhort speach had at Tanridge the first of Feb. laſt paſt vpon a portion of the first leſſon appointed for the Sabbath. In which as certain learned Iuſtices of Surrey (who in heart honor your Grace) M. Boſtock & M. Sander my very good friends with other vertuous & religious gentilmen thē aſſēbled, had bin worthy to haue had more exact matter thē my voice eyther did or could at that time deliuer: ſomuch more now your Grace ſhoulde haue had, if any way my penne had bin of

power to prepaire it. This Sermon deſcribing (as it doth) the originall cauſe of both thoſe enormities which are condemned in the treatiſes following, and hauing bene (as it was) in time firſt made and vttered, doth therefore now iuſtly chalenge to poſseſſe here in order the first and principall place.
                  And being by the Printer vnited with the reſt into one little diſcourſe as to frame thereby ſome ſlē
                     der gift to beginne the new yeare withall, I doe here moſt humbly preſent it vnto your Grace, hoping that the greatneſſe of my ſincere and deutifull deſires ſhall not be meaſured by the ſmalneſſe of my gift, and praying that J may remaine ſtill

continued in the good fauour of your Grace, to whom god the dispoſer of all times grant, that this and many other good yeares may be moſt healthfull & proſperous to the ioy of vs all, who do hartilie deſire the long peace of the Church and to your eternal & moſt Honorable renowne. From Tanridge this ſecond of Ianuarie. 1598.
                  
                     
                        Your Graces moſt humble in all deutie, Simon Harward,
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A DISPLAYING of the wilfull deuiſes of wicked and vaine worldlings.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           The text. Eſay. cap. 59. ver. 5.
                        They hatch the egges of the Cockatrice [or dropbloud] and weaue the Spiders webbe, he that eateth of their eggs ſhall dye, euen he which is ſprinkled (ſhal be) as though a Viper did burſt out (vpon him.)
                     
                  
                  
                     THE Prophet Eſay (beloued in the Lord)Eſay. 37.9. hauing a little before deſcribed the great miſery of the Iewes who togither wt their King Achas were compelled by their enimies to ſeeke

help of a deadly foe, to wit, of Tiglah Pilleſer King of the Aſſyrians, and that in ſuch baſe manner that their King beſids the humble ſending of preſents was enforced to bende and crouch with theſe ſeruile ſpeaches, ſeruus tuus & filius tuus ſim,
                     2 Reg. 16.7 
                     let mee bee thy ſeruant and thy ſon, onely ſaue me this time from the hands of Retzin king of Syria: which abiect abaſing ye Prophet doth notably name to be euen a throwing downe into hell. Hee doth afterward expreſſe the cauſes of that and all other their calamities,Eſay. 57.9. which were indeede their wickedneſſe in their liues and their damnable hypocriſie in their faſtings and ſeruice of GOD. Which their iniquities although he haue in the chapter laſt going before very liuelily deciphered them and very effectually condemned them,Eſay. 58. yet in this chapter hee houldeth on ſtill ye ſame argument declaring vnto them, that God is of as great power to aſſiſt them as euer he was to deliuer their forefathers,
                     Eſay. 56.1. 
                     his hand is not ſhortned, but that hee can ſaue, neither is his eare made heauie but that hee can heare. Onely their

iniquities made a ſeperation betwixt God and them, as afterwards was likewiſe ſaide vnto them by the Prophet Ezechiel,
                     Eze. 8.9. that by their 
                           •
                        prophaning of diuine ſacrifices and by their wicked abhominations they had ſet vp poſts and pillers againſt God and made a wall betwixt God and them. The enormities which at this time did make a diuiſion betwixt God and this people and cauſe the Lord euen to hide his face from them, are expreſſed heere in the verſes laſt going before to be of thre ſeuerall ſorts. Firſt the bloudy oppreſſions of their handes & outward dealings, your hands (ſaith Eſay) are full of bloud,
                     Ver. 3. 
                     and your fingers defiled with wrong. Secondly the abuſes of their tongues, your lips ſpake falſhood, your tongue vttereth vngodlineſſe. No man cryeth out for iuſtice, no man contendeth for faithfull dealing,ver. 4. euery one doth truſt vnto vanitie and vtter forth deceipt. Thirdly the malicious counſailes & cogitations of the heart, which hee noteth by the word Conceiuing, euery one conceiueth miſchiefe and bringeth forth iniquity: which ſpeach though it

ſeme heare to be vttered only to ye 
                     Iewes, yet the Apoſtle Paul in the thirde to the Romains doth apply it generally to all that are deſtitute of the grace of God,Rom. 3.15. and it doth paint out indeede all ſuch malicious purpoſes of heart, out of which as out of a bad roote do ſpring all rotten and vnſauory fruits aſwell in Iew as in Gentile. This conceiueing of miſchiefe is by the Prophet Eſay in this firſt verſe more at large laide open vnto vs by a threefolde Allegory pointing out three eſpeciall things vnto vs, firſt the malice of the minde, compared to the hatching of the egges of the ſerpent Haemorhous. Secondly the vanitie and vnprofitableneſſe of all ſuch wicked conceiptes reſembled here by the weauing of the Spiders webbe: And thirdly, the daungers that do thereby iſſue out as well to others as to themſelues, If but a droppe thereof bee ſprinkled it is euen as if a Viper ſhoulde breake out vpon them. The malicious counſels of the hearte which hee hath called in the verſe going before the conceiuings of miſchiefe,
                     Pſal. 7.15. according to the phraiſe of the Pſalmiſt,

                     he trauaileth with vanitie and conceiueth ſorrow and bringeth forth vngodlineſſe are likened here firſt to the hatching of the drop bloude his egge, whereby the Prophet ſignifieth that they are no ſodaine motions, but premeditate purpoſes, not reſiſted and withſtoode, but cheriſhed and brooded not ſuch as are eaſilie cured, but ſuch as are venemous, poyſonfull and altogither deadly and deſperate.
                  Saint Hierom doth follow the ſeptuaginta in tranſlating this place, oua aſpidum ruperunt, they haue broken the eggs of Aſpes,
                      which interpreting though it do not altogither rightly anſwere the Hebrew text, yet doth it import the very ſame meaning, to wit that the deuiſes of the wicked are moſt dangerous and incurable. As in Deuteronomy there is as it were a reaſon rendered when it is ſaide,Deut. 32.33. 
                     venenum aſpidū ſaeuum & immedicabile (ſpeaking of ye diſeignements of ye malicious) they are as the poyſon of Aſps euill & ſuch as can no way be cured.
                  
                  They which are ſtrong with an Aſpe are ſaid to fall by and by into a deade

ſleepe, and in that ſleepe to bee preſently depriued of the life and light of this worlde. And therefore Cleopatra Queene of Aegypt when her huſband Antonius was dead becauſe ſhe woulde not bee led in triumph by Auguſtus the Emperour, choſe eſpecially to ſhorten her owne daies by the ſtinging of an Aſpe, hoping thereby to depart with ſome eaſe, and to die without feeling any pangs or torments of death, as witneſſeth the Poet Propertius.
                  
                  
                     
                        Prop. lib. 3.
                        Brachia ſpectaui ſacris admota colubris
                     Et trahere occultum membra ſoporis iter.
                  
                  
                     Such a deade ſleepe is in the wicked when being paſt feeling they do giue thē
                        ſelues ouer to wantonneſſe, to worke all vncleanneſſe euen with greedineſſe,
                     
                        Eph. 4.19. Such is in thoſe who are vtterly deſtitute of all godly remorſe of conſcience of, whom S. Bernard. Quis magis mortuus eo qui portat ignem in ſinu, peccatum in conſcientia nec ſentit,
                     
                     Ber
                           •
                         lib. 1. de cōſider. 
                     nec excutit, nec expaueſcit? who is more deade than hee which carieth fier in his boſome or ſinne in his conſcience, & doth neither feele it, nor ſhake it out, nor once ſtande in any feare of it?
                      Such a

deade ſleepe is in all them which lye ſtill ſecurely in ſinne and doe neuer riſe vp to amendment of life,Eph. 5.14. to whom the Apoſtle Paul cryeth out, awake thou that ſleepeſt & ſtand vp from the dead, and Chriſt ſhal giue the light. And ſuch is in thoſe obſtinate and wilfull hearts which will in no wiſe hearken to ye voice of wholſome admonition, of whome the Prophet Dauid ſpeaketh, that they are like the deafe Aſpe which ſtoppeth her eares, and wil not heare the voice of the charmer,
                     Pſal. 58.5. 
                     charme he neuer ſo wiſely: for ſo doe the beſt late writers expound there the worde Pethen to ſignifie an Aſpe, as likewiſe doe the auncient fathers, Auguſtine, Hierom, and Caſſiodor: who doe yelde alſo the reaſon, becauſe the Aſpe alteram aurem terrae preſſius infigit, alteram cauda obturat: ſhe faſteneth one eare cloſe to the ground and with her taile doth ſtoppe the other. Such wilfull obſtinacie doth Iob affirme to be in thoſe wicked which ſay vnto God, depart from vs,
                     Iob. 21.14. 
                     we deſire not the knowledge of thy waies: who is the Almightie that we ſhould ſerue him, or what profit haue wee if we pray vnto him?
                     
And ſuch was in thoſe malicious Iewes whom Stephen calleth ſtifnecked and of vncircumciſed hearts and eares,
                     Act. 7.51. 
                     alwaies readie to reſiſt the holie Prophets of God. As that man in whome an euill tongue is (as Saint Iames ſaith) 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     full of deadly poyſon may be ſaid by a phraſe of ſcripture, to haue the poyſon of Aſpes vnder his lips, becauſe therby his whole body & ſoule is empoyſoned and putrified,Rom. 3.13 as ye Apoſtle calleth euil ſpeaches 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      rotten talke ſuch as doth cōſume & weare awaie all good gifts and graces in man: ſo wilful and malicious purpoſes of heart, may well be reſembled to the poyſon of Aſpes,
                     Eph. 4 29. who haue not onely the ſtingings and bitings, but euen the whole fleſhe and ſubſtance,Gal. de the
                        
                           •
                        i ac. cap. 8
                      full of moſt deadly venom, as Galen moouing the queſtion, why the fleſhe of Aſpes may not goe into the Theriaca as well as the fleſh of Vipers, yeldeth this for the reaſon, becauſe the one may by are be rectified, but the other can receiue no alteration or correction.
                  
                  Sundry late and learned interpreters becauſe the Prophet Eſay doth not vſe in this the Hebrue worde Pethen which

doth properly ſignifie, the Aſpe, but an other worde tſiphgnoni. haue therefore departed from the tranſlation of Saint Hierom, and in ſteede of Aſpe haue ſet the worde Cockatrice. Theſe alſo though they haue not (in the iudgement of ſome) duely expreſſed ye Hebrew word, yet haue they caried a ſenſe nothing diſſonant frō the meaning of the Prophet. The Cockatrice called Baſiliſcus and Regulus is named as it were the prince of Serpents not onely becauſe of his exceeding force in that hee is reported to haue power to kill euen with the ſight of the eye, but alſo in reſpect of that marke and badge or rather Diadem which nature hath giuen vnto him hauing a little crownet growing vpon his heade. To this Serpent may very well bee compared that enuious and malicious hearte which here the Prophet Eſay doth principally condemne,Math 20.15. for that both the venome thereof is by the eye often diſcloſed as our Sauiour ſaith, is thy eye euill becauſe I am good?
                     Pro. 22.6. and Salomon doth pronounce that hee which hath a good eye ſhall bee bleſſed of

                     God Saint Hierom doth interpret yt place, qui pronus eſt admiſericordiā benedicetur ei: but the Hebrew which is, a good eye, and Saint Hieroms worde which is, a prone diſpoſition of heart, are ſo perpecually vnited togither that the one may very well be ſignified by the other) As alſo becauſe all ſuch malice of heart doth proceede from Satan whom Saint Hierom vpon Eſay doth call regul
                           •
                        m volantem the flying baſiliſke & principem ſerpentum and prince of Serpents,
                     
                     Hiero. in Eſa. 30 &c. in 59. and who is named by our Sauiour Chriſt to be 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     the enuious or malicious man, becauſe as firſt by enuy of the Diuell death came into the world, ſo he is ſtill the father and author of al deadly malice in the hearts of the wicked.
                     Math. 13.28. Howſoeuer the malicious may thinke ſometimes that their enuious affections are but the ordinary courſe of fleſh & blood,Sap. 2. v. vlt. & ſo be like the fond dogge which when a ſtone is flung, will bite the ſtone and not regard the hand that threw it,Eph. 4.26. yet the Apoſtle doth teach vs plainly that he which doth lodge and harbour malice in his heart hath yelded a roome and giuen

place to the Diuell. In the breaking of the Serpents egge, Saint Hierom doth note further the deceiptfulneſſe as well of ſinne as of Sathan: oua putaverit gallinarū,
                     
                     Hiero. in Eſa. 59. 
                     aut volucrum; ſed ſi fregerit, antequam comedat ſtatim teterrimum foetorem agnoſcit, & principem ſerpentum Diabolum: A man would thinke the egges of Serpents to bee the egges of ſome hennes or birdes, but if he once breake them,
                      yt is if he do ſound the bottome of malicious (though glorious) pretenſes, then ſhall hee ſtraightwaies perceiue a moſt odious ſent & deadly ſauour, then ſhall he plainly acknowledge the Deuill the prince of Serpents.
                     2. Cor. 11.1 Apoc. 12.9 Sathan is called in the Scriptures the Serpent, and the olde Serpent, firſt becauſe hee appeared to Eue in the ſhape of a ſerpent, and choſe it to be the inſtrument of his voice vnto hir. Where by the waie I cannot but maruaile at and abhorre the forwardnes of ye captious Atheiſts which thinke that they haue gotten ſome aduantage againſt the Scriptures when they can alledge the impoſſibilitie of the ſpeach of a Serpent, not conſidering that the ſpeach through

an inſtrumēt yt hath breath may farre better be granted then their oracles through ſenceleſſe inſtruments which were giuen either by Iupiter Ammon out of a nauell of Braſſe, or by Apollo at Delphos out of an oake, or by any other Idoll in their heatheniſh writers, the ſtrange impoſſibilities wherof they can readily ſwallow and eaſily digeſt. Secondly becauſe of his ſubtiltie (for the Serpent was the ſubtileſt beaſt in all the fielde) which appeared moſt euidently when in the aſſaulte vpon our firſt parent he could vſe all the ſleights and aduantages which poſſibly could be deuiſed.Gen. 3.1. He could firſt deale wt ye weaker veſſell, he could firſt plucke from hir the weapon of hir defence, to wit the word of God: Hath God ſaide thus? it ſhall not be ſo.
                     2. Cor. 4.4. As ye Ra
                        •
                     en ſetting vpon her ſpoyle, doth firſt pluck out the eyes, ſo ſtil ye God of this worlde doth firſt blinde the eyes of men that the glorious light of the Goſpell of Chriſt ſhould not ſhine vpon them. He could chooſe a fit time when Eue was giuen to curious beholding of the fruites, and when Adam hir counſellor was awaie: As likewiſe hee could tempt

                     Dauid with Bethſaba in a fit time when hee was ſo ſlothfull that hee would lye vpon his bedde at noone daies:2. Sa. 11.2. and when the goodman of the houſe is aſleepe, then in a fit time hee is ſaide to ſow tares:
                     Math. 13.25. hee could alſo come with faire pretenſes as though hee would teach our firſt parents how they ſhould become Gods, when his purpoſe is nothing but to throwe them headlong into hell. His entiſments are like the Serpents egges whereof Ariſtotle reporteth, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     the egge is of one colour and ſoft ſkinned, as ſimply pretending good,Lib, 1. de hiſt. animal. Ca. 6 
                     but the whole ſubſtance is venemous and ful of deadly poyſon. The intemperat man is perſwaded by his delicacies to lengthen his daies. The couerous man hath an Imagination that by his wealth hee ſhall make his houſe cōtinue for euer: but their conceipts doe then prooue like the deceiptfull egges of Serpents,
                     Pſal 49.1. when not only the one doth by ſurfetting haſten his owne ende,
                     Eccle. 37.30. Zach. 5.4. 
                     and the other procure a curſe toroote out his houſe euen with the ſtones and tymber,
                     Gal. 5.21. but alſo both togither by following and cheriſhing their carnall

deſires do depriue themſelues of the immortall ioyes of heauen. The eating of a fruite might ſeame a ſmall thing in the eyes of Eue, but the intemperancie, diſobedience, & vnthankfulneſſe of the heart, did driue our firſt parents out of Paradiſe,
                     Lib. 2
                              •
                           
                         de hiſt. animal. cap. 33.
                      
                     and bring the poyſon of death vpon their poſteritie. Ariſtotle writeth that the Crocodile doth grow out ſome times into ſuch a huge bigneſſe that hee attaineth to the length of thirtene cubits, yet is hee nothing ſo venemous nor dangerous as is the Cockatrice, who is reported to grow not paſt the length of three ſpans. Dauid his ſpilling of bloode, may ſeame a greater offence than Saul his ſparing of bloode:
                     2. Sam. 11. 1. Sam. 15. 
                     Peters denying may ſeame a greater treſpaſſe, than Magus his deſire of buying.
                  
                  But it is the poyſoned malice of the heart which eſpecially maketh the ſinne to be moſt deadly, & then is it a venom incurable whē it offendeth neither of ignorance nor of infirmitie, but of ſet purpoſe & euen in deſpite of ye ſpirit of grace, as did ye malice of the Libertines & Cyrenians,
                     Act. 6.10. 
                     who withſtoode Stephen though they

could not reſiſt the wiſdome which ſpake in Stephen,
                     1. Ioh. 3.12 And as did the enuie of Cain who hated not his brother, but the vertue of his brother, and woulde haue no peace with him, becauſe he would not be as vngodly a man as himſelfe.
                  
                  The beſt approoued interpreters do in this place by the worde tſiphgnoni vnderſtand neither the Cockatrice nor the Aſpe, but another ſerpent named Haemorrhous: the french men expreſſing the meaning of the Greeke worde doe terme it Coule ſang, and we may by a like compounded word fitly name it drop-bloud. Auicen, (who very well knewe the nature of the originall word) doth deſcribe it to be a ſerpent of about a cubit long, gray and gliſtering breeding much by the riuer Nilus, whoſe venome hath ſuch a ſtrange and bloody operation, that whoſoeuer is ſtong therewith doth preſently fall on bleeding at ye corners of the eyes, at the nailes endes, and almoſt at euery ioynt and part of the body. Which Serpent as it doth moſt directly anſwere the Hebrew word, ſo doth it moſt liuelilie expreſſe the drift and meaning of the

Prophet in this place: for both before and after this text he beginneth wt their bloodie cruelty as their chiefeſt offence now raigning amongſt them, your hands (ſaith hee) are defiled with blood:
                     Ver. 3. and againe a little after he telleth them that their feete did runne to euil and make haſt to ſhed innocent bloode, and euen their thoughts were altogither wicked and malicious.
                     ver. 7. All crueltie hath the name of ye latin word cruor which ſignifieth blood, becauſe cruel harts are murdering harts,1. Iohn. 3.15. 
                     he that hateth his brother is ſuch a manſlayer as hath no eternal life abiding in him. Eſau when with a bloodie intent he gaped for Iſaacks death & ſaid the daies will come that I ſhall morne for my father,
                     Gen. 27.41 
                     & then will I ſurely kill my brother Iacob, was in the ſight of God guiltie of parricide. The Iewes which with cruell harts cryed crucifie him,
                     Act. 7.52. & 5.30. 
                     cucifie him, are named murderers of Chriſt, as well as the Romaines which put him to death. The Iewes were commaunded of God in ſundry Lawes by types and figures to abhorre and deteſt all beaſtly crueltye. For as by abſtaining from ſwines fleſhe
                     
they were taught to flie all filthie pleaſures, So by not eating the kite, vulture,
                     Deut. 14, 13. 
                     gripe, hawke, and ſuch rauening ſpoylers, they were admoniſhed to reiect all cruell affections.Deut. 22.6 Leuit. 19.14. 
                     When thou takeſt any birdes thou ſhalt not (ſaith God) kill the young with the damme: thou ſhalt not reuile the deafe, nor lay a ſtumbling blocke before the blinde. Seldome doe we reade of any crueltie, but that the Lord by his iuſt iudgement, as it were lege talionis, doth heape the like meaſure vpon it againe. Adonibezeg had taken Seauenty Kinges,Iud. 1. and being priſoners, he cruelly cut off their thumbs and great toes, and made them as dogges to gather breade vnder his table, but at the laſt hee was taken by Iude, and hauing his owne thumbs & toes cut off,Iud. 9.5. was compelled in the ſame manner to receiue his foode as hee himſelfe before had preſcribed to others.
                  
                  
                     Abimelech to vſurpe,Iud. 9. v. 53 a kingdome did vpon a ſtone cruelly put to death Seauentie of his brethren: but afterwarde by a ſtone being throwne vpon him by a woman, his braine-panne

was cruſht in peeces. As by the crueltie of Achab, dogges did licke the bloode of Naboth, ſo dogges did licke his bloode,
                     1. Reg. 21.19. 
                     and the bloode of her that gaue the counſell, inſomuch that when Iehu ſaide of Iezabell being deade, ſeeke out that curſed woman and burie her becauſe ſhee is a kings daughter, ſhee was founde in a manner all deuoured by dogges,2. Reg. 9. nothing was to be had but the ſkull and the feete and ſome part of her handes. Haman with an enuious heart moſt cruelly ſought to hang Mardocheus: but on the gybbet which he had cauſed to be erected for others,
                     Heſt. 9.14. 
                     hee and his owne tenne ſonnes did firſt take hanſell and poſſeſſion.
                  
                  The manifolde curſes which Dauid doth rehearſe in the ſixtie and ninth Pſalme,
                     Pſal. 69.27 as to haue the table to be made a ſnarre, the eyes to be darkned, the howſes to be left deſolate, and to be wiped out of the booke of life, are all denounced againſt ſuch as with cruell hearts adde affliction vpon affliction: they perſecute (ſaith Dauid) thē whom thou haſt ſtricken & vex them whom thou haſt wounded.
                  
                  This crueltie of heart may very well

be compared to the poyſon of the Haemorrhous or Dropbloode mentioned in this place. For no ſooner hath any receiued the venome thereof, but preſently the hands, the tongue, the deuiſes of ye heade, and the whole actions of the life doe yelde forth bloodie fruites in ſundry deadly kindes of murder.Chriſoſt. in Mat. 15. Baſilia pſ. 14.
                      
                     The hands do breake out in bloode either by cut throat vſurie, which by Chryſoſtom is compared to the ſtinging of an Aſpe, and by Baſill to the biting of a Viper, becauſe as the one doth caſt aſleepe, and the other cauſe to ſwell, ſo doth vſury caſt ye poore borrower for a time into a pleaſant ſlepe but ſuch a ſleepe as bringeth death; it maketh him for a time to ſwell with abundance, but it cauſeth a burſting and vtter ruine to him and his whole familie: Or els they become murdering by witholding ſuſtenance from the needie:Eccle. 34.22. Ambr. vt ſi Gratian diſt, 86.
                      
                     the breade of the poore (ſaith the ſonne of Syrach) is the life of the poore & he that defraudeth him is a murderer. Paſce fame morientem (ſaith Amboſe) ſi non paſcis occidiſti feede him that is ready to die with famine, if thou feede him

not, thou haſt murdered him: or els, if they doe bring forth their foode, they doe ſucke out the bloode of the poore,
                     Amos, 8, 5 and (as Amos ſpeaketh) ſwallow vp the poore by making the Epha ſmall, and the ſhekell great. The Epha is an Hebrue meaſure, the ſhekell their coyne and price. Many thinke that if they make iuſt meaſure, they may aduance ye price of their wairs to what extremity they can. But the Prophet doth place a kinde of murder as well in exceſſe of price as in the deceiptfulneſſe of meaſure. The Apoſtle forbideth as well the oppreſſion of the one as the fraude and ſubtiltie of the other. Let no man oppreſſe nor defraud his brother,
                     1. Theſ. 4, 6 
                     for the Lord is the auenger of all ſuch things. Iehoiakim his hands were an otherway defiled with blood, when as ye Prophet Ieremie ſaith hee vſed his neighbours in his worke without wages and gaue them no recompence for their toyle.
                     Ier. 12, 13. & 17. The ſweate of the laboring man is as it were the wearing and waſting and conſuming of his ſtrength and life: to vſe that toyle without recompence is to bee guiltie

of a kinde of murder. As the bloode of Abel did cry out of the earth for vengeance,Gen. 4.10. ſo Iob doth make the grounde to be as it were an olde mother crying out,Iob, 31, 38, and the forrowes thereof complaining togither againſt thoſe which by detaining the rewarde do vexe and grieue the ſoules of the labourers and tillers therof, Effundit ſanguinem qui fraudat mercede, hee that defraudeth men of their hyre is a blood ſucker.
                      Further,Ecc. 34, 26 the venome of this Serpent, to wit, the malice of the hearte, doth cauſe as the handes, ſo the tongue alſo to commit many deadly ſorts of bloodſhedde. In ſome, by ſlaunderings and railings, whereby as the Pſalmiſt ſheweth their tongues are become ſharpe raiſors, and their ſmooth wordes nothinge but very ſwordes. In others,Pſal. 52, 2. & 55, 22. 
                     by flatteries, whereby as Antiſthenes ſaide, men doe often become worſe than Rauens:
                     Laer lib, 6 Cap. 1. 
                     for thee Rauens feede vpon carkaſes beeing deade, but the flatterers doe eate vppe and deuoure their neighbours beeing aliue. Laertius
                     
who aſcribeth that ſpeach to Antiſthenes, doth likewiſe record that Bion, when one aſked the queſtion of him, of all beaſtes what was moſt noyſome, made this anſwere: Si de feris percontaris, tyrannus; ſi de mitibus, adulator. If your demaund be of wilde beaſts, a tyrant; if of tame beaſts,
                     
                     Greg. ſuper Ezech. 
                     a flatterer. Saint Gregory, ſaith very wel, tot occidimus quot ad mortē ire trepidi & tacentes videmus, we murder ſo many men as we ſee to runne headlong vnto death, and by a fearefull ſilence doe refuſe to admoniſh them of the truth:
                      as likewiſe Saint Auguſtine:
                     Aug. ſuper Ioh. tract, 42.
                      
                     homicida dicitur Diabolus non gladio armatus, non ferro accinctus, verbū ſeminauit & occidit. Noli ergo putare te non homicidam cùm fratri tuo mala perſuades. The Diuel is called a murderer from the beginning, not as one armed with ſworde and weapon, but he ſowed ill counſell and ſo did kill. Doe not therefore imagine that thou art free from murder, if thou doeſt perſwade or entiſe thy brother to any kinde of wickedneſſe.
                     
                  
                  The poyſoned malice which lucketh in the hearts of the Romiſh Catholicks doth another dangerous way breake out

into murder, to wit, by treaſons and rebellions, which are called of Dauid bloodſhedde, in the fiftie and fift Pſalme,Pſal. 55. ver. vlt, made (as Beza and Tremellius do iudge) in the time of the conſpiracie of Abſolon and Achitophell. The bloodthirſtie and deceiptfull men, ſaith hee, ſhall not liue out halfe their daies. For although lawfull warres bee called the warres,2. Chr. 20.15. not of men but, of God himſelfe, (prouided alwaies that they bee taken in hande withan aduiſed care, not to thruſt men into wilful dangers, and ſo to make as it were a paſtime of the bloode of man: Dauid becauſe his men were ſo fewe which brought him water through the greate armie of the Philiſtines, woulde not drinke of it,2. Sam. 23.16. becauſe it was (as hee ſaid) the bloode of them which did fetch it with ſo deſperately endangering their liues): Yet traitorous rebellions do moſt euidently proceede of a very poyſonfull and diueliſh malice of heart, and are ſo deteſtable in the ſight of God, that whatſoeuer is done by them againſt the anointed Soueraigne, the Lord doth reuenge and puniſh it euen as done againſt his

owne perſon.2, Sam, 16, As may manifeſtly appeare in the before named conſpiracie, where though Abſolon were moſt noble in birth as being the kings owne ſonne, though hee were moſt comely and beautifull in perſonne,2, Sam. 16, though he were highly in fauour with the people (whoſe hearts hee had ſtollen away) and though hee were moſt dearely and entirely beloued of his father Dauid, inſomuch as the King gaue moſt earneſt commaundemēt to his Generals and captaines that notwithſtanding his traiterous ſedition, yet they ſhould for his ſake intreat Abſolon kindly, and no man to be ſo hardy as to lay hands vpon Abſolon: Yet the Lord of heauen (who in treaſons and rebellions doth account his owne maieſtie moſt of all contemned, and his owne authoritie impugned, did as it were take the matter into his owne hands, when hee cauſed an oake ſtretching out her bough to truſſe vp Abſolon by the locks of his gallant heire, to teſtifie vnto all poſteritie, that no nobilitie of bloode, no comelineſſe or gifts of body, no loue nor fauour eyther of prince or people ſhall ſaue a rebell from

due puniſhment, but that howſoeuer the iudgements of man be ſometimes wanting, yet GOD himſelfe, who is thereby chiefly diſhonoured, will vndoubtedly follow by ſome extraordinary meanes with a heauie and ſharpe reuenge. Howſoeuer GOD did for a time ſuffer that rebellion to growe to head and waxe ſtrong: Yet at the laſt the words which Dauid did pronounce of them, that the bloodthirſtie men ſhould not liue forth halfe their daies,
                     Pſa 55. ver. vlt. 2. Sam. 18, 7. were verified to the full when as the heade of that conſpiracie was plucked vp by the heade, ſo the baiſer ſort receiued a fit rewarde for a raſcall crewe, beeing ſlaine in one day twentie thouſand, beſides that the Counſellour Achitophell, who gaue the aduice to the rebellion,Sam. 17, 23 
                     had his wiſedome ſo confounded, that for want of a hangman hee became a hangman to himſelfe. That the treaſons and rebellions, which for theſe many yeares haue beene and are ſtirred vp in Chriſtendome, doe eſpecially proceede from the Romiſhe Catholickes, there needeth no other proofe, but their owne

confeſſion. For the writer of the Popiſh Chronicle called Gallo-Belgicus, in that part of his third Come which he calleth ſupplementum,
                     Tom 3. lib 15, pag. 439. calleth the commotious in Ireland, Comitis Tyronij & Hibernorum rebellionem, the rebellion of the Earle of Tyronne and of the Iriſh men, but the ſame man in other places of the ſame booke doth ſay Catholicos plurimos ad comitē Tyronium vndique confluxiſſe, that many Catholiks out of all quarters did ioyne themſelues to the Earle of Tyronne,
                     
                     Pag. 421. whom hee alſo calleth Catholicorum anteſignanum & ducem the captaine & General of the Catholiks.
                      Whereby it appeareth that hee accounteth rebellion and his owne profeſſion of the Catholike faith to haue ſuch neare affinitie amongſt thē
                     ſelues, that very eaſily they doe knit and ioyne the one to the other. So heretofore by the dealings of pope Innocentius the third againſt Iohn king of England, and by Pope Adrian the fourth his abſoluing the ſubiects of the King of Sicily from all loyaltie and alleageance, as alſo by dailie experience in theſe daies (for we heare of no inſurrection, but there

is a popiſh Prieſt at the one ende of it, nay the Popes priuie Factors are the chiefeſt Authors, and their Fryers handes the very inſtruments to murder Princes) wee ſee it plainly confirmed vnto vs that Rome is the fountaine and ſpring, out of which, poyſons, bloodſhedde, witchcrafts, treaſons and rebellions do ouerflow the whole earth. Of all the egges of the drop-bloode, that is, the malicious purpoſes of the heart, here condemned by the Prophet Eſay, theſe of ye 
                     Catholike rebels are moſt diueliſh & dangerous. Hee yt nameth other ſins, nameth moſt commonly ſimple and ſingle tranſgreſſions, but he ye nameth rebellion nameth in a manner a heape of all ſinnes that can bee named, murders, rapes, thefts, blaſphemies, oppreſſions, whordomes and (in a manner) all ſinnes whatſoeuer, they are all together vnited in this crime of rebellion. It is as it were a hell in this worlde, the feendes and furies whereof are the traiterous cutthroats, the Generall and Captaine is Lucifer the prince of rebels, the torments & puniſhments are greefes, walings and woes of children fatherleſſe, of

fathers childleſſe, of women huſbandleſſe, of poore friendles, of all comfortleſſe.
                  They may cloake and couer their pretences and purpoſes with a ſhew of the Catholicke faith, but they muſt needes bee counted diueliſh intents, which ſeeke to drawe any ſuch miſcheefes and calamities vpon their natiue ſoyle and countrie:Mart. fox. Tom. 2. for infinite are the miſeries which then needes muſt follow, when (as one hath written) treaſon is aboue reaſon, and might ouerrunneth right, and it is had for lawfull whatſoeuer is luſtfull, and common woe is accounted common wealth. The very heathen Poet by the light of naturall reaſon coulde perceiue the filthineſſe of ſuch ſeditious affections.Homer.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                     
                     
                        Moſt vngodly is he, lawles, vnnatural, vnkynde
                        Which deſireth warres by ciuil bloudy rebelling.
                     
                  
                  The kingly Prophet when he had the electiō of three plagues offered vnto him of which one muſt of neceſſitie be taken he made choyce of peſtilence rather tha
                        •
                      
                     warre: Lord (ſaide he) let vs fall into thy hands,
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Sa. 24.14 
                     for with thee there is mercie
                           •
                        
                        
let vs neuer fall into the hands of men.
                  
                  To preuent all theſe ſeuerall kindes of bloodſhed, our way is to labour (eſpecially) for the reforming of the affections of our hearts:
                     Pro. 4.23. 
                     keepe thy heart (ſaith Salomon) with all diligence, for frō thence do proceede the actions of this life. If ſinne do once make a breach into the heart, it is planely of the nature of the Serpent which if once into any place it can get in the head, it will ſoone into the ſame place winde in ye body.1. Reg. 21. 
                     When Achab did in heart couet the vineyard of Naboth, how ſoone was he brought to yelde his conſent to ſhede innocent bloode?Gen. 4.5. When Cain ſuffered wrath to caſt down his coūtenance, how ſone did his hands follow to ye achieuing of his villany and parricide? When Herod in hart had cōceiued wrath againſt ye wiſemen,Mat. 2.16. how ſone did ye venome burſt out into a lamentable bloodſhed, when he cauſed ſo many young infants to be ſlaine & ſo cruelly butchered? The wrath of man ſaith S. Iames, worketh not that which is righteous before God. Salomon aduiſeth thee not to keepe company with an angry man, ne aſſumas tibi tendiculam,
                     
                     Pro, 22.24
                     
                     leaſt thou procure a ſnarre vnto thy ſelfe. For as hee which is ſlow to wrath doth abound in vnderſtanding,
                     Pro, 14.29. ſo the haſtie and furious do ſtirre vp folly. And not onely wrath, but ſomtimes a ſiniſter fauour may cauſe bloody effects whē either by bribery or partialitie, iuſtice is peruerted, as the Prophet Eſay here cryeth out in the verſe laſt going before, no man calleth for iuſtice, no man cōtendeth for the truth: & in ye firſt chapter when he hath ſhewed them yt their hands were full of bloode, to redreſſe that fault hee biddeth them, ſeeke iudgement,
                     Iſa. 1.17. 
                     releeue the oppreſſed, iudge the fatherleſſe, and defende the widow. Saint Hierom diſcourſing vpon theſe wordes heere they weaue the ſpiders web, doth make an application of them to condemne corruption in iudgements:
                     Hier. in Iſ. 59. 
                     telas arancae texunt quibus muſcas & culices & paru
                           •
                         capiunt animalia, ad quas cùm forte quid ve nerit quaſiper aerem vanum tranſuolat. Lawes are made like vnto the webbes which ſpiders do weaue,
                      they take flies and gnats and ſuch other little creatures, but if any ſtrong thing do come, it breaketh through euen as through the

thinne ayre. But I take the ſpiders web in this place to ſignifie rather, the vanitie and vnprofitableneſſe of the malicious purpoſes of the heart, becauſe as great labour and curious art is vſed of the ſpider in framing the web, but when it is made a ſmall puffe of winde doth blow it away, euen ſo much cūning is practiſed of wicked worldlings to intrap their neighbours, and to inrich their owne howſes with the ſpoyle of others: but when they haue brought it to the hight of their deſires, then do they ſodainly conſume,
                     Pſal. 73.19 
                     periſh, and come to a fearefull ende, euen as a dreame when a man awaketh▪
                     Iob. 8.13. So doth Iob apply the like phraiſe of ſpeach, when hee ſayeth, The hope of the hypocrite ſhall periſh, his confidence is as the howſe of the ſpider, which leaneth vpon that dwelling that hath no foundation. The Pſalmiſt doth as it were weigh the delights and vanities of men, hee putteth man in the one end of the ballance, and vanitie in the other, & maketh his concluſion that man is more light than vanitie.
                     Pſal. 62.9. And as men with all their worldly deuiſes are light, ſo

                     are they ſoone blowne away:
                     Pſal. 103, 14. & 15. Ecc. 14.18. 2. Sam, 14.14. Pſal. 39.5.6. in which reſpect they are compared ſometimes, to duſt, ſomtimes to a bloſſome, ſomtime to greene leaues and thicke trees, ſometime to water ſincking into the groūd, ſomtime to a ſpanne long, as of a ſmall and ſhorte continuance, ſomtimes to a ſhadow, as ſoone vaniſhing.2. Cor. 5, 4. The Apoſtle Paul compareth our eſtate here to tents or pauillions which are ſone pitched and ſoone remooued. Gregorie Nazianzene in that Sermon which hee made vpon the death of his brother,Greg in Epitaph. ſuper frat, ſaith very well: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . We are here as a dreame that maketh no tariance, as a ghoſt or phantaſie which cānot be taken holde on, as the flying of a birde in the ayre, or of a ſhip vpon ye ſeas which paſſe & leaue no ſteppe behinde them, as duſt, as a vapour, as a morning dewe or as a flower which in a ſhorte time is ſprong and in a ſhort time doth fade away. What a curious webbe had Salomon wouen when hee could not onely in wiſedome diſcourſe of the nature of all trees, plants, beaſts, fowles, and

creeping things, but alſo for his pleaſure in dwelling heere, had built himſelfe gorgeous howſes,
                     1 Reg, 4, 33 planted vineyeards, framed goodly gardens and orchardes abroade, and within his pallace erected a goodly throne of eſtate made of Iuory, and ouerlayed with pure golde,
                     Eccle. 2.4. mounted to ſuch height that it had ſixe ſteppes going vp into it, on ech ſide of which ſteppes were ſet ſixe Lions, and Lyons alſo vpon the knoppes and pummells of the throne, the very footeſtoole whereof was made of golde:
                     2. Chron. 9 18. yet hee ſaith that when he had duely conſidered all the workes which his handes had wrought, and all the toyle and trauaile which heere hee had taken, hee founde all to be but vanitie and vexation of ſpirit,
                     Eccl, 2, 11 
                     and nothing (as hee ſaith) to bee of any profit vnder the ſun. Vanitie he calleth them, becauſe like ſpiders webbes, they were ſoone puft away, the vſe of them was very ſhorte and tranſitory: vexation of ſpirit, becauſe they were wrought with thoſe buſie troubles and cares, which like the flies of Aegypt
                     
                     
did depriue him of quiet reſt. Nothing he founde to bee of any ſound profit, becauſe in the infirmities and greefes eyther of bodie or minde he found no perfect comfort in them. The onely ſound comfort is in the teſtimonie of a good conſcience. Dauid ſaith,Pſal. 112.4. 
                     that vnto the righteous there ariſeth vp light in darkeneſſe. In the middeſt of all the miſeries and calamities of this life, the light, that is, the ſweete feeling of the mercie of God, doth neuer depart from them. Bleſſed (ſaith he) is the man that conſidereth the poore & needie,
                     pſa. 42, 1, 3 
                     the Lord wil deliuer him in the time of troble, the Lord will ſtrengthen him vpon the bed of ſorrow,
                     pro. 28.27. 
                     the Lord will turne his bedde in all his ſickneſſe. It is a moſt cōfortable promiſe of ye wiſdome of God, qu
                           •
                         dat pauperi non indigebit, he that is bountifull to the needie ſhall neuer himſelfe ſtand in neceſſitie.
                      As vertue & mercie do bring two moſt ſingular bleſſings in this life, to wit, the teſtimonie of a good conſcience, bringing a continuall comfort (according to that of the wiſe man,prou. 15.15 
                     A good conſcience is a continuall feaſt) and the prouidence of God ſo gratiouſly

protecting them, that euen the generation of the righteous ſhall be bleſſed, and they themſelues,
                     Pſal. 112.6 as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh, ſhall bee had in an euerlaſting remembrance, So on the other ſide, malicious practiſes and ſubtill deceipts, vſed as nettes one to inſnare another, do draw vpon the wicked two fearefull curſes; the one is, the ſtinge of a corrupt conſcience, when they are here depriued of hope and confidence,
                     Iob. 8.13. as Iob affirmeth like the howſe of the ſpider that hath no foundation,
                     Pro. 20, 17 
                     The breade of deceipt (ſaith the wiſeman) may for a time bee ſweet in the mouth, but in the ende the mouth is filled with grauell: The other is that thoſe things which they take in hand ſhal neither proſper in themſelues,
                     Pſal. 1.4. Zach. 5, 4. 
                     but they ſhall bee as the chaffe which the winde doth ſcatter away, neither ſhall they benefit their poſteritie, but as Zachary ſheweth the curſe of God ſhall enter in and deſtroy euen the ſtones and timber of their cruell habitations.
                     Hag. 1.4 The Prophet Haggei telleth vs that in the bags of the wicked there is a hole or breach,, by which hole hee meaneth the curſe of GOD,
                     
when that which is euill gotten is euill alſo waſted and conſumed, that as it neuer came from God, ſo doth it runne all to the Diuell.Heſiod. The very heathen Poet could giue this warninge,

                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        Ne malalucreris, mala lucra aegualia dāni
                              •
                           
                        
                        
                           Seeke not wrongfull gaines, bad gaine
                                 •
                               and loſſe are all one.
                        
                     
                  
                  The third Allegory here vſed by the Prophet, is drawne from the viper called here Ephgue, of whoſe nature Ariſtotle writeth,Lib. 1. de hiſt. animal. cap. 6. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , among ſerpents the viper bringeth forth (not egs as the reſt do but) liuing creatures (though bad) and her egs are firſt bred & hatched within herſelf. And therefore the viper may very fitly ſignifie & point out them which do cheriſh & nouriſh bad purpoſes in their hearts and with a premeditate hatching of their deuiſes do worke miſchiefe againſt their neighbours
                  
                  The Prophet Eſay in this place would haue vs to mortifie theſe firſt beginnings of ſinne, wherwith if ye heart be but once ſprinckled, it will bee as if a viper did preſently burſt out. The beginnings of

ſinne, do ſeame at the firſt ſmall, but they are dangerous and harmefull, they are like thoſe leſſer wedges which open the entrance to ye greater, like little theeues entering in at ſome hole or windowe to open ye doores to the greater, like a ſmall droppe of poyſon or a ſlender venomous ſtinge, whereof the one doth infect a whole veſſell, and the other deſtroy the whole bodie. If we would be free from iniurious dealings, we muſt firſt not let the ſunne goe downe vpon wrath, if wee would abſtaine from bloody oppreſſions,Eph. 4.26 
                     Heb. 13.11 we muſt firſt let our cōuerſation be without couetouſneſſe. If we would be (as we ought to be) obedient and deutifull ſubiects, we muſt firſt caſt away all malcontented affections and all enuying ye bleſſings of God beſtowed vpon our brethren.
                  The viper who by the bearing of his owne fruites is burſt a ſunder, doth very well repreſent all ſin: for ye ſting of death is ſin, and ye reward of ſinne is death:1 Cor. 15.56. Ro. 6.23. but eſpecially it doth moſt liuely paint out ye malicious enuie of ye heart, as Auguſtine doth ſhewe,Augu. ſer. 83. de tēp. 
                     ficut aerugoferrum ita inuidia illam ipſam animam in qua eſt interimit

& conſumit, ſicut aiunt viperas dilacerato & dirupto illo ipſo materno vtero in quo conceptae erāt naſci, ita & inuidiae natura illam ipſam animam a qua concepta eſt & conſumit & perdit. As the ruſt (which doth grow of the Iron) doth conſume the Iron, ſo enuie which breadeth in the heart doth conſume the heart: and as they ſay that Vipers do come out, breaking the bellies of their dammes in which they were conceiued, ſo the nature of enuie is to deſtroy that ſoule, in which it is foſtered.Chryſ. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 45.
                      In which reſpect Chriſoſtome doth compaire enuie to the wood worm which though it doe breede in the tymber, yet it doth conſume & waſte the tymber, as enuie ſpringing of the heart doth putrifie and vtterly eat vp the heart. As Salomon ſaith well, A ſound heart is the life of the bodie,
                     Pro. 14.30, 
                     but enuie is a rottenneſſe to the bones. The prophaine Poet could ſay.Hor.
                  
                  
                     Inuidia Siculi non inuenêre tyranni
                     
                        Tormentum maius, And another,
                     Iuſtius inuidia nihil eſt, quae portinus ipſum
                     Auctorem rodens extruciat miſerè.
                  
                  The biting of this viperous Enuie, as

                     they are dangerous,
                     Gen. 26.15. vnto others (which Iſaac felt when the Philiſtians enuying his riches did ſtop vp all his wels which his fathers ſeruants had digged in his father Abrahams time: and Dauid when Saul enuying the ſongs of the women,
                     1. Sam. 18.8 
                     that Saul had killed one thouſand, and Dauid ten thouſand, did therefore ſeeke the death of him, who by all meanes ſought his good: And Daniel when by the enuie of the malicious Iudges,Dan. 6.4. he was throwne into the denne of Lions: and all the ſaints of God haue and doe ſtill from time to time to their ſundrie loſſes verie often feele & ſuffer) So eſpecially the wounds therof are moſt deadly to the enuious perſons themſelues, when their hearts are therby made altogether carnall and altogether vnfit for any ſpirituall exerciſe.1. Cor. 3.3 
                     If there be enuying amongſt you (ſaith Paul) are ye not carnall? and Saint Iames ſaith, where there is in men bitter enuying their wiſedom is not from aboue,
                     Iam. 3.14. 
                     but is earthly diueliſh and ſenſuall.
                     Gregorie. 
                     They cannot withſtand and ſubdue the enemies in the field, that is, the outward temptations of ſinne and wickednes, when

they harbour within the wals the malicious traitour of an enuious heart.Beda. 
                     They cannot receiue any helpe or comfort by the plaſter or medicine of prayer, ſo long as the arrow head remaineth within the wound, ſo long as the cankered Iron of enuie doth feſter and empoyſon their affections. They cannot be true and liuely members of the miſticall bodie of Chriſt when they doe not with thankfull hearts reioyce at the weldoing and benefit of others,1. Cor. 12.26.26. as he Apoſtle doth teach vs, that If one member be had in honour all the reſt ſhould reioyce with it. Reioyce with them that reioyce and weep with them that weepe.
                     Rom. 12.15 Finally they can neuer in this life feele any perfect ſolace and comfort, when as the heathen Poet could ſee & ſay:

                        
                           Virg.Liuor tabificum malis venenum
                        Intactis vorat oſſibus medullas.
                        Cloſe conſumptiō enuie brings to badmē,
                        Not touching any bone it eats the marow.
                     
                  
                  Neither can they receiue any hope to be deliuered from the eternall tyranny of Sathan,Wiſd. 2.
                           •
                        4 when they find in themſelues that ſinne which is equal or rather worſe

                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE DANGER OF Diſcontentment, Intreated of in a Sermon preached at Crowhurſt in Surrey the ninth of Iuly 1598.
                  
                     By Simon Harward.
                  
                  Imprinted at London by William White. 1599.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT VVorshipfull M. Edmunde Bowyer Eſquire, and M. Iohn Bowyer his brother, mercie and peace be multiplyed in Chriſt Ieſus.
                  
                     
                        FOr as much as ſome yeeres ſince (Right Worſhipfull) it pleaſed you ſo courteouſly to accept that Sermon, which at your requeſt I then publiſhed, as concerning The fruites of our repentaunce towardes God; wherein Dauid Pſal. 1. doth place The chiefeſt bleſſedneſſe and felicitie of man: I haue thought good to adde thereunto this Sermon, which I made at the ſame Church (where you, and others, Iuſtices & Gentlemen

were aſſembled on the ninth of Iuly laſt paſt) vpon a part of the firſt Leſſon, by the order of our Church appoynted for that Sabboth, as concerning that duetifull contentment of minde which (as good ſubiects) we owe all to our Prince and Countrey; that as in the firſt we are put in remembrance of our duetie towards the Lord of Lords, and Prince of Princes: ſo in this other, as well we which vttered and heard it, as others into whoſe handes it ſhall come to be read, may be admoniſhed of thoſe loyall affections which we ought continually to beare to our mo
                        •
                      gracious Soueraigne, and our eſtabliſhed Common-wealth. As I am well aſſure
                        •
                      that theſe affections are, and haue alway
                        •
                      bin throughly ſetled in your faythful hartes; ſo I doubt not, but ye are alſo a fully deſirous, that by this ſlender labour and by all meanes poſsible, others may be allured & drawen to the like diſpoſition▪ Thus hoping that you will as louing
                        •
                     
                     
accept the reading and publiſhyng, as you haue already done the hearing, I commit this my ſhort Diſcourſe to your Worshippes, and you and it to the bleſſing of the Almightie. From Tondridge this .xij. of Iuly. 1598.
                  
                     
                        Your Worſhips aſſured in the Lord, Simon Harward.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           1. Sam. 12.19.
                        
                        VVe haue added a vvickedneſſe to all our other ſinnes, in asking vs a King.
                     
                  
                  
                     WHen Nachaſh the King of the Ammonites (Right Worſhipfull and beloued in Chriſt) had now brought the inhabitantes of Iabeſh Gilead into ſo greate diſtreſſe, that onely vpon ſeauen dayes reſpite they were to yeelde vp their Citie into the enemies handes vpon a very hard condition (which was, that euery one of the Citizens ſhould haue his right eye plucked out.) The people of Iſrael, partly becauſe they ſaw Samuel their Iudge to be olde and feeble, and partly, becauſe they percei
                     
                        •
                     ed the ſonnes of Samuel, Ioel and Abiah, though ruling in the place and ſtead of their Father; yet not walking in the wayes and 
                        •
                     teps of their Father, as diſpayring to haue

any ayde or deliuerance by their Iudges (in which ſtate of gouernment, God had fo
                        •
                      many yeeres ſo happily preſerued them
                        •
                      They come (with one conſent) to the
                        •
                      Iudge, and deſire that they may haue King.
                     1. Sam. 11.12 
                     Samuel when he had vſed ma
                        •
                      meanes, and many forcible argumentes 
                        〈◊〉
                      diſſwade them from this their malcontent
                        •
                      and diſpayring minde, and ſeeing euidently that no perſwaſions could take any pla
                     
                        •
                     n their wilfull hartes, doth now at the la
                        •
                      call vpon the Lord in the time of Wheat harueſt, for a ſodaine and miraculous thu
                        •
                     
                     der and ſtorme of raine, that thereby, as were by an other voyce of God, the peo
                        •
                      might be further certified, both how greuouſly they had offended, and how for th
                        •
                      offence the Lorde was highly, diſpleaſ
                        •
                      with them. When the Iſraelites ſaw 
                        •
                     
                     parantly that Samuel had no ſooner call vnto the Lord for that thunder and rain
                        •
                      but that preſently his requeſt was hea
                        •
                      and that in terrible manner, in the ſight a
                        •
                      hearing of the whole people, they were a
                        •
                     
                     niſhed: and being wonderfully ſtriken w
                        •
                      ſodaine feare, They deſire Samuel to p
                           •
                         to the Lord for them, that they die n
                           •
                        
                     
                     
adding theſe wordes (which now I haue read) as a reaſon of their petition, and a confesſion of their deſart: For (ſay they) we haue ſinned, beſides all our other ſinnes, in aſking vs a King. What this offence was which the Prophet doth ſeeke ſo many wayes to lay open vnto them, it ſhall the better appeare if we conſider theſe two eſpeciall obſeruations.
                  Firſt, the mightie prouidence, and infinite goodneſſe of God extended towardes that people, ſo many yeeres together, during the tyme of the gouernment of the Iudges. And ſecondly how ſmall & weake the occaſions were for the which they deſire to ſhake off that bleſſed gouernment: as alſo on the other ſide, what great and waighty cauſes they had to haue bin contented with that eſtate wherein God had ſo long and ſo miraculouſly protected them.
                  How long the people had liued, deliuered, defended, and gouerned by Iudges, S. Auguſtine doth record it in his. 18. booke de Ciuitate Dei, where he affirmeth,Aug. de Ciuitate dei, lib 18. Cap. 22: that at that time wherein Rome was buylt (which was by Romulus, in the time of Ioſias king of Iuda) the Hebrewes had bin ſeauen hundred

and eighteene yeeres in the land of Canaan; whereof (ſayth he) ſeauen & twentie appertaine to Ioſua, three hundred twentie and nine to the Iudges, and three hundred ſixtie and two to the Kinges: where he maketh three ſeuerall eſtates of Gouernment, vnder which it pleaſed God that his people Iſrael ſhould liue. The firſt was vnder Dukes, as in the dayes of Moſes and Ioſua. The ſecond was by Iudges, which differed from Ioſua, for he was appoynted a gouernour in the time of proſperitie, when Sehon the King of the Amorits and Ogge the King of Baſan were ouerthrowne and vanquiſhed: but the Iudges were firſt inaugurated and inueſted into their callinges in ſome great diſtreſſes, by the affecting of ſome notable deliuerance. Neither were they like the Dictators, aduaunced amongſt the Heathen; for they were choſen by the voyces of men, but theſe by the voyce of God him ſelfe. They were choſen out of men of greateſt accompt, and beſt furniſhed for the vndergoing of ſuch a charge: but theſe were rayſed vp miraculouſly out of the inferiour ſort, and loweſt degrees of people, and inabled extraordinarily

by the gyftes and preſence of the Almightie, as it is ſayd in the ſecond Chapter of the Iudges: The Lord rayſed vp Iudges,
                     
                     Iudg. 2.16.18. 
                     which deliuered them out of the handes of their oppreſſours: And when the Lord did raiſe vp any Iudges, the Lord (as it is ſayd there) was with that Iudge, and did deliuer the people out of the handes of the enemies all the dayes of that Iudges life.
                  
                  There were alſo many differences betwixt them and the Kinges which folowed. In the Kinges, ſucceſſion of blood tooke 
                        •
                     lace: in the Iudges it tooke no place. The Kings, had a greater authoritie in ru
                     
                        •
                     ing and commaunding then the Iudges would chalenge. The affayres hauing good ſucceſſe againſt the Madianites,
                     Iudg. 8.22. the people offered to Gedeon, that he ſhould Reigne 
                           •
                        s king ouer them: But Gedeon anſwe
                     
                        •
                     ed, Neither will I reigne ouer you, ney
                        
                           •
                        her ſhall my childe reigne ouer you; but 
                           •
                        he Lord ſhall ſtill raigne ouer you. The Kinges were ſome of them holy, and ſome picked:Heb. 11.32. Iudg. 2.18. the Iudges were all the faythfull 
                        •
                     eruantes of God, though ſome times er
                     
                        •
                     ng, yet alwayes ryſing againe by repen
                     
                        •
                     nce. The Kinges did ſome of them ſaue

the people from inuaſions, and ſome no
                        •
                      but the Iudges did euer deliuer them fro
                        •
                      the hands of their oppreſſours: And the
                        •
                     
                     fore they haue the Hebrewe name Moſ
                           •
                         grim, Sauiours, giuen vnto them, as in 
                        〈◊〉
                      thirde Chapter of the Iudges it is ſayd Othoniel,
                     Iud 3.9. that the Lord did ſtirre vp
                           •
                         Sauiour vnto the children of Iſrael. A
                        •
                      in the ninth of Nehemias,
                     Nehe 9.27. where there mention made of the former mercies 
                        〈◊〉
                      God during the time of the Iudges: i
                        •
                      added, that God of his mercie gaue 
                           〈◊〉
                         people Sauiours, who ſaued them out the handes of their aduerſaries. Some adde hereunto, that the Iudges more t
                        •
                      any other, were the moſt euident types 
                        〈◊〉
                      figures of that deliuerance which we h
                        •
                      by Chriſt, from the tyranie of ſinne, de
                        •
                      and Sathan.
                  A. fourth kinde of gouernement, v
                        •
                      which the people afterwarde liued, is me
                        •
                     
                     tioned by Ioſephus in the .xx. chapter of Antiquities,
                     Ioſeph Antiq. lib. 20. Cap. penult 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      After the death of theſe (to wit) Herod Archelaus their gouernment was Ar
                           •
                        
                        cratie, wherin the chiefe authority of the

                     
                        •
                     on was committed to the High-prieſtes.Ioſeph Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 10. Of that gouernment he maketh mention 
                        •
                     efore, when he declareth how Gabinius 
                     
                        •
                     ad diuided the Kingdome into fiue parts; 
                        •
                     d ordeyned fiue Counſayles, called 
                        
                           •
                        ynedri
                           •
                        : he ſheweth what enſued of it, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      They altering the gouernment, lyued in Ariſtocratie. They had then, and long be
                     
                        •
                     ore, three ſeuerall orders of their coun
                     
                        •
                     yles: one was an authoritie geuen to 
                        •
                     ree choſen Men, who ſhould decide all 
                        •
                     auſes in money matters. The ſecond was 
                        〈◊〉
                      councell of twentie three Iudges: they 
                        •
                     ere to heare the cauſes of lyfe and death. The thirde was a councell of ſeauentie 
                        •
                     e: their office was to determine of moſt 
                        •
                     aightie matters, of the high Prieſthood, 
                        •
                     r of a whole Tribe, or of a falſe Prophet. Concerning the excellencie of euery one of 
                        •
                     eſe foure gouernmentes, and which of 
                        •
                     em ought to haue the preheminence to be moſt to be deſired amongſt Chriſtians, I 
                        •
                     olde with Caluin, 
                           Ʋaldè otioſum est,
                     
                     Caluin inſtitut. lib. 4 cap. 20. ſect. 8. 
                     quis 
                           •
                        tiſſimus ſit politiae ſtatus a priuatis hominibus 
                           •
                        iſputari, quibus de conſtituenda aliqua re
                        
                           •
                        ublica deliberare non licet. It is a very idle

thing, that about the beſt eſtate of gouernment, a diſputation ſhould be had among priuate men, who haue no authority to co
                        •
                     
                     ſult of ye ordering of any Common-weal
                        •
                      It is a moſt ſingular token of the migh
                        •
                      power and prouidence of God, that ſo 
                        •
                     
                     nie ſeuerall Nations ouer the face of 
                        〈◊〉
                      whole worlde, are vpholden and maynt
                        •
                     
                     ned by ſo many ſeuerall ſortes of gouernmentes, That Quemadmodum non niſi 
                           〈◊〉
                         aequali temperatura elementa inter ſe cohaere ita hae regiones ſua quadam inaequalitate 
                           〈◊〉
                         timè continentur: As in bodily eſſences, t
                              •
                            foure elementes do cleaue togither by v
                              •
                            equall temperaturs, ſo as it were by ac
                              •
                           
                           taine inequalitie, all theſe ſeuerall co
                              •
                           
                           tries are holden togither:
                      But for eu
                        •
                      particuler Nation, he very well require
                        •
                      that 
                        Ʋoluntas Domini ſatisfaciat: The w
                              •
                            of God ought to ſuffice euery man. Si
                           •
                         
                        Ʋiſum eſt reges, regnis praeficere, liberis ciui
                           •
                         tibus ſenatus aut decuriones, quoſcunque lo
                           •
                         praefecerit in quibus degimus, nostrū est ijs 
                           〈◊〉
                         morigeros ac obedientes praeſtare: Wheth
                              •
                            it pleaſe God to place Kinges ouer kin
                              •
                           
                           domes; or to ſet Senatours, Counſailou
                              •
                            and Aldermen, ouer free Cities, whom 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           
euer the Lord ſhall eſtabliſh in thoſe places wherein we liue, we ought to yeelde ſubmisſion and obedience to them.
                     
                  
                  Some do highly aduaunce the gouernment of many, becauſe many are not ſo 
                        •
                     oone corrupted as one may be; euen as a great quantitie of water will not ſo ſoone 
                        •
                     utrifie, as will a ſmall portion: But theſe muſt on the other ſide conſider, that it is a great deale more hard to finde many good, 
                        •
                     hen one: and it is moſt likely, that ſuch a 
                        •
                     ne will prooue beſt, whom the Nobilitie 
                        •
                     f Royall blood, and Princely enſamples of 
                        •
                     redeceſſours, do inuite vnto vertue. They 
                        •
                     eſt much vpon the libertie which ought to 
                        •
                     e in man, and whereunto (they ſay) man is 
                        •
                     orne: But we ſee, that (by nature) as ſome
                     
                        •
                     re framed fit to commaund, ſo others are made fit to obey. It is an excellent kinde 
                        •
                     f libertie, when men being ſet free from 
                        •
                     he thraldome of their owne luſtes, do vn
                     
                        •
                     er the rule of ſuperiours, obey godly and 
                        •
                     olſome lawes.Tul. parad. penult. As the Oratour doth well 
                        •
                     eſcribe a Free-man, Qui legibus non prop
                        
                           •
                        r metum paret, ſed eas ſequitur at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         colit quia 
                           •
                        d ſalutare maxime eſſe iudicat, Which doth 
                              •
                           ot obey the Lawes for feare, but doth

follow them and imbrace them, becauſe he doth iudge it a thing holſome and neceſſarie for the ſafegarde of man.
                      For better it is to dwell where nothing is lawfull, then to dwell where all thinges are lawful.Iudg. 2.16. The Iudges which were approoued in a kinde of Ariſtocratie,
                     Pſal. 21.3. are ſayd to be rayſed vp of God. So alſo the ſame is ſayd in other places of Kinges.Prou. 8.15. The wiſedome of God doth pronounce it: By mee Kinges doe reigne:
                     Dan. 2 21. 
                     and Princes decree iuſtice Daniel ſayth, that the Lord doth change times & ſeaſons:
                     Iere. 27.6. 
                     he taketh away Kings and ſetteth vp Kinges. Nabuchadnezzar in reſpect of his kingdome, is called The Seruant of God: and a iudgement i
                        •
                      threatned againſt all people which will no
                        •
                      ſubmit their necke vnder his yoke.Rom. 13.1. 
                     The
                           •
                         is no power, but of God: and whoſoeuer doth reſiſt power, doth reſiſt the ord
                           •
                        
                        nance of God. Of all powers, the authoritie of the King (who is named by th
                        •
                      Apoſtle Peter ſuch a chiefe or ſupream power as for the Lordes ſake,
                     1. Pet. 2.13. is to 
                        〈◊〉
                      obeyed) doth ſeeme firſt to be moſt agreeable to nature,Hieron. epiſt. 4. ad Ruſticum. as S. Ierome doth witneſſe
                        •
                      his .4. Epiſtle: In apibus principes ſunt, gru
                           •
                        
                        
vnam ſequuntur ordine literato, Imperator vnus, Iudex vnus prouinciae, in naui vnus gubernator, in domo vnus dominus, in quamuis grandi exercitu vnius ſignum expectatur. Bees haue their chiefe gouernor. The Cranes do follow one in exquiſite order. There is one chiefe commaunder, one chiefe Iudge of a Prouince, one gouernour of all in the Shippe, one Maiſter in a houſe: In an armie be it neuer ſo great, the enſigne of one is eſpecially regarded and attended on.
                      In the body of man, though the limmes and partes be many, yet they all obey one head.
                  Secondly, moſt fit for the cutting off of ſeditions and rebellions: and therefore the Romains in all their extreameſt dangers had recourſe vnto this Tanquam ad anchoram ſacram, as to their ſhoote anchor, as to their laſt & beſt refuge, as Liuy witneſſeth,Liu. lib. 6. 
                     Trepidi patres ad ſummum auxilium decurrunt, dictatorem dici placet, The fearefull Senators did flie to their chiefeſt ſuccour,
                      (which was, to chooſe out one to haue ſupreame aucthoritie) whom it pleaſed them to cal a Dictator.
                     
                     Liu. lib. 22. And when Hannibal preſſed the Romains Ad dictatorem dicendum

remedium iamdiu deſideratū ciuitas confugit, The Citie went to the chooſing and pronouncing of the Dictator,
                     
                     Liu. lib. 6. 
                     which was the remedie they long expected: Becauſe, as in an other place he writeth, Dictatoris edictum pro numine ſemper obſeruatum eſt, The commaundement and proclamation of the Dictator, was eſteemed to be as the voyce of God:
                      there was no appealing from him.Liu lib. 2. 
                     Agedum dictatorem à quo prou
                           •
                        
                        catio non eſt creemus: Come
                      (ſayd the Conſull Appius) let vs make a Dictator,
                     
                     Liu. lib. 6. 
                     from whom it ſhall not be lawfull for any man to appeale. Tantus erat Dictatoris terror apud hoſtes vt eo creato ſtatim à moenibus diſceſserint. So great was the terrour of the Dictator, euen amongſt the enemies, that as ſone as he was created, they raiſed their ſiege and departed. Wherby appeareth playnely, that the ancient Romains as wel in warre as in peace, founde this as a ſure anchor holde againſt all ſeditions and dangers, to enioy one, ſuch a Magiſtrate, as from whom there ſhould be no appeale, and whoſe authoritie ſhould poſſeſſe, as it were, the roome of God vpon the earth. The Carians were once a wealthy and flouriſhing

people: but by ſeditions, which came by the hauing of many heads & gouernours, they were brought to ruine and vtter deſolation: wherevpon there aroſe a prouerbe,

                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        
                           Multi duces diſperdidere Cariam,
                           Homer. 
                                 •
                              .
                        
                        Too many Guydes vndid the countey Caria.
                     
                  
                  When many Souldiers were mutinous, prudent Vlyſſes did repreſſe them with theſe wordes,

                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        
                           Multos imperitare malum eſt, rex vnicus eſto.
                        
                        Tis not good too many to rule,
                        let onely be one King.
                     
Which verſe (as Aemilius Probus doth teſtifie) Dion did alſo vſe when Heraclides began his faction.
                  Thirdly, the gouernement of one Monarch doth ſeeme to reſemble moſt liuely the image of Gods power & maieſtie: For as in the firmament, the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, do as it were repreſent ſome image of the glory of the Eternall: So the rule of Monarches, in their ſeuerall kingdomes vpon earth, doth call to our conſiderations the gouernment and high maieſtie

of the omnipotent God. And moſt certainly ac this time of the alteration of the eſtate of the Iewiſh common-wealth, the wil and purpoſe of God is in his ſeruant king Dauid,
                     Pſal. 22, 3. Pſal. 2, 6. to erect an Image & type of the kingdome of Chriſt. But here (may ſome ſay) If the will of God were now in Dauid and his poſteritie, to ſet foorth a figure of the kingdom of Chriſt, how can the Iſraelites be ſaid to ſinne ſo great a ſinne, in aſking a king, when they aſked onely that, which was determined in the purpoſe of God: Why doeth the Lorde ſo puniſh their requeſt, in ſending them ſo wicked a king as was Saul,
                     1. Sam. 13 11 1. Sam. 15, 9. who beſides his often and wilfull diſobedience againſt the cōmandement of God, did moſt cruelly murder the prieſts of God,1 Sam. 22, 18. cauſing to bee ſlaine at one time foureſcore and fiue, which ware the linnen Ephod, if in deſiring a king, their will did concurre with the will of God? Yee are heere to obſerue, that the Iſraelites had no reſpect to the purpoſe of God, but onely they ſhewed foorth the fruites of deſpairing and malcontented affections. In the ſpoile of the goods of Iob,
                     Iob. 1 15, 17, 21. the Caldeans and Sabeans had no regarde to the will and purpoſe

of God, which was moſt iuſt and holy to examine ſharply one of his ſeruants, and to make him a ſchoolemaſter of patience to all poſteritie: their deſire was onely iniuriouſly to enrich themſelues with the ſpoyle of Iob. In the death of our ſauiour Chriſt, the high Prieſtes, Scribes, & Phariſes had no reſpect to the will of God,Act. 2.23. which was moſt mercifull and iuſt, by that all ſufficient raunſome for ſinne, to ſaue all beleeuers: their intent was onely to bee reuenged of him, whom they hated with deadly malice. Euen ſo, theſe Iſraelites haue no deſire here to obey the ſecret decree of God, in the kingdome of Dauid and of his ofſpring, to ſet out a reſemblance of the kingdome of Chriſt, but onely their purpoſe is, with a deſperat diſcontentment to ſhake off the gouernment of their good iudge Samuel, contrary to the reuealed wil of God, which had before decreed,Iud. 2.18. that Whoſoeuer was approued to be raiſed vp of God for their deliuerer, he ſhould afterward iudge Iſrael all the dayes of his life. And therefore they worthily receiue a puniſhment of their obſtinate diſobedience againſt the expreſſe commandement of God. And yet notwithſtanding

this hiſtorie doeth ſhew vs that the appointment of God was performed in Samuel,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         7.14. who is ſaid, To haue iudged Iſrael all the dayes of his life. Seuen and twentie yeeres and ſeuen moneths hee had iudged,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         2. when Saul beganne to reigne. Two yeeres was Saul king: for although he liued aboue twelue yeeres after that hee was elected king, yet foraſmuch as in the ſecond yeere hee was denounced to bee reiected of God,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         1, 7. his kingdome is named to be but of two yeres in continuance. And during that time alſo, ye authoritie of Samuel is not aboliſhed, for euen in theſe affaires againſt Nachaſh the Ammonite, a puniſhment was in a publique Proclamation threatened againſt euery one which would not followe Saul and Samuel,
                     Act. 13.21. although in the Actes of the Apoſtles, becauſe the kingdome is the more excellent ſtate of gouernment, the whole fourtie yeeres be attributed to Saul, as the greater power and maieſtie, ſwallowing vp the leſſe. As concerning the miraculous prouidence of God extended towardes the Iſraelites during the time that Samuel was their Iudge, there neede no further teſtimonies, but that onely place in

the ſeuenth chapter of this booke,1. Sam. 7, 13. wher it is ſayd, That the hand of the Lord was againſt the Philiſtines all the dayes of Samuel. The Philiſtines were the deadlieſt and fierceſt enemies that euer moleſted the Iſraelits. Seeing then that God ouerthrew their cruelleſt & mightieſt enemies, & that not once or twice, but euen al the dayes of Samuel: what a wretched ingratitude was this, that becauſe a few aduerſaries had gotten aduantage againſt one of their Cities, they ſhould therfor vnthankfully ſhake off that happie gouernment, vnder which God had graunted them ſo many triumphant victories? But what were the cauſes of this their vnkind & froward deſire of alteration? Firſt they would be like to other nations rounde about them, as they ſay:1. Sam. 8, 5.20. 
                     Make vs a King to gouerne vs, like all other nations. And afterward againe: We will be like all other Countries, a King ſhall iudge vs, and goe out before vs, and fight our battayles. Forraine gouernementes, although they be in them ſelues moſt excellent (as no doubt thoſe were which were eſtabliſhed vnder kings) are not to be drawen as enſamples to other nations

wherein another eſtate of gouernment hath alreadie taken place. Wee cannot affirme that becauſe this or that is nowe done in the common wealth of Geneua,
                     Ioh. 12, 42. or becauſe this or that was once done in the Elderſhips and Councels of the Iewes, therefore the ſame ought to bee done in other ſeniories and aſſemblies where there is not that Ius gladij, that ciuill authoritie & power, which we ſee plainly was in them. Their Synagogues had the ordering of ciuill puniſhments,Math. 10, 17. to condemne to bee ſcourged, thoſe whom they iudged to offend:Math. 26, 47, 57. they could ſend out officers with ſwords and ſtaues to apprehend Chriſt, they could examine witneſſes againſt him, and binde him and deliuer him to Pilate. And whereas when Pilate bade them take him and iudge him after their owne lawe:Ioh. 18, 31. they anſwered, That it was not lawfull for them to put any man to death. Chryſoſtome doeth one way expound it, that it may well bee meant of that kinde of death, which (to aggrauate the ſhame) they ſought eſpecially to haue executed on Chriſt. For otherwiſe they had authoritie to ſtone to death, as it may ſeeme that Steuen was condemned by them, becauſe

as the lawe was, that the witneſſes ſhould caſt the firſt ſtone,
                     Deut. 17, 7. ſo the witneſſes in the ſtoning of Stephen,
                     Act. 7, 58. doe orderly lay downe their clothes at the feete of Saul. In the Chapter following, their power doth extend to draw out men,
                     Act. 8, 3. 
                     women and children, and to thruſt them into priſon: which authoritie Saul could put in execution at Damaſcus,
                     Act. 9, 1. much more at the citie Hieruſalem.
                  
                  
                     Tertullus their Oratour doeth acknowledge this before the gouernor Faelix when he ſayth of Paul, We tooke him,
                     Act. 24.6. 
                     & would haue iudged him according to our law, but that the chiefe captaine Lyſias came vpon vs, and with great violence tooke him out of our handes.
                  
                  The enſamples of thoſe which are chiefe gouernors in Ariſtocratie, ought not to be drawen vnto them which are ſubiects vnder a Monarchie. There is in euery dominion a ſupreame power, which the Greeks do cal call 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      the Latines Maieſtatem, the Italians Signoria, and we in England do name it by the French word Soueraintie. Whereſoeuer that chiefe authoritie doth remayne, whether it be in one

or in many, from thence muſt be deriued the ordering of all thinges, both in Church and Common-wealth.
                  
                     1. Sam. 8.20Theſe Iſraelites here deſire that they might haue a King to goe before them, & to fight their battayles. Their requeſt had not diſpleaſed God, had there not been before an other forme of gouernment eſtabliſhed amongſt them: for otherwiſe of a Monarchie,Aug. contra Faſtum Manichaeum lib. 22 cap. 75. that may well be ſayd which S. Auguſtine doth write againſt Fauſtus the Manichee, Ordo ille naturalis mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poſcit vt ſuſcipiendi belli auctoritas at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            conſilium ſit penes principem, exequondi autem iuſsa bellica miniſterium milites debeant paci ſaluti
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            communi. The naturall order moſt fit for the peace of mankind, doth require this; that the authoritie and counſell of taking Warre in hand, be in the power of the Prince: and the dutie of executing the commaundementes of Warre, is a thing that the Souldiers doe owe, for the maynteinance of the peace of the Common-wealth. And a litle after, 
                        Ʋir iustus ſi forte ſub rege etiam ſacrilego militet, rectè poſsit illo iubente bellare, ciuicae pacis ordinem ſeruans, oui quod iubetur vel non eſse

contra dei praeceptum certum eſt, vel vtrum ſit certum non eſt, ita vt fortaſſe reum regem faciat iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem militem oſtendat ordo ſeruiendi. A iuſt man, if he be a Souldier vnder his King being wicked, may at his commandement fight, keeping the order of ciuill peace with his fellow ſubiectes, when that which is commaunded is not directly againſt the word of God: or whether it be or no, it is not certainely knowne; ſo that perhappes a ſinne in commaunding may make the king guyltie, and yet the order of obeying may declare the Souldier innocent.
                     
                     Num. 13, 3. Ioſu. 11. Ioſu. 6, 6. When God ruled his people by Moſes and Ioſua, they as Dukes and Magiſtrates, diſpoſed all thinges both in warre and peace, in ordering both Church & Common-wealth, in cauſing the people to be circumciſed, in buylding Aulters, and euery way gouerning the charge committed to them. When afterwarde he rayſed vp Iudges, he endued them not onely with warlike vertue, but that they might better alſo reforme abuſes in the Church,Iudg. 4, 4. he gaue ſometimes to the Women, as vnto Debora:
                     1. Sam. 3, 20 ſometimes to Men, as vnto Samuel, the ſpirit of prophecying.

When after, he eſtabliſhed Kinges, the Scriptures do plentifully declare vnto vs what ſupremacie was graunted to them ouer all perſons,1. Chro. 13. 1. Chro. 23, 4. and in all cauſes, as well eccleſiaſticall as ciuill. Dauid armed his people with the authoritie of the ſworde, againſt all their publike enemies: he cauſed the Arke to be remooued from a priuate mans houſe: he placed the orders of the Prieſtes and Leuites,
                     Pſal. 132.5. and had a principall care to finde out a ſeate for the Lordes ſeruice, an habitation for the mightie God of Iacob. Salomon depoſed the wicked Prieſt Abiathar, and placed Sadoc a better in his roome.1. Reg. 2.35. 2. Chro. 8, 14. He eſtabliſhed the orders of the Leuites and other officers: and (leaſt any man ſhoulde thinke that Salomon did herein more then he might) it is ſaid by expreſſe wordes that this his charge of the Church was the commaundement of Dauid the man of God. Aſia armed his people againſt the enemies of Gods Church,2. Chro 14. 2. Chro 15.13, 16. 2. Chro. 20.3. he made a decree, that they ſhould be ſlaine which would not ſeek and worſhip the Lord God of Iſrael, hee depoſed Maacha from her regencie, becauſe of her idolatrie. Iehoſaphat ordered the warres of the houſe of

                     Iuda: he ſent foorth Eliſham and Iehoram Prieſts to inſtruct the people:2. Chro. 17, 8. 2. Chro. 19.8. 2. Chro. 29.1. 2. Chro. 31.4. he placed in authority the Prieſts and chiefe nobles for the iudgement of the cauſe of the Lord. Ezechias by lawfull warre withſtood Sennacheribs vnlawfull oppreſſions. He repayred the temple, rooted out idolatrie, and appointed the courſes of the Prieſts and Leuites. Ioſias tooke order for the pulling downe of idolatrie,2. Reg. 23.4 and the execution of the prieſts of Baal. Afterward when the Romanes had conquered Iurie, for as much as there is no power but of God, S. Peter doth alſo to them attribute this ſupremacie,1. Pet. 2 13. Rom. 13, 4. calling the king a chiefe and ſupreme gouernour: and ſhewing alſo what manner of ſupremacie he hath: to wit, ſuch a chiefe power as doeth extend it ſelfe generally to the puniſhment of euill doers, and to the praiſe of them that doe well. As largely then as goeth good or euill, that is, through the obſeruation and breach of euery commaundement of either of the two tables, & throughout all nations that can bee either in the Church or common wealth: ſo farre goeth the ſupremacie of Princes in their dominions, to ſhewe foorth their iuſtice in puniſhing,

their mercie in fauouring, and the
                        •
                      loue in rewarding. Saint Paul ſpeake
                        •
                      as well of the Romane Emperours of h
                        •
                      time,Rom. 3, 4. as alſo of all other higher power which are to enſue in any other age 
                        〈◊〉
                      place, that they beare not the ſworde f
                        •
                      nought, but are the miniſters of God, take vengeance of euill doers.
                  
                     1. Sam. 8, 3,The ſecond cauſe why theſe people deſire to ſhake off the gouernment of Samuel was,1. Sam. 2, 3, 4. becauſe his ſonnes ruling in his ſtee
                        •
                      did receiue bribes, and peruert iudgement Samuel doeth in this twelfth Chapter e
                        •
                      poſtulate this matter at large with them & is cleared ſufficiently in the conſcience, teſtimonie of them all. The iniquiti
                        •
                      which his ſonnes committed,1. Sam. 8, 2. were not b
                        •
                     
                     cauſe he did not preſcribe good wayes vn
                        •
                      them, but becauſe they did not walke in t
                        •
                      wayes and ſteps of their father. If a m
                        •
                      haue but a ſmall familie, he ſhall yet be ab
                        •
                     
                     ſed by ſome: What then muſt wee think of thoſe higher powers, who haue ſo ma
                        •
                      vnder officers in ſo infinite places, de
                        •
                     
                     uing their authoritie from them:1. Reg 2, 22 
                     Salom
                           •
                        
                      when hee commaunded Ioab to bee put death for thoſe wilfull murders which h
                        •
                     
                     
had before committed, ſaith, that he did thē 
                     Patre ſuo Dauide inſcio, His father Dauid
not knowing of it.
                      So herein Samuel his children, and in all ages vnder Chriſtian Princes, many thinges are done by inferiour Magiſtrates, which come not to the knowledge of ſuperiour powers, and whereof no fault is to be imputed to them, ſeeing the offences proceede not of want of good and holſome lawes: but, for that there is not due obedience yeelded vnto them.
                  The thirde cauſe,1. Sam. 8, 1. why they ſo greedily gape for alteration, was, becauſe they diſtruſted in the power and prouidence of God. They thought that the weakeneſſe of aged Samuel, was not ſufficient to deliuer them from the oppreſſion of Nachaſh the Ammonite. The puniſhment which God layde vpon their diſtruſtfull forefathers, might haue been a ſufficient warning to them,Num. 13, 3. to haue ſhewed them the greeuouſneſſe and horror of this ſinne. When Moſes had ſent of euery Tribe one, to view the land of Canaan (amongſt whom, were Ioſua, of the tribe of Ephraim; and Caleb, of the tribe of Iuda:) at their returne, many

of them gaue great reportes of the power and ſtrength of the Canaanites,
                     Nū. 13, 34. that they were mightie men,Num. 14.2, 9. like Giants, and the ſonnes of Enachim: and that the Iſraelites were but as Graſhoppers in reſpect of them. The people began by and by to murmure & diſpayre, and to prepare a returne into Aegypt. Ioſua
                      and Caleb did what they could to encourage the people, bidding them not to feare,Pſal. 78, 18. for (ſay they) they are but bread for vs: the Shield is departed from them: the Lord is on our ſide: But the Iſraelites were ſo farre from receiuing comfort, that they cried out one to an other, to fling ſtones agaynſt their comforters. This diſtruſting minde did ſo highly diſpleaſe God,Num. 26.64. that they were cut off and deſtroyed with many feareful plagues, ſo that of aboue ſixe hundred thouſande of them, there came but two into the land of Promiſe. The Lord had let that people ſee by ſundry enſamples, that there is no power ſo ſmall, but that hee is able ſufficiently to ſtrengthen it againſt the enemies of his trueth. Abraham hauing but three hundred and eighteene men,Gen. 14, 14 ouerthrewe the power of fiue Kings. Samſon with a lawe

bone ſlew a thouſand. Siſera the captaine of the hoſte of Iabin king of Canaan,
                     Iudg. 15, 15. was of great ſtrength, he had .900. charets of yron,Iudg 4, 13. & 22. yet was he ſlaine at the laſt by the hands of a ſilly woman. And to Samuel,
                     1. Sam. 7, 13. though he were old, yet ye Lord gaue him power to his dying day, to ſubdue and keepe vnder the haughty Philiſtines. By this cōtinual experience of ye power of God, they might haue euidently ſeene, that there is no ſtrength ſo feeble, but God can plentifully inable it, for the fighting of the Lordes battayles: and thereupon they ſhould haue gathered courage and comfort, & not with ſuch wretchleſſe vnthankfulneſſe, ſtarted backe from the lyuing God. What a moſt ingratefull part was this,1. Sam. 3, 20 when Samuel had ſo long time propounded vnto them the heauenly trueth of God, and for the ſpace of aboue .xxvii. yeeres, as a moſt carefull Magiſtrate defended them from all inuaſions & oppreſſions, now in olde age to forſake him, & as weery of his gouernment, to deſire a King to be placed ouer them? Theſe Iſraelites do deale with Samuel, as afterward the ſubiectes of Dauid did with their king, at the time of the rebellion of Abſolom. Dauid had then

reigned .xxx. yeeres, & therefore was about lx. yeeres of age (for he was about .xxx. yeeres olde at the death of Saul.
                     Pſal. 3.1.) How his people did cary them ſelues in Abſoloms conſpiracie, he declareth him ſelfe in his .3. Pſalme, wherein he complaineth that in that his time of neede, he found many ſo to become his enemies, that in moſt deſpitefull maner they obiected vnto him, that there was no helpe for him in his God. But theſe vnfaythful Subiectes, were like vnto the Swallowes which cary with vs in the Spring and Sommer, but in the colde of Winter doe wholly forſake vs: they were like the Doues, which ſit vpon the houſe in fayre weather: but if once a ſtorme do come, they are preſently gone: or rather they were like that curriſh kind of lazy Dogges, that will fawne vpon their maiſters by the fiers ſide, but if they ſee him goe abrode in foule weather, they are content to let him goe a ſone: or like vnto curſed Vipers, ſeeing that as much as in them lyed, they ſought to rent the bowels of him of whom next vnder God they had their beeing, their ſtrength, & wealth, and whatſoeuer they poſſeſſed. The ſinne of many in theſe our dayes, is by manie

degrees more haynous and deteſtable, then was the offence of the Iſraelites in the dayes either of Dauid or of Samuel. They deſired an exchange of their gouernour: but yet they deſired to haue a King erected out of the middeſt of their brethren, according to the law in Deutronomie.
                     Deut. 17.15. 
                     Out of thy brethren ſhalt thou appoynt thy ſelfe a King: thou mayſt not ſet ouer thee a ſtranger, which is not thy brother. How greeuouſly then do they offende, which deſire to haue brought in vpon their Prince a forraine power, ye power of a Prieſt of Rome? How horrible is their ſinne (if there be any ſuch monſter in nature) that do gape for the inuaſion of a forreine Prince, to weaken or abrogate that authoritie, which right, and blood, and the law, hath placed ouer them? What meaſure we ſhould looke for of Strangers, the dealinges of the Spaniards in the Low-countries may be a ſufficient warning vnto vs. Their Nobles haue been murdered, their auncient inhabitants ſpoyled, or dryuen to flie their natiue ſoyle. Their famous and flouriſhyng Cities ſo oppreſſed and diſpeopled, that the graſſe doth grow in thoſe ſtreetes, which haue bin heretofore

by wealthy Citizens and Marchants ſo notably frequented and repleniſhed. Naples may likewiſe ſerue for inſtruction herein: where, when the Spaniards preuayled, they were preſently moſt miſerably plagued with many new taxes & tributes, whereof before, they neuer had mention. No man could haue a ſire, but he muſt firſt pay ſixe ſhyllinges for the chimney: none permitted to eate ſundry kindes of meates, but firſt he muſt fine for them: none to kill a Fowle, but firſt ſticke vp a fether to giue warning for the Impoſt: ſo that the farmer of the Butcherie & Poultrie, receiued dayly the ſumme of three hundred Duckets. None fared the better becauſe he bare the name of a Catholick. Religion was not the thing which the hungry Souldiers reſpected: Proteſtant or Papiſt, if he were rich, and had a ſleece, all was one.
                  
                     1. Sā. 8, 3.11.The Iſraelites found them ſelues greeued, that Samuels, children receiued ſome thinges of them: But by Samuels anſwere it may appeare, that the receiptes of his ſonnes, were nothing to thoſe infinite taxes & oppreſſions which a Tyrant ſhould bring vpon them. It was well ſayd of the Poet,

                        
                        Temporibus diris igitur iuſsu
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            Neronis
                        Longinū, & magnos Senecae praediuitis hor
                              •
                           s,Iuuenal. ſatyr. 10.
                        
                        clauſit et egregias Lateranorum obſidet aedes tota cohors. &c.
                        
                           In bloody times, and in rage of Nero the tyrant
                        
                        
                           
                              Longinus great ſubſtance, gardens of Seneca, buildinges
                        
                        
                           of Laterans ſerue for fit ſpoylinges for the men armed.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Quintus Aurilius, when he (hauing a faire houſe in Alba) was drawen to execution in the tyrannie of Sylla, cryed out, O houſe at Alba, thou waſt the cauſe of my death! In ciuill vprores, and in inuaſions of ſtrangers, no man can chalenge any priuiledge for his integritie or profeſſion. Be they Catholiques in name (as are now the Romaniſtes) or Catholiques in deede (as are true faythful Chriſtians) be they Miniſters, be they Marchants, be they Recuſants, be they Reformers, if they be wealthy, & haue any thing to looſe, all is one. The moſt fearefull puniſhment of all, is that which Samuel doth warne them off, that when the Lord ſhal lay oppreſſion and bondage vpon them, as a plague for their diſcontentment, they ſhall cry vnto the Lord for helpe, and not be heard:1. Sam. 8.18. 
                     Ye ſhall cry out (ſayth he) at that day, becauſe of the King which you haue choſen to your ſelues, and the Lord

at that day will not hearken vnto you. There are three eſpeciall dueties required in all good Subiectes in any eſtabliſhed Common-wealth, whereof euery one is wanting in theſe inconſtant Iſraelites. The firſt is in hart to be loyall to the ſupreame Gouernour.Eccl. 10.20. 
                     Curſe not the King (ſayth the Wiſe man) no not in thy hart, leaſt the birdes of the ayre doe cary the voyce, and the fethered fowles bewray thee. Whatſoeuer is amiſſe in ſuperiour powers, ſeeing that (as Salomon witneſſeth) The hart of the King is in the hand of the Lord:
                     Pro. 21.1. it is the part of vs that are inferiors, to pray to God to renew and guyde their hartes with his principal ſpirit: but in the meane time, in no caſe, either to take vp or moue againſt them, or once in hart to wiſh for the ſubuertion of their eſtate. When Nero, Caligula, or ſuch Heathen tyrantes poſſeſſed the Scepter and Empire, yet did the Apoſtles of Chriſt Exhort euery ſoule to be ſubiect to them:
                     Rom. 3.1. 2. Tim. 2.2. 
                     and all prayers and ſupplications to be made to God for them.
                     Baruch. 1.11 
                     Pray for the life of Nabuchadnezzar king of Babilon, and for Baltaſar his ſonne, that their dayes vpon earth may be as the dayes of heauen,

that ye may long do them ſeruice, and finde fauour in their ſight.
                  
                  The ſecond duetie of a faythful Subiect, is in the ordering of his life, to abandon ſinne and iniquitie: for (as Salomon declareth) For the iniquitie of the people,
                     Pro. 28, 2. the Prince is often changed. Theſe Iſraelites ſay, That they haue added this, deſiring of a King, to all their other wickedneſſe, as their owne conſcience accuſing them of many other enormities. Looke how odious the name traytor is to the eares; and ſo greeuous in deede ſhould ſinne be to the ſoule and ſpirite: for whoſoeuer doe by heaping ſinne vpon ſinne, draw downe a vengeance vpon the place where they inhabite, are by the ſentence of the Wiſe man, found guyltie of high treaſon againſt Prince and Countrey.
                     Hoſe. 41. 
                     There is (ſayth the Prophet) no trueth, no mercie, no knowledge of God in the land: but by ſwearing, lying, murdering ſtealing, & whooring, they breake out; and blood toucheth blood: therefore ſhall the land mourne, and the inhabitants thereof ſhall vtterly be deſtroyed.
                  
                  The third duetie is in tongue alſo to carrie him ſelfe loyall and duetifull. The Law

of God is,Exod. 22 28 
                     Thou ſhalt not rayle vpon the Iudges, neither ſpeake euill of the Ruler of the people.
                     Num. 12.2. Num. 21.6. The olde Iſraelites were ſome ſtriken with Leproſies, ſome deſtroyed with Peſtilence, with fierie Serpents, & many fearefull kindes of death, becauſe they murmured againſt the Lords annoynted. Theſe Iſraelites here,1. Sam. 12.2 do tread in their ſteps, when becauſe Iabeſh Gilead their citie was in great diſtreſſe, do therefore impute the fault to the gouernment vnder Samuel. Such is the wickedneſſe of many in our age, which becauſe ſome troubles, dearth, and ſcarcity, are for a time befallen vnto, doe therefore murmure either againſt the Worde now preached, or the Gouernment now eſtabliſhed: whereas in deede the occaſion ought chiefly to be aſcribed to their owne vngodly lyues, and to their wilfull diſobedience againſt the lawes both of God and Soueraine.Pſal. 81.13. 
                     O (ſaith God by the pſalmiſt) that my people would haue harkened vnto my voyce: For if Iſrael would haue walked in my wayes, I ſhould ſoone haue humbled their enemies, & turned my hand againſt their aduerſaries: I ſhould haue fed them with the flower of Wheate, & with Honey,

out of the ſtony Rocke would I haue ſatiſfied them.
                     Ier. 44.1 
                     When the Iewes (as it is in Ieremie) cryed out that thinges were not ſo cheape and plentifull amongſt them ſince they gaue ouer baking cakes to the Queene of heauen, as they were before, when they worſhypped the hoaſt of the Skies: where, I pray you, was then ye fault? Not in the worde taught by Ieremie, but in the want of due obedience in the people to the voyce of God vttered by the Prophet. Euen ſo in theſe our dayes, the cauſe of the dearth and ſcarcitie which doth remaine amongſt vs, is not in the worde now preached, or the lawes now confirmed, but in the diſobedience of the people both to the one and to the other. As (not to vſe many inſtances) the Worde of God, and the Statutes of our moſt gracious Soueraigne, do condemne pride and exceſſe, as well in apparrell as diet, with all vnthriftie gaming, and prodigalitie of life. Now where there is no regarde to auoyde theſe ſinnes, but that ſo many runne wilfully headlong to exceede their calling, and to liue at a greater rate then their maynteinance doth extende vnto, How is it poſſible, but that thereby many

muſt needes be brought to great diſtreſſe, want, and penurie. A late writer ſpeaking of a dearth in Germanie, did yeelde this as the cauſe therof,Hulric. Hutten in aula. 
                     Omnes ferè per Germaniam principes egent propter luxum et vanitatē, quibus dediti plurima inutiliter abſumunt. Videſne enim vt multa ſcurris, ludionibus, mimis, paraſitis ac muſicis largiuntur? Videsne vt in aulis noctu diu
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         edatur et bibatur? vt pauimenta vino madeant? vt plus ebrij isti profundant quàm ingurgitent, plus ingurgitent quàm ferre poſsint? Tum ad aemulationem quoque dantur vestes, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         is eſt principum tumor vt quanto magis egent tanto minus egere videri velint, et idcirco nihil de pompa, nihil de apparatibus remittāt. What want we haue, muſt be imputed to our owne abuſe of Gods bleſſinges, when for the prodigall waſting of them, God doth ſhorten them, & make the heauen as iron,Leuit. 26.19. and the earth as braſſe. It muſt be laide vpon oux haughtie diſobedience of the Law, and not vpon ſuch decrees, ſtatutes, and proclamations whereby the ſaid abuſes haue bin ſo often and ſo iuſtly prohibited. And yet if we would duely call to minde how wonderfully people are now multiplyed in euery part of this our realme of England

(by reaſon that although by warre we haue ſomtime loſt ſome men, & by plagues alſo the Lord hath eftſoones corrected vs gently, and as it were ſhaken the rod at vs, and beaten vs with a ſoft hand: yet we haue had no ſuch ciuill warres, and vniuerſall plagues of Peſtilence, Sweates, or other conſuming diſeaſes, which heretofore haue made waſte ouer our whole land) if I ſay, we would duely conſider the great increaſe of people now, in reſpect of that they haue bin in times paſt; and how notwithſtanding, the Lord of his bountifull goodneſſe hath from yeere to yeere, either mercifully prouided for vs within the land, graunting vs ſufficient not onely to ſuſteine our ſelues, but alſo to be helpfull and comfortable vnto others; or els plentifully ſupplyed our neceſſities out of other countries, ſending vs, though peraduenture not ſo much as we haue deſired, yet infinite times more then we haue deſerued: we ſhould rather be enforced to admire and reuerence the great mercies of God, then with vnthankfull mindes to repine and grudge againſt him.Gen. 12, 10. Gen. 26.2. 
                     Abraham was compelled by famine to flie out of Canaan into Egypt. Iſaak dryuen to

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
flie to Abimilec king of the Philiſtines, and to dwell in Gerar.
                     Gen. 45.2, 
                     Iacob forced to ſende his Familie and Aſſes againe and againe to buy Corne of Pharaoes ſeruants. And although now through want of graine, we haue in many places endured ſome puniſhment, yet hath it been nothing ſo heauily layde on, as heretofore it hath been vpon many of our forefathers. In the yeere of our Lord God a thouſand ſixtie and nine, men were conſtrayned to eate Cattes, Dogges; yea, and mens fleſhe, in ſundry partes of this land. In the yeere one thouſand three hundred and fifteene, ſome did eate Horſe-fleſh, ſome their owne children: and in diuers places, when Priſoners came to be committed which had any fleſh vpon them, they were welcommed with plucking in peeces, and deuoured halfe aliue. Of late time, in the dayes of Queene Marie, many yet can remember how many thouſandes in this land, for want of their accuſtomed corne, were glad that they could feede vpon their bread of Ackornes. But we (although our people be now in a manner doubled or trebled aboue the number that were then) yet the Lord of his euerlaſting

mercy, doth ſtill vouchſafe to continue his goodneſſe towardes vs: Whoſe prouidence in thus ſuſteining vs is as mightie and powerfull, and in a manner the very ſame that was in the time of the Flood in the Arke of Noah: which though it were but a ſmall veſſell,Gen. 6.15. the length but three hundred Cubites, the breadth but fiftie, the deapth but thirtie;Gen. 7.11. yet did the Lord in the ſame for the ſpace of about a whole yeere together (for ſo long were they toſſed vpon the waters) prouide not for Noah onely and his family, but alſo for all beaſtes, birdes,Gen. 8.13. and creeping thinges, two and two of euery kinde. How was it poſſible to any iudgement of man, that ſo ſmall a veſſell ſhould conteine roome, reliefe and ſuccour, for ſo many, and that for the ſpace of ſo large a time? And how coulde it be that thoſe beaſtes and birdes which do commonly one liue of the ſpoyle of an other, ſhould yet be all both wilde and tame togyther, ſo long a time in the Arke, and not one deuoure an other. Heere the omnipotent power of God did wonderfully ſhew foorth it ſelfe. God multiplyed their foode. God helde his holy hand ouer them. God preſerued

them one from praying vpon another, and one from hurting an other. And ſo miraculous in a maner hath been, and is the prouidence of God to this our Realme of England. It is but a ſmall Arke, but a handfull in reſpect of other nations: it is with inhabiters mightily repleniſhed: yet the Lord not one yeere (as in the Arke) but from yeere to yeere, and many yeeres hath fauourably preſerued vs. And though there be many wylde beaſtes, amongſt which with malcontented mindes doe gape for an alteration, that they may wreake their malice on the Sainctes of God, which haue their willes inwardly prone, and as it were the kniues in their handes ready drawen, to cut the throates of Gods chyldren: yet the Lord doth ſo with his power put a ſnaffie in their mouth, and a hooke in their noſtrelles, that they haue not their purpoſe: The Lordes name be bleſſed therefore, and the Lord ſo bridle them euer hereafter, euen for his mercies ſake, in his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus.
                  If theſe brutiſh natures had eyes to beholde, and hartes to remember, what ſingular bleſſinges the Lord hath beſtowed

on this ſmall Ilande, that they could (as Samuel ſpeaketh here to the Iſraelites) conſider what great thinges the Lord hath done for them,
                     1. Sam. 12.24. they could not but be touched with remorſe and griefe for this their viperous and haynous vnkindneſſe: whereas many other Countries about vs, either haue not the worde of God truely taught,1. Cro. 14.15. or if they haue it, they haue it eyther with warre or bloddſhed, or (which is as ill) with ioyning together Chriſt and Belial. We may in all peace and quietneſſe freely reſort to the Temple to heare the worde of God and publicke prayer in a knowen language, whereby both hart and tongue may goe together; in which reſpect euery litle Village in this realme of Englande hath a greater bleſſing, then all that large and ample region of Spayne. And whereas other Nations about vs haue continuall broyles and troubles within the land, we ſtand as it were in a gallarie, as the Greeke prouerbe is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Extra telorum iactum,
                     Lucian. in votis. where we may beholde them (though to our griefe) bayting and renting one an others bowels: but we are free our ſelues from thoſe outragious miſchiefes. Wee

feele thoſe 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,Ariſtoph. in auibus. Plin. lib. 10 cap. 32. Plant. in paenulo. 
                     Halcyonios dies, as the auncient Writers haue obſerued, that when the litle birde Halcyon, otherwyſe called Alcedo, doth buylde her neſt in the Sea bankes, be the Sea neuer ſo rigorous and ſtormie before, yet there followeth then a great calme and quietneſſe, which continueth till ſhe haue hatched her young: duering all which time, the Shipmen in the Sicilian Seas, do feare no dangers of tempeſt.
                  This calme time, this milde, quiet, and peaceable time, the Lord hath graunted to vs, not for a few dayes, but for many happy yeeres togither. We enioy that ſweete bleſſing which was in Iurie and Iſrael in the time of Salomon,
                     1. Reg 4.25 
                     To dwell ſafely euery man vnder his owne Vine, and vnder his owne Figtree, from Dan to Beerſheba:
                      from one ende of the land to the other, euen all the dayes of Salomon. O that we were not become ſo drunkē with this our proſperitie as to forget that good Lord,Deut. 8.14. which hath giuen this good Land vnto vs!Deut. 32.15. O that we were not like Ieſhurun, ſpoken of in Deutronomie, like the Horſe, which being fat and well fedde,

fedde, doth ſpurne and flinge againſt his keeper, & nouriſher! O that we were not lyke the vntamed Heyfar,
                     Ier. 31.18. by reaſon of our long running in plentifull paſtures, to forget to cary the ſweete yoke of obedience! O that we coulde make true vſe of all the benefites and bleſſinges of our heauenly Father! that the louing kindneſſe of God might leade vs to repentance:Rom. 2.4. that we could (as Samuel ſpeaketh heere to the Iſraelites) Feare the Lord, and ſerue him 
                           •
                        n trueth with all our hartes,
                     1. Sam. 12.24. 
                     and conſider what great thinges he hath done for vs:
                     Pſal. 107.8. that we coulde Prayſe the Lord for his goodneſſe, and declare the woonders which he dayly doth for this realme of Englande:2. Sam. 12.14. Then ſhoulde the bleſſing of God ſtill remayne vppon vs, both vpon Prince and people.Pro. 16.7. Then ſhould the Lord continue his mercies in going in and out with our Armies.
                     Pſal. 8.13. Then ſhould the Lord eyther make our enemies become our 
                        •
                     riendes, or throughly turne his hande againſt our aduerſaries.Rom. 13.1. Then ſhould there 
                        •
                     e amongſt vs euery ſoule duetifully ſub
                     
                        •
                     ect to the higher powers. Then ſhould we 
                        〈◊〉
                      all diſtreſſes, with contented mindes,

                     caſt all our care on God,
                     1. Pet. 5.7. 
                     for he careth for vs. Then ſhould we in hart conceiue that aſſured confidence & truſt in the goodneſſe of God, that we ſhould faythfully ſay with Dauid,
                     Pſal. 118.6. 
                     If the Lord be on our ſide, we neede not care what man can doe vnto vs. Then ſhould the Lord long proſper,Pſam. 21.4. and euen for euer preſerue that happie Monarchie vnder which we are here ſo peaceably gouerned, and graunt vs a Kingdome of euerlaſtyng peace in the worlde to come▪ Which giftes & graces, the Lord of Lords, and King of all Kinges, vouchſafe to giue vnto vs, for the merites of our ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghoſt, one true and euerliuing God, for all his ineſtimable benefites beſtowed vpon vs, be all honour, glory, thankſegeuing, and prayſe, now & for euer. Amen.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A SERMON DESCRIBING THE NATVRE AND HORROVR OF STVBBERNE DISOBEDIENCE.
                  Preached at Tanridge in Surrey the xvi day of Iuly Anno domini 1598.
                  And at the ſame time written to be added as a ſecond part, to the Danger of diſcontentment. *⁎*
                  
                  
                     By Simon Harwarde.
                  
                  LONDON, ¶ Imprinted by RICHARD BRADOCKE for RICHARD IOHNS. 1599.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO MY VERY good friende M. Michaell Murgatrod Steward in houſehold to the moſt reuerend Father in God the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury his grace many ioyfull and happie yeares. *⁎*
                  
                  
                     
                        SIR, the great kindneſſe and courteſie heretofore by me receiued at your hands whenſoeuer I came either to Lambeth or Croydon to do my humble dutie vnto your moſt honorable Lord & maiſter my L. his grace

of Canterbury, hath many times and often iuſtly occaſioned me to remember you, and to bethinke my poore ſelfe how happily I might anyway, if not requite you, yet yeald at the leaſt ſome acknow. ledgement and plaine teſtimonie of my thankfulneſſe in that behalfe vnto you. Hereof it commeth that being now to publiſhe this little treatiſe of horrour of diſobedience, I haue preſumed (in hope of pardon) to direct the ſame to you as to a ſpeciall friende meriting a farre greater matter frō me. But vntill ſuch time as I may performe ſome thing of greater moment for you, my truſt is you will accept in good part this ſmall

                     
                        •
                     oken of my greate loue towardes 
                        •
                     ou; And withall ſtill continew
                        •
                     our former well-wiſhing affection 
                        •
                     owards me. The which I doe 
                        •
                     ore deſire than any waies I am 
                        •
                     ble to deſerue, and yet purpoſe
                     
                        •
                      by Gods grace) further to re
                     
                        •
                     mpence, if euer either occaſion 
                        •
                     all ſerue, or power ſhall better 
                        •
                     able me thereunto. Euen ſo with
                     
                        •
                     anie thankes for your manifold 
                        •
                     auours, I ceaſe to bee further troubleſome at this time vnto 
                        •
                     ou, beſeeching almightie God 
                        •
                     ll to bleſſe you with the honou
                     
                        •
                     able countenance of him whom 
                        •
                     u ſerue, and whom for his great 
                        •
                     ertues ſake all good and honest

men doe loue, reuerence, and entirelie honour. From Tanridge this ſecond of Ianuarie 1599.
                  
                  
                     Yours euer aſſured to his power, Simon Harward.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ The preface of the Author to the Chriſtian Reader.
                  
                     AS in the former Sermon (beloued in Chriſt) there is laide open vnto thee the offence of the Iſraelites in deſiring a king: So in this (the argument whereof was likewiſe takē out of the firſt chapter by the order of our church appointed for the Sabaoth then next enſuing) there doth

follow ſome part of the puniſhment, wherewith it pleaſed God to ſcourge the malcontented deſires of that rebellious people. In aſking a king, they did wilfully caſt off the ordinance of God, who had eſtabliſhed anotherforme of gouernmēt amongſt them: therefore (as this hiſtory doth euidently declare) the Lord hath now giuen them a King in his wrath, and as commonly he doth puniſh euery tranſgreſſion in and by it ſelfe, ſo to a rebellious & wilfull people he hath ſent a ſtubborne and obſtinate gouernour. The matter then of this latter Sermon

depending ſo neceſſarily on the other going before; I haue thought it not amiſſe here to ioyne them both togither with equall labour of pē
                     ning, as before they required not much vnequall time in their vttering & deliuering: And being ſo vnited I do offer them here ioyntly to thy godly conſideration, praying thee in the ſame maner to accept them, as they are now preſented to thee, that is with a ſingle ſincere and wel-willing affection. Farewell in Chriſt, From Tanridge this xviii. of Iuly. Anno 1598.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        1. Sam. 15. Ver. 23.
                        But rebellion is as the ſinne of witchcraft & ſtubborne reſiſting is as ſuperſtition and Idolatrie: becauſe thou haſt caſt awaie the word of the Lord, the Lord hath likewiſe caſt awaie thee from being King.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        THE Amalechits (of whom Agag is now King, & whom GOD doth heere in this Chapter commaunde to be vtterly deſtroyed by Saule) were as the Prouerbe is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , mali corui mala oua, of a wicked race a curſed generation, as deſcended of one Amalec,
                     Gen. 36. v. 12. who was a baſe ſonne of Eliphas the ſonne of Eſau, by a concubine named Timna.
                     Exod. 17.14. They did with ſuch bloudy hearts afflicte and aſſault the Iſrael 
                        •
                     s in Rephidim
                     
when they were comming out of Aegypt,
                     Deut. 25. v. 17. eſpecially in following them and beating downe the hinmoſt of them, killing ſuch as they ſaw were faint and weary and not able to march with the reſt, that God did both aſſure his ſeruant Moſes that he would deſtroy the remembrance of Amalec from vnder heauen, and alſo by Moſes commaund the Iſraelites, that as ſoone as they had gotten victory of their enemies about them, they ſhould put in execution that decree of Gods vengeance denounced againſt thoſe Amalekites. For although the Lord doe ſuffer for a time the wicked to rage and make hauocke of his ſeruants, yet hee doth alſo determine & appoint a time when their outrage and crueltie ſhall be puniſhed and reuenged. He permitted for a time Pharaoh to oppreſſe the Iſraelits Senacherib to triumph againſt, Ezechias with blaſphemous ſpeches:Exod. 14, 28. 2. Reg. 18.13. but he appointed alſo the time when the one ſhould be ouerwhelmed in the ſea, and the other murdered by his owne children. He ſuffered for a

time Herod, Nero, Maxentius, Diocleſian, Maximinus and others to perſecute the faithfull Chriſtians in the primitiue Church: but hee determined alſo a time when Herod ſhould be eaten vp with wormes,Act. 12.23. 
                     Maxentius fall off a bridge and together with horſe & harnes be ouerwhelmed in ye waters, Diocleſian poyſon himſelfe, Nero cut his own throat, & Maximinus ſo be plagued wt vermine yt no Phiſitian could abide to come neare vnto him. A time the Lord gaue to the Amalekites to embrew their hands in the bloode of the Iſraelits,
                     Deut. 25.17. and a time alſo did the Lord preſcribe when their crueltie ſhould be remembred to their vtter confuſion.Pſ. 56. v. 8. For if God (as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh) doe put the teares of his Saints in his bottell, much more ſhall God remember the bloud of his Saints. The Amalekites ſhewed themſelues to haue cruell and very vnmercifull heartes when they murdered ſuch as were faint & wearie and by reaſon of their weakneſſe no waie able to encounter with them: But now lege talionis, by

the law of like recompence God doth commaunde an vtter deſtruction of them, their wiues, their children, their ſucklings their cattell,Iam. 2. v. 13 and whatſoeuer appertaineth to them, that iudgement may be without mercie to them which ſhewed no mercie. Achab and Iezabell for Naboths vineyard cauſed Naboths bloud to be ſhed:1 King. 21.19. but as dogs did licke the bloude of Naboth, ſo of dogs alſo was their bloode afterward deuoured.Iudg. 1. 
                     Adonibezeg cut off the thumbs and toes of ſeuentie Kings & made them gather breade vnder his table: the ſame deſpightfull reproach which he had meaſured to others was at the laſt in like manner meaſured to himſelfe. A moſt cruell enuie it was in Haman that could no way be ſatiſfied, but with the hanging of harmeleſſe Mardocheus:
                     Heſt. 7.9. Heſt. 9. v. 14. but by the iuſt iudgment of God Haman and his ten ſons were hanged on the ſame gallowes which he had prepared for Mardocheus. Seneca writeth that Xerxes the King of Perſia when one Pithius came vnto him and deſired him, that of his

fiue ſonnes which were preſt out of all to be ſouldiers in Xerxes his armie,Seneca li. 3. de ira. cap. 17. it would pleaſe him to graunt him one of them to go home with him to be a comfort to his ould age. The King tooke that ſonne whom the father had made choyce of, and cauſing him to be pluckt in peeces he caſt the limmes of the dead carkaſe on either ſide the waie, commaunding his army to paſſe through them, and ſaying that he would in this manner purge and purifie his armie. But what did enſue thereupon? Xerxes himſelfe not long after being vanquiſhed by the Grecians was compelled to runne ouer the dead carkaſes of his armie to ſaue his owne life.Deut 15 v 11. God in his law did commaund the Iewes mercifully to make prouiſion for their poore and needy.Ezech. 16. v. 49. Amos. 8.6. But they (as the Prophets do euery where conuince them) had no care to ſtrengthen the hand of the poore: nay moſt vnmercifully they bought and ſould the poore for ould ſhooes, they vtterly made no account of them. But at the laſt they themſelues were ouerrunne by ſtrangers,

and being exiled out of their natiue ſoyle were made a ſwarme of beggers to all poſteritie.Iam. 2, 13. Euen ſo to theſe mercileſſe Amalekites by the ſame tenour of Gods iuſtice, though many hundred yeares after, yet now at the laſt there is iudgement denounced without mercie againſt them which ſhewed no mercie. For as when a man falleth timber, the longer he draweth his blow the deeper the Axe doth enter: and as the Archer the longer he draweth his arrowe the more violently it doth ſtrike and pearce: eauen ſo the longer the Lord doth withholde his hand from puniſhing vnrepentant tranſgreſſours, the more ſeuerely at the laſt is the vengeance brought againſt them. But heere it may ſeeme ſtrange to ſome that theſe Amalekites ſo long after ſhould receiue the puniſhment of their predeceſſors tranſgreſſion. Doth it ſtand with the iuſtice of God, for the fault of the forefathers ſo many hundred yeares after to deſtroy the poſteritie? Heere ſome doe make anſwere that God doth lay

temporall puniſhments vpon the ſonne for the fathers offence, becauſe temporall puniſhments do oftentimes turne to the good and benefit of them which are afflicted.Eſai. 39. v. 7. So it is threatned againſt Ezechias that becauſe of an ambitious minde he ſhewed the Babilonians his treaſures, therefore his children ſhould be depriued of their kingdome and caried awaie captiue.Hebr, 7. v. 10. But further ſeing that as Leui though he were fower generations after Abraham, is yet ſaide to be ſhut vp in the loynes of Abraham, ſo euery poſteritie ought to be accounted as included in the perſonne of the predeceſſour; it may well be reputed iuſt in humaine lawes when any are found guilty of treaſon to account the bloode attainted, and it muſt needes be acknowledged moſt iuſt in God to lay the puniſhment of the treſpas of the parents vpon the children continuing in their parents wickedneſſe. Otherwiſe if the children, though by nature being children of wrath,Rom. 1
                           •
                         24. being yet by faith graffed into the true vine Chriſt Ieſus, doe ſee what their fathers haue done, and feare, and not commit the like,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     then, ſaith the Prophet, the ſonne ſhall not beare the fathers offence, neither ſhal the father beare the ſonnes offence, but that ſoule that ſinneth that ſhall die.
                     ver. 3. 
                     You ſhall no more vſe that prouerbe, The fathers haue eaten ſower grapes, & the childrens teeth are ſet on edge, as I liue ſaith the Lord, ye ſhal vſe this by-word no more in Iſraell. When Saule was about to put in execution the commaundemente of God concerning the deſtruction of theſe Amalekites (who continuing in the ſteps of their forefathers were ſtill profeſſed enemies of the people of God) the Lord doth ſo order the matter,1. Sam. 15. v. 6. ye firſt the Kenits who dwelled in the mountaines amongſt the Amalekites ſhould be called out, and ſet free from that calamitie and bloodſhed.Iudg. 1.16. Theſe Kenits were deſcended of Iethro,
                     Exod. 18.21. who by comfort and good counſaile had ſhewed mercie vpon the Iſraelits as they came from Aegypt, therefore doth the Lord now ſhewe mercie vpon thouſandes vnto ſuch as feared him and regarded his commaundements. The beſt treaſure therefore which parents can lay vp in ſtore for

purpoſes of God do ſeeme to varie,Rom. 10.29. which notwithſtanding do abide ſtedfaſt and grounded faſt for euer, onely by the vnſtable mutabilitie of man they appeare to become variable. The decrees of Gods iudgements, as that of Ionas againſt the Niniuits,
                     Ion. 3. v. 4. 
                     yet fortie daies and Niniuy ſhall be deſtroyed, and that of Eſay againſt Ezechias: put thy houſe in an order,
                     Eſai. 38.1. 
                     for thou ſhalt die and not liue, haue included in them a ſecret condition, to wit, vnleſſe they ſhould truly repent. For ſo in Geneſis God ſaide to Abimelech for his keeping of Abrahams wife, beholde thou art as a deade man, thou ſhalt ſurely die:
                     Gen. 20. ver. 3. yet there followeth afterward, reſtore the wife to hir huſband, for he is the Prophet of the Lord, he wil pray for thee and thou ſhalt liue. As the threatnings of GOD doe conteine in them a hidden condition of repentance, ſo the promiſes of aduancement in his temporall elections do cō
                     prehend in them a ſecret condition of continuance in ſuch duties as their function requireth. In which becauſe now Saule doth not abide, but falleth to manifeſt rebellion againſt the word of God,

he is therefore moſt iuſtly caſt off and reiected.
                  
                     1. Sam. 15.11.
                     Samuel before hee did denounce this iudgement of God in reiecting Saul, did firſt as it is ſaide in the xi. verſe of this Chapter cry all night vnto the Lord Where a doubt may ariſe how Samuel could pray in faith ſeeing that his prayer may ſeeme to be againſt the decree of GOD.Gen. 18.22 The like may be ſaide of Abraham praying for the Sodomits and of Ieremie praying againſt the captiuitie of Ieruſalem.
                     Ier. 32.16. Saint Auguſtine doth verie well anſwere this queſtion, Quomodo ſide orant ſancti vt petant à Deo contra quàm decreuit?
                     Aug, deciuitate dei. lib. 22, cap. 2.
                      
                     nempe quia ſecundum voluntatem eius orant, non illā abſconditā & incōmutabi lem, ſed quā illis inſpirat vt eos exaudiat alio modo. How doe the Saints pray in faith when they require a thinge of GOD againſt that which hee hath decreed? Truely becauſe they pray according to his will, not his ſecret and vnchangeable purpoſe, but according to that will which hee doth ſo inſpire into them, that hee heareth them ſome other way:
                      hee heareth them, if not that way which

they deſire, yet vndoubtedly that way which hee knoweth to be moſt expedient for them. And in the meane time their charitable affection,Anno dom. 558.
                      obeying the generall commaundement of GOD cannot but be agreeable to the grounde of faith. We reade of Narſes that noble Captaine of Italy who ſubdued the Goths, vanquiſhed the Bactrians, and receiued by dedition all the Cities of Tuſcia, that he neuer gaue his enemies the battaile, but hee wept in the Temple the night before. Such was the humaine and louing affection heere in Samuel, who before hee commeth to be a miniſter of the iudgements of GOD againſt Saul, doth firſt mourne and lament all the night before and earneſtly ſolicite the Lord by humble praier: Afterwarde hee doth faithfully diſcharge that which the Lord had giuen him in commiſſion concerning Saul of his wilfull rebellion againſt GOD in reſeruing the fatteſt of the Cattle of the Amalekites (whereas GOD had commaunded their whole ſubſtance to bee vtterlye deſtroyed,)

And alſo of his wretched ingratitude in contemning that good God by whom he was, of in a manner nothing, annointed to be the king and heade of the Tribes of Iſraell. Saule being reprooued and manifeſtly found guiltie, doth (as is the part of notable hypocrits) firſt giue glorious words to the Prophet and ſtand vpon iuſtifying of himſelfe: Bleſſed art thou of the Lord,
                     Ver. 13. 
                     I haue fulfilled the commandement of the Lord. Secondly he poſteth off the fault to others,Ver. 15. accuſing ye people that they had ſpared the beſt & fatteſt of the cattell to offer them in ſacrifice vnto God. And laſt of all hee continueth obſtinate in defending of himſelfe, thinking that the accuſing of others might be for him a ſufficient excuſe, and alleaging the feare of the people as a cloake to couer his caſting awaie of their feare of God. I feared (ſaide he) the people, and therefore I obeied their voice.
                     Ver. 24. But Samuel ſheweth him what were indeed the true cauſes of his ſparing of Agag and of his carying away the fatteſt of ye ſheep & Oxen of the Amalekites, to wit, firſt his ſetting his heart vpon the prey, thou

haſt (ſaith he) turned thy ſelfe to the prey and done wickedly in the ſight of God: and ſecondly a ſtubberne diſobedience againſt the worde of God,
                     Ver. 19. which he doth at large deſcribe in this verſe which now eſpecially is offered to our conſiderations. Wherein we haue two eſpecial things to obſerue. Firſt the nature and effects of rebellion, which are here ſet out by comparing it with witchcraft and Idolatrie. Secondly the iudgement of God againſt Saul being found guiltie of this deteſtable offence: Becauſe thou haſt caſt awaie the worde of the Lord, therfore the Lord hath caſt awaie thee from being King. Rebellion may well be reſembled to witchcraft and Idolatrie in fower eſpeciall reſpects:Eph. 2. v. 2 Gal. 5.20. firſt in regard of the originall, in that they all proceede of one fountaine, all fruites of infidelitie, all manifeſt workes of the fleſh, all proceede of yeelding to the ſuggeſtions of Satan, and renouncing to be gouerned by the ſpirit of God. Gregory Nazianzene ſaith verie well of witchcraft, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     there can be no good vſe of witcheries &

ſorceries, by which the Deuill doth enter and take poſſeſſion of man. So of Idolatry the Apoſtle ſpeaketh that thoſe things which the Gentiles ſacrificed to Idols,
                     1. Cor. 10.20. 
                     they ſacrificed vnto deuils & not to God. The like may be ſaide of wilfull diſobedience. For as faith is notably approued and declared by obeying the will of God,Gen. 22.10. ſo a ſtubberne rebelling againſt ye commaundement of GOD is an euidēt token of an vnfaithfull renouncing of God. If any of vs being ſieke ſhoulde haue two ſeuerall perſons come vnto vs, whereif thone ſhould bring a ſoueraigne medecine to cure our maladie, and the other ſhould bring a box of moſt deadly poyſon, how ſhall it appeare in which of theſe two we place our greateſt confidence? Surely the embracing of the parties counſaile and the taking of his receipt will manifeſtly declare, of whether of them we haue conceiued the better thoughts, and whether we do more rely vpon: though we ſpeake well of the one and neuer ſo much commend his excellent knowledge, yet if we follow the aduiſe of the other, he is the man whome

our heart doth moſt preferre. Euen ſo it falleth out in matters which do concerne our feeble and diſeaſed ſoules. Whoſoeuer they are that do refuſe the ſoueraigne ſalue of repentance offered vnto them by the heauenly Phiſition Ieſus Chriſt, and do receiue the deadly poyſon of rebellion miniſtred vnto them by Sathan, their owne deedes do beare apparant witneſſe againſt them, that howſoeuer in word they cal Chriſt their Lord and Sauiour, yet in the hearte the ſuggeſtions of Sathan haue found the chiefeſt harbour. Secondly rebellion may well be compared to theſe ſins of witchcraft, ſuperſtition & Idolatry in regard of ye nature & qualitie of ye offence, becauſe they are all moſt odious & deteſtable in ye ſight of God. How abominable theſe trāſgreſſiōs are, is ſufficiently made manifeſt vnto vs by thoſe puniſhments which God in his word hath denounced againſt thē.Exod 22.18, Leuit. 20.27. & 19.31 & 20.6. The law is in Exod. that witches ſhould not be ſuffered to liue, & in Leuit. that if any haue a ſpirit of diuinatiō & ſouthſaying, they ſhal dy the death: yea it is denoūced againſt ſuch as ſeeke any helpe of

them, that they ſhal be cut off frō amongſt the people. For Idolaters there needeth no mention of any other law, but only yt which is contained in the thirteenth of Deuteronomy,
                     Deut. 13. v. 6.8.9. where the Lord doth commaund vs that, if any do entiſe vs to go after any ſtrange God, our eye muſt not pitie him, neither muſt we ſhew any mercy vpon him, though it be thy brother the ſonne of thine owne mother, or ſhe that ſleepeth in thine owne boſome, or thy friend that is as deare vnto thee as thine owne ſoule, yet (ſaith the law) thou ſhalt kill him, thy hand ſhall be firſt vpon him. Some to prooue that Idolaters are not now to be puniſhed by death,Math. 13. ver. 25. do alledge that parable in S. Mathews goſpel, where the ſeruants are cōmanded not to plucke vp the tares frō amongſt ye wheat,Ver. 41. but to let thē both grow together vntil ye harueſt. But our Sauiour doth there himſelfe expound it, that by the ſeruants are not mēt the Magiſtrats, but the Angels of God▪ and by the tares are ſignified not Idolaters only,Ver. 38. but generally all the children of the wicked. The purpoſe then of the Parable is, not to abridge the authority

of the Magiſtrate, but to ſhew how in this world the Lord with long patience doth permit the hypocrits to be mingled with the faithfull,Ver. 39. vntill in the harueſt (which is there interpreted to be the end of the world) he ſhall by the miniſtery of his Angels ſeperate the ſheepe from ye goats and the good wheate from the darnell. For ſo I do rather tranſlate it thā tares, for that Tares are called Aphacae or viciae ſylueſtres wild firches: but Zizanium the word here uſed is according to Dioſcorides, Lolium, Darnell or Ray: and S. Hierom doth yelde this cauſe why he doth interpret it by Lolium, becauſe that Darnell ſo long as it is in the blade can hardly be deſcerned from good corne, and ſo hypocrits in the Church for a long time can hardly be diſtinguiſhed from true Chriſtians. They ſay further that to puniſh Idolatours with death is nothing els but to throw them headlong to vtter condemnation. The like may be ſaide in deliuering from the puniſhment of death any other miſchiefe whatſoeuer, becauſe that if the malefactours be executed in ye time of their vnrepentance, they are depriued

of all hope of ſaluation. But their execution is no occaſion of their vnrepentance, yea rather it is an ordinary means to drawe ſuch deſperate mindes to ſome conſiderations of themſelues, when ſeing their end to be moſt certainely at hand, they begin then or neuer to thinke of their owne eſtate, to renounde the world, and to call the Lord to remembrance. They ſeeke alſo to ſtrenghthen their opinion by that ſaying of Salomon, the throne of a King is eſtabliſhed by mercie.
                     Prou. 20. v. 28. But mercie and iuſtice cannot be ſaide to be things contrary, ſeing they are both commaunded by one God who is neuer contrary to himſelfe.Iam. 1.17. Pſal. 101. ver. 1. 
                     Dauid in his meditations doth giue the firſt and principall place to mercie, my ſong ſhall be of mercy and iudgement,
                     ver. vlt. yet hee affirmeth afterward in the ſame Pſalme that betimes he will deſtroy all the wicked of the land that he may cut off all the workes of iniquitie from the Cytie of GOD.
                     Numb. 12. v. 3.
                  
                  
                     Moſes is ſaide to be the mildeſt man in all the earth,Exod. 32, ver. 82. yet he proceeded zealouſly againſt Idolaters when at one

time were ſlaine about three thouſande Samuell was of an humble ſpirite,1. Sam. 12, 3. as may appeare by his ſubmitting himſelfe to be accountable to the common people (ouer whom he was gouernour) & offering them to recompence whatſoeuer iniury had beene done vnto them,1. Sam. 15.33. yet we ſee with what courage and zeale hee did afterward hew in peeces Idolatrous Agag.
                  
                  To ſpare the Wolues is no mercie to the flocke, but extreame cruelty.Ioſua. 23. ver. 13. Iud. 2. v. 3. The Iſraelites ſhewing too much fauour to Idolaters, are threatned to receiue then a iuſt reward, when they ſhould finde thoſe whom they had ſpared, to be at the laſt whipps to their ſides, and thornes in their eyes. As by the puniſhment of death the Lord hath declared how greeuous and horrible the ſinnes are of witchcraft and Idolatrie, ſo by the ſame meanes he hath laide open to vs how odious rebellion is, and how hainous is the offence ſtubbornly to diſobey the commaundement of GOD. There needeth no further proofe of it, but only to call to minde howe not the

death of a few particular men, but death it ſelfe and the death of all men came firſt into the worlde by the diſobedience of man.Rom. 5.19. Gen. 3.19 If riotous perſons which will not harken to the voice of their parentes,Deut 21. v. 20. be condemned by the lawe to be ſtoried to death, then what death doe they deſerue which wilfully reſiſt the cōmandement of the eternal God? If they eſcaped not which deſpiſed him ye ſpeaketh in earth,Heb. 12.25 how ſhal they eſcape ye deſpiſe him which ſpeaketh frō heauen? As by tēporal plagues the greeuouſnes of theſe ſinnes are equally made manifeſt, ſo in eternal puniſhments Saint Iohn in the Reuelation doth ſignifie that they equally haue their portion.Reue. 21. ver. 8. 
                     The fearefull (ſaith hee, that is, they which feare men more than God) and the vnbeleeuers, and the abhominable (that is, the ſtubberne & wilfull contemners of God) and witches, and Idolaters, and Liars, they ſhall haue their part in the lake burning with fire & brimſtone, which is the ſecond death.
                  
                  A third reſemblance wherein rebellion may well be compared with witchcraft and Idolatrie is, in that (as it appeareth

heere plainely by the enſample of Saule) it is full of many glorious pretences and excuſes. The witches haue a goodly pretence for their charmes and ſorceries, when they defend that to heale the ſicke, to releeue griefe and paine, to recouer things loſt, muſt needes be a good and charitable deede.Math. 27. Ver. 6. But they conſider not that good is to be done by good & lawfull means: we may not caſt the price of blood into Corban, we may not robbe the poore to builde a Temple, we may not doe euill that good may come of it.Eſay. 8.19. Mich. 3.7. Sorceries (as ye haue heard) are in the Law euery where condemned, the Prophets doe threaten ſharpe iudgements againſt them. The very heathen men which knewe not the worde of God, yet by the lawe of nature they ſaw them to be moſt wicked and abhominable.Lib 2. de Repub. 
                     Plato doth condemne all 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Iuglars, and Wiſards and all thoſe which can 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , bring dammage to their enemies by ſacrifices and inchantments. If they pleade that they do good and no harme, Galen doth well call 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      witcheries and ſorceries not only ſuperfluous things, and beſides all the groundes of Phiſicke, but wholly deceiptfull and ful of illuſions. A glorious pretence they haue when they vſe deuout prayers and call vpon all the holy and ſacred names of GOD: but this is onely a cloake to couer their villanies,2. Cor, 11, ver, 4, when to deceiue the ſimple the diuell doth transforme himſelfe to an Angell of light. They will ſeame to imitate the Apoſtles of Chriſt, who wrought ſundry miracles and cured many infirmites by the name of Ieſus of Nazareth. But they did it ex mandato, by commaundement and by the vertue & power of Chriſt,
                      but ſorcerers do it ex pacto, by ſome ſecret couenant and agreement with Satan.
                      As Witches haue many goodly pretenſes, ſo likewiſe Idolaters. The Romaniſts thinke their excuſe ſufficient that they worſhippe not the Idoll, but GOD in and through the Idoll. Surely the Iſraelits were not ſo blockiſhe as to thinke that the golden Calfe which they had cauſed to

bee made of their Iewels, was truely GOD, onely they woulde haue a viſible repreſentment of God,Exod. 22. ver. 4. & yt not in memory of any heathen God, but in remembrance of that God which brought them out of the Land of Aegypt, yet was their deede moſt wicked Idolatrie. They ſay that if they put no holines in the Idol, they may lawfully erect Images in memory of Chriſt and his Apoſtles with other bleſſed Saintes of GOD. Wherefore then doe the Spaniards now take greater paines to viſite the Idoll of Saint Iames in Compoſtella,
                      than they doe to any other Images of Sainte Iames, whereof they haue abundance in many other their Temples? And wherefore did they in time paſt in England goe greater iourneyes on pilgrimage to the Image of the Virgine Marie in Walſingham, to Saint Anne at Buckſtons, to Saint Chad at Lichfield, and to the holie Roode at Cheſter, than they did to any other the like Images ſet vp in other Churches, but onely that they did moſt certainely place ſome

holines & vertue euen in the Idols thē
                     ſelues? If onely men do ſeeke a remembrance of Chriſt & his Saints, let them heare what auncient Clemens Alexandrinus hath written,Clemens de imag. lib. 5. ad Iacobū fratre domini. 
                     Si velitis Dei imaginem colere, homini vtique benefacientes, veram in eo Dei imaginem coletis, If ye haue a deſire to worſhip the Image of God, do good then to man, and ſo ye ſhall in him worſhippe the true Image of God.
                      Chriſt tooke the ſhape of a poore ſeruant vpon the earth. What neede they to ſeeke any deade Image,Phil. 2. ver. 7. when they haue ſo many liuely Images daily before their eyes, of whome our Sauiour doth ſo manifeſtly affirme, that whatſoeuer is done to them, he will accept as done to his owne perſon?
                     Math. 25. Ver. 40. Let them heare alſo what Saint Auguſtine ſaith honorandi ſunt ſancti propter imitationem non adorad
                           •
                         propter Religionem,
                     Aug. de ver a relig. cap. 6.
                      
                     the Saints are to bee honoured for imitation, and not to be adored for Religion. The beſt Image which wee can erect of the Saints of God, is by following the ſteps of their godly life, to propound our ſelues vnto

the worlde an Image of their vertue.Exod. 25, Ver. 18. Numb. 21.9. Another pretence they haue of following the ordinances of God in the olde Teſtament, in the which were Cherubins and the braſen Serpent, Images allowed of the Lord. But thoſe which were expreſly commaunded cannot be drawne as a fit defence & a warrant for theſe which are not onely not commaunded, but are on the other ſide expreſly forbidden. They were Types and figures of Chriſt,Heb 10. v. 1. Numb. 21.9. 2. King. 18.4. but the time is now come that ſuch ceremoniall ſhadowes are vaniſhed awaie. If the braſen Serpent which was ſet vp by the cōmaundement of God himſelfe, was yet afterward worthily broken in peeces by ye godly King Ezechias & called Nehuſhtan but a peece of braſſe when it was come to giue occaſion of Idolatrie, then what ought to be done with the workes and deuiſes of men, which being erected againſt the diuine law of God, haue bene ſo long adored with Idolatrous worſhip? As theſe damnable ſins aſwell of witchcraft as of Idolatry haue many glorious ſhewes of coloured pretenſes, ſo the like may be heere affirmed of Saul his diſobedience

and wilfull rebellion. He pretendeth firſt that the people did reſerue the beſt and fatteſt of the ſheepe and Oxen to offer them in ſacrifice. To this Samuel anſwereth,V. 22. 
                     hath the Lord as great pleaſure in burnt offering and ſacrifice, as he hath when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? beholde to obey is better than Sacrifice,
                     Heb. 9.23. 
                     and to harken is better than the fatte of Rams. The ſacrifices had theſe two eſpeciall ends and vſes: firſt to bee Types and figures of the death and paſſion of Chriſt. Secondly to bee ſeales vnto the children of GOD of the ſlaying and mortifying of their owne iuſts and affections. Vnto him (ſaith GOD) will I looke that is poore and of a contrite ſpirite and that trembleth at my words:
                     Eſay. 66. ver. 2. 
                     otherwiſe he that killeth a Bullocke is as he that ſlayeth a man, and he that ſacrificeth a ſheepe is as he that cutteth off dogges necks, hee that offereth an oblation is as he that offereth ſwines bloude, and hee that remembreth Incenſe is as hee that bleſſeth an Idol: and why? they haue choſen their owne waies and their Soule doth delight in

their owne abhominations. Seing then that Saul hath not the inward grace to bee of a contrite ſpirite and to tremble at the worde of GOD, ſeeing that hee hath not his will and affections mortified and made ſubiect to the will, and commaundement of GOD, but doth chuſe and follow his owne way and doth performe what ſeameth good in his owne fancie, his pretence of ſacrificing howſoeuer it might ſeame holineſſe in the iudgement of carnall man, yet was it indeede a damnable hypocriſie moſt odious in the ſight of GOD. Intents of the minde bee they neuer ſo godly in outwarde appearance, yet are they wicked when they are without ſome grounde of Gods worde, but moſt wicked when they are directly againſt the worde,Deut. 12.8 The Lawe is in Deuteronomie that the people muſt in no wiſe performe that which ſeameth good in their owne eyes.2. Sam Ver. 
                           •
                        
                      When the Arke of GOD was carried from the houſe of Aminadab, Vzza when hee ſawe the

Oxen going awry, and the Arke readie to fall, put to his helping hande to ſaue the Arke from falling.Numb. 4. Ver. 15. This his intent might ſeame to be good and godly, but for as much as it was a breach of the law of God, wherein lay-men were forbiddē once to touch thoſe holy things, he was therefore ouertaken with vengeance,Pro. 14.12. and ſtricken with ſodaine death, There is a waie (ſaith Salomon) that ſeameth good to man,
                     Rom. 10.2. 
                     but the iſſues thereof are the iſſues of death. Paul ſaith of the Iewes that they had a zeale, but not according to knowledge:Math. 15.9 & therfore in vain they worſhipped God while they taught for Doctrines, mens precepts.
                  The Apoſtle ſaith of himſelfe that before he was called, concerning zeale, he had perſecuted the congregation of God.Phil. 3. v. 6 
                     1. Tim. 1, 13. Yet hee affirmeth that in that his blind zeale hee was a blaſphemer and a perſecuter vntill he had obtained mercy for that which hee committed ignorantly. If the intent of the heart might ſerue for a ſufficient warrant, then any Turke or heathen ſhould be holden excuſed: for they thinke they worſhippe a true God,

yea the bloodie tormenters of Chriſtians might then chalenge a full diſcharge and freedome for their tyranny,Iohn. v. 2. becauſe (as our Sauiour doth witneſſe) when they kill the Saints of GOD they thinke they do God good ſeruice. But thoughts & intents can no longer awarrant vs, than they themſelues be awarranted by the worde of God.Coloſ. 2.23. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      (as the Apoſtle doth call it) will-worſhippe be it neuer ſo deuout and zealous in outwarde ſhewe, yet if it be againſt the will and worde of God, it is nothing but a blinde zeale of a diueliſh ſuperſtition. The ſecond pretence which Saul doth vſe to cloake and couer his rebellion is, the feare of man. I feared (ſaith hee) the people and therefore I obeyed their voice.
                     Ver. 24. This feare of man to permit or to commit wickedneſſe for feare of diſpleaſing man, is a crime to be condemned euen in the priuate perſons of the inferiour people, becauſe all are commaunded one to exhort another,1. Theſ. 5.11. and one to edyfie another, and our Sauiour ſaith generally to all,
                        Luc. 12, 4. 
                     feare not them that can only kill the bodie and haue no more that

that they can doe, but feare him which hath power to kill both bodie and ſoule and to caſt both into hell fire. But it is much more to bee condemned, if it bee found in them which haue any charge of a publicke function. For of Miniſters may be ſaide that which the Apoſtle Paul ſpeaketh of himſelfe,Gal. 1.10. 
                     If I ſhould pleaſe men I were not the ſeruant of Chriſt. And all magiſtrates ought to approue themſelues to be ſuch as Iethro doth deſcribe them, to wit, men of courage, fearing God,
                     Exod. 18.21. 
                     dealing truely and hating couetouſneſſe. But eſpecially this crime of fearing man is moſt intollerable in them whome it pleaſeth GOD to call (as hee did heere Saul) to the dignitie and Maieſtie of ſupreeme gouernours and to poſſeſſe as it were the room of GOD vpon earth. When GOD had placed Ioſua chiefe gouernour ouer his people hee gaue him in charge two eſpeciall deuties:Ioſ. 1. v, 8 Firſt that hee ſhould neuer let the booke of the Lawe depart out of his mouth, but ſo meditate in the ſame day and night,Ver. 9. that hee ſhoulde obſerue and doe according

to the thinges contained therein: and ſecondly that he ſhould bee ſtrong, and of a good courage, not to feare, neither to bee faint hearted, for (ſaith God) I will bee with thee at hande which way ſoeuer thou goeſt. Whatſoeuer Saule doth pretende of the intent of Sacrifice, and of his fearing the people, yet Samuel ſheweth him what was indeed the true cauſe of his wilfull rebellion in ſparing the cattell of the Amalekites.
                     Ver. 19. 
                     Thou haſt (ſaith hee) turned thy ſelfe to the prey and doone wickedly in the ſight of GOD. To receiue the ſpoyles of enemies is a thing of it ſelfe not vnlawfull in thoſe which are authoriſed and armed with the ſworde of Iuſtice: for ſundrye times did Dauid carie away ſpoyles euen from the Amalekites,
                     2. Sam. 3.12. 1. Sam. 30.26. and ſent part thereof for preſents to the elders of Iuda, Ramath and Bethel. But the pray which Saul doth turne vnto, was commaunded by the voice of GOD vtterly to bee deſtroyed, and no portion thereof to bee ſaued or reſerued. Againe though it be permitted in lawfull warre

to cary away the ſpoyles of ſuch enemies as the Lord ſhall deliuer into our hands, yet is it not lawfull to ſet our heart vpon the ſpoyle, & to make that as it were the principal drift of our labours and endeuours, as heere it is ſaid of Saul that hee turned himſelfe to the prey, as ſetting his heart eſpecially vpon it:Eph. 5. v. 5. Phil. 3. v. 19. Which if he did of a couetous affection, then did hee make Mammon his Idoll: If he did it for his owne feeding and refreſhing, then did hee make his belly his God and his glory to his ſhame: If he did it to pleaſe man, then was it alſo ſpirituall whordome and Idolatrie, As Saint Iames ſaith:Iam. 4. v. 4. 
                     O ye adulterers and adultereſſes know ye not the friendſhip of the world is enmitie againſt God? If any man will be a friende of the world, he maketh himſelfe the enemie of God. So that euery way this rebellion of Saul againſt the commaundement of God may bee fitly compared with the ſinne of Idolatrie. The fourth thing wherein rebellion may well be compared with witchcraft and Idolatrie, is in ſundry effects which they do equally worke in the hearts & eſtates

of men: as firſt they do harden and make obſtinate the heart of man. In witches what one amongſt a thouſand hath in many years bene ſeene to returne to the Lord by vnfained repentance? Of Idolatours that may well be ſpoken which Ieremy ſaith of the Idolatrous people,Ier. 3.3. 
                     thou haſt had a whoriſh face and wouldeſt not be aſhamed,
                     Pſa. 135.18 and that which Dauid ſaith of the Idols themſelues, they haue eyes and ſee not, eares and heare not, they that make them are like vnto them, and ſo are all ſuch as put their truſt in them. The cuſtome of rebellion in Saul (for hee had wilfully broken another commaundement of God before,1. Sam. 13.8 in refuſing to tary for Samuel, for which diſobedience he was firſt denounced to be reiected of God) This cuſtome, I ſay, of oppoſing himſelfe againſt the will of GOD,Ier. 3, 3. doth ſo harden the heart of Saul, that with a whoriſh countenance (as Ieremy ſpeaketh of Idolatours) he doth now impudently defende that he hath done nothing amiſſe, but perfectly fulfilled the will of God: and afterward as hauing eyes and not ſeeing, and eares and not
                     
hearing doth run headelong in the race of wilfulneſſe euen vnto the ende of his miſerable daies. Samuel when hee exhorteth the people to auoide all Idolatrie and all ſetting their owne wils againſt the will of GOD, doth vſe this reaſon, becauſe (ſaith hee) they cannot profite nor deliuer you,
                     1. Sam. 12.21. 
                     for they are but vanitie. So that in this alſo theſe ſinnes are reſembled one to another, for that they are vtterly vnprofitable for the eſtate of mans life. That may well bee ſpoken of all the contemners of God which Oſea ſaith of Idolaters,Oſea. 8.7. 
                     they ſow in the ayre and reape the winde, their bud bringeth forth no meale, their fruite is like blaſted graine. Wee ſee it moſt euident in the common courſe of mans life,1. Tim. 6. ver. 6. that as godlineſſe is a great gaine, and vertue is profitable to all things, ſo the ſeruice of ſinne is vtterly vnprofitable:Rom. 6.21. 
                     what fruite (ſaith the Apoſtle) had ye then in thoſe things whereof ye are now aſhamed? What fruite haue contentious men by their ſuites and debaits,Gal. 5. v. 15 but as one doth bite another, ſo one in the ende to deuour another?

What fruite receiue they which liue a diſſolute life in whordome and dronkenneſſe,Pro. 23.21 Pro. 29.3. Pro. 23.17. 2. Sa. 12.11. Pro. 6.23. Hoſ. 4, 11, 1. Cor 6, 10 Apoc. 22.15, but onely the conſuming of their ſubſtance, the waſting of their health, trouble and vnquietneſſe in their owne houſe, ſhame and confuſion abroade, the loſſe of ſpirituall graces in this life, and the loſſe of life eternall in the worlde to come? What fruite doth the couetous miſer reape by his abundance of welth,Eccl. 4, 8 Pro. 10. ver. 2, when hee doth not poſſeſſe his goods, but is poſſeſſed of them, when hee hath them and cannot finde in his heart to vſe them, when hee hath no hope to haue them bleſſed to the third generation, and eſpecially what will it profit him if hee ſhoulde winne all the worlde,
                     Mat. 16.26 
                     and in the meane time looſe his owne ſoule? As liuing in the obedience of Gods worde in goodneſſe of life is called by the Apoſtle 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      a greate gaine and profit:1. Tim, 6, 6 ſo diſobeying the Lord by riotouſnes of life doth heape vpon man all plagues and miſeries.
                  The people which here vnder Saul doe againſt the commaundement of GOD

keepe ſome cattell to make a wil-worſhip of their owne, do reſerue the beſt & fatteſt of the ſheepe and Oxen: wherein wee may further obſerue how forwarde and zealous men are to ſet forth & maintaine thoſe things which they haue hatched in their owne braine againſt the direct rule of Gods word. For I can account no better of their ſacrifices when they will make them as ſeales of their diſobedience againſt God.
                  
                     Exod. 32.3The people of Iſraell to erect a golden Calfe would part with their Earings, euen the beſt Iewels they had: but in the true worſhippe of God euery thing went hard with them, they were continually murmuring & grudging againſt Moſes and Aaron. When Elias could finde little ſuccour amongſt the Iſraelits their ſucceſſours, Iezabel to maintaine the Idolatry of Baal kept fower hundred Chaplaines, as it is ſaide in the Scriptures,1. Reg. 18.19. 
                     there were fower hundred Prieſts of the groues that did eate at Iezabels table. Wee ſee in our daies many monuments and remnants of ſuperſtition which do ſufficiently lay open to

vs, how forward they were in times paſt to maintaine their wilworſhippe, and we ſee alſo on the other ſide (more is the pittie,) by too lamentable experience, how colde and backwarde we are to vpholde and reſorte vnto the true ſeruice of God framed according to his worde. Manie now are like vnto childrē, who if they be cōmaunded any thing by their parents, they are eyther by and by hungry & wearie, or ſtraight way oppreſſed with heat or colde: but if they runne headlong vpon any deuiſe of their owne braine, they continue in their trauell a long time without feeling hunger or colde, a whole day will ſcarce ſuffice for their vaine inuentions. Euen ſo it is with many men, which though they be growne in ſtature,1. Col. 14.20. yet are children in vnderſtanding and knowledge: what pleaſeth their owne humors and affections, yt they are forwarde with greate charges to ſuſtaine. But if any thing be cōmaunded by godly lawes of Chriſtian Princes, agreeable to the worde of God, of that they make little or ſmall account. So likewiſe it falleth out in the performance of the duetyes of

the ſecond Table.
                  If there be any thing that ſhall diſobey the commaundement of GOD, any riotouſnes of life, any pride, any vncleane luſtes, any exceſſe and ſurfeting, how forward are we, nay how prodigall to compaſſe and accompliſh ſuch diſſolute affections? But if any thing be to be done in obedience of the word, any poore to be releeued, any vertuous acte to bee performed, alas how colde are we then, how ſparing? yea rather how froward? how obſtinate? Rebellion is as the ſinne of witchcraft, and ſtubborne reſiſting as ſuperſtition and Idolatry. Of the ſecond part of this text, to wit, of the iudgement of God denoūced againſt Saul for this his rebellion, I ſhall (godwilling) intreat at ſome other conuenient time. In ye meane while, as the Lacedemonians by ſhewing to their children the lothſome ſight of dronkards, would therby withdraw their youth from that lewde and beaſtly vice, So let this viewe and beholding of the horrour of rebellion, effect and worke in our hearts a perfect hatred of all diſobedience. Let vs earneſtly endeuour to be

that flock of Chriſt which heare his voice and follow him, that ſo we may be certainly aſſured,Ioh. 10.27. that he will giue vnto vs eternall life, and that nothing ſhall bee able to plucke vs out of his hands. Let vs ſhewe forth the fruite of our faith by humble obedience,Gen. 22, 10 as did faithfull Abraham, yt walking after ye ſpirite, we may be fully certified that we liue by the ſpirite.Gal. 5.25. Let vs order our conuerſation duetifully in the feare of God, as becommeth obedient children, in ſacrificing & mortifying our owne wills and affections yt ſo being ſonnes and daughters,1. Pet, 1, 14 Col, 3, 5. 1. Cor. 6, 18 Apoc. 1, 6, yea kings and prieſts to God the father in this life we may raigne with him for euer in his eternall kingdome in the world to come,Apo, 22, 5, whereunto he ſpeedily bring vs all, that mercifully dyed for vs all, our Lord and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus, To whom with the Father and the holy Ghoſt, three perſons and one true and euerliuing God, bee all honour, glory, thankſgiuing & praiſe now and for euer. Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Errata.
                  In the firſt Sermon, for ſtrong, r. ſtong, for portinus, r. protinus. In the ſecond ſermon, fol. 3. b. r. moſhegnim, fol. 5. b.r. effecting of ſome, fol. 18. a. r. Longins. fol. 14. a. actions that can be. In the third, for honoradi. r. honorandi.
                  
                     The often ſudden changing of the Character, was the Printers conceipt, in the abſence of the Author.
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   