
      
         
            
            
            
               THE SPEECHE WHICH THE FRENCH KING made to the Lords of the Parliament on the fifth of Ianuary. 1599.
            Faithfully tranſlated out of French, by H.W.
            
            Imprinted at London by Iohn VVolfe, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop in Popes head Alley, neere vnto the Exchange. 1599.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The ſpeech which the King made to the Lordes of the Parlement, on the 5. of Ianuarie 1599.
            
               BEfore I ſpeake of that, for which I cauſed you to be héere aſſembled, I will tell you a hiſtorie, which euen now I put the Marſhall De la Chaſtre in minde of.
            Preſently after S. Bartholmeus, foure of vs playing at Dice, ſawe ſome drops of blood appearing on the Table, the which being wiped twice out, they ſtill returned againe. And for the third time, I ſayd I would play no longer, and that it was an Augure againſt them which had ſpilt it: The Lord Guiſe being one of the companie.
            This talke ended, his Maieſtie ſaid as followeth.
            YOu ſée me in my cloſet, where I come to ſpeake with you, not in Royall habitements, with my Rapier and Helmet, as my predeceſſors, norlike a Prince who intendeth to ſpeake to forraigne. Embaſſadors: but apparrelled like a father of a familie, in a doublet, to ſpeake familiarlie to his children. That which I haue to ſay, is to pray you, to verifie the Edict which I haue graunted vnto thoſe of the Religion. That which I haue doone, is for the good of the peace, which I haue concluded without, and I will now haue it within my Realme. You ought to obay me, although there were no other conſideration, but my qualitie, and the obligation of all my ſubiects, and eſpecially you of my Parlement. Some I haue replaced in their houſes, from which they were baniſhed: and other ſome in the faith which otherwiſe they would

not haue had. If the obedience was doone to my predeceſſors: as much or more is dew to me, becauſe that I haue reeſtabliſhed the eſtate: God hauing choſen mee, to ſet me in the kingdome which is dewe to me by inheritance and purchaſe. The Lordes of my Parliament ſhould not be in their ſeates without me. I will not vaunt nor boaſt, but thus much I will ſay, that I haue no other example to imitate, but my ſelfe: I know full well, that there hath béene great briberie: and that ſeditious preachings haue béene raiſed vp. But I will ſet good order for thoſe men, and will not referre the ſame to you: It is euen the way which was taken, to make the Barricadoes, and to come by degrées to the murther of the late King. Naye I will looke to all that, I will cut the roote of all thoſe factions, and of all factious Sermons, and will ſhorten all thoſe which ſhall raiſe them. I haue leaped vpon the walles of Citties, I ſhall alſo be able to leape vppon your Barricadoes, which are not ſo high. Alleadge not vnto me, the Catholique religion: I loue it better then you: I am more Catholique then you: I am the eldeſt ſonne to the church, which none of you is, nor cannot bee: you deceiue your ſelues greatly, in ſuppoſing your ſelues in the Popes fauour: I am in it better then you. (If in caſe that I will vndertake it, I will cauſe all you to be declared hereticks for not obeying me. I haue more intelligence at Rome then you: you may doe enough, I ſhall know what euerie one of you ſaye: I know all what is in your houſes: I know all what you doe and ſay: I haue a little Demon, who reuealeth it all vnto me. Thoſe which will not haue my Edict to paſſe, ſéeke warres. I will declare them to morrowe to thoſe of the Religion: but I will not make the warres. You your ſelues ſhall goe thether, with your gownes, and gather againe the proceſſion of the Cappuchins, which ſhall carrie their Muſkets vpon their garments: It will bee a goodly ſight to ſée you. If you will

not paſſe my Edict, you will make me goe to the Parliament: You ſhall be vnkinde, when you ſhall haue engendred me this enuie: Witneſſe thoſe of my counſaile which haue found the Edict good and needfull, for the eſtate of my affaires: my Lord the Conſtable, my Lord Chauncelor, my Lords of Belliure, of Sancy, de Sillery and Villeron, I haue doone it by their aduice, and of the Dukes and Peeres. There was not one of them, that durſt name himſelfe Protector of the Catholique Religion, or that durſt denie to haue giuen me his aduice therein. I am the onely conſeruator of the Religion. I will, well enough diſſipate the commotions which will bee 
                  •
               owed. They haue complained at Paris, that I would make ſome leuying of Switzers, or other gathering of troopes. Well, I haue doone it: It ought to bee well thought of, and it ſhould be to a good end, by reaſon of all my forepaſſed demeanors. Witneſſe what I haue doone for the reconqueſt of Amiens: where I haue employed the moneys of the Edicts, which you would not haue paſſed, had I not gone to the Parliament. Neceſſitie conſtraind me to make this Edict: through the ſame neceſſitie I haue at other times playde the Souldier. It is ſpoken of, and yet I haue not made any ſemblance thereof. I am King now, and ſpeak like a King. I will be obeyed.
            In déed I confeſſe, that the Iuſtice is my right arm. But if now the right arme be infected, the left ought to cut it off. When my regiments doe not ſerue me, I caſheere them. What ſhall you gaine by not verifying the Edict? for aſwell will I paſſe it. The Preachers may preache their fill, and brawle: as the brother to my Lord of Silery hath doone, to whome I will ſpeake in this companie. And hauing called the ſaide Lorde of Sillery, he ſaid.
            I haue before aduertiſed you of ſome complaints doone againſt your brother, as alſo I had commaunded you to admoniſh him to reſtraine himſelfe, and to bee wiſe.

At the firſt, I beléeued that there was no ſuch matter, that he had preached againſt the Edict: becauſe there were no proofes, yet was it true: And at laſt, he got to S. Andrew, where my Generall Atturney hath heard him preach ſeditiouſly, againſt the Edict, but it was not taken vp as it ought, they will accuſe him to be mooued by an inconſiderate zeale. But be it of purpoſe or otherwiſe, it is alwaies euill, and this inconſiderate zeale deſerues a puniſhment. This complaint done, his Maieſty returning to the Lords of his Parlament, ſaid: There is not one of you but findes me good, when he néedeth me, there being not one amogſt you but néed me once a yeere: And yet notwithſtanding to me which am ſo good, you are bad. If the other Parlements, for hauing reſiſted my will, haue béen cauſes that thoſe of the Religion, haue demaunded new thinges: I will not that you alſo bee cauſes of other nouilties, by your refuſall. Anno. 94. and 95. when I ſent you a declaration vpon the Edict of Anno 77. for the prouiſion of the Officers. I had promiſed not to prouide any of the religion, with the Eſtates of the court of Parlement: Since that, the time hath changed the affaires: yet neuertheleſſe I will haue good aſſuraunce of thoſe vnto whom I commit charges, that they ſhall behaue themſelues as they ought. Speake not ſo much of the Catholike Religion. All thoſe great Catholike and Eccleſiaſtical cryers, if I giue but to the one, a benefice of 2000. crownes, and to another 4000. pounds of rent, they wil play mum, they will not ſpeake a word more. I iudge of this ſort of all the reſt which ſpeake againſt the Edict. There are fomelewde, which ſéeme to hate ſinne, but it is, for feare of the paines: and the good hate it for the loue of vertue. I remember once I learned two Lattin verſes.
            
               Oderunt peccare male formidine pene,
               Oderunt peccare boni virturis Amore.
            
            
               I haue not repeated theſe verſes theſe twenty yéers, but at this preſent, becauſe I know that ſome of you which hate ſinne, do beare the hate for loue of the vertue: and I wiſh puniſhment to thoſe which ſhall hate it for feare of the paine. And afterwards (as doth a ſonne to his Father) they will thanke me for the puniſhment. I had not thought to haue ſent for you but yeſter night late. Séeing the Edict whereof I tell you, is the Edict of the late King: Alſo it is mine: for it hath this day béen done by me, and I doe yet confirme it. I finde not good to haue one thing in my mind and to write another. And although ſome others haue done ſo, yet will I not doe it. The laſt words which you ſhall haue of me is. That you follow the exāple of Monſieur du meyne: who, whē ſome deſiring him to make ſome enterprizes againſt my wil: anſwered that he was too much bound vnto me, as alſo all my ſubiectes, amongſt the which he would alwaies be one, who ſhould expoſe his life to pleaſure me: Becauſe that I haue reeſtabliſhed Fraunce, in diſpight of thoſe which ſought the ruine thereof: Although that in times paſt, he would haue aſſayed all wayes and meanes to ouerthrow the Eſtate. If then the head of the league, hath ſpoken ſo: how much more ought you which I haue reeſtabliſhed? Thoſe which alwaies haue béene faithfull vnto me: Thoſe which I haue replaced in their houſes: In fine what ought they to doe? Finally, grant vnto my requeſts: what you will not graunt to threates, yet ſhall you not haue any of me: doe what I commaund you, and what I pray you. Yee ſhall not onely doe it for me, but alſo for your ſelues, and to the good of the peace.
            FINIS.
         
      
   