
      
         
            
            ¶ The Familiar Epiſtles of Sir Anthony of Gueuara, Preacher, Chronicler, and Counceller to the Emperour Charles the fifth.
            Tranſlated out of the Spaniſh toung, by Edward Hellowes, Groome of the Leaſhe, and now newly imprinted, corrected, & enlarged with other Epiſtles of the ſame Author.
            
               VVherein are contained very notable letters, excellent diſcourſes, curious ſayings, and moſt naturall reaſons.
            VVherein are contained expoſitions of certaine figures, authorities of holy Scripture, very good to be preached, and better to be followed.
            
               VVherin are contained declarations of ancient ſtamps of writings vpon ſtones, Epitaphes of Sepulchers, Lawes and cuſtomes of Gentiles.
            
               VVherein are contained Doctrines, Examples, and counſelles for Princes, for noble men, for Lawyers, and Church men: very profitable to be followed, and pleaſant to be readde.
            
               ¶Printed at London by Henry Bynneman, for Raufe Nevvbery, dvvelling in Fleetſtreete, a little aboue the Conduit.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Right worshipfull Sir Henry Lee Knight, Maiſter of the Leaſſhe.
            
               RIGht vvorſhipfull, being combred vvith doubt too be noted of raſh preſumption, and no leſſe afflicted vvith that vncouth & deteſtable vice of dull deſpaire: I vvas conſtrained vvith tvvo much oddes, to endure combat with both theſe furious ſprites: and after long conflicte, as it vvere by the vvaye of taking breath, they began to argue: and firſt deſpaire (being more fierce, vvith thinne face and holovve eyes) grimmely began to ſaye, Oh beaſtly Svvine vvithoute prouidence, and enraged Beare, to performe thy ovvne diſpoſition, vvithout all grace or learning, and voyd of all conſideration of the iſſue of iudgemente of others, vvhich greedily deſpiſe, hate and beare enuie, and at all times ceaſſe not to perſecute the feeble attemptes vvhich thou and others takeſt in hande, euery of vvhiche euills vvith many others might be auoyded, if by the nature and manner of my diſpoſition thou couldſt keepe thy ſelfe coy and mute. But vvith great impatiēce preſumption did breath foorth theſe or ſuch like vvords: ah miſerable Cockatrice, and caytife moſt cruel to mankind, vvhich by thy ougly ſhape declareſt the lothſome frute of thy vvretched nature, vvhiche in all times and places

doſt practiſe the ouerthrovv of al honeſt, lavvdable and noble enterpriſes, vvherin they vvould haue vſed many tedious argumēts, if I had not cut off by ſute for diuine aſſiſtance. Preſently obtayning tvvo ſuch auncient and famous Champions, of no common ſingularitie, by vvhoſe preſidents, directions, and conductions, I vvas foorth vvith deliuered of all perplexities, namely Lucifer and Iudas: but therevvithall not omitting to ſuccour my ſelfe vvith the vviſedome and policie of the Bee, vvhi
                  •
               h gathereth honey out of nettles, vvhich both and ioyntly made ſuch diſcourſes of the horrible euills, deſperate miſchiefes, and cruell miſhaps, that hath enſued the hatefull company of both theſe companions aforeſayd, in ſuch ſenſible maner, as ſuche feeling vvitneſses poſsibly might report. Leauing all their particular reaſons vvhich vvoulde grovv ouerlong, they concluded, that euery extremitie engendreth vice, and only vertue is that which is equal in ballance: & ſo departed. Therby giuing to vnderſtand, that the vertue of a noble mind, is neither daūted vvith frovvard fortune, either exalted or puffed vp vvith gifts or proſperitie. And preſently being brought to a certaine examination, I vvas driuen flatly to confeſſe that al ſtrength is vveakneſſe, al knovvledge ignorance, actiuitie impotencie, vviſdome fooliſhneſſe, iuſtice vvrong, temperāce raſhneſſe, fortitude covvardneſſe, and all perfection but corruption: of all vvhich, & no other notable deedes, man vvhatſoeuer, may preſume and boaſt himſelfe, but vvhen God alone vnto diligence doth adde his grace. And thus preſumption vvith his ſequele being remoued, and deſpaire vvith his drovvſie troupe being vaniſhed, depending only of

diuine prouidence, I began to cal to mind my God, my Prince, my countrey, & alſo your vvorſhip, of vvhom I had receyued many good things, being very loth to ſhevv my ſelfe vtterly idle, either ingrate, receyuing aduertiſemēt of Gueuara vvhich giueth vs to vnderſtand, that ſince the beginning of the vvorld, there hathe not bin any Prince that hathe excelled, or to vvhom Iulius Caeſar, either Alexander the great ought to giue place: obtayning ſoueraintie in their ſeuerall vertues, namely the one in pardonīg of iniuries the other in giuing large and bountiful revvards: affirming therevvithall, that to the ingrate or vnthankfull man, neither vvould Alexander giue any revvard, either Iulius Caeſar pardon iniurie: giuing vs therby to vnderſtand, that they helde it much better to darken their ovvne ſingular and renovvmed vertues, thā to yeld benefit vnto ſo deteſtable vice. Forthvvith being vrged therby to confeſſe my debt, & conſtrayned to ſhake off all drovvſie forgetfulneſſe, & avvake my dull ſpirits to yeld my ſelfe as abandoned to do your worſhip either ſeruice or pleaſure: but my treaſure and ſtorehouſe being ſearched and ranſackt, I find it furniſhed vvith no other implements, but emptie abilitie, and barren facultie to performe the ſame: forced in the place of vvorkes to furniſh the ſatiſfaction vvith vvords. Yet frankly confeſsing that although oportunitie ſhall deny to yeeld hir ſelfe to ſtretch to the merit of your great goodneſſe vſed vvith me: notvvithſtanding at all times and places, vvords of confeſsion and diſpoſition to performe, ſhall neuer ceaſſe to do their indeuor to eſcape the vnkind diſgrace of ingratitude. Adding therby hardines vnto my ſelf once more to attēpt your patiēce vvith this preſent of Gueuara being finiſhed,

and alſo out of the French Booke ſomevvhat augmented, vvith matter both horoicall and deuine: the prayſe and commendation vvhereof, I rather remitte vnto the glorious fame of the Auctor himſelfe, than tediouſly vvithout skill to paint or poliſh the ſame vvith colours of imperfect hevv. Right humbly beſeeching youre VVorſhip to accepte the ſame vvith the mildneſſe of your vvonted fauoure: & (as it apperteyneth) I ſhall not ceaſſe to pray that the protection of the liuing God may conduct and follovve you vvith perfect felicitie in all nobleneſſe both of body & mind, as may yeld your worſhip before god & man immortal renowne.
            
               Your worſhippes moſt humble to command Edwarde Hellowes.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               RIght gentle Reader, in all nations, cuntries, and Common wealthes, although barbarous, yet in reſpect of the office of Harold, Purſiuant, Meſſenger, or Interpreter, they alwayes beare with patience and take in good parte, all actions both of worde and deede, appertayning vnto his office: And ſomtimes of theyr owne nobleneſſe, do bountifully rewarde the ſame, although he vtter vnto them matter both opprobrious and ſpitefull. And alſo Gueuara maketh report, that it was a law amōg the Romanes, that no man whatſoeuer, ſhoulde aduenture to approche the Emperours tent in the nyght and tyme of warre vpon payne of death. The Emperor Aurelius as then making warre with Zenobia Queene of Palmiris, it chaunced, that a certaine Greeke ſouldier was apprehended within the compaſſe of the ſame, being committed to be executed for his offence, the Emperour himſelfe from within his Pauilion with a lowde voyce cryed out and ſayd, If his approche were for himſelfe, let him dye for it, but if it be for another, let him liue. The matter beyng ſearched and examined, it was founde, that he came to ſue for his twoo fellowes that were taken ſleeping in the watche, which after whipping ſhoulde haue bin deliuered vnto the enimies. And ſo it came to paſſe, that the ſouldier eſcaped death, his fellowes deliuered from puniſhment, and the Emperor of clemencie obteined immortall renoune. Of all which premiſſes, me thinketh I gather vnto my ſelfe, a ſafetie and protection from all iniurie, bothe of worde and deede of all manner of men, not vnreaſonable, which in this matter haue vſed but the office of meſſenger, interpreter, & ſoliciter: but to my owne payne, and thy profite, beeing vtterly without doubt to be requited with thy ingratitude. And whereas but with ſuche time as was rather ſtretched vnto the liking of him that myght command them mete for the matter, I haue not onely corrected, but alſo performed the tranſlation of the firſte booke of the familiar Epiſtles of Gueuara, that were not tranſlated, and further finding certaine Epiſtles and

diſputations of the ſayde auctor, by no man as yet tranſlated, wā
               dring and as it might ſeeme taking leaue: I thought it more conuenient to entertaine the ſame with my ſimple Engliſh ſpeach, thā to hazard the loſſe of ſo rare, ſingular, diuine, & moſt neceſſary doctrine therin cōteyned, although but with my poore abilitie: flatly confeſsing that I want both gloſſe & hew of rare eloquence, vſed in the poliſhing of the reſt of his workes: neuertheleſſe moſt certaynely affirming, that it goeth agreable vnto the author thereof. For due commendations whereof, for want of tyme I ſhall yeelde no other wordes, than be conteyned in my former Preface, as followeth: Being furniſhed ſo fully with ſyncere doctrine, ſo vnvſed eloquence, ſo high a ſtile, ſo apte ſimilitudes, ſo excellent diſcourſes, ſo conuenient examples, ſo profounde ſentences, ſo old antiquities, ſo ancient hiſtories, ſuch varietie of matter, ſo pleaſant recreations, ſo ſtrange things alledged, & certaine parcelles of Scripture with ſuch dexteritie hādled, that it may hardly be diſcerned, whether ſhal be greater, either thy pleaſure by reding, or profit by following the ſame. Like as in a moſt curious ſhop furniſhed with incōparable drugs, & moſt precious ſpices, both to preſerue health, as alſo to expell moſt peſtilent diſeaſes: euen ſo heerein is plentifully to be founde, things not only precious to conſerue, but alſo to remedy the contagion of any eſtate both in peace & warre. As rules for Kings to rule, counſellers to counſell, magiſtrates to gouerne, prelates to practiſe, captaines to execute, ſouldiers to performe, the married to follow, the proſperous to proſecute, and the poore in aduerſitie to be cōforted, wherein he delicately toucheth with moſt curious ſayings, & no leſſe philoſophie, how to write or talke with all men, in all matters at large, with matter ſo apte, ſo learned, ſo merry, and alſo ſo graue, with inſtruction of behauiour, with thy better, with thy equal, with thy friend, with thy foe, with thy wife, ſeruaunte, and children: That for prayſe and aduancement thereof, wordes moſt certainly, and alſo tyme may want, but not matter and iuſt occaſion to commend the ſame. Commending the reſt vnto thy good conſideration, and yeelding my ſelfe vnto thy mildneſſe, grace, and fauour, I commit thee to the liuing God, to whome be prayſe for euermore.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The familiar Epiſtles of Sir Antony of Gueuara, Biſhop of Mondonedo, Preacher and Chronicler to Charles the fifth.
            
            
               
                  ¶ An Oration made vnto the Emperours Maieſtie in a Sermon, at the triumphs when the French King was taken. VVherin the Author doth perſwade to vſe his clemency, in recompence of ſo great a victory.
               
               
                  S.C.C.R.M.
               
               
                  
                     SOlon Solonio cōmanded in his lawes to the Athenians, that on the day they had ouercome any battayle, they ſhould offer vnto the Gods great Sacrifices, and giue vnto men large rewards: to the end that againſt other warres, they might finde the Gods fauourable, and men of willing mindes. Plutarch ſayth, that when the Greekes remayned Conquerours in that renowmed battaile of Marathon, they ſent vnto the temple of Diana in Epheſus,
                  What they gaue in olde tune in reward for good newes. to offer ſo much Siluer, that it was to be doubted, whether there remayned ſo much more in all Greece. When Camilius ouercame the Etrurians and Volſians, mortall enemies to the Romaines, all the women of Rome did not forget to ſende to the Oracle of Apollo, which ſtoode in Aſia, as much Golde and Siluer as they had in poſſeſſion, without reſeruing any one iewell. When the Conſull Silla was Conquerour of the valiant King Mithridates, he conceyued ſo great pleaſure in his hart, that not contented to offer to the God Mars all the ſpoyle gotten of the enemies, he offered alſo a viall of his owne bloud. The famous and glorious Iephthah Duke of the Hebrewes made a ſolempne vowe, that if God gaue him victorious returne frō the warres he then had in hand, he would offer in the temple

both the bloud and life of his onely daughter: the which vow as he promiſed, ſo he accompliſhed. Of theſe examples it may be gathered, what and how many thanks Princes ought too giue vnto God, for the triumphes, victories, and bounties hée giueth them: for though it be in the hands of kings to begin warre, it is in the hands of God only to giue victory. There is nothing that moueth god to be leſſe carefull for vs, than the ingratitude of a good turne receiued. For the good things wée receiue of men,God will not but that we gratifie the good thing we receyue. they will wée recompence or deſerue them: but God will that wée gratifie and not forget them. Princes moſte chiefly haue cauſe to beware they forgette not benefites receiued of GOD, bycauſe the ingratitude of a benefite receiued maketh them incapable and vnworthy of diuine fauour in time to come. The forgetfull, ingrate or vnkind Prince, neither God doth delight too helpe, or men ſo ſerue. All this haue I ſayde vnto your imperial Maieſtie, by occaſion of this great victory ye haue obtained at Pauia, where your armye hath taken Fraunces the Frenche King, who in his owne galleys was brought priſoner into Spayne. A caſe ſo graue,In the wars more than in other things fortune vſeth doubleneſſe. a newes ſo new, a victorie ſo ſeldom heard of, a fortune ſo accompliſhed is both terrible to the world, and brings your Maieſty in debt, which debt is, to giue God thankes for the victory, and to recompence the conquerours of the battayle. By this it may be apparant to your Maieſty, that there is nothing wherin fortune is leſſe conſtant, than in martiall affayres, ſince the French king being preſent (and alſo taken in his owne perſon) with all the potentates of Italy, did loſe the battayle, where dyed all the nobles of Fraunce. Much ſhold your Maieſty erre, once to thinke the victory to be gotten by your pollicy, or obtayned by your power, or els to haue happened by chaunce. For a déede ſo famous, an act ſo glorious, and a caſe ſo heroicall, as this is, doth not fall out vnder fortune, but is only giuen by diuine prouidence. Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? If Dauid being a King, a Prophet, a Sainct, and with God ſo priuate, vnderſtoode not what to preſent vnto God, for the good things hée had receiued:

what ſhall we doe that are miſerable, that vnderſtand not what to ſay, nor haue not what to giue? of our ſelues wée are ſo weake, and our abilitie ſo ſmall, our valure ſo little, and haue ſo few things, that if God do not giue wherwith to giue, of our ſelues we haue not what to giue. And what we haue to craue, or els that he ſhould giue: is his grace to ſerue him, and not licence to offend him.There is no ſacrifice more accepted, than to pardon an enimie. In remuneration of ſo great victory, I would not counſell your Maieſty too offer iewels as the women of Rome, eyther Siluer or Gold as the Greekes, eyther your owne blud as Silla, neyther your childrē as Iephtha: but that ye offer the inobedience and rebellion againſt your Maieſty, by the commons of Caſtile. For before GOD there is no Sacrifice more accepted, than the pardoning of enemies. The iewels that we might offer vnto God, procéede from our Cofers: the Gold from our Cheſts: the bloud from our Veynes: but the pardoning of iniuries, from our hartes and entrayles, where enuie lyeth grinding, and perſwading reaſon to diſſemble, and the hart to be reuenged. Much more ſure is it for Princes, to be beloued for their clemency, than to be feared for their chaſtiſements. For as Plato ſayeth,The man that is feared, hath neede to feare. the man that is feared of many, hath cauſe alſo too feare many. Thoſe that offended your Maieſtie in thoſe alterations paſte, ſome of them bée deade, ſome bée baniſhed, ſome hidden, and ſome be fledde. Moſt excellent Prince, it is great reaſon, that in reward of ſo great victory, they maye boaſt themſelues of your pietie, and not complaine of your rigor. The wiues of theſe vnfortunate men bée poore, their daughters vpon the poynt to be loſt, their Sonnes are Orphans, their kinſfolkes bluſhe and are aſhamed: In ſo muche as the pitie that yée ſhall vſe towardes a fewe, redoundeth to the remedie of manie. There is no eſtate in this worlde, whiche in caſe of iniury, is not more ſure in pardoning than in reuenging: for that many times it dothe happen, that a man ſéeking occaſion too bée reuenged, doth vtterly deſtroy him ſelfe.It is more ſure to forget an iniurie, than to reuenge it. The enemies of Iulius Caeſar, did more enuie the pardoning of the Pompeyans, than the killing of Pompeyus himſelfe.

For excellencie, it was written of him, that he neuer forgot ſeruice, or euer did remember iniurie. Two Emperours haue bene in Rome, vnlike in name, and much more in maners: the one was named Nero the Cruell, the other Antony the Méeke. The which ouernames the Romaines gaue them, the one of Méeke, bycauſe he could not but pardon, the other of Cruell, bicauſe he neuer ceaſed to kill. A Prince although he be prodigall in play, ſcarce in giuing, vncertaine of his woorde, negligent in gouernement, abſolute in cōmaunding, diſſolute in liuing, diſordinate in eating, and not ſober in drinking, is termed but vicious: but if he be cruel and giuen to reuenge, he is named a tyrant. As it is ſayde by Plutarch: He is not a tyrant for the goods he taketh, but for the cruelties he vſeth. Foure Emperours haue bene of this name. The firſt was called Charles the great: the ſecond, Charles the Bohemian: the third, Charles the Balde: the fourth, Charles the groſſe, the fifth, which is your maieſtie, we wiſhe to be called Charles the Méke, in following the Emperoure Antony the Méeke,Fewe & good wordes are to be vſed with Princes. which was ye Prince of all the Romaine Empire beſt beloued. And bicauſe Caliſtines would that Princes ſhould be perſuaded by few things, & thoſe very good, and woordes well ſpoken: I cōclude and ſay, that Princes with their pietie and clemencie, be of God pardoned, and of their ſubiects beloued.
            
            
               
                  An Oration made vnto the Emperours Maieſtie, in a ſermon on the day of Kings, wherein is declared, howe the name of Kings was inuented, and howe the title of Emperours was firſt found out. A matter very pleaſaunt.
               
               
                  S. C. C. R. M.
               
               
                  THis preſent day being the day of Kings, in the houſe of Kings, and in the preſence of Kings, it is not vnfitte that wée ſpeake of Kings: though Princes had rather be obeyed than counſelled. And ſeing we preache this day before him that is the Emperour of the

                  Romains, & King of the Spaniards, it ſhal be a thing very ſéemly & alſo very neceſſary, to relate here what this woorde King doth mean, and from whence this name Emperor doth come: to the end we may al vnderſtand how they ought to gouerne vs, and we to obey them. As concerning this name of King, it is to be vnderſtood, that according to the varietie of nations, ſo did they diuerſly name their Princes, that is to ſaye:How in the old tyme they called their Kings. Amongeſt the Aegyptians they were called Pharaones: the Bythinians Ptolomaei:
                   the Perſians, Arſicides:
                   the Latines, Murrani:
                   the Albans, Syluij: Sicilians, Tyrants: the Argiues, Kings. The fyrſte king of this world the Argiues doe ſaye was Foroneus: and the Greekes do report, to bée Codor Laomor: Whiche of theſe opinions is moſt true, hée only knoweth that is moſte high and only true. Although we know not who was the firſt King, neither who ſhal be the laſte king of the worlde, at the leaſt we know one thing, & that is, that al the Kings paſt are dead, and al thoſe that now liue ſhal die: bicauſe death doth as wel cal the King in his throne, as the laborer at his plow. Alſo it is to bée vnderſtood, that in olde time,In the olde time to bee a king was no dignitie, but an office. to be a King was no dignitie, but onely an office, as Maior or Ruler of a common wealth: After this maner, that euery yeare they did prouide for the office of King to rule, as nowe they do prouide a Viceroy to gouerne. Plutarke in his booke of Common wealth dothe reporte, that in the beginning of the worlde all Gouernours were called tyrantes,He that knoweth not to gouern, deſerueth not to reigne. and after the people did perceiue what difference was betwéene the one and the other, they did ordeyn amongſt thēſelues, to name the euill gouernors tyrāts, and the good, they intituled Kings. By this it may be gathered (moſt excellent Prince) that this name King, is conſecrated vnto perſons of good deſerning, and that be profitable vnto the common wealth: for otherwiſe he doth not deſerue to bée called King, that doth not knowe to gouern. When God did eſtabliſh an houſhold, & for himſelf did conſtitute a Common Wealth in the land of the Aegyptians, he would not giue thē kings to gouerne, but Dukes to defend them, that is to ſay, Moſes, Gedeon, Iephtha, and Sampſon. This God did to deliuer

them from paying of tributes, and that they might be vſed as brethren, & not as vaſſals. This maner of gouernment amōg the Hebrues did cōtinue vnto the time of Helie the high prieſt, vnder whoſe gouernance the Iſraelites required a King to gouerne their cōmon welth, and to lead them in their warres. Then God gaue them Saul to be their King, much againſt his will: ſo that the laſt Duke of Iſraell was Helie, and the firſte king was Saule. In the beginning when Rome was founded, and the Romanes began to be Lords of the worlde, forthwith they did create kings to rule them, and Captaines to defende them. They found themſelues ſo gréeued with that maner of gouernment, that they ſuffred but ſeuen kings, not withſtanding they thought them ſeuen hundred. And bicauſe the ſoothſayers had ſaide, yt this name King was conſecrate vnto the Gods,Amongſt the Romaines a Prieſt was called a king. the Romanes cōmaunded that he ſhould be called King, that was no king: And this was the high prieſt of the god Iupiter, in ſuch maner that he held only the name of king, & the office of prieſt. Hauing ſpoken of the name of king, nowe let vs ſpeake of the name of Emperour, that is to ſay, how it was inuented, where it was inuented, and to what ende it was inuented, ſince it is the name in all this world moſt reuerēced, & alſo moſt deſired. And although amongſt the Syrians, the Aſſyrians, Medes, Perſians, Grekes, Troyans, Parthians, Paleſtines, & Aegyptians, their haue bin princes glorious in armes, & in great eſtimation in their cōmon wealths, yet they neuer obteyned the name of Emperor,In old times they did not boaſt themſelues with vaine titles. either intituled themſelues therwith. In thoſe ancient tymes & in thoſe goldē worlds, the good men and the noble perſonages did not lay vp their honor in vaine titles, but in noble, valiāt and glorious acts. This name Emperour the Romanes firſt brought into this world, whiche they inuented not for their Princes, but for their Captains generall. In ſuche wiſe, that in Rome he was not intituled Emperoure, that was Lorde of the Common wealth, but that was choſen generall of the warre. The Romanes euery yere in the Moneth of Ianuarye, did chooſe all their officers of the Senate, and in their ſuch election, they did firſte ordeyne the high Prieſt, which they named King: then the Dictator,

then the Conſull, then the Tribune of the people, then the Emperor, then the Cenſor, and then the Edill. By this election it may be gathered,The office of the Edil was the maiſter of ceremonies in triumphs and theatres. that the ſame which is nowe an Imperiall dignitie was in thoſe dayes but an office giuen in the moneth of Ianuary, and ended in the moneth of December, Quintus Cincinatus, Fabius Camillus, Marcus Marcellus, Quintus Fabius, Annius Fabricius, Dorcas, Metellus, Gracchus, Sempronius, Scipio the African, and the greate Iulius Caeſar: when they did gouerne the Romane hoſtes, were called Emperors, but afterwards when in the Senate the office was taken away, they were named by their proper names. But after the great battayle of Pharſalie, in whiche Pompey was ouercome and the field remayning to Caeſar, it hapned that the cōmon wealth came into the hands of Caeſar. The Romanes made requeſt he ſhould not take vnto himſelfe the Title of king, bicauſe it was odious vnto them, but that he would vſe ſome other at his liking, vnder which they woulde obey and ſerue him. Being at that time Captain generall of the Romanes, and therefore then called Emperour, he choſe his name,How the name of Emperour was firſt found out. and not the name of Kyng, to doe the Romaines pleaſure, in ſuche wyſe, that this greate Prince was the firſte of the worlde, that left this name annexed vnto the Emperour. Iulius Caeſar beeing deade, Octauius his couſin did ſuccéede him in the Empire, then Tyberius, then Caligula, then Claudius, then Nero, and Vitellius, and ſo of al the other Princes to this day: The whiche in memorie of the firſt Emperour be intituled Auguſtus, Caeſars, and Emperours.
               
               
                  Of the ſeuen conditions that a good king ought to haue, with an expoſition of a text of holie Scripture.
                  
                     THis name of Kyng béeyng declared, and the inuention of the title Emperour being ſpoken of (moſte Noble Emperoure) it ſhall be méete that we declare howe a good king ought to gouerne his kyngdome, and howe the good Emperour oughte to rule his

Empire,The beſte office is to bee holden by the beſt man. for, béeing as they are, the two greateſt offices in this worlde, it is neceſſarie that the two beſte men in thys world doe vſe them. It were great infamie to the perſon, and no ſmall offence to the common wealth, to behold a man earing at the plough,It is more worthy to deſerue honoure than to hold it that deſerueth to reigne, & to ſée him reign that deſerueth to go to plough. Wherfore (moſt ſoueraigne Prince) it is cōuenient you vnderſtand, that to be in honor is a thing of ſmal effect, but to deſerue the ſame is of moſt great worthineſſe. If he which is only a King, be bound to be good, he that is king & Emperour, is he not bound to be good & very good?The ingrate Prince is vnfortunate. The euil Princes be ingrate, and forgetful of benefites be they great or little: but the good Princes and the Chriſtian Emperours, recompence euery ſeruice bountifullye. The Prince that is to God ingrate, and of the ſeruice they do him vnthankfull, in his perſon it will be ſéene: and in his kingdome it will appeare: bicauſe all his attempts do falle out confuſed or with ſhame. And for that it ſhal ſeeme wée ſpeak not of fauour or at large, we will expound vpon the ſame a certaine authoritie of holie Scripture, wherein is ſhewed what a one the King ought to be in his own perſon, and how he ought to gouerne his common wealth, for it is not ſufficient that the Prince be a good man, but that his common wealth be good: neyther is it ſufficient that the cōmon welth be good, but the Prince alſo bée good. In Deutero. 18. Chapter,What conditions a good king ſhoulde haue. God ſayd vnto Moyſes, If the people ſhal aſke thée a King, thou ſhalt giue them one, but beware that the King whiche thou ſhalt giue them, be natural of the kingdom, that he haue not many horſſes, that he turne not the people into Egipte, that he holde not manye wyues, that hée gather not muche treaſure, that he bée not proud, and that he reade in Deuteron. Vpon euery one of theſe commaundementes, to ſpeake what myght be ſayd, ſhould be, neuer to make an ende, only we will briefly ſpeake of euery of them.
                  Before all things God cōmaunded that the Kings ſhould be natural of the kingdome, that is to vnderſtande, that hée ſhuld be an Hebrue circūciſed, & no Gentile, for that god would

not they ſhold be gouerned that honoured one God, by thoſe that did beléeue in many Gods. The Prince to whome it aperteyneth to gouerne Chriſtians, it is conuenient hée be a good Chriſtian: and the ſignes of a good Chriſtian are theſe,The good king doth forget his owne iniuries, and doth chaſtiſe the offences to God. when the offences to God he dothe chaſtiſe, and his owne hee doth forget. Then is the Prince naturall of the kingdome, when he doth obſerue and defend the Goſpell of Chriſt. For to ſpeake according to truth, and alſo with libertie, he dothe not deſerue to be king, which is not zealous of Gods law. God alſo commaundes the Prince not to haue many horſes, that is to ſay, that he waſt not the treaſure of the common wealth in ſuperfluous coſt, in maynteyning a great houſe, and in ſuſtayning a greate ſumptuous trayne of horſes, for vnto the Chriſtian Prince it is more ſound counſell, rather to ſéede a few men, than to haue many horſes.
                  Notwithſtanding I will not ſay but that in the houſes of Kynges and of high Princes, many muſt enter,In palace more is ſpoyled than ſpent. many muſt ſerue; many muſt liue, and many muſt eate: but that whych is to be reprehēded is this: that many times more is ſpoiled than is ſpent. If in the Courtes of Princes there were not ſo many horſes in the ſtable, ſo many haukes in the mewe, ſo many gibers in chambers, ſo many vagabondes in pallace, and ſo greate diſorder in expences, I am ſure,The diſordinate expences of the mightie is to bring neceſſitie. that neyther ſhoulde they ſo go ouercharged, eyther their Subiectes ſo much gréeued. God in commaunding the Prince not to haue many horſes, is to forbid him that he vſe not exceſſiue expences: bycauſe in déede and in concluſion, they ſhal giue an accoumpt vnto God of the goodes of the common wealth, not as Lords but as tutors. Alſo God dothe commaunde that hée which ſhall be King, do not conſent to turne the people intoo Egipt, that is to ſay, that he do not permit them to commit Idolatrie, ne yet to ſerue King Pharao, for oure good God will that we adore him alone for Lorde, and that we hold hym for our creator. To come out of Egipt is to come out of ſinne, to turne into Egipt, is to turne into ſin, & for this cauſe the office of a good Prince is, not only to remunerate the vertuous, and

ſuch as liue wel: but alſo to chaſtiſe the wicked and ſuche as liue euil.The ſecrete is to be remitted to God, but the publik offence to be chaſtiſed. It is no other thing to return into Egypt, but boldly, openly, and manifeſtly to ſinne, the which the good Prince ought not to conſent vnto, eyther with any in lyke cace to diſpence, bicauſe the ſecrete ſinnes to God, are to be remitted, but thoſe whiche are manifeſt the good king ought to chaſtiſe. Then doth the Prince ſuffer any to return into Egipt, when openly he ſuffreth him to liue in ſinne: that is to ſay, to paſſe his life in enuious reuenging, to holde by force yt which is due to an other, to be giuen to folow the luſts of the fleſhe, and to dare to renue his olde age into wanton affections, in which the Prince doth ſo much offend God, that although he be no companion in the fault, yet in the worlde to come, hée ſhall not eſcape to be partaker of the payne. For a kyng to gouerne well in his kingdome, oughte to be aſmuche feared of the euyll,The good king ought to impart his goodes, but not his conſcience. as beloued of the good. And if by chaunce any bée in his houſe that is in fauour that is a quareller, or any ſeruaunt that is vicious, I denie not, but vnto ſuche a one, he may impart of his goods, but not with his conſcience. Alſo God commaundeth him which ſhall be king, that he hold not in his companie many women, that is to vnderſtand, he ſhal content himſelf with his Queene, with whom he is maried, without vngodly acquayntance with any other, for ye great Princes and mighty potentates doe more offend God, with yll example they giue, than with the faultes they committe. Of Dauid, of Achab, of Aſſa, and of Ieroboam, the ſcriptures do not ſo much complaine of their ſinnes, as of the occaſion they gaue vnto others to ſinne:Princes are more viewed and more accuſed than the reſt. bicauſe very ſeldome wee ſée the people in awe of correction when their lorde is vicious. As Princes be more high and alſo mightyer than the reſt, euen ſo are they more behelde & alſo more viewed thā others. And for this cauſe according to my iudgement, if they be not chaſt yet at the leaſt they ſhould be more ſecrete. Among the heap of ſinnes this maye be one wherewith God is not a little offended. And on the other part, it is wherwith ye cōmon welth receiueth moſt ſclander: for in caſes of honor, none wil yt they

haunt his houſe, requeſt his wyfe or defloure his daughter. The writers of hiſtories do much prayſe Alexander ye great, Scipio the Affrican, Marcus Aurelius, the greate Auguſtus, & the good Traian, which onely vſed not to force women in libertie, but did not ſo much as touch ſuche as were their captiues & taken in battaile: and truly they were iuſtly praiſed for vertuous mē. For it procedeth of a more noble corage to reſiſt a prepared vice, thā to giue an onſet vpō a cāp of great power.
                  Alſo God doth commaund him, which ſhal be king, that he hoord not vp much treaſure, that he be not ſcarce, or a nigard, for the office of the marchant is to kéep, but of a King to giue and to be liberal. In Alexander the great is muche more praiſed the largeneſſe be vſed in giuing, than his potencie in fighting: the which doth clearly appeare, when we wil praiſe any man, we do not ſay, he is mightie as Alexander, but franke as Alexander. To the contrary of this, Suetonius writeth of the Emperor Veſpaſian, the which of pure miſerie, nigardſhip, and couetouſneſſe, commanded in Rome to be made publike places to receyue vrine, not to kéepe the Citie more ſwéete, but to the end that they ſhould giue him more rente.
                  The diuine Plato did counſell the Atheniens in his bookes of a good comon wealth,The conditions of a good king. that the gouernour whiche they had to chooſe, ſhould be iuſt in his iudgements, true of his word, conſtant in that he takes in hand, ſecrete in that he vnderſtandeth, large and bountiful in giuing. Princes and great potentates for their power they be feared, and for their magnificēt liberalitie they are beloued. But in déed and in the end, fewe folow the king, not only for that his conditions be good, but bicauſe they think his giuing is much and verie noble.
                  Gods commaunding in his lawe, that the Prince ſhal not hourde vp treaſures, is no other thyng to ſaye, but that all ſhall ſerue hym of good wyll, and that bée vſe towarde all men of his liberalite: for that many tymes it dothe happen, that the Prince in béeyng vnchearefull in giuyng, it commeth to paſſe in proces that very few haue any mind to gratifie or ſerue hym. Alſo God commaunded the kyng that

ſhould gouerne his people, that he ſhould not be proude, tha
                        •
                      he ſhould always read in Deuteronomie, which is the Booke of the Lawe. And bycauſe wée haue alreadie made a large diſcourſe, we will leaue the expoſition of theſe two woordes for an other day. There reſteth, that we pray vnto the Lord, to giue your Maieſtie his grace, and vnto you and vs his glorie, to the which Ieſus Chriſt bring vs. Amen.
               
            
            
               
                  A diſcourſe or conference with the Emperour, vpon certayne moſte aunciente ſtampes in Mettalles, the whyche he commaunded the Author to reade and to expounde, wherin are touched many antiquities.
               
               
                  S. C. C. R. M.
               
               
                  Princes ought ſo to recreate themſelues, that thereof ryſe none offence.
                  SO greate be the affaires of Princes, and ſo muche laden wyth ſtudious cares, that hardlye remayneth tyme to ſléepe, or eate, muche leſſe to recreate or ioye themſelues with gladſome paſtyme. Oure forces are ſo ſmall, our iudgemente ſo weake, oure appetite ſo variable, and oure deſyres ſo diſordinate, that ſometyme it is neceſſarie, and alſo profitable, to giue place to the humanitie to bée recreated: vppon condition, that the truth bée not putte to flyghte or weakened. The ſenſualitie makes vs warre with his vices. Reaſon fyghteth with oure wickedneſſe. Our bodie contendeth with his appetites. The hart ſtriueth with his deſires. For whiche cauſe it is neceſſarie to giue place to the one, that they bring vs not to oure ende, and to diſſemble with the other, that they leade vs not to deſpaire.Princes ought to limite their recreations. This I ſaye to your imperiall Maieſtie, for the magnificent meanes whiche your excellencie vſed to paſſe the tyme, whē it pleaſed you to cōmand that I ſhuld be called to your chāber & preſēce. And for a trouth, ye recreatiō of princes ought ſo to be meaſured & limited, that thei may recreate without offēce to ye world. Arſacidas king of the Bactriās, his paſtime was to knit fiſhing nets: of king Artaxerxes, to ſpin:

And of Arthabanus king of Hircans, to arme for Rats. And of Viantus King of Lidians, to fiſhe Frogges. And of the Emperour Domitianus, to chaſe Flies. Princes (hauing their times ſo limitted, & alſo of all men ſo beholden and conſidered,) that imploy themſelues in ſuch paſtimes and vanities, we cannot well ſaye that therin they paſſe their times, but looſe their times. The caſe is this, that your Maieſtie preſently after you felt your ſelfe deliuered of your quartaine, commaunded to be ſet before you a certaine little table, all full of ſtamped metals, aſwell of gold, as ſiluer, of braſſe, as alſo of Iron. A thing ſurely worth the beholding, and much to be prayſed. I did not a little delight, in ſeing your Maieſtie take pleaſure in beholding the faces of thoſe metalles, in reading the letters they held, and in examining the deuiſes they did containe. All which thinges might not eaſely be read, and much leſſe vnderſtood. There were amongſt thoſe ſtamped metalles, certaine that were Gréeke, ſome Latin, ſome Caldée, ſome Arabick, ſome Gothick, and other ſome high Dutch: your Maieſtie cō
                  maunded mée to vew them, reade them, and the moſt notable to expound: aſſuredly the commaundement was directed very iuſtly, and in me more than another moſte aptly imployed. For being (as I am) your imperiall Chronicler, it is my part to render accompt of the thinges you ſhall doubt, and to declare ye meaning of that which you reade. I haue vewed thē, read them, and ſtudied them: and although ſome of them be very hard to be read, and very difficult to bée vnderſtoode, I will trauayle with ſuch playneſſe to declare them, and euery parcell ſo diligently to examin and diſtinguiſh, that not only your Maieſtie may vnderſtand to reade the ſtampe, but alſo comprehend the blaſon and originall therof.
               It is to be vnderſtoode, that the Romanes more than all other nations were couetous of riches, and ambitious of honoures: whereby it came to paſſe, that to haue to ſpend, and to magnifie their names, they hild warres ſixe hundreth and fortie yeares, with all nations and kingdomes. In two things the Romanes did trauell to leaue and perpetuate their memorie,

that is to wit, in buildings they made, and in their Coines they did graue or ſtampe: neither did they allowe the grauing or ſtamping of any money, but vnto him that had ouercome ſome famous battaile, or done ſome notable thing in the cōmon wealth. The buildings they moſt vſed to make, were wals for Cities, cawſies in high waies, Bridges ouer Riuers, fountaines artificially made, ſtatues or greate pictures ouer gates, Bathes for the people, arches for their triumphes, and Temples for their Goddes. Much time paſſed in the Empire of Rome, wherein the Romanes had no money but of braſſe or of yrō.In the auncient times yron was vſed in coyne. Whereof it procéedeth that the true and moſt auncient metalls be not of golde but of Iron. For the firſt coyne that was made to be melted in Rome of gold, was in the time of Scipio the Africane. The auncient Romanes vſed to ſtampe or graue on the one ſide of their money, their faces drawne moſt naturall, and on the other, the kingdomes they had ouercome, the offices they had held, and the lawes they had made.
               And for that it ſhall not ſéeme that I ſpeake at large or of fauour, it is reaſon I giue account of all I haue ſaid. The letters of one of theſe ſtamped mettals doth ſay, Pboro. dact. Leg. Your Maieſtie hath to vnderſtand, that this ſtampe is the moſt auncient that euer I ſaw or redde, which appeareth very well by the mettall it is made of, & by the letter it is written in: for declaration whereof, it is to be vnderſtoode, there haue bin ſeuen whiche inuented to giue lawes to the world, that is to wit, Moſes, that gaue lawes to the Hebrewes, Solon to the Athenians, Licurgus to the Lacedemonians, Aſclepius to the Rhodians, Numa Pompilius to the Romanes, and Phoroneus to the Aegiptians. This Phoroneus was King of Aegipt before that Ioſeph the ſonne of Iacob was borne. And as Diodorus Siculus doth ſay, he was a King very iuſte, vertuous, honeſt, and wiſe. This was he that firſt gaue lawes in Aegypt, and alſo (as it is thought) in all the worlde, whereof it dothe procéede, that all Coūſellours and Lawyers of Rome did call the lawes that were iuſte, and moſte iuſt, Forum, in memory

of king Phoroneus. And ſo the letters of this mettall would thus much ſay: This is King Phoroneus, whiche gaue lawes to the Aegyptians. The letters of the other ſtampe, Genuci. D. vi. Leg. For the vnderſtanding of this ſtampe, it is to be conſidered, that the Romanes conceiued ſo great ſhame and diſdaine of the filthineſſe of king Tarquine cōmitted with chaſt Lucrece, that onely they would not, that in Rome there ſhould be any more kings, but alſo that the name of king, and the lawes of kings, ſhould for euermore bée baniſhed, and in the common wealth forgotten.
               So the Romanes not meaning to obey the lawes they had receiued of their good King Numa Pompilius, ſent a moſte ſolemne imbaſſage to Grecia, to bring them the lawes that the Philoſopher Solon had giuen to the Athenians. Which being brought to Rome accepted, and obſerued, were afterwards intituled the lawes of the twelue tables. The Embaſſadours that were ſent to bring theſe lawes from Greece, were ten moſte ſapient Romanes, whoſe names are Apius, Genutius, Sextus, Veturius, Iulius, Mannilius, Sulpicius, Curius, Romulus, Poſtumus: and bicauſe Genutius was one of thoſe ten notable men, & for that great act ſo famous, he ſtāped thoſe words on the one ſide of his money. The whiche would ſay: this is the Conſull Genutius, one of the ten men of Rome, that was ſent for the lawes of Greece. The words of the other ſtamp following are Con, Quir, Ius, Mos, Le, Obs. To explane theſe words which are very darke, it is to be vnderſtood, that al the lawes of this world, are reduced frō thrée maner of lawes, which is to wit,It is to be noted that all lawes are reduced from three lawes. 
                  Ius naturale, lex condita, & mos antiquus. That whiche in the old time was called the Law of Nature, is, That thou wiſh not for another, which thou wilt not for thy ſelf: & alſo to ſhunne euil, & approch to do wel, which is not to be learned by leſſon, but by reaſon. Lex condita are the lawes that kings haue made in their Kingdomes, and Emperours in their Empires: Some of the which conſiſte in Reaſon, and other ſome in opinion. Mos antiquus is, when a Cuſtome by little and little is brought in amongſt the people: the force whereof dependeth

vpon the well or euill obſeruing thereof. Of the aboue ſayd it is to be gathered, wée call Ius naturale the lawe whiche reaſon doth direct: we name Lex Condita, whiche is ordayned and written: and we terme Mos antiquus, the cuſtome of long time vſed, and preſently obſerued: this preſuppoſed the letters of this ſtampe do ſignifie,Seuen maner of auncient lawes. 
                  This is the Conſull Quirinus, the which in the time of his Conſulſhip, did obſerue, and cauſed to be obſerued, that which right requireth, lawe commaundeth, and cuſtome hath brought in.
               
               The wordes of the other ſtampe are theſe: Popil. Con. Iu. Mill. fecc. for the vnderſtanding of theſe wordes is to be vnderſtood, that the auncient Lawyers did ordaine ſeuen manner of Lawes, which is to wit, Ius gentium, Ius ciuile, Ius conſularis, Ius publicum, Ius quiritum, Ius militare, & Ius magiſtratum.
               
               In the old time, they did call Ius Gentium, to occupie that which had no owner, to defende the Countrey, to die for the libertie, to endeuer to poſſeſſe more than others, and to be of more abilitie than the reſt. This was named ius Gentium, bycauſe in all Kingdomes and Nations, Greekes, Latines, and Barbarians, this manner of liuing was vſed and obſerued.
               
                  Ius Ciuile was the order and manner in old dayes, to forme their plees in lawe, that is to wit, to cite, aunſwere, accuſe, proue, denie, alledge, relate, to giue ſentence, and to execute: to the end eche one might obtaine by iuſtice, that which was taken by force.
               
                  Ius Conſulare, was, ſuch orders, as the Conſuls of Rome did vſe amongſt themſelues, for themſelues: which is to ſay, of what number they ſhould bée, what garments they ſhould weare,Lawes onely for Romane Senators. what company they ſhould kéepe, where they ſhould congregate, and how many houres they ſhould aſſemble, of what things they ſhould conferre, howe they ſhould liue, and to how much goods they ſhould attaine.
               This Ius Conſulare did ſerue but for the Romane Conſuls that were reſident in Rome, for notwithſtanding there were Conſuls in Capua, they would not conſent they ſhould liue as thoſe of the Senate of Rome.
               
               
                  
                  Ius Quiritum, was the lawes and priuiledges that the Romane Gentlemen did vſe or enioy, that did liue within the cō
                  paſſe of Rome, or had the priuiledge of a Romane Gentleman: which is to ſay, that the Gentlemē and knights of Rome had foure names: that is to vnderſtand, Patricios, Veteranos, Milites, & Quirites. The which foure names, according to the varietie of the time was giuen them.
               The priuiledge or law Quiritum, that the Knights of Rome enioyed, was, that they might ſit in the tēples, thei might not be areſted for debt, or pay for lodging, or prouēder where they went, to be maintained by the cōmon treaſure if they became poore, to make a teſtament without witneſſe, not to be accuſed but in Rome, to pay no impoſt in time of tribut, and alſo that they might be buried in an highe Tombe. All theſe preheminences no gentleman did enioy, but only ſuch as were Citizens of Rome.
               
               
                  Ius Publicum, was the ordinances and conſtitutious, that euery people in particular did vſe amongſt themſelues and for themſelues: that is to ſaye, how they ſhould repaire their walles, conſerue their waters, meaſure their ſtreates, build their houſes, prouide neceſſary thinges, to haue ſtore houſes, to gather money, to make their fifes, to watche their cities. They called theſe ordinances Ius Publicum, becauſe they were made by all, and obſerued by all.
               
                  Ius Militare, was the lawes that the anciēt Romains made,The lawes for warre, they vſed in Rome. for the times that kingdoms did breake peace, and entred into warres one with the other, bicauſe they eſtemed muche to be wiſe in gouernment, and to fight as men determined in order. The lawes of Ius militare were how to proclaime warres, to confirme peace, to take truce, to leuie their ſouldiours, too pay their Campe, to giue order for their watches, too make their trenches, to giue battaile, to retire their hoſt, to redéeme priſoners, and how the Conquerours ſhould triumphe.
               They called theſe lawes Ius militare, which is to ſay, the order of Knightes, becauſe they ſerued no further, but too giue order vnto thoſe that did follow the warres, and with armes

did defend the common wealth.
               Comming now to the expoſition of the ſtampe, it is too be vnderſtood, yt in the daies of the firſt Romane Dictator Quintus Cincinatus, ther was alſo in Rome a certain Romain Conſull named Popilius Vaſtus, a man very well learned, and no leſſe expert in armes. This Conſul Popilius made lawes to be obſerued in warres, and gaue it in ſtampe in his money: that which is conteyned in the ſtampe before reherſed in the letters,The firſt that made lawes for warres. hath this ſignification: This is the Conſull Popilius, which made lawes for the captaines, that ſhould goe to the warres for defence of the common wealth.
               
               Alſo it may pleaſe your Maieſtie to vnderſtand, that if any Prince or Romane Conſull, did chaunce to make any law either neceſſary or very profitable for the people, they did vſe for cuſtome, to entitle that lawe by the name of him that did inuent and ordaine the ſame: for that in the worldes to come it might bée knowen who was the author therof, and alſo when it was made. After this maner, the lawe that they made to eate with dores open, was called Caeſaria. The lawe that Pompey made too giue tutors to Orphans, was named Pompeia. The lawe that Cornelius made for parting of fields, was intituled Cornelia. The law that Auguſtus made to take no tribute but for the profit of the cōmon wealth, was writtē 
                  Auguſta. The law that the Cōſul Falcidias made, that none might buy the dowry of any other mans wife, was nominated Falcidia. The law that the Dictator Aquilius made, that no Romāe ſhould be put to death within Rome, was cleped Aquilia. The lawe that the Cenſor Sempronius made, that none might diſinherit his ſon, but if he were a traytor to the Empire of Rome, was termed Sempronia.
               
               The wordes do followe of the other ſtampe Rusti, prie, tris, ple. For the vnderſtanding of theſe wordes, it is to be noted, that ye order whiche the Romanes did vſe in creating dignities and offices, was as followeth: Firſt they had Kyngs, afterward Decemuiri, then Triumuiri, after that Conſulles, and thē 
                  Cenſores, then Dictators, afterwardes Tribunes, and laſtely

                  Emperoures. Of their Kinges there were but ſeuen, their Decemuiri endured ten yeares, their Triumuri continued fortie yeres, their Conſulls foure hundreth thirtie and foure yeres, their Cenſor one yere, their Dictator halfe a yere: their Tribune thrée yeres. That which wée call the procurer of the people, the auncient Romanes did name the Tribune of the people, whoſe office was, euery day to enter into the Senate, and to procure the cauſes of the people: and in ſuch buſineſſe as did not like him, he had authoritie to ſtand for the poore, and to reſiſt the Senators. And for that the office of Tribune was alwaies againſt the Senate, and thereby paſſed his life in perill, it was a law made and capitulate by the Lawyers and Senators, that what ſoeuer man or woman did violently preaſe to his perſon or vnto his garment to offend him, publikely they cut off his head.
               And be it knowne to your Maieſtie,The procurer of the people was moſt priuiledged in Rome. that many Romane Princes did procure to be choſen Tribune of the people, not for the intereſt they receiued by that dignitie, but for the ſecuritie they had with the ſame: bycauſe not only they might not kill them, either in their clothes ſo much as touch them. The firſt Tribune that was in Rome was a certaine Romane named Ruſticius, a man of a very ſincere life, and merueilous zealous of his common wealth. This Ruſticuis was, and this dignity created, betwixt the firſt and the ſecond Punick battails, in the time that Silla and Marius did leade great bands in Rome, and did ſpoile the common wealth. Thus much the letters of the ſtampe would ſay, This is the good Conſull Ruſticius the which was the firſt Tribune that was in the Empire of Rome. Your Maieſtie amongſt theſe hath many other ſtāpes, the whiche being eaſie and facile to reade, and cleare to vnderſtand, I ſhall not néede to ſpende the time too expound them.
            
            
               
               
                  A certaine relation vnto Queene Germana, declaring the life and lawes of the Philoſopher Licurgus.
                  
               
               
                  MOſt high and ſerene Lady, this Sunday paſt, after I had preached before your highneſſe the Sermon of the deſtruction of Ieruſalem, ye commaūded I ſhould recite, and alſo giue in writing, who was that great Philoſopher Licurgus, whoſe life I prayſed, & whoſe lawes I alledged. In repayment of my trauell, and to binde me the more vnto your ſeruice, you commaunded I ſhoulde dine at your table, and alſo gaue me a rich clocke for my ſtudie. For ſo ſmall a matter as your highneſſe doth commaund, neither it needed ye ſhould feaſt me, either giue me ſo great rewards: for that I attaine more honour and bountie in that ye commaund, than your highneſſe doth receiue ſeruice in the thing I ſhall accompliſh.We receiue liberalitie from the Prince, when he commaundeth to ſerue. To ſay the truth, I had thought rather yée had ſlept in the ſermon (the curtains drawne) but ſince ye cō
                  maund, I ſhall recite that whiche I ſayd of the Philoſopher Licurgus, it is a ſigne ye heard the whole Sermon, and alſo noted the ſame. And ſince it pleaſeth your highneſſe, that the Ladies and dames that ſerue you, and the gallants & Courtiers that attend vpon you be preſent at this communicatiō, that ye commaund them that they be not gibing, either making of ſignes: for they haue ſworne to trouble me, or to put me from my matter. But cōming to the purpoſe, it is to wit, yt in the firſt reignes of this world, whē 
                  Sardanapalus reigned in Aſsiria, Oſias in Iury, Teſplus in Macedonia, Phocas amongſt the Greekes, Alchimus amongſt the Latins, Arthabanes amōgſt the Aegyptians, Licurgus was borne amōgſt the Lacedemoniās.
               
               This good Licurgus was iointly Philoſopher and King: & King and Philoſopher: bicauſe in thoſe Golden times, either Philoſophers did gouerne, eyther elſe Gouernours did vſe Philoſophie.Note the great vertues of the Philoſopher Licurgus. 
                  Plutarche doth ſay of this Licurgus, that he was low of ſtature, pale of colour, a friend of ſilence, an enemie of vaine talke: a man of ſmall health, & of great vertue. He was

neuer noted of diſhoneſtie, he neuer troubled the common welth, he did neuer reuēge iniury, he did neuer thing againſt iuſtice, either againſt any man did vſe malicious wordes. He was in féeding tēperate, in drinking ſober, in giuing liberall, in receiuing of conſideration, in ſleeping ſhort, in his ſpeache repoſed, in buſineſſe affable, in hearing patient, prompt in expedition, gentle in chaſtiſement, and benigne in pardoning. Being a child was brought vp in Thebes, being a yong mā he did ſtudie in Athens, and in the time of more yéeres he paſſed into the great India, & afterwards being old was king of ye 
                  Lacedemonians, which alſo were called Spartans, which of nation were Greekes, and of condicion very barbarous. For excellencie, it is recounted of him, that they neuer ſaw him idle, he neuer dranke wine, neuer trauailed on horſebacke, neuer chid with any man, neuer did hurt to his enemies, neither at any time was ingrate to his friends. He himſelf wente to the temples, he himſelf did offer the Sacrifices, he himſelf did reade in ſcholes, he himſelfe did heare complaints, he himſelf gaue ſentēce in cauſes of the law, he himſelf did cauſe to giue chaſtiſement to offenders. This Licurgus was of a valiant mind in warres, of great deuiſe in time of perill, certaine in things determined, ſeuere with rebels, in ſodaine aſſaults of great readineſſe, affable with offenders, & a mortal enemie of vagabonds. They ſay that this Philoſopher did inuent the Olimpiades, whiche were certaine playes vſed euery fourth yéere in the mountaine Olimpus, to the ende that all ſhoulde giue themſelues to ſtudie, or to learne ſome Art, bicauſe in that aſſembly which there they vſed, euery man made a proofe of his knowledge, and the ſprite that was giuen him. Licurgus was the firſt that gaue lawes to the Spartans, which afterwards were called Lacedemonians: whiche is to vnderſtand, before Solon, and Numa Pompilius.
               
               And alſo it is written of him, that he was the firſt that inuented in Greece, to haue publique or cōmon houſes founded at the charges of the common wealth, & alſo endewed, where the ſicke might be cured, & the poore refreſhed. Before the days

of Licurgus, the Lacedemonians were a people very abſolute, & alſo diſſolute: for which cauſe ye good Philoſopher did paſſe immeſurable trauels, & no leſſe perils amongſt thē, before they would be gouerned by a King, or liue vnder a law. On a certaine day before al the people, he tooke two little dogges new whelped, the one of the which he fedde in his own houſe very faire & fat: the other he cōmanded to be brought vp in a countrey houſe,Of him that brought vp one dog fat in idleneſſe and in the houſe, & the other in the field. with hunger, & to vſe the fields. Theſe dogs being thus brought vp, he cōmaunded thē to be brought to the market place, in the preſence of the whole multitude, & throwing before them a liue Hare, & a great péece of fleſh: preſently the countrey dog ran after the Hare, and the pampered dogge to the fleſhe. Then ſaid Licurgus, you are witneſſes that theſe two dogges were whelpt in one day and in one howre, in one place, of one Syre & Dam. And for that the one was brought vp in the field, he ran after the Hare: and the other that was brought vp in idleneſſe, ran to his meat. Beléeue me ye Lacedemoniās,
                  To be good, it doth much profite to be well brought vp. & be out of doubt, that to proue good & vertuous, it importeth muche, from the infancie to bée well gouerned and brought vp: for we retaine much more of ye cuſtomes wherwith we be bred, thē of ye inclinatiōs wherwith we be borne.
               
                  Licurgus comming to his old age, commaunded to call all the Noble and moſt principal of his kingdome, and being gathered togither at the dores of his Temple, ſaid theſe wordes: I haue knowen many yéeres ſince, how ye goe complayning and blaming me and my lawes, affirming & ſwearing that they are very ſharpe to be obſerued, and intollerable to be accompliſhed, and that iointly by my death there may end both the law and the law giuer, I will goe to the Ile of Delphos, to conſulte with the God Apollo, if theſe my lawes be iuſt or vniuſt, and by the ſame God I do ſweare, to ſtand to that which he ſhal ſay, and to performe what he ſhall commaund. Therfore, oh ye Lacedemonians, it is conuenient, that all you iointly do ſweare in this holy temple, that vntill I returne either aliue or dead from the God Apollo, you ſhall not breake the lawes that you haue ſworne, the good God Apollo being witneſſe.

This good King and Philoſopher departed, minding neuer to returne from the Ile of Delphos, and prouided before he ſhould die, a great cheſt of lead, wherin they ſhould encloſe him, and caſt him into the depth of the Sea, at the inſtant that his life ſhould depart.
               Very worthy is Licurgus to be prayſed, in that he woulde baniſh himſelfe from his owne Countrey, vnto the ende his common wealth ſhould remaine bound vnto good Lawes.
               And the Lacedemonians are much to be commended, that haue ſo kept their othe, as if Licurgus were aliue. Behold moſt ſerene Lady, the life that the philoſopher led. Now we ſhal recite the lawes he did ordaine, the which although they were many and very good, yet we ſhall here repete but ſome.
               
                  The lawes that Licurgus gaue to the Lacedemonians.
                  
                  
                     
                        LIcurgus did ordaine and commaunde, that all the hilles, paſtures and méedes, houſes & inheritances ſhould be parted, and equally deuided, to auoide tyrauntes for being to riche, and the poore from complaints. He did ordaine and commaund, that if any were vicious or idle in tilling his land, or in vſing his inheritance, that hée ſhoulde not ſell his lande to another, without ſelling himſelf to be ſlaue therewith. All the Gold, the Siluer, the Copper, the Tinne, and the Lead, he did giue to the Temples where his Gods were worſhipped, onely he did reſerue the mettal of yron, wherwith the people of his kingdome might eare their fieldes, and reſiſt their enimies. The children that were borne fooles, dumbe, blinde, deafe, counterfet or lame, he commaunded their fathers to commend them to be ſacrifiſed, ſaying, that in their creation, either the Gods were negligent, or elſe nature erred. Alſo amongſt them he did forbid bāqueting, affirming, that men loſt there their iudgemēt with drinking, their grauitie with babling, and their health with eating. He did permit, that nine perſons ſhould feaſte togither, in the reuerence of the nine Muſes: but vpon this cōdition, that if they would talke, they ſhould drink no wine,

and if they vſed ſilence, they gaue them wine to drinke.
                  Their Vines were not planted to drinke in time of health, but to cure in tyme of ſickneſſe: in ſuch wiſe, that they ſold not wine in Tauernes, but in Apotecaries ſhoppes. They held ſcholes for children to learne, but no ſtudies to learne Philoſophie: for he held opinion, that ſuch as gouerne the common wealth, ought not too bée of thoſe that reade Philoſophie, but ſuch as did performe it in manner of life, neither did they cō
                     ſent that any Coyne ſhold bée currant amongſt them, but did make exchange, wheat for bread, wine for cloth, cloth for oile, and ſo of all other things, in ſuch wiſe they chāged, but bought not. From the returne of the battell Marathon, certaine Lacedemonian ſouldiours brought home money coyned, wherefore the Magiſtrates of the commō wealth determined to drown the money, and to hang the men. Alcamenus and Theopontus, two famous Kings that were before Licurgus receiued aunſwere frō the Oracle of Apollo, that only for the vice of couetouſneſſe their common wealth ſhould be deſtroyed. Alſo amongſt them, the vſe of nauigation was forbidden, as well for the wars as for their traffike, bicauſe they held opinion, that marriners did neuer ſerue GOD, neither were ſubiect too lawes. Alſo to no woman did they giue anything in mariage: wherefore, commonly the women did ſéeke the men of moſt wealth: and the men did chuſe the women of moſte vertue. In ſuche ſort, that amongſt the Lacedemonians, none were left vnmaried for their pouertie, but for their lewdneſſe and want of vertue.
                  As concerning any crafts man that did liue in their common wealth, he muſt exerciſe his Art according to the auncient faſhion of the countrey. And if it chaunced any to attempt any noueltie, or new inuention, they did baniſhe the Maſter and aboliſhe the deuiſe. Fiue things they were cōmaunded to obſerue, the whiche were publikly cried with a loude voyce euery day, after this maner.
                  
                     A notable proclamation daily made.It is cōmaunded by the Senat of Licaonia, yt thou ſhalt beare honour and reuerence to the Goddes, that thou be pacient in

aduerſities, that thou giue obedience vnto the Iudges, that thou accuſtome thy ſelf to trauaile, that thou retorne from the warres victorious, eyther els dead. In one whole yere they might not weare but one new garment, and if any man neded any other garment, he muſt not only haue leaue, but alſo ſhew wherwith he muſt buy the ſame.A right worthy ſearch. In certaine prefixed times the Iudges did ſearch the houſes, and if they by chaunce found ſpyld bread, rotten wheat, garments mothe eaten, fleſh corrupted, and ſuch other things ſpoiled, they were not onely reprehended, but publikely whipped: aduertiſing the imployment therof much more cōuenient to the reliefe of the poore, than vtterly to be loſt. Being demaūded why he had forbiddē hote houſes, bathes, and oyntments, aunſwered:Bathes and oyntmēts forbidden. that bathes did inféeble the vigor and ſtrength of the members, and oyntments did reuiue vices. Ambre grece, Muske, Storax, Siuet, Beniamim, and all kind of perfumes amongſt them were forbidden: affirming it to be no leſſe infamy for a man to be perfumed, than for a woman to be manifeſtly wicked.
                  And vntill ye time that men were maried, or of thirtie yeres of age, they did neuer féede or take repaſt but ſtanding, neither ſléepe but vpon the leaues of Canes: giuing therin to vnderſtand, to auoyd both delaye and exceſſe of ſléepe, and of meate.The authoritie of old men. The auncient men had libertie to enquire of yong men that paſſed by, whither goeſt thou? and what to doe? And if they aunſwered to do any good thing, they let them paſſe, but if otherwiſe, the old mē might both reprehend, & alſo detaine thē.
                  If any yong man committed any diſhoneſty in the preſēce of an olde man, without let or reprehenſion, he himſelf was chaſtiſed, and the yong man abſolued. And if it fortuned any man to be taken for an offender, in the market place he was ſet aloft vppon a Piller, where he ended his miſerable daies: holding opinion, to be inhumaine to kil a man with Iron, but to permit him to languiſh that is wicked, to be a thing moſte iuſt. The diſobedient ſonne was chaſtiſed, and afterwardes diſenherited. When any yong man did encounter with an old man, if he were ſet, he did riſe & ſalute him: and if he were

alone,The diſobedient ſonne both chaſtiſed and diſinherited. hée did accompany him, and if he were negligent herein, the Iudges did chaſten him, and the people did reprehend him. Their communaltie and fraternitie was ſo great, that the nature of their children, the order of their ſeruants, and the commaundement of their ſlaues were indifferēt.A friend by fraternitie. It was permitted amongſt them to vſe theftes, not that they had eſtimation therof, but to yéeld vnto men ſkill, aduiſe, and pollicie. For if by chaunce he were taken with the maner, he was openly puniſhed: alſo the cauſe of the permiſſion therof was, to moue men to be carefull of their goods. In their féeding and diet they were very ſober and temperate, taking refection only to liue, and to ſuſtaine life. For it was Liourgus opinion, that the fat & gluttonous man, was of groſſe iudgement, and of vnable and vnhealthy bodie. They vſed to ſing with great delight, and no ſmal friends of muſicall inſtruments, for they held opinion, that the ſwéeteneſſe of muſicke did recreat the ſpirites, and the heart did vndertake to loue. They vſed no other ſonges but ſuch as were inuented to the praiſe of glorious perſonages, that finiſhed their dayes in great nobleneſſe: or els to the diſprayſe of the wicked. They might not permit or endure in their muſicke, more than in the reſt, any newe inuention.New inuentiō, and the inuentors baniſhed. 
                     Therpandar, in thoſe dayes the moſt famous muſitian, for that he inuented to adde an other ſtring to a certaine Inſtrument, was baniſhed, and his inſtrument broken too ſhiuers. To auoid the great ſuperſtitions that in aunciēt time were vſed in building of Sepulchers,An honour vſed to the dead that valiantly died in the warres. it was forbiddē to bury any more in the fieldes, but neare vnto the Church. It was not permitted vnto any perſon too raiſe vp any ſumptuous Sepulcher, but vnto ſuch, as in time of peace did gouerne the common wealth, or valiantly had died in the warres. The Lacedemonians were ſo great enemies to admit nouelties in their common wealth, that they neither permitted ſtraungers to enter, or their people to wander into ſtraunge countries: doubting to bée entangled with new faſhions and cuſtomes. The father that gaue no learning vntoo his childe in his youthe, did loſe that ſuccour that in his old age was due vnto

him. Three things were in great eſtimation among them, whiche is to wit: ſlaues too trauell, Houndes to hunt, and horſe for the warres. As touching thinges to be eaten, I meane fruite, herbes, and rootes, was common to all men to eat at full, but not to cary to their houſes. Their apparell, which they vſed too weare in the warres, was died with the iuyce of Grapes, to the end the bloud of the maimed, ſhould be no diſmay to the reſt. The prayers they made vnto their Goddes, was to entreat them, to diſſemble their iniuries, and to remunerate their ſeruice they did vnto them.
                  When they went to the warres, they did ſacrifice a For vnto the God Mars, and at the inſtant to giue battayle, they did ſacrifice an Oxe: To giue the Captaine to vnderſtand, that they ought not onely to be ſtrong as a Bull, but alſo ſuttle, wiſe, and prouident as a Fox. They painted their Goddes, ſome with a blunt launce, and other ſome with a naked ſword: to giue aduertiſment, that the Goddes did chaſtiſe ſome, and but threaten others. Their vſage was not to craue any thing of their Goddes, that was not of importance: affirming that al other ſmal matters, were to be obtained by mās induſtrie. Iuſtice was ſo much obſerued amongſt them, that they vſed no lockes to their Coffers, neither boltes to their doores. It was not permitted amongſt them, that one man ſhould vſe many faculties or occupations: And for that the Philoſopher Chriſiphont, reported in his Oration, that in euery Art he knew ſomewhat, they baniſhed him, affirming that he could not proue a perfect Philoſopher, that ſtudied Sciences generall.
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Sir Alonſo Manrique, Archbiſhop of Ciuile, and to Sir Antonio Manrique, Duke of Naiara, for that they did chuſe the Authour, for Iudge in a contention. A matter very notable.
               
               MOſt high & mighty Princes, ſir Iohn Mārique gaue me ij-letters frō your honors, ſigned & ſealed wherin you gaue me to vnderſtād how you had choſē me for your cēſor & iudge

vpon a certain doubt wherin both haue doubted, and ſufficiently contended. I my Lordes, doe accept the ſame, and doe declare my ſelfe for your Iudge in this behalfe, vpon ſuch cō
                  dition, that neither of you appeale from the ſentence, and further, that yée paye the coſtes of the proceſſe, and the penaltie ye ſhall be condemned in. But firſt I do note and blame your Honours, and in a manner reprehend, that ſuche contention ſhoulde riſe betwixt you, for that betwene ſo high perſonages, conference is admitted, but contention vtterly condemned. Nobleneſſe and contētion did neuer accompanie in one generous perſonage, which is not ſo in the ignorant & contendor, hauing betwéene themſelues ſo great parentage.Gentlemen may commen, but not cōtend It is conuenient to the Philoſophers, to proue, to proſecute, and to maintaine all that whiche they ſhall ſpeake: but to the good Knight it doth not appertaine to contend, but to defend. The Knight that is of a noble minde,For what cauſes a Gentleman may be inflamed with choler. valiant, and of courage, his choler is neuer inflamed, but in drawing of his ſworde. For he proueth very ſeldome valiant, that is giuen to be a brabler.
               But cōming to the purpoſe, your Honours do write, that all your contention hath riſen for the verifying, and the vnderſtanding, which of theſe two Cities hath bene Numantia: that is to wit, Ciquentia, or elſe Monviedro. Likewiſe you write, you haue not onely contended, but alſo haue waged a good Mule for him in whoſe fauour the ſentence ſhall be giuen. Speaking with ſuch conſideration as is due to ſo highe perſonages, if the one do no better vnderſtand to praye, and the other to giue battell, than ye vnderſtand in Chronicles and auncient hiſtories, in vaine is the one Archbiſhop of Ciuile, and the other Duke of Naiara.
               
               
                  Helia is nowe Ieruſalē, and Byzantio is Conſtantinople.Howe much diſtance is betwixte Helia and Thiro, from Bizantio to Mephis, from Rome to Carthage, from Agripina to Gades: ſo much is betwixt the citie of Numantia and Sagunto: bicauſe the moſt auncient Numantia: was founded in Caſtile: and the generouſe citie of Sagunto, was ſituate néere to Valentia. Numantia & Sagunto were two moſt ancient & famous

Cities, and very much renoumed and celebrate in Spaine: in opinions contrary, in kingdomes diuers, in ſituations different, in names diſcordant, and alſo in conditions variable: for Sagunto was founded of the Greekes, and Numantia of the Romanes. The Citie of Sagunto was alwayes friend and allied with the Romanes, & mortall enimie to the Carthagians. But the Citie of Numantia, neither was friend to the one, or confederate with the other: for they neuer gaue obediēce to any, but alwaies made a Seigniory of it ſelfe.
               The ſeate of the Citie of Sagunto, was foure leagues from Valentia, where is now Monviedro: & he that ſhall ſay, that, which we call now in Caſtile Ciguenca, was in time paſte the Citie Sagunto: it ſhall be becauſe he dreamed it, & not to haue read it. Being Inquiſitor of Valentia, I was many times at Monviedro, as well to viſite the Chriſtians, as to baptiſe the Moores. And conſidering the ſharpneſſe of the place, the antiquitie of the walles, the greatneſſe of the colledge, the diſtāce from the Sea, the ſtatelineſſe of the buildings, and the monſtrouſeneſſe of the ſepulchers, there is none, but he may vnderſtand that to be Monviedro, which was Sagunto, and that which was Sagunto is now Monviedro. In the fields of Monviedro and in the ruinous buildings that be there at theſe daies, there are found many ſtones ingrauē, and many auncient Epitaphes of the Hannibals, & of the Aſdrubals that died there in the ſiege of Sagunto: the which were two linages of Carthage, very notable of bloud, and alſo famous in armes. Neare to Monviedro there is a certaine place, that in thoſe daies was called Turditanos, & is now named Torres torres: & for that they were mortall enemies of the Saguntines, Hanniball put himſelf in with them, and from thence did make his batterie, & did throw downe & burne the citie of Sagunto: not ſuccoured then of the Romanes, or euer after reedified.
               Behold here my Lords, how your contention was, which was Sagunto, and not whiche was Numantia: So that Soria and Samorra doth rather giue doubte, whiche was Numantia, and Monviedro and Sigentia, which was Sagunto. But the reſolution

and concluſion of all the aforeſayde, conſidering the merites of the proceſſe, and what eyther partie hath alledged for him ſelfe, I doe ſay and declare by my definitiue ſentence, that the Archbiſhop of Ciuile, did faile, and the Duke of Naiara did erre: in the thing that both did contend, and lay their wager. And I condemne either of them in a good Mule, to be employed vpon him that ſhall declare whiche was the greate Numantia.
               
               I my Lordes will now recount and declare whiche was that Citie Numantia, and alſo ſay, who was the founder therof, where it was fōnded, how it was founded, and what time it laſted, and alſo how it was deſtroyed, for that it is an hiſtory very delectable to read, worthie to be vnderſtood, pleaſant to recount, and lamentable to heare.
               
                  VVhich was the great Citie Numantia in Spaine.
                  
                     THe Citie of Numantia, was founded by Numa Pompilius,
                     Numantia was named of Numa Pompilius. the ſecond king of Romanes, in the fiftie and eight yeere after the foundation of Rome, and in the eightenth yeare of his raigne, in ſuche ſorte, for that the founder thereof was called Numa, it was named Numantia. In the old time they did much vſe to name their Cities they builded by their owne proper names, as Ieruſalem of Salem, Antioche of Antiochus, Conſtantinople of Conſtantine: Alexandria of Alexander, Rome of Romulus, and Numantia of Numa. Onely ſeuen Kings there were of Romanes: The firſt of the which, was Romulus, & the ſeuenth was Tarquine, of theſe ſeuen the moſte excellent of them all was this Numa Pompilius, for he was the firſt that brought the Goddes into Rome, he did incloſe the veſtall Virgins, builded the temples, and gaue lawes to the Romanes. The ſituation of this Citie was neare the riuer of Dwero, and not farre from the head of the ſame, and it was ſet vpon the heigth of an hill, and this heigth was not of a Rocke, but vpon a certaine plaine.

Neither was it towred within, nor walled without, onel
                        •
                      it was compaſſed about with a broade déepe diſch
                        •…
                      was inhabited with more than fiue, and leſſe than ſixe thouſand houſeholds, two partes of the which did follow the warres, and the third parte their tillage and labour. Amongſt them exerciſe was much praiſed, and idleneſſe greatly condemne, & which is more, not couetous of goods, and yet very ambitious of honour. The Numantins of their naturall cōdition, were more flegmatike than colericke, ſuffring, diſſembling, ſuttle, and of great actiuitie: in ſuch wiſe that that whiche they did at one time diſſemble, at another they did reuenge. In their Citie there was but one crafts man, & that was the Smith: Goldſmiths, Silkworkers, Drapers, Fruters, Tauerners, Fiſhmongers, Butchers, & ſuch like, they would not cōſent to liue amongſt them: For al ſuch things euery mā ought to haue in his owne houſe, & not to ſéeke them in the common wealth.
                  They were ſo valiant, and ſo doubtie, in the affayres of warre, that they neuer ſaw any Numantine turne his barke,The Numantins in the warres did rather die than flee. or receiue any wound in the ſame, in ſuch wiſe that they did rather determine to die than to flée. They could not go a warfare without licence of their common wealth, and thoſe alſo muſt goe altogether and followe one quarell, for otherwiſe if one Numantine did kill another Numantine, the murtherer afterwards was put to death by the common wealth. Foure kind of people the Romanes had very fierce to tame, and very warlike to fight, that is to wit, the Mirmidones whiche were thoſe of Merida, the Gauditanes, whiche were thoſe of Calis, the Saguntines, whiche were thoſe of Monviedro, and the Numantines, whiche were thoſe of Soria. The difference amongſt theſe was, that the Mirmidons were ſtrong, they of Calis valiant, the Saguntines fortunate, but the Numantines were ſtrong, valiant, and fortunate. Fabatus, Metellus, Sertorius, Pompeius, Caeſar, Sextus Patroclus, & all the other Romane Captaines, that by the ſpace of one hundred and foure ſcore yéeres held warres in Spaine, did neuer conquere the Numantins, neither at any time had to doe with them.
                  
                     Amongſt all the Cities of this world, onely Numantia did neuer acknowledge hir better, or kiſſe the hands of any other for lord. This Numantia was ſomewhat Rockie, halfe cōpaſſed, with out-towers, not very well inhabited, and leſſe riche. With all this, none durſt hold hir for enemie, but for confederate: and this was the cauſe, for that the Fortune of the Numantins was much more than the power of the Romanes. In the warres betwene Rome and Carthage, Caeſar and Pompey, Silla and Marius, there was no King, or kingdome in the world, that did not follow one of thoſe partes and againſt the other did not fight, except the proude Numantia: which always made aunſwere to thoſe that did perſuade hir to followe their opiniō, that, not ſhe of others, but others of hir, ought to make a head. In the firſt Punick warres, neuer would the Numantines follow the Carthaginiās, or fauour the Romanes: for which occaſion (or too ſay better) without any occaſion, the Romanes determined to make warre vpon the Numantins, not for anye feare they had of their power, but for enuie of their great fortune. Fouretene yeares continually, the Romanes beſieged the Numantins,
                     Rome was enuious of the fortune of Numantia. in which great was the hurt the Numantins receiued, but much more meruelous of the Romane Captaines that there died. There were ſlaine in that Numantine warre Caius Criſpus, Trebellius, Pindarus, Rufus, Venuſtus, Eſkaurus, Paulus Pilos, Cincinatus, and Druſius, nine Conſuls that were very famous, and Captaines of much experience. Theſe nine Conſuls being ſlaine,Nine Conſulles were, ſlaine at the ſiege of Numantia. with an infinite number of Romanes, it happened in the twelfth yere of the ſiege of Numantia, that a Romane Captaine named Cneius Fabricius, did ordaine and capitulate with the Numantins, that they and the Romanes for euermore ſhould be friendes,The good Captaine ought rather looſe his life than make an infamous truce. and in perpetual confederation. And in the meane time, while they ſent aduertiſement therof to Rome, they confirmed a long truce. But the Romanes vnderſtāding the whole order, to be greatly to the honour of the Numantins, and to the perpetuall infamie of the Romanes, they commaunded the Conſulles throte to bée cut, and to proſecute the warres. Then in the yere following, which was the thirtenth

of the ſiege, the Romans did ſende the Conſull Scipio with a newe armie to Numantia, the whiche being come, the firſt thing he did, was to deliuer the Campe from all maner men that were vnprofitable, and women that were leude of diſpoſition: ſaying that in greate armies more hurte is done with prepared vices, than with determined enimies. A yere and ſeuen monethes was Scipio at the ſiege of Numantia,
                     In the warres vice doth more hurt thā the enimies. all which time he neuer gaue battaile or ſkirmiſh, but only gaue order that no ſuccour might come at them, or vitayles might enter to them. When a certain Captaine demaunded of Scipio, why he did not ſkirmiſh with thoſe that came foorth, neither fight with them within? He made anſwer: Numantia is ſo fortunate, & the Numantins ſo luckie, that we muſt rather think their fortune to come to an end, than hope to ouercome them. Many times the Numantins did ſallie to fight wyth the new Romaines, and it hapned one daye, that there paſſed betwixt them ſo bloudie a ſkirmiſhe, that in an other place, it might be counted for a battaile. And in the end, the Romanes receyued ſuche foyle, that if the fortune of Scipio had not holpen, that day the name of Rome had ended in Spaine. Scipio conſidering the Numantins to encreaſe in pride, and the Romaines to diſcourage, aduiſed to retire his campe more than a myle from the citie: bicauſe they ſhould giue no attempt vpon the ſodaine, and to auoyde by the néerneſſe of the place, the hurts that might happen. But in the end the Numantins wā
                     ting vitayles, and hauing loſt many of their men, did ordeyn amongſt themſelues, and did make a vowe vnto their gods, no day to breake their faſte, but with the fleſhe of Romaines,
                     The Numā
                        tines did eate the fleſhe of the Romains neither to drinke water or wyne, before they had taſted and dronken the bloud of ſome enimie they had ſlayne. A monſtrous thyng then to ſée, as it is nowe to heare, that euen ſo the Numantins euery daye went in chaſe of Romanes, as hunters doe in hunting Coneys: and with as great apetite they did eate and drinke the fleſh and bloud of enimies, as if it had bin ſhoulders and loynes of mutton.
                  Verie greate were the hurtes that euery day the Conſul

                     Scipio receiued in ye ſtege, bicauſe the Numantins like moſt fierce beaſtes,To fight with a deſparate man is no ſmall perill. with Romanes bloud imbrued, did not fighte as enimies, but as men deſperate. Among the Numantines hée was holden excuſed that tooke any Romane alyue, and muche leſſe to giue him a buriall. For at the houre that anye were ſlaine, they did take hym, ſlay him, quarter him, and in the ſhambles did waigh him. In ſuche wiſe, that a Romane was more (being dead) than alyue and raunſomed. Verie manie tymes Scipio was perſwaded, prayed, and importunated of his captaines to raiſe his ſiege and to 
                        •…
                     urue to Rome: but hée would neuer doe it, neyther could in any wiſe abide to heare of it: for at his comming out of Rome, a Nigromantik prieſt, did aduertiſe him, that he ſhould not diſmay, neither retyre from that conqueſt, although in the ſame he ſhoulde paſſe immeaſurable perilles, bicauſe the goddes had determined that ende of the fortunate Numantia, ſhoulde be the beginning of all his glorie.
               
               
                  Howe Scipio dyd take Numantia.
                  
                     SCipio perceiuyng the Numantins not to be ouercome by prayers, neyther by armes, he cauſed to be made (in compaſſe of the citie) a ſtately ditche, the which was in depth ſeuē fadoms, and in bredth fiue: in ſuch ſorte, that to the diſcomfortable Numantins) neither mighte there any vitayles enter, that they mighte eate, neither they come out with the enimies to fighte. Many times did the Conſull Scipio requeſte the Numantines to commende themſelues to the clemencie of Rome, and that they ſhoulde credit and giue faithe vnto his words,The noble minded had rather die free than lyue a ſlaue. to which thyngs they made anſwere: that ſince they had liued thrée hundred and thirtie eight yeres free, they would not now die ſlaues. Great cryes did the women giue within the citie, greate clamoures

did the Prieſtes make vnto their Gods, with great and loude voyces did the men exclame vpon Scipio, that he ſhould lette them out to fight as men of worthyneſſe, and not to kill them with hunger like wretches. And ſaid more, thou (oh Scpio) being a yong man of Rome, valiant and bolde, conſidereſt not what thou doſt, neyther do they counſel thée what thou oughteſt to doe. For to kéepe vs in as thou doeſt, is but a pollicie of warre, but if thou ſhouldeſt ouercome vs in battel, it ſhold be for thée an immorall glorie. But in the ende the Numantins ſéeing them ſelues ſo infamouſly and miſerably incloſed, and that now their vitayles fayled them, the moſte ſtrongeſt did ioyne themſelues together, and killed al the old men,The Numantines did kill their wiues and children. children and women, and did take all the riches of the Citie and of the temples, and heaped them vp in the market place, and gaue fire to all partes of the Citie, and poyſoned themſelues, in ſuche wiſe, that the Temples, the houſes, the riches, and the perſons of Numātia ended all in one day. A monſtrous thing it was to ſée that which the Numantins did while they were aliue, and a thing no leſſe fearefull whiche they dydde when they were a dying:No Numantine taken priſoner. Bicauſe they left to Scipio neyther goods to ſpoile, neyther man or woman of whom to triumph. During the tyme that Numantia was beſieged, no Numantin entred into priſon, or to any Romane was priſoner, but ſuffered death before he conſented to yelde. When the Conſul Scipio did ſée the Citie burne, and entred the ſame, & founde all the Citizens dead and burned, there came ouer his heart great heauines, and out of his eyes he poured out many teares, and ſayde: O righte happie Numantia, whyche the goddes willed to haue an ende, but not to bée ouercome.The continuance of the proſperitie of Numantia. Foure hundreth threeſcore and ſyxe yeares endured the proſperitie of the Citie of Nmantia: For ſo manye yeares had paſſed, ſince the foundation thereof by Numa Pompilius, vntill it was deſtroyed by Scipio the Affricane.
                  
                  In thoſe old tymes there were thrée Cities verie enemies and rebelles to Rome, that is to wit, Helia in Aſia, Carthage in Africa, and Numantia in Europa, the whiche thrée were vtterly

deſtroyed, but by the Romaines neuer poſſeſſed or inhabited. The Prince Iugurth of the age of .xxij. yeares came from Africa to the warres of Numantia, in fauor of Scipio, and did there ſuche and ſo notable feates in armes, that he deſerued with Scipio to be verie priuate, and in Rome to be eſteemed. Al the Hiſtoriographers that write of the warres of Numantia, ſaye that the Romaines did neuer receyue ſo muche hurte or loſe ſo many people, or were at ſo greate charges, neyther receyued ſo great ſhame, as they did in that conqueſte of Numantia. And the reaſon they giue for this, is, for that all the other warres hadde their beginning vppon ſome iniurie, except that of Numantia, whiche was of méere malice or enuie. To ſay, that the Citie of Samorra, was in tyme paſt Numantia, is a thing verie fabulous, and worthie to be laughed at: bicauſe (if ſtories do not deceiue vs) from the time that Numā
                        tia was in the world, vntil the time that Samorra begā to be, there did paſſe ſeuen hundreth thirtie & thrée yeres. If Plinie, Pomponius, Ptholomaeus, & Strabo, had ſaid that Numantia was néere to Dwero, there had bin a doubt whether it had bin Soria or Samorra. But theſe Hiſtoriographers doe ſaye, that the foundation thereof was néere to the head of Dwero: wherof it may be gathered, that ſéeing Samorra is more than thirtie leagues from the heade of Dwero, & Soria is but fiue, that it is Soria and not Samorra.
                  
                  There be thrée opinions where the ſituation of the citie of Numantia ſhould bée, in whiche ſome doe ſaye, that it was, where nowe is Soria: others affirme that it was on the other ſide of the bridge vpon an hill: ſome do auouche that it was a league from thence, on a certain place named Garray: and in my iudgement as I conſider of the thrée ſituations, this opinion is moſte true, bycauſe there is founde greate antiquities, and there doth appeare auncient greate buyldings. Thoſe that wrote of Numantia, were Plinius, Strabo, Ptholomaeus, Trogus Pompeius, Pullio, Trebellius, Vulpicius, Iſodorus, Inſtinus, and Marcus Ancus.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto the Conſtable Sir Ynigo Valaſco, in the whiche the Authour doth perſwade, that in the taking of Founterabie he firſt make proofe to profite his wiſedome, before he do, experiment his Fortune.
               
               
                  MOſt renoumed Lorde and Captaine to Caeſar, about the dead of this night, Peter Herro deliuered mée a Letter from your Lordſhip, the whiche althogh it had not come firmed or with ſuperſcription, by the letter I ſhould haue knowen it to be written with your owne hand: bicauſe it conteined few lines & many blots. While you are in the warres, it is tollerable to write on groſſe paper,In the warres it importeth dot to write with an euill pen. with crooked lynes, euill ynke, and blotted letters: For good warriers doe more eſteme to ſharpen their launces, than to make pennes. Sir, you write vnto me, that I ſhould pray for your health and victorie, for that at the commaundemente of Caeſar, you goe to beſiege Founterabie, which was taken by the Admirall of Fraunce, the ſame béeyng of the Crowne of Caſtile. Thys youre ſeruaunt preaceth with ſuch diligence for this letter, that I ſhal be forced to anſwer more at large than I can, and muche leſſe than I woulde. As touchynge Founterabie, I doe certaynly beléeue, that within theſe two yeares, the takyng and ſuſteynyng of it, hathe coſte the French King more than it would haue coſt to haue bought, or elſe to haue buylt it.More is ſpent to maynteyne opinion, than to defende reaſon. Wherof there is no cauſe to haue maruell, for that great Lordes and Princes do ſpend much more in ſuſteyning the opinion they holde, than the reaſon that they vſe. In all chriſtendome (at this preſente) I fynde not an enterpriſe more dangerous than this of Founterabie. For either you muſte ouercome the French king, or elſe diſpleaſe the Emperor. I wold ſay, that ye take in hand to deale with the might of the one, and with the fauour or diſgrace of the other. To be a Captain generall is an eſtate verie honorable

and profitable, although ryght delicate. For notwithſtanding hée doe all that he can; and all that is méete to bee done, it by the miſhap of his ſinnes hée giue any battel, and carie not away the victorie, it is not ſufficiēt that the ſorowfull man doe loſe his lyfe, but alſo they ſéeke ſome faulte, by the whiche they ſay he loſt that battell. Be it that euery man be what he can, and fight what he may, yet neuer to this day haue we ſéene a conquered Captain called wyſe, neyther him that ouercame, termed raſhe. It is verie good, that the Captaines which fight,No excuſe may excuſe ye loſſe of a battayle. and the Phyſitions that cure, be wiſe: but it is muche better, that they be fortunate: For theſe bée two things wherein many tymes wyſedome fayleth, and fortune preuayleth. Sir you do take in hand an enterpriſe iuſte, and verie iuſt: bicauſe from tyme out of mynde to this day, wée haue neuer heard or ſéene, the towne of Founterabie poſſeſſed by any king of France, neyther any king of Caſtile to haue giuen it them: In ſuche wyſe, that it is a conſcience for them to holde it, and a ſhame for vs not to take it.
               Sir conſider well for your owne part, that a warre ſo iuſt, be not loſt through ſome ſecrete offence:A iuſt warre is loſte by an vniuſt captaine. bycauſe the diſgraces and ouerthrowes that do happen in ſuch like enterpriſes, doe not chaunce bicauſe the warre is not iuſt, but for that the conductours thereof bée vniuſte. The warre the Hebrewes made with the Philiſtines in the mount of Gilboa, was a war verie iuſt, but king Saule that had the conduction therof, was a Kyng verie vniuſte, for whoſe cauſe the Lorde did permit that noble battayle to be loſt, to the ende the kyng ſhould be ſlayne in the ſame.
               But as the iudgements of God are in them ſelues ſo high, and of vs ſo vnknowen, many times it dothe happen, that a king or prince doth choſe out one of his ſeruāts, to make him general of an armie, to the ende he be honored, and his ſtate more amended than the reſt: And on the other ſide, God doth permit, that there where he thought to obtayn moſt honor & good happe, from thence he dothe eſcape moſte ſhamed and confounded. Let it not bée thought of Princes and of great

men, that ſéeing they woulde not abſtaine from ſinne, they ſhall more than others auoyd the payne.An euill lyfe doth come to make repayment in one day. For God doth compaſſe them in ſuche wiſe, that they come to make paymente in one houre, of that whiche they committed in all their life. In the houſe of God there hath not, is not, neyther ſhall be, merite without reward, or fault without puniſhment. And if it hap that preſentely wée ſée not the good rewarded, eyther the euill chaſtiſed, it is not for that God doth forget it, but vntill an other tyme to deferre it.
               The Marſhall of Nauarre with his band of Agramontenſes, wée vnderſtande is in the defence of Founteraby: it ſéemeth not to be yll counſell, to make youre ſiege openlye, and to practiſe wyth them ſecretely. For although they be nowe ſeruauntes to the Frenche Kyng: they ſhal remember they were ſubiectes to our Caeſar: for ſo much as I finde in old Hiſtories, that this linage of Marſhalls of Nauarre is auncient, generous, and valyant. And for my parte I doe firmely beléeue, that the Marſhall had rather ſerue Caeſar his lord, than folow the French king his maſter. The good Scipio the Affricane, did vſe to ſay, that al things in the warrs ought to be aſſayed before the ſworde be drawne: And ſurely he did ſpeake moſt truely: Bicauſe there is not in all this world ſo greate a victorie as that which is obtayned withoute bloud.The more noble victorie is that which is obtayned by counſel thā by the ſword. 
                  Cicero to writing to Atticus, dothe ſaye and affirme, that the deuiſe that vanquiſheth the enimyes with counſell, is of no leſſe worthyneſſe, than he that ouercommeth by the ſworde. Sylla, Tyberius, Caligula, & Nero, neuer could but cōmaund & kill, and on the other ſide, the good Auguſtus, Titus, and Traianus, coulde not but pray and pardon, in ſuche maner, that they ouercame praying, as the other fighting. The good Surgion oughte to cure with ſwéete oyntments, and the good Captaine with diſcrete perſuaſions. For as for yron,Iron was made to eare fields, and not to kill men. God rather made it to eare fieldes, than to kill men. Plutarch dothe ſaye, that Scipio being at the ſiege of Numantia when they were importunate that he ſhould beſiege the Citie and deſtroy the Numantins, anſwered: I had rather conſerue the life of one Roman,
                  
than kill all thoſe in Numantia. If theſe words of Scipio were wel conſidered of the Captains of warre, peraduenture they woulde leaue to bée ſoo raſhe in hazardyng theyr armyes in ſo greate and many perils. Wherof doth folow oftentimes that thinking to be reuenged of their enimies, they execute vengeance of their owne proper bloud.
               All this haue I ſayde (noble Conſtable) to the ende that ſith Caeſar hath iuſtified the warre of Founterabie, your nobleneſſe of your parte ſhould alſo iuſtifie the ſame: And the iuſtification whiche you haue to make, is: Firſt perſuade thē, before you come to beſiege them,We ought rather to make tryall by perſwaſion, than by ſworde. bicauſe it doth many times happen, that the prayers of a friend may doe more, than the ſworde of the enimie. Of the good Emperoure Theodoſius the hiſtorie writers recount, that vntill ten dayes were paſt after he had beſieged any Citie, he did not permit his ſouldiours to make warre, neyther to miſuſe the neighbors therof: Saying and proclayming euery daye, that thoſe tenne dayes ſpace hée gaue them, to the ende they ſhoulde profite themſelues by his clemency, before they ſhould make proof of his power. When the greate Alexander did ſée the deade bodie of Darius, and Iulius Caeſar: the heade of Pompeius: and Marcus Marcellus, Syracuſa burne: and the good Scipio, Numantia deſtroyed: They coulde not detaine their eyes from wéeping, althoughe they were mortall enimies. For if the tender hearted and noble mynded, reioyce of the victorie, they are grieued with others ſpoyle. Beleeue me (noble Conſtable) that pitie and clemencie doe neuer blunt the launce in tyme of warre:The bloudie Captain doth finiſhe his days with an euill ende. Iulius Ceſar pardoned more enimies than he kilde. And on the other ſide, the Captaine that is blouddie and reuenging, eyther the enimies doe kill him, or elſe his owne doe ſell hym. Iulius Caeſar, not vndeſerued, ſhall hold the ſupremacie amongſt the Princes of the world: and not bycauſe hée was more fayre, ſtronger, valyanter, or more fortunate than the reſt: but for that, without compariſon, muche more were the enimies hée pardoned, than thoſe he ouercame or killed. We doe reade of that famous Captaine Narſetes, that he did ſubdue the Frenche, ouercame

the Bactrians, and did conquere and gouerne the Germains: and with all thys, dyd neuer gyue battayle to the enimies: but hée wepte in the Temples the night before.It is more loued that is obteyned by requeſt than by the ſworde. The kingdome wherein the Emperour Auguſtus moſte delighted and ioyed, was that of the Mauritanes, whyche is nowe called the kyngdome of Marrewcos. And the reaſon that he gaue for this, was: bycauſe all other kingdomes he got by the ſword, and this kingdome he obtained by entreatance.
               If vnto my wordes it pleaſe you to giue credite, trauayle that Founterabye maye bée yéelded, rather by compoſition than by force: For that in graue and doubtefull caſes: firſte men oughte to profite themſelues with their pollicie, before they make proofe of Fortune. All the reſt that your Lordſhip dothe commaunde mee, I will perfourme with greate good will: Whiche is to witte, that I praye vnto our God, for your Lordſhips victorie. And that hée giue vnto mée of hys glorie.
               
                  From the towne of Victoria, 
                     the .xiij. of Ianuary .1522.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter for Sir Antonie of Cuniga, Priour of Saint Iohn, in the which is ſaid, that although there be in a Gentleman to bee reprehended, there ought not to be cauſe of reproch.
               
               
                  FAmous and moſte valiaunt Captayne, yeſterday béeyng Sainct Luces day, Lopes Oſorius gaue mée a letter from your woorſhip, made at the ſiege of Toledo: And of a truthe,In tyme of warre it beſemeth not a knighte to write from his houſe. I didde muche reioyce therein: and no leſſe eſtéeme the ſame, to bée written of ſuche a hande, and ſente from ſuche a place. For in the tyme of rebellion, as nowe, the Knyght ought not to write from his houſe reſting, but from the Campe fightyng. The Prieſt oughte to boaſte hymſelfe of his ſtudie: the huſbandman of his plough: and the Knyght of his launce. In ſuche wyſe, that in a good common wealth, the prieſt prayeth, the huſbandman ploweth, & the Knight fighteth. He is not to be

accounted a knight, yt is extract of noble blud, in power great, in iewels rich, in ſeruāts mighty: for al theſe things in marchauntes is many times found, and alſo of a Iewe many tymes obtained.Note ye right conditions of a right gētleman. But that whiche maketh the Knight to be a perfect gentleman, is to be meaſured in his words, liberal in giuing, ſober in diet, honeſt in lyuing, tender in pardoning, and valiant in fightyng. Notwithſtanding any one be noble in bloud, and mightie in poſſeſſions, yet if hee bée in his talke a babbler, in eating a glutton, in condition ambicious, in conuerſation malicious, in getting couetous, in trauells impatient, and in fightyng a coward: of ſuch we ſhal rather ſay, to haue more abilitie for a carle, than for a Knight: vileneſſe, ſluggiſhneſſe, nigardſhip, maliciouſneſſe, lying, and cowardneſſe,Is a gentleman a fault is tolerable, if it be not vile. did neuer take repaſt with knighthoode. For in the good knight, although there may be founde wherewith to be reprehended, there ought not to be conteyned wherfore to be reproued.
               In our age there hath bin no tyme, wherin the good knight mighte better ſhewe his ableneſſe, or to what ende hee is, than at this inſtant: bicauſe the King is out of his kingdom, the Quéene is ſicke, the royall Counſell is fledde, the people rebell, the gouerners are in Camp, and all the kingdome out of quiet: nowe or neuer, they ought to trauaile, and die, to appeaſe the kingdome, and euery man to ſerue his King. The good Knight doth now turne his gloues into gantlets: Mules into horſſes, his buſkins into greues, his hattes into Helmets, his doublets into Harneſſe, his ſylke into mayle, his golde into yron,The good knight hath in poſſeſſiō more armour than bookes. his hunting into fighting: In ſuch wiſe that the valiant knight ought not to boaſte himſelfe of his great Librarie, but of his good armorie. For the weale of the common wealth, it is as neceſſarie that the knight doe arme, as the prieſt reueſt himſelfe: for as prayers do remoue ſinnes, euen ſo doth armour defende from enimies.
               Sir, I haue ſayd all this, to the ende you ſhall vnderſtande there, that we know here all that you do in your campe: and alſo, all that you do ſay: Wherwith you ought not to be grieued,

ſith euery man dothe praiſe your wiſedome, and magnifie your Fortune. In the regiſter of fame maruellous is the great Iudas Machabeus: the whiche when he was counſelled by his ſouldiours by flying to ſaue their liues,Iudas Machabeus had rather loſe his his lyfe, than his fame. euen at the inſtant to giue battaile, ſayd: God neuer permit, that we put our fame in ſuſpitiō, but that this day we die all here, to kéepe our lawes, to ſuccour our brethren, and not to liue de famed. Great account doe the Gréeke writers make of their king Agiges, the which vpon the point to giue battayle to the Licaonians: when his ſouldiors began to ſay, that the enimies were very many, he made anſwere: The Prince that will ſubdue many, of neceſſitie muſt fight with many.To cōmaund many wil coſt muche. 
                  Anaxandridas Captaine of the Spartans, béeing demaunded why thoſe of his armie did rather endure themſelues to be ſlaine than taken, anſwered: That it was a lawe amongſt them much vſed, rather to dye frée, than lyue captiues. The great Prince Bias, holding warres with Iphicrates Kyng of the Athenians, when hée happened to fall into the ſtale of his enemies, and hys Souldiours beganne to crie, what ſhall we doe? he made aunſwere: That you make reporte to thoſe that are aliue, that I dye fyghtyng: and I will ſay there to the dead, that you ſcapte flying. Leonidas the ſonne of Anaxandridas,
                  Note the wordes of a valiant captain. and brother to Cleomenides, fighting in a certayn battaile, when his ſouldiours ſayd, the enemies dyd ſhoote arrowes ſo thick that the Sunne was couered. He aunſwered: Then lette vs fighte in the ſhade. Charrillus the fifte King after Licurgus, béeing in warre with the Athenians, when one of his Captaynes didde aſke an other if hée dydde knowe what number the enemyes were: Charrillus anſwered: The valiant and noble mynded Captaynes ought neuer to enquyre of their enimies, howe many they are, but where they be.To demaunde how many, & not where the enimies be, is a ſigne of fear. The one is a ſigne of flying, the other of fyghting. Alcibiades a famous Captaine of the Athenians, in the warres he held with the Lacedemonians, when they of his campe ſodenly made alarum with great cries, that they were fallen into their enemies handes: 
                     •
                  e valiant and feare not (quod he) we are not

fallen into their handes, but they into oures.
               I thought good to recounte theſe fewe antiquities, that it may be knowne to all that be preſente, and alſo notified to thoſe that are abſent, that amongſt theſe ſo glorious perſonages, your noble worthineſſe mighte be recounted: for that they neyther did excéede you in their wordes they ſpake, neither in their actes they did.
               We haue here vnderſtoode in what manner the armye of Toledo did make their ſalye, to take away a great bootie that you were driuing to your Campe: and many of your ſouldiours did not onely begin to flée, but alſo gaue you counſell to ſaue your ſelfe by running away: but you of your part, as a man of muche courage, and a Captaine of no leſſe experience, gaue onſet amongſt the enimies, crying: Here Gentlemen here, ſhame, ſhame, victorie, victorie, if this daye wée ouercome, we obtain that we deſire, and if we die, we perform our duetie.Words wordthy to be engraued on his tombe. Oh woordes worthy to bée noted, and right worthie vppon your tombe to be engrauen: Since it is certain that you ſlew that day more thā .vij. with your ſword, & with your noblenes of mind ouercame more than ſeuen thouſand.
               
                  Trogus Pompeius doth ſaye many tymes and in many places,Of more value is the noble mynded & expert captain than a greate armie. that the innumerable victories whiche the Romaines did obtain, were not ſo much for that their armies were of ſuch power, but bicauſe their Captains were of experience.
               And this may we verie well beléeue, for we euery day ſée that the happie ſucceſſe of a battell, is not ſo much attributed to the armie that fighteth, as to the captain that ouercōmeth. The Aſſyrians doe muche glorie themſelues of their captaine Belus: The Perſians of Syrus: The Thebans of Hercules: The Iewes of Machabeus: The Grekes of Alcibyades: The Troyans of Hector: The Aegyptians of Oſiges: The Epirothians of Pyrhus: The Romains of Scipio: The Carthagians of Hanniball: The Spaniardes of Viriato.
               
               
                  Who was the valiāt Viriato captain of Spayne.This noble man Viriato was naturall of the prouince of Luſitania, the which is now called Portingale. In his youth he was firſt a ſhepeherd, afterwarde a ploughman, and then a

robber, and in fine made Emperour, and of his countrey only defendour.Viriato was inuincible in the warres. The writers of Rome themſelues doe recount of this valiant Captaine Viriato, that in fiftéene yeares that the Romaines helde warre with hym, they coulde neuer kill, take, eyther foyle hym. When they founde him inuincible, and not to be ouercome in battaile, they ordeyned treaſon to kill him with poyſon.
               Sir, I thought good to bring this Hiſtorie in remembrāce, to the ende that in this ciuill warre, that we the Gentlemen hold with the Communers, that you ſhew your ſelf an other new Machabeus amongſt the Hebrues: and an other newe Viriato amongſt the Spaniards: To the end that our enimies may haue what to ſay, and your friends what to prayſe.
               But to let the concluſion bée, that you ceaſſe not to trauell (as you haue a noble mynde) to giue aduenture vpon your enimies, that you may alſo reſiſt al vices:Fewe vices are ſufficiente to darken many victories. for men of valiantneſſe, as your worſhip is, fewe vices are ſufficient to darken many victories. As concerning the reſte, that M. Hernando of Vega did commend vnto mée of your part, wich is to wit, that ſince you haue doone notably in the warres, it maye bée remembred in the Chronicles. Sir, holde your ſelfe for happie, that if your launce ſhall be ſuch as was Achilles, my pen ſhall be ſuche as that of Homere.
               
               
                  From Medina of Ruiſſeca, 
                     the .18. of Februarie. 1522.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A Letter to the Earle of Myranda, wherin is expounded that text of Chriſt, whych ſayth: My yoke is ſweete. &c.
                  
               
               
                  MOſte famous and right noble Lorde and Maſter of the houſe to Caeſar, your honoure requireth by youre Letter, that I ſhould ſend vnto you the expoſition of that text of Chriſte, whiche ſayeth, My yoke is ſweete, and my burden is lyght, the whiche you heard me preache the other day before his maieſtie

in the ſermon of all ſaincts, and that you delighted not a little to heare it, and no leſſe deſire to haue the ſame in writing. Alſo you write, it ſhall not be muche for me to take the payne to ſend the expoſition thereof, for that you came to viſite me when I was Warden of Soria: in ſuche wiſe, that if I would not performe your requeſt of courteſie: you would demaund it by iuſtice.
               I will not denie, but that viſitation was to me no ſmal pleaſure and conſolatiō: for that the Monaſterie is moiſt and ye ſoyle cold, the aire ſubtill, ſcarce of bread, euil wines, crude waters, and the people no fooles: for in very déede, if in other parts they iudge what they ſée, there they ſpeake what they thinke. That which I moſt wanted, was not lacke of vitayles, but the company of friends, without which, there is neither countrey doth like, or conuerſation that dothe contente. You haue greate reaſon to demaunde the viſitation you vſed with me,Note what is due betwixte friendes. and the conſolation you gaue me: for the good fréend doth owe no more vnto his fréend then to remedie his neceſſities, and to comfort him in his aduerſities.
               For ſo great courteſie, if I would vſe liberalitie, I am not of power: if I would ſerue you, I haue not wherewith: if I would viſit you, I haue no libertie: if I woulde requite or recompence you, I am poore: if I woulde giue any thing, you haue no néede. That which I am able to performe, is to confeſſe the curteſie ye then vſed with me, and to accompliſhe that, which you now commaund me, although if be not very great, it is not to be eſtéemed as little, that I holde you as my good Lord, and chooſe you for my friend. For it is muche more to gratifie a good turne receyued, than to recompence it.
               Vice for vice, and euill for euill: there is none in this world ſo euill as the ingrate man.Ingratitude ſeldom or neuer pardoned. And of this it commeth that the humayne and tender hart doth pardon all iniuries, except ingratitude: which he neuer forgetteth. Alexander in vſing liberalitie, and Iulius Caeſar in pardoning of iniuries, to this daye there haue not bin born two Princes that excéeded, or elſe to bée compared vnto them. And with this, it is readde of

them, that if they had knowen a man ingrate, Alexander woulde not gyue hym, neyther Iulius Caeſar woulde pardon him.
               
                  The expoſition of the text, My yoke is ſweete. &c.
                  
                  SIr, as concerning that your lordſhip doth ſay that I ſhuld ſend you the text which I preached vnto his Maieſtie as I did then pronoūce it, is a thing that I neuer vſe to do, neither ought to do: for if it be in our hands to ſend you what we ſay, we cannot ſend you the grace wherwith we do preach:The grace that is giuen in preaching is ſeldome giuen in writing. for ye grace, diſpoſition & vain that God giueth in ye houre vnto the tong, he doth giue afterwardes, verie ſeldome vnto the pen. Aſclepius amongſt the Argiues, Demoſthenes amongeſt the Athenians, Aeſchine amongſt the Rodians, Cicero amongeſt the Romans, were not only ſkilfull in orations, but Princes of all other Oratours. And ioyntly with this, neuer any Oration that they made, would they giue afterwardes vnto the people in wrytyng, ſaying, they woulde not commende vnto the penne, the glorie their tongue had giuen them.The hearte is more moued hearing the word of God than by reading. For howe much difference is betwixte the drawen plat and the builded houſe, the figure and the thing figured, the naturall and the thing repreſented: ſo muche is betwixte the hearing of a ſermon in a Pulpit, and the reading therof afterwardes in writing. For in the writyng chiefly the eyes do vſe theyr office, but with the worde the heart is moued. It is the propertie of Diuine letters, that béeing read, they be vnderſtood, and being heard, they be taſted or fauoured. And ſo it cōmeth to paſſe, that many mo perſons be turned to God by hearing of Sermons, than by reading of Bookes.
                  Syr, I wyll doe that you commaunde me, and will ſende you that you require of me, with a teſtimonie which I craue and with a proteſtation whyche I make: that yf it ſhall not ſéeme ſo good when you reade it, as it didde when you hearde it, impute not the fault to my good wyll, but to your importunitie.
                  
                     But now to the poynt, Chriſt ſayth: Come vnto me all you that be ouerladen and wearie, and I will vnlode you and refreſhe you. Eſay ſayeth in his viſions, the burden of Babylon, the burden of Moab, the burden of Arabia, the burden of Aegypt, the burden of Damaſcus, the burden of the Deſert of the ſea, the burden of Tyrus: whiche is to be vnderſtode, that he did ſée Babylon burdened, Moab burdened, Arabia burdened, Aegypt burdened, Damaſcus burdened, and Tyrus burdened. The prophete Dauid dothe ſaye: As with a gréeuous burden I am ouerladen: as if he ſhould ſay, A mightie greate burden they haue laid vpō me. Of the premiſſes it may be wel gathered, ye before Chriſt,The old lawe gaue puniſhment to the euill, but no glorie to the good. all the old law was tedious and painful: & held vs laden & wearied, bicauſe it was rigorous vnto thoſe that did breake it, and held no glory for ſuch as did obſerue it. In repayment of the Moral precepts they obſerued, the lawes they accōpliſhed, the ceremonies they vſed, and the ſacrifices they offered, only God gaue them victorie of their enimyes, peace in their common wealths, health to their perſons, and goodes wherwith to ſuſteyne their families.
                  What greater burden might ther be in this worlde, than that he which did break the law, went preſently to hell: And to him that did obſerue the ſame, they did not incontinently giue Paradyſe. From the beginnyng to the ende of the olde law, euer they laid on precept vpon precept, ceremonie vpon ceremonie, law vpon law, burden vpon burden, paine vpon pain, in ſuch wiſe, that all wer in burdening, but none in diſcharging.Vntill Chriſt none proclaymed reſt. The firſt in this world that gaue cōmaundemente to be proclaimed, that al the loden ſhould come vnto him, and he would vnlode them, all the wearied, and he would refreſh them, was Chriſt our God. And this was when in the molde of loue, he did melt that lawe of feare.
                  It is here to be vnderſtoode, euery yoke naturally to bée heauie, ſharpe, harde and painefull: and the beaſte that draweth the ſame, goeth bound and trauailed. And on the other parte Chriſte to ſaye, that his yoake is ſwéete, and hys burden lighte, ſurely is a thing worthy to be noted, and moſt

highly to bée conſidered: Chriſt did not ſay ſimply euery yoke is ſwéete: bicauſe otherwiſe wée had not knowen of what yoke he had ſpoken, neither what lawe hée dyd approue.
                  In that Chriſte ſaid, his yoke is ſwéete, hee did giue vs too vnderſtand, that other yokes be bitter.For what cauſe Chriſte ſaide, my yoke is ſweete, and my burden is light. In ſaying that his burdē is light: he gaue vs to conceiue that others were heauy, in ſuch wiſe, that he doth lighten vs, when he doth burden vs: and giueth vs libertie when he doth yoke vs: neyther did Chriſt ſaye, my yokes be ſwéete, and my burdens bée light, bycauſe our God doth neyther commaund vs to plough with many yokes, either to be laden with many burdens. It is the deuil that doth perſwade vs to many vices: It is the worlde that doth ingulfe vs in greate troubles: It is the fleſhe that craueth of vs much exceſſe and ſuperfluities. But the good Chriſt our God, doth aſke vs no more but that we loue him, & not to abhor our brethrē. The law of the Hebrewes was the law of feare: but the law of Chriſtians is the law of loue. And as they ſerued god of force and by feare, ſo we of loue and good wil: their law is called hard, and that of the chriſtians ſweete.
                  The propertie of loue is to turne the rough into plaine, the cruell to gentle, the bitter to ſwéete, the vnſauory to pleaſant,The propertie of a faithfull louer. the angry to quiet, the malicious to ſimple, that groſſe to aduiſed, and alſo the heauy, to light. Hée that loueth, neither can he murmur of him that doth anger him: neither denie that they aſke him: neither reſiſte when they take from him: neyther anſwere when they reproue him: neither reuenge if they ſhame him: neither yet will be gone when they ſend him away. What doth he forget that dothe loue with all his hart? what leaueth he vndon, that knoweth not but to loue? wherof doth he complaine, that alwaies doth loue? If he that doth loue hath any cauſe of complainte, it is not of him that he loueth, but of him ſelfe, that hath made ſome fault in loue: the concluſion is: The hart that loueth entierly without cōpariſon,Perfect loue endureth all trauell. much more is the pleaſure that hee taketh in loue, than the trauell he paſſeth in ſeruing.
                  Oh, to how greate effect ſhould it come too paſſe, if being

Chriſtians, wée ſhould therewith be enamored of the lawe of Chriſt: for then ſurely, neither ſhould wée be penſiue, nor liue in paine: for the heart that is occupied in loue, doth neyther flie daungers, nor is diſmayed in trauelles. The yoke that cattell do beare, when hée is new, is of him ſelfe very heauie: but after, when he is drie, and ſomewhat worne, he is more ſoft to be ſuffered, and more light to be caried. Oh good Ieſu, Oh high miſterie of thée my God: Since thou wouldeſt not incontinent after thy byrth burden vs with the yoke of thy lawe: but that thou thy ſelfe, vppon thy ſelfe didſt beare the burden: and thirtie yeares firſte didſt cary the ſame, that it ſhould drie,Chriſt did not commaund vs to doe, that whiche he did not firſt experimēt himſelf. and growe light, and be ſeaſoned. What hath Chriſt cōmaunded vs to do, that he firſt hath not done? what yoke hath he caſt vpon our backs, that he firſt hath not borne vppon his ſhoulders? If hée commaunded to faſt, he faſted: if he commaunded to pray, he prayed: if he commaunded wée ſhould forgiue, he pardoned: if he commaunded to die, he died: if he commaunded vs to loue, he loued: In ſuch wiſe, that if he commaunded vs to take any medicine, firſt in him ſelfe hée made experence.
                  Chriſt doth not compare his bleſſed lawe, vnto Tymber, Stone, Plants, or Iron: but only to the yoke, bycauſe al theſe things may be caried by one alone: but to drawe ye yoke of neceſſitie, there muſt be twain. High & alſo moſt profoūd is this miſterie, by the which is giuen vs to vnderſtand, yt euen at the preſent houre that the good Chriſtian ſhall put downe his head vnder the yoke to cary the ſame: forthwith on the other part, Chriſt puts himſelfe to helpe him. None calleth Chriſt, that he doth not anſwere. None doth commend himſelfe vnto him,The worlde doth more chaſtiſe than pardon, but in the houſe of God more pardoned than chaſtiſed. that he doth not ſuccour. None doth aſke him, that he giueth not ſome what. None doth ſerue him, that he payeth not. Likewiſe none doth trauell, that he doth not helpe. The yoke of the lawe of Chriſt, doth more cure, then wound: doth more pardon, than chaſtiſe, doth more couer than accuſe: doth more feare, than weary, and alſo doth more lighten, than burden. For Chriſt him ſelf, that commaunded to beare, he himſelf &

no other doth helpe vs to cary. Oh good Ieſu, O loue of my ſoule, with ſuch a guide as thou, who can loſe the way? with ſuche a patron as thou, who feareth drowning? with ſuch a captaine as thou, who diſpaireth victory? with ſuch a companion as thou, what yoke may bée painefull? Oh ſwéete lawe, oh bleſſed yoke, oh trauell well imployed, by the whiche wée paſſe vntoo Chriſte: for, not only thou doſt make accompt too bée with vs in all our trauels, but alſo doſt promiſe, not to leaue vs to our ſelues.
                  He that in the garden of Gethſemany came forth, to receiue thoſe that were come too take him: It is firmely to bée beleued, that he fayleth not to come forth to imbrace them that come to ſerue him. If any worldly and mightie riche man doe contend at any time with a poore Chriſtian, truely we ſhall finde, that the helpe is much more that Chriſte giueth vnto his poore ſeruant, than all the coſt that the world giueth to thoſe that do followe the ſame. Thoſe that the world doth leade vnder his yoke, to them hée giueth al things variable, diſmeſured, and by falſe waight: but in the houſe of god, all things are giuen whole, entier, without counterpeyſe, and moſt perfect. We may well ſay with great reaſon, that the yoke of Chriſte is ſwéete, and his burden light: for that the world doth not ſo muche, as pay for the ſeruice wée do him, but Chriſt doth pay vs, euen for the good thoughts we hold of him.
                  Chriſt doth well ſée that of our owne nature we be humane, weake, miſerable, foule, and remiſſe: for which cauſe he doth not behold what we are, but what we deſire to be. Moyſes gaue the lawe to the Hebrewes: Solon to the Greekes: Phoroneus, to the Egyptians: Numa Pompilius, to the Romanes: but as mē made thē, & euen as men died, ſo they ended: but the yoke of the law of God ſhall endure, as long as God doth endure.In all the lawes of the world vices be permitted, Chriſtes lawes excepted.
                  
                  What may Moyſes lawe be worth in whiche was permitted diuorcements, and vſury? What may the lawe of Phoroneus be eſtemed, in which was graunted, to the Aegyptians, to be théeues? Of what value may the law of Licurgus be

accompted, in whiche man ſlaughter was not chaſtiſed? of what accompt may the lawe of Solon Solonius be reputed, in which adultery was diſſimuled? Of what reputation may the lawe of Numa Pompilius be weighed, in which it was allowed, that as much as you coulde take, was lawfull to conquer? Of what conſideration may wée iudge the law of the Lidians, in which the maydēs vſed no other mariage, but vnto him that did win them by adultery? Of what iudgemēt, may we thinke the law of the Baleares, wherein it was commaunded that the bride ſhoulde not be giuen vnto the bridegrome, before the next kinſman had vſed hir? Theſe and ſuche like lawes, wée cannot ſay otherwiſe but that they were beaſily, brutiſh, and vnhoneſt: ſince they did containe vices, and by vicious men were permitted.
                  He that is entred into the religion of Chriſt, to be in déede a Chriſtian: hath no licence to bée proude, a théefe, a murderer, an adulterer, a glutton, malicious, neither blaſphemous. And if we ſhall happen to ſée any to do the contrary, he ſhall haue onely the name of a Chriſtian, but for the reſt, he ſhalbe of the pariſh of Hell.
                  The holy, and ſacred Lawe of Chriſte, is ſo right in the things it doth admitte, and ſo pure and ſincere in the things it doth permit: that it doth neither ſuffer vice, nor conſent to the vicious man, Quia lex Domini immaculata. The Hebrewes, the Arabians, the Pagans, and Gentiles, that defame our law, and complayne of the hardneſſe thereof: Surely they haue no reaſon,The Lawe of chriſt is ſharp vnto the wicked, but eaſie and light to the vertuouſe. much leſſe occaſion ſo to do. For the defecte is not in that ſhée is euill, but in that of vs ſhée is euill obſerued. Thoſe that would bée vertuous, of the preceptes of Chriſte neuer conceyue hardneſſe, bycauſe the yoke of God, is not for their purpoſe that followe their opinion, but for thoſe, that liue conformable to reaſon. Finally: I doe ſay, that all that wée do in reſpect of Chriſtians, wée are bound to do, in conſideration that wee are men: and to this end Chriſte ſayeth, that his yoke is ſwéete, and his burden light. For he is ſo good, and ſo magnificent, that he payeth vs as well,

for that we do for him, as though we were not bound to do it. This is it, that I vnderſtand of this text. And this is it, that I ſaid vnto his maieſtie, when I preached thereof. No more, but that our Lord haue you in his keping, and giue me grace, to ſerue him.
               
               
                  From Madrid 
                     the .x. of Iune. 1526.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Sir Peter Gyron, wherein the authour doth touch the maner of auncient writing.
               
               
                  
                     VIlloria your Solicitor and ſeruaunt gaue me a letter of yours here in Borgos, written in Oſſuna the .xxiiij. of Auguſt, the which, (although he departed from thence in the ſame moneth) came hither the .xv. of Nouember. Your letters be ſo wiſe and ſo well prouided for, that before they come out of their Countrey they will haue Auguſt and the grape gathering paſt. If it had bene powdred fleſhe as it is a letter, it had good time to come hither very well ſeaſoned, for by this time it had taken ſalt. Sir, the letters that you haue to ſende, and the daughters that you haue to marry, care yée not to leaue them far ouer yeared:Daughters are to be married before they grow old for in our countrey they do not ouer yeare other things than their bacon, which they will eate, and their ſtore wine which they will drinke.
               There is much leſſe diſtāce betwixt Oſſuna & Borgos, than is betwixt Rome & Conſtantinople. And the Emperour Auguſtus gaue cōmaundement vnto al his Viceroys that were reſident in the Eaſt, that if they did not receiue his letters within xx. daies after they were written, they ſhould not take thē as receiued, although in proceſſe they did receiue them, ſaying, that afterwardes there might happen ſome thing in Rome whiche were to be otherwiſe prouided than according to the firſt letters. The Emperour Tiberius Caeſar, if the letters that came frō 
                  Aſia were not of .xx. daies writing, & thoſe that came from Europa of .xv. and thoſe that came from Africa of x. and thoſe that came from Yllirica of .v. and thoſe that came out of

all Italie of .iij. daies, he would neither read them, and much leſſe prouide for them.
               Sir, it ſéemeth to me that you ought from henceforth to talke, indent and alſo couenant with your letters, that if they come to Caeſars Court, they make more haſte vpon the way: for (in deede) ſpeaking the truth, & that with libertie, if your letters were wood of the Pines of Soria, as they be letters of Oſſuna, by the faith of a Chriſtian, they might come ſo drie, yt therof might be made both dores & windowes. Although they giue me many Letters togither, preſently I know yours among the reſt: the which come wrinkled like linnē, ruſty like bacon, beſweat like a doublet: & beſide al this, to open & read them, there néedeth no force or neceſſitie to teare thē, for that the foldes come all broken, and the ſeales all to pieces.
               
                  Philiſtratus in the life of Apolonius Thioneus ſaith, that it was a cuſtome amongſt the Ipimeans,
                  The Ipineās did write the date of their letters with ye ſuperſcriptiō. to put the date of their letters with the ſuperſcriptiō, to the end, if they were but few daies written, to read thē, & if they were ouer yeared, to teare them. If (as you be a Chriſtiā) you had bin a Ipimean, be ſure & out of doubt, that of a .100. letters writtē with your hād .98. ſhold be torne. And alſo I doubt, whether the other two ſhold be read. But ſince it is true that the Date of the letter is old, yet that the letters be good and legible, I ſweare by the holy things of God, that it ſéemeth rather the caracters wherwith they write muſike, than the letter of a Gentleman.
               If your Tutor you had in your youth did not inſtruct you better to liue, than your ſcholemaiſter to write, your life ſhould be no leſſe diſgraced in the ſight of God, than your euill letter to my diſcontētation. For I giue you to wit, that I had rather take in hand to conſter cifers, thā to read your letters.
               
                  With what paper they were wont to write.According to the varietie of time, ſo was the diſcouering of the manner of writing amongſt men. For (according to the ſaying of Strabo) in the beginning of the worlde, firſt they did write in aſhes, afterwardes in Kindes of trées, then in Stones, afterwardes in leaues of Laurell, afterwardes in ſhéetes of lead, after that in parchement, and at laſte they

came to write in Paper. It is alſo to be noted, that in ſtones they did write with yron, in leaues with penſils, in aſhes with fingers, in rinds with kniues, in parchment with canes, and in paper with pennes.
               The Incke that our old forefathers did write withall,Note the inck of old time. was firſt of a fiſhe called Zibia, after that they made it of ſoote of ſmoke, afterwards of vermilion, after that of Cardenillio: in the end they inuented it of gumme, galles, coperas and wine.
               Sir, I thought good to recite theſe antiquities, to gather thereof (of this your letter) whether it were written with kniues, with yron, with penſilles, or with the finger. For, (as I thinke) it is not poſſible (at the leaſt) but that you did write it with a cane or with a canon. You haue to vnderſtand, that the forme of your letter was, groſſe paper, whitiſh incke, croked lines, letters turned vpſide downe, and the reaſons blotted: ſo that either you did write it by Moone light, or elſe it was ſome childe that beganne to learne at ſchoole. Although the letter came old, open, ſlubbred, rent, and all be blotted, is it true, that it was ſhorte in reaſons, and fewe in lines: no ſurely, but to haue little or nothing to write, it helde twoo ſhéetes & a halfe of paper. In ſuch wiſe, that when I did open it and did ſée it, I thought it rather to be ſome citation wherwith they cited me, than a letter whiche any ſhould write to me. The letters written with your owne hand, I cannot tell why they ſhould be cloſed, and much leſſe ſealed: for ſpeaking the truth, for more ſafe I holde your letter being open, than your plate being lockt in your cheſt. For vnto ye one a gardeniance is not ſufficient: & to the other, a ſeale is ſuperfluous.
               I gaue your letter to be read to Peter Coronell, to ſée if it were in Hebrew: I deliuered it to maiſter Prexamo to tel me if it were in Chaldee, I ſhewed it vnto Hameth Abducarin,
                  Famouſe eloquence of the Auctor in a baſe matter. to ſée if it came in Arabian: I did preſent it alſo to Siculo, that he might ſée the ſtile if it were in Greeke: I ſent it vnto maiſter Alaia, to vnderſtand, if it were a thing of Aſtrologie. Finally, I ſhewed it vnto Flemings, Almans, Italians, Engliſhmen, Scottes and Frenchmen, the which all did affirme, that either it was

a letter in ieſt, or elſe a writing inchanted. And when many ſaid that it was not poſſible, but that it was a letter inchanted, or elſe infected with a ſpirit, I determined with my ſelfe to ſend it to the great Nigromancer Iohn de Barbota, inſtantly deſiring him to read it, or elſe to coniure it: who aunſwered by writing, and alſo certefied me, that he had coniured it, and alſo put it in circle, and that he could gather of the matter, is, that the letter (without doubt) had no ſpirit in him: but he aduiſed me, that he which wrote it ſhould be beſprited.
               Sir, for that I wiſh you well, and am alſo beholding vnto you: I aduertiſe, and alſo beſéech you, from henceforth to vſe ſome amēdment in your letters, if not, ye may cōmend them to Iohn de Barbota. That your letters ſhall ſcape my handes, as good a virgin as Putifars wife did ſcape the handes of Ioſeph,
                  Notable exā
                     ples of cōtinē
                     cie in Princes or the fayre Sara the handes of Abimelech, or the Hebrues Sunamite the handes of Dauid, or the Dame of Carthage the handes of Scipio, or Phocions wife the handes of Dioniſius, or the daughter of King Darius the handes of Alexander, or Quéene Cleopatra the hands of Auguſtus: finally, I do ſay that I cannot reade, or els you know not to write.
               If the letter, ſent by Dauid vnto his Captaine Ioab, vppon the death of the vnhappy Vrias, and the conception of the fayre Berſabe, had bene of this curſed letter, Dauid had not ſinned, neither the innocēt Vrias bene ſlaine. If the conſederacie made by Eſcaurus,
                  Catiline a tyrant of Rome. and his companions, in the comuration of Catiline, had bin of ſuch miſerable letter as youres, neither had they receiued ſo cruell death, or in the Citie of Rome had they rayſed ſo infamous warre? that it had pleaſed the diuine prouidence that you had bene ſecretarie to Manicheus, to Arrius, Neſtorius, Sipontinus, Marius, Ebion, and all the other heretiks that haue bene in the world: for though they had conſtrayned you to write their excommunicate and curſed hereſies: wée ſhould neuer, or any other haue found meane to reade them.
               
                  It ought not to be written that cannot be written.Of Plinie in his naturall Hiſtory, of Clebius in his Aſtrologie, of Pitus in his Philoſophy, of Cleāder in his Arithmetike, of Eſtilphon in his Ethiks, and of Codrus in his Politikes, all

the auncient writers doe moſt ſharpely complaine, bycauſe in their doctrines they did write ſome thinges the which are eaſie to bee reade, but difficill to vnderſtand. In the Captaineſhip of theſe ſo excellent men: you may well ſet downe your launce, and alſo giue thrée poundes of wax to enter their fraternitie. For if their writings will not be vnderſtoode, no more may your lines be read.
               Many times I do muſe, how with the antiquitie of times, and with the varietie of wits, all things haue bin renued, and many made better, except the letters of the A.B.C. in whiche, from the time they were firſt inuented, there hath bene nothing added, and much leſſe mended.
               The A.B.C. holdeth xxj. letters, eightene of the which.The inuētion of the A.B.C. 
                  Neſtor found, and the other thrée, the captaine Diomedes inuented, being at ye ſiege of Troy. And ſurely it is a thing to be noted, that neither the eloquence of the Greekes, either the curioſitie of the Romanes, or the grauitie of the Aegyptians, ne yet the excellency of the Philoſophers, both found, or could find, another letter to the A.B.C. to be added, or to be taken awaye, or to be changed. And although the humaine nations are in ſome part diuers, at the leaſt, the letters of the A.B.C. thoroughout the world do ſound one.
               As Solon, Harman Cortes, Pedrarias, and Piſarro, haue diſcouered in the Indies a new world to liue in: it may be, that you haue found out a new A.B.C. to write withall: but I feare mée much, that none will goe to learne at your ſchole, if the matter therof be like your letters. I ſay for my owne opinion, that you ſhall neuer come to any good market, to ſell your land by ſuch a liſt.
               I will ſay no more, of the matter of your letter, but that you accept this of mine, as a warning, and therwith of your curteſie I do craue, from henceforth you kéepe your letter vnmoth eaten: And that it may ſtand with your pleaſure, to amend the imperfection of the ſame: for I haue learned too read, and not to diuine.
               I did imagine with my ſelfe, that of purpoſe you had ſent

me this letter in ieſt, to giue me occaſion to anſwere you in ieſt: and of very ouerthwartnes you did write to me ſo, bycauſe I ſhould aunſwere to the ſame purpoſe: if happely it were your intent, Sir you muſt thinke, that out of ſuch pilgrimage, you can obtaine but like pardons.
               Sir from this Court of Caeſar, very fewe things are to bée written: although many to be murmured, the newes now are, that many titles of Dukes, Marqueſes, Earles, and Vicountes the Emperour our Lorde and Maiſter hath giuen to many of his kingdome, thē which do deſerue them very wel, for the authoritie of their perſons, & for the antiquitie of their houſes.
               
                  The rentes of great Lords, ought to be agreeable to their titles.If ye demaund of the rents they receiue, and of the landes and Seigniories they poſſeſſe, in theſe things I do not entermedle or dare not put to my hand, although it be true that ſome of theſe Noble mens eſtates be ſo narow and ſtrait, that if it appertained to the Friers Hieronimites, (as it doth to thē) they would ſhortly chooſe it within a wall.
               
                  Rodrigo Giron, to you beholding, and my ſpeciall friend, deſired me of his owne part, and commaunded me of yours, that I ſhould ſpeake to the gentleman Antony of Fonſeca, vppon I cannot tell what, unbarge, or ſtay, that you had vppon a licence. Sir I haue diſpatchte it, as your authoritie and my fidelitie did require. Since that time I haue not vnderſtood, what hath ben done therin: but that which I can certifie you of and affirme, is: If he do perſeuer with ſuche diligence too take order for your licence, as he hath with great earneſtnes played away his goodes: your worſhip ſhal as well be deliuered of auditors and of an accompt, as he was this other night of gamſters at dice. For as one of them aduertiſed me, he loſt no more but the cap he did weare: & the ſpurs vpon his héeles.
               There are, that do well reſemble their owne, and do followe the ſteps of their forefathers: for if I be not forgetfull, I haue ſéene his father the Iuſtice or Maior of Montanches,
                  Gamſters at dice play them ſelues to nothing. many times kepe his chamber, not bycauſe hée was ſicke, but for that in Merida hée had played and loſt all that euer

he had. The lord haue you in his kéeping, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Burgos 
                     the 15. of September in the yeare 1523.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Sir Ynnigo of Velaſco, Conſtable of Caſtile, wherein the author doth teache the briefeneſſe of writing in olde time
               
               
                  THe fourth of October, here in Valiodolid I receyued a letter from your honour, written in Villorado the thirtith of September: and conſidering the diſtance from hence thither, and the ſmall tarying of your letter from thence hither, too my iudgement, if it had bin a troute, it had come hither very freſh. Pirrhus the King of the Epirotes was the firſt that inuented currers or poſtes: and in this caſe, he was a Prince ſo vigilant, that hauing thrée armies ſpred in diuers partes, his ſeate or pallace being in the Citie of Tarento: in one day he vnderſtood from Rome: in two dayes out of Fraunce: in thrée out of Germany:
                  Poſtes in old time made great ſpeede. and in fiue out of Aſia. In ſuch ſorte, that his meſſengers did rather ſéeme to flie, than otherwiſe.
               The hart of man is ſuch an inuentor of new thinges, and ſo farre in loue with nouelties, that the more ſtraunge the thing is they ſay or wright vnto vs, ſo much the more we do reioyce and delight therein: for that olde things do giue lothſomeneſſe, and new things do awaken the ſpirites. This vā
                  tage you haue (that can do much) of them that haue but little, that in ſhort time you write whether you will,Euill newes neuer cōmeth to late. and vnderſtand from whence you think good: although alſo it is moſt true, that ſometime you vnderſtand ſome newes within thrée dayes, which you would not haue knowen in thrée yeares.
               There is no pleaſure, ioye, or delight, in this world, that with it bringeth not ſome inconuenience: in ſuch wiſe, that that wherin long time we haue had delight, in one day wée pay and yelde againe.
               
                  Sir I haue ſaide thus muche, to the end to continue your good opinion towards Moſen Ruben, your Steward: whiche by the date of your letter, dothe ſéeme to haue made greate ſpéede, and to haue ſlept very little, for he brought the letter ſo freſhe, that it ſéemed the inke to be ſcarce drie.
               You write vnto me, that I ſhould certefie you, what is the cauſe, that I being deſcended of a linage ſo auncient, of body ſo high, in the momentes of my prayers ſo long, and in preaching ſo large, how I am in writing ſo briefe: eſpecially in my laſt letter, that I ſent from the monaſterie of Fres Dell Vall, when I was there preaching vnto Caeſar: Whiche you ſay, did containe but foure reaſons, and eight lines.
               Sir in theſe things, that you haue written, you haue giuen me matter, not to anſwere very ſhort. And if by chaunce I ſhall ſo doe from hencefoorth, I ſay and proteſt, it ſhalbe more for your pleaſure than for mine owne contentation.
               As concerning that you ſay my linage is auncient, your lordſhip doth well knowe, that my graundfather was called ſir Beltran of Gueuara:
                  The auctor reporteth of his linage of Gueuara. my father alſo was named ſir Beltran of Gueuara: and my Coſin was called ſir Ladron of Gueuara, and that I am now named ſir Antony of Gueuara: yea and alſo your Lordſhip doth know, that firſt there were Earles in Gueuara, before there were Kings in Caſtile.
               
               This linage of Gueuara, bringeth his antiquitie out of Britaine: and dothe containe ſixe houſes of honour, in Caſtile: whiche is to wete, the Earle of Onate, in Alaua: ſir Ladron of Gueuara, in Valldalega: ſir Peter Velez of Gueuara in Salinas: ſir Diego of Gueuara in Paradilla: ſir Charles of Gueuara in Murcia: ſir Beltran of Gueuara in Morata. All which be valiant of perſones, although poore in eſtates & rentes: in ſuch ſorte, that thoſe of this linage of Gueuara, do more aduaunce themſelues of their antiquitie, from whence they are deſcended, than of the goods which they poſſeſſe.
               
                  To deſcend of a noble bloud, prouoketh to be vertuous.A man to diſcend, of a delicate bloud, and to haue noble or Generous parents: doth muche profite to honour vs, and doth not blunte the launce to defende vs: for that infamie

doth tempt vs to be deſperate: and the honour, to mende our eſtate. Chriſt and his Mother would not deſcend of the tribe of Beniamin, whiche was the leaſt, but of the tribe of Iuda, which was the greater and the better.
               They had a law in Rome, named Proſapia, which is to ſay, the law of linages, by which it was ordained and commaunded in Rome, that when contention did ariſe in the ſenate for the conſulſhip, that thoſe which diſcended of the linage of the Siluians, of the Torquatians, and of the Fabritians, ſhould obtain chiefe place before all others: and this was done after this manner, for that theſe thrée linages in Rome were moſt auncient, and did deſcend of right valiant Romaines.
               
               They whiche deſcended of Cato in Athenes: of Licurgus in Lacedemonia: of Cato in Vtica: of Ageſilaus in Licaonia:
                  The auncient and noble Linages in Rome were much eſteemed. and of Tuſsides in Galacia: were not onely priuiledged in their prouinces, but alſo amongſt all nations much honored. And this was not ſo much for the deſert of thoſe that were liuing, as for the merite of the auncient perſonages that were dead.
               Alſo it was a lawe in Rome, that all thoſe that deſcended of the Tarquines, of the Eſcaurians, Catelines, Fabatians, and Bithinians, had no offices in the commō wealth:In Rome they bare no office that deſcended of traitours. neither yet might dwell within the compaſſe of Rome. And this was done for the hate they bare to King Tarquin, the Conſull Eſcaurus, the tyrant Catiline, the Cenſor Fabatus, and the traytour Bithinius: all which were in their liues very vnhoneſt, and in their gouernement very offenſiue.
               Sir, I ſay this, bicauſe a man to be euill, deſcending from the good, ſurely it is a great infamie: but to deſcend of the good, and to bée good, is no ſmall glorie. But in fine, it is with men as it is with wines: ſometime he ſauors of the good ſoyle, ſometime of the caſke, & others of the goodneſſe of the grapes. A minde not to flie, a nobleneſſe in giuing, ſwéete and curteous in ſpeach, an heart for to aduenture,The properties of a man born of a good linage. and clemencie to pardon: graces and vertues be theſe, that are rarely founde in a man of baſe ſoyle. And many times ſuche one is extract of an auncient and Noble linage. As the worlde nowe goeth,

vpon who art thou, and what art thou, it doth not ſéeme to me, a man may haue better blaſon in his houſe, than to be, and alſo deſcended of a bloud vnſpotted. For that ſuch a man ſhall haue whereof to commend himſelf: and not wherefore to be deſpiſed or taunted.
               Sir alſo you ſay in your letter, that I am in body large, high, drie, and very ſtraight: of which properties I haue not whereof to complaine, but wherefore to prayſe my ſelf. Bycauſe the wood that is large, drie, and ſtraight, is more eſtéemed, and bought at a greater price. If the greatneſſe of bodie diſpleaſed God, hée had neuer created Paulus the Numidian, Hercules the Grecian, Amilon the wilde woodman, Sampſon the Hebrewe,
                  A note of the Giants of the old time. 
                  Pindarus the Thebane, Hermonius the Corinth, nor Hena the Ethicke: whiche were in the greatneſſe of their bodies, ſo monſtrous, and ſo fearefull, that other men ſéemed in their preſence, as Crikets or Graſhoppers do ſéeme before men.
               The firſt King of Iſraell, which was Saule, how much difference is betwixt the ſhoulders and the crowne of the head, ſo much was he higher than all the men of his kingdome.
               The great Iulius Caeſar, was of bodie high and leane, although of face, not very faire. It is ſayd of Auguſtus the Emperour, that he was ſo highe of ſtature, that of the high trées, with his owne hands he did gather fruite.
               Alſo it is written of the Conſull Silla, that his greatneſſe was ſo exceſſiue, as hée alwayes ſtouped to enter at euery doore.
               
                  Titus Liuius ſayth, that Scipio the Affrican was of ſo great a ſtature, that none was equall to him in minde, neither did paſſe him in heigth of bodie.
               
                  The differēce betwixt the great and litle men.
                  Plutarch ſayth of Alexander the Great, that according vnto ſuch a minde as he poſſeſſed, vnto the world it did ſeeme they had more than inough of Alexander: and to Alexander it did ſéeme, that for himſelfe the whole world was not ſufficient.
               Sir this do I ſay in the ende, hereby to conſider howe the heart of man may be contained in a little bodie: Since vnto

it, the whole world ſéemeth very ſtraight: A man, to be very great or very little: of theſe two inconueniences, the leſſe is to be great, bycauſe the large garment eaſely is made leſſe, but that whiche is too little without blemiſh or deformitie, cannot be made greater.
               
                  Allonſo Henricus, Aluergomes, Salaia, Valderrauano, and Figueroa, whiche be little of bodie, although not of minde, euer as I ſée them go in Court, ſéeme to me to be proude, furious, troubled, and angrie. And of this I do not much meruayle: bycauſe little chimneys alwayes be ſomewhat fumiſhe or ſmokie.
               In the Monaſtery of Toros, of Guiſando,
                  Of a little Frier of the Abbay of Guyſando. I found there a very little Frier, whiche for that I knockt thrice arowe, he did braule with me very frowardly, and when I ſayde vnto him, that he had little pacience, he made me aunſwere, that I had leſſe good maner: I intreated him to giue me ſome drinke, and that we might ceaſe chiding, where vnto he anſwered: Brother, although you ſée me, you knowe me not: I giue you to vnderſtand, that I am, as you ſée but little, but there withall I am a péece of ſtéele, and ſuche greate men and vnweldie as you are, if they ſpeake to me by day, by night they dreame of me: for this other day I cauſed my ſelf to be meaſured, and founde the heart to haue aduauntage of the body fiue yardes in meaſure, whereunto I replied: father, therof is great neceſſitie, that the heart haue fiue yardes of meaſure in heigth, ſince in all your body there is not two Cubites and a half: but after the father heard this, he ceaſed to chide, and alſo left me without drinke.
               Sir beleue me, the ſhort haquebuts ſooneſt breake, the ſmaleſt fortes be ſooneſt beſieged: the ſhaloweſt Seas do ſooneſt drowne: in ye naroweſt waies is greateſt peril: the ſtrayteſt garments be ſooneſt rent: and little men bée ſooneſt angrie.
               In little beaſts,Little thinges giue more offence than profite. there is not ſuch ſtrēgth neither ſuch grace as in the great: bycauſe the Elephant, the Dromedary, the Ox, the Bul, & the Horſe, which be great beaſts do profite for ſeruice. But the Flie, the Rat, the Flea, the Graſhopper, and

the Criket ſerue not but onely to offend.
               And alſo you note me, that in ſaying of ſeruice I am very long, and in contemplation not ſhort, and likewyſe as tedious therein as M. Prexmus in telling his tale. But I promiſe your Lordſhip, that if I be long in praier, your Lordſhippe is not ſhorte in communication: for many times I haue ſeene you begin a long tale that I neuer durſt tary the end therof: for if I had ſo done, either I ſhould come to the court at none, or goe to bed at midnight.
               Sir I do conferre the moments of my contemplations, with the ſinnes of my life, and I do find by my rekoning, that it is not a iuſt thing to be large in ſinning, and ſhort in praying. The maker and redéemer of the worlde, did vſe great meaſure in all things, except in praying: wherin he was alwayes long, which he ſhewed moſt clearely in the garden of Gethſemany, where, how muche the more the agony did oppreſſe him, ſo much the more did he enlarge his prayer.
               Alſo your Lordſhip doth ſay, that in preaching I am long and tedious, wherto I anſwere: that in the whole world there is no long ſermon, if the hearer do giue eare as a Chriſtian, and not as to curious. I remember the lent paſt being with your Lordſhip, they preſented vnto your honour, certaine Samons of Penia Melera, whiche you praiſed for very good, and yet complained that they were very little. In ſuch ſorte that your Samons are neuer ſufficiently large, or ſermons ſhort inough.
               
                  A ſiſe is obſerued in nothing but in ſermōs.It is thirtie eight yeares ſince I was brought to Caeſars Court, during which time, I haue ſéene all things increaſing, except ſermons, which alwaies doe ſtand at one ſtaye. This ſéemeth to be true, for that in our eating we adde more time, in our ſleeping we conſume more houres, all our garmentes hold more cloth, our houſes are more large, our expences more exceſſiue, our apparell more coſtly, and the men more vicious. Finally, I ſay that in our talke, or in any other thing no ſyſe is ſuffered, but in ſermons whiche muſt not paſſe aboue an howre.
               
                  Wheras your Lordſhip ſaith, I am ſo ſhort in writing: to this I aunſwere, that if I be not deceyued,More grauitie is required in writing, thā in talking. to talke there néedeth but a certaine liuelineſſe, but to write, it is neceſſary to haue muche wiſedome: becauſe, to proue if a man be wiſe or fooliſh, there is no other néed, than to put a paire of ſpurres to his héeles, or a pen in his hand.
               In all things I confeſſe my ſelfe to be large, except in writing, which I repent nothing: for an inconſidered woorde, I may incontinent reuoke: but the firme of my hand I can not denie. To ſpeake ſomething with too much ſimplicitie or inconſidered, is a ſheepiſhneſſe, but to firme it with the hand, is meere folly.
               
                  Saluſt ſaith, that if the tyrant Catilene and other his felowes had not firmed the letter of their coniuration (although they were accuſed) they had not bene condemned: in ſuch wiſe, that as well killeth the penne as the launce. If Laertius, Plutarch, Plinie, Vegetius, Sulpitius, and Eutropius doe not deceiue vs by their hiſtories: many Poetes, Orators, Philoſophers, Kings, & Princes, haue bin in the worlde paſt, of whome it is read, that in their talke they were very large, but in their writings very conſiderate.
               
                  Caeſar in a letter that he did write from the Perſicke warres of Rome, ſaid no more but theſe wordes, Veni, vidi, & vici,
                  Note the breuitie of ancient writing. I came, I haue ſéene, and I ouercame.
               
                  Octauius the Emperour, writing vnto his Couſin Caius Druſius, ſaid thus: For that thou art in Illiria, remember thou art of the Caeſars, that the Senat hath ſent thée, and that thou art a yong man, my nephew, and a Citizen of Rome.
               
               The Emperour Tiberius writing vnto his brother germain, ſaid thus: The Tēples be reuerenced, the Gods be ſerued, the Senate in peace, the common wealth in proſperitie, Rome in health, Fortune gentle, and the yeare fertile: this is here in Italy, the ſame we deſire vnto thée in Aſia.
               
               
                  Cicero writing vnto Cornelius ſayeth thus: Bée thou merry ſince I am not euill, for likewiſe I ſhall reioyce, if thou be well.
               
                  The diuine Plato, writing from Athens vnto Dionyſius the tirant, ſaith thus: To kill thy brother, to demaund more tribute, to force thy people, to forget me thy friende, and to take Photion as an enimie, be workes of a tyrant.
               The great Pompeius writing from the Eaſt vnto the Senate, ſaith thus: Conſcript Fathers, Damaſcus is taken, Pentapolis is ſubiect, Syria, Colonia, and Arabia is confederate, and Paleſtina is ouercome.
               The Conſull Cneius Siluius, writing newes of the battel of Pharſalia vnto Rome, ſaith thus: Caeſar did ouercome, Pompeius is dead, Rufus is fled, Cato killed himſelfe, the gouernement of Dictator is ended and the libertie loſt.
               Behold Sir, the manner that the ancients vſed in writing to their peculiar friends, which with their breuitie gaue vnto all men wherefore to be noted, but we in neuer making an end, giue large occaſion to be corrected. No more, but that I pray the Lord to be your protector, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Valiodolid, 
                     the eight of October, in the yere. 1525.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Marques of Peſcara, wherein the Authour doth touch, what a Captaine ought to be in the warres.
               
               
                  BEing with Caeſar in Madrid the .xxij. of March, I receiued a letter from your Lordſhip, written the .xxx. of Ianuary: and God be my witneſſe, that when I ſawe and read it, I would rather the date thereof had bin, not from the ſiege of Marcellus, but from the conqueſt of Ieruſalem. For, if it were from Aſia, and not from France, your iourney ſhould be more famouſe and magnified, and of God much more accepted.
               
                  Titus Liuius reporteth of no ſmall variance betwixt Mar. Marcellus, and Quintus Fabius, which did ariſe vpon the Cenfulſhips of the warres, for that the good Mar. Marcellus would not be Captaine of the warre, which was not very well iuſtified? And Quintus Fabius did not accept to go to the warres,

were it not very daungerous.Twoo Romane Captaines would two manner of warres. The Romanes were in a maruelous vaine glory in that worlde, when theſe twoo noble Princes were borne: but in the ende, muche more was the eſtimation of Marcus Marcellus (for being iuſt) than of Quint. Fab. for being valiaunt.
               The Romanes were neuer ſo foyled, or euer did incurre ſo muche diſhonor in the warres of Aſia, either in Africa, as they receiued at the ſiege of Numantia. And this was not for defaulte of batterie, eyther bicauſe the Citie was very ſtrong,The warres againſt Numantia was vmuſt. but for that the Romanes had no reaſon to make them warre. And the Numantines had iuſt cauſe to defend themſelues.
               
                  Helie the Spartan doth ſay, that onely the Emperour Traian was hee, that neuer was ouercome in battell. And the reaſon thereof was this, that he did neuer take any warre in hand, wherein he did not iuſtifie his cauſe.
               The King of Pontus whiche was called Mithridates, dyd wryte a certaine Letter vnto the Conſull Silla, being bente in warres moſte cruelly the one againſt the other, wherein was thus written: I doe muche wonder of thée Conſull Silla, to take warre in hande in ſo ſtraunge a lande as this of mine: and that thou dareſt aduenture to deale with my great fortune, ſince thou knoweſt ſhée neuer deceiued mée, neither had acquaintance with thée. To theſe woordes the Conſull did anſwere: Oh Mithridates, I weighe it very little to holde warre farre from Romae ſince the Romanes haue fortune alwayes by them. And if thou ſay, that ſhe did neuer fayle thée, nor euer know mée, thou ſhalt now ſée, how (in vſing hir office) ſhe ſhall paſſe to mée, and take hir leaue of thée. And although it be not ſo, I do neither feare thée, or doubte hir, for that I hope that the Goddes will do more for my iuſtice, than for thée thy great fortune.
               Many times the Emperoure Auguſtus vſed to ſay: that warres to be good, muſt be incommended vnto the Goddes,The nature of warres that is to be holden iuſt. accepted of Princes, iuſtified of Philoſophers, and executed of Captaines.
               Thus much I haue ſaide vnto your Lordſhip, to this end,

that if your warre had bin vpon Ieruſalem: it were to be holden for iuſt, but for that it is vpon Marſellius, alway we hold it for ſcrupulous. The kings hart is in the hand of God, ſaith the diuine ſcripture. If it be ſo, who may attaine vnto this ſo great a ſecret? whiche is to wéete, that the Kings hart, being in Gods hand, he dare offend God: which doth appeare moſt cleare, in that we ſee no other thing but warres amongſt the Chriſtians: and leaue the Moores to proſper and liue in reſt. This buſineſſe to me is ſo difficulte, that although I cā ſpeak thereof: I know not, how to vnderſtand it: ſince all day wée ſée no other thing, but that God doth permitte by his ſecrete iudgements,Warres betwixt chriſtiās dependeth of the ſecretes God. that the Churches where they prayſe him be deſtroyed and throwen downe: and the curſed remaine ſound and frée, where they do offend him.
               Your Lordſhip is a Chriſtian, a good man at armes, my neare kinſeman, and my ſpeciall friend, any of which things doth much binde me to féele your trauaile, and to be gréeued with your perill: I ſpeake of trauell to the bodie, bycauſe the Captaine that holdeth much of his honour, ought to eſtéeme little of his life: I ſay perill vnto the ſoule, bicauſe amongſt Chriſtians there is no warre ſo iuſtified, that in the ſame remayneth not ſome ſcruple.
               Herein your Lordſhip ſhall ſée that I deſire to ſaue you, in that I will not delite you with lies:Eight condicions meete to be performed, by a captaine generall of the warres. But only to ſay vnto you that which I do conceiue, to the end that afterwards you may do what is méete. If you know not wherunto you are bound, I wiſh your Lordſhip to vnderſtand, it is, that the Captaine generall do auoyde vniuſt wrongs, correct blaſphemers, ſuccour innocents, chaſtiſe quarellers, pay his armie, defend the people, auoyde all ſackings, and obſerue fayth with the enemies.
               Aſſure your ſelfe my Lord, that there ſhall come a time, in whiche, you ſhall giue an accompt to God, and alſo to the king: not onely of what you haue done, but likewiſe of that whereunto you haue conſented.
               Sir Iohn of Gueuara was your Grādfather and my couſin,

and he was one of the Gentlemen at armes,The good knight ought to imitate his good predeceſſors. that paſſed out of Spayne, into Italy with the King Sir Alonſo, and there did helpe to get this kingdome of Naples, and in recompence of his ſeruice, hée made him Lorde greate Seneſhall of the kingdome. Of whiche you may gather, howe muche your Lordſhip ought to trauell, to leaue ſuche another renoume vnto your ſucceſſours, as hath bene left vnto you by your predeceſſors.
               As Cicero ſayth, writing vnto Articus, this name Knight or Gentleman, the Romaynes did neuer admit, either conſent to entitle thoſe that could gather muche riches, but ſuche as had bene at the victory of many battailes.
               That Knight or Gentleman that doth not imitate the valiant actes of his predeceſſours, ought not boaſt himſelfe,He is not to be intituled a knight that is rich, but vertuous. to deſcend of them. For, how much the more renoumed the life of the fathers is, ſo much the more are the children to be accuſed, for their negligence. To preſume much of no more but to deſcend of Noble parents, I ſay is a thing moſt vaine. To blaſon a mans owne proper déedes is fooliſhneſſe: but in the end of theſe two extremities, he is more tollerable that prayſeth his owne vertues, than he that boaſteth himſelfe of other déedes.
               When amongſt Knights or Gentlemen talke is of armes,In the talke of warres, not that I haue heard, but that I haue ſcene is moſt commendable for a gentleman. a Gentleman ought to haue great ſhame to ſay, that he read it, but rather that he ſaw it. For it is very conuenient for the Philoſopher to recount what hee hath read, but the Knight or Gentleman it becommes to ſpeake of things that hée hath done. The Conſull Marius, when he was reſident in Rome, and alſo in the warres, many times would ſay: I confeſſe that I am extract of linage obſcure, and alſo I acknowledge that I haue no armes of my predeceſſors, for that they were not floriſhing Captaines. But iointly with this, they that are now aliue can not denie, that in the temples I haue erected pictures or counterfets, I haue receiued in my body many woundes, and in my houſe many enſeignes: none of which I do enherite of my predeceſſours, but haue wonne thē of mine

enimies. And Marius ſaide more: Your predeceſſors left you riches to enioy, houſes wherein to dwell, ſlaues to ſerue you, gardens to delight in, fame whereof to boaſte, and armour wherwith to venter: but they haue not left you vertue, wherof you might preſume. Of which déede, Oh you Romaynes, ye may inferre, that it is very little that he doth enherite, which doth not enherite the vertues of his predeceſſors.
               I thought good to aduertiſe you of theſe things, to the end that in remembring the fame and nobleneſſe of ſuch men as were your predeceſſours, you ſhould muche more eſtéeme to imitate their vertuous actes, than too haue their armes ſette forth and drawen at large. I am deceiued, if I did not ſée in Caeſars court, a certaine gentleman of more than a Quent of rent, whiche I did neuer ſée haue a horſe in his ſtable, either launce in his houſe, neither yet commonly did weare his ſword, but onely a Dagger that was very little. But on the other part, when he began to recount the doubty déedes of his forefathers, it ſéemed that he daunted Lions.
               
                  The armes of a knight are giuen him to fight, and not to behold.Men do now eſtéeme to paint their armes in their houſes, to graue them in their ſeales, to place them in their portals, & to weaue them in their ſumpter clothes, but none aduētureth to win them in the field: in ſuch wiſe, that they hold armes, for others to behold: and not for themſelues to fight.
               One thing I will counſell your lordſhip: which for ſuche as are of your eſtate in the warres, is very neceſſary: And that is, aboue al things to be vigilant, & to haue great regard, that amongſt the captaines of your army, there be vſed great ſecrecie: for in greate affayres there is neuer good ſucceſſe, when they be diſcouered before they take effect. If Suetonius Tranquillus doe not deceyue vs: Iulius Caeſar neuer ſayde, to morow this ſhalbe done, and to day let this be done: but onely to day this ſhalbe done, and to morrowe wée ſhall ſée what wée haue too doe. Plutarche ſaithe in his politiques, that Lucius Metellus, being demaunded of one of his Captains, when the battayle ſhoulde bée giuen, made aunſwere: if I thought my ſhirt did knowe the leaſte thought that is in my hart, I

woulde preſently burne it, and neuer weare another. It were very well the affaires of warres, ſhoulde bée commoned of many, but the reſolution of them, to be vſed with few. For otherwiſe, they are like to be diſcouered before they bée concluded.
               Alſo I thinke very well,Age and abilitie be mothers of good counſell. that you take counſayle with men that be graue and of experience but not without conſideratiō, that they be wiſe, without raſhneſſe. For ſometimes, more ſound counſaile doth procéede from men of fewe yéeres, and of much habilitie, than from men that be opinatiue and of old yéeres.
               Your Lordſhip hath great cauſe to conſider howe to take aduiſe of men, that in their counſayles be headſtrong,The generous and noble mind dothe more feare to flie, than to abide. and in their déedes very raſhe: for in daungerous caſes that happen in the warres, it is leſſe euill to retire, than to be loſte. Alcibiades a Captaine amongſt the Greekes, did vſe to ſay, that men of bolde and valiant harts haue more néede of fortitude, to moue them to retire, than to abide their enemies. For not to flie, their honour doth moue them: but to retire, their wiſdome doth conſtraine them.
               In greate hazardes it is muche better that men ſubmitte themſelues to reaſon, than to hurle themſelues into fortune: In all things your Lordſhippe hath to imbrace counſaile,In ſoden perils it needeth not to vſe lōg and delayed counſels. except it be when you ſhall ſee your ſelfe in ſome ſodaine daunger: for in the warre, wée haue ſéene many Captaines loſt, for no other cauſe, but for that when they ſhould haue done a thing at the ſodaine, they haue ſit downe with great leyſure to take counſell.
               Alſo your lordſhip ought to admoniſh your armies, that in their forcible and neceſſary perilles, they ſhew not thēſelues to be menns diſmayed: for the warres be of ſuche qualities that the feare of ſome diſmayeth the reſt. Your Lordſhip may hold it for certaine: that the heart which is full of feare, muſt of neceſſitie be voide of hope. Thoſe that go alwayes to the warres, neither ought to holde victorie for certaine, eyther diſpayre to obtaine it. For there is nothing wherein

fortune is leſſe correſpondent, than in the affaires of warre.
               
                  Braſidas the Greek, in the warres that hée held with the Thracians, when they did take by force of armes a certaine fort which he defended meruailous valiantly, being demaunded by one of his enemies,A fort ought to be the ſepulchre of the defendant. why he had put him ſelfe within the ſame for his defēce, anſwered: I do ſweare by the immortall Gods, that ſhe did rather commend hir ſelf vnto me to be kept, than I vnto hir to be defended: Bycauſe in the end, I haue more certentie of hir to ſerue me for a ſepulcher, than for a ſauegard.
               I will ſaye no more in this caſe, but craue of eſpeciall fauour: that in ſuch wiſe ye behaue your ſelfe in theſe warres of Prouance, that it may ſéeme, and alſo be to all men notorious, that you do more for the obedience of your Lord the Emperour, than to be reuenged of the French king. For otherwiſe God would take vengeance of your reuengement.
               The penne of gold that you ſent me I haue receiued, and ſo I beleue your Lordſhip ſhall receiue Marcus Aurelius, whiche I do ſend you: the difference betwixt the one and the other is, that in the Booke your Lordſhip may vnderſtand my ſimplicity, and in the pen there doth appeare your great bountie. No more, but that our Lorde be your protectour, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Valiodolid, 
                     the xix. of Auguſt, 1524.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto ſir Allonſo of Albornaz, wherin is touched, that it is a point of euill maner, not too aunſwer too the letter that is written vnto him.
               
               
                  IF the Lady Marina your wife bée as well affected to your perſon, as my penne is offended at your ſlouthfulneſſe: you may ſafely marrie without after repentāce. And I think not that I bind my ſelfe vnto a ſmall matter in ſaying, that in your mariage you ſhall find no repentance, for ſurely, I wiſh too haue no more contrition of my ſinnes, than many men haue

too think themſelues maried.If many be married, they are not fewe that be repentant. To contract matrimonie with a woman, is a thing very eaſie: but to ſuſtaine it vnto the end, I hold it for very difficult. Whereby it comes to paſſe, that thoſe which mary without reſpect, but only for loue, liue afterward with ſorowe. Conſidering al the diſpleaſures that proceede of the familie, then tediouſneſſe of the wife, the care for the children, the neceſſitie of the houſe, the prouiſion for the ſeruants, the importunitie of the couſins, and the ſutes of the ſonnes in law: Although of all theſe thinges the maried doth not repent him, at the leaſt it doth tyre him.
               The Philoſoper Mirtho, being demaunded why hée did not marry, aunſwered:No married man may liue without trauell. bycauſe if the woman (whome I take in mariage) bée good, I ſhall ſpill hir, if ſhe bée euill I muſt ſupporte hir, if ſhe bée poore I muſt maintaine hir, if ſhée bée riche, I muſt ſuffer hir, if ſhe bée foule I ſhall abhorre hir, it ſhe be faire, I muſt watch hir, and that which is worſt of al, for euermore I giue my libertye to hir that ſhall neuer gratifie mée. Riches bréedeth care, pouerty ſorrow, ſailing feare, eating heauines, going wearineſſe: all which trauelles we ſe deuided amongſt many, except amongſt the maried where they ioyne altogither. For we ſeldome ſée the maried man go without care, ſorow, wearied, heauie, yea and alſo ſometime aſtonied, I ſay aſtonied, of that whiche maye happen vntoo him, and of that his wife may dare to do.
               The man that doth encounter with a woman that is a dizard, fooliſh, a babler, light, a glutton, a chider,That man is miſerable that is maried vnto a fooliſh woman. ſlouthfull, a goer at large, vntractable, iealouſe, abſolute or diſſolute: it were better for that man too bée a ſlaue to ſome honeſt man, than a huſbande too ſuche a wife. It is a terrible thing too ſuffer a man: but there is very much too bée knowen in a woman. And for no other cauſe more, than for that they knowe not too vſe a meaſure in louing, or giue no ende in abhorring: I will not, or perchance, I dare not, ſaye more in this caſe. For if in the ſame I ſhould occupie my ſelfe and giue libertie to my pen, I ſhould want time to write, but not matter to ſpeake.
               
                  Not without cauſe I ſaide, my pen was angry with your ſlothfulneſſe, ſince halfe a yeare paſt I did write vnto you, and you haue not as yet anſwered me. And afterwards came Iohn de Occanio, and alſo with him you did not write: in ſuche wiſe, that on the one part I call you ſluggiſh, and of the other part note you of negligence.
               
                  Worſhip is not blemiſhed by anſwering of a letter.Sir, you may take it for a rule, neuer to leaue him vnanſwered that hath taken paine to write vnto you: For that the maiſter of the henchmen, which is Harnan Sanz de Minchaſa, ſaid vnto me, that none loſt his worſhippe for anſwering vnto a letter. To write to our better, is of neceſſitie: to anſwere our equall, is of will: but to write vnto our inferiour, is of pure vertue. Alexander the great did write vnto Pulion his bit maker:A Prince did write vnto a bitmaker. 
                  Iulîus Caeſar to Rufus his gardiner: Auguſtus to Pā
                     philo his ſmith: Tiberius to Eſcaurus his miller: Tullius too Mirto his tailer: and Seneca to Gipho his rent gatherer: wherof it may very wel be inferred, that baſeneſſe doth not conſiſt in writing or anſwering baſe perſones, but to will or to do vile things.
               
                  A noble Romane did write vnto a plough man.
                  Paulus Aemilius writing vnto his plough man, ſaid: I haue vnderſtood what word thou didſt ſend me by Argeus, and the aunſwer of the ſame is, that I ſend thée another oxe, to yoke with that firce oxe, & alſo I ſēd thée a cart redy dreſt: therfore eare that ground well, dreſſe the vines, purge the trées, and alway haue memorie of the Goddeſſe Ceres. Curius Dentatus béeing in warre with Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, did write a letter vnto a carpenter, which ſaid thus: Cneius Patroclus certified me, that thou doſt worke in my houſe: take héed that the timber be dry, and that thou make the lightes towardes the ſouth, that it be not high, that it be cléere, ye chimney without ſmoke, with two windowes, and no more but one dore. Alexander the great, writing vnto his ſmith, ſaid: I ſend thée a horſe, which the Athenians ſent me: he and I did ſcape wounded from the battaile: breath him well euery day, cure wel his wounds, pare his foreféete, let him be vnſhod, ſlit his noſe, waſh his necke, let hym not growe fat, for that no

fat horſe may well endure with me in the field. Of the famous Phalaris the tirant, it is read,No man is ſo euill in whom there is not ſomwhat to be prayſed. that neuer man did him ſeruice, that he did not gratifye: either write him a letter, that he dyd not aunſwer.
               So high and ſo great Princes, as bere we haue named too haue written to men ſo baſe and ſo vile occupations, is not written by hiſtoriographers too blemiſh them, but by the ſame to magnifie them. Of which we may gather, that: baſenes doth not conſiſt, in wryting or aunſwering baſe perſons. but in doing thinges ſcandolous or vnhoneſt. In this matter as in all other thinges, you may vſe that boldneſſe with me as with your ſelfe: but if vniuerſally you vſe to do the ſame with all men, it may be, if your frendes do note you of negligence, there ſhall not want that will accuſe you of preſumption.
               To be noted angry, enuious, couetous, ſlothfull, wanton gluttonous, auaricious, certainly is a griefe:Negligence & preſumptiō be two things that loſeth friends. but to be noted of fooliſhnes, is an infamie, which giueth me occaſion to ſaye vnto you, that to cal a man preſumptuouſe by a cunning maner of ſpeach, is to call him foole.
               In Caius Caeſar there wanted no fortitude, for that he ouercame many people: either clemencie, for he pardoned his enemies: either liberaliitie, for that he gaue kyngdomes: either ſcience, for that he wrote many Bookes: either fortune, for he was Lorde of all men: But he wanted good manner, which is the foundation of a quiet life.
               Amongſt the Romanes it was a cuſtome,Euill nurture is hurtfull in all eſtates. that when the Senate entred the Emperours houſe, they did vnto him a certaine great obeyſance, and he did vſe vnto them a certaine curteſie: in doing whereof, as he grew negligent, either for that he woulde not, or not remembring: the caſe was thus, that within fewe dayes after, they gaue him thrée & twentie ſtabs with a dagger: in ſuch wiſe, that, ye moſt Noble Prince loſt his life for no greater matter, than for not hauing a little good maner. The contrary of this Suetonius Tranquillus doth write of Auguſtus ye Emperour, which being in ye Senat,

or in the Colledge, did neuer ſit downe vntill they were all ſet, and rendred the ſame reuerence that they gaue him, and if by chaunce his children entred the Senate houſe, neither did he conſent that the Senators ſhoulde riſe, either that his children ſhould ſit downe.
               Sir, if you will not that men call you preſumptuous: or to ſpeake plainly, do call you foole, haue a care to be well manered: for with good maner, more than with any other thing, we withdraw our enemies, and do ſuſtaine our friends.
               Sir, I haue ſpoken with the Popes meſſenger, vppon the diſpenſations that you ſent to haue, to marry with the Gentlewoman the Lady Marina. Whiche wée haue agréed for thrée ſcore ducates,Where is money, there is diſpatch. and as he is a Venetian, and would not be counted a foole, he will firſt be payed, before you ſhall be diſpatcht.
               I haue ſpoken with Perianes as concerning the expedition of the priuiledge of the Iury, and as he was deaffe and moſte dunch, I cried out more in ſpeaking vnto him, than I do vſe in preaching.
               The newes of the Courte is, that the Empreſſe wiſheth the Emperours comming, the Dames woulde marrie, the ſuters would be diſpatched, the Duke of Veiar would lyue: Antony de Fonſeca woulde grow young: Sir Rodrigo of Voria would enherit, & alſo Frier Deniſe wold be a Biſhop. Of my ſelfe I giue you to vnderſtand, that I am in poſſeſſion of all the condicions of a good ſuter, that is to wit: occupied, ſoliciting, carefull, ſpent, ſuſpicious, importunate, out of temper, and alſo abhorred: for that my Lorde the Archbiſhop of Toledo, and I go to the lawe for the Abbay of Baza, vppon which I haue for my parte a famous ſentence. No more, but that our Lord be your protector, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Medina del Campo, 
                     the twelfth of Marche .1523.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A lerter vnto ſir Gonſalis Fernandes of Cordoua, great Captaine: in which is touched, that the knight eſcaping the warres, ought not from thence forth to depart his houſe.
               
               
                  MOſt renoumed & valiant Prince, my weakeneſſe to write vnto your mightineſſe, my ſimplicitie vnto your prudencie, if it ſhall ſéeme vnto thoſe that ſhal heare thereof to be a thing ouer proude, and to ſuch as ſhal ſee it, to be ouer preſumptuous, lette them lay the fault vpon your honour, which did firſt write vnto me, and not on me, that do anſwere with ſhamefaſtneſſe.
               Sir, I will trauell to ſatiſfie your excellencie in all things that ye cōmaund me by your letter, vpon this condition: moſt humbly beſéeching, that you do not ſo much conſider what I doe ſay, as that which I would ſay. And for that (to a perſon of ſo greate an eſtate) it is reaſon to write with grauitie: I will trauell to be meaſured in the wordes I ſhall ſpeake, and to be remeaſured in the reaſons I ſhall write. The diuine Plato in his Bookes of common wealth did ſay: That leſſe greatneſſe is not to be imputed to the honorable, to deale and be conuerſant with the weake, than it is to ſtand and to countenance with the mightie: and the reaſon that he gaue for the ſame, is, that the Generouſe and magnificent mā, vſeth more force in taming his harte to ſtoupe vnto lowe things, than to take in hand graue, weightie, and high attempts. A mā of an high ſtature, receiueth more paine in ſtouping to the ground for a ſtraw, than to ſtretch out his arme to reach a braunche. By this that I haue ſaid, I would ſay, that this our hart is ſo puffed vp and ſo proude, that to riſe vnto more than he may, it is life, and to deſcend to leſſe than he is worth, it is death.
               There are many things whiche God woulde not bring to paſſe by himſelf alone, to the end they ſhall not ſay, that he is a Lord abſolute: either wil he bring them to paſſe by the hāds of the mightie, for that it ſhal not be ſayd, that he taketh help of humaine fauour: and afterwardes he performeth the ſame

by the hand and induſtrie of ſome man beaten down of fortune and forgotten amongſt men:God doth many times bring things to paſſe rather by the weake, thā by the ſtrong. wherein GOD ſheweth his greatneſſe, and filleth the ſame with his might.
               The great Iudas Machabeus was leſſe in body and much leſſe in yeares, than his thrée other brethren, but in the end the good old Mathathias his father, to him onely did cōmend the defence of the Hebrewes: and into his handes did alſo reſigne the armies againſt the Aſsyrians.
               
               The leaſt of the children of the great Patriarch Abraham was Iſaac, but in him was eſtabliſhed ye right line of Chriſt, & on him al ye 
                  Iewiſh people did fixe their eyes. The inheritāce of the houſe of Iſaac came too Eſau and not to Iacob: but after the daies of the Father, Iacob did not onely buy the inheritance of his brother Eſau, but alſo did ſteale the bleſſing.
               
                  Ioſeph the ſonne of Iacob was the leaſt of his brethren and the laſt of the eleuen Tribes,Amongſt .xij. ſonnes, the yongeſt was moſt excellent. but in the ende it was he alone that foūd grace with ye kings of Aegypt, & did deſerue to interprete their dreames. Of ſeuen ſonnes that Ieſſe had, Dauid was the leaſt, but in the ende, King Saul was of God reproued, and Dauid King of Hebrewes elected. Amongſt the meaner Prophetes Heliſeus was the leaſt, but in the ende, vnto him and vnto none other was giuen a dubled ſpirite. Of the meaner ſorte of the Apoſtles of Chriſt was S. Philip, and the meaneſt Diſciple of Paule, was Philemon: but in the end, with them more than with others they did take counſaill, and in great affaires would take aduiſe.
               Sir, it ſeemes to mée that agréeing with that which I haue ſaide, your Lordſhip wold not take counſell with other men, that be learned and wiſe, but with me that am the ſimpleſt of your friends. As your Lordſhip hath ben ſo long time in the warres of Italie, it is very ſeldome that I haue ſéene you, but much leſſe, that I haue eyther ſpoken or bin conuerſant with you, for whiche cauſe my friendſhip is to be holden for more ſure and leſſe ſuſpitious, for that I loue you, not for the rewardes you haue giuen me, but for the magnificence that I haue ſéene in you. When one cōmes to ſeeke to be our frend,

maketh much to the matter, to conſider the cauſe that moueth him to ſéeke the ſame: for if he be poore we muſt giue him: if he be rich, we muſt ſerue him: if he be fauoured, we muſt worſhip him: if he be wilfull, we muſt faune on him: if he be impatient, we muſt ſupport him: if he be vicious, we muſt diſſē
                  ble with him: and if he be malicious, we muſt beware of him.
               One of the great trauelles that vnprofitable friends bring with them is, that they come not to ſeeke vs,To lacke friends is perillous. And ſome friends be tedious. to the end to doe what we wil, but to perſwade vs to doe what they will. It is great perill to haue enemies, and alſo it is greate trauell to ſuffer ſome kind of friendes: for to giue the whole hart to one is not much, but how much leſſe, when amongſt many it is reparted? neyther my condition may beare it, either within the greatnes of your eſtate may it be cōtained, that we ſhould loue after ſuch ſort, neither in ſuch maner to behaue ourſelues: for that there is no loue in this worlde ſo perfect, as that which holdeth no ſcruple of intereſte.
               Your Lordſhip ſaith in your letter, that you write not vnto me, for that I am rich or mighty, but becauſe I am learned and vertuous. And you inſtantly deſire me, that I write vnto you with mine owne hand ſome thing that maybe worthy to be vnderſtood, and pleſaunt to be read.
               To that which you ſay, that you hold me to be wiſe, to this I aunſwere, as Socrates did, whiche is too wit, that hée knew not any thing more certaine, but in perceyuing that he did know nothing.
               Very great was the Philoſophie that Socrates did incloſe in ye aunſwere: for (as the deuine Plato doth ſay) the leſſer part that we vnderſtand not, is much more, than al that we know. In all this world there is not ye like infamie, as a man to bée imputed ignorant, either the like kind of praiſe, as to bée called wiſe: bycauſe in the wiſe, death is very euil imployed, and in the foole life is much worſe beſtowed.
               The tirant Epimethes, ſéeing the Philoſoher Demoſthenes wéep immeaſurable teares for the death of a Philoſopher, demaunded for what cauſe hée wept ſo muche, ſince it

was a ſtraunge thing for Philoſophers to wéepe. To this Demoſthenes anſwered:We ought rather to bewaile the life of the wicked, than the death of the iuſt. O Epimethes, I do not wéepe bycauſe the Philoſopher died, but for that thou liueſt: and if thou knoweſt not, I will giue thée to vnderſtand, which is: that in the ſcholes of Athens we do more wéepe, bycauſe the euill doe liue, than for the death of the good.
               Alſo your honour doth ſaye, that you doe iudge me, to be a man ſolitarie and vertuous: might it pleaſe the diuine clemencie, that in al this, and much more, you ſpeake the truth: bycauſe, in caſe for one to be or not to bée vertuous, I dare venter to ſpeake, that how muche ſure it is, to be, and not too ſéeme to be, ſo daungerous it is to ſeeme to be, and not to be in déede.
               
                  A man is to be knowne, but not to be vnderſtood.Man is naturally variable in his appetites, profoūd in hart, mutable in his thoughts, incōſtant in his purpoſes, & indeterminable in his concluſions: wherof we maye well gather, that man is eaſie to knowe, and very difficile to vnderſtand. Your excellencie giues me more honour, in calling me wiſe and vertuous: than I giue to intitle you Duke of Seſa, Marques of Bitonto, Prince of Guilache, and aboue all, great captaine. For to my vertue and wiſedome, warres can giue no impeachment, but your potencie and greatnes is ſubiect vnto fortune.
               Your honour writeth vnto me, that I certifie you of my opinion, in that the king our maſter doth commaund now of new, that you paſſe once more into Italy, by occaſion of the battell,The battell of Rauenna for euermore ſhall be renoumed. that the Frenchmen of late haue ouercome at Rauenna, whiche in the worldes to come ſhall be ſo famous, as it was now bloudie. Vnto this anſwering your honour, I ſaye that you haue great reaſon to doubt: and vpon the ſame too vſe counſell: for if you do not accompliſhe what you be commaunded, the Kyng takes diſpleaſure, and if you doe what they entreat you, you contend with fortune.
               Two times your honour hath paſſed into Italy, and twice woon the kyngdome of Naples, in which two iorneyes, you ouercame the battell of Garrellano, and the battell of Chirinola,
                  
and ſlewe the beſt people of the houſe of Fraunce. And that which is moſt of all, you brought to paſſe, that the Spaniſh nation of all the world were feared, and obtained vnto your ſelfe renoume of immortall memory.
               This being true as it is, it were no wiſedome,Leſſe in the warres, than many other thing we haue to beleue fortune. either ſuretie, once more to returne thither to tempt fortune, which with none doth ſhew hir ſelf ſo malicious and double, as with ſuch as ſpend long time in the warres.
               
                  Hanniball, a Prince of the Carthaginians, not contented too haue ouercome the Romanes, in thoſe great and famous battailes of Trene, Traſmene, and Canna, but as hée would alway force and wreſtle with fortune, he came to be ouercome of thoſe, which he many times had ouercome. Thoſe that haue to deale with fortune, muſt entreate hir,With great eloquence the aucthor declareth the nature of fortune. but not force hir, they muſt heare hir, but not beleue hir, they muſt hope in hir, but haue no confidence in hir, they muſt ſerue hir, but not anger hir, they muſte bée conuerſant with hir, but not tempt hir. For that fortune is of ſo euill a condition, that when ſhee fauneth, ſhe biteth, & when ſhe is angred, ſhe woundeth.
               In this iourney that they commaund your honour, neither do I perſwade you that you go, either diſwade you to tary: Onely I ſay and affirme, with this third paſſage into Italy, you returne to put your life in perill, and your fame in ballance. In the two firſt conqueſts, you obtaine honour with them that be preſent, fame for the worldes to come, riches for your children, an eſtate for your ſucceſſours, reputation amongſt ſtraungers, credit amongſt your owne, gladnes for your friends, and grief vnto your enemies. Finally, you haue gotten for excellencie, this renoume of great Captaine, not only for theſe our times, but alſo for the world to come.
               Conſider well what you leaue, and what you take in hand: for that it may rather be imputed for raſhnes, than for wiſedome, yt in keping your houſe where al doth enuie, you ſhould depart where al men ſhould be reuenged.The words of a very friend, without diſſimulation. You ouercame the Turkes in Paflonia, the Mores in Granada, the Frenchmen in Chirinola, the Picardes in Italy, the Lombardes in Garellano, I

holde it to be doubted, that as fortune hath not more nations to giue you to ouercome, ſhe will now leade you, where you ſhall be ouercome.
               The Dukes, the Princes, the Captaines, and vnder Captaines, againſt whom you haue fought, eyther they be deade, or elſe gone: In ſuche ſort, that nowe againſt an other kinde of people you muſt deale and fyght. I ſayd it, for that it may chaunce, that fortune which then did fauour you, now maye fauour them.
               
                  Men do order warres, but God onely giueth victorie.To accepte warres, to gather people, to order them, and to giue battaile, it belongeth vnto men: but to giue victorie appertaineth only to God. Titus Liuius ſaith, that many times with greate ignomie the Romaines were ouercome at Furcas Caudinas, in the ende, by the counſell of the Conſull Aemilius they changed that Cōſul which had the charge of that army: & where they were before that time ouercome, were frō thence forward conquerours of their enimies. Of whiche we may gather for our purpoſe, that chaunging the Captaines of the warres, ioyntly therwith fortune doth alter.
               
                  To one perſon and one matter, fortune very ſeldome ſheweth fidelitie.In one ſelf kingdome, with one ſelf people, vnder one king, in one ground, and vpon one ſelfe quarell or demaunde, hope you not, that Fortune will alwayes be faithfull? For in the place where ſhe hath vſed to be moſte fauourable, it is hir deuiſe, by the ſame meanes, to ſhewe hir crueltie.
               
                  Rodrigo of Viuero did ſay vnto me, that your honour was not a little gréeued to ſée that your departure was prolonged: and that the Kyng for this preſent helde it in ſuſpenſe. And further he ſayd vnto me, that you held it for ſo great diſpleaſure, that if it were with an other that were your equal, you would demaund it at his hand as an iniurie. To heare this I do maruell, & am not a little, but muche offended: for I holde him not for a good beaſte, that when they lade him wil ſtand ſtock ſtill, and when they vnlade him, will yerke out behind. Since the ſoule goeth charged with ſinnes, the hearte with thoughts, the ſpirit with temptations, and the body with trauels: it is much conuenient for vs, that if maye not altogether

diſcharge oure ſelues of this burden at the leaſt, that in ſome parte we lighten the ſame.
               Your honour is not ſo yong a man, but that the more part of your life is paſt: and ſince the lyfe goeth conſuming,What he ought to do that hathe continued long in the warres. and death approching: in my iudgement it ſhould be better counſell for you to occupie your ſelfe in bewayling your old ſins, than of newe to ſhed the bloud of enimies.
               It is nowe time, rather to wéepe than to fight: to withdraw youre ſelfe, than to vſe libertie: to make a reckoning with God, more than with the king: to accompliſh with the ſoule, and not with honour: to call vpon God, and not to prouoke with enemies: to diſtribute your owne, and not to take from others: to conſerue peace, and not to inuent warres. And if in this caſe, your lordſhip will not beléeue me: from hence forward I diuine, that then you ſhall begin to féele it, when you may not remedie the ſame.
               Your honour deceyueth your ſelf, or elſe I know not what to ſay, for that I ſée you flée that you ſhould procure, which is quietneſſe: and you procure that which you ſhould flée,There is no greater trauel than to be ignorant of quietneſſe. which is diſquietneſſe. For there is no man in this world more vnfortunate, than he that did neuer experiment what thing it is to be repoſed.
               Thoſe that haue trauailed throughout diuers landes, and haue had exprience of diuers fortunes, the thing yt they moſt deſire in this lyfe is, with honoure to ſée themſelues returned to their countrey. Of which it may be inferred, that it is great temeritie, that you alone wil rather go to die amongſt ſtrangers, than to liue with honor amongſt your own. Vntil men haue gotten neceſſarie to eate, yea vntill they haue obteined alſo ſome ſurpluſage alſo to giue, in my iudgement, they ought not much to be blamed, although they wander through out diuers kingdomes, and put themſelues in great perilles.Men oughte to trauell vntill they haue wherwith to defende neceſſitie. For he is as muche worthie reprehenſion, that doth not procure that whiche is neceſſarie, as he that ceaſſeth not to prouide that which is ſuperfluous.
               After a man hath found that which he hath ſought for, and

alſo perchaunce it hath happened him better than he thought of:He is in ſome hatred with fortune, that is not ſuffred to repoſe in his owne houſe. if after he be retired vnto his houſe in great quietneſſe, will returne to rubbe againe with the world, I dare be bold to ſpeake it, that ſuch a one eyther lacketh wit, or elſe fortune will be to him vnhappie. The diuine Plato doth ſaye in his bookes of common wealth, that Fortune is more contrary vnto that man, that he doth not ſuffer to enioye that which he hath, than vnto him, to whome he denieth what he craueth.
               I doe beſeche, and alſo aduiſe your honour, that after you haue red this ſentence, that you turne againe and againe too read the ſame: for in my iudgement, this ſentence of Plato is very true, and very profound, and alſo vſed of many. For almoſt we ſée it by dayly experience, that many men can obtaine fame, honour, quietneſſe, riches: and haue not the meane afterward to enioye them.
               
                  It is more to know how to enioy a victory than to ouercome a battell.
                  Iulius Caeſar was he that nature endued with moſt grace
                     •
                  , and to whom Fortune did giue moſt victories: and with all this, great Pompey did ſay of him: that hée had great hardineſſe to ouercome any battaile, but that afterwardes he did not vnderſtand how to enioy the victory. If in the great renoumed battail of Canas: Hanniball had knowen how to enioy the conqueſt, he neuer afterwards in the fields of Carthage, by Scipio the Aphrican had bin ouercome.
               Your Honour may take it as it pleaſeth you, and vnderſtand thereof as it may like you to cōmaund: but in my iudgement, he is not ſo cruell an enemie yt hurles his darte at me in the warres, as he that comes to driue mée from my houſe. Cōformable to that which I haue ſaid, I do ſay: that ſince we can not flée from cares and trauelles, yet at the leaſt, that we procure to auoid ſome diſpleaſures thereof. For without compariſon, much more be the offences that wée ſeeke vnto our ſelues, than be brought vnto vs by our enemies.
               
                  Our greateſt trauels be of our owne ſeeking.I will ſay no more in this letter, but that the Gentleman Rodrigo of Viuero and I, haue talked ſome things worthie the vnderſtanding, and perillous to be writtē. I commend them with truſt vnto his noblenes here, & he ſhal relate them

vnto your excellencie there. No more, but our Lord be your protector, and vnto me giue grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Medina del Campo, 
                     the .viij. of Ianuarie .1512.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter to ſir Enrique Enriques, wherin the Authour doth anſwer to many gracious demaundes.
               
               
                  RIght magnificent and my olde frend Valdiuia, your ſolicitour, gaue mée a Letter, the whiche ſéemeth verie well to be written with youre owne hande, for that it helde fewe lynes, and many blottes. As God made you a Knight, if he had made you a Scriuener, you woulde haue bene more handſome to colour Cordouan ſkinnes, than to haue written proces. Sir, alwayes frame, if you ſhall write any Letter to bée ſente, that the lynes bée ryght, the Letters cloſe, the reaſons deuided, the letter legible, the paper cleane, the folding equall, the cloſyng ſmoothe, and the ſeale cléere:Both wiſedome and eloquēce in writing of a letter bee diſcouered. for it a lawe of Courte, in that whiche is written, the wyſedome is vttered: and in the manner of writyng, good manner is knowne.
               In the letter that was giuen mée, were contayned many demaundes vnder verie fewe woordes. And for that with one Turquois wée both will make but one ſhewe. The caſe ſhall be thus: to euery demaunde, I will anſwere onely one word. Firſt you aſke me, wherfore I came to the Courte: to this I anſwere, that I came not willingly, but conſtrained of neceſſitie, for the contention betwixte me and the Churche of Toledo: my comming was expedient to cléere my ſelfe, and to withdraw the lawe.
               Alſo you demaund of me, what I doe in the Court:In the courte men doe not, but vndoe. whervnto I anſwer, that as my aduerſaries do follow me, and my buſineſſe enlarging: I do nothing but vndoe my ſelfe.
               Likewiſe you will that I write vnto you in what thing I do imploy the time: to this I anſwere, that according to the faſhion of vs Courtiers, beare euil will, blaſpheme, loyter,

lye, trafike, and curſſe: with more truth we may ſay of time, that we loſe it, than employe it. Alſo you demaund, with whō I am moſte conuerſant in this Court: to this I anſwer, that the Court and the people therof, be grapes of ſo euill a ſoyle, that we that goe in the ſame, and from our childhode be brought vp therein, ſtudie not with whome to be conuerſant, but in diſcouering of whom to beware: with muche payne wée haue tyme to defende vs from oure enimies: and will you that wée occupie our ſelues in ſéeking newe friendes? In the Courtes of Princes I doe confeſſe there is a conuerſation of perſons, but no confederation of will: for here enimitie is holden for naturall, and amitie a ſtraunger. The Court is of ſuch nature, that they that do moſt viſit them, the worſe they doe entreate them: and ſuch as ſpeake beſte vnto them, the more euill they do wiſh them.In the courte ther are thinges to be wondered, as alſo to be ſhunned They which haunt the Courts of Princes, if they will be curious and no fooles, ſhall fynde many things wherat to wonder: and muche more whereof to beware.
               Alſo you demaunde how the difference betwixt the Admirall and the Earle of Myranda ſtandeth: to this I anſwer, that the Admirall, as one of muche power, and the Earle, as one in much fauor, giues to eche other wherwith to be occupied, and to vs ſufficient wherat to murmure.
               Sir, you demaund what newes we haue of the Emperors comming: to this I anſwer, that which we preſently vnderſtand,Newes of thoſe dayes from Italy. is, that the Turke is retired, Florence is alyed, ye Duke of Milane is reduced, the Venetians did amaine, the Pope and Caeſar did conſecrate, the Eſtates of Naples be reparted, the Coluna is deade, the Marques of Villa Franca is made Viceroy of Naples, the Prince of Orange is ſlayn, and vnto the Chanceler and to the Confeſſor, to either of them is giuen a Cardinals hat. Other ſecret news they write from thence, which be lamentable to ſuch as be therewith touched, and gracious to thoſe that heare therof, which is: many of thoſe that went into Italie with Caeſar, are became amorous, and in the artes of loue haue raunged too farre. But ſir, in this caſe I ſweare

vnto you, as it foundeth in myne eares,In Italy they win not ſo muche money as they learne vice. theyr wiues be here ſufficientely reuenged of them, for if they leaue there any women greate with childe, alſo they ſhall fynde here theyr wyues brought a bed.
               You will alſo that I write vnto you, howe it goeth wyth vs for vittailes this Lent: to this I aunſwere, that by diuine grace we haue not wanted this lent fiſhe to eat, and alſo fins ynowe to confeſſe. For the caſe is come to ſuch diſſolution and vnſhamfaſtneſſe, that the Gentlemen hold it for an eſtate and aduancement of honour to eate fleſhe in Lent.
               Alſo you demaund if the Court be deare or good cheape, to this I anſwere, that my ſteward telleth me, that from October vnto Aprill, it hath coſt me in wood and cole, an hundreth and fortie Ducates. The cauſe of this is, that this ſame towne of Medina as it is rich in faires, ſo is it poore in moū
                  taines or woods, in ſuche ſorte that the count being wel caſt, the wood coſts as deare as the dreſſing of the pot. Other thinges are in this Court at a good price, or to ſay it better,Eight conditions of the courte, and all verie perillous. very good cheap: that is to wit, cruel lies, falſe news, vnhoneſt women, fayned friendſhip, continuall enimities, doubled malice, vaine words, and falſe hopes, of whiche eight things we haue ſuche abundance in this Courte, that they may ſet out bouthes, and proclayme faires.
               Sir you demaund of me, if there be good expedition of cauſes, for that you haue ſome to be diſpatched:In the courte more deſpited than diſpatched. to this I doe anſwere, as the things of the court be tedious, diſpleaſant, long deferred, coſtely, intricate, vnfortunate, deſired, beſieged, lamented, and beſcratched, I conceyue of mine own part, that if ten be diſpatched, nintie be deſpited.
               Alſo you will mée that I write vnto you if the faire be good thys yeare at Medina. To this I anſwer, that as I am a courtyer and a ſuter, and haue neyther marchaundiſe to ſell, and muche leſſe money wherwith to buy: I knowe not whereof to prayſe it, nor do I fynde why to miſlyke it. But in paſſing thorough the faire, I ſée in the bouthes of theſe Burgaleſes, ſo many riche and pleaſaunt things, that in beholding them, I

tooke great pleaſure, and being not able to buy them, I was muche tormented. The Empreſſe came foorth to ſée the faire, and as a Princeſſe moſt wiſe, wold not be accompanied with hir maids of honor, bicauſe the Gentlewomen that did ſerue hir, being ſo poore and ſo fewe, it coulde be no leſſe, but that they would vſe their libertie in aſking fairings, and the gentlemen ſhould thinke it their partes to giue them.
               Sir, you demaund if the Courte be in health, or if the peſtilence be thereaboutes: to this I aunſwere, that of agues, tertians, and quartaines, plague ſores, and ſuch other infirmities of the body, we are al in health and verie well, excepte the licenciate Alarcon, that being relating a proces before the counſell, ſodainly fell downe dead. And of a trouth, his death was to many in this Court very terrible,Death giueth feare, but not amendment. although I ſée none to amende his lyfe by the ſame. Other infirmities be in this Courte, that bée not corporall, but ſpirituall, as angers, hatred, quarels, rancours, wrath, and ſlaughters: the whiche maladies doe conſiſt, not that they go with bodies infected, but in the ſwelling of the ſplene, & corruption of the gall.
               I haue turned many tymes to reade your letter: and haue not founde any more to aunſwere. For of a ſuretie, it did rather ſéene an Interrogatorie to take witneſſes, than a letter to a frend: I wil ſay no more, but that I haue eſcaped in writing vnto you, very wearie, & alſo angrie not for the anſwering to the matter, but in conſtruing youre ill fauored letter. Our Lord be your protector, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Medina del Campo, 
                     the fift of Iune, in the yeare .1532.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter to ſir Antonie of Cneua, wherin is expounded an authoritie of holie Scripture, very notable, which is to wit why God did not heare the Apoſtle, and did heare the diuell againſt Iob.
               
               MAgnificent ſir, & particular beloued, Alonſo Eſpinell gaue me a letter from your worſhip here in Toledo, the date whereof was the .12. of May, and it is nowe the .16. of Iune:

in ſuch ſort, yt your letter neyther may by cōdemned for ſtale, either for freſh. Many from many partes do write vnto me: ſometime their letters be ſuche, that to read them, it is very tedious, and to aunſwere them, no leſſe diſpleaſant. To ſée a letter ill written, and worſe noted, neither is it to be taken in good parte, either may wée leaue to murmur thereat.The ploughman reuewing the ſtraightnes of his forough, giueth note to the wiſe to examin their writings The ploughman in plowing, dothe reuew his forough that it bée ſtraight: and ſhall not a man haue regard to note and write his letter very well? There be many who wil as lightly take the pen in hād to write, as the glaſſe to drink: and that which is worſt of all, they thinke much of themſelues to be talking and writing. The which doth well appere in their letters, becauſe the letter is illegible, the paper blotted, the lines crooked, and the reaſons doltiſh. To knowe a man whether he be wiſe or fooliſh, is a great part to conſider, whether he write vpon aduiſement, and ſpeake with iudgement, for a mā muſt not write what commeth to his memory, but what reaſon doth direct.
               
                  Plutarch doth ſay of Phalaris the tyrant, that he did neuer write but being alone, withdrawen, and with his own hand: whereof it doth follow, that although, al do blaſpheme him for his tyranny, his letters wer praiſed throughout the world.
               Of a trouth, a Gentleman and a kinſeman of mine, did write vnto mée a letter of twoo ſhéetes of paper, and as he wrote ſo large, and not returning to read what he had writtē, the very ſame reaſons, and the very ſame woords that he had put in the beginning, he did return to write in the end, wherat I was ſo much offended, that I burnt the letter,A letter ought to be pleaſant to reade, & diſcret to be noted. and made him no aunſwere. Doubtles your letters are not of ſuch qualitie, the whiche to me be very pleaſant to reade, and not tedious to aunſwere, bycauſe in ieſtes they are very pleaſant, and in earneſt, very wiſe.
               Sir you ſay, that in reading the moralles of ſaint Gregory, you did note, and alſo did meruaile to ſée, that the deuill did aſke licence of God to do hurt vnto holy Iob, & it was graunted him: and the Apoſtle S. Paule did pray vnto God to take

away the temptation of the fleſh, and it was denied him. In ſuch wiſe, that God heard the Deuill, and did not condiſcend vnto the prayer of ſaint Paule. Maruell ye not ſir of this: for the thinges that the diuine prouidence do bring to paſſe be ſo iuſt, and done for ſo iuſt cauſes: that although wée maye not reach them: they want not therefore reaſon, why they ſhould not be done. If wée déepely conſider what God did with the Apoſtle, wée ſhall finde, that it was more that God gaue him, than the Apoſtle did craue.God dothe more for vs in giuīg vs grace than to take away temptations. Bycauſe, hée deſired that the temptation of the fleſh might be taken away: and God gaue him grace to ouercome it. What iniurie doth the Prince to the Captaine, that ſendes him a warfare, if hée makes him ſure to haue the victory? If abſolutely God ſhould haue taken away the temptation of the fleſh, from the Apoſtle ſaint Paul: neither ſhould there haue remayned occaſiō to deſerue, either ſhould haue béen giuen grace to ouercome. For hée is more ſupported of God, to whom hée giueth helpe to conquere, than to him, that hée excuſeth to fight. Let vs not deſpaire, afflict our ſelues, or bée ouer thoughtfull, and much leſſe complayne and murmur of God: if forthwith hée giue not that whiche wée deſire. For hée doth it not, with diſfauour in that hée will not heare vs,God doth know what he giueth vs, but we know not what to craue. but bycauſe he wil change it into a better cauſe. Hée knoweth what hée doth, and wée vnderſtand it not: hée knoweth what hée doth denie, but wée not what wée aſke: hée meaſureth all thinges with reaſon, and wée but with apetite: hée dooth denie that is hurtfull vnto vs, and graunteth that which is profitable. Finally I doo ſay, that he doth know: how hée are to bée handled: and therfore, wée ought of him only to depend. The Apoſtle had ſéene the inuiſible and diuine ſecrets, whiche of his forefathers had béen much deſired but neuer ſéene: and bycauſe, of that ſo high reuelation, hée ſhould not boaſt or grow proud,To haue the occaſion of ſinne taken awaye, is no ſmall benefite of God. the Lord would not take away the concupiſcence of the fleſhe. In ſuche wiſe, that in recompence of not condeſcending to his deſire, hée did take awaye the occaſion to ſinne, and gaue him grace to ouercome. God vſed more pitie with ſaint Paule, in that hée would not heare him:

than if hée had heard him. For if hée ſhould haue taken awaye the concupiſcence of the fleſh, it might haue come to paſſe that as much as hée had diminiſhed in temptation,To be without temptatiō is no good ſigne. hée might haue increaſed in pride. When the Lord doth permit that one is tempted, it doth not followe therfore, that hée is of God abhorred: for my parte, I holde it rather a ſigne, that of God, hée is elect. For as ſaint Gregory ſayth, there is not a greater temptation, than not to be tempted. Chriſt hath left the way to heauen marked: and the markes of this voiage be tribulations, aduerſities, miſhappes, and infirmities. In ſuch wiſe, that it is no other thing to be remembred of God: but that in this world he be permitted to be tempted. Let it be holden for certaine, that they of him are loſt, whiche in this world, from aduerſities be priuiledged. For the enemy of mankind, (whiche is the deuill) vnto all thoſe that he hath regiſtred for his owne, hée doth trauell, that they may liue in great welfare and eaſe. Sir, alſo you ſaye,The deuil procureth great welfare vnto his dearlings. that you doe much maruail to ſée the boldneſſe that the Deuill had in aſking licence of God, to hurt holy Iob: and to ſée the liberalitie that God vſed in giuing it. In ſuch ſort, that he denied S. Paule, that he deſired, and graunted the Deuill, that whiche hee craued. Sir, although you haue no reaſon, yet haue you ſome occaſion to demaund that whiche you aſke: for of a ſuretie, it as an hard thing to conſent that our enemy do hurt vnto our friend. That whiche I dare ſpeake in this caſe, is that it is leſſe, pernicious, and of more worthineſſe to ſuffer ill, than to haue authoritie to do euill. And after this maner wée haue more enuie of holy Iob, in that hée ſuffred, than vnto the deuill, for that whiche he did. It ought to be farre diſtant from the diuine will, that he that hath to giue grace to ſerue him, ſhould giue licence to offend. It is a great euill for a man to be euill: but it is much worſe to make him euil, which is good. Bycauſe, our owne proper ſinnes God doth well ſée, they procéede of weakeneſſe: but the perſecuting of the good, alwayes groweth of malice. If men do aſke of God vppon their knées, that hée giue grace to ſerue him, they ought to aſke

with teares that he do not giue them place, to offend him. For in the ende,Notable examples againſt ſuch as do perſecute. if I do not good workes I ſhall haue no reward: but if I doe euill, for the ſame I ſhall haue paynes. By Caine, Abell was ſlaine: by Eſau, Iacob was perſecuted: by Saule, Dauid was baniſhed: by Nabugodonoſer, Ieruſalem was burned: by Achab, Micheas was impriſoned: by Zedechias, Eſaias was ſawen: and by the Diuell, holy Iob was afflicted. Man by the multitude of his ſinnes, doth deſerue to be an offence, and a ſcourge of the good. Much did the Diuell offend Iob, in tempting him: but much more did holy Iob deſerue in ſuffering that temptation. Bycauſe in the perſecutions of the iuſt, God doth more behold the pacience of him that ſuffreth, than he doth the malice of him that doth perſecute.
               Alſo you will, that I write vnto you, what it was I preached this other day vnto the Emperour, which is to wit, that the Princes which tyrānouſly gouerne their common wealthes, haue more cauſe to feare good men, than thoſe that be euill. Sir, that whiche I ſayde in this caſe was, that the tyrants whiche in the common wealthes haue offices of moſt preheminence, haue much more reſpect to the bountie of the good,Very great bee the priuileges of the vertuous. than to the conſpiracies of the euill. For that amongſt many other thinges, this priuilege is cōtayned in vertue: that is to vnderſtand: amongſt the leaſt inferiors it giueth diſmay: with the equall, it moueth enuie: and to the great & mightie, it yeldeth feare. The Siracuſan Dioniſius, had more feare of the diuine Plato which was in Grecia, than of al the enemies he had neare him in Cicilia. Kyng Saule had more reſpect to the deſeruings of Dauid, than to the armies of the Philiſtines. The proud Aman,
                  He incurreth great perils that cōtendeth with the vertuous. that was ſo priuate with Kyng Aſſuerus, was more grieued with the good Mardocheus, that he held him in no reuerence, than with all the reſt of the kyngdome. Herod Eſcalonite, did hold in more reuerēce, and alſo did more feare only Iohn Baptiſt, than all the kingdome of Iudea. Finally, I do ſay and affirme, that none may with a troth ſay or affirme that he hathe an enemie, but when he hath ſome good man to his enemie. Bycauſe the euil man doth hurt with

his knife, but the good, doth hurt with his credit. Sir, alwaies haue regard, not to ſtriue or contend with a man that naturally is good, and hath credite in the common wealth with all men. For, he ſhall do you more hurt with his word, than you ſhall offend him with a blowe of a launce.
               Sir as touching the Commendathor, Iohn of Towres, that would not the gouernment this yéere,The certaine before the doubtfull is to be preferted. which the gouernours had giuen him, ſaying: that he deſerued better, and that the king when he ſhall come from Flaunders will giue him more: to this I aunſwere, that it ſeemeth to me lacke of wit, and alſo a ſurpluſage of fooliſhneſſe, to leaue a reward certaine, for a hope doubtfull.
               Sir, alſo you coniure me that I write vnto you, what I thought of the Lorde Preſident, Sir Antony de Roias, when I talked with him in your buſineſſe: to this I aunſwere, that hée ſéemeth to mée ſharpe in his aunſweres, and wiſe in his dealings. I do not like well with many of this Court,A Kintall is a hundreth waight. that depraue him for his ſpeache, and do not afterwards conſider of his doings, as it is true, ſo likewiſe many of our fréends giue vs wordes by Kintals, but workes by the ounce.
               Alſo you will mée that I write vnto you what I iudge of the Embaſſadour of Venize, for that I am conuerſant with him, and hée confeſſeth himſelf with me. Sir, I can tell you, that hée is in ſcience learned, in his life reformed, and in conſcience much conſiderate. And it may bée ſayde by him, thatwhich Plato ſaide by Phocion his friend: he did more loue to bée, than ſéeme to be vertuous. In the other ſecrete and particular buſineſſe, that Alonſo Eſpinell commoned with mée off, in your behalf,It is better to be, than to ſeeme to bee vertuouſe. with the ſame faith that your worſhip ſent me the meſſage: receyue yée alſo the aunſwere.
               
                  From Toledo 
                     the .xxx. of Iune, in the yeare of our Lord. 1525.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto Maſter Frier Iohn Beneuiades: wherein is expounded, that which is ſayd in the ſcripture, that the euill ſpirite ſent of God, came vpon Saule.
                  
               
               
                  REuerend and welbeloued Father, the letter that your fatherhod made in Salamanca, I haue receiued héere in Soria: the which forthwith I read, and afterwardes many times did turne to reade: For that I receyued very great conſolatiō in remembring my ſelf from whom it came,The conditiōs of a friends letter. and in noting what it contained. In the letter of a very friend, the ſpirits do reioyce, the eyes delight, the hart is recreated, friendeſhip confirmed, and the vnderſtanding is comforted. For Plutarch ſayth in the book of the fortune of Alexander: that the great Alexander did neuer reade the letters whiche tyrantes did ſend him, eyther did teare the letters that Philoſophers did write vnto him. All the letters, that Marcus Antonius did write vnto Cleopatra, and all the letters that Cleopatra did write vnto Marcus Antonius, were found by the Emperoure Auguſtus very well laide vp, after the death of Marcus Antonius. The letters that Cicero did write to Publius Lentulus, to Atticus, to Rufus, to Fabarius, and to Druſius, which were his familiar frends, were all found in their keping, and not in his originall.
               As co
                     •
                  cerning that your fatherhode wryteth, and by this letter comaund me to write: it may be very well anſwered: as ſaint Agneda did anſwer the virgin Lucie, which is to wete, Quid a me petis Lucia Virgo? nam ipſa poteris praeſtare continuò matri tuae. In this caſe, and in this demaund, I can not tell whether of vs deſerueth more paine, your fatherhode, for tempting my patience, or I, in aduenturning my ſelfe to publiſhe my ignorance. For hée is not worthy leſſe fault that ſinneth, than hée that is the cauſe of ſinne. Si nequeo aſcendere in montem cum Loth: ad minus ſaluabor in Segor. I would ſay, that if your fatherhode, bée not ſatiſfied with that whiche I ſhall aunſwere, it maye pleaſe you to bée ſatiſfied with that I would

aunſwere. For as Plato ſayd, hée that doth trauel not to erre, miſſeth very narowly.
               You will that I write vnto you, what I iudge, and how I vnderſtand that text, whiche is written in holy ſcripture, 1. Regum
                   cap. xvj. where it is ſaid, ſpeaking of King Saul and of his infirmitie: Spiritus Domini malus arripiebat Saulem.
                  A text of ſcripture expounded. The fyrſt King of Iſraell was named Saul, he was choſen of the Tribe of Beniamin, which was the laſt Tribe of all ye Tribes: and in the ſecond yeare of his raigne, an euill ſpirit ſent of God did vex him, whiche would not come out of him, neyther leaue to torment him, vntill the good King Dauid came before him, to play and to ſing. But now the dout is, how it may be vnderſtoode, and agrée withall, that the ſcripture ſhould ſay, the euill ſpirit of the Lord did take Saul: if the ſpirit were of the Lord, how was he euell? and if he were euill, how was he of the Lord? it ſéemeth an hard thing, and not intelligible, to ſay of the one part, that that ſpirit which held Saul, was of the Lord: and of the other part, to ſay that the ſpirit was euil. But if the ſpirite were of the Lord how was he then euil? and if he were euill, how was he of the Lord? For the vnderſtanding hereof, it is to be noted, how it is written in the 1. Regum
                   cap. xxvj. that Dauid being compaſſed with the armie of King Saul, who ſléeping on a night in his tent, Dauid did paſſe thorough the middes of his campe, and toke from the Kinges beds head, the launce that he fought withall, and a cruſe of water, wherein he vſed to drink: and in this paſſage, he was neither ſéen of the watch, nor perceiued of the ſcout. And why? Quia ſopor Domini irruit ſuper eos: to ſaye, as the Scripture ſaith, that the ſléepe of the Lord fell vppon them, is moſt true: but to ſay, that God doth ſléepe, and hath néede of ſléepe, is a great mockery. For, as the Pſalmiſt doth ſaye, Ecce non dormitabit neque dormiet qui cuſtodit Iſrael. Whē the ſcripture doth ſay: Quòd ſopor Domini irruit ſuper eos: that God had ſent a dead ſléepe vpon them: it is to be vnderſtoode: non quòd ipſe dominus dormiret: Sed quia eius nutu infuſus eſſet: ne quiſquam preſentiam Dauid ſentiret. The diuine prouidence would caſt a

ſléepe vpon King Saul, and vpon his watch, and vpon thoſe of his Campe: not for their recreation, but for the ſafe kéeping of Dauid: in ſuch wiſe, that in God, his ſléepe and his prouidence is one ſelf thing: the Lord is ſo zelouſe of his elect, and ſo vigilant to preſerue them, that he doth not only giue them grace to performe good purpoſes, but alſo doth direct them alwaies by good meanes: in ſuche wiſe, that although hée doth permit them to trauaile, he doth not conſent that they periſh.
               But comming to the purpoſe, that after the maner, that the Scripture is to be vnderſtood, Sopor Domini irruit ſuper eos: after the ſame manner, is vnderſtand, Spiritus Domini malus arripiebat Saulem. And for farther declaration of this I ſay: Quod ſi Diabolus tentationem iuſtis ſemper inferre cupiat: tamen ſi à Domino potestatem, non accepit: nullatenus adipiſci potest, quod appetit. The ſpirite that did tempt and torment King Saul: for this cauſe he is called an euill ſpirite: for that the will of the Deuill in tempting vs, is euill. And for this purpoſe, he is named the ſpirite of the Lorde: for that the power which the Lord doth giue him to tempt vs, is good. When God dothe giue licence to any Diuell, that he go to vexe and diſquiet any iuſt man: it is not Gods intention, that he tempt him, but to exerciſe him: bicauſe vertue is of ſuch qualitie, that it groweth mortified, when it is not exerciſed with trauailes. The wheat whiche is not turned, is eaten with wiuels. The garment that is not worne,Vertue & the vertues by exerciſe be conſerued. is eaten with mothes: the timber that is not ſeaſoned, is ſpoiled with cheſt lockes: the frō that is not wrought, doth conſume with ruſte: bread long kept groweth finnowed.God hath more regarde vnto vs than we our ſelues. By this that I haue ſaide, I would ſay, that there is not any thing that turneth vs to more weakeneſſe & negligence: than to be a certaine time without temptations. Much more care hath God of vs, than we of our ſelues: for in the end, as our worthineſſe is litle, and but to ſmal purpoſe, if we do quaile, he doth comfort vs: if we lie downe to ſleepe, he waketh vs: if we be wearied, he helpeth vs: if we grow fearful, he doth encorage vs: if we grow negligent, he doth intice vs. Finally I ſay, that leauing our ſelues vnto our owne

power, wée permit our ſelues to fall, and he alone giues the hand to lift vs vp.
               Alſo holy Iob was tempted of the euill ſpirit of the Lord, not becauſe there was any notable fault in the man: but for that ther raigned in the Diuell enuie and malice. For curſed ſathan had not enuie of the great goods that Iob had, but of the excellent life that he led. At the inſtant that one is euill, he doth deſire that all be euill: if he bée ſclaundered, that all be defamed: in ſuch wiſe, that ther is not ſo perillous an enuie, as that whiche euill men haue of thoſe whiche be good and vertuous: If one be good and ritch, and liue by one that is euill and malicious. Firſt, he that is euill, dooth trauell to take away the credit the good man hath, before he vſeth force to ſpoile him of his goodes.
               
                  Abrabam was tempted when it was commaunded that his onely ſonne ſhoulde be ſacrifized. Tobie was tempted when he loſt his ſight. The holy Iob was tempted, when they killed his children, tooke his goods, and filled him with the mangie: in which temptatiōs thoſe holy men ſuffered much;Not the ſuffring but the paciēce wherwith we ſuffer, God regardeth. and alſo loſte much: but at the time of repayment he did not giue them reward according to the goods they loſt, but according to the patience they vſed. Since it is certain that all paſſions or troubles, eyther God doth ſend them, or elſe do come by the hand of God, it is reaſon that we take them as ſent by the hand of God, who is ſo iuſt in that he commaundeth, and ſo limited, in that hée permitteth,The tēptation of the Deuill is limited. that he doth neuer ſuffer vs to be tempted aboue our ſtrength. With men that be of a good life, and doe kepe rekening with their conſcience: the licence whiche God giueth to the Diuill to tempte them, is ſurely limited, and the patience that hee giueth them, is very bountifull, & de hoc bactenus ſufficit.
               
               The Controler Hineſtroſa came from the Court this way to ſée me, whiche came in ſuche diſtreſſe, for that he had gone thither, he him repented, and for that hée had ſtaied, hée was deſpited, and for that whiche had happened, he was abhorred: in ſuche ſorte, that to heare him report his great trauelles,

moued me to weigh my owne as light. Men in ſadnes ought not to ſéeke comfort of thoſe that be merie, but of others that are ſorrowfull and more confounded than them ſelues. For if they ſo doe, of a troth, they ſhal find that it is very little they ſuffer, in reſpecte of that whiche others endure. No more, but that our Lord be your protector, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Sotia 
                     the 4. of March. 1518.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Marques of Velez, wherein hee writeth vnto him certaine newes of the Court.
               
               
                  RIght magnificent & my ſingular good Lord, Garcy Rodrygues ſeruant and ſolicitor vnto your Lordſhippe, gaue me a letter of yours made the ſeuēth of this preſent in Velez el Rubio, which came with more ſwiftnes, and alſo more freſh thā the Samons they bring from Bayon. Your honour writeth vnto me, that I ſhoulde certifie you what newes, and what worlde runneth: vnto whiche, I dare aunſwere your Lordſhip, that in this Court, none runneth, but they goe all bechafed. It is an auncient peſtilence in the courtes of Princes: that they call ſuche men as do not aunſwere theim: they loue where they be hated: they follow ſuche as know them not: they ſeeke thoſe that flie them: they ſerue thoſe that pay them not: they hope for that which is not giuen them: and they procure that which they can not obtaine. Suche and ſo great trauelles as theſe are, although we performe with our bodie that ſuffereth, we can not bring to paſſe with the heart to diſſemble them: if the body ſuffer paynes, and the heart bée compaſſed with anguiſh, ſooner dothe the body ceaſe to complain, than the hart to ſighe. Plutarche ſaithe of Aeſchines the Philoſopher, that being as he was alway ſick, did neuer complaine of the Splene that did gréeue him: and on the other parte, hée did muche lament of

any ſorow that hapned vnto him. As a wiſe man it ſéemethe your Honor to bée aduiſed in kéeping your houſe, ouerſeeing your landes, enioying your goods, vnderſtanding how to liue, and howe to diſcharge your conſcience. In ſuche wiſe, that of affaires in court, ye delight to heare, & flie to ſée them. For of a troth, as all things that doe paſſe here are fayned, vayne, voide, inconſtant, and daungerous: it is a paſtime to vnderſtand them, and a great deſpite to behold them.
               Your Lordſhip will that I write vnto you, whether I bée preſent at any time when the Empereſſe doth eate, and what things ſhe doth moſt vſe to feed on. Now in winter (as at this preſent) few Prelates being at Court, I (my Lord) am preſent euery day at dinner and ſupper, not to ſée, but to bleſſe the table. And I can tell your Lordſhip, that if I bleſſe hir, I curſſe my ſelf: bicauſe at the houre that I departe the Court to go to dinner, it is then time (very neare) to goe to bed. There is much leſſe trauell in ſeruing of God, than the kyng.It is leſſe trauel to ſerue God, than the world. For the king doth not accept ſeruice, but when it liketh him: but our God, dothe not only accept when hée will, but alſo when we thinke good. To that you demaund, what and how the Empreſſe doth eate: I can ſhew your Lordſhip, that ſhée eateth that whiche ſhe eateth cold, and in the cold, alone, with ſilence, and that all ſtand beholding. If I be not deceiued, theſe bée fiue ſuch condicions, that onely one were ſuffcient to giue me a very euill repaſt. Sir it is now winter, the which naturally is a time very heauie, cold, melancholike, and all men delite to eate their meate by the fire, warme, accompanied, and talking, and that none ſtand to behold, for that in time of reioycing, when a man neither eateth or ſerueth, but ſtandeth with ſilence muſing with him ſelfe: I dare ſaye, of ſuch a one, yt he doth not behold vs, but rather watch vs. To eat in ye winter any cold meat, is no ſmal wāt of good diet, for meats that are cold, do hurt the ſtomacke, & giue no apetite. A man to eat alone is likwiſe great ſolitarneſſe, & in ye ende,Good company is more pleaſant then great fare. the gentleman doth not ſo much delite in the meate he eateth, as in ye mirth he maketh with ye company he hath at his table.

For a man to eate without communication and warmthe: I would ſay, the one proceded of filthineſſe, the other of wretchedneſſe. Princes bée not bound to bée ſubiect to theſe rules: bycauſe they are forced to vſe great ſeueritie in their life, and great authoritie at their meat. My Lord, be it as be may: and let hir Maieſtie eate, as ſhall pleaſe hir to commaund: for in the end I do more repine at hir pacience, than enuie the meat ſhe eateth. The meates yt are ſerued at hir table are many: and thoſe that ſhee féedeth on, bee very few, (for if hir Phiſiognomie do not deceiue me,) the Empreſſe is of a very good condition, and of a weake complexion. The moſt that ſhée eateth of, is winter Mellons, poudred Beefe, fed Pigions, minſt Bacon, great Geeſe, and Capons roſted: in ſuche wiſe, that ſhée eateth that others do loth: and ſhée abhorreth that, for whiche men of the countrey do ſighe. They ſet before hir, Pecocke, Partridge, Capōs, franked Feſant, Manger blāck, Paſties, Tarts, and other variable kind of gluttonies: of all whiche, ſhée not only pretendeth a contempt to eate, but alſo, ſheweth a lothſomneſſe to behold. In ſuch wiſe, that the contētation doth not cōſiſt in the much or little that we haue, but only in that, wherunto we be inclined. In all her dinner, ſhée drinketh but once, and that is not pure wine, but water mixed with wine: in ſuche wiſe, that with hir ſippets none may ſatiſfie his apetite, and much leſſe kill his thirſt. Shée is ſerued after the maner of Portingall, which is to wit: there is placed at the table thrée Dames vppon their knées, the one to carue, the other twaine to ſerue, in ſuch ſort, that the meate is braught by gentlemen, and ſerued with Ladies. All the other Dames be there preſent, ſtanding vpright, not in ſilence, but talking, not alone, but accompanies: ſo that the thrée Ladies giue the Empreſſe to eate, and the others yéeld their ſeruaunts ſufficient matter both to ſpeake and thinke. Authorized and pleaſant is the maner of Portingall, yet truly, notwithſtanding that ſometimes the Dames do laugh ſo loude, and the gallants do ſpeake ſo high, that they loſe their grauitie, and alſo are yrkſome to hir Maieſtie.
               
                  To that whiche your Lordſhip doth demaunde, that whether bée more, the Dames that be ſued vnto, or the gallants that do ſerue them? to this I aunſwere: that Eſayas did ſaye, Apprehendent ſeptem malieres virum vnum. Manye ſonnes of Knights and Gentlemen, do trauel to ſée the Dames, to talke with them, and to ſerue them: but at the tyme of maryage, none doth marrie with them. In ſuch maner that Iuſtice iuſtice, but not at home.
               To that whiche you demaund, who gaue the Hat to the Lorde Cardinall: it was Sir Frauncis of Mendoza, Biſhop of Samora. And if my diuination deceiueth me not, the Lord Biſhop, had rather haue ben vppon his knées to receiue the ſame, than ſitting to giue it. They preſented the Hat in ſaint Antonies Church: and at the inſtāt it was giuen him, there fell ſo great tempeſt of wind and raine,The old Romanes were ſuperſtitious. that if as he was a Chriſtian, hée had bene a Romane, either he would not haue receiued it, or els haue defered it vntill another daye. My Lord it is not to be holden for a ieſt, that at the very preſent, the wind and the raine was ſo cruell and vehement, and the water ſo great, that when the Cardinall went thence made Cardinall, he did more profite him ſelfe of the Hat he brought, than of the Hat whiche he receiued. The banquet made by the Cardinall, was magnificent in expences and of long continuance, for that we began to eat at one, and made an end at foure. As concerning drinking, there were found ſo good wines, and alſo ſo good drinkers, that Toro, S. Martin,
                  Places where the good wine of Spaine doth grow. 
                  Madrigall, and Arenas, did cauſe that ſome did ſtauke with vnſtedy ſteppes.
               As concerning my lodging, your Lordſhippe ought not to aſke me, if I haue good lodging, but if I haue any lodging. For I ſaye many times vnto Iohn de Aiala the harbenger, that of God wée obtain that wee deſire with praiers: and of him wée can not get a lodging, no not with teares. On a ſunday in Aduent, preaching in the Chappell vnto hir Maieſtie, I ſayd, that ſaint Iohn Baptiſt went to dwell in the deſert, not onely to auoyd ſin, but alſo for that he woulde not haue to

doe with herbingers: and your Lordſhip do demaund if there be much people at the Court: to my iudgement ther are few men & many women: for that from Auila there came inowe to the Court, and here in Medina was very many, & beſide theſe, Toro, Zamora, Salamanca, & Olmedo, haue ſent hither other aduentures, in ſuche fort, that if in Palace there be for euery galant ſeuen dames, there is in Courte for euery courtyer ſeuen Courtizanes. For that Caeſar is in Flanders, ye winter harde, and the yeare déere alſo, there is none at the court that willingly would be there, but for neceſſitie.
               Further, your Lordſhip will that I write vnto you what I thinke of the duke of Veiar, which gathered ſo great treaſure in hys lyfe, that at his death he left foure hundreth thouſand Ducates. This is a matter perillous to write, and odious to heare: but in the ende (my iudgemente is) that he wente to ſéeke care for himſelfe, enuie for his neyghboures, ſpurres for his enimies,Terrible notes for the rich nigard. a praie for théeues, trauaile for his perſon, anguiſhe for his ſpirite, ſcruple for his conſcience, perill for his ſoule, lawe for his children, and curſſes for his heyres. Great contention and debate goeth betwixt the olde ducheſſe and the yong Duke, and the Erle of Miranda, and others his kinſfolke and heyres, vpon the inheritaunce of his good, and the ſucceſſion of his houſe: in ſuch wiſe, that there be many that eft procure to inherit his money, and none that takes the charge of his diſcharge. In the yeare. 1523. I béeing ſicke in Burgos,
                  The deed do here leaue their moneye, and carie awaye theyr ſinnes, the Duke came to ſée mée, and demanded who might properly be called couetous, for ye he had aſked many, & none had anſwered vnto his minde: and that which I anſwered at the ſodeyn, were theſe words: The man ye ſitteth in ye ſmoke when he may warme himſelf by a faire fire: that may drinke good wyne, and drinketh euill: that may haue a good garment and goeth hard and ragged: and that will lyue poorely to die riche:Horrible to liue poorely, to die in great wealth. he alone and no other wée maye name couetous and wretched. And ſayde further: Beléeue mée (my Lord Duke) that I holde hym a more woorthie man that dothe venter to parte his riches, than him that gathereth them together:

bicauſe, for a man to be riche it is ſufficient that he be diligent, but to employ his greate riches, he muſte be a Gentleman, and noble minded. To that your Lordſhip doth demaūd my opinion of this towne of Medina, I can ſaye vnto youre honour (to my iudgement) that it hath neyther grounde nor heauen, for the heauens are always couered with Clowdes, and the grounde with dirt: in ſuche wiſe, that if the neighbourhed do call it Medina of the field, we Courtiers doe terme it Medina of the dirt. It hathe a riuer that is called Sapardiell, which is ſo déepe and daungerous, that géeſe in ſommer go ouer drye footed: and as it is a riuer narrow and muddy: it doth prouide vs many éeles: and dothe couer vs with many Clowdes. No more, but that our Lord be your protector, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  Frō 
                     Medina del campo, 
                     the xviij. of Iuly in the yeare. 1532.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Biſhop of Tui, new preſident of Granado, in which is ſayd, what is the office of Preſidents.
               
               
                  MAgnificent and moſt reuerend Lorde and regall iudge, I wiſh the new prouiſion that his maieſtie hath beſtowed vpon your honour for the Preſidentſhip of this royal audience of Granado, may be fortunate. I can ſhewe youre lordſhip, that in this countrey you are more knowen by your fame, than by your perſō. Wherfore (as you know) you haue to trauaile that your life may be conformable vnto your fame, alſo you haue to conſider that if you come to iudge, you ſhall alſo: be iudged, not of few, but of many: not of learning but of cuſtome: not of goods, but of fame: not only in publique, but alſo in ſecret: not of waightie cauſes, but alſo of very ſmall matters. One of the greateſt trauayls that Preſidents haue, and ſuche as gouerne common wealthes, is, that they doe not onely iudge what they doe, but alſo what they

thinke: not only the things that they doe in earneſt, but alſo what they commit in ieſt: in ſuch ſort that all things whiche they doe not with ſeueritie, they iudge it for lightneſſe. Plutarke ſayth in his politikes, that the Athenians did note in Simonides, that he ſpake loude. The Thebanes accuſed Parniculus that he ſpet much. The Lacedemonians ſayd, that Licurgus went ſtouping The Romains blamed Scipio, that hée ſlepte ſnorting. The Vticenſes defamed the good Cato, that he did eat with both his chéekes. The enimies of Pompey murmured that he ſcratched with one finger. The Carthaginiās reproued their Hanniball, for that he went loſe with his garments: and the Sillanos charged Iulius Caeſar, that he went euill girt. Behold ſir, how far the malice of man doth extend, and in what things the ydle (in the common wealth) do occupie themſelues: to witte, that they prayſe not, what the noble mynded doe take in hande as valiaunt men, but condemne that whiche they doe of negligence.
               With reaſon they mighte haue prayſed Simonides: that ouercame the battaile of Marathone: Parniculus that reſkued Thebes: Licurgus, that reformed his kingdom: Scipio that ſubdued Carthage: Cato, that ſuſteined Rome: Pompeius, that augmented the Empire. Hanniball: that was of a mynd immortall: and Iulius Caeſar, that thought it little to bée Lord of the world. Wherof we may gather, that the people of a baſe ſoile do not ſpeake of their betters and of the mightie: accordyng as reaſon directeth, but agréeable to that whiche enuie dothe perſuade them. Plinie ſayeth that the Romanes, onely in the prouince of Vetica, held fiue iuriſdictions conuented: whiche is, that of Gades, Hiſpalis, Emeritans, Aſtaginenſis, Cordubenſis: they called Andelozia, the Prouince of Vetica: they named the Chauncellorſhips, iuriſdictions conuented: Gades, was Calis: Hiſpalis, was Seuill: Cordubenſis, Corduua: Meritenſis, Merida: Aſtaginenſis, Ecija. Of theſe fiue Chauncelorſhips, the firſt and the greateſt was that of Calis: for there was reſident the Counſell of the Prouince: and in Merida were the men of warre. I haue broughte all theſe antiquities vnto youre

Lordſhips memorie, therby to be aduertiſed and alſo to conſider: as there were then many preſidents appoynted to gouerne, ther were many of whom alſo to murmur: but now you being alone, ye charge of murmuration wil light vpō you onely. The people of this countrey, are not lyke the people of your countrey: for here they be ſharpe, ſuttle, and greate diſſemblers: therefore I aduiſe and forewarne you, that in hearing them you vſe leyſure: and in your anſwers reſolution. As you ſhall perceiue more hereafter,Strange cuſtomes in a cōmon welth are perillous. they will applie more vnderſtādings to one word, than ther be gloſes vpō the Bible. Conſerue thē in their auncient cuſtoms: care not to attempt or bring in any new things: for nouelties doe always bring diſpleaſures to thoſe that deale therin: and amongſt the people, doth engēder vprores or offences. Stand always vpon good aduiſement: & walk always vpon conſideration: for in the houſes of iudges, as many enter to view, as to diſpatch matters. The houſe of Audience is verie moyſt, old, narowe, little, diſpleaſant & darke; in ſuch ſorte, that it is rather to bée puld down than to dwel in: it wil greue your honor to ſée it, & offend you to inhabite the ſame, but in the ende, you haue to comfort your ſelfe, that your comming thither is not to dwel, but to amende your eſtate. My Lorde preſident your predeceſſor, entred the ſame, Biſhop of Malorca, & came frō thence, made biſhop of Auila. And ſo may it pleaſe the Lord, as yée now come Biſhop of Tui, ye ſhall returne Archbiſhop of Ceuill: for it is nowe an auncient cuſtome, that the preſidentes be neuer remoued, vntill their eſtate be amended. Your Lordſhip may bold it for moſt certain, that the office of preſident is not a little honourable, but ioyntly therwith, verie tedious and burdenſome. For that no man hath compaſſion of his trauell, & all (if he take eaſe,) blaſpheme him. In this preſidentſhip there is other trauell, which is, your friends haue licence to ſée you, and to ſpeake vnto you, but your Lordſhip hathe not libertie, to vſe conference with them: for if you talk with any in particular, and admitte him to youre ſecrete affaires: foorthwith they will reporte thorowe the audience, and alſo

will talke in place, that you haue more abilitie to bée commaunded, than capacitie to commaund. In hard, graue, and waightie matters, it is not repugnant to wiſedome, neither yet to conſcience, for a Iudge to confer with his friendes, vppon this condicion, that they be neither affected or furious, for there doth wit moſt bend, where will hath moſt force. In ſuch wiſe, ye ought to be conuerſant, confer, talke, and alſo cōſult with your familiar friends, that all men may thinke of you, that they do coūſell, but not cōmaund you. Such as come to bée ſuters vnto you, are not to be anſwered ſharply or with rigor, a milde aunſwere neuer offendeth: for if they go not with hope to bée deſpatched, it were not iuſt they ſhoulde depart complayning of their aunſwere. In the wordes, in the curteſies, and in the aunſweres, that you ſhall vſe, deale with euery one according as your Lordſhip ſhall perceiue the condicion of his eſtate to require: for otherwiſe, ſome will prayſe you for iuſt, and other ſome note you of euill nurture. Your Lordſhip alſo hath to trauel in the commō wealth, to appeare milde, pitifull, louing, and well wiſhing: in ſuche ſort, that you rather ſeeke to be praiſed for the bountie ye vſe, than for the authoritie you haue. Conſent not to be furious, angry, cruell, & abſolute, for that Iudges be bound to ſuffer infinite iniuries, and haue no licence to reuenge onely one. When at any time you ſhal fele occaſion to be angrie, troubled, and alſo iniuried, breake not forth into ire, nor ſpeake any euil word. For if the man that doth iniury vs, be diſcrete, we take no ſmall reuenge,Notable cōdiciōs of a good Preſident. if to his wordes wée giue no aunſwere. The good Preſident, ought to haue rectitude in iudgement, puritie of life, quickneſſe in diſpatch, pacience in hys affayres, and prudence in his gouernaunce. The whiche fiue vertues, he in them ſelues ſo connexed, and in him ſo neceſſary, that he ſhall not be ſo much profited by the foure that he hathe, as he ſhall receiue offence by the one that he lacketh. Of my ſelfe I giue your Lordſhip to vnderſtād, that two yeres ſince I haue 
                     •
                  in at the law in this audience, againſt the Church of Toledo, for the Abbay of Baſa, in whiche, I haue ſentence in my

fauour, Per omnia benedictus Deus. My Lord, at this preſent, we be in degrée of a reuew, and for that the matter dependeth in ſuch eſtate, and maye not farther procede without the Preſident, Nil iam ſupereſt, niſi quod deſcendas, & ponas manum ſuper eam. In that your Lordſhip is Preſident and I a ſuter, this letter ſuffreth not offers in words, nor permitteth much leſſe ſeruice in workes. Ne imponamus crimen gloriae veſtrae. Come your Lordſhip when you will with gladnes, and enter this audience in an happie houre, that as you know, poſitus es in ruinam, & in reſurrectionem multorium. Of lawiers and officers olde and new, you ſhall find a ſacred College, dignum profectò tali viro. No more, but our Lord bée your protector, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Granado 
                     the 12. of May. 1531.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the warden of Alcala, in whiche is expounded that of the Pſalme, whiche ſaith, Let the liuing deſcend into hell.
               
               
                  MOſt reuerēd and ſufficient religious father, Frater Antonius de Gueuara, predicator & Chroniſta Caeſaris: ſuo precordiali patri guardiano, cumplu: ſal. plu. mittit. Quamuis hactenus non ſcripſi paternitati tuae, non tunc minus tibi deditus & affectus fui. Cauſam autem meae taciturnitatis, tua ſingularis, prudentia per ſeſe optime nouit. Literas tuas accepimus: quae nobis incunditati, & volup
                        •
                     ati: fuerunt. Nec enim eſt alius quiſquam bomimum, cuius ſcripta libentius quàm tua legamus: eſt enim in eis, & dicendi ornatus, & debiti ſalis condimentum. Gaudemus te bene valere: vtinā & ſemper tibi ſit. Et de bis hactenus: In the general chapter I preached, all our order being preſent, & amōgſt other authorities of holy Scripture, I expounded that text of the Pſalmiſt, whiche ſaieth, deſcēdant in infernū viuētes. The expoſitiō wherof your reuerence deſireth me to ſend written as it was preached, for that as then you heard it not. The preacher that giues in writing what hée hath fayd in the pulpit, bindes him ſelfe to loſe his credit. For in the mouth of a great preacher,

it is more to ſée the ſpirit whiche he giueth to the words he ſpeaketh, than to all that he can write vnto vs. Aeſchines the Philoſopher, being baniſhed by the Athenians to the Rodes, when vppon a certaine daye hée related the Oration that Demoſthenes had made and written againſt him, hée ſayd vnto them: if ye had ſéene that beaſt Demoſthenes blaſon his words, and the ſpirite he had in ſpeaking of them. Amongſt the thirtie moſt famous tyrants that did deſtroy the common wealth of Athenes, Pifiſtrato was one, in whoſe time the Philoſopher Damonidas did floriſh: A man out of doubt of a reformed life, and muſt eloquent in his ſpeech. Of this Philoſopher Damonidas, Pifiſtraro the tyrant, on a daye ſayd vnto the Senate of Athens: All maner of men of Athe
                        •
                     s, and of Greece, may fréely come and ſpeak with me in their affaires, and ſay what appertaineth, except the Philoſopher Damonidas, which may write vnto me, but not come and talke with me,The wordes of the eloquēt containe great efficacie. for he holdeth ſuche efficacie in his wordes, that he perſwadeth to what hee will. Kyng Philip (Father to Alexander the great, beſieging a certaine citie in Grecia,) came to parlée with thoſe in the Citie, that if they would ſuffer the Philoſopher Theomaſtes to enter, and to ſpeake with them certaine words, he would depart and rayſe his ſiege: the Philoſopher Theomaſtes had great eloquence in the words he did ſpeake, and very great perſwaſion in things he would bring to paſſe, and ſo it chaunced there,A ſtraunge example of an Orator. that he entring alone into the Citie, making his Oration in the Senate: they did not only render them ſelues and open their gates, but alſo did kiſſe King Phillips hands for kyng. In ſuch wiſe, that the Philoſopher had more power with his wordes, thā the King with his armies. I ſay this reuerend Father, for that betwixt the bearing and reading of a ſermon there goeth no ſmall difference. For as the Apoſtle ſayeth, the letter killeth, but the ſpirit quickneth. The authoritie of the Prophets be aſſured, the ſermon goeth written as it was preached, but I giue you to vnderſtand, it goeth deſpirited and vnſauery.
               But comming to the purpoſe of that the Prophet ſaithe:

which is to wete: deſcendant in infernum viuentes. The doubt is, how it may agrée, that they may go downe to hell,A text of the Pſalmiſt expounded. being aliue, and being aliue, how they may bée in hell. Saying, as the Prophet doth ſaye, in an other Pſalme: Non mortui lnudabunt te Domine, nes omnes qui deſcendant in infernum. If thoſe that goe downe into hell, ſhall not there praiſe God, but blaſpheme him: to what end doth the prophet commaund vs to deſcēd? To ſay that Oreſtes entred into hell after the Nymphes, and that Aeneas deſcended thither to ſeke his father: and that the muſicion Orpheus did fetch from thence his wife, and the valiant Hercules did breake the gates and bind the Giant Aethna, and the dog Cerberus: Theſe may bée termed poetical fixions, and no truthes: for the vnfortunate that is once ouertaken with night in hell, for euermore there remaineth buried: and he that can once tymely riſe vp into Paradiſe, ſhall neuer more ſée night: for the elect ſhall there find day without night, and the dampned ſhall find night without day. Being ſuch as wée ought to be, wée may excuſe our going to hell: but after that wée ſhall be entred thither, it is not in vs to returne againe. For ther is nothing more conſonant to reaſon, thā that he which willingly came to the fault, againſt his wil do ſuffer paine. For the prophet to ſaye, deſcendant in infernum viuentes, in my iudgement I durſt ſay, that his meaning was to perſwade vs, and to warne vs, that wée deſcend into hell being aliue: that wée deſcend not after wée be dead. Now let vs deſcend into hell by contemplation, ſo that afterwards we deſcend not to eternall dampnation. Let vs deſcend thither by feare, that they carry vs not thither by rigour. Let vs deſcend thither with good will, that they carry vs not by force. Let vs deſcend by day, that they carry vs not at night. Let vs deſcend alone, bycauſe they ſhall not compell vs to goe with companye. Let vs deſcend in tyme, that wee maye returne, becauſe that afterwardes they ſhall not carry vs to leaue vs there. Finally, I do ſaye, that it is an holy thing to deſcend into hell, while we are aliue, to the ende wée deſcend not whē wée bée dead. They dayly deſcend into hell that thinke vpon

the gréeuous paines and formentes that be giuen there for ſinne. For there is no better ſalue to part vs frō our ſinnes, than alway to carry the paine in memorie. For out of doubt, the paine of the dampned dothe withdraw vs from vices. Goe who will on pilgrimage to Mōſerate, let them wander to get the Iubile of S. Iames: let him vow himſelfe to our Lady of Gadaliape: let him trauaile to S. Lazarus of Ciuill: let him ſend almes to the holy houſe: and let him offer his goods to S. Antony de Caſtro. But for my part I will no other ſtation, but that vnto hell. Hée vnderſtendeth not a little, nor occupieth himſelfe in little, nor goeth not a little, nor takes in hand that is little, neither goeth on pilgrimage a little, that euery daye giueth a hoylt or a turne into hell. Once a yeare did the Hebrewes viſit their temple. From fiue yeares to fiue, the Samnites did celebrate their Luſtros: from foure to foure yeares the Greekes did feaſt at their Olimpiades: from ſeuen yeares to ſeuen yeares, the Aegyptians did renew the Temple of Iris: from ten to ten yeares, the Romanes did ſend preſentes to the Oracle of Apollo: but he that is a faithful and a true Chriſtian, not from a time to ſo long a time, but euery houre and euery moment ſhall goe and come to hell. For of a perpetual paine, perpetual ought to be the memorie therof. In the pilgrimage to the holy Houſe, there is coſt, trauell, and alſo perill: but thoſe that euery day do viſite hell by contemplation: neyther haue coſt, or paſſe trauell, neyther runne in any kind of daunger: For it is a pilgrimage that you goe on drie foote, and is viſited with ſtanding ſtill. Oh bleſſed is the Soule that euery day by the ſtations of hell giues a turne, in which he doth behold, howe the proud be there brought downe: the enuious chaſtized: the gluttons pine with hunger: the furious grow milde: and the fleſhly conſumed. Therfore, let the liuing deſcend into hell. To go this holy iorney, neyther weakneſſe maye excuſe vs, eyther pouertie let vs: for it dothe neyther commaunde vs to weary our perſons, or that wée employe our goods, but that wée kéepe our money and there to beſtow our thoughtes. Therefore let the liuing deſcend into hell.

It doth not ſéeme to me, ye 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ath an vnméet painted ſtorie, yt hath hell painted in his oratorie: for they are much more that abſtain from ſin for fear of the pain, than for loue of ye glorie.
               This is that I iudge of that text of the Pſalmiſt, about the whiche (may it pleaſe the king of heauen) that euen as my pen hath written, my ſoule may alwayes ruminate: for as the Apoſtle ſayth, not the hearers, but the doers ſhall be iuſtified. 
               
                  Vale. Iterum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vale.
                  From Madrid 
                     the .viij. of Ianuarie .1524.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A Letter vnto ſir Diego of Caminia, wherein is treated, how enuy raigneth in all men.
               
               
                  MAgnificent and good Chriſtian gentleman, you write vnto me, that you are muche offended by many ſlaunderers that depraue your doings, & vnframe your attemptes: I ſaye, to maruaile thereat, you haue ſome occaſion, but to be offended, you haue no reaſon. For in the ende,It is leſſe euill to enuie vs, thā to pitie vs it is leſſe euill that your neybors enuy you, thā that your frends ſhuld pitie you The moſt auncient vice of this world is enuie, and that which ſhall not ende vntill the worlde be finiſhed, is enuie. Adam, and the ſerpent: Abell and Cain▪ Iacob and Eſau: Ioſeph and his brethren: Saul and Dauid: Iob and Sathan: Achitophell, and Hewſey: Haman and Mardocheus: did not perſecute each other for the goodes they did poſſeſſe: but for the enuie they had. Muche more is the enimitie that is ſowen vpon enuie: than that whiche is founded vpon iniurie. For the iniured man, dothe many times forget: but the enuious dothe neuer ceaſe to perſecute. More cruell and alſo more long were the warres betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians: than betwixte the Greekes and the Troians: For the Greekes did fight for the iniurie done vnto Helene: and the others, who ſhoulde obtayne the ſeygnorie of Europe.
                  
The mortall hatreds that fell betwixt thoſe two great Romain Princes,The cauſes of hatred of Iulius Ceſar, and Pompeius. 
                  Iulius Caeſar and Pompeius, was not for that the one had iniured or euill dealt with the other: but for that Pompeius had enuie at the great fortune Iulius Caeſar had in fyghting, and Caeſar had enuie at the great grace Pompeius had in gouernement. Twoo kinde of people were amongſt the Romaines: much famous and very glorious, which is to wit: the Dictators, that were very wiſe in gouernement, vnto whom they erected pictures liuely counterfet: and the Conſulles, whiche were ſkilfull in ordering of their batailles. And to theſe were giuen triumphes. In ſuche wiſe, that when Rome was in hir great proſperitie, no ſeruice was left vnrewarded, nor crime vnpuniſhed. Ther be few men in whom all vices 
                     〈◊〉
                   concorre, and muche leſſe be thoſe that want all faultes: and if there be any man that is good, he is enuied, and if he be euill, he is enuious. In ſuch wiſe, that with the vice of enuy, eyther we muſt perſecute, or of ſome bée perſecuted. Wée may ſaue our ſelues from the liar, by not ſpeaking with him: From the proud, by not comparing with him: Frō the ſlothfull, by not troubling him: from the lecherous, in not being conuerſant with him: from the glutton, by not eating with him: From the furious, by not chiding with him: from the nigard, by aſking him nothing. But from the enuious, it is not ſufficient to flie from him, much leſſe to flatter him. The vice of enuie is of ſuche effect, that there is no tower, which he doth not ſcale: nor wal, that he doth not ouerthowe: nor mine, that the doth not countermine: nor power, that he doth not reſiſt: neither man, againſt whom he doth not bend. If in one man alone might bée found the beautie of Abſolon, the ſtrength of Sampſon, the wiſedom of Salomon, the ſwiftnes of Azaell, the riches of Croeſſus, the liberalitie of Alexander, the valiantnes of Hector, the eloquence of Homer, the fortune of Iulius, the life of Auguſtus, the Iuſtice of Traianus, & the zeale of Cicero, let him hold it for certaine, that he ſhall not be ſo indued with graces, as he ſhall be perſecuted of the enuious: the wolfe followes the flock, the Rauens the carion, the Bee
                     •
                  
                  
the floure, the Flies, the Honie, men, the riches, and the enuious proſperitie: I would ſay, that naturally as wée haue cōpaſſion vpon the wretched, ſo haue we enuie at tthe proſperous. At the venim of Socrates, at the exile of Aeſchines,
                  Enuie bendeth his artillerie againſt proſperitie. at the hangyng of Creſſus, at the deſtruction of Darius, at the miſchaunce of Pyrrhus, at the end of Cyrus, at the infamie of Cateline, at the miſfortune of Sophoniſa, none euer bare enuie, but pitie. One of the thynges by the whiche I knowe howe far the malice of man doth extend, is: in that to the miſerable & ouerthrowne, there is none that will giue his hand to helpe them vp: and to the riche and thoſe that are in fauoure, there wantes not that armeth ſtumblyng blockes to make them fall. Let them perſwade themſelues whiche be riche of power, and priuate or in fauour, that their power and riches is not ſo great, as the malice and enuie of their neighboures is cruell. Sir I thought good to bring vnto youre memorye theſe olde things, to the end you ſhall not refuſe to pay youre pounde of waxe, to bée admitted into the brotherhode of enuie. I gyue you to vnderſtande, if you knowe not, that the brothers of the fraternitie of enuie,Behold the fraternitie of enuie. obſerue it as a principall office, to burie men quicke, and to rayſe vp dead men. This brotherhode of enuie is generous, for of them haue bin Chriſtians and infidels, abſent and preſent, riche and poore, and all thoſe that be dead, and ſuch as be now alyue. They haue in that fraternitie, greate liberties and priuiledges, that is to ſaye, they repaire not to Chappels, but to houſes: they ſpeake not euill of the poore, but of the riche: they doe not helpe, but hinder: they giue not, but they take: they praye not, but they curſſe: they abſtaine not from mans fleſhe, but from beaſts: they be not in doubte of their enimies, but of their frends: Finally they haue licence to murmur one of an other, and neuer to common of the truth. Although this brotherhood be painfull and tedious, yet is it a ſigne of great miſerie not to be regiſtred in the ſame: for the man that hath not in this world ſome enimies, it is a note that of fortune he is muche forgot. Plutarch in his Apophthegmes, ſpeaking of Themiſtocles,
                  
the renoumed Captaine of the Grekes ſayeth, that one demaunding why he was ſo ſad? made anſwere: The ſorow that I haue is, for that in .xxij. yeare ſince I was borne, I thinke not that I haue haue done any thyng worthie memorie, bicauſe I ſée no man in all Athens beareth me enuy. The firſt tyrant that was in Sicile, the auncients doe affirme, was Herion, the ſecond Celon, the thirde Dionyſius the Syracuſan, the fourth Dionyſius the yong man, the fifth Taxillo, the ſixte Brudanus, the ſeuenth Hermocrates: of the which ſeuen, to this day the Scicilians do as much complayne, as the Greekes doe boaſt themſelues of their ſeuen ſages. The laſte tyrant Hermocrates, approching neare to death is reported to haue ſaid vnto his ſonne: Sonne, the laſt words I ſay vnto thée, is, bée not enuious in condicion, but do ſuch deedes as therefore thou muſt be enuied. Surely, theſe wordes were not wordes of a Tyrant, but of a very wiſe man. For he commaunded by the ſame, that he ſhould be vertuous, and forbad him to be malicious. Sir I ſayd vnto you in the beginning of this letter, that although you had ſome occaſion, yet had you no iuſt reaſon too vexe your ſelfe, neither to deſiſt in weldoing. For of two euils the leſſe euill is, to conſent that they murmur of well doing, then to leaue to do well.
               Sir from hence there are few things to write of, but that, if you haue there too many euill tongues, héere we haue no want of blaſphemies, whiche do neither make exception of God, or pardon the King. Two times I haue moued the Cardinall Tortoſa in your buſines: & if I be not deceyued, as great is his forgetfulneſſe, as my diligence. We that be in thys Court, aduiſe our ſelues to ſéeke that whiche we may, when we cannot what we deſire. No more, but our Lorde be youre protector, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Valiodolid, 
                     the xxvj. of October .1520.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto ſir Iohn of Moncada, in whiche is declared what thing is Ire, and how good is patience.
               
               
                  EXpectable Gentleman and magnificent Knight, if it ſhall ſéeme vnto you that I aunſwer youre Letters with ſlackneſſe, impute the fault to Palome your ſeruant which halteth, and the horſe whereon hée rideth is lame, the way long, the winter hard: and I alſo am always in buſineſſe, although from the ſame I haue gathered ſmall profit: and as I ſuſpect, if this your ſeruant haue made any tarriance vppon the way in comming hither, or hath made ſmall haſt in returning thither, it hath procéeded of a certayne combat with loue that he hapned to encounter by the way. Wherein, you may then well thinke how much rather he would accompliſhe the loue that he beares in his breſt, than with your letters that he carieth in his boſome. If you will credit me, to men inamored you ſhall neuer commend your buſines: For his office is not to be occupied in other affayres, but in writing letters, watching at corners, playing on gitterns, climing of walles, and vewing of windowes. As concerning that which you write vnto me in youre letter, I ſhall aunſwer you more briefly than your deſire, and more largely than I may. Conſidering how I goe to the Inquiſition to reforme, and to the Court too preach: and euery day in Caeſars Chronicles to write. My buſines is ouermuch, and my time too little. By the holy God I do ſweare, that as many courtiers which be idle in this court, I do more enuie the time they looſe, than the money they poſſeſſe. But comming to the purpoſe,Courtiers looſe time. I do ſweare by the law of a friend, I haue bene as muche gréeued for your greate miſchance and miſfortune, as if it had bin myne owne cauſe. For as Chilo the Philoſopher ſaid: the miſchances of a friend we muſt not onely remedy them, but alſo bewayle them. Ageſiſaus the Greek being demanded for what cauſe he did more lament the heauineſſe of his frends, than the death of his children,

made anſwere: I do not bewayle the want of my wife, the loſſe of my goodes, or the death of my children: for al theſe are partes of my ſelfe: but I bewayle the death of my frend, which is an other my ſelfe. Sir, I ſaye thus muche, ſince I may not be there preſent to lamente with you, neither doe I here finde my ſelfe of power ſufficient to remedie your caſe, I will write ſome letter to comforte you. For ſometimes the pen vſeth no leſſe pitie with the friende, than the launce doth crueltie with the enimie, to perſuade that you ſhoulde not féele, that which reaſon would you ſhoulde ſo muche féele: it ſhuld be iuſt occaſion for me to be worthily noted with want of due conſideration, and you accuſed to be inſenſible. That which I dare ſpeak in this matter is, that you conceyue therof as a man, and diſſemble the ſame as aduiſed and diſcrete. The iniuries that touche our honour, done by ſuche of whom we may not be reuenged, the moſt ſounde counſell is, to let it fal, ſince with due vengeance it may not be quited. If in theſe preſent gréeues you wil take the order of a Chriſtian, & leaue the way of a worldly knight, you ſhall fixe your eyes (not on him that doth perſecute you) but in God that doth permit the ſame: before whō you ſhal find your ſelf ſo faultie, that that is little whiche you ſuffer, in reſpect of that ye deſerue to ſuffer. Moreouer,Iniuries don by the almightie are to bee diſſembled. ye ought to thinke, that tribulations whiche God permitteth, be not to loſe vs, but to proue vs. For in the books of God they ſet downe no man as quited, but he that is apte for trauell: and amongſt thoſe of the worlde, they giue wages to none but vnto him that is giuen to wantonneſſe.
               Sir you write vnto me that I certifie you what thing is anger, and the definition therof. To ſée if you may forget the diſpite of him that hath done you ſo cruel an outrage to know what thing is Ire, and to cut of the furious curſe of his rage. Sir, it ſemes to me no euill counſell (the very troth being knowen) many times it is more ſecuritie for him that is iniuried to diſſemble the iniurie, than to reuenge it.
               
                  Ariſtides ſaieth, that ire is no other thing, but an inflaming of the bloud: and an alteration of the hart. Poſsidonius
                  
ſayth, that ire is no other thing, but a ſhort fooliſhnes. Cicero ſaith, that which the Latins do cal ire, the Grekes do name deſire of vengeance. Aeſchines ſayth, that ire was cauſed of the fume of the gall, and of the heate of the heart.The trefull of al men and at all times abhorred. 
                  Macrobius ſaith there is muche difference betwixte ire and teſtineſſe: bicauſe ire groweth of an occaſion, and teſtineſſe of euyll condition. The diuine Plato ſayeth, that the faulte is not in anger, but in hym that giues occaſion. Laertius ſayth, when the chaſtiſement excéedes the fault, then is it vengeance, and not zeale: But when the fault doth excéede the chaſtiſemente, it is zeale and no vengeance. Plutarche ſaith, that the priuiledges of ire, are not to beléeue our friends, to be raſh in attempts, to haue the chéekes inflamed, to vſe quickneſſe with ye handes, to haue an vnbridled toung, at euery word to vſe ouerthwartneſſe, to be fumiſh for ſmall cauſes, and to admitte no reaſon. Solon Solonio being demāded whom we cal properly irous, anſwered, he that little eſtéemeth to loſe his friendes, and maketh no account to recouer enimies. After ſo manie and ſo graue Philoſophers, that which I dare ſay is, that the vice of ire is lightly written, eaſy to perſuade, pleaſaunt to preach, ready to counſell, and very difficile to refrayne. Of any vice wée may ſpeake euill, but of the vice of anger we may ſay much, and very much euil. For ire doth not only tranſform vs into fooles, but alſo maketh vs of al men to be abhorred. To temper ire is ſufficientely vertuous: but vtterly to expell it, is a thing more thā ſure. For all things that are euill of themſelues, and of condition hurtfull, are more eaſily reſiſted than throwne away. In the beginnings, many thinges be in oure owne handes, to admit or to ſend them away: but after they haue taken power ouer vs (if by chaunce reaſon riſe againſt them) they ſay they will not depart, ſince they be in poſſeſſion. Ire hath ſo euil a condition, that of one only tyme that we yéelde him our will, he afterwards maketh our will vnto all the hée liketh.
               In the Magiſtrates that gouerne the common wealthe,In him that gouerneth, ire is perilious. we condemne not the good or euill correction they vſe: but the

greate furie they ſhewe in the ſame. For if they be bounde to chaſtiſe the offences, they haue not licence to ſhew themſelues paſſioned. Thoſe that offend, it is a thing very iuſt yt they remaine not vnpuniſhed: but this puniſhment muſt not be ſuche, that it appeare that they take ſome great vengeance: for be a man neuer ſo brute, without compariſon he dothe more féele the hate that they ſhewe, than the chaſtiſements which they giue. The whip, the ſtaffe, the ſworde, & the puniſhment that is giuen to the fleſhe, although it be gréeuous, yet it ſoon paſſeth: but the iniurious worde the heart neuer forgetteth. For a man to be in power and authoritie, and to refraine his anger, it is not an humaine vertue, but heroicall and diuine. For in this world, there is not a more high or excellent kind of triumph, than a man to triumph ouer his owne heart. Socrates the Philoſopher,A notable example to re
                     
                        •
                     traine ire. holding his dagger in his hād to ſtrike one of his ſeruantes (the ſame alreadie lifted vp) ſayde: remēbring my ſelf that I am a philoſopher, & that at this preſent I am angrie, I wil not giue thée thy deſerued chaſtiſemente. O example for certayne worthie to bée noted, and muche more to be imbraced and followed. Of whiche wée may gather, that duryng the tyme that ire hathe vs in poſſeſſion, we ought not to dare to ſpeake, and muche leſſe anye man to chaſtiſe.
               
                  Licurgus the Philoſopher, commaunded thoſe that gouerned his common wealth:An example of the heathen to be noted and learned. that all euill and diſhoneſt things they ſhoulde condemne and chaſtiſe, but yet by no means, abhorre the malefactor, ſaying that there could not be amongſt the people, a more gréeuous plague than a iudge that woulde make hymſelfe dronke with furie. There be few that follow this counſell, and verie manie that do the contrarie: for now a days there is none that is angred with the offence, but with the offender. For my part (and alſo for thoſe that ſhall) it is a great trauayle to trafike or deale with furious, impacient, and men of euill ſuffering: For that they are importable to ſerue, and of conuerſation very perillous. Since I haue ſaid what thing is ire, and the hurtes that are doone by ire: nowe

let vs ſay, what remedies may be giuen againſt ire. For my meaning is not to teache you to be angrye, but to bée paciente. I dare auouche, that it is a great remedie agaynſt ire, when a man is angred to refrayne the tongue, and to deferre vengeaunce vntill an other tyme. For that many tymes a man doth ſay and promiſe béeing in choler, thinges the whiche afterwardes he woulde not ſhoulde haue once paſſed hys thoughtes. With the yrefull we muſt not be importunate to entreate a pardon, no not from the foote to the hand, but only to deſire that vengeance be deferred. For during furie, there is no accompte to bée made that the iniuried will pardon, excepte he bée quieted with the man that is furious and in choler: for any one to ſéeke to bring him to agreement, or to iuſtice, eyther it is lacke of witte, or diligence more than néedeth. For the ire that is muche inflamed, and the heart that is kindled with furye, neyther doth admit conſolation, or is ouercome with reaſon. I doe aduiſe and readuiſe the man that preſumes to be wiſe, that he take not in hand to contend with him that is inflamed with yre. For if he faile to follow counſell herein, when he ſcapeth beſt, he ſhal eyther haue his honour reuiled, or his head broken. Although a man be a frēd vnto him that is offended, he doth him more profite to let him alone, than to ſpeake vnto him, or help him. For at ye inſtant he hath more néede of a bit to bridle him, than a ſpur to quicken hym. With the man that is in a rage, it is more néede to vſe ſkill than to deale by force. For although he were angred at the ſodain, the pacifying of him muſt be at leiſure. Plutarch in the bookes of his cōmon wealth doth counſell the Emperoure Traiane that hée bée paciente in his trauayles, mylde in his affayres, and of muche ſuffering amongeſt the furious: affirming and ſwearing, that many mo thyngs bée cured by tyme, than framed and agréed by reaſon. Betwixt noble perſonages wée haue ſéene greate quarelles, whiche paſſions and furies mighte not be ſtayed by entreataunce of friends, threatning of enemies, giftes of money, neyther yet with wearineſſe of trauayles: And after that tyme hath had

his courſe (and calling them to remembrance) haue agréed amongſt themſelues, without the requeſt of any friende to talke therin. Finally, I ſay, that when a friende doth ſée the choler of his friende inflamed, if hée will doe him good, lette hym caſte on water with temperaunce to coole hym, and not wood wyth furie to burne him. I (ſir Iohn) haue enlarged this Letter muche more than I thoughte, and alſo more than I deſyred, but that youre excéedyng payne and ſorrowes haue made my penne diſcourteous, to ſuffer, vſe ſilence, and diſſemble, and let the tyme paſſe, and ſomewhat forget the matter. For if I bée not deceyued, you ſhall ſée, the fire that they made at your gates, burne in their entrayles. Salomon the Hebrew ſayde, that the wiſe man hathe his tongue in his hearte: and he that is a foole and furious, hath his heart in his tongue. Agis the Greeke ſayd, that the fooliſh man is grieued with that whiche he doth ſuffer, and boaſtes himſelfe of that whiche he hath ſpoken. And the wyſe is gréeued with that whiche he hath ſpoken, and boaſteth himſelfe of that he doth ſuffer. Nowe or neuer it is néedfull, that you profyte your ſelfe of your ſcience and wiſedome: For it is a ſpice of no ſmall fooliſhneſſe, to knowe to cure others, and not to remedie your ſelfe. I am not forgetful, that when my ſiſter the Lady Francis died in Mexia hir towre, you did write mée ſo many and ſo good thinges, that they were ſufficient to lyghten me of the payne, althoughe not altogether of the ſorrowe. And ſir, I ſaye it for this cauſe, that it ſhall bée greately to youre owne purpoſe, to take ſome grapes of the ſame vine.
               As concerning the reſte, I haue no more to write vnto you, but that the credite whiche youre ſeruaunte broughte with youre letter, in that hée ſhoulde ſay vnto mée, the ſelfe ſame credite, my letter doth giue him, in that whiche he ſhal anſwere.
               
                  From Toledo 
                     the .vj. of Aprill. 1523.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto Sir Ierome Vique, in whiche is treated, how great libertie is much hurtfull.
               
               
                  RIght magnificent and Caeſars Embaſſadour, I being in Granado the xx. of Iuly, receiued a letter from your worſhip. And conſidering it came ſo farre as it is from Valentia to Granado, he hath made good ſpéed vppon the waye, ſince he departed from thence the Saterday and came hither the Monday. Comming as you come from ſo ſtraunge a coūtrey as is Rome, and hauing paſſed ſo daungerous a Sea as is the gulfe of Narbona, I will not demaund if you came ſafe: But giue God thankes for that you are come aliue. I wiſhe (if it pleaſe the Lord) that you come from Italy ſo ſound in bodie and ſo perfect in ſoule, as when you parted from Spaine: for in new countreyes alwaies there is learned new faſhions.
               The good Licurgus did commaund the Lacedemonians, that neyther out of the kingdome they ſhould goe to traffike, or ſuffer ſtraungers to enter their countrey, ſaying: That if kingdomes grow rich by trading with ſtraūgers, they turne poore of their proper vertues. Speaking the trueth and alſo with libertie, I haue ſéene fewe come from Italie; that came not abſolute and alſo diſſolute: and this, not becauſe the land is not conſecrat with ſaints, but for that it is now inhabited with ſinners. The properties of the belles, are to call men to come to ſeruice, & neuer enter into the church them ſelues: and in my iudgement, ſuch is the condition of Italie, where there be great Sanctuaries that prouoke vnto prayer, and the people thereof hath no deuotion. Many doe ſay that all the weale of Italie conſiſteth in libertie. I ſay that all their hurt riſeth by want of ſubiection: becauſe, for men to doe all that they will, they come to doe that, whiche they ought not. If Trogus Pompeius do not deceiue vs, the Romanes giuing libertie

to the Bactrians for that they had ſuccoured the Conſull Rufus in the Spartian warres,For the doubt of vice, libertie refuſed. they refuſed it, ſaying, that, that day they ſhould be made frée, they ſhould commit whereby deſeruedly to be ſlaues. Speaking the trueth, there be no common wealthes more loſt than thoſe where the people be moſt at libertie? For the condition of libertie is, to be of many deſired and of fewe well employed: where there is no ſubiection, there is no King: wher there is no King, there is no law: where there is no lawe, there is no Iuſtice: where is no Iuſtice, there is no peace: where there is no peace, there is continuall warre: and where there is warre, it is impoſſible that the common wealthe maye long endure. Neuer might the mighty Rome bée brought vnder by the Greeks, the Carthaginians, the French, the Hunnes, the Epirotes, the Sabines, the Samnites, and Hetrurians: but finally it came to ruine and was loſt, by the pryde they had in commaunding, and the much libertie in ſinning. The diuine Plato did ſay many times to the Athenians when hee ſawe them goe ſo at large: take heed you Athenians to your ſelues, & looſe not by your viciouſnes, that which you haue wonne by your valiauntnes. For I giue you to vnderſtand, that libertie aſketh no leſſe wiſdom to conſerue it, than valiauntnes to obtain it. Experiēce teacheth daylie, how in a frée cōmon wealth, they do more hurtes, they ſpeak more blaſphemies, they cōmit more offences, they rayſe more ſcandales, more good be defamed, and more theft attempted, onely of two yongmen at libertie, than of two hundred that be ſubiect. If curiouſly we do behold, of a troth we find that they doe not drowne in welles, whip, baniſhe, cut the throtes, hang, cut of eares, nor put in priſon, but loſt men that ſpends their time in vanities, and employ their libertie in vices.
               In the life of man ther is not the like riches to libertie, but iointly therewith, there is nothing more perillous than ſhée is, if they know not to meaſure hir and vſe hir according to reaſon: libertie ought to bée wonne, procured, bought, ſuccoured and defended:Libertie craueth wiſdome. but iointly with this, I do warne, giue counſell, and alſo aduiſe him that ſhall haue hir, that hée vſe

hir (not when the appetite ſhall require) but when reaſon ſhall giue licence. For otherwiſe, thinking that he had libertie for all his life, he ſhal not enioye hier a month. The libertie of Phalaris did trouble the Greekes: that of Roboam loſt the Hebrewes: that of Cateline did offend the Romanes: that of Iugurtha defamed the Carthaginians: that of Dionyſius decayd the Scicilians: and in the end, the common wealths had an end of their trauailes, and they of their liues and tyrānies. Many men there be that leaue to doe euill, bycauſe they will not: but much more are they that ceaſe, bycauſe they cannot. Many there be that doe abſtaine for conſcience, and many more for ſhame: many do refraine for loue, but many more for feare: many liue with a deſire to be good, & many more for feare to be diſhonored. But yet for fear, or for loue, or for cōſcience, or elſe for ſhame: alwaies we muſt ſtay our ſelues by the truth, & cut of the ſway of libertie. For if we giue the bridle to ſenſualitie, & doe not ſhut the doore to libertie, we ſhal haue what to think vpon by daye, and alſo wherefore to wéepe by night.
               Sir, I thought good to bring this to your memorie, to the ende, that ſince you come from Rome, you be not ouer carefull to boaſt your ſelfe of the cuſtomes thereof. For you ſhall vnderſtand (if ye know not) that the faſhions of Italie are more pleaſaunt to be recounted, than ſure to be followed. If you call to remembraūce the generoſitie of Rome, the libertie of the neighbours, the varietie of the people, the galantnes of the women, the plēty of victualles, the goodnes of the wines, the mirth and ioye at their feaſtes, & the magnificēcy of their Pallaces: you haue therewith to remember, yt there where goods be ſpent, the cōſcience is charged, and alſo many times yt ſoule is loſt. The Romiſh people in Rome many of them be good, but the ſtraunge people yt are ſtayed in Italie, for ye more part are euill, for they be but very few that goe thyther with deuotion, but they be infinite that be loſt in wandring after their fleſhly luſtes. Rome is not now in ye power of the Chriſtians, as it was in the time of the heathen, for then being the mother of all vertues, ſhe is now turned to ye ſchole of al vices.
               
                  Leauing this aparte, what ſhall we ſay of a poore prieſt that goeth to Rome through Spaine, Fraunce, and Lumbardy, and before hée can get ſentence of his benefice, he cōmittes a thouſand vices, ſpendes his money, and doth a thouſand wicked déedes? I ſay for myne own part, that I was at Rome, I ſawe Rome, I viſited Rome, and did behold Rome: in which I ſawe many things that gaue deuotion, & other things that brought me to admiration. Oh how much, and how much is betwixt the cuſtomes of Italie, and the law of a pure chriſtian?
               
                  Twelue cōdiciōs of Rome, variyng from Chriſtes law.1 For in the one they ſaye, that ye maye doe all that you will, and in the other, nothing but what you ought to do.
               2 In the one, that you be a comfort to all men, and in the other, that you ſhall denie to procure to be ſaued.
               3 In the one, that you haue much conſcience, and in the other, that you make no accompt of ſhame.
               4 In the one, that you trauell to be a good Chriſtian, and in the other, that you care to be very rich.
               5 In the one, that you liue cōformable vnto vertue, in the other, that you care not but to enioye libertie.
               6 In the one, that for any thing you ſhal not ſpeake a lye, in ye other, yt in caſe of intereſt, you make no accōpte of truth.
               7 In the one, that you liue onely with your own, and in the other, that alſo you take profit of other mennes.
               8 In the one, that alwaies you remember to dye, & in the other, that for nothing you leaue to lead an ill life.
               9 In the one, that alwaies you occupie your ſelf in knowledge, & in the other, yt you giue your ſelf to be of much power.
               10 In the one, that you impart of that you haue with the poore and friends, and in the other, that alwaies you keepe for deare yeares.
               11 In the one, that you vſe much ſilence, and in the other, that you preſume to be very eloquent.
               12 In the one, that you beléeue onely in Chriſt, and in the other, that you procure to haue money. If you my Lord Embaſſador, with theſe xy. conditions wilbe a Romane, much good may it do you. For vpon the day of accoumpt, you would

rather haue bin a laborer in Spaine, than an Embaſſadour at Rome. No more, but that our Lord be your protector, and to you and to me he giue good endings.
               
                  From Granado, 
                     in the yeare 1525. the daye and moneth aforeſaid.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the ſaid Sir Ierome Vique, in whiche is declared an Epitaph of Rome.
                  
               
               
                  RIght magnificent Embaſſadour to Caeſar: by your letter that I haue receiued, I was certified yt to you was deliuered an other of mine,A condicion at be in braced. wherein I haue vſed no curious care: For vnder your good condicion, there is no place for any thing to be diſprayſed, much leſſe to be condemned. Moſen Rubine aduertiſed me, that by ſléeping in an ayry place, you haue bin very reumatike, which I certainly béeleue hath procéeded of the great heate of the moneth of Auguſt, but by my aduiſe you ſhall not vſe it, neither others ſo giue counſell: for that it is leſſe euill in ſommer to ſweate than to cough.
               You write, and alſo ſend vnto me certaine Gothicke letters, that you haue foūd written in an aunciēt place in Rome, whiche you can neither reade, or they in Italy can declare.
               Sir I haue very well ſéene, conſidered, and alſo reconſidered them: and to him that is not acquainted with this Romiſh cyphringes they ſéeme illegible, and not intelligible, and that to vnderſtand and read them well, it were neceſſary that the men that bée a liue ſhoulde deuine, or thoſe that wrote them ſhoulde riſe from death to life. But to expound theſe letters, no dead man ſhall bée rayſed, either am I a ſoothſayer or diuine. I haue tyred my wittes, and called to remembrance, I haue ouerturned my Bookes, and alſo haue ouerloked meruailous and many hiſtories, to ſee and to know who it was that did write them, and wherefore they were written: and in the ende, as there is nothing that one man doth, that another can not do, or that one man knoweth, and an other

knoweth not, your good luck wold, and my great diligence, that I met with that whiche you deſired, and I ſought for. And for that it ſhall not ſéeme that I ſpeake without Booke, in few wordes I will recite the hiſtory.
               In the times of Octauius Auguſtus the Emperour, there was in Rome a Romane Knight named Titus Annius (verely a man) of great experience in cauſes of warre, and right wiſe in the gouernment of the common wealthe. There was in Rome an office that was called Tribunus Scelerum, & this had the charge of all criminall cauſes, whiche is to wit, to hang, to whip, to baniſh, to cut throates, and to drowne in wels: in ſuch maner, that the Cenſor did iudge the Ciuill, and the Tribune the Criminall. This office amongſt the Romanes was of great preheminence, and of no leſſe confidence, they neuer incommended the ſame but to a man of noble bloud, auncient in yeares, learned in the lawes, in life honeſt, and in iuſtice very moderate: for that all theſe condicions did concurre in Titus Annius, hée was by the Emperour Auguſtus in the office of Tribune named, by the Senate confirmed, and of the people allowed. Titus Annius liued and was reſident in this office xxv. yeres, in all whiche time hée neuer ſpake to man any iniurious word, either did any iniuſtice. In remuneration of his trauell,A rewarde after death. and in reward of his bountie, they gaue him for priuilege that hée ſhoulde bée buried within the walles of Rome, and that hée ſhould bury by him ſelfe ſome money, and that in that ſepulcher there ſhoulde not any other bée buried. For a man to bée buried in Rome, was amongſt the Romanes a great preheminence, the one was bycauſe the prieſts did conſecrate the ſepulcher, and the other for that malefactors to flie vnto ſepulchers, were more worth than the temples. But now theſe letters woulde ſaye, that Titus Annius (Iudge of the faultie) by him in his ſacred ſepulcher did hide certaine money, whiche is to wit, ten foote off, and that in the ſame ſepulcher the Senate doth commaund, that none of his heyres be buried. This Titus Annius when hée died left his wife aliue that was named Cornelia, whiche in the ſepulcher of hir huſband

did ſet this Epitaphe. The aucthors of this hiſtory are Vulpicius, Valerius, Trebellius. And bycauſe the declaration of the hiſtory ſhall appeare more cleare, let vs ſet the expoſition ouer euery letter, and theſe be the letters.
               
                  Titus. Annius. Tribunus. Scelerum. Sacro.
                  A darke Epitaph expounded.
               
               
                  T. A. T. Sce. S.
               
               
                  Suo. Sepulcro. Pecuniam. Condidit. Non.
               
               
                  S. S. P. Con. N.
               
               
                  Longe. Pedes. Decem. Hoc. Monumentum.
               
               
                  Lon. P. X. H. M.
               
               
                  Heres. Non. Sequitur. Iure. Senatus.
               
               
                  H. N. S. I. S.
               
               
                  Cornelia. Dulciſsima. Eius. Coniux. Poſuit.
               
               
                  Cor. D. E. Con. P.
               
               Behold here my Lord Embaſſador your letters expounded, and not dreamed, and in my iudgement this that we haue ſaid they would ſay, and if you be not ſatiſfied with this interpretation, let the dead expound them that did write them, or thoſe bée whiche aline that gaue them. No more but that our Lord be your protector, and giue vs grace that we ende in his ſeruice.
               
                  From Toledo 
                     the third of April, 1526.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Biſhop of Badaios, in whiche there is declared the auncient lawes of Badaios.
                  
               
               
                  RIght magnificent and Caeſars Precor, I receaued a letter from your Lordſhippe, with the whiche I did much reioyce my ſelfe before I did read it, and after that I had reade it, I remained no leſſe offended: not for that whiche you had written vnto me, but for that you commaunded me, and alſo demaunded of me. (If Plutarch do not deceaue vs,) into the chamber of Dioniſius the Siracuſan none did enter: in the librarye of Lucullus no man ſate

down: Marcus Aurelius with the key of his ſtudy, (no not with his Fauſtine) did vſe any truſt: and of a troth they had great reaſon: bycauſe there be things of ſuch qualitie, that not only they ought not to be dealt withall, neither yet to be looked vppon. Aeſchines the Philoſopher ſaid, that for very great frendſhip that might be betwixt one and other, he ought not to ſhew him all thinges in his houſe,He is depriued of libertie, that diſcouereth a ſecret. nor to communicate with him all that he thinkes in his hart: ſaying that a man is no more himſelfe, than that he holdeth ſecret in himſelfe. It is long ſince I commended vnto my memorye, that ſentence of the diuine Plato, wher it is ſaid: that vnto whom we diſcouer our ſecret, wée giue our libertie. I ſay this vnto your Lordſhip, for that if I had not conſented that your Secretarie ſhoulde enter my ſtudie, neither had hée bin a babler, or your Lordſhip importunate. Your honor ſaith that he ſaid, he had ſéene in my library a banke of olde bookes, whereof ſome were Gothike, Latin, Greeke, Calde, and Arabic, and that he forgat not to ſteale one, which made much for your purpoſe. In that he ſaid vnto you, he ſaid very troth: and in that he did, he did me much diſpleaſure, for that amongſt the learned, ieſtes do extend euen to the ſpeaking of wordes: but not to the ſtealing of bookes.
               As I my Lord haue no other goodes to lay vp, nor other paſtimes wherewith to recreat me, but bookes that I haue procured, and alſo ſought in diuers kingdomes: beeleue me one thing, whiche is, that to take my bookes, is as much as to pull out my eyes. Of my naturall condiciou, I was euer an enemie to new opinions, and a great frend of olde bookes: for if Salomon ſay, Quòd in antiquis est ſapientia, for my part I do not beleue, that the wiſedonie lyeth in horeheades, but in olde bookes. The good king ſir Alonſo that toke Naples, did vſe to ſay that all was but traſh, except drie wood to burn, an olde horſe to ride, olde wine to drinke, olde frendes to bée conuerſant, and olde bookes to reade in. Olde bookes haue great aduantage of the newe, whiche is to wit, that they ſpeake the trueth, they haue grauitie, and do ſhew authoritie: of whiche

it followeth, that we maye reade them without ſcruple, and alledge them without ſhame.
               The caſe is this, that in the yeare 1523. I paſſing thorough the Towne of Safra, came to a Booke binders ſhop, whiche was tearing out leaues of an olde parchement booke to couer another new booke, and knowing that the booke was better to reade in, than to make couerings, I gaue him for the ſame viij. Rialles of plate, & alſo would haue giuen him viij. Ducates. Now Sir, you ſhal vnderſtand, that the booke was of the lawes of Badaios, that king Allonſo the xj. made, a Prince that was very valiant, and not a little wiſe. This is the booke that your Secretarie did ſteale from me, whiche he carried vnto you, and it hath pleaſed me muche that you haue ſéene it, and haue not vnderſtood it: in ſuche wiſe, that if you render it, it is not becauſe ye haue deſire to make reſtitution, but for that you will I make expoſition thereof.
               
                  The reſt of this letter is the expoſition of certaine olde lawes, wherein there ariſeth this maruell, that the Caſtilian ſpeeche (but in a few hundreth yeares) is ſo altered, and the prices of their things ſo chaunged, that not only the common people, but alſo a Biſhop of the ſame countrie; craued an interpretor of the ſayd lawes.
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Syr Iohn Palamos, wherein is declared whiche was Saians horſe, and the Gold of Tholoſe.
                  
               
               
                  RIght noble Knight, I haue receyued your letter and your complaint therein, wherevnto anſwering, I ſay, that I haue bin much buſied in certaine affaires whiche Caeſar hath commaunded, (during the expedition whereof) I haue had no time to pray my houres, muche leſſe to aunſwere your letters miſſiue. It came vnto Caeſars vnderſtanding, that the Duke of Sogorbe, and the Monkes of the vale of Paradiſe did beare each other ill will, and did vſe euill neighbourhod: for whiche cauſe hée commaunded,

that I ſhoulde viſite them, and trauaile to bring them agréed: whiche I did of very good will, although not without great difficultie. In fourtie dayes that I was there, I neither wente to walke, either did occupie my ſelfe in preaching, eyther giue my ſelfe to ſtudie: but all my exerciſe was to ſée priuiledges, to viſit boundes, to heare quarelles, and to appeaſe iniuries. And for that theſe affaires were of importance, and betwixt perſonages of ſo great authoritie: I paſſed immeaſurable trauel before I could make them frendes, and remoue their griefes. I haue ſaid all this, to the ende you ſhoulde holde me the rather excuſed, for not aunſwering ſo ſoone vnto your letter: and for not accompliſhing that whiche I promiſed you in the grades of Valentia: but the caſe was this. The Prince of Borbon paſſing by Valentia, wée ſaw in a certaine cloth of his tapiſtrie a horſe, whiche had at his féete Knightes throwen downe and dead. And in the breſt of the horſe was a writing in whiche was ſayde, Equus Seianus: as one would ſaye, this is Saians horſe. Marueylouſlye did they of the Citie beholde this cloth, and no man vnderſtode what the blaſon of that horſe might ſignifie: ſome ſaide it was the hiſtorie of Ioſue, ſome of Iudas Machabeus, ſome of Hector, ſome of Alexander, otherſome of Cirrudias. After that maner euery man did ſpeake as hée did geſſe, but no man as hée did know for troth. There was in that troupe a gentlemā which ſaid, that that was king Don Martin his horſe which won Valentia of the Mores, & that they were fyue Kings of the Mores that hée killed in one daye: and his horſe was named Seian, for that he was of Sogorbe.
                  It ſtaineth a Gentleman to tell a lye. And bycauſe there was no man that did knowe the ſecret of that hiſtory but I (that held my peace) he did ſo ſweare and forſweare, and alſo affirme it ſo true, as if he had recompted a ſtorie of the Bible. Cōſidering he was a Knight, in bloud. Generouſe, of goods rich, & of yeares auncient, (although in his wordes very lying) I would not there declare preſently the miſterye of that horſe, bycauſe others ſhould not haue wherewith to deride him, or the poore gentleman wherfore to bée diſpleaſed. Mimus Publianus, the

Philoſopher ſaid, that with old mē that be vaine bablers and ianglers, we ought to haue more reſpect to their hore heares that they poſſeſſe, than to the wordes they ſpeake.
               The hiſtory of Saians horſe is written by very graue authors, whiche is to wit: Cayus Baſsianus, Iulius Modeſtus, and Aulus Gelius in the third Booke that hée made de noctibus Atticis. And I doe aledge theſe authors, for that no man ſhall thinke it is a compound fable, but that of a troth it did paſſe, as here wée ſhall recount the hiſtorie, reſiting it from the foundation.
               The great Hercules the Thebane, after that hée had ſlaine Diomedes in Thracia, brought with him to Greece, a certaine race of horſes yt 
                  Diomedes had bred, which of their own proper nature were in colour fayre, of ſtature large, in condicions gentle, and in battell couragious. Of the race of theſe there was bred an horſe in the prouince of Argoſe, whoſe proportiō was, a high creſt, hear to the groūd, ſlit noſtrelles, ſure houed, well membred, broade buttocks, a long tayle, great eyes, a ſoft ſkinne, colour baye, and aboue all, of courage maruellous fierce. This horſe being yet but a colt, they came from Aſia, from Paleſtina, from Thebes, from Pentapolis, and from all Greece, by the meane of his fame: ſome to ſée him, others to buy him, and other ſome to praiſe him and ſet him a ſale to the people: for there was no perſon that deſired not to ſée him, and much more to haue him. And in this world, as there is not a thing ſo perfit, in whiche there is not ſome imperfection, the deſtiny of this horſe was ſo accurſed: for all they that bred him, bought him, and did ride him, died miſerable and infamed. And for that it ſhall not ſéeme that wée ſpeake at large, and doe recounte an hiſtorie very ſuſpicious: briefly we will touche who were they that bought this horſe and did poſſeſſe him, and alſo the great miſfortunes that came vnto them by the ſame.
               In the yeare CCCCxiij. from the foundation of Rome, Quintus Cincinatus the Dictator being dead, the Romanes did ſende a Romane Conſull into Grecia that was named Cneius

Saianus, a man in bloud holden famous, and for gouernement in the common wealth very wiſe. When the Conſull Cneius Saianus went into Greece, that horſe was a Colt of thirtie monethes, the which he cheapened, bought, and brake, and was the firſt that did ryde him. And for that this Cneius Saianus being in Rome, did follow the partialitie of Octauius Auguſtus: a yeare after hée went into Greece, and not ſix moneths after hée had bought that horſe, Marcus Antonius commaunded his head to be cut off, and alſo his body to be vnburied. This maye it appeare, that Cneius Saianus was the firſt that bought and brake this horſe, and alſo did experiment by death his vn happy deſtenie. They named him then, (and from thence forwarde,) Saianus horſe. Cneius Saianus being beheadded, there ſuccéeded him in the office of Conſulſhip, a certayne Romaine named Dolabella: whiche immediatly being Conſull, did buy that horſe for an hundreth thouſand Seſtercios: and ſurely if hée had knowen the euill that hée bought vnto his houſe (I think) hée would haue giuen an other hundreth thouſand not to haue bought him. Within a yeare after the Conſull Dolabella had bought that horſe, there aroſe in the Citie of Epirus (were hée was reſident) a popular ſedition, in whiche the ſorowfull Dolabella was ſlaine, and alſo drawen throughe the ſtreates. The Conſull Dolabella being dead, another Conſull was deſirous to buy that horſe, whoſe name was Caius Caſsius, a manne whome Plutarch writeth to haue borne great office in Rome, and to haue done great déedes in Africa. Not two yeares after, the Cōſul Caſsius had bought that vnhappy horſe, they gaue him ſuche herbes at his dinner, that within an howre, hée, his wife and children loſt their liues, not hauing time to ſpeake one word. The Conſull Caius Caſsius being dead, the famous Romane Marcus Antonius deſired to buy that horſe: and hée was ſo pleaſed with the forme and ſhape thereof (when they brought him) that hée gaue as great reward to the bringer, as hée paid vnto him that ſolde the ſame: not twoo monethes after that Marcus Antonius had bought this horſe, a batell was fought

at Sea betwixt him and his enemy Octauius Auguſtus: In whiche bataill his onely beloued Cleopatra would be preſent, to hir greate infamie, and greater loſſe of him ſelfe. What vnfortunate ende Marcus Antonius had, and what an haſtye death his Cleopatra did ſuffer, is notorious to all men that haue reade Plutarch. Marcus Antonius being dead, yet ſtill that vnfortunate horſe remained aliue, whiche came to the handes of a Knight of Aſia, who was named Nigidius, and for that the horſe (as now) was ſomewhat olde, at that preſent he bought him good cheape, although afterwards he coſt him very deare: for within one yeare after he bought him, at the paſſage of the Riuer Marathon, the horſe ſtumbled and fell in ſuche wiſe, that both maſter and horſe were drowned, and were neuer more ſeene.
               Theſe are the fiue Knightes that are throwen downe at the foote of Sayans horſe, to wit, Saian, Dolabella, Caſsius,
                  Fiue Knightes throwne downe. 
                  Marcus Antonius, and Nigidius. The whiche hiſtory, although it bée delectable to reade, on the other part it is lamentable to heare. Afterwardes, whē in Aſia they fell in reckoning and to remēber the euill fortune that the horſe had alway with him, there aroſe amongeſt them a common prouerbe, to ſaye vnto the man that was vnhappy or vnfortunate, That he had ridden vpon Sayans horſe.
               
               The like chaunce happened when Scipio did robbe the Temples of Toloſa in France, in that of all thoſe which caried away any golde and riches to their houſes, none did eſcape, but within one yeare died, and all his familie and houſe deſtroyed. To this daye it is a cuſtome in France, to ſaye vnto the man that is vnfortunate, That he hath Tolouze golde in his houſe.
               
               
                  Laertius ſaith, that in Athenes there was an howſe where all were borne fooles: and there was another houſe where they were all borne doltiſh: and as by diſcourſe of time, the Senators fell into the reckoning therof, they commāded that thoſe houſes ſhoud not bée inhabited, but pulled downe. Herodianus ſayeth, that in the Marcian field in Rome, there was a

Gentlemans houſe,Sometimes ſome things vnfortunat. in whiche all the owners died ſodainly: And as the neighbourhod made relatiō thereof vnto the Emperour Aurelianus, he did not onely commaund it to bée threwen downe, but alſo that all the tymber ſhoulde be burned. Solon Solonius forbiddeth in his Lawes to the Aegyptians, that nothing of the dead ſhould be ſold, but that all ſhould bee parted amongſt his heyres, ſaying: If the dead had any vnfortunate or vnluckie thing, it ſhould remayne in his family and kinred, and ſhould not paſſe vnto the common wealth. Incontinent vpon the death of the infamouſe Romane Princes Caligula and Nero, the Senate prouided that all the riches and houſhold ſtuffe ſhould be burned and buried in welles, fearing that in their tyrānicall goods, ther might be hid ſome euill fortune, by the couetouſneſſe whereof, Rome might be loſt, and the common wealth impoyſoned.
               Sir, I thought good to write all theſe examples and ſtraūge chaunces, not that you ſhoulde béeleue in Augureis, but to the ende you ſhould think that there be in this world ſome things ſo infortunate as they ſéeme to draw or bring with them the ſelfe ſame or other miſhaps. No more but that our Lord bée your protector. &c.
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Duke of Alba, Sir Frederique of Toledo, in the whiche is entreated of infirmities, and the profites of the ſame.
               
               
                  REnoumed and moſt magnificēt Lorde, at the time that Palome your ſeruaunt came to viſit me on your behalf, and gaue me your letters, I was in a furious feuer, in ſuche wiſe, that I could neither read your letter, or ſpeake a word vnto the bearer thereof. After that ye feuer begā to ceaſe, & that I had reade your letter, I vnderſtood the deſire you had of my health, and the grief you ſéemed to haue of my infirmitie. Beleue me Sir, and be out of doubt, that at that preſent I had more abilitie to drink, than to read, for I would

haue giuen all my Librarie for one only ewer of water. Your Lordſhip writeth vnto me, that you alſo haue béen ill, & that you thinke all your ſickneſſe to be well employed, as well for that you féele your ſelfe recouered, as alſo that you finde your ſelfe affected with a holy purpoſe to departe from ſin, and to abſtaine from exceſſe in eating.
               My Lord, I am ſory with all my heart that you haue ben ſicke, and it pleaſeth me very much that you ſtand vppon ſo good a purpoſe, although it be very true, that I wold more reioyce to ſée you performe, than to heare you promiſe: for hell is full of good deſires, and heauen is full of good workes. But be it as be may, to my iudgemēt there is not any thing wherin we may ſoner diſcerne a man to be wiſe or fooliſh, than to ſée in what maner he behaueth him ſelfe in aduerſitie, & how he reapeth profite by ſickneſſe.To profite by ſicknes declareth great wiſedome. There is no ſuch fooliſhnes as to employe our health to euill purpoſe, either is there any ſuch wiſedome, as to drawe fruite or commoditie out of ſickeneſſe. Cum infirmor iuncfortior ſum: the Apoſtle ſaid, that whē he was ſicke, then was he moſt ſtrong: & this he ſaid,Priuileges & profites obtained by ſicknes bycauſe the ſicke man doth neither ſwel by pride, or fornication doth make him cōbat, or auarice doth ouerthrow, or enuie doth moleſt, or ire doth alter, or gluttony doth bring vnder, or ſlouthfulneſſe doth make negligent, either ouerwatch him ſelfe with ambition.
               My Lord Duke, pleaſeth it the Lord that wée were ſuche being whole, as we promiſe to be when we be ſicke. All the care of the euill Chriſtian when he is ſicke, is, to deſire to bée whole, onely to liue and enioye more of this world: but the deſire of the good Chriſtian whē he is diſeaſed, is to be whole, not ſo much to liue as to reform his life. In the time of ſickeneſſe, there is none that doth remember himſelfe of affection or paſſion, of friendes or enemies, of riches or pouertie, of honour or diſhonour, of ſolace or trauell, of laying vp treaſure or growing poore, cōmaunding or obeying: but to be deliuered of one grief of the dead, would giue all that he had gotten all the daies of his life. In ſicknes ther is no true pleaſure, & in health all trauel is tollerable: what wants he that lackes not health?

What is it worthe that he poſſeſſeth that enioyeth not his health? What doth it profite to haue a very good bed if he cannot ſléepe? What benefite hath he that hath old wine of fragrant fauour, if the phiſitian do commaund that he drinke ſod water? What auayleth to haue good meat, whē only the fight thereof moueth belkes, and makes the ſtomacke wamble? What commoditie ariſeth vnto him that hath much money, if the more part hée ſpend vpon Phiſitians and Poticaries? Health is ſo great a thing, that to kéepe it and to conſerue it, wée ought not only to watche but ouerwatche: The whiche ſurely ſéemes not ſo, ſince we neuer haue regard thereof, vntil we haue loſt it.
               
                  Plutarch, Plini, Nigidius, Ariſticus, Dioſcorus, Plotinus, Necephalus, & with them many others, haue written great Bookes and treatiſes, how infirmities are to be cured, and how health is to be conſerued. And (ſo God ſaue me) if they affirmed a troth in ſome things, in many other things they did but geſſe, and other things not a few they dreamed. Béeleue me my Lord Duke, and bée out of doubt, for my part I doe fully béeleue, and alſo I haue experimented, that to cure diſeaſes and to conſerue healths, there is no better thing, than to auoyd anger,Angers and exceſſe be no ſmall enemies to health. and to eate of few meates. How great weale ſhould it be for the body, and alſo for the ſouls, if we might paſſe our life without eating, and without anger? For meates do corrupt the humors, and anger doth cont
                     ••
                  ne the bones. If men did not eat and would not be angrie, there ſhoulde be no cauſe to be ſicke, and muche leſſe of whom to complaine. For the whips that doe moſt ſcourge our miſerable life, are ordinary exceſſe, and profound ſadneſſe. Experience teacheth vs euery daye, that the men that bée doltiſhe and ignorant, for the more part are alwayes ſtrong, luſtie, and in good healthe, and this is the reaſon: for that ſuche as they are, neither doe weary them ſelues to obtaine honour, eyther doe féele what is ſhame, reproch, or diſpite: the contrary of all this doth happen to men that be wiſe, diſcrete, quicke witted, and of ſharpe deuiſe: euerye one of which be not only grieued of that which

is ſpoken vnto them, but alſo they growe ſorowfull, for that they imagine what others do thinke. Ther be men that be ſo ſharpe, and ſo ouerſharpe or refined, that it ſéemeth little vnto them to interprete wordes, but alſo they holde it for an office to diuine thoughts: and their repaiment is, that by them ſelues always they goe diſcomforted, and with others euill lyked. I durſt affirme, and in a maner ſweare, that to bréed a ſickeneſſe, and to daunger a mannes lyfe, there is no poyſon of ſo daungerous infection, as is a profounde and déepe ſorrow: for ye miſerable hart when he is ſad, doth reioyce in weping, and takes eaſe in ſighing. Let euery man ſpeake what he thinketh good, for amōgſt ſuch as be diſcrete (and no fooles) without compariſon they be more that grow ſicke by anger they receyue, than of the meates they féede on. All day long wée ſée no other thing, but that thoſe men whiche be merrie and glad, be always fat, whole and well coloured, and thoſe that be ſadde and melancholike alwayes go heauie, ſorowful, ſwollen, and of an euill colour. In theſe writings I confeſſe vnto you (my Lorde Duke, that the Ague that now I haue, was not of any meate that I had eaten, but of a certayne anger I had taken.
               Your Lordſhip doth write that by ſléeping vpon the groūd you haue taken a peſtilente reume, I verily thynke, the greafe heate of this moneth of Auguſte, hath bin the cauſe therof, whiche in myne opinion you ought not to vſe, or counſell any other therevnto: For it is leſſe euill to ſweate with heate, than to cough with colde. To the reſt which I vnderſtand by your letter, in deſiring I ſhould write ſome newes, it is ſufficient for this tyme, that of this our Courte there bée few things to be truſted in paper,To manifeſt the ſecrets of Princes, is perillous. & much to be ſaid in a mās eare. The thinges that appertaine vnto Princes and lordes of high eſtate, wée haue permiſſion to conceyue them, and no licence to ſpeake them: In the Courte and out of Courte, I haue ſéene many aduaunced by ſecrecie, and many ſhamed by want of ſilence. Your Lordſhip pardon for this tyme my pen, and when wée ſhall méete together, my toung ſhall ſupplie

this preſent want. No more but that our Lord be youre protectour.
               
                  From Borgos 
                     the .15. of October, Anno .1523.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto ſir Peter of Acunia Erle of Buendia, wherin is declared a propheſie of a certaine Sibill.
               
               
                  RIght magnificent & Chriſtian knight, doth your honor thinke in your iudgement, that the anſwere I ſhall ſende you, ſhall be as large as the letter you haue written vnto me? of a trouth it may not be ſo: for I am nowe come to that age, that nothing lyketh me, that I take in hand, either can I performe any thing that I would do. The many yeares, the cōtinual ſtudies, & the great trauels yt I haue paſſed, haue made in me ſuch impreſſion, yt now the eyes be tired with reading, the pulſes with writing, the memorie with retaining, and alſo the iudgemente with noting and compounding. God knowes I would not boaſt my ſelf therof, but in ye end I can not but cōfeſſe it, which is, euery day I féele my ſelf much more in age, and much leſſe in abilitie: the more I wold diſſemble, the more I would enable my ſelf, the more I wold grow yong, the more tenderly I would deale with my ſelfe, I can not leaue to acknowledge, but that my ſighte decreaſeth, my memorie fayleth, my bodie goeth wearied, & the ſtrength decayeth, and alſo my heares grow hoare. Oh my ſoule, what be all theſe things, but certaine cruell ſummoners, that cite my life to inhabite the ſorowfull ſepulture?
               
                  Epaminondas the Greke ſayde, that vntill the age of thirtie yeares they ought to ſay vnto men, you are welcome, or you come in a good houre: bicauſe at that tyme they ſéeme to bée cōming into ye world: from thirtie vntill fiftie, they ought to ſay, God keepe you, or ſtande in a good houre, bycauſe at that time they begin to haue ſome iudgement of the world: from fiftie yeares forwarde they ought to ſay vnto them, God ſpeed you, or goe in a good hour, for from thence they go taking their

their leaue of the world. In theſe repartments of Epaminondas, it appertaineth not vnto your honour and mée, that wée come in a good houre, nor that we ſtande in a good houre: for we are now come to be of the number that go in a good houre, I beſéech the redéemer of the worlde, that when we ſhal paſſe out of this worlde, we may depart in a good houre, take our leaue in a good houre, and that we goe in a good houre. For if it be muche requiſite for vs to liue well, muche more it ſtandeth vs vpon to finiſh well. I thought good to write vnto your Lordſhip all this, to the end, that if I ſhal anſwere you ſomewhat ſhort, ye haue me excuſed, and to hold me blameleſſe.
               But comming to the purpoſe, I ſay that I muche delighte to reade your letters, & on the other parte, I am ouercharged with your importunities: for alwayes you come to me with vnknowne demaunds, and right ſtrange queſtions: you now ſende mée a moſte auncient Epitaph,An olde Epitaph. that a certaine friende of yours hath brought from Rome, whiche hath waged with your honour a certain wager, that in all Spayn there ſhoulde not be a man which ſhould haue ſkil to reade it, much leſſe to vnderſtand it: the letters of the Epitaph be theſe. R.R.R.T. S.D.D.R.R.R.F.F.F.F. Neyther did that Romane ſpeake according to knowledge, eyther ſhall he winne his wager. For that notwithſtanding they be moſte obſcure, and euery letter importe one worde, I will ſende them ſo declared and ſo aptly diſtinguiſhed, that he ſhall remayn confounded, and you win the wager. The caſe is thus.
               
                  Romulus raigning in Rome, and Ezechias in Iudea, there was a woman borne in Tarento, named Delphica, which was famous in hir life, and ſingular in the art of diuining. Amongeſt the Hebrues, ſuch women were named Propheteſſes, and amongſte the Gentils, called Sibilles. Thys Sibill Delphica propheſied the deſtruction of Carthage, the proſperitie of Rome, the ruine of Capua, the glorie of Graecia, and the great peſtilence of Italie: And for that the fame of this Sibill was ſpread thoroughoute the worlde: Kyng Romulus ſente hir great preſentes, made hir greate promiſes, and wrote to hir

many letters, to remoue hir out of hir countreye, to lyue at Rome. Neyther for any intreatance they vſed with hir, or for any giftes they could ſende hir, this Sibill at any tyme would leaue hir countrey, or come to dwell at Rome. The whiche Romulus perceiuing, determined in his owne perſon to goe ſée hir, and with hir in certayne cauſes to communicate.
               The ſecret that Romulus deſired, was to vnderſtand what Fortune was reſerued for him, and what deſtenie the Citie of Rome ſhould haue (whiche at that time king Romulus began to buylde.) Anſwere better nor worſe mighte the kyng receyue of that Sibille Delphica, but that ſhe gaue him fouretéene letters written in certayne barkes of trées, (for that in thoſe ſo auncient tymes they had not as then founde oute the manner to write in parchement, and muche leſſe in paper) the ſecrete and miſterie of which letters neither coulde King Romulus vnderſtande, eyther woulde the woman declare the ſame. But ſo muche ſhe did certifie him, that there was one to be borne, which ſhould vnderſtand and interprete thoſe letters. King Romulus being returned vnto his Citie of Rome, commaunded thoſe letters to be ſet in one of his Temples, vnder greate and ſafe kéeping, vntill the tyme ſhoulde come, that the Goddes ſhoulde reueale them, or ſome other bée borne that ſhoulde vnderſtande them. Foure hundreth thirtie ſeuen yeares thoſe letters ſtoode hydden that no man coulde reade them, muche leſſe vnderſtand them, vntil there came to Rome an other Sibill, named Erithra, the whiche ſo clearely did declare, interprete, and expound them, as if ſhe hir ſelfe and none other had compoſed them. The letters are but fouretéene, the whiche declared in Engliſhe, ſayeth:
               
                  Romulus reygning, Rome triumphing, Sibill Delphica ſayde, the kingdome of Rome ſhall periſh by Sword, Fier, Hunger, and Colde. Let vs put the ſelfe ſame caracters of the letters, and the expoſition in Latin vppon euery one of them, in the forme that the Sibill expounded them, whyche was as followeth.
               
                  
                  R.Romulo R. Regnante, R. Roma T. Triumphante, S. Sibilla
                  
               
               
                  D. Delphica D. Dixit, R. Regnum R. Romae R. Ruet
                  
               
               
                  F. Ferro, F. Flamma,F. Fame, F. Frigore.
                  
               
               Sir, behold héere your letters expounded, your propheſies deuined, your Romane confounded, and alſo youre wager gotten. And the reward ſhalbe, that (I ouer watching my ſelfe to ſéeke this hiſtory) your honour ſhall beare away the prayſe of the aunſwer. If he will more thorowly know of this hiſtory, let him come to ſéeke and reade Liuius, Vulpitius, Trebellius,
                  Who dyd write the hiſtorie of the, Sibils. and Pogius, whiche haue written of the antiquities of the Romans, & the ſayings of the Sibilles. No more, but that our Lord be your protector, and that he giue vs both his grace. Amen. Amen.
               
                  From Madrid 
                     the .xiij. of March. 1535.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Sir Ynigo Marrique, in which is re counted what hapned in Rome betwixt a ſlaue and a Lion: an hiſtory very pleaſant.
               
               
                  MAgnificent and diſcrete Gentleman, your ſeruaunt Truſillo gaue me a letter of yours at the breaking vp of the counſell of the Inquiſition: and to ſpeake the troth, neither did he aduertiſe me from whome hée came, neither did I demaund him any queſtion. To my iudgemēt the one did well, and the other did not erre: for he came wearied with trauell, and I came from the Counſel angred. The philoſopher Mimus ſayd, qui cū laſſo fameli
                        •
                     o loquitur, rixam quaerit: as if he ſhould haue ſayd: to talke with a man that is hungrie, and to haue buſines with him that is wearie, be great occaſions to moue debate. For if at the time the hungrie would eate, or when the wearied would repoſe himſelfe, and woulde ſéeke occaſion of buſines, he would giue the buſines to Barrabas,
                  
and the Author to Sathan. Experience doth teach vs, that at the preſent when a man is refreſhed, forthwith he begins to talke: at the inſtant that a man doth eate or drinke, forthwith he beginneth to debate. And therfore we ſay, that then, (and not afore) it is an apt time to diſpatch affaires. For other wiſe, it ſhould be rather to importune, thā to diſpatch. Sir, I ſay thus much for yt you ſhal ſée and alſo vnderſtand, that it is verie conueniente for him that goeth in affaires, not onely to flée importunitie, but alſo that hée knowe to ſéeke oportunitie.
               Syr, leauing this aparte, I giue you to vnderſtande, that your importunities, & my muche buſineſſe, haue bin together (by the eares:) the one procuring that I ſhould condeſcende to your deſire: the other reſiſting, that I could not do what you required: in ſuch wiſe, that the cauſe why I haue not anſwered, is I can not, & alſo I will not: why I cannot anſwere, dyd proceed at that time, for yt we toke order in the inquiſition for the buſines of witches in Nauerne: and that I woulde not, dyd riſe, that you ſent to demaund of me a thing ſo ſtraunge, with the which (if you did take pleaſure in reding) I receiued much offence, and alſo tired my ſelfe in ſéeking.
               The declaratiō of which hiſtorie, that you ſent to demand, I did well remember I had ſéene it, but I coulde not call to mynde in what booke I had red it, and therof we do not maruel, that do not deale with humain and diuine ſcriptures. For the diuine Plato ſaith, we ſhould leaue to be men, and become Gods, if the memorie were able to retaine ſo muche as ye eyes were able to reade and ſee. Although on the one parte I had great buſineſſe, and on the other part was ſomwhat offended, yet always I left my affaires, and began to turne ouer my booke, to ſée if I could finde out that hiſtorie, and remember ye counterfait. And I thought good to take this trauell in hand, not only to accompliſh your demaunde, but alſo to proue my abilitie.The hiſtorie of the man and the Lion. Sir, you write vnto mée, that in the Wardrobe of the great captain you ſawe a riche cloth, which (they ſay) the Venetians had giuen him for a preſent, wherin was figured a

man leading a Lyon, and a Lyon that went led and laden after a man. Alſo you ſaye, that in the breaſt of the Lyon were written theſe wordes: Hic Leo eſt boſpes huius hominis. In lyke maner was written in the breaſt of the man other wordes, which were: Hic homo est Medicus huius Leonis. The one and the other letters thus much did ſignifie: This Lion is the hoſte of this man: and This man is Phiſition or Chirurgian to this Lyon. Sir, you may well thinke ſomewhat at the ſtraungeneſſe of the hiſtorie, ſince the maner of the paintyng ſéemeth ſo monſtrous: therefore I maruell not thoughe you deſire to vnderſtande the ſame: notwithſtanding, to finde it, was not a little painefull to me. It ſhall happen to this my letter, whiche I conſent verie ſeldome vnto an other: that is, that it ſhal be ſomewhat long, & yet not tedious: for the hiſtorie is ſo pleaſant to hear, yt the reader ſhalbe gréeued, for that it is no lōger.
               Comming to the purpoſe, The good Titus Emperoure of Rome, (whiche was ſonne to Veſpaſian, and brother to that euill Emperour Domitianus) commyng from the warres of Germanie, determined to celebrate in Rome the daye of his natiuitie in Campania. Amongſte the Romaine Princes, thrée feaſtes of all other were moſte celebrated, to witte, the daye wherein they were borne, the daye wherein their Fathers dyed, and the daye wherein they were created Emperours. The day of this Titus byrth béeing come, he ordained to make great feaſts to the Senate, and to diſtribute gifts among the people. For in great diſportes and feaſts, alwayes the Romaine Princes didde feaſte the myghtye, and gaue rewarde to the poore. A thyng worthye to bée noted, and alſo vnto memorye to bée commended, that in the great feaſtes and triumphes of Ianus, of Mars, of Mercurie, of Iupiter, of Venus, and of Berecinthia, they dyd not boaſte, neyther eſtéeme ſuche feaſtes to be ſolemne, great, or duly ſolemniſed, by the coſtes that were ſpent, either by the ſhewes and triumphs that therein were repreſented: but by the number of rewards and liberall giftes that there were giuen.Great liberalitie vſed in feaſtes. The Emperour Titus commaunded to be brought for that feaſte

many Lions, Beares, great Harts, Onchas, Vnicorns, Griffins, Bulles, Bores, Wolues, Camelles, Elephants, and ether many maruelous cruell beaſts, which for the more part be bred in the deſerts of Aegypt, and in the edge of the mountayne Caucaſus. Many dayes before, the Emperour had commaunded that they ſhould reſerue all théeues, and robbers by highwayes, murderers, periured perſons, traytors, quarellers, and rebelles: to the end that on that day they ſhoulde enter into liſtes, to chaſe and fight with the beaſts, in ſuch wiſe, that the chaſtiſements of malefactors ſhoulde be perfourmed by the ſame beaſts. The order that he vſed herein was, that the wretched men ſhould be put within the greate Colledge, and thoſe cruell beaſts ſhould come foorth to fight againſt thē, all the people ſtanding to behold, and none to help. And if it hapned the beaſts to teare the man in péeces, there he payde his det: but if the man kild the beaſt, by iuſtice they could not put him to death. Amongſt other beaſts that they brought vnto that feaſt, there was a Lion whiche they had taken in the deſerts of Aegypt, which was mightie of body, of great age, of aſpect terrible, in fighting cruell, and in his yelles and cries very horrible. This moſt cruell Lion walking in the chaſe all imbrued (for at that time he had ſlayne and torne to péeces xv. men) they determined to caſt vnto him a fugitiue ſlaue, to the intent he ſhould kill and eate him, and therevpon to quiet his rauenous furie. A maruellous thing it was to heare, and fearefull to ſée,Did acquaintance renued betwene a mā and a Lyon. that at the very inſtant they caſt the ſlaue in the chaſe to the Lion, he did not onely refuſe to deuoure him, but alſo haſted not to touche him, but rather went vnto him and lickt his handes, fauned with his tayle, helde downe hys head, and couched downe vpon the ground, ſhewing ſignes of old acquaintāce, and that he was in his det and beholding vnto him. The ſlaue, ſéeing the fawnings and the curteſies that the Lion vſed with him, caſt himſelfe downe vpon the groūd, and créeping to the Lion, and the Lion comming to the ſlaue, they began one to imbrace the other, and to faune as mē that had bin of old acquaintāce, that had not ſéene in many yéeres.

To ſée a thing ſo monſtrous and ſtrange at the ſodain, (which the eyes of man had neuer ſéene, neither in old Bookes had euer bin read) the good Emperour Titus was amaſed, and all the Romane people grewe aſtonied: and did not preſently imagine that the man and the Lion had bin of olde acquaintance, and there knew ech other: but that the ſlaue ſhoulde be a nigromantike, and had inchaunted the Lion. And after the Lion and the ſlaue had played together, renued their olde acquaintance, and the people of Rome beholding a greate ſpace, the Emperour Titus commaunded the ſlaue to be cald before him, the which comming to accompliſh his commaundemēt, the cruell Lion came after him, ſo quiet and ſo gentle, as if it had bin a houſe lamb brought vp by hand. The Emperour Titus ſaid vnto him theſe words: tell me man what art thou, of whence art thou, what is thy name,The Emperour Titus talketh with a ſlaue. to whome didſt thou belong, what haſt thou done, what offence haſt thou committed, wherefore waſt thou brought hither and caſt vntoo the beaſtes? may it happen that thou haſt bred this moſt cruell Lion, or haſt thou known him by chaunce in times paſt? waſt thou preſent when he was taken, or haſt thou deliuered him from any mortall perill? (perchaunce thou art a Nigromantike, and haſt enchaunted him.) I commaund thée that thou ſay vnto vs the truth, what hath paſſed, and deliuer vs of thys dout, for I ſweare vnto thée by the immortall gods, this matter is ſo mōſtrous, & ſo ſtrange, that it ſéemeth rather that we dreame it, than behold it. With a good courage, & with a hygh cleare voyce, the ſlaue made aunſwer to the Emperour Titus as followeth, the Lion being layd at his foote, and all the people in admiration.
               
                  Andronico recompteth by diſcourſe, all his life.
                  
                     IT may pleaſe thée to vnderſtande moſt victorious Caeſar, that I am of the countrey of Slauonia, of a certayne place that is called Mantuca, the which when they dyd riſe and rebell againſt the ſeruice of Rome,
                     
we were there al taken & condemned to ſeruitude & bondage. My name is Andronico, and my father was named Andronicus,
                     A ſlaue and alſo noble was Andronicus. and alſo my grandfather. This linage of Andronicos wer in our Countrey ſo noble and generous, as Quintus Fabius, and Marcus Marcellus be nowe in Rome. But what ſhall I wretche do vnto fortune, which do ſée the ſonnes of ſeruants there, to be knightes, and my ſelfe that was there a Gentleman, in Rome become a ſlaue? It is twentie ſix yeares ſince I was taken in my Countrey, and ſo long agoe ſince I was brought vnto this Citie, and alſo other twētie ſix ſince I was ſold in the field of Mars and bought of a ſawyer, which when he perceyued that my armes were better giuen to handle a launce, than to pull at a ſawe, he ſold me to the Conſull Dacus, father to the Cenſor Rufus, that is now aliue. This Conſull Dacus was ſent by thy father Veſpaſian, to a certain prouince in Affrica, whiche is called Numidia, as Proconſull to miniſter Iuſtice, and as Captayne of the horſemen to vnderſtande in cauſes of warre, for that in verie trouth in the warres he had great experience, and in gouernment muche wiſedom. Alſo (great Caeſar) it may pleaſe thée to vnderſtād, that my maiſter (the Conſull Dacus) ioyntely with the experience and wiſedom that he had, was on the other ſide proude in commaundemente, and couetous in gathering together. And theſe two things be brought to paſſe,Auarice is cauſe of great infamie. that he was yll ſerued in his houſe, and abhorred in the common wealth: and his principall entente was to gather money to make hym ſelfe riche, ſo that although he had many offices, and muche buſineſſe, he had no more in his houſe, but my ſelfe and an other to do all the ſame: in ſo muche, I gathered and caſte abroade, did grynde, fift, and bake the breade: And beſides all this, I dreſſed the meate, I waſhed the clothes, I ſwepte the houſe, I dreſſed the cattel, and alſo made beddes. What wilt thou that I ſhal ſay more, (O moſt victorious Caeſar?) but that his couetouſneſſe was ſo great, and his pitie ſo little, that he gaue me neither coate, ſhoes, or ſhirt: and moreouer, beſide al this, euery nighte he made mée to weaue two baſkettes of

Palmes, which he made me to ſell for eight Sextertios,
                     Foure ſextertios amounte to .iiij. d. towardes his diſpences. And that night that I had not performed the ſame, he gaue me nether to eate, either left me vnwhipt. But in the end, ſéeing my maſter ſo continually to chide me, ſo oft to whippe me, to kéepe me ſo naked, ſo to ouer worke me, and ſo cruelly to deale with me, I will confeſſe the troth vnto thée (oh inuincible Caeſar) whiche is, that ſéeing my ſelfe in ſo deſperat a ſtate, and in a life ſo miſerable, I deſired hym oftentimes that it mighte pleaſe him to ſell me, or elſe to giue order to kill me. Eleuen yéeres continually I paſſed this wretched life with him, without receyuing at his handes any rewarde, or at his mouth any milde word. And farther ſéeing in the Proconſul (my maſter) that euery day his anger increaſed, and vnto me there was no trauell diminiſhed, and ioyntly with this, féeling age cōming vpon me, and my head to be hore, mine eyes blinde, my ſtrength weake, my health wanting, and my hart deſperat: I determined with my ſelfs to runne away vnto the cruell deſerts of Aegipt, to the intent that ſome rauenous beaſt mighte eate me, or that by pure hunger I might die. And for that my maſter did not eate but what I dreſt him, or drinke but what I broughte him, wyth great ſuertie I might haue killed him and reuenged my ſelfe: but that hauing more reſpect to the nobleneſſe of bloud from whence I was deſcended,Where nobleneſſe dwelleth, no treaſon haunteth. than to the ſeruitude that I ſuffered, I thought it better to put my life in perill, than to do treaſon to my nobleneſſe. In the end, my maſter (the proconſull) going to viſite a certaine Countrey named Tamatha which is in the confines of Aegipt and Affrica, when on a night he had ſupped and I ſaw him a bed, I departed without knowing any high way: but that I tooke care that the nighte might be very darke, and did beholde (the daye before) whiche mountayne was moſt ſharpe, where I myght be moſt hidden and leaſt ſought for. I caried with me but a payre of ſandalles to weare, a canuas ſhirt to put on, a bottell of water to drinke, and a little bunch of grapes to eate, with whiche prouiſion I might haue bin ſuſtained for ſixe dayes: whiche being paſt,

eyther I muſt die, or be eaten with beaſtes, or returne to my maiſter, or elſe put my ſelfe in ſafetie. Hauing paſt thrée days and thrée nights, forſaking all high wayes, thicked my ſelf in the great deſert. And being vtterly tired with great & extreme beate, and no leſſe in feare of them that ſhoulde ſéeke mée, I conueyed my ſelfe into a great Caue, ſomwhat darke, the entrance narrow, but more large within.
                  Not ſixe houres after I had conueyed my ſelfe into that denne, I ſaw at the entring therof a Lyon moſte terrible to beholde, whoſe feete and mouth was all bloudie, and my iudgemente was that he had eaten ſome beaſte, or torne ſome man in pieces: (whiche was lyke inough) for that notwithſtanding the countrey is inhabitable, and the heate intollerable, yet there reſorte into thoſe deſertes ſome that go to hunt the Lyon, and other vnfortunate (as I) that flée from their Mayſters, whiche chooſe for leſſe euyll to be eaten wyth Lions,An extreme diſtreſſe. than all their liues to be ſlaues. Perceyuing that monſtrous Lion ſitting at the entrance of the caue, and ſéeing in my ſelf that I had no place to eſcape or flée vnto, nor ſtrength to reſiſte: the teares preſently fell from myne eyes. Remembring my ſelfe, with feare I became ſenſleſſe, & fell diſmayd to the ground, holding for certain, that now the hour was come, in which (by the rage of that beaſt) my miſerable lyfe ſhould take an end. Oh what difference there is to blaſon death with the tongue, and to ſée it with the ſight of the eyes. I ſay this (puiſſant Caeſar,) for that in ſéeing him at the doore that ſhould eate mée, and that the ſepulcher of my fleſhe ſhoulde be thoſe beſtiall entrayles, I would haue choſen an other lyfe much worſe at that preſente to haue eſcaped with lyfe. But after the Lyon had a little viewed and alſo reſted at the entrance of the caue, he came forward halting on one of his féete, gréeuouſly groning, and comming vnto me (that was fallen to the grounde) laide his lame foote vpon my hands, after the maner of a wiſe man that diſcouereth his hurte to an other, and craueth remedye for the ſame.A paſſing toye. My tongue can not ſufficiently ſay vnto thée (Oh magnificent Caeſar) the ſtrength I recouered,

and the ioy I cōceiued to ſée that moſt cruel beaſt ſtand ſo myld, come ſicke, goe ſo lame, and to aſke to be cured. And you may wel beleue it, for at that houre I was in ſuch eſtate, that if it were in the power of that Lion to take awaye my lyfe, I had not at that inſtant any ſenſe to féele my death.Beaſtes doe feele benefits. The griefe of this poore lion was, that from the head to the point he had thruſt a thorne into his foote, and his foote was full of of matter, maruellouſly ſwollen, and the worſt of all was, that the wounde was ſo blacke and ſo feſtred, that hardly the thorne might be then ſéene. When I had with the poynte of a knyfe opened the wounde, preſently iſſued the matter, and foorthwith I pulled out the thorne, incontinente I waſhed it with vrine, and then annoynted it with ſalue, and ſpéedyly I bound it vp with a piece of my ſhirt: in ſuch maner, that if I did not as I ought to do, at the leaſt, I did that I thought beſt to be doone. Noble Caeſar, thou wouldeſt haue delighted to haue ſéene how at the tyme I brake vp the ſwelling, pulled out the thorn, thruſt out the matter, and bound vp the wound, he ſtretched his féet, clitched his fiſt, turned his head, gnaſhed with his téeth, and ſecretly gaue certaine ſighes, in ſuch ſort, that if he felt ye grief as a beaſt, yet he diſſembled it as a man. After I had dreſt him and bound it vp, al that euening & night the Lyon remained ſtil and lay cloſe by me, and like one that had reaſon, he would lament one while, and reſt an other: in ſuch wyſe we paſſed all the night, he in bewayling, and I in pitying. Now when day appeared, and light came into the caue, I began againe to ſquiſe out the matter, and to anoint it with a little ſalue which I had, both little and verie drie, bicauſe there had two dayes paſſed wherein I had not eaten, and as muche more that I had not drunk.The Lyon feedeth his Chirurgian. Two houres after that I had dreſt him, and that the ſunne was riſen, the poore Lion departed by little & little out of his caue vnto the deſert, to ſéeke ſomething where vpon we might féed, and wherwith we might be ſuſtayned. And when I thought not thereof, beholde, he brings me ouerthwart in his mouth a péece of a beaſt of what nature or kinde of beaſt it was, I ſweare (O mightie

                     Caeſar, I am not able to ſay vnto thée: for at that tyme I was not able to vnderſtād. Hunger oppreſſing me, hauing too much fleſh, & wāting fire, & hauing no mean to boile nor reſt, I gat me out of ye caue, laying my fleſh in ye ſun vpon a fayre ſtone, where with the moſt feruent ſunne in thoſe deſertes which doth not warme, but burne, althoughe not ſufficient to roſt: I dyd eate it ſo dryed and parched, not withſtanding with no ſmall appetite. Foure whole daies and nightes I was with the Lion in his caue, in whiche I tooke charge to cure him, and hée, to maintain and féede me. Now ſix dayes being paſt, that I had ended my bottell of water, he went out of the caue very early before the ſunne was vp, and did take of thoſe herbs moſt ful of dew, which I taſted with my mouth, more to refreſhe, than to kill the thirſt which I had. After I ſawe my hoſt the Lions foote ſomewhat amended, and alſo that I likewiſe grew weary, lothſome, and full of that beaſtiall life: at the inſtant that he went out of the caue to hunt, preſently I came foorth to hyde me, conſtrayned thereto by neceſſitie, and not of will.Abſence extremely lamented. The nighte béeing come, when the Lion returned to his caue, and founde me abſent (of a trouth I ſwear vnto thée O magnificēt Caeſar, that) I heard him from thence where I was hidden, giue ſo many and ſo ſorowfull brayes, that they filled my eyes full of teares. The poore Lion didde ſhewe that he was gréeued with ſolitarineſſe, whiche he felte by the wante of my companie, and the lacke he had of me to performe his cure: of my part (being wearyed to trauell in thoſe cruell deſertes, and to eate ſuch rawe fleſhe) I determined to do that which I ſhould not ſo much as once haue thought: which was, to ſéek a place inhabited, where I might find people to ſpeake and be conuerſant withall, to the end that I might kill hunger with bread, & the intollerable thirſte with water. But as my maiſter had taken all the paſſages, and aboue all, that yet my heauie and ſorowfull deſtinies were not ended, I was ſcarſly come vnto the firſt place, but that I fell into their hands, that had ſought and followed me. Being taken, bound, whipt, & drawne, they brought me to my cruell

maiſter: and I may ſay to thée (O good Caeſar) that I wold rather haue remained dead at the Lions féete, than aliue to appeare before my mayſter. Incontinent after I was brought into his preſence, he began to take aduice of them that brought me, if I ſhould be drawne to péeces, haue my throate cut, be hanged, flayne quick, or elſe be drowned. In ſuche wyſe, that thou mayeſt well conceyue (O noble Caeſar) in what caſe my hearte ſtoode, and how afflicted in ſpirite I was, when in my owne hearing they intreated, not how they ſhuld chaſtiſe me, but what cruell death they myght giue me. After they had ſpoken many cruell wordes, & had threatned me with diuers cruell deathes, he commaunded that I ſhould be thrown into the dungeon amongſt the condemned men, for that with them I ſhould be broughte hyther to Rome, to bée meate for beaſtes: and ſurely he did not erre in thinkyng to be thus moſte cruelly reuenged of mée: for there is not ſo cruell a kinde of death, as to tarie & thinke euerie houre to die. This lion that you ſée here lying by me, is the ſame that I cured of the thorne, and he that kept me ſo manie dayes in his caue: and ſince the immortall Gods haue willed yt he and I, & I and he, ſhould come to be acquainted in the place where they haue brought vs to be ſlain, vpon my knées I beſéech thée (moſt victorious Caeſar,
                     The ſlaue craueth mercie. that ſince my fault hath condemned me to the beaſts, that it may pleaſe thy great clemencie to quite vs, and to make vs frée. This was that which Andronicus ſayde vnto the Emperor Titus, and that he related before all the Romane people. If the myldneſſe of the Lion had put them in greate maruel, the words & the great trauailes of Andronicus moued them to great compaſſion, to heare the immeaſurable paines the poore man had paſſed,The people of Rome make humble ſupplication for the ſlaue. & to ſée how many times death had ſwallowed him: with loude voyces al the people began to beſéech & pray the Emperour Titus, that it might pleaſe him to prouide and commaund, that Andronicus might not be ſlaine, neyther caſt vnto the Lion: for the beſt part of the feaſt had bin to ſée the mildneſſe of the Liō, & to heare the life of Andronicus. The Emperor Titus condeſcended with a very good wil,

to that whiche the people required, and Andronicus deſyred. And thus it was, that from thence forward, he and the Lyon wente together throughout all the ſtréetes and Tauernes of Rome, making merie, and al the people reioycing with them: After the maner of a little aſſe, Andronicus with a ſmall lyne did leade the Lion girded with a payre of bougets, wherin he caryed certaine prouiſion of bread, and other things that they gaue him at their houſes and tauernes. And ſomtime he conſented that boyes ſhoulde ride vpon the Lion for money: and to the ſtraungers that came to Rome from farre countreyes, and had not heard the ſtorie therof, demandyng what that ſo ſtraunge and monſtrous ſighte ſhoulde ſignifye, aunſwere was made, that that man was the Lyons ſurgion, and that the Lyon was that mannes hoſt. This hiſtorie is recounted by Aulus Gellius the Latin,Note the authors of the hiſtorie. and Apius the Gréeke much more at large. Behold ſir, your paynting here declared, behold here your ſtraunge ſtorie founde out, beholde here your deſire accompliſhed, and beholde mée here that remayne tyred: that for any thing woulde not againe take ſuche paine, neyther put my ſelfe in ſuche care. No more but that our Lord be your protector, and giue vs good ending. Amen.
               
               
                  From Toledo 
                     the .25. of Auguſt. 1529.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Sir Peter of Acuna, Earle of Buedia, wherin is touched howe Lordes ſhould gouerne their eſtates. A notable letter for ſuche as come newly to their inheritance.
               
               
                  REnoumed Lord and Chriſtian knight Gonſalus of Vrena, your ſeruant & my friend, gaue me a letter frō your lordſhip, by ye which you maintain againſt me a certain greate cōplaynt, ſaying that it is a yere paſt ſince I haue not ſéene you, and ſix monethes wherein I haue not written vnto you. Syr, I am ſo buſyed and of my naturall condition ſo ſolitarie,

that it is painfull vnto me to viſite, and no leſſe tedious to be viſited: not bycauſe they doe viſit me, but for that they let and hinder me. The diuine Plato ſaid, quòd amici ſunt fures temporis, whiche is to ſaye, that friends are ſtealers of tyme, wherein he ſayed troth. For there be friends ſo importune in viſiting, and ſo tedious in communication, that the time is more euill employed that is loſt with them, than the goods that theeues ſteale from vs.
               We Courtiers be much combred with tediouſnes whiche in the court our friends doe vſe with vs, that ſit downe by great leaſure, and doe ſettle them ſelues in a chayre, not to aſke any caſe of conſcience, or to talke any thing of holy ſcripture, but to murmur, ſaying, that the King doth not firme,Of what things they murmur in the Court. the Counſell doth not diſpatch, the Paymaſters doe delay, the priuat doe commaund, the Biſhops bée not reſident, the Secretaries rob, the Iuſtices diſſemble, the Officers compoūd, the Gentlemen play, and the women go at large. Thinke you Sir, that a man learned, giuen to reading, ſolitary and buſied, doth not more looſe tyme in hearing theſe newes, than to cure an infirmitie with euill diet: to haue delight in murmuring, he muſt be ill tongued that talketh: of lend diſpoſitiō, and of euill condicion, that delighteth therein. They ſay that the good Marques of Santillana vſed to ſaye, that euill tongs and euill eares did frame pleaſant murmurings. There be ſo many men in this Court loytering, ſuperfluous, idle,Who be great murmurers. vagarant and euill tonged, that if Laurence Temporall bée ſo great workman in refining clothes, as they bée in ſhearing their neighbours liues, we maye boldly giue more for the refining of cloth of Segeuia, than for the cloth in Graine of Florencia.
               
               My Lord, I ſaye all this to the ende you haue me excuſed for my want of diligence, and alſo to giue you to vnderſtand of my condicion, the whiche ſtretched no farther with his friendes, than to make them aunſwere to their letters, and that ſometime I write vnto them. Before all things I am right glad of the ſentence gyuen on your Lordſhips behalfe, wherin they haue entituled you with Towne of Duennas, and

the Earldome of Buendia, in whiche I beſéeche God giue you many yeares of fruition, and children to inherit. For it is no ſmall ſorrowe to ſée ſtrange childrē inherit our proper ſweat.
               Your Lordſhip doth write vnto me in your letter, that I pray vnto God to giue you grace, as well to ſaue you, as alſo to gouerne this eſtate: whereunto I aunſwere, as alſo vnto them of the Towne of Duennas: great is the miſchance, if they ſhould not bée better intreated than my ſacrifice of God aceepted. Do you not thinke that I being a ſinfull man, a religious ſinner, and a Courtlike ſinner, ſhall not haue ynough to pray for myne own ſinnes, but that I muſt burdē my ſelfe with you? Much is God pleaſed with the prayer of the iuſt, but much more he doth delight in the amendment of the ſinner: for it doth litle profit for the one to augment his prayers, if the other do not diminiſhe his ſinnes. If you will gouerne this Earledome very well, begin the gubernation in youre ſelfe: for it is impoſſible for him to vnderſtand to gouerne the common wealth, that doth not know to rule his owne houſe, or order his owne perſon: when the Lorde is milde, honeſt, chaſt,The order of the noble or gentlemans houſe. ſober, ſilent, patient, and deuout: all his houſholde and common wealth be likewiſe affected: and if by chaunce there be any ſeruaunts abſolute or diſſolute, they muſt be hidden and withdrawen, which to the Lord is no ſmall glory: for hée doth not little, yt taketh holdneſſe from any man in his houſe to be euill. In the houſes where Lordes are ambitious, raſhe, quarelling, lyars, gluttons, gamſters, infamous, and lecherous: what ſteward may bring to paſſe that the ſeruants bée honeſt, ſeeing they do not, but what their maiſters do allowe, and likewiſe do. The wordes of Lords be fearfull, but theyr good works do animate: and I ſay it to this end: for their ſeruaunts and vaſſalles do rather imitate the works they ſée thē do, than the words they heare them ſpeake.
               The charge that a Biſhop hath of his houſholde and Dioceſſe, the ſame hath a Gentleman of his ſeruants. For, it is not ſufficient that a maſter or Lorde pay his ſeruants what is dew, but that they make them alſo do their dutie: it is a lamentable

thing to ſée; that a mother ſhall ſend hir ſonne to the houſe of Gentleman clad, ſhod, ſhamefaſt, honeſt, ſolitarie, well mannered, and deuoute, and at the yeares end, the poore yong man ſhall returne ragged bare legged, diſſolute, a glutton, a dice player, a liar, and a quarreller, in ſuch wiſe, that it had bin leſſe euill to haue had him dead, than ſent to ſuch pallace or Court. Let the concluſion of this caſe be, that in ſuche maner you order your life and gouerne your houſe, that your owne may haue to follow, and ſtraungers to prayſe.
               
                  That the Knight ought to be to God gratefull and to men pitifull.
                  
                     ALſo it is right neceſſary that alwayes you haue in remembrance the bounties and good things ye haue receyued of God. In ſpeciall to giue you this Earledome (be depriued the Earle youre Brother of his life, the Lady counteſſe died, diſherited your Coſin, & gaue a ſentence againſt the Admirall,) in ſuche wiſe that you owe vnto God not only for the gift thereof, but alſo for the deliuerance of the incumber thereof. My Lorde be ye certaine that although before God all ſinnes be gréeuous, yet the ſinne of ingratitude is holden for moſt intollerable: for God will not any thing that we haue but only for that which he giueth vs;The ſinne of Ingratitude before God is deteſtable. we be thankfull. Giue thanks vnto God for that he created redéemed, and reléeued you, and alſo prouided for you. And ſurely with this eſtate & Earledome (if you kéepe rekoning with your rent, and meaſure in expences) you may ſerue God, and liue honorably. Although this Earledome hathe coſt muche trauell, perilles, ſutes, anger, and money: contend not wyth God, thinking that you haue obtained it by youre owne diligence, but confeſſe his great mercie to haue giuen it: for the victories and good gifts that God doth giue vs, we may deſire thē & alſo craue thē, but not deſerue thē. Remēber (my Lord) that god hath remoued you frō anger to eaſe, frō poore to rich,

from aſking to giuing, from ſeruing to commaunding, from miſery to plentie, and from ſir Peter to be intitled the Earle of Buendia, in ſuch wiſe that you owe vnto God not only the ſtate that he hath giuen you, but alſo the miſerie that he hath taken from you. Oh how great mercie doth God vſe with that man, that giues him wherewith to giue, and putteth him not in eſtate to craue of any man. For to ſhamefaſt faces, and to generous hearts, there is no trauell that ſo doth perce their intralles, as to enter to craue at other mens dores. Plutarch reported of the great Pompeius, that being ſicke in Puſoll, whē the Phiſitions ſaide, that to be hole and recouer ſtrength, it were conuenient hée ſhoulde eate of certain Zorzales that the Conſull Luculus did bréede:Zorzales blackbirds. he aunſwered I will rather die, than ſende to craue them, for the Goddes haue not created Pompeius to aſke, but to giue.
                  My Lord I ſaye thus much, to the ende ye conſider, ſince God hath giuen you liberally, that you néede not craue of any man, that you be not rechleſſe to giue as they gaue you, to ſuccour as they ſuccoured you, and to part as they parted with you. For of the temporall goods that God giues vs, we be not lords but reparters. Although the Earledom of Buendia be of no great rentes, yet maye you do with it many good workes. For (as I haue ſaid) the gentleman that knoweth to rule his houſe, and to order his goodes: hée ſhall haue to ſpende, to kepe, and to giue. For Princes and Lordes of power ought not to bée called great or mighty for the proude eſtates that they hold, but for the great rewardes they giue. The office and dewtie of the labouring man, is to digge, the religious to be contemplatiue, the prieſt to pray, the craftes man to worke, the Marchaunt to be guilefull,He is not to be holden for noble that hath much, but that geueth much. the vſerer to keepe, the poore to craue, and of the gentleman to giue: for vppon that day, that the gentleman doth beginne to hourde vp money: from thēce foorth, he putteth his fame in proclamation.
                  In Lordly houſes and of inheritours, there ought to be the haunts of brothers, coſines, nephewes, vncles, and all others of his kinne, bearing good will to their affaires, and ſupporting

their neceſſities. In ſuche wiſe, that to them there is no houre forbidden, or any dore ſhut: neuertheleſſe there are ſome Brothers, Coſins and Nephewes, tedious in theyr ſpéech, ſo importunate in viſiting, and ſo without meaſure in their crauing: that they make a man angrie, and alſo abhorre them: and the remedy for ſuche, is to ſuccour their neceſſities and to appart their conuerſations.
                  You ſhall now find in your Earledome retaynours of your Fathers, Seruants of your Brothers, allies of youre houſe, and friends of all your dealings, vnto whome you ought in generall to vſe good countenance, ſpeake ſweete words, gyue good hope, and deale ſome rewards: for if you ſhould be ingrate vnto them, you ſhould run into greate indignation of the people. Alſo my Lord you ſhal find ſome old Seruants and ſome poore widowes, vnto whome youre predeceſſours commaunded to be giuen ſome penſion or ſome refreſhing for trauelles paſt, or for ſeruice they did them: beware in no wiſe to take it away, neither yet to diminiſh it: For beſides that vnto you it were a great wretchedneſſe, and vnto them a great want: In the place to pray vnto God for your life, they would craue of God vengeance vpon you. Without compariſon you ought to haue more feare to doe iniurie vnto the poore,The poore do reuenge with teares. than to the riche: for the riche doth reuenge himſelfe with armes, but the poore with teares.
                  Alſo you ſhall finde in youre Earledome ſome yong men and maydens, that were children of old ſeruants, and the ſorowfull orphanes, neither haue father to help them, neyther good to ſuſtayne them: your Lordſhip ought in ſuche caſes to bring vp the ſonnes, and to mary the daughters: for there is not in this world an almes of God more accepted, thā to giue mariage vnto a damſell vpon the point to be caſt away.
                  As it is a great offence to cauſe another to ſinne, ſo doth hée deſerue much glory, that takes away the offence for another to fal: for certainely we are more beholding to him that kéeps vs from ſtumbling, than vnto him that helps vs vp. Alſo you ſhall find ſome men and women, of whom they ſhall ſay vnto

you, that they were affectioned to one partialitie, and offended at the other,To forget an iniurie, proceedeth of ſingular wiſedome. and in ſuch caſes take no care to make ſearch, and much leſſe to take vengeance: for the noble harts ought neuer to thinke themſelues iniured, but of ſuch as be mighti
                        •
                      like themſelues. If any want of dutie or offence hath bin done vnto you by any of youre eſtate, I holde it for more ſuretie to diſſemble it, than to reuēge it: for it may ſo happen, that thinking all lawe were ended, there mighte ariſe vnto you other new more indigeſted angers. It is tollerable that the Lords do chaſtiſe his vaſſall, but not that he reuenge: for it is ſure that he will not only defend him ſelfe, but alſo attempt to offend, and the offence ſhall be, raiſing his countrey, and defaming his perſon. If you will be reuenged of ſuch as haue gyuen ſome occaſion, be grateful vnto thoſe that did follow and ſerue you: for after this maner they ſhall remayne recompenſed, and the other confounded. And let it be in this cace for concluſion, that in my iudgement and conceit, your Lordſhip ought not to care to remember the iniuries they haue done you, but the ſeruice that now they do you: and make no account to make quarells with your vaſſals, for in things of cō
                     mon libertie, he that ſhall ſéeme moſt to ſerue you, the ſame is he that moſt will ſell you.
               
               
                  That a Knight do miniſter Iuſtice in his Countrey.
                  
                     ALſo it is neceſſary to the good gouernment of youre vaſſalles, that you leaue them to bee gouerned of vertuous men and of experiēce: for ther is no mā in this world ſo wiſe, that néedeth not the counſell of another. We ſayd not without graue conſideration: that you ſhould vſe men of experience, and ſayde not that you ſhoulde take men of learning: For matters in law muſt be commended vnto the learned, but gouernment of the common wealth vnto men of wiſedome. For we ſée euery day by experience, what difference or aduauntage there is, betwixt hym that

hath a good wille, and him that knoweth no more but out of Bartlet.
                     Things that many deſire but few obtain If you fynde any that ioyntly is both learned and wiſe: leaue not to lay hande vppon him, nor let him ſlip for any price: for learning to giue ſentence, and prudence to gouerne, be two thynges that many deſire and fewe doe obtayne.
                  My Lord you haue to be aduiſed to commend youre countries to mouthy or brutiſhe bachelers, that come from Salamanca, which bringing their ſcience in their lippes, and their witte in their ſachelles, before they can chance to do Iuſtice, they ſhall eſcandeliſe the common wealth, and alſo robbe the whole countrey. Thoſe that do procéede from Colledges, and from the Vniuerſities, as they tie themſelues to that theyr Bookes do ſay, and not to that whiche theyr eyes doe ſée: and to that their ſcience doth ſpeake, and not to that whiche experience doth find: ſuch are good to be aduocates, but not to gouerne.
                  Sir beléeue me and be out of doubt, that the art of gouernment, neyther is ſold at Paris, either is found at Bolloigne, neither yet learned at Salamanca, but is found out by prudence, is defended by Science, and conſerued by experience. Plato in his booke of common wealth ſayd theſe words: Conſilium peritorum ex apertis obſcura, ex paruulis magna, ex proximis remota, ex partibus tota aeſtimat. As if he ſhould haue ſayde: the man that is wiſe and of experience: the cleare he holdeth for darke, the little for great, the neare to be far off, the gathered together to be caſt abrode, the certaine for doubtfull.
                  Out of theſe words of Plato there may be gathered, the difference betwixt ſcience and experience: for that we ſée inexpert men holde all things for eaſie, and he that is expert iudgeth all things difficult. God dealeth mercifully with ſuche men, as he leaueth not into ye hands of proude captaines, raſh Pilots, vnlearned Lawyers, fooliſhe Phiſitions, and vnexpert Iudges: bycauſe the proude Captayne fighteth out of time, the raſh Pilots ſendes you to the bottome, the vnlearned Lawyer looſeth youre matter, the fooliſhe Phiſition

ſpoyles your life,Conditions of a good iuſtice. and the vnexpert iudge robbeth your goodes. The Iudges to whome you ſhal put your conſcience in truſt, and commende youre common wealth, ought to be honeſt in their liues, vpright in iuſtice, pacient in iniuries, meaſured in their ſpéech, iuſtified in that they commaund, righteous in iudgement, and pitifull in their executions. Beware of Iudges that be childiſh, fooliſh, ouerbold, raſh, and bloudy: which to the end their fame ſhall ſounde at Courte, that from thence they may receyue commiſſion of Iuſtice: they wil commit a thouſand cruelties in your countreyes, and will giue a thouſande diſpleaſures to youre perſone, in ſuche wiſe, that many times there néedes more reformation for their diſorders, than for the offences youre vaſſals ſhall commit. I do lie if it did not happen on a time to me in Arreuallo, being warden with a new vnexpert Iudge: which bicauſe I did ſomewhat aduertiſe him that he was ouer furious and cruell, ſayde: Father Warden, you get youre meate by preaching, and I get it by hanging: and by your Lady of Gadilupe, I do more eſtéeme to put a foote or a hand to the Pillery, than to be Lord of Ventoſilla. When I heard him mention Ventoſilla, I replied thys word, of my troth maſter Iuſtice, iuſtly apertayneth vnto you the Lordſhip of Ventoſa, for you may not be contayned in Vē
                        toſilla. But proſecuting our intent, it is to wit: that thoſe that the Romaines did call Cenſors or iudges, we do call Corregidores or Correctors, and it was amongſt them a lawe inuiolable, that they made no man a Iudge, that was not at the leaſt aboue forty yéeres old: he ſhoulde be maried, holden for honeſt, meanely ritch, nor infamed with couetouſneſſe, and that in other offices of the common wealth hée had experience.
                  
                     Iulius Caeſar, Octauius Auguſtus, Titus Veſpatianus, Neruus Coceyus,
                     The conditions of Iudges vſed to be choſē in Rome 
                     Traian the iuſt, Antony the méeke, and the good Marcus Aurelius: All theſe ſo glorious Princes from the office of Iudges, did riſe to be Emperours, in ſuche wiſe, that in thoſe dayes, they did not prouide offices for men, but men for offices: for the office of Gouernour, Iuſtice, and corrector, many

will be ſuters: and for many they will make ſute, but in any wiſe you ought to be aduiſed howe ye make promiſe thereof to any man, eyther for prayers or intreataunce to giue the ſame. For your good, you may giue to whome you ſhal think good, but the rod of iuſtice to him who ſhall beſte deſerue it.The office of Iuſtice is to be giuen for merit, and not for affection. Alſo ſome of your ſeruants (in recompence of ſeruice) will craue the office of iuſtice: and in my iudgement, you oughte leſſe to giue it vnto thoſe than vnto any other: for in ſaying they be your ſeruants, & that you ſhal beleeue them more thā the reſt: The people ſhal not dare to complayn, and they ſhall haue libertie the more to robbe and ſteale.
                  If any man or woman ſhall come to complain before your Lordſhip of your Iuſtice, giue him eare at leyſure, and with good will, and if you ſhall fynd his complaynte to be true, remoue his griefe, and reprehende your Iuſticer: but if it bée not ſo, declare how iuſt it is that he commaundeth, and how vniuſt that he demaundeth: for the baſe countrey people doe holde the words of their Lord for goſpell, & of the officer as a paſſioned. If it be not cōuenient for the Iudge you ſhal chooſe, that he bée ſkilful to ſteale or bribe, muche leſſe dothe it beſeeme your Lordeſhip to be a nigarde or couetous, neyther with the price of iuſtice to profit your chamber. Aduiſe your Iuſtices, that haynous, bloudy, deſperate, and ſcandalous offences (in no wyſe) be redeemed with money: for it is impoſſible that any may liue in ſuretie, eyther goe ſafe by the highe way, if there be not in the common wealth the whip, the halter, and the ſworde. There are ſo many quarellers, vagabonds and théeues, murtherers, rebels, and ſedicious, that if they had hope for money to eſcape Iuſtice, they would neuer ceaſe to commit offences. And therfore it is conuenient, that the Iudge bée wyſe and ſkilfull, to the ende he chaſtiſe not all offences with extremitie: neither that he leaue ſomtime with the voyce of the king to honoure the people. Alſo your Lordſhip hath to prouide, that the officers of your audience, which is to wit, Counſellers, Atturneys, and Scriueners, be faithfull in the proceſſe they make, and no tyrantes in the Lawes

they haue in hande:Euill iudges do execute the purſe, and not the perſon. for many tymes it doth happen, that one cōming to complayn of an other, they do not iuſtice vpon the perſon that gaue the quarel, but they execute iuſtice vpon the pouche that he weareth. Alſo aduiſe your Iuſtices, that they diſpatche their affaires with breuitie and with trouth: with trouth, bicauſe they ſhall iudge iuſtly: with breuitie, that it be done with expedition: for it hapneth to many Clients, that without obteyning that they craue, they conſume al that whiche they haue. Alſo your Lordſhip ought to prouide and commaunde the miniſters of your iuſtice, that they doe not diſhonor, miſvſe, ſhame, or deſpiſe ſuch as come to your audience, but that they be mylde, modeſt, and manerly. For ſometimes the ſorowful ſuter doth more féele a rough word they ſpeake, than the Iuſtice they delate. I aſſure you, there be officers ſo abſolute, without temperance, and ſo yll manered, that they preſume to doe more cruelties with their pen, than Roulande with his ſworde.
                  
                     Iudges ought to diſpatche with ſpeed, and anſwere with pacience.Alſo your lordſhip hath to prouide, that your Iudges doe not ſuffer themſelues to be muche viſited, accompanied, and muche leſſe ſerued. For the iudge can not hold narrow frendſhip with any man, that is not in the preiudice of iuſtice: for verie fewe reſorte vnto the Iudge for that he deſerueth, but for the power he holdeth.
                  In the common wealthe diſſentions, angers, quarelles of ambition amongſt your officers of Iuſtice, neither ought you to diſſemble, or in anye wiſe conſente vnto: for at the inſtant that they ſhall grow into quarels, the people ſhal be deuided into partialities: wherof may riſe great offences in the common wealth, and great want of reuerence to youre perſon. Concluding in this caſe (I ſay) that if you will hold your Countrey in iuſtice, giue your Officers occaſion to conceyue opinion that you loue Equitie: And that for no requeſt or intereſt, you will be remoued from the ſame: for if the Lord be iuſt, his officers neuer dare to be vniuſt.
               
               
                  
                  That a Knight or Gentleman be mylde, and of good gouernance.
                  
                     ALſo it is neceſſarie to the good gouernmēt of your houſe & cōmon wealth,Humanitie to all men of the mighty is to be vſed. yt your behauior towardes your ſubiects be ſuche, that with the meaner ſort ye deale as with ſonnes, with the equall as with brothers, with the ancient as with fathers, and with the ſtrangers as with felows: for you ought much more to eſtéem your ſelf in holding them for frends, than to cōmaund them as vaſſals. The difference betwixt the tirant & the Lord is, that the tyrant (ſo he may be ſerued) makes ſmall accompt to be beloued: but he that is a Lorde wiſe, and will rather chooſe to be beloued than ſerued, and I aſſure you he hath great reſon, for ye perſon that giues me his heart, will neuer denie me his goods. The great Philoſopher Licurgus in the laws he gaue to the Lacedemonians, did commaund and counſel: That the auncient men of his common wealth ſhoulde not talke ſtanding, neyther be ſuffred to ſtand bareheaded: and I ſay it to this ende: For that it ſhall diminiſhe nothing your authoritie or grauitie, in that you ſhall ſay vnto the one, be couered Goſſip, and vnto the other, ſit down frende. The good Emperour Titus was worthily beloued, for that the old men he called fathers, the yong men fellowes, Strangers Couſins, the priuate frendes, and all in generall brothers.
                  The gentleman that is humble, courteous, and of a good bringing vp, ſtrangers loue him, and his owne do ſerue him, for courteſie and friendly behauiour is more honour to hym that vſeth it, than to whom it is done. I am not far in in loue with many Gentlemen, vnto whom there goeth to talk and to diſpatche affaires, olde honorable and wiſe men (although poore) & they neuer offer vnto thē ſo much curteſie, as to ſay, aryſe, neyther be couered, and muche leſſe to ſit downe, conceiuing all their greatneſſe to conſiſte, in not commaundyng

to giue them a ſtoole, eyther to put of their cap to any man: note and conſider well this which I ſay vnto your Lordſhip, that the authoritie, greateneſſe, and grauitie of Lordes and Gentlemen, doth not conſiſt to haue their vaſſals knéeling, and bare headed, but in gracious and good gouerning them.
                  When I heard a certain knight valiant and of noble bloud (yet diſdainfull and very proud) that vſed always to ſay to all men (although of worſhip he talked withal) thou, thou, and he he, & neuer added wordes of fauor, worſhip, or curteſy: I ſaid vnto him: By my life ſir I aſſure you, and do iudge many tymes with my ſelfe, yt for this cauſe God or the king ſhew you any fauor, bicauſe you neuer talk with any man with words of fauor, worſhip or curteſie. He did ſo much féele this word, that from thence forward, he left to ſay thou, and ſaid vnto all men: My maiſters, or by your fauors. All men that ſhal come to talke and haue buſineſſe with your Lordſhip, you ought to vſe with mildneſſe, honour, and alſo fawne on them, as euerie man ſhall deſerue, and according to their degrées, cōmanding the olde men to couer, the yong men to riſe, and ſome to ſit downe. For if they delight to ſerue as vaſſalles, they will not that you intreate them as ſlaues: many vaſſals wée doe ſée euery day riſe againſt their Lords, not ſo much for the tributes they raiſe on them, as for the euil dealings they vſe towards them:Of all men to be noted. always your Lordſhip hath to remember, that you and they haue one God to honor, one King to ſerue, one lawe to kéepe, one land to inhabite, and one death to fear: and if you hold this before your eies, you ſhall ſpeak vnto them as vnto brothers, and deale with them as with Chriſtians.
                  Aboue all things take greate héede, to ſay at the ſodaine to any of your ſubiects any word that ſhall ſtaine his kinred, or iniurie his perſon, for there is no villain of Saigo ſo inſenſible that doth not more féele an iniurious word that is ſpoken, than the chaſtiſement which is giuen: and there is a greater euil therin than this, that amongſt the cōmon and countrey-people, all the kinred doth aunſwere for the iniurie, and the ſhame to one, redoundeth to the deſpite of the whole: whereof

it hapneth many times, that to be reuenged of a worde, the whole people do riſe againſt their Lord. So in this caſe take my counſell, that if any your ſubiects ſhal doe a thing whiche he ought not to do, that you determine to chaſtiſe him, & not to vpbrayd or defame him: for the chaſtiſement he ſhal think to procéede of iuſtice, but your vpraiding of malice. For any diſtemperance that may gréeue you, or maye happen to anger you: Auoyde in any wiſe to call any man knaue, Iew, filth, or villaine: for beſides that theſe woords be rather of tiplers, than of Knightes or Gentlemen: The Gentleman is bound to be as chaſt of his ſpéech, as a virgin of hir virginitie: for a gentleman to be of a diſtempred ſpéeche, foule mouthed, euill manered, loude and foule ſpoken, this maye not procéede of any other occaſion, but that he is melancholike,The womans armour is hir tongue. a coward and feareful. For it is notorious vnto all men, that vnto the woman it appertaineth to be reuenged with the toung: but the knight or Gentleman with his launce.
                  The king Demetrius had a certain loue named Lamia, whiche when ſhe demaunded Demetrius why he didde not ſpeake and was not merrie, he made anſwere: Holde thy peace Lamia, and let me alone, for I doe as wel my office, as thou doſt thine: for the office of the woman is to ſpin and prattle, and the office of the man is to holde his peace and fight. To buffet the boyes of the chamber, to pull them by the heare, to ioll them againſt the portall, and to ſpurne with the féete: Your Lordſhip ought not to do it, neither conſent that it bée done in your preſence. For in palaces of auctoritie and grauitie,True gentilitie pitieth the diſtreſſed. to the Lord it appertaineth to manifeſt his mind, and to the ſtuarde to chaſtiſe. If your lordſhip ſhall commaunde to chaſtiſe or to whip any page or ſeruaunt: prouide that it be doone in a place priuie and ſecrete: for it ought to be very ſtrange vnto the Lord or Gentleman that is noble & valiant, to ſée any man wéepe, either to heare any complaine. The writers of hiſtories do muche prayſe the Emperour Octauius Auguſtus, which did neuer conſent that any execution ſhoulde be doone whileſt he was within the walles of Rome, but for the taking

away of any mans lyfe, he always went to hunting: By the contrarie, the Hiſtoriographers do much reprehend the Emperour Aurelius, who before his owne eyes, commaunded his ſeruants to be whipt and chaſtiſed, which certaynly he ſhould not haue doone: for the clemencie of the Prince oughte to bée ſuch, that not only they ſhould not ſée the execution, neyther yet ſo much as the perſon that is executed.
                  
                     Brothers children.Your Lordſhip alſo hath to beware to aduenture to recoūt newes, to compound lies, to relate fables, and to tell tales: For the fooliſhe man, and the tatling tedious Gentleman, be brothers children. The officers and ſeruantes of your houſe, you haue to kéepe them corrected, warned, and alſo in feare: that they rayſe no quarels, robbe no orchardes, ſpoyle no gardens, neither diſhonour maried women: In ſuch ſort that the ſeruants preſume not to doe that whiche theyr Maiſters dare not commaunde: the yong men and pages that ſhal attende on you, cauſe them to learne the commandements, to praye and faſt, and to kéepe the Sabbaoth dayes: For God wyl neuer deale mercifully with you, if you make not greatter accompt that they ſerue God, than your ſelfe. Suche as ſhall play at cardes or dice (for drie money) not only chaſtiſe them, but alſo diſpatch them away, for the vice of play may not be ſuſteyned but by ſtealing or diſceyt. The pages and yong mē that you ſhall take into your chamber, you haue to make choyſe of ſuche as be wyſe, honeſt clenly and ſecret: for babling and foulemouthed boyes, they will imbeſill your apparell, & ſtaine your fame. Commaunde the Controller of your houſe, that the pages be taught to go clenly, to bruſhe, and laye vp their apparel, ſerue at the table, put of their cap, vſe reuerence, and to ſpeake with good maner, bicauſe it may not bée named a palace, where there wants in the Lorde ſhamefaſtneſſe, and in the ſeruants good bringing vp.
                  To the ſeruaunt that ſhall be vertuous, and agréeable to your condition, truſt him with your perſon, let him cōmaund in your houſe, incommend him with your honoure, and giue him of your goods, vpon ſuche condition that he preſume not

to be abſolute lord of the common weal: for that day that they holde ſuch one in reuerence, they ſhall eſtéeme you but little. If you will enioy ſeruice, and be frée from diſpleaſures, you ſhall giue no man ſuche rule in your eſtate, that your ſeruant ſhall thwart you, or your vaſſal diſobey you. Alſo your Lordſhip is to be aduertized (in that as now ye enter of new) you attempt not to doe manye newe thinges: for euery noueltie doth not more pleaſe him that doth inſtitute the ſame, than the accompliſhement therof diſpleaſeth hym to whome it is commaunded.
                  
                     Lactantius Firmianus doth ſaye, that the common wealth of the Sicienians endured longer, than that of the Grekes,
                     A ſpeciall aduenture. 
                     Aegyptians, Lacedemonians, and the Romaines, bicauſe in ſeuen hundreth and fortie yeares they neuer made newe lawes, neyther brake their olde. Suche as ſhall counſell you to renewe your Iudges, chaunge your Iuſtices, make proclamations,The pretence of priuate profite, is voyde of all good counſell. and to remoue your ſeruice to other perſons vnknown. Conſider very well, if they attempte the ſame, to the ende that you ſhall not erre, or elſe to amend their owne eſtate. For it was a lawe amongſt the Athenians, that he ſhoulde haue no voyce in the common wealth, that pretended to haue intereſt in that which he counſelled.
                  Now at the beginning you haue muche cauſe to conſider in whom to truſt, and with whom to take counſell: for if the counſeller be ſuch as hopeth thereby to gather any gaine: to that end he will direct his counſell, where his affection is enclined. In ſuche ſorte that if he be couetous, he will ſéeke to rob, and if he be malicious or matched with enimies, how to be reuenged. And alſo ſuch things as you ſhall finde in your houſe to be reformed, and your common welth to be chaſtiſed. It is not my opinion that you amend or reforme all things in haſt that is amiſſe: For it is not iuſt, neither yet ſure, that ancient cuſtomes of the cōmon people be taken away ſodeynly, being brought in by little and little. The cuſtomes that touch not the faith, neither offende the Churche, eyther offende the Common wealth, take them not away, neither alter thē: the

which if you will not for their cauſe, yet for your owne cauſe diſfauor the ſame (for if I be not deceiued) in the houſe where dwelleth nouelties, there lodgeth want of iudgement.
                  
                     A notable meaſure.Alſo my Lord I counſell you, yt you in ſuche wiſe meaſure your goods, that they liue not with you, but that your lordſhip liue with them. I ſay it bicauſe there be many noble men of your eſtate, that kéepe a great houſe with other mens goodes: he that hath much, & ſpendes little, they call him a nigarde: & he that hath little & ſpendes muche, they hold him for a foole: for which cauſe men ought to liue in ſuch ſorte, yt they bée not noted mizers for their kéeping either prodigal for their ſpēding.
                  
                     A quent of Meruedis, whiche be .6. a penie, amoūt 2500. Ducates.My Lord Earle, be none of thoſe that haue two quentes of rent, & foure of follies, which alwayes go taking by lone, dealing by exchāge, taking rent aforehand, and ſelling their patrimonie: In ſuch maner, as all their trauel doth cōſiſt not in mainteyning houſe, but in ſuſtayning follies. Many other things I might ſay vnto youre Lordſhip in this matter, the which my pen doth leaue to write, to remit them vnto your prudencie. No more but the Lorde be your protector.
               
               
                  From Valiodolid 
                     the thirde of Nouember.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Admirall Sir Fadrique Enriques, wherin is declared, that olde men haue to beware of the yeare three ſcore and three.
               
               
                  MOſte renoumed Lorde and great Admirall, I aſſure you, I maye firmely aduouche vnto your honour, that at the inſtant, there was not anye thyng farther oute of my mynde, than was your letter when I ſawe it enter into my Cell: and incontinente I imagined with my ſelfe, that you wrote vnto mée ſome ieſt, or ſent vnto me to declare ſome doubt.
               
                  The harte of man is moſte excellēt in his kynde.To the very like purpoſe the diuine Plato did ſay, that ſuch is the excellencie of the heart, aboue all the other membres of man, that many tymes the eyes be deceiued in the things

they ſée: and the hart doth not erre in that it doth imagin. The Conſul Silla, when he ſawe Iulius Caeſar being a yong man euill truſſed, and worſe girt: (for whiche cauſe many did iudge him to be negligent, and alſo doltiſh) ſayd vnto all thoſe of his band, beware of that il girt youth: that although he appeareth to be ſuch, yet this is he that ſhall tiranniſe the Citie of Rome, and be the ruine of my houſe. Plutarch in the life of Marcus Antonius recounteth of a certaine Gréeke named Ptolomeus: which being demaunded wherefore he did not talke, or was conuerſant with any man in all Athens, but with the yong man Alcibiades? anſwered, bycauſe my hart giueth me, that this yong man ſhall ſet Greece on fire, and defame all Aſia. The good Emperour Traiane ſayd, that he was neuer deceyued in chooſing fréends, and in knowing of enemies: for preſently his hart did aduertiſe him, to whome he ſhoulde repaire, and of whome he ſhould beware. And if we well conſider the foreſayd: neither the hart of Silla was deceyued in that he propbeſied of Iulius Caeſar, neyther the Art of Ptolomeus did erre in that he diuined of Alcibiades: bycauſe the one depriued Rome of hir libertie, and the other darkned the glory of Greece. Thus much I thought to ſaye vnto youre Lordſhip, to the ende you might ſée, how my hart was not deceiued in diuining what you had written, and alſo what you craued.
               I may very well ſay, that ſometimes your Lordſhip writeth me ſome ieſts that makes me mery: and ſometimes you demaund queſtiōs, that makes me watch: for your Lordſhip hath your iudgement ſo cleare, your memorie ſo readye,Commēdable qualities. the Scripture ſo prompt, the time ſo diſpoſed, and aboue all great ſwiftneſſe in writing, and much vſe in reading: that you doe me great gréefe to importunate me ſo often to declare that which you vnderſtande not, and to ſéeke out that whiche you may not finde, to expound as I did the verſes of Homer, too declare the life of Antigonus, to ſearch you the hiſtorie of Methiados the Thebane, to relate you the Ceruatica of Sertorius, you haue iudged to be don in maner without trauel: but I ſweare by the law of an honeſt man, I was ouer watched in ſéeking,

ſpent in diſpoſing, and tried in writing it. Many other Lords of this kingdome, and alſo out of the ſame do write vnto mée, and craue that I declare them ſome doutes, and ſend thē ſome hiſtories: which doutes and demaundes be all plaine and eaſie, and at thrée turnes, I finde them amongſt my writings: but your Lordſhip is ſuch a frend of nouelties as always you aſke me hiſtories ſo ſtraunge and peregrine, that my wittes may not in any wiſe but néedes go on pilgrimage. My Lord comming, to the purpoſe, you ſay that the Earle of Miranda did write vnto you, that eleuen dayes before the good Conſtable Sir Ynnigo of Velaſco died, he hard me ſay and certifie that he ſhoulde die, the whiche as I then ſpake, ſo afterwards it came to paſſe, but I would not declare vnto him, by what meane I vnderſtood it.
               Youre Lordſhips pleaſure is, that I ſhoulde write vntoo you, whether I did ſpeake it in earneſt or in ieſt: or if I ſawe in the ſickeman any prognoſtication, or if I knewe in thys matter any great ſecret: the which I will diſcouer vnto you, if you promiſe me to kéepe it ſecret, and that vnto me thereof you be not ingrate. The truth is, I ſayd it to the Earle of Miranda, and alſo to the Doctour Carthagna: neyther did I know it by reuelation as a Prophet, either did I obtayne it in Circle as a Nigromanticke, either did I finde it in Ptolomeus as an Aſtronomer, nor vnderſtand by the pulſe as a Phiſition, but I found it as a Philoſopher: for that the good Conſtable did then goe in the yeare Climatike.A notable ſecret in the yere climatik. At the preſent I vnderſtood the Conſtable to be ſick, I demaunded how old he was, and when they anſwered that he was thrée ſcore and thrée, I ſayde his life was in great perill, for that he was then in the moſt daungerous yeare to die.
               For the vnderſtanding hereof it is to wit, that all the lyfe of man is like a long & a perillous ſicknes, wherin the ſeuēth and the ninth day is muche to be noted, for that in thoſe cretick dayes, the ſick do mend or grow worſe. That whiche the Phiſition dothe call Terme in the ſick man, is called in the whole by the Philoſopher Climate: and from thence it is, that

from ſeuen to ſeuen yeares, and from nine to nine yeares, mē do chaunge their complexions, and alſo many times theyr conditions. That this is true, it clearely appeareth, in that the man which is now flegmaticke, we ſée him turne cholerike, the furious to be milde, the proſperous to be vnfortunate, and alſo he that is wiſe remoue to be fooliſh. All whych commeth to paſſe, that after ſeuen or nine yeares, they haue chaunged as we haue ſayde their conditions, and alſo theyr complexions. Alſo it is to be vnderſtoode, that in all the diſcourſe of oure lyfe, we onely lyue vnder one onely climat, the which is ſeuen, or nine yeares: except in the yeare of thréeſcore and thrée, in the which two termes of two climats doe ioyne, which is to witte, nine ſeuens, or ſeuen nines: becauſe nine times ſeuen, and ſeuen times nine, be thréeſcore and thrée yeares, and therefore in that yeare many olde men dye. Thoſe that come to the yeare of thrée ſcore and thrée,A perillous time for old men. oughte to lyue in very good order, and to walke very warely: becauſe that yere is ſo perillous, that none paſſeth the ſame without ſuffering ſome daunger. Many and very notable men (in time paſt, and alſo preſent) died in that yeare of thréeſcore and thrée. More and ioyntly with this I ſaye, that the ſonne that ſhall ſée his Father paſſe this terme, let him not hope ſo ſoone to ſée him die: neyther as yet to inherite.
               The Romaine and Greeke Princes, after they ſawe themſelues eſcaped the yeare, théeſcore and thrée, they gaue greate gifts vnto their people, and alſo offered no ſmall offerings in their Temples: as it is read of the Emperour Octauius, the Emperour Antonie the méeke, & the good Alexander Seuerus.
               
               I thought good to giue a reckoning vnto your honor of this hiſtorie: or to ſay better, of this philoſophie: becauſe you maye vnderſtand how I did diuine the death of the good Conſtable of Caſtile: which all we his friends and louers did ſée, within the yeare ſixtie thrée to begin to be ſicke: and alſo to make and to dye. Of all the great-ſtates of this kingdome, I holde ſome for kinſmen, others my good Lordes, ſome for neighbours, and others for aquainted: but amongſt them all, I

held him for my ſinguler good Lord and friend, for that I foūd him of a very good conuerſation, and of a ſounde condition. The good Conſtable was milde in commaunding, iuſt in gouerning,Notable conditions of a noble man. wiſe in ſpéeche, large in expence, valiant in battell, méeke in pardoning, and a very good Chriſtian in liuing. For that your Lordſhip and he were captaynes in the warre, and Viceroys in time of peace: you will not denie that whiche I ſay to be very true, although I leaue of him much more to be ſaid. When you gaue and alſo ouercame the battell of Reniega neare vnto Pampalona, I do remember, that I comming vnto your honour to confirme two billes, the one as concerning Iuſtice, the other for goodes: your Lordſhip ſayde vntoo me theſe words: with me (father maſter) you haue framed and brought to paſſe, that I will do what you will, and confirme what you demaund: but it is neceſſary, that firſte you informe the Conſtable of the caſe, and make relation vntoo him of the qualitie of the matter, for that he is very much aduiſed in the diſtribution of goodes, and very ſcrupulous in matters of Iuſtice. The good Conſtable had with me very great familiaritie, and I with him inuiolable friendſhip, and vpon this foundation he did alwayes communicate with me matters of conſcience, and diſcharges of his goodes, wherein alwayes I did know of hym, that he did procure to do well, and did ſhunne and auoyde to offende, I knowe not what to write more in this matter vnto your Lordſhip, but that the good Conſtable (if he finiſhed his life here in Madrid) at the leaſt in my chronicle his memorie ſhall remayne immortall.
               
                  From Madrid 
                     the xv. of October .1529.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Admirall, Sir Frederique Enriques, in which is expounded, wherefore Abraham and Ezechiell did fall forward, and Hely and the Iewes backwardes.
               
               
                  RIght renowmed Lord and Archmariner, great be the complaints that your Honor ſendeth me in this your laſt letter: the one for that I haue not anſwered thys

yeare vnto youre writing: and the other, bycauſe I haue not ſent your doubt abſolued. The truth knowen and the certaintie vnderſtood, neyther ſhall I be blamed, or you remaine offended. The very truth that hath paſſed in this matter is, that as they haue ſtolen from Manſilla your ſeruant his horſe, and he played away al his money that he brought by the way (in ſéeking to borow, to pay at his lodging) he forgat with me to take order for his anſwere. Since I read youre letters with a very good will, and preſently forthwith did put my ſelf in ſtudie for your doubts, it is not iuſt that faulte to be imputed vnto me, if youre ſeruantes be forgetfull to take their anſwer. Oftentimes I was both aſhamed and alſo offended, to ſée your letters come ſo bitter and ſo cholerike: that of a troth to ſhew ſo much anger, and to write ſo heauie or leadenlike, youre Lordſhip had no occaſion, and muche leſſe any reaſon. But as your body is little, and your hart excéeding the ſame, by a third or fift: if you giue him place to ſpeake what he wil, and that he complayne what he féeleth, beléeue me my Lorde and be out of doubt, you ſhall liue in your ſelfe payned and diſcontented, and of others not welbeloued.
               The great and mightie Lords,A leſſon for Lords. ought of nothing more too preſume or boaſt themſelues, than to haue great harts, which they ought to inioy, (if they will imploy them well,) in moderating themſelues in great proſperities, and not to be diſmaied in their great aduerſities. My iudgement is, ſince your Lordſhip is naturally cholerike, and of ſmall patience, that you giue not your ſelfe to write when you be diſtempered: for men do write many times in their choler, whiche afterwards they would not ſhould haue paſſed (ſo much as) their thoughts. To the argument whiche you alledge that I eſtéemed you but little bycauſe I wold not anſwer preſently: this I anſwere, I deny the premiſes, and defye the conſequence: bicauſe your Lordſhip hath much, may do muche, deſerueth much, and therefore we all eſtéeme you very muche. For me to be ignorant of the great eſtate of your perſone, of bloud ſo vnſpotted, of iudgement ſo delicate, in letters of ſo great exerciſe,

and of ſo greate dexteritie in armes: the cauſe were to great fooliſhneſſe, or to much lacke of wit. But let the cace reſt, let vs deuide all this vnkindneſſe amongſt vs, whiche is to wit, that your Lordſhip from hence forward deferre or put off your choler, pardon Manſilla for forgetting his letter: and alſo kind me to expound your doubts: and after this maner we will giue amends to that which is paſt, and vſe ſilēce for the time to come.
               Your honour demaundeth, that I declare, wherefore the Patriarch Abraham in the vale of Mambre,
                  The expoſitiō of the text. and the Prophete Ezechiel neare vnto the riuer Cobar, as holy ſcripture ſaith of them, fell to the ground vpon their faces: and contrariwiſe, Heli the Prophet, and the Iewes that tooke Chriſte, fell backwards Your Lordſhip hath to conſider, that it is not ſo light or eaſie whiche you doubt of, for if I be not deceyued, it is a queſtion that few men do moue, and in a manner none dothe expound. For notwithſtanding I haue ſéene much, and read much, I can not remember me to haue conſidered or doubted, neither at anytime to haue preached thereof: I dare bée bold to ſay, that by theſe two maners of fallings, the one back wards, and the other forwards, do ſignifie two kindes of ſinning. For euen as to fall after the one manner or the other, in the end all is falling: ſo in like manner, to ſinne after the one ſort or the other, all is ſinning. Thoſe that do fall vppon the backe, and backwards, we ſée them haue their faces diſcouered,To be aſhamed of ſinne, is hope of amēdment. and looking vp to heauen: by theſe are to be vnderſtood: thoſe which do ſinne without the feare of God, & afterwardes haue no ſhame to haue ſinned. We ſée by experience that he that falleth forwardes, may helpe hym ſelfe to riſe with hys hands, with hys elbowes, with his knées, and with hys féete: by this I woulde ſay, that then we haue hope to come out of ſinne, when we ſhall be aſhamed to haue ſinned. The contrary happeneth in him that falleth backwards, yt whych can neuer help him ſelfe with his handes, or lift him ſelfe, or ſtay with his féete. By this I would ſay, that the man that is not aſhamed to be a ſinner, late or neuer ſhall we ſée hym

come out of ſinne.
               
                  Plutarch and Aulus Gellius doe ſaye, that no yong man of Rome might enter amongſt the common women, but wyth their faces very wel couered. If ther hapned any ſo vnſhame-faſt that durſt enter or come foorth diſcouered: ſo openly was he chaſtiſed, as if he had committed ſome forcible adultery. It is to be noted, that all thoſe that fell forward were ſaints: as Abraham and Ezechiel: and on the contrary, thoſe that fell backwardes, as Hely the prieſt of the temple, and the Iewes that ſold Chriſt were ſinners. Out of all this there may bée gathered, how much, and how greatly we haue to regard, not only that we fall, either ſo much as to ſtumble: for we knowe not whether we ſhall fall forward as Abraham, or backward as the vnfortunate Hely. Conſidering we diſcend of ſinners, liue amongſt ſinners, be conuerſant amongſt ſinners, and this world being in ſo great want of iuſt men, we cannot deliuer our ſelues from all ſinnes: ioyntly therefore with thys let vs pray vnto the Lord, that if he take away his grace, that we do fall, that he take not away ſhamefaſtneſſe wherewith to ariſe. Much is God offended with vs to ſée how little we eſtéeme to ſinne, but he is muche more offended to ſée howe ſlowly we remember to repent: for they be very few that do leaue to ſinne, but at the time when they cannot more ſinne. Oh how many moe be they that fal backward with Hely, thā forward with Abraham: for if there be one that is aſhamed of ſinne, there is an hundreth that account ſinne but paſtime. Let euery man eſtéeme himſelfe as he liſt, and let euery man ſay what he ſuppoſeth:No greter ſinner than he that preſumeth to be good. but for my part I hold none for a greater ſinner, than he that accompts himſelfe for very iuſt: neyther do I conceyue for very iuſt, but he that acknowledgeth himſelfe to be a great ſinner. God doth well knowe what wee can do, and he vnderſtandeth very well the ſtrength that we haue: and thereof it is, that he is not offended for that we bée not iuſt, but bycauſe we doe not confeſſe to be ſinners. I returne to ſay, that God doth not maruell that we be humane in ſinning, but yt which doth offēd him is, for that being as we

are ſo great ſinners, we would well make the world beléeue that we be very iuſt. Let the concluſiō be in this matter, that they only fall backwards with Hely, and with the Hebrewes, that ſo without remorſe ſit downe to ſinne, as they would ſit downe to eate, and lie downe to ſléepe. Of that whiche I doe moſt maruell in this matter is, that being as we are fallen into moſt grieuous ſinnes, we do ſo liue, and go ſo contented, as though we had receyued of God a ſafeconduit to be ſaued. Behold here my Lord your letter anſwered. Beholde youre doubt abſolued. Beholde here my fault excuſed. And alſo behold here your choler remoued. No more but that our Lorde giue you his grace, and vnto me his glory.
               
                  From Madrid 
                     the xj. of Nouember. 1528.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Abbot of Monſerrate, wherein is touched the oratories that the Gentiles vſed, & that it is a better life to liue in Monſerrate, than at the Court.
               
               
                  MOſt reuerend, and bleſſed Abbot, in the eleuenth Calends of May, your Monke brother Roger gaue me a letter of yours, which I receyued with gladneſſe, and read with pleaſure, for that it was from your fatherhoode, and brought by the hands of that graue Father. Of Aurelianus the Emperour it is read, that the letters which Domitius ſent vnto him were ſo tedious, that he heard them, but did not anſwer them: and the letters that the Cenſor Turinus ſent him, he himſelfe did read them, and with his owne hand aunſwered them. Of a troth there be men ſo tedious in their ſpéech, and ſo without grace in writing, that a man would rather be ſicke of a feuer, than heare their talke, either reade their letters.
               No man, of any man ought to maruell, ſince men be ſo diuers in complexion, and ſo variable in condition, that many times againſt our will the hart doth loue which were muche better to be abhorred, and doth abhorre that which were better

to be beloued. I ſay this father Abbot, to the ende you ſhall vnderſtand, that as oft as they ſay, here is one of Monſeratte, my heart reioyceth to heare ſome newes from thēce, and the eyes he quickened in readyng your letters.
               Father you write vnto me, that I aduertiſe you, if in the olde tyme amongeſt the Gentiles were vſed holy Oratories: as nowe is vſed amongſt the Chriſtians: to which demaund I wil ſay what I haue read,Oracles of old time. and that which preſently I do remēber. The oracle of the Scicilians was Libeus, the Oracle of ye 
                  Rodes was Ceres, the oracle of the Epheſians was the greate Diana, the Oracle of the Paleſtines was Belus, the Oracle of the Argiues was Delphos, the oracle of the Numidians was Iuno, the Oracle of the Romains was Berecinthia, the oracle of the Thebans was Venus, the oracle of the Spanyards was Proſerpina, (whoſe temple ſtood in Cantabria, which is now called Nauara.) That which the Chriſtians do now call Hermitage, the Gentils did name Oracle. This Oracle ſtode always diſtant from the Cities, and holden in very great veneration. There was always in the Temple one prieſt alone, it was well repaired, well lockte, and well indued, and thoſe that went thither on ſtations, they might only kiſſe the walles, & alſo from the dores behold, but within they might not enter, except ordinarie prieſts, and ſtrange Embaſſadors. Nere vn
                  
                     ••
                   the Oracle, they plāted trées, within alwais oyle did burn: the couering was all of lead to defende the raine: at the doore there ſtoode an Idoll the which they did kiſſe: they had there a certaine hollowe trunke where they did offer, and an houſe buylded where they lodged.
               
                  Plutarch doth much praiſe the Emperor Alexander the great for that in all the kingdomes he conquered, and in all the prouinces that he ſubdued, he commaunded ſolemne Temples to bée made to praye in, and Oracles farre diſtant to viſite.Antigonus to be noted. The king Antigonus that was page to the Emperour Alexander, and father of king Demetrius, (althoughe they reprehend him to be abſolute in gouernement, and diſſolute in maners, the Hiſtoriographers do much praiſe him, bicauſe euery

wéeke he went once into the Temple, and euery moneth did ſleepe one night to the Oracle. The Senate of Athens did muche more honour vnto the dinure Plato after his death, than they did when he was liuing: and the cauſe therof was, for that the good Plato, when he was wearie of reading and ſtudying, did withdraw himſelf to liue, and alſo to dye neere vnto a certaine deuoute Oracle, wherin he was afterwards buried, and as God adorned. Archidamas the Greeke, that was ſonne to Ageſilaus, after hée had gouerned the cōmon wealth of Athens .22. yeares, & had ouercome by ſea & by land ten battailes, he cōmaunded to he made in the moſt ſharpe mountaines of Argos a moſt ſolemne oracle, wherein Archidamas did ende his lyfe, and alſo for himſelfe did chooſe a ſepulchre. Amongſt all the oratories that of olde they had in Aſia, the moſt famous was the Oracle of Delphos: for to that place from all partes of the worlde they did concurre, and thither did carye moſte preſentes, and there made moſte vowes, and alſo from thence of their Goddes receyued moſt anſweres.
               When Camillus ouercame the Samnits, the Romans made a vow, to make an image of gold to ſend to ye Oracle, for which purpoſe the matrons of Rome, gaue their cholers, their rings, their bracelets, and their eare rings from their perſons, for which liberalitie they were greatly honored and largely priuiledged. I haue ſayd all this Father Abbotte, to the end y
                     •…
                   ſhall vnderſtand, that it is no new thing in this world to haue amongſt the people temples and hermitages. The difference betwixt ours and theirs, is: that thoſe Oracles men haue appoynted, but our ſanctuaries God doth chooſe, whereof there followeth great vtilitie, and no ſmall ſecuritie: for that in the place that of God is choſen, wée may praye withoute any ſcruple. I doe remember I haue bene at oure Ladies of Lorito, of Gadalupe, del a penia de Francie, del a Hoz de Segouia, y de Balunera, the which houſe and ſanctuaries be all of much praier & admiration: but for my contēt & my condition, our Ladie of the craggy Rocke, I finde it to be a buildyng

of admiration, a temple of prayer, and a houſe of deuotion. Father Abbot I aſſure you of a troth, I did neuer ſée my ſelfe amongſt thoſe ſharpe crags, amongſt thoſe high mountains, amongſt thoſe cruell rocks, & amongſt thoſe thick woods, that I did not purpoſe to be an other, that I did not ſorow for time paſt, and that I did not abhorre libertie, & did loue to be alone. I did neuer paſſe by craggie moone that forthwith I was not contrite, that I was not repentant at great leyſure, that I did not celebrate with teares, that I did not watche one nyghte, that I gaue not to the poore: & aboue all, that I did not fill my ſelfe with ſighing, and purpoſe to amend. Or that it pleaſed the God of heauen that I were ſuche here, and in my whole lyfe, as I haue purpoſed to bee when I was there. The more I goe laden with dayes, the more dull I féele my ſelfe in vertues, & which is worſt of al, that in good deſires I am a ſaint, and in dooing good works I am a ſinner, preaching as I doe preach, that heauen is full of good works, & hell is full of good thoughts. I knowe not whether they be my frendes that doe counſel me, parents that doth importune me, enimies that do direct me, buſineſſe that doth hinder me, Caeſar that withoute ceaſing commaundes me, or the diuell that temptes me. The more I doe purpoſe to parte from the worlde, more and more I fynde my ſelfe ſinkyng to the bottome thereof. The trouth is, that the lyfe of the Courte, is verie pleaſaunte for ſuch as haue an appetite therto: for there we ſuffer hunger, colde, thirſte, wearyneſſe, pouertie, ſorrowe, angers, diſfauours and perſecutions: all whyche be tollerable and verie eaſy to be ſuffered: for there is none that dothe hynder oure libertie, neyther taketh reckening of our ydleneſſe. Beléeue mée father Abbotte, and be oute of doubte, for the ſoule and alſo for the bodye, your lyfe is muche better there at Craggye Mounte, than this that wée leade héere at Courte: for the Courte ſerueth better to heare newes thereof, than to experimente the things that paſſeth therin. In the Courte he that may doe little is ſoone forgotten, and hée that hath ſomewhat,

is purſued. In the court the poore hath not to care, and the riche can not help himſelf. In the Court they be few that liue contented, and many that be abhorred. In the Court all procure to be in fauour and authoritie, and in the end one only doth commaunde. In the Court none hath deſire there to die, notwithſtanding we ſee not any that will departe from thence. In the Court we ſee many doe what they 
                     〈…〉
                  t, but very fewe what is méete, In the Courte all doe blaſpheme the court, notwithſtanding all follow the court. Finally, I ſay and affirme that which I haue ſaid and preached, whiche is, that the Court is not but for men that be priuate and in fauour, that can gather the frute therof: and for yong men that haue no feeling thereof. It with theſe conditions (Father Abbot) you will come and dwell at Court, from hencefoorth I make exchaunge for your craggy mount, and alſo doe promiſe you by the faith of a Chriſtian, you ſhall more repent you to haue bin conuerted a courtier, than I to be admitted of the religion of S. Benet. For the much good will I beare you, for the much deuotion I hold of that place, you are bound to pray vnto God,Gods grace doth only ſaue vs. that he will draw me from this infamous life, and fight me with his grace, without the whiche we cannot ſerue hym, and much leſſe be ſaued. By the handes of Frier Roger I haue receyued the ſpoones you ſent me, and to him I deliuered the booke that he deſired me: in ſuch wiſe, that I ſhall haue ſpoones to eate with, and your fatherhod a booke to pray in. In the reſt that you write, as concerning your Monaſterie, the cace ſhall be, that you deale with God for me, as one that is deuoute, and I ſhall do with Caeſar the worke of a friend. No more, but that our Lorde be your protector.
               
                  From Valiodolid 
                     the vij. of Ian. 1535.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Admirall Sir Frederique Enriques, in the whiche there is declared a certaine authoritie of the holy ſcripture.
               
               
                  GLorious and right famous Archmarriner, I am determined before ye Iudge Ronquillo to adiorne your Lordſhip, to the end that the parties called and hearde, hée

he iudge and giue ſentence betwixte vs, whether I, being as I am a Gentleman, and a Courtier, be bound to anſwere Extempore, vnto all your Letters: and to expounde all doubtes, which your honour ſo continually writeth vnto me. Your ſollicitor is ſo importunate for anſwere (I confeſſe) that many tymes I giue the ſeruaunt to the Deuil, and alſo at ſometime, I pray not vnto God for the maiſter.
               Complayning yeſterdaye vnto your ſolicitour, for that he was ſo tedious, and bicauſe ſo continually he did moue me, he made me anſwer with a verie good grace. Conſider ſir maſter I giue you to vnderſtande, that the Admirall (my Lorde) craueth of your reuerence, that you write vnto him as a friend, that you ſend him newes as a Chronicler, declare his doubtes as a Diuine, and counſell his conſcience as a Religious. Whervnto I replyed, if your maiſter the Admirall will be well ſerued, alſo I wil be wel payed. The paiment ſhal be, for the office of Chronicler, of a diuine, of a friend, and of a Counſeller: that ſince I cānot get my meat with the laūce, I muſt obtayn it with the pen. I made al this threatening, not to the intente your Lordſhip ſhall giue me to eate, but for that you ſhould ceaſe to be importune: for I thank God,A benefit due to ſuche as ſerue princes. the Emperour (that is my lord and maiſter) hath not onely giuen mée that whiche is neceſſarie, but alſo wherewith to reliene others. The benefit that we haue (that attend vpon Princes) is, that if we be bound to ſerue them, we haue alwais licēce to craue of them, but let the concluſion be, that with the ſame intention that I did ſpeake thoſe wordes here, it may pleaſe your Lordſhip to receiue them there: that in fine & in the end, chide we neuer ſo much, or be we neuer ſo angrie, you muſt nedes do what I deſire you: and I muſt of neceſſitie doe what you commaunde me.
               Your Lordſhips pleaſure is, that I write vnto you, howe that texte is to be vnderſtoode of Eſaias, where he ſayeth, Vae tibi Ieruſalem, quia bibiſti calicem irae Dei vſque ad feces: Whiche woordes are to bée vnderſtoode: wo be vnto thée Ieruſalem, bycauſe thou haſt dronke the cuppe of the Lords wrath, euen

to the dregs. Your lordſhip aſketh a matter ſo high, & a thing ſo profound, that I had rather vnderſtand than ſpeak it, taſt it than write it: for they know more therof that be giuē to contemplation, than ſuch as be occupied in reading: but this is the doubt. Since God the father did ſend to Chriſt his ſon, a cup to drinke of bitterneſſe: wherof is Ieruſalem reprehended, for the cup that ſhe drank of wrath? the one was the cup, the other was the cup: the one of bitterneſſe, the other of wrathe: the Synagogue did receyue the one, and the Churche the other: Chriſte dyd drinke the one, Ieruſalem dyd drynke the other: God ſent the one, and God ſent the other. But ſince it is ſo, why doe they ſo muche prayſe the cuppe that Chriſte taſted of, and condemne the ſorrowfull cuppe that Ieruſalem dyd drinke?
               To vnderſtand the profunditie of this ſcripture, we muſte preſuppoſe, that there be two maners of cuppes, which is to wit, the cup that is ſayd ſimply only of God, and the cup that is ſayd with an addition, that is, of the ire of God. There is ſo great difference betwixt theſe two cuppes, that in the one we drink heauen, in the other we ſwalow hell: the holy cup of God is no other thing but temptations, hunger, cold, thirſte, perſecutions, exile, pouertie, and martirdom: of which thinges, God giues to drink and to taſt, to ſuch as he hathe choſen to ſerue him, and hath predeſtinate to be ſaued. Vnto whome God giueth this cup to drynke, it is a ſigne that he is regiſtred amongeſt them that ſhall be ſaued: in ſuche ſorte that we can not eſcape Hell, but at the coſte of verie great trauel. Profoundly it is to be conſidered what Chriſt ſayde: that the cup ſhould not only be giuen to his owne perſon, but that it ſhoulde alſo paſſe vnto his Church, in ſuch wiſe that he drank thereof, but he made not an ende: for if Chriſt had dronke al the cuppe, only Chriſt ſhould haue entred the glorie. And for this cauſe he prayed vnto his father that the cup ſhoulde paſſe vnto thoſe of his Churche, for that we ſhoulde all enter with him into the glorie. Oh high miſterie neuer heard of, yt Chriſt being in the Garden, in the darke alone, flat vpon his knées,

ſweating, praying, and wéeping, he did not craue of hys Father, that the elect of his Church ſhuld be cheriſhed or worldly pampred, but of that cup he would giue them a draught to drinke. Of that cup of bitterneſſe and trauell, only Chriſt did drinke his fill: bicauſe he only was ſufficient to redéeme vs. All we that came after Chriſt. If we cannot drinke our fill, I would to God we might drinke ſufficient for our Saluation: the ſword of ſaint Peter, the Croſſe of ſaint Andrew, the knife of ſaint Bartelmew, the girdierne of S. Laurence, & the ſheares of ſaint Steuen, what other things are they, but certaine badges they haue receyued of Chriſte,Badges of Chriſt. and certaine gulpes they haue drunke of his cup. So many more degrées we ſhall receiue in Heauen of Glorie, as we haue drunke of the cup of Chriſt in this life, and therefore we ought to pray vnto God euery day with teares, that if we cannot drinke all his cup, at the leaſt that he will ſuffer vs to taſt thereof. The cuppe of Chriſt (although it be bitter in drinking) after the drinking thereof, it doth greate profit: I would ſaye, that the trauells which we ſuffer to be good, they giue not ſo much paine when we endure them, as they afterwards giue pleaſure, hauing paſſed them. Prouide who will of the wines of Illana, of the buttes of Candia, and of the pipes of Rebedew: but for my conſolation and ſaluation, I aſke not of God, but that al the days that remaine of my life, he giue me leaue to drink if he pleaſe but one drop of his cup.
               There is another Cup which is called the cup of ye wrath of God: wherof to ſpeake, the entrailes do open, the hart doth faile, the fleſh doth tremble, and the eyes do wéepe: with thys God doth threaten vs, this is that whiche the Prophet ſpeaketh of: Of this the ſorowfull Ieruſalem did drinke: of this the vnfortunate Sinagogue did make hir ſelfe dronke. And the drunkenneſſe of this, was the cauſe that Iſraell was baniſhed from Iudea, and tranſlated into Babilon.
               
               He drinketh of the cup of wrath, that falleth from the ſtate of grace wherein he ſtood, wherof it foloweth that the ſoule is much more dead without grace, than a body without a ſoule.

Then it is ſayde that God is an angred,Withoute grace a ſoule is lyke a body without life. when he is careleſſe of vs, and that day that we be forgetfull to feare him, and he not delighted to loue vs, and ſtumbling at euery ſteppe, in the end of the iorney we ſhall be condemned. Oh what difference there is in the wrath that men doe ſhewe, and in that wrath and yre, which is ſayd to procéede from God: for when men be angry they reuenge, but God when he is angrie, hee ceaſeth to chaſtiſe. In ſuche wiſe that God doth more chaſten an euill man, when he deferreth & doth diſſemble with hym, than when he doth preſently torment him. There is not a greater temptation, than not to be tempted: there is no greater trouble, than not to be troubled: there is not greater chaſtiſement, than not to be chaſtiſed: neyther is there a greater whip, than not to be ſcourged of God. The ſick man of whoſe helth the phiſition diſpaireth is in ſmall hope of his life, I would ſay, that his ſinne which God doth not chaſtiſe: I haue great ſuſpition of his ſaluation.
               It is much to be noted, that the Prophete dothe not onely threaten Ieruſalem for that ſhe did drinke the cuppe of wrath: but alſo bycauſe ſhe did drink the grounds and dregs therof, vntill nothing was left: in ſuche wiſe, that if there had bin more, ſhe woulde haue dronke more. To drinke of the cuppe vnto the dregges, is: that hauing offended God greeuouſly committing all manner of ſinnes wickedly, forſaken ſome articles of the faith peruerſely, and hauing ſinned with al the members damnably: As if the commaundements being ten, had bin ten thouſand, we had rather die than leaue any one of them diſobeyed.
               To drinke the Cup vnto the dregges, is when we be not contented with breaking of one commaundement or two or thrée, but that of force they muſt be broken al ten: to drinke ye cup vnto the dregs, is: if we leaue to commit any ſinnes, it is not for want of will, but for want of power, or for wante of occaſion: to drinke the cup vnto the dregges is, that we doe not onely content our ſelues with ſinning, but that we doe preſume and boaſte ourſelues of oure ſinning: to

drinke the cuppe vnto the dregges is, committing as we doe all manner of ſinnes, we can not ſuffer that they call vs ſinners: to drinke the cup vnto the dregges is, to haue ſo greate vnſhamefaſtnes in ſinning, that we dare not entire and vrge others to ſinne: to drinke the cup vnto the dregges is, to haue our deſires like a ſaint, and our deſerts like a deuill.
               Behold here my Lorde Admirall, what I conceaue of that text of the Prophet, beholde here what I do thinke of youre doubt, and I beſéech God our Lord that he being pleaſed, we may deſerue to drinke of the cup that Chriſt did drinke of, and not of the cup that Ieremie doth write of. I write not vnto your lordſhip newes of the court as I was wont to write,To drinke of the one or of the other, great choyce is to be vſed. bicauſe it ſeemeth to commit treaſon vnto the holy Scripture, if we ſhould place any profane things at the foote of ſo holy a matter. No more but that our Lord giue vs his grace.
               
                  From Madrid 
                     the xxv. of March.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Another letter vnto the ſame Commendathor, Sir Lewes Braue, wherein is written the conditions that the honorable old men ought to haue: and that loue ſildome or neuer departeth the hart where it is entred.
               
               
                  VEry noble and refourmed knight, by ye words of youre letter, I vnderſtoode how quickly the medicine of my writing came to youre hart, and I do much reioyce to haue ſhotte at you with an arrow ſo inuenomed, that was ſufficient to make you ſtagger: but not to ſtrike you downe. Although in the other letter whiche I did write vnto you, it repented me to call you noble: now I holde it for very well imployed, in this letter to entitle you very noble, bycauſe you haue amended the abuſe of your life, and anſwered according to your nobleneſſe.
               Sir you write vnto me, that the words of my letter did penetrate your hart, and touch you to the quicke, and to ſay you

the troth, I was right glad thereof: for I did not write it that you ſhould onely reade it, but to the end you ſhould cordially féele it. Iointly with this I promiſe you as a Gentlemā, and ſweare vnto you as a Chriſtian, that it was not my meaning when I did write vnto you to offend you, but to the intent to amend you. Alſo you ſay, that at the inſtant you read my letter you burned the tokens of your enamored, dyd teare the letters of loue, diſpatch the page of meſſages, remoued all talke of youre loue, and gaue a quittance to the Pandor. I cannot but praiſe what you haue done, and much more will praiſe it when I ſhall ſée you continue and perſeuer in the ſame. For vices be ſo euill to be vnrooted where they once take place: that when we thinke they be all gone, in the houſe they remayne hidden. Sir I giue you great thankes for that you haue done, and alſo do craue pardon for that I haue ſaid, although it be true, to ſée you amended I do little eſtéeme that you be offended. For an vnkindneſſe is ſooner loſt, than vice remoued.
               Alſo you craue of me in your letter, that ſince I haue written you the conditions of an old man enamored, that I write alſo vnto you the conditions that a wiſe olde man ought too haue: bycauſe by the one may be knowne the ſhelfe that is to be ſhunned, and by the other the channell obtayned that is nauigable, wherein I delight to accompliſh your requeſt, and to write your deſire: although it be true, that I knowe not, if my iudgement ſhall haue ſo delicate a vayne, and my pen ſo good a grace, in giuing counſell, as in reprehending. For there be many that in giuing counſell be very cold, but in ſpeaking malicious taunts very ſkilfull. Sir, I will doe my indeuour to do and ſay the beſt I can, with an admonition that I gyue before all things vnto him that ſhall heare or reade the ſame, that he prepare, not to take ſo greate a taſt in reading theſe counſels, as profit by vſing them.
               The olde men of your age, they oughte to be ſo aduiſed in that they ſpeake, and ſuch examplers of that they do, that not only they are not to be ſéene to do euill works, either ſo much

as to ſpeake vnhoneſt words. For the olde man that is abſolute and diſſolute: is ſufficiēt to corrupt or caſt away a whole Towne or common wealth. The old men of your age:Rules for old men. ought to giue, not onely good examples, but alſo good counſell: for the inclination of the yong man is to erre and to varie, and the condition of the old man, ought to be to correct by diſcretion, and giue good counſell to amende. The old men of youre age: ought to be gentle, modeſt, and patiēt: for if in times paſt they were bréeders of diſcorde, now they ought to be makers of peace. The olde men of youre age ought to be maſters of ſuch as know little, and defenders of ſuch as can do little, and if they may not giue them remedie, they leaue not to gyue them comfort. For the hart that is tormented, deſpited, and in great diſtreſſe, ſometimes receyueth more comfort with the wordes which they ſpeake, than with that whiche they giue them. The old men of youre age, now haue no time to be occupied, but in viſiting of hoſpitalles, and reléeuing the poore: for there may not be a thing more iuſt, than that, ſo many paces as haue bin ſpent to brothel houſes, ſhould now be ſpent to viſit Tēples. The old men of your age, ought not to be buſied, but in making their diſcharges when they be in ye houſe, and to bewaile their ſinnes when they go to Church: for hée ſtandeth in great ſuertie of ſaluation, that in his life doth that he ought to do, and in his death what he can do.
               The olde men of youre age ought to vſe great meaſure in the words they ſpeake, and pleaſant breuitie in that they recount, and alſo they ought to beware to tell newes, and much leſſe to vſe to relate fables: for in ſuch a caſe, if they call yong men light and fooliſh, they wil ſay that old men dote and babble. The old men of your age ought to be remoued from contentions, and from troubles in law, and if it be poſſible, to redéeme them by the waight of money, to the end to be frée from infinite trauells: for yong men onely do feele the trauell, but the old men do féele vexation, and bewaile the diſpleaſure.
               The olde men of youre age, ought to haue their communicatiō with perſons wel complexioned, & not euil conditioned,

with whome they may repoſe and pleaſantly be conuerſant: for there is not in this mortall life a thing that doth ſo recreate the hart: as is ſwéete conuerſation. The old men of youre age ought to ſéeke men, and chuſe honeſt friends, and muche to conſider that the friendes whiche they ſhall chuſe, and the men with whome they ſhall be conuerſant, be not tedious in their ſpéech,Conuerſation for old men. and importunate in crauing: 
                     •
                  or friendſhip and importunitie neuer féede at one diſh, either name themſelues to be of one band.
               The old men of your age, ought not as nowe to vſe vayne and light paſtimes, but to haue regarde to the beſtowing of their goodes, and to conſider for their houſes: for the olde man that lookes not to his ſubſtance, ſhall want to eate, and hée that watcheth not his houſe, ſhall not lacke wherefore to wéepe. The old men of your age be bound to go cleanly, and well clad, but they haue not licence to be curious, either with niceneſſe to weare their garmentes: for in yong men to bée neat, is a good curioſitie, but in old men, it is great vanitie.
               The olde men of your age ought much to flée brawling with your aduerſaries, either trauerſe in words with your neighbours: for if they replie any ouerthwart words, or ſpeake any bitter iniury, the hurt is, that you haue a hart to feele it, and not ſtrength to reuenge it. The old men of your age, oughte to be charitable, pitifull, and almes giuers: for yong menne without experience, walke ſo bedolted of the things of thys world, that it ſeemeth vnto them ſufficiēt to be termed Chriſtians: but the old men that time hath aduiſed, and age deliuered from diſceit, let them hold it for certaine that God of thē will neuer haue pitie,The exerciſe of good old men. if they haue not charitie. The old men of your age, ought to haue ſome good Bookes to profite, and other hiſtories to paſſe away the time: for as nowe their age doth not ſuffer to walke, muche leſſe to trauell, and as they are forced all day to be idle and penſiue, ſo is it of more deſeruing that they fill themſelues with reading in bookes: than too be tired in thinking of times paſt. The old men of youre age ought to auoyde entering into conuocations, ſeſſions, and

Siſes: for in ſuch places they intreat not but cauſes of the cō
                  mon wealth, and intereſt for goodes: and that by the iudgement of froward yong men, and men paſſioned, where they neuer beléeue the wiſe, either heare the olde of experience. The olde men of your age, when you ſhall be in counſell, or called to counſell, ought not to be raſh, ianglers, or contentious: for it apertayneth to yong men to folow their opinion, & the old men but only reaſon. The olde men of your age,The notes of good old men. ought to be ſober, pacient, and chaſt, and to preſume more to be named vertuous than old: for in theſe times, and alſo in time paſt, they haue more reſpect to the life he leadeth, than to the hoare heares he weareth. The olde men of your age, ought to hold for their chiefe exerciſe, to go euery day to Church, and to heare ſeruice on the holyday: and if this ſhall ſéeme painefull or tedious, I giue him licence to go no ofter to Church being old, than he went to viſite his innamored when he was yong. The olde men of your age, ought to haue all things well prouided for their ſoules, to vnderſtād alſo for the health of their perſons: for as Galene ſayth, old age is ſo monſtrous in condition, that it is neither a ſickneſſe finiſhed, or a perfect health. The old men of your age, before all thinges ought to procure their houſes good and healthy, ſcituate in a gladſome & ſound ayre: for I am of opinion, that there is no goodes better imployed, than that whiche old men beſtowe vpon a good houſe. The old men of your age, ought to procure, not only to dwell in a good houſe, but alſo to ſléepe in a good chamber,Neceſſary prouiſion for olde men. in a bedde very clenly, and the chamber very cloſe: for as the old man is delicate and of ſmal ſtrength, ſo be is more offended by a little ayre that cōmes in at a chinke, thā the cold of one whole winter night did gréeue him when he was yong. The old men of your age, ought very much to procure to eate good bread, and to drinke good wine, and the bread that is well baked, and the wine that is a yeare old: for as old age is compaſſed with infirmities, and laden with ſadneſſe, the good vituals ſhall hold them in health, and the good wine ſhall leade them in mirth.A diet for old men. The old men of your age, ought much to conſider that theyr

meales be ſmall, their meate yong and well ſeaſoned: and if they eate much, and of many meates, they euer goe ſicke: for notwithſtanding they haue money to buy them, they haue not heate to diſgeſt them. The old men of your age, ought too procure their bed curteyned, their Chamber hanged, a meane fire, the chimney without ſmoke: for the life of olde men conſiſteth in going clenly, warme, cōtented, and without anger. The old men of your age, ought vtterly to auoide to dwel vppon any riuer, either to do their buſines in moiſt groundes, either to ſléepe in ayry places, for olde men being delicate as they are, be like children, and naturally accraiſed: the ayre ſhall penetrate their powers, and moyſtneſſe ſhall enter their bones. The old mē of your age, vpon paine of their life ought to be temperate in their diet, refuſing to eate late: for old mē, as they haue their ſtomacks weake and growen colde, they may not diſgeſt two meales in a day:Temperance in old men prouoketh ſleepe and auoydeth belke. for the olde man that is vnſatiable and a glutton, vſing the contrary, ſhall belke much and ſléepe little. The olde men of your age, to the ende that they be not ſicke, or grow heauie, neyther turne to be groſſe, ought a little to refreſhe them ſelues, walke into the fielde, vſe ſome exerciſe, or be occupied in ſome facultie: for otherwiſe, it might happen them to get a tiſick, or a lameneſſe in their limmes: in ſuch wiſe, that it will be hard to fetch breath, and by puffing and blowing giue warning where you walk. The old men of your age ought to haue great care to auoyde all contentious brabbling amongſt their ſeruants, and ſometime to beare with their negligences, to pay their wages, too the ende they go contented: for otherwiſe they will be negligent in ſeruice, and very ſuttle in ſtealing. For concluſion, the old men of your age ought much to procure to weare their apparell ſwéete and cleanly:A concluſion with rules, conuenient for old men. their ſhirts very well waſhed: their houſe neat and wel ſwept, and their chamber very cloſe, warme, and well ſmelling. For the olde man whiche preſumeth to be wiſe, if he will liue in health, and goe contented, ought to haue his body without life, & his hart without ſtrife. In the end of your letter you write, that hauing left to loue,

ſorow leaueth not to vere you, which vſeth to folow the enamored: and inſtantly you deſire me to giue you ſome remedy, or to ſende you ſome comfort: for notwithſtanding you haue throwen it out of the houſe, it leaueth not nowe and then too knocke at the gate.
               Sir in this caſe I remit you to Hermogenes, to Teſiphontes, to Doreatius, to Plutarch, and to Ouid, which ſpent much time, and wrote many bookes, to giue order in what manner the enamored ſhoulde loue, and the remedies that for their loue they ſhould vſe. Let Ouid write what him pleaſeth, & Dorcas ſay what he thinketh good, but in fine, there is no better remedie for loue, than is, neuer to begin to loue:A moſt certaine remedie for loue. for loue is ſo euill a beaſt, that with a thread he ſuffereth to be taken, but hée will not depart with thruſts of a launce. Let euery man conſider what he attempteth, marke what he doth, beholde what he taketh in hand, note whither he dothe enter, and haue regarde where he may be taken: for if it were in his handes to ſet the tables, he is not certaine to win the game. There is in loue after it is begon, infinite ſhelues, immeſurable ſloughes, daungerous rockes, and vnknowen whirelpooles, in whych ſome remaine defaced, others blinded, ſome beſoilde, and alſo ſome others vtterly drowned, in ſuch wiſe, that he that is beſt deliuered, I accoumpt to be euill deliuered.
               Oh how many times did Hercules deſire to be deliuered from his loue Mithrida, Menelaus from Dortha, Pyrrhus from Helena, Alcibiades from Dorobella, Demophon from Phillis, Hā
                     niball from Sabina, and Marcus Antonius from Cleopatra, from whome they could neuer, not only depart, but alſo in the end for them, and with them, they were caſt away.
               In caſe of loue, let no man truſt any man, and much leſſe him ſelfe: for loue is ſo naturall to man or woman, and the deſire to be beloued, that where loue amongſt them dothe once cleaue, it is a ſore that neuer openeth, and a bond that neuer vnknitteth. Loue is a metall ſo delicat, & a canker ſo ſecret, yt he planteth not in ye face where he may be ſene, nor in ye pulſe where he may be felte, but in the ſorowfull hart where (although

he be ſenſible) they dare not diſcouer it. After all this, I ſay, that the remedie that I giue for loue, is, that they gyue him no place to enter amongſt the entrayles, nor giue theyr eyes libertie to behold windowes, or giue eare to bawdes, either ſuffer any trade of Dames to come or goe, & if any come to houſe, to ſhut the dores, and not to walke abroade after euening: if with theſe conditions loue may not altogither bée remedied, at the leaſt it may be eaſed and amended.
               Sir (and my goſſip) if you will in all theſe things profite youre ſelfe and well conſider thereof, you ſhall be excuſed of many angers, and alſo ſaue much money. For to youre age and my grauitie it is more conuenient to vnderſtande of the beſt wines, than to view the windowes of the enamored. Take for example & chaſtiſement the Licentiat Burgos, your acquainted,A ſodaine and ſtrange ſpectacle. and my great friend, which being old (and enamored as you) died this ſaterday, a death ſo ſtraunge and fuddayne, as was fearefull to al men, and ſorowfull to his friēds. No more, but our Lord be youre guide, and giue me grace too ſerue him.
               
                  From Burgos 
                     the .24. of Febr. 1523.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Sir Iames of Gueuara, vncle to the Author, wherein he doth comfort him, for that he hath bin ſicke.
               
               
                  MAgnificent and right honorable Vncle, it pleaſeth your Honor to complaine of mée in youre letter, that I neither ſerue you as my good Lorde, either do ſue as vnto a father, or viſite as an vncle, neyther write as vntoo a friende. I may not denie, but as concerning kinred your are my Fathers brother,Note the eloquence of the Author. in merit my good Lord, my father in curteſie, and my Progenitor in giuing of liberall rewards, which I haue receiued at your hands: not as a nephew, but as a ſonne much beloued.
               Since I haue confeſſed the affinitie that I hold, and affirme the dette that I do owe, no more will I denie the fault that I

haue committed in neglecting my dutie in viſiting and writing vnto you:The perfect condition of a friende. for with our friendes we ought to accompliſhe vntill we may doe no more, and ſpende vntill we haue no more: let it auayle what it may auayle, and my excuſe ſerue, what it may ſerue. The very troth is, that I go in this court with myne offices ſo occupied, and ſo bewandred in my buſines, that ſcarſely I knowe any man, neither yet remember my ſelfe: and this which (I ſay) is not ſo muche to excuſe my fault, as it is to accuſe my liuing. For in the time when I was aliue, and abode in my monaſtery, I did riſe earely to go to Church, I ſtudied my bookes, preached my ſermons, faſted the aduents, performed my diſciplines, bewailed my ſinnes, and prayed for ſinners: in ſuch ſort, that euery night I made a reckening of my life, and euery day did renewe my conſcience. But afterwards, I died: afterwards they buried me:Buried, being alyue. and afterwards they brought me vnto the Court: I grew negligent in faſting, I brake holy days, I forgot my diſciplines, I dyd no almes, I prayed with negligence, I preached ſildome, I ſpake at large, I ſuffred little, I celebrated wyth dulneſſe, I preſumed much, and ouer much: and the worſt of all is, that I gaue my ſelfe to vnprofitable conuerſations, the which lead me vnto ſome tedious paſſions, and alſo affectiōs to be auoyded. Beholde here my Lorde and Vncle, after what manner we goe in Court, neither know we kindred, or ſpeake to friends, neither be ſenſible of the miſchiefe, or profit vs of the time, neyther do we ſéeke reſt, or haue any wit: but wandring here and there, we goe as certaine men bedolted and charged with a thouſand thoughts.
               But ſetting this apart, ſince in time to come there ſhal be amends, and for that which is paſt I may obtaine pardon, I ſhall promiſe you by the faith of an honeſt nephew, that the court hauing paſſed theſe ports, I ſhall come to viſit you, and wil write by euery meſſēger. Sir Ladron your ſonne and my coſin willed me (here in Madrid) that I ſhoulde write vnto you, the ſorow which I conceyued of the ſickneſſe your Lordſhip hath had, and the long diſeaſes you haue paſſed. The exceſſe

you vſed, is grief vnto mée: the ague that held you, ſorroweth me: the ſorowes you haue paſte, diſpleaſeth me: the ſyropes you receyued, irketh mée: the purgations you vſed, lothed me: the oyntmentes you experimented, deſpiteth me: the bathes you proued, are tedious, and tormenteth mée: the lauatories you taſted, payneth me: the money you waſted, vexeth me: bycauſe the ſicke man, conſideryng the goodes he expended, and the little that medicines haue profited, many tymes it dothe more gréeue hym, that he giueth to the Phyſition and Apoticarye, than the maladie whiche hée ſuffered.
               Behold here my Lorde, howe I am not a man that giueth one ſorowe, but an hundreth if néed bée: although it be true, that a thouſand tymes it ſoroweth me, is not ſo much worth as one it pleaſeth me. Licurgus in the lawes that he gaue to the Lacedemonians, did commaund, that no man ſhould bring euill newes to any man, but that the pacient ſhould diuine it, or by diſcourſe of tyme, he ſhoulde vnderſtande it. The diuine Plato in the bookes of his common wealth, did counſell the Athenians that they ſhould not viſite any of their neyghbours in tyme of aduerſitie, except they coulde by ſome meanes remedie them. For (he ſayd) and ſayd well, that colde and vnſauorie is that comfort, when it commeth not be wrapt in ſome remedie. Of a trouth, to remedie and giue counſell bée two diſtinct offices, & very ſeldome conteyned in one perſon: for counſel is to be giuē by the wife, & the remedy by him that poſſeſſeth the ſame. My Lord & vncle, I would God, that your remedie were in my hands (as it is to deſire it) that I myght rather ſay, It pleaſeth me of your helth, than that it ſoroweth me of your ſicknes. Sir, you haue to vnderſtand, I beare you much enuie: not of Paradilla, where you dwel, not to the newe plāted vineyard which you poſſeſſe, or to the mil yt you make, either to the nintie yeares that you poſſeſſe, but of the order that you vſe in your houſe: for that in nurtour it is a palace, and in honeſt ciuilitie,A good praiſe to a Gentleman. a Colledge.
               
                  Cato the iudge, in his old age did withdrawe himſelfe to a

countrey houſe, which ſtoode betwixt Nola, and Caieta, & all the Romanes that paſt thereby did ſay, iſte ſolus ſcit viuere: whiche is to vnderſtand, this man knoweth to liue by himſelf, wherfore they reported that he had withdrawn himſelf thither in time, and ſequeſtred himſelfe from the hurly burly of the worlde. The greateſt mercy that God vſeth to an old man is to giue him to vnderſtand, that he is become old: for if he know this of himſelf, of a trouth he ſhal fynd that the olde man hath not of any thing more certaintie, than euery day to look for death. Plato ſaide: Iuuenes citò moriuntur, ſenes autē diu viuere nō poſſunt, yt is to ſay, it is true that yong men die quickly, but the old men can not liue long. The ſtéele being ſpente, the knife may not cut: the talow conſumed, the candle goeth out: the Sunne being ſet, the day can not tarie: the floure being fallen, ther is no hope of fruite. By that which is ſayd, I would ſay, yt after an olde man is paſt foure ſcore yeres, he ought to make more readineſſe to die, thā prouiſiōs to liue. Diodorus Siculus ſayth, that it was a lawe amongſt the Aegyptians, that no king, after he had children, either any old man hauing paſſed thréeſcore yeares, ſhoulde preſume to buylde an houſe, without firſt for himſelfe he had made a ſepulcher. My Lord, thus much I ſay, that not as an Aegyptian, but as a good Chriſtian, you haue in the Monaſtery of Cuenca, made a ſepulture, and indued a chapell, where your bones ſhall reſt, and whereof your kynred may boaſte.
               
                  Peter of Reynoſa (your neyghbour, and my greate friende) hathe aduertiſed mée, that in the pleaſant Peradilla, the ſtorm hath ſpoyled youre wheate, and that in lowe places the vines be blaſted, with which lamentable and ſtraunge chaunce (although you féele much grief) your lordſhip muſt ſhewe good courage, and haue great pacience: for that you now ſtande in ſuche an age, as you ſhall rather wante yeares to lyue, than corne to eate. Thoſe that ingroſſe wynes to make it deare, & kéepe their corne againſt the moneth of May, vpon ſuch men, heauineſſe ought to fall, and vpon ſuche loſſe is wel employd:

for there is nothing ſo méete, eyther more iuſt, than the man that wiſheth an euill yeare to the common wealth, ſhoulde neuer ſée a good yeare enter his owne houſe.
               It is a propertie of ſuch as be muche couetous, and little vertuous to murmure at that which nature doth performe, and God doth permit, in ſuch ſort that they will rather amēd God, than correct themſelues. Let houſes fal, the vines be blaſted, the ſtormes ſpoile corne, the flocks die, and rent gatherers run away: if we giue thanks to God for that he leaueth vs, if we do not murmur for that he taketh away, if we grow not dul to ſerue him, he will neuer grow negligent to giue vs prouiſion. They ſay vnto me that your Lordſhip is vexed, ſorowfull, and alſo vntractable: theſe are priuileges of olde menne, but not of wiſe olde men: for it ſhoulde be a muche greater loſſe to haue the wit blaſted, thā the Corne deſtroied. Vncle you know very well, that in all the the markets of Vilada, & Palencia we ſhal find bread to be ſold, but in none of the faires of Medina, ſhal we find wiſdome to be bought: For which cauſe men ought to giue more thanks vnto God, for that hée did create them wiſe, than for that he made them rich. It is a more ſounde welthineſſe for a man to eſtéeme himſelfe wiſe, than to preſume to be of great wealth: for with wiſdom they obtaine to haue, but with hauing they come to loſe thē
                  ſelues. The office of humanitie is to féele trauells, and the office of reaſon is, to diſſemble them. For when ſodaine aſſaultes come vpon vs, and infortunes knocke at our gates, if the hart ſhould receiue them all and of euery one complaine and bewayle: he ſhould euer haue wherof to recount, and neuer want wherfore to lament.
               
                  The wyſe man weepeth not but for the loſſe of a frend
                  Prometheus that gaue laws to the Aegiptians, ſaid, that the Philoſopher ſhould not wepe for any thing, but for the loſſe of his friend: for all other things are contained in our cheſtes, onely the friend dwelleth in the hart. If Prometheus did not permit to ſhew any griefe but for a friende, it is not credible that he would wéepe for the corne in the field, wherin he had greate reaſon: for notwithſtandyng that the loſſe of temporall

good is, wherewith we be moſte grieued: yet on the other part, it is that wherein our loſſe is leaſt. Séeing the incertayntie of this lyfe, and the continuall chaunges that be in the ſame, as little ſuretie men haue thereof, that be in their houſes, as the corne that is in the field. I dare ſay that wée haue very little wherin to truſt, and many things wherof to be afrayd. It is not vnknowen to your Lordſhip, that in this lyfe there is nothyng ſure, ſince wée ſée the corne blaſted, trées ſtriken downe, floures fall, woodde wormeaten, cloath deuoured with moathes, cattell doe ende, and menne doe dye: and that all thynges well marked, in the ende all thyngs haue an ende. Men that haue paſſed thrée ſcore yeares, haue for their priuiledge, to ſée in their houſes great miſfortunes, whiche is to witte, abſence of friendes, deathe of children, loſſe of goodes, infirmities in their perſones, peſtilences in the common wealth, and manye nouelties in Fortune: and for thys cauſe Plinie durſte ſaye, that men ought not to bée borne, if that he being borne foorthwith ſhould die.The honeſt care, not to liue long, but well. Oh howe well ſayde the diuine Plato, that men oughte not to be carefull to liue long, but to lyue well. I thought good thus muche to write vnto you, to the ende you ſhoulde vnderſtande to profite your ſelfe by olde age, ſince you had ſkil to enioye the dayes of youth: for in the age of foureſcore yeares, it is a tyme to make ſmall accounte of lyfe, and to vſe great ſkill and no ſmall reckening of death.
               All theſe thinges I haue written vnto your Lordſhippe, and my good vncle, not for that you haue néede, but bicauſe you ſhall haue wherein to reade, and alſo to the ende you ſhall vnderſtande, that (although I go beſcattered and wandring in thys Court,) I doe not leaue to reknowledge the good. No more, but that our Lorde be your protectour.
               
                  From Madrid 
                     the eleuenth of Marche. 1533.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto Maſter Gonſalis Gil, in which is expounded that which is ſayd in the Pſalmiſt, Inclinaui cor meum ad faciendas iuſtificationes tuas in aeternum.
                  
               
               
                  RIght reuerend and eloquent Doctor, ad ea quae mihi ſcripſisti quid tibi ſim reſpō
                     ſurus ignoro: although I ſaye that to ſo many things I know not to anſwer, I ſhould haue ſayd better, that I dare not to wright. For the affaires of our common wealth, are come to that eſtate, that though we be bound to féele them, we haue no licence to reporte them. It is too gréeuous in our humanitie to ſuffer iniuries, but it is much more gréeuouſe vnto the hart to kéepe them ſecret,Who is worthie of prayſe. and not to vtter them: for the remedie of the ſorowfull hart is, to diſcouer his poyſon, and to vnburden where he loueth. He deſerueth much, and can do very much, that hathe a hart to féele things as a man, and diſſembleth them as diſcret. For he is of a greater courage that forgettes the ſorowe that once entreth into the hart, than he which reuengeth it. If my memorie ſhould reueale what it doth retaine, my tong ſpeake what it doth knowe, and my pen write what me liſteth, I am ſure thoſe that be preſent would maruell, and ſuche as be abſent, would growe offended: for nowe burneth the pearcher without tallow, and at randon all goeth to the bottom. The armie of gentlemen be here in Medina del ryo ſecco, and they of the communaltie in Villa Braxima, in ſuche wiſe, that too the one we deſire victory, and of the other we haue compaſſion. For the one be our good Lords, and the others our good friēds: I deſire that the part of the gentlemen may ouercome: and it grieueth me to ſée the deathe and fall of the poore: chiefly for that they know not what they aſke, either vnderſtand what they do. If the trauell of the warre, and the perill of the battel might light vpō their ſhoulders, that were inuenters therof, and that haue altered the people, it ſhoulde be tollerable too ſée, and iuſt to ſuffer: but alas the ſorow, they fight in ſafetie,

and chaſe the bull in great ſuretie: wée haue the monaſterie full of ſouldiors, and the Celles occupied with knights: wherin, there is no place for a man to withdrawe, eyther a quiet houre to ſtudie: In ſuch wyſe, that if my Bookes be ſcattred, alſo my wits be wandring. What quietneſſe or contentation will you that I haue, ſéeing the king is oute of his kingdome, the commons rebell, the counſell fled, the Gentlemen perſecuted, the townes men altered, the gouernours aſtonied, and the people ſacked, euery houre entreth men of warre, euery houre they make alarums, euery houre they ſound to battell, euery houre they ordeine ambuſhes, euery hour there is ſkirmiſhes, euery houre they intende repayres, and alſo euery houre I ſée them bring men wounded. The Cardinal and the gouernours commaunde me to preache and inſtructe them in the affaires of peace, that which I can ſay, is euery thirde day I goe from one campe to an other, and they of the cōmonaltie will not beléeue me, neither will be conuerted: in ſuche wiſe that they haue the voyce of Iacob, and the handes of Eſau. In this ciuil warre, I heare them ſay from thence ſo many things, that it diſpleaſeth me, and I ſee héere ſo many things that diſcontenteth me, Quod poſui custodiam ori meo, vt nō delinquam in lingua mea. If they meete there with my letters, or yours ſhould be ſéene here, eyther for not vnderſtanding, or by euill interpreting, it might be, I ſhould incurre ſome daunger, and you diſcredite. Ignoſce mi domine, tum breuitate literarum, tum etiam quòd non liceat hic noſtra tempeſtate apertius loqui.
               
               
                  The Authour dothe expounde an authoritie of the Prophete.
                  
                     THis other daye (whyche was the feaſte of Saincte Thomas) when I preached vnto the Gouernoures, you doe ſay in your letter that you hearde mée expounde that Texte of the Prophete, whyche ſayeth: Inclinaui cor meum ad faciendas Iustificationes

tuas in aelernum proptet tribulationem: and you deſire me to ſend it you in writing, in ſuche forme & maner as I did pronoūce it in the pulpet. Sir I will performe it (although I vſe it not) for that I wiſhe you well, and am alſo beholding vnto you. For the friend vnto his friende, ſhoulde neither hyde ſecrete that hée knoweth,The friende vnto the frēd, neither hideth ſecret, nor denieth money. or denye anye thing that he poſſeſſeth. But coming to the purpoſe, it is a thing to be noted, & no leſſe to be maruelled, that the Prophet wold bind himſelf to ſerue God for euermore without end, knowing that ſhe ſhould die, and haue an ende. For the vnderſtanding of this text of Dauid, it is neceſſarie to expounde that of Chriſte, which ſaith, Ibunt in ſupplicium, boni autem in vitam aeternam: bicauſe the one authoritie béeing expounded, the other is eaſyly vnderſtanded. Chriſt being as hée is, the whole truth and the ſumme of Iuſtice, it ſéemeth a thyng diſproporcioned to giue vnto the good, infinite glorie for temporall merites, and to giue vnto the euill eternall paine, for temporall faultes: Since he commaundeth in the Apocalips, that by the weight of their demerites the wicked ſhould be tormented. If it were not diuine iudgement, it would ſéeme in the opinion of man, to be a iuſt thing they ſhoulde giue vnto the iuſt that ſerued God an hundreth yeares in this worlde, ſo muche more of glorie in the other worlde: and to the wicked that offended fiftie yeares, being aliue here in this world, they ſhuld torment him as many more in hell: In ſuch ſort that there the payne ſhould be giuen by weyght, and the glorie by meaſure. In that God giueth not temporal reward, for temporall ſeruice, neither doth giue temporall payne for temporall offences: there ſéemeth and ought to be in this caſe ſome high miſterie, which if it bée facile to demaunde, is verie difficile to abſolue. For the vnderſtanding hereof, it is to wit, that the paine they haue to giue vs in the other world, and the rewarde we ſhall receyue in the glorie, is not anſwerable to the many or fewe workes which wée do, but vnto the much or little charitie wherewith we worke them: for God dothe not beholde what wée doe preſently, but what we would do. It may be that a man may

deſerue much with little workes: and another merite little paſſing many trauels, for our deſertes conſiſt not in the trauels we do paſſe, but in the pacience we vſe therein.
                  Not without a high and very notable miſterie Chriſt ſayd (in your patience,) and ſaid not (in your labour) you ſhall poſſeſſe your ſoules. For as Auſtine ſayth,
                        Not in your labour but in patience.
                        Not the paine but the cauſe maketh the martir.
                      the paine makes not the Martyr, but the cauſe wherefore he ſuffreth. Anſwering to your demaund and to my dout, I do ſay and affirme: that for this cauſe, in the other world they ſhall giue eternall reward vnto the good: for if God ſhould let them liue for euer and euer, they would neuer ceaſe to ſerue God. In like manner they ſhal giue vnto the wicked infinite paine, their ſinnes being infinite, for if God for euermore ſhoulde giue them life here in this world, they would neuer ceaſe to offend him. The Prophet to ſay, inclinaui cor meum in aeternum, is as if he ſhoulde ſay, I Lorde do bind my ſelfe to ſerue thée, ſo muche as ſhall pleaſe thée to be ſerued of me. In that if it ſhall pleaſe thée to perpetuat my life, it ſhall be always imployed in thy ſeruice, what wilt thou that I ſay more, (oh my God,) but if it ſhall pleaſe thée, and may be to thy ſeruice, that my dayes be temporall, that at the leaſt my good deſires may be infinite, quia in aeternum inclinaui cor meum. Oh with how greate deſire ought we to ſerue God, and how great hope ought we to haue of our ſaluation, for that we haue a Lord of ſo good condition, and a God of ſuche power, that without any ſcruple we maye ſet downe in his accompt, not only what we doe, but alſo what we deſire to do. No more but that our Lord be your protector.
               
               
                  From Medina del rio ſecco 
                     the xxij. of Ianuary. 1523.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Abbot of ſaint Peter of Cardenia, in which he much prayſeth the mountaine countrey.
               
               
                  REuerent Abbot and monaſticall Religious, Regi ſeculorum immortali ſit gloria, quia te ex litteris tuis bene valere audio, & ipſe bene habeo. The health of the body at all times ought to be much eſtéemed, & muche more in this preſent

yeare: for we haue warre within the houſe, and peſtilēce is calling at dore. I haue not ſayd much in ſaying that the peſtilence calleth at the doore, ſince Auila is infected, Madrigal depopulate, Medina eſcandalized, Valiodolid in great feare, and Duennas mourning.
               As touching the reſt I giue your fatherhood many thankes for Ochams Dialogues that you lent me. And I gyue you no leſſe for your poudred meat you ſent me; and as I was borne in the Aſtuaries of Sintillana, and not in the coſts of Cordoua, you coulde haue ſent me nothing more acceptable than that ſalt fleſh: in ſuche ſorte, quod cognouisti cogitationes meas de longe. From Aſia vnto Rome, the fayre Cleopatra ſent vnto hir good friend Marcus Antonius a poudred Crane,A poudred crane ſent frō Aſia to Rome whiche he ſo eſteemed, that he eat euery day onely one morſell of that poudred meate. From Illiria (in the Confines of Panonia) they brought preſēted vnto the Emperour Auguſtus ſixe ſalted Lampreys, whiche meate was ſo newe a thing in Rome, that hee onely eate but one, and deuided the other fiue amongſt the Senators and Embaſſadours. Macrobius in his Saturnals recounting, or to ſay better, reprehending Lucullus the Romane of a ſolemne and coſtly ſupper that he made to certaine Embaſſadours of Aſia, he ſayth amongſt other things they did eate, a Gripe in potage, and a Gooſe in pickle. In a certain inuectiue that Criſpus Saluſt maketh againſte his aduerſarie Cicero, amongſt the moſt graue thinges that he dothe accuſe him, is, that he cauſed to bée broughte to ſatiſfie his wanton exceſſe, poudred meates from Sardinia,
                  Plato offended with Dioniſius for eating twice on the day. and wines from Spaine. The diuine Plato when he went to ſée Dioniſius the tyrant, was not of any thing in him ſo much offended, as he was to ſée him eate two times a day, and to drinke the better he did eate ſalt fleſh. There paſt much time in Rome, in which although they did eate fleſhe newly poudred, they not yet know to make a brine. But as times goſh euery day diſcouering more things, & the induſtry of mā goeth more ſharpned, it is come to paſſe yt the pickle, brine, & poudred meats yt was foūd out moſt delicate for kings: at this preſēt the ruſtical be glutted withal.

For better ſeaſoned and alſo more ſwéete & delectable I hold the poudred meats of the mountaine, than thoſe of Caſtile for in ye mountains herbs be more delicate, ye waters more pure, the countrey more cold, the beaſts more ſound, and the ayre more ſubtill. That the mountaine is a better countrey than Caſtile, it appeareth moſt cleare, in that the wines that goeth from hence thither be more fine, and the men that commeth from thence hyther bée conuerted more malicious, in ſuche wiſe, that wines be there made better, and here men made worſe.
               I like very well of that Iames Lopes of Haro was wont too ſay, that for one to proue a perfect man, he ought to bée borne in the mountaine, and tranſferred into Caſtile: but I am ſory that vnto my countrey men there cleaueth few curteſies and leſſe good manners that we haue there, and very much malice that we vſe here. When we demaunde of a neighbour of the confines of Cordoua, of Zocodouer, of Toledo, of Valiodolid, or of Segouia, in what countrey he was borne, incontinent he aſſureth (it is true) that he was borne in that countrey, but hys grandfather came from the mountaine, in ſuch wiſe that at ye inſtant they wil be Caſtilians, & in linage they wil be Biſcains.
               
               If Roger of Toledo do not deceiue vs, ſeuen Nations had the dominion of nine prouinces of Spaine, which is to wit, the Greekes of Carpentania, the Vandales of Andoloſia, the Zuitſers of Carthagene, the Alaians of Galiſia, the Hunes of Arragonia,
                  Seuen nations inhabited Spaine. the Gothes of Lucitania, and the Romanes of Pirenea. But of all the nine Nations we reade of none that did paſſe the rocke of Ordunia, neither durſt approch the rocke of Horadaida. To vs that be Montanezes the Caſtilians cannot denie, that when Spaine was ſurpriſed by the Moores, the greateſt & chiefeſt men were not ſaued only in the mountaines, and that afterwards all the nobles haue not diſcended from thence. The good Inigo Lopos of Santillana did vſe to ſaye, that in this oure Spaine that linage was a ſtranger or very new, yt in ye mountaines was not poſſeſſed of ſome notable Mannor. Father Abbot I thought good to ſaye all this, to the ende you ſhall ſée

how much I do eſtéeme that which you ſent me: the one, for that it was poudred, and the other for that it was ſeaſoned in my countrey. It is no noueltie that the poudred meates of my countrey do like me well, ſince the Emperour Seuerus dyd neuer weare ſhirt but of the flax of Africa which was his naturall countrey.
               Of Aurelius the Emperor, his chroniclers do recount that he ſaide many times, that all meates that we eate of other countries, we eate them with appetite, but thoſe that bee of our owne countrey we eate them with loue and alſo wyth appetite. As concerning the reſt that youre Fatherhood dyd write and incommend vnto me, frier Benet your ſubiect and my friend, may ſay what I did ſpeake therein vnto his Maieſtie, and what he aunſwered me, whiche preſently was diſpatched. No more, but that the grace Dei noſtri Ieſu Chriſti ſit tecum & mecum.
               
               
                  From Madrid, 
                     the twelfth day of March, Anno Domini .1522.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Doctor Manſo, preſent of Valiodolid, in which is declared, that in the affaires of an other, a man may be importunate.
               
               
                  RIght magnificent and moſt reuerent Imperiall Iudge, quanto timore ad vos ſcribam, nouit ipſe quem timemus in vobis, with much feare and no ſmal ſhame, I write this letter vnto your Lordſhip, bycauſe euery day I haue bene with my letters ſo importunate, that I deſerue to be holden importune and tedious. Beléeue me ſir, that it is a ſtraunge thing vnto me to goe to importune, or yet to be importuned:The importunat and the foole are brothers children for the man that is importune, I holde him for the brother of a foole. The ſuter that is patient, ſilent, and manerly, we take pleaſure to heare him, anſwer him, and diſpatche him: on the other ſide, to him that is troubleſome, ouerſharp,

entermedling, and importunate, we ſhut the dores againſte him, we cut off his taile, we turne away our face, and alſo wee giue him betwixt the téeth (you are come in an euill houre.)
               
                  Cicero in his booke of Friendſhip, ſayth, that in the affaires that toucheth but our ſelues, we ought only to make ſute, but for ſuch as concerne our neare friends, we ought to intreate, and may be importune. In folowing ſutes, there is muche to be conſidered: what the ſuter is, to whome he maketh ſute, and wherefore he maketh ſute, and alſo in what time he ſueth: bycauſe to diſpatch a thing out of time, is to cut the pecocke by the knées. There are affaires of ſuche qualitie, that only to ſpeake in them were ſhamefull, and yet if they bée procured for others, it is great charitie. The thing that Alexander the great moſt prayſed in the great philoſopher Caliſtenes, was, that for others he craued many things, and for himſelfe nothing. Iulius Caeſar and Cicero were mortall enemies, but in the ende, on a certaine day in the Senate, Iulius Caeſar ſayd vnto Cicero, I cannot denie this (Oh Cicero) but that in the thinges that touche thy ſelfe, thou art remiſſe, and in matters that concerne the common wealth, very importune.
               There was a Law amongſt the Romaines much vſed and alſo obſerued, that vpon paine of death none ſhoulde preſume to approch the tent, where the Emperour did eate and ſléepe, except ſuch as did ſerue him by day and guard him by night, but the caſe was thus. The Emperour Aurelius being in warres in Aſia againſt Cenobia, in the night a certaine Greeke ſeruitor entred the Emperours tent,A notable example of a pitifull Prince. whiche being taken and preſently condemned to die, the Emperour Aurelius from hys bed where he lay ſpake with a loude voyce, if this man dyd come to ſue for any thing for himſelfe, let him die: and if hée came to ſue for another, let him liue, and for certaine it was found, that the poore man came to make ſute for his thrée companions that had ſlepte being of the watch, whiche the Captaine commaunded to be whipt and to be deliuered to the enemies. Oh example to be noted, and to memorie to bée incommended, for that out of one ſelfe chance and miſfortune,

the ſoldiour obtayned life, the companions eſcaped diſtreſſe and ſhame, and the good Prince enioyed the renoume of clemencie. I thought good to alledge theſe old examples, to aduiſe ſuch as you that be ſupreme Iudges, and conſtituted in high eſtates, to the ende that if you will not doe all that wée craue, at the leaſt you will not chide vs when we be ſuters vnto you: bycauſe, that bond that holdeth the Iudge to be iuſt in that he iudgeth, the very ſame doth bind the good to be importune when he ſueth for another. The office of the good mā is to pray and be importunate, not only for the good, but alſo for the euill: it is to wit, for the good that they maye be made better, and for the euill that they pardon them. Since there is no lawe in this worlde ſo rigorous, that in good or in euill part may not be interpreted, the Iudges haue to preſuppoſe we do not deſire them to breake their lawes, but that they do but moderate them: for many times the ſuter doth complaine, not of the ſentence of condemnation, but of the deſire that the iudge did ſhew to condemne him In the iudge it is not onely a vice intolerable to condiſcend to all that which they craue, but alſo a great extremitie to doe nothing of that they deſire: the good Iudge ought to be alwayes iuſt in that he giueth ſentence, and in that they deſire him ſometime humaine. When the Conſull Aſcanius did boaſt himſelfe that in the office of Cenſor or iudge, he had neuer admittted, either ſo muche as heard the requeſts of his friends.An anſwer of Cato to Aſcanius. The good Cenſor Cato ſayd vnto him on a certain day in the Senat, the offence ſtandeth not (oh Aſcanius) in that the Iudge ſuffreth himſelfe to be ſued vnto, but to conſent himſelfe of any man to be commaunded. Not of few, but of many Iudges we maye iuſtly ſaye, that which they do not at the intreatance of a gentleman, they doe afterwards by the Counſell of their priuat friend. I do lie if I did not intreat a Iudges wife to cauſe him to cōſider of a plée of a friend of mine, whiche aunſwered me, Intreat? what think not Maſter Gueuara, that my huſband hath a wife that muſt intreat, but commaund: And ſo it came to paſſe (as ſhe ſaid) for that which could not be obtained in halfe a yeare, ſhe

diſpatched in one night. In the bookes of common wealth, Plutarch doth aduiſe Traiane, that ſince in humane lawes there be more things arbitrable than forceable, he ſhould aduiſe his Iudges, to approch more vnto reaſon than opinion. The vnbridled Iudges that naturally be ſeuere and vntractable, it is impoſſible but that they muſt be odious vnto all men, and for this cauſe I thinke it very méete, that one by one they ſhoulde heare all men with curteſie, and afterwards determine what they ſhall finde by Iuſtice. Many Iuſtices do holde it for aduauncement of honour to heare their ſuters with an euill will, and not to doe anye thing wherein they bée intreated: which they do not, bycauſe they be iuſt in their offices, but for that of their nature they be euill condicioned.
               The good Iudge ought not to wreſt the lawes to his condicion, but wreſt his condicion conformable vnto the lawes:The good Iudge wreſteth his condition agreeable to good lawes. for otherwiſe it ſhould not be expedient to ſéeke iuſt Iudges, but men well cōdicioned: but in ſomuche as God was intreated of thoſe of Niniuie that w
                     •
                  re condemned, of Ezechias that was anoynted, of Dauid that offended in adultery, of Achab that committed Idolatry, of Ioſua that did not ouercome, of Anna that was barraine,An example for men to be intreated of other men. and of Suſan that falſely was accuſed: ſurely it is not much that men do ſuffer them ſelues to bée intreated of other men. I thought good my Lord preſident too write all theſe things, not to teach you them, but to remember you of them. The Abbot of ſaint Iſidro is of my acquaintance and great friend, for we were brought vp in pallace together, and were fellowes of one Colledge, in ſuche wiſe that we be bretherne, not in armes, but in letters: and now of late there hath bin proces againſte him to appeare in this youre audience, for which he would preſent him ſelfe before youre preſence, and in his way take a letter of mine, by which I do much deſire your Lordſhip that the Father Abbot and hys Monks: Sentiant ſi placet, quod non ſit amor ocioſus, ſiue veſter ad nos, ſiue noſtrum ad illos, ſalua tamen in omnibus iuſticia, contra quam noque patrem respicere fas eſt.
               
               
                  From Toledo 
                     the xx of Auguſt. 1532.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto the Earle of Beneuent ſir Alonſo Pimentell, wherein is intreated the order and rule holden by the auncient Knights of the band.
               
               
                  RIght renowmed, and greateſt Earle of Spaine, moſt acceptable to my hart was the letter you did write vnto me (by the Commendathor Aquilera) bycauſe there was not in theſe Kingdomes, Lorde nor Prelate, that had not written vnto me, and to whome I had not writtē againe, (except your honour, & my Lorde the Earle of Cabra,) but ſince we haue paſſed the port, and that the gulfe is nauigable, the way tracked, and I come to youre acquaintance: knowing the ſinceritie of your bloud, the generoſitie of youre perſone, the authoritie of your houſe, and the fame of your renowme: I will not leaue from hence forward to requeſt you, neither will I be negligent to write vnto you. With ſome Lords and gentlemen I hold aquaintance,A ſugred ſpeach. with others kinred and affinitie, with other friendſhip, with others couerſation: but to other ſome I refuſe communication, and flye their condition: for in wit they be doltiſhe, and in their cōmunication very tedious. It is more painefull to ſuffer a tedious Lord or Gentleman, than a fooliſh ploughman: for the inconſiderate Gentleman will make you raue, and the doltiſh ploughman prouokes you to laugh: and farther (and beſides this) the one you may commaunde to holde his peace, and the other you muſt ſuffer vntill he haue made an end: but youre Lordſhip is of ſo good ſtuffe, and come of ſo right a Turquois, and ſo delicate of iudgement, that there may be no place in my conceit, but that from hence forward I wil boaſt my ſelfe of your conuerſation, and ioy my ſelfe of your condition. Your Lordſhip dothe commaunde me to write vnto you (if I haue read in any auncient writing) who were the knights of the Band in Spaine. Alſo you woulde vnderſtande, in the time of what prince this order was eſtabliſhed, who was the inuentour thereof, why he deuiſed the ſame, what rules he gaue

them to liue with, how long it laſted and wherefore it was loſt: although I were ſome ſuſpitious witneſſe, and youre Lordſhip were iudge Ronquillo, you could not take my depoſition by interrogatories more delicatly.A commendable eloquence. I ſweare by the law of a good man, that if mine anſwer be ſo accompliſhed, as your demaund is exquiſit, your honour ſhall be ſatisfied, and I not a litle tired. After I did ſée the ſtately buildings that you haue made at Valiodolid I did more boaſt you for a good builder thā for a curious reader, and therefore I do much delight in that you demaund and write vnto me, for that to the good Knight it is as pertinent to haue a booke vnder his pillow, as a ſword at his beds head.
               The greate Iulius Caeſar, in the mids of his campes, had his Commentaries in his boſome, his launce in his left hand,Notes of Iulius Ceſar, & of Alexander the great. and his pen in the right hand: in ſuche wiſe, that all the time that was frée from fighting, he ſpent in reading and writing. The great Alexander, that onely with feare did ſubdue the Weſt, and with armes did conquere the Eaſt, he was alwayes girt with Achilles ſworde, and with the Iliades of Homer did alwayes ſléepe in his Chamber. It is not my opinion that you ſhould take writing and reading for your principall office (as I that am bound to ſtudie) but the tenth houre you ſpende in talke and looſe in play, you ſhould employ and ſpend in reading. But comming to the purpoſe, it is to witte, that in the yere M.CCC.lxviij. the King Sir Alonſo being in the Citie of Burgos, that was the ſonne of King Sir Hernando, and of the Quéene the Lady Conſtance: This good King made a certaine new order of Knighthood, which he entituled the Order of the band, wherein he himſelfe with his children, hys bretherne, and the ſonnes of the moſt riche and noble Knightes of the realme did enter. Four yeares after he had ordayned thys order of the band, the king Sir Alonſo being in Palentia, reformed the rules which he had made, and alſo added puniſhmēts for the tranſgreſſors of the ſame: in ſuch wiſe, that agréeable to the laſt rule, which was the better and more Knightlike, I will write this letter vnto your Honor: They were named

Knightes of the bande,The order of the knights of the band in Spayne in time paſt. bycauſe they dyd weare vpon them a certayne redde ſkarffe thrée fingers broade, after the maner of a ſtoale, caſt vppon the lefte ſhoulder, and knit vnder the right arme. None coulde giue the bande but onely the Kyng, eyther any myghte receyue the ſame, except he were the ſonne of a Knight, or the ſon of ſome notable Gentleman, & that at the leaſt had bene reſident at the Court ten yeres or in the warres againſt the Moores had ſerued the King.
               In thys order of the bande, the eldeſt ſonnes of knightes that were inheritours coulde not enter, but ſuche as were ſecond or thirde ſonnes, and that had no patrimonie, for the intention of the good Kyng (Sir Alonſo) was, to honoure the ſonnes of the worſhipfull of his Courte, that coulde doe and had but little. That daye whiche they receyued the band, they dyd preſent into the Kings hande faithe and homage to obſerue the rule, and I ſaye they made not any ſtrayt vow, or rigorous othe, bycauſe if afterwardes any ſhoulde tranſgreſſe ſome parte of the rule, they ſhoulde bee ſubiecte to the chaſtiſement, but not bounde to the ſinne.
               HIs firſte rule commaunded, that the Knight of the bande was bounde to ſpeake vnto the Kyng (béeing required) for the aduauncemente of his Countrey,A right notable rule. and for the defence of the Common wealth, vpon payne that béeing noted therof, he ſhould be depriued of his patrimonie, and baniſhed out of his countrey.
               2 His rule commanded, that the knight of the band aboue all thinges ſhoulde ſpeake trouth vnto the kyng, vnto hys Crowne and perſon ſhoulde obſerue fidelitie: And if anye in hys preſence ſhoulde murmure of the kyng, and he ſhould not diſco
uer it, and béeing approued with infamie, he ſhoulde bée turned oute of Courte, and for euermore depryued of the bande.
               3 His rule commaunded, that all thoſe of that order ſhuld vſe muche ſilence, and that whyche they ſpake, ſhould be of great trouth: and if by chaunce any knight of the band ſhuld tell any notable lie, he ſhuld go one month without his ſword.
               
                  4 His rule commaunded, that they ſhoulde accompanie themſelues with wiſe men, of whome they myghte learne to lyue well, and with men of warre that might teach them to fight, vpon paine that the knight of the band which ſhould ſuffer himſelfe to be accompanied, or be ſéene to walke with marchants, men of occupations, Lawyers, or with men of the countrey, ſhoulde be grieuouſly reprehended of the maiſter: and one whole moneth in his chamber impriſoned.
               5 His rule commaunded,A neceſſary rule for theſe our dayes. that all the knights of this order ſhould maynteyne their words, and kéepe fidelitie vnto their friendes, and in caſe it were proued agaynſte any knighte of the bande, that he had not accompliſhed his word (although it were giuen vnto a baſe perſon, and vpon a ſmall matter, yet) ſuche a one ſhoulde goe alone in courte and vnaccompanied, not preſuming to ſpeake, or to approche or kéepe companie with any knight.
               6 His rule commanded, that the knight of the band ſhould be bounde to haue good armour in his chamber, good horſſes in his ſtable, a good launce at his gate, and a good ſworde at his girdle: vpon paine that if in any of theſe things he were defectiue, they ſhoulde call him (in Court) by the ſpace of a moneth, ſeruant, and ſhould loſe the name of knight.
               7 His rule did commaund, that no knight of the band ſhold preſume to ryde to the Court on a mule, but on horſebacke, eyther openly ſhould dare to goe withoute his bande, eyther ſhould take vpon him to go to Court without his ſworde, or venture at his lodging to eate alone: vpon pain to pay a mark of Siluer towards the iuſtes.
               8 His rule commaunded, that no knight of the band ſhould be ſerued with a lyer, eyther boaſt himſelf like a babler, vpon pain yt if any of thē ſhuld put himſelf in palace to tel newes or tales, or to make to the king any falſe report, he ſhould goe to court one month on foot, & areſted an other into his chamber.
               9 His rule commaunded that no knight of the band ſhuld complain of any wound that he had receyued, eyther ſhoulde boaſt himſelf of any déed he had don, vpon paine if he ſo reported

of his ſore, or ſhoulde relate many tymes of his prowes, he ſhould of the maiſter be gréeuouſly reprehended, and of the other knightes of the band not viſited.
               10 His rule commaunded, that no knight of the band ſhuld preſume to play at any playe, (in eſpeciall at the dice) vpon paine, that if any did play, eyther in his lodging did conſent to play, they ſhould take away his moneths wages, and for ſixe wéekes baniſhed him the Courte.
               11 His rule commaunded, that no knight of the band ſhuld preſume to lay his armour to guage, eyther to play the apparell perteyning to his perſon at any play that might be deuiſed, vpon paine that he that ſhould play them away, or laye them to guage, ſhould go two moneths without the band, and an other month remaine priſoner in his lodging.
               
                  A rule for modeſtie of apparell.12 His rule commaunded, that the knight of the bande in the wéeke dayes ſhould be apparelled in fine cloth, and on the holy dayes he ſhould weare ſome kynd of ſilke, and at Eaſter ſome little of golde, and he that ſhoulde haue nether ſtockes, and weare buſkins, the maiſter ſhould be bound to take them away, and to make an almes of them to the poore.
               13 His rule commanded that if the knight of the band wold to the Palace, or walke to the Court on foote, that he ſhoulde not goe in great haſte, eyther ſpeake with loude voyce, but that he ſhould talke with lowe voyce, and walke at greate leyſure, vpon payne that of the other knightes he ſhould bée reprehended, and of the maiſter chaſtiſed.
               14 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band ſhuld preſume either in ieſte or in earneſte, to ſpeake to an other knight any malicious or ſuſpicious wordes, wherof the other knight might remaine ſhamed or diſpited, vpon pain he ſhuld aſke pardon of the iniuried, whiche ſhoulde giue the offender baniſhement from the court for thrée monethes.
               15 His rule commaunded, that no knight of the band ſhuld take any quarrell wyth any damſel vnmaried, eyther ſhould rayſe anye Lawe to a woman that were the daughter of a

a Gentleman, vpon paine that any ſuche knighte might not accompany any Gentlewoman in town, eyther dare to ſerue any dame in pallace.
               16 His rule commaunded, that if any knighte of the band ſhould encounter in the ſtréete with any Lady or Gentlewoman that ſhould be generous & of valor, he ſhould be bounde to bring himſelfe on foote, and to accompany hir,A rule for erection of curteſie and good maner. vpon paine to loſe a monethes wages, and ſhoulde be of the dames not beloued.
               17 His rule cōmaunded, that if any noble woman or damſell in hir haire, ſhould deſire any knight of the band to do any thing for hir which he coulde do, and ſhoulde refuſe to doe it, that ſuche a one in Palace the Dames ſhould call: The euil commaunded knight, and voyd of curteſie.
               18 His rule commaunded, that no knight of the band ſhuld dare to eate any vile or groſſe meates: which is to wit, Onions, Garlike, Chibols, nor ſuch like, vpon paine that he that were ſuch a one, ſhould not that wéeke enter into the Courte, either ſit at the table of a gentleman.
               19 His rule commaunded, that no knight of the band ſhold preſume to ſtand at his meate, eate alone, eyther to eate without napkins: but that they ſhould eate ſitting, accompanied, and the cloath ſpread, vpon pain that the knight which ſhould not do ſo, ſhould eate one month without his ſword, and pay a marke of ſiluer for the tilt.
               20 His rule commaunded, that no knight of the band ſhuld drinke wine in a veſſell of earth, either ſhoulde drinke water in a pitcher, and at the tyme of drinking he ſhoulde bleſſe himſelfe with his hande, and not with the potte, vpon paine, that the knight whiche ſhould doe the contrarie ſhould be a moneth baniſhed from the Court, and an other month drinke no wine.
               21 His rule commaunded, that if two knights of the band ſhould quarell, and defie each other, the other knights ſhoulde trauel to bring them agréed, and if they would not be friends, that no man ſhould helpe them vpon paine, that if any did cō
                  trarie,

he ſhould goe one moneth without his band, and pay
                     •
                   a marke of ſiluer to the Iuſtes.
               22 His rule commaunded, that if any did weare the bande without gift from the king, two Knights of the band ſhoulde defie him, & if they did ouercome him, he might not weare the bande, but if he ouercame them, he might from thence forward weare the bande, & name himſelfe knight of the bande.
               
                  Rules for the obſeruyng of peace.23 His rule cōmaunded, that when in court they ſhould exerciſe Iuſtes and Turneys, the knightes that ſhould win the priſe at the iuſtes and turneys, ſhuld alſo win the bande (although before he were none of the knights of the band) which the king preſently there woulde giue, and all the knightes of the order into their companie ſhould receyue.
               
                  Rules for the obſeruing of peace.24 His rule commaunded, that if any knighte of the bande ſhould lay hand vpon his ſworde againſt any other knight of his companie, that in ſuch a caſe he ſhould not appeare before the king in two moneths, and that he ſhould weare but halfe his band other two moneths.
               25 His rule commaunded, that if any knight of the bande ſhould giue a worde to an other knight of the bande vpon any anger or quarell, that he ſhould not enter in court one whole yeare, the half of which time he ſhould be priſoner.
               26 His rule commaunded, that if any knighte of the bande were made a Iuſtice by the king, either in the court, or out of the ſame, that he might not do Iuſtice vpon any of ye knightes of the bande, but that in taking him in anye thyng not well done, he might only take him, and afterwards remit ye ſame vnto the king.
               27 His rule commaunded, that the king going on warfare, that all the knights of the band ſhould attend vpon him, and being in campe, they ſhould all ioyne vnder one ſtanderd, and ioyntly ſhould fight togither: vpon paine, that that knyghte whiche in the warres ſhould ſight without his ſtandard, and ioyne to an other ſtraunge knight, ſhould loſe his yeares wages, and an other yeare ſhould go with halfe his band.
               28 His rule commaunded, that no knight of the band ſhuld

preſume to go to the warres (except it be againſt the Moores) and that if in any other warre he ſhould be founde with the Kyng, that for the preſent he take away the band, and that if he ſhould fight in the fauour of any other than the king, he ſhould loſe the bande.
               29 His rule cōmanded,Rules for the exerciſe of armes. that al the knights of the band ſhuld aſſemble thrée times in the yeare where the king ſhoulde cō
                  maund: and theſe aſſemblies ſhuld be to make muſter of their armor and horſſes, & to talk in things of their order: and theſe were in Aprill, September, and Chriſtmaſſe.
               30 His rule cōmaunded, that all the knightes of the bande ſhould at leaſt turney two times in the yere, and iuſt foure, & to practiſe the play at the canes ſix times, and vſe the carrere euery wéeke: vpon paine, that that knight which was foūd negligent to liue in theſe warlyke exerciſes, and ſhould be vnreadie in exerciſing of them, he ſhoulde go one moneth without his bande, and an other without his ſwoord.
               31 His rule cōmanded, that al the knights of the band ſhuld be bound within eight days after the king ſhould come to any place, to ſet vp a tilt to iuſt, and letter for turney, and more than this, they ſhoulde haue a Maiſter, where to ſchoole and ſkirmiſhe, and to play at rapier and dagger: vpon paine that he that ſhould be negligent herein, ſhould be arreſted in hys lodging, and they ſhould take away halfe his bande.
               32 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band ſhould be in the Court without ſeruing ſome dame, not to diſhonour hir, but to feaſt hir, or elſe to marrie with hir, and when ſhe ſhall walk abrode to accompanie hir, as ſhe ſhal lyke, on foote, or on horſebacke, vſyng reuerence with his cappe, and curteſye with the knée.
               33 His rule commaunded, that if any knight of the band did vnderſtande, that within the compaſſe of thyrtie myles of the Courte there ſhoulde bée made any Iuſtes or Turneys, he was bounde to go thither to iuſt and turneye: vpon pain to goe one Moneth without his ſworde, and as much without his bande.
               
                  34 His rule commaunded, that if any knight of the bande ſhoulde be maried within thrée ſcore miles compaſſe of the Court, al the other Knights of the band ſhould go with him to the King, to craue for him ſome reward, and that afterwards they ſhould accompany him to the place of his mariage, to the end that there they ſhoulde do ſome honorable exerciſe of chiualrie and knighthood, & to the end they ſhould offer ſome iewell vnto his ſpouſe.
               35 His rule commaunded, that on the firſt ſonday of euery moneth, the knights of the band ſhould go to Court together, very well appointed & armed, and that there in the Court, or in the great hall in the preſence of the king and al his Court, they ſhould play at all weapons two and two, in ſuch wiſe that no hurt were done: for ye end that this order was made, was bicauſe they ſhoulde rather boaſt themſelues of déedes, than of the names of knights, and were of the kyng therefore much honored.
               
                  They ſhould aſſaile each other.36 His rule commaunded, that they ſhoulde not torney more than thirtie with thirtie, and with ſwordes rebated, and at the ſounde of a trumpet they ſhoulde aſſayle eche other, and alſo at the ſound of the Clarion they ſhoulde all retire, vpon paine not to enter more in torney, and in one moneth not to go to the Court.
               37 His rule commaunded, that at the iuſtes none ſhoulde run more than euery man his foure courſes, and ſhould haue for Iudges, foure Knights, and he that in foure courſes brake not a ſtaffe, ſhould pay al the coſtes of the tilt.
               38 His rule commaunded, that at the time that any Knight of the band did fayle or die, they ſhoulde all go to helpe him to die well, and after they ſhould go to his buriall, and for that he had bin brother and companion of the band, they ſhould for one moneth be cladde with blacke, & after for thrée moneths forbeare to Iuſt.
               
                  The nobleminde of the maker of this rule is to be noted.39 His rule commaunded, that two dayes after the knight of the band ſhould be buried, al the other knights of the order ſhould aſſemble and go to the king, on the one part to deliuer

the king the band that the dead had left, and on the other part to make ſupplication (to haue remembrance) to rayſe in hys place ſome of his able ſonnes, if he left anye, and to vſe hys bountie towards his wife, to ſuſtaine and marrie hir children and daughters.
               Behold here my Lord the rule and order of the knightes of the band, that was made by the king Alfonſo: Ioyntly whervnto I will adde all the knights that did firſt enter into thys order, the title of whome ſaid thus.
               
                  
                     Theſe are the most Courteouſe, the most eſteemed, the moſte renoumed, the moſte choſen Knights and Infants of the Knightlike order of the Band, that our Lord and king Don Alphonſo commaunded to be made, whome God maintayne. The King Don Alfonſo that made this order.
                  
                     The infant Don Pedro.
                  
                  
                     Don Enrique.
                  
                  
                     Don Fernando.
                  
                  
                     Don Tello.
                  
                  
                     Don Iuan el bueno.
                  
                  
                     Don Iuan Nunez.
                  
                  
                     Enrique Enriquez.
                  
                  
                     Alfonſo Fernandez Coronel.
                  
                  
                     Lope Diaz de Almacan.
                  
                  
                     Fernan perez puerco carrero.
                  
                  
                     Fernan Perez ponce.
                  
                  
                     Carlos de Gueuara.
                  
                  
                     Fernan Enriquez.
                  
                  
                     Aluer Garcia Dalbornoz.
                  
                  
                     Pero Fernandez.
                  
                  
                     Garci Ioffre tenorio.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Eſteuanez.
                  
                  
                     Diego Garcia de Toledo.
                  
                  
                     Martin Alfonſo de Cordoua.
                  
                  
                     Goncalo ruys dela Vega.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Alfonſo de Benauides.
                  
                  
                     Garci Laſo dela Vega.
                  
                  
                     Fernan Garcia Duque.
                  
                  
                     Garci Fernandez tello.
                  
                  
                     Pero Goncales de Aguero.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Alfonſo de Carriello.
                  
                  
                     Ynigo Lopez de Horozco.
                  
                  
                     Garci Gutierez de Graialba.
                  
                  
                     Gutierre Fernandez de Toledo.
                  
                  
                     Diego Fernandez de Caſtriello.
                  
                  
                     Pero ruyz de Villegas.
                  
                  
                     Alfonſo Fernandez Alcayde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Ruy Goncales de Caſtaneda.
                  
                  
                     Ruy ramirez de Guzman.
                  
                  
                     Sancho Martiuez de Leyua.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Goncales de Bacan.
                  
                  
                     Pero Trillo.
                  
                  
                     Suero Perez de Quinones.
                  
                  
                     Goncalo Meria.
                  
                  
                     Fernan Carriello.
                  
                  
                     Iuan de Roias.
                  
                  
                     Ptralbarez Oſorio.
                  
                  
                     Pero Lobez de Padilla.
                  
                  
                     Don Gil de Quintana.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Rodrigez de Villegas.
                  
                  
                     Diego Peres Sarmiento.
                  
                  
                     Mendorodrigues de Viezma.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Fernandez Coronel.
                  
                  
                     Iuan de Cereiuela.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Rodrigez de Ciſneros.
                  
                  
                     Oreion de Liebana.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Fernandez del Gadillo.
                  
                  
                     Gomez Capiello.
                  
                  
                     Beltran de Gueuara vnico.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Tenorio.
                  
                  
                     Ombrete de Torrellas.
                  
                  
                     Iuan Fernandez de Bahamon.
                  
                  
                     Alfonſo Tenorio.
                  
               
               THat which is to be noted in all this letter is, how in order the Gentlemen and Knights went in thoſe days, and how they did exerciſe them ſelues in armes, and auaunced themſelues by deedes of prowes, and that the children of good men were in the kings houſe very well brought vp, and were not ſuffered to be vitious and go loſt. It is alſo to be noted in this letter,Things to be noted. in how little time the world hath made ſo many changes, it is to wit, vndoing ſome, and aduauncing others out of the duſt, bicauſe fortune neuer diſchargeth hir ſhot but againſt ſuch as be ſet aloft. My Lord I ſay this, for that ther is to be founde in this order of the band, ſome auncient linages which in thoſe days were noble and famous: all which be not only ended, but (alſo) altogither forgotten. What houſes or Manors be there now in Spaine of the Albornozes, of the Tenorios, of the Villegas, of the Trillos, of the Quintanas, of the Bieſmas, of the Cereiuelas, of the Bahamondas, of the Coronels, of the Ciſneros, of the Graialbas, and of the Horozcos: of all theſe linages there were Gentlemen and Knights very honorable. In thoſe days, as in the liſt it doth appeare amōgſt thoſe that firſt entred into the order of the band, of al which, at this preſent there is not found any notable Manor, neither ſo much as the name. There are nowe in Spaine other Linages, the

which be Velaſcos, Manriques, Enriques, Pimenteles, Mendozas, Cordouas, Pachecos, Cunigas, Faiardos, Aguilares, Manueles, Arellanos, Tendillas, Cueuas, Andradas, Fonſecas, Lunas, Villandrandos, Carauaiales, Soto maiores, and Benauides.
               
               It is a thing ſurely to be noted, and no leſſe to be maruailed, that none of the linage of all aboue ſaid, is named amōgſt the Knights of the band. All which in theſe our days be illuſtre, generouſe, ritch, and much renoumed. It is well to bée beléeued that ſome of theſe glorious linages were riſen in thoſe dayes, and if they were not put amongſt the knightes of the band, it was not bycauſe they wanted grauitie, but for that they had not at that tyme ſuche authoritie, and alſo bycauſe (though they had ſufficient nobleneſſe) they wanted riches. Alſo it is to be thought that of thoſe aunciente and forgotten linages there are inough at thys inſtant deſcending and decayed, that he noble and vertuous: whiche for that we ſée they haue little and may do little, we hold it for better too kéepe ſilence, than ſo name them. The ſonnes of Gentlemen and Knights, be they neuer ſo glorious in bloud, if they haue little, and may doe little, (let them hold it for certaine) they will eſtéeme them but little: and therefore it were very good counſell, that they ſhoulde rather remayne riche ſeruantes in their countries, than to come to the Courts of Kinges to bée poore Gentlemen. For after thys manner they ſhoulde in their countries be honored, that now go in Court diſcountenaunced.
               According to this purpoſe it came to paſſe in Rome, that Cicero being ſo valiaunt of perſon, and hauing ſo great commaundement and power in the common wealth, they dyd beare him great enuie on all ſides, and beheld him with ouermuch malice. Wherefore a certaine Romane magiſtrate ſaid (as if we ſhould ſay vnto a frankling of Spaine) tel me Cicero,
                  A gracious confeſſion of Cicero. wherfore wilt thou cōpare with me in the Senat, ſince thou knoweſt & al others do know, that I am deſcēded of glorious Romanes, and thou of ruſticall ploughmen? where vnto Cicero made aunſwer with very good grace, I will confeſſe it,

that thou art deſcended of noble Romane magiſtrates, and I procéede from poore ploughmen, but ioyntly with thys thou canſt not denie me, but that all thy linage is ended in thée, and all mine beginnes in me. Of thys example your Lordſhip may gather what difference there is betwixt times, betwixt linages, and alſo betwixt perſons. Since we knowe, that in Caius began the Auguſtus, and in Nero ended the Caeſars. I would ſay by that which is ſaide, that the want of nobleneſſe in many gaue an ende to the linages of the Knightes of the band, and the valiantneſſe of others, gaue a beginning to other glorious linages that be now in Spaine: bycauſe the houſes of greate Lordes be neuer loſt for want of riches, but for want of perſons.
               I haue enlarged this letter much more than I promiſed, and alſo more than I preſuppoſed, but I giue it all for well employed, ſince I am ſure, that if I remaine wearied in writing thereof, it will not be tedious vnto your Honour too reade it, bycauſe therein are ſo many and ſo good things, that of old Gentlemē they are worthy to be knowen, and of yong gentlemen neceſſary to be followed.
               
                  From Toledo, 
                     the xij. of December. 1516.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Conſtable of Caſtile ſir Ynigo of Valeſco, in which is touched that the wiſe man ought not to truſt his wife with any ſecret.
               
               
                  REnoumed and good Conſtable, Sir Iames of Mendoza gaue me a letter from your honor written with youre hand, and ſealed with youre ſeale, I would to God there were as good order taken with my letters that I aunſwer you, as is here vſed with ſuch as you ſend me. For I cannot ſay, whether it be my hap, or my miſhap, that

ſcarcely I can write you a letter wherof al in your houſe vnderſtand not. As much as it doth pleaſe me that al men know me to be your friende: ſo muche doth it gréeue me, when you diſcouer of me any ſecret, chiefly in graue and moſt waightie affaires: for comming to the intelligence of youre wife and children that you communicat with me your delicat affayres, they will make great complaint if to the profit of their ſubſtance I direct not your conſcience. My Lady the Ducheſſe did write vnto me, aduertiſing to haue ſome ſcruple in me, ſaying: that I was againſt hir as concerning the houſe of Touare, which I did neuer ſpeake or thinke: for the office that I do moſt boaſt myſelfe of, is to direct men that they be noble and vertuous, and not to vnderſtand in making or marring of heyres or Manor houſes.
               My Lorde Conſtable you do know, that at all times when you diſcouer your ſelfe, and take counſell of me, I haue always ſayd, and do ſay, that the Gentleman of neceſſitie muſt pay that he oweth, and what he hath, deuide at his will: and that to make reſtitution there néedeth a conſcience, and too giue or deuide, iudgement and wiſdome: if there paſſe eyther more or leſſe betwixt vs two, it is without néede that youre nobleneſſe ſhould ſpeake it, or of my authoritie be confeſſed. For the things that naturally be graue, and do require ſecrecie, if we may not auoyde that they iudge or preſume of them, at the leaſt we may cut off, that they knowe them not. In that your Lordſhip hath let flie ſome words, or loſt ſome letter of mine, my Lady the Ducheſſe is not a little offended with me, and I do not maruell thereof, in that ſhe not vnderſtanding the miſterie of your ſpéech, or the ciphers of my letters, did kindle hir choller, and rayſed a quarrell againſt me: Beléeue me my Lorde Conſtable, that neither in ieſt or earneſt, you ought to put ſecret things in confidence of women: for to the end that others ſhall eſtéeme them more, they will diſcouer any ſecret. I hold the huſbands for very doltiſh that hide their money from their wiues, and truſt them wyth their ſecrets: for in the money there is no greater loſſe than

the goodes, but in diſcouering their ſecretes ſometime he loſeth his honour. The Conſull Quintus Furius diſcouered al the conſpiracie of the tirant Cateline to a Romane woman named Fuluia Torquata, the which manifeſting the matter to another friend of hirs, and ſo from hande to hande it was deuulgate thorough all Rome, whereby it happened that Quintus Furius loſt his life, and Cateline his life and honour. Of this example your Lordſhip may gather, that the things that be graue and effectuall, ought not to be committed to the confidence of women, muche leſſe ſpoken in their preſence: for to them it importeth nothing the knowledge of them, and their huſbāds it toucheth much, if they be diſcouered. There is no reaſon to thinke, either is it iuſt to preſume and ſay, that all women are like, for that we ſée there are many of them honorable, honeſt, wiſe, diſcrete, and alſo ſecrete: whereof ſome haue huſbands ſo fooliſh and ſuch buzardes, that it ſhoulde be more ſure to truſt them than their huſbands. Not offending the gentlewomen that be diſcrete and ſecrete, but ſpeaking commonly of all, I ſaye, that they haue more abilitie to breede children, than to kéepe ſecrets. As concerning this let it bée for concluſion, that it happen you not another day to talke before any man, much leſſe before any woman. That whyche we haue cōmuned and agréed betwixt our ſelues, there might riſe thereof that your Lordſhip might remaine offended, and I diſgraced. At this preſent there is nothing more newe in Court, to write, thā that I am not a little offēded, of that your Lordſhip dare diſcouer, & troubled with the wordes yt my Lady the Ducheſſe hath ſent me, for which cauſe I beſéeche you as my good Lord, and commaund you as my godſonne, that you reconcile me with my Lady the Ducheſſe, or commaund me to be forbidden your houſe.
               
                  From Valiodolid 
                     the eight of Auguſt .1522.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto the Conſtable Sir Ynigo of Velaſco, wherein is touched that in the hart of the good Knight, there ought not to raigne paſsion or anger.
               
               
                  REnoumed Lord, and pitifull Conſtaple, I may ſaye by your honour, that whiche God ſaide by the Sinagog, which is to wit: Curauimus Babilonian, & nō est curata, relinquamus illam, which is to ſay: we haue cured Babilon, and it woulde not bée cured, let vs abandon it. Sir I ſay thus muche, for that it hath happened not a little gracious vnto me, that whereas I craued in my letter that my Lady the Ducheſſe ſhould not ſee any one part therof, notwithſtanding you haue not only ſhewed it, and conferred theron with hir, but alſo had great game thereat. Wherevpon in the way of reuenge, I ſhewed youre letter vnto the Earle of Naſſaro, who with Flemings, Portingalles, Almaines, and Spaniards, dyd alſo take ſome paſtime therewith, yet was it my very good lucke that all the euill that I ſaide of women in your letter, my Lady the Ducheſſe conuerted into ieſt, in ſuch wiſe that with greate reaſon I may praiſe hir for hir wiſedome, and complaine me of your temeritie.
               My Lord Conſtable, I ſhall moſt hartely deſire you not to haue ſuch care to make proues of triacle with my letters, but to reade them, and to teare or elſe burne them: for it may happen that ſome day you might reade them before ſome not very wiſe, either yet of good condition, that might deuine to my hurt, that which they vnderſtand not, to their owne profit.
               Leauing this a part, your Lordſhip ſayeth, yt for my ſake you haue remitted the diſpleaſure you did beare againſt ye Gentleman, the which I accept for ſo great courteſie, and grace, as if vnto my ſelfe ye iniurie had bin pardoned: for I am ſo tēder ouer him that is my dere friend, that al which I ſée to be done in the behalfe of his perſon, & to the amendment of his eſtate,

I ſet it downe in mine own account. Beſides the accompliſhment of my deſire, your Lordſhip hath performed that which you were bound to doe: for Princes and great Lordes haue no licence to doe iniuries, eyther ſo muche as to reuenge them. For as you know, that whiche is in the meaner called wrath, in the mightie is named pride: and that which amōgſt the ſmaller ſort is chaſtiſement, in the mightie is termed vē
                  geance. As oft as you ſhall make coniugation with youre nobleneſſe and conſcience, and ſhall call to remembrance that you be a Chriſtian and a Knight, it ſhall not miſlike you of the offences you haue diſſimuled, and it ſhall grieue you of the iniuries you haue reuenged. The pardoning of iniuries gyueth great contentation to the hart, and the deſire of reuengement is no ſmall torment thereof. By that whiche is ſaid, I woulde ſaye, that ſometimes for ſome man to reuenge ſome little iniurie, he eſcapeth from thence much more iniuried. There be ſome iniuries, that onely are not to be reuenged, neither as muche as to bée confeſſed: for things of honour are ſo delicate, that the ſame day that any confeſſeth to haue receyued an iniurie, from that day he bindeth himſelfe to take reuengement.
               The Conſull Mamilius demaunded at a certaine time of Iulius Caeſar, wherein it was that he had in this worlde moſt vaine glory, and in the remembring thereof did take moſt pleaſure: to this the good Caeſar made aunſwer, by the Goddes immortall I ſweare vnto thée (Oh Conſul Mamilius) that of nothing in all this life I doe thinke that I deſerue ſo muche glory, or any other thing doth giue me ſo greate ioy and contentation,A notable example to be imbraced. as pardoning of thoſe that do offend me, and gratifying ſuch as do ſerue me. Oh wordes worthy prayſe, and pleaſant to heare, notable to reade, and neceſſary to followe: for if Iulius Caeſar did beléeue as a Pagane, he did worke as a Chriſtian, but we all beléeue as Chriſtians, and worke lyke Paganes.
               I ſpeake it not without a cauſe that we liue as (Paganes, although we beléeue as Chriſtians,) ſince in this caſe the malice

of man is growen ſo great, that many woulde pardon their enemies, and dare not for feare of their friends: for if they once perceiue them to ſpeake of pardoning any man, preſently they will ſay, they doe it more of cowardiſe, than of conſcience. Be it as be may, and let euery man ſpeake as he thinketh good in this caſe of pardon, your lordſhip hath done with that Gentleman like a faithfull Chriſtian, and with me like a very friend: and beſide fidelitie to God, and frendſhip to a friend. There is no more to be craued of any man in this world.
               The memoriall that your Lordſhip ſendeth me of yt things that toucheth your goods and conſcience, I (my Lord) wil conſider therof at leyſure, and wil anſwere vpon aduiſement, becauſe in your charges or diſcharges, in ſuch wiſe I will giue you counſel as in my breſt no ſcruple ſhall remaine. In him yt aſketh counſell there ought to be diligence and no ſlackenes, for that many times buſineſſe lieth ſo in corners and ſo farre from hand, that it ſhall be more ſure counſell to truſt to our weapon, than to ſtaye for that bookes ſhall ſay: the contrary wherof is to be vſed of him ye ſhall giue counſel vnto another, which is to wit, that he haue much wiſedome and little diligence: for counſell that is giuen, if it be not vpon aduiſement, moſt times bringeth ſome repentance.
               The diuine Plato writing of Orgias the Greeke ſayd,Haſtie counſell breedeth repentance. My frend Orgias, thou writeſt vnto me, that I ſhould counſell thée how thou ſhouldeſt behaue thy ſelfe in Licaonia, and on the other parte, thou makeſt great haſte to haue an aunſwere: which thing although thou doeſt raſhly craue, I dare not performe, for that I doe much more ſtudie to counſel my frends, than to read in ſcholes to Philoſophers: the counſell that is giuen or taken, ought to be giuen by a man that is wiſe, for ye good iudgement he hath, a learned man for the much that he hath read, an auncient man for that he hath ſéene,Worthy to be admitted a counſellour. a patient man for that of him ſelfe he hath ſuffered, a man without paſſion bycauſe malice ſhall not blind him, a man without intereſt, for that couetouſneſſe ſhall not let him: Finally, I ſaye,

that the ſhamefaſt man and of a noble minde, oughte to giue vnto his friendes money with liberalitie, and counſell with greate grauitie.
               If it bée true (as it is moſte certayne) that he oughte to haue all theſe conditions that ſhoulde giue counſell vnto an other, we dare wel ſay, that to giue counſell is an office ſo cō
                  mon, that many vſe it, and very few can performe it. There commeth a carefull man to aſke counſell of his friende (in giuyng whiche counſell the one way or the other, there goeth lyfe, honour, goodes, and alſo conſcience) and then his friend whoſe counſell he hath craued, without remouing or further thinking therof, voyde of all ſcruple or doubt, ſayeth what is to be doone in that caſe (as though he had founde it written in the holy Scripture.)
               All this I ſay vnto youre Lordſhip, bycauſe ſometime you be offended and growe angrie, if I anſwere not preſently vnto your letters, and ſend you not your doubtes declared. As concerning that whiche you write of Marcus Aurelius, the caſe ſtandeth thus: that I tranſlated and preſented it vnto Caeſar not all finiſhed, the whiche Laxao did ſteale from the Emperoure, and the Quéene from Laxao, and Tumbas from the Quéene, and the Lady Aldonſa from Tumbas, and your lordſhippe from the Lady Aldonſa: in ſuche wiſe that my ſweates ended in your theftes. The newes of this Courte is, that the Secretarie Cobos groweth priuate: the gouernour of Brefa doth kéepe ſilence: Laxao doth murmure and groane: the Admirall dothe write: the Duke of Veiar dothe hoorde and kéepe:Short newes from the court the Marquiſe of Pliego dothe plays: the Marquiſe of Villa Franca followeth his buſyneſſe: the Earle of Oſorno dothe ſerue: the Earle of Siruela doth praye: the Earle of Buendia doth ſigh: Gutiere quixada doth iuſt: and the Iudge Ronquillo doth whippe.
               
                  From Madrid 
                     the ſixthe of Ianuarie 1524.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto the Conſtable Sir Ynigo of Velaſco, in which is ſaid, that which the Marques of Piskara reported of Italy.
               
               
                  REnowmed Lorde, and cōplayning Conſtable, it hath chaunced me with very good grace, that you neuer writte me letter wherin there cō
                  meth not ſome murmuring complaintes, ſaying: that I haue not anſwered to all that you haue written, or that I am very ſhort in writing, or that I write but now and then, or that I detayne the meſſenger, or that I write as one offended: in ſuche wiſe that neyther in me is any end of faults, nor in your Lordſhip any lacke of complaints: but if youre Lordſhip will note, and accuſe all the wants of conſiderations, negligences, ſlackneſſe, ſimplicities, and doltiſhneſſe that I haue: I can tell you, that you ſhall be wearied, and alſo tyred, for there is in me many things to be reprehended, and very few wherefore to be praiſed. That which is in me to be praiſed is that I eſtéeme my ſelfe to be a Chriſtian, kéepe my ſelfe from doing hurt to any man, and boaſt my ſelfe to be your friend. And that which is in me to be reprehēded is, that I neuer leaue to ſinne, neither euer begin to amend: this it is my Lorde that doth vexe me, this it is that ſettes me aground, and this is the cauſe why that there neuer remayneth in me gladneſſe: for as youre Lordſhip knoweth, matters of honor and of conſcience, gyue great cauſe to be felt or conſidered, but not to be diſcouered. To write ſhort or at large, to write late or in time, to write poliſhed or without order, neither is it in the iudgemente of him that doth indite it, either in the pen that writeth ye ſame: but in the matter that he hath in hande, or in the aptneſſe of time he vſeth: for if a man be diſgraced, he writeth that hée ought not, and if in diſpoſition, he writeth what he liſteth. Homer, Plato, Aeſchines, and Cicero, in their writings neuer ceaſſe to complaine, that when theyr common wealthes were in quiet and pacifyed, they ſtudied, read, and writte:

but when they were altered and vnruly, they coulde not ſtudy, & much leſſe wrought. That which paſſed by thoſe glorious perſonages in thoſe days, euery day paſſeth now in my ſelfe, for if I bée well diſpoſed and in temper, it is offred me by heapes, as muche as I woulde write, and if by chaunce I bée diſgraced or diſtempred, I would not ſo muche as to take pen in hand. There be tymes that I haue my iudgement ſo kindled and ſo delicate, that (as me thinketh) I coulde ſwéepe one graine of wheate, and cleaue a haire in ſunder. At another time I haue it ſo dull and ſo farre remoued, that I can hardly hit a nayle with a ſtedge. I knowe not what to write of thys Court, but that the Marques of Peskara, is come hither from Italy, which doth recount from thence ſuch & ſo many things, that if they be worthy to be put in Chronicle, they be not to be written in a letter. He that knoweth the condicione of Italy, will not maruell of the things therof: for in Italy no man may liue vnder the defence of iuſtice, but that to haue and too be able, he muſt be of power or elſe very priuate. Let him not deſire to liue in Italy, that hathe not fauour of the king to defend, or power in the field to fight: for in Italy they neuer care to demaunde by Iuſtice, that whiche they may winne by the launce.The conditions of Italy. In Italy they haue not to aſke of him that hathe an eſtate or goodes, of whome he did inherit them, but how be did winne them. In Italy to giue or take away eſtates or goodes, they ſéeke not right in the lawes, but in armes. In Italy hee that leaueth to take any thing, it is for want of power, and not for want of will. Italy is very pleaſant to liue in, and very perillous to be ſaued. Italy is an enterpriſe whether many do go, and from whence few do returne. Theſe and many other ſuch like things the Marques of Peskara recounted vnto vs at the table of the Earle of Naſſao, (many Lords being preſent, and ſome Prelates.) Giue thanks vnto God our Lorde that hath bred you in Spaine, & of Spaine, in Caſtile, and of Caſtile in Caſtile the olde, and of Caſtile the olde in Burgos, where you are beloued and ſerued, for that in the other places or townes of Spaine, althogh they be noble & of power, they haue always ſome controuerſies. The memoriall ye your Lordſhip

ſent me this yeare to conſider of, and vpon the ſame to giue you counſell, nowe I ſende it you corrected with my conſcience, and conſulted with my ſcience. No more. &c.
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Conſtable Sir Ynigo of Velaſco, in which is declared, the priſes of thyngs as in olde tyme they were wonte to be ſold in Castile.
                  
               
               
                  REnoumed and curious Conſtable, I haue receiued a letter from your Lordſhippe, as it appeareth by the ſame: although you be chief or heade of the Valaſcos, and I of the Ladrons of Gueuara, there you haue the déede, and here I haue the name. For entring into my cell, you haue ſtolne my Pictures, and ouerturned my Bookes. If there be a priuiledge of the Conſtables of Castile, (the religious being at his prayers, that they ſhal enter and ſacke his Cel, it were very iuſt to ſhew wherfore they did it, or elſe to reſtore vnto the owner the thing ſtolne. Your Lordſhip writeth vnto me, yt you wil not reſtore the pictures that you haue takē away, except I ſend you written the auncient ordinances that were made by the king Don Iuan in Toro, in ſuche wyſe, that you doe not content your ſelfe with ſtealing, but that you will alſo extort and doe violence. I know not which was greater that day, your fortune or my miſchance, in that my Cell was open: for I ſwear by the faith of a chriſtian, that my lance in the ſight of God wer much more worth, if I ſhuld vſe as great circūſpection in refraining my thoughts, as I vſe in the keeping of my bookes. Your Lordeſhip ſayeth, that the booke you hapned vpon in my librarie was olde, of an olde letter, of olde tyme, and of olde thinges, and dyd entreat of the prices how all things was ſold in Caſtile, in the time that King Iohn the firſt did firſt raigne. I wyll not only wryte vnto you that which the good king did ordeyn in Toro, but alſo the rude and groſſe ſpéeche wherewith that ordinaunce was written, whereof maye be gathered howe there hath bene

changed in Spayn, not onely the maner of ſelling, but the maner of ſpeaking. That which hath paſſed in this caſe is, that the king Sir Iohn the firſt kept Court in the Citie of Toro, in the yeare. M.CCCC. and .vi. in which he did ordein very particularly, not only how victuals ſhoulde be ſolde, but alſo for what prices the labourer ſhould worke. The title of that ordinance ſayth theſe wordes which followeth, in ſo olde a kinde of ſpéeche, that the Spanyards themſelues craue an interpreter, and is much to be maruelled at, but moſte of all for the prices of thinges, is almoſte incredible. Whiche I leaue vnwritten, partly to be conſidered by theſe words that follow, wherwith the Author concludeth his Letter as followeth.
               Thys Letter beeing read, I beleeue your Lordſhippe will maruell of the good cheape that was in thoſe dayes, and of the dearth that is nowe of victuals. And I beleeue that you will laugh at the ruſticall ſpéeche that was then, and of the polyſhed ſpéeche that nowe is vſed, although it be true, that the vantage that we haue nowe in the ſpéeche, they had then of vs in their liuing.
            
            
               
                  A Letter vnto ſir Alonſo of Fonſeca, biſhop of Burgos, preſident of the Indians, wherin is declared, wherfore the kings of Spayne be intituled Catholike.
               
               
                  RIght magnificent and Indian Proconſull, about twenty dayes paſt they gaue me a letter from your honour: and aboue fifteene dayes ſince I did write an anſwere of the ſame, the which no man to this day hath come to aſke, neither do I know by whome to ſend it. Your lordſhip doth write that I ſhould aduertiſe your honor what it is that they ſay here of your Lordſhip: to ſpeake with libertie, and to ſay you the truth, they ſay al in this Court, that you are a very good chriſtian,A plaine aduertiſement. and a very vntractable Biſhop: alſo they ſay, that you are long, prolix, negligent, and indetermined in the affaires that you haue in hand, and with the futers

that follow you, & which is worſte of all, that many of them doe returne to their houſes, ſpente and not diſpatched: they ſaye that your Lordſhip is fierce, proude, impacient, and ſuſpicious, and that many doe leaue their buſineſſe vndetermined, to ſee themſelues by your Lordſhip ſo ouerſhadowed. Others ſay, that you are a man that deales in troth, you ſpeak truth, and that you are a friende of truth, and that a man giuen to lying was neuer ſéene to be your friend: alſo they ſay that you are right in that you commaund, iuſt in your iudgements, and moderate in your executions, and that whiche is more than all: that in matters of iuſtice, and in the determination therof, you haue neither paſſion or affection:Notable conditions in a Iudge. they ſay that you are of muche compaſſion, pitifull, and an almes giuer: and that (whiche can not be ſpoken but to your greate praiſe) to many poore and in neceſſitie, from whom you take goods by Iuſtice, on the other parte you giue it them oute of your chamber. Your Lordeſhip hathe not to maruell of that which I ſay, neither doe I miſlike of that which you doe, bycauſe out of the one and the other, there may be gathered, that no man in this worlde is ſo perfect, but there is in him to bée amended, eyther any man ſo euill, that hath not in him to be prayſed. The hiſtorie writers do note Homere of vain ſpéech, Alexander for furious, Iulius Caeſar for ambicious, Pompeius for proude, Demetrius for vicious, Haniball for periured, Veſpaſian for couetous, Traiane for a wine bibber, and Marcus Aurelius for amorous: Amongſt men ſo illuſtre, glorious, and heroicall as all theſe were, it is not much that your Lordſhip do pay for a pounde of waxe to be of their fraternitie: And this pounde is not bicauſe you are an euill Chriſtian, but for that you were of weake pacience. There is no vertue more neceſſarie in him that gouerneth a common wealthe than is patience: for the Iudge that is meaſured in that he ſpeaketh, and diſſembleth the iniuries that they doe vnto him,May deſcend but not fall. he maye deſcende, but not fall. The Prelates and Preſidentes that haue charge to gouerne people, and determyne cauſes, muche more than other menne ought to lyue circumſpectly,

and be of more ſuffering: for if we of you be iudged, beléeue me that of vs alſo you are beholden, vewed and conſidered. There is nothing in this worlde more ſure, than he whiche is feared of many, ought alſo to feare many: for if I will be a Iudge of your goodes, for the ſame you will be a vewer of my life: and thereof it commeth to paſſe that manye times the Iudge is more damnified in his fame, than the ſurer in his goodes.
               My Lorde all this is to be vnderſtoode of Iudges that bée proude, of euill complexion and melancholike: Suche as bée milde, gentle, and ſuffring, they do not examine the liues they leade, but alſo they diſſemble the weakenes they commit. He that hathe charge of the common wealth, it is neceſſary that he haue a milde condicion, in ſuch wiſe that when he ſhall ſée weakenes,Excellent graces in a iudge. that he make ſtrong: and where he ſéeth courage, that he praiſe it: and where he ſéeth want of foreſight, that hée prouide: and where he ſéeth diſſolution, that he chaſtiſe: and where he ſéeth neceſſitie, to ſuccour: and where he ſéeth ſedition, to appeaſe it: and where he ſéeth conformitie, to conſerue it: and where he ſéeth ſuſpicion, to cleare it: and where he ſéeth heauineſſe to remedie it: and where he ſéeth gladnes, to temper it: for after extreme pleaſure and gladneſſe, many times do follow no ſmall diſtreſſes. If in your vertuous attempts ye take in hand, there ſhall happen ſome ſucceſſe not conformable to youre good deſires, and if it ſhall alſo chaunce that you be grieued therewith, impute not all the fault vpon your ſelfe: for the man that doth all that he can do, we cannot ſay to him, that he doth not that he ought to do, ſince in bloud I hold you for kinſman, in conuerſation for friend, in authoritie for my good Lord,A friēdly perſwaſion. and in deſeruing for father, I ſhall not leaue to pray you as a father: and beſéeche you as my good Lord, that you be mild in conuerſation, and meaſured in your words: bycauſe of Iudges & Lordes as you are, at ſometimes they do more féele a word, than of another the puſh of a laūce. But ſince in all this kingdome it is notorious that youre Lordſhip is honeſt of your life, and iuſt in youre tribunall or

iudgements: I wold not gladly heare that thoſe that do praiſe that which you do, ſhould complaine of that whiche you ſay: with a Lorde of ſo high eſtate,Skilful eloquence. and with a iudge of ſo preheminent an office, my pen ſhould not haue preſumed to write what it hath written, if your Lordſhip had not commaunded. My Lord I ſaide it, bycauſe if this that I haue here written vnto you ſhall not like you, that it may pleaſe you to ſende too reuoke the licence that you haue giuen.
               Alſo you will that I ſhall write vnto youre Lordſhip,Why ye kings of Caſtile be called Catholiques. if I haue founde in anye auncient Chronicle, what is the cauſe wherefore the Princes of Caſtile do call themſelues not onely Kings, but alſo Catholique Kings. And that alſo I write vnto you, who was the firſt that called himſelf Catholique King, and what was the reaſon and the occaſion to take this ſo generous and Catholique title. There were ynowe in thys Court of whome you might haue demaunded, and of whome you might haue vnderſtood, in yeares more aunciēt, in knowledge more learned, in bookes more rich, and in writing more curious than I am. But in the end my Lord be ſure of this one thing, that that which I ſhall write, if it be not written in a poliſhed ſtile, at the leaſt it ſhall be all very true: Comming to the purpoſe, it is to be vnderſtood, that the Princes in olde time did always take proud ouer-names:The ouer-names of renoumed kings as Nabugodonozer that did intitle him ſelfe King of Kings, Alexander the greate the king of the world, the king Demetrius the conqueror of Cities, the great Haniball the tamer of kingdomes, Iulius Caeſar the Duke of the Citie, the king Mithridates the reſtorer of the world, the king Athila the whip of nations, the king Dioniſius the hoſt of all men, the king Cirus the laſt of the Gods, ye king of England defender of the Church, the king of Fraunce ye moſt Chriſtian king, and the king of Spaine the Catholique king. To giue your Lordſhip a reckoning who were theſe kings, and the cauſe why they did take theſe ſo proude titles, to me it ſhould be painfull to write, and to your Lordſhip tedious to reade, it is ſufficient that I declare what you commaunde me, without ſending what you craue not.
               
                  
                  The yere, the day, ye month and hour that Spaine was loſt.It is to wit, that in the yere ſeuen hundreth fiftie two, the fift day of the month of Iuly vpon a ſunday, ioyning to the riuer Bedalake, about Xeres on the frontiers, euen at the breake of day was giuen the laſt and moſt vnfortunate battell betwixt ye 
                  Gothes that were in Spaine, and the Alarues that had come from Africa, in whiche the ſorowfull king Sir Rodrigo was ſlaine, and all the kingdome of Spaine loſt. The Moore that was Captaine, and that ouercame this famous battell was named Muſa, which did know ſo well to folow his victorie, that in the ſpace of eight moneths he did win and had dominion from Xeres in the frontieres, vnto the rocke Horadada, which is neare to ye towne of Onnia. And that whiche ſéemeth to vs moſt terrible is, that the Moores did win in eighte moneths,Spaine loſt in eight months, and hardly recouered in eight hundred yeares. which in recouering was almoſt eight hundred yeres, for ſo many yeares did paſſe from the time that Spaine was loſt, vntill Granado was wonne. The fewe Chriſtians that eſcaped out of Spaine, came retiring vnto the mountaines of Onnia, neare vnto the rocke Horadada, vnto which the Moores did come: but from thence forward they paſſed not, either did conquer it, for there they found great reſiſtance, and the land very ſharp. And when they of Spaine did ſee that the king Sir Rodrigo was dead, and all the Gothes with hym, and that without Lord or head they could not reſiſt the Moores, they rayſed for king a Spaniſh Captaine that was named Sir Pelaius, a man venturous in armes, and of all the people very well beloued. The fame being ſpread thoroughout all Spaine, that the mountaine men of Onia had raiſed for king the good Sir Pelaius, all men generouſe and warlike did repaire vnto him, with whome he did vnto the Moores greate hurt: and had of them glorious triumphes. Thrée yeares after they had rayſed the good ſir Pelaius for King, hée married one of his daughters with one of the ſonnes of the Earle of Nauarn, who was named Sir Peter, and his ſonne was called Sir Alonſo. This Earle Sir Peter deſcended by right line of the linage of the bleſſed King Richardos, in whoſe tyme the Gothes did leaue the ſect of the curled Arrius, by the meanes of

the glorious and learned Archbyſhop Leonard. The good king Pelaius being dead, in the eighteene yeare of his raigne, the Caſtilians exalted for king a ſonne of his, that was named Fauila, the which two yeares after he began to raigne, going on a certaine day to the mountaine, meaning to flea the Beare, the Beare killed him.
               And for that the king Fauila died without children, the Caſtilians elected for king, the huſband of his ſiſter, whiche is to wit, the ſonne of the Earle of Nauarne, who was named Alonſo, the whiche began his raigne in the yeare .vii.C.lxxij. hys raigne endured eightene yeares, which was as much tyme as his father in law the good King Sir Pelaius had raigned.
               This good King was the firſte that was named Alonſo, which tooke his name in ſo good an houre, that ſince that daye amongſt all the kings of Caſtile that haue bin named Alonſo, we reade not of one that hath bin euill, but very good. Of thys good king Alonſo the hiſtoriographers do recite many landable things to recompt, worthy to be knowen, and exemplars to be followed. The King ſir Alonſo was the firſt that out of Nauarne entered Galizia, to make warre vppon the Moores, with whome be had many encounters and battells: in the ende he ouercame and droue them out of Aſtorga, Ponferada, Villa franca, Tuy and Lugo, with all their Countries and Caſtelles.
               This good king Alonſo was he that did win of the Moores the Citie of Leon, and builded there a royall place, to the ende all the Kings of Caſtile (his ſucceſſors) ſhould there be reſidēt, and ſo it came to paſſe, that in long time after, many Kings of Caſtile did liue and die in Leon. This good King Alonſo was the firſte that after the deſtruction of Spaine began to builde Churches and to make Monaſteries and Hoſpitalles, in eſpecially (from the beginning) the Cathedrall churches of Lugo, T
                        •
                     y, Aſtorga, and Ribe
                        •
                     ew, the which afterwards did paſſe to Mondonedo. This good king Alonſo did bui
                     •
                  d many and very ſolempne Monaſteries of the order of ſaint Benet and many hoſpitalles in the way of ſaint Iames, and many particular

Churches in Nauarne, and in the Countrey of Ebro, whiche he endewed all with great riches, and gaue them opulent poſſeſſions. This good King Alonſo was the firſt that did ſéeke, and commaunded to be ſought with very great diligence, the holy bookes that had eſcaped the hands of the Moores, and as a zelous Prince commaunded that they ſhoulde bée caried to the Church of Oiendo to be kept, and gaue great rewards vnto ſuch as had hid them. This good King Alonſo was the firſts that commaunded that all the greate writers and ſingers ſhould reſort to Leon, to the end they ſhould write great ſinging bookes, and litle breuiaries to pray on, the which he gaue and deuided amongſt all the Monaſteries and Churches that he had founded: for the curſed Moores had not left a Church in Spaine that they did not ouerthrow, either booke that they did not burne. This good king Alonſo was the firſt, that did begin to make all the Biſhops houſes ioyning to the Cathedrall Churches,To the end cold in winter neither heate in ſomer ſhold hinder reſidents. bycauſe the heate in the Sōmer, either the colde in Winter, ſhould not let them to be reſident in the Quier, and to ſée how they worſhipped God.
               This good king Alonſo the firſt died in ye age of .lxiiij. yeres, in the Citie of Leon, in the yeare of our Lord. 793. And hys death, of the Caſtilians and Nauarrois was as much bewayled, as of all men his life was deſired. How acceptable his life was vnto God, it appeared moſt cleare, in that the Lord ſhewed by him at his death: whiche is to wit, that at the point of his laſt breath, they heard ouer his chamber Angelike voices ſing and ſay: Beholde how the iuſt dieth and no man maketh account thereof, his dayes be ended and his ſoule ſhall bée in reſt. The lamentation was ſo great that was made through out Spaine for the deathe of this good King Alonſo, that from thence forward euery time that any named his name, if hée were a man he put off his cap, and if a woman ſhe made a reuerence. Not thrée months after the death of the good King Alonſo, all the mightie of the Kingdome ioyned in parliament, wherein they did ordeyne and commaund by a publique Edict, that from thence forward and for euermore none ſhould

preſume to ſay coldly or driely, the king Alonſo, but for his excellencie they ſhould cal him the king Alonſo the Catholique, for that he had bin a prince ſo glorious, and of the diuine ſeruice ſo zelouſe. This good king was ſonne in law of ſir Pelaius,
                  The firſt inuētiō of the title Catholike. he was the third King of Caſtile, after the deſtruction thereof: he was the firſt king of this name Alonſo: he was ye firſte that founded Churches in Spaine: he was the firſt King at whoſe death ſuch Angelike voyces were heard: he was the firſt king that was intituled Catholike: by whoſe deſeruings and vertues all the kings of Spaine (his ſucceſſors) be called to thys day Catholike Kings.
               My Lorde, it ſéemeth to me, that ſince the kings of Spaine preſume to inherit the name, they ſhould alſo preſume to follow his life, which is to wit, to make warre vpon the Moores, and to be fathers and defendours of the Church: And for that in the beginning of this letter, I did vſe the ſpéech of a friend, and in this I haue accompliſhed what you craued as a ſeruāt. I ſay no more, but that our Lord be your protector, and gyue vs all his grace.
               
                  From Segouia 
                     the xij. of May. 1523.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Moſen Rubin of Valentia, beeing enamoured, wherein is touched the diſpleaſures that the amorous dames giue vnto their louers.
               
               
                  MAgnificent and old enamored,Contrary ſalutations in reſpect of his birth and maners. being in Madrid the fourth of Auguſt, where I receyued a letter of youres, and for that it was torne, and the firme ſomewhat blotted, I ſweare vnto you by the law of an honeſt mā, I could not find meanes to read it, or imagine or cal to remembrance who ſhould write it. For notwithſtanding we were acquainted when I was Inquiſitor in Valencia, it is almoſt a thouſand yeares ſince we ſaw eche other: after I awakened and called my ſelfe to remembrance, and did read,A ſufficiente cauſe to forget olde acquaintance. and read againe your letter, I fell in the reckoning that it was of Moſen Rubin my neighbour (I ſay Moſen Rubin the enamored)

I remēber that ſometimes we were wont to play at the cheſſe in my lodging, and cannot aduiſe me that you gaue me the dame, but I do certainly remember, that you did not ſuffer me to ſée your enamored. I remember that at the rock of Eſpadon,
                  Aſſured notes of old acquaintance. at the encounter we had with the Moores, I eſcaped wounded, and you with a broken head, where wée could neyther finde Chirurgion to cure vs, or as muche as a clout to bind vs. I remember that in reward for that I cauſed your bill to be firmed by the Quéene, you ſent me a Mule which I did gratifie and not receyue. I remember that when we went to accompany the French King to Requena, whē we came to the ſeuen waters, I complayned for want of meate, and you for lacke of lodging: and in the ende, I receyued you into my lodging, and you went foorth to prouide victualles. I remember when Caeſar commaunded me to repaire vnto Toledo, you gaue me a letter to be deliuered vnto the Secretarie Vrias, vppon a certaine buſineſſe of yours, to whome I dyd not only ſpeake but alſo obtained your ſute. I remember that chiding with a Chaplayne of youre wiues in my preſence, when he ſaid vnto you, that it were not conuenient you ſhuld deale fowly with him, for that he had charge of ſoules, & was a Curat, you made anſwer, that he was not a Curat of ſoules but of fooles. I remember that I counſelled you and alſo perſwaded you, being in Xatina, that you ſhoulde giue to the Diuell the loue that you wot of: and I alſo doe knowe, bycauſe they were tedious, perillous, and coſtly. I remember that after in Algezira you reported (wéeping and ſighing) that you had no power to chaſe them from your minde, either roote them from your hart: and ther I returned to ſay and ſweare, that it was no loue, eyther pleaſant to your perſone, or too your eſtate conuenient. I remember that after we mette at Torres, where I demaunded to what concluſion you had framed your loue, you anſwered in a thouſand ſorrowes and trauelles, for that you had eſcaped from thence wounded, abhorred, beflouted, infamed, and alſo be pilled. Of many other things, (I remember) I haue both ſéene and hard you ſpeake

and do, in that time that we were neighbours and couerſant in Valentia:
                  The iſſue of vnhoneſt loue. whereof (although we may talke) they are not too be written.
               In this preſent letter you aduertiſe me that now you are enamored and taken with other new loues, and that ſince I ſayd the troth in the firſt, you pray me to write my opinion in the ſecond, (holding it for certaine, that my ſkil ſerueth to let bloud in the right vayne, and alſo to bind vp the wound.) Sir Moſen Rubin, I woulde you had written or demaunded ſome other matter: for ſpeaking the very troth in this matter of loue, you are not in the age to follow it, eyther may it be contained with my ingrauitie to write it: of my habit, of my profeſſion, and of my authoritie and grauitie, you ſhoulde haue demaunded caſes of counſell, and not remedies of loue: for I haue red more in Hoſtienſis that inſtructeth to giue counſell, thā in Ouid that teacheth to be enamored. Of a troth maſter Moſen Rubin I ſay, that it is neither you or I, that loue dothe like, and with whome ſhe doth delight. For you are now olde, and I am religious, in ſuch ſort, that in you age doth abound, and in me wanteth libertie. Beléeue me ſir & be out of doubt, it is not loue but ſorow, not mirth but diſpleaſure, not taſt but torment, not recreation but confuſion: when in the enamored there is not youth, libertie, and liberalitie. The man that is now entred into age, and wil be yong againe and enamored, they neuer terme him an old louer, but a filthy old foole, and (as God ſaue me) they haue great reaſon that ſo do call them: for old rotten ſtrawes are more fit to make dung, than to bée kept. The God Cupid, and the Goddeſſe Venus,
                  The conditions of men apt for loue. will not haue in houſhold but yong men that can ſerue, liberall that knowe to ſpend, and frée that can enioy and delight, pacient that can ſuffer, diſcréete that haue ſkill to talke, ſecret that knowe too kéepe ſilence, faithfull to gratify, and valiant that can perſeuer: he that is not endued and priuileged with theſe conditions, it ſhould bee more ſound counſell for him to delue in the field, than to be enamored in pallace. For there are not in this world men more miſerable than the enamored that be fooliſh.

The doltiſh louer beſides that his dame ſcorneth him, his neighbours ieſt at him: his ſeruantes beguile him, Pandar bepéeleth him, he is blinded with gilefull ſpéeche, euill imployeth his iuels, goeth without foreſight, he is light of beliefe, and in the end findes himſelfe beflouted. All the offices, crafts, and ſciences in this world may be learned, except it be the ſkil and occupation to know to loue: the whiche, neither Salamon had ſkill to write, Aſclepius to paint, Ouid to teache, Helen to report, either yet Cleopatra to learne, but that from the ſchoole of the hart it muſt procéede, and pure diſcretion muſt giue inſtruction. There is not any thing wherein is more neceſſitie to be diſcréet, than in being a louer: for if a man haue hunger, cold, thirſt, and werineſſe, the only body feeleth it, but the follies that is committed in loue, the hart chiefly bewayleth thē. To the end that loue be fixed, ſure, perpetuall, and true, there muſt be equalities betwixt the enamored: for if the louer bée yong, and ſhe old, or he old and ſhe yong, or he wiſe and ſhe a foole, or he a foole and ſhe wiſe, or he loue hir, and ſhe abhorreth him, or ſhe loue him, and he abhorreth hir: beléeue me ſir and be out of doubt that of fained louers, they ſhall ende aſſured and vnfained enemies. Maſter Moſen Rubin, I thought good to ſay thus muche vnto you, to the ende that if the louer that you haue now choſen be in poſſeſſion of thrée ſcore and thrée yeres as you are,A louer in poſſeſſion of threeſcore and three yeares. there is no greate perill that you loue and know hir. For moſt of the time you ſhall ſpend, ſhall bée in recounting vnto hir the louers that you haue holden, and ſhe in reckoning vp vnto you, all ſuch as hath ſerued hir.
               Speaking more in particuler, I woulde knowe to what purpoſe a man as you that hath paſſed thréeſcore yeares, that is full ſpent, and laden with the goute, will nowe take a Curtiſan yong and faire, which will rather occupy hir ſelfe in robbing, than delighting of you? To what ende will you haue a loue of whome you may not be ſerued, but to bind vp grieues, and to driue away flies? Wherefore will you haue a daintie Dame, ſince betwixt you and hir there may riſe no either cō
                  uerſation or communication, but to relate and count reckonings

and tales, and how little you haue eaten all the daye, and howe manie tymes you haue tolde the clocke that night? For what cauſe wold you haue a loue ſince you want ſtrēgth to folowe hir, goodes to ſerue hir, patience to ſuffer hir, and youth to enioye hir? Why will you haue an amorous dame vnto whome you can not repreſente howe muche you haue ſuffered and endured for hir ſake, but reporte howe the goute is ryſen from the hande to the ſhoulders? To what concluſion will you loue an infamous woman, whiche will not enter in at your dores that daye whiche you ceaſe to giue hir, or ſhall grow negligent to ſerue hir? To what conſideration doe you delite to haue a wanton loue, vnto whome you ſhall not dare to deny any thing that ſhe craueth, either chide for anye diſpleaſure ſhe giueth? To what ſeruice will you haue a lawleſſe loue, who may not be ſerued conformably to youre good, but agréeable to hir fooliſhneſſe? For what ſkill will you haue alemman, which muſt be gratified for the fauour ſhe beareth you, and dare not complayne of the ieloſies ſhe ſhal demaund of you? For what conceyt will you haue a ſeconde Lais, which when ſhe ſhall flatter you, it ſhall not only be to content you,A chief cauſe of courtizans loue. but ſomething to craue of you? For what intente will you haue a loue, before whome you muſt néedes laugh, althoughe the goute make you raue? For what meaning will you haue a diſſolute dame, with whom you ſhall ſpend all your goodes, before you ſhall haue acquaintance with hir conditions? And why deſire you a luſtie Laſſe, with whom you are ioyned for money, and alſo ſuſteyn hir with delights, and yet in the end muſt depart from hir with diſpleaſures? If you M. Moſen Rubin with theſe conditions will néedes be enamoured, be it ſo in a good houre, for I am ſure it will rayne into your houſe.
               To your age and infirmitie, it were more cōuenient to haue a friend to recreate, than a Lamia, with whom to putrifie. Samocratius, Nigidius, and Ouide did wryte many bookes,The authors of remedies for loue, and the frute they reaped therof and made greate treatyſes of the remedies of loue, and the rewarde of them, is, they ſought remedies for others, and vſed none for themſelues, all thrée dyed, perſecuted and baniſhed,

not for thoſe offences they committed in Rome, but for the loues they attempted in Capua. Let Ouide ſay what hée dreameth, Nigidius what him pleaſeth, Samocratius what hée thinketh good, but in fine, the greateſt and beſt remedy againſt loue, is to flée the conuerſation and to auoyde the occaſion: for in cauſes of loue wée ſée many eſcape that doe flée it, and verye fewe that abide it. Sir take you héede, that the Dinel deceyue you not in your reckenyng (a freſhe to be enamoured) ſince it is not conuenient for the health of your perſon, either aunſwerable to the authoritie of youre houſe: For I aſſure you of my faith, that ſooner you ſhall be deliuered of the diſpleaſures of your Courtizan, than of the paynes of the goute. My pen hath ſtretched out farther than I thought,The beginners of quarels do ſometyme catche a wipe. and alſo farther than you would: but ſince you were the firſt that laid hand to weapon, the fault is not myne, if I haue hapned to giue you a wype. To the Father Prior of Corta caeli, I ſende a riche palia, for my ſake I pray you to cōmaunde that it bée giuen him, & in my behalf to viſit him, bicauſe I lodged long time with him, & am much bound & affectioned vnto him. No more but that our Lord be your protector, and kéepe you from an euill lemman, and heale you of your goute.
               
                  From Madrid 
                     the thirde of Marche .1527.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Biſhop of Zamora Sir Anthony of Acuna, wherein he is ſharply reprehended, for that he was captain of the commons that rebelled in Spaine.
               
               
                  Contrarye congratulations in reſpect of his functiō and maners.
                  REuerent and ſeditious Prelate, Zalobrena the ſergeant of your bande gaue mée a Letter of yours, whiche preſently I coulde not vnderſtand, but after I had read, & returned againe to reade the ſame, I did ſée it was no letter, but a bill that the Biſhop of Zamora had ſente: wherein he dyd deſie and threaten that he woulde kill me, or commaunde mée to be chaſtized. The cauſe of this defiaunce your Lordſhippe declareth to procéede, for that in Villa Braxima I withdrew Sir Peter Giron from your parcialitie, and

counſelled hym to ceaſe to followe you, and retire to ſerue the king. I my Lorde doe accept your defiance,The lykelyhode of a notable combat. and hold my ſelfe defyed, not that wée kill our ſelues, but that we examin our ſelues, not to the ende wée goe vnto the fielde, but to incommende our ſelues to reaſon. Which reaſon as a viewer of our factes ſhall declare whether of vs is moſte culpable, I in followyng and obeying the Kyng, or you in altering and reuolting the kingdome. I remēber me being as thē but yong in Trecenon, a manour houſe of Gueuara, I did ſée my vncle Sir Ladron, & ſir Beltram my father, mourne in black for your father, & (in verie trouth my lord Biſhop) ſeeing you as I did ſée you in Villa Braxima compaſſed with artillery, accōpanied with ſouldiours, and armed at al points: with more reaſon we might weare gréen, bicauſe you liue, than black for yt your father died. The diuine Plato of two thinges did not diſcerne which firſt to bewayle, that is to wit: the death of good men, or the life of the wicked: for it is a moſt great grief vnto the heart to ſée the good ſo ſoon to die, and the wicked ſo long time to liue. A certain Greeke béeing demanded for what cauſe he ſhewed ſo great ſorow in ye death of Ageſilaus? He anſwered: I wéepe not bicauſe Ageſilaus died, but for that Alcibiades remaineth liuing, whoſe life offendeth the Goddes, and eſcandalizeth the world. A certain Gentleman of Medina (who is named Iohn Cnaſo) reported that being appointed to haue the ouerſight of your bringing vp, he was driuen to change foure Nurſſes in ſix moneths: for that in nurſing you were fierce wayware, and importune in ſuckyng. It ſéemeth vnto mée my Lorde Biſhop, that ſince in your childhoode you were ſo paynfull, and in your lyfe ſo ſedicious, it were great reaſon, that in your olde yeares as you ſhoulde be quiet: if not for your deſeruing, yet to repoſe you ſhoulde ſeeke quietneſſe: holding as you haue in youre poſſeſſion thrée ſcore yeare completed▪ and ſhortely maye boaſte youre ſelfe of thrée ſcore and tenne accomplyſhed, it ſeemeth to mée no euyll counſayle that you offer (if it lyke you) the flower to God, for that you beſtowed ſo muche branne in the worlde.

Since your gardein is blaſted, your vinedage ended, youre floure fallen, your primetyme finiſhed, your youthe paſſed, you olde age come, it were muche more conueniente to take order for amendment of olde ſinnes, & reformation of youre life, than to execute the office of Captaine ouer rebelling cō
                  moners. If you will not followe Chriſte that made you, yet folow ſir Lewes of Acuna that begat you: at whoſe gates many poore euery day did féede, and at your gates we ſée not but playing and blaſpheming ſouldiours.
               
                  A lewde office for an old biſhop.To make of ſouldiours prieſts, it paſſeth: but of prieſts to make ſouldiors, is an acte moſte ſcandalous: whervnto I wil not ſay your Lordſhip conſented, but that you exactely haue perfourmed. You broughte from Zamora to Tordiſsillas, thrée hundreth Maſſing Prieſtes, not to inſtructe the Kinges ſubiectes, but to defend that Town againſt the King: and to remoue your Lordſhip from euill toungs, as alſo for the better ſaluation of their ſoules,Prelates for the bodie. you brought them from Zamora, in the beginning of Lent, in ſuch wiſe that like a good paſtor & an excellent Prelate, you remoued thē from praying to fighting: in the aſſault which ye Gentlemē gaue at Tordeſsillas againſt your bande, I ſaw with mine eyes one of your prieſts with an harquebuſe ouerthrow eleuen men behinde a window, & the grace was, that when he did leuell to ſhoote, he bleſſed him ſelfe with his péece, and killed them with the pellot. I ſawe alſo, before the aſſaulte was ended, the Souldiours of oure ſide, that were without, giue that good Prelate ſuch a blow in the forehead with an arrow, that the death of that caytiſe was ſo ſuddain, as he had neither time to confeſſe his ſinnes, nor yet ſo muche as to bleſſe himſelfe. But nowe the ſoule of that Biſhop that remoued that prieſt from his churche, & the ſoule of that prieſt that ſlew ſo many men,Doubtfull to be anſwered. what excuſe can they haue before men, and what accounte maye they make to God? It were a ſinne to take you from the warres, but much greater to make you of the church, ſince you be ſo offenſiue, & in nothing ſcrupulous, & hereof we be moſt certain, for yt you make no account to fight & to kill, and alſo to be irregular.
               
                  I woulde gladly knowe in whether booke you haue read moſt, which is to wit, in Vegetius, whiche entreateth of matters of warres, or in S. Auſtine his booke of Chriſtian doctrine? and that whiche I durſte auouche is, I haue ſéene you many tymes handle a partiſan, but neuer anye booke: and it ſéemeth vnto mée not a little gréeuous, that to the ſouldioures that aſſaulted and fel at the taking of the fort of Impudia, they ſay, that you ſayde: So my ſonnes vp, fight and die, beholde, my ſoule for yours, ſince you dye in ſo iuſt an enterpriſe, and a demaunde ſo holye. My Lorde Biſhop,A Biſhoppe vtterly voyde of a ſcrupulous conſcience. you well knowe that the Souldiors that there were ſlayne were excommunicate for ſacriledge, traytours to the King, robbers of churches, théeues on high ways, enemies of the common wealth, and maintainers of ciuill warre. It is moſt euident, that the ſoule of that Biſhop that ſpeaketh ſuche blaſphemie, is not much ſcrupulous, that deſireth to die as a ſouldiour: neither doe I maruell that he deſireth to die like a deſperate Souldiour, that neuer made account of his eſtate as a Biſhoppe. If you had rayſed this warre to reforme the common wealth,A biſhop fighting for a biſhoprike. or to haue made frée your countrey from ſome oppreſſion and taxation, it might ſéeme you had occaſion, although in déed no reaſon) but your Lordſhip hath not riſen againſt the king for the weale of the kingdom, but to make exchange for a better Biſhoprike, and to driue the Erle of Alua de Liſta, out of Zamora. If you enter in reckening with all thoſe of your bande, which goe in your companie, certainly you ſhall fynde that paſſion was your foundation, & not reaſon, neither zeale of the common wealth, but ouermuche deſire in euery one to augment his owne houſe and eſtate.
               Sir Peter Giron woulde haue the poſſeſſion of Medina: the Earle of Saluatiera commaunde the royall Paſtures: Fernando de Aualoes reuenge his iniurie: Iohn de Padilia be maiſter of S. Iames: Sir Peter Laſſo the onely ruler in Toledo:
                  An Abbot fighting for a biſhoprike. 
                  Quintanilla Controller of Medina: Sir Fernando de Hulloa expell his brother out of Toro: the Abbot of Compludo obtaine the Biſhoprike of Zamora: the Doctor Barnardine, the Auditor of Valiodolid:

Ramir nimez the poſſeſſion of Leon: and Charles de Arrelano ioyne Soria with Vorobia. The wiſe man ſayeth, hée ſéeketh occaſion that will depart from a frend: in like maner we may ſay, that ſedicious men ſéek not but rebellious times: for that it ſéemeth vnto them whiche want & are in neceſſitie, while rebellion laſteth, they may feed of the ſweate of other mens brows, and profit by their neighbors loſſe. The arte ſéemeth not a litle gracious which you haue vſed to deceiue and perſuade Toledo, Burgos, Valiodolid, Leon, Salamanca, Auila, and Segouia to rebell, ſaying, that by this meane they ſhal be eſtabliſhed and made frée, as Venize, Geneua, Florence, Sena, and Luke: in ſuche wiſe, that from hencefoorth they ſhall not bée named Cities, but Seigniories. Muſing what was to be ſaid in this matter: a good ſpace I had my pen in ſuſpence, and in the end, I conceiued that vpon ſo great a vanitie and miſchief (neuer lyke heard of) there is nothing to be ſayd, much leſſe to be written. For I hold it for certain and dare auouch, that you make not thoſe Cities frée, but a praye, not entitle them with ſeigniories, but profit your ſelues with their riches. Thoſe ye wil take in hand any enterpriſe that naturally is ſeditious or offenſible, haue not to conſider of the occaſion that moueth thē to ryſe, but only the good or euil end which therof may procéed: for all famous offences haue had always a beginning of good reſpects. Silla, Marius, and Cateline, whiche were famous Romains, and glorious Captaines, vnder the coloure to delyuer Rome from euill gouernours, made themſelues tirants of the ſame. At ſometymes it is leſſe euill in greate Cities to beare with ſome want of Iuſtice, than to moue the people, and therby to raiſe warre: for that war is a certain net that catcheth away all weale from the common wealth.
               The great Alexander being demaunded for what cauſe hée would be Lord of the whole worlde, made anſwere: All the warres that are raiſed in this worlde, is for one of theſe thrée cauſes, which is, eyther to haue goodes, many lawes: or elſe many Kings: therfore would I obtain the ſame, to cōmaund throughout the whole worlde, that they honour but one God,

ſerue but one king, and obſerue but one law. But let vs now conferre your Lordſhip with Alexander the great, and we ſhal finde, that he was a King, and your Lorſhip a Biſhoppe: he a Pagan, and you a Chriſtian: he bred in the warres, and you in the Church: he neuer heard of the name of Chriſte, & you haue ſworne to obſerue his Goſpell: and with all theſe conditions he would not for the whole worlde haue but one king, and your lordſhip wold haue ſeuen only for Caſtile. I ſay vnto your Lordſhip, that you wold eſtabliſh ſeuen kings in Caſtile, for that you would make the ſeuen Cities of the ſame ſeauen ſeigniories. The good and loyal gentlemen of Spayn vſe to remoue kings, to make one king, and ſuch as be traytours and diſloyall, do vſe to remoue the King, to make kings.
               For vs and our friends, we wil no other God but Chriſt, no other law but the Goſpell, or other king but the Emperoure Charles the fifth. And if you and your commoners will haue an other king, and an other lawe, ioyne your ſelues with the Curate of Mediana, which euery ſunday doth eſtabliſhe and take away kings in Caſtile. And this is the caſe. In a certain place named Mediana, which is néere vnto Palomera of Auila there was a Biskay prieſt, and halfe a foote, whiche was moued with ſo great affection to Iohn of Padilia, that at the tyme of bidding of beads on the holy days, he recōmended after this maner: My brethren, I commend vnto you one Aue Maria for the moſt holy communaltie, that it neuer decay. I commende vnto you an other Aue Maria for the maieſtie of king Iohn of Padilia, ye God may proſper him. I cōmend vnto you an other Aue Maria for the Quéenes highneſſe our miſtreſſe and Lady Mary of Padilia, that God may preſerue hir: for of a troth theſe be the true kings, and all the reſt before time were tyrantes. Theſe prayers continued aboute thrée wéekes (little more or leſſe.) After whiche tyme Iohn of Padilia, with his menne of warre paſſed that waye, and the ſouldiers that lodged in the prieſts houſe inticed away his woman, drank his wine, kilde his hennes, and eate vp his bacon. The ſundaye folowing, in the Churche he ſayde: It is not vnknowne vnto you my

brethren, howe Iohn of Padilia paſſed this way, and howe his ſouldiors hath left me neuer a henne, haue eaten me a flitch of bacon,The prelate loſt his Catelina. haue drunke out a whole tinage of wine, and haue caried away my Cateline, I ſay, for that from hencefoorth you ſhall not pray vnto God for him, but for king Charles, and for our Lady Quéene Ione, (for they be the true Princes) & giue to the diuell theſe ſtraunge kings.A tinage is an earthen can vſed in Spain of no litle ſyſe to holde their wine. Behold here my Lord Biſhop, how the Curate of Mediana is of more power than your Lorſhippe, for that he made and vnmade Kings in thrée wéekes, whiche you haue not performed in eyght moneths: and yet I doe ſweare and propheſie, that the King that you ſhall eſtabliſh in Caſtile, ſhall endure as little as that king whiche was made by the Curate of Mediana. No more but that our Lorde be your protectour, and lighten you with his grace.
               
                  From Medina del rio ſecco, 
                     the .xx. of December .1521.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Biſhop of Zamora, ſir Antony of Acunna, in whiche the Author doth perſwade him to turne to the ſeruice of the kyng.
               
               
                  Repugnancie in reſpect of eſtate and maners.
                  REuerend & diſquiet biſhop, by the letter of Quintanilla of Medina, I was aduertiſed in what maner your lordſhip receiued my letter, and alſo vnderſtoode, that in the ende of reading thereof, preſentely you beganne to groue, and murmuring, ſayd: Is this a thing to be ſuffred, that the tong of Frier Antony of Gueuara, may bee of more power than my launce? and that he be not contented to haue withdrawne Sir Peter Giron, (euen from betwixte oure hands) but alſo now euen here doth write me a thouſand blaſphemies. It hath much pleaſed me, that my letter was ſo wel cōfected, yt with ſuch ſwiftnes it pierced vnto your heart: for I did not write that you ſhould read it, but that you ſhuld reade and feele it. The patiēt that doth determine to receiue a litle

rubarbe, ſuffreth the bitterneſſe that it leaueth in the throte, for the profite it doth him againſt his feuer. I woulde ſay, that it ſhall little profite your Lordſhip, though you know how to complaine: if you do not likewiſe determine how to amende: for that your Lordſhip is an Oforio in bloud, in dignitie a Biſhop, in authoritie a gentleman or a knight, and in profeſſion a Chriſtian, I hold you in great reuerence: but ioyntly therewith, as concerning your furious complainſes and threates, I eſteeme them very little: for there is a God that beholdeth his ſeruants, and a Prince that ſtandeth for his ſubiects.
               I conceyue no euil, that you be a warriour, and that you go armed, vpon condition that your armour be ſuch, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of, quòd arma militiae nostrae non ſunt carnalia ſed ſpiritualia: bicauſe your warre ought not to be with enemies but with vices, and as Seneca ſayth, more glory was deſerued by Cato in baniſhing vice out of Rome, than of Scipio for conquering the Carthaginians in Africa. But ſince you would needes go on warfare, and make warre vppon the whole common wealth of Caſtile, to foyle your enemie the Earle of Alua de Liſta, what faulte had the King and Quéene committed? To pardon many for the merite of one is the office of Chriſtians, but to chaſtiſe many for one mans offence is the condicion of tyrants: in ſuche ſorte,The conditiō of tyrants. that from henceforth we may not call you Biſhop of Zamorra, but tirant of the common wealth.
               Many times I ſtay, to cōſider to what purpoſe your Lordſhip would néedes diſobey the king, alter the kingdome, raiſe vp the people, make armies, ioyne with communers, caſt away your ſelfe, and hurt and endamage the common welth: I am not able to comprehend any occaſion, muchleſſe any reaſon (except it be that, as you deſire to be Archbiſhop of Toledo you would obtaine by ſtrength, that whiche you deſerue not by vertue.) If the matter might come in iudgement before God, yea, and alſo before mē, your Lordſhip may be ſure, that more demerites would be found in you to be diſpoſſeſſed of your Biſhoprike that you now poſſeſſe, than merits wherefore to giue you the Archbiſhoprike that you craue. The dignities

of the Church of God ought not to be giuen vnto ſuche as doth procure them, but vnto thoſe that do refuſe them: for ſo muche the more worthy is he to gouerne ſoules, that thinketh himſelfe moſt vnworthy to performe the ſame. To deſerue the Archbiſhoprike of Toledo, your Lordſhip ought rather to ſhed teares, than bloud: to be in the temple, and not in the fields: to accompany the religious, and not ſouldiers: too pray at your houres, and not to alter the common wealthe: but your Lordſhip ſéeing that you cannot deſerue by vertue, you determined to obtaine by armed ſtrength. You ought too haue remembred that God hath choſen you for a Biſhop, and not for a Captaine,The office of a Biſhop. for the Church, and not for the warre: to preach, and not to fight: to be inueſted with ſurples, and not with a ſhirt of maile: to ſuccour Orphanes, and not ſouldiers: and alſo to giue orders, and not to order ſtales and ambuſhes to ſkirmiſh. The firſt biſhop of this world which was S. Peter, founde amongſt all the Apoſtles but two ſwordes to defende Chriſt, and there is to be founde a M. Hagbuts within youre houſe to ruinat this Realme. In ſuch wiſe we haue to praiſe you, not for your bookes that you reade in, but for the armour you do poſſeſſe.
               
                  Maldonado (your ſeruant and my friende) hath aduertiſed me, that you haue giuen him a benefice of ij. C. Ducats. I demanding if he vnderſtood to read his diuine prayers? He made aunſwere: Sir you are in a wrong accompt, for at this inſtāt in the houſe of my Lord Biſhop, none hath ſkill to pray, but we all learne to ſkirmiſh.A Biſhop practiſeth his houſhold not to pray but to ſkirmiſh. The houſes of good prelates, are not but certaine ſchooles of vertues where none may haue acquaintance with lies, or learne to play the glutton, or too goe at large, or to be idle, either yet to delight in much talke, either to quarrell, or to be ambitious: which is not ſo in your houſe, where all become abſolute, and glory and preſume too be diſſolute. When the gouernours of the kingdome thys other daye ſente me thither vnto you, to offer condicions of peace with thoſe of the conuocation in the towne of Braxima, and ſawe your Lordſhip armed, like a clocke compaſſed with

ſouldiers, inuironed with ſuch multitude of ſhot, acompanied with ſuch numbers of commoners, and laden with affaires, and buſineſſe of ſo greate importance, I was in a dout with my ſelfe, whether that which I ſaw was a dreame, or elſe the Byſhop Sir Turbin were riſen againe from deathe. If you will not call to remembrance that you are a Chriſtian, that you are a prieſt, that you are a Preacher, and that you are a natiue of this kingdome: yet become aduiſed that you deſcended of noble bloud, and of an auncient houſe (although it bée moſt true, that as you be an Oſorio in bloud, ſo are you raſh and deſperat in condition.) It grieueth me (my Lord Biſhop) that you vſe armour, not as a wiſe man, but as one ouerraſh,Armour vſed to wrong purpoſe. not as one that defendeth, but as one that offendeth, not as you ought, but as you liſt: for I perceiue you follow opinion, and flie reaſon: all your diſpleaſure riſeth for following your will, and imploying your abilitie to a wrong purpoſe, but as Seneca ſayth, in the houſe where will doth commaunde, very ſildome reaſon doth inhabit, and (as Muſcoſo maketh report,) that eating many times you ſaye at youre table, is there no man that will take me maſter Gueuara, to hang him at a windowe for the diſceite and intiſing away of ſir Peter Giron out of oure percialitie? To ſay that I deceyued him, I denie it: to ſaye that I deliuered hym from diſceite I confeſſe it: and whether it be good or euill for him to remayne there or turne hyther, I am ſure he repenteth not to haue beléeued me, neyther I to haue giuen hym counſell.
               Youre Lordſhip doth well remember when youre Captaine Lares did take me, and ſo taken brought me before you: and notwithſtanding you reprehended and delte euill with me, I requeſted you on the behalf of the gouernours, that you would leaue warre, and accept an honeſt concorde, in whyche Embaſſage you eſtéemed me very little, of that I ſaid made ſmal accompt alſo, and ſkoffed at that which I ſpake. My lord Biſhop you do well knowe, how many euil dayes I haue paſſed, how many iniuries I haue ſuffred, what froward words with me haue bene vſed, what perills I haue paſt, what

deſpites haue bene done vnto me, with what threatnings I haue bin threatned, and alſo what ſlaunders they haue rayſed vpō me: for that I haue folowed the King, and procured peace vnto the Kingdome. When I was at the towne of Braxima with your Lordſhip and with the Commoners, I preached nothing vnto you but penitence, and to the kings gouernours at Medina del rio ſecco I perſwaded nothing but clemencye: for it was impoſſible, if the one did not repent, and the other pardon, that theſe kingdomes might be remedied, neither ſo many euilles and daungers cut off. Now ſince I haue traueled after this maner, and ſuffered ſo greate trauails, I knowe not why you ſhould call me traytor, deſire to kill me, and to hang me at a window, ſince I deſire not to ſée your Lordſhip hanged, but amended. Titus Liuius maketh mention of a Romane Patricide,A wrong meane to obtayne fame. who being ambitious of honour, & a coward to obtaine the ſame, determined to ſet fier on ye treaſure houſe where all the people of Rome layd vp their treaſure. This euill diſpoſed fellow being taken, tormented, and examined of the cauſe of his enterpriſe, made anſwer: I would haue done this hurt to the commō welth, for that writers ſhould make mention of me in their Chronicles: whiche is to wit, as touching the treaſures of Rome, though I had not abilitie to obtaine them, yet had I ſkill to burne them. I thought good too put youre Lordſhip in remembraunce of this hiſtorie, to the end you may vnderſtande, conſidering I am Preacher and Chronicler vnto his maieſtie, in which imperiall Chronicle, there ſhall be ſufficient report of your Lordſhip, not that you were a father and a pacifier of your countrey, but rebellious, and an inuentor of theſe warres. How maye I with troth write of the rebellion of Toledo, the death of the ruler of Segouia, the taking of Tordeſillas, the impriſonment of the counſell, the ſiege of Alaheios, the conuocation of Auila, the burning of Medina, the alteration of Valiodolid, the ſcandall of Burgos, the loſſe of Toro, Zamora, and Salamanca, without I make mention of your Lordſhip? How may I make report of the euils that Vera the Lockier hath cōmitted in Valiodolid: Bobadilla
                  
the ſhereman in Medina: the Lockiar in Auila,
                  A ſclaunderous fraternitie. and Burgos: and in Salamanca the Skinner: but that in that holy brotherhood we muſt find the Biſhop of Zamora? I report me vnto you my Lord Biſhop, ſhall I raiſe any ſlaunder vpon you, by reporting in my Chronicle, that I ſawe at the towne of Braxima, all the artillerie brought togither to the gates of your houſe. I ſaw watch & ward kept rounde about your lodging, I ſaw all the Captaines of your bands féede at your table, I ſaw them all ioyne to conſult in your chamber, and that al did exclame for long life to the biſhop of Zamora? All theſe things which your Lordſhip hath done, I woulde gladly leaue them vnwritten, if your Lordſhip would amend, and alſo remedie the miſchiefe you haue in hand: but I beholde you with ſuche eyes, and with ſuch an opinion: that you will rather loſe your life wherewith you liue, than the opinion which you follow. I conceiued no ſmall compaſſion, when this other day I ſaw you compaſſed with the commoners of Salamanca, with villaines of Saiago, with manquellers of Leon, with rebelles of Zamora, with Cappers of Toledo, and with hit makers of Valiodolid. All which in generall you are bound to content,Difficult to content. and not licence to commaund. This kind of people that you leade of the communaltie is ſo vaine and fickle, that with threates they will followe you, with intreatance bée ſuſtayned, with promiſes be blinded: fighting with feare, walking with ſuſpition, liuing vpon hope: not contented with little, or pleaſed with gifts: for their intente is not to followe thoſe that haue moſt right, but ſuch as giue beſt wages. There is a certayne difference betwixt vs and you, which is: that we whiche follow the King, hope to be rewarded, but you haue no ſuche hope, but by violence to pleaſe your ſelues, which we knowe well that you your ſelfe haue promiſed to your ſelfe the Archbiſhoprike of Toledo,
                  Vaine promiſes. we well knowe that Iohn of Padilia (hée himſelfe) hath promiſed vnto himſelfe the Maſterſhip of S. Iames, we do know that Clauero (himſelfe) hath promiſed vnto himſelfe the Maſterſhip of Alcantara, we well knowe that the Abbot of Compludo (he himſelfe) hath promiſed vnto hym

ſelfe the Biſhoprike of Zamora, we well know that the Prior of Vadiodolid (he himſelfe) hath promiſed vnto himſelfe ye Biſhoprik of Valentia, ſir Peter Pinentel, Maldonado, Quintanilla, Sarabia,
                  A quent of Maruedis which be 6. for a penny. amount. 2500 Dukats. ye Licēciat Barnardine, and the doctor Cowſehed: None of theſe at this day wil giue their hope for a good quēt of rent. Ramir Nunez & Iohn Braue do accept to be called Lordes, Iohn Braue for yt he hath hope to be Earle of Chincon, & Ramir Nunez Earle of Luna: it may be that one of thē or both may firſt loſe their heads, before they haue obtayned their eſtates.
               Wherefore my Lord Byſhop, retire, repent, and amend, bycauſe the loyaltie of Caſtile doth not ſuffer but one king, neyther endure but one lawe. No more, but that our Lord bée youre inſtructor.
               
                  From Tordeſillas 
                     the tenth of March. 1521.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Sir Iohn of Padilla Captaine of the Commoners againſt the King, wherein he perſwadeth him to ſurceſſe that infamous enterpriſe.
               
               
                  Repugnancie of ſpeech in reſpect of noble bloud, and want of iudgement.
                  MAgnificent and vnaduiſed Gentlemā, the letter that with youre owne hande you haue written vnto mée, and the credite and truſt you ſent me, with your ſeruant Montaluan, I haue receyued here in Medina: and to ſay the troth, I did not more delight to ſée your leter, than I receyued griefe to heare youre meſſage: for that it ſéemeth you determine to procéede with youre enterpriſe, and to finiſh the ruine of this common wealth. Sir you do well vnderſtande, at the aſſemblie of Auila, I ſaide vnto you, that you were loſt, deceyued, and ſolde: bycauſe Hernando of Auila, Sir Peter Giron, the Biſhop of Zamora, and the other commoners, had not inuented this Ciuill warre with zeale too redreſſe the offences in the common wealth: but to take vengeance of their enemies. Sir alſo I ſaide vnto you, that the reſolution of that aſſembly ſéemed vnto me great vanitie and no ſmall vaunte,A friuolous deuiſe. and that which the common people demaunded, which is to witte, that in Caſtile all ſhoulde contribute,

all ſhoulde be equall, all ſhoulde paye, and that they ſhould be gouerned after the manner of ſegniories in Italy, the whiche is ſcandalous to heare, and blaſphemie to ſpeake: for as it is impoſſible to gouerne the body without armes, ſo is it impoſſible that Spaine be ſuſtayned without Gentlemen. Alſo I ſaid vnto you, that being of bloud vndefiled, of perſone ſo well compact, in armes ſo expect, of minde ſo valiant, in iudgemente ſo aduiſed, in condition ſo well liked, in age ſo tender, and in the flowers of youre youth, it were muche more conuenient for you to ſerue the King in Flaunders,
                  Notable qualities euill imployed. than Caſtile to trouble his kingdome. Alſo I did aduertiſe you, how in that of late the King had created the Admiral and the Conſtable for gouernours, whiche with all the mightie and nobles of Spaine, ioyned in Medina del rio Secco, to giue order for the ſuccour of Tordiſillas, and to chaſe away the Rebelles frō the town of Braxima, my deſire and iudgemēt is, that you ſhoulde rather eſtéeme to be a ſouldier with the Gentlemen, thā a Captaine ouer Rebelles. Alſo I ſaid vnto you, that ye gouernours had commaunded a ſcaffold to be made, wherevppon a King at armes beeing aſcended made publique proclamation, that all Knightes and Gentlemen that repaired not within fiftéene dayes with Horſe and Armour vnder the Kings Standerd to ſerue and be reſident, ſhould bée holden as traytors and diſloyall, and that it ſéemed vnto me that you ſhoulde rather haue accompliſhed that which the gouernours cōmanded, than that which in Toledo they had deſired. Alſo I ſayde vnto you that commonly ciuill and popular warres decay in puiſſance, preuaile ſildome, and may not indure, and after they bée finiſhed, and the common wealth pacified:In rebellon vſe to pardon the poore, and to behead the Captaines. the Kings and Princes of the ſame doe vſe for cuſtome to pardon the commō people, and behead the Captaines. Alſo I ſayd vnto you that you ſhoulde not blinde your ſelfe with fooliſhe lyes, eyther with wordes of vncertaine purpoſes, whyche is to witte: if anye ſhall ſaye vnto you that you are the father of the countrey, the refuge of priſoners, the repaire of the grieued, the defender of the common wealthe, and

the reſtorer of Caſtile: for the very ſame perſons that to daye do name you redeemer, on the morrow will proclaime you traytor. Alſo I ſayd vnto you that you ought to haue before youre eyes, that your father Peter Lopes, and your Vncle Sir Garcia, and your Brother Gutiere Lopes, and all your friends and alies, be all in ſeruice of ye King in the gouernours Camp: and that you alone (of all your linage) amongſt rebelles bend againſt the King, whereof there followeth that you alone being in fault, they here in generall receiue the ſhame.
               Alſo I ſaid vnto you, that ſince the King had giuen you no cauſe of offence, either taken from you any rewarde or bountie, or commaunded you any iniuſtice. It were very vniuſt that you ſhoulde be the whip wherewith Hernando of Aualos ſhould reuenge his iniurie. For if he hath ſworne to be reuenged of Xeues, alſo you are bound to be faithfull vnto the King. Alſo I ſaide vnto you, that you ſhoulde giue to the Diuell the propheſtes, witchcrafts, and enchantments of the Lady Mary your wife: whiche is ſayde that ſhe and a certaine woman ſlaue do practiſe? for that to ſpeake and practiſe with the Diuell, it may not be otherwiſe but that ſhe-looſeth hir ſoule, and you to loſe your life and honor. Alſo I ſaid vnto you, that you ſhould not care to attempt to enter the Couent of Vcles, with intent to be maſter of Saint Iames, either to throw Sir Iohn del rio Secco out of Toledo, ſince it were a vanitie to thinke it, and a great lightneſſe to take it in hande, for to be maſter of ſaint Iames, you haue not done ſuche ſeruice wherefore it ſhould be giuen you, neyther ſir Iohn hath done any treaſon, why it ſhould be takē from him. So many and ſo good Counſells, ſo many and ſo profitable aduiſes, ſo many and ſo perſwaſible words, ſo many and ſo importune deſires, ſo many and ſo great promiſes, ſo many and ſo great aſſurances, as I gaue, promiſed, did ſweare, deſire, and importune, and aſſure you, mighte not procéede from a ſuſpitious friende, either from a man of a double cōdition, but rather as from a father to a ſonne,Perſwaſions of a perfect friend. from a brother to a brother, and from a friend to a friende. I would to God you did throughly know my hart,

and the heart of Hernando of Aualos your vncle, then ſhoulde you ſée moſt cleare, how it is I that do loue you, and he that doth deceyue you: I that giue you the hande, and he the man that offreth you deceyts: I that ſhew you the deapth, and he that ſendes you to the bottome: I that ſet vp the marke, and he that takes away the white: I that lettes you bloud in the right vaine, and he that lameth your armes. Finally,An eloquence rarely vſed. I am he that would cure and open your impoſtume, and he is the man that giueth end to your lyfe, and burieth your renoume. If you had taken my counſell, I had placed you in my Chronicles amongeſt the glorious perſonages of Spayne, with the famous Viriato, the venturous Cid, the good Fernan Gonſalis, the Knight Tiran, and with the great Captaine, and other infinite Knightes and Gentlemen woorthie of prayſe, and no leſſe to be followed. But ſince you woulde néeds imitate and credit Hernando of Aualos, and the other rebellious commoners, I ſhall be forced to place you in the Cathaologe of the famous tyrantes, that is to ſaye, with the Iuſtice Caſtromino, and Fernan Centeno, with captayn Sapico, the ducheſſe of Villalua, the Marſhal Peter Pardo, Alfonſo Truſillo, Lope Caraſco,
                  Rebelles of Spayne. and Taymayo Iſquirdo.
               
               All theſe and many other with them, were tyrantes and rebelles in the dayes of king Iohn, and king Henry. And this is the difference betwixt you and them, that euery one of them dyd tyranniſe but their owne countreyes, but you the whole countrey of Caſtile. I can not comprehend your intention, either can I conceyue what you may obtaine in folowing this enterpriſe, and to contend vpon ſo vniuſt a demaunde, ſince you knowe, and all we vnderſtande, that if your enterpriſe ſhoulde happe to preuayle, there is none that woulde accepte, gratifie, or take it in good part: and if your purpoſe be made fruſtrate, there is a Kyng that will reuenge the iniurie, for the greateneſſe and Maieſtie of Caſtile knoweth not to endure diſobedience to their kings, either ſuffer themſelues to be commaunded by tyrantes.
               When this yeare ye came to talke with me in Medina del

campo, and I went with you to ſée the bit maker, and Viloria, the ſkinner, Bobadilla the ſheareman, Pennelas the carde maker, Ontoria the lockier, Mender the bookebynder, and Lares the enſeigne bearer, that were the heads and inuentours of the commoners of Valiodolid, Borgos, Leon, Zamora, Salamanca Auila, and Medina: I aſſure you, I was diſmayde and aſhamed for that preſently I did both ſée and knowe that paſſion was your guyde,Euill guydes not to be followed. and they conducted by opinion, & that you all, did flée reaſon: but for that I am in lyfe a ſinner, in habite religious, in office a preacher, and in knowledge ſimple, you haue not to make ſmall accompt of my counſell: for as Plato ſayd, we are not a little beholding vnto thoſe that do aduiſe vs wherin wée erre, and doe directe vs in what wée ought to doe: for it is much better we amend by others correction, than loſe our ſelues by fooliſhe perſeuerance. Beléeue me, and be out of doubt, Maiſter Iohn of Padilla, if you had ſpoken firſte with me in Toledo, as you did after talke with me in Medina, you had neuer taken this enterpriſe in hande: for as the Emperour Traiane did vſe to ſay, men that poſſeſſe noble heartes and bluſhing vyſages, ought neuer to beginne that, whiche lyeth not in their handes to performe: for otherwyſe, they ſhall leaue with great ſhame, that they beganne with great hope. Sir, you doe well knowe, that all thoſe that you leade in your campe againſt the king, be théeues, murtherers,An eloquent perſuaſion. blaſphemers, and ſeditious Commoners: all whiche as they are a baſe people, and men of handicrafte, you haue to intreate them, but not to force them: ſuffer, but not to chaſtiſe: to pray, but not to commaunde: to flatter, but not to threaten: for they followe you not to remedie things amiſſe, but to rob the goods that others haue in poſſeſſion. That daye that the king ſhall enter into Caſtile: that day that you ſhal loſe any battell: and alſo that daye that you haue not to paye the men of warre, then ſhall you ſée howe they will trudge from you, without takyng any leaue, and alſo make a ſecrete ſale of you.
               Sir, haue compaſſion of your age ſo tender, and of youre

bloud ſo vndefiled, of your parentage ſo honorable, of youre houſe ſo auncient, of your condition ſo good, of your abilitie ſo 
                     •
                  ntier, and of your youth ſo euill imployed: all which things you haue vnfauourly infected, and alſo in a maner mortifyed. If you will beléeue me and giue credite vnto my wordes, incommende your ſelfe vnto God, leaue this enterpriſe, turne vnto the king, goe vnto the Gouernours, and ſhake handes with theſe commoners. Foraſmuche as the king is pitifull, and all men deſire your remedie and welfare: hée woulde much more accept your comming to ſerue with the reſt, than to haue raiſed this war againſt him. Let not the deuil deceiue you, either any vaine or fantaſticall imagination hinder you to performe the ſame, neither to conceiue that they haue to charge you with vnſtableneſſe, in that you haue enterpriſed, either as a traitor for yt you haue taken in hād: bicauſe in al ye hiſtories of this world they be acompted loyal that ſerue their king and ſuch as rebell be called diſloyall, & traitors. Alſo if a Gētleman be reproued for ſlouthfulneſſe, he riſeth more early, and vſeth more diligence: if they call him babbler, he kéepeth ſilence: if they accuſe him for a glutton, he vſeth temperance: if they charge him as an adulterer, he abſtayneth: if they burden him to be furious, he ſuffereth: if they impute him to be ambicious, he abaſeth: if they name him a ſinner, he amendeth: but if they call him by the name of a traytor, there is no water that may waſh or make it cleane: either any excuſe that may excuſe it. Neyther is the King ſo muche offended, or the kingdome ſo much altered, or affaires ſo aforehand, nor the Gouernours of ſo hard diſpoſition, but that you maye be reduced and finde time very conuenient to ſerue the King.The wordes of a very frende. The which if you woulde performe, I promiſe you by ye faith of a Chriſtian, and do ſweare vnto you by the lawe of an honeſt man, that amending this wrong, my penne ſhall change his ſtile.
               
                  Montauan, maiſter of your houſe, and I haue communed in ſecrete things of greate importaunce, and ſince he did herein credit me, it ſhal not be amiſſe that you beleue him there, and

if you will not, I waſhe my handes of all your faulte, and from hence forwarde doe take my leaue of your friendſhip. No more, but that with the faith and credit that I haue receiued your letter, with the verie ſame it may pleaſe you to receyue this of myne.
               
                  From Medina del camop 
                     the eight day of Marche, in the yeare of our Lorde .1521.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto a Gentleman, and ſecrete friend to the Author, wherin he doth aduiſe and reprehende him for his wretched couetouſneſſe.
               
               
                  Repugnancie in ſpeeche, in reſpect of birth and maners.
                  MAgnificent and couetous Gēleman, the good Emperor Titus, that was ſon to Vaſpaſian, and brother to Domitian, was of himſelf ſo vertuous, & of al the Romane Empire ſo welbeloued, that at the tyme of his death they did engraue theſe words vpō his ſepulcher: Delitiae moriūtur generis humani, which is to ſay, To daye is dead in Rome yt did reioyce all mankynd. Of this good Emperor Titus is read in Suetonius, yt being at ſupper on a time with many Princes of ye empire,A famous ſpeache of an heathen prince & other Embaſſadors of diuers kingdoms, ſodeinly gaue a great ſigh, & ſayd, Diem amiſimus amici, as if he ſhould ſay more cléere: Let not this day be accompted amongſt the days of my lyfe, bicauſe this day I haue not performed any bountie, neither giuen any reward. Plutarke doth report of Alexander the great, that when many Philoſophers had diſputed in his preſence wherein conſiſteth the good happe of this lyfe, hée made anſwere: Beléeue me friends, and be out of doubt, that in all this worlde there is not equall delighte or lyke pleaſure, as to haue wherwith to be liberall, and not wherefore to chaſtiſe.A magnificēt anſwere of a pagan king. Alſo it is ſaid of Theopontus the Thebane, who béeing a Captayne of men of warre, a ſouldioure craued of him ſome péece of money to buye breade, and hauing none to giue, pulled of his ſhoes, ſaying: If I had better, I would giue thée better, but in the meane while take theſe ſhoes of

myne for that I haue no money:An exceeding humanitie of a generall to a poore ſouldior for it is more iuſt that I goe barefoot, than thou an hungred. Dionyſius the tyrant entring vpon a certain day into his ſonnes chamber, and ſéeing there many iewels of ſiluer and gold, ſayde: Sonne, I did not giue theſe riches to the end thou ſhouldeſt kéepe them,An excellente counſell to make enimies tender, and to conſerue frendes. but bicauſe thou ſhouldſt giue and imparte them. For there is no man in this world of more power, than the giuing and liberall man: for with his giuing he conſerueth his frends, and maketh tē
                  der his enimies. I haue made this diſcourſe to vtter a certaine thyng vnto you, which if you were in Caſtile, as you are in Andolozia, my penne ſhould neuer haue written vnto you, but my toung ſhould haue ſpoken it into your eare: for our aſſured friendes, notwithſtanding wée haue licence to blame them, yet we may not vſe our libertie to defame them. Some of Andolozia hath told me here, and ſome of your frendes haue written me from thence, that your delite excéedeth to farre in hoording vp of money, and no leſſe enimie with the ſpendyng therof. Of which déede and diſpoſition I am not a little grieued, & alſo muche aſhamed, bicauſe honor & auarice be ſo contrarie and in ſuch contention and defiance, yt they neuer dwell in one perſon, neither at any time had any affinitie. All vicious men in this life haue ſome taſt in their vices, except it be the miſerable and moſt vnfortunate couetous nigard, which is tormēted with that which others do poſſeſſe, & takes no taſt in that whiche he hath. The painfull trauell of the couetous nigarde is, that always he walketh ſuſpicious and in feare, that the raging flouds carrie awaye his Milles, that the hierd eate vp his meades, that hunters ſteale his game, and that théeues rob his treaſure: but in fine, the miſerable couetous man, from no man dothe ſo muche defend his goodes,The couetous man defendeth his goodes from himſelfe. as from his own perſon. That wherin the couetous man takes moſt ſauour, is to hutch vp double Ducates, to tell golde, to hyde money, to ſel his wine deare, to hoord much wheat in garners his Eawes to haue good yeaning, not to raine in Aprill, and to haue much wheate in May. The higheſt glory of the couetous man is, to be gettyng, to be hoording, none to craue of

him, and neuer to ſpende. And although in theſe fewe things he taketh ſome taſte, with many other he paſſeth greate torments, which is to vnderſtande, if they aſke an halfepenie for ſpice, a peny for candles, a dandiprat for an earthen pot, a farthing for oyle, two pens for ſalt, he riues the houſe with yelles, and giues vnto the diuell both wyfe and children, exclaming that they are all bent to rob him. God endueth that 
                     〈◊〉
                   with ſingular grace to whom he giueth a ſhamfaſt coū
                  
                  
                     •••…
                  unce, and an heart of noble diſpoſition. For if the wretched nigard had once taſted how ſweet a thing it is to giue: the things moſt neceſſarie to his propre vſe, he ſhould not be able to retaine. The noble mynded and liberall man giueth not ſo muche as they giue him: for in recompence of euery bountie, they giue themſelues wholly at his libertie to bée commaunded.
               
                  The liberall and noble minded, is Lorde of his neighbour.The liberall and noble minded man is Lorde of the people where he dwelleth, & of all men with whom he hath conuerſation: for being aſſured that he wil gratify them, no mā hath the face to denye him any thing. The contrarie doth chaunce to the miſerable nigarde and harde harted couetous man, vnto whome no man will approche, no man will talke, no man will accompanie, no man giueth any thing, no man entreth his dores, neither any man will fetche fire at his houſe. Who will craue any thing of the couetous nigard? much leſſe enter his houſe,The vile conditions of the couetous. ſéeing him weare his ſhoes torne, his hoſe rent, his cap thréede bare, his hat greaſye, his ſhirt ragged, his doublet loſe and vnpoynted, and he walking alone? Howe will he remedie the neceſſitie of a ſtranger, that will not mende the gutter of his houſe? Howe will hée giue any man an almes that truſſeth himſelfe with a points end? How wil he ſuccour the vnknown, that killeth his own with hunger? How wil he giue wood to the hoſpitall, that warmes himſelfe by the traſh of ſtrawe? To whome will he lend money that burieth his owne? Howe will he imparte and giue of his wheate, that hath hope in May to ſel for double price? Who dare be a frend to the couetous and wretched nigard, being an enimye to him

ſelfe? How many couetous men haue we ſéene and doe ſée euery day, vnto whome God giueth force to get riches, wit to ſuſtain them, a mind to defend them, a life to poſſeſſe them, & giueth them not licence to enioy them? but where they might be Lordes of other mens,Slaues to their owne goodes. we ſee them ſlaues to their owne proper goodes. Of how muche more excellencie is honeſt propertie, than is curſed auarice, whiche is to be knowen moſte cleare: bicauſe the poore man is contented with his little, and the rich man with his aboundance ſéemeth to be in neceſſitie? What greater diſgrace, eyther greater miſchance may happen to the welthy couetous man, ſince for all things he ſéeth in others he ſigheth, and all that he hathe in poſſeſſion he lacketh? The couetous man hath his eyes occupied in his vines he planteth, his hands in the money he receyueth,Wāting that which he poſſeſſeth. his tong amongſt his factors with whome he chideth, his feete in wandring to his heards and granges, hys time in wiles that hée frameth, his eares in accompts be receaueth, his body in bargaines he maketh, & his hart on the Ducates that with great watch he kéepeth: in ſuch wiſe, that as he goeth wandring beſides himſelf, ſo he obſerueth no part to himſelfe. That the couetous man hathe not the heart or courage to giue to hys friends or kindred, it is moſt true. Dare they beſtow any coſt vpon themſelues? no ſurely: no truly: but holde it as euill imployed whatſoeuer they beſtowe vppon themſelues, as that which is ſtolne from them. To the couetous miſerable nigard they raiſe a ſlander vpō him, in ſaying that he is rich: bicauſe, not he the riches, but ye riches doth him hold & poſſeſſe: in ſuch wiſe, that he paſſeth greate trauelles in gathering of them, danger in kéeping them, law in defending them, and tormēt in departing from them: for if ſhame did not let him, he would rather eate bread and onyons, than lay out one peney. The couetous man is not of ſo good diſpoſition as is the dirtie Potter, ſince the one profiteth himſelfe by earthe, and the other dare not touch golde: and farther and beſides this, the poore Potter getteth his liuing by ſelling of pottes, & the wretched couetous man loſeth his honor by hoording of riches. The

wretched niggard hauing his money neuer ſo muche buried, watched, and kept, yet from none doth he ſo much kéepe it, as from himſelfe,Two kayes to his cofer, but two C. in his hart. bycauſe if hée haue two keyes vnto his coffer to make all ſafe, he hath two hundreth in his hart to ſaue thē from ſpending: men ſhamefaced and of noble mindes, haue greate cauſe to beware that they begin not to hourd or lay vp money: for if he once giue himſelfe to hourd and hide money, be it neuer ſo little, be it no more but to gain one only groate, he ſhal euery day fall into a thouſand euils, ſhames, and confuſions. For any man to be reuenged of a couetous manne, he hathe not but to deſire that he may liue long, for a muche worſe life is obtayned by the wretched nigard with his auarice,The whole life of the niggard is ſpent in penance. than we would giue him with ſome great penance. I doe lie if I did not know (being warden of Areuallo) a great riche man, which did not eate of all his goodes, but the faine frute, the rotten grapes, the muſtie Wheate, the ſowre Wine, the Rateaten bread, the wemmy chéeſe, and the reſty Bacon: in ſuch wiſe that he would not enterpriſe or aduenture to eate, but that he could not ſell. I confeſſe that ſometimes I wente vnto his houſe, more to beholde than for any buſineſſe, and ſaw his chambers full of Cobwebs, his doores vnhanged, the windowes cleft, the lockes decayed, the flowers vneuen and full of holes, the tiles vntiled, the chaires broken, the chimneys falne downe: in ſuche wiſe, that it was rather an houſe to murmure at, than to dwell in. Although it be a ſhame to ſpell it, I wil not leaue to ſay that which the neighbours and his friends hath ſayd vnto me: that if there hapned any kinſman or friend to viſit him, he was driuen to ſéeke lodging at his neighbours, or to borow all that was neceſſary. Great (of a troth) is that couetiſe, and much infamous is that auarice, which is not repreſſed with the ſhame of this world, neyther cut off by the feare of death. The couetous wretched niggard, that he goeth ſeeking,The fruites of couetouſneſſe. is carefulneſſe for himſelfe, enuie for his neighbours, ſpurres vnto his enemies, a pray for théeues, perill for his perſon, damnation for his ſoule, malediction for his heires, and law for his children. All theſe thinges Sir I

thought good to write, thereby to giue you to vnderſtande the groſſe office you haue taken in hande, and the euill opinion they do couceyue of you (the which to vs your friends is great ſhame, and to you a moſt great infamie.) Sir amende youre fault, and take ſome other order in your life, for in the houſe of any honeſt manne, any lacke of goodes is tollerable, but no want in honour. If you ſhall alwayes continue to be a miſer, a niggard, and ſhall giue your ſelfe to kéepe and hoord money, from henceforward I take my leaue of your friendſhip, and alſo to call you my acquainted: For I neuer delighted to hold acquaintance with the man that woulde preſume to lie, and giue himſelfe to kéepe. This letter I ſend you without head or foote, which is to wit, without date or firme, for going with ſuch choler and ſo vnſauorie, it is not reaſon he ſhoulde bée knowen that did write it, neither to whome it was written. No more.
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto the Lady Mary of Padilia, wife to Don Iohn of Padilia, wherein the Authour doth perſwade, that ſhe tourne to the ſeruice of the king, and giue no occaſion of the loſſe of Caſtile.
               
               
                  MAgnificent and vnaduiſed Lady, in the dayes that the good Emperour Iuſtinian did raigne in the Eaſt, a certaine Captaine of his dyd gouerne the kingdomes in the Weſt yt was named Narſetes, a man of greate capacitie to gouerne, and of great valiantnes in fighting and giuing battell: of this Narſetes the Romanes did ſaye, that in him only was the force of Hercules, the boldneſſe of Hector,
                  Notable conditions of the captain Narſetes. the nobleneſſe of Alexander, the wiſdome of Pirrhus, the valiantneſſe of Antheus, and the fortune of Scipio. After that thys glorious captain had ouercome and ſlaine Atholia King of the Gothes, Vncelino king of the French men, Sindual king of the Brittons: and alſo pacified and triumphed ouer all the kingdomes of the Weſt, the Romanes ſought meanes to diſgrace

him with his Lorde and maiſter Iuſtinian, ſaying and giuing him to vnderſtand, that he ſought meanes to obtaine the Empire: wherefore Narſetes was conſtrayned to departe from Rome and to paſſe into Aſia to appeare before the Emperour Iuſtinian, and the Empreſſe Sophia his wife, to declare his innocencie, and to make proofe that enuie had raiſed that ſclaunder: certaine dayes were then paſt that the Empreſſe Sophia had conceyued diſdaine againſt Narſetes, ſome ſay it was for his great wealth, others for that he commaunded in the Empire with too much authoritie, and others bycauſe he was a gelded man: and when ſhe ſawe time to vtter hir hatred, ſhe ſaid vnto him in Court on a certaine day: ſince thou Narſetes art leſſe than a man, and halfe a woman (being an Eunuche) I commaunde thée to leaue the gouernment of the Empire,I cruell commandement. and that thou get thée vp to weaue where my maydes doe weaue and knit caules, and that there thou help them what they commaund thée. Although Narſetes were a man of great authoritie and of no leſſe grauitie, theſe words did ſo deepely pearce him to the quicke, that he chaunged countenance, the teares brake from his eyes, and ſo chafed, with teares he ſaid: Serene Princes, I woulde right gladly that you ſhoulde chaſtiſe me as a Lady, but not to defame me like a woman: it gréeueth me not ſo much of that you haue ſaid, as the occaſion which you giue me, how to make you anſwer: and ſaid more, I preſently depart vnto Italy to weaue, knit, and frame ſuch a toyle,A ſharpe anſwere. that neyther thou maiſt comprehend, nor yet thy huſband able to vnweaue. Comming now to the purpoſe, my Lord Abbot of Compludo gaue me here in Medina a letter frō your Ladiſhip, which contained ſuch ouerthwarts, ſuch want of meaſure, and ſo greate raſhneſſe, that he was aſhamed too haue deliuered it, and I aſtonied to ſée the contents thereof. And as the good Narſetes aunſwered the Empreſſe Sophia, it gréeueth me not of that you haue ſaide, but of that whiche I muſt anſwer,His penne is conſtrained to make combat for of neceſſitie my penne muſt ſtand foorthe to make combat with your tong. Your Ladiſhip doth ſay in your letter, that you haue ſéene the letter that I ſent vnto youre

huſband Iohn of Padilia, and that it dothe well appeare in the ſame, that it came from a frier, irreguler, foule ſpoken, ouerthwart, abſolute and diſſolute: and that if I were one of the world, not only I would not dare to wright ſuch things, neyther yet ſo much as in corners to ſpeake them. Alſo you do extréemely charge me that I haue ſuborned Sir Peter Laſſo, diſſwaded ſir Peter Giron, contended with the Biſhop of Zamora, reſorted to Villa Braxima for the Gouernours, that I preache publikely againſte the commoners, and that in my mouth there is no truth, nor in my déedes any fidelitie. Alſo you blame me, charge, condempne, and threaten me for the letter I did write vnto your huſbande, and for the counſelles and aduertiſementes I gaue him: affirming and ſwearing, that ſince he had conference with me, he hathe alwayes bene ſorowfull, penūue, melancholicke, and alſo vnfortunate.
               Alſo you note, blame, and charge me, that I neuer ceaſe too lye vnto the gouernours, deceyue the commoners, diſcourage his men of warre, preach againſt the commonaltie, promiſe that which the King commaundeth not, goe and come to Villa Braxima, and to leade all Caſtile in ſuſpence. Theſe and ſuch other things are contayned within youre letter vnworthy the writing, and ſcandalous to recount. But ſince youre Ladiſhip hath firſt laide hand vpon the ſword, complaine not if I happen to giue you ſome wound on the head. To that which your Ladiſhip ſayth (if I were of the world as I am of religion,) I durſt not wright ſuche a letter vnto youre huſband, your Ladiſhip ſpeaketh greate troth: for I being the ſon of Sir Beltram of Gueuara, and couſin to Sir Ladron of Gueuara, and to be there in the worlde, I ſhoulde not write vnto him but fighte with him: not make pennes, but ſharpen the launce: not gyue counſell or perſwade your huſbande, but defye him: bycauſe the contention betwixt loyaltie and treaſon,Loyaltie and treaſon fight not with wordes, but with ſwordes. ought not to be tried with wordes, but with ſwords. I am in profeſſion a Chriſtian, in habite religious, in doctrine a diuine, in linage of Gueuara, in office a preacher, and in opiniō a gentleman and no commoner: for which cauſe I preſume to

preach the troth, and to impugne the communaltie. I holde for ſure, that thoſe whiche defende the troth, be the moſt nobleſt knights and gentlemen in your Camp: for they rob not vpon high wayes, neyther ſteale out of Churches, deſtroy no corne, burne no houſes, ſpoyle no people, neither do conſent to men of vile conditions: for they obſerue the law, and obey the king. I hold theſe for rebelles amongſt the commoners, Hernando of Aualos that did inuent it, your Ladiſhip that doth ſuſtayne it, your huſbande that dothe defende it, the Biſhop of Zamora that doth proſecute it, Sir Peter Giron that doth aucthorize it, Sir Peter Laſſo that doth publiſh it, Sarabia that doth cōmende it, Quintanilla that doth accompany it, Sir Charles of Aurellano that doth honor it, and Sir Peter Pimentel that commands it: all whiche know not what they followe, muche leſſe what they demaund.
               I do well vnderſtand that Hernando of Aualos was ye firſt that inuented the ſtate of all things in common, and I know that in your houſe was commaunded and ordeyned, to make conuocation in Auila, and the order to raiſe all Caſtile, in ſuch manner, that he made the fier, and your Ladiſhip did blewe it. A blacke correction was that of Giberaltar, whiche was taken from Hernando of Aualos. Since it was the cauſe that hée deceyued you, and you Iohn of Padilla, and Iohn of Padilla Sir Peter Giron, and ſir Peter Giron ſir Peter Laſſo, and Sir Peter Laſſo the Abbot of Compludo, and the Abbot of Compludo the Biſhop of Zamora, the Biſhop of Zamora the Licenciat Barnardine, the Licenciat Barnardine Sarabia, and Sarabia all the reſt of the Letany. I haue many times thought, deuiſed and alſo enquired, what motion might moue your Ladiſhip to vowe the alteration of this kingdome: and all youre friendes and kinſfolke do anſwer, that you haue diuined or elſe dreamed, to ſée your huſband maſter of Saint Iames, which if it be ſo, is a moſt certaine great lightneſſe, and no ſmal vanitie: for it may come to paſſe, that in the place to gyue hym the croſſe, they may put him vpon the croſſe. If you woulde make your huſband Maſter of Saint Iames, you muſt take ſome other order,

and giue him ſome other coūſel: for ſo gret a dignitie in times paſt was not obtayned to the maſters thereof by rebellion, (as you that haue raiſed all Caſtile) but by fighting valiantly with the Moores in the viage of Granado. In all the common welthes of this world there be friends and enemies, contented and diſcontented, proſperous and vnfortunate, and alſo loyalties and treaſons, wherein the one or the other is knowen: the loyall in that they giue themſelues to ſerue, and the traytors to ſpoyle and rob. Your Ladiſhip hath to remember that king Iohn is dead, and king Henry gone, they haue cut the throte of the Marſhall Peter Pardo, and they haue baniſhed the Iuſtice Caſtromino, the Captaine Sapico was drowned in a well; and Fernan Centeno was hanged: in whoſe miſerable times, who could do moſt had moſt, but now praiſe be to God, he that will haue any thing, muſt not only craue but deſerue. If ſtories doe not deceiue vs, Mamea was proud, Medea was cruell, Martia was enuious, Popilia was vnchaſt, Mirtha was malicious, and Domitia was raſhe: but I haue read of none that hathe bin diſloyall and a traytreſſe, but youre Ladiſhip that hath denied the fidelitie that you owe, and the bloud from whence you are diſcended. Your Ladiſhip deſcending from a parentage ſo honorable, of bloud ſo auncient, of father ſo valiant, and of linage ſo noble: I know not what ſinnes you haue committed (that it ſhoulde be your chaunce) to match with a huſband of ſo ſmall diſcretion, and he to obtaine a wife of ſo great wiſdome. Women naturally were wont to be pitifull, but your Ladiſhip is cruell, they were wont to be milde, but you are fierce, they were wont to be pacient, but you are quarelling, and alſo they were wont to be cowardes, but you are ouer hardie: in ſuche wiſe that to the Ducheſſe of Vilalua, ſuccéeded the Lady Mary of Padilla. Aſsiria complayneth of their ſcandall Semiramis, Damaſcus for Mithridates,
                  Famouſe women. 
                  Armenia for Pincia, Grecia for Helena, Germany for Vxodonia, Rome for Agripina, Spaine for Hecuba, and now Caſtile complayneth not that they are rayſed for you, but that you haue raiſed them. To quiet this Citie of Toledo where you are reſident, neither

the commaundementes of the King is ſufficiente, neyther the promiſes of the Gouernours, neither the ſiege of the Prior Iohn, neyther the threatnings of Sir Iohn de Ribora, neyther the intreatance of the Archbiſhop of Varry, neither perſwaſions of your brothers, neither yet prayers of the monaſteries, but that euery day more and more you are fleſhed in warre, & leſſe friend to peace. Alſo they report that you haue a ſorcereſſe or rather a foole to your ſlaue, which is a great witch: and (they ſay) that ſhe doth affirme and make you beléeue, that ere it be long, you ſhall be magnified with the title of Grace, and your huſband with the title highneſſe, in ſuch wiſe that you ſtand
                     •
                   in great hope to ſuccéede the Quéenes Maieſtie, and your huſband no leſſe to ſuccéede the Kings highneſſe: which I cannot beléeue, nor lightly will beléeue. But if by chance there be any thing, beware of the Diuell, and haue no confidence in ſpirits: for Ioſeph did dreame that he ſhuld be Lord of his brethren, but he dreamed not that they ſhould ſell him into Egypt for a ſlaue. But it may be (conſidering the Deuill is ſo ſkilful and very ſubtill) he hathe prognoſticated vnto you the ſame that now you hold, the authoritie that your huſband now poſſeſſeth, how the king ſhould be abſent, and Caſtile riſe and bée in rebellion: but on the other ſide, he hath hidden frō you how the communaltie ſhal be defaced, and how your ſelues ſhal be caſt away. Zoraſtes that was inuentor of that art of magike, Democritus the Philoſopher, Arthenius Captain of the bands, Pompeius Conſul of the Romanes, Iulia the daughter of Iulius, and others infinite with them, gaue themſelues to ſpeake with Diuels, and to beléeue much in dreames: which (as they beléeued) if they were aliue, would recount vnto vs the great deceypts the Diuell vſed with them here on earthe, and the great torments that they giue them there in hell. I did neuer ſée,Vngodly ſciences. neyther euer did read mā or womā to beléeue in dreames, vſe witchcrafts, deale with Nigromancers, marke or ſtudie in Auguriſe, practiſe with Enchantors, & incommende themſelues to Magiſians, that were not holden for light witted, and for euill Chriſtians, for the Diuell with no man holdeth

ſo ſtraight friendſhip, to the end to aduiſe him, but to deceyue him. Alſo they make report of your Ladiſhip here, that you entred the veſtorie or treaſure houſe of Toledo, to fetche the plate that was there, not to the ende to renew it, but to pay your men of warre. The maner that you vſed in fetching the ſame hath not ſéemed here a little gracious, which is, that you entred kneeling, holding vp your hands, couered with blacke,A religiu
                        •
                      theft. ſtriking your breſt, wéeping and ſobbing, with two burning torches before you: Oh fortunat theft, oh glorious pillage, oh happie plate, ſince thou haſt deſerued to be ſtolne with ſo gret deuotion from that holy Churche. Men, when they ſteale doe feare, and wéepe when they be hanged: the contrary is found in your Ladiſhip, ſince you wéepe when you ſteale, I thinke you will laugh at execution. The Romanes to ſend a certaine preſent vnto the God Apollo in Delphos, all the Ladies and women of Rome gaue their collers from their neckes, theyr rings from their fingers, their bracelets from their armes, and alſo their eare rings from their eares: bycauſe they helde them better imployed to be giuen to their temples, than to weare them to their owne vſes. Madame, God graunt that you be now a better Chriſtian, than you would haue then bin a Romane: ſince you haue preſumed to take the plate from the Church of Toledo, with an euil will would giue your gold to the temple of Apollo. To take from ſouldiours to giue to the Churche, it paſſeth: but to take from the Churche to gyue vnto Souldiers, is a thing very ſlaunderous and intollerable: in ſuch wiſe as it was great ſacriledge to take it from whēce it was taken, and no leſſe horrible to giue it where it was gyuen. Humbly I beſéech your Ladiſhip to cut off theſe euilles, leaue that people, open thoſe gates, retire your huſband, quiet your owne hart, giue witchcraft to the Deuil, and haue pitie on Toledo: for if otherwiſe the affayres go on, as they haue begonne, we ſhall not want wherefore to bewayle, and you ſhall haue to paye.
               
                  From Medina del rio ſecco, 
                     the ſixtenth of Ianuary .2522.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  An Oration made in the towne of Braxima, vnto the Knights and Gentlemen of the aſſembly, wherein the Author doth requeſt them vnto peace in the name of the King.
               
               
                  MAgnificent and extreme Gentlemen, I doe inuoke and call to witneſſe the God that made me, and I do ſweare by this holy temple that in all things that here I intende to ſpeake,An eloquent perſwaſion. my intent is not to defame any man, and leſſe to deceyue: bicauſe the religious habit wherewith I am clad, and the noble bloud from whence I deſcend, giue no place that I ſhould be of malicious entrailes, either double in words. Some of thoſe that are here preſent do very well know my condicion and my conuerſation: and alſo you doe knowe the libertie I vſe to take in ſpeaking franckly, and my bold plainneſſe in preaching, and in the vſe of lying very cold, and in reprehending abſolute. Yeſterday which was New yeres day, I preached vnto the gouernours, and to all the mightie and noble men of the kingdome that was there with them. And for that I did ſharply ſay what was to be cut off, and in the kingdome to be amended: to day they haue commaunded me to come hither with this letter of credite and of ſafe conduit, to the ende I ſhoulde ſay vnto you wherein you erre, as I ſaide vnto them wherein they fayled. Alſo gentlemen I bring with me a large inſtruction firmed by the Cardinall, the Admirall, and the Conſtable, in whiche is contayned what worde the King doth ſende you, and what they on his behalfe do offer: bycauſe his writing being ſéene, and my tale heard, from hencefoorth eyther cruell warre ſhal be determined, or a generall and godly peace concluded. In ſixtéene dayes I haue come hither to conferre with you ſeuen times: and bycauſe the gouernours will not any more commaund me to come hither, neyther in theſe affaires farther to trauell, it is neceſſary that this day we determine, and as friends or enemies to declare our ſelues: for otherwiſe being

as you are ſo neare togither, of neceſſitie you muſt ſtrike battell. I my Maſters wil ſay what I thinke, and alſo wil ſpeake what is commaunded me, to the ende, that the one and the other being heard, you may vnderſtand what you haue to aunſwere, and determine what you haue to doe. But firſt I haue to complaine of your captaine Lares which tooke me, and miſvſed me both in word and deede, he knowing very well that a mediator paſſing from Campe to Camp, in all places is accuſtomed to go ſafe. There is no reaſon that Lares ſhould carrye me taken as a thiefe, and vſe me with rudenes as a traytor, for I come in the Kings name, and at the commaundement of the gouernours, to bring peace and to auoyde warre, and beſides this, if I were one of the world, he would hold him ſelfe right happie to be one of my ſeruants: but leauing this apart, I will recite vnto you what I haue paſſed, and the hainous miſchaunces whereat I haue ben preſent. Since ye king hath bene abſent, and ye cōmonaltie rayſed, (you may credit me in all that I ſhall ſay vnto you, which I haue not deuined either dreamed, but with my eyes haue ſéen it) you wel know of this your cōmotion the beginner was Harnando of Aualos, the captaine ſir Peter Ciron, the generall Iohn of Padilla, the counſeller the licenciat Barnardine, the acceſſary the Doctor Sūiga,
                  The auhors of Rebellion. the enſeigne bearer Peter of Mercado, the chaplain the Abbot of Cō
                     pludo, and the Metropolitan my Lord biſhop of Zamora. I was preſent in Segouia at the firſt riſing that was in this kingdome, when vpon the .xxiij. of May on a wedneſday after Eaſter, they pulled out of the Churche of S. Mighell the Iuſtice Tordiſillas, & caried him to the gallowes, where they hanged him betwixt two hogges, as Ieſus Chriſt was betwixt two théeues.
               I was preſent alſo in Auila, when all the procurers of the aſſembly were ioyned together in ye veſtry of the great Church and there did al ſweare to proſecute and die for the ſeruice of ye cōmonaltie, (except Antony Ponce & I that would not ſweare:) whereupon commmaundement was giuen to pul downe his houſe, and that I ſhoulde departe from Auila. Alſo I was

preſent in Medina del campo the .xxij. of the moneth of Auguſt, on a tewſday in the morning, when Antony of Fons ſeca came vpon them in the breake of the day with .viij C. launces, and for that they denyed him the kings artillery, he burnt the towne and the monaſtery of S. Francis.
                  Hard ſhiftes. Alſo I was preſent there when the Shereman Bobadilla did riſe, and others with him, and threw out at the towne hall window, the Iuſtice Nieto, and ſlewe Telles the Bookebinder, and forthwith toke the houſe, placed porters, and entituled him ſelfe with grace and highnes, as though he had ben preſently Lorde of Medina, or that the King of Caſtile had ben dead. I was preſent when Valiodolid firſte rebelled in burning Medina, and al in armour went the whole night pulling down howſes, hauing for their Captaine Vera ye bit maker. Alſo I was in Valiodolid whē the Cardinall fledde away by the bridge, the Preſident put himſelfe into Saint Benets, the Licenciat Vergas ſkaped out at a window, the Licenciat Sapata we brought forth in Friers habite vnto Sigales, and the Doctor Gueuara my brother was ſent in the name of the Counſell vnto Flaunders: all the other lords of the royall Counſel I did not ſée them when they were taken, but I ſawe them afterwards priſoners, and nowe I ſée them fled, that they neyther dare aſſemble, or execute iuſtice. This other day I ſawe in Soria where they hanged a Procurer of the citie, béeing poore, ſicke, and olde, not bycauſe he had cōmitted any euill, but for that ſome did wiſh him euill. To report vnto you how they haue throwen the Conſtable out of Burgos, the Marques of Auia frō 
                  Tordiſillas, ye Earle and Counteſſe of Duneas, and the knights and gentlemen frō 
                  Salamanca, and Sir Iames of Mendoza from Palentia, and how in place of theſe gentlemen they haue taken for their leaders and captaines,An vntoward change. bit makers, ſheremē, ſkinners & lockmakers, is no ſmal ſhame to recount, and infamy to heare. The hurts, murders, robberies, and ſcandals, that is nowe committed within this realme, I dare ſay, that of this ſo great fault wée al are in fault, bycauſe our God is ſo right a iudge, that hée would not permit that all ſhould be chaſtiſed, if all were not

offenders. The affairs of this miſerable kingdome is come to ſuch a ſtate, ye through the ſame there is no way ſure, no tēple priuiledged, none that tilleth the fielde, none bringeth vitailes, none ye executeth iuſtice, none ſafe in their houſes:A miſerable ſtate. yet all confeſſe a king, and appeale to the king, but the diſgrace is, that none doth obſerue the law, & none doth obey the King: beleue me, if your people did acknowledge the King, and obſerue the law, neyther would they robbe the kingdome, or diſobey the King: but for that they haue no feare of the ſword, nor doubt of the gallowes, they do what they luſt, and not what they ought. I knowe not how you can ſay, that you wil refourme the kingdome ſince you obey not the King, you conſent to no gouernours, you admit no royall counſell, you ſuffer no Chancelour, you haue no Iudges nor Iuſtices, no giuing of ſentence in matters of lawe, neyther any euill chaſtiſed: in ſuch wiſe, that your iudgemēt to haue no iuſtice in the kingedome,A wrong deuiſe to maintaine a common wealth. is to refourme iuſtice. I can not cōprehende how you wil reforme this kingdome, ſince by your conſent there is no ſubiect that ſhall acknowledge a preacher, neither any Nunne that keepes hir cloyſter, no Frier that remayneth in his monaſtery, neyther womā that obeyeth hir huſband, nor vaſſall that obſerueth loyalty, neyther any man that dealeth iuſtly: in ſo much that vnder the colour of liberty, euery man liueth at his owne wil. I know not how you will reforme the common welth, ſince thoſe of your campe do force women, rauiſh maydens, burne villages, ſpoyle houſes: ſteale whole ſlockes, cut downe woods, and rob churches, in ſuch wiſe, that if they leaue any euill vndone, it is not bycauſe they dare not, but for that they can not. I can not conceiue how you will reforme the common welth, ſince by your occaſion Toledo is riſen, Segouia altered, Medina burned, Halaheios beſieged, Burgos fortified, Valiodolid immutined, Salamanca ſtragled, Soria diſobedient, and alſo Valentia an Apoſtata. I can not perceiue how you will reforme the common welth, ſince Naiarza is rebelled againſt the Duke, Dueas againſt the Earle, Tordiſillas againſt the Marques, Chincon againſt his Lorde, ſince Auila, Leon, Toro, Zamora, and Salamanca, doe neither more or

leſſe than the aſſembly doth commaund. So may my life proſper as I like of your demaund: which is to weete, yt the King be not abſent out of this Realme, that he maintaine all men in iuſtice, that he ſuffer no money to be tranſported out of the Realme, that he giue his rewardes and offices vnto the natural ſubiectes of Spaine, that they deuiſe not any new tributs: and aboue all, that the Offices be not ſolde, but gyuen to men of moſt vertue.
               Theſe and ſuch other like things you haue licence to craue, and only the King hath authoritie to graunt: but to demaund of princes with the lance, that which they haue to prouide by Iuſtice, is not the part of good vaſſalles, but of diſloyall ſeruants, wée well vnderſtand that many people of this lande doe complaine of the newe gouernement of Flemmings, and to ſpeake the truth, that fault was not all theirs, but in their ſmall experience, and our much enuie. Further, aduertiſing that the ſtraungers were not more to bée blamed than our owne countrie men, they knew not the ſtate of things, either what offices to craue, neither how they would be ſolde, but that they were aduiſed and alſo inſtructed in the ſkill thereof by the men of our owne nation, in ſuch wiſe, that if in them there did abound deſire of gain, in vs there did excéed the vice of cruell malice. Although Maiſter Xebes and the reſt haue cō
                  mitted ſome fault, I know not that our Spaine hath done any offence,Miſchiefe for a medicine. that you ſhould in the ſame and againſt the ſame rayſe any warre. The medicine that you haue inuented for the remedie of this miſchiefe, is not to purge but to kill. But ſince you will néedes make war, let vs examine here againſt whom is this war? not againſt the king, bycauſe his tender youth dothe excuſe him: not againſt the Counſell, for they appeare not: not againſt Xebes, for hée is in Flaunders, not againſt the Gouernors whiche haue but nowe entred their offices: not againſt the Gentlemen, who haue not offended: neither yet againſt tyrantes, for the Kingdome was in peace: than is this war againe your own countrie, and againſt our own (lamentable) common wealth. The wante of prouidence

in the king, neither the auarice of Xebes is ſufficient cauſe that we ſhould ſée that whiche wée doe ſée, the people to ryſe againſt people, fathers againſt the ſonnes, the vncles againſt their couſins, friends againſt friends, neighbors againſt neybours, and brothers againſt brothers: but that our ſinne hath ſo deſerued to be chaſtiſed, and yours hath merited that you ſhuld be our ſcourge. Speaking more particular, you are not able to excuſe your faulte, for beginning as you did the aſſemblie of Auila, from which counſell all this warre hath had his féeding, and of a trouth preſently I did diuine and alſo preache that is to witte, yt neuer was Monipody of any kingdome, whereof did not ariſe ſome notable ſcandall. The kingdom is nowe altered, the kyng is diſobeyed, the people are nowe riſen, the hurt is alreadie begon, the fire is alreadye in flame, and the common wealth goeth ſinking to the bottom. But in the ende, if it like you, a good end may be made, from whence may procéede all the remedie, for that we haue firmely to beléeue, that God will rather heare the hearts that praye for peace, than the fifes and drums that proclaime warre. If it may lyke you to forget ſome part of your anger, and the gouernours to loſe ſome part of their right, I hold it all for finiſhed. And to ſpeake you the trouth, in popular and ciuil warres, men do rather fight for the opinion they haue takē, than for the reaſon that they hold. My iudgement ſhould be in this caſe, that you ſhould ioyne with the Gouernours to talke and conferre for the gréeues and things amiſſe, and to vnderſtād for the remedie therof: for by this meanes you ſhould growe to more ripeneſſe for the things you haue to demaund, and in our king and maiſter more facilitie in that whiche he ſhoulde graunt. If it may pleaſe you to leaue your armour, and giue faith vnto my words, I ſweare by the faith of a Chriſtian, & by this letter of credence yt I bring with me, do promiſe you that you ſhall be pardoned of the king, and well intreated of his gouernors: that you ſhal neuer for this déed be chaſtized, neither yet in wordes be blamed or defamed. And bicauſe it ſhall not ſéeme that your zeale hath bin in vaine, and that the

Gouernours doth not deſire the common wealth, I will here ſhew vnto you, what they wil do for the kingdome, and what kindneſſe on his Maieſties behalfe they will beſtowe vppon you, which is as followeth.
               
                  Firſt, they promiſe you, that at any time whē the kings Maieſtie ſhall be abſent from this kingdome, he ſhall place a Caſtilian to gouerne Caſtile:
                  Large offers. bicauſe the authoritie & greatnes of Spaine endureth not the gouernment of ſtraungers. Alſo they promiſe you, that all the dignities, holdings, and offices of the kingdome and Court, ſhall be giuen to Spaniards, and not to ſtraungers: notwithſtāding there be many noble perſonages that haue well deſerued and in whome they were well employed. Alſo they promiſe you that the royall rents of the people ſhall be rated at an indifferent rente, in ſuch wiſe, that the Cities may haue reaſonable gayne, and no greate loſſe to the king. Alſo they promiſe you that if in the regall counſell ſhal be found any examiner, or any other officer, (although it be the preſident) vnwiſe or vnapt for gouernement, and not learned to giue ſentence, or not honeſt of lyfe, that his maieſtie ſhall abſolue him of his office: notwithſtanding they may be affectionate to ſome, and alſo offended like other men. Alſo they promiſe that from hencefoorth his Maieſtie ſhall commaund his Iuſtices of Court and Chauncery, that they ſhall not vſe their commaundements ſo abſolute, neyther their chaſtiſements ſo rigorous: notwithſtanding that ſometimes they be in ſome things fierce, bycauſe they may be more feared and alſo more eſteemed. Alſo they promyſe, that from henceforth his Maieſtie ſhall commaunde to reforme his houſe, and alſo remoue the exceſſiue charges thereof: conſidering that diſordinate expences bryng forth newe tributes. Alſo they promiſe you, that for any neede the Kings Maieſtie may haue, hée ſhall not carry, neither yet commaund to be caried any money out of this kingdome to bée tranſported into Flaunders, Almayne, or Italy: conſidering that incontinent, trafficke decayeth in kingdomes where money wanteth. Alſo they promiſe that his Maieſtie ſhall not permitte from

henceforth, Biſcay Iron, Alum of Murcia, Vitailes of Andolozia, nor Sackes of Burgos, to be laden in ſtraunge botoms, but in ſhippes of Biſcay and Galizia, to the ende that ſtraungers ſhall not robbe, and our Countrey men to gayne whereby to eate. Alſo they promiſe that his Maieſtie ſhall not permit to be gyuen from henceforth, fortreſſe, Caſtell, bridge, gate, or towne, but vnto Gentlemen plaine and curteous, and not vnto Gentlemen or Knights of power, which in reuolting times may riſe with the ſame: conſidering that in the ancient times none might haue Artilery or Fortreſſe, but the King in Caſtile. Alſo they do promiſe you, that from henceforth his Maieſtie ſhall not permitte licences to cary corne into Portingall, neyther from Mancha to Valentia: conſideryng that many tymes to haue licence to tranſport thither, is here amongſt ourſelues cauſe of greate dearth. Alſo with all breuitie his Maieſtie wil commaund the contentions and matters in law to be examined and conſidered, that haue bene continued betwixt Toledo, and the Earle of Velalcaſſar, and Segonia, and ſir Fernando Chichon, and of Iaen with the towne of Martos, and Valiodolid with Simancas, and that of ſir Peter Giron with the Duke of Medina: conſidring that thoſe in poſſeſſion do delay, and the diſpoſſeſſed complaine. Alſo they promiſe, that the King will commaund to reforme the exceſſes, giue lawe for banquets, reforme Monaſteries, viſit Chanceries, repayre ſorts, and fortifie all the frontiers: conſidering that in all theſe things there is neceſſitie of reformation and alſo of correction. If you my Maſters bée ſuche as you publiſhe your ſelfe throughout Caſtile, whiche is to witte: that you bée the redéemers of the Common wealth, and the reſtorers of the libertie of Caſtile: behold here wée offer you the redemption, and alſo the reſurrection thereof, bycauſe ſo many and ſo good thinges as theſe are, neyther did you remember to demaunde, eyther woulde preſume to craue: nowe is the houre come wherein of neceſſitie it muſte bée manifeſted, whither you ſpeake and meane one thing. For if yée deſire the generall wealth now is it offred you, and if you

pretend your particuler intereſt, it may not be graunted you: for ſpeaking the troth it is not iuſt, but moſt vniuſt, that with the ſweate of the poore common wealth you ſhoulde ſéeke to amend the ſtate of your owne houſes. But let it be for cōcluſion ſince we be here in the Churche of the towne of Braxima, of my part I do humbly beſéeche you vppon my knées, and in the behalfe of the gouernours I doe requeſt you,Pithyly perſwaded. and on the Kings name I commaund you to leaue your armour, to diſcamp your camp, and to vnfortifie Tordiſillas: if not, I iuſtifie this offer for the gouernours, that all the euils, miſchieues, and ſlaughters that hereafter ſhall happen in this kingdome be vpon the charge of your ſoules, and not vpon the burden of their conſcience.
               As I knéeled downe at the ſpeaking of theſe laſt wordes, forthwith came vnto me Alonſo of Quintanilla and Sarabia, bare headed and with great courteſie, did help me to riſe and forced me to ſitte downe. During the time I didde ſpeake all that is aforeſaid, it was a thing to looke vpon, and worthy conſideration: how ſome of them did behold me, ſome did ſtampe, ſome did eye me, and alſo ſome did mocke me: but I neuer the more did leaue to note, either ſtay to ſpeake. After I had finiſhed my Oration, they all with one voice ſaid and deſired the Biſhop of Zamora to ſpeake his iudgemente, and that afterwards they would all ſée what were conuenient to be done. Forthwith the Biſhop toke me by the hand & in the name of thē all, he ſaid vnto me: Father frier Antony of Gueuara, thou haſt ſpoken ſufficiently, and alſo for the authoritie of thy habite as a man ouer raſh, but for that thou art a yong man and of ſmall experience, neither knoweſt thou what thou ſpeakeſt, eyther vnderſtandeſt thou what thou demaundeſt, eyther waſt thou made a Frier being a boy, or elſe thou art angrie, or knoweſt little of this worlde, or thou wanteſt iudgement: ſince thou preſumeſt to ſpeak, & ſuch things wouldeſt make vs beleue: but thou father (being ſtayd within thy monaſterie) knoweſt not of tirānies whiche they execute in the kingdom, & that which the knights & noble mē hath tirāniſed

of the reall patrimonie, for whiche cauſe,A ſharp reprehenſion. thy entent ſhall be receyued, although thy wordes not beléeued. I haue heard ſay, that thou arte raſhe in thy ſpéeche, and ſharpe in reprehending, and ioyntly therewith I did beléeue (ſince the Gouernours had thée in their cōpany) that thou hadſt a good zele and no want of iudgemente, but ſince they ſuffer they fooliſheneſſe, it is not much that we endure thy wordes. God hathe bin thy good Lord that none of the captains of the warre hath bin preſent, for according to thy diſordred talke whiche thou haſt vſed, they woulde firſte haue taken away thy life before thou mightſt haue finiſhed thy tale, & then it might be in oure hands to be ſory, but not to remedie.A friendly aduiſe. When ſome other daye thou ſhalt talk in the preſence of ſo great authoritie & grauitie as theſe are which be preſent, thou oughteſt to be in that thou ſhalt ſay very moderat, & in ye maner of thy ſpéech very much meaſured, bycauſe thy ſpéeche hath bin rather to ſcandalize than to mitigate vs, for that thou pretendeſt to condemne vs and diſcharge the gouernours: and ſince we be but Captaines to execute and not iudges to determine: it is conuenient that thou giueſt vs by writing firmed with thy hande al that thou haſt ſayd, and promiſed on the Kings behalfe: that wée maye ſende it to the Gentlemen of the holie aſſemblie, and there they ſhall ſée what they haue to commaunde vs, and to anſwere to thy ambaſſage: preſently they ſente a poſt to Tordiſillas, (for there was the aſſemblie) with the credence that I brought, and with the talke I had vſed, whiche gaue for anſwere, that ſo colde a meſſage, and ſuche diſordred talk deſerueth no other anſwere but to be wel reprehended, & alſo greuouſly puniſhed. Preſently they commaunded me to departe from the towne of Braxima without any letter, neyther any worde that I ſhould ſay to the gouernors: except this Biſhop yt ſaid vnto me, Father Gueuara fare you wel, & beware you come not againe, for if you do, you ſhal returne no more: and ſay vnto your gouernours, that if they haue authoritie from the king to promiſe much, their cōmiſſion extendeth to performe very little. This done and ſaid, I returned to Medina

del rio Secco euill vſed, and worſe anſwered, and from thence after I had ſpoken & the Biſhop aunſwered me, warres was determined, and peace neuer more ſpoken of. It was no ſmall griefe vnto Sir Peter Giron and Sir Peter Laſſo of the foule wordes they vſed with me, and of the euill aunſwere their felowſhip gaue me, for ſurely they would right gladly haue ben reduced to the Kings ſeruice, and that peace ſhould haue bene eſtabliſhed. Sir Peter Giron met me vpon the way when I retorned, and there conferred vpon ſuch and ſo delicate things, whereof did riſe that he retired from the Campe to Villalpandos, and that the gouernours ſhould marche vnto Tordiſillas, & ſo it was brought to paſſe. By that iourney the Queene was deliuered, and they of the aſſembly taken.
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Doctor Melgar Phiſicion, wherein is touched (by great eloquence) the hurtes and profites that Phiſicions commit.
               
               
                  RIght reuerent Doctor & Caeſars Phiſicion, I haue receyued your letter, and the receipt that came therein: & whether I did ſpeake or not ſpeake vnto the Preſident in your caſe, you may vnderſtand by the diſpatch therof, & by the report of your ſeruant: in ſuche wiſe, that you haue performed with me like a Phiſicion, and I with you like a friend. And whether you or I haue done beſt, it is to wit, you in curing of me, or I in diſpatching of you, let good mē ſée & iudge, ſince I remaine with my gowte, & you haue obtayned good deliuerance. Sir I commaunded thoſe hearbes to be ſought, & the rootes to be gathered: and according to the tune of your billet, I haue gathered, ſtampt & dranke them, and God giue your ſoule better health, than they did profite mee any thing for my goute, for they did inflame my liuer, & too much coole my ſtomacke. I wil confeſſe vnto you that as in this my diſeaſe you did not onely erre, but alſo you did hurt me: euery

time, that with the cold my ſtomacke beginneth to belke,Cruell prayers. preſently I ſay, a ſhame beſhine Doctor Melgar, ſince my diſeaſe was not aboue the girdle, but from the thigh downewards, I did not craue that you ſhould purge the humors, but deliuer me from payne, I know not why you ſhould chaſtiſe my ſtomacke, my foote making the offence? I cōmoned with Doctor Sotto here in Toledo, as cōcerning a Sciatica I had in my thigh, & he cōmanded to be giuē vnto me two Cautories with an bote inſtrument behind the eares, & the profite I gathered thereof was, he gaue all the Court occaſion to laugh, and mine eares to endure great paine. And in Alcala I cōmoned with Doctor Cartagema, and he did ordayne me a certaine receit wherein was contained the gal of an Ox, the ordure of a Rat, the bran of Otes, the leaues of nettles, the buddes of Roſes, and Scorpions fried, to make a plaiſter to be layd vnto my thigh: The profite and greate eaſe I gathered thereof was, it kepte mée from ſléepe thrée nights, and I payde to the Apoticary that made it ten grotes: but from henceforth I renounce the counſelles of ſuche counſellers, the Aphoriſmos of Ipochras,
                  The authors of Phiſicke. the fines or concluſions of Auicene, the caſes of Ficino, the compoſitions of Raſis, and alſo the Canons of Erophilo, if in their writings that wretched and curſed playſter be to bée found, which as it did not ſuffer me to ſléepe, much leſſe to take any reſt, I did not only take it away but alſo buried it, for that it did not onely ſtincke moſt filthily, but burned mée moſt grieuouſly. I remember that in Borgos Anno 21. Doctor Sotto cured me of a certaine wandring feuer, made me eate ſo muche Apium, take ſo much Barley water, and drinke ſo much ſtild Endiue, that I fel into ſuch a thirſt, that only I could not eat, neither ſo much as to abide yt fauor of meat. Not many yéeres after I wēt to viſit the ſame Doctor Sotto being ſicke in Tordiſillas, and ſaw him eat an Orange, & drinke a cup of fragrant white wine after the cold had left him, and the heat began to come vpon him. Wherfore I did not a little maruel, and half offended I ſayde vnto him laughing: tell mée Maſter Doctor in what lawe is it contayned, or what Iuſtice doth ſuffer it,

that you cure your ſelfe of your Ague with wyne of S. Martin, and on the other ſide you cure my Sciatica with dung of oxen? Whervnto graciouſly he made me anſwere, your Lordſhip (Maſter Gueuara) hath to vnderſtand, that our maiſter Ipochras hath giuen commaundement to all Phyſitions his ſucceſſors, that vpon paine of his malediction we ſhoulde cure our ſelues with wine, and our pacientes with ſtilled water. Although Doctor Soto tolde me this tale in ieſt,A tale tolde in ieſt, beleued in earneſt. I did firmly beléeue it, bicauſe you Maſter Doctor did once ſaye vnto mée in Madrid, that in all the days of your life, you neuer receiued compound purgation, either proued the faſt of ſtilled water. Ther is no arte in this world that makes me loſe the ſtirops (or to ſay better) my wits, but the maner that Phyſitions do vſe to cure: For wée ſée them deſirous to cure, and enimies to be cured. And bicauſe Maſter Doctor you write vnto me, alſo you ſweare and coniure me, by the deſire I wiſhe to the welfare of my father, that I write vnto you, what is my iudgement of Phyſike, and what I haue read of the inuenters birth & and firſt riſing thereof. I will performe your requeſt, although it be more than others would wiſh, for it is a matter that the wiſe Phyſitions will delight in, but wherefore the fooliſh will giue both you and me to the diuell.
               
                  Of the moſte auncient inuenters of Phyſike and medicine.
                  
                     IF Plinie doe not deceyue vs, there is no arte of the ſeuen liberall Artes, wherein there is practiſed leſſe trouth, and whiche hath paſſed more mutabilitie than the Arte of Medicine. Bicauſe there hath not bin kingdom, people, either notable natiō in this world, wher ſhe hath not bin receiued, and after entertaynment, againe throwne out of the ſame.Great trauailes that phyſik hath paſt. For if as ſhe is a medicine, ſhe were a man, immeſurable wer the trauels that ſhe wold report that ſhe had ſuffred, and many and very many are the kingdoms that ſhe hath

traueled, and prouinces that ſhe hath wandred, not bycauſe they neglected to be cured, but for that they helde Phiſitions ſuſpitious & to be doubted. The firſt that amongſt ye Greekes found the art of curing, was the Philoſopher Apollo, and hys Sonne Aeſculapius, which for being ſo famous in Phiſicke,Phiſick hath wandred many countreys they concurred vnto him, as vnto an Oracle throughout all Grecia, but the chaunce was thus. This Aeſculapius was but a yong man, and by greate miſchaunce was ſlayne with lightning. And as he left no diſciple that knew his ſecretes, neither that could make his medcines, the maſter and the Art of medcine ioyntly did periſh. Four hundred and forty yeres was the Art of Phiſicke loſt, in ſuche wiſe,Phiſicke vtterly decayed the ſpace four hūdred yeres that in all the worlde there was not a man founde that did cure publikely, or was called Phiſition: for ſo many yeares paſſed from the time that Eſculupius died, vntill the birth of Arthaxerxes the ſecond, in whoſe time Ipochras was borne, Strabo, Diodoro, & alſo Plini maketh mention of a woman of Grecia, that in thoſe moſt aunciente times did floriſh in the art of Phiſicke, of whome they recite ſo many mōſtrous things and ſo incredible, that to my iudgemēt they be al, or the more part of thē fayned: for if they ſhuld be true, it ſéemed rather that ſhe rayſed the dead, than cured the ſicke. In theſe days there did riſe in the prouince of Achaia an other womā, that began to cure with pſalmes and words, without applying any medcine ſimple or compound: whyche being knowne in Athens, was condemned by decrée of the Senate to be ſtoned to death: ſaying, that the Gods, neyther nature, had giuen remedies for ſickneſſe in words, but in herbes and ſtones. In the dayes that they had no phiſitions in Aſia, the Gréekes held for cuſtome when any man had made experiēce of a medcine, and did heale with the ſame, he was bound to write it in a table, and to hang it vp in the temple of Diana, that was at Epheſus: for that in the like caſe any other might vſe the ſame remedy. Trogos, Laertios and alſo Lactantius ſaith, that the cauſe whereby the Gréekes did ſuſtayne themſelues ſo long time without Phiſitions was,Rules to be noted. that in May they dyd gather ſwéete herbes whiche they kept in their houſes: they

were let bloud once in the yeare, did bath once euery monthe, and alſo they did eate but once a day.
                  Conformable to this Plutarch doth ſay, that Plato being demaunded by the philoſophers of Athens, if he had ſeene any notable thing in Tinacria, which is now called Sicilia, made aunſwer, vidi monſtrum in natura, bominem bis ſaturum in die, whiche is to ſay, I did ſee a monſter in mās nature which did fill or féede himſelfe twice in one day: he ſayde thus by Dionyſius the tyrant, which was the firſt that inuented to eate at noone, and afterwards to ſuppe at night: for in the olde worlds they did vſe to ſuppe but not to dine. I haue curiouſly conſidered, and in great varietie of bookes I haue ſought, and that whiche I found in this caſe is, that all the nations of this world did eate at night, and onely the Hebrewes did féede at none: but following our intent, it is to vnderſtand, that the temple moſt eſtéemed in all Aſia, was the Temple of Diana: the one cauſe was, for that it was ſtately of buildings, another, for that it was ſerued with many Prieſts, but the moſt principall cauſe was, for that the tables of Medicines were hanged there, to cure the diſeaſed. Strabo ſayeth, that eleuen yeares after the battells of ye 
                     Peloponenſes,
                     The place whereas Ipochras was borne, and other famous men. the great Philoſopher Ipochras was borne in a little Iland named Coe, in whiche alſo were borne thoſe glorious perſonages Licurgus and Brias, the one Captayne of the Athenians, and the other Prince of the Lacedemonians Of this Ipochras it is written, that he was of ſmall ſtature, ſomewhat poare blind, with a great head, of much ſilēce, paynefull in ſtudy, and aboue all, of a high and delicate iudgement. From xviij. yeares vnto thirtie fiue, Ipochras continued in the ſcholes of Athenes ſtudying Philoſophie and reading, and notwithſtanding that in his time many Philoſophers did flouriſh, he was more famouſe, renoumed, and eſtéemed, than all the reſt. After that Ipochras departed from the ſtudies of Athenes, he wandred throughout diuers kingdomes and prouinces, inquiring and ſearching of all men and women, what they did knowe of the properties and vertues of herbes and planets, and what experience they had ſeene of them. At which

things he did write and incommend vnto his memorie. Alſo Ipochras did ſearch with moſt great diligence for other bookes of Phiſick, written by any other auncient Philoſophers,The diligence of Ipochras. and it is ſayd that he found ſome written bookes, in whyche theyr authours had written no medcine that they had made, but ſuch as they had ſéene made.
               
               
                  Of the Kingdomes and Prouinces where Phiſitions were baniſhed.
                  
                     TWelue yeares Ipochras did trauell in this peregrination, after which time he retired vnto the temple of Diana that was in Epheſus, and tranſlated al the tables of medcines, and experiments that were there preſerued many yeares, he put in order all that was before confuſed, and added many things that he had founde out, and other things that he had experimented. This Philoſopher Ipochras, is Prince of all Phiſitions in the world, for he was ye firſt that tooke penne to write and to put Phiſicke in order.
                  Alſo it is ſayd of him, yt he neuer made error in that he prognoſticated, either in any diſeaſe he tooke in cure. Ipochras dyd giue counſel to Phiſitions, that they ſhould neuer take in hād to cure anye diſordered patient, and did counſell the ſicke to ſhunne the vnfortunate Phiſition: for (ſayth he) he that cureth may not erre, where the patient is of good gouernment, and the Phiſition fortunate.
                  The Philoſopher Ipochras being dead, for that his diſciples began to cure, or to ſay more truly, to kill many ſicke people of Grecia, (for that ye ſcience was very new, and the experiēce muche leſſe) it was commaunded by the Senate of Athenes,
                     Phiſitions baniſhed out of all Greece. not only that they ſhoulde not cure, but alſo depart out of all Grecia. After that the diſciples of Ipochras were thruſt out of Grecia, the art of Phiſicke was baniſhed and forgotten an hū
                     dred and thréeſcore yeres, ſo as none durſt to learn, and much leſſe to teache the ſame: for the Gréekes had their Ipochras in ſuche eſtimation, that they affirmed that Phiſicke was borne

and buried with him. Thoſe hundred and thréeſcore yéeres being paſt, another Philoſopher and phiſition was borne named Chriſippus, in the kingdome of the Sicionians, whiche was as renoumed amongſt the Argiues, as Ipochras amonſt the Athenians. This Philoſopher Chriſippus, although he were very well learned in Phiſicke, and very fortunate in the experience thereof, of the other part he was much opinionatiue and of preſuming iudgement: for all the time of his life & lecture, and in all his bookes that he did write, his purpoſe was none other, but to impugne Ipochras in all that he had ſaid, and only to proue moſt true that which he affirmed, in ſuche wiſe, that he was the firſt Phiſition that pulled medicine out of reaſon, and put it in opinion. The Philoſopher Chriſippus being dead, there was great alteration amongſt the Gréekes, whiche of the two doctrines they ſhould follow, whiche is to wit, that of Ipochras or of Chriſippus, and in the end it was determined that neither the one ſhould be followed, or the other admitted: for they ſayd,Another hundred yeares phiſick baniſhed out of Greece. that neyther life nor honor ought to be put in diſputation. After this the Gréekes remayned an other hundred yeres without Phiſition, vntill the time of one Ariſtrato a philoſopher which did riſe amōgſt them. He was coſin to ye great philoſopher Ariſtotle, and was reſidēt in the kingdome of Macedonia, where he of new did exalt the art of Phiſicke, not for that he was more learned than his predeceſſours, but for that he was more fortunate than all the reſt. This Ariſtrato recouered fame by curing king Antiochus the firſte, of a certayne diſeaſe of the lights, in reward whereof the yong prince his ſon that was named Ptholemus did giue a thouſande Talents of ſiluer,An exceeding reward. and a cup of golde, in ſuch wiſe, that he wan honor thoroughout all Aſia, and ritches for his houſe. This Philoſopher Ariſtrato, was he that moſt defamed the art of Phiſicke, bycauſe he was the firſt that ſet Phiſicke aſale and begā to cure for money, for vntill this time all phiſitions did cure, ſome for friendſhip, and ſome for charitie. The Phiſition Ariſtratus being dead, ther ſuccéeded him certaine his diſciples, more couetous than wiſe: which for that they gaue thēſelues to be more handſome

men of their money, than to cure diſeaſes,The firſt phiſition that cured for mony. they were commaunded by the Senat of Athens, that they ſhould not preſume to teach phiſicke, much leſſe to cure any perſon.
               
               
                  Of other trauels that Phiſick did paſſe.
                  ANother hundred yeres in Aſia was phiſick forgotten, till the time that Euperices was rayſed in the kingdome of Tinacria, but for that he and another Phiſition did vary vpon the curing of King Criſippus (the which at that time raigned in that Ile) it was determined by thoſe of the kingdome,Phiſick baniſht another C. yeares. that they ſhould only cure with ſimple medicines, and not preſume to mixe or make compoſitiōs. Long time the kingdome of Sicill continued, and alſo the greater part of Aſia, without the knowledge of the art of medicine, vntill the time that in the Ile of Rhodes there remayned a certain notable phiſition and philoſopher named Heroſilo, a man that was in his time very learned in phiſick, and very ſkilfull in Aſtrology, Many do ſay that this Heroſilus was maſter to Ptolomeus, and others ſay yt he was not, but his diſciple: but be it as be may, he lefte many bookes written of Aſtrology, and taught many ſcholers alſo. This Heroſilus held opinion, that the pulſe of the patient ought not to be taken in the arme, but in the temples, ſaying: that there neuer wanted that, which in the arme was ſometime hidden. This phiſition Heroſilus was of ſuche authoritie amongeſt the Rhodians, that they held this opinion, to take the poulſe in the temples, all the dayes of his life, and alſo the liues of his ſcholers, who with his ſcholers being all dead, the opinion tooke an end, although it were not forgotten. Heroſilus béeing deade, the Rhodians would neuer more bée cured, neither admit any other phiſition in their countrie: the one cauſe, was not to offend the authority of their philoſopher Heroſilus: and the other, for that naturally they were enimies vnto ſtraunge people, and alſo no friendes of newe opinions. This being paſt, phiſicke fell aſléepe other .iiij. ſcore yeres, as wel in Aſia as in Europa, vntill

the great philoſopher & phiſition Aſclepiades was rayſed in ye Ilande Mitiline: A man ſufficiently well learned, and moſt excellent in curing. This Aſclepiades helde opinion, that the pulſe ought not to be ſought in the arme (as nowe they ſeeke) but in the temples, or in the noſe. This opinion was not ſo farre beſides reaſon, but that long time after him, the phiſitions of Rome and alſo of Aſia did entertaine the ſame. In all theſe times it was not read that any phiſition was borne in Rome, or came into Italy: for the Romanes were the laſt of this world that did entertaine Clockes, Ieſters, Barbars, & Phiſitions.In foure hū
                        dreth yeares, Rome reſerued no Phiſitions. Foure hundred. iij. yeares and ten months, the great city of Rome did paſſe, without the entertayning of any Phiſition or Chirurgian. The firſt that hath ben read to haue entred Rome, was one that was named Antony Muſa, a Greeke borne, and in ſcience a Phiſition. The cauſe of his comming thither was, the diſeaſe of Sciatica, that the Emperor Auguſtus had in his thigh: the which when Antony Muſa had cured, and therof wholy deliuered him, in remuneration of ſo great a benefite, the Romanes did erect vnto him a picture of Porphiry in the fielde of Mars, and farther and beſides this, did giue him priuiledge of citizen of Rome. Antony Muſa had gathered excéeding great riches, & alſo obtained the renoume of a great Philoſopher, if with the ſame he could haue bene contented, and not to haue excéeded his Art of phiſick: but this was the chance of his ſorrowfull fate. Giuing him ſelfe to cure by Chirurgery, as alſo by medicine, it is ſome time neceſſary in that Art to cut of féete, or fingers, and to make inciſions: the Romanes being not vſed to behold ſuch cruelties, and to ſuffer ſo intolerable grieues, in one day and in one houre they ſtoned him to death, & drew him al abouts in the ſtreates. Frō the time they ſtoned this miſerable Antony Muſa, they cōſented not to haue any Phiſition or Chirurgian in all Italy,
                     Nero brought from Greece vices and phiſitiōs. vntill the time of the wicked Emperour Nero, which at his returne from Grecia, brought vnto Rome many phiſitions, and alſo many vices. In the times of the Empire of Nero, Galba, Octo, and Bitello, phiſicke did much floriſh in Italy, and the phiſitions

did greatly triumph in Rome: but after the death of theſe Princes, the good Emperour Titus commaunded the Orators and alſo the phiſitions to be driuen out of Rome. The Emperour Titus béeing demaunded why hée did baniſh them,Phiſitions baniſhed by Titus the Emperour. ſince the one were aduocates for matters in lawe, and the other did cure the diſeaſed? he made anſwer: I baniſh the Orators, as deſtroyers of the cuſtomes, and alſo phiſitions as eni
                     
                        ••••
                      to health. And more he ſaid, I do alſo baniſh the phiſitions to take away the occaſions from men that be vicious, for that we ſée by experience, in the Cities where phiſitions be reſident, there is alwaies abundance of vices.
               
               
                  A letter written from Grecia to Rome, wiſhing them to beware of the Phiſitions that were come thither.
                  
                     THE great Cato of Vtica was no ſmall enimie to all phiſitions of this worlde, ſpecially that they ſhould not enter within the Empire of Rome,
                     Cato an enemy of Phiſitions. who from Aſia did write a letter vnto his ſonne Marcellus that was in Rome, after this maner. In thée and in me it appeareth moſt clearely, that more is the loue that ye Father beareth vnto the ſon, than ye ſon vnto the father: ſince thou forgetteſt thy ſelf to write vnto me, neither yet to prouide for defence of thy neceſſities. If thou wilt not write vnto me as to thy father, write vnto me as vnto thy friend: not withſtanding it is much more which thou oweſt vnto my hoare haires, and alſo vnto my good & friendly works. As concerning ye reſt, my ſon Marcellus, thou knoweſt that I haue ben reſident a Conſull here in Aſia fiue yeres, of which the moſt time I haue continued here in Athens, where al Grecia do hold their notable ſtudies of their renowmed Philoſophers, and if thou wilt vnderſtand what I conceiue of theſe Greekes, it is, they ſpeake much and performe little, they call all men barbarous, and onely themſelues Philoſophers: and the worſt of all is, they be ready friends to giue counſell vnto al men, & enimies to accept the

ſame, iniuries they know to diſſemble, but neuer to pardon: they be very conſtant in hatred, and very mutable in loue and friendſhip. Finally my ſon Marcellus I ſay vnto thée, that naturally, they be proud to commaund, and vntamable to ſeruice. Behold here what in Grecia the Philoſophers do reade and teach, and what the popular people do learne: and if I do write vnto thée, it is, for that thou ſhalt not paine thy ſelfe to come into Grecia, neither to paſſe thy thought to leaue Italy. Since thou knowſt and alſo doſt vnderſtand, that the grauitie of our Mother Rome, neither may ſuffer youthly wantonnes, neither admit nouelties. That day that the fathers of our ſacred Senate ſhall permit the Artes and letters of Grecia to enter Rome, from that day I hold our common wealth as loſt: for our Romanes do eſteme and make accompt to liue well, and the Greekes but only to ſpeak well. In thoſe kingdomes and Cities where ſchooles and ſtudies be wel ordred, and on ye other part their common wealthes euill gouerned, notwithſtanding we ſée them floriſh, very ſhortely we ſhall ſée them famiſh, for there is not in al this whole world any thing that iuſtly may be termed perpetuall, but that which vpon troth and vertue is founded. Although al the arts of Grecia be ſuſpicious, pernicious & ſcandalous, yet I ſay to thée my ſon Marcellus, for the commonwealth of our Mother Rome, the worſt of them all is phiſicke, for that all theſe Greekes haue ſworne to ſend to kill by medicine thoſe which they might not ouercome by armes. Euery day I ſée here theſe phiſick Philoſophers holde amongſt themſelues great altercations, about the curing of infirmities and the applying of certaine medicines: and that whiche is moſt to be wondred, that doing what the one commaundeth, and the other counſelleth, we ſée the patient cruelly tormented, and ſometimes finiſh his dayes: in ſuch wiſe, that their queſtion riſeth, not how they ſhall cure him but how with medicines they may kill him. My ſon Marcellus, thou ſhalt aduiſe the fathers of the Senat, if they bring thither vj. phiſicke philoſophers which be departed hence out of Grecia, that they ſuffer them not to read or teache phiſicke,

either to cure in the common welth: bycauſe this art of medicine is ſo perillous to be exerciſed, and ſo delicate to be vnderſtoode, that there be many that do learne, and very few that do know it.
               
               
                  Of ſeauen notable benefites that proceedeth from the good Phiſition.
                  BEhold here maiſter Doctor, the beginning of your Phiſick declared, and how it was found, how it was compiled, how it was loſte, how it was baniſhed, how it was receiued, and alſo how ſorowfully ſhe went wandring from common welth to common welth. Maſter Doctor, by your letter you alſo craue of me, that I write vnto you, not onely what I haue read of Phiſick, but alſo my iudgment therof: whiche I will accompliſh to do you pleaſure, and alſo for that it may 
                        Nota
                      be ſeene, how much profite riſeth from the good Phiſition, and what hurtes from the euill. Medicine is to be praiſed, bycauſe the maker of all things did create the ſame for the remedie of his creatures, giuing vertue to waters, plantes, herbs, ſtones, & alſo in wordes, to the end that with all theſe things men ſhould be cured, and with their health ſerue him.The cauſes of praiſe of phiſicke. God is much 
                        〈…〉
                     ed with the pacience which the ſicke manne vſeth, but much more with the pacience, charitie, and hoſpitalitie that the whole and ſound man performeth. It is a thing religious and alſo neceſſary to procure bodily health, and to ſerue God, for if the ſicke man haue good deſires: his workes bée weake, but he that is whole, ſound, and vertuous, hath good deſires and excellent, and alſo notable workes.
                  Medicine is to be praiſed, when it is in the handes of a Phiſition that is learned, graue, wiſe, ſtayed, and of experience: for ſuch a Phiſition with his ſcience ſhal vnderſtand the infirmitie, with his wiſdome ſéeke his medicine, and with his great experience what and when to imploy the ſame.
                  Medicine is to be praiſed, when the Phiſition vſeth not the ſame but in ſharpe diſeaſes that be very perillous: which

is to wit, for the Plureſy, Squinancy, inflamation, ſharpe Feuer, or Apoplexie: bycauſe in caſes ſo daungerous, and in perils ſo perillous, all thinges for health is to be prouided, and the Phiſition in all things to be credited.
                  Phiſick is to be praiſed, when the Phiſition is ſo wiſe, that he doth heate a great repletion or heat of bloud, by waſhing the megrim with a fume, a griefe of the ſtomake with a ſacket: a heate of the liuer with an oyntment: bleared eyes with colde water: a conſtupation of the belly with a Gliſter: and a plaine Feuer with good diet.
                  Phiſicke is to be praiſed, when I ſhal ſée the Phiſition that cureth, profite more with ſimple medcines that nature hath created, than with compoundes which Ipochras hath inuented
                        •
                      in ſuch wiſe, that hauing power to cure me with cleare water, he force me not to drinke ſtilled Endiue.
                  Medicine is to be praiſed, when the phiſition is expert, that knoweth the times to be conſidered in a ſicke man, that is to wet: when they haue their beginning, increaſing, and alſo their declinations, ordering the rule and remedie according to the diſeaſe and the eſtate therof trauelling to know the complexion of his pacient, inquiring his eſtate paſt, and iudging aforehand what may happen in time to come, giuing order for the caſe preſent, alwaies hauing regard to the ſtrength and puiſſance of the pacient.
                  Phiſick is commendable, when the phiſition ſéeth a ſicke man in great perill, and ſtricken with a doubtfull ſicknes, doth delite that they ſhal call an other vnto him, (and more if the pacient deſire) vpō ſuch condiciō, that euery one of thē do giue themſelues to ſtudie & to conſult for the recouering of health, & not that they prepare to argue and contend. The phiſition that with theſe conditions doth vſe to cure, we may ſafely call and put our truſt in him, and alſo with our purſes pay him: bycauſe the effect of phiſicke conſiſteth to haue ability to vnderſtand the griefe, and experience to miniſter.
               
               
                  
                  Of nine pernicious euilles that Phiſitions doe commit.
                  
                     I Lament me vnto you Maiſter Doctor of many filthy Phiſitions, idiotes, raſhe, and vnexpert, yt which hauing heard a little of Auicene, or for that they haue bene reſidēt at Gadulupe, or ſeruauntes to the Quéenes Doctor, they tranſporteth mſelues to the vniuerſitie of Merida, or elſe with a reſcript from Rome, they take degrée of Bachelers, Licentiates, and Doctors, of whō the olde prouerbe may iuſtly take place, which ſaith, Phiſitions of Valence, long robes and ſmall ſcience.
                  
                  I complayne me vnto you Maiſter Doctor of many common phiſitions and inexpert, the whiche if they take in hand any ſtraunge or perillous diſeaſes, after they haue purged the ſorowfull patient, let him bloud, oynted, & giuen him Sirope, they know not to apply any other remedie, either practiſe any other experience, but to commaunde him after ſupper to receiue a culeſſe prepared, and in the mornings tiſan clarifyed.
                  I complaine me vnto you maiſter Doctor, of many yong and childiſh phiſitions, and without iudgement, which to an ague that is ſimple, ordinarie, common, not furious, neither daungerous, they make their receiptes as large and déepe frō the Apoticarie, as if it were an inflamed peſtilence, in ſuche wiſe, that it ſhall be leſſe hurt vnto the ſorowfull patient to endure the euill he poſſeſſeth, than to abide the remedy that ſuch prouide.
                  I complaine me vnto you, maiſter Doctor, of many of your companions that preſume of learning, and (of trouth they be no fooles) which doe neuer cure vs with ſimple medicines, either doe miniſter vnto vs that which is plain, gentle and not furious: but to giue vs to vnderſtand, that they knowe that which others knowe not, they make their receipts of things ſo ſtraunge and out of vſe, that at the preſēt they be very difficill to bee founde, and afterwardes more difficult to be receyued.
                  
                     I complayne me vnto you maiſter Doctor, of many of your ſeruantes and doltiſh batchelers, in conſideration yt a
                        •…
                      infirmities hauing their chreticke or determinatiue dayes, going frō day to day making their courſe, that they haue no care to conſider therof, and much leſſe to recken on what daye the diſeaſe began, either the houre wherein the acceſſe did firſte offend, to behold whether the diſeaſe goeth increaſing or diminiſhing: bycauſe to applie or miniſter a medcine in one howre, or in an other, there dependeth no more but the life of the man.
                  I complaine me vnto you maiſter Doctor, that generally all you that be Phiſitions, doe wiſh eche other euill, being different in condition, and contrary in opinions, wherein it appeareth moſt cleare, that ſome follow Ipochras, ſome Auicen, ſome Galen, ſome Raſis, ſome the Counſeller, ſome Ficine, and other ſome none at al, but their owne iudgemēt, & that which is moſt to be lamented, is, that all the miſchief lieth not but vpon the ſorrowfull patient, bycauſe at the time you ſhould cure him, you giue your ſelues to diſputing.
                  I complayne me vnto you maiſter Doctor, of many phiſitions that be childiſh in age, new in office, rude in iudgemēt, and not well ſtayed in their wittes, which in any experience that they haue ſéene, read, or heard, be it neuer ſo difficult to be done, or perillous to take, preſently they commaunde it to be perfourmed, although it be not requiſit but hurtful to the diſeaſe, wherof ryſeth many tymes that one fooliſh experience doth coſt the ſick mans life.
                  I complayne me vnto you, and alſo of you mayſter Doctor, that generally all you Phiſitions doe make your receites for ſuch things as you commaunde vs to take, in darke latin, in blind cypherings, and in termes vnuſed, with great and large receyptes, which I know not wherefore nor to to what ende you vſe it for if it be euill that you commaund, you ought not to doe it, and if it be good, let vs vnderſtande it: for that wée, and not you, muſt take them, and alſo paye the Apoticarie for them.
               
               
                  
                  The Authors iudgement of Phiſick.
                  BEhold here maſter Doctor delicately touched, not onely the commodities that good Phiſitions do performe, but alſo the great hurts that the euill Phiſitions do commit. And to ſaye the troth for my part I do beléeue it, that notwithſtanding my complayntes be many, your faults be much more: ſince to the coſt of our liues you winne greate fame, and obtayne greate wealth.The rule and Lordſhip of the Phiſition With the rule and Lordſhip of the Phiſition no mā may compare, for at the inſtant they enter our dore, we do not only put thē in truſt with our perſons, but alſo we part with them our ſubſtance, in ſuch wiſe that if the barber draw foorth three ounces from the vaine of the head, they draw foorth ten from the vayne of the cheſt. After the charitable exerciſe of almes giuing, ther is nothing better imployed thā that which is giuen to the Phiſition that hapneth to performe hys cure, & on the other part, there is nothing in this world ſo euill ſpent, as that whiche the Phiſition getteth that erreth in his cure, which doth deſerue not only to be vnpayde, but alſo for ye ſame to be well chaſtiſed. It was a law much vſed, and alſo a long time obſerued amongſt the Gothes,
                     A law amōgſt the Gothes. that the ſick man and the Phiſition betwixt them made bargayne, the one to cure, and the other to pay, and if by chaunce he did not cure according to his promiſe and band: in ſuch a caſe the law commanded that the Phiſition ſhoulde loſe the trauell of his cure, and alſo pay the Apoticary. I aſſure you Maſter Doctor that if this lawe of the Gothes were obſerued in theſe oure dayes, that you and your companions would giue your ſelues more to ſtudy, and would be better aduiſed in the things you ſhuld take in hand, but for that you be very well payd whether the pacient be cured or not cured, and if ye happen to performe the cure, you attribute the glory vnto your ſelues, but if not, you lay all the fault in the poore pacient. This appeareth moſt cleare, for cō
                     monly you charge the pacient that either he is a glutton, drinketh much water, eateth much frute, ſléepes at noone, doth not receyue that he is commaunded, takes too much ayre, or doth

not endure to ſweate: in ſuch wiſe that the ſorowfull pacient which they cannot cure, they do not forget to defame. It ſéemeth not a little gracious vnto me, that which your Ipochras affirmeth, whiche is, that the Phiſition is not to be eſtéemed, that of himſelfe is not well fortunate: whereof we may inferre that all our lift and health doth depende not in your medcines that you miniſter vnto vs, but in the fortune good or bad, that the Phiſition holdeth. He ſéemeth to haue ſmall confidence in Phiſicke, that durſt publiſh ſuch a ſentence: for if we ſtay our ſelues by this rule of Ipochras,
                     A ſentence of Ipochras. we muſt flie the wiſe Phiſition that is ill fortunate, and ſéeke to be cured with him that is vnwiſe and fortunate. In the yere of xviij. I being ſick in Oſoruillo, whiche is neare vnto your houſe of Melgar, comming to viſite me, you ſayd that I had to conſider, for that you had killed Sir Ladron mine Vncle, Sir Beltram my Father, Sir Iames my coſyn, and the Lady Ynes my Siſter, and that if I had a mind to enter into that brotherhood, you would rather vndertake to kill me, than to cure me: although Maſter Doctor you ſpake it in ieſt, yet in déede it was moſt true: for whiche cauſe ſince I heard you ſpeake it, and read that rule of Ipochras, I determined in my heart neuer more to offer my pulſe, neither incommend my health vnto your counſell, bycauſe in my linage of Gueuara your medcine is vnfortunate. Of many famous phiſitiōs I haue ſéene performed diuers famous cures, and of many fooliſh Phiſitions, I haue ſéene brought to paſſe many and great doltiſh follies. I ſpeak it for this cauſe maſter Doctor, for in the hands of the Miller we loſe but our meale, in the Ferrar but our Mule, in the Lawyer but our goodes, in the Tayler but our garment, but in the hands of the Phiſitiō we loſe our liues. Oh how great neceſſitie ought he to haue, & how conuenient it is for him firſt to cōſider, that at his mouth hath to receyue a purgation, or to conſente that in his armes they let him bloud, for many times it doth hapen that the ſick would giue all that he hath to be deliuered of his purgation, or to recouer his bloud into his arme.
                  In this whole world there be no men of more healthe than

ſuch as be of good gouernment, and reck not to follow phiſick:The Emperour Adrians opinion of Phiſitions. for our nature craueth to be well ruled, and very little to vnderſtand with Phiſicke. The Emperour Aurelius died of the age of thréeſcore and ſixe yeares, in al which time he was neuer purged or let bloud, neyther did vſe Phiſicke, but euery yeare he entred the Bath, euery moneth he did vomit, euery wéeke he did forbeare to eate one day, & euery day dyd walke one hour. The Emperour Adrian, for that in his youth he was gréedy in féeding, and diſordered in drinking, he came to bée in his age much gréeued and ſickly of the goute, with greate paine in the head, whereby he went euer laden with Phiſitions; and of great experience of many medcines. If any man be deſirous to know the profit he found by phiſick, and the remedies be receyued of Phiſitions, he may eaſely vnderſtand in that (at the houre of his death) he commaunded theſe words to be ingrauen vppon his tombe, per 
                           •…
                         turba medicorum, as if hée ſhould ſpeake more cleare, mine enemies hauing no power to kill me, am come to die by the hands of Phiſitions. They report a certain thing of the Emperour Galienus, of a troth worthy to be noted, and gracious in hearing, whiche is, that the Prince being ſicke and very euill of a Sciatica, a certayne famous Phiſition had the cure of him, which had vſed a thouſād experimēts without any eaſe or profit: on a certayn day ye Emperour called and ſaid vnto him, take Fabatus two thouſande ſexter
                        〈◊〉
                      and alſo vnderſtande, that if I giue them,A notable reward in the place of puniſhment. it is not bycauſe it 
                        〈…〉
                      haſt cured me, but for that thou ſhalte neuer more hereafter cure me. To how many Phiſitions might we ſay 
                        〈…〉
                      thoſe dayes as the Emperour Gabenus ſayd vnto hys Phiſition 
                        〈◊〉
                      which although there be not named Fabates, with greate reaſon we mighte tear me them Bobates: for they neyther knowethe him
                        〈…〉
                      that offendeth the diſeaſe, eyther 
                        〈…〉
                      apply a neceſſary or conuenient medcine. As God ſai
                        •…
                      and maſter Doctor, for my part I do firmely beléeue, that it ſhuld be ſounder counſel for vs, for no cauſe to pay the ignorant Phiſitions (to the ende they ſhall not cure vs) than for that they ſhoulde miniſter vnto vs: for we 
                        •…
                     earely ſée with

our owne eyes,Valiant phiſitions. that they kill more with their receipts frō the Apoticaries, than their predeceſſors haue ſlayn fighting in the warres.The authors opinion of Phiſicke. But this ſhall be the concluſion of my letter, that I do accept, approue, praiſe, and bleſſe medcine: and on the other ſide I do curſe, reproue and condemne the Phiſition that knoweth not to vſe the ſame. For, according to that whiche youre Plinie ſayeth (ſpeaking of medcine) non rem antiqui damnabant ſed artem. As if Plinie ſhould ſpeake more cleare, the auncient wiſe men and ſuche as baniſhed Phiſitions out of their common wealthes, did not condempne medcine, but the art of curing, that men had inuented in the ſame: for nature hauing layde vp the remedy of diſeaſes in ſimple medcines, they haue framed and ſhut it vp in things compound, in ſuche wiſe, that manye times it is leſſe painefull, to ſuffer the diſeaſe, than to abyde the remedie. No more but that our Lorde be youre protector, and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
               
                  From Madrid, 
                     the xxvij. of December. 1525.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Moſen Puche of Valentia, wherein is touched at large, how the husband with the wife, and the wife with the husband, ought to liue. A letter for the new married.
               
               
                  YOng and new married Gētleman Moſen Puche, to be married vnto the Lady Mary Gralla: and the Lady Mary Gralla to be married with Moſen Puche, from hence I wiſhe them good ſucceſſe of their mariage, and from hence I pray vnto God they may delight ech other long and many a day. Moſen Puche to be married with a wife of xv. yeares, and the Lady Mary to be married vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                   huſband of xvij. if I be not deceyued, there remayneth vnto them ſufficient time to enioy their matrimonie, and alſo to bewaile their marriage.
               
                  Anciēt lawes for the maried
                  Solon So
                        •…
                     onio commaunded the Atheni
                        •
                     es that they ſhoulde not marry vntill the age of xix. The 
                     〈…〉
                   commaunded

the Lacedemonians that they ſhould not marrie vntill the age of xxv. The Philoſopher Promotheus commaunded the Egyptians that they ſhuld not marrie vntill the age of xxx. yeres. And if by chaunce any durſt marry before the appoynted age, the fathers were publikely chaſtiſed, and the children not holden for legitimat. If Moſen Puche and the Lady Mary Gralla wer of Egypt (as they be of Valencia) they could not eſcape vnpuniſhed, and alſo their children diſinherited.
               For the great curteſy that I haue receyued of your mother, and for the entire amity and perfect loue I held with your father, in the time I was Inquiſitor at Valencia it gréeueth me to ſée you maried in ſo tender yeres, and laden with ſo greate a charge: for ſo great a burden is matrimonie, as you neyther may haue licence to leaue it, eyther haue you age to ſuffer and ſupport it. If your father did marry you of him ſelfe withoute conſent, he vſed with you no ſmall crueltie: and if you maried without licence, you haue committed no leſſe raſhneſſe. For a yong man of xvij. and a young woman of xv. to dare ſet vp houſe, their déedes declareth great temeritie, and want of good counſell in the conſent thereof: for the poore yonglings, neyther do they know the burden they take in hand, eyther féele the liberty that they loſe. Let vs vnderſtand what conditions the wife ought to haue,The conditions of the hapily maried. and what conditions the huſbande muſt hold in poſſeſſion, to the end they may be happily maried: and if it be founde in Moſen Puche, and in the Lady Mary Gralla, from hencefoorth I confirme and ratify their mariage, and condemne my ſelfe to haue ſpoken without ſkil. The properties due to a maried wife is, that ſhe haue grauity when ſhe walketh abroade, wiſedome to gouerne hir houſe, patience to ſuffer hir huſband, loue to breede and bringing vp hir children, affable with hir neighbours, diligence to lay vp and to ſaue goodes accompliſhed in things appertayning to honour, a friend of honeſt company, and a great enemy of wanton and light toyes.
               The properties appertayning to the married huſbād is,A note for the maried. to be repoſed in his ſpeach, milde of cōuerſation, faithfull wherin

he is truſted, wiſe wherein he giueth counſell, carefull for the prouiſion of his houſe, diligent in the ordering of his goodes, of ſufferance for the importunities of his wife, zealous in bringing vp of his children, aduiſed in things of honor, and a ſure man with all men that he dealeth. But now demaunding anſwer, if in the xvij. yeres of Moſen Puche, and in the xv. yeres of Lady Mary Gralla, we ſhall finde all that we haue ſayde, or that euer they thought thereof. In men of ſo tender yeres, and married ſo yong, it is to be ſuſpected, that ſuch and ſo delicate things, neyther do they knowe to vnderſtande when they bée told them, neyther yet being wanting to aſke for them: but I aunſwer and alſo propheſy vnto the xvij. yeres of Moſen Puche, & to the xv. yeres of the Lady Mary Gralla, that if they will not learne all theſe properties, and after their learning obſerue them, that in a little further proceſſe of time, they with their burden ſhall fall to the ground, or elſe eyther of thē ſéeke newe loue. I hold it not for ſo waighty to be admitted a nouice frier, as a yong man to be married, for the one may refuſe and come foorth, and the other may not repent. The incommodities that do follow the marriage of xvij. with xv. Moſen Puche and the Lady Mary Gralla can more effectually declare, than I can write. For if I ſay ought, it is by geſſe, but they maye affirme it as féeling witneſſes. For men to marry themſelues very yong, there followeth great hurtes: whiche is to vnderſtande, their wiues are broken and ſpoyled in their child bed, weaken their ſtrength, laden with children, ſpend their patrimonie, ſoone moued to ielouſy, not comprehending what appertayneth to honor, they vnderſtande not to prouide for the houſholde: the firſt loues finiſhe, and new cares approche, in ſuch wiſe, for marrying them ſelues ſo yong, they come afterwards to liue diſcontented, or elſe to be ſeparated in theyr old age.A graue ſentence of Plato. The diuine Plato gaue counſel to his commō wealth, that they ſhould marrie their children in ſuche an age, wherein they ſhoulde vnderſtande what they did chooſe, and very well perceyue what they tooke in hande. Graue and very graue is this ſentence of Plato, for to take a wife, or to chooſe a

huſband is no hard thing, but to vnderſtande to ſuſtayne an houſhold is very difficult. I haue not bene married, neyther haue had any motion to be married, but for as much as I haue ſéene amongſt my kinred, and haue read in bookes, by that I haue ſuſpected of my neighbours, and by which I haue hearde of my friends, I find by my rekoning, that thoſe that chaunce to be well married, haue here their Paradiſe, and ſuch as haue had worſe chaunce, of their houſe they haue made an hell. What man to thys day, that hath matched with a woman of ſuch perfection, that wiſhed not in hir ſome things to be amended? What woman hath choſen a huſbande ſo accompliſhed, that found not in him ſome thing to be miſliked?
               In the firſt vew of wowers & of their contraction few mariages be diſpleaſant, but in proces of time few things be liked, and that which is moſt certaine being in want, and money ſpent, incontinent without delay, diſpleaſures knocks at gate. Oh ſorowful married man, if thou marry with a gentlewoman, thou muſt beare with hir pomp and follie: If thou encounter with a woman that is mild and wiſe, thou muſt accept hir pouertie: if thou match with one that is riche,The trauels of the maried man. it may happen thée to be aſhamed of hir kinred? if thou chooſe thée a wife that is fayre, thou haſt miſchaunce ſufficient to watche hir: if it be thy chaunce to obtayne a wife that is foule, after fewe dayes thou wilt ſhunne thy houſe, and alſo ſeeke newe lodging: if thou boaſt thy ſelfe that thy wife is wiſe, and of goodly perſonage, alſo thou complayneſt that ſhe is coſtly and no houſe kéeper: if thou ſay of thy ſelfe that thy wife is a good huſwife, forthwith it is reported that no ſeruant may endure hir fierce crueltie: if thou doeſt glory that thy wife is honeſt and chaſt, many times thou doeſt abhorre hir for that ſhe is too much ielouſe: what wilte thou that I ſay more? Oh thou poore maried man, that which I ſpeake, beſides that is ſpokē, is: If thou ſhut thy wife within doores ſhe neuer ceaſſeth to complayne: if thou giue hir leaue to walke at libertie, ſhe gyueth occaſion for thy neighbours to talke, and thy ſelfe to ſuſpect,

and if thou do much chide, ſhe goeth always with a crooked countenance: & if thou ſay nothing, none may endure hir: if thy diſpence be in hir diſpoſition, the ſtocke goeth to wrack: if the laying out be in thine owne hands beware thy purſe or ſecret ſale of thy goodes: if thou kéepe thée much at home, ſhe thinks thée ſuſpicious: and if thou come late home, ſhe will ſay that thou doſt wander: and if thou giue hir good garmentes ſhe muſt go foorthe to be ſéene, if ſhe be not well apparelled thou art bidden to an euill ſupper: if thou ſhewe thy ſelfe louing ſhe eſtéemeth thée little, if thou be negligent therein, ſhe ſuſpecteth thée to be in loue els where: if thou denie what ſhe craueth, ſhe neuer ceaſeth to be importunate: & finally if thou vnto hir diſcouer any ſecret, ſhe cannot but publiſh it: behold here the reaſon, and alſo the occaſion wherefore, if in the common wealth there be ten well maried, there be a hundred that do liue abhorred and in repentaunce, which preſently would depart from their wiues, houſe and chamber, if they could finiſh with the Church, as they can performe with their conſcience. If matrimony amongſt Chriſtians were as it is amongſt the Gentiles to be diuorced at euery mans liking, I ſweare there would be more haſt to the lent of diuorcement, than to all the reſt of the yeare to be maried.
               
                  That no man do marry but with his equall.
                  
                     THe rules and counſels that I will giue here vnto thoſe that are to be married, and alſo vnto ſuch as be already maried: if they be not profitable to liue contented, at the leaſt they ſhall ſerue them to auoyde many diſpleaſures. The firſt holeſome counſell is to vnderſtande,Equalitie betwixt the maried very neceſſary. that the woman chooſe ſuch a man, and the man ſuch a woman, that there bée equalitie both in bloud and in eſtate: whiche is to witte: the Knight with the Knight, the merchaunt with the merchaunt, the Squier with the Squier, and the ploughman with the ploughman: For if herein there be diſconformitie, the more

baſe ſhal liue moſt diſcontented, and the other of more worthy degree very much repentant. The marchaunt that marieth his daughter vnto a Knight, and the riche ploughman that taketh a man of worſhip vnto his ſonne in law: I do ſay and affirme, that they bring into their houſe a proclaymer of their infamie, a certaine moth for their garments, a tormenter of their fame, and alſo a ſhortner of their liues. In an euill houre hath he maried his ſonne or daughter, that hath brought into his houſe ſuch a ſonne in lawe, or daughter in lawe, that is aſhamed to name him father,Houſholde enimies. whoſe daughter or ſonne he or ſhe hath maried: in ſuch mariadges it can not truely be ſaid that they haue brought to houſe a ſon, but a Deuill: a daughter but a Snake: not: to ſerue but to offend: not: children but baſiliſks: not to honour him, but defame him. Finally I ſay, that he that marieth not his daughter with his equall, ſhall finde it leſſe euill to burie than to marie hir: for if ſhe die, they ſhall bewayle hir but one day, but to be euill maried, is to bewayle hir many yeares. The rich marchant, the poore ſquier, the wiſe plough man, and the good townflike craftes man, néedes no daughter in lawe that can frill and paint hir ſelfe, but ſuch as he ſkilfull very well to ſpinne: for that day that ſuch men ſhall preſume to haue in vre the carpet and pillow,A caueat for Parents. that day they ſpoyle their houſe, and their goods ſinketh to the bottome.
                  I retourne agayne to ſay and affirme, that ſuch men beware, that bringes into their houſes a ſonne in Lawe that preſumeth of woorſhip, and knoweth not but to walke vp & downe the ſtreates: that accompteth to be a trim Courtier, and that is ſkilfull at cardes: and dice: or boaſteth himſelfe for running of horſes: for in ſuch caſes the poore father in lawe muſt faſt, to the ende the fooliſh ſonne in lawe may haue to ſpend in follies. But the concluſion of this counſell ſhall be, that al men marry their children with their equall and according to their eſtate, otherwiſe I doe certyfie before the yeare be out, it ſhall raigne vpon their heades that ſéeke a fooliſhe or an inconuenient mariage.
                  
                     Alſo it is a counſell very expedient that euery man chooſe a wife according to his complexion and condition: for if the father marry ye ſonne, or if the ſonne do marry of neceſſitie & not at his liking, the ſorrowfull yong man may not ſay (of a troth) that they haue maried him, but for euermore haue marrd him. To the ende that marriages be perpetual, louing and pleaſant, betwixt the man and the woman there muſt be a knitting of hartes,A knitting of harts before ſtriking of handes. before ſtryking of hands: it is very conuenient that the Father gyue counſell vnto the ſonne that he marry to his contentation, but in no wiſe to vſe violence to force him againſt his lyking: for all violent marriages engender hatred betwixt the married: contention betwixt the fathers, ſcandall amongſt the neyghboures, lawe betwixt the parents, and quarrelles betwixt the kinred: neyther is it my opinion that anye ſhould marry ſodainly and ſecretly, as a vayne light yong man: for euery mariage done onely in reſpect of loue without further aduiſement, moſt tymes doe ende in ſorrowes.
                  It is a thing very common that a yong man of ſmall age and leſſe experience, but of to much libertie, knowing not what he doeth loue, and muche leſſe what he taketh in hand, groweth enamoured of a young gyrle and marrieth with hir, which (at the very inſtant) when he hathe finiſhed to taſt hir, he beginneth preſently to abhorre hir. The thing that is moſt to be procured betwixt the married is, that they loue entierly and feruently:Loue cometh rūning, and retorneth flying for otherwiſe they ſhall all day goe ſorrowing with crooked countenances, and the neighbours ſhall haue no want whereof to ſpeake. Alſo I will aduiſe them to haue their loues fixed, true and ſure, ſettling in the hart by little and little: for otherwiſe, by the ſelfe ſame way that loue came running, they ſhall ſée hir returne flying. I haue ſéene many in this world loue in greate haſte, whiche I haue knowen afterwardes abhorre at great leaſure. One of the moſte painfulleſt things contained in mans life is, that if there be a hū
                     dred permanent and conſtant in loue, there is alſo a hundred thouſand that neuer ceaſe to abhorre. It is alſo to be aduertiſed,

that the counſell which I giue vnto the father to make no mariage without conſent of his ſonne, the ſame I giue vnto the ſonne, that he marie not againſt the will of his Father: for otherwiſe, it may come to paſſe, to receiue more offence by the malediction of his father, than his mariage portion may yéelde him profit. Yong men when they marry in their youth haue no further conſideration but of their pleaſure, and onely content them ſelues to haue their wiues beautifull: but the father and mother, for that it toucheth both honor and goods, they ſéeke him a wyfe that ſhall be wiſe, ritch, gentle, honeſt and chaſt: and the laſt thing they behold, is, hir beautie. The marriages that be made, hidden and in ſecret, I ſay it groweth of greate lightnes, and procéedeth of no ſmall crueltie: for it giueth to al the neighbours whereof to talke, and to their old parents wherfore to wéepe. It hapneth many times that the mother ouerwatcheth hir ſelfe to ſpinne, and the Father to grow old in gathering a ſufficiēt portion. And at the time they ſhall entreat or talke of an honeſt marriage, the fooliſh yong man remayneth ſecretly married, whereof after followeth, that the mother remayneth wéeping, the father aſhamed, the kindred offended, and the friende ſcandalized: and yet thereof procéedeth a greater griefe, which is, that the ſonne hath chanced to matche with ſuche a wife, that the father holdeth his goods not onely euill employed, but is much aſhamed to admit hir into his houſe. Alſo another offence riſeth in the like marriage, which is, many times the fathers doe determine, with the ſonnes portion to remedie and amend the daughters marriage: and as the yong mans moſt principall intent is to enioye the mayde withoute care of goodes: the ſiſter remayneth caſt awaye, the ſonne deceyued, and the father derided. Plutarche in hys politikes ſayeth, that the ſonne whyche married withoute conſente of hys Parentes, amongſt the Greekes, was publikely whipt: amongſt the Lacedemonians they did not whippe, but diſinherite. Laertius ſayeth, that vnto ſuche (ſo married) it was a cuſtome amongſt the Thebanes, not that they ſhould only be diſinherited

of all goodes,In old tyme the fathers bleſſing preferred before hope of inheritance. but alſo openly be curſed of their parents. Let no man eſtéeme it light to be curſed or bleſſed of their elders: for in the old time amongſt the Hebrewes, the children (withoute al compariſon) held more account of their fathers bleſſing, thā of their Grandfathers inheritance.
               
               
                  That the woman be very ſhamefaſt, and no babler or full of talke.
                  ALſo it is a counſell very neceſſary, that the man whyche ſhall marrie and ſet vp houſe,Want of ſhamefaſtnes in womē moſt hurtfull. do chooſe a wife ſhamefaſt, for if forceably there ſhould be in a woman but one vertue, the ſame ought to be only ſhamefaſtneſſe. I confeſſe that it is more perillous for the conſcience, but (I ſay) leſſe hurtfull to honeſty, that a woman be ſecretely vnhoneſt, than openly vnſhamefaſt. Very many infirmities be couered in a woman only by ſhamefaſtneſſe, and many more ſuſpected in hir, that is of ouerbold and of ſhameleſſe countenance. Let euery man ſay what he will, but for my part I doe firmely beléeue, that in a woman of a baſhfull countenance there be fewe things to bée reprehended, and in hir that is otherwiſe, there wanteth all things wherefore to be prayſed.The ſafetie of womens reputation. The ſafety that nature hathe giuen vnto a woman to kéepe hir reputation, chaſtitie, honoure, and goodes, is only ſhamefaſtneſſe: and that day, that thereof ſhe hathe not great regard, let hir yéeld hir ſelfe euermore for a caſtaway. When any man ſhall enquire marriage of any woman, the firſt thing he hath to demaund is not, if ſhe be rich, but if ſhe be ſhamefaſt: for goodes is euery daye gotten, but ſhamefaſtneſſe in a woman once loſt, is neuer recouered. The beſt portion, the greateſt inheritance, and the moſt precious iewell that a woman can bring with hir, is ſhamefaſtneſſe.
                  For if the Father ſhall ſée that his daughter hath loſt the fame, it ſhallbe leſſe euill for him to bury hir, than to marry hir. The maner is, that many women preſume to be talkers, and to ſéeme gratious in taunting, whiche office I woulde not

ſée them learne, and much leſſe put in vre for ſpeaking the troth, and alſo with libertie, that which in men we call gratious, in women we terme it witleſſe babling.
                  Newes, tales, vaine fables, and diſhoneſt talkes, an honeſt woman ought not onely ſhame to ſpeake them, but alſo loth to heare them. The graue women & of authoritie ought not to care to be ſkilfull of talke and newes, but to be honeſt and ſilent: for if ſhe much preſume of talke and taunting, the very ſame that did laugh at hir deuice, will afterwards murmur at hir manners. The honour of women is ſo delicate, that many things whiche men may both doe and ſpeake, is not lawful vnto women that they once dare to whiſper them. The gētlewoman or women that will be holden graue, ought not onely to kéepe ſilence in things vnlawfull and vnhoneſt, but alſo in lawfull things, if they bée not very neceſſary: for women ſeldome erre by ſilence, and by much ſpeach they ſeldome ceaſe to giue cauſe of reproche. Oh ſorrowfull huſband, whoſe lot hath chaunced to light on a wife that is a great babler, & yet would ſéeme a curious ſpeaker. For truly, if any ſuch once take in hand to recite a matter or to frame any complaint or quarell, ſhe neither admitteth reaſon, or patiently ſuffereth any woord to be ſaid vnto hir. The euill life that women paſſe with their huſbands, is not ſo much for that which they commit with their perſons, as it is for that which they ſpeake with their tongues: if the woman would kéepe ſilence, when the huſband beginneth to chide, he ſhould neuer haue bad dinner, neither ſhe worſe ſupper: which ſurely is not ſo,The cauſe of domeſticall Combatts. for at the inſtant that the huſbande beginneth to vtter his griefe, ſhe beginneth to ſcolde and yell: whereof doth follow, that they come to handy grypes, and alſo call for neyghbours.
               
               
                  That the wife be a home keeper, and auoyding all occaſions.
                  JT is alſo a commendable counſel that the wife preſume to be honeſt, and an houſekéeper: for when women in their

houſes will be abſolute, they come afterwards to wander the ſtreates diſſolute. The honeſt woman ought to be very well aduiſed in that which ſhe ſpeaketh, and very ſuſpicious and doutfull in all thinges ſhe doth: bycauſe ſuche maner of women as haue no regard to their wordes, do afterwards offend in déedes. For how ſimple and ignorant is that man, but he eaſely knoweth the honour of women to be much more tender and delicate than of men: and that this is true it appereth moſt cleare, for that a man may not be diſhonored but with reaſon, but for a woman to ſhame hir ſelfe, occaſion is ſufficient. She that is good and preſumeth in goodnes to continue, may hold it for moſt certaine, that ſhe ſhalbe ſo much better as ſhe ſhall haue of hir ſelfe leſſe confidence: I ſay leſſe confidence, to the ende that ſhe neither aduenture to giue eare to wanton or light words, or preſume to admit fayned offers. Let hir be as ſhe may be, and deſerue what ſhe may deſerue, and preſume what ſhe thinketh good: that if ſhe delighteth to heare, and ſuffer to be ſerued, early or late ſhe ſhall fall. And if they ſhall aunſwere that they do it for paſtime and to laugh and be mery: to this I reply, that of ſuch ieſtes, they vſe to remaine all to be ieſted. I aduiſe, and readuiſe any Gentle woman, or other Dame of Citie or towne: that ſhe do not venter with coſin or Vncle, either with any other of hir kinſmen to encommend hir ſelfe or go alone: for if to be alone with a ſtraunger there is to be feared of that may chaunce: with hir Coſin or kinſman let hir doubt what may be ſpoken. Let no honeſt womā haue confidence in ſaying, the kindred betwixt them is ſo neare, that it is impoſſible that any may miſtruſt them: for if the malice of mā wil venter to iudge the thoughts, it is no credible that he will pardon that which he ſéeth with his eyes. The Gentlewoman or others that ſhal heare or reade this my writing, I would they ſhuld note this ſentēce, which is:Suſpition no ſmall enimy to womens liues. 
                     That to a man for that he is a man, it is ſufficient that hee bee good, although it doth not appeare: but the woman, for that ſhe is a woman, it is not ſufficient that ſhe be good, but that alſo it be manifeſt.
                  
                  
                     It is to be noted and noted againe, that as the prouiſion of houſhold dependeth onely on the huſband, euen ſo the honour of all dependeth onely of the woman: In ſuche ſorte,The honoure of the huſbād dependeth on the wife. that there is no honour within thy houſe, longer than thy wife is honorable. We do not here intitle honorable ſuch as be onely faire of fare, of gentle bloud, of comely perſonage, and a keper of goods: but onely hir that is honeſt of life, and temperat and aduiſed in hir ſpéech. Plutarch reporteth that the wife of Thucides the Greeke, being demaunded how ſhe could endure the ſtench of hir huſbandes breath, aunſwered:A notorious example of a Greeke. As no other but my huſband hath come neare mée, I thought all other mens breath had bene of the very ſame ſauor. Oh example worthy to be knowne, and much more to be followed, which is taught vs by that moſt Noble Greeke: that the honeſt woman is ſo muche to be aduiſed, that ſhe conſent not the haunt of any vnhoneſt company ſo neare as to ſmell his mouth, either ſo much as to touch his garments.
               
               
                  That the maried woman be not proud or cruell.
                  
                     ALſo is right worthy counſell, that the wife be not cruel and ambitious, but milde and ſuffring: for they be two things that giue no ſmall hindrance vnto a woman, which is to wit: hir much talke, and little ſufferance:A furio
                           •…
                         woman is compared to the hill Ethna. and thereof procéedeth, that if ſhe be ſilent, all men do eſteeme hir: if ſhe ſuffer hir huſband, ſhe ſhal be very well maried Oh how vnfortunat is that man, yt is maried vnto a froward and a cruell woman: the hill Aethna doth not whirle out fire ſo furiouſly, as ſhe throweth poyſon out of hir month. Without compariſon muche more is ye fury of a woman to be feared, than the ire of a man: for the angred man doth but diſcouer his minde, but the fierce woman to ſcold, yell and exclaime can finde no end.
                  The amuſed manne, and the woman that preſumeth of

honeſtie, ought not to contend with any other woman that is furious: for at the inſtant that ſhe loſeth hir ſhamefaſtnes, and kindleth hir choler, ſhe onely ſayth not what ſhe hath ſéene or hard, but alſo what ſhe hath dreamed. It is vnto me not a litle gracious, that when a woman is kindled with a furious rage, neither heareth ſhe hir ſelfe, nor vnderſtandeth others, neyther doth admit excuſe, nor ſuffer worde, neyther taketh counſell, or cometh neare to reaſon: And the worſt of all is, that many times ſhe leaueth to quarell with whom ſhe was firſt offended, and ſpitteth hir malice againſt him that came to make peace. When any furious woman brauleth with any man or womā, and ſome other cōmes betwixt to make peace: ſhe will not onely afterwards geue him ſmall thanks, but alſo will rayſe againſt him many quarrels: Saying that if he had bene the man ſhe thought of, he would haue chidde on hir behalfe, and alſo reuenged hir cauſe. The woman that naturally is fierce and crabbed, ſhe neuer thinketh to be angry with out a cauſe, neither ſkoldeth without reaſon, and therfore it is muche better to leane hir than to reſiſt hir. I retourne to rectifie my ſaying: whiche is, that the houſe is vnfortunate where the wife is a brawler and quarellous: for ſuch a one is alwaies ready to chide, and neuer to confeſſe hir fault. The cruell brawling woman is very perillous, for ſhe cauſeth hir huſbande to bee fierce, ſhe giueth offence vnto hir kinred, ſhe is hated of hir coſins,An euill kind a meaſuring. and the neighbours flie from hir: whereof followeth ſometimes, that hir huſbande méeteth hir body with his féete, and combeth hir haire with his fingers. Vnto a furious brawling woman on the one ſide it is a paſtim to heare hir chide: and on the other part it is terrible to vnderſtand what ſhe will not let to ſpeake: for if a proceſſion of people ſhall take in hand to aunſwere hir, ſhe ſhall wearie thē al with a letanie of iniuries. Vnto hir huſbande ſhée ſaieth, that he is negligent, his ſeruants ſlothfull, the mayds ſluttiſh, hir Sonnes glutonous, hir daughters windowgazers, that friendes be in grate,Malice finds many faultes. that the enimies bée traitoures, the neighboures malicious, hir Goſſippes enuious: and

aboue all the reſt, ſhe ſayth that no man dealeth truly with another, either obſerueth loyaltie with his wife. I do lye, if I did not ſée two honorably maried, ſeparate themſelues for no other occaſion, but for that the ſéely maried man was ſometimes ſadde at Table, and other times did ſigh at bed. The woman ſayd that hir huſband had ſome treaſon againſt hir at the Table: and for the beauty of ſome other that he loued hée did ſigh in bed: and the certaintie of the matter well knowen, the troth was, that the man was bound in a perillous ſuertiſhip, and could not be mery, but in the ende for any thing that I could intreate, preach, or chide, I could neuer bring them agreed, vntill he had ſworne and giuen me his fayth,Commodities following a pacient wife. not to bée ſadde at the Table, neither to ſigh at bed. The woman that is patient and ſuffering, ſhall be bleſſed of hir huſband, well ſerued of ſeruants, much honored of neighbours, and in great reuerence with hir kinred. And where it is otherwiſe, let hir hold it for certain, that they will all flie from hir houſe & bliſſe them ſelues from hir tong. When a woman is fierce, proude, and cruell, ſmal delight hath hir huſband that ſhe is deſcended of gentle bloud, of comely perſonage, ritch of goodes, and allied into his houſe: but he curſeth the day he was maried, and blaſphemeth the man that firſt moued the matter.
               
               
                  That Husbands be not rigorous, chiefly when they be new maried.
                  
                     IT is alſo an aceeptable counſell, that the huſbād be not fierce, nor diſorder with his wife: for betwixt them there ſhal neuer be concord, if the woman doe not learne to kéepe ſilence, and the huſband to haue patience. I dare ſaye (and in a manner ſweare) it ſhall rather bée the dwelling of fooles, than the houſe of friends,The dwelling rather of foles than friends. where ye huſbands wanteth wiſedome and the wife patience: for in proceſſe of time they ſhall eyther ſeparate, or elſe euery day be in battell. Women naturally be tender in complexion & weake

in condition: to this end a man is a man, that he know to tolerate their faultes, and couer their weakeneſſe, in ſuche wiſe, that once they muſte ſupport them byting, and an hundred times licking.
                  If there be compaſſion of the man that is matched with a fierce wife, much more of the woman that is encountred with a furious huſband: For there be men ſo fierce and of ſo ſmall patience, that the poore women their wiues, neyther is theyr wiſedome ſufficient to ſerue them, neyther their patience to ſuffer them, ſometime for their children, ſometime for theyr ſeruants, and ſometime for want of money: betwixt man and wife offences may not be excuſed: and in ſuche a caſe I durſt auouch,A time for the huſbande to ſeeke hys wittes. that then when the wife is angrie, he hath néede to ſéeke his wittes, which is to witte, to take all things in ieſt, or not to anſwer a word. If vnto all things that the wife will be gréeued and frame complaints, the wiſe man ſhoulde aunſwer and ſatiſfye, let him holde it for certaine, that he néedeth the ſtrength of Sampſon, and the wiſedome of Salomon. Marke well married man what I ſay vnto thee, which is, that either thy wife is wiſe, or elſe thy wife is a foole. If thou be matched with a foole, it auayleth little to reprehend hir, and if thou bée married vnto a wiſe woman, one ſharp word is ſufficient: bycauſe my friend thou haſt to vnderſtand, that if a woman bée not corrected by that which is ſayde, ſhe will neuer amend by that which is threatned. When a woman ſhall be inflamed with yre, the man ought to ſuffer hir, and after the flame is ſomewhat quenched, to reprehend hir: for if ſhe once begin to looſe hir ſhame in the preſence of hir huſband, they will euery houre cleaue the houſe with yelles.
                  He that preſumeth to be a wiſe man, and to be a good huſband, he ought rather to vſe his wife with milde reaſons and ſagacitie, than with rigor and force: for the woman is of ſuche diſpoſition, that in the ende of thirtie yeares marriage, there ſhal euery day be found thwartings in hir condition, and alterations in hir conuerſation. Alſo it is to be noted, that if at all times the huſband ought to ſhunne quarrelling with his wife,

much more he ought to auoyde the ſame when they ſhall bée newly married: for if at the beginning ſhe ſhall haue cauſe to abhorre and hate, late or neuer will ſhe returne to loue. At the beginning of their marriage, the wiſe huſband ought to fawne, flatter, and to enamour his wife: for if then they recouer loue ech to other, although afterwards they come to ſome houſhold words and grudgings it procéedeth of ſome new vnkindneſſe, and not of old rooted hatred.Forget not to make choyce to harboure ſuch gueſts. Mortall enimies be loue and hatred, and the firſte of them that taketh lodging in the heart, there he remayneth inhabitant all the days of life, in ſuch wiſe, that the firſt loues may depart from the perſon, but neuer forgotten at the hart. If from the beginning of the mariage the woman do take the bit to abhorre hir huſbande, I commend them both vnto a miſerable life, and alſo vnto an vnfortunate old age. For if he ſhall haue power to make hir to feare him, he ſhall neuer haue ſtrength to force hir to loue him.Cauſes rather of pitie than of enuy. Many huſbandes do boaſt themſelues to be ſerued and feared in their houſes, of whome I haue more pitie than enuie: bycauſe the woman that abhorreth, doth feare and ſerue hir huſband, but ſhe that liketh doth loue him and cheriſh him. Muche ought the woman to trauell to be in grace with hir huſband, and very much ought the huſband to feare to bée in diſgrace with his wife: for if ſhe doe once determine to fixe hir eyes vpon ſame other, he ſhall enioy hir in deſpite of hir huſband: for ſo long a iorney, and for ſo painefull a life, as matrimonie is, the huſbād ought not to be ſatiſfied that he hath robd his wife of hir virginitie, but in that he hath poſſeſſion and vſe of hir will: for it is not ſufficient that they be maried,To be noted. but that they be well maried, and liue very well contented. The man that is not beloued of his wife, holdeth his goodes in daunger, his houſe in ſuſpition, his honour in ballance, and alſo his life in perill: bycauſe it is eaſie to belieue, that ſhe deſireth not long life vnto hir huſband, with whome ſhe paſſeth a time ſo tedious.
               
               
                  
                  The Husbands be not ouer ielouſe.
                  ALſo it is a counſell to be imbraced, that married men doe auoyde to be with their neighbours malicious, and of their wiues ielouſe: bycauſe onely two kindes of people be ielous, which is to vnderſtand, ſuch as be of euill condition, and ſuche as in their youth haue ſpent their time in wantonnes. Such kind of men do imagine, that their wiues giue the like entertainment vnto others, as they receyued of their neighbours wiues: the whiche is no ſmall vanitie to thinke, and no leſſe fooliſhneſſe to ſpeake: for if there be ſome that be diſſolute, ther be alſo other ſome wiſe, honeſt, and aduiſed. To ſay that all women be good, is of too much affection: and to ſay that all bée euill, is to great want of reaſon. It is ſufficient to ſay, that amongſt men there is many things to be reprehended, and amongſt women there wanteth not wherefore to be prayſed: I hold it not for euill, that vnto hir whiche is vaine and light, they vſe hir not only with reaſon, but alſo taking away occaſion:Good counſel. but withall it is to be vnderſtoode with this condition, that they vſe hir not with ſuch ſtraytneſſe, either giue hir ſo euill a life: whereby vnder colour to kéepe herin, they bring hir to diſpayre. We cannot denie but there bée women of ſo euill condition, and ſo vnhoneſt of inclination, that will not be corrected with force, eyther amended by chaſtiſement. But it ſéemeth that ſuche were borne into this world, only to tormēt their huſbands and to ſhame their kinred. And on the other ſide there be women many and very manye, whiche of theyr owne proper nature be of ſo tractable condition and chaſt inclination: that it ſéemeth not that they were borne into the worlde, but for a mirror to the common wealth, and a glory vnto their whole kinred. I retourne once more to ſaye, that ſometimes it is not euill to ſhut the dore, to remoue hir from the window, to denie hir going abroade, and to deliuer hir frō ſome ſuſpitious company:Aduertiſements worth the folowing. but this the huſband muſt bring to paſſe with great ſkill, that he always ſhew a greater faith in the liberty ſhe hathe, than in the watch or direction he giueth.

I do prayſe and approue, that men with their wiues be cautelous, but I hold it not for ſure that they be ouer ielous: for women be of ſuch qualitie, that they procure nothing ſo much as that which is moſt forbidden them. If the huſbande haue the wife in ſuſpition, he ought to profite himſelfe by ſkill, not vttering it in words: for if a woman doe once find hir ſelfe aſhamed, ſhe will not fayle to find out the meanes and maner, to make the ſuſpition true, and not ſo muche for the appetite ſhe hath to be vicious, as ſhe hath to féele hir hart reuenged of hir huſband. The force of Sampſon, the ſcience of Homer, the prudence of Auguſtus, the cautels of Pirrhus, the patiēce of Iob, the ſagacity of Haniball, and the vigilancy of Hermogenes, bée not ſufficient to gouerne a woman, either to bring hir will in ſubiection: for finally and in the end, in all this world there is not ſo great force, that can make one good by force. The negligences, wants, and weakeneſſe that the huſbande ſhall ſée in his wife, it were no wiſedome to proclayme them, neyther yet preſently to chaſtiſe them, but ſome he muſt gently correct, ſome aduiſedly admoniſh, ſome ſeuerely puniſh, ſome cut off, and the moſt and greateſt part he muſte diſſemble.To be cōſidered. For wiſe and patient though a woman may be, only two thinges ſhe cannot endure to heare, neyther is hir patience ſufficiente to ſuff
                        ••
                     , which is to vnderſtand, that any hold hir for euill of body and foule of face: but notwithſtanding ſhe be euill, ſhée will be holden for good, and being foule, ſhe will be prayſed for fayre. But let it be for concluſion, that when the huſbande is ſure of all things, whiche is to witte: that his wife maketh no market of his perſon, that his fame wander not the ſtreates, and that his goodes goe not to wracke, in my iudgement it is méete, that he neuer handle hir as one that is ielouſe, or ſpeak vnto hir as one that is malicious: bycauſe the woman is much bound to be vertuous, when the huſbande in hir commendeth great confidence.
               
               
                  
                  That if betwixt the maried there happen ſome vnkindneſſe, they ought not to giue part thereof vnto neighbours.
                  
                     ALſo it is a right profitable counſell, that in ſuch wiſe the huſbande & wife behaue themſelues in their vnkindneſſe and differences, that they giue no parte thereof vnto theyr neighbours: for they haue to vnderſtande, that if they wiſh thē euill they will reioyce, and if they wiſhe them well they giue them whereof to talke. There be men ſo comberſome,An euill maner of cōferēce and women of ſuch euill ſuffering, that they know not to chide, but yelling: nor the other to aunſwer but crying: in ſuch wife that their neighbours haue an office in the wéeke time to pacifie them, and on the holyday to heare their gréeues. The huſband complayneth ſaying, that his wife is fierce, and that no Diuell may deale with hir. He alſo cōplayneth that ſhe is ielous and ſuſpitious, and that he is not able to liue with hir. He alſo complayneth, that ſhée is impacient and foule tonged, and continually reuileth him. He alſo complayneth, that his wife is weake, foule, and ſickly, and that he ſpendeth al in curing hir. Alſo he complayneth, that ſhe is coſtly, ſlouthfull, and alwayes ſléeping, and that ſhe riſeth not till noone.
                  Alſo he complayneth, that ſhe is ſluttiſh, idle and negligent, and that the things of his houſe ſhe neither knoweth to gather togither, and much leſſe to lay them ſafe. Alſo he cōplayneth, that his wife is a ſéeker of kinred, a goſſip, a ſtréete gadder, and that if ſhe once take the dore, vntill the ſtarres ſhine ſhe returneth not to houſe.The wiues complaynt. On the other ſide the poore women for that they haue no force to reuenge, they profit themſelues to complayne with their tongs. The wife complayneth of hir huſband that he is ſad, ſullen, and melancholicke, and that of an extreme euill condition: neyther liked of his neighbours, nor endured of his ſeruants. She complaineth of his huſband, that he is furious, proude, and of euill ſuffering, and that many times when with choler he is inflamed, he beſwingeth hir

maydes, and alſo teareth hir kerchife from hir head. Alſo ſhée complayneth, that he vpbraydeth hir to be foule and euill fauored, a ſlut, a filthe, and a Iew: and that ſometimes he ſpeaketh ſo many and ſo great diſpitefull words, that they breake hir hart, and teare the teares out of hir eyes. Alſo ſhe cōplayneth that he conſenteth not, that ſhe goe to ſée hir father and mother, nor viſit hir friends and kinſfolkes, and of pure malice he doth not ſuffer hir to go out at dore: and commaundeth hir at the middes of ſeruice to depart home from the Churche. Alſo ſhe complayneth, that hir huſbande is ielouſe and ſuſpitious without any occaſion, and much leſſe with any reaſon, and for that cauſe he dothe not ſuffer hir to goe out at dores, or to looke out at windowe, neyther put on good garment, neyther dreſſe hir head, or ſpeake a word with any man, but that ſhée muſt be watched as a mayd, and hid in like a Nunne. Alſo ſhe complayneth of him that he beléeueth nothing that ſhe ſpeaketh, neyther doth accept any ſeruice ſhe can do him: for if hée be once angrie, preſently he chargeth hir with a lie, and whirleth all that he catcheth. Alſo ſhe complayneth of him that hée leaueth no married woman that he ſerueth not, nor widdowe that he followeth not, or woman at large to whome he goeth not, or wench with whome he dallieth not: and that he kéepeth hir (ſorrowfull and moſt vnfortunate) to no other ende, than to make ready children, dreſſe the pot, and ſwéepe the houſe. Alſo ſhe complayneth of him, that not contented to take the wheate, the bacon, the butter, the oyle, the chéeſe, to gyue vnto ſuch and ſuch out of the dore, but alſo ſtealeth from hir, to giue vnto his minion that which ſhe ſpinneth at the rocke, and alſo what ſhe getteth by making of lace. Alſo ſhe complaineth of him, that he is a common gamſter at tables and dice, & that not contented to play al the rent, and al that he can get: but alſo he playeth the furniture of his houſe and the iewells apperteyning to hir perſone. Alſo ſhe cōplayneth of him, that many times he commeth from abroade ſo furious, ſo troubled, and ſo be deuild, that none may abide him, or much leſſe ſuffer him, but that he whippeth and chideth the children, he brawleth

and maddeth with the maydes,Froward out of meaſure. he teareth and pulleth the boyes by the heare, and alſo behayleth hir by the lockes. Of thoſe and other ſuch like things doth the man and the wife cō
                     playne each of other, whereof to giue parte vnto ſuche as can not remedie it, neyther conuenient that they ſhoulde vnderſtand it, it ſemeth vnto me, that in the man it is too muche ſimplicitie, and in the woman too much vanitie.
                  I retourne to ſaye, that it is of ſmall ſkill, and too much ignoraunce, ſince they will ſhew vnto none what they haue in their cheſts, and at times will vtter all that is in their ſtomacks. For a friend to ſhew vnto his friende, his bread, hys wine, his money, and his garner, there is no inconuenience at all, but the inconueniēce is in that we loue, in that we deſire, and in that which we worſhip: all which is not only to be kept ſecret, but alſo hidden and remoued. The loue and hatred that is fixed in the harte, it is neceſſarye that it be lockt and alſo ſealed. For what do I reſerue for him that I like very well, if I ſay vnto all men what is hidden in my hart? vnto him that loueth vs with his hart, and we wiſh him good with all oure hart, to him alone and to none others we haue to manifeſt our hart.A counſell to be imbraced. The paſſions that they giue vs, and the miſfortunes that they offer vs, it is no wiſedome to diſcouer, but vnto hym that will help vs to remedie it, and alſo will helpe to bewayle the ſame: bycauſe the teares of a friende dothe not a little diſburden the hart of trauell. If this be true, as it is, to what end doth the huſbande complayne of the wife, and the wife of the huſband, vnto any which they know can giue them no remedie, but ieſt, ſkorne and deride them? If any ouerthwarting of the huſbande, or any weakeneſſe be in the woman, it is great fooliſhneſſe and little wiſedome to vtter where it is not knowen, for it is leſſe euill, that others do ſuſpect it, than to gyue them to vnderſtand it of their owne mouth.
               
               
                  
                  That the Huſbandes prouide things neceſſary for the houſe.
                  JT is alſo a ſound counſel, that the huſbands be diligent and carefull to make prouiſiō for their houſes, to cloth their wiues, to bring vp their children, and to paye their ſeruants, bycauſe in voluntarie matters men may be negligent but the neceſſities of their houſe, doe neyther ſuffer negligence, or forgetfulneſſe. The office of the huſbande is, to get goods, and of the wife, to gather them together, and ſaue them.The office of the huſband and of the wife. The office of the huſbande is, to goe abroad to ſéeke liuing, and of the woman to kéepe the houſe. The office of the huſband is, to ſéek money, and of the woman not vainely to ſpend. The office of the huſbande is, to deale with all men, and of the woman to talke with few. The office of the huſband is, to be entermedling, and of the woman to be ſolitary and withdrawen. The office of the man is, to be ſkilfull in talke, and of the woman to boaſt of ſilence. The office of the man is to be zelous of honor, and of the woman to preſume to be honorable. The office of the man is to be a giuer, and of the woman to be a ſauer. The office of the man is, to apparell him ſelfe as he may, and of the woman as it becommeth. The office of the huſband is, to be lord of all, and of the wife to giue account of al. The office of the huſband is to diſpatche all things without dore, & of the wife to giue order vnto all things within ye houſe. Finally I doe ſay, that the office of the huſband is, to huſband ye goods, & of the wife to gouerne the familie. I thought good to ſay thus much, to the end that the houſe wherin euery one performeth his office we may call a colledge of quietnes, & ye houſe wherin euery one ſhifteth for him ſelfe, we may terme it a hell.
                  That the wife ſhall demaund of hir huſband things ſuperfluous and very coſtly, neyther ought ſhe to craue it, or the huſband to giue it: but if ſhe require thinges neceſſary, they ought not to be denied, for the huſbande hath to conceiue for moſt certaine, that vppon the gages of honor, many times the wife dothe prouide for hir ſelfe and hir houſholde. The

huſband that giueth not vnto his wife, a coate nor mantell, ſmocke nor ſhoe, kerchife nor ſléeue, neyther to clothe hir children, nor yet to pay ſeruants: and on the other parte hée ſéeth all theſe things prouided for frée, and made better: certaynely ſuch a one may well thinke that ſhe rather getteth them trotting,Rather trotting than ſpinning. than ſpinning. Oh how many women be euill, not bycauſe they would be ſo, but for that their huſbandes giueth them not that whyche is conuenient: The whiche, by exchange of chaſtitie, do ſupplie their extreme neceſſitie.
                  To maintaine houſe and familie, it is not ſufficient that the wife doe ſpinne, weaue, ſowe, worke, watche, and ouerwatch: but that alſo the huſband do watch, ſweate, and trauel: and if not, he may hold it for certayne, that his houſe ſhall bée prouided to the coſt of his honor, and to the charge of hir perſone. For pouertie or weakeneſſe, no woman ought to do any thing to ſhame hir ſelfe, or diſhonour hir kindred: but ioyntly with this, I dare auouche, that many times the negligence of the huſband doth bring to paſſe, that his wife with him is abſolute, and with others diſſolute. I know not with what face, either with what hart he dare beate or chide his wife, ſince ſhe neuer ſéeth him put hand to his purſe to buy meate.
                  The huſband that conformably vnto his eſtate doth mayntayne his family and ſuſtayne his houſe, iuſt and moſt iuſtly he may chide with his wife for the negligence that ſhe vſeth, and for the exceſſe that ſhe committeth,Cauſes of ſpitefull patience. and where it is not ſo, he muſt ſuffer what ſhe ſpeaketh, let paſſe what he heareth, vſe ſilence in what he ſuſpecteth, and alſo diſſemble what hée ſéeth.
               
               
                  That the Husband bring no ſuſpitious perſons to their houſes.
                  
                     ALſo it is a conuenient counſell, that married men be friends and familiar with honeſt perſons, and procure to auoyde euill companye. There be many that be euill married, not for the faultes that in their wiues is ſéene, but for

ſhe vicious words that vnto hir the malicious ſpeaketh. If the huſband be an Oxe I ſay nothing, but if he be of iudgemēt and diſcréete, he hath to take it for ſcorne and ſhame, that any man dare ſaye any euill of his wife, ſince others ſeeth hir not once a wéeke, and he hath hir euery night in his chamber, euery day at his table, and euery houre in his houſe. If the wife be a foole, a babbler, a goer at large, wanton, light, abſolute or diſſolute, the huſband is the firſt that ſhould vnderſtand thereof, and the man that ſhould preſently therefore giue remedie: and if he know it and do not amend it,No ſmall offence to God. ſuch an Oxe and ſo behorned, they ought to permit to himſelfe, ſince he will ſuffer it. One of the moſt gréeuous offences that we may committe againſt God, is: to bring hatred betwixt the man and his wife, and the wife and hir huſband: for if there ſhall any negligence he ſéene in the man, or any weakeneſſe found in the woman: we are bound to aduiſe them, but haue no licence to accuſe thē. Many times the huſbande is in fault, and ouer eaſely gyueth credite vnto his friends, neighbours, and alſo to his ſeruants, the whiche if they aduertiſe him of any euill of his wife: it is not ſo much for the zeale of his honour, as it is for the malice they beare vnto hir. Alſo it is hurtfull vnto the huſband to bée conuerſant with euill mē: by the infamie that may procéede of their conuerſation, for there be ſome men ſo euill and of ſo farre a fetch, that they procure friendſhippe with the huſbād, to no other purpoſe, than to haue an entrie more ſure to deale with his wife. It may be well ſuffred, that the neighbour, the friend, the kinſman, and the acquainted with the huſband may haue friendſhip with the wife, but no familiaritie: bycauſe friendſhip requireth no more but communication, but familiaritie leadeth to conuerſation. I am not of the opinion, that a man ſhould haue ſuch confidence in any man: that certaynly he durſt ſay, vpon my vow I aſſure thée, that I entred ſuche a mans houſe, and with hys wife did eate, laugh, and play, talke, and paſſe the tyme: bycauſe ſhe is muche my good Miſtreſſe, friende, and deuoute. I defye that friende that hathe no other paſtime but with hys friendes wife. That

which is tollerable to be ſaid in ſuch caſes, is: that ſuch a man is my friend,The wife and ſword muſt not be lent. and his wife of ſome acquaintance: bycauſe it is an olde prouerb That the wife and the ſword may be ſhewed, but not lent: If vnto the huſbande there happen any infamy for bringing his friend to houſe, & to bring him acquainted with his wife, let him complaine of him ſelfe that was the cauſe, and not of his wife that ſtumbled.
                  
                     Plutarch ſayth, that it was a law amongſt the Parthians, that the wiues might not hold other particular acquaintance, but the friendes of their huſbandes: in ſuch wiſe, that amongſt thoſe barbarous people, the goods they helde was not onely common, but alſo the friendes that they loued. I ſhould think it good, that the wife ſhould loue the friendes of hir huſband, and that the huſband ſhould loue the kindred of his wife: bycauſe if he will obtaine peace in his houſe, he ought to be ſerued of his wife, & of hir kinred honoured. The huſband ought not to be ſo wilfull or careleſſe, that when the kinred of his wife ſhall come to houſe, that he leaue to talke with them, & to entertaine them with ſome cheare: bycauſe it ſhould be vnto hir no ſmall diſgrace, and vnto him great want of good nature. Sometime alſo the wiues do conceiue affections, and take in hand friendſhips to be excuſed (although not ſuſpicious) for the ſuſtayning wherof, they come to ſome quarelles with their huſbands, and alſo ſometime vnto extréem vnkindneſſe, the whiche I alowe not, neither muche leſſe do I counſell: bycauſe the honeſt or honorable and aduiſed woman, hath to hold no frendſhip ſo deare: that it may be ſufficient to bréede vnkindneſſe with hir huſband. In any honeſt woman it is not tollerable to ſay, this is my friend: but to ſay this is of my acquaintance: bycauſe the maried woman ought to haue none for enemie, and onely hir huſbande to hold for friend. Alſo it ſéemeth not well vnto me, that ſome women be to much affectioned, paſſioned, and bending, the which ſometimes for defence of their friends and to ſtand forth to helpe their parties: do mete their haire by the fiſtes,A fooliſh faſhion to take vp duſt. and alſo take vp duſt with their ſhoulders.
               
               
                  
                  That women ought to gather and to ſow.
                  ALſo it is a right neceſſary counſell, that maried women do learne, and alſo know very well to gouerne their houſes, which is to wéete, to gather, to ſowe, to worke, to ſwéepe, to play the Cooke, and to ſow with the néedle:Neceſſary exerciſes for the maried wife. bycauſe they be thinges ſo neceſſary, that with out them, they them ſelues can not liue, and much leſſe content their huſbandes. Suetonius doeth ſay, that Auguſtus the Emperour commaunded the Ladyes his children, to learne all the offices & qualities wherewith a woman might liue & be maintained, and whereof ſhe ought to boaſt hir ſelfe: in ſuch wiſe, that al which they did weare, they did ſpin and weaue. For the greatnes of any gentlewomās eſtate, or noblenes of bloud, or eſtimation of great welth, ſo well doth a rocke become hir girdle, as a knight his launce, or a prieſt his booke. When the Romanes vpon a certaine wager, did ſend from the wars to Rome, to vnderſtande what euery mans wife did at home: amongſt them all, the moſt famous and moſt prayſed was the chaſt Lucrece, & for no other cauſe, but for that ſhe onely was found weauing, and al the reſt idle. If they ſay vnto one, that amongſt the nobles it is a matter of no account to vnderſtande in theſe ſimplicities: to this I aunſwere, that the honeſt woman hath not to be aſhamed to ſpinne, and to lay vp, but to eate, reſt, and talke: bycauſe the honour of a gentlewoman doth not conſiſt to be ſet at hir eaſe, but to be in buſineſſe. If women would take pain in their houſes,Idleneſſe and chaſtitie are greatenimies. we ſhould not ſée in the ſtréets ſo many caſt away, bycauſe in this worlde there is not ſo mortal an enemie vnto Chaſtitie, as is idleneſſe. A womā that is young, in helth, at libertie, fair, luſty, and taketh hir eaſe, what is it that ſhe thinketh leaning vpon a cuſſhin? That which ſhe performeth is, to ſet hir down at leyſure, to deuiſe what forme ſhe may vſe for liberty to loſe hir ſelfe: in ſuch wiſe, that ſhe deceyueth all men, ſaying that ſhe is good, and on the other part ſhe enioyeth hir lyfe at pleaſure. What a delight is it to ſée a woman riſe earlye in the morning, to ſtirre about, hir kerchiefe not all

dreſt, hir coate tuckt vp, hir armes bare, without ſlippers, chyding with the maydens, calling vp ſeruantes, and dreſſing hir children? What a pleaſure is it to ſée hir make hir owne partlet, to waſh hir clothes, to ayre hir Wheate, to ſyfte hir Meale, to gather hir things together, to bake hir bread, to ſwéepe the houſe, to make the fyre, and to ſet on the pot: and after meate to take hir cuſſhin for boane lace, or hir rock to ſpinne?The workes of an huſwife. there is no huſband in this worlde that is ſo fooliſh or vnſenſible, that wil not like his wife much better on the ſaterday when ſhe worketh, than on the Sonday when ſhe friſteth. I like not well of thoſe women, that knowe no other thing but to goe to bedde at one, riſe at eleuen, goe to dinner at twelue, and talke till night: and more and beſides this, they know nothing but to trimme their chamber where they ſhall lye, and to dreſſe a withdrawing place wher to worke in, in ſuch wiſe, that ſuch be not borne but to eate, ſléepe, reſt, and talke. Leauing apart the chamber wherein they ſléepe, and the place where they worke, if you make a turne about the reſt of the houſe, you will be aſhamed to ſée it, & lothed to walke in it. where all things lieth diſordred, and worſe ſwept: in ſuche wiſe, that many Gentlewomē to mayntaine an eſtate, make their houſe a ſtable. For a woman to be good, it is no ſmall help to be alwayes in buſineſſe:A friendly warning to al mothers. and by the contrary, we ſée no other thing, but that the idle woman goeth always penſitiue. Let all maner of women beleue me, that in any wyſe they buſie their daughters in ſome honeſt exerciſe for I giue them to vnderſtand (if they know not,) that of idle moments, and wanton thoughtes, they come to make euill concluſions. No more but that our Lord be in your procéeding:
               
               
                  from Granada 
                     the .4. of maye .1524. yeares.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto Moſen Rubin of Valentia, wherein he anſwereth to certayne notable demaunds. A letter very conuenient, for the woman that marrieth an olde man.
               
               
                  RIght worſhipfull aunciente, renued with youthely motion, youre Letter read and conſidered, that which I conceyue and comprehende thereof, is, that it contayneth much writing, and commeth written in very groſſe paper, whereof it may very well be inferred, that you haue waſt time, and want of money. Small comforte ſhoulde he haue at youre handes, that at thys inſtant ſhould craue youre almes for a Cote,A Mareuedy is the ſixt part of a peny. that hathe not a Maruedye to buy a ſhéete of paper: Althoughe I holde it for moſt certayne, that if you haue not at this preſent a Mareuedy to buy paper, at other times you vſe to ſet an hundred Duckats at a reſt. The property and condition of Players is, ſometymes to haue greate abundaunce, and at other times to ſuffer greate lacke, in ſuche wiſe, that to daye hauing too many Duckats to play, on the morrowe they haue not to paye for their dinner. I haue ſayde it many times, and alſo written in my doctrines: that I enuy not theſe gameſters for the money that they win, but at the ſighes that they gyue: bycauſe, if they caſt the dice with courage, with great ſighes they wiſh their chaunce. But comming to the purpoſe of youre demaunde, and anſwering to youre requeſt: I ſaye, that if to all the demaundes of youre letter, I ſhall not aunſwer with grace and good eloquence, impute the fault to my diſgrace, and alſo vnapte diſpoſition. And the cauſe of my diſgrace endureth not to be written with inke in paper. But it ſuffiſeth a man to be at Court, where be few things to be commended, but many to the contrary. Sir you write vnto me to aduertiſe you of my opiniō of ye bailiwick of Orihnela, which ye Quéene

hathe giuen you, and the garde of the frontires of Caſpe, whither the Moores of Pampe do paſſe, and they of Affrica do enter. To this I aunſwere, that you haue to make ſmall accounte, that the Quéene hath giuen you the charge of Iuſtice if god deny you his grace: bycauſe preheminent offices, by vertues be conſerued, but heroicall vertues amongs offices, do runne in perill. In him that adminiſtreth Iuſtice, it is neceſſary he haue good Iudgement to giue ſentence, temperance in his ſpeche, patience to ſuffer, good counſell to diſcerne, good diſpoſition to Iuſtice, and fortitude to execute. If in the budget of your houſehold ſtuffe, you finde your ſelfe furniſhed with all theſe kind of goods: you may ſafely be Iudge of Orihnela, and alſo gouernour of Valentia. And if your abilitie ſtretch not ſo farre, it ſhould be more ſounde counſell for you, to kepe your houſe, than to bring your honour in queſtion and diſputation. Alſo you wright vnto me, to aduertiſe you what was contained in the counteſſe of Concentainas letter, which the quéene ſhewed me. That which paſſed in this caſe, is: that the Earle of Concentaina being dead, my Lady the Counteſſe preſently did wright vnto ye vaſſalles of ye Earldōr, a certaine letter of the ſorrow and griefe of hir huſbands death: and in the ende and concluſion of the letter, they placed according to the manner of ſuch Ladies and widowes, which is to witte, the ſorowfull and moſt vnfortunat counteſſe, and added ther vnto in ye place of ye firme therof, two great blottes. The letter being receyued, and redde by hir vaſſals, in their counſell before all men: they aduiſed to aunſwere my Lady the Counteſſe, and alſo to giue hir to vnderſtande, of the ſorowe they conceiued of the death of the Earle hir huſband and their Lorde. And it ſéemed good vnto them, that ſince ſhe hadde changed the ſtile of hir firme, that alſo they were bounde too alter the ſtile of their letter: In which, the ſuperſcription therof ſaide thus: Vnto our ſorrowfull Ladye and moſte vnfortunate counteſſe of Concentayna: withinin the vpper face of the letter, where they place the woordes of curteſy and congratulation, was after this manner: Righte magnificente and

moſt ſorowfull Lady: at the end where was ſayd, by the ordinance of ye coūſell, iuſtice, & gouernours, were made thrée daſſhes much blotted, in ſuch wiſe, that according to the tenor of hir writing, ſhe anſwered: My Lady the Counteſſe receyued no ſmall offence thereof, and yet with good grace ſhe ſayd vnto me, that ſhe wiſhed the error had paſſed by one mans faulte, and not as it was by all their conſents. Alſo you write vnto me to aduertiſe you how it ſtandeth with Moſen Burela, ſince the time he receyued that ſo great diſtreſſe in Xatina: Sir vnto this I anſwer, that vnto me he giueth great ſorow to beholde him, and no leſſe compaſſion to heare him: bycauſe I ſée hym wander laden with thoughts, and no leſſe forſaken of friends. Beléeue me ſir and be out of doubt, that he falleth not in all this world, yt falleth not out of his princes fauour, bycauſe ye faſhion or ſtile of Court is, that the priuate and in fauoure, knoweth not himſelfe, & with the fall, and out of fauoure, no mā will grow aquainted. The houſes and Courts of Princes be very fortunate vnto ſome, & no leſſe perillous vnto others: bycauſe there, either they preuayle and growe very greate, or elſe vtterly loſe themſelues. All Courtiers ſéeme to me, to reſemble the Bée, or elſe the Spider: wherin there be ſome perſons in Court ſo fortunate, that all thinges whereon they lay hands, turneth to golde, and others ſo vnlucky, that all which they pretend cōuerts to ſmoke. As concerning our Moſen Burela, I can ſay vnto you, that he is thoroughly ſmoked, as touching his honor: and no leſſe ſtumbled and falne in reſpect of his goodes, bycauſe he hath loſt the office that he held, and the credite wherwith he was ſuſtayned. Sir, alſo you wrighte to me, to aduertiſe you of the ſtate of the Sonnes of Vasko Bello, your friend and my neighbour: to this I anſwer, that their parents hauing paſt their liues in the trade of merchants, they haue conuerted themſelues to the ſtate of Gentlemen: and to the end you vnderſtād me better, I ſay, they be not of ye Gentlemen of auncient right, but ſuche as haue obtayned by priſe and purchaſe, bycauſe their goodes being conſumed, I holde their gentry fully finiſhed. In the ſtate that men do get theyr

liuing, in the ſame they ought to conſerue themſelues: for otherwiſe, of rich Merchantes, they become poore Seruantes. The Sonnes of Vesko Bello haue quartered their goodes, as if they ſhould haue quartered the ſame by iuſtice: for the one part they haue giuen to women, another to banquets, another to dice, and the other to wanton deuiſes, in ſuch wiſe, that that which their fathers gate in Fayres, they ſpend and conſume in follies. Sir, alſo you write me to aduertiſe you of my iudgement, of a certayne new marriage that they offer you in Villena with a woman that is rich, yong, fayre, gentle, and aboue all of good report and fame.
               As concerning the firſt, Sir I can ſay vnto you, that ſuch a marriage as this, is of many deſired, and of few obtayned, bycauſe there is not in this world, a woman ſo perfect and accō
                  pliſhed, ye hath all in hir, that of hir huſband may be wiſhed, & nothing found in hir to be remoued & reiected. There be ſome Gentlewomen, the whiche if they on the one part be riche, of gentle bloud, yong, and faire, they hold on the other part, a certaine ouerthwartneſſe in condition, and certain frowardneſſe in conuerſation, that their huſbāds hold it for leſſe euill to diſſemble that they ſée, thā to chide or grow angry for that which they féele. Leauing this apart, Sir you haue to conſider, that if ſhe be yong, you are old: and if ſhe be fayre, you are hoare headed: and that it is not ſufficient that ſhe doe content you, but that ſhe alſo of you haue very good liking: for otherwiſe, ſhée walking with a crooked face, you ſhall paſſe with hir a very tedious life. Amongſt the married, it is leſſe euill that miſliking do happen vnto the man, than vnto the woman: bycauſe the huſband if he be wiſe, can diſſemble his griefe: but ye wife, neyther can ſhe diſſemble it, neyther yet kéepe ſilence. If the wife which they giue you, be rich, I hold it for profitable: if ſhe be fayre, I hold it for delectable: if ſhe be of gentle bloud, I hold it for honorable: but if ſhe be yong, I holde it for perillous, bycauſe ſhe ſhall haue wherefore to ſigh, to ſée you ſo old: and you ſhal not wāt, wherfore to watch, to ſée hir ſo yong. I cānot ſay in whether of you both I may lay the blame, or rather which

I may not blame: you, for chooſing, or ſhe in accepting: bycauſe a yong wench of twenty yeares, with an old man of thréeſcore yeares, is a life of two yeares. Conſider well what you doe, and haue regard what you take in hande, and be aduiſed with whome you marry: for a man of ſo greate an age, to marry with ſo tender yeares, from henceforward I propheſy, that either ſhe ſhall hate you, or elſe defame you, eyther elſe finiſh or make an end of you. Sir, finally I ſay, that if you will accept my counſell, and eſcape anger and diſpleaſure, you ſhall kéepe your houſe, and procure and follow your profit: and if you wil néedes marry, you ſhall marrie with the fatlings of Algezi, with the lambs of Polop, with the white wine of Monuiedro, and with the Claret of Venicarlo, the whiche ſhall yéelde you ſubſtance, and enlarge your life. No more but that I incommend my ſelfe, to the grace of the Lady Leonora of Villa noua.
               
               
                  From Granado 
                     the xij. of February. Anno. 1526.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter to the Chanon Oſorius: wherein is declared, that we know not the things that profit or hurt vs in this life.
               
               
                  REuerende Chanon, Cornelius Rufus in the late time of Omitus Cincinatus, lying one night in his bed in good health, dreamed that he had loſt his ſighte, ſo as he was conſtrayned to be lead like a blind man, which afterward was found true, for awaking from ſléepe he was ſo depriued of ſight, that he neuer after could ſée either heauē or earth. Phalaris the Theban being gréeuouſly ſicke of a diſeaſe in hys lungs, enterpriſed himſelfe to enter into battell, wherin he receyued a wound with a Speare, and ſuche was his fortune, that he was not only healed of the hurt which in the battel he receyued, but was alſo diſcharged and cured of his former malady. Mamilius Bubulus king of Hetruria receyuing in battaile a wound with an arrowe whiche entred his body vp to the feathers, the ſame being drawen out, the head thereof remayning ſtill in hys fleſhe, had afterwardes by fortunes

fauour this good chaunce, one day going to chaſe, in purſute of a Hart was caſt downe Horſe and man into a ditche, out of which miſhappe ſprang his better lucke, for by meanes of the ſame he voyded from him the arrow head before left and cloſed in his fleſh, and became afterwards more healthfull than euer he was before. So as we may inferre by that which hath bin ſayd, that men full little know what is profitable or hurtfull to them: ſure it appeareth that Cornelius Rufus ſléeping in his bed became blind, Phalaris the Thebane by hurt of a ſpeare recouered remedie of his former ſickneſſe: and Mamilius by miſhappe of a fall to receyue happie auoydance of the arrowe head whiche before lay cloſed in his fleſh. Wherefore I conclude and ſay that all the chaunces of this preſent life haue in themſelues alone no more good or euill than according to their ſequele and effect they bring, ſo that if we find they haue concluſion to our liking, we count them happie and good: and if contrary to our deſires and expectatiō they bring miſfortune, vnfortunate and euill, which giueth me iuſt cauſe to ſay that we ſhould not for any flatterie of fortune, or of any good hap be proude, nor yet for any hir frownings and contrary haps deſpaire. I haue made all this recitall before, to gratify your new recouered health and the departure of your ſickneſſe, that is to ſay, that hauing bin thrée yeares gréeuouſly ſicke of a feuer quartan, there hath hapned to your mind ſome ſo greate a griefe that the force thereof ſuffred to driue and beate the quartaine from your houſe, which maketh me once twice and thrice to affirme that we know not what to require to be helping to vs, bycauſe diuers times with greate care we ſéeke that we ſhould flée and eſchue, and we flée from that we ſhuld with all diligence ſéeke and follow. Amongſt the high precepts of the diuine Plato this was one, that we ſhuld not pray to the Gods to giue vs this or that, but with importunat prayer to require, that it would pleaſe them to giue vs that which ſtoode with deuine pleaſures beſt to beſtow, and to our néede moſt commodious. The Hebrewes being long time ruled by Iudges, demaunded of God a King to gouerne them, whome

they might obey, which God performed, rather to ſatiſfye their earneſt petitiō, than of any procéeding from his merciful pleaſure: he gaue them ſuche a perſon to their King, as it had bin better for thē neuer to haue demanded or had any at all. Now be it as it be may, or happen what ſhall happen, I returne agayne to reioyce with you for ye departure of your troubleſome feuer, and the bitter anger whiche hathe chaced it from you: though I remember not that euer I red and much leſſe heard the Lady Sorrowe at any time cauſed any good thing to happē vnto vs. I certify you Sir Chanon, if al the diſeaſes might be cured like yours with heauineſſe and ſadneſſe, penſiueneſſe and cares would then be more déere in our hearts, than Rubarb is now in the Apoticaries ſhops: and if we ſhoulde buy ſighes, ſobbes, and teares in the market for money, I aſſure you very many both men and women woulde thereby grow excéeding riche and happie, whiche nowe are poore and vnfortunate, bycauſe ſorow with euery body is ſo common, that there is neyther corner nor place ſo ſecret wherein ſhe is not found. Touching my ſelfe I tell you, if the ſighes I haue breathed, and the ſorow I haue endured, might ſerue for medicines to cure the quartaine, I would be bound to ſet vp ſuch a Shoppe of thoſe merchandizes, that it ſhould ſerue both Spayne and Fraunce. I haue ſéene many in this world whereof ſome wanted their eyes, ſome their eares, and ſome their hands: otherſome lacke houſes, others goodes, and ſome other apparrell: But I neuer knew nor heard of perſon were he neuer ſo poore that had not ſorrow and griefe: ſo is there no houſe in the world ſo rich, that ſometimes wanteth not money, and of enuies and ſorrowes is neuer deſtitute. Sadneſſe ſaith Salomon drieth ye ſinowes, and cōſumeth the bones, which by you cannot be proued, ſince it is apparant, that melancholy ſullenneſſe hathe not waſted your bones, but purged youre body of all euill humors and reſtored your health. Now from hencefoorth, if any one come to viſit you whē you are ſicke, he cannot (as I thinke) more pleaſure you thā to giue or miniſter occaſiō to moue you to choler. But ſir I curſe your complexion and hate your cōditiōs, ſince

anger, enuie, and ſorrowe muſte bée your Phiſitions to cure your maladies, for men that be reaſonable, doo vſually gyue money to inioy myrth and ſolace, and to eſcape ſom ſorrowes and troubles. Now if you will beléeue mée, and hereafter folowe myne aduice, bée gladde for the loſſe of your quartayne, but ſay not that you dryue him from you with anger & gréefe. For I ſweare to you by the law of a fréende, if you do, that all men wyll therefore diffame you, and ſaye that you are compounded and furniſhed with cholericke, aduſte, and euill complexion: but for this matter let this ſuffiſe. There bée many things héere in the Courte to be talked of in ſecrete, and fewe to be written openly. For murmurings bée matters of counſell, and my letters ofte paſſe through many mens fingers, which when they cannot rightly vnderſtand & perceyue their effect, then euerye one iudgeth and gloſeth thereof after theyr owne deuiſe and opinion. I praye God be your guyde, & gyue vs grace euermore to feare him.
            
            
               
                  A letter to Count Maſaoth Marques of Cenolte, wherin is expreſſed why amongſt the ſectes of Mahomet, ſome be termed Turkes, Sarracenes, and others, Moores.
               
               
                  HOnorable Lord and ſingular frende, it is now ten dayes paſte ſince you requeſted mée in the Emperours chāber, to reſolue you one doubt, the which to doo I haue ſearched with payne, and vſed what diligence I poſſibly myghte: holding it but iuſtice to ſubmit my trauell to your cōmaundement, that neuer denyed mée any thing which I requeſted of you: deſiring you withall to reſpect, that if I ſéeme long in ſatiſfying your demaunde, it is not want of diligence to ſearche, but of good happe quickly to finde that which I ſéeke, and you deſire to haue, bycauſe a man of youre ſtate and calling, muſte bée ſerued with truthes and reaſon, and not with fabling vncerteynties. Your Lordſhips deſire is to

know why the greate Turke is termed the Greate Turke: and wherefore the followers of Mahomets feete be called Sarracens, ſome Mores, and ſome Turkes, being all of the lawe and religion of their only god and Lord Mahomet? For the diſcuſſing of the which doubte, and for that you may the better vnderſtande my reſolution of the ſame: I am forced to recite the hiſtorie to you (as it were from the firſte or beginning. Vnderſtande my Lorde,The originall of the Turks that Aſia the leſſe is a region whiche with many other Regions is incloſed, all which generally are called greate Turquie: it boundeth towardes the Eaſte, on the confynes of Arabia minor: on the weſt it is encloſed with the great lake Cynia: and on the north ſide with the floude Euponius: and on the ſouthe coſte it is walled with the mounte Pithmiaus. In this Turquie néere to Armenia, by the greate hill Paton, was an auncient Citie named Truconia, whereof the inhabitantes were named Truconians, after the name of the Citie. Within this Citie Gothes did come to inhabite, who bycauſe they coulde not call it Traconia, pronounced and called it Turquie, and Cityzens Turkes: ſo that the worde Turquy is a name corruptly come from the worde Traconie. Within the countrey of Turquie is ſundry prouinces: as the Prouince of Licaonia, whereof the chéefe citie is Icaonia: Likewyſe Cappadocia, the chéefe whereof is Coſaria: the Prouince Iſanca, whoſe heade citie is Solenna, which now is called Briquemust: the countrie called Icaonia, whoſe chéefe citie is Fer, in olde tyme named Quiſguaince: alſo Paflagonia, whoſe capitall or Metropolicke towne is Gernapolis, in which moſte properly ended the whole Aſia. And as within this cuntry of Turquy is conteyned many ſeuerall countryes and prouinces, ſo hath it euer bene peopled with men of ſeuerall cuntries and nations, as with Aſians, Gréekes, Armenians, Sarracenes, Iacobines, Iewes, and Chriſtians: The whiche albeit they acknowledge the Greate Turke for chéefe Lorde, yet notwithſtāding they were not all in obedience to one kind of lawe and religion.
               
                  In like manner you muſt note that in the kingdome of Paleſtina, which bordereth vpon Damas, there were thrée Arabies, as Arabia Silapide,
                  
                     
                        The firſt Saracyns.
                     
                     This Mahomet was borne in Arabia, iſſued of the line of Iſmaell and of a baſe place: he being an Orphant was ſold to a great Marchant, his maſter dyed, he married his wydow, he was inſtructed in falſe doctrine by a Moonke named Sergius a fugitiue from Conſtantinople, he afterwards chalenged and the people attributed certaine deuine veneration vnto him, whych the vnlearned Barbarians were prompt to beleeue, ſo as whē by force of the falling ſickneſſe he fel, he feyned to the people that he could not endure the brightneſſe of the Angell Gabriell, whome he affirmed to celebrate with him the ſecrets of the higheſt, with many ſuche abhominable errours, and ſuch like abuſes he abuſed the people.
                   that nowe is Siria maior: Arabia deſerta, ioyning vpon Egypt: and Arabia Petroſa, which is compaſſed with Iudea. In Arabia Petroſa, by the floud Iordanus néere the mount Libanus, ther dwelt an ancient kinde of people called Saracyns, which were ſo called after the name of Sartato their chiefe and Metropolitan Citie, which at this preſent be ſtill ſo named Saracyns. This kind of people in times paſt were much eſtéemed for their ſtrength and valiantneſſe in warres, and were then had in reputation therefore, as the Swiſſers are accompted of at this day in Europa, in ſuch wiſe, that no Prince durſt enterpriſe againſt any other to battell, except he were ayded with the ſtrength of Saracyns. It chaunced that Heraclius a Romane Emperour paſſing through Aſia to inuade the Perſians, requeſted ayde of the Saracyns in the ſame voyage and iorney, to whome he promiſed good vſage and true pay, the Saracyns agréeing to Heraclius requeſt, came throughly furniſhed with 40000 footemen ſouldiars, whoſe Captaine generall was a gentleman of their own countrey called Mahomet, a man ſubtill in witte, of valiant hart, and fortunate in exployt of war, as he manifeſted moſt puiſantly by obtayning more honour than any other in the Campe, whereby he grew in dayly reputation amongſt his owne companions, and more fearefull than the Wolfe is to the Shéepe, to the hearts of his enemies, which hanging the times of theſe warres, cauſed the Emperour Heraclius to fauoure him aboue all others. The warres ended, and licence giuen for all the ſtraungers to departe, he ſent the Saracyns away diſcontented and not wel payed, which moued them, and their generall Mahomet to rayſe mutine and coniuration, in ſuche wyſe, that they aſſayled Paleſtina, whyche before they had ſubdued, and inuaded the countreys of Aegypt, Damas, the two Syrias, Pentapolis, and Antioch, without reſiſtaunce of any perſon.
               Here alſo you muſt vnderſtande, that Mahomet was by his father a Gentile, and by his mother a Iewe, whyche is the

cauſe why he was foſtred in Iudea. He held one Sergius which was infected with the hereſies of Arius and Neſtor, a very ambitious man, for his eſpeciall friende. By whome Mahomet vnderſtanding well, what honour and reuerence the Saracyns yeelded vnto him: and accompting him ſelfe their head and chiefe, determined to become their King & lawegiuer, to the end, as King to be reputed, and for lawmaker to be worſhipped. And as thys mōſter Mahomet had a Gētile to his father, a Iew to his mother, and a Chriſtian Heretique to his chiefe friend and inſtructer: ſo each of them vſed their ſeueral lawes: out of whiche thrée he determined to elect one, to ſatiſfye, or more properly ſpeaking, to delude all nations. Thus this miſcreant (nothing regarding the ſoules health, nor due reformation of the common ſtate, but thriſting after the renoune of a Prince during life, and the fame of their lawgiuer after death) inſtituted and publiſhed a ſect, or rather a rabble of abhominable preceptes, and deteſtable counſells: thereby to chaunge the vertuous, and therewith to delight the vicious and wicked.
               In the yeare 630. Heraclitus inferred and began his warres againſt the Perſians, and in the yeare 632. the warres ended. In yt yeare 632. Mahomet by conqueſt ſubdued the greateſt part of Aſia, and in the yeare 636. he gaue his lawes to the Saracyns his countrymen, the which he firſt brought into Arabia Petroſa, not by preaching in worde, but murdering with ſword. The gouernment of the Eaſt thus reſting, it chaunced in the yeare 642. that an infinite number of barbarous people, paſſing by the ſtréetes of the mountaynes Caucaſus, to inuade that part of Aſia Minor that bordereeh on Aſia Maior, whoſe comming brought good ſucceſſe to the Nations adioyning. Theſe people by diſcent were of thrée mighty rude countries, that is, of the Scithians, now called Perſia, of the Panoniās now named Hungaria, and of the Eſcaines nowe called Denmarcia: whiche barbarians departed foorth of their natiue ſoyle, as it is iudged, conſtrayned with penurie and want of victualls, as alſo with the Ciuill warres which they had amongſt themſelues. For

being without a gouernour, they liued by robbing and pilling one from another, euermore driuing the weakeſt to the worſt. Whereat Mahomet aſtonied at this their arriuall, and ſéeing the Scithes and Paenonians dayly more and more to endamage Aſia, and to become ſo ſtout, as to furniſh themſelues with places of defence, he determined with a mighty power of Saracyns to encounter them. This thing diſmayed the Barbarians, and cauſed them to aſſemble togither, where they choſe one Trangolipique for their general, a man in warres much fortunate, and in peace moſt vicious.
               Now the warres of the Scithians and Saracyns grew ſo hote, ſo long, and ſo cruell, that in thrée yeares and a halfe was ſoughten ſixe mightie and bluddy battells, wherein Fortune declared hir mutabilitie, for to the Saracyns ſhe was vnfriendly, and to the Scithians nothing fauorable, ſometimes gyuing victory to the one ſide one day, and tryumph to the other ſide on the next day. Which the Scithians well noting, and perceyuing that their number was muche decreaſed by meanes of thoſe warres: and alſo the Saracyns beholding the preſente ſpoyle of their countr
                     •…
                  
                  ▪ they agréed amongſt themſelues vppon Articles enſuing, to continue friends for euer: that is, that the Scithes ſhoulde receyue the lawe of Mahomet, and that the Saracyns ſhould giue them that countrey to inhabite. Whyche accordingly tooke effect, and was concluded in the yeare 647. that the Saracyns and Turks became friends and confederates, and from that time forwarde, did wholly ſubmit themſelues to the obedience of Mahomet, taking him for king, and vowing fidelitie to his lawes.
               
                  Strabo, Plynie, Pomponius Mela, and Gelaton, whiche haue deſcribed all countries in the worlde, make little accompte of Turkie before ſuche time as the Scythes beganne to inhabite the ſame, who in the end became ſo ſtrong, and the Great Turk and Turquy ſo famous, as at this day it is reputed one of the moſt renowmed Empyres in the world.
               
                  
                  How the loue of Mahomet entred Africa.
                  VNderſtand you, that in the yeare 698. a puiſſant Pirat named Abeuchapeta, paſſed from Aſia into Africa, leading with him 70. Galleys and 100. other veſſels furniſhed for his exployte, with which he pilled, & piraſed, ſuch as he met withall by Seas, and did alſo many times much hurt on the firme land. This Abeuchapeta was a man valiant, hardie, and rich: and a Saracyne obſeruing the law of Mahomet, of whome the Arabian Hiſtoriographers reporte, that he neuer ſacked anye Towne that would ſubmit thēſelues to him, nor raunſomed to libertie any perſone that he had taken priſoner. This companion (for ſo hencefoorth will I terme him,) vnderſtanding that in the Realme of the Moores, (otherwiſe called the countrie of Mauritania, and now called the kingdome of Marrucos) were extreme cruell and ciuill warres: he determined to haſten thither with his fléete, and to eſtabliſh himſelfe Lorde of all: who paſſing ye ſtraites Giberaltare, and being arriued vpon firme lande, immediately practiſed to acquaint himſelfe with one of the chéefe bands of the Moores, by which policie in ſhort time he obtayned afterward to be chéefe of the Realme, and compelled them ſecretly to accept and obſerue the Mahometicall lawes and religion, by killing ſome and baniſhing others. Whereby it came to paſſe, that ſuch as this cōpanion brought thither with him, and the ſubdued inhabitantes of Marrucos, were the firſt in Africa that togythers imbraced the lawes of Mahomet, who as before time were alwayes called Moores, do ſtill at this preſente and euer after continue the name of Moores or Moriſques: ſo that the inhabitants of Thunies, whych be thoſe of Tunis, and the Numidians whiche are the people of Feſſe, and the Maurentines, which are the people of Marrucos, be al generally tearmed by the name of Moores: though ye countries do much differ in ſcituatiō. This then is the reſolution of your letter, and the aunſwere to youre demaunde: that the name Saracyns was firſt found in Arabia, where Mahomet was borne: the name Turkes inuented in Aſia, where Mahomet
                     
remayned, and the name of Moores eſtabled in Africa, when the lawe of Mahomet was there firſt receyued.
                  Now reſteth it to diſcouer vnto your Lordſhip, wherefore this name Greate is attributed to the Turke, ſeeing it is a title which none but he vſeth: other Princes being onely and ſimply called by the names of Kings or Emperours.
                  For better vnderſtanding whereof, knowe you, that in the yeare 1308. when Michael Palealogos was Emperour of Conſtantinople, and Bonifacius the 8. chiefe Byſhop of Rome. There ſprang amōgſt the Turkes a family of Othomans, much fortunate & famous ouer all Aſia, in ſuch ſort that thoſe Turkes ſurnamed Othomans, enlarged the limits of their rule, and reuenewes of their crowne, more in 200. yeares, than any of their predeceſſors had in 800. Theſe Othomans diſcended of baſe linage, and were naturally of Pruſea thrée dayes iorneys from Trapezoncia. The firſt Prince of this nation called Othoman, tooke this name vppon him at his erecting of a Caſtle in the cuntrey of Gallana, which he did to perpetuate ye memorie of the Othomans name.Othoman. This Othoman the firſt ſubdued many prouinces of the Kings his adioyning neighbours, he wan all that which ſtretched from Bithynia vnto the Sea Cocſin. He brought to his obedience many fortreſſes, towardes the Sea Pontick and all the Cities ſtanding on the Sea coſts named Teutonica, with the Towne of Sina, aunciently named Sebaſtia. Leauing to ſucceede him his only ſonne named Orchanees,
                     Orchanees. ſecond Emperour of the Turkes of the race of Othomans, whiche conquered many prouinces from the Empyre of Palialogos: but eſpecially he obtained the countries of Lycaonia, Phrygia, Miſsina, and Carye: he tooke by force Pruſia, now called Burſia, which was the abiding ſeate of the Kyngs of Bythynie in whiche he receyued his mortall wound in the firſte yeare of the raigne of Iohn King of Fraunce.
                     Amurathes. To whome ſucceeded Amurathes his ſonne, who imitating the ſteppes of hys Father and Grandfather, in paſſing an arme of the Sea Hellispont in Abidie, to inuade the Greekes, tooke Galiapolys with diuers other Townes, and afterwardes ſuddaynely with a mightie power ſette

vpon the Emperor of Constantinople, that nothing miſtruſted him, and wanne Seruia and Bulgaria, but in the ende he was killed by a ſeruitor.
                  After Amurathes ſuccéeded by ſucceſſion two infants,Solyman and Baiazeth. 
                     Solyman and Baiazeth, which by treaſon murdred his brother Solyman, whereby he alone enioyed the Empire of Turkie, and to reuenge the murdering of his father, hée attempted ſharpe warres agaynſt Marke the Lorde of Bulgaria, whome he vanquiſhed and flewe, and ſubdued a greate parte more of his country. Shortly after he ouercame the prouinces of Hungaria, Albania, and Valachia, and there committing many ſpoyles and dammages, he tooke diuers chriſtian priſoners, which he ledde in miſerable captiuitie into Thracia, to whiche Baiazeth ſuccéeded in right of inheritance two infants, one named Mahomet, and the other Orchanees, which by his vnnatural brother Mahomet, was depriued of lyfe, ſo as the gouernment of the Empire was wholly in Mahomet, who by might conquered the Valachians, and layde vpon them a gréeuous tribute: after, hée inuaded the Satrapes of Aſia, and recouered all the countries whiche the greate Tamberlens ſouldiers before had taken: hée chaſed his owne kynred and aliaunce from Galacie, Pontus, & Capadocia, not ſparing, nor once pitying any noble perſonages or princes of his own bloud. He alwaies kept himſelfe in Drinople, the Metropolike Citie of Thracia, there placing his imperiall ſeate: from thence exiling ſuch Chriſtians as were remayning and inhabiting there in the ſeuentéenth yeare of his Empire.
                  To this Mahomet ſuccéeded his ſonne called Amurathes, hée ordayned firſt the Ianiſſayres, (runnagate chriſtians to defend his perſon) by whoſe valiancie, hée togither with his ſucceſſors haue ſubdued the Eaſt. With force he inuaded Hungaria, Boſina, Albania, Vallachia, and Grecia: he toke Theſſalonia from the Venetians, he obtayned victorie againſt Laodiſlaus king of Polonia, againſt the Cardinall Iulian, and againſt Huniades.
                  
                  When Amurathes was deade, his ſonne named Mahomet,
                     Mahomet ſonne to Amurathes. ſuccéeded in his place, whiche with homicide entred his gouernement:

for, bycauſe his father ſhoulde not be buryed alone, hée ſlewe his yoonger broother, to kéepe companie with his deade father. This wicked Prince beleeued in no God: hée affirmed Mahomet a falſe Prophete, like vnto himſelfe. Hée alſo ſcorned all Saintes, Patriarches, and Prophetes. This Mahomet was of hearte lyke Alexander the greate, in good fortune a Ceſar, in trauell a Haniball, in Iuſtice a Traian, in vyces a Lucullus, and in cruelties a ſeconde Nero. Hée was of greate courage, well fauoured, euyll coloured, friend to Iuſtice, and hyghly delyghted in martiall affayres. Hée was in féeding a glutton, and in the actes of Venus much impacient: To hunting an enimie, and to Muſicke no friend. Hée delyghted to exercyſe him ſelfe ſometymes with feates of armes, and ſometymes in reading hiſtories. This Mahomet conquered from the Chriſtians the Empire of Conſtantinople and Trapezonda. Hée wanne twoo hundred townes and twelue Realmes, that is to ſaye: Pontus, Bythinia, Capadocia, Pamphilia, Licia, Sicilia, Papblagonia, Acbaria, Lydia, Phrygia, Hellespont, and Morea: Hée alſo wanne the Segniories of Achaia, Carcania, and Epyrus, and all the Fortes and Cities néere the ryuer Randabelo. Hée likewyſe obtayned a greate parte of Macedonia, and of the Prouince of Bulgaria, togyther with the lande of Roſcia, and the mountaynes Serbye, euen to the lake Nicomante. Moreouer bée conquered all the Cities, Prouinces, and Fortreſſes that were betwéene Andrinopolis, and the famous ryuer Danubia and Balaquian: alſo the Iſle Mitilene, and the foreſayde Boſina. Theſe and muche more did this miſcreaunt Mahomet vanquiſhe and ſubdue. And yet notwithſtanding, as Hiſtoriographers reporte,Mahomet firſt of ye race of Othomās, that tooke on him the name of Greate Turke and Emperor. hée woulde amongeſt his wayghtie affayres conſume muche tyme in abhominable vyces. This was hée, whiche firſte acquyred to himſelfe the glorious tytle and name of Greate Turke and Emperour, of all the houſe and race of Othomans, whoſe predeceſſoures before his tyme were alwayes intytuled Kings or Turkes. He raygned thirtie twoo yeares, and dyed of the Collicke foure dayes after

hée ſyckened, in the yeare of our ſauiour Chriſt. 1492. In whiche yeare of this Tirantes deathe, was the Citie of Granado taken by the King Don Ferdinando. To this Mahomet ſuccéeded in Empyre and name of Greate Turke, a ſeconde Baiazeth, who, in his Fathers lyfe,To this Baiazeth ſucceded Selim, which poyſoned his father, bicauſe he liued ouerlong, and to Selim ſucceded Soliman which wanne Belgra, Hū
                        garia, Buda, and Rhodes. by procurement of the Ianiſſayres, and in the hope of theyr ayde, purpoſed to vſurpe the ſtate and Empyre to himſelfe. And as the father béeyng nowe verie olde, coulde yéelde no remedie nor reuenge to his diſloyall ſonne, dyed for thought: ſo was his life, whiche by enimies coulde not bée taken awaye, loſte by the enuyes of his children. Now if your Lordſhippe deſire more amplie to reade the wryters of this hiſtorie, I will when it pleaſe you, bring them vnto you.
               
               
                  From Tolledo 
                     the .7. of Ianuarie. 1533.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter to Don Frances of Villoa, expounding certayne ſtraunge and auncient Epitaphes.
               
               
                  MAgnificent and curious Knyght, for anſwere to the letter whiche Peter de Heredia (maiſter of youre houſe) deliuered mée at Carſares the 15. of the moneth paſte. I ſay, that after I had opened it, I ſtoode long in doubte, whither it ſhoulde be a letter ſent mée from a friende, or the laſte will and teſtament of ſome one departed: but then, when I better aduiſed the ſuperſcription, I founde it a letter come from Don Frances de Villoa, a friende, nay a ſingular friende to Fryer Anthonie Gueuara: and to ſaye truely, after I had peruſed and conſidered it, I rather wiſhed twoo doſen of Quailes, and a gammon of Bacon, whereof you haue plentie, than a ſhéete of paper: for they woulde haue delyghted myne eyes, and nothing haue troubled my memorie. But notwithſtanding this my pleaſaunt ſpeacke, I delyghted muche in the receyte of your letter: whereby I perceyue that your hurte legge is cured, and that preſently

you omit all tedious affayres, and onely applye your ſelfe to pleaſant paſtymes.
               Alſo, I gather by your letter, that you muche deſire to vnderſtande of the deſtruction of Spayne, and the ſignification of certayne Epitaphes, whiche you haue found written in a booke in your coffers, and now you ſende thē to me to be expounded. For which I cannot yéeld cōdigne thāks to your gentle hart, which conceyueth of my abilitie ſuche good opinion, that you iudge my knowledge ſufficiente to ſatiſfie you in ſo high matters. Wherefore to arme my indeuor to incounter your curteſie, I haue moſt willingly in this my letter ſent you the expoſition of thoſe Epitaphes, and the diſcourſe of the hiſtory, which you ſo much deſire, beginning with the Epitaphes, and ending with the reſt.
               
                  The firſt Epitaph.
                  
                     Semiramis Queene of Babylon ſet this Epitaph vp in ye name of hir huſbād Ninus.
                     MIhi pater Iupiter Belus auus Saturnus Babilonicus: proauus Chus Saturnus Aethiops: Abanus Saturnus Aegiptius: Atauus Caelus Foenix Ogiges. Ab Ogige ad meum auum ſolorbem ſuum circumlustrauit ſemel ac tricies & centies.
                  
                  
                     Ab Auo ad patrem ſexties & quinquagies: A patre ad me bis & ſexagies. Columnam, templum, ſtatua, Ioui Belo Socero, & matri Rheoe in olimpo Semiramis dicaui.
                  
                  
                     Semiramis Quéene of the Aſsyrians graued this title on a piller, and dedicated it vnto Belus hir father in law, in the name of hir late huſbande Ninus, as then it was vſed amongſt thē, which words engliſhed, ſignifie as followeth.
                  My father was Iupiter named Belus: my grandfather, Saturnus Babylonicus: my great grandfather was Chus Saturnus Aethiops: The father of my greate grandfather was Saturnus Aegipriacus, and the grandfather of my great grandfather was Celus Faenix Ogiges.
                  
                  From the time of the fludde vntill Ninus, the ſunne hadde performed his courſe .330. times. Nemroth raigned .56. yeares.

                     Belus my father raigned .62. yeares. I Semiramis haue dedicated this piller, temple, and Image vnto Belus my father in law, and Rhea his mother in law in Olympia.
                  
                  Now better to make you vnderſtand this antiquitie ſo aū
                     cient, and this age ſo old, you muſt note that theſe wordes Saturnus, Iupiter and Hercules were not proper names, as Peter and Iohn be, but they were common names or titles attributed to men for their excellencies and dignitie, as the names of Emperours, Kings and Dukes. The moſt ancient kings that founded any chiefe Towne or Citie within their Realmes or dominiōs, were called Saturni, and their eldeſt ſonnes Iupiters, and their daughters Iuno. Their Nephewes, and the infants of their children, if they were valiant, were called Hercules. And therefore when any Princes ſucceſſors of the ſayde firſte founders, did place themſelues at any time in other countries to inhabit the ſame, and founded any new Cities or Townes (as oftentimes they did when their aunceſters and predeceſſors had ſufficiently peopled ſuch as they before had buylded) ſuch Princes enioyed a duble title, kéeping the name of Iupiter by right of ſucceſſion, and the name of Saturne, by reaſon of their new foundatiō, and ſo likewiſe the Princes which ſprāg of them by ſucceſſion, were alſo named Iupiters in one reſpect, and Hercules in another: whereof procéedeth the greate number of Iupiters, Saturnes, and Hercules, wherewith hiſtories be ſo repleniſhed.
                  
                     Belus was therefore héere intituled by the name of Iupiter, for that he was ſonne and ſucceſſor to Nemroth in the Aſsirian Empire. Nemroth alſo was tearmed Saturne Babylonicus, bycauſe he firſt founded the Citie, and peopled the Realme of Babylon. Chus was alſo tearmed Saturnus Aethiopicus, for that he firſt peopled Aethiopia, and there founded townes and Cities. Cham for yt he firſt peopled Egypt was called Saturnus Aegiptiacus. Theſe Saturnius were called children of the Heauens and of Earth. Thus haue you now heard the firſt Epitaph expounded.
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond Epitaph.
                  
                     The Epitaph of Cata Mā
                        lia that was buried liuing.C. Man. C. Man. F. inferno Plutoni tricorpori chariſsimae Proſerpinae tricipitique Cerbero munus mecum ferens, damnatam dedo animam vitamque. Hoc me condo monumento, ne obrutis domus lapſu filijs ſex, quos Pûblius Scipio patrijs Camertibus ad Salid ex Libia incolumes restituerat, in deſolata orbitate ſuperſim. Vixi An. 56. M. 1. D. 5. boras ſcit nemo: vale vita.
                  
                     The expoſition of the ſame.
                     
                        ICaia Manlia, daughter to Caius Manlius, do carry with me mine owne preſent, for I gyue my condemned ſoule and life to the infernall three bodied Pluto, and to Proſerpina hys moſt deare ſpouſe, & to the threeheaded Cerberus. I haue encloſed my ſelf in this Sepulchre to lyue in care and griefe abandoned and afflicted. I haue vj. Children ſlayne moſt miſerably by the fall of a houſe, after that Publius Scipio had led them into their countrey of Camerin out of Libia trauelling towardes Salia. I lyued lvj. yeares, one moneth, and fiue dayes, but how many houres no man knoweth. Farewell life.
                     
                     Nowe if memory deceyue me not, and that my bookes bée true, this Epitaph was found in our time in Rome, which was of a woman of Camerin that was burned liuing, bycauſe in thoſe dayes they were ſo fooliſhe and faythleſſe, that they eſtéemed it a thing deſeruing prayſe, and muche honorable to be buried quicke, or violently to murther themſelues with their owne handes: and thus they did to pleaſe themſelues and ſerue the Deuill. But lawe diuine and humane doth manifeſt nowe vnto vs howe execrable a vice this is, and forbiddeth euery man to procure his owne death, ſince we haue our ſauioure Chriſt the author of our life.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The third Epitaph.
                  
                     Belli potens valida natus de gente Gothorum,The Epitaph of Athaolphus king of the Gothes.
                     
                     Hic cum ſex natis Rex Athaolphe iaces:
                     Auſus es Hispanas primus deſcendere in oras,
                     Quem comitabantur milia multa virum:
                     Gens tua tunc natos & te inuidio ſa peremit,
                     Quem post amplexa est Barcino magna gemens.
                  
                  To vnderſtande this Epitaph you muſt note, that when the Gothes (which were a barbarous and cruell nation of the North) had ſacked Italy, as by the ruines remayning it appeareth, Athaolphus the 24. their King, determined to haue ouerrunne Spayne, and to haue ſpoyled it as they had done Italy, and other places in their way. But when he came and was arriued at Barcelona, he, with vj. of his children, were there by hys owne ſouldiers trayterouſly murdred and buried, vpon whoſe Tomb was placed this Epitaph, with his armes, whiche engliſhed importeth as followeth.
                  
                     Here lyeth the valiant Athaolphus, with ſixe of his children, iſſued of Gothick bloud: this was the firſt that aduentured to enter Spayne with an Army, ſlayne with his owne men, and buried with great teares, in the great Citie of Barcelone.
                  
                  Sée here the expoſition of your Epitaph, and the cauſe of the fame.
                  It reſteth now to reueale the occaſion of the deſtruction of Spayne, and how the Chriſtians loſt the ſame to the Paynims, concerning which you muſte vnderſtande, that in the tyme of the raigne of king Roderic (whiche was of ye line of the Gothes,) there was in Spayne a Prince called Iulian, Earle of Cepta, and Lord of Conſuegra: whiche had a daughter of excellent beautie and incomparable wiſedome, named Caba. Thys Dameſell beyng ſent to the Courte to attende vppon the Quéene, to ſerue hir according to the manner of the Countrey, was cauſe

of the deſtruction of Spaine.
                     The deflouring of a maidē, was cauſe of the ruine of Spaine, or rather the hereſie of Arius wherewith they were infected, was cauſe of that puniſhment. For the king being ſurpriſed with hir loue, (when ſhée woulde not agrée to accompliſhe his inordinate deſires) determined by force, if not by loue to inioy hir, béeyng thus drowned in extreme paſſions, hée defloured hir within his royall Palace. The which when Count Iulian vnderſtoode, hée was hyghly offended therewith, and féeling himſelfe muche iniured thereby: determined reuenge vpon the kings owne perſon, to the ende he myght make a perpetuall remembrance of the wrong done by the Prince to him and his defloured daughter.
                  This Counte Iulian kepte ſecretely in his ſtomacke, the mortall hatred hée bare vnto King Roderic: and when hée ſawe conuenient tyme, hée made ſemblance to paſſe into Africa with an armie whiche the King had committed vnto him, where with to repulſe the Moores, whiche then inuaded the borders of Spaine. And hauing conferred of his determinations with Muzza Liuetenaunt generall of that Prouince, to the greate Miramamolyn Vlit, hée ſecretely practyzed with him in this ſorte, that if hée woulde yéelde him ſufficient ſupplye of ſouldiers, hée woulde put all Spaine vnder his obedience. The whiche when Muzza vnderſtoode, hée gaue intelligence thereof to King Miramamolyn, who did not onely in curteous wiſe accepte the offer of the Count, but alſo ſent him a ſufficient army to bring his deuyſed practize to effect.
                  The countrie béeyng néere the ſtraites of Giberaltare, was well furniſhed with men of great courage. He then folowing fortune, béeyng ſtirred forwarde by his wife, and the iniury whiche he had receyued, reiecting all loue of his cuntry, & renouncing obedience to his Prince: Sodenly as hée had imbarked his army of Moores in foure ſhips, and ſtrongly fortified himſelfe, he reuealed to his friends and kinred the iniury which the king had done him by deflouring his daughter, and requeſted their friendly ſuccour in his enterpriſe ſo waighty. Wherevnto they aſſenting, ſent him aide both of men & monie:
                  
                     Sée here the expoſition of your Epitaph, and the cauſe of the fame.
                  It reſteth now to reueale the occaſion of the deſtruction of Spaine, and how the Chriſtians loſt the ſame to the Paynims, concerning which you muſte vnderſtande, that in the tyme of the raigne of king Roderic (which was of ye line of the Gothes,) there was in Spaine a Prince called Iulian, Earle of Cepta, and Lorde of Conſuegra: whiche had a daughter of excellent beautie and incomparable in wiſedome, named Caba. This damſell beyng ſent to the Courte to attende vppon the Quéene, to ſerue hir according to the manner of the cuntrie, was cauſe of the deſtruction of Spaine.
                     The deflouring of a maidē, was cauſe of the ruine of Spayne, or rather the hereſie of Arius wherewith they were infected, was cauſe of that puniſhment. For the King being ſurpriſed with louing hir (when ſhée woulde not agrée to accompliſhe his inordinate deſires) determined by force, if not by loue, to inioy hir, ſo as béeyng thus drowned in extreme paſſions, hée defloured hir within his royall Palace. The whiche when Counte Iulian vnderſtoode, he was highly offended therewith, and féeling himſelfe muche iniured thereby: determined reuenge vpon the kings owne perſon, to the end he might make a perpetuall remembrance of the wrong done by the Prince to him and his defloured daughter.
                  This Counte Iulian kepte ſecretely in his ſtomacke, the mortall hatred hée bare vnto king Roderic: and when hée ſawe conuenient tyme, hée made ſemblance to paſſe into Africa with an armie which the king had committed vnto him, where with to repulſe the Moores, which then inuaded the borders of Spaine. And hauing conferred of that which he woulde do, with Muzza Auuenokair Liuetenaunt generall of that prouince, to the greate Miramamolyn Vlit, hée ſecretely practyzed with him in this ſorte, that is, if hée woulde yéelde him ſufficient ſupply of ſouldiers, hee woulde put all Spaine vnder his obedience. The whiche when Muzza vnderſtoode, hee gaue intelligence thereof to King Miramamolyn, who did not onely in curteous wiſe accepte the offer of the Counte, but alſo ſent him a ſufficient army to bryng his deuiſed practize to effect.
                  
                     The Ilandes of this country beyng néere the ſtraites of Giberaltare, were wel furniſhed with mē of great courage. He thē folowing fortune, being ſtirred forwarde by his wife, and the iniury which he had receyued, reiecting all loue to his cuntry, & renouncing obedience to his Prince: Sodenly as he had imbarked his army of Moores in foure ſhippes, & ſtrongly fortified himſelfe, he reuealed to his friends and kinred the iniurie which the king had done him by deflouring his daughter, and requeſted their friendly ſuccour in his enterpriſe ſo waightie. Whervnto they aſſenting, ſent him aide both of men and monie: ſo as he tooke all the coaſtes of Spaine, and much of the cuntry for the Moores: whiche was the firſte entrie of the Moores into Spaine, and was in the yeare of grace, 712.
                  
                  When the miſerable king Roderic had vnderſtāding hereof, & that if with ſpeede he ordered not his affaires, he ſhoulde be in daunger to looſe his realme and ſtate: with all the haſ
                        ••
                      poſſible he aſſembled an armie to encounter the Moores, and made a nephew of his Captaine generall. But the Moores giuing them the ouerthrow, mangled him & his men in péeces. About which time, another armie of Moores, which the fornamed Muzza had placed in gariſon in places before ſubdued, entred and tooke another countrye or prouince. Whiche King Roderic vnderſtanding, and perceyuing the Moores daylye to aduaunce their force, committing to fire and ſwoorde all the countrie that they ſubdued: he gathered togither another army, in whiche himſelfe in perſon togither with all the Nobilitie of Spaine,
                     The Moores being Lordes of all Spaine except Biſcay & the Mountaines, which is Aſtiria & Cantabria, diuided it into kingdomes, as Cordubia, Carthage, & ſuche like. woulde go to ſearche out the Moores, which then remayned at Seres, and did ſo in déede: where hée made greate ſlaughter both of the ſtraunge Moores, & of his owne Chriſtians. But in fine, the Chriſtian army was vtterly deſtroyed, & the king loſte: in ſuche wiſe, that afterwards he could neuer be founde quicke or deade. From this tyme Spaine fell into the ſubiection of the Moores. This battell was ended on a ſunday the fourth of September, in the yeare of our Sauiour 714. ſo as the Moores beeyng then victors, might eaſily make themſelues Lordes of all Spaine.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  A letter vnto the Admirall Sir Frederirk, wherein the Auctor doth touche the maner that in olde time was vſed on their ſepulchers, and the Epitaphes that were placed vpon the ſame.
               
               
                  GLorious Admiral & curious Lord, neither doth it profite mée to bée angrie, eyther to hold my peace, to exclame or complayne, neither yet to ceaſe to make anſwere: but yt alwayes I muſt continue in combate with your letters, as alſo with your meſſengers, for abſoluing your doubts. It is but .15. dayes ſince I anſwered your letter, and not a month ſince I abſolued a certaine doubt: I am determined with my ſelfe not to anſwere you to any letter, neither to declare you any doubt vntill the counſell of Saratan haue conſidered therof, and they of Villaunblalo do determine and iudge therein.
               To performe wherin you requeſt mée, & to execute the caſe which you cōmaūd me: I may not deny vnto your Lordſhip, that I haue not ſéene much, heard, paſſed, & alſo reade muche: but ioyntly herewith, your honor hath to conſider, that I am now become old, wearied & alſo tired, & go ladē with greate afaires, which be of neceſſity, but your doubts procéede of will.
               I haue ſayde & alſo written vnto your honor many times, as you are but of little bodie, & haue that minde ſo generous & noble, it ſhould be much to your eaſe,A neceſſarie conſideration betwixt will and neceſſitie. that you & Alonſo Eſpinel made exchange, which is to wit, that he ſhould lend you ſome more body, wherin that hart of yours might be conteined: and you beſtow on him ſome more heart, for that groſſe and ſo vnweldy a bodie. Cōſidering the great dulnes of Alonſo Eſpinel, and the excéeding ſpirite & liuelineſſe of your honor: I do not thinke to be deceiued, to vouche that your Lordſhip is a ſoule without a body, & that he is a body without a ſoule.A harde comfort. One thing doth yet comfort me, which is, that as your Lordſhippe nowe groweth old, and I alſo, both olde & ſickly: we ſhall not much write eche to other, and much leſſe vſe mutuall viſitation: bicauſe, as the diuine Plato ſayd, that yong men at times die ſodenly, but olde men may not liue long.
               
                  Little or muche, or muche or little, may it pleaſe the king of heauen, that that which we lyue, we may liue to his ſeruice,An accompte to be made, not what wee liue, but howe we liue. for that we haue no accompte to make, what we lyue: but howe we lyue.
               Leauing aparte both your ieſtes, and my complaintes: I my Lorde from hence foorth am determined to anſwere your letters with all breuitie, as alſo to declare vnto you all your doubts: for as Horace the Poet ſayth, it appertaineth to wiſe men,A counſell of Horace the Poet. to ſhewe a willing minde in that, wherein neceſſitie conſtreyneth.
               Cōming to the purpoſe, your honor cōmādeth me, to write vnto you, ye maner which they vſed in old time to make their ſepulchers, & the faſhion which they obſerued in placing their Epitaphes: for as it ſéemeth, you meane to take order for your ſepulture, & to deuiſe for the inuention of your Epitaph. From hencefoorth I ſay and diuine, that all thoſe which ſhall ſée my anſwere vnto your demaunde, will maruell, & alſo as it may chance to laugh, for that I ſhalbe forced in this place to relate hiſtories very ſtraunge, and cuſtomes neuer heard off.
               
                  Plinie in the beginning of his ſeuēth booke, reciting the great miſeries wherwith man is borne, & the immeſurable trauels wherin he liueth, ſayeth thus: Amongs all the beaſts that nature hath brought foorth, only man crepeth, onely man is ambitious,Errors of mans life. man onely is proude, couetous, and ſuperſtitious, only deſireth long life, & maketh a ſepulture wherin to be buried: moſte truely Plinie ſpake greate troth, bicauſe all other beaſts, neither riches doth make proude, neither pouerty doth make ſad, neither care to lay vp in ſtore, neither trauell to gather togither, neither wéepe whē they be borne, neither grow ſad when they ſhall dye: but only trauell for liuing, without carefulneſſe where to be buried.A ſuperfluous care. Onely the fooliſhe man is he, which fetcheth marble from Gene, Alabaſtre from Venice, porphire from Candie, bone of Gelofe, and Iuory of Guinea: for no greater purpoſe than to build a ſtately chappell, and to erect a ſumptuous ſepulcher, where to bury his bones: & the wormes to gnaw his intrailes. I do not diſalow, eyther reproue, but ye
                  
rather I admit, & prayſe, to build good churches, to erect great Chappells, to endue with good doctrines, to paint faire ſtories, and to make rich ornaments: but ioyntly therewith I ſay, that I hold it for more ſafe, that a man trauell and payne himſelfe to leade a good life, than make a rich Sepulture.A ſound coū
                     ſell. Oh how many poore men which are buried in Churchyards, whoſe ſoules reioyce and reſt in heauen: and how many, which be buried in ſumptuous and ſtately Sepulchres, whoſe ſoules be tormēted in Hell. On that night which Troy was burned, Aeneas intreating his father Anchiſes to depart the Citie, to the end he ſhould not want a Sepulchre,A ſmal boaſt of Anchiſes. the old man aunſwered Facilis iactura Sepulchri, as if he had ſayd, There is no leſſe griefe vnto manne, than to want a Sepulchre. The King Anchiſes ſayde well in that he ſpake, ſince we ſée the liuing man complayne of the biting of a flye, and of a flea that doth offend him: but of a man that is dead, we neuer heare any complaynt, for any lacke of ringing, or want of ſumptuous buriall.
               If Homer and Piſiſtratus do not deceyue vs: The Cithes were the people that with moſt pomp did burie their dead, and in moſt reuerence did hold their Sepulchres. Zenophon the Thebane ſayth, That the Cithes fléeing before Darius, he ſent word to knowe how farre they woulde runne: they aunſwered, we Cithes make no great accompt to loſe our houſes, our fieldes,S
                        〈…〉
                      of 
                        〈…〉
                      thi
                        〈…〉
                     
                   neither oure children, neyther yet our ſelues, in reſpect of offence to the Sepulchres of our forfathers: vnto the which whē thou ſhalte approche, oh King Darius, there ſhalte thou ſée and know, in how much more we eſtéeme the bones of the dead,Th
                        〈…〉
                      me
                        〈…〉
                      thei
                        〈…〉
                      An
                        〈…〉
                      eni
                        〈…〉
                      ceaſ
                        〈…〉
                      amō
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   than the life of the liuing.
               The Salaminos buried their dead, their backs turned againſt the Agarens, whiche were their mortall enimies: In ſuch wiſe, that their enemitie endured not onely in time of life, but alſo when they were dead.
               The Maſſagedas at the time of death of any man or womā, they drew foorth all the bloud in their vaynes: and that day all the kindred being aſſembled, did drinke the bloud, and afterwards did burie the body.
               
                  The Hircans did waſhe the bodies of the dead with wine, and did anoynt the ſame with a precious oyle: and after the parents had bewayled and buried the dead, they kept that oyle to eate, and that wine to drinke.
               The Caspians in finiſhing the laſt breath were caſt into the fire: and the aſſhes of the bones being gathered into a veſſell, did afterwards drinke them in wine, in ſuche wiſe, that the entrayles of the liuing, was the Sepulchre of the dead.
               
                  A ſtraunge Sepulture.The Cithes held for cuſtome, to burie no dead man, without burying a liue man with the ſame: and if by chance ther were not that willingly would be buried with the dead, for money a ſlaue was bought,A violence without all reaſon. with violence to be buried with the ſame.
               The Bractians whiche were a people very barbarous, with ſmoke did cure the bodies of the dead, as we now vſe to ſmoke oure Bacon: after at times (in ſtead of Martelmas béefe) by péecemeale to boyle the ſame in the pot.
               
                  An art moſt barbarous.The Thibirins did by induſtrie breede certayne moſt cruell Dogges, the whiche at the laſt gaſp of the dead, were caſt vnto ye Dogs to be eaten & torne to péeces: in ſuche manner, that the bowels of the Dogs, was the place where the Thibirins did burie their dead.
               
                  An vſe of the Chibirins moſt inhumayne.And for yt it ſhall not ſéeme that we ſpeake of fauoure or at large, your honor hath to read S. Ierome againſt Iouinian, & the Poliantea, in ye title of ſepulture, where you ſhal find al that I haue ſaid, and alſo much more which we haue omitted here to be written.
               Of the ſepulture of Belus, of Minus, of Semiramis, of Promotheus, of Ogiges, and of the other kings of Aegipt, Diodorus Siculus
                   reſiteth ſo many and ſo fabulous things, the whych I thinke better to omitte than to wright, to auoid his diſhonor and mine owne trauell.
               The Cithes did burie their dead in ye fields, incoffined with a certayn wood of Cithia incorruptible. The Hebrues did burie their dead in their inheritances or vineyards: vppon the ſame they erected a faire couer curiouſly wrought, & of ſtone of great choyce. Commonly in olde time they did burie within their houſes, or in the mids of their poſſeſſions, and ſo at this preſēt

appeareth in Italy, that whereſoeuer ye ſhall find any Tombe of earth & ſtone, it ſignifieth that there hath bene erected ſome honorable ſepulture. Foure Sepultures haue bin in Rome,The foure notable Sepultures in Rome. moſt rich and ſtately: that is to vnderſtand, of the great Auguſtus, whiche at this preſente is called the néedle of Adrian, whiche now is the Caſtell Saint Angell: of the good Marcus Aurelius, whiche is erected in the fielde of Mars: and of the valiant Seuerus, which was placed in the Vatican.
               Many Princes, both Gréekes, Latins, Romayns, Perſiās, Medes, Argiues, Hebrues, and Germaines, did make & build many & very ſtately temples: but we reade of none that commaunded or gaue order for themſelues to be buried therein: but in the fieldes, and their Temples they did dedicate vnto their Gods. More than thrée hūdreth yeares after the foundation of the Chriſtiā fayth, none at any time were buried within the Church: whereof it procéedeth, that it is not found in any of the ancient Legends of the martirs, but that ſuch a martyr was buried in Cimiterie of Pretexato, either of Caliſto, or els in the houſe or inheritance of ſome faithfull Chriſtian.
               Long time after the great Conſtantine, this cuſtome was brought into the catholike Church, to be buried in the ſame: & it is to be thought, that it rather procéeded of the deuotion of the faithfull, than for any intereſt to the Cleargy.
               Alſo your honor ſayth in your letter, that you hold me for a man both carefull and curious, for whiche cauſe you ſuppoſe, (for that I haue paſſed diuers times with Caeſar into Italy, and haue many ways traueled through Spayne:) I ſhuld haue collected and recouered ſome Epitaphs of Sepultures, worthy to be ſéene, and notable to be red. I cannot denie, but that after the manner of a Drunkarde, that venteth for the beſt wine:A commendable manner of drunkenneſſe. ſo doth mine eyes ſtare and wander to find out ſome old Sepulture, that may contayne ſome thing to reade, or ſentēce or Epitaph worthy the writing: and as I haue trauelled many & diuers lands & prouinces, I haue ſene many & very anciēt ſepultures, in which I haue found ſome writings graue, ſome ſharpe, others deuout, ſome malitious, ſome gracious, & ſome fooliſh,

in ſuche wiſe, that ſome are to be noted, ſome to be ſkoft, and others to be laughed at. If I had thought that any would haue bene ſo curious, as to haue craued or demaunded them, as I haue bin carefull and curious to ſearch and find them: I would haue held them in more eſtimatiō, and alſo haue commended them to more ſafe kéeping: for of them I haue lent, giuen, loſt, and ſome haue bin ſtolen, and otherſome I haue reſerued.
               But the caſe ſhall be thus, I will ſend vnto your Lordſhip all manner of Epitaphs, whiche is to vnderſtand, ſuche as bée graue, malicious, fooliſh, and ſome that be gratious: for that in ye good your honor hath to note, & in the other wherat to laugh.
               In an Hoſpitall of the incurable, that is in Naples, Caeſar
                   vppon a certayne feſtiuall day did heare ſeruice, where I ſaw in the great Chappell, a Tombe of a yong gentleman, whereon his old mother had placed this lamentable Epitaph.
               
                  Quae mibi debebas, ſupremae munera vitae,
                  Infelix ſoluo, nunc tibinate prior,
                  Fortuna inconstans, lex & varabilis aeui,
                  Debueras cineri iam ſupereſſe meo.
               
               In the ſame kingdome and Citie of Naples, vppon another feſtiuall day, Caeſar wēt vnto a ſtately Monaſterie of Nunnes of S. Clare, wher I found a Tombe of a certaine gentlewomā betrothed, which hapned to die the ſame wéeke ſhe ſhuld haue bin married: vpon whome hir parents beſtowed this lamentable Epitaph.
               
                  Nate beu miſerum: miſero mibi nata parenti,
                  Vnicus vt fieres, vnica nata dolor,
                  Nam tibi dum virum, taedas, thalamum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      parabam,
                  Funera & inferias, anxius ecce paro.
               
               In the Citie of Capua, I found a Sepulture very old, and in a manner defaced, in which theſe letters were ingrauen, although very ſhort, yet comprehending much.
               
                  Fui non ſum,
                  Estis non eritis.
               
               
                  In the Citie of Gaieta, one of the ſtrongeſt vpon the Sea coaſt in all Italy, being there with Caeſar, I met with a Sepulture not of the oldeſt, vpon which were written theſe words.
               
                  Siluius Paladius,
                  Vt moriens viueret,
                  Vixit vt moriturus.
               
               In Rome walking the ſtations of Saint Paule, paſſing at greate leaſure beholding the Churche: I encountred with an old Sepulchre vppon the ground: on the ſtone whereof theſe words were ingrauen.
               
                  Hospes quid ſim vides,
                  Quid fuerim noſti,
                  Futurus ipſe, quid ſis cogitae.
               
               In the Monaſterie of Minerua in Rome, whiche be of the order of Preachers, I ſawe in a certaine Tombe written theſe words.
               
                  O mors, O mors, O mors,
                  Aerumnarum portus,
                  Et meta ſalutis.
               
               
                  Caeſar being in the warres of Africa, the Viceroy of Cicilia died, which was called the Earle of Monteleon, Lord of Calabria. And for that by iuſtice he did cutte the throte of the Earle of Camarato, and with him many others, the Cicilians did deadly hate him for the ſame. The cauſe was thus, being buried in Saint Frauncis of Mezina, by night they added this title vpon his Sepulchre, as I was aduertiſed by the warden of the houſe.
               
                  Qui propter nos homines,
                  Et propter nostram ſalutem,
                  Deſcendit ad inferos.
               
               
                  In the yeare a thouſande fiue hundred twenty and thrée, comming out of Fraunce by Nauarne, in a little Churche in Viena not farre from ye Growine, I ſaw an Epitaph vpō the Tomb of the Duke Valentine: which without writing, I commended vnto my memorie: and as I thinke thus it ſayd.
               
                  
                     Here lieth clad in a little clay,
                     That mortall men did feare,
                     VVhich in peace & war the ful whole ſway,
                     In all this world did beare.
                  
                  
                     O thou that goeſt with care to ſeeke,
                     VVorthy things of prayſe moſt meete,
                     If worthy things thou wouldeſt prayſe,
                     Here thou haſt to direct thy wayes,
                     And therein farther to ſpend no dayes.
                  
               
               In the warres of Lumbardy there dyed an auncient ſoldier, which was valiant and meanely rich, who was buried by his friends in a little Village betwixt Plazentia and Voguera, on whoſe Sepulture were written theſe words.
               
                  Here Campuzano doth lie,
                  VVith whoſe ſoule the Diuill did flie,
                  But his goodes had Sir Antonie.
               
               In Alexandria de la Palla, I found another ſoldier buried in the Churche within the Caſtell; vpon whoſe Sepulture, that is to ſay, vpon ye wall, I ſaw writtē with a Cole theſe words.
               
                  Here lieth Horozco the Sergeant,
                  VVhich liued playing,
                  And died drinking.
               
               In the Citie of Aſte, when Caeſar went to make warre in Fraunce, we ſtayed certayne dayes: A Souldier was buried in

the monaſterie of Saint Frauncis, & as it ſéemed being very poore, made his will very rich, vppon whoſe Sepulture another Soldier placed theſe wordes.
               
                  Here lyeth Billandrando,
                  VVhich all that he had did not let to play,
                  And that which he had not he gaue away.
               
               In the Citie of Niſa, we buried an honorable ſoldier that had bin Captayne: but in the morning, and at night, with a Cole I ſaw written vpon his Tomb theſe words.
               
                  Here lieth the Soldier Billoria,
                  VVhoſe body to the Church by his friēds did ſend,
                  But his hart to his loue he did incommende.
               
               In a place of Spayne which ſhall be nameleſſe, I founde the Sepulture of a certayne Gentlewoman, vpon whoſe Tombe theſe words were written.
               
                  Here lieth the Lady Marina in earthly preſſe,
                  VVhich died thirty days before ſhe was counteſſe.
               
               In the .18. yeare, I being warden of the Citie of Soria, going to preach to the Camp of Gomara, in a little Village I encountred with an old Sepulture, vppon the ſtone whereof were written theſe words.
               
                  Here lieth bald Iohn Huſsillo,
                  VVhich taught boyes to ſwimme,
                  And wenches to daunce very trim.
               
               This yeare paſt, in viſiting my Byſhoprick of Mondonedo, I found in the Archdeaconſhip of Traſancos, in a little Churche by the Sea ſide, an auncient Tomb, which they ſayd was of a gentlemā naturall of ye place, which had theſe words writtē.
               
                  
                  Here lieth Vasko Bell,
                  A good Gentleman and a fell,
                  The which neuer drew his ſword indeede,
                  That made any man euer to bleede.
               
               Going for Cuſtos of my prouince of conception, in a generall Chapter, ioyntly with certayne religious Portingalls of my order bound to the ſame place: amongſt the which the warden of Sanctaren a man both wiſe and learned, vnderſtanding me to haue delight in old things, ſayde that in his Monaſterie, vppon a Tombe of a Portingall Gentleman were written theſe words.
               
                  Here lieth Basko Figueira,
                  Much againſt his will.
               
               
                  An amplification vpon a ſmall cauſe.So high a ſentence, ſo delicate words, and ſo certain a troth as this, as God ſaue me might not procéed, either be inuēted, but of a man of an high & delicate iudgement: they wer ſpokē in Portingall, in a Monaſterie of Portingall, in the behalfe of a Portingall, and a Portingall ſaide them: whereof I gather vnto my ſelfe, that the nobles of Portingall be wiſe in their attempts, and of ſharp iudgement, in what they ſpeake. To my iudgemēt, my appetite, & to my taſt and liking, to this daye I haue not heard or red a thing ſo gratious, as ye letter of that Sepulture: bycauſe, ther may not be ſaid a greater troth, than to ſay that Basko Figueira, or any other perſone, is in hys Tomb much againſt his will. What Sepulture is in thys world ſo rich, wherein any man deſireth to dwel, or wiſheth to be buried, what man is ſo inſenſible, that woulde not rather liue in a narrow houell, than in a large and ample ſepulture. Not only Basko Figueira lieth in his ſepulture againſt his wil, but alſo the Machabees in their Piramides, Semiramis in hir Polimite, the great Cirus in hys Obiesko, the good Auguſtus in hys Columna, the famous Adrian in his Mole magno, the prowde Alaricus in hys Rubico: All whyche if we coulde demaunde of them, and they aunſwere vs, woulde ſweare

and affirme, that they dyed without their owne conſent, and were buryed agaynſte their willes. My Lorde Admirall from hencefoorth I diuine, that if Basko Figueira lyeth deade in his ſepulture agaynſt his will: with an euill will I dare auouche you will bée buryed in yours, although moſte certayne the chappell is riche, and your Tombe very ſtately.
               Your honor hath to vnderſtande, that I thought good to enlarge this letter, to the end you ſhould haue, wherat to maruel, and alſo wherwith to laugh with a proteſtation that I make, that if you wryte agayne within this halfe yeare, I wyll refuſe to anſwere: for that I haue in hande certayne woorkes of myne owne, preſently to be printed, and after to be publiſhed. No more, but that our Lorde be in your kéeping.
               
                  From Valiodolid, 
                     the .xxx. of Marche, 1534.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A letter vnto Sir Alphonce Manrique, Archebiſhop of Ciuill, wherein is declared a certayne paſſage of holy Scripture, conuenient to bee read of Iudges and prelates that be cruell.
               
               
                  RYght Noble and pitifull Prelate, if your reuerend Lordſhip do conceyue that for the gallant baye mule which you haue ſent mée by Orlande your Stewarde, I ſhoulde ſubmit my ſelfe to do you great ſeruice, eyther to render greate thankes, ye are greatly deceiued: for although ſhe be both faire and good, I haue wonne and gayned the ſame by a ſentence pronounced agaynſte your honor, for the coſtes of proceſſe, and the amendes wherein you are condemned, when your moſte reuerend Lordſhip and the Duke of Naiarra, vppon a certaine contention did elect mée for your iudge: which is to wéete, where the ſituation of Sagunto ſhuld haue ſtande, and the renowned Neomantia ſhould haue bene: wherein to determine and verifie your doubte, I ſtudied very

muche, and traueled not a little. And ſince you are condemned in a Mule, and conſented vnto the ſentence, once againe I aduertiſe your honor, that I will neyther reſtore hir, and muche leſſe pay for hir. My Lord the Duke of Naiarra your brother, at Courte doeth dayly threaten mée, that eyther by violence he will take hir from mée, or elſe cauſe hir to be ſtolen: wherfore I humbly pray your honor, to commaunde that he leaue me in peace, otherwiſe I promiſe you, to proue vnto him, by my auncient hiſtories, that the borders and limites of Naiarra, haue bene twoo leagues within the Duchie.
               But nowe ſetting aſide all ieſtes, to ſpeake in earneſt, I ſhall performe with right good wyll, what your honor doeth commaunde, as touching the expoſition of the paſſage in Exodus, which I preached laſt in the preſence of Caeſar.
               
               
                  An expoſition of the .25. chapiter of Exodus.In Exodus, the .25. chapter, it is written, that our Lord God ſayde vnto Moyſes: Emunctoria quoque facies, & vbi ea quae emuncta ſunt, extingantur, fiant de auro puriſsimo.
                   As if he would haue ſaid, About the lampes of the Temple, thou ſhalt haue ſnuffers of moſt fine golde, to ſnuffe withall: and alſo thou ſhalt make a baſen of gold, wherein to laye the ſame.
               
               
                  A neceſſary maner to expounde the Scriptures.But now to vnderſtande this text very well, it is conuenient and neceſſary to take holde of the Scripture farder of, and more déeper: bicauſe in the profound and delicate paſſages of the holy ſcripture, it doth muche importe to declare the texte from the bottome and very roote.
               Wherein it is to be noted, that immediatly after our Lord God had deliuered the children of Iſraell out of the country of Aegipt, he gaue them a lawe to obſerue, Prieſtes to informe them, magiſtrates to gouerne them, a land to inhabite, Manna to ſuſteyne them, and a tabernacle to praye in. The curious reader ſhall find in the Pſalmes and Prophets, many times theſe names repeated: that is to ſaye, Tabernacle, Sanctuarie, Aultar, Propiciatorie, Sancta Sanctorum. Which names although they were verified in the ſynagoge of the Hebrewes, there was notwithſtanding a difference of the one and other. Tabernacles among the Iewes was as muche, as among

the Chriſtians at this preſent wée call Churche. The order wherof although it be difficile to write, neuertheleſſe it is very myſticall, and worthie the vnderſtanding.
               In the middes of the hoſte, where the Hebrues did aduance their pauilions,A deſcription of the Tabernacle. they left a certayne ſpace of an hundreth cubites in length, and fiftie of breadth: where on both ſides they erected twoo ſtately pillers, which did ſerue for diſtinctions or ſeparations of the roume for the Prieſts from the people. All which place as well in length as breadth, the Iſraelites did name Tabernacle, whiche is as muche to ſaye, as a place dedicate onely to God. In the middes of this tabernacle, was placed a ſolemne and a magnificent altar, where vpon the ſacrifice was done: there was alſo the greate baſon of water, where the Prieſtes did waſhe: and for that vnto that place, and no further, the Iſraelites might not enter, it was named Sanctuarium, which is to ſay, a place ſanctifyed.
               Within the Sanctuarie there was another ſeparation, of the ſpace of thirtie cubites in length, and ten of breadth, made of Sittim woodde, and alofte hauing the faſhion or forme of heauen, it was couered with a triple couerture, whereof the one was made of red ſhepes woolle, the other of goates heare, and the other of Taxus ſkinnes, whiche was for defence of the rayne and Sunne. Vnder this ſayde heauen, and in the mids of this ſayde place, there was the holy table, vpon which was ſette the holie breade, called the loues of propoſition, and the holie incenſe, and other ſwéete odors. This place héere named, was called the holie Tabernacle, bycauſe the Prieſtes onely myght enter: vnto the whiche place no other perſon would aduenture to approche.
               In the middes of this tabernacle ther was a great curtaine ſtrained betwixt the pillers, within the which was the tabernacle of witneſſe: wherein alſo was placed the tables of the law, the Manna of heauen, & Aarons rod. This place was intituled the holy of holieſt: wherin the high Prieſt might enter once a yeare. Within the ſayd Arke there was a table of fine gold, ſomwhat more long thā broad, wheron were placed two

Cherubins of golde at euery corner, their wings alofte ſtretched abroade, beholding eche other. In the middes betwixt the cherubins, there was a darke clowde, within the whiche was the Angell that gaue anſweres, as God commanded: And alſo anſwered what the good olde Moyſes determined. In this place where theſe cherubins are, was the moſte ſecrete and ſacred of all the tabernacle. This place was called the Propitiatorie: bycauſe in that place, the Lorde God did manifeſt himſelfe more propice and neare, as well to pardon, as to anſwere them. Beſides the propitiatory, and neare the aultar of the tabernacle, night and daye was fire, wherein alſo they did burne the holocauſtes, ſacrifices, and oblations.
               Within the tabernacle and propiciatory, ten paces or there aboutes off the mercie ſeate, or Sancta Sanctorum, was placed a magnificent candelſticke of fine golde: whereon were fyxed ſixe lampes full of oyle Olyue, which did burne day & nyght, to giue light to the tabernacle. Héere it is to be noted, that neither in the auncient Tabernacle of Moyſes, either in that famouſe Temple of Salomon, it was not commaunded, either permitted to burne tallowe candels, eyther tapers of waxe, but lampes of oyle: for the myſterie of the waxe, the onely woorkmanſhippe of the hony Bée, was left to lighten the Catholicke Churche. And bycauſe the Tabernacle, the Sanctuarie, the Aulter, the mercy Seate, and Sancta Sonctorum, were holie places, and edifyed onely vnto God: The law commanded they ſhooulde be decked, nete, cleare, and gladſome: and not fowle, or fylthie. Wherefore the Prieſtes had alwayes neare vnto the candelſticke, ſnuffers of golde to ſnuffe the lampes, and a baſen of golde, incontinently to place and put out that whiche was ſnuffed. Beholde the litterall ſenſe, and that whiche was permitted in the Synagogue, nowe ryght reuerende, it is greate reaſon that wée declare what wée vnderſtande as touching theſe ſnuffers, and the ſnuffing of the lampes.
               
                  
                  The ſignification of this diſcourſe touching the myſterie of the ſnuffers of Golde.
                  SVrely a thing woorthie the noting, & alſo to be maruelled at, that fire or flame, being a thing that doth purifie, mundifie, and giue light: notwithſtanding it throweth from it ſelfe and produceth fume and ſmoke, bothe tedious and ſtinking: and therefore I would gladly demaund of him that ſhal heare or reade the ſame, what hée woulde anſwere, whereof it is,A queſtion. That the aultar beyng holy, the Tabernacle holy, the Propipitiatorie holy, the Arcke holie, the candelſticke holy, and all that there is, holy and bleſſed: notwithſtanding there remaineth alwayes in the Temple, to clippe, to nete, to purge, to ſnuffe, and whervpon to ſet the foote. We haue hereby to vnderſtande and to inferre: That there hath not bene, neyther is there any nation, congregation, common wealth, eſtate,An imperfection of all eſtates. or perſon ſo holy, ſo perfect, or ſo reformed, that there is not in the ſame to be amended, or elſe purged, wiped, & alſo ſnuffed. For to ſay the troth, we ſée no perſon lyue ſo well, that might not, and ought not to liue better than he doth.
                  And howe commeth it to paſſe,A note for the Pope and papiſtes. that any dare canonize for Saint the moſt holy man in this worlde: ſéeing the ſcripture ſayeth, The childe new borne to be in ſinne. God finding cauſes to chaſten the Angels, doth he not finde wherfore to purge and ſnuffe men?
                  Hée that heareth the royall Prophete Dauid ſpeake after this manner: Ecce enim in iniquitatibus conceptus ſum, & in peccatis concepit me mater mea: Durſte he peraduenture ſay, that in him was no ſinne?
                  And God ſayde vnto Noe, Quòd omnis caro corruperat viam ſuā:
                      what may hée be, that will ſaye, he had no ſinne, conſidering that God condemneth the vniuerſall worlde of ſinne?
                  Since the Pſalmiſt ſayeth with moſt cleare voyce, Omnis homo mendax: how cōmes it to paſſe, that any dare excuſe himſelfe of ſinne? The Scripture ſaying thus, Adam ſinned in eating of the defended frute: Cain ſinned in killing his brother:

King Dauid ſinned by his adultery: Ionathas ſinned in eating the hony: Abſalon in conſpiring againſt his father Dauid: and alſo Salomon ſinned by idolatrye. Then ſince theſe glorious perſonages be fallen downe flatte, is there any perſon, that may thinke himſelfe ſafe from ſtumbling?
                  And in the name of God, I craue to be anſwered, for what cauſe did the diuine Paule cry, ſaying: Qui ſe existimat ſtare, videat ne cadat, but to the ende that euery man ſhoulde conſider with himſelfe, that hee is fallen into ſinne, or that ſhortly hée may fall into ſinne?
                  
                     An example not to be forgotten.He that conſidereth the moſte infortunate fall of Iudas the diſciple of Ieſus Chriſt, accompanying Ieſus Chriſte, and hearing Ieſus Chriſt: dareth he aduenture to truſt and haue confidence in himſelfe? Since wée are deſcended of ſinners, haue taken our byrth of ſinners, be conuerſant with ſinners, and committe ſo enorme and deadly ſinnes: ſay we not moſt true, that they be moſt vniuſt, which affirme & eſtéeme themſelues for iuſt and rightuous?
                  I admitte that euery man ſay what he will, and performe of himſelfe what hée thinketh good: For if I will confeſſe the troth, that in mée there is many things to be amended, many things to be clipt or ſhorne, many things to be purged, and to too muche to be ſnuffed.
                  
                     
                        No ſmal part of iuſtificatiō, to confeſſe our ſinnes.
                        And yet vnperfect without correctiō.
                     And ſurely, it is no ſmall parte of Iuſtification, to confeſſe our faultes: notwithſtanding the confeſſion ſuffiſeth not, if wée do not inforce our ſelues to correction. For if a candell haue too long a ſnuffe, it ſuffiſeth not a little to dreſſe and erect, but to ſnuffe the ſame. And for that, if in this whole worlde there were but one vice wherein wée myght fall, all men woulde beware thereof: But ſéeyng there be ſo many quagmires, wherein to bée myred, it is a thing too common, that if we ſincke not to the bottome, at the leaſte we remayne all bemyred.
                  Yf wée wyll haue the candle cleare, and of himſelfe gyue lyght, it is very neceſſary that he be oft ſnuffed. By this that I haue ſayde, I woulde ſay, that the man that hath ſhame in

his face, and woulde preſerue his conſcience, preſently when he hath committed the faulte, he muſte determine to amende. For if he once harden his conſcience, late or neuer doth hée amende his lyfe.
                  To this purpoſe the wiſe Salomon ſayde, Impiusciòn in profundum malorum venerit, contemnit: as if he ſhoulde ſay,Contempt of amendement yeldeth vtter confuſion. 
                     He that the Lorde doth refuſe to ſuccour with his mercifull hande, deferring from day to day to amend, he goeth deeper and deeper to the bottome, beeing clad in ſuche manner with ſinne, as he in no wiſe wyll yeelde to correction.
                  
                  Wherefore God in commaunding that at the foote of the lampes that did light in the Temple, there ſhoulde be ſnuffers to ſnuffe them, it is no other thing, as mée thinketh, but that euery man ought to ſéeke with whome to bée indoctrined, in that whiche hee ought to followe, and remoued from his errour wherein hée offended. For in his owne cauſe, it is not permittible for any man to bée Iudge of himſelfe.
                  But how contrary is the faſhion at theſe dayes in this miſerable worlde. The glorious Apoſtle S. Paule ſayde, In nouiſſanis diebus coaceruabunt ſibi magistros prurientes auribus, which is,A chaunge of faſhion. 
                     They ſhall more delyght to haue with them, flatterers to deceyue them, than directers by good counſell to aduiſe them.
                  
                  I returne to ſay and reiterate, that it is no other thing to commaunde to haue ſnuffers nyghe vnto the candleſticke, than to gyue vs to vnderſtande, that wée ought often to accuſtome our ſelues to purge our conſcience. For if it be neceſſarie in one houre, thrée or foure tymes to ſnuffe the candle, it ſhall not be ouermuche, that euery wéeke at the leaſte, once or twice to purge and ſnuffe the ſoule. The candle hauing a greate ſnuffe, may not well gyue lyght, and the ſoule laden with ſinnes, may finde no merite. And therefore it is neceſſarie to gyue and maynteyne muche; as to a lampe, or to ſnuffe him well as a candle: bycauſe, ſinnes that bee rooted and growen olde, be difficile to confeſſe, and harde to amende.
                  
                     Therein it is alſo to bée vnderſtoode, God commaunded that the ſnuffers, wherewith they ſhoulde ſnuffe the lampes, and alſo the baſon wherin they ſhoulde lay the ſnuffers, to be not of groſſe, but pure and moſte fine golde, to gyue vs to vnderſtande,The vnderſtāding of the ſnuffers of moſt pure and fine golde. that the King, the Prelate, the Iudge, the gouernour and giuer of chaſticement, ought not to containe in thē
                     ſelues any vice, wherfore to be ſhorue, clipt, or ſnuffe: for that it is not permittable by the lawes humane or diuine, that one théefe ſhould iudge another théefe to be hanged.
                  
                     The ſnuffers of leade or yron to bee noted.And then are the ſnuffers of leade, or of yron, when the Iudge or gouernor is of a life leſſe honeſt, in his ſpeache inordinate, and wherein hée iudgeth of partiall affection. For otherwiſe it ſhall be more expedient, to neate and purge the ſnuffers, than to ſnuffe the Candelles,
                  And then be the ſnuffers of fine golde, when the Iudge or Prelate is of a ſyncere life: modeſt in his purpoſes, zelous of his Common wealth,Notable qualities of a magiſtrate. & a right Iuſticer, as alſo by the voyce of common conſent to haue nothing whereof to be amended, and leſſe to be deſired.
                  
                     Faciebat Dauid iudicium & iustitiam omni populo. This is written of Dauid in the ſeconde booke of Kings, which is as muche to ſay,A notable example of king Dauid. 
                     That the good king Dauid did ſitte openly giuing audience to euery man, and doing iuſtice to all men. Certaynly there bée many, that as Iudges do heare all in publike: and ſmal is the number which giueth right to all men: And ſome that do iuſtice vnto diuers, but not many that equally miniſter iuſtice to all men. Which ought in no wiſe to be done, much leſſe to be conſented vnto. For the lawe ought not to go as the king willeth: but rather the King as the lawe willeth. O wordes moſte certainely to bée noted, and to memorye bée incommended:To be incommended to the memory of Princes. by the which is ſayde of the good King Dauid, not by the hands of another, but of himſelfe: not in his houſe, but openly: not once, but euery daye: not to one perſon, but to al the people: not that he would prolong them, but it is ſayde, from the preſent hour
                        •
                      in whiche hée hearde them, he did diſpatche them.
                  
                     The Iudges that God did conſtitute and ſend into diuers places, all haue bene holy and iuſt, which is to ſay, Noe which was ſent againſt the idolaters, Loth that was ſent againſt the Sodomites, Moyſes
                      againſt the Aegiptians, Helie
                      againſt the falſe prophetes, and Daniel againſt the falſe Iudges. Notwithſtanding they found much wherefore to correct, yet in them there was not founde any thing whereof to be ſnuft. And therefore of the Prelate, which is wiſe, vertuous, and not cruell, all mē take pleaſure to be aduiſed of their negligences, and corrected of their faultes. But if ſuch a one be abſolute, or diſſolute, with greate griefe they indure to be chaſtiſed.
                  Neither ſerueth it to great purpoſe, that the ſnuffers wherwith we ſnuffe the candell, be of golde or ſiluer, if in the place of ſnuffing, we dowte the candel: whereby I would ſay,A note for Iudges. that the true Iudge or Prelate ought to conceyue better of himſelfe, to be pitifull, than rigorous, ſtretching his intention rather to amend the fault, than diſcredite the ſinner. With ſnuffers of gold doth he ſnuffe the candell, when the Iudge or prelate do chaſtice the miſchiefe, and on the other parte hath pitie on the offender. For otherwiſe God will accept the pacience of him that is corrected, and condemne the will and frowarde diſpoſition of him that correcteth.
                  Neither is it alſo without myſterie, that God commanded in his law, that vnder the holy candelſticke the ſnuffers ſhold be placed, & the baſon of golde, wherin they ſhould beſtow the ſnuffings of the lampes. For in the ſacred Scripture, there is no word that is not miſtical. Surely I ſuppoſe it is no error to ſay, that the Candleſticke is the Church, the cādell the ſinner, the ſnuffers the Prelate, and that whiche is ſnuffed, is ſinne:An excellent expo
                           ••
                        tion. which God commaundeth to be ſnuffed, and incontinently in water or ſand to be couered, to the end it do not offend or gyue ſtēch vnto him that ſnuffeth the ſame. And therfore the Iudge or gouernor of ye cōmon wealth, ought curiouſly to cōſider, not onely the acte of correction of faults, but alſo whiche cōcerneth the preſeruing of credite. And it is no other thing, when God willeth, ye preſently after the ſnuffing of the lampe, the ſnuffe ſhold be buried, but yt the ſinner be chaſtiſed, & not diſhonored.
                  
                     Admitting that our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt had ſinne in great horror, notwithſtanding hée did not hate the ſinner. For he himſelfe ſayde, Nō veni vocare iusto, ſed peccatores. And of him thus was ſayde, Hic peccatores recipit, & manducat eum illis. The Lorde & redemptor with golden ſnuffers did ſnuffe the lāpes, and in a golden baſon did lay the ſnuffers, when he called ſinners; did preache to ſinners, & was ſerued of ſinners, hauing no diſdayne to haue them in his companie, and to ſitte with them at one table.
                  Yf we ought to vſe our ſkill in ſnuffing the candels, muche more delicately we ought to correct ſinne, whiche to ſay, that the correction be in ſecrete, diſcrete, and done with Chriſtian charitie, and not as a Prelate or Iudge cruell and inhumane. Ieſus Chriſt vnderſtoode very well, that Iudas ſhould ſell him and deliuer him into the hands of the Iewes, and yet notwithſtanding he waſhte his féete,An example to be imbraced did communicate as with his other diſciples, did ſitte at table with him, and gaue him leaue to talke and conferre: to gyue vs to vnderſtande, that with ſuch modeſtie we ſhould correct the faults of our neyghbour, that by no meanes we ſhould hinder his credite.
                  In this wretched world, that which we ſnuffe from the candle, we caſt vpon the grounde, and treade vpon with the foote, I would ſay, that from the houre that a poore ſinner committeth any notable crime, from thence forth he is abhorred of al men, and likewiſe defamed, as though wee were not accuſtomably vſed to proſecute ſinne, behold ſinne, and committe offences. I aſſure your Lordſhip, that if all men which know to ſinne, that be giuen to ſinne, & glorifie themſelues to haue ſinned, ſhoulde fayle or dye: we ſhould then haue ſmall cauſe to build houſes, neither yet to ſowe wheate. But it is not ſo, nor hath bin ſo in the houſe of God. For that whiche was ſnuffed, was layd in the baſon of golde,For that God pardoneth ſinners, it is conuenient that ſinners do pardon eche other. to giue vs alſo to vnderſtande, that he which ſinneth by frailtie, either doth erre by negligēce, we ought not preſently to defame, and much leſſe to diſhonor.
                  For if God which is moſt iniured, giue pardon, there is no reaſon that another ſinner as greate, ſhoulde condemne him.

Beholde moſt noble and my good Lorde, what it is that I vnderſtande as concerning this paſſage, and that which I preached vnto the Emperor in the pallace at Madrid, 
                     the .12. of Auguſt, Anno. 1527.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A diſcourſe made vnto Queene Elenor, in a ſermon of the transfiguration, wherein is touched by an high ſtyle, the greate loue that Chriſte did beare vs.
               
               
                  RIght high and magnificent Princes, the moſte auncient among the Auncientes, and the moſt famous amongſt the famous Adages or Prouerbes, is the ſame whiche was gyuen by the Oracle of Apollo vnto the Orators of Rome: whiche is to witte, Noſce teipſum: and, Ne quid himis: As if he woulde haue ſayde, All the weale of the common wealthe is contayned in that, that euery man do knowe himſelfe, and that none do manifeſt himſelfe, his déedes & attēpts extreme. Inaſmuchas that preſumption, & to great ſelfe lyking, importeth daunger, and euery exceſſe likewiſe, and leadeth vnto trauell. Wordes more briefe, and ſentences more compendious certaynely myght not bée ſpoken, eyther found in wryting: For that (to ſay the troth) if euery man did conſider with himſelfe the ſmall woorthineſſe that he contayneth, he woulde not ſo lyghtly iudge of others, and if no man woulde ſo extremely determine to perfourme his wyll, ſo manie errours, violences, and faultes woulde not be committed.
               And for that cauſe, the man that is in his conuerſation preſumptuous, and in his affayres headſtrong, vnbrydeler,To rowe agaynſte the ſtreame, and fiſhe agaynſte the winde. and opiniatiue, no man ought to beare him enuie, or impaire his rent, ſince he roweth agaynſt the ſtreame, and fyſheth agaynſt the winde.
               To eate too much, is extreme and exceſſe: too much colde & to greate heate, is the ſame: greate aboundance & miſerable

pouertie is likewiſe extreme, whereof wée may inferre, that onely vertue is that, which is equall in ballance, and that only is vice,The notes of Vertue. that endureth no equalitie. One man to cal another man extreme or exceſſiue, is to touche him with to greate an iniurie, conſidering that euery man whiche is headdy and extreme,The garmēts wherewith a foole is clad. he is not farre from the ſtate of a foole. Inſomuch that follie is no other thing, but when a man without reſpect doeth all things to his owne liking.
               Then I demaunde if this be true, as it is, wherfore ſayeth the Goſpell, that vpon the Mount of Thabor, Moyſes
                   and Helie did talke with Ieſus Chriſt, of the greate exceſſe whiche hée ſhould vſe and performe in Ieruſalem.
               
               Truly theſe be woords very ſtraunge, the perfectiō of God being ſuch, yt his powerſerueth not to cōmit any thing ſuperfluous, neither yet defectiue in any thing he taketh in hande. And what is he that dareth to ſaye, that there is any thing, which he cānot do? or performeth yt which is not reaſonable?
               Then preſently lette vs examine the life of the good Ieſus Chriſt, and we will ſée if we can finde, wherin he hath bin extreme, or wherein he hath vſed exceſſe, ſince wée all confeſſe, that his life hath not bin but as a clocke to gouerne vs, and as a butte whereat to ſhoote.
               Neyther are we able to ſaye, that he committed any exceſſe in eating or drinking, for preſently after he was baptized, hée wēt to faſt in the deſert fortie dayes & fortie nights on a tāke.
               And leſſe did Ieſus Chriſt vſe exceſſe in his apparrell, ſince it is not found written that he had more than two coates, and yet went bare foote.
               Not in ſléeping, eyther in recreating that hée vſed exceſſe: ſince that many times he paſſed the night without reſt, ſlepe or lodging, and tyred with trauell, was driuen to repoſe vpon the welles ſide of Samaria.
               
               Not in woordes, eyther in his Sermons, ſince his enimies did ſaye, that neuer any man ſpake ſo little, ſo well, and with ſuche modeſtie,
               Not in the lawe which he hath giuen vs, eyther in the preceptes

which he hath ordeyned: for he hath not commaunded in his Goſpell any thing whiche is prophane: and in recompence he hath promiſed the obſeruers therof life euerlaſting.
               Neyther hath hée vſed exceſſe in hourding of treaſures or other comfortes of mans lyfe: for that hée lyued Apoſtolike, and all thoſe of his colledge, whiche partly lyued of Almes, and did eate eares of corne in the fieldes for neceſſitie.
               And to ſay the troth, and to ſpeake clerely of this matter, the exceſſe and the greate extremitie whiche the bliſſed Ieſus committed, was not, as it is ſayd, in drinking, eating, ſleping,An extreme exceſſe cōmitted of Chriſt. or in any other thing, but only in loue: for all his other works and actions were finiſhed, except the loue which he did beare, that was infinite and had no ende. And therfore if any would ballaunce the griefes, ſorrowes, afflictions, and teares of Ieſus Chriſt, with the loue that he did beare vs, without compariſon hée ſhall finde his loue farre to excéede and ſurmount his tormentes, for that vpon the trée of the Croſſe, his paſſion had an ende, but his loue and affection did neuer ceaſſe.
               And certaynly Ieſus Chriſt in all things vſed greate moderation, excepte in his loue, whiche he did beare vnto the vniuerſall worlde, béeyng ſo exceſſiue, that it excéeded the humanitie, approching very néere vnto the diuinitie. And therfore, if he had not bene God and man, as he was, it had bene impoſſible to haue loued with ſo great affection, and to haue beſtowed ſo greate and maruelous things, for that whiche he loued.
               Moſte certaynly Ieſus vſed exceſſe and greate extremitie, to ſuffer ſo many thornes to pearce his ſacred heade, & ſo many other paſſions and tormentes to afflict his moſte diuine bodye: whiche paſſions and tormentes, did farre excede the afflictions which the Martyrs indured. Therfore we ſay,Thirſte ceaſſeth not to cō
                     mit exceſſe. that greate was the exceſſe and extreme was the loue that Ieſus Chriſt did beare vs: which he did manifeſt in the workes of a moſt true and perfect louer.
               
                  Moyſes and Helie did not common with Ieſus Chriſt, of gouernement of the family, neither of their ſynagoge, but of the

ignominious & ſtaunderous death, which Ieſus Chriſt ſhould endure at Ieruſalem, and how he ſhould die for all men, and that he ſhoulde be tormented with excéeding afflictions, whiche hée ſhould indure with an heart accompanied with extreme loue. Si diligitis me, mandata mea ſeruate: which is to ſay, My deare diſciples, it is not ſufficient to ſay, that you loue me, if otherwiſe you be negligent to obſerue my commaundements: for that you ſee, I am not ſatisfied to loue you well in woordes, but that I ſhew and performe the ſame in dedes. Yf we would profoundly regard theſe wordes of Ieſus Chriſt,Loue of effect more than of affection. we ſhoulde finde the loue of God not onely to conſiſt in affection, but in effect.
               I would ſay that good workes be more exorable vnto God than holy deſires. For him that is féeble and ſicke, it ſuffiſeth that he loue, but he that is hole and ſounde, ought to loue and woorke: for Ieſus Chriſt our God doeth accept the wante of power, but is diſpleaſed with want of will.
               
                  Wante of power, but not of will is accepted.
                  Diligite inimicos vestros, & benefacite ijs qui oderunt vos: As if he ſhould ſay, Loue your enimies, and do good vnto them that perſecute you. Ieſus Chriſt gyuing to vnderſtād, that loue ought to be put in effect.
               Likewiſe the ſcripture ſayth, Ignis in altari meo ſemper ardebit, & ſacerdos nutriet illum mittens ligna: VVithin the Temple that is dedicate,
                   ſayeth the Lorde, and vpon the Aultar which is conſecrate vnto me, I will that it be alway furniſhed with fire, one of the Prieſtes hauing charge with wood to maintaine the ſame that it go not out. In ſuch wiſe that God is not ſatiſfied, that for his own tyme, there ſhoulde be fire of loue: but alſo therewithall hée commaundeth, that it be entertayned with the woodde of good workes. For as fire goeth out, if it be not maintayned with wood, ſo likewiſe loue groweth cold, which is not mixed with good workes: and as the fire without wood turneth to aſhes, ſo doth loue without workes take an ende and finiſhe.
               
                  Loue hath his maintenance by good workes.The Philoſopher will ſay, that, habitus, is ingendred of actus: and the Diuine will ſay, that the good loue is conſerued by the meane of the good worke.
               Speaking of the extreme loue that God did beare vs, Ieremie
                  
ſayeth, In charitate perpetua dilexi te: which is, I loue not as others, neither is my loue like the loue of others: for I loue mine with charitie, and do intreate them with pitie.
               
               The loue of man is ſuch, that if they determine to loue any thing, it is moſte likely they loue the ſame, for the perfection therof. As if he ſhoulde loue an Orient ſtone, it is for the propertie or beautie thereof: if he loue meate, it is for the taſt: If he loue golde, it is, for that it is precious: If he loue Muſicke, it is for that it gladdeth him: If he loue his wife, it is for hir bountie or beautie. In ſuch wiſe, that man aduaunceth not to loue any thing, in which he hath not ſome opinion, that it ſhall like or pleaſe him. But far otherwiſe is the loue whiche God beareth vs. For we knowe not in ourſelues any cauſe,Weake cauſes to obtayne the loue of God. why God ſhould be in loue with vs, which is moſt euident, for that our eies delight to behold nothing but vaine things, our eares to heare lyes & flatteries, our hands ready to rapine, our harts bent vpon couetiſe: In ſuche wiſe, that in our wretched and miſerable perſon, God findeth not any occaſion why he ſhould loue vs, but many wherefore to hate vs. Notwithſtanding the bleſſed Ieſus, determined to remedie the ſinnes that hée ſawe in vs, and the ingratitude that he founde in vs: it pleaſed him to ſuccour vs with his mercie, and to lend vs his bleſſed grace, by the meanes whereof we might bring foorth the frutes of good woorks, wherof he himſelfe might be amourous, and our conſcience comforted.
               Then Sainct Peter, that denied him, S. Paule, that purſued him, S. Mathew that as a Publican did exchaunge, the théefe that did ſteale, might not haue foūd the houſe of Ieſus Chriſt if he himſelfe firſt had not giuen his grace.
               Oh loue neuer hearde of, oh louer not to be compared,Agaynſt the heare of mundaine loue. the which againſt the heare of mundaine loue, both giue loue, and the occaſions of loue.
               
                  In charitate perpetua dilexi te, ſayde Ieſus Chriſt by the Prophete, that the loue wherewith Ieſus Chriſt doeth loue vs, is not fayned, much leſſe tranſitorie, but perpetuall, & ſtable: whiche is moſte true, in as muche as by the meane of his

owne grace, he is pleaſed with vs, before our good works can declare vs to be his friendes.
               
                  A diuine loue not vſed among men.That with a perpetuall and perfect charitie thou loueſt mée, oh thou loue of my ſoule and redéemer of my lyfe, conſidering the loue which thou beareſt vs is thine, and the profite therof is mine, pretēding no other thing of thy loue which thou beareſt to all creatures, but by demonſtration to declare thy ſouerayne bountie, in placing vpon vs thy moſt great and ardent charitie.
               With perpetuall charitie, O Lorde, thou doſt loue vs, conſidering that greate daye of thy paſſion, wherein neyther the tormentes of thy body, eyther the deſpitefull malice of the people,A moſt ſoueraine & vnremouable loue. might in no maner withdraw thy ſouerayne bountie, or darken thy moſt great charitie: but rather with innarrable ſighes, and teares incomparable, didſt praye for them that did crucifie thée, & didſt pardon them that did offend thée.
               And moſt certainly, with a perpetuall charitie did our good Lorde loue vs, ſince from the preſent houre wherein hée finiſhed his prayer, and rendred his ſpirite, incontinent was manifeſted the frute of his paſſion, and the efficacie of his prayer.
               
                  Non rogo pro ijs tantum, ſed pro bis qui credituri ſunt in me. Ieſus Chriſte ſpeaking vnto his father the nyght before his paſſion, ſayd, O my father, I pray not vnto thée onely for my Apoſtles and Diſciples, but alſo I praye as well for all the faythfull whiche ſhall beleeue in mée, and that ſhall loue thée. For euen as thou & I be one ſelfe thing in diuinitie, ſo they and I be one body myſticall by charitie.
               O Redéemer of my lyfe, oh repayrer from all my diſtreſſes, what may I do that may pleaſe thée, wherewith may I recompence thy great goodneſſe, wherwith I am indebted? if I be not ſufficient to giue due thankes for the good things that hourely thou doſt beſtow vpon me, what abilitie may I finde to ſatiſfie the great loue which thou beareſt vnto my ſoule?
               Surely the woordes that the Lorde Ieſus Chriſt did ſpeake in his prayer, bée ryght woorthie to bée noted, retayned,

and to memorie to be commended, conſidering we were not yet borne, neyther yet our greate Grandfathers.Chriſt extended an ardent loue vnto vs, before we had being. He prayed vnto his father with ſuche inſtance and great efficacy, for the health of all his Churche, as much I ſaye, as for thoſe, whiche were with him at ſupper: in ſuch wiſe, that the good Lorde, as he ſhould die for all, woulde pray for all: whereof we maye inferre, that we ought fully to beléeue, and to be out of doubt, that ſince oure redéemer had vs in remembrance before wée came into the world, that he will not now forget vs, when by faith we enter into his ſeruice.
               I pray thée gentle Chriſtian ſay vnto me,A great cauſe of hope. if Ieſus Chriſte had not pitied our eſtate, what had become of vs? ſurely if the Church of God at this preſent do contayne, or is endued with any obedience, patience, charitie, humilitie, abſtinence, or cō
                  tinence, all is to be imputed to the ardēt loue that Ieſus Chriſt did beare vs, by the prayer he made vnto his father on oure behalfe, redéeming our diſgrace with his precious bloud, and by his prayer placing vs in fauour.
               To be in loue with ſuch as be preſent and abſent, to be in loue both with quicke and dead, it paſſeth:A loue neuer hard of. but to loue ſuche as be yet to come; and be not yet borne, certainly is a thing that was neuer heard of: the which our redeemer hath performed and brought to paſſe, and yet hateth the wicked liuer, and loueth the good not yet borne.
               In ſuch manner is cuppled togither, both life and deathe, loue and hatred, he that loueth, and the thing loued, that al taketh end at an houre, which is contrary vnto the loue whyche Ieſus Chriſt doth beare vs: for his loue had beginning before the creation of the world, and yet ſhall not ende at the daye of iudgement. The concluſion of all that we haue ſayd ſhall bée:An euerlaſting loue. that the exceſſe or extremitie which was ſpokē of in ye mount of Thabor, was of the extreme and exceſſiue ſorrowes, that Ieſus Chriſt ſhould endure, and of the moſt great and exceſſiue loue that he did beare vs, and in time to come ſhoulde ſhewe vs here by grace, and after by glory. Ad quam nos perducat Ieſus Christus Amen.
               
            
            
               
               
                  The taking and ouerthrow of Carthage, done by Scipio the great, with a ſingular example of continencie which he there expreſſed, written to the Byſhop of Carthage.
               
               MOſt honorable Lord, and Catholike Prelate, I haue receyued in this Citie of Toledo, in his Maieſties Chamber, the letter that you haue written, and the Emrode which you haue ſent me, the which ſurely is very faire and rich, but notwithſtanding, in reſpect of the place and from whome it commeth, I rather hold and eſtéeme it more deare, & incontinuall remembrance. And I vnderſtoode by your letter, youre eſtate, and how you behaue your ſelfe in your biſhoprick, and that you are not as yet diſpoſed to come to this Court, for that you are there in greater quietneſſe, and haue leyſure to ſerue God, whereof doubtleſſe I do not a little enuie your felicitie: for this life at Court is no other thing than a languiſhing death,The manner and frute of life in the Court of Spayne. a certayne vnquiet life, without peace, and principally without money, and a certayne purchace of domage and offence to the body, and of Hell for the ſoule.
               If it pleaſed his Maieſtie yt I might retire vnto my houſe, I promiſe you by the fayth of a Chriſtiā, I would not ſtay one houre at Court. For the Court is neyther good or conuenient for me, either I for ye Court. But being confeſſor vnto his maieſtie, and Amner vnto the Empereſſe, I may not eſcape one day from the Court. Notwithſtanding amongſt all theſe diſcommodities,The commodities of the Court of Spayne. wé receyue this benefite, whiche is, we vnderſtand in this Courte all that is done, or in practiſe, through the world, which is a matter wherein man dothe much delight, & content his ſpirites, hauing no regarde to other thinges, that might tourne him to more profite.
               As touching you my Lorde: you poſſeſſe youre houſe with great quietneſſe deliuered of all fantaſy to come to the Court, as well for the reaſons aboueſayd,A good rule for a Byſhop as alſo for that your people ſhal be indoctrined and maintayned in better behauiour, and your haule and buttry more throughly furniſhed.
               Farther, you commaund me to write vnto you particularly, whē the Carthaginians entred into Spayne, & at what time Scipio the African did take Carthage, the chiefe Citie of youre

Biſhoprick: and that you haue layd a wager with the Lord ſir Peter of Mendoza gouernour of the ſame Citie, vpō the ſame matter, & being of cōtrary opinions, haue choſen me for iudge or arbitrator of your contentiō. Certaynly theſe be things very farre from my profeſſion: for being religious as you know, it ſhoulde ſerue much better to the purpoſe, to ſit and vnderſtand of the time that my religion was inuented, and in what countrey S. Francis was borne, than to vnderſtande when the Carthaginians entred Spayne, & at what time ye 
                  Romaynes did ſack & ſubuert Carthage. But ſince you haue choſen and eſtabliſhed me for your iudge, & will yt I ſhal ſay my opiniō,A matter without remiſſion. & that which I know: I ſhal not fayle to yéeld & rēder my endeuor, without any remiſſiō of ye Mule which you promiſed me.
               But comming nowe to the purpoſe, you haue to vnderſtād, during the warres betwixt ye 
                  Gaditains,
                  The Gaditains be thoſe of Caliz. & the Turdetaynes, the Gaditains ſent their embaſſadors to the Carthaginians, to draw thē to their party, & to haue ſuccour from them: whervnto ye Carthaginians conſented, and at the inſtant ſent Marhaball, a man very valiant, to go into Spayne to the ſuccour of the Gaditains. This Marhaball vnder ye colour of giuing aide vnto the Gaditains,
                  A poſſeſſion and a ſecret commiſſion to be noted. brought himſelf in poſſeſſion of a certayne part of Andolozia, and reduced the ſame vnder the gouernmēt of the Carthaginians, folowing his ſecret commiſſion, and the order which was giuen him in his eare: This was broughte to paſſe in the yeare of the general Floud. M.D.CCCX.
               This was the firſt diſcent of ye Carthaginians in Spayne. In the days when the Romaynes expelled their kings. But afterwards, the Carthaginians diuers times by diuers Captayns, did inuade & had poſſeſſiō of many countries & cities of Spayne, which they held vnto ye time that the Romayns comming vnto ye ſuccour of the Saguntines, where ye Carthaginians wer diſcomfited, diſtreſſed & driuen away: both the armies being conducted by Hanniball & Scipio, the firſt being the leader and Captayn of ye armies of Carthage, the other for ye 
                  Romains. This Scipio was thē intituled Scipio the great, & renoumed with ye ſurname, African, for yt after he ſubdued ye great Carthage, & did take the ſame by diuers aſſaults. This City as is knowen to your

Lordſhip,A deſcription of the ſituation of Carthage. it holdeth on the Eaſt part, a certaine hill with a ridge, compaſſed with the Sea, and on the other ſide wher this hill or ridge ioyneth vnto the Citie, there is a lake on that ſide of Bize.
               
               The Carthaginians ſuppoſing theyr Citie to bée ſufficiently ſtrong vpon that ſide, gaue no order thereof either for watche or ward. As Scipio battred the Citie by Sea & land, he had aduertiſemēt by certaine fiſhermen of Tarresko, which at othertimes had repaired and gone to Carthage, that the water of the lake did vſe to fall at an houre.A moſt vnfortunate report of a neighbor. By whiche aduertiſement Scipio cauſed the water to be ſounded, and hauing found the greateſt depth but to the girdle, & in moſt places but to the knées, he cauſed certayne choſen ſouldiers to enter the water, whych paſſing without impediment, did climbe the walles, & entred the Citie, obtayning thereby poſſeſſion with ſmall loſſe, hauing executed great ſlaughter of the people thereof, and Hanno the Captayne of the Citie being taken priſoner. And as the Romaines did proſecute and performed the deſtruction of the Citie, forcing to paſſe by the edge of the ſword al that euer they met, a Damſel of Spayne of a noble houſe, ye wife of Madonius, brother to Indibilis, Lord of the Illergets, did yéelde hir ſelfe proſtrate and groueling at the féete of Scipio, moſt humbly beſéeching, that it might pleaſe him to vouchſafe to recommende the honor of the women vnto the ſouldiers. And as Scipio anſwered, that he woulde gladly performe the ſame, this Lady replyed ſaying after this manner:
               O Scipio, I am charged with one particular and right ſorrowfull griefe,A duble fute of a vertuous Lady. whiche pearceth my heart in this preſent fortune to ſolicite thy excellēcie to vſe thy mild fauour with great diligence: for I haue héere my two nices (ſhewing two moſt excellent right ſingular yong Ladies) daughters of Indibilis, which hold and eſtéeme me as their onely mother, who teare mine entrayles and breake and pearce my hart, to ſée them in ſeruitude amids the armies.
               Whereof Scipio being moued by great compaſſion, and no leſſe reuerence, made anſwer vnto this Lady: Madame, you

haue to vnderſtand, that notwithſtanding the common courteſy of the Romayne people, and my naturall condition doe prouoke me to defend the honor of Ladies: yet therewithall,An anſwer of a noble & vertuous minde. youre great vertue and dignitie conſtraynes me to vſe more ſpéedy diligence therein: conſidering that in the mids of youre aduerſities you forget not the chiefe poynt of honor, whiche al Ladies of chaſt renowne ought to mayntaine, kéepe & defend.A chiefe point of Ladies of chaſt renowne
               
               The which being ſayd, he commended theſe thrée Damſels to the gard and defence of a gentleman of name and much eſtéemed for his vertue, ſtraightly commaunding the ſame, to entreate and ſerue theſe Ladies, with no leſſe courteſie, than if they were the wiues or daughters of gentlemen of Rome.
               
               And nowe, ſince you haue bin aduertiſed of one vertuous acte of Scipio, I will yet recite another right famous déede,A ſpectacle for yong Captaynes. of great vertue, to ſhew vnto the world, that Scipio doth worthily deſerue eternall prayſe, to ſerue as an example and perfect ſpectacle of continencie to all yong Captaynes.
               The cauſe was thys: at the very inſtant that Scipio hadde diſpatched theſe thrée Ladies aforeſayd, ye Souldiers brought vnto him a certayne yong Damſell, the faireſt that euer they had ſéene: but Scipio vnderſtanding that ſhe was betrothed to Lucius Prince of the Celtibires, and that ſhe was diſcended of parents very noble, would in no wiſe touch hir, but rather had a duble care to defend hir honor. And hauing commanded the father and the huſband of the ſayd Lady to be called vnto hys preſence, and alſo vnderſtanding the ſayd Prince to loue with an ardent deſire, and an inflamed affectiō: ſaid thus vnto him: O Lucius, hauing thy loue in my power, and being yong as thou art, I might well enioy the delight of hir beauty:Scipio of ſingular continencie. but hauing aduertiſement that thou beareſt hir great and moſt perfect affection: I haue thought good not only to defende but alſo to preſerue hir for thée, and render the ſame into thy handes as chaſt a virgin, as ſhe was deliuered vnto me. And I wil no other recompence at thy hands, but that thou cōtinue a faithfull friend vnto the Romaines, for thou ſhalt not find a Nation in this world of ſo perfect friendſhip as are the Romayne people,

neither of ſo great merit for their worthy vertues.
               Wherevnto Lucius coulde ſay no other thing, but kiſſing the right hande of Scipio, beſought the immortall Gods, to remunerate the great goodneſſe and paſſing courteſie he had vſed vnto him, confeſſing his great want of abilitie, for the recompence of ſo great a bountie.
               And after returning vnto the parents of the ſayd Damſell, rendering their daughter without any raunſome: They moſt inſtantly beſought him, that it might pleaſe him to accept the gold whiche they had brought for hir raunſome, in token and as a pledge of their amitie and dutifull affection.
               
                  Scipio being preſſed of them, did accept the ſame: and placing it at his feete, in the preſence of them all, called Lucius and ſayd:A rendred raunſome giuen to the mariage of an enemie. behold Lucius, I giue thée this gold which thy father and mother in law haue preſented me, as a gift vnto the marriage of thy wife, beſides that which before was appoynted thée. Take and refuſe it not for my ſake, and as a token for remembrance of ſound friendſhip in time to come.
               Then Lucius and his father and mother in lawe, receiuing the Damſell and the golde, did take their leaue of Scipio, and retired into their countrie, publiſhing in all places wher they paſt, moſt greateſt praiſe of Scipio and the Romaine people.
               
                  A recompence for curteſie receyued.Very ſhortly after Lucius came to ſéeke Scipio with fourtéene hundreth horſe, to attend and aſſiſt the Romaynes. After which time Scipio departed from Carthage to Tarzacone, to giue order for the warres, in effect to chace and expulſe the Carthaginians out of Spayne.
               
               My Lorde beholde here my opinion as touching youre demaund: and if your honor, or the gouernor be not of the ſame opinion, which is, that if Marhaball were not the firſt Carthaginian that entred Spayne: and that the great Scipio the African, did not take, ſack, and ſubuert new Carthage: I will ſay no more, but that if Titus Liuius were aliue, he would giue you ſuche a cōbat with the Camp of his Decades, that he would throughly giue you to vnderſtand of your wrong information.
               Of newes there is no other, but yt his Maieſtie is in health,

and twice a wéeke goeth to ye aſſembly. The Empereſſe alſo is in health, and this hote weather féedeth very little. Thys other night from Ciuile they broughte a paquet of letters vnto his maieſtie:Newes. wherein he was aduertiſed of ten ſhippes from Peru, to be arriued in ye hauen of Ciuill with twenty Millions of gold, whereof there were eight for his maieſtie, and twelue for other particular perſons. Diego of Acunia the bearer hereof, ſhall farther make report of all that paſſeth here at Court. No more but God haue you in his kéeping and giue me grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Toledo 
                     the 22. of Iuly. 1537.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  A diſputatiō and diſcourſe holdē againſt the Iewes of Rome, wherin is declared notable authorities of the ſacred Scripture.
               
               
                  ALiama Horranda, which is to ſay, honorable troupe of Inis, I remayne with the long diſputation paſt, ſo wéery, and my head ſo diſtempred with your cries, that if it were not for the ſeruice of my Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, and for the zeale of youre ſoules, the profeſſion of a deuine, as alſo for the honor of my law which I confeſſe & ſoundly beleeue: you ſhoulde be aſſured that I would neither diſpute with you any more, or enter at any time into your Sinagogue, for that as touching your cō
                  uerſion ye are too too much obſtinate,To be obſtinate and opiniatiue expreſſeth enimitie to the troth. and in the maner of diſputation extremely opiniatiue. Neyther vnto you eyther yet vnto me doth it apertayne, that the difficulties or opinions which eyther of vs defendeth, ſhuld be verefied with offenſiue armes, much leſſe with iniurious words aſſuring, that at the Scholes where I haue ſtudied, and of the maſters of whome I haue learned, he was not eſteemed wiſe, that cried ſtrongly, but could performe and ſpeake very well.
               And ſince we debate not vppon any matter of your goodes, much leſſe is my comming for the ſame or any ſuche purpoſe, but only for the verifying of the ſacred Scripture. I pray you for the loue of God, interrupt not my reaſons, but heare me with patience vntill I haue finiſhed my tale: for al you of this Sinagogue hold for cuſtome, yt if any word be ſpokē againſte your taſt or liking, forthwith ye begin to garboile, cry & brable. Therefore

heare me, and I will heare you: ſpeake, or elſe I will ſpeake: giue eare vnto me, or elſe I wil hearken vnto you: ſuffer me, and I ſhall endure and ſuffer you: ſince we talke, confer and diſpute of matters ſo high and deuine, it is good reaſon that ſuch difficulties, and ſo great myſteries ſhould be diſputed after the manner of wiſe men, and not crying as fooles: conſidering that the wiſedome of the wiſe is knowen by his talke,The wiſe is knowen by the manner, & modeſtie of his talke. and his prudence in the modeſtie which he vſeth in his ſpeech.
               I haue ſayd all this, for that in the diſputation which wee haue had betwixt vs, eight days paſt, ye did not only impugne and ſpeake againſt both the authorities which I alleadged of the holy Prophet Eſay, and of King Dauid, but alſo ioyning your fiſtes to my eyes, ye charged me with the lie, iniuriouſly and threatning.
               
                  The Inis diſpute with their fiſts.If ye ſhuld ſay, that I am a great ſinner, a daſterd, dull, and ſimple, I confeſſe the ſame.
               But to ſaye that is falſe whiche I alledged, or erroneous whiche I defended, I vtterly appeale and denie: for my good Lord Ieſus Chriſt of his mercy either coulde or woulde fayle me therin. But comming to the purpoſe, me thinketh to commit no iniurie, to bring foorth and alleage the paſſages of the holy Bible, and therewithall, of the holy Prophet Dauid, and a king amongſt you beſt beloued, and of Eſay the Prophet, of you moſt eſteemed. The whiche haue ſayde and prophecied, of the ignorance which ye ſhould haue, from the which I beſéech God to drawe you and with his grace to enſpire you: for certaynely I haue compaſſion to conſider youre greate infamie, hauing in times paſt aboue all nations receyued moſt fauour of God.
               
                  Pſalme. 63.
                  Scrutati ſunt iniquitates, defecerunt ſcrutantes ſcrutinio. The royal Prophet Dauid ſayd, ſpeaking of the doctors of your lawe, as if he would ſay,King Dauid did Propheſie the errours and falſe interpretation of the Inis. the miniſters of the lawe be ſet, to interprete and declare the ſacred ſcripture, from the which, they haue not drawen but falſhood and malice.
               But now honorable Inis, I pray you to ſay, of whome doth your Prophete here ſpeake: And tell me what they be, that

dare falſifye the ſacred ſcripture? to the ende we may vnderſtand to ſhun them, or elſe as Heretiques to burne them. For as the diuine Plato ſayde, he ought to be accuſed of high treaſon, that falſely doth interprete the law.
               If ye will ſaye, that the Gentiles, Scrutati ſunt iniquitates,
                  The Gētiles be excuſed of falſe interpretation of the ſcripture. which is to ſay, That they haue euill interpretated the law, I anſwere that you ſpeake vniuſtly and raiſe a falſe teſtimonie againſt them: for the princes of the heathen haue more gloried and giuen themſelues vnto the warres than to the interpretation of bookes.
               If ye will ſay, that thoſe whiche preſently be called Moores or Turkes, be the ſame people, whereof the Prophet ſpeaketh: Scrutati ſunt iniquitates, herevnto I anſwer,The Turks, Moores, and Saraſins, were not acuſed by the propheſy of King Dauid, to be falſe interpreters. The Chriſtians be defended of falſe interpretation of the Scriptures. that as falſe is the one, as the other: for as muche as if we will haue regarde vnto the time of the raigne of King Dauid, which did propheſie the ſame: vntill the time of Mahomet the firſt inuentor and conductor of the ſect of the Moores, we ſhall find, that there dyd paſſe, leſſe than 2000. and more than 1800. yeares.
               If we would ſay and affirme that the Prophet did meane, and direct his ſpeech vnto the Chriſtians, I ſaye alſo it is moſt falſe, and repugnant vnto all troth, for being admitted, that the Chriſtian faith had beginning to raigne 600. yeares, before the ſect of the Moores, and more than 3000. yeares after the beginning of the Gentilitie or the Heathen from the tyme that this prophecie was written at Ieruſalem, vnto ye time they began to name themſelues Chriſtians at Antioch, there paſſed more than a thouſand yeares, and alſo thrée hundred yeares more for aduantage.
               Behold here truly verifyed, that ſince the prophecie may not be aduouched vpon the Gentiles, the Moores, neyther yet the Chriſtians, that it is to be vnderſtood, & ſpoken vnto you Iewes, more expreſſely, for yt the Prophet ſaith not Scruteront,
                  A manifeſt proofe that the Prophet only chargeth the Iewes of falſe interpretation. but Scruterent, giuing vs to vnderſtande, that many yeares before King Dauid did pronounce the ſame, youre aunceſters had then already begon to corrupt the ſacred Scriptures, and

to adde vnto the ſame erroneous gloſſes.
               I lie not, neyther do I repent to haue ſayd, that your auncient fathers, Scrutati ſunt iniquitates, ſince they haue no grace to vnderſtand the Prophecie of Ieremie which ſayth,Ieremy. 31. 
                  poſt dies multos (dicit dominus) dabo meam legem in viſceribus illorum, & in corde eorū ad ſcribā legem meam As if he wold haue ſayd: After many dayes, and after many yeares, I will create a newe people, and will giue them a new lawe, whiche I my ſelfe will wright in theyr bowells,
                  A comfort vnto Chriſtians 
                  and hide within their harts: to the ende that no perſone ſhall falſefy the ſame, and muche leſſe ſhall they be able to forget it.
               
               Then as the Prophecie which ſayth: Scrutati ſant iniquitates. &c. is ſpoken onely vnto you, and not to all men: in lyke manner this Prophecie of Ieremy whiche ſayth, dabo legem in viſceribus illorum, &c. is ſpoken vnto vs Chriſtians, and not to you Iewes.
               For as muche as our Catholike fayth conſiſteth more in that which is rooted within our hartes, than in that whyche is written in bookes: in ſuch manner the weale of the Chriſtian lieth not in that whiche hée readeth, but in that which he beléeueth.The weale of the Chriſtian is faith.
               
               The maruels that Chriſte hathe done, and the doctrines which he hath giuen vnto the world: It is neceſſary and well done, to knowe and alſo to reade them: but it is muche more founde and ſure to beléeue them: for the number is infinite which be ſaued without reading, but not one perſone without well beléeuing.
               
                  Many be ſaued without reading, but not one perſon without beleeuing.The Edicts and Proclamations, which they ordeyned, and the lawes of Moſes, Promotheus, Solon, Licurgus, and Numa Pompilius, were all written with their handes, and preſerued and kept ſafe in their originals within their liberties: but the law of Ieſus Chriſt, ought moſt certaynly to be writtē within our harts: for that, in as much, that the Lord gaue vs no other law, but the law of loue, he did like and thought it better, that we ſhoulde ſearch and find the ſame within our hartes,Loue is the law of Chriſtians. than within our bookes.
               
                  And not without great miſtery, God ſayd by the mouth of your Prophet, yt the law which his ſonne ſhould giue vs, yt he ſhuld firſt write it within the harts, before ye Euangeliſt ſhuld reduce them by writing into bookes: for after this manner, it might not be forgotten, neyther yet burned.
               And ſo, if youre auncient predeceſſors, hadde obtayned the law of Moyſes written in their harts, as they had them writtē in old parchment: they had not in times paſt worſhipped the Idolls of Baal, Bell, Pegor, Aſterot, Bahalim, and Belzebub: for whiche offence, you were caried captiue into ſtraunge countries, and falne into your enimies hands.
               
                  How it came to paſſe, that the Hebrew tong was loſt.
                  
                     IN like manner ye vſed me with no ſmall deſpight, for that in diſputing againſt you,Chapter .49. I alleaged youre Eſay, where God the Father ſpeaking vnto his owne proper ſonne, ſayde theſe wordes, parum eſt mihi, vt ſuſcites tribus Iacob, & feces Iſraell: dedit te in lucem gentium vt ſis ſalus mea vſque ad extremum terrae. As if hée would haue ſayd: it is no great matter, that thou ſerue me, to ſuſcitate and raiſe vp the lies of Iacob, and to conuert the dregges of Iſraell: for I haue giuen thee alſo for a light vnto the Gentiles: to the ende that thou ſhalt be my ſauing health vnto the ende of the worlde.
                  
                  There is no man, hauing read although but little in the holy Scripture, that will not ſaye and affirme, that the Prophet Eſay was not an Hebrew borne, a Prophet of a noble line, and right eloquent in the ſcriptures: for which cauſe, you ought rather to blame and complayne of him, which doth call and tearme you lies and dregges of Iacob, than of me, the which in all oure diputations, haue not at any time alleaged any Chriſtian doctor, but only Hebrewiſh Prophets.
                  
                     I ſaye agayne, that you haue ſmall reaſon to be offended with him or me: for there is another Prophet which doth call you off ſcowring, another venim, another lies, another dregs, another ordure,A report as true, as miſerable. another ſlime, another ſmoke, another filthe, in ſuche wiſe, that as oft as ye did not ceaſſe to ſin, ſo did they not ceaſſe to blaſon, and to expreſſe you with moſt perfect tearmes.
                  Are ye able to denie, that of your prieſthood, of your Scepter, of your Temple, of your Realme, of your lawe, of youre tong,An heauy deſtenie. either of your ſcripture, is there any remayning but the lies which ſmelleth, and the dregs which ſtinketh?
                  Surely, that which was in youre lawe, cleare, nete, precious, and odoriferous, long before the incarnation, was conſumed: and that little which remayned, in Ieſus Chriſt did take an end. And as cōcerning the prieſthood of your law, the great ſacrificer, or the high Prieſt, ought he not to be extract out of the Trybe of Leuy, whereof you haue nothing left but the lies? for yet in the time of yonger and better dayes, it was no more giuen vnto the Leuits that did beſt deſerue it, but vnto him that offred moſt ſiluer: in ſuch wiſe that to him that offred moſt,Nothing left but lies. and had greateſt ſkill to flatter, the prieſthood was giuē: as when a garment is ſold by the drumme.
                  Likewiſe of your Scepter royal, what haue you but ye lyes? for Herod Eskalonite a ſtraunger, did not onely vſurpe your Realme, but by induſtry cauſed the Prince Antigonus, ſonne to Alexander your King, to be drowned: the finall end of youre Realme of Iudea,
                     Nothing left but dregs. and of the Crowne of Iſraell.
                  
                  What ſhall we ſay of your moſt auncient Temple, ſo magnificent in buildings, and ſo holy in the action of ſacrifice: ſurely ye haue no other thing but the lies.
                  For ye well know, that forty yeares and no more. After ye crucifyed the Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, the Emperours Titus and Vaſpaſian the father and ſonne,Nothing but lies. did ſack, deſtroy, and burne the ſame.
                  
                     Of the Monarchy of your kingdome muche leſſe haue you not of any thing, than the lies, for that, from the time, ye great Pomp
                           •
                        y paſſed into Aſia, and ſubdued Paleſtine, he neuer after committed fayth to any Iewe: I ſay to giue him any ſpeciall charge of gouernmēt in the Citie, or defence of any fortreſſe,Nothing but dregges. but perpetually did ſhew your ſelues ſubiect to the Romaynes, not as Vaſſals, but rather as ſlaues.
                  If we ſhould ſpeake of your auncient language, & of the old carrecters of your wrightings, we ſhould likewiſe finde, that you haue not any thing left but lies: and for proofe thereof, firſt I pray you tell me, whiche is he amongſt you, that knoweth the language of your anceſters, either can reade,Nothing but lyes. or elſe vnderſtand, any of the auncient Hebruiſh bookes?
                  But nowe to bring you to the knowledge thereof, I ſhall deduce, notwithſtanding it doth not like you, directly and ſucceſſiuely, the beginning of your Hebrewiſh tong, and how by little and little it was loſt agayne.The beginning and ending of the Hebrew tong deſcribed. Wherein you haue to vnderſtand, that the Patriarke Noe, with his children and Nephewes, eſcaping the Floud, went and did ſettle in the countrey of Caldea: the ſituation whereof, is vnder the fourth Climate, the Regiō after the Floud firſt inhabited and populat, from whence be iſſued the Aegiptians, Sarmits, Greekes, Latines, and all other Nations. In the ſame Region, I meane beyond the riuer Euphrates, and neare vnto Meſopotamie: the Patriark Abraham was borne and nouriſhed, the whiche being called of God, came to dwell in the countrie of Canaan, afterwardes named Siria the leſſe: the countrey where the good old Abraham and his generation did moſt inhabit.
                  In thoſe days in that countrey of Canaan they had in vſe to ſpeake another language named Sirien, very differēt from the Calde tong: But as Abraham and hys poſteritie dwelling in that countrey many yeares, theſe two languages by proceſſe of time, grewe to be corrupted, Abraham hys family and ſucceſſors, being not able to learne the Sirien ſpéeche, neyther the Siriens the Calde tong: of theſe two languages there remayned in vſe one, which was named the Hebrew.
                  
                  
                     Alſo you haue to vnderſtand, that this name Hebrew, is as much to ſay, as a man that is a ſtraunger, or come from beyond the Riuer: and for that Abraham was come from the other ſide of the Riuer Euphrates, he was generally called Hebrew, in ſuch wiſe, that of this name Hebrew, by the which Abraham was called, the ſpéeche, tong, and language, was alſo named Hebraique, and not Caldean, notwithſtanding that hée was of Caldea.
                  
                  Many Doctors, Gréekes and Latins, haue ſayde, that the Hebrew tong doth come from Heber, the ſonne of Sale: and that it was the language, which was in vſe and ſpoken before the generall Floud: notwithſtanding, Rabialhazer, Moſanahadach, Apheſrura, Zimibi, and Sadoc, your moſt anciente and famous Hebrew doctors, do ſweare and affirme, that the firſt ſpéeche and language in this world, was loſt in the conſtruction, or to ſay better, the confuſion of the towre of Babylon, without perfection remayning in any one word of their language.
                  And then, ſince the language of Noe was loſt, the Caldean conuerted into the Sirien, and the Sirien into the Hebrew, it came to paſſe that Iacob with his twelue ſonnes, went to dwel in Egipt, where they did ſoiorne ſo long Captiues, that very neare they forgate the Hebrue tong, neyther aptly coulde learne the Egiptian language, remayning in their ſpéech and pronounciation corrupted.
                  And as after the deſtruction of the ſecond Temple, as alſo the totall and finall loſſe and deſtruction of the holy lande. That your brethren were diſperſed throughout the worlde, & for the moſt part Captiues, and that in you ther remayned nothing but the lies of Iacob, the things deſolate of Iſraell, God did permitte that they ſhoulde ioyntly take ende, both the forme of your life, and the manner of your ſpéech.
                  
                     The Iewes loſt both the forme of their life, and the maner of their ſpeeche.Behold here honorable Iewes, ſufficiently proued by your owne doctors, that of your countrey, language, renowne, glory, and the whole ſtate of your Sinagoge, ye haue nothing left but the lies, as the Prophet ſayth, and the dregs and grounds of the tubbe.
                  
                     In ſuche manner, that ye haue neither Lawe to obſerue,A maruelous deſolation. King to obey, Scepter to eſtéeme, prieſthood to aduaunce youre honor. Temple to pray in, Citie to inhabit, neyther language to ſpeake.
                  And for that the ſcope and proofe of your obſtination, and oure healthe and ſaluation, doth lye and conſiſt in the veritie of the Scripture whiche we haue receyued,How, where, when, and by whom, the ſcriptures were falſifyed and the falſhoode and corruption of thē which you confeſſe: it ſhall be expedient to recite, how, where, and when, youre Scriptures were corrupted and loſt, euen as I haue produced and broughte foorth the loſſe of your language.
                  Ye haue therefore to vnderſtande, that the fyue bookes of the lawe, the which your greate Duke Moyſes did write, after he came foorth of the Land of Egypt, and before he entred the lande of promiſſe: and thoſe whiche were written by the Prophet Samuell and Eſdras, were all written in the Hebrew tong without any addition of the Egiptian language, for youre Moyſes (being inſpired by God in all the things hée did take in hand) did wright theſe bookes in the moſt auncient Hebrew tong, which is to vnderſtande, in the very ſame that Abraham did ſpeake at his comming out of Calde: God giuing you thereby to vnderſtand, that you ſhould haue folowed your father Abraham, not onely in the forme of your life, but alſo in your ſpéech.
                  During the time that Moyſes, Aaron, Ioſue, Ezechiell, Caleph, Gedeon, and all the fourtéene Dukes, did gouerne your Aliama, vntill the deceaſe of the excellent King Dauid,Aliama a troup or company. the lawe of Moyſes was alway well vnderſtood, and indifferently wel obſerued.
                  But after the deceaſe of theſe good perſonages, and the kingdome and gouernment being come into the handes of the ſucceſſors of Dauid, the Sinagoge was neuer more well gouerned, neyther the Scriptures well vnderſtoode: I woulde ſaye not well vnderſtoode generally of the twelue Tribes.
                  There were notwithſtanding, alwayes ſome particular perſones of the houſe of Iſraell, the whiche were agreable

and alſo acceptable vnto God, and to the common wealth very profitable.
                  That your law was not from thencefoorth wel vnderſtood, is moſt euident: for it was prohibited and defended in your Aliama,A prohibitiō amongſt the Iewes to reade the ſcriptures. that neyther the viſions of Ezechiell, the ſixt Chapter of Eſay, the booke of the Canticles of Salomon, the booke of Iob, neyther the lamentations of Ieremy, ſhould be read, or commented by any perſon: whiche was done, not bycauſe the bookes were not holy and approued, but rather bycauſe ye could not vnderſtand them.
                  Muche leſſe may you denie me, that your Rabby Salmon, Rabby Salomon,
                     The Iewes doctors aleaged. 
                     Rabby Fatuell, Rabby Aldugac, and Rabby Baruch, do not ſaye and affirme by their writings, that after your ſecond deliuerance from the Captiuitie of Babylon, ye neuer more vnderſtoode, to performe the Ceremonies of your temple, ſpeake the Hebrew tong, either vnderſtande the holy Scripture, much leſſe to ſing the Canticles of Dauid.
                  And no leſſe may you denie, that of all ſorts of your Iewiſh people in the dayes of the great Prieſt Mathathias, did repaire vnto the Court of king Antiochus, to ſell the Realme, and to learne his law: and that which is more vile, ye conſented that all the bookes of Moyſes, ſhoulde publikely be burnt, and likewiſe permitted ſcholes in the Citie of Ieruſalem, to reade the lawes of the Gentiles,A moſt wicked exchange. placing alſo an Idol in the holy temple, vnto whome was offered incenſe, and other odours, as if it had bin the true God: the which moſt certaynly I woulde not haue ſpoken, if I had not found it written in the booke of Machabees.
                  And then our Lorde God, ſeing the wine of the lawe in a manner conſumed, and that there remayned nothing but lies and dregs, and the time approching that the Gentiles ſhoulde be called and conuerted, and that in them the Church ſhoulde begin: he did permit and ordayne that all the holy ſcriptures ſhould be tranſlated into the gréeke tong, foreſéeing yt the Hebrew tong ſhould be loſt.
                  And how ſo famous a tranſlation and interpretation came

                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
as touching their law, hauing alſo in ye ſame charge to iudge all differences betwixt the people. They had likewiſe the charge to commaunde, and to make ordinances as touching the gouernement of the Common wealth, euen to the aſſignement & direction, what euery one ſhould haue in his houſe.
                  Theſe were the mē, hat did ordeyne and commande, that before the Hebrewes ſhould ſute at table,The apoſtles accuſed by the Iewes, and defended by Chriſt. they ſhoulde waſh their handes: the tranſgreſſion of whiche Ceremonie the Iewes did accuſe the Apoſtles, but as well defended by Ieſus Chriſt.
                  For ſurely, if theſe auncientes had not dealte farther than with the gouernement of their common wealth, and iudging their cauſes, it had bene notwithſtanding a thing tolerable. But by their authoritie they thruſt in themſelues, to gloſe the Bible, and garboyle the ſcripture. Wherof the principal that therto did firſt giue attēpt, was Rabby Salmon, Rabby Enoch,
                     A cauſe of error in the ſcripture. 
                     Limuda, Rabby Adam, Rabby Elechana, and Rabby Ioiade, whoſe gloſes ye haue as much prayſed and eſtéemed, as if God him ſelfe had ordeyned, and Moyſes written them.Cōgregatiōs or Common wealthes. Whereof hath riſen many errors in your Aliames, and many wrong and moſt vntruthes in the Scriptures, which you haue.
                  Neither are ye able to denie vnto mée, that by the meane of your falſe interpretations, and the erroneous vnderſtandings that your prediceſſors haue committed and done vppon the Bible, there hath not riſen in your Synagoge,The three curſed ſectes, Aſees, Saduces, and Phariſes. thoſe thrée curſed ſectes, of the Aſſees, Saduces, and Phariſes, the which heretiques cauſed in your common wealth great ſcandalles, and in your lawe greate doubtes.
                  And to the ende you ſhall vnderſtand, that I know all your ſecrets. It is not vnknowne vnto you,The auctor knoweth the ſecretes of the Iewes. that .40. yeares before the incarnation of Ieſus Chriſt, there was in Babylon a Iewe named Ionathan Abemiziell, ſo muche eſtéemed amongſt you, and his doctrine ſo muche reuerenced, that your auctors haue ſayde, that in him was renewed the fayth of Abraham, the pacience of Iob, the zeale of Helie, and the ſpirite of Eſay.
                  
                  This Rabby Abemiziell, was the firſte that tranſlated the

Bible out of the Hebrew into the Caldian tongue, with ſuche diligence and fidelitie, that hée was thought to bée inſpired of the holy Ghoſt in the doing thereof.
                  This good Iewe Abemiziel, is the ſame, the which, whereas the Pſalmiſt ſayeth, Dixit Dominus Domino meo: he ſayde, Dixit Dominus verbo meo.
                  
                  And in that Pſalme whiche ſayeth, Ego mortifico: hée ſayde, Ego mortificor. And where it is ſayde, Percutiam & ego ſanabo: he ſayde, Percutiar & ego ſanabo.
                  
                  And where it is ſayde, Aduerſus Dominum, & aduerſus Christū eius: he ſayde, Aduerſus Dominum, & aduerſus Meſsiam eius.
                  
                  And where Salomon ſayeth: Viam viri in adoleſcentia, he ſayd, Viam viri in adoleſcentula. In ſuche manner, that in his woordes he ſéemed rather to propheſie than to tranſlate.
                  The tranſlation of this Iewe Abemiziel, is the ſame, which at this preſent we call the Caldian tranſlation, and the which is moſte in vſe in the Orientall Churches, likewiſe is vſed of the Armenians, the Caldees, the Aegiptians, and of many Greekes.
                  
                  
                     The Iewes began to conuert Chriſtians.But the doctors of your law, perceyuing that many Iewes did conuert Chriſtians, and that alſo conformable vnto his tranſlation they gathered, that Chriſte was the true Meſsias. The whiche when they perceyued, they did aſſemble in the Citie of Babylon, in the fourthe yeare of the reygne of the Emperour Traian:
                     The Iewes cōdemne and dury ye trāſlation of Abemiziel, doubting the conuerſion of the Iewes to Chriſt. wherein it was ordeyned, and commaundement giuen, vnder great penalties, that any of that tranſlation ſhould neuer more be vſed, but in all places wherſoeuer it ſhould be founde, without remiſſion to be burned.
                  The tranſlation of Abemiziel béeyng condemned by the cō
                     mon conſent of the Iewes, it came to paſſe in the ſixt yeare of the ſayde Emperor Traian, a certayne greate and famous heathen Prieſt, borne in the Iſle of Pont, named Aquile, did conuert himſelfe to the lawe of Moyſes, the which conuerſion hée did not performe of conſcience to ſaue his ſoule, but to obtaine in mariage an excellent fayre Iewiſhe woman, with whome he was farre inflamed.
                  
                     And for that this Aquile, was a man very ſkilfull in the Gréeke and Hebrewe tongues, hée founde no better opportunitie more aptly to ſhewe his ſpirite, than to take in hande the tranſlation of all the holy Scripture, out of Hebrewe into Gréeke.
                  This ſame was the firſt tranſlation that was performed after the incarnation of Ieſus Chriſte,The firſte traſlatiō after ye incarnation of Chriſt. in the yeare .104. after his natiuitie. The whiche tranſlation among you Iewes, was in ſmall eſtimation, bycauſe it was doone by ſuche a one as in tymes paſte had bene a Heathen or Gentile, and of the Chriſtians much leſſe eſtéemed, for that it was brought to paſſe by him that was conuerted a Iewe.
                  Fiftie twoo yeares after the death of the ſayde Aquile, it is to bée vnderſtoode, in the eyght yeare of the euyll Emperour Commodus:
                     The ſeconde tranſlation. There was another Gréeke tranſlation performed by a Iewe named Theodoſius, the whiche after became a Chriſtian: which remooued and made perfect all the errors of Aquile.
                  
                  Thirtie ſeuen yeares after the death of Theodoſius, which is to vnderſtande,The thirde tranſlation. in the nynth yeare of the Empire of Seuerus: there was another tranſlation performed out of the Hebrewe into Gréeke, by a man learned and vertuous, named Simachus, the whiche was approued, well allowed, and reſeued throughout all the Eaſte: notwithſtanding that, not long after it was reproued and reiected.
                  In thoſe tymes, there raygned in the greateſt partes of Aſia, the Hereſie of Ebionites, whereof Sainct Iohn in the Apocalips maketh reporte: notwithſtanding that Theodoſius and Simachus had bene faithfull in their tranſlations, and of troth and veritable in their words: our Church would at no tyme receyue their ſcriptures, hauing no confidence in the credence of their perſons.
                  Fourtéene yeares after the death of Simachus, whiche was the fifth yeare of the Empire of Heliogabalus, it came too paſſe, that a certayne Patriarcke of Ieruſalem, béeyng

named Ioannes Budeus, founde in a caue at Iericho, faythfully written and catholikely tranſlated out of Greke into Latine, all the olde and new Teſtament.
                  
                     The fourth tranſlation allowed in the Chriſtian Churche.This is the tranſlation the whiche at this preſent the Latine Church doth vſe, this is that which we call Quinta editio: and of others is named the Tranſlation Hiericontini, which is to ſaye, that which was founde in Hiericho: the auctor whereof was neuer knowen.
                  In the eyght yeare of Alexāder Seuerus, the ſonne of Mamea, which was about ten yeares after the tranſlation Hiericontine was found, a Doctor of ours named Origene, did correct the trāſlation of the .70. Interpreters, which is to vnderſtand, in adding where they had bin briefe,A fifth trāſlatiō by Origen after Chriſt. declaring the darke myſteries, placing a little ſtarre, as a marke, wher he had made declaration of any matter, and where he did remoue or take away, he added the marke of a little arrowe.
                  All theſe ſixe tranſlations aboue mentioned, whiche is to ſay, of the .70. Interpreters, of Aquile, of Simachus, of Theodoſius, of Iericho, & that of Origene, our auncients did vſe for cuſtome, of them all to make one booke, writing in euery leafe, by ſix diuiſions, and this booke was named, Hexapla, ab ex, quod est ex Latinè, quaſi ſex traductiones in ſe continens.
                  
                  Foure hundreth yeares after this, a certaine Doctor of ours named S. Ierome, moſt certainly a man very holy, and in his tyme and of his temple moſt learned, and greateſt vnderſtanding in the ſacred Scriptures and humaine letters, and no leſſe expert in the Gréeke, Hebrewe, and Caldée tongue. This man did in like maner correct the tranſlation of the .70. Interpreters, & made alſo another by it ſelfe out of Greke into Latine, as well of the olde as of the new Teſtament. The greateſt part wherof, is now in vſe in our Catholike Church, and is the ſame that we moſt eſtéeme.
                  In like maner I will that you vnderſtande, that in the 314. yere after the natiuitie of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, there was rayſed among you a certayne Iewe of Idumaea, named Maier, a man very ſubtyle, and in the arte of Nygromancie

no leſſe ſkilfull, which obtayned ſuche credite and reputation among you, that he made you fully beléeue, that God had gyuen twoo lawes vnto Moyſes in the mount of Sinay:
                     One of the great & manifeſt cauſes of the falſe beleefe of the Iewes. the one in writing, and the other in worde: and ſayde, that God had done the ſame, knowing that in time the wrytten lawe ſhoulde bée loſte, and that lawe ſhoulde raygne whiche was gyuen by woorde.
                  This curſed Iew Maier, further ſayde, that God had reuealed this lawe vnto Moyſes only and alone,A Cruell ſuggeſtion of the Diuell. and Moyſes did reueale the ſame to Ioſue, and Ioſue to his ſucceſſors, and ſo from hand to hande it was reuealed vnto him, and that vnto him onely God had commaunded to put the ſame in writing, and to manifeſt the ſame to his Iewiſh people. Inſomuch that the lawe of Moyſes beganne to bée aboliſhed, and the people and their lawe to be loſte.
                  This lawe whiche your Iewe Maier had inuented, in the Hebrwe ſpeache was named Miſna, which is to ſaye, the Secrete lawe. This ſayde lawe was gloſed afterwards by many of your doctors, namely by Rabby Manoa, Rabby Andaſy, Rabby Butaora, and Rabby Samuel: the whiche in like manner with him did write many wretched and curſed things, and no ſmall lyes, in preiudice of the lawe that Ieſus Chriſte had preached vnto you, and the lawe which Moyſes had giuen you.
                  This lawe is the ſame whiche your Rabbyes haue otherwiſe named the booke of the Talmud, wherein your doctors do ſay, that when God vpon the Mount of Sinay, did gyue the law vnto Moyſes, that then were preſent the ſoules of Dauid, of Eſay, of Ieremie, of Ezechiel, and of Daniel, and of all the other Prophetes. And likewiſe they ſaye, that there was preſent all the ſoules of theyr Rabbyes of the Synagogue,Vanities affirmed by the Iewiſhe doctors. whiche ſhoulde declare bothe the lawes of Moyſes, and alſo ſayde, that ſhortly after God would anew create their bodies, to infuſe theſe ſoules.
                  But it is right well knowen vnto you, that according to the Propheſies, and the lawes of Moyſes, the true Meſsias, whiche was Ieſus Chriſte, was then come, and that all

your Iewiſh Common wealth is nowe finiſhed: for whiche cauſe ye haue preferred this lawe named Miſna, and his gloſe, named Talmud, by the meane of which law and gloſſe, ye bold abuſed all the common people, and yeelde deſtruction to your Iewiſhe eſtate.
                  
                     This prophecie of Dauid verified vpon the Iewes.Concluding, I ſay, that very well, to good, right, and direct purpoſe, I haue alleadged agaynſte you that texte of Dauid, whiche ſayeth, Scrutati ſunt iniquitates: And the other of Eſay, whiche ſayeth, Parum est mihi vt ſuſcites feces. In ſo muche, as you haue falſified the Scriptures,This prophecie of Eſay verified vpon the Chriſtians. & inuēted other new lawes.
                  Wherefore, in reſpect thereof, I haue done you neyther wrong nor iniurie, conſidering alſo that at this preſent yee do more defende the lawe of Maier, than the lawe of Moyſes. And for that I haue dilated this diſcourſe, more than I thought to haue done, the reſte ſhall remayne to bée verified in ſome other diſputation.
               
            
            
               
                  An excellent diſputation, which the Auctor held againſt the Iewes of Naples, wherein is declared the hyghe myſteries of of the Trinitie.
               
               
                  HOnorable Rabbyes, and ſtiffenecked Iewes, in the laſte diſputation holden betwixte vs on ſaterday laſt, ye would haue pluckt out myne eyes, and alſo haue beaten mée: bycauſe I alledged thē theſe words of Ieſus Chriſt, which ſay: Ego principium qui & loquor vobis. Anſwering ye ſayde, that neyther Ieſus Chriſt vnderſtoode what he ſayde, eyther I muche leſſe what I defended: ſcornfully mocking ye affrmed that I was but ſimple: the whiche in déede may be very true. But to note my Lord Ieſus Chriſt of falſehoode, moſt certaynly of your parte it procéedeth of your to too greate wretchedneſſe, and moſte excéeding and extreme wickedneſſe: béeyng vtterly repugnant vnto his bountie to deceyue, and to his diuinitie to lye. Were it in you, or had ye the grace to beléeue, as I, and all others do, and ought to beléeue, that his humanitie & word is vnited, ye would in like maner

beléeue & confeſſe that it were impoſſible, that the bliſſed Ieſus might erre, in that which he commaunded, eyther exerciſe his life as ſinner, eyther his ſpeache as lyer.
               But foraſmuche as ye remayne obſtinate in your lawes of Moyſes, ye deſerue not to vnderſtande ſo high myſteries. The law of Moyſes I do not deny, but your Cabal I can in no wiſe credit, but vtterly defie, & firmly beleue the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. And alſo moſt faythfully am fully perſuaded, that whē Chriſt in his humanitie did take beginning, your ceremoniall law did then take ending. And from the preſent houre that ye Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſayd vpō the croſſe, Conſummatū est, he gaue vs to vnderſtande, that then was finiſhed the holocauſtes, ſacrifices, oblations, figures, ceremonies, and alſo your royall ſcepter had then taken ende, and pontificall dignitie declined and in ſhort time after vtterly conſumed, and in the ſame momēt our church began to ſpring, & your ſynagoge to be buried.
               There is now more than .1500. yeres paſt, that ye haue had neither King to obey, ſacrifiſing prieſt to command, temple to pray in, ſacrifice to offer, prophets in whome to giue credite, either as muche as a citie wherein to be ſuccoured or repaire vnto: in ſuche wiſe, that to all men it is manifeſtly ſeene, that your ſorowfull ſynagoge is dead, and ended without all hope for euermore to ryſe agayne.
               Ieſus Chriſt ſayde, that your kingdome ſhould be remoued and taken away, that your temple ſhould be ſubuerted and ouerthrowen, that ye ſhold be diſperſed throughout the world, ye 
                  Ieruſalem ſhould be deſtroyed, & that your law ſhould be loſt. In like maner Ieſus Chriſt ſayd, that ye ſhould dye obſtinate in your ſinnes, and ſo cōtinue wandering as vacabunds vntill the ende of the world.
               Notwithſtanding that ye remained in bondage, ſeruitude, & ſlauery, in thoſe two greate captiuities of Aegipt & Babylon, yet there remained with you ſome rēnāt of prieſthood, of prophet, of king, or of law. But after ye cōming of Ieſus Chriſt, all was loſt, al was finiſhed, & al was vaniſhed away, nothing remaining vnto you, but the name of Iewes, & the liberty of ſlaues.

There is not any nation in this worlde, be it neuer ſo barbarous, that hath not ſome place to retire vnto, or ſome captaine to defend them, the Garaments of Aſia, the Meſſagetes bordering vppon the Indians, and the Negros of Aethiope, bearing witneſſe, except you moſt miſerable Iewes, the which in all places and countries be fugitiues and captiues.
               Certaynely, moſte obſtinate and ſtiffe necked people, I do not maruell that I haue ſo little profited, and done ſo little good amongſt you in theſe fyue monethes, in arguing, preaching, and diſputing: in ſo muche that Ieſus Chriſt with his excellent doctrine and maruelous miracles, could do no more in .30. yeares, hauing no grace to accept the ſame in better part, than to crucifie him for his greate bountie.
               Then ſithens the principall cauſe of your loſſe doth conſiſt, in that yée beléeue not the newe Teſtament, neyther vnderſtand the olde, which is moſt true. For, if ſoundly and intierly ye had vnderſtanding of the ſacred ſcripture, with your owne handes ye would ſet fire vnto the ſynagogue.
               And for that you haue all in generall, and euery one in particular, deſired mée, to ſay and gyue you to vnderſtande, what, or howe the Chriſtians do conceyue, and what our doctors and learned men do teache, as touching the right hyghe myſterie of the Trinitie.
               I pray you alſo honorable Rabbies, to be intentiue to that which I ſhall propoſe, and to haue regard to that which I ſhal determine, for that the myſteries of the Trinitie, be of ſuche depth and profunditie, that they ought to be beléeued with the vnderſtanding, although reaſon may not ſhewe and comprehend them. Foraſmuch as all you Rabbies & Iewes, whiche be preſent, do well vnderſtand the Latine and the Spaniſhe tongue, and I vnderſtand your Hebrew & the Italian tongs, I will endeuoire and vndertake to declare the beſt that I can, this myſterie of the Trinitie, partly in Latine, and partly in Hebrew, & partly in Spaniſhe: for the matter is ſo high, that one language is not ſufficient to declare the ſame.
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
               
               
                  ſcilicet ſingularitatis, incommutabilitatis: et dignitatis. By this I vnderſtande, that for one perſonne, to bee a Diuine perſonne, it is requiſite, that he ſhoulde haue thrée thinges, whiche is to vnderſtande, that it haue in it ſome ſingularitie: whiche is not founde in any other, Incommutabilite, whiche vnto it and to no other, is communicated: And ſome dignitie, which in it, and not in any other is to bée founde. The perſonne of Ieſus Chriſt our God, by all theſe reaſons here aboue ſayde, is a perſon Diuine, notwithſtanding, it bee cladde with humayne fleſhe. As touching the fyrſt, which is to haue ſome priuiledge of ſingularitie, that hath beene founde, in the Soule of Ieſus Chriſte, the which onely by ſpetiall grace, from the howre it was create, it was vnited with the Diuine worde.
               The ſeconde priuiledge of Iucommutabilite, was founde in the Sacred bodye of Ieſus Chriſte, the whiche in the Wombe of his gloryous mother, lykewiſe, was by the holye Ghoſte fourmed, Et a verbo Aſſumptum. The thyrde priuiledge, whiche is of dignitye, is lykewyſe founde in the Soule and bodye of Ieſus Chriſte, remayning in his humayne nature, and not, but one perſon: the whiche was and is Diuine.
               You haue farther to vnderſtande, honourable Rabbis. That there are twoo termes: the diffinicion of which, is verye neceſſarie to bee knowne vnto them, That ſeeke to vnderſtande any thing in the holye Scripture, whiche is to ſaye: Actes eſſentialles, and actes perſonalies. The example thereof is written in the fyrſte Chapter of Geneſis. Jn principio Creauit deus Celum et terram, &c.
                   In this place here, this name Deus, Accipitur eſſentialiter, Et non perſonaliter, quia creare eſt actus eſſentiales, et non perſonalis: et conuenit e rinitati, in quantum deus.
               
               
                  Alſo it is writtē, Dominus dixit ad me filius meus es tu: in which place, this name (dominus) Accipitur perſonaliter, et nō eſſentialiter:
                  Pſal. 2. 
                  qui de patris perſona preciſe intelligitur: et in diuini, generare eſt actus perſonalis, et non eſſentialis, et eſt notio ipſſius patris. Likewiſe ye haue to vnderſtande, that as in Ieſus Chriſt, is one perſon diuine, there is in ye ſame diuine nature: humaine nature, & miſtical nature. Prima eſt eterna, Secunda eſt a verbo asſumpta. Tertia eſt in Adam corrupta, qui licet nō ſunt altera spetie ab humanitate Chriſti, tamen eſt altera ſecundū conditionē nature ſauciate. In the ſcriptures Ieſus Chriſt is introduced ſometimes,Pſal. 30. Pſal. 119. Pſal. 20. ſpeaking according to diuine & eternal nature, as when it is ſayd: Dominus dixit ad me filius meus eſt tu: Sometimes ſpeaking in the humaine nature, As when he ſayth: In capite libri ſcriptū eſt deme et illum: non eſt exaltatū cor meū. &c. And ſometimes is brought in ſpeaking according to the nature miſtical, & corrupted. So as, Longe A ſalute meaver ba delictorum meorum, et illud: Delicta labiorum meorum non ſunt a te abſcondita. The which he ſayd, as of the paine, not touching ye faulte, for as much as the body miſtical dyd perpetrate, & his true & verie body dyd paye and ſuffer. Our amitie is ſo lytle. That our proper ſinnes we diſcharge vpō others: And in Ieſus Chriſt, charitie is ſo great, That he taketh the ſinnes of others, vpon him ſelfe: in ſuch maner that he confeſſeth to haue many ſinnes, for as much, as he is the redéemer of many ſinners. Behold honorable Rabbis, what it is that the Chriſtiās doe vnderſtand, of his diuinitie, and that which we confeſſe of his humanitie. Vnto which faith I extéeme to lyue, and proteſt to dye. And for that I haue ſayd more then I thought to haue done, yea and more then ye would haue heard: we wyll remitte for another diſputacion, both your doubtes, and my aunſweres: Conſidering that my Lordes the Prelates, And the noble men that be here, do ſtaye to goe to dinner, and to withdrawe them ſelues. &c.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ A Letter to Syr Ferdenando of Cordoua, wherein is diſcourſed the eleuen perſecutions of the Church: when, and by whom they were perſecuted.
               
               
                  WOrſhipful Syr and Chriſtian Knight, Iohn de Cabreta your Steward deliuered me a letter from your worſhip, which was as long as betwéen Madrid & Almagro, where at this preſent you do remaine: wherby if you thinke to receiue no ſhort anſwere: by writing ſo long a Letter: you do much abuſe your ſelfe, for wanting oportunity & leaſure to ſtudie: I maie not imploye my ſelfe to write ſuch long & tedious Epiſtles: eſpeciallye, when he to whom they are written is ſimply, but a friend: Yet true friends delight, not only in reading lōg letters, but are grieued if their friends write not euery day: al which aboue ſayd, is not to ſay: that I eſtéeme not to place you in the chiefeſtes rankes of my beſt friends. And if you imagine the contrarie, you are much deceiued: For your friendes & mine do wel know that Don Ferdenand de Cordoua, and Friar Anthony de Gueuarra Biſhop of Mondoneto be twoo bodies ioyned in one wyll, linked in a chaine of in diſſoluble amitie. But omitting this diſcourſe, & retorning to your letter: I aſſure you it pleaſed me very much, & chieflie in that I perceiued your good diſpoſitiō, which is no ſmal matter in ye middeſt of theſe perillous heates. Now touching the perſecutions of the myllitant Church: wherof you haue written, & wherof the Prior of Calatrana & you haue liberally diſcourſed: I aunſwere, that there haue beene many perſecutions of the Church: done at ſundry times and by ſeuerall Princes. And for that I greatly deſire to do you that ſeruice which lyeth in my power, I haue not fayled to ſende you the ſayde perſecutions in order as followeth.
               The firſt perſecution was in the raigne of ye Emperour Nero, the which (poſſeſſed with ye Deuil, in whoſe bonds his offēces did impriſō him) perceiuing the nūber of Chriſtiās daily to increaſe at Rome (by grace of ye euangelical worde which Peter & Paul preached there, where they were martered for ſuch conuerſion of ye people) determined with his power to perſecute & deſtroye the Church: whereby he murdred many Chriſtiās, as wel in Rome as els where, which was the firſt perſecution of the Church. For albeit the Church ſince the ſuffering of Chriſt hath béen continually perſecuted in hir perticuler

members, yet notwithſtanding vntyll the comming of Nero, there went forth no commaundement to perſecute the Chriſtians.
               Touching the conſtancy of the Martyrs, and the diuerſitie of the tormentes which they endured (beſide the Catholique Hiſtoriographers which write therof) Cornelius Tacitus a Painim writer, and enemie to the Chriſtians (yet verye credible in his writing) doth report the ſame: who making recitall of the perſecutions made by the ordinaunce of the Emperour Nero, (of whome Sueton maketh alſo mencion) doth ſay of the ſlaughter of Chriſtians, both men and women: that amongeſt a thouſande diuerſities of puniſhmentes and deathes, they caſt the Chriſtians to be torne in péeces with dogges: And to make the dogges more fierce vpon them, the men were braced in ſkinnes of Beares, and other ſauadge Beaſtes. Which perſecution was performed (as witneſſeth Cornelius Tacitus and Suetonius) after the huge fire of Rome: In the eleuenth yéere of the Empyre of Nero: by whoſe decrée the glorious Apoſtles Peter and Paul were martyrred. It maye well bée, as I alſo beléeue, that this martyrdome continued lytle more then thrée yéeres: For though it were done at that time (according to the Prior of Calatrana his opinion) yet God would preſerue his Apoſtles, and deferre their martyrdoms vntyll the foreſayde time.
               The ſecond perſecution was in the time of the Emperour Domitian. This wicked and accurſed monſter, vnderſtanding that there ſhould one ſpring out of the lyne of Dauid, which ſhould expell him out of the Empyre, he cauſed ſearch to be made with much diligence, for all thoſe whiche deſcended from the race of Dauid amongſt the Iewes, and cauſed them to be put to death: onelye raunſoming as Euſebius ſayth twoo perſons of the ſame familie, who further for the accompliſhment of his deuilliſhe deuices, at the motion of the fiende he determined to perſecute the Catholique Churche: Whereby at his commandement a great ſlaughter was made of Chriſtians within Rome and without. In which perſecution multitudes of the Chriſtians were at the firſt committed to baniſhment, who after were tormented, and then murdered by moſt horrible paines and cruell deaths, as affirmed Euſebius: Oroſius and many other Chriſtian Hiſtoriographers. This was the ſecond general perſecution of the primitiue Church, in which S. Iohn the Euangeliſt was confined, or

exiled into the Yle of Pathinos where he ſawe the viſions of the Apocalips. It were hard to know how long this perſecution endured, but as we may gather by Euſebius, it continued twoo yéeres & a lytle more. For he ſayth that Domician dyd moderate and ceaſe his execution, and yet notwithſtanding aſwel by reaſon of the ſayd perſecution as for his other vices, the ſame Domician hath béene holden to be one of the moſt wicked and cruell Princes that euer liued.
               The third perſecution of the Church was vnder the gouernment of the Emperour Traian, who allured by the Deuill & his other miniſters determined by torments to puniſhe the Chriſtians: and therfore by publique edict, ordayned that the Chriſtians ſhould worſhip the Idol of the Gentiles vpon paine of death: Wherevnto the Chriſtians not wylling to obey, he made a great ſlaughter of them. This was the third perſecution of the Church Catholique, whereof Euſebius and diuers other Hiſtoriographers Chriſtians do make plentiful mencion, & that was in the tenth yéere of the Empyre of Traian, which afterward alſo commaunded this perſecution to be ſtayed as doth apeare by ſome writers, & eſpecially in the letters of Plyny directed to Traian, & in the anſweres thereto ſent by the ſame Emperor which are at this preſēt extant, where he preſcribed that the chriſtians ſhould be permitted to lyue in their Lawes and vnder theyr liberties: If they dyd not commit any other wickedneſſe therewith.
               The fourth perſecution was in the time, and vnder the dominion of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius ſurnamed the Philoſopher, whoſe lyfe we haue diſcribed in another booke apart by it ſelfe, this Prince during the tyme that he made warres againſt the Parthians, as Euſebius and Oroſius do declare, endeuored his power to perſecute the Chriſtians, which remayned in Europe and Aſia, where Lucus Varus was gouernour. This was the fourth perſecution of the Church myllitant, ſo that it followeth that God ſuffered this general peſtilence to raigne amongſt them, and a thouſande other callamities to happen vnto them enduring the gouernment of this Prince as wee haue largely declared in his Cronicle.
               The fift perſecution of the Church was during the raigne of Septimus Seuerus the Emperour the which by the inſtigation of ye deuil, made a great butcherie of the faithful Chriſtiās. This fift perſecutiō was the cauſe (as fayth Oſorius) ye God dyd not permit this Prince

to lyue in peace, for one of his Captaines rebelled againſt him, named Albinius, the which made all Brittany to reuolt from him, calling him ſelfe Emperour during the time of his life.
               The ſixt perſecution of the Church was in the time of the Emperour Maximius, the curſed Prince being offended that Alexander Seuerus had ſupported the Chriſtians, by expreſſe ordinaunce & commiſſion made a great and blooddye ſpoyle of the Chriſtians, & principallie of ye miniſters of thoſe which executed any aucthoritie amōgſt the Chriſtiā people: This was the ſixt perſecutiō as ſaith Euſebius & Oroſius in the which this Prince vſed many vnacuſtomed tormēts, and cauſed diuers cruell puniſhmentes to be inuented, whereby the poore Chriſtians might be miſerablye handled, who had ſuch an opinion and preſumptuous pride of himſelfe & his power, that he eſtéemed that no perſon might once hurt him, and that it were impoſſible to wounde or to kyll him. In which opinion he moſt deuilliſhlie purſued all his cruelties and tormentes.
               The ſeuenth perſecution was in the rule of the Emperor Decius: This Prince although otherwiſe he were of good naturall diſpoſition, was notwithſtanding in religion an Infidell, and in that reſpect ſought the vexation of the millitant Church, ſo that no ſuch crueltye were before tyme vſed, as nowe in his tyme towardes the afflicted Chriſtians. The which is affirmed that he onely dyd in deſpite of his prodeceſſour Phillip: who had before béene Chriſtened. And ſo this ſeuenth perſecution was in the time of this Decius.
               
               The eyght perſecution was enduring the raigne of the Emperour Valerian: who (as Euſebius doth report) was ſo fauourable to the Chriſtians in the beginning of his raigne, that he would not permitte that any perſonne dyd them any wrong or violence: for he bare ſuch affection and honour vnto them that his pallace was a true colledge and ſanctuarie for the Chriſtians: but towardes the ende of his raigne, he ſuffred him ſelfe to be ſeduced by a Magicien of Egipt, who was a deadlye enemie to the Chriſtian religion, becauſe the ſame dyd impugne the deceiptes and Sorceries of the Magicians. In ſuch ſort that he dyd not all onely chaunge his opinion towardes the Chriſtians, but alſo perſecuted them with great ſlaughter. This was the eyght perſecution of which Oroſius doth liberally diſcourſe, but ſuch was the iuſtice of God for his cruell exceſſe, that ſuch euyll

fortune followed Valerian after this déede, that he was taken priſoner and fell into the handes of Sapor King of Percia which dyd intreate and handle him moſt cruelly.
               The ninth perſecution of the Church was in the time of the Emperour Aurelian, who hauing moſt louinglie vſed the Chriſtians in the firſt ſixe yeares of his raigne (as appeareth by the writing of Euſebius and Oroſius) in the ende by the prouocation of the Deuill and other moſt wicked perſons, he perſecuted the Chriſtians generally throughout all the confines of his Empire. And this was the ninth perſecution of ye faithfull. Now it happened that as this Prince was readie to ſigne a commiſſion which he was to diſpatche to the gouernors of the Princes of the Empire againſt the Chriſtians, an arrow fell from Heauen ſo neare vnto him that thoſe which were preſent, thought that it had kylled the Emperour. But beſides this ſigne and aduertiſement God ſuffered the effect to followe, that is to ſaye, the death of the aforeſayd Prince, for he was miſerablye ſlaine by his owne men and ſeruauntes, and by the ſame receyued the guerdone and payment of his deſartes and offences.
               The tenth perſecution was in the time of the Emperour Diodeſian. This Prince being in quiet reſt from all his affaires, ſtyrred by Belzebub and his miniſters: he being a Painim and noriſhed in the ſuperſticions of the Idolatrye of the Gentiles, beganne to perſecute and purſue the Catholike church, which was the tenth generall perſecution of the Chriſtians, (to accoumpt from the ſame of Nero) and this was the moſt cruell & longeſt of continuaunce of al others, the which endured by the ſpace of ten continuall yeares. Now the Chriſtiās had long time liued in reſt & quiet ſince the perſecution which was in the gouernment of the Emperor Aurelian, in ſuch ſort yt the Chriſtian religion was now become of great force in all churches. And all the Cities and Towns, as well within the dominions of the Emperour, as without the limmits of the ſame: and the Chriſtians were excéedinglie multiplied in nomber, and had great aſſemblies in their Churches. But as ſayth Euſebius, this reſt and libertie which they enioyed, was cauſe that the pollicie and maner of lyuing of the Chriſtians began to bee corrupted, ſo that many iniquities & wickedneſſe dyd grow preſently, & the old former ſanctimony began to deminiſhe, and ſuch diſorders & diſcentions began to be moued amongſt

the Biſhops and the Prelats, that as the ſayd Euſebius witneſſeth: God permitted this perſecution to ſerue in place of reuenge, and chaſtiſement of his Church. This perſecution was ſo great, ſo cruell, and ſo blooddy: that it is impoſſible for any pen to write the vnnatural ſlaughters which the Paynims vſed: neither is there any tongue that is able to pronoūce them. The which Euſebius doth well declare, being a preſent witneſſe, beholding the ſame with his eies, as done in his owne ſight: for he ſayth that he cannot diſcribe nor ſpeake that which he ſaw executed before his face. To whom Oroſius doth condiſcend, wryting in the ſame ſort, that there was not any heart ſo harde that would not be moued to compaſſion, reading the cruelties of this perſecution. Which amaſeth me to conſider of the conſtancie of the Martyrs which endured ſuch tormentes ſo valiantlye, and of the cruelty of thoſe which murdered and tormented them ſo maliciouſlye. And to the entent that you and all other ſhoulde know what puniſhments this butcherlie Prince miniſtred vnto the Chriſtians, I haue wyllinglie recited ſome notable partes of the ſame, which be theſe. Fyrſt this Prince dyd ruinate and ſacke al the Churches of the Chriſtians, and forbid them to make any aſſembles for the ſeruice of God in any part: be commaunded all the bookes of the holy Scriptures to be burned which they might finde. Alſo he ordayned that all Chriſtians of what eſtate or condition ſo euer they were, ſhould not be admitted to eſtate or any office of Magiſtrat, and yt thoſe preſentlie which were placed in any offices ſhould be remoued, and counted infamed, and ſome were put to death for example.
               Further they appointed that the goodes of the Byſhops and Prelates Chriſtians, ſhoulde be declared to be conſticate and for fayted. The Chriſtian bond man could not be manumitted or enfranchiſed. And theſe Lawes were publiſhed through the confines of the Empyre. Beſides the which conſtitucions, the poore miſerable Chriſtians, were otherwiſe moſt wickedly intreated, and receiued diuers outragious iniuries: diuers being enforced to dye cruellye and with much ſhame. And in ſome prouinces where they were blinded with affections & perticular occaſions which the Deuil guided by the permiſſion of the diuine God, they vſed many cruelties and incredible horribleneſſe towardes the Chriſtians, as in Frigia, Suria, Egipt, and diuers other countreys, for ſome were broyled and ſcorched in

lyfe, and others had theyr fleſhe carded as though it had béene well, or flaxe, which poore Chriſtian creatures after ſuche burning and torments, were throwen into ſtraite priſon, in great féebleneſſe, and yet honeſt and conſtant in the faith, they were hanged naked by the féete, to prolong theyr deathes the more with ſhame and diſhoneſty. And by that meanes endured double torment, of ſome they cut of the nooſe, the eares, the fingers, the handes, and the féete, and onely left them theyr eyes to behold their miſerie, and to encreaſe their griefe and paine, they tare ſome alyue quite in the middeſt, tying one legge to a great arme of a Trée bended with force, and the other legge to another trée crooked in the ſame manner: Afterward letting the ſame Trées to returne into his naturall place, for to cleaue the body in ſunder. So others they vſed this cruelty, that they pricked ſharpe néedles and great thornes betwéene the nayles of the fleſhe and the handes, which be the moſt ſenſible and tendereſt partes of al the body. Some other men were beaten with rounde balles, and pellets of Leade and Tynne. In concluſion they were enforced to endure and ſuſtaine the moſt cruell tormentes which might bée deuiſed, by the Deuilles pollicie. And this ſlaughter of the Chriſtians was excéeding great, during this perſecution.
               The eleuenth and laſt perſecution generally of the Church was enduring the gouernment of the Emperor Iulianus, which was an Idolater, & Sacrificer to the Deuill: Which Emperour ſtudied by al meanes he might to perſecute the chriſtian church. Who likewiſe to attaine the effect of his purpoſed deuiſe, dyd vſe a ſinguler & vnaccuſtomed ſubtiltie, by the which vnder cloked & collor of ſhadowed curteſie & benignitie, he did enféeble the Chriſtiā religion as much as he could, giuing them alwaies yet to vnderſtand, yt he was ſoft & gentle by nature, & not cruel & rigorous. This new inuēcion in perſecuting the Church was ſubtilly found out by him as I think, bicauſe he had ſéen & by experiēce did vnderſtand yt the blood of ye martirs did cauſe the chriſtiā religion to ſpring more frutefully. And therfore he determined to worke & procéede contrary to ye other Emperors his prodeceſſors had performed, yt is to ſay, to draw ye chriſtiās vnto his Idolatrous worſhipping by aduancement of eſtats, offices, & dignities, as witneſſeth Ruffinus, S. Hierom & Caſiodorus, ſo yt hereby he cauſed diuers ambicious & couetous perſōs to denie chriſtianity, & to folow Idolatry, by means of ye eſtates & offices which they had giuē them.

This was the greateſt wound that euer the Church receiued, for diuers Chriſtians by the meanes of this inuencion, remooued theyr faith, but in the ende when the Emperor Iulian perceyued that theſe deuiſes ſerued to ſmall ende to his entent, although he made them not to léeſe their lyues, neyther dyd violentlye conſtraine their conſciences. Yet he publiſhed diuers hurtfull edictes againſt the Chriſtians, and verye vitious for Chriſtianitie. Firſt he commaunded that no Chriſtian might obtaine any degrée in Schoole, kéepe Lecture, or reade in any arte or ſcience, whatſoeuer, neyther that hée might be admitted to ſtuddie, vnleſſe he dyd worſhip the Idols. The which he dyd to the ende yt the Chriſtians baniſhed from the knowledge of learning ſhould be brought to Idolatrie, or that they ſhould els remaine fooles and ignorant Ideots, and ſo by continuance that none ſhould be able to preache the Euangelie. Alſo he ordained that no Chriſtian ſhoulde be admitted to any eſtate, office, or dignitie of Magiſtrate, eyther in warre or peace. In concluſion this monſter ſearched out all the wayes to rayſe battaile againſt Ieſus Chriſt, without ſhaedding humaine blood, which was the right deuiſe of the Deuill, to depriue the bleſſed Martyrs from the glorye and crowne which they ſhould haue obtained for theyr martyrdome. Behold the firſt, & moſt notable perſecutions, which the church millitant ſuſtained: ſince which time there hath béen many other, in euery ſeuerall place, but they were of ſmall importaunce in reſpect of theſe before ſayde. Touching the reſt, becauſe I am wéery of writing this long letter, & that my pen can do me no more ſeruice therin. I ſay nothing elſe but this, that I wyl more redéelie employ my ſelfe towards the Countie of Oſarno, for ye affaires of Vaſco lopes, which you haue recōmended vnto my fauor: as ſoone as the ſayd Coūtie may attend the ſame, for he kéepeth his bed at this inſtant, & laboreth gréeuouſly of ye Gowte. The Lord haue you in his kéeping, & giue mée grace to ſerue him.
               
                  From Valiodolid 
                     the .15. of Iune. Anno. 1541.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The Table of the familiar Epiſtles of Sir Antony of Gueuara.
            
            
               
                  AN Oration made vnto the Emperours Maieſtie in a Sermon at the triumphes, vvhen, the french king vvas taken. fol. 1
               An Oration made vnto the Emperours Maieſtie in a Sermon on the daye of kinges vvherein is declared hovv the name of kinges vvas inuented. fol. 4.
               A diſcourſe or conference vvith the Emperour vpon certaine and moſt auncient ſtampes in metalles. 12
               A relation vnto Queene Germana declaring the life and lavves of the philoſopher Licurgus. 20
               A letter vnto Sir Alonſo Manrique, Archbishop of Ciuile, and Sir antony Manrique Duke of Nauara, for the iudgemēt of a matter in cōtentiō. 21
               A letter vnto the Conſtable Sir Ynnigo of velaſco, vvherin the Author doth perſvvade in the taking of Founterabie, to make profe firſt of his vviſdome, before he experiment his fortune. 38
               A letter vnto sir Antony of cuninga, Prior of saint Iohn, in vvhich is ſaide that although there be in a Gentleman to be reprehended, there ought not to be cauſe of reproch. 41
               A letter to the Earle of Miranda, vvherin is expounded that text of Chriſt, vvhich ſaith, My yoke is ſvveete. 45
               A letter vnto sir Peter Giron, vvherin the Author doth toutch the manner of auncient vvriting. 53
               A letter vnto sir Ynnigo of Velaſco, Conſtable of Caſtile, vvherein th'author doth teach the breifnes of vvriting in old time. 59
               A letter vnto the Marques of Peſcara, vvherein the Author doth note vvhat a captaine ought to be in the vvarres. 66
               A letter vnto sir Allonſo Albornos, vvherein in is touched that it is a poynt of euill manner not to aunſvvere to a letter vvritten vnto him 72
               A letter vnto ſir Gonſalis Fernandes of Cordoua, great captaine, in vvhich is touched that the knight eſcaping the vvarres ought not from thenceforth to depart his houſe. 77
               A letter to ſir Enrique Enriques, vvherein the author dothe aunſvvere to many gratious demaundes. 83
               A letter for ſir Anthony of Cneua, vvherein is expounded an authoritie of holy ſcripture. 88
               A letter vnto Maiſter frier Iohn Beneuiades, vvherein is expounded the text, vvhich ſayth: The euill ſpirite ſent of God came vpon Saule. 94
               A letter vnto the Marques of Velez, vvherin he vvriteth vnto him certaine nevves of the court. 98
               A letter vnto the Bishop of Tui nevve preſident of Granado, in vvhiche is ſayd vvhat is the office of Preſidents. 103
               A letter vnto the VVarden of Alcala, in vvhiche is expounded the Pſalme vvhich ſayth: Let the liuing deſcende into hell. 1
                     •
                  7
               
                  A letter vnto Diego de camina, vvherin is treated hovv enuy raigneth in all men. 111
               A letter vnto ſyr Iohn de Moncada, in vvhich is declared vvhat thinge is ire, and hovv good is pacience. 115
               A letter vnto ſir Ierome Vique, in vvhich is treated hovve greate libertie is much hurtfull. 121
               A letter vnto ſir Ierome Vique, vvhere in is declared an Epitaph of Rome. 125
               A letter vnto the Bishoppe of Badaioz, vvherein is declared the auncient lavves of Badaioz. 127
               A letter vnto ſir Iohn Palamos, vvherein is declared vvhich vvas Saians horſe, and Toloze gold. 129
               A letter vnto the Duke of Alba ſyr Frederique of Toledo, vvherein is intreated of infirmeties & the profits of the ſame. 134
               A letter vnto ſir peter of acunia, Earle of Buendia, vvherein is declared a propheſie of a certaine Sibill. 138
               A letter vnto Ynigo Manrique, in vvhich is recompted vvhat happened in rome betvvixt a ſlaue and a Lion 141
               A letter vnto ſir Peter of Acunia, Earle of Buendia, vvherein is touched hovv lordes should gouerne their eſtates. 152
               A letter vnto the Admirall ſir Frederique, Enriques, in vvhich is declared that olde men haue to bevvare the yere three ſcore and three. 168
               A letter vnto the admirall ſir Frederique Enriques, vvherein is expounded vvherefore Abraham and Ezechiell did fall forvvarde, and Hely backevvardes 172
               A letter vnto the abbot of Monſerrate, vvherein is touched the Oratoris that the Gentyls vſed. 176
               A letter vnto the Admirall ſyr Frederique Enriques, vvherein is declared a certayne authoritie of holy Scripture 178
               An other letter vnto Levves Braue, vvherein is touched the conditiones that honourable olde men ought to haue. 185
               A letter vnto ſir Ieames of Gueuara Vncle to the author, vvherein he doth comforte him 192
               A letter vnto Mayſter Gonſalis Gill▪ in vvhich is expounded that vvhich is ſaide in the Pſalmiſte, Inclinaui cor meum. 198
               A letter vnto the Abbot of ſaint Peter of Cardenia, in vvhich he much praiſeth, the Mountaine countrey. 201
               A letter vnto Doctor Manſo Precident of Valiodolid, vvherein is declared that in other mens affaires vvee may be importunate. 204
               A letter vnto the Earle of Beheuent ſir Alonſo pimentill vvherein is intreated the olde auncient order of the knightes of the band 208
               A letter vnto the Conſtable of Caſtile ſir Ynigo of Valaſco, in vvhich is touched that the vviſe man ought not to truſt his vvife vvith any ſecrete of importaunce. 220
               
                  A letter vnto the Conſtable ſir Ynigo of Valaſco vvherein is touched, that in the harte of the good Knight, there ought not to raigne paſſion or anger. 223
               A letter vnto the Conſtable ſir ynigo of Valaſco, vvhiche is ſayde vvhat the Marques of Piſcara reported of Italy. 227
               A letter vnto the Conſtable ſir ynigo of Valaſco, in vvhich is declared the priſes of thinges in olde time in Caſtile. 229
               A letter vnto ſir Alonſo of Fonſica, Bishop of Burgos, preſident of the Indians, vvherein is declared vvherfore the Ringes of ſpaine bee intituled catholique. 2
                     •
                  0
               A letter vnto Moſon Rubin of Valentia being old and enamored. 237
               A letter vnto the Biſshop Zamora Sir Antony of Acuna, vvherein he is sharplie reprehended, being capitaine of the commoners that rebelled in spaine. 242
               A letter vnto the ſaide Bishoppe of Zamora, in vvhich he is peſvvaded to turne to the ſeruice of the king. 248
               A letter vnto ſyr Iohn of Padiila, captain of the commoners reuolted. 
                     •
                  54
               A letter vnto a gentleman, and ſecrete friend to the Aucthor, vvherein hee aduiſeth and reprehendeth his vvretched couetouſneſſe. 260.
               A letter vnto the Lady Marye of Padilla, vvife to Don Iohn of Padilla, vvherein the Aucthor doth perſvvade that she turne to the ſeruice of the king. 265
               An oration made in the Toune of Braxima, vnto the knightes and gentlemen of the aſſemblie, vvherein the Aucthor doth tequeſt them to peace in the name of the king. 272
               A letter vnto Doctour Melgar Phiſition, vvherein is touched the profites and diſprofites of Phiſicke. 282
               vvho firſt inuented medicine and practiſed Phiſicke. 282
               Of kingdomes and prouinces that banished Phiſicke. 287
               The trauailes of Phiſicke. 289
               A letter ſent from Grec
                     •
                  a to Rome, vvith a caue
                     •
                  t againſt Phiſitions. 291
               Of ſeuen notable benefites proceeding from the good Phiſition. 293
               Of nine perniciou
                     •
                   euils, that Phiſitions commit. 295
               The Aucthors iudgement of Phiſicke. 297
               A letter vnto M
                     •
                  ſen Puche of Valentia, vvherein is touched at large hovve the husband vvith the vvife, and the vvife vvith the husband &c. 300.
               That none doe marrie but vvith his equall. 304
               That the vvomen be very shame
                     •
                  aced and no babler. 3
                     •
                  8
               That a vvoman be a home keeper and 
                     •
                  hun occaſions. 309
               That the maried vvoman be not proude or cruell. 311
               That the huſbands be not rigorous, eſpecially vvhē they be nevv. &c. 313
               That the husbandes be not ouer ielouſe. 316
               That if betvvixt the married there paſſe any vnkindneſſe, they giue no part thereof vnto their neighbours. 318
               That the husbands prouide thinges neceſſarie for the houſe. 321
               
                  That the husbands bring not to their houſes ſuſpicious perſons. 322
               That maried vvomen ought to learne to ſovve and gather togither. 325
               A letter vnto Moſen Robin of Valentia, vvherein he anſvvereth to certaine notable demaunds, a letter very conuenient, for the vvoman that marrieth an olde man. 327
               A letter to the cha
                     •
                  on Oſorius: vvherein is declared, that vve knovve not the things that profit or hurte vs in this life. 331
               A letter to count Naſaoth Marques of cenece, vvherein is expreſſed vvhy amongſt the fectes of Mahomet, ſome be termed Turkes, ſome saracens, and others Moores. 334
               A letter to Don Frances of vlloa, expounding certayne ſtraunge and auncient Epitaphes 344
               A letter vnto the admirall ſir Frederike, vvherin is touched the maner that in olde time vvas vſed on their ſepulchers, and the Epitaphe vpon the ſame. 351
               A letter vnto ſir Alphonce Maurique, Archbishop of ciuill, vvherein is declared a certaine paſſage of holy ſcripture. 361
               A diſcourſe made vnto queene Elinor, in a ſermon of the transfiguration, vvherein is touched, the great loue that chriſt did beare vs. 371
               The taking and ouerthrovv of carthage, done by scipio the great. 378
               A diſputation and diſcourſe holden againſt the Ievves at Rome 383
               An excellent diſputation, that the authour had vvith the Ievves of Naples, vvherein is declared, the moſt high myſteries of the trinitie. 398
               A right high &, ꝓfitable diſcourſe apertayning chiefly vnto the learned. 401
               A letter to ſir Ferdenādo of Cordoua, vvherin is diſcourſed the eleuen perſecutions of the church vvhen, and by vvhom they vvere perſecuted. 405
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            The favvtes that be eſcaped in printinge.
            Foll. 328. line. 2. Reade caſpe for pa
                  •
               pe.
            Foll. 329. line. 4. Reade they for flee.
            Foll. Idem. line 16. Reade falne for fall.
            Foll. 331. line. 11. Reade algezire for algezi.
            Foll. Idem line. 20. Reade Tincinatus, for omitus.
            Foll. 336. line. 26. Reade during, for ba
                  •
               ging.
            Foll. 335. line 13 Reade enxo
                  •
               ius, for enponius.
            Foll. Idem. line. 14. Reade pithiniachus, for pithanius.
            Foll. Idem. line. 17. Reade theſithes, for gothes.
            Foll. Idem. line 23. Reade Ceſaria, for 
                  •
               oſar
                  •
               a.
            Foll. Idem. line 24. Reade Iſawrus, for Iſauca.
            Foll. Idem. line 24. Reade feleuce, for ſolenua.
            Foll. Idem. line 25. Reade briquiene, for briquemuſt.
            Foll. Idem. line 26 Reade, fes, for fee.
            Foll. Idem. line. 6. Reade quiſquiane, for gniſquaince.
            Foll. 354. line 27. Reade ninus, for mimus
            Foll. 
                  •
               6
                  •
               . line 5. Reade demanded, for determined.
            Foll. 384. line 20. Reade neither, for ether.
            
         
      
   