
      
         
            
            To the honorable Aſſembly of the Commons Houſe of Parliament.
            The humble Petition of Robert Harriſon of Marleborough, in the Countie of Wilts Inkeeper.
            Moſt humbly ſhewing,
            THat fiue yeares ſince the Petitioner bargained with one Stephen Barber alias Laurence, for the Inne called the White-hart in Marleboroogh and certaine goods therein for 350. li. whereof 50. li. was for the Leaſe, and 300. li. for the goods. The Petitioner at diuers times agreed vpon, paid all the ſaid 300. li. except onely 100. li. for ſecuritie whereof, Iohn Booth and Iohn Goldſmith, became bound in a Bond of two hundred pound to Barber, and for their indemnpitie, the Petitioner aſſigned ouer to them all the goods which hee had bought of Barber, beeing worth 300. li. the goods neuertheleſſe to remayne in the Petitioners poſſeſſion till the Sureties were damnified. Afterwards Barber being diſpleaſed with the Petitioner (for not permitting him to build a Barne on the backe ſide of the Inne, threatned to roote him out, and euer afterwards ſought means to vndo him, & the better to compaſſe his malitious purpoſe, he combining with the ſaid Booth, and Goldſmith, procured them (although they were neuer damnified) priuately to confeſſe a Iudgement vnto him vpon the ſaid Bond of two hundred pound, and therupon ſued out a Fieri facias, which being deliuered to the vnder Sheriffe, he entred into the Inne, and ſummoning a Iurie there: inquired what goods were there of the ſaid Booth and Goldſmith towards ſatisfaction of the Execution, and there not only extended the goods which the Petitioner bought of Barber, beeing worth as aforeſaid 300. li. but alſo (contrary to Lawe,) extended vpon all the reſt of the Petitioners proper houſholdſtuffe and bedding, worth at the leaſt 200. li. more, all which the vnder Sheriffe cauſed to be vndervalued but at two hundred and eight pound, for which, with the Leaſe the Petitioner was by one Maſter Wydley then lately offered eight hundred pounds, which their indirect practiſes to vndoe the Petitioner being perceiued, he ſhewed vnto them a Protection from his Maſter Mr. Iohn St. Awbin a member of this Houſe, hoping vpon the ſight thereof (in reuerence to this honourable Aſſembly,) they would forbeare to doe him wrong. But they made a ſcorne therof, Booth ſaying he cared not a fart for the ſame, and Cockes the Bailiffe ſaid in deſpight of the Protection, hee would carry the Petitioner to Priſon for tenne Groats recompencene, all the reſt laughing and ieſting at the ſame. Then the ſaid Maſter Wydley pretending great friendſhip to the Petitioner ſatisfied the Execution and tooke the goods from the vnder Sheriffe into his hands, and then Maſter Andrew Holdipp a friend to the Petitioner offering to pay vnto him 140. li. for the Redemption of the goods (which was as much as he was to pay for the ſame) he vtterly refuſed to deliuer the ſame, ſaying, That his throate ſhould be cut rather then the Petitioner ſhould keepe that Inne againe, and thereupon carryed the goods out of the Houſe.
            The Petitioner further ſheweth, That making declaration vnto Sir Thomas Richardſon the Speaker of this honourable Aſſembly, of the contemptuous behauiour of the ſaid parties, and of the wrongfull taking away the Petitioners goods without lawfull authoritie as afore-ſaid, Maſter Speaker (commiſerating the Petitioners diſtreſſed eſtate,) did write to the High Sheriffe, and the reſt that were Actors in the buſineſſe, wiſhing them to deliuer to the Petitioner his goods ſo wrongfully taken from him. But the High Sheriffe ſaid that he was ſufficiently ſecured by his Vnder Sheriffe, and the reſt regarded not the meſſage nor would deliuer the goods. By which meanes not only the Priuiledges and Liberties of this honourable Houſe are violated and contemned, and the Petitioner his Wife and nine Children are vtterly vndone. But alſo his Maieſties Subiects trauailing into thoſe parts are deſtitute of lodging and entertaynment, it being one of the chiefeſt Innes of Receipt betwixt London and Briſtoll.
            The Petitioner, therefore moſt humbly prayeth that the contemners of the Priuiledges of this honourable H
                  •
               uſe may anſwere their contempt, and that by order of this Houſe the Petitioner may be reſtored to his goods wrongfully taken from him. And he ſhall daily pray, &c.
         
      
   