
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  A maruellous Medicine to cure a great paine,
                  If a Mayden-head be loſt to get it againe.
               
            
            To a pleaſant new tune.
            
               
            
            
               ONce buſie in ſtudy betwixt night and day,
               with choyſe of inuentions I had in my minde,
               And many odde matters my minde did aſſay,
               but any to pleaſe me I could not well finde:
               Then ſuddenly caſting the noſe in the winde,
               I ſmelt out a Medicine both precious and plaine,
               How to help ſilly Maydens that had béen ſomwhat kind
               to get by good order their Mayden-head againe.
            
            
               Firſt the Mayde muſt be brought into a ſléepe,
               for thrée houres together before ſhe awake,
               And ſeuen dayes after this dyet muſt keepe,
               with theſe kind of compounds the which ſhee muſt take,
               She muſt eate neyther roſt-meate, ſod, neyther bake,
               but all kinde of dainties ſhée muſt refraine,
               Saue onely this medicine, the which if ſhee take,
               then it will reſtore her Mayden-head againe.
            
            
               The firſt day giue her the ſlime of an Gele,
               blowne through a Bag-pipe with the wind of a bladder,
               With two or thrée turnings of a ſpinning whéele,
               boyld in an Egge-ſhell, and ſtreind through a ladder:
               The tongue of an Vrchin, the ſting of an Adder,
               boyld in a blanket in a ſhowre of raine,
               With ſeuen notes of muſicke to make her the gladder,
               and it will reſtore her mayden-head againe.
            
            
               The ſecond day giue her the péeping of a Mouſe,
               with thrée drops of thunder that fals from the skie,
               And temper it with thrée leapes of a Louſe,
               and put therein thrée skips of a Flye,
               With a gallon of water of a Widdowes eye,
               that wéepes for her husband when death hath him ſlaine,
               Let her take this medicine and drinke by and by,
               and it will reſtore her mayden-head againe.
            
            
               The third day giue her the chattering of a Sparrow,
               roſted in a Mitten of vntan'd Leather,
               Giue it her with the rumbling of a wheele-barrow,
               and baſte it with thrée yards of a blacke Swans feather,
               The iuyce of a Whetſtone thereto put together,
               with the farr of a Fryer brought hither from Spaine
               
               Let her lay all theſe in an ell of Louſe leather,
               and lay warme to her belly to helpe her great paine.
            
            
               The fourth day giue her the ſong of a Swallow,
               well tempered with Marrow wrung out of a log,
               With thrée pound and better of Stock-fiſh tallow
               hard fryed in the left horne of a Butchers blue dog,
               With the gaggling of a Gooſe, & the friskes of a Frog
               the bill of a ſhouell, or a Humble-bées braine:
               Giue her this faſting, with the grunting of a Hog,
               and it will reſtore her mayden-head againe.
            
            
               The fift day giue her betwixt eight a clocke and nine,
               ſome gruell of Grantum made for the nonce,
               The braines of a birdbolt powdred very fine,
               and beat in a Morter of Ginne-wrens bones,
               Boyld in a nut-ſhell betwixt two mill-ſtones:
               with the guts of a Gudgin before ſhe be ſtaine:
               Let her be ſure to drinke all this at once,
               and it will reſtore her mayden-head againe.
            
            
               Now marke well the ſixt day what muſt be her trade,
               ſhe muſt haue a Woodcocke, a Snipe, or a Quaile,
               Bak'd fine in an Ouen before it be made,
               and mingle it with the blood of a Snaile,
               With foure or fiue Inches of a Iacke-an apes faile:
               what though for a while it put her to paine,
               Yet let her take it without any faile,
               and it will reſtore her mayden-head againe.
            
            
               The ſeuenth day giue her a pound of Maydes moches,
               brayd in a basket of danger and blame,
               With conſerues of Coleworts bound in a boxe,
               to comfort her ſtomacke with the ſirrup of ſhame:
               Although ſhe be paſt all hope of good name,
               and vnto her honeſtie a very great ſtaine.
               Let her take it to remedy the ſame,
               and it will reſtore her mayden-head againe.
            
            
               Loe theſe are our Medicines for Maydens each one,
               which in their Virginitie amiſſe ſomewhat fell,
               Pray you if euer you heare them make moane,
               and gladly would know the place where I dwell,
               At the ſigne of the Whip and the Eg-ſhell,
               néere Pancake ally on Salisbury Plaine,
               There ſhall they finde remedy vſing this well
               or elſe neuer to recouer their mayden-head againe.
            
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London for H.G.
         
      
   