
      
         
            
            
            TO THE HONOVRABLE HOVSE OF Commons aſſembled in Parliament.
            An Abſtract of the generall grieuances of the poore Free-men and Iourney-men Printers oppreſſed, and kept in ſeruile bondage all their liues by the vnlawfull ordinances of the Maſter and Wardens of the Company, which they fortifie only by a Warrant dormant.
            With their moſt Humble Petition,
            FFOM the beginning of Printing his Maieſties progenitors by their prerogatiue Royall did priuiledge ſuch perſons as they pleaſed ſoly to Print ſome peculiar bookes, leauing the reſt in generall to the Printers.
            And for this Art of Printing was the key that opened the doore of knowledge and learning (which is the honour and ſupport of all States and Kingdomes) his Maieſties progenitors were pleaſed to incorporate a ſelected number, and to indow them with a large Charter and many great priuiledges which was graciouſly intended for the generall good of the whole company, but by the innouations brought in by the Maſters and their ordinances, the benefit is conuerted to them in particular, and the petitioners vtterly ruined thereby.
            The lawes of the kingdome authoriſe all perſons, that haue ſerued an Apprentiſhip according to the ſtatute, lawfully to ſet vp and vſe that trade to which they haue ſerued. But the petitioners are depriued of that benefit (which all honeſt and loyall ſubiects inioy) by ordinances of the Maſters of their company. And made perpetuall bondmen to ſerue ſome few of the rich all their liues vpon ſuch condiſsions, and for ſuch hire, and at ſuch times, as the Maſters thinke fit: for their trade of Printing (but as ſeruants) they muſt not vſe, ſo as they take all poſsibiltie of Aduancement (be they neuer ſo exquiſite in their qualitie) from the petitioners, and make them vncapable of maintenance for them their wiues and poſterities.
            The Maſters obtained a decree 28. Eliz. prohibiting the petitioners to ſet vp any preſſe or preſſes wherewith to print vpon paine of ſixe moneths impriſonment without Bayle or mainpriſe, and his preſſes and other inſtruments to be defaced.
            The decree was obtained vnder colour of granting the petitioners diuers bookes in priuiledge to bee printed for their benefit, and diners ordinances for the petitioners continuall and full imployments, and other orders profitable for them. But the decree obtained, they obſerued none of their contracts: thoſe being inſtituted without penalty. But all that tended to the petitioners preiudice, and their Maſters particular profits, were inioyned vnder great and grieuous puniſhments.
            Whereas his Maieſtie was graciouſly pleaſed to grant in priuiledge the printing of diuers bookes vnto the petitioners the poore Printers (they by their ordinances haue diſpoſed them wholly to their owne particular benefit, the petitioners hauing no ſhare or benefit of his Maieſties moſt gracious and free bountie, intended chiefely to the poore petitioners. And with the profit of his Maieſties gift, they haue purchaſed and drawne into their hands diuers other priuiledged bookes, conuerting them likewiſe to their owne ends.
            In like maner vnder a falſe pretence of relieuing the poore, they haue obtained almoſt al into their hands, what either his Maieſtie: or his progenitors euer granted in priuiledge, of which the Petitioners and poore ſort of Printers expecting benefit, reape indemnity and preiudice, and his Maieſties Subiects in general are abuſed by their exactions.
            For they keeping multiplicity of Apprentiſies, (who after their Apprentiſhips, like the Petitioners, become for euer more ſeruile then before) Print Bookes moſt by their Apprentiſes, whereby the Petitioners haue not halfe imployment ſufficient to worke as ſeruants; But the Petitioners are in worſe caſe, then when the priuiledges were in ſtrangers hands, which had no prentiſes. Beſides the Maſters of the Company haue raiſed the prizes of Bookes, Print in worſe Paper, and with dimne and bad Letters.
            The Stationers to whom theſe priuiledges were neuer intended by his Maieſties moſt Gracious Gift, or the Grant of his Progenitors, are the chiefe Ingroſſers of theſe Priuiledged Coppies, with ſome few Printers. And further, the Stationers by an agreement among themſelues will retale no new Copies, vnleſſe they be of their owne. For be it neuer ſo Religious, Learned, or profitable, if it be a Printers, either by purchaſe, or by free gift, they will not ſell the ſame: but the Printer muſt looſe his labour, his Paper and expence, if he will not ſell them at their rate: by which meanes the Stationer hath all the profit both by Printing and Booke-ſelling.
            If the Petitioners infringe any part of the former Decree, or any of their owne Ordinances, or but ſeeme to queſtion their right in the benefits Graciouſly giuen them by his Maieſtie, or complaine of their vnconſcionable and lawleſſe proceedings, they by vertue of a Warrant Dormant, preſently breake the Petitioners houſes, impriſon their bodies, ſeize their goods, and deface their Preſſes and Printing Inſtruments, without legall proceeding or euiction by information. And by this meanes diſpoſe of all things amongſt themſelues, ſo a few are raiſed to great and infinite eſtates, and all the Petitioners thereby made abſolute beggers.
            
               Reaſons why the Petitioners ſhould be relieued in this high and moſt Honourable Court.
               The Decree and their Ordinances barre them all reliefe in any Court of Iuſtice, or any other Court of Equity, but this onely.
               The Decree and their Ordinances are abſolutely contrary to the Lawes of this Kingdome, and againſt the Lawes of God and Nations.
               The Maſters haue in nothing performed their Contracts made at the obtaining the Decree.
               The Petitioners are depriued of that freedome that all other loyall ſubiects inioy, and they ought to haue.
               His Maieſties bounty extended to charitable vſes, but is conuerted to their priuate endes and benefits.
            
            
               The Petitioners moſt humble request is:
               That the Decree may be diſſolued.
               That the Petitioners may inioy that liberty and priuiledge that euery honeſt and loyall ſubiect ought to inioy.
               That they may haue equall ſhare of what his Maieſtie Graciouſly gaue for their charitable vſes.
               And ſuch other priuiledges diſtributed amongſt the whole Company as of right belongs, wrongfully by them now vſurped.
            
            The Petitioners ſhall beſeech the Iudge of all Iudges, to Crowne you all with eternall Honour.
         
      
   