
      
         
            
            
            To the Honorable Aſſembly of the Commons houſe of PARLIAMENT, and to the Committees for grieuances of the ſame HOVSE:
            
               The Anſwere of the Maſter, Wardens and fellowſhip of Woodmongers, London, to the Complaint of ſome few Wharfingers and others, whereof, ſome are forraine, and ſome free of the ſame Citie.
            
               THe gouernment of Carres and Carremen within the Cittie of London was ancientlie time out of mind in the Maior and Aldermen of the Cittie of London.
            At a Court holden before the ſaid Maior and Aldermen xj. Octobris Anno 22. Eliz. It was ordered that the gouernment of the ſaid Carres and Carremen ſhould from that time be in the Maſter and VVardens of the companie of VVood-mongers of the Citie of London.
            After, his Maieſtie by his Letters patents dated the xxix. of Auguſt and in the third yeare of his raigne did incorporate the ſaid Woodmongers and Carremen by the name of the Maſter, Wardens and fellowſhip of woodmongers of London.
            After the xxi. Of October in the ſaid third yeare of his Maieſties raigne the gouernement of all Carres and Carremen, within the ſaid Cittie was by Act of Common Councell confirmed vnto the ſaid Maſter Wardens and Fellow-ſhipp and their Succeſſors. They paying to Chriſts Hoſpitall for the reliefe of the poore there 150li. Per annum, And it was by the ſame Act further enacted that from thenceforth all perſons vſing the trade of Carremen ſhould be tranſlated to the Company of Woodmongers.
            After the ſaid Maſter VVardens and Fellowſhipp did make diuers ordinances for the gouernment of the ſaid Carres and Carremen which ordinances the xviii. of May Anno, 5. Iacobi were confirmed by the late Lord Chauncellor Elleſmere, Sir Iohn Popham, Knight, then Chiefe Iuſtice of the kings bench, and Sir Edward Coke Knight then Chiefe Iuſtice of the Common plees according to the ſtatute of 19. Henrie 7.
            
               XXX. Nouembris Anno 6. Iacobi, it was ordered by the Lords of the Councell that all perſons vſing the trade of Carres ſhould be ordered and gouerned according to the before recited Act of Common Councell. And that the nomber of Carrs within London ſhould not exceed 400. And that none of them ſhould be vſed but by the licence of the Company of VVoodmongers and Carremen.
            
               XI. Octobris Anno 9. Iacobi, the before recited Charter and ordinances were decreed in the Court of Star-chamber.
            After diuers diſordered perſons not conforming themſelues according to the ſaid ordinances the Lords of the Councell were pleaſed to direct their Honorable letters to the Lord Maior and Court of Aldermen requiring them to call the ſaid perſons before them and to cauſe them preſently without delay or excuſe to ſubmit themſelues to the ſaid ordinances or elſe to commit them to priſon vntill they ſhould ſo conforme themſelues.
            The 20. of November Anno 16. Iacobi Regis, a ſecond decree was made in the ſtarr-chamber, whereby the decree of the xi of October in the ix. yeare of his Maieſties raigne the order of the Lords 30. Nouembris Anno 6. Iacobi, the letters of the Lords of the Councell before mencioned the ordinances of the ſaid Companie of VVoodmongers, the before mencioned Act of Common Councell and all other ordinances eſtabliſhed for the gouernment of the ſaid Companie of VVood-mongers & Carremen were decreed to be after trulie obſerued performed and kept according to the purport and true meaning thereof.
            After the xv. of October Anno 17. Iacobi, the ſaid laſt mencioned decree was in all the points afore-ſaid confirmed by a third decree in the ſaid Court of Starr-chamber & diuers perſons that is to ſay Robert Wright Thomas Newton Thomas Guy William Barwell Edward Hopkines and Robert Violet, And alſo Mathew Kimpſter and William Sligh ſhould be reſtrained and prohibited to vſe or worke any Carre or Carres within the ſaid Citie liberties & ſuburbes thereof without allowance of the ſaid VVood-mongers vpon paine of puniſhment to bee inflicted vpon them by the cenſure of the ſaid Honorable court: And it was then further decreed by the ſaid Court that ſuch perſons as then did or ſhould after vſe Carres and were free of any other Companies in London then of the ſaid VVood-mongers ſhould forthwith bee tranſlated ouer to the ſaid company of VVood-mongers in manner and forme as by the ſaid Act of Common Councell is ſet downe and preſcribed. And that ſuch perſon or perſons as did or ſhould refuſe or neglect to be tranſlated after requeſt made vnto them according to the ſaid Act ſhould vndergoe and be ſubiect to the Cenſure and puniſhment of the ſaid moſt Honourable Court of Starr-chamber for his or their contempt in that behalf: And laſtlie it was ordered by the ſaid high Court that the ſaid Robert Wright for his contempt ſhould be committed to the priſon of the Fleet there to remaine vntill he ſhould conforme himſelf and ſhew obedience to the decrees orders and ordinances eſtabliſhed as aforeſaid.
            All which notwithſtanding the ſaid Robert Wright and the other perſons before mencioned and diuers others by their example doe not onelie continue Contemners of the ſaid Act of Common Councell ordinances and decrees but doe alſo become ſuitors to the high Court of Parliament to put in vſe diuers things contrarie to the ſaid Act of Common Councell ordinances and decrees.
         
      
   