
      
         
            
            
            TO THE HONORABLE ASSEMBLY OF THE COMMONS houſe of Parliament, and to the Committees, for Grieuances of the ſame houſe.
            
            The humble petition of Edward Hopkins, William Barwell, Iohn Bellamy, Robert Vilet, Iohn Walter, Robert Wright, and other Wharfingers in and neere the Cittie of London.
            WHereas the petitioners and all others vſing Wharfes for ſale of Fuell within and neere the Cittie of London, haue time out of minde had the vſe of a competent number of Carts and Carres as neceſſarily incident to their trade, to carry wood and cole for the neceſſary vſe of his Maieſties ſubiects in and about the ſaid Citie, vntill ſome of the Woodmongers in An. 3. Iac. (without the conſent of the reſt) did not onely procure themſelues to be incorporated by his Maieſties letters patents, with power to make ordinances for gouernment thereof, but alſo for their owne lucre, and to the intent to oppreſſe his Maieſties ſubiects and make a Monopoly thereof, vpon pretence of better gouernment, haue by colour of the ſaid Letters patents made ordinances, whereby they haue drawne the gouernment of Carres into their owne hands, and ſo prouided that neither Wharfinger nor other might vſe a Carre without licence from the ſaid Companie; and vpon ſuch as had licence for vſe thereof, laid an impoſition of 17. 
                  s.
                4. 
                  d.
                
               per annum, and other great taxes, as ſometimes 40. 
                  s.
                and at other times 4. lib. a man.
            ANd the ſaid Companie hauing ſo ſetled their ſaid gouernment, did denie the vſe of Carres to diuers owners of ancient Wharfes vſing the trade of Woodmongers, and either ſold them out to others for 40. and 50. lib. a Car-roome, or elſe did farme them for 10 
                  s
                and 12. 
                  s.
                the weeke; by which meanes the ſaid Car-roomes are appropriated to Tapſters, Ale-houſe-keepers, Scriueners, Hoſtlers, Bakers, and ſuch like, not vſing themſelues either Wharfe or Carre, and become priuate intereſts, and go as Chattels to Executours.
            ANd when Wharfingers (in caſe of neceſſitie) vſed any Carres for vſe of their trade, themſelues and their ſeruants haue at ſeuerall times beene (by colour of the ſaid Letters patents) committed to priſon by the Maſter and Wardens of the ſaid Companie, and there detained ſometimes 7 or 8 dayes; at other times their Carres haue beene by the ſaid Companie or their miniſters taken from them; and when they haue endeuoured by courſe of law to relieue themſelues, they haue beene vnduly ſtaid.
            BY which vniuſt courſes the petitioners and diuers others being free of the Citie of London, haue beene moſt vniuſtly denied the free vſe of Carres, and thereby hindred from vſing their ſaid trade, and inforced either to buy diuers Car-roomes, or to farme them at the ſeuerall rates aforeſaid, to the vtter vndoing of themſelues, wiues and children, to the great inhanſing and raiſing of the price of Fuell, and the great grieuance and oppreſſion of his Maieſties ſubiects in and neere about the ſaid Citie, and to the raiſing of the price of cariages, with many other inconueniences.
            IN tender conſideration whereof, and for that the ſaid Grant (accompanied with ordinances as aforeſaid) is not onely a Monopoly, but the execution thereof tends to depriue his Maieſties ſubiects of their libertie, by vnlawfull impriſonment, contrary to the great Charter of the Liberties of England, and to the hinderance of Legall proceedings and ſtop of Iuſtice for their goods vniuſtly and againſt law taken from them, and to the deſtruction of their trade, and is otherwiſe enormous and extreme grieuous to the petitioners and others his Maieſties ſubiects, and may with the like colour be put in execution againſt Brewers, Scauingers, and diuers other trades; and for that the petitioners are ready to make good each of the ſaid generals, with diuers particulars of euery ſort.
            MAy it therefore pleaſe this honorably Aſſembly and high Counſell to take the premiſſes into conſideration, and to appoint ſome time for the hearing thereof, and to take ſuch courſe to reforme the ſaid abuſes, and puniſh the ſaid offenders, as to iuſtice ſhall appertaine:
            And the petitioners (as moſt bound) ſhall euer pray for the long continuance and happie proſperitie of this honorable Aſſembly, and all the members thereof, &c.
         
      
   