
      
         
            
            THREE
GODLY AND FRVITFVLL
SERMONS, DECLARING,
FIRST HOW WE MAY BE SAVED
in the day of iudgement, and ſo come to life ever
               laſting:
ſecondly, how we ought to liue according
to Gods will during our life: which are
the two things that every one ought to he most care
               full
of as long as they liue.
*⁎*
            
            Preached and written by the reverend & godly learned
M. IOHN MORE, late Preacher in the
Citie of Norwitch.
            And now firſt publiſhed by M. NICHOLAS BOVVNDE
whereunto he hath adioyned of his owne,
A Sermon of comfort for the afflicted: and,
A ſhort treatiſe of a contented mind.
            
            1. Theſſal. 5. 21.
            
               Try all things, and keepe that which is good.
            
            Seene and allowed.
            Printed by Iohn Legatt, Printer to the Vniverſitie of
Cambridge. 1594.
            And are to be ſolde at the ſigne of the Sunne in
Pauls Church-yard in London.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL AND
SVCH AS FEARE GOD, THE
Knights, and Eſquires, Iuſtices for the preſeruation
of her Maieſties peace in the Countie of Norffolke,
and to euery one of them, Grace,
mercie, and peace from God the Father,
and from Ieſus Chriſt our
Lorde.
            
               WHereas among the many hundred
Sermons, or rather certaine thouſandes
preached by this graue and
learned father, by the ſpace of more
then twentie yeares, in which hee
was licenſed thereunto by the Vniverſitie
of Cambridge; he left no
ſuch notes at large whereby the
principall heades or chiefe matter of any of them almoſt
might be well collected for the better vnderſtanding of others,
ſauing onely of theſe, which he wrote out worde for
worde as you haue them: It ſeemed vnto me, that his meaning
and purpoſe was, thereby to commende the moſt neceſſarie
doctrine in them cōtained, to as many as he mought,
and that it ſhould not be proper to them onely, to whome it
was firſt vttered, but ſtretch out it ſelfe further: neither

that the fruit of it ſhould periſh with the ſound thereof, but
remaine afterwards, yea liue when himſelfe ſhould be dead.
Which moued me thus to publiſh them, that ſo they might
more ſpeedily be caried farre and nere, and more eaſily be in
the hands and eyes of all them, to whome they were meant.
And as they intreat of that matter principally, which was
moſt common in all his preachings, as being moſt neceſſary,
(namely how we may be ſaued in death, and how we ought
to lead our life) which can neuer be too much preached of,
or too often heard of any; and therefore if he had ſtill liued,
he would ſtill haue preached of this; ſo nowe becauſe
he is fallen aſleepe in the Lord, and can ſpeake no more vnto
vs, and theſe points are but ſhortly ſet downe of him in
the beginning of his Catechiſme, (which yet with great
fruite theſe many yeares hath beene often printed) this larger
diſcourſe of his might be in ſteade of a continuall preaching
vnto all thoſe that are deſirous ſtill to be confirmed in
them: In which beſides the matter whole and intire without
any alteration, you haue his owne very wordes alſo as
they were penned by himſelfe, that ſo by the graue ſimplicitie,
or ſimple grauitie appearing in them, all that were acquainted
with his preaching, might thereby as it were by the
colour & lineaments of it, eaſily diſcerne that it is altogether
his owne doing in deede: eſpecially ſo many as then hearde
him, might therby as it were by his footing, traſe out the author
himſelfe. Seeing then, vpon this occaſion theſe ſermons
come abroad, I thought it expedient, or rather neceſſarie to
commend them to your Worſhips godly conſideration &
Chriſtian protection; becauſe that being firſt preached in a
Right worſhipfull aſſembly and meeting of yours helde at
Ocle for the quarter Seſsions then; and afterwards (the Lord
ſo effectually bleſsing him, and mouing ſome of you with

his holy ſpirit) beeing written at the earneſt requeſt (as it ſeemeth)
of your Worſhips, him ſelfe in his life time dedicated
them after a ſort vnto you: ſo that I could not now after his
death, haue alienated them from you: vnleſſe I would of
purpoſe haue violated the will, and made fruſtrate the good
intent of the deade: which yet if I had inconſiderately done,
your Worſhips might haue chalenged them, and recouered
them into your handes. Hoping therefore that your Worſhips
will fauourably interpret my boldnes, who beeing vnknowne
euen in the face vnto the greateſt part, yea almoſt all
of you, haue preſumed thus farre: ſeeing that therein I haue
not ſo much diſorderly intruded any thing vpō you againſt
your wils, as dutifully tēdered & deliuered vp vnto you your
own: (as herafter you may for my credit herein, heare in this
treatiſe the author him ſelfe ſpeaking vnto you by name) I
humbly beſeech you to receiue it as your own: I count it altogether
needleſſe to write in the commendations of it, (neither
are my praiſes any thing, if they were needfull) the name
of the preacher and writer of them commends them ſufficiently,
eſpecially vnto ſo many of you, as knew his great learning,
both in all the liberall arts, and almoſt all languages, and
alſo in other ſtudies meete for ſo great a Divine: with his
great godlines and continuall graue cariage of himſelfe in the
whole courſe of his life, which worthily did purchaſe him
great reuerence amongſt all: beſides his feruent zeale for the
houſe of God, which at the laſt did eat him vp: & his endleſſe
paines in preaching the Goſpell in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon:
ſometimes almoſt euery day in the weeke, for the ſpace of
certain yeres, and euery Lords day three or fowre times: and
when he did leaſt, ſo often as ordinarily the ſtrength of man
will permit, as many of your Worſhips are credible and eiewitneſſes
of it, beſides many hundreds more: By all which

it may ſeeme he vntimely ſhortned his daies, yet ſeeing the
ende of our life is to doe good, and he by making haſt, did in
ſo ſhort a time, as much good, as if by ſparing him ſelfe he
had drawne out the ſame in length, if he could poſsibly ſo
haue liued an hundred or two hundred yeares: what cauſe
had he in his death thereof to repent, or we now in that behalfe
to be ſorie for him? But I will keepe your Worſhips
no longer from him; you ſhall heare him ſelfe ſpeaking vnto
you, or rather the Lord by him: vnto whoſe gratious bleſſing,
for the fruit of this, and all other his good ordinances
towards vs, for our direction in this life, and ſaluation in the
life to come,Phil. 4. 8. 9. commending all your Worſhips, I humbly
take my leaue, praying you to thinke on theſe things, which
ye haue both learned and receiued, and heard, and ſeene in
him: thoſe things doe, and the God of peace ſhalbe with you
Norton in Suffolke. 26 Auguſt. 1594.
            Your Worſhips in all Chriſtian
duties for the Lords ſake,
Nicholas Bownde.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST
Sermon.
            
               2. Cor. 5. 10.
               For we muſt all appeare before the iudgement ſeate of
Chriſt, that euery one may receiue the things which
are done in his bodie, according to that he hath done,
whether it be good or euill.
            
            
               WE haue heard (good Brethren) heretofore,
howe to behaue our ſelues one
with another touching ſtrifes and contentions;
that we muſt not be mooued
to reuengement vpon euery light occaſion,
but put vp iniuries and harmes,
and pray for our enemies, following
the exāple of our Lord Ieſus our chiefe
peacemaker with God: that we euery one in like maner ſhould
be ſtudious of peace in our ſelues, and helpe others to be at one
among themſelues, that the prince of peace may reſt among
vs: all this we haue heard at large declared vnto vs: it remayneth
onely that we be diligent followers of it, for thereunto
tendeth all teaching and preaching, to beate into our heades
knowledge of our dutie towardes God and our neighbour,
that we ſhould not onely be knowers of his will with the wicked
ſeruant, but practiſers of the ſame with the godly childe.
And becauſe in this point we be very dull, & content our ſelues
often with the bare knowledge of our dutie, thinking it ſufficient,

that we can make iolly diſcourſes of matters, whereof we
be nothing at all touched in our heart: I haue therefore choſen
out this portion of Scripture, to this end, that it might partly
awake vs out of ſuch a ſound ſleepe of ſecuritie, to the more
deepe and effectuall conſideration of our dutie.
            Theſe words as I haue read them vnto you be vttered by the
Apoſtle to this ende, that he might ſtirre himſelfe vp more feruently
and earneſtly to the doing of his dutie not onely before
men in ſhew, but alſo ſyncerely from the bottome of his heart
before God the ſearcher of the heart. For ſo it doth appeare
by the verſe going before: howſoeuer it be, ſaith he, whether it be
that we be at home in this bodie,
               2. Cor. 5. 9. 
               or remoouing from home out of this
bodie, we doe alwaies indeauour that our actions and deedes may
pleaſe our God. For we muſt all once appeare before the iudgement
ſeate of God, as though he ſhould ſay, Howe men iudge and eſteeme
of me, I make not ſo great account, ſo that my doings
may be allowed of my God, for there is no remedie they muſt
once come to be skanned before God, where all the allowing
or diſalowing of man can take no place.2. Cor. 5. 17. And herin alſo he
ſecretly repreſſeth and beateth backe the vaine oſtentation of
the falſe teachers,1. Cor. 4. 2. that had nothing before their eyes, but onely
to haue the applauſe and the liking of men. I dare not ſo doe
my dutie, ſaith he, as ſome teachers among you, who frame
them ſelues to pleaſe men, but my chiefe and whole purpoſe is
to pleaſe God in my calling; for when men ſhall haue giuen
vpon my doings their verdict and iudgements, either in liking
or diſliking of me, I know that when men ſhall haue don with
me, with their iudgements and cenſures, that I muſt after all
that come before God, and he muſt take the viewe of me and
my life, not according as it hath appeared outwardly to the
ſhew of men, but as it hath beene indeede before God, and
therefore I dare not frame my ſelfe to the onely liking of man,
but eſpecially to the pleaſing of my God, before whoſe iudgement
ſeat I muſt once ſtand, and that is it, that maketh me ſo
carefull (as he addeth in the verſe following) not onely to doe
my dutie before men ſo truly as they can not iuſtly blame me,2. Cor. 5. 11.
but eſpecially to examine my heart before God, that it be vpright

before him, as my outward doings are before mē: becauſe
I ſet before mine eies this terrible iudgement of the Lord, who
is a ſore reuēger of all diſſimulatiō. Thus ye heare then for what
purpoſe the Apoſtle bringeth in this ſentence of our appearing
before the iudgement ſeat of God, that is, to ſtirre himſelf
vp to walke more ſincerely before God, & not to be contented
with the applauſe or liking of men. It remaineth now that we
gather our profit by it, & applie it to our vſe, that it may ſerue
vs in as good ſtead, as it did the Apoſtle: for I neede not ſtande
long to prooue the truth of the ſentence, ſeeing it is ſo euident
through the whole bodie of the Scriptures, & ſo apparant as cā
be, that Chriſt ſhall come to iudgement: it is a thing euident ynough
of it ſelfe, and denied of none, the ſimpleſt of all doe acknowledge
it, euery one knoweth that doomes day wil come,
it is an article of our Creede, that Chriſt ſhall come to iudge vs,
ſo that I neede not buſie my ſelfe to ſet out that matter in large
proofe, which is of all ſo generally confeſſed: but this eſpecially
we haue to note out of it, that we learne to make our profit &
benefit by it vnto our ſoules health, as the Apoſtle doth vnto
his ſoule, and applie it vnto our ſoules, as he doth vnto himſelfe.
For he bringeth this ſentence, not to doe vs to vnderſtande,
that he knoweth onely and acknowledgeth a iudgement to
come (for the very diuels do in like maner ſo much, & yet ceaſe
not continually to rage againſt God) but that by the acknowledging
of that iudgement,2. Cor. 5. 11. he is inwardly touched with a reuerent
feare, and an earneſt deſire to doe his dutie and walk vprightly
both outwardly before man, & inwardly before God.
This profit doth he gather to him ſelfe then, by thinking vpon
the iudgement to come, & ſetting it before his eies, that therby
he is ſtirred vp to walke this life warily & ſincerely both before
God & men: & by this example we are admoniſhed (good brethren)
to doe the like, that is, to ſet the remembrance of the
iudgement ſeat of God before our eyes, that thereby we may
be raiſed from our ſecuritie: but alas, we are very farre from
it; euery one of vs, I graunt, can confeſſe, (and I thinke we doe
beleeue it too) that Chriſt ſhall come to iudgement, we can ſo
ſay, but alas we goe no further, wee gather not hereupon

with the Apoſtle, a leſſon to our ſelues to walke therefore vprightly
and without guile before God, knowing that all our
doings muſt once come to the skanning before his iudgement:
this we leaue out, and content our ſelues onely with a vain repetition
of bare words in our Creede: & think that we are notable
Chriſtians when wee haue rolled vp the wordes in our
Creede, that Chriſt ſhall come to iudge both the quicke and
the dead, & in the meane time neuer apply it to our life, to take
admonition thereby to walke in the feare of our God, this I ſay,
men litle thinke vpon: but we ſee how the Apoſtle teacheth
vs another leſſon by his example, to apply the conſideration of
the comming of Chriſt vnto our ſoules with feare and trembling,
to walke in ſimplicitie before God, becauſe we cannot eſcape
his iudgement. And it ſtandeth vs in hand to learne it
well, and put it in practiſe, for we ſee the vntowardnes of the
world, & our owne blindnes, how we doe not onely ſuffer our
ſelues to be blinded by others, but willingly caſt before our
eyes a thouſand clouds and myſts of hypocriſie and ſecuritie to
blind our ſelues with all, that we ſhould neuer ſee our owne perill
and danger, & vtterly to burie in vs altogether the remembrance
of the laſt iudgement, that we might more ſafely ſleepe
in our deadly ſecuritie and ſinnefull behauiour, to our vtter deſtruction
both of our ſoule and bodie: therefore it is notable
here that the Apoſtle calleth vs to the iudgement ſeat of God,
for ſuch kinde of doctrine hath great force to waken vs more
liuely out of ſuch perill & danger, when we commonly vſe to
tumble and wallow without feeling: for as long as we thinke
we haue to deale but onely with man, we take vpon vs to rage
like cruell beaſts, without al reaſon & cōſcience in oppreſſing
one an other & in deceiuing one an other, we cōmit all abhominable
wickednes in corners, & in the darke night, & thinke
we be in excellent good ſafetie, becauſe our naughtines cānot
be eſpied, nor tried out by men: but alas the Apoſtle ſaith we
muſt all appeare before the iudgement ſeate of God; when all
the men in the earth haue done with vs, and can finde out
none of our naughtines, then muſt the Lord beginne to try out
our wickedneſſe: and ſhall he in like manner (thinke you)

be conſtrained to give vs ouer as one not able to bewray our
lewdneſſe!1. King. 8. 39 No, no, all the ſecret thoughts of our hearts are
open vnto him: all our ſubtill practiſes which we contriue neuer
ſo cloſely are every one of them apparent to his eyes, and
he will ſit in iudgement vpon them, and euen condemne vs
for them to everlaſting torment, if wee doe not now repent
while he gives time. Yee ſee then it ſtandeth vs in hand to put
this leſſon well in practiſe, to avoide the danger now in this
time of mercie, which otherwiſe will fall vpon vs. And away
with all vaine gloſes, and viſours of hypocriſie, whereby we
vſe both to deceiue our ſelves and others, and let vs learne now
at laſt to walke in ſimplicitie before our God, and in plaine
dealing with men. For otherwiſe, there is no remedie, when
we haue wrangled out the matter never ſo ſtoutly before men,
it muſt be brought notwithſtanding in hearing before our
God, whome wee can not with all the fetches of our ſubtill
heads, neither deceive nor abuſe. And yet it is a wonder to ſee
how boldly men dare deale with God, and how impudently
they dare behave themſelves in his preſence, what wickedneſſe
we dare commit even before his eyes, without all feare of
his iudgement ſeate, as though he had neither eye to ſee out
our lewdneſſe, nor ſword to puniſh, nor yet iudgement ſeate
to condemne. Wee dare boldly in the open preſence of our
God commit filthy adulterie, fornication, & all vncleanneſſe,
which wee durſt not for our lives be ſo bold as doe in the preſence
of a child of xiii. yeres old for feare of his preſence, that
could bring vs to a little ſhame here in the world, & yet ſticke
nothing at all like bruite beaſts, to commit all ſuch villany in
the preſence of our God, who hath his iudgement ſeate to
condemne vs eternally. Doth not this ſufficiently bewray our
blockiſhnes, that there is no feare of God in vs at al, when we
dare ſo proudly checke againſt his maieſty, and do vtterly ſe
                  ••
               
to bury vp all the remēbrance of his iudgment, that we might
like filthy ſwine wallow and tumble our ſelves in all wickedneſſe
and abominations without controlment! But like miſerable
caitiffes, which dare be ſo bold with our God, to make
no account of his maieſtie, and doe ſo lightly eſteeme of his

iudgement continually in our ſinnes without repentance, vvee
ſhall be haled before his iudgement ſeat in ſpite of our teeth,
when we vvould be glad to haue the hils & mountaines to fall
vpon vs,Luc. 23. 30. to hide vs from his preſence:Revel. 6. 17. & 9. 6. but all ſhall not prevaile.
This ſentence muſt ſtand more firme & ſure then heauen and
earth, that all of vs muſt appeare before the iudgement ſeate
of God; wherfore good brethren, let vs not abuſe this time
of mercy, but now repent, while God giveth vs time, for afterwarde
is a time of iudgement without mercy to all thoſe that
dare ſo horribly abuſe Gods maieſty, & do not ſtudy to repent
while they haue time: let vs now, while we liue vpon this earth
ſet daily before our eyes the continual remembrance of Chriſts
comming to iudgement, that wee flatter not our ſelues in our
ſinnes: and the more carefully muſt we looke vnto it, becauſe
we ſee what blockiſh heatheniſhnes the vvorld is grovven
vnto for lack of practiſing this leſſon: for vvhat is the cauſe of all
the diſorders grovven amongſt men, & all outragious dealing,
but that men forget themſelues, and think nothing of their appearance
before the heauenly iudge? What is the cauſe of ſuch
flattery & craft among vs, ſuch fetches, ſhiftes, & devices to
deceive one another, ſuch ſwearing & forſwearing? what is the
cauſe, I ſay, of all this, but only that men doe not effectually
conſider vvith themſelues of the day of iudgement, vvhen all
matters ſhalbe righted, all ſecrets revealed, & craftie iuggling
vvith God & man diſcloſed? mē, I ſay, do not think upō this, &
therefore do harden themſelues in their ſinne. And eſpecially
here in Norffolke it is a marvelous thing to ſee hovv vve haue
ſo ſhaken off all feare of God, & utterly buried the remembrāce
of his iudgement: if vvee can once deuiſe ſhifts & ſubtilties to
delude Iuſtices, Iudges, and Gods magiſtrates, that the lavv of
man can not take hold of vs, vve thinke our ſelues as ſure and

                  •••
               e as can be: if vve can find out any colour or fetch that can
not be eſpyed by man in the iudgement ſeate, vvee on as ſlily
vvith the matter as can be, & think all cock ſure. And though
the matter be never ſo well knovvn vnto our conſciences, whē
vve do iniuries vnto others, yet if there be no vvitneſſes of the
matter, or evident proofe by lavv to convince vs, vve thinke vve

be as ſafe as can be: & if vve be dealt vvithall by good men to
deale uprightly vvith men & according vnto conſcience, oh
vve be ſtraightvvaies vpon them; vvhat ſirrha? vvhat knovve
ye by me? vvhat can ye charge me vvithall? vvhat vvitnes haue
yee againſt me? if ye haue any thing to charge me vvithall I
vvill anſvver it: & thus vve play the iolly fellovves in advancing
of our ſelues, & ſetting vp our creſt, if nothing can be prooved
againſt vs by man. And vvhat if no man liuing can charge thee
vvith any thing, thou miſerable caitiffe, & that things can not
be laid out plainly by vvitneſſes, & evidences before men? doſt
thou thinke therefore to eſcape ſcotfree at Gods hand, & ſo to
eſcape his iudgement? vvhat if there be no mā that can charge
thee? haſt not thou vvithin thine ovvne breaſt a gueſt at home,
euen thine ovvne conſcience that chargeth thee of a thouſand
matters more ſtrongly, and more fierſly purſuing the matter
then a thouſand vvitneſſes? So could that cruell beaſt Cain, that
bathed in the blood of his brother, vvrangle vvith God after
that manner:Gen. 4. 8, 9. 
               What doeſt thou meane to aske me of my brother? ſaith
he, what have I to doe with him? am I my brothers keeper? is he not
old enough to keepe himſelfe? He thought forſooth, he had made
ſure vvorke on all hands vvhen he had gotten his brother into
the broad fields far from the preſence of men that none could
eſpie him to beare vvitneſſe of the fact;Gen. 4. 8. but the Lord findeth
out this cruell tiger, and ſubtill foxe, & bringeth in vvitneſſes
enough to condemne him, that vvere preſent, euen at the deed
doing.Gen. 4. 10. Thy brothers blood, ſaith God, crieth aloud for vengeance
in mine eares: doeſt thou thinke to eſcape ſcotfree in my
iudgement, becauſe no mortall man can teſtifie of it? the
blood vvhich I put into thy brothers body, and thou cruelly
didſt let out the ſame, that ſame blood hath a lovvd voice before
my iudgement ſeate,Geneſ. 4. 11. to beare vvitneſſe againſt thee, and
to call for iuſtice at mine hand to revengement: the verie
earth vvhich opened her mouth to receiue the blood is another
loud vvitnes before me to condemne thee, vvhat ſaiſt thou
to the matter? vvhat haſt thou to ſay for thy ſelfe? Alack poore
ſoule, he ſtandeth as dumb as a block before his iudge, & hath
not a vvord to anſvvere in his defence againſt theſe vvitneſſes

but like an obſtinate rebell againſt Gods maieſty, doeth murmure
againſt God, that he is hardly dealt withall, and that his
puniſhment is greater then he is able to indure,Gen. 4. 13. that he is oppreſſed
and throwne downe with the fierce wrath of God. Let
vs ſee then what we can prevaile with all our ſhiftes and ſubtilties
here, where wee thinke no man can charge vs, no witneſſe
againſt vs: the Lord needs no ſuch witneſſe in his iudgement
ſeate, he can call all his creatures to witneſſe againſt vs:
the very houſe wherein we commit wickedneſſe, our conſcience
in our breaſt witneſſing thereunto, the darke night, the
ground we tread vpon, the bedde we lye vpon, all the creatures
of God about vs, when we are committing wickedneſſe,
ſhall be ſufficient teſtimonies againſt vs. The matter that we
ſo ſubtilly contriue in our braines, for to wind in our neighbours
and deceive them, euen the very matters them ſelves
ſhalbe ſufficient before our God to ſtand againſt vs to condem
nation. The pen, ynke, paper, parchment, ſcribe, ſubtill pety-fogger,
and whatſoever haue bene inſtruments with vs in
our craftie deuiſes, whatſoever of Gods creatures we haue
vſed or rather abuſed thereunto, ſhall teſtifie their humble obedience
to their creatour to our condemnation: yea, euen
our owne hands that wrote, our tongue that ſpake, our feete
that went, our heart that deviſed, our body that executed, muſt
needs ſtand in iudgement as an army of witneſſes, to condēne
vs. What did it availe that miſerable caytiffe, that he could
uſe his legges and feete to meete his Maſter, and his armes to
imbrace him, and his tongue falſly to ſpeake wordes of pretenſed
friendſhip,Matt. 26. 48. 
               Haile maſter, & his mouth like a truſty frend
to kiſſe him: what could all theſe prevaile, I ſay, when God
purſued him more narrowly, and haled him more neerely vnto
his iudgement ſeate? what did they prevaile? Alas poore
damned creature, his conſcience was made his hangman. The
Lorde needed no other witneſſe to bewray the falſe meaning
of his fained friendly heart, then his owne conſcience within
his breaſt, that ſpake ſo lowd againſt him to his condemnation,
that he could not abide, but cruelly cauſed his owne ſelfe
ſame legges and feete to carry him to his owne death, and the

ſelfe ſame hands to hang vp his body to diſpatch his life: and
then, which is moſt lamentable, when he thought to be ridde
from his Iudge, then alas did he but begin his torments, which
never can be ended.Heb. 10. 31 So horrible a thing it is to fall into the
hands of ſo mighty a Iudge. O good breethren, let vs lay vp
theſe examples deepe in our hearts, to bring in continuall remembrance
before our eyes the iudgement ſeate of God, that
we may learne to feare his maieſtie, and ſtand in awe of his
dreadfull iudgement ſeate, that we be not ſo bold with our
God, to dally with him, and as it were, play with his noſe as
they ſay; thinking our ſelves ſure enough when we can make
faire weather with men, and with our ſmooth lookes, ſugred
wordes, and faire countenances ſubtilly intrappe our brethren.
Alas good brethren this geere will not be good ſtuffe with our
God, when hee calleth vs to anſwer the matter in his higheſt
court of parliament, it vaniſheth away as ſmoke. Thoſe ſame
Iudas kiſſes be to common againſt vs, and which worſe is, it is
holden almoſt no ſin: nay, I am afraid, it is accounted of moſt
of vs a notable point of pollicie, as without which we could not
be able to live amongſt men, to flatter, ſpeake faire, and as it
were, to creep into mens boſoms, whereas within there is nothing
but falſhood and a double heart: and yet we are growen
to this brutiſhneſſe, as though God had no iudgement ſeate,
that we thinke we could not otherwiſe live amongſt men, unleſſe
we play on both hands with God and the world: and we
haue made it, as it were, an infallible rule, and brought it to a
common proverb, Neſcit regnare, qui neſcit diſſimulare, He
knoweth not how to keepe his owne, that knoweth not how
to diſſemble & fayne: flatterie & faire ſpeech is called holy-water
of the court, and I can not tell what. I know not what is
in the court, for I am no courtier, but I am ſure that we haue too
much of ſuch holy-water amongſt vs here in Norffolke: faire
words and falſe hearts, ſugred talke and ſubtill meaning; it is
too too common the Lorde be mercifull vnto vs, as though
God did not ſee vs, view vs, marke vs, and even regiſter vs vp
vnto his iudgement ſeat:Pſal. 10. 11. well good brethren, let vs not deceiue
ourſelves, all this our faire ſubtiltie is no more but Iudas kiſſes,

and vndoubtedly, vnleſſe we in time repent, we ſhall with Iudas
at the hand of Almighty God taſte of the like vengeances
for God will not be mocked:Pſal. 6. 7. & although during our life wee
come not to the gallowes, or to fordoe our ſelues as he did, yet
our God hath his iudgement after this life, & will hang vs vp
in hell with Iudas everlaſtingly: all of vs, if we doe not repent,
yea although we do weare velvet coats on our backes, all ſhall
not ſave vs: there is no remedy, we muſt all appeare before
the iudgement ſeat of God: & therfore let vs now think upon
it whiles we have time, that vve may be in a readines when it
commeth: for therfore we are ſummoned, & in that court we
muſt appeare. Away then with all theſe counterfaited deviſes,
which be ſo common amongſt vs, and fall at length to plaine
dealing: let vs examine all our doings euen now preſently, as
they muſt be examined before the iudgement ſeat of God,Dan. 5. 27. and
farſe in no bumbaſies of our own gloſes, for that wil be found
too light in the ballance: let euery one of vs now preſent, examine
our ſelues, & apply this ſentence unto our ſelues, & make
our profit by it, to the direction of our life according to the wil
of our God, and not only to pleaſe man. What naughtines ſoever
we go about, let vs alwaies enter into our ſelues and ſay,
what am I doing now? doth not God ſee me? yes: doth he not
abhor this my doing? yes: hath he not ſummoned me to anſwer
this my doing before his iudgement ſeat? yes: O what a
miſerable wretch am I then,Pſal. 50, 21. that dare ſo boldly commit open
ſin before my God, as though he were fellow with me in my
ſinnes! ſhould I caſt mine own ſoule away! O good Lord forgiue
me, I will never do the like againe, graunt me thy ſtrength
to beat back al the falſe allurements of Satan, that goeth about
to deſtroy my ſoule, be merciful vnto me, & ſet alwaies before
mine eyes a reuerent feare of thy iudgement ſeat, that I neuer

                  ••
               ep in my ſinne, but thereby may be awaked to walke ſimply
& plainly before my God without hypocriſie diſſimulation, or
ſubtilty during the whole courſe of my life. Loe then how we
muſt apply this doctrine vnto our ſelves, that it may be profitable
unto vs, & ſtand us in ſtead againſt the ſubtill practiſes of
our adverſarie Satan.
            
               
But here is yet a further thing in this matter needfull to be
conſidered, namely that whereas the holy ghoſt here calleth
into our remembrāce the comming of Chriſt to iudgement, he
leaueth out the time when he will come, & maketh no mentiō
of it at all. We muſt all appeare before the iudgement ſeate of
Chriſt, but when the time ſhall be, whether to morrow, this
night, or the next yere, or ten, twenty yeres, he telleth us not: no
he ſpeaketh not one word of that, he leaveth it out cleane: the
holy ghoſt through the whol Scriptures hath left that time uncerten
unto man,Mat. 24. 36. yea the very angels in heauē are ignorant of
that, they know not when the Son of man ſhall come, no creature
in heauen, earth, or hell knoweth that; the Lord hath hid
it from his creatures, & only reſerved it to him ſelfe: wherfore?
that we knowing certenly that he will come, & not knowing
when,Mat. 24. 41. might alwaies be in a readineſſe, when he commeth,
leſt he taketh vs vnwares:Mat. 13. 35. for ſo doth our Lord Ieſus Chriſt admoniſh
vs,Mat. 24. 44. therefore be ready, ſaith he, for ye know not when the
Son of man ſhall come: & to waken vs up more ſharply, he telleth
vs, that his comming will be ſudden, ſaith he, at an houre
when ye leaſt thinke, even as a theefe in the night. And upon the
contemners of God ſaieth Paul, which lie and wallow themſelues
in their ſinne,
               1. Theſ. 5. 2, 3 
               the day of the Lord ſhall come vpon them ſuddenly
to their destruction: yea when they ſhall think themſelues
moſt ſure, & ſafe, & make no more but a tuſh at the matter, &
ſay in themſelves,Verſ. 34. tuſh all is well, all is quiet, euen then ſuddenly
ſhall deſtruction come vpon them, as ſorow upon a woman
with child. God then hath left the certen time of his comming
vncerten vnto man, that we might alwaies be ready and deferr
not the time of our repentāce till to morow, becauſe we know
not whether the Lord will call us before to morrow: and this
point is moſt ſpecially to be noted, for elſe all that ever hath bin
taught hitherto concerning the appearāce before Gods iudgement
ſeat will be altogither vnprofitable vnto vs: we vvil acknowledge
that vve muſt appeare before the iudgement ſeat
of God, but we think it vvill not be ſo ſoone, but that vve may
haue a litle ſpace to continue in our ſinne: & you ſhall ſee that
this is the chiefeſt thing that Satan uſeth to bring into the heart
of man, to make him beleeve that the day vvil not be ſo ſoone,

but that he may have time enough before that day come, and
therfore that he may yet a long time take his pleaſure in his ſin
and repent before that day come. And I waraant you he hath
bene buſie euen with ſome of you ſince that time that I haue
bene intreating of this matter, to blow this blaſt in your eare,
that that day is not yet ſo neare, but that you may continue a
while in your ſinne & amend afterwardes. The carnall eare of
him that is ſoked in the ſweetnes of his ſinne, hath heard me al
this while intreating of the iudgement of God to come, & very
pleaſantly laugheth in his ſleeue: oh, ſaith he, here is a fellow
indeed, he is afraid of his owne ſhadow, belike he thinketh we
be babes, & would afray vs with bugs: he hath bin telling a lōg
tale of Gods iudgement ſeate, as though there were any that
denied it, & as though we did not know it as well as he: but
what for that? ſhould we forgo the pleaſures of our youth, the
commodity of our crafty ſubtilties, & the hope of our gaine
therby for feare of this iudgemēt? as though forſooth we could
not amēd all this geere before that day come: nay, nay, let him
ſpeak what he vvill, we will take the pleaſure and gaine of our
ſinne, and afterwards we will amend, & we truſt all in time enough
too. O ſubtill deuill that can ſo be witch the ſoule of mā
to vtter deſtruction! but harken thou carnall beaſt to the voice
of the Sonne of God,Mat. 24. 41, 44. he telleth thee that this day is not known
to any of Gods creatures, & dareſt thou appoint with thy ſelfe
a certenty of it, as though it were not ſo ſoone? thy God ſaith,
it ſhall come ſuddenly, and dareſt thou ſet him to ſchoole, to
be wiſer thē he? and ſay tuſh in thine heart, it will be lōg firſt? no
but he telleth thee, if thou be ſecure, it vvill take thee vnwares,
in a moment,1. Cor. 15. 52. in the tvvinkling of an eye, before thou be vvare,
and vvhere is thy amendment then?1. Theſſ. 5. 2. therfore he chargeth thee
to amend novv, & deferre not the time, leaſt thou be taken vnavvares,
and ſo caried to eternall deſtruction, and vvhat ſhall
then all thy vaine hoping for a longer day profite, vvhen thou
art taken ſuddenly, as the bird in the net? But thou ſaiſt, it vvill
not come ſo ſoone, but Chriſt ſaith, it vvill come at an houre,
vvhen thou leaſt thinkeſt:Luc. 21. 55. & telleth thee flatly, that if thou ſhalt
play the vvicked ſervant, and thinke thy maſter will tary long,

and be many yeares and daies before he come,Mat. 24. 48, 50, 51. and thereupon
falleſt to beate thy fellow-ſeruants, and deale ſubtily with thē,
without regard of the comming of thy maſter, Ieſus Chriſt
flatly telleth thee, that he will come in an houre, when thou
leaſt thinkeſt, and giue thee thy portion with hypocrites in eternall
burning fire: then what haſt thou gained by ſuch preſuming
vpon Gods mercie, and hardning of thy ſelfe in thy
ſinne againſt God, when thy pleaſure is turned into paine, and
thy ſecuritie and eaſe into continuall torment? Alas, good brethrē,
that we ſhould be ſo blinded with the ſubtilties of Satā,
for the gaine of a ſmall earthly trifle to caſt away ſoule and
bodie eternally.Mat. 16. 26. VVhat can it profit vs to winne the whole
world, and looſe our owne ſoule? and this we doe ſo long as
giuing care to the vaine allurement of Satan, we continue in
our ſinne, deferring the time of our repentance till afterwards,
thinking that the Lord will not come ſo ſoone: you ſee then
the lacke of practiſing this doctrine, that is here taught vnto
vs, is the cauſe that at this day men are ſo hardned in their
ſinne, and boldly goe on forward to eternall deſtruction. Men
doe imagine with them ſelues, that although they muſt one
day appeare before the throne of God, yet it will not be ſo
ſoone, and thereupon they neuer thinke of that matter, but
deuiſe all wickednes in their braines to fill their purſes, feede
the paunches, deceiue their neighbours, and generally all other
ſpite and villanie againſt God and man: and all becauſe
they thinke themſelues in ſure caſe, that the day of repentance
is not ſo neere, but that they may amend all this geare in time:
but it is not ſo, they are deceiued. The Scripture telleth vs it
will come ſooner then we thinke, & therefore amend betimes,
leaſt we periſh all. And it is a maruelous matter to ſee howe
wonderfully the aduerſarie hath preuailed in this: for whereas
God would haue vs alwaies in readines, becauſe the time 
                  〈◊〉
               
vncertaine, the cleane contrarie is ſettled in our hearts, namely
to take our libertie in ſinning, becauſe the time is a farre
off, as we dreame: and this perſwaſion is ſo deepely ſettled in
our breaſt, that if men be admoniſhed to take heede of their
dealings: for a day will come when all things ſhalbe righted,

then they thinke ſtraightway they haue a great long ſcope giuen
them to range in: for they take it as a principle moſt ſurely
rooted in their hearts, that that day is a far off. If they be threatned
with the comming of Chriſt to iudgement, you ſhall ſee
them make of the matter no more but a ſcoffe and a mocke:
oh ſyr, if ye giue me ſo long a day, nay then I ſhall doe well ynough:
and here they can fall to gybing, and make themſelues
merrie with the talke of the welchman, who hauing robbed a
man of his budget, and beeing threatned that he ſhould anſwer
for it at the day of iudgement, made anſwer, that if he
might haue ſo long a day, he would haue the cloake too: and
thus miſerable caytiffs they thinke they haue notably preuailed,
when thus they haue ſcoffed out the matter: but alas, pore
ſoules, it is no more then a laughter from the teeth forward:
for when they haue put from them the day of the Lord as farre
as can be, and that God for a time let thē play vpon the hooke,
yet alas, there is a thing within their breſt, that ſometimes will
ſting them to the heart in ſpite of their teeth: but yet here-withall
you ſee how common this is amongſt men, that the day of
the Lord is a farre off:Amos 6. 3. for when we can ſo readily giue ſuch anſwers
as this, If ye giue me ſo long a day, &c. ſurely we bewray
our owne heartes vnawares, that wee are perſwaded in our
breaſts, that it is long to that day. And the ſame opinion haue
we in like maner of the day of our death; there is ſcarcely found
amongſt vs any ſo old, but he wil thinke he might liue one yere
longer, or at leaſt one moneth, or one day, ſo farre he is off from
thinking on his death: if we be young, oh then we thinke our
ſelues as ſure from dying, as God had ſealed vs his letters patents
for our life till old age: and hereupon it commeth, that in
our luſtie youth (as they tearme it) we neuer thinke to make
our ſelues readie to God-ward: nay ſo farre are we from all

                  〈◊〉
                of God, that vnleſſe we play the wilde coltes in all licentiouſneſſe
and ſinne, we thinke we haue not well ſpent our
youth according to the courſe of nature: and into ſuch beaſtlines
we are gone, that we haue framed an heatheniſh, nay
worſe then heatheniſh, rather a deuiliſh prouerbe, A young
ſaint, an old deuill; as if ſo be we ſhould beginne to be holy in

our yong age, it were the next way to make vs diuels when we
are old: and as though it were the beſt way to be a diuell in
thy yong age, that thou mighteſt be made a good holy man
in thy old age. But I pray thee, what if thy God call thee while
thou art a young deuill, what ſhall become of thee in thine old
age? if the Lord cut thy yeares ſhort, and make an ende of thy
life, while thou art playing the yong luſtie deuil, I warrant thee
thou ſhalt neuer come to be neither old ſaint nor young ſaint.
This I ſpeake (good brethren) with griefe of heart, to ſee into
what miſerable blindnes we are tumbled, that the thing which
God hath hid from vs ſo ſecret to himſelfe (the day of his comming,
and the day of our death) as though we were of Gods
counſell, we will be ſo cunning in it, as if he had not onely reuealed
it vnto vs, but alſo had ſealed vnto vs the aſſurance of it.
And all this we doe, that we may more boldly ſinne without
controlment, thinking when we are old, we will then beginne
to frame our ſelues to godlines: but alas, good brethren, we
deceiue our ſelues, it is not ſo, we haue no aſſurance of our
life, we can not tell when it ſhall pleaſe our God to call vs, at
midnight, noonetide or cockerovve, wee are not certen one
minute of an houre to liue, and therefore let vs not driue off
from day to day, and thinke he will amende, leaſt he come
vpon vs vnwares, and finde vs vnprepared. Take heede, good
brethren, that we doe not flatter our ſelues, to thinke I am but
yong, & I truſt I ſhall not die ſo ſoone, I will take the pleaſures
of my youth a while, and when I beginne to be old, I will
then wholly applie my ſelfe to Gods will: or thus, although
I be ſome what aged, yet I truſt I ſhall not goe ſo ſoone, I
thanke God I feele my ſelfe ſtrong and luſtie, I can eate my
meate well, and I will not yet ſettle my ſelfe to be readie,
when God calleth me: I may continue yet a little while in
my craft and ſubtiltie, til I haue got but ſuch a piece of ground▪
or ſo much money to lie by me, and then I will amend: when
I ſhall begin to be ſicke, then I will ſettle my ſelfe wholly to
God-warde: Let vs take heede, good brethren, of theſe blaſts
and temptations of Satan, that we be not deceiued; doe we
not ſee both daily and hourely how that the Lord calleth as wel

the young as the old? and what patent haue we of our life, that
we are not in the number? Doe we not ſee that God calleth
men euen ſuddainly, when they are in as good health as can
be, yea euen when they are eating their meate at dinner, euen
ſupping an egge is the laſt breath that euer they draw? wherefore
doth the Lord this, but onely to let vs vnderſtand and ſee
before our eyes, how ſoone our life is gone, that ſo we might
alwaies be in readines: we ſee theſe things continually, and
yet alas howe ſmally we profit by them: wherefore we ſee it
needefull, and a thouſand times more then needefull, to haue
this ſoundly imprinted in our heart, and the remembrance of
it continually before our eyes, that we muſt hence we can not
tell when, that our heatheniſh eares, and Epicures pleaſures
may be cut off by the continuall meditation of the ſame, otherwiſe
vndoubtedly, good brethren, when we thinke our ſelues
moſt at eaſe, we ſhal vnderſtand the ſentence here that Chriſt
Ieſus ſpake,Luc. 12. 17, 18. That we ſhalbe taken in an houre, when we leaſt
thinke. That rich Epicure that wallowed and tumbled in his
wealth, little thinking vpon his death, but ſoked in his ſinnefull
pleaſures, ſitteth at his eaſe debating with himſelfe howe
he may make his life moſt eaſie, and at length concludeth
with himſelfe ſuch a way, as he thinketh to liue moſt pleaſantly
and eaſily for many yeares: he will pull downe (forſooth)
his old barnes, and build him greater, that ſhalbe able to receiue
all his grayne, and then like a iolly carnall ſwine, he will ſay
to his ſoule, Oh ſoule, eate and drinke, and make luſtie good
cheare, for thou haſt ynough laid vp for many yeare▪ here is
nothing with him but cheriſhing the belly and pampering
the bodie, as though God had put life into him, and ſet him
in this world for none other end, but like a bruit beaſt to crāme
vp his bellie to the corge, and feede him ſelfe fat againſt the

                  〈◊〉
                of ſlaughter: this miſerable caytiffe hath forgot himſelfe
that he muſt die, there is no remembrance of death, but as
though he muſt liue euer: but when the carnall belly-god in
his chiefeſt ruffe and (as he thinketh) in his greateſt felicitie,
his cheare was cleane changed in a moment, he heard a voice
that daunted his courage, it was ſaid vnto him in the ſelfe

ſame houre,Luc. 12. 22. Thou foole, this night ſhall thy ſoule ſhall be taken
from thee, this night thou muſt needs die, and what ſhalt
thou then be better for all this falſe conceiued ioy in thy pleaſures
and riches, when thou muſt not inioy them one minute
of an houre? I am afraid, good brethren, it is too liuely and too
true a deſcription of vs Engliſhmen, which haue neuer done
with feeding the belly and cloathing the backe, as though
we ſhould liue here euer. I am afraid too many of vs haue
vtterly vaniſhed out of our remembrance the day of our death,Amos 6. 5.
or els haue put it a farre off, as though it would not come of a
long time: I am afraide too many of vs ſay in our hearts with
this worldly wretch: Oh, if ſuch a thing and ſuch a thing were
brought to paſſe, I would ſay to my ſoule, take euen thy full
pleaſure, eate and drinke thy belly full, make merry, take euen
thy hearts deſire. Alas, good brethren, let vs take heede vnto
our ſelues, what ſhall it auaile vs, when God ſhall ſuddenly
take vs from all our pleaſures in a moment, and throw our
ſoules into euerlaſting torment? The cauſe of this looſenes amongſt
vs is, becauſe we doe not practiſe that doctrine that is
taught vs out of this ſentence, namely that the day of our departure
is vncertaine, euen oftentimes when we leaſt thinke:
wherefore I deſire you in the feare of God, for the loue we beare
vnto our owne ſoules, that we make our profit of this ſentence
better then we haue done heretofore: let vs apply it vnto our
ſelues, and call our ſelues to an account, euery one of vs enter
into his own heart, and thus ſay, VVhat wickednes doe I know
by my ſelfe? Am I a thief, a murtherer, a couetous perſon? is all
this hid from man? yea. But alas, God doth ſee it, and hath appointed
a iudgement to puniſh it, therfore I will no more continue
in it: I will now repent while I haue time, I will not dāme
mine own ſoule, for once I muſt appeare before the iudgemēt
ſeat of God. And if the deuill would goe about to ſuggeſt into
thine heart, that it wilbe long before the day come, and that
that thou haſt yet a long time to liue,Matt. 24. 51. and 21. 44. and therefore thou maiſt
a while continue in thy ſinne, anſwer him with Ieſus Chriſts
words, that then I ſhall haue my part with the wicked ſeruant
in the continuall burning lake: that the time is not knowne to any

creature, it is vncerten, it will be ſudden when we leaſt
think: & therfore defer not to be alwaies in a readines: if he will
reply and ſay, it is not like to be ſo ſoone, for that all things are
well, and there appeares no tokens of ſicknes, much leſſe of
death, anſwer him againe, that euen therefore I ought more to
ſuſpect the day to be neare,
                  
                     •
                  . Theſſ. 5. 2. becauſe it ſhall be at ſuch a time, as
men ſhall thinke all thinges well and quiet, euen then ſhall it
come and take men vnprepared. Let vs, good brethren, in this
manner applie this doctrine to our ſelues, that we may profit
by it in newneſſe of life: let vs not deferre the time till to morrow,
the Lord God knoweth where we ſhall be to morrow: we
are al of vs here now, God be thāked, but the Lord knoweth
whether we ſhall euer come togither againe or not: the Lord
may take vs before we goe out of the Church-doore; ſo vncerten
are we of our life: wherefore let vs for Gods ſake deferre
the time no longer, but euery one of vs now beginne to
amend, and lie no longer in our ſinne, but turne to the Lord
by true repentance, knowing that our time is vncerten; thus
doing, we ſhall finde the Lord our God mercifull vnto vs, he
will increaſe in vs his graces and gifts of his holy ſpirite, that
we may grow on forward from faith to faith in ſanctification
and newneſſe of life, till it ſhall pleaſe his goodnes to call vs in
his good time to euerlaſting reſt.
            Thus we haue heard, good brethren, what we haue to learne
out of this ſentence, it remaineth that we knowing it, put it in
practiſe, and that we doe not thinke it ſufficient to come hither
to ſit here, and to lend our eares to the preaching to giue it the
hearing, and haue yet notwithſtāding no purpoſe of amēding,
but rather ſome hard heart ſtill to continue in our ſinne, as we
we came: for aſſuredly if we doe ſo, the eternall God wil neuer
ſuffer vnreuenged ſuch horrible contempt of his bleſſed word:
it is an horrible abuſe of Gods worde, yea of God him ſelfe,
whē we ſo dally with God: ye, if I that preach the word ſhould
thinke it ſufficient for me, when I haue told you Gods will out
of his word, and yet not applie it to my ſelfe, to reforme my life
after the ſame, aſſuredly I ſhould anſwer that horrible contēpt
of Gods maieſtie before his eternall throne of iuſtice: if ye ſhall
then (good brethren) harden your faces againſt this worde of

God, and ſhake it off, and ſay ſtill in your hearts, For all this I
will continue in my ſinne a while, and for all his threatning I
truſt I am not ſo neare death, but I may amend before that day
come, let him ſay what he will, I vvill not yet begin: then I teſtifie
vnto you before the eternall God, that the maſter of the
houſe vvill come in an houre,Matth. 24. 5. vvhen ye leaſt thinke, and giue
you your portion vvith hypocrites, vvhere ſhal be vveping and
vvayling and gnaſhing of teeth: and then vvhen ye vvould it
is too late,Rom. 2. 4. alas ye can not. If ye ſhall novve abuſe this day of
mercie, and Gods long ſuffering that dravveth you to repentance,2. Pet. 3. 13.
and like carnall beaſts fling abroad, and kicke vp your
heeles againſt the Lord, violently throvving from you all godly
admonitions, vvhereby he goeth about to pul you vnto him,
he ſhal come vpon you like a fierce lyon, & vtterly conſume you
in your greateſt pride, vvhen ye leaſt think: but I hope better of
you, brethren, and good cauſe I haue ſo to doe, I thank God for
it, I truſt the Lord vvill vvorke in your heart, that ye vvill not
deferre the time, but euen novv beginne to turne to him, vvhile
he offereth you mercie, and preſume not of hereafter. Remember
the fiue fooliſh virgins,Math. 25. 11. that had no oyle in their lamps, and
yet for all that tooke no thought, but ſnorted and ſlumbred
vvithout all care, thinking they ſhould haue time enough to
prepare, but alas they vvere deceiued, for the bridegrome came
ſodainly, and thoſe that vvere found readie entred in, and thoſe
iolly fooles that deferred ſo long vvere ſhut out, and ſhall neuer
enter in: for Gods ſake, brethren, let theſe things enter deep into
our head & heart: let vs haue theſe things ſo deeply imprinted
in our hearts, that vve may think vpon them continually, &
ſay alvvay vvith that holy man, vvhether I ſleepe or vvake, me
think I heare continually ſounding in mine eares, the trump of
the Lord that ſaith, Ariſe ye dead, come to iudgement: let vs alvvay
be prepared againſt that day, & alvvaies ſay in our heart vvith
the ſaints in the Apocalyps, Come Lord Ieſu, come quickly, I am
ready for thee,Reuel. 22. 20 come vvhen thou vvilt: that our hearts may ſtill
long after it,Phil. 1. 23. & ſay vvith the Apoſtle, I deſire to be diſſolued, & to
be with thee, ô Chriſt: othervviſe if we ſhall deferre it, and take
our pleaſures in this vvorld, then alas euen the remembrance
of death, Oh how bitter wil it be to him, that hath his heart vpō
               
the things of this world? it will nippe our heart a ſunder to
part with our goods, to part with our pleaſures, and all becauſe
we haue ſo long abuſed Gods long ſufferance, and prolonged
the day of our repentance, till ſuddenly we are taken: then we
could with the wicked contemners of God, wiſh the very
hils and mountaines to couer vs and hide vs from the preſence
of the fierce iudge,Luc. 23. 30. whom we haue ſo ſtubbornly contemned:Reuel. 6. 17. and 9. 6.
but alas, it will not preuaile, we muſt euen be hayled before his
iudgement ſeat in ſpite of our teeth: wherefore, good brethrē,
let vs thinke vpon it, and thinke vpon it againe, that it neuer
part from vs: theſe be waightie matters to be thought vpon,
theſe be things that muſt alwaies keepe vs occupied, and not
heard with the eare for the ſpace of an houre, but they muſt be
our continual meditation our whole life: I truſt by Gods grace
ye wil think vpon it, that you may profit by it: I hope well of
you, as good cauſe I haue, eſpecially becauſe I ſee the Lord
hath mooued you to this good work, whereunto you are aſſē
               bled,
that you think not much neither of coſt nor trauail for the
benefit of the common-wealth and eaſe of your brethren: continue
and goe on forward, be not wearie of well doing, ſeeing
the Lord is with you in bleſſing your labours, remember the
time we haue is ſhort, let vs be doing good while we haue time,
remember that your callings require the ſame, beeing magiſtrates
of peace, to be carefull of peace: remember that ye muſt
once be called to account before the iudge for your calling, &
then though all the men in the earth would cleare you, if God
doe condemne you, there is nothing but deſtruction: let the
vprightnes then of your conſciences be in theſe your meetings,
that ye may be void of vaine glorie before men, and be
ſimple before God to doe good, and then the Lord will bleſſe
your labours in this life, and in the life to come ye ſhall receiue
full ioy both of ſoule and bodie for euer. Ye ſee then the meaning
of this ſentence, and how the Apoſtle takes it to his vſe,
to take his profite by it, in ſetting it alwaies before his eies, to
keepe him thereby in a continuall awe of God, while he skanneth
his doings, not onely by man, but eſpecially by God, who
hath his iudgement to call vs vnto, to anſwer the matter when

we leaſt think: & herin how we are admoniſhed to do the like,
and to take our profite by it in like manner; thus much, I ſay,
hath bene declared out of this place, in that ſence and manner
that it is vſed by the Apoſtle. There is yet further doctrine in
particular to be delivered out of the ſame very profitable for vs
for our inſtruction, of which we muſt in like maner gather our
profit: for whereas it delivered vnto vs, that we muſt once appeare
before the iudgement ſeate of God, we are not onely
thereby taught to be raiſed vp to a more diligent vew of our
doings, that they be ſincere before God, which the Apoſtle
doth here, but further having entred into our ſelves, and found
in vs many imperfections, yea and horrible ſinnes, which the
Lord hateth, and which he hath pronounced to be puniſhed
with his heavie curſe and eternall condemnation, knowing
that he is both a iuſt God and a true, which hath ſet this puniſhment
downe, and hath already ſummoned vs to his iudgement
ſeate, we are hereby (I ſay) admoniſhed carefully to
conſider how we may be diſcharged in that iudgement day, &
delivered from that ſame puniſhment, which our ſinnes haue
deſerved. This is a ſpeciall point to be conſidered, and deeply
to be waighed of every one of vs, and not ſlightly to be paſſed
over: it is our chiefeſt ioy in our life, our only comfort in our
death, and our true happineſſe after death. Without this wee
are moſt miſerable of all creatures, yea in worſe eſtate then
the very brute beaſtes: for they (ſilly poore things) yet ſhall
have an end of their miſerie and toyle in their death: but wee
if we know not this, ſhall then in death and after death begin
our eternall torments, which ſhall never haue end. Without
this although we liue in this world moſt pleaſantly, moſt wealthily,
and moſt gloriouſly, yet we are of all creatures moſt unhappie:
for what ſhall it availe vs, if we winne the wealth, pleaſure,
and glory of the whole world, and at the day of iudgement
looſe our owne ſoules, and be throwne downe into eternall
torment? what benefit doth that rich glutton, that now
lyeth burning in hell, and ſhall, what benefit doth he reape of
all his good cheere, that he devoured in his life time? what is
he better for all the fine apparel, that he clothed himſelfe withall?

all? what doeth he now gaine by all the glory that he inioyed
in this world? what doth it help him now, when he is in everlaſting
torments? He would now haue eaſe for a minute of an
houre, and can not. Ye ſee then it is a moſt needfull thing to
think upon this now while we are living; that ſeeing we muſt
once appeare all before the iudgement ſeate of God, we may
now begin to be carefull to know the wayes and means how
we may be ſet free in that iudgement, & ſo come to eternall
life: for vnto this end the Lord giveth vs life and being here in
this world, to the glory of his name, to learne all this while we
liue here the true waies & meanes how to be delivered in that
day to liue ever & never die: you ſee this, it is a ſpecial & a moſt
principall point, that wee be here taught, that is, that wee be
moſt carefull to be diſcharged in the day of iudgement, becauſe
it ſtandeth vs in hand in paine elſe of caſting away both
of ſoule and body into eternall fire. But it is lamentable to ſee
the great ignorance among vs in this moſt chiefe and moſt
neceſſary thing: there is none almoſt but he knoweth he muſt
come to iudgement & looketh for doomes day, but alas, how
or by what meanes he ſhalbe diſcharged in that doome and
iudgement ſcarſly ſhal ye find the hundreth perſon, that know
eth it: in this point generally the whole earth is ignorant. It is
too lamentable, good brethren, eſpecially among vs that haue
the name of Chriſtians, yea in the time of the goſpell that wee
ſhould be ignorant of this chiefeſt point, how we are ſaued by
Chriſt. The multitude generally are ſo ignorāt in this, as is marvelous:
aske thē how they hope to be ſaued in the day of iudgement,
they can not tell: ſome peradventure will give anſwer
in generall words, Even as it pleaſeth God, or by Gods mercy,
I put me wholly to his mercy, or by Chriſt, or ſuch like words:
but aske them further how & by what means it pleaſeth God
to ſaue them ſeing their ſinne muſt be puniſhed? or how they
truſt to be ſaved by Gods mercy ſeing God in iuſtice muſt puniſh
their ſinne? or how or by what meanes they hope to be
ſaved by Chriſt? theſe things, I ſay, they are vtterly ignorant of.
And you ſhall ſee not only ſimple ſoules (as they call them) ignorant

of theſe points, but commonly even thoſe, which otherwiſe
haue great gifts of wit, & skill of things in the world: yee
ſhall ſee a company that are ſo skilfull in any matter almoſt
which is to be skanned before a mortall iudge, that they wil go
neare to goe beyond a good skilfull lawyer, & put him to his
pinch, & yet notwithſtanding examine them of this law point,
how they ſhalbe ſaued in the day of iudgement, they haue no
wit to anſwer it, they are not book learned forſooth, as though
only book-learned men ſhalbe ſaved, & not the ſimple as wel.
Nay come alſo to thoſe that haue excellēt gifts to ſerue in the
common wealth, & ſeeme to be of great countenance & wiſdom,
and I warrant you, if due examination were made, they
ſhould be found to be ignorant in this point, & not to knowe
the way and meanes of their ſalvation. I ſpeake that which I
know, it is a lamentable thing to ſee it. I haue dealt with ſuch
men divers times, and haue found them vtterly ignorant in the
knowledge of their ſalvation, & yet otherwiſe men of great
wiſdom. Wherfore the caſe is too lamentable, that that thing
which the moſt ſimpleſt ought to know, euen the moſt excellent
are ignorant of. Nay there is yet a further thing that augmenteth
the matter, and maketh it worſe: namely, that mē are
not ignorant of this ſo needfull a thing, but alſo they are altogether
retchleſſe, and haue no care to ſeeke to know it: we haue
neuer done with carking and caring for our bodies, we ride, we
runne, wee digge, we delve, wee labour, wee toile, and all
wee thinke too little to preſerue our bodies, and in the mean
time what ſhall become of our ſoules and bodies in the day
of iudgement wee haue no regarde: and yet euery one
of vs will confeſſe that we ought to be more carefull for our
ſoules, then for our bodies, more carefull for the life euerlaſting,
then for this preſent momentarie life: and yet contrarie
to our owne conſcience, contrary to our owne knowledge
we leaue the principall not regarded, & bend our whole
force, wit, skill and travell to the other, that indureth but a moment
in cōpariſon of the other, what do we now hereby good

brethren, but onely make our ſelves vnexcuſable before the
throne of God: Nay further, even all the whole partes of vs
both of ſoule and body, which God hath giuen vs to be moſt
chiefly exerciſed about the heavenly life, we make them euen
ſo many witneſſes againſt vs in the day of the Lorde, becauſe
we haue abuſed them to ſerue our turne in this bodily life, far
above the heauenly life. So that the Lorde need no other witneſſes
againſt vs to condemne vs in the day of iudgement. The
wit that God giveth vs, which we haue ſo carefully vſed to deviſe
for our bodies in this life, and never bent it carefully to
ſeeke for the life to come, muſt needs beare record againſt vs
in the day of iudgement: the tongue that we have vſed ſo carefully
to ſpeake and crave for worldly things, and hath bene ſo
dumb in heavenly things: the feete that haue ſo ſpeedily runne
about worldly gaine, and haue bene lame in heauenly profit:
the eare that could ſo carefully liſten after worldly gaine, and
was deafe at heavenly matters: and to be ſhort, all the whole
partes both of our ſoules and bodies, that we haue ſo carefully
and miſerably vſed about theſe worldly things, and ſo ſlackly
vſed about heavenly things which ſhould haue bene the chiefeſt:
all theſe, I ſay, ſhall be ſufficient to condemne vs before
our God, when he ſhall come in iudgement. It ſtandeth vs
in hand then, good brethren, to be more carefull how we may
be diſcharged before the iudgement ſeat of God, and ſo come
to eternall life: more carefull, I ſay, then we haue bene. The
matter muſt once come to handling, and it is a waightie matter,
it toucheth the life euerlaſting. There is none of vs all, but
if we had a matter to be anſvvered before an earthly iudge, if
it vvere but touching a parcell of our lands & goods, if it were
but an hundreth pound matter or a thouſand pound, there is
none of vs all, I ſay, but in ſuch a caſe we would be marveilous

                  ••
               refull for the anſvvering of it, and ſeeke all the meanes poſſible
to know the remedy in law hovv to be diſcharged: but if
it were a matter that touched the loſſe of our life, oh then vvee
vvould trudge poſt vp and dovvne for counſell this way and
that way, and ſeeke all the meanes that could be: vve could
never ſleepe quiet in our beddes, till vve knevv hovv the matter

would fall out. But in the caſe that muſt be anſwered before
the heauenly iudge, and toucheth the loſſe of the lands of heaven,
the loſſe of the goods of heaven, the loſſe of the life euerlaſting,
O Lord, how careleſſe are we? we never care for it, we
neuer ride nor run for it, we never breake our ſleepe for it: wee
ſhall ſee men in this behalfe as ſenſeleſſe as can be, utterly ouerwhelmed
with a brutiſh ſecuritie: & yet we think our ſelues
notable Chriſtians, and to haue wound up the matter very
cunningly, when we can haue giuen ſome generall anſweres,
as to ſay, euen as it pleaſeth God: but as he hath revealed himſelfe
in his word, we never ſeeke that, but only keepe our ſelues
contented with ſuch generall ſpeeches, and never ſeeke in his
word the mean how. If there were any ſuch one among vs, as
hauing a waighty matter before a iudge to be anſwered, cared
not for it, and would ſeeke no counſell, nor vſe no wayes nor
meanes for to anſwere the matter, would wee not ſharply rebuke
the man, & bid him take heed to himſelfe, to ſeek for help
in time, and caſt not himſelfe away, & his wife and children,
& ſo forth? and yet if the ſtubborne man would notwithſtanding
be careleſſe of the matter ſtill, and wilfully caſt himſelfe
away, will we not ſay ſtraightwaies, hee was well ſerued? he
mought haue helped the matter if he would haue ſought for it
in time, but he would take no counſell, and therefore hee hath
caſt himſelfe away? we can haue theſe ſpeeches too common
in our mouthes concerning theſe worldly matters, and yet in
the meane time doe ye not ſee, how we giue ſentence againſt
our ſelues? for, there is none of vs all, but we have a great waightie
matter of life and death, of ſoule and body to anſwer before
the great iudge Ieſus Chriſt, and yet as though the matter
were nothing we will not now in this time of mercie be carefull
how wee may anſwere it, but onely wipe it avvay with
a worde: even as it pleaſeth God (ſay wee) euen as it pleaſeth
God. True it is, that all muſt be as it pleaſeth God, that is
true, and that God will deale with vs in that laſt iudgement
even as it pleaſeth him, all that is true: but ſeeing God hath
ſet downe in his vvorde hovv and by what meanes it pleaſeth

him to deliuer us & diſcharge us in that iudgement, if we
ſhall now not ſeeke to know that ſame meanes of our deliuerance,
which he hath ſo plainely left unto us in his worde,
ſurely we can not but be guiltie of our owne condemnation,
and muſt needes confeſſe, that we are but rightly ſerued at
the hands of our Iudge, when hee giueth ſentence of condemnation
upon us, becauſe vvee would not ſeeke that counſell,
that the Lorde had left us, nor ſeeke to know the way
and meanes of our deliverance, when wee had time, although
wee can couer it neuer ſo cloſely, with, as it pleaſeth
God, as it pleaſeth God. Wee ſhall finde that it pleaſeth
God to puniſh with euerlaſting deſtruction ſuch horrible
negligence and contempt of our ſaluation. Away then with
all ſuch vaine colours as Satan would caſt before our eyes to
make us negligent ſtill: and let us in the feare of God begin
to ſeeke carefully how wee may be diſcharged in the day of
iudgement, and ſo come to euerlaſting life. It is a waightie
matter, it is a great matter, it muſt be looked unto, it paſſeth
a Weſtminſter matter, this toucheth landes, goods, and life
euerlaſting. The reaſon that maketh men ſo retchleſſe and
negligent in caring for the heauenly life, is becauſe wee
dreame it to be but an eaſie matter to come to euerlaſting life,
we thinke it but a ſmall matter and ſoone gotten, and therefore
we buſie our ſelues the leſſe about it. True it is we will not
ſay ſo with our tongue and lippes, that it is but a ſmall matter,
but it is evident, that we accept it ſo in our hearts, ſeeing we
take ſo little paine about it. For that we might obtaine the
things that we iudge hard to come by, we doe not vſe ſmall
paines, but great care and labour, for otherwiſe we thinke that
can not be had: that is it that maketh vs ſo carefull for the bodily
life, becauſe we ſee it ſo hard a thing, that doe we what
we can, all is little enough to get vs our living. So that if we
were perſwaded, that if it were as hard a matter to get everlaſting
life, as we ſee it is to get a temporall thing, we would beſtow
as much paines in the one, as in the other: and therefore
ſay what we will, our owne heart condemneth vs, that wee

count it but an eaſie matter, and therefore are too negligent to
prouide for it. And againe, the griefes and miſeries of our ſoules
we do not feele halfe ſo much, as the paines and griefes of our
bodies, and therefore that maketh vs to be ſo carefull to prouide
remedies for the one, and utterly to neglect the other: if
our bodies be but a little touched with ſickneſſe, we can feele
it ſtraightwaies, we can complaine, ſigh, and grone, and becauſe
we feele the paine nip us, there is riding and running for
the phiſitian, no coſt, no labour ſpared, yea if our litle finger be
but cut, we make a doe in wrapping and ſaluing, & all becauſe
we feele the griefe of it: & yet for all that the ſilly poore ſoule,
that ſame nice body is pained with ſickneſſe euen unto death,
wounded unto eternall damnation with the fiery dartes of
whordome, covetouſneſſe, uſury, oppreſſion, craftie dealing,
idolatry, ſuperſtition, vaine glory, and ſuch like others, and like
ſenſeleſſe blockes, we feele it neuer a whit, it is no griefe unto
us, no paine unto us at all. Theſe diſeaſes of our ſoules do not
greeue us a whit, and therefore we are not carefull to runne to
the phiſitian Ieſus Chriſt to be cured: if the body be but a little
pinched with cold, nakedneſſe, hunger, or any other calamitie,
we cannot abide it, it grieveth us, we are marveilouſly troubled
with it, and therefore are we ſo carefull to provide meate for
the bodie, and clothes for our backe, we haue never done with
that, all is too little, that we can cramme into this our filthie
paunch, and to hang upon our laſie backes, all is too little, we
haue neuer done purchaſing, and preparing for it. What ſhall I
ſay? whole towneſhips and lordſhips will not ſerue to fill this
our greedie maw, and cloath our fine and delicate backe. And
yet in the meane time alas, our poore ſoule within, ſtarued
with hunger, pined euen to death with cold and nakedneſſe,
and we not a whit carefull to prouide for it the bread of life,
the food of life to releeue his hunger, nor the righteouſneſſe of
Chriſt to cloath the nakednes of it, leaſt it die eternally: we are
not a whit carefull for that, becauſe we feele nothing at all the
miſery & dāger that our ſoules be in. The whol world is aſleep
in ſinne, wallowing and tumbling themſelues therein, in perill

and daunger of eternall deſtruction, and hell fire euerlaſting,
and yet doe not ſee it: they thinke them-ſelues in no daunger,
and that maketh men ſo careleſſe, that they neuer ſeeke
for any remedie. Oh a harde worlde, a hard vvorlde. God
helpe, never ſo hard a world, we haue much a doe to liue, it is
ſo harde a worlde: (thus can we ſay touching the body) never
ſo much pouertie, and ſuch exclamations and outcries
for the pinching of the body as is marveilous, and I partly
beleeue them to be true. But in the meane time in this great
miſerie and perill of our ſoules, in the great hunger of our
ſoules, who doth exclaime upon that? skantly the hundreth
perſon: and although it be exclaimed upon, yet it is but coldly
looked unto for the remedie of it: other things yet touching
the hunger and harme of the body they are looked unto
to be remedied, and this hunger of our ſoules which bringeth
to eternal death is ſmoothly paſſed over. I can not ſee but
it is the Lordes iuſt ſcourge to puniſh vs with our roddes in
ſending ſuch ſcarſeneſſe in ſo great plentie, becauſe we will
needes contrarie to his commaundement be more carefull
for our bodily life then for our heauenly life. For if wee did
chiefely and aboue all ſeeke for the kingdome of heauen,Matth. 6. 33. God
giueth his promiſe that all other things needefull ſhould be miniſtred
vnto vs: but becauſe we will needes be wiſer then
God, like a young ſcholler to ſet him to ſchoole, and whether
he will or not, needes before the kingdome of heauen ſeeke
the kingdome of this world, he laieth our owne deuiſes vpon
our owne necks, and giueth vs neither the one nor the other.
Therefore let vs repent in time, for a iudgement wil come, there
is no remedie, we muſt all appeare, there is no remedie. Let vs
now be carefull to be ſaued in that day both in ſoule and bodie;
let vs be carefull for it, it is a waightie matter, it is not ſo eaſie
a matter as men thinke. The Lord Ieſus telleth vs ſo, the
way to the deuill and eternall deſtruction is eaſie,Math. 7. 13. broad, and
wide, and many finde it, they flocke thither euen by heapes;
but the way to life, he telleth vs, is very painfull and rough,
many pricks in our way, and therefore fewe finde it. It is not a

tuſh with thy mouth, and a fillip with the finger, and three
words ſpeaking, as they ſay, at a mans death, that will bring
a man to heauen; nay the Lorde Ieſus ſaith, that in that day
there ſhall be many that can ſay gloriouſly, Lord, Lord, yea
and with great knowledge haue taught other the Lord, and
yet for all that ſhall haue their portion with the deuill in the
burning lake. Men thinke it not ſo waightie a matter, becauſe
they do not ſee in what peril & danger they ſtand in, they think
themſelues in good caſe, becauſe they ſee a great number
worſe then they: they thinke they ſhall doe as well as the reſt,
and they are content to take part with the reſt, and becauſe
Satan hath blinded them, they thinke if they be void of great
notorious crimes, ſuch as are puniſhed with death by the magiſtrate,
treaſon, murder, theft, and ſuch like, they thinke God
can not iuſtly condemne them; what (ſay they) I labour truly
for my liuing, and I thanke God I am no thiefe nor murtherer,
I truſt I ſhall doe well ynough in the day of iudgement: ſo he
thinketh becauſe he is not an outragious ſinner, his other ſinnes
be but ſmal petie ſinnes, & that God muſt needs forgiue, and ſo
he flattereth himſelfe: and becauſe he ſeeth not the daunger
of his ſinnes, he neuer careth to prouide the remedie. But alas, it
is farre othervviſe, the puniſhment even of the leaſt ſinne, if
it were but in thought is the eternall curſe of God, and his everlaſting
vengeance: the Lord God himſelfe hath appointed
it,Deut. 27. 26. which can not goe backe.Gal. 3. 10. 
               Curſed, ſaith he, be everie
one, which doeth not fulfill all things, that are vvritten in the booke
of the Lawe:
               Mat. 5. 22. vvhere be novv your ſmall ſinnes, vvhen God
appointeth his curſe to all? And our Saviour Chriſt telleth
vs, that he that ſpeaketh but a railing vvorde, as foole or ſuch
like, is guiltie of hell fire: where be novv our pety ſinnes, when
a vvorde ſpeaking is hell fire? Let me ſee vvhat man vpon
earth novv is not guiltie of hell fire.Prov. 20. 9. Who can ſay, My heart
                  •
               
pure?1. Kin. 8. 46. there is none but hee ſinneth; and the revvard of ſinne is
death:1. Ioh. 1. 8. vvho is there then not in danger of death? if our caſe
ſtand thus,Eccl. 7. 22. then good brethren, haue wee not need to looke
hovv this may be anſvvered before the iudgement ſeate of
God?Rom. 6, 23. haue vve not neede to be raiſed out of our ſecuritie,

ſeeing the great danger we ſtand in? God is iuſt and true that
hath ſpoken the worde,Rom. 3. 4. and therefore muſt puniſh our ſinne
with his curſe:Ioh. 3. 33. it ſtandeth vs in hand then I trow (vnleſſe we
will damme our owne ſoules, to looke for the anſwer of this
geare VVell, the waies and meanes howe to anſwer it, is by
Chriſt, and it is ſet downe vnto vs in euery point to the full in
the word of God, for the anſwer of the matter, which by Gods
grace I ſhall declare vnto you hereafter more largely: but becauſe
it is waightie, and containeth much matter, I leaue the
full handling of it till the next day: I truſt by Gods grace, ye
ſhall haue the whole matter out of the word of God, as fully
anſwered before the iudgement ſeate of God in his heauenly
court, and as ſtrongly as you haue your euidences to confirme
your goods and landes before the iudgement ſeate of man, in
their earthly courts: in the meane time, becauſe I will not
paſſe mine houre, I doe here ende this matter, deſiring you in
the feare of God, good brethren, to applie vnto your ſelues all
that haue beene here taught: haue alwaies before your eyes
the remembrance of this iudgement ſeate, and thinke with
your ſelues it muſt once come, and therefore frame your doings
ſo, as they may be cleare before God, not onely haue a faire
ſhew before men: and away with this craftie dealing, which
doth ſo ouerflow in this our countrie: beginne to deale ſimply
and plainly, knowing that Ieſus Chriſt will once call you to
account, and becauſe the time is vncerten, be alwaies readie,
deferre not one minute of an houre. And becauſe our account
muſt be taken by the Sonne of God, whoſe eies we can not
deſell with our iuggling ſhifts; let vs be carefull to ſee howe
the caſe of our ſaluation will ſtande in that day: let vs as carefully
looke for that, as we doe vſe daily for the ſafegard of
our bodie: conſider it, it is a waightie matter: if our caſe faile

                  〈◊〉
                in that day, remember all the pleaſures that we haue had
will ſtand vs in no ſtead, when we muſt be throwne into continuall
torment for euer without ende: good brethren, for the
loue of the Lord Ieſus, for the loue of our owne ſoules, let vs
looke to this geare nowe whiles wee haue time, and then our
God ſhall be mercifull vnto vs, he ſhall increaſe in vs continually

his heauenly graces daily more and more, till it ſhall be
his heauenly will and pleaſure to take vs to him ſelfe,
to raigne with him in continuall glorie
for euer and euer. The Lord in
mercie graunt it. Amen.
            
               John More.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND
Sermon.
            We muſt all appeare before the iudgement ſeate of
Chriſt, &c.
            
               OVT of this portion of Scripture (good
brethrē) the other day we were taught
to examine all our thoughts, wordes,
and deeds, how they ſhould be allowed
before God, and not to content our
ſelues either with the vaine allowing
or applauſe of man, nor yet with the
ſimple diſcharge of man, becauſe our
God, when all men haue done and can
finde nothing by vs, hath afterward his iudgement ſeate,
whereunto we muſt be brought to anſwer the matter there
where no wrangling nor craftie iuggling muſt preuaile, but
things muſt be laid open euen as they are in deede, and not as
they appeare to be before men: and moreouer becauſe the
Scripture leaueth this time vncerten, we were admoniſhed alwaies
to be in a readines, and not to deferre the time from day
to day, becauſe we know not when it ſhall pleaſe God to call
vs, for that euery momēt we are ſubiect vnto death, yea oftentimes
when we thinke our ſelues moſt ſafe, and furtheſt from
death, it pleaſeth God euen then oftentimes to call vs ſuddenly,
whereof we ſee daily examples before our eyes: And euen
ſince that time that we were laſt here, it hath pleaſed God to
teach vs by experience, howe true theſe things are by one of

our neighbours in Yarmouth as ye knowe, whome ſuddenly
the Lord tooke away euen in drinking of a cuppe of beere, otherwiſe
beeing in as good health as could be: thus the Lord
letteth vs ſee in what caſe we ſtand in the vncertentie of our
departure hence, that we ſhould not giue eare to the flattering
allurements of Satan, to ſleepe in ſecuritie, but to be awaked
out of our drowſines, and fall earneſtly to repent, and make readie
for the Lord againſt he call. VVe are all in the ſame taking
that he was, he thought himſelfe as ſure of his life as any of vs
doth now, and yet now he is gone ye ſee; and after him muſt
euery one of vs goe, how ſoone we can not tell, whoſe courſe
amōg vs is next we know not: but euery man perſwadeth himſelf
it is not he: ſo far off are we frō that which god would teach
vs herby, that is, that we ſhould euery one of vs think that our
own courſe is next, ſo far are we from that, I ſay, that we think
cleane contrarie, it ſhall not be we: it is maruelous to ſee how
little we profit by ſuch examples for all that, that euery one
almoſt thinketh he hath notwithſtanding aſſurance of his life
for as many yeres, as he himſelfe ſhal think good: it is wonderfull,
I ſay, to ſee howe ſuch examples mooue almoſt no whit at
all, but are ſtraightwaies buried in forgetfulnes, as though
there were no ſuch thing: well, for my part, I can not, nor dare
not, let ſuch examples ſlippe, but put you in minde of your dutie
by them, eſpecially when I ſee God ſpeaketh, as it were
from heauen, by ſuch examples, and as it were by his owne
finger to write out our leſſon,Luc. 13. 3, 5. I dare not but with the Lord Ieſus
ſay, Vnleſſe ye repent, ye ſhall all in like manner periſh: gaze not ſo
much vpon the man, but looke into your ſelues; it is for vs, for
vs (good brethren) and not for him alone, that we might be
taught hereby to thinke that all of vs are in like caſe, if God
ſhould call vs: vve be too carnall, vve thinke our ſelues too ſure
of our life: the Lord vvould open our eies by ſuch ſignes, if vve
vvere not to ſtubborne & vvilful to ſhut our eyes againſt them.
            It pleaſed God then at our laſt meeting, to vſe my tongue
out of this portion of Scripture, to admoniſh you to be alvvaies
readie to this iudgement of the Lord, becauſe our life vvas ſo
vncerten, that vve are oftē takē avvay vvhen vve leaſt thought,

and it hath pleaſed God to confirme the ſame hard by vs, by
this example of this our neighbour, now ſuddenly gone from
vs: let vs take it as though God in heauen himſelfe had ſpoken
vnto vs, & ſaid, Ye Norffolkemē beware, looke that ye be readie
when I call you at a minuts warning: then we ſhall like the
deare children of God, well profit by the Lords dealing, & not
like ſtocks and ſtones without ſenſe neuer be mooued, though
the Lord ſhould knock vs on the head with a beetle: you know
how Chriſt Ieſus teacheth vs to apply ſuch things to our profit,Luc. 13. 3. 5.
to ſtirre vs to repentance: Let vs do it then in deed, God loueth
no delaying: he would haue vs begin, & therfore vſeth all
meanes to drawe vs thereunto. And thus much for that point.
            Now whereas the holy Ghoſt calleth vs to the iudgement
ſeat of God, we were admoniſhed the other day not onely to
view our doings before God to be ſincere, not double, nor diſſembled,
but alſo we were further taught to prouide for a remedie
when as we ſee our ſelues in ſo much ſinne & wickednes,
conſidering that God, as he hateth ſinne, ſo becauſe he is
iuſt, muſt needs puniſh, & becauſe he is true muſt puniſh with
the ſame puniſhment, which he him ſelfe appointeth: conſidering
this, I ſay, we were taught to ſeeke for remedie againſt
this euill, how we might be diſcharged from this puniſhmēt in
that day: for it is not ſufficient, that mooued with this feare, we
indeuour our ſelues to vprightnes of life only, vnleſſe our cōſciences
alſo be perſwaded of our ful diſcharge in the ſame iudgement
day from the great debt that we owe vnto God for out
daily ſinnes: this, I ſay, is the chiefeſt thing to be carefully conſidered
vpon, while God giueth vs now time: and hereunto we
were exhorted the other day, and our negligence herein condemned,
I truſt we haue amended it: & novv if the Lord hath
giuen you eares willing to heare, & hearts readie to imbrace, I
purpoſe to lay out the matter more at large, and fully to ſet before
your eies, as plainly as God will giue me grace, the waies
and meanes howe we are diſcharged before this iudge from
whatſoeuer can be laid againſt vs: & becauſe the matter is touching
our care before a iudge, I purpoſe to handle it euen after
the ſame maner, that ye vſe to handle your law matters before

iudges, ſauing that I meane not to bring ſuch ſlender ſtuffe for
the proofe of the matter, as you vſe in your brablings. I dare not
ſo deale with ſo waightie a cauſe, eſpecially before ſo wiſe
and ſincere a iudge, that can not be deceiued, and will not be
corrupted: I minde to bring into this heauenly court no other
euidences, but of ſuch ſtrength and ſoundnes, as ſhalbe able to
abide the pearcing eies of this ſeuere iudge without blemiſh,
and that is euen out of Gods bleſſed word: I purpoſe to bring
no other euidence, witneſſe, nor writing, then is there found,
and that onely will ſtand for good ſtuffe in this high court,Ioh. 12. 48. and
no other thing, for ſo ſaith the ſame God, that by his worde he
will iudge in that day: he will not goe by heare-ſay, nor by had
I wiſt, nor by coniectures, nor receiue one man for fauour, an
other for feare, but looke howe he anſwereth the matter by
proofe out of Gods word, ſo doth this iudge pronounce vpon
him ſentence, either of ſaluation, or of damnation: all deuiſes
of mens braines, what goodly ſhewes ſo euer they haue made
here in this world muſt needs vaniſh away as ſmoke, before the
heauenly iudge. I purpoſe therefore, as I ſay, to handle this
matter of our ſaluation euen after the ſame maner, that ye vſe
to handle your court matter, that it may more deepely ſinke into
our dull braines: for we can good skill of law matters, we
be maruelouſly practiſed in them, euery countri-clowne here
amongſt vs in Norffolk is able to ſet a good lawyer to ſchoole,
in worldly brabbles, about worldly goods, lands, and liuings.
Well, becauſe ye haue ſo good a fancie to law, I wil teach you,
if ye will learne, to be as cunning in this great law matter touching
the goods of heauen, the land of heauen, the liuing in
heauen. I would, if it pleaſed God, that all Norffolk men were
men of law to anſwer this waightie matter in the high court:1. Cor. 9. 10.
we muſt all to it: the ſimpleſt muſt anſwer it: we muſt needs appeare
to the action, and that by no atturny, but in our own perſon:
we muſt all be ſummoned to appeare there perſonally, the
writ is already gone out, and ſerued vpon vs: The Apoſtle Paul
here is our herald, ſhrieff, ſergeant, or bayliff, that doth aſcite vs
before this iudge: we be areſted alreadie, and the mace vpon
our ſhoulders, to be readie at a minuts warning (when we ſhall

be called) to anſwer to an action of high treaſon committed
by vs againſt the King of kings, for that he taking vs to be his
ſubiects, we haue trayterouſly forſaken him, and ioyned our
ſelues with a forrain prince enemie to this high king: & further
alſo to anſwer an other action of rebellion againſt his maieſtie,
for that he fauourably receiuing vs to mercie, after our treaſon
committed againſt him, haue neuer ſince ceaſed to riſe vp
againſt him, but continually ſpurned againſt his will, and neuer
would ſuffer our ſelues to be ruled by him, but like proude
rebels haue ſtarted vp againſt him, ſeeking to thruſt him out of
his throne, and to place our ſelues, and our owne deuiſes there,
that we might rule and raigne after our luſts: and for theſe and
many ſuch like hainous crimes are we to receiue iudgement, to
looſe the hold we haue of Gods kingdome in heauen, and to
take poſſeſſion of the eternall torments in hell. Theſe great and
weightie matters are we ſummoned to anſwer vnto, not in
Weſtminſter court before my L. chiefe Iuſtice, my L. Chauncelour,
the Q. Maieſtie, or her counſell; thoſe be men fleſh and
blood, and not appointed iudges of ſo waightie matters, they
muſt needs come to be iudged them ſelues, and yeild vp their
account then and there: but we are ſummoned to anſwer theſe
matters in the Court holden in heauē, before the kings maieſty
of the whole earth, and his counſell and aſſembly of glorious
Angels, before my Lord chiefe iuſtice of the whole earth, and
Chauncelour of the whole world, the deare Sonne of God, Ieſus
Chriſt the Lord of all: before him we muſt appeare perſonally
then and there, to anſwer theſe and ſuch other waightie
matters, as ſhalbe laid to our charge. Thus we are all ſummoned
and aſcited, & thether muſt we go whither we will or not,
there will no bayle ſerue, we can not vſe any ſhift to winde vs
out of his preſence, we can not fee the officer with bribes, that
the might friendly in our behalfe returne, Non eſt innuentus, the
Lord wil find vs, I warrant vs: we are found out alreadie, & apparant
before his eies. VVell, thus ſtandeth the caſe, what ſhall
we doe then? flying will not ſerue, bribing will not ſerue, bolſtring
will not ſerue, there is no remedie but appeare we muſt
to the action, & ſtand to the anſwer, & ſubmit our ſelues to the

ſentence: what ſhall we do then? I tolde you before, becauſe
we might ſee the matter more plaine before vs, I purpoſed to
handle it after the common proceſſe in law, as we vſe to deale
with our common worldly matters: what then would we doe
any of vs if we had a matter to appeare vnto that we muſt anſwer,
the writ and all ſerued, what would we doe in this caſe?
we would ſtrait waies firſt learn out at whoſe ſuite vve are troubled,
who it is that is our accuſer, then we would learne out diligently
what matter he hath to lay againſt vs, what it is that
he purpoſeth to charge vs withall: and laſt of all we would be
glad to know what evidence he can ſhew for the proofe of his
matter: all theſe things we would be glad to know if we can
by any meanes before vvee come in open court: and if ſo be
that vve haue once gotten out, who is our accuſer, what matter
he hath againſt vs, and vvhat ſound proofe he can bring in
for to make his matter good: when vvee know all this, vvee
know in a manner before vve come there how the matter will
goe: for then vve vvill ſeeke out our euidence on our ſide, what
ſound geere vve haue, and hovv vve may make anſwere to his
euidences on the contrary ſide: thus vve vſe to do in our worldly
matters. It ſtandeth vs in hand I trow to be as carefull in
this our heauenly action. Novv before vve come to the iudge,
vnleſſe we will looſe the hold of euerlaſting life, and throvve
our ſelues headlong into everlaſting death. It ſtandeth vs vpon
loſſe of life and goods euerlaſting to looke to this geere,
both to looke out our accuſer and purſuer of this matter againſt
vs, and alſo vvhat vvee are charged vvith: and finally vvhat
proofes he hath for it, that knovving the matter throughly, we
may be carefull to ſee it anſvvered novv before the great iudgement
day come ſodenly vpon vs. Who is then our accuſer? can
we knovv that? I told you the vvord of God vvill lead vs ſtrait
to all thoſe things that muſt be handled in this iudgement, as
ſtrait & more ſtraight then any counſellour can infourme vs of
our vvordly matters out of his lavv booke.Apoc. 12. 9. The holy ghoſt telleth
vs plainly, that the deuill is our accuſer, for ſo he ſaith, the
great dragon, that old ſerpent, which is called the deuill & Satan,
vvhich deceiueth the vvhole vvorld, & the accuſer of our

brethren, vvhich accuſeth them before God day and night, the
ſame old ſubtill beaſt, ſaith he, is throwen downe. Lo here the
ſpirit of God giueth us to underſtand, that we haue an olde
ſubtill ſerpent, the deuill, that by his craft hath deceiued the
whole vvorld, we haue ſuch a furious beaſt our accuſer: yea,
that doth not reſerue his matter till then only, but euen now is
alwaies accuſing vs before our God, and neuer ceaſeth night
nor day: it is high time for us then to looke about us, ſeeing
we haue ſo craftie an accuſer that hath by his ſubtiltie deceiued
ſo many, and by his long experience is an old worne ſoldier
in ſuch dealing, yea, and our olde ſworne enemie, furiouſly
ſet on rage againſt us to deſtroy vs in a moment if he
could: be ſure we ſhall haue no fauour at his hand, but whatſoeuer
he can lay againſt vs, for he hath bene priuie to moſt
of our naughtie doings, yea the very authour him ſelfe, and
we his ſlaues in doing them: vvell then ye ſee, ſeeing we haue
ſuch an enemie for our accuſer, we had neede to furniſh our
ſelues on all ſides againſt him. But what can he lay to our
charge now? let vs ſee that: hath he any matter of waight to
lay to our charge? Hee layeth to our charge matters of high
treaſon againſt God the ſupreme King, and rebellion againſt
his maieſtie, and there withall putteth in his plea, to prooue us
guiltie of the forfeiture of our heauenly inheritance, & therefore
to be throwne out into euerlaſting fire: theſe matters then
toucheth the quicke, ſeeing they concerne life euerlaſting,
or elſe death everlaſting: if we be convicted, there is no way
with us, but euerlaſting torment. But let us ſee what proofes
he hath for his matter, what evidence he can bring into this
high court to prooue this great action: for if he haue nothing
to prooue and make good that, which he layeth againſt vs,
then, although the action be never ſo great, it is to no purpoſe,
it muſt fall and come to nought: for it may be he playeth with
vs, as a company of his members vſeth to deale with poore
men here about us, who put in their actions of thouſands
and thouſands, and make ſimple men beleeue that great matter
is againſt them, and when all comes to all that poore

men haue bene toſſed from poſt to pillar up to London, and
downe againe, and emptyed their poore purſes among the
rich lawers, then the matter falleth out neither ſo nor ſo, neither
thouſands nor hundreths, no not of a farthing weight,
not the very turning of a ſtrawe: and yet great a doe made about
it till it come to the triall, as though it concerned infinite
worldes and mountaines of golde, and at the length all not
worth a ſtrawe. It may be then their maſter Satan purpoſeth
ſo to deale with vs, as he hath taught theſe idle fellowes his
ſeruants to play with poore folkes. It may be, I ſay, he purpoſeth
to face out the matter with great bragges in this high
court, and make us beleeue we be in danger of hell, and loſſe
of life euerlaſting and ſuch like, and when it commeth to the
triall, nothing ſo: therefore let vs ſee what ſtrong euidence
he can ſhew for the proofe of it. He bringeth in for the proofe
hereof no ſmaller ſtuffe then the very worde of God: he bringeth
in the great charter made betwixt God and vs, wherein
the Lorde bindeth himſelfe to be our God, and we to be his
people, if we performe the couenants therein contained: & we
on our ſide do aſſent to the performance of the ſame, if he will
vouchſafe to be our good and gratious god, & take vs to be his
ſeruants & tenants: this great charter & handwriting of God
confirmed, ſealed, and ratified vnto vs, firſt by the old ſeale
of the blood of calves and goates, ſecondly in the new ſeale
of the blood of the Sonne of God: this ſame great charter &
hand writing of God doth Satan bring in againſt vs, to prooue
vs guiltie of forfeiture of the kingdome of God, and heires of
hell ſire, becauſe we haue not performed the couenants of that
writing; for that is one clauſe of the charter: if we do not fulfill
all the couenants, that then we ſhould be excluded from
the ioyes of heaven, and haue Gods curſe raigning ouer vs, as it
doth appeare Deuter. 27.
                  
                     ••
                  ut. 27. 26. 
               Curſed, ſaith God, is every one, which
doth not fulfill all that is written in the booke of this law:
               Gal. 3. 10. and the
Apoſtle Paul bringeth the ſame ſentence in, to proove that
all of vs are guilty of curſe & condēnation, & ſaith moreouer,
that the law doeth condemne us, becauſe we did not performe
the couenants contained therein. Ye ſee then what is brought

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
againſt vs to proove us to be caſt off from God, and guiltie of
the wrath and curſe of God, here is the word of God brought
againſt vs to proove the ſame, becauſe we haue broken and
tranſgreſſed the couenants which God gaue vs to walke in: &
further to proue that we haue brokē them (if vve ſhould be ſo
impudent as to ſtand to the deniall) there is avouched the ſelfe
ſame word of God, which flatly convinceth vs, and telleth vs
that there is no man but ſinneth; all haue ſinned and ſtand in
need of the glorie of God:1. Kin. 8. 46. 
               If we ſhould ſay that we have no ſin,
we deceive our ſelves,
               Rom. 3. 23. 
               and there is no truth in vs: theſe evidences
and records out of the worde of God do beate vs downe to the
hard ground before the iudgement ſeate of God,1. Ioh. 1. 8. beſides the
record and teſtimonie of our owne conſciences, which ſtandeth
in greater force to condemne vs, then a thouſand witneſſes,1. Ioh. 3. 20.
eſpecially before God, who is greater then our conſcience,
and knoweth all▪ yea many things which our conſciences be
not touched withall. Thus you ſee here is brought in, in this
iudgement, ſufficient proofe againſt vs for our condemnation,
it is no ſleight nor ſlender ſtuffe, but ſound proofe out of the
word of God:Mat. 5. 17. here is no counterfeit deeds, no forged evidences,
but ſuch as are ſealed and ratified by the Sonne of God
himſelfe,Mat. 5. 18. which teſtifieth of himſelfe, that his comming was
not to diſanull them,Luke 16. 17. but to fulfill and accompliſh them: wee
muſt not then thinke,Ioh. 12. 48. but that this geare, that is here brought
in againſt vs,Matt. 24. 35. will ſtand and be allowed euen before the Lord
in his tribunall ſeate, becauſe it is nothing but his owne word,
by the which he telleth vs he will iudge vs: and though heaven
and earth paſſe, yet that word never paſſeth: wherefore it
ſtandeth vs now in hand to ſee how this matter may be anſwered
on our part: we had need to looke about vs, and ſeeke for as
good ſtuffe for the anſwering of the matter to our diſcharge, as
is brought in againſt vs to our condemnation, or elſe (the Lord
knoweth) we be in miſerable caſe: vnleſſe we haue as ſure profe
out of the ſelfe ſame word of God for our diſcharge, there is no
remedy but we periſh euery mothers child: for the Lorde can
not goe againſt his worde. let vs ſee then, good brethren, how
we can anſwer the matter, and let vs beware that we bring not

our ovvne cauills againſt God, not the deuices of our ovvne
braine, nor that vvhich vve thinke good of our ſelues, unleſſe
it haue his ground on the vvord of God, vvhich onely muſt be
the great court rolles that this heauenly iudge vvill uſe in this
court. And this is one ſpeciall cauſe that mooveth me to handle
the matter of our ſaluation before the throne of God, & not
as here upon earth, becauſe euery fond deviſe of our ovvn fooliſh
head ſeemeth to vs vvhile vve keepe vs here belovv to be
moſt excellent & ſound, as nothing can be more: euery toy &
trifle that liketh vs, ſeemeth to be ſo firme & ſtrong, as God
muſt needs yeeld unto our liking: but it ſhalbe far othervviſe
vvhen is commeth to be handled before God: all ſuch imaginations
muſt needes vaniſh avvay as ſmoke before the iudgement
ſeate of God: nothing can abide his preſence there, but
only his ovvne bleſſed vvord, and that vvhich is grounded upō
it. Let us therefore ſo examine the matter of our ſaluation, as it
may ſtand ſteady & ſtrong before the eternall God againſt Satan,
ſinne, & all the povvers of hell. Let us come novv to the anſvvering
of the matter. There hath come proofe againſt vs as
ye haue heard out of the vvord of God, that vve are all of vs accurſed
of Gods ovvne mouth,Deut. 27. 26. becauſe vve haue tranſgreſſed
his lavv and holy commandements,Gal. 3. 10. this is prooued againſt us:
vvhat ſhall vve ſay, can vve deny it? not unleſſe vve vvill denie
God himſelfe,1. Reg. 8. 4
                     •
                  . for it is prooued unto us out of his vvord, that
all of vs haue ſinned,Rom. 3. 23. & none but ſinneth, vve can not then deny
that;1. Ioh. 1. 8. & if that be graunted, the other muſt needs follovv, that
vve are therefore ſubiect to the curſe of God & eternall death,
becauſe it is vvritten,Rom. 6. 23. that the reward of ſinne is death: &, Curſed
is every one that doeth not abide to fulfill all that is written in
the booke of the law:
               Gal. 3. 10. it is then apparant, that the vvrath of God
is pronounced upon us for our diſobedience to God: that can
not be denyed, vvhat ſhal vve ſay then? vve ſtand before God
to anſvver the matter, vvhat ſhall vve ſay to it? I am afraide a
great number of us are far to ſeeke in theſe lavv points of our
ſaluation, although vve be othervviſe neuer ſo excellent, cunning
& skilfull in other lavv matters to handle them marueilous
ſubtilly & vviſely, I am afraid for all that vve are farre to

learne in theſe moſt chiefe & waightie cauſes of life & death
eternall. And yet I know we be not altogether without our
anſwers, ſuch as they be, very ſimple (God knoweth) & ſlender,
far unmeet to come before ſo glorious a iudge in ſo waightie
cauſes. We doe not deny but we haue broken theſe bleſſed
commandements of God, we confeſſe that, but in the meane
time, vve haue our ſhifts & gloſes to aſſvvage the matter withall:
vve can alledge for our ſelues, that although vve haue broken
Gods cōmandements & offended God, yet they be not ſo
great offenſes as deſerue any great puniſhment: & herein vve
be marveilous eloquent to paint out the matter, to make our
ſelues beleeue that our ſins be not ſo great, becauſe we ſee other
men haue done greater: or, becauſe vve ſee our ſelues void
of notorious crimes, & ſuch as be puniſhed by the magiſtrate:
vve can very readily alledge for our ſelues; what man? I truſt I
am not ſo great a ſinner, I thank God I am no theefe, I labour
truly for my liuing: nor, I am no murtherer or cōmon whoremaſter,
& ſuch like: and hereupon we ſet our ſelues in a good
ſtay, & neuer buſie our ſelues to anſwer the matter any further
before the throne of God: but conclude with our ſelues that
God muſt be good vnto us, becauſe vve be not ſo notorious ſinners,
as outragious men be. Yea (good brethren) but will God
be ſo anſwered think you? wil this ſtand for good euidence before
the throne of God? Doth the vvord of God ſay, Curſed be
euery one that doth not abide in the greateſt commandemēts,
as in abſtaining from murther, man ſlaughter, whordom, theſe
& ſuch like? doth it ſpeak on this matter only? no it goeth further
& ſaith, Curſed be every one that doth not abide, & fulfill all
that is written in the book of the law: it doeth not ſay, ſome part,
but all: & ſo forth in the reſt. Although thou be no whoremaſter
nor murtherer, & yet be a ſwearer, thou haſt not fulfilled al.
And therfore the Apoſtle S. Iames reproueth ſuch kind of people
as dare ſo boldly blanch vvith Gods commandements, to
think themſelues in good caſe for doing one or tvvo of the
commandements,Iames 2. 10. & neglecting the reſt. He telleth vs, Whoſoever
ſhould filfill all the cōmandements, & yet breake but one of them,
is guiltie of the whole burthē of the law; which threatneth curſe to

the tranſgreſſours & breakers of any one,Mat. 5. 10. yea euen of the leſt, as
Chriſt Ieſus alſo vvitneſſeth: yea further, Gods commandemēts
be ſo pure, deare, and precious, that they are to be fulfilled and
done not only with our outward body, but eſpecially with our
heart: for the commandements of God are ſpirituall, (ſo ſaith
Paul) & pearce euen to the heart:Rom. 
                     〈◊◊〉
                  . & God that giueth them, is
not God of our bodies only, but alſo of our ſoules, & therefore
giueth us lavves not only to tye our hands frō doing euill, but
the heart alſo frō thinking & deuiſing euill, becauſe he is a God
that loueth pure truth & ſincerity, not only in outward ſhevv,
but eſpecially in the in ward heart,Pſal. 51. 
                     •
                  . as teſtifieth the Pſalm. Therfork
Ieſus Chriſt doeth tell vs, that they be broken, not onely
whē our body doth cōmit the outward fact, but alſo euē when
the heart doth break it, although the body haue not done it,
that thou art guilty before God,Mat. 5. 28. when thy heart hath broken it,
euen whē thou haſt luſted after thy neighbours wife,Mat. 5. 22. thou haſt
cōmitted adultery in thine heart, ſaieth Chriſt: yea, and if thou
ſpeak but a railing or reprochfull ſentence, thou art guilty of hel
fire: & although thou neuer neither kill thy brother nor ſmite
him,1. Ioh. 3. 15. yet if thou hate him in thine heart, thou art a mankiller before
God, who condemneth the thoughts of our hearts. Yea &
further, it muſt be done not only with thy heart after a cold faſhion
with ſome part of thy good vvill & liking,Matt. 22. 37. but cheerfully
vvith all the heart, with all the mind, yea & with all the ſoule. So
that although vve could fulfill all the cōmandements of God,
& yet break but one of them once in al our life, yea & although
it were but in our heart, yet that vvord condēneth vs as guilty of
Gods curſe,Gal. 3. 10. vvhich ſaith, Curſed is euery one, which doth not fulfill
all that is written in the booke of this law: if any one cōmandemēt
be but once in all our life brokē, all is not fulfilled, & therfore is
a curſe pronounced againſt vs. This is brought in againſt vs ye
ſee, and alledged to prooue vs guiltie of the curſe and vengeance
of God, for breaking his commandements: the leaſt of
them, although it were but in thought, yet ſufficient to throw
vs downe to hell: all this is brought againſt vs out of the word
of God in this iudgemēt, & therfore cannot be anſwered with
gloſes: we may vvel enough ſurmiſe of our own head what we
think good here below, whē we come before god nothing wil

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
ſerve but his vvord. It vvill not availe thee a ſtravv (vvhen thou
ſhalt ſtand before the iudgement ſeat of God) it will not availe
thee to ſay, O good Lord, I graunt indeed I haue ſinned, but
yet they are but ſmall ſinnes, for ſtrait thou ſhalt haue anſvver,
Curſed is every one that doth not fulfill all, not onely the great,
but alſo the ſmall, theſe gloſes vvill not ſerue at that day: and
yet ſee hovv many are caried avvay novv a dayes by ſuch imagination
of Gods commandements. For a great number think,
that if they be not notorious ſinners before men, they ſhall be
vvell enough: for they think that the reſt of their ſinnes are not
of ſo great vvaight becauſe they be knovvn only to God, & not
greatly hated of the vvorld: & this the, fall into becauſe they
meaſure the breach of Gods commaundement by the rule of
their ovvne iudgement, or by the common opinion of men.
But alas (good brethren) it vvill go farre othervviſe vvith vs before
the iudgement ſeat of God,Rom. 6. 23. vvho vvil meaſure the breach
of his bleſſed vvill not by mens vvord, but by his ovvne vvorde:
& that vvord telleth vs, that the revvard of the leſt ſin is death.
We muſt ſeeke then for more ſound ſtuffe then this to anſwer
our cauſe, or all vvill elſe go vvrong vvith vs. We go on yet further
vvith the matter, & vvhen vve are conuicted that our ſinnes
are great & grieuous before God, vve acknovvledge it to be ſo,
but vve haue remedy enough for it, as vve thinke: for vve bring
in to anſvver the matter, the puniſhments vvhervvith vve haue
puniſhed our bodies, as pining our ſelues vvith faſting, vvhipping,
ſcourging, & ſuch like: and theſe things vve thinke be a
ſufficient recōpenſe to God for our ſins, as ſo much as he muſt
needs be ſatisfied vvith, & therfore vve call them Satisfactions.
oh, (ſay vve) vve haue ſinned indeed, & our ſins be grieuous, but
yet for al that vve haue pinched our body for our ſins, vve haue
ſcourged our ſelues euery day, vve haue gone on pilgrimage in
froſt & ſnovv barefoot, and therfore although vve haue ſinned,
yet we haue ſatisfied God for our ſins: vve truſt this vvill be a
ſufficiēt recōpenſe to God for our ſins: yea but let us ſee, whether
this wil be a ſufficient anſvver before God, vvhether God
vvill take this recompence for our ſins or no. The Lorde our
God hath appointed in his vvord a far greater puniſhment and
recompenſe for our ſins, then can be fall the body of man: whē
               
they haue pined it all that euer they can: the puniſhment and
due debt of our ſinne by the word of God, is not onely a puniſhment
of the bodie but alſo of the ſoule, not onely for a certaine
time of daies and yeares which haue an ende,Matt. 25. 4
                     •
                  . and 10. 28. but daies
and yeares which neuer ende. It is the fire which neuer goeth
out,Marc. 9. 44. which can neuer be quenched: it is the worme which neuer
dieth:Apoc. 20. 6. and 21. 8. it is a ſecond death, where men be alwaies dying,
and neuer can make an end, becauſe it is euerlaſting; this is the
iuſt recompence of our ſinnes: we muſt not then thinke we
haue trimly ſatisfied for our ſinnes, when we haue vndergone
and taken vpon vs certaine puniſhments in our bodies, which
we thinke be very grieuous; for although we ſhould our whole
life long pine our ſelues with the greateſt and extreameſt torment
that could be, it is nothing in compariſon of that full
meaſure of puniſhment for our ſinnes, which God ſetteth
downe: for that is not for a day or two, or as long as we liue,
no not for twentie thouſand yeares, but for euer, euer, euer, and
hath neuer ende: and not onely in the torments of the bodie,
but alſo in ſoule, the griefe whereof can not be expreſſed, a
thouſand times more intollerable then any griefe that can
come to the bodie. Doth the Lord God ſay, VVhipped be that
bodie for certaine yeares, which doth not fulfill all that is written,Gal. 3. 1
                     •
                  .
&c. no, he ſaith not ſo; but he ſaith, Accurſed be he: I trow
the curſe of God ſtretcheth further then the bodie of man: the
curſe of God containeth in it all the torments that can be deuiſed
both in ſoule and bodie, euen as his fauour and goodnes
containeth all happines. This curſe of God which is due for
our ſinnes, as it containeth all the torments which can be deuiſed
both of ſoule and bodie, ſo is it ſet forth vnto vs in Scripture
by ſuch things as ſeeme terrible vnto vs, to expreſſe vnto
vs more deepely the terrour of it by ſuch things as ſeeme terrible
vnto vs in this earth:Matth. 5. 41. as fire that can not be quenched,
burning lake,Apoc. 19. 20. and 20. 10. ſecond death, damnation, where is weeping and
wayling and gnaſhing of teeth, and ſuch other like kinde of
ſpeeches,Marc. 9. 44. to expreſſe vnto vs the horrour of the ſame: not that
any terrible thing in this life can ſufficiently expreſſe the horrour
of theſe paines, as they are in deede, for the tongue of man

can not vtter, nor heart thinke the torment prepared for ſinne.
The burthen thereof cauſed the deare Sonne of God to ſweat,
not vſuall ſweat, but droppes of blood, not one or two drops,
but in ſuch abundance,Luc. 22. 44. but in ſuch abundance, that it came
flowing downe to the ground: the waight of the puniſhment
of our ſinnes, is more grieuous then men doe thinke. Let vs
not then flatter ſelues, good brethren, and dally in this matter
with our God, bringing in recompence and ſatisfaction for
our ſinnes, after our owne deuiſing, it will not ſtande for good
ſtuffe before the iudgement ſeat of God: if we will take vpon
vs to ſatisfie for our ſinnes, then we muſt take vpon vs hell fire,
the curſe of God, eternall death, for theſe puniſhments hath the
Lord God appointed to be due for our ſinnes.Gal. 3. 10. Let vs not then
thinke that the torments of our bodie,Rom. 6. 23. although it be neuer ſo
hainous as long as we liue, although it be an hundreth yeare
can be any ſufficient ſatisfaction vnto GOD, no not
for the leaſt of our ſinnes, for we ſee flatly that the Lord himſelfe
hath appointed farre greater, to be endleſſe both in ſoule
and bodie foreuer. Peraduenture it may be, that we ſhall think
our ſelues well ynough eaſed by theſe ſatisfactions, ſo long as
we are quiet here be low, and no torment commeth to our
conſciences, but alas, when we muſt anſwer it before our God,
all theſe our dreames muſt needes vaniſh away as ſmoake,
from the preſence of our God, becauſe they haue not their
ground vpon the worde of God, by which all thinges muſt be
tried in that day. It is alleadged vs before the great iudge, that
we haue ſinned:Ioh. 12. 48. we confeſſe it, but we ſay, we haue ſatisfied for
our ſinnes, we haue pined our bodie with faſting all our life
long, we haue gone on pilgrimage barefoote and bare legged,
we haue whipped our bodie till the blood euery day, we haue
worne hairecloath vpon our bodie, and this we haue done for
a recompence for our ſinnes: God anſwereth vs by his word,
I haue appointed the due recompence for ſinne, my euerlaſting
curſe,Marc. 9. 44. the worme that neuer dieth, the torments of hell, haue
ye ſuffered theſe,Matt. 16. 28. and ouercome them? we muſt needes confeſſe
No: but we ſay, yet good Lord we haue ſuffered a little
(in our bodie: but he ſaith, the puniſhment which I appoint is

both of ſoule and bodie euerlaſting, and therefore that puniſhment
which ye bring in, is not able to anſwer the debt, it is but
onely a forged recompence of our owne braine. This geare then
good brethren, can not fall out iumpe in the iudgement ſeat of
God, the Lord our God will not be ſatisfied with our anſwer
to the debt, which we forge of our owne head, but he wilbe anſwered
the true debt in deede: the true debt which we owe our
God in deede for our ſinnes, is the euerlaſting curſe of God,
which neuer hath ende, it is not a certaine puniſhment of the
bodie for a certaine time, that is but falſe and forged of our
owne head, that is not the right debt. Is it not an intollerable
thing, and not to be ſuffered before a mortall iudge, when as
the right debt is a thouſand pounds, to bring in ſtead thereof a
falſe forged debt of halfe a mite, and there face out the matter,
as though all were diſcharged, becauſe he can bring proofe ynough,
that that forged debt is diſcharged? can this be ſuffered
among earthly magiſtrates? and ſhall we thinke to gloſe out
the matter with our forged debts before the heauenly iudge?
There is ſound proofe come in againſt vs, that we are indebted
vnto our God the penaltie of his curſe, euerlaſting torments
both of ſoule and bodie, this debt muſt be anſwered vnto our
God, or elſe wee ſhall neuer he diſcharged, this our right debt
muſt be paid, and ſure proofe brought in how it is paid, or elſe
wee ſhall neuer haue our generall acquittance, but lye in the
priſon of hell for euer. The like is to be ſaid of all other the ſatisfactions,
that haue beene forged by man, they can nor ſtand in
this iudgement. That ſame great and horrible Maſſe, which
hath bin thought to be a ſufficient recompence for the ſinne
both of the liuing & the dead, it can not ſtand before the iudgement
ſeat of God, it is but a counterfeit payment of our debt:
the true paiment is to pay the true debt of our ſinnes, and that
is the curſe of God, but the Maſſe is not the payment of that
debt, that is too waightie and heauie both for the maſſer and
the maſſe it ſelfe, to ouercome the torments of euerlaſting
death; that can not recompence God there for our ſinnes, ſeeing
the true and onely recompence is, to vndergoe the torments
of hell due for all our ſinnes. Neither can their forged

purgatorie paines be a recompence to God for our ſinnes, becauſe
the true debt vvhich muſt be anſvvered, is infinite and
without end: the full puniſhment which we owe for our ſinnes
is incomprehenſible and infinite, euen as our God, againſt
whome the offence is committed. All theſe then, and whatſoeuer
haue bin deuiſed by man, will fall out in the day of iudgement
to be no payment, but onely forged payments, and ſo
we found alwaies guiltie, and our debts vnanſwerable: it ſtandeth
vs in hand (good brethren) to looke to it, you ſee it is a
more waightie matter, then men doe commonly iudge it, it
will not be ſo ſoone diſcharged as men doe dreame: let vs take
paines in it for Gods ſake, nowe while we haue time, and not
flatter our ſelues with our owne weenings, the Lord will not
ſo be anſwered at our hands: he giueth vs nowe time to looke
for the anſwering of it, he giueth vs his bleſſed word, wherein
we may learne how to anſwer it, euen to the full: if we careleſly
paſſe ouer this time of mercie, and ſeeke not for this geare,
we ſhal herafter taſt of his iudgements without mercie. VVell,
thus ye ſee all this ſtuffe that is yet brought in, will not ſerue to
anſwer the matter: we muſt trie further what we can ſay for
our ſelues: we goe on yet further, and will acknowledge that
we haue ſinned grieuouſly, and that our ſinnes are horrible, but
we thinke although we haue done many ill deedes, yet becauſe
we haue done many good deedes, we thinke God muſt needes
hold vs excuſed: and therefore we thinke our almes deedes
and many praiers, and faſtings, muſt needs binde God to giue
vs heauen for them, we thinke we may addle heauen (as they
ſay) by our good deedes. But the anſwer is giuen vs herein, that
was giuen vs before, that the recompence to God for our ſins,
is not two or three good deedes, no not tvventie thouſand
thouſand, but the curſe of God, death, and damnation: that
muſt be ſuſtained and ouercome, or other recompence to God
is there none. True it is that the Lorde promiſeth vnto vs
euerlaſting life for doing his commaundements: he that doth
them ſhall liue in them: God promiſeth life to the doing of
his commandement, yea euen euerlaſting life, but then he requireth
that they be done not in part (as hath beene ſaid before)

but in whole,Matt. 22. 3
                     •
                  . and that with al the heart, with all the mind,
with all the ſoule: vpon this condition in deede, that we doe all
his commandements, and neuer breake one of them, he putteth
vs in good aſſurance of euerlaſting life, and ſurely he will
not faile vs, if we performe all thoſe couenants: but if ſo be we
breake but one of them, we then forfeit our hold, & incurre the
penalty of the breach of the couenants, which is the euerlaſting
wrath of God:Gal. 3. 10. for ſo doth God ſay, Curſed is euery one which
doth, &c. The life euerlaſting is, as ye would ſay, let to farme
to vs, to haue and to hold to vs and our poſteritie for euer, vpon
this condition, that we performe all ſuch and ſuch couenants
as are contained in the booke of God: Doe theſe, ſaith God, and
thou ſhalt haue life. But prouided alwaies, that if thou breake any
one of them once in all thy life, then accurſed be thou from
my face: here is indeede heauen promiſed to vs, if we do Gods
commandements, but then we muſt doe all, and not ſome one,
or elſe we forfeit all. Now let all the men vpon the earth come
and ſtand before the iudgement ſeat of God, and let me ſee amongſt
them al, that euer haue beene, or euer ſhalbe to the end
of the world, let me ſee if any one can be found, that euer hath
done all theſe commaundements of God, that he may iuſtly
challenge his right and intereſt in heauen by it: let me ſee if
ſuch an one can be found; onely one excepted. Ieſus Chriſt
God and man. The Scripture and worde of God flatly condemneth
all of vs of ſinne,Gal. 3. 22. and therefore can we challenge no
right nor intereſt in heauen by our deedes,Rom. 3. 23. becauſe we haue not
done all:1. Ioh. 1. 8. but rather our intereſt for our deeds is of right in hell,
becauſe we haue broken ſome one,1. Reg. 8. 40. yea all,Prov. 20. 9. and all againe euen
the beſt of vs all. VVe muſt not then ſeeke to claime heauen by
our deeds, but we muſt be carefull howe to be deliuered from
hell, which we haue deſerued by our deeds. Thus you ſee then
it will not auaile to alleadge one or two good deedes before
God, no nor twentie thouſand, vnleſſe thou bring the full performance
of the deedes of the whole lawe: for God promiſeth
not life but to the performance of the whole: our good deedes
will not ſerue vs then to ſet againſt our euill for payment before
God, ſeeing one of our euill deedes, euen the leaſt which

we doe or thinke, condemneth vs to hell. We can not ſeeke
life then in our workes, becauſe we are not able to performe
all,Gal. 3. 20. and neuer offend: and that is that the Apoſtle ſo often ſaith,
That by the deedes of the Law,Rom. 7. 4. & 3. 20. & 4. 15. no man can be ſaued: that the
law worketh death, bringeth the knowledge of ſinne, worketh
wrath, can not giue life, &c. becauſe we doe not fulfill it. This
wil then ſeeme for no anſwer before God,Gal. 3. 20. to ſay I haue ſinned,
but I haue done ſo many good deedes for the recompence
thereof:Rom. 6. 23. for he anſwereth out of his owne worde, that the reward
of ſinne, is death, and he will take no other recompence,
but that which he himſelfe hath ſet downe, and therefore we
muſt looke that that may be carefully ſought. Thus then, good
brethren, in viewing the true and right debt which we owe to
God for our ſinne, it bringeth to nought all forged debts of
mans braine: for ſeeing the curſe of God, euerlaſting death
and damnation, is the iuſt puniſhment which God hath ſet
downe for our ſinnes, and all our faſtings, maſſes, pilgrimages,
pardons, ſcourgings, mans-merits, wilfull pouertie, watchings,
prayers, almes deedes, purgatories, will not ſerue to recompence
God, becauſe the puniſhment is farre greater then all
theſe, and a thouſand ſuch like: And yet herein, good brethren,
I would not haue you take me, as though I did ſpeake againſt
faſting, praying, and almes deedes doing, I doe not meane ſo;
the word of God ſtraightly chargeth vs both to faſt, pray, and
exerciſe our ſelues not onely in almes deedes doing, but alſo
in all other kinde of well doing, and the Lord knoweth we are
too ſlacke in ſuch matters (but I ſhall haue occaſion to handle
thoſe matters hereafter, God willing:) my meaning nowe, I
ſay, is not to ſpeake againſt faſting, prayer, and other good
deedes, for the word of God commandeth them to be done:
but here onely I tell you out of the word of God, that theſe and
all the good deedes that ye doe, can ſerue for no part of the leaſt
recompence to God for one of your leaſt ſinnes: for the leaſt
deſerueth euerlaſting death. You ſee then it is a greater matter
to ſatisfie God, thē to bring in a companie of good deeds,
ſeeing our leaſt euill deede hath the threat of Gods euerlaſting
curſe: that debt muſt be ſatisfied, or elſe the Lord our God

will neuer be ſatisfied. The Lord will not accept our owne
forged debts, but he will haue the true debt anſwered: this is
a great matter, and deepely to be wayed, good brethren, that
wee may vnderſtande the depth of our ſaluation to be more
waightie, then it is generally accounted. This maketh men ſo
careles of their ſaluation, as common they are, becauſe they
dreame the price of ſinne to be ſo vile, that a certaine pining of
the bodie will ſatisfie God for it, or that a little holy-water
will waſh it away, or certaine deeds doing, or certaine praiers
ſaid, will pleaſe God for it: they doe not way that the debt for
ſinne is Gods curſe and condemnation. And ſurely nowe in
theſe our daies in the time of ſo great light of the goſpell, the
people are maruelouſly ignorant of their ſaluation: generally
they know no other way to be ſaued, but by their good deeds,
and yet they be void of them too (God knoweth) and hereof
commeth that common ſaying, framed in the time of darkenes,
and continued ſtill among vs, that we muſt carie nothing with
vs but our good deedes and our bad; and where is Chriſt Ieſus
then?Eph. 3. If he be not in our hearts, we ſhall neuer come to life eternall:
if we haue Chriſt, we haue life and all: if we haue not
Chriſt, all our good deeds and bad deeds we carie with vs, ſhall
nothing auaile vs, but throw vs downe to hell. This will not
then ſerue before our God, to bring in our good deeds for recompence
of the debt we owe, which is the very wrath of God:
we muſt then yet looke further, what we haue to ſay for our
ſelues, and lay in for anſwer of the matter. VVe goe on yet further,
and will acknowledge our ſelues ſinners, and all that hath
beene ſaid before, that the puniſhment of ſinne is euerlaſting
death, and that nothing that we can doe is able to recompence
or ſatisfie God for it; but yet we haue our ſtarting holes, & windings
whereby we can winde and wring our ſelues iollily out
of the matter, that we may more ſafely lye and continue ſtill
in our moſt ſenſeles ſecuritie and wilfull wretchednes and
blockiſhnes. VVe flatter and ſoothe vp your ſelues with the
mercies of God, and becauſe we heare that the Lord God is
mercifull, we ſleepe in the matter, & neuer go about to ſee his

iuſtice anſwered, but content our ſelues with theſe vaine gloſes,
that he is a merciful God, and therefore we will neuer trouble
our ſelues about the matter to ſee our ſinne anſwered: for
why? God is mercifull, we ſhal do wel ynough with him. Yea,
but is not God alſo a iuſt God?Rom. 3. 4. is he not alſo a true God? is he
not an hater of ſinne?Ioh. 3. 33. is he not a ſincere and grieuous puniſher
of ſinne? VVilt thou make the Lord ſo mercifull a God that
he ſhall not be alſo iuſt? wilt thou make him ſo mercifull, that
he ſhall not be alſo true? ſhall God become ſo mercifull to
forgiue thy ſinnes, that he ſhall not be alſo iuſt to punniſh thy
ſinnes? wilt thou haue him ſo merciful, to paſſe ouer thy ſinnes,
that he ſhall not be alſo true to execute to execute that, which
he hath appointed for the rewarde of thy ſinnes? The Lorde
hath appointed for all ſinnes, yea for the leaſt breach of his
commaundements, (as hath beene prooued before) eternall
death.
                  
                     •
                  al. 3. 10. Is God falſe and vntrue when he ſaith, Curſed is euery
one, which doth not abide, and fulfill all that is written in
the booke of the Lawe: is not this ſentence true? wilt thou
haue God in forgiuing thy ſinnes goe backe with his worde
here, and play as men play, ſay and vnſay, one thing to day
and an other thing to morrow? and wilt thou haue the Lorde
of truth in forgiuing thy ſinnes to forget all truth, as he ſhall
not looke vnto the execution of the curſe vpon thy ſinnes, appointed
by the euerlaſting truth? It will not auaile thee to alledge
Gods mercie to forgiue thy ſinnes, vnleſſe thou ſeeke alſo
the ſatisfying of Gods truth and iuſtice which puniſheth thy
ſinnes. The Lord God can not of his iuſtice and truth, but he
muſt needes puniſh all ſinnes of all men with his heauie curſe,
which he hath appointed for all ſinne in all men, as he is alſo
a mercifull God notwithſtanding when he hath appointed a
meane to ſaue from this curſe all thoſe that be his, God cannot
then goe backe with that which he hath ſpoken, becauſe he is
the truth that can not lie: he muſt therefore needes vnleſſe he
ſhould denie him ſelfe, puniſh thy ſinne with euerlaſting curſe,
becauſe he hath ſo ſpoken, that both meant it, and can not goe
from it, but muſt needes execute it. If thou ſay; yea but he is

mercifull, and therefore I truſt he will not: it is anſwered, he
is iuſt and true, and therefore hee muſt and will. Let vs ſee
now vvhat all the vvranglers vpon the earth can ſay to it, in
bringing in all their brabbles againſt God to impeach Gods
cleare iuſtice and truth, to eſtabliſh their fleſhly mercie, ſuch
a mercy in God as they dreame, that doeth uphold their carnall
ſecuritie and beaſtly pleaſures. Nay, nay, they ſhall finde
him a God of iuſtice, a ſevere reuenger of all ſuch contempt, a
ſharpe iudge againſt all ſuch worldly heartes, that vnder pretence
of Gods mercy ſet them dovvne in all ſinne and filthineſſe,
never ſeeking for the remedie hereof in this time of mercie,
they ſhall finde it I warrant you too true. The Lorde God
giue vs hearts and mindes to thinke upon it while we are here,
for all ſuch gloſes can not prevaile againſt God in the day of
the Lord. True it is, that the Lord is a mercifull God, a God of
all mercies,2. Cor. 1. 3. yea ſo mercifull that all his vvorkes are iudged
with his mercies,Pſal. 145. 
                     •
                  . & 86. 
                     •
                  5. yea even unto thoſe that he doth of his iuſtice
condemne. They can not deny, euen the damned caytiffes
can not denie, but that the mercies of God haue bene
powred upon them aboundantly, yea a thouſand thouſand
fold: it is Gods mercie that maketh the comfortable ſunne to
ſhine vpon them, that maketh his ſweete ſhowres to water
their groundes, that maketh their land fruitfull, that giueth
them eyes to looke vpon the light▪ eares to heare, feete to
walke, to take the profite and benefite of all Gods bleſſings:
theſe ſingular mercies and a thouſand more, it can not be
denyed but God ſhevveth vpon the vvicked and damned
creatures, as vvell as vpon his ovvne children, but they
like carnall ſvvine doe abuſe them every one of them: they
vvill not giue their eares to heare the vvorde of life, they
vvill not giue their heartes to take pleaſure in it, they vvill
not vſe their feete to ſeeke after life, they caſt of all theſe
heauenly mercies of God, and abuſe Gods benefites to
deuiliſh uſes, there eares are open to heare vvickedneſſe,
vanitie, and filthineſſe, their tongue looſe to ſpeake lyes,
abomination and naughtineſſe, their feete ſvvift to ſhedde

innocent blood, and all other the great mercies of God
doe they horribly abuſe to their utter condemnation, ſo that
they can haue no iuſt cauſe to wrangle againſt God, but
muſt needes acknowledge their condemnation to be moſt
iuſt, hauing taſted ſo many of Gods mercies, and utterly
abuſed them. So then this their wrangling ſhifte of Gods
mercie will helpe them not a vvhit in that day of iudgement,
but rather increaſe their damnation; and let vs that be the
children of God here alſo be admoniſhed that it will not availe
vs to alledge Gods mercy for vs, unleſſe we can alſo as
vvell alledge hovv his iuſtice and trueth is ſatisfied. And
this muſt now be looked for, vvhile vvee are here, God giveth
vs our life to this ende: vvee muſt ſeeke for it more
earneſtly a thouſand folde, then for our bodily life, as ye
often haue heard. Let vs not flatter our ſelues with theſe
ſpeeches, God is mercifull, God is mercifull, and therefore
vvill forgiue vs our ſinnes, but alſo let vs acknowledge
that God is iuſt and true, and therefore muſt puniſh our ſinne
euen vvith that ſame puniſhment, that hee him-ſelfe hath
appointed: and let vs be carefull novv to ſeeke out how and
by what meanes this ſame iuſtice and truth of God in puniſhing
our ſinne may be anſwered, that vve may be ſaved.
Well then, becauſe God is true, which hath appointed euery
of our ſinnes to be puniſhed with damnation, and therefore
vvill haue it ſo, vve muſt therfore ſeeke hovv this ſame
may be vndergone and ouercome. Are vvee able to take
this heavie curſe vpon vs, and make an ende of it? It is endleſſe,
the vvorme that never dieth, the fire that can not be
quenched.Mark. 9. 44. The moſt higheſt, that euer were, are, or euer
ſhall be of the poſteritie of old Adam muſt needs ſhrink
vnder this burden,Matt. 25. 40. no fleſh is able to ſuſtaine and ouercome
it: the damned ſoules indeede doe feele the waight of it, &
ſhall both in ſoule and body feele the full meaſure of it after
the laſt iudgement, but they ſhall neuer be able to ouercome
it, they ſhall alwaies be dying and neuer die, they
can not make an ende of it, they can not ouercome it. Let all

fleſh ſtoope then vnder the heauy iudgement of God vpon
ſinne, let us pull downe our loftie creſtes, which we ſo proudly
ſet up, & let us learne at length to humble our ſelues under the
hand of our God, and ſeeke otherwhere then in our ſelues the
diſcharge of this heauie burthen of our ſinnes, which ſo preſſeth
dovvne all the poſteritie of Adam, that the holieſt quaile
vnder it. It is time for vs to looke to it, and high time: yee ſee
vvhat is laide againſt vs in this high court, whereunto we are
ſummoned, euen matters of high treaſon againſt the king of
glory, wee can not deny it, the matter is ſo euidently prooved
againſt vs by Gods ovvne mouth in his word, and therfore guiltie
of the forfeiture of our hold and intereſt of euerlaſting life,
and to be puniſhed with everlaſting death, as a iuſt recompenſe
for our treaſon & rebellion againſt our God. No other
forged recompences of our ovvne fancy will be receiued, no
preſence of Gods mercy will colour the matter againſt Gods
truth and iuſtice. What ſhall we doe now? we in our ſelues
cannot indure and ouercome that ſame puniſhment of our
rebellion▪ ſhall we ſtand to it, and ſticke by it, to take the debt
vpon vs? then we utterly periſh: and if we bring any other
debt but that, it will not ſerue; ſo that both that debt, & no other
forged debt muſt be anſwered, and we alſo are not able to
pay it. What ſhall we doe in this caſe? Iuſtice muſt proceede,
the law muſt haue his courſe: if it were a vvorldly matter we
could deuiſe ſhiftes for it, to ſaue vs from the Iayle: vvhen
the matter is fully concluded againſt vs, that the debt muſt
needes be anſwered, and wee not finde our ſelues able to diſcharge
it, our laſt refuge is to trie our friends, and trie if vvee
can finde any of abilitie, that can and will pay it for vs, and
if wee haue founde out ſuch a one that vvill vndertake the
debt for vs, we are diſcharged: We ſhall ſee, good breethen,
if vve will be conuerſant in the vvorde of God, that the Lorde
God hath beene as carefull for vs in this point, as any of vs
could be carefull for our ſelues in our ovvne vvorldly cauſes: he
hath provided for us a good and truſtie friend, that freely and
frankely hath diſcharged for vs the vvhole debt. We finde in
the word of God that ſame true and truſtie friend, that hath

paid the debt for vs; that although the angels can not helpe
here,1. Ioh. 2. 1. nor the Saintes, nor any other creature in heauen or earth,
the Sonne of God ſteppeth out, and taketh to him that which
pertained to vs and vvas ours, and whatſoeuer Gods iuſtice &
truth doth require on vs, he willingly hath performed it for vs:
vvhatſoeuer is due for our ſinnes, he hath willingly taken it vpon
him, and diſcharged it: and becauſe he could not taſt of the
puniſhment of mans ſinne, vnleſſe he had bene man, he tooke
vpon him true fleſh of the virgine,Gal 4. 4. that he might become perfect
man,Heb. 2. 9, 10. & 4. 15. as vve are ſubiect to all infirmities, ſinne onely excepted:1. Tim. 2. 15.
and that he might not only as man ſuſtaine and abide the
puniſhment due to our ſinnes, but alſo (which no man can
do) ouercome and make an end of it, he ioyned his God head
with his manhood, ſo being perfect God and perfect man, hath
fully in our nature paied whatſoeuer the iuſtice of God can lay
againſt vs. What is due to our ſinnes? death: he hath ſuſtained
death.Rom. 8. 3. What is due to our ſinnes? curſe: he became accurſed for
vs, ſuſtaining and abiding the fierce and terrible wrath of
God for our ſinne:Gal. 3. 13. as teſtifieth the Apoſtle: that he deliuered
vs from the curſe of God in that he became accurſed for
vs: for it is written, Curſed is he that hangeth vpon the tree. This
was an apparant proofe vnto vs that hee hath vndergone the
curſe for vs:Matt. 27. 46. and partly he giueth vs to vnderſtand the heauines
of it, vvhen he mightily crieth vnto his father, My God, my
God, why haſt thou forſaken me? He felt the taſt of abiection to
be caſt off from God,Eſa. 59. 2. for that ſame is a part of the curſe of God
which is due to our ſinnes, according as the holy ghoſt ſaieth,
that our ſinnes do ſeparate vs from God: vve deſerve then to be
caſt off from God,Luc. 23. 46. and this ſame ſharpe abiection did Chriſt
ſuſtaine and yet ouercame it: for although he cryed neuer ſo
lovvd as forſaken of God:1. Cor. 4. yet he willingly yeeldeth his ſoule
into the hands of his Father:Eph. 1. 20. 
               Father, into thine hands I commit
my ſpirit. And although he ſuffered death, yet by ſuffering he
ouercame death, and roſe vp from death, and is aſcended vp
into heauen, aboue al power and principalities of things in heauen,
in earth, or in hell. Here then you ſee Ieſus Chriſt the

Sonne of God, taking vpon him our nature hath borne and
ouercome for vs whatſoeuer God of his iuſtice and truth can
lay againſt vs. And here behold the depth of the miſterie of
Gods eternall wiſdome, his mercy and his iuſtice ioyned togither:
his mercy in forgiuing our ſinnes, his iuſtice in puniſhing
our ſinnes: his iuſtice that would not ſuffer one of our ſins unpuniſhed,
but euen with his heavy curſe doth reward them: &
yet his mercy toward his elect, that he doth not puniſh their
ſinnes in themſelves, but layeth them all vpon the ſhoulders
of his owne deare ſonne for vs. Here behold the wonderfull
wiſdom of God, who in ſaving of his children, yet omitteth no
part of his iuſtice, but puniſheth their ſinne euen to the ful with
that ſelf ſame puniſhment which he himſelfe hath appointed:
& this which he hath ſuffered is a full recompenſe for all our
ſinnes, according as the holy ghoſt alledgeth, If any man ſin,
wee haue an advocate with the Father,1. Ioh. 2. 1, 2. euen Ieſus Chriſt the
righteous, and he is the propitiation or ranſome for our ſins, ſo
much as is ſufficient, & well pleaſing the Lord our God, it is a
ſweet ſmelling ſacrifice before our God.Eph. 5. 2. This then is ſufficient
for the ſinnes of the whole world. But here yet ariſeth a doubt,
for ſeeing Ieſus Chriſt hath ſuſtained and borne the puniſhmēt
of our ſinnes, ſo much as the ſinnes of the whole world deſerueth,
it ſhould ſeeme then that all the world ſhould be ſaued:
but we ſee the cleane contrary,Matth. 7. 13. even by the teſtimony of Ieſus
Chriſt himſelfe, who ſaith, that many runne to damnation,
and fewe in compariſon to ſaluation. How can this be then
that Chriſt hath ſatisfied the puniſhment of all our ſinnes?
True it is that Ieſus Chriſt hath borne whatſoeuer is due for all
our ſinnes, & that which hee hath borne is alſo ſufficient puniſhment
for all the ſinnes of the earth, and yet as true it is alſo
that a great number are damned notwithſtanding, and that
becauſe they haue not the hand of faith to take ſome part of
this recompence for their ſinnes. For the bleſſed word of God,
which ſetteth forth vnto vs Ieſus Chriſt a full ranſome of our
ſinnes, doth alſo giue vs to vnderſtand, that none are benefited
to ſaluation, ſauing only thoſe, vvhich do beleeue. So God loved
the world,Io
                     •
                  . 3. 16. 18. that he gaue his onely begotten ſonne, to the

end that all that beleeue in him ſhould not periſh, but haue euerlaſting
life: he ſaith not, all the world; but, all that beleeue:
he ſaith on the contrariwiſe, whoſoeuer doth not beleeue is dā
               ned:Verſ. 18. 36.
looke now, none are ſaued, ſaue only thoſe which doe
beleeue in Chriſt: if we do not beleeue, the word of God ſaith,
we are condemned: ye ſee then although Chriſt hath ſuffered
for ſinne, yet vnleſſe we beleeue, we can not be ſaved. But yet
here ariſeth another doubt, which might ſeeme to bring with
it alſo a liberty to ſinne, for it ſhould ſeeme, if all are ſaued that
beleeue in Chriſt, then all England, France, Ireland, Spaine, Italy,
and all Europe ſhalbe ſaued; & none ſhould be damned,
but the Turke, Iewe, & ſuch other as denie Chriſt: for all Europe
doe beleeue in Chriſt, & acknowledge Chriſt, whether
they be papiſts or proteſtants, none doeth deny Chriſt: all beleeue
that Chriſt is God, the ſonne of God, borne of the virgine
& ſo forth, therfore it ſhould ſeeme that none of thoſe ſhould
be damned, for they all beleeue. True it is, I graunt, all theſe do
beleeue, & ſo do the deuils too & yet are damned. They do beleeue
& confes as faſt as the beſt of them all,Mat. 8. 29. that Chriſt is God,
ſonne of the living God,Mark 5. 7. we know whō thou art (ſay they) euen
Chriſt the ſonne of the higheſt God: yea they beleeue he ſhal
come to iudgemēt,Iam. 2. 19. art thou come to tormēt vs before the time?
to be ſhort, there is no article of our faith but they know it as
wel as we, & beleeue it to be true, & yet notwithſtanding they
do nothing but tremble, & ſhake, & muſt utterly be damned.
The whole company of them that beare the name of Chriſt, &
are called Chriſtians do beleeue, that Chriſt is God▪ ſo doe the
diuels. They beleeue that Chriſt is the ſonne of God, ſo doe the
diuels: They beleeue that Chriſt was borne of the virgine, ſuffered
vnder Pontius Pilat, was crucified for mans ſin, roſe again,
aſcended into heauen, & ſhall come againe at the latter day,
all this do the divels beleeue, & yet are damned: ſeeing thē the
word of God ſetteth down vnto vs two kinds of faith or beleeving
in Chriſt, the one, ſuch as the diuels & wicked mēbers of
Satan haue to damnation: the other, ſuch as the childrē of god
haue to ſaluation, we muſt therefore be very carefull to ſeeke
out that true & ſound faith of Gods people, leſt we flatter our

ſelues, & thinke we beleeue wel enough, when we haue no other
beleefe, then the very deuils in hell haue: we muſt be therfore
very carefull to know in what points the deuils faith doeth
differ frō the ſound faith of Gods people. Firſt of all the diuels
although they beleeue that all that Ieſus Chriſt did was truely
done, yet they do not beleeue that he did it for them: although
they can acknowledge & confeſſe all the articles of our faith,
yet they can not apply them unto thēſelves: although they can
beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt is God, & ſoone of God, & hath paid
the puniſhment of mans ſinne, yet they can not beleeue that
he hath done this for them, they can not beleeue that he hath
paid the puniſhment for their ſins, they can not beleeue that,
for they haue not aſſurance therof out of the word of God: nay
they know the clean contrary,Hebr. 2. 16. that Chriſt came not to ſaue thē:
for the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes writeth, that Chriſt tooke not
vpon him the nature of ſpirits & angels to ranſome them, but
the nature of man: therfore although the deuills can ſay neuer
ſo faſt, we beleeue that Chriſt hath paid the puniſhmēt of mās
ſinnes, yet they muſt needs withall ſay, acknowledge, and beleeue,
he hath paid the puniſhment of mans ſinnes, but not for
ours, & therfore we looke & beleeue to be tormented. This is
then the moſt chiefe and principall point in our beleefe, that is,
that we beleeue whatſoeuer Chriſt hath done for the ſaluation
of man, pertaineth to vs our ſelves as well as unto others: we
muſt beleeue euery one of us that wilbe ſaued, that the ranſome
which Chriſt hath performed is euen the ranſom of our ſins,
yea every one of vs particularly muſt apply it unto himſelfe, &
ſay, I beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt did ſuffer to pay the puniſhmēt
of theſe my ſins, I beleeue that he hath purchaſed euerlaſting
life euen for me as well as for others. Otherwiſe if we beleeue
neuer ſo much that Chriſt hath ſuffered for the ranſome of others,
& not for us our ſelues, it is no faith, but a deuils faith, ſuch
as makes us tremble before our God. For alas, what would it
availe me if I could neuer ſo much beleeue, that Chriſt had ranſomed
other mens ſins, & in the mean time could not beleeue
that he had ranſomed my ſins? I beleeue indeed, he hath purchaſed
life for others, his elect, but alas not for me. I muſt looke for

nothing but hell, what, I ſay, could all this beleefe helpe me?
Alas nothing, but make me looke for Gods dreadfull vengeance,
and therefore euery houre tremble and ſhake. So could
that miſerable poore caytiffe Francis Speyra acknowledge &
confeſſe, when they brought out of the word of God that
Chriſt was the Saviour of the worlde, the ranſome of mens
ſinnes, that by his death he had pacified Gods wrath, that hee
had purchaſed everlaſting life for vs, & ſo forth: all this is true,
ſaith he, I beleeue it as well as you, but all this pertaineth nothing
to me, he hath done this, ſaith he, for his people, not for
me. I beleeue, ſaith he, that he ſuffered the puniſhment of the
ſinnes of his people, not for my ſinnes, I looke for nothing but
extreme horror, vvhich I do already taſt of. For this cauſe doth
the worde of God ſet forth unto us Ieſus Chriſt to be ours, not
onely other mens,1. Cor. 1. 30. but our ovvne. Chriſt is become our righteouſneſſe,
our iuſtification, our ſanctification, our redemption:Rom. 8. 15.
and for this ende is the holy ſpirit of God ſent into our
hearts, that we might cheerfully beleeue God to be our Father:
hee beareth recorde to our ſpirits, that we are the children
of God, not onely others, but that we our ſelues are the
children of God. And this our true faith doeth not onely let vs
ſee Chriſt a farre off to appertaine vnto others,Eph. 3. 17. but bringeth
him to vs, and maketh him ours, euen to dwell in vs, euen in
our hearts, not onely in others, but in vs, yea in our heartes.
The promiſes of God which be in generall to his people the
particular faith of every one applyeth them to himſelfe, and
maketh him ſay, I am fully aſſured, that neither life nor death,
principalities nor powers,Rom. 8. 38. neither things preſent nor things to
come, neither height nor depth, nor any other creature can
ſeparate vs from the loue of God, vvhich is in Chriſt Ieſus
our Lorde. And for the confirmation of this in vs, be the
Sacraments ordained to be applyed to euery one particularly,
not only to be deliuered to others, but alſo to euery one of vs to
be partakers of thē, that we might be more certenly perſwaded,
that the benefits of Chriſts paſſion wrought for the ſaluatiō of
his flock in common pertaineth euen to euery one of vs particularly,
as certenly as we be partakers of the outward ſeales &

pledges of them. This is then the chiefeſt point in a ſound beliefe,
wherein it differeth from the deuils beliefe, to applie
whatſoeuer Chriſt hath done to our ſelues, not onely to other
men: this is a ſpeciall point, and pertaineth to the true faith of
the children of God. The deuils can not beleeue that Chriſt
is theirs: peraduenture they may ſay Chriſt, Chriſt, and Lord,
Lord, but they can not beleeue in their heart that Ieſus Chriſt
is theirs with his death and paſſion; and that is alſo another
point in true and ſound faith, that is, not onely to ſay with the
tongue notably and finely, that I beleeue that Chriſt is mine,
and dyed for me, &c. (for ſo can the deuils and damned creatures
ſay, and yet lye impudently) but it is to beleeue, and inwardly
to be perſwaded thereof in the heart, which no diuell
nor damned creature can doe, but rather they feele the horror
of Gods iudgements in full meaſure in their hearts and conſciences.
True and ſound faith of Gods children is not then a
whirling knowledge and ſpeculation of the braine, but it is an
inward feeling of the heart: for a great number haue a knowledge
what they ſhould beleeue, and yet not an heart to beleeue:
yea further, not onely a knowledge what they ought to
beleeue, but alſo be able notably to ſet out the matter, to teach
others how they ſhould truly and rightly beleeue, and yet they
themſelues damned creatures, members of Satan, and firebrands
of hell,Mat 6. 10. 1. as the miſerable caytiffe Iudas, who with the
reſt of the twelue went and preached the Goſpel of the kingdome,
and ſealed it with miracles in Chriſt name, and as Chriſt
Ieſus teſtifieth of many that not onely know to ſay Lord, Lord,
but alſo had knowledge to teach others, and propheſie and
preach in his name, and yet Ieſus Chriſt refuſeth them to be
his. Let vs then, good brethren, looke well to our ſelues, and
content not our ſelues with a vaine babbling tongue-faith,
that will not ſerue in the day of the Lord, it muſt be an heart-faith:
let vs looke whether we feele Ieſus Chriſt there or not.
Therefore ſaith the holy Ghoſt,Eph. 3. 17. that this true faith maketh
Chriſt Ieſus dwell not in worldly brauerie in our tongues, but
in our hearts, in our hearts: in our hearts, good brethren, in our
hearts. It is too too lamentable to ſee how the world is bewitched

with this tongue faith, with this carnal goſpelling-faith:
it is an horrible abuſe of Ieſus Chriſts goſpell, we ſhall dearely
abide at his hands, vnles we ſpeedily repēt: it is euident ynough
that Ieſus Chriſt dwelleth not in that inward heart, where the
deuill apparantly ſheweth his hornes (as they ſay) in the outward
deeds▪ there is not Ieſus Chriſt in that heart, but the whol
power of Satan, and therefore no children of Gods faith in that
heart, but a deuils faith. Let vs not deceiue our ſelues, good brethren,
a true and a ſound faith admitteth Chriſt with further entrance
into vs, then our tōgues, & lodgeth him into our hearts:
I can not enter into your conſciences, but there is a Lord Ieſus
that ſeeth them: onely I deſire you in the name of God, to enter
euery man into his owne heart, and examine himſelfe diligently
whether he beleeueth that Chriſt hath redeemed him
& ranſomed, or not, whether he beleeue that Chriſt Ieſus hath
purchaſed euerlaſting life for him, or not; Let him examine him
ſelfe throughly whether he beleeue it in his heart, now while
it is the time of mercie: for once we muſt come to iudgement,
and ſo let him reſt himſelfe in the Lord Ieſus with full aſſurance
of euerlaſting life, not miſtruſting our good and gracious God,
nor doubting of his good will towards him:Iam. 1. 6. for he that doubteth
is like the waues of the ſea, that be toſſed to and fro: ſuch
wauering is farre from the certentie that true faith bringeth vnto
our conſciences,Rom. 5. 1. whereby beeing iuſtified by faith, we haue
peace with god.Eph. 3. 12. For this true & ſincere faith maketh vs to haue
entrance vnto our God with boldnes, ſo that it is far from the
wauering vncertenty of the wicked vnbeleeuers, & yet the deareſt
children of God, euen the moſt faithfull, haue often maruelous
aſſaults to ſhake their faith, & oftentimes feele thēſelues almoſt
deadly woūded, as though they were almoſt paſt al hope,
but yet their faith getteth the victorie in the ende. At that ſtay
was the Prophet,Pſal. 77. 3. when he ſaid to himſelfe, Hath the Lord forgotten
to be mercifull? is his mercie cleane gone? but yet they vſe to
ſtriue and ſtirre vp themſelues by calling vpon God and tarying
Gods leaſure:& 42. 
               Why art thou vexed, o my ſoule? (ſaith Dauid)
why art thou ſo troubled within me? &c. So that although the
children of God be oftentimes maruelouſly aſſaulted with diſtruſt

and doubtings of their ſaluation, yet they ſtriue againſt
them,Phil 5. 6. & at Gods appointed time & leaſure, they feele the peace
of God which paſſeth all vnderſtanding. Thus farre ye ſee then
the full anſwer of our cauſe and matter of our ſaluation before
the iudgement ſeat of God, againſt Satan, ſinne, deuill, death,
and hell, that we that be the people of God doe fully beleeue,
not onely ſay with our tongue, but beleeue aſſuredly in our
heart, that Ieſus Chriſt hath ſatisfied whatſoeuer Gods iuſtice
doth require for our ſinnes not onely for other mens ſinnes, but
euen for our ſinnes, whereby we feele our ſelues at peace with
God, reconciled by the death of his Sonne, & brought into an
aſſured hope of euerlaſting life: thus far haue we heard taught,
and now yet further leaſt any carnall wretch ſhould thereby
take libertie to ſin, ſaying within his heart, If there be nothing
but this, that whoſoeuer beleeueth ſhalbe ſaued, then I care not
what I doe, I wil continue in my ſinne, & then I wil beleeue to
be ſaued, & I ſhalbe ſaued, I can beleeue when I liſt: the word
of God to anſwer all ſuch filthie ſinne, doth teſtifie vnto vs, that
this true & liuely faith of Gods people to ſaluation, is not in the
power of man, to beleeue when he liſt, but it is onely the worke
of God:Matt. 16. 17. 
               Fleſh and bloode, ſaith Ieſus Chriſt, hath not reuealed this
vnto thee, but euen my heauenly father which is in heauen: it was
the Lord which touched the heart of Lydia to beleeue the doctrine
of ſaluation preached by Paul:Act. 16. 14. 
               It is the Spirit of God that
beareth record to our ſpirits,
               Rom. 8. 15. 
               that we are the children of God, and
heyres of euerlaſting life: all the men of the earth if they would
come, & beare record with vs in the day of iudgement, that we
are ſaued, can not preuaile, vnles God be witnes vnto our hearts
& conſciences: no if all the men of the earth ſhould but ſpeake
to a pore ſoule in this life, & ſay, I warrant thee man, my ſoule
for thy ſoule, thou ſhalt be ſaued, vnles God touch his heart &
perſwade it, their warrants be nothing. Alas what can the witnes
of the whole worlde preuaile, when the Lord is witnes in
the heart of the pore man againſt himſelfe. So could Franciſcus
Speyra cry out to thē that perſwaded him to beleeue aſſuredly
that Ieſus Chriſt hath ſaued him, I would, ſaid he, I would beleeue,
but I cannot: faith is Gods gift: all the worlde can

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
not giue it me: you fare with me, ſaith he, as if one were faſt tyed
with chaines, and the paſſers by bid him come out and looſe
himſelfe, but they can not helpe him, neither can he help himſelfe,
although he would neuer ſo much: euen ſo, ſaith he, ye
pitie my caſe, and bid me beleeue in Chriſt; I would doe ſo, but
I can not, for it is Gods gift, and I haue denied him before
men, and therefore he hath denied me, and wil not giue me an
heart to beleeue. Let al the skoffers vpon the earth that think
it ſo ſmall a matter to haue a true faith in Chriſt, and therefore
take libertie to ſinne freely, let all the packe of thembe taught,
if they will be taught, by this horrible iudgement of God, that
they can not beleeue, vnleſſe it be a ſpeciall and mightie working
of God: and let vs (good brethren) let vs hereby be admoniſhed
and all the deare children of God with vs, to ſeeke
the Lord now while he may be found: and let vs in this good
time of mercie that he giueth vs, enter deepely into our ſelues,
and examine it to the full, whither we haue this faith or no, in
this full aſſurance that we be ſaued: if we haue it not, let vs neuer
reſt knocking, asking, and ſeeking at Gods hand till he giue
it vs: we ſhall ſurely haue it, if we aske, for he promiſeth that
neuer deceiueth any,Math. 7. 7, 8. Aske and ye ſhall haue, ſeeke and ye ſhal
finde, knocke and it ſhalbe opened vnto you. Can a father denie
his childe any good thing, if he haue it? this is a good thing,
and our God hath it in ſtore, he will neuer then denie it vs.
Thus then ye ſee it is a greater thing to haue faith, then a great
number of men make account of, it is the onely worke of God,
and a rare worke of God which he beſtoweth vpon his children
onely: men may haue peraduenture a certaine fleſhly perſwaſion,
and ſome carnall opinion of their ſaluation, which
peraduenture may ſeeme vnto them, while all things be quiet
and no diſtreſſe of conſcience, to be maruelous ſtrong; but alas,
becauſe it is not from the ſpirite of God, but onely a fleſhly
brauerie, as ſoone as God doth but touch them, it vaniſheth away
as ſmoake: as that carnal brag of Peter, which was at the
very looke of a litle damſell cleane daunted. So all the worldly
perſwaſions of men, which for a time keepe them in very great
ſecuritie, muſt needs fall before the iudgement ſeate of God:

there can nothing ſtand againſt the deuil, death, hel, ſinne, &
Satā, but onely that which proceedeth from him, who hath ouercome
hel, death, ſinne, Satā. It may be that for a time it may
be couered as it were a ſparkle of fire in aſhes, but gathering
ſtrēgth by gods promiſes, & depēding only vpon him, it paſſeth
through al douts, til at lēgth it getteth victorie. Thus ye ſee thē
the true and liuely faith of Gods children, is not in the power
of any to haue it when he will, it is the ſpeciall gift of God, and
peculiar onely to his people, and therefore can giue no libertie
to ſinne vnto the carnall man, in hope that he can beleeue
when he wil. And yet here on the other ſide we muſt beware of
an other vice tending to the ſame, and yet growing of a contrarie
cauſe. A great number of worldlings and others, which
care neither for God nor deuill, hell nor heauen, ſo they may
liue at eaſe in this world, thoſe, I ſay, hearing that faith whereby
we come to ſaluation, is the onely gift of God, and not in
mans power, theſe iolly fellowes ſet cocke on hoope (as they
ſay) and vtterly caſt away all care of their ſaluation. For ſay
they, ſeeing faith is the gift of God, and not in our owne power,
wherefore ſhould we trouble our ſelues about it? we will
neuer care to ſeeke for it, for if ſo be God will giue it vs, wee
ſhall haue it, though we neuer ſeeke after it, but lie ſnorting in
our beds: and if God will not giue it vs, we can neuer haue it,
therefore we neuer purpoſe to care for the matter, but euen ſit
vs downe, and take our eaſe, and fill our paunch, and if God
will giue it vs, he will giue it vs euen in our greateſt ſecuritie.
But here I aske theſe ſenſeleſſe caytiffs, of whome they haue
their life and beeing, and who doth feede their bodies, and
preſerue their life: they muſt needes confeſſe it to be God that
giueth foode to all liuing creatures: I aske them whether they
will ſit them downe, and neuer neither eate nor drinke, becauſe
it is God that feedeth vs: they ſhould within a little while taſt of
ſuch horrible contempt, and be guiltie of their owne death,
at the hande of that God that gaue them both life, and the
meanes to preſerue their life. For although God doth feede vs,
yet he doth it by the ordinarie meanes of meats and drinkes,
which if they be reiected, the life it ſelfe is reiected. Euen ſo the
Lord our God hath prepared a remedie againſt theſe wranglers

againſt their own ſaluation: for although he onely do giue
faith, whereby we come by ſaluation, yet he plainly in his word
doth ſhew vnto vs a way whereby he giueth it vnto vs, and that
is the preaching of the word,Rom. 10. 17. for ſo he ſaith, Faith commeth by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God: & leaſt we ſhould think
it were a ſufficient means the hearing of the word read, he addeth
& ſaith,verſ. 14. 
               Who cā beleeue without the hearing of the word preached?
by this mean of preaching the word hath the Lord appointed
to giue faith ordinarily, & by no other ordinarie means; For
who, ſaith he, can beleeue without a preacher? & vnles we beleeue,
there is no ſaluatiō, for whoſoeuer beleeueth not is dāned: if this
thē ordinarie means of preaching the word be reiected,Ioh. 3. 18. 36. we reiect
our ſaluation, & ſo are we willingly guiltie of our own dā
               nation:
So then the Lord onely doth giue faith, yea but he giueth
it ordinarily by the preaching of the word. It may pleaſe
him, I graunt, to giue faith otherwiſe, if he ſee it good, but we
haue no warrant out of his word to come by faith, but only by
the preaching of the worde. So it may pleaſe him, if he ſee it
good, to feede vs otherwiſe then by meate & drinke, but if we
refuſe theſe ordinarie meanes of feeding, ſurely we ſhal die, and
be guiltie of our own death.1. Cor. 1. 21. The Lord hath appointed to ſaue
his people by preaching▪ ſo ſaith the Apoſtle: he can ſaue them
otherwiſe if he will, but it pleaſeth him by this meanes to ſaue
them; if this be neglected, our ſaluation is neglected, & whereas
this faileth, the people periſh. Alas, what ſhall we ſay to the
ſtate of this people here in this land? skarſly the twentie pariſh
hath a preacher,Ioh. 3. 36. & can they be ſaued then? Shal we make God
a lyer?Rom. 10. 14. he ſaith, whoſoeuer doth not beleeue, is damned: & none
can beleeue without a preacher; if then we will haue the people
of the Lord to be ſaued, let thē haue preachers: It is a great
bleſſing of God, I graunt, that we haue it as we haue it, for the
Lord knoweth a great number can not ſo haue it: but alas, ſeeing
the Lord giueth vs this mercie and quietnes, that we may
haue further care of it, let vs for Gods loue be carefull for the
ſoules of our brethren, poore ſoules that ſtarue round about
through the lacke of the foode of their ſoules: but alas, I cā not
preach to the whole land, but for the diſcharge of my conſcience,
I deſire you, good brethren, ſo many of you as haue any

voyces in place and parliament where theſe things may be reformed,
conſecrate your tongues to the Lord in the behalfe of
your poore brethren, that ignorant & blind guides which haue
the conducting of Gods people to the great danger of loſſe of
the ſoules both of the leaders and the people, that theſe blinde
guides, I ſay, be remooued, and true preachers placed in their
roomes, that they may labour cherefully to get the Lords harueſt
into his barne, to inlarge Gods kingdome: the Lord
ſhall then bleſſe this land & kingdome, wherein his kingdome
is firſt ſought for:Matth. 6. for ſo he ſaith, Firſt of all ſeeke the kingdome of
God, and then all other things of this earthly life ſhalbe giuen you:
be carefull for this, good brethren, when ye come in parliamēt
where theſe thinges may be prouided for through the whole
land, that Gods people may be taught: In the meane time let
euery one of vs doe what we can by prayer to God, to thruſt
forth labourers into his harueſt let vs beſtow our labours carefully
to ſeeke for them: let vs ſtretch our purſes to relieue them,
then the Lord our God ſhall bleſſe vs with all ſpirituall graces
daily more and more. Alas, let vs remember, good brethren,
that they are in daunger of damnation, vnleſſe they haue the
word preached; the Lord ſaith ſo, let vs not be wiſer then God.
Let thoſe eſpecially that by the gouernement of this Church
haue the prouiding & placing of guides ouer the Lords flock,
let them be carefull that they ſeeke out thoſe onely which be
preachers, otherwiſe, good brethren, the people do periſh, but
they ſhal not ſcape skot-free that were the cauſes: whether it
were the couetous patrone in preſenting, or the negligent Biſhop
in admitting, or the blinde guide in taking vpon him that
waightie charge of leading Gods people. The Lord will haue
the blood of his people anſwered: he will call to an account
both Biſhop, patrone, and blinde guide for the loſſe of the
ſoules of his people. The ſame price of bloode which is taken
by the couetous patrone, wherby the ſoules of Gods people are
bought & ſold, although he laugh in his ſleeue and think himſelfe
in good caſe when he hath purſed his hundreth poundes
for the benefice, yet that ſame price of blood ſhall ſpeak aloud
in the eares of the Lord to his vtter condemnation in the day of
the Lorde. I am not ignorant howe the patrone will ſhift it

off to the Biſhop, and ſay it is the Biſhops charge to looke to its
and that he as patrone hath no more to doe but ſeeke out his
clarke, the Biſhop ſhal anſwer for it, if he admit him & be not
able: & the biſhop on his behalfe can as cunningly ſhift off the
matter from him to the patrone, & ſay, he can not ſtay them, for
the patrone hath preſented them, & if he ſhould not allowe of
them, a Quare impedit would come vpon him, which he purpoſeth
not to beare for none of them al. And the ignorant blind
guide, he hath his letters of orders, inſtitution, & induction, &
hath filled the purſe of the patrone, he thinketh himſelfe as wel
diſcharged as the beſt, no law in England can put him out: &
thus the pore ſheepe of Ieſus Chriſt, which Chriſt hath bought
with his precious blood, they periſh for it, and are deuoured of
Satan. But let thē waſh themſelues as cleane as they will, they
ſhalbe found before the iudgement ſeat of God no more innocent
of the bloode of Chriſts flocke, then was Pilate of the
blood of Chriſt himſelfe: let them ſhift off the matter as faſt as
they can, the people of God periſh by them: I knit them together
all of them in one farthell, & throw them into the pit of hel
as guiltie together of the death of the Lords flock, if they do not
repent this periſhing of all the Lords people. For Ieſus Chriſt
that bought them with ſo deare a price, wil not haue them periſh
of ſo vile a price as they are bought and ſold for. Seeing thē
the people periſh without preaching, it ſtandeth the patrons in
hand, I trow, to preſent, & the Biſhop to admit none but thoſe
which be able to preach, vnleſſe they purpoſe to be guiltie of
the blood of the people that periſh for want of preaching. Neither
ſhal the people that are led by an ignorant guide, & ſo periſh,
be excuſed before God: for although they can alledge for
themſelues, we could not doe withall, he is placed by law, preſented
by the patrone, admitted by the Biſhop, all the lawes in
England can not remooue him, all this wil not ſerue for excuſe
before God: for although there be no law in Englād to diſplace
him for his inſufficiēcy, that by law is placed; yet I anſwer there
is no law in England that forbiddeth thee to place a preacher
beſides, if thou wilt ſtretch thy purſe: I know no law that forbiddeth
prouiding & ſeeking for preachers, vnles it be the law of
our purſe: & if thou ſay, I am but one, the reſt wil not, I can not

maintain him my ſelfe: then, I ſay, if thou can not get preaching
to thee, there is no law in England that forbiddeth thee to go
to it, to tranſport thy dwelling thither, where thou maiſt haue
it: there is no law, I trow, forbiddeth this, vnleſſe, I ſay, the
law of the purſe. And if thou ſay, I can not there be able to
liue: I anſwer thee, firſt ſeeke the kingdome of God, and the
righteouſneſſe thereof, and all other things needfull ſhall be
giuen vnto thee, as ouerplus. So we ſee, there is nothing can
excuſe us before God, vnleſſe we get vs preachers. I know there
be other kind of excuſes, that vve frame unto our ſelues as we
thinke ſufficient to exempt vs from the preaching of the word:
but let vs not deceiue our ſelues, vnleſſe there be preaching, the
people periſh: vnleſſe they haue beleeued, they are damned:
and beleeue can they not without preaching. Away therfore
with all vaine excuſes, which might make vs thinke our ſelues
well enough without preaching, theſe gloſes will not ſerue
before God; the Lord will haue his people taught, there is no
ſhift, otherwiſe we ſhall all of vs anſwer for it, ſo many of vs as
haue our hands ſtained with the blood of them that periſh.
And let all of vs in the feare of this our God fall ſeriouſly to
meditate of this geare, and now at the length begin to make
more diligent and careful preparation for the preaching of the
word then hitherto we haue done, ſeeing it ſo ſtandeth vs in
hand vnder paine of damnation. God may otherwiſe ſaue vs
as I haue told you,1. Cor. 1. 21. if he will, but it hath pleaſed him to let vs
vnderſtand, that he will haue vs ſaued by preaching: if we ſhal
not be carefull and carefull againe to prepare for that meanes
of our ſaluation, ſurely we ſhall declare our ſelues either to be
wiſer then God, eſteeming his heauenly wiſdome but baſe and
fooliſh, or elſe plaine contemners of God in deſpiſing ſo heauenly
and wholſome ordinance. Wherefore (good brethren)
if ye will be ſaued, get you preachers into your pariſhes, that
may inſtruct you in the wayes and meanes of your ſalvation againſt
that day that yee muſt appeare before this iudgement
ſeate: beſtow your labour, coſt, and trauell to get them, ride
for them, runne for them, ſtretch your purſes to maintain them,
we ſhall begin to be rich in the Lord Ieſus, and ſo much riches

alſo of this world we ſhall haue, as our God ſhall make vs contented
withall: and then our ioy ſhall be full in the laſt day,
when we muſt leaue all theſe earthly things, & receiue at the
hands of the Lord Ieſus an heauenly & an euerlaſting crowne.
Thus farre then, good brethren, how we are diſcharged in this
iudgement ſeat from the euerlaſting curſe and condemnation
which euery one of us haue fallen into by breaking Gods cō
               mandements:Gal. 3. 13.
ye haue heard how we are diſcharged from this
puniſhment by Ieſus Chriſt who hath fully taken it upon him
& ouercome it,Ioh. 3. 16. how it is made ours & applied vnto us by faith:Rom. 8. 15.
not ſuch a faith as the deuils haue:Eph. 3. 17. 12. but ſuch as teacheth unto us
all that euer Chriſt did for us,Matt. 16. 17. & maketh Chriſt dwell with us,
not in our tongues but in our hearts,Rom. 8. 15. not in a wauering maner,
but in a true certenty, not by a vaine perſwaſion of the fleſh, by
the liuely witnes of Gods ſpirit: & all this to be deliuered unto
vs by no other ordinary means, but onely by the preaching of
the word. Here is then the full waies & means of our ſaluation
declared unto us to be in Chriſt, & onely in Chriſt, in no worke,
deed, or merit of ours, or any ſaint or angell for us, but in Chriſt
alone, & none other: & herein remaineth our whole comfort
& ioy, which paſſeth all the ioyes of the earth. But I haue yet
one thing more to anſwer, which the deuill might bring into
the head & heart of the carnall goſpeller hereby. What? ſaith
that filthy Epicure, this is ſweete doctrine in deede, now I may
take my pleaſure at will, & liue at luſt in my ſinne, for I beleeue
in Chriſt, & therfore muſt needs be ſaued: it maketh no matter
I will ſin my belly full, for I beleeue that Chriſt hath borne the
burthen of my ſin, & therfore what need I care. I anſwer, theſe
abuſes of Gods mercy, that if there be any ſuch that either
hath ſuch a blaſphemous tongue to ſpeake, or an heart to purpoſe
to ſinne, or one minute of an houre to continue in ſinne,
becauſe he beleeueth that Chriſt hath paid the puniſhment of
his ſinne, if there be any ſuch that thus ſay or purpoſe, I ſay with
the worde of God, that ſuch haue no ſparkle of true faith: for
the word of God ſetteth forth unto vs this true faith, not ſuch
a faith as filleth the heart with ſinne and all uncleanneſſe,
as theſe carnall Epicures ſpeake of,Act. 15. 9. but ſuch a faith as maketh

the heart pure, ſuch a faith as doth not incourage men to ſinne
but ſuch a faith as maketh men to hate their ſinne,Roman. 8. 9. lothe, & abhorre
it;Epheſ. 3. 17. becauſe this true faith of Gods people proceedeth frō
the ſpirit of Chriſt,Rom. 8. 15. & maketh Chriſt dwell in vs by his holy ſpirit,
which ſpirit of Chriſt can neuer dwell in one and the ſame
heart with ſinne & wickednes in ſuch maner, as to be at agreement
with it, to like well of it, & take pleaſure in it, but continually
ſtriveth and ſtruggleth againſt it. And although ſin doe
continually hang on vs, yet this ſpirit of Chriſt dwelling in vs
will not let ſin raigne & rule in vs: therefore ſuch carnall wretches
as ſhall loue ſinne, take pleaſure in their ſinne, doe ſufficiently
declare that they haue no part nor fellowſhip with Gods
ſpirit & conſequently no true & liuely faith. They haue no part
of the ſpirit of Chriſt that ſuffered death for ſinne, but the ſpirit
of Satan the authour of ſin, the ſpirit of the world, the imbracer
of ſin, the ſpirit of the fleſh, the nource of ſinne; for it filleth
the heart with the fruits not of the ſpirite but of the fleſh,Gal. 5. 19. luſt,
whordom, fornication, uncleanneſſe, wantonnes, vanity, filthineſſe,
couetouſnes, extortiō, uſury, oppreſſion, pride, contempt,
diſdain, flattery, diſſimulation, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, malice,
diviſion, drunkennes, gluttony, &c. And I warrant them, let
theſe carnal ſwine, that thus wallow in their ſinne, taking their
full ioy & pleaſure in it, & yet ſay ſtoutly, that they haue a beleefe
that Ieſus Chriſt hath paid the puniſhment of their ſin, let
them, I ſay, enter a litle more deep into their own heart, & they
ſhal find a thing within them that ſhal ſpeak the clean contrary;
euen their own cōſcience doth cry aloud within their breſt,
if they would let it ſpeak, that they beleeue no whit at all of the
diſcharge of their ſin by Chriſt: for then they would not loue &
like wel of their ſin, which was the cauſe of the death of Chriſt.
Is it like they hold any thing of Chriſt, which ioyne hands with
the wicked Iewes to put Chriſt to death? They neuer therfore
haue any true faith in Chriſt, unleſſe they deteſt their own ſin,
which was the cauſe of the death of Chriſt. Therfore this true
& liuely faith of Gods people is ſo farre from making men lie
wallowing in their ſin, that untill ſuch time as they haue it they
neuer haue a perfect hatred of their ſinne: then onely when
wee haue faith, and neuer till then begin we to take pleaſure

in thoſe things,Roman. 6. 4. which are allowed and liked of God. For this
true liuely faith maketh vs new creatures,Epheſ. 4. 25. beareth vs a new, &
maketh vs the children of God,Galat. 3. 20. whereas by nature we are the
children of Gods anger,Ioh. 1. 2. that hee can neither loue vs, nor any
thing that we doe.Epheſ. 2. 3. Then begin our blind hearts to be lightned
to perceiue our ſinne, which before we did not ſee, then beginneth
our hard heart to be ſoftened and effectually touched
with griefe and horrour of our ſinne, which before wee did
like well of: whereas we had a delight in deceit and craft, flatterie
and briberie, now we begin to abhorre it, and to loue
plaine and ſimple dealing, whereas before we were covetous,
hard hearted, vnmercifull, uſurers, oppreſours, now we begin
to hate it, and to ſtudy after pity and compaſſion. The ſelfe
ſame tongue that had a pleaſure to talke of filthineſſe, lying, &
blaſphemie, now is framed a new to hate all curſed ſpeaking,
and hath a delight to ſpeake the truth, and talke of godlineſſe,
and to reprooue wickedneſſe. To be ſhort, when we haue
this true and liuely faith wrought in vs by Gods ſpirit, we are
then framed a new by the ſame ſpirite into an inward lothing
of our ſinne, and continually pricked on forward to ſtriue againſt
our ſinne by true repentance, and not to ſay, we purpoſe
to continue in our ſinne, but to labour continually againſt
our ſinne. Let vs therefore, good brethren, diligently enter into
our ſelves, and examine the thoughts of our hearts, whether
we haue our delights in our craft, ſubtiltie, whordome, fornieation,
vncleanneſſe, and ſuch like: whether wee ſet downe
with our ſelues to abide in it yet a certaine time: and if wee
finde ſuch an vncleane, filthy, and beaſtly heart in our ſelues,
let vs not flatter our ſelues, good brethren, vndoubtedly there
is no true faith in ſuch a heart, but onely a fleſhly and carnall
perſwaſion, there is not the ſpirit of Chriſt, which ouercometh
ſinne and death, & the deuill in vs, & continueth firme, ſteadfaſt,
and ſtrong euen in the great and terrible day of the Lorde,
there is not that ſpirite in vs: but the ſpirit of the world, which
periſheth with the world, the ſpirit of Satan which ſhalbe confounded
with Satan, and the Spirit of the fleſh, which bringeth
forth in vs the workes of the fleſh and darkeneſſe, and

therefore ſhal come to nought with the deeds of the fleſh. Let
all thoſe therefore that haue ſhadowed them ſelues vnder the
name of the goſpell, and ſay they doe beleeue, and ſay they
haue faith, and yet when they come home nearer to themſelves
into their owne boſome, and finde no loue there to the
goſpell, to Chriſt, to holineſſe and righteouſneſſe, but a luſt, liking,
and pleaſure in all their wonted ſinne, let them once for
all be anſwered out of Gods bleſſed worde, that they haue no
portion with the goſpell, that they pertaine not to Chriſt, not
his ſanctification and holineſſe: and let all ſuch as by theſe filthy
beaſts, which pretend the goſpell and yet haue ſuch abominable
heartes and carnall liues, are caried away to miſlike
Chriſtes glorious goſpell, and to forſake the truth therein thorough
theſe carnall profeſſours: let all ſuch as haue bin drawne
away by them, I ſay, be anſwered, that the Sonne of God neuer
taketh ſuch carnall profeſſours for his, that they be no true
goſpellers, that they be none of his members, none of his
faithfull, but meere members of Satan transformed into an
angell of light: and therefore that although they cloake them
ſelues with the name of the goſpell, and can ſay, Lord, Lord,
and Chriſt, Chriſt, that they may more ſafely worke all ſinne
and wickedneſſe to the ſhame of the goſpell & Chriſt, yet in
the great and terrible day, when all muſt yeelde up their accompts,Matt. 28. 41.
he ſhall giue ſentence againſt them, Depart from me
ye curſed caitiffes, workers of iniquitie, I neuer acknowledged
you for mine, depart from me into euerlaſting torments,
to the deuill and his angels, to whome alwaies you appertained,
and whome in heart you ſerued, there ſhalbe weeping &
wailing, and gnaſhing of teeth. Wherefore let vs all humble
our ſelues under the hand of God: abuſe not his goſpell, ſo many
of us as the Lord hath called to taſt of the ſweet cōfort in his
goſpell, let the fruit of it appeare in our life and conuerſation to
the glory of Gods goſpell. For the Lord is a ſeuere reuenger
of the blaſphemie done to his heauenly goſpell, if wee ſhall
ſeeme to profeſſe it, and through our conuerſation cauſe it to
be ill ſpoken of. Wherefore, good brethren, let vs remember
our ſelues,1. Theſſ. 4. 7. that we are called to an holy calling, the Lorde is

holy and loueth holineſſe that hath called vs, we are called to
holineſſe, and not to filthineſſe, let us walke then in holineſſe
and righteouſneſſe all the dayes of our life. Thus then, good
brethren, you haue heard the wayes and meanes of our ſalvation
handled before the iudgement ſeate of God at large, how
we are delivered from ſin, death, hell, and Satan by the meanes
that Ieſus Chriſt in our nature hath ouercome them all for us,
that ſo many as take hold of him by faith ſhould be deliuered
from eternall deſtruction, and haue everlaſting life: ye haue
hearde that this true faith is not to beleeue generally, but to
reach all that Chriſt hath done unto our ſelves, not to ſay with
the tongue wee beleeue, but to feele in the heart, not with a
worldly perſwaſion of the fleſh, but with an inward perſwaſion
of Gods ſpirit, that ſealeth all theſe ſame in our hearts, ordinarily
by the preaching of the worde, whereby we are tranſformed
into the image of Chriſt, and renevved in the inwarde
heart to haue our delight and pleaſure to walke in holineſſe
and righteouſneſſe all the daies of our life: all this we haue
heard, as it hath pleaſed God to giue me wiſdome and knowledge
out of his word to vnderſtand it, and vtterance to deliuer
it. I haue bene peraduenture longer in handling the matter
then ſome would haue wiſhed, to whome theſe principall
groundes of religion are knowen well enough, and peradventure
therewith all looked for more curious ſpeeches in handling
of the matter: but ſuch muſt underſtand, that my purpoſe
is to inſtruct the ignorant in the waies and meanes of
their ſalvation: not to ſpeake to the eares of men, but to the
heartes of men, if I can, that the deuill may be pulled out from
thence, and Ieſus Chriſt planted there. I will neuer ſo abuſe
Gods bleſſed worde to ſatisfie the vaine humour of men, ſo
long as I liue by Gods grace, it is ſufficient for me that I know
Ieſus Chriſt and him crucified. The matter of our ſaluation is
waightie, and ſuch deepe matters can not be paſſed ouer in a
vvorde or tvvo: and the beſt of vs all can neuer learne it too
much, nor heare it too often: it muſt be our comforts, and our
onely ioy in death and after death: it muſt be that vvhich muſt
ſticke by vs vvhen vve muſt ſhake handes with all the world,

and ſay, farevvell father, farevvell mother, farewell my deareſt
friends, farewell my riches, wealth, and vvorldly ioyes, it muſt
then be our only ioy to ſay, vvelcome Chriſt, vvelcome heaven,
welcome euerlaſting ioy. Happy ſhalbe the day, and bleſſed
ſhalbe that houre, when vvee ſhalbe crowned with an euerlaſting
crovvne of glory,Phil. 1. 23. vvhen all teares ſhalbe waſhed
from our eyes. The Lord God for his deare ſonnes ſake graunt
vs to haue heartes and mindes to long after it, and to ſay with
the holy Apoſtle, I deſire to be diſſolued and be with the Lord
Chriſt: and that we effectually thinke upon it, & take our profit
of all this that hath bene taught vs, let vs pray to the Lord our
God, that he will giue his holy ſpirite to write it deepe in our
heartes, and ſeale it in our conſciences, that it may bring forth
fruite in us to the comfort of our conſcience and glorie of our
God. O moſt mercifull God and heauenly Father, &c.
            
               Iohn More.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD SERMON.
            
               Ioh. 13. 34, 35.
               I give you a new commandement, that ye
love one another, as I haue loved you, that you even ſo
love one another: by this ſhall all men know that ye are
my diſciples if ye haue love amongst your ſelves.
            
            
               WE haue heard, good brethren, heretofore
ſufficiently I truſt out of the fifth to
the Corinthians declared unto us, how
we are cleared and diſcharged before
the iudgement ſeat of God, reconciled
unto our good and gratious God, by the
means of his deare ſonne our only Lord
& Saviour Ieſus Chriſt, our only reconciliation
and attonement applied vnto vs by the holy ſpirite of
god, working in our hearts a true & a liuely faith, which taketh
hold of all the righteouſnes, ranſome, & ſatisfaction of Chriſt,
and makes it ours, wherby we are iuſtified and holden as righteous
being clothed with the righteouſnes of Chriſt, & ſo our
conſcience pacified before the throne of Gods glorious maieſtie.
All this, I ſay, we haue ſufficiently heard uttered unto us
out of the bleſſed word of God: & this is the chiefeſt & moſt
principall thing that wee muſt labour for during the vvhole
ſcope of our life, and our onely comfort in our death, and
our onely life after death, and therefore I truſt it hath beene
well marked of us and conſidered, & in our hearts deeply imprinted.
Now it followeth, that knowing how we be ſet at one
with god, we do alſo indeavor our ſelues to be at one with mā:
for which purpoſe I haue choſen out this piece of Scripture,

which you heard now read vnto you, which containeth a ſhort
exhortatiō to loue: a ſhort leſſon, & ſoone learned, that we loue
one another; in a word, it is no more, but that we haue ſincere
loue one with an other: it is an eaſie leſſon & ſoone borne away,
the dulleſt memorie that is here preſent may eaſily beare it away,
and the ſimpleſt wit among vs may without any great
diſcourſing of the matter, ſtraightwaies vnderſtande it, that
we neede not pretende any excuſe of ſimplicitie and dulneſſe,
whereas the playnneſſe and ſhortneſſe will ſtraightwaies convince
vs. It is then a leſſon ſoone learned, which we haue here
taught vnto vs, to loue one an other: if nothing els were required,
but as ſchollers in grammer ſchoole to conne it by heart,
and ſay by rote, we might diſpatch it in a minute of an houre:
but alas, good brethren, becauſe it is in Chriſts ſchoole, wee
muſt not onely like grammer ſchollers haue it by heart, but like
Chriſts ſchollers haue the feeling and loue of it in our hearts;
not onely by rote like children ſay it with our mouth, but like
Gods children practiſe it in our deedes. And herein (good
Lord) how ſmally haue we profited this xv. yeares, learning
the practiſe of this leſſon in Chriſts ſchoole? or if we haue learned
it, how ſoone haue we forgot it? or if we haue both known
it and thought vpon it, in what caſe are we that ſo generally
haue vſed continually againſt our owne conſcience & knowledge
to doe contrarie vnto it? VVell, for that which is paſt
let vs repent, and now in the feare of God let vs beginne more
deepely to conſider the thing, eſpecially ſeeing the deare Sōne
of God exhorteth vs thereunto, and ſaith, I giue you a new commandement,
that ye loue one an other: if a prince or any noble
perſonage ſpeake vnto vs, exhorting vs to any good thing, wee
vſe to giue attentiue care, and for the authoritie of the perſon
the words haue credite with vs, that we dare not doe contrarie
thereunto for feare of looſing their good will and fauour: what
ſhall we then ſay to our Sauiour Chriſt, the king of kings, aboue
all the nobles vpon the earth, who doth here exhort vs
to loue one an other ſhal we make none account of his words,
but without regard fling them at our heeles, not caring for the
loſſe of his heauenly fauour, who gaue his owne ſelfe to the

death to purchaſe our life? Surely we ſhould then declare our
ſelues to be worſe then the bruit beaſts, who yet vſe to haue
ſome regard to their maſters that feede them and ſhew them
fauour. If we ſhould not then carefully take heede vnto thoſe
things which are ſpoken vnto vs of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who
hath ſo dearely loued vs, euen▪ the very bruit beaſts ſhould be
ſufficient to condemne vs. Let vs therefore in the feare of God
looke vnto it, not ſlenderly and with dull eares, and hard hearts
conſider of it, for it is the deare Sonne of God that ſpeaketh vnto
vs, that requireth of vs, that we loue one an other. If he had
but ſlenderly handled our matter concerning our redemption,
we had beene but in ſlender caſe: if we ſhall nowe giue but
ſlender eare vnto that which he ſpeaketh vnto vs, and make it
as a thing of courſe, ſurely we prouoke his iudgement againſt
vs, whoſe maieſtie we dare ſo boldly abuſe: if it be high treaſon
to caſt off the words of a prince, & make no account of them,
what ſhal we ſay of the reiecting the words of this our heauenly
prince and Sauiour? Ye ſee then it ſtandeth vs in hand diligently
to heare, prudently to marke, and deeply to waigh theſe
wordes which here be ſpoken, for they are the wordes of the
Lord Ieſus, who of his vnſpeakeable loue, hath giuen him ſelfe
for vs. And yet further then this, if we conſider the circumſtances
of the time when theſe words were ſpoken, it will make vs
yet a little more carefull to thinke vpon them: It was at ſuch
time as he was now neare his death, for in the verſe going before
he told them, he was going from them. Theſe words were
vttered then by our Sauiour Chriſt, when he was going to his
death, as a thing ſpecially to be marked of vs, & which he knew
to be moſt needefull for vs, and therefore of vs more to be conſidered
and marked, yea and neuer to be forgotten, but alwaies
deepely imprinted in our minde. You know thoſe things that
are ſpoken of men lying vpon their death bedde vſe to pearſe
much, that commonly the words be neuer forgotten, but ſtill
almoſt as freſh in memorie as when they were newe ſpoken:
thoſe words which be ſpoken by a louing father vpon his death
bed vnto his childe, take great effect in a good childe: if a
tender father at the point of death doth call his ſonne vnto

him, and vttereth theſe or ſuch like words; Oh ſonne, thou ſeeeſt
in what caſe I am, I am euen now readie to goe from thee,
theſe be the laſt words that I ſhall ſpeake vnto thee, remember
them well, thou ſhalt neuer heare me more ſpeake, I muſt goe
from thee, yet for a remembrance, that thou maiſt thinke vpon
me when I am gone; I will giue thee one leſſon from my
mouth while I liue, that thou maiſt remember me when I am
dead, as long as thou liueſt; I charge thee therefore, as thou
loueſt me, doe this or that, &c. thou knoweſt I haue had many
troubleſome daies for thee, much coſt and paines I beſtowed
vpon thee, nowe I muſt goe from thee, thinke vpon this that
I charge thee, euen as thou loueſt me: if a tender hearted father
giue this or ſuch charge vnto his ſonne vpon his death
bed, will it not make the heart of any naturall childe to bleede
in his bodie to heare ſuch tender wordes of his louing father:
alas, thoſe louing wordes neuer be forgotten of any naturall
childe and good ſonne, vnleſſe he be an vnthrift and paſt all
grace, which careth neither for father nor friend, liuing nor
deade. Euen ſo in like manner will theſe words of our Sauiour
Chriſt, ſpoken at his death, pearce the hearts of any of the children
of God, vnleſſe they be baſtards and no ſonnes: we can
not if we loue the Lord Ieſus, but remember this his laſt leſſon,
which he giueth vs for his farewell. And I am ſure vnto the
children of God it pearceth a thouſand times more their tender
hearts to heare them ſo louingly taught of their louing
Lord, then any other rough manner of dealing, becauſe they
be children and not ſlaues, and therefore ſerue of loue and not
of ſlauiſh feare; although it be ſometime needefull for the beſt
of them to feele of the louing correction of their louing father
for the taming of their wilde fleſh. But becauſe in the
houſe of God all be not children which haue the outward coū
               tenance
of children, but there be a great companie of diſſembling
hypocrites, which take the libertie of the Goſpell to liue
after the fleſh, & doe nothing but only make a mock of all louing
kind of dealing & laugh in their ſleeues when they heare
any ſuch exhortations, becauſe they wil not be taught by faire
meanes, and as ye would ſay by maner of intreatie: therfore the

Lord Ieſus for their cauſe eſpecially dealeth after an other ſort
here in this ſentence, and calleth this ſame his admonition to
loue not onely a friendly exhortation as by way of requeſt,
but alſo a commandement. Not onely a matter of intreatie forſooth,
to doe or not to doe as beſt liketh vs, but a ſpeciall commaundement
to be done whether we will or no, whether we
like it or not like it, vnleſſe we will abide the penaltie of diſobedience.
And herein then he dealeth with us, not only as a louing
friend to exhort, but alſo as a prince of authoritie to command,
that if we ſhould violently caſt off from vs all kinde of friendly
admonitions here, and thinke we haue eſcaped wel, becauſe
we haue broken in ſunder all the faſt bonds of louing exhortations;
we ſhould yet vnderſtand he is our Prince, that hath
his iudgement ſeat to arrayne vs there to anſwer the breach of
his bleſſed commandement: and that we ſhould not thinke or
ſay, Oh I will indeede loue my brethren, but it ſhalbe at leiſure,
when I ſee my time, and when I thinke beſt; but rather
thinke becauſe it is commanded vs, we muſt doe it whether
we will or no, not at our pleaſure, but at the pleaſure of the
commander, vnleſſe we wilbe guiltie of his curſe in his iudgement
ſeat. So then ye ſee what we haue to marke in this, where
the Lord Ieſus doth not onely exhort, but commaund vs to
loue one an other, that is, that we not only haue a cold affectiō
thereunto, but that we be liuely touched with the authoritie of
the commander, ſetting before our eyes his princely iudgemēt
ſeat, where he will bring in triall all ſtubborne breaches of his
bleſſed commandements, although they be neuer ſo ſmoothly
paſſed ouer in this life. Ye ſee then this hath, or at leaſt vviſe
ought to haue a vvonderfull vvaightie force vvith it, vvhere the
Lord Ieſus falleth a commanding, and therefore ought of vs
deepely to be conſidered, and not coldly for faſhion imbraced,
becauſe it is the Lord Ieſus, that not onely vvilleth, but commaundeth
it. But alas, it is a vvonderfull thing, to ſee the authoritie
of the Lord Ieſus ſo ſmally regarded among vs: if once
the vvill of a prince be but knovvne, it is a vvonder to ſee hovv
readie vve are to frame our ſelues thereunto; but if he fall a commanding,
vvho doe not then tremble at his diſpleaſure? But

the Lord Ieſus may intreat, pray, and beſeech, nay ſtraightly
charge and command, and for all that not regarded of a ſtraw.
It declareth certenly, good brethren, that there is no feare of
God among vs, but onely a certaine worldly feare of man, and
yet the one killeth the bodie alone,Math. 10. 28. the other throweth both
ſoule and bodie into hell fire eternall. Oh, good brethren, let
vs not deceiue our ſelues, it is the Lord Ieſus that commaundeth
vs, let vs obey: he chargeth vs to loue one an other, let it
be done, not onely ſaid, but done: done, done. Let vs earneſtly
repent, that we haue beene ſo ſlacke in doing this commandement
for our Sauiour hetherto, that we haue done nothing, but
onely make a mocke of it: oh it is his mercie that hath ſaued vs
hetherto, and hath not throwne vs downe to hell, as we haue
deſerued, but in mercie hath kept vs till this day: let vs nowe
from henceforth thinke earneſtly vpon this commandement of
our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and now begin to practiſe it, that there
may be loue among vs, and not ſuch brabbling, brawling, and
contention, as we ſee daily, and is too lamentable, but like to
good ſchollers in the ſchoole of the Lord Ieſus let vs haue loue
and peace among vs; and ſurely then he will dwell among vs,
and protect vs for euer.
            Nowe it is ſaid in the text, that this commaundement of louing
one another, is a new commaundement: it may ſeeme
ſtrange that he calleth it new, and yet was giuen ſo long agoe
by the Lord God himſelfe in his commandements,Lev. 19. 18. and is the
very ſumme of the whole ſecond table, as it doth appeare by the
Lord Ieſus Chriſt his owne interpretation,Matt. 11. 39. that we loue our
neighbour as our ſelfe. This then ſeemeth not to be new, which
was deliuered to Moſes a thouſand yeare before & more. True
it is our Sauiour Chriſt doth not here call it newe, as though it
had neuer bin vttered before, but becauſe he would call a newe
to the minde that which they had heard of old out of the lawe
before: he calleth it therefore new, which is newly renewed againe
in memorie: & moreouer alſo now at his death, becauſe
he would haue it ſticke continually in their mindes, as a thing
new told freſh in our mindes: for we know things that be old
done or ſpoken are not ſo ripe in our heades, as that that is newly

done or ſpoken: that it might be therefore vnto vs continually
newe, and freſh in our minde, he calleth it newe, not
olde and raw, but freſh and new. VVe haue therefore well to
conſider of it, and euery one of vs to enter deepe into our
ſelues, and trie our hearts whether this commaundement be
newe, freſh, and greene in our mindes or no, or rather whether
it be ſo old vnto vs, that we haue cleane forgot it. I am
afraid if we well trie and examine our ſelues, we ſhall finde it
freſh and newe amongſt a very fewe or none of vs, but ſo olde
that it is euen at the laſt caſt with a great number of vs, and a
new commaundement come in the roome of it, not from Ieſus
Chriſt, but Satan and the deuill: a new commaundement,
that we loue not one an other, but euery man him ſelfe. This
ſame new commandement of Satan of louing our ſelues, oh it
is maruelous rife, freſh, and newe amongſt vs: but the newe
commandement of the Lord Ieſus of louing one an other, it is
ſo ſtale and worne out of vſe amongſt vs new-fangled engliſhmen,
and eſpecially amongſt vs Norffolke men: if Ieſus
Chriſt had giuen vs this commaundement to loue our ſelues,
how notably could we haue practiſed it? and what a number
of followers thereof ſhould we haue found amongſt vs at
this day? all England, all Norffolke ſhould haue beene found
very perfect in it: But alas, good brethren, it is cleane contrarie,
that commaundement which he would haue newe
amongſt vs, is not to loue our ſelues, but to loue one an other:
this is that which is very rare in our daies, and muſt be newe,
freſh, and rife amongſt vs, there is no remedie, or ſurely the
Lord will beginne a newe worke amongſt vs: he cannot abide
to heare his commandement ſo contemptuouſly and deſpightfully
troden vnder our feete: therefore let vs be carefull
in the feare of God, to amende that which is amiſſe in vs, and
now beginne to imbrace this newe commaundement of the
Lord Ieſus of louing one an other, and vtterly forſake and remooue
that olde Satans commaundement of louing of our
ſelues, that wee may be right diſciples and ſchollers of Ieſus
Chriſt, as we ſay we are Chriſtians, and hold of Chriſt. VVell,
thus you ſee what waightie charge is giuen of our Sauiour,

to loue one an other: it is no ſmall matter, and therefore not
haſtily to be put vp, becauſe it is both a commaundement,
and proceedeth alſo from him that hath authoritie ouer all
things to commaund, which hath his iudgement for vs in the
life to come, if we will not be taught by faire meanes here in
this life.
            Now it followeth in the text, Euen as I haue loued you: This
ſentence ſerueth both for a reaſon more vehemētly to perſwade
vs to loue one an other by his owne example, that ſo tenderly
loued vs, & alſo it ſerueth for a patterne to try our loue by, whether
it be ſincere or fained. The reaſon whereby he exhorteth
vs to loue one an other, ſtandeth thus: I ſo tenderly loued you,
that beeing from all eternitie with my father in ioy eternall,Phil. 2. 6.
humbled my ſelfe to become man in your nature,Hebr. 4. 15. ſubiect
to all miſeries and ſorrowes as you are, and for your loue
yeilded my ſelfe not onely to all ſpight and villanie that wicked
men could doe vnto me, but euen to the very death I ſubmitted
my ſelfe, and that to the moſt ſhamefull death for your
death, to bring you to a glorious life: and this I did not onely
when ye were no friends of mine, but alſo when ye were mine
vtter enemies:Rom. 5. 8. ought not you then in like manner much more
loue one an other, beeing thus redeemed ſilly poore ſoules by
my bitter death?Ioh. 15. 13. you were all alike ſubiect to eternall hell fire,
and now I ſo loued you▪
               1. Ioh. 3. 6. that I gaue my ſelfe a ranſom for you,
ought not ye then much more conſidering my goodnes, loue
one an other? If a king ſhould of his great goodnes giue his
owne life to ranſome a companie of beggers beeing in bondage,
and beſides not onely deliuer them out of ſlauerie of a
forraine prince, but alſo exalt them to the ſtate of lords and nobles,
by deuiding his inheritance amongſt them, were it not,
I ſay, an intollerable thing, if theſe exalted beggers, forgetting
their former eſtate, ſhould nowe be ſo puffed vp in pride, that
one of them would not vouchſafe to looke vpon an other, but
contemne, hate, and diſdaine one an other, were not this
thing intollerable and not to be ſuffered amongſt men, ſo to requite
the goodneſſe of their king? nay would not we rather
giue our verdict vpon them, and thinke them well ſerued to

be ſet againe all alike in beggerie and ſlauerie as they were
before, and looke if they could agree any better among themſelues
there? yes ſurely would we, and thinke them well ſerued;
euen ſo, good brethren, if we will not loue one an other
ſince our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath ſo tenderly loued vs, that he
hath giuen him ſelfe for vs, to redeeme vs from hell, ſurely
it can not be otherwiſe thought but that we deſerue to be
throwne downe headlong to hell eternally, and looke if we
can agree any better there. It pleaſed the Lord Ieſus to redeeme
vs from damnation, that we might loue one an other,
as he loued vs: if we will not then loue one an other, what is
it elſe but euen to prouoke the Lorde Ieſus to leaue vs euen
where he found vs, that is, euen firebrands of hell, and looke
howe we can away with that geare. Wherefore, good brethren,
let vs take this argument to our ſelues, and although
we would not loue one an other for no other thing, yet at the
leaſt let vs loue one an other for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, who ſo
tenderly and dearely loued vs, that he gaue his owne life
for vs: if not for his ſake, yet good brethren, for our owne
ſoules ſake, which ſhall periſh in hell euerlaſtingly: thus ye
ſee what force this reaſon hath, which the Lord Ieſus vſeth
here charging vs to loue one an other, as he hath loued vs,
that is, that it maketh vs inexcuſable before his iudgement
ſeat, if we can not finde in our heart to loue one an other, ſeeing
he ſo dearely and tenderly hath loued vs. It carieth with
it alſo a further thing to be conſidered and thought of, and
that is this, that it ſerueth for a notable and moſt excellent
patterne for vs to trye and examine our loue by it, whether it
be ſincere and ſound or no: for when he ſaith, Let your loue
among your ſelues be ſuch a kinde of loue as mine was towardes
you, he condemneth all fayned and vaine loue, all corrupt
loue, gainfull loue, tongue-loue, falſe loue, and ſuch like;
and biddeth looke as his loue was towards vs, ſo let our loue be
one towards an other: his loue was not towards vs, when we
were his friends, but euen then he loued vs when we were his enemies,
and gaue his life for vs: this is a ſpeciall point to be
conſidered of vs, good brethren, and pithely to be waied; for it

toucheth vs very neere: we be ſo corrupt in iudgement, and
meaſure all things ſo by our owne eaſe, that we thinke it ſufficient,
if we haue made ſome countenance of loue to them, that
neuer did us harme, when as in the meane time we rage like
cruell beaſtes againſt thoſe, which haue but a little touched us
with harme and iniurie, and we thinke we may doe it lawfully,
it is ſo generall a thing, and toucheth the corruption of our
nature ſo neere, that if he doe or ſpeake but any ill by vs, vvee
thinke vve may very iuſtly be incenſed againſt him.Rom. 5. 8. Yea, but
was the love of the Lord Ieſus ſo in that maner, nay he loued us
euen when we were his enemies, and telleth vs that our loue
muſt be in like maner one towards another, not only to them
that loue vs, but alſo to them that be our enemies. Our Saviour
Chriſt telleth vs,Matth. 6. 32. that the very heathen will ſo loue one another
as long as they haue no harme, and we would be aſhamed
being Chriſtians to be no better then they: we ſay wee
are Chriſtian men and not heathen, let vs then I pray you proceed
one ſteppe further then the heathen, who will as faſt
as wee for our liues love them that doe them good: let vs, I
ſay, go one ſteppe before them, & follow our Sauiour Chriſt,
who biddeth vs loue one another as he loued vs, not as the
heathen uſe to loue. Oh ſaith one, I could be content to loue
him, if hee had not ſo railed upon me, and done me ſo much
ſpight and villanie, I could haue bene content to haue borne
it, but it is too too, no man can beare it: and I pray thee, hath he
done thee more ſpight then thou haſt done to the Lord Ieſus
Chriſt? I trow not: thy ſpight and villany hath put the Lorde
Ieſus to death, and wouldeſt thou haue him not hate thee for
thy ſpight done to him, as thou doeſt thy brother for the
harme he hath done unto thee? thou ſhouldſt be in hell then
ſtraightwaies. Looke now then, I pray you, whether it ſtandeth
vs not in hand to put well in practiſe this leſſon that our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt here teacheth vs, when he ſaith, our loue among
our ſelues muſt not be to avenge our ſpight, to wrecke
our malice, but euen as he loued vs: to be content to forgiue
our greateſt enemies, & put our hatred and malice out of our
hearts againſt them.Matth. 6. 12. Ieſus Chriſt teacheth vs to pray for forgiueneſſe

at Gods hand euen as we doe forgiue others: would
we thinke it a good prayer to pray to God in this manner: O
Lorde God if my ſinnes towards thee had bene but a few and
ſmall, I could haue bene content, thou ſhouldeſt haue forgiuen
them unto me, but becauſe they be ſo many and ſo ſpitefull,
now I would haue thee euen poure out all thy diſpleaſure vpon
me, for ſo doe I uſe to do with them, that do offend againſt
me, therefore I pray thee, deale euen ſo with me now, good
Lorde, for after this maner I do uſe to forgiue them that offend
me: I uſe to doe the worſt I can to them either by worde or
deede, therefore I pray thee, doe the worſt to me thou canſt:
were not this, I pray you, to pray for vengeance upon our own
head? yes ſurely: and certenly euen ſo do we, as oft as wee dare
pray the Lords prayer, and yet can not finde in our hearts to
forgiue offences done againſt vs. Good brethren, let vs not deceiue
our ſelues,Matth. 6. 15. the Lord Ieſus flatly telleth vs, we ſhall neuer
be forgiuen, unleſſe we can be content to forgiue others, let vs
ſay what we will, the Lord Ieſus ſaith ſo, we ſhall neuer be forgiuen,
unleſſe wee can forgiue others, there is no remedy, the
truth hath ſpoken it: let vs flatter our ſelues as long as vve vvil,
we cannot be forgiuen unleſſe we forgiue, therefore if euer we
will be forgiuen at Gods hand, unleſſe vve vvill be throwne
into the pit of hell, let us forgiue: and away with theſe fond &
brabbling excuſes, to ſay they be ſo many, and ſo great, I can
neuer forgiue him. Wouldeſt thou be contented that the Lord
Ieſus ſhould anſwere thee ſo, when thou comeſt unto him for
forgiueneſſe? If he ſhould ſay unto thee, O ſilly poore ſoule, I
could be content to forgiue thee, if thy ſinnes had not bene ſo
many and ſo great, but becauſe they are ſo huge & ſo hainous,
I can not forgiue thee, go thy wayes to hell, for I can not finde
in mine heart to forgiue thee; wouldeſt thou be content with
this anſwer at the Lords hands for thy ſinnes? I trow not: And
yet cruell hearted tyrant thou canſt be content to ſay ſo, and
thinke ſo of them that haue not offended thee the thouſand
parte ſo much, as thou haſt done the Lorde thy God. Doeſt
thou thinke then thou canſt ſo ſ
                  ••
               ly eſcape the Lord thy God?
thou canſt not, thou canſt not: and therefore there is no remedie

but either thou muſt forgiue, or ſurely thou ſhalt neuer
be forgiuen: looke now to it, as thou wilt, and fling avvay
from God as faſt as thou wilt, they be vvordes of the Lord Ieſus
vvhich can not lie. Let us for Gods loue looke unto them, it
ſtandeth vs in hande: thinke vve to be forgiuen of God our
great and intollerable ſinnes, and can not be content to forgiue
ſmall ſinnes in compariſon? No ſurely, it can not be. The Lord
Ieſus ſetteth out this matter more largely in the 18. of Matthevv,Matt. 18. 23.
by the example of a king, vvhich minded to take a reckening
of his ſeruants, vvhereof one was brought unto him,
which did owe him a thouſand talents, & he not being able to
pay, commandement was giuen, that he, his wife and children,
ſhould be ſold and paiment made: the man with pitifull teares
fell dovvne at the feet of the king, deſiring him onely to beare
with him for a time, and he vvould pay him the vvhole: the
king taking compaſſion upon the man forgaue him the whole
debt: this man being ſo diſcharged went his vvay, and found
one of his fellovves that ovved him a certaine ſmall trifling
peece of money, and ragingly caught him by the throate,
commaunding him to pay that he ovved; the poore man amaſed
fell downe at his feete with vveeping teares, humbly beſought
him to be good unto him, and he vvould pay him all.
The other vvould not heare, but cruelly commaunded him to
be caſt in priſon, and there the poore man lay. The king hearing
of this crueltie, called him and ſaide, I forgaue thee the
vvhole debt vvhen thou beſoughteſt me, oughteſt not thou to
haue had compaſſion upon thy fellow alſo, as I had on thee? &
the king in great diſpleaſure cōmanded him to be deliuered to
the tormentours.Verſ. 35. Euen ſo, ſaith our Saviour Chriſt, vvill my
heauenly Father doe to you, unleſſe you forgiue one another
from the bottome of your heartes your ſinnes and offences
done one to another. This is the doctrine of the Lord Ieſus, it is
not mine, they be his ovvne vvords, and therefore they muſt be
marked. It is a vvoonder to ſee how much vvee can make of
a ſmal offence done unto us, & how ſmall account we make
of our great offences done to God: if one do but a litle contrary
to our mind in any ſmal matter, oh we make it ſo great a matter

we haue never done with it, and hardly ſhall a man bring vs
to any good agreement: we be ſo hard hearted, it will not out
of our ſtomacke, but we muſt be reuenged ſtrait waies, vve will
waite him at the advantage once in our life time, to be euen
with him if we can: What is this els but to prouoke Gods
fearce wrath and indignation vpon vs, and to heape Gods
iudgement vpon vs? Ieſus Chriſt telleth vs, euen ſo will our heauenly
father deale with vs. Doeth it not now then ſtand vs in
hand to forgiue one another, to put malice and hatred out of
our hearts, and now at the length to learne perfectly this leſſon
at our Sauiour his hand to loue one another as he loued vs?
not onely them that doe us good, but euen our enemies, and
them that hate vs. True it is, wee muſt neuer loue the ſinne of
our enemies, nor of none els, but alwaies be in deadly hatred
with that, but yet we muſt loue and pity the perſon of our enemies,
that is in dangered thereby. And if this were well waighed,
you ſhould ſee that we had more need to pity, then to hate
our enemies. If there be any iniurie or harme done unto vs
either by word or deed,Matth. 5. 22. they that doe it are guiltie of hell fire,
ſo ſaith Ieſus Chriſt: would it not pitie our hearts to ſee any in
the torments of hell? alas yes, if we were not worſe then bruit
beaſts, we would take pitie vpon them: and ſurely in that caſe
are all thoſe vvhich doe vs harme, vnleſſe they repent: and
therefore the Lord Ieſus pitied the caſe of them that put him
to death, becauſe he knew in what dangerous eſtate their ſoules
were, whereas they in ſpight and rage againſt him were ſo
blind, that they could not ſee it: but alas, he ſaw it, and pitied
their caſe,Luc. 23. 34. and prayed, ſaying, O Father, forgiue them. they can
not tell what they do, they are euen almoſt in the gulfe of hel,
and yet ſee it not, they are ſo blind in their rage, that they run
headlong to hell, and neuer thinke upon it. The ſame affection
muſt be in vs towardes our enimies, if we be of the ſame
ſpirite of Chriſt: we muſt pitie their caſe that haue done any
harm or iniurie againſt vs, & thus think, O Lord God, this their
fact is damnable before thine eyes, they haue deſerued hel fire,
and yet, O Lord, they ſee it not, Good Lord giue them hearts
and mindes to ſee their ſinne, that they may ſee in what daunger

they be in, and ſo turne unto thee and repent. Thus you
ſee, how we muſt pity our enemies, and pray for them, & doe
what we can to bring them out of the danger: there is none
without ſo much naturall affection, but he will pitie the life
of any thing being in danger, if it be but an oxe or an aſſe to put
it out of the mire if he could, there is none ſo brutiſh that will
ſuffer the life of a beaſt to periſh if he can helpe it, much more
is the life of man to be pitied being in danger, but much more
is the everlaſting life of the ſoule of man to be tendered being
in daunger: while thine enemie rageth againſt thee with all
deſpite and villanie, his poore ſoule is in perill to be drowned
in the gulfe of hell, oughteſt not thou to pitie his eſtate, and
reach out thine hand to helpe him out, and not like an unmercifull
man to plunge him downe to be drowned, that thou
mighteſt reuenge thy ſpite and malice for the iniurie & harme
he hath done vnto thee? There is none ſo cruell that woulde
deale ſo with a very beaſt. If vve had receiued any harme at
any beaſtes handes, either a ſtroke with an horſe his foote or
ſuch like, if wee ſhould happen to ſee the poore beaſt after
that, in perill of drowning, is there any ſo cruell that he might
be revenged of the harme done unto him, would let the poore
beaſt ſtarue, or elſe violently puſh him headlong, and holde
downe his head to drowne him? Surely none would doe it,
vnleſſe he were worſe a thouſand fold then a beaſt. What do
we meane then, ſeeing the ſoules of our enemies in ſo great
perill by continuance in their ſinne, that we doe not pitie their
caſe, to pray for them, to helpe them out, but rather to revenge
our malice, doe ſooner puſh them in forwardes headlong
to deſtruction? Nay rather what doe wee meane in
puſhing them forwarde to deſtruction to throwe our ſelues
downe headlong with them to the pit of hell? For what is
it els when we beare hatred, ſpite, and malice againſt them?
It is murther before God, and therefore guiltie of hell ſire.
Haue wee not then notably prevailed againſt our enemies,Ioh. 3. 15.
when for pure ſpitefull loue, and reuengefull good will towards
them wee vvill euen iumpe with them into the dungeon
of hell? This is not to loue one another, as the Lord loued

vs: well then, good brethren, I pray you, let us looke unto
it, vvee muſt loue one another, yea, euen our enemies, for
ſo did Chriſt loue vs his enemies: we muſt loue their ſoules,
and pitie their ſoules, and helpe them euen as we can: vvee
muſt not ſo much regarde the ſpite they haue done unto us, as
the daunger their ſoules be in before God, and this may make
vs to ſtay our rage and reuengement againſt our brethren,
vvhen they haue offended us: for what is the cauſe that we
be ſo out of patience with them that haue done us iniurie, that
wee can not finde in our heartes to forgiue them? Surely euen
this, becauſe wee doe onely looke upon the hurt done unto
us, we muſe upon that, we make much adoe about that, and
ſo marveilouſly weigh what loſſe we haue by it on euery ſide
but in the meane while, wee doe not conſider the ſoule of
him that did vs the iniurie, continuing in impenitencie: for
then wee ſhould be driuen to pitie him for the daunger before
God, and not hate him for our loſſe before man. The want
of this is the onely cauſe then why wee be ſo hatefull and malitious
towardes our enemies, which haue iniuried vs, becauſe
we looke upon our owne harme, and not on the harme of the
ſoule of man before God: but wee muſt doe it, certenly the
Lorde Ieſus commaundeth us, Pray for your enemies, doe good
to them that hate you: and here biddeth us, loue, as he loued
us, euen enemies to him. Well then, good brethren, thus yee
haue heard, how by the loue that Chriſt loued us, wee be
taught, to frame our loue one towardes another, euen towards
our enemies, in pitying them, praying for them that they may
be brought to amendment, not for the hurt done vnto vs, but
for the auoiding of the hurt of their ſoules. I haue bene ſomewhat
more long in this matter of loue towardes our enemies
becauſe I know it is ſo hard a matter for fleſh and blood to be
ſatisfied in this point to ſtay from revengement: it is marveilous
neere growen into the corruption of our nature, and therfore
it muſt be more carefully taken heed of us, and we muſt
bende our force more to reſiſt it, and ſo ſhall we not onely be
hearers of this leſſon of our Lorde Ieſus, but alſo followers
of the ſame.
            
               
And yet further, when he ſaith, that we muſt loue one another
as he loved us, he giueth vs to underſtand, that our loue
muſt be ſincere, without reſpect of gaine or aduantage. Such
loue then as is commonly amongſt vs Norffolke men will not
ſerue, that is to loue a man as long as we can get any profit by
him, and then farewell: no, our loue muſt not be ſo, but it muſt
be as Chriſt loued vs, which was not for any great gaine I trow
that he hoped to get at our handes, and yet this is ſo common
amongſt vs, as is marveilous: there is ſcarſely found amongſt
vs any other loue, then that which is for gaine: a lamentable
thing: If we haue money enough, we make our account to
get friends enough, and without mony or hope of gaine we
ſhall hardly finde any great ſtore of friends. Is this the loue,
good breethren, which ought to be amongſt vs? Alas no: ſuch
loue may be found amongſt the very deuils in hell: and yet we
will be Chriſtians forſooth, yea, and proteſtants to, but it is
but onely in name: for Chriſt ſaith, that among his true ſchollers,
loue muſt not be for advantage, but as he loued vs. Moreouer,
we are hereby taught alſo, that our loue muſt not be
diſſembled in faire countenance outwarde, & within nothing
but rancour and malice, it muſt not be in a faire flattering outward
ſhewe, but it muſt be as he loued us, euen in very deede
from the bottome of our heart: from our heart, from our heart,
from our heart: Oh this muſt be marked, good brethren. The
Lorde Ieſus ſeemeth to plucke vs Engliſh men by the ſleeue,
and condemne our faire flattering diſſembled loue, which
raigneth ſo commonly among vs: Such faire lookes, ſugred
wordes, louing ſalutations, and courteous embracings as is
marveilous, as though there were ſuch perfect loue and
friendſhippe amongſt vs, as could poſſibly be required, and
yet ſuch deepe diſſembled hatred and ſpight in the bottome
of our breaſtes, as we would (if we could) euen pull their hearts
out of their bodies, and eate them with garlicke, as they ſay.
Alas, good brethren, is this Chriſtian like? is this as Chriſt loued
vs? No, no, it is Iudas-like, faire kiſſes, & falſe diſſembling harts.
Is there not a God in heauen thinke you, to reuenge it? yes, no
doubt, and I warrant vs, we ſhall feele it, if we doe not repent.

We thinke we haue done notable finely, when we haue made
a man a faire countenance, and in the meane while practiſe
his death if we can: we go ſlily on with the matter, and laugh
in our ſleeue when wee haue thus done, as though there were
not a God in heauen that did ſee, view, and try all the ſecret
thoughts of our deepe diſſembling heartes, and ſpie out all
our crooked waies, and when we haue made faire with all the
earth, will then call our crooked practiſes to account. Did
that cruell wretch Cain any thing preuaile, when diſſembling
his cruell malice towardes his brother, he made faire words
with him, till he gate him in the broad wilde field alone, and
then fell upon him, and killed him: did it any thing preuaile
with God, I ſay, that none was at the deede doing to accuſe
him? needed God any ſuch thing, which was privie to his
wicked malicious thoughtes? No, but he bringeth in the very
blood which he ſhedde, and the earth which receiued the
bloode to bring euidence againſt the man to condemnation:
what ſhall we ſay then? will our faire lookes and ſweet words
one to another prevaile before God, when there is nothing ſo
in our hearts but murther and malice? No I warrant you, hee
will bring in account euen the very ſecret wicked thoughts,
that we conceiue upon our beds, he will bring in euen our pillowes
to beare evidence againſt vs to our condemnation, if this
geere be not amended, looke as ſmoothly on the matter as we
can: God will haue an aſſaying with vs, when we haue made
all whole with man. Wherefore, good breethen, in the feare
of God let us looke to this geere, let us giue eare to Ieſus Chriſt
his teaching, that commaundeth our loue one toward another
to be as his was towardes vs, and away vvith this ſame
diſſembled loue, vvhich raigneth ſo amongſt us, this Iudas
loue, theeſe loue, deuils loue, and let vs like good Chriſtians
here in Norffolke once at the length beginne to imbrace
Chriſtes loue, true loue, unfained, from the bottome of
the heart, and ſincere, to the glorie of our God, and comfort
of our ſoules: And thus much for this part, where we are
commaunded that our loue ſhould be as Chriſts loue toward
vs: now it followeth. By this ſhall all men know that ye are my

diſciples, if ye loue one an other. This is an other reaſon to perſwade
to the obedience of that commaundement, which he
hath giuen in the verſe before, that we loue one an other as he
hath loued vs, for that men ſhall thereby take them to be his
ſchollers, his diſciples, Chriſtian men: This is an argument
which carieth with it great force to perſwade amongs men,
for there is none but he will ſay he is a Chriſtian, euery man
will ſay ſo, yea and euery man would gladly ſo be taken and
eſteemed of men, we would ſay ſo all of vs, and ſo would gladly
be counted Chriſtian men: well, then let vs looke if there
be loue among vs, for ſaying will not ſerue, he telleth vs men
ſhall take vs for Chriſtian men, not becauſe we can boldly
ſay ſo, but becauſe they ſee amongſt vs loue; ſincere loue, pure
loue▪ no diſſembling, colouring, nor gloſing, but ſimple tender
loue one towards another, euen as he loued vs: that is the cogniſance,
whereby we be knowne amongs men to be the ſeruants
of Chriſt; as the princes and noble mens ſeruants are
knowne by their cogniſance and badges to be the ſeruants of
their ſeuerall maſters, ſo is this the cogniſance and badge of
true Chriſtian men from a falſe diſſembling Chriſtian: its intollerable
to abuſe any princes name without ſome warrant,
& ſhall we be ſo bold with the Lord Chriſt to abuſe his name
with the title of Chriſtian men, when we be nothing ſo? if any
durſt be ſo bold as to make a facing and bracing vnto the pore
people, and ſay, I am the Queenes ſeruant, and vnder that title
exerciſe all the authoritie of the Queenes maieſties ſeruice,
and yet neuer authorized into ſeruice, nor receiued her cogniſance
to be knowne by, could ſuch dealing be well paſſed ouer
without puniſhment amongſt men? No ſurely, it could
not be: ſuch things would be or els ſhould be ſeuerely puniſhed,
and that iuſtly, for els no man ſhould liue vnbeguiled by
ſuch counterfeyts, and the authoritie of the prince abuſed, to
the vndoing of her ſubiects. And ſhall we thinke then that the
Lord Ieſus ſhall ſo ſlightly ouerpaſſe the abuſe of his name, and
authoritie of Chriſtians, when we be nothing but onely counterfeits?
for he telleth vs we can not be his diſciples, we cannot
be true Chriſtians vnleſſe we loue one an other: Let vs ſay and

face, and brace it out neuer ſo much, all will not ſerue: for he
ſaith, he that can not lie, that by this we ſhalbe knowne, whether
we be in deede Chriſtian men or no, if we loue one an other.
What ſhall we ſay then, good brethren, to vs Norffolke
men, amongſt whome raigneth too much ſtrife & contention,
hatred, malice, brabbling, brawling, & wrangling? ſhall we ſay
we be Chriſtian men, & ſo flatter our ſelues in our ſinne, and deceiue
our own ſoules? Ieſus Chriſt telleth vs the contrarie, that
we can not be iuſtly accounted of men to be true Chriſtians,
much more ſhal he the ſearcher of hearts condemne vs. VVhat
a lamentable thing is this amongſt vs in this little countrey of
Norffolke, that we ſhould be ſo farre from the badge of Chriſtian
men, that cleane contrary, ſuch contention, ſtrife, & brabbling,
is amongſt vs, that we are become infamous thereby to
the whole world, when there is found more wrangling in this
ſame little part, then is in xx. parts of the land beſides? VVhat a
thing is this, good brethren, that the Iudges in their aſſiſes in
other places finde in ſome place foure, in ſome place three Niſi
priuſes, and here amongſt vs x. ſcore and more: commeth this
becauſe there is ſo much loue amongſt vs? & yet we wilbe coū
               ted
Chriſtians; but Ieſus Chriſt ſaith, that then we muſt loue
one an other, it can not otherwiſe be, he hath ſpoken it that
can not lie. Therefore on Gods behalfe, good brethren, let vs
looke vnto it, let vs not flatter our ſelues, & ſo die in our ſinnes;
we can not be Chriſtians, Ieſus Chriſt telleth vs ſo, vnles there
be loue amongſt vs: & I pray you, what appearance of loue is
there amongſt vs, where there is ſuch brabling and brawling,
that neuer the like was heard of in any place of the land? nay, I
thinke in Turkie-lande: and yet we wilbe Chriſtians. But the
Lord Ieſus ſaith we be not, ſaue onely in name, & in what caſe
are we then, I pray you? euen firebrands of hell, vnles we doe
repent. VVherefore, good brethren, let vs looke vnto it, and
looke to it earneſtly in deede, that at the length we Norffolke
men may become Chriſtian men. I can not ſpeake alas, to all
Norffolke, my voice will not reach ſo farre, but I exhort you,
good brethren, for Gods cauſe euery man put to his helping
hand, that ſuch ſtrife & contention as is amongſt vs my be ſuppreſſed,

and the badge of Chriſtians, which is true loue, may
come in the roome. Where ye heare of contention betweene
your neighbours, perſwade with them as you can to take it vp
amongſt themſelues charitably, and that they doe not like
bruit beaſts one reuenge all their ſpite they can againſt an other:
perſwade with them & take paines with them, & you ſhal
ſee God will bleſſe your labours. And you, good brethrē, which
are here gathered together, whoſe hearts the Lord hath touched
to take paines in ſuch matters, I deſire you in the feare of
God to continue, be not wearie of well doing, the Lord is with
you, God doth bleſſe you, and your labours, ye ſerue God in it
highly, the Lord Ieſus Chriſt accounteth you happie, Bleſſed,
bleſſed ſaith he, be the peacemakers. Although it be ſome pains
vnto you, & a little coſt & charges, yet remember it is done to
the Lord, & the common-wealth, whoſe you are, & to whome
you owe your ſeruice & dutie. Although you ſhall heare ſome
that like not of it, and peraduenture of ſome countenance, yet
good brethren, be not diſcouraged, the Lord liketh well of it,
he which is of the greateſt countenance of all, the Lord Ieſus
himſelfe he liketh highly of it, & calleth you happie & bleſſed,
Bleſſed be the peacemakers, for they ſhalbe called the children of
God. Be not diſcouraged then from doing good, becauſe ſome
doe not like of it: Alas, they are deciued with falſe & ſlaunderous
lies, that men blow abroad in corners, I warrant you whē
they ſhall heare & know the truth, there is no good man but
will well like of it, and further the like to the vttermoſt. In the
meane time goe you on forward, & content your ſelfe with this
that ye ſee the Lord ſo greatly bleſſe your labours in ſo ſmall
time, that all your cuntrie is ſo cleane ſwept of rouges, wheras
in other places they abound, and ſo few miſdemeanours foūd,
ſcarſe the tenth part that was before, and which is in other places
& that euē very nere you. You ſee this God hath wrought
by this meanes in ſo ſmall a time, beſides that the whole limits
is ſo quiet & void of all contentions and brabbles, that now it
is not one to an hundreth that was before, and in compariſon
of other places rounde about you. This ye ſee God hath
brought to paſſe in a ſhort time, for this muſt you be thankfull

vnto God, and giue him the honour and glorie, and continue
and goe forward in your well doing▪ leauing the ſucceſſe to his
maieſtie, as he knoweth ſhalbe moſt for his glorie, your diſcharge,
and the benefit of his people.
            Thus you haue heard out of this text the earneſt exhortation
of our louing Sauiour, ioyned with authoritie in commanding
vs to loue one an other ſincerely without diſſimulation,
euen as he loued vs: a needefull leſſon, but very ill practiſed of a
great number of vs, who yet continually will needes be counted
Chriſtians: well, let vs thinke vpon it more carefully then
we haue done, for we cannot deceiue him with titles. Let vs
looke vnto it, eſpecially in this countrey, that haue beene this
long time ſo farre from true Chriſtianitie a great number of vs,
that we haue not ſo much as the outward cogniſance, whereby
men ſhould know vs from diſſembling Chriſtians: let vs in the
feare of God now beginne, good brethren, and let vs not be aſhamed
nowe at length of the liuerie of Chriſt, we beare his
name, let vs not refuſe his liuerie: throw away the deuils liuerie,
which we haue worne a great long time, we abhorre
the name of the deuill, away then with his liuerie,
and let vs giue a louing eare to Ieſus Chriſt
thus friendly ſpeaking vnto vs.
            
               John More.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL AND
TRVLY RELIGIOVS S. ROBERT
Iermine Knight, & M. Robert Aſhfield Eſquire,
Iuſtices of her Maieſties peace for the county
of Suffolke, the continuance and increaſe
of all needefull bleſſings ſpirituall and
temporall in this time, and euerlaſting
life after death.
*⁎*
            
            
               MAy it pleaſe your Worſhips to vnderſtand,
that I haue many yeares
ſince, by the requeſt of you both,
committed theſe Sermons to writing;
at which time I thought nothing
leſſe then of the publiſhing of
them, eſpecially in theſe daies in
which by the grace of God there is
ſuch varietie and ſtore of ſermons, both preached and printed,
as it may ſeeme nothing can be added vnto thē: yet ſince
it hath ſo fallen out, that theſe copies haue beene multiplied,
and are diuerſly diſperſed in the hands of many, and are ſtill
deſired of ſome: whereupon I haue thought it good by this
one labour, both to eaſe my ſelfe of this burden in time to
come, and alſo to ſatisfie the earneſt deſire of thoſe, which

haue beene lingring about it this long time. Not that I haue
any hope in this argument to adde any thing to the treatiſes
before written, (for what can be ſaid in this great plentie and
diuerſitie of writing which we enioy, that hath not beene
ſpoken before?) but that by ſaying the ſame thing againe,
yet after an other manner, I might ſomewhat deceiue, and
ſo in part ſatisfie the vnquiet mindes of ſome, who in their
trouble can not long ſauour any old comfort, be it neuer ſo
good, but through a loathſomnes in themſelues are ſtill inquiring
after newe. And if we in loue thus ſtoope to the infirmitie
of the ſicke patient, by preparing the ſame meate diuers
waies to deceiue his taſt for his good, when he abhorreth
the daintieſt meate: then ſeeing in the ſoule of man there
is much more loathſomnes, whereby they ſometimes refuſe
all comfort, (as the Pſalmiſt complaineth in the perſon of the
whole Church) if they may be delighted with any thing
here, as ſeeming new vnto them, and ſo feede vpō it to their
comfort: neither my labour herein ſhall ſeeme ſuperfluous
in doing that which ſeemed to be done before, nor they repent
them for taſting of that as it were in an other kinde
which they refuſed before, yea if through weaknes in long
ſicknes, all places are ſo weariſome to them that it is an eaſe
vnto them ſometimes to be brought backe againe vnto that
place which they were wearie of before: why then may
there not be hope alſo in the tyred ſoules of men, through
the continuance of their trouble, that by bringing them back
againe vnto thoſe places of holy Scripture (as it were of reſt)
which they had left lōg before as finding no eaſe in thē, euē
in the very ſame they ſhould finde ſome comfort at the laſt,
and lie downe in peace in them, as it were in their old lodgeings
dreſſed & prepared for them: In which kind if I ſhall attaine
vnto any thing, its all that I deſire, or hope to performe.

The argumēt of the latter Sermon agreeth with the former,
for commonly in trouble we are diſcontented with our preſent
eſtate, & that makes us impatiēt, therefore it is neceſſarie
that ſuch ſhoulde be perſwaded to thinke well of their eſtate
as that which the Lorde knoweth to be beſt for them:
and therefore to determine to beare that, and to be quiet under
it; which if they doe not, they ſhall finde, that vvhen
they be out of it, ſome other thing will diſquiet them, and
ſo they ſhall neuer be contented. In handling of which I
haue not ſo much tyed my ſelfe to that ſpeciall text choſen
for that purpoſe, as laboured out of that, and other partes
of the word to conclude a generall propoſition of a contented
minde. Herein I craue pardon of your Worſhippes,
that for theſe cauſes I haue made that common to others,
which was firſt proper to your ſelues: which I hope ſo
much the more eaſily to obtaine of you, becauſe hereby
(in imparting it unto others) I take nothing from you,
when, as it were by lighting others mens candles at yours,
you haue notwithſtanding ſtill the whole light of your
owne, if it gaue any light vnto you before. Deſiring alſo
of your Worſhippes, that as at the firſt you did fauourably
accept it in writing, ſo now it might not ſeeme tedious
unto you, to haue it the ſecond time after this manner preſented
unto you. I acknowledge it is unworthy of either of
your Worſhippes, much more of you both, who haue
deſerued ſo well a long time of thr common-wealth and
Church in our countrey, eſpecially my ſelfe in many reſpectes
am much bound unto you both: but ſeeing God
hath ſo neerely ioyned you in ſituation of the countrey, in
office and calling, in friendſhip, in kindred, and yet neereſt in
profeſsion and religion; I hope you will be contented euen
in this ſmall treatiſe not to be ſundred. And thus praying

God to make you ſtill more and more one in Chriſt, and
one anothers in him, and ſo long to preſerue you both
for the further good of our countrey, I humbly
take my leaue of your Worſhips.
            
               Norton. 26. Auguſt. 1594.
               
Your Worſhips at all times
in the Lorde,
Nicholas Bownde.
            
         
         
            
            A EERMON CONtaining
many comforts for the
afflicted in their trouble vpon Rom. 8.
verſ. 26. vnto 30.
            Likewiſe the Spirit alſo helpeth our infirmities: for
we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it ſelfe maketh requeſt for vs, &c.
            
               YOu can not be ignorant of the generall
argument that the Apoſtle hath in
hande, which is to intreat of the matter
of afflictions, to this ende that he
might ſhew, that none of them ſhalbe
able to hinder vs from our ſaluation,
that ſo we might be prepared for them,
and comforted in them. For he ſpeaketh
wiſely and to the purpoſe, and
therefore hauing prooued that we are ſaued onely by faith in
Chriſt (which is the generall argument of the Epiſtle) he remoueth
thoſe things that might ſeeme to make for the contrarie.
And namely firſt the conſideration of our naturall corruption,
cleauing faſt vnto vs, hindring vs from that which is good, and
drawing vs to that which is euill, euen after ſuch time as we
doe beleeue, of which he hath ſpoken in the other chapter, and
in the former part of this, declaring that by the imputation of
the perfect holines of Chriſt it is taken away: which we know
both by the fruits of it, which is, that we are ſanctified in part,

and by the ſpirite of adoption, which teacheth vs to call God
Abba father. Secondly the conſideration of thoſe manifold &
grieuous afflictions which may & doe befall vs in this worlde,
whereby it may ſeeme, that our waies are not ſo acceptable to
the Lord, that we might haue comfort therein: in which he
dealeth in the latter part of this chapter from verſ. 17. to the
ende of it, ſhewing that they ſhall be ſo farre from keeping vs
from ſaluation, as that in them we haue Chriſt Ieſus that went
before in all afflictions further then we can, and yet at the laſt
came vnto glorie, and therefore if we patiently abide, as we
haue not onely the Prophets, Apoſtles, and Martyrs, but Chriſt
himſelfe to be our fellow in them, ſo we ſhal be fellowes with
him and like vnto him in glorie. And leaſt that it might ſeeme
grieuous vnto vs, to goe to ſo happie an eſtate, through ſo grieuous
a way, and ſo might thinke that the kingdome of heauen,
though it be ſo pretious, we ſhould bie it too deare: he
telleth vs aſſuredly that by caſting the account he hath found
it to be moſt true, that all the afflictions in this miſerable and
wretched world are not to be compared in greatnes or continuance,
vnto the glorie that ſhall be reuealed vs, verſ. 18.
which as it is thus great, ſo it is moſt ſure and certaine, and
therefore we neede not in no wiſe to doubt of it: for the very
creatures them ſelues haue a certaine ſenſe and feeling of it,
which but for a time are ſubiect to this vanitie (that is, corruption
and abuſe) which they are and by the inſtinct of nature
doe moſt earneſtly, and as it were, with their heads lifted
vp, looke for the reuealing of the ſonnes of God, that they might
be redeemed from bondage, into their glorious libertie, and
ſhall not be diſapointed of their hope: therefore much more
we that haue receiued the firſt fruits of the ſpirite, ſhould with
greater patience in trouble abide the will of God, and with
more certentie and earneſt deſire▪ looke for an happie chance
of all our afflictions in that moſt glorious day, v. 20, 21, 22, 23.
The which condition, though grieuous for a time, but happie in
the ende, that we might not refuſe to vndergoe with the reſt of
he creatures, and our brethren, he willeth vs to conſider the
order which the Lord hath appointed in ſauing of vs, which is

by hope, and becauſe hope is of things not ſeene or inioyed,
therefore we muſt not imagine ſo ſoone to enioy all happines
as we beleeue it, but be content to want all things for a time,
that hoping for them with patience and long ſuffering, we
might come to them at the laſt, vnleſſe we will goe about to
peruert this moſt excellent order, which the Lord hath determined
and appointed to vſe in ſauing vs, which is by training
vs vp in the hope and expectation of all things promiſed for a
ſeaſon, v. 24, 25. And becauſe the hope that is deferred is the
fainting of the bones, & we might feare in reſpect of our owne
weakenes, and the greatnes together with the continuance of
afflictions, that we ſhould not with patience vnder the croſſe
continue to hold out happily vnto the ende, he further addeth
for our ſingular comfort, that the ſpirite which we haue receiued,
ſhall helpe to beare the burthen with vs, and ſo though
we be neuer ſo weake, yet by the power of it we ſhall be able
to endure, verſ. 26. So that it ſhall be all one with vs, as with
the childe vpon whoſe ſhoulder the father laying an heauie
burthen, that were able to preſſe him downe, doth ſo put his
hande vnder it, that he beareth the waight and burthen of it
him ſelfe: and if the father will not ouerlade the childe, wee
neede not to feare but that the Lorde will ſo increaſe our
ſtrength according to the meaſure of our afflictions, that we
ſhall finde this promiſe to be true, that his holy ſpirite ſhall
helpe our infirmities. For as a father hath tender compaſſion
of his children, ſo hath the Lord tender compaſſion of vs, ſeeing
he knoweth whereof we are made, and remembreth that
wee are but duſt, and that wee flouriſh but as a flower of the
fielde: which thing as it is moſt comfortable to conſider, ſo
we ſhall finde it to be moſt true by experience: becauſe our
Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt hath praied vnto his heauenly Father for
vs, that hee might giue vs a Comforter, that might abide
with vs for euer, euen the Spirite of truth, as the bleſſed Apoſtle
confeſſeth of himſelfe, 1. Corinth. chap. 4. verſ. 9. ſaying,
We are afflicted on euery ſide, yet are we not in diſtreſſe: in
pouertie, but none ouercome of pouertie: wee are perſecuted,
but not forſaken: caſt downe, but wee peniſh not:

for (as it is in another place) his grace ſhall be ſufficient for vs,
for his power is made perfect through our weakeneſſe, ſo that
when we are weake, then are we ſtrong 2. Cor. 12. 9, 10. and
thus we ſhall alwaies finde it to be moſt true, that God is faithfull
which will not ſuffer vs to be tempted aboue that we be able,
but will euen giue the iſſue with the temptation, that we
may be able to beare it, 1. Corinth. 10. 13. and if there were
no Scripture to prooue it, our owne experience might tell vs
the trueth of it: for if wee haue obſerued any thing, wee
may remember that many times we haue beene low brought,
and haue ſuſtained very heauy thinges, and thought we
ſhould neuer haue beene able to haue borne them, neither
in deede ſhould we, but that there was an other thing farre
aboue our ſelues, which made vs indure and ouercome thoſe
thinges which we thought we ſhould haue fainted in the
middeſt of them, ſo that we may boldly ſay with the holy Apoſtle,
Bleſſed be God euen the Father of our Lord Ieſus Christ,
the father of mercies, and God of all comforts, which comforteth
vs in all our tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them that
be in any affliction, with the comfort wherewith we our ſelues are
comforted of God. For as the ſufferings of Chriſt abound in vs, ſo
our conſolation aboundeth through Chriſt, 2. Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5. And
this is ſo much the more worthy to be conſidered of vs, becauſe
he ſaith that the ſpirite ſhall helpe vs, not in ſome fewe onely,
but in all our infirmities whatſoeuer, and there can be no
weakenes in vs ſo great, or infirmities ſo many vpon vs, which
the ſpirit ſhall not ſtrengthen, euen to the bearing of the greateſt
croſſe that may be laid vpon vs, as we heard the Apoſtle
ſaying before, that God did comfort him in all his tribulations;
and that his conſolations did abound, euen as his ſufferings did
abound. In the meane ſeaſon he giueth vs to vnderſtand, that
the afflictions of the godly are ſo great, that they farre paſſe any
ſtrength that is in vs to beare them: yea that we are very
weake of our ſelues, and ſubiect to many infirmities, though
we be partakers of the ſpirite of God; for it doth not ridde vs
of them. Nay the very Apoſtles and Paul him ſelfe confeſſeth
that hee was not able to haue vndergone ſo many and

great things as he did being a fraile man like vnto vs, but that
he had the ſpirit helping him in his infirmities. The trueth of
which may likewiſe appeare in the great complaints of David,
Iob, and the reſt, who though they did patiently beare many
great things, yet not without many infirmities. For Iob ſometimes
curſeth his day: & Dauid ſaith unto God in his haſt. I am
caſt out of thy ſight, Pſal. 31. 22. & therefore we are not to imagine
of ſuch a portion of God, ſpirite, that might ſwallowe
up all our infirmities (for then we were no men) but it muſt
be ſufficient that we are ayded with the ſtrength of it, ſo that
wee finally fall not downe, and lye ſtill vnder the heauy
burthen of affliction, but that there is a mixt thing as it
were in vs: namely, our owne infirmities to humble vs, & the
ſtrength of Gods ſpirit to inable vs to beare: ſo that hauing ſo
able an helper to beare with vs, wee may be comforted with
hope of induring the greateſt thing that may befall vs in this
world, though continuing upon vs never ſo long. And that we
might doe it the rather; the Apoſtle further addeth, that the
ſame ſpirit ſhall likewiſe ſtirre us up in all neceſſities of ours to
pray vnto God, and to make our moane vnto him, as to our
Father and ſhall be heard of him. For though we ſometimes
through the greatneſſe of our miſerie knowe not what, or
how to pray as wee ought, yet his ſpirite ſhall ſtirre vp euen
then though not many well ordered ſpeeches or wordes, yet
thoſe ſighes and grones, which being unſpeakeable and only
felt, are notwithſtanding well vnderſtoode and accepted of
God, becauſe they proceede from his ſpirit, whoſe meaning he
knoweth and graunteth, becauſe it maketh requeſt for the
Saintes according to the will of God, as it is ver. 26. wherein
we are notwithſtanding to conſider, that though we haue receiued
the ſpirite of God, euen the ſpirite that teacheth vs to
pray, ſo that we haue many times called upon God with great
aſſurance and comfort for and with our ſelves and others, yet
there may be a time and that very often, wherein we may be
ſo diſtracted by ſome great affliction, and in that caſe that being
as it were aſtoniſhed and ouercome with the greatnes and
ſtrangeneſſe of it, wee can not tell what to pray: and though

prayer then be our onely refuge, yet wee can not tell how to
begin it, or what to ſay. And ſo unlike ſhall we be unto our
ſelues, and that that we haue bene in times paſt, as though
we were not the ſame: nay our eſtate may ſeeme like unto the
wicked, who are at their wits end. For if we were asked what
we would haue, vve can not tell, and though we haue liberty
to aske of God, we can not uſe it: for we can not tell what to
pray. A wonderfull thing, but yet moſt true, and that which is
to be found not in ſome, but in the moſt excellent ſeruants of
God, euen the Apoſtles themſelues, as Paul here bringeth in
himſelfe for an example, and in this infirmitie maketh himſelfe
like unto the reſt. And though we haue a forme of prayer preſcribed
us by our Sauiour Chriſt, yet we aske thoſe things many
times which if we had them would hurt vs, and when we
aske that which is profitable and good, yet by preſcribing to
the Lord, the time, maner, and meanes of our deliverance, we
pray with ſuch impatience and diſtruſt, that it may truely be
ſaid, we can not tell what to pray as we ought. This was the
eſtate of good King Hezekiah, Iſa. 38. 14. when he was oppreſſed
in the bitterneſſe of his ſoule (as he ſaith) & he chattered
like a Crane or a Swallow, and mourned as a Doue. Such
was the perplexitie and more then infirmitie of Dauid, when
inſtead of praying, he roared all the day long, Pſal. 32. 3. and
when hee mourned in his prayer, and could but make a noiſe,
Pſal. 55. 2. and when (as he ſaith) for the voice of his groning
his bones did cleave to his skinne, and that he was like a Pelicane
of the wilderneſſe, and like an Owle of the deſert, and as
a Sparrow alone upon the houſe toppe, Pſalm. 102. 5, 6, 7. and
when his heart panting and his ſtrength failing him, euen the
light of his eyes, he roared for the very griefe of his heart, and
he powred out his whole deſire before the Lorde, by ſobbing
and ſighing, rather then by any thing elſe. Thus theſe moſt
excellent ſeruants of God, in their greateſt agonies, were ſo
farre from being able to pray unto God in any tollerable maner,
that in their owne ſence and feeling they did but roare
and crie, ſobbe and ſigh, mourne and complaine, and that very
confuſedly, euen like the Crane, the Swallow, & the Owle,

ſo confuſed were they in themſelues and full of diſorder, and
fallen into ſo many great infirmities at once: Therfore we may
not iudge of our ſelues or others by any one ſuch or fewe particular
caſes, leaſt wee deceiue our ſelues: neither muſt wee
then in this great vnfitneſſe of ours be like unto the wicked,
who giue ouer all prayer becauſe they are unfitte for it, but
ſtriue earneſtly againſt this infirmitie of ours, and then pray
vnto God that we might pray, vvhich if we will do, no doubt
we ſhall finde his promiſe to be true in this, That euen then
his Spirit ſhall teach us to pray; for as our Sauiour Chriſt comforteth
his diſciples in another caſe. Matt. 10. 19, 20. that when
they ſhoulde be brought before kings they ſhould not take
thought what or how to ſpeake for he would giue them in
that houre what to ſay, becauſe it was not they which ſhould
ſpeake, but the ſpirite of the Father vvhich ſpeaketh in them:
euen ſo we ſhall finde when we are moſt unfitte to pray, if we
will not yeelde to it: there ſhall be a ſecrete inwarde working,
whereby wee ſhall be ſtirred up to doe ſomething, and there
ſhalbe a labour of the heart, and an indeauour of the minde
aſpiring unto that which we may ſeeme not to attaine unto,
and there ſhall be many ſighings, though fewe vvordes, many
great deſires, though fewe voices, yea there ſhalbe that which
wee can not greatly conceiue of our ſelues, and euery thing
ſhall be unſpeakeable. For no doubt thoſe men that we ſpake
of before euen at thoſe times when they could not tell, what
and hovv to pray as of them-ſelues, yet the ſpirite helping
them, they did pray, and there were at leaſt vnſpeakeable
ſighes and grones ſtirred up in them, For it is ſaid of Hezekiah
that hee then turned his face to the wall and prayed to
the Lorde and wept ſore, 2. Kings 20. 2, 3. and Dauid vvhen
as in his owne feeling hee did but roare and ſigh: euen then
he poured out, &, that very plentifully his whole deſire before
the Lord, Pſal. 38. and when he did but mourne and make a
noiſe, it was counted a prayer before the Lord, Pſal. 55. 2. and
when as he ſaith that his grouings were like the Pelicans, & the
ſparrows, or the ſhriekings of an owle, yet to ſhew that in them
there was a worke of Gods ſpirite, that made them acceptable

to him, he beginneth the Pſalme thus: O Lorde heare my prayers
and let my cry come unto thee. So it is ſaide of the whole
Church of God in Egypt, Exod, 2. 23. 24. that vvhen for the extremitie
of their bondage they could not pray unto God, yet
they cryed and ſighed and mourned unto him. This then is a
moſt notable cōfort in all afflictions, that beleeuing in Chriſt
and pertaking of his ſpirit, it ſhall helpe vs in all our infirmities
ſo, that when we can not tell what or how to pray as we ought,
it ſhall teach us ſo to doe it, as wee may haue hope and comfort
of being heard. For this is that which he addeth, that the
Lord which ſearcheth the heart, knoweth the meaning of his
owne ſpirit, for it maketh requeſt to him for the Saintes according
to his will: for by knowing, he doth not only meane, that
he underſtandeth it, as he doth all other things, but he accepteth
and alloweth it, and doeth moſt willingly graunt ſuch requeſtes,
as though they were made in farre better liking to our
ſelues, and ſo is the word taken, Pſalm. 1. 6. The Lord knoweth
the way of the righteous. For, he heard the crie of the Iſraelites
when they did but ſigh & moane, & deliuered them from the
bondage: he heard Hezekiah chattering in his prayer, & raiſed
him vp from death, & added 15. yeres more to his life: he heard
David roaring for the extremitie of his paine, and forgaue the
puniſhment of his ſinne: and he hath heard us many times in
our greateſt need, when wee haue howled and cried, rather
then haue made any ſetled and well ordered prayer: yea, when
we haue rather ſighed then ſpoken. For the Lord in this caſe
regardeth not ſo much the multitude of wordes, as hee looketh
to the meaning of his ſpirite, and graunteth that though
we ſpeake neuer a worde. For euen as a father hauing a yong
Infant ſicke of ſome ſore diſeaſe, though the child can ſpeak
neuer a worde, is ready to helpe it: and if it can ſpeake, yet
being full of paine, can not call for things as it ought, yet if the
mother can but by any ſignes geſſe at the meaning of it, ſhee
will accept as much of it as if it had ſpoken very plentifully: yea
though it ſhould ſay one thing and meane another, ſhe would
giue it according to the meaning of it. So the Lord that is filled
with the bowels of compaſſion towardes us in Chriſt, farre aboue

any father or mother though he delighteth to heare vs
pray unto him, yet when as by the extremitie of our miſeries,
we are oppreſſed or diſtracted, ſo that we can not in any orderly
maner pray unto him as we ought, he alloweth of the ſighes
and ſobbes that wee offer vp unto him, and graunteth not ſo
much our words (which are none or fewe) as the meaning of his
ſpirite which is plentifull in vs. Hereupon it commeth to paſſe
that the Lord in his rich mercy imputeth not unto his ſervants
the manifold rebellions of the fleſh, or great complaints in
their prayers, as not unto Iob or to David who vvere full of
them: becauſe he hath reſpect vnto the meaning of his ſpirite
in them: euen as the father is not ſo much greeued or offended
with the murmurings, impatience, and outcries of his
poore ſicke childe, as he by the leaſt token geſſeth at the meaning
of him, and taketh that in good part. What ſhall we then
ſay to theſe things? is it true indeed that the Lord wil vouchſafe
to looke vpon the lowe degree of his ſervants, and haue
reſpect unto poore ſinnefull creatures, who when they are in
their iuſt deſerued miſerie, and euen then cannot pray vnto
him one worde aright; and when they beginne to ſpeake,
and their tongue cleaueth unto the roofe of their mouth, that
he vvill then heare their ſighes and their cries? yea undoubtedly,
he that of his great mercie will not quench the ſmoaking
flaxe, nor breake in ſunder the bruiſed reede; will of the like
mercie heare, not only the well ordered prayers of his Church,
but euen the very cryings and roarings of his ſeruants, though
they be like the Pellicanes and the Owles: yea their mournings
though they be like unto the Doues, yea when they ſay
nothing, neither indeede can, their verie lobbes and ſighes
which come from the aboundance of a troubled Spirite and
can not be expreſſed: for he alloweth of the meaning of his
ſpirit which worketh thoſe things in them, and if they could,
are willing thereby to perfourme better ſeruice unto him.
What can be more comfortable vnto vs then this? In all our
neceſſities let us then with great boldneſſe goe vnto the Lord
by Chriſt, and though we cannot utter many wordes, yet 
                  〈◊〉
               
vs ſpeake vnto him: for ſurely the acceptation of our praiers

conſiſteth not in the multitude or well placing of our wordes,
but in the requeſt of our hearts, and therefore if we can pray
but two wordes, and ſay with the Publicane. Lorde be mercifull
vnto me a ſinner: with the Apoſtles, Lord increaſe my faith: or
with the blind man, O ſonne of David haue mercie upon me: or
with the Theefe on the croſſe, Lorde remember me: this ſhorte
thing proceeding from the ſpirite in vs, and offered up in the
mediation of Chriſt Ieſus and in the vertue of his praiers, ſhall
be as well receiued of him when we can doe no otherwiſe, as
if we had ſpent an whole houre in praier: and if we can not doe
this, yet if we lift up our mindes unto God as Hannah did, who
ſpake neuer a worde, and as Nehemiah did: yea if we doe but
ſigh after an unſpeakeable manner, the Lorde will not refuſe
that. Verſ. 28. Alſo we know that all things worke together,
&c. Wherein the Apoſtle proceeding to comfort us in afflictions
miniſtreth this ſoueraigne medecine againſt the contagion
thereof, namely that all affliction come to the beleeuers not
for their hurt, but for their ſingular good, ſeeing that they doe
befall them not by fortune or chance but by the ſpeciall prouidence
of God, & that for the ſame end; who as he hath choſen
them frō euerlaſting, ſo in the ſame counſell of his, he ordeined
that they ſhould be like unto his ſōne, v. 29. & therfore calleth
them in time, iuſtifieth them by faith, and ſo by the croſſe bringeth
them to eternall glory as he did his Sonne, ver. 30. & therfore
concludeth that no affliction ſhall be able to hurt them,
ſeeing the Lorde is with them in it, meaning thereby to doe
them good, ver. 31. and that he is ſo, we may be aſſured of it,
ſeeing that he ſpared not his owne Sonne but gaue him for us
all to death, and therefore it can not be, but that with him hee
ſhould giue us all things alſo verſ. 32. Therfore when he ſaith,
All things, whether it be as generally taken as it is ſpoken,
namely that not onely proſperitie but adverſitie alſo: or it
be reſtrained to his particular purpoſe, namely all afflictions
of what kind ſoeuer: true it is, that his purpoſe is to ſhew, that
all afflictions doe not onely not hinder the ſaluation of the
godly, but doe greatly further it: which howſoeuer it conteineth
an whole and entire matter by it felfe, yet being inferred

upon the former wordes: The Apoſtle ſeemeth therein to anſwere
a ſecrete obiection which might ariſe in mens mindes
from thence, namely, that it ſeemeth many times that the
Lorde doeth not heare the prayers of the afflicted, becauſe
their afflictions be not onely not remooued according to their
prayer, but ſometimes increaſed contrary to their deſire. Therfore
wee muſt remember what hath beene alreadie ſpoken,
how the Lorde in graunting our requeſtes, not ſo much looketh
vnto the particular things wee deſire, as to the meaning
of his ſpirite, and graunteth that in turning the afflictions unto
our ſingular good, whereas if they were remooued, it
would be farre worſe with us though we imagine to the contrarie:
for as if one in a burning feuer ſhould in the middeſt of
his fitte aske colde water and his friend the Phiſition ſhould in
ſteade of that giue him an wholeſome medecine, ſhoulde in
denying that particular thing demaunded, graunt unto his
generall meaning which was that he might haue that, which
might doe him moſt good, though now being diſtempered
he was not able to iudge of it, but did take one thing for another:
So whatſoeuer we aske in our diſtreſſe, our meaning
muſt needes be, if it be ruled by Gods ſpirit, that we woulde
haue that, which might procure our beſt good: therefore if the
Lord turne our croſſes to our good though we prayed for the
cleane taking away of them, he fulfilleth both theſe promiſes
at once. Thus when Paul prayed thriſe that the meſſenger of
Sathan might depart from him, the Lorde in giuing him his
grace, that was ſufficient for him, & making his power known
in the Apoſtles weakenes, 2. Cor. 12. 8, 9. did both ſatisfie the
meaning of his ſpirit, & turne his croſſe unto his ſingular good.
But further touching this matter we are more generally to underſtād,
that th' Apoſtle ſaith not only that the croſſe ſhall turn
to our good: but that this ſhalbe verefied of all the croſſes that
euer may come upon us be they neuer ſo ſtrange, as ſicknes, pouertie,
impriſonment, baniſhmēt, loſſe of husbād, wife, childrē,
father & mother, name, or any thing els; which is to be marked
leſt at any time we might be deceiued, to think if it were ſome
other afflictiō, we could haue ſome good hope in it, but this is ſo

great, it toucheth vs ſo nearely, that we can not poſſibly ſee
which way it ſhould bring any good vnto vs. Which as the
deuill is ready to perſwade vs, and we too ready to yeeld unto
his perſwaſion herein, ſo that wee might comfortably withſtand
it, we muſt conſider, that this good commeth from affliction,
not as though it were naturall and proper vnto it (for
indeed it is otherwiſe) that of it ſelfe it maketh men worſe, and
driueth them from God, as the rod doeth the child from the
mother: and this Satan aimeth at, as in Iob when he ſaid, If the
Lord touched him he would curſe him to the face: and ſo he
prevaileth with the wicked, as with Pharaoh. But in the children
of God his goodneſſe ouercommeth the deuils malice,
and the venume of the croſſe is taken away by the vertue of
the croſſe of Chriſt, whereby it is ſanctified, ſo that contrary
to the nature of it, it worketh good, The which that it might
not ſeeme ſtrange, much leſſe unpoſſible to vs, we muſt remē
               ber
that euen men by their wiſdome are able to make thoſe
things ſerue for the benefite of man which of them-ſelues
would hurt him. For if the Phiſitian thorough his skill can
cure a man by taking away his blood and humours, by cutting
and ſearing his fleſh, which of themſelues are hurtfull: if hee
can by arte ſo temper that which is poyſon, (as the vipers
fleſh) remper it, I ſay, with other wholeſome things,
and correct it with thoſe that be cordiall, that of it, he will
make a ſoveraigne Treacle, euen that which ſhall expell
poyſon, and ſo make that which could cauſe death to be
a preſeruer of life: Shall not the Lorde by his infinite wiſedom,
& almightie power, the Lord, I ſay, which bringeth light
out of darknes, & good out of euill, & calleth the things that be
not as though they were: ſhal not he be much more able by the
moſt grieuous croſſes that can befall us, worke the greateſt
good for vs that may be: ſo that when wee would hope for
good by our afflictions, and ſo be comforted in them, wee
are not ſo much to looke to the things themſelues, how they
are like to worke upon vs: as the promiſe which the Lorde
hath made vnto us concerning this matter, and ſo to be ſure
that the Lord himſelfe will work our good therby, becauſe he

hath ſayde it. This perſwaſion, no doubt, ſhould worke in vs
great patience in all our afflictions. For howe many grieuous
things will the ſicke patient ſuffer at the hands of a Phyſition
or Chyrurgion, by launcing, ſearing, corſying, &c. when he is
perſwaded that it will worke his good? but in deede here lyeth
the point of the matter, and this is all in all, that the poore
afflicted ſoule knoweth not that the Lord by his affliction will
worke his good, and therefore is he ſo vnquiet, and euer complaining;
for giue him this faith, and the feeling of it, and lay
vpon him whatſoeuer you will. Therefore let vs hearken to
that which the Apoſtle ſaith, that howſoeuer we, becauſe of
our ignorance are vncertaine what will be the happie iſſue of
all our afflictions, yet he knoweth very wel that that ſhal worke
together our good, which he ſpeaketh confidently both as a
teacher of the Church, an Apoſtle, and as a man of experience,
and therefore we ought to giue credit vnto him: euen as the
patient doth to the Phyſition, though him ſelfe had neuer experience
of any ſuch thing before; which eſpecially we ought
to doe, becauſe vnto his owne word he ioyneth the teſtimonie
of many others ſaying, We know, meaning the reſt of the
Apoſtles and miniſters, & men of experience, that all of them
knowe it, and therefore this worde beeing confirmed by the
mouthes, not of two or three witneſſes, but hauing ſo great a
cloud of witneſſes for it, ſhould be receiued without all gaynſaying.
For it is all one as if the fearefull patient ſhould haue
not one, but a whole companie of Phyſitions ſaying vnto him,
that vndoubtedly this medicine is like to doe you good, wee
know the working of it well, and haue had great experience
of it in many, you neede not to feare it, take it vpon our credit:
this would much mooue him: So, no doubt, this ſhould correct
the too much feare, that is in vs, of beeing hurt by the
croſſe, that we heare ſo many excellent and famous men very
skilfull therein, to ſpeake ſo boldly vnto vs of the benefite
of it: euen thoſe whome we are moſt readie to beleeue in all
other things, why then ſhould we not doe ſo in this? but that
we might doe it the rather, let vs a little conſider in particulars
of the benefit of the croſſe, and though the Apoſtle nameth

one great one here, which might be ſufficient, yet before wee
come to it, let vs ſee what other ends of it the Scripture affordeth
vs. And firſt of all we ſhall finde it to be a ſpeciall meane
to draw vs frō the too much loue of this world, that we might
vſe it as though we did not vſe it: for when we haue all things
at our will, we are wedded vnto this worlde, and thinke it beſt
for vs alwaies to abide here, and though heauen be a thouſand
times heauenly, yet we deſire it not ſo earneſtly as we ought,
but are ſtil groueling vpon the earth: but when by affliction we
finde that there is no contentment in any thing here below, it
may mooue vs to diſpiſe them, and with more feruent deſire to
aſpire at heauen, where is the fulnes of ioy and pleaſure for euermore.
For this cauſe the Patriarks ſuffered ſo many afflictions,
to whome ſo many earthly things were promiſed; that
they might not ſtay in them, but from them aſcend vp into heauen
which they were eſpecially to looke for, as the Apoſtle
faith, Heb. 11. 9, 10. that Abraham, Iſaak, and Iaakob heyres
of the promiſe, aboad in the land of promiſe, as in a ſtraunge
cuntrey: for they looked for a citie whoſe builder and maker is
God. Thus the Lord dealeth with many before their death,
laying long and grieuous diſeaſes vpon them, that they finding
no reſt in this world, might be willing to goe out of it, and to
deſire death moſt willingly, which before as moſt ougly, they
did abhorre. So that as the mother by ſome vnpleaſant thing
weaneth the child from the breſt, vpon which it would otherwiſe
alwaies linger to the hurt of it, nowe when ſtronger
meate is more fit for it: ſo the Lord weaneth vs by the croſſe
from the loue of this worlde, and thus turneth it vnto our good.
Moreouer by the ſame he bringeth vs to a more through repentance
& ſorrow for our ſinnes, & worketh that in vs therby
which the word did not before, when we find by woful experience
what great miſeries they haue brought vs vnto: for if we
would iudge ourſelues, we ſhould not be iudged of the Lord,
but when wee are iudged, we are chaſtened of him, becauſe
we ſhould not be condemned with the wicked world, 1. Cor.
11. 31, 32. whereunto agreeth that Pſal. 107. 10. &c. that affliction
humbleth men vnto true repentance before God, euen

as we ſee it to be true in the Prodigal child, who by his great
miſerie came to repent him of his riotous life, Luk. 15. 16. and
the brethren of Ioſeph, though we may preſume of them, that
they being brought vp in the houſe of there godly father, did
ſecretly repēt there ill dealing towards Ioſeph, yet many yeres
after, about 20. or there about, when they were in aduerſitie, the
memorie of it renued it ſelfe afreſh, and thereby they weare
brought more ſeriouſly to iudge them ſelues for it; ſo that in
this reſpect, it is compared to fire that purgeth the gold, & conſumeth
the droſſe of it; vnto a fyle that skoureth oft the ruſt; vnto
a purgation that expelleth corrupt humours from the body.
Therefore euen as the fire doth not hurt the gold, in conſuming
the droſſe, and the fyle in taking away the ruſt, and the purgation
in expelling ill humours: ſo afflictions cauſing vs to abhorre
and leaue ſome ſinne or other, which if we continued in, would
deſtroy vs, may truly be ſaid to worke our good. In the third
place, it preſerueth vs from many ſinnes, which otherwiſe we
ſhould fall into, but that beeing vnder the hand of God, we are
kept in more awe: and as Phyſicke ſerueth not onely to cure vs
of the diſeaſes we are fallen into, but to preſerue vs from them
in ſome tollerable health: ſo the croſſe both recouereth vs out
of ſinne, when we are fallen into it, and preuenteth many, that
otherwiſe might creepe vpon vs: ſo that as ſome ſickly bodies
are driuen to diet them ſelues, and are in continuall Phyſicke
to preuent that which their corrupt eſtate would otherwiſe
neceſſarily pull vpon them: ſo ſome are alwaies, or the greateſt
part of there liues in the dyet of affliction, not ſo much to
bring them from groſſe and grieuous ſinnes which they are
not yet fallen into, as to keepe them from falling, which the
Lord knoweth they are readie to doe, in reſpect of their ages,
callings, and places that they liue in. So that if the Lord deale
with vs as with vntamed heyfers, which are kept from ſtraying
out of there paſtures with hedges and ditches; ſo he puts
thornes and briars in our waies as Hoſeah ſaith 2. 6. that is, laieth
affliction vpon vs, and ſo as it were ſtoppeth the way that
we might not break forth by diſobedience to our hurt, muſt we
not needes ſay, that euen this way as well as any other, the

Lord worketh by affliction our ſingular good? and with the
Prophet, Bleſſed is the man whome thou chaſteneſt, O Lord,
and teacheſt him in thy law, that thou maiſt giue him reſt from
the daies of euill, while the pit is digged for the wicked. And
Pſal. 119. 67. 71. Before I was afflicted, I went aſtray, but now
I keepe thy word: and, It is good for me that I haue beene afflicted,
that I may learne thy ſtatutes. Beſides all this, afflictions
are called trialls, becauſe that by them the Lorde tryeth
what is in vs, not that he is ignorant of it, but becauſe hee
would haue thereby our ſelues and others throughly to knowe
what is in vs, and in what meaſure, and what is both good and
euill, which without the triall could not ſo well be knowne:
which ſerueth for this ende, that if we haue receiued any good
grace, we might be thankefull to God for it, if not, we might
labour for it. Thus ſpeaketh the Apoſtle Peter, 1. Epiſt. 1. 6, 7.
Now for a ſeaſon if neede require, ye are in heauines through
manifold tentations, that the triall of your faith beeing much
more precious then gold that periſheth (though it be tried
with fire) might be found vnto your praiſe, honour, and glorie,
at the appearing of Ieſus Chriſt. Where the Apoſtle ſaith, that
if men by the fire will trie the gold to the ende that they might
certenly know what is the value of it, and yet it is but a thing
that periſheth, and therefore in no wiſe to be compared to
faith and other graces of Gods ſpirite: then the Lord much
more by affliction may make triall of them, to the ende that
all men may ſee them to be ſo precious as they be. Thus was
Abraham prooued, Gen. 22. 1. when the Lord commaunded
him to offer vp his onely ſonne Iſaak whome he loued, which
he willingly obeyed, and by faith offered him vp, Hebr. 11. 17.
ſo that the Lord ſaith, now it was knowne by good proofe that
he feared the Lord, when for his ſake he had not ſpared his
onely ſonne. Thus is it knowne who are they that haue receiued
the ſeede of Gods word into good ground, and who into
ſtonie ground, euen ſuch as goe away in tentation: and ſo
though they beleeued for a time, yet then ſhew that the word
was not rooted in them, Luk. 8. 13. and thus it is knowne who
haue builded there houſes vpon the rocke, and who vpon the

ſands, who haue beene onely hearers of the word, and who doers
of the ſame. Euen ſuch as when the rayne fals, the floode
comes, and the winde blowes, there houſes ſtand or fal, that is,
they that in affliction and tentation continue the ſame that
they were before, or are vnlike vnto themſelues; to be ſhort,
thus were the Iſraelites tried in the wildernes, where it appeared
many waies what was in euery man, where ſome were
murmurers, ſome fornicatours, ſome idolatours, ſome diſobedient,
and ſome faithfull, and all this by the ſeuerall afflictions
and croſſes that did befall them. Thus by the great afflictions
that came vpon Iob at once, appeared what was in him, when
in all that he ſinned not with his mouth, but ſaide, The Lorde
gaue, and the Lord hath taken away, bleſſed be the name of the
Lord. And thus laſtly by triall appeared the weakenes of Peter,
who though he had made ſo large a confeſſion of his faith
before; yet at the voyce of a mayde, when he ſaw greater danger,
ſware and foreſware with curſing and banning, denying
Chriſt, euen that he neuer knew the man: therefore if it be good
for vs not to be ignorant of our ſelues, and ſo not to be deceiued
with an ouerweening of our ſelues; if it be good for any man
to ſee his wants and weaknes, that he may be humbled and
ſeeke to haue them healed, if it be good to know certenly that
we haue receiued ſuch and ſuch graces, euen in that meaſure
that we haue, that we might be thankefull to God and comforted
in our ſelues: then ſeeing that affliction and the croſſe
bringeth forth all this at once, and by trial we finde what faith,
hope, loue, patience, obedience, &c. is in vs, and what not, that
whatſoeuer we ſeemed to be before to our ſelues, and others,
yet now we know certenly that we are thus and thus, it can not
be denied but that affliction worketh much good vnto vs, and
we ought to ſay with the Apoſtle, that we knowe it to be ſo.
VVhich we may much more confidently when we ſhall ſee
(omitting to ſpeake of many moe vſes that the croſſe hath)
that laſt and greateſt of all, that is ſpoken of verſ. 29. Hetherto
we haue ſeene that there is great vſe of affliction, and that it
worketh much good, and that in euery croſſe beſides the preſent
bearing of it, the Lord offereth great commoditie vnto

vs and worketh it in vs thereby: ſo that as in all other thinges
there is the preſent poſſeſſion of them, and the vſe of them, in
ſo much that many haue great goods and yet not know howe
to vſe them; ſo many haue great and long croſſes vpon them,
yet labour not after the fruit of them. Thus ſeeing afflictions
are common to the good and the bad, and both doe beare
them, whether they will or no, yet the one muſt labour for the
good which the Lord offereth to them thereby, which the other
not once ſo much as looketh after: which no doubt when
Gods children are ſome thing careleſſe in, then he continueth
his roddes vpon them, nay increaſeth them, becauſe his purpoſe
is to doe them good: and ſo herein dealeth with them
as a father (euen as he is) who ſpareth not the rodde, till his
childe be thereby humbled, to the confeſſion and amendment
of his fault, becauſe his purpoſe is to doe him good, when as
notwithſtanding he letteth his ſeruant goe, when he ſeeth that
he will not profit by wordes or a fewe ſtripes, as not caring for
him: ſo the Lord when he ſpareth the wicked in their ſinnes,
and reſerueth them to further iudgement, correcting his owne
children againe and againe, ſheweth that his purpoſe is to
doe them good. Therefore let no man in the continuance of
afflictions be too much diſcouraged, as though the Lord were
continually angrie with him, or had a purpoſe to deſtroy him
thereby, which he could doe in a moment at once, but let
him thus reaſon with himſelfe out of the word; Nowe I know
aſſuredly that the Lord loueth me in deede, becauſe he purpoſeth
to doe me good by all things, euen by affliction, and therfore
whereas I through the vntowardnes of my nature, haue
not profited ſufficiently by his former chaſtiſments, he ſendeth
a new fatherly correction, thereby to worke my further good,
and whereas I through my crookednes and ſtubbornnes doe
not yet profit by them, as he would haue me, therefore I ſee
that in much mercie he continueth it, that ſo I might get good
by it at the laſt: and herein the Lord dealeth like a wiſe & carefull
Phyſitian, who purpoſing not ſo much to giue Phyſick vnto
the ſicke patient, as to cure him thereby, if the firſt medicine
will doe it, there he leaues them; if not, he applieth one medicine

after an other, becauſe he hath a diligent care of him:
and if at any time he maketh any intermiſſion, it is becauſe of
the patients weaknes, whome he would by that meanes to gather
ſome ſtrength, not that he meaneth to leaue him: ſo the
Lord purpoſing, according to his word, by affliction to doe vs
good, when by the firſt croſſe we profit not as we ought, then
either he letteth it lie the longer vpon vs, or remoouing it
ſendeth an other in ſteade of it, though not preſently, becauſe
we could not beare it, yet afterwardes when it ſeemeth beſt
vnto him. Therefore the beſt thing for euery man is, ſoone to
profit vnder the croſſe, that ſo it may be remooued, and not ſo
much to labour for the remoouing of it, as for the fruit of it,
leaſt it going away without profit, the Lord bring vpon vs
ſome greater afterwards, ſeeing he is purpoſed thereby moſt
aſſuredly to doe vs good. Moreouer, by this we knowe that
whereas euery man deſireth that which is beſt for him, and
yet moſt men erre in the particulars, deſiring that which is moſt
pleaſant, profitable, honourable, &c. in this worlde; that in
deede is beſt for vs at all times, whatſoeuer it be, which maketh
moſt for the glorie of God in vs, our owne ſaluation, and
the edifying of our brethren, which becauſe the Lord worketh
many times by afflictions, as wee haue heard, euen they then
are beſt for a man: Euen as when a mans bodie is ſo diſtempered,
and ſome member ſo putrified, then it is beſt for him
to haue his bloode taken away from him, to be launced and
ſeared, yea to haue a part cut off: therefore when any affliction
or calamitie doth befall vs, let vs not be diſcontented therewith,
or be impatient, but ſubmitting our iudgements & wills
to the iudgements and will of God, let vs quietly indure, ſeeing
the Lord giueth vs that, not which we fondly deſire as the beſt,
but which he knoweth to be, and is indeede the beſt. Now ſeeing
it is ſo, what then I pray you is the cauſe why not onely
the wicked, but euen the godly, which ought to knowe this,
and to beleeue it, doe ſo grieuouſly complaine of there afflictions?
as Dauid, Iob, and the reſt, as though they ſhould be hurt
thereby, when as we haue ſeene they worke their good and
therefore are beſt for them: Truly it can not be denied, but that

men for the moſt part doe more complaine of their afflictions
then they ought to doe, and doe not ſo comfortablely
beare them as they ſhould: yet this hindereth not but that
men ſhould get good by their afflictions, and be alſo perſwaded
thereof, though they be full of complaints, whilſt they are
in the midſt of them: for who complaineth more then theſe
two men, and yet who had more profit and got greater good
of them then they? for ſuch is our nature, that we muſt needes
haue the feeling of afflictions, vnleſſe our heart were hard like
yron or braſſe, and ſo we were ſtocks and no men: but ſeeing
it is otherwiſe that our hearts are ſoft and tender, it can not be
but that euery thing ſhould worke vpon vs, and we be mooued
according to the nature of it, to ioy, ſorrowe, loue, hatred,
anger, and feare, and therefore tribulation muſt needes trouble
vs, and affliction afflict, and the croſſe crucifie, and yet we
may be perſwaded that it is for our good, and looke for it from
thence, euen as the ſicke patient can not as he is man, but feele
the launcing, and ſearing of his fleſh, and ſo complaine of it
with great griefe, yea cry out for the extremitie of paine,
though he knoweth it to be beſt for him then, and therefore
after a ſort doth moſt willingly ſuffer it. But many others are
ſo full of complaints in their affliction, becauſe they are not
perſwaded at that time, that the very thing is ſent for their
ſpeciall good, and therefore ſuch are to meditate vpon that
which we haue alreadie ſpoken concerning this matter.
            In the latter part of this verſe when he ſaith, to them that
loue God, as he thereby reſtraineth this generall promiſe, ſo he
ſheweth to whome it appertaineth, namely to thoſe that beleeue
in Chriſt Ieſus, and are ſanctified by his Spirite, for he intreateth
of the certaintie of the ſaluation of ſuch: nowe the
true and faithfull beleeuers as he hath before diſcerned them
from others by this fruite of faith, namely ſanctification, ſo
he doth here by one part of it, which is loue, as in the Epiſtle
to the Galat. chap. 5. verſ. 6. ſo that vnder one kinde he comprehendeth
all godlineſſe, but he taketh this thing rather then
any other, as moſt fitte for his purpoſe; for ſpeaking of affliction,
he ſaith, By this we ſhall trie our faith, if our loue vnto

to GOD continue euen then. For vvhereas the vvicked
vvill pretend to loue God in proſperitie, but in adverſitie they
fall unto hatred, yea unto plaine curſing and banning: he that
truly loueth God, loueth him not for his backe and bellie
alone, nor principally, but becauſe he is goodnes it ſelfe, and
therefore to be loued. And herein the one bevvray their ſervile
nature, that like as ſervants loue not their maſters, if they
once beginne to correct them: and the other their liberall and
childiſh diſpoſition, whome no correction or ſtripes of the father,
can make to chaunge their loue to him, much leſſe driue
avvay from him. This is that which Satan knowing generally
to be in the nature of man, thought to haue found in Iob,
though he vvas deceiued, vvhen he ſaid, Doeth Iob loue or
feare God for nothing? haſt not thou bene an hedge round about
him? but touch all that he hath, and ſee if he vvill not
blaſpheme thee to thy face. Therefore if in affliction we ceaſe
not to loue God, and in loue to ſerve him, vve ſhall be ſure
that he vvil fulfill this promiſe to vs, of turning all things to our
good. Moreouer, ſeeing that the Apoſtles purpoſe is, to intreat
of patience in affliction, this no doubt, is moſt fit for the purpoſe,
namely the conſideration of the loue which vve ought to
beare unto God. For if that in worldly matters we vvill beare
many great things at the hands of them vvhome vve loue, as
the childe at the mother; the husband at the wife; and one
friend at another; then how much more ought vve to beare all
things at the hands of God, vvhome vve knovve ſo loueth vs
in Chriſt, and therefore vve ought ſo to loue him againe: and
no doubt would beare if there vvere that loue in us unto him,
which ought. When he addeth in the ſame verſe, (Which are
called of his purpoſe) as hee doeth further ſhewe to whome this
promiſe doeth appertaine, euen to ſuch, ſo he ſhevveth the
cauſe of it, vvhich is not any vvorthines of theirs, or right be
having themſelues under the croſſe, as thereby deſeruing it,
but the free loue of God, vvhereby he before the beginning
purpoſed to doe them good, vvhich purpoſe of his nothing can
alter, but he maketh all things to further it, euen afflictions?
ſo that thus he declareth the certentie of this, for vvhat can

hinder the purpoſe of God? Nothing: and therefore afflictions
can not hinder the good of his children, ſeeing that hee
hath purpoſed to do them good, which purpoſe of his appeareth
by their effectual calling, and therefore when he had purpoſed
to ſaue them, he called them in time to the knowledge
of it, and from thence it came that the worde was effectuall to
them, when it was unprofitable vnto others. So the Lord continuing
the ſame purpoſe of his towards them, it ſhall come to
paſſe that though all other men ſhould waxe worſe and worſe
by their affliction, yet the Lorde would turne all theirs unto
their good becauſe he had purpoſed it. So that for the certentie
of this hee leadeth them to the conſideration of the purpoſe
of God appearing in their calling, which being verie
ſtrange, and many things againſt it, yet nothing could hinder
it becauſe it was purpoſed. So by the croſſe our good being ordained
by the unchāgeable purpoſe of god, how many things
ſoeuer may ſeeme to be againſt it within vs or without us, nothing
ſhall be able euer to hinder it, but we ſhall alwaies finde
this promiſe to be true: that all things ſhall worke togither
for the beſt to thoſe that loue God, euen thoſe that are called
of his purpoſe. In the next verſe when hee addeth; For
thoſe whom he knew before, hee alſo predeſtinate to be made like to
the image of his Sonne, that he might be the firſt borne among many
brethren: he declareth another moſt excellent end wherefore
the Lorde layeth the croſſe vpon his children, namely, that
thereby they might be like unto Chriſt their eldeſt brother, as
the Lorde hath ordeined, that all that are his ſhould be: and
thus eſpecially it worketh our good, when it maketh us conformable
to Chriſt: where he not onely ſaith, that afflictions
doe befall us by the very ſpeciall prouidence of God, and not
by chance, but to what ende he ſendeth them, namely that as
Chriſt firſt ſuffered and then entred into glory, ſo all others
going the ſame way might be like unto him, as he hath appointed
that they ſhoulde, and therefore wee neede not to
feare that the croſſe ſhould hinder us from our ſaluation, no
more then it hindred Chriſt from glorie: nay, that wee ought

in the middeſt of it, to haue ſure hope, that in the ende vvee
ſhall be like unto Chriſt in glory, becauſe vvee are like unto
him in the croſſe.
            Concerning the former, that no affliction commeth by fortune
or by chaunce, but by the appointment of God, he not
onely ſuffering it, but firſt ordaining it, and then laying it upon
us with his owne handes, it containeth in it moſt notable
comfortes by it ſelfe, and is that vvhich the whole Scripture
beareth very plentifull witneſſe unto: for ſeeing that wee beleeue
that God made all things of nothing, therefore whatſoeuer
are the meanes of any thing the Lorde is the doer of
it, for that they did that which they did by his ſpeciall power,
ſeeing that without him they are nothing. Therefore the
ſeruants of God haue confeſſed, that the Lorde himſelfe hath
brought all their troubles upon them, as Pſalme 66. 10.
Thou, O God, haſt prooved, thou haſt tried vs as ſilver is tried,
thou haſt brought vs into the ſ
                     •
                  are, and laide a ſtraite chaine
upon our loynes, thou haſt cauſed men to ride over our heades.
And Iob vvhen all his goods were giuen into Satans hand,
who ſtirred vp the Sabeans and the Chaldeans to ſpoile
him, yet hee ſaieth, The Lorde hath given, and hee hath taken
it. The deuils beſought Chriſt not onely that he vvould
ſuffer them, but that he vvoulde ſende them into the ſwine,
that they might goe into them, Mark. chap. 5. verſ. 12. So
Matth. chap. 4. verſ. 1. Chriſt is ſaide to be ledde by the ſpirite
into the vvilderneſſe to be tempted of the deuill, to
ſhevve, that whatſoeuer did befall him there, the Lorde
ſent him thither, and to that ende. And ſo hath hee taught
vs to pray, Leade us not into temptation, vvhich is
more comfortable then to ſay, Suffer us not to be ledde:
becauſe therein vvee confeſſe, not onely that the Lord
beholdeth vs in all our troubles, but that hee, that is our
Father, and knovveth our ſtrength, layeth them vpon us
vvith his ovvne hande, and therefore vvee neede ſo much
the leſſe to feare leaſt vvee ſhould be ouer-laden. The

conſideration of this ſhould not onely make us patient in all
afflictions, but to looke for ſome good from them, ſeeing that
he vvhich hath promiſed to vvorke our good by them, doeth
lay them upon us himſelfe: this no doubt vvas that, that ſtayed
the olde man Hely vvhen hee hearde that meſſage from the
Lorde by Samuell, vvhich othervviſe might haue bene more
vncomfortable vnto him, as appeareth by his vvordes, 1. Sam.
3. 18. It is the Lorde let him doe vvhat ſeemeth him good.
For this is all one, as if the ſicke patient ſhould haue a Phiſitian
to deale vvith him, that vvere his brother, his father, or
his friende, vvho ſhoulde not onely preſcribe the medecine,
but make it and miniſter it himſelfe, of vvhoſe fidelitie
and care tovvardes him, becauſe he doubteth not one vvhit,
it might make him moſt vvilling to receiue it, though verie
bitter and unpleaſant, and to hope for ſome good from it.
Thus our Sauiour Chriſt ſpeaketh, Ioh. 18. 11. Shall I not
drinke of the cuppe vvhich my Father hath giuen me? ſpeaking of

                  •
               his ſufferings. To ſhevv us, vvhenſoeuer any croſſe doeth
befall us, it is the cuppe vvhich God our Father in vviſedome
and mercie hath mingled for vs; and therefore vve ſhoulde
not feare any hurt by drinking of it, but rather hope that it
ſhould vvorke our good, as he hath promiſed. If vvhen the
childe hath offended his father, he ſhould ſay to his ſeruant
in his anger, Take him out of my ſight and puniſh him, it
would be more grieuous then if he ſhould take correction of
him himſelfe: ſo it may miniſter unto us ſome comfort that
in afflictions vve knovve that vve are under our fathers hand,
and that he hath not deliuered us unto any other, to be tormented.
If one that were blind ſhould be ſuddenly taken, & caried
to ſome puniſhment, he knew not by vvhom, he might
greatly feare, vvhat would be the ende or meaſure of it. Or if
one ſhoulde be dealt withall as is the manner of the Spaniſh
Inquiſitours, to put the poore ſoule in the greater feare, if he
ſhould haue a tormentour ſent unto him uery ougly diſguiſed,
who ſhovld cary him into a darke place, he knew not whether,
that might increaſe the griefe of his affliction the more,
but if vvhen he were in the middeſt of it, he ſhould heare the

vnto us, becauſe vvee looke not up unto him that ſendeth
it, and vvee are ſo blinde, that wee conſider not vvho
ſtriketh us, yet vvhen wee heare out of the Worde, the
voice of our Father ſpeaking unto us, and telling us that
it is hee that dealeth vvith us, hovve ſtraunge and deformed
ſoeuer the tormentour may ſeeme to be, let vs not be
too much diſcouraged, becauſe that euen vvhen hee ſtriketh
us, the bovvels of compaſſion in him doe yearne upon
us more then in a mother towardes her children, and hee
ſeeketh thereby to doe us good. Thus wee ſee that all afflictions
are ordained and ſent of God, and that the ſaluation
of the Church, and euery member of it is ioyned
with bearing the croſſe, ſo that vvee are not to looke to
be freed from it, unleſſe vvee will pervert this order eſtabliſhed
by Gods decree, neither neede vvee to feare
it vvhen as the Lorde that hath determined to ſaue us, hath
appointed alſo this vvay and meanes to ſaue us, and vvhen
his decree of ſauing cannot be ſeuered from his decree of
exerciſing vs under the croſſe. Which that vvee might not
looke to be freed from, or feare leaſt it ſhould hinder us in
our ſaluation, the Apoſtle telleth us wherefore the Lorde
hath thus decreed of the whole Church, euen that ſeeing
his owne Sonne Chriſt Ieſus came no other way but this
unto glorie, hee beeing the eldeſt brother in the houſe of
God, All other by their practiſe might yeelde unto his ſoveraigntie,
when they will not refuſe to goe that way to
their inheritance, which hee went before though never ſo
grieuous, euen through many afflictions. So that euen as a
noble man will haue all his ſervants to weare one liverie, that
they might be knovven: ſo the Lorde would haue all his
children knowen by one badge: the badge that he put upon
his eldeſt ſonne Chriſt was the croſſe, therefore none
of us the younger breethren muſt refuſe it. For as in a familie,
great is the priuiledge of the eldeſt brother, and
none muſt looke to goe beyonde him, nay euery one can
not be like unto him, and if any might come to as great

an inheritance, as hee by doing thoſe things which he did
before them, they might not refuſe the condition, unleſſe
they woulde preferre them-ſelues before him. So
ſeeing it hath pleaſed the Lorde to conſecrate the prince
of our peace through affliction, Hebr. cap. 2. verſ. 10. and
hee came vnto glorie no other way then this, vve muſt
thinke it good for us to goe the ſame way, that we might
be like unto him, and ſo by our practiſe, ſhewe that wee
acknowledge him to be the prince of our peace, and our
eldeſt brother. Then euen as hee is the chiefe and principall
in the common wealth, in the Church, in a private
familie, and in any place, that all deſire to be like unto,
ſo vvhen vvee are contented to be like unto Chriſt in any
thing, euen in the croſſe, then ſhall wee declare that vvee
holde him to be the chiefe and principall, and as it is ſaide
here, the firſt begotten among many breethren. For indeede
howſoeuer there is great difference betvveene the heade
and the reſt of the members, yet there is a certaine conformitie
betweene the members of the ſame bodie and the
heade, and all of them are inferiour vnto it: ſo howſoeuer
there is no compariſon betvvixt Chriſt and us, yet vvee
muſt be like him in this, that we muſt not be aboue him,
and therefore not to refuſe any condition, that he hath undergone
before, unleſſe vvee would prepoſterouſly preferre
our ſelues the members before him our heade: vvhich
were to darken the glorie of him, that is the firſt borne,
and to ſtaine the honour of him that is the prince of our
peace. For what a diſorder were it, if the ſubiects would
refuſe to doe that which the Prince had done before? and
if the younger breethren ſhoulde thinke much to bee
brought up that way that the heire hath beene before? euen
ſo when vvee ſhall refuſe to beare the croſſe vvhich
our Saviour Chriſt by the appointment of his Father hath
borne in greater meaſure then wee ſhall or can, it is nothing
elſe but to lifte up our ſelues aboue him, and to ſay

that wee will not be conformable unto him as to our
prince or eldeſt brother. And what a thing were this, that
vvee beeing vvorſe then duſt and aſhes, ſhoulde deſire
to be ſpared aboue the onely Sonne of God, and ſhould
ſo loue our ſelues, that the eſtate of Chriſt Ieſus ſhould
ſeeme to be vnmeete for vs, and when he was in all ſufferings
and afflictions brought vnto glorie, wee ſhoulde
dreame of a more readie way, and thinke to come to it
ſome other way wee knowe not what? Therefore let this
comfort us in all trouble and aduerſitie, that wee can neuer
be preſſed ſo lowe with it, but that Chriſt Ieſus hath
beene deeper plunged in it before, ſo that the more trouble
and aduerſitie wee ſuffer, the more are wee like unto
him: yea, if it were poſſible for us to goe dovvne into
hell, and to ſuffer all torments of a deſperate man in
ſoule and bodie, euen in them wee ſhoulde be moſt like
unto Chriſt in his great agonies and bloudy ſweates, yea
in his croſſe when hee cryed out vvith a lovvde voice,
My God, my God, vvhy hast thou forſaken mee? But if al
this doe not ſatisfie us, and wee further demaund vvhy
the Lorde ſhoulde appoint ſo harde a vvay for us vnto
heauen, and ordaine that by the ſtraight way and narrow
gate, wee ſhoulde enter into life, and ſhoulde vviſh that
hee had appointed ſome eaſier way then this: Firſt of all
wee muſt not preſcribe the Lorde any thing in the matter
of our ſaluation, but thinke our ſelues happy, that
wee are ſaued any way, yea if wee went to heauen by
hell: and ſecondarily when wee are come thither, wee
ſhall finde the ioyes ſo farre ſurpaſſe all troubles and aduerſities
vvhatſoeuer that wee haue ſuffered both in greatneſſe
and continuance, that wee ſhall neuer repent vs of
the hardneſſe of the way, no more then it did Ioſeph, that
hee firſt induring the priſon was afterwardes made ruler in
Egypt: or Iacob that he came to inherite his fathers bleſſing
at the laſt, by a long exile & tedious bondage: or the Iſraelites,

that by paſſing through a forlorne wildernes fourtie yeeres,
they came to the lande of promiſe in the ende. Or
Dauid that he came to the kingdome of Iſrael
by ſuffering ſo many things under
Saule as he did.
            
               Nicholas Bownde.
            
         
         
            
            A Treatiſe of a contented minde.
            Num. 11. From the 4. verſ. Moſes ſetteth downe the moſt
hainous ſinne of the people, which grieued him ſo, that he
complaineth of it vnto the Lord, verſ. 11. Who gaue him
this anſwer concerning this matter, verſ. 18. the execution
of which is deſcribed, verſ. 31.
            
               THeir ſinne was this, that they were not
contented with that moſt bleſſed eſtate
that the Lord had placed them
in: which, howſoeuer it may ſeeme to
be but a ſmall thing, yet if we meaſure
it by the puniſhment that came vpon
them for it, we muſt needes confeſſe it
to be great. For if the iuſtice of men
doth puniſh men but according to the qualitie of the fault, the
Lord doing it a great deale more, it can not be but a great ſinne
that pulled ſo great a puniſhment vpon them. And in deede
ſeeing that we beleeue that the Lord doth gouerne the whole
world, in wiſdome and mercie, deuiding vnto euery one that
portion which he knoweth to be moſt conuenient for them,
looke how much we are diſcontented with our eſtate, ſo much
doe we detract from the wiſe and mercifull prouidence of
God. Now this ſinne of theirs was ſo much the more grieuous,
by howe much more their eſtate was ſo good as it was, and
therefore had ſo many cauſes to be contented therewith. For
beſides that, they were deliuered from the cruell bondage of
Aegypt, they had many ſingular teſtimonies of Gods fauour,
both for this life and the life to come, and therefore the Prophet
Dauid, Pſal. 78. 12. doth thus ſet forth the indignitie of their

ſinne, declaring howe many benefits of God they did enioy,
when they begunne thus to murmure. And if we doe but conſider
the manifold publique benefits in the Church and common-wealth,
as the word of God, this long peace vnder ſo
gratious a gouernment, with ſo great plentie and freedome
from ſo many plagues, whereby all theſe are ſo much the more
comfortable vnto vs, beſides the priuate commodities which
euery one of vs many particularly remember in daungers eſcaped,
in good things receiued vpon ſoule and bodie, for this life
and the life to come in our owne perſons, and ſuch as appertaine
vnto vs, we muſt needes acknowledge that there is great
cauſe why euery one of vs ſhould be contented with our eſtates,
and that our ſinne in murmuring at any time ſhould be very
great. But yet we muſt come vnto that whereof the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh, Phil. 4. 11. I haue learned in what ſoeuer eſtate I am
therewith to be contented.
            Nowe that we might the better ſee into the ſinne of this
people to auoid it, we muſt marke by what ſteppes they came
vnto the height of it. Firſt of all they did leſſe eſteeme of that
pleaſant foode, then they ſhould, and did not ſee it to be ſo excellent
& conuenient for them as it was: for they ſpeak of it very
contemptuouſly, ſaying, There is nothing but this Man; when
as it was not onely able to nouriſh them, but was as pleaſant
as holeſome, for it had the taſt of pure oyle, and ſweete honie,
beſides it beeing giuen them daily, they might ſee in it the ſpeciall
prouidence of God towards them in feeding them from
hand to mouth as it were: ſo that this ſhould haue beene vnto
them in ſtead of all dainties in the world, if they could haue
ſeene it, but as though all this were nothing, they ſay, There is
nothing but this Mā. Therfore we muſt heed take leaſt at any
time we doe denie or leſſon the benefits of God, but labour to
ſee them all, and acknowledge them to be ſo great as they be,

                  •
               hat ſo in reſpect of them wee may confeſſe our eſtate to be ſo
good as it is, and therewithall to be contented. And euen then,
when we begin to miſlike any thing, becauſe it is not ſuch as
we wiſh it were, then we muſt alſo remember how otherwiſe
it may be commodious vnto vs, & what great vſe we may haue

haue of it, and ſo beholding the goodnes of God towards vs
in it, to reſt with thankefulneſſe well contented therewith.
            But they, giuing place to the deuill, & their own corruption
in this, from hence it came to paſſe, that they preferred any other
food which they had not, before that excellēt meat which
they had: & in deede thus Satan dealeth with men, whē he hath
brought thē to a miſliking of that which they ſhould not, then
he wil offer thē many other things, & perſwade thē to like of any
rather then of it. And this is to be marked ſo much the rather
becauſe they eſteeme onyons, leekes, & ſuch like▪ & fiſh, not of
the daintieſt, but ſuch as the pooreſt were wont to be fed withall,
before this moſt holſome & pleaſant meat▪ and ſo are contented
to chāge for the worſe. And they were ſo much the more
wicked in all this, becauſe they ſay they had the other food for
nothing, though in deede they had not, for they being vſed as
cruelly as might be, were no doubt conſtrained to pay for euery
thing to the vttermoſt, but they meane, they had theſe baſe &
cōmon things for a ſmall price: yet they might haue truly ſaide
of the Man, that they had that for nothing, euen for the gathering.
But now in a murmuring ſpirit, they had rather giue ſome
thing for the worſe, then enioy the beſt for nothing, & would
not onely change for the worſe, but alſo giue ſomthing for the
exchange: & thus had an imagination that it ſhould be meruelous
well with thē, if they were any otherwiſe then they were
yea though it were much worſe. Therefore wee muſt endeauour
to profit by our preſent eſtate, & to ſerue God in it, neuer imagining
that if it were any otherwiſe with vs, we ſhould be
very well, & we would doe great matters, when in the meane
ſeaſon we cannot keepe a tollerable courſe in that cōdition we
be preſently in. But whether God bleſſeth vs we muſt be thākful
& rightly vſe it: or whether he chaſtiſeth vs, vve muſt be hū
               ble
& profit by it: & be aſſured that it is a meere illuſion of the
deuil to be perſwaded that if we were otherwiſe, thē we would
be a great deale better, whē as now we cānot be as we ſhould:
forif we haue no power ouer owne will in time preſent, what
hope is there we ſhould haue it in time to come, vnleſſe vve
preſently labour for it? And if they could haue ſerued God with

               Man, then there had bin hope, that if that they had bin driuen
to onions and leekes, they ſhould haue done there duties then
alſo: as he that ſerueth God in a ſingle life, may hope to ſerue
him alſo in mariage: he that doth it in one eſtate, may hope to
doe it in an other. But they that ignorantly dreame, that if this
were not their eſtate, let befall then what will, they hope to do
well ynough, or let this croſſe be remooued, and let any other
be laid vpon them, and they will beare it, and let their eſtate be
but any waies changed, and they will indure it: they ſhal finde
it farre otherwiſe by experience, euen as this people, who not
vſing well their owne condition, when they were fedde with
Man, after when the Lord gaue them not common meate but
quailes, they were ten times worſe then they were before.
            The deuill doth not here leaue them, but draweth them on
further, and they following the corruption of their own hearts
doe not here ſtay, but beeing once perſwaded, contrarie to all
reaſon, that to be fedde with onions were better for them then
with Man, doe as men void of all reaſon, ſo vnſatiably deſire
them, like vnto bruit beaſtes, as they will not be quieted, till
they haue their greedie deſires ſatisfied: for they ſay their ſoule
is dried away, verſ. 6. As indeede this is the nature of any immoderate
affection, that it worketh vpon the bodie to the hurting
and conſuming of it, eſpecially a lingring and vnreaſonable
deſire. So that there fault was not onely in that they deſired
that which they ſhould not, but moſt of all, that they had
no gouernment of their affections to ſtay them, but did let
them range ſo inordinately. But here if we demaund, whether
it be ſimply vnlawfull for a man to deſire any thing that hee
wanteth, and to wiſh that his eſtate were bettered; or whether
he muſt alwaies remaine in one eſtate: I anſwer, it is lawfull
for vs to deſire and pray for as many things as we want, and
God hath promiſed, but in that maner that he hath promiſed
them. Therefore whereas he hath firſt of all promiſed vs the
forgiuenes of our ſinnes, his fauour and euerlaſting life, and
theſe be the greateſt thinges in the worlde, wee may, nay wee
ought to deſire our owne ſaluation, and all the meanes of it,
both firſt of all, and with the greateſt deſire that may be; and

here we neede not to feare any exceſſe. For we muſt hunger
and thirſt after the righteouſnes of Chriſt Ieſus, Matt. 5. 6. and
as newe borne babes, deſire the ſincere milke of the worde,
euen ſo earneſtly as they doe deſire their mothers milke, 1.
Pet. 2. 2. Wee muſt deſire the publike aſſemblies of Gods
people, euen as the hart deſireth the water brookes, in the
heate of ſummer, when he is chaſed, Pſal. 42. 1. And we muſt
long to be preſent at Gods ſeruice, euen to our fainting, which
is the propertie of longing, Pſal. 84. 2. And it were a ſinne
not to haue theſe great affections in vs vnto them. But all
outward thinges as they be promiſed vnto vs, euen as they
ſhall further vs in theſe things, and make vs more fit to glorifie
Gods holy name; and in the ſecond place, ſo we muſt deſire
them, but to theſe endes eſpecially, and all our affections
vnto them muſt be in a ſecond degree, neither aboue nor equall
with the former. Therefore firſt of all, we muſt deſire
them as it is the will of God to beſtow vpon vs, and as he in
his wiſedome doth better knowe then our ſelues, what will
make vs moſt fit to ſerue him: which will of his is firſt reuealed
vnto vs in his word, in that the thinges be honeſt and lawfull
in their owne nature, in ſo much that we may neuer deſire
any vnlawfull thing, for it is not his will to giue vs that: Secondly
in all outward things that be lawfull (for we ſpeake of
them) I ſhall know whether it be the will of God to beſtowe
this vpon me or no, or whether as it is good in it owne nature,
ſo he ſeeth it to be good for me now by the ordinarie meanes
he giueth me to bring it to paſſe, and by bleſſing of the means:
for ordinarily he worketh by meanes, in ſo much that if I deſire
a thing, and he denie me all meanes to compaſſe it, or maketh
not the meanes to proſper with me, then I am aſſured it
is not the will and pleaſure of almightie God to beſtow it vpon
me, yet it is not the time, this is not the place or meanes
whereby he will beſtow it vpon me: here I muſt ſtay my deſire,
but when I ſee the Lord both to offer and bleſſe the
meanes, whereby I conclude it his will, that it ſhould be ſo, or
whilſt I ſee it, and ſo am in no doubt of it, I muſt take heede
that my deſire or my affection vnto it be not ouer great,

and that I be not like the people in conſuming and pining away
with the deſire of it: and as Ahab and Ammon were ſicke
of their vnlawfull deſires, we muſt take heede of theſe vnlawfull
deſires ſo much the more carefully, becauſe they alwaies
bring with them the abuſe of the things we deſire. For as the
people did inordinately deſire any foode ſaue Man, ſo when
they had it, they glutted themſelues therewith, as Pſal. 78. 29.
So they did eate, & were filled, for he gaue thē their deſire, they
were not turned from their luſt, but the meate was yet in their
mouthes, when the wrath of God came vpon them: Where
he noteth their behauiour, that they did not onely eate, but
ſtuffed themſelues till they were full, and they ſatisfied their luſt
and like bruit beaſts, as their perſwation of the things was vnreaſonable,
ſo their affection to them was intemperate, and the
vſe of them vnlawfull. And this muſt needes follow it, for beſides
that our owne affections, if they be not ruled by Gods
ſpirit, are headie and ſtrong, and readie to blinde our vnderſtā
               ding,
it is the iuſt iudgement of God vpon vs in puniſhing our
vnlawfull deſires, to ſuffer vs to fall into the abuſe of the things.
Therefore as we muſt alwaies deſire the things here belowe
but in that meaſure that we ſhould, ſo we muſt pray vnto God
that together with them he would teach vs the right vſe of
them; & we muſt not imagine that if we had them, we ſhould
be happy and bleſſed, but pray the Lord that we may haue thē
with his fauour and bleſſing, and that by abuſing of them we
neuer offend his maieſtie. This we finde to be true in all the
commodities of this life by experience; he that ambitiouſly ſeeketh
honour, is proud when he hath it, and knoweth not howe
to vſe it: the couetous man as he careth not how he comes by
his riches, ſo he cannot tell how to ſpend them the voluptuous
man, as his deſire is vnſatiable, ſo in his pleaſure he obſerueth
no circumſtances of time, place, perſon, or end, but onely ſatiſfieth
his luſt. Therefore though to haue theſe outward benefits
be a ſingular bleſſing of God, yet rightly to vſe them is a ſpeciall
grace proper to his children that aske it of him.
            And the abuſe of things is ſo much the more carefully to be
looked vnto, becauſe the Lord though he ſatisfied their vnſaſaiable

deſire to the full, Num. 11. 19, 20. yet for all that, and
for the abuſe that followed vpon it, he ſent a moſt grieuous
plague among them, v. 33. And in deede theſe two as they be
moſt vſually ioyned together, ſo the Lord doth many waies puniſh
them: for as concerning our inordinate deſires, euen that is
the thing many times that hindreth vs from obtaining the deſires:
for though in all heauenly things the more earneſtly wee
deſire thē, the ſooner we haue thē, yet in earthly things this only
hindreth vs frō thē, or at leaſt wiſe cauſeth thē to be deferred,
that we haue thē not ſo ſoone as otherwiſe we might: whereby
the Lord correcteth our deſires, & teacheth vs more earneſtly
to deſire heauēly things: or els if the Lord do giue vs the things
that we thus deſire, together with it he ſendeth ſome grieuous
affliction, as vpon this people here. And afterwardes the ſame
people, when they would needes haue a King, & could not be
diſſuaded to the cōtrarie, the Lord gaue them one in his wrath,
but it was a cruell Saul. And there is great reaſon of this in all
things: for beſides that the deſire it ſelfe is worthie to be puniſhed,
vnreaſonable deſires many times doe make vs to vſe vnlawfull
meanes to haue them ſatisfied, both which when they
be ioyned with the abuſe of the thing, muſt needes prouoke
the Lord ſo much the more grieuouſly againſt vs.
            The chiefeſt cauſe of all this, was their incredulitie, Pſal. 78.
22. they did not beleeue that the Lord had a fatherly care of
them, & ſought in all things to do them good, euen as he knew
what was commodious for them: which was ſo much the greater
a ſinne in them, by how much the Lord had ſo many waies
teſtified his great loue to them, not onely by his word, but by
his workes, v. 23. where he beginneth to reckon vp ſo many
benefits of his beſtowed vpon them. Therefore that we might
auoide all theſe ſinnes, we muſt labour firſt of all to beleeue
the forgiuenes of our ſinnes by Chriſt Ieſus, and that we are
receiued into Gods fauour by the imputation of his righteouſnes:
then we muſt be perſwaded of his fatherly prouidence
watching ouer vs for good, and that he hauing giuen his ſonne
Chriſt Ieſus vnto vs, will with him giue vs all things needefull
for vs, and that there beeing a kingdome prouided for vs in

heauen, much more are wee heyres of this worlde: which
faith that wee might be confirmed and ſtrengthened in, we
muſt not onely barely acquaint our ſelues with the promiſes
of the worde, wherein hee teſtified and ſhewed all theſe
thinges vnto vs, but alſo marke his fatherly dealing with vs
from time to time, wherein he hath confirmed the truth of
theſe promiſes vnto vs.
            Moreouer, concerning this matter, this is an eſpeciall
meanes to bring vs to a contented minde, if in worldly things
we neuer propound too high an eſtate to our ſelues, neither
looke for great matters of this life, but ſet a meane condition
before our eyes as Iacob did, Gen. chap. 28. 20. If God will
be with me, and keepe me in this iourney which I goe, and will
giue me bread to eate, and clothes to put on, ſo that I come
againe to my fathers houſe in ſafetie, &c. with words proceeding
from the trueth of his heart, not purpoſing to diſſemble
with God, did declare a maruelous contented minde, if we
conſider who it was that ſpake it. Firſt of all, the graundchilde
of that mightie Abraham, who was able to reske we
his kinſman Lot with three hundred and eighteene ſouldiers
borne and brought vp in his houſe, Gen. chap. 14. verſ. 14.
and who was ſo rich, that the land in which he ſoiourned was
not able to beare them, cap. 13. 6. Then he was the onely heyre
of that rich Iſaak, who dwelling in Gerar, ſowed and found by
eſtimation an hundred fold, and was exceeding rich, cap. 26.
12, 13. and was ſo bleſſed, that the king of the land was afraid
of him, v. 28. Thirdly it was he, who was ſo bleſſed in all earthly
and heauenly things by his father in the chap. going before,
and was confirmed in the ſame againe in this very chap. v. 1. 3.
and laſt of all, was eſtabliſhed in the faith of it by the Lord
himſelfe, v. 17. After all ſo many and great things, which might
haue made him looke a loft, what a minde had he that deſireth

                  〈◊〉
                meate and drinke, and clothes? eſpecially in ſo long a time
of abſence from his friends, for he knewe well the cauſe of his
owne departure, euen the cruel rage of his brother, which could
not be appeaſed, but in a long time. And this is ſo much the
more worthie to be conſidered, if we reade the text, as ſome of

the learned tranſlatours doe, namely when the Lorde ſhall
haue bene with me, & ſhall haue kept me in this way, by the
which I am to goe, and ſhall haue giuen me bread to eate, and
clothes to put on: and to be ſhort, when the Lord ſhall haue
bin my God, then this heape of ſtones, which I haue ſet up for
a pillar, ſhalbe Gods houſe, &c. wherein as hee doth not tie
Gods favour to the aboundance of theſe outward things, but
confeſſeth that he may be mercifull unto him, yea in a meane
eſtate, ſo this mercie of God he deſiring aboue all, is contented
that the Lord ſhould ſhew it unto him which way it pleaſeth
him, if it be but in meate and drinke, and clothes. So our
Sauiour Chriſt hath taught us to pray for our daily bread, by
which though he meane all things needefull for this life, yet in
naming bread, he ſheweth us what meane things we ſhould
looke for: whereunto agreeth the prayer of the wiſe man
Proverb. 30. 9. Giue me not pouertie nor riches, feed me with
food conuenient for me: and the exhortation of the Apoſtle,
1. Timoth. 6. 8. When we haue foode and raiment, let us be
contented therewith: which that we might ſo much the more
earneſtly labour to attaine unto, let us conſider how God
hath alvvaies bleſſed them, that haue looked for ſmall matters,
and puniſhed them that haue had aſpiring mindes, reſiſting
the proud, and giuing grace to the humble. Dauid when
hee was accuſed of treaſon againſt the king, truly proteſteth
of himſelfe Pſalme 131. Lorde, mine heart is not havvtie, neither
are mine eyes loftie, neither haue I walked in great matters,
which are to high for me. And when Saul in pollicie offered
his daughter unto him to be his wife, that by that meanes he
might be deſtroyed of the Philiſtines, he anſwered, 
                  Ʋ
                  Ʋhat
am I, that I ſhould be ſonne in law to the king? 1. Sam. 18. 18. and
when it was further urged upon him, he ſaid, Seemeth it a ſmall
thing unto you to be the kings ſon in law? v. 23. yet afterwards God
made him King. But Adoniah & Abſolon both of them afterwards
aſpiring unto the kingdom, by the puniſhments which
God brought upon thē, were made ſpectacles of ſo great ambition
to the poſteritie. Mordecai in time of the captivitie having

well deſerued of the king, Heſt. 2. 22. ſought not ambitiouſly
to preferre himſelfe, but ſerving ſtill faithfully in his former eſtate
was highly aduanced at the laſt cap. 6. Contrariwiſe Haman
ſwelling with pride like a toade, as it appeareth in many
places of that ſtory, was at the laſt brought to that great ſhame
& confuſion, which deſeruedly fell upon him. And that we
might in all perſons conſider the truth of this we ſhall find that
if they haue no other puniſhment of God upō them, yet they
haue this, which is no ſmall one, reſtles minds & unquiet ſpirits.
For beſides that, the mind of man is inſatiable, & there is
no worldly thing ſo great, but mans deſire is greater, & therfore
when he hath this & that, ſtill he deſires more, & is not ſatisfied:
we muſt remember that great things are very rare, & hard
to be attained unto▪ & therfore we like to miſſe of them: and ſo
the mind muſt needs ſtill be unquiet. So the other, if they haue
no other bleſſing yet they ſhall haue this, quiet ſpirits, & contented
minds, which is an eſpeciall grace: For beſides that, ſmal
& meane things are eſpecially promiſed of God, and are moſt
common in the world, & therefore moſt like to be attained unto,
and ſo the deſire ſooneſt ſatisfied: the bleſſing of God alſo is
upon ſuch, which quieteth their mindes, and is unto them in
ſtead of all things which they want.
            Laſt of all concerning this matter, when we haue through
the bleſſing of God attained vnto great things, we muſt make
this account of them, that there is no certentie in them, for wee
may looſe them all in a moment. Iacob had experience of this,
Gen. 32. 7, who being commanded of God to returne into his
cuntry, & was in the way confirmed in the prouidence of God
ouer himſelf in that iourney, ver. 1. & came laden homewards
with ſo great abundance, as is noted in that chap. vnderſtādeth
of the ſudden, contrary to his expectation, that Eſau commeth
againſt him with 400. men, who remēbring his former threatnings
when he departed frō him, & now conſidering his great
power & maner of cōming towards him, is ſuddenly ſtricken
into a great feare of looſing his life & al that he had: & though
it pleaſed the Lord to deale more mercifully with him, yet by
the prouidence of God he greatly feared it, by which he was

taught, not to place his chiefeſt cōtentation in this great abundance,
but in the fauour of God, which before he moſt of all
deſired: which, as he inioyed when he had none of all theſe
things, ſo it might continue with him when all they ſhould be
loſt. Therfore we muſt not ſay, Oh if I had this or that, &c. I
ſhould be well, and then I would be cōtented: for what if I had
it? how ſoone may I looſe it againe? then how quickly ſhall I
be diſcontented? Therefore are they called uncerten riches. 1.
Tim. 6. which is true of all worldly commodities & pleaſures.
And the whole ſcripture, beſides daily experiēce teacheth, how
great uncertentie there is in the inioying of husbād, wife, children,
parents, friends, goods, houſes, lands, libertie, life, or any
thing elſe: onely the fauour of God in Chriſt Ieſus is certaine,
& his promiſes of the forgiuenes of ſinnes and euerlaſting life
are irrevocable: for as all of them be Yea & Amen in Chriſt
Ieſus, ſo he is to day and yeſterday, and the ſame for euer: therfore
if in all times and eſtates, we would be well contented, we
muſt onely make a certen account of that: ſo that whether we
enioy any thing, we muſt more account of the fauour of God
appearing unto us in it, then of the thing it ſelfe: or whether
the Lord denie us the thing we deſire, it muſt be ſufficient unto
vs, that he hath receiued us into his fauour, or whether hee
taketh the thing away from us againe, yet this contenteth us,
that he turneth not his louing countenance from us: which if
we could come unto, then no doubt many times we ſhoulde
enioy things longer then we doe: for this is the next way to
keepe all things ſtill, ſo to hold them, as being contented to
giue them to the Lorde, whenſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe him to take
them from us. Beſides it maketh the minde contented whether
we haue them, or we haue them not, when we alwaies eſteeme
them but as things uncerten.
            
               Nicholas Bownde.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            WHOSOEVER IS DESIROVS TO LEARNE AND REMEMBER THE
word of God that he might liue according to it, let him conſider that which is
written in the Pſalme 119. part. 2.
            
               
                  
                     THE TEXT.
                     THE PARAPHRASIS.
                  
                  
                     
                        1 Wherwith ſhall a yong
man cleanſe bis wayes?
In taking heed thereto
according to thy word.
                        2 With my whole heart
haue I ſought thee, let
me not vvander from
thy commandements.
                        3 I haue hid thy promiſe
in my heart, that I
might not ſinne againſt
thee.
                        4 Bleſsed art thou, O
Lord, teach me thy ſtatutes.
                        5 With my lippes haue I
declared all the iudgements
of thy mouth.
                        6 I haue had as great delight
in the way of thy
teſtimonies, as in all
riches.
                        7 I will meditate in thy
precepts, and conſider
thy wayes.
                        8 I will delight in thy ſtatutes;
and I will not
forget thy word.
                     
                     
                        1 Firſt of all be perſwaded, that the word of God is onely
that rule, whereby the whole life of euery man, & that in
euery thing muſt be ordered, euen the life of a yong man,
who hath moſt reaſons for him ſelfe, why he ſhould be
excuſed, as he is moſt diſordered.
                        2 Then upon this perſwaſion giue your ſelfe unfainedly to
the reading and hearing of Gods word, as to the meanes
which God hath appointed to teach you: & pray to God
in the carefull uſe of thoſe meanes for his holy ſpirit, that
therby you might come to the true underſtanding of his
worde.
                        3 That which you haue thus learned, let it not ſwim aloft
in your braine, but let it be deeply ſetled & hidden in your
heart as a treaſure, labouring to frame al your affections
unto it, that ſo you may haue it in a readineſſe, whenſoever
you ſhall occupie it, otherwiſe though you know neuer
ſo much it will not keep you frō ſinning againſt God.
                        4 You thus profiting giue thanks vnto god alwaies for that
which you learne, becauſe be it neuer ſo little, it is more
then many in the world do knowe, yet content not your
ſelfe with it, as though you had ſufficient, but pray unto
him to be further inlightened, becauſe it is leſſe then
many others doe, and you your ſelfe ſhould knowe.
                        5 But aboue all be carefull to talke of that unto others,
which you doe daily learne your ſelfe, and out of the aboundance
of your heart let your mouth ſpeake, for by
teaching others you ſhall learne your ſelfe.
                        6 That you might do all theſe things, labour to haue ioy in
the worde, and in all the exerciſes of it, more then in any
worldly thing, and be occupied about thoſe things with
greateſt delight: for in whatſoeuer we take greateſt pleaſure,
that will ſticke faſteſt by us.
                        7 Laſt of all, meditate and conſider of that with your ſelfe,
which you haue learned, and muſe upon it alone, not
contenting your ſelfe with the generall rules, but labouring
in your conſcience to make the uſe of them profitable
to your owne ſelfe in the particular practiſe therof.
                        8 Thus doing all theſe things carefully, you ſhalbe ſure neuer
to forget that which you learne: though you doe not
remember euery thing, yet God will by his ſpirite call ſo
much into your remembrance as is needfull for you to
know, and then eſpecially when you haue moſt neede of
it, as in the houre of your death, & the day of temptation:
but as you faile in all, or any one of theſe, ſo may you
feare to faile in the truth of this promiſe.
                     
                  
               
            
            A good helpe for an ill memorie.
            
               N. B.
            
            
         
      
   