
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  M. PERKINS, HIS EXhortation to Repentance, out of Zephaniah: Preached in 2. Sermons in Sturbridge Faire.
                  
                  TOGETHER WITH TWO Treatiſes of the Duties and Dignitie of the Miniſtrie: Deliuered publiquely in the Vniuerſitie of Cambridge.
                  
                  With a Preface praefixed touching the publiſhing of all ſuch workes of his as are to be expected: with a Catalogue of all the perticulers of them, diligently peruſed and publiſhed, by a Preacher of the Word.
                  
                     Prouerbs 28. 13. 
                     Hee that hideth his ſinnes ſhall not proſper, But he that confeſſeth and for ſaketh them ſhall finde mercy.
                  
                  LONDON Imprinted by T. C. for William Welby, and are to bee ſold at his Shop in Pauls Church-yard, at the ſigne of the Grey-hound. 1605.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the right worſhipfull, my very worthie and Chriſtian friend, Syr William Gee, Knight, one of his Maieſties Honourable Counſell in the North, Recorder of the Towne of Beuerley, and Hnll, and one of his Maie
                     ſties Iuſtices of peace in the Eaſtriding of the Countie of Yorke, a true friend of learning, and pietie, and to the vertuous, and religious Lady his wife. Grace and peace from God &c.
                  
                     AMongſt the many reaſons (Worſhipful Syr',) which haue perſwaded mee that Poperie cannot bee the true religiō, this is not the leſt: the inſufficiency of their doctrin of faith & repētance: which two things though they be the chiefe & principal points

in Religion, and ſo neceſſarie that he, who doth not, both knowe, and practiſe them aright, can neuer be ſaued yet I dare auouch, that the faith and Canitius in Catechiſme. Coſterus in Enchiridio. repentance of the Romiſh Church, as they are taught by many of the beſt approued Papiſts, are no better then ſuch a faith, and ſuch a repentance as an hypocrite, and a very reprobate may attaine vnto: Indeed, to inſiſt vpon repentance onely (they make many faire floriſhes, they call it penance, they make it a ſacrament, & ſay it is a boord that ſaues a man after ſhipwrack, and write great volumnes of it, and of confeſsion, and of Caſes of 
                     Corradus. Nauarrus. Loper Sairus. Hallus. Graffius, & many other. 
                     conſcience, (as you good Syr in your owne reading know better then I) & yet alas, when all is done, it is but a ſhadow of repentance; and indeede how can they teach aright the doctrine of repentance: which erre ſo fowly in ſetting downe the iuſtice of God, and the vilenes of ſin, which 2.

points a man muſt know, elſe he will neuer repent: but Poperie miſconceiuing the iuſtice of God, teaching it not to bee infinite in as much as it needes not an infinite ſatisfaction, & miſconceiuing the nature of ſin, teaching euery ſin not to bee damnable, 
                        〈◊〉
                      to offend Gods Infinite iuſtice, 
                        ••
                     ring (I ſay) in theſe 2. how is it poſſible they ſhould conceiue aright the nature of repentance? by which a man ſeeing his ſins, their fouleneſſe their puniſhment, and his own miſery by them, confeſſeth them, bewails them, fearing Gods iuſtice, flyeth frō it, and craues forgiueneſſe of his mercie, and laſtly purpoſeth, & indeuoureth to leaue them all, and to leade a newe life. The ſerious conſideration hereof, hath often made me wonder, why many Popiſh treatiſes being in ſome ſort exhortations to repentance ſhould be ſo accounted of, as they are by ſome: for though I confeſſe there

are in ſome of them, good and holeſome meditations, and many motiues to mortification, and good life, yet would I gladly learne of any man but this one thing, how thoſe exhortations can be pithie, or powerful, ſound or any way ſufficient to moue a man to repentance, when as, not thoſe bookes, nor all Poperie is able to teach a man ſufficiently what true repentance is.
                  If any man reply: I will therefore learne the doctrine out of the Proteſtants bookes, and vſe the Papiſts for exhortation onely: I then anſwere, is it not a more compendious, and conuenient, and a leſſe ſcandalous courſe, to ſeeke exhortations out of ſuch writers, as do teach the doctrine aright? nay I doubt how it is poſſible to finde a powerfull exhortation to repentance in any Papiſt, who erres in the Doctrine: the reaſon is manifeſt, becauſe Doctrine is the ground

of exhortation: and if the doctrine be vnſound, how can the exhortation, be any better. Let vs therefore leaue theſe muddic puddles, and fet our water at the fountaine: the water of life, at the fountaine of life, I mean the doctrine of faith, and repentance at the written word of God, and at ſuch mens writings as are grounded therevpon, and agreeable thereunto. Deering
                           •
                         Grenham. Bradford. and many other.
                  
                  Now, amongſt thoſe many inſtruments of God, who haue laboured with profit in this great point of Religion: namely repentance, drawing their doctrine out of the two breſts, of the 2. Teſtaments of Gods booke, I may well ſay, (to ſay no more,) that this man of God Maiſter Perkins, deſerues to haue his place: whoſe labours, whilſt he liued, and his yet liuing labours, what they deſerue, I had rather others ſhould proclame, then I once name: who profeſſe my ſelfe to bee one of thoſe many, who

may truely ſay, that by the grace of God & his good meanes principally, I am that I am: But leaning him in that glorious manſion, which Chriſt the Lord of the Harueſt hath prepared for him: and now giuen him. I returne to my ſelfe, and doe humbly praiſe the Lord of heauen, who gaue mee my time in the Vniuerſitie, in thoſe happie dayes, wherein (beſide many other worthy men of God, whereof ſome are falne aſleepe, and ſome remaine aliue vnto this day) this holy man did ſpend him ſelf like a Candle to giue light vnto others:
                  The ſcope of all his godly endeuours was to teach Chriſt Ieſus, and him crucified, and much laboured to moue all men to repentance, that as our knowledge hath made Popery aſhamed of their ignorance: ſo our holy liues might honour our holy profeſsion. And as repentance was one of the principal ends, both of his

continuall preaching and writing: ſoeſpecially and purpoſely hath hee twiſe dealt in that Argument.
                  Firſt, in his Treatiſe of Repentance: publiſhed 1592. wherein briefly (as his manner was) but ſoundly, pithily, and feelingly, hee layeth downe the true doctrine, and the very nature of repentance: and after the poſitiue doctrine, hee toucheth ſome of the principall controuerſies and difficulties in that doctrine, but afterwards thinking with himſelfe, that hee had not ſeriouſly and forcibly enough, vrged ſo great & neceſſarie a Leſſon as Repentance is, therefore ſhortly after, being deſired and called to the duty of preaching, in that great, & general aſſembly at Sturbridge-Faire, he thought it a fit time: for this neceſſary and generall exhortation to Repentance: to the intent, that as wee were taught the doctrine of Repentance, in the former treatiſe: ſo in theſe ſermons

we might bee ſtirred vp to the practiſe of it. And certainly, (Good Sir:) I iudge there could haue beene no matter, more fit for that aſſembly then an exhortation to repentance, for as the audience was great and general, of all ſorts, ſexes, ages and callings of men, and aſſembled out of many corners of this kingdom ſo, is this doctrine generall for all: ſome doctrines are for Parents, ſome for children, ſome for ſchollers, ſome for tradſe-men, ſome for men, ſome for women, but repentance is for all: without which, it may bee ſaid of all, and euery one of age, not one excepted: No Repentance, no ſaluation
                  Theſe Sermons being in my hands, and not deliuered to mee from hand to hand, but taken with this hand of mine, from his owne mouth, were thought worthy for the excellencie, & fit for the generallity of the matter, to be offered to the publique veiwe:

I haue alſo other workes of his in my hands: of which (being many,) I confeſſe my ſelfe, to be but the keeper for the time, taking my ſelfe bounde to keepe them ſafely, to the benefite of Gods Church, of whoſe treaſure vpon earth I make no queſtiō, but they are a part: and I hartily deſire you (my godly friends) & all other faithfull Chriſtians to ſolicite the Lord in prayer for me, that I may faithfully diſcharge my ſelf of that great charge which in this reſpect lyeth vpon me: and that his grace and bleſsing may be on mee, and all others, who are to be imployed in this ſeruice, wherein (had the Lord ſo pleaſed) wee could heartily haue wiſhed neuer to haue bin imployed: but that his life might haue eaſed vs of the labour: and that as I begin with this, ſo I, or ſome other better able (which I rather deſire) may goe forward, vndertaking the weight of this great burthen, and

not faint, till he haue made a faithfull account to the Church of God, of all theſe Iewels deliuered to our truſt.
                  And now theſe firſt fruites of my labours, in another mans vineyard, as alſo all that hereafter doe or may follow, I humbly conſecrate to the bleſſed Spouſe of Chriſt Ieſus, the holy Church of God on earth, and namely to the Church of England, our beloued mother, who may reioyce, that ſhe was the mother of ſuch a ſonne, who in few yeares did ſo much good to the publique cauſe of religiō, as the wickedneſſe of many yeares ſhall not Maiſter Perkings, but forty yeares old at his death. be able to weare out. But firſt of all, and eſpecially, I preſent the ſame vnto you (my very worſh▪ and Chriſtian friends) who (I muſt needes ſay) are very worthy of it in many reſpects.
                  1 For the matter it ſelfe, which is repentance, my ſelfe being able to teſtifie, that you are not heares.

but doers, ripe in knowledge, & rife in the practiſe of repentance, inſomuch as I dare from the teſtimonie of my conſcience, and in the word of a miniſter pronounce of you, that as you haue heard and knowne this Doctrine of repentance, ſo bleſſed are you, for you doe it.
                  And 2. for him, who was the author hereof (whoſe mouth ſpake it from the feeling of his ſoule, & whoſe ſoule is now bound vp in the bundle of life:) I know and cannot in good conſcience cōceale the great delight, you haue alwaies had in the reading of his bookes, the reuerend opinion, you had of him liuing, and how heauily and paſſionately, you tooke his death, and departure: therefore to cheare you vp in want of him, I ſend you here this little booke, his owne childe, begotten in his life time, but borne after his death: obſerue it well and you ſhall find it, not vnlike the

father, yea, you ſhall diſcerne in it the fathers ſpirit, and it doubts not, but to find entertainement with them, of whom the father was ſo well reſpected.
                  And for my ſelfe, I ſpare to rehearſe what intereſt you haue in me, & al my labours, it is no more then you worthily deſerue, and ſhall haue in me for euer: you are the faireſt flowers in this garden, which in this place I after others haue planted for the Lord (or rather God by vs): And two principall pearles in that caowne, which I hope for, at the laſt day from the Lord my God, whoſe worde at my mouth you haue receiued with much reuerence, and with ſuch profit, as if I had the like ſucceſſe of my labours in others, I ſhould then neuer haue cauſe to ſay, with the Prophet, I haue laboured in vain, & ſpent my ſtrength in vaine, but my iudgement is with the Lord. & my work with my God.
                  
                     
And if I knewe you not, to be ſuch as take more delight in doing well, then in hearing of it, I would proue at large, what I haue ſpoken of you: yet giue me leaue to ſay that, which without open wrong, I may not conceile, that beſide your rare knowledge, and godly zeale to religion, and other duties of the firſt table to God himſelfe: your charity & pitty to the needy diſtreſſed Chriſtians, at home and abroad: your mercifull dealing with them, who are in your power; your beneuolence to learning, and namely to ſome in the Vniuerſitie; doe all proclaime to the world thoſe your due praiſe: which I (well knowing your modeſties) do ſpare once to name: neither, would I haue ſaid thus much, were it not for this cold and barren age, wherein wee liue, that ſo, when our preaching cannot moue, yet your godly examples might ſtirre vp. Pardon me therefore I pray you,

and think it no wrong to you, which is a benefit to Gods Church: But goe forward in the ſtrength of the Lord your God, & hold on in that happie 
                        Pſal. 11. 16 Apoc. 2. 10 1. Theſ. 5. 24. courſe you haue begun, bee faithfull vnto the end, the Lord will giue you the Crowne of life, faithfull is hee, which hath promiſed, who will alſo doe it: proceed (good Sir) to honour learning in your ſelfe and others, and religion eſpecially, which is the principall learning; and proceed both of you, to practiſe religion in your own perſons; and in your family: hold on to ſhine before your family, and amongſt the people, where you dwell, in zeale and holineſſe: hold on hereby, ſtill to ſhame popery, to ſtop your enemies mouthes, and to honour that holy religiō, which you profeſſe, to gaine comfort of good conſcience to your ſelues, & aſſurance of eternall reward: and laſtly, to encourage me in thoſe painefull duties which lye

vpon me: for I openly profeſſe that your religious zeale and loue of the truth, with māy other good helps, are principal incouragements in my miniſtry, & eſpecial motiues vnto me, to vndertake the charge of publicatiō, of ſo many of the workes of this holy man deceaſed, as may not in better maner be done by others. But I keep you too long from this holy exhortation following, I therefore ſend you to it, & it to you, and from you to the Church of God, for I dare not make it to bee priuately yours and mine, wherein the whole Church hath intereſt, as well as we: It was preached in the field, but it is worthy to be admitted into our hearts: I found it in the open field, but vpon diligēt view, finding it to bee Gods corne, and a parcel of his holy and immortal ſeed, therefore I brought it home, as good corne deſerues: And as it is Gods corne, ſo in you I deſire all holy chriſtians to lay it vp in Gods garners,

that is in their hearts and ſoules.
                  And thus committing this little volume to your reading, the matter to your practiſe: you and yours, to the bleſſed fauour of that God, whom you ſerue: and my ſelfe and my endeuours. to your hartie loue, and holie praiers. I take leaue: From mie ſtudie. Auguſt. 7. 1604.
                  
                     Yours in Chriſt Ieſus, euer aſſured.
WILLIAM CRASHAVVE.
                     
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  
                     To the Chriſtian Reader, and eſpecially to all ſuch as haue any Coppies of the workes of Maiſter Perkins, or intend any of them to the Preſſe.
                  
                  FOraſmuch as there hath beene lately ſignification made, of diuers of M. Perkins his workes hereafter to bee printed, in an Epiſtle to the Reader praemiſed before the Treatiſe of Callings, and that ſignification being but generall, might peraduenture giue occaſion to ſome, to ſet out ſome particulars (without the conſent of M. Perkins his aſsignes) as imperfectly as are theſe two bookes, intituled The reformation of Couetouſneſſe, and The practiſe of Faith, iuſtly and truly (for ought that I ſee) cenſured in the aforeſaide Epiſtle: It is therefore nowe thought good, to mention the particular Treatiſes, and workes of his, which ſhall hereafter (if God wil) be publiſhed, for the benefite of Gods Church: I doe therefore

hereby make knowne to all, whome it any way may concerne, that there were found in the ſtudie of the deceaſed, and are in the hands of his Executors, or aſsignes, and preparing for the Preſſe.
                  
                     
                        1 His Expoſitions on the Epiſtle to the Galathians.
                        
                           
                              2 On the Epiſtle of Iude.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        2 His Booke of the Caſes of Conſcience.
                     
                     
                        3 His Treatiſes,

                           
                              1. Of Witch-craft.
                           
                           
                              2. Of Callings.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  All theſe he had peruſed himſelfe, and made them ready for the Preſſe, according to which Coppies by himſelfe ſo corrected, ſome of them already are, and the reſt will be publiſhed in due time: And hereupon we deſire all men who haue Coppies of them, not to offer that wrong to that worthy man of God, as to publiſh any of their own, ſeeing the coppies hereof which are to be printed, are of his own correcting: but rather if they can helpe to make any of

them more perfect by their coppies, they may therin doe a good worke to the benefit of many, and much comfort to themſelues.
                  And further, I doe hereby make knowne, that I haue in my handes at this preſent of his workes, taken from his mouth, with my owne hand, hereafter (if God wil) to be publiſhed, with the allowance of our Church, and for the benefit of his children, theſe particulars.
                  
                     
                        1 His Expoſitions or readings, on the 101. Pſalme.
                     
                     
                        2 On the 32. Pſalme.
                     
                     
                        3 On the 11. Chap. to the Hebrewes.
                     
                     
                        4 On the 1, 2, & 3. Chap. of the Reuelation.
                     
                     
                        5. On the 5, 6, and 7. Chapters of Saint Matthew.
                        
                           
                              2 His Confutation of Camſius his little Popiſh Catechiſme.
                           
                           
                              3 His Treatiſes,

                                 
                                    1. Of Imaginations Out of Geneſ. 8. 2.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    2. Of Temptations, out of Mathew 4.
                                 
                                 
                                    3. Of Chriſtian equitie, out of Phillippians 4. 3.
                                 
                                 
                                    4. Of the Callings of the Miniſtery, out of two places of Scripture.
                                 
                                    5. Of Repentance, out of Zephaniah, 2. 1.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Beſides many other particular Sermons, and ſhort diſcourſes made vpon ſeuerall, and ſpeciall occaſions: of al which, ſome are already publiſhed by others, and ſome by my ſelfe: and all the reſt that remaine, as they bee the Iewels of Gods Church, ſo did I willingly dedicate them to the publique and general good: Iudgeing it were a foule ſinne in mee, or any other, to impropriate to our ſelues, or our owne priuate vſe, the labours of This, or any other learned man, which are in my opinion, parts of the Treaſurie of the militant Church: And as it were wrong to the Church, if I ſhould conceale them, ſo doubtleſſe were it to him & his children: If I ſhould publiſh them for mine owne alone,

and not for their benefit. If I doe, I thinke it may be iuſtly ſayde vnto mee, or whoſoeuer doth ſo, Thy monie periſh with thee. And what herein I haue ſayd for my ſelfe: I know I may boldly & ſafely ſay, for his Executors or aſsignes, which haue or had in their hands, any of thoſe which were found in his Studie: In the publiſhing of alwhich, as we do intend to deale truly with the Chriſtian Reader, and not to commit any thing to the Preſſe, which hath not either beene written or corrected, by the Authour himſelfe, or faithfully penned according to the trueſt Coppies taken from his owne mouth, and ſince by others of ſufficiencie and integritie, dilligently peruſed: ſo we purpoſe to referre them to the benefit of the Authours wife and children, as much as may bee, wishing that vpon this Caueat, men would not be ſo haſtie (as ſome haue been) to commend to the world, their vnprefect notes, vpon a baſe deſire of a little gaine, both to hinder the common good of the

Church, and to defraude the ſaid parties of their priuate benefit, to whom in all equitie and conſcience, it doth principally appertaine: And deſiring all who haue any perfect Coppies of ſuch as are in my owne handes, that they would either helpe me with theirs, or rather take mine to helpe them. That by our ioynt powers and our forces layd together: the walles of this worthy building, may goe vp the fairer & the faſter. And ſo I commend them all to Gods bleſsing, who endeuor to commend themſelues, and their labours to God and to his Church.
                  
                     Your brother in the Lord.
W. C.
                     
                  
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  AN EXHORTATION TO REPENTANCE.
                  
                     Zophoniah, Chap. 2. verſe. 1. 2.
                     Search your ſelues, euenſearch you ô nation, not worthy to be beloued: before the Decree come forth, and you be as Chaffe that paſſeth on a day.
                  
                  
                     THe Prophet in the firſt Chapter of this prophecy, rebuketh the Iewes of three notable crimes, Idolatry, fraud, and crueltie. In this ſecond he exhorts them to repentance, and withall reproueth ſome of their ſpeciall ſinnes. In the three firſt verſes he propoundeth the Doctrine of Repentance,

and addeth ſome ſpeciall reaſons to mooue and ſtirre them vp to the practiſe of it. In propounding the Doctrine of repentance, he directs it to two ſorts of men. Firſt to the obſtinate and impenitent Iewes in the firſt and ſecond verſes. Secondly, to the better ſort of them, in the third. So that the ſumme and ſubſtance of theſe two firſt verſes, is a briefe and ſummarie propounding of the doctrine of Repentance to the obſtinate Iewes. The wordes containe in them 5. ſeuerall points, touching the doctrine of repentance.
                  1 The dutie to be performed, Search:
                  
                  2 Who muſt be ſearched: your ſelues.
                  
                  3 Who muſt doe it. The Iewes: who are further deſcribed to be a nation, not worthy to be beloued of God, theſe are in the firſt verſe.
                  4. In the ſecond verſe: the time limitting them, when to repent, before the decree come forth that is, before God put in execution the iudgements which are already decreed & appointed for them.
                  5. A forcible reaſon vrging them to doe

it which lieth hid, and is neceſſarily implied in the fourth point: namely, that there is a decree againſt them, which wants nothing but execution: which alſo ſhal come vnleſſe they repent, whereby they ſhal be fanned: and if they ſhall be found to be chaffe, they ſhal fly away with the winde of Gods iuſtice. Of all theſe points in order.
                  For the firſt, the holy Ghoſt ſaith; Search your ſelues. The words are commonly reade thus. Gather your ſelues, which, though it be good, for that in repentance a man gathereth himſelfe, and all his wits together, which afore were diſperſed, & wandred vp & down in vanity: yet I rather allow their tranſlation who read thus. Search, or fan your ſelues: but either of them may ſtand, becauſe Īunius. the word in the original doth cōprehēd both ſignifications; yet it ſeemeth that to ſearch, or ſift, fits this place better, conſidring the ſame manner of ſpeech is atterwards continued in the word Chaffe: ſo that the meaning of the Holy Ghoſt ſeemeth to bee this: Search, try, and

fanne your ſelues, leaſt you bee found light chaffe, and ſo fly away and be conſumed before the iuſtice of God.
                  Concerning this duty of ſearching, let vs obſerue firſt, that the holy Ghoſt vrging the Iewes to repent, vſeth not the word Repentance, but bids them ſearch themſelues: yet meaning, hee, would haue them to repent: giuing vs to vnderſtand, that no man can haue true and ſound repentance, but hee who hath firſt of all ſearched and examined himſelfe: and this ſtands with good reaſon, for no man can repent, who firſt of all doth not know himſelfe, and his owne wretchedneſſe. But no man can ſee into himſelfe, nor knowe himſelfe, but hee that doth diligently ſearch himſelfe: ſo that the beginning of all grace, is for a man to ſearch and try, and fanne himſelfe, that thereby he may knowe what is in himſelfe: that ſo vpon the ſearch, ſeeing his fearefull and damnable eſtate, hee may forſake himſelfe & his owne waies and turne to the Lord. Thus ſpeaketh

the holy Ghoſt in the heartes of holy men; Let vs ſearch and try our waies: and 
                        Lamen. 3. make what followeth; and turne againe to the Lord: as though there were no turning againe to the Lord, but after a ſearching of our ſelues. With this teſtimonie of the holy Ghoſt, agreeth the teſtimonie of al holy mens conſciences, who all knowe, that the firſt beginning of their turning to the Lord, was a ſearching of themſelues: Let any repentant ſinner aske his conſcience, and call to minde his firſt calling and conuerſion, and he will remember that the firſt thing in his repentance was this; that he ſearched into himſelfe, and looked narrowly into his waies, and finding his waies dangerous, and his caſe fearefull, did thereupon reſolue to take a new courſe, and turne to the Lord for pardon and mercie, and for grace to enter into more holy, and more comfortable courſes.
                  The man that paſſeth vpon ridges of Mountains, and ſides of hils, or that goeth ouer a narrow bridge, or ſome dangerous

and ſteepe Rockes, at midnight; feareth not, becauſe hee ſeeth no daunger: but bring the ſame man, in the morning, and let him ſee the narrowe bridge, he went ouer in the night, vnder which runnes a violent ſtreame, and a bottomleſſe gulfe, and the daungerous Mountaines, and rocks, he paſſed ouer, and he will wonder at his owne boldneſſe, and ſhrinke for feare to thinke of it, and will by no meanes venter the ſame way againe: for now hee ſeeth the height of the Mountaines; the ſteepneſſe of the Hilles, the craggineſſe of the Rockes, the fearſul downfall, and the furious violence of the ſtreame vnderneath, & therby ſeeth the extreame daunger, which afore he ſaw not: therfore he wondreth, & reioy 
                        •
                     oth, that he hath eſcaped ſo great a da
                        •
                     nger; and will by no meanes be drawn to goe that way in the day, which hee went moſt careleſly in the darkeneſſe of the night, but ſeeketh another way (though it ſhould be far about:) So a ſinner in his firſt eſtate, which is naturall and corrupt

(as wee are bredde and borne) hath a vaile before his face: ſo that hee ſeeth nothing: the wrath of God and the curſe due for ſinne, Hell and damnation ſeeking to deuoure him, he ſeeth them not, although (liuing alwaies in ſinne,) hee walketh in the very Iawes of Hell it ſelfe: and becauſe he ſeeth not this fearefull daunger, therefore hee refuſeth no ſinne at all, but ruſheth ſecurely into all maner of ſinne: the night of impenitencie, and the myſt of ignorance ſo blinding his eyes, that he ſeeth not the narrow bridge of this life, from which if he ſlide, he falles immediatly into the bottomleſſe p
                        •
                     t of Hell.
                  But when as Gods ſpirit hath by the light of Gods word opened his eyes & touched his heart to conſider his eſtate, then hee ſeeth the fraile bridge of this narrow life, and how little a ſleppe there is between him and damnation; then hee ſeeth Hell open due for his ſinnes, and himſelfe in the high way to it: ſinne being the craggy rocke, and Hell the gaping gulfe vnder it; this life

being the narrowe bridge, and damnation the ſtreame which runneth vnder it: Then hee wondreth at his miſerable eſtate, admireth the mercie of God in keeping him from falling into the bottome of hell, wondreth at the preſumptuous boldneſſe of his corruption, which ſo ſecurely plodded on towards deſtruction, and being aſhamed of himſelfe, and theſe his waies, he turnes his heart to the God that ſaued him from theſe daungers; and ſets himſelfe into more holy wayes, and more comfortable courſes, and confeſſeth that ignorance made him bold, and blindneſſe made him ſo preſumptuous; but now hee ſeeth the daunger, and will by no meanes goe the ſame way againe: and thus the ſearching and ſeeing into the foulneſſe of ſinne, and the daunger thereof, is the firſt beginning of repentance, and the firſt ſtep into grace.
                  This doctrine teacheth vs what faith and repentance is generall in the world: All men ſay, they beleeue, and haue repented

long agoe; but trie it well, and we ſhall finde in the bodie of our Nation, but a lippe faith, and a ſippe Repentance: for euen when they ſay ſo, they are blinde and ignorant of their owne eſtate, & know not themſelues, but preſume of themſelues, that becauſe they are baptized and liue in the Church, therefore they are in Gods fauour, and in very good eſtate, when as they neuer yet were recōciled to God: and are ſo farre from it, that they neuer yet ſaw any ſinnes in themſelues wherof they ſhuld repent: as a man trauelling in the night, ſeeth no daunger, but plods on without feare: So the moſt part of our common people, in the night of their ignorance, think and preſume they loue and feare God, and loue their Neighbour; and that they haue euer done ſo: Nay, it is the common opinion that a man may do ſo by nature, and that hee is not worthy to liue, who doth not loue God with all his heart, and beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt: But alas poore ſimple ſoules, they neuer

knewe what ſinne was, neuer ſearched nor ſaw into theirown harts with the light of Gods lawe, for if they had, they ſhould haue ſeene ſuch a Sea of corruption, that then they would confeſſe it to bee the hardeſt thing in the world, to loue God, and to beleeue in Chriſt, and for ſake ſinne: it is therefore manifeſt, that they haue not yet begun to beleeue or repent, nor haue entred into the firſt ſtep of grace, which leadeth to repentance, for that they haue not learned this leſſon, which the Prophet teacheth: that is, to ſearch themſelues.
                  
                  Furthermore, let vs in the ſecond place, obſerue better the ſignification of the word: it ſignifieth to Search narrowly, as a man would doe for a piece of gold, or a p
                        •
                     cious Iewell, which is loſt in a great houſe: Or as a man may ſearch for gold in a Myne of the earth, where is much earth, and but very little gold Oare.
                  Hence wee may learne, that in true Repentance, and conuerſion, we muſt

not ſearch ſo only, as to find the groſſe and palpable ſinnes of our liues: but ſo as we may finde thoſe ſinnes which the world accounts leſſer ſinnes, and eſpie our ſecret faults & priuy corruptions. Some corruptions ſee memore neere a kinne to our nature, and therein men hope to be excuſed, when they forſake many other greater ſins: But a true penitent ſinner muſt ſearch for ſuch, ſo as a good Magiſtrate ſearcheth for a lurking 
                        〈…〉
                      which is 
                        〈◊〉
                      into ſome cloſe and ſecret corner, and he muſt ranfack his heart for ſuch corruptions, as wherein his heart takes ſpecial delight, and muſt thanke that no ſinne can be ſo ſmall, but it is too great to be ſpared, and that euery ſinne great or litle, muſt be ſearched for, as being all Tray 
                        〈◊〉
                      to Gods Maieſtie.
                  But alas, the practiſe 
                        ••
                      the world is farre otherwiſe, great ſinnes are little ſinnes, little ſinnes are no ſinnes: Nay, after a little cuſtome, great ſinnes are alſo little or nothing, and ſo at laſt men make no bones of groſſe and grieuous

ſins: and for the moſt part men ſearch ſo ſuperficially, that they ſcarſe finde any thing to be ſinne: ſuch excuſes are made, ſuch diſtinctiōs are deuiſed, ſuch mittigations, ſuch qualifications, ſuch colours are caſt vppon all ſinnes; as now vp and downe the world, groſſe ſins are called into queſtion, whether they be ſins or no: and the great tranſgreſsions of the lawe are counted ſmall matters, neceſſarie euils or inconueniences, tollerated to auoyd other euils: and what is he counted but a curious and a preciſe foole, which ſtands vpon them: Ignorance after fiue and thirtie yeares preaching is counted no ſinne, blind deuotion in Gods ſeruice no ſin, lippe labour in praying, vaine and cuſtomable ſwearing, mocking of religion, and the profeſſors thereof, no ſin: prophaning of the Saboath, contemning of preachers, abuſing of parents▪ no ſinnes pride in apparel, ſuperfluitie in meates, beaſtly and ordinarie drunkennes, fornication, no ſinnes. Nay, decites, Coſonages, oppreſsing vſury,

notorious briberie, and couetouſnes, that mother ſinne; theſe are counted no ſinnes: theſe beames are made but moates by prophane men, & they are ſo minced and carued, or there is ſome ſuch neceſsitie of them, or ſome ſuch other flouriſh or verniſh muſt be caſt vpon thē, as that they are little or none at all. Alas, alas, is not that a ſimple & a ſilly ſearch where ſuch blockes as theſe are, lye vnſpied? what are moulehils, when ſuch mountaines are not ſeene? Moates will be little regarded, where ſuch beames are not diſcerned: but it is cleare, that therefore there is no true trial nor diligent ſearch made: for a true conuert will ſearch his heart for all, and wil ſpare none: He deales in ſearching his owne heart, as a good Iuſtice of peace in ſearching for traytors or Seminarie Prieſts. He ſeekes not ſuperficially, but moſt exactly, and leaueth neuer a corner vnſought, and he thinkes great ſinnes to be infinite, and little ſinnes great, and iudgeth no ſinne ſo ſmall, but that it deſerueth the

                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
anger of God, & therefore he wonders at the mercy of God, which throwes vs not al downe to hel in a moment: & he crieth out with holy Ieremie: It is the Lords mercie that we are not conſumed. 
                     
                        Lam. 3. 22 Away then with this ſuperficial & hypocritical ſearch, where ſo many ſinnes are ſpared and not found out. It is Phariſaical, for euen ſo the Phariſie, when hee came into the Temple to recken with God, and to tell what Traytours hee had found, that is, what ſinnes, vpon good ſearch hee had eſpied, he returnes his precept, all is well, he hath found neuer a one, but beginnes to thanke God that he was ſo good, and ſo good, and not ſo il, and ſo il, nor yet like the Publicane. The world is full of Phariſies, not onely the popiſh Church: but euen our Church ſwarms with theſe ſuperficial ſearchers, who cannot (becauſe they will not,) finde any ſinnes to preſent vnto God, Men thinke in the Countrie, a Church Officer hazards his Oath, if he preſent all well, and findeth no fault in his Pariſh,

to preſent as puniſhable to the Ordinary: for men thinke it vnpoſsible, that there ſhould bee none in a whole pariſh: then how doth that man hazard his own ſoule, who being made ouerſeer & ſearcher of his heart, findes nothing in it to preſent to the Lord. For it is not more eaſie to eſpie outward & actual trāſgeſsions in a whole pariſh, then it is to finde a heape of corruptions in a mans heart, if a man will ſearch into the bottome of it with the light of Gods Law. Therefore when the Lord comes and keepes his viſitation, what ſhal become of ſuch a man, but to vndergoe the ſtrict and ſeuere ſearch of the Almightie, becauſe hee would not ſearch himſelfe?
                  Our bodyes and liues are free from ſpaniſh Inquiſition (which is one of the laſt props, which Sathan hath lent the Pope, wherewith to vphold his declining kingdom) and the Lord grant we may be euer free from it. But in the meane time, that might put vs in mind how to deale with our corrupt hearts,

                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
and vnmortified affections, euen to erect an Inquiſition ouer them, to lay in waite for them, to ſearch them narrowly, and to vſe them roughly: yea, to ſet our hearts vpon the rack of Gods law, that ſo it may confeſſe the ſecret wickedneſſe of it: for the Papiſtes doe not thinke vs Proteſtants, greater enemies to their ſuperſtition, then the inward corruptions of our hearts, are to our ſaluation: therefore it may bee a godly pollicie for euery man, curn to erect an Inquiſition ouer his owne heart and conſcience, and not to ſpare his moſt ſecret and deareſt ſinnes, and ſuch as are neereſt allyed to his owne nature: for that is the true ſearch here commaunded by the Prophet, and practiſed by all Godly and holy men: when a man purpoſeth to finde al that are, & to eſpie euē al his ſins: for a godly man is neuer ſatisfied in his ſearch, but ſtill, the more he findes, he ſuſpects the more are ſtil behind: and therefore hee continueth ſearching his owne heart all his life long: Therefore let

euery, profeſſor looke to it betwixt God and his conſcience, that he dally not with himſelfe in ths caſe: for if he doe, then, when God comes with his priuie ſearch, his hypocriſie ſhall bee diſcouered, and his nakedneſſe ſhall be layd open in the view of men, and Angels: to his eternal confuſion.
                  Thirdly, Search, ſaith the Prophet, but not ſo content: he forceth it againe, Euen ſearch you. In thus repeating and vrging this exhortation, the holy Ghoſt giues them, and vs to vnderſtand, that the true ſearching of a mans heart, and life, is a duty of a great moment, and ſpecial neceſsitie: therefore he leaues it not after once naming it, but inforceth it the ſecond time, as being no matter of indifferency, but of great neceſsitie: thereby ſhewing, that it is a principal dutie in repentance, euen the beginning and foundation of all true grace.
                  And further, it is a meanes alſo to preuent Gods Iudgements: for when men ſearch not themſelues, then God

ſendes the fire of afflictions, and Croſſes to trie and Search them: but, when they Search themſelues, then God ſpareth to Search them by his iudgements.
                  Now in that this dutie of ſearching, is both the beginning of all true grace, and the meane to ſtay Gods iudgements, and therefore is ſo pithely, and forceably vrged by the holy Ghoſt, it muſt teach vs all a neceſſarie leſſon: namely, to make great conſcience of ſearching our ſelues. Firſt, becauſe God hath ſo commanded, and we are to make conſcience of obedience to euery commandement. Secondly, becauſe therby we ſhal reape two ſo great commodities, as firſt, thereby we ſhal lay a ſure foundatiō for the good work of grace in vs, and ſecondly, ſhall ſtay the hand of God, and his iudgements from being executed vpon vs. Let vs therefore hearken to this counſaile of the holy ghoſt, let vs take the fan of the Lawe, and therewith ſearch and winnowe our hearts and liues. Our hearts,

for ſecret and hidden corruptions. Our liues, for committing of euil, and omitting of good. Doe with your hearts as men doe with their wheate: they will not ſuffer their corne to lie long in the chaffe, leaſt the chaffe hurt it, but commits it to the fanne that the winde may ſeparate them: So the graces of God in our hearts are pure corne, our ſinnes and corruptions are Chaffe: looke well, and thou ſhalt finde in thy ſelfe much chaffe, and but little corne: let not then the chaffe lye too long mingled with the Corne, leſt it corrupt the corne. Let not thy ſinnes lye mingled with the grace of God in thee, if thou doe, they will choake it in the end, and ſo depriue thee of all grace; therfore rippe vp thy heart, and looke into thy life, and when thou haſt ſinned, enter into thy ſelfe, aske thy conſcience what thou haſt done, & be not quiet till thou haſt found out thy ſin, and the fouleneſſe of it: and neuer thinke that thou knoweſt any thing in Religion, till thou knoweſt what

is in thine owne heart. And what are thy ſpecial and priuieſt corruptions, and looke into thine owne faults, not with a partial eye, but with a cenſorious, and a ſtrait iudgement, ſpare ſin in no man, but eſpecially condemne it in thy ſelfe.
                  But alas, theſe times of ours, cry out of an other ſtate, for euen Ieremies caſe is ours: We may complaine as hee did, No man repents him of his wickedneſſe, 
                     
                        Iere. 8. 6. 
                     ſaying what haue I done? the ſame is the ſore of our people, and the ſickneſſe of all Nations: that euery man runnes on in his ſinnes, from ſinne to ſinne careleſly: euen as the barde horſe into the battaile. But how rare a thing is it, to find a man, that dayly ſearcheth himſelf, & examines how he liues, and how the caſe ſtandeth betwixt GOD and himſelfe: and that when hee hath done amiſſe, entereth into the cloſet of his heart, and ſtrikes himſelfe vpon the breaſt, and diſputes the caſe with himſelfe, ſaying: What hane I done? O what is this, that I haue done againſt God,

againſt his Church, and againſt my owne ſoule?
                  The want of this, is that, which the Prophet complaines of in that place: not as though it were ſufficient thus to doe, in a mans owne conſcience: but becauſe it is a good beginning, and a ſtep to further grace. For if a man did ſeriouſly thus deale with his conſcience after his ſinne, his conſcience would ſhape him ſuch an aunſwere, and would tell him ſo roundly, what hee had done, that hee would take heede, how hee did the ſame againe, and looke more narrowly, and warily to himſelfe all the dayes of his life. Seeing therefore it is ſo neceſſarie a dutie, let euery one of vs indeuour the practiſe of it, namely, to rippe and ranſacke our hearts, and to ſearch our wayes vnto the bottome.
                  Now for your better inſtruction, and furtherance in the performance hereof: you muſt know that this Search is to be made by the Lawe of

God, for nothing els, but Gods law can helpe vs, & let vs ſee yt
                      which we muſt ſearch for: for if wee ſearch by any other means, we may ſeek & ſearch long enough, ere we find any thing that wil be matter of repentance. Aske the diuel, he will tell thee all is well, & that thou art in an excellent eſtate: and God loues thee, and thou art ſure of Heauen: this ſong the diuell alwayes ſings for the moſt part til a man comes to die, for then hee appeares in his colours, but till then, hee laboures, to ſing, and lull all men a ſleepe in the cradle of ſecuritie. Aske our owne fleſh, & our owne hearts and natures, and they will anſwere, and ſay, that all is well and ſafe, and that wee haue beleeued, and loued and feared God all our dayes. Aske the world, and men in the world: and they will aunſwere, all is well; and they will ſay further, that thou art a right good fellow, and art worth twentie of theſe curious fooles that ſticke vpon points, & ſtand vpon circumſtances, as ſwearing and

drinking, and good fellowſhippe, and gaming, and ſuch other nice and circumſtanciall points: thus will worldly men anſwere: for thy prophane courſe is acceptable to them, becauſe thereby thou approueſt the ſame in them. Nay, goe further, and aske all humane learning in the world, and it cannot tell thee what one ſinne is, nor what it is to offend God: ſo that there remaines onely the law of God, the light whereof will diſcloſe the darkneſſe of our hearts, and the iuſtice whereof will reueale the vnrighteouſneſſe & the peruerſneſſe of our natures: therefore to the lawe of God muſt we flye to helpe vs in this Search.
                  And yet for our better helpe in this dutie, and that there may bee nothing wanting to that ſoule, that ſeeketh God, therfore we are further to know, that if we will ſearch our ſelues by the law profitably, wee muſt marke three rules, the truth whereof vnleſſe wee know, acknowledge, and feele: wee

ſhall neuer ſee our owne eſtate, nor profite by this Search, but plodde on from finne to ſinne, vntill wee plunge into hell.
                  The firſt Rule is, that euery man that came from Adam, ſinned in the ſinne of Adam: Thou muſt therefore know, that his ſinne in eating the forbidden fruite, was thy ſinne: and thou ſinnedſt therein, as well as he (though thou waſt then vnborne) and that thou art guiltie of it before God, and muſt anſwere for it to Gods iuſtice, vnleſſe Chriſt doe it for thee. The reaſon hereof is, becauſe we are his ſeede & poſteritie, we were thē in his loynes, he was the father of vs all: and was not a priuate mā as we are now, but a publike perſon, the pledge of al mankind, and bare the perſon of vs all at that time: therefore what he did then, hee did it for himſelf, & for vs: what couenant God made with him, was made for himſelfe and vs: what God promiſed him, and he to God, he promiſed for himſelfe, & for vs: what he receiued

in his Creation, he receiued for himſelfe, and for vs: and what he gained or loſt by his fall, he gained and loſt for vs, as for himſelfe. He loſt the fauour of God, and originall puritie: therefore he loſt it for all his poſteritie: guiltineſſe, and Gods anger, and corruption of nature which he gained, he got for vs all, as well as for himſelfe. If we doubt of this point, it is proued by the Apoſtle: where the holy Ghoſt ſaith; Sin entred by one man, and death by ſinne: and that ſinne went ouer all, and that it went ouer 
                     
                        Rom. 5. 14 
                     all them, which ſinned not in the like tranſgreſſion with Adam (that is, euen our children) who as they are borne, are borne not onely tainted with originall corruption: but guiltie alſo of Adams ſinne. This is a moſt certaine truth, though it ſeeme ſtrange, for fewe men thinke of it, that euer they ſhall anſwer for Adams ſinne: and therefore if any obiect, what reaſon is there that I anſwere for another mans ſinne? I anſwere, true, if it had bene Adams ſinne alone: but it was his and thine alſo: for

hee was thy father and ſtoode in thy roome: and thou alſo ſince thou waſt borne, haſt confirmed what hee did. Now therefore though not one of many thinkes ſeriouſly thereof: namely, that he ſhould ſtand guilty of a ſin committed more then fiue thouſand yeares before he was born, yet ſeeing it is moſt true, both in Scripture and good reaſon: let euery man ſubſcribe in his conſcience to this truth. And let this be thy firſt reſolution in this Search, that thou ſtandeſt guilty of Adams tranſgreſsion.
                  The ſecond rule to bee knowne is, that in euery man are all ſinnes: more plainly, that in euery man by nature are the ſeedes of all ſinnes: and that not in the worſt, but in the beſt natured men: make choyſe of the beſt man and the greateſt ſinne, and that worſt ſinne is to be found in that beſt man. If any doubt of this, let him conſider what originall ſinne is, namely, a corruption of the powers of our ſoules; and that not of ſome, or in part, but of

all, and wholy. This corruption hath two parts. Firſt a want, not of ſome, but of all good inclination, a want of all goodneſſe. Secondly, a deprauation & proneneſſe, not to ſome, but to all euill: and not a proneneſſe onely, but originall ſin infuſeth into euery mans heart, the ſeed of all corruption.
                  Many men ſtand much vpon their good meaning, and vpright heart, and bragge of a good nature: but they are foulely deceiued; for take the ciuileſt man vpon the earth, and the ſeeds of all ſins in the world are in him by nature. But to explaine this point fully, obſerue theſe two clauſes.
                  Firſt, I ſay not, the practiſe of all ſinnes, but the ſeedes; for all men practiſe not all ſinne: the ſeedes are in their nature▪ but the practiſe is reſtrained, ſometime by education, ſometime by good and wholeſome lawes, ſometime the conſtitution of mens bodies deny the practiſe of ſome ſinnes, ſometime the Countrey a man dwels in, or calling a man liues in, keepes him from

the practiſe of ſome ſinnes: and alwayes a generall and limitting grace of God, reſtraines the natures of all men from running into many ſinnes: which hand of God, if God ſhould take away, and leaue euery man to his nature, wee ſhould ſee that euerie man would practiſe any ſinne in the world: yea, euen the greateſt ſinnes that euer wee heard to bee done in the world. All men which knowe themſelues knowe this to be true. And the more a man knowes his owne heart, the more he ſeeth that his heart is a ſea of all wickedneſſe: & that it is the mercy and grace of God, that hee hath not fallen into the mightieſt & moſt monſtrous ſinnes in the world.
                  Secondly, I ſay, by nature. For I know by good education, & by grace, it is otherwiſe: grace rectifieth nature, but that is no thankes to nature: for it is as euill and corrupt ſtill, being ſeuered from grace: and therefore nature muſt be fully aboliſhed, afore man come to heauen. And yet (though all

this be true (I ſay not, that ſin breakes out in all natures alike, though all natures be alike corrupt: for the courſe of nature is reſtrained in ſome more then others, by the meanes aforeſaid; but this is the truth, that whereas ſome are not ſo angry, ſome not ſo wanton, ſome not ſo cruel, ſome not ſo couetous, ſom not ſo ambitious, &c. as others: that comes not from any goodneſſe of nature in them, aboue the other originally, but from Gods hand, which tempereth, reſtraineth, and moderateth euery mans nature as he ſeeth good.
                  And if God did not thus moderate & reſtraine the natures of men, but ſuffer them to breake out to the full: there would then be no order, but all confuſion in the world: therefore, (as eſpecially for his Churches quietneſſe, ſo alſo for the preſeruatiō of publike peace, and the vpholding of ſocietie in the world betweene man and man) the Lord holdes a hand ouer euery mans nature, and keepes euery one in a certaine compaſſe limitted by the wiſdom

of his power, which reſtraining hand of his, if the Lord ſhould take away: all ſocieties and common wealths would be turned vpſide downe, becauſe euery man by the vniuerſall corruption of his nature, would breake out into euery ſinne: I ende this point with appealing to the teſtimonie of the conſciences of all men, and eſpecially of the beſt and holieſt men, of whom I would aske this queſtion, whether they find not in their natures an inclination, euen to the fouleſt ſinnes in the world; if ſhame, or feare, or elſe the grace of God reſtrained them not? ſo that the beſt men doe knowe well enough, what adoe they haue with their corrupt natures, to keepe them within the compaſſe of Obedience.
                  Nay, I yet adde further, the nature of men, and of all men is ſo corrupt, ſince Adam: that euen the ſeede of the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt, and a proneneſſe to it, is in the nature of euery man (though not one man amongſt many thouſandes doe commit

that ſinne,) for ſeeing in that ſinne, there is a heape or Sea of all ſinnes gathered together, hee therefore that hath in his nature the ſeede of all ſinnes, hath alſo the ſeede of it. And againe, ſeeing all euill tendes to a perfection, as well as grace doth; what reaſon therefore is there, but wee may ſafely thinke that the Diuell would hale euery one to that height of ſinne: if it were not that the powerfull hand of God preuented him, who will neither ſuffer wicked men, nor the Diuell himſelfe to bee ſo wicked as they could, and would be.
                  The vſe of this ſecond rule, is notable. For in this ſearching of our ſelues, it ſheweth vs what wee are, without all colours or deceit, and fully diſcouers vnto vs, the vglineſſe of our natures: and it may teach vs all how 
                        Gen. 4. Exod. I. Gen. 18. 2. Sam. 15 & 16. Eſay. 38 to think and eſteeme of our ſelues, when we heare of Caines vnnaturall murther, Pharohs vnnatural crueltie, the Sodomits vnnatural luſt, Achitophles, diuiliſh pollicy, Senacheribs horrible blaſphemie,

                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                     Iudas monſtrous treaſon, Iulians fearefull Apoſtacie. When we heare of the fearefull murders, treaſons, periuties, ſinnes againſt nature, blaſphemies, Apoſtacies, witchcrafts, and other the horrible ſinnes of the world: let vs then returne into our ſelues, & looke homewards, euen into our owne hearts, and confeſſe euery one, that theſe ſhould haue bene euen thy ſinnes alſo, if Gods grace had not preuented thee.
                  This will humble thee, and make thee thinke vilely, & baſely of thy ſelfe, and ſo conſequently bring thee to repentance and true amendment: and the very reaſon, why men repent not, nor amend their waies, is, becauſe they are Phariſies by nature, and thinke highly of themſelues, and of their owne natures, and their naturall inclinations: this will be a harſh and a ſtrange Doctrine to them: Oh, they haue excellent natures, and they cannot indure ſuch, and ſuch ſinnes, and they thanke God, they are not as ill as others: but let all ſuch men knowe, they muſt ceaſe magnifying

nature, and learne to magnifie Gods grace. Let them knowe, that nature in them, is in the Roote, as much corrupt, as in the worſt man in the world, and euery mans heart is a bottomleſſe fountaine of all ſinne; therefore praiſe not thy nature, but Gods grace and mercy, in giuing thee ſo good a nature; or rather, ſo well reſtraining, and rectifying thy nature; and ſtay not there, but deſire of the Lord, that as he hath giuen thee a better tempered nature, thē to other men: ſo alſo he would beſtowe on thee his ſpeciall and ſauing grace: and as he hath kept thee from the feareful ſins of others (thou being as ill, naturally, as they) ſo he would alſo lead thee into the way of ſaluation, which elſe the beſt nature in the world, can neuer attaine vnto.
                  The third rule to be known and practiſed by him, who will truly ſearch himſelfe, is, that euery man borne of Adam, is by nature, the child of wrath, and Gods enimie: this is true of all without exception; High or Low, Rich

or poore, noble or ſimple, borne in the viſible Church or without. And further, by being enemy of God, he is therefore borne ſubiect to hell, to damnation, and to all other curſes: ſo that looke as a Traytour conuicted, ſtands therby in his Princes high diſpleaſure, and is ſure of death without ſpeciall pardon: ſo ſtands euery man, when he is borne, conuicted of high treaſon againſt God, in his high diſfauour; and is in daunger of Hell, which is the fulfilling of the wrath of God. Thus Dauid confeſſeth of himſelfe. I was borne in iniquitie, and in ſinne hath my Mother conceined me: If in ſinne, then in Gods wrath, and vnder the danger of damnation, If any aske, how, or why this is ſo. I anſwere, the truth, as alſo the equitie of this third rule depends on the two former: for, becauſe euery man is borne guiltie of Adams great ſinne, and alſo tainted originally with all corruption & a pronneſſe to all ſin: therefore it followeth in equitie and iuſtice, that euery man is borne vnder the

wrath and curſe of God. This point is a plaine and euident truth: yet men in the world thinke not ſo, and it is the cauſe, why men repent not of their ſinnes: for moſt men thinke that by nature, they are in Gods fauour; and therfore they neede not to ſue for it in humiliation and repentance; but onely liue ciuily, and do no open wrong, and all is well: whereas (alas) there is no condemned Traytour, more out of his Princes fauour, nor more ſure of death without a pardon, then al we are out of Gods fauour, and ſure of damnation, vnleſſe we procure Gods fauour again, by faith and repentance,
                  For the better opening of this third rule, and the manifeſting of the truth: let vs know further, that the curſe of God, vnder the which we are all borne, is three-fould.
                  The firſt, is a bondage vnder Sathan: It is a certaine truth that euery man as he is borne of his Parents, and till hee repent, is a ſlaue of Sathan: man or woman, high or low, Sathan is his Lord

and Maiſter. Hee ſittes as iudge in his heart; and in this ſence Sathan is the King of the Nations, and God of the world. Men will in wordes defie Sathan, and not name him without defiance, and ſpitte at him; and yet (alas,) hee is in their hearts: they ſpit him out of their mouthes, but hee is lower; they ſhould alſo ſpitte him out of their hearts, and that is true defiance indeede: for alas, hee lodgeth in thy heart, and there he makes his Throne, and raignes vntill the ſpirit of regeneration diſpoſſeſſe him: and till then, no ſeruant is ſo ſubiect to his maiſter, no ſlaue to his Lord, as is the heart of man by nature vnto Sathan, the prince of darkneſſe. Nay, our bondage, is more fearefull, then the ſlauery of any poore Chriſtian, in the Spaniards, or in the Turkes Gallies: for their bodies are but in bondage, and at commaund, and vnder puniſhment: but our beſt part, our heart, our conſcience, our ſoule it ſelfe is captiuated vnto him, and vnder his commaunde,

who is the King of crueltie, and confuſion, and Lord of Hell, whoſe commaundements are Iniuſtice, whoſe ſeruice is ſinne, and whoſe hyre is damnation.
                  The ſecond part of the Curſe, is the firſt death, or the death of the body: that is, a ſeparation of the ſoule and body a ſunder for a time, namely, till the laſt iudgement. This death is duly and iuſtly the puniſhment of any one, or the leaſt ſinne: therefore, how due and iuſt a puniſhment vpon that horrible heape of ſinfulneſſe, which is in euery mans nature▪ and it is a moſt terrible curſe. For it is the very gate of hel, and the downfall to damnation, vnto all men, but ſuch, as by faith and repentance doe get their death ſanctified by the death of Chriſt: vnto ſuch men indeed it is no curſe, but a gracious and glorious bleſſing, for it is altered by Chriſt his death. But vnto all men by nature, and which repent not, it is the heauy curſe of Gods wrath, and the very downfall into the gulfe of Hell.
                  
                     
The thirde part of the curſe, vnder which euery man is borne, is, the ſecond death: the death of ſoule and bodie; which is the eternall want of Gods preſence, and the accompliſhment of his wrath: and an apprehenſion and feeling of that wrath, ſeazing on body, ſoule, and conſcience. The firſt curſe, was a ſpirituall death; the death of the ſoule, The ſecond a temporarie death, the death of the body. The third, is an eternall death, a death both of ſoule and bodie together; and for euer. This eternall death is the curſe of all curſes, the miſerie of all miſeries, and torment of all torments: and I ſhewe it thus. Often when thy tooth acheth, and ſometime when thy head acheth, or in the paine of the ſtone or collicke, thou wouldeſt giue all that thou haſt in the world to bee eaſed of that paine: Nay, in the exſtremitie of ſome fitts, many will wiſh them-ſelues euen out of the world: Now, if the paine of one tooth, can ſo farre diſtemper minde and body, that

it cannot bee releiued with all the pleaſures of this life; O then, what a torment ſhall that bee? when not one kinde of paine, but the whole viole of Gods wrath ſhall bee powred, not on one member, but on the whole ſoule body, and conſcience, and that not for a time, vnder hope of better: but eternally without hope of releaſe; and that not in this world, where there are comforts, helpes and remedies: but in that vgly and darkſome place of torments: and that not amongſt liuing men, which might mittigate thy paine, or elſe bemone thee, and beway leit with thee: but with the Diuels, and damned ſpirits, which will now laugh at thy deſtruction, and ſolace themſelues in this thy miſery, and will reioyce, as thou dideſt ſerue them in earth, ſo now in hel to be thy tormēters. It may be therfore (by the way), good warning and wiſedome to vs all, when we feele the extremity of ſome bodily paine, to conſider with our ſelues, and ſay: O then, what ſhall be my miſery and torment

if I repent not; when not one member, but ſoule, bodie, and conſcience, ſhall be racked and tormented in the feeling and apprehenſion of the anger of the Lord of Hoſtes.
                  In theſe three points, ſtands that curſe and wrath of God, vnder which euery man is borne. And theſe doe anſwer to the three degrees of ſinne, which are in vs: for as the two firſt Rules taught vs, there is in euery man by nature, till hee repent, a three-fold guiltineſſe. Firſt, a guiltineſſe of Adams ſinne. Secondly, the taint of originall, and vniuerſal corruption. Thirdly a pollution by many outragious actuall ſinnes. In the firſt of theſe, euery man is equally guiltie. In the ſecond, euery man is equally corrupt. But in the third, euery one keepes that compaſſe, within which the Lord wil keepe them, by his limitting power.
                  Now as in our guiltineſſe of Adams ſinne, ſin hath his beginning: In originall ſinne, his continuance: in actuall ſin, his perfection: So anſwerable herevnto, the wrath of God (which alwaies

ſtandeth oppoſite to ſinne) is begun in leauing vs by nature to the ſlauerie of Sathan, is continued by death, and is accompliſhed in damnation.
                  And now theſe three Rules, I commend to the carefull & Chriſtian conſideration of you all: certifying you from God, that as you can neuer bee ſaued, vnleſſe you repent: nor repent, vnleſſe you Search your ſelues (as here the Prophet bid deth) So, that you can neuer ſearch your ſelues aright, til you bee perſwaded, and reſolued of theſe three Rules, and of the truth of them all, euen in your hearts and conſciences: namely, Firſt, that thou art guiltie of Adams ſin. Secondly, that thou art prone by nature to al euil in the world. Thirdly, that for theſe, thou art ſubiect to the wrath of God, and to all the curſes of his wrath: but when thou art in heart, & conſcience reſolued, that theſe are true, then thou art a fit Scholler, for this Leſſon of the Prophet, Search thy ſelfe. For when thou goeſt, thus prepared vnto this Search, and eſteemeſt

of thy ſelfe, as theſe three Rules haue deſcribed thee: then if thou Search into thy ſelfe, thou wilt finde thy ſelfe, and thy eſtate to be ſuch, as will cauſe thee to repent, returne and take a new courſe: therefore, what the Prophet ſayd to thoſe Iewes, I ſay vnto you alſo, my brethren of this Realme of England, who are here now gathered together out of ſo many countries, & quarters of this Realme: yea, in the name of the ſame God, I cry vnto you. Search, O Search your ſelues: and thinke it not a matter indifferent to do, or not to doe it: but know it, that God commandes you, as euer you will come to ſaluation: Search your ſelues. And the rather, becauſe by theſe three Rules▪ you ſee how much chaffe of corruption is in your nature, and what neede therefore it hath to bee ſearched into, and fanned by Repentance. Bee well aſſured: thou man, whatſoeuer thou art: there is ſo much Chaffe in thee, that if thou ſearch not, and fanne it not out, thou wilt proue nothing but

Chaffe at the laſt day, and ſo be blown away with the winde of Gods iuſtice into Hell. Take hold therefore of this exhortation, and deferre it not.
                  Thou wilt not ſuffer thy Wheate to lye too long in the chaffe, for feare of hurting it: Is it then ſafe to ſuffer the chaffe of thy ſinnes and corruptions, to lie cankering and rotting in thy heart? Bee ſure that that little portion of grace, which thou attaineſt vnto, by liuing in the Church, and vnder the Miniſtrie of the Word of GOD, will bee putrifyed, and cleane corrupted with the Chaffe of thy ſinnes: therefore againe, and againe, I exhort you to make conſcience of this dutie: Search into your ſelues, fanne out this Chaffe, this preſumption of ours, and high eſteeming of our owne nature, and conceits of Gods fauour before wee haue it: that ſo this Chaffe being blowne away, the Lord may then beſtow vpon vs foundneſſe of grace, & the foundation of al goodnes, which is a holy & humbled heart.
                  
                     
                     Salnation is ſuch a building, as the foundation thereof had need to be ſure and ſtrong: Ignorance, blindneſſe, and preſumption, are not ſufficient foundations for ſuch a building: therefore as no man wil build a ſtrong houſe vpon any earth, but will firſt ſearch it, leaſt it prooue Sandie, & ſo ouerthrow all: So a wiſe Chriſtian will not build his ſaluation, vpon fancies & conceits, and naturall preſumptions: but will Search, and looke into his heart: and finding theſe to be ſandie, and rotten, and therefore too weake for the foundation of ſo glorious a building, wil refuſe them all, and labour to furniſh his heart with ſuch ſound grace, as whervpon he may truſt ſo weighty a work, as is the Saluation of his ſoule. Againe, if thou wilt ſtand in the day of triall, then Search thy heart betime, and diſcerne betwixt Chaffe & Wheat: thou ſeeſt, that chaffe flyeth away before the wind; but good corne indures the Fan, and the furie of the wind: ſo in the day of triall, temptation, ſickneſſe, or open

perſecution, the chaffe of natural preſumption, and outward formalitie in Religion, wil flye away: and it muſt be the penitent, humbled, and beleeuing heart, which muſt then abide it out, and endure the fanne of temptations and perſecutions.
                  And to conclude, Let not the Diuell deceiue thee, in making thee imagine or hope to pleaſe God, and yet to let thy corruptions lie vnſeene, and thy ſins vnſearched out, leaſt thereby thou marre all: for thou vſeſt not to lay vp-wheat in thy garners, vntil it be purged from the Chaffe: ſo thinke not to ſtore vp any ſauing knowledge, or any other grace of God in thy heart, vntill the chaffe of vanitie be firſt blowne away, that ſo the holy graces of God, may be layd vp in the garners of thy ſoule. And therefore queſtionleſſe (to ſpeake one word to touch our common profeſſors, in the very ſore of their ſoule) al knowledge that is ſtored vp in theſe impure and vnſearched hearts: is euen as Wheat layd vp in the Chaffe, which

is (a thouſand to one) ſure to bee eaten vp by the chaffe, ſo that, when the winnowing time of tryall and perſecution comes: I feare, that ſuch men will (for al their knowledge) ſhrinke aſide, and betray the truth: there knowledge then prouing no better then chaffe, becauſe it was layde vp in an vnholy heart: If therefore, thou wouldeſt ſtand and endure when Poperie, or perſecution, or temptations come, if thou wouldeſt abide the furie of the fanne of temptations: now, then exerciſe thy heart with the fanne of GODS law, Search and ranſacke it, purge out the chaffe of corruption, and ſtore vp knowledge in an holy heart, and a good conſcience, and that will abide the violence of all temptations: yea, when God ſuffers the Diuell to doe with vs, as he did with Peter, to winnow vs like Wheate, to ſift and trie vs, as he did Iob, with the furious winde of all his mallice: this knowledge will proue Wheate, that will abide the winde, and gold that will abide

the fire: thus glorious will it be in the ende, if we follow this holy Prophets councel, and Search our hearts.
                  
                     And thus much for the firſt point (namely) the dutie of Searching heere commanded, in which wee haue ſtayed the longer, becauſe it is the foundation of all the reſt: and this being wel laid, the whole building wilt goe vp the faſter.
                  
                  Now we come to the ſecond general point here laid down: that is, whom muſt we Search? the Prophet aunſwereth: your ſelues not other mē, but your ſelues. This ſearch ſo vrged and inforced by the Prophet, muſt not be of other mens hearts and liues, but of our owne: our owne are our charge, and not other mens: and therein is the ſaying true, which elſe is moſt falſe: Euery man for himſelfe: for as euery ſoule muſt bee ſaued by it ſelfe ſo muſt it beleeue, Repent, and ſearch it ſelfe.
                  
                     
The dutie therefore here commanded, is, for euery man that would haue his ſoule to be ſaued, to Search it, and reforme it, and leaue others to bee ſearched by themſelucs. Here the holy Ghoſt meetes with the common corruption of this world, (and that is) that men are Eagle eyed, to ſee into the liues of other men, but to looke into their owne hearts, and liues, they are blinder then Moles: they can ſee moates in other mens liues, but diſcerne not beames in their owne: wherby it comes to paſſe, that they ſtumble and fall fowly: for the eies of moſt men are ſet vpon others, & not vpon them ſelues: and thereupon it is, that an euil, man ſeeing other men, & not himſelfe: thinkes beſt of himſelfe, & worſt of other men: but contrariwiſe, a good man ſeeing himſelfe, & not other men, thinkes worſt of himſelfe, and better of other men: an euil man lookes outward, and iudgeth other men: but a good mā lookes homeward & iudgeth himſelfe: and in iudging, condemnes

himſelfe, farre aboue other men: and that becauſe by ſearching into his own heart and wayes, hee knowes that by himſelfe, which he knowes not, by any man in the world beſides.
                  So then we muſt ſearch, not other men, but our ſelues: our owne hearts and our owne liues are our charge, and burthen: the liues of other men concerne vs not, being priuate mē, further thē, either to follow them being good, or take heede of them being euil: but to ſearch, or to bee inquiſitiue into them, is no dutie commaunded vs, but rather a foule & a baſe vice forbidden of God. Indeede Magiſtrates in their people, Paſtours in their congregations, and houſe-holders in their families are to ſearch: but they can ſearch onely for criminall cauſes, or open actuall ſinnes: but this ſearching muſt bee of our hearts, which no man can ſearch, but our ſelues onely. Few men haue a calling to enquire into other mens liues, but euery man hath a calling to ſearch into himſelfe: but (alas) men

doe farre otherwiſe, they ſuffer themſelues to rotte in their owne ſinnes, and erect an Inquiſition ouer other mens liues, & it is to be ſeene in dayly experience, that thoſe men, who are the great Searchers and priers into other men, are the neglecters and forgetters of themſelues: And contrariwiſe they who doe narrowly ſearch themſelues and their owne wayes, and looke into the corners of their owne hearts, doe finde ſo much worke to do with themſelues that they little buſie themſelues, with other men.
                  And thus much may ſuffice for that point.
                  It followeth.
                  
                     O Nation not worthy to be beloued.
                  
                  The third point: Who muſt ſearch? the Iewes, who are here termed a Nation, not worthy to be beloued: & yet for al that, they are bid to ſearch themſelues, that ſo vpon their Repentance, they might bee beloued. Where, wee

may ſee the vnſpeakable loue of God, and his wonderfull mercie, offering grace vnto ſuch men, as are altogether vnworthy of it. Gods children are by nature like other men, and God findes nothing in them, why to reſpect them aboue others: but euen of his owne mercie, makes them worthy, who of themſelues are not: therefore how worthy is that God, to haue all the loue of our hearts, who loued vs, when wee were not worthy to be beloued.
                  But let vs examine more particularly, why GOD doth call the Iewes a Nation, not worthy to bee beloued: I anſwere, God had bleſſed them aboue other Nations: He gaue them his Couenant of grace, and thereby made them his people, & commited to their truſt, his holy word and Oracles: but 
                        Rom. 3. 2. he delt not ſo with other Nations, neither had the Heathē knowledge of his lawes. Beſides all this, they had a better 
                        Pſal. 143. 20. land then others about them, it flowed with Milke, and Honie, (that is, with all commodities, & delights)

and though their Countrie was but little: yet themſelues ſo populous, and ſo powrefull, that whileſt they pleaſed GOD, no enemie durſt ſet vppon them.
                  Thus for ſoule and bodie, they were euery way a Nation, bleſſed of God, a people beloued of God aboue all others. Now, how did this people (thus beloued of their God,) requite this his loue, which they had no more deſerued, then any other Nation? Certainly, as they deſerued it not afore they had it: ſo they requited it not, when they had it: but requited this loue of God with ſinne, with rebellion, and with diſobedience. They tempted him, they prouoked him to wrath, they preſumed of his mercy, & proued a moſt ſtubborne and ſtifnecked people, a froward generation: Moſes partly ſawe this in his owne experience, & better diſcerned it in the ſpirit of Propheſie: and therefore wondering at this their wickednes, he cryed out, Do you thus requite the Lord: O fooliſh people, & vnwiſe? 
                           Deut. 32. 5
                        
thus: that is with ſin, & diſobedience, which is the only meanes to diſpleaſe the Lord, & to prouoke him to wrath: for this cauſe, they are worthily called a fooliſh and vnkind people by Moſes, and here, by the Prophet. A Nation, not worthy to bee beloued, namely, for their vnthankefulnes, and vnkindnes: which was ſuch, as they not only were ſlacke, and careleſſe in performance of ſuch duties as God required: but euen multiplyed their ſinnes, & committed thoſe foule rebellions, which his ſoule hated.
                  And amongſt many, the Prophet here in this Chapter, noteth three of their great ſinnes: for which they were a Nation not worthy to bee beloued. Couetouſneſſe, Crueltie, and Deceite: all which were the more hainous and intollerable, becauſe they were the ſins of their Princes, their Rulers, and their prieſts: who ſhould haue beene lights and examples to the reſt.
                  Now, although euery ſin in it ſelfe, is of that ill deſert, as it is able to caſt vs

out of Gods fauour, and depriue vs of his loue: yet, behold, here God complaines, not vpon a little cauſe, but for wonderfull, & exceeding vnthankfulneſſe, & vnkindneſſe in them: who of all other ſhould haue loued the Lord.
                  As a man cares not for hard vſage from him, whome hee eſteemes not: but a little vnkindneſſe doth greatly greiue a man, from him who is loued and reſpected: ſo is it with the Lord our God, he loued not the Gentiles, as hee did the Iewes, neither was hee ſo bountifull vnto them: and therefore, 
                        Pſal. 147. Acts 17. verſe. 30. (as we may ſee) though they liued alwayes in ignorance, and continued alwayes in diſobedience, yet, the Text ſaith, the time of that ignorance God regarded not: but when as the Iewes, his owne people, whome he choſe out of all people, & beſtowed his loue vpon them, and made his Couenant of grace with thē, when they became vnkinde, vnthankfull, forgetfull, ſtubborne, and rebellious, that cauſed the Lord euen to complaine of the indignitie,

and to cry out by Moſes. Doe yee thus requite the Lord: O fooliſh people & vnwiſe? And hereby the Prophet, O nation, not worthy to be beloued: & therfore ther is no man, but if he be asked what he thinkes of this Nation of the Iewes: he will anſwere, that they are a moſt vile & wicked people, a froward generation, and that they are worthy to taſte deepely, of all Gods plagues, who ſo farre abuſed his loue and mercie.
                  But what doth this belong to them alone? and is Iſrael onely a Nation not worthy to be beloued? Nay, I may cry out with as good cauſe: O England, a nation not worthy to be beloued. For, God hath beene as good a God to vs, as he was to them: and we haue beene as vnkinde a people to him, as they were to him: But that I may bee free from diſcrediting our nation, and from defiling my owne Neſt: let vs prooue both theſe points, and lay them open to the view of the world.
                  1 Firſt therefore, the ſame mercies,

and farre greater, haue beene powred & heaped vpon vs: hee hath called vs out of the darkneſſe; Firſt, of Heatheniſme, & then of Poperie: his couenant of grace and ſaluation, he hath confirmed with vs, his treaſures of his word and Sacraments, hee hath imparted to vs: his holy word neuer better preached, and the myſteries thereof neuer more plainly opened, ſince the time of the Apoſtles: and as wee haue Religion, ſo wee haue it vnder a religious prince, whereby it comes to paſſe, that theſe bleſſings of ſaluation, wee inioy not in ſecret, or by ſtealth: but wee haue it countenanced by authoritie: ſo that religion is not barely allowed, but euen as it were thruſt vpon men. Beſides al this, wee haue a land alſo, that floweth with milke & hony, it is plentifull in all good things: we haue libertie, & peace vnder a peaceable prince, and the companions of peace: proſperitie, plentie, health, wealth, corne, Woole, gold, ſiluer, abundance of all things, that may pleaſe the heart of

man: thus hath God deſerued the loue of England.
                  2 But now England, how haſt thou requited this kindneſſe of the Lorde? certainely euen with a greater meaſure of vnkindneſſe: that is, with more and greater ſinnes then euer Iſraell did: ſo that if Moſes ſpake true of them: then may our Moſes much more truly cry out againſt England, doeſt thou thus requite the Lord, thou fooliſh people? And if this Prophet ſaid thus of Iſraell for three ſins: then may it bee ſaide of England, for 300 ſinnes (O England) a Nation not worthie to bee beloued: for thou haſt multiplyed thy tranſgreſſions, aboue theirs of Iſraell; euen as though, thou haddeſt reſolued with thy ſelfe, the more Gods kindneſſe is heaped on thee, the more to multiply thy ſinnes againſt him. For thou England, as thou haſt requited the Lord with ſinnes; ſo not with a few ſinnes or ſmall ſinnes; or ſinnes, which hardly coulde haue bene preuented: for that had bene a matter of ſome excuſe, or not of ſo

great complaint. But thy ſinnes are many, and grieuous, and capitall. And which is worſt of all, wilfull and affected, euen as though God had deſerued euill of vs and that therefore we ought malitiouſly to requite him.
                  If any man make doubt of this, and therefore thinke I ſpeake too hardly of our Church: I will then deale plainly, and particularly, and rip vp the ſores of our nation, that ſo they may bee healed to the bottome.
                  The common ſins of England, wherwith the Lord is requited, are theſe. Firſt, ignorance of Gods will and worſhip, (I ſpeake not of that compelled ignorance, in many corners of our Land, which is to bee pittied becauſe they want the meanes) but wilfull, and affected ignorance. Men are ignorant, euen becauſe, they will bee ignorant. Meanes of knowledge were neuer ſo plentifull, and yet neuer more groſſe ignorance: is not hee wilfully blinde, who will not open his eyes in the Light? and can there bee any darkneſſe

at Noone day, but it muſt bee wilfull? but our Nation is darke and blinde in the Sunſhine of the Goſpell: and groſſely ignorant, when the Goſpell beates their eares, and light ſhines round about them; ſo, as if they cloſed not their eyes, and ſtopped not their eares, they could not, but both heare & ſee; who would looke for ignorance after 35 yeares preaching? & yet, many are as ignorant, as if they had bin borne & brought vp vnder Poperie: ſo that our people are as euill as thoſe in the dayes of Chriſt, of whom the holy ghoſt ſaith Light is come into the world; but men loue 
                     
                        Iohn. 3. 1
                           •
                        
                      
                     darkneſſe more then light: ſo knowledge is come into England: but many Engliſhmen loue ignorance better then knowledge. Alas, how many thouſands haue we in our Church, who know no more in religiō, then they heare in common talke of al men, & which is worſe, they thinke it ſufficient alſo, and which is worſt of all, whereas they might haue more, they will not, but care not for it.
                  
                     
2 The ſecond maine ſin of England, is: Contempt of Chriſtian Religion. Religion hath bin among vs theſe fiue and thirtie yeares: but the more it is publiſhed, the more it is contemned, and reproached of many: in ſo much, as there is not the ſimpleſt fellow in a country town, who, although he knowes not one point of religion, yet he can mock, and ſcorne ſuch as are more religious then himſelf is: this is one of the moaths of England, that eates vp religion, this is grieuous in whomſoeuer, but moſt intollerable in two ſorts of men. Firſt, in them, who are altogether ignorant: that they ſhould mocke they know not what. A pittifull thing to hear one, who himſelfe cannot giue the meaning of one petition in the Lords praier, to vpbraide other men, becauſe they are too forward: but it is the worſt of all, when men of knowledge, and ſuch as liue ciuilly, and would be counted good chriſtians: and are indeede of the better ſort: cannot abide to ſee others go, a little before them: but if they doe: preſently,

they are Hypocrites and diſſemblers: Thus not prophaneneſſe, nor wickedneſſe; but euen Religion it ſelfe is a by-word, a mocking-ſtocke, and matter of reproach: ſo that in England, at this day, the man or woman that begins to profeſſe religion, and to ſerue God, muſt reſolue with himſelfe to ſuſtaine mockes, and iniuries, euen as though he liued among the enimies of religion, and not among profeſſors: and as religion increaſeth and ſpreadeth it ſelfe: ſo doth the number of theſe mockers: O what a curſed ſinne is this? to contemne the greateſt fauour, that God can giue vs; that is his holy religion: for the which, wee ſhould rather praiſe him all the dayes of our liues. All that God can giue a man in this world, is his Goſpell: what then can God giue to be regarded, when his goſpel is contemned?
                  This ſinne was neuer amongſt the Iewes: they indeed regarded it not ſo as it deſerued, but who did euer make a mocke and a ſcorne of it but England?
                     
O England, how canſt thou anſwere this. God ſends thee the moſt precious Iewell, that he can ſend to a Nation; and thou ſcorneſt it, and them that bring i
                        •
                     , and them that receiue it; euen as though it were no bleſſing, but a curſe: ſo that as Chriſt ſaith to the Iewes, for which of my good workes doe you ſtone mee; So may the Lord ſay to 
                        Iohn. 10. 32. 
                     England: I haue giuen thee a fruitfull land, a bleſſed Prince, gold and ſiluer, peace and libertie: plentie and proſperitie: for which of theſe (O England) doeſt thou contemne my religion? The leaſt of theſe deſerue loue; but England hath a better then all theſe; that is, his Goſpell and word of ſaluation: and yet, that alſo is contemned (as beeing nothing worth) and thoſe which confeſſe it, and thoſe that bring it, and conſequently God himſelfe that gaue it. If England had no more ſinnes but this: this deſerues, that it ſhould bee ſaide of vs, that wee are a Nation vnworthy to bee loued aboue all Nations, for ſome Nations would haue religion, that they

might loue it, but they cannot haue it: ſome haue it, and doe loue it: ſome haue it, and loue it not: but in noe Nation is it made a mocking-ſtocke, but in England. And where are thoſe men, but in England, who (like the dog in the manger) will neither entertaine Religion themſelues, nor ſuffer them that would: let vs in time take heede of this ſinne, as a ſinne that crieth to God, to reuenge ſo vile a diſhonour done to his maieſty: neither is there any ſinne that more certainly foreſhewes, and more forceably haſtens the remouing of the Goſpell from vs. For high time is it to ceaſe louing, wher loue procures diſdaine. And to ſtay giuing, where giftes are ſcorned. There were then preſent inhabitants of London, Yorke, Cambridge, Oxford. Norwich, Briſtow, Ipſwich colcheſter Worceſter, Hull, Lin, Mancheſter.
                  
                  Carry home this leſſon to your great townes & cities, where you dwel, for in theſe populous places are theſe great mockers, for wher God hath his profeſſors, the diuel hath his mockers; & repēt betimes of this ſin, for hold on in mocking, & be ſure that God (who will not be mocked) will remoue his goſpel frō you; but if you leaue this ſin, and entertaine the goſpel, (as it worthily deſerus)

then be ſure of it, God will continue Kendal, Couentry, Nottingham, Northampton, Bathe, Lincolne, Durby, Leiceſter, Cheſter. Newcaſtle, and of many other moſt populous cities and townes. of England the Goſpell, to you, and your poſterities after you, in the face of al your enemies round about you.
                  3 The third common ſinne of Englande, is, Blaſphemie, many waies, but eſpecially in vaine ſwearing, falſe ſwearing, and forſwearing, and the abuſe of all the names and tytles of the Lord God. This ſinne is general, euen ouer the whole land, eſpecially, in Fayres, and Markets, where men for a little gaine, wil not care to cal the Lord of Hoſtes to be witneſſe to a lye, and the God of truth, to teſtifie an vntruth. And which is worſt of all, Gods holy name is vſed in vaine oathes, and ordinarie talke. When men haue no cauſe to ſweare at all: ſo that, it is moſt lamentable to ſee and obſerue, that the name of any man of honour, or worſhip, is vſed more reuerently, and leſſe abuſed, then that fearefull and glorious name: the Lord our God.
                  
                  4 The fourth generall and great ſinne is, Prophanation of the Saboath. A
                     
common ſinne euery where, and yet ſo great a ſinne, that where it raignes, in that Country, congregation, family, man or woman, there is noe feare of God, nor any true grace in them: for the keeping of the ſaboath, is the maintaining, increaſing, and publiſhing of religion.
                  5 The fift ſinne of our Nation, is, vniuſt dealing in bargaining betwixt man and man. How hard is it to finde an honeſt, ſimple, plaine dealing man: and that euen in ſuch great aſſemblies as this is, I feare preſent experience wil teſtifie: you are now many thouſands gathered together, ſome to buy, ſome to ſell, ſome to exchange: Remember, that I haue tolde you, an honeſt hearted and plaine dealing man is hard to finde: therfore labour to approue your ſelues ſincere hearted men. remember the counſell of the holy Ghoſt: Let no man oppreſſe nor defraude his brother, in bargaining: for the Lord is the auenger of all ſuch things Theſe ſinnes are generall and vniuerſall as a cancker: And ſo

are the ſinnes of the 6. 7. and 8. Commandements (though they be not altogether ſo cōmon as theſe be) Murthers, Adulteries, Vſuries, Briberies, Extorſions, Couſenages, they are a burthen, vnder which, our earth groanes; and they cry againſt vs to heauen, ſo that vpon as good or much beter cauſe may it be ſaid to vs, as to the Iewes: O Nation not worthy to be beloued.
                  
                  Looke at the outward face of our Church, at the ſignes of Gods loue, which are amongſt vs, and at Gods dealing with vs; and behold, we are a moſt beautifull Church, a glorious Nation, a Nation to bee admired, and wondred at: but looke at the liues of our ordinarie profeſſors, looke at our ſinnes, and at our requiting of Gods loue: and we are a people of Sodome, as full of iniquities as they were, whoſe ſinnes are ſo many, ſo rife, and ſo ripe; that at the laſt they wil euē bring down fire & brimſtone, or ſome other ſtrange iudgement vpon vs, if repentance doe not preuent it, or the cries and prayers

of holy men ſtay not Gods hands. So, then let vs all here aſſembled, grant & confeſſe, that we are a Nation ſo farre from being worthy to bee beloued, as that we are moſt worthy to be hated, & to haue all the wrath of God powred vpon vs.
                  Now then, are we ſo? and ſhall wee continue ſo ſtill? Nay, that is the worſt, and moſt wretched of all: then let euery one of vs learne this duty, enter into our ſelues, Search our hearts and liues, that they may lye open to our owne ſight, to the confuſion of vs in our ſelues, that in God by repentance wee may bee raiſed vp.
                  Our ſinnes lye open before the face of God, and ſtincke in his preſence, and and cry for vengeance: and before the face of Gods Angels, who bewaile it, and before the face of the Diuell, who reioyceth in our confuſions: and ſhall they lye hid onely to our ſelues? Now then, if wee would haue them hidde from God, and ſtoppe the cry, that they make againſt vs, and keepe them

from Sathan, who accuſeth vs for them: wee muſt ſo Search our ſelues, that they may lye open to our owne hearts: remember thou thy ſinnes, and God will forget them: lay them open before thy owne face, and God will hide them from his: write them vp for thy owne ſelfe, and God will blot them out of his remembrance: but if contrariwiſe, thou hideſt them: then aſſure thy ſelfe, the more thou hideſt, and burieſt them, the more open doe they lye in the face of GOD: and then what will followe, but that they will all bee diſcloſed at the laſt day, to thy eternall confuſion. Therefore againe, and againe, I exhort you in the name of GOD, Search your ſelues, finde out your ſinnes, confeſſe them to GOD, freely, and ingeniouſly; confeſſe their deſert to bee Hell and damnation, humble your hearts to God, cry and call for pardon, as for life and death, purpoſe and promiſe to leaue them, begin a new courſe of life, beleeue ſtedfaſtly, and doubt not

of pardon and forgiueneſſe in the blood of Chriſt, continue in that faith, and that newe courſe of life: So may Englande preuent Gods iudgements, and quench that great action of vnkindnes, which God hath againſt them, and become a Nation as worthy (vpon their faith and repentance) in Chriſt to be beloued: as for their peace and proſperitie, they haue bene of all nations of the earth admired.
                  
                     Hitherto, of the third generall point.
                  
                  4 The fourth generall point in this exhortation, is the time limitted them, when they ſhould Search. Before the Decree come forth &c. As though the Prophet ſhould ſay. Iſraell, repent, before God execute his iudgements on thee. For behold the gratious dealing of God: Man ſinneth, his ſinnes deſerue plagues: but GOD preſently plagueth not, but deferres it, he puts a time betwixt the ſinne and the puniſhment (ordinarily:) this he doth to ſhew his

mercie to mankinde, becauſe that hee would not deſtroy them, if they would amende. Therefore, after the ſinne, he ſmites not preſently, but puttes of his puniſhment, that in the meane time man may Repent. Here the Prophet compares the Lord to a mother; for as ſhe conceiues the fruite in her wombe, and beares it a long time, ere ſhe bring it out: ſo the Lord after a mans ſinnes, or a peoples ſinnes, conceiue (that is) ordaines, and decreeth a iudgement for it, but he keepes it vp, and all that while he heares it: But as ſhe, when her time is come, then trauailes and bringes forth: ſo, when the time that God hath appointed, is come, and ſtil ſinne is not repented of: then his iuſtice trauailes to be deliuered of that iudgemēt, which mercy hath kept vp ſo long a time. Thus the old world had an hundred & twentie yeares giuen them for time of repentance; all that while God was in conceiuing, at laſt when there ſinnes were ripe, and no hope of amendment: then GOD trauelled, and brought

forth a fearefull byrth, namely the vniuerſall flood, to waſh away, and take reuenge vpon the vniuerſall iniquities of thoſe times. So many hundred yeares he gaue vnto the Iewes, long hee was in conceiuing their deſtruction, and oftentimes hee had it at the bringing forth, as in the captiuitie of Babylon, and vnder Antiochus; yet his mercy ſtayed it: and ſtill hee trauailled longer: telles them here by the Prophet, that yet the Decree is not come forth, (though it bee conceiued:) but at laſt when Iſraell would not Repent, but grewe worſe, and worſe; (as in Chriſt his time) then hee could containe no longer, but trauelled indeede, and though it bee with griefe, yet hee hath brought foorth: and what? a moſt fearefull byrth, euen an vtter diſolation of that kingdome and Countrey, of their Citie, and Temple, and a diſpertion of their Nation ouer all the world: but as a woman at laſt is deliuered with daunger, and difficultie, with paine and ſorrowe:

ſo the Lord long conceiues, but at laſt bringes forth his iudgements: yet it is with griefe and vnwillingneſſe, and hee is loath (as it were) and much agrieued to execute his moſt iuſt iudgements on thoſe, who haue profeſſed his name: hee often touched the Iewes a little, and as being vnwilling to ſmite them: hee drue backe his hande againe: but at laſt when their ſinnes did ſo increaſe, and were ſo ſtrong, that they euen did wring out, by violence his plagues from him, then with much bewayling of their great miſery (as wee may ſee in Chriſt, weeping for them,) hee executes his iudgements on them. But as they are long a comming: ſo, when they come forth, they were the heauier; as a child, the more fulneſſe of time it hath, is the greater, the liuelier, and the ſtronger: ſo, Gods iudgements, the longer God deferreth them, and is in conceiuing them, the heauier are they, when they come: that is manifeſt in the Iewes▪
                      once his owne people, for he hath deſtroyed

their land with an irrecouerable deſtruction, and ſmitten their poſteritie with a blindnes of minde til this houre, ſo that to this day, when the old Teſtament is read, the vaile is ouer their eies, that they cannot ſee the light of Chriſt Ieſus, but plodde on in fearefull and palpable blindneſſe.
                  This Doctrine hath ſpeciall vſe to this our Church, to teach vs to looke to our ſelues betimes, and try our owne wayes, and turne to the Lord, for wee cannot tell how farre of his iudgments are: in reaſon they muſt needs be near, they haue beene ſo long deferred, and yet beene ſo iuſtly deſerued of vs. Certainly God hath long beene in conceiuing iudgements and plagues for the ſinnes of England, and often hath Gods hand beene vpō vs by warre▪ famine, peſtilence, inundations: and yet it hath been puld backe againe: and his ſword hath beene put vp into his ſheath, and God hath ſtayed his birth euen in the very trauell, and we haue eſcaped, euen as a man, whoſe necke

hath beene vpon the blocke, and the Axe holden vp to ſtrike: ſo then, yet the day is not come, yet we haue time: happie wee that euer wee ſaw this day, if now wee haue grace to repent, and ſearch our hearts, for then wee ſhall ſtay this Iudgement decreed, that it ſhall neuer come forrth againſt vs: but if we deferre to repent, & put off from day to day, and lye rotting ſtill in our ſinnes: then know and be aſſured that as the Decree is eſtabliſhed, ſo it muſt needes come foorth: and then, when iudgement is come forth, & the ſtroke ſtricken, Repentance is too late: therefore what he ſaid to the Iewes, I ſay vnto vs, Search thy ſelfe, O England, (a Nation not worthy to be beloued) before the Decree come forth, which is already paſt againſt thee.
                  Thus much for the fourth point.
                  5 Now followeth the laſt point: the reaſon of all. Why ſhould we ſearch our ſelues? The reaſon is included in the

fourth point: For there is a Decree come forth againſt thee. And though the execution be deferred, and though God be vnwilling to take it out, yet without Repentance, it is moſt certaine, it ſhall come foorth and bee executed at the laſt. In one word, this is the reaſon. Repent, or elſe certainely God will take vengeance: But (will mans heart ſay) is this true? Or rather theſe bee but words to feare men, and to keepe them in awe. I aunſwere, for the proofe and experience hereof, neuer goe further, then this place, and preſent example wee haue in hand: the Prophet bids them Search, Search, and repent, elſe, as certainly, as there was a iudgemēt conceiued, ſo certainly it ſhould be executed vpon thē: they would not heare, nor Search, nor repent: but what followed; let all mē iudge whether God is not true, of his word to them or no: yea, alas, who ſeeth not that God hath trauelled indeede, and hath brought foorth a fearefull iudgement on them, and hath made them for theſe thouſand

yeares and a halfe, the gazing ſtocke, the by word, and the amazement of all the world.
                  Thus was it threatned to the Iewes, and thus it is performed: and certainly thus hath it beene threatned, & thus ſhall it be performed to thee, O England, except thou preuent the iudgements that are comming: O happy England, that I may ſay to thee, it is yet but comming. For as for the miſerable Iewes: vpon them (alas) it is come already: to thoſe poore ſoules it can bee ſaid no more, Repent before the Decree come forth: for it is now paſt: but thou art happie, for thy day is not yet come: yet I may ſay to thee: Repent before the Decree come forth: and O happie England, that thou mayeſt heare this worde: (Before) ſounding in thine eares. Therefore my beloued brethren, who are heare aſſembled out (almoſt) of euery corner of this kingdom, heare my words: and carry them home with you into al countries. God is the ſame God ſtill, as iuſt, and

as iealous, as euer hee was: our ſinnes are as ill, nay, much viler then the Iewes were: how can it be then, but that muſt fall to vs that fell to them? therefore the zeale of Gods glorie, and my deſire of your ſaluations, make mee, that I dare not flatter: but tell you the truth: that is, that out of all queſtion, if we ſearch not our ſelues & repent, there is a generall iudgement in preparing for vs: certainely the Decree is out, and what can ſtop the execution of it, but Repentance: God hath long ſpared, and hee hath been long in trauelling, therefore (though nothing can be ſaid in way of propheſie) I am in my conſcience perſwaded to feare, and that out of infallible grounds of the word of God, that a plague, and a iudgement, and that moſt fearefull, hangs ouer England: & that it is alreadie pronounced vpon this Nation, and ſhall be as certainely executed, without a viſible reformation: and becauſe I may ſeeme to ſpeak ſomewhat at large, giue mee leaue to giue you the reaſons inducing mee

hereunto.
                  1 Firſt, the Goſpel hath beene preached theſe fiue and thirtie yeares, and is daily more and more, ſo that, the light thereof neuer ſhone more gloriouſly, ſince the Primitiue Church: yet for al this, there is a general ignorance, generall of all people, generall of all points, yea, as though there were no preaching at all: yea, when Poperie was newly baniſhed, there was more knowledge in many, then is now in the body of our Nation: and the more it is preached, the more ignorant are many, the more blinde, and the more hardened (euen as a Stithi
                        •
                      (the more it is beaten vpon, the harder it is) ſo they, the more they heare the Goſpell, the leſſe eſteeme they it, and the more they contemne it; and the more God calles, the deafer they are: & the more they are commanded, the more they diſobey. We Preachers may cry, till our Lunges flie out, or bee ſpent within vs, and men are mooued no more then ſtones, O alas, what is this, or what

can this bee: but a fearefull ſigne of diſtruction? Will any man endure alwayes to bee mocked, then how long hath God beene mocked? Will any man endure to ſtand knocking continually? If then God hath ſtood knocking at our hearts fiue & thirtie yeares: is it not now time to bee gone, vnleſſe we open preſently?
                  But, if we wil know what this argueth, to contemne the Goſpel, and not to repent, when the word is ſo abundantly preached: read the Storie of Ely his wicked ſonnes. Hee ſpake vnto them, and gaue them godly counſaile, but they hearkened not vnto the 
                     1. Sam. 2. 13. 
                     voyce of their Father: But will ſome ſay, that is no great matter, not to heare their Father is a common thing: but marke what followeth. They would not beare their Father, becauſe the Lord would deſtroy them: a fearefull thing. Euen ſo it is with a nation, or a people: are they taught, and are they worſe and worſe? take heede: If Elyes ſonnes obey not, it is, becauſe God will deſtroy them.
                  
                     
If therefore Ely, and many Elyes haue ſpoken to England, and England heares not, England obeyeth not, England repents not: take heed the Lord in heauē ſay not, England will not heare the voyce of the Prophets, becauſe I will deſtroy it. Let no man ſay, wee take vpon vs to propheſie: wee onely giue warning, and ſhewethe daunger, by example of the like.
                  My ſecond reaſon is this. One iudgement executed: and not working Repentance, is alwayes a fore-runner of another, that Rule is certaine, and an euident truth, and needs no prouing. Now; we haue beene viſited with Famines, Earthquakes, peſtilences, inundations, Thunder & lightning in winter, and moſt ſtrange & vnſeaſonable weather: but alas, all theſe haue taken no effect: where is the humiliation, repentance and reformation which they haue wrought? therefore it muſt needs bee, there remaines behinde a greater iudgement. Men may be ſo madde to thinke theſe to be ordinary things, and

to come by courſe of Nature, and ordinarie cauſes: but certainly, they are the ſhaking of the Rod, and fore-runners of a greater iudgement, vnleſſe Repentance cut of their courſe. For looke as one cloud followeth another, till the Sunne conſume them: ſo one iudgement haſtens after another, and repentance onely is the Sunne, which muſt diſpel them.
                  3 Thirdly, it ſtands with the iuſtice of God, according as he hath reuealed it in the Scripture, eſpecially in Deut. 28. out of the whole Chapter, it muſt needs be gathered as a Rule. I wil curſe that people which breake my lawes: now we may not deny but this land of ours, is for abundance of ſinne, a people of Sodome. All kinde of ſinnes, in all eſtates of men, rage and raigne euery day more and more: therefore I conclude, that vnleſſe wee repent, and ſo diſſolue this cloude of iudgement, that hangs ouer our heads: it cannot be, but a moſt fearefull tempeſt is to come at the laſt, and when it is come, it will be

too late to wiſh we had done it. Therefore in the bowels of Chriſt Ieſus, Let this be to intreate and exhort you all, to ſearch and looke into your ſelues, that ſo Repenting and changing your wayes, you may get the ſword againe into his ſheath, which is already drawn out, but yet hath not ſtricken home, & may quench the wrath which is already kindled, but yet burns not out as it wil do, if by repentance we quench it not: & do this euery one as you tender the ſaluatiō of your owne ſoules, & the continuance of the Goſpel to this glorions Nation, and the peace and proſperous ſtate of this Church & common wealth. For let men make what cauſes they will, it is certainely ſinfulneſſe that ouerturnes kingdomes, and changeth ſtates, as all theſe kingdomes and ſtates haue felt, who haue continued finally to contemne the Goſpel.
                  It followeth:
                  
                     And you be as Chaff, that paſſeth on a day.
                  
                  
                     
The Prophet proceedeth, & deſcribeth more plainely, the manner and ſtate of that plague, which God will ſend vpon thē: the meaning was partly opened before, to bee in effect thus much; Search your ſelues, leaſt God take his fanne and try you, becauſe you would not try your ſelues, and finding 
                        •
                     ou vppon the tryall, not ſound wheat, but light chaff: blow you to hel with the winde of his wrath: the Metaphor which the Prophet vſeth is this, he compares the Lord to a husband man, great and rich, the whole world is his corne-field: ſeueral nations, (as this of ours for one,) are his heapes of Corne: but theſe heapes of corne be ful of chaf, that is, theſe particular Churches, are ful of hypocrites: now a wiſe husbandman letteth corne and chaffe lye together no longer, then til the winde doth blow, and then he appoints his fanning time to ſeuer his corne from his chaffe, and to blow away his chaffe, & lay vp his corne: ſo God, the great & wiſe husbandman, will not let the Chaffe

lye for euer amongſt the Wheat, hee hath therefore appointed his fanning times, when to blow the Chaffe into hell, and to gather his wheat into heauenly garners.
                  Now Gods winnowing times are two: the one is at the laſt day, after this life, and that is Gods great winnowing day of all his Corne (that of al
                        •
                      men) when the bad ſhall bee ſeuered from the good for euer, neuer to be mingled againe with thē, but by the ſtrong and powerfull fanne of his laſt and finall iudgement to be blowne into Hel: the winde of whoſe wrath, at that day, ſhall bee ſtronger to blow them all away, then al the winde in the world to blow away one handfull of light Chaffe.
                  2 Gods other fanning time, is in this world: and that is alſo double. The one is, when the word is preached: the preaching of the word is one of Gods fans. For when the Goſpell is preached to a Nation or Congregation, it fannes them, and tries them, & purgeth them, and ſo ſeuers them, that a man may ſee

a manifeſt difference of the chaffe and the wheate, that is, of the godly man, and the wicked man: this preaching of the Goſpell, doth Iohn the Baptiſt, 
                     
                        Matth. 3. expreſly call a Fanne: where the holy Ghoſt purſueth this whole Metaphor, moſt plainely ſpeaking of Chriſt, hee ſaith; Whoſe Fanne is in his hand, and hee will 
                           •
                        roughly purge his floore, and gather his w
                           •
                        eat into his garner, but the chaffe he will burne with fire vnquenchable. The winde of this fanne of the word preached is ſo ſtrong, as that it ſeuers the Chaffe from the Wheate, that is, good profeſſors from hypocrites in the viſible Church, and blowes ſo ſtrongly vpon the wicked, that it brings them to the beginning of Hell euen in this world, for it ſo worketh vpon the conſcience, as if it cannot conuert them, it ſtrikes them with feare, terrour & torment, either in life or at death, which torment of conſcience is the very flaſhes of hell-fire.
                  But, when this firſt Fanne of the word, will not ſerue to bring men to repentance,

(for the word preached, doth not confound a man actually, but only pronounce the ſentence, and thereby ſtrike the conſcience) then God hath another fanne, and that is the fanne of his iudgements: and that fanning or winnowing time is, when he executes his vengeance and his iudgements on a Nation: this is his latter fanne, 
                        〈◊〉
                      the firſt will not preuaile, this 
                        ••
                      his powerfull and ſtrong fanne driuen about with the winde of his wrath, this fanne went ouer the olde world, and ſwept them all away, and went ouer the nation of the Iewes, and we ſee they are no more.
                  1 Theſe three fannes of God make a three-fold ſeparation of the Chaffe from the Wheate, that is, of the wicked from the elect: with the fanne of his word which is powerfull, he ſeuers them in affection, and diſpoſition, and makes a diſtinction of them, ſo, as generally the Wheate is knowne to be Wheate, and Chaffe diſcerned to be Chaffe, by the preaching of the word:

but though the tare be knowne to bee tare, yet both grow together, ſo that the word onely ſeuers them in affection, and ſets ſeueral notes of diſtinction vpon them both.
                  2 But then the ſecond fanne of his Iudgements is more violent, for thereby, he ſeuereth them a ſunder in ſoule, gathering the godly men, as his wheat into the heauens, & blowing the ſoules of the wicked into hell: but yet the bodyes of them both lye together, as partakers of the ſame iudgement, ſo ſubiect to the ſame corruption, and are all lodged in the ſame graue of the earth, and death hath like dominion ouer them all.
                  3. But afterwards at the laſt day, at Gods great harueſt, & great winnowing time, he then with the winde of his power, ſeuereth them a ſunder in ſoule and body. Wheate from the Chaffe, ſheepe from the Goates, & ſeparateth them, neuer to be mingled againe for euer & euer: and then with the winde of his wrath, he blowes the chaffe into

fire vnquenchable, and with his louing fauour gathereth his wheate into the euerlaſting and glorious garners of heauen.
                  So then the firſt ſeuereth them in affection. The ſecond in ſoule for a time. The third, actually in ſoule and body for euer and euer.
                  Now of theſe three winnowing times, the holy Ghoſt ſpeaketh here properly of the ſecond: namely the fan of Gods iudgements: ſo that, the meaning of the Metaphor is this: ſearch your ſelues and repent betimes, leaſt God come vpon you with ſome fearefull iudgements: becauſe you haue ſo long contemned the fan of the word, and finding you too light to abide the try all, doe take you away in the iudgement, and caſt you into hell: for as ſure as the fan of the word hath made difference of you, which are chaffe, and which are wheate, ſo ſure ſhall the fanne of his iudgements blow away the chaffe to hell and damnation.
                  Thus much for the meaning.
                  
                     
Now for the vſe, for vs in England, the caſe ſtands thus: Our church doubtleſſe is Gods corne field, & we are the corne heape of God: and thoſe Browniſles and Sectaries are blinde and beſotted, who cannot ſee that the church of England is a godly heape of Gods corne: but withall, we muſt cōfeſſe, we are ful of chaffe: that is, of prophane, & wicked Hypocrits, whoſe hearts and mindes abound in ſinnes and rebellions: and many of our beſt profeſſors are alſo too full of chaffe (that is) of corruptions, and doe giue themſelues too much libertie in many ſinnes: but alas, the pure wheate, how thinne is it ſcattered? howe hard to finde a man (at leaſt a family) which dedicate themſelues to the Lord in holy and ſincere obedience, and labour to make conſcience of all ſinnes: now therefore, ſeeing wee are Gods corne field, and we haue ſome pure wheat amongſt much chaffe, therefore God will winnow vs, to find out the corne, if hee haue but one corne of wheat in a handfull of chaffe, but one good man

of many, he will ſtirre all the heape for thoſe fewe cornes, hee will not care to blow all the chaffe to hell, to finde out thoſe fewe cornes of wheat, to lay them vp in heauen: ſo that out of all queſtion, England being ſo ful of chaffe, muſt look to be winnowed.
                  Nowe for the firſt Fanne of his word, it hath beene vſed in this land theſe fiue and thirtie yeares, and that as powerfully, and as plentifully as any where in the worlde, and yet (alas) many are more Godleſſe, more ignorant, more prophane then euer they were, yea wickedneſſe groweth, and the Chaffe increaſeth aboue the Wheate: bee ſure therefore, that God will bring his ſecond Fanne vpon vs; becauſe wee will not ſuffer the firſt and the milde and gentle fanne of his word to try and ſearch vs: therefore hee will bring the fearefull fanne of his iudgements, and with it, hee will blowe ſoule & body into hell, with thoſe our ſinnes & corruptions, which we would not ſuffer the Fanne of Gods worde to

blowe from vs. The firſt hath ſo long blowen in vaine, that the ſecond muſt needs come vpon vs, & it hath already begun to blow: three or four blaſts haue blown ouer vs; famin, peſtilence, earthquakes, fire, water, winde, theſe haue ſo blowne ſome of vs, that they haue taken away a great number of vs. For vs that remaine, this onely remaines, that wee In the plagu at London there dyed ſome weeks almoſt 2000 a weeke in 92. but in 1603. there dyed 3300. in a weeke. ſtrengthen our ſelues by grace, to be able to ſtand againſt the next blaſt, for come it wil, & when it comes, no wealth nor worldly thing can inable vs to endure it, onely faith & repentance, & the grace of God will ſtand at that day. Now therefore, in that ſo feareful a fanning abideth vs: ſeeing it is ſo neer (as appeareth by the blaſts already paſt ouer vs, which are nothing but the forerunners of a greater tēpeſt:) what ſhuld be our care (except wee care not to be blown body & ſoule into hel) but to labour to efchew this feareful fan of Gods wrath: or at leaſt, if it come vpō vs, that it may not blow vs to hell, but haſten vs to heauen. It thy heart be touched to

aske, how this may be: I anſwere thee, onely to follow the Prophets aduice in this place, by Searching and trying our ſelues. The way to eſcape Gods triall, is to try thy ſelfe: and to eſcape Gods iudgement, to be a iudge to thine owne ſoule: and ſo the way to eſcape the fearfull fanne of God, is to fanne thine own heart by the law of God. For whomſoeuer the firſt fanne (that is the word of God) doth worke vpon: theſe men are neuer blowen away with the fanne of Gods iudgements. O then, entertaine the word of God into thy heart, ſubmit thy ſoule vnto it, let it pearce, & try, and ranſacke thy heart, and lay before thee thy wretched eſtate by thy ſinnes, and when thou ſeeſt thynakedneſſe and miſery, confeſſe it, bewayle it, be humbled for it, cry & call for mercy and forgiueneſſe; pray againſt thy ſpeciall ſinnes, ſtriue to purge them out as the poyſon of thy ſoule, craue grace from God againſt al thy ſinnes: and if thou ſeeſt any ſins more welcome to thy nature, more deere vnto thee, and which more prevaile

againſt thee, then others doe: pray againſt theſe ſinnes, and ſtriue againſt them aboue all: and endeuour, that by the fanne of Gods word, they may bee blowen away from thee. When thou haſt done this, then marke, what will come of it: when thou haſt fanned thy ſelfe, God will not fanne thee: but when the fanne of his iudgemēt comes; and bloweth ſo ſtrongly vpon the wicked, then the Lord finding thee already fanned, and clenſed by his word, will ſpare thee, and his iudgement ſhall either blow ouer thee, and paſſe by thee vntouched (as ouer Lot, in the deſtruction of Sodom) or elſe ſhall fanne out all thy corruptions, and blow thee vp to heauen, to be laid vp as pure wheat in the heauenly garners, and manſions of glory, which Chriſt aſcended to prepare for thee.
                  Now then amongſt thoſe many buſineſſes, with which this world doth comber euery one of vs (all which ſhall periſh with the worlde it ſelfe) let vs good brethren, ſpare ſome time for this

great buſineſſe. Martha may be combred about many things, but this is that one thing, which is neceſſarie: therefore whatſoeuer is done, let not this bee vndone. Once a day put thy ſelfe and thy life vnder the fanne of Gods lawe, try thy ſelfe what thou art and thy life, how thou liueſt. Once a day keepe a Court in thy conſcience, call thy thoughts, thy wordes, and thy deedes to their tryall: let the ten Commaundements paſſe vpon them, and thy ſins and corruptiōs which thou findeſt to be chaffe, blow them away by repētance, ſo ſhalt thou remaine pure and cleane wheate, fit for the houſe and Church of God in this world, & for his kingdome in heauen. But, if we will not doe this, then alas, what wil follow? my heart grieueth to vtter it: but I muſt vnleſſe I ſhould be a falſe prophet: And therefore I wil. Our long peace, plentie, and eaſe, haue bred great ſinnes, ſo great that they reach to heauen, and prouoke Gods Maieſtie to his face, and ſo ſtrong, that they will violently drawe downe iudgments

from God vpon vs: which when they come, they will bee ſo powerfull, and ſo violent, that they will blow vs away like chaffe, and bring this kingdome to ſome miſerable ruine. O therefore how happy are wee, if we can entertaine this Doctrine, and practiſe it: for in ſo doing, we ſhall preuent Gods iudgements, wee ſhall continue the Goſpell to this land, and preſerue this glorious Nation from being deſtroyed or diſpeopled, by ſome fearefull iudgement.
                  Beloued, you come hither to this At Sturbridg faire place, purpoſely to buy and ſell and thereby, to better your eſtates in this world: how happy then are you, if beſides the good markets, you make for your bodies and eſtates, you learne alſo how to make your ſelues abide the triall of Gods iudgements, and how to be made pure corne, fit to repleniſh the garners of heauen, & how to continue Gods fauour and the Goſpell to this Nation. If thou goe away with this leſſon, thou haſt a Iewel more worth, then

if thou ſhouldeſt goe home poſſeſſed or all the huge riches of this Faire: you call this and ſuch like times, Faire times: but if thou learne this leſſon right, then thou maiſt ſay, that this was the faireſt day in deede, that euer ſhon vpon thee, ſince thou waſt borne. This pretious Iewell which I haue ſpoken of all this while, I heare offer vnto thee. Euery one brings hither ſome-thing to bee ſolde, this is the merchandize that I bring and ſet to ſale vnto you: what euer commoditie any of you bring, it is from ſome quarter of this land, but all is from the earth: but this that I bring, it is from heauen: and all the earth cannot yeelde it: and as it is from heauen, ſo it is of a heauenly vertue, and will worke that which all the wealth in this faire is not able to doe: therefore caſt not, to buy the baſeſt, and let paſſe the beſt of all: and neuer alledge that it is aboue thy compaſſe, and being a Iewell, it is too deare and coſtly for thee: for I offer it freely vnto you, and to euery one of you, I pronounce vnto you, from the 
                        Eſa. 55.
                     
Lord, that here this bleſſed doctrine is offered vnto you all, in his name, freely, and that you may buy it without money. Happie is that day when thou comming ſo farre to buy things for thy bodie, and paies ſo deare for them, doeſt meete with ſo pretious a Iewell, the vertue whereof, is to ſaue thy ſoule, and payeſt nothing for it. Thou maieſt hereafter reioyce and ſay: I went to buy and ſell, and to helpe my body: but I haue alſo learned to ſaue my ſoule. I went thither to helpe to maintaine my owne eſtate: but I haue learned to helpe to maintaine England in proſperitie: for aſſuredly, if wee would all of vs learne this leſſon, and practiſe it, we might aſſure our ſelues of the glorious proſperity of England, to cotinue from generatiō to generation: whereas alas, if we continue & go forward in our ſins▪ & impenitency, it is greatly to bee feared, that neither the Goſpell nor this peace, will reach to our poſterities. Therefore now to make an end: I once againe: & laſtly, cōmend this doctrine to you al, & euery

one of you (for this marchandiſe that I bring, is of that nature, that though ſome take it, yet there is alſo enough for euery one) and I commend it vnto you, euen from the very mouth of God himſelfe? thinke of it I charge thee, as euer thou lookeſt to appeare before the face of Chriſt Ieſus the great iudge, at the laſt day; and if thou wouldeſt eſcape the rigour of that iudgement, enter now into iudgement with thy ſelfe, and ſearch thy ſelfe: if thou now wilt not receiue this doctrine, then ſhal it at the laſt day be a bill of Enditement againſt thee, for if it ſaue thee not, it ſhal condemne thee, thinke of it therefore ſeriouſly, as a matter that concernes thy ſoule and bodie: yea, and thy poſteritie, and this whole Realme, all which ſhall ſmart for it, if we repent not. And if the body of our people, and thoſe, whoſe harts are wedded to this world, wil not enterteine this doctrine: then I turne vnto you that feare the Lord, and to you I direct my laſt warning, Search, O ſearch, and try your hearts and liues, renewe and reuiue

your faith and repentance, that if iudgements doe come and blowe vpon this Nation, and driue the Goſpell from it, and it to hell: that yet you may haue a teſtimony to your conſciences, that you did not pull down this generall calamitie, but for your parts laboured to haue preuented it, by your earneſt prayers and heartie repentance: that ſo, the poſteritie enſuing; may not curſe you, but ſpeake reuerently of you, and praiſe God for you, and wiſh that al had done as you did; for then had they enioyed this goodly land, and al Gods bleſſings with it, as wee their forefathers did before them: & ſo ſhall our names not rot, but flouriſh amongſt the poſterities to come, which ſhall bee partakers of the deſolation: And when we haue renewed our repentance, let vs then euery one of vs, deale with the Lord by earneſt prayer for this Church and Nation, that the Lord would ſhew his mercy vppon it, and continue vnto it, this place & the Goſpell: it is nothing with the Lord to doe it, his powerfull hand is not ſhortened,

he can continue our peace, when the Papiſts look for hurli-burlies, he can continue the goſpell, when they hope to ſet vp their Idolatry againe: let vs therefore apply the Lord with our praiers, and with Moſes ſet our ſelues in the breach, and pray for the ignorances of the multitude, and bewaile their ſinnes, who bewaile not their owne, So did Eze. 14. 13. 14. 
                     Noah, Daniel, and Iob, in their ages, and prayed for the people in generall calamities: Let vs all be Noahs, Daniels, and Iobs, in our generations; if we doe thus: then when Iudgements come, we ſhall either turne them away from our Nation, or at the leaſt wee ſhall deliuer our owne ſoules.
                  Let vs nowe turne to the Lorde in prayer, and becauſe it cannot be hoped, but that this our generall ſinfulneſſe muſt needs end with ſome heauy Iudgment: let vs deſire the Lord ſtill to defer our deſerued puniſhments, and ſtill to ſpare vs, and to giue vs time and leaſure to repent: that ſo, we entering into our ſelues, and ſearching our hearts, and

turning to the Lord: wee may turne away his imminent iudgemēts, and that when his wrath doth burne out indeed, we may then bee counted worthie in Chriſt, to eſcape thoſe things which muſt needes come vpon the worlde. Amen.
                  WILLIAM PERKINS.
                  
                     Lament. 3.
                  
                     Let vs Search and try our waies, and turne againe to the Lord.
                  
                  
                     Trin. vni Deo gloria.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT Worſhipfull Sir Edward Cooke Knight, his Maieſties Atturney General, & Sir Thomas Heskith Knight, Atturney of his Highneſſe Court of Wardes and Liueries, and one of his Maieſties Honourable Counſell in the North, Grace and peace from Ieſus Chriſt.
                  RIght Worſhipfull, giue mee leaue to put you both in one Epiſtle, whō 
                     one ſeruice, one place, one profeſſion, one order, and one Religion haue ſo neerely combined: As you are Brethren many waies, and eſpecially in the profeſsion & practiſe of one Religion: to vouchſafe to be ioynt Patrons of this little after-birth, this faetus posthumus, of that worthy man Ma. Perkins, now deceaſed. I ſend you heere one of the ſhortest, and one of the ſweeteſt of his Treatiſes: had it bene as well brought foorth by me, as it was begot by him it had beene a child not vnworthy of ſo great a father: but ſeeing it is now as a fatherles child, be you the Tutors to this Orphane, at whoſe hands Orphanes and Wards haue euer bene well vſed. The father
                     
whilſt he liued was a ſhining light in this our Church, and beeing dead, is a ſhining ſtarre in heauen, for he turned manie to righteouſneſſe, and his doctrine wil ſhine 
                        Dan. 12. 3. in Chriſtian Churches whilſt the Sunne ſhineth vpon the earth. The ſubject of this Treatiſe is the Ministerie, whereof are layde downe the duties and dignities. And well dooth he couple theſe two together: for ſome can challenge the dignities of the Miniſterie, and cunningly caſt the duties from their ſhoulders: others performe the duties, but are kept from the dignities duly belonging to that calling: but as hee that will doe the duties, may iuſtly challenge the dignities, ſo he that will expect the dignities, muſt doe the duties of a Miniſter: therefore in this building, theſe two beames are in great wiſedome well ſet together by this wiſe Maiſter builder, and ſo cloſely coupled, as the idle or ambitious man cannot looke at the dignities, but hee muſt withal behold the duties, nor the painful & laborious man ſee his dutie, but withal ſha
                        •
                      ſee the dignitie thereto belonging.
                  And ſurely (Right Worſhipfull) none might better haue written of this ſubiect then he: for who may more worthily deſcribe

the dignities of the Miniſterie, then he, who neither by doctrine nor conuerſation, was euer the leaſt diſgrace vnto his Ministerie? or who may better challenge the honour of his calling, then he who was euer an honour to his calling; And who might better teach the duties of the Miniſterie, then hee who ſo diſcharged them, as En
                        •
                     ie it ſelfe cannot iuſtly reproue, and the enemies thēſelues cannot but Anſwere to Perkins his reformed Catholike, by B. a Prieſt. commend? and who may better teach them to others, then he that carefully practiſed thē in his owne perſon: And as none could be a fitter Author of this diſcourſe then hee, ſo not many fi
                        •
                     ter Patrons then your ſelues: not many in your profeſſion better ſchollers, nor any that better loue ſchollers then your ſelues: & you are ſome of thoſe few in this wicked age, who willingly yeld all dignities and due reuerence to ſuch Miniſters as you ſee willingly to diſcharge the duties of good Miniſters. Well would it be with the Miniſterie of England, (and the better with it, the better with England) if all as great as you, were as good friends to it as you. And if the Papiſts except, and ſay how can this be, for that you haue beene perſecuters of their Priests, let

me anſwere once for you, who often anſwere for many diſtreſſed men: they perſecute you with ſlander, that ſay you perſecuted thē, (but be content to beare your part in popiſh ſlanders, with our Prince and ſtate, our Counſellers & Cleargy, our Parliaments and Lawes, for none of theſe haue eſcaped theſe viperous tongues) for though you haue executed the Lawes vpon ſome of them in your ſeuerall places, yet not with ſharpeneſſe nor ſeueritie but with mercifull iuſtice▪
                      and that alſo not as they were Priests, but Plotters, Practiſers, ſubuerters, and ſeducers: and as they were Prieſts, you ſought their reformation, not their ruine. And if they, who can hardly diſcharge themſelues from beeing Priests of Baal, haue had but iustice, and that alſo tempered with mercy, it ſhewes how good regard you haue, and howe much you eſteeme all good and faithfull Miniſters, which are God Interpreters. In a word, if all our Miniſters were ſuch as this Treatiſe deſcribeth, or came but as neere it as the Author hereof did, and if all our great ones did vſe and eſteeme good miniſters as you do, we ſhould then ſoone pull the Miniſterie frō vnder that foote of contempt, with

which this prophane age doth daily tread vpon it. The Church of Rome, who are farre wiſer in their kinde then the children of light, haue taken other & ſtrange courſes to magnifie the Cleargie. They teach, that the ſtate Eccleſiaſticall, is ſo far more excellent then the Ciuile, as the Sunne is then the Moone, & that not in ſpirituall onely, (for that we deny not) but in temporall power, pompe, and eſtate: and that therefore the Chiefe of their Clergie, is as farre aboue the mightieſt Emperour, as the Sunne is aboue the Moone; and as the Moone borroweth her light from the Sunne, ſo doth the Emperour is ſtate and power from the Pope.
                  
                  They teach, that the Cleargie is a ſtate ſo diſtinct, & ſo abſolute of it ſelfe, as it hath not to do with the Ciuile ſtat
                        •
                     , yea they exempt their Cleargie, from beeing any way ſubiect to the temporall Magistrate. And though their crimes, be neuer ſo many or monſtrous, yet the Prince, or ciuill authoritie, hath nothing to do to take notice thereof, much leſſe to puniſh them: and herevpon great volumes are written, and many Acts and decrees are made in their Cannon Lawe, De exemptione Clericorum. They extoll their Cleargy aboue the Temporaltie,
                     
allowing the Prieſts both Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, but leauing the Laitie bread alone. They make them in their maſſe, mediators betwixt Chriſt & God the Father, & Creators of their Creator and Redeemer, when and as often as themſelues liſt. And finally, they ſend for the moſt part, all their Clergie immediatly to heauen without let, wheras all the Temporaltie (except Martyrs) muſt paſſe by Purgatorie. Here are great buildings, but on a ſandy foundation, goodly Caſtles, but built in the ayre; if theſe deuiſes were of God, they would certainly ſtand, but their long tottering threatens a ſuddaine fall.
                  Contrariwiſe, our Church, or rather the corruption of our Church, by auoyding this Scilla, haue falne into Charibdis, by auoyding one extremitie, haue falne into the other, by taking too much dignitie and authority frō our Miniſterie, & by laying too much pouerty, contempt, & baſeneſſe vppon it. It were a worke worth the labour of the wiſeſt heads, to put downe the true meane betwixt both extreames, & worth the labour of our Noble King, to take order that that meane be kept, without riſing to the right hand, or falling to the left.

This ſhort Treatſe may hap to giue ſome light & directions therein, or at leaſt may encourage & ſtir vp their hearts in whoſe hands it is to doe it: Vnder your woorthy names would I haue it ſee the world, not ſo much for that I am bound to you both in many priuate and particular reſpects, (though that be much) as for that know you both to be o
                        •
                      ſo right and reformed a iudgement in this caſe, as you would haue none Miniſters but of ſufficient gifts, and vnblameable liues, nor thoſe Ministers put to their Penſions, or vncertaine ſalailes, but to haue certaine & ſufficient maintenance proportionable to their charge, and beſeeming the honour of a Chriſtian Church: God continue you ſtill in that minde, and make many more of the ſame with you, ſo ſhould we haue as floriſhing a Church as any Chriſtendome hath ſeene. Goe forward in that, and other your religious reſolutions, it is the true way to honour, both heere and in a better world: ſtand firmly for the truth, and boldly againſt the Popiſh enemies thereof, as hitherto you haue done: Religion had neuer more cauſe to thanke you, and all that doe ſo, then now it hath, for her enemies

were neuer ſo inſolent ſince they were our enemies: but if you and others holde on, as in your ſeuerall places you haue wel begun, and others take the like courſe, there is hope their inſolencies will bee eaſily (if timely) repreſſed, and themſelues neereſt the fall, when they imagine they are in the full. The Lorde bleſſe and aſſiſt you in your painfull places, and make you on earth Inſtruments of his glorie, to the good of his Church, ſo ſhall you bee veſſels of glory in the kingdome of Heauen: And thus commending this little treatiſe to your reading, and my ſelfe to your fauour, I take leaue, and wil euer reſt, 1605.
                  
                     Your Worſhips in the Lord,
VV. Craſhawe.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A Treatiſe of the duties and dignitie of the Miniſterie.
                  
                  
                     Iob. 33. 23. 24.
                     
                        If there bee with him a Meſſenger: An Interpreter, one of a thouſand to declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe:
                        Then will be haue mercie on him, and will ſay, deliuer him that he goe not downe into the pit, for I haue receiued a reconciliation.
                     
                  
                  IN this Chapter and the former, Elihu a The Co
                           ••
                        
                        rence of theſe words with the reſt. holy, learned, noble, & wiſe young man, had conference with Iob in matters of high and excellent Diuinitie: the points of his conference are theſe: From the firſt verſe of this chap. to the 7. verſe, is a Praeface to his ſpeach. From thence to the 13. he repeateth certaine propoſitions of Iob, and reproueth them: frō thence to theſe wordes, hee inſtructeth Iob in certaine points touching Gods dealing with ſinners:

and thoſe are two.
                  1 How God preſerueth a ſinner from The parts of this Chapt. falling.
                  2 How God reſtoreth a ſinner being falne.
                  1 The meanes whereby God preſerueth a ſinner, are ſet downe to bee two principall.
                  1 By Admonitions in dreames and viſions.
                  
                  2 By ſcourges and chaſtiſments, when the firſt will not preuaile. And theſe are layde downe from the thirteene verſe vnto theſe words.
                  2 Then followeth the 2. point, namely the reſtoring of a ſinner: when both the meanes formerly ſpoken of, haue not preuailed with him, but that through his corruption he is fallen: and concerning this point, he handleth theſe particulers.
                  1 The remedie and meanes of his reſtoring.
                  2 The effect that followeth thereupon. 1 The remedie is layde downe in theſe wordes now red vnto vs, then followeth the effect, which is, that when a ſinner is

reſtored by repentance, then the graces of God are plentifully powred vpon him both for ſoule & body: from theſe words to the end of the Chapter.
                  The intent then of this Scripture, is, The ſome and ſcope of this text is a deſcription of the inſtrument by whom God raiſeth a ſinner into the ſtate of grace and ſaluation. that God vſeth meanes in his mercie to preſerue ſinners from falling into ſinne, but if they doe, then hee in much greater mercie afordeth them meanes and helpes to riſe againe. And this is the ſumme and ſubſtance of the words. Now, that means and remedie is the matter I purpoſe to ſpeake of, out of theſe wordes: The meanes then to reſtore a ſinner after a fall, is to raiſe him by repentance to a better Namely a Miniſter of his word, and he is deſcribed. eſtate then hee was in before, and that is incluſiuely, and by implication taught in this Text: But the inſtrument by whom that great worke is to be wrought, is here in plaine termes layd downe to bee a Miniſter of God, lawfully called and ſent by God, & appointed by his Church to that great dutie. So that theſe wordes containe a worthy deſcription of a true Miniſter, and he is here deſcribed.
                  
                     
1 By his titles, 1. By his titles. which are two,

                        An Angell.
                        An Interpreter.
                     
                  
                  2 By his rarneſſe, One of a thouſand.
                  
                  3 By his office: which is, to declare vnto man his righteouſnes.
                  
                  4 By the bleſsing that God giueth vpon the labours of this true Miniſter: which is, then God will haue mercie vpon the ſinner.
                  
                  5 By his Commiſsion and authoritie in the laſt wordes: God will ſay, Deliuer him that he goe not downe into the pit, for I haue receiued a reconciliation.
                  
                  Let vs ſpeake of them in order as they lie in the text, and firſt of his titles.
                  1 The firſt title of a Miniſter of God is, 1. Title an Angel. he is called a Meſſenger, or an Angel: and not here alone, but elſwhere in the Scripture, Malachy 2. 7. He is the Meſſenger of the Lord of hoſtes. And in the Reuelation, Reuel. 2. and 3. Chapters. the Miniſters of the 7. Churches are called the Angels of thoſe Churches. So that it is apparant, a true Miniſter is an Angel 
                     Hee is Gods Angel & the Churches. 
                     of God in one place, and in the other place, the Angel of the Church. Hee is an Angell or Meſſenger ſent from God to his Church. 
                     Vſe 1. for Miniſters.
                  
                  This conſideration affords matter of

much vſe. And firſt for Miniſters themſelues.
                  The moſt of vs in this place This ſermon was in the vniverſitie church, to the body of the vniuerſitie. are eyther Prophets, or ſonnes of the Prophets.
                  If thou be a Prophet, thou art Gods Angel. If a ſonne of the prophets thou intendeſt to bee, then marke thy dutie, prophets and Miniſters are Angels in the very inſtitution of their calling. Therefore 1. Vſe for Miniſters. Go they muſt preach gods word, as Gods word. thou muſt preach Gods word as GODS word, and deliuer it as thou receiueſt it: for Angels, Embaſſadors, and Meſſengers, carry not their owne meſſage, but the meſſage of their Lords and Maiſters who ſent them, and Miniſters carry the meſſage of the Lord of Hoſtes, therefore they are bound to deliuer it as the Lords, and not their owne.
                  In the firſt Epiſtle of Peter, 4. 11. wee are bid, If any man ſpeake, let him ſpeake, not onely the word of God, but as the word of God Gods word muſt bee ſpoken, and as Gods word: then ſhew thy faithfulneſſe For they carie not the it owne meſſage but gods. to the Lord, in diſcharging thy hands ſincerely of that meſſage, which he hath honoured thee to carry, Gods word is pure,

thercfore purely to be thought vpon, and to be deliuered. Then let all that are Gods Angels, and would be honoured as his Angels and Embaſſadors, thinke it no leſſe reaſon to doe the dutie of Gods Angels, leaſt (as many men mar a good tale in the telling, ſo) they take away the power and maieſtie of Gods word, in the manner of deliuering it.
                  The ſecond vſe concernes the miniſters 2. Vſe for miniſter. They muſt dreach Gods word in the euidence, & demonſtration of gods ſpirit. alſo: are they Gods Angels? therefore they muſt preach Gods word in the euidence & demonſtration of the ſpirit of God: for he that is Gods Angell, the ſpirit of that God muſt ſpeake in him: Now to ſpeake in the demonſtration of Gods ſpirit, is to ſpeake in ſuch a plaines, and yet ſuch a powerfulnes, as that the capacities of the ſimpleſt, may perceiue, not man, but God teaching them in that plaineſſe: and the conſcience of the mightieſt may feele, not man, but God reproue them in that powerfulneſſe: That this is ſo, appeares by Saint Paul. If a man prophecie aright. (ſaith the holy Ghoſt) the vnlearned 
                     1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. 
                     or vnbeleeuing man comes in, hee thinkes his ſecret faults are diſcloſed and laid

open, he thinkes all men ſee his nakedneſſe, and doe reproue him for it, he therefore falls down and ſaith ſurely God ſpeakes in this man.
                  
                  In which words, obſerue an admirable This is done 
                     plaineſſe, and an admirable powerfulneſſe (which a man would thinke coulde not ſo Firſt by teaching plainly. well ſtand together.) Firſt plainneſſe, for whereas the vnlearned man perceiueth his faults diſcouerrd, it followeth neceſſarily he muſt needes vnderſtand, and if an vnlearned man vnderſtand it, then conſequently it muſt needes be plaine: Secondly powerfulneſſe, in that his conſcience is ſo conuinced, his ſecret faults ſo diſcloſed, Secondly. powerfully in that plainneſſe. and his very heart ſo ript vp: that he ſaith, certainly God ſpeakes in this man. This is the euidence and demonſtration of Gods ſpirit: It is thought good commendation before the world, when men ſay of a Preacher, ſurely this man hath ſhowne himſelfe a proper ſcholler, of good learning, great reading, ſtrong memory, and good deliuery, Miniſters muſt magnify Gods ſpirit, & not themſelues in preaching. and ſo it is, and ſuch commendation (if iuſt) is not to be contemned: but that, that commends a man to the Lord his God, and to his owne conſcience, is when he preacheth

ſo plainely to the capacitie, and ſo powerfully to the conſcience of a wicked man, as that he thinkes doubtleſſe God is within him. Art thou therefore an Angell of God, then magnifie the ſpirite of God, and not thy ſelfe in thy preaching of his word.
                  The next vſe is for the hearers, and they are here taught, that if their Miniſters bee The 2. vſe for hearers. 
                     Angels ſent them from God, then are they to heare them, gladly, willingly, reuerently, They are to receiue thē and their doctrine willingly and reuerenly. and obediently: gladly and willingly, becauſe they are Ambaſſadors, reuerently and obediently, becauſe they are ſent from the high God the King of Kings, and doe deliuer his embaſlage. God ſaith, the people muſt ſeeke the Lawe at his mouth: 
                     Malach. 2. 7. and good reaſon, for if the lawe be the reuealed will of God, and the Miniſter the Angell of God, then where ſhould they ſeeke the will of God, but at the mouth of his Angell? The reaſon therefore followeth well in that place: they ſhould ſeeke the Lawe at his mouth, for hee is the meſſenger of the lord of hoſts: and this muſt all Chriſtians doe, not onely if their Doctrine be pleaſing vnto them, but though

it croſſe their corruptions, and bee quite contrary to their diſpoſitions, yea though For it is Gods meſſage, though they be men that bring it. it bee neuer ſo vnſauory and harde vnto nature, yet in as much as it is a meſſage from thy God and King, and the teacher the Angellor meſſenger of that God: therefore both hee and it muſt be receiued with all reuerence, and with the very obedience of the heart and ſoule. And this is the cauſe why a conuenient reuerence and honour is to be giuen of all good Chriſtians, euen to the perſons of Gods Miniſters (eſpecially when they adorne their high calling with a holy life:) euen becauſe they are Angels of God. Saint Paule teacheth, that women ought to be modeſtly altired in the congregation 
                     1 Corinth. 11. 11. 
                     becauſe of the Angels: it is not onely, becauſe the holy Angels are preſent, and alwaies beholders of our ſeruice of God, but euen becauſe the Ministers, which are Angels and meſſengers ſent from God, are there, delinering their meſſage and Embaſſage receiued from God: And thus we haue the firſt title giuen to the Miniſter: he is an Angell.
                  
                  
                     An Interpreter.
                  
                  
                     
Secondly hee is an Interpreter, that is, 2 Title, an Interpreter, and that two wa
                           •
                        es. one that is able to deliuer aright the reconciliation, made betwixt God and man: I ſay not, the author of that reconciliation, for that is the godhead it ſelfe: nor the worker of this reconciliation, for that is the ſecond perſon, Chriſt Ieſus: nor the aſſurer or ratifier of it, for that is the holy Ghoſt: nor the inſtrument of it, for that is the glad tidings of the goſpell: but I ſay he is the interpreter of it, that is, firſt one that can open and explane the couenant of grace, and rightly lay downe the meanes how 1 Gods interpreter to his Church. this reconciliation is wrought: Secondly, one that can rightly and iustly apply thoſe meanes, for the working of it out. Thirdly, one that hath authoritie to publiſh and declare it when it is wrought: and by theſe three actions hee is Gods Interpreter to the people. 2 Mans interpreter to God.
                  
                  Then hee is alſo the peoples interpreter to God, by being able to ſpeake to God for them, to lay open their wants and nakedneſſes, to confeſſe their ſinnes, to craue pardon and forgiueneſſe, to giue thankes in their names for mercies receiued,

and in a word to offer vp all their ſpirituall ſacrifices vnto God for them: and ſo euery true Miniſter is a double interpreter, Gods to the people, and the peoples to God. In which reſpects, hee is properly called, Gods mouth to the people, by preaching to them from God, and the peoples mouth to God, by praying for them to God: and this title ſheweth how great & glorious a calling this miniſtery is if it be rightly conceiued. Now then for the vſe of it.
                  Firſt, if euery true Miniſter muſt bee 1 Vſe. Miniſters muſt haue the tongue of the learned. Gods Interpreter to the people, and the peoples to God, then hence wee learne that euery one, who either is or intends to be a Miniſter, muſt haue that tongue of the learned, whereof is ſpoken in Eſay 50. 4. wher the prophet ſaith (firſt in the name of Chriſt, as he that is the great Prophet and teacher of his Church; and ſecondarily in the name of himſelfe, and all true Prophets while the worlde endureth.) The Lorde God hath giuen me a tongue of the learned, that I ſhould knowe to ſpeake a word in ſeaſon to him that is wearie: where note the

                     wearie ſoules, or troubled conſcience, muſt haue a word in ſeaſon ſpoken to him for his comfort, and that cannot bee ſpoken without the tongue of the learned, and laſtly that tongue of the learned muſt bee giuen 
                     Firſt he muſt be furniſhed with human learning. 2 with diuinity. 
                     of God. Now to haue this tongue of the learned, which Eſay ſpeakes of, what is it but to be this Interpreter, which the holy Ghoſt heere ſaith a Miniſter muſt bee: But to bee able to ſpeake with this tongue is, firſt to bee furniſhed with humane learning. Secondly, with Diuine knowledge, as farre as it may by outward meanes bee taught from man to man: but beſides theſe, hee that will ſpeake this tongue aright, muſt be inwardly learned, and taught by the ſpirit 
                        
                           •
                        . He muſt be inwardly taught by Gods ſpirit. of God: the two firſt he muſt learne from men, but the third from God: a true Miniſter muſt be inwardly taught by the ſpiritual ſchool-maiſter the holy Ghoſt. Saint Iohn in the Reuelatiō muſt take the book, Reuel. 10. 8. that is the Scripture, and eate it, and when hee hath eaten it: then (ſaith the Angell) he must goe preach to Nations, tongues, people, and to Kings: which was done, not that Saint Iohn had not eaten that booke, in

                     the comming downe of the holy Ghoſt, the Acts. 2. very ende of whoſe comming was to teach them ſpiritually: but that in him Chriſt might teach his Church for euer, that no Miniſter is fit to preach, to nations and to Kings, vntill they haue eaten the booke of 
                     This is to eat the boo of God. 
                     God: that is, till after and beſides all the learning that man can teach them, they be alſo taught by the ſpirit of God himſelfe, and this teaching is it that makes a man a true interpreter, and without this he cannot be, for how can a man bee Gods interpreter to his people, vnleſſe he knowe the mind of God himſelfe, and how can he knowe the minde of God, but by the teaching of the ſpirit of God. For as no man knoweth the thought of a man, but the ſpirit 1. Corinth. of man that is in him. So the things of God knoweth no mā, but the ſpirit of god. Indeed we may be mans interpreter by humane teaching, and may interpret the Scriptures truly and ſoundly as a humane booke or ſtorie, for the increaſe of knowledge, but the diuine & ſpiritual interpreter, which ſhal pearce the hart, and aſtoniſh the ſoule of man, muſt bee taught by the inward teaching of the holy Ghoſt.
                  
                     
Let no man thinke I heere giue the leaſt allowance to Anabaptiſticall fancies, This is no approbation to Anabaptiſts who depend onely on reuelations, & neglect all meanes. and reuelations, which are nothing, but eyther dreames of their owne, or illuſions of the Diuell, for they contemne both humane learning, and the ſtudy of the ſcripture, and truſt wholy to reuelations of the ſpirit; but Gods Spirit worketh not but vpon the foundation of the worde: onely I teach this, that a Miniſter muſt bee a diuine Interpreter, an Interpreter of Gods meaning. And therfore he muſt not onely reade the books, but eate it, that is, not onely haue the knowledge of Diuine things flowing in his braine, but ingrauen in his heart, and printed in his ſoule by the ſpirituall finger of God: and therefore for this end, after all his owne ſtudy, meditation, conference, Commentaries, and after all humane helps, hee muſt pray with Dauid, Pſal. 119. 18. 
                     Open thou mine eyes, that I may ſee the wonders of thy lawe. The diſcerning of thoſe wonders requires a ſpirituall illumination, and the opening of them requires the tongue of the learned. Therefore after all the ſtudie which fleſh and blood, and humane

reaſon can yeelde, pray with the Prophet, Lord giue me the tongue of the learned, that I may be a right interpreter of thy holy will.
                  Furthermore, inaſmuch as miniſters are 2 Vſe. For miniſters. Eſay. 13. Interpreters, they muſt labour for ſanctitie, and holineſſe of life. In Eſay, the king of Aſſiria is ſaide to bee ſanctified or ſet a part They muſt be holy and ſanctified men: and ſo be firſt of all interpreters to themſelues. to destroy Gods enemies. If there be a certaine kind of ſanctification, neceſſary for the worke of destruction, then how much more is true ſanctification neceſſarie for this great and glorious worke of the edification of Gods Church? A Miniſter is to declare the reconciliation betwixt God and man, and is hee himſelfe not reconciled? Dare he preſent another man to Gods mercy for pardon, and neuer yet preſented himſelfe? Can hee commend the ſtate of Grace to another, and neuer felt the ſweeteneſſe thereof in his owne ſoule? Dare hee come to preach ſanctification with polluted lips, and out of an vnſanctified heart? Moſes might not ſtand vpon the Mount in Gods preſence, till hee had put off his ſhooes from off his feet. Exod. 3. and dare any man preſume

to come into this moſt high and holy preſence of the Lord, vntill he haue mortified his corruptions, and caſt off the vnrulines of his affections?
                  In Exodus, the prieſts are bid to ſanctifie 
                     Exod. 19. 20. Leuit. 10. 3. 
                     the people, and in Leuiticus it is ſaide, that God will be ſanctified in all that come neere him, but who come ſo neere vnto God as the Miniſters do? So that it is apparant, Ministers doe ſanctifie the people, and in ſome conſtruction, God himſelfe: Nowe, ſhall they one way bee ſanctifiers of the people, another way of God himſelfe, and For elſe they will hardly do good to others. no way of themſelues? Surely if it bee ſo, they are but lame Interpreters. And this is the reaſon doubtleſſe, why vnſanctified Miniſters, and ſuch as are of a looſe conuerſation, beſtow ſuch fruitleſſe labours in the Church: many want no learning, no ability to interpret, & yet how fewe ſoules doe they bring to God? Some it may bee are conuerted by their Miniſterie, that God may ſhewe, the efficacie is not in the perſon of man, but in the ordinance of God, but fewe doubtleſſe (for ought that we can ſee:) to teach vs, how God hateth

him which will take in hand to reconcile others to God, himſelfe being vnreconciled. Seing-then Miniſters are Gods Interpreters to the people, to declare & publiſh their reconciliation with God, and that they cannot be reconciled, vnleſſe they be ſanctified, and can ſo hardly bee ſanctified by the miniſterie of an vnſanctified man: let therefore all true Miniſters of God: firſt be Gods Interpreters to their owne conſciences, and their owne ſoules Interpreters to God, then ſhall they know more perfectly how to diſcharge the office of true Interpreters betwixt God and his people.
                  And thus we haue the true titles of a true Miniſter.
                  Now it followeth in the Text.
                  
                     One of a thouſand.
                  
                  Here is the ſecond part of this deſcription, 2. Part of the deſcription is the rarenes of a good Miniſter. He is one of a thouſand. which is by the rareneſſe, or ſcarceneſſe of good Ministers: which is layd downe in a very ſtrange phraſe, namely, that a true Miniſter one that is a right Angel, and a true Interpreter, is no common or ordinarie man, but thin ſowne, one of many, Nay, one of a thouſand.
                  
                  
                     
The meaning hereof is to be conceiued The meaning. either properly, or figuratiuely: in the figuratiue ſence, it is ſpoken in relation to miniſters themſelues: in the proper ſenſe, it hath a compariſon with all men: the figuratiue and hyperbolicall ſenſe is, that of all the Miniſters in the worlde, not one of many is a right Angel, and a true Interpreter: the plaine & proper ſenſe is, that amongſt the men of this worlde, there is not one of a thouſand which proues a true Miniſter. For this point let vs examine three points: the truth of it, the reaſons of it, and the vſe of it.
                  The truth hereof is manifeſt, by the experience 1. The truth hereof. of all ages, wherein it is ſtrange to obſerue, how fewe men of any ſort, eſpecially of the better ſort, affect the calling of a Miniſter: and which is more ſtrange, howe fewe of thoſe that are Miniſters in name and title, doe deſerue theſe honourable names of an Angel, and an Interpreter, and the truth is too manifeſt in common practiſe, to inſiſt much vpon it: rather therefore let vs ſee the reaſons of it, and they be theſe principally.
                  
                     
Firſt, the Contempt that lyeth on that 2. The reaſons hereof. calling, it being alwayes hated, by wicked and prophane men, becauſe it diſcouers their filthines, and vnmaskes their hypocriſie: 1. Reaſon the contempt of it: it being alwayes hated by wicked men. and their doctrine oftimes is a fretting corraſiue to their conſcience, that they cannot welter, and wallowe ſo quietly, and ſecretly in their ſinnes, as otherwiſe they would, therefore is it that they ſpurne both againſt the calling, and the men, and watch them narrowly, and take holde of their leaſt infirmities, thereby to diſgrace them: iudging that to caſt contempt on that calling, is to remoue ſhame from their owne ſhamefull courſes: nor is it poſsible, but that they ſhould thus hate this calling, inaſmuch as they hate ſo deadly both that lawe and Embaſſage which they bring, and that GOD, whoſe Embaſſadors they are.
                  This hatred and diſgrace in the wicked world, was that that cauſed Ieremie to cry, woe is me, & made him in the ſeeming of his natural reaſon, curſe ye
                         time yt
                         euer he was 
                     Ieremie, 15. 10. 
                     a prophet, for ſaith he, I am a man of cōtention,
                     
euery man is at ſtrife and at enmitie with me.
                  The next reaſon is The difficultie of diſcharging 
                     2. Reaſon, the defficultie of diſcharging the duties. 
                     the duties of his calling: to ſtand in Gods preſence, to enter into the holy of holieſt, to goe betwixt God & his people, to be Gods mouth to the people, and the peoples to God: to be the Interpreter of the eternall lawe of the olde Teſtament, and the euerlaſting Goſpell of the New: to ſtand in the roume, and to beare the office of Chriſt himſelfe, to take the care and charge of ſoules, theſe conſiderations are ſo many amazements to the conſciences of ſuch men, who doe with reuerence approch, & not with raſhnes, ruſh vnto this ſacred ſeate: this made Saint Paul cry out, who is ſufficient for theſe things. And if Paul 
                     2. Corinth. 2. 16. ſaid, Who is? no marnell though many a man ſay, I am not ſufficient, and doe therefore draw their neckes from this yoke, and their hands from this plough, vntill God himſelfe or his Church doe preſſe them to it.
                  The laſt reaſon is more peculiar to this 3. Reaſon▪ want of maintenance. age of the newe Teſtament, namely, want

of maintenance and preferment, for them that labour in this calling: men are fleſh and blood, and in that reſpect muſt be allured, and wonne to embrace this vocation, by ſome arguments, which may perſwade fleſh and blood: the world hath in all ages beene negligent herein, and therefore God in his law tooke ſuch ſtrict orders, for 
                     Deut. 10. 9. & 28. 2. Num. 18. 26. 
                     the maintenance of the Leuites: but eſpecially, now vnder the Goſpel, this calling is vnprouided for, when it deſerues beſt of all to be rewarded: certainly it were a worthy Chriſtian pollicie, to propound good preferments to this calling, that thereby men of the worthieſt giftes might be won vnto it, and the want thereof, is cauſe why ſo many young men of ſpeciall partes, and greateſt hope, turne to other vocations, and eſpecially to the Lawe, wherein at this day the greateſt partes of the fineſt wits of our 
                     This makes many of our beſt wits turne from Diuinitie to Law. 
                     kingdome, are imployed, & why? But becauſe they haue al the meanes to riſe, wheras the Miniſterie, for the moſt part yeeldeth nothing, but a plaine way to beggery: this is a great blemiſh in our Church, and ſurely I wiſh the Papiſts, thoſe children of
                     
this world, were not wiſer in their kinde, (in this point) then the Church of God: the reformation hereof is a worke worth the labour of prince and people▪ & ſpeciall care is to bee had in it, elſe it will not be reformed, for doubtleſſe had not God himſelfe in the olde teſtament, taken ſuch ſtraight orders for the liuings of the Leuites, they had beene put to no leſſe extremities, then is the Miniſtrie of this age. And this reaſon added to the other, makes them perfect; and all put together make a reaſon infallible: for who will vndergo ſo vile contempt, and vndertake ſo great a charge for no reward: and where there is ſo great contempt, ſo heauie a burthen, and ſo meane a reward, what maruell, if a good Miniſter be one of a thouſand?
                  
                  Now let vs make vſe of this doctrine: 3. The vſe of it. The vſe is manifold, and yeelds inſtructions to many ſorts of people: Firſt, Rulers 
                     1. To Rulers to maintaine Vniuerſities, Colledges, and ſchooles of the Prophets. 
                     and Magiſtrates are heere taught, if good Miniſters be ſo ſcarce, therefore to mainetaine and increaſe, and doe all good they can to the ſchooles of the Prophets, to Vniuerſities, Colledges, & Schooles of good

learning, which are the Seminaries of the Miniſterie: herein the example of Samuel, is very worthy to bee followed, in whoſe dayes the ſchooles of the Prophets floriſhed, 1. Sam. 19. 20 21, 22, 23, 24. and euen Saul himſelfe, though hee did much hurt in Iſrael, yet when he came to the ſchooles of the Prophets, his hard heart relented, he could doe them no hurt, nay, he put off his robes & prophecied amongſt them. So ſhould all Chriſtian princes and magiſtrates aduaunce their ſchooles, and ſee them both well maintained, and well ſtored, the reaſon is euident & forcible.
                  
                     A good Miniſter is one of 1000. If therfore The rather, becauſe the Pope doth ſo to vphold his ſuperſtition. At Rome Reimes Doway. they would haue the number increaſed, let them maintaine the Seminaries. And againe, if Antichriſt to vphold his kingdome, the Kingdome of Sathan, bee ſo carefull herein, to erect Colledges, and indowe them with liuing, to bee Seminaries for his Synagogue, and vſe ſo great meanes to ſowe his tares in the hearts of young men, that ſo they may ſowe them in the hearts of the people abroad: ſhall not Chriſtian princes bee as carefull, or rather much more zealous, for the

increaſing of the number of godly Miniſters? 1. Kin. 18. 22. ſhall Baal haue his 4. hundred prophets, and God haue his Elias alone? great ſhame muſt it bee to Ahab, or to any king, whoſe kingdome is in that eſtate.
                  The Ieſuites diligence is ſuch in teaching, And the Ieſuites to cō
                        tinue their late founded Hierarchie. and the readineſſe of ſome of their nouices ſuch in learning, (the diuell himſelfe doubtleſſe, putting to his helpe withall) that in three yeares (as ſome of them ſay of themſelues) they proceede in humane learning, and in the fourth, in Diuinitie: which if it be ſo, then it may bee a good Leſſon, for theſe our ſchooles of learning, and an inducement to moue all that haue the gouernment thereof, to labour to aduance learning, by all good meanes, and to giue it more ſpeedie paſſage: And it may ſhame ſome that ſpend ſo many yeares in the Vniuerſitie, and yet alas for all that proue not one of a 1000. In theſe our ſchooles are by Gods mercy, many young trees planted by the riuer ſide of this goodly Orchard, which by good ordring and dreſsing, may prooue goodly trees in the temple of God, and ſtrong pilſtrong

pillers in the Church: but they are like tender plants, and muſt be cheriſhed. Princes and great men, by allowing maintenance, and the Gouernours by eſtabliſhing good orders, and looking carefully to their execution, muſt ſee that theſe plants haue ſufficient moiſture to grow ſpeedily to perfect ripeneſſe, and that then they be tranſplanted in due time, into the Church and common wealth: theſe be the trees ſpokē of in Ezechiel, which growe by the ſides of the riuer, which floweth out of the ſanctuarie: 
                     Ezchiel, 47. 1, &c. Waters out of the Sanctuary muſt noriſh them, and ſo they growe vnto their perfection: but take away theſe waters: take away the liberalitie of princes and good diſcipline from the Vniuerſities, and theſe trees muſt needes decay and wither: which if they do, then the ſmal number of good Miniſters will be fewer & fewer, & of one of a 1000. ther wil not be one of 2000
                  In the next place, Miniſters themſelues are here taught: Firſt if good Miniſters 2. Vſe for Miniſters. bee ſo ſcarce, then let euery man feare to make them fewer then they bee: euery man therefore for himſelfe, labour

                     firſt for abilitie, then for conſcience to diſcharge 1. Let euery man feare to make them fewer. his dutie: namely, to bee an Angel, to deliuer faithfully Gods Embaſſage, and a true Interpreter betwixt God and his people: thus if thou doeſt, then howſoeuer the number of good Miniſters is ſmall, yet it ſhall bee nothing ſmaller for thee.
                  2 If they bee ſo fewe, labour to increaſe them, for the more they are, the leſſe burden lyeth vpon each particular 2. Labour to encreaſe them, by winning others to it. man, therefore let euery Miniſter by his teaching, and by his conuerſation labour, ſo to honour his calling, that hee may thereby allure and drawe others to a loue and liking thereof.
                  3 Are good Miniſters ſo thinne ſowne? are there ſo few of them? then let all good and godly Miniſters giue the right hand of fellowſhip one to another, and ioyne together Galath. 2. 9. in loue, & by that meanes arme thē
                     ſelues 3. Let them one loue an other and ioyne together. againſt the ſcorne and contempt of the world: we ſee they that are of a kinred, or a brotherhood, or any kind of ſocietie, the fewer they are, the more cloſelie doe

they combine, the more firmely doe they holde together againſt all forraine force: ſo ought Gods Miniſters to doe, becauſe their number is ſo ſmall: if they were many, leſſe danger in their diſvnion. But ſeeing they are ſo fewe, the more it concerneth them to cut off contentions, and all occaſions of debate, and to ioyne hand in hand againſt theſe common aduerſaries.
                  In the third place, young Students are 3. Vſe for ſtudents. 1. To conſecrate themſelues and their Studies to that calling. heere taught, ſeeing a true Miniſter is but one of a thouſand, that therfore they bend their ſtudies, and their thoughts to the Miniſterie, for they well know it is an old prouerbe, the beſt things are hard to come by: & certainly there are ſo few good Miniſters, becauſe the holy Miniſterie in it ſelfe is ſo high & excellent a calling: & as it is a ſhame to the men that there are ſo few good Ministers, ſo it is a commendation to the calling: whoſe honour & excellency is ſuch, that as wee ſee heere ſcarce one of a thouſand attaines vnto it, therefore men of the moſt excellent giftes, are here inuited to dedicate themſelues vnto the moſt excellent vocation, yea, very reaſon it ſelfe would vrge a man to be one of a thouſand.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     
2 And further, as they are to intend To furniſh themſelues with the true ornaments of a Miniſter. this calling as the moſt rare and excellent: ſo this muſt teach them like wiſe, to haſten to furniſh themſelues with all good helpes and meanes, that they may become true Miniſters and able Interpreters, and not too long to ſticke in thoſe ſtudies, which keep a man from the practiſe of this high function: for it is not to liue in the Ʋniuerſitie, or in the Colledge, and to ſtudie, though a man neuer ſo faſt deuoure vp learning, but to be a good Miniſter, is that that makes a man one of a thouſand.
                  
                  In the laſt place, Hearers are heere taught their dutie, firſt, to reſpect with reuerence 4 Vſe for Hearers. 1. To reuerence the perſon and receiue the doctrine. 
                     the perſon, and to receiue with reuerence the Meſſage of euery true Meſſenger, ſeeing it is ſo rare a thing to finde a true Miniſter for as nothing is more vile or baſe then an euil & lewd Miniſter, (whom Chriſt compares to ſalt which hath loſt his 
                     Math 5. 13. 
                     ſauour, which is good for nothing, but to bee caſt out & troden downe of men:) ſo is there none worthy of more loue and reuerence, then a holy Miniſter: for as Eſay ſaith, their

very feete are beautifull which bring glad tydings; and we ſhould kiſſe their feete which bring newes of peace: therefore all good Chriſtians are to receiue and vſe a good Miniſter, as S. Paul ſaith the Galathians 
                     Gala. 4. 16. did him, euen as an Angel of God Haſt thou then a godly paſtor, run to him for conference, for comfort, for counſell, vſe his company, frequent his fermons, account him worthy of double honour, thinke it no ſmall or ordinary bleſsing, for thou haſt one of a thouſand, and bleſſe God for beſtowing his mercy on thee, which hee had denyed to ſo many others: for ſome haue no Miniſter: ſome haue a Miniſter, but yet 
                        〈◊〉
                     , he is not one of a thouſand.
                  
                  And further: all men that are Fathers, 
                     2. Fathers to dedicate their ſonnes to the miniſterie. may heere learne to conſecrate their children to God in the ſeruice of the Miniſterie, conſidering that it is ſo rare and excellent a thing to be a good Miniſter: nay that man ſhould thinke himſelfe happie, and honoured of God, who may be father to ſuch a ſonne, as ſhal proue one of a thouſand.
                  
                  In a word to conclude this point, all men
                     
muſt heere learne, ſeeing good Miniſters 5 Vſe for al men. Pray that God would encreaſe the number. are ſo ſcarce, to pray the Lorde of the harueſt, to thruſt out more labourers into his harueſt: and for thoſe that are called already, that God would make them faithfull in that high function. And as Eliſha craueth of Elias, that the good ſpirit may 
                     2. Reg. 2, 9. 
                     be doubled, and trebled vpon them, ſo that the number may be encreaſed. And thus wee haue the truth, the reaſon, and the vſe of this, that a good Miniſter is one of a thouſand.
                  
                  It followeth. To declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe.
                  
                  Heere is the third part of the deſcription 3. Part of the deſcription by his office that is to declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe. of a Miniſter, that is, by his office, to declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe: that is, when a poore ſinner, by his ſinnes (the foulnes whereof he ſeeth, and the burden whereof he feeleth) is brought downe, as it were to the very gates of hell, when this ſinner by the preaching of the Lawe, is brought to a true ſight of this miſerie: and again by preaching the goſpel, is brought to lay hold on Ieſus Chriſt, then it is the proper office of a Miniſter to declare vnto that The meaning
                        
man his righteouſnes. Namely, that though in himſelfe he be as ill, and as foule as ſinne can make him, & as the law can diſcouer him to be: yet in Chriſt he is righteous, & iuſt, and by Chriſt ſo iuſtified, as he is no more a ſinner in the preſence and account of God, this is the righteouſnes of a Chriſtian man, this is the iuſtification of a ſinner. And to declare this righteouſnes to him that repents and belieues, is the proper dutie of a true Miniſter.
                  
                  In the Actes, Paule ſaith of himſelfe, that he witneſſed to the Iewes, & to the Gentiles, 
                     Act. 20. 21. 
                     the repentance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. In which words is layde downe the complete dutie of a Miniſter (as he is a publique Angell or Interpreter,) firſt, to preach repentance, which a man muſt performe to GOD, whom by his ſins hee hath grieuouſly offended; ſecondly, to preach faith in Chriſt, and free forgiuenes, and perfect ſaluation through that faith in Chriſt, to all that ſhal truly belieue in him. And after both theſe, It com
                           •
                        rehendeth theſe points. followeth that which is heere ſpoken of, which comprehendeth both the former,

namely, to declare vnto man his righteeuſneſſe. 
                     1. He muſt declare wher true righteouſneſſe is. So that in theſe words, are incluſi
                        •
                     ely layd downe, theſe points of a Miniſters calling: firſt, a true Miniſter may & muſt declare vnto a ſinfull man where righteouſneſſe is to be found, namely, in Ieſus Chriſt: 
                     1. John 2. the righteous. Secondly, how that righteouſnes 2. How it may be obtained. may bee obtained, namely, by d
                        ••
                     
                     ing two duties: Firſt, by denying & diſclaiming 3. He muſt declare it to him, that is 1. Shew that it is ready for him if he beleeue and repent. his owne righteouſneſſe, and that is done by repentance; ſecondry, by clayming & cleaning to Chriſte righteouſnes, and that is done by faith. Thirdly, a true Miniſter may and muſt declare this righteouſnes to him, that is firſt publiſh and proclaime, that it is ready to his beſtowed on euery ſinner, which will thus apprehend it, and that it is able to iuſtifie and ſaue him:) ſecondly, beſide a bare publication of this inſtification, he muſt (as Paul 
                     2. He muſt teſtifie and aſſure him of it. did) witnes and teſtifie it to the conſcience of the ſinner, that it is as certainely true 
                        〈◊〉
                      God is true. For as a witneſſe in: doubtfull caſes is called, that by his teſtimone 
                        〈◊〉
                      may cleere the truth, ſo when the conſciences of poore ſinners are 
                        〈◊〉
                      and

doubtfull what to belieue, when they doubt of this righteouſneſſe, then is a true miniſter as a faithfull witneſſe of God to auerre and testifie this truth, from his owne conſcience, knowledge and feeling of the infallible certaintie of Gods promiſes, vnto the doubtfull and diſtreſ
                        •
                     ed conſcience of the ſinner.
                  Thirdly, beſides declaration and testificati
                           •
                        n been to maintaine this truth, and this 3 He muſt maintaine it. & auerre it againſt all doubts and temptations. 
                     righteouſneſſe (if the ſinners conſcience be yet not quiet) againſt all gain ſayers, againſt the power of darkneſſe, and all the gates of helld that this is true and perfect righteouſneſſ
                        •
                      to him that apprehends it as afore is 
                        〈◊〉
                      downe 
                        〈◊〉
                      this is ſo infallible to euery ſoule that repents and beleeueth, that the miniſter, may aſſure it to the conſcience of the ſinner in the worde of truth, and in the name of God, and may call to 
                        〈◊〉
                      all Gods Saints, and all his holy Angels, and may 
                        〈◊〉
                      vnto him his owne 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      vpon it, that it is moſt true, that this is 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         perfect, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſufficient righteouſneſſe.
                  
                  That we ſee in ſome meaſure, what it is

                     to declare vnto a man his righteouſnes. And This dutie is ordinarily peculiar to Miniſters. this is the peculiar office of a Miniſter of God, and this is the height and excellencie of his office. In the want of godly miniſters, I confeſſe that godly Chriſtian men may one helpe another in the performance of theſe duties, and that with profit, but it is the proper function of a godly Miniſter to doe it, and the promiſe and bleſſing belong properly to him: as the conſciences of all penitent ſinners, will teſtifie in this caſe: let Dauids ſerue for many, who when hee was caſt downe euen to the mouth of hell, by that fearefull diſcouery of his two hideous ſinnes by Nathans preaching; & when the faith of his ſoule beganne to wreſtle againſt Hell, and ſtriue againſt deſpaire, and to apprehend the mercy of God in Chriſt: then I ſay, could not the teſtimonie of all the men in the worlde haue giuen him that ioy, comfort and aſſurance, that Nathan did, when hee ſaide in the word of a 2. Sam. 11. Prophet, and of a true Miniſter, God hath taken away thy ſinne, thou ſhalt not dye: what did Nathan here, but declare vnto man his

righteouſneſſe? what did Nathan heere, but the duty of euery true miniſter?
                  If this be the office and duty of a miniſter; 1 Vſe for Miniſters. and if ſuch bee the height and excellency: of his office, let vs ſee then what vſe we may make of it.
                  Firſt, concerning the Miniſterie: It Firſt for the Popiſh miniſtery, they doe inſufficiently declare it. firſt diſcouereth how nakedly, weakely, and inſufficiently, the Popiſh Church doth declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe, who wil let a man ſeeke it in himſelfe▪
                      where alas it is not: for Paule himſelfe teſtifieth, that his deſire is, that hee may bee found out of himſelfe, and in Chriſt; and yet certainly, if Philip. 3. 8, 9. euer man had righteouſneſſe of his owne worth truſting to, Paule had: this is the cauſe why ſo many of that religion finde not that righteouſneſſe, which will pacific and ſatisfie their conſciences; when they come to dye: and why ſo many of them, whē it comes to the pinch, do then go out of themſelues, and with vs doe ſeek for this righteouſneſſe in Chriſt, where both aſſuredly, and ſufficiently it is to be found.
                  Then for our owne Miniſterie, heere they are taught: firſt the true manner

of teaching, and declaring righteouſneſſe, 
                     Secondly our owne. namely this, not to preach the lawe alone, or the Goſpell alone, as ſome vnaduiſedly doe (but both without profite) but both the lawe and the Goſpell; the lawe to breed repentance the goſpell to worke f
                           ••
                        th
                           •
                        
                      but in order; firſt the lawe to breede repentance, Both the lawe and the goſpell. and then the goſpell to worke faith and forgiueneſſe, but neuer before.
                  Secondly, they are taught to bee holy: to bee ſanctified and reconciled themſelues 2 To be holy men themſelues. for is it thy office to declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe, and not thy own to thy ſelfe? and how, canſt thou bee a true witneſſe to teſtifie betwixt God, and the ſoule of a ſinner, when thy owne ſoule knoweth not, nor feeleth the truth of it? certainly ſuch men are but lame witneſſes betwixt God, and the ſinners ſoule. Dauid ſaith to the ſinner, I will instruct thre in the way 
                     Pſal. 32. 
                     wherein thou ſhalt goe: but hee firſt of all in the ſame, ſets downe his owne experience in a large ſtory of his owne repentance, and of Gods mercy on himſelfe. For elſe they will conuert but fewe. And though God ſome time doe ſatisfie,

and ſaue the poore diſtreſſed ſoule of a ſinner, by the teſtimonie of ſuch men, to teach vs, that the vertue is not in the men, but in the truth of Gods couenant: yet alas how fewe are they, to teach vs, how pleaſing it is vnto him, when a Miniſter is a declarer of that righteouſneſſe to others, which hee firſt hath himſelfe: and is a witneſſe of that truth to others, which he firſt knoweth in his owne experience. 
                     3. Vſe to Miniſters, not to care for the contempt of the world.
                  
                  Thirdly, the conſideration of this high excellencie of their calling, muſt arme all true Miniſters againſt the ſcorne and contempt of the world, which by wicked men is caſt like duſt and mire into the face of Miniſters: let this ſuffice them, they are the men that muſt declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe, euen he that ſcornes and contemnes the miniſterie, hee hath no righteouſneſſe in him, vnleſſe it bee by the meanes of a poore Miniſter: then doe thou thy duty, and bee that mockes thee, hath cauſe to honour thee. And let this encourage Students to conſecrate themſelues 2 Vſe for Students. to the miniſtery, for what calling hath ſo high an office, as this, to declare vnto man

his righteouſneſſe? And aſſuredly how euer To conſecrate themſelues to the high calling. in this wicked world, thou art little accounted of (for if it did not ſo, it were not wicked:) yet thou art honoured in the harts of all Gods children▪ and euen in the conſcience of ſome, whoſe tongues doe ſmite thee: and the ſoules of thouſands, when they dye ſhal bleſſe thee, who in their liues cared not for thee: and the diuell himſelfe doth enuy, & the holy Angels themſelues doe wonder at the excellency of thy calling, in that thou haſt power to declare vnto men his righteouſneſſe.
                  
                  In the next place, hearers may heere 3 Vſe for the hearers. Seeke righteouſneſſe both in the law and the Goſpell. learne; firſt if their righteouſneſſe bee thus to bee declared as afore, then if they will haue it, they muſt ſeeke it as it may bee found, namely, both in the lawe, and in the Goſpell and not in the Goſpell alone: and firſt in the lawe, then in the Goſpell: for he muſt neuer looke to taſte the ſweetnes of the Goſpell, which hath not firſt ſwallowed the bitter pilles of the law: if therefore thou wouldeſt be declared righteous by the Goſpell, bee content firſt to bee pronounced miſerable by the lawe: if thou

wouldſt be declared righteous in Chriſt, then bee content firſt to bee pronounced ſinfull 2 What to eſteeme of Gods miniſters. and vnrighteous in thy ſelfe. Secondly, all men may heere learne, how they are to eſteeme of Gods Ministers, and what reuerence and obedience is due to their perſons, and their doctrine: theſe are they which muſt declare vnto thee thy righteouſneſſe, if thou haſt any: Art thou beholden to him, who, when thou haſt loſt a Iewell (which was all thy wealth) can tell thee where it is, and helpe thee to it againe? or to him, who, when thy cauſe is in triall at the barre, will pleade it for thee? or to him, who, when thy health is loſt, can tell thee how to get it againe? then beholde how thou art beholden to a godly Minister, who when Adam had loſt both himſelfe and thee, that Iewell of righteouſneſſe, which was, and is the whole wealth of thy ſoule, can truly tell thee where it is, and howe it is to bee had againe: and who, when the diuell haleth thee to the barre of Gods iuſtice, to receiue triall for thy ſinnes, can drawe thee there ſuch a declaration, as the diuell himſelfe ſhall not

bee able to anſwere? and who, when thy ſoule is ſicke to death, and euen to damnation, can heale the deadly wounds thereof. A good miniſter therefore is worthy (as the Apoſtle ſaith) of double honour, whoſe dutie wee ſee is to declare vnto man his righteouſneſſe. And to conclude this point alſo, the conſideration of the height of this office of a miniſter, may encourage fathers to dedicate their ſonnes to this holy 4 Vſe for fathers, to make their ſounes Miniſters. calling: for the Phyſitians care for the body, or the Lawyers for thy cauſe, are both inferiour duties to this of the Mininiſter. A good Lawyer may be one of tenne: a good Phyſitian one of 20. a good man one of 100. but a good miniſter is one of 1000. A good Lawyer may declare the true ſtate of thy cauſe; a good Phyſitian may declare the true ſtate of thy body: No calling, no man can declare vnto thee thy righteouſneſſe, but a true Miniſter. And thus we ſee the office or function of a miniſter. Now followeth the bleſſing.
                  
                     Then will he haue mercy vpon him.
                  
                  
                     
The fourth generall part of this deſcription, 4. Point, the bleſsings: then will God haue mercy on the ſinner: 
                     is the bleſſing which God giueth to the labours and function of a true Miniſter: then that is, when a man by the preaching of the lawe, is brought to true humiliation and repentance, and by the preaching of the Goſpell, to true faith in the Meſſias: then will he (that is, God) haue mercy on him (that is, on the penitent and beleeuing ſinner.) Behold heere the admirable ſimpathy, and the cooperation of God, and the Miniſters office. Man preacheth, and God bleſſeth: Man worketh on the heart, and God giues grace: a miniſter declares vnto man his righteouſneſſe, and God ſaith ſo be it he ſhall be righteous: a miniſter pronounceth mercy to a penitent ſinner, and forthwith God hath mercy on him. Heere wee ſee the great and glorious God & his Miniſter worke together. account which God makes of the worde of his miniſters, by them truly taught and rightly applyed, namely, that he as it were tyeth his bleſſing vnto it: for ordinarily till a man knowe his righteouſneſſe, by the meanes of an Interpreter, God hath not mercy on him, but as ſoone as he doth

knowe it, then as we ſee here God wil haue mercy on him and will ſay deliuer him, &c.
                  
                  This is no ſmall honour to miniſters, and to their Miniſterie, that God himſelfe giues a bleſſing vnto it, & worketh when they work, and as it were ſtaieth wayting, when they declare vnto a man his righteouſneſſe, and then hath he mercy on him: ſo powerfull and ſo effectuall is the worde ſpoken by a miniſter of God. This is that Math. 16. 16. which Chriſt auoucheth, Whatſoeuer you looſe in earth, ſhall be looſed in heauen. Will Iohn. 20. 23. you knowe the meaning hereof? Reade Saint Iohn, whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer you remit, they are remitted; whoſe you retaine, they are 
                     Eſay. 44. 25, 26. 
                     retained: will you haue the meaning of both? read Eſay, God destroyeth the tokens of Soothſayers, and makes Wiſards and Aſtrologers fooles, turneth worldly wiſemen backward and makes their knowledge fooliſhneſſe: but hee confirmeth the word of his ſeruants, and performeth the counſel of his meſſengers, Thus God bindeth and looſeth with them, remitteth and retaineth with them, by confirming their word and performing their counſell: For example.
                  
                     
A true miniſter ſeeth a ſinner hardned in his ſins, & ſtill rebelling againſt the will of God, he therfore declareth vnto him his vnrighteouſnes, & his ſin, & denounceth vnto him, the miſery & curſes of Gods iuſtice, as due vnto him for the ſame: here he binds on earth, here he retains on earth, this mans ſins are likewiſe bound & retained in heauen. On the other ſide, hee ſeeth a man penitēt, & belieuing, he pronounceth forgiuenes of ſins, & happines vnto him for the ſame: he looſeth him from the band of his ſins, by declaring vnto him his righteouſnes, this mans ſins are likewiſe looſed & remitted in heauen, & God himſelfe doth pronounce him cleare in heauen, when the Miniſter doth on earth. Thus God confirmeth the word of his ſeruants, and performeth the counſell of his meſſengers,
                  
                  The vſe of this doctrine is, firſt for rulers 
                     1 Vſe for rulers to giue due reuerence to the miniſters. and great men of this worlde, this may teach them to be nurſing Fathers and nurſing Mothers vnto the Church, whoſe authority they ſee is ſo great ouer them, as that their decree ſtands ratified in heauen: Therefore though their place bee great, Pſalme. 82. and they bee Gods vppon earth, yet muſt

they withall acknowledge, that in iuſtifying a ſinner, in interpretation, in declaring vnto man his righteouſnes; in binding and looſing, their power alſo is immediate from God, & aboue theirs, and they themſelues, as they are men, muſt ſubmit themſelues to this powerfull word of the miniſters, to be taught by it, and to be reconciled by meanes of it, & highly muſt they reſpect it; for though a man ſpeake it, yet is it the word of God: this is to lick the duſt of Christs feete, which the Prophet ſpeaketh Eſay. 2 Vſe for Miniſters. of: not as the Pope would haue it, to hold the ſtirrop, & leade the horſe, & hold the water to the Pope, to kiſſe his toes, to holde their kingdomes of him, as tenants at will, or by curteſie, but reuerently to acknowledge the ordinance to be Gods, the function & duty to be high & excellent, to acknowledge the power of their keyes and cenſures (being rightly applied, their promiſes & their threatnings to be as frō God, & to ſubmit to them accordingly.
                  Secondly, Miniſters thēſelues here muſt learne, when they take the word of reconciliation into their hands and mouthes, to

call to minde whoſe it is, euen the Lords, and 2 Vſe Gods word reuerently. that he worketh with them, & hath the greateſt hand in the work, and that therefore they muſt vſe it in holymaner, with much feare and reuerence: It is not their owne, they may not vſe it as they liſt. And laſtly, Hearers are here taught, first to ſee how mad ſuch men be which careleſly, and ſildome heare ſermons, but vpon any 3 Vſe for Hearers. 1 Heare Gods word often & reuerently. occaſion flye to wiſards and charmers, which are the diuels Prophets: for ſee the difference of theſe two, the wiſard and charmer hath ſocietie with the diuell, the Preacher with God: the charmer hath his calling from the diuel, the Preacher is from God: the Charmers charme is the diuels watchword, (when he charmeth, the diuell doth the feate): the preachers doctrine is Gods watchword, when hee truly applyeth it, GOD himſelfe ratifieth and makes it good: therefore let all men feare to haue thus to doe with the diuell, by ſeeking to his ſlaues, & let them draw neere to God, by entring into fellowſhip with his holy prophets, and godly Miniſters.
                  And further, if when they preach, and thou 2 See the dignitie and pre
                           •
                        ogatiue of the Miniſters calling. belieueſt, then GOD hath mercy on thee, then learne what reuerence they and their word is

                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
worthy of, which is thus accompanied with Gods mercy and forgiuenes: and then learne to heare the Word with feare and trembling, for it is Gods word, and not theirs: and when a true Miniſter ſaith vnto thee, on a true ground, I denounce thee a ſinfull man, and vnder the curſe, or I declare thee to be righteous, and a child of grace, it is all one, as though God from heauen had ſaid ſo vnto thee. If any man aske; But is it not as good if another Obiect. But may not another Chriſtian do it? man pronounce forgiueneſſe vnto me vpon my repentance? I anſwere, yes vndoubtedly, if it be in extraordinarie times or places, when there are no Miniſters: for otherwiſe, certainly this bleſsing is principally tied vnto the And not ordinatily. Miniſters calling: for it is not ſaid of any priuate mens calling any wher in the ſcripture, as it is heere ſaide of the miniſters.
                  If an Angell, an Interpreter come to a man 
                        
                           •
                         For they haue not the ſame promiſe. 
                     and declare vnto him his righteouſneſſs, then (marke the conexion) then will GOD haue mercy on him, and will ſay, Deliuer him, &c. Whence comes this bleſsing? from this promiſe of God. If therfore other callings wil challenge ordinarily the ſame bleſſing, then muſt they haue the ſame proſmiſe. Beſides, other

Chriſtiās being priuate men, though they 2 They haue not the ſame power to diſcerne. be ſanctified, & haue a good meaſure of knowledge, yet haue they not the ſame ſpirit of diſcerning that godly Miniſters haue: nor can ſo fully & truly iudge, when a man hath repented, when not; and therefore cannot ſo truly pronounce the ſentence of the law or Goſpel, nor haue they abilitie ordinarily by their good conference, and Chriſtian counſell, to conuert a ſoule, but to confirme one conuerted: but that power ordinarily belongs to the publike miniſtery of the word, therefore it followeth, that ordinarily they haue not the power to pronounce the ſentence of binding or looſing vppon any man: I confeſſe, in times or places, where no miniſter can be In extraordinary times and in want of miniſters they may. had, God bleſſeth the labours of priuate men, that haue knowledge, ſometimes euen for the conuerting of a man to God, & for comforting him at the houre of death, and giues a vertue and power to that ſentence which they ſhal pronounce one vpon anothers repentance: but as this is extraordinary, and in the want of ordinary Miniſters, ſo in that caſe a priuate man of knowledge and Godlineſſe,

                     is made a Miniſter for that time to himſelfe, or to another, euen as a priuate man in caſes of extreame danger, whē 
                     no magiſtrate is preſent, is made a magistrate himſelfe to defend his own life. So then as in want of a Magiſtrate, the ſword of the magiſtracie is put into the hand of a priuate man: ſo in the want of Miniſters, the keyes of the Ministerie are committed, and put into the hands of priuate men, (as in ye
                      dayes of perſecution) that then they may with comfort admoniſh & aduiſe: and with power pronounce mercy and forgiueneſſe one vnto another, vpon their true repentance. Yet alwaies remember that in ſo doing, a priuate man is as a minister for that time, & in that caſe: but ordinarily (and alwaies in ſetled Churches) this power pertaineth to the Miniſterie, & is theirs alone by ordination; and to them belongeth the promiſe and the bleſsing, that when hee hath declared to a man his righteouſneſſe, then God will haue mercie on him. And thus we ſee alſo the bleſſing of God vpon the function of the Miniſterie, & annexed therunto by the merciful diſpenſation of God. It followeth.
                  
                     
                     And will ſay, Deliuer him that he goe not downe into the pit: for I haue receiued a reconciliation.
                  
                  The fift and laſt part of this deſcription 5. Part, the Commiſsion, which is, Deliuer the penitent man from hell. is, the Commiſsion & authoritie giuen vnto him, which is ſo great, as neuer was giuen to any creature, and is this, when a Miniſter of God hath declared vnto man his righteouſneſſe, hath brought him to the ſtate of grace, and God in his fauour hath had mercie on him; then God ſaith to the Miniſter, Deliuer that ſoule from hell, for I haue pardoned him in Chriſt, I am reconciled to him.
                  
                  In which words, authoritie is giuen to How a Miniſter is a redeemer. a Miniſter of God to redeeme a man penitent, from hell & damnation: not that hee is the meanes of working out this redemption, for that wholy and onely is Chriſt himſelfe: but hee is Gods inſtrument and Chriſts inſtrument: Firſt, to apply thoſe meanes vnto him: Secondly, to pronounce his ſafetie and deliuerance when theſe means are vſed. Here is the principall honour

of all, belonging to that calling: and More then Angels. it is the greateſt that euer was vouchſafed to any creature, Man or Angel: for it is a plaine Commiſsion, to go and deliuer ſuch a man from the power of hell, & to redeeme him into the ſtate of Gods children, and to make him heire of heauen: Angels neuer had this Commiſsion, they are Meſſengers ſet out for the good of thoſe whom 
                     Heb. 1. vlt. 
                     Miniſters haue redeemed, and they haue brought many comfortable meſſages vnto them: but it was neuer ſaid to any Angel, Deliuer that man that he goe not downe into the pit: as it heere is ſaide vnto a Miniſter, More then any other calling of men. nor any man but Miniſters haue this Commiſsion. To ſome callings GOD ſaith, worke thou for man, build him houſes, prouide him ſuſtenance; to the Phiſition, heale that man: to the Lawyer, doe that man iuſtice: to the ſouldier, fight for him: to the Magiſtrate, defend him: to the King, gouerne him, & ſee that euery one doe his dutie: to none but to the Miniſter doth he ſay, Deliuer him that he goe not downe into the pit.
                  
                  If this be ſo then for the vſe, firſt Miniſters

muſt learne heere, that if they will Vſe 1. for Miniſters. haue the honour of Redeemers, then muſt they doe the dutie of Redeemers, they Ergo, They muſt pray and preach, diligently. muſt pray earneſtly for the people, for that is one meanes whereby they redeeme men.
                  They muſt ſay with Samuel, God forbid that 
                     1. Sam. 12. 
                     I ſhould ceaſe to pray for you: They muſt mourne for the impenitent, when they will not turne to God. So did Dauid, 
                     Pſalm. 119. 
                     his eyes guſhed out with riuers of waters, becauſe men kept not Gods law. And Ieremie, who wiſhed a fountaine of water in his eyes, that he might weepe for the ſinnes of the people. They muſt priuarly conferre viſite, admoniſh, and rebuke, and principally they muſt preach, and that in ſuch good manner, and in ſo diligent meaſure, as that they may redeeme and winne ſoules, and the end that they muſt ayme at, muſt bee to winne ſoules. Some preach for feare of For ſo doing they are redeemers▪
                      the law, to auoyd cenſure or puniſhment: ſome for faſhion ſake, that they may bee like to others: ſome for oſtentation ſake, to win credite and praiſe: ſome for ambition, to riſe in the world: all theſe forget their

Commiſsion, which is, Deliuer a man 
                     Idle Miniſters are no redeemers. 
                     from hell.
                  
                  This ſhould bee the end of their preaching, to deliuer a ſoule from hell: & what ſhould Commiſsioners doe, but execute their Commiſsion? High Commiſſioners are worthy to be low Commiſsioners, or rather, no Commiſsioners, if they wil not put it in execution. It is therefore lamentable to ſee, that ſome by not preaching; ſome by vaine preaching, ſhew that they intend any thing rather then the winning of ſoules to God.
                  
                  Let then all good Miniſters ſo preach, as they may ſay with Eſay, Behold Lord heere am I, and the children whom thou hast giuen me. And that they may returne their Commiſsion thus: Whereas thou O Lord gaueſt mee this people, and badſt mee deliuer them, that they goe not downe into hell, Lord I haue done it: it is the thing my ſoule aymed at with all my deſire and endeuour: and by thy mercy I haue effected it accordingly.
                  
                  And the rather muſt all Chriſtian Miniſters ſeriouſly intēd the ſauing of ſoules, inaſmuch as Antichriſt doth ſo earneſtly

ſeeke the destruction of ſoules, by winning Turkes and Iewes, and Ieſuites, are carefull to ſeduce ſoules. them to his Synagogue. The Turke ſpares no labour, no coſt, to infect young children of Chriſtians with his impure and blaſphemous ſuperſtition. The Pope and his vaſſals (eſpecially Ieſuits,) vſe al means, deuiſe many ſtratagems, ſpare no coſt, nor labor, to ſeduce & inueagle young men, and the beſt wits. Surely their care and policie herein is admirable: and yet alas, when (like the Phariſies) they haue compaſſed Sea and land to make a Proſelite, they make him like themſelues, the childe of hel.
                  
                  And they are ſo farre from hauing any Commiſſion from God to doe this, or any bleſsing promiſed, as contrariwiſe GOD forbids them, and his curſe lyeth vppon them for ſo doing.
                  Shall they be ſo diligent to deſtroy ſoules without a commiſsion, and incurre Gods curſe for their labour? and ſhall not Chriſtian Miniſters be much more diligent to winne and redeeme ſoules, hauing ſo large a commiſsion for the purpoſe, and ſo great a bleſsing promiſed thereunto?
                  In the next place, this doctrine hath

vſe to the hearers. Firſt, to let them ſee 2. Vſe for Hearers. the excellencie of this calling, which hath a Commſſion and power to redeeme them 1 To ſee the excellencie of this calling. from hell and damnation, & what honour is due vnto it: and to let the wicked man ſee (which any way abuſeth either the perſons or the function) how baſe & vnthankefull men they are, to recompence euill for good, and therefore no maruell though euil do neuer depart from the houſes and families of ſuch men: and further, to encourage all men to giue thēſelues to God in this calling, for ſee here what they are, euen the high Commiſſioners of God. Wee haue in our eſtate, a power deligated to Miniſters are Gods high Commiſsioners. certaine men of worth, and it is called the high Commiſsion, becauſe they haue power to doe great things, and that man thinkes himſelfe happy who can bring his ſonne to this, to be thought fit to bee one of this Commiſsion: but behold heere a higher Commiſsion, a Commiſsion from God, to redeeme ſoules from the power of hell, and the diuels clawes: this is in deed a high Commiſsion, and ſo high as this, was neuer granted out of the Court of heauen to any

creature but to Miniſters: they therefore are the High Commiſsioners of the high God. Is it not then an honour and happineſſe vnto thee to bring thy ſonne to this eſtate?
                  And laſtly, this muſt teach all hearers, 
                     2. Hearers, Ergo, muſt ſubmit thē
                        ſelues to bee redeemed. their dutie to Gods word: namely, to ſubmit themſelues vnto it: for if the Miniſter haue a Commiſsion to redeeme thy ſoule, it muſt be by the word & holy diſcipline. Therefore thy dutie is to heare Gods word patiently, to ſubmit thy ſelfe vnto it, to be taught and inſtructed, nay, to be checked and rebuked, and to haue thy ſinnes diſcouered, & thy corruptions ript vp. If thou wouldſt haue thy cauſe ſucceed wel, thy Lawyer muſt diſcouer the weakneſſes of it: If thy body to be cured, thy Phyſition muſt purge the corruption of it. So if thy ſoule bee to be redeemed, thy Minister muſt ſee the weaknes, & purge the corruptions of it, and though his doctrine be harſh, & hard vnto thy nature, and ye
                      diſcipline of ye
                      Goſpel ſeeme rough vnto thee, yet muſt not thou rage and rebel againſt it, nor hate him, nor raile at his perſō
                     
but ſubmit thy ſelfe vnto it, for it is the meſſage and Miniſterie of thy ſaluation: if otherwiſe, thou doeſt indeede a great wrong to the Miniſter, for thou fruſtrateſt his commiſsion: but alas, a farre greater to thy ſelfe, for thou furſtrateſt thine owne ſaluation.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE SECOND Treatiſe of the Duties and Dignities of Miniſterie, by Maiſter Perkins.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     TO THE RIGHT worſhipfull and Reuerend Iudges, Sir Iohn Sauile Knight, one of the Barons of his Maieſties Exchequer, and Sir Chriſtopher Yeluerion Knight, one of the Iudges of his Majeſties Court of Kings Bench, and Sir Edward Phillips Knight, his Maieſties Sargeant at Lawe, now or late the worthie Iudges of our Northeren Circuite, The ſpirit of wiſedome, zeale & courage be multiplied.
                  
                  RIght worſhipfull, it is ſayd in other Nations, and written in ſome of their bookes, that there are three diſgraces of the Engliſh Nation: The Ignorance, or (that I may ſo call it) the vnlearned of our Gētrie & Nobilitie, the beggery of our poore, & the Baſenes of the bodie of our Miniſterie, The firſt blot, our Nobilitie and Gentrie haue well wiped off, ſince the firſt daies of our bleſſed Queen Elizabeth, partly by ſtudie at home, partlie by trauell abroade, and I hope they will do it more & more: The ſecond hath beene well leſſened by good lawes of late, and would hee more, if the Execution were as good as our lawes b
                        •
                     e, & it were much honour to our Nation, and more to our

                     Religion, if it were quite taken away: for hee that tells vs there ſhall bee poore euer with vs, ſaith alſo, there ſhall not bee a begger amongſt Mat. 26. 11. vs; If there were no poore, what ſhould become Deut. 15. of Charitie? for it is Charitie, to relieue Pouertie, not to maintaine Beggerie: Pouerty may bee a Croſſe, but it is no Curſe: but Beggerie is a fearefull curſe, threatened on the enemies of God▪ and Dauid ſaith not, hee neuer ſaw a righteous mans child poore, but that Pſalm. 109. 10. hee neuer ſaw him begge his bread. The daily cries in our ſtreetes, crie for yet further reformation Pſal. 37. 35. heereof, that the impotent poore may bee ſufficiently prouided for, that he neede not, and the Sturdie begger complied to worke, that hee may not be ſuffered to begge. Happy you, or whoſoeuer can haue a hand in effecting this bleſſed worke, wee who can doe little elſe, ſhall pray for it, and for them that labour in it. But now for the third, I feare none but the verie hand of God, can wipe out that ſtaine from our Church: The baſeneſſe of the generall body of our Miniſterie, whence is it, but either from the vnworthineſſe, or Pouertie thereof: and the vnworthineſſe, whence is it, but from the Pouertie, and baſe maintenance of our Miniſtry, which was once robbed by the Abbies, and after by ſome in our owne State, which was then Popiſh, and Poperie that ſtands ſo much

vpon Non dimittitur peccatum niſi reſtituatur ablatum, yet for all that, would not reſtore vnto the Church her tenthes againe. But as popiſh Abbies ſtole them, ſo a popiſh State kept them, and to their ſhame ſome of the good Profeſſors of our Religion haue of late reſtored ſuch as were in their hands, and there is hope that all our Profeſſors, (vnleſſe they care not to bee accounted hypocrus) will make ſome conſcionable reſtitution We doe not craue that they would with Zacheus reſtore foure-fold (though it is apparant, that the Luke 19. &c. 
                     tenthes were got from vs in old time, by moſt falſe and forged Cauillations) we onely craue our owne, we would aske no more, nor willingly take leſſe: for our whole duetie is ſtill required: then why ſhould not our whole due be payd? And yet that the world may learne of vs contentedneſſe, as well by our practiſe as our doctrine, we would for the preſent take in good part, & reſt contented with a part of our owne: And ſome competent portions out of the Impropriations, (proportioned to the quantitie of the charge impoſed, and the giftes and paines required) would for a time be a reaſonable ſatisfaction in our Miniſterie, vntil our ſtate found it ſelf, either better enabled or more ſtraightly tied in Conſcience to full reſtitution.

But as I ſaid, this is a worke of God himſelfe, for if a man could doe it ſo many Parliaments would not haue ſlipt it, but ſome of them would haue eternized it ſelfe, with this honourable name to all posterities. The Parliament that reſtored Impropriations, but til that, or ſome other courſe (as good) bee taken▪ it is both vnſeaſonable and vnreaſonable to complaine of the Ignorant, or to craue a learned Miniſterie. For ſhal the Oxes mouth be mouſled, 
                     
                        1. Corinth. 9. 7. 9. 14.
                      
                     which treads out the corne, or ſhall a man goe to warre at his owne coſt? and hath not God ordained (marke, it is his Ordinance) that thoſe which teach the Goſpel, ſhall liue of the Goſpel? But alas, how ſhal the Miniſterie of England liue of the Gospel, when my ſmall experience can ſhew that in one Corner of one Countie of this Kingdom, wherin there are ſome 105. pariſhes, or parochial Chappels, The Eaſt-Riding of the County of Yorke. almoſt a 100. of them, (if not a full 100.) are Impropriate: and amongſt them I can ſhewe the moſt pariſhes haue but 10 pound or thereabouts ſome 8. li ſome 6. li. ſome 
                        
                           •
                        . li ſome foure pounds, ſome not 4. pounds yearly liuing for the Miniſter and thoſe impropriations worth ſome 300. li many 200. li. almoſt all 100 li. per an yea there is one worth 400 pound per an: where there were but 8 li. left for the Miniſter,
                     
vntill of late with much adoe, 10. pound more was obtained for a Preacher, and ſo there is out of 400, 8. pound ſhared for a Miniſter, and 10. pound caried for a Preacher, in that pariſh where there are 2000. Communican
                           •
                        s. Of all the reſt the Crowne hath ſome 100 pound rent, or not ſo much, & the remainder of 180. pound being a rich liuing, for a worthy learned Miniſter, a competent liuing for 2. and more then ſome 7 painful & able miniſters haue) I know not what becomes of it, vnleſſe it go to the feeding of Kits & Cormorats. Are not theſe goodly liuings for learned men? and may not wee expect a learned miniſterie, where there is ſuch maintenance? & I hartily with that other countries, be not able to ſhowe the like Preſidents. I haue the rather made relation hereof, that our high Court of Parliament, may ſee how great cauſe they haue, to go forward with that motion already by the made, for the eſtabliſhing of a learned Miniſterie. But if they bring it not to paſſe, what then remaineth, but to hope that the great God of heauen, will put into the heart of the God on earth our noble king (into whoſe hands he hath put the ſword of ſoueraigne authoritie) an irre
                     
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     able and unreſiſtable reſolution to execute his ſupreme power, for the reformation of this

                     euill, which as Maiſter Perkins ſaith in this treatiſe) may well be called the Kings euill, for it will hardly be healed, but by the will & power of a king. In the meane time this. Treatiſe of that worthy man, may be a motiue to our zealous profeſſors, who haue any impropriations in their owne hands, to excite and prouoke them to a conſcionable reſtitution, in whole or in part, as their eſtate may beare, or their, conſcience ſhall mooue them. For heerein are layd downs and mixed together, both the duties to be done by faithfull Miniſters, and the Dignities due vnto them for their duties: and ſo ſeeing the dignities of that calling to bee moſt honourable, and the duties ſo chargeable, it cannot but grieue their christian harts to ſee the maintenance ſo miſerable.
                  This Treatiſe I firſt of all ſend to you, & vnder your names to the world, & to you firſt, for as I am ſure you loued the Author, and honoured thoſe excellent gifts of God in him, ſo you cānot but accept this after birth of his (as a fatherles child for the fathers ſake. And for my ſelf, to cō
                     ceale al perſonal & priuat reſpects, in the name of many thouſands in the Northeren countries, I praiſe God, for the good done in thoſe parts, by your painful courſes, & religious care, not doubting, but if your ſelues, or the like
                     
bee imployed there, to aſiſt our honourable and Religie us Lord Preſident that the multitude of Popiſh Prieſtes there lurking, will bee dayly leſſened, the number of preachers augmented, Poperie put downe, and the Goſpell maintained more and more. Which bleſſing GOD graunt to that and all other Counteries of this Kingdome, for his mercies ſake: and giue vnto you, & all others in your place, the ſpirit of courage and conſtancie, in theſe declining dayes, that being faithfull in your great charges, vnto the end, you may receiue the Crowne of life: for which he hartily prayeth, who will euer rest,
                  
                     VV. Craſhawe.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The ſecond Treatiſe, of the Duties and Dignities of the Miniſterie.
                  
                     Eſay. 6.
                     
                        5. Then I ſaid, woe is me, I am vndone for I am a man of polluted lips, and dwell in the midſt of a people of polluted lips: for my eyes haue ſeene the king and Lord of hoſtes.
                        
                        6. Then flewe one of the Seraphins vnto me, with a hote coale in his hand.
                        
                        7. Which he tooke from the Altar with the tonges: and touched my mouth and ſaid, Loe this hath touched thy lips, and thy iniquitie ſhall be taken away, and thy ſin ſhall be purged.
                        
                        8. Alſo I heard the voyce of the Lorde, ſaying, whom ſhall I ſend, and who ſhall goe for vs? then ſaid I, here am I, ſend me: and he ſaid goe.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     IN the fiue former Chapters are cōtained ſuch Sermons, as the Prophet had made vnder Vzziah king of Iuda: At this Chapter begin ſuch as he preached in the raigne of Iotham,
                     
and ſo forward: But before hee either The Cohoerence. preach or prophecie of any thing, in King Iothams dayes, or his ſucceſſors, the Lord in this Chapter giues a newe commiſsion to the Prophet, & a newe With a new King, God giues the Prophet a new Commiſsion. confirmation to this Calling: the olde king in whoſe dayes Eſayah was firſt called being now dead, & another ſucceeding him, God with the new king, reneweth the calling & commiſsion of the Prophet: wherein God doth not giue him another calling, for one calling to the office of the miniſtery is ſufficient: but hee confirmeth the calling formerly giuen, by repeating & ratifying it. And this God did to Eſay, not as he was an ordinarie, but an extraordinary prophet: for ordinary Miniſters need no renouation of their calling, nor any new ſignes of cōfirmation, but extraordinary prophets, who come in extraordinary maner, & to doe many extraordinary workes, God in his wiſdom wil haue their calling confirmed, again, & againe, & that by very extraordinary meanes. Out of which practiſe of the Lord, we learne, how great cauſe wee Ergo, extraordinary. haue to doubt theſe men, to bee either

fantaſticall or worſe, who pretend extraordinary Callings o
                           •
                         motions in theſe dayes are not eaſily to be beleeued. callings in theſe dayes, and yet ſcarce can ſhew vs any good ſignes of an ordinary, much leſſe of an extraordinatie motion: for if in thoſe dayes, when ſuch courſes were more cōmon, God will haue his extraordinary Prophets calling to be renued & cōfirmed, again, & againe, then certainly in theſe dayes, we may iuſtly require, more, & more wonderfull ſignes of an extraordinary calling afore we belieue it: and if God himſelfe was ſo carefull to ſatiſfie his Church in thoſe dayes of the vocation of his prophet, ſurely the church in theſe daies hath much more cauſe to doubt in ſuch caſes, and to require many and extraordinary ſignes, afore it acknowledge any ſuch extraordinary calling: Theſe men therefore offer much wrong to the Church, & deſerue both the cenſure thereof, and the ſword of the Magiſtrate, who dare ſo boldly offer and obtrude to the Church their owne fancies and dreames, as extraordinary motions of Gods ſpirit. This is the occaſion and coherence.
                  This Chapter hath two partes, The parts of the Chapt.
                     
firſt, the meanes of his confirmation, from the beginning to theſe words: ſecondly, the confirmation it ſelfe, from theſe words to the end: the meanes of his confirmation is a viſion he ſaw from heauen, of certaine holy Angels appearing and ſpeaking to him, in the firſt 4. verſes. In the confirmation, which followeth in theſe words, are three points
                        •
                     
                  
                  1 The effect of the viſion, which i The parts of this text. wrought in the Prophet, it cauſed him feare, it aſtoniſht him, and caſt him downe: in the fifth verſe.
                  2 His Conſolation, & raiſing vp again after his feare, in the 6. and 7. verſes.
                  3 The renuing of his Commiſſion againe, from thence to the end.
                  The feare and aſtoniſhment of the Prophet, is deſcribed,
                  1 By the ſignes, of which are two;
                  1 A note of exclamation, woe is me.
                  
                  2 By a note of extreame deiection in himſelfe, I am vndone.
                  
                  2 By the cauſes of it, which are alſo ſet downe to be two:
                  1 He was a man polluted, and dwelt amongſt people polluted.
                  
                  
                     
2 He had ſeene the Lord. 
                     1. Point is the feare of the prophet.
                  
                  
                     Then ſaid I, woe is me, I am vndone.
                  
                  The firſt point in order is, the feare & extaſie into which the Lord droue his holy Prophet, which the Lord did not in his anger, but in his loue vnto him, not for a puniſhment of ſinne, but as an euidence of his further loue: for the intent and purpoſe of God in ſtriking this feare into him, was to inable him to be a true prophet, & a fit meſſenger for himſelf. It may ſeeme a ſtrange courſe, which God taketh to confirme & raiſe vp his ſeruant in zeale and courage, to ſtrike him into an extreame feare, euen to aſtoniſh and amaze him, and yet we ſee it is the courſe which the Lord taketh: out of which practiſe of the Lord, we learne this doctrine: That all true Doct. Beſt Miniſters moſt amazed at their enterance. Miniſters, eſpecially ſuch as are deputed to the greateſt works in his church, muſt be firſt of all ſtriken into a great feare, in conſideration of the greatnes of their function, yea, into an amazement and aſtoniſhment, in the admiration of Gods glory & greatnes, whoſe

roome they occupy, & whoſe meſſage they bring, & the more they are afraid and ſhrinke, ſo it be vnder the contemplation of Gods Maieſtie, and their owne weaknes, the more likelier it is that they are truly cald of God, & appointed for worthy purpoſes in his Church: but he that ſteps to this function without feare, he may thruſt in himſelfe, but its doubtfull whether hee bee cald of God, as here the Prophet was: Nor is it ſo here alone, but euery where when God called any of his ſeruants, to any great worke, be firſt droue thē into theſe feares and a mazements, as is euident 
                        Exod. 3. 11. & 4. 10. 13. in Moſes, in 
                        Ieremie 1. 6. 7. 
                     Ieremie, in 
                        Act. 9. 6. &c.
                      S. Paul and others. The reaſon of this dealing of the Lord is plaine: namely, becauſe mans nature is alwayes ready to take enough and too much vnto it ſelfe, God therefore in his wiſdome puts a bridle vnto the corrupt nature of mā, & aſtoniſheth it, leaſt it preſume too much, & take too much vpon it ſelfe: Againe▪ a Miniſter is to preach vnto the people, feare & reuerēce of the Lord: but how can he do ſo to others, whē he hath not

tyed that bond in his owne conſcience, nor was euer caſt downe in admiration of Gods glory & Maieſtie: And laſtly, the miniſtery is a high & excellent calling (eſpecially the office of extraordinary prophets in the old teſtament) & is therefore ſubiect to pride, and to bee puft vp with ſelf-conceits, & therefore teacheth the Apoſtle to Timothy, that a 
                     1. Tim. 13. 
                     Miniſter may not be a yong ſcholler, leaſt he be puft vp, & fall into the condemnation of the wicked: giuing vs to vnderſtand, that it is ye
                      peculiar danger of that calling to haue high conceits of thēſelues, becauſe of the height & dignitie of ther function. Therfore to preuent this incōuenience, God in mercy appointeth that all his true Miniſters ſhall haue ſome means or other, to be caſt down euen to nothing in thēſelues, & ſhall be driuen into ſuch feares & amazements at ſight of their owne wickedneſſe, as they ſhal throwe downe themſelues at Chriſts feete, and denying themſelues wholy, ſhal acknowledge that they are in him whatſoeuer they are: and doe relye,

and truſt onely on his grace and helpe. Vſe. Ergo, Miniſters: and eſpecially in the Vniuerſities, labour to bee humbled in ſight of Gods
                  
                  The vſe of this doctrine, as it is for all Miniſters, ſo ſpecially for vs which liue in the Vniuerſity: we liue as it were in a Seminary, and many of vs are hereafter by Gods grace to be framed to the Miniſtery, and ſome of vs already are. Now here we haue many occaſions to be puft vp in ſelf-conceits: we ſee our greatnes, and their own meaneneſſe. ſelues growe in time, in degrees, in learning, in honour, in name and eſtimation: & to many of vs God giues good portions of his gifts: what are all theſe, but ſo many baites to allure vs to pride, & vaine opinions of our own worths? but let vs remēber the end wee aime at, is not humane, nor carnal: our purpoſe is to ſaue ſoules, Then the weapons of our warre muſt not be carnal, as pride, vaineglory, 2. Cor. 11. 4. and ſelf-conceit. If therefore we euer looke to be made inſtruments of Gods glory in ſauing of ſoules, then at the firſt ſet we not before our eyes the honour, but the daunger of our calling, and humble we our ſelues vnder the mightie hand of our God, that he may exale

vs in his due time: and let vs bee content that God giue any occaſion or meanes to pul vs down, either by outward croſſe, or inward temptation: and let vs reioyce, when wee are thereby ſo farre caſt downe, that wee cry out in the aſtoniſhment of our ſpirits, as the Prophet heere
                        •
                      
                     Woe is mee, I am vndone: but otherwiſe if wee will needes followe the ſwinge of our proude natures, and truſt in our owne abilitie, gifts, and learning, let vs knowe, wee vſe carnall weapons in a ſpirituall warfare: and let vs bee aſſured the Lord will worke no great worke in his Church by our Miniſterie: wee may raiſe our ſelues in worldly eſtimation, and worke out our owne purpoſes, but we ſhal do little in the ſaluation of ſoules: for thoſe men doe pronounce the moſt powerfull bleſſings on other mens ſoules, and ſpeake the beſt wordes of comfort to other mens conſciences, which ofteneſt ſay vnto themſelues; Woe is mee, I am vndone.
                  
                  Furthermore, whereas the Prophet at this Viſion and Reuelation of Gods

glory vnto him, cryeth out of himſelfe, 2 Doct. Ergo, The Prophets hold not the opinion of the Interceſſion of Angels. 
                     Woe is mee, I am vndone: being wordes of extreame feare and aſtoniſhment, and of ſo lowe a deiection as is a degree towards deſperation (if it had gone forward): let vs learne that the Prophet helde not in his iudgement, the Doctrine of Interceſſion of Angels and Saints for particular men, for if hee had, hee neede not at the ſight of Gods maieſtie, foorthwith to haue cryed out, Woe is mee, I am vndone, but hee might haue ſtayed himſelfe a while in this cogitation, I will deſire Moſes, Samuel, or Dauid, to pray to this glorious GOD for mee, or heere are holy Angels of the Seraphins here preſent, they ſee in what fearefull caſe I am, I will pray to them to ſpeake to this glorious and mightie Lorde for mee, that I periſh not in this feare: but hee inſtantly ſeeing the Lorde appeare in Maieſtie, and fearing his iuſt wrath, (being guiltie of his owne corruptions) without any hope or expectation, or (as he ſeemes) without the leaſt cogitation of helpe or aſsiſtance from

any creature, he cryeth out, I am vndone. 
                     3 Doct. Ergo, The calling to the Miniſtery is a worke like vnto the calling of a ſinner to the ſtate of grace.
                  
                  Laſtly, whereas hee exclaimeth, Woe is mee, I am vndone: being words of a ſoule humbled and deiected, and hereby ſheweth himſelfe to bee in that caſe, which a poore ſinner is, when the preaching of the Lawe hath humbled him, by ſhewing him his ſinnes and his extreame daunger by them. Wee may learne, that to bee called to the Mniſterie, is to be as it were conuerted and regenerate: and that when a man is called thereunto, it is a worke little leſſe then that whereby GOD calleth a ſinner from his ſinne, to the ſtate of repentance: for as God firſt caſteth downe the ſinner, before hee giue him grace, or any feeling of his loue in Chriſt: ſo heere, hee firſt abaſeth and caſteth downe the Prophete in the ſight of GODS Maieſtie, and his owne miſerie, afore hee honour him with a Commiſsion to preach his word vnto his people. Which I note againſt thoſe men, which holde it ſo ordinary a matter Vſe. Ergo, 
                           〈◊〉
                         be required, to to enter into the Miniſterie, as many doe, which take it vppon them in

worldly and politique purpoſes. And Qualify a man for the Miniſterie. ſome of a better ranke, which thinke if a man haue learning, degrees and age, hee is ſufficiently qualified for that calling. But alas, this is not all; there is a greater worke to be wrought then ſo, hee muſt be humbled and caſt down in ſight of the greatneſſe of that calling, of the maieſtie of that God whoſe roome hee is to execute, and of the vnworthineſſe of himſelfe to ſo great a worke: hee muſt be reſolued, that to call a man to the Miniſterie, is the greateſt worke that GOD worketh in his Church, but the conuerting of a ſinner, and calling him to the ſtate of grace: nay it is a worke euen like vnto it: for as a ſinner in his conuerſion, ſo hee at his Vocation to that place, is often to cry out in the amazement of his ſoule, Woe is mee, I am vndone. As therefore they are fouly deceiued, which thinke any holineſſe or ſanctification, can ſufficiently qualifie a man without learning, ſo are they no leſſe which thinke all outward complements to bee ſufficient without this worke, which heere was

wrought in the holy Prophet. Thus Cauſes of we ſee the feare & aſtoniſhment of the his feare 2. Prophet. It followeth.
                  
                     For I am a man of polluted lippes. 
                     1 Cauſe pollution of himſelfe & his people.
                  
                  Now follow the cauſes of his feare, which are two. The firſt is, his owne pollution and ſinfulneſſe, and the ſinfulneſſe of his people: his own he freely 1 His owne. He was a man of polluted lippes. confeſſeth in theſe words; I am a man of polluted lippes: that is, I am a miſerable and ſinfull man, and therefore I feare and tremble to ſtand in Gods preſence: nay, I dare not looke vpon the Lorde, for my ſinnes. But it may be demaunded, how could the Prophet ſay thus truely, for he was a holy man, and iuſtified A he was a polluted man. in Gods prefence, by his true faith in the Meſſias, and ſanctified by repentance: can a man iuſtified and ſanctified, ſay, he is a man polluted? I anſwere, And he complaineth not of capltall ſinnes. It is doubtleſſe, he was ſo, he therefore complaineth here not of any great and enormous ſinnes, which hee had committed to the publike ſcandall of the

Church, but firſt of the corruptiō of his But of the corruption of his nature nature, which in him as in all men is a very ſea of iniquity, & which alwaies appeares the more, the neerer a man comes to God, and therefore did now moſt apparantly diſcouer it ſelfe in the prophet, when he was in the preſence of the Lord himſelf. Secondly, he complaineth of ſome actual ſins of his life, and it is more likely of ſome ſins of omiſſion, 2 Of ſome omiſsion in his calling. then of cōmiſsion: for we find not that the prophet was euer touched with any great ſin, & where we know it not, we are in charitie not to imagine it. So that it is moſt probable, hee complaineth of ſome ſmaller faults, or negligences in his Miniſtery: as not preaching to the people at ſome time when he ought, or not preaching ſo willingly or cheerfully as he ſhould, or deſire to leaue preaching, becauſe the people were ſtubborne & diſobedient, or ſome impatience in his Miniſtery, when the people were rebellious and reſiſted his doctrine, which paſsion might the rather vexe him (as we read it did Ieremy)
                     
the Iewes were ſo ſtubborne & ſtifnecked a people: or it may be ſome want of zeale or forwardnes, theſe, or ſome ſuch were the cauſe of his feare: And the cōſcience of theſe makes him here cry out that he cannot ſtand in the ſight of God. Where we learn, firſt, what a tender Doct. Ergo, Miniſters muſt be men of tender conſcience. conſcience godly Miniſters muſt haue aboue all men: namely, that they muſt make conſcience, not of the great and groſſe ſins onely; but euen of the loweſt & leaſt ſins: and he muſt endeuour in his calling, not only to be cleere of great crimes, but as far as may be, to bee free from the leaſt appearance of euill, and from the leaſt negligences in his place, for a ſmall faultin other men is great in them, and that which may be ſome waies pardonable in other men, is no way in them: they muſt therefore watch ouer themſelues moſt carefully, And make confidence of the leaſt ſinnes. and take heede to all their waies: & for this ende is it, that a Miniſter in godly wiſedome muſt often depriue himſelfe euen of many things (which it may be, lawfully hee might vſe) leaſt his liberty

be an occaſion of euill to others: and muſt abſtaine from the leaſt ſins, leaſt euen they be blemiſhes to his calling, and burthens to his conſcience. And hence is it, that a miniſter cannot be too carefull in his calling, in his words, diet, company, recreation, apparel, geſtures, and in his whole carriage, becauſe little ſins are ſo great in thē, Eſpecially And be moſt carefull in his miniſtery both publikely and priuately. miniſters muſt here learne the Apoſtles leſſon, to bee inſtant in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon: to preach and exhort, to comfort and rebuke, publikely and priuately: to good, to bad: when it is wel taken, when it is ill taken: when they willingly receiue it, and when they ſtubbornly reſiſt it: when they commend him, and reward him, and when they raile at him, and perſecute him for it: thus muſt he be diligent in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, for the leaſt negligence in his dutie, or omitting the leaſt opportunity of doing good, will when God viſits his conſcience, bee a burthen and vexation to him, as it was heere to the Prophet.
                  
                     
And furthermore, if theſe ſmal ſinnes Vſe. Vrgo, Miniſters for great ſins ſhould be greatly humbled. thus afflicted the Prophet, then alas what is to be thought of thoſe miniſters who make no conſcience of foule and ſcandalous ſinnes? how ſhall Symonie, Incontinencie, Vſury, inhoſpitality, couetouſneſſe, Ignorance, Idleneſſe, careleſſe Nonreſidencie, how ſhall theſe (I ſay) and other like grieuous crimes oppreſſe & burthen the ſoule, when as the ſmalleſt ſins doe ſo affright this holy man? Surely, whē God ſhal viſite them, their ſtates will bee moſt fearefull, nor, ſhall any mans caſe be ſo miſerable, as an vncōſcionable miniſters: And thogh nowe ſuch looſe and licentious Miniſters ſeeme to liue in Iolitie, & without any feare, yet when God ſhall appeare vnto their conſcience, then will they cry out in fearefull anguiſh, Woe is me, I am vndone. 
                     And for great negh
                           •
                         gēce in their calling, elſe they haue no conſcience.
                  
                  And againe, if theſe ſmal faults ſo affrighted this holy prophet, & burdened his conſcience, then what pittifull conſciences haue thoſe miniſters, whoſe daily negligence, and vnconſcionable

careleſſeneſſe in their places is ſuch, as all men ſpeake of, and yet they are not touched: ſurely theſe men are not of ſo tender cōſciences as the prophet was: & either the prophet here was much more nice then needed, or elſe theſe men will proue to be in a miſerable eſtate.
                  Laſtly, let Miniſters of care and conſcience, be here comforted in the example Good and faithfull miniſters not to be diſcouraged, though they haue ſome wants, for ſo the prophets had, but let them complaine of them as here the prophet doth. of the Prophet: who is there, but may find imperfections and blemiſhes in himſelfe, which will often make him cry out; Woe is me? but let not that diſcomfort them, but rather reioyce, that they can ſee their owne weaknes, as the Prophet did here: If they haue cauſe to exclaime againſt themſelues, they are not alone, it was this, and all other holy prophets caſe before them. In hauing imperfections in themſelues, they are no more miſerable then the Prophet was: but let them labour to be as bleſſed in ſeeing & complaining of themſelues as hee was: And let euery miniſter aſſure himſelfe, that the more hee makes conſcience, euen of the leaſt ſinnes of

all, the more he reſembleth the ancient holy Prophets, & the more likely is he to worke effectually in his miniſtery. For his duty is to worke in his people a conſcience, not of great ſinnes onely, but euen of all: but how can he doe that in them, if he haue not firſt of all done it in himſelfe? hence it is therefore, that godly miniſters finde fault with themſelues, Godly miniſters find
                           •
                         fault with themſelues when the world cannot. when other men cannot, and cry out againſt themſelues, for their pollutions (with the prophet here) when no other man can accuſe them of the leaſt crime: nay, when other doe magnifie God for his graces on them, and praiſe their giftes, and commend their good liues, euen then doe they condemne themſelues, and exclaime againſt their owne corruptions: and their owne ſmalleſt negligences, or omiſſions, are great wounds to their conſciences: and their leaſt ſinnes, and their moſt pardonable infirmities, are ſore burthens vnto them: for of all men in the worlde, a godly miniſter is a man of the moſt tender conſcience.
                  
                     
Hitherto hath the prophet complained generally of his pollution.
                  Particularly, hee exclaimeth againſt the pollution of his lippes. But why will Particularly he complaineth againſt the pollution of his lippes. ſome ſay, complaines hee of the pollution of his lippes, rather then of his heart, or his hands, or any other part of him, were they not all polluted▪ yes, all in ſome meaſure: and was not he grieued at them all? yes aſſuredly, wee muſt grant that alſo. But the reaſon is he was a prophet, his dutie was to vſe his tongue, the practiſe of his calling conſiſted For a Prophets dutie conſiſts in the vſe of his tongue. in the vſe of his tongue: for a miniſter is an interpeter, as he is called, Iob 33. 23. that is, the peoples to God by prayer, and Gods to the people by preaching: he is Gods mouth, and the peoples mouth: ſo that the tongue of a Miniſter is that part of his body, which is to be vſed as a principall inſtrument of Gods glory, and more to the ſetting foorth of his honour then any other: Now euery man is to be tryed what he is by his calling, rather then by any other accidentall or collaterall courſes: therefore the

honour or diſhonour of a miniſter, is the vſe or the abuſe of his tongue: and his comfort or diſcomfort is the well vſing, or not vſing of it. The prophet therefore here affrighted at Gods prefence, His ſmalleſt negligence in teaching, checks his conſcience. and therefore retyring into himſelfe, preſently his conſcience checkes him for his moſt proper ſins: namly, for ſome fault or negligence in his Miniſterie, (which is the proper ſinne of that calling) and therfore is it that he exclaimeth againſt the pollutions of his lippes: out of which practiſe of his we may learne; Vſe. 1. Vrgo popiſh doctrin of mans merits is falſe.
                  
                  Firſt, the vanitie of the Papiſts, who magnifie the merites of holy mens workes: for if this holy prophet, a man truly iuſtified, & extraordinarily ſanctified, yet durſt not ſtand before God in this little apparance of his glory, notwithſtanding all his zeale, and courage, and conſcience, and paines, and ſufferings in his function, but was caſt downe ſo farre, from a conceit of his owne worth, that hee cryed out; Woe is mee, I am vndone. How then can

wee who are no better, but much worſe then hee, ſtand before GOD in the day of Iudgement, in the great appearing of his infinite iuſtice and glorie? Rather doubtleſſe, as here the ſmalleſt pollution of his lippes, and negligence in his calling, droue him out of all conceit of merit, when once hee came into the preſence of GOD: ſo the due conſideration of our ſo many and foule pollutions aboue his, ſhould beate downe all proude conceites of our owne goodneſſe, when wee appeare before GOD. It is therefore to bee feared, that the Papiſts, who thus magnifie their owne merits, doe ſeldome or neuer enter into earneſt conſideration of their owne infirmities, doe ſeldome perſent themſelues in the preſence of Gods maieſtie. For if they did, then doubtleſſe the leaſt ſight of their leaſt pollutiō, would make them farre from euer thinking of their own merits. And of workes of ſuperrogation.
                  
                  They alſo tell vs, of workes of ſuperrogation, but it ſeemes heere,

this holy Prophet had none of them. And they teach, a man may in this life And perfect fulfilling the lawe in this life. perfectly fulfill the Lawe, but who can doe it, i
                        •
                      not miniſters? And what miniſters, if not extraordinary prophets? And yet Iſaiah (the firſt and chiefe of them) exclaimeth here in pittiful manner againſt his pollutions: Doubtleſſe, if the papiſts would ceaſe flattering themſelues, and not examine their conſciences by their own pleaſing corruption, but preſent themſelues in the face and preſence of GODS Maieſtie, they would bee farre from theſe conceits. 2. Vſe. Ergo Miniſters muſt take heed of negligence in their function aboue all ſinnes, for that burtheneth the conſcience moſt heauily of all.
                  
                  In the next place, whereas the prophet complaineth of the pollution of his lippes: As of the peculiar ſinne of his place: Miniſters are heere taught, to auoide that ſinne aboue all other; and to labour in that dutie aboue any other: for the dooing of it, is his moſt comfort: the want of it is his moſt vexation: his tongue is the Inſtrument giuen him to honour God, if hee vſe it well, it yeeldes him comfort,

more then any other duties.
                  But if he vſe not, or abuſe his tongue, the pollution of his lippes will bee the heauieſt burthen of all: they therefore are greatly deceiued, who thinke a Miniſter to diſcharge ſufficiently Other vertues are excellent, but cannot ſuffice, if this want. his duetie, though hee preach not if he keepe good Hoſpitalitie and make peace amongſt his Neighbours, and performe other workes of charatie and good life: for if a Miniſter haue not this vertue, hee hath none: If hee preach not; If hee abuſe his lippes: or if hee open them not, hee hath no conſcience, nor can haue any comfort, for that is the principall dutie of a Miniſter (though all the other bee required to make him compleate): the want of them may condemne him before men, but it is the pollution of his lippes, which preſently checkes him before GOD, as we ſee here in this holy Prophet: the concluſion then is to euery Miniſter, that if hee had all the vertues and good properties, that can commend a man in the world,

yet if his lippes be polluted, either by not preaching, or by negligēt, idle, or careleſſe preaching, this pollution will ſo ſtaine his conſcience, and ſo burthen him in the preſence of God, that the time will come (notwithſtanding al his other good qualities) he will cry out in farre more pittifull maner thē here the Prophet doth
                        •
                      
                     Woe is 
                           〈◊〉
                         I am vndo
                           ••
                        , becauſe I am a 
                           •
                        an of polluted lippes. It followeth;
                  
                     And I dwell in the midſt of a people of polluted 
                     2. His peoples pollution. lippes.
                  The Prophet not onely complaines of his own pollution, but of his peoples He complaines of it to teach, 1. That a Miniſter is to confeſse his peoples ſinnes as wel as his owne. alſo amongſt whom he liued, and this he doth for theſe cauſes: Firſt, to teach vs, that it is the Miniſters duty to confeſſe not onely his owne ſinnes, but the ſinnes of his people, & to complaine of them to God: for as he is the peoples Interpretar to God, he muſt not thinke it enough to put vp their petitions, to vnfolde their wants, & craue reliefe for them at Gods hand, but hee muſt further take knowledge of the ſins of his

people, and make both publique and priuate confeſsion of them to God: and the more particularly he can doe this, the better: and this hee is to doe, both For generally he is acceſſarie to his peoples ſinnes. for the peoples good, and for his owne alſo, becauſe it cannot be but the ſinnes of his people, are in ſome ſort his: for this is the peculiar danger of the Magiſtrates and Miniſters 
                        •••
                     ling, that generally the ſinnes of their people are theirs: I meane, that they are acceſſarie to the ſinnes of their people, either by prouoking them by their euil example, or by not reprouing, or not hindring or ſuffering, or winking, or couering & concealing, or not puniſhing them, or not carefully enough vſing meanes to preuent them: by all which meanes and many more, it comes to paſſe, that the peoples ſinnes are the Miniſters by communication: ſo that as well for his owne ſake, as theirs, hee is to confeſſe to GOD their ſinnes, as well as his owne.
                  Now if a Miniſter muſt confeſſe his peoples ſinnes, then it followeth

confequently, that he muſt know them; and take notice of them, for elſe hee 1. Vſe. Ergo, a miniſter muſt know his peoples ſins. cannot confeſſe them. And this is one cauſe why the holy Ghoſt commands a Paſtor to know his flocke.
                  
                  He muſt not onely haue a flocke, and knowe which is his flocke: or haue a generall Pro. 2
                           •
                        . 23. 
                     
                        •
                     ye ouer it, out hee muſt haue a particular and 
                        〈◊〉
                      knowledge of the ſtate of it, 
                        •
                     nd the more particular the better.
                  And if the Miniſter ought to know and confeſſe his peoples ſinnes, then if Ergo, it is beſt for a Miniſter to bee with his people. followeth, firſt, that it is beſt for a Miniſter to bee preſent with his people, that ſo hee may the better know them and their ſtate: and certainly if it be a Miniſters dutie to confeſſe to God the pollutions of his people, then wilfull and careleſſe Nonreſidency and all abſence, without iuſt and conſcionable cauſes, muſt needs be a foule & fearefull ſin. For how could Iſayah haue cō
                     feſſed, that his people were a people of polluted lips, but that he dwelt amongſt them. Nay, ſaith the Prophet, he dwelt

in the midſt among them, indeede well may hee know and confeſſe his peoples pollutions, that dwelles in the midſt amongſt them. 2. Vſe. Ergo, people muſt cōfeſse their ſinnes, and reueale thē to their Miniſter.
                  
                  Againe, if the Miniſter be to confeſſe his peoples ſinnes, and therefore muſt needs knowe them, then it followeth alſo that they muſt diſcouer & confeſſe them vnto him, or elſe 
                        〈◊〉
                      not poſsible he ſhould perfectly kno
                        •
                     e their eſtate: the want of this is a great fault in our Churches, for how euer we condemne Auricular confeſsion, as a very pollicie in the deuiſers, and as a rack to the conſciences Not popiſh but voluntarie. of poore Chriſtians, yet we not onely allowe, but call and 
                        〈◊〉
                      for that confeſsion, wherby a Chriſtian voluntarily And of ſuch ſinnes as diſquiet the conſcience. at all times may reſort to his Paſtor, and open his eſtate, and disburden his conſcience of ſuch ſins, as diſquiet him, and craue his godly aſsiſtance, and holy prayers: great bleſſing and comfort doth doubtleſſe followe them that vſe this godly practiſe, and the want of it, is cauſe that a miniſter canot diſcerne the ſtate euen of his own flock nor can

complaine to God of their pollutions, and confeſſe their ſinnes ſo particularly, as would be good both for him and them.
                  Secondly, the Prophet couples together 2. To teach vs that a polluted people make their Miniſter more or leſse polluted alſo. his own pollution, and the pollutions of his people, as the adjuvant, or helping cauſe & the effect: For the pollution of a people, helpes forward the pollution of a Miniſter, and the worſe people they are, the worſe doe they make him, though he be otherwiſe neuer ſo good: For euen the Prophet, though called of God himſelf, & iuſtified and ſanctified, & a man of extraordinary grace, yet dwelling in ye midſt of a people ſo ſtubborne & diſobedient, as the Iewes were, was ſomething touched with their pollutions: Miniſters (euen the beſt) are men, and this comes to paſſe by reaſon of the corruption of their nature as they are mē: the nature of which corruption is to apprehend any euill where euer it findes it, and to partake with it: regeneration qualifieth & abates this corruption, but takes it not away perfectly in this life:

whereby it comes to paſſe, that a Miniſter, liuing amongſt euill people, cannot but be ſomwhat ſtained with their pollution, of what ſort ſoeuer they be: inſomuch as it is often ſeene, that one knowne to be otherwiſe diſpoſed of himſelfe, is found to bee diſpoſed to this or that euill, by liuing amongſt a people ſo diſpoſed. And againe, that a miniſter in ſuch a place, and amongſt ſuch people, free from ſuch and ſuch ſinnes, remoued to another place, is there found more or leſſe tainted with them, becauſe they abound amongſt the people: and yet further, that a miniſter, knowne to bee faithfull, painfull and zealous, & comming to a diſobedient, ſtubborne, froward, or prophane & diſſolute people, his faith is weakened, A wicked people dull and decay Gods graces in good Miniſters. Vſe double. his zeale & courage abated, Gods graces in him dulled, & much decayed: godly Miniſters doe daily complaine hereof, and experience euery where ſhewes it too true. Out of this, we may learne ſomething both for our inſtruction, and for our conuerſation.
                  
                     
For our inſtruction, it here appeares 1. For inſtruction: 1. See how corrupt our natur
                           •
                         is. how wicked and wretched the corruption of our nature is, which cannot but receiue ſome contagion from the pollution of thoſe with whom we liue: for this is ſo, not onely in them who carry a looſe hand ouer themſelues, but euen in ſuch as looke moſt narrowly vnto their ſteps: as wee ſee here in this holy Prophet, who was a man of more then ordinary ſanctification: how litle cauſe therfore hath any man to extoll nature? and how much leſſe cauſe the ſchoolemen and ſome other papiſts, to giue the leaſt commendation to our pure naturals: for if nature rectified by grace, be ſo hardly kept within compaſſe, alas how outragious & peruerſe is it, when it raignes without controlment?
                  And for our further inſtruction, heere wee may ſee of what a creeping 2. What a creeping nature ſinne hath. and incroaching nature ſinne is, which like a ſecret venome in the naturall bodie, ſo it in the pollitique body reſtes not in the place, or partie poiſoned, but cloſely creepes

& diffuſeth it ſelfe into euery part and member of the whole: it creepes from man to man, yea, from an euil man to a good, from the worſt man to the beſt: from prophane men, to godly Miniſters: and as from publique perſons (as Magiſtrates and Miniſters) it deſcendeth It wil creepe from Miniſters to people, & from people to Miniſter. viſibly, and the example of their euil life is palpably ſcandalous: ſo from the people to the Magiſtrate, or Miniſter, it creepeth cloſely, & aſcendeth in more ſecret and inſenſible manner, yet in the effect it is too ſenſible: for it is alwayes ſeene, that they are ſomething touched with their peoples pollutions: ſinne is not onely as a poiſon ſpreading from the heart to all parts, from the miniſter to the people: but as a gangreue, if it begin in the foot, wil without ſpeedy preuention ſpred priuily to the hart: ſo ſinne ſhewes it ſelfe, euen from the Ergo, ſtop ſinne in the beginning. people to the Miniſters: So great cauſe is there for all men to ſtop ſinne in the beginning, to breake it in the egge, to giue water no paſſage, no not a little: for let this gangreue beginne at the feete, it

will not reſt till it be in the heart.
                  For our conuerſation wee are heere 2. For our conuerſation. taught, firſt, if a Miniſter, by reaſon of the corruption of his owne nature, and the creeping nature of ſinne, is in ſuch danger to be ſtained with the peoples pollutions, then let all Miniſters deſire, and vſe all good meanes to dwell 1. Miniſters, Ergo, labour to liue amongſt people. with a people as litle polluted as may be: otherwiſe let him aſſure himſelfe to be polluted with them, which is both a great diſcōfort to his owne conſcience (as here it was to the Prophet) and diſgrace to his profeſsion: for if it be a dutie of euery good profeſſor of religion, to keepe himſelfe vnſpotted of the world, then how much more is it the Miniſters Iam. 1. 17. duetie ſo to doe? and how foule a ſtaine is it to the honour of his calling, to be polluted in the common pollutions of his people?
                  It may bee therefore good counſell to all godly Miniſters in the placing & diſpoſing of themſelues, not to enquire onely how good a liuing ſuch

and ſuch a place is, how wel ſeated, how healthfull and beneficiall it will bee, (which are alas the common & almoſt the onely queſtions now adayes) but And in diſpoſing themſelues, rather regard it, then other commoditie. principally, to regard what a people they be: and how affected, amongſt whome they are to liue: if godly and wel diſpoſed, or at leaſt tractable and gentle, & willing to be taught, thē leſſe to regard other incommodities: but if wicked, and prophane, or (which is worſe) ſtubborne, froward, and vntractable, then leſſe to regard the greateſt commodities: & certainly if this point be well conſidered of, and how bitter it hath beene in the ende, to many who haue not regarded it, it will appeare, that this is the beſt encouragement or diſcouragement, the greateſt commoditie, or diſcommoditie, and the beſt reaſon, either to win a mā to a place, or to drawe him from it, how good ſoeuer it be otherwayes: they that neglect this dutie, and are led (or miſled rather) with carnall and wordly reſpects, how

iuſt is it vpon thē when they are made to cry in the ſorrowe of their ſoule, W
                           •
                        e is me, I dwell in the midſt of a people of polluted lippes.
                  
                  And here ſuch Miniſters as haue A poore liuing with good people better then a great liuing and euil people. 
                     poore liuings, but good people, let them not faint nor bee diſcouraged, they haue more cauſe to bleſſe God, then to be grieued, for doubtleſſe they are farre better thē thoſe who haue great liuings, and an euill people.
                  
                  But as for thoſe to whom God hath bene ſo good, as to beſtowe vpon them competent liuings, and a willing and well diſpoſed people, let them thinke themſelues double bleſſed of God, and treble bound to honour God, & to doe good in his Church: and if ſuch men goe not before their brethren in al Miniſterial care and dutie, their fault is aboue al mens, & they make themſelues vnworthy of ſo great mercies. 2. Ergo, Miniſters muſt take heed of their company.
                  
                  Againe, if that a polluted people, pollutes their Miniſter, here is a good warning for al miniſters to be wary &

choyſe of their companie, with whom they will moſt priuately conuerſe: for, as on the one ſide they may not retire themſelues into ſolitarineſſe, nor ſequeſter thēſelues from all ſocietie with their people, (which is rather a Cimicall and fantaſticall, then any way a religious practiſe): ſo of all men are they to be moſt carefull, that they doe not looſely and lauiſhly beſtow themſelues on all companies, as too many doe in All companies and all recreations are not for Miniſters. our Church, to the great ſcandall therof, who care not with whom they conuerſe, but all companies, all places, all times, all ſportes & recreations, al meetings, all occaſions, are one with them: but alas, what maruel, though ſuch men keepe not thēſelues vnſpotted of the world, but proue too offenſiue to their calling: for ſeeing the beſt mē cannot liue with the beſt people, but they ſhall receiue ſome contagion from them, how carefully ought ordinary miniſters to make difference of men and meetings, times and places, and not diffuſedly & careleſly

to thruſt themſelues into all: So doing ſhall they keepe their calling from much reproach, & preſerue themſelues from much pollution, which otherwiſe from their polluted people, they ſhal be ſure to receiue.
                  And here people are to be admoniſhed, And people muſt not draw their Miniſters too much into company. not too ſharpely to cenſure their miniſters: though hee bee not ſo ſociable with them all, as it may bee many would expect: for it concerns no man to be ſo warie of his company and his ſports, as it doeth the miniſter: and if they would haue comfort and honour by their miniſter, let them bee carefull into what recreations & company they draw or deſire him: for the more polluted the people are amongſt whom he liues, the more carefull muſt he bee to keepe himſelf cleare from their pollutions.
                  Laſtly, here people are taught, not to 3 People muſt not condemne too ſharpely ſuch Miniſters as are faultie in their liues▪ for themſelues are the cauſe of it, being of euill liues themſelues. be too ſharpe condemners of thoſe miniſters, whoſe conuerſations are not ſo vnblameable as were to be wiſhed: for as they liue ill, generally the cauſe is,

becauſe they liue amongſt an il people.
                  Why then ſhould they ſo much condemne them, for ſuch faults, as wherein themſelues haue made them faultie? I ſay not, but our Church and ſtate, and Miniſterie, are to cenſure ſuch men, (and it were good they did it more) but it is againſt all reaſon the people ſhould do ſo, wheras themſelues are the cauſe of it: For alas, if this holy Prophet was a man of polluted lippes, becauſe hee dwelt with a people of polluted lippes: what maruell then, though ordinary Miniſters be polluted with the common and vniuerſall pollutions of their people: People therefore, are firſt of all to ſee that themſelues bee well ordered and godly, and then iuſtly may they complaine, if the liues of their Miniſters be not agreeable: but otherwiſe, it is not poſsible without very ſpecial grace of God, but that a miniſter ſhalbe more or leſſe touched Wt
                      thoſe crimes which are the cōmon faults of his people. And lamentable experience daily lets vs ſee, Looke what ſinnes aboundes in any place, and there generally the Miniſter is tainted with it. that where a people in a town is giuen

to drunkenneſſe, there the Miniſter, is either ſo for company, or at leaſt too good a fellow: where a people are giuen to contention, there the Miniſter hath too many fuites: where the people be Popiſh, there the Miniſter is too ſuperſtitious: where the people bee ignorant, there the Miniſter is no great clarke: where the people are giuen to any great ſinne, there the Miniſter generally is not cleare from the ſame pollution: and it is ſeene, that the beſt miniſters & moſt carefull of all, doe complaine bitterly of the pollutions of their people: for that how ſoeuer it may bee they eſcape partaking with their ſins: yet they alwayes finde, at the leaſt a dulling & decaying of Gods graces in themſelues, where the people are vntoward and diſobedient. If therefore a Miniſter liues with ſuch a people, his caſe is pittifull and daungerous, for he walkes in the midſt of nets and ſnares, which are layd for him on euery ſide, and if he eſcape them (I meane, if hee

keepe himſelfe vnſpotted, in the midſt of a ſpotted & polluted people) his care and his conſcience is worthy both admiration and imitation, and himſelfe is worthy double honour, as being both a zealous miniſter and a holy man. But he whō God hath bleſſed with a good But ſuch Miniſters as liue with a good people and yet are looſe, they are not worthy to be Miniſters, but to be depriued. and tractable people, and wel affected to the worde, and yet himſelfe liueth looſely & ſcandalouſly amongſt them, a heauy burden and a hard account, lyeth on that miniſter, and no rebuke is too rough no puniſhment too great, no cenſure too ſharpe for him. And, if this holy Prophet, feare ſo much the preſence of God for his ſmall pollutions, and yet liued amongſt ſo wicked and polluted a people, then what heauineſſe and horror, ſhall bee heaped on his ſoule, who cares not with how foule pollutions his life be ſtained, and yet liueth amongſt a godly & wel diſpoſed people? And thus wee haue the firſt cauſe of his feare, his owne, and his peoples pollutions.
                  It followeth.
                  
                     
                     And mine eyes hath ſeene the King, and 2 Cauſe of his feare, he ſawe the Lord. Lord of Hoſtes.
                  
                  THe ſecond cauſe of the Prophets feare and aſtoniſhment is, He ſan the Lorde, who then appeared in glory vnto him: not that hee ſawe the ſubſtance of God (for that is inviſible How? In a viſion. and incomprehenſible) but his glory: Nor the fulneſſe of his glory, for that cannot be endured, but a glimſe of it: nor that with the eies of his body in ordinary manner, but in a viſion: wherein how farre the eyes of his body were vſed, neither the Prophet expreſſeth, nor wee can well conceiue. The meaning then is; In a viſion hee ſawe ſuch glorie and Majeſtie, as hee knewe there was an extraordinary preſence of the Lord of hoſtes, who is the King of glorie, at whoſe ſight, and thought of his preſence, inſtantly his conſcience is ſmitten with feare, for his own infirmities, and the pollutions of his people.
                  Wherein let vs firſt of all obſerue the

connexion and dependance of theſe two cauſes, one vpon another: for as they are both ioyntly the cauſe of his feare, ſo one of thē is in a ſort the cauſe of another: he feareth, becauſe of his own and his peoples ſinnes, and becauſe he ſawe the Lord: but why is he afraid to ſee the Lord? the cauſe thereof is his owne and their ſins, without which he would neuer haue beene affraid, but rather haue gloried to ſee the Lord: but his conſcience checking him, for ſome defect of dutie in his calling, therfore he trembleth at the leaſt glimſe of Gods glory. Here let vs marke the ground of his Doct: the man that is in his ſinnes endures not Cods preſence. 1 For God hates ſinne, aboue all things. reaſon, which is this: That man that is in his ſinnes, is not able to ſtand in the preſence of God: this is a generall and certaine truth, & the reaſons of it are; Firſt, the contrarietie betwixt God, and the nature of ſinne, it being the onely thing which offends him, & which prouokes his wrath and iuſt diſpleaſure: therefore as a ſubiect cannot but be much amazed, if he hap to come into the kings preſence, with any thing about him

which the king hates, or cannot abide to ſee: ſo a man cannot but be extreame aſtoniſht, if hee knowe himſelfe to bee in Gods preſence with his ſinnes, which Gods ſoule hateth. 2 Sin makes a man a debter to God.
                  
                  Secondly, ſin makes a man indebted to God: for as the Lawe tyeth him firſt to obedience, ſo if he ſin and faile in that, it bindes him to puniſhment: and the more a man ſinneth, the deeper is he in Gods debt. If then in this world, a man willingly indures not the ſight of him, in whoſe debt hee is; what maruell, though a poore ſinner tremble at the preſence of God, to whom he hath forfaited ſoule and all.
                  Thirdly, ſin is that which prouoketh 3 Sin is that, that makes God angry. God to 
                        〈◊〉
                     : therefore a ſinfull man feareth the preſence of God, as a traitor the face of the Prince, or a malefactor of the Judge. For theſe cauſes, a wicked man endures not Gods preſence. Degrees of Gods preſence.
                  
                  Now Gods preſence hath diuers degeees. Firſt, God is preſent to our coſcience, 1 To our thoughts. 2 To our nami
                           •
                        g him when we thinke of him. 2. He is preſent, when wee name him, or heare

him named or mentioned by others, and theſe are the ſurtheſt off: Thirdly, God is neerer vnto vs in the preſence of his Ordinances, as his Word and 3 Neere in his ordināces Sacraments, and publike ſeruice in the Congregation: Fourthly, there is a 4 Necreſt at the laſt day. moſt apparant and ſenſible preſence of God, which ſhall bee at the laſt Iudgement, when all men ſhall ſtand before him in his immediat preſēce, to receiue their iudgement. Now all theſe preſences of God, are hatefull to a wicked A ſinful man feares all theſe. man: for the firſt, a wicked man by his good will neuer thinkes of God, and if ſometime a thought of God (like lightning) flaſhes in his minde, preſently he 1 He neuer, or vnwillingly thinks of God. quencheth it, as being a moſt vnwelcome and burdenſome thought vnto him: therefore ſaith Dauid; The wicked is ſo proud, he careth not for God: neither 
                     Pſal. 10. 4. 
                     is God in all his thoughts: Nay, God himſelf is ſo little thought on, by them, that they will willingly thinke of nothing, that might bring GOD into their thoughts: as namely, Gods great works of his wonderfull Iudgements:

of whom the ſame prophet ſaith, in the ſame place, Thy Iudgements are farre aboue, out of his ſight. As if hee had ſaid, Pſal. 10. 5. hee labours to ſet them farre from the eye of his minde, that hee may neuer haue occaſion to thinke of them, nor on God by them. That this is true for his thoughts', I haue endeuored thus to proue, by Gods owne teſtimonies, becauſe thoughts cannot be diſcerned by 2 He neuer ſpeakes of God vnleſſe it be to abuſe his maieſtie. man. But alas, for the ſecond, that is, for his wordes, that's too apparant in the ſight of all men. For obſerue it, and you ſhall neuer ſee a wicked man, by his good will haue God in his mouth, (vnleſſe it bee to abuſe his name, by ſwearing or blaſphemie) nor willingly doth he heare any other man talke, or diſcourſe largely of God, or of his greatneſſe and his Iuſtice; but ſuch talke is tedious & comberſome vnto him: and if hee cannot breake it off with other diſcourſe, then he ſits as mute as a fiſh, and inwardly either frets with anger, or is tormented with feare. All this is true in Faelix the Gouernour: who whilſt

                     Paul diſcourſed of righteouſneſſe, temperance, and Iudgement to come: The Text ſaith, in the meane time, he trembled.
                  
                  And for the third, we ſee daily wicked men, endure not Gods preſence 3 They loue not the word nor Sacraments. in the Church: for nothing is more troubleſome vnto thē, then many Sermons, often praying, and much receiuing of the Sacrament: & therfore they neuer come to the Church, nor receiue ofter then the Lawe layes vpon them: but further then that, as the Pſalmiſt ſaith; they neuer call vpon God. But as Pſal. 14. 4. 4 They wiſh Chriſt would neuer co
                           •
                        e to iudgement. for the laſt, that they feare and abhorre aboue all, they wiſh in their hart it may neuer be. And therfore S. Paul makes it a token of a true beleeuer, and a holy man, to loue, and looke for the appearing of Ieſus Chriſt. Whereupon it followeth, 2. Tim, 4. 8. that euē ſo it is a ſigne of a wicked man, to feare the laſt iudgement, & to wiſh it might neuer be: And when it comes indeed, & they ſee they cannot eſcape it, what thē do they? Euen cry to the mountaines, fall vpon vs: and to the hils, couer 
                     Reuel. 6. 16, 
                     vs, and hide vs: from what? from the preſence

of God: ſo fearefull and ſo hatefull is Gods prſence to a ſinfull man.
                  Beſides theſe, there is another way, whereby God ſheweth his preſence: Extraordinary apparitiōs of Gods maieſtie, a ſinfull man cannot endure. and that is, by extraordinary reuelation of his glory immediately: which was vſual in the old Teſtament, as here to the Prophet, but now is not to bee expected. But how terrible that is to the ſinfull nature of man, appeares in this place: for if the Prophet a moſt holy man, whoſe conſcience accuſed him, but of a fewe and ſmall ſinnes, yet thus cryes out, amazed & affrighted, at the reuelation of ſome part of Gods glory: alas, how would they be terrified with it, whoſe conſciences are burdened with great and grieuous ſinnes, & that without repētance? Thus we ſee the ground of his reaſon, how true it is, that a man in his ſin, cannot cheerefully come, nor boldly ſtand in Gods preſence. The The firſt vſe for Miniſters: Ergo. let them not enter into. vſe of this Doctrine: Firſt of all, let vs ſee the monſtrous preſumption of ſuch miniſter as dare venture raſhly into the miniſtery, to tread vpō the holy groūd

of God, with vncleane feete; to handle that calling in their ſins. the holy things of God with vnwaſhen hands: For what is it to enter into the Miniſtery, but to enter into the chamber of preſence of the great King? and ſhould not a man look about him, For it is into Gods preſence chamber. afore he come there? Therefore if God rebuked Moſes, for ſtepping too haſtily towardes the Buſhe, where his preſence is, and ſaide; Come not too neere, for 
                     Exod. 3. 
                           •
                        . 
                     the place wher thouſtādeſt is holy ground: then how will God rebuke and checke the conſciences of ſuch carnall men, as careleſly & carnally ruſh into the Pulpit, and to Gods holy Table, where God is preſent, in a farre more excellent manner then hee was in the Buſh? And if they bee ſo to be blamed, who Nor come to doe the duty of that calling without repentance, and holy preparation. enter into this calling without feare and reuerence, then how much more faulty are they, who beeing Miniſters, dare venture to preach, or miniſter the holy Sacraments, without holy and priuate preparation, & ſanctification of themſelues: but ruſh vpon them, as vpon common & prophane actions? Whereas

God is preſent there, in a moſt holy and glorious maner: theſe men ſure wil ſay, the Prophet heere was of too nice a conſcience: but fearefully and terribly ſhall God appeare at laſt vnto ſuch men, as care not how they appeare in his holy preſence.
                  Secondly, this ſheweth the reaſon of the practiſe of al Chriſtian churches: 2 
                           •
                        rgo, They are to pray before and after ſermon. who vſe to pray before the Sermon & after: namely, not for Decorum onely, & to grace the action, but to ſanctifie and to humble our ſelues, becauſe then we come before Gods preſence: they therfore doe not thinke reuerently enough of God, and his preſence, who doe by their practiſe in any ſort, make way to the contrary.
                  Thirdly, we may here learne, the pittifull The 3 Vſe. Ergo, ſuch men are extreamly deſperate who dare come to preach & miniſter ſacraments, in their ſinner. caſe of thoſe miniſters, who are ſo preſumptuous, as to exerciſe that holy function, & yet remain 
                        〈◊〉
                      their ſinnes without repentance: what doe theſe men? they approach to the burning Buſh, with their ſhooes on their feete: that is, into Gods preſence in their ſinnes: what

ſhall come of it in the end? ſurely, that burning fire ſhal conſume thē: the leaſt ſinne, & ſmalleſt negligences affrighted this holy Prophet, when he ſhould goe into Gods preſence: But theſe men Pſal. 50. 16. dare come into the Sanctuarie of God; yea, dare take Gods word in their mouth's, and yet hate to bee reformed, and doe caſt the glorious Word of God behinde their backes, which they preach to others with their mouthes: theſe men may wonder at this holy Prophets nicenes, or elſe al the world may wonder at their prophaneneſſe. A little pollution of his lippes, feared him to come into Gods preſence: but theſe dare doe it, with eies, eares, lippes, feet, hands, hart; and all polluted: their eyes polluted, with careleſſe looking at all vanities: their eares with hearing: and their lips with ſpeaking, wanton & wicked talk: their feete, with running into wicked company: their hands, with practizing and their harts, with deuiſing and conſenting Such mens labours are fruitleſſe. to all wickedneſſe.
                  This is the cauſe, why the labours of

ſuch men are almoſt vnprofitable: becauſe they dare come into Gods preſence in their ſinnes. In many places of our land, ther is by Gods bleſſing much teaching, yet there is little reformation, in the liues of the moſt: but contrariwiſe, ſome fal to Atheiſme: ſome to Papiſme: ſome into foule ſinnes, not to be named amongſt Ghriſtians.
                  Where is the cauſe? ſurely not in the And their leoſeneſſe doth more hurt; then their Doctrine good. Goſpell: nor in our doctrine, nor in the teaching of it; but one very principall cauſe is, many Miniſters come into Gods preſence, vnſanctified, & in their ſins: not caring how looſely they liue, in the face of their people: and therfore God in iuſtice, thogh he inſtantly ſmite not them, with viſible vengeance for their preſumption: yet he ſmites the By Gods ſeacret iudgement. people, with ſpirituall blindneſſe, that they regard not their Doctrine, but looke at their liues, and doe rather follow the prophaneneſſe of the one, then the holineſſe of the other. Miniſters are ſuch, in whome God will be ſanctified,

therefore becauſe they doe not ſo, but diſhonour him, by cōming into his preſence in their ſinnes: therefore hee cannot abide them, nor giue any bleſſing to their labours.
                  All miniſters therfore, as they would ſee any fruite of their Miniſterie, let them firſt ſanctifie themſelues, & clenſe their hearts by repentance, afore they preſume, to ſtand vp to rebuke ſinne in others: elſe let them not thinke, that Good words are vaine, where there is no good life. their golden wordes ſhall doe ſo much good, as their leaden liues ſhall doe hurt: and they may happe to confirme men, that already are conuerted, but hardly ſhall any ſuch men, conuert any ſoules from Poperie or prophaneſſe. And it is a vaine conceite for men to imagine, ther is any force in eloquence, or humane learning, to ouerthrow that ſin in others, which ruleth and raigneth in themſelues. Our Church, and all reformed churches, may make vſe of this doctrine: for it is the glory of a Church to haue their doctrine powerfull, & effectuall for the winning of ſoules, therfore

it cōcerneth them, to take order, as well that their miniſters be godly men, as good Schollers, & their liues inoffenſiue, as wel as their doctrine ſound: or elſe they will find in woful experience, that they pull down as much with the one hand, as they build vp with the other.
                  But moſt neerely this doctrine toucheth miniſters themſelues: who muſt know, their caſe is moſt feareful of all mens, if they come into Gods preſence, in their prophaneneſſe: for as no man is more honourable, then a learned and holy Miniſter: ſo none more contemptible in this world, none more miſerable for that to come, then he that by his looſe & lewde life, doth ſcandalize his doctrine: and let him aſſure himſelfe, that for his preſumption, in ruſhing into Gods preſence in his ſinnes, he ſhall in this world, be caſt out as vnſauory ſalt 
                     Math. 5. 13. 
                     and troden downe of men, with the foot of contempt: and in the world to come, he ſhall aboue all men cry out, in moſt extreame torment of conſcience, W
                           •
                         is me, that my eyes muſt ſee the King and Lord

of hoſtes and ſo becauſe hee would not in this world, come into Gods preſence in ſanctification and holineſſe: he ſhal therefore in feare and horror, be haled into the preſence of Gods glorie, at the laſt day: there to receiue the iuſt ſentence of his condemnation.
                  Laſtly, all painfull and godly Miniſters may receiue comfort, not to bee The fourth vſe for Miniſters: Ergo Good miniſters muſt not fly from Gods preſence becauſe of their ſins, but repent: and ſo approach to his dutie. diſcouraged or driuen from Gods preſence, becauſe of their corruptions or infirmities, for wee ſee it was the Prophets, caſe: but let them ſtill approach in feare and reuerence, and be ſo farre from being driuen from their duty, becauſe they being ſinfull men, dare not come into Gods preſence without much feare: as let them contrariwiſe be aſſured, that the more they tremble at Gods preſence here, the leſſe ſhall they feare it at the laſt day: and when prophane and vngodly men, who in this world feared not to ſtand in Gods preſence in their horrible ſins, ſhall cry to the Mountaines, fall vpon vs, and hilles couer vs, and hide vs from the preſence of

God: then ſuch miniſters as in this world in feare and trembling, and alwaies in repentance, did approach into Gods preſence: ſhall then looke vp, and lift vp their heads, & ſhall ſay to the holy Angels, & all the powers of heauen, helpe vs, and haſten vs to come into the glorious preſence of our God and Sauiour.
                  And thus we ſee the maniſold vſe of this doctrine to our Church and miniſterie. The ſecond vſe againſt the Papiſts.
                  
                  Secondly, In aſmuch as here the prophet in a conſcience of his corruptions, feareth and cryeth out at the leaſt apparition of Gods glory.
                  
                  The vanitie and falſe dealing of the Ergo, The apparitions of God, and chriſt, which they make ſo ordinary, are but colluſions. Church of Rome, is here diſcoured, in whoſe Legēds & ſtories of their Saints, nothing is more common then apparitions from heauen, of Saints depa
                        •
                     ted: of glorious Angels, of the virgin Mary, (and that ſo familiarly, as ſometime ſhe ſang with thē in their Cell, kiſſed ſome of them, and let them ſucke her breſts). Nay, of God himſelfe: and eſpecially of our Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus: who they

ſay, appeared (I knowe not how oft) to one man: namely, to Saint Francis: and appeared as he was crucified with his woundes, and imprinted thoſe woundes of his, in Francis his body, which they ſay he bare all his life, and that they bled whenſoeuer hee would ſuffer them, which he alwayes did on Good Fryday, that hee might be like to Chriſt. Thus, &c many more ſuch, may youſee in that fabulous & blaſphemous book, of the conformities of S. Francis.
                  
                  But for the matter: Are apparitions from heauen ſo ordinary in the popiſh Church? how then came it to paſſe, that the greateſt and holieſt men in the olde Teſtament, were ſo amezed at the very apparition but of an Angell: as wee may ſee in the whole courſe of the Storie? Some ranne away, and hidde themſelues: ſome couered their faces, ſome fell flat on the grounde: and the Prophets heere cryed out; Woe is mee, I am vndone: my eyes haue ſeene the King and Lorde of Hoſtes. But in the Church of Rome,
                     
looke the ſtories, that Saint or Monke is no body that hath not had ſome apparition: either of the Virgin Marie, or ſome of the Apoſtles, or an Angel, or Chriſt Ieſus appearing and talking with them: and yet alas, Peter, lames, 
                     
                        Gala. 2. 9. Mat. 17. 6. & Luke 9. 33. and Iohn, thoſe three great pillars, they were as good as beſide themſelues at the appearing of a little part of the glorie of Chriſt in his transfiguration.
                  Either therefore muſt it followe that theſe men haue no ſinne in them, which dare and can behold Gods glory ſo eaſily, and ſo ordinarily, (which is impoſsible): or rather which indeed is truth, it appeares that theſe are but deceitfull fancies and forgeries of their owne deuiſe, to deceiue the world, and to magnifie themſelues before the eyes Reaſons i
                           •
                         1. Apparitions of God cannot be mores dommon in the new, then they were in the old Teſtament. of the common people: for it is firſt of all moſt falſe, that apparitions are ſo common as they make them, for if they were, then are they more ordinary in the newe Teſtament then in the Olde. For whereas the Scripture hath one, their Legions haue twenty: & whereas

one, namely, Saint Paul, was once rapt into heauen, they haue 20. that were rapt thither: And as that is falſe, ſo is it 2. Cor. 12. 2. No man in his fleſh can endure gods glory. 
                     impoſsible that any man cloathed with fleſh can endure an extraordinary apparition of Gods glorie, without extreame amazement, as is plaine herd in the Prophet: who I hope was as holy a man, as the holieſt monke that euer was. I haue noted this, that young Diuines may be occaſioned to looke a litle into their fabulous legends, that ſo they may diſcouer the falſe trickes, and iugling caſtes of that religion: which euill ſhiftes it needed not, if it were of God.
                  Thirdly, the people may here learne; 3. Vſe, to the people: they may ſee Gods merey to them, in teaching them by men like themſelues, and not by apparitions from heauen. 
                     Firſt, in that Gods preſence is ſo glorious and fearefull to mans nature, how mercifully God hath delt with them, in teaching them not by himſelf, or by his Angels from heauē, which they could neuer endure; but by men, who are like themſelues: and how vaine and fond theſe men are, who would bee taught from heauen, & not by men, who are ſo

full of wants. In the olde Teſtament, when the people receiued the law from 
                        Deut. 5. 25 26, 27. 28. Gods owne mouth, it is ſaide, they ran away, and cryed out, Why ſhould we die? if we heare the voyce of God any more wee ſhall dye: for what fleſh euer heard the voice of the liuing God & liued therefore they ſaid to Moſes: Goe thou neare and heare, al that the Lord ſhal ſay, & declare thou vnto vs▪ what God ſaith to thee, & we wilheare it, & doe it. And then ſaith the text, ye Lord ſaid I heard the words of this people, they haue ſaid well in al that they haue ſpoken. And ſo, from that day forward, God ordinarily taught his church by men like themſelues: & we ſee, yt
                      the beginning of it was not in iudgement, but in mercie vnto them. It is therefore the dutie of all men, both to acknowledge this mercy of God, in due thankfulneſſe, and withall to remember, when they ſee infirmities in Miniſters, that they are but men, and that if they had not the Miniſtery of men, howe hard it would, goe with them: conſidering, that the leaſt meaſure of Gods

owne preſence, cannot be endured by any man.
                  2. Inaſmuch as gods preſence, is ſo glorious 
                     2. Vſe. Ergo, they muſt prepare thē. ſelues before they come to the word or Sacraments. in it ſelf, and fearefull to our nature, al men are taught to prepare themſelues by holy prayer, by humiſiation, and confeſsion of their ſinnes and vnworthineſſe, afore they come to Gods word or ſacraments: for they come at that time into Gods preſence: they therefore are not to come in their ſecuritie, nor in their ordinarie ſinnes vnrepented of, leaſt God ſtrike their conſciences, with a ſence of his fearefull diſpleaſure: & make them cry out, vpon farre greater cauſe, then here the Propet did.
                  Thirdly and laſtly, wee learne here the different natures and properties of 3. Vſe ſee the different natures of ſinne, and holineſse. Sin drawes a man from Gods preſence. ſinne and holineſſe: Sinne, euen the leaſt ſinne: nay, a very ſinfulnes of nature makes a man afraid of Gods preſence: That ſinne vnrepented of doth ſo, appeares in Adam, who as in his integrity, he ſpoke & conuerſed euen in a familiar ſort with God: ſo no ſooner

had he finned, but he ranne from God, and hid himſelfe: & that euen the leaſt ſinnes not repented of, doe ſo alſo, appeares in this Prophet, who beeing a holy man, yet his conſcience being priuie to it ſelf of ſome ſmall omiſsions or negligēces in his calling, he crieth out, he is vndone, becauſe he ſeeth the Lord of hoſts. But contrariwiſe, the ſtate of perfect Holineſſe inuites a man into Gods preſence. holineſſe, & the want of all ſinne, makes a man bold in Gods preſence, and rather deſirous then afraid to behold Gods glory, which ſhall bee moſt apparant at the laſt day: for when the wicked ſhal deſire rather to be couered 
                     
                        Reue. 6. 16. Luke 21. 28. Iob. 19. 25 26, 27. 
                     with the hilles, and ground to duſt by the mountaines, then to appeare before the face of God: then ſhal the godly whoſe holineſſe ſhal then bee perfect, looke vp and lift vp their heads, becauſe their redemption is ſo nigh. And Iob teſtifieth of himſelfe, that hee knoweth his redeemer liueth, and that hee ſhall ſtand before him, & looke vpon him with his eyes. Thus as guiltineſſe driues a man from the kings preſence, but innocency makes

him bold before him: So ſinfulneſſe makes a man auoid Gods preſence, but holineſſe makes him drawe neare vnto God, and to reioyce in his preſence.
                  Then for a concluſion of this point, Vſe. Ergo, if a man would haue boldneſſe with God, he muſt be a holy man. let all men heare learne the way to true courage and boldneſſe before GOD: namely, to repent dayly of their ſinnes, and labour to growe in true holineſſe: wealth nor wit, learning nor authoritie can do this for thee, but onely a good conſcience, which muſt bee made good by grace and by repentance, then ſhalt thou reioice in Gods presēce in this world, and delight, to thinke of God, to ſpeake of God, to pray vnto him, to meete him in his word and ſacraments, and at the laſt day ſhalt thou ſtand with confidence before the throne of his glory.
                  Hitherto of the feare and aſtoniſhment of the Prophet, and of the cauſes thereof. Now followeth his conſolation.
                  
                  
                     Then flewe one of the Seraphims, &c.
                  
                  In theſe two verſes is laid downe the 2. Generall points: His conſolation, ſecond generall point: namely, the conſolation of the Prophet: concerning

which, there are two points in the text: wherein are 2. points. 1. Circumſtances of it. 2. The ground of of it.
                     
                        1. the ground and matter of his conſolation, that is the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes.
                        
                        2 Diuers circumſtances of that conſolation.

                              1 The time. Then.
                              
                              2 The miniſter by whom it was done: Circumſtances are many. 
                                 an Angell, one of the Seraphims.
                              
                              3 The manner how he did it, ſpeedily, He flewe.
                              
                              4 The inſtrument or outward ſigne a Coale from the altar.
                              
                              5 The outward action or application of it: He touched his lippes.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The matter of the conſolation is laſt in order. Let vs therefore firſt ſpeake of the Circumſtances.
                  The firſt circumſtance, is the time 1. Circumſtance, the time that is after his feare. when this Prophet was comforted and raiſed frō his feare. Then ſaith the text: that is, after his feare and aſtoniſhment, but not afore. Thus dealt God alwaies with all his Saints, he beſtoweth no graces on thē pertaining to ſaluation, but after he hath by ſome meanes or other

brought thē to true humiliation in themſelues, Doct. No conſolation but after humiliation. and to ſorrow for their ſinnes: Humiliation is the preparatiue for grace: for when by ſight and ſenſe of their ſinnes, and their owne miſery by ſinne, he hath euen driuen them quite out of themſelues, finding nothing in themſelues, but cauſe of feare and aſtoniſhment, then powres hee the oyle of grace, and of ſweete comfort into their hearts, & refreſheth their weary ſoules with the deawe of his mercy: this point needes no further proofe, for looke into the Scriptures, & we ſhal finde, God neuer called any man to the ſtate of grace, or to any notable worke or function in his Church, but hee firſt humbled them, and then brought them out of al conceit with themſelues, and then wrought in them, and by them, his wonderfull workes.
                  The vſe of this doctrine, is firſt of all to teach all men, to eſteeme aright of the Vſe 1. To al men: Ergo, eſteeme of afflictions, namely, as afflictions that God layeth vpon them in this world: commonly men take them impatiently, & our nature grudgrudgeth

againſt them: but let a Chriſtian man conſider with himſelfe, how God hath alwaies dealt with his children, and he hath cauſe not to thinke ſo: for doth God lay ſome great affliction on thee? it may be he hath ſome mighty worke of his grace to worke in thee, or ſom great work of mercie to bewroght by thee in his church, and hereby prepareth thee for the ſame. Say therefore Pſal: 39. 9. with the holy Prophet; I helde my tongue ô Lord, and ſpake nothing, becauſe it was thy doing: and what God may intend in his ſo doing to thee, thou canſt not tell: and therefore in ſilence, and patience poſſeſſe thy ſoule.
                  
                  Againe, here is a comfort to all ſuch 2 To men diſtreſſed in conſcience, that their ſtate is not deſperate as they Imagine but moſt comfortable as are diſtreſſed in mind, in ſenſe of their finnes, and ſight of Gods wrath: their ſtate is not miſerable, much leſſe deſperate, for they are in the high way to grace and fauour. God iustifieth not, but him that repents: God exalts not, but him that is humbled: God comforts not, but him that is diſtreſſed: God hath mercie on none, but ſuch as both knowne

and feele they want it: and knowe alſo, that they knowe not where to haue it, but at his hands. Happie therefore is that ſoule, that feeles the waight and burden of ſin, for to him wil Chriſt bring moſt eaſe and comfort. Gods Miniſters therefore are hereby to comfort diſtreſſed conſciences, to aſſure them, that if with this Prophet they bee ſo deepely touched with ſight of their ſins, and Gods iuſtice, as that they cry, Woe is me, I am vndone. Then, euē 
                     Then, are they moſt capable of comfort, and beſt prepared to receiue it, as here it ſell out to the holy Prophet. Thirdly, here is the Vſe 3. The way to get excellent graces at Cods band, is to labour to feele the wan. of them. way taught vs how to attaine to any excellēt graces of God, either for our own ſaluation, or the good of the Church, namely to labour for a ſencible feeling of the want of them in our ſelues: for God vſeth to beſtowe no gifts on any man, but ſuch as do in humilitie & low-lineſſe, confeſſe to God, & acknowledge in themſelues, the want of them. So the bleſſed 
                        Ʋirgin ſingeth, God filleth the 
                     Luke. 1. 53. 2 Pſal. 107. 9. 
                     hungry with good things, but the rich hee

ſendes emptie away: And ſo the Pſalmiſt, God ſatisfieth the hungry ſoule, and filleth the emptie ſoule with goodneſſe. So then if thou be rich in thy conceits, God hath not for thee: but if thou be hungry, he is readie to fill thee with good things: and doſt thou acknowledge thy ſoule emptie, then behold treaſures of goodneſſe, to feede and fill thee: and art thou caſt downe with the Prophet, and is thy ſoule emptie of hope, and fraught with feare, then behold, euen then, God and his Angels ready to raiſe thee vp, & to fill thee with conſolation. Thus much for the time of his conſolation: the miniſter, by whom was,
                  
                  
                     One of the Seraphims.
                  
                  The 2. circumſtance of his conſolation 2. Circumſtance of the Miniſter An Angell, a Seraphim. is the Miniſter by whom it was done: An angel. One of the Seraphims: that is, an Angell of that order ſo called: out of which we learne; Doct 1. Ergo there are ſeueral degrees of Angels, that wee knowe not.
                  
                  Firſt, that there are diuers degrees and ſeuerall orders of Angels, though wee knowe not the true diſtinction thereof:

nor thinke it lawful to imagine them to be 9. nor to ſet them down particularly, as the Church of Rome doth, who make many of their owne deuiſes, which they cal traditiōs, of equal authority with the ſcriptures. Secondly, that theſe holy Angels are the glorious guard of God, and Doct. 2. That they are Gods guard. doe continually ſtand about the throne of his glory, & attend his holy wil, both in heauen and in earth.
                  Thirdly, that they are alſo by the Pſal. 34. Heb. 1. Doct. 3. that they are the guard of Gods children. merciful appointment of God, the guard of Gods children, and miniſtring ſpirits ſent out, as it were with a commiſſion, for the good of the elect. All theſe points, becauſe they are plaine in the ſcripture, and do leſſe cōcerne our general ſcope, which is touching the Miniſtery, I paſſe them ouer.
                  Fourthly, here it is apparāt, that as the Ange's are ſent out for the helpe & ſeruice Doct. That they haue ſpeciall charge and care of godly miniſters. of the elect: ſo eſpecially of Gods miniſters, as is plaine in this place, where the Prophet being afrighted, a holy Angel is ready to giue him comfort: and ſo ouer the whole courſe of the Prophets: and

at this day, their protection, and comfortable aſſiſtance, is no leſſe preſent to the godly Miniſters of the newe Teſtament, though not in ſuch ſenſible ſignes, and ſuch viſible manner, as in the olde: for if they bee miniſtring ſpirits, ſent out for the good of them which ſhall bee ſaued, howe much more for their good, which ſhall bee both ſaued themſelues, and ſaue others alſo.
                  
                  A doctrine of great comfort, and Vſe to Gods miniſters. I let them be content with their calling though it be full of croſſes and contempts for it is honoured of the Augels aboue others. much good vſe to all Miniſters: who firſt of all may here learne contentment intheir calling: for howſoeuer no calling hath more croſſes, ſo none againe hath more comfort: and howſoeuer none bee more diſgraced by euillmen, yet none is more honoured by the holy Angels: and howſoeuer in this world they aboue any calling, are ſeruāts to all men, yet none hath the ſeruice & attendance of Angels ſo much as they: for though we haue them not to helpe vs to do the outward actions of our miniſtery with vs, or for vs, (as ſome popiſh Doctors teach, that in their Maſſe, A men is not ſaid to one

                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
collect, becauſe the Angels ſay A men to it) yet doubtleſſe they are preſēt alwaies, as at all holy exerciſes and lawfull actions, ſo eſpecially at the publike ſeruice of God, performed by the Miniſters: and beſide that, they are witneſſes thereto, and of the paines, and diligence, and faithfulneſſe of a good Miniſter, they alſo do Miniſter vnto them oftentimes, bodily ſtrength, and aſsiſtance, & many comforts: in their troubleſome trauels, which they know not how by any naturall meanes they come vnto them. And as this Doctrine doth thus yeeld them 2 Ergo, Let them haue courage, for though men be againſt them, Angels are with them. 
                     contentment againſt the contempt, ſo alſo courage againſt the danger of this calling. For what though thou haſt mightie men of this world againſt thee, when thou haſt angels for thee? & what though thou fighteſt againſt principalities and powers, when thou haſt Cherubins, and Seraphims on thy ſide? Godly Miniſters haue many enemies, but if by the eye of faith, they can ſee as well who are with them, as with the eye of reaſon who are againſt them, they will confeſſe with Eliſha,

there are more with vs, then againſt vs. The ſtories of all ages doe affirme, and the cōfortable experience of theſe daies of ours doth verifie the truth hereof. Miniſters that liue in places very prophane, or very popiſh, it is admirable to ſee how many daungers they haue eſcaped, and plottes they haue auoided, which by their enemies, (or rather the enemies of their Doctrine) haue bone laide for their liues: which their deliuerance, and many other comforts in their Miniſtries, whence are they but from Gods protection, by the miniſtry of his 2 Queſtions Angels. 1. Ergo, Whēce is it that Angels attend miniſters more then other men. Anſ. 2. reaſons.
                  
                  Afore we leaue this point, two queſtions may be asked, not amiſſe briefely to be reſolued.
                  Firſt if any aske, whence comes it that Angels performe more ſeruice to good Mlnisters then to other men: I anſwere, the reaſon is partly from God, 1 From God' he will haue it ſo, becauſe they worke his worke more then other callings. partly from the Angels: firſt God hath a principall care of them aboue other men, becauſe they worke his worke aboue all other callings: for their labours

immediately cōcerne the good of mens ſoules: whereas others do firſt concerne the body, and conſequently the ſoule: therefore, whereas he hath giuen his Angels charge ouer all his elect, to keepe them 
                     Pſal. 91. 11. 12. 
                     in all their good waies, they haue a ſpeciall charge doubtleſſe ouer al godly and faithfull Miniſters, whoſe waies are Gods in a ſpeciall manner.
                  Againe, Angels themſelues as they 2 From the Angels themſelues. willingly performe any ſeruice to the Church, or to any part thereof, ſo moſt willingly of all are they imployed for the good of godly Miniſters, and that for two cauſes.
                  Firſt, becauſe they are their fellow-labourers, both for that yt
                      Angels & good Becauſe they are fellowlabourers. 1 Cor. 4. 2. Heb. 1. 1
                           •
                        
                        ▪ Mal. 27. Reue. 2. &. 3, Chap. Miniſters are both called Gods embaſſadors, & Gods own ſeruants or officers, in a more peculiar manner then any other calling: & for that their ſeruice is ſo like, that their names are common, one to the other. Angels being called Miniſters, and Ministers Angels, as though they were almoſt all one.
                  Secondly, becauſe the Miniſters dutie

is, to conuert & ſaue ſoules, being a Becauſe they conuert ſoules, which delighteth the Angels aboue any in this world. Heb. 1. 14. Luke 15. 10. worke which (next to the glorifying of God, and doings his wil) the Angels doe take moſt delight in aboue any other: for if they be ſent out for the good of them which ſhal be ſaued, how much more willingly for their good, by whom they are ſaued, which ſhal be ſaued? & if the Angels reioice at the cōuerſion of a ſinner▪
                      ſurely they much loue him, & deſire to doe him good, by whom the ſinner is conuerted: and in theſe reſpects, that Angels and Miniſters haue the ſame names: and are both imployed in the ſame great worke; namely, doing good to the elect.
                  Therefore is it, that the Angel calles himſelfe S. Iohn the Euangeliſts fellow in the Reuelation: If then they be fellowes, 
                     Reuel. 19. 10. & 22. 9. euē fellow-ſeruants, & fellow-laborers, in a more ſpecial maner then any other, what maruel though the angels be moſt willingly imployed, in doing any ſeruice of helpe or comfort to godly Miniſters.
                  In the ſecond place, If any aske, if it be ſo, then what duties are Miniſters

to performe to angels, for this their ſo 2. Queſtion: what duties then are good Miniſters to performe to Angels. Not worſhip them ſo as the Papiſts doe. carefull ſeruice, & eſpeciall attendance vpon them, aboue other men?
                  A Papaſt would anſwere; Miniſters muſt therefore worſhippe them, and keepe their faſting, & Holy-dayes, and ſay their ſeruice, and pray vnto them, as to their keepers and Mediators. But alas, cannot the Kings Meſſenger or Officer be honoured, vnleſſe he be ſet vpon the Kings throne? will nothing ſerue him, but the Crowne and Scepter? ſo cannot Angels be honoured, vnleſſe they be made Gods, or Sauiours, or mediators? But I anſwere therefore, wee dare not go ſo farre, leaſt we remember the ſeruant ſo much, that we forget the maſter: but rather we anſwere thus: ſeeing angels are thus ſeruiceable to Gods miniſters, As all men ſhould therfore honour that calling. it ſhould firſt of all, teach al men to honour that calling, with all due reuerence: For they cannot but pleaſe the angels, in honouring good Miniſters, whom they eſteeme their fellowes. 
                     1. So Miniſters ſhould labour to be faithfull in their calling.
                  
                  Secondly, it ſhould teach all Miniſters, not to content themſelues with

the name and title, but to labour to bee good and faithfull. For ſo doing, they are fellowes to the Angels, and it is a diſgrace to the Angels, when thoſe that are their fellowes are vnfaithfull.
                  And it ſhould further teach them, 2. To adorn it with a holy life. to adorne their Calling with a holy life, for as ſinne is that, that grieues the angels, & driues them away, ſo it is grace and holineſſe, which makes them delight in the fellowſhip of men.
                  And it may alſo encourage any man, 3. To be painfull in their calling. to take paines in that holy Calling, wherein hee is ſure to haue Gods angels, in a ſpeciall manner to attende him, to aſſiſt him, to protect him, and to bee a witneſſe of his faithfulneſſe: and who would not worke cheerefully in that labour, wherein hee hath the Angels to bee in a ſort fellow-workers with him?
                  To doe theſe three duties, is to honour good angels: and that Miniſter 
                     Thus to do, is to honour them. that conſcionably performeth them, the angels will take themſelues ſufficiently honoured of that man.
                  
                     
And if beſide this honour, we would And if a Miniſter would reioyce thē, let him labour ſeriouſly, ſo to preach as he may winne ſoules. 
                     reioyce Gods angels, and miniſter matter of ioy vnto them, then in the fourth place, let all Ministers propounde to themſelues aboue al things, the converſion of ſoules, rather then their own praiſe, or liuing, or pleaſing of men, and ſo endeuour it both in teaching, and all their other courſes, that the angels may ſee it, and bee witneſſe of it: for if they reioyce at the converſion of a ſinner, (as Chriſt ſaith they doe, then thoſe men make them ofteſt reioyce, which doe moſt ſeriouſly aime at the converſion of ſinners.
                  
                  And thus we ſee, both the ſeruice of angels to Gods Miniſters, and the duties they are to performe to them in that regard. The due conſideration of this point, may raiſe the world to a better conceit of this Calling, and perſwade fathers to dedicate their ſonnes to it, and ſtirre vp young ſtudents to conſecrate themſeluest hereto, & turne their ſtudies to that ende: for no man in no calling hath ſo ſpeciall attendance, and

aſſiſtance of Gods angels, as godly Miniſters haue: At leaſt, if it worke not this in the world, yet it may yeeld comfort & contentment to all faithfull Miniſters in their painfull calling.
                  But let vs ſee how the angel performed his ſeruice to the Prophet: not vnwillingly, not lingeringly, but ſpeedily: ſo ſaith the Text.
                  
                     He flewe.
                  
                  Which is not ſo to bee vnderſtood, 3. Circumſtance, the maner: He flewe. as though the angels had wings: for they haue no corporall nor ſenſible bodyes, but ſpirituall and inſenſible ſubſtances, the actions whereof are performed with ſuch nimbleneſſe and agilitie, as That is readily, ſpeedily, willingly. can not fall within the compaſſe of outward ſenſe. But the Phraſe is vſed for our capacities, to ſhew how readily and ſpeedily the angel went about to miniſter comfort to the Prophet. For as nothing moueth ſo quickly to our ſenſe, as doth the creature that flyeth: and as wee ſay, that man doth flye about his buſineſſe,

which doth it quickly and diligently: ſo here the holy Ghoſt ſets downe the willingneſſe and quickneſſe of the angel, to comfort this holy Prophet, and to doe the will of God. Where we learne;
                  Firſt, what excellent ſeruants of God Doct. 1. So what excellent ſeruants of God, Angels are. the holy angels bee, which ſo readily, willingly, and ſpeedily execute the will of their Lord. This muſt teach all gods ſeruants to doe the like, and to imitate thē in this excellent obedience: And the rather, becauſe wee pray dayly to God; Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen. In earth of vs, as it is in heauen The fourth petition. 
                     of the holy angels: But they doe it moſt cheerfully, and without all lingring, therefore ſo ought we. Magiſtrates in their places, and Miniſters in Vſe, we muſt ſo ſerue Cod in our places. theirs, and euery man in his function, is to apply this to himſelfe, and to bee ſtirred vp thereby to a cheerfulneſſe & quickneſſe in their duties: for therein they reſemble the bleſſed angels, & then their deodes accord wity their prayer: but contrariwiſe, he that doth his dutie vnwillingly, and vnreadly, is like the Diuel;
                     
which indeed doth Gods will, & yet againſt his will. and ſurely vnto ſuch obedience there belongeth no reward. But as God loueth a cheerfull giuer, ſo doubtleſſe loues hee a cheerfull worker. 
                     2. Corinth. 9. 7. Doct. 2.
                  
                  Secondly, we ſee here how great loue angels beare vnto Gods children, eſpecially vnto godly Miniſters, how willingly 
                     What good friends they are to good men, eſpecially to good Miniſters. they are imployed to doe them good. Willingneſſe and readines to doe good to any man, muſt needes come from loue: and yet alas all men, euen the beſt, and all Ministers, euen the beſt, are creatures farre inferior to the angels.
                  
                  Here Magiſtrates & Miniſters, muſt 1. Vſe. Ergo, ſuperiors loue their inferiors, and contemne them not. learne to be farre from contempt of their inferiours: and to doe their duties of ruling and teaching carefully, though the people bee farre their infriors: it is the nature of loue, to make any man doe ſeruice moſt willingly, to him that hee loues, though he be farre meaner then himſelfe.
                  If therefore Princes loue their ſubiects, they will not ſpare any care, coſt, And ſhew it by doing them good.
                     
nor paines, nay they will reioyce to doe them good, and they will labour to bee like the angels, who are farre greater then men, as they are then their ſubiects.
                  And if Miniſters loue their people, they will forget their owne dignitie, which oft-times they might ſtand vpon, and will make themſelues euen ſeruants to all, that they may winne ſome.
                  
                  And ſeeing angels doe flie ſo faſt to 2. Vſe. Ergo, Miniſters muſt. giue helpe and comfort to good Miniſters: this muſt teach them further. 1. Corinth. 9. 19. 1. Be faithfull.
                  
                  Firſt, euery one to labour to bee a good Miniſter, for then are they ſure of the loue of angels, and then moſt willingly doe the angels any ſeruice to them. Againe, let it teach them to flye as faſt to the diſcharge of their duties to Gods 2. Painfull. Church, as the angels flye to doe them ſeruice, ſo ſhal God angels thinke their diligence and carefull ſeruice well beſtowed vpon them.
                  
                  Laſtly, this diligence of the angels, & their willingneſſe, proceeding from loue, muſt ſtirre vp al Chriſtians, to performe

all duties of godlineſſe to God, 
                     3. Vſe. Ergo, al men ſerue God cheerefully: If wee be like Angels, therein we ſhal euen be like them in glory. & of loue vnto his Church, with alacritie and cheerfulneſſe. So doe Gods angels; we looke to be like the angels in glory, in the world to come: then bee like the angels in diligence, loue and faithfulnes in this world. The Wiſe man ſaith, Hee that is ſlothfull in his buſineſſe is good for nothing: but the diligent man ſhall ſtand 
                     
                        Pro. 22 29. 
                     before the King. And ſurely, hee that is willing & diligent in the duties of Chriſtianitie, ſhall ſtand before the King of kings in heauen. And let this ſuffice for the Angels ſeruice, and his diligence in his ſeruice. Now let vs ſee what inſtrument the Angel vſed.
                  
                     A coale from the Altar.
                  
                  The fourth Circumſtance of this 4. Circumſtance: the Inſtrument a Coale of fire. conſolation, is the Inſtrument which it pleaſed God, the angel ſhould vſe to miniſter comfort to the Prophet, a ſtrange inſtrument for ſo great a work: A ſtrange and wonderfull meanes. A coale of fire. Here let humane reaſon hide it ſelfe, and wordly wiſedome bee confounded, to ſee the wonderfull works

of the Lord: God could haue healed the Prophets infirmities, and giuen him comfort againſt his feare & courage in his calling, without meanes, but hee will And which ſeemes contrarie to reaſon. vſe meanes: and what? a weake meanes: nay, a meanes that ſeemes contrary: A coale of fire muſt touch his lippes: that which in all reaſon would haue made him ſpeake worſe, by Gods appointment and the power of his word, ſhall make him ſpeake better. Out of which practiſe of God, we learn many points.
                  Firſt, ſee how GOD magnifieth Doct. r. ſee God commendeth the vſe of meanes. 
                     meanes: hee can worke without them, and ſo hee did in the Creation, giuing light to the worlde, diuers dayes before there was Sunne: but ſince the order of 
                        Gen. 1. from 4. to 17. nature was eſtabliſhed, hee generally vſeth meanes, not onely in his ordinary, but euen in his miraculous actions: and Seeing himſelfe alwaies vſeth them. though he vſe not alwayes the ordinary and direct meanes: yet meanes he generally vſeth, though they ſeeme contrary: as heere in this place; and the ſame wil be found true in almoſt al the miracles, both of the Old and New Teſtament.
                  
                     
This therefore commends vnto all Vſe Ergo, we are to vſe the meanes appointed in all our purpoſes. men, the vſe of ſuch good meanes, as Gods prouidence hath ordained of any duties, or effecting of any thing, that doth belong vnto vs to doe: and not to depend vpon immediate helpes from Heauen, as many fonde and fantaſticall men doe, who are therfore oftentimes iuſtly forſaken of God, and left deſtitute of all helpe; and ſo expoſed to ſhame and reproach.
                  Secondly, ſee here the mighty power of Gods ordinance, how it appeareth Doct 2. ſee how Gods power doth ſhew it ſelfe in weaknes. in weakeneſſe: ſuch are all his great workes. In the Creation, hee brought light out of darkneſſe. In our Redemption, hee brought vs life out of death. In our conuerſions, he workes vpon vs by his word, & by it hee drawes vs to him, which in al reaſon would driue vs from him: and by it confounds the wiſedome of the worlde, which is ſtarke fooliſhneſſe to the wiſedome of the world.
                  And ſo here, hee cleanſeth the Prophet by a Coale of fire: which would

rather defile him, and ſeaſoneth his mouth with it, which in reaſon ſhould haue burned him: ſo great, ſo admirable, and ſo powerfull are the ordinances of God, though they ſeeme ſo contrary, or ſo weake in themſelues, or in their meanes.
                  Let this teach all men not to contemne the Sacraments, though the outward Vſe. Ergo, God can worke by his word, and ſacraments, and mans Miniſterie, though neuer ſo baſe. Elements, Bread, Wine, and Water, be weake and common, and dead creatures in themſelues: nor the Miniſterie of the Word, though it be exerciſed by a weake man, mortall & miſerable as others are: for that God, which can ſeaſon the Prophets mouth, and clenſe his heart by a coale of fire, no maruell though hee worke vppon the conſciences of men, by his word and Sacraments.
                  
                  And againe, when we ſee Grace and Holineſſe conueyed into mens hearts by the Word and Sacraments; let vs learne, not to aſcribe it to the dignitie, either of the Miniſter, or the Elements, but to the ſupreme power of the mightie

God, who can purge the Prophet, by a coale from the altar.
                  
                  Neither is it altogether without Myſterie, 
                     Doct. 2. The ap
                           •
                         teacher muſt haue a fiery toong. that God here ſanctifieth the prophet, by touching his lippes with a fierie coale: for it ſignifieth, that the apt & ſufficient teacher, muſt haue a fierie tongue, and to that ſame purpoſe, the holy Ghoſt came downe vppon the Apoſtles in fierie toongs, & it may be that the one is a tipe of the other. Certaine it is, that they Acts 2. That is a powerfull tongue, to reproue and burne vp ſinne. both teach vs thus much, that all true and able Miniſters, muſt pray and endeuour to haue a tongue full of power and force, euen like fire, to eate vp the ſinnes and corruptions of the worlde. For though it be a worthy gift of God to ſpeake mildly, and moderately, ſo that his ſpeech ſhal fall like deawe vpon the graſſe: yet it is the firerie tongue that beates downe ſinne, and workes ſound grace in the heart: It may be there are ſome, which neede the fierie tongue.
                  
                  This ſhewes apparantly, that thoſe Miniſters neuer had their lips touched with a coale frō Gods altar: that is, their ſoules

with a coale from Gods altar: that is, their Ergo, ſuch Miniſte
                           •
                        s are fauitie, who reproue not ſinne. conſciences neuer touched, nor their ſoules ſeaſoned with the ſanctifying grace of Gods ſpirit, which ſit ſtill and ſee great and grieuous ſtaines in a Church, and corruptions in a State, and can bee content neuer to reproue them, as though Miniſters were perſwaders onely, and not reprouers.
                  But when this comes to be wayed in the ballance of a good conſcience, it will bee found, that not the pleaſing tongue, but the fierie tongue, is the principall grace of a good Miniſter.
                  
                  But to goe further: whence came this Coale? 
                     Whence came this Coale? from the Alter; which fire came from heauen.
                  
                  
                     Taken from the Altar.
                  
                  This coale of fire was taken by the angel from the altar of God, where was a fire which neuer went out, and this fire was that, that came from heauen: ſent downe by God at the dedication of the Temple by Salomon. And this fire kindled by God neuer went out: for

no man could kindle the like, but all other was counted ſtrange fire; As Nadab and Abihu, tryed in wofull experience, when they would needes offer with in.
                  
                  Now the Prophet muſt be cleanſed with the fire which came from Heauen: 
                     
                        Leuit. 10. 1. 2. teaching vs, that the Miniſter muſt Doct. The fire and zeale of the Miniſter muſt come from Gods ſpirit. haue his fierie tongue frō the holy Ghoſt. As the Apoſtles were ſaid to bee baptized with the holy Ghoſt and with fire: A fierie tongue, is a ſpeciall ornament of a Miniſter, but that fire muſt come from heauen: that is, his zeale muſt be a godly 
                        Acts. 1. 5. Math. 3. 11. and heauenly zeale; but hee that hath a rayling, lying, a ſlanderous, a malicious, or a contentious tongue, hee hath a Not from carnal affections. 
                     fierie tongue indeed. But this is kindled of the ſire of hell, as S. Iames ſaith; The vnbridled tongue is a world of wickednes, 
                     
                        Iames 3. 6 
                     and defileth the whole body, ſetteth on fire the whole courſe of nature, and is ſet on fire in hell.
                  
                  So then, a ſpitefull and malicious tongue wee ſee, is a fierie tongue, but For that is from hel, not from heauen. that fire is taken from hell, and not from Gods altar.
                  
                  And hee that ſtands vp to preach

with this tongue, God will neuer ſuffer any great worke to be done by him in his Church, though his tongue be neuer ſo fierie, and his ſpeech neuer ſo powerfull.
                  As therefore Ministers muſt abhorre the flattering and pleaſing tongue, and muſt haue a fierie tongue: ſo on the other ſide, this fire muſt bee from Gods altar: that is, the fire of their zeale muſt bee kindled by Gods ſpirit, and not by the ſpirit of diſcord and diſſention. Ambitious humors, turbulent & proud humours, new opinions, priuate quarrels, all theſe, nor none of theſe, are for the pulpit.
                  Theſe may make a man fierie tongued, but this fire, was neuer taken from Gods altar, as the Prophets was: this fierie tongue neuer came from heauen, as the Apoſtles did. It followeth.
                  
                     And touched my lippes.
                  
                  This fifth and laſt circumſtance, is

the Application of the remedie. The coale which is the medicine, is applyed by Circumſtance, the Application of the remedie to his lips which were polluted. this Angel to his lips, that is, to that part which was polluted: and as he formerly complained of the pollution of his lips, ſo the medicine is applyed to his lippes: Here the Angell, which in this caſe is made GODS miniſter, doth teach all Gods Miniſters, a great point of wiſedome, Doct Ergo, miniſters muſt apply their doctrin fitly. in heauenly Diuinitie, namely, to apply their Doctrine to their audience, in ſuch manner, as the circumſtances of place, times, or perſons do require: ſome Miniſters come to an ignorant and vnhumbled people, and teach them the Goſpell, which neuer knewe the lawe: here the firy coale is vſed, but the lips are not touched, that is, good doctrine taught, but not well applyed: for that the lawe ſhould firſt be laid to their conſciences, others beate all vpon the Lawe, when it may be their hearers are a people ſufficiently caſt downe, and haue more need to be raiſed vp with the ſweet comforts of the Goſpell: others vſe to laye open the nakednes of the Court in the country,

and to reproue the faults of Princes and great magiſtrates before the cōmon people, who haue more need of the Catechiſme: others bring the Catechiſme or points of ordinarie inſtruction into the Court, where the duties of Kings and councellors ſhould be taught in all plainneſſe and ſinceritie: others bring their new opinions or controuerſall points vnto popular audiences, which indeede are fit for the ſchools: other buſie themſelues about ceremonies, when the ſubſtance is in daunger to be loſt: All theſe (haue it may be) the Coale of fire, but it is miſapplyed, and not applyed to the polluted lips. Let all miniſters therefore learne this point of wiſdome of the Angell, to apply the medicines of their doctrine to the times, perſons, and places, which are infected, ſo ſhal they be ſure not to take paines in vaine.
                  And thus much of the circumſtances of his conſolation.
                  It followeth in the text.
                  
                     
                     Loe thy iniquitie ſhall be taken away, and 2 Point, the ground of his conſolation: which is the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes. thy ſinnes ſhall be purged.
                  
                  After the Circumſtances, followeth the ground and matter of his conſolation, and that is the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes; where firſt let vs marke how it and the inſtrument are annexed together: Loe Doct 1. Forgiueneſſe & the meanes, are annexed together. ſaith the Angel, this Coale ha
                        •
                     h touched tay lippes, and thy Iniquities ſhall bee forgiuen, and thy ſinnes purged: as though hee had bene clenſed by the Coale: where we may note, how greatly God magnifieth the meanes which himſelf ordaineth, euen true remiſſion and ſaluation to the right and holy vſing of them, though it come not from them, but from his own mercy, and power of his ordinance. It is therefore no maruell though God ſanctifieth the childe by the Miniſtery of water in Baptiſme, and feede our ſoules Vſe. Ergo, Vſe the meaues, with reuerence & deſpiſe then not. in the Lords Supper, by feeding our bodies with bread and wine: and no maruell though the careleſſe neglect of either of them, be damnation to him that

deſpiſeth them: ſeeing they are Gods inſtruments, ordained by him to conuey his grace vnto vs: And yet for all this, wee are to knowe, that remiſſion or ſaluation, is no more tyed to the very elements, or the actions, then here the Prophets forgiueneſſe is to the Coale of fire.
                  
                  But the maine point is, that for the Prophets conſolation, the Angell tells him his iniquities ſhall bee taken away, and his ſinnes purged, as thereby he had ſaid thy ſins were the cauſe of thy feare, therefore that thy feare may be taken away, thy ſinnes ſhall be forgiuen.
                  Where we learne, that as few comes by ſinne, ſo all true comfort comes from Doct 2. Here comfort is from forgiueneſſe of our ſins. the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes: this is that, that onely pacifieth the conſcience, and ſatisfieth the ſoule: when Dauid had ſinned againſt the Lord in his two great True in Dauid. ſinnes, and thereby prouoked Gods wrath againſt him, and wounded his owne conſcience, if the Prophet had told him hee had made him King of 10 kingdomes more, he had not ſo reioyced his 2. Sam 11. heart, as when he told him, after his repentance,

                     thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee, thou ſhalt not dye: So when this Prophet was And in this Prophet. extreamely affrighted at Gods preſēce, becauſe of ſome ſinnes and negligences in his calling it had bene no comfort to his poore ſoule, to haue bene told, thou ſhalt haue a more eloquent tongue, and a more powerful ſpeech, thou ſhalt haue better acceſſe to the Court & audience before the King: all theſe, and all ſuch like, would haue beene no better then guided poyſon vnto him, being in this caſe: but the happy anſwere that refreſheth his wearie ſoule more then all the world, was this, Loe thy iniquities are forgiuen and thy ſinnes purged.
                  
                  All faithfull Miniſters muſt heere Vſe. Here is the true way to comfort diſtreſſed conſciences. learne the true way of comforting troubled and diſtreſſed conſciēces, namely, firſt to drawe him vnto a ſight of ſome particular ſinnes, then to ſummon him into Gods preſence, and there to arraigne him for thoſe ſinnes, vntill the view of the foulneſſe of his ſinnes, and the glory of Gods iuſtice, haue ſufficiently humbled him, and then to labour to

perſwade his conſcience vppon good groundes of the pardon of thoſe ſinnes by Chriſt Ieſus, this is the way that God vſed and deuiſed, this is the ſure way, that cannot faile.
                  Some thinke that all trouble of mind is nothing but melancholy and therefore Phyſick and outward comforts wil not ſerue. Pſal. 3. 3. 6. 7. Pſal. 32. 3. 4. Pſal. 51 the whole Pſalm thinke nothing needes but Phyſicke and outward comforts: but he that conſiders in what caſe the Prophet heere was, or Dauid when hee made the 6. the 32. or the 51. Pſalmes, will be of another mind, and will finde that nothing can properly trouble the mind but ſinne: therefore as the wiſe Phyſitian in his cure firſt ſearcheth out the cauſe, and then endeuours to take it away: ſo the good Phyſitian of the ſoule, muſt firſt of all ſearch into the cauſe of his ſickneſſe, that is his ſins, and muſt take them away: which if they doe not, then al their labour is loſt: for al the companie, muſicke, recreation, wine, diet, nay all worldly comforts & delights, if it were the aduancement to a kingdom, cannot ſo much comfort the diſtreſſed ſoule of a ſinner, as this voice of a miniſter
                     
ſpoken from God vpon good grounds; Thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. Now to lay downe what bee thoſe true and good groundes, whereupon a Miniſter may This is done by the Author in his Caſes of conſcience. ſafely and comfortably pronounce pardon of ſins to a ſinner, belongs properly to another place.
                  In the next place; Let vs heere obſerue Doct. 5. True qualification of a Miniſter, is to be humbled, and to repent. how the Lord afore he renued the Prophets commiſſion, or ſend him to preach to the people, firſt humbles him for his ſinnes, and then vppon his repentance, giues him pardon: teaching vs, that no Miniſter is well qualified to the holy duties of the Miniſterie, vnleſſe hee haue truly repented of his ſins, and haue obtained pardon and mercie in the Meſſias.
                  
                  Miniſters labour for qualifications, but the true Miniſter of God will labour for this qualification aboue all other: for doubtleſſe hee ſhall pronounce moſt powerfully the pardon of ſinnes to others, to whoſe conſcience God hath pronounced pardon of his owne.
                  
                  In the laſt place, let vs obſerue how

the Prophet being to be comforted before Doct. 4. True Prophets & miniſters ſhall haue helpe and comfort in their labours, elſe Angells ſhall to comfort them. hee goe this newe embaſſage, the Lord is ſo carefull for him, that rather then he be not comforted (if there be no man to do it), An Angel ſhal be ſēt to be his comforter, & (if ther be not another Prophet to doe it) An Angell ſhall pronounce vnto him the pardon of his ſins.
                  Let this be an encouragement for all Paſtors and Miniſters of Gods Church, to labour painfully & faithfully in their places, for the goodneſſe of the Lord will neuer faile them, nor ſhall they want comfort, when euer they ſtand in neede thereof. Yea rather ſhall Angels from heauen be their helpes and comforters, then faithfull Ministers ſhall be left deſtitute.
                  Hitherto of the ſecond generall points: namely, of the Prophets conſolation.
                  The third and laſt generall point is, the renouatiou of the Prophets commiſſion, 
                     Geoerall points, the renuing of his cōmiſsion: which coſitaineth 3 points. in the eight, & part of the ninth verſes, and it containeth 3. parts, 1. A queſtion or inquirie made by God; When ſhall I

ſend, and who ſhall goe for vs?
                  
                  2 The anſwere of the Prophet: Here am I, ſend me.
                  
                  3 The commiſsion renued vnto him: The Lord ſaid, Goe and ſpeake vnto this people.
                  
                  The firſt part, is a question made by 1 Gods queſtion. God, by way of proclamation, wherein he enquireth who ſhall goe preach vnto Whom ſhal I ſend. this people.
                  
                     Alſo, I heard the voice of the Lord ſaying, whom ſhall I ſend? and who ſhall gae for vs?
                  
                  In which Proclamation, and inquirie 
                     Not as though God had none to ſēd or knew not whom. of the Lord, we are not to imagine that the Lord, was either vnprouided of ſuch as ſhould execute his will, or knewe not who were able, or who were willing to goe preach his word: For as the Apoſtle ſaith, in the matter of Election; 
                     2. Tim. 2. 19. 
                     The Lord knoweth whr are his: ſo much more in particular vocations. The Lord knoweth who are his, and neede not to aske whom ſhall I ſend, or who ſhall goe?
                     
But then it may be demanded, why the But to our conceits and for our ſake, to teach vs many good doctrines. Lorde ſaith ſo? I anſwere, not for his owne ſake, but for ours: whom hereby he would inſtruct, in diuers points of holy doctrine.
                  Firſt, hereby he would giue vs to vnderſtand, how hard a thing it is, to finde an able and godly Miniſter, for if Doct. 
                           •
                        . How hard to find a good Miniſter. there were not a great ſcarcitie of ſuch men, the Lorde needed not aske this queſtion. But ſome will obiect againſt this, that there are in many Chriſtian Ob. Ther are too many miniſters, for ſome goe vp and downe. Churches ſo many Ministers, as they cannot all bee maintained, but ſome goe vp and downe vndiſpoſed, and vnprouided for. I anſwere, this is too true in all ages: there were Wandering 
                     Anſ. 1. Then it is a diſorder in a Church. 
                     Leuits in the Olde Teſtament, which went vp and downe and offered their ſeruice, and ſerued for 10. ſhekels of ſiluer, and a ſute of apparell, and meate and drinke: but this calamitie was vpon the Iudges. 19. 18. & 17. 8. 6. Church of the Iewes, (neuer but then,) when there was no King in Iſrael, and euery one did that which was good in his owne eyes. If therefore there bee any in our

Church, and in chriſtian nations, which goe vp and downe, and offer their ſeruice at ſuch rates, it is much more miſerable, Iudge. 17. 6. ſeeing now there are kings in Iſrael: and therefore it is no reaſon that euerie man rob the Church, as it ſhal pleaſe his couetous minde. But ceaſing to enquire whether this be ſo or no: and if it bee ſo, leauing the reformation thereof to thoſe Churches and States Anſ. 2. He ſeeke not for any. whom it may concerne: I anſwere, for the matter in hand, that this may be ſo, and yet the Lorde may complaine as heere hee doth; Whom ſhall I ſend? for the Lord meane
                        •
                     h not ſuch as beare the name of Leuits or Prieſtes in the olde, or of Miniſters in the new Teſtament (for there were alwaies inow of them: who, ſome for preferment ſake, ſome for their eaſe, and ſome for a refuge how to liue; are willing to enter that function, and accordingly in that calling, ſeee not the Lord, but themſelues, and their owne ends).
                  But heere the Lorde enquireth for But for good miniſters. ſuch men, as firſt, purely doe ſeeke and

vndertake that function, therein to honour God, and to gather his Church, and then in all their labours and miniſteriall duties, truly and faithfully endeuour to the ſame ends; Preaching Gods word, and as Gods word, diligently reprouing, exhorting, and admoniſhing, and ſhining before their people in good workes: for ſuch men, it is no maruell though the Lorde light a Candle at No one day, and make open Proclamation Job. 33. 23. 2. Corinth. 2. 16. to ſeeke for them, ſaying; Whom ſhall I ſend? for, ſuch a man is as Iob ſaith, One of a thouſand: for ſome wat ability to diſcharge their duties, as S. Paul ſaith, Who are ſufficient for thoſe things? And ſome want willingneſſe to vndertake the labour, as God here complaineth; Who ſhall goe for vs? Now to make vſe of this doctrine to our Church.
                  It were to be wiſhed, that in theſe daies, & for our chriſtian Churches, the Lord Good miniſters ſcarce, euen in theſe dayes. had not as great cauſe to cry out in the want of able, faithfull, and godly Miniſters, Whom ſhall I ſend, and who ſhall goe for vs? But alas, this want is too apparant,

and this blemiſh is too notorious, and it is a worke worthy the labour of kings and princes to reforme it: and is a kings euil; not to be healed but by the power of a King: for as long as there are ſo fewe and meane preferments for painefull Miniſters, there will neuer want abundance of ſuch Ministers as doe want either conſcience or abilitie to diſcharge their duties.
                  In the meane time, till God put into Vſe. 1. To Miniſters. 1 They in the vniuerſities frame themſelues to the miniſterie. the hearts of Parliaments, and Princes, to locke to this great and needfull worke; let vs Miniſters learne our duties: and firſt, wee who are in the Vniuerſities, are here admoniſhed to look to our ſelues. By Gods bleſsing we are many, and daily growe more and more: let vs therefore ſo furniſh our ſelues, as that when God or his Church ſhall ſay, Who ſhall goe for vs, and whom ſhall I ſend? then he may find many amongſt vs, whō he may ſend to that great worke of the Miniſierie: & let vs feare to be ſuch, as thar God may affirme of vs, as in the daies of Iob, that he cannot finde one of a thouſand.
                  
                  
                     
Secondly, all Miniſters learne here, 2. Labour to be worthy Miniſters. not to content themſelues with the name and title of Miniſters, but labour for the ſubſtantiall ornaments thereof, nor to be willing to take the honour and liuings, and to refuſe the burden and duties of the Miniſterie.
                  For elſe let them knowe, God hath For God hath vſe of them, but none of vncōſcionable or idle Miniſters. no neede of them: for had the Lorde pleaſed or contented himſelf with ſuch kinde of men, as ſeeke to bee Miniſters for themſelues, and not for his ſake: or beeing Miniſters, doe feede themſelues, and not their flocke: or Preach themſelues, and not Chriſt: then had he not needed to haue made this Proclamation, for Ages haue yeelded ſtore of ſuch. But contrariwiſe, hee that is painfull and faithfull in this function, let him knowe, that God and his Church hath 2. Vſe. To the Cleargie of Rome. A ſhame to them, that being ſo many, there are ſo few of them fit for God to ſend. neede of him.
                  Laſtly, heere the Romiſh Cleargie are iuſtly to bee taxed, whoſe number is infinite: but it is lamentable to ſee howe fewe among them be ſuch as the Lord heere ſeeketh for. Their Orders

of Regulars are exceeding many, beſide all their Secular Prieſts, and it is almoſt incredible, how many thouſands there bee of Dominicans or Franciſcans, or in ſome one of their orders: and yet amongſt the many millions of their Monkes, there is ſcarce to bee found one of many, who for his learning & other gifts, is fit to be ſent to the worke of God: nay, their ignorance was palpable and ridiculous to the world, vntill Moſt of all their Prieſts & Monks are ignorant drones. of late being by Luther, and others of our Church, made aſhamed thereof, they haue laboured (eſpecially the Ieſuites) to become learned. How foule a thing is it that amongſt ſo many, the Lord ſhould haue cauſe to complaine; Whom ſhall wee ſend? The Ieſuits indeed, The Ieſuites haue learning but no conſcience: and are rather Statesmen, then Diuines. many of them are learned, but for other qualities, they are fitter to be plotters, & practiſers in Statematters, Spies or Intelligencers, reconcilers, ſeducers, and ſubuerters, then Ministers: and fitter to be inſtruments of pollicie to euil kings, then Miniſters of the Goſpel vnto God. But take away them, and ſome

fewe ſelected Monkes (and thoſe but fewe out of many thouſands) & then euen for learning alſo God may cry, and call & proclaime in their Monaſteries; whom ſhal I ſend? And if it be a ſhame and miſerie to a Church to want ſuch as God may ſend, or to haue but a fewe, then the Romiſh Church is ſhameleſſe, which ſhames not to haue ſo many, and yet amongſt them all, whom God may ſend, almoſt none.
                  In the next place. By this inquirie, and queſtion made by God, whom ſhall 
                     Doct. 2. No man is to goe vntill God ſend him. 
                     I ſend, and who ſhall goe for vs? The Lord would teach vs, that no man is to vndertake this function, vnleſſe God call and ſend him: therefore heere are condemned, the prophane fancies of the Anabaptists, and all like them, who thinke that any man vppon a priuate motion, may ſteppe foorth and vndertake And not to run vpon priuate motions, the duties of a Prophet, to preach and expound, &c. Oh, but ſay they, theſe motions are from Gods ſpirit: ſurely they can ſay litle for themſelues, who cannot ſay ſo much: but that cannot

ſerue their turne: for if we ſay, contrariwiſe nay, but they are from the diuel, or at the leaſt from your owne vanitie and pride, how can they diſproue it? Againe, might not the Prophet haue alledged that with a better pretence and colour then they? yet he ſtayeth till God heere call him: euen ſo all good Miniſters are to ſtay Gods calling.
                  If any aske, how he ſhal know when Ob, How ſhall I know when God calles me? Anſ. If Gods Church allowe thy calling. 
                     Gods calles him? I anſwere, God calleth ordinarily by his Church, her voyce is his: therefore whenſoeuer the Church of God, ſaith vnto thee, thou ſhalt bee ſent, and 
                        ••
                     ou ſhalt goe for vs, euen then doth the Lorde call vs out to this holy function. Doct. 3. out of the repetition of holy 3. times. Here is no ſufficient proofe of the Trinitie, as ſome thinke.
                  
                  Thirdly, let vs obſerue how the Lord ſaith: Who ſhal (I) ſend? & who ſhal goe for (vs)? Some Interpreters gather out of this Chapter, an Argument for the trinitie of perſons; as namely, out of the 3. Verſe, where the Angels ſing; Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God, &c. But it is not ſound enough to ouerthrowe our ſtubborne enemies the Iewes and therfore

it ſeemes thoſe Diuines are of a ſounder and wiſer iudgement: who ſeeing we haue other places pregnant and plaine enough, therefore thinke it no good diſcretiō to vrge this or any ſuch place which may probably admit another Interpretation, leaſt that the Iewes finding the weaknes of the Argument, doe iudge al our proofes to be as weak, and ſo take occaſion to perſiſt the rather in their blindneſſe, by that which wee brought to haue conuerted them. And as for that ſong of the angels in the third Verſe, where they aſcribe holineſſe to For the repetition made by the Angel, ſheweth onely how he cannot content himſelfe in prayſing God. the Lord 3. times: that thei
                        •
                      repetition ſignifieth nothing elſe, but the continuall ioy and delight which the holy Angels take in praiſing of God, who cannot ſatisfie thēſelues in honouring his name: teaching vs in their example, neuer to bee weary of prayſing God by prayers and holy hymnes, and of honouring him in our liues and callings.
                  But to proue out of the words; Holy, Holy, Holy, the three Perſons in Trinitie, ſeemes to bee no fit nor ſound collection.

Rather in my opinion, wee But he may be proued a pluralitie of perſons. may ſafely collect and conclude out of theſe wordes (I and vs) that there are more perſons in the Trinitie then one: for firſt, God the Father, or the whole Deitie ſaith: Whom ſhall I ſend? and then changing the number, hee ſaith: Who ſhall goe for v
                           •
                        ? For howſoeuer God may imploy in the word Vs, that he that is ſent to preach, is ſent as well for the good of the Church, as for his owne glory, yet can it not bee denyed, but that the plurall number heere, and elſe where, aſcribed to the Deitie, muſt needs argue a certaine pluralitie of perſons in that Deitie: as in Geneſis it is written, that God ſaid, Let vs make man: and here, Who ſhall goe for vs? 
                     
                        Gen. 1. 16.
                  
                  Out of the euidence of which places, ſeeing the enemies of this Doctrine muſt needes grant a pluralitie, namely, that there are more then one: then wee ſhal ſufficiently proue out of other places, and by other argnments, that there are three.
                  In the laſt place, let vs marke what

                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
God ſaith: Whom ſhall I ſend, & who Doct. 4. Miniſters are Gods ſeruants, they goe for God. ſhal goe for vs? God ſends a miniſter to preach and he goeth for God. Then behold here, what is the trade and profeſſion of a miniſter, hee is the ſeruaunt of God. So ſaith God here, he goeth for me: and ſo ſaith the Apoſtle of himſelf & al other good miniſters, that they are Gods Labourers.
                  
                  And in another place, the Angel of 1. Corinth. 3. 9. Acts 27. 23. God appeared, Whoſe I am, and whom I ſerue. But if any man thinke that either God ſpeaketh too fauourably of them, or S. Paul too partially of themſelues, then let the Diuell himſelfe bee Confeſsed euen by the diuel himſelfe. Acts 16. 16. 17. q. What place is it they holde? R. His Ambaſsadors. Iob. 33. 23. iudge in this caſe, who plainly & freely confeſſeth) though he did it not in loue to the truth or them). Theſe men are the ſeruants of the moſt high God, which teach vnto vs the way of ſaluation. Let therefore either God be beleeued, who is for them, or the diuell who is againſt them. But what kinde of ſeruantes are they? what place or office haue they? They are his Meſſengers or Ambaſſadors, this is their profeſsion, and their place.
                  
                     
Now then for the vſe hereof,
                  If they be Gods ſeruants, then are they Vſe. 1. Then they muſt ſeeke to pleaſe God their maiſter, not themſelues. not their owne Maiſters, they haue a Maiſter, euen God, whoſe they are, and for whom, and from whom they come: they may not therefore pleaſe thēſelues, nor ſerue their own pleaſures, nor ſeeke the ſatisfying of their owne carnall luſtes, either in matter of pleaſure, credite, or profite: if they doe, then wil he call thē to a heauie account, whoſe ſeruants they are.
                  Againe, if they bee Gods ſeruants, Vſe 2. then let them do their ſeruice diligently, and expect their reward aſsuredly. then let them doe their ſeruice to God, and expect their reward from God: ſome Miniſters wil expect the reward, and honour of Gods ſeruants, but will doe no ſeruice: that beſeemes not ſeruants: let ſuch men remember for whom they come, euen from that God, who as he can giue reward, ſo hee will expect ſeruice.
                  And as for ſuch men as painfully do Though the world doe not, yet God will, for they are his Ambaſsadors. their ſeruice, but are not regarded, nor rewarded of men as they deſerue, let them bee content & continue in their

faithfulneſſe, for they are Gods Embaſſadors: & we know Embaſſadors may haue gifts giuen them, of thoſe to whom they are ſent: but they expect their maintenance from the kings their owne Maiſters: So the maintenance which the world ſhould giue Miniſters, is like gifts giuen to Embaſſadors: if it come, it is no more then they deſerue. If it come not, yet will faithfull Miniſters doe their dutie, and expect their payment from their king and Maiſter God, whoſe they are, and whom they ſerue.
                  Thirdly, if they bee Gods Embaſſadors, 
                     3. Vſe. Let no man therefore wrong them for God will not ſuffer his Embaſſadors to be abuſed. ſent by him, and come from and for him, then let all ſuch as either condemne, or any way iniury them, bee aſſured, that as God is mighty & powerfull, ſo he will mightily reuenge it.
                  There was neuer King ſo poore or weake, but thought himſelfe ſtrong inough to reuenge any wrong offered No king ſo poore that ſuffred it. to his Embaſſador. And ſhall God ſuffer ſo foule a wickedneſſe to lye vnpuniſhed? Nay, they and their poſterities ſhall ſmart for it: let Ahab, and Iezabel, 1. King. 22. 26. 27. 28. 34. &c.
                        
and Iulian, ſay it be not ſo: and all ages 2. King. 9. 33. &c. Act. 12. 1. 2. & 23. or ſtories, ſhew the cōtrary if they can, that euer any contemner and abuſer of godly Miniſters, eſcaped the viſible vengeance of Gods reuenging hands 4. Vſe. Ergo, they muſt not be ſeruants of men: that is, men pleaſers: but his that ſent them. on him or his.
                  Fourthly, ſeeing they are Gods Meſſengers & ſeruants, they muſt not be the ſeruants of men, to pleaſe, or flatter, or ſatisfie humours, this is not for them that are Gods ſeruants: they therefore that will bee ſlaues to the perſons, and pleaſures, and humours of men, they forget that they are Gods ſeruants, and came for him: yea, they muſt not endeuour the pleaſing of themſelues, nor the bringing of their owne purpoſes to paſſe, but in euery motion, either made to them by others, or ſuggeſted from their owne hearts, they muſt forth-with call to minde, Who ſent me hither, & for whom am I come? Euen from & for God: therefore they are to yeeld to nothing, nor ayme at any thing, but which may be both to the will, and for the glory of him that ſent them.
                  
                     
And if the great men of this world, Great men muſt not thinke to haue Gods ſeruant at their command. doe thinke it wrong that any man ſhould command their ſeruant againſt their will, or expect any ſeruice from them againſt their owne honour: then let them thinke it reaſon that Gods Miniſters ſhould not bee commanded any thing contrary to Gods will, or againſt his honour.
                  And further, if Miniſters bee Gods ſeruants, then let them regard their maiſters 5. Vſe. Ergo, they muſt for the glory of God their Maiſter, both in life and doctrin. glorie, and be aſhamed to doe any thing, either in their doctrine or liues, which may diſhonour him: that ſeruant is vnworthy of a good maiſter, who ſeekes not his maiſters credite in all his courſes.
                  Laſtly, if they be Gods embaſſadors, 6. Vſe. Etgo, they muſt deliuer Gods embaſsage not their owne, and as they receiued it. then muſt they not deliuer their owne fancies, or inuentions, but that meſſage they receiued: And as they receiued it, ſo muſt they deliuer it. And if they do their duties faithfully, this doctrine is comfortable to them, they may take paines, with ioy they haue a maiſter wil reward them: they may ſpeake freely, (ſo

it be with diſcretion) they haue a maſter will make it good: they may ſtand boldly in the face of their enemies, they haue a maiſter wil defend them. And euery faithfull Minister may ſay to himſelfe, I will doe my dutie, and deliuer my Embaſſage. He whom I ſerue▪ and whoſe I am He who ſent me and for whom I come, will beare me out. And thus much of the inquirie which God makes, and the manner of it.
                  Now let vs ſee the anſwere which the Prophet makes, in theſe words. 2. Point: The Prophets anſwere here am, I ſend me.
                  
                  
                     Then I ſaid, Here am I: ſend me.
                  
                  The Prophet after hee was comforted by God, and had his ſinnes forgiuen, then anſwereth; Heere am I, ſend me. Firſt, marke heere, what a great Doct. 1. He whoſe ſins are forgiuen comes boldly to God: & to his dutie. change is wrought on the ſuddaine: he who a little afore, feared and ſhrunke at the leaſt appearance of Gods glorie: now ſtands forth boldly, as ſoone as he is called, and anſwereth: Heere am I, ſend me. So great a matter is it for a miniſter

to haue his ſinnes forgiuen, and to feele the fauour of God to his ſoule and conſcience. Here therefore wee haue an anſwere to two great Queſtions, Vſe. 1. Here is the true way to peace of conſcience, and quietnes of minde. often mooued in the worlde.
                  Firſt, many would haue quietneſſe of minde, and peace of conſcience, and cannot attaine vnto it; If they aske how they might, to them I anſwere; Here is the way, ſeeke it not in wordly wealth, carnal pleaſures, nor humane learning, in companie nor recreations: but ſeeke it in the fauour of God, and pardon of thy ſinnes, and thou ſhalt not miſſe of it. Thus ſhalt thou haue comfort in thy owne conſcience, courage before men, and boldneſſe toward God.
                  Secondly, many Students in Diuinitie, would gladly be Miniſters and doe Vſe. 2. To ſtudents. 1. If they would be Miniſters, repent and get pardon of their ſinnes. much honour to the Calling: but they finde a feare and ſhrinking in themſelues, and thereby an vnwillingneſſe to venter vpon it. If they aske, how they may amend this: I anſwere, or rather the example of his Prophet anſwereth for me); Let that man ſet himſelfe in

Gods preſence, enter into himſelfe, ſearch his conſcience, finde out his ſins, confeſſe and bewaile them to God, craue pardon in Chriſtes blood, & grace to leaue them, & ceaſe not till he heare the voyce of Gods ſpirit ſounding in his conſcience: Thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. Then when God ſhal aske whom ſhall I ſend, thou wilt anſwere readily, and with ioy, Heere am I, ſend me.
                  
                  And againe, many are driuen from 2. If they would be encouraged againſt the contempts and wrongs of the world be aſſured of Gods fauour in the Pardon of thy ſinnes. this calling, to beholde the contempt and reproach, and daungers which belong vnto it. But let thoſe men marke heere the phraſe of this holy Prophet, when God asked, Whom ſhall I ſend? Hee might haue anſwered: Lorde, I would goe, but ſuch diſgraces and diſcouragements doe accompanie this Function, as I deſire to bee excuſed: but hee caſting aſide all ſuch conceits, anſwereth peremptorily, Here am I, ſend mee. How came this to paſſe, for certainly the Prophet was as ſenſible of theſe wrongs as any of vs all, for he was

nobly borne and brought vp, & was of the blood royal: ſurely, becauſe he ſaw he was in Gods fauour, he had him and his Commiſsion on his ſide, & he held this for a ſure ground: If God bee on my ſide, who can be againſt me?
                  
                  Therefore doubtleſſe, thoſe men who are driuen backe by theſe diſcouragements, were neuer ſetled in aſſurance that their ſinnes were forgiuen: nor ſatisfied ſufficiently, that God is on the ſide of all good Miniſters, and that their Calling as it hath his authoritie from God, ſo likewiſe, allowance, bleſsing, aſſiſſtance, and defence of God aboue any other calling: for if they were, they would ſcorne the ſcorne, and contemne the contempt of the prophane world, and with much courage and comfort ſet their hand to Gods Plough, and ſay with the Prophet; Here I am, ſend me. 
                     Doct. 2. We mu
                           •
                        t not ſet others to the labour of the Miniſterie, but our ſelues alſo.
                  
                  Secondly, let vs obſerue, how the Prophet when God askes the queſtion, ſends him not to others, nor commends others to that ſeruice, as is to be thought

hee might haue done many in the Churches of the Iewes, but offers himſelfe, Here am I.
                  
                  It controlles the carnall courſes of many amongſt vs in the 
                        Ʋniuerſities, who thinke it ſufficient to liue there, and ſend out other men, and giue teſtimonies and Letters of commendations Vniuerſitie men muſt not be alwayes ſending out others, but muſt alſo ſend out themſelues. to other men, but themſelues ſtirre not, when queſtion is made; Who ſhall goe to ſuch a place? or who ſhall be ſent to ſuch a pariſh? they ſay not, Here am I, but either it is too little a liuing, or too great a charge, or ill ſeated, or ſome fault it hath, that they will not be ſent to it: but will anſwere God and his Church, there is ſuch a man, and giue him Letters of teſtimonie, or commendation, and ſo all is well: but for themſlues, they liue too ſweete and eaſie liues, willingly to vndertake the contempt and burthen of the Miniſterie.
                  
                  Let ſuch men therefore learne, when God & his Church giue them a calling, to anſwere with the Prophet: Here am I, ſend me.
                  
                  
                     
And let all ſuch as are Students of And Students muſt not deferre too long, but haſtē to the Miniſterie. Diuinitie in the Vniuerſities, marke here the Prophets anſwere, not, I will bee ready, but here I am: why takes hee no longer time? becauſe hee was now ſufficiently qualified. Where let them learne, not to linger and lye rotting too long in their ſpecidatiue courſes: but when they are competently furniſhed with learning, and other qualities befitting that calling: let them ſhew themſelues willing and ready to yeeld their ſeruice to the Church, when they ſhall be called. For as an Apple may as well For ſome too long, as ſome goe too ſoone. hang too long on the tree, as bee puld too ſoone, and both make it vnfit for vſe: ſo many men as well ſtay too long, as goe out too ſoone: and both wayes are made vnprofitable, or at leaſt leſſe profitable in the Church.
                  And to conclude this ſecond point; It is not vnworthy to be noted, that the Prophet ſaith not, Here I am: and I Doct. 3. The Prophet wil not goe till he be ſent. runne on my owne head, but, Send me.
                  
                  Hee willes the Lord to ſend him: then where are they who dare bragge

of their priuate motions, and will runne when they are not ſent?
                  The Prophet might haue ſaid: Oh, And that not by priuate motion onely, but in expreſse words. now I feele a motion from the Spirit, therefore I will goe and preach: but he ſtayeth til he be ſent in expreſſe termes: Let no man therfore preſume to preſſe into this function, till hee bee fully reſolued in his conſcience, that God and his Church hath ſaid vnto him, Goe.
                  
                  And though a man be neuer ſo well qualified with all maner of ſufficiency, Men therefore are to offer themſelues, but not to goe till they be ſent. yet let him ſit ſtill and ſtay Gods leiſure, and let him ſay, Heere I am, ſend me: and ſo reſt contented vntill hee bee ſent. If any man ſay it is vnfit that a man ſhould ſay ſo of himſelfe, I anſwere, let him not ſay ſo in words, but in deeds: let him therfore make proofe of himſelfe, and giue the Church tryall of his gifts. Vpon which experience of his gifts, if he be found ſufficient, that practiſe of his is all one, and much more then if hee had ſaide, Here I am, ſend me.
                  
                  Thus wee ſee the Prophet would

not ſtirre til he were ſent, and therefore in the next word he is bid to goe.
                  
                  
                     And he ſaid, Goe and ſpeake vnto this people.
                  
                  Here is the third and laſt point, 3 The Commiſsion receiued. Namely, the eſſentiall words of his Commiſſion. Wherin, (after God had ſought for one to goe, and the Prophet had preſented himſelfe, and offered his ſeruice) God both giues him leaue to goe, and further doth furniſh him with authoritie, both to goe and ſpeake. 
                     Doct 
                           •
                        . No ma
                           •
                         is to preach without a Commiſsion.
                  
                  Wherein the principall point is, that the authoritie of the Prophets calling, is 
                        〈◊〉
                      from God him
                           •
                        elſe, in plaine and e
                        •
                     ide at words; Goe and ſpeake: and 
                        Matth. 28. 19. Acts 9. 6. &c.
                      till then the Prophet went not. So in the new Teſtament, the Apoſtles went not into the world to preach, till they had their Commiſsion: Goe and teach all Nations▪
                      And after them Saint Paul 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      hot till it was ſaid vnto him, Ar
                           •
                        ſe and goe.
                  
                  In all which is diſcouered and condemned

the pride and preſumption of thoſe who dare run on their own heads, and will not ſtay till the Lord ſay vnto them: Goe, and ſpeake. Theſe men are bolder, then either the extraordinarie Prophets of the olde Teſtament, or the Apoſtles, which are the extraordinary This is ſo, for theſe cauſes. Miniſters of the new: who alwaies had their warrant with the when they went. And if any man aske why is it neceſſarie they ſhould haue ſo; I anſwere, the reaſons are many.
                  Firſt, all Prophets and Ministers, are Gods Deputies and Commiſsioners, it Rea. 1. Commiſsioners haue no power but from the King. is therfore reaſon that they haue authoritie from their Lord and Maiſter.
                  Secondly, their wordes nor deedes beare no credit, nor haue any power in them, vnleſſe they be ſpoken by vertue 
                     Real. 2 Elſe what they doe, is without vertue or bleſ
                           •
                        ing. Rea
                           ••••
                        l
                           •
                        e their perſōs haue no protection. 
                     of a Commiſſion: nor haue their labours any bleſſing, vnleſſe God giue it.
                  
                  Thirdly, theſe perſons haue no protection, nor ſafetie▪ vnleſſe they bee Gods Embaſſadors: and how are they ſo, vnleſſe they be called and ſent by God, and haue authoritie giuen of God? For

                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
theſe cauſes, no man is to thruſt himſelfe into the Ministerie, without a calling from God, and therefore no maruell, though thoſe men who will bee Chuſers, and Callers of themſelues, and run when they are not ſent, bee in their perſons, ſubiect to all daungers: becauſe they are out of Gods protection, & their labours without profit, becauſe no bleſſing, nor promiſe of God was giuē vnto them: for GOD may iuſtly ſay vnto them: Let him that ſent you, protect your perſons: let him that ſent you, bleſſe your labours.
                  But it will then be demaunded, how may I know if God bid me goe? for God Ob. how may I know if God bid me goe? ſpeakes not now from heauen as in old time, and as to this Prophet: I anſwere, It is true, we are to looke for no ſuch viſiions, nor apparitions from heauen, for ordinarily Anſ. we muſt not expect Gods voice from heauen. there are none ſuch, and the Popiſh Church doth but deceiue themſelues, and cozen the world, who tell vs of ſo many apparitions that happen to their Monkes and Fryers: for now ordinarily, God ſpeaketh in another maner

to his Church: for in Generall duties God ſpeaketh to vs out of his word and holy Scriptures, and in particular But hee ſpeaketh to man two waies, generally in his word. and perſonall duties, (where the word in plaine termes ſerueth not) hee ſpeaketh to a man by his owne conſcience, and by the voice of his Church.
                  
                  Out of his word, God ſheweth thee the dignitie and excellencie of this calling, 1. Corinth. 4. 1. Iob. 33. 23. Acts. 16. 17. Pro. 29. 18. to be a Miniſter of the word: Namely, they are his Meſſengers and Embaſſadors, &c. that ſo hee may winne them to loue and affect it. And againe, the neceſſicitie of it, that it teacheth the way to ſaluation, that without it ordinarily Gods Church is not gathered, nor mens ſoules ſaued, that this may ſtirre thee 2. Particularly God ſpeaketh. 1. by the voice of his conſcience for his inclination. 2. By the voice of 
                           •
                        is Church for thy gifts. vp to vndertake the burthen: this is generall. But now particularly for thy ſelfe, wouldeſt thou knowe whether GOD would haue thee to goe or no, then thou muſt aske thy owne conſcience, and aske the Church, for if thou be hartily willing, and be fully and worthity qualified, then God bids thee goe. Now thy conſcience muſt iudge of thy willingneſſe, and the

Church of thy abilitie: and as thou mai
                        ••
                      not truſt other men, to iudge of thy inclination or affection, ſo thou maiſt not truſt thy owne iudgement, to iudge of thy worthines or ſufficience. If therefore thy owne conſcience tell thee vpon true examination, that thou doeſt not loue and affect this calling aboue any other, then God ſends thee not: and if thou enter with ſuch a teſtimonie, not God, but ſome worldly and ſiniſter reſpect doth ſend thee, and put thee forward: for though thou doeſt deſire it, yet if the Church of God giue not allowance of thy ſufficiēcie, God doth not ſend thee: But if contrariwiſe, thy conſcience doe truly teſtifie vnto thee, that thou deſireſt to doe ſeruice to God and his Church, in this calling aboue any other: And if withal, vpon ſignification hereof to the Church, and vpon trial made of thy gifts and learning, the Church (that is, maly Where theſe 2. voices call a man, there God bids him goe. learned, wiſe, and godly, and ſuch as the Church hath publikely appointed for that purpoſe) doe approue of that thy deſire, and of thy ſufficiencie to doe God

ſeruice in his Miniſterie, and thereupon by a publike Calling, bid thee goe, then aſſuredly God himſelfe hath bid thee goe. And it is as effectuall a calling, as if thou heardſt the voice of God frō heauen: for as in Repentance, If thy conſcience tell thee thou haſt truly repented, and if thou canſt make that knowne to the Church by ſo good euidēce, as thervpon a Miniſter of God pronounceth the pardon of thy ſins vnto thee: If thou reſt herein, and knoweſt it to be as effectuall, as if God from heauen had told thee thy ſinnes are pardoned. So is it here, if thou haſt the teſtimonie, firſt of thy conſcience, and then of the Church, thou art to reſt therein, as in the voice of God: Vſe. 1. Againſt thē that run, cry they be ſent. And this is the calling that wee are to looke for in theſe dayes.
                  By which doctrine, as thoſe are iuſtly condemned of foule preſumption, who dare runne vppon priuate motions, and carnall reſpects, and are iuſtly left 2. Againſt ſuch as are called by both voices and yet will not goe. without bleſſing or protection: ſo they on the other ſide, doe offer great wrong to God and to his Church, who when they

cannot denie, but they affest the Miniſterie aboue any calling, and haue approbation of their giftes from the Church of God, yet will not beleeue the Teſtimonie of the Church herein, but their own priuate Iudgemēts, which in this caſe is no way a competent Iudge, either for, or againſt. Let ſuch men knowe, that they oppoſe themſelues euen againſt God himſelfe: it being certaine, that where the inward calling of the conſcience, and the outward calling of the Church doe concurre, there God himſelſe calleth and biddeth that man, Goe, and ſpeake.
                  
                  Now then (to drawe to an ende) let vs obſerue in the laſt place, with what Doct 2. See the authoritie of a true, mioiſter immediate frō God himſelf 
                     authoritie a Miniſter of God comes vnto vs, and executes his Function: euen with an immediate authoritie & Commiſſion from God: whereby he is bid, Goe, and ſpeake. If it bee ſo, let it perſwade the world, to feare to doe any wrong, either to that calling, or to thoſe perſons who come with ſo faire a commiſſion from Vſe. 1. Ergo, Let no man wrong them from God himſelfe. But if it doe

not perſwade the prophane worlde, at Vſe. 2. Ergo, Let Miniſters be comforted in doing their dutie, for if God ſend them, he wil neuer faile them. leaſt let this be a comfort & encouragement to all true Ministers, for if God bid them goe, he will goe with them himſelfe: If hee ſend them; hee will not forſake them, but aſſiſt them, and bleſſe them, and open their mouthes, and enlarge their hearts, and harden their foreheads, and giue power vnto their words to conuer this children, & to confound and aſtoniſh the hearts of his enemies. If he ſend them, he will defend and protect them, ſo that one haire of their heades ſhall not fall to the earth, without his prouidence. If hee ſend them, hee will prouide for them, and ſufficiently reward them: and will honour them in the hearts of his owne people, and magnifie them in the faces of their enemies. And laſtly, if hee ſend them, he will pay them their wages, euen an eternal waight of comfort here, and of glorie in heauen. And as they are here bid goe, ſo once they ſhul be bid Come: and that not onely with the generall Math. 25. 34 Math. 25, 21 call of all the Elect; Come ye bleſſed of my father, inherite the kingdome prepared

for you. But euen with that particular Call, which eſpecially belongs to them that are faithfull in this ſeruice: Come thou good and faithful ſeruant, enter into thy Maiſters ioy.
                  
                  
                     
                        Pſalme, 118. 16.
                        
                           Bleſſed be he that commeth in the name of the Lord.
                        
                        W. P.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Daniel 12. 3.
                        
                           They that turne many to righteouſneſſe, ſhall ſhine as the ſtarres for euer and euer.
                        
                        W. C.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        1. Cor. 4. 1.
                        
                           Let a man ſo thinke of vs as of the miniſters of Chriſt, and diſpoſers of the ſecrets of God.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The ſecond time newly pervſed and publiſhed with Marginall notes. Briefly laying down the matter and method.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   