
      
         
            
            
            
            
            ¶The teſtament of Ioſeph whych was tranſlated oute of Greke into Latyne by a certayn byſſhop of lyncoln called (by hys Syrname) Groſthede, and into Engliſhe, by wyllyam Freloue.
            Reade thys prety & wholſome volume, that maye theach the to fle from the abhominable ſynne of adultery.
            Prynted by Rychard grafton and Edward whytchurch.
            
               1530.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        Cum priuilegio ad imprimend: in ſolum.
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            The prol
                  •
               gue
            
               HOwe thys booke was found, and cā to lyght, ād of what aucthoryte it is; bryfely here after ſhalbe declaryd. By cauſe the hiſtory is of the Iewys, it apperyth the ſame to haue bene wrytyne in their proper tōge or lāguage, whiche is Hebrew ād they beynge malyciouſe agaynſt Chryſten people kept the ſame ſecret many yeris that it ſhould not come abrode, ſpecially by cauſe of a certayne prophecy whych is in the ende touchyng the byrthe of Chryſt whych is greatly to theyr reprofe & ſhame. Thus after certayne yeris the Grekes which be great ſerchers for the ſcrypture confeſſe theym ſelfes that they opteynyd it ād trāſlatyd it out of the Hebrew, & ſo it remainyd amōge the grekes many yerys after, by cauſe ther was veray

               
fewe foūd ye tyme whych were experte in both tounges: that is to ſaye in the Greke and Latyne. Vntyll ſuch Seaſon a certayne byſhop of lyncoln here in Englond callyd Robert the Secōd and by hys Syrname Groſthed, whyche had herde herof, being alſo that tyme namyd a man of greate fame and lernyn
               
                  ••
                ſent forthe hys ſpyes or meſſengers & commaūdyd them to ſpare f
                  •
               rno coſtes to ſerche for ſuche antique wrytynges. And in the yere of oure Lorde. M.cc.xlij. he opteynyd and tranſlatyd the ſame out of the Greke into the Latyne. whych reprouyth vice and abhomynable adulterye, and magnyfieth, a chaft lyfe & matrymonye. All thys is cō
               ſonant vnto god
                  ••
               s worde accordynge to hys ſayeng: he that is not againſt vs is with vs, this cauſeth me to thynk it to be of ſuffycyent

               
aucthorite. Finally, it d
                  •
                h
                  •••
                puerly ſet forth chaſt matrymony and ſhewyth what grace and haboundance of goodnes commyth therby that it ſhuld be ynough to conuerte a pagayne from abhomynable lyuynge, and to enſew the holly lyfe of Ioſeph, wherof the hyſtory folowynge makyth mencyon, whych Ioſeph was one of the .xij. patriarkes: and the tytle or name of the whole boke is callyd the Teſtamē
               tes of the ſaid .xij. patriarkes, whyche be full of the ſpyrite of Prophecye. I entende therfore to tranſlate moo of theym wyth the permyſſyon of God, yf time ād place ſhall geue occaſyon. Now God hym ſelfe which gyuythe lyght to all creatures hathe ſent thys amonge hys people as a myrroure to loke in, accordynge to hys holly worde ſayenge. Nothynge is hydden that

               
ſhall 
                  •
               ot be made opyne.
            ¶ Yf thys volume beynge but the Teſtament of one of the patriarckes, ſhall be thankfully receaued of the good reader. Then ſhall I yf God permyt, do myne endeuour that thou mayſt haue all the reſt.
            
               ✚
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   