
      
         
            
            
            THE
TRAGEDIE
OF
Caeſar and Pompey
OR
CAESARS
Reuenge.
            Priuately acted by the Students of Trinity
Colledge in Oxforde.
            AT LONDON
Imprinted for Nathaniel Foſbrooke and Iohn Wright and are
to be ſold in Paules Church-yarde at the
ſigne of the Helmet.
1607.
         
         
            
            The names of the Actors.
            
               Diſcord.
               Titinnius.
               Brutus.
               Pompey.
               Caeſar.
               Anthony.
               Dolobella.
               Cornelia.
               Cleopatra.
               Achillas.
               Sempronius.
               Caſsius.
               Cato Sen.
               Caſca.
               Roman 1.
               Roman 2.
               Bonus Genius.
               Calphurnia.
               Augur.
               Praecentor.
               Senators.
               Bucolian.
               Octauian.
               Caeſars Ghoſt.
               Cicero.
               Cato Iun.
               Camber.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Tragedie of Caeſar
and Pompey.
            
               Sound alarum then flames of fire.
               Enter Diſcord.
               HEarke how the Romaine drums ſound bloud & death,
               And Mars high mounted on his Thracian Steede:
               Runs madding through Pharſalias purple fieldes.
               The earth that's wont to be a Tombe for Men
               It's now entomb'd with Carkaſes of Men.
               The Heauen appal'd to ſee ſuch hideous ſights,
               For feare pu
                     •
                  s out her euer burning lights.
               The Gods amaz'd (as once in Titans war,)
               Do doubt and feare, which boades this deadly iar.
               The ſtarrs do tremble, and forſake their courſe,
               The Beare doth hide her in forbidden Sea,
               Feare makes Bootes ſwiften her ſlowe pace,
               Pale is Orion, Atlas gins to quake,
               And his vnwildy burthen to forſake.
               
                  Caeſars keene Falchion, through the Aduerſe rankes,
               For his ſterne Maſter hewes a paſſage out,
               Through troupes & troonkes, & ſteele, & ſtanding blood:
               He whoſe proud Trophies whileom Aſia field,
               And conquered Pontus, ſinge his laſting praiſe.
               Great Pompey; Great, while Fortune did him raiſe,
               Nowe vailes the glory of his vanting plumes
               And to the ground caſts of his high hang'd lookes.
               You gentle Heauens. O execute your wrath
               On vile mortality, that hath ſcornd your powers.
               You night borne Siſters to whoſe haires are ty'd
               In Adamantine Chaines both Gods and Men
               Winde on your webbe of miſchiefe and of plagues,
               And if, O ſtarres you haue an influence:
               That may confounde this high erected heape
               
                  
Downe powre it; Vomit out your worſt of ills
               Let Rome, growne proud, with her vnconquered ſtrength,
               Periſh and conquered BE with her owne ſtrength:
               And win all powers to diſioyne and breake,
               Conſume, confound, diſſolue, and diſcipate
               What Lawes, Armes and Pride hath raiſed vp.
               Enter Titinius
               
                  Tit.
                  The day is loſt our hope and honours loſt,
                  The glory of the Romaine name is loſt,
                  The liberty and common weale is loſt,
                  The Gods that whileom heard the Romaine ſtate,
                  And Quirinus, whoſe ſtrong puiſſant arme,
                  Did ſhild the tops and turrets of proud Rome,
                  
                  Do now conſpire to wracke the gallant Ship,
                  Euen in the harbor of her wiſhed greatneſſe.
                  And her gay ſtreamers, and faire wauering ſayles,
                  With which the wanton wind was wont to play,
                  To drowne with Billows of orewhelming woes.
               
               Enter Brutus.
               
                  Bru.
                  The Foe preuayles, Brutus, thou ſtriueſt in vaine.
                  Many a ſoule to day is ſent to Hell,
                  And many a galant haue I don to death,
                  In Pharſalias bleeding Earth: the world can tell,
                  How litle Brutus praizd this puffe of breath,
                  If loſſe of that my countries weale might gaine,
                  But Heauens and the immortall Gods decreed:
                  That Rome in higheſt of her fortunes pich,
                  In top of ſouerainty and imperiall ſwaye.
                  By her owne height ſhould worke her owne decay.
               
               Enter Pompey
               
                  Pom.
                  Where may I fly into ſome deſert place,
                  Some vncouth, vnfrequented craggy rocke,
                  Where as my name and ſtate was neuer heard.
                  I flie the Batle becauſe here I ſee,
                  My friends lye bleeding in Pharſalias earth.
                  Which do remember me what earſt I was,
                  Who brought ſuch troopes of ſoldiars to the fielde,
                  And of ſo many thouſand had command:
                  
                     
My flight a heauy memory doth renew,
                  Which tels me I was wont to ſtay and winne.
                  But now a ſouldier of my ſcatred traine:
                  Offered me ſeruice and did call me Lord,
                  O then I thought whome riſing Sunne ſaw high,
                  Deſcending he beheld my miſery:
                  Flie to the holow roote of ſome ſteepe rocke,
                  And in that flinty habitation hide,
                  Thy wofull face: from face and view of men.
                  Yet that will tell me this, if naught beſide:
                  
                     Pompey was neuer wont his head to hide.
                  Flie where thou wilt, thou bearſt about thee ſmart,
                  Shame at thy heeles and greefe lies at thy heart.
               
               
                  Tit.
                  But ſee Titinius where two warriers ſtand,
                  Caſting their eyes downe to the cheareles earthe:
                  Alaſſe to ſoone I know them for to bee
                  
                     Pompey and Brutus, who like Aiax ſtand,
                  When as forſooke of Fortune mong'ſt his foes,
                  Greiſe ſtopt his breath nor could he ſpeake his woes,
               
               
                  Pom.
                  Accurſed Pompey, loe thou art deſcried.
                  But ſtay; they are thy friends that thou behouldeſt,
                  O rather had I now haue met my foes:
                  Whoſe daggers poynts might ſtraight haue piercd my woes
                  Then thus to haue my friends behold my ſhame.
                  Reproch is death to him that liu'd in Fame▪
                  
               
               
                  Bru.
                  
                     Brutus Caſt vp thy diſcontented looke:
                  And ſee two Princes thy two noble friends,
                  Who though it greeues me that I thus them ſee,
                  Yet ioy I to bee ſeene they hung be.
                  He ſpeakes vnto them.
                  Let not the change of this ſucceſſes fight,
                  (O noble Lords,) diſmay theſe daunteles mindes,
                  Which the faire vertue not blind chance doth rule,
                  
                     Caeſar not vs ſubdued hath, but Rome,
                  
                  And in that fight twas beſt be ouerthrowne.
                  Thinke that the Conqueror hath won but ſmale,
                  Whoſe victory is but his Countries fal,
               
               
                  Pom.
                  O Noble Brutus, can I liue and ſee,
                  My Souldiars dead, my friends lie ſlaine in field,
                  
                     
My hopes caſt downe, mine Honors ouerthrowne,
                  My Country ſubiect to a Tirants rule,
                  My foe triumphing and my ſelfe forlorne.
                  Oh had I periſhed in that proſperous warre
                  Euen in mine Honors height, that happy day,
                  When Mithridates fall did rayſe my fame:
                  Then had I gonne with Honor to my graue.
                  But Pompey was by envious heauens reſeru'd,
                  Captiue to followe Caeſars Chariot wheeles
                  Riding in triumph to the Capitol:
                  And Rome oft grac'd with Trophies of my fame,
                  Shall now reſound the blemiſh of my name.
               
               
                  Bru.
                  Oh what diſgrace can taunt this worthineſſe,
                  Of which remaine ſuch liuing monuments
                  Ingrauen in the eyes and hearts of men.
                  Although the oppreſſion of diſtreſſed Rome
                  
                  And our owne ouerthrow, might well drawe forth,
                  Diſtilling teares from faynting cowards eyes,
                  Yet ſhould no weake effeminate paſſion ſeaſe
                  Vpon that man, the greatneſſe of whoſe minde
                  And not his Fortune made him term'd the Great.
               
               
                  Pom.
                  Oh I did neuer taſt mine Honours ſweete
                  Nor now can iudge of this my ſharpeſt ſowre.
                  Fifty eight yeares in Fortunes ſweete ſoft lap
                  Haue I beene luld a ſleepe with pleaſant ioyes,
                  Me hath ſhe dandled in her foulding Armes,
                  And fed my hopes with proſperous euentes:
                  Shee Crownd my Cradle with ſucceſſe and Honour,
                  And ſhall diſgrace a waite my haples Hearſe?
                  Was I a youth with Palme and Lawrell girt,
                  And now an ould man ſhall I waite my fall?
                  Oh when I thinke but on my triumphs paſt,
                  The Conſul-ſhips and Honours I haue borne;
                  The fame and feare where in great Pompey liu'd,
                  Then doth my grieued Soule informe me this,
                  My fall augmented by my former biſſe.
               
               
                  Bru.
                  Why do we vſe of vertues ſtrength to vant,
                  
                     
If euery croſſe a Noble mind can daunt,
                  Wee talke of courage, then, is courage knowne,
                  When with miſhap our ſtate is ouerthrowne:
                  Neuer let him a Souldiers Title beare.
                  Wihch in the cheefeſt brunt doth ſhrinke and feare,
                  Thy former haps did Men thy vertue ſhew,
                  But now that fayles them which thy vertue knew,
                  Nor thinke this conqueſt ſhalbe Pompeys fall:
                  Or that Pharſalia ſhall thine honour bury,
                  
                     Egipt ſhalbe vnpeopled for thine ayde.
                  And Cole-black Libians, ſhall manure the grounde
                  In thy defence with bleeding hearts of men.
               
               
                  Pom.
                  O ſecond hope of ſad oppreſſed Rome,
                  
                  In whome the ancient Brutus vertue ſhines,
                  That purchaſt firſt the Romaine liberty,
                  Let me imbrace thee: liue victorious youth,
                  When death and angry fates ſhall call me hence,
                  To free thy country from a Tyrants yoke.
                  My harder fortune, and more cruell ſtarrs.
                  Enuied to me ſo great a happines.
                  Do not prolong my life with vaine falſe hopes,
                  To deepe diſpaire and ſorrow I am vow'd:
                  Do not remououe me from that ſetled thought,
                  With hope of friends or ayde of Ptolomey,
                  
                  
                     Egipt and Libia at choyſe I haue.
                  But onely which of them Ile make my graue.
               
               
                  Tit.
                  Tis but diſcomfort which miſgreeues thee this,
                  Greefe by diſpaire ſeemes greater then it is.
               
               
                  Bru.
                  Tis womanniſn to wayle and mone our greefe.
                  By Induſtrie do wiſe men ſeeke releefe,
                  If that our caſting do fall out a miſſe,
                  Our cunning play muſt then correct the dice.
               
               
                  Pom.
                  Well if it needs muſt bee then let me goe,
                  Flying for ayde vnto my forrayne friends,
                  And ſue and bow, where earſt I did command.
                  He that goeth ſeeking of a Tirant aide,
                  Though free he went, a ſeruant then is made.
                  Take we our laſt farwell, then though with paine,
                  
                     
Heere three do part that ne're ſhall meet againe.
               
               Exit Pompey at on dore, Titinius at
another. Brutus alone.
               
                  ACTVS 1. SCENA 2.
                  Enter Caeſar
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Follow your chaſe, and let your light-foote ſteedes
                     Flying as ſwift as did that winged horſe
                     That with ſtrong fethered Pinions cloue the Ayre,
                     Or'take the coward flight of your baſe foe.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     Do not with-drawe thy mortall woundring blade,
                     But ſheath it Caeſar in my wounded heart:
                     Let not that heart that did thy Country wound
                     Feare to lay Brutus bleeding on the ground.
                     Thy fatall ſtroke of death ſhall more mee glad,
                     Then all thy proud and Pompous victories;
                     My funerall Cypreſſe, then thy Lawrell Crowne,
                     My mournefull Beere ſhall winne more Praiſe and Fame
                     Then thy triumphing Sun-bright Chariot.
                     Heere in theſe fatall fieldes let Brutus die,
                     And beare ſo many Romaines company.
                  
                  
                     Caeſa.
                     T'was not 'gainſt thee this fatall blade was drawne
                     Which can no more pierce Brutus tender ſides
                     Then mine owne heart, or ought then heart more deere,
                     For all the wronges thou didſt, or ſtrokes thou gau'ſt
                     
                        Caeſar on thee will take no worſe reuenge,
                     Then bid thee ſtill commande him and his ſtate:
                     True ſetled loue can neere bee turn'd to hate.
                  
                  
                     Brut.
                     To what a pitch would this mans vertues ſore,
                     Did not ambition clog his mounting fame,
                     
                        Caeſar thy ſword hath all bliſſe from me taine
                     And giueſt me life where beſt were to be ſlaine.
                     O thou haſt robd me of my chiefeſt ioy,
                     And ſeek'ſt to pleaſe me with a babiſh toye.
                  
                  Exit Brutus.
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     
                        Caeſar Pharſalia doth thy conqueſt ſound
                     
                        Ioues welcom meſſenger faire Victory,
                     
                        
Hath Crown'd thy temples with victorious bay.
                     And Io ioyfull, Io doth ſhe ſing
                     And through the world thy laſting prayſes ring.
                     But yet amidſt thy gratefull melody
                     I heare a hoarſe, and heauy dolfull voyce,
                     Of my deare Country crying, that to day
                     My Glorious triumphs worke her owne decay.
                     In which how many fatall ſtrokes I gaue,
                     So many woundes her tender breſt receiu'd.
                     Heere lyeth one that's boucher'd by his Sire
                     And heere the Sonne was his old Fathers death,
                     Both ſlew vnknowing, both vnknowne are ſlaine,
                     O that ambition ſhould ſuch miſchiefe worke
                     Or meane Men die for great mens proud deſire.
                  
               
               
                  ACTVS 1. SCENA 3.
                  Enter Anthony, Dolobella, Lord and others.
                  
                     An.
                     From ſad Pharſalia bluſhing al with bloud,
                     From deaths pale triumphes, Pompey ouerthrowne,
                     
                        Romains in forraine ſoyles, brething their laſt,
                     Reuenge, ſtange wars and dreadfull ſtratagems,
                     Wee come to ſet the Lawrell on thy head
                     And fill thy eares with triumphs and with ioyes.
                  
                  
                     Dolo.
                     As when that Hector from the Grecian campe
                     With ſpoiles of ſlaughtered Argians return'd,
                     The Troyan youths with crownes of conquering palme:
                     The Phrigian Virgins with faire flowry wrethes
                     Welcom'd the hope, and pride of Ilium,
                     
                     So for thy victory and conquering actes
                     Wee bring faire wreths of Honor & renowne,
                     Which ſhall enternally thy head adorne.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Now hath thy ſword made paſſage for thy ſelfe,
                     To wade in bloud of them that ſought thy death,
                     The ambitious riuall of thine Honors high,
                     Whoſe mightineſſe earſt made him to be feard
                     Now flies and is enforc'd to giue thee place.
                     
                        
Whil'ſt thou 
                           〈◊〉
                         the conquering Hercules
                     
                     Triumphing in thy ſpoyles and victories.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     When Phaebus left faire Thetis watery couch,
                     And peeping forth from out the goulden gate
                     Of his bright pallace ſaw our battle rank'd:
                     Oft did hee ſeeke to turne his fiery ſteedes,
                     Oft hid his face, and ſhund ſuch tragick ſights.
                     What ſtranger paſſeſt euer by this coſt
                     Thee this accurſed ſoyle diſtainde with blood
                     Not Chriſtall riuers, are to quench thy thirſt.
                     For goaring ſtreames, their riuers cleereneſſe ſtaines:
                     Heere are no hils wherewith to feede thine eyes,
                     But heaped hils of mangled Carkaſes,
                     Heere are no birdes to pleaſe thee with their notes:
                     But rauenous Vultures, and night Rauens horſe.
                  
                  
                     Anto.
                     What meanes great Caeſar, droopes our generall,
                     Or melts in womaniſh compaſſion:
                     To ſee Pharſalias fieldes to change their hewe
                     And ſiluer ſtreames be turn'd to lakes of blood?
                     Why Caeſar oft hath ſacrific'd in France,
                     
                     Millions of Soules, to Plutoes griſly dames:
                     And made the changed coloured Rhene to bluſh,
                     To beare his bloody burthen to the ſea.
                     And when as thou in mayden Albion ſhore
                     The Romaine, Aegle brauely didſt aduance,
                     No hand payd greater tribute vnto death,
                     No heart with more couragious Noble fire
                     And hope, did burne with glorious great intent.
                     And now ſhall paſſion baſe that Noble minde,
                     And weake euents that courrage ouercome?
                     Let Pompey proud, and Pompeys Complices
                     Die on our ſwords, that did enuie our liues,
                     Let pale Tyſiphone be cloyd with bloud:
                     And ſnaky furies quench their longing thirſt,
                     And Caeſar liue to glory in their end.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     They ſay when as the younger Affrican,
                     
                     Beheld the mighty Carthage wofull fall:
                     And ſawe her ſtately Towers to ſmoke from farre,
                     
                        
He wept, and princely teares ran downe his cheekes.
                     Let pity then and true compaſſion,
                     Moue vs to rue no traterous Carthage fall,
                     No barbarous periurd enemies decay,
                     But Rome our natiue Country, haples Rome,
                     
                     Whoſe bowe's to vngently we haue peerc'd,
                     Faire pride of Europe, Miſtreſſe of the world,
                     Cradle of vertues, nurſe of true renowne,
                     Whome Ioue hath plac'd in top of ſeauen hils:
                     That thou the lower worldes ſeauen climes mightſt rule.
                     Thee the proud Parthian and the cole-black Moore,
                     
                     The ſterne Tartarian, borne to manage armes,
                     Doth feare and tremble at thy Maieſty.
                     And yet I bred and foſtered in thy lappe,
                     Durſt ſtriue to ouerthrowe thy Capitol:
                     And thy high Turrets lay as low as hell.
                  
                  
                     Dolo.
                     O Rome, and haue the powers of Heauen decreed,
                     When as thy fame did reach vnto the Skie,
                     And the wide Ocean was thy Empires boundes,
                     And thou enricht with ſpoyles of all the world,
                     Was waxen proud with peace and ſoueraine raigne:
                     That Ciuill warres ſhould looſe what Forraine won,
                     And peace his ioyes, be turn'd to luckles broyles.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     O Pompey, curſed cauſe of ciuill warre,
                     Which of thoſe hel-borne ſterne Eumenides:
                     
                     Inflam'd thy minde with ſuch ambitious fire,
                     As nought could quench it but thy Countries bloud.
                  
                  
                     Dolo.
                     But this no while thy valour doth deſtayne,
                     Which found'ſt vnſought for cauſe of ciuill broyles,
                     And fatall fuell which this fire enflamd.
                  
                  
                     Anto.
                     Let then his death ſet period to this ſtrife,
                     Which was begun by his ambitious life.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     The flying Pompey to Lariſſa haſtes,
                     And by Theſſalian Temple ſhapes his courſe:
                     Where faire Peneus tumbles vp his waues,
                     Him weele purſue as faſt as he vs flies,
                     Nor he though garded with Numidian horſe,
                     Nor ayded with the vnreſiſted powre:
                     
                        
The Meroe, or ſeauen mouth'd Nile can yeeld:
                     No not all Affrick arm'd in his defence
                     Shall ſerue to ſhrowd him from my fatall ſworde.
                  
                  Exit.
               
               
                  ACT. 1. SC. 4.
                  Enter Cato.
                  
                     Ca.
                     O where is baniſh'd liberty exil'd,
                     To Affrick deſerts or to Scythia rockes,
                     Or whereas ſiluer ſtreaming Tanais is?
                     Happy is India and Arabia bleſt,
                     And all the bordering regions vpon Nile
                     
                     That neuer knew the name of Liberty,
                     But we that boaſt of Brutes and Colatins,
                     
                     And glory we expeld proud Tarquins name,
                     Do greeue to looſe, that we ſo long haue held.
                     Why reckon we our yeares by Conſuls names:
                     And ſo long ruld in freedon, now to ſerue?
                     They lie that ſay in Heauen there is a powre
                     That for to wracke the ſinnes of guilty men,
                     Holds in his hand a fierce three-forked dart.
                     Why would he throw them downe on Oéta mount▪
                     
                     Or wound the vnder ringing Rhodope,
                     
                     And not rayne ſhowers of his dead-doing dartes,
                     Furor in ſlame, and Sulphures ſmothering heate
                     Vpon the wicked and accurſ'd armes
                     That cruell Romains 'gainſt their Country beare.
                     
                        Rome ware thy fall: thoſe prodigies foretould,
                     When angry heauens did powre downe ſhowers of blood
                     And fatall Comets in the heauens did blaſe,
                     And all the Statues in the Temple blaſt,
                     Did weepe the loſſe of Romaine liberty.
                     Then if the Gods haue deſtined thine end,
                     Yet as a Mother hauing loſt her Sonne,
                     
                        Cato ſhall waite vpon thy tragick hearſe,
                     And neuer leaue thy cold and bloodles corſe.
                     Ile tune a ſad and dol-full funerall ſong,
                     
                        
Still crying on loſt liberties ſweete name,
                     Thy ſacred aſhes will I waſh with teares,
                     And thus lament my Countries obſequies.
                  
               
               
                  ACT. 1. SC. 5.
                  Enter Pompey and Cornelia.
                  
                     Cor.
                     O cruel Pompey whether wilt thou flye,
                     And leaue thy poore Cornelia thus forlorne,
                     Is't our bad fortune or thy cruell will
                     That ſtill it ſeuers in extremity.
                     O let me go with thee, and die with thee,
                     Nothing ſhall thy Cornelia 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         thinke▪
                     
                     That ſhee endures for her ſweete Pompeys ſake.
                  
                  
                     Pom.
                     Tis for thy weale and ſafty of thy life,
                     Whoſe ſafty I preferre before the world,
                     Becauſe I loue thee more then all the world,
                     That thou (ſweete loue) ſhould'ſt heere remaine behinde
                     Till proofe aſſureth Ptolomyes doubted faith.
                  
                  
                     Cor.
                     O deereſt, what ſhall I my ſafty call,
                     That which is thruſt in dangers harmefull mouth?
                     Lookes not the thing ſo bad with ſuch a name,
                     Call it my death, my baſe, my wo my hell,
                     That which indangers my ſweete Pompeys life.
                  
                  
                     Pom.
                     It is no danger (gentle loue) at all,
                     Tis but thy feare that doth it ſo miſcall.
                  
                  
                     Cor.
                     Ift bee no danger let me go with thee,
                     And of thy ſafty a partaker bee,
                     Alas why would'ſt thou leaue mee thus alone:
                     Thinkſt thou I cannot follow thee by Land
                     That thus haue followed thee ouer raging Seas,
                     Or do I varie in inconſtant hopes:
                     O but thinke you my pleaſure 
                           •
                        uckles is
                     And I haue made the
                           •
                         more vnfortunate.
                     Tis I, tis I, haue cauſ'd this ouerthrow,
                     Tis my accurſed ſtarres that boade this ill,
                     And thoſe miſ-fortunes to my princely loue,
                     
                        
Reuenge thee Pompey, on this wicked brat,
                     And end my woes by ending of my life,
                  
                  
                     Pom.
                     What meanes my loue to aggrauate my griefe,
                     And torture my enough tormented Soule,
                     With greater greuance then Pharſalian loſſe?
                     Thy rented hayre doth rent my heart in twayne.
                     And theſe fayr Seas, that raine downe ſhowers of tears,
                     Do melt my ſoule in liqued ſtreames of ſorrow.
                     If that in Aegipt any daunger bee,
                     Then let my death procure thy ſweet liues ſafety,
                  
                  
                     Cor.
                     Can I bee ſafe and Pompey in diſtreſſe,
                     Or may Cornelia ſuruiue they death,
                     What daunger euer happens to my Soule▪
                     
                     What daunger 
                           •
                        ke ſhall happen to my life,
                     Nor Libians quick-ſands, nor the barking gulfe,
                     Or gaping Scylla ſhall this Vnion part,
                     But ſtill Ile chayne thee in my twining armes,
                     And if I cannot liue Ile die with thee.
                  
                  
                     Pom.
                     O how thy loue doth eaſe my greeued minde,
                     Which beares a but then heauier then the Heauens,
                     Vnder the which ſteele-ſhouldred Atlas grones.
                     But now thy loue doth hurt thy ſelfe and me,
                     And thy to ardent ſtrong affection,
                     Hinders my ſetled reſolution.
                     Then by this loue, and by theſe chriſtall eyes,
                     More bright then are the Lamps of Ioues high houſe,
                     Let me in this (I feare) my laſt requeſt.
                     Not to indanger thy beloued 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                     But in this ſhip remayne, and here awaite,
                     How Fortune dealeth with our doubtfull State,
                  
                  
                     Cor.
                     Not ſo perſwaded as coniurd ſweete loue,
                     By thy commanding meeke petition.
                     I cannot ſay I yeeld, yet am conſtraind,
                     This neuer meeting parting to permit,
                     Then go deere loue, yet ſtay a little while,
                     Some what I am ſhure, tis more I haue to ſay,
                     Nay nothing now but Heauens guide thy ſteps.
                     Yet let me ſpeake, why ſhould we part ſo ſoone,
                     
                        
Why is my talke tedious? may be 
                           〈◊〉
                         the laſt.
                     Do women leaue: their husbands in ſuch haſt,
                  
                  
                     Pom.
                     More faithfull, then that 
                           ••
                        yre deflowred dame,
                     That ſacrifizde her ſelfe to Chaſtety,
                     And far more louing then the Charian Queene,
                     That dranke her Husbands neuer ſundred heart.
                     If that I dye, get will it glad my ſoule,
                     Which then ſhall feede on thoſe Eliſian ioyes,
                     That in the ſacred Temple of thy breaſt.
                     My liuing memory ſhall ſhrined bee.
                     But if that enuious fates ſhould call thee hence,
                     And Death with pale and meager looke vſurpe,
                     Vpon thoſe reſiate lips, and Currall cheekes,
                     Then Ayre be turnde, to poyſon to infect me,
                     Earth gape and ſwallow him that Heauens hate,
                     Conſume me Fire with thy deuouring flames▪
                     
                     Or Water drowne, who elſe would melt in teares.
                     But liue, liue happy ſtill in ſafety liue,
                     Who ſafety onely to my life can giue.
                  
                  Exit.
                  
                     Cor.
                     O he is gon, go hie thee after him,
                     My vow forbids, yet ſtill my care is with thee,
                     My cryes ſhall wake the ſiluer Moone by night,
                     And with my teares I will ſalute the Mo
                           •
                        ne.
                     No day ſhall paſſe with out my dayly plaints,
                     No houre without my prayers for thy returne.
                     My minde miſgiues mee Pompey is betrayd.
                     O Aegypt do not rob me of my loue.
                     Why beareth Ptolomy ſo ſterne a looke?
                     O do not ſtaine thy childiſh yeares with blood:
                     Whil'ſt Pompey floriſhed in his Fortunes pride,
                     
                        Aegypt and Ptolomy were faine to ſerue
                     And ſhue for grace to my diſtr
                           •
                        ſſed Lord:
                     But little bootes it, to record he was,
                     To be is onely that which Men reſpect,
                     Go poore Cornelia wander by the ſhore
                     And ſee the waters raging Billowes ſwell,
                     And beate with fury gainſt the craggy rockes,
                     To that compare thy ſtrong tempeſtuous griefe.
                     
                        
Which fiercely rageth in thy feeble heart,
                     Sorrow ſhuts vp the paſſage of thy breath:
                     And dries the teares that pitty faine would ſhed,
                     This onely therefore this will I ſtill crie,
                     Let Pompey liue although Cornelia die.
                  
                  Exit.
               
               
                  ACTVS. 1. SCENA. 6.
                  Enter Caeſar, Cleopatra, Dolobella, Lord and others
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Thy ſad complaints fayre Lady cannot chuſe▪
                     
                     But mooue a heart though made of Adamant,
                     
                     And draw to yeeld vnto thy powerfull plaint,
                     I will replant thee in the Aegiptian Throne
                     And all thy wrongs ſhall Caeſars vallor right,
                     Ile pull thy crowne from the vſurpers head,
                     And make the Conquered Ptolomey to ſtoope,
                     And feare by force to wrong a mayden Queene.
                  
                  
                     Cleo.
                     Looke as the Earth at her great loues approch.
                     When goulden treſſed fayre Hipperions Sonne
                     With thoſe life-lending beames ſalutes his Spouſe,
                     Doth then caſt of her moorning widdowes weeds,
                     And calleth her handmayde, forth her flowery fayre,
                     To cloth her in the beauty of the ſpring,
                     And of fayre primroſes, and ſweet violets,
                     To make gay Garlonds for to crowne her head.
                     So hath your preſence, welcome and fayre ſight,
                     That glads the world, comforts poore Aegipts Queene,
                     Who begs for ſuccor of that conquering hand,
                     That as Ioues Scepter this our world doth ſway.
                  
                  
                     Dolo.
                     Who would refuſe to ayde ſo fayre a Queene.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Baſe bee the mind, that for ſo ſweet a fayre,
                     Would not aduenture more then Perſeus did,
                     When as he freed the faire Andromeda.
                     
                  
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     O how thoſe louely Tyranizing eyes,
                     The Graces beautious habitation,
                     Where ſweet deſire, dartes woundring ſhafts of loue:
                     Conſume my heart with inward burning heate,
                     Not onely Aegipt but all Africa,
                     
                     
                        
Will I ſubiect to Cleopatras name.
                     Thy rule ſhall ſtretch from vnknowne Zanziber,
                     
                     Vnto thoſe Sandes where high erected poaſtes.
                     Of great Alcides, do vp hold his name,
                     The ſunne burnt Indians, from the caſt ſhall bring:
                     Their pretious ſtore of pure refined gould,
                     The laboring worme ſhall weaue the Africke twiſte,
                     And to exceed the pompe of Perſian Queene,
                     The Sea ſhall pay the tribute of his pearles,
                     For to adorne thy goulden yellow lockes,
                     Which in their curled knots, my thoughts do hold,
                     Thoughtes captiud to thy beauties conquering power.
                  
                  
                     Anto.
                     I marueyle not at that which fables tell,
                     How rauiſht Hellen moued the angry Greeks,
                     
                     To vndertake eleuen yeares tedious ſeege,
                     To re-obtayne a beauty ſo diuine,
                     When I beheld thy ſweete compoſed face.
                     O onely worthy for whoſe matchles ſake,
                     Another ſeege, and new warres ſhould ariſe,
                     
                        Hector be dragde about the Grecian campe,
                     And Troy againe conſumed with Grecian fire.
                  
                  
                     Cleo.
                     Great Prince, what thanks can Cleopatra giue,
                     Nought haue poore Virgins to requite ſuch good:
                     My ſimple ſelfe and ſeruice then vouchſafe,
                     And let the heauens, and he that althings ſees.
                     With equall eyes ſuch merits recompence,
                     I doe not ſeeke ambitiouſly to rule,
                     And in proud Africa to monarchize.
                     I onely craue that what my father gaue,
                     Who in his laſt be-heſt did dying, will,
                     That I ſhould ioyntly with my brother raigne:
                  
                  
                     But.
                     How ſweet thoſe words drop from thoſe hunny lips
                     Which whilſt ſhe ſpeakes they ſtill each other kiſſe.
                  
                  
                     Caeſa,
                     Raigne, I, ſtil raigne in Caeſars conquered thoughts,
                     There build thy pallace, and thy ſun-bright throne:
                     There ſway thy Scepter, and with it beat downe,
                     Thoſe traiterous thoughts (if any dare aryſe:)
                     That will not yeeld to thy perfection,
                     
                        
To chaſe thee flying Pompey haue I cut,
                     The great Ionian, and Egean ſeas:
                     And dredeles paſt the toyling Helleſpont,
                     Famous for amorous Leanders death:
                     And now by gentle Fortunes ſo am bleſt,
                     As to behold what mazed thoughtes admire:
                     Heauens wonder, Natures and Earths Ornament,
                     And gaze vpon theſe firy ſun-bright eyes:
                     The Heauenly ſpheares which Loue and Beauty mooue,
                     Theſe Cheekes where Lillyes and red-roſes ſtriue,
                     For ſoueraignty, yet both do equall raigne:
                     The dangling treſſes of thy curled haire,
                     Nets weaud to cach our frayle and wandring thoughts:
                     Thy beauty ſhining like proud Phaebus face,
                     When Ganges glittereth with his radiant beames
                     He on his goulden trapped Palfreys rides,
                     That from their noſtrels do the morning blow,
                     Through Heauens great path-way pau'd with ſhining (ſtarres)
                     Thou art the fized pole of my Soules ioy,
                     Bout which my reſteles thoughts are ouer turn'd:
                     My Cynthia, whoſe glory neuer waynes,
                     Guyding the Tide of mine affections:
                     That with the change of thy imperious lookes,
                     Doſt make my doubtfull ioyes to eb and ſlowe.
                  
                  
                     Cleo.
                     Might all the deedes thy hands had ere achiu'd,
                     That make thy farre extolled name to ſound:
                     From ſun-burnt Eaſt vnto the VVeſtern Iles,
                     VVhich great Neptunus fouldeth in his armes,
                     It ſhall not be the leaſt to ſeat a Maide,
                     And inthronize her in her natiue right.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     VVhat neede you ſtand diſputing on your right,
                     Or prouing title to the Aegiptian Crowne:
                     Borne to be Queene and Empreſſe of the world.
                  
                  
                     An.
                     On thy perfection let me euer gaze,
                     And eyes now learne to treade a louers maze,
                     Heere may you ſurfet with delicious ſtore,
                     The more you ſee, deſire to looke the more:
                     Vpon her face a garden of delite,
                     
                        
Exceeding far Adonis fayned Bowre,
                     Heere ſtaind white Lyllies ſpread their branches faire,
                     Heere lips ſend forth ſweete Gilly-flowers ſmell.
                     And Damaſck-roſe in her faire cheekes do bud,
                     VVhile beds of Violets ſtill come betweene
                     VVith freſh varyety to pleaſe the eye,
                     Nor neede theſe flowers the heate of Phaebus beames,
                     They cheriſht are by vertue of her eyes.
                     O that I might but enter in this bowre,
                     Or once attaine the cropping of the flower.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Now wend we Lords to Alexandria,
                     
                     Famous for thoſe wide wondred Piramids.
                     
                     Whoſe towring tops do ſeeme to threat the ſkie,
                     And make it proud by preſence of my loue:
                     Then Paphian Temples and Cytherian hils,
                     And ſacred Gnidas bonnet vaile to it,
                     A fayrer ſain
                           •
                         then 
                           Ʋerus there ſhall dwell.
                  
                  
                     Antho.
                     Led with the lode-ſtarre of her lookes, I go
                     As crazed Ba
                           •
                        k is toſl'd in trobled Seas,
                     Vncertaine to ariue in wiſhed port.
                  
                  ACT. 1. FINIS.
               
            
            
               Enter Diſcord.
               Flaſhes of fire.
               
                  Antho.
                  Now Caeſar hath thy flattering Fortune heapt
                  Thoſe golden gifts and promiſ'd victories,
                  By fatall ſignes at Rubicon foretould:
                  Then triumph in thy glorious greateſt pride,
                  And boaſt thou caſt the lucky Die ſo well,
                  Now let the Triton that did ſound alarme,
                  In his ſhrill trump reſound the victory,
                  That Heauen and Earth may Ecco of thy fame:
                  Yet thinke in this thy Fortunes Iollity.
                  Though Caeſar be as great as great may be,
                  Yet Pompey once was euen as great as he,
                  And how he rode clad in Setorius ſpoyles:
                  And the Sicilian Pirats ouerthrowe.
               
               
                  
                  Ruling like Nepoune in the mid-land Seas,
                  Who baſely now by Land and Sea doth flie,
                  The heauenly Rectors proſecuting wrath,
                  Yet Sea nor Land can ſhroud him from this iar,
                  O how it ioyes my diſcord thirſting thoughts,
                  To ſee them waight, that whilom flow'd in bliſſe.
                  To ſee like Banners, vnlike quarrels haue.
                  And Roman weapons ſhethd in Roman blood,
                  For this I left the deepe Infernall ſhades
                  And paſt the ſad Auernus vgly iawes,
                  And in the world came I, being Diſcord hight,
                  Diſcord the daughter of the greeſly night.
                  To make the world a hell of plauges and woes,
                  Twas I that did the fatal Aple fling,
                  Betwixt the three Idean goddeſſes,
                  That ſo much blood of Greekes and Troians ſpilt,
                  Twas I that cauſed the deadly Thebans warre.
                  And made the brothers ſwell with endleſſe hate.
                  And now O Rome, woe, woe, to thee I cry
                  Which to the world do bring al miſery.
               
               
                  ACTVS 2. SCENA 4.
                  Enter Achillas, and Sempronius.
                  
                     Ach.
                     Here are we placed, by Ptolomies command,
                     To murther Pompey when he comes on ſhore,
                     Then braue Sempronius prepare they ſelfe.
                     To execute the charge thou haſt in hand,
                  
                  
                     Sem.
                     I am a Romaine, and haue often ſerued,
                     Vnder his collours, when in former ſtate▪
                     
                     
                        Pompey hath bin the Generall of the field,
                     But cauſe I ſee that now the world is changd:
                     And like wiſe feele ſome of King Ptolomies gould.
                     Ile kill him were he twenty Generalls,
                     And ſend him packing to his longeſt home
                     I maruell of what mettell was the French man made▪
                     
                     Who when he ſhould haue ſtabbed Marius,
                     
                     
                        
They ſay he was aſtoniſhed with his lookes.
                     
                        Marius, had I beene there, thou neere hadſt liu'd,
                     To brag thee of thy ſeauen Conſulſhips.
                  
                  
                     Achil.
                     Brauely reſolu'd, Noble Sempronius,
                     
                     The damnedſt villaine that ere I heard ſpeake:
                     But great men ſtill muſt haue ſuch inſtruments,
                     To bring about their purpoſe, which once donne,
                     The deede they loue, but do the doer hate:
                     Thou ſhalt no leſſe (ſtout Romaine) be renown'd,
                     For being Pompeys Deathſ-man, then was he,
                     That fir'd the faire Aegiptian Goddeſſe Church.
                  
                  
                     Sem.
                     Nay that's al one, report ſay what ſhe liſt,
                     Tis for no ſhadowes I aduenture for:
                     Heere are the Crownes, heere are the wordly goods,
                     This betweene Princes doth contention bring:
                     Brothers this ſets at ods, turnes loue to hate;
                     It makes the Sonne to wiſh his Father hang'd
                     That he thereby might reuell with his bagges:
                     And did I knowe that in my Mothers womb,
                     There lurk'd a hidden vaine of Sacred gould,
                     This hand this ſword, ſhould rape and rip it out.
                  
                  
                     Achil.
                     Compaſſion would that greedineſſe reſtraine.
                  
                  
                     Sem.
                     I that's my fault, I am to compaſſionate,
                     Why man, art thou a ſouldier and doſt talke
                     Of womaniſh pity and compaſſion?
                     Mens eyes muſt mil-ſtones drop, when fooles ſhed teares,
                     But ſoft heeres Pompey, Ile about my worke
                  
                  Enter Pompey.
                  
                     Pom.
                     Truſting vpon King Ptolomeys promiſ'd fay
                           •
                        n,
                     And hoping ſuccor, I am come to ſhore:
                     In Egipt heere a while to make aboade.
                  
                  
                     Sem.
                     Fayth longer Pompey then thou doſt expect.
                  
                  
                     Pom.
                     See now worlds Monarchs, whom your ſtate makes (proud)
                     That thinke your Honors to be permanent,
                     Of Fortunes change ſee heere a preſident,
                     Who whilom did command, now muſt intreate
                     And ſue for that which to accept of late,
                     Vnto the giuer was thought fortunate.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sem.
                     I pray thee Pompey do not ſpend thy breath,
                     In reckning vp theſe ruſty titles now,
                     Which thy ambition grac'd thee with before,
                     I muſt confeſſe thou wert my Generall,
                     But that cannot a vaile to ſaue thy life.
                     Talke of thy Fortune while thou liſt,
                     There is thy fortune Pompey in my fiſt.
                  
                  
                     Pom.
                     O you that know what hight of honor meanes,
                     What tis for men that lulled in fortunes lap,
                     Haue climd the heigheſt top of ſoueraignety.
                     From all that pomp to be caſt hed-long downe,
                     You may conceaue what Pompey doth ſuſtayne,
                     I was not wont to walke thus all alone,
                     But to be met with troopes of Horſe and Men.
                     With playes and pageants to be entertaynd,
                     A courtly trayne in royall rich aray,
                     With ſpangled plumes, that daunced in the ayre,
                     Mounted on ſteeds, with braue Capariſons deckt,
                     That in their gates did ſeeme to ſcorne the Earth.
                     Was wont my intertaynment beautiefie,
                     But now thy comming is in meaner ſort,
                     They by thy fortune will thy welcom rate.
                  
                  
                     Sem.
                     What doſt thou for ſuch entertaynement looke,
                     
                        Pompey how ere thy comming hether bee,
                     I haue prouided for thy going hence.
                  
                  
                     Achi.
                     I will draw neere, and with fayre pleaſing ſhew,
                     Wellcome great Pompey as the Siren doth
                     The wandering ſhipman with her charming ſong.
                  
                  
                     Pom.
                     O how it greeues a noble hauty mind,
                     Framed vp in honors vncontrouled ſchoole,
                     To ſerue and ſue, whoe erſt did rule and ſway▪
                     
                     What ſhall I goe and ſtoope to Ptolomey,
                     
                     Nought to a noble mind more greefe can bring
                     Then be a begger where thou wert a King,
                  
                  
                     Ach.
                     Wellcome a ſhore moſt great and gratious prince
                     Welcome to Aegipt and to Ptolomey.
                     
                     The King my Maiſter is at hand my Lord,
                     To gratulate your ſafe ariuall heere.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sem.
                     This is the King, and here is the Gentleman,
                     Which muſt thy comming gratulate a non,
                  
                  
                     Pom.
                     Thanks worthy Lord vnto your King and you,
                     It ioyes me much that in extremity,
                     I found ſo ſure a friend as Ptolomey,
                     
                  
                  
                     Sem.
                     Now is the date of thy proud life expird,
                     To which my poniard muſt a full poynt put,
                     
                        Pompey from Ptolomey I come to thee,
                     From whome a preſant and a guift I bring,
                     This is the gift and this my meſſage is
                  
                  Stab him
                  
                     Pom.
                     O Villaine thou haſt ſlayne thy Generall,
                     And with thy baſe hand gor'd my royall heart.
                     Well I haue liued till to that height I came,
                     That all the world did tremble at my name,
                     My greatneſſe then by fortune being enuied,
                     Stabd by a murtherous villaynes hand I died.
                  
                  
                     Ach.
                     What is he dead, then ſtraight cut of his head,
                     That whilom mounted with ambitions wings:
                     
                        Caeſar no doubt with praiſe and noble thanks,
                     Regarding well this well deſerued deede,
                     Whome weele preſent with this moſt pleaſing gift,
                  
                  
                     Sem.
                     Loe you my maiſters, hee that kills but one,
                     Is ſtraight a Villaine and a murtherer cald,
                     But they that vſe to kill men by the great,
                     And thouſandes ſlay through their ambition,
                     They are braue champions, and ſtout warriors cald,
                     Tis like that he that ſteales a rotten ſheepe
                     That in a dich would elſe haue caſt his hide,
                     He for his labour hath the haltars hier.
                     But Kings and mighty Princes of the world,
                     By letter pattens rob both Sea and Land.
                     Do not then Pompey of thy murther plaine,
                     Since thy ambition halfe the world hath ſlayne.
                  
               
               
                  ACTVS 2. SCENA. 2.
                  Enter Cornelia.
                  
                     Corne.
                     O traterous villaines, hold your murthering hands,
                     
                        
Or if that needes they muſt be waſht in blood,
                     Imbrue them heere, heere in Cornelias breſt.
                     Ay mee as I ſtood looking from the Ship
                     (Accurſed ſhippe that did not ſinke and drowne:
                     And ſo haue ſau'd me from ſo loath'd a ſight)
                     Thee to behold what did betide my Lord,
                     My Pompey deere (nor Pompey now nor Lord)
                     I ſawe thoſe villaines that but now were heere:
                     Bucher my loue and then with violence,
                     To drawe his deare beloued Body hence;
                     What doſt thou ſtand to play the Oratrix,
                     And tell a tale of thy deere huſbands death?
                     Doth Pompey, doth thy loue moue thee no more?
                     Go curſed Cornelia rent thy wretched haire,
                     Drowne blobred cheekes in ſeas of ſalteſt teares.
                     And if, it be true that ſorrowes feeling powre,
                     Could turne poore Niobe into a weeping ſtone
                     O let mee weepe a like, and like ſtone be,
                     And you poore lights, that ſawe this tragick ſight,
                     Be blind and punniſh'd with eternall night,
                     Vnhappy long to ſpeake, bee neare ſo bould
                     Since that thou this ſo heauy tale haſt tould.
                     Theſe are but womaniſh exclamations
                     Light ſorrowe makes ſuch lamentations,
                     
                        Pompey no words my true griefe can declare,
                     This for thy loue ſhalbe my beſt welfare.
                  
                  Stab her ſelfe.
               
               
                  ACT. 2. SCE. 3.
                  Enter Caeſar, Cleopatra, Anthony,
Dolobella, a Lord,
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     There ſterne Achillas and Fortunius lie,
                     Traytorous Sempronius and proud Ptolomey,
                     
                     Go plead your cauſe fore the angry Rhadamant,
                     
                     And tel him why you baſely Pompey ſlew.
                     And let your guilty blood appeaſe his Ghoſt,
                     That now ſits wandring by the Stygian bankes.
                     
                        
Vnworthy ſacrifice to quite his worth,
                     For Pompey though thou wert mine enemy,
                     And vayne ambition mou'd vs to this ſtrife;
                     Yet now in death when ſtrife and enuy ceaſe.
                     Thy princely vertues and thy noble minde,
                     Moue me to rue thy vndeſerued death,
                     That found a greater daunger then it fled;
                     Vnhapy man to ſcape ſo many wars,
                     And to protract thy glorious day ſo long,
                     Here for to periſh in a barbarous ſoyle,
                     And end liues date ſtabd by a Baſtards hand,
                     But yet with honour ſhalt thou be Intomb'd,
                     I will enbalme thy body with my teares,
                     And put thy aſhes in an Vrne of gold,
                     And build with marble a deſerued graue.
                     Whoſe worth indeede a Temple ought to haue.
                  
                  
                     Dolo.
                     See how compaſſion drawes foorth Princely teares
                     And Vertue weepes her enemies funerall,
                     So ſorrowed the mighty Alexander,
                     
                     When Beſſus hand cauſ'd Darius to die.
                  
                  
                     Ant.
                     Theſe greeued ſorrowing Princes do with me.
                     Ioyntly agree in Contrariety,
                     Alacke we mourne, greeued is our mind alike,
                     Our gate is diſcontented, heauy our lookes,
                     Our ſorrowes all a like, but diſlike cauſe.
                     Their foe is their grifes cauſer which my friend,
                     It is the loſſe of one that makes them wayle,
                     But I, that one there is a cruell one,
                     Do wayle and greeue and vnregarded mone.
                     Fayre beames caſt forth from theſe diſmayfull eyes,
                     Chaine my poore heart, in loue and ſorrowes giues,
                  
                  
                     Cleo.
                     Forget ſweete Prince theſe ſad perlexed thoughts,
                     Withdraw thy mind in clowdy diſcontent,
                     And with Aegiptian pleaſures feed thine eyes,
                     Wilt thou be hould the Sepulchers of Kings,
                     And Monuments that ſpeake the workemens prayſe?
                     Ile bring thee to Great Alexanders Tombe,
                     Where he, whome all the world could not ſuffice,
                     
                        
In bare ſix foote of Earth, intombed lies,
                     And ſhew thee all the coſt and curious art,
                     Which either Cleops or our Memphis boaſt:
                     Would you command a banquit in the Court,
                     Ile bring you to a Royall goulden bowre,
                     Fayrer then that wherein great Ioue doth ſit,
                     And heaues vp boles of Nectar to his Queene,
                     A ſtately Pallace, whoſe fayre doble gates:
                     Are wrought with garniſh'd Carued Iuory,
                     And ſtately pillars of pure bullion framd.
                     With Orient Pearles and Indian ſtones imboſt,
                     With golden Roofes that gliſter like the Sunne,
                     Shalbe prepard to entertaine my Loue:
                     Or wilt thou ſee our Academick Schooles,
                     Or heare our Prieſts to reaſon of the ſtarres,
                     Hence Plato fecht his deepe Philoſophy:
                     And heere in Heauenly knowledg they excell.
                  
                  
                     Antho.
                     More then moſt faire, another Heauen to me,
                     The ſtarres where on Ile gaze ſhalbe thy face,
                     Thy morall deedes my ſweete Philoſophy,
                     
                        
                           Ʋenus the muſe whoſe ayde I muſt implore:
                     O let me profit in this ſtudy beſt,
                     For Beauties ſcholler I am now prefeſt.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     See how this faire Egiptian Sorceres,
                     Enchantes theſe Noble warriars man-like mindes,
                     And melts their hearts in loue and wantones.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Moſt glorious Queene, whoſe cheerefull ſmiling (words)
                     Expell theſe cloudes that ouer caſt my minde.
                     
                        Caeſar will ioy in Cleopatras ioy,
                     And thinke his fame no whit diſparaged,
                     To change his armes, and deadly ſounding droms,
                     For loues ſweete Laies, and Lydian harmony,
                     And now hang vp theſe Idle inſtruments.
                     My warlike ſpeare and vncontrouled creſt:
                     My mortall wounding ſword and ſiluer ſhield,
                     And vnder thy ſweete banners beare the brunt,
                     Of peacefull warres and amarous Alarmes:
                     Why Mars himſelfe his bloudy rage alayd,
                     
                        
Dallying in Venus bed hath often playd,
                     And great Alcides, when he did returne:
                     From Iunos taſkes, and Nemean victories,
                     From monſters fell, and Nomean toyles:
                     Repoſed himſelfe in Deianiras armes.
                     Heere will I pitch the pillars of my fame,
                     Heere the non vltra of my labors write,
                     And with theſe Cheekes of Roſes, lockes of Gold,
                     End my liues date, and trauayles manifould.
                  
                  
                     Dolo.
                     How many lets do hinder vertuous mindes,
                     From the purſuit of honours due reward,
                     Beſides Caribdis, and fell Scyllas ſpight:
                     More dangerous Circe and Calipſoes cup,
                     Then pleaſant gardens of Alcionus:
                     
                     And thouſand lets voluptiouſneſſe doth offer.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     I will regard no more theſe murtherous ſpoyles,
                     And bloudy triumphs that I lik'd of late:
                     But in loues pleaſures ſpend my wanton dayes,
                     Ile make thee garlondes of ſweete ſmelling flowers,
                     And with faire roſall Chaplets crowne thy head,
                     The purple Hyacinth of Phaebus Land:
                     Freſh Amarinthus that doth neuer die,
                     And faire Narciſſus deere reſpendent ſhoars,
                     And Violets of Daffadilles ſo ſweete,
                     Shall Beautify the Temples of my Loue,
                     Whil'ſt I will ſtill gaze on thy beautious eyes,
                     And with Ambroſean kiſſes bath thy Cheekes.
                  
                  
                     Cleo.
                     Come now faire Prince, and feaſt thee in our Courts
                     Where liberall Caeres, and Liaeus fat,
                     Shall powre their plenty forth and fruitfull ſtore,
                     The ſparkling liquor ſhall ore-flow his bankes:
                     And Meroé learne to bring forth pleaſant wine,
                     Fruitfull Arabia, and the furtheſt Ind,
                     Shall ſpend their treaſuries of Spicery,
                     
                     VVith Nardus Coranets weele guird our heads:
                     And al the while melodious warbling notes,
                     Paſſing the ſeauen-fould harmony of Heauen:
                     Shall ſeeme to rauiſh our enchanted thoughts,
                     
                        
Thus is the feare of vnkinde Ptolomey,
                     
                     Changed by thee to feaſt in Iolity:
                  
                  
                     Antho.
                     O how mine eares ſuck vp her heauenly words,
                     The whil'ſt mine eyes do prey vpon her face:
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Winde we then Anthony with this Royall Queene,
                     This day weele ſpend in mirth and banqueting.
                  
                  
                     Antho.
                     Had I Queene, Iunoes heard-mans hundred eies,
                     To gaze vpon theſe two bright Sunnes of hirs:
                     Yet would they all be blinded inſtantly.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     VVhat hath ſome Melancholy diſcontent,
                     Ore-come thy minde with trobled paſſions.
                  
                  
                     Ant.
                     Yet being blinded with the Sunny beames,
                     Her beauties pleaſing colours would reſtore,
                     Decayed ſight with freſh variety.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Lord Anthony what meanes this trobled minde,
                     
                        Caeſar inuites thee to the royall feaſt,
                     That faire Queene Cleopatra hath prepard.
                  
                  
                     Antho.
                     Pardon me worthy Caeſar and you Lords,
                     In not attending your moſt gratious ſpeech
                     Thoughts of my Country, and returne to Rome,
                     
                     Som-what diſtempered my buſy head.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Let no ſuch thoughts diſtemper now thy minde,
                     This day to Bacchus will wee conſecrate,
                     And in deepe goblets of the pureſt wine,
                     Drinke healths vnto our ſeuerall friends at home.
                  
                  
                     Antho.
                     It of my Country or of Rome I thought,
                     Twas that I neuer ment for to come there,
                     But ſpend my life in this ſweete paradiſe.
                  
                  Exeu
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  ACT. 2. SCE. 4.
                  Enter Cicero, Brutus, Caſca, Camber, Trebonius.
                  
                     Cice.
                     Moſt prudent heads, that with your councels wiſe,
                     The pillars of the mighty Rome ſuſtaine,
                     You ſee how ciuill broyles haue torne our ſtate:
                     And priuate ſtrife hath wrought a publique wo,
                     
                        Theſſalia boaſts that ſhe hath ſeene our fall,
                     
                        
And Rome that whilom wont to Tiranize,
                     And in the necks of all the world hath rang'd,
                     Looſing her rule, to ſerue is now conſtraynd,
                     
                        Pompey the hope and ſtay of Common-weale,
                     VVhoſe vertues promiſ'd Rome ſecurity
                     Now flies diſtreſt, diſconſolate, forlorne,
                     Reproch of Fortune, and the victors ſcorne.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     VVhat now is left for wretched Rome to hope,
                     But in laments and bitter future woe,
                     To wey the downefall of her former pride:
                     Againe Porſenna brings in Tarquins names,
                     And Rome againe doth ſmoke with furious flames.
                     In Pompeys fall wee all are ouerthrowne,
                     And ſubiect made to conqueror Tirany.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     Moſt Noble Cicero and you Romaine Peeres,
                     Pardon the author of vnhappy newes,
                     And then prepare to heare my tragick tale.
                     VVith that ſame looke, that great Atrides ſtood,
                     At cruell alter ſtaind with Daughters blood,
                     VVhen Pompey fled purſuing Caeſars ſword,
                     And thought to ſhun his following deſteny.
                     And then began to thinke on many a friend,
                     And many a one recalled hee to minde
                     Who in his Fortunes pride did leaue their liues,
                     And vowed ſeruice at his princely feete,
                     From out the reſt, the yong Egiptian King,
                     VVhoſe Father of an Exild baniſh'd man
                     Hee ſeated had in throne of Maieſty,
                     Him choſe, to whome he did commit his life,
                     (But O, who doth remember good-turnes paſt)
                     The Riſing Sunne, not Setting, doth men pleaſe,
                     To ill committed was ſo great a truſt,
                     Vnto ſo baſe a Fortune fauoring minde.
                     For he the Conquerors fauor to obtaine,
                     By Treaſon cauſ'd great Pompey to be ſlaine:
                  
                  
                     Caſca.
                     O damned deede.
                  
                  
                     Cam.
                     O Trayterous Ptolomey.
                     
                  
                  
                     Tre.
                     O moſt vnworthy and vngratefull fact.
                  
                  
                     
                     Cum.
                     What plages may ſerue to expiate this act,
                     The rouling ſtone or euerturning wheele,
                     The quenchles flames of firy Phlegeton,
                     
                     Or endles thirſt of which the Poets talke,
                     Are all to gentle for ſo vilde a deede.
                  
                  
                     Caſ.
                     Well did the Cibills vnreſpected verſe.
                     Bid thee beware of Crocadiliſh Nile,
                     
                  
                  
                     Ter.
                     And art thou in a barbarous ſoyle betrayd,
                     Defrawded Pompey of thy funerall rites,
                     There none could weepe vpon thy funerall hearſe,
                     None could thy Conſulſhipes and triumphs tell,
                     And in thy death ſet fourth thy liuing praiſe,
                     None would erect to thee a ſepulcher.
                     Or put thine aſhes in a pretious vrne,
                  
                  
                     Cice.
                     Peace Lords lament not noble Pompeys death,
                     Nor thinke him wreched, cauſe he wants a Tombe,
                     Heauen couers him whome Earth denyes a graue:
                     Thinke you a heape of ſtones could him incloſe,
                     Whoe in the Oceans circuite buried is,
                     And euery place where Roman names are heard,
                     The world is his graue, where liuing fame doth blaze,
                     His funerall praiſe through his immortall trump,
                     And ore his tombe vertue and honor ſits,
                     With rented heare and eyes beſpent with teares,
                     And waile and weepe their deere ſonne Pompeys death,
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     But now my Lords for to augment this griefe,
                     
                        Caeſar the Senates deadly enimie,
                     Aimes eke to vs, and meanes to tryumph heere,
                     Vpon poore conquered Rome and common wealth,
                  
                  
                     Caſ.
                     This was the end at which he alwayes aymd,
                  
                  
                     Tre.
                     Then end all hope of Romaines liberty,
                     Riſe noble Romaine, riſe from rotten Tombes,
                     And with your ſwordes recouer that againe:
                     With your braue prowes won, our baſenes loſt,
                  
                  
                     Gi
                           •
                        .
                     Renowned Lords content your trobled minds,
                     Do not ad Fuell to the conquerors fier.
                     Which once inflamed will borne both Rome and vs.
                     
                        Caeſar although of high aſpiring thoughtes,
                     
                        
And vncontrould ambitious Maieſty,
                     Yet is of nature faire and courteous,
                     You ſee hee commeth conqueror of the Eaſt,
                     Clad in the ſpoyles of the Pharſalian fieldes,
                     Then wee vnable to reſiſt ſuch powre:
                     By gentle peace and meeke ſubmiſſion,
                     Muſt ſeeke to pacify the victors wrath.
                  
                  Exeunt.
               
               
                  ACT. 2. SCE. 5.
                  Enter Cato Senior, and Cato Iunior.
                  
                     Cat. Sen.
                     My Sonne thou ſeeſt howe all are ouerthrowne,
                     That ſought their Countries free-dome to maintaine,
                     
                        Egipt forſakes vs, Pompey found his graue,
                     VVhere hee moſt ſuccor did expect to haue:
                     
                        Scipio is ouerthrowne and with his haples fall,
                     
                        Affrick to vs doth former ayde denay,
                     O who will helpe men in aduerſity:
                     Yet let vs ſhewe in our declining ſtate,
                     That ſtrength of minde, that vertues conſtancy,
                     That erſt we did in our felicity,
                     Though Fortune fayles vs lets not fayle our ſelues,
                     Remember boy thou art a Romaine borne,
                     And Catoes Sonne, of me do vertue learne;
                     Fortune of others, aboue althings ſee
                     Thou prize thy Countries loue and liberty,
                     All bleſſings Fathers to their Sonnes can wiſh
                     Heauens powre on thee, and now my ſonne with-drawe
                     Thy ſelfe a while and leaue me to my booke.
                  
                  
                     Cat. Iun.
                     What meanes my Father by this ſolemne leaue?
                     Firſt he remembred me of my Fortunes change,
                     And then more earneſtly did me exhort
                     To Counrries loue, and conſtancy of minde,
                     Then he was wont: ſom-whats the cauſe,
                     But what I knowe not, O I feare I feare,
                     His to couragious heart that cannot beare
                     The thrall of Rome and triumph of his foe,
                     
                        
By his owne hand threats danger to his life,
                     How ere it be at hand I will abide,
                     VVayting the end of this that ſhal betide.
                  
                  Exit.
                  Cato Senior with a booke in his hand.
                  
                     Cato Sen.
                     
                        Plato that promiſed immortality,
                     Doth make my ſoule reſolue it ſelfe to mount,
                     Vnto the bowre of thoſe Celeſtiall ioyes,
                     VVhere freed from lothed Priſon of my ſoule,
                     In heauenly notes to Phoebus which ſhall ſing:
                     And Pean Io, Pean loudely ring.
                     Then fayle not hand to execute this deede,
                     Nor faint nor heart for to command my hand,
                     VVauer not minde to counſell this reſolue,
                     But with a courage and thy liues laſt act,
                     Now do I giue thee Rome my laſt farewell.
                     Who cauſe thou feareſt ill do therefore die,
                     O talke not now of Cannas ouerthrowe,
                     And raze out of thy laſting Kalenders,
                     Thoſe bloudy ſonges of Hilias diſmall ſight:
                     And note with black, that black and curſed day,
                     When Caeſar conquered in Pharſalia,
                     
                     Yet will not I his conqueſt glorifie:
                     My ouerthrow ſhall neere his triumph grace,
                     For by my death to the world Ile make that knowne,
                     No hand could conquer Cato but his owne.
                  
                  ſtabs himſelf.
                  Enter Cato Iunior running to him.
                  
                     Ca. Iun.
                     O this it was my minde told me before,
                     VVhat meanes my Father, why with naked blade,
                     Doſt thou aſſault, that faithfull princely hand:
                     And mak'ſt the baſe Earth to drinke thy Noble bloud,
                     Bee not more ſterne, and cruell 'gainſt thy ſelfe,
                     Then thy moſt hateful enemies would be,
                     No Parthian, Gaule, Moore, no not Caeſars ſelfe,
                     VVould with ſuch cruelty thy worth repay,
                     O ſtay thy hand, giue me thy fatall blade:
                     VVhich turnes his edge and waxeth blunt to wound▪
                     
                     A breſt ſo fraught with vertue excellent.
                  
                  
                     Ca. Seni.
                     VVhy doſt thou let me of my firme reſolue,
                     
                        
Vnkinde boy hinderer of thy Fathers ioy,
                     Why doſt thou ſlay me, or wilt thou betray
                     Thy Fathers life vnto his foe-mens hands,
                     And yet I wrong thy faith, and loue too much,
                     In thy ſoules kindeneſſe, tis thou art vnkinde.
                  
                  
                     Cat. Iun.
                     If for your ſelfe you do this life reiect,
                     Yet you your Sonnes and Countries: ſake reſpect,
                     Rob not my yong yeares of ſo ſweete a ſtay,
                     Nor take from Rome the Pillor of her ſtrength.
                  
                  
                     Cat. Sene.
                     Although I die, yet do I leaue behinde,
                     My vertues fauor to bee thy youths guide:
                     But for my Country, could my life it profit,
                     Ile not refuſe to liue that died for it,
                     Now doth but one ſmal ſnuffe of breath remaine:
                     And that to keepe, ſhould I mine Honor ſtaine?
                  
                  
                     Cat. Iuni.
                     Where you do ſtriue to ſhew your vertue moſt,
                     There more you do diſgrace it Cowards vſe,
                     To ſhun the woes and trobles of this life:
                     Baſely to flie to deaths ſafe ſanctuary,
                     When conſtant vertues doth the hotteſt brunt's,
                     Of griefes aſſaultes vnto the end endure.
                  
                  
                     Ca. Seni.
                     Thy words preuaile, come lift me vp my Son,
                     And call ſome help to binde my bleeding wounds.
                  
                  
                     Cat. Iuni.
                     Father I go with a more willing minde,
                     Then did Aeneas when from Troyan fire,
                     He bare his Father, and did ſo reſtore:
                     The greateſt gift hee had receiued before.
                  
                  Exit.
                  
                     Cat. Seni.
                     Now haue I freed mee of that hurtfull Loue,
                     Which interrupted my reſolued will,
                     Which all the world can neuer ſtay nor change:
                     
                        Caeſar whoſe rule commands both Sea and Land,
                     Is not of powre to hinder this weake hand,
                     And time ſucceeding ſhall behold that I
                     Although not liue, yet died courragiouſly,
                  
                  ſtab himſelfe.
                  Enter Cato Iunior.
                  
                     Ca. Iuni.
                     O haſt thou thus to thine owne harme deceiu'd me
                     Well I perceiue thy Noble dauntles heart:
                     Becauſe it would not beare the Conquerors inſolence,
                     
                        
Vſed on it ſelfe this cruell violence,
                     I know not whether I ſhould more lament,
                     That by thine owne hand thou thus ſlaughtred art,
                     Or Ioy that thou ſo nobly didſt depart.
                  
                  Exit.
                  FINIS. ACTVS. 2.
               
            
            
               Enter Diſcord.
               
                  Diſ.
                  Now Caeſar rides triumphantly through Rome,
                  
                  And deckes the Capitoll with Pompeys ſpoyle:
                  Ambition now doth vertues ſeat vſurp,
                  Then thou Reuengfull great Adaſtria Queene.
                  Awake with horror of thy dubbing Drumm,
                  And call the ſnaky furies from below,
                  To daſh the Ioy of their triumphing pride,
                  
                     Erinnis kindle now thy Stigian brands,
                  In diſcontented Brutus boyling breſt,
                  Let Caeſar die a bleeding ſacrifice,
                  Vnto the Soule of thy dead Country Rome.
                  
                  Why ſleepeſt thou Caſſius? wake thee from thy dreame▪
                  
                  And yet thou naught doſt dreame but blood and death.
                  For dreadfull viſions do afright thy ſleepe.
                  And howling Ghoſts with gaſtly horrors cry,
                  By Caſſius hand muſt wicked Caeſar die,
                  Now Rome caſt of thy gaudy painted robes
                  And cloth thy ſelfe in ſable colored weedes,
                  Change thy vaine triumphs into funerall pomps,
                  And Caeſar caſt thy Laurell crowne apart,
                  And bind thy temples with ſad Cypres tree.
                  Of warrs thus peace inſues, of peace more harmes,
                  Then erſt was wrought by tragick wars alarmes,
               
               Exit.
               
                  ACT. 3. SCE. 1.
                  Enter Caſſius.
                  
                     Caſ.
                     Harke how Caeſarians with reſounding ſhoutes,
                     Tell heauens of their pompes and victories,
                     
                        
                        Caeſar that long in pleaſures idle lap,
                     And daliance vayne of his Proud Curtezan,
                     Had Iuld his ſterne and bloody thoughts a ſleepe,
                     Now in Rome ſtreets ore Romaines come to triumph,
                     And to the Romains ſhews thoſe Tropheyes ſad,
                     Which from the Romaines he with blood did get:
                     The Tyrant mounted in his goulden chayre,
                     Rides drawne with milke white palferies in like pride,
                     As Phaebus from his Orientall gate,
                     Mounted vpon the firy Phlegetons backes.
                     Comes prauncing forth, ſhaking his dewie locks:
                     
                        Caeſar thou art in gloryes cheefeſt pride,
                     Thy ſonne is mounted in the higheſt poynt:
                     Thou placed art in top of fortunes wheele,
                     Her wheele muſt turne, thy glory muſt eclipſe,
                     Thy Sunne deſcend and looſe his radiant light,
                     And if none be, whoſe countryes ardent loue,
                     And loſſe of Roman liberty can moue,
                     Ile be the man that ſhall this taske performe.
                     
                        Caſſius hath vowed it to dead Pompeys ſoule,
                     
                        Caſſius hath vowed it to afflicted Rome,
                     
                     
                        Caſſius hath vowed it, witnes Heauen and Earth,
                  
                  Exit▪
                  
               
               
                  ACTVS 3. SCENA 2.
                  Enter Caeſar, Antony, Dolobella, Lords, two Romaines, & others
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     Now haue I ſhaked of theſe womaniſh linkes,
                     In which my captiud thoughts were chayned a fore,
                     By that fayre charming Circes wounding look,
                     And now like that ſame ten yeares trauayler,
                     Leauing be-hind me all my trobles paſt.
                     I come awayted with attending fame,
                     Who through her ſhrill triump doth my name reſound,
                     And makes proud Tiber and Lygurian Poe,
                     
                     (Yet a ſad witner of the Sunne-Gods loſſe,)
                     Beare my names glory to the Ocean mayne,
                     Which to the worlds end ſhall it bound it again
                           •
                        ,
                     
                        
As from Phaegiean fields the King of Gods,
                     With conquering ſpoyles and Tropheus proud returnd,
                     When great Typheus fell by thundering darts,
                     And rod away with their Caeleſtiall troops,
                     In greateſt pride through Heauens ſmooth paued way,
                     So ſhall the Pompeous glory of my traine,
                     D
                           •
                        ring to match ould Saturns kingly Sonne,
                     Call downe theſe goulden lampes from the bright skie,
                     And leaue Heauen blind, my greatnes to admire.
                     This laurell garland in fayre conqueſt made,
                     Shall ſtayne the pride of Ariadnes crowne,
                     Clad in the beauty of my glorious lampes,
                     
                        Caſſiopea leaue thy ſtarry chayre,
                     And on my Sun-bright Chariot wheels attend,
                     Which in triumphing pompe doth Caeſar beare.
                     To Earths aſtoniſhment, and amaze of Heauen▪
                     
                     Now looke proude Rome from thy ſeuen-fould ſeate,
                     And ſee the world thy ſubiect, at thy feete,
                     And Caeſar ruling ouer all the world.
                  
                  
                     Dolo.
                     Now let vs ceaſe to boaſt of Romulus,
                     
                     Firſt author of high Rome and Romaines name.
                     Nor talke of Scaurus, worthy Africans,
                     
                     The ſcurge of Libia, and of Carthage pride,
                     Nor of vnconquered Paulus dauntles minde,
                     Since Caeſars glory them exceedes as farre
                     As ſhining Phebe doth the dimmeſt ſtarre.
                  
                  
                     Ant.
                     Like as the Ship-man that hath loſt the ſtarre.
                     By which his doubtfull ſhip he did direct,
                     Wanders in darkenes, and in Cloudy night,
                     So hauing loſt my ſtarr, my Gouerneſſe.
                     Which did direct me, with her Sonne-bright ray,
                     In greefe I wander and in ſad diſmay:
                     And though of triumphes and of victoryes,
                     I do the out-ward ſignes and Trophies beare,
                     Yet ſee mine inward mind vnder that face,
                     Whoſe collours to theſe Triumphes is diſgrace.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     As when from vanquiſhed Macedonia,
                     
                     Triumphing ore King Perſius ouerthrow,
                     
                        
Conquering Aemelius, in great glory came.
                     Shewing the worlds ſpoyles which he had bereft,
                     From the ſucceſſors of great Alexander,
                     
                     With ſuch high pomp, yea greater victories,
                     
                        Caeſar triumphing coms into fayre Rome,
                     
                  
                  
                     1. Rom.
                     In this one Champion all is comprehended,
                     Which ancient times in ſeuerall men commended,
                     
                        Alcides ſtrength, Achilles dauntles heart,
                     Great Phillips Sonne by magnanimity.
                     Sterne Pyrhus vallour, and great Hectors might,
                     And all the prowes, that ether Greece or Troy,
                     
                     Brought forth in that ſame ten years Troians warre.
                  
                  
                     2. Rom.
                     Faire Rome great monument of Romulus.
                     
                     Thou mighty ſeate of conſuls and of Kings:
                     Ouer-victorious now Earths Conquerer,
                     Welcome thy valiant ſonne that to thee brings,
                     Spoyles of the world, and exquies of Kings.
                  
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     The conquering Iſſue of immortall Ioue.
                     
                     Which in the Perſian ſpoyles firſt fetch his fame.
                     Then through Hydaſſpis, and the Caſpian waues,
                     Vnto the ſea vnknowne his praiſe did propagate,
                     Muſt to my glory vayle his conquering creſt:
                     The Lybick Sands, and Africk Sirts hee paſt.
                     
                        Bactrians and Zogdians, knowne but by their names,
                     Whereby his armes reſiſtles, powers ſubdued,
                     And Ganges ſtreames congeald with Indian blood,
                     Could not tranſeport his burthen to the ſea.
                     But theſe nere lerned at Mars his games to play,
                     Nor toſt theſe bloody bals, of dread and death:
                     
                        Arar and proud Saramna ſpeaks my praiſe,
                     
                        Rohdans ſhrill Tritons through their braſen trumpes,
                     Ecco my fame againſt the Gallian Towers,
                     And Iſis wept to ſee her daughter Thames.
                     
                     Chainge her cleere criſtall, to vermilian ſad,
                     The big bond German, and Heluetian ſtout,
                     Which well haue learned to toſſe a tusked ſpeare,
                     And well can curbe a noble ſtomackt horſe,
                     Can Caeſars vallour witnes to their greefe
                     
                        
                        Iuba the mighty Affrick Potentate,
                     That with his cole-black Negroes to the field,
                     Backt with Numidian and Getulian horſe,
                     Hath felt the puiſſance of a Roman ſword.
                     I entred Aſia with my banners ſpred,
                     Diſplayed the Aegle on the Euxin ſea:
                     By Iaſon firſt, and ventrous Argo cut,
                     And in the rough Cimerian Boſphorus▪
                        
                     
                     A heauy witneſſe of Pharnaces flight,
                     And now am come to triumph heere in Rome,
                     
                     VVith greater glory then ere Romaine did.
                  
                  Exeunt.
                  Sound drums and Trumpets amaine.
                  Enter Anthony.
                  
                     Antho.
                     Alas theſe triumphes mooue not me at all,
                     But only do renew remembrance ſad,
                     Of her triumphing and imperious lookes,
                     VVhich is the Saint and Idoll of my thoughtes:
                     Firſt was I wounded by her percing eye:
                     Next priſoner tane by her captiuing ſpeech,
                     And now ſhee triumphes ore my conquered heart,
                     In Cupids Chariot ryding in her pride,
                     And leades me captiue bounde in Beauties bondes:
                     
                        Caeſars lip-loue, that neuer touch'd his heart,
                     By preſent triumph and the abſent fire,
                     Is now waxt could; but mine that was more deep
                           •
                        ,
                     Ingrauen in the marble of my breſt,
                     Nor time nor Fortune ere can raze it out.
                  
                  Enter Anthonies bonus genius.
                  
                     Gen.
                     
                        Anthony, baſe femall Anthony,
                     
                     Thou womans ſouldiar, fit for nights aſſaults,
                     Haſt thou ſo ſoone forgot the diſcipline,
                     And wilſome taſkes thy youth was trayned to,
                     Thy ſoft downe Pillow, was a helme of ſteele:
                     The could damp earth, a bed to eaſe thy toyle,
                     Afrigted ſlumbers were thy golden ſleepes:
                     Hunger and thirſt thy ſweeteſt delicates,
                     Sterne horror, gaſtly woundes, pale greeſly death:
                     Thy winde depreſſing pleaſures and delights,
                     
                        
And now ſo ſoone hath on enchanted face,
                     Theſe manly labours luld in drowſy ſleepe:
                     The Gods (whoſe meſſenger I heere do ſtand)
                     Will not then drowne thy fame in Idleneſſe:
                     Yet muſt Philippi ſee thy high exploytes,
                     And all the world ring of thy Victories.
                  
                  
                     Antho.
                     Say what thou art, that in this dreadful ſort
                     Forbidd'ſt me of my Cleopatra
                              •
                           s loue.
                  
                  
                     Gen.
                     I am thy bonus Genius, Anthony,
                     
                     VVhich to thy dul eares this do prophecy:
                     That fatall face which now doth ſo bewitch thee,
                     Like to that vaine vnconſtant Greekiſh dame,
                     VVhich made the ſtately Ilian towres to ſmoke,
                     Shall thouſand bleeding Romains lay one ground:
                     
                        Hymen in ſable not in ſaferon robes,
                     Inſtead of roundes ſhall dolefull dirges ſinge.
                     For nuptiall tapers, ſhall the furies beare,
                     Blew-burning torches to increaſe your feare:
                     The bride-grooms ſcull ſhal make the bridal bondes▪
                     
                     And hel-borne hags ſhall dance an Antick round,
                     VVhile Hecate Hymen (heu, heu) Hymen cries,
                     And now methinkes I ſee the ſeas blew face:
                     Hidden with ſhippes, and now the trumpets ſound,
                     And weake Canopus with the Aegle ſtriues,
                     
                        Neptune amazed at this dreadfull ſight:
                     Cals blew ſea Gods for to behold the fight,
                     Glaucus and Panopea, Proteus ould,
                     
                     VVho now for feare changeth his wonted ſhape,
                     Thus your vaine loue which with delight begunne:
                     In Idle ſport ſhall end with bloud and ſhame.
                  
                  Exit.
                  
                     Antho.
                     VVhat waſt my Genius that mee threatned thus?
                     They ſay that from our birth he doth preſerue:
                     And on mee will he powre theſe miſeries?
                     VVhat burning torches, what alarums of warre,
                     VVhat ſhames did he to my loues propheſie?
                     O no hee comes as winged Mercurie,
                     
                     From his great Father Ioue, t' Anchiſes ſonne
                     To warne him leaue the wanton dalliance,
                  
                  
                     
                     And charming pleaſures of the Tyrian Court,
                     Then wake the Anthony from this idle dreame,
                     Caſt of theſe baſe effeminate paſſions:
                     Which melt the courrage of thy manlike minde,
                     And with thy ſword receiue thy ſleeping praiſe.
                  
                  Exit.
               
               
                  ACT. 3. SC. 3.
                  Enter Brutus.
                  
                     Bru.
                     How long in baſe ignoble patience,
                     Shall I behold my Countries wofull fall,
                     O you braue Romains, and among'ſt the reſt
                     Moſt Noble Brutus, faire befall your ſoules:
                     Let Peace and Fame your Honored graues awaite,
                     Who through ſuch perils, and ſuch tedious warres,
                     Won your great labors priſe ſweete liberty,
                     But wee that with our life did freedoms take,
                     And did no ſooner Men, then free-men, breath:
                     To looſe it now continuing ſo long,
                     And with ſuch lawes, ſuch vowes, ſuch othes confirm'd
                     Can nothing but diſgrace and ſhame expect:
                     But ſoft what ſee I written on my ſeate,
                     O vtinam Brute viueres.
                     What meaneth this, thy courage dead,
                     But ſtay, reade forward, Brute mortuus es.
                     
                     I thou art dead indeed, thy courrage dead
                     Thy care and loue thy deareſt Country dead,
                     Thy wonted ſpirit and Noble ſtomack dead.
                  
                  Enter Caſſius.
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     The times drawe neere by gratious heauens aſſignd
                     When Philips Sonne muſt fall in Babilon,
                     
                     In his triumphing proud perſumption:
                     But ſee where melancholy Brutus walkes,
                     Whoſe minde is hammering on no meane conceit:
                     Then ſound him Caſſius, ſee how hee is inclined,
                     How fares young Brutus in this tottering ſtate▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     Euen as an idle gazer, that beholdes,
                     
                        
His Countries wrackes and cannot ſuccor bring.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     But wil Brute alwaies in this dreame remaine,
                     And not bee mooued with his Countries mone.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     O that I might in Lethes endles ſleepe,
                     And neere awaking pleaſant reſt of death
                     Cloſe vp mine eyes, that I no more might ſee,
                     Poore Romes diſtreſſe and Countries miſery.
                  
                  
                     Caſi.
                     No Brutus liue, and wake thy ſleepy minde,
                     Stirre vp thoſe dying ſparkes of honors fire,
                     VVhich in thy gentle breaſt weare wont to flame:
                     See how poore Rome oppreſt with Countries wronges,
                     Implores thine ayde, that bred thee to that end,
                     Thy kinſ-mans ſoule from heauen commandes thine aide:
                     That laſtly muſt by thee receiue his end,
                     Then purchas honor by a glorious death,
                     Or liue renown'd by ending Caeſars life.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     I can no longer beare the Tirants pride.
                     I cannot heare my Country crie for ayde,
                     And not bee mooued with her pitious mone,
                     
                        Brutus thy ſoule ſhall neuer more complaine:
                     That from thy linage and moſt vertuous ſtock,
                     A baſtard weake degenerat brahch is borne,
                     For to diſtaine the honor of thy houſe.
                     No more ſhall now the Romains call me dead,
                     Ile liue againe and rowze my ſleepy thoughts:
                     And with the Tirants death begin this life.
                     
                        Rome now I come to reare thy ſtates decayed,
                     VVhen or this hand ſhall cure thy fatall wound,
                     Or elſe this heart by bleeding on the ground.
                  
                  
                     Caſ.
                     Now heauen I ſee applaudes this enterpriſe,
                     And Rhadamanth into the fatall Vrne,
                     That lotheth death, hath thruſt the Tirants name,
                     
                        Caeſar the life that thou in bloud haſt led:
                     Shall heape a bloudy vengance on thine head.
                  
                  Exeum.
               
               
                  
                  ACT. 2. SCE. 4.
                  Enter Caeſar, Anthony Dolobella, Lords, and others.
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Now ſervile Pharthia proud in Romaine ſpoile,
                     Shall pay her ranſome vnto Caeſars Ghoſt:
                     Which vnreuenged roues by the Stygian ſtrond,
                     Exclaming on our ſluggiſh negligence.
                     Leaue to lament braue Romans, loe I come,
                     Like to the God of battell, mad with rage,
                     To die their riuers with vermilion red:
                     Ile fill Armenians playnes and Medians hils,
                     With carkaſes of baſtard Scithian broode,
                     And there proud Princes will I bring to Rome,
                     
                     Chained in fetters to my charriot wheeles:
                     Deſire of fame and hope of ſweete reueng,
                     Which in my breſt hath kindled ſuch a flame,
                     As nor Euphrates, nor ſweet Tybers ſtreame,
                     Can quench or ſtack this feruent boyling heate:
                     Theſe conquering ſouldiers that haue followed me,
                     From vanquiſht France to ſun-burnt Meroe,
                     
                     Matching the beſt of Alexanders troopes.
                     Shall with their lookes put Parthian foes to flight,
                     And make them twiſe turne their deceitfull lookes,
                  
                  
                     Ant.
                     The reſtleſſe mind that harbors ſorrowing thoughts,
                     And is with child of noble enterpriſe,
                     Doth neuer ceaſe from honors toileſome taske,
                     Till it bringes forth Eternall gloryes broode.
                     So you fayre braunch of vertues great diſcent,
                     Now hauing finiſh'd Ciuill warres ſad broyles,
                     Intend by Parthian triumphes to enlarge,
                     Your contryes limits, and your owne renowne,
                     But cauſe in Sibilles ciuill writs we finde,
                     None but a King that conqueſt can atchiue,
                     Both for to crowne your deedes with due reward,
                     And as auſpicious ſignes of victorye.
                     Wee here preſent you with this Diadem,
                     
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     And euen as kings were baniſh'd Romes high throne
                     
                        
Cauſe their baſe vice, her honour did deſtayne,
                     So to your rule doth ſhee ſubmit her ſelfe,
                     That her renowne there by might brighter ſhine,
                  
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     Why thinke you Lords that tis ambitions ſpur.
                     That pricketh Caeſar to theſe high attempts,
                     Or hope of Crownes, or thought of Diadems,
                     
                     That made me wade through honours perilous deepe,
                     Vertue vnto it ſelfe a ſhure reward,
                     My labours all ſhall haue a pleaſing doome,
                     If you but Iudge I will deſerue of Rome:
                     
                     Did thoſe old Romaines ſuffer ſo much ill?
                     Such tedious ſeeges, ſuch enduring warrs?
                     
                        Tarquinius hates, and great Porſennas threats,
                     To baniſh proude imperious tyrants rule?
                     And ſhall my euerdaring thoughts contend
                     To marre what they haue brought to happy end:
                     Or thinke you cauſe my Fortune hath expeld,
                     My friends, come let vs march in iolity,
                     Ile triumph Monarke-like ore conquering Rome,
                     
                     Or end my conqueſts with my countryes ſpoyles,
                  
                  
                     Dolo.
                     O noble Princely reſolution.
                     Theſe or not victoryes that we ſo call,
                     That onely blood and murtherous ſpoyles can vaunt:
                     But this ſhalbe thy victory braue Prince,
                     That thou haſt conquered thy owne climing thoughts,
                     And with thy vertue beat ambition downe,
                     And this no leſſe inblazon ſhall thy fame.
                     Then thoſe great deeds and chiualrous attempts,
                     That made thee conqueror in Theſſalia.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ant.
                     This noble mind and Pincely modeſty,
                     Which in contempt of honours brightnes ſhines,
                     Makes vs to wiſh the more for ſuch a Prince,
                     Whoſe vertue not ambition won that praiſe,
                     Nor ſhall we thinke it loſſe of liberty.
                     Or Romaine liberty any way impeached,
                     For to ſubiect vs to his Princely rule,
                     Whoſe thoughts fayre vertue and true honor guides:
                     Vouchſafe then to accept this goulden crowne,
                     
                        
A gift not equall to thy dignity.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Content you Lordes for I wilbe no King,
                     An odious name vnto the Romaine care,
                     
                        Caeſar I am, and wilbe Caeſar ſtill,
                     No other title ſhall my Fortunes grace:
                     Which I will make a name of higher ſtate
                     Then Monarch, King or worldes great Potentate.
                     Of Ioue in Heauen, ſhall ruled bee the ſkie,
                     The Earth of Caeſar, with like Maieſty.
                     This is the Scepter that my crowne ſhall beare,
                     And this the golden diadem Ile weare,
                     A farre more rich and royall ornament,
                     Then all the Crownes that the proud Perſian gaue:
                     Forward my Lordes let Trumpets ſound our march,
                     And drums ſtrike vp Reuenges ſad alarms,
                     
                        Parthia we come with like incenſed heate,
                     As great Atrides with the angry Greekes,
                     Marching in fury to pale walls of Troy.
                  
               
               
                  ACT. 3. SC. 5.
                  Enter Caſſius, Brutus, Trebonius, Cumber Caſca.
                  
                     Tre.
                     Braue Lords whoſe forward reſolution,
                     Shewes you deſcended from true Romaine line,
                     See how old Rome in winter of her age,
                     Reioyſeth in ſuch Princely budding hopes,
                     No leſſe then once ſhe in Decius vertue did,
                     Or great Camillus bringing back of ſpoyles.
                     On then braue Lords of this attempt begun,
                     The ſacred Senate doth commend the deede:
                     Your Countries loue incites you to the deed,
                     Vertue her ſelfe makes warrant of the deed,
                     Then Noble Romains as you haue begun:
                     Neuer deſiſt vntill this deede be done.
                  
                  
                     Caſi.
                     To thee Reueng doth Caſſius kneele him downe.
                     Thou that brings quiet to perplexed ſoules,
                     And borne in Hel, yet harboreſt heauens ioyes,
                     
                        
Whoſe fauor ſlaughter is, and dandling death,
                     Bloud-thirſty pleaſures and miſ boding bliſſe:
                     Brought forth of Fury, nurſe of cankered Hate,
                     To drowne in woe the pleaſures of the world.
                     Thou ſhalt no more in duſkiſh Erebus:
                     
                     And dark-ſome hell obſcure thy Deity,
                     Inſteede of Ioue thou ſhalt my Godeſſe bee,
                     To thee faire Temples Caſſius will erect:
                     And on thine alter built of Parian ſtone
                     Whole Hecatombs will I offer vp.
                     Laugh gentle Godeſſe on my bould attempt,
                     Yet in thy laughter let pale meager death:
                     Bee wrapt in wrinkels of thy murthering ſpoyles.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     An other Tarquin is to bee expeld,
                     An other Brutus liues to act the deede:
                     Tis not one nation that this Tarquin wronges,
                     All Rome is ſtayn'd with his vnrul'd deſires,
                     Shee whoſe imperiall ſcepter was invr'd:
                     To conquer Kings and to controul the world,
                     Cannot abate the glory of her ſtate,
                     To yeeld or bowe to one mans proud deſires:
                     Sweete Country Rome here Brutus vowes to thee,
                     To looſe his life or elſe to ſet thee free.
                  
                  
                     Caſ.
                     Shame bee his ſhare that doth his life ſo prize,
                     That to Romes weale it would not ſacrifize,
                     My Poniardes point ſhall pearce his heart as deepe,
                     As earſt his ſworde Romes bleeding ſide did goare:
                     And change his garments to the purple die,
                     With which our bloud had ſtaynd ſad Theſſaly.
                     
                  
                  
                     Cam.
                     Hee doth refuſe the title of a King,
                     But wee do ſee hee doth vſurp the thing.
                  
                  
                     Tre.
                     Our ancient freedome hee empeacheth more,
                     Then euer King or Tyrant did before.
                  
                  
                     Caſ.
                     The Senators by him are quite diſgrac'd,
                     
                        Rome, Romans, Citty, Freedome, all defac'd.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     We come not Lords, as vnreſolued men,
                     For to ſhewe cauſes of the deed decreed,
                     This ſhall diſpute for mee and tell him why,
                     
                        
This heart, hand, minde, hath mark'd him out to die:
                     If it be true that furies quench-les thirſt,
                     Is pleaſ'd with quaffing of ambitious bloud,
                     Then all you deuills whet my Poniards point,
                     And I wil broach you a bloud-ſucking heart:
                     Which full of bloud, muſt bloud ſtore to you yeeld,
                     Were it a peerce to flint or marble ſtone:
                     Why ſo it is for Caeſars heart's a ſtone,
                     Els would bee mooued with my Countries mone.
                     They ſay you furies inſtigate mens mindes,
                     And puſh their armes to finniſh bloudy deedes:
                     Prick then mine Elbo: goade my bloudy hand,
                     That it may▪ goare Caeſars ambitious heart.
                  
                  Exeunt.
               
               
                  ACTVS 3. SCENA 6.
                  Enter Caeſar, Calphurnia.
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Why thinkes my loue to fright me with her dreames?
                     Shall bug-beares feare Caeſars vndaunted heart,
                     Whome Pompeys Fortune neuer could amaze,
                     Nor the French horſe, nor Mauritanian boe,
                     And now ſhall vaine illuſions mee affright:
                     Or ſhadowes daunt, whom ſubſtance could not quell?
                  
                  
                     Calphur.
                     O deareſt Caeſar, haſt thou ſeene thy ſelfe,
                     (As troubled dreames to me did faine thee ſeene:)
                     Torne, Wounded, Maymed, Blod-ſlaughtered, Slaine,
                     O thou thy ſelfe, wouldſt then haue dread thy ſelfe:
                     And feard to thruſt thy life to dangers mouth.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     There you bewray the folly of your dreame,
                     For I am well, aliue, vncaught, vntoucht.
                  
                  
                     Calphur,
                     T'was in the Senate-houſe I ſawe thee ſo,
                     And yet thou dreadles thither needes will go.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     The Senate is a place of peace, not death,
                     But theſe were but deluding viſions.
                  
                  
                     Calphur.
                     O do not ſet ſo little by the heauens,
                     Dreames at diuine, men ſay they come from Ioue,
                     
                     Beware betimes, and bee not wiſe to late:
                     
                        
Mens good indeuours change the wills of Fate.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Weepe not faire loue, let not thy wofull teares
                     Bode mee, I knowe what thou wouldeſt not haue to hap
                     It will diſtaine mine honor wonne in fight
                     To ſay a womans dreame could me affright.
                  
                  
                     Cal.
                     O Caeſar no diſhonour canſt thou get,
                     In ſeeking to preuent vnlucky chance:
                     Foole-hardy men do runne vpon their death,
                     Bee thou in this perſwaded by thy wife:
                     No vallour bids thee caſt away thy life.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Tis daſtard cowardize and childiſh feare,
                     To dread thoſe dangers that do not appeare:
                  
                  
                     Cal.
                     Thou muſt ſad chance by fore-caſt, wiſe reſiſt,
                     Or being done ſay boote-les had I wiſt.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     But for to feare wher's no ſuſpition,
                     Will to my greatneſſe be deriſion.
                  
                  
                     Cal.
                     There lurkes an adder in the greeneſt graſſe,
                     Daungers of purpoſe alwayes hide their face:
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     Perſwade no more Caeſar's reſolu'd to go.
                  
                  
                     Cal.
                     The Heauens reſolue that hee may ſafe returne,
                     For if ought happen to my loue but well:
                     His danger ſhalbe doubled with my death.
                  
                  Exit.
                  Enter Augur.
                  
                     Augur.
                     I come they are, but yet they are not gon.
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     What haſt thou ſacrifiz'd, as cuſtome is,
                     Before wee enter in the Senat-houſe.
                  
                  
                     Augur.
                     O ſtay thoſe ſteeps that leade thee to thy death,
                     The angry heauens with threeatning dire aſpect,
                     Boding miſchance, and balfull maſſacers,
                     Menace the ouerthrowe of Caeſars powre
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        Saturne ſits frowning on the God of Warre,
                     VVho in their ſad coniunction do conſpire,
                     Vniting both their bale full influences,
                     To heape miſchance, and danger to thy life:
                     The Sacrificing beaſt is heart-les found:
                     Sad ghaſtly ſightes, and rayſed Ghoſtes appeare,
                     Which fill the ſilent woods, with groning cries:
                     The hoarſe Night-rauen tunes the chearles voyce,
                     And calls the bale-full Owle, and howling Doge,
                     
                        
To make a conſort. In whoſe ſad ſong is this,
                     Neere is the ouerthrow of Caeſars bliſſe.
                  
                  Exit.
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     The world is ſet to fray mee from my wits,
                     Heers harteles Sacrifice and viſions,
                     Howlinge and cryes, and gaſtly grones of Ghoſts,
                     Soft Caeſar do not make a mockery,
                     Of theſe Prodigious ſignes ſent from the Heauens,
                     
                        Calphurnias Dreame lumping which Augurs words,
                     Shew (if thou markeſt it Caeſar) cauſe to feare:
                     This day the Senate there ſhalbe diſſolued,
                     And Ile returne to my Calphurnia home,
                     One giues him a paper.
                     What haſt thou heare that thou preſents vs with,
                  
                  
                     Pre.
                     A thing my Lord that doth concerne your life.
                     Which loue to you and hate of ſuch a deed,
                     Makes me reueale vnto your excellence.
                     Caeſar laughs.
                     Smileſt thou, or think'ſt thou it ſome ilde toy,
                     Thout frowne a non to read ſo many names.
                     That haue conſpird and ſworne thy bloody death,
                  
                  Exit.
                  Enter Caſſius.
                  
                     Caſſius.
                     Now muſt I come, and with cloſe ſubtile girdes,
                     Deceaue the prey that Ile deuoure anon,
                     My Lord the Sacred Senate doth expect,
                     Your royall preſence in Pompeius court:
                  
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     
                        Caſſius they tell me that ſome daungers nigh.
                     And death pretended in the Senate houſe.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     What danger or what wrong can be,
                     Where harmeles grauitie and vertue ſits,
                     Tis paſt all daunger preſent death it is,
                     Nor is it wrong to render due deſert.
                     To feare the Senators without a cauſe,
                     Will bee a cauſe why theile be to be feared,
                  
                  
                     Caeſa.
                     The Senate ſtayes for me in Pompeye court.
                     And Caeſars heere, and dares not goe to them,
                     Packe hence all dread of danger and of death,
                     What muſt be muſt be; Caeſars preſt for all,
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     Now haue I ſent him headlong to his ende,
                     Vengance and death awayting at his heeles,
                     
                        Caeſar thy life now hangeth on a twine,
                     
                        
Which by my Poniard muſt bee cut in twaine,
                     Thy chaire of ſtate now turn'd is to thy Beere,
                     Thy Princely robes to make thy winding ſheete:
                     The Senators the Mourners ore the Hearſe,
                     And Pompeys Court, thy dreadfull graue ſhalbe.
                  
                  Senators crie all at once.
                  
                     Omnes.
                     Hold downe the Tyrant ſtab him to the death▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Caſi.
                     Now doth the muſick play and this the ſong
                     That Caſſius heart hath thirſted for ſo long:
                     And now my Poniard in this mazing ſound,
                     Muſt ſtrike that touch that muſt his life confound.
                     Stab on, ſtab on, thus ſhould your Poniards play,
                     Aloud deepe note vpon this trembling Kay.
                  
                  ſtab him.
                  
                     Buco.
                     
                        Bucolian ſends thee this.
                  
                  ſtab him.
                  
                     Cum.
                     And Cumber this.
                  
                  ſtab him.
                  
                     Caſ.
                     Take this frō 
                        Caſca for to quite Romes wronges.
                  
                  
                     C
                           •
                        ſ.
                     Why murtherous villaines know you whō you ſtrike,
                     Tis Caeſar, Caeſar, whom your Poniards pierce:
                     
                        Caeſar whoſe name might well afright ſuch ſlaues:
                     O Heauens that ſee and hate this haynous guilt,
                     And thou Immortall Ioue that Idle holdeſt
                     Deluding Thunder in thy faynting hand,
                     Why ſtay'ſt thy dreadfull doome, and doſt with-hold,
                     Thy three-fork'd engine to reuenge my death:
                     But if my plaintes the Heauens cannot mooue,
                     Then blackeſt hell and Pluto bee thou iudge:
                     You greeſly daughters of the cheereles night.
                     Whoſe hearts, nor praier nor pitty, ere could lend,
                     Leaue the black dungeon of your Chaos deepe:
                     Come and with flaming brandes into the world,
                     Reuenge, and death, bringe ſeated in yout eyes:
                     And plauge theſe villaynes for their trecheries.
                  
                  Enter Brutus.
                  
                     Bru.
                     I haue held Anthony with a vaine diſcourſe,
                     The whilſt the deed's in execution,
                     But liues hee ſtill, yet doth the Tyrant breath?
                     Chalinging Heauens with his blaſphemies,
                     Heere Brutus maketh a paſſage for thy Soule,
                     
                        
To plead thy cauſe for them whoſe ayde thou craueſt,
                  
                  
                     Caeſ.
                     What Brutus to? nay nay, then let me die,
                     Nothing wounds deeper then ingratitude,
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     I bloody Caeſar, Caeſar, Brutus too,
                     Doth geeue thee this, and this to quite Romes wrongs,
                  
                  
                     Caſſius.
                     O had the Tyrant had as many liues.
                     As that fell Hydra borne in Lerna lake,
                     
                     That heare I ſtill might ſtab and ſtabing kill,
                     Till that more liues might bee extinquiſhed,
                     Then his ambition, Romanes Slaughtered.
                  
                  
                     Tre.
                     How heauens haue iuſtly on the authors head,
                     Returnd the guiltles blood which he hath ſhed,
                     And Pompey, he who cauſed thy Tragedy,
                     Here breathles lies before thy Noble Statue,
                  
                  Enter Anthony.
                  
                     Anth.
                     What cryes of death reſound within my eates,
                     Whome I doe ſee great Caeſar buchered thus?
                     What ſaid I great? I Caeſar thou waſt great,
                     But O that greatnes was that brought thy death:
                     O vniuſt Heauens, (if Heauens at all there be,)
                     Since vertues wronges makes queſtion of your powers,
                     How could your ſtarry eyes this ſhame behold,
                     How could the ſunne ſee this and not eclipze?
                     Fayre bud of fame ill cropt before thy time:
                     What Hyrcan tygar, or wild ſauage bore,
                     (For he more heard then Bore or Tyger was,)
                     Durſt do ſo vile and execrate a deede,
                     Could not thoſe eyes ſo full of maieſty,
                     Nor prieſthood (o not thus to bee prophand)
                     Nor yet the reuerence to this ſacred place,
                     Nor flowing eloquence of thy goulden tounge,
                     Nor name made famous through immortall merit,
                     Deter thoſe murtherors from ſo vild a deed?
                     Sweete friend accept theſe obſequies of mine,
                     Which heare with teares I doe vnto thy hearſe,
                     And thou being placed among the ſhining ſtarrs.
                     Shalt downe from Heauen behold what deepe reueng,
                     
                        
I will inflict vpon the murtherers,
                  
                  Exit with Caeſar, in his
armes.
                  FINIS. Act. 3.
               
            
            
               Enter Diſcord.
               
                  Diſ.
                  
                     Brutus thou haſt what long deſire hath ſought,
                  
                     Caeſar Lyes weltring in his purple Goare,
                  Thou art the author of Romes liberty,
                  Proud in thy murthering hand and bloody knife.
                  Yet thinke Octauian and ſterne Anthony.
                  
                  Cannot let paſſe this murther vnreuenged,
                  
                     Theſſalia once againe muſt ſee your blood,
                  And Romane drommes muſt ſtrike vp new alaromes▪
                  
                  Harke how Bellona ſhakes her angry lance:
                  And enuie clothed in her crimſon weed,
                  Me thinkes I ſee the fiery ſhields to claſh,
                  Eagle gainſt Eagle, Rome gainſt Rome to fight,
                  
                     Phillipi, Caeſar, quittance muſt thy wronges,
                  Whereas that hand ſhall ſtab that trayterous heart.
                  That durſt encourage it to worke thy death,
                  Thus from thine aſhes Caeſar doth ariſe
                  As from Medeas haples ſcatered teeth:
                  New flames of wars, and new outragious broyles,
                  Now ſmile Aemathia that euen in thy top,
                  
                     Romes victory and pride ſhalbe entombd,
                  And thoſe great conquerors of the vanquiſhed earth,
                  Shall with their ſwords come there to dig their graues.
               
               
                  ACTVS. 4. SCENA. 1.
                  Enter Octauian.
                  
                     Octa.
                     Mourne gentle Heauens for you haue loſt your ioy.
                     Mourne greeued earth thy ornament is gon,
                     Mourne Rome in great thy Father is deceaſed:
                     Mourne thou Octauian, thou it is muſt mourne,
                     Mourne for thy Vncle who is dead and gon.
                     
                        
Mourne for thy Father to vngently ſlaine,
                     Mourne for thy Friend whome thy miſhap hath loſt,
                     For Father, Vnkell, Friend, go make thy mone,
                     Who all did liue, who all did die in one.
                     But heere I vow theſe blacke and ſable weeds,
                     The outward ſignes of inward heauines,
                     Shall changed be ere long to crimſen hew,
                     And this ſoft raiment to a coate of ſteele,
                     
                        Caeſar, no more I heare the mornefull ſongs.
                     The tragick pomp of his ſad exequies,
                     And deadly burning torches are at hand,
                     I muſt accompany the mornefull troope:
                     And ſacryfice my teares to the Gods below.
                  
                  Exit.
                  Enter Caeſars Hearſe Calphurnia Octauian, Anthony,
Cicero, Dolobella, two Romaynes, mourners.
                  
                     Calp.
                     Set downe the hearſe and let Calphurnia weepe,
                     Weepe for her Lord and bath his Wounds in teares:
                     Feare of the world, and onely hope of Rome,
                     
                     Thou whileſt thou liuedſt was Calphurnias ioye,
                     And being dead my ioyes are dead with thee:
                     Here doth my care and comfort reſting lie:
                     Let them accompany thy mournefull hearſe.
                  
                  
                     Cice.
                     This is the hearſe of vertue and renowne,
                     Here ſtroe red roſes and ſweete violets:
                     And lawrell garlands for to crowne his fame,
                     The Princely weede of mighty conquerors:
                     Theſe worthles obſequies poore Rome beſtowes,
                     Vpon thy ſacred aſhes and deare hearſe.
                  
                  
                     1. Rom.
                     And as a token of thy liuing praiſe,
                     And fame immortall take this laurell wreath,
                     Which witneſſeth thy name ſhall neuer die:
                     And with this take the Loue and teares of Rome,
                     
                     For on thy tombe ſhall ſtill engrauen be,
                     Thy loſſe, her griefe, thy deathes, her pittying thee,
                  
                  
                     Dolo.
                     Vnwilling do I come to pay this debt,
                     Though not vnwilling for to crowne deſert,
                     O how much rather had I this beſtowed,
                     On thee returning from foes ouerthrow,
                     
                        
When liuing vertue did require ſuch meede,
                     Then for to crowne thy vertue being dead,
                     
                        Lord. Thoſe wreaths that in thy life our conqueſts crowned
                     And our fayre triumphes beauty glorified,
                     Now in thy death do ſerue thy hearſe to adorne,
                     For Caeſars liuing vertues to bee crowned,
                     Not to be wept as buried vnder grownd,
                  
                  
                     2. Ro.
                     Thou whileſt thou liuedſt wast faire vertues flowre
                     Crowned with eternall honor and renowne,
                     To thee being dead, Flora both crownes and flowers,
                     (The cheefeſt vertues of our mother earth,)
                     Doth giue to gratulate thy noble hearſe.
                     Let then they ſoule diuine vouchſafe to take,
                     Theſe worthles obſequies our loue doth make.
                  
                  
                     Calp.
                     All that I am is but deſpaire and greefe,
                     This all I giue to Celebrate thy death,
                     What funerall pomp of riches and of pelfe,
                     Do you expect? Calphurnia giues her ſelfe.
                  
                  
                     Ant.
                     You that to Caeſar iuſtly did decree
                     Honors diuine and ſacred reuerence:
                     And oft him grac'd with titles well deſerued,
                     Of Countries Father, ſtay of Commonwealth.
                     And that which neuer any bare before,
                     Inviolate, Holy, Conſecrate, Vntucht.
                     Doe ſee this friend of Rome, this Contryes Father,
                     This Sonne of laſting fame and endles praiſe,
                     And in a mortall trunke, immortall vertue
                     Slaughtered, profan'd, and bucherd like a beaſt,
                     By trayterous handes, and damned Paracides:
                     Recounte thoſe deedes and ſee what he hath don,
                     Subdued thoſe nations which three hundred yeares.
                     Remaynd vnconquered; ſtill afflicting Rome,
                     
                     And recompenſed the firy Capitoll,
                     With many Citties vnto aſhes burnt:
                     And this reward, theſe thankes you render him:
                     Here lyes he dead to whome you owe your liues:
                     By you this ſlaughtered body bleedes againe,
                     Which oft for you hath bled in fearefull fight.
                     
                        
Sweete woundes in which I ſee diſtreſſed Rome,
                     
                     From her pearc'd ſides to powre forth ſtreames of bloud,
                     Bee you a witneſſe of my ſad Soules griefe:
                     And of my teares which wounded heart doth bleede,
                     Not ſuch as vſe from womaniſh eyes proceede.
                  
                  
                     Octa.
                     And were the deede moſt worthy and vnblamed.
                     Yet you vnworthely did do the ſame:
                     Who being partakers with his enemies,
                     By Caeſar all were ſaued from death and harme,
                     And for the punniſhment you ſhould haue had,
                     You were prefer'd to Princely dignities:
                     Rulers and Lordes of Prouinces were you made,
                     Thus thanke-les men hee did preferre of nought,
                     That by their hands his murther might be wrought.
                  
                  All at once except Anthony and Octauian.
                  
                     Omnes.
                     Reuenge, Reuenge vpon the murtherers.
                  
                  
                     Antho.
                     Braue Lords this worthy reſolution ſhewes,
                     Your deereſt loue, and great affection
                     VVhich to this ſlaughtered Prince you alwaies bare,
                     And may like bloudy chance befall my life:
                     If I be ſlack for to reuenge his death.
                  
                  
                     Octa.
                     Now on my Lords, this body lets inter:
                     Amongeſt the monuments of Roman Kinges,
                     And build a Temple to his memory:
                     Honoring therein his ſacred Deity.
                  
                  Exeunt omnes.
               
               
                  ACT. 4. SC. 2.
                  Enter Caſſius, and Brutus with an army.
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     Now Romains proud foe, worlds common enemy,
                     In his greateſt hight and chiefeſt Iollitie,
                     In the Sacred Senate-houſe is done to death:
                     Euen as the Conſecrated Oxe which ſoundes,
                     At horny alters in his dying pride:
                     VVith flowry leaues and gar-lands all bedight,
                     Stands proudly wayting for the haſted ſtroke:
                     Till hee amazed with the diſmall ſound,
                     
                        
Falls to the Earth and ſtaines the holy ground,
                     The ſpoyles and riches of the conquered world,
                     Are now but idle Trophies of his tombe:
                     His laurell gar-landes do but Crowne his chaire,
                     His ſling, his ſhilde, and fatall bloudy ſpeare,
                     VVhich hee in battell oft 'gainſt Rome did beare,
                     Now ſerue for nought but ruſty monuments.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     So Romulus when proud ambition,
                     His former vertue and renowne had ſtayned:
                     Did by the Senators receiue his end,
                     But ſoft what boades Titinnius haſting ſpeede.
                  
                  Enter Titinnius.
                  
                     Titin.
                     The frantike people and impatient,
                     By Anthonyes exhorting to reuenge:
                     Runne madding throw the bloudy ſtreetes of Rome,
                     
                     Crying Reuenge, and murthering they goe,
                     All thoſe that cauſed Caeſars ouerthrowe.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     The wauering people pytiyng Caeſars death,
                     Do rage at vs, who fore to winne their weale:
                     Spare not the danger of our deareſt liues,
                     But ſince no ſafety Rome for vs affordes:
                     
                        Brutus weell haſt vs to our Prouinces,
                     I into Syre, thou into Maccedon,
                     
                     Where wee will muſter vp ſuch martiall bandes,
                     As ſhall afright our following enemies.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     In Theſſaly weele meete the Enemy,
                     And in that ground diſtaynd with Pompeys bloud,
                     And fruitefull made with Romane maſſaker,
                     VVeele either ſacrifice our guilty foe,
                     To appeaſe the furies of theſe howling Ghoſtes,
                     That wander reſtles through the ſhemy ground
                     Or elſe that Theſſaly bee a common Tombe:
                     To bury thoſe that fight to infranchize Rome.
                     
                  
                  
                     Titin.
                     Brauely reſolu'd, I ſee yong Brutus minde,
                     Strengthned with force of vertues ſacred rule:
                     Contemneth death, and holdes proud chance in ſcorne.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     I that before fear'd not to do the deede,
                     Shall neuer now repent it being done,
                     
                        
No more I Fortun'd, like the Roman Lord,
                     Whoſe faith brought death yet with immortall fame,
                     I kiſſe thee hand for doing ſuch a deede:
                     And thanke my heart for this ſo Noble thought,
                     And bleſſe the Heauens for fauoring my attempts:
                     For Noble Rome, and if thou beeſt not free,
                     Yet I haue done what euer lay in mee:
                     And worthy friend as both our thoughts conſpired,
                     And ioyned in vnion to performe this deede,
                     This acceptable deede to Heauens and Rome,
                     
                     So lets continue in our high reſolue:
                     And as wee haue with honor thus begunne,
                     So lets perſiſt, vntill our liues bee done.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     Then let vs go and with our warlike troopes,
                     Collected from our ſeuerall Prouinces,
                     Make Aſia ſubiect to our Conquering armes,
                     
                        Brutus thou haſt commanded the Illirian bandes:
                     The feared Celts and Luſitanian horſe,
                     
                        Parthenians proud, and Thraſians borne in warre:
                     And Macedon yet proud with our old actes,
                     With all the flowre of Louely Theſſaly,
                     
                     Vnder my warlike collours there ſhall march:
                     New come from Syria and from Babilon,
                     
                     The warlike Mede, and the Arabian Boe,
                     The Parthian fighting when hee ſeemes to flie:
                     Thoſe conquering Gauls that built their ſeates in Greece,
                     And all the Coſters on the Mirapont.
                     
                  
               
               
                  ACT. 3. SCE. 1.
                  Enter Caeſars Ghoſt.
                  
                     Gho.
                     Out of the horror of thoſe ſhady vaultes,
                     Where Centaurs, Harpies, paynes and furies fell:
                     And Gods and Ghoſts and vgly Gorgons dwell,
                     My reſtles ſoule comes heere to tell his wronges.
                     Hayle to thy walles, thou pride of all the world,
                     Thou art the place where whilome in my life.
                     
                        
My ſeat of mounting honour was erected,
                     And my proud throane that ſeem'd to check the heauens.
                     But now my pompe and I are layd more lowe,
                     With theſe aſoſiates of my ouerthrow,
                     Here ancient Aſſur and proud Belus lyes,
                     
                        Ninus the firſt that ſought a Monarches name.
                     
                        Atrides fierce with the Aeacides,
                     
                     The Greeke Heros, and the Troian flower,
                     Blood-thirſting Cyrus and the conquering youth:
                     That ſought to fetch his pedegree from Heauen,
                     Sterne Romulus and proud Tarquinius,
                     
                     The mighty Sirians and the Ponticke Kings,
                     
                        Alcides and the ſtout, Carthagian Lord,
                     The fatall enemie to the Roman name.
                     Ambitious Sylla and fierce Marius,
                     
                     And both the Pompeyes by me don to death,
                     I am the laſt not leaſt of the ſame crue,
                     Looke on my deeds and ſay what Caeſar was,
                     Theſſalia, Aegipt, Pontus, Africa,
                     Spayne Brittaine, Almany and France,
                     Saw many a bloody tryall of my worth.
                     But why doe I my glory thus reſtraine,
                     When all the world was but a Charyot,
                     Wherein I rode Triumphing in my pride?
                     But what auayles this tale of what I was?
                     Since in my chefeſt hight Brutus baſe hand.
                     With three and twenty wounds my heart did goare,
                     Giue me my ſword and ſhild Ile be Reueng'd,
                     My mortall wounding ſpeare and goulden Creſt.
                     I will diſhorſe my foemen in the field,
                     Alaſſe poore Caeſar thou a ſhadow art,
                     An ayery ſubſtance wanting force and might,
                     Then will I goe and crie vpon the world,
                     Exclame on Anthony and Octauian,
                     
                     Which ſeeke through diſcord and diſcentions broyles,
                     Timbrue their weapons in each others blood,
                     And leaue to execute my iuſt reuenge,
                     
                        
I heare the drummes and bloody Trumpets ſound,
                     O how this ſight my greeued ſoule doth wound,
                  
                  Enter Anthony, at on dore, Octauian at
another with Souldiers.
                  
                     Anth.
                     Now martiall friends competitors in armes,
                     You that will follow Anthony to fight,
                     Whome ſtately Rome hath oft her Conſull ſeene,
                     Grac'd with eternall trophes of renowne,
                     With Libian triumphes and liberian ſpoyles,
                     Who ſcorns to haue his honour now diſtaind,
                     Or credit blemiſht by a Boyes diſgrace,
                     Prepare your dauntles ſtomakes to the fight,
                     Where without ſtriking you ſhall ouer come.
                  
                  
                     Octa.
                     Fellowes in war-faire which haue often ſerued,
                     Vnder great Caeſar my diſceaſed ſier,
                     And haue return'd the conquerors of the world,
                     Clad in the Spoyles of all the Orient:
                     That will not brooke that any Roman Lord,
                     Should iniure mighty Iulius Caeſars ſonne,
                     Recall your wonted vallour and theſe hearts,
                     That neuer entertaynd Ignoble thoughts
                     And make my firſt warre-faire and fortunate:
                  
                  
                     Ant.
                     Stike vp drums, and let your banners flie,
                     Thus will we ſet vpon the enemy.
                  
                  
                     Gho.
                     Ceaſe Drums to ſtrike, and fould your banners vp,
                     Wake not Bellona with your trumpets Clange,
                     Nor call vnwilling Mars vnto the field:
                     See Romaines, ſee my wounds not yet cloſ'd vp,
                     The bleeding monuments of Caeſars wronges.
                     Haue you ſo ſoone for got my life and death?
                     My life wherein I reard your fortunes vp.
                     My death wherein my reared fortune fell,
                     My life admir'd and wondred at of men?
                     My death which ſeem'd vnworthy to the Gods,
                     My life which heap'd on you rewards and gifts,
                     My death now begges one gift; a iuſt reueng.
                  
                  
                     Ant.
                     A Chilly cowld poſſeſſeth all my Ioyntes,
                     
                        
And pale wan feare doth ceaſe my fainting heart,
                  
                  
                     Octa.
                     O ſee how terrible my Fathers lookes?
                     My haire ſtands ſtiffe to ſee his greiſly hue:
                     Alaſſe I deare not looke him in the face,
                     And words do cleaue to my benummed Iawes.
                  
                  
                     Gho.
                     For ſhame weake Anthony throw thy weapons downe
                     Sonne ſheath thy ſword, not now for to be drawne,
                     
                        Brutus muſt feele the heauy ſtroke thereof:
                     But if that needes you will into the field,
                     And that warrs enuie pricks your forward hate.
                     To ſlacke your fury with each others blood,
                     Then forward on to your prepared deaths
                     Let ſad Alecto ſound her fearefull trump.
                     
                        Reueng a riſe in lothſome fable weedes,
                     Light-ſhining Treaſons and vnquenced Hates,
                     Horror and vgly Murther (nights blacke child,)
                     Let ſterne Maegera on her thundering drumme,
                     Play gaſtly muſicke to comfort your deathes.
                     Banner to banner, foote gainſt foote opoſ'd,
                     Sword againſt ſword, ſhild gainſt ſhild, and life to life,
                     Let death goe raginge through your armed rankes,
                     And load himſelfe with heapes of murthered men,
                     And let Heauens iuſtice ſend you all to Hell,
                  
                  
                     Anth.
                     Shamſt thou not Anthony to draw thy ſword,
                     On Caeſars Sonne, for rude raſh youth full brawles,
                     And doſt let paſſe their treaſon vnrevenged,
                     That Caeſars life and glory both did end,
                  
                  
                     Octa.
                     Shame of my ſelfe, and this intended fight,
                     Doth make me feare t' approach his dreadfull ſight:
                     Forgiue my ſlacknes to reuenge thy wronges,
                     Pardon my youth that raſhly was miſlead,
                     Through vaine ambition for to doe this deed,
                  
                  
                     Gho.
                     Then ioyne your hands and heare let battle ceaſe,
                     Chang feare to Ioy, and warre to ſmooth-fac't Peace.
                  
                  
                     Oct.
                     Then Father heere in ſight of Heauen and thee,
                     I giue my hand and heart to Anthony,
                     
                  
                  
                     Ant.
                     Take likewiſe mine, the hand that once was vowd',
                  
                  
                     
                     To bee imbrued in thy luke-warme bloud,
                     VVhich now ſhall ſtrike in yong Octauians rights.
                  
                  
                     Gho.
                     Now ſweare by all the Dieties of Heauen,
                     All Gods and powers you do adore and ſerue:
                     For to returne my murther on their cruell head,
                     Whoſe trayterous hands my guiltles bloud haue ſhed.
                  
                  
                     Anth.
                     Then by the Gods that through the raging waues,
                     Brought thee braue Troian to old Latium,
                     
                     And great Quirinus placed now in Heauen:
                     By the Gradinus that with ſhield of Braſſe,
                     Defendeſt Rome, by the ouerburning flames
                     Of 
                           Ʋeſta and Carpeian Towers of Ioue.
                     
                     Vowes Anthony to quite thy worthy death,
                     Or in performance looſe his vitall breath.
                  
                  
                     Octa.
                     The like Octauian vowes to Heauen and thee.
                  
                  
                     Gho.
                     Then go braue warriors with ſuccesfull hap,
                     Fortune ſhall waite vpon your rightfull armes,
                     And courage ſparkell, from your Princely eyes,
                     Dartes of reuenge to daunt your enemies.
                  
                  
                     Antho.
                     Now with our armies both conioyned in one,
                     Weele meete the enemy in Macedon:
                     
                     
                        Aemathian fieldes ſhall change her flowry greene,
                     And die proud Flora in a ſadder hew:
                     Siluer Stremonia, whoſe faire Chriſtall waues,
                     Once ſounded great Alcides echoing fame:
                     When as he ſlew that fruitefull headed ſnake,
                     Which Lerna long-time foſtered in her wombe:
                     Shall in more tragick accentes and ſad tunes,
                     Eccho the terror of thy diſmall fight,
                     
                        Hemus ſhall fat his barren fieldes with bloud:
                     And yellow Ceres ſpring from woundes of men,
                     The toyling huſband-men in time to come,
                     Shall with his harrow ſtrike on ruſty helmes,
                     And finde, and wonder, at our ſwordes and ſpeares,
                     And with his plowe dig vp braue Romans graues:
                  
                  Finis. Act.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ACT. 5. SCE. 1.
                  Enter Diſcord.
                  
                     Diſ.
                     The balefull harueſt of my ioy, thy woe
                     Gins ripen Brutus, Heauens commande it ſo.
                     Pale ſad Auernus opes his yawning Iawes,
                     Seeking to ſwallow vp thy murtherous ſoule,
                     The furies haue proclaym'd a feſtiuall:
                     And meane to day to banquet with thy bloud,
                     Now Heauens array you in your clowdy weedes:
                     Wrap vp the beauty of your glorious lamp,
                     And dreadfull Chaos, of ſad drery night,
                     Thou Sunne that climeſt vp to the eaſterne hill:
                     And in thy Chariot rides with ſwift ſteedes drawne,
                     In thy proud Iollity and radiant glory:
                     Go back againe and hide thee in the ſea,
                     Darkeneſſe to day ſhall couer all the world:
                     Let no light ſhine, but what your ſwords can ſtrike,
                     From out their ſteely helmes, and fiery ſhildes:
                     Furies, and Ghoſts, with your blue-burning lampes,
                     In mazing terror ride through Roman rankes:
                     With dread affrighting thoſe ſtout Champions hearts,
                     All ſtygian fiendes now leaue whereas you dwell:
                     And come into the world and make it hell.
                  
                  Enter Caſſius, Brutus, Titinnius, Cato Iunior,
with an army marching
                  
                     Caſi.
                     Thus far wee march with vnreſiſted armes,
                     Subduing all that did our powres with-ſtand:
                     
                        Laodicia whoſe high reared walles,
                     Faire Lyeas waſheth with her ſiluer waue:
                     And that braue monument of Perſeus fame,
                     With Turſos vaild to vs her vanting pride,
                     Faire Rhodes, I weepe to thinke vpon thy fall:
                     
                        
Thou wert to ſtubberne, elſe thou ſtill hadſt ſtood,
                     Inviolate of Caſſius hurtles hand,
                     That was my nurſe, where in my youth I drew
                     The flowing milke of Greekiſh eloquence:
                     Proud Capadocia ſawe her King captiu'd,
                     (And Dolabella vanting in the ſpoyles.
                     Of ſlayne Trebonius) fall as ſpringing tree,
                     Seated in louely Tempes pleaſant ſhades:
                     Whom beuteous ſpring with bloſſoms braue hath deckt,
                     And ſweete Fauonia manteled all in greene,
                     By winters rage doth looſe his flowry pride,
                     And hath each twigg bar'd by northerne winds.
                     Thus from the conqueſt of proud Palestine,
                     
                     Hether in triumph haue we march'd along,
                     Making our force-commaunding rule to ſtretch,
                     From faire Euphrates chriſtall flowing waues
                     Vnto the Sea which yet weepes Io's death,
                     Slayne by great Hercules repenting hand,
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     Of all the places by my ſword ſubdued,
                     Pitty of thee poore Zanthus moues me moſt;
                     Thriſe haſt thou ben beſeeged by thy foe,
                     And thriſe to ſaue thy liberty haſt felt
                     The fatall flames of thine owne cruell hand.
                     Firſt being beſeeg'd by Harpalus the Mede,
                     
                     The ſterne performer of proud Cyrus wrath:
                     Next when the Macedonian Phillips ſonne,
                     Did rayſe his engines gainſt thy battered walls,
                     Proud Zanthus that did ſcorne to beare the yoake,
                     That all the world was forced to ſuſtaine,
                     Laſt when that I my ſelfe did guirt thy walls,
                     With troopes of high reſolued Roman hearts,
                     Rather then thou wouldeſt yeeld to Brutus ſword,
                     Or ſtayne the mayden honour of thy Towne,
                     Did'ſt ſadly fall as proud Numantia.
                     
                     Scorning to yeeld to conquering Scipios power.
                  
                  
                     Caſ.
                     And now to thee Phillipi, are wee come,
                     Whoſe fields muſt twiſe feele Roman cruelty,
                     And flowing blood like to Darcean playnes,
                     
                        
When proud Eteocles on his foaming ſteede,
                     Rides in his fury through the Argean troopes,
                     Now making great Aeraſtus giue him way,
                     Now beating back Tidaeus puiſſant might:
                     The ground not dry'd from ſad Pharſalian blood,
                     Will now bee turned to a purple lake:
                     And bleeding heapes and mangled bodyes ſlayne,
                     Shall make ſuch hills as ſhall ſurpaſſe in height
                     The Snowy Alpes and aery Appenines,
                     
                  
                  
                     Titi.
                     A Scout brought word but now that he deſcryd,
                     Warlike Anthonius and young Caeſars troopes,
                     Marching in fury ouer Theſſalian playnes.
                     As great Gradinus when in angry moode,
                     He driues his chariot downe from heauens top,
                     And in his wheels whirleth reueng and death:
                     Heere by Phillippi they will pich their tents,
                     And in theſe fieldes (fatall to Roman liues)
                     Hazard the fortune of the doubtfull fight,
                  
                  
                     Cat.
                     O welcome thou this long expected day,
                     On which dependeth Romane liberty,
                     Now Rome thy freedom hangeth in ſuſpence,
                     And this the day that muſt aſſure thy hopes.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     Great Ioue, and thou Try
                              •
                           onyan warlike Queene:
                     Arm'd with thy amazing deadly Gorgons head.
                     Strengthen our armes that fight for Roman welth:
                     And thou ſterne Mars, and Romulus thy Sonne,
                     Defend that Citty which your ſelfe begun.
                     All heauenly powers aſſiſt our rightfull armes,
                     And ſend downe ſiluer winged victory,
                     To crowne with Lawrells our triumphant Creſts.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     My minde thats trobled in my vexed ſoule,
                     (Oppreſt with ſorrow and with ſad diſmay,)
                     Miſgiues me this wilbe a heauy day.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     Why faynt not now in theſe our laſt extremes,
                     This time craues courage not diſpayring feare,
                  
                  
                     Titin.
                     Fie, twill diſtayne thy former valiant acts.
                     To ſay thou fainteſt now in this laſt act,
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     My mind is heauy, and I know not why.
                     
                        
But cruell fate doth ſommon me to die,
                  
                  
                     Cato.
                     Sweet Brute, let not thy words be ominous ſignes,
                     Of ſo miſ-fortunate and ſad euent,
                     Heauen and our Vallour ſhall vs conquerours make.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     What Baſtard feare hath taunted our dead hearts,
                     Or what vnglorious vnwounted thought,
                     Hath changed the vallour of our daunted mindes.
                     What are our armes growne weaker then they were?
                     Cannot this hand that was proud Caeſars death,
                     Send all Caeſarians headlong that ſame path?
                     Looke how our troups in Sun-bright armes do ſhine,
                     With vaunting plumes and dreadfull brauery.
                     The wrathfull ſteedes do check their iron bits,
                     And with a well grac'd terror ſtrike the ground,
                     And keeping times in warres ſad harmony.
                     And then hath Brutus any cauſe to feare,
                     My ſelfe like valiant Peleus worthy Sonne,
                     The Nobleſt wight that euer Troy beheld,
                     Shall of the aduerſe troopes ſuch hauock make,
                     As ſad Phillipi ſhall in blood bewayle,
                     The cruell maſſacre of Caſſius ſword,
                     And then hath Brutus any cauſe to feare?
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     No outward ſhewes of puiſſance or of ſtrength,
                     Can helpe a minde diſmayed inwardly,
                     Leaue me ſweete Lordes a while vnto my ſelfe.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     In the meane time take order for the fight,
                     Drums let your fearefull mazing thunder playe.
                     And with their ſound peirce Heauens brazen Towers,
                     And all the earth fill with like fearefull noyſe,
                     As when that Boreas from his Iron caue.
                     With boyſterous furyes Striuing in the waues,
                     Comes ſwelling forth to meet his bluſtering foe,
                     They both doe runne with feerce tempeſtuous rage,
                     And heaues vp mountaynes of the watry waues.
                     The God Oceanus trembles at the ſtroke,
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     What hatefull furyes vex my tortured mind?
                     What hideous ſightes appalle my greeued ſoule,
                     As when Oreſtes after mother ſlaine.
                     
                        
Not being yet at Scithians Alters purged,
                     Behould the greeſly viſages of fiends.
                     And gaſtly furies which did haunt his ſteps,
                     
                        Caeſar vpbraues my ſad ingratitude,
                     He ſaued my life in ſad Pharſalian fieldes,
                     That I in Senate houſe might worke his death.
                     O this remembrance now doth wound my ſoule,
                     More then my poniard did his bleeding heart,
                  
                  Enter Ghoſt.
                  
                     Gho.
                     
                        Brutus, ingratefull Brutus ſeeſt thou mee:
                     Anon In field againe thou ſhalt me ſee,
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     Stay what ſo ere thou art, or fiend below,
                     Rayſ'd from the deepe by inchanters bloody call,
                     Or fury ſent from Phlegitonticke flames,
                     Or from Cocytus for to end my life,
                     Be then Megera or Tyſiphone,
                     
                     Or of Eumenides ill boading crue.
                     Fly me not now, but end my wretched life,
                     Come greeſly meſſenger of ſad miſhap,
                     Trample in blood of him that hates to liue,
                     And end my life and ſorrow all at once.
                  
                  
                     Gho.
                     Accurſed traytor damned Homicide,
                     
                     Knoweſt thou not me, to whome for forty honors:
                     Thou three and twenty Gaſtly wounds didſt giue?
                     Now dare no more for to behould the Heauens,
                     For they to Day haue deſtyned thine end:
                     Nor lift thy eyes vnto the riſing ſunne,
                     That nere ſhall liue for to behould it ſet,
                     Nor looke not downe vnto the Helliſh ſhades,
                     There ſtand the furyes thurſting for thy blood,
                     Flie to the field but if thou thither go'ſt,
                     There Anthonyes ſword will peirce thy trayterous heart.
                     
                        Brutus to daie my blood ſhalbe reuenged,
                     And for my wrong and vndeſerued death,
                     Thy life to thee a torture ſhall become,
                     And thou ſhalt oft amongeſt the dying grones,
                     Of ſlaughtered men that bite the bleeding earth.
                     
                        
With that like balefull cheere might thee befall,
                     And ſeeke for death that flies ſo wretched wight,
                     Vntill to 
                           ••
                         unne the honour of the fight,
                     And dreadfull vengeance of ſupernall ire.
                     Thine owne right hand ſhall worke my wiſh'd reueng,
                     And ſo Fare ill, hated of Heauen and Men.
                  
                  
                     Bru.
                     Stay Caeſar ſtay, protract my greife no longer,
                     Rip vp my bowells glut thy thirſting throte,
                     With pleaſing blood of Caeſars guilty heart:
                     But ſee hee's gon, and yonder Murther ſtands.
                     See how he poynts his knife vnto my hart.
                     
                        Althea raueth for her murthered Sonne,
                     And weepes the deed that ſhe her-ſelfe hath done:
                     And Meleager would thou liuedſt againe,
                     But death muſt expiate. Altheas come.
                     I, death the guerdon that my deeds deſerue:
                     The drums do thunder forth diſmay and feare,
                     And diſmall triumphes ſound my fatall knell,
                     Furyes I come to meete you all in Hell,
                  
                  Enter Cato wounded.
                  
                     Cato.
                     Bloodles and faynt; Cato yeelde vp thy breath;
                     While ſtrength and vigour in theſe armes remaynd,
                     And made me able for to wield my ſword,
                     So long I fought; and ſweet Rome for thy ſake
                     Fear'd not effuſion of my blood to make.
                     But now my ſtrength and life doth fayle at once,
                     My vigor leaues my could and feeble Ioynts,
                     And I my ſad ſoule, muſt power forth in blood.
                     O vertue whome Phyloſophy extols.
                     Thou art no eſſence but a naked name,
                     Bond-ſlaue to Fortune, weake, and of no power.
                     To ſuccor them which alwaies honourd thee:
                     Witneſſe my Fathers and mine owne ſad death,
                     Who for our country ſpent our lateſt breath:
                     But oh the chaines of death do hold my toung,
                     Mine eyes wax dim I faynt, I faynt, I die.
                     O Heauens help Rome in this extremity.
                  
                  
                     
                     Caſſ.
                     Where ſhall I goe to tell the ſaddeſt tale,
                     That ere the Romane toung was forc'd to ſpeake,
                     
                        Rome is ouerthrowne, and all that for her fought:
                     This Sunne that now hath ſeen ſo many deaths,
                     When from the Sea he heaued his cloudy head,
                     Then both the armes full of hope and feare,
                     Did waite the dreadfull trumpets fatall ſound,
                     And ſtraight Reuenge from Stygian bands let looſe,
                     Poſſeſſed had all hearts and baniſhed thence,
                     Feare of their children, wife and little home.
                     Countryes remembrance, and had quite expeld,
                     With laſt departed care of life it ſelfe:
                     Anger did ſparkell from our beautious eyes,
                     Our trembling feare did make our helmes to ſhake,
                     The horſe had now put on the riders wrath,
                     And with his hoofes did ſtrike the trembling earth,
                     When Echalarian ſoundes then both gin meete:
                     Both like enraged, and now the duſt gins riſe,
                     And Earth doth emulate the Heauens cloudes,
                     Then yet beutyous was the face of cruell war:
                     And goodly terror it might ſeeme to be,
                     Faire ſhieldes, gay ſwords, and goulden creſts did ſhine.
                     Their ſpangled plumes did dance for ſolity,
                     As nothing priuy to their Maſters feare,
                     But quickly rage and cruell Mars had ſtaynd,
                     This ſhining glory with a ſadder hew,
                     A cloud of dartes that darkened Heauens light,
                     Horror inſteed of beauty did ſuceede.
                     And her bright armes with duſt and blood were foyld:
                     Now Lucius fals, heare Druſus takes his end,
                     Here lies Hortenſius, weltring in his goare.
                     Here, there, and euery where men fall and die,
                     Yet Caſſius ſhew not that thy heart doth faynt:
                     But to the laſt gaſp for Romains freedom fight,
                     And when ſad death ſhall be thy labors end,
                     Yet boaſt thy life thou didſt for Country ſpend.
                  
                  Enter Anthony.
                  
                     Ant.
                     Queene of Reuenge imperious Nemeſis▪
                        
                     
                     
                        
That in the wrinkels of thine angry browes,
                     Wrapſt dreadfull vengance and pale fright-full death:
                     Raine downe the bloudy ſhowers of thy reuenge,
                     And make our ſwordes the fatall inſtruments,
                     To execute thy furious bale-full Ire,
                     Let grim death ſeate her on my Lances point,
                     Which percing the weake armour of my foes,
                     Shall lodge her there within there coward breſtes,
                     Dread, horror, vengance, death, and bloudy hate:
                     In this ſad fight my murthering ſworde awaite.
                  
                  Exit
                  Enter Titinnius.
                  
                     Titin.
                     Where may I flie from this accurſed ſoyle,
                     Or ſhunne the horror of this diſmall day:
                     The Heauens are colour'd in mourning ſable weedes,
                     The Sunne doth hide his face, and feares to ſee,
                     This bloudy conflict; ſad Cataſtrophe,
                     
                     Nothing but grones of dying men are heard:
                     Nothing but bloud and ſlaughter may bee ſeene
                     And death, the ſame in ſundry ſhapes araied.
                  
                  Enter Caſſius.
                  
                     Caſi.
                     In vaine, in vaine, O Caſſius all in vaine,
                     Tis Heauen and deſtiny thou ſtriueſt againſt.
                  
                  
                     Titin.
                     VVhat better hope or more accepted tydinges,
                     Iſt Noble Caſſius from the Battell bringe?
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     This haples hope that fates decreed haue,
                     
                        Philippi field muſt bee our haples graue.
                  
                  
                     Titin.
                     And then muſt this accurſd and fatall day,
                     End both our liues and Romane liberty:
                     Muſt now the name of freedome bee forgot,
                     And all Romes glory in Theſſalia end?
                  
                  
                     Caſi.
                     As thoſe that loſt in boyſterous troublous ſeas,
                     Beaten with rage of Billowes ſtormy ſtrife:
                     And without ſtarres do ſayle 'gainſt ſtarres and winde.
                     In drery darkeneſſe and in chereles night,
                     Without or hope or comfort endles are:
                     So are my thoughts deiected with diſmay,
                     Which can nought looke for but poore Romes decay.
                     But yet did Brutus liue, did hee but breath?
                     
                        
Or lay not ſlumbering in eternall night,
                     His welfare might infuſe ſome hope, or life:
                     Or at the leaſt bring death with more content:
                     Weried I am through labour of the fight:
                     Then ſweete Titinnius, range thou through the fielde,
                     And either glad me with my friends ſucceſſe,
                     Or quickly tell mee what my care doth feare:
                     How breathles hee vpon the ground doth lie,
                     That at thy words, I may fall downe and die.
                  
                  
                     Titin.
                     
                        Caſſius, I goe to ſeeke thy Noble friend,
                     Heauen grant my goings haue a proſperous end.
                  
                  
                     Caſſi.
                     O go Titinnius, and till thy returne,
                     Heere will I ſit diſconſolate alone,
                     
                        Romes ſad miſhap, and mine owne woes to moone:
                     O ten times treble fortunate were you,
                     VVhich in Pharſalias bloudy conflict dyed,
                     VVith thoſe braue Lords, now layed in bed of fame:
                     VVhich neere protected their moſt bleſſed dayes,
                     To ſee the horror of this diſmall fight,
                     VVhy died I not in thoſe Aemathian playnes,
                     VVhere great Domitius fell by Caeſars hand?
                     And ſwift Eurypus downe his bloudy ſtreame
                     Bare ſhieldes and helmes and traines of ſlaughter'd men,
                     But Heauens reſerud mee to this luckles day,
                     To ſee my Countries fall and friends decay.
                     But why doth not Titinnius yet returne?
                     My trembling heart miſgiues me what's befalne,
                     
                        Brutus is dead: I: herke how willingly
                     The Ecco itterates thoſe deadly words,
                     The whiſling windes with their mourning ſound,
                     Do fill mine eares with noyſe of Brutus death,
                     The birdes now chanting a more cheerles lay,
                     In dolefull notes recorde my friends decay.
                     And Philomela now forgets old wronges,
                     And onely Brutus wayleth in her ſonges.
                     I heare ſome noyſe, O tis Titinnius,
                     
                     No tis not hee, for hee doth feare to wound,
                     My greeued eares with that hearts-thrilling ſound.
                     
                        
Why doſt thou feed my thoughts with lingering hope?
                     Why doſt thou then prolong my life in vayne?
                     Tell me my ſentence and ſo end my payne:
                     He comes not yet, nor yet, nor will at all,
                     Linger not Caſſius for to heare reply,
                     What if he come and tels me hee is ſlayne?
                     That only will increaſe my dying paine,
                     
                        Brutus I come to company thy ſoule,
                     Which by Cocytus wandreth all alone.
                     
                        Brutus I come prepare to meere thy friend
                     Thy brothers fall procures this balefull end.
                  
                  Enter Titinius.
                  
                     Titi.
                     
                        Brutus doth liue and like a ſecond Mars,
                     
                     Rageth in heate of fury mongeſt his foes,
                     Then cheere thee Caſſius, loe I bring releefe▪
                     
                     And news of power to eaſe thy ſtormy greefe,
                     But ſee where Caſſius weltreth in his blood,
                     Doth beate the Earth, and yet not fully dead.
                     O Caſſius ſpeake, O ſpeake to me ſweet friend,
                     
                        Brutus doth liue; open thy dying eyes,
                     And looke on him that hope and comfort 
                           ••••
                        gs.
                     O noe, hee will not looke on mee but cryes,
                     That by my long delayes he haples dies:
                     Accurſed villaine murtherer of thy friend,
                     Why hath thy lingering thus wrought Caſſius end,
                     How cold thy care was to preuent this deed,
                     How ſlow thy loue that made no greater ſpeed,
                     Care winged is, and burning loue can flye,
                     My care was feareles, loue but flattery,
                     But ſithence in my life my loue was neuer ſhewne,
                     Now in my death Ile make it to be knowne.
                     Accurſed weapon that ſuch blood could ſpil,
                     Nay curſed then the author of this deed,
                     Yet both offended, both ſhall puniſhed be,
                     Ile take reueng of the knife, the knife of me,
                     It ſhall make a paſſage for my life to paſſe,
                     Cauſe through my life his maſter murthered was.
                     And I on it againe will venged bee.
                     
                        
Cauſe it did worke my Caſſius tragedy.
                     Then this reueng ſhalbe to end my life.
                     Mine to diſtayne with baſer blood the knife.
                  
                  Enter Brutus the Ghoſt following him.
                  
                     Bru.
                     What doeſt thou ſtill perſue me vgly fend,
                     Is this it that thou thirſted for ſo much?
                     Come with thy tearing clawes and rend it out,
                     Would thy appeaſeles rage be ſlacked with blood,
                     This ſword to day hath crimſen channels made,
                     But heare's the blood that thou woulds drinke ſo fayne,
                     Then take this percer, broch this trayterous heart.
                     Or if thou thinkeſt death to ſmall a payne,
                     Drag downe this body to proud Erebus,
                     
                     Through black Cocytus and infernall Styx,
                     
                     
                        Lethean waues, and fiers of Phlegeton,
                     
                     Boyle me or burne, teare my hatefull fleſh,
                     Deuoure, conſume, pull, pinch, plague, paine this hart,
                     Hell craues her right, and heere the furyes ſtand,
                     And all the hell-hounds compaſſe me a round
                     Each ſeeking for a parte of this ſame prey,
                     Alaſſe this body is leane, thin, pale and wan,
                     Nor can it all your hungery mouthes ſuffice,
                     O tis the ſoule that they ſtand gaping for,
                     And endleſſe matter for to prey vpon.
                     Renewed ſtill as Titius pricked heart.
                     Then clap your hands, let Hell with Ioy reſound?
                     Here it comes flying through this aery round.
                  
                  
                     Gho.
                     Hell take their hearts, that this ill deed haue done
                     And vengeance follow till they be ouercome:
                     Nor liue t' applaud the iuſtice of this deed.
                     Murther by her owne guilty hand doth bleed.
                  
                  Enter Diſcord
                  
                     Diſ.
                     I, now my longing hopes haue their deſire,
                     The world is nothing but a maſſie heape:
                     Of bodys ſlayne, The Sea a lake of blood,
                     The Furies that for ſlaughter only thirſt,
                     Are with theſe Maſſakers and ſlaughters cloyde,
                     
                        Tyſiphones pale, and Megeras thin face,
                     
                        
Is now puft vp, and ſwolne with quaffing blood,
                     
                        Caron that vſed but an old rotten boate
                     Muſt nowe a nauie rigg for to tranſport,
                     The howling ſoules, vnto the Stigian ſtronde.
                     Hell and Eliſium muſt be digd in one,
                     And both will be to litle to contayne,
                     Numberles numbers of afflicted ghoſtes,
                     That I my ſelfe haue tumbling thither ſent.
                  
                  
                     Gho.
                     Now nights pale daughter ſince thy bloody ioyes,
                     And my reuengfull thirſt fulfilled are,
                     Doe thou applaud what iuſtly heauens haue wrought,
                     While murther on the murtherers head is brought.
                  
                  
                     Diſ.
                     
                        Caeſar I pitied not thy Tragick end:
                     Nor tyrants daggers ſticking in thy heart,
                     Nor doe I that thy deaths with like repayd,
                     But that thy death ſo many deaths hath made:
                     Now cloyde with blood, Ile hye me downe below,
                     And laugh to thinke I cauſed ſuch endleſſe woe.
                  
                  
                     Gho.
                     Sith my reueng is full accompliſhed,
                     And my deaths cauſers by them ſelues are ſlaine,
                     I will deſcend to mine eternall home,
                     Where euerlaſtingly my quiet ſoule,
                     The ſweete Elyſium pleaſure ſhall inioy,
                     And walke thoſe fragrant ſlowry fields at reſt:
                     To which nor fayre adonis bower ſo rare,
                     Nor old Alcinous gardens may compare.
                     There that ſame gentle father of the ſpring,
                     Mild Zephirus doth Odours breath diuine:
                     Clothing the earth in painted brauery,
                     The which nor winters rage, nor Scorching heate,
                     Or Summers ſunne can make it fall or fade,
                     There with the mighty champions of old time,
                     And great Heroes of the Goulden age,
                     My dateles houres Ile ſpend in laſting ioy.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   